Eﬀect of size and shape of a moving charged object on the propagation
characteristics of precursor solitons

Garima Arora,1, a) P. Bandyopadhyay,1 M. G. Hariprasad,1 and A. Sen1
Institute For Plasma Research, HBNI, Bhat, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India, 382428

(Dated: 15 August 2019)

We report on experimental observations on the modiﬁcations in the propagation characteristics of precursor
solitons due to the diﬀerent shapes and sizes of the object over which the dust ﬂuid ﬂows. The experiments
have been performed in a Π shaped Dusty Plasma Experimental (DPEx) device where dusty plasma is created
in a DC glow discharge Ar plasma using kaolin particles. A ﬂoating copper wire installed radially on the
cathode, acts as a charged object in the plasma environment. The ﬂow on the dust ﬂuid is initiated by
suddenly lowering the potential of the charged object from grounded potential to close to ﬂoating potential.
The size (height and width) of the potential hill is then varied by drawing current from the wire through a
variable resistance. With a decrease in the height of the potential hill the amplitude, velocity and the number
of excited precursor solitons are found to decrease whereas the widths of the solitons are seen to increase. It
is found that below a threshold value these solitary waves are not excited and the dust ﬂuid simply ﬂows over
the hill. To examine the eﬀect due to the shape of the potential proﬁles, the wire is replaced by a triangular
object. Only trailing wakes are seen to be excited when the dust ﬂuid faces the linearly increasing slope of
the potential proﬁle whereas both solitons and wakes get excited when the object is placed with the sharp
edge facing the ﬂow. All the experimental ﬁndings qualitatively agree with numerical solutions obtained with
diﬀerent source terms in the forced-Korteweg de Vries (f-KdV) model equation.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The simultaneous excitation of precursor solitons
ahead of a fast moving object with wakes behind it, is
a phenomenon that has been widely studied in hydrody-
namics particularly in the context of disturbances cre-
ated by ships and boats close to the coast1–3. These
earlier studies have also provided model descriptions of
this fascinating non-linear phenomenon by employing a
forced Korteweg de Vries equation or a forced general-
ized Boussinesque equation4. Controlled laboratory ex-
periments using model ships moving in a channel were
carried out by Huang et al.5 and Sun6. It was found that
as long as the speed of the object moving through the
ﬂuid (water) was below a critical value (in this case the
phase velocity of the surface water waves) the movement
only created the customary trailing waves (wakes) in the
downstream direction. A dramatic change occurred when
the object speed was trans-critical. Then, in addition to
the trailing wakes the object also created a steady stream
of solitons ahead of it in the upstream direction. These
solitons with a speed higher than the object moved away
as precursors. The phenomenon was Galilean invariant4
- it could be reproduced by keeping the object stationary
and moving the ﬂuid over it.

Fluid concepts have often been successfully translated
and exploited to understand collective phenomena in
plasmas. A prime example is the extensive past study
of linear waves and nonlinear structures in a dusty (or
complex) plasma medium. Such a medium, consisting
of heavy dust grains immersed in a plasma of electrons

a)Electronic mail: garimagarora@gmail.com

and ions, display a host of collective excitations on a slow
time scale due to the low charge to mass ratio of the dust
particles and can be understood from a ﬂuid model of the
dusty plasma. There is a rich literature on the study of
linear waves e.g. the Dust Acoustic Wave (DAW)7,8, the
Dust Ion Acoustic Wave (DIW)9, Dust Lattice Waves
(DL)10 and non-linear waves like Dust Acoustic Solitary
Waves (DASw)11,12, Shock Waves13,14, dust voids15–17,
Vortices18–20 etc21 consisting of both theoretical and ex-
perimental investigations. As in a hydrodynamic ﬂuid,
there have also been observations of wake structures in
laboratory dusty plasmas19,22,23. These wakes (some-
times termed as Mach cones24–28) are generated when
a dust particle moves through a stationary dusty plasma
medium. The topic of forewake excitations (precursor
waves) has however received very limited attention till re-
cently. The ﬁrst experimental demonstration of the gen-
eration of a precursor soliton in a ﬂowing dusty plasma
was reported in 2016 by Jaiswal et al.29. In their study
they observed the spontaneous excitation of precursor
solitons when a super-sonically (with respect to the dust
acoustic speed) moving dusty plasma ﬂuid was made to
ﬂow over an electrostatic potential structure. The phys-
ical mechanism underlying this phenomenon can be un-
derstood in terms of the ﬂuid concept used to explain
hydrodynamic precursors. An object moving in a ﬂuid
always creates a pileup of matter in front of it.
If its
speed is sub-critical then the matter in front can disperse
away at the linear phase velocity leading to the creation
of a wake structure. However if the object speed is super-
critical then the matter in front cannot disperse away fast
enough and continues to build up. At a certain stage non-
linear eﬀects become important and this can lead to the
formation of solitons or other nonlinear structures. These
nonlinear structures can move at a higher speed and can

9
1
0
2

g
u
A
4
1

]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
4
8
9
4
0
.
8
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore separate from the object and move away as pre-
cursors. These ﬁrst ever observations of precursor soli-
tons in a plasma have been well characterized by detailed
experimental measurements of their propagation features
and qualitative comparisons with results from theoretical
models. The existence of such precursor excitations have
also been conﬁrmed from full scale ﬂuid simulations30as
well as molecular dynamic simulations31 .

The object of our present study is to further consol-
idate and extend the previous experimental study29 by
carrying out a detailed investigation of the propagation
characteristics of the precursors under varying excitation
conditions. In particular, we look at the eﬀects of varying
the size and shape of the potential hill on the fore-wake
phenomenon. We ﬁnd that there is a systematic depen-
dence of the amplitude, velocity and number of excited
precursors on the size of the potential hill and the exis-
tence of a threshold value of the potential height below
which no precursors are excited. There is also a very in-
teresting dependence on the shape of the potential hill
that highlights the role of sharp gradients in the excita-
tion of precursors.

The paper is organized as follows:

In the next sec-
tion (in Sec. II) we describe the experimental setup and
procedure for excitation of precursor solitons and wakes.
The experimental results of precursor solitons and wakes
are discussed in Sec. III A. The excitation of these forced
solitary waves over diﬀerent sizes of the potential pro-
ﬁle of the charged object are described in Sec. III B and
the results on the inﬂuence of the shape of the potential
proﬁle are described in III C. A brief summary of all the
results and some concluding remarks are given in Sec.
IV.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP AND PROCEDURE

The experiments are performed in a Π shaped Dusty
Plasma Experimental (DPEx) device and its schematic
diagram is shown in Fig. 1. A detailed description of
the experimental setup and its associated diagnostics are
available in Ref.32. DPEx device is basically an inverted
Π shaped glass chamber which has a number of axial and
radial ports used for diﬀerent purposes. A rotary pump
is connected to one of the arms of DPEx device for evacu-
ating the vacuum vessel whereas a mass ﬂow controller is
attached at the gas port to feed argon gas into the cham-
ber. A disc shaped anode and a tray shaped cathode are
used for plasma generation. The tray type conﬁguration
of cathode is chosen for providing radial conﬁnement to
the dust particles. In addition to that two metal strips
are also placed at the ends on the cathode to conﬁne the
particles axially. For the experiments to study the ef-
fect of the obstacle height on the solitons, a copper wire
of diameter 1 mm and length 50 mm is mounted at a
height of 10 mm from the base of the cathode. The wire
acts as a charged object for the excitation of solitary
waves as reported in Ref.29. This wire is connected to

2

FIG. 1. A schematic diagram of dusty plasma experimental
(DPEx) setup.

the grounded potential through a switch and it can also
be kept at various potentials by connecting a variable re-
sistance ranging from 10 KΩ−10 MΩ in between the wire
and the switch. Micron sized Kaolin particles (2-5 µm)
are sprinkled on the cathode in between the wire and the
right strip before closing the chamber for creating a dusty
plasma. These dust particles get negatively charged in
the presence of the background plasma and levitate in
the cathode sheath region where the sheath electrostatic
force acting on the particle balances the gravitational
force. The mass of the levitated dust particles md ∼
8.9 × 10−14 kg for a radius of r = 2 µm. These levitated
micro particles are then illuminated by a green laser light
and their dynamics are captured by a fast CCD camera
for further analysis.

To start with, the chamber is pumped down to a base
pressure 0.1 Pa and then Argon gas is injected into the
device to set the working pressure at 9-15 Pa. In this con-
dition the gate valve attached with the pump is opened
at 20% whereas the mass ﬂow controller is opened at
5% to maintain the equilibrium pressure in the chamber.
An Argon plasma is produced between the anode and
grounded cathode by applying a voltage in the range of
280-320 V using a DC power supply. The plasma pa-
rameters like plasma density (ni) and electron temper-
ature (Te) are measured using a single Langmuir probe
and they come out to be ni ∼ 0.5 − 3 × 1015/m3 and
Te ∼ 2 − 5 eV for the range of discharge conditions as
discussed in details in Ref.32. To create a dusty plasma,
ﬁrst the plasma is formed at a higher voltage and left for
a few minutes. Later, the discharge voltage is reduced
and set accordingly so that a highly dense dust cloud is
formed. To repeat the earlier observations of Jaiswal et
al.29, the wire is kept at ground potential (negative com-

LaserGrounded CathodeCameraGas PortAnodeConfiningStripDustDispenserWirePumping Portpared to the plasma potential), which acts as a barrier for
these negative charged dust particles and as a result the
particles remain conﬁned between the wire and the right
potential strip as shown in Fig. 2(a) and exhibit only
thermal motion. For the present set of experiments, the
discharge condition is kept in such a way that there is no
spontaneous excitation of waves in dust cloud due to ion
streaming. For a speciﬁc discharge condition, Vd = 320
V and p = 11 Pa, the average charge of these micron
sized dust particles comes out to be Qd ∼ 8.43 × 103e
which is estimated from a Collision Enhanced plasma
Collection Model (CEC)33,34. The other dust parame-
ters like dust density nd ∼ 1011/m3 and dust tempera-
ture Td ∼ 0.6 − 1.2 eV are estimated with the help of an
IDL based super Particle Identiﬁcation Tracking (sPIT)
code35,36. Based on the above parameters the phase ve-
locity of the Dust Acoustic Wave (DAW) turns out to be
Cda ∼ 20 mm/sec. To compare the theoretical estima-
tion, a separate experiment is also carried out to excite
DAW for the above discharge condition by applying a
sinusoidal signal to the wire. It is found that the mea-
sured Cda comes out to be ∼ 25 mm/sec, which is in
good agreement with the estimated value.

3

try (PIV) technique39. The velocity of the dust ﬂuid is
changed from subsonic (∼ 15 − 18 mm/sec) to supersonic
(∼ 25 − 32 mm/sec) values by varying the discharge pa-
rameters. To study the propagation characteristics of the
excited structures, the size (both height and width) of the
potential hill created by the charged object is altered by
changing the resistance connected to the wire, whereas
the shape of the potential proﬁle is modiﬁed by using ob-
jects of diﬀerent shapes. These studies are discussed in
the subsequent sections (Sec. III B and Sec. III C).

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Excitation of precursor solitons and wakes

Before investigating the dependence of shape and size
of the potential hill on the propagation characteristics
of precursor solitons, the experiments of Jaiswal et al.29
were repeated to serve as a benchmark. The results are
brieﬂy summarized here. As in29, for a subsonic ﬂow only
wake structures were observed in the downstream direc-
tion whereas supersonic ﬂows created precursor solitons
propagating in the upstream direction ahead of the object
and wakes in the downstream direction. Fig. 3(a) depicts
such a scenario for a supersonic ﬂow of dust ﬂuid, with
Fig. 3(b) showing the normalized amplitudes of solitary
and wake structures extracted from Fig. 3(a).

FIG. 2.
(a) Equilibrium conﬁguration of dust cloud before
generating the ﬂow. (b) Dust ﬂow initiated by lowering the
potential hill suddenly by making it ﬂoating. The yellow circle
represents the location of charged object and ﬂow is generated
from right to left.

For the excitation of forced solitary waves and wake
structure, the dust particles are made to ﬂow over the
wire. The ﬂow of the dust cloud is generated by suddenly
lowering the height of the negative potential hill created
by the charged object. When the wire is switched to
near ﬂoating potential the potential hill is lowered and
the dust particles ﬂow from right to left over the wire as
shown in Fig. 2(b). During the ﬂow, the dust particles
attain a constant velocity due to neutral drag force37,38
and excite solitary waves along with wakes depending
on the ﬂow velocity of dust ﬂuid. The ﬂow velocity of
dust ﬂuid is measured by tracking the individual parti-
cles at the tail of the cloud using Particle Image Velocime-

FIG. 3.
(a) Propagation of solitons against the direction
of ﬂow (in upstream direction) and wakes in the direction of
ﬂow (in downstream direction) for the case of supersonic ﬂow.
The position of wire is represented by the yellow dashed line.
(b) The intensity proﬁle of the solitons and wakes.

These nonlinear precursor structures were conﬁrmed
to be solitons by checking the constancy of the quantity
amplitude × width2. The following model f-KdV40 equa-
tion was also solved as part of the benchmark exercise to
obtain a qualitative account of the phenomenon.

∂nd1
∂t

+ A

∂nd1
∂ξ

+

1
2

∂3nd1
∂ξ3 =

1
2

∂S2
∂ξ

,

(1)

where the source term (S2) represents the charged object,

GroundedFloatingFlowDust CloudDust CloudCathode sheath thickness(a)(b)(a)SolitonsWakesDustflowPixel Positions50100150Pixel Position02004006008001000nd/nd0012(b)10 mm4

FIG. 4.
obtained from the numerical solution of f-KdV equation.

(a) Source function (b) Precursor solitons and wakes

nd1 is the perturbed density normalized to the equilib-
rium density nd0 and ξ(t) is the coordinate in the wave
frame moving at the phase velocity uph normalized to the
dust acoustic speed. The coeﬃcient ‘A’ associated with
Eq. 1 depends upon the electron and ion temperatures
and the plasma density. A detailed description of the f-
KdV model equation and its solution can be found in40.
The source function S2, as shown in Fig. 4(a), is chosen
as a Gaussian with amplitude As and width G. Fig. 4(b)
shows the spatial variation of density perturbation which
is obtained by solving f-KdV equation (Eq. 1) numeri-
cally. In this simulation, the Gaussian source function is
made to move from left to right either subsonically or su-
personically to replicate the relative velocity between the
wire and the dust ﬂow in our experiments and the coeﬃ-
cient A is chosen to be 4 for our experimental parameters.
As shown in Fig. 4(b), just like the experimental obser-
vation, the numerical solution of f-KdV equation yields
the excitation of precursor solitons which propagate in
the upstream direction whereas the wakes move in the
downstream direction. The f-Kdv will be further used
to model the present set of experiments exploring the ef-
fect of the size and shape of the obstacle on the solitonic
excitations.

B. Excitation of precursor solitons for ﬂow over objects of
diﬀerent sizes

The benchmark experiments were executed by chang-
ing the height of the potential hill from its maximum
value (grounded potential) to its minimum value (ﬂoating
potential) to excite the precursor solitons. To investigate
the eﬀect of the size (height and width) of the potential
hill on the phenomenon, a systematic set of experiments
were performed by connecting a variable resistance in se-
ries with the wire to change the size of the potential hill.
The size of the potential hill of the charged object is ad-
justed by drawing a current through various resistance
values ranging from 10 KΩ to 10 MΩ and measuring the
voltage across the resistance (Vwg). To begin with, the
height and width of the potential hill is measured using

FIG. 5.
(a) Variation of height (represented by red open
circles) and width (represented by blue star) of the potential
hill with Vwg. (b) Power law ﬁt on the height and width of
the electrostatic potential created by the charged wire.

dust particles as a dynamic micro probes as discussed in
Ref.41. In this technique, these tracer particles are made
to ﬂow over the potential hill and tracking of the individ-
ual particle trajectories yields their positions and veloci-
ties over the time. The potential of the electrostatic hill
just above the wire is then directly estimated by using
the energy conservation arguments. The height and the
width of the potential hill is measured for a wide range of
Vwg and plotted in Fig. 5. Fig. 5(a) shows the variation
of height (represented by ‘o’) and width (represented by
‘(cid:63)’) of the potential hill created by the charged object
with voltage measured (Vwg) across the diﬀerent resis-
tance connected with the wire in series. It can be seen
that the height of the hill decreases and width increases
with the increase of Vwg. The height of the potential hill
is maximum when Vwg becomes close to the grounded
potential which is negative with respect to the plasma
potential and it decreases when the voltage drop across
the variable resistance reaches towards the plasma poten-
tial which is ∼ 300 V for this speciﬁc set of experiments.
The variation of the height (h) with width (w) of the po-
tential hill created by the wire is plotted in Fig. 5(b) and
it is seen that the width decreases with an increase of the
height of the potential hill. The solid line represents the
power law relationship (h ∼ w−3.13) between the width
and height. Further experiments are performed with sim-
ilar range of Vwg to examine the eﬀect of the size of the
potential hill on the excitation of forced solitary waves.
Figure 6(a-c) shows typical images of fully developed
forced solitary structures. It visually shows how the num-
ber, amplitude and width of solitons changes with the
wire potential, Vwg. Fig. 6(a) shows the solitary waves
at p = 11 Pa and V = 320 V when Vwg is kept at 5 V
which is approximately at grounded potential. The dot-
ted line in this ﬁgure represents the location of the wire.
For Vwg = 5 V, ﬁve prominent solitary waves get excited
which are found to propagate in the upstream direction
from the frame of ﬂuid. When the resistance connected
to the wire is increased such that Vwg ∼ 75 V, the num-
ber of prominent solitary structures decreases to four as
shown in Fig. 6(b). The number further decreases to two
when the Vwg is increased to 132 V as shown in Fig. 6(c).
If the potential of the wire is increased further towards

S2(9)2468930405060708090nd/nd002(b)(a)t=10 Voltage acorss Wire (Vwg)050100150Height of Potential hill (mm)1618202215202530Height of Potential hill (mm)16182022Width of Potential hill (mm)15202530(b)(a)5

FIG. 8. Variation of amplitude of solitons with (a) amplitude
of source, (b) width of source numerically obtained from the
solution of f-KdV.

of the amplitude (nd/nd0) of solitary wave, the max-
imum intensities are extracted from the images later
normalized by the equilibrium intensity of dust density.
Fig. 7(a) shows the variation of this amplitude of forced
dust acoustic solitary waves (f-DASw) with Vwg. It shows
that the amplitude of these excited solitary waves de-
creases whereas the width increases with the increase in
Vwg. It can also be seen in Fig. 5(a), that the height of
the potential hill decreases whereas the width increases
with the increase of Vwg.
It essentially indicates that
the amplitude of the solitary structures strongly depends
on the size of the potential hill. In addition to that the
velocity of the forced dust acoustic wave also decreases
with the increase of Vwg as shown in Fig. 7(b). Hence
in our experiments, the solitary wave having higher am-
plitude propagates with higher velocity which is one of
the important properties of a KdV type solitons. There-
fore, it can be concluded that the size of the potential hill
plays a salient role on the propagation characteristics of
a solitary wave.

To model these experimental ﬁndings, we have again
solved numerically the f-KdV equation (Eq. I) for diﬀer-
ent values of the amplitude (As) and width (G) of the
Gaussian source function by choosing the values from
the power law relationship derived from the experiments
and measured the mean value of the amplitude of soli-
tary structures. Fig. 8 depicts the variation of amplitude
of forced solitary waves obtained from numerical solu-
tion of f-KdV with the height and width of the source
function. For the present set of numerical simulation,
the amplitudes and widths are chosen from the experi-
ments as shown in Fig. 5(b).
In Fig. 8(a) one can see
that the amplitude of the excited forced solitary waves
decreases with the decrease of amplitude of the source
function while it decreases with the increase of width of
the source function as shown in Fig. 8(b). The ﬁrst point
of Fig. 8(a) and last point of Fig. 8(b) correspond to a
single soliton solution of the equation which is also the
threshold conditions for the creation of f-KdV solitons.
Further decreasing of A and increasing of G causes only
the excitation of wake structures instead of the creation
of solitons. Therefore, the ﬁndings from the numerical
analysis qualitatively support our experimental observa-
tions and there is indeed a threshold for the generation
of solitons in the f-KdV simulation similar to the exper-

FIG. 6. Excitation of precursor solitons for (a) 5 V, (b) 75
V, (c) 132 V by varying the voltage across the hill created by
the charged wire.

the ﬂoating potential, the height of the source object de-
creases and it is not suﬃcient to excite any forced soli-
tary structures. We have also found the threshold value,
Vwg = 135 V, beyond which the particles simply ﬂow and
do not excite any wave structures. It is also found that
the amplitude decreases whereas the width of the fully
developed solitons increases with the increase in Vwg but
the change is not visually appreciable. A more quantita-
tive discussion of the variation of amplitude, width and
In all
velocity with Vwg is given later in this section.
these experiments (Fig. 6(a-c)), the dust velocity is mea-
sured using PIV analysis to make sure that the dust ﬂuid
moves super-sonically over the wire.

FIG. 7. Variation of (a) amplitude (represented by red open
circles), width (represented by blue star) and (b) velocity of
the excited precursor solitons for the case of supersonic ﬂuid
ﬂow with the voltage drop Vwg across the resistance.

Figure 6 qualitatively shows that the amplitude of
the solitary structures decreases whereas width increases
with the increase of Vwg. For a quantitative analysis

5 V75 V132 V(a)(b)(c)Vwg2060100140nd/nd01.52(a)Width (mm)0.80.91Vwg2060100140 Velocity (mm/sec)25303540(b)Amplitude of Source Function6.577.588.5nd/nd022.533.5(a)Width of Source Function1.21.41.61.822.2nd/nd022.533.5(b)6

FIG. 10.
(a) Generation of non linear wakes in the direction
of ﬂow when the ﬂow is initiated and facing rising slope of the
potential hill (b) Intensity proﬁle of Fig. 10(a).

iments.

C. Forced Solitary Waves over diﬀerent shapes of the
charged object

All the above experiments were performed by ﬂowing
the dust ﬂuid supersonically over the wire of diﬀerent
sizes (height and width) of the potential hill. The po-
tential proﬁle around the wire41 is indeed a Gaussian
where the fall of the sheath proﬁle is symmetric and sharp
around the object. Next, to investigate the eﬀect of shape
of potential proﬁle on the propagation characteristics of
forced solitary waves, a triangular shaped object was used
in two diﬀerent conﬁgurations as shown in Fig. 9(a) and
(b). The supersonic ﬂow in the dust ﬂuid was again gen-
erated by switching the object from grounded potential
to ﬂoating potential as described in Fig. 2. In the ﬁrst
case (see, Fig. 9(a)), the dust ﬂuid ﬂows over the rising
slope of the potential proﬁle created by the triangular
charged object, whereas in another conﬁguration, dust
ﬂuid ﬂows over a steep charged object (see, Fig. 9(b))
ﬁrst and then ﬂows over falling slope.

FIG. 9. Equilibrium conﬁguration of dust cloud before gen-
erating the ﬂow for two diﬀerent shape of the charged object.

FIG. 11.
Time evolution of numerical solution of f-KdV
equation using the source function half Gaussian function as
Source function to replicate the triangular shaped object.

Figure 10(a) shows a typical image of the excited struc-
tures when the dust ﬂuid supersonically ﬂows over the
charged object as shown in Fig. 9(a).
Interestingly in
this conﬁguration, no structures are found to propagate
in the upstream direction dissimilar to the case when the
object is purely Gaussian (see Fig. 3(a)). Instead a se-
ries of crests are found to propagate in the down stream
direction. The perturbed dust density proﬁles (extracted
from Fig. 10(a)) is plotted in Fig. 10(b) to explore the
properties of these structures. These smaller amplitude
crests propagate in the downstream direction with re-
spect to the frame of ﬂuid as wakes. These experimen-
tal ﬁndings are also compared with numerical solutions
of forced-KdV equation (see Eq. I) in which the source
function is taken as a half Gaussian with a rising slope as
shown in Fig. 11(a). In case of the triangular object with
ﬂat hypotenuse (Fig. 11(a) and Fig. 13(a)), the object is
replicated by a half Gaussian with a width ( W
2 ∼ 6) that
is bigger than the source function with a full Gaussian.
The choice of the width of the source term is dictated by
the size of the sheath that forms around the obstacle. For
p=11 Pa and V= 320 V the sheath around the grounded
wire of 1 mm diameter is ∼ 15.5 mm (see ﬁrst ‘(cid:63)’ of

Fig. 5 (a)). For the same discharge condition, the sheath
around the triangular charged object (of hypotenuse 65
mm) is ∼ 80.5 mm. Hence, W
for the half Gaussian
2
source function is chosen to be 6 which is approximately
5 times higher compared to the full Gaussian. Fig. 11(b)
displays the perturbed dust density proﬁle for a given
time when the object moves with supersonic velocity sim-
ilar to our experimental situation. The solution of f-KdV
equation shows only the excitation of wake structures,
which propagate in the downstream direction as observed
in the experiments.

To investigate further the inﬂuence of shapes, the same
triangular object is used in reverse conﬁguration as shown
In this conﬁguration, the dust ﬂuid ﬁrst
in Fig. 9(b).
faces a sharp rise of the potential and then it goes through
a monotonic fall in the potential. When the ﬂuid ﬂows
supersonically over this object, it excites both precursor
solitons in the upstream direction as well as wakes in the
downstream direction as shown in Fig. 12(a). The per-
turbed dust density extracted from Fig. 12(a) is shown
in Fig. 12(b). To mimic the experimental observations,
the f-KdV equation is again solved numerically by using a

(a)(b)FlowFlow(a)DustflowWakesPixel Positions50100150200Pixel Position02004006008001000nd/nd00.40.60.81(b)10 mmS2(9)02468(a)930405060708090nd/nd000.51t=10(b)7

using Kaoline particles. The ﬂow of the dust cloud was
initiated by suddenly lowering the height of the potential
hill created by a charged object (wire or metallic wedge
shaped object). For the case of subsonic dust ﬂuid ﬂow,
only wakes were observed in the downstream direction
in the frame of the ﬂuid whereas for a supersonic ﬂow
solitary structures were excited in the upstream direc-
tion along with the wakes in the downstream direction.
The size and shape of the potential proﬁle was varied by
connecting a variable resistance in series with a copper
wire and by using the triangular object in diﬀerent orien-
tation with respect to the ﬂow, respectively. The major
outcomes of our present work are listed below:

• To investigate the eﬀect of size of the potential hill
on the propagation of precursor solitons, the height
of the potential hill was varied by drawing current
through a variable resistance.
It was found that
the amplitude and velocity of the solitons decreased
whereas their widths increased with a decrease in
the height of potential hill. The number of emit-
ted solitonic structures also decreased with the de-
crease of the hill height.
It was also discovered
that there is a threshold height of the potential hill
below which the dust ﬂuid simply ﬂows over the
object without exciting any structures.

• The f-KdV equation was once again solved numeri-
cally by changing the height and width of the Gaus-
sian source function. The numerically obtained am-
plitudes and widths of solitonic structures followed
a similar trend as observed in the experiments.

• In another set of experiments, the shape of the po-
tential proﬁles of the charged object was changed
by replacing the wire by a solid triangular shaped
object.
In this speciﬁc set of experiments, the
ﬂow was only generated by switching the charged
object from ground to ﬂoating potential. When
the dust ﬂuid ﬂowed supersonically over this tri-
angular object facing the linearly increasing slope
only wakes were found to be excited in the down-
stream direction and no nonlinear structures were
seen to propagate in the upstream direction. How-
ever, when the experiments were carried out by re-
versing the object so that the dust ﬂuid faced the
sharp jump of the potential created by the charged
object, both solitons propagating in the upstream
direction and wakes propagating in the downstream
direction were seen.

• These results were also modeled and compared
qualitatively with the experimental ﬁndings by tak-
ing the source function to be a half Gaussian in the
forward and reverse directions respectively.

Hence to summarize, the excitation of precursor solitons
and their propagation characteristics are found to
depend on the shape and size of the potential proﬁles
of the charged object over which the ﬂuid ﬂows. Our

FIG. 12. (a) Generation of wakes and solitons when the ﬂow
faces sharp rise of the potential hill (b) intensity proﬁles of
these wakes and solitons extracted from ﬁg. 12(a).

(a) Source function (b) Time evolution of numerical
FIG. 13.
solution of f-KdV equation by reversing the source function
as shown in ﬁg. 11(a).

half Gaussian object like Fig. 11(a) but in the reverse di-
rection as shown in Fig. 13(a). The solution of f-KdV also
shows the excitation of solitary waves in the upstream di-
rection and wakes in the downstream direction. Hence,
it can be concluded further that the shape of the charged
object is also an important parameter which decides the
excitation of nonlinear structures. A linear gradient is in-
suﬃcient to excite the precursor solitons and only gives
rise to the customary wakes whereas a sharp gradient
excites both.

IV. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

A set of experiments were done to investigate in de-
tail the modiﬁcations of the propagation characteristics
of precursor solitons which get excited when a super-
sonic ﬂow of dust ﬂuid is made to ﬂow over a stationary
charged object of diﬀerent sizes and shapes. The experi-
ments were performed in the DPEx device in which dusty
plasma was created in a DC glow discharge Ar plasma

(a)DustflowWakesSolitonsPixel Positions50100150Pixel Position02004006008001000nd/nd000.511.5(b)10 mmS2(9)02468(a)930405060708090nd/nd0012t=10(b)experimental ﬁndings not only conﬁrm and consolidate
earlier experimental observations of precursor solitons
but bring to light new fundamental results regarding
the excitation process. These insights should prove
helpful in interpreting the manifestation of this concept
in natural occurrences such as in excitations triggered
by solar wind interactions with the earth and moon
or space debris or satellite interactions with the iono-
spheric plasma. The ﬁndings may also stimulate further
experimental and theoretical
towards more
fundamental investigations of this yet poorly explored
topic in plasma physics.

studies

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

is

thankful

Indian National Science
A.S.
Academy (INSA) for their support under the INSA
Senior Scientist Fellowship scheme.

to the

References

1D.-B. Huang, O. Sibul, W. Webster, J. Wehausen, D.-M. Wu,
and T. Wu, “Ships moving in the transcritical range,” in Proc.
Conf. on Behaviour of Ships in Restricted Waters, Varna, Bul-
garia (1982) pp. 26–1.
2R. ERTEKIN, “Ship-generated solitons,” Proc 15th Symp on
Naval Hydrodynamics, Hamburg, Germany, Aug 1985 (1985).
3R. Ertekin, W. Webster, and J. Wehausen, “Waves caused by a
moving disturbance in a shallow channel of ﬁnite width,” Journal
of Fluid Mechanics 169, 275–292 (1986).
4T. Y.-T. Wu, “Generation of upstream advancing solitons by
moving disturbances,” Journal of ﬂuid mechanics 184, 75–99
(1987).
5H.-L. A. Huang, Dynamics of surface waves in coastal waters
(Springer, 2010).
6M. Sun, “The evolution of waves created by a ship in a shallow
canal,” The 60th Anniversary Volume Mechanics Essays , 17–25
(1985).
7N. Rao, P. Shukla, and M. Yu, “Dust-acoustic waves in dusty
plasmas,” Planetary and Space Science 38, 543 – 546 (1990).
8A. Barkan, R. L. Merlino, and N. DAngelo, “Laboratory obser-
vation of the dustacoustic wave mode,” Physics of Plasmas 2,
3563–3565 (1995), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.871121.
9P. K. Shukla and V. P. Silin, “Dust ion-acoustic wave,” Physica
Scripta 45, 508 (1992).

10F. Melandso/, “Lattice waves in dust plasma crystals,” Physics of
Plasmas 3, 3890–3901 (1996), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.871577.
11N. Rao and P. Shukla, “Nonlinear dust-acoustic waves with dust
charge ﬂuctuations,” Planetary and Space Science 42, 221–225
(1994).

12P. Bandyopadhyay, G. Prasad, A. Sen, and P. K. Kaw, “Experi-
mental study of nonlinear dust acoustic solitary waves in a dusty
plasma,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 065006 (2008).

13P. K. Shukla and A. A. Mamun, “Dust-acoustic shocks in a
strongly coupled dusty plasma,” IEEE Transactions on Plasma
Science 29, 221–225 (2001).

14J. Heinrich, S.-H. Kim, and R. L. Merlino, “Laboratory observa-
tions of self-excited dust acoustic shocks,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 103,
115002 (2009).

15E. Thomas, K. Avinash, and R. L. Merlino, “Probe induced voids
in a dusty plasma,” Physics of Plasmas 11, 1770–1774 (2004).
16J. Goree, G. E. Morﬁll, V. N. Tsytovich, and S. V. Vladimirov,
“Theory of dust voids in plasmas,” Phys. Rev. E 59, 7055–7067
(1999).

17A. M. Lipaev, S. A. Khrapak, V. I. Molotkov, G. E. Morﬁll,
V. E. Fortov, A. V. Ivlev, H. M. Thomas, A. G. Khrapak, V. N.

8

Naumkin, A. I. Ivanov, S. E. Tretschev,
and G. I. Padalka,
“Void closure in complex plasmas under microgravity condi-
tions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 265006 (2007).

18M. Kaur, S. Bose, P. K. Chattopadhyay, D. Sharma, J. Ghosh,
and Y. C. Saxena, “Observation of dust torus with poloidal rota-
tion in direct current glow discharge plasma,” Physics of Plasmas
22, 033703 (2015).

19G. E. Morﬁll, H. M. Thomas, U. Konopka, H. Rothermel,
M. Zuzic, A. Ivlev, and J. Goree, “Condensed plasmas under
microgravity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1598–1601 (1999).

20M. Choudhary, S. Mukherjee, and P. Bandyopadhyay, “Experi-
mental observation of self excited co-rotating multiple vortices
in a dusty plasma with inhomogeneous plasma background,”
Physics of Plasmas 24, 033703 (2017).

21A. Usachev, A. Zobnin, O. Petrov, V. Fortov, M. Thoma,
M. Kretschmer, S. Ratynskaia, R. Quinn, H. Hoefner,
and
G. Morﬁll, “The project plasmakristall4(pk-4)a dusty plasma ex-
periment in a combined dc/rf (i) discharge plasma under micro-
gravity conditions,” Czechoslovak Journal of Physics 54, C639
(2004).
22D. H.

E. Dubin,

two-dimensional
charge moving
crystal,”
3895–3903
7,
https://aip.scitation.org/doi/pdf/10.1063/1.1308078.

relative
of

phonon wake
“The
to
a
Plasmas

a
plasma
(2000),

Physics

behind

23L.-J. Hou, Z. L. Miˇskovi´c, K. Jiang, and Y.-N. Wang, “Energy
loss of a charged particle moving over a 2d strongly coupled dusty
plasma,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 255005 (2006).

24D. Samsonov, J. Goree, Z. W. Ma, A. Bhattacharjee, H. M.
Thomas, and G. E. Morﬁll, “Mach cones in a coulomb lattice
and a dusty plasma,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3649–3652 (1999).
25D. Samsonov, J. Goree, H. M. Thomas, and G. E. Morﬁll, “Mach
cone shocks in a two-dimensional yukawa solid using a complex
plasma,” Phys. Rev. E 61, 5557–5572 (2000).

26O. Havnes, F. Li, F. Melandso/, T. Aslaksen, T. W. Hartquist,
G. E. Morﬁll, T. Nitter, and V. Tsytovich, “Diagnostic of dusty
plasma conditions by the observation of mach cones caused by
dust acoustic waves,” Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology
A 14, 525–528 (1996), https://doi.org/10.1116/1.580119.

27A. A. Mamun, P. K. Shukla,

and G. E. Morﬁll, “Theory of
mach cones in magnetized dusty plasmas with strongly correlated
charged dust grains,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 095005 (2004).

28L.-J. Hou, Y.-N. Wang, and Z. L. Miˇskovi´c, “Theoretical study
of laser-excited mach cones in dusty plasmas,” Phys. Rev. E 70,
056406 (2004).

29S. Jaiswal, P. Bandyopadhyay, and A. Sen, “Experimental obser-
vation of precursor solitons in a ﬂowing complex plasma,” Phys.
Rev. E 93, 041201 (2016).

30S. Kumar Tiwari and A. Sen, “Wakes and precursor soliton ex-
citations by a moving charged object in a plasma,” Physics of
Plasmas 23, 022301 (2016), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4941092.
31S. K. Tiwari and A. Sen, “Fore-wake excitations from moving
charged objects in a complex plasma,” Physics of Plasmas 23,
100705 (2016), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4964908.

32S. Jaiswal, P. Bandyopadhyay,

and A. Sen, “Dusty plasma
experimental (dpex) device for complex plasma experiments
with ﬂow,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 86, 113503 (2015),
https://aip.scitation.org/doi/pdf/10.1063/1.4935608.

33S. A. Khrapak, S. V. Ratynskaia, A. V. Zobnin, A. D. Usachev,
V. V. Yaroshenko, M. H. Thoma, M. Kretschmer, H. H¨ofner,
G. E. Morﬁll, O. F. Petrov, and V. E. Fortov, “Particle charge
in the bulk of gas discharges,” Phys. Rev. E 72, 016406 (2005).
34S. A. Khrapak and G. E. Morﬁll, “Grain surface temperature
in noble gas discharges: Reﬁned analytical model,” Physics of
Plasmas 13, 104506 (2006), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2359282.
35U. Konopka, Wechselwirkungen geladener Staubteilchen in

Hochfrequenzplasmen (na, 2000).

36Y. Feng, J. Goree, and B. Liu, “Accurate particle position mea-
surement from images,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 78,
053704 (2007), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2735920.

37S. Jaiswal, P. Bandyopadhyay,

and A. Sen, “Flowing dusty

plasma experiments: generation of ﬂow and measurement tech-
niques,” Plasma Sources Science and Technology 25, 065021
(2016).

38G. Arora, P. Bandyopadhyay, M. G. Hariprasad,

and
A. Sen, “Micro-dynamics of neutral ﬂow induced dusty
plasma ﬂow,” Physics
(2019),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5078866.

of Plasmas 26,

023701

39W. Thielicke and E. Stamhuis, “Pivlab-time-resolved digital par-
ticle image velocimetry tool for matlab (version: 1.35),” J. Open

9

Res. Software 2, e30 (2014).
40A. Sen, S. Tiwari, S. Mishra,

and P. Kaw, “Nonlinear wave
excitations by orbiting charged space debris objects,” Advances
in Space Research 56, 429 – 435 (2015), advances in Asteroid
and Space Debris Science and Technology - Part 1.

41G. Arora, P. Bandyopadhyay, M. G. Hariprasad, and A. Sen, “A
dust particle based technique to measure potential proﬁles in a
plasma,” Physics of Plasmas 25, 083711 (2018).

