MULTI-USER AUGMENTED REALITY APPLICATION FOR VIDEO 
COMMUNICATION IN VIRTUAL SPACE 

Kumar Mridul, M. Ramanathan, Kunal Ahirwar, Mansi Sharma  

Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai - 600036

ABSTRACT 

Video conferencing helps multiple users to connect over a 
common platform so as to interact with each other with the aid 
of audio and video. The major issue arises when there are  too 
many people joining the same platform. It becomes quite diffi-
cult to accommodate too many users over the same call because 
screen dimensions are fixed. More the number of users that join 
a  call,  the  smaller  becomes  their  window  of  display,  thereby 
making it very frustrating for every user to even be merely visi-
ble. The display size of each user does not only become smaller 
with every increasing number of participants, but also deviates 
the purpose of such a conference call. The entire call is bewil-
dered and the idea is not even communicated at its required lev-
els. 
Our objective is to create a communication channel in AR [2, 3] 
wherein  many  participants  can  be  placed  all  around  the  real 
space of the environment, bringing each participant a step closer 
to in-place, face-to-face communication compared to a normal 
video calling application. Such immersion will bring life to the 
communication and give an essence of natural one on one inter-
action. 

is 

to 

tool 

Communication 

the  most  useful 

impart 
knowledge, understand ideas, clarify thoughts and expressions, 
organize plan and manage every single day-to-day activity. Alt-
hough  there  are  different  modes  of  communication,  physical 
barrier always affects the clarity of the message due to the ab-
sence  of  body  language  and  facial  expressions.  These  barriers 
are overcome by video calling, which is technically the most ad-
vance  mode of communication at present. The proposed work 
concentrates around the concept of video calling in a more nat-
ural and seamless way using Augmented Reality (AR). AR can 
be helpful in giving the users an experience of physical presence 
in each other’s environment. Our work provides an entirely new 
platform for video calling, wherein the users can enjoy the priv-
ilege of their own virtual space to interact with the individual’s 
environment.  Moreover,  there  is  no  limitation  of  sharing  the 
same screen space. Any number of participants can be accom-
modated over a single conference without having to compromise 
the screen size. 

Index Terms — Virtual/Augmented reality, video call, re-

alistic tele-immersion, remote collaboration, Mobile AR 

1. BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES 

The smartphones have become a commonly used gadget to serve 
multiple purposes in the present time. With the advent of novel 
technologies and applications, life has become simpler and ac-
celerated. In this fast paced world, being physically present in 
every  situation  is  not  possible.  This  potentially  increases  de-
mand of novel tools for Mobile video calling and conferencing. 
Video conferencing with a smartphone  could be used  to com-
municate across any part of the world.  

Figure 2: Current video conferencing solution 

2. METHOD 

To implement this project, we are using Unity Game En-
gine [9] with different plugins. There are three main factors that 
need to be taken care of: 

Figure 1: Evolution of Communication Devices 

1 – Communication 
2 – Augmented Reality 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 – Bringing AR video call on Mobile device 

Communication 

The  main idea of this project is to  establish a connection 
among different devices. We used plugins provided by agora.io 
[8] to establish the connection. The plugin takes care of commu-
nication  channel,  connection  and  transfer  of  audio  and  video 
data in real-time. The implementation is done in Unity to estab-
lish the communication channel. 

Bringing the application on the mobile devices [7] is quite 
cumbersome and tough. This application runs only over selected 
devices  or  smartphones  that  are  supported  by  ARCore  [12]. 
These devices include all the Google Pixel, Nokia 6.1, Nokia 7, 
etc. The application requires a special permission to be granted. 
The permission seeks for using both, the primary  and the sec-
ondary  camera  of  the  phone.  Once  the  .apk  is  created  and  in-
stalled on the phone, the channel (just like a chat room) can be 
joined. This room is open and active for other users to join the 
same channel. Once the participant joins, their screen adds up in 
the user’s reality.  

3. RESULTS 

We created an application using the proposed methodology 
which runs on the phone and gives the recommended results. As 
it is a crude model, it requires some modification. We are work-
ing on UI of the application. As per now, we can add 16 people 
in the conference Video AR call.  

Figure 3: Virtual screens in users’ reality 

Figure 4: Proposed Video Conference in AR 

Augmented Reality 

4. NOVELTY 

Video calling and conferencing mitigate the physical barri-
ers.  However,  in  the  modern  era  it  is not  highly  competent  to 
meet the ever increasing needs to the transfer of knowledge and 
manpower.  Augmented  Reality  being  state-of-the-art  technol-
ogy is effectively used in video conferencing. Using AR in com-
munication adds a new dimension to the current solution.  The 
major problem of the windows stacking over increasing number 
of participants of the call will be effectively reduced using this 
application.  Moreover,  adding  many  participants  on  a  confer-
ence  is  not  possible.  There  are  particular  restrictions  over  the 
number of users joining a call. The proposed novel model solves 
this  problem  by  providing  space  for  accommodating  the  win-
dows of many participants in the user’s real environment. It also 
enables  a  more  realistic  presence  of  the  communicators  while 
providing  a  mode  for  effective  and  efficient  communication, 
without  causing  any  chaos  and  confusion  for  interaction.  A 
demo of the proposed model is available (see the link [13]).  

Augmented Reality is an upcoming technology, which lets 
users visualize virtual objects into the real world. In a typical AR 
set-up, the real world is captured as it is and virtual information 
is overlaid upon the real world, making sure that virtual object 
does  not  move  with  respect  to  the  real  world  when  the  user 
moves. This lets the user feel that the virtual world is a part of 
the  real  world,  thereby  creating  augmentation.  Environment 
tracking, light estimation, motion, occlusion are major compo-
nents of AR implementation. 

The major role of Augmented Reality has been achieved in 
the proposed work with the aid of Unity and ARCore [11]. This 
plugin  helps  us  to  develop  other  Augmented  Reality  applica-
tions.  It  recognizes  the  feature  points  and  merges  this  infor-
mation  with  IMU  (Inertial  Measurement  Unit).  A  tightly  cou-
pled algorithm is written to utilize the camera and IMU infor-
mation. It is very efficient on the devices that support ARCore. 
The  surfaces  or  walls  can  be  created  and  mapped by  showing 
them using the phone screen.  

Bringing on Mobile Device 

Mobile devices have been successfully utilizing a lot of ap-
plications for enhancing communication. Most of these applica-
tions end up giving the same or at least similar features, but noth-
ing in addition to the existing ones. So, bringing a revolution in 
the  mode  of  video  communication  will  be  highly  rewarding. 
However,  introducing  these  traits  in  the  application  and using 
them on the devices is actually challenging.  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: More results of proposed AR video calling application; YouTube demo is available [13].  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. APPLICATIONS 

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This concept is novel and may find route to its application 
in the VR/AR/MR and Mobile 3D TV research fields. Its major 
applications are foreseeable in communication. With the usage 
of Augmented Reality, the user gets a next level of immersive 
[6,8] experience while interacting. Augmented Reality helps in 
placing the participant in the real world, who is communicating 
virtually. This creates a trustable interaction and brings people 
closer without any requirement to strain oneself. Such forms of 
communication  can  help  in  personal  as  well  as  professional 
fronts like hang out and chat, collaborate and work, conduct vir-
tual meetings, etc. 

Apart from this, another important application of this tech-
nology  can  be  seen  in  education,  surveillance  and  medical  in-
dustries.  The  extended  version  and  study  of  this  work  will  be 
very effective to provide real time instructions and training.  

Figure 6: Application of concept for industry 

For example, many on-site technical issues are unresolved 
due  to  various  reasons.  Time  and  monetary  constraints  may 
cause ineffective utilization of resources. This may also lead to 
serious immeasurable damages, if not fixed in time. Experts may 
be located in any nook and corner of the globe, but can provide 
instant advice and/or solution to the  problem faced on the site 
using this tool. The proposed work can be very useful to give a 
clear view of the faulty equipment and the expert can  analyze 
and rectify the problems right from their locations.  

6. FUTURE WORK 

Taking a step ahead, we are making Avatars, a replica of the 
participants interacting with each other in the real world. These 
avatars  will  depict  the  facial  expressions,  body  language  and 
movements. Using light field imaging techniques, these avatars 
will depict the characteristics of individuals. We will develop a 
technology  that  will  enable  the projection of  3D  model of  the 
people interacting with each other in real time. A single light-
field camera will be used to capture light fields which will give 
us the capability to reconstruct a human face model based on the 
facial characteristics. This paves our path towards the concept of 
holoportation on Mobile devices using light fields with proposed 
tool and existing VR/AR HMDs [14]. 

Figure 7: Future Work 

The  authors  would  like  to  thank  Anusha  Iyangar  and  stu-
dents from “Computational Imaging and Display Lab” and “Ad-
vanced Geometric Computing Lab” at IIT Madras for their con-
tribution in experiments and testing the tool.  

8. REFERENCES 

[1]  Weldy, T. G., & Icenogle, M. L. (1997). A Managerial Per-
spective:  Oral  Communication  Competency  Is  Most  Im-
portant for Business Students in the Workplace Jeanne D. 
Maes.  The  Journal  of  Business  Communication  (1973), 
34(1), 
67–80. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/002194369703400104. 

[2]  T.  Arakawa,  K.  Kasada,  T.  Narumi,  T.  Tanikawa  and  M. 
Hirose, "Augmented reality system for overlaying a scene 
in a video onto real world and reliving the camera operator's 
experience," 2013 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR), Lake Buena 
Vista, FL, 2013, pp. 139-140. 

[3]  S. Patil, C. Prabhu, O. Neogi, A. R. Joshi and N. Katre, "E-
learning system using Augmented Reality," 2016 Interna-
tional Conference on Computing Communication Control 
and automation (ICCUBEA), Pune, 2016, pp. 1-5. 

[4]  Billinghurst, Mark, and Hirokazu Kato. "Collaborative aug-
mented reality." Communications of the ACM 45.7 (2002): 
64-70. 

[5]  Lukosch, S., Billinghurst, M., Alem, L. et al. Comput Sup-
515. 
Work 

ported 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-015-9239-0 

(2015) 

Coop 

24: 

[6]  P.  Wang  et  al.,  "Do  You  Know  What  I  Mean?  An  MR-
Based  Collaborative  Platform,"  2018  IEEE  International 
Symposium  on  Mixed  and  Augmented  Reality  Adjunct 
(ISMAR-Adjunct),  Munich,  Germany,  2018,  pp.  77-78. 
doi: 10.1109/ISMAR-Adjunct.2018.00038 

[7]  https://www.cse.wustl.edu/~jain/cse574-10/ftp/reality/in-

dex.html 

[8]  G.  A.  Lee,  T.  Teo,  S.  Kim  and  M.  Billinghurst,  "A  User 
Study  on  MR  Remote  Collaboration  Using  Live  360 
Video," 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and 
Augmented Reality (ISMAR), Munich, Germany, 2018, pp. 
153-164. 
doi: 10.1109/ISMAR.2018.00051 

[9]  https://unity.com/ 

[10] https://www.agora.io/en/ 

[11] https://developers.google.com/ar/discover/ 

[12] https://developers.google.com/ar/discover/supported-de-

vices 

[13] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BLe1nB-m-k8 

[14] https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/holo-

portation-3/   

  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
