AR-based interaction for safe human-robot collaborative manufacturing

Antti Hietanen1, Jyrki Latokartano2, Roel Pieters3, Minna Lanz2 and Joni-Kristian K¨am¨ar¨ainen1

9
1
0
2

p
e
S
6

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
3
9
2
0
.
9
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— Industrial standards deﬁne safety requirements
for Human-Robot Collaboration (HRC) in industrial manufac-
turing. The standards particularly require real-time monitoring
and securing of the minimum protective distance between a
robot and an operator. In this work, we propose a depth-sensor
based model for workspace monitoring and an interactive
Augmented Reality (AR) User Interface (UI) for safe HRC.
The AR UI is implemented on two different hardware: a
projector-mirror setup and a wearable AR gear (HoloLens).
We experiment the workspace model and UIs for a realistic
diesel motor assembly task. The AR-based interactive UIs
provide 21-24% and 57-64% reduction in the task completion
and robot idle time, respectively, as compared to a baseline
without interaction and workspace sharing. However, subjective
evaluations reveal that HoloLens based AR is not yet suitable
for industrial manufacturing while the projector-mirror setup
shows clear improvements in safety and work ergonomics.

I. INTRODUCTION

Industrial manufacturing is going through a process of
change toward ﬂexible and intelligent manufacturing, the so-
called Industry 4.0. Human-robot collaboration (HRC) will
have a more prevalent role and this evolution means breaking
with the established safety procedures as the separation of
workspaces between robot and human operator is removed.
However, this will require special care for human safety
as the existing industrial standards and practices are based
on the principle that operator and robot workspaces are
separated and violations between them are monitored.

The International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
Technical Speciﬁcation (TS) 15066 [1] has recently ad-
dresses this need for safety with industrial collaborative
robotics and deﬁnes four different collaborative scenarios.
The ﬁrst speciﬁes the need and required performance for
a safety-rated, monitored stop (robot moving is prevented
without an emergency stop conforming to the standard).
The second outlines the behaviors expected for hand-guiding
a robot’s motions via an analog button cell attached to
the robot. The third speciﬁes the minimum protective dis-
tance between a robot and an operator in the collaborative
workspace, below which a safety-rated, controlled stop is
issued. The fourth limits the momentum of a robot such that
contact with an operator will not result pain or injury. Our
work focuses on the third scenario where the operator-robot
distance is communicated interactively.

Marvel and Norcross [2] propose methods for the ISO/TS
15066 deﬁned human-robot speed and separation monitoring
based on measurable quantities (robot and operator speeds

Laboratories of Signal Processing1, Mechanical Engineering and In-
dustrial Systems2 and Automation and Hydraulic Engineering3, Tampere
University of Technology, Finland First.Family@tut.fi

Fig. 1.
manufacturing: projector-mirror
https://youtu.be/A8VTTcYFoMo

The proposed interactive UIs

safe human-robot
(top) and HoloLens (bottom). Video:

for

and uncertainties). The main focus of this work is to deﬁne a
model to monitor safety margins with a depth sensor and to
communicate the margins to the operator with an interactive
User Interface (UI) (Figure 1).

We propose a shared workspace model for HRC manufac-
turing and interactive UIs. The model is based on the virtual
zones introduced by Bdiwi et al. [3]: robot zone and human
zone. In the human zone an operator can freely move and the
robot is not allowed to enter. The robot zone is dynamically
changing based on robot tasks and if the operator or any
other object enters the robot zone, the robot is halted. In
the proposed model, the two zones are separated by a safety
monitored danger zone and any changes in the workspace
model, either from the robot or operator side, cause halting
the robot. The purpose of the safety zone is to allow dynamic
update of the workspace model without compromising safety.

II. RELATED WORK

a) Human-Robot Collaboration (HRC) in industrial
manufacturing: Manufacturing industry leans on industrial
standards that deﬁne safety requirements for Human-Robot
Collaboration and therefore it is important to reﬂect research
to the existing standards. Hitherto the main safety princi-
ple has been separation of human and robot workspaces

 
 
 
 
 
 
and monitoring their violations. However, Industry 4.0 re-
quires more ﬂexible HRC and therefore the recent ISO/TS
15066 [1] provides best practices for shared workspaces.
Marvel and Norcross [2] proposed methods for the ISO/TS
15066 compliant human-robot speed and separation moni-
toring. However, shared workspaces are yet only rarely used
in industry as shown in a recent survey [4].

There have been attempts to formalize HRC in industrial
settings such as Bdiwi et al. [3] who introduce four levels
of HRC. The proposed workspace model, safety monitoring
and User Interfaces (UIs) in our work are consistent with
their collaboration levels Level 1 and Level 2. In Level 1 the
robot and operator work close to each other, but have their
own tasks. In Level 2 there is an additional cooperation zone
where the robot and operator collaborate without physical
interaction, for example, the robot holds a component ﬁrmly
and stationary. Level 3 deﬁnes a handing-over zone and
Level 4 adds interaction where, for example, human guides
a heavy component held by the robot. From the safety
perspective, Lasota et al. [5] provide a survey of existing
HRC safety approaches and divide them into four categories:
Safety Through Control, Safety Through Motion Planning,
Safety Through Prediction and Safety Through Consideration
of Psychological Factors. Our works belongs to the Safety
Through Control category.

Safety through control is the most active research ﬁeld in
HRC safety. There are existing works to stop a robot for
collision avoidance [6], [7], [8] and motion re-planning [9],
[10]. The proposed workspace model and safety monitoring
are inspired by the safety zones in [3] and instead of a passive
system we propose AR-based interaction for HRC.

b) Augmented Reality in HRC: Shared workspace HRC
requires seamless and safe interaction between a robot and
an operator. These have been studied in several recent works
that augment the workspace with interactive and dynamic
user interface features [11], [12], [8].

Chadalavada et. al [11] proposed a projector based safety
system for mobile robots operating on a ﬂat industrial ﬂoor.
The planned navigation path was projected on the ﬂoor to
increase human awareness. Their user study veriﬁed that the
projector system increased predictability and transparency
experience of co-workers in the same space with the robots.
Andersen et al. [12] proposed a projector based display
for HRC in industrial car door assembly. User studies of the
systems against two baselines, a monitor display and simple
text descriptions, showed clear improvements in the terms of
effectiveness and user satisfaction.

[13],

[14],

Vogel et al.

[8] have proposed multiple
projector-camera based systems for safe HRC in a similar
setting to ours. [13] introduces a safety monitoring system
based on a projector and multiple camera based monitoring.
The robot working area is projected by a standard DLP pro-
jector and the violations are detected by geometric distortions
of the projected line due to depth changes. In the more recent
work [8] the system is installed to an industrial workcell
with a shared screwing task. Our model is based on a depth

camera which make workspace model update and monitoring
more straightforward.

Wearable AR gear, also referred to as “Augmented Reality
Head-mounted Displays”, have recently gained momentum.
Huy et al. [15] use a head-mounted display in an outdoor
application where a projector system cannot be used. Elsdon
et al. [16] introduced a handheld spray robot where the
control of the spraying was shared between the human and
robot. However, it is unclear how mature the wearable AR
gear technology is for real
industrial manufacturing and
therefore we compara wearable AR and projector-based AR
in our work.

The main contributions of our work are:

• We propose a depth-based model for shared workspace
Human Robot Collaboration. The model is based on
three zones, human, robot and danger, and their contin-
uous update and safety monitoring.

• We propose two AR-based and interactive User Inter-
faces (UIs) based on the proposed model: projector-
mirror and wearable AR gear (HoloLens).

We experimentally evaluate the model and UIs on a realistic
industrial assembly task and report results from quantitative
and qualitative (subjective) evaluations with respect to per-
formance, safety and ergonomy, and against a non-shared
workspace baseline.

III. THE SHARED WORKSPACE MODEL

Fig. 2. A shared workspace S is modelled as a depth map image IS aligned
with the robot coordinate system. The robot zone Zr (blue) is dynamically
updated and subtracted from IS to generate the human zone Zh (gray). The
two zones are separated by the danger zone Zr (red) which is monitored for
safety violations. Changes in Zh are recorded to binary masks Ri (green).
Manipulated objects are automatically added to Zr (bottom right).

In our model, a shared workspace S is modelled with
a single depth map image IS and divided to three virtual
zones: robot zone Zr, human zone Zh and danger zone Zd
(Figure 2). The zones are modelled by binary masks in the
same space as IS which makes their update, display and
monitoring fast and simple.

A. Depth-based workspace model

We consider a shared workspace monitored by a depth sen-
sor which can be modelled as a pin-hole camera parametrized
by two matrices: the intrinsic camera matrix K, modelling
the projection of a Cartesian point to a image plane, and
the extrinsic camera matrix (R | t), describing the pose of
the camera in the world. The matrices can be solved by the
chessboard calibration procedure [17]. For simplicity we use
the robot coordinate frame as the world frame.

After calibration the points p in the depth sensor plane
can be transformed to a Cartesian point in world frame and
ﬁnally to the workspace model IS = {x}i of the size W ×H:
P = N −1 (cid:0)RK−1p + t(cid:1) ,

(1)

Zr = Mr(ω) ∪ Mobj(ω),

(5)

Zd = Mr(ω + ∆ω) ∪ Mobj(ω + ∆ω) \ Zr .

(6)

D. Safety monitoring

The main safety principle is that the depth values in the
danger region Zd must match with the stored depth model.
Any change must produce immediate halt of the system. Our
depth based model in the robot frame IS provides now fast
computation since the change detection is computed as a fast
subtraction operation

x = TprojP ,

(2)

I∆ = ||IS − I||.

(7)

where N −1 is the inverse coordinate transformation and
Tproj is the projective transformation. Now, computations are
done efﬁciently in IS and (1) is used to display the results
to the AR hardware and (2) to map the robot control points
(Sec. III-B) to the workspace model.

where I is the most recent depth data transferred to same
space as our workspace model. The difference bins (pixels)
are further processed by Euclidean clustering [20] to remove
spurious bins due to noisy sensor measurements.

Finally, the safety operation depends on which zone a

B. Binary zone masks

Since all computation is done in the depth image space
IS the three virtual zones can be deﬁned as binary masks of
the size W × H: the robot zone Zr, the danger zone Zd and
the human zone Zh.

a) The robot zone mask Zr: The zone is initialized
using set of control points Cr containing minimum number
of 3D points covering all the extreme parts of the robot.
The point locations in the robot frame are calculated online
using a modiﬁed version of the Hawkinses model [18] and
projected to IS. Finally, the projected points are converted to
regions having radius of ω and a convex hull [19] enclosing
all the regions is computed and the resulting hull is rendered
as a binary mask Mr representing Zr.

b) The danger zone mask Zd: Contour of the Zr and
constructed by adding a danger margin ∆ω to the robot zone
mask and then subtracting Zr from the results:

Zd = Mr(ω + ∆ω) \ Zr.

(3)

c) The human zone mask Zh: This is easy to compute
as a binary operation since the human zone is all pixels not
occupied by the robot zone Zr or the danger zone Zd:

Zh = IS \ (Zr ∪ Zd).

(4)

C. Adding the manipulated object to Zr and Zd

An important extension of our model is that the known
objects that the robot manipulates are added to the robot
zone Zr and Zd (see Figure 2). This guarantees that the
robot does not accidentally hit the operator with an object
it is carrying. In such case a new set of control points Cobj
is created using known dimensions of the object and point
locations of the robot joints. Finally the binary mask Mobj
for the object is created similarly as Mr and the ﬁnal shape
of the zones are computed by fast binary operations:

change is detected:

∀x | I∆(x) ≥ τ






if x ∈ Zd HALT
if x ∈ Zr
if x ∈ Zh Mh = 0, Mh(x) = 1

IS(x) = I(x)

, (8)

where τ is the depth threshold.

In the ﬁrst case, the change has occurred in the danger
zone Zd and therefore the robot must be immediately halted
to avoid collision. For maximum safety this processing stage
must be executed ﬁrst and must test all pixels x before the
next stages.

In the second case, the change has occurred in the robot
working zone Zr and is therefore caused by the robot itself
by moving and/or manipulating objects and therefore the
workspace model IS can be safely updated.

In the last case, the change has occurred in the human
safety zone Zh and we create the mask Mh that represents
the changed bins (note that the mask is recreated for every
measurement to allow temporal changes, but it does not
affect robot operation). Robot can continue operation nor-
mally, but if its danger zone intersects with any 1-bin in
Mh, then these locations must be veriﬁed from the human
co-worker via user interface. If the bins are veriﬁed, then
these values are updated to the workspace model IS and
operation continues normally. Note that our system does not
verify each bin separately, but a spatially connected region
of changed bins. This operation allows a shared workspace
and arbitrary changes in the workspace which do occur away
from the danger zone.

IV. THE USER INTERFACES

The danger zone deﬁned in Section III-B and various User
Interface (UI) components are rendered to graphical objects
in two AR setups (Figure 3).

virtual fence. The fence is rendered as a polygonal mesh
having semi-transparent red texture. From the 2D boundary
and a ﬁxed fence height we construct the fence mesh from
rectangular quadrilaterals that are further divided to two
triangles for the HoloLens rendering software.

The UI component and the virtual fence coordinates p are
deﬁned in the robot frame and transformed to the HoloLens
frame by

P (cid:48) = T AR

H T R

ARP

(9)

where T M
R is a known static transformation between the
robot and an AR marker (set manually to the workspace)
and T AR
H is the transformation between the marker and the
user holographic frame . Once the pose has been initialized
the marker can be removed and during run time T AR
H is
updated by HoloLens software.

V. ENGINE ASSEMBLY TASK

Our task is adopted from a local diesel engine manufac-
turing company and we also present a baseline without a
shared workspace.

A. Task description

Fig. 4. The engine assembly task used in the experiments. The task consists
of ﬁve sub-tasks (Task 1-5) that are conducted by the operator (blue) or the
robot (red) or both (yellow). Task 4 is the collaborative sub-task where a
rocker shaft is held by the robot and carefully positioned by the operator.

Fig. 3. User Interface graphics for the projector-mirror as a 2D color image
(left) and the HoloLens setup (right) rendered in Unity3D engine.

A. UI Components

The proposed UI contains the following interaction com-
ponents (Figure 3 and Figure 2): 1) a danger zone that shows
the region operators should avoid; 2) highlighting changed
regions in the human zone; 3) “GO” and “STOP’ buttons
to start and stop the robot; 4) “CONFIRM” button to verify
and add changed regions to the current model; 5) “ENABLE”
button that needs to be pressed simultaneously with the “GO”
and “CONFIRM” buttons to take effect; and 6) a graphical
display box (image and text) to show the robot status and
instructions to the operator.

The above UI components were implemented to two
different hardware, projector-mirror and HoloLens. The UI
components and layout were the same for the both hardware
to be able to compare the human experience on two different
types of hardware.

B. Projector-mirror AR

The projector-mirror setup is adopted from Vogel et
al. [13], [14], [8] with the main difference that we replace
multiple RGB cameras with a single RGB sensor (KinectV2).
A standard 3LCD projector is installed to the ceiling to
point to a 45◦ tilted mirror that reprojects the picture to
the workspace area. The mirror is needed to expand the
projection area of the standard projector, but could be
replaced with a wide angle lens projector. The projector
outputs a 1920×1080 color image with 50Hz frame rate. The
projector coordinate frame is calibrated to the world (robot)
coordinate frame using the inverse camera calibration with
a checkerboard pattern [21].

C. Wearable AR (HoloLens)

As a state-of-the-art head-mounted AR display, we adopt
Microsoft HoloLens. The headset can operate without any
external cables and the 3D reconstruction of the environment
as well as accurate 6-DoF localization of the head pose is
provided by the system utilizing an internal IMU sensor,
four spatial-mapping cameras, and a depth camera. The
data exchange between HoloLens and our model is done
using wireless TCP/IP. We implemented a Linux server
that synchronizes data from the robot simulator (ROS) to
HoloLens and back.

The interaction buttons are displayed as semi-transparent
spheres that are positioned similar to the projector-mirror UI
(Figure 1). In addition, we render the safety region as a solid

The task used in our experiments is a part of a real engine
assembly task from a local company. The task is particularly
interesting as one of the sub-tasks is to insert a rocker shaft
that weights 4.3 kg and would therefore beneﬁt from human-
robot collaboration. The task is illustrated in Figure 4 which
also shows the ﬁve sub-tasks (H denotes the human operator
and R the robot): Task 1) Install 8 rocker arms (H), Task 2)
Install the motor frame (R), Task 3) Insert 4 frame screws
(H), Task 4) Install the rocker shaft (R+H) and Task 5) Insert
the nuts on the shaft (H).

Tasks 1-3 and 5 are dependent so that the previous sub-
task must be completed before the next can begin. Task 4
is collaborative in the sense that the robot brings the saft
and moves to a force mode allowing physical hand-guidance
of the end-effector. In the force mode, the robot applies just
enough force to overcome the gravitational force of the object
while still allowing the human to guide the robot arm for
accurate positioning.

B. A non-collaborative baseline

Our baseline is based on the current practices in manu-
facturing - the human and robot cannot operate in the same
workspace simultaneously. In our setting, the operator must
stay 4 meters apart from the robot when the robot is moving
and the operator is allowed to enter the workspace only when
the robot is not moving. In this scenario the collaborative
Task 4 is completely manual, the robot only brings the part.
Safety in the baseline is ensured by a dead man’s switch
button which the operator needs to press all the time for the
robot to be operational. The baseline does not contain any UI
components, but in the user studies the subjects are provided
with textual descriptions of all sub-tasks.

VI. EXPERIMENTS

We report quantitative and qualitative results for the as-

sembly task and compare the three setups.

A. Settings

The experiments were conducted using the model 5
Universal Robot Arm (UR5) and OnRobot RG2 gripper.
KinectV2 was used as the depth sensor installed to the ceiling
and capturing the whole workspace area. The AR displays,
the projector or HoloLens, were connected to a single laptop
with Ubuntu 16.04 OS and it performed all computations.

a) User studies: The experiments were conducted with
20 unexperienced volunteered university students. Their per-
formance times were recorded and after experimenting the
three systems they were asked the questionnaire in Figure 5.
The goal of the questionnaire was to evaluate physical and
mental stress aspects of the human co-workers during the
task. The questions were selected to cover safety, ergonomics
and mental stress experience as deﬁned in Salvendy et
al. [22], and autonomy, competence, and relatedness in Deci
et al. [23]. Users were asked to score each question using
the scale from 1 (totally disagree) to 5 (totally agree).

Fig. 5. The questionnaire used in our subjective experiments.

Fig. 6. Average task execution and robot idle times from the user studies.

B. Quantitative Performance

For quantitative performance evaluation we used two dif-
ferent metrics, Average total task execution time and Average
total robot idle time, that measure the total performance
improvement and the time robot is waiting for the operator
to complete her tasks.

The results in Figure 6 show that the both AR-based
interactive systems outperform the baseline where the robot
was not moving in the same workspace with an operator. The
difference can be explained by the robot idle time which is
much less for AR-based interaction. The difference between
the HoloLens and Projector based systems is marginal. On
average, the AR-based systems were 21−24% and 57−64%
faster than the baseline in the terms of the total execution
time and the robot idle time respectively.

C. Subjective evaluation

Since the results from the previous quantitative evaluation
of system performance were similar for the both HoloLens
and Projector based AR interaction the user studies provided
important information about the differences of the two sys-
tems.

Fig. 7. Average scores for the questions Q1-Q13 used in the user studies (20 participants). Score 5 denotes “totally agree” and 1 “totally disagree” and
scores for the questions Q3, Q4, Q6, Q7 and Q10 are inverted for better readability (score 5 has the same meaning as for other questions).

From the each 20 participant the 13 template questions
(Q1-Q13) in Figure 5 were asked and the results analyzed.
The average scores with the standard deviations are shown in
Figure 7. The overall impression is that the Projector-based
display outperforms the two others (HoloLens and Baseline),
but surprisingly HoloLens is found inferior the baseline in
many safety related questions.

The numerical values are given in Table I and these
verify the overall ﬁndings. The projector-based method is
considered the safest and the HoloLens-based method most
unsafe with a clear margin. The amount of information
needed to understand the task is smallest for the baseline
while Projector-based has very similar numbers and again
the HoloLens-based method was found clearly more difﬁcult
to understand. Ergonomy-wise the HoloLens and Projector
based methods were superior likely to the fact that they
provided help in installing the heavy rocker shaft. The
autonomy numbers are similar for all methods, but
the
projector-based is found the easiest to work with. The users
also found their performance best with the Projector-based
system (Competence). The question Q12 was obviously
difﬁcult to understand for the users, but all users found the
system with AR-interaction more plausible (Q13) than the
baseline without interaction. Overall, the projector-based AR
interaction in collaborative manufacturing was found safer
and more ergonomic than the baseline without AR interaction
and also the HoloLens-based AR.

Below are free comments from the user studies that well
point out the reasons why different systems were preferred
or considered difﬁcult to use:

• HoloLens: “Too narrow ﬁeld of view, head has to be

rotated a lot.”
“Feels heavy and uncomfortable after a while.”
“Holograms feels to be closer than they actually are.”
• Projector: “I would choose the projector system over

HoloLens”
“Easier and more comfortable to use”

TABLE I
AVERAGE SCORES FOR THE QUESTION (Q1-Q13). HIGHER IS BETTER
EXCEPT FOR THOSE MARKED WITH “¬”. THE BEST RESULT
EMPHASIZED (MULTIPLE IF NO STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE)

HoloLens

Projector

Baseline

Safety

Information
Processing

Ergonomics

Autonomy

Competence

Relatedness

Q1
Q2

Q3¬
Q4¬

Q5
Q6¬
Q7¬

Q8
Q9

Q10¬
Q11

Q12
Q13

3.7
3.9

2.6
2.3

3.2
1.7
1.7

3.5
3.1

1.8
3.4

3.6
4.0

4.7
4.6

1.7
1.7

4.4
1.7
1.4

3.8
3.6

1.4
3.9

3.4
4.2

4.6
3.6

1.3
1.4

2.9
2.5
2.4

3.3
2.7

1.9
3.4

3.5
3.4

VII. CONCLUSIONS

We proposed a computation model of

the shared
workspace in human-robot collaborative manufacturing. The
model allows to monitor changes in the workspace to estab-
lish safety features. Moreover, we proposed a user interface
for HRC in industrial manufacturing and implemented it
on two different hardware for augmented reality, a project-
mirror and wearable AR gear (HoloLens). In our experiments
on a realistic assembly task adopted from automotive man-
ufacturing the both AR-based systems were found superior
in performance to the baseline without a shared workspace.
However, the users found the projector-mirror system clearly
more plausible for manufacturing work than the HoloLens
setup.

REFERENCES

• Baseline: “System could be fooled by placing object on

the switch button.”

[1] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/TS 15066:2016

Robots and Robotic Devices Collaborative Robots, 2016.

[2] J. Marvel and R. Norcross, “Implementing speed and separation
monitoring in collaborative robot workcells,” Robotics and Computer-
Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 44, 2017.

[3] M. Bdiwi, M. Pfeifer, and A. Sterzing, “A new strategy for ensuring
human safety during various levels of interaction with industrial
robots,” CIRP Annals, vol. 66, no. 1, 2017.

[4] V. Villani, F. Pini, F. Leali, and C. Secchi, “Survey on human–robot
intuitive interfaces and

collaboration in industrial settings: Safety,
applications,” Mechatronics, 2018.

[5] P. Lasota, T. Fong, and J. Shah, “A survey of methods for safe human-
robot interaction,” Foundations and Trends in Robotics, vol. 5, no. 4,
2017.

[6] P. A. Lasota, G. F. Rossano, and J. A. Shah, “Toward safe close-
proximity human-robot interaction with standard industrial robots,”
2014.

[7] F. Flacco, T. Kroeger, A. De Luca, and O. Khatib, “A depth space
approach for evaluating distance to objects,” Journal of Intelligent &
Robotic Systems, vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 7–22, 2015.

[8] C. Vogel, C. Walter, and N. Elkmann, “Safeguarding and support-
ing future human-robot cooperative manufacturing processes by a
projection-and camera-based technology,” Procedia Manufacturing,
vol. 11, pp. 39–46, 2017.

[9] G. Dumonteil, G. Manfredi, M. Devy, A. Confetti, and D. Sidobre,
“Reactive planning on a collaborative robot for industrial applications,”
in Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Informatics in
Control, Automation and Robotics - Volume 2: ICINCO,, pp. 450–457,
INSTICC, SciTePress, 2015.

[10] V. V. Unhelkar, P. A. Lasota, Q. Tyroller, R.-D. Buhai, L. Marceau,
B. Deml, and J. A. Shah, “Human-aware robotic assistant for collabo-
rative assembly: Integrating human motion prediction with planning in
time,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 2394–
2401, 2018.

[11] R. T. Chadalavada, H. Andreasson, R. Krug, and A. J. Lilienthal,
“That’s on my mind! robot to human intention communication through
on-board projection on shared ﬂoor space,” in Mobile Robots (ECMR),
2015 European Conference on, pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2015.

[12] R. S. Andersen, O. Madsen, T. B. Moeslund, and H. B. Amor,
intentions into human environments,” in Robot
“Projecting robot
and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), 2016 25th IEEE
International Symposium on, pp. 294–301, IEEE, 2016.

[13] C. Vogel, M. Poggendorf, C. Walter, and N. Elkmann, “Towards
safe physical human-robot collaboration: A projection-based safety
system,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), pp. 3355–3360, IEEE, 2011.

[14] C. Vogel, C. Walter, and N. Elkmann, “A projection-based sensor
system for safe physical human-robot collaboration,” in IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
pp. 5359–5364, IEEE, 2013.

[15] D. Q. Huy, I. Vietcheslav, and G. S. G. Lee, “See-through and spatial
augmented reality - a novel framework for human-robot interaction,”
in 2017 3rd International Conference on Control, Automation and
Robotics (ICCAR), pp. 719–726, April 2017.

[16] J. Elsdon and D. Y, “Augmented reality for feedback in a shared
control spraying task,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), 2018.

[17] F. C. Park and B. J. Martin, “Robot sensor calibration: solving AX=
XB on the Euclidean group,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics and
Automation, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 717–721, 1994.

[18] K. P. Hawkins, “Analytic inverse kinematics for the universal robots

ur-5/ur-10 arms,” tech. rep., Georgia Institute of Technology, 2013.

[19] R. L. Graham and F. F. Yao, “Finding the convex hull of a simple

polygon,” Journal of Algorithms, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 324–331, 1983.

[20] R. B. Rusu, “Semantic 3d object maps for everyday manipulation in
human living environments,” KI-K¨unstliche Intelligenz, vol. 24, no. 4,
pp. 345–348, 2010.

[21] I. Martynov, J.-K. Kamarainen, and L. Lensu, “Projector calibration by
”inverse camera calibration”,” in Scandinavian Conference on Image
Analysis (SCIA), 2011.

[22] G. Salvendy, Handbook of human factors and ergonomics. John Wiley

& Sons, 2012.

[23] E. L. Deci, R. J. Vallerand, L. G. Pelletier, and R. M. Ryan, “Motiva-
tion and education: The self-determination perspective,” Educational
psychologist, vol. 26, no. 3-4, pp. 325–346, 1991.

