9
1
0
2

v
o
N
2
1

]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[

2
v
6
9
4
3
1
.

9
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Plasma treatments and photonic nanostructures
for shallow nitrogen vacancy centers in diamond

MARIUSZ RADTKE,1 LARA RENDER,1 RICHARD NELZ,1 AND ELKE
NEU1,*
1Saarland University, Department of Physics, Campus E2.6, 66123 Saarbrücken
*elkeneu@physik.uni-saarland.de

Abstract: We investigate the inﬂuence of plasma treatments, especially a 0 V-bias, potentially
low damage O2 plasma as well as a biased Ar/SF6/O2 plasma on shallow, negative nitrogen
vacancy (NV−) centers. We ignite and sustain using our 0 V-bias plasma using purely inductive
coupling. To this end, we pre-treat surfaces of high purity chemical vapor deposited single-crystal
diamond (SCD). Subsequently, we create ∼10 nm deep NV− centers via implantation and
annealing. Onto the annealed SCD surface, we fabricate nanopillar structures that eﬃciently
waveguide the photoluminescence (PL) of shallow NV−. Characterizing single NV− inside these
nanopillars, we ﬁnd that the Ar/SF6/O2 plasma treatment quenches NV− PL even considering
that the annealing and cleaning steps following ion implantation remove any surface termination.
In contrast, for our 0 V-bias as well as biased O2 plasma, we observe stable NV− PL and low
background ﬂuorescence from the photonic nanostructures.

© 2019 Optical Society of America under the terms of the OSA Open Access Publishing Agreement

1.

Introduction

Single-crystal diamond (SCD) with high purity, high crystalline quality and well-controlled surface
properties is an enabling material for quantum technologies including quantum sensing [1, 2].
SCD is transparent for visible light and supports light conﬁnement and guiding in photonic
nanostructures (refractive index 2.4 visible range, indirect electronic band gap 5.45 eV, [3]).
SCD hosts more than 500 optically active point defects termed color centers [3]. Considering
quantum technologies, the currently mostly investigated color center is the negative nitrogen
vacancy complex (NV−). NV− centers provide controllable, optically readable spins [4] and are
stable electrical dipoles that emit single photons [5, 6] or react to optical near-ﬁelds [7, 8]. Their
electronic spin degree of freedom renders them sensitive to magnetic ﬁelds [9], electric ﬁelds [10],
temperature [11] and strain [12] in the diamond matrix. In this context, the key to sensitive
measurements with simultaneously nanoscale spatial resolution is to employ individual NV−
centers placed shallowly (typically < 10 nm) below SCD surfaces. To enable nanoscale imaging
of various samples, it is mandatory to embed the sensing NV− in a SCD scanning probe tip [9,13].
In addition to enable scanning of a sample, the SCD tip’s photonic properties direct the NV−
photoluminescence (PL) to the collection optics and thus enhance sensitivity [9, 14]. The most
prominent candidates for SCD scanning probes are pyramidal tips [15, 16] and cone-shaped or
cylindrical pillars (on platforms) [9, 13, 14]. The latter require sophisticated top-down processes
to sculpt the structures from SCD.

Top-down nanofabrication processes reliably create tailored sensing devices potentially
enabling highly eﬃcient sensing. However, these processes simultaneously endanger shallow
NV− centers: To ensure reliable processing, typically smooth (roughness several nanometers),
mostly commercially available SCD plates are used. Mechanical polishing of ultra-hard SCD
used to obtain these smooth surfaces, however, may create subsurface damage and stress extending
several micrometers into SCD [17, 18]. Consequently, SCD surfaces which are highly suited
for nanofabrication might not be optimal to host shallow NV−. To circumvent this challenge,
typically several micrometer of SCD are removed using inductively coupled plasma reactive ion

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Schematic of the employed nanofabrication process. The manuscript is structured
into the section according to these schematics.

etching (ICP-RIE) [13]. Typical ICP-RIE plasmas, however, have been shown to damage the
uppermost few nanometers of the etched SCD [19]. This damage will also potentially aﬀect
shallow NV− created under this etched surfaces [20]. Moreover, e.g. chlorine gas in the etch
plasma is very helpful to keep SCD surfaces smooth during etching [21, 22] but might attach
to the surfaces, potentially de-activating shallow NV− [23]. Low damage plasmas in which
the etching species are not accelerated towards the etched SCD (0 V-bias plasmas) have been
investigated as a solution to the challenge of ICP-RIE induced damage [20]. Using ICP-RIE here
is the method of choice as the density of activated species in the plasma and the acceleration
towards the etched substrate can be controlled independently of each other by controlling the
power inductively coupled to the plasma (ICP power) and the power coupled capacitively to the
plasma (often termed radio frequency (RF) power or platen power) [24–26]. Previous work [20]
employed the 0 V-bias plasma after creating shallow NV−. Consequently, the plasma treatment
removes SCD containing shallow NV− centers and alters the NV− density. Uncertainties in the
etch rate of the 0 V-bias plasma thus transform into uncertainties in NV− density rendering the
reliable creation of individual NV− in nanostructures challenging.

In this manuscript, we present a process to manufacture photonic nanostructures namely
nanopillars with shallow, individual NV−. We, for the ﬁrst time, include a 0 V-bias O2 plasma
as pre-treatment for NV− creation and SCD nanopillars fabrication thus avoiding changing
the NV− density by our plasma treatment. Figure 1 summarizes our nanofabrication process.
Following our previous work [27], we restrict the used etch gases to non-corrosive, non-toxic

gases namely Ar, SF6 and O2. Starting from polished, commercial SCD plates [Fig. 1(i)], we
use high bias ICP-RIE to remove micrometer thick potentially damaged layers [stress relief
etch, Fig. 1(ii)] while conserving smoothness. We ﬁnish this processing step with diﬀerent
plasma treatments, especially a potentially low damage O2 plasma step [pre-etch, Fig. 1(iii)].
Following this sample pre-treatment, we use established techniques to create NV− centers [Figs.
1(iv)-1(vi)]. We use an optimized process involving electron beam lithography (EBL) and
ICP-RIE to structure nanopillars with single NV− [Figs. 1(vii)-1(ix)]. We characterize single
NV− using PL spectroscopy, PL saturation, PL lifetime, photon correlation measurements as
well as optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR).

2. Experimental setup and methods

We use a custom-built confocal scanning microscope (numerical aperture 0.8) to characterize the
NV centers’ properties in the SCD where confocal ﬁltering is ensured using a single mode ﬁber.
To acquire confocal PL maps, we excite NV centers with a continuous diode-pumped solid-state
(DPSS) laser with a wavelength of 532 nm. To investigate the charge state of NV centers, we use
an additional DPSS laser with a wavelength of 594 nm. We detect the PL signal through a 650 nm
longpass-ﬁlter and use highly-eﬃcient photon counters (Excelitas SPCM-AQRH-14, quantum
eﬃciency ∼ 70 %) to quantify the PL intensity. In addition, we can send the light to a grating
spectrometer (Acton Spectra Pro 2500, Pixis 256OE CCD). We use a tuneable (450-850 nm),
pulsed laser (NKT EXW-12, pulse length ∼ 50 ps) equipped with a ﬁlter system (NKT SuperK
Varia) and correlation electronics (PicoQuant, PicoHarp 300) to perform time-resolved PL
analysis for e.g. lifetime measurements. To perform spin manipulation on NV− centers in the
SCD, we equip the setup with a microwave source (Stanford Research Systems, SG 384) and an
ampliﬁer (Mini Circuits, ZHL-42W+) to deliver microwaves through a 20 µm thick gold wire.
To perform ICP-RIE, we employ an Oxford Plasmalab 100 ICP RIE system. The plasma lab 100
uses a helical coil ICP conﬁguration. We analyze the plasma composition by means of optical
emission spectroscopy (Ocean Optics USB 2000+ coupled by ﬁber optics to the ICP-RIE system).
We employ atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements (Bruker Fastscan, tapping mode,
silicon carbide cantilevers) to deduce the surface roughness of our etched surfaces. To create NV−
centers, ion implantation has been performed at Augsburg University (Ion-Implantation-System
NV 3206, Axcelis Technologies). Samples were annealed at 800 ◦C under 1.5 × 10−7 mbar
vacuum using a home-built annealing oven incorporating a heater plate (Tectra Boralectric). We
employ a cold-cathode scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Hitachi S45000), equipped with
RAITH Elphy software to perform electron beam-lithography (EBL).

3. Sample pre-treatment: stress relief- and pre-etch

In this study, we use commercially available SCD grown by chemical vapor deposition of
electronic grade purity (nitrogen, [N0
] <5 ppb and boron [B]<1 ppb, Element Six, UK). The SCD
s
is polished to form plates with 50 µm thickness by Delaware Diamond Knives, US. Using such
thin SCD plates is motivated by our goal to manufacture free-standing SCD scanning probe
devices that require thinning the plate to a thickness < 5 µm [13]. Here, a thickness of 50 µm
is a good compromise between mechanical stability and process time for thinning. To ease
handling during nanofabrication, we ﬁx the SCD plate to a silicon carrier using small amounts
of crystalbond adhesive. The plates have a roughness of Ra=3 nm according to manufacturer
speciﬁcations and lateral dimensions of 2x4 mm. The received diamonds were cleaned by
a boiling tri-acid mixture (1:1:1 v/v of H2SO4, HNO3, HClO4) and subsequent washing in
acetone/isopropanol. We check surface cleanliness in a stereo microscope (50 x magniﬁcation)
and ﬁnd no visible residues over the entire SCD surface.

Subsequent to cleaning, we use an etching recipe published previously [27] to remove the
topmost 2.3 µm of our SCD plate. This stress relief etch [see also Fig. 1(ii)] is applied uniformly

to the full surface of the SCD plate and uses an Ar/SF6/O2 plasma as ﬁnal step (parameters see
Table 1). This recipe avoids surface roughening, despite the fact that we are removing potentially
damaged SCD material [27]. As indicated by previous work, adding a ﬂuorine containing etch
gas to the process aids in avoiding micromasking on the SCD arising from potential silicon
contamination in typical ICP-RIE chambers [26].

Plasma

ICP
Power
(W)

435 V O2

Ar/SF6/O2

500

700

RF
Power
(W)

200

100

DC
Bias
(V)

435

150

Etch
Rate
(nm/min)

Pressure
(mTorr)

rough-
ness
(nm)

98

87

11

13

0.7

1

Gas
Flux
(sccm)

O2: 50

O2 22

SF6:7

Ar:15

0 V O2

550

0

0

O2: 50

8

12

0.7

Table 1. Plasma parameters for stress relief and pre-etch. The etch rate of the 0 V-bias O2
plasma varied between 8 to 10 nm/min and was thus reasonably consistent.

While the stress relief etch procedure reliably removes even tens of micrometers of SCD
keeping the surface smooth [27], highly energetic etch species in the plasma potentially damage
the ﬁrst nanometers of the SCD [19]. In this study, we thus systematically investigate the eﬀect of
additional plasma steps, termed pre-etch plasmas, which follow the stress relief etch and by which
we terminate the removal of material [see Fig. 1(iii)]. We aim to compare diﬀerent pre-etch
treatments applied to the same SCD plate. We thus rule out that sample quality changes inﬂuence
our ﬁndings. To this end, we protect not to be etched areas using a 100 µm thin quartz plate and
create three areas in the SCD plate [see Fig. 2(a)]. In two areas, we apply additional pre-etch
plasmas (0 V-bias O2 area I, 435 V-bias O2 area III) prior to creating shallow NV− centers (see
Sec. 4). In contrast, area II is not treated by a pre-etch plasma and was consequently only etched
by the Ar/SF6/O2 plasma of the stress relief etch.

Table 1 summarizes the parameters of the employed etch plasmas. We note that a larger variety
of 0 V-bias plasmas has been tested but only the 0 V-bias O2 plasma enabled etching without
excess surface roughening (see Appendix 7.1). We also take great care to ignite the 0 V-bias
plasma without bias building up in its starting phase by careful adjustments of capacitors in the
reactor and without using capacitively coupled radio frequency power. As discernible from Table
1, the biased plasmas reach etch rates of almost 100 nm/min, while the 0 V-bias O2 plasma’s etch
rate is an order of magnitude lower. As indicated above, 2.3 µm of SCD were removed in the
stress-relief etch (and consequently in area II). In area I, we additionally remove ∼200 nm using
the 0 V-bias O2 plasma. In area III, we additionally remove 2 µm using the 435 V-bias O2 plasma.
After the pre-etches, we again clean the SCD sample as described above and measure the
surface roughness in areas I, II and III using AFM. The results of these measurements are depicted
in Figs. 2(b)-2(d) and summarized in Table 1. For all areas, we ﬁnd an rms roughness below
1 nm, consequently all regions are usable for the fabrication of nanopillars with shallow NV−.
Smooth surfaces are mandatory for high spatial resolution, scanning probe sensing using NV− as
any surface roughness will transform into uncontrolled stand-oﬀ distances between NV− sensor
and sample under investigation.

In the following, we discuss the etch mechanisms underlying the diﬀerent plasma processes.
While all surfaces show low roughness, remarkably the surface etched with the 0 V-bias O2 plasma
shows the lowest roughness. 0 V plasmas have been found to etch isotropically [28,29] via chemical

Fig. 2. (a) Sample layout for the characterization of diﬀerent plasma treatements. The whole
polished SCD plate ﬁrst undergoes the stress relief etch. Subsequently, we apply diﬀerent
pre-etches to form three distinct areas (plasma type and depth of etch given in the sketch).
The ordering of the plasma treatments for the pre-etch step is as follows: We cover areas II
and III with a quartz plate (thickness 100 µm) and apply the 0 V O2 plasma to area I. By
moving the quartz plate and covering areas I and II, the 435 V O2 plasma was applied to
area III. Subsequently, we fabricate nanopillars in all areas. The pillars are not to scale and
for illustration only. (b)-(d) AFM scans to determine the surface roughness in areas I,II and
III. The given roughness is the rms value obtained from 5x5 µm2 tapping mode scans.

Fig. 3. Optical emission spectra of (a) Ar/SF6/O2, (b) O2 435 V and (c) O2 0 V (350 W ICP)
plasmas with corresponding Boltzmann plots used to extract electron temperatures Tel.

2 . In a biased O2 plasma, O+

etching eﬀects. This situation might induce micromasking due to e.g. residual impurities/dust on
the SCD surface that cannot be removed by this soft plasma or lead to preferential etching of
defective areas [26]. However, we do not observe pronounced micromasking in our work. We
use optical emission spectroscopy to compare the composition of reactive species in our plasmas
(see Fig. 3). Observing the molecular transitions depicted in the insets of Figs. 3(b) and 3(c), we
analyze the concentration of ionized oxygen O+
2 is the main etching
species as the charged ions are eﬀectively accelerated towards the SCD sample and will induce
physical etching [30, 31]. We ﬁnd a 50 times higher concentration of O+
2 in the 435 V-bias O2
plasma compared to the 0 V-bias O2 plasma (see Fig. 3). In contrast, the etch rate of the 0 V-bias
O2 plasma is only roughly one order of magnitude lower than for the 435 V O2 plasma indicating
an additional etching species in the 0 V-bias plasma. We suggest this additional etching species
to be (atomic) oxygen radicals. Observing the transitions 3s5S0 → 3p5P and 3s5S0 → 3p3P
in the oxygen radical system, we ﬁnd almost the same concentration of oxygen radicals in the
0 V-bias and 435 V-bias plasmas. For the 0 V-bias plasma, chemical etching based on the oxygen
radicals is dominant which leads, as expected [32], to much lower etch rates (see Table 1). We
expect chemical etching induced by non-accelerated radicals to introduce less damage to the
SCD surface compared to the etching via ionized species accelerated under a DC bias. However,
chemical etching is isotropic [28, 29] and therefore not applicable for nanostructures that require
steep sidewalls e.g. nanopillars.

To additionally characterize the employed O2 plasmas, we investigate their electron temperature
Tel. Electrons in the plasma will collide with the molecules/atoms of the etch gas exciting the
gas. Consequently, higher electron densities transfer into a higher population of excited states in
molecules/atoms. In the absence of a DC bias, the electron temperature can be an upper estimate
for the thermal energy of the etching species in the plasma. It should be noted that the electrons
might not fully transfer their thermal energy to the etching species but are still a clear indication
of the plasma density [33]. In contrast in the case of a biased plasma, the energy of the etching
species will be mainly governed by the DC bias [25]. We use the measured optical emission
spectra of the plasmas to extract Tel. First, we consider that

ln Iλ
gk A

= −

Ek
kTel

+ C.

(1)

Here, λ is the wavelength and I the measured intensity of each transition. gk is the statistical
weight of the upper excited level, k the Boltzmann constant, Ek the energy of the excited upper
level, A the Einstein coeﬃcient for the respective transition and C is the constant of integration.
as a function of Ek and thus the slope measured is equal to − 1
and Tel can be
We plot ln I λ
kTel
gk A
extracted. The electronic transitions taken into account to determine Tel are marked in Fig. 3.
We ﬁnd Tel=6000 ± 2000 K for the 0 V O2 plasma, Tel=10000 ± 1400 K for the 435 V O2
plasma and Tel=16000 ± 9000 K for our Ar/SF6/O2 plasma. For the O2 plasma especially the
(543.06 nm),3P1 →5 S0
following transitions were chosen: 5P3 →3 S0
2
(646.18 nm), 3D2 →3 P0
(601.19 nm). These
values clearly indicate the higher density of the biased plasmas.

(615.83 nm), 3D1 →3 D0

(599.45 nm),3D1 →3 D1

(544.04 nm),5P1 →5 S0

2

2

0

0

2

After determining the surface roughness of our SCD samples, we also analyze the PL
originating from the etched surfaces. Broadband PL from processed SCD surfaces is detrimental
in experiments with individual NV− as it will lead to low signal-to-background ratios for single
color center observation. Here, we ﬁnd a spatially homogeneous background PL (detected
at wavelengths > 650 nm, excited using 532 nm laser light) in the order of 30 kcps/mW for
both O2-based pre-etches (areas I and III). The observed PL is stable under continuous laser
illumination. In addition, we show that the background PL arises purely from the SCD surface
as no PL is observed upon focusing the laser deeply (> 5 µm) into the SCD material. Thus, in
contrast to previous work [20] that compared a biased Ar/O2 plasma with a 0 V-O2 plasma, we
do not ﬁnd a reduction of PL background for the 0 V-O2 plasma. We note that the observed
background PL from these surfaces is in the same order of magnitude as the PL from single NV−
centers. We ﬁnd similar background levels after creating shallow NV− centers (see section 4).
However, the fabrication of photonic nanostructures allows us to eﬃciently reduce the inﬂuence
of background PL (see section 5).

In stark contrast, the SCD surface exposed to the Ar/SF6/O2 plasma (area II) shows an intense,
fast-bleaching background PL. The background that bleaches within ∼ 100 ms is in the order
of more than 7.5 Mcps/mW. For examples of the PL maps recorded on these surfaces, see
Appendix Fig. 8. For diamond ﬁlms, typically broadband PL in the red-spectral range is observed
and attributed to highly defective material (sp2 inclusions, disorder, amorphous carbon [34]).
Signiﬁcant broadband PL in the red spectral range thus indicates the presence of damaged
material close to the surface which could not be removed using the acid clean. Interestingly, this
background PL is removed after NV creation steps (see Sec. 4). We suspect that this is connected
to the annealing process which in conjunction with acid cleaning aids in removing damaged
layers at SCD surfaces [19].

4. Creation of NV centers
Subsequently, we implant the whole surface of our SCD plate using 14N+ ions (Energy 6 keV,
2 × 1011 ions/cm2). We create NV− centers via annealing at 800 ◦C for 4 hours. We note that
directly after this procedure, we typically do not observe any NV− PL and the emission spectrum
of the SCD surface shows non-diamond Raman lines. Re-cleaning the sample in tri-acid mixture
activates the NV− PL which we attribute to the removal of non-diamond, graphitic phases from
the SCD surface. We note that alternatively thin layers of NV− centers can also be introduced
using δ-doping, reducing crystal damage due to implantation [35].
We ﬁrst characterize the inﬂuence of the plasma treatments on NV− centers by investigating the
implanted NV− ensembles. To obtain illustrative results in the diﬀerent areas, we investigate NV−
ensembles in micrometer-sized marker structures (crosses) that we obtained during nanofabrication
(see Sec. 5). These structures do not signiﬁcantly alter the collection eﬃciency for NV− PL or
the properties of NV− ensembles due to their size in the micrometer range. However, they give us
the possibility to clearly distinguish NV− PL from background PL of the SCD surface as well as
to clearly compare the diﬀerent areas. First, we record PL maps of crosses and the corresponding

Fig. 4. NV− center ensembles in areas exposed to diﬀerent pre-etches: (a)-(c) show PL
maps and the corresponding PL spectra. It is clearly visible that in the area exposed to the
Ar/SF6/O2 stress-relief etch only [Area II, part (b)] we do not observe any NV− PL. The
measured spectrum only slightly diﬀers from the background PL (light gray). Both areas
treated with pure O2 plasmas [Area I (unbiased):(a); Area III (biased):(c)] clearly show NV−
PL with a minor NV0 signal. The peak at 574 nm is the ﬁrst-order Raman line of SCD. Due
to experimental constraints (laser linewidth, spectrometer resolution) the Raman line here
does not allow to deduce the level of strain in the SCD material. (d) Excited state lifetime
τNV − of the NV− ensemble as recorded in areas I and III. Both ensembles show similar
average τNV − 17(1) ns in area I and 16(1) ns in area III. τNV − is thus prolonged compared
to bulk SCD due to the NV−’s proximity to the surface [36]. In addition, the measurements
clearly show an absence of quenching. (e) Saturation behavior of the NV− ensembles area I
and III. Discussion see text.

PL spectra in areas I, II and III [see Figs. 4(a)-4(c)]. As clearly discernible from Fig. 4, in areas I
and III, the NV− ensemble has similar PL brightness and the recorded PL spectra clearly reveal
the spectral features of NV− PL. In contrast, in area II treated using the Ar/SF6/O2 etch, we do
not ﬁnd any NV− PL nor any evidence for neutral NV0 centers. We note that we do not expect
this eﬀect to result from surface termination: First, ﬂuorine terminated surfaces are supposed to
stabilize NV− [37]. Second, any surface termination would have most probably been removed
during vacuum annealing and replaced by oxygen functional groups during the acid cleaning.
The complete absence of an NV− ﬁngerprint supports the assumption of highly-damaged layers
which prevented the creation of NV− centers or strongly quench their PL.

In addition, we measure the excited state lifetime τNV − [see Fig. 4(d)] of the NV− ensemble in
areas I and III. We obtain comparable results for both areas with τNV −=17(1) ns for area I and
τNV − =16(1) ns for area III, respectively. Here, τNV − is longer than the bulk lifetime (12 ns) due

(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)to the NV−’s proximity to the surface [36]. However, we exclude quenching which would reduce
τNV − .

To further characterize the inﬂuence of the plasma-treatments onto the brightness of the NV−
ensemble, we measure PL saturation curves in areas I and III. Here, we note that we investigate a
NV− ensemble with a low density of ∼7 NV− centers statistically distributed in the laser focus of
our confocal microscope (density estimate see Sec. 5). Consequently, the observed saturation
behavior and the parameters extracted from it are only estimates as few NV− centers experience
diﬀerent laser intensities as well as diﬀerent collection eﬃciencies. We ﬁnd saturation powers
Psat which are in the same order of magnitude (1.60(5) mW area I, 0.74(3) mW area III) as well
as comparable background PL rates (∼60 kcps/mW area I, ∼40 kcps/mW area III) and count rates
(I∞ =407(7) kcps area I, I∞ =315(5) kcps area III) in both O2-etched areas. We also note that
the background PL level estimated here agrees with the level measured in area I and III before
creating NV− centers (see Sec. 3).

By applying microwave-driven spin manipulation to the NV ensembles in areas I and III,
we are able to measure their coherence time T2 <10 µs limited mainly by the proximity of the
NV− centers to the surface which agrees well with other measurements of shallow NV− centers
under tri-acid cleaned surfaces [38]. In contrast to previous work [20], we do not observe an
enhancement of T2 as a result of the 0 V-bias O2 plasma treatment. We consequently conclude
that T2 for our NV− centers is mainly governed by noise due to surface termination and we are
not yet able to reveal positive eﬀects of the 0 V-bias O2 plasma treatment. As we do not observe
signiﬁcant strain-induced splittings of ODMR resonance, we conclude that our NV− centers are
not experiencing signiﬁcant strain.

5. NV− in photonic nanostructures
To asses the stability as well as brightness of individual NV− centers created under the 0 V-bias
O2 plasma treated surface, we fabricate SCD nanopillars in the shape of truncated cones. We aim
for diameters of the pillars’ top facet that contains the NV− center in the range of 200 nm. To this
end, we use a reﬁned process compared to previously published processes [6, 13, 39], details of
the process are published elsewhere [40]. The steps in the process are:

• Deposition of a silicon adhesion layer onto SCD.

• Spin coating of hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ)-based negative tone EBL resist (Fox 16,

Dow Corning).

• EBL to create pillar masks, development of resist.

• ICP-RIE removal of adhesion layer and subsequent etching of SCD to form pillars, details

see Appendix 7.3 and Ref. [40]

• residual mask stripping in buﬀered oxide etch and sample cleaning (acid clean).

To demonstrate reliable nanofabrication on all plasma treated surfaces, we generate various
patterns of nanopillars on the SCD sample. Using our optimized fabrication process, we reliably
create large ﬁelds of pillars with high yield [see Fig. 5(a)]. Due to the novelty of our 0 V-bias O2
plasma pre-treatment, we focus on area I. For consistency, we also check pillars with individual
NV centers in area III, conﬁrming stable, bright PL in accordance with previous work [13]. From
various pillars ﬁelds written in area I using diﬀerent EBL doses (1.96-2.52 mC/cm2) and etched
using diﬀerent plasmas (Ar, Ar/O2 pure O2, for details see Appendix 7.3), we focus on two ﬁelds
in which we were straightforwardly able to identify single NV− in the pillars. The tapered pillars
written with an EBL dose of 2.2 mC/cm2 show top diameters of 120 nm and 180 nm [see Figs. 5(b)
and 5(c)].

Fig. 5. Scanning electron microscope images of SCD nanopillars. (a) overview of large
pillar ﬁeld, (b) pillars with top diameter of 120 nm (c) pillars with top diameter of 180 nm
Images recorded using a Jeol arm200 microscope at 20 kV acceleration voltage with no
conductive layer applied.

The investigated pillars have been etched using a pure O2 plasma (500 W ICP power, 50 W
radio frequency (RF) power, 50 sccm O2, pressure 1.5 Pa). We found O2 plasmas to be most
reliable for etching our SCD pillars and we obtain an etch rate of 65 nm/min. We observe smooth
surfaces in-between the pillars without any indication of micromasking. In contrast to the O2
plasma, mask erosion and micromasking was strong using a pure argon plasma due to excess
sputtering of material. We note that the investigated pillars have a stronger taper angle than we
typically aim for [14]. The novel fabrication process used here includes a SF6-based plasma to
remove the silicon adhesion layer which could potentially attack HSQ masks [40]. We however
ﬁnd that this plasma etches our thin (25 nm) silicon adhesion layer 20 times faster than the HSQ
mask and should not cause mask erosion and strong tapering [40]. We consequently suspect
an additional eﬀect causing the tapering. One possibility might be a low thickness of the HSQ
layer as the mask structures were not imaged using SEM prior to etching the pillars to avoid
contamination. Also strong mask faceting might have occurred that is known to cause tapered
sidewalls [41].

To characterize NV− centers in our photonic nanostructures, we ﬁrst measure PL and lifetime
maps of the pillar ﬁelds [see Fig. 6(a) and 6(b)]. Here, we clearly observe a comparable lifetime
for most of the pillars containing NV− centers. In addition, the average lifetime of τNV − =17(2) ns
agrees with τNV − we ﬁnd for the NV− ensemble in Sec. 4. By measuring second order correlation
functions g(2) [see Fig. 6(c)], we estimate a NV− probability per pillar. We then use the pillars’ top
diameter from SEM images (Fig. 5) to calculate the NV− density. Subsequently, we compare this
with the implantation dose and extract an implantation yield of 0.01 NV−/implanted N which is in
good agreement with literature [13, 42]. To estimate the PL enhancement in our nanostructures,
we perform several PL saturation measurements on pillars containing single NV− centers. These
measurements are summarized in Fig. 6(d). Here, we compare NV− centers in pillars with a
length of ∼ 460 nm and diameters of 120 nm and 180 nm, respectively. As discernible from
Fig. 6(d), most measured NV− centers show similar saturation power. The 180 nm-pillars oﬀer
slightly higher PL rates as the 120 nm-pillars. Simulations suggest a much stronger decrease
in PL rate from pillars thinner than 180 nm [14]. However, the here observed brightness of
single NV− PL also indicates a suﬃcient usability of 120 nm-pillars for sensing applications. For
most scanning probe based sensing applications, it would be advantageous to use pillars with a
small top diameter, as a thinner scanning probe tip will be able to follow the topography of a
sample more closely and keep the NV− center closer to the surface under investigation e.g. when
scanning over a step in the sample [13]. We note that we were not able to deduce NV− and NV0
probabilities for our NV centers [43–45] due to inconclusive results (see Appendix 7.4).

Fig. 6. (a) and (b) Fluorescence maps and lifetime τNV − maps of a pillar ﬁeld (top diameter:
180 nm, length: ∼460 nm) in area I (0 V O2 plasma). (a) shows the measured PL rate
under pulsed excitation at 530-540 nm with a pulse energy of 15 nJ and a repetition rate of
8 MHz while (b) shows the corresponding lifetime map. It is nicely visible that bright pillars
have a consistent lifetime corresponding to τNV − measured for the ensemble in Sec. 4. (c)
Exemplary second order correlation measurement g(2) of a NV− center in the pillars clearly
showing single-photon emission with a reasonable signal/background ratio. (d) Summary of
PL saturation of several pillars containing single NV− centers in the ﬁelds with top diameters
of 120 nm and 180 nm. While most measured NV− have comparable saturation powers, the
180 nm-pillars oﬀer slightly higher countrates compared to the 120 nm-pillars as expected
from their photonic properties [14]. However, these results indicate that even 120 nm-pillars
act as waveguides, potentially improving AFM operation of NV−-based scanning probe
devices.

(a)(b)(c)(d)6. Conclusions
In the presented study, we investigate a chemically etching, pure ICP discharge, 0 V-bias O2
plasma as a pre-etch for the fabrication of SCD photonic structures. We compare this treatment
to a biased O2 plasma as well as a Ar/O2/SF6 plasma. We analyze plasma compositions and
etch rates. While the biased plasmas have etch rates exceeding 100 nm/min, the 0 V-bias plasma
shows an order of magnitude lower etch rate. While etching in the biased O2 plasma is dominated
by oxygen ions, oxygen radicals dominate in the 0 V-bias case. Remarkably, we only succeed in
creating shallow NV− under the O2 treated surfaces, while all NV− centers are deactivated under
the Ar/O2/SF6 treated surface. We investigate single NV− centers in the nanopillars with 180 nm
as well as 120 nm top diameter. We ﬁnd stable, bright emission from single NV− rendering our
structures suitable for nanoscale sensing using single NV−. We have shown that 0 V-bias plasmas
can be integrated into the fabrication of SCD photonic nanostructures as a pre-treatment, opening
the route towards low damage treatments of SCD surfaces within SCD nanodevice fabrication.

7. Appendix

7.1. Testing of 0 V plasmas and sample layout
To check the applicability of 0 V-bias plasmas to pre-etch our SCD surfaces, we run diﬀerent
plasmas. Figure 7 summarizes the tested 0 V plasmas. We select only the 0 V O2 plasma for the
main study due to the observed large surface roughening of 0 V Ar/SF6 and Ar plasmas (rms ≥
10 nm). We furthermore expect no signiﬁcant etch rate in a 0 V SF6 plasma and do thus also
not use this plasma. Figure 7 shows the bias drop in time for each plasma after the ignition.
This drop could be eliminated by optimizing the matching circuit parameter conditions- which
required a run of pre-tests before actual etching prior to each process. The bias drop was found to
be comparable in time for each plasma and was dependent on the chamber pressure and gas ﬂux.
For the studies presented in the manuscript, we used the optimized parameters for the matching
circuit and consequently avoid any buildup of bias.

7.2. Characterization of the pre-etched areas
As described in the main text, we characterize the three pre-etched areas after etching and cleaning
before implanting nitrogen ions into the SCD.
Here, we see a similar behavior of the two oxygen etched areas leading to a spatially homogeneous
background PL of 30 kcps/mW [see Figs. 8(a) and 8(c), area I and III]. In contrast, the Ar/SF6/O2-
etched area II shows a diﬀerent behavior: Here, we clearly see a high background PL in the order
of 7.5 Mcps/mW which is rapidly bleaching within roughly 100 ms. This is clearly visible in Fig.
8(b). Here, we ﬁrst measure a smaller PL map and afterwards a larger PL map around it. This
second PL map clearly shows the bleached square of the ﬁrst measurement. By further focusing
the laser onto a single point (as can be seen in the lower left and upper right corner of the smaller
square) we are able to further bleach the PL to PL rates comparable with the oxygen-etched
areas. In addition, we scan the focus of our confocal laser microscope through the SCD surface
(z-scans). Z-scans in all areas clearly show that the background PL originates only from the SCD
surface. Note, that z-scans in area II [Fig. 8(b)] do not show a clear peak due to the bleaching
behavior which is triggered by focusing onto the surface.

7.3. Details on pillar fabrication

7.3.1. Technical details on electron beam lithography
Diamond plates immobilized on a silicon chip and spin coated with negative tone, HSQ-based
resist FOX-16 were inserted into cold-cathode SEM (Hitachi S45000), equipped with RAITH
Elphy software. The electron beam is calibrated on a Si chip containing nanoparticles and the

Fig. 7. Bias drop in time in generation of 0 V-bias plasmas using O2, Ar, SF6 and their
mixtures.

Fig. 8. Optical characterization of the three pre-etched areas: (a) unbiased O2, (b) Ar/SF6/O2,
(c) biased O2. For further information, see text.

writing process is performed at 30 kV acceleration voltage and 20 µA extracting current. The
beam current was measured always prior the lithography session and applied as correction for the
writing dose in the software. The z-distance was kept constant at 15.3 nm for 400x400 µm ﬁelds.

(a)(b)(c)The writing process occurs at 100x magniﬁcation. The writing mode for long structures is kept
longitudinal and for small structures concentric. The area dose is kept as 1400 µAs/cm2. The
dose was established to be 2.24 mC/cm2 for the pillar structures. Varying the dose in the electron
beam lithography, inﬂuences the shape of the resulting nanopillars as well as their diameter.

7.3.2. Details on pillar etching
Areas I, II and III were divided into three sub-parts each. We fabricated various pillars masks
using a variety of EBL parameters out of HSQ that were treated with various oxygen and argon
plasmas to elucidate the eﬀects of DC bias, RF/ICP power and gas ﬂux on the geometry of the
pillars.

In order to remove the adhesive layer used at the SCD/HSQ interface, a specialized SF6-based
etching plasma was applied prior to etching the SCD pillars for 5 seconds. Figure 9 shows

Fig. 9. SEM images of SCD nanopillars: (a) overview image of large pillar ﬁelds etched
into the diamond by O2 plasma (b) High magniﬁcation scanning electron microscope (Inset
B, Jeol arm200, 20 kV acceleration voltage, no conductive layer applied).

detailed scanning electron microscope images of etched SCD nanostructures. Fig. 9(a) shows
large pillar ﬁelds as an indication of the reliability of the employed nanofabrication process. Fig.
9(b) gives examples of nanopillars written with diﬀerent EBL doses and a nominal mask diameter
of 180 nm. As clearly discernible from Fig. 10, increasing the dose increases the eﬀective mask
size and consequently the top diameter of the pillar. All SEM images were acquired at 20
kV acceleration voltage without the use of conductive layer. The mask erosion and resulting
micromasking was especially visible with use of pure Ar plasma probably due top sputtering
eﬀects and we observed the generation of needles and damaged surface. This eﬀect was lowered,
while mixing argon with other gases (SF6, O2) and totally removed by using only biased oxygen
plasma for the etching. We achieved the best control over the pillar shape using a O2 plasma at
750 W ICP power and 50 W RF power, 90 ±5 nm etch rate, 2.2 mC/cm2 writing dose for the
FOX-16 mask (compare Table 2).

Plasma DC bias RF power (W)

ICP Power (W)

etch rate (nm/min)

O2/Ar

O2

Ar

O2/Ar

O2

Ar

191

170

149

157

144

119

50

50

50

50

50

50

500

500

500

750

750

750

–

65

20

65

90

10

Table 2. Parameters for diﬀerent etch plasmas. Due to excess mask erosion etch rates of the
pure Ar plasmas have to be considered coarse estimates.

Fig. 10. Correlation between the EBL dose and the resulting top diameter of the nanopillars.
The investigated pillars have been etched using a pure O2 plasma with 500 W ICP power
and 50 W RF power.

7.4. Charge state detection
To further study the inﬂuence of the diﬀerent pre-etches on single NV− centers, we investigate
the switching between NV− and NV0 for our centers according to [43–45]. Typically, this
measurement shows two Poisson distributions whereas the distribution at low count rates
corresponds to NV0 and the second one to NV− PL. We here ﬁnd one distribution broader than
usual [see Fig. 11(a)]. This could be explained by the following: First, both distributions are
joint hindering a clear distinction of both distributions [see Fig. 11(b)]. This could be mainly
arising from enhanced background PL. This enhanced background might arise from residuals
that were created during repeated cleaning of our sample before the charge state investigations.
Second, these residuals could also cause a change of the electrical environment of the NV
centers potentially increasing the charge state switching rates drastically. When this rate exceeds
1/read-out time, both distributions start to merge and eventually become one distribution centered

around the mean PL of both charge states [see Fig. 11(c)]. Due to the limited amount of photons
we detect under weak excitation with the 594 nm laser, we are not able to optimize our read-out
time for fast charge state switching rates.

To further explain the behavior of the charge state detection measurement, we ﬁrst have to

Fig. 11. (a) Exemplary measurement of the charge state distribution we obtain on the NV
centers in the nanostructures. Here, we use the following parameters: 532 nm laser: 1 ms at
100 µW, 594 nm-laser: 1 ms at 15 µW, read-out time: 1 ms. While using excitation powers
ranging from 1 µW to 250 µW for both lasers and integration times up to 25 ms, the mean
values of the distributions are just shifting without a signiﬁcant change of the distribution.
(b-c) Calculated photon statistics for illustrating the behavior for special cases described in
the text.

brieﬂy introduce the photon statistics model used to describe the process. Here, we follow the
derivation of [44, 45].
By allowing the charge state of the NV center to switch during the measurement, the resulting
photon probability changes from two pure Poissonian distributions to a more complex distribution
which involves a sum over an inﬁnite number of Poisson distributions weighted by the probability
for switching the charge state [44, 45]. This leads to a complex behavior:
First, we describe the case of the Poissonian distributions lying closely together. This belongs to
the case of a strong background PL or a weak NV− PL as shown in Fig. 11(b). Both panels in Fig.
11(b) show the same mean count-rate of the background and NV−, respectively, with diﬀerent
read-out times (1 ms in the lower panel, 20 ms in the upper). Here, it is clearly visible that even
by signiﬁcantly increasing the read out time of the charge state detection it is not possible to
distinguish two distributions when the diﬀerence of background PL and NV− PL is too low. Note,
we use a negligible charge state switching rate for this calculation.
Second, we describe the case of a fast switching between the charge states of the NV center
compared to the read-out time. This is shown in Fig. 11(c). Here, we have two clearly
distinguishable distributions for the pure NV charge states (blue for NV0 and olive for NV−). By
calculating the complex photon statistics with ionization rates exceeding 1/read-out time, we
get the black curve. This shows that even distinguishable mean photon rates can result in an
indistinguishable photon distribution in the case of fast charge state switching.

Funding

We acknowledge funding via a NanoMatFutur grant of the German Ministry of Education and
Research (FKZ13N13547).

Acknowledgments

We would like to acknowledge Dr. Matthias Schreck and Wolfgang Brückner (Augsburg
University, Germany) for performing nitrogen ion implantations, Dr. Ing. Sandra Wolﬀ (TU
Kaiserslautern, Germany) for help with electron beam evaporation, Jörg Schmauch (Saarland

(a)(b)(c)University, Germany) for his help with acquiring high-quality SEM images and Dr. Rene Hensel
(INM, Germany) for granting access to the ICP RIE reactor. We acknowledge Michel Challier
for his assistance.

Disclosures

We note that the nanofabrication method applied in this study is ﬁled for a patent, application
number: EP19198772.6. The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.

References
1. M. Atatüre, D. Englund, N. Vamivakas, S.-Y. Lee, and J. Wrachtrup, “Material platforms for spin-based photonic

quantum technologies,” Nat. Rev. Mater. 3, 38 (2018).

2. F. Casola, T. van der Sar, and A. Yacoby, “Probing condensed matter physics with magnetometry based on

nitrogen-vacancy centres in diamond,” Nat. Rev. Mater. 3, 17088 (2018).

3. A. Zaitsev, Optical Properties of Diamond: A Data Handbook (Springer, 2001).
4. A. Gruber, A. Dräbenstedt, C. Tietz, L. Fleury, J. Wrachtrup, and C. von Borczyskowski, “Scanning confocal optical

microscopy and magnetic resonance on single defect centers,” Science 276, 2012–2014 (1997).

5. C. Kurtsiefer, S. Mayer, P. Zarda, and H. Weinfurter, “Stable solid-state source of single photons,” Phys. Rev. Lett.

85, 290–293 (2000).

6. T. Babinec, B. Hausmann, M. Khan, Y. Zhang, J. Maze, P. Hemmer, and M. Loncar, “A diamond nanowire

7.

single-photon source,” Nat. Nanotech. 5, 195–199 (2010).
J. Tisler, T. Oeckinghaus, R. J. Stöhr, R. Kolesov, R. Reuter, F. Reinhard, and J. Wrachtrup, “Single defect center
scanning near-ﬁeld optical microscopy on graphene,” Nano Lett. 13, 3152–3156 (2013).

8. R. Nelz, M. Radtke, A. Slablab, M. Kianinia, C. Li, Z.-Q. Xu, C. Bradac, I. Aharonovich, and E. Neu, “Near-ﬁeld
energy transfer between a luminescent 2d material and color centers in diamond,” Adv. Quantum Technol. DOI:
10.1002/qute.201900088 (2019).

9. P. Maletinsky, S. Hong, M. Grinolds, B. Hausmann, M. Lukin, R. Walsworth, M. Loncar, and A. Yacoby, “A robust
scanning diamond sensor for nanoscale imaging with single nitrogen-vacancy centres,” Nat. Nanotechnol. 7, 320–324
(2012).

10. F. Dolde, M. W. Doherty, J. Michl, I. Jakobi, B. Naydenov, S. Pezzagna, J. Meijer, P. Neumann, F. Jelezko, N. B.
Manson, and J. Wrachtrup, “Nanoscale detection of a single fundamental charge in ambient conditions using the nv-
center in diamond,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 097603 (2014).

11. G. Kucsko, P. Maurer, N. Yao, M. Kubo, H. Noh, P. Lo, H. Park, and M. Lukin, “Nanometre-scale thermometry in a

living cell,” Nature 500, 54–58 (2013).

12. J. Teissier, A. Barfuss, P. Appel, E. Neu, and P. Maletinsky, “Strain coupling of a nitrogen-vacancy center spin to a

diamond mechanical oscillator,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 020503 (2014).

13. P. Appel, E. Neu, M. Ganzhorn, A. Barfuss, M. Batzer, M. Gratz, A. Tschöpe, and P. Maletinsky, “Fabrication of all

diamond scanning probes for nanoscale magnetometry,” Rev. Sci. Instruments 87, 063703 (2016).

14. P. Fuchs, M. Challier, and E. Neu, “Optimized single-crystal diamond scanning probes for high sensitivity

magnetometry,” New J. Phys. 20, 125001 (2018).

15. R. Nelz, P. Fuchs, O. Opaluch, S. Sonusen, N. Savenko, V. Podgursky, and E. Neu, “Color center ﬂuorescence and

spin manipulation in single crystal, pyramidal diamond tips,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 109, 193105 (2016).

16. L. Nicolas, T. Delord, P. Huillery, E. Neu, and G. Hétet, “Diamond nano-pyramids with narrow linewidth siv centers

for quantum technologies,” AIP Adv. 8, 065102 (2018).

17. P.-N. Volpe, P. Muret, F. Omnes, J. Achard, F. Silva, O. Brinza, and A. Gicquel, “Defect analysis and excitons
diﬀusion in undoped homoepitaxial diamond ﬁlms after polishing and oxygen plasma etching,” Diam. Relat. Mater.
18, 1205 – 1210 (2009).

18. M. Naamoun, A. Tallaire, F. Silva, J. Achard, P. Doppelt, and A. Gicquel, “Etch-pit formation mechanism induced on
hpht and cvd diamond single crystals by h2/o2 plasma etching treatment,” physica status solidi (a) 209, 1715–1720
(2012).

19. Y. Kato, H. Kawashima, T. Makino, M. Ogura, A. Traoré, N. Ozawa, and S. Yamasaki, “Estimation of inductively
coupled plasma etching damage of boron-doped diamond using x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy,” physica status
solidi (a) 214, 1700233 (2017).

20. F. F. de Oliveira, S. A. Momenzadeh, Y. Wang, M. Konuma, M. Markham, A. M. Edmonds, A. Denisenko, and
J. Wrachtrup, “Eﬀect of low-damage inductively coupled plasma on shallow nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond,”
APPLIED PHYSICS LETTERS 107, 073107 (2015).

21. C. Lee, E. Gu, M. Dawson, I. Friel, and G. Scarsbrook, “Etching and micro-optics fabrication in diamond using

chlorine-based inductively-coupled plasma,” Diam. Relat. Mater. 17, 1292–1296 (2008).

22. I. Friel, S. Clewes, H. Dhillon, N. Perkins, D. Twitchen, and G. Scarsbrook, “Control of surface and bulk crystalline
quality in single crystal diamond grown by chemical vapour deposition,” Diam. Relat. Mater. 18, 808–815 (2009).
23. Y. Tao, J. Boss, B. Moores, and C. Degen, “Single-crystal diamond nanomechanical resonators with quality factors

exceeding one million,” Nat. Commun. 5, 3638 (2014).

24. D. Hwang, T. Saito, and N. Fujimori, “New etching process for device fabrication using diamond,” Diam. Relat.
Mater. 13, 2207 – 2210 (2004). Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on New Diamond Science and
Technology (ICNDST-9).

25. L. Xie, T. X. Zhou, R. J. Stöhr, and A. Yacoby, “Crystallographic orientation dependent reactive ion etching in single

crystal diamond,” Adv. Mater. 30, 1705501 (2018).

26. M.-L. Hicks, A. C. Pakpour-Tabrizi, V. Zuerbig, L. Kirste, C. Nebel, and R. B. Jackman, “Optimizing reactive ion

etching to remove sub-surface polishing damage on diamond,” J. Appl. Phys. 125, 244502 (2019).

27. M. Challier, S. Sonusen, A. Barfuss, D. Rohner, D. Riedel, J. Koelbl, M. Ganzhorn, P. Appel, P. Maletinsky, and
E. Neu, “Advanced fabrication of single-crystal diamond membranes for quantum technologies,” Micromachines 9,
148 (2018).

28. B. Khanaliloo, M. Mitchell, A. C. Hryciw, and P. E. Barclay, “High-Q/V Monolithic Diamond Microdisks Fabricated

with Quasi-isotropic Etching,” NANO LETTERS 15, 5131–5136 (2015).

29. B. Khanaliloo, H. Jayakumar, A. C. Hryciw, D. P. Lake, H. Kaviani, and P. E. Barclay, “Single-crystal diamond

nanobeam waveguide optomechanics,” Phys. Rev. X 5, 041051 (2015).

30. Y. Zhang, C. Charles, and R. Boswell, “Thermodynamic study on plasma expansion along a divergent magnetic

ﬁeld,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 025001 (2016).

31. K. Bazaka, O. Baranov, U. Cvelbar, B. Podgornik, Y. Wang, S. Huang, L. Xu, J. W. M. Lim, I. Levchenko, and S. Xu,
“Oxygen plasmas: a sharp chisel and handy trowel for nanofabrication,” Nanoscale 10, 17494–17511 (2018).
32. A. Sarangan, “5 - nanofabrication,” in Fundamentals and Applications of Nanophotonics, J. W. Haus, ed. (Woodhead

Publishing, 2016), pp. 149 – 184.

33. Y. Zhang, C. Charles, and R. Boswell, “Thermodynamic study on plasma expansion along a divergent magnetic

ﬁeld,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 025001 (2016).

34. L. Bergman, M. McClure, J. Glass, and R. Nemanich, “The origin of the broadband luminescence and the eﬀect of

nitrogen doping on the optical properties of diamond ﬁlms,” J. Appl. Phys. 76, 3020 (1994).

35. F. F. de Oliveira, S. A. Momenzadeh, D. Antonov, J. Scharpf, C. Osterkamp, B. Naydenov, F. Jelezko, A. Denisenko,
and J. Wrachtrup, “Toward Optimized Surface delta-Proﬁles of Nitrogen-Vacancy Centers Activated by Helium
Irradiation in Diamond,” NANO LETTERS 16, 2228–2233 (2016).

36. R. Nelz, J. Görlitz, D. Herrmann, A. Slablab, M. Challier, M. Radtke, M. Fischer, S. Gsell, M. Schreck, C. Becher

et al., “Toward wafer-scale diamond nano-and quantum technologies,” APL Mater. 7, 011108 (2019).

37. C. Osterkamp, J. Lang, J. Scharpf, C. M´’uller, L. P. McGuinness, T. Diemant, R. J. Behm, B. Naydenov, and F. Jelezko,
“Stabilizing shallow color centers in diamond created by nitrogen delta-doping using sf6 plasma treatment,” Appl.
Phys. Lett. 106, 113109 (2015).

38. S. Sangtawesin, B. L. Dwyer, S. Srinivasan, J. J. Allred, L. V. Rodgers, K. De Greve, A. Stacey, N. Dontschuk, K. M.
O’Donnell, D. Hu et al., “Origins of diamond surface noise probed by correlating single spin measurements with
surface spectroscopy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00144 (2018).

39. E. Neu, P. Appel, M. Ganzhorn, J. Miguel-Sanchez, M. Lesik, V. Mille, V. Jacques, A. Tallaire, J. Achard, and
P. Maletinsky, “Photonic nano-structures on (111)-oriented diamond,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 153108 (2014).
40. M. Radtke, R. Nelz, L. Render, and E. Neu, “Reliable nanofabrication of single-crystal diamond photonic

nanostructures for nanoscale sensing,” Micromachines 10, 718 (2019).

41. A. Toros, M. Kiss, T. Graziosi, H. Sattari, P. Gallo, and N. Quack, “Precision micro-mechanical components in single

crystal diamond by deep reactive ion etching,” Microsystems & nanoengineering 4, 12 (2018).

42. S. Pezzagna, B. Naydenov, F. Jelezko, J. Wrachtrup, and J. Meijer, “Creation eﬃciency of nitrogen-vacancy centres

in diamond,” New J. Phys. 12, 065017 (2010).

43. N. Aslam, G. Waldherr, P. Neumann, F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup, “Photo-induced ionization dynamics of the
nitrogen vacancy defect in diamond investigated by single-shot charge state detection,” New J. Phys. 15, 013064
(2013).

44. D. Bluvstein, Z. Zhang, and A. C. B. Jayich, “Identifying and mitigating charge instabilities in shallow diamond

nitrogen-vacancy centers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.02058 (2018).

45. B. J. Shields, Q. P. Unterreithmeier, N. P. de Leon, H. Park, and M. D. Lukin, “Eﬃcient readout of a single spin state

in diamond via spin-to-charge conversion,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 136402 (2015).

