Prepared for submission to JINST

Reconstruction and Measurement of O(100) MeV Energy
Electromagnetic Activity from π0 → γγ Decays in the
MicroBooNE LArTPC

MicroBooNE Collaboration
C. Adamsj M. Alrashedl R. Ank J. Anthonyc J. Asaadicc A. Ashkenazip
S. Balasubramanianhh B. Balleri C. Barnesq G. Barrt V. Basqueo M. Bassb F. Baydd
S. Berkmani A. Bhanderio A. Bhatz M. Bishaib A. Blakem T. Boltonl L. Camillerig D. Caratellii
I. Caro Terrazas f R. Carrp R. Castillo Fernandezi F. Cavannai G. Ceratii Y. Chena E. Churchu
D. Ciancig E. O. Cohenaa J. M. Conradp M. Converyx L. Cooper-Troendlehh
J. I. Crespo-Anadóng M. Del Tuttot D. Devittm A. Diazp L. Dominex K. Duﬀyi S. Dytmanv
B. Eberlyh A. Ereditatoa L. Escudero Sanchezc J. Esquivelz J. J. Evanso R. S. Fitzpatrickq
B. T. Fleminghh N. Foppianij D. Francohh A. P. Furmanskio D. Garcia-Gamezo S. Gardineri
V. Gentyg D. Goeldia S. Gollapinnibb O. Goodwino E. Gramellinii P. Greeno H. Greenleei
R. Grossoe L. Gu f f W. Gub R. Guenettej P. Guzowskio P. Hamiltonz O. Henp C. Hillo
G. A. Horton-Smithl A. Hourlierp E.-C. Huangn R. Itayx C. Jamesi J. Jan de Vriesc X. Jib
L. Jiangv J. H. Johh R. A. Johnsone J. Joshib Y.-J. Jwag G. Karagiorgig W. Ketchumi
B. Kirbyb M. Kirbyi T. Kobilarciki I. Kresloa I. Lepetick Y. Lib A. Listerm B. R. Littlejohnk
S. Lockwitzi D. Lorcaa W. C. Louisn M. Luethia B. Lundbergi X. Luohh A. Marchionnii
S. Marcoccii C. Mariani f f J. Marshallgg J. Martin-Alboj D. A. Martinez Caicedoy K. Masonee
A. Mastbaumd N. McConkeyo V. Meddagel T. Mettlera K. Millerd J. Millsee K. Mistryo
A. Moganbb T. Mohayaii J. Moonp M. Mooney f C. D. Moorei J. Mousseauq M. Murphy f f
R. Murrellso D. Naplesv R. K. Neelyl P. Nienaberw J. Nowakm O. Palamarai V. Pandey f f
V. Paolonev A. Papadopouloup V. Papavassiliour S. F. Pater A. Paudell Z. Pavlovici
E. Piasetzkyaa D. Porzioo S. Princej G. Pulliamz X. Qianb J. L. Raafi A. Raﬁquel L. Renr
L. Rochesterx H.E. Rogers f M. Ross-Lonergang C. Rudolf von Rohra B. Russellhh
G. Scanavinihh D. W. Schmitzd A. Schukrafti W. Seligmang M. H. Shaevitzg R. Sharankovaee
J. Sinclaira A. Smithc E. L. Snideri M. Soderbergz S. Söldner-Remboldo S. R. Soletit, j
P. Spentzourisi J. Spitzq M. Stancarii J. St. Johni T. Straussi K. Suttong S. Sword-Fehlbergr
A. M. Szelco N. Taggs W. Tangbb K. Teraox R. T. Thorntonn M. Toupsi Y.-T. Tsaix S. Tufanlihh
T. Usherx W. Van De Pontseelet, j R. G. Van de Watern B. Virenb M. Webera H. Weib
D. A. Wickremasinghev Z. Williamscc S. Wolbersi T. Wongjiradee K. Woodruﬀr M. Wospakriki
W. Wui T. Yangi G. Yarbroughbb L. E. Yatesp G. P. Zelleri J. Zennamoi C. Zhangb

aUniversität Bern, Bern CH-3012, Switzerland
bBrookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), Upton, NY, 11973, USA
cUniversity of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0HE, United Kingdom

9
1
0
2

t
c
O
4

]
x
e
-
p
e
h
[

1
v
6
6
1
2
0
.
0
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
dUniversity of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA
eUniversity of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, 45221, USA
f Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, 80523, USA
gColumbia University, New York, NY, 10027, USA
hDavidson College, Davidson, NC, 28035, USA
iFermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL), Batavia, IL 60510, USA
jHarvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
kIllinois Institute of Technology (IIT), Chicago, IL 60616, USA
lKansas State University (KSU), Manhattan, KS, 66506, USA
mLancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YW, United Kingdom
nLos Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), Los Alamos, NM, 87545, USA
oThe University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom
pMassachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
qUniversity of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA
r New Mexico State University (NMSU), Las Cruces, NM, 88003, USA
sOtterbein University, Westerville, OH, 43081, USA
t University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3RH, United Kingdom
uPaciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL), Richland, WA, 99352, USA
vUniversity of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA
wSaint Mary’s University of Minnesota, Winona, MN, 55987, USA
xSLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA, 94025, USA
ySouth Dakota School of Mines and Technology (SDSMT), Rapid City, SD, 57701, USA
zSyracuse University, Syracuse, NY, 13244, USA
aaTel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 69978
bbUniversity of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, 37996, USA
ccUniversity of Texas, Arlington, TX, 76019, USA
ddTUBITAK Space Technologies Research Institute, METU Campus, TR-06800, Ankara, Turkey
eeTufts University, Medford, MA, 02155, USA
f f Center for Neutrino Physics, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, 24061, USA
ggUniversity of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
hhWright Laboratory, Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 06520, USA

E-mail: microboone_info@fnal.gov

Abstract: We present results on the reconstruction of electromagnetic (EM) activity from photons
produced in charged current νµ interactions with ﬁnal state π0s. We employ a fully-automated
reconstruction chain capable of identifying EM showers of O(100) MeV energy, relying on a com-
bination of traditional reconstruction techniques together with novel machine-learning approaches.
These studies demonstrate good energy resolution, and good agreement between data and simula-
tion, relying on the reconstructed invariant π0 mass and other photon distributions for validation.
The reconstruction techniques developed are applied to a selection of νµ + Ar → µ + π0 + X
candidate events to demonstrate the potential for calorimetric separation of photons from electrons
and reconstruction of π0 kinematics.

Contents

1

Introduction

2 Electron and Photon Propagation in Argon

2.1 Electron Energy Loss
2.2 Photon Energy Loss
2.3 Stochasticity of EM Showers

3 Shower Reconstruction

3.1 Overview of The MicroBooNE Time Projection Chamber
3.2 Track-Shower Discrimination and Cosmic Ray Rejection
3.3 Charge Clustering

Polar Coordinate Merging

3.3.1
3.3.2 Vertex-Aligned Merging

3.4 Clustering Ineﬃciencies
3.5 Cluster Matching
3.6
3.7 Shower Reconstruction Performance

3D Shower Reconstruction

4 π0 Event Selection

5 Energy Reconstruction

5.1 Calorimetric Energy Reconstruction
Ion Recombination for EM Showers
5.2
5.3 Energy Biases and Corrections
5.4 Energy Resolution Measurement
5.5

π0 Energy Resolution

6 Measurements of π0 Reconstructed Variables in Data

6.1 Reconstructed π0 Mass
6.2 Photon dE/dx
6.3 Photon Conversion Distance

7 Conclusions

A Energy calibration through the Mγγ π0 mass and data-simulation agreement

2

2
3
3
4

5
6
7
9
9
10
11
12
12
13

14

15
15
17
17
19
20

20
21
22
24

24

28

– 1 –

1

Introduction

We present studies of electromagnetic (EM) showers from photons produced in the decay of neutral
pions (π0s) that originate from charged current (CC) νµ interactions recorded with the MicroBooNE
detector [1] on the Booster Neutrino Beamline (BNB) [2] at Fermilab. This work focuses on the
reconstruction and characterization of EM showers in the 30-250 MeV energy range. Particular
emphasis is given to studies of energy reconstruction. This paper describes in detail the employment
of a fully-automated reconstruction technique in a liquid argon time projection chamber (LArTPC)
for this topology of interactions.

Measuring and characterizing the signatures of electromagnetic showers is key to the success
of the neutrino oscillation programs of SBN [3] and DUNE [4], which both rely on measuring νe
appearance in a νµ beam to search for possible sterile neutrinos and perform precision neutrino
oscillation measurements, respectively. The topology of electromagnetic activity with energies of
a few hundred MeV makes the reconstruction particularly challenging.

To date, measurements of EM showers from π0 decay photons in a LArTPC have been published
by the ICARUS, ArgoNeuT, and MicroBooNE [5] collaborations. The ICARUS experiment has
made measurements of π0s from both cosmic-ray [6] and neutrino [7] interactions, both with
samples of order 100 reconstructed π0 candidates. The ArgoNeuT collaboration has measured π0
decays to perform a measurement of semi-inclusive neutral current (NC) production in the NuMI
beamline [8]. ArgoNeut’s photon energy reconstruction capability is limited by its small volume
and lack of containment of electromagnetic showers. The ArgoNeuT collaboration also released
the ﬁrst study on e/γ separation using calorimetry [9]. This work expands on previous literature by
implementing a fully-automated EM energy reconstruction and presenting detailed studies of energy
reconstruction and resolution which describe the various sources of energy smearing and bias. This
work uses a sample of 440 ± 21 (of which 88 expected background) candidate π0 events, the largest
available to date. Accurate and eﬃcient reconstruction of electromagnetic activity in LArTPCs is
a key to the success of a broad physics program which aims to perform detailed diﬀerential cross
section measurments of π0 production, precise νµ → νe neutrino oscillation measurements, as
well as tests of beyond the Standard Model physics models which manifests themselves through
O(100 MeV) EM signatures.

Section 2 summarizes energy loss mechanisms for electrons and photons in liquid argon.
Section 3 describes the shower reconstruction employed in this work, and is followed by a description
of the event selection applied to obtain νµ CC π0 events in section 4. Section 5 is dedicated to
shower energy resolution studies, followed by a presentation of results pertaining to measurements
of π0 and γ shower metrics in section 6. Finally, a brief conclusion is presented in section 7.

2 Electron and Photon Propagation in Argon

This section introduces EM energy loss in liquid argon, focusing on the features that lead to the
characteristically sparse and stochastic nature of EM showers of O(100) MeV. This work builds
upon previous studies of Michel decay electrons in MicroBooNE [10].

– 2 –

2.1 Electron Energy Loss

Radiative contributions to energy loss from electrons become signiﬁcant at 10 MeV, and are the
dominant cause of energy loss by 100 MeV. Figure 1 (a) shows the energy loss contribution from
collisions (ionization) in blue and radiative losses in red as a function of an electron’s energy.
While ionization losses are continuous over the scale of a few millimeters, radiative contributions
are largely stochastic due to the nature of bremsstrahlung and Compton scattering cross-sections,
dictating the topological features of EM showers below 1 GeV.

(a)

(b)

(b)
Figure 1: (a) Energy loss for electrons in argon obtained from NIST ESTAR tables [12].
Energy loss for electrons and positrons in argon. The blue and red curves are obtained employing
the formulas presented in ICRU Report 37 [11], with no density correction applied. The green line is
obtained from NIST ESTAR tabulated data [12] (these values are identical to the tabulated quantities
in the ICRU report itself, but begin to diverge once density corrections become signiﬁcant). The
magenta line is obtained applying Bethe energy loss to electrons. The bottom section shows the
relative diﬀerence of plotted curves with respect to the NIST (green) values.

Ionization losses for electrons diﬀer slightly from those of heavier particles due to the interaction
cross-section with electrons orbiting the nuclei of the target material. Such collisions are described
by Møller scattering, which accounts for the indistinguishability between incoming and target
electrons. For positrons, the same interactions are governed by Bhabha scattering. These diﬀerent
interactions lead to a collision stopping power which diﬀers slightly from that of heavier particles
described by the Bethe-Bloch formula, and is shown in ﬁgure 1 (b).

2.2 Photon Energy Loss

Photons with energies larger than a few MeV lose energy predominantly via e+e− pair production,
leading to a cascade that produces EM showers of electrons and photons of successively lower
energy.
In the few MeV energy range, Incoherent Compton scattering dominates and remains
non-negligible up to a few tens of MeV.

– 3 –

Figure 2 (a) shows the mean free path λ (the inverse of the cross-section) for photons in liquid
argon, as a function of the photon energy. In the 10–100 MeV energy range, photons propagate
20–30 cm before undergoing an interaction that leads to energy deposition via electrons. EM
showers will thus develop over considerable distances in liquid argon.

2.3 Stochasticity of EM Showers

The stochastic nature of radiative energy loss causes large event-by-event variations in the topology
of EM showers with energies of up to several hundred MeV, where contributions to the energy loss
by secondary electrons close to the critical energy (taken here to be the energy at which radiative
and collision losses are equal, 39 MeV) play a dominant role. The relatively long photon conversion
distance and stochasticity of photon production leads to segmented and scattered energy deposit
with large gaps which exhibit more variations in topology than higher energy, fully-developed EM
showers.

At 0.1–1 GeV energies, EM showers deposit their energy over distances of ∼ 1 meter, with
the shower range logarithmic in energy. Figure 2 (b) shows the energy loss proﬁle of EM showers
produced by 100 MeV electrons as the median fractional energy deposited within a certain radial
distance of their starting point. The band denotes the interval encompassing 50% of all simulated
electrons. Its spread is used to estimate the loss of energy resolution caused by the event-by-event
variation in energy deposition.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: (a) Mean free path for photons in liquid argon obtained from NIST XCOM tables [13].
In cyan 9/7 the radiation length of 14.1 cm is shown, corresponding to the asymptotic mean free
path. (b) Energy loss proﬁle for EM showers produced by 100 MeV electrons represented by the
median fractional energy lost as a function of radial distance from the electron creation point.

Figure 3 shows the energy distribution of photons produced from the decay of neutral pions
from νµ CC interactions as simulated in the MicroBooNE detector. The EM showers being studied
in this work mainly populate the 50-200 MeV energy range.

– 4 –

Figure 3: Predicted energy spectrum of photons from the decay of neutral pions obtained from
MicroBooNE’s νµ + Ar → µ + π0 + X simulation assuming the BNB ﬂux. The black line shows
the inclusive photon spectrum, subdivided in the two contributions of leading (red) and subleading
(blue) photon.

3 Shower Reconstruction

There are two main challenges to performing shower reconstruction of EM interactions in a LArTPC:

1. It is diﬃcult to separate energy deposition associated with EM showers from that caused by
track-like particles. This is a challenging task since showers at the energy of interest for π0
reconstruction often appear as scattered track-like segments. Figure 4 shows an example data
event with four EM showers produced in a candidate neutrino interaction.

2. The presence of a high rate of uncorrelated cosmic-ray activity in the event poses a challenge
to the energy reconstruction of EM showers, where correctly integrating the energy deposited
in the detector is essential. This challenge is particular to a surface detector like MicroBooNE.
The signiﬁcant distance over which showers propagate and the sparsity of energy deposition
of low-energy EM showers exacerbate this challenge.

The reconstruction presented in this work is a “second-iteration” reconstruction that is per-
formed subsequent to the identiﬁcation of a sample of candidate neutrino interactions. These
interactions are obtained from the neutrino selection described in reference [5]. The reconstructed
vertex obtained from these candidate interactions is used to guide the π0 and γ reconstruction.

Shower reconstruction is performed in a staged approach. First, hits in the event are classiﬁed
as shower or track-like by a trained deep-neural network (section 3.2). Shower-like hits are then
clustered, employing the neutrino vertex as a guide, searching for radially collinear charge associated
with each photon (section 3.3). After matching charge from diﬀerent wire planes (section 3.5),

– 5 –

Figure 4: Example of MicroBooNE data event with two π0 mesons in the ﬁnal state. The entire
image spans a distance of ∼ 1 meter. In this event display the horizontal axis corresponds to the
beam direction coordinate, while the vertical to drift time. Color on the image corresponds to the
amount of energy deposited. The EM showers in this event, typical for BNB π0 events, exhibit a
segmented stochastic nature, are segmented, and contain track-like linear segments.

3D kinematic properties (start point, direction, energy, and dE/dx) of showers are reconstructed
(section 3.6). To orient the reader in the upcoming decription of the reconstruction in which a
speciﬁc coordinate system is referenced, a brief description of the MicroBooNE TPC geometry is
provided in section 3.1.

3.1 Overview of The MicroBooNE Time Projection Chamber

The MicroBooNE TPC is placed on-axis on the BNB and has dimensions of 2.56 m in the drift
coordinate (X), 2.32 m in the vertical (Y ), and 10.36 m in the beam direction (Z). Ionization charge
produced by drifting electrons is detected by recording induced currents on 8,156 wires placed
on the anode plane which is oriented vertically, on the y − z plane. Wires are arranged on three
wire-planes. The ﬁrst two planes encountered by the drifting electrons, referred to as induction
planes, are at an angle of +60 and −60 degrees with respect to the vertical direction, and record
bipolar signals. The last plane, referred to as the collection plane, has wires aligned vertically
and measures uni-polar pulses. For charge deposits by minimally ionizing tracks, induction planes
provide signal-to-noise ratios of 10–30, while on the collection plane the range is 30–50 [14].

The speciﬁc orientation of each wire-plane leads to anisotropic charge-detection and recon-

– 6 –

struction eﬀects which in turn can cause angular-dependence in detector performance. To illustrate
this we describe the case of the collection plane wires, oriented vertically (0, 1, 0) in detail. Particles
moving in the beam direction (0, 0, 1) are parallel to the collection plane’s wire-pitch (0, 0, 1) and
therefore deposit their charge on numerous wires. Particles moving perpendicular to the wire-pitch
can either be oriented vertically (0, 1, 0) or in the drift direction (1, 0, 0). The former lead to large,
isochronous charge deposits which collect on few wires at the same time, while the latter still
deposit their charge on very few wires, but this charge is spread in drift, and thus readout time. The
orientation-dependent pattern of charge on a wire-plane can lead to angular-dependent reconstruc-
tion performance for the identiﬁcation and reconstruction of charged particle trajectories and EM
showers.

In addition to angular-dependent charge patterns on the wire-planes, the wire-response itself
depends on the orientation of a charged particle’s trajectory with respect to the wire-pitch direction.
This can lead to biases in the calorimetric estimation of energy loss, particularly for particles moving
at large angles with respect to the wire-pitch direction. This causes complications for EM showers,
where the energy deposition is contributed by a cascade of electrons and positrons which scatter
and move in a broad range of directions. Eﬀects of this angular-dependent charge response impact
both the reconstruction of shower dE/dx, as well as the total calorimetric energy reconstruction.

3.2 Track-Shower Discrimination and Cosmic Ray Rejection

Identifying energy deposits associated with EM showers is essential to successful shower recon-
struction. The detailed nature of LArTPC images and the stochastic variations of EM activity
complicate the use of algorithms to achieve this reconstruction.

We use an SSNet convolutional neural network [15] to identify electromagnetic activity in the
event. SSNet is an adaptation of the U-ResNet network [16, 17], which employs deep-learning
techniques to identify EM activity in LArTPC neutrino interaction images on a pixel-by-pixel basis.
The network is trained and assigns a score to each pixel in a 2D wire-versus-time MicroBooNE
event image, based on its compatibility with shower- or track-like energy deposits. Scores range
from zero to one, with "one" indicating shower-like pixels. Training is performed on Monte Carlo
samples of neutrino interactions generated either with the GENIE [18] neutrino generator or through
a single particle generation approach. Training scores are assigned based on the truth-level particle
species contributing charge to each pixel in the image. EM-like activity produced by electron and
photon showers, as well as Michel electrons and δ rays, all contribute to the shower-like pixel score.
Further details on network training are provided in section IV of reference [15].

Pixels on each 2D image from the three wire-planes are classiﬁed as shower-like if they have
a shower score above a given threshold. Hits associated with the 2D coordinates of such pixels
are then used in subsequent reconstruction steps as shower-like energy deposition. The SSNet
network shows very good performance and data-MC agreement on the collection plane, but less
so on induction planes, in which additional noise and signal-processing issues cause noise and
track-like pixels to be reconstructed as shower-like. For this reason, collection and induction planes
are used in diﬀerent ways: a high-threshold score of 0.9 is placed on induction-plane hits to reject
background hits. Induction-plane hits are used solely to reconstruct the 3D direction and start point
of EM showers. Completeness in collecting energy deposition is therefore not a concern on these
planes. On the other hand, collection-plane hits are selected as shower-like with a score greater than

– 7 –

0.5. This allows the collection of as much energy as possible deposited by EM showers. Updates
in signal processing developed by MicroBooNE [19, 20] will increase reliance on induction plane
information in future analyses.

An example data event showing a collection-plane view of a candidate νµ CC π0 interaction with
overlayed hits from the SSNet pixel-tagging is shown in ﬁgure 5. The ability of the SSNet algorithm
to identify shower-like pixels with an accuracy of better then 90% [15], including in cases where
EM energy deposition is track-like, as in this example, motivates the choice to implement this tool
in our reconstruction approach.

Figure 5: Candidate νµ CC π0 event from MicroBooNE data. Overlayed in black on the 2D
collection-plane image are reconstructed 2D hits with a shower-like score greater than 0.5 as
determined by the SSNet network.

The SSNet network is trained to discriminate between energy deposited by electrons and photons,
and that produced by track-like particles (protons, pions, muons). It therefore associates EM activity
correlated with muons, such as δ rays and bremsstrahlung showers, as shower-like. In addition,
SSNet pixel tagging often associates energy deposited by muons in proximity to such correlated
EM activity to a shower. These types of interactions are a background to the π0 reconstruction.
Figure 6 shows an example cosmic-ray muon from data with shower-like hits in proximity to EM
activity correlated with the muon. Because of the cosmic-ray background in MicroBooNE data
and the similar energy deposited by cosmic rays and γ showers, we target the removal of these
backgrounds with speciﬁc selection criteria. The PANDORA pattern-recognition cosmic-ray muon
reconstruction (section 4.1 of reference [21]) is used to identify cosmic muon tracks in 3D. Those
longer than 50 cm are selected. If such tracks have an Impact Parameter (I P) with respect to the

– 8 –

neutrino vertex greater than 10 cm, all shower-like hits associated either to the track itself or to any
correlated δ rays are removed. Remaining shower-like hits from the cosmic muon of ﬁgure 6 after
these cuts are applied are shown in the image on the right.

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: MicroBooNE data event showing SSNet shower-like pixels for a cosmic-ray. Black hits
denote EM-like pixels as identiﬁed by SSNet. (a) Before cosmic-hit removal. (b) After cosmic-hit
removal.

3.3 Charge Clustering

This reconstruction stage is tasked with grouping the reconstructed hits on each plane into clusters,
one for each of the two γs produced by the π0. This is done through a series of algorithms, and
precedes the full 3D shower reconstruction. Figure 7 shows an example event through the clustering
stages (a, b) and ﬁnal 3D reconstruction (c).

Hits identiﬁed as shower-like in the track-shower separation stage (section 3.2) are clustered via
a proximity algorithm into independent and contiguous charge segments (see ﬁgure 7 (a)). These
proximity-based clusters are used as the input to the γ clustering stage for which two algorithms are
applied.

3.3.1 Polar Coordinate Merging

This algorithm is a speciﬁc implementation of a widely used class of cone clustering algorithms.
Hit coordinates in wire and time are converted to polar coordinates with the neutrino vertex as
the origin. The radial and angular correlations of individual energy deposits are used to guide
their merging into a single photon shower. For each cluster we compute an angle and angle-span,
deﬁned, respectively, as the charge-weighted direction of the hits in the cluster, and the range of
angles encompassing all hits in it. A start and end point are also reconstructed, corresponding to
the (r,θ) coordinates of, respectively, the hit closest and furthest away from the vertex. The radial
distance between these two points is referred to as the cluster length. In this context, the qualiﬁers
upstream and downstream for two clusters are used to denote the one closest and the one furthest
from the neutrino interaction vertex, respectively. Using these quantities, the showers are merged
if all of the following criteria are met:

1. The upstream shower has more charge associated to it than the downstream one.

– 9 –

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 7: Example event display from a simulated νµ + Ar → µ + π0 event in MicroBooNE.
Track-like pixels as identiﬁed by SSNet are masked out (grey), and the reconstructed vertex is
labeled with a red star. (a) Individual segments of the photon showers, clustered by proximity, are
labeled by diﬀerent colors. (b) The photon showers as identiﬁed by the clustering algorithms are
labeled in magenta and brown. (c) The reconstructed showers, shown as green and orange cones, are
overlayed on hits with corresponding colors associated to the two showers on the collection plane.
The orange shower shows an example of under-clustering, with some hits not correctly associated
to the reconstructed photon.

2. The downstream cluster reconstructed angle θ is within the angle-span of the larger upstream

one.

3. The distance between the two clusters, measured as the radial separation between the upstream
end-point and the downstream start-point, is smaller than the total length of the larger upstream
photon-cluster.

This procedure is repeated recursively on each plane separately until an iteration is reached in which
no further clusters are merged.

3.3.2 Vertex-Aligned Merging

A second algorithm aims at clustering photon-clusters under the assumption that two γ EM showers
from a π0 decay are present in the event. The ﬁrst action taken is identifying, in each plane, the two
clusters with the largest amount of charge. These two clusters must be separated in polar angle θ
by at least 15 degrees. Once these two clusters are identiﬁed, all remaining clusters in the event are
scanned to determine if they should be merged with a γ cluster. A smaller cluster is merged if the
following conditions are both met:

1. Its polar angle is within 12 degrees of the closest large γ cluster, but more than 15 degrees

away from the second large γ cluster.

2. The radial distance between its start point and the large gamma cluster end point is less than

three times the radial length of the large γ cluster.

– 10 –

This procedure is repeated recursively on each plane until an iteration is reached in which no more
clusters are merged. As a reminder, the clustering techniques employed are purposely conservative
in order to avoid over-clustering EM activity associated with uncorrelated cosmic-rays in the event.

3.4 Clustering Ineﬃciencies

Inevitably, each step in the reconstruction can lead to ineﬃciencies in recovering the full energy
deposited by EM showers. We examine the ineﬃciencies here, studying in the simulation the deﬁcit
between the energy recovered at each step in the reconstruction versus the true photon energy. The
metric we utilize is the fractional energy diﬀerence [Ereco − Edeposited]/Edeposited with Edeposited the
photon energy deposited in the TPC active volume from simulation, and Ereco the energy associated
with surviving hits on the collection plane. Figure 8 reports this study for the four stages in
our reconstruction, evaluated on a sample of photons from simulated BNB νµ CC π0 neutrino
interactions with overlayed simulated CORSIKA [22] cosmic-ray particles.

Figure 8: Fractional energy resolution measuring the impact of clustering and other charge-
collection ineﬃciencies, evaluated on a sample of 10s to 100s of MeV photon EM showers from
simulated CC π0 neutrino interactions using collection-plane reconstructed charge.

Hit ﬁnding, in black in the ﬁgure, encapsulates the eﬀect of identifying signals produced by
energy deposits on the wires and reconstructing hits associated with them. The distribution at
this stage is largely symmetric around zero with entries above zero caused by energy response
smearing in the reconstruction. Nonetheless, a negative oﬀset of 10% in the peak of the distribution
is present, associated with thresholding eﬀects which impact EM showers due to the signiﬁcant
number of energy depositions of less than a few hundred keV. In simulation, we ﬁnd that the hit
reconstruction threshold on the collection plane is approximately 300 keV. Pixel-labeling, in red

– 11 –

in the ﬁgure, begins to signiﬁcantly skew the distribution, adding to the bias and to the low-end
tail in the distribution. The bias intensiﬁes further after the cosmic-removal stage, in blue in the
ﬁgure, particularly with a signiﬁcant broadening of the low-end tail due to events for which many
of the photon hits are removed due to their accidental proximity to a cosmic-ray muon. Finally, the
clustering stage, in cyan in the ﬁgure, exhibits an additional residual ineﬃciency. In moving from
hit ﬁnding to clustering, the purity of the collected photon showers is increasing. The skewed and
biased nature of the distribution of ﬁgure 8 will impact energy reconstruction for EM showers, as
will be discussed in detail in Section 5. The purity of clustered charge is also evaluated and found
to be on average 82%.

3.5 Cluster Matching

After clusters have been merged on each plane separately, a cross-plane matching algorithm is
applied to associate clusters belonging to the same γ. Due to wire-coverage in the TPC, and the
overall diﬃculty of ﬁnding a photon which is well-clustered on all three planes, we require that
matching be performed only between pairs of planes. We further demand that one of the two
clusters must be associated to the collection plane, as this will provide us with the best information
with which to perform calorimetry and measure the energy of the γ. Finally, only clusters which
have at least 10 reconstructed hits will be considered. The matching algorithm applied calculates
the overlap in time of pairs of clusters from diﬀerent wire-planes and assigns a score based on
this overlap. Cluster-pairs with the highest score are then merged. The ﬁgure of merit devised as
the overlap score is denoted IoU, for Intersection over Union, and is deﬁned as the time-interval
common to the two clusters over the union of the two clusters’ time-spans. A minimum IoU of 0.25
is required to match two clusters, and clusters are matched in order of their score: if a cluster has a
match with two or more other clusters, the pair with the largest score is associated as belonging to
the same γ.

3.6

3D Shower Reconstruction

Finally, pairs of clusters on two planes are used to reconstruct 3D showers. Speciﬁcally, this
reconstruction stage aims to measure the γ’s 3D start point and direction, as well as its energy and
dE/dx. The reconstruction is modularized in a series of algorithms, which are described below.

The 3D direction of a shower is reconstructed by geometrically correlating the two 2D directions
obtained on the pair of matched clusters. The 2D direction on each plane is calculated by measuring
the charge-weighted 2D direction of hits in the cluster with respect to the neutrino vertex location.
An accuracy in shower direction of 3 degrees is obtained from simulation studies.

The 3D start point is reconstructed by taking the reconstructed start-point in 2D associated
with the collection-plane cluster, and projecting it onto the reconstructed 3D direction to recover
the missing Y (vertical) coordinate. The X (drift) and Z (beam) coordinates are reconstructed from
the time-tick and wire associated with the start-point on the collection-plane.

The shower energy is reconstructed calorimetrically, by integrating all the charge associated
with collection-plane hits belonging to the γ shower, and converting this quantity to MeV by
accounting for the following factors:

– 12 –

• An electronics gain obtained from calibration of the dE/dx of minimally ionizing muons that

stop in the detector.

• A work function for ionization in liquid argon of 23.6 eV/e− [23].

• An eﬀective recombination factor R, obtained from studies presented in Section 5.

The energy reconstruction of EM showers, methodology for correcting for energy biases, and energy
resolution studies, are presented in detail in section 5.

The energy deposited by an EM shower in the ﬁrst few centimeters of propagation can help
distinguish electrons from photons, given suﬃcient calorimetric and spatial resolution. For each
shower, a dE/dx quantity is calculated by considering hits within a four centimeter radius of the
shower starting-point. Charge from these hits is integrated in 3 mm segments extending radially
in the shower direction. The median value of non-empty segments is then chosen as the shower
dE/dx. Results for reconstructed γ candidates are presented in Section 6.2.

A quality cut is applied to ensure that reconstructed showers are truly associated with neutrino-
induced photons. We compare the reconstructed 3D shower direction, projected on the collection-
plane, and the charge-weighted vector sum computed from the neutrino vertex to collection-plane
2D hits.
If the angle between these vectors is larger than 25 degrees, the shower candidate is
rejected.

To improve the clustering eﬃciency and thus the energy reconstruction of EM showers, a
second clustering stage is applied once 3D showers are reconstructed. The advantage of applying
this second-pass clustering step is that, given a candidate 3D shower, it is easier to identify charge
spatially correlated with the shower direction. This charge may have been missed at an earlier
reconstruction stage due to a conservative clustering approach which purposely attempts to avoid
including accidental charge in the shower. Clusters are merged into an already existing shower if
they overlap a 2D projected cone 150 cm long, with an opening angle of 30 degrees and with its
apex at the shower start point. If the overlapping cluster contains more than eight hits, two further
requirements are imposed. The direction of the 2D hits of the shower and photon cluster to be
merged, calculated via a linear regression to the hit coordinates, must agree to within 30 degrees.
In addition, the cluster to be merged cannot cross the projected cone on more than one boundary.

3.7 Shower Reconstruction Performance

The performance of the reconstruction is evaluated on simulated νµ CC interactions with ﬁnal state
π0s and overlayed simulated cosmic ray interactions. The peak in the angular resolution plot is
2.7 degrees, with 23% (60%, 70%) of simulated photons associated to a reconstructed EM shower
within 3 (10, 20) degrees (see ﬁgure 9 (a)). The shower reconstruction eﬃciency as a function of
true γ deposited energy in the TPC is shown in ﬁgure 9 (b). We note that we achieve a shower
reconstruction eﬃciency of at least 60% for showers with more than 100 MeV of deposited energy
and that reconstruct to within 10 degrees of the true shower direction. The eﬃciency drops for
energies below 100 MeV, mostly due to the challenge of identifying low-energy EM showers due
to their topological features. The eﬃciency is found to depend on shower direction as well, with a
decrease in eﬃciency for showers propagating in the drift and vertical directions, perpendicular and
parallel to the collection-plane wire directions respectively. This is because the shower projection

– 13 –

on the collection plane is particularly challenging to reconstruct if the charge is collected on only a
few wires. Energy reconstruction performance studies are presented in detail in section 5.

(a)

(b)

Figure 9: (a) 3D angular resolution for reconstructed EM showers. (b) Reconstruction eﬃciency
of γ EM showers from simulated CC π0 interactions as a function of the photon’s energy deposited
in the detector. The eﬃciency calculation has as denominator all true γ photons produced in the
active volume from simulated neutrino π0 decays. The numerator includes all such true photons
with an associated reconstructed EM shower reconstructed within 10 degrees of the true direction.

4 π0 Event Selection

Candidate π0 events are selected by applying the following criteria:

1. Events must have two or more reconstructed showers.

In cases with more than two EM
showers, only the two highest energy showers are considered. These two showers are the γ
candidates.

2. Each γ candidate must have more than 30 MeV of reconstructed energy.

3. The two EM showers must have an opening angle between them greater than 20 degrees.
Small opening angles are often indicative of events in which a single EM shower was split into
two reconstructed objects. A 20 degree requirement corresponds to excluding π0 momenta
greater than 700 MeV, which is far in the tail of the distribution of π0 momenta expected from
BNB neutrino interactions.

The eﬃciency and purity of this selection, measured with respect to the underlying eﬃciency
of identifying neutrino candidate events, is shown in ﬁgure 10. The mis-identiﬁcation rate for
neutrino interactions in simulation is found to be 0.75%, which, due to the abundance of non-π0
CC interactions, leads to a purity of approximately 80%. Backgrounds are dominated by categories

– 14 –

in which EM activity in the event originates either from charge-exchange interactions induced by a
ﬁnal-state charged pion which exits the target nucleus (π+ → π0 + p) or events where cosmic-ray EM
activity near the neutrino vertex is mis-associated. The π0 selection eﬃciency is heavily dependent
on the energy of the sub-leading γ shower, and saturates at approximately 50% for events with a
subleading shower energy greater than 50 MeV.

Figure 10: Eﬃciency and purity of the π0 selection evaluated on simulated νµ CC events with a π0
in the ﬁnal state. The eﬃciency is measured relative to the νµ CC pre-selection. Both eﬃciency and
purity are measured as a function of the energy of the least energetic of the two π0 decay photons.

When applied to 1.6 × 1020 protons on target (POT) of BNB data, collected from February to
July 2016, the selection leads to the identiﬁcation of 440 ± 21 candidate νµ CC π0 events (of which
88 expected background), one of which is shown in ﬁgure 11.

5 Energy Reconstruction

This section presents the energy reconstruction performed for γ-induced EM showers which includes
a data-driven validation of the calorimetric energy reconstruction on muons, an evaluation of
energy reconstruction biases, and corrections from simulation, as well as a proﬁling of the energy
reconstruction performance.

5.1 Calorimetric Energy Reconstruction

Shower energy reconstruction via calorimetry is performed by integrating the charge recorded by
TPC wires associated with EM activity and recovering a calibrated MeV energy scale. Doing so
requires accounting for detector eﬀects such as charge loss due to electron attenuation and ion
recombination. A calibration to convert pulse amplitudes collected on the wires to drifting charge

– 15 –

Figure 11: Example νµ CC π0 candidate event from MicroBooNE data. Reconstructed showers
are overlayed on the event in orange and purple. The long track exiting on the right hand side of the
image is the candidate muon, while the short track in red is likely a proton.

(in units of number of electrons) is obtained using a sample of stopping muons for which energy
loss proﬁles are known [24]. This calibration procedure is described in reference [26]. Charge
quenching due to recombination is modeled using ArgoNeuT’s modiﬁed box parametrization [25],
applied for MicroBooNE’s electric ﬁeld of 273 V/cm. For this work, attenuation due to electron
lifetime and space-charge eﬀects are not corrected for, leading to 2–3% smearing in the energy
resolution in the bulk of the detector volume. Additional details on the absolute energy scale
calibration applied for muons in MicroBooNE can be found in reference [26].

Calorimetric energy reconstruction can be validated on stopping muons for which a range-
based energy measurement is also obtainable. This data-driven comparison, performed using a
sample of tagged stopping muons, shows agreement at the 3% level. The calorimetric energy
reconstruction procedure applied to muons for this sample is identical to that applied to photons,
giving conﬁdence in the energy-scale calibration. While the same ion recombination model is used,
the implementation of corrections to account for this eﬀect is diﬀerent for showers, and discussed
in detail in the next section.

We assess an uncertainty in the energy scale calibration for this work of 3% for charge deposited
collinear to the collection-plane wire-pitch direction, noting that additional angular-dependent biases
can impact the energy reconstruction of showers in particular.

– 16 –

5.2

Ion Recombination for EM Showers

Ionization electrons can recombine with positive argon ions produced concurrently in a charged
particle’s energy loss. In terms of magnitude, recombination is the largest physics eﬀect that impacts
energy collection, suppressing almost half of the energy deposited in the detector. When correcting
for ion recombination, the observables to take into account are the local electric ﬁeld and the local
energy deposition density, which can be related to the observable dE/dx. For particles which
deposit energy at diﬀerent rates along their path, such as stopping muons or protons, accounting for
the signiﬁcantly varying recombination factor at diﬀerent steps in a particle’s path is essential to
recover the correct calorimetric energy measurement. In the case of EM activity, which has a much
ﬂatter energy loss rate over a wide energy range, this correction is much more uniform. In addition,
calculating an accurate path length dx necessary to recover the correct recombination factor step-
by-step is made diﬃcult by the fact that reconstructing the 3D direction of EM energy deposition
hit-by-hit is very challenging for the bulk of the shower. We therefore decide to implement an
eﬀective recombination correction applied to the total measured shower charge. The eﬀective
recombination factor, Reﬀective, accounts for the global impact of charge quenching on a given EM
shower, and is deﬁned in equation 5.1 as the fraction of charge surviving after recombination, where
Qvisible is the total number of drifting electrons released after quenching, Edeposited the total energy
deposited by the EM shower, and Wion the work function of argon. and is meant to account for the
global impact of charge quenching on a given EM shower.

Reﬀective = Qvisible [e−] × Wion [MeV/e−]

Edeposited [MeV]

(5.1)

This quantity is plotted for a sample of γ showers from simulated muon neutrino CC π0 events as
a function of the photon energy in ﬁgure 12 (a). The same distribution is plotted in ﬁgure 12 (b)
and shows, collapsed in one dimension, a peak value of 0.572 with a spread of 0.018. We take
this as the spread in energy resolution introduced by applying a constant recombination factor for
measuring the reconstructed shower energy. This term is smaller then other contributions to energy
resolution, which are dominated by ineﬃciencies in the shower charge integration.

5.3 Energy Biases and Corrections

Thus far we have validated the procedure for calorimetric energy reconstruction on stopping muons,
and established that an eﬀective recombination correction can adequately account, with minimal
smearing, for the eﬀect of charge loss due to recombination. We next evaluate the performance
of this energy reconstruction procedure on EM showers in simulation. Figure 13 compares the
reconstructed to true γ energy for γ showerss from simulated νµ CC π0 interactions. Unlike for
muons, a signiﬁcant bias is observed. This bias is introduced by two main eﬀects: charge falling
below the threshold necessary to identify and reconstruct a hit (thresholding) and ineﬃciencies
due to hits not correctly labeled as shower-like, or not accounted for in the 2D reconstruction of
shower clusters (under-clustering). The intrinsically lossy nature of these processes leads to an
under-estimation of the total shower energy. These biases must be accounted for in order to recover
the correct energy scale and reconstruct the kinematics of the photons and hence of the π0s which
produced them.

– 17 –

(a)

(b)

Figure 12: (a) Eﬀective recombination factor for simulated γ showers vs. true photon energy. (b)
Distribution of the eﬀective recombination factor for all photons. The full-width at half maximum
(FWHM) is an estimate of the smearing in energy response caused by the use of an eﬀective
recombination correction.

In order to quantify the bias observed, and be able to correct for it, we extract, in bins of true
energy, the fractional energy resolution deﬁned as (Ereco − Etrue)/Etrue, and ﬁt each distribution to a
Gaussian plus a low-tail exponential. This choice is motivated by the interest in modeling the lossy
impact of clustering and thresholding on energy reconstruction. Examples of such distributions and
the resulting ﬁts are shown in ﬁgure 14 for three energy ranges. The mean of the ﬁtted Gaussian is
taken as an estimate of the most-probable energy bias for each true energy bin. The bias is found to
range between 10% and 20%, depending on the energy bin.

The measured energy bias is ﬁt to a straight line constrained to pass through the origin and
its slope is used to compute an energy-independent correction factor which aims to account for the
bias. Figure 13 shows the result of the ﬁtting, giving Ereco = 0.802 ± 0.006 × Etrue. This leads to
the deﬁnition of a corrected energy: Ecorr = Ereco/0.802.

Diﬀerent methods for applying a bias correction were investigated, partially to address the
possibility of an energy-dependent bias correction. While diﬀerent approaches, which included
allowing the ﬁt intercept to ﬂoat, led to bias corrections which were statistically signiﬁcant, they
ultimately caused an O(1%) diﬀerence in the reconstructed di-photon invariant mass (Mγγ) distribu-
tion. While in this work an energy-independent correction is applied, in the future, and depending
on the details of the implemented reconstruction, adopting an energy-dependent correction may
be beneﬁcial. We note that the bias correction obtained for this reconstruction is smaller than the
value of 1/0.70 obtained from MicroBooNE’s previous study of EM activity at lower energy based
on Michel electrons [10]. This is a consequence of an improved energy reconstruction and reﬁned
charge collection capabilities.

– 18 –

true energy for reconstructed γ EM showers from simulated π0
Figure 13: Reconstructed vs.
decays. The magenta line represents Ereco = Etrue. The red points are the medians of the Gaussian
plus exponential tail distributions ﬁtted in bins of true energy. The red line (slope 0.802, intercept
0) is the result of a linear ﬁt, constrainted to pass through the origin, to the points. The magenta
line deontes the diagonal y = x.

5.4 Energy Resolution Measurement

After applying the energy bias correction described above, the fractional energy resolution is again
ﬁt to a Gaussian plus exponential-tail function. The energy resolution is quantiﬁed in two ways: the
Gaussian σ of the ﬁt function is taken to represent the resolution for the bulk of the distribution, while
the reported 68% interval accounts for the low-end tail by integrating 68% of entries asymmetrically
around the peak in proportion to the ratio of areas below and above the peak. Measurements of the
energy resolution as a function of true photon energy from simulation are reported, using these two
deﬁnitions, in ﬁgure 15. The ﬁtted Gaussian gives a resolution of 8-12%, while the 68% interval
method results in a width of 15-20%. The ﬂat nature of the energy resolution as a function of
E dependence typical of a total absorption
energy indicates that rather than being limited by the 1/
calorimeter, we are in a regime where other eﬀects, including clustering ineﬃciencies, dominate the
energy smearing. This resolution meets, in the 50-300 MeV energy range studied, the requirements
for electron energy measurements of DUNE (2% ⊕ 15% / (cid:112)E [GeV]) [4] which corresponds to a
resolution of 47% and 27% at 100 and 300 MeV, respectively.

√

– 19 –

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 14: Energy resolution for reconstructed γ showers from simulated π0s. The blue points
indicate the measured energy diﬀerence. The red curves denote the ﬁtted Gaussian plus one-
sided exponential functions used to model energy smearing. The importance of modeling lossy
contributions from clustering ineﬃciencies and thresholding eﬀects can be clearly seen from the
substantial negative energy diﬀerence of these distributions.

5.5 π0 Energy Resolution
We next study the π0 energy resolution. To do so, we use two deﬁnitions for energy: in one, the π0
energy is given by summing the energy of the two photons, after applying the corrections described
in section 5, while in the second, we make use of the kinematic constraint which can be leveraged
assuming the two showers are produced by a π0 decay and employing the reconstructed opening
angle in the momentum and hence energy determination. The more complex energy deﬁnition is
shown in equations 5.2 and 5.3, where θ is the γγ opening angle, and α the energy asymmetry
between the two showers, deﬁned as |E1 − E2|/(E1 + E2).

pπ0 = Mπ0

(cid:115)

2
(1 − α2)(1 − cos θ)

,

(5.2)

(cid:113)

Eπ0 =

π0 + p2
M 2
π0 .
The ﬁrst method, which simply integrates the reconstructed energy of the two photons, is susceptible
to the lossy biases of shower energy reconstruction presented earlier in this section. While this
method leads to a reasonably accurate energy determination, it presents a large negative tail, as
shown in the blue distribution of ﬁgure 16. The second method, which makes use of the π0 decay
kinematic constraint and relies on the energy asymmetry, rather than on the absolute energy, is
less sensitive to energy biases, and provides a more accurate and less biased energy resolution, as
shown in the red curve. The central peak of this distribution, when ﬁtted to a Gaussian, gives a
10% resolution on the π0 energy.

(5.3)

6 Measurements of π0 Reconstructed Variables in Data

In this section, we present various measurements pertaining to π0 and photon reconstruction which
are useful to assess the energy calibration of the detector, as well as study electron-photon separation.

– 20 –

Figure 15: Energy resolution for reconstructed γ showers, measured after applying bias corrections.
Red points show the ﬁtted σ of the Gaussian plus exponential ﬁt function, used to model energy
losses and smearing. Blue points denote the 68% interval half-width of the entire Gaussian plus
exponential distribution. Error bars on the measurements in red are obtained from the statistical
uncertainty of the ﬁt on the parameter σ. Error bars on the blue points are obtained from the
statistical uncertainty of the ﬁt on the exponential component of the Gaussian plus exponential ﬁt
function.

These results showcase both an accurate modeling of the detector and the capabilities of a robust
and sophisticated reconstruction. While the study of ν-Ar interactions is not the subject of this
work, we acknowledge that modeling discrepancies in our simulation can contribute to data-MC
disagreement. To that end, we limit this work to distributions which are least sensitive to such eﬀects,
and present them area-normalized. For graphs in this section blue points are from data, drawn with
statistical error bars. Solid lines come from MicroBooNE’s BNB simulation and are separated into
signal events associated with π0 interactions in red and backgrounds with no ﬁnal-state π0 in black.
Oﬀ-beam backgrounds, subdominant to those associated with neutrino-induced interactions, were
determined to not impact the results presented, and are not included in this analysis. Data and
simulation comparisons are area-normalized.

6.1 Reconstructed π0 Mass

Applying the energy reconstruction and bias corrections described in section 5, we can use the
sample of selected di-photon candidates to reconstruct the di-photon mass Mγγ. The mass is obtained
from the decay kinematics of the two γ showers, through the expression Mγγ = (cid:112)2E1E2 (1 − cos θ),
with E1 and E2 the energy of the two photons, and θ the reconstructed angle between them. The
reconstructed mass is shown in ﬁgure 17. Energy corrections are derived from simulation studies

– 21 –

Figure 16: Fractional energy resolution, deﬁned as [Ereco − Etrue]/Etrue, for the π0 energy computed
as the sum of the two photon energies (blue), and employing equations 5.2 and 5.3 (red). The π0s
in this Monte Carlo simulation sample come from simulated νµ CC interactions and have momenta
of up to a few hundred MeV.

on single photon showers, as presented in section 5. After these corrections, we ﬁnd good data-
simulation agreement in the reconstructed Mγγ with a χ2/d.o.f. of 44.7/34. When we rely on the
reconstructed Mγγ distribution itself as a calibration, as described in Appendix A, we ﬁnd that a
scaling of the simulation by 1.055 (or 5.5%) relative to data leads to an agreement quantiﬁed as
36.1/34 χ2/d.o.f. with the scaling factor range [0.98, 1.13] encompassing an interval iin ∆ χ2/d.o.f.
of 1.0. The fact that the calibration relying on the invariant mass itself is consistent with the
calibration procedure performed relying on stopping muons (found to be accurate at the 3% level,
with possible additional angular dependences which can impact showers more signiﬁcantly) is an
indication of a sound calibration procedure and well modeled detector response for EM showers.
In ﬁgure 17, and subsequently in comparisons of dE/dx distributions, for simulation distributions
the 1.055 scaling described in appendix A is applied. Finally, the fact that the reconstructed mass
in data lines up with the expected π0 mass of 135 MeV/c2 is an indication that the bias corrections
correctly account for the impact on energy reconstruction of the lossy processes of thresholding
and under-clustering.

6.2 Photon dE/dx
The sample of γ showers obtained from νµ CC π0 interactions is well suited to studying the
topological and calorimetric separation of electrons from photons via the measurement of the energy
deposition in the initial segment of the shower. We measure shower dE/dx using hits deposited
in the ﬁrst 4 cm from the photon showering point (in a similar way as presented by the ArgoNeuT
collaboration [9]) and measuring their median dE/dx value. This work shows a measurement of

– 22 –

Figure 17: Reconstructed Mγγ from candidate νµ CC π0 events after applying photon-shower energy
corrections derived from simulation with an additional 5.5% shift of the energy in the simulation
as explained in the text. The χ2/bin for the area-normalized data and simulation distributions is
36.1/34. The dashed line denotes the π0 mass of 135 MeV/c2. The data corresponds to 1.6 × 1020
POT recorded from the BNB.

shower dE/dx performed in a fully automated way for the ﬁrst time. Due to ineﬃciencies and
biases in calorimetry at small angles with respect to the wire-pitch, we limit ourselves to photon
showers that are at an angle with respect to the collection-plane wire direction of at least 33 degrees.
In future work, which will incorporate improvements in signal processing already developed by
the MicroBooNE collaboration [19, 20], shower dE/dx information in the full phase-space will be
utilized relying, when beneﬁcial, on calorimetric information from the induction planes. Finally,
to enhance the purity of the photon sample, only showers with reconstructed energy greater than
50 MeV are included in this study.

The reconstructed dE/dx is shown in ﬁgure 18. The bulk of the distribution is peaked at
4 MeV/cm, expected for a twice minimally ionizing converting photon signature in liquid argon.
The peak at 2 MeV/cm is a contribution from misreconstruction as well as irreducible backgrounds
made up of Compton scattering photons and pair-conversions to an asymmetric e+e−, both of which
are especially dominant at low γ energy. This work shows that MicroBooNE can identify photons
by relying on dE/dx measured in the ﬁrst few centimeters of the EM shower development. In this
work photons reconstructed with a dE/dx below 3.0 (3.5) MeV/cm make up 21% (30%) of the
selected photons in data. Photon dE/dx reconstruction is found to be particularly challenging at
low photon energies, due to a combination of the above eﬀects.

– 23 –

Figure 18: dE/dx for photon candidates from selected νµ CC π0 events. The χ2/bin for the area-
normalized data and simulation distributions is 15.8/21. The data corresponds to 1.6 × 1020 POT
recorded from the BNB.

6.3 Photon Conversion Distance

An additional variable of interest for photon identiﬁcation is the photon conversion distance: the
separation between the point at which the photon is produced and the point at which it manifests
itself in the detector by ﬁrst contributing to energy deposition. Figure 19 shows the distribution
for reconstructed photons from the π0 selection. The signal exhibits an exponential behavior as
expected for photons converting in the detector. An exponential ﬁt to the background-subtracted
distributions, shown in ﬁgure 19 (b), results in an extracted conversion distance of 29.3 ± 1.9 cm in
data. While this measurement does not correct for a conversion distance dependent eﬃciency, it is
consistent with that expected for EM showers of this energy range.

7 Conclusions

MicroBooNE has presented a description of a method for the reconstruction of EM interactions in
LArTPC detectors in the tens to a few hundred MeV energy range, which are particularly diﬀuse
and stochastic in nature. Particular emphasis has been given to describing the implementation of an
energy calibration procedure for EM showers above the Michel electron threshold, identifying and
quantifying the primary contributions to energy biases associated with clustering and thresholding.
We have shown that we are able to obtain energy resolutions in the range 10–20%, meeting
the requirements for electron energy reconstruction in DUNE’s long-baseline neutrino oscillation
program [4]. This reconstruction is used to perform a selection of νµ CC interactions with ﬁnal

– 24 –

(a)

(b)

Figure 19: (a) Measured conversion distance for reconstructed γ showers belonging to the νµ CC
π0 sample. The χ2/bin for the area-normalized data and simulation distributions is 15.6/19. The
data corresponds to 1.6 × 1020 POT recorded from the BNB. (b) Background subtracted conversion
distance distributions ﬁt to an exponential. The exponential constant, denoted as λ, is found to be
27.6 ± 0.1 cm in simulation (red dotted curve) and 29.3 ± 1.9 cm in data (in blue), in good agreement
with each other. The ﬁrst bin is not included in the ﬁt. Backgrounds as estimated from simulation
as in (a) are subtracted identically in both data and simulation.

state π0 → γγ decays, leading to 440 candidate events. The reconstructed Mγγ distribution shows
good data-simulation agreement, validating both the calibration and reconstruction being presented.
The sample of γ EM showers is further used to probe valuable electron-photon separation metrics
such as the photon conversion distance and shower dE/dx, demonstrating the ability to use this
information in MicroBooNE for physics analyses.

– 25 –

References

[1] R. Acciarri et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration) Design and Construction of the MicroBooNE

Detector, 2017 JINST 12 no.02, P02017.

[2] I. Stancu, et al. Technical Design Report for the 8 GeV Beam, 2001 FERMILAB-DESIGN-2001-03.

[3] R. Acciarri et al. (SBN Collaboration) A Proposal for a Three Detector Short-Baseline Neutrino

Oscillation Program in the Fermilab Booster Neutrino Beam, arXiv:1503.01520

[4] B. Abi et al. (DUNE Collaboration) The DUNE Far Detector Interim Design Report Volume 1:

Physics, Technology and Strategies, arXiv:1807.10334

[5] C. Adams et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration) First Measurement of Muon Neutrino Charged Current
Single Neutral Pion Production on Argon with the MicroBooNE LArTPC, Phys. Rev. D99 (2019)
no.9, 091102.

[6] A. Ankowski et al. (ICARUS Collaboration) Energy Reconstruction of Electromagnetic Showers from
π0 Decays with the ICARUS T600 Liquid Argon TPC, Acta Physics Polonica B, vol. 41 (2010).

[7] I. Kochanek, Analysis of Neutral Pions from νµ CC CNGS Interactions in the ICARUS Detector.

https://sbc.org.pl/dlibra/publication/220536/edition/208391, retrieved 06/11/2019.

[8] R. Acciarri et al. (ArgoNeuT Collaboration) Measurement of νµ and ¯νµ neutral current π0 → γγ

production in the ArgoNeuT detector, Phys.Rev. D96 (2017) no.1, 012006.

[9] R. Acciarri et al. (ArgoNeuT Collaboration) First Observation of Low Energy Electron Neutrinos in a

Liquid Argon Time Projection Chamber, Phys. Rev. D95, 072005 (2017).

[10] R. Acciarri et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration) Michel Electron Reconstruction Using Cosmic-Ray

Data from the MicroBooNE LArTPC, 2017 JINST 12 P09014.

[11] ICRU Report 37, Stopping Powers for Electrons and Positrons, International Commission on

Radiation Units and Measurements, 1984.

[12] M.J. Berger, J.S. Coursey, M.A. Zucker, and J. Chang, ESTAR, PSTAR, and ASTAR: Computer

Programs for Calculating Stopping-Power and Range Tables for Electrons, Protons, and Helium Ions
(version 1.2.3), (2005), [https://physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/Star/Text/method.html,
retrieved Feb. 24, 2017].

[13] M.J. Berger et al., XCOM: Photon Cross Section Database (version 1.5), (2010),

[http://physics.nist.gov/xcom, retrieved Feb. 24, 2017].

[14] R. Acciarri et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration) Noise Characterization and Filtering in the

MicroBooNE Liquid Argon TPC 2017 JINST 12, P08003.

[15] C. Adams et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration) A Deep Neural Network for Pixel-Level Track/Shower
Separation in a Liquid Argon Time Projection Chamber Phys.Rev. D99 (2019) no.9, 092001.

[16] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, T. Brox, U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image

Segmentation, Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MICCAI) 9351, 234
(2015).

[17] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition, Computer Vision

and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016 IEEE 770 (2016).

[18] C. Andreopoulos et al. (GENIE Collaboration), The GENIE neutrino monte carlo generator Nucl.

Instrum. Meth.A, 87, (2010).

– 26 –

[19] C. Adams et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration) Ionization electron signal processing in single phase
LArTPCs. Part I. Algorithm Description and quantitative evaluation with MicroBooNE simulation,
2018 JINST 13 no.07, P07006.

[20] C. Adams et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration) Ionization electron signal processing in single phase
LArTPCs. Part II. Data/simulation comparison and performance in MicroBooNE, 2018 JINST 13
no.07, P07007.

[21] R. Acciarri et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration) The Pandora multi-algorithm approach to automated
pattern recognition of cosmic-ray muon and neutrino events in the MicroBooNE detector, Eur.Phys.J.
C78 (2018) no.1, 82. [arXiv:1708.03135]

[22] D. Hecket al., Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe ReportFZKA-6019 (1998), version v7.4003 with

constant mass composition model.

[23] M. Miyajima et al., Average Energy Expended per Ion Pair in Liquid Argon, Liquid Argon-gas
Mixtures and Liquid Xenon, Phys. Rev. A9 (1974) 1438, and erratum in A 10 (1974) 1452.

[24] C. Patrignani, et al. (Particle Data Group), Chin. Phys. C40, 100001 (2016). [http://pdg.lbl.
gov/2012/AtomicNuclearProperties/MUON_ELOSS_TABLES/muonloss_289.pdf,retrieved
Feb. 20, 2017].

[25] The ArgoNeuT Collaboration, A study of electron recombination using highly ionizing particles in the

ArgoNeuT Liquid Argon TPC, 2013 JINST 8 P08005.

[26] C. Adams, et al., Calibration of the charge and energy response of the MicroBooNE liquid argon time

projection chamber using muons and protons, arXiv:1907.11736

– 27 –

A Energy calibration through the Mγγ π0 mass and data-simulation agreement

After applying the calorimetric energy reconstruction and shower energy bias corrections described
in section 5, good agreement is found for the reconstructed Mγγ invariant mass, both between
data and simulation, as well as between the observed and expected reconstructed π0 mass value of
135 MeV/c2. This section aims to quantify the level of data-simulation agreement, and utilize the
reconstructed Mγγ from π0 candidates as an additional, orthogonal, calibration tool.

Figure 20: Statistical χ2 obtained when comparing the area-normalized Mγγ distribution for data
and simulation, as a function of the scaling factor to the data energy scale. An oﬀset of 5.5% is
found, with an interval of ∆ χ2 = 1 encompassing the scaling range [0.98, 1.13].

To quantify the level of agreement in the reconstructed Mγγ variable, we measure the χ2 between
the area normalized data and simulation distributions, accounting for statistical uncertainties only,
as a function of a relative energy scaling applied. Furthermore, the χ2 is computed only for
bins below 250 MeV/c2 to focus on signal events. The result of this measurement is shown in
ﬁgure 20 and indicates a 5.5% discrepancy in energy scale. Speciﬁcally, the simulation distribution
underestimates by 5.5% what is reconstructed in data. The ∆ χ2 = 1 scaling factor correction covers
the range [0.98, 1.13]. This factor is compatible with the calibration outlined in section 5 when
accounting for the 3% expected level of uncertainty.

Figure 21 (a) and (b) show the reconstructed π0 mass distribution obtained without and with bias
corrections, applying an otherwise an identical calibration procedure between data and simulation.
Figure 21 (c) shows the distribution accounting for the remaining 5.5% discrepancy observed, where
simulation has been scaled by a factor of 1.055. The χ2/d.o.f. moves from 44.7/34 to 36.1/34
before and after applying the 1.055 scale factor.

Finally, the impact of the 1.055 oﬀset on the reconstruction of shower dE/dx is shown in
ﬁgure 22 (a) without and (b) with the 5.5% correction applied. For this distribution we also see an
improved level of data-simulation agreement after the scaling obtained from the π0 mass is applied.
It is important to note that unlike for shower energy reconstruction, calorimetric dE/dx is not
impacted by the eﬀect of hit-thresholding and charge-clustering, suggesting that the uncertainty in
energy scale for γ reconstruction is primarily contributed by the uncertainty in the absolute energy
scale calibration.

– 28 –

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 21: Reconstructed Mγγ. (a) After proper calorimetric energy calibration but before any
shower energy reconstruction bias corrections. (b) After bias corrections are applied identically in
data and simulation. (c) After applying a further 5.5% correction to simulation. The distribution in
(b) has a χ2/bin of 44.7/34, and the one in (c) gives a value of 36.1/34.

(a)

(b)

Figure 22: dE/dx for photon candidates from the π0 selection. dE/dx is calibrated following the
same calorimetry reconstruction described in section 5, omitting the shower energy-bias corrections
which are not relevant here. (a) Reconstructed distribution after applying an identical calibration
procedure to data and simulation. (b) Reconstructed distribution after accounting for the additional
5.5% bias measured from the reconstructed π0 mass distribution. The distribution in (a) gives a
χ2/bin of 22.9/21, while for the one in (b) the χ2 is 15.8/21.

– 29 –

