9
1
0
2

v
o
N
4

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
0
0
1
0
.
1
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Modeling an Augmented Reality Game Environment to
Enhance Behavior of ADHD Patients

Saad Alqithami, Musaad Alzahrani, Abdulkareem Alzahrani, and Ahmed Mostafa

Department of Computer Science, Albaha University, Saudi Arabia
{salqithami,malzahr,ao.alzahrani,amyosof}@bu.edu.sa

Abstract. The paper generically models an augmented reality game-based en-
vironment to project the gamiﬁcation of an online cognitive behavioral thera-
pist that performs instant measurements for patients with a predeﬁned Attention
Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). ADHD is one of the most common neu-
rodevelopmental disorders in which patients have difﬁculties related to inatten-
tion, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. Those patients are in need for a psychological
therapy; the use of cognitive behavioral therapy as a ﬁrmly-established treatment
is to help in enhancing the way they think and behave. A major limitation in tradi-
tional cognitive behavioral therapies is that therapists may face difﬁculty to opti-
mize patients’ neuropsychological stimulus following a speciﬁed treatment plan,
i.e., therapists struggle to draw clear images when stimulating patients’ mind-
set to a point where they should be. Other limitations recognized here include
availability, accessibility and level-of-experience of the therapists. Therefore, the
paper present a gamiﬁcation model, we term as “AR-Therapist,” in order to take
advantages of augmented reality developments to engage patients in both real
and virtual game-based environments. The model provides an on-time measure-
ments of patients’ progress throughout the treatment sessions which, in result,
overcomes limitations observed in traditional cognitive behavioral therapies.

Keywords: Gamiﬁcation· ADHD · Cognitive Behavioral Therapy · Augmented
Reality

1 INTRODUCTION

Attention Deﬁcit-Hyperactivity Disorder is an increasing concern in the past few decades.
It has undeﬁned etiology as a heterogeneous developmental disorder leading to bias and
extensive diagnostic evaluations when examining patients through traditional clinical
interviews and rating of patients’ behaviors [3,1]. ADHD in underage patients can be
observed in patients’ hyperactivity and inability control their impulses and may have
trouble paying attention which, in result, will intervene with their daily lives. In adult-
hood, patients with ADHD may have trouble managing time, being organized, setting
goals, and holding down a job, which may lead to problems with relationships, self-
esteem, and addiction. The treatment of many psychological disorders, such as ADHD,
can be through a well-known type of psychotherapy called Cognitive Behavioral Ther-
apy (CBT). CBT involves patients in multiple psychosocial interventions in order to
improve the status of their current mental health. This treatment requires patients to go

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

S. Alqithami, et. al.

through multiple sessions with specialized therapists. In ADHD, those sessions can be
of increasing order of difﬁculty to help patients expand their cognitive capabilities to
overcome current behavioral limitations.

ADHD has undeﬁned etiology as a heterogeneous developmental disorder to in-
volve hyperactivity and distractibility as well as difﬁculties with constant attention, im-
pulsive control disorder and impaired cognitive ﬂexibility, especially in problem solving
and behavioral management [7]. Many studies have indicated the potential beneﬁts of
VR and AR exposure therapy for many types of mental disorders [21,16,4,22,6,18]. In a
study by Parsons, et. al. [21], attention performance was compared between 10 children
with ADHD and 10 normal control children in a VR classroom. The results showed that
children with ADHD are more impacted by distraction in the VR classroom. In spite
of that, Ben-Moussa, et. al. [5] proposed a conceptual design of an exposure therapy
system for patients with a social anxiety disorder. The proposd system integrates the
AR and VR technologies through a simulated environment. It provides more effective
exposure therapy solutions for patient with social anxiety disorder due to exploiting the
beneﬁts of AR and VR.

This highlights the importance of utilizing immersive technologies, e.g., Augmented
Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR), for their promising results that are stated in
previous studies [21,16,4,22,6,18]. As the name suggests, AR-technology combines
real and virtual contents, rendered in 3D, to be interactive in real-time [2]. Whereas,
VR-technology replaces the real world with a computer-generated graphics via head
mounted display [9]. In other words, the user in VR environment totally isolated from
the real-world while the AR optimizes the interactions in the real world [8]. In AR, the
environment is real but augmented with virtual objects from the system as it bridges
the gap between real and virtual world in a seamless way [11]. The information pre-
sented by the immersed virtual objects enhances a user’s perception of- and interaction
with- the real-world [2]. The rendering have much lower requirements in AR than in
VR because VR completely replace the real world with the virtual environment which
makes display devices used in AR have less stringent requirements than that used in
VR systems. Also, the tracking and sensing requirements for AR are much stricter than
those for VR systems [2]. This can be of great beneﬁts for ADHD patients because it
enables therapists to collect more information about the behavior of the patient which
helps in the diagnosis and treatment procedures.

It is unfortunate that proposed solutions fail to overcome language and cultural bar-
riers for diverse patients and to employ the power of augmented reality by rendering 3D
objects and avatars rather than solid textual instructions leading to increase in patients’
engagements and speeding-up the recovery. The believe is that there is no statistically
signiﬁcant difference between the ADHD patients who will be treated using this system
and those who are treated by traditional CBT; although, online CBT may exceed tra-
ditional ones methods by accelerating recovery time and saving money and resources
for both government and patients. This is due to achieving a concept of “a therapist
for each patient” as the system mimics the therapist roles through an augmented reality
development that provide it with features including: adaptiveness, smartness, respon-
siveness, and accuracy. Other advantages are availability, accessibility, and assurance
of the therapist’s level-of-experience which cannot be guaranteed in traditional CBT.

Modeling an AR-Game for ADHD Patients

3

Therefore, this paper models a system using a game pipeline and propose measure-
ments that can be used to test the validity of using an online system as CBT, which we
called “AR-Therapist”. The believe tackled here is that an increase in patient correct
attention, e.g., when selecting a predeﬁned object, contributes positively to their per-
formance index which means they are following along with their treatment plan; the
opposite should be true when they fail to achieve their assigned tasks. The result of this
can be observed through applying the measurements we propose here on an augmented
reality game.

2 GENERIC DESIGN OF THE SYSTEM

The high-level design, shown in Figure 1, represents the main components of the AR-
Therapist and the therapist-patient relationships within the online AR-environment.

!
!

!

)
&
(
$
%
7
-
<
)
&
&
-
$
8
%
$
;

!"#$%&"’(")**

!

;-$&%.6+">-1)/0&(%:">6("%.&)

6.1)2#-.6$"%)?%$@’+%A)

)
(
$
%
7
-
<
)
&
"
&
9
+
6
.
=

/+%01)2-$3-$)

)
1
.
6
)
(
.
-
:
.
%
$
"
3
.
B

)
.
%
"
(
6
+
0
:
"
2

)
F
&
(
#
-
E
D
C

!"#$%&%’()*%+%,-.&)

+(,-.%(’(")*,"/*0&")%&1*

45-$67"&(&)!%."(%$".8)29&(-:&)

;$%8$-&&)4$6#@".8)

B3-.(&)4$6#@".8)

?%$@’+%A)B.8".-)

G-563"%$)H.(-$7$-(6("%.)

B.3"$%.:-.()B3-.(&)H.(-$7$-(6("%.)

Fig. 1. The System Architecture for AR-Therapist

Patients play-to-win the game that has been designed to attract their attention through
the guidance of voice/sign instructions. Movement and actions are measured and then
stored in a database to allow a therapist to monitor the treatment progress. Next, we
present the logical ﬂow presented in Figure 1.

2.1 Formal Game Pipeline:

The AR-Therapist is based on the following 8-proﬁles for the generic assembly of the
game pipeline.

1. Treatment is the whole treatment system (i.e., AR-Therapist). Its proﬁle is a tuple

of: h Patient, Doctor, Game, {Treatment-Program} i

– Patient: Each patient will have his/her own proﬁle. The proﬁle has to be com-

plete for the patient to join the treatment program.

4

S. Alqithami, et. al.

– Doctor: Each doctor will have his/her own proﬁle.
– Game: The game has to be deﬁned by the doctor considering patients current

mental state and the disorder severity.

– {Treatment-Program}: Players will go through a treatment program that in-

cludes playing an AR-based game consisting of a set of levels.

2. Patient: h ID, Level, Performance-Index, {Preference} i

– ID: is a short identiﬁcation as a name or a referral number used by the doctor

to deﬁne a patient.

– Level: The level to where the patient has arrived in the treatment plan.
– Performance-Index: The current value of performance the patient has achieved

throughout the game.

– {Preference}: The set of predeﬁned preferences for a patient considering other
psychological disorders that may affect current design and methodology of the
treatment plan.

3. Doctor: h ID, Experience, Involvement i

– ID: The doctor has to have his/her own proﬁle that is different from other thera-
pists or psychological centers. This will give the doctor an access to the patient
proﬁles and progress reports to allow for further evaluations.

– Experience: Experience level of the doctor is useful in allowing access to more

complex/detailed data of the patients.

– Involvement: The level of engagement within the treatment process which al-
low the doctor to get involved in the game and in the reporting progress along
the way of the patient assigned treatment.

4. Game: h Type, {Level} i

– Type: The type of the game to be played that has to be suitable for the patient.

E.g., drag-and-drop and multiple-choices.

– {Level}: The game consists of a set of levels that have different levels of com-

plexity.

5. Level: h {Object}, Max-Time, Effects i

– {Object}: Maximum set of objects used in this level.
– Max-Time: A predeﬁned maximum time for the whole level to be completed or

aport otherwise.

– Effects: Simple directional voice or instructions used for guidance in case of a

remote following.

6. Object: h Shape, Size, Random-Location, Visibility i

– Shape: The structure of an object has to be predeﬁned beforehand the start of a

session.

– Size: The size of an object will depend on the location and closeness from the

player focal point.

– Random-Location: The initial distribution of objects around the real-environment.
– Visibility: The appearance of one object after another.

7. Treatment − Program: h {Game-session}, Performance-Measures, Duration i

– {Game-session}: The set of game session to complete the treatment program.
– Performance-Measures: The performance in one session reports the correct,
incorrect and uncompleted tried the patient has gone through in one session.

Modeling an AR-Game for ADHD Patients

5

– Duration: The maximum treatment time for the whole treatment program. E.g.,

20-min to complete the treatment.

8. Game − session: h Level, Timer, Current-location, Number-of-tries i

– Level: The game level has to be deﬁned beforehand. The initial level is de-
ﬁned in the patient proﬁle and player can move from one level to another
asynchronously depending on his/her achievement in the session and then the
patient proﬁle is updated.

– Timer: To count the response time for the patients.
– Current location: To track current location of the patient for measuring close-

ness from objects within a session.

– Number of tries: The repetition of tries within one session to include correct,
incorrect and uncompleted tries. E.g., the number of collected target objects
the patient has correctly collected in one session.

To this end, we have introduced Eight-proﬁles that when merged will best formulate
the AR-Therapist model. Next, we show the process of combining those proﬁles into a
conceptual model.

2.2 General Conceptual Model:

The conceptual model consists of Four layers: 1) interface layer, 2) conﬁguration layer,
3) run-time layer, and 4) storage layer. Figure 2 depicts an architecture of the AR-
Therapist based on the proﬁles presented in previous section.

- Therapist

- Patient

Interface Layer

Graphical User Interface

AR-Gadget

Configuration Layer

Treatment Plan Configuration

Run-time Layer

Context Agent

Game

Level

Session

Object, Location, 
Time, … etc.

Monitor

Control

Storage Layer

Treatment Plan

Treatment Program

Patients Profiles

Games Design

Fig. 2. The general conceptual model for AR-Therapist

6

S. Alqithami, et. al.

1. The Interface Layer contains the interfaces used for accessing other layers. For
instance, doctor can use a user-friendly interface to conﬁgure the treatment plan,
whereas player interact with the game through Augmented Reality glasses.

2. The Conﬁguration Layer consists of the “treatment plan conﬁguration” compo-
nent, where the doctor can add new treatment plan and conﬁgure the existence
ones.

3. The Run-Time Layer has the components that interact with the player while the
game is running. These components are: the Context Agent component and the
Game component.

- The Context-Agent Component retrieves the player treatment plan, and his/her
performance in order to controlling the current game-session and guiding the
player based on the treatment plan. Furthermore, the context agent capable of
monitoring all the player’s behaviors and interactions with the environment,
logging “Ethically” the needed data, and calculating the player’s performance
following the measurements highlighted in the next section. Thus, the agent
gains a deeper understanding of the patient to enrich the AR-Therapist model
based on appropriate reasoning techniques. This in turns can be utilized in the
future for suggesting the most optimal treatment plan for new patient (e.g. when
facing a “cold start issue”). In addition, logging the needed data and reasoning
them will reveal some of hidden information that can be valuable for advancing
research on treating patients with ADHD.
On the other hand, there is a persistent need for employing intelligent agent
capable of performing the tasks explained above since the AR-Therapist model
is used by the patients with the aid of their families and under the doctors’
remote supervision (i.e. ambient assistant living “AAL”). A prior use of AAL
is observed in the literature for fall detection [10], and for monitoring elderly
in their homes using video surveillance [15].

- The Game Component involves levels of game; each level has its own games-
sessions, and each game-session in turns contains the appropriate difﬁculty
level that characterizes the maximum game-session time, used objects, and
their locations.

4. The Storage Layer involves components that store data about the treatment-plan,
treatment-program, player proﬁle, and game levels and objects. Each component
follows an appropriate common speciﬁcation for structuring the related data. Thus,
the system’s extensibility can be guaranteed as well as the integration with the
existence E-Health systems.

3 Performance Measures:

One of the most important issues in diagnosing and treatment of ADHD is to determine
a set of accurate performance measures. These performance measures should have the
ability to differentiate accurately between patients having ADHD symptoms and oth-
ers who do not have it. According to psychiatric recommendations, it would be bet-
ter to collect these performance measures from patients within different environments
such as at homes or schools [19]. There are many tests used to diagnose patients with

Modeling an AR-Game for ADHD Patients

7

ADHD [17]. Continuous Performance Tests (CPT) are the most popular laboratory-
based test supporting clinical diagnosis [14,25,13]. CPT is usually a computer-based
test that aims to measure attention and impulsivity. CPT involves the individual and
random presentation of a series of visual or auditory stimuli that changes rapidly over a
period of time. Patients are informed to respond to the “target” stimulus and avoiding a
“non-target” stimulus. The test provides summary statistics of performance parameters
(e.g., response time, average response time, response time standard deviation, omission
errors, and commission errors). These parameters have been shown to be useful in the
detection of ADHD [23].

An important limitation of traditional CPTs is low ecological validity [24]. Ecolog-
ical validity means the degree to which a performance test produces results similar to
those produced in real life [20]. One approach to improve assessment methods which of-
fers better ecological validity is CPTs based on VR, such as the Aula Nesplora test [12].
Those approaches have an advantage of being more realistic and ecologically-valid en-
vironment while still having the ability to assess the degree of ADHD severity. Using
AR instead of VR will further improve the ecological validity of the performed test.
Here, multiple performance measures is used to provide ADHD diagnostics and treat-
ment assessment. Thus, let us assume that we have an AR-game that frequently present
an interactive environment with the following assumptions:

T : Total number of tries progressed in one session, which is a combination of:

a. Number of correct tries in one session, i.e., C,
b. Number of incorrect tries (due to omission or commission errors) in one ses-

sion, i.e., I, and

c. Number of uncompleted tries in one session, i.e., K.

Then, the performance measures that will be used for providing ADHD diagnostics

and treatment assessment include:

– Correct Response Times (CRT ): The percentage of measuring attention deﬁcits
for the time spent on the correct tries. CRT measures the time period that a patient
takes to make a correct try (i.e., choose the target object in the try). The longer the
CRT is, the more likely the patient has attention deﬁcit and less time to focus on
tasks. As a result, the patient takes longer time comparing to normal subjects when
performing a task (i.e., choosing the target/correct object in our case).

– Mean of the CRT (M): To compare with correct response time to make sure they

follow opposite relation to one another, i.e., M = ∑C

i=1 CRTi/C.

– Standard deviation of the CRT (SD): Indicative of impulsive and hyperactive
symptoms of the patient. The higher the value of SD, the more probability that
patient suffers from impulsivity/hyperactivity and difﬁculty in controlling his/her
moves after a certain period of time. As a result, the patient starts periodically to
∑C

move with no destination. I.e., SD =

i=1(CRTi − M)2/{C − 1}.

– Try time (θ): The maximum allowed time to complete one try within a session.
q
– Omission errors (OE): The absence of any response during a try period to be used

to measure inattention.

– Commission errors (CE): The response to non-target stimuli which to be used to

measure impulsivity.

8

S. Alqithami, et. al.

– Engagement Factor (GF): It indicates the patient engagement level with the game.
In a case, a patient is considered to be engaged in the game if s/he continues to play
the game. In contrast, the patient is considered to be not engaged if s/he stops the
game before completing all tries in a session. Thus, GF is deﬁned as the number of
correct and incorrect tries divided by the total number of tries in the session, i.e.,
GF = {C + I}/T .

– Inattention Factor (IAF): It represents the percentage of patient’s inattention, i.e.,
IAF = OE/{C +I}. In a case, the inattention of a patient increases when s/he makes
Omission Errors (OE) in a session, i.e., when the patient does not choose any of
the objects appearing to him/her. The number of uncompleted tries (K) in a session
should be excluded when indicating IAF, i.e., C + I = T − K.

– Impulsivity Factor (IMF): Indicates the percentage of patient’s impulsivity ob-
served in his/her behavior within a session. IMF is deﬁned as the number commis-
sion errors divided by number of correct and incorrect tries, i.e., IMF = CE/{C +
I}. We also excluded K when deﬁning IMF. In our case, a patient who suffers from
impulsivity will likely make more commission errors because impulsivity will pre-
vent him/her from focusing when choosing an object.

– Error Factor (EF): It represents the percentage of the error rate during a session,
i.e., EF = {OE + CE}/{C + I}. The error in the case includes omission and com-
mission errors excluding K. Thus, EF = IAF + IMF.

– Correct Response Factor (CRF): A percentage of total correct response-time rel-
ative to maximum allowed time for all correct tries, i.e., CRF = {∑c
i=1 CRTi}/{C ×
θ}. In a case, CRF should be negatively affected by the amount of time that the
patient takes when s/he makes an incorrect try. Thus, we deﬁne CRF as the total
summation of CRTs to the actual time of the game during the session (GT ). In this
case, CRF will be 100% if the patient makes all tries correctly. Otherwise, it will
decrease depending on the total amount of time spent by the patient on I.

– Performance Index (PI): It reﬂects the single measure for the overall performance
of the patient which depends on the correct response, error, and engagement factors.

(1 − CRF) + (1 − EF)
2

PI =

"

× GF

#

PI is a composite score which measures the overall performance of a patient. In
a case, the PI is affected positively by the patients’ CRF and negatively by the
patients’ EF. In addition, we need to take into account different possible scenarios
that can happen in the game session. One possible scenario is that the patient does
not complete all the tries in the session. The patient can make one correct try and
stop the game before ﬁnishing all the tries in the session. If we only considered the
CRF and EF, the PI in the case would be the highest. In order to prevent this from
happening, we consider the GF in the deﬁnition of PI. Another possible scenario
is that we have two patients who have the same CRF, EF, and GF but different
GT . In this case, they will have the same PI. However, the patient who has less
GT should have a higher PI. Thus, we considered the ratio of GT to the maximum
session time when deﬁning the PI.

Modeling an AR-Game for ADHD Patients

9

4 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

The paper proposed a gamiﬁcation system, called “AR-Therapist”, as an online cogni-
tive behavioral therapist to help in treating patients with a predeﬁned ADHD symptoms.
The purpose is to replace traditional CBT with a more advanced virtual one that may ex-
ceed traditional CBT methods by accelerating recovery time and saving money and re-
sources. AR-Therapist achieves an excellent accessibility level to every patient in need,
as it mimics the therapist roles through an augmented reality environment that provides
it with features including: adaptiveness, smartness, responsiveness, and accuracy. Other
advantages are availability and assurance of the therapist’s level-of-experience which
cannot be guaranteed in traditional CBT. We are working to implement a simulated
augmented reality environment using a simple game, where the results should lead to
an increase in patient correct attention (e.g., choosing a predeﬁned object) which con-
tributes positively to their performance index, i.e., they are following along with their
treatment plan; the opposite is correct when they fail to achieve their assigned tasks. Fu-
ture research should provide extensive empirical case studies that will support this area
of research with a rich and valuable data when collected ethically and will introduce
interesting ﬁndings when analyzed.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was funded by the Deanship of Scientiﬁc Research at Albaha University,
Saudi Arabia [grant number: 1439/4]. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or rec-
ommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessar-
ily reﬂect the views of the Deanship of Scientiﬁc Research or Albaha University.

References

1. Abikoff, H., Courtney, M., Pelham, W.E., Koplewicz, H.S.: Teachers’ ratings of disruptive
behaviors: The inﬂuence of halo effects. Journal of abnormal child psychology 21(5), 519–
533 (1993)

2. Azuma, R.T.: A Survey of Augmented Reality. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environ-

ments 6(4), 355–385 (Aug 1997)

3. Barkley, R.A.: The ecological validity of laboratory and analogue assessment methods of

adhd symptoms. Journal of abnormal child psychology 19(2), 149–178 (1991)

4. Beard, L., Wilson, K., Morra, D., Keelan, J.: A survey of health-related activities on second

life. Journal of medical Internet research 11(2) (2009)

5. Ben-Moussa, M., Rubo, M., Debracque, C., Lange, W.G.: Djinni: a novel technology sup-
ported exposure therapy paradigm for sad combining virtual reality and augmented reality.
Frontiers in psychiatry 8, 26 (2017)

6. Bickmore, T.W., Mitchell, S.E., Jack, B.W., Paasche-Orlow, M.K., Pfeifer, L.M., O’Donnell,
J.: Response to a relational agent by hospital patients with depressive symptoms. Interacting
with computers 22(4), 289–298 (2010)

7. Biederman, J.: Attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder: a selective overview. Biological psy-

chiatry 57(11), 1215–1220 (2005)

8. Billinghurst, M., Clark, A., Lee, G.: A Survey of Augmented Reality. Foundations and

Trends R(cid:13) in Human–Computer Interaction 8(2-3), 73–272 (Mar 2015)

10

S. Alqithami, et. al.

9. Burdea, G.C., Coiffet, P.: Virtual Reality Technology. John Wiley & Sons (Jun 2003)
10. Chan, E., Wang, D., Pasquier, M.: Towards intelligent self-care: Multi-sensor monitoring and
neuro-fuzzy behavior modelling. In: 2008 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man
and Cybernetics. pp. 3083–3088 (Oct 2008)

11. Chang, G., Morreale, P., Medicherla, P.: Applications of augmented reality systems in edu-
cation. In: Society for Information Technology & Teacher Education International Confer-
ence. pp. 1380–1385. Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE)
(2010)

12. Climent, G., Banterla, F., Iriarte, Y.: Aula: Theoretical manual. San Sebastian, Spain: Nes-

plora (2011)

13. Conners, C.K., Staff, M., Connelly, V., Campbell, S., MacLean, M., Barnes, J.: Conners’

continuous performance test ii (cpt ii v. 5). Multi-Health Syst Inc 29, 175–96 (2000)

14. Edwards, M.C., Gardner, E.S., Chelonis, J.J., Schulz, E.G., Flake, R.A., Diaz, P.F.: Estimates
of the validity and utility of the conners’ continuous performance test in the assessment of
inattentive and/or hyperactive-impulsive behaviors in children. Journal of abnormal child
psychology 35(3), 393–404 (2007)

15. Foroughi, H., Aski, B.S., Pourreza, H.: Intelligent video surveillance for monitoring fall
detection of elderly in home environments. In: 2008 11th International Conference on Com-
puter and Information Technology. pp. 219–224 (Dec 2008)

16. Gorini, A., Gaggioli, A., Vigna, C., Riva, G.: A second life for ehealth: prospects for the
use of 3-d virtual worlds in clinical psychology. Journal of medical Internet research 10(3)
(2008)

17. Hall, C.L., Valentine, A.Z., Groom, M.J., Walker, G.M., Sayal, K., Daley, D., Hollis, C.: The
clinical utility of the continuous performance test and objective measures of activity for di-
agnosing and monitoring adhd in children: a systematic review. European child & adolescent
psychiatry 25(7), 677–699 (2016)

18. Meyerbr¨oker, K., Emmelkamp, P.M.: Virtual reality exposure therapy in anxiety disorders: a
systematic review of process-and-outcome studies. Depression and anxiety 27(10), 933–944
(2010)

19. Morales-Hidalgo, P., Hern´andez-Mart´ınez, C., Vera, M., Voltas, N., Canals, J.: Psychometric
properties of the conners-3 and conners early childhood indexes in a spanish school popula-
tion. International Journal of Clinical and Health Psychology 17(1), 85–96 (2017)

20. Negu, A., Jurma, A.M., David, D.: Virtual-reality-based attention assessment of adhd: Clin-
icavr: Classroom-cpt versus a traditional continuous performance test. Child Neuropsychol-
ogy 23(6), 692–712 (2017)

21. Parsons, T.D., Bowerly, T., Buckwalter, J.G., Rizzo, A.A.: A controlled clinical comparison
of attention performance in children with adhd in a virtual reality classroom compared to
standard neuropsychological methods. Child Neuropsychology 13(4), 363–381 (2007)
22. Parsons, T.D., Rizzo, A.A., Rogers, S., York, P.: Virtual reality in paediatric rehabilitation: a

review. Developmental neurorehabilitation 12(4), 224–238 (2009)

23. Rapport, M.D., Chung, K.M., Shore, G., Denney, C.B., Isaacs, P.: Upgrading the science and
technology of assessment and diagnosis: Laboratory and clinic-based assessment of children
with adhd. Journal of clinical child psychology 29(4), 555–568 (2000)

24. Rodr´ıguez, C., Areces, D., Garc´ıa, T., Cueli, M., Gonz´alez-Castro, P.: Comparison between
two continuous performance tests for identifying adhd: Traditional vs. virtual reality. Inter-
national Journal of Clinical and Health Psychology 18(3), 254–263 (2018)

25. Vogt, C., Williams, T.: Early identiﬁcation of stimulant treatment responders, partial respon-
ders and non-responders using objective measures in children and adolescents with hyperki-
netic disorder. Child and Adolescent Mental Health 16(3), 144–149 (2011)

