Draft version November 18, 2019
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX62

9
1
0
2

v
o
N
4
1

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
0
4
3
6
0
.
1
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Measuring and modeling the rate of separator reconnection between an emerging and existing active region

Marika I. McCarthy,1 Dana W. Longcope,1 Anna Malanushenko,2 and David E. McKenzie3

1Department of Physics, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717
2High Altitude Observatory, National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO 80301
3NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, AL 35812

ABSTRACT

Magnetic reconnection occurs when new ﬂux emerges into the corona and becomes incorporated
into the existing coronal ﬁeld. A new active region (AR) emerging in the vicinity of an existing
AR provides a convenient laboratory in which reconnection of this kind can be quantiﬁed. We use
high time-cadence 171 ˚A data from SDO/AIA focused on new/old active region pair 11147/11149,
to quantify reconnection. We identify new loops as brightenings within a strip of pixels between the
regions. This strategy is premised on the assumption that the energy brightening a loop originates
in magnetic reconnection. We catalog 301 loops observed in the 48-hour time period beginning with
the emergence of AR 11149. The rate at which these loops appear between the two ARs is used to
calculate the reconnection rate between them. We then ﬁt these loops with magnetic ﬁeld, solving
for each loop’s ﬁeld strength, geometry, and twist (via its proxy, coronal α). We ﬁnd the rate of
newly-brightened ﬂux overestimates the ﬂux which could be undergoing reconnection. This excess can
be explained by our ﬁnding that the interconnecting region is not at its lowest energy (constant-α)
state; the extrapolations exhibit loop-to-loop variation in α. This ﬂux overestimate may result from
the slow emergence of AR 11149, allowing time for Taylor relaxation internal to the domain of the
reconnected ﬂux to bring the α distribution towards a single value which provides another mechanism
for brightening loops after they are ﬁrst created.

1. INTRODUCTION

The solar corona is a dynamic region where both the
coronal magnetic ﬁeld and the plasma which traces it
is constantly evolving. Complicated magnetic ﬁelds can
lead to energetic events, particularly in regions of strong
magnetic ﬁelds such as active regions (ARs), where the
Sun’s magnetic ﬁeld breaches the surface. The mecha-
nism believed to drive events like ﬂares (Sweet 1958), or
the heating of the corona (Parker 1972) is magnetic re-
connection. In most theories of reconnection, energy is
released as magnetic ﬁeld line connectivity is rearranged
(Sweet 1958; Parker 1957; Petschek 1964). While there
are many theories about how this process takes place,
there are not so many quantifying observations.

Previous studies looked to ARs to provide observa-
tional evidence of magnetic reconnection.
In several
studies, the formation of coronal loops between two dif-
ferent ARs has been used as evidence of nonﬂaring re-
connection in the corona (Tsuneta 1996; Sheeley et al.
1975; Webb & Zirin 1981). Work done by Tarr et al.
(2014) examined quiescent reconnection within sin-
gle NOAA AR11112 and inferred a reconnection rate
therein. Analysis of a single AR, however, can be diﬃ-

cult to interpret due to the ambiguity in distinguishing
between old and new photospheric ﬂux.

The emergence of a new AR in the vicinity of an ex-
isting one provides a good laboratory in which to study
and quantify magnetic reconnection. Under the prevail-
ing understanding, each AR originates as an isolated
magnetic ﬂux tube (Fan et al. 1994; Fisher et al. 2000;
Magara & Longcope 2001). This ﬂux tube is buoyant,
rises and breaches the surface, and expands to ﬁll a
larger volume in the corona. Two ARs that are adjacent
to each other will be distinct systems, yet expand into
contact in the corona. Under this assumption, any coro-
nal loops that interconnect the two ARs must be formed
by magnetic reconnection; this is the process that allows
the connectivities to change. This has been modeled
in various numerical magnetohydrodyamic (MHD) sim-
ulations of emerging ﬂux interacting with other ﬁelds
in a model corona (Galsgaard et al. 2007; MacTaggart
2011; Toriumi & Takasao 2017). The slower emergence,
compared to impulsive reconnection in a ﬂare, provides
an extended opportunity to observe and make measure-
ments of any reconnection that occurs during the event.
Longcope et al. (2005) performed this sort of two-
active-region analysis with the Transition Region and
Coronal Explorer (TRACE; Handy et al. 1999). They

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

studied a single pair of active regions, and found no
other suitable candidates for analysis in the TRACE
archives. The limited FOV of that instrument required
a deliberate pointing for an extended period of time to
observe an emergence and the subsequent magnetic evo-
lution. Longcope et al. (2005) reported that reconnec-
tion, measured using the newly formed loops observed
between the ARs, did not occur at the rate they in-
ferred from the magnetic evolution of the system. There
was instead a delay of approximately 24 hours between
emergence of the new AR and its reconnection to the
overlying ﬁeld based on loop measurements, while the
magnetic modeling was suggestive of no delay between
emergence and the onset of reconnection. An observa-
tion by Zuccarello et al. (2008) has also noted a delay of
12 hour between ﬂux emergence within an existing AR
∼
and the ﬁrst appearance of coronal loops between the old
and new ﬂux. Kobelski (2014) used SWAP to look at 8
ﬂux emergence events and also observed a delay between
emergence and coronal loops as evidence of reconnec-
tion to a nearby pre-existing AR. Those observed delays
generally were around 25 hours. However, limitations
on the temporal and spatial resolution of SWAP lead to
the interpretation of these values as an upper bound for
the time delay. More observations are required before it
is possible to further characterize the speciﬁc properties
of ﬂux emergence and subsequent reconnection.

The Atmospheric Imaging Assembly (AIA) on the So-
lar Dynamics Observatory (SDO; Lemen et al. 2012) ob-
serves the full solar disk every 12s thus providing con-
tinuous, high-cadence observation of active region emer-
gence. With AIA we need not wait for a serendipitous
instrument pointing to “catch” this kind of emergence
event, nor do we need to monopolize the instrument as
the event occurs. As such, this mission oﬀers many more
candidates for analysis. This is ideal for elucidating how
magnetic reconnection is involved when two ARs come
into contact in the corona.

The present work analyzes data from 2011 January
20-22, wherein NOAA AR11149 emerged to the south
of AR11147 as the two AR system crossed disk cen-
ter in the northern hemisphere. We ultimately ﬁnd that
the reconnected ﬂux inferred from the appearing coronal
loops is comparable to the total ﬂux in either AR, over-
estimating the reconnected portion of its ﬂux. In order
to explain this we argue that a single ﬂux element in the
reconnected domain appears more than once, manifest-
ing as re-brightening coronal loops. This interpretation
constitutes a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the new case
and that analyzed in Longcope et al. (2005). It is nec-
essary to explore and understand the diﬀerent scenarios
represented by these two cases if we are to ultimately

form a general picture of coronal reconnection between
In order to obtain the best estimates of recon-
ARs.
nected ﬂux, the present work replaces potential-ﬁeld ex-
trapolation with a linear force-free model of individual
loops in the coronal ﬁeld. The improved techniques de-
tailed herein will later be applied in a larger set of 17
emerging/existing AR pairs to quantify reconnection be-
tween them.

We describe the analysis in the following sections. We
build a potential ﬁeld model from SDO/HMI data in
Section 2, to produce a context calculation illustrating
the separator reconnection process in which we are inter-
ested. Section 3 uses data from SDO/AIA to construct
a time/space stack plot from which we determine the
reconnection rate, computed from the identiﬁed inter-
connecting loops. The process of cataloging the loops is
explained in that section and their parameters are re-
ported. An improved method for determining magnetic
ﬁeld’s structure and properties is detailed in Section 4.
Loops are observed in plane-of-sky (POS) and their POS
projections are 2D curves. The POS curve of a coronal
loop previously identiﬁed in the data is ﬁt to a three-
dimensional ﬁeld line in a linear force-free ﬁeld (LFFF)
model. As a result, we obtain a three-dimensional model
of that loop.These results are used in Section 5 to reex-
amine both the reconnection rate and the potential ﬁeld
context calculation. Reasons for discrepancies are then
explored. With the beneﬁt of the 3D tracks of coronal
loops obtained through the LFFF modeling, in Section 6
we are able to use the line-of-sight (LOS) coordinate
to show where the loops lie in a plane deﬁned by the
LOS and the pixels from which the stack plot was built.
We ﬁnd there is signiﬁcant overlap of the catalog loops’
cross-sections in that plane. Various rates of bright-
ening are explored in that section before discussion in
Section 7 regarding possible rebrightening of magnetic
ﬂux tubes inside of the reconnected ﬂux domain.

2. POTENTIAL FIELD MODEL

We construct a model of the magnetic ﬁeld of the
emerging and existing active region system in order to
precisely deﬁne the interconnecting ﬂux between these
two magnetic systems. Because it is common to as-
sume that an active region is a distinct, internally con-
nected magnetic system that emerges from within the
Sun (Fan et al. 1994; Fisher et al. 2000), any ﬂux link-
age between two ARs must be formed by some pro-
cess post-emergence. We construct a Magnetic Charge
Topology (MCT) model which uses magnetic “charges”
to represent the AR’s polarities (Longcope 1996). A po-
tential ﬁeld is subsequently extrapolated from these to
create a volume-ﬁlling ﬁeld model. To do this, we uti-

3

tion to a height of 6 pixels above the magnetogram
surface (Longcope 1996). Local extrema are identiﬁed
and grouped with all surrounding, downhill pixels whose
magnitudes are greater than 75 G. Regions smaller than
200px in total pixel count are then discarded, to bet-
ter isolate the regions of strong ﬂux from the small ﬂux
concentrations that are scattered all over. Each ﬂux con-
centration is then replaced by a magnetic charge located
at its ﬂux-weighted centroid, with net charge given by
the integrated ﬂux. This step also includes introducing
a factor that accounts for the projection of the line-of-
sight ﬁeld being a component of the radial. The results
of this stage are referred to as the “many-poles” model.
We choose to reduce our many-poles model to a
quadrupole in order to clarify and simplify the emer-
gence scenario. As the ﬂux concentrations are continu-
ously combining and separating, there is no guarantee
that any one pole exists continuously in the many-poles
model. Tarr & Longcope (2012) took steps to remedy
this by utilizing automated tracking algorithms to gain
consistency as the sources evolve in time. Here, at the
expense of losing some of the ﬁner topological detail
about the two-AR system, we gain continuity by re-
duction to a quadrupole. Loss of resolution is not a
major problem since we are concerned with intercon-
necting ﬂux between the two regions. This information
is retained in the simpliﬁcation, as the emerging and
existing AR polarities are still distinct.

To reduce the many-poles model to a quadrupole, we
manually trace a boundary around the emerging active
region at each time in the sequence. All poles within
the boundary are reduced to a positive-negative pair, P1
and N1, by totaling the charges of each sign in the region
and computing the ﬂux-weighted centroid of them to de-
termine the single charge’s location. The poles outside
this boundary are reduced similarly to P2 and N2. After
the quadrupole reduction, the ﬁeld is organized into four
magnetic domains: P1-N1 (emerging), P2-N2 (existing),
P1-N2 (interconnecting), and P2-N1 (also interconnect-
ing). The global ﬁeld is extrapolated from the point
sources at the photosphere and ﬁeld lines are traced
from a positive source to its termination at a negative
source. As the quadrupole is not exactly ﬂux-balanced,
this can include sources at inﬁnity. However, as we are
concerned only with the AR-AR interaction, we con-
sider the four topological domains previously mentioned
for clarity. The ﬁrst three domains can be seen in Fig-
ure 1 (bottom), along with the separator (black) which
is the shared boundary between the four domains. For
clarity, we do not show the fourth domain.

Creating a quadrupolar model of the active regions’
polarities over a time period captures the emergence

Figure 1. Top: Using the line-of-sight magnetogram from
SDO/HMI, we build a MCT model (orange). The magne-
togram is shown on a linear scale that saturates at ±700 G.
Bottom: Three out of four total magnetic domain are illus-
trated: the existing AR (blue), the emerging AR (green),
and the interconnecting ﬂux between the new and old ARs
(red). The separator, the junction at which the four mag-
netic domains meet, is shown in black.

lized the MPOLE suite written in IDL (Longcope 1996).
As a potential ﬁeld is the state of lowest possible mag-
netic energy, this simple case provides a good basis for
comparison with the EUV imaging observations.

The magnetic charges in our model are constructed
from a series of line-of-sight magnetograms from the
hmi.M 720s data series of SDO/HMI (Scherrer et al.
2012). A subregion which contains both active regions is
selected from the full-disk magnetograms. Flux concen-
trations are automatically identiﬁed from a smoothed
version of the extracted magnetogram; the ﬁltered ﬁeld
is the vertical ﬁeld from a potential ﬁeld extrapola-

4

Figure 2. The ﬂuxes from our MCT model are shown here. The ﬂux of the active regions are shown in black: the ﬂux of existing
AR (solid) is fairly constant in time while the emerging AR ﬂux (dashed) increases over a 72 hour period. The interconnecting
ﬂux from the quadrupolar MCT model is shown in orange. The crosses are the interconnecting ﬂux determined from many
magnetic charges before the reduction to a quadrupole to make sure we did not lose information by doing the reduction of the
model. The vertical dotted line denotes the ﬁrst time of the MCT modeling and the x-intercept of the blue dotted linear ﬁt
denotes what we call the time of emergence of the new active region.

of the P1-N1 system and provides ﬂux measurements
which are used to characterize the active region emer-
gence in this event. From mid-emergence (2011-01-
21T09:58:10), we work backwards in time until the po-
larities from the emerging active region do not ﬁt the
criteria for the ﬂux concentration selection (2011-01-
20T23:46:10). This provides one crude deﬁnition of the
onset of emergence. This model-building was done ev-
ery 2 hours for 72 hours, until the ﬂux of the emerging
active region began to level-oﬀ. During this time period,
the P2 and N2 poles stay fairly constant in both their
individual magnitudes and their diﬀerences – they are
not quite ﬂux balanced, but diﬀer by a median value
1020 Mx (about 10% of the ﬂux in either po-
of 8.9
larity). To determine the beginning of our emergence
event, the rate of ﬂux emergence in the P1-N1 active
region was estimated by eye such that it reasonably ﬁt
the rate of both the positive and negative polarity emer-
gences. We ﬁnd that these ﬂuxes grow at approximately
1016 Mx s−1 during the initial phase (from 2011-
3.47
01-20T23:46 to 2011-01-21T19:58:10.50, Figure 2, blue
dotted line). We ﬁt a straight line to the rate of change
of the unsigned ﬂux in each polarity; this line intersects

×

×

the horizontal axis in Figure 2 on 2011-01-20 at 22:01.
We will henceforth call this time the beginning of the
emergence.

From this quadrupolar model, we calculate the inter-
connecting (IC) ﬂux that connects the emerging posi-
tive (P1) to the existing negative (N2) polarity. This
is the same as the ﬂux through the surface bounded by
the separator – the intersection of the separatrices, sur-
faces which divide topologically distinct regions – pro-
vided the separator curve is closed such that the P1
and N2 charges lie on opposite sides of this bounded
surface (Longcope & Magara 2004). We perform this
calculation using a Monte Carlo method that uses ran-
domized locations around each source to trace ﬁeld lines
(Barnes et al. 2005). The ratio of number of ﬁeld lines
that connect charges P1-N2 to the total amount of ﬁeld
lines traced around these charges determines the frac-
tion of ﬂux that connects them and thereby determines
the P1-N2 interconnecting ﬂux. In Figure 1 (right), the
red ﬁeld lines belong to the interconnecting domain.
Observe that these ﬁeld lines go through the surface
bounded by the separator (black). Figure 2 shows the
results for the quadrupolar modeling over the emergence

time in orange. The crosses shown in Figure 2 are in-
stances where the interconnecting ﬂux was determined
with the many-poles model. When using the more com-
plex model, the more complex topology requires us to
consider the contributions from multiple poles between
active regions which is much more computationally in-
tensive. With the quadrupolar model, we only need to
consider the P1 and N2 poles. Both the many-poles
and quadrupolar models give approximately the same
result and thus we may use the computationally cheaper
method at other times as well.

The interconnecting ﬂux changes in time throughout
our model. A time-evolving ﬂux is described by Fara-
day’s law

˙Φ =

d~l =

~E

·

.

−E

− I

(1)

The presence of an electric ﬁeld is of no consequence in a
vacuum, since any electric ﬁeld is allowed to be aligned
with the magnetic ﬁeld (Longcope & Silva 1998).
In
a conducting plasma, however, this is not permitted
and the electric ﬁeld is required to be perpendicular to
the magnetic ﬁeld (Longcope & Silva 1998). Thus there
must be a diﬀerence in the mechanism causing the evolv-
ing interconnecting ﬂux between our idealized, MCT
model in vacuum and reality in a conducting plasma.
This mechanism is magnetic reconnection. A perfect
conductor would not break magnetic ﬁeld lines to rear-
range the ﬁeld topologically; the presence of the EMF,
, violates the condition of a good conductor. Therefore,
E
reality lies somewhere in between zero interconnecting
ﬂux and the interconnecting ﬂux obtained through our
MCT model. In the next section, we seek evidence of
newly reconnected ﬂux between the old and new active
regions in coronal loops using data from SDO/AIA to
make measurements of this reconnection process.

3. INTERCONNECTING FLUX EVIDENT IN AIA

We use a series of SDO/AIA images to measure mag-
netic reconnection between the emerging and existing
active regions. In most theories reconnection is accom-
panied by an energy release (e.g. Sweet 1958; Parker
1957, 1972). We expect the plasma that traces the coro-
nal magnetic ﬁeld to be heated as a result of this re-
connection and become bright in the EUV. We go fur-
ther and assume that the only means by which loops are
heated, and made visible, is the energy released by the
reconnection which creates interconnecting ﬂux. This
allows us to correlate the reconnected magnetic ﬂux with
the magnetic ﬂux in newly brightened interconnecting
loops. Longcope et al. (2005) used this same approach
to quantify separator reconnection between an emerg-
ing AR and the overlying ﬁeld in the form of coronal

5

Figure 3. A 171˚A image from SDO/AIA showing the
emerging and existing active regions. The slit location is
shown by the dark bar. We assume that any coronal loops
connecting the two ARs will cross that slit. The ﬁgure is
displayed with a reverse (light-to-dark) color scale, has been
square root-scaled as to better see the coronal loops for ref-
−1/2. The quadrupolar
erence, and saturates at 55(DN/s)
MCT model is overlaid for reference in orange.

loops between the two ARs. Magnetic reconnection is
occurring in the present emergence event as well: we see
the coronal loops between the two active regions in the
AIA 171˚A images (see Figure 3). This is clear evidence
of magnetic reconnection in the corona, and with the
foregoing assumption we can quantify its rate.

We make measurements of magnetic reconnection by
quantifying the accumulated area of coronal loops cross-
ing the surface bound by the separator at a given time.
Ultimately, we obtain accumulated ﬂux, manifesting it-
self in newly appeared interconnecting loops. By mea-
suring the rate of change of the interconnecting ﬂux, we
determine the integrated reconnection electric ﬁeld using
Faraday’s law (Equation 1). To make this measurement
we use 48 hours of AIA data in the 171˚A channel with
a 1 minute cadence, starting at the time we identiﬁed in
Section 2 as the beginning of the emergence. Although
evolution of the emerging ﬂux region continues beyond
this, 48 hours was enough time to assure that measur-
able reconnection had taken place. The data were pro-
cessed with the SolarSoft routine aia prep to convert
level 1 data to level 1.5 (Freeland & Handy 1998). This
included exposure normalization to convert intensities
from DN to DN/sec.

3.1. Cataloging Coronal Loops

6

Figure 4. A time/space stack plot built from the virtual slits extracted from AIA images. Veriﬁed interconnecting coronal
loops are plotted over the stack plot in red. The stack plot has been square root-scaled for this ﬁgure to better distinguish the
streaks of strong emission; the data used in the analysis was not scaled in this way. The image’s reverse color scale saturates at
55(DN/s)

−1/2.

7

will appear in the stack plot as persistent bright streaks
in time1.

Bright streaks are identiﬁed from the stack plot au-
tomatically, and subsequently visually conﬁrmed to be
coronal loops. For each time slice of the stack plot,
bright peaks along the slit are determined. The inten-
sity is boxcar smoothed with a kernel of 5 pixels along
the artiﬁcial slit. A threshold is determined from taking
an average of the intensity values along the slit; all pix-
els below the threshold are removed from consideration.
Local maxima are then identiﬁed and the loop’s “edges”
are determined from their full width at half maximum
(FWHM). From the identiﬁed edges, we obtain the di-
ameter. A peak must be greater in smoothed intensity
than 90 DN/s above the threshold to be included in the
set of local maxima.

Successive intensity peaks at a similar location in the
slit are linked together to turn individual peaks into
sustained bright streaks, which are candidates for be-
ing interconnecting loops.
In order to be linked, the
subsequent peak (1 minute later) can have moved no
more than 3 pix (1.8”) to either side. This is within
a typical
loop radius of 2” in previous studies with
TRACE (Aschwanden et al. 2000; Longcope et al. 2005)
and AIA (Aschwanden et al. 2013). When there is no
next peak to be linked to, this is the end of the bright
streak. If in a given row there is a new maximum that
does not link to any existing, “alive” loops, then that
is considered the beginning of a new bright streak. We
allow for a peak to temporarily disappear for one time
step only, such that two bright streaks at the same lo-
cation and which look to be the same loop but are sep-
arated by one slice in the stack plot are not counted as
two distinct loops. There must be two successive images
without linked peaks for a bright streak to truly end.

The properties of the streaks are interpreted as prop-
erties of loops. Through our maxima-linking procedure,
we obtained both a lifetime (taken from the start and
end of the bright streak in the stack plot) and a median
diameter (median of all FWHMs during maxima iden-
tiﬁcation) for every bright streak. At this point in the
automatic selection process, we have 2259 loop candi-
dates. Note that these candidates included 852 maxima
that were not linked to another at a diﬀerent time, and
394 streaks that only lasted 2 time steps.

1 Figures 3, 4, and 5 use a reverse (light-to-dark) color scale and
thus our “bright streaks” of emission are dark in this color table.
We choose to refer to the appearance of these loops from the onset
of intense emission as “brightening” for consistency with common
usage

Figure 5. Top: A single row from our stack plot. Peaks
from our local maxima ﬁnder are shown as asterisks and the
diameters are shown as horizonal bars.
Bottom: The peaks identiﬁed from the top panel are now
plotted over the AIA image. The peaks indicated by blue
crosses do appear to correspond to interconnecting coronal
loops. The red X does not, and would be discarded. The
reference AIA image has been square root-scaled for better
clarity in seeing the coronal loops in the data. The reverse
color scale of the image saturates at 60(DN/s)

−1/2.

A time/space stack plot is used in our analysis to cat-
alog all the coronal loops that connect the two ARs. An
array of pixels was extracted from each of the prepped
AIA images (Figure 3). This was a horizontal array 300
pixels (180”) wide and 5 pixels tall. The slit is positioned
between the two ARs so that any interconnecting loop
would be certain to cross it and no loops internal to ARs
would. That array is averaged to a 300x1 pixels array,
where each pixel was the mean of the 5 in the column
extracted from the data. At the beginning of the data
set (2011 January 20 at 22:01 as determined from the
linear ﬁt in Section 2), the lower left pixel of the slit
was located at [-250”,420”] in Cartesian coordinates on
the plane of the sky, where disk center is [0”,0”]. The
x-position was tracked with solar rotation thereafter in
the data set. The intensity arrays were stacked to build
the stack plot shown in Figure 4. As the coronal loops
are bright, they will appear as local maxima in intensity
in one row of the stack array, as seen in Figure 5 and

8

Of the 2259 bright streaks automatically selected, only
554 lasted 5 minutes or longer. This minimum-lifetime
cutoﬀ of 5 minutes was chosen to make the subsequent
manual-conﬁrmation from a data set that did not in-
clude ephemeral bright streaks. We visually examine
each of the remaining loop candidates to ensure that it
is a true coronal loop. The automatic maxima ﬁnding
and linking procedure identiﬁes many candidates and
these can include features other than coronal loops, for
example transition region moss (see Berger et al. 1999),
that produce persistent bright streaks. For example, the
right-most peak in the top panel of Figure 5 is caused
by the chromospheric moss feature marked with a red
X in the lower panel. We use this kind of visual inspec-
tion to identify and discard bright streaks that are not
loops. After this process, we have 301 veriﬁed intercon-
necting coronal loops, which are shown on the stack plot
in Figure 4 in red.

3.2. Loop Properties

Each of the 301 identiﬁed loops is characterized by
properties obtained from the stack plot. Lifetimes are
determined from the stack plot slices which contain the
birth and death of the loop. This is the length of time
that there is a continuous (in time) peak in the intensity
at nearby locations along the virtual slit. A loop’s diam-
eter is found from the median value over all times of the
FWHM found in the local maxima-ﬁnding process. The
histograms in Figure 6 show these values2. The shoulder
on the low end of the lifetime distribution is an artifact
of our minimum lifetime cutoﬀ criteria. Loops have a
median diameter 5.9 Mm (median of all medians), and
the loops of the smallest diameter are well above the
CCD pixel size of AIA (approx. 0.4 Mm). Loops usu-
ally last less than 30 minutes with a median lifetime of
15 minutes.

We compare these observed lifetimes to a typical cool-
ing time of a coronal loop. During its cooling phase, the
loop will cool through a combination of radiation and
thermal conduction. These processes operate on time
scales given by

τrad = 2.3

103 s

×

(cid:18)

T
106 K (cid:19)

τcond = 270 s

ne
109 cm−3

(cid:16)

(cid:17) (cid:18)

T
106 K (cid:19)

3/2

(cid:16)
−5/2

ne
109 cm−3

−1
(2)

(cid:17)

2

L
109 cm (cid:19)

(cid:18)

where T and ne are the temperature and electron density
at the tube’s apex, and L is its full length (Cargill et al.

2 The lifetimes histogram cuts oﬀ a single outlier data point, a

loop that lasts 202 minutes

Figure 6. Histograms denoting the properties of the 205
loops interconnecting the two ARs. Top: Median loop diam-
eters in Mm. The dotted vertical line denotes the size of one
AIA CCD pixel during this event (0.6”, 0.43 Mm). Bottom:
Loop lifetimes in minutes. This histogram cuts oﬀ one data
point to better show the bulk of the distribution for clarity,
whose lifetime of 202 minutes was much greater than the rest
of the distribution. A vertical dashed line shows the thresh-
old time (5 min) for a loop to be included in our database.
The abrupt drop at the lower end of the lifetime distribution
is an artifact of our loop cutoﬀ criterion.

1995). When the loop is sustained by uniform volumet-
ric heating (i.e. RTV equilibrium, Rosner et al. 1978)
or is cooling quasi-statically, conductive and radiative
cooling rates are equal. This condition can be used to
eliminate the electron density, ne, and obtain a com-

9

Figure 7. Integrated reconnection electric ﬁeld. The mean voltage is 2.13 × 1016 Mx/sec = 213 MV. Crosses at the bottom
denote the times used for magnetic modeling in Section 4. The vertical dotted line denotes when the bulk of reconnection
begins, a 13 hour delay from the emergence.

bined cooling time

1
τ

=

1
τrad

+

1
τcon

=

2
τrad

=

√270

2.3

·

2
103T

×

giving a cooling time

τ = 6.5 L9T

−1/2
6

[min],

,

−1/2
6

L9

(3)

(4)

where L9 = L/(109 cm), and T6 = T /(106 K). For a loop
of length 60 Mm (L9 = 6.0) and observed in the 171˚A
passband at T = 0.6 MK (T6 = 0.6), the cooling time
τ = 50.3 minutes. The lifetime range for our identiﬁed
loops are typically of the same order of magnitude as this
crude estimate. This is consistent with loops which have
been heated impulsively, for example by reconnection,
and then undergo free cooling.

Our 301 loops have properties similar, but not identi-
cal, to the 43 found by Longcope et al. (2005), also dur-
ing a 48-hour interval. The typical loop diameter we ﬁnd
(5.9 Mm) is approximately 60% larger than the value
from Longcope et al. (2005), 3.7 Mm. It is possible the
discrepancy arises from the artiﬁcial enhancement of our
diameters due to the boxcar smoothing. The lifetimes
found between that work and this one lie mostly within
90 minutes (1.5 hours), with both studies containing sev-
eral loops that last much longer. As in Longcope et al.
(2005), there was a delay between emergence and the
bulk of reconnection. The delay in this case was 13
hours since the beginning of the emergence as deter-
mined in Section 3.1 (the vertical dotted line in Figure

7), compared to 24 hours in Longcope et al. (2005). De-
lays in the range of 12 to 25 hours have previously been
observed (Longcope et al. 2005; Zuccarello et al. 2008;
Kobelski 2014; Tarr et al. 2014) but more investigation
is required to conﬁrm whether this seemingly common
phenomena is ubiquitous in ﬂux emergence. If we ﬁnd
that it is, we also wish to ascertain what properties of
the system determine if the delay is closer to 12 hours,
as in this work, or to the 24 hour interval found in
Longcope et al. (2005).

We use the loops and their properties to calculate
the time-varying interconnecting ﬂux. Under the as-
sumption that the ﬂux tube is a cylinder, we turn the
identiﬁed diameters into cross-sectional areas. We de-
ﬁne a cumulative area, A(t), which jumps by the cross-
sectional area where it crosses the slit of a particular
loop at the instant that loop is born. To obtain inter-
connecting ﬂux as a function of time, we multiply A(t)
by a characteristic magnetic ﬁeld strength Bchar. We
chose Bchar = 30 G as informed by our MCT model. We
use the quadrupole model to ﬁnd a typical ﬁeld strength
around the approximate location of the separator in the
middle of our data set; reconnection occurs along that
boundary to exchange ﬂux between the magnetic do-
mains. Then, interconnecting ﬂux as a function of time
is

Φ(t) =

Bchar

·

Z

dA(t) = BcharA(t),

(5)

which is shown as the purple line in Figure 7.

10

The integrated reconnection electric ﬁeld was deter-
mined from Faraday’s law (Equation 1) by taking a
time derivative with respect to Φ(t). The voltage, ˙Φ, is
shown in Figure 7 as the gray line. Though this has been
boxcar-smoothed over half-hour time intervals to elim-
inate some of the high frequency variation for clarity,
this reconnection between the old and new ARs occurs
in bursts similar to the observations of Longcope et al.
(2005), impulsively heating these loops into the 171˚A
passband.

The interconnecting ﬂux obtained from accumulated
coronal loops is larger than that from the MCT model
presented in Section 2. This is despite possible under-
sampling of the coronal loops between the two active
regions during our cataloging process by choosing a min-
imum loop lifetime of 5 minutes, as well as the fact that
we are using 171˚A data only. While the eﬀect of re-
ducing our system of two active regions to a quadrupole
was minimal with regards to the calculation of intercon-
necting ﬂux, a more complete model of the ﬁeld might
lead to a characteristic ﬁeld diﬀerent than we obtained
through our MCT model earlier in this section.

4. NON-POTENTIAL FORCE-FREE FIELD

MODELING

It is possible to compute the ﬂux more accurately than
in Equation (5) which assumes that a single B value ap-
plies to every single loop at the location where it crosses
the slit in this projection.
If each coronal loop traces
out a magnetic ﬁeld line, each should have its own ﬁeld
strength as it crosses the slit. By using a more sophisti-
cated modeling method, we can assign each loop identi-
ﬁed in the stack plot its own ﬁeld strength and calculate
a more informed value for the interconnecting ﬂux. The
coronal magnetic ﬁelds of active regions are believed to
be in a force-free state that satisﬁes

B = α(r)B

∇ ×

(6)

∇

∇ ·

in which

(Nakagawa et al. 1971). A particular case of a force-free
ﬁeld is a linear force-free ﬁeld (LFFF), or a constant-
α = 0. We use this condition
α ﬁeld,
B = 0 to transform Equation (6) into
along with
a Helmholtz equation for B. We will ﬁt a coronal
loop to a ﬁeld line in a LFFF to determine its three-
dimensional structure and properties, using the tech-
nique from Malanushenko et al. (2009). However, the
superposition of LFFF lines with diﬀerent values of α is
not a LFFF ﬁeld itself. Thus, a global ﬁeld containing
these LFFF extrapolations not necessarily a force-free
ﬁeld itself.

The method of Malanushenko et al. (2009) uses mag-
netogram data to create a set of volume-ﬁlling LFFFs

Figure 8. A 3D rendering of the loops at 2011-01-21T14:21
(compare to Figure 5) that were reconstructed from our
LFFF models. The top ﬁgure shows a line-of-sight view-
ing angle, similar to how the loops are seen in AIA. The
lower panels show the three-dimensional reconstruction of
the loops at diﬀerent angles.

Figure 9. A histogram showing the α values for all the loops
obtained through our LFFF model. The Gaussian ﬁt and its
parameters are plotted in light blue.

11

Figure 10. This combination scatterplot and histogram details the magnetic ﬁeld strengths we obtain from our LFFF model.
Crosses denote B strength vs height and colors correspond to diﬀerent time intervals. The intervals were chosen to contain
roughly the same number of loops; each color is a group of 33 loops (with red containing 34).
The grey histogram shows the B values for all the loops obtained through our LFFF model. Bins are 5G.

and, from a traced coronal loop in an EUV image, de-
termines the most likely LFFF to which it ﬁts. For
each modeling attempt, the Helmholtz equation for
B is solved with the aid of magnetic boundary data
at that time from a LOS magnetogram in the half-
space (Chiu & Hilton 1977; Lothian & Browning 1995).
Constant-α ﬁelds are computed for an entire volume for
61 values of α equally spaced within the range [-0.05,
0.05] arcsec−1. A coronal loop is manually traced with
a smooth curve over an AIA image. With this method,
we need only trace a portion of the loop and the inclusion
of visible footpoints is not required. The coordinates of
the loop in the plane of the sky (POS) are known. The
third coordinate, along the line-of-sight, is unknown.

The coordinate along the line-of-sight (LOS) is de-
termined by using ﬁeld lines traced from various loca-
tions, h, along the LOS for various constant-α ﬁelds, and
comparing their projections to the original coronal loop.
The line-of-sight along which the ﬁeld lines are initiated
is selected to cross the center of the traced loop in the
POS. For every LFFF, a set of such ﬁeld lines along the
LOS are then projected onto the plane-of-sky. An aver-
age distance between these projections and the original
POS-loop, d(h, α), is then minimized. Determining the
correct minimization is not intuitive, and is detailed in
Malanushenko et al. (2009).

This modeling was done at 56 time intervals, shown
by the crosses in Figure 7. These times were chosen to
maximize the number of identiﬁed loops modeled using

the fewest sample times (as building the volume-ﬁlling
LFFF magnetic models is computationally expensive).
Further, as the POS tracing and selection of the correct
minimization is labor intensive, we chose to prioritize
modeling of loops that lasted for 10 minutes or longer.
For each instance in time where the modeling is done,
every ﬁeld of view is cut to the same size. By doing so
we accounted for diﬀerences in time and the impact they
would have on the model. The volume-ﬁlling ﬁeld was
created in a rectilinear domain whose bottom boundary
was a plane tangent to the solar surface. We will ref-
erence z-positions with respect to the height above this
tangent plane. We modeled 185 individual loops of the
205 that were identiﬁed in the stack plot from Figure 4
and also lasted 10 minutes or longer. Due to the man-
ner in which we selected times in an eﬀort to maximize
the loops we modeled, there were occasions where a loop
was modeled for more than one instance in time. Thus
there are 199 linear force-free ﬁeld lines being modeled.
For each time when the LFFF model was constructed,
all stack plot-identiﬁed loops present at the time and
satisfying the lifetime criteria were traced to determine
their structure. One such modeling instance is shown
for reference in Figure 8. The value of α along the ﬁeld
line is a result of selecting the correct minimization of
d(h, α). The distribution of these values for all of the
loops we modeled is shown in Figure 9.

Of the 16 loops that were modeled at more than one
time, most (but not all) of their subsequent modeling

12

yielded their α trending closer to 0. This was true even
those values trended less
for loops with negative α:
negative. Furthermore, α and emergence time have a
Spearman rank-order correlation ρ =
0.21, indicating
a correlation at a signiﬁcance level of 99.8%. A linear
ﬁt of this data set had positive values with a negative
slope. Because the values of α skew positive, this trend
towards 0 could show the positive wing of the α distri-
bution trending to an equilibrium near 0.

−

The three-dimensional magnetic ﬁeld line correspond-
ing to an observed loop yields a value for its full length,
and for the height and magnetic ﬁeld strength at the
point it crosses our slit. (The full length is used in the
estimate of cooling time given in Section 3.2.) A height
vs. ﬁeld strength scatter plot of the modeled loops is
shown in Figure 10 where the loops are grouped into
diﬀerent colored time intervals, chosen such that each
bin has the same number of loops (34 for the red, 33
for the other colors). The magnetic ﬁeld strength values
obtained from the model are also shown in Figure 10. If
one loop was alive for multiple instances of modeling, its
ﬁeld strength was found from the average of slit-crossing
ﬁeld strengths. We used a characteristic ﬁeld strength
of 30 G in Section 3.2, which was near the histogram’s
peak and thus a reasonable choice for a single charac-
teristic value. However, the distribution skews to the
positive side of the mode and neglecting the skew may
have resulted in an underestimation of the ﬂux.

The interconnecting ﬂux was recalculated using the
computed ﬁeld strength value for each loop (Figure 11,
dot-dash red line). There were 116 loops not modeled
individually, which could not be assigned a ﬁeld strength
informed by the LFFF modeling. To these we assigned
the median value B=39 G of the modeled loops. The
interconnecting ﬂux calculated with this method is ap-
proximately 50% greater than when every loop was as-
signed a common characteristic value of 30 G. The mean
value of ﬁeld strength of our LFFF-modeled loops at the
location of the virtual slit as determined from the LFFF
model was 43.7 G, approximately 45% larger than the
characteristic value used in Section 2, which may play
a part in the discrepancy between using the median of
the distribution and the mean. However, not only is
the interconnecting ﬂux determined from our stack plot
in conjunction with our improved ﬁeld modeling still
larger than the maximum allowed by the MCT model,
but the magnitude of interconnecting ﬂux is compara-
ble to the total emerged ﬂux of the newly emerged AR
and even surpasses the magnetic ﬂux of the stronger,
existing AR’s polarities. This implies that more ﬂux is
reconnecting from the emerging positive polarity to the
existing active region than is there to begin with. If this

were true, then there is an additional source of ﬂux that
contributes to this interconnecting region that is not ei-
ther of the two ARs. Therefore, more investigation is
necessary.

5. MCT MODEL WITH NON-ZERO TWIST

In an eﬀort to ﬁnd a better coronal magnetic model
with which to compare the interconnecting ﬂux, we re-
visit our initial assumption of a potential ﬁeld. The up-
dated ﬂux calculation uses values of α informed by the
LFFF modeling. In the modeling done in Section 2, the
potential ﬁeld used had an α = 0 by deﬁnition. We ﬁnd
the interconnecting ﬂux is larger for a non-zero α value
compared with the potential ﬁeld case (where α = 0, see
the orange line in Figures 2, 7, 11 and 12). However, we
ﬁnd that this increase is
20% and does not account for
the large discrepancy between the interconnecting ﬂuxes
calculated in Section 3.2 and Section 4 (purple and dot-
dash red lines in ﬁgure 11) when compared to that from
the potential ﬁeld.

≈

To perform this computation we use values of α ob-
tained from the modeling in Section 4, which deﬁnitely
skew positive (see Figure 9). This positive skew in values
of α may be responsible for the discrepancy between the
high interconnecting ﬂux we see in contrast to what a
potential ﬁeld allows. The non-potentiality of the ﬁeld,
suggested by the modeled loops, might partition the ﬂux
in a diﬀerent manner such that there is more ﬂux al-
lowed in the interconnecting region than when compared
to the lowest energy state of the ﬁeld. We redid the
interconnecting ﬂux calculation using a non-zero α in
the MCT model (these values are detailed below). The
same quadrupole models from Section 2 were used to
perform the extrapolation for these new ﬁeld and sub-
sequent interconnecting ﬂux, using the Green’s function
from Chiu & Hilton (1977). Unlike the modeling in the
previous section, the global ﬁeld in the MCT model de-
tailed here is a LFFF.

Two extrapolations were done to calculate intercon-
necting ﬂux in a LFFF model, for two diﬀerent values
of α: one corresponding to the peak of a Gaussian ﬁt to
10−3 arcsec−1), and
the histogram in Figure 9 (α = 3.7
the second one corresponding to the median of the same
10−3 arcsec−1). The results of
distribution (α = 3.0
these are shown in purple and navy, respectively, with
the original α = 0 results in orange on Figure 12. There
is an increase in the magnitude of interconnecting ﬂux
between the two ARs for a non-zero twist, however it is
nowhere large enough to account for the results deter-
mined from the stack plot with AIA data.

×

×

6. LOOP LOCATIONS IN THE PLANE DEFINED

BY THE SLIT AND THE LINE OF SIGHT

13

Figure 11. The same ﬂux plot as in ﬁgure 2, but with the interconnecting loop ﬂux obtained from the loop diameter data from
the stack plot with a characteristic (purple) or LFFF modeled (dot-dash red) ﬁeld strength.

eling in Section 4. The pixel color denotes the number
of diﬀerent disks that overlap at that point. The loop
cross-sections lie on top of each other in the xz-plane,
with three distinct locational hot-spots and at least one
empty pocket where there appears to be no loops. The
most apparent empty pocket to which we refer is in the
range 0-50” from the point of tangency, and at a height
of less than 30” above the tangent plane. Figure 14
shows a selection of modeled coronal loops from Sec-
tion 4 with the separator from a similar time from the
MCT model in Section 2. Figure 15 depicts a version
of Figure 13, showing the time evolution trends of the
loops in that plane. (An animated version of Figure 15
is available.) The discrete color bins used in Figure 15
are the same as those used in the left panel of Figure 10.
Due to the manner in which our interconnecting loops
lie on top of each other in the plane of the virtual slit, it
may be that our assumption that a coronal loop bright-
ens only when it is newly reconnected is faulty. Perhaps
not all brightening interconnecting loops are indepen-
dent samplings of new ﬂux and in assuming so we have
overestimated substantially the ﬂux linkage between the
two active regions. Under this assumption we neglected
to consider any internal reconnection within the mag-
netic domain where the interconnecting loops are lo-
cated. Loops in that domain reconnecting to achieve a

Figure 12. The interconnecting ﬂux of the potential ﬁeld
(orange) is the same as Figure 2. We also repeated this
analysis for α values that were the mean (navy) and gaussian
(mode) ﬁt (purple) of the distribution in Figure 9.

With the beneﬁt of three-dimensional loop informa-
tion we see that it is likely that some ﬂux has bright-
ened repeatedly during our 48-hour observation. Figure
13 shows a two-dimensional histogram depicting the lo-
cation of the modeled loops in the plane deﬁned by two
vectors: along the LOS and along the slit. We assume
a cylindrical loop, and that each cylinder intersects the
plane of the virtual slit normally, so each intersection
is a circle. The center of this disk lies at the position
in the tangent plane determined from the LFFF mod-

14

Figure 13. A 2D histogram showing the locations of loops in the plane which projects into the virtual slit. There appear to be
distinct “hot-spots” where many loop cross-sections lie on top of each other and “pockets” where no loops appear to be. The
maximum value is 15 loop cross-sections lying on one another in 48 hours of data, or 8.7 × 10

−5 Hz.

that, to ﬁrst order, corrects for overlap we initially at-
tributed to independent samplings of ﬂux. This scaled
1021 Mx, which is much closer to the
value is 1.56
interconnecting ﬂux predicted by the MCT models.

×

7. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Due to the advent of AIA and the subsequent in-
creased availability of observations of emerging/existing
AR pairs, we perform analysis to quantify the recon-
nection during one such emergence event between two
distinct magnetic systems. We ﬁnd we overestimate the
amount of interconnecting ﬂux we identify, despite po-
tential undersampling of the loops with footpoints an-
chored in opposite ARs due to our decision to not in-
clude loops with short lifetimes in our analysis. We as-
sert that this may be due to seeing multiple brightenings
of a single magnetic ﬂux element throughout our obser-
vations (Webb & Zirin 1981).

We propose that the repeated brightening of loops in
similar spatial locations are the result of Taylor relax-
ation of the coronal ﬁeld within the domain which con-
nects the emerging positive polarity to the existing neg-
ative (Taylor 1986; Nandy et al. 2005). Reconnection
occurs within the domain in order to reach a lower en-
ergy state. The decay of a nonpotential coronal ﬁeld has
been observed on timescales of tens of hours after new
ﬂux emerges (Schrijver et al. 2005). We assert that we
see the ﬁeld relaxing to one with constant α after an in-
terconnecting loop is created through reconnection. As
we see a distribution of α-values in our LFFF model-
ing of individual coronal loops, we know that the ﬁeld

Figure 14. The intersection of the virtual slit with the
separatrix (MCT model) and loops (LFFF model) from sim-
ilar times. As in Figure 13, the loops are clustering in “hot
spots”.

lower energy state would be brightening loops that cross
our virtual slit, but would not be newly reconnected ﬂux
from between the two AR.

Our data suggests that we are seeing a ﬂux element
brighten multiple times. We calculate the minimum
amount of reconnected ﬂux supported from our anal-
ysis by ﬁrst considering an overlap percentage obtained
from the 2D-histogram in Figure 13. This percentage
is that of the pixels with counts of more than 1 in the
histogram, over the total number of pixels with nonzero
counts. This yields a percent overlap of 70.77%. Apply-
ing the likelihood of non-overlap (29.23%) to the max-
imum interconnecting ﬂux value from Figure 11 (red,
1021 Mx returns a scaled value
dot-dash line) of 5.35

×

15

Figure 15. A version of Figure 13, wherein the time evolution is depicted by the diﬀerent colored bin. The loops are binned
in the same manner as in ﬁgure 10. An animated version of this ﬁgure is available.

between the two ARs is not in its lowest energy states.
There is ample time for internal reconnection of the in-
terconnecting loops due to the slower pace of reconnec-
tion and ﬂux evolution driven by the rate of emergence
of AR11149 and the resulting topological evolution of
the two AR system.

5

×

×

∼

∼

×

The result of the large interconnecting ﬂux inferred
from the data lead to an artiﬁcially high reconnection
1016 Mx s−1 (yielding a
rate. We found a rate of 2.13
total reconnection time of 2.72 days when dividing the
1021 Mx by this rate)
strength of the existing AR of
over two days. Tarr et al. (2014) examined quiescent re-
connection within single NOAA AR11112 and inferred
1016 Mx s−1 over the same
a reconnection rate of 0.38
time interval. This is a reconnection time of
16.74
days for an AR of similar strength, where our inﬂated
reconnection time value is just 16% in comparison. And
though the conclusions of Longcope et al. (2005) was
the underestimation of the reconnection rate, their in-
1016 Mx s−1 (3.49 days), though
ferred rate was 3.97
over a substantially smaller time window of approx. 3.5
hours wherein there was an abundance of reconnection.
The reconnection rate in this study peaked at approx.
7
175% larger than the
reconnection rate of Longcope et al. (2005). The me-
dian diameter of our loop distribution 5.9 Mm is larger
than the 3.7 Mm result of Longcope et al. (2005), a po-
tential result of our boxcar smoothing during our peak
ﬁnding procedure. Though these enhanced diameters
could contribute to the excess of ﬂux we see, we do not
believe this is the source of signiﬁcant over-counting of
the interconnecting ﬂux as our median diameter result

1016 Mx s−1 (0.83 days), or

×

∼

×

is comparable to those of other studies with maximum
6 Mm with both TRACE and AIA
5.6
diameters of
(Aschwanden et al. 2000, 2013).

−

∼

Of particular note between this work and that of
Longcope et al. (2005), though the properties of loops
obtained in both are similar, the discrepancy in number
of loops cataloged (43 vs 301 in this work) may point
to a signiﬁcant topological diﬀerence between the two
studies. MHD simulations have explored the parameter
space regarding the favorability of an AR to reconnect
with a neighbor. Such a diﬀerence in the amount of
observed loops could be a result of the physical charac-
terization of the polarities between these two regions
(Toriumi & Takasao 2017), or whether the ﬁeld lines
of opposite ARs are oriented parallel or anti-parallel
to each other (Galsgaard et al. 2007). This topologi-
cal diﬀerence could manifest in many ways, including in
the delay between an AR emergence and the onset of
reconnection to the overlying ﬁeld. The observed de-
lay in reconnection, both in this study and elsewhere
in the literature (Longcope et al. 2005; Zuccarello et al.
2008; Kobelski 2014), might be a result of how inclined
the ﬁelds are to reconnect given their α values (as in
Linton et al. 2001; Yamada et al. 1990, in regards to co-
and counterhelicity). The evolution of the AR system
may reach some critical point, allowing for reconnec-
tion that changes a property of the ﬂux tube (like α)
instead of the exchange of new ﬂux between domains.
The change in twist may cause some sort of cascade ef-
fect, wherein Taylor-like reconnection is able to take the
ﬁeld to an even lower energy state.

16

We aim to reﬁne the methods detailed herein to im-
prove the reliability of our loop catalog through a more a
robust loop identiﬁcation and selection technique. This
is especially vital for a more thorough investigation of
those loops with shorter lifetimes below our thresh-
old in this work. Applying the improved method to a
wider set of emerging/existing AR pairs will allow us to
quantify what considerations, particularly with cohelic-
ity/counterhelicity between the two, play a role in this
kind of coronal reconnection process.

The foregoing analysis has assumed the coronal loops
observed in EUV had circular cross sections. While this

is a fairly common assumption, it can be called into
question (Malanushenko & Schrijver 2013). Doing so
might oﬀer additional insight into, or an alternative ex-
planation for, the large ﬂux values we have obtained.

This work was supported by NASA’s HGI program.

We would like to thank the anonymous referee for
his or her helpful suggestions for improving both this
manuscript as well as the future work involving emerg-
ing/existing active region pair reconnection.

REFERENCES

Aschwanden, M. J., Boerner, P., Schrijver, C. J., &
Malanushenko, A. 2013, Solar Physics, 283, 5

Magara, T., & Longcope, D. W. 2001, ApJL, 559, L55
Malanushenko, A., Longcope, D. W., & McKenzie, D. E.

Aschwanden, M. J., Nightingale, R. W., & Alexander, D.

2009, The Astrophysical Journal, 707, 1044

2000, The Astrophysical Journal, 541, 1059

Barnes, G., Longcope, D. W., & Leka, K. D. 2005, The

Astrophysical Journal, 629, 561

Berger, T., De Pontieu, B., Fletcher, L., et al. 1999, Solar

Physics, 190, 409

Cargill, P. J., Mariska, J. T., & Antiochos, S. K. 1995, ApJ,

439, 1034

Chiu, Y. T., & Hilton, H. H. 1977, ApJ, 212, 873
Fan, Y., Fisher, G. H., & McClymont, A. N. 1994, ApJ,

436, 907

Malanushenko, A., & Schrijver, C. J. 2013, ApJ, 775, 120
Nakagawa, Y., Raadu, M. A., Billings, D. E., & McNamara,

D. 1971, SoPh, 19, 72

Nandy, D., Hahn, M., Canﬁeld, R. C., & Longcope, D. W.
2005, in IAU Symposium, ed. A. V. Stepanov, E. E.
Benevolenskaya, & A. G. Kosovichev, 473–474

Parker, E. N. 1957, Phys. Rev., 107, 830
Parker, E. N. 1972, ApJ, 174, 499
Petschek, H. E. 1964, NASA Special Publication, 50, 425
Rosner, R., Tucker, W. H., & Vaiana, G. S. 1978, ApJ, 220,

Fisher, G., Fan, Y., Longcope, D., Linton, M., & Pevtsov,

643

A. 2000, Solar Physics, 192, 119

Freeland, S. L., & Handy, B. N. 1998, SoPh, 182, 497
Galsgaard, K., Archontis, V., Moreno-Insertis, F., & Hood,

A. W. 2007, The Astrophysical Journal, 666, 516
Handy, B., Acton, L., Kankelborg, C., et al. 1999, Solar

Physics, 187, 229

Kobelski, A. R. 2014, PhD thesis, Montana State University
Lemen, J. R., Title, A. M., Akin, D. J., et al. 2012, SoPh,

275, 17

Linton, M. G., Dahlburg, R. B., & Antiochos, S. K. 2001,

ApJ, 553, 905

Longcope, D. W. 1996, SoPh, 169, 91
Longcope, D. W., & Magara, T. 2004, ApJ, 608, 1106
Longcope, D. W., McKenzie, D. E., Cirtain, J., & Scott, J.

2005, ApJ, 630, 596

Longcope, D. W., & Silva, A. V. R. 1998, SoPh, 179, 349
Lothian, R. M., & Browning, P. K. 1995, Solar Physics,

161, 289

MacTaggart, D. 2011, A&A, 531, A108

Scherrer, P. H., Schou, J., Bush, R. I., et al. 2012, Solar

Physics, 275, 207

Schrijver, C. J., De Rosa, M. L., Title, A. M., & Metcalf,

T. R. 2005, ApJ, 628, 501

Sheeley, Jr., N. R., Bohlin, J. D., Brueckner, G. E., et al.

1975, SoPh, 40, 103

Sweet, P. A. 1958, Il Nuovo Cimento (1955-1965), 8, 188
Tarr, L., & Longcope, D. 2012, ApJ, 749, 64
Tarr, L. A., Longcope, D. W., McKenzie, D. E., &

Yoshimura, K. 2014, SoPh, 289, 3331

Taylor, J. B. 1986, Rev. Mod. Phys., 58, 741
Toriumi, S., & Takasao, S. 2017, ApJ, 850, 39
Tsuneta, S. 1996, ApJL, 456, L63
Webb, D. F., & Zirin, H. 1981, Solar Physics, 69, 99
Yamada, M., Ono, Y., Hayakawa, A., Katsurai, M., &

Perkins, F. W. 1990, Physical Review Letters, 65, 721

Zuccarello, F., Battiato, V., Contarino, L., et al. 2008,

A&A, 488, 1117

