Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. tilt_correct_corr
January 1, 2020

c(cid:13)ESO 2020

9
1
0
2
c
e
D
0
3

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
0
9
9
2
1
.
2
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Correcting the effect of magnetic tongues on the tilt angle of
bipolar active regions

M. Poisson1, M.C. López Fuentes1, C.H. Mandrini1, 3, P. Démoulin2 and C. MacCormack1

1 Instituto de Astronomía y Física del Espacio, IAFE, CONICET-UBA, CC. 67, Suc. 28, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina, e-mail:
mpoisson@iafe.uba.ar, lopezf@iafe.uba.ar
2 LESIA, Observatoire de Paris, Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Univ. Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 5 place Jules
Janssen, 92195 Meudon, France, e-mail: Pascal.Demoulin@obspm.fr
3 Universidad de Buenos Aires, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina, e-mail:
mandrini@iafe.uba.ar

January 1, 2020

ABSTRACT

Context. The magnetic polarities of bipolar active regions (ARs) exhibit elongations in line-of-sight magnetograms during their
emergence. These elongations are referred to as magnetic tongues and attributed to the presence of twist in the emerging magnetic
ﬂux-ropes (FRs) that form ARs.
Aims. The presence of magnetic tongues aﬀects the measurement of any AR characteristic that depends on its magnetic ﬂux distri-
bution. The AR tilt-angle is one of them. We aim to develop a method to isolate and remove the ﬂux associated with the tongues to
determine the AR tilt-angle with as much precision as possible.
Methods. As a ﬁrst approach, we used a simple emergence model of a FR. This allowed us to develop and test our aim based on a
method to remove the eﬀects of magnetic tongues. Then, using the experience gained from the analysis of the model, we applied our
method to photospheric observations of bipolar ARs that show clear magnetic tongues.
Results. Using the developed procedure on the FR model, we can reduce the deviation in the tilt estimation by more than 60%. Next
we illustrate the performance of the method with four examples of bipolar ARs selected for their large magnetic tongues. The new
method eﬃciently removes the spurious rotation of the bipole. This correction is mostly independent of the method input parameters
and signiﬁcant since it is larger than all the estimated tilt errors.
Conclusions. We have developed a method to isolate the magnetic ﬂux associated with the FR core during the emergence of bipolar
ARs. This allows us to compute the AR tilt-angle and its evolution as precisely as possible. We suggest that the high dispersion
observed in the determination of AR tilt-angles in studies that massively compute them from line-of sight magnetograms can be
partly due to the existence of magnetic tongues whose presence is not suﬃciently acknowledged.

Key words. Physical data and processes: magnetic ﬁelds, Sun: photosphere, Sun: magnetic ﬁelds

1. Introduction

A dynamo mechanism located at the bottom of the convection
zone (CZ) is frequently invoked to explain the formation of ac-
tive regions (ARs, see e.g. the reviews of Charbonneau 2014;
Brun & Browning 2017, and references therein). In this con-
text, the magnetic ﬂux is ampliﬁed and deformed by diﬀeren-
tial rotation and convective motions until it becomes buoyant
and emerges in the form of twisted ﬂux-tubes or ﬂux ropes
(FRs). Several magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations of
ﬂux emergence consider the rise of coherent FRs from deep in
the CZ that will later form ARs, once the rope succeeds to tra-
verse the photosphere (see the reviews by Fan 2009; Cheung
& Isobe 2014; Toriumi 2014, and references therein). However,
there are also numerical simulations that explain the formation of
ARs due to the in situ ampliﬁcation and structuring of the mag-
netic ﬁeld by convection (see the review in Brandenburg 2018)

The structure of the emerging FRs determines the observed
characteristics of ARs in line-of-sight (LOS) magnetograms.

Send oﬀprint requests to: M. Poisson

One of these characteristics is the presence of magnetic tongues
(López Fuentes et al. 2000), which have been also called tails
(Archontis & Hood 2010). If we assume that ARs are formed
by the emergence of Ω-shaped FRs, magnetic tongues are pro-
duced by the projection of the azimuthal component along the
LOS and they appear in bipolar ARs as elongations of the main
polarities with a yin-yang pattern. López Fuentes et al. (2000)
reported their existence for the ﬁrst time in a rotating bipolar AR
and they were later observed in many other examples (see e.g.
Luoni et al. 2011; Mandrini et al. 2014; Valori et al. 2015; Yard-
ley et al. 2016; Vemareddy & Démoulin 2017; Dacie et al. 2018;
López Fuentes et al. 2018). They also have been found in nu-
merical simulations of emerging FRs (Archontis & Hood 2010;
Cheung et al. 2010; MacTaggart 2011; Jouve et al. 2013; Rempel
& Cheung 2014; Takasao et al. 2015).

In Poisson et al. (2015a) we presented a systematic method
to quantify the inﬂuence of magnetic tongues using the evolution
of the photospheric inversion line (PIL) during the emergence of
bipolar ARs. We measure the acute angle between the estimated
PIL and the line orthogonal to the AR bipole axis. From this
angle, which we called the tongue angle [τ], we estimated the

Article number, page 1 of 17

 
 
 
 
 
 
A&A proofs: manuscript no. tilt_correct_corr

average twist present in the sub-photospheric emerging FR under
the assumption that it can be modelled using a uniformly twisted
half torus. We found that, in general, the twist is below one turn.

In a subsequent article (Poisson et al. 2015b), for a set of sim-
ple bipolar ARs, we compared the twist computed as in Poisson
et al. (2015a) with the twist inferred using a linear force-free
ﬁeld model of the AR coronal ﬁeld. The signs of the twist esti-
mated from both methods are consistent. Furthermore, we found
a linear relation between the twist derived from the analysis of
tongues and that obtained from the coronal ﬁeld model.

In Poisson et al. (2016), we studied how the tongues af-
fect the evolution of the magnetic ﬂux distribution of ARs.
This study was done for bipolar ARs observed over more than
one solar cycle. We also developed a more sophisticated FR
emergence model that considered loop cross-sections with non-
uniform twists (both in the radial and azimuthal directions). We
found that the eﬀect of tongues tends to be stronger at the be-
ginning of the evolution and weaker as the AR emerges. We also
found a variety of evolutions that suggested, by comparison with
the model, that emerging ARs have a wide set of twist proﬁles.

Although the results obtained by Poisson et al. (2016) pro-
vide constraints to theoretical and numerical models of FR emer-
gence, they do not provide a method for removing the eﬀects of
the tongues from the intrinsic characteristics of emerging FRs.
One of these intrinsic properties is the inclination of the emerg-
ing FR with respect to the solar equator, usually deﬁned as the tilt
angle. The distribution of tilt with solar latitude sets constraints
on dynamo models. In addition, there has been an important ef-
fort over the past few years to characterise the tilt of ARs with a
diverse range of results (Li & Ulrich 2012; McClintock & Nor-
ton 2013; McClintock et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2015; Tlatova et al.
2018). As we demonstrated in Poisson et al. (2015a, 2016), the
presence of tongues has a non-negligible eﬀect on the determina-
tion of the tilt. We consider that part of the disperse (also taking
into account the sometimes inconsistent results found by obser-
vational studies determining the tilt of ARs) can be aﬀected by
the lack of consideration for the eﬀect of magnetic tongues in
the measurements.

In this work, we introduce a method to compute the intrinsic
tilt-angle of bipolar ARs using LOS magnetograms. The method
aims to remove the eﬀect of the magnetic tongues when comput-
ing the barycentres of the polarities and, hence, to obtain the AR
tilt angle that better represents the intrinsic tilt. This method is
deﬁned in Sect. 2 following a summary of the the analytical FR
model used to test it. In Sect. 3, we explore the parameter spaces
of the model and of the method to evaluate the tilt correction
and analyse the strengths and weaknesses of the method. Next,
in Sect. 4, we describe the four bipolar ARs used in Sect. 5 to
evaluate the method. These selected emerging ARs have strong
magnetic tongues, which implies a strong deviation of the AR
tilt deduced directly from the magnetograms. Finally, in Sect. 6,
we summarise and discuss our results.

2. Flux rope model and the tilt correction method

In this section, we ﬁrst summarise the main characteristics of
the FR model deﬁned in Luoni et al. (2011), then extended in
Poisson et al. (2016), in order to set a framework to test the new
method designed to remove the eﬀect of magnetic tongues on
the tilt of ARs.

Article number, page 2 of 17

Fig. 1. Synthetic magnetograms of the axial (a) and the azimuthal (b)
magnetic ﬁeld components of a uniformly twisted torus model with
Nt,0 = 0.5. (c) Total superposed magnetic ﬁeld map. The red- and blue-
shaded areas represent the positive and the negative value of Bz. The
magenta contour in each map corresponds to |Bz| = 50 G (the maxi-
mum axial ﬁeld is set to 1000 G). The associated movies are available
online (ﬁg1_a.avi, ﬁg1_b.avi, and ﬁg1_c.avi).

2.1. The simple ﬂux emergence model

The simple FR model, developed in Luoni et al. (2011), provides
a global description of the evolution of the photospheric mag-
netic ﬁeld during the emergence of bipolar ARs. It consists of a
toroidal FR with uniform twist (both along and across its axis).
The sign and amount of magnetic twist is given by imposing a
number of turns [Nt] to the magnetic ﬁeld lines. Nt corresponds
to half of the emerging torus (see Figure 2 in Luoni et al. 2011).
The axial ﬁeld component is supposed to have a Gaussian proﬁle
in the FR cross section (a distribution typically present in numer-
ical simulation of FRs in the CZ). The upper half of the torus is
set to progressively emerge without distortion. Therefore, this
simple model does not take into account the deformations and
reconnections occurring during emergence.

The emergence of the FR at the photospheric level provides a
series of synthetic magnetograms, which are analysed in exactly
the same way as observed magnetograms (Sect. 5). The proce-
dure consists in cutting the toroidal rope by successive horizon-
tal planes (z = constant, where z is vertical coordinate), which
play the role of the photosphere at successive times, and com-
puting the magnetic ﬁeld projection in the direction normal to
these planes [Bz]. These synthetic magnetograms are the result
of the superposition of the axial and azimuthal ﬁeld components

(a)(b)(c)Time step 45Time step 45Time step 45Poisson et al.: Correcting magnetic tongues eﬀects

Fig. 2. (a)-(b) Synthetic magnetograms for the FR emergence model with Nt,0 = 0.5 (h = 0, g = 0) at two diﬀerent time steps of the evolution. The
red and blue dashed-contours correspond to the |Bz| = 50 G isocontours of the axial ﬁeld map (Fig. 1a). The magnetic ﬁeld strength on the FR axis
is set to 1000 G. The red and blue dots show the position of the magnetic barycentres of the axial map and the black segment in between indicates
an intrinsic tilt φi = 0. The |Bz| = 50 G isocontours of the total map (see also Fig. 1c) are drawn with magenta continuous lines. The magenta line
that joins the total map barycentres indicates an apparent tilt φa. (c) Evolution of φa for the uniform-twist models with Nt,0 = 0, 0.2, 0.5, 0.7 (black,
red, green and blue continuous lines, respectively). The non-uniform twist models have a ﬁxed value of Nt,0 = 0.5 and (h, g) values indicated
between brackets (violet, yellow, orange, and brown continuous lines, respectively). The associated movie is available online (ﬁg2_a.avi).

of the torus (Bφ and Bθ, respectively) projected in the z-direction
(see an example in Figure 1 of Poisson et al. 2015b). Henceforth,
each cut, that is, each magnetogram, is identiﬁed with a time step
number in an analogous way to the observation time of ARs. For
all the models that we use in this work, we set the number of cuts
at 65.

In order to identify the eﬀect of tongues on the synthetic
magnetograms, in Fig. 1a–b we separate the axial and azimuthal
ﬁeld components for time step 45. The axial ﬁeld component
map (Fig. 1a) has a mirror symmetry with respect to the y-
direction which corresponds to the PIL direction. In this exam-
ple, the FR is oriented in the x-direction and the tilt is null. When
we add the azimuthal component map (Fig. 1b), we obtain a
magnetogram in which the polarities are elongated producing
magnetic tongues (Fig. 1c). This change is caused by the com-
bination of two eﬀects. In the top part of the positive polarity
(y > 0), both the azimuthal and axial ﬁeld components con-
tribute to a positive Bz, thus enhancing it compared to the no-
tongue case. In the bottom part of the positive polarity (y < 0),
the azimuthal component contributes to a negative Bz and thus
partially cancels the positive Bz-signal from the axial compo-
nent. The reverse occurs in the negative polarity, with the en-
hancement of the negative polarity occurring in the bottom part
(y < 0) and the cancellation in the top (y > 0) part. Both en-
hancement and cancellation of the ﬁeld components, result in an
asymmetric shape of each polarity, so in the presence of mag-
netic tongues.

In Poisson et al. (2016), the aforementioned simple model
was extended to interpret the evolution of the PIL and tilt angle
in ARs with a large variety of twist proﬁles. For half of a torus-
shaped FR with a major radius [R], a minor radius [a], and a

ﬁeld strength on the axis [B0], we deﬁne the azimuthal ﬁeld in
the natural coordinates of the torus {ρ, φ, θ} as

Bθ(ρ, θ) = 2 ρ Nt(ρ) B0 e−(ρ/a)2

/(R + ρ cos θ) ,

(1)

where ρ is the distance to the torus axis, φ is the angle describ-
ing the position along the torus axis, and θ is the rotation angle
around this axis. The modiﬁcations we introduced include a non-
uniform twist proﬁle [Nt(ρ)] along the radial direction of the FR
cross-section that depends on a single non-dimensional parame-
ter, called h. We deﬁne the non-uniform twist proﬁle as

Nt(ρ) = Nt,0 max(1 + h (ρ/a)2, 0) .
For h = 0, the FR is uniformly twisted as the model presented
in Luoni et al. (2011). A value of h > 0 implies a twist more
concentrated at the edge of the FR; as an example, if h = 1 the
twist at ρ = a duplicates the value at the centre. Similarly, h < 0
implies a twist decreasing from the axis to the FR border.

(2)

We introduce a simple θ-dependence on the torus axial ﬁeld,
which produces a non-uniformity of the twist in the azimuthal
direction:

Bφ(ρ, θ) = B0 asy(θ) e−(ρ/a)2

,

with asy(θ) = (1 + g cos θ) ,

(3)

where g is the parameter controlling the non-axisymmetric level
of Bφ. This parameter introduces a strong asymmetry between
the top and the bottom parts of the FR cross-section. If g > 0,
the twist is lower in the top part of the FR cross-section than in
its bottom part and, conversely, if g < 0. Both parameters, h and
g, vary within the interval [-1, 1] and strongly aﬀect the evolution
of the magnetic tongues (see Appendix B in Poisson et al. 2016).

Article number, page 3 of 17

Time stepTilt angle [deg]Nt,0 = 0 (0,0)Nt,0 = 0.2 (0,0)Nt,0 = 0.5 (0,0)Nt,0 = 0.7 (0,0)Nt,0 = 0.5 (1,0)Nt,0 = 0.5 (-1,0)Nt,0 = 0.5 (0,0.8)Nt,0 = 0.5 (0,-0.8)Time step 10Time step 45(c)(a)(b)A&A proofs: manuscript no. tilt_correct_corr

Figure 2a-b shows two time steps in the FR emergence when
Nt,0 = 0.5 and h = g = 0 (i.e. they correspond to the uniformly
twisted FR). The intrinsic tilt angle [φi] of this FR is φi = 0; it
is indicated with a black continuous line joining the barycentres
of the axial ﬁeld as the FR emerges. When the torus is cross-
ing the photospheric plane in the ﬁrst steps, the projection of the
azimuthal ﬁeld in the normal direction increases. As a conse-
quence, the ﬂux of the tongues becomes stronger and shifts the
position of the barycentres towards the elongated region of each
polarity, producing a spurious increase of the tilt angle, that is,
an apparent tilt angle [φa]. The magenta dots show the position
of the barycentres computed from Bz and the solid magenta line
marks the tilt direction obtained from these barycentres. Fig. 2c
illustrates the evolution of the tilt angle for the torus model with
diﬀerent values of Nt,0 and (h, g). In this panel, the green line
corresponds to the model shown in the left panel. We conclude
that the deviation of φa from φi could be signiﬁcant.

2.2. Core Field Fit Estimator

The separation of the axial and the azimuthal ﬁeld components
from only a Bz magnetogram is an ill-posed problem. Since we
cannot identify both components separately, we deﬁne the core
and the tongue regions as the areas on the magnetogram that
best represent the extension of the axial and azimuthal compo-
nents, respectively, and we develop a method to approximately
locate and constrain each of these regions on synthetic Bz mag-
netograms.

The procedure aims to locate on each synthetic magnetogram
the magnetic ﬂux in the FR core region, which is the closest to
the axial ﬂux. Henceforth, we refer to this method as the core
ﬁeld ﬁt estimator (CoFFE). The segment between the centres of
the core ﬂux region of each polarity is the one we use to estimate
the FR tilt-angle [φc]. One of the main advantages of using our
FR model (Sect. 2.1) to design this method is that we can test
our procedure by comparing φi to φc, which, in the best scenario,
should be the same.

We approximate the core ﬁeld distribution assuming that it
is symmetric with respect to the core centre position and with
a decreasing proﬁle towards the borders. We use a Gaussian
function for our procedure because that is the proﬁle of the ax-
ial ﬁeld distribution in the simple FR model. An axisymmetric
Gaussian function has ﬁve free parameters: the maximum ﬁeld
strength [Bmax], the magnetic baseline level [B0], the position of
the Gaussian centre [xmax, ymax], and the mean dispersion around
the centre, or simply the half width [σ]. We ﬁx B0 = 0, since the
mean background ﬁeld is null in our synthetic magnetograms.

The Gaussian function is ﬁtted using an IDL routine based on
the non-linear least-squares ﬁtter MPFIT. Since the eﬀect of the
azimuthal ﬁeld component in emerging ARs typically decreases
with time, as it is the case in the model, we ﬁrst apply the ﬁt to
the last magnetogram of the series. For the FR model, when the
half torus is fully emerged, that is, at magnetogram 65, the Gaus-
sian ﬁt is exact due to the absence of the azimuthal component
and the Gaussian distribution selected for the axial component.
Next we use the parameters of the ﬁt at step i as an initial guess
to estimate the Gaussian for the magnetogram at step i − 1. This
way of proceeding improves the stability of the method, assum-
ing that consecutive magnetograms have similar magnetic ﬂux
distributions.

We now present how we proceeded and applied our method.
Figure 3a shows the magnetogram for the model with uniform
twist (Nt,0 = 0.5) at time step 32, which is when the LOS pro-
jection of the azimuthal ﬂux is maximum (Fig. 4a). The black

Article number, page 4 of 17

circles correspond to the contour levels drawn at half the max-
imum of the Gaussian function ﬁtted over each polarity. This
ﬁtting has been done using the information of the entire magne-
togram. In this ﬁrst step, we identify areas where the magnetic
ﬂux departs from the Gaussian distribution. We represent those
areas with green and blue isocontours for the ﬂux that is larger
and lower by a given amount than the ﬁtted Gaussian, respec-
tively. We ﬁx this amount to 50% of the maximum diﬀerence
between the Gaussian function values and the synthetic magne-
togram. These contours are labeled in Fig. 3a on the positive
polarity (symmetric contours are present on the negative polar-
ity). The largest of these isocontours (labeled 1 and 2) repre-
sent the asymmetry generated by the presence of the azimuthal
ﬁeld. The outer isocontours (3 and 4) are produced by the shift
of the position of the Gaussian peak towards the tongues. These
last isocontours should be very small; they should not even be
present at all when we have a good approximation to the core
ﬁeld distribution.

We use the information obtained from the ﬁrst ﬁtting
(Fig. 3a), which we call zero iteration, and redo the ﬁt by mask-
ing those points where the asymmetry is the largest, that is,
where the excess or lack of ﬂux with respect to the Gaussian
function is larger. To do this we select a region between the
Gaussian centres as the one delimited by the red lines in Fig. 3b
and c. The red lines are deﬁned with a linear function which
crosses the core centre of the respective polarity and it is also
orthogonal to the bipole axis deﬁned by φc in the previous iter-
ation. The region deﬁned between these lines is used to exclude
those points from the map at the next iteration, that is, Fig. 3b,
which is obtained excluding a region that was deﬁned at iteration
zero but the lines shown in this panel enclose the region that is
to be excluded in the next iteration. In this way, we consider the
ﬂux of the polarities with less contribution from the azimuthal
ﬁeld. The removal of the points is done using a weighting op-
tion; we assign a weight of 1 or 0 to the points that are outside or
inside the limited region, respectively. We call this new compu-
tation (see Fig. 3b) as the ﬁrst iteration of the method. Once we
get the new parameters of the Gaussian, a new limited region for
the next iteration is deﬁned (see Fig. 3c).

We repeat this procedure until we consider we have found
the best ﬁt to the core ﬁeld distribution. We set lower and upper
limits to the number of iterations [nit] we carry out for each mag-
netogram. We ﬁx the lower limit to four iterations. We chose to
stop the computation when φc varies by less than 1◦ between two
successive iterations. We call Cit the minimum iteration in which
this convergence criterion is fulﬁlled. In summary, the method
automatically iterates Cit times at time step i and then uses the
ﬁtted parameters as a ﬁrst guess for the parameters at time step
i − 1.

Figure 3c corresponds to the Gaussian ﬁtting for nit = 4.
One of the outer isocontours (4 in Fig. 3a) has vanished but the
other one is still present. Although the latter contour is smaller
than in the ﬁrst iteration (Fig. 3b), the remaining ﬂux below the
Gaussian means that the points removed at each iteration are not
enough to fully eliminate the eﬀect of the tongues from the com-
puted tilt angle. Therefore, we modify the region that is excluded
using a single parameter p that shifts away from the polarity cen-
tres each of the red lines by a quantity p σ where σ is the width
of the ﬁtted Gaussian. If p is positive, the region is to be ex-
tended. Figure 3d shows the same magnetogram of panel c but
with the Gaussian computed with p = 1. The main diﬀerence
between these two panels is in the size and location of the green
and blue isocontours. Removing a larger area of the polarities
means that we reduce the eﬀect of the tongues when we ﬁt the

Poisson et al.: Correcting magnetic tongues eﬀects

Fig. 3. (a) Synthetic Bz magnetogram for the torus model with uniform twist (Nt,0 = 0.5, h = 0, g = 0) at time step i = 32. We use the same
coloured code and isocontours levels for Bz than the ones used in Fig. 1. The black circles over each polarity represent the contour level of 0.5Bmax
of the Gaussian function that best ﬁts the magnetic ﬁeld distribution. The position of the maximum value for each Gaussian is marked with a +
symbol. The green and blue isocontours indicate the areas where the ﬁeld is larger and lower than the ﬁtted Gaussian, respectively (by 50% of
the maximum diﬀerence between the Gaussian function values and the synthetic magnetogram). The red lines, deﬁned as discussed in Sect. 2.2,
delimit the area which is excluded from the computation of the Gaussian ﬁt in the next iteration step. (b) Same as (a) but one iteration step forward
in the procedure (nit = 1). (c) Three iterations further (nit= Cit = 4). The associated movie is available online (ﬁg3_c.avi). (d) Same as (c) but with
the exclusion area extended one σ (Gaussian width) towards the outer part of the magnetic bipole (see Sect. 2.2).

core ﬁeld. In Fig. 3d, the increase of the green contours corre-
sponds better to the location of the tongue ﬂux. We can increase
even more the exclusion region but at some point the amount of
ﬂux removed from the computation aﬀects the goodness of the
ﬁt and the stability of the iterative procedure.

The standard error on the position of the Gaussian centre,
xmax and ymax, can be computed using the diagonal elements of
the covariance matrix obtained with the non linear least-square
ﬁt. But these errors are too small and do not reﬂect the goodness
of the model to approximate the polarity core ﬁeld. In particu-
lar, the eﬀect of the exclusion region is not well accounted for
considering only the standard deviation of the ﬁtting parameters.
Therefore, we consider another type of error, more intrinsic
to the CoFFE method. We compute φc using values of p within
the interval [−1, 1] to delimit the range of the tilt angle correc-
tion. We consider p = 1 as an upper limit due to its impact on the
ﬁtting procedure. For p > 1 the exclusion region removes more
than 85% of the core ﬂux signiﬁcantly degrading the goodness
of the ﬁt. Conversely, for p < −1, more core ﬂux is added to the
ﬁt but the tongue ﬂux included also increases as p becomes more
negative.

3.1. First tests

The evolution of the total magnetic ﬂux [Fz] of each AR po-
larity in the model with Nt,0 = 0.5 is shown in Fig. 4a (black
line). The green and blue lines correspond, respectively, to the
evolution of the FR axial and azimuthal ﬂux contributions in the
synthetic magnetograms. The diﬀerence between the black and
green curves changes during the emergence. This diﬀerence cor-
responds to the eﬀect of the tongues on Fz. The tongue eﬀect
peaks when the FR is about halfway emerged.

Even though the eﬀect of the tongues becomes smaller as we
go closer to the end of the emergence, the ﬁeld enhancement pro-
duced by the tongues is enough to modify the maximum of Fz.
This maximum is reached before the half torus is fully emerged
(see black-dashed vertical line in Fig. 4a) at step 57, while the
eﬀect of the azimuthal ﬂux disappears at step 65 when the half
the torus has emerged. We henceforth call this eﬀect Bz enhance-
ment. This implies that at the time of maximum ﬂux we can still
have strong magnetic tongues and, therefore, the time of maxi-
mum ﬂux cannot be used to identify the end of the emergence
(even if it seems to be a logical choice).

3. Correction of the tilt angle for a FR model

In this section, we apply the CoFFE method (described in
Sect. 2.2) to isolate the core ﬂux along the emergence of the
modelled FR described in Sect. 2.1. We scan diﬀerent twist pro-
ﬁles and we investigate how the results depend on the parameters
of the CoFFE method.

The corrected tilt angle [φc] is determined by the acute an-
gle between the x−axis and the line that joints the core cen-
tres with the CoFFE method, meaning its tongue eﬀects have
been removed, while the apparent tilt φa is the tilt deduced from
the full magnetogram using the barycentres. Figure 4b shows
the computed φa and φc using the model with uniform twist

3.2. Convergence tests

Article number, page 5 of 17

1234(a)(b)(c)(d)Time step 32A&A proofs: manuscript no. tilt_correct_corr

the red curve with p = 0) are closer to φi along most of the FR
emergence. More speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that for p = 1 the varia-
tion of φc reduces to 8◦ away from φi = 0, compared to the vari-
ation of ≈ 20◦ for φa (black line). This implies a decrease of the
tongue eﬀect by ≈ 60% when using the extended region p = 1.
Secondly, the mean value of Cit computed along the emergence
ranges between the minimum iteration number (4) and a mean of
5.15 for all the diﬀerent values of p; this means that the method
has a fast convergence to a stable value of φc at each time step.

3.3. Effects of the twist amplitude
Next we selected diﬀerent Nt,0 values to test how the strength of
the azimuthal ﬁeld aﬀects the stability of our method and the cor-
rection of the tilt angle. Figure 5 shows the magnetic ﬂux and φc
evolutions for models with low and high uniform twist. In panel
(a) we show the evolution of the magnetic ﬂux (continuous lines)
and the azimuthal ﬂux (dashed lines) for both models, Nt,0 = 0.2
in black and Nt,0 = 0.7 in red. The maximum azimuthal ﬂux
in the ﬁrst case is around 10 % of the total axial magnetic ﬂux.
Therefore, there is no signiﬁcant Bz enhancement and the total
maximum ﬂux is reached at the end of the emergence at time step
65 (black line). On the contrary, the model with Nt,0 = 0.7 has
a large enhancement of Bz that causes the shift of the maximum
ﬂux to time step 50 (red vertical line).

In Fig. 5b–c we show the evolution of the apparent tilt φa
for models with Nt,0 = 0.2 and Nt,0 = 0.7 (black lines). Despite
the reduced eﬀect of the azimuthal ﬂux for the case with Nt,0 =
0.2, there is a 10◦ variation of the apparent tilt angle during the
emergence that departs from the FR intrinsic tilt, φi = 0. The tilt
variation for the Nt,0 = 0.7 model is around 30◦, that is ≈ 10◦
larger than the model with Nt,0 = 0.5 (Fig. 4b).

Next we use CoFFE with nit = Cit, implying that conver-
gence is achieved, to compute a corrected tilt angle. The red lines
in Fig. 5b–c show the evolution of φc computed with p = 0 with
Nt,0 = 0.2 and Nt,0 = 0.7, respectively. Using p = 0 we reduce
the diﬀerence between the corrected tilt φc and φi in approx-
imately 45% of the original diﬀerence derived from φa (black
line). The percentage of correction is nearly independent of the
FR twist strength (see Figs. 4 and 5). The best correction of φc
for both models is obtained with p = 1 (φc closer to 0). For the
Nt,0 = 0.2 model, φc departs from the intrinsic tilt in less than
4◦ along the full FR emergence and even below 2◦ between time
steps 20 to 50. For Nt,0 = 0.7 the correction reduces the apparent
rotation of the bipole to a 12◦ counter-clockwise rotation for the
case p = 1. More generally, in all the models shown we are able
to reduce the diﬀerence between φc and the intrinsic tilt of the
bipole by about 60% along the FR emergence.

With even higher p values, that is of 1.5 and 2 (not shown
here), and despite the large amount of ﬂux removed from the
ﬁtting procedure, we are above an 80% correction in all cases,
reducing the diﬀerence between φc and φi below 10◦ along the
full FR emergence for the model with Nt,0 = 0.7. However, the
amount of ﬂux removed from the procedure with these values of
p above 90 % of the core ﬂux makes the ﬁt unstable, especially
in real ARs where the core ﬁeld does not follow in general a
Gaussian proﬁle.

The FR model used has no deformation of its main axis (the
FR axis is located in a plane). However, from the evolution of
the apparent tilt φa we ﬁnd a spurious rotation of the polarities
produced by the magnetic tongues that can be wrongly related
to the FR writhe, which corresponds to the deformation of the
FR axis as a whole (López Fuentes et al. 2000). All models with
positive twist have an apparent rotation in a counter-clockwise

z

] (green line), and the azimuthal ﬂux [Fazimuthal

Fig. 4. (a) Evolution of the magnetic ﬂux computed from the synthetic
magnetograms for the FR model with uniform twist (Nt,0 = 0.5, h = g =
0) during its emergence. We plot the magnetic ﬂux [Fz] (black line), the
axial ﬂux [Faxial
] (blue
line). All ﬂuxes are computed for the z component of the ﬁelds. All
ﬂuxes are normalised to the maximum axial FR ﬂux. (b) Evolution of
the apparent tilt φa computed from the magnetic barycentres (on the
full magnetogram, black line) and φc using CoFFE with p = 0 for two
nit values (see the inset). The coloured-shaded area surrounding the red
line represents the φc range obtained for diﬀerent values of p within
the interval [−1, 1] after the convergence criterion of the tilt angle is
achieved.

z

(Nt,0 = 0.5, h = 0, g = 0). The green and red lines show the
evolution of φc obtained by CoFFE with p = 0 and for nit =
0 and Cit, respectively. They correspond to the Bz distributions
shown in Fig. 3a,c. φc becomes closer to φi = 0 as the number
of iterations increases, which shows that the method converges
well.

To estimate an error for the tilt angle derived from the CoFFE
method, we compute φc for diﬀerent values of p. For each model,
we compute nine estimations of φc for equispaced values of p
within the interval [−1, 1]. These values are displayed in Fig. 4b
with a red-shaded area. As p is more negative the tilt is closer
to the result obtained at the zero iteration (green curve). As it is
expected the inclusion of more ﬂux of the tongues (p more neg-
ative) produces a smaller shift of the Gaussian centres towards
the core so less tilt correction. In contrast, a larger positive p
value increases the Gaussian centre displacement at each iter-
ation achieving a more signiﬁcant correction of the tilt angle.
Despite the broader range of φc obtained from time step 15 to 0,
two aspects are noteworthy. First, the results with p > 0 (above

Article number, page 6 of 17

nit = 0 & p = 0nit = Cit & p = 0 ΦaΦc:p=1p=-1Time stepModel Nt,0 = 0.5 (0,0)(a)FzFzaxialFzazimuthalMagnetic ﬂux (F/Fzmax)(b)Tilt angle [deg]p=0Poisson et al.: Correcting magnetic tongues eﬀects

gence (López Fuentes et al. 2003; Liu et al. 2014; Yang et al.
2009). Our analysis suggests that the magnetic tongues have a
strong impact on the correct estimation of the tilt in agreement
with López Fuentes et al. (2000), who ﬁrst show that the retrac-
tion of magnetic tongues could induced a fake rotation of an AR
bipole, even reversing its direction of rotation during emergence.
The correction achieved with CoFFE reduces this spurious rota-
tion signiﬁcantly, providing a more reliable estimation of the FR
writhe.

3.4. Non-uniform twist

Next we study the model with non-uniform twist using the h
parameter as a measure of the radial proﬁle of the twist (see
Sect. 2.1). We keep Nt,0 = 0.5 and we change h using its ex-
treme value of 1 as reference. Figure 6a shows the Bz map at
diﬀerent time steps for the model with h = 1 which corresponds
to a ﬂux-rope with an enhanced number of turns of 1 at the pe-
riphery of the torus (in comparison to Fig. 3). This increase of
the azimuthal ﬁeld is reﬂected in the strong elongation displayed
by the tongues during all the emergence of the FR. In Fig. 6b the
azimuthal ﬂux (blue line) is larger than the axial ﬂux (green line)
till the ﬁrst third of the emergence. The strong enhancement of
the azimuthal magnetic ﬂux shifts the maximum ﬂux (black dot-
ted line) to time step 43, far from the end of the FR emergence. In
this case, the location of the maximum Fz is closer to the maxi-
mum azimuthal ﬂux, which indicates that the tongues are strong
at this time. This fact supports the statement mentioned above
that the maximum ﬂux is not a good reference to establish the
centre location of the core ﬁeld. At this time step the LOS pro-
jection of the azimuthal ﬁeld masks most of the characteristic
features of the axial ﬁeld distribution.

Figure 6c shows that the apparent tilt angle, φa (black line),
has a large variation of 60◦ due to the long and persistent mag-
netic tongues. φc, derived from CoFFE with p = 0 (red line),
partially corrects the tilt angle achieving a variable correction
ranging from 25% at the ﬁrst third of the emergence phase and
up to 50% towards the end of the emergence. Comparatively, the
estimation for p = 1 (red-shaded area upper boundary) produces
a more stable computation of φc and provides about 55% correc-
tion of φc compared to φa along the FR emergence.

This test case with h = 1 represents an extreme instance
where the azimuthal ﬂux is larger than the axial ﬂux during the
ﬁrst third of the emergence. The few ARs interpreted as formed
by highly twisted FR develop other signatures on their ﬂux distri-
bution, apart from the magnetic tongues, that can be linked to the
writhe of the main axis of the FR. In those cases, the magnetic
tongues are diﬃcult to interpret due to the development of kink
instabilities that produce complex ARs with non simple bipolar
magnetic ﬁeld distribution (López Fuentes et al. 2003; Poisson
et al. 2013; Dalmasse et al. 2013).

Next, the models with negative h and positive g have signiﬁ-
cantly reduced tongues (see Fig. A.1a-b in Appendix A), so the
eﬀect of the magnetic tongues tongues is comparable or lower
than the already studies case with Nt,0 = 0.2.

Finally, a negative g parameter produces a strong variation
of the apparent tilt φa along the FR emergence (see Fig. A.1c
in Appendix A). Despite the large variation of φa, this case has
results similar to the case with strong magnetic tongues using the
h = 1 model (Fig. 6).

Article number, page 7 of 17

z

(dashed lines), and the axial ﬂux, Faxial

Fig. 5. Comparison of the magnetic ﬂux and the tilt angle evolution for
uniform twist models (h = 0 and g = 0) with Nt,0 = 0.2 and Nt,0 = 0.7.
(a) Evolution of the magnetic ﬂux, Fz (continuous lines), the azimuthal
ﬂux, Fazimuthal
(green-continuous
z
line) for the models with Nt,0 = 0.2 (black) and Nt,0 = 0.7 (red). The
vertical continuous lines (with the same black and red colours) show
respectively the time step in which each model reaches its maximum
Fz ﬂux. The black-dashed vertical line indicates the time step in which
is maximum. All ﬂuxes are normalised to the maximum Faxial
Fazimuthal
.
(b)-(c) Evolution of the tilt angle for models with (b) Nt,0 = 0.2 and (c)
Nt,0 = 0.7. The black and red lines show the tilt angle estimations of φa
and φc (see inset), respectively. The red-shaded areas correspond to the
values of φc computed for p within the interval [−1, 1]. The associated
movies are available online (ﬁg5_b.avi and ﬁg5_c.avi).

z

z

sense due to the tongue retraction, suggesting a torus geometry
with a positive writhe. Several studies have estimated the writhe
of ARs from the evolution of the tilt angle along their emer-

(c)(Nt,0 = 0.7) nit = Cit & p = 0  Φa: ΦC:Nt,0 = 0.7(Nt,0 = 0.2) nit = Cit & p = 0  Φa: Φc:Nt,0 = 0.2FzaxialFz Nt,0 = 0.2Fz Nt,0 = 0.7Fzazimuthal Nt,0 = 0.2Fzazimuthal Nt,0 = 0.7(a)Magnetic ﬂux (F/Fzmax)(b)Tilt angle [deg]Tilt angle [deg]Time stepp=1p=-1p=0p=1p=-1p=0A&A proofs: manuscript no. tilt_correct_corr

Fig. 6. (a) Synthetic Bz magnetograms for the model with a twist proﬁle increasing with the radial coordinate of the torus (Nt,0 = 0.5 and h = 1,
deﬁned in Eq. (2) at time steps 4, 19, 34, and 49). We use the same colour code and contours as in Fig. 3. The segments join the polarities
barycentres (magenta line) and the core centres (black line). (b) Computed Fz (black), Fazimuthal
(green) along the FR emergence.
Dashed-vertical lines indicate the time step of each maximum ﬂux with their respective colour. All ﬂuxes are normalised to the maximum value
of Faxial
. (c) Evolution of the apparent tilt φa computed from the magnetic barycentres (black line) and of φc using CoFFE (see the inset). The red-
z
shaded area corresponds to the values of φc computed for p within the interval [−1, 1] after the convergence criterion of the tilt angle is achieved.
The associated movie is available online (ﬁg6_a.avi).

(blue), and Faxial

z

z

4. Data Used

We applied CoFFE to LOS magnetograms of ARs obtained with
the Michelson Doppler Imager (MDI: Scherrer et al. 1995) on
board the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO). The
full-disc magnetograms with 96-minute cadence are obtained by
averaging either one-minute and ﬁve-minute magnetograms. The
diﬀerent averages results in a ﬂux density errors of 16 G and 9 G
per pixel, respectively. These data provide 15 magnetograms per
day with a size of 1024 × 1024 pixels and a spatial resolution of
1.98(cid:48)(cid:48).

We use the same temporal and morphological criteria to se-
lect ARs as described in Poisson et al. (2015a). The sample con-
sists of ARs with a low background ﬂux, whose emergence phase
is observed during their transit across the solar disc. We limit the
latitude and the longitude of the emergence to ± 30◦ from the
solar equator or the central meridian (CM), respectively. This
criterion aims to minimise foreshortening and projection eﬀects
when the AR is close to the solar limb (Green et al. 2003). In
order to describe the behaviour of our new method on observa-

Article number, page 8 of 17

tions, we select four bipolar ARs; these ARs are representative of
regions with strong tongues. This selection is best to test the abil-
ity of CoFFE to remove the tilt deviation associated to magnetic
tongues. Furthermore, because CoFFE performs better when the
tongues are less extended (lower tilt correction), we prefer not to
exemplify such cases.

To obtain the set of magnetograms to which we applied
CoFFE, we processed the full-disc magnetograms using stan-
dard Solar-Software tools. We ﬁrst transformed the magnetic-
ﬂux density measured in the LOS direction to the solar radial
direction, neglecting the contribution of the components on the
photospheric plane. This is a small correction as the selected
ARs are close to the disc centre. The eﬀects of this transforma-
tion were analysed by Green et al. (2003). Then we rotated the
magnetograms to the date when the AR was located at the CM
and we removed from the set any magnetogram with evidence of
wrong pixels.

Next we chose rectangular boxes of variable size encom-
passing the AR polarities during the emergence phase in order

Time stepTilt angle [deg]Model Nt,0 = 0.5 (1,0)(b)(a)Time step 4Time step 19Time step 34Time step49FzFzaxialFzazimuthal(nit = Cit & p = 0) ΦaΦcMagnetic ﬂux(F/Fzmax)(c)p=1p=-1p=0Poisson et al.: Correcting magnetic tongues eﬀects

Fig. 7. (a) SOHO/MDI LOS magnetograms of AR 9574. The red- and blue- shaded areas represent the positive and the negative Bz magnetic ﬁeld
component. The magenta contour in each map corresponds to the ﬁeld magnitude of ±50 G. The black circular contours are the half-width level
of the Gaussian ﬁt for each polarity using p = 0 and nit = Cit. The green and blue isocontours indicate the areas where the ﬁeld is larger and lower
than the Gaussian, respectively, by 50% of the maximum diﬀerence between the Gaussian and the local observed ﬁeld. The black and the magenta
segments show the tilt of the AR respectively obtained with the core ﬂux centres (which deﬁne φc) and the magnetic barycentres (which deﬁne the
apparent tilt φa). (b) Evolution of the AR magnetic ﬂux computed from the magnetograms. The vertical dashed line marks its maximum value. (c)
Evolution of φa derived from the magnetic barycentres (black line) and φc obtained with CoFFE (see inset). The red-shaded area corresponds to the
values of φc computed for p within the interval [−1, 1] after convergence criterion of the tilt angle is achieved. The associated movie is available
online (ﬁg7_a.avi).

to minimise the contribution of the background magnetic ﬂux
(Poisson et al. 2016). Movies for each AR were made to verify
that the variable size box included all the magnetic ﬂux of the
AR at all times. All the AR parameters were computed consid-
ering only the pixels inside these rectangular boxes.

5. Correction of the tilt angle for ARs

The application of CoFFE to the models in Sect. 3 has shown
that p is the most relevant parameter to obtain the best approx-
imation to the intrinsic tilt of the bipole. We have shown that a
proper selection of p can improve the computed tilt φc even in
those cases where the azimuthal ﬁeld is stronger than the axial

ﬁeld. It is noteworthy however, to see that increasing the p value
also increases the uncertainty of the ﬁtted Gaussian parameters
(because smaller portions of the magnetograms are used for the
ﬁts). In this section, we present the φc results determined for four
ARs and we test the dependence of the tilt correction on diﬀerent
values of p.

For each of the four selected ARs, we studied diverse condi-
tions that help us to test the performance of CoFFE. We started
with an AR which has a clear separation between the core and
the tongue components, facilitating the core selection made with
CoFFE. Then we analysed a more complicated case where the
tongues are completely linked to the core distribution, as it hap-
pens for the FR model. Increasing the tongue ﬂux complexity,

Article number, page 9 of 17

Tilt angle [deg]Magnetic ﬂux [1022 Mx2]30001500-1500-3000010 Aug 2001 11:15 UTAR 9574(a)(b)111 Aug 2001 6:23 UT212 Aug 2001 1:35 UT312 Aug 2001 20:47 UT4p=1p=-1p=0(c)nit = 0  & p = 0nit = Cit & p = 0 ΦaΦc:A&A proofs: manuscript no. tilt_correct_corr

we studied the tilt correction in an AR where the tongues have
a fragmented structure because of the emergence of a secondary
bipole located at the centre of the AR. Finally, we tested CoFFE
in an AR that has strong tongues all along the analysed time span
and a partially observed emergence limited by the longitudinal
criterion of Sect. 4.

As we have seen in Sect. 3, we expect the core magnetic ﬂux
to be dominant at the end of the FR emergence. However, while
for observed ARs we may not be able to see the full emergence,
we still use the last magnetogram of the set as the initial refer-
ence to start the computation.

Despite the complexity of the observed ARs, magnetic
tongues have a ﬁeld distribution that is typically easy to recog-
nise and locate in the LOS magnetograms by simple visual in-
spection. Conversely to the models of Sect. 3, where the tongue
and core ﬂuxes have a continuous overlap, the tongue ﬂux is typ-
ically more separated from the core ﬂux in ARs. In the case of
observed ARs no intrinsic tilt is available to test the CoFFE re-
sults, then, we qualitatively consider that a ﬁt of the core is good
when the ﬁeld that is above the Gaussian, that is, the green con-
tours in Fig. 7a, 8a, 9a, and 10a approximately coincide with the
observed magnetic tongues.

It is worth noting that the ﬂux of the core in ARs does not
follow in general a Gaussian proﬁle. Furthermore, this core ﬂux
proﬁle varies from AR to AR; therefore, without having a clear
ﬂux proﬁle for all ARs and in an eﬀort to apply our method uni-
formly, we decided to use the proﬁle that is better applied to the
modelled FR for observed ARs. On the other hand, a Gaussian
proﬁle is the simplest and has the lower number of free param-
eters still keeping most of AR core characteristics (i.e. a maxi-
mum of the ﬂux and a width).

5.1. Results for AR 9574

AR 9574 emerged between 10 and 13 August 2001. The time
span for this AR encompasses 55 magnetograms limited accord-
ing to the longitude criterion deﬁned in Sect. 4. This bipolar AR
emerged in a low magnetic ﬁeld environment and close to the
equator (S3). Figure 7a shows a set of four MDI magnetograms
corresponding to its emergence phase. The red- and blue-shaded
areas on the magnetograms represent the strength of the outward
and inward components of the radial magnetic ﬁeld. We refer to
this ﬁeld as Bz as it is equivalent to the ﬁeld on the synthetic mag-
netograms. The magenta isocontours correspond to |Bz| = 50
G. Elongated polarities associated to strong magnetic tongues
are present all along the AR emergence. Despite the asymmetric
elongation between the leading and the following polarity, we
recognise a magnetic tongue pattern that corresponds to a FR
with positive twist.

CoFFE provides the approximate location and extension of
the core ﬁeld on each polarity. The circular black contours in
Fig. 7a correspond to 50% of the ﬁtted parameter Bmax on each
polarity. The location of Bmax for each polarity is marked with a
black dot. The core ﬁeld distribution is obtained using p = 0 and
nit = Cit. For these parameters, we obtain the best tracking of
the core ﬁeld centre back to the ﬁrst ﬂux emergence of AR 9574
(see “ﬁg7_a.avi” in the supplementary material).

Green and blue contours show the regions where Bz is signif-
icantly above and below the Gaussian values, respectively. The
values of those contours are expressed in Gauss over the drawn
lines and set on each magnetogram as half the maximum dif-
ference between Bz and the ﬁtted Gaussian. The green contours
outline the spatial extension of the magnetic tongues (Sect. 3.1).
The blue contours are dominant on the core regions indicating

Article number, page 10 of 17

that the Gaussian proﬁle is not completely correct to approxi-
mate the ﬁeld closer to the core centre. As a consequence of this
discrepancy, we notice that the observed ﬁeld on the centre of
the polarity is less concentrated than the Gaussian function de-
termined with CoFFE.

CoFFE excludes a region around the central PIL of the AR
from the tilt computation (Sect. 2.2). The red lines show the lim-
its of the exclusion region in Fig. 7a with p = 0. Finally, we
show the lines that join the core ﬁeld centres (black segment),
and the magnetic barycentres of the full magnetogram (magenta
segment) to compare φc and φa tilts.

The emergence near the central meridian passage allows us
to analyse the evolution starting from the ﬁrst ﬂux emergence,
that is, when the AR ﬂux is below 10% of the maximum ﬂux
observed. A fast ﬂux emergence rate is present in the ﬁrst half of
the evolution in association to the early development of strong
magnetic tongues (Fig. 7b). The last half of the emergence has
a lower ﬂux emergence rate similar to what we obtained for dif-
ferent models in Sect. 3. The latter evolution corresponds to the
progressive reduction of the tongue magnetic ﬂux.

Figure 7c shows the evolution of the tilt angle computed
along the emergence of AR 9574. We deﬁne a positive tilt angle
when the leading polarity is closer to the equator than the fol-
lowing one, consistently with the Joy’s law. The method with no
iterations (nit = 0) and p = 0 (green line) performs similarly as
the other cases with higher nit and p parameters, except at the be-
ginning of the emergence (see below). This implies that CoFFE
removes the tongues in a similar way independently of the pa-
rameter values so that the core ﬂux is properly identiﬁed. This
is the case because the spatial separation between the tongues
and the core distributions is more pronounced than for the mod-
elled cases in Sect. 3, as seen by comparing Fig. 7a with Fig. 3.
Archontis & Hood (2010) described a fragmented conﬁguration
of the tongues due to the convergence of vertical plasma ﬂows
on the photosphere producing tongue regions where the ﬁeld is
compressed. This produces a discrete structuring of the tongues
that makes them more distinguishable than in the FR model.

Both cases, with nit = 0 or nit = Cit, and p = 0 have a con-
sistent and clear evolution along most of the AR emergence, but
they cannot track back the core centre when Fz is below about
10% of its maximum. That short time span can only be corrected
with CoFFE using nit = Cit and the extended region of p = 1
(upper limit of the red-shaded area).

The tilt φc departs signiﬁcantly from the apparent tilt φa for
all the time span of the AR emergence. The diﬀerence between
φc and φa ranges from 5◦ up to 25◦ (Fig. 7c), which is above the
uncertainties estimated for CoFFE (red-shaded area). We also
ﬁnd that there is an opposite tilt of the bipole determined with
CoFFE (φc) and the magnetic barycentres (φa). The mean φa is
≈ −2◦ while the mean for φc is approximately 10◦ (for p = 1).
The estimated values of φc correspond to an AR located at the
southern hemisphere accordingly to Joy’s law and indeed AR
9574 is in the southern hemisphere.

Moreover, there is an opposite tendency for the bipole ro-
tation determined with φc and φa, suggesting diﬀerent signs of
FR writhe for each estimation. The rotation computed with φc
is around 15◦ in the clockwise direction (negative writhe), while
the evolution of φa indicates a counter-clockwise rotation of 5◦
(positive writhe). In this case the magnetic tongues aﬀect the de-
termination of the tilt angle changing both the intrinsic tilt and
the rotation direction of the bipole.

Poisson et al.: Correcting magnetic tongues eﬀects

Fig. 8. (a) SOHO/MDI magnetograms of AR 10268. The magnetograms have the same contours and colour convention as described in Fig. 7a. (b)
Evolution of the AR magnetic ﬂux computed from the magnetograms (black-solid line). The vertical-dashed line marks the time at which the AR
10268 reaches its maximum ﬂux. (c) Evolution of φa derived from the magnetic barycentres and φc obtained with CoFFE (see inset). The drawing
conventions are the same as in Fig. 7. The associated movie is available online (ﬁg8_a.avi).

5.2. Results for AR 10268

Figure 8a shows four magnetograms of the emergence phase of
AR 10268, each of them labelled with a number that indicates
their temporal order. AR 10268 emerged in the north hemisphere
(N12) around midday of 21 January 2003. The 5-day long evo-
lution of the AR is only limited by the longitudinal criterion (see
Sect. 4), restricting the number of analysed magnetograms to 71.
This AR has a clear bipolar conﬁguration and magnetic tongues
that are more interwoven with the main core ﬁeld than in AR
9574. There is a small secondary bipole emerging northward
of the leading polarity (magnetograms 3 and 4 in Fig. 8a), but

this has only a weak impact on the apparent tilt φa, as the mag-
netic tongues, with their larger ﬂuxes, are the main cause of the
shift of the magnetic barycentres towards the AR centre (see also
“ﬁg8_a.avi” in the additional material).

As in AR 9574, AR 10268 has two diﬀerent ﬂux emergence
rates (Fig. 8b). The ﬁrst part is associated with the fast devel-
opment of tongues and the consequent enhancement produced
on the observed ﬁeld Bz. After January 23, around the mid-
emergence phase, there is a decrease in the ﬂux emergence rate.
The evolution of the apparent tilt φa (i.e. without tongue re-
moval) shows that AR 10268 rapidly evolves towards a highly

Article number, page 11 of 17

27001350-1350-2700021 Jan 2003 23:59 UT22 Jan 2003 23:59 UT23 Jan 2003 23:59 UT24 Jan 2003 23:59 UT(a)1234Tilt angle [deg]AR 10268(b)(c)Magnetic ﬂux [1022 Mx2]nit = 0  & p = 0nit = Cit & p = 0 ΦaΦc:p=1p=-1p=0A&A proofs: manuscript no. tilt_correct_corr

Fig. 9. (a) SOHO/MDI magnetograms of AR 9748. The magnetograms have the same contours and colour convention as Fig. 7a. (b) Evolution of
the AR magnetic ﬂux computed from the magnetograms (black line). (c) Evolution of φa derived from the magnetic barycentres (black line) and
φc obtained from the core ﬂux centres with the same coloured pattern and input parameters as the ones used in Fig. 7c. The associated movie is
available online (ﬁg9_a.avi).

tilted bipole which opposes to Joy’s law prediction (Fig. 8c). The
largest departure from the E-W direction reaches up to −25◦.
Towards the end of the emergence φa tends to a more regular
tilt value, in agreement with Joy’s law, ≈ 20◦. However, a dif-
ferent tilt evolution is obtained after removing the tongues with
CoFFE method as φc ≈ 0◦ initially and it grows progressively to
φc ≈ 20◦ (Fig. 8c). For p within [0, 1] we get a consistent evolu-
tion of φc and a large departure from φa during more than the ﬁrst
half of the emergence phase. Later on, when the tongues retract
(Fig. 8a), φc values are consistent with φa (Fig. 8c). The diﬀer-
ence between CoFFE and the barycentres estimation ranges from
around 25◦ to 1◦ towards the end of the observed emergence. Fi-
nally, the mean number of iterations along the AR emergence is
below 6, which implies a fast convergence of the procedure to a
stable and consistent φc.

The rotation of AR 10268, derived from φa has a sudden
change during the ﬁrst half of the emergence (see black line in
Fig. 8c). Indeed, φa measurements imply a spurious 20◦ counter-

Article number, page 12 of 17

clockwise rotation observed until 23 January and then a large
clockwise rotation of ≈ 45◦ towards the end of the emergence.
Using the φc estimation for nit > 0 and p > 0, we are able
to completely remove the initial spurious rotation and we get a
consistent clockwise rotation of ≈ 20◦ along the full emergence.
We achieve a better approximation to the intrinsic rotation of the
bipole, which is consistent both with the Joy’s law and with the
emergence of a FR with a negative writhe. In this case the signs
of the twist and the writhe coincide.

5.3. Results for AR 9748

AR 9748 emerged in the southern hemisphere (S11) and close
to the east limb on 21 December 2001. We analyse its ﬁve-day
long evolution across the solar disc which corresponds to 72
LOS magnetograms. The last magnetogram used corresponds to
a longitudinal position close to W30◦, so the evolution is trun-
cated before reaching the end of the emergence. Figure 9a shows

AR 9748p=1p=-1p=0Tilt angle [deg]Magnetic ﬂux [1022 Mx2](c)(b)nit = 0  & p = 0nit = Cit & p = 0 ΦaΦc:29001450-1450-2900022 Dec 2001 06:27 UT23 Dec 2001 07:59 UT24 Dec 2001 16:03 UT21 Dec 2001 01:36 UT(a)1234Poisson et al.: Correcting magnetic tongues eﬀects

Fig. 10. (a) SOHO/MDI magnetograms of AR 9906. The magnetograms have the same contours and colour convention as Fig. 7a. (b) Evolution
of the AR magnetic ﬂux computed from the magnetograms (black line). (c) Evolution of the apparent tilt φa derived from the magnetic barycentres
(black line) and φc obtained from the core ﬂux centres with the same coloured-pattern and input parameters as the ones used in Fig. 7c. The
associated movie is available online (ﬁg10_a.avi).

four magnetograms illustrating the evolution of AR 9748 mag-
netic ﬂux distribution. From the initial stage of the emergence a
bipolar distribution is present with a large tilt with respect to the
equatorial direction. The elongated magnetic tongues pattern is
more complex than in previous examples as it is formed of frag-
mented polarities that change of location. For most of the AR
evolution we recognise a tongue pattern which indicates that the
AR is produced by the emergence of a FR with negative twist
(e.g. Fig. 9a on 23 December), while the initial tongue pattern at
the beginning of the emergence rather indicates a FR with posi-
tive twist (e.g. Fig. 9a on 21 December).

The core ﬁt shown in Fig. 9a was obtained with p = 0 and the
number of iterations for convergence (nit = Cit). The magnetic
tongues mostly coincide with the green contours, although they
seem to be mixed with other ﬁeld elements, like a secondary
bipole and/or magnetic ﬁeld remnants present between both core
ﬁeld centres (see “ﬁg9_a.avi” in the additional material). Despite
the complex ﬁeld distribution and strong tongues observed in the

last magnetogram, the method successfully locates the main core
ﬁeld contribution and it eﬀectively tracks it back along the full
observed evolution of the AR (Fig. 9c).

AR 9748 has nearly a constant magnetic ﬂux emergence rate
along most of the observed evolution. Only near the end there
is a small decrease of this rate (Fig. 9b). Comparing this ﬂux
evolution with the FR model examples we infer that the stud-
ied interval corresponds to about the ﬁrst half of the emergence
phase shown in Figs. 4a and 5a. The time at which the ﬂux emer-
gence rate changes coincides with the maximum extension of the
magnetic tongues (see “ﬁg9_a.avi” in the additional material).

Figure 9c shows the tilt φa computed from the magnetic
barycentres (black line) and the estimations of φc with the same
set of parameters as in the previous AR example. For p in [0, 1],
we obtain similar results while there is a clear diﬀerence between
φa and φc that ranges between 4◦ and 7◦ and is larger than the es-
timated uncertainties. As seen in all the previous examples, the
method performs eﬃciently requiring a low number of iterations

Article number, page 13 of 17

AR 990630001500-1500-30000Magnetic ﬂux [1022 Mx2]Tilt angle [deg]nit = 0  & p = 0nit = Cit & p = 0 ΦaΦc:(a)12 Apr 2002 09:36 UT14 Apr 2002 00:00 UT15 Apr 2002 14:24 UT17 Apr 200204:47 UT(b)(c)1234p=1p=-1p=0A&A proofs: manuscript no. tilt_correct_corr

Table 1. List of the analysed ARs and their computed parameters using the magnetic barycentres and CoFFE. Column one and two show the AR
NOAA number and the twist sign [sign(T )] derived from the magnetic tongues. Columns three to seven list the values of the mean φa and φc, the
mean diﬀerence between both tilt estimations [|φa − φc|], and the variation of the tilt angle [∆φa] and [∆φc] per day; all these values are expressed
in degrees. Finally, the right column shows the mean number of iterations [nit] required for the computations. The errors reported in columns three
to ﬁve correspond to the standard deviation of the temporal averages. The values correspond to p = 0.

AR

9574
9748
9906
10268

sign(T )
+
-
+
-

φa
-2◦ ± 3◦
26◦ ± 4◦
-10◦ ± 4◦
-1◦ ± 16◦

φc
10◦ ± 6◦
20◦ ± 5◦
2◦ ± 2◦
10◦ ± 9◦

|φa − φc|
13◦ ± 6◦
5◦ ± 2◦
9◦ ± 3◦
13◦ ± 9◦

∆φa / day
0.2◦
-0.3◦
2.2◦
-6.0◦

∆φc / day
-3.9◦
-2.7◦
0.9◦
-2.6◦

nit

5.4
5.3
5.5
5.5

to achieve a stable φc value. The mean number of iterations along
the AR emergence is below 5.5 in the cases where p = 0 and
p = 1.

φa measurements imply a strong apparent counter-clockwise
rotation of the polarities of around 14◦ due to the presence of the
magnetic tongues, which can be observed along the ﬁrst day of
the emergence. This rotation is removed when we compute φc
and instead we ﬁnd a constant clockwise rotation of the bipole
of ≈ 13◦ (Fig. 9c). The inversion of the rotation sense observed
with φa during the ﬁrst analysed day of AR 9748 evolution, can-
not be explained as the emergence of a single coherent FR. This
kind of change would imply an unrealistic scenario where the
FR have mixed writhe along its main axis. The results achieved
with CoFFE are consistent with a single emerging FR.

5.4. Results for AR 9906

Finally, we tested CoFFE with the partial emergence of AR
9906. During its solar disc transit, AR 9906 (S16) presented
strong magnetic tongues with a pattern associated to a FR with
positive twist. In this case, we were able to study only part of
the emergence as we could not include the initial ﬂux emergence
and the maximum ﬂux was reached far beyond the limit imposed
by the longitude criterion. The temporal interval covers ﬁve days
between 12 and 17 April 2002.

Figure 10a shows selected magnetograms of the emergence
phase of AR 9906. The full set of 75 magnetograms is shown
in the movie “ﬁg10_a.avi”, which is included in the additional
material. We ﬁnd that CoFFE provides a good approximation of
the core ﬁeld distribution for p = 0 and achieving convergence
(nit = Cit) at all times studied. Both the Bz ﬁeld regions above
and below the ﬁtted Gaussian, deﬁned as in the previous exam-
ples, can be well identiﬁed by the green and the blue contours,
respectively. Despite their small extensions, the blue contours in
Fig. 10a (panels 1, 2, and 3) show the regions in which the core
ﬁeld symmetry is aﬀected by the tongue ﬁeld of the opposite
polarity. The locations of these regions are similar to those ob-
served for the FR model in Figs. 3 and 6, but as it was mentioned
previously with regard to AR 9574, there is a discrepancy be-
tween the Gaussian proﬁle used and the ﬁeld distribution around
the core centre. However, the green contours are well delimiting
the magnetic tongues. Hence, all the ﬁeld contributions are well
isolated by the method. This example has the ﬁeld distribution
that most resembles the model used in Sect. 3 (see Fig. 6a).

This AR has a slow emergence rate that allows us to have
a good temporal resolution of the ﬁrst half of the emergence.
Figure 10b shows that the magnetic ﬂux increases with a con-
stant rate. Comparing this case with the other ARs, the magnetic
ﬂux evolution suggests that the AR does not reach the time cor-
responding to half FR emergence (see Sect. 2.1). Interestingly,

Article number, page 14 of 17

this example shows how CoFFE responds in a case in which the
tongues ﬂux is as strong as the core ﬂux at all times.

Figure 10c shows the φa evolution (black line) and the φc
estimations using CoFFE with the same set of parameters and
colour convention as for the previous ARs analysis. The diﬀer-
ence between both tilt angle estimations ranges between 16◦ to
5◦, being around 8◦ at the last analysed magnetogram. This dif-
ference is far above the estimated uncertainties. In this case, the
magnetic tongues mostly add a constant shift to the estimated
tilt, producing a tilt angle that opposes the Joy’s law prediction.
This eﬀect is mostly removed with CoFFE, achieving a better
estimation of the FR axis intrinsic tilt at all analysed times. The
computed diﬀerence between φa and φc is also above the mean
dispersion reported in several Joy’s law studies (e.g. Wang et al.
2015; McClintock & Norton 2016). Similarly to what we have
seen in the previous examples, there is a strong apparent rotation
of ≈ 11◦ in the counter-clockwise sense due to the evolution of
the magnetic tongues, while CoFFE provides an almost constant
tilt along the same period of time.

5.5. Summary of the AR results

In Table 1, we compare the diﬀerent tilt-angle parameters ob-
tained from both estimations, magnetic barycentres, and CoFFE
with p = 0, for the analysed ARs. The four ARs were selected
as representative bipolar regions showing strong tongues along
their full observed emergence. Columns one and two show the
AR NOAA number and the twist sign identiﬁed from the mag-
netic tongues as done by Luoni et al. (2011). In columns three
and four we compare the mean tilt angles, apparent and derived
from CoFFE, computed along the AR emergence and noted φa
and φc, respectively. In three cases, ARs 9574, 9906, and 10268,
magnetic tongues aﬀect the ﬁeld distribution producing values
of the apparent tilt φa such that the sign of φa is opposite to Joy’s
law (Figures 7c, 8c and 10c). In contrast, the estimation of φc is
in accordance with Joy’s law along most of the AR emergence.
Column ﬁve in Table 1 shows the mean diﬀerence between
both estimations [|φa − φc|]. There is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence be-
tween φa and φc, especially in the aforementioned cases the mean
correction achieved with φc is above 9◦. It is noteworthy that the
largest correction corresponds to AR 10268, a case in which the
tongue ﬂux is more entangled to the core, and therefore, repre-
sents the most diﬃcult scenario expected for the optimal perfor-
mance of CoFFE.

In columns six and seven we show the mean tilt variations
per day [∆φa] and [∆φc], respectively. The tilt variation per day
is deﬁned positive (negative) when it corresponds to a counter-
clockwise (clockwise) rotation of the bipole. We chose to show
these two quantities to highlight the role of magnetic tongues on

Poisson et al.: Correcting magnetic tongues eﬀects

the dispersion observed in studies that determine Joy’s law using
daily-averaged tilts taking few data per day and at random times
(e.g. Li & Ulrich 2012).

In previous studies, the rotation of the bipole is used as a
proxy of the FR writhe. In all the analysed ARs, the magnetic
tongues produced strong spurious rotations, detected in the esti-
mation of φa during the ﬁrst day of the emergence. Depending on
the AR inclination and the sign of the twist the corrected rotation
obtained with φc can be enhanced (ARs 9574 and 9748) or di-
minished (ARs 9906 and 10268) by the presence of the magnetic
tongues.

All the examples have a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between φc
and φa. Even the case with one iteration (nit = 1) provides typ-
ically a good approximation of φc , except for the initial phase
of the AR emergence. For all the analysed cases, a fast conver-
gence is achieved with a mean number of iterations between 4
and 6 (see right column in Table 1), though there are a few iso-
lated magnetograms for which Cit is larger than 10. This param-
eter indicates how fast the method converges to φc in average
and it has a direct impact on the performance of the code. With
a mean number of iterations of 5, the procedure takes less than
ten seconds per magnetogram to compute φc in a regular desktop
computer.

For all the examples, we ﬁnd a reliable correction of the tilt
angle for p = 0 and the number of iterations to achieve con-
vergence (nit = Cit) because we are able to correct the spurious
rotations produced by the enhanced ﬂux of the magnetic tongues.
The ﬁeld distribution in the ARs shows a clearer separation be-
tween the tongue and the core ﬁeld than in the analytical models,
therefore, in most cases, we ﬁnd that p = 0 is enough to ob-
tain a good approximation of φi, thus removing substantially the
eﬀect of the tongues. Despite the increase of the uncertainties,
larger p values also provide a consistent estimation of φc, but
as p increases the computations have a tendency to have larger
ﬂuctuations.

6. Summary and conclusions

The estimation of the tilt angle of solar bipolar ARs using
LOS magnetograms is aﬀected by the intrinsic properties of the
emerging FR. In this work, we have focused on the eﬀect of the
FR twist on the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld distribution during
the emergence of ARs. The evolution of the magnetic tongues
shifts the location of the ﬂux-weighted centre of the polarities
(or magnetic barycentres), which can be interpreted as an appar-
ent tilt [φa] or rotation of the bipole. We develop a novel method
named Core Field Fit Estimator (CoFFE) that partially removes
the aforementioned eﬀects and provides a corrected estimation
of the tilt angle.

The procedure is based on the identiﬁcation of two diﬀer-
ent magnetic ﬂux distributions, deﬁned as core and tongue, that
best represent the contribution of the axial and the azimuthal
ﬁeld projection in the LOS direction. We estimate the core ﬁeld
centres of each polarity using a Gaussian ﬁt of the deprojected
magnetograms and we compute the corrected tilt angle [φc] with
CoFFE. The procedure is simpliﬁed to have only one input pa-
rameter, called p, which deﬁnes the reduction of the ﬁtted area
in each magnetogram removing most of the tongue ﬁeld contri-
bution from the tilt estimation.

In Sect. 3, we tested CoFFE using an analytical model based
on the kinematic rise of a half-torus FR (see Poisson et al. 2016).
Using this model we are able to study the evolution of the axial
and the azimuthal ﬁelds separately and to compare them with the

core and tongue locations provided by CoFFE. The tilt correc-
tion achieved for p = 0 is around 45% of the diﬀerence between
φa and φi along the FR emergence, being this correction nearly
independent of the twist amplitude (see Figs. 4 and 5). However,
for the case of non-uniform twist with h = 1, the eﬀective cor-
rection provided by φc is reduced to a range between 25% to
50% of φa (see Fig. 6). Although the use of p = 1 removes up to
85% of the core magnetic ﬂux, the value of φc for this parameter
provides an improved estimation of the intrinsic tilt [φi] along all
the FR emergence. For the uniform twist models the correction is
around 60%, while for the model with a non-uniform radial twist
proﬁle increasing towards the FR border (h = 1) the correction is
slightly lower; the diﬀerence between φc and φi is reduced to ap-
proximately 55% of φa. Therefore, for all the models tested with
diﬀerent twist strengths, we achieved a better approximation to
the intrinsic tilt of the FR axis than the one given by φa.

In Sect. 5, we studied the emergence of four bipolar ARs us-
ing SOHO/MDI magnetograms to compute φc using CoFFE. We
selected these ARs because their magnetic tongues are strong
along the full emergence. In the studied cases the magnetic
barycentres are strongly shifted towards the tongues producing a
large variation on the measurements of the apparent tilt φa. For
all the analysed magnetograms, we found that CoFFE achieved a
clear identiﬁcation of both the core and tongue dominant ﬁelds.
The removal of the tongue ﬁeld from the tilt estimation allows
us to obtain an estimation of φc which is not only compatible
with the Coriolis force action in each hemisphere (Joy’s law) but
also presumably closer to the FR intrinsic tilt. It is noteworthy
that the assumed Gaussian proﬁle, used for the core region of
observed ARs, is highly idealised and can be a limitation to the
strength of the method. Although it is out of the scope of the
present work, we intend to explore the inﬂuence of the core pro-
ﬁle on the intrinsic properties derived from CoFFE in the future.
The core and tongue ﬁelds are not easily separable in the
synthetic magnetograms obtained from the FR model because
of the continuous transition between the two ﬁelds. In contrast,
ARs have magnetic tongues which are at least partially detached
from the core ﬁeld. This kind of ﬁeld distribution was predicted
by the MHD simulations of Archontis & Hood (2010) in which
the azimuthal ﬁeld projected on the vertical direction presented
concentrated structures, described as ﬁngers. These structures
appeared due to the presence of transverse converging plasma
ﬂows on the photosphere. The aforementioned characteristic of
the tongue ﬁeld, observed in the analysed ARs, improved the
performance of our procedure to identify the core centre posi-
tion and distribution. Consequently, we found that CoFFE is sta-
ble and weakly dependent of the selection of the parameter p
within the interval [-1,1] when applied to ARs. We found that
a value of p = 0 is suﬃcient to obtain a good estimation of φc
along the AR emergence. As less ﬂux is removed from the ﬁt,
than for cases with p > 0, the results provide a more robust ﬁt of
the core centres. Therefore, CoFFE can be used automatically to
correct the tongue eﬀect independently of the AR studied.

In three of the cases (ARs 9574, 10268, and 9906), the de-
parture of the apparent tilt angle φa from Joy’s law was larger
than the mean deviation and even of opposite sign than the tilt
reported in several statistical studies (e.g. Wang et al. 2015; Li &
Ulrich 2012; McClintock et al. 2014). This implies that the mag-
netic tongue eﬀect over the tilt angle can impact the variation and
the mean deviation in the determination of Joy’s law. Although
an statistical analysis is still needed to support this statement, it
is noteworthy that the eﬀect of the magnetic tongues is not con-
sidered in observational studies that use daily measurements of
the tilt angle of ARs.

Article number, page 15 of 17

A&A proofs: manuscript no. tilt_correct_corr

The correct determination of the tilt angle is essential for un-
derstanding the complex mechanisms involved in magnetic ﬂux
emergence. The method proposed in this work provides a more
precise estimation of this parameter using AR observations of
the magnetic ﬁeld projected along the line-of-sight. In a similar
way, it can be applied to the vertical component of the ﬁeld in
vector magnetograms. We consider that CoFFE is an important
new complement to several observational studies that rely on the
precise determination of the tilt angle, in particular by allowing
for the analysis to be extended to the early stage of AR emer-
gence.

Acknowledgements. The authors are grateful for the insightful referee who stim-
ulated us to improve several parts of the manuscript. MP, MLF, and CHM ac-
knowledge ﬁnancial support from Argentine grants PICT 2012-0973 (ANPCyT),
UBACyT 20020130100321 and PIP 2012-01-403 (CONICET). MLF and CHM
are members of the Carrera del Investigador Cientíﬁco of the Consejo Na-
cional de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas y Técnicas (CONICET). MP is a fellow
of CONICET. This work was supported by the Programme National PNST of
CNRS/INSU co-funded by CNES and CEA. The authors acknowledge the use
of data from the SOHO (ESA/NASA) mission. These data are produced by the
MDI international consortia.

Article number, page 16 of 17

Poisson et al.: Correcting magnetic tongues eﬀects

Appendix A: CoFFE applied to non-uniform twist

models

In this appendix, we further scan the space of parameters of the
ﬂux rope model with a non-uniform twist. We show the results
for three pairs of h and g values, complementing the other ex-
treme pair shown in Fig. 6.

The model with h = −1 and g = 0 has a strong reduction
of the twist towards the edges of the FR, Eq. (2), so the ef-
fect of the tongues is weak along the full emergence (see movie
“ﬁg11_a.avi”). The correction achieved with CoFFE is close to
the intrinsic tilt φi (p = 0, red line in Fig. A.1a).

The model with h = 0 and g = 0.8, Fig. A.1b, has a tilt
angle which departs from φi in a similar way as the one obtained
from a uniform twist model (Figs. 4 and 5). Then, the results of
CoFFE are also similar (Fig. A.1b).

Finally, the case with h = 0 and g = −0.8 is an extreme case
(Fig. A.1c). In this model the ﬁeld lines concentrate more at the
bottom of the FR than at the top, producing a strong asymmetry
between the inner and the outer part of each polarity (Poisson
et al. 2016). The resulting Bz is less concentrated at the core
centre position but stronger towards the PIL. Therefore, the po-
larity barycentres are shifted towards the centre of the AR, closer
to the magnetic tongues, and φa increases along the emergence
(see “ﬁg11_c.avi”). As seen in the case with h = 1 (Fig. 6), a
partial correction of the tilt angle can be achieved using p > 1
(Fig. A.1c).

References

Archontis, V. & Hood, A. W. 2010, A&A, 514, A56
Brandenburg, A. 2018, Journal of Plasma Physics, 84, 735840404
Brun, A. S. & Browning, M. K. 2017, Living Rev. Solar Phys., 14, 4
Charbonneau, P. 2014, ARA&A, 52, 251
Cheung, M. C. M. & Isobe, H. 2014, Living Rev. Solar Phys., 11, 3
Cheung, M. C. M., Rempel, M., Title, A. M., & Schüssler, M. 2010, ApJ, 720,

233

Dacie, S., Török, T., Démoulin, P., et al. 2018, ApJ, 862, 117
Dalmasse, K., Pariat, E., Valori, G., Démoulin, P., & Green, L. M. 2013, A&A,

555, L6

Fan, Y. 2009, ApJ, 697, 1529
Green, L. M., Démoulin, P., Mandrini, C. H., & Van Driel-Gesztelyi, L. 2003,

Sol. Phys., 215, 307

Jouve, L., Brun, A. S., & Aulanier, G. 2013, ApJ, 762, 4
Li, J. & Ulrich, R. K. 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 758, 115
Liu, Y., Hoeksema, J. T., & Sun, X. 2014, ApJ, 783, L1
López Fuentes, M., Mandrini, C. H., Poisson, M., et al. 2018, Sol. Phys., 293,

166

López Fuentes, M. C., Démoulin, P., Mandrini, C. H., Pevtsov, A. A., & van

Driel-Gesztelyi, L. 2003, A&A, 397, 305

López Fuentes, M. C., Démoulin, P., Mandrini, C. H., & van Driel-Gesztelyi, L.

2000, ApJ, 544, 540

Luoni, M. L., Démoulin, P., Mandrini, C. H., & van Driel-Gesztelyi, L. 2011,

Sol. Phys., 270, 45

MacTaggart, D. 2011, A&A, 531, A108
Mandrini, C. H., Schmieder, B., Démoulin, P., Guo, Y., & Cristiani, G. D. 2014,

Sol. Phys., 289, 2041

McClintock, B. H. & Norton, A. A. 2013, Sol. Phys., 287, 215
McClintock, B. H. & Norton, A. A. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 818, 7
McClintock, B. H., Norton, A. A., & Li, J. 2014, ApJ, 797, 130
Poisson, M., Démoulin, P., López Fuentes, M., & Mandrini, C. H. 2016,

Sol. Phys., 291, 1625

Poisson, M., López Fuentes, M., Mandrini, C. H., & Démoulin, P. 2015a,

Sol. Phys., 290, 3279

Poisson, M., López Fuentes, M., Mandrini, C. H., Démoulin, P., & Pariat, E.

2013, Advances in Space Research, 51, 1834

Poisson, M., Mandrini, C. H., Démoulin, P., & López Fuentes, M. 2015b,

Sol. Phys., 290, 727

Rempel, M. & Cheung, M. C. M. 2014, ApJ, 785, 90
Scherrer, P. H., Bogart, R. S., Bush, R. I., et al. 1995, Sol. Phys., 162, 129
Takasao, S., Fan, Y., Cheung, M. C. M., & Shibata, K. 2015, ApJ, 813, 112
Tlatova, K., Tlatov, A., Pevtsov, A., et al. 2018, Sol. Phys., 293, 118
Toriumi, S. 2014, PASJ, 66, S6
Valori, G., Romano, P., Malanushenko, A., et al. 2015, Sol. Phys., 290, 491
Vemareddy, P. & Démoulin, P. 2017, A&A, 597, A104
Wang, Y.-M., Colaninno, R. C., Baranyi, T., & Li, J. 2015, ApJ, 798, 50
Yang, S., Zhang, H., & Büchner, J. 2009, A&A, 502, 333
Yardley, S. L., Green, L. M., Williams, D. R., et al. 2016, ApJ, 827, 151

Fig. A.1. Evolution of the tilt angle for non-uniform twist models with
Nt,0 = 0.5 and (a) h = −1, g = 0, (b) h = 0, g = 0.8, and (c) h = 0,
g = −0.8. The black line shows the apparent tilt angle estimations ob-
tained from the polarity barycentres, φa. We plot φc computed with
CoFFE without (green) and with convergence (red) achieved (see in-
set). The red-shaded area corresponds to the estimation of φc computed
with diﬀerent values of p within the interval [−1, 1] and after achiev-
ing the convergence criterion of the tilt angle described in Sect. 2.2.
The associated movies are available online (ﬁg11_a.avi, ﬁg11_b.avi,
and ﬁg11_c.avi).

Article number, page 17 of 17

nit = 0  & p = 0nit = Cit & p = 0 ΦaΦc:nit = 0  & p = 0nit = Cit & p = 0 ΦaΦc:nit = 0  & p = 0nit = Cit & p = 0 ΦaΦc:(a)(b)(c)h=0 , g=-0.8 h=0 , g=0.8 h=-1, g=0 Tiltangle[deg]Tilt angle [deg]Tilt angle [deg]Time stepp=1p=-1p=0p=1p=-1p=0p=1p=-1p=0