0
2
0
2

n
a
J

9
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
3
1
1
1
.
1
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Developing an Augmented Reality Tourism App
through User-Centred Design
(Extended Version)(cid:63)

Meredydd Williams1, Kelvin K. K. Yao1, and Jason R.C. Nurse2

1 University of Oxford, UK
meredydd.williams@cs.ox.ac.uk
2 University of Kent, UK
j.r.c.nurse@kent.ac.uk

Abstract. Augmented Reality (AR) bridges the gap between the phys-
ical and virtual world. Through overlaying graphics on natural environ-
ments, users can immerse themselves in a tailored environment. This
oﬀers great beneﬁts to mobile tourism, where points of interest (POIs)
can be annotated on a smartphone screen. While a variety of apps cur-
rently exist, usability issues can discourage users from embracing AR.
Interfaces can become cluttered with icons, with POI occlusion posing
further challenges. In this paper, we use user-centred design (UCD) to
develop an AR tourism app. We solicit requirements through a synthesis
of domain analysis, tourist observation and semi-structured interviews.
Whereas previous user-centred work has designed mock-ups, we itera-
tively develop a full Android app. This includes overhead maps and route
navigation, in addition to a detailed AR browser. The ﬁnal product is
evaluated by 20 users, who participate in a tourism task in a UK city.
Users regard the system as usable and intuitive, and suggest the addition
of further customisation. We ﬁnish by critically analysing the challenges
of a user-centred methodology.

Keywords: Augmented reality · user-centred design · tourism · mobile
· user study · system development

1

Introduction

Augmented Reality (AR) projects virtual graphics into real-world environments,
thus bridging the gap between the physical and virtual spaces. These interfaces
can enhance human vision, helping users absorb information in an intuitive man-
ner [29]. AR systems oﬀer beneﬁts in a variety of ﬁelds, from healthcare to mar-
keting, manufacturing to entertainment. Such tools are particularly useful for
navigation, enabling tourists to move away from static paper-based maps [3,28].

(cid:63) This paper is an expansion of our earlier publication Williams, Yao & Nurse, 2017,
ToARist: An Augmented Reality Tourism App created through User-Centred De-
sign, 31st British Human Computer Interaction Conference (BHCI)

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Williams, Yao & Nurse

Points of interest (POIs) can be highlighted by overlaid icons, helping users ne-
gotiate unfamiliar cities. While such systems previously required head-mounted
displays, smartphones can now support this functionality [5]. It is worth not-
ing that smart devices are increasingly researched in mixed-reality environments
[17]; this is despite their related privacy issues [25,26]. With such mobile devices
pervading our lives in several cases, tourism apps have grown signiﬁcantly in
popularity [18].

While AR oﬀers advantages to tourists, apps have been criticised for their
usability issues. Julier et al. ([11]) found that displays are often cluttered, while
Tokusho and Feiner ([23]) highlighted the limited ﬁeld of view. Occlusion can
occur when overlays collide, causing confusion as icons are obscured. Many apps
require the device to be held constantly upright, resulting in an uncomfortable
stance. Usability is a goal of user-centred design (UCD), where feedback is sought
throughout the development process [24]. Through soliciting requirements and
reﬁning prototypes, the product is often better-suited to users’ needs.

Our contribution is the user-centred development of an AR tourism app. We
ﬁrst extract our requirements from a synthesis of domain analysis, interviews
and tourist observations. This allows user suggestions to be informed by existing
best practice. We then proceed through four rounds of iterative prototyping, re-
ﬁning our overhead map, route planner and AR browser. Rather than developing
design frameworks, as has been done in previous work [16,9], we implement a
full Android application. To empirically evaluate our system, we conduct live
trials with 20 participants. These users judge our app to be usable and intuitive,
and recommend the addition of further customisation. We ﬁnish by critically
analysing the challenges of a user-centred methodology.

The rest of our paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reﬂects on related
work, including usability studies and AR apps. We describe our requirement-
gathering process in Section 3, which synthesises domain analysis, user interviews
and tourist observations. In Section 4 we outline our development process and the
iterative prototypes. Section 5 concerns our user evaluation, study ﬁndings and
methodological challenges. We conclude in Section 6 and discuss opportunities
for future work.

2 Related Work

2.1 User-Centred Design

Before we discuss our development, we should clarify what is meant by user-
centred design (UCD). Vredenburg et al. ([24]) deﬁne it as “the active involve-
ment of users for a clear understanding of user and task requirements, iterative
design and evaluation, and a multi-disciplinary approach”. The process involves
participatory design where users do not simply evaluate a product on comple-
tion, but deliver feedback throughout development. The general approach is
summarised in Roda [19].

Augmented Reality Tourism Apps through User-Centred Design

3

2.2 AR Tourism Literature

AR apps have been studied through a range of works. Grubert et al. ([8]) con-
ducted an online survey to ascertain browser opinions. Usability issues were
frequent, with respondents frustrated by the awkward stance for holding their
phones. Whereas this survey identiﬁed issues, we extract requirements for a real
application.

Olsson and Salo ([16]) undertook focus groups and online surveys to study
user expectations. Participants expressed that AR should increase the eﬃciency
of everyday tasks. Users also believed discovery should be facilitated through
an engaging environment. However, while the researchers only extracted system
requirements, we develop a user-centred Android app.

In other work, Yovcheva et al. ([27]) explored AR interface design. They cre-
ated a range of annotation mock-ups, before evaluating these through a user
study. Participants were found to value names and descriptions, with walking
time considered less important. They also evaluated how to highlight POIs most
eﬀectively. The researchers discovered that colour-coded overlays were most
salient, but that the technology required is computationally expensive. While
these studies inform AR design, they did not result in an implemented system.
Tokusho and Feiner ([23]) developed an AR equivalent for Google StreetView.
They encountered several usability issues, including cluttered screens and a lim-
ited ﬁeld of vision. Although the researchers implemented a prototype, their
requirements were not user-informed. In contrast, we seek to improve usability
through a user-centred approach.

Schinke et al. ([20]) suggested 3D arrows to assist navigation. While user
studies indicated these shapes were beneﬁcial, the test included only four POIs
per screen. Since Fr¨ohlich et al. ([6]) found that radars can be complex, maps
could be a consideration for our design. We now move forward to outline our
requirement-gathering process.

2.3 Mobile Tourism Apps

With the barriers to global travel decreasing, tourism apps [3] have become in-
creasingly popular. Google Maps, for instance, possesses many features beneﬁcial
for tourists. Users can search for a variety of attractions, including restaurants
and bars, with these POIs (points of interest) annotated on the map. Foursquare
oﬀers similar functionality, but can be customised around the user’s preferences.
By adding tags corresponding to interests, the application will recommend lo-
cal attractions. TripAdvisor diﬀers from Google Maps in that it is speciﬁcally
designed for tourists. The app includes user-generated travel guides, location-
speciﬁc forums and in-depth restaurant ﬁltering.

While these apps are popular, Augmented Reality oﬀers several advantages.
POIs are easier to locate when their position is highlighted in the physical world.
Furthermore, navigation is enhanced when users know in which direction their
destination lies [13]. Unfamiliar attractions might be hard to locate, even once

4

Williams, Yao & Nurse

users near the vicinity. Annotations allow the POI to be clearly marked, with
the phone’s bearing indicated by its magnetometer.

With AR oﬀering advantages over conventional apps, these tools have grown
popular. In this work we constrain our focus to Android applications, as they
oﬀer greater ﬂexibility in AR design. Wikitude ([2]) is an Austrian technology
provider which oﬀers both AR browsers and development kits. Their app inter-
faces with Google Places, populating a locale with nearby attractions. Despite
useful features, the application possesses usability issues. In an attempt to re-
duce occlusion, annotations are grouped when several overlap. While this reduces
on-screen cluttering, the icons may be too small for simple use. With user orien-
tation being key for navigation, the current location should always be displayed.
However, Wikitude often places POIs over this symbol, thus causing potential
confusion.

ARNav ([1]) oﬀers similar functionality, allowing users to search for nearby
attractions. Rather than crowding the screen with icons, the app presents a
list of POIs to be selected. The system can even identify mountains, with their
distance calculated from the GPS position. However, the app does suﬀer from
usability issues, with POI selection being a cumbersome process.

3 Requirement Gathering

3.1 Method

To create our AR application, the ﬁrst task was to deﬁne our system’s require-
ments. Given that the aim of this research was to develop a highly-usable app,
we adopted a strict user-centred process. This stage comprises the ‘User Re-
search’ component of User-Centred Design, as shown in Roda [19]. In extracting
our product requirements, we used a synthesis of approaches. Firstly, we built
on prior work to establish the fundamentals of an AR system. As non-technical
users might not be familiar with AR browsers, they cannot be expected to de-
sign the application unassisted. With domain analysis extracting existing best
practice, participants can select requirements with greater feasibility.

Secondly, we conducted a participant observation with real tourists. We se-
lected this study as it supported data extraction from a real-life setting [22].
Through surveying behaviour, we identiﬁed how people navigate a location and
what information they desire. This ensured requirements reﬂected the needs of
ordinary tourists. Informal conversations informed a set of interview questions,
ensuring we collected the most-relevant information.

Finally, we undertook these interviews with 14 participants. Through semi-
structured discussions of AR design, we considered important features and the
decision-making process. This qualitative data enriched the observation notes
and existing best practice, supporting the construction of our requirement list.
All the requirement-gathering tasks were ethically approved by our IRB board.
These processes are discussed in the rest of this section.

Augmented Reality Tourism Apps through User-Centred Design

5

3.2 Domain Analyses

We ﬁrst investigated AR tourism apps to identify their common components. A
product which is not informed by current expertise might either ‘reinvent the
wheel’ or lack feasibility. By supplementing best practice with user requirements,
we can develop applications which are both feasible and usable.

To begin our domain analysis [30], we examined applications in the Google
Play Store. We selected this portal as we construct an Android app, with the
search phrase of ‘augmented reality tourism’ used. We retrieved 192 applications,
73 of which concerned AR with 45 of those in the English language. Considering
those 22 with user ratings of 4/5 and above, we identiﬁed the features which
individuals appreciated. Common functionality included contextual information,
usable controls and a clean interface. Most browsers included a built-in map to
display nearby POIs. Attractions should also be enhanced with helpful data
concerning type, distance and user reviews. This can vary based on the POI,
such as lunchtime menus for restaurants.

We then surveyed user studies and the signiﬁcance of their ﬁndings. One
criticism of user-centred design is that the product is excessively customised to
idiosyncratic opinions [4]. By supplementing our requirements with academic
expertise, our browser should be suitable for a range of users. Whereas apps
should not arbitrarily omit POIs from the display, visual cluttering is a frequent
issue [16]. Yovcheva ([27]) found the most-recognisable annotations used colour-
coded highlighting. However, the resource constraints of smartphones can make
computer vision infeasible.

In addition to conducting user studies, Yovcheva ([27]) provided an AR over-
lay framework. It consisted of eight usability points, such as prioritising details
for nearby attractions. We also surveyed generic usability guidelines, such as
those developed by Schneiderman ([21]) and Nielsen ([15]). We factored these
points into our ﬁnal requirements.

3.3 Tourist Observation

After identifying best practice from previous work, we solicited opinions from
ordinary tourists. Whereas design frameworks can form a foundation, require-
ments must be informed by ordinary users. We selected interviews as our main
means for extracting comments. However, we required contextualised data to
construct our interview questions. Through observing the activities of ordinary
tourists, we were able to deﬁne our queries. As our interviews also included a
user scenario, our observation also informed the design of this task.

Our study was conducted with six tourists in Oxford, UK. These participants
were recruited in situ from members of the public. We observed their naviga-
tional behaviour and the resources they used during their visit. Whereas some
tourists used smartphones for research, many relied on maps and guidebooks.
After observation, we informally solicited the participants’ experiences. Topics
included navigational diﬃculties and the factors that inﬂuence their decisions.

6

Williams, Yao & Nurse

All six of our participants had planned their own trips to popular attractions.
Through discussions of surrounding landmarks, we found the tourists generally
knew little about the POIs. They were more encouraged by photos and user
reviews than by the history of iconic buildings. Several expressed that while they
wished to learn more about the sites, they had no access to this information.
We also found many participants needed a coﬀee shop’s WiFi to learn about the
local area. This implies that apps with oﬄine content could be of beneﬁt.

Our discussions highlighted the importance of pre-trip planning. We also
found a variety of paper-based and digital methods were used to obtain on-site
details. Since route planning, features (e.g., top attractions, etc.) and decision-
making (e.g., what should I visit?) seemed most important, we constructed our
interview questions around these topics. Several suggestions had merit, such as
oﬄine content, and these were added to our requirements.

3.4 User Interviews

Informed by the topics of Route Planning, Features and Decision Making, we
developed our interview questions. These included queries about user’s preferred
applications and favourite features. The interviews were contextualised around
a user scenario, grounding discussions in a tourism environment. This helped
participants consider a real trip, rather than answering queries in a disengaged
manner. The scenario was informed by our observations, building on the common
activities mentioned by tourists. The scenario is as follows:

‘Richard is planning to tour X. It is the ﬁrst time that he will be visiting the
city and he knows nothing about it. When he arrives at X, he will explore
around the city centre. He will use his smartphone to locate places to eat
and attractions to visit. He is also fascinated by the historical buildings
and wishes to learn more information. Finally, he must return to the train
station before his train departs’.

We selected a semi-structured approach to further explore participant re-
sponses. All 8 questions were open-ended in nature, encouraging respondents
to explain their answers in detail. This qualitative data helped construct an
extensive list of requirements.

We conducted interviews with 14 participants, with the duration ranging
from 30 to 45 minutes. These users were recruited from students at a local
university. Findings are grouped based on our three aforementioned topics: Route
Planning, Features and Decision Making.

Participants were asked whether they plan prior to their trip and, if so, what
techniques do they use. 13/14 respondents organised their tour, with all of these
reporting that they made use of the Internet. Most individuals used Google
Maps to mark attractions, before constructing an itinerary on paper. Distance
to travel was the most important priority, with 8/14 stating they optimise their
routes. Our planning discussions suggested that an AR tourism app would be

Augmented Reality Tourism Apps through User-Centred Design

7

appreciated. By consolidating reviews, routes and POI details, tourists could
navigate locations in an informed manner.

Participants next ranked six features in order of importance. These comprised
navigation, events, route creation, local restaurants, suggested routes and top
attractions. Individuals were also invited to suggest other features they would
ﬁnd valuable. The highest-rated functions were top attractions and local restau-
rants, with events deemed least important. Participants were also asked which
details they require about a POI. Most requested data such as price, photos and
opening times. Suggested features included nearby toilets and optimised routes,
with these points added to our requirements.

To assess decision-making, participants were tasked to select a local attrac-
tion. They disclosed the factors which inﬂuenced their choice, listed in order of
importance. We found distance and user ratings were most inﬂuential, though
price was mentioned on several occasions. Through our semi-structured inter-
views we identiﬁed a number of requirements. Using our user-centred approach,
we believe these will contribute to a usable and functional AR app.

3.5 User-Centred Requirements

Our user-centred requirements have been extracted through three processes: do-
main analysis, tourist observations and semi-structured interviews. The ﬁnal list
of requirements was divided into ﬁve themes: POI Information, Route Planning,
Interface Design, AR Design and Miscellaneous. We summarise the requirement
topics below:

POI Information concerned the data presented for each attraction. Based
on the most popular factors from both prior work and our user studies, we
prioritised details for our POIs. Route Planning was highly valued, whether
conducted before the trip or on-site. The application should allow users to select
their POIs and follow an optimised path. Interface Design is critically important
to ensure the application is usable. Our principles, informed by both prior studies
and user comments, include clarity, consistency and coherence. By minimising
the cognitive load on tourists, we can support their requests in a usable manner.
AR Design contains several challenges, including visual cluttering and oﬀ-
screen content. As users are usually more interested in nearby POIs, annotations
can be grouped and sorted by proximity. With design decisions requiring user
feedback, we trialled diﬀerent versions through our prototypes. Miscellaneous
requirements came from user suggestions, such as oﬄine content and nearby
toilets. With these features proposed by real tourists, we expect the functionality
will beneﬁt our target audience.

4

Iterative Development

4.1 Method

After extracting our user-centred requirements, we began a process of iterative
development. Within this methodology (as outlined in Roda [19]), we reﬁne

8

Williams, Yao & Nurse

prototypes through frequent user testing. After each round we feed participant
comments back into development, leading to an app which should match user
expectations.

Through our user-centred approach, we solicited the opinions of 10 partic-
ipants. These users were again recruited from students in a local university.
Feedback was audio-recorded, with the process ethically approved by our Uni-
versity’s IRB. Our development consisted of ﬁve stages: Initial Mock-ups, Map
Prototypes, Route Planner Prototypes, AR Browser Prototypes and the Final
Design. We now brieﬂy outline each phase in turn.

In Initial Mock-ups, we created low-ﬁdelity designs for the user interface.
These mock-ups included the main menu screens and the AR browser annota-
tions. With these elements comprising key functionality, we felt it appropriate
they were designed ﬁrst. After soliciting feedback, we moved forward to build
Map Prototypes. The overhead map was a crucial component, with AR building
on this functionality. Before AR features were implemented, it was essential we
developed the underlying maps.

The Route Planner, suggested by several tourists, is a key component of both
Google Maps and TripAdvisor. In wishing to provide an app of similar func-
tionality, we reﬁned our design through iterative development. We developed
AR Browser Prototypes last as the navigation tools required a strong founda-
tion. Following iterative development and repeated consultation, we delivered
our Final Product. We now proceed through each stage in detail, describing the
prototype, the feedback and our user-centred approach.

4.2 Stage 1: Initial Mock-ups

We began by creating a series of low-ﬁdelity mock-ups, as found in the ‘Design’
component of UCD (see Roda [19]). These were designed to give our users an
overview of the future application. Rather than building a full system, which
might be costly to adjust, mock-ups allow cheap and rapid reﬁnement. We ﬁrst
sketched the main menu screen, which users will navigate to access the app’s
functionality.

The mock-ups were designed around four principles drawn from our require-
ments. We wanted to build an app which was intuitive and easily understandable
to our users. We also required the interface to allow quick navigation between
diﬀerent features. For our app to be usable, this navigation must be simple and
consistent. Finally, to minimise the cognitive load on users, the interface should
be clean and coherent. The low-ﬁdelity mock-ups are presented in Figure 1.

Our participants analysed the interface sketches and gave qualitative feed-
back. They decided that ‘Main UI 1’ was most preferable, as it lists all the
features on a single screen. They also appreciated ‘Main UI 3’, where popular
attractions are displayed on the top bar. A user commented: “The UI is more
attractive with images of the attractions and I can ﬁnd all the attractions. There
is also a top bar showing other functions of the app”.

Whereas ‘Main UI 3’ advertises POIs, it does obscure other pieces of function-
ality. In contrast, ‘Main UI 1’ showcases the wide range of available functions.

Augmented Reality Tourism Apps through User-Centred Design

9

Fig. 1. Mock-up interfaces: Main UI 1 (top-left), Main UI 2 (top-centre), Main UI 3
(top-right), Map View (bottom-left), POI List (bottom-centre) and AR View (bottom-
right)

With both interfaces appreciated and the menu required for navigation, ‘Main
UI 1’ was selected for the launch screen.

We next developed 5 mock designs for the AR annotations. Diagrams were
implemented using stock images and overlaid icons. These designs varied around
four factors: size, recognisability, details and decision-making information. Whereas
one annotation included a small image, another used name and distance. Our
users were presented with these candidates and asked which they preferred. The
alternatives are presented in Figure 2.

Most participants found Design 3 most useful, which contained POI name,
distance and user rating. They also appreciated Design 4 as the icon indicated
the type of attraction. This was important as a POI’s name might be irrelevant
if the category is not known. Many participants commented that images should
not be included, as they occupied too much space on the user interface. One
mentioned: “If there are many attractions in one area, there will be a mess if
many pictures are displayed on the screen”.

8/10 participants agreed that distance helps them locate the attractions.
They also commented that user ratings can help them ﬁlter out undesirable

10

Williams, Yao & Nurse

Fig. 2. Mock-up annotations: Design 1 (top-left), Design 2 (top-right), Design 3
(centre-left), Design 4 (centre-right) and Design 5 (bottom)

locations. Based on this feedback, we selected four characteristics for our POI
annotations: name, type, distance and rating. By subscribing to this user-centred
approach, we believe the implemented interface will be more usable.

4.3 Stage 2: Map Prototypes

Prior research suggests maps are the best technique for spatial visualisations
[14]. AR acts as an enhancement to this functionality, placing helpful anno-
tations on the physical world. Without an overhead projection at least in the
internal system, the annotations lose their spatial relevance. Therefore, before
we developed AR features, we prototyped the underlying maps. This comprises
the ‘Build’ component of User-Centred Design, as shown in Roda [19]. We de-
veloped a prototype Android application, incorporating data from Google and
Wikipedia APIs. The initial prototype is presented in Figure 3.

Feedback suggested our interface was usable, with some caveats. One user
searched for an attraction but received no results due to a typographic error.
We therefore inferred that an autocomplete function might assist individuals.
Users complained about interface navigation, with moving between POIs proving

Augmented Reality Tourism Apps through User-Centred Design

11

Fig. 3. Map prototype: Overhead View (left), POI List (centre) and POI Details (right)

cumbersome. Individuals had to press the back button and then select another
attraction, with this causing some frustration. This was clearly an area which
required additional work.

Based on user feedback, we implemented several revisions. By developing an
autocomplete feature, individuals were assisted in their search for attractions.
‘BottomSheets’ were implemented to improve navigation, with the interface re-
vealed when the user swiped upwards. This helped individuals browse details
without moving to another screen. Based on our user-centred approach, we be-
lieve these revisions improved the app’s usability.

4.4 Stage 3: Route Planner Prototypes

In our tourist observation, presented in Section 3.3, we found that route plan-
ners were greatly appreciated. These tools enhance map functionality, enabling
users to navigate in an eﬃcient manner. With our app designed for tourism pur-
poses, we believed route planning was required at an early stage. Conforming
to our user-centred approach, we developed and evaluated an initial prototype.
The design was informed by Schneiderman’s ‘Golden Rules’ ([21]), including
consistency and informative feedback. The app is shown in Figure 4.

Individuals create a new trip by selecting a collection of POIs. The user then
uses the route planner to navigate themselves between attractions when they
reach the city. We designed icons for each POI type, in a similar manner to prior
work [27]. For example, restaurants were represented by a knife and fork, while
bars were denoted by a cocktail glass. To assess the usability of the system, we
requested feedback from our participant group.

Several users noted that once POIs were added to a trip, there was no func-
tionality to remove them. In this case, individuals needed to create a new trip

12

Williams, Yao & Nurse

Fig. 4. Route planner prototype: Trip Selection (left), Trip Creation (centre) and Route
Navigation (right)

and add the attractions individually. As tourists might arrive in cities from dif-
ferent directions, users asked for the POI sequence to be adjustable. Similarly,
the start and end locations were initially deﬁned based on the attractions. Users
requested the ability to set a deﬁned end point, such as a hotel or train station.
We reﬁned our prototype based on the participant feedback. We ﬁrst imple-
mented POI checkboxes, allowing them to be easily added and removed from
trips. Start and end locations also became adjustable, with navigation routes re-
calculated automatically. Routing algorithms were further enhanced, with paths
considering opening times and duration of visit. Therefore, routes now more-
accurately reﬂected the practicalities of undertaking a trip. With the map foun-
dations now ﬁnalised, we move forward to implement AR functionality.

4.5 Stage 4: AR Browser Prototypes

In previous stages we prototyped interfaces, maps and route planners. These
are the elements found in most tourism apps, including TripAdvisor and Google
Maps. While a purely AR application could assist localised navigation, tourists
might have diﬃculty ﬁnding distant attractions. By building on our user-reﬁned
features, we sought to provide a usable app.

We began by prototyping a basic browser, which allowed users to search for
local POIs. Attractions were represented by a simple icon, with a search bar
and radar also included. While icon annotations were less popular in our mock-
ups (Section 4.2), we trialled this approach for quick feedback. Our initial AR
prototype is shown in Figure 5.

Participants commented that annotation size should represent proximity,
with larger icons denoting nearby attractions. It was observed that individu-

Augmented Reality Tourism Apps through User-Centred Design

13

Fig. 5. Initial AR browser prototype

als usually held their phones in a portrait orientation, rotating to landscape to
use the AR browser. They would then return to portrait mode to read the POI
details, causing frustration. Users also suggested that we add category short-
cuts to the search bar. For example, rather than typing “bars” in a cumbersome
fashion, they would prefer to select a cocktail icon.

Reacting to user feedback, we implemented AR in portrait mode. If individ-
uals rotated their device to landscape, the display would also adjust accordingly.
This would help tourists operate the app with one hand, leaving the other free
for maps or luggage. We also implemented search bar shortcuts, simplifying the
selection of bars and restaurants. To user test our annotations, we replaced our
icons with three alternatives. ‘Simple text’ contained name, type and distance;
‘Detailed text’ also possessed description and rating; while ‘Image’ consisted of
a POI photo.

Most participants were pleased with the browser updates. The majority of
users preferred the ‘Detailed text’ annotations, as it provided a range of informa-
tion. With this approach being quite verbose, some suggested that icons could
be used when the screen becomes cluttered. Others commented that the annota-
tions were too small and this impeded the recognition of POIs. One participant
mentioned: “Detailed-text design is good enough, although having a photo is good
if the place is not visible, but I think it is too small on the screen”.

To accommodate this feedback, we allowed users to adjust the overlay size.
With occlusion and crowding causing confusion, we also developed a grouping
mechanism. When AR overlays begin to overlap, they are collected into a scrol-
lable list. Users can navigate this list by clicking the annotation, with grouped
attractions ranked in proximity order.

Through prior work [11], we found that AR usability is frequently criticised.
The awkward stance required to use these apps might discourage users. With

14

Williams, Yao & Nurse

AR serving little purpose when the phone faces downwards, we conﬁgured the
interface to switch modes. This enables the user to move seamlessly between the
browser and the overhead map through a simple gesture. After presenting these
design updates to our user group, all 10 were pleased with the app’s functionality.

4.6 Stage 5: Final Design

After four rounds of prototyping, evaluation and user-centred reﬁnement, we
constructed our ﬁnal application. Before completion, we added one additional
feature: oﬄine content. This was not developed through our user testing, as our
study participants had Internet connections. However, we recognised that many
tourists will not have access, as was found during our observations (Section 3.3).
After route trips and POIs have been selected, they remain navigable without
Internet access. The ﬁnal app is displayed in Figure 6, which showcases the
switching between the AR browser and the map.

Fig. 6. Final AR tourism application: AR Browser (left) and Overhead Map (right)

This application has been tested and reﬁned through an iterative process.
However, piecemeal feedback does not provide the rigour required for a compre-
hensive evaluation. Thus far, individual features have been tested in isolation. To

Augmented Reality Tourism Apps through User-Centred Design

15

ascertain whether the app could beneﬁt ordinary tourists, we move on to evalu-
ate the system in its entirety. This comprises the ‘Usability Testing’ element of
User-Centred Design (see Roda [19]), where we test whether the solution meets
the needs of the users.

5 Evaluation and Discussion

5.1 User Evaluation Method

We recruited 10 participants through our user-centred development. While we
considered using the same sample, we wished to explore the wider applicability
of their opinions. A distinct user group would have suﬃced, but we also desired
validation of our requirements. To both validate our design and evaluate at a
larger scale, we recruited 10 additional students. By using a test sample of 20
users, we evaluated the app through a range of viewpoints.

To test the system in a real-world environment, we developed a tourism
exercise. In this task, users were observed while visiting POIs around Oxford,
UK. When a participant reached one of our deﬁned stops, they were asked to
use the app to explore the area. The open-ended scenario was as follows:

“Jane is going to visit X. She wants to plan her route but only has a single
day to explore the city. Jane will use the app to undertake route planning.
When she does arrive at X, she will use the app to navigate the area. She will
also use the AR browser to explore attractions and receive more information
on the POIs”.

Participants were ﬁrst given a brief demonstration of the app. An informa-
tion sheet was also provided, in addition to the written scenario. Users had
the opportunity to trial the app so they could ask any pertinent questions. Af-
ter participants ﬁnished the navigational tasks, the study was completed by an
exit questionnaire. This contained 9 questions, concerning functionality, usabil-
ity and AR design. Participants were given an hour to perform their tasks. Since
the route was estimated to take 30 minutes, we believe this was ample time.

5.2 Study Findings

Four main themes emerged from our ﬁndings: User Experience, AR Browser,
Route Planning and POI Annotations. Each of these topics will now be discussed
in turn.

In terms of User Experience, participants remarked that the application was
simple and intuitive. They commended the consistent use of colour and praised
the coherence of the interface. One user particularly enjoyed the AR browser,
asking for the app to start on this screen. Since the system’s Unique Selling Point
was this mode, the alteration could be considered in future updates. General
feedback was complimentary: “The UI is more or less self explanatory. Overall
experience is very good ”.

16

Williams, Yao & Nurse

The AR Browser also received praise, both for its usability and functionality.
Grouping overlays was considered successful in reducing on-screen cluttering.
Several remarked that they would be more likely to explore their area if they
owned such an app. However, one individual had smartphone reservations, claim-
ing that AR could not be adequately supported: “I am not sold on AR in mobile
context, the user experience is good because of the context approach which is not
directly tied with AR”.

Several users commented that bystanders avoided their ﬁeld of vision, be-
lieving that the participant was taking a photo. Being cognisant of this fact,
we ensured all the stops were historical attractions. Therefore, a person hold-
ing their phone in this manner should feel less awkward. Despite these generic
AR issues, users praised the gesture navigation between browser and map. One
stated: “I like how you simply ﬂip the phone to use AR function. It is good to
have both AR and map view let users decide which they prefer ”.

Rather than concerning design, the most frequent complaint came from phone
hardware. Several users encountered issues with magnetic interference, which re-
duced the accuracy of their magnetometers. This caused the AR annotations to
ﬂicker, impacting browser usability. While the overlays were appreciated, adjust-
ing their size was found challenging. One user suggested a pinch gesture could
be used, and that this should be added in updates.

The Route Planner received consistent praise, with the functionality com-
mended. Participants appreciated the oﬄine content, which allowed navigation
without an Internet connection. The routing algorithm was also complimented,
as it factored opening times into its calculations. Participants did oﬀer sugges-
tions for upcoming releases, including pop-up notiﬁcations and automatic end-
points. As one noted: “It would be better if it can pop up notiﬁcation to show
information about the route, the next place to go, the distance to next attraction
etc”.

Finally, the POI Annotations were also praised. Most users preferred the
‘Text and review’ overlay, which included name, rating and attraction type. Al-
though several participants appreciated images, the majority believed the details
were suﬃcient. Icons were found to present a high-level overview of nearby at-
tractions. However, since a downward gesture opened the map, many preferred
this overhead view.

Our participants appear to regard the application as both functional and us-
able. We move on to discuss general themes from our comprehensive evaluation.

5.3 Discussion

During the ﬁnal task, it was observed that the style in which tourists navigate can
be grouped into three categories. Some individuals planned their trip in detail
and visited the POIs in the most eﬃcient manner. These users are goal-driven
and less interested in exploring unscheduled attractions. They beneﬁted most
from the route planner, which plotted a shortest path between the locations.

Other individuals registered the POIs but navigated the city in a ﬂexible
manner. They structured their trip around certain attractions but preferred

Augmented Reality Tourism Apps through User-Centred Design

17

the scenic route to the shortest path. These users demand an app which not
only provides the direction, but takes them via other POIs. Alternatively, some
individuals were exploratory, locating attractions in situ. These participants used
the app while walking, and therefore required accurate annotations. A successful
AR tourism app must cater for the needs of all three groups.

Users appreciated our technique to reduce occlusion: ranking intersecting
overlays by their proximity. However, annotations still often cluttered the screen.
When POIs are not nearby, icons could be used to advertise the range of at-
tractions. Although our participants claimed that images aid recognition, most
believed them to be superﬂuous. Since distance information was embedded in
the browser, users also used these details to locate the POIs. As bearing readings
are prone to magnetic interference, this data could prove helpful to disorientated
tourists.

The transition gesture proved very popular, with it enabling quick movement
between the map and browser. This suggests that users appreciate using both
tools to locate attractions. While AR technology is exciting, it should only be
used where it adds value. If users visualise distant POIs better on a map, us-
ability is impaired if this choice is obstructed. With screen real estate limited on
smartphones, AR designers should further explore the role of gestures.

Participants considered the route planner to be their favourite feature. This
could be due to apps generally possessing AR or routing algorithms, but not
both. Although ARNav ([1]) has these features, its inconsistent interface might
deter tourists. In contrast, our usability is reﬁned through an iterative user-
centred process. Despite its popularity, the route planner was not used to its full
potential. Advanced settings, such as deﬁning duration at each POI, were not
conﬁgured by any participant. This might be because such features were hidden
in submenus to reduce visual cluttering. Users had diﬃculty using the planner
before the app demonstration, suggesting its usability could be enhanced. While
we subscribe to Android design principles [7], we could ensure our interface
reﬂects familiar apps such as Google Maps.

5.4 User-Centred Challenges

While we believe user-centred design oﬀers many advantages, we would like to
highlight our encountered challenges. Users often requested the perfect system:
one that is functional, performant, usable and attractive. Although it was opaque
to our participants, trade-oﬀs were often required at the design level. Requests
were also made which were contradictory, particularly if they originate from
diﬀerent users. While one participant wanted larger annotations due to poor
eyesight, another preferred smaller symbols. In these situations we went with
the majority view, unless it would have crippled usability.

Design is highly subjective and diﬀerent individuals have diﬀerent prefer-
ences. As non-technical users might know little about UI guidelines, there can
be a temptation to design by committee. Although most of our participants ap-
preciated the textual annotations, some preferred images. We were required to
make an executive decision, as a composite approach would have cluttered the

18

Williams, Yao & Nurse

screen. Developing an app without best practice could result in a Frankenstein-
esque hybrid of subjective suggestions.

The composition of one’s sample should also be considered. Even if demo-
graphics correspond to those of the target audience, the opinion of one group
might diﬀer to that of another. This was our rationale for inviting 10 additional
users for our ﬁnal evaluation. Aside from design challenges, there were practi-
cal issues in frequent consultation. Each round of development was signiﬁcantly
delayed by soliciting feedback, as has been expressed in other works [4]. While
our prototyping stages each took a week to complete, the software development
comprised less than half of this time. Participants might also lose interest and
withdraw from the process. We encountered initial challenges in recruiting users
but were fortunate they did not require replacement.

Despite these challenges, we do endorse user-centred design. Through eliciting
feedback throughout the process, we produced an app fulﬁlling our participant’s
requirements. With the system informed by tourists and evaluated through a
live scenario, we believe it would be appreciated by the broader public.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In our contribution, we developed an AR tourism app through user-centred de-
sign (UCD). Rather than deﬁning our own speciﬁcation, the requirements were
informed by ordinary users. This was achieved through a synthesis of domain
analysis, tourist observations and semi-structured interviews. In this manner,
best practice supplemented the suggestions of our users. We proceeded to con-
struct our novel app through an iterative process of prototyping. Each com-
ponent was tested in succession, with participant opinions fed back into the
design. After completing the app, we evaluated it through a live scenario with
20 participants. Through performing real tourist exercises, our users found the
application to be both usable and useful. We ﬁnally reﬂected on the challenges
of our user-centred methodology.

Despite our novel contributions, we accept several limitations to our work.
Firstly, while our sample is not insigniﬁcant, we would have beneﬁted from
more participants. Future work will extend this approach with a larger group of
tourists. Secondly, whereas our participants valued the app, their opinions were
not made relative to other systems. We would like to compare our tool to popular
alternatives, conducting qualitative analyses of usability and performance.

After considering our user feedback, we developed several suggestions for fur-
ther work. Our participants praised the gesture which transitioned from browser
to the map. Future studies could explore the role of gestures in AR and whether
they can simplify cluttered interfaces. With the overhead map preferred for dis-
tant POIs, AR should attempt to enhance the experience. This could achieved
through 3D isometric projection, with the view updated based on smartphone
sensors. Another feature that may be worth experimenting with is improving
the situational awareness presented in the tool. There has been research in this

Augmented Reality Tourism Apps through User-Centred Design

19

area (e.g., [12,10]) which may be incorporated, to provide the user with a more
immersive experience.

References

1. ARNav (2017), http://arnav.eu/
2. Wikitude (2017), https://www.wikitude.com/
3. Abowd, G.D., Atkeson, C.G., Hong, J., Long, S., Kooper, R., Pinkerton, M.: Cy-
berguide: A mobile context-aware tour guide. Wireless Networks 3(5), 421–433
(1997)

4. Abras, C., Maloney-Krichmar, D., Preece, J.: User-centered design. In: Encyclope-

dia of Human-Computer Interaction, pp. 445–456. Sage Publications (2004)

5. Allison,

P.R.:

get

to
Augmented-reality-business-applications-start-to-get-real

real

Augmented
(2015),

reality
start
http://www.computerweekly.com/feature/

applications

business

6. Fr¨ohlich, P., Simon, R., Baillie, L., Anegg, H.: Comparing conceptual designs for
mobile access to geo-spatial information. In: Proceedings of the 8th Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services. pp. 109–112
(2006)

7. Google: Android design principles (2017), https://developer.android.com/

design/get-started/principles.html

8. Grubert, J., Langlotz, T., Grasset, R.: Augmented reality browser survey. Tech.

rep., University of Technology Graz (2011)

9. Han, D.I.D., Weber, J., Bastiaansen, M., Mitas, O., Lub, X.: Virtual and aug-
mented reality technologies to enhance the visitor experience in cultural tourism.
In: Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality, pp. 113–128. Springer (2019)

10. Javornik, A., Kostopoulou, E., Rogers, Y., Fatah gen Schieck, A., Koutsolampros,
P., Maria Moutinho, A., Julier, S.: An experimental study on the role of augmented
reality content type in an outdoor site exploration. Behaviour & Information Tech-
nology 38(1), 9–27 (2019)

11. Julier, S., Lanzagorta, M., Baillot, Y., Rosenblum, L., Feiner, S., H¨ollerer, T.,
Sestito, S.: Information ﬁltering for mobile augmented reality. In: Proceedings of
the 2000 International Symposium on Augmented Reality. pp. 3–11 (2000)

12. Kingston, C., Nurse, J.R.C., Agraﬁotis, I., Milich, A.B.: Using semantic clustering
to support situation awareness on twitter: the case of world views. Human-centric
Computing and Information Sciences 8(1), 22 (2018)

13. Kounavis, C.D., Kasimati, A.E., Zamani, E.D.: Enhancing the tourism experience
through mobile augmented reality: Challenges and prospects. International Journal
of Engineering Business Management 4, 10–16 (2012)

14. Kraak, M.J., Ormeling, F.: Cartography: Visualization of Spatial Data. Guildford

Press (2011)

15. Nielsen, J.: Usability engineering. Elsevier (1994)
16. Olsson, T., Salo, M.: Online user survey on current mobile augmented reality ap-
plications. In: Proceedings of the 10th IEEE International Symposium on Mixed
and Augmented Reality. pp. 75–84 (2011)

17. Park, K.B., Lee, J.Y.: New design and comparative analysis of smartwatch
metaphor-based hand gestures for 3d navigation in mobile virtual reality. Mul-
timedia Tools and Applications 78(5), 6211–6231 (2019)

20

Williams, Yao & Nurse

18. Ramos, F., Trilles, S., Torres-Sospedra, J., Perales, F.J.: New trends in using aug-
mented reality apps for smart city contexts. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-
Information 7(12), 478 (2018)

19. Roda, N.: User

centered design process

(2014), http://nikkiroda.com/

user-centered-design-process/, accessed on: 9 Jan 2020

20. Schinke, T., Henze, N., Boll, S.: Visualization of oﬀ-screen objects in mobile aug-
mented reality. In: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Human
Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services. pp. 313–316 (2010)
21. Schneiderman, B., Plaisant, C.: Designing the user interface: Strategies for eﬀective

human-computer interaction. Pearson (2009)

22. Spradley, J.P.: Participant observation. Waveland Press (2016)
23. Tokusho, Y., Feiner, S.: Prototyping an outdoor mobile augmented reality street
view application. In: Proceedings of ISMAR Workshop on Outdoor Mixed and
Augmented Reality (2009)

24. Vredenburg, K., Mao, J.Y., Smith, P.W., Carey, T.: A survey of user-centered
design practice. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. pp. 471–478 (2002)

25. Williams, M., Nurse, J.R.C., Creese, S.: (Smart) Watch Out! encouraging privacy-
protective behavior through interactive games. International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies 132, 121–137 (2019)

26. Williams, M., Nurse, J.R.C., Creese, S.: Smartwatch games: Encouraging privacy-
protective behaviour in a longitudinal study. Computers in Human Behavior 99,
38–54 (2019)

27. Yovcheva, Z.: User-centred design of smartphone augmented reality in urban

tourism context. PhD Thesis, Bournemouth University (2015)

28. Yung, R., Khoo-Lattimore, C.: New realities: a systematic literature review on
virtual reality and augmented reality in tourism research. Current Issues in Tourism
22(17), 2056–2081 (2019)

29. Zhou, F., Duh, H.B.L., Billinghurst, M.: Trends in augmented reality tracking,
interaction and display: A review of ten years of ISMAR. In: Proceedings of the 7th
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality. pp. 193–202 (2008)

30. Zowghi, D., Coulin, C.: Requirements elicitation: A survey of techniques, ap-
proaches, and tools. In: Engineering and Managing Software Requirements, pp.
19–46. Springer-Verlag (2005)

