Patient Speciﬁc Biomechanics Are Clinically Signiﬁcant In Accurate Computer Aided
Surgical Image Guidance

Michael Barrow1, Alice Chao1, Qizhi He1, Sonia Ramamoorthy2, Claude Sirlin2 and Ryan Kastner1
1 University of California San Diego 2 University of California San Diego School of Medicine
mbarrow@eng.ucsd.edu, awchao@ucsd.edu, q9he@ucsd.edu, sramamoorthy@ucsd.edu, csirlin@ucsd.edu, kastner@ucsd.edu

0
2
0
2

n
a
J

9
2

]

V

I
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
7
1
7
0
1
.
1
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Augmented Reality is used in Image Guided surgery
(AR IG) to fuse surgical landmarks from preoperative images
into a video overlay. Physical simulation is essential to main-
taining accurate position of the landmarks as surgery progresses
and ensuring patient safety by avoiding accidental damage to
vessels etc. In liver procedures, AR IG simulation accuracy is
hampered by an inability to model stiffness variations unique to
the patients disease. We introduce a novel method to account for
patient speciﬁc stiffness variation based on Magnetic Resonance
Elastography (MRE) data. To the best of our knowledge we are
the ﬁrst to demonstrate the use of in-vivo biomechanical data for
AR IG landmark placement. In this early work, a comparative
evaluation of our MRE data driven simulation and the traditional
method shows clinically signiﬁcant differences in accuracy during
landmark placement and motivates further animal model trials.
Index Terms—Image Guided Surgery, Magnetic Resonance

Elastography, Physical Simulation, Augmented Reality

I. INTRODUCTION

Primary liver cancer has the fastest growth of incidence
and the second highest mortality of all cancers in the United
States [1]. It is estimated that over one million people will
die from liver cancer in 2030 [2]. A partial hepatectomy
is a common treatment
to remove cancerous primary and
metastatic lesions where the diseased parts of the liver are
excised. A crucial part of the operation is understanding where
the tumors, vessels, and other important structures/landmarks
are located. To aid in this, the patient typically undergoes
preoperative cross-sectional
imaging (e.g., CT/MRI scans).
Surgeons use these images to determine resectability based
upon the location of important structures (e.g., portal pedicles
and hepatic veins), analyze tumor margins, accurately compute
future liver remnant volumes, and generally aid in surgical
planning and navigation. However, it can be challenging to
register preoperative cross-sectional images to the surface of
the liver at the time of operation since surgical actions cause
signiﬁcant and sometimes permanent liver deformations that
lead to mismatches with cross-sectional images [3]. Further-
more, the liver can be mobilized further distorting anatomic
relationships and liver shape. Mentally integrating preoperative
data into the operative ﬁeld is time consuming and error prone
[4]. This can make it difﬁcult to accurately localize smaller
tumors intra-operatively, which can affect surgical decision
making and adequate resection of primary and metastatic liver
tumors.

Computer-assisted image guidance aids surgeons by enhanc-
ing surgical video feed with added guidance landmarks. In
liver procedures, the goal is to assist the surgeon with error
prone manual image mappings. Augmented Reality (AR) Im-
age Guidance (IG) is a mapping method that fuses preoperative

scans with intraoperative images to provide more detailed in-
formation about the surgical site. Typically AR IG merges the
preoperative CT/MRI data directly into the surgeons view [5].
Accurate real-time image guidance is a valuable surgical tool
that
leads to more precise surgical procedures. The state
of the art in computer assisted image guidance for hepatic
surgery does not use patient speciﬁc biomechanical models
to position surgical landmarks in AR image guidance [6]–[9].
We propose a data driven approach that uses patient speciﬁc
liver mechanics to estimate the landmark positions. Magnetic
Resonance Elastography (MRE) provides an accurate method
to measure tissue mechanical properties [10]–[15]. Moreover,
it is non-invasive, and it can be acquired in conjunction with
MRI images which are commonly used in conventional image
guided liver operations. We believe that we are the ﬁrst to
propose the use of these measurements for image guided
hepatic surgery.

Our initial studies described in this manuscript indicate
that modeling using MRE based physical simulation versus
modeling with a constant value “atlas” (i.e., current state
of the art) results in clinically signiﬁcant differences in IG
accuracy. Overall, while demonstrating the improvement in
AR IG accuracy with our approach, we make the following
three contributions:

is demonstrated. Using the MRI

Firstly; The need for patient speciﬁc biomechanics is
demonstrated. We analyzed the MRE data from a cohort
of 120 patient scans and found liver stiffness commonly
assumed in AR IG is unrealistic.
signiﬁcant AR IG accuracy
Secondly; Clinically
improvement
and
MRE data of our cohort, we simulated liver
retraction
procedures. The simulations show that MRE based image
guidance more accurately models the patient’s liver response
to a surgical tool interaction when compared to conventional
techniques.
Thirdly; Our method is validated using convergence of
our simulation with theory. We construct a liver phantom
model using parameters from characterized silicone. We
the
compare the theoretical Euler-Bernoulli
phantom under a retraction load to the response of our MRE
method. The convergence study found our method to be sound.

response of

Taken together these three studies motivate, test and demon-
strate the hypothesis that patient speciﬁc biomechanics from
MRE can improve AR IG in liver procedures.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Block diagram of an AR IG pipeline. For each video frame; Firstly, the 2D laparoscope video is converted to 3D.
Secondly, registration maps the visible portion of liver to a complete 3D surface model. Thirdly, changes on the 3D surface
are propagated inside the liver using a physical simulation. Finally, updated guidance landmark positions are displayed on a
modiﬁed laparoscope video feed. This work focuses on accurate physical simulation (gray area) which is key to accurate IG.

II. METHODS

We performed three experiments to better understand the
effect of MRE based physical simulation on augmented reality
image guidance accuracy. Firstly, we use MRE scans of a
patient cohort to check if traditional AR IG stiffness assump-
tions are reasonable. Secondly, we study how our method can
improve accuracy by comparing AR IG landmark placement
between MRE based and traditional IG simulations. Thirdly,
we use established theory to validate our simulation method
with a convergence study.

A. Study of Variations in Patient Liver Stiffness

There is little literature on the variation and distribution
of liver stiffness because of the difﬁculty of measuring it in
vivo. We use a statistical study of liver stiffness measured
using MRE to determine if variations of stiffness in a sample
population motivate using MRE data for patient speciﬁc image
guidance. It would be interesting to use MRE data in AR IG
if a signiﬁcant portion of the cohort shows a large difference
in liver stiffness from a atlas value of 2.1kPa commonly used
in AR IG guidance simulation [16].

We used 120 2D MRE scans acquired between March
2012 and December 2013 under a Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act (HIPAA)-compliant study. Our cohort
sample population was adults (>18 years of age) who were
severely obese (body mass index [BMI] >35kg/m2) and

Fig. 2. Major steps of our liver stiffness case study. Using
our tool (enclosed in gray); Firstly, liver was segmented from
the cohort abdominal MRI. Secondly, liver was segmented
from MRE using a MRI voxel mapping. Thirdly, the Young’s
modulus of the liver was calculated.

were being evaluated for weight loss surgery. The exclusion
criteria were contraindications to MRI or history of known
liver disease besides potential nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
MRE were acquired using a GE Medical Systems Discov-
ery™MR750 system at 3.0T ﬁeld strength. Voxel resolution
was 1.64×1.64mm, slice thickness was 10mm and space
slicing was 10mm. 44ml MultiHance contrast bolus agent was
administered to patients by IV route.

We created a tool to segment the liver portion of 2D MRE
DICOM ﬁles and extract liver stiffness. Major steps of the
MRE analysis process are shown in ﬁg. 2. The tool allowed
a imaging expert to deﬁne a ROI polygon of the liver on top
of the MRI sequence used to create MRE elastograms. Once
the expert had deﬁned a ROI polygon, our tool mapped the
polygon to a corresponding MRE.

After the cohort MRE segmentation, we masked away stiff-
ness voxels outside of the liver ROI using a binary inclusion
test. Next the mean shear modulus is computed on the masked
MRE. Then, shear modulus is converted to a Young’s modulus.
Finally we create a histogram of liver stiffness from the
segmented cohort data set.

B. Study of MRE Signiﬁcance in Image Guidance

Accidental damage to vessels in the liver can complicate
surgery. Our MRE based AR IG method could improve patient
safety if clinically signiﬁcant difference exists between blood
vessel landmark positions using our method and a traditional
approach. We studied the difference of blood vessel landmark
placement in a liver retraction procedure, a common step in
liver surgery.

Fig. 3. Block diagram of liver retraction used to evaluate
clinical signiﬁcance of our novel MRE data driven AR IG
approach. To the best of our knowledge, our physical model
is unique in integrating in-vivo measurements of stiffness. Our
simulation procedure was applied to 113 of our 120 cohort
using their MRE data. Firstly in the ofﬂine steps; A liver
physics model was created from MRI and MRE scans (gray
region). Secondly a hoisting load was computed using the
physics model (green region). Next the retraction is simulated
in an online stage and IG landmarks are positioned. Finally our
blood vessel positions are compared for clinically signiﬁcant
difference with traditional AR IG in a post processing analysis.

Fig. 3 shows how we adapted the SOFA AR IG framework
to implement our MRE method. We compared retraction stud-
ies of our cohort simulated using our method to simulations
using a traditional AR IG approach.

MRE Data Driven Physical Simulation: Our patient speciﬁc
AR IG method uses a mesh free physical simulation. Mesh free
approaches are suited to AR IG because they do not require

re-meshing after topology changes (such as cutting) that occur
during a resection and have been previously implemented in
SOFA [17]. Our MRE simulation uses the following canonical
semi-discrete formulation:

M¨q − fint(q, ˙q) = fext(q, ˙q)

(1)

where q is the nodal displacement vector, ˙q is the nodal
velocity vector, ¨q is the nodal acceleration vector, M is the
mass matrix, fint is the internal force vector, and fext is the
external force vector.

We choose a computationally efﬁcient discretization of this
system by adopting the Implicit Euler method [18] which
will create a system of linear equations. This is because our
cohort MRE data encodes linear mechanics and because linear
approximations are used to achieve video rate performance in
AR IG. The system of equations is fed into the Conjugate
Gradient (CG) descent method that will ultimately solve for
δ ˙q for each time step. The implicit Euler method is adopted
as follows:

(M − hC − h2K)δ ˙q = h(fext + hK ˙q)

(2)

where h is the time step (this is in milliseconds for our
study), K is the Jacobian of ﬁrst order derivatives of fint with
respect to ˙q (also known as the stiffness matrix), and C is
the Jacobian of ﬁrst order derivatives of fint with respect to
q (also known as the damping matrix). Note that K, C and
M may be precomputed ofﬂine and that this corresponds to
“building the simulator model” from processed preoperative
MRI and MRE in ﬁg. 3.

The next step of ﬁg. 3, Physical Simulation, is online. Equa-

tion (2) is solved numerically via the following mappings:

A = (M − hC − h2K)

b = h(fext + hK ˙q)

x = δ ˙q

(3)

(4)

(5)

Such that Ax = b, where x contains the vector encoding of
surgical landmark positions to resolve for the current time step.
Once δ ˙q is solved for each node in the system, calculating the
change in global position, δq, is simply done by integration.
Our MRE method can improve AR IG accuracy with no
computational overhead since it can be shown that online
computation method of δ ˙q is the bottleneck. First, there is
an initial guess: x0

rn = b − Axn

αn =

rT
n rn
pT
n Apn

xn+1 = xn + αnpn

0 ≤ n ≤ N, n ∈ Z

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(When n = 0, p0 is initially set to r0)
The steps above illustrate a portion of one iteration of the
conjugate gradient descent method, with each subsequent xn

representing a closer approximation of x. The linear solver
continues to iterate until the loop is terminated upon reaching
preset error bounds (in the example given, this happens when
n = N which is 200 in our study). Since MRE data is used
to construct A it does not exacerbate the CG bottleneck.

MRE Liver Physics Model: We create a SOFA [19] Physics
Model “node” that can be integrated into any SOFA AR
IG system. The node is composed of a stiffness matrix (K)
created from MRE data, geometry created from MRI data, a
mass matrix (M) computed using MRE and MRI data and a
displacement vector q that is initialized from MRI data and
updated by the physical simulation during AR IG.

Patient liver models are built using the procedure depicted
in ﬁg. 3 (gray region). Firstly liver data from our cohort MRI
and MRE scans is segmented using the tool described in ﬁg. 2.
Next surface geometry is created from MRI data using a
modiﬁed Delaunay triangulation [20]. Liver biomechanics are
then extracted from MRE data. We ﬁrst convert voxel intensity
to elastic modulus, then sub-sample this for real time AR IG
using a 3D Voronoi decomposition of the volume to choose
DOFs. After M is computed, K,M, and q are assembled into
the SOFA node.

Clinical Signiﬁcance Study Methodology: Fig. 3 shows the
major steps of a retraction experiment using our MRE AR
IG method. We compare blood vessel positions from our
method with a traditional AR IG method. Our focus is on
clinical signiﬁcance of our landmark placement method and
our experimental pipeline differs from the canonical AR IG
pipeline in ﬁg. 1. We emulate AR steps prior to physical
simulation (ﬁg. 3 green region) because accurate real time
implementations of all major AR steps remain open research
problems. Laparoscopic video input is noisy and many ac-
curacy trade offs are made in the 3D reconstruction and
registration steps that would make analysis of our Physical
simulation method difﬁcult. Liver retraction (hoisting) video
input is therefore emulated using a virtual implementation of
the 10mm diameter Nathanson retractor shown hoisting the
liver in ﬁg. 3.

The traditional AR IG approach is an implementation of
Plantafeve’s state of the art model [6] that uses a traditional
“atlas” reference stiffness from Lee’s study [16]. Traditional
AR IG can be directly compared with our data driven simula-
tions by using the same emulated retraction input as our MRE
method.

Liver retractions were simulated using the same cohort
described in section II-A. We assumed the hoisting force was
equal to the gravitational force of the liver and was coplanar
on the transverse plane, with the Nathanson retractor force
applied to the lower inferior right lobe. We further assume a
linear elastic resistance from the abdomen and that friction is
negligible. We rejected 17 of our cohort scans where it was
not possible to simulate a retraction because of bad geometry,
leaving 103 cases of vessel placement compared.

C. Validation of Our Image Guidance Approach

It

is extremely challenging to validate AR IG physical
simulation in vivo. Difﬁculties center on the problem of
obtaining a ”ground truth” of the initial and steady state of
the surgical scene owing to a lack of accurate procedurally
approved measuring tools. However there a host of other
complications including the ethical questions of destructive
material characterizations on live subjects, unknown contact
coefﬁcients, and unknown boundary conditions.

Physics Simulator Theoretical Convergence Study: Standard
AR IG validation approach is to measure simulation regis-
tration error with a phantom (tissue proxy) or a theoretical
model [21], [22]. Because MRE validation has been reported
using theoretical models [23] we choose a theoretical vali-
dation. We simulate a cantilever beam under distributed load
and check for convergence of our simulation method with an
established theoretical model of the system and our mesh free
model.

Fig. 4. Steps in our IG landmark placement accuracy study.
Our landmark placement physical simulation method is com-
pared with a traditional baseline and a theoretical model.
Because simulations that converge to the theoretical model
are accurate, beam deﬂection error can be used to validate our
MRE based landmark positioning. Comparing our error with
error of the traditional method benchmarks our performance
against state of the art.

In addition to testing our simulation method, we use a con-
ventional Finite Element Analysis (FEA) simulation method to
model beam deﬂection as a convergence baseline. This helps
better understand the accuracy and speed trade off of our real
time mesh free model.

Major steps of our validation study are shown in ﬁg. 4.
Our simulation method and the traditional method are imple-
mented using the SOFA framework. The theoretical model is a
closed form Euler-Bernoulli model and beam deﬂection can be
computed directly. All three beams model a silicone phantom
since the phantom stiffness can be reasonably linearized for
a validation model [24], our MRE scans have linear elastic
modulus and beam models have been used for SOFA mesh free
validation in the literature [17]. We choose a high resolution
FEA method with 1.64mm3 element geometry as the baseline.

We use a shape function to compare our mesh free beam to
the theoretical beam as they have different coordinate systems.
The mapping result can be seen in the “Phantom Physics
Model (Our Method)” of ﬁg. 4. The green line is the Voronoi to
Euler-Bernoulli coordinate mapping. We then use registration
distance to compute the convergence error as is common in
the literature [21], [22]. Details of the shape function can
be found in [17]. The procedure for the FEA baseline is
similar except FEA DOFs coincident with the green line of the
“Phantom Physics Model (Traditional Method)” in ﬁg. 4 can
be directly compared with the theoretical model. The Euler-
Bernoulli beam equation reads:

Our study of variations in patient liver stiffness in sec-
tion II-A motivated using MRE data in AR IG since tradi-
tional assumptions about liver stiffness were found unreason-
able. Fig. 5 is the histogram of cohort liver stiffness gener-
ated by running the liver MRE analysis procedure illustrated
by ﬁg. 2. Of the 120 liver scans analyzed, 30% were over
1kPa stiffer than the “atlas” value of 2.1kPa used in the
state of the art [16]. Furthermore, 20% were more than twice
as stiff. Because of the large stiffness variation and since
liver stiffness typically increases as disease progresses [25],
[26], we demonstrated that it is interesting to consider MRE
stiffness data in AR IG for liver procedures.

B. MRE Signiﬁcance in Image Guidance Accuracy

Our study of MRE signiﬁcance in image guidance in sec-
tion II-B demonstrated that using MRE patient data in physical
simulation could provide more accurate AR IG than traditional
methods. We studied blood vessel landmark placement of our
method (illustrated in ﬁg. 3) and compared it to a traditional
AR IG method [6] in 103 cases. 5mm landmark placement
difference was considered clinically signiﬁcant [5].

w(x) =

floadx2(6L2 − 4Lx + x2)
24EI

(10)

where w(x) is displacement of the central beam axis in the
load direction, E is Young’s modulus, L is the long edge and
I is the second moment of beam cross sectional area.

Simulation Validation Conﬁguration: For validation sim-
ulation geometry, a hyperrectangle beam with idealized ax-
isymmetric AAA geometry was discretized with dimensions
l=50mm, w=10mm, h=10mm. E was the 12kPa Young’s
modulus of a well characterized 10% silicone phantom from
Clear Ballistics LLC. We set loading and convergence criteria
following Plantefeve’s patient speciﬁc modeling approach for
liver vessel tracking [6].

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Overall

the results of our studies in section II showed
that our MRE AR IG method was more accurate than the
traditional approach. Although we focused on introducing a
novel physical simulation and liver modeling approach in this
manuscript, our method plugs in to the existing SOFA AR IG
framework and runs at video frame rate.

A. Variations in Patient Liver Stiffness

(i)

(ii)

Fig. 6. Box plot showing liver IG difference of our method
vs the traditional from our 103 patient case study. Fig. 6i
shows most cases agree to within one MRI voxel (magenta
line) except near surgical tools. Fig. 6ii shows IG error is
often clinically signiﬁcant (orange) near surgical tools where
accuracy is most critical.

Fig. 6i plots the mean displacement difference throughout
the whole volume of liver for each pair of retractions com-
pared. Averaging over the whole liver, the two methods agree
to within a 1.64mm MRI voxel (magenta line). Fig. 6ii plots
the displacement difference at the retractor. There is clinically
signiﬁcant difference in accuracy (orange line) between our
method and the traditional at the tool for 50% of cases.

Fig. 5. Histogram of mean liver stiffness. A large fraction of
the MRE scans are signiﬁcantly stiffer than a 2.1kPa atlas
value which motivates using MRE for AR simulation.

(a) Mean strain δ with error zoom

(b) +1 standard deviation strain δ with error zoom

(c) +2 standard deviation strain δ

(d) strain δ outlier

Fig. 7. Simulations showing effects of incorrect stiffness on guidance. The MRE and atlas retraction simulations are blue and
red channels in each image, respectively. Differences in image color indicate where features are misplaced. The green grid
shows the scale of error. Mean strain δ has vessel misplacement concentrated around the retractor load. As strain δ increases,
vessel misplacement also increasingly spreads throughout the liver.

Fig. 7 shows the clinical implications of ﬁg. 6 by illustrating
retraction comparisons for standard deviations of ﬁg. 6ii.
Where the two simulation methods agree the images appear
purple. Where they disagree, the image appears more blue or
red. It is clear from the contrast enhanced vessels in ﬁg. 7 that
the difference of landmark placement in the traditional simu-
lation method would impact a surgeon’s ability to effectively
use AR IG for vessel avoidance.

C. Validation of Our Image Guidance Approach

A Physics Simulator Theoretical Convergence Study in sec-
tion II-C validated the accuracy of our mesh free AR IG
landmark placement method by checking its convergence with
Euler-Bernoulli beam theory. In addition, a traditional AR IG
physical simulation had comparable theoretical convergence
as compared to our method.

Fig. 4 illustrates the validation procedure and ﬁg. 8 shows
the convergence error for the retraction experiments run on
our cohort (section II-B). Both our method and the traditional
method converge to within 1% of the 1.64mm MRI resolution.

Fig. 8. Convergence evaluation of Mesh Free (ours) and FEA
simulation convergence with theory for our retraction study
(ﬁg. 3). Both our method and traditional FEA simulations
agree with theory to within 1% of the 1.64mm MRI resolution
although FEA is more accurate. Our simulator accuracy is
acceptable since AR IG landmarks are at minimum 1 voxel.

This convergence is sufﬁcient to accurately model the position-
ing of a 1 voxel IG landmark in a liver retraction. Although

[13] T. K. Yasar, M. Wagner, O. Bane, C. Besa, J. S. Babb, S. Kannengiesser,
M. Fung, R. L. Ehman, and B. Taouli, “Interplatform reproducibility of
liver and spleen stiffness measured with MR elastography,” Journal of
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 1064–1072, 2016.
[14] C. D. Hines, T. A. Bley, M. J. Lindstrom, and S. B. Reeder, “Repeata-
bility of magnetic resonance elastography for quantiﬁcation of hepatic
stiffness,” Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging: An Ofﬁcial Journal
of
the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine,
vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 725–731, 2010.

[15] S. K. Venkatesh, G. Wang, L. L. Teo, and B. W. Ang, “Magnetic
resonance elastography of liver in healthy asians: normal liver stiffness
quantiﬁcation and reproducibility assessment,” Journal of Magnetic
Resonance Imaging, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2014.

[16] D. H. Lee, J. M. Lee, J. K. Han, and B. I. Choi, “MR elastography
of healthy liver parenchyma: Normal value and reliability of the liver
stiffness value measurement,” Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging,
vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 1215–1223, 2013.

[17] F. Faure, B. Gilles, G. Bousquet, and D. K. Pai, “Sparse meshless models
of complex deformable solids,” in ACM transactions on graphics (TOG),
vol. 30, no. 4. ACM, 2011, p. 73.

[18] D. Baraff and A. Witkin, “Large steps in cloth simulation,” in Proceed-
ings of the 25th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques. ACM, 1998, pp. 43–54.

[19] J. Allard, S. Cotin, F. Faure, P.-J. Bensoussan, F. Poyer, C. Duriez,
H. Delingette, and L. Grisoni, “Sofa-an open source framework for
medical simulation,” in MMVR 15-Medicine Meets Virtual Reality, vol.
125.

IOP Press, 2007, pp. 13–18.

[20] D. Engwirda, “Locally optimal delaunay-reﬁnement and optimisation-

based mesh generation,” 2014.

[21] N. Haouchine, J. Dequidt, I. Peterlik, E. Kerrien, M.-O. Berger, and
S. Cotin, “Image-guided simulation of heterogeneous tissue deformation
for augmented reality during hepatic surgery,” in 2013 IEEE interna-
tional symposium on mixed and augmented reality (ISMAR).
IEEE,
2013, pp. 199–208.

[22] N. Haouchine, J. Dequidt, I. Peterlik, E. Kerrien, M. Berger, and
S. Cotin, “Towards an accurate tracking of liver tumors for augmented
reality in robotic assisted surgery,” in International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2014.

[23] L. Hollis, N. Conlisk, L. Thomas-Seale, N. Roberts, P. Pankaj, and
P. Hoskins, “Computational simulations of mr elastography in idealised
abdominal aortic aneurysms,” Biomedical Physics & Engineering Ex-
press, vol. 2, no. 4, p. 045016, 2016.

[24] L. Liu, Z. Jia, X. Ma, and Y. Fan, “Analytical and experimental studies
on the strain rate effects in penetration of 10wt% ballistic gelatin,” in
Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 451, no. 1.
IOP Publishing,
2013, p. 012035.

[25] M. Yoneda, H. Mawatari, K. Fujita, H. Endo, H. Iida, Y. Nozaki,
K. Yonemitsu, T. Higurashi, H. Takahashi, N. Kobayashi et al., “Non-
invasive assessment of liver ﬁbrosis by measurement of stiffness in
patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (naﬂd),” Digestive and
Liver Disease, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 371–378, 2008.

[26] S. Mueller and L. Sandrin, “Liver stiffness: a novel parameter for the
diagnosis of liver disease,” Hepatic medicine: evidence and research,
vol. 2, p. 49, 2010.

the traditional FEA physics simulation method more closely
approximates Euler-Bernoulli theory, our method can be far
more accurate in practice by using MRE data to account for
patient speciﬁc biomechanics as shown in section III-B.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We demonstrated a novel method of surgical

landmark
placement for augmented reality image guidance in liver
surgery. Our method is the ﬁrst
to apply patient speciﬁc
biomechanics from magnetic resonance elastography to the
problem of accurately intraoperatively tracking surgical land-
marks within the liver using a physical simulation.

We used three studies to motivate, test, and validate our
image guidance approach. Our results indicate our simulation
method could improve image guidance accuracy by clinically
signiﬁcant margins. Although we focus on introducing the
use of patient elastogram scans to enhance surgical landmark
placement, our method is plug in compatible with the SOFA
framework which has been successfully applied to augmented
reality image guidance in liver procedures. In conclusion, our
promising preliminary results motivate animal model trials
where our landmark placement method may be integrated into
a SOFA based AR IG system.

REFERENCES

[1] R. L. Siegel, K. D. Miller, and A. Jemal, “Cancer statistics, 2019,” CA:

a cancer journal for clinicians, vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 7–34, 2019.

[2] World Health Organization. Projections of mortality and causes
[Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/

of death, 2016 to 2060.
healthinfo/global burden disease/projections/en/

[3] O. Heizmann, S. Zidowitz, H. Bourquain, S. Potthast, H.-O. Peitgen,
D. Oertli, and C. Kettelhack, “Assessment of intraoperative liver de-
formation during hepatic resection: prospective clinical study,” World
journal of surgery, vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 1887–1893, 2010.

[4] C. Hansen, J. Wieferich, F. Ritter, C. Rieder, and H.-O. Peitgen,
“Illustrative visualization of 3d planning models for augmented reality
in liver surgery,” International journal of computer assisted radiology
and surgery, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 133–141, 2010.

[5] S. Bernhardt, S. A. Nicolau, L. Soler, and C. Doignon, “The status of
augmented reality in laparoscopic surgery as of 2016,” Medical image
analysis, vol. 37, pp. 66–90, 2017.

[6] R. Plantefeve, I. Peterlik, N. Haouchine, and S. Cotin, “Patient-speciﬁc
biomechanical modeling for guidance during minimally-invasive hepatic
surgery,” Annals of biomedical engineering, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 139–153,
2016.

[7] N. Haouchine, S. Cotin, I. Peterlik, J. Dequidt, M. S. Lopez, E. Kerrien,
and M.-O. Berger, “Impact of soft tissue heterogeneity on augmented re-
ality for liver surgery,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization & Computer
Graphics, no. 1, pp. 1–1, 2015.

[8] L. Soler and J. Marescaux, “Patient-speciﬁc surgical simulation,” World

journal of surgery, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 208–212, 2008.

[9] L. Soler, S. Nicolau, P. Pessaux, D. Mutter, and J. Marescaux, “Real-
time 3d image reconstruction guidance in liver resection surgery,”
Hepatobiliary surgery and nutrition, vol. 3, no. 2, p. 73, 2014.

[10] S. A. Xanthakos, D. J. Podberesky, S. D. Serai, L. Miles, E. C. King,
W. F. Balistreri, and R. Kohli, “Use of magnetic resonance elastography
to assess hepatic ﬁbrosis in children with chronic liver disease,” The
Journal of pediatrics, vol. 164, no. 1, pp. 186–188, 2014.

[11] Y. Shi, Q. Guo, F. Xia, J. Sun, and Y. Gao, “Short-and midterm
repeatability of magnetic resonance elastography in healthy volunteers at
3.0 t,” Magnetic resonance imaging, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 665–670, 2014.
[12] J. Zhang, C. Arena, A. Pednekar, B. Lambert, D. Dees, V. V. Lee,
and R. Muthupillai, “Short-term repeatability of magnetic resonance
elastography at 3.0 t: Effects of motion-encoding gradient direction, slice
position, and meal ingestion,” Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging,
vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 704–712, 2016.

