0
2
0
2

n
u
J

8

]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

3
v
6
0
0
3
0
.
2
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Experimental characterization of a section of a spherically imploding plasma
liner formed by merging hypersonic plasma jets

K. C. Yates,1, 2, a) S. J. Langendorf,1, b) S. C. Hsu,1, c) J. P. Dunn,1 S. Brockington,3, 4 A. Case,3, 4 E. Cruz,3, 4 F.
D. Witherspoon,3, 4 Y. C. F. Thio,4 J. T. Cassibry,5 K. Schillo,5 and M. Gilmore2
1)Physics Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545,
USA
2)Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131,
USA
3)HyperV Technologies Corp., Chantilly, VA 20151, USA
4)HyperJet Fusion Corporation, Chantilly, VA 20151, USA
5)Propulsion Research Center, University of Alabama in Huntsville, Huntsville, AL 35899,
USA

(Dated: 9 June 2020)

We report experimental results on merging of hypersonic plasma jets, which is the fundamental building
block for forming spherically imploding plasma liners as a potential standoﬀ compression driver for magneto-
inertial fusion. Jets are formed and launched by contoured-gap coaxial plasma guns mounted at the six
vertices and the center of a hexagon covering approximately one-tenth of the surface area of a 9-ft.-diameter
spherical chamber. First, from experiments with two and three merging jets of four diﬀerent species (N,
Ar, Kr, Xe), we show that (1) density spatial non-uniformities can be large (with electron-density jumps
ranging from 2.9 for N to 6.6 for Xe) when shocks form upon jet merging, but smaller (density jumps <2)
when shocks do not form; (2) jet impurities (20% Ti in these experiments) can increase the level of density
spatial non-uniformity by increasing the collisionality of jet merging, leading to shock formation rather than
potentially more desirable shockless jet merging; and (3) the liner Mach number can remain high (& 10), as
required for plasma liners to be an eﬀective compression driver. Second, from experiments with six and seven
merging jets using Ar, we present results with improved jet-to-jet mass balance of <2% across jets, including
(1) evidence of substantially increased balance in the jet merging and symmetry of the liner structure, and
(2) potentially favorable changes in the jet-merging morphology with the addition of the seventh jet. For
both experiments, we present comparisons between experimental and synthetic data from three-dimensional
hydrodynamic codes.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Magneto-inertial fusion (MIF), aka magnetized target
fusion (MTF), is a class of pulsed fusion approaches in
which an imploding liner compresses a magnetized target
plasma to fusion conditions,1–4 at ion densities intermedi-
ate between those of magnetic and inertial fusion. Many
MIF embodiments have been pursued over a period span-
ning more than forty years, e.g., the development of ro-
tating cylindrical liquid liners5,6 intended to compress
a ﬁeld-reversed conﬁguration, MAGnitnoye Obzhatiye
(MAGO) or magnetic compression,7 cylindrical solid-
liner compression of an FRC,8,9 acoustically driven
liquid-liner compression of a spherical tokamak,10 and
magnetized liner inertial fusion11,12 (MagLIF, which is
a cylindrical solid-liner compression of a laser-preheated
magnetized plasma). MagLIF provided a deﬁnitive
demonstration of proof-of-concept for MIF by achieving
multi-keV temperatures12 and BR (product of magnetic
ﬁeld times fuel radius) values13 approaching those needed
for fuel self-heating from energy deposition by fusion-

a)kyates@lanl.gov
b)samuel.langendorf@lanl.gov
c)scotthsu@lanl.gov

produced α particles.14 To meet the economic require-
ments of a power plant, it may be necessary for an MIF
embodiment to have high repetition rate (e.g., ∼ 1 Hz)
and low cost per shot (e.g., few cents/shot amortized over
the life of the power plant). This tends to favor liquid
and plasma liners, which avoid the repetitive mass de-
struction associated with solid liners that lead to lower
repetition rate and higher cost per shot.

Since 2009, a multi-institutional collaboration led by
Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) has been ex-
ploring the development of a high-shot-rate, low cost-
per-shot compression driver for MIF based on the con-
cept of plasma-jet-driven MIF, or PJMIF,15–22 in which a
spherically imploding plasma liner is formed via merging
hypersonic plasma jets. The chief advantages of PJMIF
are (1) high implosion speeds (> 50 km/s) to overcome
the rate of energy loss in the magnetized plasma target
and (2) several-meter standoﬀ of the plasma-formation
hardware (plasma guns) to allow for reasonably long pe-
riods between maintenance or replacement in a power
plant. The key disadvantages of PJMIF are the early
stage of development and challenges in forming both the
spherically imploding plasma liner19,23 and a compati-
ble magnetized plasma target.24 Furthermore, merging
plasma jets will seed non-uniformities in the liner that
could lead to intolerable levels of Rayleigh-Taylor insta-

 
 
 
 
 
 
bility and liner/fuel mix when the heavier liner deceler-
ates against the lighter target plasma. The amount of
liner non-uniformity resulting from merging plasma jets
and the amount that can be tolerated for PJMIF to re-
main viable are both open research questions. Plasma
liners may also have limited hydrodynamic eﬃciency in
transferring energy to the target due in part to radial
expansion of the liner during implosion.21

A body of published literature lays out the theoreti-
cal issues and numerical scaling-studies of plasma-liner
formation and implosion via merging hypersonic plasma
jets.15,18–21,23,25–31 Previous research on the LANL
Plasma Liner Experiment (PLX),19,32 using parallel-
plate mini-railguns developed by HyperV Technologies
Corp.,33–36 studied single plasma-jet propagation,37 two-
jet oblique merging,38,39 and two-jet head-on merging.40
These earlier experiments led to the identiﬁcation and
characterization of plasma shock formation between
merging jets that was shown to be consistent with hy-
drodynamic oblique shock theory.38,39 The merging of
head-on plasma jets was shown to lead to slightly higher
electron temperature Te and mean-charge-state ¯Z, tend-
ing to reduce the counter-streaming ion–ion mean free
path and increasing the collisionality of the jet merging.40
The aim of this work is to characterize in detail the
merging of up to seven hypersonic plasma jets launched
by new contoured-gap coaxial guns22,41 developed un-
der the ARPA-E ALPHA program.42 First, we report
results from two- and three-jet merging experiments re-
peated for diﬀerent gas species (N, Ar, Kr, Xe), augment-
ing recent shock-ion-heating studies,43,44 which are based
on some of the same experimental campaigns presented
here. As mentioned earlier, plasma-jet merging gener-
ates non-uniformities upon formation of the imploding
plasma liner, leading to strong, localized ion heating43
and an impulsive increase in the ion sound speed Cs and
decrease in Mach number M . This degrades the liner’s
ability to eﬀectively compress a magnetized fusion tar-
get. This work provides experimental data on the plasma
parameters and new understanding of shock-formation
dynamics and evolution of M during two- and three-jet
merging. Second, we evaluate the symmetry in a section
of the spherically imploding plasma liner that is formed
by merging six and seven hypersonic plasma jets with re-
duced (< 2%) jet-to-jet mass variation across all the jets,
as compared to earlier results with > 20% mass variation
across six jets.41 While merging two and three plasma jets
is the most fundamental building block for forming spher-
ically imploding plasma liners via merging plasma jets,
the merging of six and seven jets covering approximately
one-tenth of the surface area of a sphere is the next step
toward evaluating the macro-structure and morphology
of a section of the plasma liner. The data presented in-
clude time- and space-resolved electron density ne and
Te measurements from interferometry and survey spec-
troscopy, respectively, and end-on images of six- and
seven-jet merging. All of the data presented in this pa-
per are being used to benchmark multi-physics models

2

FIG. 1. The coaxial plasma gun used in these experiments,
with an integrated -5-kV (negative polarity on the inner elec-
trode), 575-µF capacitor bank driving the gun electrodes.
The timing and speed of each plasma jet are measured by
ﬁber-coupled photodiodes with viewing sightlines separated
by 2 cm as shown.

The paper is organized as follows.

and codes45,46 to further evaluate plasma-jet merging,
plasma-liner formation, and the PJMIF concept.15,19,22
Section II de-
scribes the experimental and diagnostic setups for both
the two/three and six/seven jet-merging experiments.
Sections III and IV present results and discussion of
the two/three and six/seven jet-merging experiments, re-
spectively. Section V provides a summary and conclu-
sions. Appendix A includes the N, Kr, and Xe data asso-
ciated with Sec. III, and Appendix B presents details on
the improved jet-to-jet balance associated with Sec. IV.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

A. PLX facility and diagnostics

Many details about PLX, on which the present
experiments were performed, have been presented
elsewhere.22,32,37,41,44 Here, we summarize the particular
details pertinent to this paper. PLX has a 9-ft.-diameter,
stainless-steel spherical vacuum chamber. For this work,
seven coaxial plasma guns are mounted on the chamber
in a hexagonal pattern (with six guns on the vertices and
one in the middle), covering roughly one-tenth of the sur-
face area of the spherical vacuum chamber.

The coaxial plasma guns (Fig. 1) are designed and built
by HyperV Technologies Corp. and described in detail
elsewhere.41 In these experiments, initial plasma-jet den-
sities are ni ∼ 1016 cm−3, Te ≈ 1.5 eV, ¯Z ≈ 1–2, speed
vjet ≈ 50 km/s, and M = vjet/Cs & 10. The banks
driving each set of gun electrodes and all the gas valves
(GV), pre-ionization (PI), and electrode-bank master-
trigger (MT) systems used peak voltages of -4.5, 8.5, 24,
and -28 kV, respectively, with capacitances of 575, 96, 6,
and 6 µF, respectively (note that there is a separate elec-
trode bank for each gun, but all seven guns share the GV,

PI, and MT banks). The GV capacitor bank is triggered
at t = −600 to -300 µs, PI bank triggered at t = −20 µs,
and gun-electrode banks at t = 0.

The diagnostic suite includes a twelve-chord inter-
ferometer, visible survey spectrometer, high-resolution
Doppler spectrometer, photodiode array at each gun noz-
zle to measure jet speed, and a single-frame camera
with an intensiﬁed charge-coupled-device (iCCD) detec-
tor The interferometer uses a 320-mW, 651-nm solid-
state laser in a heterodyne conﬁguration, which is an
upgrade from the previous eight-chord system.47,48 Each
probe beam is approximately 0.3 cm in diameter, which
sets the spatial resolution transverse to each chord. Vis-
ible survey spectroscopy is ﬁelded with 0.160-nm/pixel
resolution at 510 nm and coupled to a PI-MAX2 inten-
siﬁed charged-couple-device (iCCD) camera, with a typ-
ical exposure of 1–2 µs and a ﬁeld-of-view of 1–2 cm in
diameter. High-resolution spectroscopy is ﬁelded using
a 4-m McPherson 2062DP, with 2400-mm-1 grating and
1.52 pm/pixel at 480.6 nm. The 4-m spectrometer is
coupled to a Stanford Computer Optics 4 Quik E iCCD
with typical exposure time of 1 µs and a ﬁeld-of-view
of 1–2 cm in diameter. The survey and high-resolution
spectrometer viewing optics (one chord each) are moved
when necessary to diﬀerent positions between shots. Two
light-collecting optical ﬁbers separated by 2 cm were in-
stalled near the exit of each gun as shown in Fig. 1.
Light is collected through a 1-mm, 5/16-in.-deep pinhole
with SH-4001 ﬁbers and relayed to a 100-MHz digitizer
board, which provides jet velocity via time-of-ﬂight anal-
ysis. Single-frame iCCD images are obtained with a PCO
DiCam Pro camera (1280 × 1024 pixels), with exposure
time of 10 ns. All experimental times t are given rela-
tive to the trigger time of the gun electrodes. Details of
the data reduction and analysis methodologies have been
used extensively and reported elsewhere.37,39,40,44

B. Setup for merging of two and three plasma jets

Two or three adjacent guns (at the vertices of the
hexagonal mounting pattern) are used in the two/three-
jet experiments (results of Sec. III), as depicted in Fig. 2.
Diﬀerent gas species (N, Ar, Kr, Xe) are used for the
two/three-jet experiments. A side-on perspective of three
jets merging with diagnostic positions is shown in Fig. 3.
Diagnostic chords are approximately 70◦ relative to the
plane of the image. Note that only ﬁve chords of the
twelve-chord interferometer are used.

C. Setup for merging of six and seven plasma jets

The gun positions and diagnostic setup for the
six/seven-jet experiments (results of Sec. IV) are shown
in Fig. 4. All the six/seven-jet results shown are for
Ar jets.
Interferometer chords (green dots), normal to
the image in Fig. 4, intersect the jet-propagation axes

3

FIG. 2. Setup for results of Sec. III: merging geometry for
◦
two- and three-jet merging experiments. The angle is 23.2
◦
between guns 1,2 and 2,3, and 41
between guns 1,3. See
Fig. 4 for gun positions.

14.7 cm from chamber center (5.7 cm in the plane of pro-
jection). Note that only seven chords of the twelve-chord
interferometer are used.

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS: MERGING OF TWO
AND THREE PLASMA JETS

The primary new results of this section are the de-
tailed characterizations of the dynamics and shock forma-
tion/evolution of two- and three- jet merging (see Fig. 5),
substantially augmenting our recent studies that were
focused on ion heating for two-jet merging,43,44 which
are based on some of the same experimental campaigns
presented here. Firstly, interferometer and spectrometer
data are presented to provide space- and time-resolved
ne, Te, and ¯Z. Secondly, we discuss and provide an ex-
planation for the observed shock morphology, including
quantitative arguments based on the collisionality of the
jet merging. All results from Sec. III are for the setups
shown in Figs. 2 and 3.

4

FIG. 3. Setup for results of Sec. III: annotated, side-on visi-
ble image (10-ns exposure, t = 36 µs) of three merging argon
plasma jets. Shown are the locations of ﬁve interferometry
and survey-spectroscopy viewing chords (green dots) and ﬁve
high-resolution Doppler spectroscopy chord positions (blue
dots). The horizontal row of blue dots intersects the jet-1,2
merge plane.

FIG. 4. Setup for results of Sec IV: annotated, end-on vis-
ible image (10-ns exposure), showing the inside of the 9-ft.-
spherical vacuum chamber, the location of six of the plasma
guns, and locations of seven interferometer and survey-
spectroscopy viewing chords. The angle between adjacent
guns is 23.2◦. A seventh gun (not shown here) is installed
at the center of the hexagon.

Inferring plasma parameters and density jumps upon

A.
jet merging

Measurements of ne are obtained via the ﬁve interfer-
ometry chords shown in Fig. 3 (green dots). The time-
resolved, line-integrated ne averaged over several shots
using Ar jets is compared to synthetic data from SFP-

FIG. 5. Visible self-emission images (10-ns exposure) of three-
jet merging. (a) Approximate jet-propagation envelopes. (b)
and (c) Jets 1,2 and 2,3 have merged. (d) All three jets have
merged with a narrow region of intense emission, which we
show in this paper to be consistent with a plasma shock.

Max in Fig. 6 (see Fig. 17 in Appendix A for N, Kr,
and Xe data). Some degree of symmetry is expected
around chord 10 for all gas species. The colors of each
trace represent a speciﬁc laser chord, with similar col-
ors expected to have similar values, i.e., light blue and
dark blue. The higher line-integrated ne for a particular
chord, e.g., chord 10 in Fig. 6, reﬂects an increase in ne
due to the formation of a plasma shock as the plasma jets
merge. This is consistent with previous, detailed oblique
plasma-shock studies.38,39 The lack of symmetry about
chord 10, which is along the midplane of jet 1,3 merg-
ing as shown in Fig. 3, is due predominantly to > 20%
mass imbalance in the diﬀerent plasma jets due to vari-
ations in the GV injection. The variation is reduced to
< 2% for the results in Sec. IV. The ability to match
simulation results to the data was diﬃcult to achieve, re-
quiring customized simulation initial conditions for each
jet in an attempt to match the observed asymmetries.
Using the initial, experimentally inferred values of jet
density, length, temperature, and axial density proﬁle,
we still had to make assumptions about free simulation
parameters in the velocity gradients, divergence of the
jets (although constrained somewhat by iCCD images),
and timing jitter.

Individual shots from Fig. 6 (and Fig. 17 of Ap-
pendix A) are analyzed to better infer the density jump
due to the shock structure. For each shot, ratios are

5

FIG. 7. Comparison of experimental and calculated atomic
spectra for three-jet merging for Ar, at the location of
chord 10 (the middle green dot in Fig. 3). Inferred ne and Te
are given in the legend.

Values of ne consistent with interferometry measure-
ments are used in PrismSPECT calculations to bound Te
and ¯Z. Figure 7 shows the comparison of experimental
spectra and PrismSPECT calculations for three-jet
merging using Ar (see Fig. 18 in Appendix A for N, Kr,
and Xe data). The inferred Te ≈ 1.2–3.2 eV (across
all four species) including error bars, which are given
in Table II, for ne = 1015 cm−3 (this is the estimated
density of the post-merged plasma). The PrismSPECT
calculations indicate singly and doubly ionized states
with ¯Z = 0.9–1.9 (across all four species). Interestingly,
post-merged plasma jets do not show much spatial
nor temporal variation in Te. There are discrepancies
between the experimental and calculated line ratios in
Figs. 7 and 18, which may be due to the line-integrated
light collection spanning regions of diﬀerent plasma
parameters.

Figure 8 shows comparisons of experimental and calcu-
lated spectra among diﬀerent jet-merging conﬁgurations
and a single jet for Ar. Across all merging conﬁgura-
tions, the spectra do not signiﬁcantly change, implying
similar values of Te and ¯Z, but the spectra for a sin-
gle jet is diﬀerent. Comparing with PrismSPECT cal-
culations, the single-jet spectra indicates Te = 1.5 eV
and ¯Z=0.9 for a density of 5 × 1014 cm−3 (pre-merged
density estimate), while the merged-jet spectra indicates
Te = 1.9 eV and ¯Z=1.0 for a density of 1 × 1015 cm−3.
Similar increases in ne, Te, and ¯Z for merging versus a
single jet are observed for all gas species and summa-
rized in Table II. The increase in Te and ¯Z in merging
conﬁgurations compared to a single jet was observed in
prior experiments,40 which was attributed to frictional
heating of electrons from slowing of the oppositely di-
rected ions. The rate of slowing can be estimated using
the ion-electron slowing-down rate. Using the estimated
parameters for each species, the slowing-down rate for ni-
trogen is calculated to be signiﬁcantly larger (factors of
approximately 2–3) than the other three species. If this

FIG. 6. Interferometer signals versus time for the chord po-
sitions shown in Fig. 3 (green dots) for Ar jets. Error bars
for select times are one standard deviation of the shot-to-
shot variation. Synthetic data from SPFMax simulations (see
Sec. III C) for line-integrated ne are represented by the x’s.
We expect symmetry around chord 10, with similar signals
expected for chords 9 and 11 (yellow and orange) and chords
8 and 12 (dark and light blue).

taken between chords with the highest and lowest line-
integrated densities, with the former assumed to repre-
sent post-shock and the latter pre-shock plasma regions.
The high-density shock structure is observed to move
across interferometry chords in time as observed in the
iCCD images. For each species, the maximum ratio be-
tween the chords with the highest and lowest line in-
tegrated density, and their standard deviation, are also
determined. The information is summarized in Table I.
The lengths of the merged jets are estimated by tak-
ing the full-width half-maximum of the line-integrated
ne traces. The merged jet lengths are estimated to be
148, 87, 88, and 57 cm for N, Ar, Kr, and Xe, respec-
tively. The long lengths compared to that of individual
jets (< 20 cm) are primarily due to speed diﬀerences
between jets leading to an extended merged-plasma re-
gion. Further reductions in individual jet lengths and
mass/speed variations across jets are needed; improve-
ments are presented in Appendix B.

To infer Te and ¯Z,
to
calculations

survey-spectroscopy data is
non-local-thermodynamic-equilibrium
compared
(non-LTE)
using
of
PrismSPECT,49 by noting when speciﬁc line tran-
sitions appear or disappear as a function of ne and Te.

spectra

atomic

TABLE I. Ratio between chords with the highest and lowest
line-integrated densities, as a measure of the shock ne jump
for three-jet merging, based on the individual shots used in
Figs. 6 and 17.

N Ar Kr Xe
Gas Species
Average
2.9 4.2 6.1 6.6
Standard Dev. 0.8 1.1 1.4 3.1
4.6 6.4 8.9 13.6
Maximum

6

ments, despite the likelihood that the merging of only
jets 1,2 and 2,3 and 1,3 are occurring in an interpene-
trating regime, the collisionality is increased to form a
shock when all three jets merge.

For these experiments, interferometer data do not show
large density jumps associated with a shock front pass-
ing through for any of the two-jet conﬁgurations shown
in Fig. 2. This is supported by two-jet interferometer
data discussed later in Figs. 10(b) and (c), where max-
imum density jumps are < 2. Furthermore, the iCCD
images in Figs. 5(b) and (c) show a diﬀuse bright re-
gion at the merge regions between jets 1,2 and 2,3. The
diﬀuse emission morphology was shown previously to
correspond to an interpenetrating, shockless jet-merging
situation.40,43,44

However, despite the two-jet merging leading to shock-
less, semi-collisional interpenetration, the merging of all
three jets leads to a shock, as seen in Fig. 5(d) and the
> 2 density jump in Fig. 10(a). Here, we show that
the presence of a shock in three-jet merging, despite the
absence of shocks in two-jet merging, is due to dynam-
ically increasing Te and ¯Z due to jet merging. This is
exacerbated by the presence of impurity titanium, which
leads to even higher ¯Z. We denote this the “Moser ef-
fect,” which was ﬁrst observed in head-on jet-merging
experiments on PLX;40 a similar eﬀect has been recently
observed in laser-driven experiments.50

The presence of titanium, from the inner electrode of
the coaxial plasma guns, is evident from side-on survey-
spectroscopy data (Fig. 9) taken at the chord-10 position
(see Fig. 3). To estimate the fraction of impurities in
the plasma jets, vacuum-chamber pressure rise for gas
injection only is compared against that with plasma-jet
discharges, which presumably ablates some electrode ma-
terial. This comparison suggests that the plasma jet has
80% injected gas species (in this case Ar) and 20% impu-
rities. The three Ar jets arrive at the chord-10 position
at about 27 µs (see Fig. 6). The titanium impurities,
Ti ii and Ti iii, appear around 34 µs, with about 10 µs
of leading edge of the jet having little to no measurable
impurities. The best-ﬁt PrismSPECT calculations indi-
cate ¯Z = 1.0 for the data at t = 30 µs and ¯Z = 2.0
for t = 34 µs. We estimate that only ∼ 5% of the jet
mass is in the leading edge where there is little-to-no ti-
tanium. Unfortunately the spectroscopy analysis of im-
purities was only conducted for argon jets.

Combining all the information on plasma parameters
that we have gathered here and elsewhere,44 we provide
quantitative estimates of the collisionality for three-jet
merging for both cases of with and hypothetically with-
out impurities. As discussed previously,39 the ion–ion
interpenetration length is

Lii,s =

v
4νii′,s

,

Xi′

(1)

where νii′,s is the ion–ion slowing frequency in the fast

FIG. 8. Measured atomic spectra (chord 10, t = 36 µs) for
three diﬀerent argon-jet-merging conﬁgurations (shots 1551,
1573, 1603; very similar spectra) and a single jet (shot 1627;
very diﬀerent compared to merging conﬁgurations). The val-
ues of pre- and post-merge Te and ¯Z are given in Table II.

TABLE II.
Experimentally inferred values of Te and ¯Z for single and
merged jets, for four gas species. The merged values are
representative of both two- and three-jet merging.

single jet
[Te(eV), ¯Z]

merged jets
[Te(eV), ¯Z]

N [1.3±0.3, 0.8±0.2] [2.8±0.4, 1.4±0.4]
Ar [1.5±0.3, 0.9±0.3] [1.9±0.5, 1.0±0.1]
Kr [1.2±0.4, 0.8±0.4] [1.9±0.5, 1.2±0.3]
Xe [1.4±0.4, 1.0±0.3] [1.7±0.5, 1.5±0.4]

is the leading mechanism for increased Te, then it could
explain the larger increase in Te for nitrogen.

B. Prospect of shockless jet merging

Earlier

two-jet merging experiments using mini-
railguns on PLX demonstrated oblique plasma-shock for-
mation in highly collisional regimes.38,39 Simulations of
spherical-plasma-liner formation via merging jets in the
collisional, hydrodynamic limit showed a “cascade of
shocks” as jets merged and during the subsequent liner
implosion.31 More recently, collisional plasma-shock for-
mation was reproduced using coaxial plasma guns,43,44
but those experiments also showed that jet–jet interpen-
etration without shock formation could occur in less-
collisional regimes.43,44

This leads to the idea of deliberately operating in a
less-collisional jet-merging regime to avoid shock forma-
tion, thereby minimizing the seeding of density perturba-
tions in plasma-liner formation as desired for PJMIF.44
The three-jet-merging results of this paper point to fur-
ther constraints. We will show that in these experi-

7

in a highly collisional limit with shock formation, Lii,s
should be ≪ 30 cm (jet system size, from the iCCD im-
ages). Our calculations show that using the parameters
from Table II (for jets with no impurities) would result
in substantial interpenetration. This is consistent with
the lack of shock structure observed in the iCCD images
and the interferometry chords for the merging of jets 1,3.
However, as seen in Table III, the merging of all three jets
leads to an increase in Te and ¯Z compared to Table II.
This, along with the presence of Ti impurities with even
higher ¯Z, leads to an increase in collisionality and reduc-
tion in Lii,s and therefore the formation of a shock along
the center line of the three jets, as observed in Fig. 5(d).
To summarize the primary points of this subsection,
it is possible to have semi-collisional, interpenetrating,
shockless jet merging, which may be desirable for plasma-
liner formation to minimize the amplitude of density non-
uniformities. However, jet merging leads to slightly ele-
vated Te and ¯Z that is further exacerbated by the pres-
ence of jet impurities, like Ti, that tend to have even
higher ¯Z. Because collisionality ∼ ¯Z 4, it is easy to tran-
sition into a regime with shock formation, i.e., “Moser
eﬀect,” for multiple-jet merging in the presence of im-
purities. This points to a need to further reduce the
impurity content in the plasma jets to enable shockless
jet merging as an option for plasma-liner formation.

C. Liner Mach-number degradation

Maintaining a high liner Mach number M to en-
able eﬃcient target compression has been identiﬁed as
important for the viability of PJMIF.17,21 The recent,
related results on shock ion heating in two-jet merg-
ing experiments showed that ion heating to tens of
eV occurs upon jet merging for cases with and with-
out shock formation.44 This degrades M , but due to
very fast cooling of the ions on the few-eV electrons
over a several-µs timescale, M should quickly increase.
In this work, we estimate M and its evolution us-
ing the previously reported high-resolution Doppler-
spectroscopy data (providing ion temperature Ti)43,44
and the interferometer/survey-spectroscopy data of this
paper. We use the data to benchmark hydrodynamic
simulations of jet-merging using the three-dimensional
SPFMax smooth-particle hydrodynamics (SPH) code.45
Simulations of fully spherical plasma-liner formation and
implosion, benchmarked to our localized jet-merging ex-
perimental data, show that the liner-averaged M remains
high even with the transient localized reduction due to
shock heating.

Doppler-spectroscopy data, providing time- and space-
resolved Ti,43,44 was obtained at the positions of the blue
dots in Fig. 3. Along with Te and ¯Z data presented in
this paper, the time- and space-resolved M = vjet/Cs is
calculated in the jet-merging and shock regions, where
Cs = (γp/ρ)1/2 = [γ( ¯ZTe + Ti)/mi]1/2. We use the
gas sound speed deﬁnition due to the very high colli-

FIG. 9. Survey-spectroscopy data (chord-10 position) for
three-jet merging (Ar) and ﬁts to PrismSPECT calculated
spectra (no Ti), for (a) leading front of the jet (no Ti) and
(b) bulk of the jet (with Ti).

limit (≫ νie,s for the present parameters),51

νii′,s = 9 × 10

−8n

′

iΛii′ ¯Z ′2 ¯Z 2

1
µ

(cid:18)

+

1
µ′ (cid:19)

µ1/2
ǫ3/2 ,

(2)

and v = 2vjet sin θ is the relative normal speed between
counter-streaming plasma jets, θ is the half angle be-
tween jets, ni is the ion density, Λii′ is the Coulomb loga-
rithm for counter-streaming ions in the presence of warm
electrons,39 µ is the ion/proton mass ratio, and ǫ (eV)
is the energy associated with v.
In Eq. (1), the factor
of 4 is the integral eﬀect of the slowing down,36 and the
summation is over all gas species. Prime and unprimed
variables refer to ﬁeld and test particles, respectively.51
Table III shows calculated Lii,s for each jet species using
averaged plasma parameters. The impurity (Ti) speed
is assumed to be the same as for the majority species.
The Te and ¯Z are determined from survey spectroscopy
for post-merging of jets, with the same values assumed
for Ti across all jet species, while ne is from interferom-
etry. The half-angle θ = 20.5◦ between jets 1,3 is used
in these estimates. Two estimations of Lii,s are calcu-
lated for the 80%/20% mixtures, i.e., with the majority
and impurity species each treated as the test particle, re-
spectively. For both cases, Lii,s values are summed over
both ﬁeld ion species, as indicated in Eq. (1). To be

◦
TABLE III. Collisionality of jet merging is evaluated based on Eqs. (1) and (2), using θ = 20.5
corresponding to the half-angle
between jets 1,3. Results are shown assuming 100% majority-species jets (top half of table) and an 80%/20% mixture of
majority-species/Ti jets (bottom half of table). The two values of Lii,s shown for the 80%/20% mixtures are for majority and
Ti ions as the test particles, respectively.

8

Species

v (km/s)
ne (1014cm−3)
Te(eV)
¯Z
Lii,s(cm)

N

36.5
3.0±0.3
2.8±0.4
1.4±0.4
1.5

Ar

29.4
2.9±0.4
1.9±0.4
1.0±0.1
18.0

Kr

39.8
3.3±2.0
1.9±0.5
1.2±0.3
109.0

Xe

19.2
2.6±0.3
1.7±0.5
1.5±0.4
8.0

Species

80%N/20%Ti

80%Ar/20%Ti

80%Kr/20%Ti

80%Xe/20%Ti

36.5

v (km/s)
29.4
ne (1014cm−3) 2.4/0.6±0.2/0.1 2.4/0.5±0.3/0.1 2.6/0.7±1.6/0.4 2.1/0.5±0.2/0.1
2.8/1.4±0.4/0.2 1.9/1.4 ±0.4/0.2 1.9/1.4 ±0.5/0.2 1.7/1.4±0.5/0.2
Te(eV)
¯Z
1.4/2.0±0.4/0.4 1.9/2.0±0.1/0.4 1.2/2.0±0.3/0.4 1.5/2.0±0.4/0.4
Lii′,s(cm)

50.0/2.6

1.3/3.0

8.8/5.0

4.7/0.4

19.2

39.8

sionality, which invalidates the isothermal assumption
for electrons. Adiabatic index γ = 5/3 is assumed due
to the unconstrained three-dimensional motion of both
electrons and ions in our unmagnetized plasmas (note:
γ can be < 5/3 for low charge states of Ar, Kr, Xe,23
so we may be underestimating M ). Figure 10 shows
side-on interferometry and inferred M using Doppler-
spectroscopy measurements of Ti at approximately 20 cm
from chamber center (see Fig. 3) for three diﬀerent argon
jet-merging conﬁgurations. The interferometry traces
shown in Fig. 10(a) and (b) cross the region where the
plasma jets merge and plasma shocks can form. Fig-
ure 10(a) shows a large ratio (> 2) of line-integrated ne
between the chords with the highest and lowest values,
consistent with the presence of a shock, while Fig. 10(b)
shows a much smaller ratio (< 2). For the three-jet case
[Fig. 10(a)], the jet merging leads to collisional ion heat-
ing, resulting in a low M , followed by subsequent cooling
of the ions through collisional equilibration with the cool
electrons, which allows M to increase back up to nearly
7. For the two-jet case at larger angle [Fig. 10(b)], ion
heating is observed; however, the lower density inhibits
radiative cooling and results in a lower M . For the two-
jet case at smaller angle [Fig. 10(c)], the collisional ion
shock heating leads to a low M followed by cooling that
leads to a high Mach number.

Hydrodynamic

simulations using the SPH code
SPFMax45 are conducted and benchmarked against the
two- and three-jet merging data in this paper. SPFMax
and its predecessor codes have been used extensively for
both one- and three-dimensional modeling of imploding
plasma liners.28,30 Figure 11 presents results for two-jet
argon merging compared to simulations using SPFMax,
showing (1) experimentally inferred M values within the
jet-merging region of jets 1,2 (black dots); (2) simulated
local values of M at the region of merging (red line);
and (3) simulated spherical-liner-averaged M (blue line),

indicating that the liner-averaged M remains & 10 de-
spite the localized value in the jet-merging region falling
well below 10. The experimentally inferred M values
use Ti measurements from the blue dots along the jet
1,2 midplane shown in Fig. 3. The ability for the global
M to remain > 10 and the localized M to rise back to
& 10 is important for the viability of the PJMIF concept
because degradation in M would lead to an increase in
liner spreading, which would degrade the liner’s ability to
compress a plasma target to fusion-relevant conditions.21

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS: MERGING OF SIX
AND SEVEN PLASMA JETS WITH IMPROVED
JET-TO-JET MASS BALANCE

The primary objectives of this section are to exper-
imentally characterize the structure of the section of a
plasma liner formed by six and seven hypersonic merg-
ing plasma jets (see Fig. 4), and to demonstrate improved
mirror symmetry in the liner structure about the jet-
propagation axes due to the improved jet-to-jet mass
balance compared to earlier work.41 Experimental evi-
dence for the improved jet-to-jet balance, achieved by
upgraded GVs and ﬁne-tuned series (ballast) impedances
of the GVs, is presented in Appendix B. Figure 12 shows
end-on images of the merging of six and seven plasma
jets. Primary shocks (deﬁned here as the oblique forma-
tion of plasma shocks and appearing as radial spokes)
are observed to form between adjacent jets43,44, for both
six- and seven-jet cases by ≈26 µs [Figs. 12(b) and (f)].
The seven-gun conﬁguration also forms primary shocks
[hexagonal pattern, Fig. 12(f)] between the six outer
jets and the seventh jet. The initially merged plasmas
from adjacent jets appear to all merge and form a sec-
ondary shock (deﬁned here as the merging of post-shock
plasma regions) near the center, pointing out of the page

9

FIG. 11. Mach number versus time: black circles and orange
line are the experimentally inferred and simulated values, re-
spectively, within a two-jet merging region (guns 1,2). Solid
blue line is the simulated, liner-averaged Mach number from
the same spherical simulation, showing that the liner-average
value remains above ∼ 10 even while the localized value within
the jet-merging region falls below 10.

A. Spatial density uniformity

With reasonably good jet-to-jet balance, it is expected
that the density proﬁle along the interferometer chord
positions will exhibit mirror symmetry about chords 3
and 5, i.e., similar values for chords 1 and 5, chords 2,
4, and 6, and chords 3 and 7 (see Fig. 4). This was not
observed in earlier six-jet merging experiments due to
poor jet-to-jet balance.41 The new data presented here
shows a signiﬁcant improvement in the mirror symmetry
of the density proﬁle about chords 3 and 5, and a gentler
density gradient compared to those in the synthetic data
from from both SPFMax45 and FronTier.46

The seven-chord interferometer provides time- and
space-resolved, line-integrated ne at the positions shown
in Fig. 4 for six-jet merging. Figure 13 shows the in-
terferometry data compared to synthetic data from SF-
PMax at diﬀerent times, both before (left column) and
after the GV and ballast upgrades (right column), which
are described in Appendix B. The perfect mirror sym-
metry about chords 3 and 5 is of course seen in the
synthetic data, and a substantial improvement is seen
in the experimental data. The results obtained prior to
the GV/ballast upgrade [Fig. 13(a)–(d)] show unbalanced
merging of six jets as indicated by the systematically low
line-integrated ne measured in chords 5, 6, and 7. The
results obtained after the upgrade [Fig. 13(e)–(h)] show a
more-balanced merging of the plasma jets with improved
mirror symmetry about chords 3 and 5. However, the
symmetry is not perfect and is likely due to the timing
and velocity jitter discussed earlier. Nevertheless, bet-
ter agreement is now achieved between experimental and
synthetic SPFMax data.

To further quantify the density non-uniformity for a
single shot,
individual shots are analyzed from six-jet
merging experiments before and after the GV/ballast up-

FIG. 10. Line-integrated ne (colored lines) and experimen-
tally inferred values of M (black dots) for merging of jets (a)
1,2,3, (b) 1,3, and (c) 1,2. The data are all taken at 20 cm
from chamber center, at the jet-2 propagation axis for (a) and
(b) and the jet 1,2 midplane for (c) (see Fig. 3 for positions).
Colors correspond to the chord numbers shown in the legends
of Fig. 6.

[Figs. 12(d) and (h)]. In this section, we present interfer-
ometry data to characterize time- and space-resolved ne
and Te associated with the jet merging. Comparisons
are made with synthetic data from SPFMax45 three-
dimensional hydrodynamic simulations. Previously pub-
lished FronTier hydrodynamic simulations provide infor-
mation on the inﬂuence of jet-to-jet variations (in both
mass and timing) on the structure and quality of plasma-
liner formation,46 showing good agreement with the im-
ages in Fig. 12 for mass variations of < 10% and timing
variations of ≤ 100 ns.

10

FIG. 12. End-on, self-emission visible images (10-ns exposure, false color) of the merging of six and seven argon plasma jets.

11

FIG. 13. Experimental and synthetic SPFMax45 data (dots and bars, respectively) for line-integrated ne from the interferometer
chord positions shown in Fig. 4. Panels (a)–(d) are prior to and (e)–(h) are after GV/ballast upgrades described in Appendix B.
Experimental data are averaged over ten shots; the error bars represent one standard deviation of the shot-to-shot variation.

grades. Figure 14 shows that the variation across inter-
ferometer chords for individual shots is reduced after the
GV/ballast upgrades, with standard deviations across
chords falling from 0.4–1.2 × 1017 cm−2 before the up-
grades to 2–7×1016 cm−2 after the upgrades. While con-
tinued reﬁnements to the jet-to-jet balance will further
improve the liner density uniformity, there will be a min-
imum level of liner non-uniformity from the jet-merging
dynamics, as presented and discussed in Sec. III.

B. Constancy of electron temperature in space and time

Knowledge of space- and time-resolved Te is important
for characterizing a section of a spherically imploding
plasma liner. It aﬀects the mean-charge state ¯Z, which
has a strong inﬂuence on inter-jet collisionality through a
¯Z 4 dependence [see Eq. (2)], and it aﬀects the electrical
resistivity ∼ T
, which aﬀects the eventual magnetic-
diﬀusion dynamics when the liner compresses a magne-
tized plasma target.

−3/2
e

Survey-spectroscopy data (Fig. 15), along with ne from

12

FIG. 14. Line-integrated ne (t = 40 µs) from all seven inter-
ferometer chords (colored dots) are plotted versus individual
shot numbers from experiments (a) before and (b) after the
GV/ballast upgrades. Standard deviation across chords is
given by the black x’s (right-hand y-axis).

interferometry and comparisons with PrismSPECT49
calculations, are used to estimate Te ≈ 1.7 eV and
¯Z ≈ 1.0 (for ne = 1015 cm−3) along the interferome-
ter chord positions shown in Fig. 4. The results indicate
very little variation over diﬀerent chord positions and
times, suggesting fairly uniform Te in the six-jet merging
experiments.

C. Morphology change by adding a seventh plasma jet

Adding a seventh gun (to the middle of the hexagonal
vertices where the six guns are mounted, see Fig. 4) pro-
vides the opportunity to explore the qualitative change
in the structure of the liner section that is formed. This
also helps further constrain and benchmark the simula-
tions. Figure 12 shows the diﬀerent morphology of the
six- versus seven-jet merging cases. As discussed brieﬂy
earlier in the paper, a new hexagonal pattern of merg-
ing shocks appears due to the presence of the seventh
jet. Unfortunately, interferometry was not possible for
these experiments because the seventh gun uses the same
chamber port as the interferometer launch optics.

Side-on images show a dramatic change in shock struc-
tures with the introduction of the seventh jet, as seen in
Fig. 16. The six-jet case shows a sharp secondary shock
formed by the merging of the primary shocks along the
symmetry axis of the six jets. The seven-jet case shows

FIG. 15. Survey-spectroscopy data for the chord positions
and times shown in the plot legends, showing that the spectra
(corresponding to Te ≈ 1.7 eV and ¯Z ≈ 1.0 based on compar-
isons with PrismSPECT calculations) are largely unchanged
over diﬀerent positions and times.

what appears to be several propagating primary shocks,
presumably associated with the hexagonal pattern seen
in Fig. 12(g). The collisional merging of the six jets with
the inner seventh jet modiﬁes the propagation of the six
jets as well as the six primary shocks, such that the sec-
ondary shock does not form at the same time and posi-
tion as for the six-jet case. Lineouts of the square root of
image intensity across the merged structures are shown
in Fig. 16(c). Assuming that Te is spatially uniform (as
shown earlier in the paper), lineouts are representative
of the density proﬁle. The seven-jet case shows a much
more uniform proﬁle than the six-jet case, showing that
gun positioning and merging angles may be a way to op-
timize the liner uniformity.

13

plasma jets merging at larger half-angles (20.5◦), the
merged plasma is more uniform due to the large interpen-
etration of the plasma jets and the softening or outright
elimination of shock formation. For plasma jets merg-
ing at smaller half-angles (11.6◦), the merged plasma has
larger density gradients due to the decrease in inter-jet
interpenetration lengths, leading to plasma-shock forma-
tion. Jet merging is shown to slightly increase Te and
¯Z, leading to an increase in collisionality. This eﬀect,
excacerbated by the higher ¯Z of titanium impurities, in-
creases collisionality in the merging process, resulting
in shock formation and density non-uniformities upon
three-jet merging. Upon jet merging, the Mach num-
ber degrades to about 4 due to shock heating of the ions
but relaxes back to about 12 after ∼10 µs due to ion-
electron equilibration. Mach-number degradation does
not appear to be a serious issue in this parameter space.
However, the formation of plasma shocks upon jet merg-
ing may pose an eventual threat to the uniformity of
magnetized target compression. Obtaining this data is
an important ﬁrst step toward addressing the key ques-
tion of what asymmetry is tolerable for PJMIF, where
the number of jets, as well as their speed, merging an-
gles, and axial proﬁles, all must be optimized to minimize
liner non-uniformity.

The second experimental campaign (Sec. IV) reported
in this paper studied and characterized the formation of a
section of a spherically imploding plasma liner formed by
six and seven plasma jets. Upgraded GVs and a ballast-
ing system were employed to achieve a signiﬁcantly im-
proved jet-to-jet mass balance of < 2% (see Appendix B)
compared to earlier work41 and the results of Sec. III. The
improvements lead to a more balanced merging of six and
seven plasma jets, which are also seen in benchmarked
simulations from SPFMax and previously published re-
sults from FronTier.46 The uniformity of the merging
process appears to be improved with the addition of a
seventh gun in the middle of the six guns. Despite these
improvements, interferometry measurements show appre-
ciable shot-to-shot variations in line-integrated electron
densities, as well as imperfect mirror symmetry about
the symmetry axes. These eﬀects could, eventually, pro-
vide a seed for the Rayleigh-Taylor instability that lead
to degraded compression of a magnetized plasma target.
Continued progress is necessary to reduce the timing jit-
ter (simulations46 suggest the need for ≤100 ns for fusion
relevance), the initial plasma-jet length, jet-to-jet veloc-
ity balance, and a reduction in shot-to-shot variations.

Further gun upgrades have been implemented since
this work, with many of the new guns already mounted
on the PLX chamber, to improve on the aforementioned
parameters and improve on gun robustness and main-
tainability. The latest guns will be used in upcoming 18-
and 36-gun experiments to form hemispherical and fully
spherical imploding plasma liners, respectively. The goal
of future experiments should include tuning the plasma-
jet merging parameters, including reduction of impuri-
ties, to optimize the collisionality parameters such that

FIG. 16. Side-on, self-emission iCCD images (10-ns exposure,
t = 34 µs) of (a) six- and (b) seven-jet merging. (c) Lineouts
of the square root of the intensity from both images at ap-
proximately 20 cm from chamber center.

V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we report comprehensive experimental
results for the merging of multiple hypersonic jets to form
a section of a spherically imploding plasma liner. This is
a ﬁrst major step toward developing plasma liners as a
standoﬀ driver for MIF, based on the PJMIF concept.

The ﬁrst experimental campaign (Sec. III) reported
in this paper focused on the merging of two and three
hypersonic plasma jets, as the most fundamental build-
ing block of plasma-liner formation, to study and char-
acterize plasma-shock formation, spatial density non-
uniformities, and liner Mach-number degradation. For

the liner density is high enough to provide ion cooling
with the surrounding electrons, yet have increased inter-
jet penetration to soften or eliminate shock formation.
The experimental data presented in this paper are being
utilized to benchmark multi-physics models and simula-
tions to guide us in the optimization and design of future
experiments.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Advanced Research
Projects Agency–Energy (ARPA-E) of the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy (DOE) under contract no. DE-AC52-
06NA25396 and cooperative agreement no. de-ar0000566.
HyperJet Fusion Corporation acknowledges the support
of Strong Atomics. Original construction and operation
of the PLX facility at LANL and earlier development
of contoured-gap coaxial plasma guns by HyperV Tech-
nologies Corp. (both prior to 2012) were supported by
the DOE Oﬃce of Science, Fusion Energy Sciences. The
data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Appendix A: Additional data from merging of two and
three jets (N, Kr, Xe)

This appendix provides N, Kr, and Xe data, shown
in Figs. 17 and 18, supplementing the Ar data shown
in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively. See the discussion in
Sec. III A.

Appendix B: Improved jet-to-jet balance

The results presented in Sec. IV are based on improved
jet-to-jet balance achieved via upgraded GVs and ﬁne-
tuned series (ballast) GV impedances. This appendix
presents detailed experimental characterization of the im-
proved jet-to-jet balance.

The ﬁrst six-jet merging experiments on PLX revealed
that jet-to-jet mass imbalance (& 20% variation across
jets) degraded the expected mirror symmetry in den-
sity proﬁles and merging morphology about the jet-
propagation axes.41 Thus, we made signiﬁcant improve-
ments to the GVs in the plasma guns to reduce the mass
variation among jets. The earlier generation of GVs con-
sisted of an in-line plenum, magnetic coils, a ﬂyer plate,
and eight metal springs. The ﬂyer plate rests on the eight
uncompressed springs. When the GV coils are pulsed
with a 10-kV capacitor bank, magnetic pressure pushes
the ﬂyer plate against the springs, compressing them far
enough to allow the ﬂyer plate to be pushed below gas-
inlet holes at the rear of the gun and letting in pressur-
ized gas. In the new GVs, a modiﬁed plenum increases
It also increases the
precision in the plenum volume.

14

FIG. 17. Interferometer signals versus time for the chord po-
sitions shown in Fig. 3 (green dots) for (a) N, (b) Kr, and
(c) Xe jets. See Sec. III A and the caption of Fig. 6.

volume, now with an annular proﬁle and a smaller cross-
sectional area. This allows higher plenum pressures and
larger dispensed masses. Previous GVs applied pressure
to the entire ﬂyer plate, whereas the new GV applies an-
nular pressure to the outer rim of the ﬂyer plate. The
ﬂyer plate now has an additional ﬁn to direct gas ﬂow
towards the inlet holes to the gun breech rather than
towards the center of the plate.

However, even with the improved GV design, further
ﬁne tuning was still required especially because all the
GVs are driven in parallel by a single capacitor bank.
The ﬁne tuning is enabled via a ballasting system that
allows for adjusting the inductances and resistances in
series with each GV to control the split of electrical cur-

15

FIG. 19. Chamber pressure rise measured by a baratron pres-
sure gauge for gas injection from each of six plasma guns with
upgraded GVs, after ﬁne tuning of ballast inductances and re-
sistances in series with each GV. Results show 1.7% standard
deviation in mass injected across six guns.

the tuning of ballast inductances and resistances results
in < 2% variation in the injected mass across all guns, as
shown in Fig. 19.

The improved synchronicity of initial jet propagation
across all jets is veriﬁed via photodiode data (Fig. 20)
of the jet propagation as it exits the gun muzzle. Each
gun has two photodiode views, separated by 2 cm, trans-
verse to the jet-propagation axis near the exit of the gun
nozzle (see Fig. 1). The timing jitter for the six guns is
determined by measuring the spread in the photodiode
signals. The arrival time of a jet is taken to be the time
that photodiode signal reaches half its maximum. Data
is analyzed for ten shots, showing an average variation
in the arrival time of 610 ns with a standard deviation of
200 ns. Figure 20 shows photodiode traces before and af-
ter the GV/ballast improvements. Shot-to-shot jitter in
the injected mass now sets the lower bound in the timing
variation across jets. End-on imaging of six- and seven-
jet merging (e.g., Fig. 12) quickly alerts us if one of the
guns is ﬁring with mismatched mass and/or timing.

The photodiode data are also use to determine the ve-
locity and length of the jets (Fig. 21). The velocity is
determined from the diﬀerence in arrival times of the
two photodiode signals for each gun. The length is from
the full-width, half-maximum of the photodiode signals.
The jet velocities are between 25 and 55 km/s, with the
jet from gun three being relatively fast and from gun six
being relatively slow. The lengths of the plasma jet upon
exiting the nozzle are in the range 7–20 cm. The varia-
tions in timing, velocity, and jet length across the guns,
as well as from shot-to-shot jitter, show that continued
engineering improvements in the gun are needed.

1I. R. Lindemuth and R. C. Kirkpatrick, Nucl. Fusion 23, 263
(1983).
2R. C. Kirkpatrick, I. R. Lindemuth, and M. S. Ward, Fus. Tech.
27, 201 (1995).
3I. R. Lindemuth, Phys. Plasmas 22, 122712 (2015).
4G. A. Wurden, S. C. Hsu, T. P. Intrator, T. C. Grabowski, J. H.
Degnan, M. Domonkos, P. J. Turchi, E. M. Campbell, D. B.

FIG. 18. Comparison of experimental and calculated atomic
spectra for three-jet merging for N, Kr, and Xe, at the location
of chord 10 (the middle green dot in Fig. 3). Inferred ne and
Te are given in the legends of each panel. See Sec. III A.

rent delivered to each GV. The ﬁne-tuning sequence is as
follows. Gas lines are disconnected from all but one GV
and evacuated. The mass injection by the one GV is de-
termined by monitoring the increase in vacuum chamber
pressure when all GVs are pulsed. The increase in cham-
ber pressure is determined using an MKS Instruments
model 626C.1TLF baratron pressure gauge. The ballast
inductance and resistance is adjusted to arrive at an in-
jected mass of 4 mg. This process is repeated for each
diﬀerent GV. Another iteration or two through all GVs is
sometimes needed. Using the modiﬁed GVs followed by

16

FIG. 21. Jet velocities and lengths from all six plasma guns
with upgraded GVs, inferred from photodiode data.

Herrmann, M. H. Hess, O. Johns, D. C. Lamppa, M. R. Martin,
R. D. McBride, K. J. Peterson, J. L. Porter, G. K. Robertson,
G. A. Rochau, C. L. Ruiz, M. E. Savage, I. C. Smith, W. A.
Stygar, and R. A. Vesey, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 155003 (2014).
13P. F. Schmit, P. F. Knapp, S. B. Hansen, M. R. Gomez, K. D.
Hahn, D. B. Sinars, K. J. Peterson, S. A. Slutz, A. B. Sefkow,
T. J. Awe, E. Harding, C. A. Jennings, G. A. Chandler, G. W.
Cooper, M. E. Cuneo, M. Geissel, A. J. Harvey-Thompson, M. C.
Herrmann, M. H. Hess, O. Johns, D. C. Lamppa, M. R. Martin,
R. D. McBride, J. L. Porter, G. K. Robertson, G. A. Rochau,
D. C. Rovang, C. L. Ruiz, M. E. Savage, I. C. Smith, W. A.
Stygar, and R. A. Vesey, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 155004 (2014).
14M. M. Basko, A. J. Kemp, and J. Meyer-ter-Vehn, Nucl. Fusion

40, 59 (2000).

15Y. C. F. Thio, E. Panarella, R. C. Kirkpatrick, C. E. Knapp,
F. Wysocki, P. Parks, and G. Schmidt, in Current Trends in
International Fusion Research–Proceedings of the Second Inter-
national Symposium, edited by E. Panarella (NRC Canada, Ot-
tawa, 1999) p. 113.

16Y. C. F. Thio, C. E. Knapp, R. C. Kirkpatrick, R. E. Siemon,

and P. J. Turchi, J. Fusion Energy 20, 1 (2001).

17P. B. Parks, Phys. Plasmas 15, 062506 (2008).
18J. F. Santarius, Phys. Plasmas 19, 072705 (2012).
19S. C. Hsu, T. Awe, S. Brockington, A. Case, J. Cassibry, G. Ka-
gan, S. Messer, M. Stanic, X. Tang, D. Welch, and F. D. With-
erspoon, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 40, 1287 (2012).

20C. E. Knapp and R. C. Kirkpatrick, Phys. Plasmas 21, 070701

(2014).

21S. J. Langendorf and S. C. Hsu, Phys. Plasmas 24, 032704 (2017).
22Y. C. F. Thio, S. C. Hsu, F. D. Witherspoon, E. Cruz, A. Case,
S. Langendorf, K. Yates, J. Dunn, J. Cassibry, R. Samulyak,
P. Stoltz, S. J. Brockington, A. Williams, M. Luna, R. Becker,
and A. Cook, Fus. Sci. Tech. 75, 581 (2019).

FIG. 20. Photodiode (PD) traces of six jets at the exit of
their gun nozzles (see Fig. 1 for photodiode viewing chords)
for the upgraded GVs, (a) before and (b) after ﬁne tuning of
ballast inductances and resistances.

Sinars, M. C. Herrmann, R. Betti, B. S. Bauer, I. R. Lindemuth,
R. E. Siemon, R. L. Miller, M. Laberge, and M. Delage, J. Fusion
Energy 35, 69 (2016).
5P. J. Turchi, A. L. Cooper, R. D. Ford, D. J. Jenkins, and R. L.
Burton, in Megagauss Physics and Technology, edited by P. J.
Turchi (Plenum, New York, 1980) p. 375.
6P. J. Turchi, S. D. Frese, and M. H. Frese, IEEE Trans. Plasma
Sci. 45, 2800 (2017).
7S. F. Garanin, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 26, 1230 (1998).
8T. Intrator, S. Y. Zhang, J. H. Degnan, I. Furno, C. Grabowski,
S. C. Hsu, E. L. Ruden, P. G. Sanchez, J. M. Taccetti,
M. Tuszewski, W. J. Waganaar, and G. A. Wurden, Phys. Plas-
mas 11, 2580 (2004).
9J. H. Degnan, D. J. Amdahl, M. Domonkos, F. M. Lehr,
C. Grabowski, P. R. Robinson, E. L. Ruden, W. M. White,
G. A. Wurden, T. P. Intrator, J. Sears, T. Weber, W. J. Wa-
ganaar, M. H. Frese, S. D. Frese, J. F. Camacho, S. K. Coﬀey,
V. Makhin, N. F. Roderick, D. G. Gale, M. Kostora, A. Lerma,
J. L. McCullough, W. Sommars, G. F. Kiuttu, B. Bauer, S. R.
Fuelling, R. E. Siemon, A. G. Lynn, and P. J. Turchi, Nucl.
Fusion 53, 093003 (2013).

10M. Laberge, J. Fusion Energy 38, 199 (2019).
11S. A. Slutz, M. C. Herrmann, R. A. Vesey, A. B. Sefkow, D. B.
Sinars, D. C. Rovang, K. J. Peterson, and M. E. Cuneo, Phys.
Plasmas 17, 056303 (2010).

12M. R. Gomez, S. A. Slutz, A. B. Sefkow, D. B. Sinars, K. D.
Hahn, S. B. Hansen, E. C. Harding, P. F. Knapp, P. F. Schmit,
C. A. Jennings, T. J. Awe, M. Geissel, D. C. Rovang, G. A. Chan-
dler, G. W. Cooper, M. E. Cuneo, A. J. Harvey-Thompson, M. C.

23S. C. Hsu and Y. C. F. Thio, J. Fusion Energy 37, 103 (2018).
24S. C. Hsu and S. J. Langendorf, J. Fusion Energy 38, 182 (2019).
25J. T. Cassibry, R. J. Cortez, S. C. Hsu, and F. D. Witherspoon,

Phys. Plasmas 16, 112707 (2009).

26R. Samulyak, P. Parks, and L. Wu, Phys. Plasmas 17, 092702

(2010).

27T. J. Awe, C. S. Adams, J. S. Davis, D. S. Hanna, S. C. Hsu,

and J. T. Cassibry, Phys. Plasmas 18, 072705 (2011).

28J. T. Cassibry, M. Stanic, S. C. Hsu, F. D. Witherspoon, and

S. I. Abarzhi, Phys. Plasmas 19, 052702 (2012).

29J. S. Davis, S. C. Hsu, I. E. Golovkin, J. J. MacFarlane, and

J. T. Cassibry, Phys. Plasmas 19, 102701 (2012).

30J. T. Cassibry, M. Stanic, and S. C. Hsu, Phys. Plasmas 20,

032706 (2013).

31H. Kim, L. Zhang, R. Samulyak, and P. Parks, Phys. Plasmas

20, 022704 (2013).

32S. C. Hsu, A. L. Moser, E. C. Merritt, C. S. Adams, J. P. Dunn,
S. Brockington, A. Case, M. Gilmore, A. G. Lynn, S. J. Messer,
and F. D. Witherspoon, J. Plasma Physics 81 (2015).

33F. Witherspoon, S. Brockington, A. Case, S. J. Messer,
and

L. Wu, R. Elton, S. C. Hsu, J. Cassibry, M. Gilmore,
the PLX Team, Bull. Amer. Phys. Soc. 56, 311 (2011).

34S. Brockington, A. Case, S. Messer, L. Wu, and F. D. Wither-

spoon, Bull. Amer. Phys. Soc. 57, 134 (2012).

35A. Case, S. Messer, S. Brockington, L. Wu, F. D. Witherspoon,

and R. Elton, Phys. Plasmas 20, 012704 (2013).

36S. Messer, A. Case, L. Wu, S. Brockington, and F. D. Wither-

spoon, Phys. Plasmas 20, 032306 (2013).

37S. C. Hsu, E. C. Merritt, A. L. Moser, T. J. Awe, S. J. E. Brock-
ington, J. S. Davis, C. S. Adams, A. Case, J. T. Cassibry, J. P.
Dunn, M. Gilmore, A. G. Lynn, S. J. Messer, and F. D. With-
erspoon, Phys. Plasmas 19, 123514 (2012).

38E. C. Merritt, A. L. Moser, S. C. Hsu, J. Loverich,

M. Gilmore, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 085003 (2013).

and

17

39E. C. Merritt, A. L. Moser, S. C. Hsu, C. S. Adams, J. P. Dunn,
and M. A. Gilmore, Phys. Plasmas 21,

A. Miguel Holgado,
055703 (2014).

40A. L. Moser and S. C. Hsu, Phys. Plasmas 22, 055707 (2015).
41S. C. Hsu, S. J. Langendorf, K. C. Yates, J. P. Dunn, S. Brocking-
ton, A. Case, E. Cruz, F. D. Witherspoon, M. A. Gilmore, J. T.
Cassibry, R. Samulyak, P. Stoltz, K. Schillo, W. Shih, K. Beck-
with, and Y. C. F. Thio, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 46, 1951
(2018).

42C. L. Nehl, R. J. Umstattd, W. R. Regan, S. C. Hsu, and P. M.

McGrath, J. Fusion Energy 38, 506 (2019).

43S. J. Langendorf, K. C. Yates, S. C. Hsu, C. Thoma,

M. Gilmore, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 185001 (2018).

44S. J. Langendorf, K. C. Yates, S. C. Hsu, C. Thoma,

M. Gilmore, Phys. Plasmas 26, 082110 (2019).

and

and

45K. Schillo, J. Cassibry, M. Rodriguez, and S. Thompson, J. Nucl.

Eng. Rad. Sci. 5, 042201 (2019).

46W. Shih, R. Samulyak, S. C. Hsu, S. J. Langendorf, K. C. Yates,

and Y. F. Thio, Phys. Plasmas 26, 032704 (2019).

47E. C. Merritt, A. G. Lynn, M. A. Gilmore, and S. C. Hsu, Rev.

Sci. Instrum. 83, 033506 (2012).

48E. C. Merritt, A. G. Lynn, M. A. Gilmore, C. Thoma, J. Loverich,

and S. C. Hsu, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 83, 10D523 (2012).

49J. J. MacFarlane, I. E. Golovkin, P. R. Woodruﬀ, D. R. Welch,
B. V. Oliver, T. A. Mehlhorn, and R. B. Campbell, in Inertial
Fusion Sciences and Applications 2003, edited by B. A. Hammel,
D. D. Meyerhofer, and J. Meyer-ter-Vehn (American Nuclear
Society, 2004) p. 457.

50R. P. Young, C. C. Kuranz, D. Froula, J. S. Ross, and S. Klein,

Phys. Plasmas 26, 012101 (2019).

51J. D. Huba, NRL Plasma Formulary, NRL/PU/6790–18-640

(2018).

