Interactive Multi-User 3D Visual Analytics in Augmented
Reality

Wanze Xie2, Yining Liang2, Janet Johnson2, Andrea Mower1, Samuel Burns1, Colleen Chelini1, Paul D’Alessandro1, Nadir Weibel2,
J ¨urgen P. Schulze2
1BodyLogical team
2University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA

0
2
0
2

b
e
F
3
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
0
3
5
0
.
2
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

This publication reports on a research project in which we
set out to explore the advantages and disadvantages augmented
reality (AR) technology has for visual data analytics. We devel-
oped a prototype of an AR data analytics application, which pro-
vides users with an interactive 3D interface, hand gesture-based
controls and multi-user support for a shared experience, enabling
multiple people to collaboratively visualize, analyze and manip-
ulate data with high dimensional features in 3D space. Our soft-
ware prototype, called DataCube, runs on the Microsoft HoloLens
- one of the ﬁrst true stand-alone AR headsets, through which
users can see computer-generated images overlaid onto real-
world objects in the user’s physical environment. Using hand ges-
tures, the users can select menu options, control the 3D data visu-
alization with various ﬁltering and visualization functions, and
freely arrange the various menus and virtual displays in their
environment. The shared multi-user experience allows all par-
ticipating users to see and interact with the virtual environment,
changes one user makes will become visible to the other users
instantly. As users engage together they are not restricted from
observing the physical world simultaneously and therefore they
can also see non-verbal cues such as gesturing or facial reactions
of other users in the physical environment. The main objective of
this research project was to ﬁnd out if AR interfaces and collabo-
rative analysis can provide an effective solution for data analysis
tasks, and our experience with our prototype system conﬁrms this.

Introduction

The goal of this project was to design an augmented reality
data visualization tool for population health management, which
uses the biomedical simulation tool Bodylogical [2] to predict the
population’s future health by scientiﬁcally simulating each indi-
vidual’s health based on dozens of biomarkers such as blood pres-
sure, cholesterol, glucose levels, etc. In this article we will report
on how we created our augmented reality prototype system, along
with the challenges we encountered and the insights we gained
along the way.

Bodylogical is a simulation tool, which for each member of
the simulated population, creates a digital twin with simulated
values for many of the human biomarkers and bodily functions.
By giving lifestyle choices, such as the amount of calories taken
in, the amount of exercise or the amount of sleep, the simulation
tool can predict the future health of each simulated individual, and
thus the entire population.

Related Work

There are two main areas of prior work our project is built
upon. One is real-time, multi-user augmented reality data visual-
ization, the other is visual analytics.

The release of the Microsoft HoloLens [3] in 2016 deﬁned
a point in the history of augmented reality from which on it was
possible to build augmented reality applications which could run
directly on a headset, did not require an external computer, and
they allowed the programmer to focus on the user facing part of
the software application because the HoloLens had built-in inside-
out tracking which was very good, as well as a built-in spatial
user interface. It even has its own ﬁnger tracking parser, which
allows for simple but effective interaction with AR applications
by interpreting the user’s head direction as a cursor while ﬁnger
gestures trigger events.

Since the release of the HoloLens, researchers and applica-
tion developers around the world have developed numerous AR
applications and wrote academic publications on them. Standout
areas of particular interest are medical visualization, molecular
science, architecture and telecommunication. The AR applica-
tion OnSight which allows scientists to virtually walk on planet
Mars, a collaboration between Microsoft and JPL, even received
NASA’s 2018 Software of the Year Award [4]. It allows multiple
users, each with a HoloLens, to explore the surface of Mars.

Trestioreanu [11] created a collaborative medical data visu-
alization system for the HoloLens which can visualize CT data
sets in 3D, but it is not designed to do general data visualization.
And it requires an external computer for the actual rendering task,
as opposed to rendering directly on the HoloLens headset.

Visual data analytics in 3D is not a novel concept. It doesn’t
require AR but can just as soon be done on a regular monitor or in
virtual reality (VR). Millais et al. [5] compare 3D data visualiza-
tion in VR to traditional 2D visualization and found that 3D visu-
alization increases the accuracy and depth of insights compared to
2D. To us, the collaborative aspect of AR data visualization is also
very important, because it allows groups of experts to brainstorm
together while viewing the data in front of them.

Implementation

On the pathway to our ﬁnal HoloLens application, we devel-

oped two separate prototype applications.

Prototype 1: Bar Charts

The ﬁrst prototype is an AR application which renders a 3D
bar chart in the AR environment, and places it on a physical table
in the room that the user chooses within the application. The pur-

 
 
 
 
 
 
pose of this is that multiple users can be standing around the visu-
alization and independently view it from their respective viewing
directions, just as if there was a physical model on the table be-
tween them. This early version of the visualization tool already
had basic features such as loading data ﬁles, selecting data points,
and the selection of viewing and ﬁltering parameters of the 3D bar
chart. Figure 1 shows an image of what this application looks like
from the user’s point of view, as seen through the HoloLens.

Prototype 2: DataCube

Our second prototype is a group data visualization tool, and
it is much more sophisticated than our initial 3D bar chart appli-
cation. We used the lessons we learned from the ﬁrst prototype,
such as positioning 3D data sets on a physical table in the room,
or menu items that are attached to the data visualization object
to build a multi-user application which allows an analyst to ana-
lyze data in truly novel ways. The core component of this design
is a multi-dimensional scatter plot, displayed inside of our Dat-
aCube, which can display six dimensions of data by making use
of the three spatial coordinate axes, as well as color, sphere size
and trace lines. Figure 3 shows what our DataCube application
looks like when two people are in a collaborative session.

Figure 1: A 3D bar chart in augmented reality on the HoloLens.

This approach has some advantages of identifying standout
data groups by looking at taller bars, and also provides a quick
reference to the data group of a certain year for a speciﬁc region,
selected by zip code. In addition to bar height, we use a color gra-
dient from cool colors (blue, green) to warm colors (yellow, red)
to emphasize the differences between bar heights, because they
are otherwise sometimes difﬁcult to discern due to occlusion ef-
fects when the user looks at the data from a low viewpoint, or lack
of discernible bar heights when the user looks from the top down.
But it turns out that there are many limitations to this kind of vi-
sualization, primarily that it does not provide much information
in addition to what a typical Excel chart on a 2D display would
show.

Within this prototype, we also explore ways to make better
use of the environment provided by the augmented reality system.
Instead of laying out all the data on a ﬂat surface, we followed
Bach et al.’s concept of “Embedded Visualization” [9] (see Fig-
ure 2). As a result, our AR application targets individual users’
health data, rather than aggregate health information averaged
over larger amounts of people. Our visualization tool provides
Embedded Visualization based on image and object recognition
to show data relevant to the health of a user.

Figure 3: Our AR data visualization tool DataCube with two
users (one looking at the other).

Another component of our visualization tool is the analysis
wall, see Figure 4. It is placed on one of the walls of the room the
users are in, so that anyone can walk up to it to take a closer look
and analyze subsets of the data with 2D diagrams and statistical
information. The user can also choose to create a snapshot of
what they are viewing inside the DataCube. The snapshots are
2D scatter plots based on the face of the DataCube the user looks
at, allowing the user to isolate crucial aspects of the data or the
visualization.

Figure 2: Embedded Visualization based on image recognition.

Figure 4: The analysis wall is placed on one of the walls of the
physical room.

File System

The DataCube application uses comma-separated value
(CSV) ﬁles to store the population health data. These ﬁles are

stored in a OneDrive data directory in the cloud, linked to the
HoloLens’s Microsoft account. The authentication process is se-
cure and managed by the HoloLens at the operating system level.
To import a data ﬁle, the user clicks on the import button on
the virtual console and the HoloLens will open up the ”Load from
OneDrive” menu for the user to select a ﬁle. The data ﬁle needs to
be uploaded by the user to their OneDrive and is required to fol-
low our custom CSV ﬁle format to work with our data importer.
During or at the end of an analysis session, the user can take snap-
shots of the data and export them to a ﬁle for further investigation
by clicking the ”Export” button in the main DataCube menu, and
the HoloLens will open up the ”Send as email” window and attach
the current data visualization converted to a ﬁle as an attachment.
In this window, the user can enter the recipient’s email address
and click send. All of this happens within the HoloLens applica-
tion, interactions are done via the standard HoloLens interface of
pointing by head orientation and ﬁnger pinching to trigger actions.

Shared Multi-User Experience

Another feature of our DataCube prototype is the shared
multi-user experience. Up to ﬁve people, each wearing a
HoloLens, can connect into the same session and analyze, dis-
cuss and manipulate the visualization together in the same place
at the same time (see Figure 5).

in the same room.

We keep track of user interactions and synchronize the in-
teractions that are applied to the shared objects. This include the
transformation matrices of movable objects and users, any change
of states of the data analysis cube and the analysis wall, etc. The
menu of the data cube does not have a shared transformation ma-
trix, but we design it in a way so that regardless of the direction the
user faces with respect to the cube, the main menu always faces
to the user to make it as easy as possible to select menu items.

One limitation of the HoloLens shared experience is the
number of participants in the same session due to the potential
interference across multiple HoloLens devices. According to the
ofﬁcial Microsoft HoloLens documentation [8], the recommended
maximal number of HoloLenses in the same shared experience
session is six. We tested up to ﬁve users in the same session and
were able to achieve a stable connection between all users and
the server for the duration of typical user sessions, which can ex-
ceed one hour. In case of temporal network disconnections, when
a HoloLens re-joins the session, it registers as a new client and
automatically downloads the shared anchor information to syn-
chronize with the current transformation matrices and states of all
the shared objects in the scene.

Data Inspection

Each user can select data points in the data cube by clicking
on them. This brings up detailed information about the data point,
which represents a speciﬁc individual of a population. If a proﬁle
that needs further concern is identiﬁed, the user can choose to save
it to a list that can be exported to the OneDrive folder and studied
at a later point. A number of menu items allow changing visual-
ization modes, activating data ﬁlters, and many more functions to
change how the data is presented to users, as shown in Figure 6.

Figure 5: Third person view of two users using the application in
a collaborative session.

To set up the shared experience, we implemented a socket-
based communication protocol within the local area network
(LAN) based on the MixedReality Toolkit provided by Microsoft.
The sharing mechanism is server-based. We set up the sharing
server on a separate PC and require all participating HoloLens
users to be connected to the same LAN as the PC. When the Dat-
aCube application is launched, each HoloLens will automatically
search for the server PC’s host name within the LAN and connect
to it. Since all HoloLenses are required to be on the same wire-
less LAN, all users will need to be able to log in to the same wiﬁ
network, which ensures that all parties in the session are trusted
users.

The sharing is also session-based. The ﬁrst user deﬁnes the
3D coordinate system the participants will be sharing by sending
its spatial coordinate system’s common points of reference (an-
chors) to the server. When subsequent users join the session, they
will automatically download the anchor information stored on the
server and try to match the anchor points with their own spatial co-
ordinate system. Eventually, each party in the same session will
share the same coordinate space, provided that they are physically

Figure 6: First person view of the HoloLens application with 3D
menu panels.

Dual-language Support

To allow non-English speakers to use our DataCube appli-
cation in Japan, we added dual language support for English and
Japanese to our application. We used this feature very success-
fully in demonstrations to Japanese users in Tokyo. We currently
only support two languages, but given a translator we could easily
support additional languages.

With the support for multiple languages, when users with
different language backgrounds join the same shared experience
session, each user can change their own language settings in the

menu with the language icon. Since the language conﬁguration is
not a shared setting, speakers with different language preferences
can see all text in the application in their preferred language. In
this way, the app ensures a smooth user experience and facilitates
communication when used in an international meeting.

This is a fascinating feature of AR, which we would love
to see more generally used in AR applications, ideally supported
on the operating system level. Our multi-language system is im-
plemented with a database which allows each text element in the
app to query the corresponding translation when it is created. The
database could potentially be adapted to use an online translation
service, such as Google Translate to support more languages au-
tomatically.

Google Daydream Controller

Finger taps in the air can get tiring rather rapidly when us-
ing a HoloLens application for a longer duration. The HoloLens
comes with a simple clicker, which helps alleviate this issue, but
it still requires head orientation to select objects on the screen. We
wanted to add an interaction concept which resembled more that
of VR headsets with 3D controllers. Therefore, we integrated a
Google Daydream [6] controller into our HoloLens application.
It allows for pointing in 3D, but the controller does not know its
location in 3D space. Our application allows the user to switch
switch between hand gestures and the Daydream controller upon
request.

The integration of the Daydream controller extends the user
interactions for our application in the following ways. Clicking
the button on the Daydream controller is more intuitive and less
tiring than the air tap gestures [10]. Air taps require a learning
curve and have a greater chance of recognition errors than a button
click. The orientation tracking of the controller allows for more
precise pointing and selection with a virtual laser pointer, which
follows the orientation of the controller. This mechanism works
much like in actual Google Daydream VR applications.

The mechanism of switching between air taps and the Day-
dream controller is done automatically. If the user’s hand is within
the HoloLens’s ﬁeld of view, the app will expect air taps. If the
Daydream controller is linked to the HoloLens, and an action is
detected from the controller, the app will switch to the Daydream
controller. This allows user to seamlessly switch between the two
modes without having to use a menu item.

Spectator View

One typical limitation of augmented reality experiences is
the lack of a sense of presence for local observers who are not
wearing an AR headset. We help solve this problem by offering
a Spectator View [7]: a real-time view of a multi-user HoloLens
session from a ﬁxed viewpoint, using a Digital Single Lens Re-
ﬂective camera (DSLR). Figures 3 and 5 were created with our
Spectator View system. In comparison, Figure 6 is an image taken
directly from the HoloLens system. Figure 7 shows the setup of
the DSLR camera with the attached HoloLens which we use for
capturing the Spectator View. The HoloLens is attached to the
ﬂash mount on the top of the camera via a custom 3D printed
bracket.

Our spectator setup includes a DSLR camera (Sony alpha-
6500), a video capture card (Elgato HD60-S), the 3D printed
bracket for mounting the HoloLens onto the camera, and a PC

Figure 7: The spectator view camera setup.

for blending HoloLens and camera video streams. The procedure
for our Spectator View is implemented as follows:

1. The PC launches the simulated application via Unity.
2. The HoloLens transmits real-time position and orientation
information to the PC and the simulation app uses it to com-
pute the correct transformation matrices for all virtual ob-
jects in the scene.

3. The DSLR camera transmits high-resolution images through
the capture card to the PC and the simulation app blends the
camera-captured view with the virtual objects to generate
the output image.

4. We project the output image via a projector to show the real-
time AR experience from the camera’s perspective to the
people in the room who are not wearing HoloLenses.

We choose to use a separate DSLR camera instead of the
HoloLens’s built-in RGB camera for two reasons. First, we want
to present the entire on-going session for the spectators, so we
need a camera that has a wider ﬁeld of view than the HoloLens to
capture as much of the room as possible. Second, we need high
resolution images to create a video stream of high quality for the
projector. In our experience, the spectator view is a very useful
feature to allow everyone in a conference setting to follow a data
analysis session.

Conclusions

Designing an interactive data visualization tool is always a
challenge, especially when trying to make the best use of an AR
system. At the time of our research, the Microsoft HoloLens was
the best self-contained AR platform available to us. We created a
multi-user application for the HoloLens, which can visualize pop-
ulation health data with a 3D data cube, as well as a 2D wall dis-
play, designed to be used in a conference room. This application
has been successful enough that it has been used in a commer-
cial environment for well over a year. In the future, we hope to
port our application to the new HoloLens 2 or other devices with
greater ﬁelds of view, higher resolution displays, and better hand
gesture recognition.

Dr. Samuel Burns, Colleen Chelini and Paul D’Alessandro are mem-

bers of the BodyLogical team.

Dr. Nadir Weibel is an Associate Professor in the Department of
Computer Science and Engineering at UC San Diego, and a Research
Health Science Specialist in the VA San Diego Health System. His work
on Human-Centered Computing is situated at the intersection of computer
science, design and the health sciences. He is a computer scientist who
investigates tools, techniques and infrastructure supporting the deploy-
ment of innovative interactive multi-modal and tangible devices in con-
text, and an ethnographer using novel methods for studying and quanti-
fying the cognitive consequences of the introduction of this technology to
everyday life. His research interests range from software engineering to
human computer interaction, particularly mobile health, computer sup-
ported cooperative work, medical informatics and mobile and ubiquitous
computing.

Dr. J¨urgen Schulze is an Associate Research Scientist at UCSD’s
Qualcomm Institute, and an Associate Adjunct Professor in the computer
science department, where he teaches computer graphics and virtual real-
ity. His research interests include applications for virtual and augmented
reality systems, 3D human-computer interaction, and medical data visu-
alization. He holds an M.S. degree from the University of Massachusetts
and a Ph.D. from the University of Stuttgart (Germany).

References
[1] Simon Butscher, Sebastian Hubenschmid, Jens Mueller, Johannes
Fuchs, Harald Reiterer; ”Clusters, Trends, and Outliers: How Im-
mersive Technologies Can Facilitate the Collaborative Analysis of
Multidimensional Data”, In Proceedings of ACM CHI 2018, New
York, NY, USA, URL: https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3173664
[2] Bodylogical health simulator, https://www.pwc.com/us/en/industries/
health-industries/library/doublejump/bodylogical-precision.html
[3] R. Furlan, ”The future of augmented reality: Hololens - Microsoft’s
AR headset shines despite rough edges”, Resources Tools and Toys,
IEEE Spectrum, June 2016.

[4] JPL: Mars Virtual Reality Software Wins NASA Award, URL:

https://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.php?feature=7249

[5] Patrick Millais, Simon L. Jones, and Ryan Kelly. 2018. ”Ex-
ploring Data in Virtual Reality: Comparisons with 2D Data Vi-
sualizations”. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’18).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, Paper LBW007, 6 pages. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3188537

[6] Google Daydream, URL: https://arvr.google.com/daydream/
[7] Spectator View URL:

https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/mixed-reality/spectator-
view

[8] Microsoft HoloLens Ofﬁcial Document URL:

https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/mixed-reality/shared-
experiences-in-mixed-reality

[9] Bach, Benjamin and Sicat, Ronell and Pﬁster, Hanspeter and
Quigley, Aaron, ”Drawing into the AR-CANVAS: Designing Em-
bedded Visualizations for Augmented Reality”. Workshop on Im-
mersive Analytics, IEEE Vis, 2017

[10] Markus Funk, Mareike Kritzler, and Florian Michahelles. 2017.
HoloLens is more than air Tap: natural and intuitive interac-
tion with holograms. In Proceedings of the Seventh International
Conference on the Internet of Things (IoT ’17). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 31, 1–2.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3131542.3140267

[11] Lucian Trestioreanu, ”Holographic Visualisation of Radiology Data
and Automated Machine Learning-based Medical Image Segmenta-
tion”, Master’s Thesis at Universite du Luxembourg, August 2018.

Author Biography

Wanze (Russell) Xie was an undergraduate student in the computer
science department of UCSD when he wrote most of the software for this
project. He graduated from UCSD in June of 2019 and is currently a
graduate student at Stanford University.

Yining Liang was an undergraduate student at UCSD when the work
for this paper was being done, and has since graduated with a B.Sc. de-
gree in computer science.

Janet Johnson is a graduate student in UCSD’s department of Com-
puter Science and Engineering and is advised by Dr. Weibel. Her work
focuses on human-centered interaction design for augmented reality ex-
periences.

Andrea Mower helped support the Bodylogical and UCSD teams in
their experimentation with augmented reality for data visualization and
storytelling. She holds a BS from Brigham Young University in Technology
and Engineering Education. Her area of specialization is helping com-
panies explore adoption of emerging technology for business use. Other
research areas include comparing the effectiveness of training in virtual
reality to traditional learning modalities.

