JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XXX, NO. XXX, XXX XXX

1

Spatiotemporal-Aware Augmented Reality:
Redeﬁning HCI in Image-Guided Therapy

Javad Fotouhi, Arian Mehrfard, Tianyu Song, Alex Johnson M.D., Greg Osgood M.D., Mathias Unberath,

Mehran Armand, and Nassir Navab

0
2
0
2

r
a

M
4

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
6
2
2
0
.
3
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Suboptimal interaction with patient data and chal-
lenges in mastering 3D anatomy based on ill-posed 2D interven-
tional images are essential concerns in image-guided therapies.
Augmented reality (AR) has been introduced in the operating
rooms in the last decade; however, in image-guided interventions,
it has often only been considered as a visualization device improv-
ing traditional workﬂows. As a consequence, the technology is
gaining minimum maturity that it requires to redeﬁne new proce-
dures, user interfaces, and interactions. The main contribution of
this paper is to reveal how exemplary workﬂows are redeﬁned by
taking full advantage of head-mounted displays when entirely co-
registered with the imaging system at all times. The proposed AR
landscape is enabled by co-localizing the users and the imaging
devices via the operating room environment and exploiting all
involved frustums to move spatial information between different
bodies. The awareness of the system from the geometric and
physical characteristics of X-ray imaging allows the redeﬁnition
of different human-machine interfaces. We demonstrate that this
AR paradigm is generic, and can beneﬁt a wide variety of
procedures. Our system achieved an error of 4.76 ± 2.91 mm
for placing K-wire in a fracture management procedure, and
yielded errors of 1.57 ± 1.16◦ and 1.46 ± 1.00◦ in the abduction
and anteversion angles, respectively, for total hip arthroplasty.
We hope that our holistic approach towards improving the
interface of surgery not only augments the surgeon’s capabilities
but also augments the surgical team’s experience in carrying
out an effective intervention with reduced complications and
provide novel approaches of documenting procedures for training
purposes.

Index Terms—Augmented Reality, Surgery, Interaction, X-ray,

Frustum, Visualization

I. INTRODUCTION

Interventional

image guidance is widely adopted across
multiple disciplines of minimally-invasive and percutaneous
therapies [1], [2], [3], [4]. Despite its importance in providing
anatomy-level updates, visualization of images and interaction
with the intra-operative data are inefﬁcient, thus requiring
extensive experience to properly associate the content of the
image with the patient anatomy. These challenges become

J. Fotouhi, A. Mehrfard, T. Song, M. Unberath, M. Armand, and N. Navab
are with the Laboratory for Computational Sensing and Robotics, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
E-mail:
javad.fotouhi@jhu.edu, amehrfa1@jhu.edu,
berath@jhu.edu, marmand2@jhu.edu, nassir.navab@jhu.edu

tsong11@jhu.edu, un-

A. Johnson, G. Osgood, and M. Armand are with the Department of

Orthopaedic Surgery, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA.
E-mail: gosgood2@jhmi.edu, ajohn190@jhmi.edu, marmand2@jhu.edu

A. Mehrfard and N. Navab are with the Technical University of Munich,

Munich, Germany.
E-mail: arian.mehrfard@tum.de, nassir.navab@tum.de

J. Fotouhi, A. Mehrfard, and T. Song are regarded as joint ﬁrst authors
Manuscript Submitted to IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging (T-MI)

Fig. 1. The augmented user interacts with the X-ray images within their
viewing frustums (A-C). Corresponding AR views are shown in D-F.

evident in interventions that require the surgeon to navigate
wires and catheters through critical structures under excessive
radiation, such as in fracture or endovascular repairs.

Surgical navigation and robotic systems are developed to
support surgery with localization and execution of well-deﬁned
tasks [5], [6], [7], [8]. Though these systems increase the
accuracy, their complex setup and explicit tracking nature may
overburden the surgical workﬂow and consequently impede
their acceptance in clinical routines [9]. Image-based naviga-
tion alleviates the requirements for external tracking, though
depends strongly on pre-operative data which become outdated
when the anatomy is altered during the surgery [10], [11].

As the surgical expectancy increases, the communication
between the surgeon, crew, and the information becomes
an important concern. Ineffective communication leads to
increase of surgery time, radiation, and frustration to a point
where in ﬂuoroscopy-guided procedures, instead of the X-ray
technician, the surgeons may reposition the scanners to ensure
the task-deﬁned views are optimal [12], [13].

To bridge the inefﬁciency gaps in surgical workﬂows, re-
searchers have investigated the importance of human factor
considerations in improving the usability of surgical data [14],
[15]. Recent works focused on facilitating the unmet interac-
tion needs by introducing touch-less mechanisms such as gaze,
foot, or voice commands [16], [17], [18]. We believe the high
stakes of surgery necessitates efﬁcient interaction between all
actors in the operating room i.e. surgeon, anesthesiologist and
staff to communicate and access information. This demands
user-centric designs that can also accommodate ﬂuid move-
ment of information and surgical inference across the entire
team.

Augmented reality (AR) solutions have gained popularity
in computer-integrated surgeries, as they can provide intuitive

ABCDEF 
 
 
 
 
 
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XXX, NO. XXX, XXX XXX

2

K-wire placement in fracture care surgery, and acetabular cup
placement in THA.

II. METHODOLOGY

Our main contributions are the collaborative AR concepts
using spatiotemporal-aware ﬂying frustums [42] that enable
intra-operative planning, deﬁne new workﬂows, support sur-
gical crew, enhance the communication between surgeon and
data, and enable intuitive documentation of the surgery for
training purposes. We present the methodology for the real-
ization of these concepts in the remainder of this section.

A. Spatial-Awareness for AR

Fig. 2. Transformation chain of the spatially-aware AR system

visualizations of medical data directly at patients’ site. Early
works on surgical AR focused largely on multi-modal fusion
of information and provided display-based overlays [19], [20],
[21]. Subsequently, AR enabled the utilization of pre- and
intra-interventional 3D data during therapies [22], [23], [24],
[25].

The emergence of commercially available optical-see
through head-mounted display (HMD) systems has led to
development of AR solutions for various image-guided surgi-
cal disciplines, including percutaneous vertebroplasty, kypho-
plasty, lumbar facet joint injection, orthopedic fracture man-
agement, bone cancer treatment, total hip arthroplasty (THA),
interlocking nailing, cardiovascular surgeries, and surgical
education [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [15].

AR has served as image viewer that directly displays the
the operative site using virtual ﬂuoroscopy moni-
data at
tors, hence eliminating the conventional off-axis visualization
through static monitors [34], [35]. Moreover, AR is used to
provide navigational
information during interventions [36],
[37], [38]. These systems often rely on tracking of external
markers, which require line-of-sight and invasive implantation
into patients tissue that can hinder their usability. Andress et
al. suggested a ﬂexible marker-based surgical AR methodology
which only required the marker to appear in the X-ray beam
during the image acquisition, and was removed immediately
after [39]. Recent inside-out localization strategies in AR have
greatly favored the ﬂuid workﬂow over explicit navigation,
and have proved effective in eliminating the need for external
markers [40], [41], [42].

This manuscript introduces the methodology and usability
of a novel spatially-aware concept that enables immediate
interaction with the medical data and promotes team approach
where all stake-holders share a uniﬁed AR experience and
communicate effectively. Our methodology exploits the view-
ing frustum of the imaging devices and human observers in
the operating room (Fig. 1), and provides an engaging and
immersive experience for the surgical team [42]. We showcase
this solution in two high volume orthopedic procedures, i.e.

ingredient

Visual data from cameras contain a wealth of information
that can be used for simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM). Visual SLAM is an important
in our
AR-based interaction recipe that enables co-localization of
augmented users and the imaging device, which we will
refer to as imaging observer,
in a shared operating room
environment. The relative pose between two frames α and β
using the environment map M can be estimated by minimizing
the following reprojection function:
D( ˆαTβ, M)

αTβ = arg min

ˆαTβ

= arg min

(cid:88)

+

ˆαTβ

(cid:88)

f (β)
i ∈Iβ

|f (α)

i − P (M(f (α)

i

))|2

f (α)
i ∈Iα
i − P ˆαTβ(M(f (β)
|f (β)

i

))|2,

(1)

where f (α)
and Iβ, and P is the projection operator.

and f (β)

i

i

are corresponding features in images Iα

In this setting, all users are localized with respect to a com-
mon spatial anchor in the operating room. The ﬁrst member
joining the shared experience will establish the anchor, i.e.
OR coordinate system, and every other member of the AR
session will share their pose in a master-slave conﬁguration
with respect to this OR frame [40]. This relation is shown as
ORTS in Fig. 2.

B. Imaging Observer

C-arm scanners offer ﬂuorscopic imaging capabilities for
a wide range of less-invasive therapeutic areas. To seamlessly
integrate this imaging device into our interactive AR paradigm,
we augment the scanner with a rigidly attached visual tracker,
that observers the structures in the OR environment, and
communicates spatial information to all users. The materializa-
tion of this imaging observer system requires a co-calibration
between the visual
tracker on the scanner, and the X-ray
source [41]. The constant transformation that explains the
calibration is denoted as xTH in Fig. 2.

To estimate xTH, we formulate an over-determined system

of equations as follows:

IRTOR =IR TX(ti)XTH

=IR TX(ti+1)XTH

ORT−1

H (ti)
ORT−1

H (ti+1).

(2)

Operating RoomPose-Aware Visual SensorC-arm X-ray SourcePatientAugmentedSurgeon PTSPTXORTSORTHXTHJOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XXX, NO. XXX, XXX XXX

3

Fig. 3. Multiple ﬂying frustum are rendered at their corresponding 3D pose.
The applications running on the computer and the HMD allows the users to
replay various acquisition during or after the intervention.

IR denotes the frame of an external tracker that is used to
track the motion of the C-arm source as it undergoes different
motion at times ti and ti+1. It is important to note that the IR
tracker is only used for this one-time and ofﬂine co-calibration,
and it is not used intra-operatively. By re-arranging Eq. 2, we
formulate the problem in the form of AX = XB as presented
in Eq. 3, such that X :=X TH, and A and B represent the
relative motion of the X-ray source and the SLAM capable
visual sensor on the gantry, respectively.
X (ti+1)IRTX(ti)XTH =X TH

H (ti−1)IRT−1

X (ti).

ORT−1

IRT−1

(3)
Rotation and translation components of the hand-eye problem
are disentangled and computed separately as:

RARX = RXRB
RAtX + tA = RXtB + tX.

(4)

We estimate the rotation parameters using unit quaternion
representation as qA qX = qX qB. Given that a unit quater-
nion qi is formed by a vector vi and a scalar si such that
qX = vX + sX, we re-write the rotation component in Eq. 4
using the quaternion product rule as:
(cid:126)(.) : sAvX + sXvA + vA × vX = sXvB + sBvX + vX × vB
(.) : sAsX − vA.vX = sXsB − vX.vB.

(5)

Re-arranging the above formulation yields:
(cid:20) sA − sB
(vA − vB)

(vA − vB)(cid:124)
(sA − sB)I3 + [vA + vB]×

(cid:21) (cid:20)sX
vX

(cid:21)

=

(cid:21)

,

(cid:20) 0
03

(6)
which is then solved in a constrained optimization fashion as:

min ||M q||2

2 s.t. ||q||2

(7)
where q = [sX , (cid:126)vx](cid:124). After the rotation parameters are
computed, the translation vector is estimated in a least-squares
setting: (RA − I3)tX = RXtB − tA.

2 = 1,

C. Geometry-Awareness for AR

In this section, we describe the underlying geometry that
allows us to combine the content of 2D X-ray images, directly
with the 3D spatial information we computed in Sec. II-A
and II-B. To this end, we explicitly model the viewable region

Fig. 4. The augmented projections allow us to exploit the geometry in AR
and plan surgical tools in relation to patient anatomy. The misaligned virtual
drill in A is repositioned until it appears inside the desired structure in all the
frustums (B).

Fig. 5. AR interface to plan trajectories on the X-ray acquisitions

of the X-ray camera, known as the ﬂying frustum [42], and
allow interaction with images within their geometries. It is
important to note that, the ﬂying frustum refers to the full
pyramid of vision (Fig. 2), and is different than the truncated
pyramids used in the computer graphics community. Despite
the similarities in formulation, the conventional frustum model
in graphics only applies to reﬂective images, and cannot
accommodate the transmission model used in ﬂuoroscopy.
Therefore, we extend the perspective pinhole camera model
that is commonly used in the computer vision community [43].
In our paradigm, users can move the images within their
frustums on a virtual plane known as the near plane, between
X-ray source and detector (referred to as the far plane),
while they remain a valid image of the same anatomy. This
interaction enables the users to intersect the images with corre-
sponding anatomies, and intuitively observe 2D-image-to-3D-
anatomy associations. Additionally, the imaging technologists
which operate the scanner, can align the scanner with a desired
frustum that is decided by the surgeon.

A ﬂying frustum is deﬁned using the following model:

Pf =





n
f
0
0

0
n
f
0



0
0
 K P
1

(cid:20)ORRX
0(cid:62)

(cid:21)

,

ORtX
1

(8)

where n refers to the distance to the near plane, f is the focal
length, K is the matrix of intrinsic parameters, and 0 ≤ n ≤ f .
The parameter n is controlled by the user, such that when
n = f , the X-ray image is directly displayed at the detector
scale. It is worth mentioning that, with conventional frustum
models, the near plane can only take values smaller than the
far plane, which is not the case in our representation.

ABAnnotated entry pointAnnotated exit pointAP X-rayimageFemoral headJOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XXX, NO. XXX, XXX XXX

4

Fig. 6. Each point in a frustum image corresponds to a ray passing through
the landmark in 3D, and connecting the source and detector of the C-arm.
Intersection of two rays recovers the 3D point and renders it directly on the
patient (A-B). Similarly, annotation of lines in each frustum, corresponds to
a plane in 3D. The intersection of these planes restores the 3D planning
trajectory, and renders it in AR such that it travels through the corresponding
anatomical structure (C-D).

(e.g. through a bone canal) in all frustums. An alignment
consensus in all frustums is the equivalent of the alignment of
the virtual 3D tool with the imaged anatomy in 3D.

The second planning approach requires 2D interaction on
the frustum X-ray images. In this setting, for each selected
landmark on a frustum image (Fig. 5), a 3D ray connecting
the C-arm source and the target landmark will be rendered into
the AR scene. As illustrated in Fig. 6, the intersection of two
rays from a corresponding landmark in two images reconstruct
the 3D landmark. Each ray is deﬁned via two elements: i)
the position of the C-arm X-ray source ci, and ii) the unit
direction vector ui from the source to the annotated landmark
in the frustum. We estimate the closest point x∗
to the N =
l
2 rays corresponding to each landmark l via a least-squares
minimization strategy as follows:

x∗

l = arg min
x∈R3

N
(cid:88)

i=1

(cid:107)(I3 − uiu(cid:62)

i )x − ti(cid:107)2,

(10)

where ti = (I3 − uiu(cid:62)

i )ci .

Similarly, two points on a frustum i deﬁning the entry and
the exit points of a drilling trajectory, associate to two rays
u1i and u2i in 3D. These two rays span a plane in 3D as
shown in Fig. 6. The intersection of the planes corresponding
to the same entry and exit points on frustums i and j form a
3D line d12 = (u1i × u2i) × (u1j × u2j) that passes through
the desired entry and exit points on the patient anatomy.

Our ﬁrst approach requires a more complex interaction
with the augmented surgical implant using the 6 degrees-of-
freedom, however generalizes to arbitrary structures beyond
linear annotations, such as the curved plates used for internal
ﬁxations.

E. Surgical Workﬂow Integration

Intra-operative planning and execution with the ﬂying frus-
tums support can be used in various ﬂuoroscopy-guided pro-
cedures. In THA,
the critical points deﬁning the anterior
pelvic plane (APP) can be each identiﬁed on X-ray images.
Given APP, a virtual acetabular implant and a rigidly attached
impactor are rendered in AR with their desired orientation that
is calculated with respect to APP. Likewise, the translational
component of the cup implant is identiﬁed by deﬁning the
center of the patient acetabulum on corresponding ﬂuoroscopic
images. These relations are shown in Fig. 7.

Another exemplary image-guided procedure is the place-
ment of screws and K-wires during fracture management. As
shown in Fig. 8, AR provides support for placement of K-wires
using the trajectory planning on the corresponding frustums.

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

A. System Setup

Our system comprises an ARCADIS Orbic 3D C-arm
(Siemens Healthineers, Forchheim, Germany) as an intra-
operative X-ray device that automatically computes the cumu-
lative area dose for each session. The immersive AR solution
was built using the Unity cross-platform game engine (Unity
Technologies, San Francisco, CA, US) and was deployed to an

Fig. 7.
are deﬁned with respect to the anterior pelvic plane.

In THA, abduction and anteversion angles of the acetabular implant

For each 2D point xi ∈ I, where I is the domain
of all acquired images, the corresponding point xf in the
frustum domain F is scaled by a factor s as xf = s xi =
( n
f )xi , such that 0 ≤ n ≤ f . Finally, the 3D pose of the
interactive image in the frustum is deﬁned as:

ORTI =

(cid:20)ORRX
0(cid:62)

(cid:21)

ORtX
1







I3

0
0
n
0(cid:62) 1








(9)







ORRX

=

0(cid:62)

r13 n
r23 n
r33 n

+OR tX

1

,





where R = {ri,j}i,j:1, 2, 3. Fig. 3 demonstrates multiple ﬂying
frustums, each rendered given their respective 3D pose.

D. Planning Using Flying Frustums

Flying frustums discussed in Sec. II-A-II-C embed sufﬁcient
3D and 2D information that enable interventional planning for
the placement of surgical tools. In this section we introduce
two distinct approaches for intra-operative planning.

In the ﬁrst method, virtual tools are manipulated in 3D by
the user, and simultaneously projected onto the X-ray images
of all valid frustums. A point Xt ∈ T , where T is the domain
of all 3D points on a virtual tool, is projected onto the ith
frustum as xti = PfiXt.

In an exemplary case shown in Fig. 4, the virtual drill is
rotated and translated until it passes through a desired structure

ABCDTrans-ischial LineAnterior Superior Iliac SpineAnterior Superior Iliac SpineAnterior Pelvic PlaneAbductionImpactor and the Acetabular ComponentPubic SymphysisJOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XXX, NO. XXX, XXX XXX

5

Fig. 8. K-wire placement in a fracture reduction procedure

optical-see-through HMD, the Microsoft HoloLens (Microsoft,
Redmond, WA). To jointly co-localize the augmented surgeon
and the C-arm scanner, a second HoloLens device with inside-
out SLAM capabilities was attached near the X-ray detector.
The two HMDs shared their spatial anchor, a rich feature
reference region in the common environment, over a wireless
local network, allowing them to remain synchronized and es-
tablish spatial awareness. This connection was enabled through
a TCP-based sharing service running on an Alienware (Dell,
Round Rock, TX, US) laptop server with an Intel i7-7700HQ
CPU, NVIDIA GTX 1070 graphics card, 16 GB RAM, and
Windows 10 operating system. The X-ray images from C-arm
were transmitted to the server computer over a direct Ethernet
connection, and then uploaded to the HMD.

Fig. 9. Mean and standard deviation of the translational and rotational
errors for the hand eye calibration step are shown in the left and right plots,
respectively. For each N number of pose pairs shown on the horizontal axis
(except the last column which considers all the available data), the experiments
were repeated 100 times by each time sampling N poses from the total 120
available poses and computing the hand-eye calibration.

B. System Calibration

To solve the hand-eye calibration problem in Eq. 3, 120
different pairs of corresponding poses were recorded from the
visual tracker on the C-arm as well as an external infrared
tracking system that tracked the C-arm source. Fig. 9 presents
the error for this ofﬂine calibration step given different sam-
pling for the pose pairs.

The localization quality of the SLAM-based visual tracking
system on the scanner, i.e. the HMD on the scanner, was com-
pared to a ground-truth provided by an external tracker. We
measured rotational errors of (0.71◦, 0.11◦, 0.74◦) with a norm
of 0.75◦ and translational errors of (4.0, 5.0, 4.8) mm with a
norm of 8.0 mm along the (x, y, z) axes, respectively [42].

C. Experiments

Eight orthopedic surgeons and residents from Johns Hop-
kins Hospital participated in pre-clinical user studies and per-
formed two surgically relevant tasks while utilizing interactive
ﬂying frustums in an immersive AR environment.

In the ﬁrst procedure, we focused on the correct placement
of a K-wire to repair complex fractures. To emulate the K-wire
placement through the superior pubic ramus (acetabulum arc),
we used radiopaque cubic phantoms, as seen in Fig. 10-C. For
direct comparison, we used the same setup that was used by
Fischer et al. [22]. Each cube consisted of a stiff, lightweight,
and non radiopaque methylene bisphenyl diisocyanate (MDI)
foam. Since the superior pubic ramus is a tubular bone with a
diameter of approximately 10 mm, we used a thin aluminium
mesh ﬁlled with MDI that was placed inside each cube and
served as the bone phantom. The two ends of the tubular
structures were complemented with a rubber radiopaque ring.
Each subject was asked to place a K-wire with a diameter
of 2.8 mm through the tubular phantom using a surgical drill
(Stryker Corporation, Kalamazoo, MI, US).

For the second procedure, we constructed a total hip arthro-
plasty mock setup by using a radiopaque pelvis phantom with a
magnetic acetabulum to ﬁxate the acetabular cup (Fig. 11). For
direct comparison, we adopted the same experimental setup
that was suggested by Alexander et al. [44]. The cup was

Real k-wireVirtual k-wire with drillExit pointEntry pointJOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XXX, NO. XXX, XXX XXX

6

Fig. 10. A-B are the X-ray images of the cubic phantom shown in C. In
D-E, the X-ray images of the same phantom are shown after a K-wire was
successfully inserted inside the tube. F is the CBCT scan of the phantom
which was acquired for veriﬁcation. Due to metal artifacts, the tube does not
exhibit strong contrast.

Fig. 11. In A the setup of the C-arm, pelvic phantom, and the acetabular cup
are shown. B is a close-up view of the phantom with an empty acetabular
socket and a magnet for holding the implant in position. Image C shows the
impactor while it is placed by a surgeon during the experiment, and D shows
the successfully placed cup in the acetabulum.

attached to a straight cylindrical acetabular trialing impactor
(Smith & Nephew, London, UK) allowing the operator to
guide the cup. Since the ideal orientation of the implant is
unknown, we use abduction and anteversion angles that lie in
a safe zone deﬁned by landmarks on the pelvis as described
in [45].

Initially, each surgeon received a brief introduction to the
Microsoft Hololens, preparing them to properly mount and use
the HMD. To further instruct them on our AR application, pre-
recorded training X-ray images were loaded onto their HMD,
allowing them to become familiar with the interface, planning
procedure, and the interaction mechanism using hand gestures.
After the required planning images were acquired by the
proctors, each surgeon planned their respective procedure in
AR and performed the drilling task into the cube or placed the
acetabular component into the pelvis. During the procedure,
they were explicitly allowed to order as many X-ray shots
from any perspective that they considered necessary.

Fig. 12. The plots present the execution time and total radiation dose during
K-wire insertion using the AR supported approach and SOP. On the leftmost
plot, the blue boxplot is the execution time with AR, whereas the orange
boxplot is the total time including the planning phase. The green lines show
the mean values for each of the groups.

and the cumulative radiation dose as it was measured by the
scanner. Finally, for the veriﬁcation and accuracy measure-
ment, we acquired a 3D cone-beam CT (CBCT) scan of the
phantoms with their respective implants.

D. Results

Tables I and II comprise the performance of every partic-
ipant in the experiments. Table I contains the measurements
for the K-wire insertion, and Table II presents the procedural
outcome for the acetabular cup placement. We separate the
interventional time measurements into i) planning time, the
time it took each surgeon to plan their procedure in AR,
and ii) execution time, determining the duration of the inser-
tion/placement of the instruments. Furthermore, we recorded
the number of X-ray acquisitions and the respective dose for
each user. Finally, to assess the overall performances, we
computed the average distance of the K-wire from the center
of the tube at the entry and the exit surface of the tubular
structure, and the abduction and anteversion angles of the
acetabular implant, based on standard guidelines.

Table III compares the K-wire insertion results of our
immersive AR system with a previous non-immersive AR
system [22] as well as the standard operating procedure
(SOP) using conventional ﬂuoroscopic guidance. Combining
the planning and execution times, the AR procedure took on
average 111.25 sec versus the 594.3 sec during SOP. Fig. 12
depicts this comparison. On average, the surgeons used 2
ﬂuoroscopic shots with a combined dose of 0.255 (cGY(cm2))
per user and committed an insertion error of 4.76 mm. The
associated standard deviation (SD) values are presented in
Table V.

We recorded the planing time, the time it took them to
execute the procedure, number of ﬂuoroscopic acquisitions,

In Table IV we present the outcome for the acetabular
cup placement procedure with the immersive AR system,

ABETubeDTubeK-wireK-wireTubeFK-wireCubeCJOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XXX, NO. XXX, XXX XXX

7

TABLE I
OUTCOME FROM K-WIRE INSERTION FOR PARTICIPANTS Pi

Planning Time (sec)
Execution Time (sec)
# X-ray images
Dose (cGY(cm2))
Error (mm)

P1
125
83
2
0.28
8.23

P2
40
74
2
0.21
5.71

P3
39
58
2
0.19
9.02

P4
58
46
2
0.27
3.26

P5
79
66
2
0.26
6.94

P6
22
67
2
0.28
1.13

P7
67
63
2
0.27
1.59

P8
44
79
2
0.28
2.23

TABLE II
OUTCOME FROM THE PLACEMENT OF THE ACETABULAR IMPLANT FOR PARTICIPANTS Pi

Planning Time (sec)
Execution Time (sec)
# X-ray images
Dose (cGY(cm2))
Abduction error (◦)
Anteversion error (◦)

P1
162
87
8
1.27
2.1
1.1

P2
70
39
8
1.3
1
0.6

P3
117
13
8
1.23
1.1
2.7

P4
88
19
8
1.26
1.3
1.4

P5
64
17
8
1.18
2.9
2.1

P6
37
35
8
1.25
0.1
0.4

P7
71
26
8
1.18
0.4
0.3

P8
110
24
8
1.29
3.7
3.1

TABLE III
COMPARISON OF AR, NON-IMMERSIVE AR (NI-AR), AND SOP FOR
K-WIRE INSERTION. WE DENOTE THE TIME FOR THE AR PROCEDURE AS
(A + B), WITH A BEING THE PLANNING TIME AND B THE EXECUTION
TIME.

MEAN

AR
NI-AR [22]
SOP

Time
(sec)
59.25 + 52
243.7
594.3

# X-ray
images
2
2.14
40.86

Dose
(cGY(cm2))
0.255
1.6
4.43

Error
(mm)
4.76
5.13
4.61

TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE DURING ACETABULAR IMPLANT PLACEMENT USING AR,
NI-AR, AND SOP. WE DENOTE THE TIME FOR THE AR PROCEDURE AS
(A + B), WITH A BEING THE PLANNING AND B THE EXECUTION TIME.

MEAN

AR
NI-AR [44]
SOP

Time
(sec)
89.88 + 32.5
180
235

# X-ray
images
8
1
13.75

Dose
(cGY(cm2))
1.25
1.83
1.96

Abd.
(◦)
1.57
1.78
4.76

Ant.
(◦)
1.46
1.43
4.77

comparing it to a previous non-immersive AR application [44]
and SOP. Using SOP, it took surgeons on average 235 sec to
place the cup and under AR a combined time of 122.38 sec
was achieved. For the AR setup, we acquired 8 X-ray images
with an average dose of 1.25 (cGY(cm2)) per surgeon, whereas
14 ﬂuoroscopic images with a dose of 1.96 (cGY(cm2)) were
acquired during SOP. With the AR system, the average errors
were 1.57◦ and 1.46◦ for the abduction and anteversion angles,
respectively. Under SOP the respective angles were 4.76◦ and
4.77◦. Figs. 13 and 14 present the outcome with respect to
time, radiation dose, and individual rotational measures for
the acetabular cup placement experiments using AR and SOP.
The corresponding SD are listed in Table VI. The immersive
AR results show an SD of respectively 89.88 sec and 32.5 sec
for planning and execution time, 0 for the number of X-ray
images, 1.25 for the dose, 1.24 for the abduction error and
1.07 in the anteversion error.

IV. DISCUSSION

We evaluated our spatially-aware AR system in two clini-
cally relevant procedures, i) the placement of K-wires through

Fig. 13. Comparison of time and total radiation dose during cup placement
with AR and SOP approaches. The orange boxplot represents the total time
including the planning time. The red (+) denote outliers, where in the leftmost
plot the top sign belongs to the orange boxplot, and the bottom (+) to the
blue plot.

TABLE V
THE RESPECTIVE STANDARD DEVIATION VALUES, RELATING TO
TABLE III.

SD

AR
NI-AR[22]
SOP

Time
(sec)
32.02 + 24.23
84.00
188.0

# X-ray
images
0
0.69
19.38

Dose
(cGY(cm2))
0.04
0.17
2.00

Error
(mm)
3.11
2.72
3.62

TABLE VI
THE RESPECTIVE STANDARD DEVIATION VALUES, RELATING TO
TABLE IV.

SD

AR
NI-AR[44]
SOP

Time
(sec)
89.88 + 32.5
15
96

# X-ray
images
0
0
3.73

Dose
(cGY(cm2))
1.25
0.06
0.45

Abd.
(◦)
1.24
1.37
2.2

Ant.
(◦)
1.07
0.66
3.15

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XXX, NO. XXX, XXX XXX

8

the placement of the acetabular cup, demonstrating the ef-
fectiveness of our AR system, we compare it against SOP
and a NI-AR system as presented in [44]. As shown in
Fig. 13, the execution time is considerably lower using AR;
even when combining planning and execution time it took the
surgeons 122.38 sec, which is nearly half of the 235 sec that
they needed under SOP and less than the 180 sec with NI-
AR. Furthermore, the number of ﬂuoroscopic images were
reduced; every surgeon used exactly 8 images, which are
again merely the images required for planning. This resulted
in an average dose of 1.25 cGY(cm2), which is lower than
with SOP, where the surgeons used an average of 13.75
radiographs with an average dose of 1.96 cGY(cm2), and
with NI-AR where one pre-procedure CBCT lead to a dose
of 1.83 cGY(cm2). The objective of this procedure was to
achieve abduction and anteversion angles of 40◦ and 15◦,
respectively, which lie in the clinical safe-zone [45]. The
respective errors are shown in Table IV and Fig. 14. The
outcome distinctly displays a more accurate cup placement
using the spatially-aware immersive AR system (1.57◦&1.46◦)
compared to the SOP (4.76◦ & 4.77◦), compared to the NI-
AR system (1.78◦ & 1.43◦) the abduction error is slightly less,
whereas the anteversion error is marginally higher (0.03◦).

For both procedures the deployment of our AR system lead
to a comparable or higher accuracy, fewer X-ray images with
a consequently lower radiation dose. For the total time, it
has to be noted that our planning time does not include the
recording of the X-ray images that were necessary to plan
the procedure. This step however, as shown in [46], can be
fully automated, resulting in an immediate availability of the
ﬂuoroscopic images.

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We presented the embodiment of a novel interaction concept
based on spatiotemporal-aware AR. For the two orthopedic
use cases presented in this manuscript, our immersive AR
system demonstrated improvements in time, number of X-
ray acquisitions, radiation dose, and outcome during cup
placement.

The spatiotemporal awareness inherent in AR overhauls
the ill-posed communication between the surgeon, staff, and
information; e.g. Fig. 15 shows the potential role of ﬂying
frustums and AR in effectively communicating desired X-ray
views to the technician, eliminating unfavorable views and
reducing the staff burnout.

An application of AR outside the OR is ”surgical replay”,
where the residents can review the surgery, accompanied with
its temporal and spatial information including all the X-ray
acquisitions and optical point-clouds from the patient site. This
enables the medical trainees to identify distinct actions that
were taken by the experienced surgeon based upon each image.
Access to such 3D post-operative analysis has the potential to
dramatically improve the quality of surgical education.

Direct visualization of X-ray images within their corre-
sponding viewing frustums delivers intuition that effectively
unites the content of the 2D image with the 3D imaged
anatomy. In this setting, images from various perspectives

Fig. 14. Anteversion and abduction angles after acetabular cup placement
using AR support and SOP

tubular structures for fracture repair tasks, and ii) placement
of acetabular components into the hip socket for total hip
arthroplasty. We selected these two high volume procedures
among the many other applications which can be enabled by
our interactive AR system, as they each represent a class of
common orientational alignment and localization tasks that are
prevalent across different ﬁelds of image-guided surgery.

For the K-wire insertion procedure,

the immersive AR
system performed substantially faster than the conventional
SOP, yielding less than a ﬁfth of the time (Fig. 12). Table III
demonstrates a detailed comparison of our system, not only
with the SOP as an established baseline, but also with a pre-
viously presented non-immersive mixed reality method based
on RGBD sensing and intra-operative CBCT imaging [22].

With the AR system every surgeon used exactly 2 X-ray
images, which were the 2 images required for procedure
planning. Despite explicitly allowing them to take as many
radiographs as they desire, no one of the surgeons requested
additional X-ray images. As mentioned above, during SOP,
surgeons inserted the K-wires with an average of 40.86 ﬂuo-
roscopic images and with an average dose of 4.43 cGY(cm2),
compared to 0.255 cGY(cm2), which were used during the AR
procedures. The RGBD-CBCT system in [22], [23] yielded
on average 2.14 X-rays, although it required a pre-procedural
CBCT scan of the phantom, inducing the higher radiation dose
of 1.6 cGY(cm2).

Finally, evaluating the outcome of the procedure with regard
to the drilling error, AR (4.76 mm) outperforms RGBD-CBCT
(5.13 mm), both being marginally worse than SOP (4.61 mm).
Considering that we only instructed the surgeons to drill
through the tube and not precisely through the center of the
tube, we regard these difference as negligible. It is important to
note that, our AR system performed similar to the conventional
X-ray method in terms of accuracy, while reducing time by a
factor of 5, number of ﬂuoroscopic acquisitions by a factor of
20, and the radiation dose by a factor of 17.

The same trend is observed with the measurements for

Cup position (degrees)Augmented RealitySOP0510152025303032343638404244464850JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XXX, NO. XXX, XXX XXX

9

The widespread adoption of human-centered AR in inter-
ventional routines requires careful considerations regarding
surgeons’ experience. The interaction with the virtual con-
tent using intuitive hand gestures, and resolving the per-
ceptual ambiguities between real and virtual that occur due
to vergence-accommodation conﬂict, can greatly contribute
to the acceptance of AR technologies [47]. Furthermore,
development of artiﬁcial intelligence strategies can i) create
semantic understanding from the surgical environment and
augment surgeon’s intelligence, and ii) enhance the spatial
mapping and co-localization, thus improving the stability of
marker-less AR systems. Lastly, future integration of eye
tracking systems into HMDs can circumvent the internal eye-
to-display calibration, adjust the rendering based on each user,
and replace unnecessary gestures with gaze-based interaction.
As shown in this paper, the introduction of new technology
requires a user-centric design for its full integration into the
clinical workﬂow. The ultimate goal may be the discovery of
new surgical workﬂows enabled by the introduction of novel
technology. This goal could only be achieved with a close and
extended partnership between surgeons and technical experts,
as well as the full integration of the advanced technology in
the broad spectrum of surgical teaching, training, planning,
workﬂow, and documentation.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Siewerdsen, D. Moseley, S. Burch, S. Bisland, A. Bogaards, B. Wil-
son, and D. Jaffray, “Volume ct with a ﬂat-panel detector on a mobile,
isocentric c-arm: Pre-clinical investigation in guidance of minimally
invasive surgery,” Medical physics, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 241–254, 2005.
[2] J. S. Hott, V. R. Deshmukh, J. D. Klopfenstein, V. K. Sonntag, C. A.
Dickman, R. F. Spetzler, and S. M. Papadopoulos, “Intraoperative
the ﬁrst 60 cases,”
iso-c c-arm navigation in craniospinal surgery:
Neurosurgery, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1131–1137, 2004.

[3] D. L. Miller, E. Van´o, G. Bartal, S. Balter, R. Dixon, R. Padovani,
B. Schueler, J. F. Cardella, and T. De Ba`ere, “Occupational radiation
protection in interventional radiology: a joint guideline of the cardiovas-
cular and interventional radiology society of europe and the society of
interventional radiology,” Cardiovascular and interventional radiology,
vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 230–239, 2010.

[4] N. Theocharopoulos, K. Perisinakis, J. Damilakis, G. Papadokostakis,
A. Hadjipavlou, and N. Gourtsoyiannis, “Occupational exposure from
common ﬂuoroscopic projections used in orthopaedic surgery,” JBJS,
vol. 85, no. 9, pp. 1698–1703, 2003.

[5] C. W. Kim, Y.-P. Lee, W. Taylor, A. Oygar, and W. K. Kim, “Use of
navigation-assisted ﬂuoroscopy to decrease radiation exposure during
minimally invasive spine surgery,” The Spine Journal, vol. 8, no. 4, pp.
584–590, 2008.

[6] U. K. Kakarla, A. S. Little, S. W. Chang, V. K. Sonntag, and
N. Theodore, “Placement of percutaneous thoracic pedicle screws using
neuronavigation,” World neurosurgery, vol. 74, no. 6, pp. 606–610, 2010.
[7] N. R. Crawford, N. Theodore, and M. A. Foster, “Surgical robot

platform,” Oct. 10 2017, uS Patent 9,782,229.

[8] T. Yi, V. Ramchandran, J. H. Siewerdsen, and A. Uneri, “Robotic drill
guide positioning using known-component 3d–2d image registration,”
Journal of Medical Imaging, vol. 5, no. 2, p. 021212, 2018.

[9] L. Joskowicz and E. J. Hazan, “Computer aided orthopaedic surgery:

incremental shift or paradigm change?” 2016.

[10] R. B. Grupp, R. Hegeman, R. Murphy, C. Alexander, Y. Otake,
B. McArthur, M. Armand, and R. H. Taylor, “Pose estimation of pe-
riacetabular osteotomy fragments with intraoperative x-ray navigation,”
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 2019.

[11] J. Goerres, A. Uneri, M. Jacobson, B. Ramsay, T. De Silva, M. Ketcha,
R. Han, A. Manbachi, S. Vogt, G. Kleinszig et al., “Planning, guidance,
and quality assurance of pelvic screw placement using deformable image
registration,” Physics in Medicine & Biology, vol. 62, no. 23, p. 9018,
2017.

Fig. 15. Visualization of a target frustum (A) allows the C-arm operator to
align the current C-arm frustum with the surgeon’s desired perspective (B)
and eliminate the waste of time and radiation during ﬂuoro hunting. This
concept is an example of the capabilities of interactive frustums on moving
information between different stake holders in the OR, i.e. surgeon, patient,
X-ray technician, staff, etc.

Fig. 16. Spatial and temporal information from the surgery can be recorded
and reviewed after surgery.

can be grouped within their frustums to form multi- or
extended-view representations of the anatomy. The interlocked
frustums shown in Fig. 17 are examples for such visualization
concept, that can particularly beneﬁt interventions where leg-
length discrepancies or malrotations in tibio- and lateral/distal-
femoral angles are major concerns.

Though our solution delivers spatial awareness, it should
not be regarded as a surgical navigation system. This is
because marker-less tracking, currently, cannot deliver the
level of accuracy achieved by marker-based surgical naviga-
tion or robotic systems. Our solution is merely an advanced
visualization platform that enhances the interaction across the
surgical ecosystem and promotes effective collaboration and
team approach.

Fig. 17. Interlocking of multiple X-ray frustums enables visualization of large
anatomical structures.

ABCurrent frustumTarget frustumC-arm operatorC-arm operatorCurrent frustumTarget frustum=JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XXX, NO. XXX, XXX XXX

10

[12] M. Synowitz and J. Kiwit, “Surgeons radiation exposure during percu-
taneous vertebroplasty,” Journal of Neurosurgery: Spine, vol. 4, no. 2,
pp. 106–109, 2006.

[13] A. Starr, A. Jones, C. Reinert, and D. Borer, “Preliminary results and
complications following limited open reduction and percutaneous screw
ﬁxation of displaced fractures of the acetabulum.” Injury, vol. 32, pp.
SA45–50, 2001.

[14] K. Aagaard, B. S. Laursen, B. S. Rasmussen, and E. E. Sørensen, “Inter-
action between nurse anesthetists and patients in a highly technological
environment,” Journal of PeriAnesthesia Nursing, vol. 32, no. 5, pp.
453–463, 2017.

[15] C. Laverdi`ere, J. Corban, J. Khoury, S. M. Ge, J. Schupbach, E. J. Har-
vey, R. Reindl, and P. A. Martineau, “Augmented reality in orthopaedics:
a systematic review and a window on future possibilities,” The Bone &
Joint Journal, vol. 101, no. 12, pp. 1479–1488, 2019.

[16] B. Hatscher, M. Luz, L. E. Nacke, N. Elkmann, V. M¨uller, and
C. Hansen, “Gazetap: towards hands-free interaction in the operating
room,” in Proceedings of the 19th ACM international conference on
multimodal interaction. ACM, 2017, pp. 243–251.

[17] A. Mewes, B. Hensen, F. Wacker, and C. Hansen, “Touchless interaction
with software in interventional radiology and surgery: a systematic
literature review,” International journal of computer assisted radiology
and surgery, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 291–305, 2017.

[18] M. Ma, P. Fallavollita, S. Habert, S. Weidert, and N. Navab, “Device-
and system-independent personal touchless user interface for operating
rooms: One personal ui to control all displays in an operating room.” In-
ternational journal of computer assisted radiology and surgery, vol. 11,
no. 6, pp. 853–861, 2016.

[19] Y. Sato, M. Nakamoto, Y. Tamaki, T. Sasama, I. Sakita, Y. Nakajima,
M. Monden, and S. Tamura, “Image guidance of breast cancer surgery
using 3-d ultrasound images and augmented reality visualization,” IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 681–693, 1998.

[20] N. Navab, A. Bani-Kashemi, and M. Mitschke, “Merging visible and
invisible: Two camera-augmented mobile c-arm (camc) applications,” in
Proceedings 2nd IEEE and ACM International Workshop on Augmented
Reality (IWAR’99).
IEEE, 1999, pp. 134–141.

[21] N. Navab, S.-M. Heining, and J. Traub, “Camera augmented mobile c-
arm (camc): calibration, accuracy study, and clinical applications,” IEEE
transactions on medical imaging, vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 1412–1423, 2009.
[22] M. Fischer, B. Fuerst, S. C. Lee, J. Fotouhi, S. Habert, S. Weidert,
E. Euler, G. Osgood, and N. Navab, “Preclinical usability study of
multiple augmented reality concepts for k-wire placement,” International
journal of computer assisted radiology and surgery, vol. 11, no. 6, pp.
1007–1014, 2016.

[23] J. Fotouhi, B. Fuerst, S. C. Lee, M. Keicher, M. Fischer, S. Weidert,
E. Euler, N. Navab, and G. Osgood, “Interventional 3d augmented reality
for orthopedic and trauma surgery,” in 16th Annual Meeting of the Int.
Society for Computer Assisted Orthopedic Surgery (CAOS), 2016.
[24] E. Tucker, J. Fotouhi, M. Unberath, S. C. Lee, B. Fuerst, A. Johnson,
M. Armand, G. M. Osgood, and N. Navab, “Towards clinical translation
of augmented orthopedic surgery: from pre-op ct
to intra-op x-ray
via rgbd sensing,” in Medical Imaging 2018: Imaging Informatics for
Healthcare, Research, and Applications, vol. 10579.
International
Society for Optics and Photonics, 2018, p. 105790J.

[25] J. Fotouhi, C. P. Alexander, M. Unberath, G. Taylor, S. C. Lee, B. Fuerst,
A. Johnson, G. M. Osgood, R. H. Taylor, H. Khanuja et al., “Plan in
2-d, execute in 3-d: an augmented reality solution for cup placement
in total hip arthroplasty,” Journal of Medical Imaging, vol. 5, no. 2, p.
021205, 2018.

[26] F. M¨uller, S. Roner, F. Liebmann, J. M. Spirig, P. F¨urnstahl, and
M. Farshad, “Augmented reality navigation for spinal pedicle screw
instrumentation using intraoperative 3d imaging,” The Spine Journal,
2019.

[27] C. A. Agten, C. Dennler, A. B. Rosskopf, L. Jaberg, C. W. Pﬁrrmann,
and M. Farshad, “Augmented reality–guided lumbar facet joint injec-
tions,” Investigative radiology, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 495–498, 2018.
[28] J. T. Gibby, S. A. Swenson, S. Cvetko, R. Rao, and R. Javan, “Head-
mounted display augmented reality to guide pedicle screw placement
journal of computer
utilizing computed tomography,” International
assisted radiology and surgery, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 525–535, 2019.
[29] B. van Duren, K. Sugand, R. Wescott, R. Carrington, and A. Hart,
“Augmented reality ﬂuoroscopy simulation of the guide-wire insertion in
dhs surgery: A proof of concept study,” Medical engineering & physics,
vol. 55, pp. 52–59, 2018.

[30] H. S. Cho, M. S. Park, S. Gupta, I. Han, H.-S. Kim, H. Choi,
and J. Hong, “Can augmented reality be helpful in pelvic bone can-

cer surgery? an in vitro study,” Clinical Orthopaedics and Related
Research R(cid:13), vol. 476, no. 9, pp. 1719–1725, 2018.

[31] H. Ogawa, S. Hasegawa, S. Tsukada, and M. Matsubara, “A pilot study
of augmented reality technology applied to the acetabular cup placement
during total hip arthroplasty,” The Journal of arthroplasty, vol. 33, no. 6,
pp. 1833–1837, 2018.

[32] H. Brun, R. Bugge, L. Suther, S. Birkeland, R. Kumar, E. Pelanis,
and O. Elle, “Mixed reality holograms for heart surgery planning: ﬁrst
user experience in congenital heart disease,” European Heart Journal-
Cardiovascular Imaging, 2018.

[33] P. E. Pelargos, D. T. Nagasawa, C. Lagman, S. Tenn, J. V. Demos, S. J.
Lee, T. T. Bui, N. E. Barnette, N. S. Bhatt, N. Ung et al., “Utilizing
virtual and augmented reality for educational and clinical enhancements
in neurosurgery,” Journal of Clinical Neuroscience, vol. 35, pp. 1–4,
2017.

[34] G. Deib, A. Johnson, M. Unberath, K. Yu, S. Andress, L. Qian, G. Os-
good, N. Navab, F. Hui, and P. Gailloud, “Image guided percutaneous
spine procedures using an optical see-through head mounted display:
proof of concept and rationale,” Journal of neurointerventional surgery,
vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 1187–1191, 2018.

[35] P. C. Chimenti and D. J. Mitten, “Google glass as an alternative to
standard ﬂuoroscopic visualization for percutaneous ﬁxation of hand
fractures: a pilot study,” Plastic and reconstructive surgery, vol. 136,
no. 2, pp. 328–330, 2015.

[36] R. Moreta-Martinez, D. Garc´ıa-Mato, M. Garc´ıa-Sevilla, R. P´erez-
Ma˜nanes, J. Calvo-Haro, and J. Pascau, “Augmented reality in computer-
assisted interventions based on patient-speciﬁc 3d printed reference,”
Healthcare technology letters, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 162–166, 2018.
[37] J. W. Meulstee, J. Nijsink, R. Schreurs, L. M. Verhamme, T. Xi, H. H.
Delye, W. A. Borstlap, and T. J. Maal, “Toward holographic-guided
surgery,” Surgical innovation, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 86–94, 2019.

[38] L. Ma, Z. Zhao, B. Zhang, W. Jiang, L. Fu, X. Zhang, and H. Liao,
“Three-dimensional augmented reality surgical navigation with hybrid
optical and electromagnetic tracking for distal intramedullary nail inter-
locking,” The International Journal of Medical Robotics and Computer
Assisted Surgery, vol. 14, no. 4, p. e1909, 2018.

[39] S. Andress, A. Johnson, M. Unberath, A. F. Winkler, K. Yu, J. Fotouhi,
S. Weidert, G. Osgood, and N. Navab, “On-the-ﬂy augmented reality
for orthopedic surgery using a multimodal ﬁducial,” Journal of Medical
Imaging, vol. 5, no. 2, p. 021209, 2018.

[40] J. Hajek, M. Unberath, J. Fotouhi, B. Bier, S. C. Lee, G. Osgood,
A. Maier, M. Armand, and N. Navab, “Closing the calibration loop:
an inside-out-tracking paradigm for augmented reality in orthopedic
surgery,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention. Springer, 2018, pp. 299–306.
[41] J. Fotouhi, M. Unberath, T. Song, J. Hajek, S. C. Lee, B. Bier, A. Maier,
G. Osgood, M. Armand, and N. Navab, “Co-localized augmented human
and x-ray observers in collaborative surgical ecosystem,” International
journal of computer assisted radiology and surgery, vol. 14, no. 9, pp.
1553–1563, 2019.

[42] J. Fotouhi, M. Unberath, T. Song, W. Gu, A. Johnson, G. Osgood,
M. Armand, and N. Navab, “Interactive ﬂying frustums (iffs): spatially
aware surgical data visualization,” International journal of computer
assisted radiology and surgery, pp. 1–10, 2019.

[43] R. Hartley and A. Zisserman, Multiple view geometry in computer vision.

Cambridge university press, 2003.

[44] C. Alexander, A. E. Loeb, J. Fotouhi, N. Navab, M. Armand, and H. S.
Khanuja, “Augmented reality for acetabular component placement in
direct anterior total hip arthroplasty,” The Journal of Arthroplasty, 2020.
[45] G. E. Lewinnek, J. Lewis, R. Tarr, C. Compere, and J. Zimmerman,
“Dislocations after total hip-replacement arthroplasties.” The Journal of
bone and joint surgery. American volume, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 217–220,
1978.

[46] L. Qian, M. Unberath, K. Yu, B. Fuerst, A. Johnson, N. Navab, and
G. Osgood, “Towards virtual monitors for image guided interventions-
real-time streaming to optical see-through head-mounted displays,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.00808, 2017.

[47] J. Fotouhi, T. Song, A. Mehrfard, G. Taylor, A. Martin-Gomez, B. Fuerst,
M. Armand, M. Unberath, and N. Navab, “Reﬂective-ar display: An
interaction methodology for virtual-real alignment in medical robotics,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.10138, 2019.

