0
2
0
2

r
p
A
6
2

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
0
1
5
2
1
.
4
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Self-consistent Nonlinear Force-free Field Reconstruction from Weighted Boundary
Conditions

Alpha Mastrano1,∗ Kai E. Yang1, and Michael S. Wheatland1
1Sydney Institute for Astronomy, School of Physics, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
(Dated: April 28, 2020)

Vector magnetogram data are often used as photospheric boundary conditions for force-free coro-
nal magnetic ﬁeld extrapolations. In general, however, vector magnetogram data are not consistent
with the force-free assumption.
In this article, we demonstrate a way to deal with inconsistent
In that procedure, the
boundary data, by generalizing the “self-consistency procedure” of [20].
inconsistency is resolved by an iterative process of constructing two solutions based on the values of
the force-free parameter α on the two polarities of the ﬁeld in the boundary (the P and N polarities),
and taking uncertainty-weighted averages of the boundary α values in the P and N solutions. When
the α values in the P and N regions are very diﬀerent, the self-consistent solution may lose high α
values from the boundary conditions. We show how, by altering the weighting of the uncertainties
in the P or N boundary conditions, we can preserve high α values in the self-consistent solution.
The weighted self-consistent extrapolation method is demonstrated on an analytic bipole ﬁeld and
applied to vector magnetogram data taken by the Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI) instru-
ment for NOAA active region AR 12017 on 2014 March 29.

PACS numbers:

I.

INTRODUCTION

The magnetic ﬁeld in the solar corona cannot be measured directly. The vector magnetic ﬁeld at the photosphere,
however, can be inferred from spectropolarimetric measurements of lines in the low atmosphere. The photospheric
measurements can then, in principle, be used as boundary conditions to extrapolate the coronal magnetic ﬁeld. A
common simplifying assumption is that the coronal ﬁeld is force-free, i.e. the Lorentz force is zero. The problem then
reduces to solving a boundary value problem, given by two vector partial diﬀerential equations for the magnetic ﬁeld
(cid:126)B, namely the physical requirement that the magnetic ﬁeld is divergence-free

and the force-free condition

∇ · (cid:126)B = 0,

∇ × (cid:126)B = α (cid:126)B,

(1)

(2)

where α is the scalar force-free parameter (which in general is a function of position). Taking the divergence of
Equation 2 allows us to recast it into

(cid:126)B · ∇α = 0,

(3)

i.e., α is constant along ﬁeld lines.

There are several methods available for extrapolating a nonlinear force-free ﬁeld (NLFFF) in the solar corona from
photospheric boundary conditions [for summaries and comparisons, see, e.g., [16, 17], [4], [23], [15], and [25]]. One
class of methods uses the Grad-Rubin approach, which solves for (cid:126)B and α via an iterative procedure, and uses α and
the normal component of (cid:126)B at the photosphere as boundary conditions.

Because α is constant along ﬁeld lines, Grad-Rubin methods only require as boundary condition the value of α
over one magnetic polarity, for ﬁeld lines connected to the lower boundary at both ends. If the values of (cid:126)B and α are

∗Electronic address: alpha.mastrano@sydney.edu.au

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

available over an entire solar active region, the boundary value problem is over-speciﬁed. One needs to make a choice
as to which set of α values to take as boundary condition — those from the positive magnetic polarity region or the
negative region. The results of the two possible reconstructions are referred to as the P solution and the N solution,
respectively. In principle, if the boundary conditions are consistent with a force-free ﬁeld, this over-speciﬁcation of
the problem is not an issue and the two solutions are equal. However, in practice the P and N solutions can diﬀer
signiﬁcantly, both qualitatively and quantitatively: they may have substantially diﬀerent energies, and one solution
may show ﬁeld structures and ﬁeld line connectivities that the other lacks. This occurs because the magnetic ﬁeld
on the photosphere, which is used to derive the boundary conditions for NLFFF reconstructions, is not force-free
[7]. One approach to deal with the inconsistency of the boundary conditions with the force-free model, developed by
Wiegelmann, Inhester, and Sakurai [24], is “preprocessing,” which alters the magnetogram data to meet necessary
conditions for the existence of a force-free solution.

A diﬀerent approach is to take the data as given, but allow the boundary values of (cid:126)B and α to change during
the NLFFF extrapolation process [23]. This procedure is used in the modiﬁed Grad-Rubin code (XTRAPOL) of
Amari and Aly [1] and the “self-consistency” procedure of Wheatland and R´egnier [20], which uses the Grad-Rubin
current-ﬁeld iteration code CFIT of [19]. The [20] method calculates P and N solutions from the two sets of boundary
conditions on α, and then averages the values of α for the two solutions at every point on the boundary, taking into
account the uncertainties in α. The resulting map of α allows two new P and N solutions to be constructed, and then
the cycle is iterated until a self-consistent set of values is obtained, i.e. the P and N solutions are the same.

The self-consistency procedure uses the uncertainties in the values of α on the boundary (calculated from (cid:126)B-
measurement uncertainties) as weightings when calculating the average value of α at the end of each cycle. When
applied with the observational uncertainties, the procedure can lead to a loss of information regarding areas with high
values of α, resulting in a self-consistent solution with a smooth distribution of boundary values of α compared to the
observed boundary conditions. This is because, when the uncertainties in α on the two polarities are approximately
equal, each self-consistency cycle takes a simple average of the values of α from the P and N polarities. For example,
[12] presented reconstructions using the self-consistency procedure of the coronal ﬁeld associated with active region
(AR) 12017 on 2014 March 29. They found the P and N solutions to be quite diﬀerent: the P solution included a
highly twisted ﬂux rope along the magnetic neutral line, and this was absent in the N solution. In this particular case,
the positive polarity ﬁeld has regions with high values of α, which do not have counterparts in the negative polarity
regions [12]. In successive self-consistency cycles, the large values of α at certain boundary points in the P solution
are averaged with small values of α, leading to a decrease in α at those locations. Therefore, while the procedure
constructs a ﬁnal NLFFF that is consistent with the boundary conditions on both polarities, that ﬁeld may be close to
potential, and have magnetic ﬁeld lines which lack resemblance to structures observed in extreme ultraviolet (EUV)
observations.

In this article, we present a modiﬁcation to the self-consistency procedure that can generate a self-consistent NLFFF
that agrees better with observations by weighting the uncertainties in the values of α in the boundary conditions
towards areas which are considered signiﬁcant. The article is structured as follows. In Section II we describe our
modiﬁcation to the self-consistency procedure as implemented by the CFIT method. In Section III, we demonstrate
the method using an analytic bipolar ﬁeld. In Section IV we apply our method to the NLFFF extrapolation of active
region AR 12017 using the data obtained by the Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI) instrument aboard the
Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO) spacecraft. We compare our NLFFF reconstructions to the EUV observations
taken by the Atmospheric Imaging Assembly (AIA) instrument aboard SDO. In Section V we summarize our results.

II. DATA AND METHODS

For the solar coronal ﬁeld reconstructions in this article, we use the HMI vector magnetogram product called Space-
Weather HMI Active Region Patches (SHARPs) [8, 18]. The NLFFF code used here (CFIT) works in a Cartesian
geometry. In application to the SHARP data, which are in a cylindrical equal-area projection, we assume the magnetic
vector ﬁeld values are on a Cartesian grid. We take the photosphere to be in the x-y plane and the positive z-direction
is the radial direction away from the Sun, and we assume Bx = Bφ, By = −Bθ, and Bz = Br, where Br, Bθ, and Bφ
are the ﬁeld components in the SHARP data. The force-free parameter α0 at z = 0, which we require as boundary
condition, is obtained from

α0 =

1
Bz

(cid:18) ∂By
∂x

−

∂Bx
∂y

(cid:19) (cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)z=0

,

(4)

3

where the derivatives are approximated using centered diﬀerencing. The uncertainties in α0, which we designate as
σ0, are derived from the uncertainties in the observed (cid:126)B ﬁeld values. These uncertainties arise from instrumental
errors, as well as uncertainties in the inversion process [8], which are propagated to assign uncertainty values for each
quantity at every pixel in the SHARP magnetogram [3].

The self-consistency procedure is as follows [20]. The CFIT method is ﬁrst applied to the boundary value problem
given by the values of Bz and α0 on the P region (the region where Bz > 0) until the NLFFF “P solution” is obtained.
Since the force-free parameter is constant along force-free ﬁeld lines, the values of α0 from the P region are mapped
via this solution to the conjugate magnetic foot points in the N region (the region where Bz < 0). These mappings
deﬁne a new set of values α1 in N. CFIT is applied again using the values of α0 on the N region until a second NLFFF
result is obtained (the “N solution”), and the values of α0 from the N region map via this solution to new values α1
on the P region. We now have two NLFFF solutions and two complete sets of α values (deﬁned over the entire region,
both P and N): α0 and α1. The uncertainties for the α1 values are obtained by mapping the values of σ0 from the P
(N) region to the conjugate magnetic foot points in the N (P) region. At each point on the region, we now have two
possible sets of values (α0, σ0) and (α1, σ1).

Bayes’ theorem can be used to decide on the most probable value of α, given some weighting factor [20]. When
working with real data, the weighting factor is taken to be the uncertainties σ in the values of α. The most probable
value of α is

with the corresponding uncertainty

α2 =

α0/σ2
1/σ2

0 + α1/σ2
2
0 + 1/σ2
1

,

σ2 = (cid:0)1/σ2

0 + 1/σ2
1

(cid:1)−1/2

.

(5)

(6)

This process deﬁnes one “self-consistency cycle” [20]. The resulting values of α2 may still be inconsistent with a
force-free ﬁeld, but they are expected to be closer to consistency. The self-consistency cycle is repeated using the
force-free parameter values α2 to obtain a new set of values α3, and so on, until the P and N solutions converge to
an identical NLFFF solution.

If the boundary values of α on the P and N regions are highly inconsistent with the force-free model, the ﬁnal
self-consistent values of α may be altogether diﬀerent again. The ﬁeld lines of the self-consistent ﬁeld may disagree
with structures seen in EUV, and the self-consistent ﬁeld may have less free energy than that implied by the explosive
events produced by the region. These problems were seen in the study of AR 12017 by [12]. In such cases, we can
consider one set of boundary conditions (i.e. P or N) to be favoured over the other, because the corresponding solution
reproduces structures of interest. This suggests the idea of weighting the self-consistent solution towards the favoured
boundary condition. We can weight the solution by decreasing the uncertainty values of α in the P or N region (that
is, σ0 or σ1 respectively) by some factor. When α2 is calculated using Equation 5, reducing σ0 (or σ1) results in α2
being closer to α0 (or α1).

III. APPLICATION TO AN ANALYTIC BIPOLE

In this section we demonstrate the weighting method, applied to an artiﬁcially constructed analytic bipole ﬁeld.
Figure 1 shows the boundary conditions for our calculations. The boundary ﬁeld Bz(x, y, z = 0) is constructed in

the region 0 (cid:54) x (cid:54) 1, 0 (cid:54) y (cid:54) 1. In dimensionless units, Bz at the bottom boundary of the volume is

Bz(x, y, z = 0) = Bmax exp[−c1(x − 0.5)2 − c1(y − 0.6)2]

− Bmax exp[−c2(x − 0.5)2 − c2(y − 0.4)2],

(7)

where we set Bmax such that the maximum absolute ﬁeld strength is 1, and c1 = c2 = 200. The boundary values of
the force-free parameter α (again in dimensionless units) are chosen to be

α(x, y, z = 0) =

(cid:26) 20, if Bz(x, y, z = 0) > 0.9,

− 20, if Bz(x, y, z = 0) < −0.9.

(8)

4

These boundary values of α are clearly inconsistent with a closed force-free ﬁeld. A ﬁeld line traced from the positive
polarity to the negative polarity cannot have the same values of α at the two foot points, contradicting Equation 3.
We can apply the self-consistency procedure [20] to ﬁnd a single NLFFF solution. However, to do this we need to
assign uncertainties σ to the values of α. A nominal choice is to choose equal uncertainties, i.e. σ = 1 everywhere.
We call this the “equally-weighted” solution. We also consider choosing σ to be constant in each polarity, but with a
diﬀerent value. Solutions constructed in this way are weighted towards the polarity with the smaller value of σ. Note
that, strictly speaking, σ in this case has no physical meaning, it is simply a weighting factor assigned to α.

We use CFIT to calculate the P, N, and self-consistent NLFFF solution in the region 0 (cid:54) x (cid:54) 1, 0 (cid:54) y (cid:54) 1,
0 (cid:54) z (cid:54) 0.75, with the calculation performed on a 400 × 400 × 300 grid. The P (N) solution is calculated using the
α value from the positive (negative) Bz region. The self-consistent solution is calculated using the self-consistency
procedure described in Section II, for diﬀerent choices of the uncertainties σ.

Figure 2 shows the magnetic ﬁeld lines of the solutions calculated by CFIT. Blue (red) ﬁeld lines are those traced
from the positive (negative) poles, and yellow ﬁeld lines are selected ﬁeld lines that pass through 0.45 (cid:54) x (cid:54) 0.55,
y = 0.5, z = 0.04. Figure 2a shows the P solution, while Figure 2b shows the N solution. Because α is positive in
the positive pole and negative in the negative pole, as given by Equation 8, the P and N solutions are antisymmetric,
i.e. the ﬁeld lines twist in opposite senses. We see in Figure 2c that the equally-weighted (σ = 1 everywhere) self-
consistent solution is approximately a potential bipole ﬁeld, and the self-consistent solution is very diﬀerent from both
the P and N solutions.

Figure 2d shows the self-consistent CFIT solution obtained by setting σ = 0.8 in the P region, and σ = 1 in the
N region. The ﬁeld lines show some twist in the sense of the P solution (Figure 2a). Figure 2e shows the solution
with σ = 0.4 in the P region, and σ = 1 in the N region. The ﬁeld lines begin to approximate those of the P solution
(Figure 2a). Figures 2d and 2e therefore show how we can make the self-consistent solution more similar to the P
solution by reducing σ in the P region.

Figure 3 shows the self-consistent values of α at the bottom boundary. Figure 3a shows the P solution and Figure
3b shows the N solution.
In the P (N) solution, ﬁeld lines traced between the poles are assigned α = 20 (−20),
i.e. the value of α in the P (N) region. Figure 3c shows the self-consistent values of α at the bottom boundary for
the equally-weighted solution. The self-consistent values of α, calculated by successive averaging of the boundary
values of the P and N solutions, have absolute values much smaller than 20 (the boundary value of |α| before the
self-consistency procedure) everywhere, with positive and negative values of α dispersed in the boundary (note that,
for clarity, the colour scale in Figure 3c is diﬀerent from the other panels of Figure 3). Figure 3d shows the values of
α with σ = 0.8 in the P region, and σ = 1 in the N region. The values and distribution of α are now closer to the
P solution, although the values are much smaller. Figure 3e shows the values of α with σ = 0.4 in the P region, and
σ = 1 in the N region. The values and distribution of α approximate the P solution, with some small negative values
of α remaining.

IV. APPLICATION TO AR 12017

In this section, we apply our weighting method to the NLFFF reconstruction of the coronal ﬁeld of active region

AR 12017 for 2014 March 29, 17:36 UT.

On 2014 March 29, 17:48 UT, AR 12017 produced an X1 ﬂare which was simultaneously observed and recorded
by a number of instruments and observatories, such as the Interferometric BIdimensional Spectropolarimeter (IBIS)
instrument at the Dunn Solar Telescope, the Hinode spacecraft, and the RHESSI spacecraft [11].

[27] generated NLFFF reconstructions of AR 12017 using the optimization method [21, 22], and [26] reconstructed
[12] presented a reconstruction of the
the ﬁeld using the magnetohydrodynamic relaxation method of [10] and [9].
ﬁeld using CFIT, with the self-consistency procedure. The results of the optimization and relaxation methods, as
well as AIA EUV observations, clearly show a ﬁlament present near the neutral line which erupts during the ﬂare.
However, the self-consistent CFIT NLFFF solution does not contain a ﬂux rope structure at the neutral line [12]. The
P solution does show a highly-twisted ﬂux rope, which is absent in the N solution, and correspondingly, is absent in
the self-consistent solution. Hence we consider applying the weighted self-consistent reconstruction procedure, with
the boundary conditions on α weighted towards the positive polarity.

The relevant vector magnetogram boundary data for our NLFFF extrapolation are the SHARP data for AR 12017,
at 17:36 UT on 2014 March 29. The SHARP patch is 642 × 504 pixels, where each pixel is 0.502 × 0.502 arcsec. We
approximate the SHARP magnetic ﬁeld data, given in Lambert equal-area projection, as ﬁeld values on a Cartesian
grid as explained in Section II, and solve for the magnetic ﬁeld in a 642 × 504 × 200 Cartesian box. The vertical
size is chosen to capture as much large-scale structure as possible without unduly slowing down the calculation. For

5

(a)

(b)

FIG. 1: (a) The boundary conditions for the vertical component of the magnetic ﬁeld, Bz(x, y, z = 0), and (b) the
force-free parameter, α(x, y, z = 0) of the analytic bipole ﬁeld, given by Equations 7 and 8, respectively. Blue
denotes positive values, and red denotes negative values. The dashed boxes indicate the cropped ﬁeld of view of
Figure 2 and Figure 3.

convenience, we work in dimensionless quantities. We use the width of the solution box as the length scale, such that
the solution box covers the region 0 (cid:54) x (cid:54) 1, 0 (cid:54) y (cid:54) 0.785, and 0 (cid:54) z (cid:54) 0.31. We normalize the vector magnetic
ﬁeld strength values to the maximum of the absolute value of Bz at z = 0 (in this case, |Bz|max = 2.649 × 103 G).
The boundary values of α are calculated using Equation II, and the associated uncertainties are propagated from
the uncertainties of (cid:126)B given in the SHARP data [3, 8], to give a map of the uncertainties σ in α that we use in the
self-consistency cycles. The values of α and σ are non-dimensionalized by multiplying by the length scale. To reduce
the inﬂuence of unphysical currents, we set the current to zero in pixels where the signal-to-noise ratio of the current
is less than one or where |Bz| < 0.05.

Figure 4 shows the results of the CFIT NLFFF extrapolations, along with the 171 ˚A EUV AIA image of the same
region for comparison (Figure 4c). The P solution, Figure 4a, shows a highly-twisted ﬂux rope, associated with high
values of α near the neutral line, which coincides with the ﬁlament structure seen in the AIA image. On the other
hand, the N solution, Figure 4b, does not show such a structure. The self-consistent solution, Figure 4d, has lost the
high values of α present in the P boundary condition, and appears as a sheared rather than a twisted ﬁeld. These
results are consistent with [12].

Because we want to generate a self-consistent solution which preserves the high values of α in the P solution
(in particular associated with the twisted ﬂux rope), we weight the boundary condition towards the P solution by
multiplying σ in the P region at locations where 50 < |α| < 150 (in dimensionless units) by a factor of 0.1. We arrive
at these upper and lower limits on |α| by visually comparing the P solution to the AIA images. We inspect the foot
points of the ﬂux rope in the P solution and we conclude that they are associated with |α| (cid:38) 50 (or |α| (cid:38) 2.14 × 10−7
m−1 in dimensional units). In addition, because we want to limit the eﬀects of high, unphysical values of α (which can
prevent CFIT from converging to a self-consistent solution), we set an upper limit of |α| < 150 (or |α| < 6.42 × 10−7
m−1). More systematic ways of identifying α values are available, such as that proposed by [13]. For our purposes,
visual inspection and comparison suﬃce. We present the result in Figure 4e. The new self-consistent solution clearly
preserves the ﬂux rope in the P solution (Figure 4a), which is absent in the unweighted self-consistent solution (Figure
4d).

We can calculate the free energy of our solutions, deﬁned as the diﬀerence between total energy E of the extrapolated

6

(b)

(d)

(a)

(c)

(e)

FIG. 2: Nonlinear force-free ﬁeld extrapolations of the analytic bipole generated by CFIT, with the boundary
conditions given by Equations 7 and 8. (a) P solution. (b) N solution. (c) Self-consistent solution where the
uncertainty value is uniform. (d) Self-consistent solution where the uncertainty value in the P region is 0.8 and the
uncertainty in the N region is 1. (e) Self-consistent solution where the uncertainty in the P region is 0.4 and the
uncertainty in the N region is 1.

7

(b)

(d)

(a)

(c)

(e)

FIG. 3: The values of α at the lower boundary for the CFIT solutions generated using the boundary conditions
given by Equations 7 and 8. (a) P solution. (b) N solution. (c) Self-consistent solution where the uncertainty value
is uniform. (d) Self-consistent solution where the uncertainty value in the P region is 0.8 and the uncertainty in the
N region is 1. (e) Self-consistent solution where the uncertainty in the P region is 0.4 and the uncertainty in the N
region is 1.

NLFFF and the energy E0 of the potential component of the NLFFF. The free energy of the P solution is 8.1 × 1031
erg (corresponding to E/E0 = 1.18), the free energy of the N solution is 2.0 × 1031 erg (E/E0 = 1.05), the free
energy of the unweighted self-consistent solution is 5.4 × 1030 erg (E/E0 = 1.015), and the free energy of the weighted
self-consistent solution is 3.4 × 1031 erg (E/E0 = 1.09). The unweighted self-consistent solution has the least free
energy of these four solutions, even less than the free energy of the N solution. The weighted solution has more free
energy than the N solution, but less free energy than the P solution.

We can also characterize the ﬁelds using relative helicity Hr [2, 6]. Using the deﬁnition given by, e.g., [5], we
separate the magnetic ﬁeld (cid:126)B in the computational volume V into the potential ﬁeld (cid:126)Bp and the current-carrying
ﬁeld (cid:126)Bc

8

where

(cid:126)B = (cid:126)Bp + (cid:126)Bc,

(cid:126)B · ˆn|∂V = (cid:126)Bp · ˆn|∂V ,

where ∂V is the boundary surface and ˆn is the unit vector normal to ∂V , and we write

Hr =

(cid:90)

V

( (cid:126)A + (cid:126)Ap) · ( (cid:126)B − (cid:126)Bp)dV.

(9)

(10)

(11)

For the NLFFF presented here, Hr = 1.91 × 1044 Mx2 for the unweighted self-consistent solution and Hr = 9.91 ×
1044 Mx2 for the weighted solution. The weighted solution has larger currents than the unweighted solution and
consequently higher relative helicity.

Figure 5 shows maps of Bz(x, y, z = 0) in units of gauss, the uncertainty σ in dimensionless units, the current
density Jz(x, y, z = 0) in units of mA m−2, and a selection of extrapolated NLFFF ﬁeld lines. Figure 5a shows the
boundary condition on Bz, with the weighted areas outlined. Figure 5b shows a map of the absolute value of the
dimensionless uncertainty σ in α, with the weighted areas outlined, saturated to 250 for clarity. Figure 5c and Figure
5d show the values of the boundary data and the self-consistent vertical current densities Jz respectively, with the
weighted areas outlined. Weak-ﬁeld areas, where |Bz| < 0.05|Bz|max, are assigned α = 0 and a maximum value
of σ. We see that, while the distribution of the current has been smoothed out, the weighting procedure preserves
areas of strong current density. We show a plot of selected ﬁeld lines superimposed on the Bz map in Figure 5e, for
comparison. Figure 5e, in conjunction with Figure 5d, show that the ﬂux rope is associated with the high-α P region
where we reduce σ. Note that the point of view in Figure 5 looks straight down the plane tangent to the photosphere,
not tilted to the image plane like in Figure 4e.

V. CONCLUSIONS

In this article, we present a modiﬁcation to the self-consistency procedure implemented using the Grad-Rubin code
CFIT [20]. It is desirable to arrive at a self-consistent NLFFF solution for coronal magnetic ﬁelds using the boundary
data given by vector magnetogram observations. In general, the values of α in the P and N magnetic polarities are
not consistent with a force-free ﬁeld. The self-consistency procedure of [20] solves this problem by constructing P and
N solutions and taking uncertainty-weighted averages of the boundary values of α from the solutions, iteratively, to
arrive at a self-consistent solution. We demonstrate this with an analytic bipole, which has inconsistent boundary
values of α on the P and N poles by construction. The unweighted self-consistent solution using these boundary
conditions is diﬀerent from both the P and N solutions, and is close to a potential ﬁeld. We show that by reducing
the uncertainties σ in the values of α in the P region, we can skew the self-consistent solution towards the P solution.
We apply this procedure to active region AR 12017. The P and N solutions obtained by CFIT from the 2014 March
29, 17:36 UT time step are inconsistent with each other. When the P and N boundary conditions diﬀer signiﬁcantly,
the resulting self-consistent NLFFF solution may, like the simple bipole case, be close to a potential ﬁeld, and not
provide an accurate model for the true coronal ﬁeld, based e.g. on comparison of ﬁeld lines with structures observed
in EUV images. The P and N solutions for this time step demonstrate this. Because the P solution has ﬁeld lines
which are more consistent with the observations, and contains greater free energy, we weight the boundary conditions
towards the P region. To achieve this, we identify the foot points of the ﬂux ropes in the P solution and multiply the

9

values of σ at the foot points by a factor of 0.1. We calculate the new self-consistent solution and, like the P solution,
it shows the ﬂux rope evident in EUV.

In this article, we show how a simple modiﬁcation to the Grad-Rubin CFIT code can achieve self-consistent NLFFF
solutions using boundary conditions derived from readily available HMI photospheric vector magnetograms, taking
into account the errors in the tangential ﬁeld strength measurements. We show how visible ﬁeld structures can be
used as an additional constraint in a Grad-Rubin NLFFF extrapolation. In the example presented in this article, the
choice of which pixels to be weighted is based on visual inspection. In future work, we will investigate an automated
approach, similar to those proposed by [13] and [14].

This work was funded in part by an Australian Research Council Discovery Project (DP160102932). The authors

thank Don Melrose for helpful comments.

The authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest.

[1] Amari, T., Aly, J.-J.: 2010, Observational constraints on well-posed reconstruction methods and the optimization-Grad-

Rubin method. Astron. Astrophys. 522, A52. DOI. ADS.

[2] Berger, M.A., Field, G.B.: 1984, The topological properties of magnetic helicity. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 147, 133.

DOI. ADS.

[3] Bobra, M.G., Sun, X., Hoeksema, J.T., Turmon, M., Liu, Y., Hayashi, K., Barnes, G., Leka, K.D.: 2014, The Helioseismic
and Magnetic Imager (HMI) vector magnetic ﬁeld pipeline: SHARPs - Space-Weather HMI Active Region Patches. Solar
Phys. 289(9), 3549. DOI. ADS.

[4] De Rosa, M.L., Schrijver, C.J., Barnes, G., Leka, K.D., Lites, B.W., Aschwanden, M.J., Amari, T., Canou, A., McTier-
nan, J.M., R´egnier, S., Thalmann, J.K., Valori, G., Wheatland, M.S., Wiegelmann, T., Cheung, M.C.M., Conlon, P.A.,
Fuhrmann, M., Inhester, B., Tadesse, T.: 2009, A critical assessment of nonlinear force-Free ﬁeld modeling of the solar
corona for active region 10953. Astrophys. J. 696(2), 1780. DOI. ADS.

[5] D´emoulin, P., Berger, M.A.: 2003, Magnetic Energy and Helicity Fluxes at the Photospheric Level. Solar Phys. 215(2),

203. DOI. ADS.

[6] Finn, J.M., Antonsen, T.M.J.: 1985, Magnetic helicity: what is it and what is it good for. Comments on Plasma Physics

and Controlled Fusion 9, 111. ADS.

[7] Gary, G.A.: 2001, Plasma Beta above a solar active region: rethinking the paradigm. Solar Phys. 203(1), 71. DOI. ADS.
[8] Hoeksema, J.T., Liu, Y., Hayashi, K., Sun, X., Schou, J., Couvidat, S., Norton, A., Bobra, M., Centeno, R., Leka, K.D.,
Barnes, G., Turmon, M.: 2014, The Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI) vector magnetic ﬁeld pipeline: overview and
performance. Solar Phys. 289(9), 3483. DOI. ADS.

[9] Inoue, S.: 2016, Magnetohydrodynamics modeling of coronal magnetic ﬁeld and solar eruptions based on the photospheric

magnetic ﬁeld. Progress in Earth and Planetary Science 3(1), 19. DOI. ADS.

[10] Inoue, S., Magara, T., Pandey, V.S., Shiota, D., Kusano, K., Choe, G.S., Kim, K.S.: 2014, Nonlinear force-free extrapo-
lation of the coronal magnetic ﬁeld based on the magnetohydrodynamic relaxation method. Astrophys. J. 780(1), 101.
DOI. ADS.

[11] Kleint, L., Battaglia, M., Reardon, K., Sainz Dalda, A., Young, P.R., Krucker, S.: 2015, The fast ﬁlament eruption leading

to the X-ﬂare on 2014 March 29. Astrophys. J. 806(1), 9. DOI. ADS.

[12] Kleint, L., Wheatland, M.S., Mastrano, A., McCauley, P.I.: 2018, Nonlinear force-free modeling of ﬂare-related magnetic

ﬁeld changes at the photosphere and chromosphere. Astrophys. J. 865(2), 146. DOI. ADS.

[13] Malanushenko, A., Longcope, D.W., McKenzie, D.E.: 2009, Reconstructing the Local Twist of Coronal Magnetic Fields
and the Three-Dimensional Shape of the Field Lines from Coronal Loops in Extreme-Ultraviolet and X-Ray Images.
Astrophys. J. 707(2), 1044. DOI. ADS.

[14] Malanushenko, A., Schrijver, C.J., DeRosa, M.L., Wheatland, M.S.: 2014, Using Coronal Loops to Reconstruct the

Magnetic Field of an Active Region before and after a Major Flare. Astrophys. J. 783(2), 102. DOI. ADS.

[15] R´egnier, S.: 2013, Magnetic ﬁeld extrapolations into the corona: success and future improvements. Solar Phys. 288(2),

481. DOI. ADS.

[16] Schrijver, C.J., De Rosa, M.L., Metcalf, T.R., Liu, Y., McTiernan, J., R´egnier, S., Valori, G., Wheatland, M.S., Wiegel-
mann, T.: 2006, Nonlinear force-free modeling of coronal magnetic ﬁelds part I: a quantitative comparison of methods.
Solar Phys. 235(1-2), 161. DOI. ADS.

[17] Schrijver, C.J., DeRosa, M.L., Metcalf, T., Barnes, G., Lites, B., Tarbell, T., McTiernan, J., Valori, G., Wiegelmann, T.,
Wheatland, M.S., Amari, T., Aulanier, G., D´emoulin, P., Fuhrmann, M., Kusano, K., R´egnier, S., Thalmann, J.K.: 2008,
Nonlinear force-free ﬁeld modeling of a solar active region around the time of a major ﬂare and coronal mass ejection.
Astrophys. J. 675(2), 1637. DOI. ADS.

[18] Sun, X.: 2013, On the coordinate system of Space-Weather HMI Active Region Patches (SHARPs): a technical note. arXiv

e-prints, arXiv:1309.2392. ADS.

[19] Wheatland, M.S.: 2007, Calculating and testing nonlinear force-free ﬁelds. Solar Phys. 245, 251. DOI. ADS.

10

[20] Wheatland, M.S., R´egnier, S.: 2009, A self-consistent nonlinear force-free solution for a solar active region magnetic ﬁeld.

Astrophys. J. Lett. 700, L88. DOI. ADS.

[21] Wheatland, M.S., Sturrock, P.A., Roumeliotis, G.: 2000, An optimization approach to reconstructing force-free ﬁelds.

Astrophys. J. 540, 1150. DOI. ADS.

[22] Wiegelmann, T.: 2004, Optimization code with weighting function for the reconstruction of coronal magnetic ﬁelds. Solar

Phys. 219(1), 87. DOI. ADS.

[23] Wiegelmann, T., Sakurai, T.: 2012, Solar force-free magnetic ﬁelds. Living Reviews in Solar Physics 9(1), 5. DOI. ADS.
[24] Wiegelmann, T., Inhester, B., Sakurai, T.: 2006, Preprocessing of vector magnetograph data for a nonlinear force-free

magnetic ﬁeld reconstruction. Solar Phys. 233, 215. DOI.

[25] Wiegelmann, T., Petrie, G.J.D., Riley, P.: 2017, Coronal magnetic ﬁeld models. Space Sci. Rev. 210(1-4), 249. DOI. ADS.
[26] Woods, M.M., Inoue, S., Harra, L.K., Matthews, S.A., Kusano, K., Kalmoni, N.M.E.: 2018, The triggering of the 2014

March 29 ﬁlament eruption. Astrophys. J. 860(2), 163. DOI. ADS.

[27] Yang, K., Guo, Y., Ding, M.D.: 2016, Quantifying the topology and evolution of a magnetic ﬂux rope associated with

multi-ﬂare activities. Astrophys. J. 824(2), 148. DOI. ADS.

11

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

FIG. 4: The nonlinear force-free magnetic ﬁeld solutions obtained from the CFIT code and overlaid onto the
contemporaneous 171 ˚A AIA image. The ﬁeld extrapolations are derived from the 2014 March 29, 17:36 UT,
SHARP vector magnetogram data for AR 12017. The panels show (a) the P solution, (c) the N solution, (c) the 171
˚A AIA image, (d) the (unweighted) self-consistent solution, and (e) the self-consistent solution from a boundary
condition weighted towards the P solution.

12

(b)

(d)

(a)

(c)

(e)

FIG. 5: Maps of the vertical magnetic ﬁeld values (Bz) and vertical current density (Jz) on the plane tangent to the
solar surface. Panel (a) shows Bz, (b) shows the absolute value of the uncertainty σ in α from the data, (c) shows
the initial boundary conditions on Jz (before the self-consistency procedure), (d) shows Jz corresponding to the
weighted self-consistent NLFFF solution, and (e) shows selected ﬁeld lines of the weighted self-consistent NLFFF
solution, superimposed on the Bz map. In panels (a)–(d), the contours enclose the regions where we reduce σ.

