A technique for the study of (p,n) reactions with unstable isotopes at energies relevant to
astrophysics

P. Gastisa,e,∗, G. Perdikakisa,e,f,∗∗, G.P.A. Bergc, A.C. Dombosc,e, A. Estradea,e, A. Faldutoa,e, M. Horoia, S.N. Liddickd,f,e,
S. Lipschutzb, S. Lyonsf,e,2, F. Montesf,e, A. Palmisanob,e, J. Pereiraf,e, J.S. Randhawaf,e, T. Redpathb, M. Redshawa,f, J. Schmittb,
J.R. Sheehanb, M.K. Smithf,e, P. Tsintaria,e, A.C.C. Villarif,g, K. Wanga,e, R.G.T. Zegersb,e,f

aDepartment of Physics, Central Michigan University, Mt. Pleasant, MI 48859, USA
bDepartment of Physics & Astronomy, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
cDepartment of Physics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
dDepartment of Chemistry, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
eJoint Institute for Nuclear Astrophysics: Center for the Evolution of the Elements, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
fNational Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL), Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
gFacility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB), Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA

Abstract

We have developed and tested an experimental technique for the measurement of low-energy (p,n) reactions in inverse kinematics
relevant to nuclear astrophysics. The proposed setup is located at the ReA3 facility at the National Superconducting Cyclotron
Laboratory. In the current approach, we operate the beam-transport line in ReA3 as a recoil separator while tagging the outgoing
neutrons from the (p,n) reactions with the low-energy neutron detector array (LENDA). The developed technique was veriﬁed by
using the 40Ar(p,n)40K reaction as a probe. The results of the proof-of-principle experiment with the 40Ar beam show that cross-
section measurements within an uncertainty of ∼25% are feasible with count rates up to 7 counts/mb/pnA/s. In this article, we give
a detailed description of the experimental setup, and present the analysis method and results from the test experiment. Future plans
on using the technique in experiments with the separator for capture reactions (SECAR) that is currently being commissioned are
also discussed.

Keywords: Nuclear reactions, Recoil separators, Radioactive beams, Spectrometers, Nuclear astrophysics

1. Introduction

Neutron-induced reactions on stable and unstable nuclei play
an important role in the synthesis of heavy elements in our Uni-
verse [1, 2]. The (n,p) reactions, particularly, are critical to nu-
cleosynthesis in slightly proton-rich conditions that may be re-
alized in core-collapse supernovae. Recent studies show that
the 56Ni(n,p)56Co and 64Ge(n,p)64Ga reactions regulate the eﬃ-
ciency of the so-called neutrino-p process (νp-process) [3, 4, 5],
which is responsible for the formation of elements between
nickel (Ni) and tin (Sn) in type II supernovae. To calculate
the reaction rates of such critical reactions and predict the el-
emental abundances produced by this type of nucleosynthesis,
we currently rely on theoretical models as very limited – if any
– experimental data exist for neutron-induced reactions away
from stability (e.g., see JINA REACLIB database [6]).

In this article, we present a newly developed technique and
the associated experimental setup that can be used for the study
of (n,p) reactions via measuring the reverse (p,n) reactions in

∗gasti1p@cmich.edu
∗∗perdi1g@cmich.edu
1Present address: Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM

87545, USA

2Present address: Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA

99354, USA

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

inverse kinematics. By providing experimental data for the re-
verse (p,n) reactions, signiﬁcant constrains can be applied on
the associated theoretical models employed for the calculation
of reaction rates [7]. The minimum pieces of equipment needed
are a stable hydrogen target, a neutron detector, and a mag-
netic separator. By taking advantage of the radioactive beams
of the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB), we will be able
to perform measurements with nuclei away from stability using
the proposed technique. This includes measurements of criti-
cal reactions for the νp-process, such as the 56Co(p,n)56Ni – the
inverse of 56Ni(n,p)56Co –, or other (p,n) reactions on neutron-
deﬁcient nuclei relevant to nucleosynthetic mechanisms such
as the p-process [8, 9]. Our approach can constitute a standard
method of studying (n,p) reactions relevant to nucleosynthesis
that cannot –yet– be measured diﬀerently.

The direct measurement of neutron induced reactions on
short-lived nuclei, constitutes an experimental challenge for
physicists [10]. Low-energy nuclear reactions are typically
measured by using fast moving beams and ﬁxed targets. A
wide variety of experimental techniques have been developed
to carry out such type of experiments eﬃciently. For the mea-
surement of (n,p) – or (n,γ) – reactions on short-lived nuclei,
however, the situation is more complex. In that case, a mea-
surement using a neutron beam necessitates the construction of
a radioactive target. While this is feasible under certain circum-

July 20, 2020

0
2
0
2

l
u
J

7
1

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

2
v
6
0
5
3
1
.
4
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
stances, it is quite restrictive and can only be used for long-lived
isotopes [11].

Another approach for the study of such challenging reactions
is the measurements in inverse kinematics, using radioactive
beams. In that case, however, a neutron target is required. Con-
ceptual ideas on the construction of a neutron target have been
reported in literature over the last few years [12, 13]. Accord-
ing to this approach, an area with a high neutron density can
be created by using a neutron spallation source. The neutrons
produced from the source slow down in a moderator, and en-
ter a beam pipe where they serve as a target for the incoming
radioactive beam. To balance the low density of such a neu-
tron target, the radioactive beam must be circulated in a storage
ring. In this way, the number of beam ions that pass through
the neutron gas in the unit of time is boosted signiﬁcantly, en-
abling the collection of adequate statistics in a reasonable time
frame. While this concept is very promising for future experi-
ments, many challenges need to be addressed before it is ready
to be used.

As mentioned in a previous paragraph, in this study we fol-
low an indirect path for the study of (n,p) reactions by perform-
ing measurements on the reverse (p,n) reactions using a recoil
separator. Radiative capture reactions such as (p,γ) and (α,γ)
at astrophysically relevant energies (<10 MeV/nucleon), have
been measured using recoil separators since the mid-80’s [14].
The operational concept for the usage of recoil separators is as
follows. After the target (typically hydrogen or helium), the
recoil nuclei are separated from the unreacted beam using elec-
tromagnetic elements. The recoils are then measured at the fo-
cal plane of the separator/spectrometer using a counter detec-
tor [15]. For the case of capture reactions, an achromatic mag-
netic separator can resolve the products at the focal plane based
on their mass-to-charge ratio (m/q). While the method seems
straightforward, adequate suppression of the unreacted beam is
not always possible, as the resolving power of the system de-
pends on the mass of the involved nuclei. For measurements
with heavy nuclei (A>30), gamma detectors are usually em-
ployed for tagging the secondary gamma-rays from the capture
reactions and improving the signal-to-background ratio [16].

In the case of (p,n) reactions, the beam ions and the reaction
products have almost the same m/q ratio as their mass diﬀer-
ence is practically negligible. To separate the two species using
electromagnetic elements, one exclusively relies on their dif-
ference in momentum. The separation of ions based on their
momentum-to-charge (p/q) ratio is achieved by using dipole
magnets (spectrometers) and/or velocity ﬁlters. In any case, this
velocity dependence of the dispersion makes the measurement
of (p,n) reactions diﬃcult. This happens because the desired lat-
eral separation of the ions at the dispersive focal plane (where
the slits are usually located), depends on the Q value of the re-
action and the energy spread of the unreacted beam. The use of
windowless gas targets can minimize the energy straggling of
the beam, but it is not always possible to eliminate the unavoid-
able low-energy tails. Therefore, a neutron detector system for
tagging the outgoing neutrons from the (p,n) reactions is needed
to further separate the reaction products.

It is important to mention at this point that for measurements

of (p,n) reactions on light nuclei, i.e. carbon or oxygen, the us-
age of a recoil separator may not be necessary. Depending on
the energy and mass regime, a tracking proportional chamber
could be a viable alternative [17]. For heavy nuclei, however,
the situation is rather diﬃcult, as it is impossible to reach the de-
sirable resolution to adequately separate the reaction products
from the unreacted beam.

In the setup we present in this article, the suppression of the
unreacted beam is achieved by operating a beamline section of
the ReA3 reaccelerator of NSCL as a recoil separator (for de-
tails see section 2), while tagging the neutrons from the (p,n)
reactions with a neutron detector.
In the forthcoming years,
the beamline-separator that we used here could be replaced by
the separator for capture reactions (SECAR), which is currently
under construction at the ReA3 facility [18]. In this article, we
report on experimental measurements that demonstrate the ap-
plication of the technique for the setup at ReA3. The technique,
however, is applicable to any separator system of a similar op-
erating principle. Moreover, the application of the technique to
(α,n) reactions is straightforward.

In the following sections we describe the details of the ex-
perimental setup that we have developed at the ReA3 facility
for the measurement of (p,n) reactions in inverse kinematics.
We discuss the details of the ﬁrst proof-of-principle experiment
with a stable 40Ar beam, and we extract partial cross-sections
for the 40Ar(p,n)40K reaction. The analysis of the experimen-
tal data is discussed step-by-step, and the results are compared
with independent cross-section measurements of the same reac-
tion in regular kinematics. Overall, we ﬁnd an excellent agree-
ment between the test experiment and the reference study, indi-
cating the reliability of the newly developed technique. Meth-
ods to further improve the experimental setup and plans for fu-
ture measurements using SECAR are also discussed.

2. Description of the Technique and Associated Instrumen-

tation.

We present an overview of the experimental setup that was
used at the reaccelerator (ReA3) facility of the National Su-
perconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) [19] in Fig. 1.
We utilized the section of the ReA3 beam-transport line down-
stream of the last reaccelerator RF cavity. This is the section
of beamline that delivers the reaccelerated beam to the user ex-
perimental area. The beamline segment we used consists of
four dipole magnets (see Fig. 1), of which the ﬁrst two can be
operated in an energy-dispersive mode, while the other two are
typically used to switch the beam among the various user exper-
imental stations. The experiment made use of the whole beam
transport section leading to the general purpose experimental
station of the ReA3 experimental area.

During the measurements, the heavy-ion beam impinged on a
solid target made out of high-density polyethylene – (C2H4)n –
(HDPE). The target foil was mounted on a target ladder placed
inside a vacuum chamber that serves as the diagnostics box 13
of the reaccelerator and is located upstream of the ﬁrst dipole
in Fig. 1. We used the low-energy neutron detector array

2

(LENDA) [20] downstream of that target box to detect the neu-
trons from the (p,n) reaction. The corresponding heavy reaction
products were detected in the vacuum box provided to the users
at the end of the general purpose beamline, using a double-
sided silicon strip detector (DSSD) of suitable thickness. We
tagged the desired reaction events by demanding a coincidence
between neutrons detected in LENDA and the heavy ions in the
DSSD. The signals from these detectors were use to determine
the time-of-ﬂight between the neutrons and the heavy reaction
product. A key concept of the experimental setup is the use of
the beam-transport line as a recoil separator. The separation be-
tween beam ions and reaction products is achieved by operating
the ﬁrst dipole magnet after the target as an energy-dispersive
spectrometer. In this way, the heavy reaction products can be
separated from the unreacted beam based on their momentum.
We used a 4-jaw slit system at the focal plane of the upstream
magnet (see Fig. 1) to block the deﬂected beam ions. While
the 4-jaw slits signiﬁcantly reduced the number of beam ions
that could reach the DSSD, it was not possible to entirely elim-
inate the low-energy tails of the beam. To further increase the
energy separation between the reaction products and the unre-
acted beam that was transmitted to the experimental end station,
we placed an (11.9±0.6) µm thick Kapton foil upstream of the
DSSD to increase the energy loss of the ions. The Kapton foil
boosted the energy diﬀerence (∆E) between ions with diﬀerent
atomic numbers (Z), facilitating particle identiﬁcation.

In the following subsections, we describe the targets, detec-

tors, and the data acquisition system in more detail.

2.1. Hydrogen Target

For the measurements we used a hydrogen target in the form
of a thin HDPE ﬁlm. The foil was fabricated by dissolving
thicker commercially available HDPE ﬁlms in boiling xylene,
according to the procedure described in Ref. [21]. We deter-
mined the target’s eﬀective thickness of (3.95±0.4) µm exper-
imentally by measuring the energy loss of a 40Ar beam in the
foil. Considering the nominal density of HDPE (0.95 g/cm3),
the corresponding areal density of hydrogen in the target is
(3.18±0.32)× 1019 atoms/cm2. By using a thin target foil we
were able to achieve a relatively high energy resolution in the
measurements (by minimizing the beam energy loss), while
maintaining a relatively high density of hydrogen. In order to
mitigate any possible out-gassing of the foil inside the target
box and maintain the appropriate ultra-high vacuum conditions
of the beamline (∼10−8 Torr), the target was vacuum baked for
approximately 16 hours at 95◦ C before the experiment.

2.2. Neutron Detector

We used the LENDA detector array [20] to register neutrons
from the (p,n) reaction. The full detector system consists of
twenty-four plastic-scintillator bars made of BC-408 type scin-
tillator.
In the current setup, however, we deployed 14 bars
arranged in two consecutive layers downstream of the target,
as shown in Fig. 2. By using this conﬁguration, we eliminated
the gaps between bars and increased the geometrical solid an-
gle coverage of the array compared to a single layer. A special

frame designed to keep the front bars aligned at 35 cm from the
target, and the rear bars at 41.5 cm was built for the experiment.
Based on this conﬁguration, the angular acceptance of LENDA
in the laboratory frame was 5◦ (cid:46) θneut. (cid:46) 52◦. The optimization
of LENDA’s geometry was done based on Monte-Carlo simu-
lations taking into account the kinematics of low-energy (p,n)
reactions in inverse kinematics. Details of these simulations are
discussed in Section 4.5.

2.3. Double-sided Silicon Strip Detector

The DSSD we used is a standard BB15-type detector from
MICRON Semiconductor Ltd. The detector has an active area
of (40.3 × 75.0) mm2 (height × width) and consists of 64 ver-
tical strips on the junction side (front), and 4 horizontal strips
on the Ohmic side (back). The eﬀective thickness of the detec-
tor is ∼1000 µm and has an optimum operation bias close to
+150 V. Figure 3 shows a picture of the DSSD mounted on a
specially designed ConFlat ﬂange. We connected the detector
to a custom-made printed circuit board (PCB) that was attached
to the air side of the ﬂange. The connection between DSSD
and PCB is done through a small vacuum sealed opening on the
ﬂange, that allows the detector’s output pins to pass-through.
The PCB is ultra-high vacuum compatible and serves both as a
feed-through and as an adapter to convert the signals from the
high-density connectors of the DSSD to the low-density 26-pin
connectors at the exit.

The DSSD signals from the vertical strips of the detector are
coupled into groups of two reducing the total number of signal
output channels from 68 to 36 (32 vertical and 4 horizontal).
The coupling of the strips is done inside the PCB, and the out-
going signals are distributed into three 26-pin connectors on the
air side of the board (see the right side of the picture in Fig. 3).
The ﬁrst two low-density connectors carry the 32 vertical strips
(16 strips per connector), and the last one carries the 4 horizon-
tal strips. These modiﬁcations reduce the load to the data acqui-
sition system while maintaining a resolution in the x-position of
2.34 mm (the original resolution of the BB15 DSSD based on
the width of each strip is 1.17 mm).

2.4. Data Acquisition System and Electronics

The signals from the DSSD and the photo-multiplier tubes
(PMTs) of the LENDA bars, are processed by a digital data
acquisition system (DDAS) based on the NSCL DDAS frame-
work [22]. A PXI/PCI crate with ﬁve XIA Pixie-16 modules is
used to collect the 64 input channels, 28 from LENDA (2 chan-
nels per bar) and 36 from the DSSD. The Pixie-16 modules are
equipped with 250 mega-samples per second analog to digital
converters and have 14-bit resolution. This setup is based on a
similar NSCL-DDAS conﬁguration that was recently developed
and implemented for the LENDA system, which is optimized
for higher beam energies [23]. Figure 4 shows a schematic di-
agram of the data acquisition system and various aspects of the
implemented logic. The signals from the PMTs are directly
connected to the Pixie modules, while the DSSD signals are
pre-ampliﬁed using three MPR-16 pre-ampliﬁers. An exter-
nal event validation circuit is available to reduce the amount of

3

Figure 1: Overview of the experimental setup at the NSCL. The area enclosed in the red rectangle in the ﬁgure is the location of the target foils and the LENDA
neutron detector. The target foils were placed on the 45 degree drive visible in the blown up drawing of the target area. The vacuum ﬂange housing the double-sided
silicon detector is also shown in the photograph in the top-right part of the ﬁgure. The photograph shows the side of the detector setup that the unreacted beam and
the reaction products see. The Kapton foil that the products and the unreacted beam have to traverse before getting detected is visible. The solid blue line indicates
the path of the nuclei from the target position to the silicon detector. A detailed description of the individual components and the corresponding detection scheme is
given in Section 2. Mechanical drawings courtesy of the NSCL mechanical design group.

4

(back-side) strips have triggered. A valid event must include a
valid signal from the DSSD, and at least one valid signal from
a LENDA bar within a preset time window. This time window
is setup wide enough to cover the time-of-ﬂight (TOF) of the
heavy reaction products along the ReA3 beamline, taking into
account all relevant delays built into the system via cables and
electronics settings.

2.5. Oﬀ-line Analysis Software

The data analysis of correlated neutron and heavy residual
events was performed by developing appropriate code routines
within the R00TLe [24] software environment. R00TLe is a
software toolkit developed at NSCL to analyze experimental
data taken with LENDA using the digital data acquisition sys-
tem. The core of the software is based on ROOT [25]. The
R00TLe toolkit utilizes a number of digital ﬁltering algorithms
for extracting timing and energy information from the digitized
traces of the LENDA signal. This gives the ability to process
the signals oﬀ-line and optimize the timing and energy resolu-
tion of the system. By integrating the DSSD channels in the
LENDA standalone data acquisition system, we were able to
use the analysis routines of R00TLe and develop a data analy-
sis tool optimized for the (p,n) experimental setup.

To get the timing information of each event, the oﬀ-line anal-
ysis code analyzes the recorded signal traces from the two de-
tectors. For a high-precision timing, the code uses an optimized
cubic algorithm to interpolate the digital constant fraction dis-
criminator signal in the region of the zero crossing [23]. For
a LENDA bar, this analysis is performed for each PMT sepa-
rately, and the average timing τ of an event is given as:

τ = 1
2

(tB + tT )

(1)

where tT and tB is the timing of the top and the bottom PMT,
respectively. With this method, a time resolution of the order of
400 ps can be achieved for a single LENDA bar. On the other
hand, the corresponding timing resolution for the DSSD signals
is close to 3.5 ns.

3. Experimental Validation Using the 40Ar(p,n)40K Reac-

tion.

To test the experimental setup and verify the proposed tech-
nique, we performed a stable-beam experiment in ReA3 using
the 40Ar(p,n)40K reaction as a test case. The choice of reac-
tion was dictated by constraints in well-developed stable beam
availability in ReA3 at the time. In this experiment, we deter-
mined the partial cross-section of the 40Ar(p,n)40K reaction for
transitions to the second excited state of 40K, using the newly
developed setup and a stable 40Ar beam. We validated the re-
sults via a separate experiment at the Edwards Accelerator of
Ohio University (OU), where we measured the total and partial
cross-sections of the 40Ar(p,n)40K reaction in normal kinemat-
ics, using a proton beam and a 40Ar gas target. Here will present
only the results of the OU measurement that are relevant for the
comparison with the data taken at ReA3. The full account of

Figure 2: Layout of LENDA in the double-row conﬁguration. This conﬁgu-
ration oﬀers near-maximum solid angle coverage for the neutrons from low-
energy (p,n) reactions in inverse kinematics.

Figure 3: Image of the front and the back side of the DSSD ﬂange. The DSSD is
connected to the PCB on the back side of the ﬂange through a small rectangular
opening located behind the detector. The PCB is ultra-high vacuum compatible
and serves both as a feed-through and as an adapter for transferring the signals
from the DSSD to the pre-ampliﬁers. The thin Kapton foil visible in the photo
is placed upstream of the DSSD to improve the particle identiﬁcation (see text
for details).

data processed by the DDAS when the input rates are too high.
The system consists of two LVTTL Breakout Boxes (100 MHz)
connected to the Pixie-16 boards, and one TTL logic module.
Having the external trigger enabled, the system requires coin-
cidence in the signals from the vertical and horizontal strips of
the DSSD, as well as the PMPs of a LENDA bar. While the
high input rates do not aﬀect the performance of DDAS, they
may have implications on the form of the recorded traces of the
signals. In the case of long input signals (e.g. signals from a
DSSD), a high input rate will cause overlaps between the traces
and increase the complexity of the oﬀ-line signal processing.
Without the implementation of the external trigger, the highest
average input rate on the system before pile-up was of the order
of 800 pps. In the measurements described in this work, the co-
incidence rate on the DAQ never exceeded 400 pps due to the
suﬃciently eﬀective rejection of the unreacted beam. Hence we
did not need to enable the external validation system and all co-
incidences between LENDA and DSSD events were registered
using a software trigger validation. According to that validation
scheme, the following logic determines the quality of an event.
A signal from a LENDA bar is considered valid when both the
PMTs have triggered. Likewise, a signal from the DSSD is
valid when at least one vertical (front-side) and one horizontal

5

Figure 4: Schematic diagram of the data acquisition system. It consists of a total number of 64 signal channels (28 from LENDA and 36 from the DSSD) that are
distributed to 5 Pixie-16 cards. The signals are recorded asynchronously and the coincidences between events are registered by the DDAS software code. To enable
use of the system in high-rate situations we implemented an optional hardware-based trigger system using two breakout boxes to create an external event validation
system. When the external trigger is enabled, the system requires a coincidence between the signals from LENDA and the DSSD to process an event. Since the
coincidence condition is processed in hardware before an event is registered the total event rate in DDAS drops signiﬁcantly.

the 40Ar experimental work at OU has been accepted for publi-
cation and can be found in Ref. [7].

The ion beam was produced by ionizing residual 40Ar gas
inside the Electron Beam Ion Trap (EBIT). EBIT is part of
the ReA3 platform upstream of the linac accelerator and is
used as a charge-state breeder for the re-accelerated beams that
are typically produced at the FRIB facility via fragmentation.
The ionized 40Ar nuclei from EBIT were then transported into
the ReA3 bunching system that consists of a Multi-Harmonic
Buncher (MHB) and a Radio Frequency Quadrupole (RFQ).
This system bunches and focuses the beam ions before inject-
ing them into the re-accelerator. The RFQ also accelerates the
ions to an initial kinetic energy of approximately 600 keV/u.
The main acceleration takes place downstream of the RFQ in
the superconducting linac of ReA3 that is comprised of ﬁfteen
Quarter-Wave Resonator (QWR) cavities for acceleration and
eight solenoids for beam focusing between the resonators [19].
For the purposes of our test, the 40Ar14+ beam was acceler-
ated to a ﬁnal energy of 3.52 MeV/nucleon. Considering the
stopping power of 40Ar in HDPE [26] and the energy loss of
the beam inside the target, the mean reaction energy during
the measurement was (3.42 ± 0.12) MeV/nucleon, which corre-
sponds to (3.36 ± 0.12) MeV in the center-of-mass system. The
energy uncertainty of ±3.5% that we report here is extracted
by taking into account the energy loss of the beam ions in the
target foil, and the energy spread of the incoming beam.

Fig. 5, shows the energy levels of the residual 40K nuclei
that were energetically accessible during this measurement. For
an incident energy of 3.42 MeV/nucleon, the 40K nuclei are
allowed to be in any of the ﬁrst three excited states, and de-
pending on the level of excitation, the corresponding exit chan-
nel is diﬀerent. We refer to these channels as 40Ar(p,nx)40K
(x=0,1,2,3). The emittance of the 40K ions from the diﬀerent
channels varies signiﬁcantly and this has implications on the
transmission of the products through the beam line. The trans-
mission of the reaction products is a critical parameter for de-
termining the reaction cross-section and its eﬀect on the mea-
surements will be described in more detail below.

During the experiment, the LENDA detector and the DAQ
system were at a large distance from each other. The LENDA
detector close to the target position, and the DAQ close to the
DSSD. To connect the two systems, we used 40 m coaxial
cables. As a result, neutron signals in the experiment were
delayed by ∼270 ns, causing a time shift between the actual
TOF of 40K and the registered time of ﬂight diﬀerence between
LENDA and the DSSD. For the rest of the article we will re-
fer to the time diﬀerence between the two detectors as “TOF.”
Taking all the timing delays of the test experiment into account,
the timing window for the validation of coincidences between
LENDA and the DSSD was set to 2 µs.

In this experiment, we collected two sets of data, with two
diﬀerent ion-optics settings. We refer to the two data sets as

6

where Yi is the integral of the TOF peak in the ith LENDA bar.
By analyzing the data of each bar separately, we were able to
extract information about the neutron angular distribution, and
calculate the neutron eﬃciency of the system more accurately
(each LENDA bar has a slightly diﬀerent intrinsic eﬃciency).

4.2. Beam Current Integration

The total number of beam ions Ib that bombarded the target
during each run, was extracted based on the incoming beam
current I that was sampled every hour using a Faraday cup. The
average value of these measurements was 7.0 pA and 8.1 pA
for run-1 and run-2, respectively. To account for the ﬂuctu-
ations of the beam current which occur in almost every long
measurement, we used the DSSD as a monitor. During the mea-
surements, a small fraction of the unreacted beam was reaching
the silicon detector at the focal plane. By integrating the en-
ergy peak of the unreacted beam in the oﬀ-line analysis, we
extracted information about the beam ﬂuctuations as a function
of time. To achieve that, we split the total time of each run into
i intervals of 5 mins, and for each interval we determined an
average beam-rate Ii and a variation wi. The variation of each
interval was calculated as wi=Ii/Ire f , where Ire f is the average
beam-rate of a reference interval. Having extracted the varia-
tions wi of the average current I, the total number of beam ions
Ib that bombarded the HDPE target during each measurement
was calculated as:
(cid:88)

Ib = I dτ

wi

(4)

i

where dτ is the width of the time intervals (5 mins).

Figure 6 shows the ﬂuctuations of the beam current as a func-
tion of time, based on the count-rate of the unreacted beam that
was transmitted to the experimental end station. For run-1, we
found some smooth variations of the current as a function of
time. For run-2, the beam was remarkably stable for the whole
period of 11 hours. The relative variations of the beam rates
are shown in the lower panel of Fig. 6. The variations of each
run are normalized to a reference point in time with negligible
ﬂuctuations. In both runs, as a reference point Ire f , we chose
the one at 4 hrs. Taking these data into account, the beam cur-
rent integral was extracted using Eq. 4. The results of these
calculations are given in Table 1.

Table 1: Results from beam current integration. The average rates were ex-
tracted from the measurements with the Faraday cup. The integrated current Ib
was calculated using Eq. 4.

Run Duration

(min)
573
646

1
2

Average Rate
(pps)
(3.16±0.32) × 106
(3.63±0.36) × 106

Ib
(atoms)
(1.37±0.14) × 1011
(1.43±0.14) × 1011

4.3. Emittance of Product Nuclei and Beam Dynamics Simula-

tions

(3)

The counting rate of the reaction products during an experi-
ment can be many orders of magnitude lower compared to the

7

Figure 5: Level scheme of the 40Ar(p,n)40K reaction for a compound excitation
energy of 11.16 MeV. This corresponds to an incident energy of 3.36 MeV in
the center-of-mass system. In this energy regime, the residual 40K nuclei are
allowed to be in any of the ﬁrst three excited states.

‘run-1’ and ‘run-2’. The diﬀerent settings were applied to the
section of the beam line that we used as a recoil separator,
i.e. between the target position in box 13, and the DSSD at
the end of the general purpose beam line. The duration of the
two runs was 573 min and 646 min, respectively. By varying
the ion optics in these two runs we were able to use the par-
tial cross-section data to explore the optical properties of the
ReA3 beam line in the oﬀ-line analysis. Using the partial cross-
section along with diagnostic measurements of the unreacted
beam transmission, we were able to characterize the transmis-
sion of ions through the beamline and develop an accurate beam
dynamics model. The simulations based on this modeling allow
us to reliably extract product transmissions and, consequently,
cross-sections in future experiments.

4. Cross-Section Quantiﬁcation and Data Analysis

In this section, we describe step-by-step the data analysis that
we performed in order to extract the partial cross-section for the
40Ar(p,n2)40K channel.

The total cross-section σ of the reaction channel that we mea-

sured was extracted by using the following equation:

σ =

Yn
Ib Nt (cid:15)n ωn T p Fq

(2)

where Yn is the yield of the reaction products (TOF peak inte-
gral), Ib is the total number of beam ions that impinged on the
target foil during the measurement, Nt (atoms/cm2) is the areal
density of hydrogen atoms in the target, (cid:15)n and ωn are the to-
tal neutron eﬃciency and the geometrical solid angle coverage
of LENDA, and Fq and Tp are the charge-state fraction and the
corresponding transmission of the product nuclei to the DSSD.

4.1. Number of Correlated Events

The total number of correlated events in each run was ob-
tained by analysing the corresponding TOF spectra. The total
yield Yn of the reaction products, was calculated as:

Yn =

14(cid:88)

i=1

Yi

the random generators that are implemented in the code (e.g.
see Ref. [31]). The generators set the 6D particle coordinates
based on the input parameters provided by the user. The 6D
coordinates are deﬁned by the longitudinal parameters δE and
δτ, that give the relative energy diﬀerence and the relative time
diﬀerence of each particle from a reference point, and the trans-
verse parameters x, y, px, and py, that give the positions and di-
rectional angles of the particles relative to the horizontal(x) and
vertical(y) axes, respectively. These angles are the Cartesian
components of the angle θ relative to the beam axis:

(cid:113)

θ =

p2
x

+ p2
y

(5)

In the used coordinate system, the beam-axis corresponds to
the z-axis. Within this context, the initial phase spaces (x,px),
(y,py), and (δE, δτ) are generated based on Gaussian probability
distributions of the form:

fG(x) = A exp

(cid:32)





−

(cid:33)2


x − µx√
2σx

(6)

where A is a normalization constant, and µx, σx are the mean
value and standard deviation of the quantity x (x = E, px, py,
etc). The µ and σ parameters of each quantity in DYNAC are
provided by the user.

To extract realistic angular and energy distributions for the
reaction products, we performed Monte-Carlo kinematics cal-
culations, taking into account the interactions of the residual
ions with the target atoms, as well as the details of the kine-
matics of the various exit channels (see Fig. 5). The kinematics
plots of the 40Ar(p,n)40K reaction for the various exit channels
are presented with the solid and dashed lines in Fig. 7 (solid and
dashed lines). As indicated by these lines, the excitation energy
of the emitted 40K ions aﬀects their energy and angular spread.
Additionally, the energy loss of the beam ions inside the tar-
get has a strong impact. To investigate this eﬀect, we repeated
the kinematics calculations for various incident energies that we
randomized based on a Gaussian distribution (see Eq. 6), where
the mean energy E0 of the distribution was the mean reaction
energy (3.42 MeV/nucleon), and σE was the corresponding en-
ergy spread (47 keV/u). Here, we assume that the full-width-
at-half-maximum (FWHM) of this distribution (≈2.355σE) is
equal to the energy loss of the 40Ar beam in the HDPE target.
The energy loss was determined experimentally by measuring
the diﬀerence in the magnetic rigidity (Bρ) of the dipole mag-
nets before and after the target foil and also with and without the
target foil for the same magnet. The result of the Monte-Carlo
calculation is the 2D histogram in Fig. 7.

To obtain the energy and angular characteristics of the emerg-
ing 40K ions after the target foil, the corresponding energy loss
of the ions as well as the energy and angular straggling in-
side the target foil must be taken into account. Considering
a 3.95 µm-thick HDPE target we were able to convert the ran-
domly chosen reaction energy into position inside the target.
This was done based on the stopping power models of Ziegler
et al. [26]. Having determined the position along the target’s
length where each random reaction event takes place, the ef-
fective thickness of the HDPE layer that each product nucleus

Figure 6: Fluctuations of the beam current during the test experiment. (Top)
Counting rate of unreacted beam as a function of time during run-1 and run-2.
The data points were retrieved by integrating the energy peak of the unreacted
beam on the DSSD in oﬀ-line analysis. Each point corresponds to the average
counting rate in a time interval of 5 mins. (Bottom) Variations of the counting
rate relative to a reference value, as a function of time. The red area corresponds
to run-1, and the blue area correspond to run-2. In both cases, the reference rate
was the one after 4 hours of beam time. To extract the integrated beam current,
the normalized variations wi from this analysis, were implimented in Eq. 4.

incoming beam rate. This sets vast limitations on the usage of
beam diagnostics devices, such as Faraday cups, for the direct
measurement of products’ transmission (Tp) along the various
sections of the beamline. As a result, these properties can only
be determined through analytical simulations.

The transmission of the 40K ions from the 40Ar(p,n)40K re-
action during the proof-of-principle experiment was extracted
from beam dynamics simulations using the code DYNAC [27].
Speciﬁcally, we used a detailed model of the entire ReA3 beam-
line that has been developed recently and is currently used as a
diagnostic tool and for beam optimization [28, 29, 30]. For the
purpose of our data analysis, we run simulations using only the
part of the transport line between the target position and the
DSSD (see Fig. 1). To make the beamline model more realis-
tic and reproduce the system’s acceptance more accurately, we
added a number of apertures along the beamline that match the
shape and size of the actual beam pipes.

To determine the system’s acceptance and the transmission of
the ions through the beamline, two important parameters must
be speciﬁed. The ﬁrst one is the initial emittance of the incom-
ing ions and the second is the pole-tip ﬁelds of the quadrupole
magnets during the experiment. The experimental values of the
pole-tip ﬁelds were determined based on the applied electric
current on each quadrupole magnet during the measurement.
The initial emittance of the beam was calculated based on the
expected energy and angular spread of the ions, and the size of
the beam spot.

In DYNAC, the initial beam proﬁle can be generated by using

8

Figure 7: Kinematics plot for the 40Ar(p,n)40K reaction. The solid and dashed
lines show the kinematic lines of the diﬀerent exit channels for an incident
energy of 3.42 MeV/nucleon, which is the mean reaction energy during the
test experiment. This 2D histogram is the result of a Monte-Carlo calculation
and shows the energy and angle of the emitted 40K nuclei that we obtained
by randomizing the reaction energy. The reaction energy could take any value
between the incoming and exit beam energy (i.e. after the target). The extent
of this energy range is visible in the yellow regions in the kinematics plot, and
corresponds to the total energy loss of 40Ar in the HDPE target.

has to traverse before exiting was obtained. Taking this into
account, the initially assigned angle θ and energy E of each
product were sampled using appropriate Gaussian probability
distributions (see Eq. 6) with the mean values µθ and µE of these
distributions taken from kinematics, and the standard deviations
σθ and σE calculated using the SW [32, 33] and LS [34] mod-
els, respectively (see also [35, 36]). To take into account the
angular spread due to the angular spread of the beam ions, the
corresponding dispersion σθ was increased accordingly based
on the angular straggling of 40Ar in HDPE.

4.4. Charge-State Fractions

The number of product nuclei that are transported to the
DSSD depends on their corresponding charge-state distribution
(CSD) after the target. The charge state fractions Fq of the prod-
uct nuclei are usually determined experimentally by performing
CSD measurements with stable beams. For the 40Ar(p,n)40K
reaction, this would be done by using a 40K beam and a HDPE
target. In this way the beam intensity would be suﬃciently high
for determining the associated CSD of 40K precisely. Such a
beam, however, is not available at the ReA facility. Hence, in
the present study, no such measurements could be performed
in a reasonable time due to the limitations caused by the low
intensity and broad angular spread of the 40K products. Never-
theless, we performed measurements for the 40Ar beam, which
has a fairly similar atomic structure with 40K.

The charge-state fractions of the 40K+q ions after the target
were determined by using semi-empirical models. Particularly,
we used the semi-empirical model of Schiewitz [37], which was
found to give the most accurate results when tested against the
experimental data from 40Ar (see Sec. 5.5). The fractions were
extracted based on a Gaussian distribution of which the mean

Figure 8: Graphical representation of the experimental setup around the target
in GEANT4. In this simulation, the solid angle and the intrinsic neutron eﬃ-
ciency of LENDA were determined. The extracted neutron angular distribution
was found to be in a good agreement with the experimental data, indicating the
adequate accuracy of the simulation (see Sec. 5.6).

value µ and standard deviation σ were given from the semi-
empirical formulas of the model [38]. For the charge-state frac-
tions extracted with this method, a conservative error of 10%
was estimated based on previous comparisons with experimen-
tal data (e.g. see [39]).

4.5. Intrinsic Eﬃciency and Solid Angle of LENDA

The geometrical solid angle ωn and the intrinsic neutron ef-
ﬁciency (cid:15)n of the LENDA system were calculated through a
Monte-Carlo simulation with GEANT4 [40]. Figure 8 shows
the geometry of LENDA in GEANT4 along with beamline
components interposed between the target and the detector. The
energy and angular characteristics of the incoming neutrons
were generated based on the kinematics of the 40Ar(p,n2) re-
action, taking into account that the shape of the neutron angular
distribution in the center-of-mass system is isotropic [7].
In
this simulation, the intrinsic neutron eﬃciency of each bar was
taken into account.

The intrinsic neutron eﬃciency of a single LENDA bar de-
pends on the applied light output threshold, which is typically
expressed in electron equivalent energy units – keVee in this
case –. By implementing the experimental threshold level of
each bar in the simulation, the intrinsic eﬃciency curves were
obtained. This method of extracting the LENDA eﬃciency has
been successfully used in previous work [20, 41] and has been
validated against experimental measurements [42, 43].

It is important to mention, that the calculated intrinsic eﬃ-
ciencies from these simulations had to be scaled. The scaling
factor adopted in this study was 0.92 and has been extracted
by comparing the simulation to the experimental eﬃciency of

9

Table 2: Geometrical solid angle coverage and intrinsic neutron eﬃciency of
LENDA during the experiment.

Solid angle ωn (%)
54.5±3.0

Intrinsic eﬃciency (cid:15)n (%)
21.9±2.4

Figure 9: Intrinsic eﬃciency of a single LENDA bar. Experimental data for the
eﬃciency of LENDA were retrieved from [7]. The theoretical data points were
extracted from Monte-Carlo calculations using GEANT4. A scaling factor of
0.92 was applied on the simulated curve, as suggested in [41].
In both the
experimental and calculated data sets, the light-output threshold was 30 keVee.
Within the corresponding uncertainties, the agreement between the two curves
is adequate.

LENDA measured with a 252Cf ﬁssion source [41, 20]. To
cross-check the accuracy of this scaling, the simulations were
tested against experimental data from an independent eﬃciency
measurement [7]. In that study, the eﬃciency of a 31 cm long
LENDA bar –1 cm longer than the ones used in the current
work– was measured by using a white neutron spectrum from
the 9Be(d,n) reaction. The comparison between the experimen-
tal eﬃciency and the corresponding GEANT4 simulation for a
single bar are presented in Fig. 9. In both data sets, the light-
output threshold was set to 30 keVee. The scale-down factor
of 0.92 suggested by [41] is suﬃced to achieve a very good
agreement between the two data sets within the experimental
uncertainty of ±11% in Ref. [7].

The extracted geometrical solid angle ωn and the intrin-
sic eﬃciency (cid:15)n of LENDA from these simulations were
(54.5±3.0)% and (21.9±2.4)%, respectively. The results are
tabulated in Table 2. The error of the solid angle was estimated
based on the sensitivity of the results on the geometry of the
system and the characteristics of the incoming neutrons, while
for the intrinsic eﬃciency, the experimental uncertainty from
Ref. [7] was adopted.

The validity of the above GEANT4 simulations was tested
by comparing the simulated neutron angular distribution with
experimental data and is discussed in Sec. 5.6.

10

4.6. Sputtering of Target Material

The loss of hydrogen from the target due to sputtering of tar-
get material in this experiment was considered negligible. This
is based on the fact that the beam intensity during the measure-
ments was considerably low (∼106 pps). To check the validity
of this assumption, we performed Monte Carlo simulations us-
ing the software SRIM [44]. In these simulations, a high den-
sity polyethylene foil of proper thickness and a 40Ar beam at
140 MeV were considered. The calculated sputtering yield was
of the order of 1 atom of H per 100 ions of 40Ar. The total
number of beam ions impinged the target foil during the exper-
iment was ∼1011 (see Table 1, Sec. 4.2). Based on the above
calculation, the expected number of hydrogen atoms sputtered
out of the target in a period of ∼24 h is close to 109 atoms. This
number is negligible compared to the total number of hydrogen
atoms in the target foil, which is of the order of 1019 atoms/cm2
(or ∼1017 atoms/mm2).

5. Results from the 40Ar Experiment

5.1. Particle Identiﬁcation

In Figures 10 & 11, we present the energy and timing char-
acteristics of the events that satisﬁed the coincidence condition
between neutron and heavy residual during the two runs of the
test experiment. The bottom panels show the energy deposited
in the DSSD versus the time diﬀerence between the signals
from LENDA and the DSSD. The correlated events associated
with the products from the 40Ar(p,n)40K reaction appear as a
blob at recoil energy of ∼84 MeV, that is in agreement with the
expected energy of the 40K ions after passing through the Kap-
ton foil. The time stamp of the products corresponded to about
450 ns. This time is consistent with the TOF of 40K for mean
energy of ∼124 MeV, after taking into account the eﬀects of
the long signal cables. Cumulative TOF spectra from run-1 and
run-2 are shown in the upper panels of Fig. 10 and 11. These
spectra were obtained by projecting the 2D histograms of the
lower panels on the time axis (horizontal axis). To reduce the
number of background events, we considered only the events in
the range 75 MeV < Erecoil < 90 MeV. This condition rejects the
events with recoil energies outside the expected energy range
for the 40K ions.

All the background events in the spectra (see Figs. 10 & 11)
are coming from random coincidences between the 40Ar ions on
the DSSD, and the background events on LENDA (cosmic rays
etc). Since there is no timing correlation between two random
particles that hit the detectors, the time stamp of these events
was uniformly distributed within the coincidence window 0 –
2 µs. As a result, the random coincidences appear as a linear
background in the TOF spectra. For each TOF peak, therefore,
the corresponding reaction yield was obtained after subtracting
a linear background. Likewise, in the 2D spectra (E vs TOF),
the background events appear as a straight horizontal line. As
can be seen in the 2D histograms of Figs. 10 & 11, there are two
horizontal lines of background events. Both lines are random
coincidences associated with the unreacted beam, but each line
corresponds to a diﬀerent charge-state of the beam ions. For

Figure 10: Correlated events from run-1. These events satisfy the basic condi-
tion of coincidence between the two detectors within a time window of 2 µs.
(Bottom) 2D histogram of the energy deposited in the DSSD, versus the time
diﬀerence between the signals of the two detectors. This time diﬀerence is di-
rectly proportional to the TOF of the ions along the beamline. The events from
40K and neutrons, appear as a blob with speciﬁc timing properties. The rest of
the events are random coincidences between the unreacted beam ions and the
background signals of LENDA. (Top) projection of the 2D histogram on the
time axis. A well deﬁned peak appears in the middle of the spectrum that corre-
sponds to the correlated events from the reaction products. This peak was used
for extracting the reaction yield, and subsequently, the reaction cross-section.

example, in Fig. 12, we show a recoil energy spectrum from
run-2. The plot was extracted by projecting the correspond-
ing 2D histogram of Fig. 11 (E vs TOF) on the energy axis.
The displayed events are gated on TOF in order to reduce the
unwanted background. The position of the peaks matches the
expected energies of the unreacted beam charge-states for that
particular Bρ. As we see, in run-2 we observed the 15+ and 16+
charge-states of the beam. In run-1, due to the diﬀerent optics
settings the corresponding charge-states were the 15+ and 14+.
In the above analysis, the TOF peaks were exclusively as-
signed to events coming from neutrons and 40K ions from the
40Ar(p,n2) channel. In principle, some of these events could in-
volve photons instead of neutrons, as there is a number of char-
acteristic gamma-rays (de-excitation of 40K, see Fig. 5) that are
also emitted in coincidence with the heavy products. This could
add a number of events in the TOF peaks that must be analyzed
separately, as they correspond to a diﬀerent intrinsic eﬃciency
and solid angle. However, the geometrical solid angle coverage
of LENDA for any emitted photons is less than 5%. This hap-
pens because the secondary photons are emitted uniformly in
4π, and are not boosted at forward angles as it happens with the
neutrons. Furthermore, the intrinsic eﬃciency of LENDA for
incoming photons is of the order of 1%. As a result, any con-
tribution from events due to secondary photons was considered
negligible for this analysis.

Finally, to investigate whether the peak of correlated events

Figure 11: Correlated events from run-2. A detailed description of the plots is
given in Fig. 10.

may include any parasitic products from the interactions of the
beam with the carbon nuclei in HDPE, we performed a 5-hour
background measurement using a thin carbon foil (100 µg/cm2).
The corresponding 2D spectrum (E vs TOF) of the background
run is shown in Fig. 13. As can be seen from the graph, no blob
of correlated events is evident in the region around 450 ns.

5.2. Energy and Angular Acceptance of the System

The maximum energy and angular acceptance of the system
was extracted from beam dynamics simulations using the ex-
In
perimental settings from run-1 and run-2 (see Sec. 4.3).
these simulations, we considered 40K ions (Z=19, A=40) emit-
ted by sampling a Gaussian distribution with a mean energy of
124 MeV (the reference beam energy of the test experiment de-
ﬁned by the set magnetic rigidity Bρ of the dipole magnets), and
an energy spread with a standard deviation of 5 MeV. Similarly,
the angle of these ions was sampled from a Gaussian distribu-
tion centered at zero, with an angular spread characterized by
a standard deviation of 10 mrad. These initial conditions were
chosen such that the emitted ions cover a broad range of angles
and energies, surpassing the maximum acceptance of the sys-
tem that was to be determined. Regarding the size of the beam-
spot, we considered a (2×6) mm elliptical spot that matches the
actual size of the beam-spot at the target position (see Fig. 14).
Here we assume that within the thickness of the target foil, any
changes on the size of the spot are negligible.

In Fig. 15, we present the calculated angular and energy dis-
tribution of the accepted 40K ions during run-1 and run-2, based
on the DYNAC simulation. In both runs, the maximum angular
acceptance was found to be less than 8 mrad, while the energy
acceptance relative to the reference energy was limited to about
±2.5% for run-1, and ±1% for run-2.

The limited acceptance of the system aﬀects both the yields
of the measured reaction products, and the energy width of the

11

Figure 12: Energy spectrum of heavy ions on the DSSD. These events corre-
sponds to time-of-ﬂight values between 400 and 500 ns (see Fig. 11). The en-
ergy peak of the reaction products appears between the two peaks correspond-
ing to the 15+ and 16+ charge-states of the unreacted beam. The energies that
these charge-states appear are consistent with the Bρ settings of the measure-
ment and the energy loss of the beam in the HDPE target and the Kapton foil
upstream of the DSSD.

measured cross-sections, i.e., the energy range over which the
measured cross-section is averaged (energy bin). This range
typically depends on the energy spread of the incoming beam
and the energy loss of the beam inside the target. Due to en-
ergy dispersion in beamline optics, when the acceptance of the
system is limited, the width of the energy bin of a data point is
not simply given by the energy loss or the energy spread of the
incoming beam, but must be calculated based on the system’s
acceptance. By using the calculated energy and angular spread
of the reaction products (details on these Monte-Carlo simula-
tions are given in Sec. 4.3), as well as the acceptance of the
system for run-1 and run-2, we extracted the distribution of re-
action energies that were “accepted” during the test experiment.
The results of this analysis are shown in Fig. 16, where each
distribution is ﬁtted with a Gaussian function. Based on this
approach, the ﬁnal energy uncertainty of the data points in this
experiment, given as the half-width of the energy bin (2.35σ),
corresponds to ∆E values of ±2.13% in run-1, and ±1.5% in
run-2.

5.3. Transmission of 40K Ions to the DSSD

Having a detailed picture of the reaction kinematics and tak-
ing into account the acceptance of the system during the test ex-
periment (see Fig.15), it is evident that the vast majority of the
nuclei from (p,n0) and (p,n1) channels fall outside our accep-
tance window (see Fig. 7). In both runs (run-1 and run-2), the
angular acceptance of the system was less than 8 mrad, while
the acceptance in energy was no more than ±3 MeV from the
mean value. Combining this information with the results from
kinematics, we estimated that the portion of the products from
(p,n0) and (p,n1) that ﬁts in the acceptance window is less than
0.1%. As a result, the contribution from these two channels to

12

Figure 13: Correlated events from the background run. A detailed description
of the quantities presented in this 2D histogram are given in Fig. 10. During
the background run, a thin carbon foil was irradiated for about 5 hours with
the 40Ar beam. No events with particular time stamp were observed, indicating
the absence of background events from carbon in the TOF spectra that could
inﬂuence the measured yield of 40K.

the measured cross-sections is negligible. Furthermore, accord-
ing to the experimental data on the partial cross-sections for the
40Ar(p,n)40K reaction [7], the contribution of the (p,n3) chan-
nel is also negligible compared to the dominant (p,n2) channel.
Therefore, during the test experiment only ions from the (p,n2)
channel were reaching the DSSD. If this was not the case and
ions corresponding to more channels were reaching the DSSD,
the situation would be signiﬁcantly more complicated and the
accuracy of the results would depend on our ability to disentan-
gle the yields of the individual channels.

The transmission of 40K through the beamline was extracted
from the beam dynamics simulations. To model the products’
emittance in DYNAC, we provided input parameters according
to the angular and energy distributions of the 40K ions from the
(p,n2) channel. Figure 17 shows the angular and energy distri-
butions of the ions based on the Monte-Carlo analysis method
that we discussed in Sec. 4.3. For the beam-spot size, we used
the same conditions as in the calculation of the system’s accep-
tance. Based on the above data, we were able to extract real-
istic input parameters for generating the initial phase-space of
the products beam.

The results of the beam dynamics simulations are summa-
In both runs, the transmission of products
rized in Table 3.
was much less than 10%, indicating that the applied ion op-
tics during the test experiment were not properly optimized for
product transmission. Nevertheless, by implementing the ex-
tracted transmissions in Eq. 2, we were able to obtain the re-
action cross-section for each run and compare the ﬁnal results
with the literature data.

The estimated errors on the calculated transmissions with
this method are on the order of 12%. This error was calcu-
lated based on the expected uncertainties on the initial energy
and angular spread of the products. The theoretical models
that we used for extracting these quantities are accurate within

Figure 14: Picture of the beam-spot at the position of the HDPE target during
the test experiment. The picture was taken by using a beam viewer system that
is mounted on the same diagnostics box with the target ladder (see also Fig. 1).
The ﬂuorescent screen of the viewer illuminates when the beam ions interact
with the material. The ﬁve dots on the viewers screen shapes a rectangle that is
used for determining the size of the beam-spot.

Table 3: Transmission of reaction products and unreacted beam through the
beamline. The calculated values were extracted from beam dynamics simula-
tions with DYNAC. The last row includes data for the transmission of the in-
coming beam without passing through the target foil. To cross-check the accu-
racy of the calculated transmissions for the unreacted beam, the obtained values
are tested against experimental data that we collected using Faraday cups.

Calculated

Data Set
Run-1
Run-2
w/o foil

40K (%)
1.35 ± 0.16
5.90 ± 0.71
N/A

40Ar (%)
4.8 ± 0.5
18.8 ± 1.5
69.5 ± 4.0

Experimental
40Ar (%)
5.0 ± 1.0
21.2 ± 4.3
66.0 ± 6.6

5% [35, 26]. By modifying the initial emittance of the prod-
ucts according to this uncertainty, the maximum variations of
the calculated transmissions with DYNAC were extracted. This
method was also used to estimate the corresponding errors for
the unreacted beam that we discuss in the following section.

5.4. Experimental Validation of the Calculated Transmissions

To test the validity of the above method in calculating
the transmission of nuclei through the beamline, we checked
whether this model can reproduce the transmission of the un-
reacted 40Ar beam. During the test experiment, the transmis-
sion of the unreacted beam was determined using the beam
diagnostics devices of ReA3. By using these data as a refer-
ence, we repeated the above analysis for the case of the 40Ar
beam.
In the ﬁrst part of this analysis, we tested the accu-
racy of the simulated transmission of the 40Ar+14 beam with-
out passing through the HDPE foil. For the incident angles px
and py at the target position, we assumed Gaussian distributions
with a mean value of 0 mrad and a FWHM of (2.0±0.25) mrad.
This angular distribution was estimated during the experiment
while tuning the incoming 40Ar14+ beam. Regarding the en-
ergy spread of the beam, we assumed a mean energy of 140.63

Figure 15: Calculated energy and angular acceptance of the system based on
the experimental ion-optics settings for run-1 and run-2. The plots display the
initial properties of the transmitted 40K ions through the section of the beamline
between the hydrogen target and the DSSD. Details on the initial conditions
(a) Energy distribution of the accepted
of the simulation are given in text.
ions. The distributions show the maximum accepted variation of the ions energy
relative to the chosen reference value. (b) Corresponding angular distribution
of the accepted ions.

MeV (3.52 MeV/nucleon) and a FWHM of (0.87±0.04) MeV.
The FWHM of the distribution was determined experimentally
using the dipole magnet upstream the 4-jaw system (see Fig.1)
and a Faraday cup. The exact method of measuring the energy
spread is described in the next paragraph. By implementing
the above beam characteristics in DYNAC we calculated the
transmission of the incoming beam through the section between
the target position and the DSSD. In this simulation, we im-
plemented the experimental ion-optics settings that were used
while measuring the transmission of the 40Ar+14 beam along
the beam line. The simulated transmission was found to be
(69.5±4.0)% which is in a good agreement with the experimen-
tal value of (66±6.6)%. The error in the calculated transmission
was extracted by using the method we described in Sec. 5.3,
taking into account the estimated uncertainties on the initial an-
gular and energy spread of the beam ions.

In the second part of the analysis, we calculated the transmis-
sion of the beam after passing through the HDPE foil. For this

13

Figure 16: Distribution of reaction energies that were ”accepted” by the sys-
tem during the test experiment. The distributions were extracted from Monte-
Carlo simulations based on the energy and angular acceptance of the reaction
products. The mean energy of these distributions is 136.5 MeV (lab system).
The energy uncertainty of the measured cross-sections in each case is given as
±2.35σ.

part, we used the experimental ion-optics settings of run-1 and
run-2. To obtain the angular spread of the beam after passing
through the HDPE foil, we performed the same Monte-Carlo
analysis as described in the previous paragraphs. To describe
the angular straggling of 40Ar in HDPE we used the SW-theory,
while for the initial angular spread we assumed a FWHM of
(2.0±0.2) mrad (as before). The energy spread of the unreacted
beam after passing the HDPE target was determined experimen-
tally using a dipole magnet and a Faraday cup. Speciﬁcally, we
measured the intensity of the beam after the 4-jaw system (see
Fig. 1), as a function of the ﬁeld of the dipole magnet that is lo-
cated upstream of the slits. During this measurement, the open-
ing width of the slits was about 0.5 mm, while the Faraday cup
was mounted right behind the slits. In this way, we were able
to measure the intensity proﬁle of the beam in terms of the B
ﬁeld. The results of this measurement are presented in Fig. 18.
To obtain the corresponding energy spread, we used the rela-
tionship that connects the amplitude of the magnetic ﬁeld and
the kinetic energy of the ions. The kinetic energy E of an ion
with mass m and charge q that is moving inside a magnetic ﬁeld
B (B is perpendicular to the ion’s velocity), is equal to:

E = (B ρ q)2
2m

(7)

where ρ is the radius of the circular trajectory of the moving
ion. By diﬀerentiating the above equation, we get:

δE
E

= 2

δB
B

(8)

By using Eq. 8, we extracted FWHM of (5.7±0.1) MeV for
the energy distribution of the unreacted 40Ar at the exit of the
target. The mean energy of the ions was set to 131.67 MeV, tak-
ing into account the energy loss in the HDPE. By implement-
ing the above beam characteristics in DYNAC, we calculated

14

Figure 17: Energy and angular characteristics of the reaction products accord-
ing to our Monte-Carlo calculations. (a) Angular spread of 40K relative to the
horizontal (x) and vertical (y) axis. The azimuthal angle of the ions is analyzed
into the x and y components of Eq. 5. Due to the symmetry of the system, the
px and py distributions are almost identical. For this reason we present them as
a single distribution. (b) Energy spread of 40K at the exit of the target. The en-
ergy loss of the beam ions in the target foil, resulted in an adequately averaged
energy distribution for the reaction products. A spread in the emittance param-
eters of one standard deviation based on the above distributions was used to
extract the emittance ellipsoids for the products, and subsequently, to calculate
their transmission through the beamline.

Table 4: Charge-state distributions of 40Ar and 40K in HDPE. The theoretical
charge-state fractions were extracted by using the Schiewitz model [37]. To
cross-check the accuracy of the calculated fractions, the theoretical values are
tested against experimental data for the unreacted beam that we collected with
a Faraday cup.

Calculated

Charge
14+
15+
16+

40K (%)
9.5 ± 1.0
28.0 ± 2.8
35.5 ± 3.6

40Ar (%)
20.0 ± 2.0
37.0 ± 3.7
29.0 ± 2.9

Experimental
40Ar (%)
16.0 ± 2.4
35.0 ± 5.3
27.0 ± 4.1

coincides with the s-p orbital transition in Ar, and therefore,
its intensity is much lower compared to the intensity calculated
from our model (see Ref. [39]).

5.6. Neutron Angular Distribution

Figure 19 shows the experimentally determined neutron an-
gular distributions for the 40Ar(p,n2) channel. The horizontal
axis corresponds to the mean angle covered by each LENDA
bar in the laboratory frame. The bars were arranged symmetri-
cally around the beam axis (see Fig. 2), therefore, each angle in
this plot includes data from two bars. The corresponding frac-
tions on the vertical axis are calculated by dividing the number
of detected neutrons in each angle with the total number of de-
tected neutrons. The presented angular distribution combines
cumulative data from both runs.

As expected from the reaction kinematics and the geometry
of the system, the vast majority of neutrons were detected at
angles below 25◦. The experimental data show that about 14%
of the detected neutrons are distributed at angles larger than
25◦, even though no neutrons from the (p,n2) channel are ex-
pected in that region according to kinematics. These counts are
associated with scattered neutrons on the stainless steel compo-
nents of the beamline, as well as on the various LENDA bars
(cross-talk). That is evident from the GEANT4 simulations dis-
cussed in Sec. 4.5 that were performed for extracting the solid
angle of LENDA. The corresponding angular distribution from
those simulations is included in Fig. 19. The good agreement
between the experimental data and the GEANT simulation in-
dicates that the calculated solid angle coverage and the intrinsic
eﬃciency of LENDA are adequately accurate, and any under-
lying systematic uncertainties associated with those quantities
are well withing the estimated errors.

5.7. Time-Spread of Correlated Events and DSSD Timing Res-

olution

The timing resolution of the system was dominated by the
DSSD’s timing response. To get an estimate of this resolu-
tion, we analyzed a TOF spectrum of the time diﬀerence be-
tween the 40Ar beam, and the reference RF signal from the re-
accelerator buncher. The spectrum is presented in Fig. 20. The
well-separated peaks reﬂect the 12 ns period of the RF signal.
Considering the average width of these peaks, an upper limit
of 3.5 ns was extracted for the time resolution of the DSSD.
To determine the detector’s resolution more precisely, the time

Figure 18: Momentum spread of the unreacted 40Ar beam, determined by using
the dipole magnet upstream the 4-jaw slits system. The plot shows the measured
beam current behind the slits as a function of the applied magnetic ﬁeld. During
the measurement, the slits opening was 0.5 mm. The energy spread of the beam
was obtained by ﬁtting the above experimental data with a Gaussian function
and converting the spread in magnetic ﬁeld to energy spread using Eq. 8.

a transmission of (4.8±0.4)% for run-1, and (18.8±1.5)% for
run-2. The corresponding experimental values are (5.0±1.0)%
and (21.2±4.3)%, respectively. By comparing the two results
we observe an excellent agreement between them, as in both
cases, the calculated values are within the experimental errors.
These results are tabulated in Table 3.

The errors in the calculated transmissions were extracted
based on the uncertainties (experimental and theoretical) on the
initial angular and energy spread of the beam ions. For the
experimental values we adopted an uncertainty of 20%. The
experimental transmissions were determined by measuring the
beam intensity at the DSSD position with a femto-ampere me-
ter, and at the target position with a Faraday cup. The mea-
surements were repeated using various charge-states of the un-
reacted beam. The error of these measurements was estimated
after taking into account the variations that we observed in the
measurements with diﬀerent charge-states, as well as the uncer-
tainty due to the measurement of very low intensities.

5.5. Experimental Validation of the Calculated Charge-State

Distributions

We performed measurements on the charge-state distribution
of the unreacted 40Ar14+, 40Ar15+, and 40Ar16+ charge-states us-
ing a Faraday cup. These data were used as a reference in or-
der to check the accuracy of the semi-empirical models that
we used for the calculation of the charge-state distribution of
40K. The results of these measurements are presented in Ta-
ble 4, along with the theoretical calculations that we discussed
in Sec. 4.4. Due to the low precision of the measurements with
the Faraday cups (aﬀected by the low transmission of the ions)
an uncertainty of 15% was adopted for the experimental charge-
state fractions. For the fractions of the most intense charge-
states, the agreement between the experimental data and the
calculations is very good. The enhanced discrepancy on the
14+ charge-state is attributed to shell eﬀects. This charge-state

15

Figure 19: Neutron angular distribution of the 40Ar(p,n2) reaction from this
work. The angles are given relative to the beam axis and correspond to the
center of each bar. The vertical axis shows the portion of the detected neutrons
that ended up at each angle. (blue bars) Experimental angular distribution based
on the cumulative data from run-1 and run-2. (green bars) Simulated angular
distribution using GEANT4. The simulation takes into account the reaction
kinematics, the intrinsic eﬃciency of each bar, and the scattering of neutrons
on the various beamline components and the LENDA bars. Details on this
GEANT simulation are discussed in Sec. 4.5.

coordinates of the beam ions must be taken into account. The
task of measuring the resolution with higher precision was not
within the goals of this study, hence we limit ourselves in this
work to quoting only the upper limit.

While the time resolution of our detectors is relatively high,
the average width of the TOF peaks in the spectra is quite large.
For example, the TOF peaks in Figs. 10 and 11 have a FWHM
of 34 ns (run-1), and 24 ns (run-2), respectively. These FWHM
were extracted by ﬁtting the experimental data with a Gaussian
function, as shown in Fig. 21. The enlargement of the FWHM
on the TOF spectra is due to the time-spread of the events (time
diﬀerence between correlated events in the two detectors) and
depends on the energy spread of the detected particles. Ac-
cording to the Monte-Carlo reaction kinematics (see Sec. 4.5),
the neutron energies in these measurements spanned between
1.5 and 6 MeV. Considering the geometry of LENDA and its
distance from the target, the corresponding TOF spread of the
detected neutrons is ∼14 ns. Regarding the TOF spread of the
40K ions, this can be estimated from the calculated energy ac-
ceptance of the system. The kinetic energy of a particle with
mass m, that covers a distance L in time τ, is given from the
equation:
E = 1
2

(cid:18) L
τ

(9)

m

(cid:19)2

By diﬀerentiating the above equation, we ﬁnd that:

δE
E

= 2

δτ
τ

(10)

Using Eq. 10 and considering an energy spread of ±2.5% for
run-1, and ±1.0% for run-2 (see Fig. 15) we obtain a time
spread of 18.1 ns for the 40K ions during run-1, and 7.2 ns dur-
ing run-2. The mean TOF in these calculations is 725 ns (the

16

Figure 20: Time resolution of the DSSD, as measured with the 40Ar beam.
This histogram shows the time diﬀerence between the signal of the DSSD and
a reference RF signal from the re-accelerator. The RF signal has a period of
12 ns resulting in the formation of consecutive peaks in the spectrum that were
observed with a good resolution. From this plot, we extract an upper limit of
3.5 ns for the timing resolution of the DSSD.

ﬂight path is 17.8 m and the mean energy of 40K is 124 MeV).
Adding together the estimated time-spread of neutrons and 40K,
and the time resolution of LENDA and the DSSD, the expected
time-spread of the reaction products is 36.1 ns for run-1 and
25.2 ns for run-2. Within an uncertainty of 6%, these num-
bers are in agreement with the FWHM of the experimental TOF
peaks (see Fig. 21), indicating that the calculated energy ac-
ceptance of the system with the beam dynamics simulation is
adequately accurate.

5.8. Reaction cross-section and Comparison with Literature

By using the experimental input parameters, we extracted the
partial cross-section of the 40Ar(p,n2) channel for run-1 and
run-2. The results are given in Table 5. The corresponding
errors on the total cross-sections are extracted from error prop-
agation in Eq. 2.

The results are plotted and compared to literature data from
Ref. [7] in Fig. 22. The cross-sections extracted from both runs
agree within the limits of their corresponding uncertainties with
the reference data. The diﬀerence in the measured values be-
tween the two runs are attributed to the diﬀerent energy uncer-
tainties of each measurement (for details see Sec. 5.2). The av-
erage cross-section over the energy range covered by the mea-
surement in run-1 was signiﬁcantly higher than the one in run-2
that covered a smaller energy range. This result is in agree-
ment with the measured cross-section for the 40Ar(p,n2) channel
by [7]. Two broad resonance structures corresponding to iso-
baric analog states of 41Ar exist at 3.3 and 3.5 MeV are boost-
ing the average cross-section for the measurement in run-1 to a
higher value. Part of that strength is shown with black squares
in Fig. 22 for comparison. In the same graph, we present the
weighted-average of the two runs, which was found to be in ex-
cellent agreement with the reference data at ∼3.36 MeV. The

Figure 21: Time-of-ﬂight peaks of correlated events. The plots were extracted
from the 2D spectra presented in Figs. 10 and 11, after subtracting a linear
background. To obtain their FWHM, the peaks were ﬁtted with a Gaussian
function. The extracted widths were found to be consistent with the energy
spread of neutrons on LENDA, and the energy acceptance of the system for the
recoils.

energy uncertainty for the average cross-section was calculated
as:

(cid:113)

∆E =

w1∆E2
1

+ w2∆E2
2

(11)

where ∆E1, ∆E2 are the energy uncertainties (energy bins) in
run-1 and run-2, and w1, w2 are weighting factors extracted
from the statistics of each run. Speciﬁcally, the weighting factor
w1 was calculated as: w1= Y1/(Y1+Y2), where Y1, Y2 are the
measured neutron yields during run-1 and run-2, respectively,
while w2= 1–w1.

Table 5: Total cross-section of the 40Ar(p,n2)40K reaction channel. In this table,
we provide the measured cross-sections from run-1 and run-2, as well as the
weighted-average of the two runs. Detailed discussion on these results are given
in the text.

Data-Set
Run-1
Run-2
Average
Gastis et al. [7]

Ec.m. (MeV)
3.36 ± 0.08
3.36 ± 0.05
3.36 ± 0.06
3.365 ± 0.051

σ (mb)
21.9 ± 6.3
13.0 ± 3.3
14.9 ± 2.9
15.0 ± 3.2

Figure 22: Comparison of the measured cross-sections in run-1 (blue triangles)
and run-2 (red circles), with literature data (black squares). Reference data
on the partial cross-sections were retrieved from [7]. Within the experimental
errors, the extracted cross-sections are in a good agreement with the reference
data. At 3.36 MeV, the data point from run-1 is above the other two points due
to the larger energy uncertainty of that point (larger energy bin size) and the
increasing trend of the cross-section evident in the literature data from Gastis
et al. [7]. An excellent agreement with the literature data is also observed for the
weighted-average cross-section of the two runs, which is shown in the zoom-in
graph (right-corner).

of the target areal density (∼10%), the beam current integra-
tion (∼10%), the charge-state fractions (∼10%), the calculated
transmissions (∼12%), and the intrinsic neutron eﬃciency of
LENDA (∼11%). In addition to the above sources of error, the
uncertainty in run-1 was also aﬀected by the low statistics in
that measurement. While the ﬁnal errors are relatively large, fu-
ture improvements on the experimental setup can signiﬁcantly
reduce them, enabling measurements within an uncertainty of
20%.

One of the dominant uncertainty factors, the transmission of
ions along the beamline, can be determined with a much bet-
ter precision for values larger than 10%, i.e.
if the ion-beam
optics are properly optimized; the current transmission was al-
ways less than ∼6% in either of the two runs. The second dom-
inant factor has to do with the precision of our knowledge of
the charge-state fraction. This contribution to the error can be
signiﬁcantly reduced by a detailed measurement of the charge-
state distribution during an experiment. In the test runs, the low
transmission of the beamline prevented as from taking high-
precision data on the charge-state distributions, but this will not
be an issue in future work.

5.9. Uncertainty Estimates

The cross-sections from the proof-of-principle experiment
are given with an uncertainty of 29% for run-1, and 26% for
run-2. These errors were calculated by adding all the un-
certainties of the associated quantities in Eq. 2 in quadra-
ture. These uncertainties are summarized in Table 6. The ﬁ-
nal errors on the cross-sections were dominated by the errors

6. Future Applications of the Technique

6.1. Ion-Optics Optimization for the ReA3 Beamline

To extract an optimized set of ion optics and facilitate the
preparations for future experiments in ReA3, we performed an-
alytical beam-dynamics simulations using COSY Inﬁnity [45].
The calculations were focused on maximizing the energy and

17

Table 6: Estimated uncertainties of the various quantities in Eq. 2, that were
used for the extraction of the ﬁnal cross-sections.

Quantity
Products’ yield (Yn)
Beam current integral (Ib)
Target’s areal density (Nt)
LENDA solid angle (ωn)
Total neutron eﬃciency ((cid:15)n)
Charge-state fraction (Fq)
Products’ transmission (Tp)
Cross-Section (σ)

Uncertainty (%)
Run-2
Run-1
8.2
15.2
10.0
10.0
10.0
10.0
5.5
5.5
11.0
11.0
10.0
10.0
12.0
12.0
25.7
28.8

angular acceptances of the system downstream of the target (see
Fig. 1).

The geometrical characteristics of the general-purpose beam-
line that we used, set limitations on the maximum acceptance
that can be achieved. This acceptance is mainly limited by
the diameter of the beam pipes in the section between the
two switching magnets in the ReA3 experimental area (see
Fig. 1). At this segment of beamline the vacuum pipe diameter
is roughly half the size of the rest of the beamline. There ex-
ist plans to upgrade this beamline section in the future, whence
the limitations we discuss here will be removed. Therefore, for
the optimization of the ion-optics that we attempt here, we as-
sume the future beamline arrangement with a uniform diameter
of beam pipe throughout.

In Fig. 23, we show a number of rays deﬁning the beam en-
velope in the x-plane (horizontal) and y-plane (vertical) using
the optimized settings. The graphs show the expected trajec-
tories of the incoming ions, while passing through the various
magnetic elements of the beamline. The calculations include
terms up to the 3rd order, while the presented “characteristic
rays” (black lines) were extracted based on the maximum an-
gular, lateral, and energy spread that were chosen in the input
(see Ref. [18]). For the incoming beam, we considered inter-
mediate mass nuclei with A=56 and charge Q=21, while for the
beam energy we used E=200 MeV. For the initial beam spot we
assumed an area of 3×3 mm2. The starting point of the simula-
tion is the center of the rear ﬂanges (downstream) of diagnostics
box 13 where the target is installed. With these conditions, the
maximum angular acceptance of the system was found to be
10 mrad in px and py, and the corresponding energy acceptance
was ±1.5%. The pole-tip ﬁelds of the quadruple magnets used
in the optimized setting are given in Table 7.

Apart from improving the energy and angular acceptance of
the system, the optimized settings oﬀer maximum x-dispersion
as a function of momentum at the position of the 4-jaw slits
system. The calculated momentum dispersion is ∼1.5 mm per
percent diﬀerence in momentum, and has been veriﬁed experi-
mentally in ReA3 using various beams, such as 85Rb and 40Ar.
By maximizing this quantity at the position of the slits, a more
precise selection of ions can be achieved based on their mo-
mentum. This is particularly useful both for the measurement
of reaction cross-sections by improving the separation of unre-

Figure 23: Optimized ion optics settings for the ReA3 general purpose line. The
beam envelopes were extracted with COSY Inﬁnity (see the text for details).
The top panel shows the maximum spread of ion trajectories in the y-plane
(vertical), and the bottom panel shows the corresponding trajectories in the x-
plane (horizontal). With these settings an energy acceptance of ±1.5%, and an
angular acceptance of ±10 mrad for px and py is achieved. Furthermore, the
x-dispersion versus momentum at the position of the 4-jaw slits system is also
maximized. An overview of the beamline can be found in Fig.1.

acted beam from the reaction products, and for optimizing the
incoming beams.

6.2. (p,n) and (x,n) Experiments with SECAR and Future Spec-

trometers in the FRIB era.

The proposed technique can also be used in experiments with
the SECAR recoil separator. The larger angular and energy
acceptance of SECAR (angular acceptances in both transverse
directions ±25 mrad, energy acceptance ±3.1% [18]) can in-
crease the transmission of reaction products along the beamline
and maximize the eﬃciency of the measurements. Figure 24
shows an overview of the SECAR system combined with the
LENDA detector for the measurement of (p,n) reactions. A
specially designed frame will allow the arrangement of an op-
timum number of LENDA bars around the target position. A
gaseous hydrogen target will be supplied by the JENSA gas-jet
system [46], which can provide highly-compressed jet-targets
with thicknesses up to ∼1019 atoms/cm2. In measurements with
extremely low counting rates where the areal density of the tar-
get atoms is critical, the gas-jet can be replaced by thin plastic
foils. The heavy reaction products will be detected either by
using a ∆E-E telescope, or an ionization chamber, that can be

18

Table 7: Optimized ion-optics settings for the ReA3 general purpose beam-
line. The optimization was done for a reference particle with A=56, Q=21, and
E=200 MeV.

Quadrupole Magnet
QD1272
QD1275
QD1281
QD1285
QD1307
QD1310
QD1323
QD1327
QD1346
QD1351
QD1369
QD1388
QD1395
QD1411
QD1415

Pole-tip Field [kG]
2.55
-2.51
-1.31
2.35
-0.013
1.80
2.10
-1.63
2.15
-0.0050
2.60
-1.65
1.01
1.51
-1.75

placed in any of the various focal planes of SECAR (labeled as
FP1, FP2, FP3, and FP4 in Fig. 24). By using this conﬁguration,
we can take advantage of the unique capabilities of SECAR and
perform measurements of (p,n) and other (x,n) type of reactions
with radioactive beams using the proposed technique. The de-
tailed analysis and optimization of the SECAR recoil spectrom-
eter for the measurement of (p,n) reaction cross-sections is left
for a future work.

In the last section we provide a rough expected counting rate
for such an experiment to make the case for the value of the
technique when combined with a recoil separator. Similar con-
siderations can in principle be entertained for a number of fu-
ture spectrometers that are being considered for higher-energy
experiments with the FRIB reaccelerator, such as, for exam-
ple,
the Isochronous Spectrometer with Large Acceptances
(ISLA) [47].

6.3. Count Rate Estimates for Future Experiments

We can make an estimate of the count rates that the tech-
nique can achieve in an optimized setup based on the results of
the test experiment. We will assume that SECAR is the spec-
trometer used, but the result can be adapted to any other system
as long as we have a known acceptance and transmission. The
maximum counting rate for the reaction products during our
test was ∼15 counts/hour during run-2, and the product trans-
mission was 5.9%. By assuming an optimized set of ion optics
for the ReA3 beamline (see Section 6.1) and a transmission be-
tween 80 – 100%, the corresponding counting rate is increased
to ∼230 counts/hour. Taking into account the intensity of the
40Ar beam and the partial cross-section of the 40Ar(p,n2) chan-
nel (≈15.5 mb), this corresponds to about 7 counts/mb/pnA/s.
Such a counting rate, taking into account the increase in beam
intensity expected from FRIB, means that many unstable iso-
tope studies will be well within the range of experimental capa-
bilities when the FRIB linac comes online.

Figure 24: Layout of SECAR recoil separator (modiﬁed image from [? ]). By
integrating the LENDA detector with the rest of system, measurements of (p,n)
reactions using the proposed technique can be performed. The heavy reaction
products will be detected by a charged-particle detector in coincidence with the
neutrons. The charged-particle detector can be placed on any of the various
focal planes of the system (FP1, FP2, FP3, FP4)

7. Summary

We have developed, tested, and veriﬁed an experimental
technique for the measurement of (p,n) reactions in inverse
kinematics at the ReA3 facility. The technique was veriﬁed
by measuring the 40Ar(p,n2)40K reaction. The results were
compared with the literature data and found to be in excellent
agreement within the limits of the experimental uncertainties.
The experimental errors of the measured cross-sections varied
between 25-30%. Future improvements of the setup, as well
as supplementary measurements of critical quantities such as
the charge-state distributions, can reduce the associated errors
by an estimated factor of 20%. Furthermore, by maximizing
the transmission of the reaction products through the beamline,
count rates of the order of 7 counts/mb/pnA/s can be achieved.
The proposed technique can be used for the measurement of
(p,n) reactions with heavy radioactive beams. This will allow
the study of key (n,p) reactions (reversed reactions) which are
relevant to nucleosynthesis via the νp-process. In the near fu-
ture, the proposed technique can also be used in experiments
with the SECAR recoil separator at the Facility for Rare Iso-
tope Beams.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the NSCL/FRIB staﬀ members: Sam
Nash, John Yurkon, Jim Vincent, Zhao Qiang, Tim Embury,
Marco Cortesi, Tasha Summers, Daniel Crisp, Laura Pratt, and

19

Alain Lapierre for their invaluable help during the preparation
and the execution of the test experiments. Furthermore, we
thank the NSCL mechanical design engineers Ben Arend, and
Craig Snow, as well as the technicians at the machine shops
at NSCL and Central Michigan University, for their contribu-
tions on the development of various components for the ex-
perimental setup. PG would also like to thank Daniel Alt for
his help with the DYNAC software. This material is based
upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Of-
ﬁce of Science, under Award Number DE-SC0014285. The
authors form CMU would like to acknowledge support by the
College of Science and Engineering of Central Michigan Uni-
versity. G.B. acknowledges support by the US National Science
Foundation through Grant No. PHY-1068192 and the Joint In-
stitute for Nuclear Astrophysics – Center for the Evolution of
the Elements (JINA-CEE) through Grants No. PHY-0822648
and No. PHY-1430152. The authors from NSCL and MSU
would like to acknowledge support by the US National Sci-
ence Foundation under Cooperative Agreement PHY-156554
(NSCL), PHY-1430152 (JINA-CEE), and PHY-1913554 (Win-
dows on the Universe: Nuclear Astrophysics at the NSCL).

References

References

[1] A. G. W. Cameron, On the origin of the heavy elements., Astrophysical

Journal 62 (1957) 9–10.

[2] K. M. Burbidge, G. R. Burbidge, W. A. Fowler, F. Hoyle, Synthesis of the

Elements in Stars, Reviews of Modern Physics 29 (4) (1957) 547.

[3] C. Fr¨ohlich and G. Martinez-Pinedo and M. Liebendorfer and F. -K.
Thielemann and E. Bravo and W. R. Hix and K. Langanke and N. T. Zin-
ner, Neutrino-induced nucleosynthesis of A>64 nuclei: the nu p-process,
Physical Review Letters 96 (2006) 142502.

[4] S. Wanajo, H.-T. Janka, S. Kubono, Uncertainties in the nu p-process:
supernova dynamics versus nuclear physics, Astrophysical Journal 729
(2011) 46.

[5] N. Nishimura, T. Rauscher, R. Hirschi, G. Cescutti, A. S. J. Murphy,
C. Fr¨ohlich, Uncertainties in νp-process nucleosynthesis from Monte
Carlo variation of reaction rates, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro-
nomical Society 489 (1) (2019) 1379–1396.

[6] R. H. Cyburt, A. M. Amthor, R. Ferguson, Z. Meisel, K. Smith, S. Warren,
A. Heger, R. D. Hoﬀman, T. Rauscher, A. Sakharuk, H. Schatz, F. K.
Thielemann, M. Wiescher, The JINA REACLIB Database: Its Recent
Updates and Impact on Type-I X-ray Bursts, The Astrophysical Journal
Supplement Series 189 (1) (2010) 240–252.

[7] P. Gastis, G. Perdikakis, J. Dissanayake, P. Tsintari, I. Sultana, C. R.
Brune, T. N. Massey, Z. Meisel, A. V. Voinov, K. Brandenburg, T. Danley,
R. Giri, Y. Jones-Alberty, S. Paneru, D. Soltesz, S. Subedi, Constraining
the destruction rate of 40K in stellar nucleosynthesis through the study of
the 40Ar(p,n)40K reaction, Physical Review C 101 (2020) 055805.
[8] J. W. Truran, A. G. W. Cameron, The p-process in Explosive Nucleosyn-

thesis, Astrophysical Journal 171 (1972) 89.

[9] D. A. Frank-Kamenetskii, (p,n) and (p,2n) reactions and the origin of

bypassed nuclei, Soviet Astronomy - AJ 5 (1961) 1.

[10] A. C. Larsen, A. Spyrou, S. N. Liddick, M. Guttormsen, Novel
Techniques for Constraining Neutron-Capture Rates Relevant for r-
Process Heavy-Element Nucleosynthesis, Progress in Particle and Nu-
clear Physics 107 (2019) 69–108.

[11] J. Wilhelmy, E. Chamberlin, M. Dragowsky, M. Fowler, R. Haight,
M. Heil, F. Kppeler, G. Miller, P. Palmer, L. Pangault, R. Reifarth,
R. Rundberg, E. Seabrrry, D. Strottman, J. Ullmann, K. Wisshak, DANCE
Device for Measurement of (n, ) Reactions on Radioactive Species, Jour-
nal of Nuclear Science and Technology 39 (sup2) (2002) 614–619.

20

[12] R. Reifarth and K. G¨obel and T. Heftrich and M. Weigand and B. Jurado
and F. K¨appeler and Y. A. Litvinov, Spallation-based neutron target for
direct studies of neutron-induced reactions in inverse kinematics, Physical
Review Accelerators and Beams 20 (4) (2017) 044701.

[13] R. Reifarth, Y. A. Litvinov, Measurements of neutron-induced reactions
in inverse kinematics, Physical Review Accelerators and Beams 17 (1)
(2014) 014701.

[14] K. H. Hahn, K. H. Chang, T. R. Donoghue, B. W. Filippone, Search for
nonresonant capture in the O-16 (alpha,gamma) Ne-20 reaction at low
energies, Physical Review C 36 (1987) 892–898.

[15] C. Ruiz, U. Greife, U. Hager, Recoil separators for radiative capture using
radioactive ion beams, European Physical Journal A 50 (2014) 99.
[16] D. Hutcheon, L. Buchmann, A. Chen, J. DAuria, C. Davis, U. Greife,
A. Hussein, D. Ottewell, C. Ouellet, A. Parikh, P. Parker, J. Pearson,
C. Ruiz, G. Ruprecht, M. Trinczek, C. Vockenhuber, Background sup-
pression by the DRAGON radiative capture facility at TRIUMF/ISAC,
Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B 266 (2008)
4171–4175.

[17] H. Ishiyama, et al., Direct measurements of (α, n) and (p, n) reaction
cross sections using light neutron-rich radioactive nuclear beams, Nuclear
Physics A 718 (2003) 481–483.

[18] G. P. A. Berg, M. Couder, M. T. Moran, K. Smith, M. Wiescher,
H. Schatz, U. Hager, C. Wrede, F. Montes, G. Perdikakis, X. Wu,
A. Zeller, M. S. Smith, D. W. Bardayan, K. A. Chipps, S. D. Pain,
J. Blackmon, U. Greife, K. E. Rehm, R. V. F. Janssens, Design of SE-
CAR a recoil mass separator for astrophysical capture reactions with ra-
dioactive beams, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research
Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equip-
ment 877 (2018) 87 – 103, ISSN 0168-9002.

[19] O. Kester, et al., in: Proceedings, 25th International Linear Accelera-
tor Conference, LINAC2010: Tsukuba, Japan, September 12-17, 2010,
ReA3 - the Rare Isotope Re-accelerator at MSU, 2011.

[20] G. Perdikakis, M. Sasano, S. Austin, C. C. D. Bazin, S. Cannon, J. M.
Deaven, H. J. Doster, C. J. Guess, G. W. Hitt, J. Marks, R. Meharc-hand,
D. T. Nguyen, D. Peterman, A. Prinke, M. Scott, Y. Shimbara, K. Thorne,
L. Valdez, R. G. T. Zegers, LENDA, a Low Energy Neutron Detector Ar-
ray for experiments with radioactive beams in inverse kinematics, Nuclear
Instruments and Methods A686 (2012) 117–124.

[21] G. E. Tripard, B. L. White, Preparation of Thin Film Deuterated Polyethy-

lene Targets, Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 38 (1967) 435.

[22] C. Prokop, S. Liddick, B. Abromeit, A. Chemey, N. Larson, S. Suchyta,
J. Tompkins, Digital data acquisition system implementation at the Na-
tional Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory, Nuclear Instruments and
Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers,
Detectors and Associated Equipment 741 (2014) 163 – 168, ISSN 0168-
9002.

[23] S. Lipschutz, R. G. T. Zegers, J. Hill, S. N. Liddick, S. Noji, C. J. Prokop,
M. Scott, M. Solt, C. Sullivan, J. Tompkins, Digital Data Acquisition For
the Low Energy Neutron Detector Array (LENDA), Nuclear Instruments
and Methods A815 (2016) 1–6.

[24] R00TLe, https://github.com/slipschutz/R00TLe, 2014.
[25] R. Brun, F. Rademakers, ROOT - An Object Oriented Data Analysis
Framework, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A 389
(1997) 81–86.

[26] J. F. Ziegler, U. Littmark, J. P. Biersack, The stopping and range of ions
in solids / J.F. Ziegler, J.P. Biersack, U. Littmark, Pergamon New York,
ISBN 008021603, 1985.

[27] E. Tanke, S. Valero, P. M. Lapostolle, DYNAC: A multi-particle beam
dynamics code for leptons and hadrons in complex accelerating elements,
in: Proceedings of LINAC2002, Gyeongju, Korea, TH429, 2002.
[28] W. Wittmer, D. Alt, S. Krause, D. Leitner, S. Nash, R. Rencsok, J. Ro-
driguez, M. Syphers, X. Wu, Online Modeling of the Rare Isotope Reac-
celerator - ReA3, in: Proceedings, 5th International Particle Accelera-
tor Conference (IPAC 2014): Dresden, Germany, June 15-20, 2014, TH-
PRO129, 2014.

[29] T. Yoshimoto, M. Ikegami, IMPACT Model for ReA and its Bench-
mark with DYNAC, in: Proceedings, 28th International Linear Acceler-
ator Conference (LINAC16): East Lansing, Michigan, September 25-30,
2016, TUPLR063, 2017.

[30] D. M. Alt, Design and commissioning of a 16.1 MHz multiharmonic
buncher for the reaccelerator at NSCL, Ph.D. thesis, Michigan State Uni-

versity, 2016.

[31] Dynac GUI, https://github.com/NSCLAlt/DynacGUI, 2015.
[32] P. Sigmund, K. B. Winterbon, Nuclear Instruments and Methods 119

(1974) 541.

[33] P. Sigmund, K. B. Winterbon, Nuclear Instruments and Methods 125

(1975) 491.

[34] J. Lindhard, A. H. Sørensen, Relativistic theory of stopping for heavy

ions, Physical Review A 53 (4).

[35] H. Geissel, H. Weick, C. Scheidenberger, R. Bimbot, D. Gardes, Experi-
mental studies of heavy-ion slowing down in matter, Nuclear Instruments
and Methods in Physics Research B 195 (2002) 3–54.
[36] ATIMA V1.41: https://web-docs.gsi.de/ weick/atima/, 2020.
[37] G. Schiwietz, K. Czerski, M. Roth, F. Staufenbiel, P. L. Grande, Fem-
tosecond dynamics snapshots of the early ion-track evolution, Nuclear
Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B 226 (4) (2004) 683–704.
[38] S. Datz, Applied Atomic Collision Physics, Academic Press, INC, 1983.
[39] P. Gastis, G. Perdikakis, D. Robertson, R. Almus, T. Anderson,
W. Bauder, P. Collon, W. Lu, K. Ostdiek, M. Skulski, Measurement of
the equilibrium charge state distributions of Ni, Co, and Cu beams in Mo
at 2 MeV/u:review and evaluation of the relevant semi-empirical mod-
els, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B 373 (2016)
117–125.

[40] S. Agostinelli, et al., GEANT4: A Simulation toolkit, Nuclear In-
struments and Methods A 506 (2003) 250–303, doi:10.1016/S0168-
9002(03)01368-8.

[41] S. I. Lipschutz, The (p,n) charge-exchange reaction in inverse kinematics
as a probe for isovector giant resonances in exotic nuclei, Ph.D. thesis,
Michigan State University, 2018.

[42] M. Sasano, G. Perdikakis, R. G. T. Zegers, S. M. Austin, D. Bazin, B. A.
Brown, C. Caesar, A. L. Cole, J. M. Deaven, N. Ferrante, C. J. Guess,
G. W. Hitt, M. Honma, R. Meharchand, F. Montes, J. Palardy, A. Prinke,
L. A. Riley, H. Sakai, M. Scott, A. Stolz, T. Suzuki, L. Valdez, K. Yako,
Extraction of Gamow-Teller strength distributions from 56Ni and 55Co
via the (p,n) reaction in inverse kinematics, Physical Review C 86 (2012)
034324.

[43] M. Sasano, G. Perdikakis, R. G. T. Zegers, S. M. Austin, D. Bazin, B. A.
Brown, C. Caesar, A. L. Cole, J. M. Deaven, N. Ferrante, C. J. Guess,
G. W. Hitt, R. Meharchand, F. Montes, J. Palardya, A. Prinke, L. A. Riley,
H. Sakai, M. Scott, A. Stolz, L. Valdez, K. Yako, Gamow-Teller Transi-
tion Strengths from 56Ni, Physical Review Letters 107 (2011) 202501.

[44] J. F. Ziegler, M. D. Ziegler, J. P. Biersack, Nuclear Instruments and Meth-

ods B 268 (2010) 1818–1823.

[45] K. Makino, M. Berz, COSY INFINITY Version 9, Nuclear Instruments

and Methods in Physics Research A 558 (1) (2006) 346–350.

[46] K. Schmidt, K. A. Chipps, S. Ahn, D. W. Bardayan, J. Browne, U. Greife,
Z. Meisel, F. Montes, P. D. O’Malley, W.-J. Ong, S. D. Pain, H. Schatz,
K. Smith, M. S. Smith, P. J. Thompson, Status of the JENSA gas-jet target
for experiments with rare isotope beams, Nuclear Instruments and Meth-
ods in Physics Research A 911 (2018) 1–9.

[47] D. Bazin, W. Mittig, ISLA: An Isochronous Spectrometer with Large Ac-
ceptances, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section
B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 317 (2013) 319 – 322,
ISSN 0168-583X.

21

