Alpha-1  adrenergic  receptor  antagonists  to  prevent  hyperinflammation  and  death  from 
lower respiratory tract infection 

Allison  Koenecke1,†,  Michael  Powell2,†,  Ruoxuan  Xiong3,  Zhu  Shen4,  Nicole  Fischer5,  Sakibul 
Huq6, Adham M. Khalafallah6, Marco Trevisan7, Pär Sparen7, Juan J Carrero7, Akihiko Nishimura8, 
Brian Caffo8, Elizabeth A. Stuart8, Renyuan Bai6, Verena Staedtke6, David L. Thomas5, Nickolas 
Papadopoulos9,  Kenneth  W.  Kinzler9,  Bert  Vogelstein9,  Shibin  Zhou9,  Chetan  Bettegowda5,9, 
Maximilian F. Konig9,10,*, Brett Mensh11,*, Joshua T. Vogelstein2,8,†,*, Susan Athey12,* 

1Institute for Computational & Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 

2Department  of  Biomedical  Engineering,  Institute  for  Computational  Medicine,  The  Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA 

3Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 

4Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 

5The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA 

6Department of Neurosurgery and Neurology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA 

7Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden 

8Department  of  Biostatistics,  Johns  Hopkins  Bloomberg  School  of  Public  Health  at  Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA 

9Ludwig Center, Lustgarten Laboratory, and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at The Johns 
Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center, Baltimore, MD, USA 

10Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA 

11Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn, VA, USA and Optimize 
Science 

12Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 

†Equal contribution. *To whom correspondence should be addressed. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract: In severe viral pneumonia, including Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), the viral 
replication phase is often followed by hyperinflammation, which can lead to acute respiratory 
distress  syndrome,  multi-organ  failure,  and  death.  We  previously  demonstrated  that  alpha-1 
adrenergic receptor (⍺1-AR) antagonists can prevent hyperinflammation and death in mice. Here, 
we conducted retrospective analyses in two cohorts of patients with acute respiratory distress 
(ARD,  n=18,547)  and  three  cohorts  with  pneumonia  (n=400,907).  Federated  across  two  ARD 
cohorts,  we  find  that  patients  exposed  to  ⍺1-AR  antagonists,  as  compared  to  unexposed 
patients,  had  a  34%  relative  risk  reduction  for  mechanical  ventilation  and  death  (OR=0.70, 
p=0.021). We replicated these methods on three pneumonia cohorts, all with similar effects on 
both outcomes. All results were robust to sensitivity analyses. These results highlight the urgent 
need  for  prospective  trials  testing  whether  prophylactic  use  of ⍺1-AR  antagonists  ameliorates 
lower  respiratory  tract  infection-associated  hyperinflammation  and  death,  as  observed  in 
COVID-19. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  Introduction 

Each  year,  approximately  300  million  people  develop  pneumonia  [1],  which  usually  results  in 
appropriate, self-limiting immune responses and clearance of the bacterial or viral pathogen. In 
some cases (Figure 1), the pathogen overwhelms host defenses, causing massive lung damage 
and  compromising  other  organs.  In  other  patients,  however,  pathological  immune  activation 
(‘hyperinflammation')  occurs  in  the  lungs  and  systemically  [2],  resulting  in  immune-mediated 
end-organ damage that can compromise gas exchange. Dysregulated immune responses may 
lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), need for mechanical ventilation, and failure 
of other organ systems, contributing to the global pneumonia death toll of 3 million per year [3]. 
The clinical picture is similar in Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by SARS-CoV-2; 
hyperinflammation  compromises  organ  function  in  the  lungs  and  systemically,  causing  high 
morbidity and mortality [4–7].  

Figure 1. Model of clinical progression of respiratory dysfunction from local infection to hyperinflammation. The timing 
and  relation  of  hyperinflammation  to  specific  organ  manifestations  of  severe  acute  respiratory  distress  syndrome 
(ARDS) are areas of uncertainty and investigation. 

Disease-modifying  strategies  for  COVID-19  include  targeting  the  virus  and  treating  (or  ideally 
preventing)  secondary  hyperinflammation  with  immunomodulatory  or  immunosuppressive 
drugs. Here, we propose an approach using the latter strategy of hyperinflammation prevention 
[8,9].  Immune  cells  communicate  with  each  other  by  secreting  peptides  called  cytokines  and 
chemokines, which initially amplify the response and later restore homeostasis after the threat 
has receded. However, in hyperinflammation, production of cytokines is dysregulated, forming 
a ‘cytokine storm’ that can damage healthy tissue and overwhelm the host.  

COVID-19-associated hyperinflammation is characterized by profound elevation of many pro-
inflammatory  cytokines  [5,7,10–13].  Several  immunosuppressive  treatment  approaches  are 
being studied or used in clinical practice to ameliorate hyperinflammation-associated morbidity 
in patients who have already developed severe complications of COVID-19, including blocking 
specific cytokine signaling axes (e.g., IL-6, IL-1, or TNF-alpha) and broader immunosuppressive 
approaches  (e.g.,  dexamethasone  or  baricitinib)  [14–19].  Dexamethasone  is  one  of  few  drugs 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that have shown a mortality benefit in hospitalized patients with COVID-19 who require oxygen 
or mechanical ventilation, but glucocorticoids may not be beneficial - and may even be harmful 
-  when  given  earlier  in  the  disease  course  [21,22].  Conflicting  data  on  tocilizumab  and  other 
inhibitors of IL-6 signaling in patients with severe COVID-19 suggests that immunosuppressive 
strategies may be of limited benefit once end-organ damage has developed [14,17–19,23,24], 
and  highlight  the  importance  of  identifying  drugs  that  can  prevent  dysregulated  immune 
responses and immune-mediated damage.  

Inhibition  of  catecholamine  signaling  has  emerged  as  a  promising  approach  to  prevent 
hyperinflammation  and  related  mortality.  The  catecholamine  pathway,  beyond  its  role  in 
neurotransmission  and  endocrine  signaling,  is  involved  in  immunomodulation  of  innate  and 
adaptive  immune  cells.  In  mice,  catecholamine  release  coincides  with  hyperinflammation  and 
enhances inflammatory injury by augmenting cytokine production via a self-amplifying process 
that  requires  alpha-1  adrenergic  receptor  (⍺1-AR)  signaling  [25].  Catecholamine  synthesis 
inhibition  reduces  cytokine  responses  and  dramatically  increases  survival  after  inflammatory 
stimuli.  The  ⍺1-AR  antagonist  prazosin  (at  clinically  prescribed  dosages)—but  not  beta-
adrenergic receptor (β-AR) antagonists—offers similar protection, providing in vivo evidence that 
this drug class can prevent cytokine storm [25]. These preclinical findings provide a rationale for 
clinical studies that assess whether ⍺1-AR antagonists can prevent hyperinflammation and its 
sequelae associated with severe infection. 

To date, no controlled trials have studied whether ⍺1-AR antagonism improves clinical outcomes 
in  patients  with  lower  respiratory  tract  infection  (pneumonia,  acute  respiratory  distress 
syndrome,  or  COVID-19).  Replicated  retrospective  cohort  studies  offer  the  highest  level  of 
evidence  prior  to  prospective  studies  [26].  We  thus  conducted  a  series  of  five  retrospective 
cohort studies, spanning different populations, age groups, demographics, and countries. 

Our primary research question is whether ⍺1-AR antagonists (e.g., through its known modulation 
of  hyperinflammation)  can  mitigate  disease  and  prevent  mortality.  We  operationalized  this 
research  question  by  testing  the  statistical  hypothesis  that  patients  exposed  to  ⍺1-AR 
antagonists, as compared to unexposed patients, have a reduced risk of adverse outcomes in 
lower  respiratory  tract  infection.  We  considered  two  outcomes  (mechanical  ventilation,  and 
mechanical  ventilation  followed  by  death),  and  three  exposures  (any  ⍺1-AR  antagonist, 
tamsulosin specifically, and doxazosin specifically). Tamsulosin is the most commonly used ⍺1-
AR  antagonist  in  the  United  States  and  demonstrates  a  ‘uroselective’  binding  pattern 
(predominantly inhibits ⍺1A- and ⍺1D-AR subtypes). In contrast, doxazosin is a non-selective ⍺1-
AR  antagonist  that  demonstrates  clinically  significant  inhibition  of  all  three  known  ⍺1-AR 
subtypes,  including  antagonism  on  the  ⍺1B-AR.  This  antagonism  of  ⍺1B-AR  expressed  in  the 
peripheral  vasculature  is  thought  to  mediate  the  antihypertensive  effects  of  doxazosin  and 
related  drugs.  Importantly,  all  three  ⍺1-AR  subtypes  have  been  implicated  in  catecholamine 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
signaling on immune cells, and signaling redundancy suggests a theoretical benefit for pan-⍺1-
AR  antagonists  (e.g.,  doxazosin  or  prazosin)  in  preventing  catecholamine  signaling  and 
hyperinflammation. Relatively few patients in our samples are prescribed doxazosin, so we are 
only  able  to  study  this  drug  in  our  much  larger  pneumonia  cohorts  (since  there  is  insufficient 
statistical power to analyze the drug in ARD cohorts). 

2.  Results 

The statistical analysis plan described in Materials and Methods was fixed across all cohorts (to 
the extent possible) to limit researcher degrees of freedom and to emulate a prospective trial 
[27]. We computed the probabilities of outcomes, relative risk reductions (RRR), odds ratios (OR), 
confidence intervals (CI), and p-values (p) using an unadjusted model as well as adjusted and 
matched modeling approaches that account for demographic and health-related confounders. 
We focus our discussion of reported results on the adjusted model comparing patients exposed 
to  ⍺1-AR  antagonists  to  unexposed  patients.  The  adjusted  model  is  an  inverse  propensity-
weighted  regression  on  a  reduced  sample  satisfying  propensity  overlap;  see  Materials  and 
Methods for details. 

      2.1 Participants 

We  studied  two  cohorts  of  patients  who  were  diagnostically  coded  with  acute  respiratory 
distress (ARD, a surrogate precursor state to ARDS) from two de-identified databases: the IBM® 
MarketScan®  Research  Database 
(which  we  refer  to  as  MarketScan)  and  Optum’s 
Clinformatics®  Data  Mart  Database  (OptumInsight,  Eden  Prairie,  MN),  a  commercial  and 
Medicare Advantage claims database (which we refer to as Optum). We further studied three 
cohorts of patients with pneumonia from the MarketScan, Optum, and Swedish National Patient 
Register [28] databases. ICD codes were used to identify the first instance of inpatient admission 
for  each  patient  in  each  cohort  (see  Materials  and  Methods  for  details).  Our  main  analysis 
employed federated analyses on the ARD cohort using pooled MarketScan and Optum results. 

We limit the study to older men because of the widespread use in the United States of ⍺1-AR 
antagonists as a treatment for benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), a diagnosis clinically unrelated 
to the respiratory system or immune disorders. Focusing on men over the age of 45 facilitated 
examining a patient population in which a large portion of the exposed group faced similar risks 
of  poor  outcomes  from  respiratory  conditions  as  the  unexposed  group,  thus  mitigating 
confounding by indication.  

We allowed a maximum age of 85 years to reflect the ongoing clinical trials investigating these 
interventions [29]. Figure 2 shows the CONSORT flow diagram for selecting patients from the 
four claims datasets (with slight modifications in the Swedish National Patient Register analysis 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to reflect different practices in that population); see Materials and Methods for details. Focusing 
this study exclusively on older men limits the study’s internal validity to older men, and it would 
take additional assumptions to justify external validity claims including excluded demographic 
groups  (e.g.,  women  and  younger  patients).  We  nevertheless  note  that  there  is  an  important 
literature on demographic fairness with regard to clinical studies [30,31]. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. CONSORT flow diagram for four claims datasets where M represents MarketScan and O represents Optum; 
ARD represents acute respiratory distress. Note that patients are considered exposed to ⍺1-AR antagonists if they 
have a medication possession ratio ≥ 50% in the prior year, and are considered unexposed if they have not taken any 
amount of ⍺1-AR antagonists in the prior year. ARD inpatient visits are not considered between 2017-2018 as ARD 
ICD-9 codes were being phased out while ICD-10 codes for ARD were not yet commonly used. Within a single dataset 
(MarketScan or Optum), there exists some patient overlap for the two cohort diagnoses (pneumonia and ARD): 5,100 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
patients  in  MarketScan  and  2,778  in  Optum.  This  diagram  only  presents  four  of  the  five  cohorts  studied;  the  fifth 
cohort (the Swedish National Patient Register) uses a different set of inclusion/exclusion criteria (see Section 4.7 for 
criteria description, and Supplementary Figure 3-figure supplement 1 for information on dataset characteristics). 

      2.2 Cohort-Specific Results 

We  conducted  the  same  statistical  analysis  in  each  of  the  five  cohorts.  In  each  cohort,  we 
measured  incidence  and  odds  ratios  (OR)  for  patients  exposed  to  any  ⍺1-AR  antagonist,  or 
tamsulosin specifically, as compared to unexposed patients, for each outcome. In the two largest 
pneumonia cohorts, we additionally consider doxazosin exposure. Our main analysis, described 
in  the  following  section,  involves  pooling  the  results  from  individual  cohorts.  For  the  sake  of 
completion, Figure 3-figure supplements 1-5 show results for each of the five individual cohorts. 
We generally found a positive RRR given any combination of exposure and outcome, and found 
that  the  adjusted  model  yielded  ORs  consistently  less  than  1.  In  all  cohorts,  the  OR  point 
estimates were robust to model changes, including other doubly robust approaches [32] such 
as causal forests [33], each of which yielded similar results to those presented here. 

      2.3 Federated Results 

We  employed  federated  causal  methods  to  enable  combining  patient-level  results  while 
maintaining patient privacy and data usage agreement constraints; see Materials and Methods 
for details. We pooled results across MarketScan and Optum for each of the ARD and pneumonia 
cohorts  (the  Swedish  dataset  used  a  different  outcome  because  ventilation  was  not  reliably 
coded, so we did not pool these results). For ARD patients (n=18,547) exposed to any ⍺1-AR 
antagonist, as compared to unexposed ARD patients, we found for ventilation and death: RRR 
= 34%, OR = 0.70, 95% CI (0.49-0.99), p = 0.021; for pneumonia patients (n=338,674) we found: 
RRR = 8%, OR = 0.86, 95% CI (0.82-0.91), p < 0.001 (Figure 3). The treatment effect was similar 
across the outcome of ventilation only, exposure to tamsulosin only, and other analysis methods 
(unadjusted and matched), with ORs consistently less than 1. Doxazosin, a non-selective ⍺1-AR 
antagonist hypothesized to have a greater efficacy than other ⍺1-AR antagonists, demonstrated 
a two-fold stronger effect than tamsulosin, which blocks fewer ⍺1-adrenoreceptors.  

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  3.  Cohorts  across  datasets  (MarketScan  and  Optum)  associated  with  the  same  disease  (ARD  in  top  row, 
pneumonia  in  bottom  row)  were  pooled  using  federated  causal  learning  techniques  described  in  Materials  and 
Methods. In each quadrant, we show: (left) plotted odds ratios (OR) with confidence intervals (CI), and (right) values 
for relative risk reductions (RRR), OR, CI, p-values (p), and sample sizes (n) for unadjusted, adjusted, and matched 
models, including any ⍺1-AR antagonists or specifically tamsulosin or doxazosin. We only study exposure to doxazosin 
in the pneumonia cohorts since there is insufficient statistical power to analyze the drug in ARD cohorts. Results are 
shown for outcomes of mechanical ventilation (left column) and mechanical ventilation leading to death (right column). 
In general, ⍺1-AR antagonists were associated with reducing risk of adverse events across exposures, outcomes, and 
modeling approaches. Each federated analysis yielded an OR point estimate below 1.  

3.  Discussion 

The  results  of  this  retrospective  clinical  study  extend  preclinical  findings  to  support  the 
hypothesis  that  ⍺1-AR  antagonists  may  reduce  morbidity  and  mortality  in  patients  at  risk  of 
hyperinflammation  [34].  A  challenge  resolved  by  our  retrospective  analysis  is  that  patients 
exposed to ⍺1-AR antagonists may differ from unexposed patients in ways that might also affect 
their outcomes from respiratory diseases. Individuals are often prescribed ⍺1-AR antagonists for 
chronic  diseases,  and  we  consider  only  patients  who  used  the  medications  for  at  least  six 
months in the year prior (i.e., for a medical possession ratio of at least 50%) to the index hospital 
admission for pneumonia or ARDS where we measure patient outcomes. This makes it less likely 
that the unmeasured severity of respiratory illness at time of admission for our patient population 
differs substantially between exposed and unexposed groups; however, we cannot rule out such 
differences.  We  refer  to  confounders  as  factors  that  vary  between  patients  exposed  and 
unexposed to ⍺1-AR antagonists and also relate to patient outcomes. One important confounder 
is age, which in turn is related to other health conditions. For this reason, our research design 
(outlined in more detail in the Materials and Methods section) includes several approaches to 
adjusting for observed demographic and health-related confounders.    

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Given that older men were generally using ⍺1-AR antagonists for reasons unrelated to ARDS, it 
was  feasible  to  balance  the  exposed  and  unexposed  groups  on  a  large  set  of  prognostically 
important  covariates,  reducing  concerns  that  differences  in  outcomes  might  be  due  to 
confounding. Nonetheless, there is an urgent need for randomized prospective trials to further 
test  this  hypothesis  in  patients  with  COVID-19  and  other  lower  respiratory  tract  infections.  In 
such trials, early administration of ⍺1-AR antagonists prior to development of severe symptoms 
is preferred because the goal is to prevent, rather than treat, hyperinflammation-related damage. 
While this study could only examine medications received outside the inpatient environment due 
to dataset limitations, future work should attempt to address whether continued use of ⍺1-AR 
antagonists by hospitalized patients is important for preventing severe symptoms. Additionally, 
future work should consider whether the patients’ respiratory illness is community- or hospital-
acquired [35]. 

⍺1-AR antagonists with various receptor subtype characteristics have been used to treat millions 
of patients with BPH, hypertension, and other disorders. This history supports their safety profile 
[36], although caution is warranted in using any medication for the first time in a new disease 
such as COVID-19. Given the poorly understood relationship between COVID-19 severity and 
hypertension [34], it is important to note that nonselective (⍺1A=⍺1B=⍺1D) ⍺1-ARs (e.g., prazosin 
and doxazosin) are often primarily used to reduce blood pressure, whereas subtype-selective 
(⍺1A=⍺1D>⍺1B)  ⍺1-ARs  (e.g.,  tamsulosin)  have  fewer  hemodynamic  effects.  However,  given  the 
known redundancy of catecholamine signaling [37], we expect ⍺1-AR antagonists that inhibit all 
three ⍺1-AR subtypes (e.g., prazosin and doxazosin) to be more efficacious in the prevention of 
hyperinflammation. 

⍺1-AR  antagonists  are  inexpensive  and  administered  orally,  enabling  widespread  use  if 
prospective  trials  support  their  efficacy  and  safety.  Beyond  COVID-19  and  other  lower 
respiratory  tract  infections,  ⍺1-AR  antagonists  may  also  reduce  hyperinflammation  and  their 
sequelae  in  adoptive  cell  therapy  (“cytokine  release  syndrome”)  and  autoimmune  rheumatic 
disease. 

4.  Materials and Methods 

      4.1 Study Definitions 

Patients were considered exposed if they were users of ⍺1-AR antagonists (doxazosin, alfuzosin, 
prazosin,  silodosin,  terazosin,  or  tamsulosin).  ⍺1-AR  antagonist  usage  is  defined  by  having  a 
medication possession ratio ≥ 50% (i.e., a minimum prescribed supply covering six of the last 
12 months) for a qualifying drug in the year prior to the first inpatient admission date for ARD or 
pneumonia.  In  additional  analyses  we  used  the  same  definition  to  consider  exposed  patients 
who were taking tamsulosin or doxazosin. Patients are considered unexposed if they have never 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been prescribed the relevant drug class or drug within the year prior to the admission date. We 
exclude patients having a medical possession ratio greater than 0% and less than 50% of the 
relevant drug class or drug (equivalently, we exclude patients who do use ⍺1-AR antagonists, 
but for less than six months of the prior year). While all patients from the MarketScan, Optum, 
and Swedish National Patient Register [28] databases were restricted to a 45-85 year age range, 
the MarketScan database only includes patients up to age 65 due to Medicare exclusion; we 
adjust for age in our analyses. The data used in this study do not include ⍺1-AR antagonist usage 
during the ARD or pneumonia admission. 

The first instances of ARD or pneumonia inpatient admissions for each patient were identified 
using ICD codes. Because the MarketScan database only includes United States patient data 
through fiscal year 2016, we only used ICD-9 codes to identify diagnoses from this database. 
The Optum database includes United States patient data from fiscal year 2004 through 2019, 
allowing  for  use  of  both  ICD-9  and  ICD-10  codes  to  identify  diagnoses.  The  Swedish  data 
contained only ICD-10 codes. To identify ARD, we used the ICD-9 code 518.82 and the ensuing 
ICD-10 code of R.0603, noting that the latter code was only available from 2018 onwards; hence, 
the Optum ARD cohort included only patients identified by their first inpatient admission for an 
ARD diagnosis occurring either from 2004-2015 or from 2018-2019. To identify pneumonia, we 
used the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) pneumonia category for both ICD-
9 and ICD-10 codes. 

We considered the following potential confounders: age, fiscal year, total weeks with inpatient 
admissions in the prior year, total outpatient visits in the prior year, total days as an inpatient in 
the prior year, total weeks with inpatient admissions in the prior two months, and comorbidities 
identified  from  healthcare  encounters  in  the  prior  year:  hypertension,  ischemic  heart  disease, 
acute  myocardial  infarction,  heart  failure,  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease,  diabetes 
mellitus, and cancer. All comorbidities were defined according to ICD code sets provided by the 
Chronic Conditions Data Warehouse [38]. The numeric confounders relevant to prior inpatient 
and outpatient visits were log-transformed; all confounders were de-meaned and scaled to unit 
variance.  

The outcomes of interest in this study included mechanical ventilation and death. Mechanical 
ventilation was tabulated as an outcome for patients receiving a procedure corresponding to one 
of  the  following  ICD-9  codes  (967,  9670,  9671,  9672)  or  ICD-10  codes  (5A1935Z,  5A1945Z, 
5A1955Z).  When  tabulating  death  outcomes,  we  note  a  difference  in  death  encoding  among 
databases. From the MarketScan database, we identified death outcomes by in-hospital deaths 
noted in claims records. From the Optum database, in-hospital death data were unavailable, so 
we instead identified death outcomes by whether a patient's month of death (if observed) was 
within one month of the relevant ARD or pneumonia inpatient visit month. For both databases, 
our analyses studied the outcome of death (as defined above) occurring along with mechanical 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ventilation during inpatient stay. The Swedish National Patient Register’s in-hospital deaths were 
tabulated in a similar manner to the MarketScan database. We focused on death associated with 
respiratory failure to avoid counting deaths due to other diseases (many of the patients were 
hospitalized for other reasons), but note that our findings are robust to outcomes defined instead 
by all-cause mortality, with OR < 1. This analysis mirrored our prospective trial design [29].  

      4.2 Unadjusted Analysis 

In our baseline unadjusted analysis, we used Fisher’s exact test to compare the probability of 
outcome occurrence with ⍺1-AR antagonist exposure versus without. Fisher’s exact test and the 
associated  non-central  hypergeometric  distribution  under  the  alternative  provided  the  odds 
ratios,  confidence  intervals,  and  p-values  (one-sided)  reported  for  individual  cohorts.  We 
additionally computed the relative risk reduction (RRR).  

      4.3 Adjusted Analysis 

We nonparametrically estimated (using generalized random forests [39]) propensity scores and 
restricted analyses to those individuals with probabilities of being exposed (and of receiving the 
unexposed condition) between the maximum of the 1st percentiles and the minimum of the 99th 
percentiles of propensity scores across exposed and unexposed groups [40]. This (propensity 
score trimming) step prevents the comparison of individuals with an extremely low estimated 
chance of receiving one of the three exposures. We refer to this as our reduced sample. We note 
that our results are robust to different definitions of propensity score trimming, such as restricting 
to propensity scores between 0.01 and 0.99. 

On the reduced sample, we then apply estimation techniques designed for causal inference to 
compare the probability of outcome occurrence with ⍺1-AR antagonist exposure versus without. 
Specifically, we invoke inverse propensity-weighting, which reweights the unexposed population 
such that on average, the reweighted population more closely resembles the exposed population 
in terms of observed characteristics. Doing so yields better balancing of covariates, as seen in 
the pre- and post-inverse-propensity-weighting comparison in Figure 3-figure supplements 2(ii)-
5(ii). To obtain an odds ratio, we fit an inverse propensity-weighted logistic regression model. 
This approach is “doubly robust” in that it yields valid estimates of causal effects if we have (1) 
observed  all  relevant  confounders  and  (2)  either  one  of  the  logistic  regression  model  or  the 
propensity score model is correctly specified. To estimate confidence intervals we used a Wald-
type estimator. To obtain one-sided p-values we invoked classical asymptotic theory.  

      4.4 Matched Analysis 

An  alternative  approach  comparing  patients  exposed  to  ⍺1-AR  antagonists  with  unexposed 
patients who are as similar as possible -- and thus mimicking a randomized controlled trial -- 
involves  statistical  matching,  where  each  exposed  patient  is  compared  to  a  set  of  “nearest 
neighbors”  measured  in  terms  of  characteristics.  This  approach  avoids  making  specific 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
functional form assumptions about the relationship between characteristics and outcomes. [41]. 
Specifically, on the reduced sample, we performed a 5:1 matching analysis [41], assigning five 
unexposed patients to each exposed patient (i.e., patients exposed to any ⍺1-AR antagonist or 
specifically tamsulosin or doxazosin) and then comparing the outcome of the exposed patient 
to the average outcome for matched unexposed patients. We required an exact match on patient 
age and then used a greedy, nearest neighbor approach based on Mahalanobis distance with a 
caliper  of  0.2  on  the  remaining  covariates  [42].  We  then  used  the  Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel 
(CMH) test on this matched sample to provide the odds ratios, 95% confidence intervals, and p-
values associated with the hypothesis of no effect.  

To  elaborate,  the  CMH  test  can  be  thought  of  as  a  generalization  of  the  chi-square  test  for 
association  [43].  Fisher’s  exact  test  considers  single  2x2  contingency  tables  containing  the 
counts  for  two  dichotomous  variables,  specifically  an  outcome  indicator  and  an  exposure 
indicator  (for  the  setting  in  this  paper).  In  contrast,  the  CMH  test  applies  to  an  array  of  k 
contingency tables such that the 2x2xk array of tables represents a stratification of the data into 
k groups or matched pairs that can be considered comparable (typically groups are defined by 
the  realization  of  some  set  of  categorical  variables)  aside  from  their  outcome  and  exposure 
values. For each single-source (e.g., MarketScan or Optum) matched model we compiled 2x2 
contingency tables for exposure and outcome values for the matched pairs obtained exclusively 
from that database. We then conducted a CMH test on each array of 2x2 contingency tables 
separately. Let kM represent the number of such tables in the MarketScan data set and kO be the 
number of such tables in the Optum data set. In both cases k corresponds to the number of 
exposed observations for which suitable matches could be identified.  

      4.5 Federated Analysis 

Pooling  the  unadjusted  models  leveraged  the  CMH  test  by  considering  all  observations  from 
each data set to be “matched” with other observations from the same data set according to one 
categorical  variable:  the  source  database.  Thus,  each  database  contributed  a  single  2x2 
contingency table to form the 2x2x2 array evaluated by the CMH test. 

To pool the MarketScan and Optum adjusted models, we calculated the pooled coefficient and 
variance  of  the  exposure  using  inverse  variance  weighting  [44].  Let  𝛽#$   and  𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝛽#$ )  be  the 
estimated coefficient and variance of the exposure on dataset i. The pooled coefficient of the 
exposure is  

and the pooled variance of the exposure coefficient is  

 𝛽*+,,-./ =

3/567(2$
∑ 2$
3)
3
∑ 9/567(2$
3)

3

,  

𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝛽*+,,-./) 	 = 	

9
∑ 9/567(2$

3

3)

. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	
	
	
	
To pool the MarketScan and Optum matched models, we concatenated the 2x2 contingency 
tables for the matched pairs from MarketScan with the 2x2 contingency tables for the matched 
pairs from Optum. In this manner, we effectively pooled the two exposed populations and their 
matched  unexposed  populations  without  ever  combining  the  raw  data  in  any  way.  Of  note, 
combining raw data was prohibited by both data use agreements. Matches for exposed patients 
came  exclusively  from  each  exposed  patient’s  source  data  set.  The  CMH  test  effectively 
processed a 2x2x(kM+kO) array of contingency tables. 

Finally,  we  pooled  the  relative  risk  reductions  (RRR)  estimated  from  the  two  data  sets  using 
inverse variance weighting of the respective RRRs contributed from separate MarketScan and 
Optum analyses. First let relative risk reduction (RRR) be defined as 

 𝑅𝑅𝑅; 	 =

<=> ?	<@>
<=>

= 	1 −

<@>
<=>

	, 

where X corresponds to the exposed group and Y corresponds to the unexposed group. Next, 
the  variance  of  the  RRR  estimate  can  be  derived  as  the  variance  of  a  ratio  of  two  binomial 
proportions: 

𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝑅𝑅𝑅;) 	 = 	𝑉𝑎𝑟(

<@>
<=>

) 	 = 	

9
C@

<@> (9?<@> )
<=> D

	 + 	

9
C=

<@> D⋅<=> (9?<=> )
<=> G

. 

Finally, multiple RRR estimates are pooled using inverse variance weighting: 

𝑅𝑅𝑅;+,,-./ =

∑ HHHI; /	567(HHHI; )
3
∑ 9/567(HHHI; )

3

	. 

      4.6 Sensitivity Analysis 

To assess the robustness of our results to alternative approaches to estimating causal effects 
under  the  unconfoundedness  assumption  [45],  we  explored  methods  including  inverse 
propensity-weighted  (IPW)  averaging  of  outcomes  as  well  as  the  (doubly  robust)  augmented 
inverse propensity-weighted (AIPW) estimator, where we using used alternatives such as logistic 
regression  and  non-parametric  causal  forests  [33].  To  assess  invariance  of  our  results  to 
definitional choices, we adjusted the definition of exposure to ⍺1-AR antagonists (e.g., requiring 
regular use of ⍺1-AR antagonists within the prior 3 months rather than 12 months, or excluding 
⍺1-AR antagonist users who simultaneously take one of the 12 most common drugs appearing 
in the cohorts studied) as well as the definitions of certain confounders (e.g., combining three 
cardiovascular  confounders  into  one  indicator,  including  different  metrics  of  prior  inpatient  or 
outpatient  stays,  including  comorbidity  severity  indices,  or  including  additional  comorbidities 
such  as  human  immunodeficiency  virus  [HIV]  infection).  The  results  using  these  alternate 
methods and definitions were consistent with those presented in the results section. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	
	
	
	
 
Further, we sought to observe the time course of health decline in the exposed and unexposed 
groups  (quantified  as  the  number  of  inpatient  visits  in  the  months  prior  to  a  patient’s  target 
admission date). This analysis shows similar temporal trends for the exposed and unexposed 
groups, indicating that neither group was declining more rapidly than the other; see Figure 4.  

Lastly, following [46], we assessed the sensitivity of our estimate of the treatment effect to the 
presence of an unobserved confounder. We estimated the E-value [47], which represents “the 
minimum strength of association on the risk ratio scale that an unmeasured confounder would 
need to have with both the treatment and the outcome to fully explain away a specific treatment-
outcome association, conditional on the measured covariates” [47]. The ORs (and corresponding 
confidence interval) are defined by the relative odds of occurrence of an outcome (we focus on 
ventilation and death) given exposure to ⍺1-AR antagonists. We calculated the E-value on both 
the  OR  point  estimate  and  confidence  interval,  each  of  which  has  its  own  interpretation.  The 
minimum  odds  ratio  necessary  for  an  unmeasured  confounder  (equally  associated  with  both 
alpha-blocker exposure and the outcome) to move the estimated treatment effect to the null (i.e., 
OR = 1) is 2.2 for the federated ARD cohort and 1.6 for the federated pneumonia cohort; our 
findings could not be fully explained by a weaker confounder. The minimum odds ratio necessary 
for an unmeasured confounder to yield a confidence interval including 1 is an E-value of 1.1 for 
the federated ARD cohort and 1.4 for the federated pneumonia cohort; we continue to reject the 
null of no treatment effect in the presence of weaker confounding. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  4.  We  plot  the  proportion  of  exposed  and  unexposed  patients  having  any  inpatient  admissions  a  certain 
number  of  months  prior  to  the  first  ARD  or  pneumonia  admission  date,  and  present  corresponding  confidence 
intervals.  Both  exposed  and  unexposed  groups  had  similar  trends  of  declining  health  leading  up  to  the  target 
admission date, where health decline is defined as having more frequent inpatient visits.  

      4.7 Sweden National Patient Register 

The Swedish National Patient Register differed from the MarketScan and Optum databases 
in several key ways that motivated slight modifications to the analysis. First, we had access 
to data from 2006-2012, during which time the US used ICD-9 and Sweden used ICD-10. 
Second,  in  Sweden,  ventilation  is  not  often  coded,  so  we  instead  only  considered  the 
outcome of in-hospital death, which likely underestimates the effect size due to deaths from 
other causes. Nonetheless, the basic results are preserved in this complementary data set. 
Results are reported in Figure 3-figure supplement 1. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.  Supplementary Figures 

Figure 4-figure supplement 1. We plot the average residuals of inpatient visits after controlling for age effects (as 
well  as  age  squared  and  age  cubed)  for  exposed  and  unexposed  patients  having  inpatient  admissions  a  certain 
number  of  months  prior  to  the  first  ARD  or  pneumonia  admission  date,  and  present  corresponding  confidence 
intervals.  Both  exposed  and  unexposed  groups  had  similar  trends  of  declining  health  leading  up  to  the  target 
admission  date,  where  health  decline  is  defined  as  having  more  frequent  inpatient  visits  after  controlling  for  age 
effects. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3-figure supplement 1. Patients from the Swedish National Patient Register with pneumonia. (i) Distributions 
of sample proportion estimates for comorbidities identified from healthcare encounters in the year prior to a patient’s 
first pneumonia inpatient admission: cardiovascular disease (CVD), chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD), 
diabetes  mellitus  (DM),  and  hypertension  (HTN).  Data  distributions  for  additional  covariates  within  the  area  of 
propensity  score  overlap:  age  and  year.  (ii)  Covariate  balance  plots  before  (cyan)  and  after  (red)  matching.  (iii) 
Assessing the outcome of progression to death: (left) number and proportion of patients taking indicated medications 
who experience the outcome, (right) relative risk reductions (RRR), odds ratios (OR), confidence intervals (CI), p-values 
(p),  and  sample  sizes  (n)  for  unadjusted,  adjusted,  and  matched  models.  Here,  the  exposed  group  includes  any 
patients  who  have  filled  at  least  one  prescription  for  an  ⍺1-AR  antagonist  in  the  prior  year;  the  unexposed  group 
includes any patients who have never filled a prescription for an ⍺1-AR antagonist in the year prior to hospitalization.  

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  3-figure  supplement  2.  Patients  from  MarketScan  Research  Database  with  acute  respiratory  distress.  (i) 
Distributions of sample proportion estimates for comorbidities identified from healthcare encounters in the year prior 
to a patient’s first ARD inpatient admission: diabetes mellitus (DM), hypertension (HTN), heart failure (HF), ischemic 
heart disease (IHD), acute myocardial infarction (AMI), chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD), and cancer 
(CAN). Data distributions for additional covariates within the area of propensity score overlap: age, total weeks with 
inpatient admissions in the prior year (STAYS12), total outpatient visits in the prior year (VISIT12), total prior days as 
an inpatient in the prior year (DAYS12), total weeks with prior inpatient stays in the previous two months (STAYS2), 
and fiscal year (YEAR). (ii) Covariate balance plots before (cyan) and after (red) inverse propensity weighting. (iii) For 
the  outcome  of  progressing  to  ventilation  and  death:  (left)  number  and  proportion  of  patients  taking  indicated 
medications who experienced the outcome, (right) relative risk reductions (RRR), odds ratios (OR), confidence intervals 
(CI), p-values (p), and sample sizes (n) for unadjusted, adjusted, and matched models, including any ⍺1-AR antagonists 
and specifically tamsulosin. Likewise for the secondary outcome of requiring ventilation. In general, ⍺1-AR antagonists 
are associated with reducing risk of adverse events across treatments, outcomes, and modeling approaches. The raw 
outcome  count  and  corresponding  RRR  for  tamsulosin  in  the  ventilation  and  death  outcome  are  redacted  per 
MarketScan policy for displaying small counts. 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  3-figure  supplement  3.  Patients  from  Optum  with  acute  respiratory  distress.  (i)  Distributions  of  sample 
proportion estimates for comorbidities identified from healthcare encounters in the year prior to a patient’s first ARD 
inpatient admission: diabetes mellitus (DM), hypertension (HTN), heart failure (HF), ischemic heart disease (IHD), acute 
myocardial infarction (AMI), chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD), and cancer (CAN). Data distributions for 
additional covariates within the area of propensity score overlap: age, total weeks with inpatient admissions in the 
prior year (STAYS12), total outpatient visits in the prior year (VISIT12), total prior days as an inpatient in the prior year 
(DAYS12),  total  weeks  with  prior  inpatient  stays  in  the  previous  two  months  (STAYS2),  and  fiscal  year  (YEAR).  (ii) 
Covariate balance plots before (cyan) and after (red) inverse propensity weighting. (iii) For the outcome of progressing 
to ventilation and death: (left) number and proportion of patients taking indicated medications who experienced the 
outcome, (right) relative risk reductions (RRR), odds ratios (OR), confidence intervals (CI), p-values (p), and sample 
sizes (n) for unadjusted, adjusted, and matched models, including any ⍺1-AR antagonists and specifically tamsulosin. 
Likewise  for  the  secondary  outcome  of  requiring  ventilation.  In  general,  ⍺1-AR  antagonists  are  associated  with 
reducing risk of adverse events across treatments, outcomes, and modeling approaches. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3-figure supplement 4. Patients from MarketScan Research Database with pneumonia. (i) Distributions of 
sample proportion estimates for comorbidities identified from healthcare encounters in the year prior to a patient’s 
first ARD inpatient admission: diabetes mellitus (DM), hypertension (HTN), heart failure (HF), ischemic heart disease 
(IHD),  acute  myocardial  infarction  (AMI),  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disorder  (COPD),  and  cancer  (CAN).  Data 
distributions  for  additional  covariates  within  the  area  of  propensity  score  overlap:  age,  total  weeks  with  inpatient 
admissions in the prior year (STAYS12), total outpatient visits in the prior year (VISIT12), total prior days as an inpatient 
in the prior year (DAYS12), total weeks with prior inpatient stays in the previous two months (STAYS2), and fiscal year 
(YEAR). (ii) Covariate balance plots before (cyan) and after (red) inverse propensity weighting. (iii) For the outcome of 
progressing  to  ventilation  and  death:  (left)  number  and  proportion  of  patients  taking  indicated  medications  who 
experienced the outcome, (right) relative risk reductions (RRR), odds ratios (OR), confidence intervals (CI), p-values 
(p),  and  sample  sizes  (n)  for  unadjusted,  adjusted,  and  matched  models,  including  any  ⍺1-AR  antagonists  and 
specifically tamsulosin. Likewise for the secondary outcome of requiring ventilation. In general, ⍺1-AR antagonists are 
associated with reducing risk of adverse events across treatments, outcomes, and modeling approaches. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3-figure supplement 5. Patients from Optum with pneumonia. (i) Distributions of sample proportion estimates 
for comorbidities identified from healthcare encounters in the year prior to a patient’s first ARD inpatient admission: 
diabetes mellitus (DM), hypertension (HTN), heart failure (HF), ischemic heart disease (IHD), acute myocardial infarction 
(AMI), chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD), and cancer (CAN). Data distributions for additional covariates 
within the area of propensity score overlap: age, total weeks with inpatient admissions in the prior year (STAYS12), 
total outpatient visits in the prior year (VISIT12), total prior days as an inpatient in the prior year (DAYS12), total weeks 
with prior inpatient stays in the previous two months (STAYS2), and fiscal year (YEAR). (ii) Covariate balance plots 
before (cyan) and after (red) inverse propensity weighting. (iii) For the outcome of progressing to ventilation and death: 
(left) number and proportion of patients taking indicated medications who experienced the outcome, (right) relative 
risk reductions (RRR), odds ratios (OR), confidence intervals (CI), p-values (p), and sample sizes (n) for unadjusted, 
adjusted,  and  matched  models,  including  any  ⍺1-AR  antagonists  and  specifically  tamsulosin.  Likewise  for  the 
secondary outcome of requiring ventilation. In general, ⍺1-AR antagonists are associated with reducing risk of adverse 
events across treatments, outcomes, and modeling approaches. 

Acknowledgments: Data for this project were accessed using the Stanford Center for Population Health 
Sciences Data Core. The PHS Data Core is supported by a National Institutes of Health National Center 
for Advancing Translational Science Clinical and Translational Science Award (UL1 TR001085) and from 
Internal Stanford funding. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily 
represent  the  official  views  of  the  NIH.  We  thank  Adam  Sacarny  (Columbia  University)  for  advice  on 
processing and analyzing health care claims data. Dr. Sacarny was not compensated for his assistance. 
We thank Sandra Aamodt for reviewing and editing the manuscript, and Julia Kuhl and Eric Bridgeford for 
help  generating  the  figures.  We  also  acknowledge  Marc  Succhard  and  Sascha  Dublin  for  helpful 
discussions.  Research,  including  data  analysis,  was  partially  supported  by  funding  from  Microsoft 
Research and Fast Grants, part of the Emergent Ventures Program at The Mercatus Center at George 
Mason  University.  Allison  Koenecke  was  supported  by  the  National  Science  Foundation  Graduate 
Research  Fellowship  under  Grant  No.  DGE  –  1656518.  Any  opinion,  findings,  and  conclusions  or 
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the 
views of the National Science Foundation. Dr. Konig was supported by the National Institute of Arthritis 
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases of the National Institutes of Health under Award no. T32AR048522. 
Dr.  Bettegowda  was  supported  by  the  Burroughs  Wellcome  Career  Award  for  Medical  Scientists.  Dr. 
Stuart was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health under Grant R01MH115487. Dr. Staedtke 
was supported by the National Cancer Institute NCI 5K08CA230179 and 1U01CA247576 and the Sontag 
Distinguished  Scientist  Award.  Dr.  Bai  was  supported  by  the  National  Cancer  Institute  NCI 
1U01CA247576.  JJC  is  supported  by  the  Swedish  Research  Council  (#2019-01059)  and  the  Swedish 
Heart and Lung Foundation. This work was further supported by The Virginia and D.K. Ludwig Fund for 
Cancer  Research,  The  Lustgarten  Foundation  for  Pancreatic  Cancer  Research,  and  the  BKI  Cancer 
Genetics and Genomics Research Program. 

Ethics Statement: No human experiments were performed as this study was retrospective in nature and 
was conducted using third-party data. Research activity on population health on de-identified data has 
been judged exempt by the Stanford IRB, precluding consent and other requirements associated with 
human subjects research.  Access to IBM® MarketScan® Research Databases and Optum’s 
Clinformatics® Data Mart Database was granted through the Stanford Center for Population Health 
Sciences (PHS); access to the Swedish National Patient Register was approved by the regional ethical 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
review board in Stockholm and the Swedish National Board of Welfare, and informed consent was 
waived.  This research is covered under Stanford PHS protocol 40974. 

Disclosures: In 2017, The Johns Hopkins University (JHU) filed a patent application (application number 
20200368324) on the use of various drugs to prevent cytokine release syndromes, on which VS, RB, NP, 
BV, KWK, and SZ are listed as inventors. JHU will not assert patent rights from this filing for treatment 
related to COVID-19. MFK received personal fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb and Celltrion. BV, KWK, and 
NP are founders of and hold equity in Thrive Earlier Detection. KWK and NP are consultants to and are on 
the Board of Directors of Thrive Earlier Detection. BV, KWK, NP, and SZ are founders of, hold equity in, 
and serve as consultants to Personal Genome Diagnostics. SZ holds equity in Thrive Earlier Detection and 
has a research agreement with BioMed Valley Discoveries, Inc. KWK and BV are consultants to Sysmex, 
Eisai, and CAGE Pharma and hold equity in CAGE Pharma. NP is an advisor to and holds equity in Cage 
Pharma. BV is also a consultant to Nexus. KWK, BV, SZ, and NP are consultants to and hold equity in 
NeoPhore. CB is a consultant to Depuy-Synthes and Bionaut Pharmaceuticals. CB, BV, KWK, and NP are 
also inventors on technologies unrelated or indirectly related to the work described in this article. Licenses 
to these technologies are or will be associated with equity or royalty payments to the inventors, as well as 
to JHU. The terms of all these arrangements are being managed by JHU in accordance with its conflict of 
interest policies. SA is an advisor and holds an equity stake in two private companies, Prealize (Palo Alto, 
California, USA) and Dr. Consulta (Brazil). Prealize is a health care analytics company, and Dr. Consulta 
operates a chain of low-cost medical clinics in Brazil. 

Legend 

Source code 1: R Markdown code to run retrospective analysis and generate figures. 

Source code 2: R script to generate cohorts and perform propensity matching. 

References 

1.   GBD 2016 Lower Respiratory Infections Collaborators. Estimates of the global, regional, 

and national morbidity, mortality, and aetiologies of lower respiratory infections in 195 
countries, 1990-2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. 
Lancet Infect Dis. 2018 Nov;18(11):1191–210. 

2.   Hay KA, Hanafi L-A, Li D, Gust J, Liles WC, Wurfel MM, et al. Kinetics and biomarkers of 
severe cytokine release syndrome after CD19 chimeric antigen receptor--modified T-cell 
therapy. Blood, The Journal of the American Society of Hematology. 2017;130(21):2295–
306. 

3.   The top 10 causes of death [Internet]. [cited 2020 Apr 21]. Available from: 

https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/the-top-10-causes-of-death 

4.   Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, Fan G, Liu Y, Liu Z, et al. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality 
of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet. 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2020 Mar 28;395(10229):1054–62. 

5.   Ruan Q, Yang K, Wang W, Jiang L, Song J. Correction to: Clinical predictors of mortality 
due to COVID-19 based on an analysis of data of 150 patients from Wuhan, China. 
Intensive Care Med [Internet]. 2020 Apr 6; Available from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00134-020-06028-z 

6.   Qin C, Zhou L, Hu Z, Zhang S, Yang S, Tao Y, et al. Dysregulation of immune response in 
patients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China. Clin Infect Dis [Internet]. 2020 Mar 12; Available 
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa248 

7.   Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical features of patients infected 

with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet. 2020 Feb 15;395(10223):497–506. 

8.   Flierl MA, Rittirsch D, Nadeau BA, Chen AJ, Sarma JV, Zetoune FS, et al. Phagocyte-

derived catecholamines enhance acute inflammatory injury. Nature. 2007 Oct 
11;449(7163):721–5. 

9.   Shaked I, Hanna RN, Shaked H, Chodaczek G, Nowyhed HN, Tweet G, et al. Transcription 

factor Nr4a1 couples sympathetic and inflammatory cues in CNS-recruited macrophages 
to limit neuroinflammation. Nat Immunol. 2015 Dec;16(12):1228–34. 

10.  Mehta P, McAuley DF, Brown M, Sanchez E, Tattersall RS, Manson JJ, et al. COVID-19: 

consider cytokine storm syndromes and immunosuppression. Lancet [Internet]. 2020 Mar 
16; Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30628-0 

11.  McGonagle D, Sharif K, O’Regan A, Bridgewood C. The Role of Cytokines including 

Interleukin-6 in COVID-19 induced Pneumonia and Macrophage Activation Syndrome-Like 
Disease [Internet]. Autoimmunity Reviews. 2020. p. 102537. Available from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102537 

12.  Pedersen SF, Ho Y-C. SARS-CoV-2: a storm is raging. J Clin Invest [Internet]. 2020 Apr 

13; Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1172/JCI137647 

13.  Chen G, Wu D, Guo W, Cao Y, Huang D, Wang H, et al. Clinical and immunologic features 
in severe and moderate forms of Coronavirus Disease 2019 [Internet]. Available from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.16.20023903 

14.  REMAP-CAP Investigators, Gordon AC, Mouncey PR, Al-Beidh F, Rowan KM, Nichol AD, 

et al. Interleukin-6 Receptor Antagonists in Critically Ill Patients with Covid-19. N Engl J 
Med [Internet]. 2021 Feb 25; Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2100433 

15.  RECOVERY Collaborative Group, Horby P, Lim WS, Emberson JR, Mafham M, Bell JL, et 
al. Dexamethasone in Hospitalized Patients with Covid-19. N Engl J Med. 2021 Feb 
25;384(8):693–704. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.  Huet T, Beaussier H, Voisin O, Jouveshomme S, Dauriat G, Lazareth I, et al. Anakinra for 

severe forms of COVID-19: a cohort study. Lancet Rheumatol. 2020 Jul;2(7):e393–400. 

17.  Rosas IO, Bräu N, Waters M, Go RC, Hunter BD, Bhagani S, et al. Tocilizumab in 

Hospitalized Patients with Severe Covid-19 Pneumonia. N Engl J Med [Internet]. 2021 Feb 
25; Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2028700 

18.  Salama C, Han J, Yau L, Reiss WG, Kramer B, Neidhart JD, et al. Tocilizumab in Patients 

Hospitalized with Covid-19 Pneumonia. N Engl J Med. 2021 Jan 7;384(1):20–30. 

19.  Stone JH, Frigault MJ, Serling-Boyd NJ, Fernandes AD, Harvey L, Foulkes AS, et al. 

Efficacy of Tocilizumab in Patients Hospitalized with Covid-19. N Engl J Med. 2020 Dec 
10;383(24):2333–44. 

20.  Liu T, Zhang J, Yang Y, Ma H, Li Z, Zhang J, et al. The potential role of IL-6 in monitoring 

severe case of coronavirus disease 2019 [Internet]. Available from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.01.20029769 

21.  Group TRC, The RECOVERY Collaborative Group. Dexamethasone in Hospitalized 

Patients with Covid-19 — Preliminary Report [Internet]. New England Journal of Medicine. 
2020. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa2021436 

22.  Gianfrancesco M, Hyrich KL, Al-Adely S, Carmona L, Danila MI, Gossec L, et al. 

Characteristics associated with hospitalisation for COVID-19 in people with rheumatic 
disease: data from the COVID-19 Global Rheumatology Alliance physician-reported 
registry [Internet]. Vol. 79, Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases. 2020. p. 859–66. Available 
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-217871 

23.  Lescure F-X, Honda H, Fowler RA, Lazar JS, Shi G, Wung P, et al. Sarilumab in patients 
admitted to hospital with severe or critical COVID-19: a randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Respir Med [Internet]. 2021 Mar 4; Available from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00099-0 

24.  Della-Torre E, Campochiaro C, Cavalli G, De Luca G, Napolitano A, La Marca S, et al. 

Interleukin-6 blockade with sarilumab in severe COVID-19 pneumonia with systemic 
hyperinflammation: an open-label cohort study. Ann Rheum Dis. 2020 Oct;79(10):1277–85. 

25.  Staedtke V, Bai R-Y, Kim K, Darvas M, Davila ML, Riggins GJ, et al. Disruption of a self-
amplifying catecholamine loop reduces cytokine release syndrome. Nature. 2018 
Dec;564(7735):273–7. 

26.  Burns PB, Rohrich RJ, Chung KC. The levels of evidence and their role in evidence-based 

medicine. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011 Jul;128(1):305–10. 

27.  Dickerman BA, García-Albéniz X, Logan RW, Denaxas S, Hernán MA. Avoidable flaws in 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
observational analyses: an application to statins and cancer. Nat Med. 2019 
Oct;25(10):1601–6. 

28.  Patientregistret [Internet]. Socialstyrelsen. [cited 2020 Jul 21]. Available from: 

https://www.socialstyrelsen.se/statistik-och-data/register/alla-register/patientregistret/ 

29.  Prazosin to Prevent COVID-19 (PREVENT-COVID Trial) - Full Text View - ClinicalTrials.gov 

[Internet]. [cited 2020 Jun 1]. Available from: 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04365257 

30.  Holdcroft A. Gender bias in research: how does it affect evidence based medicine? J R 

Soc Med. 2007 Jan;100(1):2–3. 

31.  McMurray RJ. Gender Disparities in Clinical Decision Making. JAMA. 1991 Jul 

24;266(4):559. 

32.  Funk MJ, Westreich D, Wiesen C, Stürmer T, Brookhart MA, Davidian M. Doubly robust 

estimation of causal effects. Am J Epidemiol. 2011 Apr 1;173(7):761–7. 

33.  Wager S, Athey S. Estimation and Inference of Heterogeneous Treatment Effects using 

Random Forests. J Am Stat Assoc. 2018 Jul 3;113(523):1228–42. 

34.  Konig MF, Powell M, Staedtke V, Bai R-Y, Thomas DL, Fischer N, et al. Preventing 

cytokine storm syndrome in COVID-19 using alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonists. 
Journal of Clinical Investigations. (medrxiv;2020.04.02.20051565v2). 

35.  Whittle J, Fine MJ, Joyce DZ, Lave JR, Young WW, Hough LJ, et al. Community-acquired 
pneumonia: can it be defined with claims data? Am J Med Qual. 1997 Winter;12(4):187–
93. 

36.  Yasukawa K, Swarz H, Ito Y. Review of Orthostatic Tests on the Safety of Tamsulosin, a 
Selective α1A-Adrenergic Receptor Antagonist, Shows Lack of Orthostatic Hypotensive 
Effects. J Int Med Res. 2001 Jun 1;29(3):236–51. 

37.  Grisanti LA, Woster AP, Dahlman J, Sauter ER, Combs CK, Porter JE. α1-adrenergic 

receptors positively regulate Toll-like receptor cytokine production from human monocytes 
and macrophages. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011 Aug;338(2):648–57. 

38.  Condition Categories - Chronic Conditions Data Warehouse [Internet]. [cited 2020 Jul 21]. 

Available from: https://www2.ccwdata.org/web/guest/condition-categories 

39.  Athey S, Tibshirani J, Wager S. Generalized random forests. Ann Stat. 2019 

Apr;47(2):1148–78. 

40.  Stürmer T, Rothman KJ, Avorn J, Glynn RJ. Treatment Effects in the Presence of 

Unmeasured Confounding: Dealing With Observations in the Tails of the Propensity Score 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Distribution—A Simulation Study. Am J Epidemiol. 2010 Aug 17;172(7):843–54. 

41.  Stuart EA. Matching methods for causal inference: A review and a look forward. Stat Sci. 

2010 Feb 1;25(1):1–21. 

42.  Ho D, Imai K, King G, Stuart E. MatchIt: Nonparametric Preprocessing for Parametric 

Causal Inference. Journal of Statistical Software, Articles. 2011;42(8):1–28. 

43.  Mantel N, Haenszel W. Statistical aspects of the analysis of data from retrospective 

studies of disease. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1959 Apr;22(4):719–48. 

44.  Hartung J, Knapp G, Sinha BK. Statistical Meta-Analysis with Applications. John Wiley & 

Sons; 2011. 248 p. 

45.  Steegen S, Tuerlinckx F, Gelman A, Vanpaemel W. Increasing Transparency Through a 

Multiverse Analysis. Perspect Psychol Sci. 2016 Sep;11(5):702–12. 

46.  Rosenbaum PR, Rubin DB. The Central Role of the Propensity Score in Observational 

Studies for Causal Effects. Biometrika. 1983;70(1):41–55. 

47.  VanderWeele TJ, Ding P. Sensitivity Analysis in Observational Research: Introducing the E-

Value. Ann Intern Med. 2017 Aug 15;167(4):268–74. 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
