The Role of Stem Noise in Visual Perception 
and Image Quality Measurement  

Arash Ashtari 
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Shiraz University of Technology, Shiraz, Iran 
E-mail: a.ashtari@sutech.ac.ir 

considers 

(reference 

images.  Specifically, 

free)  quality 
Abstract—This  paper 
assessment  of  distorted  and  noisy 
it 
considers the first and second order statistics of stem noise – that 
can be evaluated given any image. In the research field of Image 
quality Assessment (IQA), the  stem  noise is defined  as  the input 
of  an  Auto-Regressive  (AR)  process,    from  which  a  low-energy 
and  de-correlated  version  of  the  image  can  be  recovered.  To 
estimate  the  AR  model  parameters  and  associated  stem  noise 
energy,  the  Yule-walker  equations  are  used  such  that  the 
accompanying  Auto-Correlation  Function  (ACF)  coefficients 
can  be  treated  as  model  parameters  for  image  reconstruction. 
To  characterize 
signal-
independent distortions, the mean and variance of stem noise can 
be  evaluated  over  the  image.  Crucially,  this  paper  shows  that 
these  statistics  have  a  predictive  validity  in  relation  to  human 
ratings  of  image  quality.  Furthermore,  under  certain  kinds  of 
image  distortion,  stem  noise  statistics  show  very  significant 
correlations with established measures of image quality. 

signal-dependent  and 

systematic 

Index  Terms—Stem  noise,  Auto  regressive  model,  The  Yule-

Walker equations, Image quality assessment, Visual perception  

I.  INTRODUCTION 

T 

HERE  are  various  image  distortions  from  different 
sources 
image 
that  affect  visual  perception.  Some 
distortions  –  like  blurriness  and  blockiness  –  are  signal-
dependent  and  others, 
like  white  noise  are  signal-
independent. Several useful approaches have been introduced 
to explain image distortion and assess the quality of an image. 
The majority employ feature extraction and training phases to 
describe  image  distortions.  For  instance,  BLIINDS  [1], 
BRISQUE  [2],  DIIVINE  [3],  C-DIIVINE  [4]  use 
the 
parameters  of  Generalized  Gaussian  Distributions  (GGD) 
fitted  to  Natural  Scene  Statistics  (NSS).  Shape,  mean,  left 
variance  and  right  variance  of  the  ensuing  distributions  are 
among  the  parameters  that  are  thought  to  capture  the 
characteristics of image distortions in different domains such 
as  spatial,  DCT  and  wavelet  decompositions.  The  current 
work  takes  a  complementary  approach  and  considers  the 
“noise”  as  a  potentially  useful  signature  of  distortion  as 
gauged  by  visual  perception  of  natural  images.  In  particular, 
in the bridges the notion of a generative model that plays a key 
role in visual neuroscience. 
     Recently, psycho-visual quality metrics, inspired by human 
brain  hypotheses  for  perception,  have  been  introduced  to  the 
literature [5], [6], [7], [8]. The stem noise used in this work is 
motivated  by  appealing  to  the  principle  of  variational  free 
energy minimization in generative modeling [9,10,11,12]. 

1 
1 

In neurobiology, this provides a formal account of perception 
in  the  human  brain  [13].  In  biology,  computational  protein 
folding  follows  a  way  through  which  conformational  states 
with lower free energies are occupied [14].  In image analysis 
and computer graphics, it provides a principled way to infer or 
reconstruct the original causes of  noisy and distorted images. 
In brief, the free energy principle entails the minimization of a 
variational  bound  on  the  model  evidence  –  or  marginal 
likelihood  –  of  an  image,  under  a  generative  model  of  that 
image.  In  this  work,  we  consider  a  generative  model  based 
upon  a  spatial  autoregressive  process  within  “blocks”  or 
“cliques” of a two-dimensional image. 

things 

The  free  energy  can  be  evaluated  using  a  (generative) 
model  and  a  (sensory)  data.  During  visual  perception,  the 
generative  model  can  actively  encode  visual  scenes  and 
images  in  terms  of  the  underlying  causes  or  latent  features. 
While  state-of-the  art,  free-energy  based  quality  assessment 
methods  such  as  [5],  [6],  [7]  and  [8]  employ  changing  the 
systems  parameters; 
this  work  considers  estimates  of 
uncertainty or precision that are part of the generative model, 
from  which  a  low-energy  and  de-correlated  version  of  the 
image  can  be  recovered.  In  the  visual  neurosciences,  this 
aspect  of  perceptual  inference  underwrites 
like 
salience  and  visual  attention  –  and  has  a  key  aspect  of 
veridical image reconstruction in the brain. 
     Understanding  how  our  brain  perceives  natural  images 
and visual scenes in the everyday life – rather than just using 
feature  extraction,  brute  deep  learning  techniques  –  may 
therefore  be  important.  A  recent  and  clear  explanation  of 
requisite  energy  computations  has  been  described  by  [15], 
which introduces the “stem noise” inspired by the stem cells 
concept  in  medical  science  that  is  convertible  to  other  cell 
types. 
     In  this  paper,  we  define  the  framework  of  stem  noise  and 
consider  different  image  distortions  such  as  blurriness,  white 
noise,  JPEG2000,  fast  fading  and  JPEG;  as  well  as  high 
quality 
framework  provides  a 
straightforward generative model that enables one to estimate 
model parameters; namely, autoregression coefficients and the 
amplitude  of  random  variables  (i.e.,  innovations  of  an 
autoregressive  process).  Making  use  of  such  a  model,  a  low-
energy, de-correlated version of image is reconstructed. In this 
setting,  under  some  simplifying  assumptions,  the  variational 
free  energy  can  be  reduced  to  the  marginal  likelihood,  as 
evaluated by the sum of squared stem noise (i.e., the energy of 
the residuals of a spatial autoregressive model). 

images.  This 

reference 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
in 

     In  what  follows,  this  approximation  to  model  evidence 
(i.e.,  marginal  likelihood)  was  evaluated  within  blocks  of  an 
image.  The  ensuing  measure  of  image  quality  was  averaged 
over blocks to provide a candidate measure of image quality. 
In  addition,  the  between-block  variance  was  evaluated;  in 
terms of the second order moment of stem noise. We will see 
below  that  this  (between-block)  average  and  variance  has 
predictive  validity 
to  quantitative  human 
relation 
assessments of image quality. Specifically, different statistics 
have a greater predictive validity depending upon whether the 
image  was  blurred  or  contaminated  with  high-frequency 
(white)  spatial  noise.  Thus,  it  is  possible  that  the  brain  uses 
similar  measures  of  image  quality  to  assess  the  precision  or 
salience  of  various  parts  of  an  image.  In  neurobiology,  this 
would involve the computation of stem noise energy through 
the local horizontal or lateral connections  within early visual 
cortex.  Interestingly,  this  sort  of  computation  may  underlie 
the  construction  of  visual  salience  maps;  namely,  regions  of 
high  salience  in  visual  space  that  attract  saccadic  eye 
movements [16]. 
     In  order  to  show  the  utility  of  stem  noise  energy  in 
characterizing  the  visual perception of distorted  images (i.e., 
establish  construct  validity);  the  statistics  of  stem  noise 
energy  were  compared  with  other  statistics  of  AR  model 
parameters.  Nine  well-known  natural  image  databases  were 
used  for  this  assessment;  such  we  could  also  consider 
databases  containing  images  simultaneously  contaminated 
with several distortions. 
     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
The  proposed  method  is  explained  in  Section  II.  Results  and 
their  interpretation  are  provided  in  Section  III.  Finally, 
conclusions are drawn in Section IV. 

II.  PROPOSED APPROACH 

     A  block  diagram  of  the  proposed  approach  is  shown  in 
Fig.1. First, an energy decreasing operation is applied to the 
image as a pre-processing step.  

Visual Stimulus 

Energy Decreasing 
& 
Repetition Suppression 

Auto-regressive Modeling 
& 
Correlation Computations 

Stem Noise Energy 
Computation 

This  preprocessing  reproduces  a  generic  and  ubiquitous 
aspect  of  free  energy  minimization,  i.e.,  the  repetition 
suppression  phenomenon,  where  evoked  responses  in  early 
(lower) visual areas of the brain are reduced for predictable, 
relative  to  unpredictable  stimuli  [13].  Thus,  a  non-linear 
operation  in  Eq.1  is  applied  to  the  image.  This  operation 
Gaussianizes  the  probability  density  functions  of  adjacent 
pixels  products  [2].  This  is  achieved  by  removing  the  local 
mean  of  luminance  coefficients  and  normalizing  the  natural 
images.  This  operation  mimics  contrast-gain  masking  (in 
early  human  vision  [17,  18].  It  is  interesting  to  note  that 
successful  IQA  metrics  –  like  structural  similarity  (SSIM) 
[19] and visual information fidelity (VIF) [20] – benefit from 
such normalization operations [21]. 
If the luminance component of the input image with the size of 

  pixels is     ,v), then its normalized form is: 

     )  

     )      )
     )  

                              (1) 

where u ∈  1, 2 . . . M, v ∈  1, 2 . . . N are spatial indices.    
and   are the mean and standard deviation of the image 
defined as follows. c= 1 is a constant to prevent instabilities. 

      )   ∑

∑

         )                 (2)    

         )   √∑

∑

(         )         ))

                         (3)  

Where     {    |                          }  is  a  low-pass 
filter. In the proposed method, with           a 3 3 window 
is used for filtering.  
     In  the  second  step  of  the  proposed  approach,  the  low 
,  is  auto-regressively 
energy  version  of  the  input  image,
modeled.  In  the  definitions  of  stochastic  processes,  a  regular 
process  is  linearly  equivalent  with  a  white  noise  process.  A 
regular process could therefore be represented as the response 
of  a  minimum-phase  system.  By  definition,  a  system  is 
minimum-phase  if  the  system  and  its  inverse  are  causal  and 
their  impulse  responses  have  finite  energy  [22].  See  Fig.2. 
This  means  that  block  of  an  image  can  be  modeled  with  a 
particular  AR  process,  in  which  the  input  is  a  white  noise 
process.  Such  a  model  could  be  considered  as  the  kind  of 
generative model that our brain employs to encode early visual 
input.  In  order  to  estimate  the  AR  parameters,  we  are 
interested  in  using  a  model  which  can  be  converted  or 
estimated efficiently. 

Minimum-phase 
system 

Fig.1 A block diagram of the proposed approach 

Fig. 2 A minimum-phase system with the white noise input 

2 

MNˆxˆx[]inˆ[]xn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
    
 
    
 
    
 
 
 
       
                                                         
 
 
       
                                 
 
 
     In  the  case  of  rth-order  AR  modeling,  numerical  analyses 
suggest  a  reasonably  optimal  number  of  non-overlapped 
square blocks is: 

                               s  ⌊

⌋   ⌊

√   

√   

⌋                                           ) 

    pixels  is  the  size  of  the 

where 
  as  the  normalized 
form of  the input image and  ⌊  ⌋ is the  floor function and s is 
the  number  of  non-overlapped  square  blocks.  Each  image 
 in which n is the index of image 
block is indicated as 

sequence indicating block pixels and   varies from 1 to  . 

is the white noise input corresponding to the   th block of the 
image.  The  particular  rth-order  AR  model  for  each  image 
block is constructed as: 

                          (5) 

Where     and      are  AR  model  parameters  for  the     th 
block of the image.        is the so-called “stem noise” for the 
   th  block.  Again     varies  from  1  to  s.  Note  that  in  this 
is  transformed  to  a  1-D 
implementation  of  AR  modeling, 

image  sequence.  This  is  implemented  by  top-down  row 
scanning, during which each row is scanned from left to right.  
Thus, the rightmost coefficient in the last row is referred to as 
and the leftmost coefficient in the first row is referred 

to as 

. For a third-order AR model i.e. a 2×2 pixels 

block, the ensuing transformation is shown in Fig. 3. Since AR 
models  could  be  considered  as  an  instance  of  Markovian 
processes,  it  would  have  been  possible  to  interpret  image 
blocks as local cliques of a Markov random field. Considering 
the  locality  of  image  distortions  and  avoiding  computational 
complexity [15], in this paper a third-order AR model is used 
for each image block. In this instance, the system function for 
the   th block of the image is as follows: 

                    (6) 

Fig3. Transformation to 1–D image sequence 

     ̂ 
  ̂ 
       ̂ 
  ̂ 

  )        ̂ 
  )        ̂ 
  )        ̂ 
  )        ̂ 

  )        ̂ 
  )        ̂ 
  )        ̂ 
  )        ̂ 

  )        ̂ 
  )        ̂ 
  )        ̂ 
  )        ̂ 

            ) 

  )      
  )                  (8)                               
  )                  (9) 
  )                (10) 

     where    ̂  is  the  auto-correlation  function  of  the  image 
sequence.  Since  in  (7)-(10)  equations,  the  auto-correlation 
function  coefficients  constitute  a  Toeplitz  matrix,  which 
means the equation can be solved using the  Durbin-Levinson 
algorithm.  Accordingly,  the  Yule-Walker  equations  include 
the  Auto-Correlation  function  (ACF)  coefficients  of  the 
natural images as the parameters of an Auto-Regressive (AR) 
model  of  the  image.  As  illustrated  in  Fig.4,  three  model 
parameterizations  are  tied  together  within  the  Yule-Walker 
equations. The AR space, the ACF space, and the stem noise 
space.  In  order  to  solve  the  Yule-Walker  equations,  the 
relevant  auto-correlation  function  can  be  estimated.  To  this 
end, the statistics of the adjacent pixels are used. In this paper, 
equation (11) is used to estimate correlation coefficients. 

  )        (∑

              ̂ 
                                                                                                        (11) 

   ̂           ))    

 ̂       )

the 

To  preclude  conditional  dependencies  between  auto 
term   ̂       )  
correlation  function  coefficients, 
  ̂       )  is excluded from calculation of    ̂ 
In this case, equation (11)  yields     ̂ 
  ),    ̂ 
As  parameterizing  horizontal,  vertical  and  diagonal 
correlations  of  the  distorted  image,  respectively.  After 
evaluating  AR  model parameters, the extent of implicit noise 
energy in each block of the input image is estimated. 

  ).  
  )   and     ̂ 

  ) 

Where z is, in general, a complex number and   varies from 1 
to s. 
    Inversion of the implicit generative model corresponds to  
determining the AR coefficients i.e.                      . 
This  inversion  problem  can  be  solved  efficiently  using  the 
Yule-Walker equations as follows. 
With multiplying both sides of  (5) by i[n], 

and lags of   

up  to 

and  then  taking  an    expectation,  The 

Yule-Walker equations obtain as follows: 

          AR space 
(Biological System parameters) 

         ACF space 
   (Environmental Quantities) 

Stem Noise 
Space  

Fig 4. Different spaces are tied together in the Yule-Walker equations 

3 

MNˆxˆ[]xni01ˆˆ[][][]rmmxnaxnmbinˆxˆ[]xnˆ[]xnr0123123()1bLZazazazˆ[]xnˆ[]xnˆ[3]xnˆ[3]xnˆ[2]xnˆ[1]xnˆ[]xn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.5 Ten degraded versions of an image sampled from the LIVE database [23], of which five images are blurred to five different degrees and five images are 
corrupted with five degrees of white noise. First and second rows contain blurred and white noise images respectively, in which the degree of image distortion in 
each row increases from right to left. Corresponding Stem Noise Energy Maps (SNEMs) of the images in the first and second rows are shown in the third and 
fourth rows, respectively. 

      For generality, let         be the multiplier of  ̂     . In 
the case of a third-order model, squaring both sides of (5) and 
then  taking  the  expectation  (see  appendix),  of  equation  (12), 
the implicit stem noise energy in each image block is derived 
as follows: 

 (12) 

     To  visualize  stem  noise  energy  variations  across  the 
image  blocks,  a  Stem  Noise  Energy  Map  (SNEM)  can  be 
created.  The  values  of  stem  noise  energy  –  computed  in  a 
block-based  manner  –  are  shown  as  greyscale  pixels.  Fig.5 
shows an image chosen from the LIVE database [23] with ten 
degraded versions, of which five images are blurred with five 
levels  of  blurring  and  five  images  are  corrupted  with  five 
levels of white noise. The first and second rows show blurred 

and  white  noise  images  respectively,  in  which  the  degree  of 
image distortion in each row increases from right to left.  
Corresponding  SNEMs  of  the  images  in  the  first  and  second 
rows are shown in the third and fourth rows. Note that as 2    
pixels  block  have  been  used,  the  size  of  SNEMs  are   
 ⁄   of 
original  images.  As  expected,  in  a  clockwise  rotation  the 
SNEMs are filled with  more  fine speckles. This phenomenon 
manifests as an expansion of  the distribution (i.e., histogram) 
of stem noise energy. This is because  white noise has a wide 
frequency  spectrum  and  its  autocorrelation  function  is  very 
narrow.  On  the  other  hand,  natural  images  have  a  decaying 
frequency spectrum and hence their autocorrelation function is 
wide.  When  images  are  blurred,  higher  frequencies  are  
removed  and    the  frequency  spectrum  gets  progressively 
narrower.  Conversely  its  autocorrelation  function  becomes 
wider. Thus, the degree of dispersion reflects image blurriness. 
Likewise,  when  images  are  degraded  by  more  white  noise, 
their  frequency  spectrum  gets  wider.  This  spread  can  be 
quantified  via  the  standard  deviation  of  the  autocorrelation 
function, which is also the AC energy of the image. 

4 

32222ˆˆ0(1)001ˆˆ(2)030(0)2(1)2(2)2(3)xmxmmmmxmmxmbEiRaRaaRaaRaa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
                
        
                          
 
 
 
      
Fig.6 Normalized histograms of stem noise energy computed across the image blocks of ten images in Fig.4 and the relevant reference image.

    Fig.6  shows  normalized  histograms  of  stem  noise  energy 
evaluated  across  the  image  blocks  of  ten  images  shown  in 
Fig.5 and the appropriate reference image. Note that the values 
of  the  normalized  input  image  i.e.   ̂     )  may  be  negative 
(because  the  mean  has  been  subtracted).  As  a  result  auto-
correlation  coefficients  may  also  have  negative  values.  Thus, 
negative values of stem noise energy computed from equation 
(12)  are  not  unexpected.  As  it  is  evident  from  Fig.6,  the 
images  with  more  white  noise  degradation  show  a  more 
dispersed  stem  noise  energy  histogram  and  conversely  the 
images  with  more  blurriness  distortion  show  a  less  dispersed 
stem  noise  energy  histogram.  It  is  noteworthy  that  histogram 
of the original image  is exactly in the  middle. Fig.6 suggests 
that  the  first  and  second  order  statistics  of  the  stem  noise 
energy  over  blocks  could  be 
suitable  quality-aware 
parameters,  specifically  for  white  noise  and  blurriness  image 
distortions.                                                                                                        
     In contrast to white noise and blurriness image distortions –
that  alter  the  stem  noise  energy  histogram–  one  of  the 
characteristic attributes of the blockiness distortion includes 
peaks that are expressed as specific energy levels, originating 
from  repetition  of  degraded  blocks  across  the  image.  This 
blockiness  distortion  is  a  very  common  degradation  resulting 
from  the  JPEG  compression  algorithm.  As  JPEG  is  a  block-
based  coding  scheme,  it  may  lead  to  discontinuities  at  the 
block boundaries. Fig.7 illustrates noise energy histogram for 
a reference image (the same as reference image used in Fig.5) 
and  its  five  blockiness  degraded  versions  with  varying 
severity.  Images  with  more  blockiness  distortion  and  coarser 
blocks  reveal  themselves  through  more  frequent  and  higher 
peaks.  In  accord  with  these  findings,  it  will  be  seen  later  –in 
the experimental results section– that the mean and variance of 
stem noise energy do not form a suitable quality indicator for 
blockiness 
illustrate 
differentiating ability of computed noise energy for blockiness  

image  distortion. 

In  order 

to 

Fig.  7  Normalized  histograms  of  stem  noise  energy  computed  for  an  image 
with blockiness distortion (a) With fine blocks (b) with coarse blocks 

distortion, a multi-level thresholding is employed. Fig.8 shows 
an  image  resulted  from  applying  a  multi–level  thresholding 
operation  to  the  noise  energy  value  computed  from  equation 
(12). Note that in this example the levels of thresholding were 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
number  of  degraded  blocks  and  artificial  patterns  produce  
intermediate  values.  The  importance  of  Fig.9  lies  in  the  fact 
that  it  reveals  the  relationship  between  the  most  important 
signal-dependent  and  signal-independent  image  distortions  – 
by capturing their characteristics with an independent, random 
component i.e. “Stem Noise” under a particular AR model. 
     Generally,  in  white  noise  distortion,  images  with  greater 
degradations get greater values of mean and variance of noise 
energy  and  in  the  blurriness  subset,  increasingly  blurred 
images  show  smaller  values  for  mean  and  variance  of  noise 
energy. This is a result of the input of using the AR model; i.e. 
stem noise, is assumed a priori to be white noise. This kind of 
behavior is discussed in the next section with regard to human 
subjective ratings, suggesting that humans share the same kind 
of  priors.  In  order 
the  differentiation 
capabilities  of  noise  energy  characteristics,  2D-histograms  of 
blurriness,  blockiness  and  white  noise  distortions    are  shown 
in Fig.10. In Fig.10 the x and y axes are the mean and variance 
of  stem  noise  energy  respectively  and  z  axis  represents  the 
number of degraded images.  

to  demonstrate 

     In  the  experimental  results  section,  Cardinal  image 
distortions  such  as  white  noise,  blurriness,  blockiness, 
JPEG2000  and  fast  fading  are  considered.  In  addition,  the 
experiments  were  performed  using  a  wide  range  of  well-
known  image  databases,  including  the  ones  that  contain 
multiple  distorted  images,  with  several  distortions  in  play 
simultaneously. 

III.  Experimental Results 

Under  the  AR  model  described  in  the  previous  section, 
different  image  distortions  shift  the  noise  energy  levels  in  a 
distinct fashion. This suggests that statistical characteristics of 
stem  noise  energy  could  be  considered  as  the  basis  of  a 
quantitative framework for image distortions.  In the appendix 
the  associated  footprint  of  image  distortions  is  provided  for 
several  image  databases  i.e.  LIVEMD[24],  MDID2013[25], 
TID2008[26],TID2013[27], MDID[28], QACS[29], CSIQ[30]                                                                                       
andVDID2014[31].

(a)                                           (b) 
Fig.8 (a) A distorted image from JPEG subset of LIVE database [23]. (b) An 
image resulted from applying a simple thresholding for noise energy value 
(computed from (12)) for image (a). 

optimized manually. As distorted image blocks own a definite 
range  of  energy  emerged  as  specific  peaks  in  the  histogram, 
they  could  be  segmented  making  use  of  such  a  thresholding 
operation.      

     Fig.9  shows  the  mean  and  variance  of  the  stem  noise 
energy  computed  for  all  the  494  distorted  images  in  three 
canonical  distortion  subsets  of  the  LIVE  image  database  i.e. 
white  noise,  blurriness  and  JPEG.  In  Fig.9,  each  point  is  an 
image  from  the  relevant  image  distortion  subset.  Blurriness 
simulates  a  loss  of  focus  e.g.  caused  by  a    narrow  depth  of 
field in cameras, blockiness due to JPEG coding is inseparable 
from  any  compression  scenario,  e.g.  for  image  storage  and 
white noise could result from imaging in low light conditions, 
where sensor noise supervenes. 
It  is  illustrated  that  blurriness,  JPEG  and  white  noise  image 
distortions  each  occupy  a  different  region  in  the  stem  noise 
energy  space.  In  fact,  there  is  a  passage  from  blurriness  to 
blockiness and then to  white  noise image distortion, in terms 
of  the  mean  and  variance  of  stem  noise  energy.  This  is 
compatible with image/video compression distortions, since as 
the  codec‟s  quantizer  step  size  increases,  the  image  initially 
becomes  progressively  blurred  and  then  becomes  blocky. 
Blurriness  alleviates  the  effect  of  high  frequencies  and  edges 
in the distorted image and white noise shows a contrary effect. 
While blurriness and white noise image distortions create low 
and  high  values  of  mean  and  variance  of  noise  energy 
respectively, blockiness distortion depending on the size and  

Fig.9 Scatter plot between average and variance of stem noise energy for distorted images in Gaussian blur, JPEG and white noise subsets of the LIVE [23] 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     In  order  to  predictive  validity  of  stem  noise  energy  in 
image  quality  measurements, 
the  Spearman  Rank-Order 
Correlation  Coefficient  (SROCC)  (defined  in  the  following) 
was calculated between the statistics of stem noise energy and 
human  DMOS  scores,  for  all  the  distorted  images  in  each 
distortion subset of the LIVE image database.  

For N pairs of data as

, SROCC is computed as:  

∑(     )(     )

√∑      ) √∑      )                (13) 

where     and       are ranks of      and      respectively,     
 and   are average ranks.  
Note that the characteristics of stem noise energy are not used 
in any training-based frameworks or linear mapping functions, 
calculating  prediction  precision  does  not  convey  any  special 
information,  so  RMSE  and  LCC  are  not  reported.  These 
parameters could be calculated for evaluating the performance 
of  an  image  quality  metric  when  using  training  strategy  for 
mapping quality-aware features to subjective scores.                     
     Nevertheless,  without  using  any  training  procedure  (or 
mapping approaches such as logistic functions, linear pooling 
etc.  which  are  generally  exploited  by  IQA  metrics)  the 
SROCC  values  show  a  substantial  correlation  with  DMOS 
scores  for  white  noise,  blurriness,  JPEG2000  and  fast-fading 
image  distortion  subsets.  Scatter  plots  between  the  mean  of 
absolute values of stem noise energy and their DMOS values 
for white noise and blurriness image distortions are shown in 
Fig.11. As Fig.11 illustrates, white noise and blurriness image 
distortions  displace   ̅    )(Mean  of  stem  noise  energy) 
computed  for  reference  images.  While  for  blockiness  image 
distortion,  such  a  displacement  and  also  the  correlation 
between  ̅    ) and DMOS values are not sufficient for quality 
measurement purposes, this is not the case in white noise and 
blurriness  distortions  in  which  there  is  a  tight  correlation 
between DMOS values and  ̅    ). As evident in the Gaussian 
blur  subset,  with  any  increase  in  the  mean  of  stem  noise 
energy, the subjective  quality increases. This is in contrast to 
white noise  image  distortion,  for  which  by  any  increase  
in    the  mean  of  stem  noise  energy,  the  subjective  quality 
decreases. 

    Fig.10  2D-histograms  of  blurriness,  blockines  and  white  noise  image 
distortions  in  LIVE  [23].  x  and  y  axes  are  the  average  and  variance  of 
computed  stem  noise  energy  respectively.  Z  axis  represents  the  number  of 
degraded images in distortion subsets. 

Herein, the performance of the proposed approach  for quality 
assessment purposes was tested and evaluated on LIVE Image 
Quality  Assessment  Database  [23],  with  regard  to  subjective 
quality  scores  assigned  to  each  image  by  human  users.  The 
LIVE  [23]  database  contains  29  reference  images,  each 
corrupted  by  several  levels  of  five  distortion  types:  Gaussian 
blur  (Blur),  JPEG  compression,  JP2K  compression,  Fast-
Fading  channel  distortions  (FF)  and  white  noise  (WN). 
JPEG2000 coding produces ringing near edges due to wavelet-
based  compression.  Fast  fading  images  in  LIVE  database  are 
actually  multi-distorted,  first  compressed  into  a  bitstream 
using a JPEG2000 codec, then passed through a Rayleigh fast 
fading  channel  to  simulate  packet  loss.  The  total  number  of 
images  are 
distorted 
accompanied by their corresponding human subjective scores, 
i.e. Difference Mean Opinion Score (DMOS).  

is  779  and  all  distorted 

images 

A.  Correlation with subjective scores 
     The predictive performance of models was evaluated by the 
Spearman  Rank-Order  Correlation  Coefficient  (SROCC),  the 
Pearson  Linear  Correlation  Coefficient  (LCC)  and  the  Root 
Mean  Squared  Error  (RMSE).  The  SROCC  measures 
prediction monotonicity, while the LCC and RMSE determine 
prediction accuracy.  

Fig.11 Scatter plot between average of absolute values of stem noise energy and DMOS values for white noise, Gaussian blur and reference images in the LIVE 
image database [23]. 

7 

(,)iixy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
(a) 

    (b)   

                                               (c)                                                                                                                 (d) 

Fig.12 (a), (b), (c) and (d) scatter plots between average of absolute values of stem noise energy and DMOS values for white noise, Gaussian blur, fast-fading, 

and JPEG2000 subsets of the LIVE image database [23]. 

Fig.12  reports  scatter  plots  between  DMOS  values  and  the 
mean  of  absolute  values  of  stem  noise  energy  computed  for 
white noise, Gaussian blur, fast-fading and JPEG2000 subsets 
of the LIVE image database.  
     Table 1 reports the SROCC values between statistics of AR 
space  of  the  pre-defined  AR  model  and  DMOS  values  for 
subsets of the LIVE [23] image database. This shows that stem 
noise  energy  outperforms  all  other  statistics  of  the  AR 
parameters  for  white  noise,  blurriness,  JPEG2000  and  fast 
fading  distortions.  For  JPEG  –  due  to  its  different  subjective 
appearances  depending  on  the  size  and  location  of  the 
degraded  blocks  –   ̅    )and        )
less  predictive 
validity.  
     The efficiency of the proposed approach is also  compared 
with other well-known methods in Table 2. 

have 

As NFEQM [5] is the basis of free-energy based approaches –
that e.g. NFERM [6] surpass image quality metrics, such as  
BLIINDS  [1],  BRISQUE  [2],  DIIVINE  [3]  and  C-DIIDINE 
[4] – it is included in our comparison as a benchmark of free-
energy based quality assessment methods. In Table 2, the best 
results  for  each  subset  are  highlighted  in  bold.  In  contrast  to 
NFEQM  [5]  results  –reported  for  white  noise  and  blurriness 
distortions  after  employing  a  four-parameter  logistic  function 
for mapping to the human subjective scores– for the proposed 
approach  the  raw  results  were  used.  Table  2  demonstrates 
supremacy of the stem noise energy. The highest correlation in 
white  noise  subset  belongs  to  the  stem  noise  approach  that 
reaches 0.9764. As the input of the AR model is white noise, 
high  correlations  with  human  scores  in  white  noise  subset  is 
particularly reassuring.  

White Noise  Gaussian Blur 

Table I 
SROCC values between statistics of AR space and DMOS values for subsets of the LIVE image database  
JPEG 
+0.7212 
+0.6494 
+0.5537 
+0.8394 
-0.0559 
-0.6170 
-0.6827 
-0.4780 
-0.5271 
-0.8667 
-0.3012 

Mean of AR Coeffs. 
Variance of AR Coeffs. 
Mean of Horizontal AR Coeffs. 
Variance of Horizontal AR Coeffs. 
Mean of Vertical AR Coeffs. 
Variance of Vertical AR Coeffs. 
Mean of Main-Diagonal AR Coeffs. 
Variance of Main-Diagonal AR Coeffs. 
Mean of Secondary-Diagonal AR Coeffs. 
Variance of Secondary-Diagonal AR Coeffs. 
 ̅    )(Mean of Stem Noise Energy) 

Fast-Fading 
-0.3871 
+0.5492 
-0.3664 
-0.1750 
+0.0797 
+0.2438 
-0.7411 
+0.4667 
-0.0618 
+0.2794 
-0.7623 

JPEG2000 
-0.1014 
+0.2420 
+0.0793 
+0.2729 
-0.1347 
-0.2053 
-0.3805 
+0.2461 
-0.1030 
-0.1032 
-0.7077 

+0.4346 
+0.1179 
+0.1227 
-0.3383 
+0.3985 
+0.8417 
-0.9158 
-0.8867 
+0.5527 
-0.7294 
+0.9764 

-0.2008 
-0.7978 
-0.2256 
+0.0332 
+0.1704 
+0.3799 
-0.7206 
+0.3754 
+0.1402 
+0.5613 
-0.8670 

      )

 (Variance of Stem Noise Energy) 

 ̅    )* 
* 
      )

+0.9623 

+0.9691 

+0.9667 

-0.8146 

-0.8638 

-0.9039 

-0.7023 

-0.6767 

-0.7792 

-0.7416 

-0.7651 

-0.7853 

-0.4149 

-0.1498 

-0.5824 

*With full R1 coefficient  

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Table II 
SROCC values between mean of stem noise energy and DMOS values for WN and Gaussian blur subsets of the LIVE image database, in comparison with 
other methods  

NFEQM  

Q Metric 

JNBM  

SINE  
 ̅    )(Mean of  Stem Noise Energy) 

      )

* (Variance of Stem Noise Energy) 

White Noise 

Gaussian Blur 

0.968 

0.879 

- 

0.957 

0.9764 

0.9667 

0.886 

0.787 

0.549 

- 

0.8670 

0.9039 

In  other  words,  poor  results  for  white  noise  image  distortion 
indicates  deficiency  in  model  performance.  Unlike  NFEQM 
[5], NFERM [5] and all other AR-based image quality metrics 
which  estimate  AR  parameters  via  least  square,  the  current 
approach  utilizes  Yule-Walker  equations,  in  which  the  auto-
is  embedded.  The  auto-correlation 
correlation  function 
function  reflects  characteristics  of  different  image  distortions 
and  contributes  to  the  efficiency  of  the  stem  noise  energy 
estimation. 

results  section,  we  have  seen  that  there  is  a  substantive 
correlation  between  characteristics of  the stem  noise energy 
and  subjective  human  scores  of  image  quality  –for  specific 
types  of  image  distortions.  This  means  that  assessing  the 
second  order  statistics  under  a  model  of  how  images  are 
generated  may  not  only  be  an  important  aspect  of  image 
reconstruction  but  may  recapitulate  the  optimal  processing 
shown in the human visual system. 

IV.  CONCLUSION 

     While  other  no-reference  metrics  are  predicted  on  some 
characteristics that are indirectly related to the amount of noise 
and distortion in degraded images, here the stem noise energy 
has  been  introduced  as  an  explicit  metric.  The  input  of  AR 
model  that  models  a  low  energy  version  of  the  input  image, 
has  been  called  “Stem  noise”.  In  the  current  approach,  the 
emphasis is on estimating stem noise energy in each block of 
distorted 
images.  Beside  NSS-based,  No-reference  IQA 
metrics  that  utilize  GGD,  Asymmetric  GGD  etc.  fitting  in 
spatial  or  transform  (DCT,WAVELET  etc.)  domain,  recently 
free-energy based methods have received attention. There are 
two  major  differences  between  the  proposed  approach  and  
previous  free-energy  based  methods.  The  first  is  while  state-
of-the  art,  free-energy  based  quality  assessment  methods  are 
based on the systems parameters, i.e. AR parameters; here the 
hyperparameters  describing 
random 
fluctuations (i.e., stem noise) have been used. It is noteworthy 
that  in  the  latter  case,  the  relevant  AR  model  might  not  be 
necessarily  optimal;  from  the  viewpoint  of  residual  error. 
While  other  approaches  generally  use  least  square  methods, 
this  paper  uses  the  Yule-Walker  equations.  Taking  the  latter 
strategy,  different  types  of  correlation  models  could  be 
incorporated in the modeling procedure. In the experimental  

the  amplitude  of 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

[1]  M.  Saad,  A.  C.  Bovik,  C.  Charrier,  “Blind  image  quality  assessment:  a 
natural  scene  statistics  approach  in  the  DCT  domain”,  IEEE  Trans.  Image 
Process,21, pp. 3339–3352, 2012  

[2]  A.  Mittal,  A.  K.  Moorthy,  A.  C.  Bovik,  “No-reference  image  quality 
assessment in the spatial domain”, IEEE Trans. Image Process., 1, pp. 4695–
4708, 2012 

[18] M.J. Wainwright, O. Schwartz, E.P. Simoncelli, “Natural image statistics 
and divisive normalization: modeling nonlinearities and adaptation in cortical 
neurons”, in Rao, R., Olshausen, B., Lewicki, M. (Eds.): „Statistical theories 
of the brain‟ (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA), pp. 203–222, 2002 

[19]  Z.  Wang,  A.C.  Bovik,  Sheikh  et  al.,  “Image  quality  assessment:  from 
error measurement to structural similarity”, IEEE Signal Process. Lett.,13, pp. 
600–661, 2004 

[3]  A.  K.  Moorthy,  A.  C.  Bovik,”Blind  image  quality  assessment:  from 
natural scene statistics to perceptual quality”, IEEE Trans. Image Process, 20, 
pp.3350– 3364, 2011 

[20] H.R. Sheikh, A.C. Bovik, “Image information and visual quality”, IEEE 
Trans. Image Process.,15, pp. 430–444, 2006 

[4]  Yi  Zhang,  Anush  K.  Moorthy,  Damon  M.  chandler,  Alan  C.  Bovik,”C-
DIIVINE: No-reference image   quality assessment based on local magnitude 
and  phase  statistics  of  natural  scenes”,  signal  processing: 
image 
communication, 29, pp. 725-747, 2014 

[5] G. Zhai, X. Wu, X. Yang, W. Lin, and W. Zhang, “A psychovisual quality 
metric in free-energy principle”,  IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 21, no. 1, 
pp. 41-52, Jan. 2012. 

[6]  Ke.  Gu,  G.  Zhai,  X.  Yang.,  W.Zhang.,  “Using  Free  Energy  Principle  for 
Blind Image Quality Assessment”, IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , 2015 

[7]  Ke.  Gu,  G.  Zhai,  W.  Lin,  X.  Yang.,  W.Zhang.,  “  No-Reference  Image 
Sharpness  Assessment 
IEEE 
Transactionson Image Processing, 2015 

in  Autoregressive  Parameter  Space”, 

[21]  K.  Seshadrinathan,  A.C.  Bovik,  “Unifying  analysis  of  full  reference 
image quality assessment”, 15th IEEE Int. Conf. on Image Processing (ICIP), 
San Diego, USA, pp. 1200–1203, 2008 

[22] A. Papoulis, U. Pillai, “Probability, random variables and stochastic 
processes”, (McGraw-Hill, London, 4th edn., 2002) 

[23]  H.R.  Sheikh,  Z.  Wang,  L.  Cormack  et  al.,  “LIVE  image  quality 
assessment database release 2”,  
Available at http://live.ece.utexas.edu/research/quality 

[24] D. Jayaraman, A. Mittal, A. K. Moorthy, and A. C. Bovik, “Objective 
quality assessment of multiply distorted images”, Proc. IEEE Asilomar 
Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, pp. 1693-1697, Nov. 
2012. 

[8] K. Gu, G. Zhai, X. Yang., W.Zhang. “Hybrid no-reference quality metric 
for singly and multiply distorted images”, IEEE Transactions on broadcasting, 
2014 

[25] K. Gu, G. Zhai, X. Yang., W.Zhang, “Hybrid no-reference quality metric 
for singly and multiply distorted images”, IEEE Transactions on broadcasting, 
2014 

[9] G.E. Hinton, R.S. Zemel, “Autoencoders, minimum description length and 
Helmholtz  free  energy”,  Proceedings  of  the  6th  International  Conference  on 
Neural  Information  Processing  Systems.  Morgan  Kaufmann  Publishers  Inc., 
Denver, Colorado, pp. 3-10, 1993 

[10]  D.J.  MacKay,  “Free-energy  minimization  algorithm  for  decoding  and 
cryptoanalysis,” Electronics Letters 31, pp. 445-447, 1995 

[11]  R.M.  Neal,  G.E.  Hinton,  “A  view  of  the  EM  algorithm  that  justifies 
incremental  sparse  and  other  variants”,  Jordan,  M.  (Ed.),  Learning  in 
Graphical Models. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht,  pp. 355-368, 1998 

[12] J.Winn, C.M. Bishop, “Variational message passing”, Journal of Machine 
Learning Research 6, pp. 661-694, 2005 

[13] K. Friston, J. Kilner, L. Harrison, “A free energy principle for the brain”, 
Journal of physiology, Paris, 100, pp. 70-87, 2006 

[14]  L.Dill,  L.MacCallum,  “The  Protein-Folding  Problem,  50  Years  On”, 
Science., 338(6110), pp. 1042-1046, 2012 

[15] A. A. Nakhaei, M. S. Helfroush, H. Danyali, M. Ghanbari, “Subjectively 
correlated  estimation  of  noise  due  to  blurriness  distortion  based  on  auto-
regressive model using the Yule–Walker equations”, IET Image Process., vol. 
12, no. 10, pp. 1788-1796, 2018. 

[16]  L.  Itti,  P.  Baldi,  “Bayesian  Surprise  Attracts  Human  Attention”,  Vision 
Res. 49, pp.1295-1306, 2009 

[17] M. Carandini, D.J. Heeger, J.A. Movshon, “Linearity and normalization 
in  simple  cells  of  the  macaque  primary  visual  cortex”,  J.  Neurosci.,  17,  pp. 
8621–8644, 1997 

[26] N. Ponomarenko, V. Lukin, A. Zelensky et al., “TID2008-A database for 
evaluation of full-reference visual quality assessment metrics”, Adv. Modern 
Radio Electron., 10, pp. 30–45, 2009 

[27]  N,  Ponomarenko,  O.  Ieremeiev,  V.  Lukin,  L.  Jin,  et  al.,  “A  new  color 
image  database  TID2013:  innovations  and  results”,  Advanced  Concepts  for 
Intelligent  Vision  Systems,  Springer  International  Publishing,  pp.  402-413, 
2013 

[28] W. Sun, F. Zhou, Q. Liao, “MDID: a multiply distorted image database 
for image quality assessment”, Pattern Recognit. 61C ,pp. 153-168, 2017 

[29]  S.  Wang  et  al.,  “Subjective  and  objective  quality  assessment  of 
compressed screen content images”, IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics Circuits 
Syst., vol. 6, no. 4, Dec.,  pp. 532–543, 2016 

[30]  E.  C.  Larson,  D.  M.  Chandler,  “Most  Apparent  Distortion:  Full-
Reference  Image  Quality  Assessment  and  the  Role  of  Strategy”,  Journal  of 
Electronic Imaging, 19 (1), March 2010. 

[31]  k.Gu,  M.  Liu,  G.  Zhai,  X.  Yang,  and  W.  Zhang,  “Quality  assessment 
considering  viewing  distance  and  image  resolution”  ,  IEEE  Trans.  Broad-
casting, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 520-531, Sept. 2015. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 

     For generality, let         be the multiplier of  ̂    . In the case of a third-order model, squaring both 

sides of AR model in equation (5) and then taking the expectation, yields: 

  Description of databases 

- LIVEMD (LIVE Multiply Distorted Image Quality Database) 

This database contains images and results from a subjective study. The study  was conducted in two parts. Part 1 
deals with blur followed by JPEG, and part 2 with blur followed by noise. Each part includes 225 distorted images. 
The database consists of 15 reference images. In the relevant diagram, highest values of the stem noise energy are 
for  images  in  the  blurnoise  subset  which  are  contaminated  with  more  white  noise.  In  this  subset,  the  images  in 
which  the  dominant  distortion  is  the  blurriness,  get  lowest  values  of  the  stem  noise  energy.  Likewise,  in  the 
blurjpeg subset, images in  which  the dominant distortion  is blockiness due  to the JPEG compression,  get  middle 
values of the stem noise energy. In this subset, images in which the dominant distortion is the blurriness, get lowest 
values of the stem noise energy.  

-TID2008 (Tampere Image Database 2008) 

The  TID2008  contains  25  reference  images  and  1700  distorted  images  (25  reference  images  x  17  types  of 
distortions x 4 levels of distortions).  All images are saved in database in Bitmap format without any compression. 
The MOS was obtained from the results of 838 experiments carried out by observers from three countries: Finland, 
Italy,  and  Ukraine  (251  experiments  have  been  carried  out  in  Finland,  150  in  Italy,  and  437  in  Ukraine).  In  the 
relevant  diagram;  white  noise,  blockiness  and  blurriness  image  distortions  along  with  the  reference  images  have 
been considered. It is evident that the reference images and blockiness distortion occupy almost a common region, 
while white noise and blurriness distortions lie at the both ends of the diagram.  

11 

ˆˆˆˆˆˆ222222220123(0)(0)(0)(0)0112(1)(1)ˆˆˆˆ[][1][2][3]ˆˆˆˆ2[][1][1][2]xxxxxxRRRRRRaExnaExnaExnaExnaaExnxnaaExnxnˆˆˆˆ23(1)0213(2)(2)22030(3)ˆˆ[2][3]ˆˆˆˆ2[][2][1][3]ˆˆ2[][3][]xxxxRRRRaaExnxnaaExnxnaaExnxnaaExnxnbEin321222ˆˆˆˆ(1)(2)030000(0)2(1)2(2)2(3)([])xmxmmxmmxmmmRaRaaRaaRaabEin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-CSIQ (Computational and Subjective Image Quality) 

The database consists of 30 original images, each distorted using one of six types of distortions, each at four to five 
different  levels  of  distortion.  The  CSIQ  images  were  subjectively  rated  based  on  a  linear  displacement  of  the 
images across four calibrated LCD monitors placed side-by-side with equal viewing distance to the observer. The 
database contains 5000 subjective ratings from 35 different observers, and the ratings are reported in the form of 
DMOS.  In  the  relevant  diagram,  just  white  noise,  blurriness  and  blockiness  image  distortions  along  with  the 
reference images  have been considered. As  it is evident,  the reference images and images contaminated  with the 
blockiness distortion occupy almost the same region in the stem noise space. The images degraded with white noise 
get higher values of the stem noise energy and images degraded with blurriness get lower values of the stem noise 
energy. 

-MDID (Multiply Distorted Image Database) 

MDID  is  an  image  database  especially  designed  for  evaluating  the  performance  of  image  quality  assessment 
algorithms  on  multiply  distorted  images.  It  contains  20  reference  images  and  1600  distorted  images.  Five 
distortions are introduced to obtain the distortion images, including: 
Gaussian  Noise,  Gaussian  Blur,  Contrast  Change,  JPEG  and  JPEG2000.  Each  distorted  image  is  derived  from 
degrading  the  reference  image  with  random  types  and  random  levels  of  distortions.  Images  with  more  Gaussian 
noise  and  more  Gaussian  blurr,  occupy  the  highest  and  lowest  stem  noise  energy  at  the  two  tails  of  the  diagram 
respectively. 

-TID2013(Tampere Image Database 2013) 

The  TID2008  contains  25  reference  images  and  3000  distorted  images  (25  reference  images  x  24  types  of 
distortions x 5 levels of distortions). All images are saved in database in Bitmap format without any compression. 
The MOS was obtained from the results of 971 experiments carried out by observers from five countries: Finland, 
France, Italy, Ukraine and USA (116 experiments have been carried out in Finland, 72 in France, 80 in Italy, 602 in 
Ukraine, and 101 in USA). Again the reference images lie at the middle region of the diagram. Images with more 
white noise form one tail of the diagram with higher values of stem noise energy and images with more blurriness 
form another tail of the diagram with lower values of the stem noise energy.  

                 -MDID2013 (Multiply Distorted Image Database) 

Images  in  MDID2013  come  from  12  pristine  images.  They  span  a  wide  range  of  scenes,  colors,  illumination 
levels  and  foreground/background  configurations.  In  a  practical  image  communication  system,  images  usually 
undergo  the  stages  of  acquisition,  compression  and  transmission,  are  presumably  distorted  with  the  artifacts  of 
Gaussian  blurring,  JPEG  compression  and  white  noise  injection  in  order.  The  overall  324  testing  images  are 
generated  by  successively  corrupting  each  original  image  with  blur,  JPEG  compression  and  noise.  In  this 
database,  images  contaminated  with  more  white  noise  get  higher  values  of  stem  noise  energy  and  images 
contaminated with more blurriness distortion get lower stem noise energy values. Images with   JPEG 
compression get middle values. 

-VDID2014 (Viewing Distance-changed Image Database) 

This  database  consists  of  160  images  generated  from  eight  pristine  versions  of  two  typical  aspect  ratios 
(height/width), and 320 differential MOS (DMOS) values collected from 20 inexperienced observers at two typical 
viewing distances, i.e. four and six times of the image height in terms of the ratio of the two physical distances. A 
total number of 160 images were produced by adding four commonly encountered distortion types: Gaussian blur, 
white noise, and JPEG2000 and JPEG compressions.  While Gaussian blur and  white noise  distortions lie at both 
ends of the diagram with lower and higher values respectively, JPEG2000 and JPEG distortions lie at the middle of 
the diagram.  

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Footprints of Image Distortions 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
