Prepared for submission to JINST

INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE INSTRUMENTATION FOR COLLIDING BEAM PHYSICS
24-28 FEBRUARY 2020
BUDKER INSTITUTE OF NUCLEAR PHYSICS, NOVOSIBIRSK, RUSSIA

Preliminary results from the cosmic data taking of the

BESIII cylindrical GEM detectors

R. Farinelli on behalf of the BESIII CGEM-IT working group

INFN, Sezione di Ferrara, via G. Saragat 1, 44122 Ferrara, Italy

E-mail: rfarinelli@fe.infn.it

Abstract: BESIII is a multipurpose spectrometer optimized for physics in the tau-charm energy
region. Both detector and accelerator are undergoing an upgrade program, that will allow BESIII to
run until 2029. A major upgrade is the replacement of the inner drift chamber with a new detector
based on Cylindrical Gas Electron Multipliers to improve both the secondary vertex reconstruction
and the radiation tolerance. The CGEM-IT will be composed of three coaxial layers of cylindrical
triple GEMs, operating in an Ar + iC4H10 (90:10) gas mixture with ﬁeld and gain optimized to
maximize the spatial resolution. The new detector is readout with innovative TIGER electronics
produced in 110 nm CMOS technology. The front end is a custom designed 64 channel ASIC
featuring a fully digital output and operated in trigger-less mode. It can provide analog charge and
time measurements with a TDC time resolution better than 100 ps, that will allow to operate in µTPC
mode. With planar prototypes, we measured an unprecedented spatial resolution below 150 µm in
a 1 Tesla magnetic ﬁeld in a wide range of incident angles of the incoming particle. Before the
installation inside BESIII, foreseen in 2021, a long standalone data taking is ongoing at the Institute
of High Energy Physics in Beijing; currently, the ﬁrst two cylindrical chambers are available for the
test, and are used to complete the integration between the detector and the electronics and to assess
the required performance. In this proceeding a description of the CGEM-IT project, the TIGER
features and performance, and the results of the analysis of ﬁrst cosmic ray data taking will be
presented. Focus will be given on the strip analysis, from which it is possible to measure the basic
properties of the detector, and the cluster analysis, where a comparison with the results with planar
prototypes will be discussed. The ﬁrst preliminary results on eﬃciency and spatial resolution will
be also presented.

Keywords: MPGD, triple-GEM, CGEM

ArXiv ePrint: XXX

0
2
0
2

r
p
A
7
2

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
8
1
6
2
1
.
4
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents

1

Introduction

2 The Cylindrical GEM Inner Tracker

2.1 Signal readout
2.2 CGEMBOSS
2.3 Signal reconstruction

3 Settings and setup conﬁgurations

4 Analysis method

5 Performance measurement

6 Conclusions

1

1
2
3
3

4

4

5

6

1

Introduction

The BEijing Spectrometer (BESIII, [1]) is an apparatus composed of several sub-detectors that
measures the properties of the particles in the energy range from 2 to 4.6 GeV. The lepton beams
are generated by the Beijing Electron Positron Collider II (BEPCII) and their collision is operated
at a luminosity of 1033 cm−2s−1. At present, the momentum of charged particles is measured by
the Main Drift Chamber (MDC) built around the beryllium beam pipe. Outside the MDC, the
time-of-ﬂight system identiﬁes the particle type and the Electro-Magnetic Calorimeter their energy.
The outermost detector is the MUon Counter built in the yoke of the 1 T superconducting magnet.
In 2019, an upgrade of the BEPCII machine and some sub-detectors of BESIII has started. The
beam energy is boosted to explore the region above the Λc threshold and a top-up injection mode is
used to increase the luminosity. From the BESIII side, the TOF is upgraded with a new technology
of Multi Resistive Plate Chamber and the Inner Drift Chamber needs a replacement due to aging
eﬀect. The Cylindrical Gas Electron Multiplier (CGEM) is a suitable technology to upgrade the
BESIII Inner Tracker (IT).

2 The Cylindrical GEM Inner Tracker

The CGEM-IT composed up by three layers of Cylindrical GEM. Each one provides a three
dimensional reconstruction of the particle position and thanks to its shape it can cover the 93% solid
angle around the beam pipe. The GEM technology [2] is a Micro Pattern Gas Detector widely used
in high energy physics to detect the primary ionization of the interacting charged particles. The
ampliﬁcation of the signal is given by the GEM foils: a 50 µm thick kapton foil with copper faces

– 1 –

Figure 1: On the left a representation of a triple GEM detector. The blue foils are cathode and
anode, while the green ones are the three ampliﬁcation stages. The orange lines represent the path
of the electrons. The applied electric ﬁeld and the distance between each electrodes are shown.
On the right a scheme of the setup with the two CGEM layers (blue circles) and the scintillating
bars (light blue boxes). The pink line is the cosmic ray, the four points are the hits on the CGEMs:
the three green dots are used for the track reconstruction and the red for the characterization of the
detector.

and bi-conical holes. An intense electric ﬁeld between the GEM faces ampliﬁes the number of
electrons entering the holes. Several stages of ampliﬁcation guarantee an high gain of the detector
with a low discharge probability [3]. The full geometry of a single cylindrical layer is given by
a cathode, three GEM foils and the readout plane, as shown in Fig. 1, left. Two electrodes are
separated by a gap of 2 mm but the cathode by 5 mm. The mechanical structure is very light and
the full interaction length of each layer is below 0.5 % of X0.

2.1 Signal readout

The readout plane is segmented by longitudinal (X) and stereo (V) strips. The pitch is 660 µm and
the angle between the strips varies layer by layer. The length of the strips is ﬁxed for the longitudinal
ones, while the stereo varies from few millimeter up a tens of centimeters. A signal of about 100 fC
per m.i.p. is collected on the strips and the TIGER (Torino Integrated Gem Electronics for Readout)
electronics [4] is used to measure the time and the collected charge. Two ASICs are installed on a
Front-End Board (FEB) to read the signal from 128 strips. The chip has two separate branches to
extract time and charge information. It is possible to operate with thresholds on both branches to
optimize the readout performance. The thresholds depend on the strips capacitance. The charge can
be measured with two methods: Sample and Hold (S/H) and Time-Over-Threshold (ToT). The S/H
provides a linear measurement of the signal amplitude in a dynamic range from 1 to 40-50 fC per
channel; the ToT converts the time spent by the signal over the threshold into charge information.
The chip has been characterized: calibration curves with external test pulse are deﬁned for the
S/H and ToT modes, the baselines of each channel is equalized. The time-walk eﬀects have been
evaluated as a function of the signal amplitude and the channel threshold. Every signal crossing
the threshold on both branches is digitized and transmitted to the oﬀ detector electronics. Once

– 2 –

Figure 2: Readout chain from the CGEM-IT to the BESIII DAQ system. The on detector electronics
are the chips connected to the CGEM anode plane and the patch cards. The oﬀ detector electronics
manages the input/output of the TIGER through the GEMROC and the data concentrator and it is
connected the the power supply, the slow control and the DAQ.

the trigger is sent to the readout chain, the data measured by each chip are collected. The GEM
Read Out Card (GEMROC) manages the low voltage of the FEB, the chip conﬁguration and the
data collection. The ﬁnal design is summarized in Fig. 2, it will have 80 FEB, 20 GEMROC and
two data concentrator cards to send the whole CGEM-IT outputs to the BESIII DAQ system.

2.2 CGEMBOSS

The reconstruction and the analysis of the data is implemented in the BESIII Oﬄine Software
System (BOSS, [5]). This environment takes care of the geometry description of the detector, the
simulation and the reconstruction of real data. Within the BOSS environment, the measurements
from the CGEM-IT are used in the global track ﬁnder algorithms and in the track ﬁtting procedure
to measure the particle path. The results shown in this proceeding use a preliminary version of the
calibration and alignment.

2.3 Signal reconstruction

Contiguous ﬁring strips are clusterized and their charge and time information are used to characterize
the signal. The digitized signal of each strip is labelled as hit. The charge of all the strips of the
cluster is proportional to the deposited energy. The position is reconstructed with two methods: the
Charge Centroid (CC) and the micro-Time Projection Chamber (µTPC, [6]). The ﬁrst averages the
position of each strip of the cluster by weighting it by its charge while the second associates to each
strip a bi-dimensional point and it uses a linear ﬁt on the points to extrapolate the particle position.
The clusterization is performed on longitudinal and stereo strips. The combination of the two gives
a bi-dimensional reconstruction.

– 3 –

Figure 3: Noise level of the strips for the outer-most layer. On the left the longitudinal strips are
reported and on the right the stereo ones. The noise depends mainly on the strip length.

3 Settings and setup conﬁgurations

Two of the three CGEM layers have been installed together in Beijing, at the Institute of High
Energy Physics (IHEP) experimental test area. The cylinders have an inner radius of 76.9 mm and
121.4 mm, while their length is 532 mm and 690 mm in the active area. The pitch size of the strips
is 660 µm, therefore the total number of channel instrumented at present is about ﬁve thousands.
The gas mixture used inside the CGEM is Ar + iC4H10 (90:10) to provide about 55 electrons from
ionization per m.i.p. in 5 mm. The total high voltage on the three GEM electrodes is 830 V that
corresponds to 12’000 detector gain, while the electric ﬁelds between the electrodes are set to
1.5/3/3/5 kV/cm1. Once the full readout chain is connected to the detectors, a threshold scan is
performed to measure the noise level on each channel. On-chip test pulse is used to measure the
width of the noise distribution and a diﬀerent level of noise as a function of the strip length is
measured. In detail, as shown in Fig. 3, the longitudinal strips with same length have a noise of
about 1 fC but in stereo strips it varies from 0.2 to 1 fC. The threshold level applied to the channel is
set in order to have the same noise rate on all the channels around 8 kHz. Cosmic interacting with
both CGEM layer are selected by the GEMROC modules trigger-matching algorithm and used in
the study of the performance.

4 Analysis method

A cosmic ray data taking is ongoing at IHEP to integrate the detector with the electronics, to
develop the software algorithms needed in the reconstruction of the events and to characterize the
performance of the IT. The cosmic ray interacting with the setup generates a signal on both halves
of the cylinders: this generates at least four points, two per CGEM layer. The readout planes are
divided in two halves, top and bottom. Three points are used to track while the fourth is tested. A
sketch of the setup is shown in Fig. 1. right. The residual distribution of the diﬀerence between
the expected position from the trackers and the measured one from the CGEM part under test is
measured. Only Charge Centroid (CC) is used for the following results. This study is performed

1electric ﬁelds in the gaps between the electrodes from the cathode to the anode.

– 4 –

Figure 4: On the left the charge distribution of the bi-dimensional clusters is shown. A mean value
of 110 fC is reported. On the center and right the residual distribution on the XY and Z planes
after the alignment procedures and the χ2 cut are shown. A Gaussian ﬁt is performed on the core
distribution and a sigma of about 350 µm is reported.

for all the four parts of the CGEM-IT with a permutation of test and trackers planes. The residual
distribution strictly depends on the trackers, on the pattern recognition algorithms and of course
on the detector itself. At present, a cut on the trackers ﬁt χ2 permits to distinguish the real signal
events from the noise event wrongly selected. This technique reduces the statistics of the data but
it allows easily to reject events where the cluster selection ineﬃciency impacts on the measurement
of the performance, i.e. combinatorial noise. Once the χ2 cut is selected, a rough alignment is
performed with a shift in the Z coordinate along the cylinder axis and a rotation around the cylinder
axis. This allows to measure a residual distribution of the XY and Z coordinates centered in zero.

5 Performance measurement

The analysis is performed for each one of the four parts. The clusters of strips within ﬁve sigma in
the residual distribution are identiﬁed as signal then cluster charge, size, eﬃciency and resolution
are evaluated. An average charge of 110 fC has been measured for a bi-dimensional cluster, in
agreement with the HV setting, as shown in the left part of Fig. 4. The eﬃciency is evaluated as the
ratio between the number of clusters within ﬁve sigma of the residual distribution and the number of
good tracks. A value around 90 % is measured for bi-dimensional clusters. This result is aﬀected by
the present status of the setup and the reconstruction: the readout chain and the pattern recognition
bias this results to a lower value. The sigma of the residual distribution is about 350 µm both on
the XY plane than in Z direction, as reported in Fig. 4 center and right. To understand this value it
is important to study the CC as a function of the incident angle. The CC is an algorithm with good
performance if the charge distribution is Gaussian, but for a large incident angle this is no more
possible and it degrades. As expected, the cluster charge and the cluster size increase with the angle
between the track and the normal to the cylinder surface. The results from the longitudinal strips
are reported: for events with a small cluster size, the sigma of the CC distribution is below 200 µm,
as shown in Fig. 5, as a function of the incident angle. When the track has a large incident angle,
the CC is no more eﬃcient and the µTPC algorithm has to be used. The µTPC is a more delicate
algorithms and it needs dedicated calibration studies. Up to now a preliminary reconstruction with
the µTPC has been performed and the results are in agreement with the CC. See Fig. 5 bottom right.

– 5 –

Figure 5: On the top the cluster charge (left) and the cluster size (right) of the X cluster as a function
of the incident angle is shown. On the bottom left the charge centroid spatial resolution as a function
of the incident angle. At 0◦ the best resolution is achieved. The incident angle is the angle between
the particle track and the surface normal vector in the XY plane. On the bottom right is reported the
correlation between the CC and the µTPC measurements is reported.

6 Conclusions

The integration between two layers of cylindrical GEM and a full readout chain based on TIGER
electronics is under study. The optimization of the setup and the software is ongoing. Preliminary
results of the CGEM-IT status are analyzed: the noise level on the channels is ﬂat for longitudinal
strips, while on the stereo ones it follows the strip length. The global eﬃciency is around 90% and
this reﬂects the present status of the hardware and the software tools. Improvements on both sides
will be implemented to optimize the performance of the detector. The cluster charge and size are
good and their dependency on the incident angle is reasonable. The spatial resolution up to now
has been evaluated with the CC only and the results copy the planar triple-GEM behavior [6]: for
orthogonal tracks the resolution is below 200 µm in the XY plane, while in the Z direction it is three
times better than the current BESIII-MDC resolution. It is needed to remove the contribution of
the tracking system and the multiple scattering of the mechanical structure to measure the spatial
resolution from the shown results. The reconstruction of the ﬁrst µTPC event with a CGEM and
a TIGER chip has been shown and an optimization of this algorithm will be implemented with
further upgrades of the calibrations.

– 6 –

Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the Italian Institute of Nuclear Physics (INFN).
The research leading to these results has been performed within the FEST Project, funded by the
European Commission in the call RISE-MSCA-H2020-2020.

References

[1] M. Ablikim et al., [BESIII Collaboration], Design and Construction of the BESIII Detector , Nucl.

Instr. and Meth. A 614, 345-399 (2010)

[2] F. Sauli, GEM: a new concept for electron ampliﬁcation in gas detector, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 386,

531 (1997).

[3] S. Bachamann et al., Charge ampliﬁcation and transfer processes in the gas electron multiplier, Nucl.

Instr. and Meth. A 438, 376-408 (1999).

[4] A. Rivetti, et al., TIGER: A front-end ASIC for timing and energy measurements with radiation

detectors, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 924, 181-186 (2019).

[5] W. Li, et al., THE OFFLINE SOFTWARE FOR THE BESIII EXPERIMENT, Proc. Int. Conf.

Comput. High Energy and Nucl. Phys. 225 (2006)

[6] M. Alexeev et al, Triple GEM performance in magnetic ﬁeld, 2019 JINST 14 P08018,

DOI:10.1088/1748-0221/14/08/P08018 (2019).

– 7 –

