A Novel Approach of using AR and Smart Surgical Glasses Supported 
Trauma Care 

Lal, Anurag 3 , Ming-Hsien Hu2 , Pei-Yuan Lee2 

, Wang, Min Liang1,3*

Department of Electrical Engineering, National Chung Cheng University, Taiwan(R.O.C)1 
Department of Orthopedics, Show Chwan Memorial Hospital, Changhua 50544, Taiwan2 
Taiwan Main Orthopaedic Biotechnology, Co. Ltd, Taichung City, 418, Taiwan3 

*Authors to whom correspondence should be addressed. 

Abstract 

-  BACKGROUND:  Augmented  reality  (AR)  is  gaining  popularity  in  varying  field  such  as  computer  gaming  and 
medical education fields. However, still  few of applications in real surgeries.  Orthopedic surgical applications are 
currently limited and underdeveloped.  

- METHODS: The clinic validation was prepared with the currently available AR equipment and software. A total of 
1 Vertebroplasty, 2 ORIF Pelvis fracture, 1 ORIF with PFN for Proximal Femoral Fracture, 1 CRIF for distal radius 
fracture  and 2 ORIF  for Tibia Fracture  cases  were performed  with  fluoroscopy combined  with  AR  smart surgical 
glasses system. 

- RESULTS: A total of 1 Vertebroplasty, 2 ORIF Pelvis fracture, 1 ORIF with PFN for Proximal Femoral Fracture, 1 
CRIF  for distal radius  fracture and 2  ORIF for Tibia Fracture cases are performed to evaluate  the benefits of  AR 
surgery. Among the AR surgeries, surgeons wear the smart surgical are lot reduce of eyes of turns to focus on the 
monitors. This paper shows the potential ability of augmented reality technology for trauma surgery.  

Introduction 

The  research  of  augmented  reality  technologies  allows  surgeons  to  see  the  data  visualization  into  diagnostic  and 
treatment procedures to improve workflow easily, safety, and cost and to enhance both surgical training and operation 
efficiency. However, the awareness of possibilities of augmented reality is generally low. This paper evaluates whether 
augmented reality can presently improve the results of orthopedic surgical procedures. This technology used an image 
for each eye to create a virtual image via the transplant glasses for the viewer. In recent years, AR technology has 
evolved at a rapid pace based on the graphics and computing technologies have evolved. The main purpose of this 
paper  is  to  see  the  utilization  of  AR  technology  into  real-time  orthopedic  surgeries  and  with  this  paper,  we  will 
demonstrate the usage of AR technology and how it affects the efficiency of the surgery reducing surgical time and 
radiation exposure [1]. 

As the growth of the technology is fast, Virtual Reality (VR), AR and Mixed Reality (MR) technologies have also 
taken into the medical industry. A lot of research papers on the VR, MR and AR technology discuss the conceptual 
usage of the technology into the real-time surgeries. New technologies, in particular virtual reality and robotics [2], 
will have a major impact on health care in the next decade [3]. This describes the application of virtual reality and 
robotics to surgical training and planning and the execution of procedures in theatre and discusses the near future of 
this new technology. Virtual reality and robotics are turning out to be a proven technology in recent years but they 
still have some limitations which restrict the usage of VR into the real cases during the surgical procedure in some of 
the areas of the surgery. Virtual reality in surgery and, more specifically, in surgical training, faces several challenges 
in the future. These challenges are building realistic models of the human body, creating interface tools to view, hear, 
touch, feel, and manipulate these human body models, and integrating virtual reality systems into medical education 
and treatment [4].   

1 

 
 
 
VR technology is to generate a completely virtual environment and while wear the glasses that can fall into the virtual 
3D  world.  The  technology  represents  an  emerging  technology  that  can  teach  surgeons  new  procedures  and  can 
determine their level of competence before they operate on patients. Laparoscopic surgery is an operative technique 
that requires the surgeon to observe the operation on a video-monitor and requires the acquisition of new skills. The 
surgical training is an apprenticeship requiring close supervision and 5 to 7 years of training. This paper plan to create 
two  important  tasks  in  a  VR  simulator  and  validate  their  use.  The  tasks  consist  of  laparoscopic  knot-tying  and 
laparoscopic suturing. They proposed a VR in combination with fuzzy logic can educate surgeons and determine when 
to perform surgical procedures on patients [5]. However, VR technology is not appropriate for real-time orthopedics 
because the surgeon cannot see through the patient and has the view of the virtual image. 

The  AR  is  another  technology  allows  physicians  to  incorporate  data  visualization  into  diagnostic  and  treatment 
procedures  to  improve  surgical  procedure  efficiency,  safety  and  to  improve  surgical  operation  and  training.  This 
reference paper [6] evaluates whether augmented reality can presently improve the results of surgical procedures. AR 
comprises special hardware and software, which is used to offer computer-processed imaging data to the surgeon in 
real-time  so  that  virtual  objects  from  the  medical  images  are  combined  with  computer-generated  images  [7].  AR 
technology has recently gained increasing interest not only in-game but also in surgical practice. AR has been applied 
to a wide spectrum of orthopedic procedures, such as tumor resection [8], fracture fixation [9], arthroscopy [10], and 
component's  alignment  in  total  joint  arthroplasty  [11].  The  use  of  computed  tomography  and  magnetic  resonance 
images during preoperative planning and intraoperative surgical navigation is vital to the success of the surgery and 
positive patient outcome. AR application in orthopedic and neurosurgery has the potential to revolutionize and change 
the way surgeons plan and perform surgical procedures in the future.  
A medical industrial device targeting the orthopedic trauma market, Foresee-X [12] helps surgeons by enhancing the 
synching of images from intra-operative fluoroscopy. This is especially beneficial for pelvic procedures, interlocking 
nail procedures, etc. The smart surgical glasses which is equipped with an augmented reality solution for visual aid, 
also has image enhancement functions such as the ability to zoom in and out. The  smart surgical  glasses can thus 
increase  efficiency  by  allowing  surgeons  to  concentrate  on  the  operational  field  instead  of  monitors.  It  reduces 
radiation exposure for surgeons by lowering the necessity of taking X-ray images during operation. It is thus a device 
that  contributes  to  the  safety  of  the  medical  staff  and  patients.  Another  advantage  is  that  it  improves  accuracy  by 
tracking the movements of surgical tools such as the puncture needle, trocar, etc. 
In the mixed reality technology, a new generation of technology has attracted much attention in recent years [13]. 
Technology advances have enabled technology to gain increased recognition in medical applications, especially in 
surgery. Technology will undoubtedly play a significant role in the future, assist surgeons in safely and effectively 
completing more risky operations. The promise of such technology in the surgical field is huge, as it allows the surgeon 
(i) to gain access to computer-based solutions in real-time during the procedure while remaining totally sterile, (ii) to 
gain access to 3-D holograms related to the patient imaging or the surgical technique, and (iii) to remotely interact 
with colleagues located outside the theatre [14].  The mixed reality is reportedly giving surgeons a superiority rivaling 
any fictional character, especially the surgeon with the superimposed 3D CT objects on the patient. The latest offering 
is expected to do big things in the spinal navigation [15]. They develop the AR and MR smart glasses and used to 
position particular entry points and they can reveal the necessary angles for the screws to be attached for spinal surgery. 
The MR technology claims that the smart surgical glasses mean that a surgeon will be able to see the exact position 
of the needle without ever taking their eyes off of the patient. As we can see there are a lot of evidence showing the 
emergence of VR, MR and AR technologies in recent years for the medical surgeries, so in order to facilitate more 
evidence, we used AR technology-based smart surgical glasses to perform surgical procedure over various cases to 
check the effectiveness of the AR technology in the trauma surgeries. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Using Foresee-
X 

ORIF for 
Pelvis 
Fracture 

Vertebroplasty  ORIF with 

ORIF for 
Tibia 
Fracture 

CRIF for 
Distal Radius 
Fracture 

PFN for 
Proximal 
Femoral 
Fracture 
1 
134 

95 

52 

2 
84/case 

82 

32/case 

360/case 

46 

440 

72/case 

2 
127 

85/case 

40/case 

1 
90 

65 

18 

No. Of Cases 
No. of 
Fluoroscopy 
Surgical time 
(mins) 
Turn of head 
(Surgeons with 
glasses) 
Turn of head 
(surgeon’s 
assistant 
without 
glasses) 

1 
45 

36 

6 

22 

3 

 
  
   
 
The flowchart 1 is the workflow of setup augmented reality for trauma surgery and table 1 shows the number of 
clinical cases used the smart surgical glasses for trauma cases with the details as shown in Figure 1 to Figure 3.  

Figure. 1: The system can easily to connect to Endoscopy, Ultrasound and C-arm machines to display the surgical 

images on smart surgical glasses. 

The Workflow and AR System  
This paper proposed a workflow to perform AR surgery by using smart surgical glasses. The AR system with a medical 
image processing box and a AR glasses for only one surgeon used during surgeries. First, set up in the OP room and 
connect to the C-arm machines (OEC-9900 Elite and Ziehm 8000 in our OP). Second, using HDMI to connect to the 
image processing box. The AR images are then generated and transmitted to the pair of smart glasses wireless. The 
displaying resolution of the images is 720p of each glass and the images displaying latency with 30ms under 33Mbs 
internet speed. The camera sensor is with Full HD resolution. Third, let the patient ready for surgery with anesthesia 
if needed.  Fourth, taking the images with fluoroscopy and see the images by AR glasses see Figure 2.  During the 
consideration,  the  smart  surgical  glasses  with  AR  technology  was  used  to  perform  the  surgeries  in  the  real-world 
surgeries in different hospitals over a variety of Trauma cases, e.g., shoulder, pelvic, endoscope integrated surgeries 
and ultrasound integrated surgeries.  

Figure 2: AR Technology smart surgical glasses usage for Real Surgery. 

4 

 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Difference in the focus of the surgeon during traditional surgery and surgery with AR smart surgical glasses. 
The surgeons are not required to focus on eternal monitors too frequently to check the fluoroscopy images. They only 
need an AR technology smart surgical glasses to see the image pop up in front of the surgical area. 

Experimental Results 
    An augmented reality system helps the surgeons during the surgical procedures with and/or without the processed 
images obtained from the CT/MRI input with the use of hardware and software. With the help of the Head Mounted 
Glasses, which we also call smart surgical glasses, the processed image is dynamically transferred to the smart surgical 
glasses  for  the  surgeons  to  view  with  no  need  to  shift  focus  on  the  external  monitors.  Refer  to  Figure  1.  for  the 
understanding  of  the  basic  concept  of  AR  technology. The  advantages of  AR include no  external  monitors 
which reduce the frequency of moving head of the surgeon from patient to monitors considerably.   
   Currently, the interpretation of the AR is under constraint as it depends entirely on the generation of 3D medical 
images which can be done using the 2D to 3D conversation software available in the market or self-made conversion 
software.  The better the quality of the 2D data, the better is the result for the 3D generation of the images. The 3D 
generation of the data enables the surgeons for the better understanding of the affected areas, to decide the approach 
of the surgery to be performed and helps in deciding the entry points for the tools during surgical procedures.   
   The data to be displayed or seen during the AR surgical procedure depends on the requirement for the surgery and 
as per the suggestion of the surgeons or the team which they deem required. The requirement of AR into the surgeries 
are  increasing  as  it  facilitates  the  visualizing  of  major  and  critical  structures  of  the  human  anatomy. An 
important aspect of AR is its ability to control the data to be displayed or projected on the smart surgical glasses. With 
the smart surgical glasses, the surgeons can not only see the images from the image processing box into the glasses 
but  also  can  see  the  real  environment  near  them.  As  the  technology  progresses,  the  control  of  the AR  smart 
surgical glasses also enhanced and can be controlled by voice command or hands-free devices which enhances the 
control of the surgeons on the smart surgical glasses without losing focus on the patients.   
   Almost all the surgeries, irrespective of the part of the human body, require constant monitoring during the entire 
surgical procedure especially the inevitable changes in the tissue during the operation. To keep a check, the DICOM 
images taken during the surgical procedure needs to be transferred instantly to the smart surgical glasses. To observe 
the  situation,  the  surgeons  prefer  to  take  the  C-arm scans  to  keep  track of the  changes  which expose not  only  the 
patient but also the surgeons and assisting staff for radiation exposures.   
As for the surgical procedures, the complexity of every surgery differs entirely from one another. With the help of 
AR smart surgical glasses, this problem can be overcome very easily as using AR technology enables the surgeons 
to have the slightest details of the surgery right in front of them. As technology is progressing into every field, AR 
technology makes it convenient for the medical and surgical field convenient too. With the AR technology, it reduces 
the  surgical time  significantly along  with the reduction in radiation exposure for both patient and surgeon and the 
team. With no need for external monitors, the surgeons can focus more on the operation of the patient. Statistically, 
the number of times the surgeons move their head during a traditional surgery and the surgery using the AR smart 
surgical glasses  reduces  considerably,  increasing the efficiency  of  the  surgeons. Taking  AR  technology  into 
consideration,  the  scope  of  the  usage of  the  technology  varies  into  a broader  spectrum  of  the  surgical procedures 

5 

 
 
adding to the integration of different apparatuses used in the trauma application like an endoscope, ultrasound [16], 
etc. With the possibility of using the AR technology over a broader application, AR smart surgical glasses proves to 
be an excellent assistance for the surgeons.   
 Fluoroscopic X-ray guidance is a cornerstone for percutaneous orthopedic surgical procedures [8]. However, two-
dimensional  observations  of  the  three-dimensional  anatomy  suffer  from  the  effects  of  projective  simplification. 
Consequently, many X-ray images from various orientations need to be acquired for the surgeon to accurately assess 
the  spatial  relations  between  the  patient's  anatomy  and  the  surgical  tools.  In  this  paper,  we  present  an  on-the-fly 
surgical support system that provides guidance using augmented reality and can be used in quasi-unprepared operating 
rooms. The proposed workflow with an AR smart surgical glasses system builds upon the medical image processing 
box to co-calibrate an optical see-through head-mounted display to a C-arm fluoroscopy system. Then, annotations 
on the 2D X-ray images can be rendered as virtual images or 3D objects providing surgical guidance. We quantitatively 
evaluate the components of the proposed system, and finally, design a feasibility study on a semi-anthropomorphic 
phantom. The accuracy of our system was comparable to the traditional image-guided technique while substantially 
reducing the number of acquired X-ray images as well as procedure time. Our promising results encourage further 
research on the interaction between virtual and real objects, that we believe will directly benefit the proposed method. 
Further, we would like to explore the capabilities of us on-the-fly augmented reality support system in a larger study 
directed towards common orthopedic interventions.   
The AR technology smart surgical glasses for ORIF(open reduction and internal fixation) with PFN(proximal femoral 
nail) for proximal femoral fracture was used during real-time surgery as shown in Figure 4.  During the surgery, the 
C-ARM shots were taken and transferred directly to the smart surgical glasses for the surgeons. As in Figure 4, the last 
image  demonstrates  the third  person  view  which can  also  be  used  as  the training  for  the  resident  surgeons  who 
are not inside the operation theater.  Ankle surgery too was performed by the surgeons using the AR smart surgical 
glasses  system  as  shown  in  Figure  5.  Although the  AR  system has the  capability  to  display  the  C-ARM  images, 
it depends on the preference of the surgeons sometimes if they want to have the CT data as well during the surgical 
procedure. For the CRIF(Close Reduction and Internal Fixation) for distal radius fracture, the surgeons used the AR 
system as a human navigator where they can just tilt their head to find the exact location for the point to be treated as 
shown in Figure 6. For the vertebroplasty surgery, the C-ARM and AR system was set up and the fluoroscope images 
were taken during the  surgical procedure as shown in Figure 7. As shown in the figure, the view of the surgeon is 
blocked by the C-ARM and the surgeon cannot focus on the external monitors, thus AR system plays a vital role in the 
surgical procedure as the images taken during the surgery are transferred to the AR system instantly at the time of shot 
which lets the surgeons perform seamless surgery. An ORIF for Pelvis fracture was also performed during the testing 
of the AR Technology Smart Surgical Glasses was done as shown in Figure 8. Lastly, the tibia surgery was performed 
as shown in Figure 9. As shown in the figure, the tibia locking plate was used during the surgical procedure.  

Figure. 4. The AR technology smart surgical glasses connected with the C-ARM for ORIF(open reduction and internal 

fixation) with PFN(proximal femoral nail) for proximal femoral fracture.  

6 

 
 
 
Figure. 5: The AR technology smart surgical glasses connected with the C-ARM for pelvic surgery and also displays 

CT data as per the surgeon’s preference. 

Figure.  6:  The  AR  technology  smart  surgical  glasses  connected  with  the  C-ARM  for  CRIF(Close  Reduction  and 

Internal Fixation) for distal radius fracture. 

Figure. 7: The AR technology Smart surgical glasses connected with the C-ARM for Vertebroplasty surgery. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Figure. 8. The AR technology smart surgical glasses connected with the C-ARM for ORIF for Pelvis fracture.

Figure 9: The AR technology smart surgical glasses connected with the C-ARM for ORIF Tibia Fracture 

Discussions 

After the experimental result, the points that are addressed in this paper according to  work flow  mentioned at the 

starting of the paper are followed perfectly. During the  whole surgical procedure performed including spine, tibia, 

hand and pelvic, the AR technology proves to be the future of the surgical procedures. Although AR technology based 

smart  surgical  glasses  have  their  advantages,  it  does  have  few  drawbacks  also.  The  Head  Mounted  Display  is 

comparatively  heavier  which  makes  it  a  bit  inconvenient  for  long  hour  surgeries.  Other  point  is  the  problem 

coordinating with the assistants available during the surgical procedure. As for now, the image processing box has the 

capability to connect only one glasses at a time which makes only the surgeon operating the patient has the AR view 

but the surgeons assisting the surgery still have to rely on the external monitors.  

As per the experimental results, AR technology can be used in a wider spectrum of the surgeries and not restricting it 

to only trauma surgeries. With the capability of the AR technology of the integration with different standard medical 

devices like  ultrasound, endoscope, etc., this technology can provide an immense increase in the efficiency of the 

surgeries and surgeons. The advantages of the surgery are not restricted to the surgeons only but also to the patients, 

resident doctors and the surgery assistant personnel. AR technology is very helpful in reducing the radiation exposure 

of the surgeons, patients and the surgery assistance personnel. Taking into consideration average of all the parameters 

considered during surgery, the statistics are very different and these parameters differs from the traditional surgeries 

considerably.  The performance of average collection of parameters from different surgeries performed during the 

8 

 
  
  
 
 
 
experiments. The average assistant turns his head: 440 times, turning of main surgeon 52 times with C-Arm times: 

134 times and the average of AR device used time 95 minutes.  

Conclusions 
As per the observation from different surgical procedures using the AR technology based smart surgical glasses proves 
a vital tool in revolutionizing the surgical procedure. The result obtained during the surgery  with the use of smart 
surgical glasses differs significantly from the traditional surgical procedure. The use of smart surgical glasses not only 
increases the efficiency of the surgeons but also helps the patients to recover faster as the incisions made in the surgical 
procedure are comparatively smaller than the traditional surgeries. The time required for the surgeries are relatively 
shorter than the traditional surgeries which let the surgeons cure more patients compared to traditional surgeries which 
are a major breakthrough for surgeons and also the patients. The accuracy of the surgery is another important factor 
that can be mentioned as the outcome of the different surgical procedures with a reduction in the surgical procedure 
timing for up to 30%.  Smart surgical glasses can also be used for the educational purpose for  the resident doctors 
where the real-time surgical procedure can be broadcasted outside the surgical theaters or recorded and used for the 
resident doctors and the aspiring surgeons to study the case studies of different cases from experienced surgeons. 

Acknowledgements  
This paper was supported by Taiwan Main Orthopaedic Biotechnology Co., Ltd. in 2016-2020. 

References 
[1]. P. Vávra, J. Roman, P. Zonča, P. Ihnát, M. Němec, J. Kumar, et al.Recent development of augmented reality in 
surgery: a review. J Healthc Eng, 2017 (2017), Article 4574172. 
[2].Burdea, G.C.; Invited review: the synergy between virtual reality and robotics; IEEE Transactions on Robotics 
and Automation, Volume 15, Issue 3, Page(s):400 - 410 June 1999.  
[3]. McCloy R, Stone R: Science, medicine, and the future, virtual reality in surgery. BMJ 323(7318):912–915, 2001. 
[4]. Lange T, Indelicato DJ, Rosen JM. Virtual reality in surgical training. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2000; 9(1):61-79. 
[5]. Ota, D., Loftin, B., Saito, T., Lea, R. and Keller, J. (1995). Virtual reality in surgical education. Computers in 
Biology and Medicine, 25(2), 127–137. 
[6].  Chytas,  D.;  Malahias,  M.A.;  Nikolaou,  V.S.  Augmented  Reality  in  Orthopedics:  Current  State  and  Future 
Directions. Front. Surg. 2019, 6, 38. 
[7]. Tagaytayan, R, Kelemen, A, Sik-Lanyi, C. Augmented reality in neurosurgery. Arch Med Sci. 2016:1-7. 
[8]. Chauvet P., Collins T., Debize C., ET AL.: ‘Augmented reality in a tumor resection model’, Surg. Endosc. Other 
Interv. Tech., 2018, 32, (3), pp. 1192–1201. doi: 10.1007/s00464-017-5791-7. 
[9]. Shen F, Chen B, Guo Q, Qi Y, Shen Y. Augmented reality patient-specific reconstruction plate design for pelvic 
and acetabular fracture surgery. Int J Comput Assist Radiol Surg. 2013;8:169–79. 
[10].Tonet O, Megali G, D'Attanasio S, Dario P, Carrozza M, Marcacci M, Martelli S, Palombara PL. An augmented 
reality  navigation  system  for  computer  assisted  arthroscopic  surgery  of  the  knee.  3rd  International  Conference  on 
Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention (MICCA. Pittsburgh, PA 2000; 1158–1162  
[11]. Andress, S., Johnson, A., Unberath, M., Winkler, A., Yu, K., Fotouhi, J., Weidert, S., Osgood, G., Navab, N.: 
On-the-fly augmented reality for orthopedic surgery using a multimodal fiducial. Journal of Medical Imaging 5 (2018) 
5 – 5 – 12. 
[12]. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/foresee-x-augment-reality-solution-from-surglasses-is-registered-
with-the-fda-and-ready-for-trauma-treatment-300979685.html. 
[13]. Hu, Hongzhi and Shao, Zengwu and Ye, Lin and Jin, Huan, Application of mixed reality technology in surgery, 
Int J Clin Exp Med 2019;12(4):3107-3113, 2019. 
[14]. Gregory T M, Gregory J, Sledge J, Allard R, Mir O. Surgery guided by mixed reality: presentation of a proof of 
concept. Acta Orthop 2018; 89(5): 480–483. 
[15]. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/breakthrough-in-medical-electronics--a-novel-mixed--augmented-
reality-smart-glasses-surgical-navigation-solution-300972026.html. 
[16].  Magee,  D.,  Y.  Zhu,  et  al.  (2007).  "An  augmented  reality  simulator  for  ultrasound  guided  needle  placement 
training." Med Biol Eng Comput 45(10): 957-67.  

9 

 
 
 
