0
2
0
2

y
a
M
9
1

]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
7
3
7
9
0
.
5
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Laminar separated ﬂows over ﬁnite-aspect-ratio
swept wings

Kai Zhang1†, Shelby Hayostek2, Michael Amitay2, Anton Burtsev3, Vassilios
Theoﬁlis3,4, and Kunihiko Taira1

1Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA
90095, USA
2Department of Mechanical, Aeronautical, and Nuclear Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, Troy, NY 12180, USA
3Department of Mechanical, Materials and Aerospace Engineering, University of Liverpool,
Brownlow Hill, England L69 3GH, United Kingdom
4Department of Mechanical Engineering, Escola Politecnica, Universidade S˜ao Paulo, Avda. Prof.
Mello Moraes 2231, CEP 5508-900, S˜ao Paulo, Brasil

We perform direct numerical simulations of laminar separated ﬂows over ﬁnite-aspect-ratio
swept wings at a chord-base Reynolds number of Re = 400 to reveal a variety of wake
structures generated for a range of aspect ratios (sAR = 0.5 − 4), angles of attack (α =
16◦ − 30◦), and sweep angles (Λ = 0◦ − 45◦). Flows behind swept wings exhibit increased
complexity in their dynamical features compared to unswept-wing wakes. For unswept wings,
the wake dynamics are predominantly inﬂuenced by the tip eﬀects. Steady wakes are mainly
limited to low-aspect-ratio wings. Unsteady vortex shedding takes place near the midspan of
higher-AR wings due to weakened downwash induced by the tip vortices. With increasing
sweep angle, the source of three dimensionality transitions from the tip to the midspan. A pair
of symmetric vortical structures forms along the two sides of the midspan, imposing downward
velocity upon each other in a manner similar to the downwash induced by tip vortices. Such
stabilizing midspan eﬀects not only expand the steady wake region to higher aspect ratios,
but also enhance lift. At higher aspect ratios, the midspan eﬀects of swept wings diminish at
outboard region, allowing unsteady vortex shedding to develop near the tip. In the wakes of
highly swept wings, streamwise ﬁnger-like structures form repetitively along the wing span,
providing a stabilizing eﬀect. The insights revealed from this study can aid the design of
high-lift devices and serve as a stepping stone for understanding the complex wake dynamics
at higher Reynolds numbers and those generated by unsteady wing maneuvers.

1. Introduction

Separated ﬂows over lifting surfaces have been studied extensively due to their critical
importance in aerodynamics and hydrodynamics. Over the past few decades, substantial
studies have been dedicated to the understanding of post-stall ﬂows over ﬁnite-aspect-
ratio wings (Winkelmann et al. 1980; Taira & Colonius 2009; Mulleners et al. 2017;
Eldredge & Jones 2019; Zhang et al. 2020). For a steadily translating wing, the vortices
generated from the leading and trailing edges exhibit complex nonlinear evolution under
the inﬂuence of the tip vortices. The resulting wake is highly three-dimensional in nature.
The introduction of sweep to the ﬁnite-aspect-ratio wings further enriches the wake
dynamics. Harper & Maki (1964) asserted that once local stall appears on the swept wing,

† Present address for correspondence: Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering,

Rutgers University. Email: kai.zhang3@rutgers.edu

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

K. Zhang et al.

the spanwise boundary layer ﬂow alters the stall characteristics of the attached sections
of the span. Thus the separated ﬂows over swept wings bear little resemblance to the
two-dimensional ﬂows. The stalled ﬂow over a swept wing usually features a “ram’s horn”
vortex, which stems from the inboard leading edge and grows in size as it trails to the
wake behind the tip. Such unique ﬂow is also referred to as “tip stall” (Black 1956; Zhang
et al. 2019). Focusing on the detailed ﬂow structures, Yen & Hsu (2007) and Yen & Huang
(2009) experimentally studied the eﬀects of sweep angle, Reynolds number and angle of
attack on the wake vortices, boundary layer ﬂow patterns and aerodynamic performance
of the swept wings. The wake features were found to be signiﬁcantly dependent on these
parameters. Visbal & Garmann (2019) conducted large eddy simulations of ﬂows over
swept wings with a semi aspect ratio of 4 at Re = 2 × 105. A region of laminar ﬂow
is observed near the midspan, and it grows in extent with increasing sweep angle. The
authors attributed this observation to the relief eﬀect provided by the sweep-induced
spanwise ﬂow toward the tip. Furthermore, dynamic stall was numerically simulated for
a swept wing undergoing pitching and plunging maneuvers (Visbal & Garmann 2019;
Garmann & Visbal 2020). Under these wing motions, the release of the arch-shaped
vortices during downstroke occurs near both tip regions, whereas only a single arch
vortex is seen to detach from the midspan in the unswept case.

As a special case, delta wing is well known for harnessing separated ﬂow physics to
enhance its aeordynamic performance. Unlike the unswept wing, for which the leading-
edge vortex grows and inevitably sheds away, the LEVs on the delta wing are stable
due to the balance between spanwise vorticity transport and local vorticity generation
(Polhamus 1966; Rockwell 1993; Gursul et al. 2005). As the LEVs trail downstream, they
create low pressure on the suction side of the wing, producing a sizable vortical lift. Such
favorable eﬀect grants delta wing the ability to operate at much higher angle of attack
than a conventional wing.

The LEVs may also contribute to enhanced lift for sustained avian ﬂight. Videler et al.
(2004) identiﬁed LEVs in the swept wings of common swifts (Apus apus) during gliding.
Ben-Gida et al. (2019) proposed a pseudo-three-dimensional ﬂow model for investigating
the stationary LEV mechanism over swept back wings. The model revealed that wing
geometry has a major role in the localization of the stationary LEVs over high aspect-
ratio wings. In addition to the above studies, LEVs on translating swept wings has been
further examined by Lentink & Dickinson (2009) and Beem et al. (2012), who showed
that the spanwise ﬂow alone can not sustain stationary LEVs. Moreover, the eﬀectiveness
of the LEVs in augmenting lift is still arguable for the low-speed ﬂights (Lentink et al.
2007). These mixed ﬁndings regarding the role of separated ﬂows in avian ﬂights with
swept wings warrants further investigations.

The detailed features of separated ﬂows over swept wings depends on various parame-
ters including the aspect ratio, angle of attack, and sweep angle. The interplay between
these eﬀects generates complex wake dynamics, which are not thoroughly understood thus
far. In this work, we present an extensive numerical study on the laminar separated ﬂows
over swept wings. The objective is to characterize the diﬀerent wake structures observed
over a large range of parameters, and to identify their formation mechanisms. The rest
of the paper is organized as follows. In what follows, we present the computational setup
in §2. A variety of wakes observed from this study is reported in §3. We conclude this
study by summarizing our ﬁndings in §4.

Laminar wakes of swept wings

3

Figure 1. Schematic of setup for (a) unswept wing and (b) swept wing. (c) shows the
cross-sectional slice along the broken lines in (a) and (b).

2. Computational setup

We consider three-dimensional incompressible ﬂows over swept ﬁnite-aspect-ratio wings
with the NACA 0015 cross-section proﬁle. The setup of the wing geometry is shown in
ﬁgure 1. The wings are subjected to uniform ﬂow with velocity U∞ in the x direction.
The z axis aligns with the spanwise direction of an unswept wing, and the y axis points at
the lift direction. For the swept wings, the sweep angle Λ is deﬁned as the angle between
the z axis and leading edge of the wing. We consider a range of sweep angles from 0◦ to
45◦, at an interval of 7.5◦. Half of the swept wing model is simulated by prescribing a
symmetry boundary condition along the midspan. Denoting the half wing span as b and
the chord length as c, the semi aspect ratio is deﬁned as sAR = b/c, which is varied from
0.5 to 4. We focus on ﬂows that develop behind wings at high angles of attack, α = 16◦,
20◦, 26◦ and 30◦, as we are particularly interested in separated ﬂows. The Reynolds
number, which is deﬁned as Re = U∞c/ν (ν is the kinematic viscosity), is kept ﬁxed at
400. In what follows, all spatial variables are scaled by the chord length c, velocity by
freestream velocity U∞, and time by c/U∞.

The ﬂows over swept wings are simulated by numerically solving the three-dimensional
Navier-Stokes equations. An incompressible solver Cliﬀ (in CharLES software package,
Cascade Technologies, Inc.) is used for the direct numerical simulations. The solver
employs a collocated, node-based ﬁnite-volume method to compute the solutions to the
governing equations with second-order accuracy in both space and time (Ham & Iaccarino
2004; Ham et al. 2006). The computational domain and the spatial discretization setup
in this study follow our previous work with extensive validation (Zhang et al. 2020). For
the swept cases, the straight wing mesh system is sheared in the x direction along with
the wing.

3. Results

The wakes of swept wings exhibit a rich variety of features depending on the aspect
ratio, angle of attack, and sweep angle. We show representative wakes in ﬁgure 2, with
their distributions over the Λ-α space in ﬁgure 3 for diﬀerent aspect ratios. The wakes
are broadly divided into two categories: steady ﬂows and unsteady ﬂows. Steady ﬂows
take diﬀerent forms, including those with tip vortices ( ), those with midspan structures
( ), and those with streamwise vortices ( ). The steady ﬂow regime appear over a wide
range of the parameter space. Unsteady ﬂows are characterized by vortex shedding near
the midspan ( ) or near the tip ( ). In what follows, we describe key mechanisms that
are responsible for the formation of the diﬀerent wakes mentioned above.

4

K. Zhang et al.

Figure 2. Representative wakes of swept wings. (a) Steady ﬂow with tip vortex ; (b) unsteady
; (d) and (e) unsteady
shedding near midspan ; (c) steady ﬂow with midspan structures
. The ﬁgures are scaled for
shedding near wing tip ; (f ) steady ﬂow with streamwise vortices
visual clarity.

Figure 3. Classiﬁcation of vortical structures behind ﬁnite-aspect-ratio swept wings. (a)
sAR = 0.5; (b) sAR = 1; (c) sAR = 2; and (d) sAR = 4. The dash lines denote the approximate
boundaries between steady (ﬁlled symbols) and unsteady (empty symbols) ﬂows over the Λ-α
space. Vortical structures are visualized by iso-surfaces of Q = 1 for select cases.

3.1. Tip eﬀects

Tip eﬀects play an important role in the development of wakes behind low-aspect-
ratio wings. At sAR = 0.5, steady ﬂows are observed up to α = 26◦, as shown in ﬁgure
3(a). These steady ﬂows typically feature a pair of tip vortices, which induce strong
downwash over the wing span, suppressing the formation of large leading-edge vortices.

Laminar wakes of swept wings

5

Figure 4. Skin-friction lines on the suction side of wings with (α, sAR) = (20◦, 1)

Such mechanism is responsible for the stability of the wake, particularly for low-aspect-
ratio unswept wings (Taira & Colonius 2009; DeVoria & Mohseni 2017; Zhang et al.
2020). At higher sweep angles, the vortical structures emanated from the leading edge
grows in size, covering a signiﬁcant portion of the suction surface of the wing. These
vortical structures are also beneﬁcial to the stability of the wake, as will be discussed in
detail in §3.2. Unsteady ﬂows are only observed at α (cid:38) 30◦ for Λ = 0◦ − 37.5◦. These
unsteady wakes are characterized by the periodic shedding of hairpin vortices (Taira &
Colonius 2009).

As the aspect ratio is increased, the downwash induced by the tip vortices weakens
along the midspan, allowing the roll-up of vortex sheet at the leading edge. As a result,
the unsteady vortex shedding develops near the midspan, as visualized in ﬁgure 2(b). The
stability boundary (dash line in ﬁgure 3) shifts towards lower angles of attack at sAR = 1
and 2 for low-swept wings. Additional details on the three-dimensional unsteady wake
dynamics of wings under tip eﬀects are reported in Taira & Colonius (2009) and Zhang
et al. (2020).

3.2. Midspan eﬀects
For wings with larger aspect ratio (sAR (cid:38) 1), in place of the weakened tip eﬀects, the
midspan symmetry introduces another type of three dimensionality that dominates the
wake. Let us present the skin-friction lines for cases of (α, sAR) = (20◦, 1) with varying
Λ as shown in ﬁgure 4. With the increase in sweep angle, the boundary layer separation
point near the midspan gradually shifts towards the trailing edge. This is caused by the
growth of the vortical structures emanated from the leading edge, as observed in ﬁgure
3(b). The increase in sweep angle for sAR (cid:38) 1 also leads to the attenuation of the tip
vortices, as reﬂected by the diminishing three-dimensional skin-friction line pattern near
the wing tip in ﬁgure 4. The above observations suggest a switch-over of the source of
three-dimensionality from the wing tip in low-Λ cases to the midspan in high-Λ cases.

Let us take a closer look at the vortical structures near the midspan. A representative
case of (α, sAR, Λ) = (20◦, 2, 45◦) is shown in ﬁgure 5. For this case, the vortex sheet rolls
up along the spanwise direction, covering the entire chord over the inboard section of the
wing. Due to the symmetric condition, the identical vortical structures on two sides of
the mid-plane are oriented at an angle of 180◦ − 2Λ, which in the current case is 90◦. As
a result, each of the vortical structures is subjected to the downward velocity (pointing
at −y direction) induced by its symmetric peer on the other side of the midspan. This
is clearly manifested in ﬁgure 5(b) by the strong negative crossﬂow velocity uy on the
suction side near the z = 0 plane.

Due to such three-dimensional midspan eﬀects, the vortex sheet emanated from the
leading edge is pinned to the suction side of the wing, forming steady vortical structures.
For cases with smaller Λ, the angle between the symmetric vortical structure tends
towards 180◦, and the mutual induced velocity becomes smaller. The three dimensionality
developed from the midspan is able to stabilize the wakes of a considerable number of
cases, as labeled by the green triangle ( ) in ﬁgure 3. The midspan eﬀects are also

6

K. Zhang et al.

Figure 5. Wake for the case (sAR, α, Λ) = (2, 20◦, 45◦). (a) Vortical structures visualized by
isosurface of Q = 1. The thick solid lines represent the approximate location of vortical structures
near the midspan, with the curved arrows showing their directions of rotation. The dash lines
indicates the locations of visualizations shown on the right. (b): uy and (c): uz ﬁelds at diﬀerent
z locations.

observed for swept wings with sAR = 0.5, in which cases the tip vortices also stabilize
the wake. In fact, the strengthening of the tip vortices with increasing Λ at sAR = 0.5
(see ﬁgure 3(a), α = 26◦ for example) is likely related to the three-dimensional midspan
eﬀects. As vortex sheets emanated from leading edge are less likely to roll up due to
the mutual downwash, they counteract less on the formation of tip vortices. We note
that spanwise vorticity transport, which is considered as the key mechanism for the
formation of steady LEVs on delta wings (Polhamus 1966; Gursul 2005), does not play
an important role in the formation of the midspan vortical structures in the current case.
This is manifested by the fact that the strong outboard velocity uz does not coincide
with the vortex core, as shown in ﬁgure 5(c).

The downward induced velocity described above is strong near the midspan, as shown
in ﬁgure 5(b). With the gradual weakening of the midspan eﬀects towards the outboard
sections, unsteadiness develops locally near the tip region, while the midspan region still
remains steady. The resulting ﬂows resemble the “tip stall” phenomenon, as described
in Black (1956); Zhang et al. (2019); Visbal & Garmann (2019). This type of ﬂows, as
indicated by yellow squares ( ) in ﬁgure 3, prevails for swept wings with large aspect
ratios (e.g., sAR = 4) and high angles of attack (e.g., α = 26◦ − 30◦). For wings with
large sAR, the unsteady shedding develops from the leading edge and features mostly
spanwise vortices, see ﬁgure 2(e) for example. In contrast, for wings with low aspect ratio
but large angles of attack, the unsteady vortices are shed from the wing tip, and they
feature hairpin structures with the legs originated from the pressure and suction sides of
the wing, as shown in ﬁgure 2(f ).

3.3. Formation of streamwise ﬁnger-like structures
For high sweep angles of Λ (cid:38) 37.5◦, the ﬂows over high-aspect-ratio wings (sAR (cid:38) 2)
transition from the unsteady tip shedding to steady wakes, through the formation of
the streamwise ﬁnger-like structures. As shown in ﬁgure 2(f ), the ﬁnger-like structures
are oriented at an angle higher than Λ with respect to the z axis. These structures
bend towards the streamwise direction away from the wing. Wakes of swept wings with

Laminar wakes of swept wings

7

Figure 6. Streamwise vortices along high-aspect-ratio wings with Λ = 45◦. (a) Vortical
structures visualized by isosurface of Q = 1 for sAR = 4, 6 and 10. (b) ux ﬁelds at indicated slices
as shown in (a). The red lines represent contours of Q = 0.5 with the curved arrows indicating
the direction of rotation. (c) uz ﬁeld on the slice IV. Black circles show the isosurfaces of Q = 0.5.

even sAR as large as 10 are stabilized with the alternating formation of the streamwise
structures along the wing span, as shown in ﬁgure 6(a).

These streamwise vortices observed in the present work are formed under the same
mechanism with those in the wakes of axisymmetric slender bodies at high incidence
(Sarpkaya 1966; Thomson & Morrison 1971). The impulse ﬂow analogy has long been
used to understand these vortical structures. According to this analogy, the progressive
development of the wake along the wing span when viewed in cross-ﬂow planes is similar
to the temporal growth of the ﬂow behind a two-dimensional wing translated impulsively
from rest. Three slices at diﬀerent spanwise locations in ﬁgure 6(b) show a temporal-like
evolution of wake vortices along the wing span. In addition, the spacing between the
neighbouring streamwise vortices is ﬁxed at g = 2.4, which follows g ≈ U∞ sin Λ · T2D,
in which U∞ sin Λ represents the speed of the spanwise ﬂow, and T2D = 3.2 is the
nondimensional period of vortex shedding in the analogous two-dimensional case (for
an inﬁnite swept wing). This relationship suggests a close analogy between the two-
dimensional unsteady ﬂow and the present three-dimensional steady ﬂow, where the
time-dependence of the former is replaced by spatial dependence of the latter.

From another perspective, when viewed from the wake on a plane parallel to the
wing span, as shown in ﬁgure 6(c), the steady streamwise vortices are positioned at
two sides of strong outboard velocity uz, resembling the conﬁguration where inverse
K´arm´an vortices are formed in the jet proﬁle. This observation suggests the important
role of the spanwise velocity in the formation of steady three-dimensional vortices. Similar
streamwise structures have also been reported for rotating large-AR wings (Jardin 2017),
in which spanwise ﬂow is promoted by artiﬁcially adding Coriolis force.

3.4. Aerodynamic forces

The vortical structures described above inﬂuence the aerodynamic forces on the swept
wings. We examine the eﬀects of sweep angle on the distribution of the time-averaged
sectional lift coeﬃcients Cl for the representative cases of (α, sAR) = (20◦, 2) in ﬁgure
7(a). For the unswept wing, the sectional lift increases slowly from the midspan towards
outboard, reaching maximum at z ≈ 1.5 before its drastic decrease at the tip. The slight
swell-up of the sectional lift at the outboard location is attributed to downwash from the
tip vortices (DeVoria & Mohseni 2017; Zhang et al. 2020). For swept wings, the sectional
lift coeﬃcients are signiﬁcantly higher at the inboard locations, due to the additional

8

K. Zhang et al.

Figure 7. Force coeﬃcients for α = 20◦. (a) Sectional lift coeﬃcients for varied sweep angles
at a ﬁxed aspect ratio sAR = 2. (b) Sectional lift coeﬃcients for cases of Λ = 45◦ with diﬀerent
aspect ratios. (c) and (d) lift coeﬃcients CL and drag coeﬃcients CD over sweep angle Λ for
diﬀerent aspect ratios.

circulation maintained by the midspan eﬀects. We note that the lift distribution of swept
wings in high Re ﬂows exhibits the opposite pattern, where sectional lift is low near
midspan and high at outboard sections (Schlichting & Truckenbrodt 1960; Nickel &
Wohlfahrt 1994). Moreover, for the same angle of attack, one sees lift loss everywhere
along the span of swept wing compared with the unswept wing (Visbal & Garmann 2019).
These diﬀerences highlight the midspan eﬀects in augmenting lift of swept wings in low
Reynolds number separated ﬂows.

The eﬀects of aspect ratio on the distribution of sectional lift coeﬃcients of swept
wings are examined for the cases (α, Λ) = (20◦, 45◦) in ﬁgure 7(b). Monotonic decrease of
sectional lift is observed across sAR = 0.5 to 6. The maximum sectional lift at midspan
z = 0 increases with the aspect ratio, and eventually saturates as sAR reaches 3. This
observation suggests that the tip eﬀect is still noticeable for low-AR swept wings even
though distinct tip vortices are not observed. For high-AR wings, the Cl-z curves feature
steep slope over the inboard region, reﬂecting the weakening of the midspan eﬀects. The
slope becomes much gentler towards the outboard, where midspan eﬀects diminish.

Finally, we present the total lift CL and drag CD coeﬃcients of the swept wings at
α = 20◦ with diﬀerent aspect ratios and varying sweep angles in ﬁgure 7(c) and (d). For
swept wings with sAR = 0.5 and 1, the lift coeﬃcients increase with sweep angle, due
to the dominance of the midspan eﬀects over the entire wing span. The drag coeﬃcients
of the low-aspect-ratio wings, on the other hand, do not show signiﬁcant variations over
the increase of sweep angle. It is interesting to note that CD for sAR = 0.5 is higher
than that for sAR = 1, an observation also reported in Taira & Colonius (2009). For
wings with sAR (cid:38) 3, the contribution of the high sectional lift at inboard region to
the total lift force is overshadowed by the lower sectional lift at the outboard region.
As a result, the lift coeﬃcients of wings with high aspect ratio decrease with increasing
sweep angle. Similar trend is also observed for the drag coeﬃcients of high-aspect-ratio

Laminar wakes of swept wings

9

wings. While for wings with small Λ the lift coeﬃcients CL are positively related with
sAR, at the highest sweep angle of Λ = 45◦, maximum lift coeﬃcient is achieved with
sAR = 2, and is even higher than the analogous two-dimensional case. The midspan
eﬀects as lift enhancement mechanism for low-aspect-ratio swept wings could potentially
inspire designs of high lift devices.

4. Conclusion

We have studied laminar separated ﬂows over ﬁnite-aspect-ratio swept wings with
direct numerical simulations at a chord-based Reynolds number of 400. Due to the
complex interplay between the eﬀects of aspect ratio, sweep angle and angle of attack, the
wakes of ﬁnite swept wings exhibit a variety of vortical features, which are not observed
behind the unswept wings. We have described key mechanisms that are responsible for the
emergence of diﬀerent types of ﬂows over swept wings. For wings with low aspect ratios
and low sweep angles, the downwash by the tip vortices stabilizes the wake. With the
increase in aspect ratio, the downwash weakens along the midspan, allowing the formation
of unsteady vortex shedding. For higher sweep angles, the source of three dimensionality
in the wake transitions from the wing tip to the midspan. A pair of symmetric vortical
structures form near the midspan due to their mutually induced downward velocity,
which stabilizes the wake of higher-aspect-ratio swept wings. Such midspan eﬀects also
act as a lift enhancement mechanism for wings with low to medium aspect ratios. At high
aspect ratio, the midspan eﬀects diminishes near the outboard of the wing, and unsteady
vortex shedding occurs near the wing tip region. For wings with high aspect ratios, steady
wakes are again achieved at high sweep angles, where a transposition occurs from two-
dimensional unsteady ﬂow to three-dimensional steady ﬂow. The resulting steady wake
features the repetitive formation of the streamwise ﬁnger-like structures along the span.
This study provided a detailed look into the eﬀects of sweep on the wake dynamics
of ﬁnite-aspect-ratio wings. The insights obtained from this study, particularly those
regarding the midspan eﬀects, could potentially be used for designing high-lift devices. In
addition, the knowledge gained here also forms a stepping stone for further understanding
the complex wake dynamics at higher Reynolds numbers and those generated by unsteady
wing maneuvers.

Declaration of interest

The authors report no conﬂict of interest.

Acknowledgement

We acknowledge the generous support from the US Air Force Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc

Research (FA9550-17-1-0222) monitored by Dr. Gregg Abate.

References
Beem, H. R., Rival, D. E. & Triantafyllou, M. S. 2012 On the stabilization of leading-edge

vortices with spanwise ﬂow. Exp. Fluids 52 (2), 511–517.

Ben-Gida, H., Gurka, R. & Weihs, D. 2019 Lift enhancement by a stationary leading-edge

vortex over a high aspect ratio wing. AIAA Paper 2019-3492.

Black, J. 1956 Flow studies of the leading edge stall on a swept-back wing at high incidence.

Aeronaut. J. 60 (541), 51–60.

10

K. Zhang et al.

DeVoria, A. C. & Mohseni, K. 2017 On the mechanism of high-incidence lift generation for

steadily translating low-aspect-ratio wings. J. Fluid Mech. 813, 110–126.

Eldredge, J. D. & Jones, A. R. 2019 Leading-edge vortices: mechanics and modeling. Annu.

Rev. Fluid Mech. 51 (1), 75–104.

Garmann, D. J. & Visbal, M. R. 2020 Examination of pitch-plunge equivalence for dynamic

stall over swept ﬁnite wings. AIAA Paper 2020-1759.

Gursul, Ismet 2005 Review of unsteady vortex ﬂows over slender delta wings. J. Aircraft

42 (2), 299–319.

Gursul, I., Gordnier, R. & Visbal, M. 2005 Unsteady aerodynamics of nonslender delta

wings. Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 41 (7), 515–557.

Ham, F. & Iaccarino, G. 2004 Energy conservation in collocated discretization schemes on
unstructured meshes. Annual Research Briefs, Center for Turbulence Research pp. 3–14.
Ham, F., Mattsson, K. & Iaccarino, G. 2006 Accurate and stable ﬁnite volume operators
for unstructured ﬂow solvers. Annual Research Briefs, Center for Turbulence Research
pp. 243–261.

Harper, C. W. & Maki, R. L. 1964 A review of the stall characteristics of swept wings. Tech.

Note D-2373. NASA.

Jardin, T. 2017 Coriolis eﬀect and the attachment of the leading edge vortex. J. Fluid Mech.

820, 312–340.

Lentink, D. & Dickinson, M. H. 2009 Rotational accelerations stabilize leading edge vortices

on revolving ﬂy wings. J. Exp. Biol. 212 (16), 2705–2719.

Lentink, D., M¨uller, U. K., Stamhuis, E. J., De Kat, R., Van Gestel, W., Veldhuis,
L. L. M., Henningsson, P., Hedenstr¨om, A., Videler, J. J. & Van Leeuwen, J. L.
2007 How swifts control their glide performance with morphing wings. Nature 446 (7139),
1082–1085.

Mulleners, K., Mancini, P. & Jones, A. R. 2017 Flow development on a ﬂat-plate wing

subjected to a streamwise acceleration. AIAA J. 55 (6), 2118–2122.

Nickel, K. & Wohlfahrt, M. 1994 Tailless aircraft in theory and practice. AIAA.
Polhamus, E. C. 1966 A concept of the vortex lift of sharp-edge delta wings based on a

leading-edge-suction analogy. Tech. Note D-3736. NASA.

Rockwell, D. 1993 Three-dimensional ﬂow structure on delta wings at high angle-of-attack:

Experimental concepts and issues. AIAA Paper 1993-0550.

Sarpkaya, T. 1966 Separated ﬂow about lifting bodies and impulsive ﬂow about cylinders.

AIAA J. 4 (3), 414–420.

Schlichting, H. & Truckenbrodt, E. 1960 Aerodynamik des Flugzeuges: Grundlagen aus

der Str¨omungsmechanik, Aerodynamik des Tragﬂ¨ugels (Teil II). Springer.

Taira, K. & Colonius, T. 2009 Three-dimensional ﬂows around low-aspect-ratio ﬂat-plate

wings at low Reynolds numbers. J. Fluid Mech. 623, 187–207.

Thomson, K. D. & Morrison, D. F. 1971 The spacing, position and strength of vortices in
the wake of slender cylindrical bodies at large incidence. J. Fluid Mech. 50 (4), 751–783.
Videler, J. J., Stamhuis, E. J. & Povel, G. D. E. 2004 Leading-edge vortex lifts swifts.

Science 306 (5703), 1960–1962.

Visbal, M. R. & Garmann, D. J. 2019 Eﬀect of sweep on dynamic stall of a pitching ﬁnite-

aspect-ratio wing. AIAA J. 57 (8), 3274–3289.

Winkelmann, A., Barlow, J., Saini, J., Anderson, Jr, J. & Jones, E. 1980 The eﬀects of
leading edge modiﬁcations on the post-stall characteristics of wings. AIAA Paper 1980-
0199.

Yen, S. C. & Hsu, C. M. 2007 Flow patterns and wake structure of a swept-back wing. AIAA

J. 45 (1), 228–236.

Yen, S. C. & Huang, L. C. 2009 Flow patterns and aerodynamic performance of unswept and

swept-back wings. J. Fluids Eng. 131 (11).

Zhang, K., Hayostek, S., Amitay, M., He, W., Theofilis, V. & Taira, K. 2020 On the
formation of three-dimensional separated ﬂows over wings under tip eﬀects. J. Fluid Mech.
895, A9.

Zhang, S., Jaworski, A. J., McParlin, S. C. & Turner, J. T. 2019 Experimental
investigation of the ﬂow structures over a 40◦ swept wing. Aeronaut. J. 123 (1259), 39–55.

