A Transition-edge Sensor-based X-ray Spectrometer for the Study of Highly
Charged Ions at the National Institute of Standards and Technology Electron
Beam Ion Trapa)

P. Szypryt,1, b) G. C. O’Neil,1 E. Takacs,2, 3 J. N. Tan,2 S. W. Buechele,2 A. S. Naing,2, 4 D. A. Bennett,1
W. B. Doriese,1 M. Durkin,1, 5 J. W. Fowler,1, 5 J. D. Gard,5 G. C. Hilton,1 K. M. Morgan,1, 5 C. D. Reintsema,1
D. R. Schmidt,1 D. S. Swetz,1 J. N. Ullom,1, 5 and Yu. Ralchenko2
1)Quantum Electromagnetics Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, Colorado 80305,
USA
2)Quantum Measurement Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899,
USA
3)Department of Physics & Astronomy, Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina 29634,
USA
4)Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware 19716,
USA
5)Department of Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA

We report on the design, commissioning, and initial measurements of a Transition-edge Sensor (TES) x-ray
spectrometer for the Electron Beam Ion Trap (EBIT) at the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST). Over the past few decades, the NIST EBIT has produced numerous studies of highly charged ions in
diverse ﬁelds such as atomic physics, plasma spectroscopy, and laboratory astrophysics. The newly commis-
sioned NIST EBIT TES Spectrometer (NETS) improves the measurement capabilities of the EBIT through a
combination of high x-ray collection eﬃciency and resolving power. NETS utilizes 192 individual TES x-ray
microcalorimeters (166/192 yield) to improve upon the collection area by a factor of ∼30 over the 4-pixel
neutron transmutation doped germanium-based microcalorimeter spectrometer previously used at the NIST
EBIT. The NETS microcalorimeters are optimized for the x-ray energies from roughly 500 eV to 8,000 eV
and achieve an energy resolution of 3.7 eV to 5.0 eV over this range, a more modest (< 2×) improvement
over the previous microcalorimeters. Beyond this energy range NETS can operate with various trade-oﬀs,
the most signiﬁcant of which are reduced eﬃciency at lower energies and being limited to a subset of the
pixels at higher energies. As an initial demonstration of the capabilities of NETS, we measured transitions
in He-like and H-like O, Ne, and Ar as well as Ni-like W. We detail the energy calibration and data analysis
techniques used to transform detector counts into x-ray spectra, a process that will be the basis for analyzing
future data.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The Electron Beam Ion Trap (EBIT1–3) is a power-
ful laboratory instrument designed to create, store, and
excite highly charged ions that may be studied through
their characteristic emission spectra. In the EBIT, elec-
trons are generated by an electron gun, and a series of
electrodes along the central axis of the machine acceler-
ates them to high kinetic energies. A set of drift tubes
along the beam path sets up a potential well that is used
to trap the ions axially. High ﬁeld magnets, historically
liquid helium cooled superconducting magnets, are used
primarily to compress the electron beam, which increases
the strength of the radial conﬁnement that the negatively
charged electron beam provides to the positively charged
ion cloud. At the end of the beam path, a collector, which

a)This article may be downloaded for personal use only. Any
other use requires prior permission of the author and AIP Pub-
lishing. This article appeared in Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments
90, 123107 (2019) and may be found at http://dx.doi.org/10.
1063/1.5116717.
b)paul.szypryt@nist.gov

is also typically actively cooled, dissipates the remaining
energy of the intense beam. Many diﬀerent mechanisms
can be used to inject ions into the electron beam of the
EBIT. A ballistic gas injection system can be used for
studying charged ions of gaseous neutral atoms such as
nitrogen, neon, or argon. For metal ions, a more compli-
cated tool must be used, such as a Metal Vapor Vacuum
Arc (MeVVA4,5) external ion source. The same electron
beam used to trap and ionize the ions also collisionally
excites them.

The ﬁrst EBIT was developed at the Lawrence Liv-
ermore National Laboratory (LLNL) in 19851 and was
soon after used to take atomic spectroscopy measure-
ments of highly charged barium6. This promising new
instrument led a handful of groups around the world to
build their own EBIT systems. One such system was
built at the National Institute of Standards and Technol-
ogy (NIST) in 1993 and quickly began producing results7.
Since its inception, the NIST EBIT has been used to
take measurements across a variety of ﬁelds, including
fundamental atomic physics8–10, spectroscopy of highly-
charged ions for fusion and lithography11–13, laboratory
astrophysics14–18, and nuclear physics19.

Low-temperature x-ray microcalorimeters that com-

0
2
0
2

y
a
M
1
1

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
3
8
4
5
0
.
5
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
bine high resolving power comparable to wavelength dis-
persive spectrometers with high broadband x-ray collec-
tion eﬃciency comparable to semiconductor based solid-
state detectors are particularly well suited for measure-
ments with an EBIT20,21. First, an EBIT’s tunable en-
ergy electron beam is capable of exciting a wide range
of charge states. The spectral features from these charge
states can be found at energies up to 10s–100s of keV, de-
pending on the highest charge state the particular EBIT
can achieve. The broad energy range of an x-ray mi-
crocalorimeter allows for the study of a wide array of
highly charged ions with a single spectrometer. Further-
more, the exceptional energy resolution of an x-ray mi-
crocalorimeter also allows for high precision studies of
line emission structures and allows us to resolve previ-
ously overlapping features. Finally, the single photon
detection nature of a microcalorimeter allows for time-
resolved studies with the EBIT. Measurements with mi-
crocalorimeters have been highly successful at multiple
EBIT or other highly charged ion facilities (see Ref. 22–27
and the references therein). Generally, 10s of few 100 µm
scale microcalorimeters are operated within a spectrom-
eter and energy resolutions of ∼5 eV at 6 keV are typ-
ically observed. At the NIST EBIT, we have utilized
an array of 4 x-ray microcalorimeters based on neutron
transmutation doped germanium (NTD-Ge28) thermis-
tors and tin absorbers developed by the Harvard Smith-
sonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO)8,16–18,29. These
NTD-Ge microcalorimeters individually have an active
area of 350 µm × 350 µm and show a resolution of 4.5 eV
at 6 keV during operation with the EBIT16.

Advances in low temperature detector technology have
recently increased the capabilities of spectrometers based
on x-ray microcalorimeters, both in terms of total array
active area and per-pixel performance. One such tech-
nology that is the basis for the new spectrometer at the
NIST EBIT is the Transition-edge Sensor (TES30,31).
TES-based x-ray microcalorimeter spectrometers with
100s of pixels have been used for applications in x-
ray astronomy32,33, beamline science21,34,35, and table-
top spectroscopy36,37, among other ﬁelds. TES mi-
crocalorimeters regularly achieve a resolving power of
better than 1 part in a 1000 for x-rays in the few keV
range21,38–42 and can measure the arrival time of an x-
ray with ∼1 µs timing resolution34. Other low temper-
ature x-ray microcalorimeter technologies based on Mi-
crowave Kinetic Inductance Detectors (MKIDs43,44) and
Metallic Magnetic Calorimeters (MMCs45,46) are devel-
oping rapidly as well. At the time of this writing, TES-
based microcalorimeters have achieved better resolution
compared to MKID-based microcalorimeters, and TES
multiplexing techniques are more mature compared to
those of MMCs.
In addition to the NIST EBIT, some
of these more recent advances in low temperature detec-
tor technology are being utilized in facilities for other
highly charged ion experiments. The EBIT at Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) is in the pro-
cess of adding a TES x-ray spectrometer to their detec-

2

tor suite20. Also, MMCs with high dynamic range have
recently been used to study highly charged ions at the
Experimental Storage Ring (ESR) at the GSI Helmholtz
Centre for Heavy Ion Research27.

Here we detail the design, commissioning, and ﬁrst-
light measurements of the NIST EBIT TES Spectrome-
ter (NETS). NETS has a factor of > 30 increase in the
active area of the array while also exhibiting a modest
(< 2×) improvement in energy resolution when com-
pared to the to NTD-Ge microcalorimeter spectrometer
previously used at the NIST EBIT. In Sec. II, we ex-
plain the physics behind TES-based x-ray microcalorime-
ters and the speciﬁcs of the spectrometer developed for
the NIST EBIT. We move on to show how the spec-
trometer was integrated with the rest of the EBIT in
Sec. III. We then discuss ﬁrst-light measurements done
with NETS (Sec. IV) and techniques used to analyze
these data (Sec. V). Finally, in Sec. VI we discuss spectra
acquired during the ﬁrst-light run including the achieved
count rates, energy resolution, line center accuracy, and
time resolution.

II. TES SPECTROMETER

A. TES Microcalorimeter Principles of Operation

The microcalorimeters in NETS use TESs as the sens-
ing elements, weakly coupled to a thermal bath. The
devices are cooled to low temperatures, often below
100 mK, to minimize thermal noise and maximize detec-
tor sensitivity. Generally, temperatures below the critical
temperature (TC) of the TESs are used, and the TESs are
then biased into their superconducting-to-normal transi-
tion. Within this narrow region, a TES has a high tem-
perature coeﬃcient of resistance (e.g., NIST TES designs
typically have ∂ log R/∂ log T values of <
∼100 at their bias
point21), allowing for a sensitive measurement of the tem-
perature change that occurs during a photon absorption
event. A TES used in x-ray microcalorimeters is typi-
cally voltage biased into its transition, providing negative
electrothermal feedback (power in the TES decreases as
absorbed photons raise its resistance). When the TES
is voltage-biased, the measured signal from an absorbed
photon is a pulse of decreased TES current. TES oper-
ation is outlined in Fig. 1. The physics and operation
of TES-based x-ray microcalorimeters are explained in
much greater detail in a number of publications21,42,47.
In order to maximize x-ray collection eﬃciency, the
TES is coupled to a thicker absorber made with a high-
Z material, necessary for stopping x-rays with energies
above a few hundred eV while maintaining the TES’s su-
perconducting and thermodynamic properties. The ther-
modynamic properties of the absorber, such as the heat
capacity, can then be tuned separately from that of the
TES, allowing for a simpler optimization of the devices
to target a speciﬁc energy range. The device is typically
fabricated on top of a membrane in order to control ther-

3

cally accomplished with Superconducting Quantum In-
tereference Devices (SQUIDs48). Here, SQUIDs are used
in an ammeter mode to measure and amplify the cur-
rent pulses.
In cryogenic detectors, it is often neces-
sary to use a multiplexing scheme to reduce the com-
plexity in wiring and the thermal load inside the cryo-
stat, and SQUIDs are also used for this purpose. A vari-
ety of SQUID-based multiplexing architectures49 can be
used, but the most mature readout method is time di-
vision multiplexing (TDM50,51), which involves sequen-
tially addressing the readout SQUIDs for a group of de-
tectors. NIST has routinely used this method to multi-
plex ∼30 detectors (rows), with 8 parallel readout chan-
nels (columns), enabling operation of large arrays of TES
microcalorimeters21,52.

B. Detector Array

NETS contains an array of nominally identical TES
x-ray microcalorimeters, the design of which is shown in
Fig. 2. The design is an evolution of previous NIST de-
signs, which use a sputtered MoCu bilayer for the TES
material and evaporated Bi for the x-ray absorber51,53–55.
Although these types detectors generally show roughly
part in a thousand energy resolution, the evaporated Bi
absorbers cause the detectors to suﬀer from non-Gaussian
response functions (∼20–30% of x-ray events in low en-
ergy tails)56. It was found that Au absorbers could be
used in place of the Bi absorbers to signiﬁcantly reduce
the low energy tail component of the detector response56.
In the past designs, the Bi absorbers were evaporated di-
rectly on top of the TES thermistors. This cannot be
done with the Au absorbers as Au is a metal (Bi is a
semimetal) and would cause the TES superconducting
properties to be intrinsically coupled to those of the Au
absorber through the proximity eﬀect57,58, which is in-
convenient from a design tuning and fabrication stand-
point.
Instead, the Au absorber is deposited laterally
away from the TES thermistor in a “sidecar” design.

The sensor material is a sputtered MoCu bilayer with
215 nm of Cu on top of 65 nm of Mo. The thicknesses of
the Cu and the Mo are tuned to target a speciﬁc super-
conducting transition temperature, TC, via the proximity
eﬀect57,58. The sample wafer is rotated during sputtering
to maximize uniformity, and the sensors in this particular
array have TC values in the range of 111–112 mK. This
TC was chosen as a trade-oﬀ between the the theoretical
energy resolution we could hope to achieve and cryostat
hold time (see Sec. II D). An additional Cu layer of thick-
ness 419 nm is deposited on top of the sensor and pat-
terned into banks, used to steer current toward the leads,
and interdigitated stripes, used to control the transition
shape and reduce excess noise59. This Cu layer also ther-
mally connects the sensor to the absorber. In addition
to its use in the sensor bilayer, the Mo is used for super-
conducting leads and traces running oﬀ the membrane.
The absorber is made from Au that is electron beam

Figure 1: (A) TES circuit diagram. The TES is voltage
biased into its superconducting transition region by sourcing
current through a 380 µΩ shunt resistor, Rsh. When an
x-ray event occurs, the TES temperature rises
proportionally to the x-ray energy, pushing the TES higher
into its transition and raising its resistance (represented by
the variable resistor, RT ES, in the diagram). This results in
a pulse of decreased current. An inductor, L, is used to
adjust the rise time of this pulse. Each TES is inductively
coupled to and read out using a ﬁrst stage SQUID, and a
SQUID-based multiplexing scheme is used to read out the
entire array of TESs. (B) Detector and cold stage readout
assembly, including the TES array with collimator and 8
sets of multiplexer (MUX) and interface chips for the 8
independent readout columns. The dashed boxes in the top
panel correspond to the diﬀerent types of physical chips
labeled in the bottom panel.

mal conductance (speed of current pulses) and minimize
the amount of energy going into phonons escaping into
the substrate instead of measurable energy in the sensor.
This is necessary for maintaining a high signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) in the pulses and therefore high resolving
power.

The readout of TES microcalorimeter arrays is typi-

RshLRTESSQUIDReadoutTESBiasMUX ChipTES ArrayInterface ChipA.TES Array+CollimatorMUXChipsInterfaceChipsB.4

Figure 2: Single TES microcalorimeter design used in
NETS. Here, the yellow square feature is the Au absorber,
with the two shades of colors used to indicate the two
separate Au layers. The TES bilayer consists of Mo (blue)
and Cu (pink). The Cu banks, bars, and connection to the
absorber in this same area are marked in orange. The entire
design is sitting on a SiN absorber, with a frame of
perforations encircling the absorber and sensor.
Superconducting Mo traces run from both ends of the sensor
to bond pads oﬀ the membrane at the edges of the chip,
providing a route for the sensors to be connected to chips
containing the bias circuit and SQUID ampliﬁers.

evaporated in two separate layers, ﬁrst 186 nm and then
779 nm thick, resulting in a total absorber thickness of
965 nm. The wafer is also rotated during this deposition
and the evaporation tool had previously been character-
ized for roughly 3% variation across a 76 mm wafer (bet-
ter than 1% variation across a single detector array chip).
The absolute thickness had been measured with a stylus
proﬁlometer with <
∼3% uncertainty. Sec. III B contains
a discussion of these absorber thickness uncertainties as
they relate to the quantum eﬃciency. The deposition is
done in two separate layers to reduce step coverage is-
sues when coupling the absorber to the sensor through
the Cu and to better control the thermal conductivity.
The absorber area is 340 µm×340 µm.

When choosing the absorber thickness and area, trade-
oﬀs between dynamic range, quantum eﬃciency, and ac-
tive area had to be made.
In particular, the total ab-
sorber volume (sets the heat capacity and dynamic range)
was chosen such that the detectors could operate in the
linear region of their superconducting-to-normal transi-
tions when measuring photons in the <
∼ 15 keV range.
Beyond this region, the x-ray pulses would begin satu-

Figure 3: (A) The TES array used in NETS. The aperture
chip used to prevent x-rays from being absorbed by areas
outside the TES absorbers is also shown (displayed on top of
a penny, for scale). (B) Pixel map indicating absorber size
(rather than aperture size) and locations. The diﬀerent
colors represent the 8 readout columns, with 24 detectors in
each column. A circle of radius 5.30 mm fully encloses all
detector absorbers.

rating and energy resolution would quickly degrade. The
highest charge state that the NIST EBIT can produce is
H-like Kr, with the brightest line at ∼13.5 keV, so we
wanted to ensure that the detectors would be capable
of measuring photons at these energies without saturat-
ing. The speed of the room temperature readout elec-
tronics (see Sec. II C) imposes a limit on the slew rate
of the pulses, which for these detectors occurs at roughly
10 keV. Reading out pulses above this ∼10 keV limit re-
quires reducing the number of detectors to increase the
readout speed of the remaining detectors and raise the
slew rate limit. We note that the majority of our planned
measurements are of highly charged ions with line ener-
gies below 10 keV. Once the saturation energy (total ab-
sorber volume) is chosen, we maximize the absorber area
given the constraints of the array layout.

NETS houses a total of 192 TES pixels arranged in the

340 m −6−4−20246X distance from center (mm)−4−2024Y distance from center (mm)12345678R = 5.30 mmB.roughly circular pattern depicted in Fig. 3. Here, 192 pix-
els are used instead of the 240 pixels that are used in the
NIST evaporated Bi absorber design due to the increased
pitch that is required when separated the absorber from
the TES. Reducing the pixel count to 192 was required
in order to keep the detector chip size constant and eas-
ily integrate it with our standard assembly package and
readout chips. Out of fabrication and assembly, 166 of
the 192 total possible detectors (86%) are working and
capable of detecting x-rays. Additional detectors may be
ﬂagged as bad in the data reduction steps depending on
the data quality and restrictions of a particular analysis,
as will be discussed in Sec. V.

C. Readout

NETS utilizes the TDM readout scheme with a two
stage SQUID architecture51.
In this scheme, each de-
tector gets its own ﬁrst stage SQUID (SQ1) ampliﬁer,
and the signals from all detectors in a given readout col-
umn are coupled into a single second ampliﬁcation stage
SQUID array (SA). The SQ1s in a given column of de-
tectors are addressed sequentially and have a maximum
critical current of 10 µA. They are designed to have an
asymmetric periodic response and are operated at the
steeper of the two asymmetric slopes to maximize gain.
The SAs contain 6 banks of 64 SQUIDs in a 2 × 3 (se-
ries × parallel) conﬁguration, with a maximum critical
current of 60 µA. Here, the direction of the SA feedback
coil current was reversed relative to TES spectrometers
previously deployed by NIST, which was recently found
to reduce SQUID ampliﬁer instability and crosstalk be-
tween columns60. At room temperature, the signals are
routed through a set of analog interface electronics and
then through the digital feedback electronics61,62. The
room temperature electronics orchestrate the TDM read-
out and maintain a separate ﬂux locked loop for each SQ1
such that the feedback value is a measure of the TES cur-
rent. In NETS, the detectors are divided into 8 parallel
readout columns, with 24 rows (detectors) per column.
NIST TDM multiplexers are described in greater detail
in other publications51,61,62.

Data acquisition (DAQ) software is used to set SQUID
and TES parameters, conﬁgure triggering conditions, and
write raw pulse records (x-ray events). Typically, the SA
bias current is set to Ic,max (deﬁned as the current which
maximizes the amplitude versus input ﬂux), while the
SQ1 bias current is set to ∼ 1.5×Ic,max to reduce settling
time after row switching. Other multiplexer parameters,
such as those deﬁning the regions of operation of the am-
pliﬁers, can also be tuned with the DAQ software. The
TESs were biased in the superconducting transition at
about 15% of their normal-state resistance (RN ), which
we found maximizes the resolving power of the detec-
tors. More speciﬁcally, each readout column has a single
bias line that is shared by all detectors within that col-
umn. The bias voltage for a column is set such that the

5

column median detector resistance is at 15% RN . The
average variability in resistance at the bias point for a
given column is 1.4% RN . Generally, we see little if any
degradation in resolution in detectors with bias points
that diﬀer from the column median by a few % RN The
DAQ software can also be used to decrease the number of
columns and rows to read out, potentially lowering elec-
trical crosstalk and improving the energy resolution at
the cost of x-ray collection eﬃciency. Lowering the num-
ber of rows is also necessary when measuring high energy
pulses (>
∼ 10 keV), ensuring that the feedback loop of the
room temperature electronics can keep up with the higher
slew rates of these pulses.

The DAQ software is also used to conﬁgure an edge
trigger for the collection of pulse data. Here, the edge
triggering threshold (minimum slope in the feedback sig-
nal) is set far below the low energy cutoﬀ in our quantum
eﬃciency curve (∼300 eV, see Fig. 6). With proper op-
timization, this triggering threshold can be set as low as
a few 10s of eV (depending on desired σ level of detec-
tor resolution), though this is rarely useful given the low
energy cutoﬀ in quantum eﬃciency. When taking noise
measurements, the data is continuously streamed rather
than run on a trigger. Raw pulse and noise records are
written to disk in a binary format and are later analyzed
using the data reduction pipeline described in Sec. V.

D. Cryostat

NETS utilizes an Adiabatic Demagnetization Refrig-
erator (ADR63,64) to cool the detectors and SQUID elec-
tronics. This ADR was primarily chosen for its com-
pact and portable design, and it is generally fairly simple
to mate to the x-ray source21. The cryostat consists of
a large rectangular section containing the SA ampliﬁers
and majority of the cooling hardware and a cylindrical
protrusion, hereafter referred to as the snout, housing the
detector package and SQ1 ampliﬁers. The bulk rectangu-
lar section is largely a commercially available component
whereas the snout is custom built. Within the outer vac-
uum jacket are four thermal stages, each named after the
nominal base temperature that stage reaches; these are
the 50 K, 3 K, 1 K, and 50 mK stages. A pulse tube cry-
ocooler is used to cool the 50 K stage to 50 K and the re-
maining stages to 3 K, eliminating the need for any liquid
cryogens. Cooling the 1 K and 50 mK stages below 3 K
is not continuous and involves a magnet ramp/deramp
cycle (hereafter, ADR cycle). For this purpose, the 1 K
stage contains a gadolinium gallium garnet (GGG) para-
magnetic salt pill and the 50 mK stage contains a ferric
ammonium alum (FAA) paramagnetic salt pill. A high
ﬁeld superconducting magnet is ramped to 3 T to align
the magnetic moments in both salt pills while the stages
are heat sunk to the 3 K stage. They are then thermally
isolated from the 3 K stage, and the magnetic ﬁeld at
the salt pills is ramped down, a process which adiabati-
cally disaligns the magnetic moments and requires them

to absorb energy (heat from the salt pills). At the end of
this cooling cycle, the NETS 1 K (GGG) stage reaches
a base temperature ∼550 mK and 50 mK (FAA) stage
reaches a base temperature of ∼45 mK. The ADR cycle
is accomplished in roughly 1.5 hours.

In order to raise the temperature of the 50 mK stage
from the base temperature to the detector operating tem-
perature (here, 70 mK), we use the superconducting mag-
net to apply a small magnetic ﬁeld (∼ 30 mT). This ﬁeld
is controlled by a feedback loop to stabilize the tempera-
ture read out by the 50 mK thermometry to the operating
temperature. The temperature of the 50 mK stage can
be controlled at 70 mK for over 24 hours (hold time) be-
fore the various power loads on the stage cause the zero
magnetic ﬁeld temperature to exceed the operating tem-
perature and the ADR cycle must be done again. Here,
the operating temperature of 70 mK was chosen as a
trade-oﬀ between detector performance and hold time.
Generally we ﬁnd improvements to detector performance
through lower operating temperature to saturate when
the operating temperature is ∼30 mK below TC. Also, a
hold time of around 24 hours is ideal for the typical work
schedule at the NIST EBIT, allowing us to cycle the mag-
net at the start of the day and collect uninterrupted data
with the spectrometer until EBIT operations end for the
day. When controlling the 50 mK stage to 70 mK, we
see a 4 µK standard deviation in the measured tempera-
ture. This is typical for systems we have deployed in the
ﬁeld21, and we have found this level of stability to not
limit single pixel energy resolution.

The array package (see Fig. 1) is placed at the front
of the 50 mK stage snout, simplifying the mating and
minimizing the distance between the spectrometer and
the x-ray source. Interface chips and SQ1 ampliﬁers are
also placed in the 50 mK snout. The 1 K stage cools the
SA ampliﬁer and associated circuitry.

Filters are positioned at the front of the 50 mK, 3 K,
and 50 K snouts, which allow for transmission of x-rays
while reﬂecting infrared (IR) radiation. These ﬁlters
are clamped and glued into Al frames, which are then
screwed into depressions at the front of the snouts and
lined with Al tape at the edges to prevent IR light leaks.
The main component of these ﬁlters is a thin (∼110 nm),
circular Al ﬁlm with a diameter of 17.1 mm. The Al ﬁlms
on the 50 mK and 3 K snouts are free-standing, whereas
the Al ﬁlm on the 50 K stage is backed by a rectangular
mesh composed of Ni. This mesh has a pitch of 363 µm
with bars that are 15 µm thick and 30 µm wide. Al was
chosen as the ﬁlm material due to ease of fabrication and
because it is a low-Z material with a high x-ray trans-
mittance in the NETS energy range.

We expect the ﬁlter on the 50 K stage to reﬂect >
∼99%
of the 300 K radiation on this stage65, and we expect
higher reﬂectance of the 3 K and 50 mK ﬁlters to 50 K
and 3 K radiation, respectively. The remainder of the
IR radiation is expected to be absorbed by the ﬁlters,
which can heat the ﬁlters and lead to increased blackbody
radiation. For this reason, the ﬁlters need to be thick

6

enough to thermalize well with the surrounding stage and
not cause excess thermal loading to the innermost stage.
Excess thermal loading can degrade the energy resolution
of the TES pixels. The 50 K stage ﬁlter, which is exposed
to more radiation than the other ﬁlters, includes a Ni
mesh to improve thermalization. A thicker (∼200 nm) Al
ﬁlm without a Ni mesh could be used in the case that the
Ni mesh limits our ability to reach a target uncertainty in
a line intensity measurement. One reason we attempted
to maximize low energy transmission is the possibility to
take simultaneous measurements on lines with energies
in this region with NETS and with an existing extreme
ultraviolet (EUV) spectrometer66 deployed at the NIST
EBIT, which is limited to energies of up to ∼500 eV.

A similar x-ray window is placed at the front of the
outermost snout (vacuum snout), but this one is also ca-
pable of holding atmospheric pressure and has a larger
diameter (25.4 mm). Here, the Al ﬁlm is ∼65 nm thick
and is backed by a ∼700 nm thick polyimide ﬁlm with
a by weight composition of 3% H, 71% C, 8% N, and
18% O. This window also contains a roughly hexagonal
mesh composed of 304 stainless steel. This mesh is on
a 360 µm pitch and has bars that are 100 µm thick and
30 µm wide. The errors in the ﬁlter/window parame-
ters as they relate to the system quantum eﬃciency are
discussed in Sec. III B.

III.

INTEGRATION WITH THE EBIT

A. Overview

NETS was integrated with the EBIT as shown in
Fig. 4. The spectrometer is held up with a rigid stand
through a single point hanging connection at the top of
the cryostat and a set of screws to ﬁx the rotation. The
stand is used align the spectrometer to the viewport of
the EBIT and hold up a fraction of the weight of the ex-
ternal calibration source after the spectrometer has been
ﬁxed to the EBIT. A remote motor (not pictured) for
the pulse tube cryocooler was placed on a rigid stand at
the same height as the pulse tube cryocooler, with a He
gas hose connecting the two components at roughly a 90◦
angle to minimize vibrations at the cryostat.

The front of the TES snout is mounted to a 6-way cross
that houses retractable metal targets for an external cal-
ibration source (Sec. III C). At the opposite end of this
6-way cross mates to a viewport in the midplane of the
EBIT through a second vacuum window (same designed
composition as window at front of TES snout), mechani-
cal valve, and short bellows (16 mm length). A top-down
cross-section of this arrangement is shown in Fig. 5. The
current setup therefore includes three separate vacuum
spaces during regular operation: the NETS cryostat, the
intermediate area between the cryostat and the EBIT
that includes the calibration source, and the EBIT cham-
ber. The separate vacuum space of the NETS cryostat
was used to ensure a lower base pressure in the EBIT

7

eﬃciency (still need one vacuum window to separate HV
cryostat side from UHV EBIT side). With the current
conﬁguration, the typical operating pressure in the EBIT
is <
∼ 10−8 Pa (10−10 Torr) when the ﬁeld coils are running
and actively cooled with liquid He.

B. X-ray Collection Eﬃciency

An understanding of the quantum eﬃciency (QE)
curve and associated uncertainties will be especially im-
portant when the scientiﬁc topic of interest is the mea-
surement of line intensity ratios. Using the xraylib67 li-
brary and thickness and elemental density measurements
of the windows and ﬁlters, we calculated their expected
transmittance. We combined this transmittance with the
expected absorption of a 965 nm thick Au absorber to
calculate a total detector QE. The average ﬁlter trans-
mittance, Au absorption, and combined QE curves are
shown in Fig. 6. Here, diﬀerent detectors will have vary-
ing QE curves primarily due to the geometry of the mesh
structures supporting the 50 K ﬁlter and vacuum win-
dows. In calculating the transmittance curve in Fig. 6,
the transmittances were averaged across the ﬁlter. The
QE has its peak of 47.8% at an x-ray energy of 3.43 keV.
As for the uncertainties in these parameters, the
Au absorbers have an absolute thickness uncertainty of
<
∼3% with <
∼1% thickness variation across the array (see
Sec. II B). In the ﬁlters and windows, the uncertainty in
the absolute Al thickness is 2% in the IR-blocking ﬁl-
ters and 3% in the vacuum windows. The uncertainty
in the elemental area densities of the polyimide is 2%.
Both the Al ﬁlm and polyimide display minimal spatial
variation. The combined uncertainty from these compo-
nents is fairly small (<1% ∆QE at 3.43 keV, including
pixel-to-pixel variations), but the uncertainty added by
the stainless steel meshes on the vacuum windows and
the Ni mesh on the 50 K ﬁlter is more signiﬁcant.

The stainless steel meshes on the vacuum windows are
fairly thick (∼100 µm), and x-ray transmission through
the mesh is expected to be low (<1% up to ∼15 keV). The
main uncertainty here comes in the open area of the mesh
(80–82%), and although this will create pixel-dependent
variations in the illumination, due to the thickness of
mesh, these variations are not expected to be energy-
dependent. The Ni mesh on the 50 K ﬁlter similarly has
an uncertainty associated with the open area (82–84%)
of the mesh. In addition, the Ni mesh is relatively thin
(15±2 µm), and there can be fairly large transmission of
x-rays through the mesh, especially near the K absorp-
tion edge (up to ∼50%) and above ∼10 keV (∼5–65% be-
tween 10–20 keV). This will cause energy-dependent vari-
ations in illumination across diﬀerent pixels on the array.
When measuring line intensity ratios, these eﬀects are in
part mitigated by coadding (averaging) results across all
detectors. If necessary for a given application, a series
of measurements at various x-ray energies can be taken
to map out the mesh positions relative to the TES mi-

Figure 4: (A) Photograph and (B) Computer aided design
(CAD) rendering of the TES x-ray spectrometer mounted to
the NIST EBIT. The spectrometer (right) is mated to a
viewport in the midplane of the EBIT (left) through a 6-way
vacuum cross that also provides access to an external x-ray
calibration source (center). In the CAD rendering, the seven
remaining EBIT viewports mated to other detectors and
EBIT components as well as external magnetic shielding
around the spectrometer snout are not pictured, for clarity.

chamber. Here, the cryostat is designed only for high vac-
uum (HV) and uses Klein Flange (KF) ﬁttings whereas
the calibration source and EBIT chamber are designed
for UHV with ConFlat (CF) ﬁttings. The second vac-
uum window between the EBIT chamber and calibration
source was used as an additional precaution during the
original commissioning run. In the case of a vacuum fail-
ure in the calibration source chamber during operation of
the EBIT and NETS, the conditions in the EBIT cham-
ber and spectrometer cryostat would be preserved. Af-
ter gaining some conﬁdence with our setup, one of these
vacuum windows may be removed to improve collection

A.TESSpectrometerEBITExternalCalibrationSourceSnoutB.8

Figure 5: Top-down cross-section schematic of NETS mounted to the NIST EBIT through an external calibration source
chamber. The total distance between the EBIT trap center and the TES array is 520 mm, with vacuum windows positioned
220 mm and 500 mm away from the EBIT trap center. IR blocking ﬁlters internal to the spectrometer cryostat are positioned
∼4 mm apart, with the innermost 50 mK ﬁlter positioned ∼4 mm from the TES array. Note that the solid angle is limited by
the radius of the active area of the array and is not obstructed by other components along the x-ray beam path, such as the
drift tube slits or gate valve walls.

crocalorimeters, given an expected no-mesh illumination
pattern.

The distance between the face of the TES array and
the trap center is nominally 520 mm when the system
is under vacuum, with 1–2 cm of leeway due to contrac-
tion of the bellows and exact positioning of the array
package along the 50 mK stage during assembly. The ac-
tive area of the array ﬁts within a 5.3 mm radius circle,
but only x-rays that hit an absorber are accurately de-
tected by the spectrometer. A collimator with an array of
280 µm×280 µm apertures, slightly smaller than the ab-
sorber length and width, is placed over the detector array
to ensure x-rays making it to the array only hit the ab-
sorbers. The area of the individual apertures is smaller
than the detector absorber area (340 µm×340 µm) in
order to account for any inaccuracy in alignment when
mounting the aperture chip. The active area of the ar-
ray is therefore reduced to 15.1 mm2, down from the
22.2 mm2 that would be expected from the total area of
the absorbers (∼32% reduction). This results in a solid
angle of 5.57 × 10−5 sr = 0.183 deg2.
In other words,
assuming isotropic emission, a fraction 4.43 × 10−6 of x-
rays originating from the trap center can make their way
to a detector, and the chance that one of these x-rays is
actually absorbed by a detector is determined by the QE
curve in Fig. 6. It should be noted that the idea of solid
angle may not be perfectly correct here as the x-ray emit-
ting region is more an extended line source rather than
a simple point source. The beam diameter is < 100 µm,

and a roughly 20 mm length of the trap is visible through
the vertical drift tube slits. Based on this beam shape,
the distance of the source to the detectors, and radius of
the active area of the array, we would expect a uniform
x-ray illumination of the pixels on the array if the meshes
backing some of the ﬁlters and windows were not present.

C. Calibration with External X-ray Sources

We plan to use well known reference lines to gener-
ate calibration curves for the NETS microcalorimeters.
Although the EBIT is capable of generating many such
lines, it is limited to the gas and metal targets accessible
to the EBIT at the time of measurement, and exchang-
ing these targets can be a lengthy process. This leads
to regions in energy space in which the EBIT cannot
generate lines with well known positions, which can be
problematic if a measurement requires energy calibration
in such a region. A more ﬂexible method for generating
well known x-rays lines for calibration was desired.

For this reason, there is a 6-way cross between the
EBIT and spectrometer used to mate an external x-ray
calibration source to the system. This source is composed
a of set of solid samples (targets) and a mechanism to ex-
cite characteristic radiation from those targets. We can
directly excite conductive targets through electron im-
pact excitation with an electron gun, or create secondary
x-rays with conductive or non-conductive targets through

520 mm220 mm280 mmEBITSnout34 mm CFGate ValveEBIT DriftTube SlitExternal Calibration6-way 114 mm CF CrossVacuumWindowsIR BlockingFilters (3x)TES ArrayViewport+ BellowsDetector and ReadoutChip Assembly9

Figure 6: Upper : Calculated average QE for a detector in
NETS, including losses due to transmittance through the 2
vacuum windows and the 3 IR-blocking ﬁlters as well as the
properties of the Au absorbers. The absorption curve is
labeled with the M and L absorption edges of the Au
absorbers and the ﬁlter transmittance curve is labeled with
the the most prominent absorption K edges of materials in
the ﬁlters, primarily Al (from ﬁlm) and Ni (from mesh).
The reduction in collection eﬃciency due to the aperture
chip masking of the absorber area (∼32%) is not included in
this ﬁgure. Lower : Low energy portion of the QE curve,
which is dominated largely by the ﬁlter transmittance. In
addition to the Al K edge, the K edges of C, N, and O (from
polymer backing) are visible here.

illumination with a commercial x-ray tube source. We
have used two tube sources, with Pd and W anodes, and
a variable beam energy of up to ∼25 kV and current of up
to ∼2 mA. The targets are on a linear actuator, allowing
for manual switching of the targets without needing to
break vacuum. The targets are held at 45 degrees to the
electron gun and to the spectrometer, enabling character-
istic x-rays to eﬃciently arrive at the spectrometer. This
ﬂexibility in source type and targets is useful for generat-
ing characteristic x-rays and calibration curves targeted
for a speciﬁc application.

A spectrum taken using the external calibration source

Figure 7: (A) Spectrum from example external calibration
source measurement. Here, Fe, Co, and Ni were used as the
targets and the total array count rate was kept to under
200 cps. The Kα, and to a lesser extent Kβ, lines are the
strongest features observed in the spectrum. (B) Detector
energy resolutions extracted from ﬁts to Kα lines from a
variety of external calibration source measurements. The
resolution is measured to be 3.7 eV at the Mg Kα
(1.25 keV) and 5.0 eV at Ni Kα (7.48 keV). The best ﬁt line
is used to show the expected energy resolution of the
detectors across this energy region. Here, only the statistical
uncertainty associated with ﬁtting the line model is shown.
Other sources of uncertainty, including uncertainty in the
line shape model, slight variations in noise pickup and
electrical crosstalk, and excess drift leftover after correction
(see Sec. V), account for a scatter of ∼100 meV.

with a target consisting of Fe, Co, and Ni foils is shown in
the top panel of Fig. 7. X-rays were excited with an x-ray
tube source with W anode. A beam voltage of 15 kV was
used, and the current (∼20 µA) was tuned to keep the
count rates at ∼1 cps/detector in order to resemble the
low rates expected in the EBIT measurements. The data
analysis is described in Sec. V. The energy resolution ex-

2.55.07.510.012.515.017.520.0020406080100%Al KAu M5,M4Au L3,L2,L1Ni KAu AbsorptionFilter TransmittanceQuantum Efficiency0.250.500.751.001.251.501.752.00Energy (keV)01020304050% Quantum EfficiencyC KN KO KAl K6250650067507000725075007750Energy (eV)0100020003000400050006000Counts per 1 eV binFe K(cid:1)Co K(cid:1)Fe K(cid:2)Ni K(cid:1)Co K(cid:2)A.0200040006000800010000Energy (eV)3.503.754.004.254.504.755.005.25E (eV)Mg(cid:1)lMnFeCoNiB.tracted from Kα lines in the coadded spectra of this and
other external calibration source measurements is shown
in the bottom panel of Fig. 7. Here, the expected natural
line shapes68–70 are convolved with a Gaussian represent-
ing the detector response, and the Gaussian FWHM is
taken to be the energy resolution.

D. External Magnetic Shielding

The low temperature TES array and SQUID electron-
ics are sensitive to magnetic ﬁelds. Excess magnetic ﬁelds
could raise the TC of the superconducting components,
broaden the superconducting-to-normal transition in the
detectors, and cause shifts in SQUID ampliﬁer gain. In
worst cases, magnetic ﬂux trapped in the superconduct-
ing components can drive them into their normal state,
rendering detectors or SQUIDs with trapped ﬂux unus-
able until the ﬂux traps are released by warming the com-
ponents far above their TC, a lengthy process. For this
reason, in previous NIST TES spectrometers the 50 K
and 3 K snout shields enclosing these components are
comprised of mu-metal71 to attenuate Earth’s magnetic
ﬁeld, typical background laboratory ﬁelds, and fringing
ﬁelds from the ADR magnet (snout magnetic ﬁeld shield-
ing described further in Ref. 21). In addition, the 50 mK
snout and ﬁlter enclosing the TES array and ﬁrst stage
SQUIDs are fabricated with Al, which goes supercon-
ducting during an ADR magnet cycle and provides addi-
tional magnetic ﬁeld shielding72. Similarly, the SA am-
plﬁers on the 1 K stage are enclosed by a superconducting
Nb box. These components are also shielded from the in-
ternal ADR magnet fringing ﬁelds through a cylindrical
vanadium permendur magnet enclosure (for a detailed
description of ADR magnet shielding with vanadium per-
mendur, see Ref. 52). Extrapolating from measurements
on systems with similar shielding arrangements21,52, we
can expect a magnetic ﬁeld on order 1 µT in the area
of the detector package when the ADR magnet is con-
trolled at ﬁelds that are typical for temperature regu-
lation. Static ﬁelds of this magnitude are largely ac-
commodated for by careful gradiometric SQUID ampli-
ﬁer design73 and proper selection of the SQUID biasing
parameters. Drifts in the ampliﬁer gain due to this ﬁeld
decaying over the course of an ADR cycle have been mea-
sured to be small compared to thermal drifts and are cor-
rected for during pulse processing, as will be discussed in
Sec. V.

Somewhat unique to this setup was the additional
strong stray magnetic ﬁeld (primarily in the transverse
direction of the snout) of the main EBIT magnet in the
region of the NETS snout. The compactness of the var-
ious snout temperature stages does not allow for addi-
tional interior magnetic ﬁeld shielding without a costly
redesign of the snout. We instead found it much more
simple to mount two concentric 1.6 mm thick cylindrical
mu-metal shields (designed for factor of ∼100 attenuation
in the transverse direction) over the vacuum snout where

10

space is much less limited. The goal here was to reduce
the expected magnitude of the stray EBIT ﬁeld directly
outside the vacuum snout to levels comparable to typi-
cal laboratory background. The shielding internal to the
cryostat could then null the remaining ﬁeld at the detec-
tors and SQUIDs to values typically seen under temper-
ature regulation. We tested the magnetic ﬁeld suppres-
sion of these external shields using a 3-axis Hall eﬀect
magnetometer with an estimated uncertainty of <
∼5%.
When the EBIT is ramped to a maximum ﬁeld current
of 147.7 A, we measure a ﬁeld of 3 mT directly outside
the external mu-metal shield and 30 µT between the ex-
ternal mu-metal shield and vacuum jacket near where the
array is located. This is below the background ﬁeld in
the laboratory, which was measured to be 58 µT prior
to ramping the EBIT magnet. With this, we expect no
signiﬁcant excess ﬁeld in the area of the detectors and
SQUIDs from the EBIT magnet.

IV. MEASUREMENTS

For our initial tests we took x-ray EBIT measurements
on previously studied ions to demonstrate the capabilities
of NETS. These are summarized in Table I. The majority
of these measurements were done on He-like and H-like
ions of injected neutral gases, including CO2, Ne, and Ar.
We also used the MeVVA5 ion source of the NIST EBIT
to inject metallic ions into the trap. Here, we primarily
focused on Ni-like W, which was the subject of a recent
EBIT study74. The ions listed in Table I have fairly well
known line shapes and positions, useful for benchmarking
a new instrument. They can also be used as calibration
lines for measurements of ion charge states with less well
known spectra, which is planned in future measurements.
We report on measurements taken across three days,
and some details of the experiment varied day to day.
The horizontal lines in Table I separate measurements
taken on diﬀerent days. The NETS ADR magnet was
cycled at the beginning of each morning, altering the
magnetic ﬁeld environment in the detectors and SQUIDs
and changing gain values. For this reason, we take cal-
ibration data for the TES microcalorimeters each day,
and data from diﬀerent days of measurement are ana-
lyzed independently from one another. We note that
precise (∼ ±0.1 eV) measurements of line energy re-
quire more calibration data than other measurements.
We have not investigated whether the calibration is sta-
ble enough to be reused from day to day in any case.
The ion trap dumping/recycling time was set at 5 s
for the ﬁrst day of measurements, but then was subse-
quently changed to 3 s on day 2 and 3. This is a pa-
rameter that gets tuned using past experience operating
the EBIT in order to improve charge state purity and
increase count rates. The Fe stand originally support-
ing the external calibration source was found to have a
permanent magnetic ﬁeld which limited the maximum
collector current (proxy for the maximum count rate at

11

Table I: Measurement log. The ions studied in this intial measurement campaign were He-like and H-like ions of injected
neutral gases and Ni-like ions of metallic W injected with a MeVVA.

Ion

Ne
Ar
CO2
W
W
Ar
Ne
Ne
W
Ar
W
CO2

Shield
Voltage (kV)
4.0
10.0
2.0
4.1
4.1
9.5
4.0
4.0
4.1
9.5
4.1
2.0

Collector
Current (mA)
99
92
53
105
105
108
108
139
137
140
145
58

Ionization
State
He/H-like
He/H-like
He/H-like
Ni-like
Ni-like
He/H-like
He/H-like
He/H-like
Ni-like
He/H-like
Ni-like
He/H-like

Count Rate
(cps/array)
180.9
51.4
35.5
136.4
164.1
51.3
179.6
266.1
264.1
52.4
232.4
58.8

Total
Counts
325736
185935
139690
651124
406991
192346
343093
577873
943025
127000
378798
79118

a more exact determination of the energy, further pulse
processing must be done, including combining the pulse
records with noise data and optimally ﬁltering the pulses
(steps outlined in Sec. V). The pulses across all work-
ing microcalorimeters have an average 1/e rise time of
60 µs and fall time of 640 µs. The pulse record length
was chosen to be long enough to store all the informa-
tion in a pulse needed to accurately determine the pulse
energy, but not too long as to reduce throughput due to
pulse pile-up and detector crosstalk. For these reasons, a
record length of 1000 samples (4.8 ms) was chosen, with
50% of the record allocated to the pre-trigger (samples
before x-ray arrival).

V. DATA REDUCTION

We used the Microcalorimeter Analysis Software Sys-
tem (MASS) Python package to reduce data from raw
pulse and noise records to a variety of output products
such as energy calibrated spectra76,77. First, the raw
data pulses (e.g., Fig. 8) are passed through a set of cuts
designed to remove piled up pulses and other irregular-
ities. An average pulse proﬁle is then created for each
detector, which is used along with noise data to opti-
mally ﬁlter the pulses. Next, the pulses undergo a tem-
poral drift correction. Finally, the detectors are energy-
calibrated using well known x-ray lines. The ﬁnal prod-
uct is a list of time-tagged, energy-calibrated x-ray events
for each detector. The steps of this analysis routine are
discussed in more detail below.

Directly after loading the raw pulse records, a variety
of summary quantities are calculated. Two of these quan-
tities, the pre-trigger root mean square (RMS) and post-
peak derivative, are used to cut out anomalous pulses.
An unexpectedly high pre-trigger RMS typically indi-
cates that the detector was triggered during the decay
of a prior x-ray pulse, whereas a high positive post-peak
derivative likely indicates a second x-ray arrived after the
peak of the triggering pulse. Additionally, we use outlier

Figure 8: Sample pulse records for a single microcalorimeter
from the H-like 1s-2p transition in O, Ne, and Ar. Here, the
transitions occur at three diﬀerent energies, and the taller
pulses indicate more energetic transitions. Note that to get
a precise estimate of the x-ray energy, further pulse
processing and ﬁltering is required.

the spectrometer) of the EBIT to below past levels. This
stand was exchanged for an Al stand between days 2
and 3, after which the collector current was identical to
that achieved prior to external calibration source instal-
lation. The higher maximum collector current resulted
in higher count rates on day 3, as shown in Table I. With
respect to detector performance, these are relatively low
count rates (<
∼ 2 cps/detector), so pulse pileup75 and
crosstalk60 events happen infrequently and have very lit-
tle eﬀect on the data quality.

The raw data products are pulse records, each contain-
ing the information of a single x-ray event. Some sample
pulse records from the H-like 1s-2p transition in O, Ne,
and Ar are shown in Fig. 8. The height of a trace is
representative of the energy of the incident x-ray, but for

−2−1012Time since t igge  (ms)0.81.01.21.41.61.8ADC units (a.u.)×104H-like 1s-2p sample pulsesA  - 3322.99 eVNe - 1021.95 eVO - 653.68 eVrise and peak times as indicators of secondary pulses ar-
riving during these periods, though these events are fairly
rare within these short periods. Noise record data are ag-
gregated to determine expected deviations for these cut
quantities, setting the limits for these cuts. Typical pulse
cut fractions were less than 2% at these low count rates.
These are high SNR cut quantities, so we do not see any
energy dependence to these cuts. The exception to this
is when an x-ray is energetic enough to produce a pulse
with a slew rate that exceeds the limit set by the speed
of the readout electronics, resulting in a highly abnormal
pulse record that is generally cut for a combination of the
summary quantities listed above. In an energy spectrum,
this would be seen as a drop oﬀ in counts near this high
energy readout limit. In addition to cutting pulses from
detectors, entire detectors may be cut during this step.
Here, we check to see if any detectors have an abnormally
low number of accepted pulse records. This typically in-
dicates a more serious issue with the individual detector
or the readout chain of that detector.

The next step in the data reduction pipeline is opti-
mally ﬁltering the pulses78,79. First, an average pulse
is created for each detector using records at a line(s) of
interest in the raw pulse height spectrum, although we
ﬁnd the latter steps of the data reduction to be largely
insensitive to the exact choice in energy at which this
average pulse is created. The average pulse is combined
with the noise data, which is assumed to be stationary, in
order to produce a ﬁlter that maximizes the SNR when
estimating the pulse height. This ﬁlter is designed to be
insensitive to the exact arrival time of a pulse relative to
the sampling clock76. The noise data are typically taken
during the same day as the measurements (same ADR
cycle), largely based on precedent; we measure roughly
the same energy resolution when using noise data from
another day. Each pulse record is passed through the ﬁl-
ter for its associated detector and a ﬁltered pulse height
is extracted.

In NETS, we observe a ∼ (3 − 5) × 10−4/hr drift in
the fractional pulse height, which varied from detector
to detector. A major portion of this drift results from
the fact that the 1 K stage temperature increases from
∼500 mK immediately after an ADR cycle to ∼1 K 10
to 20 hours later. To reach line placement accuracy to
better than a few parts in 104 for measurements with in-
tegration times of on order hours it is necessary correct
for this drift. We use a spectral entropy-minimizing al-
gorithm that uses the baseline, or pretrigger mean, and
the x-ray timestamps as indicators of drift in the ﬁltered
pulse heights (see Ref. 76 for more detail). Typically, one
or multiple strong lines in the calibration data are mea-
sured at multiple times during an ADR cycle to generate
the data necessary for drift correction, but strong lines in
the measured EBIT data could also be used for this pur-
pose if they exist for a given measurement. This approach
to drift correction has previously been used to achieve on
order 10−5 fractional line position accuracy80,81. In addi-
tion to the drift in pulse height throughout an ADR cy-

12

cle, there is also a small amount of pulse height variation
between diﬀerent ADR cycles (detectors typically show
∼ 10−4 − 10−3 cycle-to-cycle variation in fractional pulse
height when measured at the same time after the start of
an ADR cycle). We generally calibrate and analyze data
from diﬀerent ADR cycles more or less independently, so
these cycle-to-cycle changes are far less signiﬁcant to the
analyzed data quality than the drift observed during an
individual ADR cycle.

Energy calibration is performed by identifying a set of
well known lines in a particular spectrum, ﬁtting those
lines with their known lineshape and the detector re-
sponse function, and generating an interpolating func-
tion between ﬁltered pulse height (including the various
corrections) and energy. We identify lines in the ﬁltered
pulse height spectrum of a single arbitrarily chosen ref-
erence pixel by hand, then use a dynamic time warping
(DTW82,83) based algorithm to identify the same lines
in all other pixels. DTW techniques are typically used
for speech recognition, where the time vector is warped
to determine the correlation of two sound sequences with
potentially diﬀerent speeds. Aligning the energy scale
of detectors is a fundamentally very similar problem,
with the ﬁltered pulse height space of each detector get-
ting warped to match that of a reference detector. We
use a Python implementation of the FastDTW84 algo-
rithm. Once this initial calibration is done and line po-
sitions across the broad spectrum are roughly known, a
more precise determination of the line centers (and an-
chor points) can be done by ﬁtting the spectral features
with their known line shapes, if available. Using these
anchor points we create a “gain” function G using a cu-
bic spline. The energy E is calculated for each pulse
as E(P H) = G(P H) × P H, where P H is the ﬁltered
pulse height. The end result is a list of time-tagged,
energy-calibrated x-ray events for each individual detec-
tor. From here, the desired output product, such as an
energy spectrum with particular bin widths, can easily
be created.

VI. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

A. Gas Spectra

The pulse records of He-like and H-like C, O, Ne, and
Ar were processed through our data reduction pipeline as
outlined above. In the data with CO2 gas injection, due
to ionization eﬃciencies and poor transmittance through
the Al ﬁlters at low energies, primarily O rather than
C lines were observed. With all of these gases, the four
most prominent lines were used for both DTW line iden-
tiﬁcation and energy calibration. These were the He-like
transitions to the 1s2 1S ground state from the 1s2p 1P
and 1s3p 1P excited states and the H-like transitions to
the 1s 2S ground state from the 2p 2P and 3p 2P excited
states.
In the CO2 and Ne data sets, the H-like tran-
sition to the 1s 2S state from the 4p 2P state was also

13

Figure 9: Coadded CO2 (primarily O), Ne, and Ar spectra with the gases ionized to primarily He-like (red) and H-like (blue)
states. The left-most red dashed line corresponds to the transition from the 1s2s 3S excited state in He-like ions. The
remaining red dashed lines make up a series of transitions from the 1snp 1P states, where n corresponds to the principal
quantum number. The blue dashed lines represent 1s–np transitions in H-like ions, where n again corresponds to the principal
quantum number. The shaded areas represent the unresolved features that make up the high energy end of the He-like and
H-like 1snp and np series, with the solid line representing the ionization limit. In each panel, only the ﬁrst 3 He-like and ﬁrst
2 H-like transitions are labeled, for clarity.

suﬃciently bright to add a calibration anchor at this tran-
sition energy. He-like and H-like line positions were lo-
cated using the NIST Atomic Spectra Database (ASD)85,
which includes a compilation of best known line positions
for these ions from theory86,87 and experiment88–90.

A ﬁnal cut was used to remove any detectors with an
outlier resolution (here, >5 eV measured at the H-like
2p 2P line energy), as well as any detectors that failed a
ﬁt during energy calibration. Detectors that passed this
ﬁnal cut had their x-ray events coadded. X-ray events
from the data sets of a given ion, taken across all three
days of measurement, were added together. The coad-
ded spectra of our CO2, Ne, and Ar measurements are
shown in Fig. 9. An average of 132, 141, and 125 de-
tectors passed all cuts for the CO2, Ne, and Ar data,
respectively, and are coadded together in the spectra.

In comparing these spectra we note that the ionization
fractions are not necessarily the same, as the O spec-
trum contains more intense H-like lines whereas the Ar
spectrum contains more intense He-like features. Never-
theless, all three spectra contain two series of lines: the
He-like transitions, shown in red, and the H-like transi-
tions, shown in blue. These relatively simple and well
known series of lines are useful for testing spectrometer
performance and can also be used for energy calibration
purposes in future measurements.

Features in the spectrum were ﬁt with a model that
is a convolution of a Lorentzian proﬁle (transition with
width dominated by natural line broadening) and a Gaus-
sian proﬁle (detector response). The convolved model is
known as a Voigt proﬁle. For these lines the Lorentzian
component of this model generally has a much smaller

5006007008009001021041s2s 3S1s2p 1P1s3p 1P2p 2P3p 2PCO2 (Primarily O)90010001100120013001400102103104Counts per 1 eV bin1s2s 3S1s2p 1P1s3p 1P2p 2P3p 2PNe30003200340036003800400042004400Energy (eV)1021041s2s 3S1s2p 1P1s3p 1P2p 2P3p 2PArTable II: Gas Measurement Coadded Spectra Resolutions

14

Ion Species
Conﬁguration
Term
J
E (eV)86,88
∆E (eV)
E (eV)86,90
∆E (eV)
E (eV)87
∆E (eV)

O

Ne

Ar

He-like
1s2p
1P
1
573.95

H-like
2p
2P
3/2
653.68

He-like
1s3p
1P
1
665.62

H-like
3p
2P
3/2
774.63

3.75 ± 0.03 3.73 ± 0.02 3.73 ± 0.04 3.76 ± 0.03

922.02

1021.95

1073.77

1210.96

3.63 ± 0.01 3.67 ± 0.01 3.66 ± 0.01 3.64 ± 0.02

3139.58

3322.99

3683.85

3935.72

3.88 ± 0.01 3.89 ± 0.02 4.13 ± 0.03 4.16 ± 0.05

Many x-rays lines generated by the EBIT emulate a
monochromatic source much more closely than other x-
ray lines easily generated in the laboratory (such as the
K lines in Sec. III C). As a result, the EBIT-generated x-
rays lines with simple structure, narrow transition width,
and few nearby interfering lines may prove useful for
studying detector behavior. For example, lines that re-
sult in a spectrum with peak to background ratio greater
than 100 can be used to look for precent scale devia-
tions from a gaussian response function, while very nar-
row lines may be useful for accurately measuring energy
resolutions approaching 0.5 eV in future detectors opti-
mized for ∼500 eV measurements92. As an example we
have used 1021.95 eV 1s–2p transition in H-like Ne to
measure the low energy tail fraction56,93 in our detector
response and ﬁnd it to be 3% at this energy.

We measured the energy resolution at four distinct
lines in each spectrum. The resolution here is taken
to be the FWHM of the Gaussian gets convolved with
Lorentzians in the ﬁtting process. The results are shown
in Table II. Note that the line energies listed in the table
are from previous theory and measurements and are not
newly measured line positions. The uncertainties listed
are ﬁtting uncertainties in the width of the Gaussian com-
ponent of the ﬁt and are typically higher in lines with a
lower number of recorded counts. The resolutions are
roughly 3.7 eV in the lower energy O and Ne spectra
and increase to about 4 eV in the Ar data.
It is gen-
erally expected that the resolution of these TES x-ray
microcalorimeters will degrade somewhat with increased
photon energy21,42 (see Fig. 7, bottom), therefore it is
anomalous that the O lines have slightly worse resolu-
tion than the Ne lines. We ﬁnd that the slope in pulse
height over energy of the detector response is higher at
low energies, as expected for better resolution at lower
energies. We also ﬁnd that the calibration and coadding
processes are not responsible for the increased resolution
at the O lines. The most plausible explanation we have
explored is the existence of low level interfering features
coming predominatingly from H-like N and lower charge
states of O, which can be close in energy to the features
of interest. For example, the structure in the region of
the 1s2p 1P line contains not only He-like O lines, but
there are also lines blended into the structure originating
from doubly excited Li-like O transitions. These low level

Figure 10: Example ﬁt of coadded Ne data at the H-like
transitions from the 2p excited state to the 1s ground state.
This ﬁt includes two narrow Lorentzians (one per
transition): one from the J = 1/2 level at 1021.498 eV and
the other from the J = 3/2 level at 1021.953 eV. The
Lorentzians were convolved with a variable width Gaussian
matching the detector response. For this spectral feature,
the ﬁt Gaussian FWHM is 3.65 ± 0.01 eV. The residuals of
the ﬁt are plotted over a
N error model characteristic of
single photon counting statistics.

√

width than the Gaussian component. For example, from
transition probabilities in the He-like states91, we expect
the natural line width of the 1s2p 1P–1s 2S transition to
be ∼14 meV in O, ∼37 meV in Ne, and ∼440 meV in
Ar. The Gaussian FWHM (detector energy resolution),
on the other hand, is ∼4 eV at these energies. For sim-
plicity, we use a ﬁxed 0.1 eV Lorentzian width (rough av-
erage for these systems) for all of our line models and note
the exact choice of Lorentzian width has little impact on
estimating detector response. The Lorentzian and Gaus-
sian widths add roughly in quadrature, and even using a
0.1 eV Lorentzian width for He-like Ar 1s2p 1P – 1s 2S
transition instead of 0.44 eV results in only a ∼20 meV
diﬀerence in the convolved proﬁle width.

0.000.250.500.751.001.251.50Counts per 0.25 eV bin×104H-like Ne, 2p TransitionCoadded DataFit101010151020102510301035Energy (eV)−2000200ResidualsResiduals±√Nfeatures are usually not individually resolvable in the O
spectrum, and it can be diﬃcult to accurately predict
their intensities in the line ﬁt models.

The combination of high resolving power and x-ray
collection eﬃciency make NETS particularly valuable for
resolving faint lines within a broad spectrum that often
contains much stronger features. As an example of this,
we measured the SNR of the highest order resolvable line
(deﬁned here as being at least two FWHMs away from
next highest order line and having a SNR of at least 1)
in the He-like 1snp and H-like np transitions, where n
is the principal quantum number. The SNR is taken to
be the amplitude of the ﬁt function over the uncertainty
in that amplitude. With this deﬁnition of resolvability
in place for the O spectrum, we could fully resolve the
He-like 1s5p line with a SNR of 30.6 and the H-like 5p
line with a SNR of 35.6. In the Ne spectrum, we could
resolve up to the He-like 1s6p line with a SNR of 48.3
and the H-like 6p line with a SNR of 48.1. Finally, in the
Ar spectrum, we could resolve the transition from the
He-like 1s9p state with a SNR of 8.4 and the H-like 9p
state with a SNR of 4.3.

Finally, we used the He-like 1s4p 1P line in O, Ne, and
to some extent in Ar to demonstrate the accuracy of our
energy calibration procedure over narrow spectral win-
dows. The He-like 1s4p 1P line was not used as anchor
point to generate the calibration curves for any of the gas
ion spectra. The determined energies were 697.788 eV,
1127.070 eV, and 3875.027 eV for the O, Ne, and Ar ions,
respectively. Prior results87,88,90 report these energies at
697.795 eV, 1127.095 eV, and 3874.886 eV, making our
calibration as measured at the He-like 1s4p 1P line oﬀ
by 7 meV, 25 meV, and 141 meV, respectively. This
reﬂects the accuracy of the calibration routine when a
high density of strong calibration lines are available in
a narrow energy band as is the case in the H-like and
He-like O and Ne data. The line placement accuracy is
poorer in the higher energy H-like and He-like Ar spec-
trum where the accuracy is limited by low statistics in
the highest energy calibration line for individual detec-
tors and ADR cycles. We believe, based on results with
similar spectrometers80, that NETS is capable of better
than 141 meV line accuracy at these higher energies, and
a dedicated line placement measurement would have im-
proved the line placement accuracy here.

B. Tungsten Spectrum

Compared to the individual gas spectra, the Ni-like
W spectrum was fairly broad (1.5–4.0 keV) and required
more anchor points to properly align and calibrate the en-
tire energy range. A ∼2.5 keV range is typical for many
of our planned future measurements. The lower level for
all reported transitions is the 3s23p63d10 ground state.
Here, we adopt the naming convention of Clementson
et al. 201074 and use the Ni-2, Ni-4, Ni-11, Ni-16, Ni-
17, and Ni-20 lines for detector alignment and energy

15

Table III: Ni-like W Energy Calibration Accuracy

Upper
Level
Ni-3
Ni-5
Ni-6
Ni-12
Ni-13
Ni-19
Ni-21
Ni-24
Ni-26

Measured
Energy (eV)
1629.6
1829.7
2015.5
2552.6
2650.7
3196.8
3424.9
3572.5
3637.2

Ref. Exp.74
Energy (eV)
1629.8(3)
1829.6(4)
2015.4(4)
2553.0(4)
2651.3(4)
3196.8(3)
3426.0(4)
3574.1(5)
3639.5(6)

Diﬀerence
(eV)
-0.2
0.1
0.1
-0.4
-0.6
0.0
-1.1
-1.6
-2.3

In addition, we use the transition from
calibration.
the (3s23p63d3
3/23d6
5/24p1/2)J=1 level at 1728.4 eV as re-
ported by Elliot et al. 199594, which was used as a cali-
brator in the Clementson et al. 2010 work. This spans the
energy range of 1562.9 eV ((3s23p63d4
3/23d5
5/24s1/2)J=3,
or Ni-2) to 3259.9 eV ((3s23p63d3
3/23d6
5/26f5/2)J=1, or Ni-
20).

Detectors that passed all of the data reduction cuts
were coadded to form a Ni-like W spectrum. Again,
detectors with resolutions worse that 5 eV are disquali-
ﬁed from the coadding, this time measured at 2179.7 eV
((3s23p63d3
5/24f5/2)J=1, or Ni-8). An average of 135
detectors passed all cuts for the Ni-like W analysis. The
coadded spectrum is shown in Fig. 11.

3/23d6

The Ni-like W measurement provides an example of
the intended energy calibration routine over a wider en-
ergy range (1.5–4.0 keV) and with a more complex spec-
trum (many electron system) than that of the He- and
H-like gas measurements. To test the calibration rou-
tine, we ﬁt a number of spectral features with varying
intensities and distances to calibration anchors. We com-
pared the positions of these features to the same previous
measurements74 that were used to ﬁx the energy calibra-
tion anchors. Here, the goal is not to report absolute
energy measurements of these transitions, but rather to
check how good of a job the calibration routine can do
given a set of calibration points. The results are summa-
rized in Table III.

Here, we see that the the majority of the measured
energies between Ni-3 and Ni-19 fall within the measure-
ment uncertainties reported by Clementson et al. 201074.
Lines that are far from calibration anchor points (e.g., Ni-
12 and Ni-13) tended to have poorer placement accuracy
than those close to anchor points (such as Ni-5 and Ni-
6). In addition, the relatively low intensities of lines past
3 keV made using any lines in the region as calibration
points diﬃcult, and the Ni-20 line was the highest en-
ergy line we could use for calibration without sacriﬁcing
a majority of the detectors due to failed ﬁts. Lines with
energies above the Ni-20, such as Ni-21, Ni-24, and Ni-
26, had increasingly worse placement accuracy the fur-
ther in energy they were from this highest energy anchor
point. This reﬂects on the limitations of the calibration

16

Figure 11: Ni-like W spectrum, coadded across four diﬀerent data sets (total integration time of 3.46 hours) with an average
of 135 detectors passing all cuts. The spectrum is separated into four regions of energy, for clarity. The blue dashed lines
represent transitions that were used as anchor points in a smoothed cubic spline during the energy calibration routine. The
line labeled ’Ni-cal’ is the transition from the (3s23p63d3
5/24p1/2)J=1 upper level and the remaining labeled lines follow
the naming convention of Clementson et al. 201074. The red lines represent features whose center positions were ﬁt as a test
of the energy calibration accuracy.

3/23d6

150016001700180019002000012 ×104Ni-2Ni-calNi-4Ni-3Ni-5Coadded Ni-like W Spectrum200021002200230024002500024 ×104Ni-7Ni-8Ni-11Ni-62500260027002800290030000.00.51.0 ×104Ni-16Ni-17Ni-12Ni-13300032003400360038004000Energy (eV)024 ×103Ni-20Ni-19Ni-21Ni-24Ni-26Counts per 1 eV binroutine for estimating the energy of pulses outside region
enclosed by the anchor points where the calibration curve
is unbounded. Altogether, this highlights the importance
of choosing calibration targets with multiple lines close in
energy to and enclosing those that are of scientiﬁc interest
and will help guide us in developing calibration measure-
ment strategies in future measurement campaigns.

C. Time-resolved Analyses

17

Microcalorimeters can provide valuable x-ray arrival
time information that can be used to probe time-varying
phenomena in an EBIT. NETS achieves its individual
x-ray arrival time resolution as follows. During the ini-
tial setup of the readout electronics, a phase calibration
is done to address physical and hardware latency varia-
tions and synchronize timing between readout channels
to ∼200 ps. The readout row-to-row pixel timing un-
certainty is tied to the timing jitter of the master clock,
which is expected to be below a ns. These timescales are
orders of magnitude below the sampling rate, which ulti-
mately limits the x-ray arrival time resolution. NETS has
a maximum sampling period of 4.8 µs when reading out
all 24 rows, and this period scales linearly with the num-
ber of rows being read out. The x-ray arrival time can
actually be identiﬁed with resolution exceeding the sam-
pling period by analyzing the digitized pulse shape76,78,
and a timing resolution of roughly 1 µs has been mea-
sured in a system using a nearly identical readout archi-
tecture and pulse processing pipeline34. The slew rates
of the measured pulses are typically much higher than
the edge trigger threshold and we do not observe integer
sample delays in triggering between pixels. Generally, we
do not require synchronization to an absolute timescale
for our applications, but the timing can be synchronized
relative to time sources of interest (such as those con-
trolling various EBIT operations) through an external
trigger signal with a precision of <

∼200 ns.

As a simple demonstration of this capability, we took a
single Ne data set and observed time-varying eﬀects on a
∼3 s period due to the EBIT’s trap dump and recycle pro-
cess. The duration of the trap dump was set for 10.1 ms.
For these early measurements, the external trigger sig-
nal had not yet been set up, so we determined the exact
trap dump period using phase dispersion minimization
(PDM95) techniques looking for periodic drops in count
rate. This accounts for uncertainty in the trap dump pe-
riod as well as linear drifts between the trap dump clock
and DAQ computer clock. We found the true trap dump
and recycle period to be 3.00002 s and folded our mea-
sured x-ray arrival times over this period. We binned the
folded time stamps into 1 ms regions and plotted the to-
tal counts versus the time since the ion trap was dumped
(Fig. 12, top). The count rate drops to zero upon the
trap dump, and then rises as new ions are trapped.

We also plotted the ∼3 s folded counts of the most
prominent H-like and He-like Ne lines (Fig. 12, bottom).

Figure 12: Upper : Total counts from a single Ne data set,
folded over the 3.00002 s trap dump and gas injection
period. The folded time stamps are binned into 1.0 ms bins.
Here, the zero point in the time since trap dump has been
set in the analysis to the point at which the falling edge
crosses below 50% of the equilibrium count rate. The width
of the the dip is consistent with the 10.1 ms trap dump
duration. Lower : Counts folded over this same period
separated into the He-like 1s2p 1P and H-like 2p states,
focused on the region of time in which trap is recycled. Note
that the H-like state lags behind the He-like state by
∼10 ms during the recovery to its equilibrium count rate.

The goal here was to see if the two ion species evolve
diﬀerently in time during a trap cycle. Although the
ratio of He-like to H-like counts remained nearly con-
stant throughout the period, the rise of the H-like state
to equilibrium lagged behind the rise of the He-like state
by ∼10 ms. This 10 ms ionization time from He-like
into H-like Ne agrees very well with simple estimates
of ionization rates using the well-known electron-impact
cross sections at 4 keV and the typical electron density
of 1012 cm−3 for the electron beam. In future measure-
ments, this sort of timing information can be used for
determining cross sections of atomic processes and set-
ting up optimal cycle times that maximize the counts of
a desired ion state relative to other states or background.
The timing capabilities of NETS can be used for other
EBIT applications where timing resolution is essential.
As an example, instead of holding the beam energy of
the EBIT constant, we can sweep the beam energy on
roughly 10 ms timescales. As has been demonstrated
by various EBIT groups, at certain beam energies and
ion states, dielectronic resonances (DRs) may occur96–99.
The DR signal can only be produced when the beam en-
ergy is equal to the DR energy, however, it is often critical
to keep the beam energy above the DR energy in order
to create a desired ion population within the trap. Typ-
ically, the beam energy is held at a beam energy above
the DR energy and then quickly swept through the DR
energy, temporarily producing the DR signal while main-

−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.50100200 Total Counts 0.15 0.10 0.050.000.050.100.15Time since trap dump (s)0204060 He-like 1s2p 1PH-like 2pCounts per 1.0 ms folded bintaining the desired ion population. With a time-resolving
instruments such as NETS, a time folding analysis similar
to the one done for Ne above can be used to isolate events
at a particular timing bin, which in the case of DR mea-
surements, could be used to isolate the DR signal.
In
addition to DR measurements, the time resolution can
also be used to observe fundamental timescales of paired
x-ray events that are correlated through certain cascad-
ing electronic transitions, among other applications.

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

We have successfully commissioned and took initial
measurements with a TES x-ray spectrometer at the
NIST EBIT. NETS improves the measurement capabil-
ities at the NIST EBIT through a combination of high
resolving power and x-ray collection eﬃciency. The sin-
gle x-ray photon counting nature of the microcalorimeter
spectrometer also provides time-resolved measurements.
These capabilities will improve the accuracy and speed
of ongoing measurement campaigns and in some cases
enable entirely new measurements.

In order to assess the performance of NETS, we took a
series of measurements of He-like and H-like O, Ne, and
Ar as well as more broadband measurements of Ni-like
W. We measured an energy resolution of roughly 3.7 eV
at the low energy O and Ne data (0.5–1.5 keV) and about
4 eV in the higher energy Ar data (3.0–4.5 keV). With
this same gas data, we were able to distinguish faint,
higher order lines, up to the H-like 9p transition in Ar,
in spectra containing observable features with line inten-
sities that varied by multiple orders of magnitude. This is
promising for measuring subtleties in spectral shapes and
ﬁnding faint features in photon-starved measurements.
We demonstrated potential energy calibration routines
that could be used with NETS and found placement ac-
curacy to better than 100 meV in narrow band spec-
tra such as that of H-like and He-like O and Ne. With
the Ni-like W data, we also demonstrated the calibra-
tion technique over a broader energy range with sparse
calibration points to a few hundred meV line placement
accuracy, consistent with the reference data uncertainty.
Finally, we looked for periodic features with respect to
the ion trap recycling time as a simple early demonstra-
tion of instrument’s potential for making time-resolved
measurements.

These ﬁrst measurements will help to optimize data
collection routines and determine which calibration mea-
surements will be necessary for achieving a particular sci-
entiﬁc goal. As was shown in the O and Ne data, we can
calibrate line positions of unknown lines to better than
100 meV when calibration lines with well known posi-
tions are located suﬃciently near the unknown lines. We
can achieve this by measuring well-studied highly charged
ions (such as the He-like and H-like ions) and also by
making more extensive use of the external x-ray source.
In future runs, we plan on improving the capabilities of

18

NETS in a number of ways. First, although we already
see a higher x-ray collection rate compared to the NTD-
Ge-based microcalorimeter that was previously attached
to the NIST EBIT, this can be raised further by reducing
the distance of NETS microcalorimeter array to the trap
center. As can be seen in Fig. 4, a substantial fraction of
this distance is used by the external calibration source,
the size of which could be decreased fairly easily. Due to
the small array diameter relative to the inner diameter of
other components in the optical path, we do not expect
to mask portions of the array by moving the it closer to
the trap center. In terms of stray ﬁelds from the EBIT
magnet, we can safely move the spectrometer ∼250 mm
closer to the trap center before the attenuated stray ﬁeld
directly outside the snout starts exceeding typical back-
ground levels. In addition, using two vacuum windows
between the EBIT and NETS is not strictly necessary,
though it reduces some complexity in integration and
risk to the various vacuum systems. Removing one of
these windows could increase collection eﬃciency, espe-
cially at energies below ∼2 keV (see Fig. 6), but also by
about 20% overall due to the thick mesh component of
the window. To go along with this, we plan on replacing
the the 50 K ﬁlter with one that has a slightly thicker
(∼200 nm) Al ﬁlm, but no Ni mesh, which we expect
will be suﬃcient for transferring heat oﬀ the ﬁlter. This
will have the advantage of removing a great deal of the
uncertainty in the QE, but at the cost of reduced QE at
the lower end of our energy band.

We also plan on improving our external calibration ca-
pabilities by introducing an annular target holder, allow-
ing us to simultaneously collect calibration and EBIT
data. This would allow us to continuously measure cali-
bration lines, reducing the uncertainty in the drift correc-
tion associated with needing to interpolate between dis-
crete calibration measurements separated in time. Next,
we plan on improving our time-resolved measurement ac-
curacy relative to events in the EBIT by establishing trig-
ger signals between the two systems. Finally, we hope to
increase our real-time measurement capabilities, which
includes the use of the DTW alignment techniques dis-
cussed in Sec. V to produce near-ﬁnal quality spectra in
real-time during data acquisition. We expect these im-
provements to further increase the measurement speed
and data quality of NETS.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was supported by the NIST Innovations
in Measurement Science (IMS) Program. Paul Szypryt
is supported by a National Research Council Postdoc-
toral Fellowship. Endre Takacs is supported by the Na-
tional Science Foundation Award #1806494. The au-
thors would like to thank Csilla Szabo-Foster, Lawrence
Hudson, and Jon Pratt for their help in establishing the
collaboration between the quantum sensors group and
the EBIT group at NIST.

REFERENCES

1M. A. Levine, R. E. Marrs, J. R. Henderson, D. A. Knapp, and
M. B. Schneider, “The Electron Beam Ion Trap: A New Instru-
ment for Atomic Physics Measurements,” Physica Scripta T22,
157–163 (1988).
2D. Vogel, “Design and operation of the electron beam ion trap,”
Tech. Rep. UCRL-ID-104990, 6785046 (Lawrence Livermore Na-
tional Lab, 1990).
3R. Becker and O. Kester, “Electron beam ion source and electron
beam ion trap (invited),” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 81,
02A513 (2010).
4I. G. Brown, “Metal vapor vacuum arc ion sources (invited),”
Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 63, 2351–2356 (1992).
5G. E. Holland, C. N. Boyer, J. F. Seely, J. N. Tan, J. M. Pomeroy,
and J. D. Gillaspy, “Low jitter metal vapor vacuum arc ion source
for electron beam ion trap injections,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instru-
ments 76, 073304 (2005).
6R. E. Marrs, M. A. Levine, D. A. Knapp, and J. R. Hender-
son, “Measurement of electron-impact-excitation cross sections
for very highly charged ions,” Physical Review Letters 60, 1715–
1718 (1988).
7J. D. Gillaspy, “First results from the EBIT at NIST,” Physica
Scripta T71, 99–103 (1997).
8Yu. Ralchenko, J. N. Tan, J. D. Gillaspy, J. M. Pomeroy, and
E. Silver, “Accurate modeling of benchmark x-ray spectra from
highly charged ions of tungsten,” Physical Review A 74, 042514
(2006).
9J. D. Gillaspy, “Precision spectroscopy of trapped highly charged
heavy elements: Pushing the limits of theory and experiment,”
Physica Scripta 89, 114004 (2014).

10A. T. Payne, C. T. Chantler, M. N. Kinnane, J. D. Gillaspy,
L. T. Hudson, L. F. Smale, A. Henins, J. A. Kimpton,
and
E. Takacs, “Helium-like titanium x-ray spectrum as a probe of
QED computation,” Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular
and Optical Physics 47, 185001 (2014).

11I. N. Dragani´c, Yu. Ralchenko, J. Reader, J. D. Gillaspy, J. N.
Tan, J. M. Pomeroy, S. M. Brewer, and D. Osin, “EUV spectral
lines of highly-charged Hf, Ta and Au ions observed with an
electron beam ion trap,” Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular
and Optical Physics 44, 025001 (2011).

12Yu. Ralchenko, I. N. Dragani´c, D. Osin, J. D. Gillaspy, and
J. Reader, “Spectroscopy of diagnostically important magnetic-
dipole lines in highly charged 3dn ions of tungsten,” Physical
Review A 83, 032517 (2011).

13D. Kilbane, G. O’Sullivan, J. D. Gillaspy, Yu. Ralchenko, and
J. Reader, “EUV spectra of Rb-like to Cu-like gadolinium ions
in an electron-beam ion trap,” Physical Review A 86, 042503
(2012).

14E. Silver, H. Schnopper, S. Bandler, S. Murray, N. Madden,
D. Landis, J. Beeman, E. Haller, M. Barbera, G. Tucker,
J. Gillaspy, E. Takacs,
and J. Porto, “Laboratory astro-
physics and microanalysis with NTD-germanium-based X-ray
microcalorimeters,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and
Associated Equipment 444, 156–160 (2000).

15E. Tak´acs, E. Silver, J. Laming, J. Gillaspy, H. Schnopper,
N. Brickhouse, M. Barbera, M. Mantraga, L. Ratliﬀ, H. Tawara,
K. Mak´onyi, N. Madden, D. Landis, J. Beeman, and E. Haller,
“Astrophysics and spectroscopy with microcalorimeters on an
electron beam ion trap,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in
Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with Materials
and Atoms 205, 144–155 (2003).

16J. N. Tan, E. Silver, J. Pomeroy, J. M. Laming, and J. Gillaspy,
“An Electron Beam Ion Trap (EBIT) Plus a Microcalorime-
ter: A Good Combination for Laboratory Astrophysics,” Physica
Scripta T119, 30–34 (2005).

17G. X. Chen, K. Kirby, E. Silver, N. S. Brickhouse, J. D. Gillaspy,
J. N. Tan, J. M. Pomeroy,
and J. M. Laming, “The 3C/3D
Line Ratio in Ni XIX: New Ab Initio Theory and Experimental

19

Results,” Physical Review Letters 97, 143201 (2006).

18J. D. Gillaspy, T. Lin, L. Tedesco, J. N. Tan, J. M. Pomeroy, J. M.
Laming, N. Brickhouse, G.-X. Chen, and E. Silver, “Fe XVII X-
ray Line Ratios for Accurate Astrophysical Plasma Diagnostics,”
The Astrophysical Journal 728, 132 (2011).

19R. Silwal, A. Lapierre, J. D. Gillaspy, J. M. Dreiling, S. A.
Blundell, Dipti, A. Borovik, G. Gwinner, A. C. C. Villari,
Y. Ralchenko, and E. Takacs, “Measuring the diﬀerence in nu-
clear charge radius of Xe isotopes by EUV spectroscopy of highly
charged Na-like ions,” Physical Review A 98, 052502 (2018).
20G. L. Betancourt-Martinez, J. Adams, S. Bandler, P. Beiers-
dorfer, G. Brown, J. Chervenak, R. Doriese, M. Eckart, K. Ir-
win, R. Kelley, C. Kilbourne, M. Leutenegger, F. S. Porter,
and J. Ullom, “The transition-edge
C. Reintsema, S. Smith,
EBIT microcalorimeter spectrometer,” in Space Telescopes and
Instrumentation 2014: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray, Vol. 9144
(Proc. SPIE, 2014) p. 91443U.

21W. B. Doriese, P. Abbamonte, B. K. Alpert, D. A. Bennett,
E. V. Denison, Y. Fang, D. A. Fischer, C. P. Fitzgerald, J. W.
Fowler, J. D. Gard, J. P. Hays-Wehle, G. C. Hilton, C. Jaye,
J. L. McChesney, L. Miaja-Avila, K. M. Morgan, Y. I. Joe, G. C.
O’Neil, C. D. Reintsema, F. Rodolakis, D. R. Schmidt, H. Tat-
suno, J. Uhlig, L. R. Vale, J. N. Ullom, and D. S. Swetz, “A
practical superconducting-microcalorimeter X-ray spectrometer
for beamline and laboratory science,” Review of Scientiﬁc In-
struments 88, 053108 (2017).

22F. S. Porter, G. V. Brown, K. R. Boyce, R. L. Kelley, C. A. Kil-
bourne, P. Beiersdorfer, H. Chen, S. Terracol, S. M. Kahn, and
A. E. Szymkowiak, “The Astro-E2 X-ray spectrometer/EBIT mi-
crocalorimeter x-ray spectrometer,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instru-
ments 75, 3772–3774 (2004).

23F. S. Porter, B. R. Beck, P. Beiersdorfer, K. R. Boyce, G. V.
Brown, H. Chen, J. Gygax, S. M. Kahn, R. L. Kelley, C. A. Kil-
bourne, E. Magee, and D. B. Thorn, “The XRS microcalorimeter
spectrometer at the Livermore electron beam ion trap,” Cana-
dian Journal of Physics 86, 231–240 (2008).

24P. Beiersdorfer, “A “brief” history of spectroscopy on EBIT,”

Canadian Journal of Physics 86, 1–10 (2008).

25F. S. Porter, J. Gygax, R. L. Kelley, C. A. Kilbourne, J. M. King,
P. Beiersdorfer, G. V. Brown, D. B. Thorn, and S. M. Kahn,
“Performance of the EBIT calorimeter spectrometer,” Review of
Scientiﬁc Instruments 79, 10E307 (2008).

26Y. Shen, E. Silver, R. Hutton,

and Y. Zou, “The status of
the micro-calorimeter at the Shanghai EBIT,” Physica Scripta
T144, 014060 (2011).

27S. Kraft-Bermuth, D. Hengstler, P. Egelhof, C. Enss, A. Fleis-
chmann, M. Keller,
and T. St¨ohlker, “Microcalorimeters for
X-Ray Spectroscopy of Highly Charged Ions at Storage Rings,”
Atoms 6, 59 (2018).

28E. E. Haller, N. P. Palaio, M. Rodder, W. L. Hansen,

and
E. Kreysa, “NTD Germanium: A Novel Material for Low Tem-
perature Bolometers,” in Neutron Transmutation Doping of
Semiconductor Materials, edited by R. D. Larrabee (Springer
US, Boston, MA, 1984) pp. 21–36.

29S. Bandler, E. Silver, H. Schnopper, S. Murray, M. Bar-
bera, N. Madden, D. Landis, J. Beeman, Eugene Haller, and
G. Tucker, “NTD-GE-based microcalorimeter performance,” Nu-
clear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A:
Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equip-
ment 444, 273–277 (2000).

30D. H. Andrews, W. F. Brucksch, W. T. Ziegler, and E. R. Blan-
chard, “Attenuated Superconductors I. For Measuring Infra-Red
Radiation,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 13, 281–292 (1942).
31K. D. Irwin, G. C. Hilton, D. A. Wollman, and J. M. Martinis,
“X-ray detection using a superconducting transition-edge sensor
microcalorimeter with electrothermal feedback,” Applied Physics
Letters 69, 1945–1947 (1996).

32A. Holland, G. Fraser, P. Roth, S. Trowell, E. Gu, R. Hart,
P. Brink, and S. Guy, “Transition edge sensors for X-ray as-
tronomy,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research

Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associ-
ated Equipment 436, 226–232 (1999).

33J. W. den Herder, D. Bagnali, S. Bandler, M. Barbera, X. Bar-
cons, D. Barret, P. Bastia, M. Bisotti, K. Boyce, C. Cara, M. Ce-
ballos, L. Corcione, B. Cobo, L. Colasanti, J. de Plaa, M. DiPirro,
W. B. Doriese, Y. Ezoe, R. Fujimoto, F. Gatti, L. Gottardi,
P. Guttridge, R. den Hartog, I. Hepburn, R. Kelley, K. Ir-
win, Y. Ishisaki, C. Kilbourne, P. A. J. de Korte, J. van der
Kuur, S. Lotti, C. Macculi, K. Mitsuda, T. Mineo, L. Natalucci,
T. Ohashi, M. Page, S. Paltani, E. Perinati, L. Piro, C. Pigot,
F. S. Porter, G. Rauw, L. Ravera, E. Renotte, J.-L. Sauvageot,
C. Schmid, S. Sciortino, P. Shirron, Y. Takei, G. Torrioli, M. Tsu-
jimoto, L. Valenziano, D. Willingale, C. de Vries, H. van Weers,
J. Wilms, and N. Y. Yamasaki, “The x-ray microcalorimeter
spectrometer onboard Athena,” in Space Telescopes and Instru-
mentation 2012: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray, Vol. 8443 (Proc.
SPIE, 2012) p. 84432B.

34HEATES Collaboration, S. Okada, D. A. Bennett, C. Curceanu,
W. B. Doriese, J. W. Fowler, J. Gard, F. P. Gustafsson,
T. Hashimoto, R. S. Hayano, S. Hirenzaki, J. P. Hays-Wehle,
G. C. Hilton, N. Ikeno, M. Iliescu, S. Ishimoto, K. Itahashi,
M. Iwasaki, T. Koike, K. Kuwabara, Y. Ma, J. Marton, H. Noda,
G. C. O’Neil, H. Outa, C. D. Reintsema, M. Sato, D. R.
Schmidt, H. Shi, K. Suzuki, T. Suzuki, D. S. Swetz, H. Tatsuno,
J. Uhlig, J. N. Ullom, E. Widmann, S. Yamada, J. Yamagata-
Sekihara, and J. Zmeskal, “First application of superconducting
transition-edge-sensor microcalorimeters to hadronic-atom x-ray
spectroscopy,” Progress of Theoretical and Experimental Physics
2016, 091D01 (2016).

35S.-J. Lee, C. J. Titus, R. A. Mori, M. L. Baker, D. A. Ben-
nett, H.-M. Cho, W. B. Doriese, J. W. Fowler, K. J. Gaﬀney,
A. Gallo, J. D. Gard, G. C. Hilton, H. Jang, Y. I. Joe, C. J.
Kenney, J. Knight, T. Kroll, J.-S. Lee, D. Li, D. Lu, R. Marks,
M. P. Minitti, K. M. Morgan, H. Ogasawara, G. C. O’Neil, C. D.
Reintsema, D. R. Schmidt, D. Sokaras, D. S. Swetz, J. N. Ul-
lom, T.-C. Weng, C. Williams, B. A. Young, K. D. Irwin, and
D. Nordlund, “Transition-Edge Sensor Spectroscopy at Stanford
Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource Beamline 10-1,” Review of
Scientiﬁc Instruments (2019), submitted.

36L. Miaja-Avila, G. C. O’Neil, Y. I. Joe, B. K. Alpert, N. H. Dam-
rauer, W. B. Doriese, S. M. Fatur, J. W. Fowler, G. C. Hilton,
R. Jimenez, C. D. Reintsema, D. R. Schmidt, K. L. Silverman,
D. S. Swetz, H. Tatsuno, and J. N. Ullom, “Ultrafast Time-
Resolved Hard X-Ray Emission Spectroscopy on a Tabletop,”
Physical Review X 6, 031047 (2016).

37G. C. O’Neil, L. Miaja-Avila, Y. I. Joe, B. K. Alpert, M. Bal-
asubramanian, D. M. Sagar, W. Doriese, J. W. Fowler, W. K.
Fullagar, N. Chen, G. C. Hilton, R. Jimenez, B. Ravel, C. D.
Reintsema, D. R. Schmidt, K. L. Silverman, D. S. Swetz, J. Uh-
lig, and J. N. Ullom, “Ultrafast Time-Resolved X-ray Absorption
Spectroscopy of Ferrioxalate Photolysis with a Laser Plasma X-
ray Source and Microcalorimeter Array,” The Journal of Physical
Chemistry Letters 8, 1099–1104 (2017).

38S. J. Smith, J. S. Adams, C. N. Bailey, S. R. Bandler, J. A. Cher-
venak, M. E. Eckart, F. M. Finkbeiner, R. L. Kelley, C. A. Kil-
bourne, F. S. Porter, and J. E. Sadleir, “Small Pitch Transition-
Edge Sensors with Broadband High Spectral Resolution for So-
lar Physics,” Journal of Low Temperature Physics 167, 168–175
(2012).

39S. R. Bandler, J. S. Adams, C. N. Bailey, S. E. Busch, J. A. Cher-
venak, M. E. Eckart, A. E. Ewin, F. M. Finkbeiner, R. L. Kel-
ley, D. P. Kelly, C. A. Kilbourne, J.-P. Porst, F. S. Porter, J. E.
Sadleir, S. J. Smith, and E. J. Wassell, “Advances in Small Pixel
TES-Based X-Ray Microcalorimeter Arrays for Solar Physics and
Astrophysics,” IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity
23, 2100705–2100705 (2013).

40S. J. Lee, J. S. Adams, S. R. Bandler, J. A. Chervenak, M. E.
Eckart, F. M. Finkbeiner, R. L. Kelley, C. A. Kilbourne, F. S.
Porter, J. E. Sadleir, S. J. Smith, and E. J. Wassell, “Fine pitch
transition-edge sensor X-ray microcalorimeters with sub-eV en-

20

ergy resolution at 1.5 keV,” Applied Physics Letters 107, 223503
(2015).

41J. Uhlig, W. B. Doriese, J. W. Fowler, D. S. Swetz, C. Jaye, D. A.
Fischer, C. D. Reintsema, D. A. Bennett, L. R. Vale, U. Man-
dal, G. C. O’Neil, L. Miaja-Avila, Y. I. Joe, A. El Nahhas,
W. Fullagar, F. Parnefjord Gustafsson, V. Sundstr¨om, D. Ku-
runthu, G. C. Hilton, D. R. Schmidt, and J. N. Ullom, “High-
resolution X-ray emission spectroscopy with transition-edge sen-
sors: Present performance and future potential,” Journal of Syn-
chrotron Radiation 22, 766–775 (2015).

42J. N. Ullom and D. A. Bennett, “Review of superconducting
transition-edge sensors for x-ray and gamma-ray spectroscopy,”
Superconductor Science and Technology 28, 084003 (2015).

43P. K. Day, H. G. LeDuc, B. A. Mazin, A. Vayonakis,

and
J. Zmuidzinas, “A broadband superconducting detector suitable
for use in large arrays,” Nature 425, 817–821 (2003).

44G. Ulbricht, B. A. Mazin, P. Szypryt, A. B. Walter, C. Bock-
stiegel, and B. Bumble, “Highly multiplexible thermal kinetic
inductance detectors for x-ray imaging spectroscopy,” Applied
Physics Letters 106, 251103 (2015).

45A. Fleischmann, C. Enss,

and G. M. Seidel, “Metallic Mag-
netic Calorimeters,” in Cryogenic Particle Detection, Topics in
Applied Physics, Vol. 99, edited by C. Enss (Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2005).

46L. Fleischmann, M. Linck, A. Burck, C. Domesle, S. Kempf,
M. Rodrigues, A. Pabinger, C. Pies, J.-P. Porst, H. Rotzinger,
S. Sch¨afer, R. Weldle, A. Fleischmann, C. Enss,
and G. M.
Seidel, “Physics and applications of metallic magnetic calorime-
ters for particle detection,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series
150, 012013 (2009).

47K. D. Irwin and G. C. Hilton, “Transition-Edge Sensors,” in
Cryogenic Particle Detection, Topics in Applied Physics, Vol. 99,
edited by C. Enss (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005).

49M. Kiviranta, H. Sepp¨a, J. van der Kuur,

48J. Clarke and A. I. Braginski, eds., The SQUID Handbook:
Fundamentals and Technology of SQUIDs and SQUID Systems
(Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, DE, 2004).
and P. de Korte,
“SQUID-based readout schemes for microcalorimeter arrays,”
in LOW TEMPERATURE DETECTORS: Ninth International
Workshop on Low Temperature Detectors (Madison, Wisconsin
(USA), 2002) pp. 295–300.

50P. A. J. de Korte, J. Beyer, S. Deiker, G. C. Hilton, K. D. Irwin,
M. MacIntosh, S. W. Nam, C. D. Reintsema, L. R. Vale, and
M. E. Huber, “Time-division superconducting quantum interfer-
ence device multiplexer for transition-edge sensors,” Review of
Scientiﬁc Instruments 74, 3807–3815 (2003).

51W. B. Doriese, K. M. Morgan, D. A. Bennett, E. V. Denison,
C. P. Fitzgerald, J. W. Fowler, J. D. Gard, J. P. Hays-Wehle,
G. C. Hilton, K. D. Irwin, Y. I. Joe, J. A. B. Mates, G. C. O’Neil,
C. D. Reintsema, N. O. Robbins, D. R. Schmidt, D. S. Swetz,
H. Tatsuno, L. R. Vale, and J. N. Ullom, “Developments in
Time-Division Multiplexing of X-ray Transition-Edge Sensors,”
Journal of Low Temperature Physics 184, 389–395 (2016).

52D. A. Bennett, R. D. Horansky, D. R. Schmidt, A. S. Hoover,
R. Winkler, B. K. Alpert, J. A. Beall, W. B. Doriese, J. W.
Fowler, C. P. Fitzgerald, G. C. Hilton, K. D. Irwin, V. Kotsubo,
J. A. B. Mates, G. C. O’Neil, M. W. Rabin, C. D. Reintsema,
F. J. Schima, D. S. Swetz, L. R. Vale, and J. N. Ullom, “A high
resolution gamma-ray spectrometer based on superconducting
microcalorimeters,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 83, 093113
(2012).

53G. Hilton, J. Martinis, K. Irwin, N. Bergren, D. Wollman, M. Hu-
ber, S. Deiker, and S. Nam, “Microfabricated transition-edge X-
ray detectors,” IEEE Transactions on Appiled Superconductivity
11, 739–742 (2001).

54J. N. Ullom, J. A. Beall, W. B. Doriese, W. D. Duncan, L. Fer-
reira, G. C. Hilton, K. D. Irwin, C. D. Reintsema, and L. R. Vale,
“Optimized transition-edge x-ray microcalorimeter with 2.4eV
energy resolution at 5.9keV,” Applied Physics Letters 87, 194103
(2005).

55D. S. Swetz, D. A. Bennett, K. D. Irwin, D. R. Schmidt, and
J. N. Ullom, “Current distribution and transition width in su-
perconducting transition-edge sensors,” Applied Physics Letters
101, 242603 (2012).

56D. Yan, R. Divan, L. M. Gades, P. Kenesei, T. J. Madden,
A. Miceli, J.-S. Park, U. M. Patel, O. Quaranta, H. Sharma,
D. A. Bennett, W. B. Doriese, J. W. Fowler, J. D. Gard, J. P.
Hays-Wehle, K. M. Morgan, D. R. Schmidt, D. S. Swetz, and
J. N. Ullom, “Eliminating the non-Gaussian spectral response
of X-ray absorbers for transition-edge sensors,” Applied Physics
Letters 111, 192602 (2017).

57N. R. Werthamer, “Theory of the Superconducting Transition
Temperature and Energy Gap Function of Superposed Metal
Films,” Physical Review 132, 2440–2445 (1963).

58J. M. Martinis, G. Hilton, K. Irwin, and D. Wollman, “Cal-
culation of TC in a normal-superconductor bilayer using the
microscopic-based Usadel theory,” Nuclear Instruments and
Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrom-
eters, Detectors and Associated Equipment 444, 23–27 (2000).
59M. A. Lindeman, S. Bandler, R. P. Brekosky, J. A. Cherve-
nak, E. Figueroa-Feliciano, F. M. Finkbeiner, T. Saab,
and
C. K. Stahle, “Characterization and reduction of noise in Mo/Au
transition edge sensors,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in
Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detec-
tors and Associated Equipment 520, 348–350 (2004).

60M. Durkin, E. V. Denison, W. B. Doriese, S. M. Duﬀ, J. W.
Fowler, J. D. Gard, G. C. Hilton, Y. I. Joe, K. M. Morgan, G. C.
O’Neil, C. G. Pappas, C. D. Reintsema, R. W. Stevens, D. S.
Swetz, P. Szypryt, J. N. Ullom, L. R. Vale, and J. C. Weber,
“Reducing dc-SQUID ampliﬁer instability in time division mul-
tiplexing for high count rate TES X-ray calorimetry.” Applied
Physics Letters (2019), in prep.

61C. D. Reintsema, J. Beyer, S. W. Nam, S. Deiker, G. C. Hilton,
K. Irwin, J. Martinis, J. Ullom, L. R. Vale, and M. MacIntosh,
“Prototype system for superconducting quantum interference de-
vice multiplexing of large-format transition-edge sensor arrays,”
Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 74, 4500–4508 (2003).

62W. Doriese, J. Beall, J. Beyer, S. Deiker, L. Ferreira, G. Hilton,
K. Irwin, J. Martinis, S. Nam, C. Reintsema, J. Ullom, L. Vale,
and Y. Xu, “Time-division SQUID multiplexer for the readout of
X-ray microcalorimeter arrays,” Nuclear Instruments and Meth-
ods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers,
Detectors and Associated Equipment 520, 559–561 (2004).

63C. Hagmann and P. Richards, “Adiabatic demagnetization refrig-
erators for small laboratory experiments and space astronomy,”
Cryogenics 35, 303–309 (1995).

64F. Pobell, Matter and Methods at Low Temperatures, 3rd ed.

(Springer, Berlin, 2007).

65M. A. Ordal, R. J. Bell, R. W. Alexander, L. A. Newquist, and
M. R. Querry, “Optical properties of Al, Fe, Ti, Ta, W, and Mo
at submillimeter wavelengths,” Applied Optics 27, 1203 (1988).
66J. D. Gillaspy, “Visible, EUV, and X-ray Spectroscopy at the
NIST EBIT Facility,” in AIP Conference Proceedings, Vol. 730
(AIP, Santa Fe, New Mexico (USA), 2004) pp. 245–254.

67T. Schoonjans, A. Brunetti, B. Golosio, M. Sanchez del Rio, V. A.
and L. Vincze, “The xraylib library for X-
Sol´e, C. Ferrero,
ray–matter interactions. Recent developments,” Spectrochimica
Acta Part B: Atomic Spectroscopy 66, 776–784 (2011).

68C. Klauber, “Magnesium Kα x-ray line structure revisited,” Ap-

plied Surface Science 70-71, 35–39 (1993).

69J. Schweppe, R. Deslattes, T. Mooney, and C. Powell, “Accurate
measurement of Mg and Al Kα1,2 X-ray energy proﬁles,” Journal
of Electron Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena 67, 463–478
(1994).

70G. H¨olzer, M. Fritsch, M. Deutsch, J. H¨artwig, and E. F¨orster,
“Kα1,2 and Kβ1,3 x-ray emission lines of the 3d transition met-
als,” Phys. Rev. A 56, 4554–4568 (1997).

71D. Jiles, Introduction to Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, 2nd
ed. (Chapman & Hall, London [u.a], 1998) oCLC: 833153057.

21

72W. Hamilton, “Superconducting shielding,” Revue de Physique

Appliqu´ee 5, 41–48 (1970).

73G. M. Stiehl, H. M. Cho, G. C. Hilton, K. D. Irwin, J. A. B.
Mates, C. D. Reintsema, and B. L. Zink, “Time-Division SQUID
Multiplexers With Reduced Sensitivity to External Magnetic
Fields,” IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 21,
298–301 (2011).

74J. Clementson, P. Beiersdorfer, G. V. Brown, and M. F. Gu,
“Spectroscopy of M-shell x-ray transitions in Zn-like through Co-
like W,” Physica Scripta 81, 015301 (2010).

75J. W. Fowler, B. K. Alpert, W. B. Doriese, D. A. Fischer, C. Jaye,
Y. I. Joe, G. C. O’Neil, D. S. Swetz, and J. N. Ullom, “Mi-
crocalorimeter spectroscopy at high pulse rates: A multi-pulse
ﬁtting technique,” The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series
219, 35 (2015).

76J. W. Fowler, B. K. Alpert, W. B. Doriese, Y. I. Joe, G. C.
O’Neil, J. N. Ullom, and D. S. Swetz, “The Practice of Pulse
Processing,” Journal of Low Temperature Physics 184, 374–381
(2016).

77D. T. Becker, B. K. Alpert, D. A. Bennett, M. P. Croce, J. W.
Fowler, J. D. Gard, A. S. Hoover, Y. I. Joe, K. E. Koehler,
J. A. B. Mates, G. C. O’Neil, M. W. Rabin, C. D. Reintsema,
D. R. Schmidt, D. S. Swetz, P. Szypryt, L. R. Vale, A. L. Wes-
sels, and J. N. Ullom, “Advances in Analysis of Microcalorime-
ter Gamma-Ray Spectra,” IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science
(2019), submitted.

78A. E. Szymkowiak, R. L. Kelley, S. H. Moseley, and C. K. Stahle,
“Signal processing for microcalorimeters,” Journal of Low Tem-
perature Physics 93, 281–285 (1993).

79B. D. O. Anderson and J. B. Moore, Optimal Filtering, dover
ed., unabridged republ ed., Dover Books on Engineering (Dover
Publ, Mineola, NY, 2005) oCLC: 834976304.

80H. Tatsuno, W. B. Doriese, D. A. Bennett, C. Curceanu, J. W.
Fowler, J. Gard, F. P. Gustafsson, T. Hashimoto, R. S. Hayano,
J. P. Hays-Wehle, G. C. Hilton, M. Iliescu, S. Ishimoto, K. Ita-
hashi, M. Iwasaki, K. Kuwabara, Y. Ma, J. Marton, H. Noda,
G. C. O’Neil, S. Okada, H. Outa, C. D. Reintsema, M. Sato,
D. R. Schmidt, H. Shi, K. Suzuki, T. Suzuki, J. Uhlig, J. N.
Ullom, E. Widmann, S. Yamada, J. Zmeskal, and D. S. Swetz,
“Absolute Energy Calibration of X-ray TESs with 0.04 eV Un-
certainty at 6.4 keV in a Hadron-Beam Environment,” Journal
of Low Temperature Physics 184, 930–937 (2016).

81J. W. Fowler, B. K. Alpert, D. A. Bennett, W. B. Doriese, J. D.
Gard, G. C. Hilton, L. T. Hudson, Y.-I. Joe, K. M. Morgan,
G. C. O’Neil, C. D. Reintsema, D. R. Schmidt, D. S. Swetz, C. I.
Szabo, and J. N. Ullom, “A reassessment of absolute energies of
the x-ray L lines of lanthanide metals,” Metrologia 54, 494–511
(2017).

82T. K. Vintsyuk, “Speech discrimination by dynamic program-

ming,” Cybernetics 4, 52–57 (1972).

83C. S. Myers and L. R. Rabiner, “A Comparative Study of Several
Dynamic Time-Warping Algorithms for Connected-Word Recog-
nition,” Bell System Technical Journal 60, 1389–1409 (1981).
84S. Salvador and P. Chan, “Toward accurate dynamic time warp-
ing in linear time and space,” Intelligent Data Analysis 11, 561–
580 (2007).

85A. Kramida, Yu. Ralchenko, J. Reader,

and NIST ASD
Team (2018), “NIST Atomic Spectra Database (version 5.6.1),”
https://physics.nist.gov/asd [Mon Jan 28 2019]. National In-
stitute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.18434/T4W30F.

86G. W. Erickson, “Energy levels of one-electron atoms,” Journal
of Physical and Chemical Reference Data 6, 831–870 (1977).
87E. B. Saloman, “Energy Levels and Observed Spectral Lines of
Ionized Argon, Ar II through Ar XVIII,” Journal of Physical and
Chemical Reference Data 39, 033101 (2010).

88F. Tyr´en, “Precision Measurements of Soft X-Rays with Concave
Grating,” Nova Acta Regiae Societatis Scientiarum Upsaliensis
IV, 12, 1–66 (1940).

89A. H. Gabriel and C. Jordan, “Interpretation of Solar Helium-
Like Ion Line Intensities,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro-
nomical Society 145, 241–248 (1969).

90N. J. Peacock, R. J. Speer, and M. G. Hobby, “Spectra of highly
ionized neon and argon in a plasma focus discharge,” Journal of
Physics B: Atomic and Molecular Physics 2, 798–819–5 (1969).
91W. R. Johnson, I. M. Savukov, U. I. Safronova, and A. Dal-
garno, “E1 Transitions between States with n = 1–6 in Helium-
like Carbon, Nitrogen, Oxygen, Neon, Silicon, and Argon,” The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 141, 543–557 (2002).
92K. Morgan, D. Becker, D. A. Bennet, R. Dorisee, J. D. Gard,
K. Irwin, S. J. Lee, D. Li, J. Mates, C. Pappas, D. Schmidt,
C. Titus, D. Van Winkle, J. Ullom, A. Wessels, and D. Swetz,
“Use of transition models to design high performance TESs for
the LCLS-II soft X-ray spectrometer,” IEEE Transactions on Ap-
plied Superconductivity 29, 2100605 (2019).

93M. E. Eckart, J. S. Adams, S. R. Bandler, S. Beaumont, J. Cher-
venak, A. Datesman, F. M. Finkbeiner, R. Hummatov, R. Kel-
ley, C. Kilbourne, M. Leutenegger, A. Miniussi, S. J. Mose-
ley, F. S. Porter, J. Sadleir, K. Sakai, S. J. Smith, N. A.
Wakeham, and E. Wassell, “Extended line spread function of
TES microcalorimeters with Au/Bi absorbers,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Applied Superconductivity Early Access (2019),
10.1109/TASC.2019.2903420.

22

94S. R. Elliott, P. Beiersdorfer, B. J. MacGowan, and J. Nilsen,
“Measurements of line overlap for resonant spoiling of x-ray las-
ing transitions in nickel-like tungsten,” Physical Review A 52,
2689–2692 (1995).

95R. F. Stellingwerf, “Period determination using phase dispersion

minimization,” The Astrophysical Journal 224, 953 (1978).

96C. Biedermann, R. Radtke, and K. Fournier, “Line ratios and
wavelengths of helium-like argon n =2 satellite transitions and
resonance lines,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
Research Section B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms
205, 255–259 (2003).

97C. Beilmann, J. R. C. L´opez-Urrutia, P. H. Mokler, and J. Ull-
rich, “High resolution resonant recombination measurements us-
ing evaporative cooling technique,” Journal of Instrumentation
5, C09002–C09002 (2010).

98S. Ali, S. Mahmood, I. Orban, S. Tashenov, Y. M. Li, Z. Wu,
and R. Schuch, “Photo-recombination studies at R-EBIT with a
Labview control and data acquisition system,” Journal of Instru-
mentation 6, C01016–C01016 (2011).

99P. Beiersdorfer, G. V. Brown, and A. Laska, “Dielectronic satel-
lite lines of Fe XVII,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series 583,
012022 (2015).

