Research Article

Applied Optics

1

0
2
0
2

n
u
J

2

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
3
5
4
1
0
.
6
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Developement of a stabilized Fabry-Pérot etalon based
calibrator for Hanle Echelle Spectrograph (HESP)

TANYA DAS1,*, RAVINDER K. BANYAL1, SIVARANI T.1, AND RAVINDRA B.1

1Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore, India
*Corresponding author: tanya@iiap.res.in

Compiled June 3, 2020

Accurate wavelength calibration is an important factor for any measurement with high resolution spectro-
graphs. Stellar spectrum comprises of discrete absorption or emission lines whose position is precisely de-
termined by calibrating the spectrograph using known reference lines generated from laboratory sources.
For the spectrograph to measure small variations in Doppler shift, the wavelength calibration must be
sufﬁciently stable during observation time. Instrument instability, mainly due to environmental factors
like temperature and pressure variations, limitations of traditional calibration methods, for example Th-
Ar lamps, are the main challenges which high precision spectroscopy. Through proper environmental
control, by maintaining pressure at few mbar and temperature ﬂuctuations within ±0.05 ◦C, Fabry Pérot
etalon (FP) can yield a velocity precision of 1-10 m/s, when used for wavelength calibration. We have
developed a passively stabilized FP based wavelength calibrator for Hanle Echelle Spectrograph (HESP)
installed on Himalayan Chandra Telescope (HCT) at Indian Astronomical Observatory (IAO), Hanle, In-
dia. The etalon has been characterized using Fourier Transform Spectrograph (FTS) and initial test runs
have been performed with HESP. In this paper we present the design and construction of the instrument
along with preliminary test results obtained from HESP. © 2020 Optical Society of America

http://dx.doi.org/10.1364/ao.XX.XXXXXX

1. INTRODUCTION

The detection of extrasolar planet orbiting a main sequence star
51 Peg in 1995 using Doppler Spectroscopy or Radial Velocity
(RV) technique, is one of the most signiﬁcant discoveries made
in astrophysics [1]. Since then, technological advancement has
led to improved high precision photometric and spectroscopic
techniques for detection of planets. To this date, the number of
conﬁrmed planets have crossed 4100 count from various ground
based observations and space missions [2]. The RV technique is
a powerful tool that contributed in many exoplanet discoveries
before transit data from NASA’s Kepler mission and later from
Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) became available.
High precision radial velocity technique measures the Doppler
shifts in the spectrum of the star. Apart from detection of ex-
tra solar planets, this technique ﬁnds application in areas such
as, detection of g-mode oscillations in the Sun [3], investigat-
ing expansion rate of the universe [4], measuring variability of
fundamental constants [5], study of stellar interiors using as-
troseismology [6] and characterization of binary and pulsating
stars [7].

In a gravitationally bound system, the star-planet pair orbits
their common center-of-mass. Hence, the star is not completely
stationary and appears to wobble slightly, causing a wavelength

shifts in the spectrum. The spectrum appears red or blue shifted
depending upon the movement of star away from or towards
us. If there are periodic wavelength shifts in the star’s spectrum,
it ascertains the presence of invisible companion around the star.
The amplitude of the wavelength shift depends on the mass and
distance of the planet from the host star and the inclination angle
that orbit makes with observer’s line of sight. In case of binary
systems, due to large mass of orbiting stars, the radial velocity
variation of several kilometers per second are easily observed.
Doppler shifts can be converted into radial velocity using the
following expression

VRV
c

=

∆λ
λ

,

(1)

where, VRV is the radial velocity, c is speed of light, λ is the
wavelength in the rest frame and ∆λ is the change in wave-
length due to Doppler motion. The RV signal is usually small
due to high mass ratio between the star and the planet. For
example, a Jupiter-size planet would induce a radial velocity
shift of 11.2 m/s in the spectra of a sun-like star from an orbital
distance of 5.4 AU, while an Earth-sized object at 1 AU would
induce a shift of ∼10 cm/s [8]. Highly stable spectrographs
dedicated to planet search programs have been able to reach a
Doppler precision of 1 m/s, allowing detection of super earths

 
 
 
 
 
 
Research Article

(5 − 8 M⊕) [9].

Charge coupled device (CCD) is used for recording the spec-
tra of star after dispersion from spectrograph grating. However,
the CCD doesn’t record the wavelength but only the intensity in-
formation. Stellar spectrum consists of series of discrete absorp-
tion and emission lines produced due to a variety of chemical
compositions and physical conditions prevailing in the star. The
wavelength position of these lines can be precisely determined
by referencing the spectrograph with known lines generated
from laboratory sources like hollow cathode lamps [10]. The
spectral intensity is recorded as a function of pixel position on a
2D grid. Grating being a non-linear device requires correct wave-
length to be assigned to each pixel position on the CCD grid
and hence the calibration is done by using a well characterized
laboratory source. An empirical relation, known as wavelength
solution, is used to map a discrete wavelength to each pixel
position. This process is called wavelength calibration, whose
accuracy is of paramount importance for any measurement with
high resolution spectrographs.

The wavelength calibration must be sufﬁciently stable during
observation time to measure small variations in Doppler shift. In-
strument instability, induced by environmental factors like tem-
perature and pressure variations, photon noise and limitations of
traditional calibration methods are the major challenges to high
precision spectroscopy [11]. Environmental ﬂuctuations can eas-
ily induce errors of few 10-100 m/s in the spectrograph data.
Even if the environmental variations are controlled, wavelength
calibration errors would still remain [12]. Preceding discussions
suggest that a meaningful comparison of the spectra taken at
different times is often a difﬁcult and nontrivial task. These
challenges have inspired researchers to build highly stabilized
spectrographs and explore innovative wavelength calibration
techniques. Emission lamps, Iodine cells [13], Laser Frequency
Combs (LFC) [11] and Fabry-Pérot (FP) etalons [14] are the meth-
ods that are used for wavelength calibration. Emission lamps
are the traditionally used technique of wavelength calibration,
Thorium-Argon lamp being the most widely used. The lines
provided by Th-Ar lamps are not uniform in distribution and
intensity and suffers from blending caused by unresolved lines.
Determining the line position in Th-Ar spectrum has an un-
certainty of around 10 m/s [15]. When used in simultaneous
calibration, the RV precision achievable with emission lamps
can be improved.
Iodine absorption cells provide a narrow
wavelength coverage (500-630 nm), have high light losses and
requires a complex code to retrieve small Doppler shift. LFC
is promising technology but comes with high costs and many
operational difﬁculties. Providing stable spectrum for referenc-
ing with nearly equispaced lines of uniform intensity and easily
matched wavelength range of the spectrograph, FP etalon can
give frequency comb-like properties at affordable costs and less
complexity.

A Fabry-Pérot etalon is a simple optical component consist-
ing of two glass plates mounted parallel to each other, separated
by a certain distance, with inner surfaces having high reﬂection
coating [16]. The plates are wedged to avoid reﬂection from
outer surfaces. The two glass plates form a resonant cavity and
produce a periodically varying transmission function due to in-
terfering multiple reﬂections of light in the cavity. In this paper,
we present the design of a passively stabilized FP for tracking
and calibration of Hanle Echelle Spectrograph (HESP) part of
India’s 2m Himalayan Chandra Telescope (HCT), to achieve an
RV precision about 1-10 m/s. Temperature, pressure and humid-
ity affect the performance of the etalon, which can be eliminated

Applied Optics

2

by installing the FP in a vacuum chamber that is temperature
controlled. Section 2 gives an overview of the design require-
ments of our instrument. In section 3 the various aspects of the
FP instrument setup are presented. The transmission spectra of
the FP etalon taken with a high resolution Fourier Transform
Spectrograph (FTS) and test results from HESP are presented in
section 4. Finally, summary of the work is given in section 5.

2. FACTORS AFFECTING FABRY-PÉROT STABILITY

The FP transmission function is produced by interference be-
tween the multiple reﬂections of light within the high reﬂecting
surfaces of the FP. The transmission function of FP is given as
[16]:

where,

and

IT =

I0
1 + Fsin2(δ/2)

√

R
π
1 − R

F =

δ =

4πnLcos(θ)
λ

(2)

(3)

(4)

Here, F is coefﬁcient of ﬁnesse, R is mirror reﬂectivity, n
is refractive index of cavity, θ is angle of incidence on second
surface and L is the cavity length.

Free spectral range (FSR) is the separation between adjacent
transmission peaks in the FP spectra. FSR in terms of wavelength
(λ) can be expressed as:

FSR = ∆λ =

λ2
2nL

(5)

Figure 1 shows the transmission spectra of FP with FSR and

full width at half maximum (FWHM).

Fig. 1. Simulated curve of FP transmission function for differ-
ent values of reﬂectivity coating R. As the R increases, the FP
transmission peaks become sharper. FSR is the free spectral
range of the FP and FWHM is the line width.

From Eq. 5, it can be seen that changes in cavity length
or refractive index of the cavity would change the FSR and
cause random drifts in calibration lines. To ensure that the FP
calibration lines remain stable, ﬂuctuations in n and L have to
be minimized. Getting stable transmission output from the FP
depends upon the following factors:

Research Article

Applied Optics

3

A. Pressure stability of the FP housing environment

Refractive index of air is a function of temperature and pres-
sure. Dispersion formula of dry air, as discussed in detail by J.
C. Owens in Ref.[17], is used to calculate the refractive index
ﬂuctuation for varying temperature and pressure. The refractive
index variation is converted into RV shift using Eq. 6.

∆n
n
where, VRV is the radial velocity and c is speed of light.

VRV
c

=

,

(6)

At atmospheric pressure, small changes in temperature
strongly effect the refractive index of air, causing large errors
in RV measurement. At low pressure, the effect of temperature
variation on RV becomes less signiﬁcant. Hence the FP setup is
installed in an evacuated enclosure operating at pressure below
1 mbar. A detailed analysis has been presented in [18].

B. Temperature stability of the FP housing environment

Fluctuations in ambient temperature can alter the FP cavity
length. A spacer of very low thermal expansion material, like
Zerodur and ULE, holds the glass plates of FP together. Shifts
in RV measurement can be caused due to small variation in
temperature induced cavity length change. The FP is being
operated at 4 – 5 ◦C above the ambient temperatures and the
temperature ﬂuctuations are limited within 0.05 ◦C to obtain
better RV precision. More implementation details can be found
in Ref. [18].

C. Misalignment errors

Effective ﬁnesse of the etalon depends upon reﬂectivity ﬁnesse,
contribution from surface ﬁnish, parallelism ﬁnesse and imper-
fect collimation due to ﬁnite size of the light source [19]. The
beam divergence resulting from the ﬁnite size of the ﬁber core in-
troduces loss in effective ﬁnesse and hence a shift in transmitted
peaks towards the shorter wavelengths. Since the transmission
function of the FP also depends upon the angle at which light
is incident on the FP surface, it is important to ensure that FP is
illuminated uniformly. Misalignment or decentering of the ﬁber
will cause line broadening and loss in effective ﬁnesse. Using the
method discussed by F. Cersullo et al. in [19], we have simulated
the decentering and effect of ﬁber size for the FP we are using
and the RV error induced by each, as shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3.
Based on the above considerations, the design requirements

of the instrument are listed in Table 1.

Table 1. Design requirements to achieve an RV precision
about 10 m/s or better.

Design parameters

Required value

Pressure

Temperature stability

Misalignment error

Fiber size

≤1 mbar
±0.05 ◦C

< 5 µm

≤ 50 µm

D. Coating dispersion

For absolute wavelength calibration, the effective cavity spacing
of etalon should be known with an accuracy better than ∆ λ
/ λ (cid:39) 3 × 10−8 for RV precision of 10 m/s. This implies that
the cavity width should be known with an accuracy of 1.5 Å.

Fig. 2. Top: Simulated transmission proﬁle of FP for different
ﬁber decentering values. Red curve shows the ideal FP output
when there is no misalignment between the optical ﬁber and
input optics. As the misalignment in the ﬁber increases, the
quality of FP lines degrade as shown by the purple and green
curves. Bottom: Radial Velocity error induced due to decenter-
ing of ﬁber. This sets a realistic limit on the misalignment that
can be tolerated for the targeted RV precision.

Fig. 3. Top: Simulated transmission proﬁle of FP illuminated
with ﬁbers of different sizes. As the ﬁber diameter increases,
the FP line quality shows a progressive degradation. A larger
core of the ﬁber acts as an extended source and hence leads to
imperfect collimation. Bottom: Radial Velocity error induced
in spectra due to ﬁnite divergence of ﬁber.

Research Article

Applied Optics

4

However, in practice the cavity mirror separation cannot be mea-
sured with an accuracy better than ∼ 1 µm [10]. Determining
the effective cavity width of the etalon and ensuring a constant
FSR is further compromised by ﬁnite thickness of multilayer
dielectric coating of the cavity mirrors. Photons of different
wavelengths penetrate to different optical depths, leading to
wavelength dependency of cavity spacing d(λ). Therefore, the
FP cavity lines, unlike LFC, will not be exactly periodic. This
is one of the factors that could limit the use of FP for absolute
wavelength calibration.The functional dependence of coating
dispersion can be predicted and corrected, provided the coat-
ing structure is known [20]. It is also possible to model the
slow variations in FSR from the FP data taken with a high-
resolution spectrograph. For example, Bauer et al. [10] used
a spline function to extract out the contribution of wavelength
dependent undulations of FSR. Other direct approach is to ex-
ternally cross-calibrate the etalon with primary sources such
as Fourier Transform Spectrograph or multiline Th-Ar lamp
[14]. Once a unique wavelength is assigned to each FP peak, a
secondary wavelength solution, without the need to consider
coating dispersion, can be easily derived. Yet another way to
ensure a constant FSR across the wavelength range is to use
dispersion-free cavity mirrors [21, 22]

3. INSTRUMENT DESIGN

receptacle type, we have used a penetrating type feedthrough
fabricated in house using a method described in Ref. [23].

Pressure stability of the setup has been tested in the labora-
tory. A vacuum pressure of 0.03 mbar was achieved in laboratory
tests. A combination of roughing pump and turbo pump are
being used to reach the desired vacuum level. The data for pres-
sure has been logged for a period of 8 hours in the laboratory
test and its plot is shown in Fig. 5.

Fig. 5. Pressure stability of the FP enclosure achieved during a
laboratory test run.

B. Temperature control

In order to obtain stable reference lines using FP, minimum ﬂuc-
tuation in the temperature inside the vacuum enclosure has to
be ensured. Arduino Uno microcontroller [24] and off-the-shelf
components have been used to design a digital Proportional-
Integral (PI) temperature controller. Block diagram of control
process is shown in Fig. 6.

Fig. 4. Schematic for complete set up of the Fabry-Pérot based
wavelength calibrator.

Figure 4 gives an overview of the instrument at component
level. The instrument design comprises of two aspects, the op-
tomechanical design and the design for environmental stability,
namely, pressure and temperature control. The optomechanical
design consists of proper mounting scheme for Fabry-Perot unit,
beam shaping optics and ﬁbers for light delivery and collection.
The second aspect deals with the vacuum enclosure with rele-
vant feedthroughs and pumps, and the temperature controller
with temperature sensors.

A. Pressure control

FP unit is being housed in a standard stainless steel coupler of
333 mm length and 147 mm diameter. Fiber feedthroughs are
used to provide access to the optical ﬁbers into and out of the
vacuum chamber. There are two types of feedthroughs available:
penetrating-type; which have ﬁbers directly running through
the ﬂange and receptacle-type; which uses two separate ﬁbers on
both side of vacuum ﬂange. To avoid the light loss which occurs
at the connection points between the ﬁbers and feedthrough in

Fig. 6. Temperature controller block diagram. The tempera-
ture of the chamber is sensed using thermistors and relayed to
the Arduino board through an external 16 bit ADC for further
processing.

The nominal operating temperature for the enclosure was
set 5 ◦C above the ambient with ﬂuctuations not exceeding
±0.05 ◦C. Four thermistors have been installed for temperature
sensing; two inside wired through electrical feedthroughs and
two outside the chamber. Printed polymer PTC heating ele-
ments, connected in series, are used to heat the chamber. The
inner layer of thermal insulation is provided by nitrile rubber

Research Article

Applied Optics

5

wrapped around the chamber tube. The entire setup is then
kept inside a styrofoam box providing an outer layer of heat
insulation.

The enclosure is initially heated in a controlled manner so that
the temperature is ramped up to reach a set point, after which
the feedback loop in the controller maintains the temperature
with minimum excursions. Temperature stability of the setup
has also been tested in the laboratory. The test was conducted for
a period of 8.5 hours. The enclosure temperature is maintained
with required stability as shown in Fig. 7. The maximum and
minimum deviations in the temperature were within ±0.05 ◦C
during the test run.

Fig. 7. Left: Temperature of the FP chamber reaching a steady
state after initial oscillatory cycle. Temperature from control
sensor is given as input to the PI controller. Right: Zoomed in
view showing the deviations within ±0.05 ◦C from the temper-
ature set-point during the steady state.

C. Optomechanical design

The optical components are being held in the vacuum chamber
using a stable rail based mounting scheme as shown in Fig. 8.

Fig. 9. Ray diagram of the complete optical setup showing the
beam path from input ﬁber to output ﬁber, through the lenses
and the Fabry-Pérot.

The FP etalon was custom built by SLS Optics Ltd., to our
speciﬁcations. The cavity mirrors were prealigned in the factory
and securely sealed inside an aluminium holder. Both mirrors
have broadband (500-750 nm) multi-layer coating. Fused silica
was used as substrate and low thermal expansion Zerodur ring
was used as spacer between two ﬂat mirrors forming plane
parallel cavity which is a preferred conﬁguration for white-light
optical ﬁlter. Reﬂectance spectra of the cavity mirrors is shown
in Fig.10. Other speciﬁcations of the FP used in our setup are
summarised in Table 2.

Fig. 8. Schematic of the rail based mounting scheme for Fabry-
Pérot.

An intensity stabilized broadband ﬁber coupled LED (Thor-
lab model MBB1F1) is used as the light source. Multimode ﬁbers
with core diameter 50 µm and 100 µm are used to carry light
into and out of the chamber, respectively. Since the system is
compact, achromat doublets (AC254-050-A-ML) of focal length
50 mm are used to collimate and collect light from the FP.

We used a collimated beam of diameter 22 mm as input to the
FP. The input beam slightly overﬁlls the 20 mm clear aperture of
the FP. The output beam (dia =20 mm) from the FP was focused
by an achromat doublet onto the 2nd ﬁber that carries it to the
spectrograph calibration unit. The end-to-end ray diagram of
optical setup is shown in Fig. 9.

Fig. 10. Reﬂectance spectra of the Fabry-Pérot cavity mirrors
measured with monochromator. The spectra was provided by
the manufacturer.

Height of the optical setup including the dovetail rail is
115 mm and total length of the setup is 290 mm. A 5mm thick
stainless steel support platform is welded at the base of the
chamber, on which the rail is mounted and secured with the
help of countersunk screws. Figure 11 shows the optical setup
mounted inside the chamber.

4. PERFORMANCE TEST OF FABRY-PÉROT

A. Test with Fourier Transform Spectrograph

The high resolution Fourier Transform Spectrograph (FTS) facil-
ity at Bhabha Atomic Research Center (BARC), Mumbai, was
used to test the etalon at normal temperature and pressure.
Etalon was mounted on a cage assembly for the purpose of
the test, as shown in Fig. 12. The collimated output from the FP
directly illuminates the FTS input port, to obtain transmission
spectra at a resolution of 100,000.

Research Article

Applied Optics

6

Table 2. Speciﬁcations of the Fabry-Pérot etalon

Etalon type

Air spaced

Mirror material

Fused Silica

Spectral coverage

500 – 750 nm

Cavity thickness

5 mm±0.001 mm

Finesse

Clear aperture

Free Spectral Range

Coating reﬂectivity

∼6

20 mm

30 GHz

∼60%

FTS spectra of the FP has been analysed and plotted in Fig.13,
along with theoretically generated FP spectra using the manu-
facturer provided parameters. From the analysis, the average
cavity width of etalon was calculated as 4.999 mm as compared
to 5mm±0.001 mm provided the manufacturer.

To investigate the impact of coating dispersion (see section
2D) in our FP, we looked for systematic variations in FSR. Other
than random scatter, the measured FSR did not show any no-
ticeable trend that can be attributed to coating dispersion. It is,
therefore, likely that coating used in our FP had nearly a ﬂat
response.

Fig. 13. FP transmission spectra obtained from FTS with a
broadband ﬁber coupled LED light source from Thorlabs
(Model MBB1F1). Right: Narrow slice of FTS spectra, over
plotted with theoretical spectra (blue curve) computed from
FP speciﬁcations provided by the vendor.

B. FP installation on Hanle Echelle Spectrograph

The etalon has been installed and tested with Hanle Echelle
Spectrograph (HESP) on 2m Himalayan Chandra telescope at
Indian Astronomical Observatory (IAO) located in Hanle, India
[25]. The spectrograph design is based on white pupil concept
and uses an image slicer in high resolution mode. It is housed
inside a thermally controlled isolated room below the observing
ﬂoor. The spectra is imaged onto a 4k×4k CCD with 15 µm pixel
size. The thermal and mechanical stability along with dual ﬁber
mode allows precision radial velocity measurements of stars.
The speciﬁcations of the spectrograph are summarized in Table
3.

Table 3. Speciﬁcations of Hanle Echelle Spectrograph (HESP)
[25].

Spectral Coverage

Echelle grating

Resolution

350-1000 nm

R2.1

30000 (without image slicer)

60000 (with image slicer)

RV Accuracy

20 m/s with dual ﬁber mode

Stability

200 m/s (over a night)

Efﬁciency (includes telescope)

∼22% peak (at ∼600 nm)

The FP with associated optics is installed in a temperature
controlled vacuum chamber with two layers of thermal insula-
tion, as shown in Fig. 14. The operating temperature for FP is
19◦C and operating pressure is 0.025 mbar. The output from the
FP is fed to calibration unit through a ﬁber of 100 µm size. The
calibration unit holds the ﬂat lamp, Th-Ar light source and a

Fig. 11. FP optical assembly mounted on a support platform
welded inside the vacuum chamber.

Fig. 12. Cage based mounting scheme used for testing FP with
FTS.

Research Article

Applied Optics

7

calibration ﬁber of 100 µm size that carries light into the spec-
trograph. The image of the calibration assembly is shown in
Fig. 15.

A detailed model of spectrograph aberrations mapped from FP
data with improved wavelength solution will be presented in a
follow-up work under study.

Fig. 14. FP setup installed in the spectrograph room at Indian
Astronomical Observatory, Hanle.

Fig. 16. Fabry-Pérot spectra obtained from Hanle Echelle Spec-
trograph (HESP) at a resolution of R = 30,000, without using
the image slicer.

Fig. 15. Calibration rack of HESP with the FP output ﬁber
integrated into the rack.

The spectra obtained from HESP, both in low resolution
(R=30,000) and high resolution mode (R=60,000), is shown in
Fig. 16 and Fig. 17, respectively. FP lines were found across 24
orders of the spectrograph. Gaussian proﬁle is ﬁt to individual
FP lines and the FSR and linewidth at each wavelength is de-
termined from the data. Total number of FP lines detected are
6124 across the wavelength range 500-750 nm. Initial level of
calibration of FP data has been done using Th-Ar to determine
the wavelength of FP lines. A wavelength calibration model
will be developed using the techniques employed in [10, 26].
Free Spectral Range (FSR) for a spectropgraph is the wavelength
range in a spectral order without overlap from the adjacent or-
ders whereas FSR for FP is the distance between consecutive
transmission peaks. Figure18 shows the FSR and FWHM val-
ues of FP plotted as a function of wavelength, for one of the
orders. Preliminary analysis of FP calibration frames show that
the spectrograph has a characteristic presence of ﬁeld curvature
and distortion introduced by the optics. We have observed a
curvature in FWHM in all the orders of the spectra. Apart from
this, the instrumental artifacts are also seen at the edges of each
order as shown in Fig. 19. This opens up new possibilities of spa-
tially mapping the spectrograph point-spread function and other
artifacts from the FP spots. Incorporating such input would help
us developing a better wavelength solution for the spectrograph.

Fig. 17. A high resolution (R=60,000) Fabry-Pérot spectra ob-
tained from HESP. Top panel: A full CCD frame of the spectra.
Bottom left panel: Zoomed in version focusing a part of the
spectra. Bottom right panel: Portion of an extracted spectral
order showing the well resolved FP lines.

5. SUMMARY

We have developed a low-cost, passively stabilized Fabry-Perot
based wavelength calibrator for Hanle Echelle Spectrograph
installed on 2m class HCT. Off-the-shelf components were used
for the construction of the setup with the temperature controller
and ﬁber feedthrough developed in-house. The FP was ﬁrst
tested using a FTS and later integrated with the wavelength
calibration unit of the HESP. Some initial test runs have been
conducted with the spectrograph. Table 4 shows the comparison
among values for ﬁnesse and cavity width as obtained from the
test data. The observed difference can be attributed to ﬁnite size
of the optical ﬁber and also the degradation of optical coating of
the FP since its purchase over 3 years back.

Table 4. Comparison of FP parameters obtained from
datasheet, FTS and HESP.

FP Parameter

FP datasheet

FTS test

HESP data

Cavity Width

5 mm

4.999 mm 4.983 mm

Finesse

6

2.73

2

Research Article

Applied Optics

8

For better accessibility and on-site alignment, some simpliﬁ-
cation of the setup are necessary. We also plan to use a 50 µm
ﬁber as input to limit FP line broadening resulting from the ex-
tended source size. With these changes in place, we would be
conducting on-sky tests using standard radial velocity target
stars to evaluate the RV performance and then commission the
instrument as an add-on calibration module for HESP to facil-
itate regular science observation. Aging of etalon spacers and
coating degradation over time can cause intractable frequency
drifts in a passively stabilized etalon [27]. Therefore, we are also
exploring the possibility of actively tracking the FP cavity with
a frequency stabilized diode laser [28].
Funding. This project is supported by Science and Engineering
Research Board (SERB), Department of Science and Technology
(DST), India, under grant no. EMR/2014/000941.
Acknowledgements. The authors want to acknowledge Dr. M.
N. Deo and Dr. H. Bhatt for allowing the use of high-resolution
FTS facility for characterizing the Fabry-Pérot etalon at Bhaba
Atomic Research Center, Mumbai. The authors also thank Mr. S.
Sriram, Mr. S. Kathiravan, Mr. A. Kumar and Ms. Devika D. for
technical support.

Disclosures. The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.

Fig. 18. FSR and FWHM of the Fabry-Pérot lines as calcu-
lated from spectrograph data. Black dots indicate FSR and
red crosses indicate FWHM in one of the orders in the spectra.

REFERENCES

1. M. Mayor and D. Queloz, “A jupiter mass companion to a solar-type

2.

3.

4.

5.

“NASA Exoplanet Archive,” https://exoplanetarchive.ipac.

star,” Nature 378, 355–359 (1995).
NASA,
caltech.edu/.
T. Appourchaux, K. Belkacem, A. Broomhall, W. Chaplin, D. Gough,
G. Houdek, J. Provost, F. Baudin, P. Boumier, Y. Elsworth, R. García,
B. Andersen, W. Finsterle, C. Fröhlich, A. Gabriel, G. Grec, A. Jiménez,
A. Kosovichev, T. Sekii, T. Toutain, and S. Turck-Chièze, “The quest for
the solar g modes,” Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 18, 197–277 (2010).
J. Liske, A. Grazian, E. Vanzella, M. Dessauges, M. Viel, L. Pasquini,
M. Haehnelt, S. Cristiani, F. Pepe, G. Avila, P. Bonifacio, F. Bouchy,
H. Dekker, B. Delabre, S. D’Odorico, V. D’Odorico, S. Levshakov,
C. Lovis, M. Mayor, P. Molaro, L. Moscardini, M. T. Murphy, D. Queloz,
P. Shaver, S. Udry, T. Wiklind, and S. Zucker, “Cosmic dynamics in the
era of Extremely Large Telescopes,” Mon. Notices Royal Astron. Soc.
386, 1192–1218 (2008).
E. Reinhold, R. Buning, U. Hollenstein, A. Ivanchik, P. Petitjean, and
W. Ubachs, “Indication of a cosmological variation of the proton-
electron mass ratio based on laboratory measurement and reanalysis
of H 2 spectra,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 151101 (2006).

Fig. 19. FWHM of Fabry-Pérot lines obtained in two adjacent
orders showing distortion in FWHM at the edges. The overlap-
ping is due to the wavelength overlap that commonly occurs
at the edges of adjacent Echelle orders.

7.

8.

6. M. Bazot, F. Bouchy, H. Kjeldsen, S. Charpinet, M. Laymand, and
S. Vauclair, “Asteroseismology of α Centauri A* - evidence of rotational
splitting,” A & A 470, 295–302 (2007).
R. P. Butler, T. R. Bedding, H. Kjeldsen, C. McCarthy, S. J. O'Toole, C. G.
Tinney, G. W. Marcy, and J. T. Wright, “Ultra-high-precision velocity
measurements of oscillations in α Centauri A,” The Astrophys. J. 600,
L75–L78 (2003).
A. P. Hatzes, “The radial velocity method for the detection of exoplan-
ets,” in Methods of Detecting Exoplanets: 1st Advanced School on
Exoplanetary Science, V. Bozza, L. Mancini, and A. Sozzetti, eds.
(Springer International publishing, 2016).
J. Dittmann, J. Irwin, D. Charbonneau, X. Bonﬁls, N. Astudillo-Defru,
R. Haywood, Z. Berta-Thompson, E. R. Newton, J. E. Rodriguez,
J. Winters, T. Tan, J. Almenara, F. Bouchy, X. Delfosse, T. Forveille,
C. Lovis, F. Murgas, F. Pepe, N. Santos, S. Udry, A. Wnsche, G. Es-
querdo, D. Latham, and C. D. Dressing, “A temperate rocky super-earth
transiting a nearby cool star,” Nature. 544, 333 (2017).

9.

10. Bauer, F. F., Zechmeister, M., and Reiners, A., “Calibrating echelle
spectrographs with fabry-pérot etalons,” A & A 581, A117 (2015).
11. M. T. Murphy, T. Udem, R. Holzwarth, A. Sizmann, L. Pasquini,
C. Araujo-Hauck, H. Dekker, S. D’Odorico, M. Fischer, T. Hänsch,

Research Article

Applied Optics

9

and A. Manescau, “High-precision wavelength calibration of astronom-
ical spectrographs with laser frequency combs,” Mon. Notices Royal
Astron. Soc. 380, 839–847 (2007).

12. S. Halverson, R. Terrien, S. Mahadevan, A. Roy, C. Bender, G. K.
Stefánsson, A. Monson, E. Levi, F. Hearty, C. Blake, M. McElwain,
C. Schwab, L. Ramsey, J. Wright, S. Wang, Q. Gong, and P. Rober-
ston, “A comprehensive radial velocity error budget for next generation
doppler spectrometers,” in Proc. SPIE, vol. 9908 (2016), pp. 2022–
2041.

13. G. W. Marcy and R. P. Butler, “Precision radial velocities with an iodine

absorption cell,” Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 104, 270 (1992).

14. F. Wildi, F. Pepe, B. Chazelas, G. L. Curto, and C. Lovis, “A fabry-
perot calibrator of the harps radial velocity spectrograph: performance
report,” in Proc. SPIE, vol. 7735 (2010), pp. 1853 – 1863.

15. C. Lovis and F. Pepe, “A new list of thorium and argon spectral lines in

the visible,” A & A 468, 1115–1121 (2007).

16. M. Born and E. Wolf, “Chapter VII - Elements of the theory of Inter-
ference and Interferometers,” in Principles of Optics (Sixth Edition),
M. Born and E. Wolf, eds. (Pergamon, 1980), pp. 256 – 369.

17. J. C. Owens, “Optical refractive index of air: Dependence on pressure,

temperature and composition,” Appl. Opt. 6, 51–59 (1967).

18. T. Das, R. K. Banyal, S. Kathiravan, T. Sivarani, and B. Ravindra,
“Development of a stabilized fabry-pérot based wavelength calibrator
for precision doppler spectroscopy,” in Proc. SPIE, vol. 10702 (2018),
pp. 1899 – 1909.

19. F. Cersullo, F. Wildi, B. Chazelas, and F. Pepe, “A new infrared fabry-
pérot-based radial-velocity-reference module for the spirou radial-
velocity spectrograph,” A & A 601, A102 (2017).

20. R. A. McCracken, Éric Depagne, R. B. Kuhn, N. Erasmus, L. A. Crause,
and D. T. Reid, “Wavelength calibration of a high resolution spectro-
graph with a partially stabilized 15-ghz astrocomb from 550 to 890 nm,”
Opt. Express 25, 6450–6460 (2017).

21. L.-J. Chen, G. Chang, C.-H. Li, A. J. Benedick, D. F. Philips, R. L.
Walsworth, and F. X. Kärtner, “Broadband dispersion-free optical cavi-
ties based on zero group delay dispersion mirror sets,” Opt. Express
18, 23204–23211 (2010).

22. Y. Ma, F. Meng, Y. Liu, F. Zhao, G. Zhao, A. Wang, and Z. Zhang,
“Visible astro-comb ﬁltered by a passively stabilized fabry-perot cavity,”
Rev. Sci. Instruments 90, 013102 (2019).

23. K. M. Kirilov, D. Denkova, G. G. Tsutsumanova, and S. C. Russev,
“note: Simple vacuum feedthrough for optical ﬁber with subminiature
version a connectors at both ends,” Rev. Sci. Instruments 85, 076107
(2014).

24. Arduino, “Getting started with Arduino UNO,” https://www.arduino.cc/

en/Guide/ArduinoUno.

25. S. Sriram, A. Kumar, A. Surya, T. Sivarani, S. Giridhar, S. Kathiravan,
M. N. Anand, D. Jones, D. Grobler, R. Jakobsson, A. Chanumolu,
A. Unni, A. Dorje, T. Dorje, and T. Gyalson, “Hanle echelle spectrograph:
design and performance,” in Proc. SPIE, vol. 10702 (2018), pp. 2007 –
2021.

26. Cersullo, F., Cofﬁnet, A., Chazelas, B., Lovis, C., and Pepe, F., “New
wavelength calibration for echelle spectrographs using fabry-pérot
etalons,” A & A 624, A122 (2019).

27. R. K. Banyal and A. Reiners, “A dual cavity fabry–perot device for high
precision doppler measurements in astronomy,” J. Astron. Instrumenta-
tion 06, 1750001 (2017).

28. Reiners, A., Banyal, R. K., and Ulbrich, R. G., “A laser-lock concept to
reach cm-precision in doppler experiments with fabry-pérot wavelength
calibrators,” A & A 569, A77 (2014).

