0
2
0
2

c
e
D
0
2

]
P
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

2
v
1
0
0
1
1
.
6
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

High-Frequency Radar Ocean Current Mapping at Rapid Scale with
Autoregressive Modeling∗

Baptiste Domps, Dylan Dumas, Charles-Antoine Gu´erin, Julien Marmain †

December 22, 2020

Abstract

We use an Autoregressive (AR) approach combined
with a Maximum Entropy Method (MEM) to estimate
radial surface currents from coastal High-Frequency
Radar (HFR) complex voltage time series. The perfor-
mances of this combined AR-MEM model are investi-
gated with synthetic HFR data and compared with the
classical Doppler spectrum approach. It is shown that
AR-MEM drastically improves the quality and the rate
of success of the surface current estimation for short
integration time. To conﬁrm these numerical results,
the same analysis is conducted with an experimental
data set acquired with a 16.3 MHz HFR in Toulon. It
is found that the AR-MEM technique is able to provide
high-quality and high-coverage maps of surface currents
even with very short integration time (about 1 minute)
where the classical spectral approach can only fulﬁll
the quality tests on a sparse coverage. Further useful
application of the technique is found in the tracking
of surface current at high-temporal resolution. Rapid
variations of the surface current at the time scale of the
minute are unveiled and shown consistent with a f −5/3
decay of turbulent spectra.

1

Introduction

Ocean surface current mapping with High-Frequency
Radars (HFR) is now a well-established technique and

∗This work has been accepted for publication in IEEE Journal

of Ocean Engineering.

†B. Domps and J. Marmain are with the Radar & Scien-
tiﬁc Applications Department, Degreane Horizon, Cuers, France
(e-mail: {baptiste.domps,julien.marmain}@degreane-horizon.fr).
D. Dumas and C.-A. Gu´erin are with the Universit´e de Toulon,
Aix-Marseille Univ., CNRS, IRD, MIO UM 110, Mediter-
ranean Institute of Oceanography, Toulon, France (e-mail:
{dylan.dumas,guerin}@univ-tln.fr).

is used routinely for a growing number of civil, environ-
mental and scientiﬁc applications (e.g.
[1, 2, 3]). The
dominant Bragg diﬀraction mechanism for scattering
of HF/VHF electromagnetic waves from the sea sur-
face was ﬁrst unveiled in the ﬁfties by Crombie [4]. It
took 2 more decades before the complete physical the-
ory to describe sea clutter and its application to ocean
current extraction was achieved [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. While the
dramatic progress in instrumentation, computerization
and costs reduction explain in large part the success
and expansion of HFR systems in the last years, there
have been no major breakthrough in the main physical
picture nor in the signal processing techniques whose
progress have been incremental.

Virtually all radar systems softwares still rely on a
spectral analysis of the backscattered time series to
infer the value of the radial surface current from the
frequency shift of the dominant Bragg ray in the sea
Doppler spectrum [10]. This is suﬃcient for the vast
majority of applications, where the integration time
from 10 min to 1 h) to
is large enough (typically,
ensure both adequate frequency resolution and satis-
factory Signal-to-Noise ratio (SNR) of the ﬁrst-order
Bragg peaks.

However,

for some emerging applications such as
tsunami early warning [11, 12], ship tracking [13] or
prediction of Lagrangian transport in oil spill [14], short
integration times are required, a constraint which dete-
riorates the accuracy and reliability of surface current
estimation and reduces the radar coverage. There has
been some isolated attempts in the literature to pro-
pose alternative, non-spectral, signal processing meth-
ods to improve the quality of oceanic parameters [15].
In particular, the use of Autoregressive (AR) model-
ing was applied by [16] within the framework of ice-
berg detection in HFR coastal measurements. Later
on, [17] ﬁrst proposed an AR approach in the context

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
of oceanographic HFR, whose interest has been con-
ﬁrmed through subsequent studies [18, 19, 20]. To date,
however, these methods have been conﬁned to speciﬁc
applications and have not yet earned their letters of no-
bility in the common HFR signal processing toolbox.

In this paper, we revisit the AR modeling and ap-
ply it to systematic surface current mapping. We show
that an AR model combined with a Maximum Entropy
Method (MEM, [21]) for the optimal estimation of the
AR model coeﬃcients makes it possible to drastically
enhance the magnitude of the ﬁrst-order Bragg peaks
in the sea clutter, as compared to conventional Fourier
analysis. When this technique is combined with classi-
cal quality criteria it yields a signiﬁcant improvement
of both the reliability and the coverage of estimated ra-
dial current for short integration times (of the order of
1 minute).

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 de-
scribes the mathematical framework used to process the
oceanic backscattered signal with an AR model and the
MEM technique for the calculation of the coeﬃcients.
Section 3 assesses the performances of the model with
synthetic HFR data and compares them with a classi-
cal Fourier analysis. Section 4 presents a ﬁrst appli-
cation of this methodology to an actual HFR data set
recently acquired in the Mediterranean sea in the re-
gion of Toulon for sea surface currents mapping. The
validity of this novel approach to produce short-time
estimation of surface current is assessed in Section 5
through some experimental comparisons with surface
drifters data. Section 6 investigates the rapid time
variations of sea surface current at ﬁxed location; it
is shown that the AR-MEM method paves the way to
high temporal-resolution monitoring of radial currents.
A notable result is the experimental evidence of a tur-
bulent behavior with a typical
5/3 spectral decay for
small-scale process down to the minute time scale.

−

2 Autoregressive Model for the
Oceanic Doppler Spectrum

2.1 Oceanic Doppler Spectrum

The sea surface radar cross section (RCS) per unit
bandwidth per unit area σ(ω) was theoretically ex-
pressed by [6, 22] as a functional perturbation expan-
sion with respect to a small dimensionless parameter,
which can be seen as the ratio of wave height to radar
wavelength. This expansion is limited to second-order,

which is suﬃcient to capture the main observed fea-
tures:

σ(ω) = σ1(ω) + σ2(ω)

(1)

The dominant, ﬁrst-order term is limited to a symmet-
ric pair of spectral rays at the so-called Bragg resonant
frequency:

(cid:110)

Sd(

2K0)δ(ω

−

−

ωB)+Sd(+2K0)δ(ω+ωB)

(cid:111)

σ1(ω) = 26πK 4
0

with

ωB = 2πfB = 2π

(cid:114) g
πλ

(2)

(3)

Here g = 9.81 m.s−2 is the gravity constant, λ is the
radar wavelength, Sd is the directional wave density
energy spectrum, K0 is the incident horizontal wave
vector and δ the Dirac function. The second-order
term σ2(ω) is a continuous, regular function of fre-
quency obtained from a quadratic summations of the
wave spectrum. It contains the proper contribution of
non-resonant waves (including wind wave and swell)
to the scattering process.
Its complicated expression
needs not be detailed here and can be found in many
references [22, 23].

In presence of a surface current of (positive or nega-
tive) radial speed Ur the ﬁrst- and second-orders terms
are uniformly shifted by an extra frequency:

ωc =

4πUr
λ

(4)

resulting in an overall translation of the Doppler spec-
trum:

σ(ω) = σ1(ω

ωc) + σ2(ω

ωc)

−

−

(5)

For bistatic radars such as the one used here (see [24] for
a detailed description), eqs. 3 and 4 must be adapted to
the system geometry by introducing the bistatic angle
ϕ, being half the angle between transmitter, range cell
and receiver:

ωB = 2π

(cid:114) g
πλ

cos ϕ and ωc =

4πUr
λ

cos ϕ

(6)

As it is well known, the estimation of surface current
from HFR data is based on the identiﬁcation of the
ﬁrst-order Bragg rays in the oceanic Doppler spectrum
and the calculation of their extra shift ωc with respect
to the theoretical Bragg frequency. This process is ren-
dered diﬃcult not only by the presence of noise (which
limits the estimation range) but also by the second-
order contribution which can induce parasitic peaks in

2

the vicinity of the Bragg frequency. Hence, when as-
sessing the theoretical performances of any surface cur-
rent estimation procedure, it is important to model the
full second-order Doppler spectrum.

In order to obtain a realistic synthetic radar signal, a
numerical simulator for second-order bistatic Doppler
spectra was used and tested in [25] (Figure 1). A sta-
tistical reference Doppler spectrum, σ0, can thus be
generated under typical sea states conditions for the
Mediterranean sea in the absence of noise and currents.
An example of such spectrum for a Pierson-Moskowitz
oceanic spectrum by a U10 = 5 m.s−1 wind speed is
shown in Figure 1. As seen, the second-order compo-
nents of the Doppler spectrum exhibit peaks of diﬀer-
ent origins (swell, wind wave local maxima, hydrody-
namical kernels) which can cause false detection when
proceeding to a systematic research of the main Bragg
rays.

Figure 1: Simulated bistatic (ϕ = 15◦) second-order
Doppler spectrum at radar frequency 16.3 MHz, for a
Pierson-Moskowitz oceanic spectrum with wind speed
5 m.s−1 in the absence of surface current and noise. The
ﬁrst-order Bragg peaks are located at
fB. Second-
order peaks are marked by “s” (swell peaks); “W”
(wind waves peaks); “h” (hydrodynamical peaks) [25].

±

such azimuthally resolved Doppler spectra can only be
obtained with phased-arrays using a beam forming pro-
cess. In the case of compact antenna arrays using Di-
rection Finding techniques, the available Doppler spec-
trum can only be described by an azimuthal integration
of eq. 2.

In most radar systems, the range-processed “I” and
“Q” voltage signals are usually acquired at a constant
temporal rate ∆t equal to the chirp duration provid-
ing uninterrupted sequences of size N . Calculation
of the Fourier Transform (eq. 7) is achieved through
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) of the resulting com-
plex times series s(n∆t) with, typically, a Blackman-
Harris tapering window. This leads to an estimation of
the Doppler spectrum with N spectral rays at the fre-
quency resolution ∆f = 1/T . In the following, we will
henceforth simply refer to this estimation technique as
the “FFT method”. Both the accuracy and reliability
of the radial current estimation are limited by the inte-
gration time. The resolution to which the current can
be determined from the spectral rays of the radar sig-
nal even in the absence of noise is in principle limited
by the frequency resolution (∆Ur = λ/2T ). The actual
accuracy can be to some extent improved by the cen-
troid method which allows choosing intermediate fre-
quencies between the spectral rays [26]. The reliability
of the estimation in presence of noise (that is, the abil-
ity to detect a “true” Bragg line) depends primarily on
the SNR [27], which can be shown proportional to the
integration time. Hence using short integration times
deteriorates the quality of the estimation in a twofold
aspect. As we will show, the use of AR modeling makes
it possible to mitigate simultaneously the issues of weak
SNR and poor frequency resolution.

2.2 Classical Spectral Estimator

As it is well-known, the theoretical Doppler spectrum
(eq. 1) is the limiting form of the Power Spectral Den-
sity (PSD) of the backscattered time series s(t) for large
integration time and surface patch (to within an am-
plitude factor given by the radar equation):

σ(ω)

∼

(cid:42)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:90) T

0

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
e−iωts(t)W (t) dt
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

2(cid:43)

(7)

Here W (t) is a windowing function over the integra-
tion time T and the complex radar signal s(t) is as-
sumed to be resolved in range and direction. Note that

2.3 Autoregressive Representation of

Time Series

The aforementioned limitations of the Fourier Trans-
form in calculating Doppler spectra are not speciﬁc to
HFR and actually arise in a wealth of applications. Sev-
eral alternative approaches have been proposed since
the late seventies [28]. One family of methods relies on
a stochastic representation of times series with help of
AR modeling and has become popular in certain ﬁelds
such as statistics and econometrics. It has been ﬁrst
shown [29] that AR can achieve better spectral resolu-
tion than FFT on a canonical, two-sinus case. Later on,
[30] demonstrated the ability of AR models to success-

3

−1.0−0.50.00.51.0Dopplerfrequency(Hz)−100−500PSD(dB)hW−fB+fBsfully represent short-time ultrasonic Doppler signals in
the case of blood ﬂow estimation, which are formally
similar to sea surface backscattered signals under the
ﬁrst-order Bragg approximation. Rather than using a
Fourier series, AR assumes that the signal s(n∆t) at
any present time step n can be written as a weighted
sum of its previous values in the past, together with a
white noise ε[n]:

s(n∆t) =

p
(cid:88)

k=1

−

a[k]s(cid:0)(n

−

k)∆t(cid:1) + ε[n]

(8)

The number p of involved time steps in the past is called
the order of the AR representation and the a[k] are
termed “AR coeﬃcients”. The choice of the order and
the computation of the AR coeﬃcients will be discussed
further. The PSD of the AR process (eq. 8) is given
by (e.g. [31]):

PAR(ω) = Pε

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

1 +

p
(cid:88)

k=1

a[k]e−iωk∆t

−2

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(9)

where Pε is the constant PSD of the white noise ε. Note
that the calculation of the PSD requires no further as-
sumption on the signal besides its AR representation
(eq. 8). Contrarily to the Fourier Transform approach,
it does not suﬀer from truncation eﬀect such as Gibbs
phenomena and does not requires tapering windows.
The expression of the AR PSD (eq. 9) is mathemat-
ically equivalent to the PSD calculated with a FFT
with the major diﬀerence that it can be evaluated at
arbitrary frequencies ω (not only integer multiples of
the lowest frequency) once the AR coeﬃcients a[k] are
known. This is very advantageous for short samples
where the discrete frequency set prescribed by FFT is
limited by a coarse resolution. Nevertheless, the AR
modeling is also subject to hidden limitations for small
order p and short sample size N . A better representa-
tion of the PSD requires higher orders while an accu-
rate evaluation of the AR coeﬃcients (most often based
on the signal auto-correlation function) requires large
p). As we will see in the following,
sample size (N
(cid:29)
the best trade-oﬀ is obtained for p

N/2.

∼

2.4 Maximum Entropy Spectral Esti-

mation

Eﬃciency of the AR spectral calculation does not only
lay in eq. 9 but primarily in the method chosen for

4

a[k]
}
{

p
k=1. Hence, inac-
obtaining the AR coeﬃcients
p
curate estimations of
k=1 will result in a poor
a[k]
}
{
spectral representation. Many methods were developed
over the past half century for the determination of these
coeﬃcients, e.g. least squares, likelihood, Yule-Walker
and Burg. We refer e.g. to [31] for a description and
comparison of these methods. As a general rule, each
AR model is equivalent to a linear prediction ﬁlter, that
is to say, every sample value s(n∆) can be predicted as
a linear weighted sum of the previous p sample val-
ues (eq. 8). The Burg’s method uses an error crite-
rion to recursively compute the nth AR coeﬃcient a[n]
1] by minimizing both the forward and back-
from a[n
ward prediction errors. The main asset of the Burg’s
algorithm is its well-known ability to provide good es-
timations when applied to short signals [32], which is
the reason why we selected this method in the present
context. This method is nowadays widely available in
most signal processing toolboxes. Minimizing the total
prediction error energy is equivalent to a maximum in-
formation entropy estimation. In agreement with the
radar literature, spectral estimation based on Burg’s
method will therefore be entitled as Maximum Entropy
Method (MEM) in the following.

−

2.5 Accuracy criterion for radial cur-

rent estimation

The estimation of radial surface currents from the
backscattered Doppler spectrum is usually deteriorated
by various factors such as poor SNR, Radio Frequency
Interferences (RFI), beam forming artifacts due to in-
suﬃcient rejection of secondary lobes, rapid variation
of the bistatic angle leading to varying Bragg frequency
within the radar cell or widening the Bragg peaks due
to spatial variations of the current in the farthest radar
cells. Dubious values can be eliminated by a series
of quality checks (QC, e.g [33]), the simplest of which
rely on a SNR threshold for the Bragg rays (typically
SNR > 6 dB), an a priori limitation of the search inter-
< 1 m.s−1) and consistent Doppler
val (typically
shifts for the positive (f +) and negative (f −) Bragg
peaks which must undergo the same translation, that
is to say
should be small. Application of
successive QC reduces increasingly the available area in
the surface current map. When using short integration
time in the FFT method, the QC are hardly met and
dramatically reduces the coverage. The main advan-
tage of the AR-MEM approach is to increase the SNR

f +
|

2fB

f −

Ur

−

−

|

|

|

and to provide a better ﬁlling of surface current map
with the same constraint of accuracy. In the analysis
of the experimental data set we imposed the following
stringent QC:

SNR(f ±) > 12 dB
f −

< 0.025fB

2fB

−

|

f +

|

−

(10)

The accuracy threshold at 16.15 MHz corresponds to a
current speed discrepancy of 0.1 m.s−1 and the choice
of 12 dB results from an empirical trade-oﬀ between
coverage and reliability.

3 Performance assessment on

synthetic data

Because of the claimed performances of the MEM in
the literature, a signiﬁcant gain in spatial coverage
and accuracy is expected for the current maps. In or-
der to quantify these increased performances, we went
through a series of tests using synthetic HFR time series
with a known radial surface current. In the absence of
noise, the time variation of the received complex volt-
age signal over a time interval [0, T ] and acquired at
rate ∆t can be described by a random stationary pro-
cess with prescribed Doppler spectrum:

s0(t) = √∆t

N
(cid:88)

(cid:113)

j=1

σ0(ωj)ei(ωj +ωc)teiϕj

(11)

where ωj = 2πj/T , the ϕj are uniform random phases
and as before ωc is the frequency shift (eq. 4) due to
the surface current and σ0(ω) is the simulated second-
order sea surface Doppler spectrum in the absence of
surface current and noise (see Figure 1). The noise
n(t) is modeled as an additive random process with
adjustable level so that the received signal s(t) can be
written:

s(t) = s0(t) + αn(t),

(12)

where α > 0 is a dimensionless coeﬃcient controlling
the relative level of noise (hence the SNR). Here, both
the signal s0 and noise n are normalized to have unit
variance.
It is customary to model the noise process
n(t) with a complex Gaussian white noise. However, it
turns out that the actual noise characteristics inferred
from the radar data deviate from the normal distri-
bution. Therefore, we also devised an hybrid synthetic
model, where the numerical signal s0(t) generated from

5

eq. 11 is combined with an experimental additive noise
n(t). To obtain the actual noise component from real
measurements we used the so-called “RFI” ﬁles pro-
vided by the WERA software. These ﬁles record the
negative frequencies in the FFT range-gating operation
and only contain the noise part of the signal (as they
correspond to “negative” time-delays). They can be
used to obtain realistic samples for the noise.

A key parameter for accurately representing the time
series with an AR model is the order p (eq. 8). As seen
from eq. 9, it governs the spectral resolution of the
PSD. Choosing higher orders will thus result in a bet-
ter frequency representation of the modeled time series.
However, as the input time series is of ﬁnite duration,
these higher orders will also produce edge eﬀects be-
cause of the lag in the AR linear prediction ﬁlter (eq. 8)
and eventually deteriorate the resulting modeled spec-
trum.

To determine the optimal order, we performed a se-
ries of numerical tests according to the model (eqs. 11,
12) for some typical values of the radial current Ur and
for a wide range of sample sizes N and AR order p.
The radar frequency (16.15 MHz) and the sampling
rate (∆t = 0.26 s) were taken identical to the actual
HFR system in Toulon. The Doppler spectrum σ0(ω)
was simulated according to the second-order model (eq.
1) with a Pierson-Moskowtiz spectrum by wind speed
U10 = 5 m.s−1. The noise was chosen to be a Gaussian
white noise with α = 1 (i.e. SNR = 0 dB). We went
through a systematic application of the AR-MEM to
estimate the radial current from the ﬁrst-order Bragg
peaks following the QC (eq. 10). For each test case,
a large number (1000) of random time series were pro-
duced and the proportion of samples passing the qual-
ity test was calculated together with the Root-Mean-
Square Error (RMSE) between estimated and actual
radial current. Figure 2 shows an example of such sim-
ulation for a typical sample of size N = 1024 (about
4.5 min) and radial current Ur = 0.3 m.s−1. As seen,
an optimal success rate is obtained for an order about
p = 500 while the RMSE remains almost constant for
orders smaller than about p = 700 and deteriorates
rapidly for higher orders. This observed behavior re-
ﬂects the trade-oﬀ that must be found between high
orders and edge eﬀects in the calculation of the predic-
tion ﬁlter. The following empirical rule was retained
after thorough numerical studies: the optimum order p
is half of the number N of samples in the input time
series (Figure 2). In practice, choosing orders smaller

than N/2 does not deteriorate much the SNR of the AR
PSD nor the RMSE in the estimation of radial current
but reduces signiﬁcantly the computational time.

Figure 2:
Inﬂuence of the AR order in estimating
the radial current Ur from a synthetic HFR time se-
ries with AR-MEM for an integration time of 4.5 min
(N = 1024 time steps) and Ur = 0.3 m.s−1. The radar
signal is modeled by a random stationary process with
prescribed Doppler spectrum (eqs. 11 and 12) and a
Gaussian white noise with α = 1 (SNR = 0 dB). The
left plot shows the proportion of Doppler spectra (in
%, among 1000 samples) passing the quality test as a
function of the AR order; the right panel shows the
normalized error (nRMSE, in % of Ur) in estimating
the radial current.

α

Once the optimal AR order has been identiﬁed we
have compared the respective performances of the FFT
and AR-MEM methods for short samples, in partic-
ular the robustness to noise. Synthetic random data
sets with the same signal characteristics as above but
with various noise level (0
3 dB <
SNR < 0 dB) were generated for the two types of noise
(white Gaussian noise or experimental noise). The per-
formance of each method have been quantiﬁed in terms
of rate of success in passing the QC test (Figure 3)
over 1000 samples for each noise level. A drastic gain
in robustness with respect to the two types of noise is
observed when using the AR-MEM instead of the FFT
method as the maximum noise level allowing for a full
rate of success is twice larger.

2, i.e.

−

≤

≤

4 Application to HFR surface

current mapping

The University of Toulon and the Mediterranean In-
stitute of Oceanography (MIO) are operating a multi-
static HFR network (Figure 4) in the region of Toulon

6

Figure 3: QC success rate (%) of the Doppler spectra
for short (N = 1024 time steps) synthetic HFR times
series, when computed with —— AR-MEM and ex-
perimental noise; —— FFT method and experimental
noise; - - - - AR-MEM and Gaussian white noise; - - - -
FFT method and Gaussian white noise.

Figure 4: Radar sweep area of the multistatic setup
of Porquerolles (transmitting site), Cap B´enat (receiv-
ing site) and Fort Peyras (not used here) along with
drifter’s trajectories on June 24-25th, 2019 (—— L3,
—— L4).

[34, 24]. It is composed of a transmitting site on Por-
querolles Island, a receiving site at Cap B´enat and a
transmitting/receiving site at Fort Peyras (see Figure
4). The working radar frequency is 16.15 MHz with
a frequency band of 100 kHz, leading to a range res-
olution of 1.5 km. The receiving sites in Fort Peyras
and Cap B´enat were originally equipped with arrays of
8 antennas which could not allow for the application
of beam forming techniques for the azimuthal discrim-
ination of surface currents and could only be processed
with direction ﬁnding techniques. Recently, the receive
sites were upgraded to linear arrays of 12 antennas (Cap
B´enat as of January 2019 and Fort Peyras as of Jan-
uary 2020), which now opens the possibility to apply
beamforming techniques and therefore allows the use

05001000AR order050100Covered Area (%)05001000AR order010203040nRMSE (%)0.00.51.01.52.02.5Noiselevel050100Coveredarea(%)ToulonFortPeyras(Tx/Rx)Porquerolles(Tx)B´enat(Rx)50kmL4L3Typicalrange5.5°E6°E6.5°E7°E42.5°N43°Nof azimuthally resolved voltage time series. In this sec-
tion, we present an analysis of such time series arising
from the Cap B´enat site in the light of the AR-MEM.
The data set used as a benchmark for the derivation of
radial surface current maps was recorded on February
4, 2019, 14:01 UTC.

We ﬁrst evaluated the performances of AR-MEM in
computing the PSD by comparing the Range-Doppler
maps obtained using the FFT and the AR-MEM. Fig-
ure 5 shows such maps along the central bearing for
short samples duration (N = 128 time steps, T = 33 s).
The AR-MEM was computed with the optimal order
(p = 64) and the PSD was evaluated on a very ﬁne
grid of 4096 bins, corresponding to a frequency step
10−4 Hz. We recall that the analytical ex-
∆f = 9, 4
pression (eq. 9) of the PSD allows for an arbitrary
small sampling rate once the AR coeﬃcients have been
derived. This is signiﬁcantly better than the frequency
resolution linked to the FFT algorithm which is related
10−2 Hz).
to the number of time steps (here, ∆f = 2, 3
Even though improving the sampling rate does not nec-
essary mean improving the resolution, it is clear from
the insets of Figure 5 that a notable improvement of
the latter has been reached with the AR-MEM PSD,
together with a signiﬁcant increase of SNR.

·

·

Figure 5: Range-Doppler maps (dB; colorscale) com-
puted with short samples (N = 128 time steps, T =
33 s) along the central azimuth for the data acquired
on Feb.
4th, 2019, by the Cap B´enat WERA HF
radar at 14:01 UTC. The PSD has been sampled us-
10−2 Hz); (b) AR-MEM
ing the: (a) FFT (∆f = 2, 3
with optimal order (p = 64) and 4096 frequency steps
10−4 Hz). Both insets are centered on the
(∆f = 9, 4
·
1 m.s−1
negative Bragg line (
fB) and rescaled to a
window.

±

−

·

Figure 6 shows four radial surface currents maps
processed from the same dataset with either the FFT

7

method or AR-MEM. The same QC (eq. 10) was used
and diﬀerent sample durations were tested (18 and
0.5 min, respectively). As seen, both methods provide
consistent maps but AR-MEM allows for a signiﬁcant
improvement of spatial coverage and range of available
radial currents. This amelioration is drastic for short
samples where the FFT method gives very sparse re-
sults.

Figure 6: Maps of radial surface current Ur (colorscale;
cm.s−1) acquired on Feb. 4th, 2019, with the Cap
B´enat WERA HF radar (around 14:01 UTC) and esti-
mated using the: (a) FFT, samples of N = 4096 time
steps; (b) AR-MEM, samples of N = 4096 time steps;
(c) FFT, samples of N = 128 time steps; (d) AR-MEM,
samples of N = 128 time steps.

The gain in coverage with AR-MEM has been quan-
tiﬁed in Table 1 for diﬀerent sample durations (18, 4.5
and 0.5 min, respectively), where the number of ﬁlled
cells has been compared with the maximum expected
coverage with a steering beam of 100◦ and a 25 km
range (that is about 1500 radar cells at 1◦
1.5 km res-
olution; see Figure 4). As already noted, the coverage
is strongly increased, especially for short observation
times, from 19 to 45 % for 0.5 min integration time.

×

Together with the gain in coverage it is important
to assess the accuracy of the estimated radial currents,
especially for short data samples. Deriving an absolute
accuracy with respect to some reference measurement
(e.g. drifters) is a delicate task because of the diﬀer-
ence of scales that enter in play. However, consistency

−1.0−0.50.00.51.0Dopplerfrequency(Hz)02040Range(km)(a)FFT−1.0−0.50.00.51.0Dopplerfrequency(Hz)(b)AR-MEM−80−70−60−50−40−30−20−100dB6°E6.5°E42.5°N43°N(a)6°E6.5°E(b)6°E6.5°E42.5°N43°N(c)6°E6.5°E(d)−50050Ur(cm.s−1)Table 1: Coverage of the sea surface current maps of
Figure 6

Method

Coverage
N = 4096 N = 1024 N = 128

FFT
AR-MEM

75 %
85 %

59 %
78 %

19 %
45 %

Note: Coverage expressed in % of a standard coverage area,
obtained with AR-MEM and FFT, for various integration
times (N = {4096; 1024; 128} time steps, i.e.
T ≈ {18; 4.5; 0.5} min).

tests can be performed between radial currents esti-
mated with long and short integration times.
If one
assumes the current to be stationary over the time in-
terval, long integration times are known to be more
reliable because of an increased SNR and augmented
Doppler frequency resolution. Using the same data set
as depicted on Figure 6, we performed various estima-
tions of radial currents according to both methods for
diﬀerent integration times and using the same QC (eq.
10) as previously. We ﬁrst checked that the AR-MEM
and the FFT method are perfectly consistent for long
integration times (4096 time steps or 18 min), as shown
on the left panel of Figure 7. Second, short-time estima-
tions were compared to long-time estimations for each
method (middle and right panels of Figure 7). As seen,
short and long samples lead to very close performances
for the AR-MEM while the data passing the QC with
the short-time FFT are much sparser.

Figure 7: Scatter plots of estimated radial surface cur-
rents over the whole covered area on Feb. 4th, 2019 (see
Figure 6): (a) FFT, long sample (4096 time steps) vs
AR-MEM (4096 time steps); (b) AR-MEM, long sam-
ple (4096 time steps) vs AR-MEM, short sample (128
time steps); (c) FFT, long sample (4096 time steps) vs
FFT, short sample (128 time steps).

Noise robustness was previously assessed using syn-

8

thetic data and level-varying simulated noise. We
tested in a similar way the robustness of real data to
the noise level. To do so, we augmented artiﬁcially
the level of noise by adding a scaled version of the ex-
perimental noise obtained with the RFI ﬁles. Hence,
the actual measured voltage s(t) was transformed to
s(t) + αn(t) with unit variance normalization, in a sim-
ilar way to the synthetic signal in (eq. 12). Again,
the covered area is deﬁned as the proportion of radar
cells passing the QC, in percent of a maximal expected
coverage; it was systematically calculated with the two
methods for diﬀerent levels α of additional noise. The
results, shown in Figure 8, conﬁrm for the two types
of noise the signiﬁcant increase in coverage (or success
rate) that was ﬁrst observed with synthetic data. Note
that the coverage is smaller than in the former case for
a same value of α; in particular, a full coverage is no
longer obtained for α = 0. This is explained by the
fact that the experimental data are already noisy be-
fore being artiﬁcially corrupted by an additional noise.
Hence, the actual signal with α = 0 in fact corresponds
to the synthetic case with some α > 0.

Figure 8: Fraction of radar cells (covered area, in %)
passing the quality test when the radial current is com-
puted with short (4.5 min, 1024 time steps) noisy HFR
times series and processed with: —— AR-MEM; —
— FFT.

Hence, the AR-MEM allows for a considerable im-
provement of current mapping both in terms of avail-
able coverage and robustness to noise. When discussing
the performances of the AR-MEM it is also important
to estimate the computational time to calculate the
PSD. The classical estimation method based on the
FFT algorithm requires O(N log N ) operations for a
sample of N time steps. When computing the PSD
with AR-MEM, the most time-consuming step is the
AR parameters estimation since the computation of the
PSD (eq. 9) also relies on FFT once the AR coeﬃcients
have been derived. This operation is known to require

−0.50.00.5FFT,N=4096−0.50.00.5AR-MEM,N=4096(a)−0.50.00.5FFT,N=4096FFT,N=128(b)−0.50.00.5AR-MEM,N=4096AR-MEM,N=128(c)0.00.51.01.52.02.5Noiselevel050100Coveredarea(%)∼

O(N p) processing steps [35], where p is the AR order
(eq. 8). With p
N/2 it follows that the complex-
ity of AR-MEM is O(N 2). However, given the short
sample size N , the computational time remains small;
with a standard desktop computer, the time needed
to produce the map of Figure 6d is of the order of
10 s. For longer integration times such as those typi-
cally employed in classical FFT processing, the compu-
tational time is signiﬁcantly increased (about 20 min
for N = 4096, Figure 6b) but remains in the reach
of real-time processing, all the more that it could be
greatly reduced using more adapted hardware. Note
that the very interest of using AR-MEM for evaluating
the surface current lies in the use of short integration
times thus allowing for fast calculations.

5 Comparisons with

surface

drifters

To assess the performances of the AR-MEM method in
operational conditions we performed a comparison of
the radial surface currents inferred from HF radar mea-
surements and those measured by Carthe drifters dur-
ing a recent dedicated campaign in the aera of Toulon.
The experiment was conducted on June 24-25th, 2019
and is fully documented in [24], where a successful com-
parison was established with high azimuthal resolution
HF radar currents obtained with an improved Direction
Finding method [36]. Here, we reprocessed the corre-
sponding radar data with a Beam-Forming technique
combined with the AR-MEM method to evaluate the
bistatic radial current (transmitter in Porquerolles and
receiver in Cap B´enat) at a high temporal rate. An in-
tegration time of 6 min (one third of standard WERA
ﬁles) was chosen, in agreement with the 5 min acquisi-
tion rate of drifters. The conventional FFT processing
with short (6 min) and long (18 min) integration time
was also carried out for reference. The results of the
diﬀerent processings is shown in Figure 9 together with
the radial currents obtained by an appropriate projec-
tion of drifters current vector. We selected the longest
2 drifter trajectories L3 and L4, which can be seen on
the Figure 11 from reference [24] and are now plotted
as a function of time. The performances of the diﬀer-
ent methods when compared with the reference drifters’
measurements are recap in Table 2. All three process-
ing are found accurate within 1-2 cm.s−1 Root Mean
Square Error (RMSE). However, the use of AR-MEM

at short integration time (6 min) results in a drasti-
cal increase in QC sucess rate (eq. 10) with respect to
the conventional short-time FFT (from 9-12 % to 23-
25 %). Note that, despite a comparable success rate to
the long-time FFT (18 min), the short-time AR-MEM
provides about 3 times more estimations because of its
shorter sampling duration.

Figure 9: Temporal ﬂuctuations of the radial surface
current Ur on June 24-25th, 2019, for the drifters L3
and L4 (——) and for the Cap B´enat WERA HFR,
estimated with:
AR-MEM and a short integration
time of T = 6 min (1364 time steps); (cid:7) FFT and a
short integration time; ♦ FFT and a long integration
time of T = 18 min (4096 time steps).

◦

Table 2: Comparison with drifters

Method

RMSE
L3

L4 L3

Success rate (%)

AR-MEM short (6 min)

◦
(cid:7) FFT short (6 min)
♦ FFT long (18 min)

1.1
1.1
1.1

1.7
1.7
1.9

23
9
21

L4

25
12
24

Note: RMSE (in cm.s−1) between the HFR radial surface
current and the drifters’ measurements L3 and L4 (Figure 9),
together with the available coverage along the trajectories and
the success rate for each method.

6 Temporal ﬂuctuations of sur-

face current

Another striking application of the AR-MEM is the
monitoring of sea surface current at short time-scale.

9

−20020Ur(cm.s−1)(a)L309:0014:0019:0000:0004:00Time(UTC)−200Ur(cm.s−1)(b)L4We used the same data set, that is the HFR signal
measured in Cap B´enat, to study the complex time se-
ries obtained after beamforming for some speciﬁc radar
cells. In the following experiment, some radar cells lo-
cated in the central part of the radar coverage were
chosen. Continuous sequences were acquired over 27
hours and split into contiguous non-overlapping sub-
sequences of either 4096 (about 18 minutes) or 512
(about 2 minutes) time steps corresponding to “long”
and “short” integration time, respectively. These sub-
sequences were processed with the AR-MEM and FFT
method and the corresponding time series of radial cur-
rent were produced. Again, a SNR threshold of 12 dB
was used to select the Bragg peaks and the same quality
criterion (eq. 10) was used to retain estimates obtained
with either method. In addition, a comparison was also
made with recent parametric methods for surface cur-
rent estimation based on a Maximum Likelihood Es-
timation (MLE) [15]. This method has been proven
to be useful in the context of rapidly varying strong
currents [12] but does not allow for the simple quality
check which is used in eq. 10.

An example of the radial current time series obtained
with diﬀerent methods and diﬀerent integration times
is shown in Figure 10 for a radar cell located at a range
35 km and at a central azimuth (180◦ from North).
As anticipated, the FFT method with short integra-
tion time resolves only a few data sequences and there-
fore does not provide a satisfactory tracking of the sea
surface current. When applied to the same short se-
quences, the AR-MEM successfully resolves the rapid
variations of surface current while remaining consistent
with the values estimated with a longer integration time
(18 min) which can be taken as reference, once linearly
interpolated on the short time. The dominant slow os-
cillation of the measured radial current is consistent
with the period of inertial oscillations in the North-
western Mediterranean sea (about 17 hours) with an
amplitude of about 20 cm.s−1. Contrarily to the MLE
estimate, the fast variations observed with the short-
term AR-MEM do not appear to be stochastic and re-
solve ﬂuctuations of the surface current at the minute
time scale. The performances of the diﬀerent meth-
ods when compared to the long-time reference FFT are
recap in Table 3.

As reliable radial surface current estimates can be ob-
tained with a smaller integration time, the correspond-
ing time series can be acquired at a higher temporal
frequency compared to the classical FFT estimation.

Table 3: Comparison with long-time FFT

Method (132 s) RMSE (cm.s−1)

Success rate (%)

AR-MEM

◦
(cid:7) FFT
(cid:3) MLE

1.11
1.18
2.32

61
25
79

Note: RMSE (in cm.s−1) between the HFR radial surface
current estimated with a short integration time (T = 132 s, 512
time steps) and the reference FFT estimate with a long
integration time (T = 1065 s, 4096 time steps), together with
the estimation success rate for each method.

This makes it possible to investigate the PSD of ra-
dial surface currents over a wider range of temporal
frequencies. Indeed, when reducing the minimal inte-
gration time from about 18 to 4.5 minutes, the Nyquist
frequency is increased from about 1.7 to 6.7 per hour.
The PSD of the radial surface current Ur obtained with
the AR-MEM and the FFT method for the same cen-
tral radial cell as in Figure 10 is shown in Figure 11 in
logarithmic scales. The PSD obtained with the FFT
method saturates around the Nyquist frequency and
reaches a plateau (thin dashed line) while it pursues its
fall oﬀ over one extra order of magnitude when esti-
mated with the AR-MEM. The
5/3 slope is marked
in thick dashed line and is seen to drive the dynamics
of the PSD over at least two decades. Such power law
decay has already been reported in the literature [37],

−

P (ω)

ωγ

∝

(13)

where the exponent γ depends on the ﬂow regime. The
5/3 is typical of Kolmogorov theory of tur-
value γ =
bulence and is recovered when inertial forces dominates
over viscous.

−

7 Discussion and Conclusion

We have presented an application of the AR modeling
with Maximum Entropy Method (MEM) to HFR map-
ping and tracking of instantaneous sea surface currents.
Contrarily to the common operational approach, the
radar signal processing does not use FFT to compute
Instead, it is based on an AR rep-
Doppler spectra.
resentation of the complex antenna voltage time series
and the calculation of the corresponding AR coeﬃcients
with the MEM. As seen, the AR-MEM approach makes
it possible to obtain a reliable and robust estimation of

10

Figure 10: Temporal ﬂuctuations of the radial surface current Ur estimated with a short integration time
AR-MEM; (cid:3) MLE; (cid:7) FFT. The FFT estimate with a long
(T = 132 s, 512 time steps) according to the:
integration time of T = 1065 s (4096 time steps) is shown for refrence and interpolated over the short time
(——). The data have been acquired on Feb. 4th, 2019 with the Cap B´enat WERA HFR and the radar cell is
chosen in the middle of the coverage.

◦

lar for short samples. An application to experimental
data has been made with a bistatic HFR located in the
region of Toulon. Surface current mapping has been
performed with the AR-MEM and FFT method for dif-
ferent integration times. A signiﬁcant increase of the
coverage has been obtained with the former method, in
the sense that a larger proportion of current estimates
pass the required quality tests. Another useful appli-
cation has been given, namely the characterization of
fast temporal ﬂuctuations of the radial current within a
given radar cell. With higher temporal resolution, the
power spectrum of surface current ﬂuctuations can be
investigated over a wider range of temporal frequencies.
The actual high-frequency cut-oﬀ can thus be pushed
to values as high as a few per minutes and the typical
power law decay of turbulence is seen to extend over
a few more decades. The ability to estimate surface
current variation with an integration time of the order
of one minute paves the way to other applications such
as tsunami early warning where very short integration
times are needed. This will be developed in subsequent
work.

Acknowledgments

We thank the Direction G´en´erale de l’Armement
(DGA) and the Agence pour l’Innovation de D´efense

Figure 11: Experimental spectrum of the radial sur-
face current Ur at a given radar cell. Ur estimated
with: —— MEM, short integration time (N =
1024 time steps); —— FFT, long integration time
(N = 4096 time steps). Data have been acquired on
Feb. 6th to 10th, 2019, with the Cap B´enat WERA
HFR; the radar cell is in the middle of the coverage.

the PSD even for short samples. This is particularly
suited to the estimation of surface currents which pro-
ceeds through the identiﬁcation of a main resonant fre-
quency in the Doppler spectrum. We have ﬁrst tested
the AR-MEM approach with noisy synthetic HFR data
and quantiﬁed its augmented performances with re-
spect to the classical spectral estimation in terms of
increased coverage and robustness to noise, in particu-

11

04:0009:0014:0019:0000:0004:00Time(UTC)−30−20−10010Ur(cm.s−1)Frequency (h-1)PSD (m2s-2 h-1)(AID) for funding the Ph.D. grant of B. Domps. The
upgrade and maintenance of the WERA HFR system
in Toulon have been funded by the EU Interreg pro-
gram SICOMAR-PLUS and the national observation
program MOOSE. We thank the Parc National de Port-
Cros (PNPC) for its support and hosting of our radar
emitter in Porquerolles Island. We also thank the “As-
sociation Syndicale des Propri´etaires du Cap B´enat”
as well as the “Group Military Conservation” and the
Marine Nationale for hosting our radar installations.
Many thanks go to Pr Anne Molcard for providing the
drifters’ data and for helping with comparisons.

References

[1] H. Roarty et al.,The Global High Frequency Radar
Network, Frontiers in Marine Science, vol. 6, p.
164, 2019.

[2] M.

R.

Heron,

Gomez,

B. Weber,
A. Dzvonkovskaya, T. Helzel, N. Thomas,
and L. Wyatt,Application of HF Radar in Hazard
Management, Intern. Journ. of Ant. and Prop.,
vol. 2016, Aug. 2016.

[3] J. Paduan and L. Washburn, “High-frequency
radar observations of ocean surface currents,”
Annu. Rev. Mar. Sci., vol. 5, pp. 115–136, 2013.

[4] D. D. Crombie, Doppler Spectrum of Sea Echo at
13.56 Mc./s.” Nature, vol. 175, no. 4459, pp. 681–
682, 1955.

[5] ——, Resonant Backscatter from the Sea and its
Application to Physical Oceanography, in IEEE
Intern. Conf. on Engineering in the Ocean Envi-
ronment, 1972, pp. 174–179.

[6] D. E. Barrick, “First-order theory and analysis of
MF/HF/VHF scatter from the sea,” IEEE Trans.
on Ant. and Prop., vol. 20, pp. 2–10, 1972.

[7] D. E. Barrick, J. M. Headrick, R. W. Bogle, and
D. D. Crombie, Sea Backscatter at HF: Interpre-
tation and Utilization of the Echo, Proceedings of
the IEEE, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 673–680, 1974.

[8] R. Stewart and J. Joy,HF Radio Measurements of
Surface Currents, Deep Sea Res. Oceanogr. Abstr.,
vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 1039–1049, 1974.

[9] D. E. Barrick, M. Evans, and B. Weber, Ocean
Surface Currents Mapped by Radar, Science, vol.
198, no. 4313, pp. 138–144, 1977.

[10] K.-W. Gurgel, G. Antonischki, H.-H. Essen, and
T. Schlick,Wellen Radar (WERA): a New Ground-
Wave HF Radar for Ocean Remote Sensing,
Coastal engineering, vol. 37, no. 3-4, pp. 219–234,
1999.

[11] A. Dzvonkovskaya, L. Petersen, T. Helzel, and
M. Kniephoﬀ, High-Frequency Ocean Radar Sup-
port for Tsunami Early Warning Systems, Geo-
science Letters, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 29, Dec. 2018.

[12] C.-A. Gu´erin, S. T. Grilli, P. Moran, A. R. Grilli,
and T. L. Insua, Tsunami Detection by High-
Frequency Radar in British Columbia: Perfor-
mance Assessment of the Time-Correlation Algo-
rithm for Synthetic and Real Events, Ocean Dy-
namics, vol. 4, pp. 423–438, May 2018.

[13] K. Laws, J. Vesecky, M. Lovellette, and J. Paduan,
Ship Tracking by HF Radar in Coastal Waters, in
Oceans MTS/IEEE, Sep. 2016.

[14] M. Berta, L. Bellomo, M. G. Magaldi, A. Griﬀa,
A. Molcard, J. Marmain, M. Borghini, and V. Tail-
landier, Estimating Lagrangian Transport Blend-
ing Drifters with HF Radar Data and Mod-
els: Results from the TOSCA Experiment in the
Ligurian Current (North Western Mediterranean
Sea), Progress in Oceanography, vol. 128, pp. 15–
29, 2014.

[15] C.-A. Gu´erin and S. T. Grilli, A Probabilistic
Method for the Estimation of Ocean Surface Cur-
rents from Short Time Series of HF Radar Data,
Ocean Modelling, vol. 121, pp. 105–116, 2018.

[16] R. H. Khan, Ocean-Clutter Model

for High-
Frequency Radar, IEEE Journ. of Oceanic Engi-
neering, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 181–188, 1991.

[17] R. Martin and M. Kearney, Remote Sea Cur-
rent Sensing Using HF Radar: An Autoregressive
Approach, IEEE Journ. of Oceanic Engineering,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 151–155, 1997.

[18] A. Middleditch and L. Wyatt, An Instantaneous-
Frequency Filtering Technique for High-Frequency
Radar Oceanography, IEEE Journ. of Oceanic En-
gineering, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 797–803, 2006.

12

[30] F. Schlindwein and D. Evans, Autoregressive Spec-
tral Analysis as an Alternative to Fast Fourier
Transform Analysis of Doppler Ultrasound Sig-
nals. Diagnostic Vascular Ultrasound, Jan. 1992,
ch. 8, pp. 74–84.

[31] L. Marple, Digital Spectral Analysis, 2nd ed.

Dover Publications, 2019.

[32] F. Laeri, Some Comments on Maximum Entropy
Spectral Analysis of Time Series, Computers in
Physics, vol. 4, pp. 627–636, Jun. 1990.

[33] R. Gomez, T. Helzel, L. Petersen, M. Kniephoﬀ,
C. Merz, Y. Liu, and R. Weisberg, Real-Time
Quality Control of Current Velocity Data on Indi-
vidual Grid Cells in WERA HF Radar, in Oceans
MTS/IEEE, 2014.

[34] C.-A. Gu´erin, D. Dumas, A. Gramoull´e,
C. Quentin, M. Saillard,
and A. Molcard,
The Multistatic Oceanographic HF Radar Net-
work in Toulon, International Radar Conference,
2019.

[35] A. Farina, Optimised Radar Processors. Peregri-

nus, 1987.

[36] D. Dumas and C.-A. Gu´erin, “Self-calibration
and antenna grouping for bistatic oceanographic
high-frequency radars,” 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.10528

[37] S. A. Thorpe, An Introduction to Ocean Turbu-

lence. Cambridge University Press, 2007.

[19] W. Wang and E. W. Gill, High-Resolution Spec-
tral Estimation of HF Radar Data for Current
Measurement Applications, Journ. Atmos. Ocean.
Techn., vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 1515–1524, Aug. 2015.

[20] W. Wang, E. W. Gill, and W. Huang,Comparison
of Spectral Estimation Methods for Rapidly Vary-
ing Currents Obtained by High-Frequency Radar,
IEEE Journ. of Oceanic Engineering, vol. 42,
no. 3, pp. 556–565, Jul. 2017.

[21] J. P. Burg,Maximum Spectral Analysis, Ph.D. dis-

sertation, Stanford University, May 1975.

[22] D. E. Barrick, Remote Sensing of Sea State by
Radar, Remote Sensing of the Troposphere, vol. 12,
pp. 1–46, 1972.

[23] B. J. Lipa and D. E. Barrick, Extraction of Sea
State from HF Radar Sea Echo: Mathematical
Theory and Modeling, Radio Science, vol. 21,
no. 1, pp. 81–100, 1986.

[24] D. Dumas, A. Gramoull´e, C.-A. Gu´erin, A. Mol-
card, Y. Ourmi`eres, and B. Zakardjian,Multistatic
Estimation of High-Frequency Radar Surface Cur-
rents in the Region of Toulon, 2020, ocean Dy-
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/
namics.
10.1007/s10236-020-01406-z

[25] S. Grosdidier, P. Forget, Y. Barbin, and C.-
A. Guerin, HF Bistatic Ocean Doppler Spectra:
Simulation Versus Experimentation, IEEE Trans.
Geosci. and Remote Sens., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 2138–
2148, 2013.

[26] D. E. Barrick, Accuracy of Parameter Extraction
from Sample-Averaged Sea-Echo Doppler Spectra,
IEEE Trans. on Ant. and Prop., vol. 28, no. 1, pp.
1–11, 1980.

[27] P. Forget, Noise Properties of HF Radar Measure-
ment of Ocean Surface Currents, Radio Science,
pp. 764–777, Aug. 2015.

[28] P. Stoica, Spectral Analysis of Signals. Pearson

Prentice Hall, 2005.

[29] L. Marple,Resolution of Conventional Fourier, Au-
toregressive, and Special ARMA Methods of Spec-
trum Analysis, in IEEE Intern. Conf. on Acous-
tics, Speech, and Signal Process., vol. 2, May 1977,
pp. 74–77.

13

