Spatio-temporal measurement of ionization-
induced modal index changes in gas-filled 
PCF by prism-assisted side-coupling 

B. M. TRABOLD, M. I. SURESH,* J. R. KOEHLER, M. H. FROSZ, F. TANI, AND 
P. ST.J. RUSSELL 
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Light, Staudtstrasse 2, 91058 Erlangen, Germany 
*Corresponding author: mallika-irene.suresh@mpl.mpg.de 

Abstract: We report the use of prism-assisted side-coupling to investigate the spatio-temporal 
dynamics of photoionization in an Ar-filled hollow-core photonic crystal fiber. By launching 
four different LP core modes we are able to probe temporal and spatial changes in the modal 
refractive  index  on  timescales  from  a  few  hundred  picoseconds  to  several  hundred 
microseconds after the ionization event. We experimentally analyze the underlying gas density 
waves and find good agreement with quantitative and qualitative hydrodynamic predictions. 
Moreover, we observe periodic modulations in the MHz-range lasting for a few microseconds, 
indicating nanometer-scale vibrations of the fiber structure, driven by gas density waves. 

1. 

Introduction 

Ionization  of  a  gas  by  an  intense  laser  pulse  causes  complex  spatio-temporal  dynamics  at 
different timescales, leading to changes in its refractive index. Over the first few nanoseconds 
the response is dominated by the presence of free electrons and their recombination with the 
ions.  Hydrodynamic  effects  follow,  lasting  a  few  tens  of  nanoseconds,  and  finally  the  gas 
thermalizes on a µs-ms timescale. The precise timescales of these different processes depend 
on the experimental conditions.  

Investigations of photoionization have led to a better understanding of plasmas [1,2] and 
filamentation [3,4], as well as the development of plasma and air waveguides [4-7] that might 
be  exploited  for  laser-based  free  space  communication  in  the  presence  of  fog  [8].  A  good 
understanding of plasma dynamics is also crucial in experiments at MHz pulse repetition rates 
in  the  strong  field  regime,  for  example  in  high  harmonic  generation  within  femtosecond 
enhancement  cavities  [9]  and  the  generation  of  broadband  deep  and  vacuum  ultraviolet  via 
dispersive wave emission in gas-filled hollow-core photonic crystal fibers (HC-PCFs) [10].  

So  far,  the  response  of  a  gas  after  ionization  by  fs  and  ns  pulses  has  been  investigated 
predominantly  in  free  space  at  atmospheric  or  lower  pressure,  using  techniques  such  as 
interferometry  [4],  shadowgraphy  [3],  electrical  or  sonographic  probing  [3,11]  and  x-ray 
absorption  [2].  Although  each  of  these  techniques  has  its  own  merits  and  limitations,  it  is 
generally not straightforward to use any of them for studying the post-ionization dynamics of 
a high pressure gas confined within a small volume, such as is the case in HC-PCFs. 

Recently a fiber-based interferometer was used to resolve refractive index changes along 
the length of a gas-filled HC-PCF and to investigate the gas dynamics after ionization triggered 
by  a  self-compressed  pulse  [12].  In  this  paper  we  extract  additional  information  about  the 
transverse spatial distribution of the photo-induced refractive index change by applying prism-
assisted  side-coupling  [13].  This  technique  is  highly  sensitive,  capable  of  detecting  index 
changes as small as 10–6, and has the advantage of not relying on interferometry (which requires 
sophisticated  stabilization  techniques)  but  purely  on  phase  matching,  making  it  very  robust 
against noise caused by air fluctuations and vibrations of mirrors in the experimental set-up. 

Fig.  1:  Experimental  set-up.  A  20-cm-long  single-ring  HC-PCF  (inset:  scanning  electron 
micrograph of fiber cross-section) is mounted with one end in a gas cell (GC). Pump pulses (805 
nm  central  wavelength,  40 fs  FWHM  duration)  are  reflected  off  a  dichroic  mirror  (DM)  and 
coupled into the fiber. Continuous-wave (CW) probe light at 1550 nm is side-launched with a 
cylindrical lens (CL) through a wedge prism (WP; wedge angle αw = 1.05°) into the fiber. A flip 
mirror  (FM)  is  used  to  direct  the  emerging  probe  light  onto  a  charge-coupled  device  (CCD) 
camera to image the transverse profile. When the flip mirror is absent, the probe signal can be 
monitored using a photodiode (PD) and an oscilloscope (Osc.). 

2.  Experimental set-up 

The experimental set-up is shown in Fig. 1(a). Laser pulses of 5.4 μJ energy delivered by a 
Ti:sapphire laser amplifier with central wavelength 805 nm, 40 fs full-width half-maximum 
(FWHM) duration and 1 kHz repetition rate, are coupled into the fundamental mode of a single-
ring HC-PCF (SR-PCF). A scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of the fiber cross-section is 
shown  as  an  inset.  The 30-µm-wide  hollow  core  is  surrounded  by  eight  capillaries 9  µm  in 
diameter with a wall thickness of ~190 nm, which act as anti-resonant elements. The input end 
of the 20 cm long fiber is placed in a gas cell filled with 7.2 bar argon, while the other end of 
the  fiber  is  kept  free  in  air  at  atmospheric pressure. This experimental  configuration, which 
results  in  a  pressure  gradient,  was  chosen  because  of  practical  space  constrains  set  by  the 
shallow angle between the fiber and the probe beam. At the selected pressure, the fiber exhibits 
negative dispersion in the near infrared spectral region, with the zero dispersion wavelength 
shifting from ~550 nm at the fiber input to ~350 nm at the output. As a result, the launched 
pulses undergo temporal self-compression as they propagate, eventually ionizing the gas in the 
vicinity of the temporal focus [12,14]. According to numerical simulations (not shown) and 
visual  inspection  of  the  side-scattering,  the  pulses  reach  the  shortest  duration  ~10 cm  away 
from  the  fiber  input,  where  the  pressure  is  estimated  to  be  ~5.5 bar  [14].  This  position  was 
therefore selected to probe the evolution of the modal index after the gas is ionized.  

Probe light is delivered by a continuous-wave (CW) single-frequency 1550 nm laser and 
coupled into the SR-PCF core using prism-assisted side-coupling  [13]. A silica wedge prism 
(WP) with 1.05° wedge angle is mounted against the fiber, with index-matching liquid between 
fiber and prism so as to avoid additional refraction of the probe light. Using a rotation stage, 
the angle of incidence of the probe light on the prism, and thus the wavevector component kz 
along  the  fiber  axis,  could  be  controlled.  A  single  core  mode  LPpm  is  then  excited  when  kz 
matches its modal index npm. The side-coupling angle αair at which the LPpm mode is excited is 
given by: 


air

 


w



cos



1

n
gl




cos



w



1

cos (

n

/

n
gl

pm


) /

n
air


 , 

(1) 

where ngl and nair are the refractive indices of silica and air, αw is the wedge angle  [13]. The 
core of the SR-PCF can be approximated as a simple capillary for which the effective indices 
of the LPpm modes are [14,15,16]: 

 
 
npm  ng

2  u pm

2 k0

2 aeff

2( , 

(2) 

where ng is the refractive index of the gas, upm the m-th zero of the p-th order Bessel function 
of  the  first  kind,  λ  the  vacuum  wavelength,  aeff(λ)  =  aAP / [1 + λ2 s/(aAP h)]  the  wavelength-
dependent effective core radius, aAP the area-preserving core radius, s = 0.08 a fitting parameter 
determined by fitting experimental data of the modal indices and h the thickness of the capillary 
walls. 

In the experiment we focused probe light (power 1 W) with a cylindrical lens (20 mm focal 
length) to an elliptical spot of dimensions 23 μm × 1.75 mm and directed it through the prism 
and into the fiber core. The resulting extended focal spot made the experiment less sensitive to 
uncertainty as to the exact location of the temporal focus. The probe light, side-launched so as 
to propagate against the pump pulses, emerged into the gas cell and was transmitted through 
the dichroic mirror (DM) that reflected the pump pulses at 805 nm before launching them into 
the HC-PCF. An additional long-pass filter with 1500 nm cut-off wavelength helped attenuate 
residual  reflections  of  the pump  light  from  the uncoated window of  the  gas  cell.  The probe 
beam  was  then  focused  onto  a  fast  photodiode  (PD,  1.5  GHz  bandwidth)  and  its  power 
monitored over time using an oscilloscope (2.5 GHz bandwidth). Alternatively, a flip mirror 
(FM) in the beam path could be used to direct the light to an ultra-sensitive infrared charge-
coupled device (CCD) camera to allow the near-field profile of the probe mode to be imaged.  

Fig. 2: Probe power detected at the photodiode as a function of side-coupling angle αair (lower 
horizontal axis) and modal refractive index (upper horizontal axis, after Eq. (1)). The insets show 
the  near-field  profiles  of  the  side-launched  SR-PCF  modes  on  the  CCD  camera.  Black  open 
squares indicate the working points for measuring plasma-related changes in the modal index. 
The dotted curve marks a range not used in the experiments. 

To calibrate the side-launching set-up, the pump pulses were blocked and the fraction of 
probe light transmitted through the SR-PCF measured while varying the angle of incidence. 
The resulting calibration curve is shown in Fig. 2. Peaks corresponding to four distinct modes 
(LP01, LP11, LP21 and LP02) can be identified at different angles of incidence, the insets showing 
the corresponding near-field profiles recorded by the CCD camera. The mode-dependent signal 
power is caused by variations in modal loss and side-coupling efficiency. 

3.  Experimental results and discussion 

Equation  (2)  indicates  that  any  change  in  ng  at  the  probing  position  will  alter  the  effective 
refractive  index  and  axial  wavevector  of  the  prism-coupled  mode.  The  side-launching 
technique translates these changes into variations in the transmitted probe power, which can be 

 
 
conveniently monitored by a fast photodiode. The sensitivity of the technique is highest when, 
for each probed mode, the incidence angle yielding the largest slope on the calibration curve is 
selected as the working point (marked by open squares in Fig. 2). While the side-coupling angle 
αair is kept fixed during the measurements, the actual excitation angles of the modes and thus 
the calibration curve as a whole are shifted by transient changes in ng. 

Fig. 3: (a) Temporal traces of the modal index change during the first 125 ns after the pump-
pulse impact at t = 0, calculated from transmitted probe signal using the calibration curve in Fig. 
2. The measured near-field mode profiles of the four excited LP modes are shown in the insets. 
(b) Modal index changes during the first 100 µs, the inset showing a zoom-in over the first 10 
μs. (c) 1-D cuts across the modal profiles, calculated (dashed lines) and retrieved (solid lines) 
from the insets in (a) along the dashed yellow line. (d) Radio-frequency (RF) spectrum of the 
four time traces, for clarity offset from each other by 50 dB. 

3.1 Plasma-related index changes 

Figures 3(a,b) show the measured temporal response of the effective refractive index for 
four LP modes, calculated from the transmitted probe signal using the calibration curve in Fig. 
2. To reduce noise, the traces are averaged 100 times for the LP01, LP11 and LP21 modes, and 
300 times for the LP02 mode. The pump pulses arrive at the side-launching position at time t = 
0 (temporal focus). The characteristic shape of each trace we attribute to the interplay of several 
effects  occurring  on  different  timescales.  Initially,  the  refractive  index  of  the  gas  filling  the 
fiber core drops because of the presence of free electrons, approximately given by: 

ng  Nee2 / (2ng20me ) , 

(3) 

where Ne is the free electron density on the fiber axis, e the electronic charge, ng the index of 
neutral argon, ω the angular frequency of the probe light, ε0 the vacuum permittivity and me the 
effective electron mass [17]. The plasma generated by the pump is localized in a narrow spot 
at the core center, which we estimate to be ~4 µm wide (1/e2 width) using the Ammosov et al. 
ionization  rate  model  [18].  As  a  result,  the  LP01  and  LP02  modes  feel  a  larger  modal  index 
change than the LP11 and LP21 modes, which carry almost no power at core center. This can be 
clearly seen in Fig. 3(a), where near t = 0 the modal index of the LP01 mode changes by Δn01 ~ 
1.8×105 over 0.5 ns (20% to 80% increase in signal), limited by the ~0.23 ns response time of 

 
 
the PD. The index change of the LP02 mode is similar, while the change for the other two modes 
is almost an order of magnitude smaller. In order to estimate the free electron density, we can 
safely assume that Δng > Δn01, as the width of the probe fundamental mode is much greater 
than the plasma spot width. By inserting Δng > Δn01 into Eq. (3), we obtain Ne > 1.7×1016/cm3. 
Numerical simulations usually predict Ne  values between 1017 and 1018/cm3 [12]. However, the 
measured value is also reduced by the slow PD response and plasma-induced optical loss, which 
is non-negligible for light at 1550 nm. 

3.2 Pressure-wave effects 

After the gas has been ionized, gradual free electron recombination (in argon this typically 
takes  several  ns  [19])  releases  energy,  which  is  mostly  converted  into  kinetic  energy.  This 
results in local changes in gas density that evolve in time and space until the gas eventually 
thermalizes over tens of microseconds [3,4,6]. As the electrons recombine, a density/acoustic 
wave emanates from core center, with a ring-shaped front that propagates radially outwards at 
the speed of sound in argon (323 m/s [12]), while a slowly evolving density depression is left 
behind at the core center. Consequently, the effective indices of LP01 and LP02 drop while those 
of the LP11 and LP21 increase.  

Within the first ~50 ns, the position of the density wave can be determined by correlating 
the traces in Fig 3(a) with the near-field images of the modes in Fig. 3(c), where for comparison 
we plot also the calculated modal intensity distributions [15]. After recovering from the initial 
plasma  peak  by  time  t ~ 3 ns  (dashed  line  in  Fig.  3(a)),  the  LP02  effective  index  reaches  a 
temporary plateau at t ~ 23 ns (dotted line in Fig. 3(a)), while at the same time the LP11 index 
reaches its maximum. By multiplying these time intervals by the speed of sound, we obtain 6.5 
µm, which coincides with the position of the first zeros of LP02 and of the maximum of the LP11 
field intensities at 6.4 µm and 6.7 µm respectively (Fig. 3(c)). After travelling another ~7 ns, 
the acoustic wave reaches the position x ~ 8.7 µm where the LP21 field intensity is maximum at 
t ~ 30 ns. At t ~ 35 ns and x ~ 10 µm, the acoustic wave crosses the second maximum of the 
LP02 mode, with the LP02 index beginning to decline again. Finally, at approximately t ~ 50 ns 
all modal indices reach a minimum. Theoretically, the acoustic wave has then traveled across 
the entire fiber core radius (15 µm) within 46 ns, which means that all modes are left in the 
residual  density  depression.  After  this  moment,  mapping  the  evolution  of  the  density 
distribution in the fiber becomes more complex, for example, when the acoustic wave arrives 
at the capillaries surrounding the core, vibrational mechanical modes are impulsively excited 
[12]. The resulting periodic modulation of the core diameter translates into an oscillation of the 
modal refractive index (deducible from Eq. (2)). Part of the acoustic wave is reflected back by 
the  capillaries,  while  part  of  it  passes  between  them  and  is  then  reflected  back  by  the  fiber 
jacket.  The  acoustic  wave  bounces  in  this  way  several  times  back  and  forth  within  the 
microstructure. All these effects result in fast modulation of the modal indices over the first few 
microseconds, which are clearly visible in the inset of Fig. 3(b). Note however, that the rapid 
oscillations with a period of ~ 2.5 ns in Fig. 3(a) (particularly pronounced in the LP02 trace) 
result from background electrical noise in the laboratory environment and are also present when 
the probe light is blocked.  

On  µs  timescales,  diffusion  due  to  heat  and  density  gradients  causes  the  gas  density 
depression in the center of the core to gradually broaden and reduce in depth. While in the first 
100 ns the density depression, being localized to the core center, is only detected by the LP01 
and LP02 probes (Fig. 3a), it slowly extends across the lobes of the LP11 and LP21 modes within 
~5 µs. As a result, their effective indices reach a minimum significantly later than the LP01 and 
LP02 modes, namely at 2 µs (LP11) and 3.5 µs (LP21) – Fig. 3(b). Since the lobes of the LP11 
modes  are slightly  closer  to  the  core  center  than  those  of the  LP21,  the  sequence  of  minima 
qualitatively visualizes the speed of thermalization. In free space, as a result of thermalization, 
the density depression at the center broadens monotonically on microsecond timescales until 
the  distribution  of  atoms/molecules  becomes  spatially  homogeneous  [4].  However,  in  our 
experiment  the  gas  is  confined  within  the  fiber  so  that,  as  it  returns  to  equilibrium  after 

ionization, an additional maximum in refractive index on a tens of microseconds timescale is 
observed.  

3.3 Mechanical vibrations of capillaries 

A Fourier spectrum of the time traces in Fig. 3(d) shows several peaks in the MHz range, 
providing further insight into the origin of the periodic index modulations. A calculation of the 
time taken for the generated pressure wave to be reflected from the capillaries back to the core 
center  (a  distance  of  30 μm)  yields  a  period  of  93 ns,  corresponding  to  11 MHz.  This  is  in 
reasonable agreement with the highest frequency peak (at 12.2 MHz) observed in Fig. 3(d). The 
peak at 6.8 MHz corresponds to a second oscillation caused by reflection of the pressure wave 
at the outer solid silica jacket, which travels a distance of 48 μm in 0.15 μs, yielding 6.7 MHz, 
in very good agreement with the measured frequency. The cluster of three narrow peaks at 3.7, 
4.0, 4.2 MHz and the two separate ones at 4.8 MHz and 5.5 MHz correspond to mechanical 
vibrations of the capillaries and were also seen in finite element simulations (not shown). The 
splitting into multiple peaks we attribute to variations in wall thickness and diameter between 
individual capillaries.   

Fig.  4:  Uncorrected  signal  trace  (blue),  scaled  background  trace  due  to  coupling  efficiency 
changes (green) and background-corrected trace (orange) only including effects of modal index 
changes (a) in the first 2 μs and (b) over 60 μs, measured for LP11 mode. Inset of (a): Working 
points for measuring uncorrected signal trace (blue diamond) and for background trace (green 
star)  marked  on  the  calibration  curve.  Inset  of  (b):  Calculated  modal  index  change  from  the 
background-corrected curve.  

3.4 Corrections for variations in coupling efficiency  

We now consider in more detail the effects of the mechanical oscillations of the capillaries 
and  the density  wave  resonating within  the  fiber  core.  Although both of  them  modulate  the 
modal index as mentioned above, they also modify the refraction and reflection of the side-
launched probe beam, and can thus alter the side-coupling efficiency, reducing the accuracy of 

 
the measured index changes. The contribution of these effects can be eliminated by measuring 
a background trace with the working point set to the top of the calibration curve, where the 
slope is flat and any index change only minimally affects the transmitted probe power. At the 
same time any variations in transmitted power caused by changes in coupling efficiency are 
maximized.  

We now explore this effect for the LP11 mode, for which the largest measured modal index 
change is Δn  –2.6×10-5 (Fig. 3), corresponding to a change in angle Δα = 0.0075°, which 
exceeds the region within which the slope in the calibration curve is approximately zero. In 
order to examine the pure effect of changes in side-launching efficiency, therefore, the pump 
pulse energy was reduced from 5.4 to 5 µJ, resulting in a five times reduction in modal index 
and Δα = 0.0015°. At the background working point (green star in the inset of Fig. 4(a)), the 
coupled power is PBWP = 66 µW, while at the signal working point (blue diamond), it is only 
PSWP  =  46 µW.  Consequently,  we  scale  the  measured  background  curve  Pback(t)  down  by  a 
factor of PSWP/PBWP  0.70 (green trace in Fig. 4) before subtracting it from the measured signal 
trace Psig(t) (blue trace). This results in Pcorr(t) = Psig(t) – (0.70 Pback(t) – PSWP) for the corrected 
signal (orange curve in Fig. 4), including only variations due to modal index changes.  

As expected, the background oscillates over the first few microseconds, due to the density 
wave resonating in the fiber core and by capillary vibrations, but is zero apart from that. This 
means that the temporal traces in Fig. 3, for which no background was subtracted, are only 
slightly affected by the periodic modulation background over the first few microseconds. To 
obtain  quantitative  information  on  these  vibrations,  we  converted  the  background-corrected 
signal into a modal index change (inset of Fig. 4(b)). Using the corrected data together with Eq. 
(2), we could estimate the deflection of the capillaries. Filtering out in Fourier space the peak 
corresponding to capillary vibrations and transforming it back into the time domain, we obtain 
–0.35×10-6 as the maximum modulation of the modal index. Inserting this value into Eq. (2), 
we obtain a core diameter change of 3 nm, corresponding to a capillary wall deflection of 1.5 
nm. Using the LP21 mode as probe, the measurements yield a much larger deflection (12 nm), 
which  we  attribute  to  the  fact  that  the  lobes  of  the  LP21  penetrate  deeper  between  the 
surrounding  capillaries. As  a  result,  the  assumption  that  the  index  change  is  due  only  to  a 
change in core diameter is no longer valid.  Note however, that this measurement was made at 
reduced pump energy; the capillary wall deflection will be much larger at higher pump pulse 
energies. 

4.  Conclusions 

The prism-assisted side-coupling technique allows monitoring, over timescales from a few 
ns  to  tens  of  µs,  of  the  dynamics  following  fs  ionization  in  gas-filled  hollow-core  photonic 
crystal fiber. Making use of the different transverse profiles of four different LP core modes, 
the spatial positions of the pressure wave generated after the free electron recombination can 
be extracted. Since the gas is confined at a high pressure within a small hollow fiber core, the 
response is more complex than in free-space studies, because it is affected also by gas density 
wave vibrations and mechanical vibrations of the capillary walls. 

REFERENCES  

1. 

2. 

3. 

L. Young, D. A. Arms, E. M. Dufresne, R. W. Dunford, D. L. Ederer, C. Hohr, E. P. Kanter, B. Krassig, E. C. 
Landahl, E. R. Peterson, J. Rudati, R. Santra, and S. H. Southworth, “X-Ray Microprobe of Orbital Alignment 
in Strong-Field Ionized Atoms,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 083601 (2006). 
E. P. Kanter, R. Santra, C. Höhr, E. R. Peterson, J. Rudati, D. A. Arms, E. M. Dufresne, R. W. Dunford, D. L. 
Ederer, B. Krässig, E. C. Landahl, S. H. Southworth, and L. Young, “Characterization of the spatiotemporal 
evolution of laser-generated plasmas,” Journal of Applied Physics 104, 073307 (2008). 
S. Tzortzakis, B. Prade, M. Franco, A. Mysyrowicz, “Time-evolution of the plasma channel at the trail of a self-
guided IR femtosecond laser pulse in air,” Opt. Communications 181, 123–127 (2000). 

4.  Y.-H. Cheng, J. K. Wahlstrand, N. Jhajj, and H. M. Milchberg, “The effect of long timescale gas dynamics on 

femtosecond filamentation,” Opt. Express  21, 4740–4751 (2013). 

5.  C. G. Durfee III, J. Lynch, and H. M. Milchberg, “Development of a plasma waveguide for high-intensity laser 

pulses,” Phys. Rev. E 51, 23682389 (1995). 

6.  O. Lahav, L. Levi, I. Orr, R. A. Nemirovsky, J. Nemirovsky, I. Kaminer, M. Segev, and O. Cohen, “Long-lived 

waveguides and sound-wave generation by laser filamentation,” Phys. Rev. A 90, 021801 (2014). 

7.  N. Jhajj, E. W. Rosenthal, R. Birnbaum, J. K. Wahlstrand, and H. M. Milchberg, “Demonstration of Long-

Lived High-Power Optical Waveguides in Air,” Phys. Rev. X 4, 011027 (2014). 

8.  G. Schimmel, T. Produit, D. Mongin, J. Kasparian, and J.-P. Wolf, “Free space laser telecommunication 

9. 

through fog,” Optica 5, 1338-1341 (2018). 
T.K. Allison, A. Cingöz, D.C. Yost, and J. Ye, “Extreme Nonlinear Optics in a Femtosecond Enhancement 
Cavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 183903 (2011). 

10.  F. Köttig, F. Tani, C. M. Biersach, J. C. Travers, and P. St.J. Russell, “Generation of microjoule pulses in the 

deep ultraviolet at megahertz repetition rates,” Optica 4, 1272 (2017). 

11.  J. Yu, D. Mondelain, J. Kasparian, E. Salmon, S. Geffroy, C. Favre, V. Boutou, and J.-P. Wolf, "Sonographic 

probing of laser filaments in air," Applied Optics 42, 71177120 (2003). 

12.  J. R. Koehler, F. Köttig, B. M. Trabold, F. Tani, and P. St.J. Russell, “Long-lived refractive index changes 
induced by femtosecond ionization in gas-filled single-ring photonic crystal fibers,” Phys. Rev. Applied 10, 
064020 (2018). 

13.  B. M. Trabold, D. Novoa, A. Abdolvand, and P. St.J. Russell, “Selective excitation of higher order modes in 

hollow-core PCF via prism-coupling,” Opt. Lett. 39, 3736–3739 (2014). 

14.  J. C. Travers,  W. Chang, J. Nold, N. Y. Joly,  and P. St. J. Russell, “Ultrafast nonlinear optics in gas-filled 

hollow-core photonic crystal fibers,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 28, A11A26 (2011). 

15.  E. A. J. Marcatili and R. A. Schmeltzer, “Hollow metallic and dielectric waveguides for long distance optical 

transmission and lasers,” Bell Syst. Tech. J. 43, 17831809 (1964). 

16.  M. A. Finger, N. Y. Joly, T. Weiss, and P. St.J. Russell, “Accuracy of the capillary approximation for gas-filled 

kagomé-style photonic crystal fibers,” Opt. Lett. 39, 821824 (2014). 

17.  Robert W. Boyd, “Nonlinear Optics,” Third Edition (2008). 
18.  M. V. Ammosov, N. B. Delone, V. P. Krainov, “Tunnel ionization of complex atoms and atomic ions in an 

electromagnetic field,” Soviet Physics JETP 64, 11911196 (1986). 

19.  A. Jarnac, M. Durand, Y. Liu, B. Prade, A. Hourad, V. Tikhonchuk, A. Mysyrowicz, “Study of laser induced 

plasma grating dynamics in gases,” Opt. Communications 312, 3542 (2014). 

 
 
 
 
 
