Net electron capture in collisions of multiply charged projectiles

with biologically relevant molecules

Hans Jürgen Lüdde∗

Center for Scientiﬁc Computing, Goethe-Universität, D-60438 Frankfurt, Germany

Alba Jorge,† Marko Horbatsch,‡ and Tom Kirchner§

Department of Physics and Astronomy,

York University, Toronto, Ontario M3J 1P3, Canada

(Dated: November 4, 2021)

Abstract

A model for the description of proton collisions from molecules composed of atoms such as

hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and phosphorus (H, C, N, O, P) was recently extended to

treat collisions with multiply charged ions with a focus on net ionization. Here we complement the

work by focusing on net capture. The ion-atom collisions are computed using the two-center basis

generator method. The atomic net capture cross sections are then used to assemble two models

for ion-molecule collisions: an independent atom model (IAM) based on the Bragg additivity rule

(labeled IAM-AR), and also the so-called pixel-counting method (IAM-PCM) which introduces

dependence on the orientation of the molecule during impact. The IAM-PCM leads to signiﬁcantly

reduced capture cross sections relative to IAM-AR at low energies, since it takes into account the

overlap of eﬀective atomic cross sectional areas. We compare our results with available experimental

and other theoretical data focusing on water vapor (H2O), methane (CH4) and uracil (C4H4N2O2).

For the water molecule target we also provide results from a classical-trajectory Monte Carlo

approach that includes dynamical screening eﬀects on projectile and target. For small molecules

dominated by a many-electron atom, such as carbon in methane, or oxygen in water we ﬁnd a

saturation phenomenon for higher projectile charges (Q = 3) and low energies, where the net capture

cross section for the molecule is dominated by the net cross section for the many-electron atom, and

the net capture cross section is not proportional to the total number of valence electrons.

0
2
0
2

l
u
J

7
2

]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
7
9
4
3
1
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ luedde@itp.uni-frankfurt.de
† albama@yorku.ca
‡ marko@yorku.ca
§ tomk@yorku.ca

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
I.

INTRODUCTION

Collisions of multiply charged ions with biologically relevant molecules are recognized as

being important for future developments in radiation medicine and related ﬁelds. There

are numerous experimental eﬀorts which focus largely on diﬀerential electron emission, but

total ionization, electron capture, and excitation are also relevant since they contribute to

energy deposition, and stopping power. A recent example is the study of net ionization in

C6+ − CH4 collisions [1].

On the theoretical side one ﬁnds several methods that attempt to explain the experimental

data. Often provided alongside with the experimental work is the continuum distorted

wave with eikonal initial state (CDW-EIS) method. Diﬀerential electron emission can be

obtained also directly from a classical-trajectory Monte Carlo (CTMC) method, which for

water molecule targets was enhanced recently to include dynamical screening eﬀects [2]. The

CTMC approach takes the (frozen) molecular orientation into account during the collision,

and total ionization cross sections, as well as some charge-state correlated cross sections have

been compared to experimental data [3].

Another approach is to use collision information obtained for the atomic constituents

and to combine them into molecular cross sections, most notably independent atom models

(IAM), which either follow the simple Bragg additivity rule, or more sophisticated versions

that take the molecular structure of the target into account, and allow for the fact that the

eﬀective cross section should be reduced due to overlap eﬀects. This pixel counting method

(IAM-PCM) tested originally for proton impact [4–7] was used recently to investigate scaling

behavior of net ionization as a function of projectile charge [8].

The CDW-EIS work also relies on ion-atom collision calculations, and includes some

molecular eﬀects on the basis of a Mulliken population analysis. For the ionization problem

we found that CDW-EIS and CTMC calculations with frozen potentials generally are close

to IAM-AR results, while the CTMC calculations with dynamical screening [3] are closer

to IAM-PCM absolute cross sections [8], which are lower in the vicinity of the ionization

maximum and merge with IAM-AR results only at very high energies when the projectile

charge is high, i.e., Q > 1. The reduction in ionization cross sections (whether in the

IAM-PCM results versus IAM-AR or CTMC with versus without dynamical screening) can

easily reach a factor of two.

2

In the present paper we focus on an analogous problem at lower collision energies, namely

the net capture problem. Here the ion-atom cross sections grow quickly with projectile

charge, and the overlap and orientation problem again becomes important for the molecular

targets. The experimental situation is more scarce in the case of capture as compared to

ionization, and therefore theoretical support is even more important.

The paper is organized as follows.

In Sect. II we introduce the theoretical basis for

the current work. Sect. II A presents new results for two-center basis generator method

(TC-BGM) ion-atom calculations for He2+ and Li3+ projectiles; for atomic hydrogen targets

the results are compared with theory and experiment. In Sect. II B we provide a summary

of the IAM-PCM methodology and brieﬂy describe the CTMC time-dependent mean ﬁeld

approach which is applied to the water molecule target. Sect. III serves to provide a detailed

comparison with experimental data and a selection of other theoretical work: in Sect. III A

we present results for water, where we also compare with CTMC results with and without

dynamical screening; in Sect. III B we present results for methane for which we demonstrate

a saturation eﬀect in the case of projectile charges Q = 3, and Sect. III C contains results for

uracil. The paper ends with a few concluding remarks in Sect. IV. Atomic units, characterized
by (cid:126) = me = e = 4π(cid:15)0 = 1, are used unless otherwise stated.

II. MODEL

A.

Ion-atom collisions

The independent atom models rely on state-of-the-art ion-atom collision calculations. In

Fig. 1 we show the results of the two-center basis generator method (TC-BGM) calculations

for atomic targets that form the constituents of biologically relevant molecules (hydrogen,

carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and phosphorus). Experimental veriﬁcation is only available for

atomic hydrogen, as is theoretical conﬁrmation by other state-of-the-art methods, namely the

convergent close coupling (CCC) approach [9, 10], and a two-center atomic orbital expansion

method based on Gaussian-type orbitals [11].

The present TC-BGM ion-atom calculations are as described in Ref. [8]: for proton impact

a projectile potential WP hierarchy is obtained on the basis of explicitly including shells up

to principal quantum number n = 4 on projectile and target, for Q = 2 projectiles we used

3

FIG. 1. In the left panel the total (net) capture cross sections for protons colliding with atoms H,

C, N, O, P is shown (solid lines) as calculated with the TC-BGM using basis sets described in the

text, the middle panel is for He2+ projectiles, while the right panel is for the case of Li3+ projectiles.

For atomic hydrogen targets and proton and He2+ projectiles the results are compared with the

convergent close coupling calculation of Ref. [9, 10] respectively. For Li3+ impact we compare with

data from Ref. [11]. For proton impact the experimental data are from Ref. [12–15], for alpha

particle impact from Ref. [15–17], and for Li3+ − H collisions from Ref. [18].

nP = 6 and nT = 5, while for Q = 3 the explicitly included basis was expanded to nP = 7

and nT = 5. These explicitly included states are complemented by states that represent the

continuum using the BGM approach [5, 19].

For the many-electron atoms the theoretical modelling is at the level of exchange-only den-

sity functional theory using the optimized potential method. Therefore, electron correlation

eﬀects are not included in these calculations [20, 21].

The results for proton and alpha particle impact on atomic hydrogen display excellent

agreement with experiments and with CCC theory over several orders of magnitude. For

projectile charge Q = 3, i.e., Li3+ projectiles, our results are slightly higher than the

experimental data, but are in very good agreement with the recently reported calculations of

Ref. [11]. Not shown in Fig. 1 for proton and He2+ impact are the calculations of Ref. [11].

4

H++AHCCCBray17CNOPBayﬁeld69Hvelplund82Wittkower66McClure66He2++AHCCCFaulkner19CNOPHvelplund82SantAnna00Shah78Li3++AHAgueny19CNOPShah78bThey agree very well the TC-BGM and CCC results for protons and are slightly lower (at

the 10 % level for energies 25 − 100 keV/amu) for He2+ projectiles.

The structure of these cross sections is simple. Notable is the increase in net capture as

one reduces the collision energy towards 10 keV/amu, with cross section values short of 8 Å2

for protons, 12 Å2 for Q = 2, and a value of 20 Å2 reached already at 30 keV/amu for bare

lithium projectiles.

For the atoms containing more than one electron capture from the outer shells becomes

large even for intermediate energies with patterns that are not totally straightforward when

one compares Q = 1, 2, 3. Capture from phosphorus reaches 100 Å2 for Q = 3 at low energies,

and electron capture from carbon atoms is also very strong. This provides a background

for interesting eﬀects when combining these cross sections to make predictions for molecular

targets.

For phosphorus atoms there are notable structures in the capture cross sections at higher

energies which are related to shell eﬀects. For collision energies below 200 keV/amu capture

from the M-shell dominates, but at higher energies capture from the L-shell becomes more

important. This was investigated, e.g., in Ref. [19] for p − Na collisions.

B.

Ion-molecule collisions

The present work reports on calculations of several theoretical models. On the one hand

we compare two independent atom models: (i) in the naive case, namely the additivity rule

based model (IAM-AR) the atomic capture cross sections described in Section II A are simply

added together and completely ignore molecular structure; (ii) in the more sophisticated pixel

counting method (IAM-PCM) molecular structure is introduced by a geometric procedure,

which will be brieﬂy reviewed below. For the water molecule target we also report results

from two classical-trajectory models.

The IAM-PCM has been described and illustrated in detail in previous papers, most

notably Refs. [4, 7]. Ref. [7] highlights the role played by the contributions from the time

evolution of occupied orbitals from diﬀerent atomic species to the net cross sections. The

model is compared there to a methodology employed by the community that uses the CDW-

EIS approach, which also uses ion-atom calculations, and incorporates molecular eigenenergies

on the basis of quantum molecular structure calculations while employing complete neglect

5

of diﬀerential overlap (CNDO), i.e., a Mulliken population analysis [22, 23].

In essence the IAM-PCM approach is based on an interpretation of the atomic net cross

sections as geometrical areas, e.g., areas that correspond to the net capture (or net ionization)

cross section. Rather than summing up all these areas (as assumed by the additivity rule,

i.e., the IAM-AR) a pixel counting method is used to measure the eﬀective cross-sectional

area that emerges when one eliminates overlaps between cross sections from diﬀerent atoms

encountered by the projectile. Therefore, the eﬀective molecular cross sectional area is

deﬁned as a function of molecular orientation. The latter is chosen randomly, and is sampled

to obtain converged cross sections. A critical discussion of the merits of this procedure

(potential emphasis on atoms encountered ﬁrst) is found in Ref. [5], where it is argued that

for net cross sections the method should certainly be appropriate. An illustration of the

method is given below in Section III B where we observe a saturation behavior of the cross

section for Q ≥ 3 projectiles colliding with methane (CH4).

For a detailed description of the other method for which we show results for water molecule

vapor targets, namely the CTMC model we also refer to previous literature. Calculations with

frozen target potential on the basis of a three-center potential are reported in Refs. [24, 25].

This eﬀective potential used in the classical statistical ensemble simulation is drawing

information from quantum structure calculations. It yields accepted values for the orbital

energies and in addition to CTMC calculations was also used for numerical grid solutions

of the time-dependent Schrödinger equation [26]. An extension of this model which can be
considered a semiclassical ((cid:126) = 0) approximation to the quantum problem is presented in

Ref. [2] where the potential parameters were allowed to vary dynamically as a function of the

average (net) ionization state of the water molecule. This resulted in a substantial reduction

of the net ionization cross section (by up to a factor of two) compared to the static potential

model results. A further extension was carried out recently where the projectile potential was

also allowed to be varied as a function of the average (net) charge state of the projectile [3].

Both the static-potential CTMC and the dynamically screened model are sensitive to

the orientation of the molecule during the collision. Therefore, the comparison with IAM-

PCM and IAM-AR calculations is of great interest. Concerning capture data there is one

problem that needs to be addressed in the CTMC approach: for high energies capture from

inner shells in target atoms (or molecules) becomes problematic in a classical-trajectory

model, because it becomes possible to capture into orbits well below the allowed 1s-level,

6

i.e., orbits with binding energies larger than Q2/2 begin to occur. These classically allowed

capture contributions need to be removed from the analysis. For proton impact (Q = 1)

this correction becomes signiﬁcant at impact energies of 200 keV/amu and higher, for Q > 1

this point moves to higher energies. The correction procedure is based on a prescription to

associate principal quantum numbers n with energy ranges [27].

III. COMPARISON WITH EXPERIMENTS

A. Collisions with water vapor (H2O)

In Fig. 2 we compare the theoretical model results for proton impact on water vapor with

experiment. We note that the IAM-PCM results are corrected compared to those shown in

Refs. [4, 5] (the wrong bond length was applied in those calculations), and they agree now

well within error bars at low energies with the experimental data of Rudd et al. [28]. The

IAM-AR results (which are independent of the molecular structure and remain unchanged)

overestimate the low-energy experimental data by up to a factor of two.

The two CTMC model calculations are expected to yield very similar results, since

dynamical screening on the projectile is not turned on for Q = 1, and dynamical screening on

the target is expected to be small. At medium to low energies both CTMC model calculations

fall in between the IAM-PCM and IAM-AR results and are consistent with experiment (at

the upper end of their errors). The inset which uses a semilogarithmic presentation shows

that the model with dynamical screening is close to IAM-PCM, and still consistent with the

experimental data of Ref. [28].

In Fig. 3 we present our results for alpha particle impact on water vapor. The IAM-PCM

results follow the trend of the experimental data of Ref. [31] very well, particularly at the

lowest energies shown. The IAM-AR model overestimates them by a factor of two at the

lowest energies. The CTMC calculations with static potential are close to the IAM-AR

results at intermediate and high energies. The CTMC time-dependent mean-ﬁeld model

calculation, on the other hand, is closer to the IAM-PCM results and overestimates them by

about 20 − 30 % at low to medium energies. For higher energies all models are practically

in agreement. The experimental data are obtained by summing single and double-capture

contributions (σnet = σ1 + 2σ2), which have error estimates of 12 % and 16 % respectively.

7

FIG. 2. Net electron capture cross section for proton-water collisions. The highest curve (dashed

blue) shows the Bragg additivity rule result (IAM-AR), the lowest (solid blue) curve the IAM-PCM

result. In between are the CTMC results, namely the (dashed red) static-potential CTMC, and below

it (solid red) the dynamical-screening CTMC result. The experimental data are from Refs. [28–30]

For Li3+-water vapor collisions the trend observed for alpha-particle impact continues:

the calculated net capture cross sections continue to grow with projectile charge Q, and the

gap between IAM-PCM and IAM-AR remains at a factor-of-two increase for the naive Bragg-

additivity-rule-based model. The static-potential CTMC calculations side with this IAM-AR

result, while the CTMC time-dependent mean-ﬁeld calculation is again only 20 − 30 % above

the IAM-PCM result at low to medium energies.

At energies above 200 keV/amu the models merge and agree well with the experimental

data of Ref. [32]. The two data points below this energy are below all calculated values,

8

P+H2OIAM-ARIAM-PCMCTMCstaticCTMCdynamicLuna07Toburen68Rudd85FIG. 3. Net electron capture cross section for He2+-water collisions. The curves follow the same

pattern as described for Fig. 2. The experimental data are from Refs. [31].

reaching a factor-of-two discrepancy at 100 keV/amu. This shortfall of the experimental

data goes hand-in-hand with an observed shortfall in double-ionization contributions in this

energy range as compared to TC-BGM calculations for pure ionization (cf. Fig. 7 of Ref. [32])

and transfer ionization (cf. Fig. 8 of Ref. [32]). Note that these transfer ionization channels

contribute both to net capture and net ionization. This shortfall in ionized electron ﬂux in

the experimental data is diﬃcult to understand in the context of modelling the projectile

charge state dependence both in the IAM-PCM [8] and the time-dependent mean-ﬁeld CTMC

model [3], and thus we can only ask for additional experimental work in this context.

9

He2++H2OIAM-ARIAM-PCMCTMCstaticCTMCdynamicRudd85bFIG. 4. Net electron capture cross section for Li3+-water collisions. The curves follow the same

pattern as described for Fig. 2. The experimental data are from Ref. [32].

B. Collisions with methane (CH4)

IAM-PCM and IAM-AR results for net capture of electrons from methane by proton

impact were described previously in Ref. [7], where they were compared with other theoretical

works, namely CDW-EIS and CNDO calculations. The CDW-EIS method was applied to

higher projectile charges in Ref. [23].

In Fig. 5 we compare the net capture cross sections from IAM-AR and IAM-PCM for

projectile charges Q = 1, 2, 3. For the methane target the diﬀerence between the two

models at the lowest energy reported exceeds a factor of two. For alpha particle impact

the experimental data fall below the present IAM-PCM results, and merge with the proton

10

Li3++H2OIAM-ARIAM-PCMCTMCstaticCTMCdynamicLuna16FIG. 5. Net electron capture cross section for collisions of protons, alpha particles, and Li3+ ions

with methane (CH4). The dashed curves show the IAM-AR results, while the solid curves are

obtained with the IAM-PCM. The curves merge at lower energies for proton impact (shown in blue),

followed by alpha-particle impact (shown in green), and even higher energies for Li3+ projectiles

(shown in red). The experimental data are from Refs. [29, 31, 33, 34].

impact data at 10 keV/amu collision energy.

For Li3+ projectiles we ﬁnd that the net capture cross section at low energies becomes 60

Å2, which is the same value that is reached by Li3+ − C collisions (cf. Fig. 1). This can be

called a saturation behavior in the sense that it is not the total number of valence electrons

that determines the size of net cross sections for high projectile charges. We ﬁrst investigate

this phenomenon in detail for methane, and then make some comments further below as to

which other target molecules will be aﬀected in a similar way. Looking at the equivalent

11

QQ++CH4IAM-PCMIAM-ARH+He2+Li3+Rudd83Toburen68Sanders03Rudd85bFIG. 6. Demonstration of the overlap eﬀect in IAM-PCM: for a particular orientation the eﬀective

net capture cross section is obtained from overlapping the atomic cross sections for the carbon atom

and the four hydrogens at a collision energy of 70 keV/amu. Left panel for proton impact (Q = 1),

middle panel for alpha particles (Q = 2), and right panel for Q = 3.

comparison of Li3+ − H2O (Fig. 4) vs Li3+ − O (Fig. 1) collisions we observe the same eﬀect
with a common value of about 35 Å2.

The saturation behavior in the net capture cross section as one goes to low impact

energies and higher projectile charges can be illustrated as an overlap eﬀect in the IAM-PCM.

A geometric condition for the saturation behavior in CH4 is obtained from the following

consideration: if rC and rH are the radii of the carbon and hydrogen cross-sectional disks
with rX = (cid:112)σX/π and b the bond length of C-H, then saturation happens if rC ≥ rH + b.
For molecules which involve large bond lengths saturation is much less likely to occur.

As shown in Fig. 1 net electron capture from carbon atoms for low energies exceeds net

capture from atomic hydrogen by more than a factor of two for Q = 3 projectiles. The

saturation condition rC ≥ rH + b is fulﬁlled up to E ≈ 80keV/amu. As a result of saturation

the IAM-PCM cross section becomes independent of the orientation of the methane molecule.

This overlap eﬀect is demonstrated for methane in Fig. 6 and analogous ﬁgures can be drawn

for water vapor.

12

FIG. 7. Net electron capture cross sections as functions of impact energy for collisions of protons,

alpha particles, and Li3+ ions with methane (CH4) calculated in the IAM-PCM are compared to

net capture from carbon atoms (short dashed lines) as calculated by the TC-BGM (cf. red curves in

Fig. 1). The top curve pair (in red) is for Li3+ projectiles, the middle curve pair (in green) for He2+

projectiles and the bottom pair (in blue) for proton impact.

To further illustrate the saturation phenomenon we show in Fig. 7 a direct comparison

between the IAM-PCM net capture cross sections for ion-methane collisions with those for

the same process involving carbon atoms. With increasing projectile charge Q the two cross

sections merge. This feature would be a strong test for the IAM-PCM if experimental capture

cross sections for ion-carbon collisions were available.

Clearly, saturation in the sense that the cross section of just one atom becomes an eﬀective

bound for the molecular cross section is not achievable for large molecules. If, however,

13

QQ++CH4IAM-PCMQQ++CQ=1Q=2Q=3saturation does occur (as was observed in methane for carbon atoms vs hydrogen) then

one can generalize, namely one ﬁnds σCH4 = σC = σCH3 = σCH2, i.e., the cross sections of

the functional groups CH3 and CH2 are also limited by the cross section of carbon. For

pure hydrocarbons (alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, aromatics, etc.) this means that they can be

described as carbon clusters with molecular geometry.

A similar situation is found for other functional groups of biorelevant molecules. For

example, the cross section for the hydroxyl group (OH) is restricted by the atomic cross

section of O, just like the amino group (NH2) by N and phosphate (PO4) is limited by the

cross section of P. This simpliﬁes the treatment of large biomolecules considerably in the

case of saturation, as they can be approximated by an IAM-PCM model of the dominant

atoms (C, N, O, P) at the molecular positions of their respective functional groups.

C. Collisions with uracil (C4H4N2O2)

For large biologically relevant molecules the saturation phenomenon will occur at another

level, namely the combinations of large contributor atoms (e.g., multiples of carbon, nitrogen)

may again lead to a reduction of the cross sections due to overlap. While it may seem that

the hydrogen atoms are ‘covered’ up by the overlap eﬀect for high projectile charges and low

collision energies, they do, of course, contribute to the capture process, particularly if there

are multiples of them. One should keep in mind that net capture includes transfer ionization

processes, i.e., for Q = 3 net capture involves more than three electrons. The overlap of net

cross sections, i.e., of the geometric areas is naturally dominated by atoms which on account

of their valence shells can make big contributions of their own. The uracil molecule is an

interesting candidate to look into the phenomenon.

We begin with a comparison of the net capture cross sections for our three projectiles with

charges Q = 1, 2, 3 in Fig. 8. The structure of the cross sections as a function of collision

energy is similar to that obtained for methane (cf. Fig. 5), although the magnitude of the

cross sections is substantially larger due to the increased number of valence electrons. This

is particularly the case for the Bragg additivity rule based result (IAM-AR), and less so for

IAM-PCM. For Li3+ projectiles at the lowest energies shown this cross section for uracil is

14

FIG. 8. Net electron capture cross section for collisions of protons, alpha particles, and Li3+ ions

with uracil (C4H4N2O2). The dashed curves show the IAM-AR results, while the solid curves are

obtained with the IAM-PCM. The curves merge at lower energies for proton impact (shown in blue),

followed by alpha-particle impact (shown in green), and even higher energies for Li3+ projectiles

(shown in red).

larger compared to that for methane by a factor of 1.5. This is in contrast with the IAM-AR

results, where this factor is about four. We are not aware of experimental data for these cross

sections with Q > 1, and therefore we cannot verify this aspect of the IAM-PCM prediction.

In Fig. 9 we compare our present results with the experimental data and with other

theoretical data for proton impact. The experimental data of Tabet et al. [35] are higher

than all theories shown for the energy range 40 − 150 keV. At energies above 100 keV where

both our IAM calculations merge they fall in-between the CDW and CDW-EIS results of

15

QQ++C4H4N2O2IAM-ARIAM-PCMQ=1Q=2Q=3FIG. 9. Net electron capture cross section for collisions of protons with uracil (C4H4N2O2). The blue

dashed curves show the IAM-AR results, while the blue solid curves are obtained with the IAM-PCM.

The experimental data are from Ref. [35], the other theoretical data are from Refs. [36–38]

Champion et al. [36]. The distorted-wave CNDO calculations of Purkaitet al. [37, 38] cross

the CDW results, while being lower below 100 keV and higher above the transition point in

energy where the IAM-AR and IAM-PCM results merge. At low energies the IAM-PCM

results are clearly the lowest by about a factor of three.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

As a follow-up to our previous work on net ionization of biologically relevant molecules by

highly charged ions [8] we have presented results for net capture for three molecules. The

16

cap(A2)H++C4H4N2O2IAM-ARIAM-PCMPurkait20Champion12CDWChampion12CDW-EISTabet10choice of water and methane was motivated by the existence of some experimental data, while

uracil is an example of a substantially larger molecule. Comparison with other theories shows

that a number of them yield cross sections that are in the vicinity of Bragg additivity rule

results (IAM-AR). For all molecules considered the IAM-PCM yields signiﬁcantly reduced

net capture cross sections at low energies with a particularly strong eﬀect for higher projectile

charges.

For the water molecule two classical trajectory based simulations were used, the standard

CTMC model was generally found to be closer to the IAM-AR results, while the recently

introduced time-dependent mean-ﬁeld CTMC model at least partially supports the decrease

in net capture cross sections provided by the IAM-PCM.

The IAM-PCM predicts that the net capture cross sections will saturate for high projectile

charge by the presence of large contributions from constituent atoms with large valence

electron number. For small molecules the eﬀect was demonstrated (CH4 cross sections are

dominated by net cross sections from C, and likewise for H2O vs O targets), while for uracil

the cross sections are dominated by the leading atoms (C, N, O). Future work may involve

an investigation as to why many of the larger biomolecules have such similar cross sections,

based on the notion that the dominant atoms (C, N, O, P) located at their positions will

control the net cross sections through their eﬀective geometric scattering cross sectional

areas.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank the Center for Scientiﬁc Computing, University of Frankfurt

for making their High Performance Computing facilities available. Financial support from

the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) is gratefully

acknowledged.

[1] A. Mandal, C. Bagdia, M. Roy Chowdhury, S. Bhattacharjee, D. Misra, J. M. Monti, R. D.

Rivarola, and L. C. Tribedi, Phys. Rev. A 101, 062708 (2020).

[2] A. Jorge, M. Horbatsch, C. Illescas, and T. Kirchner, Phys. Rev. A 99, 062701 (2019).

[3] A. Jorge, M. Horbatsch, and T. Kirchner, Phys. Rev. A 102, 012808 (2020).

17

[4] H. J. Lüdde, A. Achenbach, T. Kalkbrenner, H.-C. Jankowiak, and T. Kirchner, Eur. Phys. J.

D 70, 82 (2016).

[5] H. J. Lüdde, M. Horbatsch, and T. Kirchner, Eur. Phys. J. B 91, 99 (2018).

[6] H. J. Lüdde, M. Horbatsch, and T. Kirchner, J. Phys. B 52, 195203 (2019).

[7] H. J. Lüdde, M. Horbatsch, and T. Kirchner, The European Physical Journal D 73, 249 (2019).

[8] H. J. Lüdde, T. Kalkbrenner, M. Horbatsch, and T. Kirchner, Phys. Rev. A 101, 062709

(2020).

[9] I. Bray, I. B. Abdurakhmanov, J. J. Bailey, A. W. Bray, D. V. Fursa, A. S. Kadyrov, C. M.

Rawlins, J. S. Savage, A. T. Stelbovics, and M. C. Zammit, Journal of Physics B: Atomic,

Molecular and Optical Physics 50, 202001 (2017).

[10] J. Faulkner, I. B. Abdurakhmanov, S. U. Alladustov, A. S. Kadyrov, and I. Bray, Plasma

Physics and Controlled Fusion 61, 095005 (2019).

[11] H. Agueny, J. P. Hansen, A. Dubois, A. Makhoute, A. Taoutioui, and N. Sisourat, Atomic

Data and Nuclear Data Tables 129-130, 101281 (2019).

[12] G. W. McClure, Phys. Rev. 148, 47 (1966).

[13] J. E. Bayﬁeld, Phys. Rev. 185, 105 (1969).

[14] A. B. Wittkower, G. Ryding, and H. B. Gilbody, Proceedings of the Physical Society 89, 541

(1966).

[15] P. Hvelplund and A. Andersen, Physica Scripta 26, 375 (1982).

[16] M. B. Shah and H. B. Gilbody, Journal of Physics B: Atomic and Molecular Physics 11, 121

(1978).

[17] M. M. Sant’Anna, W. S. Melo, A. C. F. Santos, V. L. B. de Jesus, M. B. Shah, G. M. Sigaud,

E. C. Montenegro, H. F. Busnengo, S. E. Corchs, R. D. Rivarola, and L. Gulyás, Phys. Rev. A

61, 052717 (2000).

[18] M. B. Shah, T. V. Goﬀe, and H. B. Gilbody, Journal of Physics B: Atomic and Molecular

Physics 11, L233 (1978).

[19] M. Zapukhlyak, T. Kirchner, H. J. Lüdde, S. Knoop, R. Morgenstern, and R. Hoekstra, J.

Phys. B 38, 2353 (2005).

[20] E. Engel and S. H. Vosko, Phys. Rev. A 47, 2800 (1993).

[21] J. D. Talman and W. F. Shadwick, Phys. Rev. A 14, 36 (1976).

[22] M. E. Galassi, R. D. Rivarola, M. Beuve, G. H. Olivera, and P. D. Fainstein, Phys. Rev. A 62,

18

022701 (2000).

[23] M. A. Quinto, P. R. Montenegro, J. M. Monti, O. A. Fojón, and R. D. Rivarola, Journal of

Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics 51, 165201 (2018).

[24] C. Illescas, L. F. Errea, L. Méndez, B. Pons, I. Rabadán, and A. Riera, Phys. Rev. A 83,

052704 (2011).

[25] C. Illescas, M. A. Lombana, L. Méndez, I. Rabadán, and J. Suárez, Journal of Physics:

Conference Series 1412, 162006 (2020).

[26] L. Errea, C. Illescas, L. Méndez, I. Rabadán, and J. Suárez, Chemical Physics 462, 17 (2015).

[27] R. L. Becker and A. D. MacKellar, Journal of Physics B: Atomic and Molecular Physics 17,

3923 (1984).

[28] M. E. Rudd, T. V. Goﬀe, R. D. DuBois, and L. H. Toburen, Phys. Rev. A 31, 492 (1985).

[29] L. H. Toburen, M. Y. Nakai, and R. A. Langley, Phys. Rev. 171, 114 (1968).

[30] H. Luna, A. L. F. de Barros, J. A. Wyer, S. W. J. Scully, J. Lecointre, P. M. Y. Garcia, G. M.

Sigaud, A. C. F. Santos, V. Senthil, M. B. Shah, C. J. Latimer, and E. C. Montenegro, Phys.

Rev. A 75, 042711 (2007).

[31] M. E. Rudd, T. V. Goﬀe, and A. Itoh, Phys. Rev. A 32, 2128 (1985).

[32] H. Luna, W. Wolﬀ, E. C. Montenegro, A. C. Tavares, H. J. Lüdde, G. Schenk, M. Horbatsch,

and T. Kirchner, Phys. Rev. A 93, 052705 (2016).

[33] M. E. Rudd, R. D. DuBois, L. H. Toburen, C. A. Ratcliﬀe, and T. V. Goﬀe, Phys. Rev. A 28,

3244 (1983).

[34] J. M. Sanders, S. L. Varghese, C. H. Fleming, and G. A. Soosai, Journal of Physics B: Atomic,

Molecular and Optical Physics 36, 3835 (2003).

[35] J. Tabet, S. Eden, S. Feil, H. Abdoul-Carime, B. Farizon, M. Farizon, S. Ouaskit, and T. D.

Märk, Phys. Rev. A 81, 012711 (2010).

[36] C. Champion, P. F. Weck, H. Lekadir, M. E. Galassi, O. A. Fojón, P. Abufager, R. D. Rivarola,

and J. Hanssen, Physics in Medicine and Biology 57, 3039 (2012).

[37] S. Sammadar, K. Purkait, S. Halder, A. Mondal, C. Mandal, and M. Purkait, Journal of

Energy and Power Engineering 13, 413 (2019).

[38] K. Purkait and M. Purkait, Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1412, 162009 (2020).

19

