Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000. 

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.Doi Number 

An Automated Contact Tracing Approach for 
Controlling Covid-19 Spread Based on 
Geolocation Data from Mobile Cellular 
Networks 

Md. Tanvir Rahman1, Risala T. Khan2, Muhammad R. A. Khandaker3, and Md. Sifat Ar 
Salan4 
1Department of Information and Communication Technology, Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University, Tangail-1902, Bangladesh  
2Institute of Information Technology, Jahangirnagar University, Savar, Dhaka-1342, Bangladesh  
3School of Engineering and Physical Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK 
4Department of Statistics, Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University, Tangail-1902, Bangladesh 

Corresponding author: M. T. Rahman (e-mail: sajal.it.ju@gmail.com). 

ABSTRACT  The  coronavirus  (COVID-19)  has  appeared  as  the  greatest  challenge  due  to  its  continuous 
structural  evolution  as  well  as  the  absence  of  proper  antidotes  for  this  particular  virus.  The  virus  mainly 
spreads and replicates itself among mass people through close contact which unfortunately can happen in 
many unpredictable ways. Therefore, to slow down the spread of this novel virus, the only relevant initiatives 
are  to  maintain  social  distance,  perform  contact  tracing,  use  proper  safety  gears,  and  impose  quarantine 
measures. But despite being theoretically possible, these approaches are very difficult to uphold in densely 
populated  countries  and  areas.  Therefore,  to  control  the  virus  spread,  researchers  and  authorities  are 
considering the use of smartphone based mobile applications (apps) to identify the likely infected persons as 
well as the highly risky zones to maintain isolation and lockdown measures. However, these methods heavily 
depend  on  advanced  technological  features  and  expose  significant  privacy  loopholes.  In  this  paper,  we 
propose a new method for COVID-19 contact tracing based on mobile phone users’ geolocation data. The 
proposed method will help the authorities to identify the number of probable infected persons without using 
smartphone  based  mobile  applications.  In  addition,  the  proposed  method  can  help  people  take  the  vital 
decision of when to seek medical assistance by letting them know whether they are already in the list of 
exposed persons. Numerical examples demonstrate that the proposed method can significantly outperform 
the smartphone app-based solutions.  

INDEX TERMS Coronavirus, Covid-19, Contact Tracing, Geolocation, Pandemic. 

I. INTRODUCTION 
Since World War II, the coronavirus (COVID-19) is being 
considered  to  be  the  most  life-threatening  event  that 
happened  in  the  history  of  mankind.  It  is  a  new  family  of 
coronavirus  that  changes  its  RNA  structure  frequently.  As 
the virus had spread all on a sudden and the spread rate could 
not be predicted in prior, only a few countries have been able 
to  control  the  penetration  of  this  virus.  The  main  reason 
behind  their  successful  control  was  the  ability  to  trace  the 
contacts of the infected persons promptly and put them into 
isolation  [1].  To  slow  down  the  coronavirus  spread,  three 

measures have been proven effective: i) contact tracing, ii) 
social  distancing,  and  iii)  quarantine.  In  particular,  contact 
tracing plays a leading role in containing the spread when the 
R-value  is  below  1.0.  Since  the  outbreak  began,  different 
countries  adopted  different 
tracing 
strategies based on their socio-economic conditions. A vast 
majority  of  these  methods  operate  through  smartphone-
based mobile apps.  
      According to the statistical portal, it has been found that 
in  2019  almost  5.07  billion  people  in  the  world  are  using 
mobile  phones  as  a  medium  of  communication  and  an 

types  of  contract 

VOLUME XX, 2017 

1 

 
 
 
estimated 67% of the world population has a mobile phone. 
The statistics also reports that in 2014 the smartphone users 
were around 38% which increased to 50% by the end of 2018 
[2]. It has been reported that the number of smartphone users 
worldwide  today  surpasses  three  billion  [2].  From  this 
growth, it is expected that the number of smartphone users 
will  grow  by  one  billion  in  a  period  of  five  years  [3],  [4]. 
Therefore, contact tracing can be easily done using mobile 
phone apps but the challenge is how the collected data can 
be  handled  securely  and  what  information  should  be 
collected [5]. In addition, people’s willingness to install the 
apps as well as the availability of smartphones in all areas of 
a society is also a major challenge. According to Ferretti et 
al. [6], [7], if 60% of the population of a country install the 
contact tracing app, the spread rate will automatically slow 
down. After collecting the data, the next obvious question is 
how to warn people effectively. Many approaches are now 
under consideration such as contact tracing, narrowcasting, 
broadcasting,  and  so  on  to  alert  people  regarding  the 
possibility  of  being  infected  or  tracing  the  likely  infected 
person's contact trajectory [8]. Accurate contact tracing data 
is  vital  for  providing  timely  exposure  notices.  For  that 
purpose,  users’  personal  information  such  as  mobility, 
details of the persons the suspected user contacted, etc. has 
to be disclosed. The app can provide the data with reliable 
accuracy only if the collected information is sufficient. But 
more information leads to increased breach of privacy which 
is a major concern these days.  
        For  a  clear  understanding  of  the  privacy  concerns 
related to smartphone app-based contact tracing, one needs 
to know how such apps operate in practice. A typical contact 
tracing app works as follows: the app should be installed on 
an  individual’s  cell  phone  and  the  Bluetooth  of  the  phone 
must always remain on. When two users, having the same 
app installed, reach in close proximity, the app exchanges a 
unique identifier using Bluetooth which is stored either in the 
phone  storage  or  in  a  centralized  database.  If  a  person  is 
found to be COVID-19 positive, his mobile is taken to collect 
all  the  mobile  numbers  that  had  so  far  been  stored  in  this 
mobile,  and  then  those  persons  are  informed  as  soon  as 
possible.  However,  the  authors  in  [9]  raised  some  valid 
questions regarding the method being used in the Bluetooth-
based contact tracing app, such as, how the anonymity of a 
user be protected from the app provider, how to prevent the 
snooper  to  access  individual’s  data  through  this  app,  what 
measure the authority will take in case of contacted persons 
after  knowing  their  details  and  so  on.  Therefore,  not  only 
finding the infected or likely infected person is enough but 
how  to  inform  them  or  what  measures  should  be  taken  to 
confine them is also important in the pandemic situation. In 
addition,  solutions  that  seem  effective  for  some  countries 
may not be appropriate for other countries due to different 
social norms. 
       To 
in 
smartphone  app-based  contact  tracing  of  COVID-19,  we 
propose the idea of using mobile phone users’ geolocation 
data for contact tracing. The proposed model does not require 

aforementioned 

challenges 

address 

the 

the 
Bluetooth/Wi-Fi/NFC  enabled  cell  phones  since 
responsible authorities will collect the data directly from the 
network providers. The procedure is detailed in the following 
sections. 

Meanwhile, the rest of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section II presents  an  extensive review of existing systems, 
Section III focuses on the details the proposed model, Section 
IV compares the proposed model with existing systems from 
different viewpoints, then, experimental results are presented 
in section V. Finally, conclusions are drawn in section VI. 

II. REVIEW OF EXISTING SYSTEMS 
After  the  declaration  of  WHO  as  COVID-19  outbreak  a 
public  health  emergency  of  international  concern  (PHEIC) 
on 30th January 2020 [10, 11] and a pandemic on 11th March 
2020  [12],  many  countries  developed  different  contact 
tracing apps to monitor and control the spread in the country. 
According to a CNN report, the Health Code app [13] that is 
being used in many parts of China works as follows: the app 
asks  people  about  their  symptom  as  well  as  their  travel 
history, the possibility of being in contact with a COVID-19 
positive  patient,  their  workplaces,  residential  addresses, 
phone numbers, passport numbers, national identity number, 
etc. will be verified. After verification, a color code will be 
sent  to  the  person’s  mobile  phone  named  as  “QR  Code” 
whose color can be either red, green or amber. Users with red 
code will have to go under government quarantine or self-
quarantine  for  14  days,  users  with  amber  code  will  go  to 
quarantine  for  7  days  but  users  with  green  code  are 
considered to be risk-free. The major problem in this app is 
if  a  person  intentionally  provides  wrong  information 
regarding  his  travel  information  or  symptom  or  being  in 
close contact with a COVID-19 positive patient, then he will 
get a green code and will likely affect more people before 
being identified. 

South Korea was among the first few countries that were 
affected  by  the  novel  coronavirus  after  China.  Hence,  in 
South Korea, the first confirmed cases were reported on 20th 
January  2020  [14].  Even  though  in  the  initial  stage  the 
number of affected people in South Korea was quite high but 
they didn’t go for any lockdown or roadblock or aggressive 
immigration control strategy. Rather they used a trace, test, 
and  treat  strategy  which  proved  very  effective  as  within  a 
short period the curve of newly confirmed cases, as well as 
deaths,  had  been  flattened  at  around  mid-March  [15].  To 
control the spreading, the Government of South Korea sent 
all the travelers who came from abroad into self-quarantine. 
During  the  quarantine  state,  the  travelers  forcefully  used  a 
self-diagnosis app and updated their health status regularly 
so  that  the  Government  can  trace  whether  there  are  any 
suspected symptoms [16]. At the same time, the government 
also sent all of the individuals who had direct contact with 
those  travelers  to  self-quarantine  as  well  and  followed  the 
same  monitoring  scheme.  But  the  main  problem  in  this 
tracing  process  arose  when  the  collected  data  was  shared 
among  many  authorities  such  as  police,  health  insurance, 
central  government  agencies,  health  care  professionals, 

2 

VOLUME XX, 2017 

 
health  care  associations,  and  others.  Hence,  it  is  a  direct 
violation of data privacy law in South Korea [15]. But during 
the pandemic situation, such law can be relaxed and that was 
what South Korea did at that time. Besides, it was suggested 
that if such a situation happens again, aggregated data rather 
than  an  individual’s  can  be  shared  to  all  the  concerned 
sectors to control the misuse of data [15]. 

In  March  2020,  Singapore  Ministry  of  Health  first 
released a contact tracing app called “TraceTogether” and its 
BLE-based protocol BlueTrace [17] where the tracing will 
be done through mobile phones’ Bluetooth technology. For 
tracking  purpose,  a  person  has  to  install  the  app,  and 
Bluetooth  must  be  turned  on  always.  A  unique  token  is 
generated  in  the  person’s  mobile  during  installation. 
Whenever  two  persons  are  in  close  proximity  their  phone 
will exchange that token through Bluetooth and preserve that 
token number in the phone storage [18]. 

The Pan-European Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing 
(PEPP-PT)  [19],  a  joint  project  between  Germany,  France 
and  Italy,  proposed  a  centralized  data  center  based  on 
Bluetooth low energy (BLE)-based tracing technique where 
any traveler travelling within EU countries can use the same 
app to let the government know his contacted persons’ list 
without needing any additional contact tracing app. 

There  are  several  major  problems  in  the  BLE-based 
tracing systems following both centralized and decentralized 
approaches.  First,  if  the  person  does  not  use  a  smartphone 
featuring Bluetooth connectivity, then there is no way he or 
she  can  be  traced.  We  acknowledge  that  in  a  first  world 
country like Singapore or Germany, most of the people use 
smartphones  but  not  necessarily  everyone  keeps 
the 
Bluetooth connectivity enabled in his/her device at all time. 
Second,  although  Bluetooth  technology  is  considered  as  a 
cheap,  reliable,  and  low  power  consuming  option,  any 
malicious  user  may  access  the  information  stored  in  the 
mobile  devices  through  the  Bluetooth  link  [20,  21,  22].  In 
[21],  Naveed  et  al.  explained  the  security  issues  of  using 
mobile Bluetooth technology for android devices and in [23] 
the authors showed the security issues in the iOS platform. 
Data  privacy  is  thus  a  major  concern  in  Bluetooth  based 
apps.  For any contact tracing app, the main goal is to inform 
the  person  that  he  or  she  has  been  exposed  to  the  virus. 
However, with Bluetooth-based apps, even if the person has 
not  been  in  touch  with  any  infected  person  but  within  the 
Bluetooth range of the person, the user of the phone will be 
flagged  as  a  suspected  one  and  may  be  subject  to  social 
bullying. It may also create a mass confusion if the number 
of  such  false  alarm  increases  significantly.  On  the  other 
hand, if we consider the scenario of a developing country like 
Bangladesh,  Nigeria  etc.,  where  coronavirus  is  creating 
phobia  among  people  as  medical  facilities  to  support  the 
massive  number  of  patients  are  not  adequate  and  many 
hospitals are not even treating patients with other problems 
due  to  the  suspicion  of  coronavirus,  this  type  of  contract 
tracing  app  will  create  mass  panic  rather  than  mass 
awareness and people will face social harassment. 

In  general,  two  types  of  data  can  be  collected  by  using 
these apps, one is “proximity” which will show with whom 
the user has been in contact and “location” which will show 
in which area the user has roamed [8]. Both may cause false 
positive  alarms  and  false-negative  alarms  [8].  A  false-
positive  alarm  will  happen  if  the  person  who  is  identified 
being  in  contact  either  by  location  information  or  contact 
information  may  just  pass  the  area  at  that  time  and  didn’t 
even come in direct contact with the infected person. A false-
negative  alarm  means  the  app  is  failing  to  identify  any 
suspected person which may happen due to many reasons as 
we have discussed earlier. 

Interestingly, many existing works suggest decentralized 
solutions because less sensitive data can then be shared with 
central  authorities  and  thus  the  end  user’s  privacy  can  be 
preserved  [24,  25].  However,  the  risk  of  the  decentralized 
solution compared to the centralized solution is still a trade-
off and beyond the scope of this work. 

While most of the contact tracing apps are now using the 
BLE-based  tracing  technique,  some  researchers  are  also 
thinking about storing user’s mobility information and only 
hand  over  this  information  only  when  found  COVID-19 
positive [26]. In terms of data security and privacy, this is 
more  secure  as  logging  the  location  without  the  contact’s 
stored information is less private.  
In [27], the authors proposed a Bluetooth based contact tracing 
app “CONTAIN” where they showed that the identity of the 
user will be completely anonymous and at the same time, they 
experimented  different  timing  of  turning  the  Bluetooth  on 
(random, decentralized, centralized) of the mobile to compare 
the results. They found in their experimental results that even 
if the Bluetooth is turned on, only when the user goes to any 
public gathering, the performance of the app is better than if it 
is turned on randomly during different times of the day. 

FIGURE 1.  Contact tracing through cell phone network using 
geolocation data. 

We have found that most of the COVID-19 contact tracing 
apps released so far are based on location/ proximity-based 
contact  tracing,  location-based  hotspot  reporting,  and  self-
reported  symptom  tracking  [17,  19,  24-33].  On  the  other 
hand,  if  the  location  data  can  be  obtained  from  cellular 
mobile phone networks, then the issues related to the BLE-

3 

VOLUME XX, 2017 

 
based  tracing  technique  can  be  eliminated  as  well  as  the 
technological requirements (e.g. phones with Bluetooth and 
smart  features)  can  be  waived.  The  authors  of  [34]  have 
proposed an outdoor location tracking technique of mobile 
devices  in  a  cellular  network.  They  have  shown  that  the 
proposed technique is nearly 88% accurate. In urban areas, 
the tracking performance is the best with median accuracies 
of up to 112m. It is also found that the cellular systems show 
promising positioning performance in indoor environments 
as well [35]. 

In this paper, we propose a contact tracing approach using 
cellular  sim  card  geolocation  data  as  opposed  to  the  BLE-
based  tracing  techniques.  In  the  proposed  model,  a 
confirmed COVID19 patient’s mobile number will be passed 
to  the  corresponding  mobile  operator  to  find  its  mobility 
information  for  the  past  7  days.  The  operator  will  use  the 
geolocation  information  to  trace  the  mobility  as  shown  in 
Fig.1.  

In the proposed model, no Bluetooth/ Wi-Fi/ NFC enabled 
cell phone is needed as the operator will use the geolocation-
based  tracing  approach  by  getting  the  location  data  directly 
from the base station to identify the likely infected persons. 
This method can avoid panic spread among people as it does 
not  require  continuous  warning  about  their  possibility  of 
getting infected. The responsible authority can then identify 
the  riskiest  persons  based  on  the  intensity  of  contact  with 
Covid-19  positive  patients  and  instruct  them  to  go  for 
isolation/test if necessary. In addition, if a person feels to have 
developed any symptoms of COVID-19, the proposed method 
can also perform an initial screening by checking whether the 
cell phone number is enlisted in the list of suspects. 

III. PROPOSED CONTACT TRACING MODEL 
In  this  section,  we  present  the  proposed  cell  phone 
geolocation-based  contact  tracing  model.  We  structure  the 
overall framework in three operational phases. Each phase has 
specific  activities.  The  phases  and  their  operations  are 
discussed below. 

A. PHASE – I: Data Collection 
In this phase, the primary data for the COVID-19 patients will 
be collected from the designated test centers. Then the infected 
areas will be shown using any map services (e.g. Google map). 
The activities to be performed at this stage are described below 
and the process is depicted in Fig. 2. 

1)  STEP 01 
Whenever a person visits a COVID-19 test center, two basic 
information,  such  as  the  current  address  and  the  active 
mobile  phone  number(s)  must  be  recorded  in  the  local 
register of the test center. 
2)  STEP 02 
If  the  person  is  found  to  be  COVID-19  positive,  then  the 
previously  recorded  information  (i.e.  address  and  phone 
numbers) must be reported to the central database. 
3)  STEP 03 
At this point, the number of infected persons in an individual 
area  (e.g.  Division,  District,  City,  Road,  etc.)  will  be 
calculated. 
4)  STEP 04 
An application will be in place (e.g. iOS or Android App, or 
Web  Application,  etc.)  where  anyone  can  do  a  simple 
registration with the mobile number. The registered user can 
search for a particular location and get the number of infected 
persons around it via any map services (e.g. Google map). 

B. PHASE – II: Identifying Probable Occurrences 
In the second phase, we focus on how the Government can 
identify the likely infected persons. The cell phone number 
of the Covid-19 positive patients can be traced to find out the 
possible occurrences as shown in Fig. 3. Here, any other cell 
phone user who came in near proximity (e.g. 2 meters) to the 
infected person during the last 7 days lies in the suspected 
list. But the mass people do not need to install any kind of 
application as the location data (latitude and longitude) will 
be  collected  from  the  cell  phone  network.  Therefore,  this 
process is not limited to the use of smart phones, rather we 
can  get  the  data  for  any  type  of  cell  phone  (e.g.  feature 
phone) users. The step-by-step process is illustrated below, 
and the process is depicted in Fig. 4. 
1)  STEP 01 
After getting the data (i.e. the list of infected persons) from 
the central database, each mobile number will be sent to the 
corresponding  mobile  operator 
the  mobility 
information  (latitude  and  longitude)  of  the  respective  cell 
phone users during the prior 7 days. At the same time, the 
operator will also be asked to provide the mobile numbers of 
the  active  cell  phone  users  within  those  infected  persons’ 
mobility zones within a given distance. 
2)  STEP 02 
The mobility zone information, acquired from the previous 

to  get 

FIGURE 2.  Flow diagram of Phase - I 

4 

VOLUME XX, 2017 

 
 
FIGURE. 3.  Finding possible occurrences using geolocation data from mobile phone operators. 

step, will then be sent to all other operators to identify all of 
the active cell phone users inside the zone at that time. 
3)  STEP 03 
All the cell phone numbers (obtained from step 1 and 2) will 
be stored in the central database marked as “possible infected 
cell phone numbers”. 
4)  STEP 04 
Step 04: If a particular number is found to appear multiple 
times in the “possible infected cell phone numbers” list, then 
those cell phone users will be instructed to go for isolation/ 
COVID-19 test as appropriate. 

C. PHASE – III: User’s Query 
At this phase, if a person feels physically uncomfortable and 
wants  to  go  for  a  test,  the  application  can  help  to  make  the 
decision  and  predict  the  intensity.  For  this  purpose,  we 
propose  activities  as  follows  in  stepwise  and  the  process  is 
depicted in Fig. 5. 
1)  STEP 01 
Through the application, any person can search whether the 
corresponding cell phone number is enlisted in the suspected 
list. 
2)  STEP 02 
If the cell phone user is already suspected by the application, 
the person will be instructed to answer some questionnaires 
which can be taken from [36, 37, 38]. The sample question 
set is shown in Table 1. 

3)  STEP 03 
The answers will be verified and analyzed in real-time with 
a predefined answer set. 
4)  STEP 04 
Finally,  after  the  analysis,  if  the  person  is  found  to  be 
possibly infected then the person will be instructed to go for 
a COVID-19 test. 
These three phases are combined to form the proposed contact 
tracing method and the overall flow is depicted in Fig. 6. 

TABLE I 
SAMPLE QUESTIONNAIRE 

Sample Questions 

1. New or worsening cough 

2. Shortness of breath 

3. Sore throat 

4. Runny nose, Sneezing or nasal 
congestion 

5. Hoarse Voice 

6. Difficulty Swelling 

7. Nausea/vomiting/diarrhea/abdominal 
pain 

8. Unexpected fatigue 

9. Fever 

User Options 

Option-1  Option-2 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

FIGURE 4.  Flow diagram of Phase - II 

5 

VOLUME XX, 2017 

 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.  Flow diagram of Phase - III 

IV. COMPARISON WITH OTHER SOLUTIONS 
The strongest aspect of the proposed contact tracing method 
is  that  it  is  not  limited  by  advanced  technological 
requirements (e.g. Smartphone, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, NFC, and 
so on). The only requirement is that every individual has to 
carry  the  cell  phone  with  an  active  sim  card.  With  5.112 
billion unique mobile users, 67% penetration globally (even 
higher in urban areas where COVID-19 has the worst effect), 
mobile phone geolocation data seems to be the most viable 
means  of  contact  tracing.  Recently,  a  few  articles  have 
summarized different approaches proposed in the literature 
for minimizing the spread during this outbreak of COVID-
19 [39], [40]. Most of the approaches are modern technology 
facilitated.  The  common  approaches  are  broadcasting, 
selective  broadcasting,  unicasting,  participatory  sharing, 
private kit: safe paths, etc. Each of these approaches has its 
strengths  and  limitations.  Raskar  et  al.  have  provided  a 
detailed summary of the approaches named above [39]. We 
have reviewed the detailed comparison presented in [39] and 
analyzed different aspects of each method. The comparison 
of  strengths  and  limitations  of  existing  and  the  proposed 

methods is outlined in Table 2. The comparison factors are 
illustrated below as per the proposed model: 

A.  ACCURACY 
As  the  mobility  information  will  be  collected  from  the 
mobile operators, it is obvious that the data will be accurate. 
In  the  proposed  model,  we  will  not  collect  the  locations 
verbally. As a result, we can say that the data will be precise 
and accurate.   

B.  ADOPTION 
There  will  be  no  adaptability  issue  as  the  person  does  not 
need  to  carry  out  any  predefined  activity.  People  will 
continue  their  day-to-day  activities,  and  what  everybody 
does most of the time, they will carry their cell phones. 

C.  PRIVACY 
The  privacy  issues  are  considered  in  the  viewpoints  of 
carriers, local businesses, users of the proposed model, and 
the non-users. These issues are discussed below: 

FIGURE 6.  Overall Flow diagram of the proposed system 

6 

VOLUME XX, 2017 

 
 
 
 
 
1)  PRIVACY RISK FOR CARRIERS 
There will be no privacy risks for the carriers as the personal 
information will not be publicized. Only the infected count 
will be made public via any map services (e.g. Google map). 
While  identifying  the  adjacent  persons  of  a  particular  cell 
phone user, the location information will not be made public 
also  because  the  proposed  model  works  in  a  centralized 
manner. The location data will be used only for predicting 
infection probability of the respective user. 

2)  PRIVACY RISK FOR LOCAL BUSINESS 
There will be very low privacy risks for the local businesses 
as  the  locations  where  the  carrier  visited  will  not  be  made 
public. 

3)  PRIVACY RISK FOR USERS 

The privacy of the users will be protected as the application 
will collect the location data from the sim card operator, not 
from the device location through Bluetooth or other means. 

4)  PRIVACY RISK FOR NON-USERS 
There  may  be  privacy  violations  for  the  non-users  as  the 
users  and  non-users  are  somehow  connected  via  social 
relationships,  but  this  is  common  for  other  contact  tracing 
methods as well. When a person is diagnosed as COVID-19 
positive, the family members or friends may endure the same 
unintended consequences of the event. 

D.  CONSENT 

The consent issues are considered in terms of the carriers, 
businesses and users of the proposed model. These issues are 
illustrated below: 

1)  CONSENT OF CARRIERS 
The proposed model is considered to operate in such a way 
where  the  information  about  the  patients  will  be  recorded 
before the test of COVID-19. As a result, there will be no 
way to hide the details of the carrier afterward. Therefore, no 
consent will be needed as it is a casual and normal practice. 

2)  CONSENT OF LOCAL BUSINESSES 
The  consent  of  local  businesses  in  the  proposed  model 
mainly depends on the Government policies. 

3)  CONSENT OF USERS 
The consent of the users is required for the proposed model. 
During the registration, the user will be asked to provide the 
cell  phone  number.  Even  when  the  user  wants  to  check  if 
he/she made any contact with any COVID-19 patient, the cell 
phone number needs to be sent to the operator for a cross-
check.    

E.  SYSTEMATIC CHALLENGES 
The  systematic  challenges  are  considered  in  terms  of 
carriers,  businesses,  and  users  of  the  proposed  model.  The 
issues are described below: 

1)  MISINFORMATION 

7 

There  is  a  very  low  risk  of  misinformation  as  the  location 
data will not be taken from any user input. Rather the data 
will be collected from the sim card operator. 

2)  PANIC 
The proposed model can reduce panic to some extent as the 
users of the model can check the initial status and also the 
intensity while staying at home. 

TABLE II 
STRENGTH AND LIMITATION ANALYSIS WITH OTHER PROPOSED METHODS 
Models 

 Major Limitations 

 Major Strengths 

Broadcast 

•  No public adoption issues. 
•  User's privacy is protected. 
•  Mostly accessible by all. 

•  Significant privacy risk 
for COVID-19 carriers. 

•  Data accuracy issue. 
•  High risk of 

misinformation and 
mass panic. 

Selective 
Broadcast 

•  Moderate privacy risk for 

COVID-19 carriers. 
•  Mass panic may be 

•  Data accuracy issue. 
•  Risk of misinformation. 
•  Limited by technological 

limited. 

requirements 

Unicast 

•  Low risk of mass panic. 
•  Data accuracy is high. 

•  No privacy for the user 
•  Not helpful for the mass 

people. 

Participatory  •  User's privacy is 

•  There can be fraudulent 

protected from mass 
people. 

activity. 

•  Mass user adoption is 

low. 

•  Full consent is needed 
from the COVID-19 
carrier. 

Private Kit: 
Safe Path 

•  Overall accuracy is high. 
•  Moderate to low privacy 
risk for the COVID-19 
carrier. 

•  Limited by technological 

requirements 

•  Full consent is required 
from the COVID-19 
carrier. 

Proposed 
Solution 

•  High accuracy of location 

•  The user has to carry the 

data. 

cell phone. 

•  Users' cell phones must 

not be smartphones rather 
any phone with an active 
sim card. 

•  To collect the data, no 
user application is 
needed. 

•  Less false negative issue. 

3)  FRAUD AND ABUSE 
It is expected that there will be no fraudulent activities as the 
application  will  not  require  any  open  connection  (e.g. 
Bluetooth, NFC, etc.). 

4)  SECURITY OF INFORMATION 
The proposed model is designed with a view in mind about 
the  security  concerns  of  the  carrier’s  as  well  as  the  user’s 
important  information.  As  only  the  cell  phone  number, 
which  is  already  a  public  entity,  is  needed  to  operate  the 

VOLUME XX, 2017 

 
 
 
 
proposed  method,  there  is  a  very  low  chance  of  security 
holes. 

understand the dispersion of the points, we use scatter plots 
(Figs. 7 and 8) and covariance measures. 

5)  EQUAL ACCESS 
Equal access is the main strength of the proposed model as it 
is  not  limited  by  any  technological  requirement  (e.g. 
smartphones,  battery,  certain  OS,  etc.)  rather  only  a  cell 
phone is needed. 

6)  SOCIOECONOMIC FACTORS 
There  are  almost  no  bad  impacts  on  the  socioeconomic 
factors for the proposed model. Sometimes it is dependent 
on the government's practice if there is any.  

Finally,  the  overall  comparison  of  existing  contact  tracing 
approaches with the proposed approach is provided in Table 
II in terms of major strengths and limitations. 

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In  this  section,  we  compare  the  proposed  contact  tracing 
method  with  existing  technologies  through  numerical 
examples.  To  understand  the  real  impact  of  our  proposed 
system and to make a realistic comparison with the existing 
solutions based on BLE technology, we have generated the 
mimic of an actual contact tracing scenario based on some 
real statistical measures. In the scenario, we have used the 
Poisson Point Process (PPP) for a circular area of radius 1. 
We have scaled a distance of 100 meters to unity for ease of 
presentation. The percentages of smartphone users and any 
type  of  mobile  phone  users  are  considered  as  the  density 
parameters of PPP for generating two separate sets of data.  
We consider Bangladesh as a typical example of developing 
countries to show the practical effectiveness of the proposed 
approach.  According  to  the  Bangladesh  Bureau  of  Statistics 
(BBS) and Bangladesh Statistics 2018, the total population of 
the 
Bangladesh 
Bangladesh  Telecommunication  Regulatory  Commission 
(BTRC),  the  total  number  of  mobile  phone  subscribers  is 
162.290 million [42] and the total number of mobile Internet 
subscribers is 93.101 million at the end of April 2020 [43]. As 
the  total  number  of  mobile  phone  subscribers  is  almost 
identical to the total population, we assume that almost 100% 
people  have  a  mobile  phone  of  some  kind.  Note  that  the 
official data of unique mobile users is not available during this 
analysis.  We  are  considering  the  percentage  of  smartphone 
users based on the total number of mobile Internet subscribers. 
Thus, we can say that almost 58% of Bangladeshi people are 
using smartphones. Without loss of generality, we assume that 
people  need  smartphones  to  be  able  to  use  the  BLE-based 
tracing app.  

is  162.7  Million  [41].  According 

to 

Now, we use the value of the density parameter for any type 
of mobile phone users as l = 100 and for smartphone users as 
l = 58 in Poisson Point Process. Based on this assumption, we 
simulate  the  data  for  both  type  of  mobile  phone  users  in 
Cartesian  two-dimensional  space.  We  have  repeated  the 
simulation four times so that we can make a reliable inference 
with  a  more  accurate  performance  measure.  In  order  to 

FIGURE 7.  Scatter Plots (four trials) using Poisson Point Process (l= 
58). 

FIGURE 8. 

 Scatter Plots (four trials) using Poisson Point Process (l= 

100). 

TABLE III 
COVARIANCE ANALYSIS OF THE GENERATED POINTS USING POISSON POINT 
PROCESS 

Trial 

T-1 

T-2 

T-3 

T-4 

l = 58 

0.00634 

0.01175 

0.024061 

0.00859 

l = 100 

0.002947 

0.009763 

0.00306 

0.00582 

     It is apparent that the points in any type of mobile phone 
users (Fig. 8) are more condensed than the points simulated 
based  on  only  smartphone  users  (Fig.  7).  The  covariance 
analysis in Table III is also supporting this observation to draw 
the same inference as the covariance is always smaller for the 

8 

VOLUME XX, 2017 

 
 
 
 
 
 
points  in  any  type  of  mobile  phone  users  (l  =  100)  than 
smartphone users (l = 58). 
     According to the official statistics, 18% of the people who 
were tested for COVID-19 in Bangladesh were found positive 
[44].  So,  we  have  randomly  selected  18%  of  the  points  as 
COVID-19 positive and marked with red dots in Fig. 7 and 
Fig.  8.  Then,  we  have  measured  the  Euclidian  distance  of 
every point with respect to the red points (likely COVID-19 
positive).  Finally,  we  have  counted  the  points  which  were 
within a 3-meter radius of any of the Covid-19 positive points. 
Similarly,  we  count  the  same  considering  the  2-meter 
distancing  strategy.  The  contact 
tracing  performance 
comparison for a maximum of 3-meter distance is shown in 
Table IV. Here, we can see that for each of the four trials, the 
count  of  contact  tracing  using  any  type  of  mobile  phone  is 
higher  than  that  of  smartphone  users.  During  the  trials,  the 
highest percentage of change with respect to smartphone users 
is 300% and the lowest is 100%. The average count of contact 
tracing  for  any  type  of  mobile  phone  users  and  smartphone 
users is 20 and 7.75, respectively. These observations clearly 
show the effectiveness of the proposed tracing strategy. 

TABLE IV 
CONTACT TRACING COMPARISON FOR MAXIMUM 3-METER DISTANCE 

Contact Tracing Count 

Trial 

T-1 

T-2 

T-3 

T-4 

For any type of 
Mobile Phone 
user 
19 

22 

19 

20 

For Smartphone 
user only 

9 

11 

6 

5 

Percentage of change 
with respect to the only 
Smartphone user 

111.11 % 

100 % 

216.67 % 

300 % 

      The contact tracing comparison for a maximum of 2-meter 
distance is shown in Table V, where we again notice that for 
each trial, the count of contact tracing using any type of mobile 
phone  is  higher  than  that  of  smartphone  users.  During  the 
trials,  the  highest  percentage  of  change  with  respect  to 
smartphone  users  is  266.67%  and  the  lowest  is  60%.  The 
average count of contact tracing for any type of mobile phone 
users and smartphone users is 9.5 and 4.25, respectively. 

TABLE V 
CONTACT TRACING COMPARISON FOR MAXIMUM 2-METER DISTANCE 

Contact Tracing Count 

For any type of 
Mobile Phone 
user 

For Smartphone 
user only 

Percentage of change 
with respect to the only 
Smartphone user 

9 

10 

8 

11 

5 

4 

5 

3 

80 % 

150 % 

60 % 

266.67 % 

Trial 

T-1 

T-2 

T-3 

T-4 

9 

two  contact 

These 
graphically in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10. 

tracing  comparisons  are  depicted 

22

19

19

20

11

9

6

5

s
t
c
a
t
n
o
C

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
N

25

20

15

10

5

0

Trial 1

Trial 2

Trial 3

Trial 4

Simulation

Any type of Mobile Phone user

Only Smartphone user

FIGURE 9.  Pairwise contact tracing comparison considering the 
maximum 3-meter distance. 

10

9

8

5

5

4

11

3

s
t
c
a
t
n
o
C

f
o

r
e
b
m
u
N

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Trial 1

Trial 2

Trial 3

Trial 4

Simulation

Any type of Mobile Phone user

Only Smartphone user

FIGURE 10.  Pairwise contact tracing comparison considering the 
maximum 2-meter distance. 

       Next, we extend the performance comparison to the case 
of  two  other  countries,  e.g.  India  and  South  Korea  because 
South  Korea  is  ranked  at  the  top  of  the  list  for  smartphone 
usage  (95%)  and  India  at  the  last  (24%)  based  on  the  total 
population  [45].  In  India,  24%  of  the  total  population  use 
smartphones,  40%  people  use  mobile  phones  that  are  not 
smartphones and 35% people do not use any mobile phone at 
all. Therefore, we simulate the data for India with the density 
parameter, l = 24 for smartphone-only users and l = 64 for 
any kind of mobile phone users. On the other hand, in South 
Korea,  95%  people  use  smartphones  and  5%  use  a  mobile 
phone  that  are  not  smartphones.  So,  for  South  Korea,  we 
consider the density parameter, l = 95 for smartphone-only 

VOLUME XX, 2017 

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users  and  l  =  100  for  any  kind  of  mobile  phone  users. 
According to COVID-19 case statistics for both the countries, 
it is found that in India, 4.16 % of people were found positive 
after test [46] and it is 1.06 % in South Korea [47]. We have 
used  these  percentages  to  consider  the  COVID-19  positive 
points.  The  country-wise  contact  tracing  performance  of 
existing and proposed schemes is shown in Fig. 11.  

FIGURE 11.  Country wise average contact tracing count comparison. 

       From  Fig.11,  it  is  noticeable  that  the  count  of  contact 
tracing is higher for most of the time when any type of mobile 
phone users’ geolocation is considered than smartphone-based 
apps. The percentage of changes with respect to smartphone 
users for each of the countries is also given in Fig. 12. 

e
g
n
a
h
C

f
o

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

400%

350%

300%

250%

200%

150%

100%

50%

0%

366.70%

260%

159.50%

142.10%

8.30%

20%

South Korea

Bangladesh

India
Country

2-meter

3-meter

FIGURE  12.   Country  wise  comparison  on  percentage  of  change  with 
respect to only smartphone users 

VI. CONCLUSIONS 
To slow down the spreading of the deadly virus termed as the 
novel Coronavirus, there is no alternative to finding out the 
infected persons as well as those who came into close contact 
with  an  infected  person,  then  taking  proper  measures. 
Considering this fundamental approach, many countries have 
already  developed  contact  tracing  applications  which  are 
showing  promising  results  but  with  significant  privacy 
concerns. In this paper, we have addressed the privacy issue 
by  avoiding  any  smartphone-based  apps  for  contact  tracing 

through  wireless  connectivity  (e.g.  Bluetooth,  Wi-Fi,  NFC, 
etc.). The proposed model uses mobile users’ geolocation data 
directly  from  the  mobile  operators.  By  doing  so  the  overall 
contact  tracing  performance  improves  significantly  while 
preserving users’ privacy.  

REFERENCES 
[1]  K. T. Eames and M. J. Keeling, “Contact tracing and disease control,” 
Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London.  Series  B:  Biological 
Sciences, vol. 270, no. 1533, pp. 2565–2571, 2003. 
users  worldwide 

[2]  Smartphone 

[Online] 

Statista, 

2020 

| 

https://www.statista.com/statistics/330695/number-of-smartphone-
users-worldwide/, Accessed on: Jul. 06, 2020. 

[3]  “Mobile  Phone  Users  Worldwide  2015-2020”,  Statistical  Research 

Department, Nov 23, 2016. 

[4]  M.  Abdulla  and  A.  Esmaeel,  “Providing  Information  through  Smart 
Platforms:  An  Applied  Study  on  Academic  Libraries  in  Saudi 
Universities”, Journal of Education, Society and Behavioural Science, 
30(4): 1-24, Article no. JESBS.43940, June 2019. 

[5]  G.  Kaptchuk,  D.  Goldstein,  E.  Hargittai,  J.  Hofman,  and  E.  M. 
Redmiles, “How good is good enough for covid19 apps? the inﬂuence 
of  beneﬁts,  accuracy,  and  privacy  on  willingness 
to  adopt”, 
arXiv:2005.04343v4, May, 2020. 

[6]  L.  Ferretti,  C.  Wymant,  M.  Kendall,  L.  Zhao,  A.  Nurtay,  L.  Abeler-
Dörner,  M.  Parker,  D.  Bonsall,  and  C.  Fraser,  “Quantifying  SARS-
CoV-2  transmission  suggests  epidemic  control  with  digital  contact 
tracing”, vol. 368, issue 6491, eabb6936 Science, March 2020.  

[7]  M.  Zastrow,  “Coronavirus  contact-tracing  apps:  can  they  slow  the 

spread of COVID-19?”, Nature, 10.1038/d41586-020-01514-2, 2020. 

[8]  E. M. Redmiles, “User Concerns & Tradeoff in Technology-Facilitated 

Contact Tracing”, arXiv:2004.13219v3 [cs.CR] 12 May, 2020.  

[9]  Y.  Montjoye,  F.  Houssiau,  A.  Gadotti,  and  F.  Guepin,  “Evaluating 
COVID-19 contact tracing apps? Here are 8 privacy questions we think 
you  should  ask”,  Technical  Report.  Imperial  College,  Computational 
Privacy Group, April 2020.  

[10] M.  Farhana  &  K.  A.  Mannan,  “Knowledge  and  perception  towards 
Novel Coronavirus (COVID 19) in Bangladesh”, 6. 76-87, 2020. 
[11] “Statement  on  the  second  meeting  of  the  International  Health 
Regulations  (2005)  Emergency  Committee  regarding  the  outbreak  of 
novel 
Health 
Organization (WHO). Archived from the original on 31 January 2020. 
(Retrieved on 24 May 2020). 

(2019-nCoV)”, 

coronavirus 

World 

[12] “WHO  Director-General's  opening  remarks  at  the  media  briefing  on 
COVID-19”, World  Health  Organization (WHO) (Press  release),  11 
March  2020. Archived from 
the  original  on  11  March  2020. 
(Retrieved on 20 May 2020). 

[13] J.  Hua,  R.  Shaw,  “Corona  Virus  (COVID-19)  “Infodemic”  and 
Emerging  Issues  through  a  Data  Lens:  The  Case  of  China”,  Int.  J. 
Environ. Res. Public Health 2020, 17, 2309. 

[14] E.  Shim,  A.  Tariq,  W.  Choi,  Y.  Lee,  G.  Chowell,  “Transmission 
potential  and  severity  of  COVID-19  in  South  Korea”,  International 
Journal of Infectious Diseases. 93. 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.03.031, 2020. 
[15] N. Al-Rousan, H. Al-Najjar, “Data Analysis of Coronavirus CoVID-19 
Epidemic  in  South  Korea  Based  on  Recovered  and  Death  Cases”, 
Journal of Medical Virology. 10.1002/jmv.25850, 2020. 

[16] H. Ko, J. Leitner, E. Kim, J. Jong, “Structure and enforcement of data 
privacy  law  in  South  Korea”,  Int  Data  Priv  Law,  7(2):100-114. 
doi:10.1093/idpl/ipx004, 2017. 

[17] J. Bay, J. Kek, A. Tan, C. S. Hau, L. Yongquan, J. Tan, and T. A. Quy, 
“Bluetrace:  A  privacy-preserving  protocol  for  community-driven 
contact  tracing  across  borders”,  Government  Technology  Agency-
Singapore, Tech. Rep, 2020. 

[18] H.  Cho,  D.  Ippolito,  Y.  W.  Yu,  “Contact  Tracing  Mobile  Apps  for 
COVID-19:  Privacy  Considerations  and  Related  Trade-offs”, 
arXiv:2003.11511, March, 2020. 

[19] K. Halunen & V. Ollikainen, “Rendezvous based pandemic tracing by 

sharing Diffie-Hellman generated common secrets”, 2020. 

[20] P.  K.  Mishra,  “Bluetooth  Security  Threats”,  International  Journal  of 
Computer Science & Engineering Technology (IJCSET), Vol. 4 No. 02, 
Feb 2013. 

10 

VOLUME XX, 2017 

 
 
 
 
 
[21] M. Naveed, X. Zhou, S. Demetriou, X. Wang, and C. A. Gunter, “Inside 
Job:  Understanding  and  Mitigating  the  Threat  of  External  Device 
MisBinding on Android,” in Proceedings of the 21st Annual Network 
and  Distributed  System  Security  Symposium  (NDSS),  San  Diego, 
California, USA, February 23-26, 2014, 2014. 

[22] D. Spill and A. Bittau, “BlueSniff: Eve Meets Alice and Bluetooth,” in 
the  First  USENIX  Workshop  on  Offensive 

Proceedings  of 
Technologies (WOOT), Boston, MA, USA, August 6, 2007. 

[23] X. Bai, L. Xing, N. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Liao, T. Li, and S. Hu, “Staying 
secure and unprepared: Understanding and mitigating the security risks 
of  apple  zeroconf,”  in  Proceedings  of  the  37th  IEEE  Symposium  on 
Security and Privacy (Oakland), San Jose, CA, USA, May 22-26, 2016. 
[24] M. Ruef, “Contact Tracing App DP3T - These are the Risks of the Swiss 

Solution”, 2020. 

[25] D. Watts, “COVIDSafe, Australia’s Digital Contact Tracing App: The 
Legal Issues”, SSRN Electronic Journal. 10.2139/ssrn.3591622, 2020. 
[26] “Private  Kit:  Safe  Paths-  Can  we  slow  the  spread  without  giving  up 
individual privacy?” http:// safepaths.mit.edu/, 2020, (Retrieved on 26 
May 2020). 

[27] A.  Hekmati,  G.  Ramachandran,  B.  Krishnamachari,  “CONTAIN: 
Privacy-oriented Contact Tracing Protocols for Epidemics”, 2020. 
[28] T.  Li,  et.  al,  “Decentralized  is  not  risk-free:  Understanding  public 
perceptions of privacy-utility trade-offs in COVID-19 contact-tracing 
apps”, May 2020. 

[29] N.  Trieu,  K.  Shehata,  P.  Saxena,  R.  Shokri,  D.  Song,  “Epione: 

Lightweight Contact Tracing with Strong Privacy”, April 2020. 

[30] G.  Lee,  “Legitimacy  and  Constitutionality  of  Contact  Tracing  in 
Pandemic  in  the  Republic  of  Korea”,  SSRN  Electronic  Journal. 
10.2139/ssrn.3594974, 2020. 

[31] M. Veale, “Analysis of the NHSX Contact Tracing App ‘Isle of Wight’ 
Data Protection Impact Assessment”, 10.31228/osf.io/6fvgh, 2020. 
[32] K. Roomp, N. Oliver, “ACDC-Tracing: Towards Anonymous Citizen-

Driven Contact Tracing”, 2020. 

[33] J.  Bell,  D.  Butler,  C.  Hicks,  J.  Crowcroft,  “TraceSecure:  Towards 

Privacy Preserving Contact Tracing”, 2020. 

[34] J.  Trogh,  D.  Plets,  E.  Surewaard, et  al. “Outdoor  location  tracking  of 
mobile  devices  in  cellular  networks”, EURASIP  Journal  on  Wireless 
Communications 
2019. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13638-019-1459-4 

Networking, 115 

(2019), 

and 

[35] K.  Pahlavan,  X.  Li,  &  J.  Mäkelä,  “Indoor  geolocation  science  and 
technology”  in  Communications  Magazine,  IEEE.  40.  pp112  –  118, 
2002. 10.1109/35.983917. 

[36] A.  Ather,  B.  P.  Nikita,  B.  R.  Kenneth,  M.  Hargreaves,  “Coronavirus 
Disease  19(COVID-19):  Implications  for  Clinical  Dental  Care”, 
Journal of Endodontics, Volume 46, Issue 5, Pages 584-595, May 2020. 
[37] “COVID-19  Screening  Tool  for  Long-Term  Care  Homes  and 
Retirement Homes”, Ministry of Health, Ontario, Version 3- May 06, 
2020. 
http://www.health.gov.on.ca/en/pro/programs/publichealth/coronaviru
s/docs/2019_screening_guidance.pdf (Retrieved on May 30, 2020). 
[38] “COVID-19  Screening  Questnnaire—Tanner  Health  System”, 

https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/TannerCOVIDQuestionnaire 
(Retrieved on May 30, 2020) 

[39] R. Raskar, et. al, “Apps gone rogue: Maintaining personal privacy in an 
epidemic”, arXiv:2003.08567v1, March, 2020G. O. Young, “Synthetic 
structure  of  industrial  plastics,”  in  Plastics,  2nd  ed.,  vol.  3,  J .  Peters, 
E d . New Y o r k , NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 1964, pp. 15–64. 

[40] N.  Ahmed,  et.  al,  “A  Survey  of  COVID-19  Contact  Tracing  Apps”, 

[41] Bangladesh 

available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.10306.  
Statistics 

Available: 
2018 
http://bbs.portal.gov.bd/sites/default/files/files/bbs.portal.gov.bd/page/
a1d32f13_8553_44f1_92e6_8ff80a4ff82e/Bangladesh%20%20Statisti
cs-2018.pdf, Accessed on: Jun. 21, 2020. 

[Online]. 

[42] Mobile Phone Subscribers in Bangladesh April, 2020. | BTRC [Online]. 
Available:  http://www.btrc.gov.bd/content/mobile-phone-subscribers-
bangladesh-april-2020, Accessed on: Jun. 21, 2020. 

[43] Internet  Subscribers  in  Bangladesh  April,  2020.  |  BTRC  [Online]. 
http://www.btrc.gov.bd/content/internet-subscribers-

Available: 
bangladesh-april-2020, Accessed on: Jun. 21, 2020. 

[44] IEDCR  [Online].  Available:  https://www.iedcr.gov.bd/,  Accessed  on: 

Jun. 21, 2020. 

[45] Smartphone  penetration  rate  by  country  2018  |  Statista.  [Online]. 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/539395/smartphone-

Available: 
penetration-worldwide-by-country/, Accessed on: Jun. 21, 2020. 
[46] COVID-19  cases  by  country,  worldwide  2020  |  Statista.  [Online]. 
Available:  https://www.statista.com/statistics/1111696/covid19-cases-
percentage-by-country/, Accessed on: Jun. 21, 2020. 

[47] Coronavirus (COVID-19) in South Korea - Statistics & Facts | Statista. 
Available: 

[Online]. 
https://www.statista.com/topics/6082/coronavirus-covid-19-in-south-
korea/, Accessed on: Jun. 21, 2020. 

MD.  T.  RAHMAN  was  born  in  Meherpur,  Bangladesh.  He  received  the 
B.Sc.  (Hons)  degree  from  Jahangirnagar  University,  Bangladesh,  in  2013 
and the M.S. degree from the same university in 2015, both in Information 

Technology. 

Daffodil 

Engineering, 

From  2015  to  2019,  he  was  working  as  a 
Lecturer  in  the  Department  of  Computer  Science 
and 
International 
University,  Dhaka,  Bangladesh.  He  is  currently 
working  as  a  Lecturer  in  the  Department  of 
Information  and  Communication  Technology, 
Mawlana  Bhashani  Science  and  Technology 
University,  Bangladesh.  His  research  interests 
include  Wireless  Communication  &  Internet 
Security Concerns. 

RISALA  T.  KHAN  was  born 
in  Dhaka, 
Bangladesh. She has completed her B.Sc. (Hons) 
in  Computer  Science  and  Engineering  from 
Jahangirnagar University, Savar, Dhaka in 2003, 
M.Sc.  in  Computer  Science  and  Engineering  in 
2005. She has completed her Ph.D.  from the same 
University  in  the  field  of  Cognitive  Radio 
System. 
    She worked as a Lecturer in the Department of 
Computer  Science  and  Engineering,  Daffodil 
International  University,  Dhaka.  She  is  now  working  as  a  Professor  at 
Institute  of  Information  Technology,  Jahangirnagar  University,  Savar, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh. Her research field is wireless communications, network 
traffic and network security. 
   Dr. Khan is a member of IEEE and also acting as counselor of IEEE WIE 
Affinity Group JU SB.  

in 

MUHAMMAD R. A. KHANDAKER (S’10–
M’13–SM’18)  received  his  PhD  degree  from 
Curtin University, Australia. He is currently an 
Assistant  Professor 
the  School  of 
Engineering  and  Physical  Sciences  at  Heriot-
Watt  University.  Before  joining  Heriot-Watt, 
he worked as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow 
at University College London, UK, (July 2013 
- June 2018). He is an Associate Editor for the 
IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, IEEE 
COMMUNICATIONS  LETTERS,  the  IEEE 
JOURNAL  ON  WIRELESS 

ACCESS 
COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING.  

the  EURASIP 

and 

11 

VOLUME XX, 2017 

 
 
 
 
 
 
MD. S. A. SALAN was born in Panchagarh, Bangladesh. He has completed 
his B.Sc. (Hons) in Statistics from Jahangirnagar University, Savar, Dhaka 
in 2015, M.Sc. in Statistics in 2016 from the same University. He is now 
working as an Assistant Professor at the Department of Statistics, Mawlana 
Bhashani Science and Technology University, Tangail, Bangladesh. Before 
that, he worked as a permanent faculty of Statistics 
at Primeasia University and Daffodil International 
University.  His  research  field  is  Statistical  Data 
Modeling with Simulation, Machine Learning and 
Time Series Analysis. 

12 

VOLUME XX, 2017 

 
