Optical Readout Studies of the Thick-COBRA 
Gaseous Detector  

F. Garcia,a,* F. M. Brunbauer,b M. Lisowska,b,c H. Müller,b E. Oliveri,b  
D. Pfeiffer,b,d L. Ropelewski,b J. Samarati,b,d F. Sauli,b L. Scharenberg,b,e  
A. L. M. Silva,f M. van Stenis,b R. Veenhof,g J. F. C. A. Velosof 

a Helsinki Institute of Physics, University of Helsinki, 
00014 University of Helsinki, Finland 
b CERN, 
385 Route de Meyrin, 1217 Meyrin, Geneva, Switzerland 
c Wroc(cid:225)aw University of Science and Technology, 
Wybrze(cid:298)e Wyspia(cid:276)skiego 27, 50-370 Wroc(cid:225)aw, Poland 
d European Spallation Source (ESS ERIC), 
P.O. Box 176, SE-22100 Lund, Sweden 
e University of Bonn, 
Regina-Pacis-Weg 3, 53113 Bonn, Germany 
f I3N-Physics Department of University of Aveiro,  
3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal 
g National Research Nuclear University MEPhI (Moscow Engineering Physics Institute), 
Kashirskoe highway 31, Moscow, 115409, Russia 

E-mail: Francisco.Garcia@helsinki.fi 

ABSTRACT: The performance of a Thick-COBRA (THCOBRA) gaseous detector is studied using 
an optical readout technique. The operation principle of this device is described, highlighting its 
operation  in  a  gas  mixture  of  Ar/CF4  (80/20%)  for  visible  scintillation  light  emission.  The 
contributions to the total gain from the holes and the anode strips as a function of the applied bias 
voltage were visualized. The preservation of spatial information from the initial ionizations was 
demonstrated by analyzing the light emission from 5.9keV X-rays of an 55Fe source. The observed 
non-uniformity of the scintillation light from the holes supports the claim of a space localization 
accuracy better than the pitch of the holes. The acquired images were used to identify weak points 
and sources of instabilities in view of the development of new optimized structures. 

KEYWORDS: Micro-Hole Strip Plate, Thick Gas Electron Multiplier,  Micro-Strip Gas Counter, 
Gas Electron Multiplier, THCOBRA, Gas Scintillation, Optical readout. 

*corresponding author 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 

1. Introduction 

2. Description of THCOBRA and Principle of Operation 

3. Experimental Setup 

4. Measurement Results 

4.1 Contributions from amplification stages 

4.2 Preservation of spatial information during amplification 

4.3 Source of instabilities 

5. Conclusions 

2 
3 
5 
6 
6 
8 
10 
11 

1. Introduction 

The Thick-COBRA gaseous detector, hereafter THCOBRA [1], was studied with optical readout 
to examine and visualize its operation. By recording secondary scintillation light, the location of 
the avalanche multiplication could be visualized with high granularity permitting to compare the 
response of the detector in light-collection mode with what is observed in charge-collection mode. 
The THCOBRA detector is based on the Gas Electron Multiplier (GEM) [2] technology and 
can be described as a hybrid amplification structure combining a Thick-GEM (THGEM) [3][4] 
and a Micro-Strip Gaseous Counter (MSGC) [5]. As such, it is an evolution of the Micro-Hole 
Strip Plate (MHSP) [6] using a more robust substrate. It has electrodes on the top and bottom 
sides  of  a  thick  substrate.  The  bottom  electrode  is  segmented  to  feature  thin  anode  strips  in 
between the GEM holes. 

In  recent  years,  the  optical  readout  of  scintillation  light  emitted  during  avalanche 
multiplication has been widely used as a readout modality for Micro-Patterns Gaseous Detectors 
(MPGDs). Stable operation at large gas gains in GEMs [2] and Micromegas [7], as well  as the 
discovery of gas mixtures with high scintillation light yield in the visible wavelength region have 
made optical readout more accessible with the use of recent developments of high performance 
digital imaging sensors. Advances in commercially available cameras with high-resolution and 
low-noise sensors have allowed for unprecedented image quality and sensitivity, making optical 
readout an attractive readout modality for gaseous radiation detectors. 

Combining  state-of-the-art  imaging  sensors  with  MPGDs  operated  in  well-understood 
scintillating  gas  mixtures  [8]  has  become  a  powerful  tool  for  studying  the  performance  and   
operation principles of different types of MPGDs. Stable operation of multi-stage amplification 
structures at large gas gains has been successfully implemented for particle tracking with GEM 
[9] detectors and in GEM-based TPCs [10][11][12] achieving good image quality in terms of high 
signal to noise ratio for tracks crossing their sensitive volumes. 
Applications such as X-ray imaging triple-GEM [13] and Micromegas detectors have also shown 
high spatial resolution [14]. In the present study, the operation concept of the THCOBRA detector 
was visualized by optical readout: 

– 2 –

 
 
 
 
 
(cid:127)  Light and charge measurements, in order to visualize sharing between the THGEM and the 

MSGC-like structures of this hybrid device. 

(cid:127)  Corroborate  in  light-collection  mode,  the  preservation  of  the primary  ionization  position 

information already observed in charge-collection mode.  

(cid:127)  Demonstrate the detection of low-energy X-rays from an 55Fe radioactive source. 

(cid:127)  Localize weak spots of the THCOBRA structure causing instabilities at large gains, in order 

to improve its design. 

The  principles  of  operation  are  described  highlighting  the  two  amplification  stages.  The 
experimental  setup  is  shown  along  with  the  integration  of  the  THCOBRA  foil  into a  gaseous 
detector with  an optical  readout. Finally, the measurements  results  are discussed  together  with 
conclusions. 

2. Description of THCOBRA and Principle of Operation 

In the Fig. 1, a picture of the THCOBRA foil with its electrodes’ pattern on the bottom and top 
sides [15] is shown. 

The foil with an area of 10x10cm2 was manufactured on a printed circuit G10 board with a 
thickness  of  400µm  and  was  cladded  with  50µm  thick  copper  strips  on  both  sides.  The  top 
electrode has strips of 400µm width, while the bottom side has cathode strips of 200µm width 
around the holes and anode strips of varying widths between hole. The holes diameter is 300µm 
with a pitch of 1mm. The principle of operation of THCOBRA foil is based on two amplification stages 
(Fig. 2) [16]. This hybrid gaseous electron multiplier works as a THGEM inside the holes and as a MSGC-
like structure between cathode and anode strips to achieve higher gas gain and consequently stronger light 
emission.  

Figure 1. THCOBRA layout.  View of the foil  on the left. Bottom and top electrodes on the  right. The 
upper-right picture displays cathode strips around the holes and anode strips inbetween the holes. The top 
electrode (bottom-right) has segmented strips hereafter called top contacts.  

– 3 –

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. The operation principle of THCOBRA foil is based on a two-stage amplification structure, where 
the first amplification occurs within the holes and the second one near the anode strips. 

To  operate  the structure,  a  voltage  difference  between  the top  contact  and  the  cathode is 
applied  to  create  high  electric  field  strength  inside  the  holes  as  is  the  case  for  THGEMs.  In 
addition, between the anode and cathode strips a voltage difference is applied as in a MSGC to 
create a high electric field at the anode strips and add its contribution to the total gas gain. In 
stable operation, such a structures can reach gas gains of the order of 104 – 105 in different gas 
mixtures [17] as has been previously reported.  

Figure 3. Schematics of the detector. A THCOBRA foil, a double-GEM stack, a cathode (on top) 
and an ITO electrode (on bottom) make up the optically read out detector. 

– 4 –

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Experimental Setup 

The detector used in this study consists of a double GEM stack (two standard thin GEM foils) on 
top of the THCOBRA foil, used as a pre-amplification stage to achieve higher gas gain. On the 
source side, a copper cathode foil is used to create a drift field in the 3 mm thick conversion gap. 
A camera was placed outside of the gas volume facing the bottom of the THCOBRA foil through 
a glass plate coated with 25nm thick Indium-Tin Oxide (ITO). This ITO electrode is electrically 
conductive  and  has  an  optical  transparency  of  approximately  80%  in  the  visible  wavelength 
region. 

The detector was powered as shown in Fig. 3 using multiple independent high voltage lines, 
with  one  of  them  connected  to  a  passive  divider  for  biasing  the  double-GEM  stack.  The  top 
electrode of the THCOBRA was grounded and two high voltage lines were used to bias the bottom 
electrodes:  one  for  the  cathode  and  another  one  for  the  anode.  This  allowed  for  independent 
control of the two amplifications stages of the hybrid structure. 

An Ar/CF4 gas mixture with volume concentrations of 80% and 20% respectively, was used 
for the present study. This allows to have the initial interaction dominated by Ar atoms, while the 
CF4 provides visible scintillation light emission. The scintillation light emission spectrum for this 
mixture  features  wide  emission bands  at  Ultraviolet  (UV)  and  visible  wavelengths,  which  are 
attributed  to  CF4  [8].  The  light  emission  spectrum  matches  well  the  quantum  efficiency  of 
conventional Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) and Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor 
(CMOS) imaging sensors. In addition, the broad emission lines of the scintillation spectrum also 
contain atomic emission lines in the near-infrared range attributed to Ar [18]. 
In Fig. 4 the experimental setup is shown with the THCOBRA detector in between an X-ray generator and 
the CCD camera. The distance between the camera and the detector is determined by the focal distance of 
the optical readout system. Supplementary lenses were added to reduce the minimum object distance. In 
the present setup, the minimum object distance is approximately 8 cm for a lens with 50mm focal length 
and additional collimating lenses.  The  cameras  used  for  these  tests  were  an  Electron  Multiplying 
Charge-Coupled Device (EM-CCD), which has high sensitivity and a 6-megapixel CCD camera 
for high resolution studies*. 

Figure 4. Experimental setup consisting of an X-ray generator, the THCOBRA gaseous detector 
and a high-resolution CCD camera. 

* The high-resolution camera was the QImaging Retiga R6 [19] which featured a 12.5×10mm2 imaging sensor with 6M pixels of 
4.54×4.54(cid:541)m2.  For  high  sensitivity  measurements  an  ImagEM X2  [20]    EMCCD  camera  was  used  featuring  an  image  sensor  of 
8.19x8.19mm2 with 512x512 pixels of 16x16(cid:541)m2. 

– 5 –

 
 
 
4. Measurement Results 

4.1 Contributions from amplification stages 

The light emission from the two amplifications stages of the THCOBRA foil was visualized as a 
function  of the applied bias voltages. The foil was biased by increasing the voltage difference 
across the holes up to the maximum achievable gain in stable operation conditions. This was done 
by  keeping  the  cathode  and  anode  located  at  the  bottom  of  the  THCOBRA  foil  at  the  same 
potential. Fig. 5 shows the powering scheme used for the measurement. 

Figure 5. Schematics of the measurement setup for the visualization of the light sharing between 
the two amplification stages of the THCOBRA.  

Figure  6.   The  currents  of  the  THCOBRA  electrodes  as  a  function  of  the  voltage  difference 
between anode and cathode strips. The current on the top contact (square), the cathode (circle) 
and the anode (triangle) is shown.  

– 6 –

 
 
 
 
 
The top contact and the cathode (in Fig. 5.) were connected to separated high voltage lines 
and  the  currents  were  monitored.  Similarly,  the  anode  strips  were  biased  and  monitored 
independently. The measured currents are presented in Fig. 6. 

At  zero  voltage  difference  between  anode  strips  and  the  cathode  contact  (VAC =  0V), the 
multiplication occurs only in the holes and creates a small current on the cathode (from the arrival 
of electrons from the avalanche) and top strips i.e. only the holes contribute to the gas gain. By 
increasing  this  voltage  difference,  a  negative  polarity  current  at  the  anode  starts  to  increase 
together the currents at the top contact and the cathode (from the ions produced in the avalanche). 
This overall effect indicates the onset of amplification from both stages and their contributions to 
the  total  gas  gain.  In addition  to the current  measurements  explained above,  images  shown in 
Fig.7 were recorded the applied voltage difference.  The VAC was increased from 0 V to 650V. 
The voltage across the holes was kept constant at 1200V, while biasing the cathode at 1200V with 
the top contact grounded. For low absolute values of VAC, only the holes provide amplification 
and therefore light is emitted only from the holes. Increasing VAC leads to the onset of gas gain at 
the anode strips which begin to contribute to the total gas gain. This is visible by the light emitted 
from the anode strips. These observations are in agreement with the interpretation given by the 
current measurements shown above in Fig.6. 

Figure  7.  Recorded  images  of  the  THCOBRA  light  emission  as  a function  the  anode-cathode
voltage difference. VTC is the voltage across the THGEM hole and VAC is the voltage difference 
between anode and cathode strips. 

– 7 –

 
 
 
 
Light is emitted primarily from the edges and corners of the anode strips when VAC is sufficiently 
high for multiplication to occurs at the strips. This is attributed to an increased concentration of 
electric field lines at those locations. 

4.2 Preservation of spatial information during amplification 

Measurements  in  charge-collection  mode  have  previously  reported  spatial  resolution  values 
below 0.5mm for THCOBRA detectors, which is well below the 1mm pitch of the holes [21]. 
This  suggests  a  preservation  of  position  information  from  primary  ionizations  during  the 
avalanche multiplication  i.e.  a so-called  “memory  effect”.  Optical  measurements  were  used  to 
investigate whether the position of the avalanches can be localized within the holes. 

Figure 8. Illumination with a collimated X-rays beam of a single cell of the THCOBRA. The beam 
is a) centred in the middle of a hole and subsequently is b) centred in the middle of three holes 
and c) inbetween two holes. 

The THCOBRA detector was irradiated with a collimated X-ray generator as shown in Fig. 
8. The beam was placed in three different locations: in the middle of a single hole (Fig. 8a), in the 
middle of three holes (Fig. 8b) and in the middle between two holes (Fig. 8c). As shown in Fig. 
8, there is an asymmetry in the light recorded from holes and anode strips indicating that spatial 
information might well be preserved in the avalanches. When the beam is centered on a single 
hole (Fig. 8a), only this hole and the anode strips in the vicinity of that hole contribute to the 
observed  charge  multiplication  and  emitted  scintillation  light.  In  the  recorded  image,  light  is 
emitted  almost  uniformly  from the  hole,  with  a slight  shift  towards  the bottom  which may  be 
attributed to imperfect centering of the X-ray beam with respect to the hole. Both neighboring 
anode  strips  are  contributing  equally  with  their  corners  displaying  increased  light  intensity 
compared to the central regions of the strips. When the X-ray beam was centred between three 
holes, all of them were contributing and emitting light (Fig. 8b). Within each hole, the sides facing 
towards  the  incident  beam  position  (center  between  the  three  holes)  were  observed  to  emit 
significantly  more  light  than the  outer  regions  of  those  holes.  The  same was  observed  for the 
anode strips, where only segments of the anode strips in the vicinity of the center between the 
three  holes  were  contributing  strongly  to the observed  light emission and  almost  no light  was 
observed from the outward anode strips. The same was observed for the case of the X-ray beam 
centered inbetween two holes (Fig.  8c),  where the amplification and emitted scintillation light 
was shared between both of them. The observed light emission for these three cases confirms that 
spatial information of the incident electrons is retained during the avalanche multiplication of the 

– 8 –

 
 
 
 
THCOBRA foil. The precise implications of this effect on the achievable spatial resolution of this 
detector could not be determined with the presented setup, since the two thin GEMs used for pre-
amplification above the THCOBRA foil resulted in a widened electron cloud on top of it. Thus, 
some  of  the  width  of  the  observed  light  emission  profiles  might  well  be  a  result  from  the 
multiplication in the two thin GEMs or from diffusion during the transfer processes. Nevertheless, 
the observation that only certain regions within the hole or along the anode strips contribute to 
the observed light emission shows that spatial information of electrons reaching the THCOBRA 
foil is not completely lost during the avalanche multiplication in this structure.  

Figure  9.  Garfield  simulations  of  the  avalanches  created  by  primary  electrons.  The  red  point 
indicates  the  entry  point  of  the  electrons  at  different  distances  from  the  center  of  the  hole: 
a) 50µm, b) 100µm, c) 150µm and 4) 200µm from the center of the hole.  

– 9 –

 
 
 
 
 
 
This was also observed in simulations using Garfield++ [22] in which individual electrons 
were placed at four different distances from the center of the hole and above the THCOBRA foil 
(as indicated by the red dots in Fig. 9). A total of 1000 avalanches were simulated for each starting 
position. In Fig 9, the black dots represent the end point of each electron of the avalanche on a 
plane  below  the  THCOBRA  foil.  The  distribution  of  the  final  electron  positions  after  the 
avalanche displays a dependence on the starting point and thus indicates a preservation of spatial 
information. While the full hole contributes for the case shown in Fig. 9a, almost no electrons are 
observed on the opposite side of the hole, when the arriving electron is outside of it, as shown in 
Fig.  9d.  This  is  in  agreement  with  the  experimental  observations  presented  above  although  a 
quantitative comparison might not be possible due to the widened incoming electron distribution 
in the experimental study. 

This effect was also observed by using photons of 5.9keV from an 55Fe source and a high-
sensitivity EM-CCD camera. The gas gain was increased and images were recorded as shown in 
Fig. 10. Recorded images display an asymmetry of the light emitted from these avalanches in the 
holes and anode strips, which indicates that the initial position of the incoming electrons for a 
single X-ray event is preserved up to some degree. However, it was not possible to disentangle 
the charge sharing contribution produced by the two thin GEMs located on top of the THCOBRA 
and the spread introduced by the THCOBRA foil itself. Further studies are needed to address this 
effect and quantify each contribution. 

Figure 10. Images of individual low-energy X-ray photon interactions from an 55Fe source. 

4.3 Source of instabilities 

While the THCOBRA detector was operating mostly in stable conditions, occasional discharges 
were observed. In order to understand the origin of these discharges,  multiple images of them 
were recorded and combined together to obtain the single image shown in Fig. 11. 

– 10 –

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  11.  Image  of  discharges  in  different  locations  on  the  THCOBRA.  The  layout  of  the 
electrodes (red) was overlaid onto the image. Discharges are preferentially oriented towards the 
narrow regions and corners of the anode strips. 

Discharges  occurred  at  random  locations  across  the  THCOBRA  foil,  with  a  preferential 
orientation towards the narrow regions and corners of the anode strips, indicating the weak point 
of this electrode structure with an increased concentration of electric field lines. 

5. Conclusions 

In summary, this study allowed a deeper understanding of the THCOBRA operation and its limits 
along with a visualization of the sources of instabilities. The conclusions from this study are:  

(cid:120)  The optical readout technique was successfully employed to read out a THCOBRA detector. 

(cid:120)  The performance of this hybrid structure was visualized. The contributions of the holes were 

clearly separated from the contribution of the anode strips. 

(cid:120)  The so-called “memory effect”, i.e. a preservation of the spatial information from electrons 
reaching  the  THCOBRA,  was  observed.  However,  it was  not  possible  to  disentangle  and 
quantify the contributions from charge sharing and this effect on the spatial resolution of the 
detector. 

(cid:120)  The observation that scintillation light can be emitted from only certain regions within the 
holes  (Fig.  8)  as  well  as  the  computed  position-dependent avalanche  charge  distributions 
(Fig. 9) show that the spatial position accuracy of THCOBRA structures can be better than 
the pitch of the holes, as reported in previous studies [21]. 

– 11 –

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgments 

This  work  was  partially  supported  by  projects  UID/CTM/50025/2019,  PTDC/FIS-
AQM/32536/2017  and  CERN/FIS-INS/0025/2017  through  COMPETE,  Portugal,  FEDER, 
Portugal and FCT programs, Portugal. Special thanks to Rui de Oliveira for the production and 
testing of the THCOBRA foils.  

References 

[1]  F. D. Amaro et al 2010 JINST 5, P10002. 

[2]  F. Sauli, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A386 (1997) 531. 

[3]  R. Chechik, et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A535 (2004) 303. 

[4]  A. Breskin et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 598 (2009) 107. 

[5]  A. Oed, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A263 (1988) 351. 

[6]  J.F.C.A. Veloso et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 71 (2000) 2371. 

[7]  Y. Giomataris et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A376 (1996) 29. 

[8]  F.A.F. Fraga et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A471 (2001) 125. 

[9]  M. Marafini et al (2015) JINST 10, P10034. 

[10]  M. Pfützner et al., Phys.Rev.C 90 (2014) 1, 014311. 

[11]  F. Brunbauer et al (2018) JINST 13, P11003. 

[12]  F. Brunbauer et al (2018) IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 65(3), 903. 

[13]  T. Fujiwara et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A850 (2017) 7. 

[14]   F.M. Brunbauer et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A955 (2020) 163320. 

[15]  L. F. N. D. Carramate et al (2015) JINST 10, P01003. 

[16]  A. L. M. Silva et al (2015) Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry 30(2), 343. 

[17]  L.F.M.D. Carramate et al (2017) JINST 12, T05003. 

[18]  F.A.F. Fraga et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A504 (2003) 88. 

[19]  QImaging Retiga R6 CCD, viewed 20 July 2020,  https://www.qimaging.com/retiga-r6 

[20]  Hamamatsu 

ImageEM 

EM-CCD 

camera, 

viewed 

20 

July 

2020, 

https://www.hamamatsu.com/eu/en/product/type/C9100-23B/index.html 

[21]  A. L. M. Silva et al (2013) JINST 8, P05016. 

[22]  Rob Veenhof et al., Garfield++, viewed 20 July 2020, http://cern.ch/garfieldpp 

– 12 –

 
