0
2
0
2

l
u
J

4
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
3
6
6
1
1
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Towards Secure and Usable Authentication for
Augmented and Virtual Reality Head-Mounted Displays

Reyhan Duezguen∗, Peter Mayer∗, Sanchari Das†, Melanie Volkamer∗
∗ SECUSO - Security, Usability, Society, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
† University of Denver, Indiana University Bloomington
∗ ﬁrstname.lastname@kit.edu, † sanchari.das@du.edu

Abstract
Immersive technologies, including augmented and virtual
reality (AR & VR) devices, have enhanced digital commu-
nication along with a considerable increase in digital threats.
Thus, authentication becomes critical in AR & VR technol-
ogy, particularly in shared spaces. In this paper, we propose
applying the ZeTA protocol that allows secure authentica-
tion even in shared spaces for the AR & VR context. We
explain how it can be used with the available interaction meth-
ods provided by Head-Mounted Displays. In future work,
our research goal is to evaluate different designs of ZeTA
(e.g., interaction modes) concerning their usability and users’
risk perception regarding their security - while using a cross-
cultural approach.

1 Introduction

New-age technologies help to connect people despite geo-
graphical constraints. However, such technological evolution
brings new risks. Augmented and virtual reality (AR & VR)
are such technologies that have expanded considerably and
are projected to reach $114 billion and $65 billion, respec-
tively, by 2021 [44]. AR & VR systems like the Oculus and
Google Glass increasingly promise to provide social activities
like interactive gaming, virtual shopping, or attending virtual
meetings [46]. Many of these activities happen in so-called
shared spaces, i.e., places not strictly public, but where multi-
ple people are present at the same time [22]. However, these
technologies also introduce new security challenges in AR
& VR [24], including authentication challenges. Nowadays,
authentication on AR & VR systems is neglected or carried
out on the smartphone or PC [6]. Yet, if authentication is
required during a VR experience, e.g., paying for a product

Copyright is held by the author/owner. Permission to make digital or hard
copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted
without fee.
Who Are You?! Adventures in Authentication (WAY) 2020.
August 7, 2020, Virtual Conference.

1

or entering a virtual conference, the user must take off the
Head-Mounted Display (HMD), interrupting the virtual expe-
rience. Such challenges motivated our research direction to
implement more secure and usable authentication strategies
for AR & VR devices.

A naive approach using voice recognition technology of the
HMD as an authentication strategy might put users at serious
security risks, especially in public and shared spaces. Another
method could be to use the available sensors for biometric
authentication, e.g., gait recognition [18]. Such authentication
schemes are designed for continuous authentication. The goal
of our research is to focus on authenticating services when
needed. Additionally, biometric-based approaches would
also hamper authenticating with someone else’s HMD (as it
would ﬁrst need to be trained) and may have several privacy
concerns. Thus, what is needed is a secure (especially in
shared spaces) and usable authentication scheme, which only
uses the sensors of the HMDs while being privacy-preserving.
Therefore, we are proposing a shoulder-surﬁng resistant
authentication scheme that relies only on the equipment of
the AR & VR HMDs.

The proposed authentication scheme is based on our pre-
vious research: the Zero-Trust Authentication (ZeTA) proto-
col [23]. In this paper we describe how ZeTA can be applied
to the AR & VR context. Our future research goal is to imple-
ment the proposed authentication scheme using a user-centred
development approach and conduct user studies to evaluate its
usability and users’ risk perception. Note, since organizations
aim to provide their products and services worldwide, it is in
particular interesting to understand the cultural differences in
the use and perception of upcoming technologies like AR &
VR.

The importance of social and cultural aspects when inves-
tigating the acceptability and appropriateness of technology
are shown in many papers [3, 12, 28, 49]. Hofstede’s [48] ﬁve
cultural dimensions (namely power distance, individualism,
masculinity, uncertainty avoidance and long-term orientation)
are widely used to quantify national differences. These cul-
tural dimensions showed many times an association towards
technology use [1,13,50]. Some studies also discovered differ-
ences on perceived usability among different cultures [40, 43].
The impact of cultural aspects on the use and acceptance of
HMDs and authentication schemes has yet to be determined.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Overview of Zero-Trust Authentication (ZeTA) in AR & VR Context.

Thus, the study is going to be conducted in Germany and the
U.S. for cross-cultural analysis.

2 Related Work

Prior research has proposed and developed different authen-
tication schemes on HMDs. Yu et al. [53] and George et
al. [20] investigated well-established concepts for the VR con-
text, such as PINs or 2D and 3D sliding patterns within VR
environments. These concepts, though helpful for authentica-
tion, have some security concerns. For example, bystanders
can observe or even record the movement which can help
them to guess the password from the controller’s action.

Additionally, for AR devices like Google Glass, Islam et
al. [25] proposed tapping gestures on the glasses’ temple and
use tapping patterns as a means to authenticate. Winkler
et al. [52] introduced an authentication method that is more
resistant to observations by using AR glasses in combination
with the smartphone. The glasses show a randomly created
PIN pad on the private display according to which the user can
input password through their smartphone. Other proposals
include biometric authentication based on head and body
movement [31,37,39] or the human visual system [29,32,34].
These proposals require either additional hardware (such as a
smartphone) or a training phase to capture the user’s biometric
pattern. In contrast, our proposal requires neither.

For any proposal aiming to advance authentication for AR
& VR devices, investigating societal and cultural aspects in
technology adoption is critical. Prior studies have shown that
authentication behaviour, usage, and experience is inﬂuenced
vastly by age [11], cultural differences [2], and geographical
locations [42, 45, 51]. Riley et al. investigated regional differ-
ences in the perception of biometric authentication in India,
South Africa, and the United Kingdom [45]. Volkamer et al.
observed in a ﬁeld study PIN usage at ATMs and in various
electronic payment scenarios in Germany, Sweden, and the
United Kingdom [51]. Given prior evidence, it is essential
to evaluate the impact of different countries when designing
a new authentication scheme, especially for new-age tech-
nologies. These technologies, such as AR & VR are used
worldwide where the demographical, societal, and cultural
impact can play a critical role.

Yet, in the AR & VR space, we found very little research
on cross-cultural aspects. Jung et al. [27] and Lee et al. [30]
explored the cultural differences in the adoption of mobile
AR in South Korea and Ireland. Few studies investigated the
effect of web-based AR on online shopping and compared
results from different countries inside of Europe [19, 41].
These studies identiﬁed differences in the use and perception
of mobile and web-based AR applications between countries.
Despite such critical research, to our knowledge, there are
no cross-cultural studies in AR & VR with HMDs. Thus,
comparing HMD usage in different countries in the context
of authentication will be novel and, therefore, very valuable.

3 Proposed Solution

The goal of this work is to propose an authentication scheme
for the AR & VR devices, which is resistant to observation
and only relies on the sensors integrated into the most AR &
VR HMDs. Our proposed authentication scheme is based on
our previous research on observation resistant authentication:
the Zero-Trust Authentication (ZeTA) protocol [23]. Here,
we ﬁrst provide a summary of the ZeTA protocol and explain
how it could be applied in the AR & VR context.

3.1 Zero-Trust Authentication (ZeTA)

ZeTA is a knowledge-based authentication protocol, i.e., the
user has to memorize a secret analogously to text passwords.
In this section we describe its working principle, which is
also illustrated in ﬁg. 1.

The general idea of ZeTA is to expand upon the human
capacity to build up semantic networks of related concepts
and is thus based on innate human-based computation. To
that end, ZeTA requires a knowledge base of concepts (e.g.,
words or symbols) and their semantic relations. The users’
secrets in ZeTA consist of two or more concepts and logical
connections between them (i.e., AND, OR, NOT), e.g., “yel-
low OR wheel”. This secret is generated and assigned to the
user by ZeTA during the enrolment of the user. The enrolment
has to be performed through a private channel between the
system and the user.

2

UserWeb ServiceUser requests accountZeTA assigns secret to userUser requests authenticationZeTA sends challenge to userUser responds to challengeRepeated until desired security level is reachedZeTA grants access to user if user could respond to challengesEnrolment requires a non-compromised device and a private channelAuthentication only requires the server to be not compromisedThe authentication is based on a challenge-response inter-
action. The user has to determine whether a speciﬁc attribute
is related to their secret or not, e.g., if the secret was “yel-
low OR wheel” and the challenge was “sunﬂower”, then the
correct answer would be “yes”. Note that all challenges are
pre-generated as part of the creation of the user secret and
stored as described in [23]. Thereby, the secret is chosen such
that it partitions the knowledge base equally in yes and no
challenges (i.e., half of the attributes are related to the secret
and half of the attributes are not related to the secret).

Due to its design, ZeTA can allow errors in responses
by the users to compensate for innate differences in users’
interpretations of the semantic relations between concepts.
This can potentially increase ZeTAs usability but might im-
pair security if the two are not carefully balanced. It also
highlights the importance of cultural effects. The system
repeats the challenge-response protocol until the desired cer-
tainty threshold is achieved; i.e., the probability of the user
being an impostor is sufﬁciently small. Consequently, ZeTA
can be scaled seamlessly to arbitrary security levels. When
user errors are not allowed during an authentication attempt,
according to [23] ZeTa can easily reach PIN-level security
with 14 challenges. The usual online guessing threshold of
106 [16] can be achieved as easily using 25 challenges, while
even allowing for one error by the user [23].

As stated above, the enrolment procedure of ZeTA relies on
a private channel. In contrast, after the enrolment, ZeTA was
designed with the threat model as introduced by Matsumoto
and Imai [35] in mind. The attacker can compromise the
communication channels and even the user’s device. Thus,
ZeTA relies only on the server being secure. Proofs for lower
bounds on the number of observations required to learn a
secret based on a probably approximately correct learning
model are presented in the original publication [23].

the communication channel, the user’s interaction, or even
the private display of the HMD. The user input can even be
processed by the web server and does not need to burden the
capacity of the HMD without impairing the user’s privacy.
The only time the user is required to use a non-compromised
device and a private channel is when being assigned the secret
by ZeTA during enrolment.

3.3 Future Design and Implementation

The proposed authentication scheme will be implemented
as mock-up for both AR & VR HMDs, as well as for each
interaction method. The development is based on a human-
centered design approach: the mock-ups are tested and im-
proved iteratively by evaluating different design variations of
the outputs and inputs with users to maximize the authenti-
cation scheme’s usability. Options for the output to show the
challenges are text, image, and audio. Options for the input of
the responses are: voice, head movement, and buttons/touch
controls (cf. section 3.2). There might also be different ap-
proaches to give feedback to the user after answering each
challenge or to proceed from one challenge to the next one.

4 Proposed Methodology for User Evaluation

As future work, we will evaluate the three interaction methods
of the proposed authentication scheme through in-lab user
studies. We are planning to use Google Glass for the AR
application and the Oculus Rift S for the VR application. The
study design is built upon our research on shoulder-surﬁng
resistant authentication using gamepads [36].

3.2 Application in the AR & VR context

4.1 Research Goal

Augmented and Virtual Reality HMDs provide various inter-
action methods depending on the capabilities of the device.
Examples of input systems are controller, head movement,
gesture, and voice recognition. The core output system is
the private display (i.e., optics that create the virtual image)
combined with audio. The idea underlying the usage of ZeTA
in the AR & VR context is that the challenge is shown on the
display of the HMDs. The user responses are entered using
input options, which can be found in most of the AR & VR
HMDs. Thus, we avoid dependencies on additional hardware.
Concerning the entry of the response to the system’s challenge
by the user, the following interaction options can be used: 1)
voice control, 2) head movement, and 3) buttons on the VR
controller or touch controls on the AR glasses. Additionally,
ﬁnding the right number of challenges as a trade-off between
usability and security while considering the speciﬁcs of the
AR/VR context is an important aspect of the development of
the ZeTA implementations for our user study.

The advantage of using ZeTA as an authentication scheme
for the AR/VR context is that shoulder-surﬁng resistance does
not need to be empirically evaluated due to the aforemen-
tioned security proofs. Therefore, the lower bound of needed
observations holds no matter whether the attacker observes

The evaluation of the authentication scheme for each of the
AR & VR HMDs and each of the three interaction methods
(voice, head movement, and touch/press) will be based on
usability criteria and users’ risk perception regarding the au-
thentication protocol security. Usability is measured by users
effectiveness, efﬁciency and satisfaction with the authentica-
tion scheme. Thus, our research goal for future work is:
Identifying the best interaction method for authenticating
through ZeTA on both, AR & VR HMDs, i.e., the method that
provides the highest effectiveness, efﬁciency, and satisfaction
as well as the lowest perceived risk by users regarding the
security of the authentication process.
We aim to inspect the cross-cultural inﬂuence by conducting
identical studies in Germany and the United States. Germany
and the U.S. are interesting cultures to compare because
of their global inﬂuence in the ﬁeld of technology [21, 38].
Both of these nations share much in common (democratic
governments, similar linguistic roots), they also have some in-
teresting differences (ethical heterogeneity, capitalistic versus
socialistic approach) [47]. Additionally, it is predicted that the
AR/VR market will rise globally, especially in U.S. (96.1%
Compound annual growth rate (CAGR)) and in Western Eu-
ropean countries (104.2% CAGR), including Germany [8].

3

Figure 2: Main study protocol.

4.2 Study Protocol

After completing the implementation, a pre-study is planned
to pilot and reﬁne the study protocol of the main study, which
is described below. The authentication scheme is tested with
each combination of the device (i.e., AR, VR) and interac-
tion method (i.e., voice, head gestures, button/touch controls)
regarding its usability and users’ risk perception regarding
its security mechanism. The study will be conducted in both,
Germany and the United States. Therefore, 12 (2x3x2) groups
are used to collect data as visualized in ﬁg. 3.

Each participant will test all three interaction methods. To
avoid ﬁrst-order carryover effects, the allocation of the partic-
ipants will be speciﬁed with the Latin Square Design [7] that
counterbalances sequential effects. The procedure of the main
study is presented in ﬁgure 2. We will ask two participants
to come to the lab simultaneously. Both of the participants
will receive an explanation of the ZeTA scheme and will be
given a user scenario with three different randomly generated
passwords. Then, we will run a 3-step evaluation process:

The effectiveness will be measured by the ratio of correct
password entries among the three. Efﬁciency will be assessed
by the average time needed for authentication across the three
passwords. Satisfaction will be measured with the System
Usability Scale (SUS) that covers users’ subjective reactions
to using the scheme [4]. To examine the user’s risk percep-
tion, the scales proposed by Fischhoff et al. [15], Liang &
Xue [33], and Das [9] will be adapted to our use case. The
risk perception metric is deﬁned by nine characteristics of
the risk: 1) voluntariness, 2) immediacy, 3) knowledge of the
exposed, 4) knowledge of experts, 5) control, 6) newness, 7)
common-dread, 8) chronic-catastrophic, and 9) severity. Of-
ﬂine, this framework informed four decades of research in risk
perception and public policy in a diversity of risk domains,
e.g., environmental risk [17] and health risk [26]. Online, this
framework has been used to explain perceptions of technical
security risks [5, 10] and insider threats [14].

Acknowledgments

1. Participant-1 authenticates on the HMD three times.

Participant-2 observes the process.

2. Now they change roles: participant-2 authenticates on
the HMD three times. Participant-1 observes the process.

3. Both participants answer questions in a survey as well
as we conclude with a short semi-structured interview.

This work was supported by the German Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (BMBF) in the Competence Center
for Applied Security Technology (KASTEL), Karlsruhe Insti-
tute of Technology; Secure and Privacy Research in New-Age
Technology (SPRINT) Lab, University of Denver; and Hu-
man and Technical Security (HATS) Lab, Indiana University.
Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are solely those of the author(s).

By having two participants in the lab simultaneously, we
aim to create a higher validity setting with respect to evalu-
ating users’ risk perception. Secrets will be assigned to the
participants by the system. Each of them will have time alone
to memorize their secret. As a baseline for the conﬁguration,
we propose to use the online guessing resistance threshold of
106 [16]. This is in line with the envisioned types of accounts
used on the HMDs (e.g., purchasing media content from on
online service). Before conducting the study, we will ask for
ethical approval. Participants will be compensated based on
the minimum wage regulations in the U.S. and Germany.

Figure 3: Allocation of the groups in the main user study.

4

References

[1] Said S Al-Gahtani. Extending the technology accep-
tance model beyond its country of origin: a cultural test
in western europe. In Advanced Topics in Information
Resources Management, Volume 1, pages 158–183. IGI
Global, 2002.

[2] Hani Moaiteq Aljahdali and Ron Poet. The affect of fa-
miliarity on the usability of recognition-based graphical
passwords: Cross cultural study between saudi arabia
and the united kingdom. In 12th IEEE TrustCom, pages
1528–1534, 2013.

[3] David Benyon, Phil Turner, and Susan Turner. De-
signing interactive systems: People, activities, contexts,
technologies. Pearson Education, 2005.

[4] John Brooke. Sus: a “quick and dirty’usability. Usabil-

ity evaluation in industry, page 189, 1996.

[5] L. Jean Camp. Mental models of privacy and security.

SSRN Electronic Journal, 2006.

[6] Pan Chan, Tzipora Halevi, and Nasir Memon. Glass otp:
Secure and convenient user authentication on google
glass. In Financial Cryptography and Data Security,
pages 298–308. Springer, 2015.

[19] Stéphanie Gautier, Claire Gauzente, and Maiju Aikala.
Are ar shopping services valued the same way through-
out europe? a four-country q-investigation. Systemes
d’information management, 21(1):69–102, 2016.

[7] Renita Coleman. Designing experiments for the social
sciences: How to plan, create, and execute research
using experiments. Sage publications, 2018.

[8] IDC:

International Data Corporation. Worldwide
spending on augmented and virtual reality expected
to reach $18.8 billion in 2020, according to idc.
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=
prUS45679219, 2019. Accessed: 2020-07-17.

[9] Sanchari Das. A Risk-reduction-based Incentivization
Model for Human-centered Multi-factor Authentication.
PhD thesis, Indiana University, 2020.

[10] Sanchari Das, Jacob Abbott, Shakthidhar Gopavaram,
Jim Blythe, and L Jean Camp. User-centered risk com-
munication for safer browsing. In Proceedings of the
First Asia USEC-Workshop on Usable Security, In Con-
junction with the Twenty-Fourth International Confer-
ence International Conference on Financial Cryptogra-
phy and Data Security, 2020.

[11] Sanchari Das, Andrew Kim, Ben Jelen, Joshua Streiff,
L Jean Camp, and Lesa Huber. Towards implementing
inclusive authentication technologies for older adults.
Who Are You, 2019.

[12] Jayati Dev, Sanchari Das, Yasmeen Rashidi, and L Jean
Camp. Personalized whatsapp privacy: Demographic
and cultural inﬂuences on indian and saudi users. Avail-
able at SSRN 3391021, 2019.

[20] Ceenu George, Mohamed Khamis, Emanuel von
Zezschwitz, Marinus Burger, Henri Schmidt, Florian
Alt, and Heinrich Hussmann. Seamless and secure
vr: Adapting and evaluating established authentication
systems for virtual reality. In NDSS, 2017.

[21] Marilyn Greenstein-Prosch, Thomas E McKee, and
Reiner Quick. A comparison of the information tech-
nology knowledge of united states and german audi-
tors. The International Journal of Digital Accounting
Research, 8(14):45–79, 2008.

[22] Jan Gugenheimer, Christian Mai, Mark McGill, Julie
Williamson, Frank Steinicke, and Ken Perlin. Chal-
lenges using head-mounted displays in shared and social
spaces. In EA CHI, pages 1–8, 2019.

[23] Andreas Gutmann, Karen Renaud, Joseph Maguire, Pe-
ter Mayer, Melanie Volkamer, Kanta Matsuura, and Jörn
Müller-Quade. Zeta-zero-trust authentication: Relying
on innate human ability, not technology. In EuroS&P,
pages 357–371. IEEE, 2016.

[24] Jassim Happa, Mashhuda Glencross, and Anthony Steed.
Cyber security threats and challenges in collaborative
mixed-reality. Frontiers in ICT, 6:5, 2019.

[25] MD Rasel Islam, Doyoung Lee, Liza Suraiya Jahan,
and Ian Oakley. Glasspass: Tapping gestures to unlock
smart glasses. In AH, pages 1–8, 2018.

[13] Abdul Azeez Erumban and Simon B De Jong. Cross-
country differences in ict adoption: A consequence of
Journal of world business, 41(4):302–314,
culture?
2006.

[26] Branden B Johnson and Paul Slovic. Presenting un-
certainty in health risk assessment: initial studies of
its effects on risk perception and trust. Risk Analysis,
15(4):485–494, 1995.

[14] Fariborz Farahmand and Eugene H Spafford. Under-
standing insiders: An analysis of risk-taking behavior.
Information Systems Frontiers, 15(1):5–15, 2013.

[15] Baruch Fischhoff, Paul Slovic, Sarah Lichtenstein,
Stephen Read, and Barbara Combs. How safe is safe
enough? a psychometric study of attitudes towards tech-
nological risks and beneﬁts. Policy sciences, 9(2):127–
152, 1978.

[16] Dinei Florêncio, Cormac Herley, and Paul C van
Oorschot. An Administrator’s Guide to Internet Pass-
word Research. In Large Installation System Adminis-
tration Conference, pages 35–52. USENIX, 2014.

[17] James Flynn, Paul Slovic, and Chris K Mertz. Gender,
race, and perception of environmental health risks. Risk
analysis, 14(6):1101–1108, 1994.

[18] Davrondzhon Gafurov, Kirsi Helkala, and Torkjel Søn-
drol. Biometric gait authentication using accelerometer
sensor. JCP, 1(7):51–59, 2006.

[27] Timothy Hyungsoo Jung, Hyunae Lee, Namho Chung,
and M Claudia tom Dieck. Cross-cultural differences in
adopting mobile augmented reality at cultural heritage
tourism sites. IJCHM, 2018.

[28] Minna Kamppuri, Roman Bednarik, and Markku Tuki-
ainen. The expanding focus of hci: case culture.
In
Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on Human-
computer interaction: changing roles, pages 405–408,
2006.

[29] Mohamed Khamis, Carl Oechsner, Florian Alt, and An-
dreas Bulling. Vr pursuits: interaction in virtual reality
In AVI, pages
using smooth pursuit eye movements.
1–8, 2018.

[30] Hyunae Lee, Namho Chung, and Timothy Jung. Exam-
ining the cultural differences in acceptance of mobile
augmented reality: Comparison of south korea and ire-
land. In Information and communication technologies
in tourism, pages 477–491. Springer, 2015.

5

[31] Sugang Li, Ashwin Ashok, Yanyong Zhang, Chenren
Xu, Janne Lindqvist, and Macro Gruteser. Whose move
is it anyway? authenticating smart wearable devices
In PerCom,
using unique head movement patterns.
pages 1–9. IEEE, 2016.

[32] Yung-Hui Li and Po-Jen Huang. An accurate and efﬁ-
cient user authentication mechanism on smart glasses
based on iris recognition. Mobile Information Systems,
2017.

[33] Huigang Liang, Yajiong Lucky Xue, et al. Understand-
ing security behaviors in personal computer usage: A
threat avoidance perspective. Journal of the association
for information systems, 11(7):1, 2010.

[34] Shiqing Luo, Anh Nguyen, Chen Song, Feng Lin,
Wenyao Xu, and Zhisheng Yan. OcuLock: Explor-
ing human visual system for authentication in virtual
reality head-mounted display. In NDSS, 2020.

[35] Tsutomu Matsumoto and Hideki Imai. Human Identi-
ﬁcation Through Insecure Channel. In EUROCRYPT,
pages 409–421. Springer, 1991.

[36] Peter Mayer, Nina Gerber, Benjamin Reinheimer,
Philipp Rack, Kristoffer Braun, and Melanie Volkamer.
I (don’t) see what you typed there! shoulder-surﬁng
resistant password entry on gamepads. In CHI, pages
1–12, 2019.

[37] Robert Miller, Natasha Kholgade Banerjee, and Sean
Banerjee. Within-system and cross-system behavior-
based biometric authentication in virtual reality.
In
IEEE VR, pages 311–316, 2020.

[38] Michael Morgan and Laura Borns.

360 degrees of
In CHI’04 Extended Abstracts on Human

usability.
Factors in Computing Systems, pages 795–809, 2004.

[39] Tahrima Mustafa, Richard Matovu, Abdul Serwadda,
and Nicholas Muirhead. Unsure how to authenticate
on your vr headset? come on, use your head! In ACM
IWSPA, pages 23–30, 2018.

[40] Jantawan Noiwan and Anthony F Norcio. Cultural
differences on attention and perceived usability: Investi-
gating color combinations of animated graphics. Inter-
national journal of Human-computer studies, 64(2):103–
122, 2006.

[41] Eleonora Pantano, Alexandra Rese, and Daniel Baier.
Enhancing the online decision-making process by using
augmented reality: A two country comparison of youth
markets. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services,
38:81–95, 2017.

[43] Katharina Reinecke and Abraham Bernstein. Improv-
ing performance, perceived usability, and aesthetics
with culturally adaptive user interfaces. ACM TOCHI,
18(2):1–29, 2011.

[44] ABI Research and Qualcomm.

Augmented
the ﬁrst wave of 5g killer
https://www.qualcomm.com/news/onq/

and virtual reality:
apps.
2017/02/01/vr-and-ar-are-pushing-limits-
connectivity-5g-our-rescue, 2017.
2020-06-17.

Accessed:

[45] Chris Riley, Kathy Buckner, Graham Johnson, and
David Benyon. Culture & biometrics: regional dif-
ferences in the perception of biometric authentication
technologies. AI & society, 24(3):295–306, 2009.

[46] Jonathan C Roberts, Panagiotis D Ritsos, Sriram Karthik
Badam, Dominique Brodbeck, Jessie Kennedy, and
Niklas Elmqvist. Visualization beyond the desktop–the
next big thing. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applica-
tions, 34(6):26–34, 2014.

[47] Peter Schmuck, Tim Kasser, and Richard M Ryan. In-
trinsic and extrinsic goals: Their structure and relation-
ship to well-being in german and us college students.
Social Indicators Research, 50(2):225–241, 2000.

[48] Mikael Søndergaard and Geert Hofstede. Culture’s con-
sequences: comparing values, behaviours, institutions,
and organizations across nations. International Journal
of Cross Cultural Management, pages 243–246, 2001.

[49] Noam Tractinsky. Aesthetics and apparent usability:
empirically assessing cultural and methodological is-
sues. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference
on Human factors in computing systems, pages 115–122,
1997.

[50] Yvonne M Van Everdingen and Eric Waarts. The ef-
fect of national culture on the adoption of innovations.
Marketing letters, 14(3):217–232, 2003.

[51] Melanie Volkamer, Andreas Gutmann, Karen Renaud,
Paul Gerber, and Peter Mayer. Replication study: A
cross-country ﬁeld observation study of real world pin
usage at atms and in various electronic payment scenar-
ios. In SOUPS, pages 1–11, 2018.

[52] Christian Winkler,

Jan Gugenheimer, Alexander
De Luca, Gabriel Haas, Philipp Speidel, David Dobbel-
stein, and Enrico Rukzio. Glass Unlock: Enhancing
Security of Smartphone Unlocking through Leveraging
a Private Near-eye Display. In CHI, pages 1407–1410.
ACM, 2015.

[42] Helen Petrie and Burak Merdenyan. Cultural and gender
differences in password behaviors: Evidence from china,
turkey and the uk. In Nordic Conference on CHI, pages
1–10, 2016.

[53] Zhen Yu, Hai-Ning Liang, Charles Fleming, and Ka Lok
Man. An exploration of usable authentication mecha-
nisms for virtual reality systems. In APCCAS, pages

458–460. IEEE, 2016.

6

