Spatial Wave Control Using a Self-biased Nonlinear Metasurface at Microwave
Frequencies

Mehdi Kiani1, Ali Momeni2, Majid Tayarani1,∗ and Can Ding3
1School of Electrical Engineering, Iran University of Science and Technology, Tehran, Iran.
2Applied Electromagnetic Laboratory, School of Electrical Engineering,
Iran University of Science and Technology, Tehran, Iran
3Global Big Data Technologies Centre,University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia

Recently, investigation of metasurface has been extended to wave control through exploiting non-
linearity. Among all of the ways to achieve tunable metasurfaces with multiplexed performances,
nonlinearity is one of the promising choices. Although several proposals have been reported to ob-
tain nonlinear architectures at visible frequencies, the area of incorporating nonlinearity in form of
passive-designing at microwave metasurfaces is open for investigation. In this paper, a passive wide-
band nonlinear metasurface is manifested, which is composed of embedded L−shape and Γ−shape
meta-atoms with PIN-diode elements. The proposed self-biased nonlinear metasurface has two op-
erational states: at low power intensities, it acts as Quarter Wave Plate (QWP) in the frequency
range from 13.24 GHz to 16.38 GHz with an Axial Ratio (AR) of over 21.2%. In contrast, at high
power intensities, by using the polarization conversion property of the proposed PIN-diode based
meta-atoms, the metasurface can act as a digital metasurface.
It means that by arranging the
meta-atoms with a certain coding pattern, the metasurface can manipulate the scattered beams
and synthesize well-known patterns such as Diﬀusion-like pattern at an ultra-wide frequency range
from 8.12 GHz to 19.27 GHz (BW=81.4%). Full-wave and nonlinear simulations are carried out to
justify the performance of the wideband nonlinear metasurface. We expect the proposed self-biased
nonlinear metasurface at microwave frequencies reveals excellent opportunities to design limiter
metasurfaces and compact reconﬁgurable imaging systems.

I.

INTRODUCTION

At the beginning of the century, remarkable atten-
tion was absorbed to metasurfaces as the sub-wavelength
structures owing to their electromagnetic features, be-
sides being low loss and easy to chip. Metasurfaces have
created a broad area to wave control from microwave
to optical frequencies. Meanwhile, theoretical develop-
ments like the emergence of Generalized Snells law of
reﬂection and refraction, paved this way. The result of
the rapid growth of metasurfaces to wave control has
witnessed and found a special place in achieving nega-
tive refraction [1, 2], engineered antennas [3–5], beam
scanning [6, 7], invisibility cloak [8, 9], absorbers [10],
polarizers [11], dispersion engineering [12, 13], and ad-
vanced analog computing [14–18]. Demands for any type
of ﬂexible structures made scientists of this ﬁeld use the
materials like graphene [19–21], vanadium dioxide [22–
24] and semiconductors [25, 26] as the phase change ma-
In addition to the use of unique materials to
terials.
obtain metasurfaces with diﬀerent functionalities, non-
linearity can also help to achieve controllable metasur-
faces.
In recent years, especially at visible frequencies
by using diverse nonlinear materials, several numbers of
studies have incorporated nonlinearity into the metasur-
face design for many applications such as polarization
rotation [27], harmonic generation [28], frequency multi-
plexing [29], and so forth. More recently, at microwave

∗ m tayarani@iust.ac.ir

frequencies, with the help of semiconductor lumped el-
ements like PIN-diodes and varactors which embedded
into the unit cells, active power-dependent metasurfaces
have been presented. Varactors at diﬀerent powers can
display diﬀerent behaviors, and the power levels verify
the capacitance of them in each time [25]. On the other
side, PIN-diode at low power intensities acts as an open
circuit or more precisely like a small capacitance, and at
high power intensities when the power intensity is more
than a speciﬁed threshold, it operates as a short circuit
or small resistance [30]. Sievenpipers group in 2013 by in-
troducing a high power surface wave circuit-based meta-
surface absorber[31] opened new doors to reach recon-
ﬁgurable metasurfaces through the use of the nonlinear
property at microwave frequencies. In 2017 [32], a fre-
quency selective surface has introduced to provide pass-
band for high power intensities which could spectrally
manipulate incoming wave; this study similar to Sieven-
pipers work proﬁts from nonlinearity characteristic at mi-
crowave frequencies, using integrating PIN diodes into
the diﬀerent particles of the metasurface. Digital coding
metasurfaces have created an opportunity to spatially re-
distribute scattered waves via two distinct coding meta-
atoms with opposite reﬂection/transmission phases (e.g.,
0◦ and 180◦) as the ”0” and ”1” digital bits form the
metasurface [33–35]. More recently, Cuis group proposed
two intensity-dependent metasurfaces whose functional-
ity of them have been determined by the power intensity
of the incoming wave [36, 37]. Organizing coding parti-
cles with the help of varactor elements into the metasur-
face give them an opportunity to control scattered waves
spectrally and spatially. In fact, digital coding and ”non-

0
2
0
2

l
u
J

3
1

]
h
p
-
p
p
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
0
8
4
6
0
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

FIG. 1.
The perspective view of the nonlinear metasurface. When a weak tilted linear-polarized wave is incident to the
metasurface, it acts as a quarter-wave plate. Whenever a high power wave is illuminated the metasurface, the operational
status changes to a 1-bit digital metasurface.

linearity” has emerged as a fascinating paradigm due not
only to their capabilities of digitally manipulating EM
waves, but also to synthesizing a metasurface with mul-
tiplexed performances. Moreover, recently a self-biased
dual-band nonlinear metasurface has been proposed by
authors [38] which at low power functions like an EM-
mirror, while at high power levels shows two separate
camouﬂage behaviors at C- and X-band. However, sim-
ilar to the other previous works, they achieve restricted
functionalities at low power state, and moreover the op-
erating band of the digital metasurface was limited to
a single narrow frequency region that is unattractive for
power limiting applications.

In this paper, an ultrawideband self-biased nonlinear
metasurface is presented, comprising of two types of non-
linear power-multiplexed L−shape and Γ−shape meta-
atoms. At low-power intensities, the metasurface acts as
a QWP that means it converts Linear Polarized (LP)
waves to Circular Polarized (CP) waves at low-power
state. By contrast, At high power intensities, the meta-
surface acts as a Digital Spatial Wave Manipulator Meta-
surface (DSWMM) by reﬂecting the LP incoming wave
in cross-polarization and owing to deploying two nonlin-
ear anti-phase meta-atoms. Indeed, the integrated PIN-
diodes in the meta-atoms directly interact with the in-
coming wave and all its functionalities is solely dictated
by the power intensity of the incident wave. Hence, our
metasurface synthesizing is fully passive, it does not re-
quire any additional active biasing network, and, more-
over, its performances are wideband enough for a wide

diversity of practical applications demanding protection
of sensitive devices from undesired high power signals.
The numerical simulations verify the performance of the
proposed bi-functional nonlinear coding metasurface.

II. THEORY OF ANALYSIS AND DESIGN

A. Principle and design

Fig. 1 shows a perspective view of the nonlinear meta-
surface, which is composed of L−shape and Γ−shape
PIN-diode integrated meta−atoms. The overall geome-
try of the proposed metasurface is described in Fig. 2(a,
b) consisting of three layers: 1) the L-shape metallic part
as the top layer, 2) a 3.683 mm RT/duroid 5880 sub-
strate, and 3) a copper (σ = 5.96 × 107 S/m) ground
plane as the bottom layer to zero transmission. The
PIN-diode can be circuitously modelled as an RL-circuit
(L=30 pH, R=7.8 Ω) in the on-state while it can be
represented by an LC-circuit (L=30 pH, C=0.028 pF)
in the oﬀ mode [39]. The common structural parame-
ters of the proposed meta-atom are p=10.6 mm, wx=2.1
mm, wy=1.5 mm, ld=0.6 mm, ly=6.6 mm, and lx=4.2
mm. By changing the power intensity of the incom-
ing wave, the electromagnetic responses of the proposed
metasurface can be tailored, leading to a QWP at low
power intensities and a DSWMM at high power inten-
sities. At low power intensities, when PIN-diodes are
in oﬀ-state and electric ﬁeld vector slanted 45◦relative

3

FIG. 2.
embedded PIN-diodes for on- and oﬀ-states.

(a), (b) The Γ−shape and L−shape meta−atoms as the basic units of the metasurface. (c) circuit model of the

to both x− and y−directions the metasurface acts as a
QWP. However, upon illuminating by high-power radia-
tions, the functionality of the proposed device is changed;
the metasurface can reﬂect LP waves to cross-polarized
waves such that the L−shape and Γ−shape meta−atoms
mimic the digital states ”0” and ”1”, realizing speciﬁc
coding pattern over the surface. The operational prin-
ciple of the aforementioned metasurface is based on the
circuit model of the PIN-diode which is changed from an
LC-circuit to RL-circuit through increasing the power
level of the illuminating wave. It is clear that the volt-
age levels induced on both ends of the embedded diode
powerfully rely on the local ﬁeld intensities stimulated
by diﬀerent incident power levels. Therefore, Depending
on the induced voltage levels of PIN-diodes, we will see
diﬀerent electromagnetic responses. At low power illumi-
nations, the peak of the induced voltage of PIN-diodes
is not high enough to turn them on, therefore, they are
modelled as open circuits (oﬀ-state) or more precisely
as LC-circuits. Conversely, at high power illuminations,
when the induced voltage of PIN-diodes is more than the
threshold, they act as short circuits (on-state) or more
In spite
accurately as RL-circuits [40](see Fig. 2(c)).
of the previous metasurface demonstrations [36, 37, 41],
the proposed nonlinear metasurface controls the oﬀ- and
on-states of the PIN-diode without any auxiliary bias-
ing network so that the operational status of the diodes
is dictated by the power intensity of the incident wave.
During the time variations of the high power AC illu-
minating signal, majority carriers (holes of P-type and
electrons of N-type semiconductors) are stored in the in-
trinsic layer of PIN-diodes. At low frequencies, because
recombination time of minority carriers (holes of N-type
and electrons of P-type semiconductors) as the switching
speed of the diode from on-to-oﬀ are in the order of time-

domain signal period (for the exploited PIN-diode it is 2
nS), the stored charges can be detached from the intrinsic
layer; therefore, the diode can switch to oﬀ mode. Con-
versely, at high frequencies, the recombination time of
the minority carriers has a considerable value against the
period of the input signal (if we consider the frequency
range of simulations between 5 to 20 GHz, the corre-
sponding time periodicity range will be T=50 ps to 200
pS). Consequently, there is not suﬃcient time to switch
oﬀ the PIN-diode, and at high power illuminations, the
PIN-diode will work stably in the on-state [40].

B. Frequency-domain analysis

To study the performance of the proposed metasur-
face. we consider that it is illuminated by a travelling
wave along the z−direction; the reﬂected wave can be
described as the sum of two LP components:

(cid:126)Er = E0(Γx(cid:126)x + Γy(cid:126)y)

(1)

in which, E0 is the magnitude of the incident wave
in both x- and y-directions. Also, Γx = |Γx|eϕx and
Γy = |Γy|eϕy are the reﬂection coeﬃcients of Ei
x and Ei
y,
respectively The metasurface comprising the proposed
meta-atoms ( see Fig. 2) as an anisotropic-surface man-
ifests distinct EM responses to the x− and y−polarized
incident waves, which would be evident in diﬀerent Γx
and Γy. When the electric ﬁeld of the incident LP
wave is tilted at 45◦ relative to the x−axis, such that
the phase diﬀerence of the reﬂected wave ∆ϕxy = 90◦
and |Γx| = |Γy|, a QWP can be produced. On the
other hand, when a y−polarized (x−polarized) wave il-
luminates a metasurface so that the reﬂected wave be

4

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 3. (a) The simulated reﬂection coeﬃcients Γx and Γy and their phase diﬀerence ∆ϕyx of the QWP with simpliﬁed LC
circuit and nonlinear (SPICE) model.(b) The simulated reﬂection coeﬃcients Γxy and Γyy of the DSWMM with simpliﬁed
RL-model and nonlinear (SPICE) model(c) The simulated phase diﬀerence between L−shape and Γ-shape meta−atoms at
high power intensities.

in x−axis (y−axis), a linear-to-linear polarization con-
verter will be achieved. The scattering parameters of
the proposed metasurface at diﬀerent power levels in ad-
dition to the distribution of the L−shape and Γ-shape
meta−atoms determine the electromagnetic performance
of the metasurface. Here, the functionality of the meta-
surface as a QWP at low power levels and DSWMM at
high power levels is investigated by using the commer-
cial program, CST Microwave Studio. Periodic boundary
conditions in x− and y−directions along with Floquet
ports assigned in z− direction form an inﬁnite array from
the meta-atoms of Fig. 2(a), (b). At low power levels, as
illustrated in Fig. 1, the metasurface is illuminated by a
45◦ tilted plane wave and plays the role of a QWP; in this
case, PIN-diodes are in oﬀ-state and they are replaced by
LC−circuits in the full-wave simulator. Fig. 3(a) shows
the simulated reﬂection coeﬃcients and phase delay of
the QWP. At low power levels, the metasurface as the
QWP presents a reﬂection coeﬃcient more than −3dB
and phase delay 90◦ ± 10◦ from 13.24 GHz to 16.38 GHz
for both of L− and Γ−shaped meta-atoms. This means
that the metasurface converts the LP incident wave to a
CP wave in the reﬂection mode.

In contrast, when the nonlinear meta-atoms are ex-
posed to high-power plane waves, digital EM response is
observable. In fact, when the power level of y−polarized
incident wave is increased, the PIN-diodes change their
states from oﬀ-to-on. In the full-wave simulator, they are
replaced with RL-circuits (see Fig. 2). Therefore, the
function of the metasurface is switched to an LP-to-LP
polarizer. Figs. 3(b) depicts the co- and cross-polarized
reﬂection spectra for the inﬁnite array of L−shape and
Γ−shape upon illuminating by y−polarized plane waves.
In which, Γxy = Er
y indicate the
reﬂection coeﬃcients of the y-to-x and y-to-y polariza-
tions, respectively. The cross-polarized reﬂection coef-
ﬁcient Γxy is higher than -1.5 dB in an ultra-wide fre-

y and Γyy = Er

x/Ei

y/Ei

quency band from 8.12 GHz to 19.27 GHz, while the
co-polarized reﬂection coeﬃcient Γxy is lower than -10
dB in this frequency range. Hence, at high power in-
tensities, the proposed meta-atoms can eﬃciently con-
vert an LP wave into cross-polarization. As illustrated
in Figs. 3(c) at high power levels, there is a 180◦ phase
diﬀerence between L−shape and Γ−shape meta−atoms.
Consequently, they can be considered as ”0” and ”1” bi-
nary codes. Actually, the binary phase response required
for constructing the coding metasurface is acquired at
the wideband frequency range. The full-wave simulation
CST setup does not support the nonlinear model of the
PIN-diodes, hence, the scattering parameters for both
high and low power illuminations with the help of Large
Signal Scattering Parameter (LSSP) solver in ADS are
calculated, where the SPICE model of the PIN-diode is
used (see Fig. 3).

To investigate the capacity of the proposed nonlinear
anisotropic metasurface in manipulating the polarization
states of reﬂected waves at diﬀerent power levels, we cal-
culated axial ratio (AR) for circular polarization conver-
sion at low power levels and polarization conversion ratio
(PCR) for linear polarization conversion at high power
levels as follows:

AR =

where

and

(cid:115) 1

r cos2 α + sin 2α cos ∆ϕxy + r sin2 α
r sin2 α − sin 2α cos ∆φxy + r cos2 α

1

r =

|Γx|
|Γy|

2α = tan−1(

2r
1 − r2 ) cos ∆ϕxy

P CR =

Γ2
xy
yy + Γ2
xy

Γ2

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

5

(a)

(b)

(c)

(a) The calculated PCR for linear polarization conversion at high power intensities and AR for circular polarization
FIG. 4.
conversion at low power intensities. The simulated (b) PCR and (c) AR at oblique incident of EM waves (equals 0◦, 10◦, 20◦,
and 30◦).

Fig. 4(a) shows the AR and PCR of the L−shape and
Γ−shape meta−atoms at low power levels as a QWP
and as a DSWMM at high power levels, respectively. It
is clearly seen the AR better than 3 dB over 21.2% from
13.24 GHz to 16.38 GHz and PCR better than 0.8 over
81.4% from 8.12 GHz to 19.27 GHz.
In addition, we
study the eﬀect of oblique incidence wave on polarization
conversion at diﬀerent power levels. Fig. 4(b) illustrates
at low power intensities, altering the incidence angle from
θ = 0◦ to 30◦ contributes to the shifting in the LP-to-CP
bandwidth. On the other hand, at high power intensities,
by increasing the incidence angle from θ = 0◦ to 30◦, the
PCR bandwidth slightly starts to decreasing (see Fig.
4(c)).

To justify the LP-to-RHCP performance of the meta-
surface at low power intensities, when PIN-diodes are in
oﬀ mode, the electric ﬁeld intensity distribution of the
L−shape and Γ−shape unit cells along with phase at 14
GHz has been shown in Figs. 5(a), (b). By increasing the
phase, the light blue part on the top layer of the unit cells
rotates counterclockwise that results in the radiation of
RHCP waves. To further understand the working mech-
anism of the metasurface as the ultrawideband linear-to-
linear polarizer at high power levels, the surface current
of the meta−atoms and ground planes at 8.6 GHz, 11.5
GHz, 15 GHz, and 18.5 GHz as resonance frequencies are
depicted in Figs. 6(a)-(d). At 8.6 GHz and 15 GHz, the
meta−atoms currents and ground plane currents are anti-
parallel; these loop currents have resulted in magnetic
resonances. Conversely, at 11.5 and 18.5 GHz, the par-
allel currents ﬂowing between meta−atoms and ground
plane have generated electric resonances. By optimizing
the structural parameters, the multi-resonance metasur-
face can operate as an LP-to-LP polarization converter
at high incident power levels in an ultra-wide frequency
range.

FIG. 5.
Electric ﬁeld distributions of (a) L−shape (b)
Γ−shape meta−atoms at low power intensities when PIN-
diodes are in oﬀ mode at 14 GHz.

C. Nonlinear analysis

The use of PIN-diodes as the nonlinear elements may
contribute to harmful eﬀects such as harmonic genera-
tion, third-order inter-modulation and AM modulation
on fundamental frequency. Therefore, to check the va-
lidity of the structure, nonlinear analysis is essential. In
this regard, the scattering parameters of the L−shape
and Γ−shape meta−atoms, in the form of an S3P ﬁle is
imported to Advanced Design System (ADS) as a circuit-
based nonlinear simulator. The S3P ﬁle consists of three
ports: (1), (2) the ﬁrst and second Floquet ports, and
In the
(3) a discrete port instead of the PIN-diode.

6

network could switch its functionality from a QWP to a
DSWMM. Again, it must be mentioned that at high fre-
quencies for high power illuminations since the carriers
injecting rate to the intrinsic layer during the positive
cycles is much more than the carriers outgoing rate from
the intrinsic layer during the negative cycles, despite the
time variations of the induced voltage, the operational
status of the diodes would be stable [42].

As mentioned before, one of the harmful eﬀects of using
nonlinear devices such as PIN-diodes may be the genera-
tion of frequency harmonics. Hence, A harmonic balance
analysis using ADS software to more study the nonlinear
behavior of the integrated meta−atom with PIN-diode
is done.
In this case, one of the Floquet ports is ex-
cited with a 15 dBm signal, and the power at another
port is measured. As we expected the most parts of the
input power has appeared in the second Floquet port
(cross-polarization) at the fundamental frequency here
11 GHz (see Fig. 7(b)). As a result, the nonlinear ana-
lyzes (LSSP, Transient Response and Harmonic balance)
with EM-circuit simulator validate our assumption in the
modelling of PIN-diode for full-wave simulations.

III. DISCUSSION

As shown in the schematic diagram of the proposed
metasurface (Fig.
1), at high power intensities, the
distribution of the L−shape and Γ−shape anti-phase
meta−atoms as the coding particles over the metasur-
face spatially manipulates the incoming wave. The non-
linear metasurface as a DSWMM contains 6 × 6 binary
super-cells such that each super-cell is composed of 4 × 4
L−shape or Γ−shape meta−atoms to depreciate defec-
tive corner-related coupling eﬀects between the neigh-
boring super-cells. The far ﬁeld pattern function of the
DSWMM can be expressed by a superposition from the
contributions of all super-cells.

FIG. 6.
Surface current distribution on the L−shape and
Γ−shape meta−atoms when PIN-diodes are in on mode at
(a) 8.6 GHz, (b) 11.5 GHz, (c) 15 GHz, and (d) 18.5 GHz

ADS medium, the discrete port is occupied with the
Spice model of a Flip Chip diode with a serial number of
MADP-000907-14020. In ADS as an EM-circuit simula-
tor, using the transient solver at 10 GHz frequency and
two employed probes at both ends of the PIN-diode the
AC voltage of the diode at diﬀerent power levels has been
measured. As can be seen in Fig. 7(a), when small signals
illuminate the meta−atoms, the diode voltages is a com-
plete sinusoidal curve. By contrast, the illuminated large
signals generate distorted voltage wave-forms so that the
positive half cycles are truncated to the diode forward
voltage (1.3 V). The threshold impinged power of oﬀ-to-
on switching is obtained 3 dBm for each 10 mm × 10 mm
unit cell. For the proposed metasurface that composed of
576 unit cells, the minimum impinging power to switch
the state of diodes from oﬀ-to-on is calculated 30.06 dBm,
therefore, the metasurface at this power as a self-biased
nonlinear surface without needs to a complex DC biasing

Efar(θ, ϕ) = fe(θ, ϕ)

N
(cid:88)

N
(cid:88)

(cid:18)

exp

m=1

n=1

− i(cid:8)ϕmn + kDsinθ(cid:2)(m − 1/2)cosϕ + (n − 1/2)sinϕ(cid:3)(cid:9)

(cid:19)

where, fe(θ, ϕ) is the pattern function of a super-cell,
and θ and ϕ denote to the elevation and azimuth angles,
respectively. D remarks the period of the digital super-
cells along both x- and y−directions, and k = 2π/λ refers
to the free-space wave-number. Referring to the above
equation, if we consider a quasi-omnidirectional far-ﬁeld
pattern for all super-cells, the realized scattering patterns
of diﬀerent coding conﬁgurations can be expressed in the
forms of two-dimensional inverse Fourier transforms of
the super-cells, i.e., Ef ar(ω1, ω2) = F −1(umn). Here, ω1
and ω2 remark the spatial Fourier space variables, and
umn is the complex status of each super-cell [43].

Based on the generalized Snell’s law [44], the scattering
direction of the DSWMM in spherical coordinates (θ, ϕ)

can be determined using the following relations:

ϕ1 = ±tan−1 Dx
Dy

, ϕ2 = π ± tan−1 Dx
Dy

(cid:115)

θ = sin−1(λ

1
D2
x

+

1
D2
y

)

in which, Dx and Dy indicate the spatial periods of
the coding sequence along the x− and y−axis, respec-
tively.
9(a), (b),
the normalized two-dimensional (2D) and 3D scatter-

8 (a), (b) and Figs.

In Figs.

(6)

(7)

(8)

7

(a)

(b)

FIG. 7.
GHz.

(a) Induced voltage at both ends of one PIN-diode. (b) The Harmonic Balance analysis for a 15 dBm signal at 11

FIG. 8. The 2-D far-ﬁeld results that show the performance of the metasurface upon illuminating by high-power incidences
for (a) stripped conﬁguration and (b) Chessboard conﬁguration.

ing pattern of the two conventional coding conﬁgura-
(stripped conﬁguration) and
tions 010101.../010101...
010101.../101010...
(chessboard conﬁguration) at 12.6
GHz are sketched, respectively. For sequence 1, where
Dx is inﬁnite and Dy is 80 mm, two symmetric re-
ﬂected beams with directions (θ1, φ1)=(17.3◦,0◦) and
(θ2, φ2)=(17.3◦,180◦) are achieved; similarly, for chess-
board conﬁguration,
four symmetric reﬂected beams
with directions (θ1, φ1)=(25◦,45◦), (θ2, φ2)=(25◦,135◦),
(θ3, φ3)=(25◦,225◦), and (θ4, φ4)=(25◦,315◦) are ob-
tained. The numerical results in Figs. 8 (a), (b) are
obtained with the help of CST Microwave Studio, which
is consistent with theoretical predictions. The use of ran-
domness distribution of the coding particles gives rise to
lower scattering signatures over a broad frequency range
from X-band to Ku-band. Hence, we use an entropy-
based method to reach the eﬃcient diﬀusion-like scat-
tering pattern for smart camouﬂage surface applications.

Entropy as a key gauge to describe the information of
diﬀerent types of coding conﬁguration Can be accepted
[45]. Surely, the more average entropy measure, as well
as diﬀusion level, results in the lower probability of esti-
mation of scattering patterns. In [46], the authors have
validated the ability of the 2D quadratic Renyi entropy
to reach the best diﬀusion-like coding conﬁguration. Ac-
cording to the high ability of the Renyi entropy in mea-
suring Gaussianity in the 2D scattering pattern, it could
be utilized to interpret diﬀerent coding conﬁgurations.
Herein, Binary Bat Algorithm (BBA) as a fast, simple,
and eﬃcient optimization method in comparison to the
conventional optimization methods to reach the best dif-
fusion phase-encoded pattern has been used that its re-
lation can be expressed as:

8

The 3-D simulation patterns of the nonlinear metasurface as a DSWMM, which indicate its ability to manipulate
FIG. 9.
reﬂection waves using various coding sequences under the normal incidence of EM waves at center frequency 14GHz.
(a)
stripped, (b) Chessboard, and (c) the optimal diﬀusion conﬁgurations. (d) The ability of the randomized coding pattern at
high power intensities in RCS reduction relative to the same-sized copper plate.

HRe = max

(cid:26) −1
2

(cid:20) 128
(cid:88)

log

128
(cid:88)

P 2
iiR

+

128
(cid:88)

128
(cid:88)

(cid:21)(cid:27)

P 2
iiD

i=1

iR=1

i=1

iR=1

(9)
here, PiiR and PiiD remark the iiR and iiD indexes
in PDFJR and PDFJD diagrams, respectively. These
two PDF diagrams based on the statuses of each neigh-
bouring pair of the 2D-IFFT image matrix elements in
the vertical and horizontal directions can be determined.
The Renyi entropy for diﬀerent distribution of L−shape
Γ−and shape meta−atoms as the anti-phase coding par-
ticles is calculated and shown in Table. 1. In addition,
with the help of Binary Bat Algorithm (BBA) the opti-
mal diﬀusion coding conﬁguration to reach the maximum
entropy, as well as the maximum diﬀusion among all po-
tential solutions, is achieved. In this case, the quantity
of the HRe is calculated as high as 1.80. As can be seen
in Figs. 9(c), the high power incident waves are scat-
tered along with the numerous random directions by the
entropy-based randomized coding metasurface in such a
way no main scattered lobes exist. As an application,
this nonlinear metasurface can reduce both bi-static and
mono-static RCS (see Figs. 9(d)) for high power inci-
dent waves. The numerical simulations clarify the signif-
icance of this work at the microwave band among all of
the nonlinear metasurfaces that recently are introduced.
Unlike previous works, the metasurface according to the

TABLE I. The computed Renyi entropy for diﬀerent distri-
bution of coding particles.

Coding conﬁguration
PEC reﬂector
Stripped conﬁguration
Chessboard conﬁguration
Optimal Diﬀusion conﬁguration

Renyi entropy(HRe)
0.143
0.318
0.452
1.80

power level of the incoming waves controls and manip-
ulates them over 21.2% (low power signals) and 81.4%
(high power signals) bandwidths.

IV. CONCLUSION

We proposed a passive wideband self-biased nonlin-
ear reﬂective metasurface at microwave frequencies to
spatially control electromagnetic waves. The designed
metasurface is composed of L−shape and Γ− shape
meta−atoms that loaded with self-biased PIN-diode el-
ements. The EM functionality of the passive structure
is determined by the level of incident power so that at
low power intensities, the nonlinear metasurface as an
anisotropic surface acts as a QWP, changes the linear
polarization of the incoming wave to the circular polar-
ization. On the other hand, the multi-resonant charac-

teristic of the nonlinear metasurface at high power inten-
sities causes the linear polarization of the incident wave
converts to cross-polarization. Moreover, using the anti-
phase meta−atoms with same magnitudes results to a
digital metasurface. Then, an entropy-based binary cod-

ing pattern and Binary Bat Optimization Algorithm are
mixed to obtain a diﬀusion-like far-ﬁeld pattern over a
broad frequency range. Nonlinear circuit-based analyzes
in addition to the full-wave simulations veriﬁed the pow-
erful wave control ability of the nonlinear metasurface.

9

[1] R. A. Shelby, D. R. Smith, and S. Schultz, Experimental
veriﬁcation of a negative index of refraction, science 292,
77 (2001).

[2] R. W. Ziolkowski, Design, fabrication, and testing of dou-
ble negative metamaterials, IEEE Transactions on anten-
nas and Propagation 51, 1516 (2003).

[3] R. W. Ziolkowski, P. Jin, and C.-C. Lin, Metamaterial-
inspired engineering of antennas, Proceedings of the
IEEE 99, 1720 (2010).

[4] M. Movahhedi and N. Komjani, Dual-frequency dual or-
thogonal polarization wave multiplexing using decoupled
pixels based on holographic technique, Optics Express
28, 12424 (2020).

[5] M. Movahhedi, M. Karimipour, and N. Komjani, Multi-
beam bidirectional wideband/wide-scanning-angle holo-
graphic leaky-wave antenna, IEEE Antennas and Wire-
less Propagation Letters 18, 1507 (2019).

[6] M. M. Moeini, H. Oraizi, A. Amini, and V. Nayyeri,
Wide-band beam-scanning by surface wave conﬁnement
on leaky wave holograms, Scientiﬁc reports 9, 1 (2019).
[7] M. M. Moeini, H. Oraizi, and A. Amini, Collimating
cylindrical surface leaky waves for highly improved radi-
ation characteristics of holograms, Physical Review Ap-
plied 11, 044006 (2019).

[8] J. B. Pendry, D. Schurig, and D. R. Smith, Controlling

electromagnetic ﬁelds, science 312, 1780 (2006).

[9] J. Li and J. B. Pendry, Hiding under the carpet: a new
strategy for cloaking, Physical review letters 101, 203901
(2008).

[10] M. Rahmanzadeh, H. Rajabalipanah, and A. Abdolali,
Multilayer graphene-based metasurfaces:
robust de-
sign method for extremely broadband, wide-angle, and
polarization-insensitive terahertz absorbers, Applied op-
tics 57, 959 (2018).

[11] Y. Zhao and A. Al`u, Manipulating light polarization with
ultrathin plasmonic metasurfaces, Physical Review B 84,
205428 (2011).

[12] Q. Feng, M. Pu, C. Hu, and X. Luo, Engineering the dis-
persion of metamaterial surface for broadband infrared
absorption, Optics letters 37, 2133 (2012).

[13] Y. Guo, Y. Wang, M. Pu, Z. Zhao, X. Wu, X. Ma,
C. Wang, L. Yan, and X. Luo, Dispersion management of
anisotropic metamirror for super-octave bandwidth po-
larization conversion, Scientiﬁc Reports 5, 8434 (2015).
[14] A. Babaee, A. Momeni, A. Abdolali, and R. Fleury, Par-
allel optical computing based on mimo metasurface pro-
cessors with asymmetric optical response, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.02948 (2020).

[15] A. Momeni, H. Rajabalipanah, A. Abdolali, and
K. Achouri, Generalized optical signal processing based
on multioperator metasurfaces synthesized by suscep-
tibility tensors, Physical Review Applied 11, 064042
(2019).

[16] A. Abdolali, A. Momeni, H. Rajabalipanah, and
K. Achouri, Parallel integro-diﬀerential equation solv-
ing via multi-channel reciprocal bianisotropic metasur-
face augmented by normal susceptibilities, New Journal
of Physics (2019).

[17] H. Rajabalipanah, A. Abdolali, S. Iqbal, L. Zhang, and
T. J. Cui, How do space-time digital metasurfaces serve
to perform analog signal processing?, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.06773 (2020).

[18] A. Momeni, M. Safari, A. Abdolali, and N. P. Kherani,
Tunable and dynamic polarizability tensor for asym-
metric metal-dielectric super-cylinders, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.04102 (2019).

[19] K. Rouhi, A. Abdolali, and S. Fallah, Wideband thz low-
scattering surface based on combination of diﬀusion and
absorption, arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09289 (2020).
[20] A. Fallahi and J. Perruisseau-Carrier, Design of tunable
biperiodic graphene metasurfaces, Physical Review B 86,
195408 (2012).

[21] H. Cheng, S. Chen, P. Yu, W. Liu, Z. Li, J. Li, B. Xie,
and J. Tian, Dynamically tunable broadband infrared
anomalous refraction based on graphene metasurfaces,
Advanced Optical Materials 3, 1744 (2015).

[22] L. Liu, L. Kang, T. S. Mayer, and D. H. Werner, Hybrid
metamaterials for electrically triggered multifunctional
control, Nature communications 7, 13236 (2016).

[23] S. Cueﬀ, D. Li, Y. Zhou, F. J. Wong, J. A. Kurvits,
S. Ramanathan, and R. Zia, Dynamic control of light
emission faster than the lifetime limit using vo 2 phase-
change, Nature communications 6, 8636 (2015).

[24] M. R. M. Hashemi, S.-H. Yang, T. Wang, N. Sep´ulveda,
and M. Jarrahi, Electronically-controlled beam-steering
through vanadium dioxide metasurfaces, Scientiﬁc re-
ports 6, 35439 (2016).

[25] B. Ratni, A. de Lustrac, G.-P. Piau, and S. N. Burokur,
Active metasurface for reconﬁgurable reﬂectors, Applied
Physics A 124, 104 (2018).

[26] L. Li, T. J. Cui, W. Ji, S. Liu, J. Ding, X. Wan, Y. B.
Li, M. Jiang, C.-W. Qiu, and S. Zhang, Electromagnetic
reprogrammable coding-metasurface holograms, Nature
communications 8, 197 (2017).

[27] A. Rose, D. A. Powell, I. V. Shadrivov, D. R. Smith, and
Y. S. Kivshar, Circular dichroism of four-wave mixing in
nonlinear metamaterials, Physical Review B 88, 195148
(2013).

[28] A. Rose, D. Huang, and D. R. Smith, Controlling the sec-
ond harmonic in a phase-matched negative-index meta-
material, Physical review letters 107, 063902 (2011).
[29] W. Ye, F. Zeuner, X. Li, B. Reineke, S. He, C.-W. Qiu,
J. Liu, Y. Wang, S. Zhang, and T. Zentgraf, Spin and
wavelength multiplexed nonlinear metasurface hologra-
phy, Nature communications 7, 11930 (2016).

[30] C. Zhao, C.-F. Wang, and S. Aditya, Power-dependent
frequency-selective surface: Concept, design, and experi-

ment, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation
67, 3215 (2019).

digital metasurface operating at microwave frequencies,
Optics Express 28, 5410 (2020).

10

[31] H. Wakatsuchi, S. Kim, J. J. Rushton, and D. F. Sieven-
piper, Circuit-based nonlinear metasurface absorbers for
high power surface currents, Applied Physics Letters
102, 214103 (2013).

[32] C. Zhao and C.-F. Wang, A power dependent frequency
selective surface, in 2017 IEEE International Symposium
on Antennas and Propagation & USNC/URSI National
Radio Science Meeting (IEEE, 2017) pp. 1029–1030.
[33] T. J. Cui, M. Q. Qi, X. Wan, J. Zhao, and Q. Cheng,
Coding metamaterials, digital metamaterials and pro-
grammable metamaterials, Light: Science & Applications
3, e218 (2014).

[34] K. Rouhi, H. Rajabalipanah, and A. Abdolali, Real-
time and broadband terahertz wave scattering manip-
ulation via polarization-insensitive conformal graphene-
based coding metasurfaces, Annalen der Physik 530,
1700310 (2018).

[35] K. Rouhi, H. Rajabalipanah, and A. Abdolali, Multi-bit
graphene-based bias-encoded metasurfaces for real-time
terahertz wavefront shaping: From controllable orbital
angular momentum generation toward arbitrary beam
tailoring, Carbon 149, 125 (2019).

[36] Z. Luo, Q. Wang, X. G. Zhang, J. W. Wu, J. Y. Dai,
L. Zhang, H. T. Wu, H. C. Zhang, H. F. Ma, Q. Cheng,
and T. J. Cui, Intensity-dependent metasurface with
digitally reconﬁgurable distribution of nonlinearity, Ad-
vanced Optical Materials , 1900792 (2019).

[37] Z. Luo, M. Z. Chen, Z. X. Wang, L. Zhou, Y. B. Li,
Q. Cheng, H. F. Ma, and T. J. Cui, Digital nonlinear
metasurface with customizable nonreciprocity, Advanced
Functional Materials 29, 1906635 (2019).

[38] M. Kiani, M. Tayarani, A. Momeni, H. Rajabalipanah,
and A. Abdolali, Self-biased tri-state power-multiplexed

[39] H. Yang, X. Cao, F. Yang, J. Gao, S. Xu, M. Li, X. Chen,
Y. Zhao, Y. Zheng, and S. Li, A programmable metasur-
face with dynamic polarization, scattering and focusing
control, Scientiﬁc reports 6, 35692 (2016).

[40] L. A. Coldren, S. W. Corzine, and M. L. Mashanovitch,
Diode lasers and photonic integrated circuits, Vol. 218
(John Wiley & Sons, 2012).

[41] M. Yoo and S. Lim, Active metasurface for controlling
reﬂection and absorption properties, Applied Physics Ex-
press 7, 112204 (2014).

[42] Z. Wu, M. Lin, J. Zhang, and J. Liu, Energy selective
ﬁlter with power-dependent transmission eﬀectiveness in
waveguide, Electronics 8, 236 (2019).

[43] H. Rajabalipanah and A. Abdolali, Ultrabroadband
monostatic/bistatic rcs reduction via high-entropy phase-
encoded polarization conversion metasurfaces, IEEE An-
tennas and Wireless Propagation Letters 18, 1233 (2019).
[44] N. Yu, P. Genevet, M. A. Kats, F. Aieta, J.-P. Teti-
enne, F. Capasso, and Z. Gaburro, Light propagation
with phase discontinuities: generalized laws of reﬂection
and refraction, science 334, 333 (2011).

[45] L. Golshani, E. Pasha, and G. Yari, Some properties of
r´enyi entropy and r´enyi entropy rate, Information Sci-
ences 179, 2426 (2009).

[46] A. Momeni, K. Rouhi, H. Rajabalipanah, and A. Ab-
dolali, An information theory-inspired strategy for de-
sign of re-programmable encrypted graphene-based cod-
ing metasurfaces at terahertz frequencies, Scientiﬁc re-
ports 8, 6200 (2018).

