Prepared for submission to JINST

LTARS: Analog Readout Front-end ASIC for Versatile

TPC-applications

T. Kosaka,
b
b

b

T. Igarashi,

b

T. Nakamura

K. Sakashita,
c

, and K. Miuchi

c

a

M. Shoji,

a

M. M.

T. Kishishita,

a,1,2

S. Sumomozawa,

b

a

a

S. Narita,

K. Negishi,

T. Hasegawa,

Tanaka,
aKEK, High Energy Accelerator Research Organization
1-1 Oho, Tsukuba, 3050801, Ibaraki, Japan
bIwate University,
4-3-5 Ueda, Morioka, 0208551, Iwate, Japan
cKobe University,
1-1 Nada-ku, Rokkodaicho, Kobe, 6570013, Hyogo, Japan

E-mail: kisisita@post.kek.jp

Abstract: We designed a versatile analog front-end chip, called LTARS, for TPC-applications,
primarily targeted at dual-phase liquid Ar-TPCs for neutrino experiments and negative-ion µ-
TPCs for directional dark matter searches. Low-noise performance and wide dynamic range are
two requirements for reading out the signals induced on the TPC readout channels. One of
the development objectives is to establish the analog processing circuits under low temperature
operation, which are designed on function block basis as reusable IPs (Intellectual Properties). The
newly developed ASIC was implemented in the Silterra 180 nm CMOS technology and has 16
readout channels. We carried out the performance test at room temperature and the results showed
an equivalent noise charge of 2695±71 e− (rms) with a detector capacitance of 300 pF. The dynamic
range was measured to be 20–100 fC in the low-gain mode and 200–1600 fC in the high-gain
mode within 10% integral nonlinearity at room temperature. We also tested the performance at
the liquid-Ar temperature and found a deterioration of the noise level with a longer shaper time.
Based on these results, we also discuss a unique simulation methodology for future cold-electronics
development. This method can be applicable to design the electronics used at low temperature.

Keywords: Time projection chambers, Front-end electronics for detector readout, Liquid detectors

1Corresponding author.
2Also at SOKENDAI, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies.

0
2
0
2

g
u
A
8
1

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
4
0
7
7
0
.
8
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents

1

Introduction

2 Architecture of the ASIC
2.1 Circuit properties

3 Performance test results at room temperature

3.1 Experimental setup
3.2 Analog waveforms and dynamic range
3.3 Equivalent noise charge

4 Measurements at the LAr temperature

4.1 Experimental setup
4.2 Waveforms and dynamic range

5 Possible cause of the Performance degradation and Simulation methodology for cold-

electronics

6 Conclusion

1

Introduction

1

3
3

4
4
6
7

9
9
9

11

12

In recent studies in particle and astro-particle physics, detectors with high-resolution positional
imaging are often desired to explore new physics phenomena because the topological information
can be utilized to discriminate the signature of the new physics phenomena from background
events. These detectors require huge numbers of readout channels and advanced electronics play
an important role in handling such large numbers of readout channels. To meet this need, we are
developing front-end electronics for versatile applications of time projection chambers (TPCs) for a
joint project called LTARS (Low Temperature Analog Readout System), located at KEK, Kobe, and
Iwate Universities. We plan to use this readout system for the directional dark matter experiments
[1, 2] and for the next-generation neutrino oscillation experiments [3].

TPC-based three-dimensional (3D) tracking detectors are thought to be one of the best detectors
for the directional direct dark matter search experiments and several groups have developed prototype
detectors [4, 5]. NEWAGE is one of these directional dark matter search experiments and has been
leading in directional sensitivity [1]. One of the next steps needed to improve the sensitivity is
to utilize a negative-ion drift gas, which enables full-volume ﬁducialization through 3D position
reconstruction of the event vertex [6, 7]. These TPCs are called negative-ion (NI) µ-TPCs and
the detector concept is shown in the left of Figure 1. In the NI µ-TPCs, the ionized electrons are
captured by the gas molecule immediately after ionization thereby generating negative ions. These

– 1 –

ions are drifted instead of the electrons in the NI µ-TPCs. Some types of negative ion gases could
contain more than one species of negative ion (SF6 and SF5 in Figure 1). Each of these ions are
drifted with diﬀerent velocities. The arrival time diﬀerence provides information on drift length,
or, the absolute position on the electric ﬁeld direction. This new concept helps to improve the
sensitivity by rejecting background events from the readout plane (indicated as MPGDs in Figure
1) and the cathode plane; this was not possible with the self-triggering TPCs.

A large scale O(10 kt) liquid argon time projection chamber (LAr-TPC) will be utilized as a 3D-
tracking device for studies of next-generation neutrino oscillation, nucleon decay, and astrophysical
neutrinos. Toward the realization of such a large-scale detector, a world-wide R&D eﬀort on kilo-
ton-scale LAr-TPC demonstrators is underway [8]. One approach to read out the ionized electron
signals is to use a dual-phase LAr-TPC [9]. The detector concept is shown in the right of Figure 1.
In the dual-phase TPC, the ionized electrons are extracted from the liquid phase (indicated as LAr
in Figure 1) to the gas phase (GAr), and the extracted electrons are multiplied with a thick-GEM
(Gas Electron Multiplier) and collected with a two-dimensional strip anode. The main advantage
of the dual-phase readout is the high signal-to-noise ratio aﬀorded by the gas multiplication. This
enables a longer drift length because the signal is ampliﬁed even though some primary electrons
are lost by impurities in the LAr. The high signal-to-noise ratio also beneﬁts the physics sensitivity
for the neutrino oscillation, nucleon decay, and astrophysical neutrino signals.

Cathode

electric
field

MPGDs
-
SF5

-
SF6

-(cid:1)
(cid:1)
-

-

(cid:1)
recoil nuclei

-
gas SF6

-
SF6

q

SF5

t

signal readout
electronics

to DAQ

to DAQ

signal readout
electronics

anode
thick-GEM

ionization
electrons

-

-

+

+

-

+

-

+

-
+

electric
field

Cathode

Figure 1. Detector concepts of the NIµ-TPC (Left) and the dual-phase LAr-TPCs (Right).

The signal timescale is much longer than that of electrons in typical gas TPCs, i.e.,≈ 10−2 cm/µs
for the NI µ-TPCs and ≈ 10−1 cm/µs for the LArTPCs, respectively. Therefore, the electronics has
a lot of similarities, but is diﬀerent from the standard electronics for the TPC. Additionally, a wide
dynamic range together with a high signal-to-noise ratio is required for the readout electronics. In
the case of the NI µ-TPCs, typical signals are 3 fC for the minority species (indicated as SF5 in
Figure 1) and 80 fC for the main species (SF6) [11, 12]. On the other hand, the typical ionization
signal in the LArTPCs is ≈ 10 fC, assuming one order of magnitude of the thick-GEM gains, for a
minimum ionization particle (MIP). The signal on one readout channel for events associated with
electromagnetic or hadronic showers is about 50 times larger than 1 MIP signals. The detector
capacitances seen from the ASIC input are both estimated as ∼ 300 pF. A ﬁne spatial resolution is

– 2 –

also necessary for both detectors, and it results in a huge number of readout channels as a whole
detector system. We also need to take the operating temperatures into consideration.

Whereas the readout electronics can be operated at room temperature (RT) in the NIµ-TPC,
the front-end needs to be operated at ≈-185 ◦C for in the LArTPCs. This thermal constraint comes
from a practical issue that the analog front-end electronics must be located as close as possible to
the strip readout in order to minimize the detector capacitance.

To satisfy various requirements from both experiments, we have developed a series of readout
ASICs in a 180 nm CMOS technology. The circuits are designed on a function-block basis as
reusable components. In this paper, we report on the performance of a newly developed 16-channel
ASIC at RT and the functionality under the LAr temperature (LT) operation. We optimized the
transistor parameters of the previous prototype chip, taking special care in the layout to improve
low-noise characteristics [10]. One of the objectives of LTARS development was to generate cold-
electronics ’know-how’ and to clarify issues for future system-integration, e.g., operating methods
of the ASICs at LT, and geometrical constrains on readout systems for a huge number of channels.
We describe the ASIC design in Section 2, report on its performance at RT and LT in Sections 3 and
4, respectively, discuss our simulation methodology for cold-electronics and future developments
in Section 5, and conclude in Section 6.

2 Architecture of the ASIC

2.1 Circuit properties

The physical layout of the readout ASIC implemented in the Silterra 180 nm CMOS technology
is shown in Figure 2. Technological parameters and requirements for the ASIC are listed in
Table 1. The chip includes 16 identical signal processing channels. The block diagram of each
channel is shown in Figure 3. The TPC readout channel is connected to an input (AIN) of the
charge-sensitive ampliﬁer (CSA) by an oﬀ-chip capacitor, while test pulses can be injected via an
on-chip AC-coupling capacitor Ctp = 2 pF. The CSA is based on a folded-cascode conﬁguration
with a p-channel input transistor and a regulated-cascode conﬁguration is implemented to improve
the open-loop gain for large detector capacitances. A transfer-gate type FET is employed for the
CSA DC-feedback component. Two distinct feedback capacitors are implemented for dynamic
gain-switching by using a metal-insulator-metal structure. The feedback capacitor is initially set at
Cf, HG = 340 fF. This state corresponds to a high-gain (HG) mode and it copes with a narrow range
signal of < 80 fC. The CSA output is fed into a discriminator to select the gain mode. Once the
amplitude of the CSA exceeds a certain threshold, which is given by a 6-bit DAC, a discriminator
followed by an RS-type ﬂip-ﬂop latches the switch on the additional feedback capacitance. This
state functions as a low-gain mode (LG) with a capacitance value of Cf, LG = 6.22 pF. As a result,
the overall voltage gain is more than 10 times smaller than that in the HG mode. After reading out
the analog output (AOUT) and the gain information (COMP_FBIN), the reset signal (RST) supplied
externally releases the latched signal and the overall circuit returns to the idle state. The inﬂuence
of the switching noise on the noise performance is negligible compared to the large input signals
required to switch on the LG mode. The dynamic-switching behaviors have been demonstrated in
the prototype chip, and this unique property makes the chip multi-purpose, not only for LAr-TPCs
but also NI µTPCs [10].

– 3 –

A CR-RC band-pass ﬁlter is composed of a pole-zero cancellation circuit (PZC) and a second-
order integration low-pass ﬁlter. The capacitance and resistance values were selected to meet the
equation of Cf, HG · Rf = Cpz · Rpz, and C1 · R1 = 4 × C2 · R2 (see Fig. 3). The transfer functions in
the HG mode are described as [13]

·

(1 + sCpz · Rpz)
Rpz

,

TCSA = −Qin ·

TCR−RC = −

Ttotal = Qin ·

Rf
(1 + sCf, HG · Rf)
R1
(2sC2 · R2 + 1)2
Rf · R1
Rpz

·

,

1
(2sC2 · R2 + 1)2

,

(2.1)

where s denotes the complex angular frequency and Qin is the input charges. The default shaping-
time of the CR-RC ﬁlter is designed as 1 µs for the LArTPCs. This value can be switched to 4 µs
for NI µTPCs via a 9-bit control register. This register is equipped in each channel, while also
controlling the test pulse enable, monitor enable, and tuning voltage threshold. A reference current
is injected to the IBIAS node via a potentiometer inserted between the ground and supply power.
The current-mirror conﬁguration generates an internal bias current of 100 µA that provides the
proper bias current to each circuit block, e.g., 510 µA for the input FET in the CSA, at the current
step of 10 µA.

Figure 2. Physical layout of the readout ASIC. The chip size is 2.5 mm×5 mm.

3 Performance test results at room temperature

3.1 Experimental setup

The experimental setup and the dedicated printed circuit board (PCB) for performance testing are
show in Figure 4 left and right, respectively. The chip-mounted board (named SIRONEKO) shown

– 4 –

Table 1. Technological parameters and requirements to the ASIC.

Technology
Chip size
The number of channels
Supply power
Fabrication options

Detector type
Minimum signal charge
Shaping time
Operating condition
Detector capacitance (Cdet) a
Dynamic range
Voltage gain
ENC

Silterra 180 nm CMOS
2.5×5 mm2
16
1.8 V core/IO, max. 2.4 mW/ch
6 metals, deep N-well, high-value poly res., MIM cap.

NIµ-TPC
≈3 fC
4 µs
room temperature

LAr-TPC
≈10 fC
1 µs
-185 ◦C

∼300 pF
±80 fC for narrow range, ±1600 fC for wide range
10 mV/fC for narrow range, 0.5 mV/fC for wide range
3000 e− (S/N>20) for small signals, < 6.4 × 104 e− for large signals

a Estimated from the pad size of MPGDs.

AIN

TP

charge-sensitive amp.

VGG

Rf

M=1

AVDD

Vbp2

Id=1 uA

Id=40 uA

pole-zero cancellation
circuit
Rpz

M=4

C1

band-pass filter

R1

Slow

Ctp = 2 pF

Vbp1

VM

buf

Cpz =1.36  pF
Voffset

TPENB

Id=510 uA

Vbn

AVSS

Cf, HG=340 fF

R2

buf

buf

AOUT

C2

Slow

bias circuit

AVDD

5.88 pF

Cf, LG=6.22 pF

COMP_FBIN

IBIAS

RST

RS latch

Comp

6-bit DAC

Vth

100 uA

100 uA

POS

AVSS

Figure 3. Block diagram of the processing chain. Unlabeled substrates are connected to the supply powers.

on the left side of the right ﬁgure provides electrical connections between the ASIC. The semi-
custom FPGA board (named GoSHIK) is also shown on the right side. A bare die was directly
mounted on the PCB, and optical light was shielded during the measurements. The GoSHIK board
is an interface with a computer and provides the register control signals. This board includes
It
8-channel ADCs (AD9637) and 8-channel voltage/current DACs (LTC2656 and MAX5550).
provides a ﬂexible bias setting to the ASIC, along with an easy-to-use pattern generation from the
FPGA. We chose the Xilinx XC7A100T-2FGG676C [14], and data transfer is done via an Ethernet
cable with the SiTCP protocol [15]. Test pulses are generated by a function generator (AFG-21025).

– 5 –

Figure 4. (Left) Experimental setup at room temperature. (Right) Testboards of the ASIC.

3.2 Analog waveforms and dynamic range

We ﬁrst injected test pulses and checked the analog output with an oscilloscope. Figure 5 shows
the waveforms in the diﬀerent gain modes. The gain-switch and shaping time (1 µs) were ﬁxed
during the measurements. The waveforms were obtained without detector capacitance. Test pulses
are shown in blue, which correspond to input charges of -40 fC in the HG mode and -1000 fC in
the LG mode. The peaking times were measured as 1.2 µs and 1.0 µs, respectively. Although the
pole and zero in the transfer function TCSA are not cancelled out in the LG mode (see Eq. (2.1)), the
overshoot was negligible at the analog output. The diﬀerence of the peaking times is not a major
issue as long as the analog outputs are continuously sampled in parallel by ADCs, and the waveform
is reconstructed in oﬄine analysis.

HG

LG

Input = -40fC

Peaking Time
1.2 (cid:1)s

Input = -1000fC

Peaking Time
1.0 (cid:0)s

Figure 5. Analog outputs. The intervals on the vertical axis are 20 mV for input and 200 mV for output in
the HG mode, and 500 mV for input and output in the LG mode. The intervals on the horizontal axis are 4
µs. All measurements were performed under the condition of Cdet=0 pF.

The dynamic range of a typical channel is shown in Figure 6. Conversion gains were obtained
by ﬁtting a line through the minimum and maximum points of the required dynamic range. The
measured values were 10.0 mV/fC for positive and 10.7 mV/fC for negative polarity in the HG

– 6 –

mode, whereas in the LG mode, these values were 0.60 mV/fC and 0.65 mV/fC, respectively . The
lower panels show the residuals between the data and ﬁtting lines. Linearity is maintained with ±
10% integral nonlinearity up to ±100 fC in the HG mode, while that extends to ±1600 fC in the
LG mode. The gain variation between the 16 channels is shown in Figure 7. We conﬁrmed that the
variation is within 10%.

Figure 6. Dynamic ranges of a typical readout channel in diﬀerent gain modes. The lower panels show the
residual between the data and linear functions. The baseline is subtracted from the peak pulse height.

3.3 Equivalent noise charge

All the noise generated inside the ampliﬁer is calculated as a quantity that is then converted into an
equivalent noise charge (ENC), which is the noise generated at the input. The ENC is given by the
following formula:

ENC (electron) =

Vnoise,rms (mV)
Conversion gain(mV/fC) × 1.6 × 10−4(fC)

.

Figure 8 shows the detector capacitance Cdet versus the corresponding ENC values. For comparison,
the simulation result is overlaid in the ﬁgure. To improve the noise performance, on-chip ESD
protection diodes were not included in the analog inputs. The voltage noise is proportional to the
detector capacitance, and the ENC in the HG mode was measured as 2695±71 e− at Cdet = 300 pF.
By comparing our results with the simulation value of 2361 e−, we can conﬁrm that the performance

– 7 –

Figure 7. Gain variation in the HG mode.

is very close to the simulation value, although there is about 13% oﬀset at Cdet = 300 pF. Possible
causes of the noise oﬀset are the bonding wire and PCB trace capacitance due to the mounting of
the ASIC on the evaluation board and the ground bounce due to a single-supply conﬁguration, i.e.,
0/1.8 V. Based on these considerations, we expect to be able to improve the performance of the
ASIC in the next experiment and design. The ENC in the LG mode was measured as 37200 ±330
e− at Cdet = 300 pF with a noise slope of 5.41 e−/pF. Since the expected value is 36913 e−, we
concluded that the overall performance at RT are in agreement with the simulation models provided
by the vendor. Moreover, the measured value is lower than the requirement of 64000 e− in the LG
mode.

The typical ionization signal for 1 MIP in the LAr-TPC of 10 fC, corresponding to 94000e−,
is expected based on recent studies at the large LAr-TPC demonstrators [8]. The ENC of
2700 e−achieves S/N = 23, and thus, the ASIC performance is considered to have reached the
level of practical application if the RT performance can be kept at the LAr temperature. The data
processing architecture in LArTPCs to handle the analog outputs from all channels is currently
under discussion. Two options exist: either using external ADCs in parallel or on-chip ADCs
combined with sparse readout. Since the number of readout channels is expected to be O(105) for a
O(10 kt) detector, it is desirable to reduce the number of feedthrough lines running from the inside
to the outside of the LAr cryostat. From this perspective, we will consider a circuit that consists of
both analog and digital processing parts by optimizing the deep Nwell option of the current 180 nm
CMOS technology.

– 8 –

Figure 8. The equivalent noise charge (rms) as a function of detector capacitance. Data and simulation are
shown in red and blue, respectively.

4 Measurements at the LAr temperature

4.1 Experimental setup

Figure 9 shows the experimental setup operated at the LAr temperature of ≈-185 ◦C. Since the
feed-through terminal of the cryostat limits the number of cable connections, we chose direct
immersion of the electronics in a Dewar vessel ﬁlled with liquid argon. To avoid thermal stress on
the FPGA board, we separated the GoSHIK board from the ASIC, soaking only the SIRONEKO
board in liquid argon. Supply powers, test pulses, and monitor lines were directly connected with
ribbon cables. The bias voltages, which were tuned with trimmer potentiometers at RT, were also
provided by external power supplies. The direct immersion approach provides an easy-to-access
environment to the ASIC, although is subjects the ASIC and mounted components to harsh thermal
and mechanical stresses. In this experiment, the temperature can be reduced to that of liquid argon
instantaneously, removing any time restrictions.

4.2 Waveforms and dynamic range

In the LAr temperature, we conﬁrmed that the circuit could not be operated under the same bias
conditions as the RT environment. By optimizing the bias settings we succeeded in obtaining analog
outputs; however, the conversion gain decreased and the noise level severely deteriorated. Such
deterioration was not observed at RT in the Dewar. The baseline ﬂuctuation was about 120 mV,
while the peak height was about 530mV for an input charge of 40 fC. Compared with the RT
result, the gain decreased by about 40%. In order to specify the cause of this issue, we used the
time-averaging function of the oscilloscope and compared the waveforms at the RT and with the
simulation. The simulation methodology is discussed in the next section.

– 9 –

Figure 9. Experimental setup for the LAr temperature operation (left). Only the ASIC, i.e., the SIRONEKO
board, was directly immersed in the LAr (right).

Figure 10 shows the time-averaged waveforms at RT and the LAr temperatures with an input
charge of -40 fC and Cdet = 300 pF. Compared with the RT results, not only the conversion gain,
but also the peaking time was clearly aﬀected by the temperature; there was an increase of 60% in
the peaking time. The conversion gain at LT was determined to be 6.6 mV/fC, while the peaking
time was about 1.6 µs. This result was contrary to our expectations since the charge carrier mobility
in silicon generally increases with decreasing temperature, while the thermal noise decreases at the
same time in the LT environment. Figure 11 shows the dynamic range at the LAr temperature.

Figure 10. Time-averaged waveforms at RT and LT. Data and simulation are shown in red and blue,
respectively.

– 10 –

Figure 11. Comparison of the dynamic range in the HG mode with Cdet = 300 pF.

5 Possible cause of the Performance degradation and Simulation methodology for

cold-electronics

The analog performance at RT satisﬁed the requirements from the experiments, however, further
optimization of the circuits and devices is clearly necessary for operation of circuits immersed in
the LAr. In this section, we discuss possible causes of the performance degradation at LT and a
unique simulation methodology for reliable cold electronics.

The gain and peaking time of the analog output are related to the operating points of the
devices. It is generally known that the threshold voltage of the transistors increases as temperature
is reduced, with a similar shifting-magnitude for n- and p-channel transistors, e.g., approximately
1 mV/K [16]. The SPICE parameters are supported at -40◦C from the vendor; however, there are
hurdles to extending this model down to the LAr temperature. Instead of modifying the individual
transistor parameters, we attempt to utilize the body eﬀect by changing the substrate voltage. The
threshold voltage, Vth, of the transistor including the body eﬀect is described with the Fermi potential
of bulk silicon ΦF with respect to the intrinsic Fermi level as

Vth = Vth0 + γ(p|2ΦF + VSB| − p|2ΦF|),

(5.1)

where Vth0 is the threshold voltage of the transistor at RT, VSB is the source-bulk potential diﬀerence,
and γ is the body eﬀect coeﬃcient which typically lies in the range of 0.3 to 0.4 V1/2 [17]. Thus,
it is possible to mimic the threshold voltages at LT, simply by changing VSB without considering
process-dependent parameters.
In the actual simulation, we separated the substrate nodes from
the source voltages, applying the negative values from the source voltage VBS,n for n-channels and
positive values of VBS,p for p-channels (see Fig. 13 as a schematic example).

– 11 –

The simulated waveforms with various VSB are shown in the left of Figure 12. The top and
bottom panels respectively show the outputs of the CSA and band-pass ﬁlter. As VSB increases, the
baselines at the CSA and band-pass ﬁlter outputs linearly shift from the RT condition, while the
the rising edge of the CSA simultaneously becomes slower. On the other hand, the peaking time
becomes longer and pulse height becomes lower. The threshold shift is estimated as 200 mV if we
assume the LAr temperatures, and thus, the corresponding VSB is 0.88–1.35 V. Here we assumed
2ΦF =0.8–0.9, and is temperature independent in this technology. We overlaid the simulation
result of VSB = 1.2 V in Fig. 10. For direct comparison, we optimized oﬀsets in the baseline and
peaking-times. While the gain and peaking-time shifts are close to the measurements, the overall
breadth of the measurement at LT is wider than that of the simulation. Although there is still room
for bias tuning, this is plausibly caused by a unity-gain buﬀer implemented on the PCB board.

The cause of the waveform shift was found to be due to the linear decrease of the transconduc-
tance gm of the input FET. The right of Figure 12 shows gm as a function of VSB. The rise time of
the CSA (tr,CSA) is given as

tr,CSA = Cdet
gm

+ CL

µ0 · gm

,

(5.2)

Cf
Cf + Cdet

where µ0 =
and CL is the load capacitance at the CSA output. We can see that the rise
time of the CSA becomes larger as gm decreases. The peaking time and pulse height of the ﬁlter
can be explained as a consequence of the slow rising edge of the CSA. The decrease of gm occurs
due to the decrease of the internal bias current, which ﬂows 100 µA at RT . The right side of Fig. 12
shows the internal bias current as a function of VSB. As described in Section 2, we used a diode- and
current mirror- conﬁgurations as a bias generator. However, even if the IBIAS node is connected to
the supply power, the internal current deviates as temperature decreases due to the higher threshold
voltage in the simple diode-conﬁguration. As a result, the nominal 510 µA for the input FET is not
provided properly, and consequently, the gm deteriorates as temperature decreases.

To reduce the threshold shift at the LAr temperature, we considered two approaches. The ﬁrst
is to apply a forward bias voltage, e.g., 0.5 V, to the source substrate junction. The resulting forward
current might be negligible at low temperature because of the decrease in the intrinsic carrier
concentration. This approach requires additional power supplies for substrate biasing, however, it is
easier to tune the bias current externally. The second approach uses a feedback-based current circuit
proposed in [18]. Figure 13 shows a schematic of such bias circuit, based on the beta-multiplier.
The addition of the resistor kills the closed loop gain, and the positive feedback system can be stable
as long as its closed loop gain is less than one. The bottleneck of the circuit is that the gain of
the loop increases as the size of resistor decreases. This pushes the feedback system closer to the
instability. If the resistor, for example, is bonded out oﬀ-chip to set the current, it is likely that this
bias circuit will oscillate, and thus, the circuit is basically self-biased with an on-chip resistor. For
comparison, current output as a function of VSB is overlaid in the right of Fig. 12 in a dashed line.
We can see that the internal 100 µA is stably provided by this circuit.

6 Conclusion

We have newly developed the TPC readout chip in the 180 nm CMOS technology. The front-end
ASIC is targeted at dual-phase LAr-TPCs for neutrino experiments and NI µ-TPC for directional

– 12 –

Figure 12. (Left): Simulation waveforms (top: CSA, bottom: shaper) with a typical process corner and
diﬀerent VSB values. The injected charge is 40 fC in the HG mode. The baseline oﬀset is also caused by the
threshold shift. (Right): the transconductance of the input transistor (top) and internal reference bias current
(bottom) as a function of VSB.

VBS,p

VBS,p

VBS,p

VBS,p

AVDD

VBIAS2

VBS,p

VBS,p

VBS,p

VBS,p

20/10

VBS,p

VBS,p

10/20

VBS,n

VBS,n
10/1

VBS,n

VBS,n

VBS,n

VBS,n
10/10

VBS,n

5.2 k

AVSS

Unlabeled NMOS are W/L=50/2, and
unlabeled PMOS are W/L=100/2 in unit of 180 nm.

VBS,p
M = 10

M = 10

100 uA

100 uA
VBS,n
M = 10

VBIAS1

VBIAS2

VBIAS3

VBIAS4

VBS,n

VBS,n

VBS,n

M = 10

Figure 13. Schematic of the improved bias circuit based on the beta-multiplier [18]. All substrate biases are
separated from supply powers for the body-eﬀect simulation.

– 13 –

dark matter searches. We optimized the transistor parameters of the previous prototype chip, taking
care in the layout for low-noise performance. The ENC reached 2695±71 e− (rms) for a 300 pF
detector capacitance with a noise slope of 3.09 e−/pF at RT. The dynamic range and shaping times
also satisfy the experimental requirements. In the LAr temperature testing, we have acquired the
analog waveforms from the ASIC, however, the noise level unexpectedly deteriorated with a longer
shaping time. By comparing our results with the SPICE simulation, this issue was found to be
caused by threshold voltage shifts of the transistors at LT. This work describes a unique simulation
methodology for reliable cold electronics, which utilizes the body eﬀect to mimic the threshold
shifts. This method can be applicable to general cold electronics designs.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by KAKENHI Grant-in-Aids (16H02189, 26104005, 17H01134, 18K03684,
19H05806), JSPS Bilateral Collaborations (Joint Research Projects and Seminars) program.

References

[1] T. Ikeda, et al., Results of a directional dark matter search from the NEWAGE experiment, J. Phys.:

Conf. vol. 1468 (2020) 012042.

[2] K. Miuchi, et al., CYGNUS, J. Phys.: Conf. vol. 1468 (2020) 012044.

[3] A. Badertscher, T. Hasegawa, T. Kobayashi, A. Marchionni, A. Meregaglia, T. Maruyama,

K. Nishikawa and A. Rubbia, A Possible Future Long Baseline Neutrino and Nucleon Decay
Experiment with a 100 kton Liquid Argon TPC at Okinoshima using the J-PARC Neutrino Facility,
arXiv:0804.2111 [hep-ph], DUNE collaboration, R. Acciarri et al., Long-Baseline Neutrino Facility
(LBNF) and Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE), arXiv:1601.02984.

[4] T. Tanimori et al., Detecting the WIMP-wind via spin-dependent interactions, Phys. Lett. B vol. 578

(2004) pg. 241–246.

[5] F. Mayet et al., A review of the discovery reach of directional Dark Matter detection, Phys. Rept vol.

627 (2016) pg. 1–49.

[6] D.P. Snowden-Iﬀt, Rev. Sci. Instrum. vol. 85 (2014) 013303.

[7] T. Ikeda, submitted for JINST arXiv:2004.09706.

[8] I. De Bonis, et al., Technical Design Report for large-scale neutrino detectors prototyping and phased
performance assessment in view of a long-baseline oscillation experiment, Tech. Rep. CERN-SPSC-
2014-013. SPSC-TDR-004 (Apr 2014). URL https://cds.cern.ch/record/1692375 .

[9] A. Badertscher, L. Knecht, M. Laﬀranchi, A. Marchionni, G. Natterer, P. Otiougova et al.,

Construction and operation of a Double Phase LAr Large Electron Multiplier Time Projection
Chamber, in Proceedings of the Nuclear Science Symposium, Medical Imaging Conference and 16th
International Workshop on Room-Temperature Semiconductor X-Ray and Gamma-Ray Detectors
(NSS/MIC 2008/RTSD 2008), Dresden, Germany, 19–25 October 2008, pp. 1328–1334,
arXiv:0811.3384.

[10] M. Nakazawa et al., “Prototype Analog Front-end for Negative-ion Gas and Dual-phase Liquid-Ar

TPCs”, Jour. Instr., vol. 14, T01008, 2019.

– 14 –

[11] K. Miuchi, Performance of the TPC with Micro Pixel Chamber Readout: micro-TPC,

IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. vol. 50 (2003) pg. 825–830.

[12] Y. Giomataris, Ph. Rebourgeard, J.P. Robert, and G. Charpak, MICROMEGAS: a high-granularity

position-sensitive gaseous detector for high particle-ﬂux environments,
Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A vol. A376 (1996) pg. 29–35.

[13] G. De Geronimo et al., ‘‘Front-end electronics for imaging detectors”,
Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A vol. A471 (2001) pg. 192–199.

[14] https://www.xilinx.com/products/silicon-devices/fpga/artix-7.html.

[15] T. Uchida, “Hardware-Based TCP Processor for Gigabit Ethernet”, IEEE TNS. 55, 3 (2008).

[16] W. F. Clark et al., Low Temperature CMOS–A Brief Review, IEEE trans. compon. hybrids mauf.

technol., vol. 15 (1992) pg. 397–404.

[17] B. Razavi, Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits, McGrawHill.

[18] R. J. Baker, CMOS Circuit Design, Layout, and Simulation, Wiley.

– 15 –

