Adapting Usability Heuristics to the Context of Mobile
Augmented Reality

Audrey Labrie
Polytechnique Montréal
Montréal, Québec, Canada
audrey.labrie@polymtl.ca

Jinghui Cheng
Polytechnique Montréal
Montréal, Québec, Canada
jinghui.cheng@polymtl.ca

0
2
0
2

g
u
A
7

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
7
1
3
0
.
8
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Augmented reality (AR) is an emerging technology in mobile
app design during recent years. However, usability challenges
in these apps are prominent. There are currently no established
guidelines for designing and evaluating interactions in AR as
there are in traditional user interfaces. In this work, we aimed
to examine the usability of current mobile AR applications
and interpreting classic usability heuristics in the context of
mobile AR. Particularly, we focused on AR home design apps
because of their popularity and ability to incorporate important
mobile AR interaction schemas. Our ﬁndings indicated that
it is important for the designers to consider the unfamiliarity
of AR technology to the vast users and to take technological
limitations into consideration when designing mobile AR apps.
Our work serves as a ﬁrst step for establishing more general
heuristics and guidelines for mobile AR.

INTRODUCTION
Mobile augmented reality (AR) is gaining an increasing at-
tention and started to break into the mass market due to the
availability of the technology on major mobile platforms (e.g.
iOS and Android). Although an increasing number of users
are discovering mobile AR, there are no commonly accepted
guidelines or heuristics to support the designers of this type of
applications to create an optimized user experience [1]. We
aim to address this challenge by identifying these guidelines
and heuristics from the evaluation of the existing commercial-
off-the-shelf applications. As a ﬁrst step towards this goal, we
examine how Jakob Nielsen’s Usability Heuristics [2], a set
of widely-known heuristics for general applications, can be
applied to the context of mobile AR design.

Particularly, we conducted a case study on AR home design
apps. We chose this application domain because, from our
preliminary investigation of mobile AR applications, home
design is a domain where a lot of commercial-off-the-shelf
apps are available and are created by professional companies.
Additionally, this type of applications has common patterns of
interactions that are important in most mobile AR applications
(i.e. placing and manipulating virtual objects in a scene) [5].

This is the pre-print for a poster paper accepted to UIST ’20

Finally, the design and evaluation of AR home design apps is
an active research direction. For example, Park et al. [4, 3]
developed a questionnaire, based on usability analysis guide-
lines [7] and the usability principles [1], for evaluating an AR
home design application. Viyanon et al. [6] also created a
questionnaire based on Nielsen’s deﬁnition of usability.

This paper situates in these related studies and focuses on
interpreting and adapting Nielsen’s heuristics in the AR home
design context. Through this effort, we provide a ﬁrst step
towards the interpretation of Nielsen’s usability heuristics for
mobile AR applications, as well as the creation of specialized
guidelines and heuristics for mobile AR application design.

METHODS
To select a set of apps for analysis, we ﬁrst used the search
string "augmented reality home design" in the Apple App
Store and found 14 apps. To narrow down our selection, we
excluded those that did not update within a month to focus on
the active projects. Additionally, we added one other app (i.e.
Sayduck) because it had unique features. The apps selected
this way were: IKEA Place, Houzz Home Design Renovation,
Interior Deﬁne AR, Stresslesshome, Graham Brown Design
Renovation, and Sayduck. The common goal of the AR home
design apps is to enable the user to view virtual objects (e.g.
furniture, wallpapers, and tiles) in a physical environment to
get a sense of how it would look in real life.

After selection of the mobile applications, we analyzed each
apps by answering thoroughly the following questions: (Q1)
How can users interact with the AR objects? (Q2) What kind
of information is presented on the mobile screen and how?
(Q3) What aspects of the app are well designed? (Q4) What
are the prominent usability issues? The two authors ﬁrst inde-
pendently reviewed the two most popular apps (IKEA Place
and Houzz Home Design) and discussed their ﬁndings. Then,
we collaboratively mapped each feature and issue identiﬁed in
those questions to the Nielsen’s 10 Usability Heuristics. This
served as a groundwork to the ﬁrst draft of interpretation of
Nielsen’s heuristics in AR home design apps. The other apps
were reviewed using the same process and the interpretation
of the heuristics were modiﬁed iteratively.

RESULTS
The following interpretation of Nielsen’s heuristics is based
on both the usability issues and the well-designed features
identiﬁed in the analyzed AR home design apps.

Visibility of system status. The system should keep the user
informed during the interaction. When scanning surfaces,

 
 
 
 
 
 
for example, the user should be informed when the physical
surfaces are difﬁcult to detect (e.g., too reﬂective or too dark).
After successful surface detection, the system should notify
the user that the object can be placed. If it takes time to load
an object, the system should inform the user.

Match between system and the real world. Virtual objects
should appear and behave as realistically as possible. Their
sizes should be proportional to the physical environment and
they should be ﬁxed to surfaces, as it is in the real world.
Objects should not overlap with each other, i.e., collisions
between objects should be detected by the system.

User control and freedom. It is possible that the user places
a virtual object in an unwanted location, or selects, deletes or
rotates the object by mistake. Therefore, the system should
support undo and redo and it should conﬁrm with the user
when deletion is selected.

Consistency and standards. Gestures used to translate and
rotate an object should be intuitive. It is particularly important
to indicate to the user how the object can be manipulated. If
adjusting the height is required for an object, it should be
done by an extra UI component (e.g. a vertical slider) because
directly moving the object on the vertical dimension can be
easily confused with object translation.

Error prevention. Possible errors include placing or deletion
of an object by mistake. For these error-prone actions that can
lead to consequences and inconveniences, the system should
ask for conﬁrmation. If the user does not conﬁrm, it would
return the object to its original location.

Recognition rather than recall. Possible actions regarding
interaction with virtual objects should be always visible. When
adding an object to the scene, to avoid recall (i.e. remembering
what object is to be added), the system should display an image
of the selected object. When an object is selected, all possible
actions should be shown on the screen (e.g. undo/redo, delete,
change color); useful gestures for translating and rotating the
object should also be indicated. When no object is selected,
the system should show the possible actions related to the
entire scene (e.g. take a photo, favorites, reset scene).

Flexibility and efﬁciency of use. Regarding frequent actions,
the system should allow the user to place several objects on
the same scene at the same time. Regarding accelerator, the
presence of additional information about objects such as mea-
surements, physical front, material, and price would be helpful.
If it is technologically possible, objects should be automati-
cally snapped to a physical corner, which would reduce the
number of actions needed by the user.

Aesthetic and minimalist design. The system should not show
irrelevant or rarely used information to the user. Extra informa-
tion could be shown when the user makes the corresponding
selection. Examples of the common relevant information dur-
ing the different stages of interaction are: (1) when placing
an object, there should be a placement shape indicating the
position and the size of the object; and (2) when selecting
an object, an indicator of selection and options for object
operations should be displayed.

Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors. Help
for error recovery is important. For example, the moment
the system has trouble detecting surfaces, the user should be
informed of the reason and help the user correct the error. If
the user is moving a virtual object on an undetected surface,
the user should have the option to re-activate surface detection.

Help and documentation. Such a system usually should not
have explicit documentation because it should be intuitive to
use. However, they should have a brief tutorial for ﬁrst time
users. Particularly, surface detection is an action that most
users are not familiar with. So there should be a brief tutorial
and explicit indication telling the user how to detect surfaces.
The possibility of translating and rotating the objects should
also be clearly communicated to the user.

DISCUSSION
One of our prominent ﬁndings is that many usability issues
in AR home design apps are associated with the current lim-
itations of AR technology. For example, one of the most
problematic aspects of these apps is the incorrectness or in-
ability to detect surfaces. These technological limitations can
affect usability. For example, if a surface is too dark to be
detected and the system does not tell the user, the user will
only be left wondering why surface detection is taking a long
time and not working. Therefore, when developing an AR
mobile app, identifying technological limitations and taking
them into consideration during the design process is critical.

Further, because mobile AR is still an emerging technology,
most AR app users should be considered as novices. For
these users, several actions such as surface detection or object
manipulation (i.e. interactions with virtual 3D objects on a
2D space) can be confusing. Therefore, it is important to
show the users how to use the technology and how to interact
with the objects with gestures. One solution could be to show
animation gestures during the ﬁrst time of use. Also, confusing
interactions need to be avoided. For example, there should be
two different types of interactions for adjusting the height of
an object and vertical translation (moves the object closer or
further from the user) because intuitively, the gesture for both
actions would be swiping up and down.

As previously mentioned, the mapping to Nielsen’s heuristics
is speciﬁc to AR mobile home design apps and they could be
used to establish more general heuristics and guidelines about
mobile AR design. To evaluate their validity, more analysis
on other applications is needed and a user study where UX
designers use the heuristics to design or evaluate AR home
design interfaces could be done in future work.

CONCLUSION
In this study, we focused on interpreting Nielsen’s 10 Us-
ability Heuristics in the context of AR home design mobile
applications. To do this, we evaluated six AR home design
apps available on the Apple App Store to identify their well-
designed features and usability issues to map them to Nielsen’s
heuristics. This effort serves as a ﬁrst step in establishing more
full-ﬂedged heuristics and guidelines for the design of mobile
AR apps.

REFERENCES
[1] Andreas Dünser, Raphaël Grasset, Hartmut Seichter,

and Mark Billinghurst. 2007. Applying HCI principles
to AR systems design. (2007).

[2] Jakob Nielsen and Rolf Molich. 1990. Heuristic

Evaluation of User Interfaces. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI â ˘A ´Z90). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 249â ˘A ¸S256. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/97243.97281

[3] Jinwoo Park, Sung Sil Kim, Hyerim Park, and Woontack

Woo. 2016. â ˘AIJDreamHouseâ ˘A˙I: NUI-Based
Photo-Realistic AR Authoring System for Interior
Design. In Proceedings of the 7th Augmented Human
International Conference 2016 (AH â ˘A ´Z16). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article
Article 14, 7 pages. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2875194.2875221

[4] Y. J. Park, Y. Yang, S. Chae, I. Kim, and T. Han. 2017.
DesignAR: Portable projection-based AR system
specialized in interior design. In 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics (SMC). 2879–2884. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SMC.2017.8123064

[5] S. Sharma, Y. Kaikini, P. Bhodia, and S. Vaidya. 2018.
Markerless Augmented Reality based Interior Designing
System. In 2018 International Conference on Smart City
and Emerging Technology (ICSCET). 1–5. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICSCET.2018.8537349

[6] Waraporn Viyanon, Thanadon Songsuittipong,

Phattarika Piyapaisarn, and Suwanun Sudchid. 2017.
AR Furniture: Integrating Augmented Reality
Technology to Enhance Interior Design Using Marker
and Markerless Tracking. In Proceedings of the 2nd
International Conference on Intelligent Information
Processing (IIPâ ˘A ´Z17). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article Article 32, 7
pages. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3144789.3144825

[7] Beth F. Wheeler Atkinson, Troy O. Bennett, G. Susanne

Bahr, and Melissa M. Walwanis Nelson. 2007.
Development of a Multiple Heuristics Evaluation Table
(MHET) to Support Software Development and
Usability Analysis. In Universal Acess in Human
Computer Interaction. Coping with Diversity,
Constantine Stephanidis (Ed.). Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 563–572.

