0
2
0
2

p
e
S
4
1

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
9
0
1
1
1
.
9
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Draft version September 24, 2020
Typeset using LATEX modern style in AASTeX62

Magnetohydrodynamic Simulation of Magnetic Null-point Reconnections and
Coronal dimmings during the X2.1 ﬂare in NOAA AR 11283
Avijeet Prasad,1 Karin Dissauer,2, 3 Qiang Hu,1, 4 R. Bhattacharyya,5
Astrid M. Veronig,2, 6 Sanjay Kumar,7 and Bhuwan Joshi5

1Center for Space Plasma & Aeronomic Research, The University of Alabama in Huntsville,
Huntsville, Alabama 35899, USA
2Institute of Physics, University of Graz, 8010 Graz, Universit¨atsplatz 5, Austria
3NorthWest Research Associates Inc, 3380 Mitchell Ln, Boulder, Colorado 80301, USA
4Department of Space Science, The University of Alabama in Huntsville, Huntsville, AL 35899, USA
5Udaipur Solar Observatory, Physical Research Laboratory, Dewali, Bari Road, Udaipur 313001,
India
6Kanzelh¨ohe Observatory for Solar and Environmental Research, University of Graz, 9521 Treﬀen,
Austria
7Post Graduate Department of Physics, Patna University, Patna 800005, India

ABSTRACT

The magnetohydrodynamics of active region NOAA 11283 is simulated using an
initial non-force-free magnetic ﬁeld extrapolated from its photospheric vector mag-
netogram. We focus on the magnetic reconnections at a magnetic null point that
participated in the X2.1 ﬂare on 2011 September 6 around 22:21 UT (SOL2011-
09-06T22:21X2.1) followed by the appearance of circular ﬂare ribbons and coronal
dimmings. The initial magnetic ﬁeld from extrapolation displays a three-dimensional
(3D) null topology overlying a sheared arcade. Prior to the ﬂare, magnetic loops rise
due to the initial Lorentz force, and reconnect at the 3D null, leading to expansion
and loss of conﬁned plasma that produce the observed pre-ﬂare coronal dimmings.
Further, the simulated dynamics documents the transfer of twist from the arcade to
the overlying loops through reconnections, developing a ﬂux rope. The non-parallel
ﬁeld lines comprising the rope and lower-lying arcades form an X-type geometry. Im-
portantly, the simultaneous reconnections at the 3D null and the X-type geometry
can explain the observed circular and parallel ﬂare ribbons. Reconnections at the 3D
null transform closed inner spine ﬁeld lines into open ﬁeld lines of the outer spine.
The footpoints of these open ﬁeld lines correspond to a ring-shaped coronal dimming
region, tracing the dome. Further, the ﬂux rope bifurcates because of these reconnec-
tions which also results in the generation of open magnetic ﬁeld lines. The plasma
loss along the open ﬁeld lines can potentially explain the observed coronal dimming.

Corresponding author: Avijeet Prasad, Karin Dissauer
ap0162@uah.edu, karin.dissauer@uni-graz.at

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Prasad et al.

Keywords: magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) – Sun: activity – Sun: corona – Sun:

ﬂares – Sun: magnetic ﬁelds – Sun: photosphere

1. INTRODUCTION

The solar corona can be treated as a magnetized plasma having a large electrical
conductivity with its evolution being governed by the magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
equations (Priest 2014). The magnetic Reynolds number RM (vL/η, in usual nota-
tions) for the corona is of the order of 1010 (Aschwanden 2004). Under such conditions,
the Alfv´en’s theorem of ﬂux freezing is valid, which ensures that the plasma-parcels
remain tied to the magnetic ﬁeld lines (MFLs) during their evolution (Alfv´en 1942).
Eruptive events occurring in the corona like solar ﬂares and coronal mass ejections
(CMEs) are thought to be signatures of magnetic reconnection: a process involving
topological rearrangement of MFLs with conversion of magnetic energy into heat and
kinetic energy of mass motion (Shibata & Magara 2011). Notably, the requirement to
onset magnetic reconnections is small RM which corresponds to small L, the length
scale over which the magnetic ﬁeld varies. The smallness of L can either be pre-
existing in a magnetic topology, manifested as magnetic nulls and quasi-separatrix
layers (QSLs), or can develop autonomously during the evolution of the magnetoﬂuid.
Such autonomous developments (owing to discontinuities in magnetic ﬁeld) are ex-
pected from Parker’s magnetostatic theorem (Parker 1972, 1988, 1994). The reduction
of L and the consequent spontaneous magnetic reconnections during a quasi-static
evolution of the plasma under a near-precise maintenance of the ﬂux-freezing have
been identiﬁed in contemporary MHD simulations performed with initial analytically
constructed magnetic ﬁelds (Kumar et al. 2015a; Kumar & Bhattacharyya 2016; Ku-
mar et al. 2016).

Typically, the coronal magnetic ﬁeld is extrapolated from the photospheric magnetic
ﬁeld observations because of a lack of accurate direct magnetic ﬁeld measurements
in the corona.
In recent years, the nonlinear-force-free-ﬁelds (NLFFFs) has been
widely used for these extrapolations by the solar community (e.g. Wiegelmann 2008;
Wiegelmann & Sakurai 2012; Duan et al. 2017). Recent MHD simulations based on
NLFFF extrapolations were successful in simulating the coronal dynamics leading
to eruptions (Jiang et al. 2013; Kliem et al. 2013; Amari et al. 2014; Inoue et al.
2014, 2015; Savcheva et al. 2015, 2016; Inoue 2016). However, the use of NLFFF
extrapolations has a serious limitation, that in the solar photosphere, where the vector
magnetograms are taken, the plasma beta is of the order of unity (Gary 2001), so
that the Lorentz force is non-negligible. Generally, to mitigate this problem within
the framework of NLFFF, a technique called ‘preprocessing’ is often performed on
the photospheric data which minimizes the Lorentz force in the vector magnetograms
and provides a boundary condition suitable for NLFFF extrapolations (Wiegelmann
et al. 2006; Jiang & Feng 2014).

MHD simulations of AR 11283

3

A novel alternative to NLFFF is the extrapolation using non-force-free-ﬁelds
(NFFFs), which are described by the double-curl Beltrami equation for the mag-
netic ﬁeld B, derived from a variational principle of the minimum energy dissipation
rate (Bhattacharyya et al. 2007). The equation was ﬁrst solved analytically to obtain
MFLs resembling coronal loops (Bhattacharyya et al. 2007; Kumar & Bhattacharyya
2011). In a previous study, a semi-analytical construction based on maximizing corre-
lations of non-axisymmetric NFFFs with photospheric vector magnetograms of NOAA
AR 11283 successfully mimicked the event of ﬁlament bifurcation by tracking the
MHD evolution of a pre-existing ﬂux rope (Prasad & Bhattacharyya 2016; Prasad
et al. 2017). However, missing from the simulations were the small-scale magnetic
features and their inﬂuence on the MFL dynamics–which cannot be captured by
analytical/semi-analytical models. A numerical NFFF extrapolation model devel-
oped by Hu & Dasgupta (2008); Hu et al. (2008); Gary (2009); Hu et al. (2010)
was used to initialize the MHD evolution of NOAA AR 12192 using the HMI vector
magnetogram taken approximately 30 minutes prior to a conﬁned X3.1 ﬂare (Prasad
et al. 2018). Another NFFF initiated simulation, for the case of a blowout jet event
was recently studied in Nayak et al. (2019).

In this study we continue our numerical studies of ﬂaring active regions (ARs)
which are initiated by NFFF with a novel focus on coronal dimmings, which are
temporary regions of strongly reduced coronal emission in EUV and soft X-rays that
form in the wake of CMEs (e.g. Hudson et al. 1996; Sterling & Hudson 1997; Zarro
et al. 1999; Thompson et al. 2000).
In general, their formation is interpreted as
density depletion due to the expansion and expulsion of plasma during the early
CME evolution (e.g. Hudson et al. 1996; Harrison & Lyons 2000; Veronig et al. 2019).
Recently, distinct statistical relationships between decisive dimming parameters and
CME and ﬂare quantities were derived (Dissauer et al. 2018b, 2019). Using a newly
developed detection algorithm, so far not resolved ﬁne structure within the dimming
region could be identiﬁed for the ﬁrst time (Dissauer et al. 2018a). Both aspects verify
the importance of coronal dimmings in the early diagnostics of solar eruptions. In
order to exploit this potential further, in this paper, we analyze the X2.1 ﬂare/CME
event on 2011 September 6 by combining extreme-ultraviolet (EUV) observations of
coronal dimmings and the associated ﬂare with MHD simulations using an intital
NFFF extrapolated ﬁeld.

Several aspects of this event have been studied already in literature, including both
observational and modeling eﬀorts (e.g. Petrie 2012; Feng et al. 2013; Yang et al.
2014; Romano et al. 2015; Janvier et al. 2016; Dissauer et al. 2016; Jiang et al. 2013,
2014, 2016, 2018; Vanninathan et al. 2018). For example, Feng et al. (2013) esti-
mated the magnetic energy partition between the ﬂare and CME. They concluded
that, within the uncertainties, both the ﬂare and the CME might have consumed free
energy of around 6.5 × 1031 erg. Janvier et al. (2016) studied the morphology and
time evolution of photosperic traces of current density and ﬂare ribbons, and com-

4

Prasad et al.

pared it with the topological features found by NLFFF modeling. They identiﬁed a
spine-fan conﬁguration of the overlying ﬁeld lines, due to the presence of a parasitic
positive polarity, embedding a ﬂux rope. In a series of papers on this AR, Jiang et al.
(2013, 2014, 2016, 2018) also have explored the dynamical evolution of this region
through diﬀerent MHD simulations.
In their latest study, Jiang et al. (2018) dis-
cuss the complex sigmoid eruption in the active region characterized by a multipolar
conﬁguration embedding a null-point topology and a sigmoidal magnetic ﬂux rope.
Based on EUV observations and MHD simulations, they suggest that a three-stage
magnetic reconnection scenario might explain this complex ﬂare event.

In the present paper we aim to use the dynamics, location, and intensity distribu-
tion of coronal dimmings together with additional observational information of the
associated ﬂare and CME (e.g. signatures of ﬂare ribbons, a hot sigmoid, the ﬂux
rope eruption etc.) as guidance for the non-force-free magnetic ﬁeld modeling and
MHD simulations of the X2.1 ﬂare/CME/dimming event on 2011 September 6 in
order to understand this complex eruption in more detail. The paper is organized
as follows: Section 2 summarizes the data used in this study and Section 3 gives
a detailed observational overview of the event and the associated coronal dimming
evolution. In Section 4, we present the details of the initial non-force-free extrapo-
lated ﬁeld. The MHD model is discussed in Section 5 along with the results of the
simulation and their comparison to the observations. Section 6 summarizes our most
important ﬁndings.

2. DATA AND PRE-PROCESSING

We use high-cadence (12 s) data from six diﬀerent ultraviolet and extreme-
ultraviolet wavelengths of the Atmospheric Imaging Assembly (AIA; Lemen et al.
2012) on board the Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO; Pesnell et al. 2012) covering
a temperature range of about 104 to 107 K. The 171 and 211 ˚A channels represent
plasma at quiet Sun temperatures (0.6–2 MK), while 335 and 94 ˚A are sensitive to hot
plasma of active regions and ﬂares (up to 6 MK). The temperature response function
of the 304 ˚A ﬁlter peaks at ≈ 50,000 K and plasma at this temperature is likely to
origin from the transition region and chromosphere. The ultraviolet 1600 ˚A ﬁlter is
sensitive to plasma at ≈ 10,000 K and resolves structures of the upper photosphere
and transition region.

In order to generate suitable extrapolated coronal magnetic ﬁeld, the photospheric
vector magnetogram of AR 11283 is obtained from the Helioseismic Magnetic Imager
(HMI; Schou et al. 2012) on board SDO at 22:00 UT on 2011 September 6. The
magnetogram is taken from the ‘hmi.b 720s’ data series that provides full-disk vec-
tor magnetograms of the Sun with a temporal cadence of 12 minutes and a spatial
resolution of 0(cid:48)(cid:48).5. The ﬁeld of view was chosen from the full-disk magnetogram to
ensure that all coronal dimming regions are located within the computational do-
main. In order to obtain the magnetic ﬁeld on a Cartesian grid, the magnetogram is

MHD simulations of AR 11283

5

initially remapped onto a Lambert cylindrical equal-area (CEA) projection and then
transformed into heliographic coordinates (Gary & Hagyard 1990). This results in a
ﬁeld of view of 1024×800 pixels centered at 226.00° and 17.00° Carrington longitude
and latitude, respectively. To adequately compare simulation results with observa-
tions, SDO/AIA ﬁltergrams are also CEA projected, remapped to the same spatial
resolution as the magnetic ﬁeld data and the same ﬁeld of view is used.

3. EVENT EVOLUTION AND OBSERVATIONS

AR 11283 was a very ﬂare-productive region which produced many ﬂares and
CMEs during its disk passage (Romano et al. 2015). The selected X2.1 ﬂare in
AR 11283 occurred on 2011 September 6 close to the disk center at heliographic
position N14°W18° (SOL2011-09-06T22:21X2.1). It was associated with a fast halo
CME with a speed of v = 990 km/s (as derived from lateral view by the STEREO-A
coronagraphs), a fast EUV wave, a type II burst, and pronounced coronal dimmings
(Dissauer et al. 2016; Vanninathan et al. 2018). The impulsive phase of the ﬂare
started at 22:12 UT and reached its peak around 22:21 UT as evident from the top
panel of Figure 1 which shows the GOES soft X-ray ﬂux in the 1–8 ˚A band together
with the RHESSI hard X-ray emission in several energy bands from 6–300 keV. We
use observations of SDO/AIA to outline important observational features that oc-
curred during this event. The bottom panels of Figure 1 present an observational
overview of the event including the formation of the ﬂux rope (associated with ﬁla-
ment 1), the initiation of the ﬂare, the evolution of the main circular and remote ﬂare
ribbons, and ﬁnally the ﬂux rope eruption. The formation and time evolution of the
associated coronal dimming regions in SDO/AIA 211 ˚A are shown in Figure 2.

Figure 1(a–c) show ﬁltergrams in SDO/AIA 171, 304, and 94 ˚A illustrating the
pre-ﬂare conditions in the corona and the chromosphere. Figure 1(a) outlines the
connectivities of the overlying loops, joining the diﬀerent polarities involved later in
the eruption. Two ﬁlaments, ﬁlament 1 (f1) and ﬁlament 2 (f2) could be identiﬁed
prior to the ﬂare (indicated by the white arrows in panel b). The ﬁlament f1, which is
also the ﬁrst one that erupts, is located along the main polarity inversion line (PIL)
that is involved in the X2.1 ﬂare/eruption and extends in the east-west direction.
Filament f2 is located north of the initial ﬂare site and, like f1, oriented in the east-
west direction but slightly bent towards south.

Around 22:00 UT, the signature of a hot sigmoid is observed, which is co-spatial with
ﬁlament 1 (see Figure 1(c)). During this interval, we also note a small enhancement
in the soft X-ray light curves (Figure 1(top panel)). From the composite image of
SDO/AIA 304 (red channel) and 94 ˚A (blue channel) in Figure 1(d), the hot sigmoid
appears to be growing with time and localized brightenings are observed, leading to
the growth of the original ﬂux rope. Until 22:11 UT, ongoing activity can be observed
in the AIA EUV imagery, which results in the accumulation of ﬁlament material (of
f1) at the right leg of the ﬂux rope (Figure 1(e)). The corresponding Hα observations

6

Prasad et al.

Figure 1. Observational overview of the September 6, 2011 ﬂare/CME/dimming event.
Top: Time evolution of the GOES soft X-ray ﬂux together with RHESSI hard X-ray
lightcurves from 6–300 keV. Bottom: Panels (a)-(i) are SDO/AIA images showing the
formation of the ﬂux rope, the initiation of the ﬂare followed by the evolution of the main
circular and remote ﬂare ribbons, as well as the ﬂux rope eruption. In panel(h), the foot-
points of the erupting ﬂux rope are identiﬁed and marked as red crosses.

SDO/AIA 171 Å 304 Å 94 Å 304 + 94 Å 335 Å 304 + 1600 Å 304 + 1600 Å 335 Å a)b)c)d)e)f)g)h)i)(c)(d)(e)(f)(h)rising overlying loopsﬁlament 2 (f2)ﬁlament 1 (f1)hot sigmoidﬂux rope formationremote ﬂare ribbon 1f1 eruptionremote ﬂare ribbon 2ﬁlament material(g)304 Å circular ﬂare ribbonparallel ﬂare ribbon(i)++MHD simulations of AR 11283

7

from Big Bear Observatory at 22:11:54 UT conﬁrm the existence of ﬁlament material
at this location.

Notably, close to the onset of the ﬂare at 22:16 UT, the rise of ﬂare loops in
SDO/AIA 335 ˚A ﬁltergrams is observed (see Figure 1(e)). These loops could be
either part of the overlying arcade above the ﬂux rope or its outer envelope. This
is followed by the simultaneous formation of a circular ﬂare ribbon, surrounding the
main ﬂare site and the standard parallel ﬂare ribbons forming as part of the circular
ribbon (see Figure 1(f)). Relevantly, the appearance of circular ribbons is generally
considered to be caused from the magnetic conﬁguration of a three-dimensional (3D)
magnetic null point (Masson et al. 2009; Wang & Liu 2012; Hernandez-Perez et al.
2017; Devi et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020).

During the main phase of the ﬂare, two strong and impulsive hard X-ray bursts are
observed by RHESSI, indicative of eﬃcient acceleration of high-energy electrons in
the ﬂare (top panel, Figure 1). The ﬁrst one occurs between 22:18 – 22:20 UT and
produced detectable hard X-ray emission up to energies >800 keV. It is co-temporal
with the appearance of the circular ﬂare ribbon at the main ﬂaring site and a remote
ﬂare ribbon to the east, shown in Figure 1(g) as a composite image of SDO/AIA 304
(red channel) and 1600 ˚A (green channel). Close to the peak time of the ﬂare, f1
erupts, as shown by the SDO/AIA 335 ˚A image in Figure 1(h). Both footpoints of
the erupting ﬂux rope are identiﬁable and are marked as red crosses. Interestingly,
during the decay phase of the ﬂare, a second hard X-ray burst is observed (up to
about 300 keV) during 22:21–22:24 UT, which is concurrent with the activity at the
main circular ﬂare ribbon and a new remote ﬂare ribbon to the north-west of the
main ﬂaring site (see composite image of SDO/AIA 304 and 1600 ˚A in Figure 1(i)).
We note that ﬁlament 2 also began to erupt around 22:37 UT (not shown), which
marks the end of the activity during this event.

Figure 2 shows SDO/AIA 211 ˚A logarithmic base-ratio images illustrating the evo-
lution of coronal dimming regions. To increase the visibility and to resolve the ﬁne
structure of dimmings, regions of increased intensity are set to 1.0, small to moderate
intensity decreases are shown from lightblue to white and strong intensity decreases
appear in red (Dissauer et al. 2018a). Panel (a) shows the signature of small-scale,
bipolar pre-ﬂare dimmings (Qiu & Cheng 2017; Zhang et al. 2017) close to the foot-
points of the sigmoid associated with f1 about 12 minutes prior to the onset of the
ﬂare and the associated eruption. Until the start of the ﬂare, cool ﬁlament material is
accumulated at the right footpoint of the ﬂux rope (see also Figure 1(d–e)), observed
as a dark region in panel (b) marked by the white arrow. This region does not result
from plasma evacuation but from the cool ﬁlament material that is darkening in the
211 ˚A passband.

Moreover, at the beginning of the ﬂare, a weak semi-circular coronal dimming region
close to the main ﬂare site is formed (see Figure 2(c)). Over the course of the event,
this region will develop into the ring-shaped dimming region D1. Panels (d–e) show

8

Prasad et al.

Figure 2. Time evolution of the coronal dimming regions associated with the ﬂare/CME
event on 2011 September 6. Panels (a-d) show the formation of small-scale pre-ﬂare coronal
dimmings before the ﬂare onset, the accumulation of ﬁlament material at the right footpoint
of the ﬂux rope, the early formation of the “ring-shaped” dimming region, and the expansion
of the overall dimming to the east and to the north-west of the main ﬂare site. The ﬁnal
extent of the coronal dimming region at the end of its main development phase is shown
in Panel (e), where dimming regions of interest are marked. D1 marks the early-on formed
ring-shaped dimming, D2 indicates the peculiar circular shaped dimming region to the east
and D3 denotes the remote dimming region to the north-west of the main eruption site.
Panel (f) shows the overall time evolution of the dimming region in the form of a timing
map, where each dimming pixel is color-coded based on the time of its ﬁrst detection in
minutes after 21:30 UT.

pre-ﬂare dimming(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)accumulation of ﬁlament materialformation of “ring dimming“ D1D2D1timing map(mins)D3MHD simulations of AR 11283

9

the formation and evolution of the coronal dimming during the impulsive phase of
the ﬂare, expanding to a remote location to north-west of the main ﬂare site and
to east. At the end of the major development phase of the dimming, three main
coronal dimming regions are identiﬁed (see Figure 2 (e)). Region 1 (marked by D1)
is characterized by a ring-shaped dimming region that is associated with the main
ﬂare site. Region 2 (denoted by D2) is a strongly decreased circular shaped dimming
region located mainly in the neighbouring positive polarity to the east of the ﬂare
location (marked by P0 in Figure 3). Dimming region 3 (indicated by D3) is located
further away from the main ﬂare site to the north-west in a positive polarity (marked
by P1 in Figure 3). Panel (f) shows the overall time evolution of the dimming region
in the form of a timing map, where each dimming pixel is color-coded based on the
time of its ﬁrst detection in minutes after 21:30 UT. This representation of the coronal
dimming allows us to identify which parts of the lower corona are aﬀected during the
eruption and at which time they are activated.

In this paper, our focus is to understand the processes of the ﬂare initiation and coro-
nal dimming formation. Therefore, the presented simulation is initiated at 22:00 UT
when the pre-ﬂare activity starts (see Figure 1). Figure 3 shows the magnetogram of
the active region at 22:00 UT where the positive and the negative polarities of the
longitudinal component of the magnetic ﬁeld are depicted in white and black, respec-
tively, and the gray represents the background. The transverse positive and negative
ﬁelds are shown by blue and red arrows, respectively, while the PIL is represented by
green lines. Following Jiang et al. (2018), we mark the main positive polarities as P0,
P1, P2 and the central negative polarity as N. Here P0 and P1 are more dispersed
than P2, which is an emerging region close to N. The ﬂare and eruption took place
near the PIL between N and P2, where the ﬁeld is most sheared and non-potential.
As a parasitic polarity of N, P2 is surrounded by the negative ﬂux which is supportive
of the existence of a magnetic null. To obtain the 3D coronal magnetic ﬁeld consis-
tent with this photospheric boundary, we use the non-force-free extrapolation, which
is described in the next section.

4. NON-FORCE-FREE EXTRAPOLATION OF MAGNETIC FIELD

The extrapolated coronal magnetic ﬁeld of AR 11283 at 22:00 UT corresponding to
the photospheric boundary shown in Figure 3 is obtained numerically by using the
non-force free extrapolation technique developed by Hu & Dasgupta (2008); Hu et al.
(2008, 2010). In this approach the magnetic ﬁeld B is constructed as

B = B1 + B2 + B3; ∇ × Bi = αiBi

(1)

with i = 1, 2, 3. Here, each sub-ﬁeld Bi corresponds to a linear-force-free ﬁeld (LFFF)
with corresponding constants αi. Further, without loss of generality, we choose α1 (cid:54)=
α3 and α2 = 0, making B2 a potential ﬁeld. Subsequently, an optimal pair α =
{α1, α3} is obtained by an iterative method which ﬁnds the pair that minimizes the

10

Prasad et al.

Figure 3. HMI vector magnetogram of AR 11283 at 22:00 UT on September 6, 2011. The
red and blue arrows depict the strength and direction of the transverse magnetic ﬁeld and
the colorbar on the right shows the vertical ﬁeld strength in kG. The Carrington longitude
and latitude of the ﬁeld of view of the center are 226.00° and 17.00°, respectively.

average deviation between the observed (Bt) and the calculated (bt) transverse ﬁeld
on the photospheric boundary. This is estimated by the following metric (Prasad
et al. 2018):

(cid:32) M
(cid:88)

(cid:33)

(cid:32) M
(cid:88)

(cid:33)

En =

|Bt,i − bt,i| × |Bt,i|

/

|Bt,i|2

(2)

i=1

i=1

where M = N 2, represents the total number of grid points on the transverse plane.
To minimize the contribution from the weaker ﬁelds, here the grid points are weighted
with respect to the strength of the observed transverse ﬁeld (see Hu & Dasgupta 2008;
Hu et al. 2010, for further details).

The extrapolated ﬁeld B is a solution of an auxiliary higher-curl equation

∇ × ∇ × ∇ × B + a1∇ × ∇ × B + b1∇ × B = 0,

(3)

where a1 and b1 are constants. Equation (3) contains a second order derivative (∇ ×
∇ × B)z = −∇2Bz at z = 0, necessitating the requirement of vector magnetograms
at two or more layers for evaluating the B.
In order to work with the available
single layer vector magnetograms, an algorithm was devised by Hu et al. (2010),
which involved additional iterations to successively correct the potential subﬁeld B2.
Starting with an initial guess, B2 = 0, the system is reduced to second-order which
allows for the determination of boundary conditions for B1 and B3 using the process

100200300400500X (arcsec)     0100200300Y (arcsec)    2011-09-06T21:58:22.40-2.0-1.00.01.02.0P0P2NP1MHD simulations of AR 11283

11

If the resulting minimum En value is not satisfactory, then a
as described above.
corrector potential ﬁeld to B2 is derived from the diﬀerence transverse ﬁeld, i.e.,
Bt − bt, and added to the previous B2, in anticipation of an improved match between
the transverse ﬁelds, as measured by En. The algorithm relies on the implementation
of fast calculations of the LFFFs including the potential ﬁeld.

The vector magnetogram shown in Figure 3 corresponds to an original cutout of
dimension 1024 × 800 pixels. To reduce the computational cost, the original ﬁeld is
re-scaled and extrapolated over a 256 × 200 × 200 pixels grid volume in the x, y and z
directions. The variation of minimum error in the transverse ﬁeld En with iteration
number is shown in the left panel of Figure 4. Here, we ﬁnd that the curve reaches
a saturation value of 0.4 after 3000 iterations. We stop the iterations at this point
to save the computational cost. Noticeably, the ﬁnal value of En is higher compared
to those obtained in earlier works (Prasad et al. 2018; Mitra et al. 2018; Nayak et al.
2019), but this is expected as we have chosen a much larger ﬁeld of view here which
results in more contribution from the weaker ﬁelds. The variations of horizontally-
averaged strength for the magnetic ﬁeld, current density and Lorentz force density
with pixel height z are shown in the right panel of Figure 4. As expected, the
horizontally-averaged value of the Lorentz force density falls oﬀ fastest with height,
followed by that of the current density and the ﬁeld strength. Notably, the Lorentz
force density is non-zero near the photosphere and almost vanishes at coronal heights
(cf. Figure 4 (b)). As a result, in our model, the corona is considered to be reasonably
force-free while the photosphere supports the Lorentz force (Yalim et al. 2020; Liu
et al. 2020).

(a)

(b)

Figure 4. Panel (a) shows the variation of En as a function of iteration number during
the NFFF extrapolation. Panel (b) depicts the logarithmic variation of strength for the
horizontally-averaged magnetic ﬁeld (X = B), the current density (X = J) and the Lorentz
force density (X = L) with pixel height z. All the values are normalized with respect to
their maximum values as we are mostly interested in the rate of decay with height.

The MFL topology of the extrapolated ﬁeld is shown in Figure 5 where the ﬁeld
lines are plotted in red, purple, yellow, green, and blue. In this and all the subsequent
ﬁgures, the arrows in red, green, and blue denote the x, y, and z axes, respectively.

0500100015002000250030000.350.400.450.500.550.600.650.70IterationEnBJL050100150200-10-8-6-4-20zLog(X/Xmax)12

Prasad et al.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 5. Side (a) and top (b) view of the extrapolated magnetic ﬁeld highlighting the
diﬀerent connectivity with the magnetogram as the bottom boundary. The ﬁeld lines in
red and purple depict sheared ﬁeld lines over the PIL. The yellow MFLs correspond to
the topology of a 3D null point, while the MFLs in blue and green represent the remote
connetivities P0–N and P1–N as earlier marked in Figure 3. Panel (c) depicts the values
log Q in the y − z plane passing through the 3D null. Panel (d) overlays the values of log Q
between 1 and 5 which helps us to identify diﬀerent regions of connectivity on the bottom
boundary. The red, green and blue arrows represent the x, y and z directions respectively.

The yellow MFLs resemble the topology of a 3D magnetic null (Lau & Finn 1990),
where the MFLs constituting the dome intersect the bottom boundary to generate
footpoints that are distributed in a circular pattern. The MFLs corresponding to
the spine-axis of the null extend through the upper boundary and do not close in
the domain. A similar complex magnetic ﬁeld topology is also suggested in Janvier
et al. (2016) based on NLFFF modeling where the spine of the 3D null closes in the
In contrast, Jiang et al. (2018), using NLFFF extrapolations, ﬁnd a
polarity P0.
diﬀerent morphology with the 3D null spine axis connecting to the polarity P1. In
our case, the ﬁeld lines marked green which originate very close to the dome have a
similar connectivity (P1 to N), while the ﬁeld lines marked blue show the connectivity
between P0 and N. The strongly sheared ﬁeld lines connecting the main polarities
of P2 and N are shown in red and overlying loops building their outer envelope are
shown in purple. The diﬀerence in the ﬁeld-line connectivity can be attributed to

MHD simulations of AR 11283

13

the key diﬀerences in the methods used to generate the extrapolated ﬁelds. For
instance, Jiang et al. (2018) utilize the full vector magnetogram to obtain the coronal
magnetic ﬁeld, while the NLFFF model used in Janvier et al. (2016) is based on the
ﬂux rope insertion method which only requires a line-of-sight magnetogram. With
diﬀerent models, these studies were able to provide signiﬁcant insight into the various
aspects of a complex ﬂaring event (as mentioned in Section 1). Therefore, it becomes
imperative to analyze the results with diﬀerent extrapolation models to obtain an
in-depth understanding of the complex ﬂaring processes.

The ﬁeld lines pertaining to the 3D null point are shown in greater detail in Figure
5(c), where the values of the squashing factor are shown in the y − z plane passing
through the 3D null point. The location of the null can be easily identiﬁed from the
high values of the squashing factor (Q) (Liu et al. 2016) shown here in logarithmic
scale. The height of the null point is found to be approximately 25 Mm from the
photosphere. Figure 5(d) overlays the values of log Q (shown in the range 1 ≤
log Q ≤ 5) along with Bz at the bottom boundary and the ﬁeld lines shown in
Figure 5(a) to highlight the diﬀerent regions of connectivities of the MFLs.

(a)

(b)

Figure 6. Side (a) and top (b) view of the distribution of the magnitude of the Lorentz
force density in the computational domain for the initial extrapolated ﬁeld. The ﬁgure
clearly depicts the high values of the Lorentz force density near the central region and its
exponential decrease in strength with height. Thus the Lorentz force is critical in driving
the ﬂows near the bottom boundary during the MHD evolution.

In Figure 6, the direct volume renderings of the Lorentz force density are illustrated
from side and top views. Noticeably, the regions of large Lorentz force density overlap
with those of high values of Bz. The ﬁgure (along with the right panel of Figure 4) also
reveals a sharp decay of the Lorentz force density with height, making the magnetic
ﬁeld force-free in the asymptotic limit as previously indicated in Figure 4(b). Figure
6(b) clearly identiﬁes the presence of strong Lorentz force between polarities P2 and
N and the corresponding PIL. Importantly, the Lorentz force plays a central role in
driving the simulated evolution that is favorable to initiate the ﬂare.

14

Prasad et al.

To relate the extrapolated ﬁeld with the observational features, in Figure 7(a), we
plot ﬁeld lines in orange which correspond to the sigmoidal brightenings as seen in
Figure 1(c) at t = 0 corresponding to 22:00 UT. We note a good correspondence
between the brightenings observed in SDO/AIA 94 ˚A channel and the ﬁeld lines
shown in orange. The highly sheared nature of the ﬁeld lines indicates the presence of
strong ﬁeld-aligned currents. The Joule heating of plasma due to dissipation of these
currents may explain the EUV and X-ray emissions which lead to the appearance
of the sigmoid (Jiang et al. 2013). Figure 7 (b) shows the extrapolated ﬁeld that
originates at the pre-ﬂare dimming locations (cf. Figure 2 (a)). As will be discussed
in more detail in Section 5, the red ﬁeld lines correspond to the ﬂux rope, while the
purple ﬁeld lines indicate its outer envelope.

(a)

(b)

Figure 7. Panel (a) shows the hot sigmoid in SDO/AIA 94 ˚A (Figure 1(c)) together
with the highly sheared orange ﬁeld lines from the extrapolation. Panel (b) shows the
small-scale, bipolar pre-ﬂare dimming (Figure 2(a)) in good correspondence with the outer
envelope (purple) of the ﬂux rope (red). Panel (b) is further overlaid with the 3D null
depicted by a green spot (also marked by a white arrow).

5. MHD SIMULATION FOR AR 11283 AND X2.1 FLARE

5.1. Governing MHD equations and EULAG-MHD numerical model

The presented dynamical evolution of the coronal plasma is governed by the incom-
pressible Navier-Stokes MHD equations under the assumption of thermal homogene-
ity and perfect electrical conductivity (Bhattacharyya et al. 2010; Kumar et al. 2014,
2015b). The relevant MHD equations in dimensionless form are:

+ (v · ∇) v = −∇p + (∇ × B) × B +

∂v
∂t
∇ · v = 0,
∂B
∂t
∇ · B = 0,

= ∇ × (v × B),

τa
τν

∇2v,

(4a)

(4b)

(4c)

(4d)

MHD simulations of AR 11283

15

written in usual notations. The various variables in Equations (4) are normalized as
follows

B −→

B
B0

, v −→

v
va

, L −→

L
L0

,

t −→

t
τa

,

p −→

p
ρva

2 .

(5)

√

The constants B0 and L0 are ﬁxed using the average magnetic ﬁeld strength and
4πρ0 is the
length-scale of the vector magnetogram respectively. Here, va ≡ B0/
Alfv´en speed and ρ0 is the constant mass density. The constants τa and τν represent
the Alfv´enic transit time (τa = L0/va) and viscous dissipation time scale (τν = L2
0/ν),
respectively, with ν being the kinematic viscosity. Notably, the simpliﬁed choice of
incompressibility (Equation 4b) leads to the volume preserving ﬂow — an assump-
tion routinely used in other works (Dahlburg et al. 1991; Aulanier et al. 2005). While
compressibility plays an important role in the thermodynamics of coronal loops (Rud-
erman & Roberts 2002), in this work, our focus is on the changes in magnetic topology
idealized with a thermally homogeneous magnetoﬂuid. Utilizing the discretized in-
compressibility constraint, the pressure perturbation, denoted by p, satisﬁes an ellip-
tic boundary value problem on the discrete integral form of the momentum equation
(Equation 4a); cf.(Bhattacharyya et al. 2010, and the references therein).

The MHD Equations (4a)-(4d) are solved utilizing the well established magnetohy-
drodynamic numerical model EULAG-MHD (Smolarkiewicz & Charbonneau 2013).
The model is an extension of the hydrodynamic model EULAG predominantly used
in atmospheric and climate research (Prusa et al. 2008). Here we discuss only impor-
tant features of the EULAG-MHD and refer the readers to Smolarkiewicz & Char-
bonneau (2013) and references therein for detailed discussions. The model is based on
the spatio-temporally second-order accurate non-oscillatory forward-in-time multidi-
mensional positive deﬁnite advection transport algorithm, MPDATA (Smolarkiewicz
2006). Importantly, MPDATA has the proven dissipative property which, intermit-
tently and adaptively, regularizes the under-resolved scales by simulating magnetic
reconnections and mimicking the action of explicit subgrid-scale turbulence mod-
els (Margolin et al. 2006) in the spirit of Implicit Large Eddy Simulations (ILES)
(Grinstein et al. 2007). Such ILESs conducted with the model have already been
successfully utilized to simulate reconnections to understand their role in the coronal
dynamics (Prasad et al. 2017, 2018; Nayak et al. 2019). In this work, the simulation
continues to rely on the eﬀectiveness of ILES in regularizing the onset of magnetic
reconnections.

5.2. Numerical setup

The simulation is performed in a computational domain having 256 × 200 × 200
grid points which resolve a physical domain spanning [0, 1.28] × [0, 1] × [0, 1] units,
respectively, in x, y, and z, where an unit length is roughly equivalent to 290 Mm.
A motionless state (v = 0) with the NFFF extrapolated magnetic ﬁeld (Figure 5(a))
is selected as an initial state for the simulation. Moreover, the magnetoﬂuid is ide-
alized to be thermally homogeneous and having perfect electrical conductivity. The

16

Prasad et al.

mass density is set to ρ0 = 1 and kinematic viscosity to ν = 0.0002, in scaled units.
The dynamics results from the initial Lorentz force which pushes the magnetoﬂuid.
To ensure the net magnetic ﬂux to be zero in the computational domain, all com-
ponents of volume B except for Bz, are continued to the boundaries (Prasad et al.
2018). At the bottom boundary, Bz is kept constant (line-tied boundary condition).
For the simulation, we set the dimensionless constant τa/τν ≈ 3.5 × 10−4, which is
roughly two orders of magnitude larger than its coronal value. The higher value of
τa/τν speeds up the relaxation because of a more eﬃcient viscous dissipation without
aﬀecting the magnetic topology. The spatial unit step ∆x = 0.005 and time step
(normalized by the Alfv´en transit time τa ∼ 20s) ∆t = 2 × 10−3 are selected to
satisfy the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) stability condition (Courant et al. 1967).
The results presented here pertain to a run for 2000 ∆t which roughly corresponds
to an observation time of 2 hours. For the sake of convenience in comparison with
observations, we present the time in units of 20τa (which is close to a minute) in the
discussions of the ﬁgures in the subsequent sections. Notably, the RM throughout the
simulation is set to inﬁnity except during magnetic reconnections facilitated by the
MPDATA driven dissipation.

5.3. Pre-ﬂare stage and sigmoid to ﬂux rope transition

To understand the dynamics of the pre-ﬂare stage of this event, we ﬁrst focus on
the formation of the pre-ﬂare dimming and the evolution of initially highly sheared
MFLs, representing the sigmoidal brightening situated over the PIL (Figure 7(a)).
Magnetic ﬁeld lines that originate at the pre-ﬂare dimming location (Figure 2(a)) are
shown in Figure 7(b) in purple color, which also represent the outer envelope of a ﬂux
rope (shown in red here, and in Figure 8) which forms during the evolution. Overall,
the simulation reveals two mechanisms causing the formation of the pre-ﬂare dimming
region. On one hand, the outermost magnetic ﬁeld lines of the ﬂux rope reconnect
at the site of the 3D null point, which leads to the opening of closed ﬁeld lines and
results in dimming at their corresponding footpoints. This is discussed in more detail
later in relation to Figure 10. On the other hand, the outer envelope of the ﬂux
rope rises due to the initial Lorentz force and the observed dimming signature is a
result of the stretching and expansion of these ﬁeld lines. In general, pre-ﬂare coronal
dimmings are observed ∼30–90 minutes before the ﬂare onset (Qiu & Cheng 2017;
Zhang et al. 2017). There is a growing consensus that overlying ﬁelds are stretched
due to the gradual and slow rise of the ﬂux rope, prior to the formation of the current
sheet (Joshi et al. 2016; Sahu et al. 2020). Expanding ﬁelds manifest as an intensity
decrease in extreme-ultraviolet emission, i.e.
transient pre-ﬂare coronal dimmings
(Forbes & Lin 2000). Hence, our model shows the possible magnetic conﬁguration
which is likely related to the dimming sites. Investigating the intensity distribution
within the pre-ﬂare dimming in Figure 7(b), we speculate that red regions, indicating
regions of the strongest intensity decrease, correspond to ﬁeld lines that opened-up,

MHD simulations of AR 11283

17

while light blue to white regions, i.e. areas of small to moderate intensity changes are
formed as a result of ﬁeld lines that expanded.

Figure 8 depicts the transfer of twist from the underlying sigmoid (in orange) to
the overlying sheared ﬁeld lines (in red). Consequently, at t ≈ 20, a magnetic ﬂux
rope is formed, depicted by red ﬁeld lines in Figure 8(c). In order to clearly identify
the ﬂux rope, we show the twist number for the ﬁeld lines in panels (a)-(d) of the
ﬁgure. Panel (c) shows that the ﬂux rope has ﬁeld lines with twist number close
to 1 turn. The low-lying ﬁeld lines become almost perpendicular to the bottom
PIL, indicating that they are close to potential ﬁeld (Figure 8(d)). Notably, such
a transfer of twist from the sigmoidal MFLs to the overlying MFLs indicates the
occurrence of magnetic reconnections which can contribute to pre-ﬂaring activities
as well as to the formation of a ﬂux rope. However, because of the computational
constraints, we could not resolve these reconnections. Further, we notice that the
negative-polarity footpoint of the ﬂux rope undergoes a signiﬁcant movement to the
right. Observations conﬁrm the shift of the right footpoint of the ﬂux rope as well
as magnetic reconnections along the sigmoid in the form of small-scale brightenings
(cf. Figure 1(d)). Moreover, the magnetic reconnections also initiate in ﬁeld lines
comprising the outer envelope of the ﬂux rope (Figure 8(d)) which is discussed in
more detail in Section 5.4. Figure 8(e) highlights that the brightenings observed
in the hotter 94 ˚A channel shortly after the impulsive ﬂare onset (∼22:17 UT) are
co-spatial with the footpoints of the reconnecting ﬁeld lines, manifesting a causal
connection between the magnetic reconnections and these brightenings. Figure 8(f)
shows a correspondence of the footpoints of the simulated rising ﬂux rope to those
identiﬁed in the observation of the SDO/AIA 335 ˚A channel (marked by red crosses
in Figure 1(h)). Although the erupting ﬁlament footpoint locations match quite well
with observation, the corresponding erupting structure is not fully reproduced by the
simulation.

Noticeably, with a potential-ﬁeld-like conﬁguration of the lower-lying orange MFLs
at t ≈ 20 in Figure 8(c), the twist transfer and, hence, the magnetic reconnections
between orange and red MFLs cease and the ﬂux rope is fully developed. Subse-
quently, in absence of magnetic reconnections, the evolution of the rope appears to
be governed by ideal MHD for the approximate time period t ε {20, 30}. To explore
the possibility of the torus instability (Kliem & T¨or¨ok 2006), in Figure 9, we show
snapshots of the decay index in the y − z plane passing through the ﬂux rope, which
measures the decay of the external ﬁeld, superposed with the ﬂux rope. Following
Jiang et al. (2016), the decay index is deﬁned as n = −d log(B)/d log(h), where h is
the height and B is the strength of the overlying strapping ﬁeld. Figure 9 illustrates
the rise of the ﬂux rope between t = 20 and t = 40. Notably, at t = 20 the decay
index is 2 in the vicinity of the ﬂux rope. However, just above the ﬂux rope, the
decay index sharply decreases to around 0, suggesting the absence of a role of the
torus instability in the rise (Zhou et al. 2017; Duan et al. 2019). Consequently, in

18

Prasad et al.

(a. t=0)

(b. t=10)

(c. t=20)

(d. t=30)

(e. t=30)

(f. t=33)

Figure 8. Panels (a-d) depict the transfer of twist from the underlying sigmoid (Figure
7(a)) to the overlying ﬂux rope through small-scale reconnections under the ﬂux rope. The
panels are overlaid with a vertical cross section of the magnetic twist number. The orange
MFLs can be observed to be almost potential by t = 30, while the red MFLs are seen to
become more twisted. Panel (d) also shows the bifurcation of the ﬂux rope due to recon-
nections. In Panel (e) the MFLs are overlayed with an SDO/AIA 304 and 94 ˚A composite
image shortly after the ﬂare onset (∼ 22:17 UT) and panel (f) uses Figure 1(h) as the
bottom boundary. In particular, these panels clearly show the correspondence between the
reconnection site and the localized brightening in 94 ˚A as well as the match between the
footpoints of the erupting ﬂux rope in 335 ˚A with that inferred from the simulations. (An
animation of this ﬁgure is available.)

MHD simulations of AR 11283

19

(a. t=20)

(b. t=40)

Figure 9. Depiction of the dynamic rise of the ﬂux rope between t = 20 and t = 40 as it
starts reconnecting at one end.

this case, the rise of the rope seems to be naturally commenced, as the ﬂux rope is
already in a dynamic phase after the reconnections.

5.4. Flaring stage: reconnections at the 3D null and the X-type MFLs

Here we focus on the physical processes leading to magnetic reconnections which
can play a key role in the ﬂare evolution. In Figure 10, we show three sets of MFLs,
plotted in color red (corresponding to the ﬂux rope identiﬁed in Figure 8), purple
(predominately representing the outer envelope of the ﬂux rope), and blue (nearby
loops which represent the post ﬂare arcade after the magnetic reconnections). The
purple ﬁeld lines start to reconnect at the pre-existing 3D null (see Figure 10(a–b)).
This is in agreement with the rising of overlying loops observed in SDO/AIA 335
˚A at the start of the ﬂare (cf. Figure 1(e)). These magnetic reconnections are also
expected to further contribute to the pre-ﬂare activity discussed above.

The subsequent evolution illustrates that the non-parallel ﬁeld lines of the ﬂux rope
(in purple and red) and the nearby loops (in blue; cf. Figure 10(c)) come in close
proximity. When viewed from a vantage point (Figure 10(d)), the non-parallel MFLs
show the near-resemblance to the X-type geometry. Therefore, we name these MFLs
as X-type ﬁeld lines. As the gradient of B steepens, a strong electric current originates
in the vicinity of the X-type MFLs at t = 20, shown by the J/B probe placed on the
y − z plane. Consequently, the scales become under-resolved which onset magnetic
reconnections that repeatedly occur in time, and are responsible for the bifurcation
Importantly, from t = 20
of the ﬂux rope (clearly identiﬁable in Figure 10(d–f)).
onwards, the evolution discerns the co-occurrence of reconnections at both sites: the
X-type MFLs as well as the 3D null. Remarkably, such co-temporal reconnections
at these two sites can provide a potential explanation of the simultaneously observed
standard parallel ribbons and circular ribbons, as shown in Figure 11(a). The bottom
boundary in the ﬁgure shows the cooler AIA 304 ˚A channel after the start of the ﬂare
at ∼22:17 UT, highlighting the chromospheric ﬂare ribbons (cf. Figure 1(f)). As the

20

Prasad et al.

(a. t=0)

(b. t=10)

(c. t=20)

(d. t=30)

(e. t=40)

(f. t=50)

Figure 10. Time sequence showing the formation and dissipation of a current sheet near the
X-type MFLs reconnection site. Panel (a) depicts the initial ﬁeld, where the outer envelope
of the ﬂux rope is seen reconnecting at the 3D null (black arrow, also see Figure 7(b)).
Panels (b)-(d) show the movement of non-parallel MFLs in the vicinity and, development
of X-type geometry (white arrow) and a consequent current sheet (with high J/B) in that
region.
In panels (e-f), simultaneous reconnections at both the 3D null and the X-type
MFLs along with the dissipation of the current sheet occur.
(An animation of this ﬁgure is available.)

MFLs constituting the fan surface of the 3D null intersect with the chromosphere, the
corresponding footpoints form a closed circle. A circular ﬂare ribbon is then expected

MHD simulations of AR 11283

21

because the magnetic reconnections at the 3D null can accelerate charged particles
which travel along the MFLs of the dome-shaped fan surface and deposit their energy
in the chromosphere (Masson et al. 2009; Jiang et al. 2013; Devi et al. 2020). In a
similar way, the reconnections at the X-type MFLs can cause the “standard” parallel
ﬂare ribbons. Moreover, ﬁeld lines from the inner spine (which are initially closed)
get transformed into the open ﬁeld lines of the outer spine. The footpoints of these
open ﬁeld lines correspond to the ring-shaped dimming region D1 (cf. Figure 2(e)),
tracing the circular dome as seen in Figure 11(b), indicated by the black arrows. The
close co-spatiality between the dimming region and the circular ﬂare ribbon supports
this result. Further, the white arrow in Figure 11(b) marks the dimming region
corresponding to the left footpoint of the ﬂux rope.

(a)

(b)

Figure 11. Comparison of MFL topology (a) at t = 25 with the ﬂare ribbons observed in
the SDO/AIA 304 ˚A channel shown in Figure 1(f) and (b) at t = 35 with the ring-shaped
dimming region shown in Figure 2(e). We ﬁnd excellent agreement with the ﬁeld lines
constituting the dome of the 3D null, the circular ﬂare ribbons and the ring-shaped dimming
region (indicated by the black arrows), while the footpoints of the X-type MFLs correspond
well to the parallel ﬂare ribbons. In addition, the white arrow marks the dimming region
corresponding to the left footpoint of the ﬂux rope.

To explain the coronal dimmings during the ﬂare in more detail, in Figure 12, we
illustrate the evolution of the ﬂux rope footpoints with respect to the coronal dimming
timing maps (Figure 2(f)). The bottom boundary in Figure 12 shows contours of
Bz (green showing positive polarity and purple showing negative polarity) and the
locations of dimming pixels are marked in color, with respect to the time of their
ﬁrst appearance in minutes after 21:45 UT. The blue pixels represent regions where
the dimming was observed ﬁrst, while red pixels represent all the sites where coronal
dimmings occurred later. Notably, the evolution shows the movement of the negative
polarity footpoint of the ﬂux rope to the right due to slipping reconnections. The
footpoint then approaches new dimming pixels (in orange) appearing to the right. A
similar movement of the ﬂux rope footpoint was also reported in Jiang et al. (2013).
At the same time, the other end of the ﬂux rope undergoes magnetic reconnection

22

Prasad et al.

Figure 12. Correspondence of the magnetic ﬁeld evolution and early development of the
coronal dimming regions. The bottom boundary shows the contours with Bz together
with dimming pixels marked in color with respect to their time of ﬁrst appearance (in
minutes after 21:45 UT). We can observe that while in panel (a) the footpoint of the ﬂux
rope corresponds to blue pixels (pre-ﬂare dimming), with time it moves due to slipping
reconnections to an orange region marked in panel (d), where the dimming is observed at
a later time.
(An animation of this ﬁgure is available.)

at the X-type geometry and the ﬁeld lines reconnect to the positive polarity on the
far left (see Figure 12(c)). This bifurcation of the ﬂux rope leads to the generation
of open magnetic ﬁeld lines. The plasma loss along the open ﬁeld lines from the
footpoint location may result in the observed dimming in this region (marked by the
white arrow in Figure 11(b)). A ﬂux rope bifurcation for this event was also reported
in Prasad et al. (2017). The slipping reconnections also result in the rotation of the
ﬁeld lines comprising the dome of the 3D null.

5.5. Evolution of ﬁeld lines in the full domain

In Figure 13, we show the overall MFL dynamics in the full computational domain.
In panels (a–d), the bottom boundary is overlaid with the magnetogram, alongwith
the ﬁeld lines previously shown in Figure 5. The panels clearly illustrate a change in
the connectivity of MFLs from P2 to P0 (purple ﬁeld lines) which resulted from the
magnetic reconnections at the X-type geometry and the 3D null. Moreover, few of
the MFLs plotted in blue and green are found to be rising and, ultimately, opening
up, indicating an outward expansion of coronal loops during the ﬂare. To establish

0.012.525.037.550.0(a)(b)(c)(d)t=0t=25t=50t=75MHD simulations of AR 11283

23

(a. t=0)

(b. t=20)

(c. t=40)

(d. t=60)

(e. t=60)

(f. t=100)

Figure 13. Global dynamics of the ﬁeld lines during the simulation highlighting the remote
connectivities that form due to the reconnections. Panels (e) and (f) use Figure 1 (i) and
Figure 2 (e) as bottom boundary for comparing the locations of MFLs with respect to the
ﬂare ribbons and dimming locations. The color of the blue ﬁeld lines from panel (a) have
been changed in panel (e) and (f) to cyan and green for better visibility.
(An animation of this ﬁgure is available.)

an overall correspondence between the ﬁeld line evolution and the observed ﬂare rib-
bons, in Figure 13(e), we overplot the bottom boundary with a composite image of
SDO/AIA 304 and 1600 ˚A shown in Figure 1(i). It is clearly seen that the footpoints
of the dome surface trace the circular ﬂare ribbon. This strongly suggets that the

24

Prasad et al.

magnetic reconnections at the 3D null play a key role for the development of the ﬂare
ribbons. Moreover, the change in connectivity of MFLs from P2 to P0 during mag-
netic reconnections may be indicative of a causal connection between the magnetic
reconnections and the remote ﬂare ribbon 1 (see Figure 1(g)). Further, the connec-
tivity of green MFLs favors a possible relationship between magnetic reconnections
at the 3D null and the remote ﬂare ribbon 2 (see Figure 1(i)).

In comparison, Jiang et al. (2018) found three episodes of reconnection occurring
at diﬀerent locations in the corona through which the initial sigmoidal magnetic
reconnection breaks out at one of its ends, and through subsequent reconnections,
gives rise to a highly twisted ﬁeld having a complex magnetic topology (see Figures
7, 8 and 10 in Jiang et al. (2018) for details of the three stages of reconnections). To
further highlight the close connection between the post-ﬂare MFL topology and the
location of the dimming regions, in Figure 13(f), we overlay the bottom boundary
with the ﬁnal dimming evolution plotted in Figure 2(e). The ﬁgure also demonstrates
the similarity between the ring-shaped dimming region D1 and the dome structure of
the 3D null. The present simulation, however, does not clearly identify the cause for
the formation of the dimming regions marked as D2 and D3 in Figure 2(e). This can
be attributed to the absence of a signiﬁcant eruption corresponding to the sudden
and rapid rise of the ﬂux rope as shown in Jiang et al. (2013, 2018). The absence of
eruption in our simulation can be ascribed to the viscous dissipation which leads to a
faster depletion of the free magnetic energy required to produce the eruption. From
the observations, these dimming regions co-locate with the remote ﬂare ribbons. This
suggests that the repeated reconnections, occurring higher-up in the corona, can be
responsible for the dimming regions. In addition, the magnetic energy released during
the simulated evolution is about 2.15 × 1031 erg. Interestingly, the energy estimate is
comparable to the ones derived from the observations in Feng et al. (2013).

6. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

In this paper, we perform an MHD simulation of magnetic ﬁeld evolution during
a X2.1 ﬂare in AR 11283. The simulation is initiated by extrapolated non-force-free
magnetic ﬁeld, which is based on the principle of minimum dissipation rate and the
photospheric vector magnetogram of the active region obtained from SDO/HMI serves
as lower boundary condition. Particularly, we aim to explain various observational
features of the complex X2.1 ﬂare and associated coronal dimmings that occurred on
2011 September 6, around 22:21 UT (SOL2011-09-06T22:21X2.1). SDO/AIA multi-
wavelength observations show the signature of a hot sigmoid, pre-ﬂare activities, the
formation of the ﬂux rope, and the evolution of circular as well as remote ﬂare ribbons.
SDO/AIA 211 ˚A logarithmic base-ratio images are analysed to locate the coronal
dimming regions and to identify their ﬁne structure. Notably, about 30 minutes prior
to the onset of the ﬂare, small-scale, bipolar dimmings are observed near the main ﬂare
site. Moreover, during the impulsive phase of the ﬂare, three main dimming regions

MHD simulations of AR 11283

25

are of interest: a ring-shaped dimming region (D1) in the vicinity of the main ﬂare
site, a circular dimming region (D2) at the far east to the ﬂare location, and a remote
dimming region (D3) at the far north-west to the main ﬂare site. The absence of any
signiﬁcant ﬂux-emergence during the event allows us to use the line-tied boundary
condition at the bottom boundary. The initial Lorentz force pushes the magnetoﬂuid
from its initial motion-less state and generates the evolution autonomously. The
following is a summary of the main results:

• The non-force-free extrapolation was able to sucessfully capture the presence
of highly sheared/twisted ﬁeld lines over the central PIL and also the magnetic
topology of a 3D null point located close to the ﬂaring region. Importantly, these
sheared ﬁeld lines explain the sigmoidal brightenings observed in the SDO/AIA
94 ˚A channel (cf. Figure 1(c), 7(a)). These ﬁndings are in agreement with the
recent observational study by Sahu et al. (2020) where a ﬂux rope is found to be
co-spatial with an HXR coronal channel, implying pre-ﬂare brightenings caused
by an activated ﬂux rope.

• The distribution of the Lorentz force is shown to be concentrated near the
bottom boundary, justifying the use of the NFFF description for the solar corona
(cf. Figure 6). The Lorentz forces are also critical in generating self-consistent
ﬂows that initiate the dynamics and trigger the magnetic reconnections.

• The observed small-scale, bipolar pre-ﬂare coronal dimming region is formed
due to (i) the rising of the outer envelope of the ﬂux rope and (ii) magnetic
reconnection at the pre-existing 3D null point resulting in open ﬁelds (cf. Fig-
ure 2(a), 7(b)). This is in agreement with predictions of such pre-ﬂare coronal
dimmings in Forbes & Lin (2000) and their observation in case studies by Qiu
& Cheng (2017) and Zhang et al. (2017).

• In the simulation, we notice the transfer of twist from the low-lying
sheared/twisted coronal ﬁeld lines to overlying loops through magnetic recon-
nections, leading to the formation of a ﬂux rope. This is in agreement with
small-scale brightenings observed during the pre-ﬂare phase in all EUV wave-
lengths (cf. Figure 1(d)). This result is in excellent agreement with the obser-
vational study by Joshi et al. (2017) in which episodic pre-ﬂare brightenings
(an evidence of small-scale magnetic reconnections) were reported during the
build-up of a hot-channel ﬂux rope. During this transfer, the right footpoint
of the establishing ﬂux rope is moving. Accumulation of ﬁlament material is
observed at this newly established right ﬂux rope footpoint (cf. Figure 1(d),
2(b)).

• The role of these magnetic reconnections in ﬂaring activities is established by
co-locating the footpoints of the reconnecting ﬁeld lines with the emission in
the AIA 94 ˚A channel. Moreover, the locations of the footpoints of the ﬂux

26

Prasad et al.

rope are found to be in good agreement with those inferred from SDO/AIA
335 ˚A observations (cf. Figure 1(h), 8(f)).

• The simulation results reveal a rise of the ﬂux rope. During the rise, the non-
parallel ﬁeld lines constituting the rope and lower-lying coronal arcades develop
an X-type geometry which lead to repeated magnetic reconnections (see Fig-
ure 10).

• The concurrent occurrence of magnetic reconnections at the X-type geometry
and the 3D null is noted to induce a bifurcation of the ﬂux rope. These si-
multaneous reconnections provide a potential explanation for the co-temporal
appearances of parallel as well as circular ﬂare ribbon patterns observed in
chromospheric emissions (cf. Figure 11(a)).

• In addition, the footpoints of the dome surface of the 3D null are co-spatial
with the ring-shaped dimming region, suggesting a causal connection between
the magnetic reconnections at the 3D null and the dimming due to the trans-
formation of ﬁeld lines of the inner spine to open ﬁeld lines of the outer spine
(cf. black arrows in Figure 11(b)).

• Importantly, the bifurcation of the ﬂux rope opens up the ﬁeld lines of the rope
which can lead to the loss of plasma trapped inside the rope. This may explain
the presence of dimming regions near the footpoints of the rope (cf. white
arrow in Figure 11(b)). The simulations also reveal the apparent motion of one
footpoint of the ﬂux rope due to slipping reconnections. The motion was found
to match well to those inferred from the timing maps of the dimming images
(cf. Figure 12). This means that the bifurcation of the ﬂux rope and magnetic
reconnections at the 3D null are key to the dimming in the neighbourhood of
the main ﬂare site.

We speculate that the ﬁne structure of coronal dimmings, resulting from a diﬀerent
intensity distribution within the overall dimming region, is caused by two diﬀerent
physical mechanisms. The locations of the strongest intensity decrease (i.e. red re-
gions in logarithmic base-ratio images) could correspond to opened-up ﬁeld lines,
whereas dimming regions showing a smaller decrease in intensity (i.e. light blue and
white regions in logarithmic base-ratio images) might correspond to the expanded
and stretched overlying ﬁelds. Our interpretation of the formation of the ring-shaped
dimming region D1 (cf. Figure 11(b)) and the intensity distribution within the pre-
ﬂare dimmings (cf. Figure 7(b)) where both mechanisms are at work support this
view.

The origin of coronal dimming regions at the far east (D2) and north-west (D3)
is not fully clear as no movement or change of connectivity of ﬁeld lines in those
locations was identiﬁed in the full domain (see Figure 13). However, we note that
from an observational point of view, the locations of these dimming regions match

MHD simulations of AR 11283

27

the positions of the remote ﬂare ribbons, indicating that magnetic reconnections may
play a role at these remote locations, potentially initiated higher up in the corona.

Overall, although successful in simulating parts of a particular complex ﬂare/CME
event, the combined model (extrapolation + MHD) can be advanced by using si-
multaneous magnetograms from two diﬀerent heights, inclusion of an apt physical
resistivity and accounting for any photopsheric motion. We leave these as future
endeavors.

We acknowledge the use of the visualization software VAPOR (www.vapor.ucar.edu)
for generating relevant graphics. Data and images are courtesy of NASA/SDO and the
HMI and AIA science teams. SDO/HMI is a joint eﬀort of many teams and individuals
to whom we are greatly indebted for providing the data. Q.H. and A.P. acknowledge
partial support of NASA grant 80NSSC17K0016 and NSF award AGS-1650854. K.D.
and A.M.V. acknowledge funding by the Austrian Space Applications Programme of
the Austrian Research Promotion Agency FFG, BMVIT: projects ASAP-11 4900217,
ASAP-14 865972, as well as the Austrian Science Fund (FWF): projects P24092-
N16, P27292-N20. A.M.V., BJ, K.D. and A.P. acknowledge the Indo-Austrian joint
research project No. INT/AUSTRIA/BMWF/P-05/2017 and OeAD project No. IN
03/2017. The authors are thankful to Dr. P. K. Smolarkiewicz for his support. We
are grateful to Dr. Ronald L. Moore for the discussion about simulation results. We
are also thankful to the anonymous referee for providing insightful suggestions, which
led to the overall betterment of this paper.

REFERENCES

Alfv´en, H. 1942, Nature, 150, 405
Amari, T., Canou, A., & Aly, J.-J. 2014,

Devi, P., Joshi, B., Chandra, R., et al.

2020, SoPh, 295, 75

Nature, 514, 465

Aschwanden, M. J. 2004, Physics of the

Solar Corona. An Introduction (Praxis
Publishing Ltd)

Aulanier, G., Pariat, E., & D´emoulin, P.

2005, A&A, 444, 961

Bhattacharyya, R., Janaki, M. S.,

Dasgupta, B., & Zank, G. P. 2007,
SoPh, 240, 63

Bhattacharyya, R., Low, B. C., &

Smolarkiewicz, P. K. 2010, Physics of
Plasmas, 17, 112901

Courant, R., Friedrichs, K., & Lewy, H.
1967, IBM journal of Research and
Development, 11, 215

Dahlburg, R. B., Antiochos, S. K., &
Zang, T. A. 1991, ApJ, 383, 420

Dissauer, K., Temmer, M., Veronig,

A. M., Vanninathan, K., & Magdaleni´c,
J. 2016, ApJ, 830, 92

Dissauer, K., Veronig, A. M., Temmer,
M., & Podladchikova, T. 2019, ApJ,
874, 123

Dissauer, K., Veronig, A. M., Temmer,

M., Podladchikova, T., & Vanninathan,
K. 2018a, ApJ, 855, 137

—. 2018b, ApJ, 863, 169
Duan, A., Jiang, C., He, W., et al. 2019,

ApJ, 884, 73

Duan, A., Jiang, C., Hu, Q., et al. 2017,

ApJ, 842, 119

Feng, L., Wiegelmann, T., Su, Y., et al.

2013, ApJ, 765, 37

28

Prasad et al.

Forbes, T. G., & Lin, J. 2000, Journal of
Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial
Physics, 62, 1499

Gary, G. A. 2001, SoPh, 203, 71
—. 2009, SoPh, 257, 271
Gary, G. A., & Hagyard, M. J. 1990,

SoPh, 126, 21

Grinstein, F. F., Margolin, L. G., &

Rider, W. J. 2007, Implicit large eddy
simulation: computing turbulent ﬂuid
dynamics (Cambridge university press)
Harrison, R. A., & Lyons, M. 2000, A&A,

358, 1097

Hernandez-Perez, A., Thalmann, J. K.,
Veronig, A. M., et al. 2017, ApJ, 847,
124

Hu, Q., & Dasgupta, B. 2008, SoPh, 247,

87

Hu, Q., Dasgupta, B., Choudhary, D. P.,
& B¨uchner, J. 2008, ApJ, 679, 848
Hu, Q., Dasgupta, B., Derosa, M. L.,
B¨uchner, J., & Gary, G. A. 2010,
Journal of Atmospheric and
Solar-Terrestrial Physics, 72, 219

Kliem, B., & T¨or¨ok, T. 2006, Physical

Review Letters, 96, 255002

Kumar, D., & Bhattacharyya, R. 2011,

Physics of Plasmas, 18, 084506
Kumar, D., Bhattacharyya, R., &

Smolarkiewicz, P. K. 2015a, Physics of
Plasmas, 22, 012902

Kumar, S., & Bhattacharyya, R. 2016,

Physics of Plasmas, 23, 044501

Kumar, S., Bhattacharyya, R., Joshi, B.,
& Smolarkiewicz, P. K. 2016, ApJ, 830,
80

Kumar, S., Bhattacharyya, R., &

Smolarkiewicz, P. K. 2014, Physics of
Plasmas, 21, 052904

—. 2015b, Physics of Plasmas, 22, 082903
Lau, Y.-T., & Finn, J. M. 1990, ApJ, 350,

672

Lemen, J. R., Title, A. M., Akin, D. J.,

et al. 2012, SoPh, 275, 17

Liu, C., Prasad, A., Lee, J., & Wang, H.

2020, ApJ, 899, 34

Liu, R., Kliem, B., Titov, V. S., et al.

2016, ApJ, 818, 148

Hudson, H. S., Acton, L. W., & Freeland,

Margolin, L. G., Rider, W. J., &

S. L. 1996, ApJ, 470, 629

Inoue, S. 2016, Progress in Earth and

Planetary Science, 3, 19

Inoue, S., Hayashi, K., Magara, T., Choe,
G. S., & Park, Y. D. 2014, ApJ, 788,
182

—. 2015, ApJ, 803, 73
Janvier, M., Savcheva, A., Pariat, E.,

et al. 2016, A&A, 591, A141

Jiang, C., & Feng, X. 2014, SoPh, 289, 63
Jiang, C., Feng, X., & Hu, Q. 2018, ApJ,

866, 96

Jiang, C., Feng, X., Wu, S. T., & Hu, Q.

2013, ApJL, 771, L30

Jiang, C., Wu, S. T., Feng, X., & Hu, Q.

2014, ApJL, 786, L16

—. 2016, Nature Communications, 7,

11522

Joshi, B., Kushwaha, U., Veronig, A. M.,

& Cho, K. S. 2016, ApJ, 832, 130

Joshi, B., Kushwaha, U., Veronig, A. M.,

et al. 2017, ApJ, 834, 42

Kliem, B., Su, Y. N., van Ballegooijen,

A. A., & DeLuca, E. E. 2013, ApJ, 779,
129

Grinstein, F. F. 2006, Journal of
Turbulence, 7, 15

Masson, S., Pariat, E., Aulanier, G., &
Schrijver, C. J. 2009, ApJ, 700, 559

Mitra, P. K., Joshi, B., Prasad, A.,

Veronig, A. M., & Bhattacharyya, R.
2018, ApJ, 869, 69

Nayak, S. S., Bhattacharyya, R., Prasad,

A., et al. 2019, ApJ, 875, 10
Parker, E. N. 1972, ApJ, 174, 499
—. 1988, ApJ, 330, 474
—. 1994, Spontaneous current sheets in
magnetic ﬁelds : with applications to
stellar x-rays. International Series in
Astronomy and Astrophysics,
Vol. 1. New York : Oxford University
Press, 1994., 1

Pesnell, W. D., Thompson, B. J., &

Chamberlin, P. C. 2012, SoPh, 275, 3

Petrie, G. J. D. 2012, ApJ, 759, 50
Prasad, A., & Bhattacharyya, R. 2016,

Physics of Plasmas, 23, 114504

Prasad, A., Bhattacharyya, R., Hu, Q.,
Kumar, S., & Nayak, S. S. 2018, ApJ,
860, 96

MHD simulations of AR 11283

29

Prasad, A., Bhattacharyya, R., & Kumar,

Vanninathan, K., Veronig, A. M.,

S. 2017, ApJ, 840, 37

Priest, E. 2014, Magnetohydrodynamics
of the Sun (Cambridge University
Press)

Prusa, J. M., Smolarkiewicz, P. K., &

Wyszogrodzki, A. A. 2008, Computers
& Fluids, 37, 1193

Qiu, J., & Cheng, J. 2017, ApJL, 838, L6
Romano, P., Zuccarello, F., Guglielmino,

S. L., et al. 2015, A&A, 582, A55
Ruderman, M. S., & Roberts, B. 2002,

ApJ, 577, 475

Sahu, S., Joshi, B., Mitra, P. K., Veronig,
A. M., & Yurchyshyn, V. 2020, ApJ,
897, 157

Savcheva, A., Pariat, E., McKillop, S.,

et al. 2016, ApJ, 817, 43

—. 2015, ApJ, 810, 96
Schou, J., Scherrer, P. H., Bush, R. I.,

et al. 2012, SoPh, 275, 229

Shibata, K., & Magara, T. 2011, Living

Reviews in Solar Physics, 8, 6

Smolarkiewicz, P. K. 2006, International
Journal for Numerical Methods in
Fluids, 50, 1123

Smolarkiewicz, P. K., & Charbonneau, P.

2013, Journal of Computational
Physics, 236, 608

Sterling, A. C., & Hudson, H. S. 1997,

ApJL, 491, L55

Thompson, B. J., Cliver, E. W., Nitta, N.,
Delann´ee, C., & Delaboudini`ere, J. P.
2000, Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 1431

Dissauer, K., & Temmer, M. 2018, ApJ,
857, 62

Veronig, A. M., G¨om¨ory, P., Dissauer, K.,
Temmer, M., & Vanninathan, K. 2019,
ApJ, 879, 85

Wang, H., & Liu, C. 2012, ApJ, 760, 101

Wiegelmann, T. 2008, Journal of

Geophysical Research (Space Physics),
113, A03S02

Wiegelmann, T., Inhester, B., & Sakurai,

T. 2006, SoPh, 233, 215

Wiegelmann, T., & Sakurai, T. 2012,
Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 9,
arXiv:1208.4693

Yalim, M. S., Prasad, A., Pogorelov,
N. V., Zank, G. P., & Hu, Q. 2020,
ApJL, 899, L4

Yang, Y.-H., Chen, P. F., Hsieh, M.-S.,

et al. 2014, ApJ, 786, 72

Zarro, D. M., Sterling, A. C., Thompson,
B. J., Hudson, H. S., & Nitta, N. 1999,
ApJL, 520, L139

Zhang, Q. M., Su, Y. N., & Ji, H. S. 2017,

A&A, 598, A3

Zhou, G. P., Zhang, J., Wang, J. X., &

Wheatland, M. S. 2017, ApJL, 851, L1

