© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030460

Personal Augmented Reality for Information Visualization
on Large Interactive Displays

Patrick Reipschl ¨ager*, Tamara Flemisch*, Raimund Dachselt

0
2
0
2

t
c
O
9
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

3
v
7
3
2
3
0
.
9
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Fig. 1.
Impressions from our prototype for extending visualizations with Augmented Reality: (a) Two analysts working with our
environment, (b) display showing our AR Brushing and Linking, Embedded AR Visualizations, and Extended Axis Views, (c) Hinged
Visualizations to improve perception of remote content, and (d) Curved AR Screen providing an overview of the entire display.

Abstract—In this work we propose the combination of large interactive displays with personal head-mounted Augmented Reality (AR)
for information visualization to facilitate data exploration and analysis. Even though large displays provide more display space, they
are challenging with regard to perception, effective multi-user support, and managing data density and complexity. To address these
issues and illustrate our proposed setup, we contribute an extensive design space comprising ﬁrst, the spatial alignment of display,
visualizations, and objects in AR space. Next, we discuss which parts of a visualization can be augmented. Finally, we analyze how AR
can be used to display personal views in order to show additional information and to minimize the mutual disturbance of data analysts.
Based on this conceptual foundation, we present a number of exemplary techniques for extending visualizations with AR and discuss
their relation to our design space. We further describe how these techniques address typical visualization problems that we have
identiﬁed during our literature research. To examine our concepts, we introduce a generic AR visualization framework as well as a
prototype implementing several example techniques. In order to demonstrate their potential, we further present a use case walkthrough
in which we analyze a movie data set. From these experiences, we conclude that the contributed techniques can be useful in exploring
and understanding multivariate data. We are convinced that the extension of large displays with AR for information visualization has a
great potential for data analysis and sense-making.

Index Terms—Augmented Reality, Information Visualization, InfoVis, Large Displays, Immersive Analytics, Physical Navigation, Multiple
Coordinated Views

1 INTRODUCTION

Interactive information visualization on large or wall-sized displays has
been shown to have great potential for data analysis [3, 38, 51]. Due
to their size, they can visualize large amounts of data or several visu-
alizations at once which are often linked to each other. Such multiple
coordinated views are useful to help understanding complex, multi-
variate data sets by highlighting connections between views through
Brushing and Linking [74]. However, working in front of large displays
also leads to awareness and perception issues regarding the periph-
eral areas of the display [4, 14]. This results in users having to step
back from the display to gain an overview of the data [4, 51] which
in turn means that details within speciﬁc visualizations are no longer
perceivable. While multiple coordinated visualizations are a valuable
technique for analyzing multivariate data sets, they still require exten-
sible context switches. Therefore, it can be beneﬁcial to visualize all
available information directly in place. Due to their size, large displays
are also suited for collaborative work [42, 43] enabling several users to
interact with the display at the same time. However, as users interact

* The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.

All authors are with the Interactive Media Lab at the Technische Universit¨at
Dresden, Germany. Raimund Dachselt is with the Centre for Tactile Internet
(CeTi) and the Cluster of Excellence Physics of Life, TU Dresden. E-mails:
{patrick.reipschlaeger, tamara.ﬂemisch}@tu-dresden.de, dachselt@acm.org.

Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of Publication
xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. For information on
obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx

with the display, they block parts of it with their body which can disturb
other analysts [45, 64]. Highlights, which result from Brushing and
Linking, can also be distracting to others. The same is true for other
people’s tools that might obstruct important details of a visualization.
Besides large displays, the recent ﬁeld of Immersive Analytics has
shown great potential for improving data analysis and mitigating prob-
lems commonly associated with three dimensional visualizations on
traditional displays [88]. By using immersive technologies, Immersive
Analytics aims to overcome barriers between people, their data, and the
tools they use for analysis and decision making [24]. In this regard,
physical navigation [8, 28, 47], spatial immersion [3], and embodied
data exploration [50, 88] have proven to help in understanding complex
data [24]. Immersive Analytics applications also have limitations re-
garding interaction and the visual quality of visualizations [7, 11, 24].
By combining Immersive Analytics and large displays, their individual
limitations can be mitigated and their advantages strengthened [7].

Based on these promising two avenues of research, we propose to
combine a large, interactive display with head-mounted, personal Aug-
mented Reality (AR). We imagine one or more analysts in front of a
large, vertical, interactive display which shows one large or several
linked visualizations of multivariate data. Each analyst wears an AR
head-mounted display (HMD) which is used to overlay the screen with
additional, user-speciﬁc information. We are convinced that this combi-
nation can mitigate the aforementioned issues for both, large displays
and pure immersive analysis techniques. The display serves as a frame
of reference for all AR content and facilitates natural pen and touch in-
teraction [85]. Augmented Reality, however, can help to guide analysts’
awareness, show remote parts of the screen, and to display additional
content directly embedded in the visualization [90]. Furthermore, this

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
enables personal views which foster undisturbed and unobstructed in-
teraction and allow for individual, personalized selections, annotations,
and extensions to the data shown on the display. In this work, we
contribute an analysis of the design space of the combination of a large,
interactive display, Augmented Reality, and information visualizations.
In this design space, we ﬁrst analyze the spatial alignment of the display,
the analyst, and the AR content. Second, we discuss which parts of a
visualization can be augmented. Third, we describe how to leverage
personal views to show additional information and minimize the mutual
disturbance of analysts. To illustrate the potential of our conceptual
design space, we contribute several augmentation techniques, which
address speciﬁc visualization problems. To examine our concepts, we
developed a generic, data-driven AR visualization framework as well
as a prototype implementing our proposed techniques (see Fig. 1). We
demonstrate their potential in a use case scenario in which we analyze
a movie data set. Lastly, we discuss technical and perceptual aspects
and give an outlook on how the presented concepts can be extended in
the future.

2 RELATED WORK AND BACKGROUND
Our work touches upon the research ﬁelds of Information Visualiza-
tion (InfoVis) and Human-Computer Interaction (HCI). In particular,
it refers to the use of (1) large, interactive displays and (2) Mixed
Reality (MR) for information visualization as well as (3) the general
combination of interactive surfaces and Augmented Reality.

2.1 Information Visualization on Large Displays
Large, interactive displays have been increasingly used for data anal-
ysis and visualization with positive impact [3, 71]. Their screen size,
the vast physical space in front of them [3, 8, 44], and their interac-
tion capabilities make them a powerful foundation for exploring large
amounts of data. Possible interaction modalities for information visual-
ization beyond the traditional desktop setup have been proposed [56,75],
with touch interaction being the most common one. Data analysis
beneﬁts from touch input due to a more direct interaction with the
data [20, 38, 43, 49, 51, 68], although some use cases proﬁt from more
distant interaction [49–51]. The increased screen estate of the displays
can be used for showing large amounts of data, such as node-link dia-
grams [50, 68], or to incorporate multiple views of data [51, 55]. Due to
their size, large displays also facilitate collaborative data analysis and
multiple analysts working in parallel [42,50,51,68,82]. Even though the
beneﬁts of large, interactive surfaces for visualization is evident, they
also contribute speciﬁc challenges, affordances, and requirements [4]
which we further discuss in Sect. 2.4.

2.2 Immersive Analytics
The ﬁeld of Immersive Analytics makes use of various display tech-
nologies to facilitate and support embodied data analysis and decision
making [24]. Recent research in Immersive Analytics focuses especially
on how Mixed Reality environments can help to explore and understand
data. Cordeil et al. [22] present a system to explore multidimensional
data in Virtual Reality (VR) through manipulating and arranging linked
axes. Approaches on how to ideally route links in immersive spaces
have been analyzed by Prouzeau et al. [69]. Alternatively, Liu et al. [58]
adapted the concept of small multiples to an immersive environment.
Overall, different MR technologies have their own strengths and weak-
nesses [7]. In this regard, Augmented Reality shows great potential for
data analysis since it allows for embedding data representations into the
physical space and therefore facilitates the simultaneous exploration of
large amounts of data [11, 90].

Whitlock et al. [88] studied how visualization techniques and dif-
ferent immersive display modalities affect data analysis tasks. They
found that analysts beneﬁt from AR and VR when estimating depth
and height but also that color perception in video see-through AR is
challenging. The impact of different edge types for node-link diagrams
in AR was investigated by B¨uschel et al. [16]. Batch et al. [11] found
that analysts are highly interested, present, and engaged when ana-
lyzing data in immersive environments. Similar to visualization on
large displays, Immersive Analytics also presents new affordances and

requirements regarding the perception, design, and interaction of and
with visualizations [24, 88].

Interaction in immersive environments is often achieved through
mid-air gestures. Although they allow for rich input modalities, they
lack haptic feedback [24]. Therefore, recent work has combined AR
with multi-touch displays. Wang et al. [86] propose to integrate Aug-
mented Reality visualizations into traditional desktop setups. Their
ﬁndings suggest that this helps analysts to better understand their data.
Work by Chen et al. [21] and VisAR by Kim et al. [48] both combine
personal AR views with small as well as large displays to generate inter-
activity for otherwise static visualizations. Sun et al. [80] incorporate
visualizations on wall-sized displays and AR HMDs for collaborative
visual analysis and personalized views. Likewise, Butcher et al. [17]
apply a video see-through AR HMD to augment a large interactive
tabletop for analyzing 2D visualizations. AR visualizations are directly
situated on the display and analysts interact with proxies on the interac-
tive surface. Furthermore, work that shows display-like surfaces in a
pure VR environment [30, 31, 69] may be adapted to a setup consisting
of a physical display and head-mounted AR.

2.3 Combining Interactive Surfaces with Mixed Reality
Starting with the early works Hybrid Displays [29] and Augmented
Surfaces [73], the recent development of commercial VR and AR
HMDs has led to a renewed interest in combining Mixed Reality with
interactive or non-interactive displays. Bodgan et al. [15] and Mendes
et al. [61] use a stereoscopic display to investigate the differences
between 2D and 3D interaction for modeling and 3D manipulation
of objects, but there is no consensus which technique is preferable.
Grubert et al. [34] use head-mounted Augmented Reality to extend the
screen around mobile devices. DualCAD by Milette and McGufﬁn [62]
loosely combines a traditional desktop CAD application with head-
mounted AR. In SymbiosisSketch by Arora et al. [5] users can draw
objects in AR using a tablet. However, the interaction on the tablet
is spatially decoupled from the AR surface that is sketched onto. In
a similar way, Sereno et al. [78] propose to manipulate an AR 3D
visualization by using touch on a tablet. Again, there is no spatial
connection between the tablet and the visualization. Cavallo et al.’s
DataSpace [18] combines multiple large displays with AR and VR
visualizations but with no strong spatial integration between content in
AR and on the displays (also cf. [19]). Reipschl¨ager and Dachselt [72]
combine an interactive surface with an AR HMD for a stereoscopic 3D
modeling tool. In this work, there is a strong connection between the
display and the AR content and a particular focus is on how the borders
of the display can be utilized to place additional views and how to
interact with them. They have also coined the term Augmented Displays
for seamlessly combining interactive displays with head-mounted AR,
to which our approach can also be attributed.

2.4 Challenges for Visualization on Large Displays
Based on previous works on visualization for large, interactive displays,
we compiled several important challenges, which we describe in detail
in the following sections.

Perceptual Issues on Large Displays

Large displays have special requirements regarding human perception
due to their size. Endert et al.’s [28] list of perceptual issues with
large displays consists of the importance of peripheral vision, distortion
due to extreme viewing angles and long distances, and the different
effects of visual variables on large displays compared to traditional
displays. Change Blindness: Change blindness is a big problem on
large displays due to the screen extending into peripheral vision [28]
which makes acquiring an overview of the data [65] or comparisons [4]
much more difﬁcult. Motion and animation can be used to create aware-
ness in peripheral areas [10], e.g., by temporary ﬂashing, afterglow
effects [13], or ambient light around the display [65]. However, while
they increase awareness, they do not improve perception of the data
itself and users have to move to the actual position to see what exactly
changed. Distortion due to Viewing Angles: Extreme viewing angles
can distort the shape [89] and orientation [28] of data marks as well as

2

C.1© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030460

the perception of aspect ratios and color encodings [4, 14]. In contrast,
others found color to be more robust to distortion [28, 92] as well as
length [14] and position [89]. Dynamically correcting the user’s per-
spective [63], images with multiple scales [40], lenses [49, 50], and
potentially using curved displays [67] have been explored to address
the issue of distortion. Physical Navigation: Users move naturally in
front of large displays [8, 71] to utilize the increased space [3]. This
physical navigation [8] usually seems to improve performance com-
pared to virtual navigation [47] and increases spatial memory [3, 44].
Generally, users step back from the display to gain an overview of the
data [8, 28] and move closer to access details [14, 28, 40]. Effects of
Visual Encodings: However, perceptual issues emerge when stepping
back from the display as visual encodings will be lost at a distance or
are perceived differently [28,40,92]. This can be mitigated by visual ag-
gregation through using color or creating light and dark regions [28,92].
Proxemics [9], i.e., adapting the information displayed according to a
user’s proximity, is another technique to handle this issue, e.g., by ad-
justing the level of detail [46, 53] or by using geometrical zooming [50].
Hybrid-image visualization [40] takes another direction by embedding
different levels of detail into one visualization which are only visible
from a particular distance. Another strategy is ofﬂoading detail views
on additional devices that can be used from afar [38, 49].

Managing Density and Complexity

The size of large displays is their most important characteristic but at
the same time also represents the challenge how the obtained space
is best used. Andrews et al. [4] provide several approaches to using
the available space to increase the amount of displayed information.
Appropriate Use of Space: While just increasing the number of data
items is an obvious option [20, 80], adding more data dimensions [82]
might result in a more comprehensive visualization. Further details,
like labels and values [1, 80] and multiple levels of data [52], can
be embedded or incorporated into the visualization. Beside scaling
visualizations and using the space to enhance one visualization, the
acquired space can be used to show multiple, coordinated visualiza-
tions [1, 20, 51, 74, 82]. However, given a big enough data set, even
large screens might not sufﬁce to display them [27, 39]. Therefore,
it is important to consider alternative ways of visualizing additional
data besides increasing the screen space. Scaling of Visual Encod-
ings: Managing the density and complexity of data is not a problem
exclusive to visualization on smaller screens, but poses an issue on
large displays as well. Some visual encodings, such as the number
of data marks and their size [3, 92] as well as color itself [28], scale
well with size and beneﬁt from the additional space. Others, such as
the number of perceivable colors and network connectivity [4], i.e.,
edge crossings, do not improve with additional space. Overplotting:
Problems such as overplotting also remain on large displays. For scatter
plots, clutter reduction, displacement, zooming, and density plots [76]
as well as pixel-based techniques [70] can be used to mitigate them.
For dense node-link diagrams, edge bundling [57] and cutting [25]
can be used to minimize edge crossings and reduce edge congestion.
Data Complexity: Other common approaches to reduce the complex-
ity of data are clustering and dimensionality reduction [59, 87] as well
as utilizing focus + context techniques, e.g., magic lenses [83] or
space-folding [27], overview + detail techniques [39], and semantic
zooming [49]. For zoomed information spaces, off-screen visualization
techniques [12, 35, 66] and ofﬂoading information to auxiliary devices
to increase screen estate [38, 49] are also beneﬁcial.

Support for Multiple Users

Large displays are naturally suitable for multi-user scenarios. Their
large size and the thereby deﬁned physical space on the screen
and in front of it makes them ideal for co-located work and col-
laboration [41, 43, 50]. Obstruction and Distraction: Large dis-
plays also lead to challenges as users will inevitably physically ob-
struct, disturb, and distract each other when working in groups [43].
Prouzeau et al. [68] suggest to leverage interactions that have a large
visual footprint to encourage close collaboration and facilitate the fre-
quent switch [43] from closely to loosely coupled collaboration [81].

Furthermore, users can easily lose awareness for what others are doing
while working on a different area of the large display [36, 43, 60, 81].
Gutwin & Greenberg [36] state that to maintain workspace awareness,
users need to monitor each other’s behavior, for instance by show-
ing past interactions of others [37], incorporating visual connections
between information [42], using ambient light [65], or embedding
animation and off-screen visualization techniques [35, 66]. Personal
Territories: Studies have shown that users value a personal territory to
interact with while still maintaining shared spaces [77, 81]. On vertical
displays, territories are mostly transient and dynamic [43] when mov-
ing around and nonetheless similar to those on horizontal displays [6].
Having a personal space can either be achieved by a designated space
on the display itself or an additional personal device, such as a smart-
phone [20, 49] or a smart watch [38].

So far, we discussed issues for visualizing data on large, interactive
displays and common strategies for addressing them. These presented
strategies might sufﬁciently resolve a particular challenge. However,
we now introduce a novel approach and a promising alternative to
address many of these challenges and potentially mitigate shortcomings
of already existing techniques.

3 GENERAL CONCEPT AND DESIGN SPACE

Our goal with this work is to address the aforementioned challenges
and improve the visualization of multivariate data on large, interactive
displays. We assume a scenario consisting of one or multiple data
analysts in front of a large, vertical, interactive display that either shows
a single large visualization or multiple coordinated views (MCV) of
multivariate data. We propose to equip each of these analysts with an
AR HMD that extends visualizations or parts of visualizations with
personalized information. As a delimitation to other work, we solely
focus on setups consisting of a single large display and exclude multi-
display environments (cf. [49,53]). We only consider vertically oriented
screens of larger size, e.g., digital whiteboards up to wall-sized displays.
Consequently, we assume that the display remains stationary during
use and does not change its position. Our concepts can be used in
a multi-user environment and we discuss cases with both single and
multiple users. However, we do not focus on such techniques fostering
communication and collaboration between users.

We contribute a design space that provides a systematic overview
deﬁning and exploring the boundaries of our proposed setup. It can
be used to inspire and guide the development of new visualization
and interaction techniques. It consists of (1) the spatial alignment of
the display, the users, and the AR content, (2) how different parts of
a visualization can be augmented, and (3) how to provide personal
content in multi-user scenarios.

3.1 Spatial Alignment of Display and AR Content

The placement of AR content with respect to its spatial alignment to
the display is an essential design aspect for augmenting visualizations.
In this section, we present possible placement options and outline
their respective implications. Reipschl¨ager and Dachselt [72] have
previously deﬁned three levels of spatial proximity that relate to our
design space: AR objects situated directly on or in front of the display,
objects close or directly at the edge of the display, and objects with
no spatial relation to the display. Our work focuses mostly on the ﬁrst
two levels, as we consider a strong connection and a precise spatial
alignment of AR and display content to be of essential importance.

We classify the display’s screen as a frame of reference for the
placement of AR objects, deﬁning a planar space around the screen.
Content positioned on this plane represents a natural extension of the
screen and thus conveys a strong relation to the display. It can be divided
based on the cardinal directions to create nine different principal zones
to place objects, which can be further extended orthogonally into the
third dimension for placing content in front or behind the display1

1While these spatial zones are considered primarily for the placement of AR
content in the context of this work, they also describe the general relationship of
visualizations to their surrounding environment, regardless of the medium used.

3

C.2C.3Fig. 2. Planar zones of spatial align-
ment of AR content with the display,
which extend in front and behind the
display’s screen.

Fig. 3. Overview of the components of a visualization
that can be extended with AR content and the symbols
used throughout the paper to represent those compo-
nents.

Fig. 4. Overview of our design space dimensions and
their relation to the techniques presented in Sect. 4.

and right zone

and bottom zone

(see Fig. 2). Although in principle, each of the zones is suitable for
placing arbitrary AR content, there are special relationships that should
be considered. Of all zones, the central zone
is the most important
one because it has the strongest alignment to the display and to content
on the display. For visualizations with a rectangular shape, the left
zone
are particularly suitable for content that
relates to the vertical dimensions of the visualization. Consequently, the
top zone
are particularly suitable for content
that refers to the horizontal dimensions. An example for this is to
extend a data dimension shown in the visualization on the screen to the
left and right or top and bottom to provide additional data. Since the
four corner zones have the weakest spatial connection to the display,
the other zones should be preferred for placing objects. AR content
may also occupy more than one zone, e.g., top and bottom , left and
right
, or even all of them . Furthermore, Content on, behind,
or in front of a spatial zone is considered to be within that speciﬁc
zone. With increasing display size, all spatial zones besides the central
zone become less important because of their increasing distance to
the center of the screen and therefore also to the likely position of the
analysts. Conversely, the smaller the display gets, the more important
the peripheral zones become. We are therefore convinced that these
spatial zones are also useful for the design of techniques for smaller
screens. The current position of an analyst in relation to the display can
also inﬂuence the spatial positioning of the AR content (cf. Proxemic
Interaction [9]). For example, if an analyst is closer to the left edge of
the display than to the right, AR content can be displayed preferably in
the left zone compared to the right zone. In practice, some zones may
be unsuitable for placement of AR content if they conﬂict with or are
constrained by the physical condition of the room. To avoid this, the
spatial zones can be adapted to the room geometry, e.g., using the ﬂoor
of the room for the bottom zone.

, data marks

3.2 Augmentations for Parts of a Visualization
While the previous considerations could be applied to every type of
content, this section concentrates on how visualizations themselves
can be augmented. A visualization consists of components, such as
, and labels, that are common to almost every
axes
visualization and which can be extended using AR techniques (see
Fig. 3 for a comprehensive list). In general, augmenting speciﬁc parts
of a visualization can address problems speciﬁc to large displays, which
we describe in Sect. 2.4. Especially data marks beneﬁt vastly from
using the space around and in front of them to present additional,
potentially multivariate data. We can harness the property that every
analyst has their own personal view to accommodate for legends
,
labels, tooltips, personal tools as well as selections
. Annotations
of the data can be created by, e.g., using a digital pen to write on
the display. Another common issue in visualization is overplotting
) through data marks, for instance in dense scatter
and occlusion (
in node-link diagrams. Using the third
plots, or nodes and links
dimension, i.e., central zone
, and incorporating Augmented Reality
can help to address this issue by providing the increased space of
for interaction
another spatial dimension. Additional UI elements
with a visualization are fundamental for the functionality of interactive

4

visualizations. Therefore, we consider them as part of a visualization
which can be augmented as well.

We have previously described how content in AR can be spatially
aligned with the display. However, this spatial alignment does not solely
apply to a display but to individual visualizations and their components
as well. As a consequence, depending on the component, zones can
), restricted by
either be very small (e.g., in case of a narrow axis
other components in proximity (e.g., a bar that is next to another bar),
or may not be available at all (e.g, a line covers only one dimension).
Larger zones are more suitable to be extended with AR content. For
instance, whereas the zones at the beginning and at the end of an axis
can be used for auxiliary components, like UI elements, such as ﬁlters,
labels, drop down menus, or legends, the adjacent and central zones
of the axis are beneﬁcial for displaying additional information for the
visualization. Furthermore, general UI elements or tools
can be
completely ofﬂoaded into AR if necessary and beneﬁcial. Besides
augmenting parts of the visualization, augmentations can be used to
enhance the visualization as a whole
, e.g., by highlighting recently
updated visualizations or by extending the whole visualization into
the third dimension. Large displays are especially well suited for
showing more than one visualization at a time due to their size [4, 51].
As a consequence, the space around a single visualization may be
constrained by other visualizations on the display (cf. Sect. 3.1). To
address this, the spatial zones can be folded by 90 degrees so that they
are now orthogonal to the visualization. Due to this spatial adaptation,
the resulting augmentation space becomes similar to a cuboid.

3.3 Personal Views in Multi-User Scenarios
In addition to showing multiple visualizations, large displays are suit-
able for being used by multiple people at the same time [4]. This can
result in several issues discussed in
(Sect. 2.4). Combining displays
with AR HMDs allows for public views as well as personal views. By
default, all content on the display can be seen by all users and all con-
tent on the AR HMDs is only perceptible by individual users. However,
this is more of a technological consequence and there is a distinction
between content on the AR glasses being private because others simply
cannot see it or content being private by design. While it is difﬁcult to
hide content on the display for individual users, content in AR can be
shared among multiple users to foster collaboration. However, there
Preventing
can be beneﬁts in not sharing AR content with others.
Obstruction: The additional views created by individual users might
obstruct or confuse others. An example is selections created by analysts
which highlight data items in other visualizations through Brushing and
Linking. Since these highlights would be visible to everyone regardless
of whether they are interesting for others, they should not be shared
Personalized Views: Personalized views and tools can
by default.
be conﬁgured to an individual analyst’s needs. For example, Magic
Lenses [83] are personal tools which can apply a variety of ﬁlters to a
data set to support the current analyst’s task. Since these views are spe-
ciﬁc to every person, they should not be shared with others as they have
Private Information: People might
their own personalized views.
consider certain information private and therefore want to keep it for
themselves. One example is annotations created by analysts which may

behindtoprightleftcentralbottominfrontToolsViewSelectionsAxesAnnotationsUIElementsGridDataMarksLegendLinksSpatialAlignmentVisualizationPartsPersonalViewsARAnnotationsMagicARLensesARVisualizationLayersExtendedAxisViewsARBrushingandLinkingallpartsCurvedARScreenHingedVisualizationsEmbeddedARVisualizationsC.2C.3© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030460

Fig. 5. Embedded AR Visualiza-
tions directly situated on a visual-
ization on the display.

Fig. 6. Hinged Visualizations in AR
space to address limited perception
of far away objects.

Fig. 7. Curved AR Screen to en-
able an overview of the whole dis-
play even when close to the screen.

Fig. 8. AR Brushing and Linking
with 3D Bezi ´er links indicating con-
nections between visualizations.

contain content that people might feel uncomfortable in immediately
sharing with others. These aspects illustrate how AR can be used to
enable personal views and in which cases they can be useful. Of course,
it is also important for collaborative work, how personal information
and views can be shared with other analysts and how they can support
social protocols and foster discourse. We discuss this aspect in Sect. 7.

The symbols we have introduced in this section for the different dimen-
sions of the design space will be used in the conceptual illustrations for
each technique to reference their relation to the design space. Addition-
ally, Fig. 4 provides an overview of the techniques and their associated
parts in our design space.

4 VISUALIZATION TECHNIQUES

In this section, we present techniques that serve as examples to illustrate,
explore, and give an overview of our design space. We categorized our
techniques by the challenges
depending on which of them
and
is mainly addressed by a technique (see Sect. 2.4). Each technique also
as user-speciﬁc content is enabled through the
addresses challenge
use of personal AR HMDs. Due to space constraints, we opted to show
the breadth of our proposed concepts by brieﬂy describing a multitude
of techniques instead of an in-depth analysis of a few techniques. As a
consequence, speciﬁc visualizations used to illustrate techniques are
also exemplary and the same or similar augmentations can be potentially
used for other suitable visualization techniques. Furthermore, we will
describe the associated interactions in general, instead of presenting a
ﬁne-grained interaction design. Due to the combination of interactive
displays and head-mounted AR, we envision the primary use of touch
and pen interaction, both for the data and for controlling the individual
techniques themselves.

4.1 Perceptual Issues on Large Displays

In this section, four techniques are presented that primarily address
perceptual problems on large displays (
) and make it easier for
analysts to better understand connections between the data and maintain
an overview of the entire data set.

4.1.1 Embedded AR Visualizations

In contrast to a single visualization, multiple coordinated views are
good at representing multivariate data sets. However, studies have
shown that this is associated with many context and focus switches and
that embedded visualizations may be preferable [71, 90]. We therefore
propose to display additional data in AR space located directly on
corresponding data objects of an existing visualization (see Fig. 5 and
Fig. 14c). These Embedded AR Visualizations extend orthogonally from
the display. In principle, any type of visualization can be embedded. To
ensure a strong spatial connection they can be adapted to the original
form of the data marks they extend. For example, a scatter plot can be
extended by a cylinder-shaped visualization which encodes additional
data dimensions similar to a stacked bar chart. Due to the additional
information displayed by the embedded visualization, reading the orig-
inal visualization may become more difﬁcult. Therefore, it would be
sensible to limit Embedded AR Visualizations to data marks selected
by analysts. They can either be toggled individually with a touch tap

or be shown on-demand for the duration they are touched. Embedded
AR Visualizations address all three challenges, however primarily
by avoiding focus switches. They also support
through their ability
to incorporate multiple data levels and additional data into a single
data marks. Since they are user-speciﬁc, they can be conﬁgured by
each analyst individually regarding what additional data is represented
and how it is visualized (
). They use the central spatial zone in
front of a visualization. We recommend to utilize the potential of the
third dimension added by AR instead of simply showing another 2D
visualization on a data mark. As this technique is focused mainly on
the extension of data marks, size needs to be considered. The smaller a
data mark is and the denser they are grouped together, the less space is
available for showing embedded visualizations.

4.1.2 Hinged Visualizations

Perception issues through distortion caused by extreme viewing angles
are a big problem on large displays (see
). Therefore, we propose
to support awareness for remote parts of the display by rotating these
parts in AR space towards the analyst similar to a hinged door (see
Fig. 1c and 6). The larger the distance of an analyst towards the Hinged
Visualizations, the more it is tilted until it is aligned orthogonally to
the display and faces the analyst. Accordingly, as analysts move closer,
the angle gradually decreases until the AR visualization has vanished
to give way to the original visualization on the display. Angles also
decrease and the Hinged Visualizations ultimately disappear the further
the analyst steps back from the display to perceive the visualizations
as a whole. Hinged Visualizations are automatically generated based
on the current selection of an analyst to allow for an overview and a
rough comparison of connected values between remote visualizations.
However, analysts can also explicitly toggle Hinged Visualizations for
speciﬁc visualizations regardless of their current selection. A potential
disadvantage of Hinged Visualizations is that they can occlude other
parts of the screen. However, we consider this a minor issue since
the occluded parts are difﬁcult to detect by the current position of an
analyst anyway. Each analyst has individual Hinged Visualizations
). Hinged Visu-
based on their current data selection and position (
alizations take up the left, center, and right spatial zones and refer to
the visualization as a whole. They are aimed at use cases where there
is a large number of connected visualizations on the display. It is only
of limited assistance when few visualizations are present, since large
parts of the screen have to be tilted.

4.1.3 Curved AR Screen

Similar to Hinged Visualizations, this technique addresses the percep-
tual problem of parts of the display being in the analyst’s peripheral
vision (
). However, instead of individual visualizations, this tech-
nique aims to provide an overview of and awareness for the entire
screen. Curved displays improve the perception of peripheral content,
as shown by Shupp et al. [79]. Therefore, we propose to simulate such
a curved display in AR. The screen, with the exception of an area of
conﬁgurable size directly in front of the individual analyst, is trans-
ferred into AR space onto two curvatures, which extend to the left and
right of an analyst (see Fig. 7 and 1d). The curvatures are inﬂuenced by
an analyst’s position. The further away they are from a certain display

5

C.1C.2C.3C.1C.2C.3C.1C.3C.1C.3allC.1C.2C.3C.1C.2C.3C.1C.1C.2C.3C.1C.3C.1Fig. 9. Expanding the axis of visu-
alizations to create Extended Axis
Views and to show additional infor-
mation, such as aggregations.

Fig. 10. Showing AR Visualization
Layers in front of the display to of-
ﬂoad data or to show additional data
for an existing visualization.

Fig. 11. Magic AR Lenses as an ex-
ample for personalized tools trans-
ferred into AR space.

Fig. 12. Personal AR Annotations
created by pen input in green for
one analyst and blue for the other.

edge, the stronger the respective side’s curvature becomes. Accord-
ingly, the curvature ﬂattens and even vanishes completely as an analyst
approaches the corresponding display edge. The distance of an analyst
to the display also reduces the curvature as they gradually move from
a detailed view to an overview position. Curved AR Screen supports
multiple users by providing a personalized view based on each user’s
position and allows to see content that might otherwise be occluded by
). Curved AR Screen affects the whole central area of the
other users (
display but may also extend into the left and right areas adjacent to the
display. However, it combines well with other techniques, because con-
tent created by other techniques can be transferred onto the curvature
as well. Curved AR Screen affects all parts of a visualization, in fact
the whole display. As the whole screen is curved, the size and number
of visualizations on the display is not relevant and the technique works
well even for a single large visualization.

4.1.4 AR Brushing and Linking

When an analyst selects one or more items, connected items in other
visualizations are often highlighted by Brushing and Linking. However,
they can be hard to perceive due to impaired color perception in the
peripheral ﬁeld of view [4] and an analyst’s ability to track changes
over long distances [28] (see
). To address this problem, three-
dimensional AR links, like B´ezier curves, can be displayed whenever
an analyst selects data marks (see Fig. 1a,b, Fig. 8 and Fig. 14d). This
provides a clear visual link that extends from the original selection to
the linked data and is therefore more easily perceptible than highlights.
These links can encode additional values, for example using the color
and height [91] or the shape of the curve [16]. Analysts can also ﬁlter
the links, e.g., to display only links of certain attributes, thus further
enhancing the analysis process and contributing to Managing Den-
sity and Complexity. With the number of selections or their individual
size growing, the amount of links can lead to visual clutter. To avoid
this, we suggest displaying links on demand, e.g., showing them while
an analyst touches a data mark, or displaying them only for a short
amount of time to establish the necessary awareness. Alternatively,
the links can be clustered or bundled [25, 57, 69] but this makes it
difﬁcult to follow individual links. In general, AR links can be used
to augment data marks, links, and selections. They reside in the cen-
tral zone of the component they augment and the central zone of the
display itself because they can cross several visualizations. Links are
created individually for each person based on their current selection and
therefore do not disturb others (
). As their main purpose is to show
connections to other visualizations, AR links work best in a multiple
coordinated view environment. However, they might be used in single
visualizations as well to show additional relations between individual
data marks. Additionally, AR links can indicate completely different
types of connections, such as the dynamic information ﬂow between
visualizations.

4.2 Managing Density and Complexity

We now present four exemplary techniques that are primarily aimed at
).
making dense and complex data easier to experience and explore (

4.2.1 Extended Axis Views

The huge amount of data presented on a large display can be overwhelm-
ing and make it challenging to get an overview or identify patterns at
ﬁrst (see
). Aggregations are an effective way to address this prob-
lem [92]. They can be shown for speciﬁc axes, i.e., data dimensions, of
a visualization, for instance by providing a histogram of the distribution
of values along an axis. In order to use the screen space exclusively for
the core visualizations, we suggest moving the Extended Axis Views
into AR space (see Fig. 1a,b, Fig. 9, and Fig. 14a). Extended Axis
Views are situated directly on the axis of a visualization and expand it
to the corresponding adjacent spatial zone, e.g., the bottom spatial zone
for the bottom horizontal axis. This creates a strong spatial alignment
between the axis and the extended view and thus allows to easily see
which data is aggregated. In case of wall-sized displays, the aggre-
gation can be visualized directly on the ﬂoor in front of the wall and
therefore integrates nicely with the room geometry. When a multitude
of adjacent visualizations results in constrained space, the Extended
Axis Views can be folded as described in Sect. 3.2.

Besides aggregations, this technique can also be used to show ad-
ditional, personalized (
), axis-related data for a visualization. For
example, a 2D scatter plot can be extended to a scatter plot matrix
with three dimensions. The additional dimension is extended directly
at the axis of the original visualization so that a cuboid is created (cf.
ScatterDice [26]). This results in a strong spatial relation between the
individual parts of the matrix. The cuboid could be rotated with a touch
gesture, so that one of the parts formerly in AR is now shown on the
display in better detail and can be interacted with using touch input.

4.2.2 AR Visualization Layers

Dense visualizations may result in overplotting [76] and an overall un-
readable visualization (see
). The increased space provided by large
displays can reduce the problem of overlapping data marks but leaves
remaining issues, such as edge crossings in node-link diagrams [4].
To tackle these issues, we propose to transfer elements of the original
visualization into AR onto multiple layers or show additional data on
AR visualization layers parallel to the screen (see Fig. 10). On the one
hand, the layers can be used to group data marks semantically, like
ﬁltering by speciﬁc attributes. In case of node-link diagrams, overlap-
ping edges also beneﬁt from AR by resolving the ambiguity among the
edges. Edge crossings are further addressed by moving a single node, a
group of nodes, or semantic clusters onto layers in front of the display.
Thereby, the connectivity of the transferred nodes to the remaining
graph is evident since the connecting edges are shown between the lay-
ers. On the other hand, additional visualizations of the same type can
be placed in layers in front of or behind the display in AR allowing for
superimposed comparison [33] and thus addressing
. For example,
if a bar chart visualizes the number of movies released in each year in a
speciﬁc genre, the development for other genres can be displayed as AR
Visualization Layers for comparison. By scrolling through the layers
using a designated touch gesture, analysts can move a certain layer onto
the display to interact with it and see it in more detail. As a potential
problem, the readability of the original visualization is affected by
the superimposed AR layers. We propose two solutions to overcome
this problem: First, the AR Visualization Layers are only displayed

6

C.2C.3C.2C.3C.3C.2C.3C.3C.1C.2C.3C.2C.2C.3C.2C.2© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030460

on-demand to provide a quick summary of similarities among the data.
Second, the transparency of the AR visualizations can be reduced in
favor of improved readability of the display. Both variants can be com-
bined, i.e., showing the AR visualizations in high transparency and
switching to full opacity on-demand. The layers themselves are either
directly on, in front of, or behind the display or a speciﬁc visualization,
taking up the central spatial zone. AR Visualization Layers affect data
marks, links, and selections, and may even augment the whole visu-
alization. While the additional AR visualizations are only visible to
individual analysts, scrolling through the AR Visualization Layers may
).
obstruct other analysts that intend to work with previous layers (

4.2.3 Magic AR Lenses

Complex data sets beneﬁt from using specialized tools to facilitate
analysis and exploration. These tools can also be transferred to AR
space. In the following, this is illustrated by the example of magic
lenses, which have been successfully applied to the ﬁeld of data visual-
ization in the past [83]. Magic lenses can apply arbitrary ﬁlters to the
underlying data set, e.g., to reduce its complexity (
), which makes
them a useful, personalizable tool for data analysis. However, these
tools take up a lot of space on the visualization and can thus disturb
other analysts in multi-user scenarios during exploration. They may
also extend the current data by private information that analysts do
not want to share. By transferring a lens into AR space, it becomes
invisible to other analysts (see Fig. 11). Not only are they no longer
hindered by the lens, but the lens becomes a personal, user-speciﬁc
tool that can be freely conﬁgured according to an analyst’s needs (
).
Controlling the lens can still be achieved via the touch interface of
the display. If the spatial alignment between the display and the AR
device is synchronized, the analyst can interact with the AR object
as if it were still on the screen. In addition, the ﬁlters assigned to a
lens can now use the third dimension added by AR which enables an
entirely new class of ﬁlters, such as resolving the overlapping of nodes
(similar to AR Visualization Layers). Magic AR Lenses mostly affect
data marks but may, depending on the applied ﬁlters, affect other parts
of the visualization as well. The lenses themselves reside directly on
and are aligned with the display or individual visualization but ﬁlters
may expand the lenses into the space in front or even behind the screen.
Magic Lenses are suitable for single as well as multiple visualizations
on the display, although an individual lens is usually conﬁned to only a
single visualization, e.g., a map.

4.2.4 AR Annotations

While analyzing data, it is often helpful for analysts to create notes,
sketches, and drawings directly on the visualizations to better capture
insights [84, 85]. However, the notes of one analyst can be irrelevant
and even disturbing for others and inﬂuence their own analysis process,
. At the same time, analysts may want
which is an essential part of
to keep their notes private and not immediately share them with others.
Therefore, we suggest moving the annotations to AR space. Analysts
create their annotations writing on the display, for example using a
digital pen. However, these annotations are created solely in AR space
(see Fig. 12 and Fig. 14b). Provided the quality of the AR content is
sufﬁciently good, there is no difference between the presentation of
annotations on the display from the perspective of an individual analyst.
Furthermore, analysts should be enabled to share their annotations with
others using additional touch interaction techniques on the display to
foster collaboration.

4.3 Combining Techniques

Many of the previously presented techniques can be adapted or even
combined according to the requirements of a speciﬁc use case. Tech-
niques that affect different parts of a visualization can be used together
without conﬂict. The same applies to techniques that affect different
spatial zones. In addition, techniques can be adapted to be compatible
with each other to create a mutually beneﬁcial combination. For ex-
ample, Magic AR Lenses can show Embedded AR Visualizations for
all data marks in the lens area allowing to select whole regions instead
of individual data marks. Magic AR Lenses can also be combined

with AR Visualization Layers to show layers only for a speciﬁc area
rather than for the whole visualization, which can be advantageous for
large visualizations. AR Brushing and Linking can be adapted to not
only link visualizations on the display but also visualizations residing
in AR like Hinged Visualizations, Curved AR Screen, and Extended
Axis Views. Furthermore, principles like Hinged Visualizations can be
applied to techniques such as Extended Axis Views and even Magic AR
Lenses. Therefore, those visualizations would face the analyst as well
and ensure better readability over far distances.

5 AR VISUALIZATION FRAMEWORK AND PROTOTYPE

In order to execute and examine our techniques, we ﬁrst developed
a visualization framework that enables traditional visualizations on
a display as well as their free placement in the 3D AR space and a
combination of the two. Furthermore, it provides extensive capabilities
for manipulation and interaction with the visualizations. This was used
as a foundation for the prototype combining a display and AR HMDs
and implementing the techniques presented in the previous section.

Technical Setup As a large display we used a Microsoft Surface Hub
(84”, 3840x2160 pixel, 1.872x1.053m, touch and pen enabled) and
our own tiled display wall (7680x3240 pixel, 4.86x2.06m, touch, pen,
and tangible enabled). For Augmented Reality, we provide a MS
HoloLens 1 head-mounted display for each user. We used the Unity 3D
engine and C# to implement all parts of the prototype and framework.
The application on the display and those on the HMDs are stand-alone
and initially independent. Since the impression of a single, seamless
application is of great importance for the user experience, we developed
a custom client server solution using TCP and Open Sound Control
(OSC) to synchronize them especially regarding the touch interaction
of the users.

u2vis: A Universal Unity Visualization Framework Although many
frameworks for information visualization exist, they are mostly lim-
ited to traditional 2D visualizations. We investigated whether existing
frameworks for Immersive Analytics are suitable for our goals. IATK2
looked promising but we found it difﬁcult to integrate the interaction
capabilities, especially regarding touch, that were essential for our pro-
totype. DXR3 only supports Unity 2017 and seems to not be maintained
anymore. Therefore, we implemented our own, data-driven framework
for interactive information visualization called u2vis4. It provides a
joint data basis for all visualizations, separates data and its presentation,
and allows for the manipulation of visualizations by touch and other in-
teraction modalities. Our framework currently supports 2D and 3D bar
charts, scatter plots, and line charts, as well as parallel coordinates and
pie charts. While Fig. 13 only depicts the 2D projection shown on the
display, all visualizations can be freely positioned in 3D as well. Our
framework is written with an explicit focus on easy extensibility, mak-
ing it simple and straightforward to add new visualization types. All
visualizations are composed by combining several components in the
Unity editor by drag and drop and conﬁgured with the help of a graph-
ical interface. The loose coupling between these components makes
it possible to use only needed parts and to easily replace components
with alternatives tailored to the current use case.

Prototype Based on this foundation, we implemented the techniques
presented in Sect. 4 as a prototype (see Fig. 1). Visualizations can
be placed in any arrangement on the display and each user is able
to access their desired techniques independent of other users. Since
the individual techniques build upon the common foundation of our
visualization framework, combining them with each other is easy. To
ensure the spatial alignment of the AR content and the screen, the AR
content has a shared anchor on the lower left corner of the display. All
objects in AR are positioned relative to the anchor. For interaction,
we focused on touch input to interact with the visualizations and our
techniques and use the digital pen to create personal annotations. When
a user touches the display, the corresponding action, e.g., creating a

2https://github.com/MaximeCordeil/IATK
3https://sites.google.com/view/dxr-vis
4Sources available at https://github.com/imldresden/u2vis

7

C.3C.2C.3C.3Fig. 13. Screenshot of the Unity application running on the display,
showcasing the capabilities of our visualization framework. Several
visualizations of a movie data set are shown that serve as the foundation
for our use case.

selection, is computed on the display and the result, e.g., highlighting a
speciﬁc data object, is transmitted to the HMDs. Within our framework,
each visualization consists of a display part, which can function on
its own, and the HMD part, that reacts to events from the display’s
counterpart.

6 USE CASE: EXPLORING A MOVIE DATA SET

We examine our concepts as well as our implemented techniques in
the form of a cognitive walkthrough based on well-established analysis
tasks [2] and a speciﬁc use case scenario [54], that we implemented in
our prototype. We visualize a movie data set5 consisting of multiple
coordinated views (see Fig. 13). In the following, we describe how Sue
and Matt solve analysis and exploration tasks utilizing our techniques.

Sue and Matt decide to investigate the typical duration of movies and
how it changed over the years. They approach a scatter plot showing the
release date from 1920 to 2019 on the x axis and the duration of a movie
on the y axis. To better identify clusters, both choose our Extended
Axis Views technique to show a histogram at the y axis (see Fig. 14a).
Because the histogram is displayed in AR, no other visualizations needs
to be replaced, moved, or overlaid. With the help of the histogram Matt
detects that the typical movie duration is between 90 and 108 minutes.
The scatter plot itself reveals that movies nowadays tend to have similar
durations but with fewer outliers than in the 20th century. To accentuate
this development, Matt sketches with his digital pen to create personal
AR Annotations (see Fig. 14b).

The two analysts now focus on separate tasks, so they decide to start
working independently. Sue is further interested in the development of
movies over time, especially in fantasy movies, whereas Matt wants
to gain knowledge about speciﬁc movies. Therefore, Sue moves to-
wards a bar chart showing the number of fantasy movies over time. A
hold gesture on a data mark, i.e., a speciﬁc year, reveals another bar
chart orthogonal to the display, using the Embedded AR Visualizations
technique, which shows the number of movies in all genres for that
particular year (see Fig. 14c). While the most fantasy movies (25)
were produced in 2007, Sue ﬁnds out that this is still vastly below the
number of produced dramas in that year (148). Through Embedded
AR Visualizations, Sue can access this information on demand directly
within the context of an existing visualization, avoiding focus switches
and saving valuable screen space.

Meanwhile, Matt looks at the scatter plot showing budget and world-
wide gross income and selects two movies with similar budget but a
huge difference in income, which are Star Wars: Episode VII - The
Force Awaken and The Chronicles of Narnia: Prince Caspian. With our
AR Brushing and Linking technique, the selected movies are highlighted
in all other relevant visualizations with 3D links in AR (see Fig. 14d).
This, together with Hinged Visualizations (or alternatively the Curved
AR Screen) guides his awareness to the relevant visualizations. Thus,

5available on Kaggle (https://www.kaggle.com/stefanoleone992/imdb-extensive-dataset)

Fig. 14. Illustrating our use case: (a1) Selecting Extended Axis Views
that (a2) show an aggregation of movie duration.
(b1) One analyst
annotating a scatter plot, (b2) without the sketches being visible to others.
(c1) Selecting the year 2007 to show (c2) Embedded AR Visualizations
of the amount of movies released in each genre for this year. (d2) AR
Brushing and Linking between visualizations, (d3) a selection of two
movies in a scatter plot visualizing budget and worldwide gross income,
(d1) Hinged Visualizations showing the average votes for those movies.

he does not have to move to the other side of the display to obtain an
overview and an approximate position of the selected data. Retriev-
ing exact values, however, requires him to approach the visualization.
One of the Hinged Visualizations shows a scatter plot of release date
in comparison to average user vote. Based on the selection and the
accompanying links, it is easy to spot the desired movies in this chart
and to derive that Star Wars has an average rating of 7.9 and Narnia
of 6.5. Since only Matt sees the selection, the links, and the curved or
hinged parts, Sue can keep exploring the data without visual clutter or
disturbance.

This cognitive walkthrough shows how our proposed setup supports
common analysis tasks and highlights the potential beneﬁts compared
to traditional setups, such as saving valuable screen space, integrat-
ing additional information directly in place, and not obstructing other
analysts. Based on this use case and our own experiences, we are
conﬁdent that our approach has high potential in assisting data analysis
involving multiple users. However, this claim must be evaluated in
a user study with speciﬁc analysis tasks that need to be solved using
our setup in comparison to conventional multiple coordinated views
systems (cf. [51]).

7 DISCUSSION

To summarize our experiences based on the prototype and the cogni-
tive walkthrough from the use case, we discuss the perception of AR
content situated on the display as well as the technical limitations of
our setup and state-of-the-art AR in general. Furthermore, we consider
collaborative work and possible future applications.

Perception of AR Content and Display An obvious question when
extending or overlaying a display with AR content is how well each
medium can be perceived and if they inﬂuence each other. In the case
of AR content, this largely depends on the technology. The HoloLens 1

8

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030460

we used creates a relatively opaque image with little bleed-through
of the background. However, resolution and ﬁeld of view are limited,
so displaying very small or detailed content is problematic. This is
especially true for very small text. We recommend to show such content
only on the display as its high resolution predestines it for these ﬁne
details. Furthermore, it should be noted that the perception of colors in
AR is inferior to conventional displays [88]. Therefore, visual attributes,
such as shape or size, should be preferably used since they are well
perceptible in AR. Otherwise, displaying AR content superimposed on
the display is usually unproblematic with respect to perception.

Regarding the display itself, a possible issue is that AR content
makes it difﬁcult to see the visualizations on the display. AR content
should therefore not be placed arbitrarily but always in relation to ob-
jects on the display, so that they support and extend them. Nonetheless,
switching between AR and display content may still lead to focus and
attention issues. Thus, we recommend to carefully examine which
content to transfer to AR and whether its beneﬁts outweigh its costs.
However, AR can also reduce focus switches, for instance through
Embedded AR Visualizations. Furthermore, we suggest the use of
on-demand techniques to reduce the number of objects displayed si-
multaneously. In general, Augmented Reality technology still has lots
of room for improvement and we expect it to further advance over the
coming years. We believe that the visual quality of AR displays might
become similar to the quality of high-resolution displays.

One question that arises in this context is: Why is an interactive
display still needed at all if the quality of an AR HMD is sufﬁciently
good? First, the display has a haptic affordance not readily available in
AR and analysts can interact with data using natural touch and pen input.
Second, the display is visible to everyone without requiring additional
technology and can be used as a shared space for data exploration.
Third, the display offers a physical point of reference which can be
used for the orientation and alignment of AR content.

Combining Environments for Data Analysis Using different inter-
active environments has great potential for data analysis which was
demonstrated by previous work on large display environments [3, 51],
physical visualizations [23], and immersive environments [24]. We
believe that combining different environments can leverage their advan-
tages and mitigate their disadvantages at the same time. In this case,
interaction constitutes a special challenge due to switches between
interaction paradigms. Similar to Butcher et al. [17], our concepts
address the missing haptic feedback of mid-air interaction commonly
used in AR by using touch interaction to control AR. However, possibly
having to reach through AR objects may nevertheless seem strange to
users due to obscuring their hands. Furthermore, the optimal balance
between content on the display and content situated in AR is an inter-
esting question that calls for further study. In this context, we have
proposed an initial approach through our concepts. Nevertheless, we
agree with Bach et al. [7] on not advocating for a complete substitution
of existing environments and techniques. We consider our approach to
be an interesting addition to other established strategies to address the
known issues (see Sect. 2.4) of large display environments and to make
them an even more powerful and sophisticated tool for data analysts,
especially for multi-user scenarios.

Alignment of AR Content in Relation to the Display One of our
assumptions in this work is that the alignment of AR content with
the display has a positive effect on analysts’ performance. However,
it is unclear how this impacts the user’s experience and it should be
further examined in comparison to alternative placement options. As
mentioned in Sect. 3.1, a precise spatial alignment of the AR content
with the content shown on display is essential for many of the presented
techniques. This places great demands on the tracking technology used
to ensure that, for instance, AR objects bound to speciﬁc data marks
in a dense visualization are not mistakenly associated with adjacent
data marks. With the HoloLens 1 we used for our prototype, limited
accuracy and drift are major issues that get worse with increasing
display sizes. Feature-based tracking, as used by the HoloLens, reaches
its limits when users are extremely close to a large or wall-sized display
as only few features remain that can be tracked. Furthermore, the

alignment of objects is not stable regarding rotation and translation. As
a consequence, objects constantly shift their position as analysts move
around in front of the display. We expect these problems to improve
and eventually be solved with subsequent technologies.

Collaboration Between Multiple Analysts By using AR HDMs, our
setup currently has a technology-caused intrinsic personal view for all
analysts. A system that would be focused on fostering communication
and collaboration requires dedicated techniques for sharing content be-
tween analysts. However, simply sharing all content between everyone
wastes much of the inherent potential of the system, as personalized
views can vary greatly from person to person or analysts may want to
keep their annotations private. The resulting interesting design ques-
tion is which content should be visible to everyone or only to certain
analysts and which content should remain private. This, however, is
beyond the scope of this work and left for future investigation. In
addition, we refer to the large body of work in the ﬁeld of computer-
supported cooperative work (CSCW) for general techniques to support
collaboration.

Connecting Multiple Visualizations with AR While AR can be used
to better illustrate relationships between several visualizations (see
AR Brushing and Linking), there is potential in using AR to visualize
the connection in more detail. AR could be used to create temporary,
user-speciﬁc views derived from the connection between existing vi-
sualizations. For example, an AR view can highlight the difference
between two visualizations and aid in comparison tasks [32, 33]. We
think there is merit in investigating the types of connections that can
visualized and how to best represent them using AR.

Further Potential Utilization of AR In the context of this work, we
have so far talked about the direct extension of the display with AR
content. However, the use of AR content that is independent of the
display but is instead based on the spatial position of the user can be
useful as well. One possible approach is to move away from simply
extending content on the display and to focus on the AR visualizations.
In this case, the display is still valuable for naturally interacting with the
AR content. For example, a 3D AR visualization, such as a height map,
could be positioned on the display. Specialized tools, such as slicing
planes, can then be manipulated using touch interaction to facilitate
a convenient way for the exploration of 3D visualizations. Although
our chosen setup has a particular set of affordances and requirements,
our techniques can serve as an inspiration for further adaption. For
example, they can be extended to horizontal displays and even mobile
devices as well. They are not limited to information visualization but
can be applied to data and scientiﬁc visualization as well.

8 CONCLUSION
We presented the combination of a large interactive display with head-
mounted, personal Augmented Reality for information visualization.
Our contribution consists of a design space, techniques for extending vi-
sualizations with AR, and the data-driven AR visualization framework
u2vis as well as the accompanying prototype we developed. We further
investigated our approach with a cognitive walkthrough of a use case
scenario, which indicates that our techniques can help to reduce per-
ceptional issues in large displays for data exploration and to facilitate
the analysis of dense data sets. However, further and more extensive
evaluation is required to validate these indications. We are therefore
convinced that the extension of large displays with AR has great poten-
tial for information and data analysis. We hope that our work inspires
the exploration of this new exciting class of visualization applications,
which combine interactive displays with Augmented Reality.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We want to thank Mats Ole Ellenberg, Severin Engert, and Remke
Dirk Albrecht for their support in creating this publication. This
work was funded by DFG grant 389792660 as part of TRR 248 (see
https://perspicuous-computing.science) and the DFG as part
of Germany’s Excellence Strategy Clusters of Excellence EXC-2068
390729961 Physics of Life and EXC 2050/1 390696704 Centre for
Tactile Internet with Human-in-the-Loop (CeTI) of TU Dresden.

9

REFERENCES

[1] M. Agarwal, A. Srinivasan, and J. Stasko. VisWall: Visual data exploration
using direct combination on large touch displays. In VIS ’19, pp. 26–30,
2019. doi: 10.1109/VISUAL.2019.8933673

[2] R. Amar, J. Eagan, and J. Stasko. Low-level components of analytic
activity in information visualization. In INFOVIS ’05, pp. 111–117, Oct
2005. doi: 10.1109/INFVIS.2005.1532136

[3] C. Andrews, A. Endert, and C. North. Space to think: Large high-
resolution displays for sensemaking. In CHI ’10, p. 55–64. ACM, 2010.
doi: 10.1145/1753326.1753336

[4] C. Andrews, A. Endert, B. Yost, and C. North. Information visualization
on large, high-resolution displays: Issues, challenges, and opportunities.
InfoVis, 10(4):341–355, 2011. doi: 10.1177/1473871611415997

[5] R. Arora, R. Habib Kazi, T. Grossman, G. Fitzmaurice, and K. Singh.
SymbiosisSketch: Combining 2D & 3D sketching for designing detailed
3D objects in situ. In CHI ’18, pp. 185:1–185:15. ACM, 2018. doi: 10.
1145/3173574.3173759

[6] A. Azad, J. Ruiz, D. Vogel, M. Hancock, and E. Lank. Territoriality and
behaviour on and around large vertical publicly-shared displays. In DIS
’12, p. 468–477. ACM, 2012. doi: 10.1145/2317956.2318025

[7] B. Bach, R. Sicat, J. Beyer, M. Cordeil, and H. Pﬁster. The hologram in
my hand: How effective is interactive exploration of 3D visualizations
in immersive tangible augmented reality? IEEE TVCG ’18, 24:457–467,
2018. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2017.2745941

[8] R. Ball, C. North, C. North, and D. A. Bowman. Move to improve:
Promoting physical navigation to increase user performance with large
displays. In CHI ’07. ACM, 2007. doi: 10.1145/1240624.1240656
[9] T. Ballendat, N. Marquardt, and S. Greenberg. Proxemic interaction:
Designing for a proximity and orientation-aware environment. In ITS ’10,
pp. 121–130. ACM, 2010. doi: 10.1145/1936652.1936676

[10] L. Bartram, C. Ware, and T. Calvert. Moticons: Detection, distraction and
task. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 58:515 – 545,
2003. doi: 10.1016/S1071-5819(03)00021-1

[11] A. Batch, A. Cunningham, M. Cordeil, N. Elmqvist, T. Dwyer, B. H.
Thomas, and K. Marriott. There is no spoon: Evaluating performance,
space use, and presence with expert domain users in immersive analytics.
IEEE TVCG ’20, 26:536–546, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934803
[12] P. Baudisch and R. Rosenholtz. Halo: A technique for visualizing off-
screen objects. In CHI ’03, pp. 481–488. ACM, 2003. doi: 10.1145/642611
.642695

[13] P. Baudisch, D. Tan, M. Collomb, D. Robbins, K. Hinckley, M. Agrawala,
S. Zhao, and G. Ramos. Phosphor: Explaining transitions in the user
interface using afterglow effects. In UIST ’16, p. 169–178. ACM, 2006.
doi: 10.1145/1166253.1166280

[14] A. Bezerianos and P. Isenberg. Perception of visual variables on tiled wall-
sized displays for information visualization applications. IEEE TVCG ’12,
18:2516–2525, 2012. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2012.251

[15] N. Bogdan, T. Grossman, and G. Fitzmaurice. HybridSpace: Integrating
3D freehand input and stereo viewing into traditional desktop applications.
In 3DUI ’14, pp. 51–58, 2014. doi: 10.1109/3DUI.2014.6798842
[16] W. B¨uschel, S. Vogt, and R. Dachselt. Augmented reality graph visualiza-
tions: Investigation of visual styles in 3D node-link diagrams. CG&A ’19,
pp. 29–40, 2019. doi: 10.1109/MCG.2019.2897927

[17] S. Butscher, S. Hubenschmid, J. M¨uller, J. Fuchs, and H. Reiterer. Clusters,
trends, and outliers: How immersive technologies can facilitate the col-
laborative analysis of multidimensional data. In CHI ’18, pp. 90:1–90:12.
ACM, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3173574.3173664

[18] M. Cavallo, M. Dholakia, M. Havlena, K. Ocheltree, and M. Podlaseck.
Dataspace: A reconﬁgurable hybrid reality environment for collaborative
information analysis. In IEEE VR ’19, pp. 145–153, March 2019. doi: 10.
1109/VR.2019.8797733

[19] M. Cavallo, M. Dolakia, M. Havlena, K. Ocheltree, and M. Podlaseck. Im-
mersive insights: A hybrid analytics system for collaborative exploratory
data analysis. In VRST ’19. ACM, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3359996.3364242
[20] M. Chegini, K. Andrews, T. Schreck, and A. Sourin. Multiple linked-view
exploration on large displays facilitated by a secondary handheld device.
In IWAIT ’19. SPIE, 2019. doi: 10.1117/12.2521648

[21] Z. Chen, W. Tong, Q. Wang, B. Bach, and H. Qu. Augmenting static
visualizations with PapARVis designer. In CHI ’20, p. 1–12. Association
for Computing Machinery, 2020. doi: 10.1145/3313831.3376436
[22] M. Cordeil, A. Cunningham, T. Dwyer, B. H. Thomas, and K. Marriott.
ImAxes: Immersive axes as embodied affordances for interactive multi-

variate data visualisation. In UIST ’17, pp. 71–83. ACM, 2017. doi: 10.
1145/3126594.3126613

[23] P. Dragicevic, Y. Jansen, and A. Vande Moere. Data physicalization. In
Springer Handbook of Human Computer Interaction. Springer, 2020.
[24] T. Dwyer, K. Marriott, T. Isenberg, K. Klein, N. Riche, F. Schreiber,
W. Stuerzlinger, and B. H. Thomas. Immersive Analytics: An Introduction,
pp. 1–23. Springer, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-01388-2 1

[25] D. Edge, J. Larson, M. Mobius, and C. White. Trimming the hairball:
Edge cutting strategies for making dense graphs usable. In Big Data ’18,
pp. 3951–3958, 2018. doi: 10.1109/BigData.2018.8622521

[26] N. Elmqvist, P. Dragicevic, and J. D. Fekete. Rolling the dice: Multidi-
mensional visual exploration using scatterplot matrix navigation. IEEE
TVCG ’08, 14:1539–1148, 2008. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2008.153

[27] N. Elmqvist, N. Henry, Y. Riche, and J.-D. Fekete. Melange: Space folding
for multi-focus interaction. In CHI ’08, p. 1333–1342. ACM, 2008. doi:
10.1145/1357054.1357263

[28] A. Endert, C. Andrews, Y. H. Lee, and C. North. Visual encodings that
support physical navigation on large displays. In GI ’11, p. 103–110.
Canadian Human-Computer Communications Society, 2011.

[29] S. Feiner and A. Shamash. Hybrid user interfaces: Breeding virtually
bigger interfaces for physically smaller computers. In UIST ’91, p. 9–17.
ACM, 1991. doi: 10.1145/120782.120783

[30] J. A. W. Filho, C. M. D. S. Freitas, and L. Nedel. Comfortable immersive
analytics with the VirtualDesk metaphor: Case studies and perspectives.
IEEE CG&A, pp. 1–1, 2019. doi: 10.1109/MCG.2019.2898856

[31] J. A. W. Filho, W. Stuerzlinger, and L. Nedel. Evaluating an immersive
space-time cube geovisualization for intuitive trajectory data exploration.
IEEE TVCG ’20, 26:514–524, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934415
[32] M. Gleicher. Considerations for visualizing comparison. IEEE TVCG ’18,

24:413–423, 2018. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2017.2744199

[33] M. Gleicher, D. Albers, R. Walker, I. Jusuﬁ, C. D. Hansen, and J. C.
Roberts. Visual comparison for information visualization. InfoVis, 10:289–
309, 2011. doi: 10.1177/1473871611416549

[34] J. Grubert, M. Heinisch, A. Quigley, and D. Schmalstieg. MultiFi: Multi
ﬁdelity interaction with displays on and around the body. In CHI ’15, p.
3933–3942. ACM, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2702123.2702331

[35] S. Gustafson, P. Baudisch, C. Gutwin, and P. Irani. Wedge: Clutter-free
visualization of off-screen locations. In CHI ’08, pp. 787–796. ACM,
2008. doi: 10.1145/1357054.1357179

[36] C. Gutwin and S. Greenberg. A descriptive framework of workspace
awareness for real-time groupware. CSCW ’02, 11:411–446, 2002. doi:
10.1023/A:1021271517844

[37] A. H. Hajizadeh, M. Tory, and R. Leung. Supporting awareness through
IEEE TVCG ’13,

collaborative brushing and linking of tabular data.
19:2189–2197, 2013. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2013.197

[38] T. Horak, S. K. Badam, N. Elmqvist, and R. Dachselt. When David
meets Goliath: Combining smartwatches with a large vertical display for
visual data exploration. In CHI ’18, pp. 19:1–19:13. ACM, 2018. doi: 10.
1145/3173574.3173593

[39] A. Ion, Y.-L. B. Chang, M. Haller, M. Hancock, and S. D. Scott. Canyon:
Providing location awareness of multiple moving objects in a detail view
on large displays. In CHI ’13, p. 3149–3158. ACM, 2013. doi: 10.1145/
2470654.2466431

[40] P. Isenberg, P. Dragicevic, W. Willett, A. Bezerianos, and J. D. Fekete.
Hybrid-image visualization for large viewing environments. IEEE TVCG
’13, 19:2346–2355, 2013. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2013.163

[41] P. Isenberg, N. Elmqvist, J. Scholtz, D. Cernea, Kwan-Liu Ma, and H. Ha-
gen. Collaborative visualization: Deﬁnition, challenges, and research
agenda. InfoVis, 10:310–326, 2011. doi: 10.1177/1473871611412817
[42] P. Isenberg, D. Fisher, S. A. Paul, M. R. Morris, K. Inkpen, and M. Czer-
winski. Co-located collaborative visual analytics around a tabletop display.
IEEE TVCG ’12, 18, 2012. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2011.287

[43] M. R. Jakobsen and K. Hornbæk. Up close and personal: Collaborative
work on a high-resolution multitouch wall display. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction, 21, 2014. doi: 10.1145/2576099

[44] M. R. Jakobsen and K. Hornbæk. Is moving improving? Some effects of
locomotion in wall-display interaction. In CHI ’15, p. 4169–4178. ACM,
2015. doi: 10.1145/2702123.2702312

[45] M. R. Jakobsen and K. Hornbæk. Negotiating for space? Collaborative
work using a wall display with mouse and touch input. In CHI ’16, p.
2050–2061. ACM, 2016. doi: 10.1145/2858036.2858158

[46] M. R. Jakobsen, Y. Sahlemariam Haile, S. Knudsen, and K. Hornbæk.
Information visualization and proxemics: Design opportunities and empir-

10

© 2020 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030460

ical ﬁndings. IEEE TVCG ’13, 2013. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2013.166
[47] Y. Jansen, J. Schjerlund, and K. Hornbæk. Effects of locomotion and
visual overview on spatial memory when interacting with wall displays. In
CHI ’19, pp. 291:1–291:12. ACM, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3290605.3300521
[48] T. Kim, B. Saket, A. Endert, and B. MacIntyre. VisAR: Bringing interac-
tivity to static data visualizations through augmented reality. In IEEE VIS
’17 Workshop on Immersive Analytics, 2017.

[49] U. Kister, K. Klamka, C. Tominski, and R. Dachselt. GraSp: Combining
spatially-aware mobile devices and a display wall for graph visualization
and interaction. Computer Graphics Forum, 36:503–514, 2017. doi: 10.
1111/cgf.13206

routing in immersive visualisations. In ISS ’19, p. 241–253. ACM, 2019.
doi: 10.1145/3343055.3359709

[70] R. G. Raidou, M. E. Gr¨oller, and M. Eisemann. Relaxing dense scatter
plots with pixel-based mappings. IEEE TVCG ’19, 25:2205–2216, 2019.
doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2903956

[71] F. Rajabiyazdi, J. Walny, C. Mah, J. Brosz, and S. Carpendale. Understand-
ing researchers’ use of a large, high-resolution display across disciplines.
In ITS ’15, pp. 107–116. ACM, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2817721.2817735

[72] P. Reipschl¨ager and R. Dachselt. DesignAR: Immersive 3D-modeling
combining augmented reality with interactive displays. In ISS ’19, pp.
29–42. ACM, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3343055.3359718

[50] U. Kister, P. Reipschl¨ager, F. Matulic, and R. Dachselt. BodyLenses:
Embodied magic lenses and personal territories for wall displays. In ITS
’15, pp. 117–126. ACM, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2817721.2817726

[73] J. Rekimoto and M. Saitoh. Augmented surfaces: A spatially continuous
work space for hybrid computing environments. In CHI ’99, pp. 378–385.
ACM, 1999. doi: 10.1145/302979.303113

[51] R. Langner, U. Kister, and R. Dachselt. Multiple coordinated views at
large displays for multiple users: Empirical ﬁndings on user behavior,
movements, and distances. IEEE TVCG ’19, 25:608–618, 2019. doi: 10.
1109/TVCG.2018.2865235

[52] R. Langner, U. Kister, C. Engel, T. Horak, and R. Dachselt. Towards a
ﬂuid interaction concept bringing star plots to interactive displays. In ITS
’15, pp. 349–354. ACM, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2817721.2823505

[53] D. Ledo, S. Greenberg, N. Marquardt, and S. Boring. Proxemic-aware
controls: Designing remote controls for ubiquitous computing ecologies.
In MobileHCI ’15. ACM, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2785830.2785871

[54] D. Ledo, S. Houben, J. Vermeulen, N. Marquardt, L. Oehlberg, and
S. Greenberg. Evaluation strategies for HCI toolkit research. In CHI
’18, pp. 36:1–36:17. ACM, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3173574.3173610
[55] A. Lee, D. Archambault, and M. Nacenta. Dynamic network plaid: A
tool for the analysis of dynamic networks. In CHI ’19, pp. 130:1–130:14.
ACM, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3290605.3300360

[56] B. Lee, P. Isenberg, N. H. Riche, and S. Carpendale. Beyond mouse and
keyboard: Expanding design considerations for information visualization
interactions. IEEE TVCG ’12, 18:2689–2698, 2012. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.
2012.204

[57] A. Lhuillier, C. Hurter, and A. Telea. State of the art in edge and trail
bundling techniques. Computer Graphics Forum, 36:619–645, 2017. doi:
10.1111/cgf.13213

[58] J. Liu, A. Prouzeau, B. Ens, and T. Dwyer. Design and evaluation of
interactive small multiples data visualisation in immersive spaces. In IEEE
VR ’20, pp. 1–8, 2020. doi: 10.1109/VR46266.2020.00-23

[59] S. Liu, D. Maljovec, B. Wang, P. Bremer, and V. Pascucci. Visualizing
high-dimensional data: Advances in the past decade. IEEE TVCG ’17,
23:1249–1268, 2017. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2016.2640960

[60] M. Mateescu, C. Pimmer, C. Zahn, D. Klinkhammer, and H. Reiterer.
Collaboration on large interactive displays: A systematic review. Hu-
man–Computer Interaction, 2019. doi: 10.1080/07370024.2019.1697697
[61] D. Mendes, F. Fonseca, B. Ara`ujo, A. Ferreira, and J. Jorge. Mid-air
interactions above stereoscopic interactive tables. In 3DUI ’14, pp. 3–10,
2014. doi: 10.1109/3DUI.2014.6798833

[62] A. Millette and M. J. McGufﬁn. DualCAD: Integrating augmented reality
with a desktop GUI and smartphone interaction. In ISMAR ’16, pp. 21–26,
2016. doi: 10.1109/ISMAR-Adjunct.2016.0030

[63] M. A. Nacenta, S. Sakurai, T. Yamaguchi, Y. Miki, Y. Itoh, Y. Kitamura,
S. Subramanian, and C. Gutwin. E-Conic: A perspective-aware interface
for multi-display environments. In UIST ’07, p. 279–288. ACM, 2007.
doi: 10.1145/1294211.1294260

[64] P. Peltonen, E. Kurvinen, A. Salovaara, G. Jacucci, T. Ilmonen, J. Evans,
A. Oulasvirta, and P. Saarikko. It’s mine, don’t touch! Interactions at
a large multi-touch display in a city centre. In CHI ’08, p. 1285–1294.
ACM, 2008. doi: 10.1145/1357054.1357255

[65] F. Perteneder, E.-M. B. Grossauer, J. Leong, W. Stuerzlinger, and M. Haller.
Glowworms and ﬁreﬂies: Ambient light on large interactive surfaces. In
CHI ’16, p. 5849–5861. ACM, 2016. doi: 10.1145/2858036.2858524
[66] J. Petford, I. Carson, M. A. Nacenta, and C. Gutwin. A comparison of
notiﬁcation techniques for out-of-view objects in full-coverage displays.
In CHI ’19. ACM, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3290605.3300288

[67] A. Prouzeau, A. Bezerianos, and O. Chapuis. Visual immersion in the
In ISS ’16, p. 33–39. ACM, 2016. doi: 10.

context of wall displays.
1145/3009939.3009945

[74] J. C. Roberts. State of the art: Coordinated multiple views in exploratory
visualization. In CMV ’07, pp. 61–71, 2007. doi: 10.1109/CMV.2007.20
[75] J. C. Roberts, P. D. Ritsos, S. K. Badam, D. Brodbeck, J. Kennedy, and
N. Elmqvist. Visualization beyond the desktop–the next big thing. CG&A
’14, 34:26–34, 2014. doi: 10.1109/MCG.2014.82

[76] A. Sarikaya and M. Gleicher. Scatterplots: Tasks, data, and designs. IEEE
TVCG ’18, 24:402–412, 2018. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2017.2744184
[77] S. D. Scott, M. S. T. Carpendale, and K. M. Inkpen. Territoriality in
collaborative tabletop workspaces. In CSCW ’04, pp. 294–303. ACM,
2004. doi: 10.1145/1031607.1031655

[78] M. Sereno, L. Besanc¸on, and T. Isenberg. Supporting volumetric data
visualization and analysis by combining augmented reality visuals with
multi-touch input. In EuroVis ’19 - Posters, 2019. doi: 10.2312/eurp.
20191136

[79] L. Shupp, C. A. PhD, M. D.-K. PhD, B. Yost, and C. North. Shaping the
display of the future: The effects of display size and curvature on user
performance and insights. Human–Computer Interaction, 24:230–272,
2009. doi: 10.1080/07370020902739429

[80] T. Sun, Y. Ye, I. Fujishiro, and K. Ma. Collaborative visual analysis with
multi-level information sharing using a wall-size display and see-through
HMDs. In PaciﬁcVis ’19, pp. 11–20, 2019. doi: 10.1109/PaciﬁcVis.2019.
00010

[81] A. Tang, M. Tory, B. Po, P. Neumann, and S. Carpendale. Collaborative
coupling over tabletop displays. In CHI ’06, pp. 1181–1190. ACM, 2006.
doi: 10.1145/1124772.1124950

[82] M. Tobiasz, P. Isenberg, and S. Carpendale. Lark: Coordinating co-located
collaboration with information visualization. IEEE TVCG ’09, 15:1065–
1072, 2009. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2009.162

[83] C. Tominski, S. Gladisch, U. Kister, R. Dachselt, and H. Schumann. Inter-
active lenses for visualization: An extended survey. Computer Graphics
Forum, 36:173–200, 9 2017. doi: 10.1111/cgf.12871

[84] J. Walny, S. Huron, C. Perin, T. Wun, R. Pusch, and S. Carpendale. Active
reading of visualizations. IEEE TVCG ’18, 24(1):770–780, 2018.
[85] J. Walny, B. Lee, P. Johns, N. Henry Riche, and S. Carpendale. Un-
derstanding pen and touch interaction for data exploration on interactive
whiteboards. IEEE TVCG ’12, 18, 2012. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2012.275
[86] X. Wang, L. Besanc¸on, D. Rousseau, M. Sereno, M. Ammi, and T. Isen-
berg. Towards an understanding of augmented reality extensions for
existing 3D data analysis tools. In CHI ’20, CHI ’20, p. 1–13. ACM, 2020.
doi: 10.1145/3313831.3376657

[87] J. Wenskovitch, I. Crandell, N. Ramakrishnan, L. House, S. Leman, and
C. North. Towards a systematic combination of dimension reduction and
clustering in visual analytics. IEEE TVCG ’18, 24:131–141, 2018. doi: 10
.1109/TVCG.2017.2745258

[88] M. Whitlock, S. Smart, and D. A. Szaﬁr. Graphical perception for immer-
sive analytics. In IEEE VR ’20, pp. 616–625, 2020. doi: 10.1109/VR46266
.2020.00084

[89] D. Wigdor, C. Shen, C. Forlines, and R. Balakrishnan. Perception of
elementary graphical elements in tabletop and multi-surface environments.
In CHI ’07, p. 473–482. ACM, 2007. doi: 10.1145/1240624.1240701
[90] W. Willett, Y. Jansen, and P. Dragicevic. Embedded data representations.
IEEE TVCG ’17, 23:461–470, 2017. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2016.2598608
[91] Y. Yang, T. Dwyer, B. Jenny, K. Marriott, M. Cordeil, and H. Chen.
Origin-destination ﬂow maps in immersive environments. IEEE TVCG
’19, 25:693–703, 2019. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2865192

[68] A. Prouzeau, A. Bezerianos, and O. Chapuis. Evaluating multi-user
selection for exploring graph topology on wall-displays. IEEE TVCG ’17,
23:1936–1951, 2017. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2016.2592906

[92] B. Yost, Y. Haciahmetoglu, and C. North. Beyond visual acuity: The
perceptual scalability of information visualizations for large displays. In
CHI ’07, p. 101–110. ACM, 2007. doi: 10.1145/1240624.1240639

[69] A. Prouzeau, A. Lhuillier, B. Ens, D. Weiskopf, and T. Dwyer. Visual link

11

