Broadband model-based inversion enables optoacoustic microscopy beyond the 
acoustic diffraction limit 

Weiye Li†, Urs A. T. Hofmann†, Johannes Rebling, Ali Ozbek, Yuxiang Gong, Daniel Razansky, and Xose 
Luis Dean-Ben* 

Institute for Biomedical Engineering and Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich 
and ETH Zurich, Switzerland 

*Corresponding author: xl.deanben@uzh.ch 

†These authors contributed equally to this work 

Abstract 

Acoustic-resolution optoacoustic microscopy (AR-OAM) retrieves anatomical and functional contrast from 
living tissues at depths not reachable with optical microscopy. The imaging performance of AR-OAM has 
been advanced with image reconstruction algorithms providing high lateral resolution ultimately limited 
by  acoustic  diffraction.  In  this  work,  we  suggest  a  new  model-based  framework  efficiently  exploiting 
scanning  symmetries  for  high-resolution  reconstruction  of  AR-OAM  images.  The  model  accurately 
accounts for the spatial impulse response and large detection bandwidth  of a spherical polyvinylidene 
difluoride  sensor,  which  facilitates  significantly  outperforming  synthetic  aperture  focusing  technique 
commonly  employed  in  AR-OAM  image  reconstruction  in  terms  of  image  contrast  and  resolution. 
Furthermore,  reconstructions  based  on  L1-norm  regularization  enabled  resolving  structures 
indistinguishable with other methods, which was confirmed by numerical simulations as well as phantom 
and in vivo experiments. The achieved performance demonstrates the applicability of AR-OAM as a super-
resolution imaging method capable of breaking through the limits imposed by acoustic diffraction, thus 
opening  unprecedented  capabilities  for  the  microscopic  interrogation  of  optically  opaque  tissues  in 
preclinical and clinical studies. 

Keywords 

Super-resolution, model-based reconstruction, optoacoustic image reconstruction, intravital microscopy, 
skin imaging 

Introduction 

Advanced acoustic inversion methods are essential to optimize the achievable resolution, contrast, and 
overall  performance  of  optoacoustic  (OA,  photoacoustic)  imaging  systems  operating  at  depths  not 
reachable with optical microscopy (>1 mm in biological tissues). The type and location of ultrasound (US) 
sensor(s) mainly determine the imaging performance in this depth range, thus are generally tailored for 
the biomedical application of interest [1, 2]. For example, OA tomography based on concave piezoelectric 

 
 
 
arrays has been shown to capitalize on a large angular coverage to render accurate images of arbitrarily-
oriented vascular networks [3-5]. However, although tomographic microscopic imaging has been enabled 
with  high-resolution  arrays  [6],  deep-tissue  OA  microscopy  (OAM)  is  typically  performed  by  raster-
scanning a single-element transducer [7-12]. This approach, generally known as acoustic-resolution OAM 
(AR-OAM),  represents  one  of  the  most  common  OA  embodiments  and  is  increasingly  being  used  in 
preclinical and clinical studies [13, 14]. Important advantages of AR-OAM over tomographic OA methods 
are  a  significantly  reduced  system  complexity,  lower  cost  laser  excitation,  and  simpler  US  sensor 
technology. More importantly, AR-OAM is particularly suitable for exploiting the multiscale OA imaging 
capabilities.  For  example,  centimeter-scale  depths  have  been  achieved  by  using  transducers  with 
detection bandwidths of a few MHz [7, 15], while ultra-wideband detectors have been used e.g. in raster 
scan  OA  mesoscopy  (RSOM)  to  image  at  depths  around  2 mm-4 mm  [13,  16].  Multiple  scales  can 
additionally be covered simultaneously e.g. via coaxial light focusing in hybrid-focus OAM [17, 18] or with 
a dual-element transducer in quad-mode OAM [19]. 

The  importance  of  AR-OAM  further  fosters  ongoing  efforts  on  the  optimization  of  reconstruction 
methods.  Diffraction-limited  lateral  resolution  can  be  achieved  around  the  focal  plane  by  simply 
superimposing time-resolved (A-mode) OA signals. However, beamforming algorithms are generally used 
to avoid out-of-focus resolution degradation. The synthetic aperture focusing technique (SAFT), also used 
in radar, sonar, and biomedical US, has become the standard image reconstruction method in AR-OAM 
[10].  SAFT  was  introduced  in  AR-OAM  as  the  virtual  detector  (VD)  concept  [20],  and  is  generally 
implemented  using  the  delay-and-sum  (DAS)  technique  in  the  time  domain  [21].  More  elaborated 
approaches based on weighting factors in the time or frequency domains [22, 23] or on delay-multiply-
and-sum (DMAS) methods [24, 25] have further been shown to provide an enhanced performance. SAFT 
relies on the heuristic principle of signal superposition via constructive interference. However, OA DAS 
may  alternatively  be  regarded  as  a  discrete  implementation  of  the  filtered  back-projection  algorithm, 
derived  from  the  time-domain  OA  forward  model  for  short-pulsed  excitation  [26].  Such  a  model 
represents  a  solid  mathematical  foundation  enabling  the  development  of  more  accurate  acoustic 
inversion methods. Thus, algorithms based on time reversal techniques [27, 28], model-based (iterative) 
inversion algorithms [29-31] or hybrid-domain modeling of a focused transducer [28] have been suggested 
for AR-OAM. Model-based reconstruction in the time domain is arguably the most accurate approach to 
account for the  finite  size  and shape  of  US  sensors  [32-34]. Additionally, the  performance  of iterative 
inversion can be enhanced by properly choosing constraints or regularization terms  [35-40]. However, 
implementation  of  this  method  for  the  dense  grid  of  voxels  required  for  high-resolution  volumetric 
imaging remains challenging due  to high  computational cost, even when  considering efficient parallel 
implementations in graphics processing units (GPUs) [41, 42]. 

Herein,  we  introduce  a  model-based  reconstruction  framework  that  efficiently  exploits  the  scanning 
symmetries in AR-OAM to enable GPU-based, high-resolution, volumetric reconstructions. The underlying 
time-domain OA forward model accurately accounts for the large bandwidth of the OA signals collected 
with  a  spherical  polyvinylidene  difluoride  (PVDF)  transducer.  Discretization  of  the  transducer  surface 
additionally  enables  modeling  its  spatial  impulse  response.  Model-based  inversion  is  shown  to 
significantly enhance the resolution achieved with SAFT even beyond the acoustic diffraction limit. The 
suggested approach is generally applicable in any AR-OAM system. 

 
Results 

AR-OAM acquires volumetric images in a raster-scan acquisition protocol schematically depicted in Fig. 1a. 
The Nyquist criterion should be fulfilled by selecting a scanning step smaller than half of the expected 
lateral resolution. The lateral resolution in AR-OAM is considered to be limited by acoustic diffraction to 
0.71 𝜆 𝑁𝐴⁄
 [43], where 𝜆 and 𝑁𝐴 are the central wavelength and numerical aperture of the US transducer, 
respectively. Typical lateral resolutions are in the range of 50 m, thus scanning steps in the order of a 
few  tens  of  micrometers  are  generally  needed.  The  suggested  model-based  framework  defines  time-
resolved OA signals corresponding to each pair of voxel and scanning point, where the lateral positions of 
the  voxels  of  the  reconstruction  grid  match  the  x-y-scanning  positions  (see  methods  for  a  detailed 
description). For a raster-scan configuration, the model is translational-symmetric — signals are identical 
if  the  relative  position  between  the  voxel  and  scanning  point  is  maintained  (Fig. 1b).  A  spherical  US 
transducer further defines axial symmetries with respect to the acoustic axis (Fig. 1b). The OA forward 
model enables accurate modeling of the impulse response (IR) of the transducer. The IR is commonly split 
into two terms, namely the electrical impulse response (EIR) defining the effective detection bandwidth, 
and the spatial impulse response (SIR) accounting for acoustic diffraction effects associated to the finite 
size of the sensing area [44]. A transducer consisting of a PVDF film featuring broad detection bandwidth 
(~100 MHz) was used herein [11] (Fig. 1c, see methods for a detailed description), and high axial resolution 
(~14 m) has been achieved [11]. However, the spatially-dependent SIR of the spherically-focused, axially-
symmetric transducer strongly limits the lateral resolution, especially if standard image  reconstruction 
methods (SAFT and its variants) are employed. In the suggested model-based framework, the SIR for each 
voxel was estimated by superimposing the corresponding time-resolved OA signals for a set of surface 
elements (~1000) covering the active sensing area (Fig. 1c). This is equivalent to adding up the OA forward 
model corresponding to each surface element (see methods for a detailed description). Considering the 
scanning  symmetries,  the  information  in  the  model-matrix  is  fully  contained  in  the  sub-matrix 
corresponding to an individual scanning point. Such sub-matrix is sparse and was further set to zero for 
voxels where the transducer sensitivity drops significantly, thus could be stored in the memory of state-
of-the-art GPUs (1.3 GB for half a million voxels and 837 time points, see methods for details). The memory 
required to store the OA forward model is invariant to the arbitrarily-large raw signal volume, which allows 
storing the OA signals, the model and the reconstructed image simultaneously on a GPU. Thereby, large 
volumes  can  be  reconstructed  at  high-resolution  in  a  reasonable  time  (~12  minutes).  The  amplitude 
spectral density of the  time-resolved signals of the  OA forward  model (columns of the model  matrix) 
reveals  the  expected  diffraction  patterns  for  different  frequencies,  while  their  amplitude  in  the  time 
domain  defines  a  transducer  sensitivity  field  matching  the  expected  diffraction-limited  resolution  for 
broadband OA signals (Fig. 1d). The capability to encode frequency-dependent information empowers the 
suggested model-based framework with unique capabilities to reconstruct absorbers with different sizes 
emitting OA waves in different frequency bands, clearly outperforming alternative approaches e.g. based 
on superimposing signals or SAFT (Fig. 1e). 

Mathematically, model-based reconstruction minimizes an energy functional consisting of a data fidelity 
term driving the solution towards the observed data and a regularization term that stabilizes the inversion 
and includes prior information [45]. Reconstruction of AR-OAM images is challenged by the limited-view 
scanning geometry and the associated ill-posed nature of the inverse problem [46]. Regularization hence 
turns  essential  for  computing  a  credible  approximation  of  the  light  absorption  distribution.  Tikhonov 
regularization, based on the L2 norm, is the classical method for noise-robust image reconstruction and 

represents  the  most  probable  solution  given  the  raw  signal  and  a  prior  Gaussian  distribution  of 
measurement noise. The model-based algorithm based on an L2 regularization term (MB-L2, see methods 
for  details)  enabled  enhancing  the  lateral  resolution  and  contrast  of  AR-OAM  images  at  out-of-focus 
locations compared to SAFT (Fig. 1e). However, reconstruction of closely separated, simulated absorbers 
at the focal plane indicate that the lateral resolution is still limited by acoustic diffraction (Figs. 2a and 2b). 
This  is  expected  considering  that  MB-L2  is  a  linear  inversion  procedure  equivalent  to  time-reversed 
propagation of US waves [47]. Alternatively, regularization terms based on the L1 norm can be used to 
promote  sparse  solutions in a given domain. Particularly, a L1-based regularization term in the  image 
domain translates to most voxels having zero (or close to zero) value. Simulation results with relatively 
separated  absorbers  indicated  that  the  full  width  at  half  maximum  (FWHM)  of  the  absorbers 
reconstructed with the model-based algorithm with L1 regularization (MB-L1, see methods for details) is 
considerably smaller (13 m) than the FWHM achieved with SAFT and MB-L2 (41 m, Figs. 2a and 2b). 
This could be erroneously interpreted as a narrower point spread function (PSF) of the imaging system 
enabling higher resolution. However, MB-L1 is a non-linear inversion procedure and hence a PSF cannot 
be defined. Instead, the achievable resolution must be estimated from the reconstructed image of closely 
separated sources. In this regard, undistinguishable absorbers in the images obtained with SAFT and with 
MB-L2 could be separated with MB-L1, thus effectively breaking through the acoustic diffraction barrier 
(Figs. 2a and 2b). Experimental results with an agar phantom embedding a ~20 µm microsphere slightly 
out-of-focus corroborated the simulation results (Figs. 2c and 2d, see methods for a detailed description). 
The FWHM of the reconstructed sphere was significantly reduced with MB-L1 compared to SAFT and MB-
L2,  while  it  was  also  possible  to  distinguish  two  closely  separated  spheres  simulated  by  shifting  the 
scanning position and adding up the corresponding OA signals (Figs. 2c and 2d, see methods for a detailed 
description). Additional experiments with an agar phantom embedding carbon fibers with 7 µm diameter 
further  validated  the  enhanced  resolution  achieved  with  MB-L1  (Figs. 2e  and  2f).  The  width  of  the 
reconstructed fibers was significantly reduced with MB-L1. More importantly, MB-L1 enabled resolving 
crossing fibers at points where SAFT and MB-L2 failed (Fig. 2f). 

The accurate OA forward model turns essential for precise reconstruction of more complex structures in 
living organisms. Proper selection of the regularization term is also highly important. Most commonly, OA 
visualizes multi-scale vascular networks in mammalian tissues with no dominant components in space or 
frequency domain, which challenges defining information on the images a priori. A raster-scan with 25 µm 
step across the back of a CD-1 mouse (Fig. 3a, see methods for a detailed description) enabled comparing 
the  in  vivo  imaging  performance  of  different  reconstruction  approaches.  SAFT,  MB-L2,  and  MB-L1 
successfully visualized microvascular structures in this region, although clear differences were observed 
in image quality and content (Fig. 3b). A smoothing effect was observed in the blood vessels reconstructed 
with SAFT, which appears to degrade the achievable resolution. The vascular network at different depths 
is clearly better resolved in the MB-L2 image, including branches not visible with SAFT. The sharpening 
effect  of  MB-L1  compared  to  MB-L2  was  similar  to  the  observations  in  simulations  and  phantom 
experiments.  The  width  of  the  reconstructed  vessels  is  clearly  narrowed  compared  to  the  other  two 
reconstruction techniques. However, this appears to reduce the available information in the image. Many 
of  the  branches  visible  in  the  MB-L2  image  are  not  seen  with  MB-L1,  arguably  due  to  the  sparsity 
constraint. The achievable resolution with different approaches can be more clearly compared in a three-
dimensional view of the central part of the scan (Fig. 3c). Individual vessels and branches in MB-L1 and 
MB-L2  images  are  shown  to  be  more  clearly  defined  than  in  superimposed  MB-L2  and  SAFT  images, 
respectively. A comparison of the image profiles for a region close to a branching point corroborates that 

MB-L1 can break through the resolution limit of the other two methods (Fig. 3d). The respective image 
content    was  better  assessed  by  quantifying  the  amount  of  vessels  in  the  binarized  images  with  an 
automatic vessel segmentation and analysis (AVSA) algorithm [48] (Fig. 3e, see methods for a detailed 
description).  Statistical  analysis  of  the  number  of  detected  vessels  from  four  different  mouse  back 
datasets showed that, on average, the number of vessels in the MB-L2 image is higher by almost two-fold 
with  respect  to  SAFT  and  MB-L1  images  (Fig. 3f).  Overall,  the  suggested  model-based  reconstruction 
framework  significantly  enhanced  the  performance  of  SAFT  in  vivo,  while  the  regularization  choice 
establishes a trade-off between achievable resolution and visibility of vascular networks. 

Discussion 

Numerical  simulations  as  well  as  phantom  and  in  vivo  experiments  demonstrated  the  enhanced 
performance  of  the  suggested  model-based  framework  with  respect  to  SAFT  as  a  standard  AR-OAM 
reconstruction technique. This is in agreement with  what has been shown in several OA tomographic 
configurations  [38,  49-51].  However,  AR-OAM  aims  at  a  significantly  higher  resolution  than  OA 
tomography  combined  with  large  FOVs.  The  implementation  of  volumetric  model-based  iterative 
inversion methods is thereby significantly challenged by the fact that the full model matrix, corresponding 
to the linear operator mapping the initial pressure distribution (OA image) into measured pressure signals, 
becomes too large to be stored in GPU or even CPU memory. Alternatively, the operations involving the 
model  matrix  can  be  calculated  on-the-fly  during  the  inversion  procedure,  but  this  has  a  high 
computational  cost  particularly  when  accounting  for  the  SIR  [32,  41].  Herein,  we  exploited  the 
translational and axial symmetries of the model for the spherically focused transducer within the scanning 
plane  and  its  limited  lateral  sensitivity,  i.e.,  absorbers  with  large  lateral  distance  from  the  transducer 
position  barely  affect  measured  pressures.  The  model  matrix  was  “compressed”  into  a  sub-matrix 
corresponding to a single scanning position and the voxel grids sufficiently close to it. The size of this sub-
matrix is defined by the lateral sensitivity, the desired imaging depth, and the number of time instances, 
i.e., it is invariant with respect to an arbitrarily-large reconstruction grid. Therefore, the suggested model-
based reconstruction framework is expected to be generally applicable in any AR-OAM system. 

The advantages of model-based inversion stem from the fact that it considers the broadband nature of 
OA signals. This is fundamentally different to other approaches based on weighting the signals with an 
approximated transducer sensitivity field, which generally changes for different OA sources due to the 
frequency  dependence  of  the  diffraction-limited  acoustic  focusing.  We  have  shown  in  numerical 
simulations that it is possible to quantitatively reconstruct absorbers of different sizes located at different 
depths, and further improve the lateral resolution at points outside the depth-of-focus. Modifications of 
the SAFT method employed for comparison can potentially provide more quantitative results than the 
standard implementation [52, 53]. However, these modifications are generally heuristically defined, while 
the suggested framework has a solid mathematical basis on the OA forward model, hence is generally 
expected to provide more accurate and robust results. In the current implementation, the model matrix 
was estimated theoretically by assuming that the collected signal is proportional to the integral of the 
acoustic pressure distribution at the surface of the transducer, which represents a valid approximation 
for  the  curved  thin  PVDF  film  employed.  However,  the  computation  of  the  model  matrix  e.g.  for 
transducers based on acoustic lenses or air-coupled transducers is more complex as it involves modeling 
acoustic  interfaces  [54,  55].  Also,  the  finite  detection  bandwidth  influenced  by  both  the  PVDF  film 

 
thickness  and  the  amplification  electronics  must  be  considered  for  a  better  accuracy.  Thereby,  a 
theoretical  calculation  of  the  model-matrix  may  not  always  be  possible.  However,  the  suggested 
reconstruction methodology can alternatively be used by experimentally estimating the model-matrix for 
a transducer position e.g. by raster-scanning a small particle or a light beam in the volume of interest [56]. 
Other parameters can also be considered in the model, such as the light fluence distribution or acoustic 
attenuation effects, which may lead to further improvements in quantification and spatial resolution [57, 
58]. 

Acoustic diffraction has been considered as a limit for the achievable resolution in OA,  similar to light 
diffraction in optical microscopy [59]. Super-resolution methods have massively impacted life sciences by 
smartly overcoming the  optical diffraction limit  [60]. The  development of similar approaches  enabling 
breaking through the acoustic diffraction barrier at depths not reachable with optical microscopy is also 
expected to highly impact the biomedical imaging field and boost the applicability of OA as a research and 
clinical  tool.  Well-established  optical  super-resolution  methods  can  be  taken  as  a  reference  for  this 
purpose,  although  fundamental  differences  exist  in  physical  principles  and  instrumentation.  Recently, 
localization OA tomography (LOT) exploited the basic principle of photoactivated localization microscopy 
(PALM)  to  image  beyond  the  resolution  limit  imposed  by  acoustic  diffraction  [9,  61-64].  The  super-
resolution  method  suggested  herein  (MB-L1)  has  some  analogies  with  stimulated  emission  depletion 
(STED) microscopy as it is based on a raster-scanning protocol where a non-linear response is induced. 
The  non-linearity  is  however  associated  with  the  reconstruction  procedure,  hence  MB-L1  also  has 
similarities with super-resolution methods based on multiple observations with sub-pixel displacements 
and/or sparse image representations [65, 66]. The use of a L1 regularization term has previously been 
shown to reduce the width of reconstructed structures in OA tomography [67, 68]. Herein, we have shown 
that the suggested OA forward model is sufficiently accurate to better resolve closely separated sources 
–  branching  vascular  structures  –  in  vivo,  which  effectively  demonstrates  its  performance  as  a  super-
resolution  biomedical  imaging  tool.  The  methodology  introduced  herein  further  establishes  a  basic 
framework for further improvements e.g. by tuning regularization terms, scanning step, or voxel size. 

In conclusion, we expect the introduced model-based reconstruction framework to significantly enhance 
the performance of AR-OAM and enable the visualization of previously unresolvable structures beyond 
the acoustic diffraction barrier. The fact that the forward model accurately accounts for the transducer 
spatial  response  and  the  broadband  nature  of  pressure  waves  indicates  that  model-based  inversion 
arguably  represents  the  most  accurate  OA  image  reconstruction  method.  Considering  that  image 
reconstruction  can  be  performed  with  low  memory  requirements  and  in  a  relatively  short  time,  we 
anticipate that it may become the method of choice in widely-used AR-OAM systems. 

Methods 

Forward modeling 

Excitation of OA signals in AR-OAM is achieved with nanosecond laser pulses fulfilling thermal and stress 
confinement  conditions.  In  an  acoustically-uniform  and  non-attenuating  medium,  the  time-resolved 
pressure signal 𝑝(𝒙, 𝑡) at a point 𝒙 is given as a function of absorbed optical energy density distribution 
𝐻(𝒙′) as [69] 

 
𝑝(𝒙, 𝑡) =

𝛤
4𝜋𝑐

𝜕
𝜕𝑡

∫
𝑆′(𝑡)

𝐻(𝒙′)
|𝒙 − 𝒙′|

𝑑𝑆′(𝑡),

(1) 

where 𝛤 is the Grueneisen parameter, 𝑐 is the speed of sound, 𝒙′ is a point where light is absorbed, and 
𝑆′(𝑡) is a spherical surface defined as |𝒙 − 𝒙′| = 𝑐𝑡. The forward model in Eq. 1 was discretized with a 
two-step procedure — the  time derivative was discretized using the finite difference method, and the 
surface integral was discretized using trilinear interpolation of neighboring voxel values [33]. Assuming a 
constant 𝛤 and 𝑐, the discrete forward model is then expressed (in arbitrary units) as the linear system of 
equations 

𝒑 = 𝑨𝑯, 

(2) 

where 𝒑 is a vector of pressure signals at all scanning positions, 𝑨 is the model matrix and 𝑯 is a vector of 
voxel values representing the absorbed energy density in the region of interest (ROI). The model matrix 𝑨 
describes the OA response to unit absorption at the voxel grid defined to cover the absorption distribution 
domain,  and  can  be  used  to  model  the  signals  of  a  point  detector  with  infinite  bandwidth.  More 
specifically, each column vector in 𝑨 corresponds to one pair of voxel and scanning point. The OA signal 
collected  by  a  finite-size  transducer  can  be  approximated  by  integrating  pressure  waves  over  the 
transducer  surface  [70].  This  approximation  represents  the  spatial  impulse  response  (SIR)  of  the 
transducer, which can be modeled by dividing the transducer surface into sub-elements with position 𝒙𝑗 
and area ∆𝑥𝑗. The vector 𝒔 of signals collected by the transducer at all scanning positions is then expressed 
as 

𝑀
𝒔 = ∑ 𝒑𝒙𝑗
𝑗=1

∆𝑥𝑗, 

(3) 

where 𝑀 is the number of sub-elements covering the transducer surface (Fig. 1c). Combining Eqs. 2 and 
3, the discrete forward model becomes 

𝑀
𝒔 = ∑ 𝑨𝑗
𝑗=1

∆𝑥𝑗𝑯 = 𝑨𝑠𝑯. 

(4) 

Thereby, the model matrix 𝑨𝑠 accounting for the SIR of the transducer is estimated as a weighted sum of 
𝑀 model matrices corresponding to 𝑀 sub-elements. 

Efficient reconstruction based on scanning symmetries 

Model-based (MB) reconstruction involves minimizing an energy functional 

𝑯  = 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑯||𝒔𝑚 − 𝑨𝑠𝑯||2

2 + 𝜆𝑅(𝑯), 

(5) 

where  𝒔𝑚  is  the  vector  of  measured  signals,  𝑅(𝑯)  is  regularization  term  and  𝜆  is  the  regularization 
parameter controlling the  trade-off between regularization and data fidelity terms. The importance of 
𝑅(𝑯) is two-fold — it makes the optimization procedure more robust to noise, and it incorporates a-priori 
knowledge of the reconstructed image. Herein, we considered the standard Tikhonov regularization based 
on the L2 norm, where 𝑅(𝑯) is given by 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
𝑅(𝑯) = ||𝑯||2

(6) 

We refer to MB reconstruction with Tikhonov regularization as the MB-L2 method. We also considered L1 
regularization based on the L1 norm, where 𝑅(𝑯) is given by 

  . 
𝑅(𝑯) = ||𝑯||1

(7) 

We refer to MB reconstruction with L1 regularization as the  MB-L1 method. The solution of Eq. 5 was 
calculated with the LSQR method [71] for MB-L2 and with the FISTA method [72] for MB-L1. 

In both LSQR and FISTA algorithms, the most computationally demanding operations are the matrix-vector 
𝑇𝒗, where 𝒖 and 𝒗 are updated in each iteration. The computational burden 
multiplications 𝑨𝑠𝒖 and 𝑨𝑠
originates from the large-scale nature of AR-OAM. This leads to a huge model matrix covering each voxel 
and scanning position in  the  entire  ROI, even if it is  stored in sparse format  [41]. However, since  the 
spherically  focused  transducer  barely  senses  voxels  sufficiently  distant  in  the  lateral  direction,  the 
corresponding model matrix values were approximated as 0, i.e., the model matrix only covers a 1 mm 
lateral extent (Fig. 1d) to reconstruct arbitrarily large ROI. The depth extent of model matrix scales with 
the collected dataset. Also, given that the transducer sensitivity field is translational-symmetric, the model 
vector is equivalent if the relative position between voxel and scanning point is maintained. Therefore, it 
was sufficient to generate the model matrix for a single scanning position, as it includes all unique lateral 
distances between pairs of voxel and scanning point. The “compressed” model matrix can then be pre-
calculated  in  a  reasonable  time  and  stored  in  a  memory-efficient  way.  To  perform  the  matrix-vector 
multiplications, translational symmetries were considered to find the correspondences between voxels 
and model vectors (Fig. 1b). Specifically, we maintained two coordinate systems — an absolute coordinate 
system to index over the voxel grid, and a relative coordinate system, with the origin at each scanning 
position, to retrieve the corresponding model vector based on the lateral distance between a given voxel 
and the origin. The matrix-vector multiplications were parallelized and executed on GPU, which greatly 
improved computational speed. 

Numerical simulations 

The performance of the suggested MB reconstruction methods, MB-L2 and MB-L1, was first tested on 
numerical simulations. In the first simulation, the absorption distribution within a (2 x 2 x 3)  mm3 FOV 
was modeled as four truncated paraboloids with diameters 60 µm, 100 µm, 150 µm, and 200 µm (Fig. 1e), 
and a 25 µm step size was used. The paraboloids were positioned 0.5 mm away from the center of the 
FOV in the lateral (x and y) directions, and equally separated within a ±1 mm range from the acoustic focus 
in axial (z) direction. The transducer surface was divided into 1200 sub-elements and the raw OA signals 
at the center of each sub-element were calculated analytically [70]. The temporal sampling frequency was 
set to 250 MHz for all simulation experiments, consistent with the experimental setting. The raw signals 
were normalized to the maximum absolute value and 2% white Gaussian noise (standard deviation of 
0.02)  was  added.  MB-L2  and  the  standard  SAFT  [10]  were  used  for  image  reconstruction  in  this  first 
simulation. 

The second simulation was performed by considering two truncated paraboloids with 20 µm diameter at 
the  axial  location  of  the  acoustic  focus  for  a  FOV  of  (200  x  200  x  150)  µ𝑚3  and  5 µm  step  size.  The 
paraboloids were first separated by 60 µm in the x direction to ensure they can be resolved by all three 

 
 
 
methods in comparison — SAFT, MB-L2, and MB-L1 (Fig. 2a, left). Subsequently, they were separated by 
40 µm in the x direction, which was empirically demonstrated to be beyond the acoustic diffraction limit 
for the filters employed (Fig. 2a, right). Specifically, the raw signals and the model matrix were band-pass 
filtered between 0.5 MHz and 80 MHz, yielding a diffraction-limited resolution of 61 µm [43]. The raw 
signal volumes were normalized by the maximum absolute value and no noise was added. 

AR-OAM set-up 

A recently proposed burst-mode AR-OAM system was used [11]. The system employs a custom-made, 
9 µm foil PVDF spherically focused transducer (7 mm focal distance and 0.43 NA). Three laser sources at 
532 nm, 578 nm, and 1064 nm were combined and coupled into a multimode fiber, which was guided 
through a central hole (0.9 mm diameter) of the transducer, thus providing concentric illumination and 
acoustic  detection.  Two  of  the  laser  sources  have  fixed  wavelengths  at  532 nm  and  1064 nm  (Onda 
532 nm  and  1064 nm,  Bright  Solutions,  UK),  and  the  third  source  is  a  tunable  dye  laser  (Credo,  Sirah 
Lasertechnik, Germany) with wavelength set to 578 nm. The transducer was translated laterally in the x-
y  plane  above  the  sample  (Fig.  1a)  to  acquire  a  time-resolved  OA  signal  at  each  scanning  position. 
Specifically, a fast-moving scanning stage moves constantly forth and back between the boundaries of the 
previously defined scan window while monitoring its position. Following each pre-defined incremental 
stage movement, all three lasers were triggered in a cascade with a 6 µs delay in between. Motion artifacts 
were  avoided  by  averting  acceleration  and  deceleration  at  each  scanning  position.  The  system  thus 
enables rapid acquisition of multi-wavelength volumetric datasets over large FOV. In all experiments, the 
temporal sampling frequency was set to 250 MSPS and no signal averaging was performed. 

Phantom experiments 

The suggested MB reconstruction framework was tested on two phantom experiments. A first phantom 
was used to test if MB-L1 is able to break the acoustic diffraction limit on experimental data. This consisted 
of a single micro-sphere with 20 µm diameter embedded in 1.3% (w/v) agar. The phantom was placed 
with the micro-sphere at the axial location of the acoustic focus and a scan covering a (200 x 200 x 150) 
µ𝑚3 FOV was performed with 5 µm step size. The 532 nm laser source was used, with up to 2.5 kHz pulse 
repetition rate (PRR) and 50 µJ per-pulse energy (PPE). The single micro-sphere in the phantom was first 
individually  reconstructed.  Subsequently,  the  signal  volume  was  artificially  shifted  by  40 µm  in  the  x 
direction and super-imposed with the original volume, which is equivalent to the signal volume of two 
micro-spheres separated by the same distance. 

A second phantom consisting of four carbon fibers with 7 µm diameter embedded in 1.3% (w/v) agar was 
imaged. The purpose of this phantom experiment was to assess the overall performance of SAFT and the 
suggested MB reconstruction methods to reconstruct elongated structures. The scan covered a (1 x 2 x 1) 
𝑚𝑚3 FOV with 10 µm step size. The PRR was again limited to 2.5 kHz and the PPE of the 532 nm laser was 
set to 50 µJ. 

In vivo mouse skin imaging 

 
 
 
The in vivo imaging performance of the suggested MB reconstruction framework was tested by imaging 
dorsal mouse skin. For this purpose, a CD-1 mouse (8 weeks old; Charles River Laboratories, Germany) 
was anesthetized with isoflurane, and placed in prone position on a heating pad. The back skin was shaved 
and cleaned before imaging. A scan covering a 10 x 30 mm² FOV with a 25 µm step size was performed, 
giving a volumetric dataset at each wavelength (532 nm, 578 nm, and 1064 nm). The PRR was limited to 
up to 2.5 kHz and the PPEs for the three lasers were set to 25 µJ, 25 µJ, and 100 µJ, respectively. Before 
reconstruction, the raw signals were bandpass filtered between 1 MHz and 120 MHz, and further median 
filtered with kernel size of 3 x 3 x 3. The animal experiment was performed in accordance with the Swiss 
Federal Act on Animal Protection and were approved by the Canton Veterinary Office Zurich. 

Image visualization and vessel quantification 

Visualization of the dorsal skin vasculature was done using maximum intensity projections (MIPs) along 
all Cartesian  dimensions.  Volume  rendering  was  performed  in  Paraview  5.8.0  [73].  The  images  of  the 
mouse skin vasculature were shown with color-coded depth. This was done by multiplying a background 
map  (reconstructed  volume),  a  foreground  map  (3-channel  color  encoder),  and  a  transparency  value. 
Foreground colors were set to blue, green, and orange from deeper to shallower regions. The number of 
vessels  was  quantified  with  a  previously  reported  automatic  vessel  analysis  and  segmentation  (AVSA) 
algorithm [48]. In short, reconstructed images were binarized, skeletonized, and vessel center-lines fitted 
by a spline. Vessel edges were found by computing the image gradient along the normal direction of the 
central line. To quantify the number of vessels achieved in SAFT, MB-L2 and MB-L1, two signal volumes 
acquired at 532 nm and 578 nm from the multi-wavelength in vivo dataset were used. Each of the two 
volumes were further split into half along the y direction, which increases the sample size and gives a total 
of four individual datasets. Reconstructed vessels in an upper-right sub-region were individually visualized 
based  on  branch  point,  central  line  and  edge  (Fig.  3e).  The  number  of  vessels  in  all  four  datasets 
reconstructed  with  SAFT,  MB-L2  and  MB-L1  was  plotted,  and  the  mean  value  was  noted  for  each 
reconstruction method (Fig. 3f). 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the Helmut Horten Stiftung (Project Deep Skin, X.L.D.B.) and by the European 
Research Council under grant agreement ERC-2015-CoG-682379 (D.R.). 

 
 
 
Fig. 1 Time-domain model for AR-OAM. (a) Lay-out of the raster-scan scanning protocol. (b) Schematic 
representation of the scanning symmetries. The OA signals generated at all voxels labeled with blue circles 
for the indicated transducer position are equivalent. Signals are preserved if the transducer and voxels 
are shifted by the same distance (dashed lines). (c) Actual photograph of the transducer active area (left) 
along with a representation of the OA model based on discretizing transducer surface into sub-elements 
(right).  The  OA  signals  corresponding  to  a  given  voxel  and  all  surface  elements  are  superimposed  to 
estimate  the  collected  time-resolved  signal  for  that  voxel.  (d)  Cross-sectional  view  of  the  amplitude 
spectral  density  of  the  modelled  time-resolved  signals  for  three  different  frequencies  along  with 
amplitude of these signals in the time domain. FWHM are indicated. (e) AR-OAM images reconstructed 
by superimposing the acquired signals (left), with the SAFT method (middle) and with the MB-L2 method 
(right). 

 
 
 
Fig. 2 Super-resolution imaging beyond the acoustic diffraction  limit. (a) MIPs of the AR-OAM images 
reconstructed with the  SAFT (top), MB-L2 (middle) and MB-L1 (bottom) methods from simulated data 
corresponding to two 20 m absorbers separated by 60 m (left) and 40 m (right). FWHM are indicated. 
(b) Cross-sectional profiles for the dashed lines indicated in (a). FWHM are indicated in the left panel, and 
separation for points >20% of the minimum is indicated in the right panel. (c) MIPs of the AR-OAM images 
reconstructed with the SAFT (top), MB-L2 (middle) and MB-L1 (bottom) methods from experimental data 
corresponding to a 20 m sphere. Reconstructions from the original collected time-resolved signals and 
from the  superposition of signals shifted by 40 m are shown (left  and right respectively). FWHM are 
indicated. (d) Cross-sectional profiles for the dashed lines indicated in (c). FWHM are indicated in the left 
panel and separation for points >20% of the minimum is indicated in the right panel. (e) MIPs of the AR-
OAM  images  reconstructed  with  the  SAFT  (top),  MB-L2  (middle)  and  MB-L1  (bottom)  methods  from 
experimental data corresponding to 7 m carbon fibers. (f) Cross-sectional profiles for the dashed lines 
indicated in (e). Separation for points >20% of the minimum is indicated. 

 
 
 
Fig. 3 Enhanced in vivo imaging capabilities. (a)  Lay-out of the  in vivo  imaging  scheme  indicating the 
scanned region. (b) Depth color-coded MIPs of the AR-OAM images reconstructed with the SAFT (left), 
MB-L2 (middle) and MB-L1 (right) methods. (c) Three-dimensional views of the central region indicated in 
(b). The reference images are the SAFT image in the middle panel and the MB-L2 image in the right panel. 
(d).  Cross-sectional  profiles  indicated  in  (c).  (e)  Reconstructed  vessels  in  the  binarized  image 
corresponding to the indicated region in the upper right corner in (b). (f) Number of detected vessels for 
four different in vivo datasets reconstructed with SAFT, MB-L2 and MB-L1. The average number of vessels 
are indicated for each reconstruction method. 

 
 
 
 
 
References 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

Wang, L.V. and J. Yao, A practical guide to photoacoustic tomography in the life sciences. Nature 
methods, 2016. 13(8): p. 627. 
Deán-Ben, X., et al., Advanced optoacoustic methods for multiscale imaging of in vivo dynamics. 
Chemical Society Reviews, 2017. 46(8): p. 2158-2198. 
Taruttis, A. and V. Ntziachristos, Advances in real-time multispectral optoacoustic imaging and 
its applications. Nature photonics, 2015. 9(4): p. 219-227. 
Li, L., et al., Single-impulse panoramic photoacoustic computed tomography of small-animal 
whole-body dynamics at high spatiotemporal resolution. Nature biomedical engineering, 2017. 
1(5): p. 1-11. 
Deán-Ben, X.L., et al., Spiral volumetric optoacoustic tomography visualizes multi-scale dynamics 
in mice. Light: Science & Applications, 2017. 6(4): p. e16247-e16247. 
Deán-Ben, X.L., H. López-Schier, and D. Razansky, Optoacoustic micro-tomography at 100 
volumes per second. Scientific reports, 2017. 7(1): p. 1-8. 
Zhang, H.F., et al., Functional photoacoustic microscopy for high-resolution and noninvasive in 
vivo imaging. Nature biotechnology, 2006. 24(7): p. 848-851. 
Jathoul, A.P., et al., Deep in vivo photoacoustic imaging of mammalian tissues using a 
tyrosinase-based genetic reporter. Nature Photonics, 2015. 9(4): p. 239-246. 
Kim, J., et al., Super-resolution localization photoacoustic microscopy using intrinsic red blood 
cells as contrast absorbers. Light: Science & Applications, 2019. 8(1): p. 1-11. 
Park, S., et al., Acoustic resolution photoacoustic microscopy. Biomedical Engineering Letters, 
2014. 4(3): p. 213-222. 
Hofmann, U.A., et al., Rapid functional optoacoustic micro-angiography in a burst mode. Optics 
Letters, 2020. 45(9): p. 2522-2525. 
Omar, M., et al., Pushing the optical imaging limits of cancer with multi-frequency-band raster-
scan optoacoustic mesoscopy (RSOM). Neoplasia, 2015. 17(2): p. 208-214. 
Aguirre, J., et al., Precision assessment of label-free psoriasis biomarkers with ultra-broadband 
optoacoustic mesoscopy. Nature Biomedical Engineering, 2017. 1(5): p. 1-8. 
Haedicke, K., et al., High-resolution optoacoustic imaging of tissue responses to vascular-
targeted therapies. Nature Biomedical Engineering, 2020. 4(3): p. 286-297. 
Jeon, M., J. Kim, and C. Kim, Multiplane spectroscopic whole-body photoacoustic imaging of 
small animals in vivo. Medical & biological engineering & computing, 2016. 54(2-3): p. 283-294. 
Li, X., et al., Optoacoustic mesoscopy analysis and quantitative estimation of specific imaging 
metrics in Fitzpatrick skin phototypes II to V. Journal of biophotonics, 2019. 12(9): p. 
e201800442. 
Estrada, H., et al., Real-time optoacoustic brain microscopy with hybrid optical and acoustic 
resolution. Laser Physics Letters, 2014. 11(4): p. 045601. 
Rebling, J., et al., Dual‐wavelength hybrid optoacoustic‐ultrasound biomicroscopy for functional 
imaging of large‐scale cerebral vascular networks. Journal of biophotonics, 2018. 11(9): p. 
e201800057. 
Liu, W., et al., Quad-mode functional and molecular photoacoustic microscopy. Scientific reports, 
2018. 8(1): p. 1-10. 
Li, M.-L., et al., Improved in vivo photoacoustic microscopy based on a virtual-detector concept. 
Optics letters, 2006. 31(4): p. 474-476. 

 
21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 

39. 

Stepinski, T. and F. Lingvall. Synthetic aperture focusing techniques for ultrasonic imaging of 
solid objects. in 8th European Conference on Synthetic Aperture Radar. 2010. VDE. 
Turner, J., et al., Universal weighted synthetic aperture focusing technique (W-SAFT) for scanning 
optoacoustic microscopy. Optica, 2017. 4(7): p. 770-778. 
Spadin, F., et al., Quantitative comparison of frequency-domain and delay-and-sum optoacoustic 
image reconstruction including the effect of coherence factor weighting. Photoacoustics, 2020. 
17: p. 100149. 
Park, J., et al., Delay-multiply-and-sum-based synthetic aperture focusing in photoacoustic 
microscopy. Journal of biomedical optics, 2016. 21(3): p. 036010. 
Mozaffarzadeh, M., et al., Enhanced contrast acoustic‐resolution photoacoustic microscopy using 
double‐stage delay‐multiply‐and‐sum beamformer for vasculature imaging. Journal of 
biophotonics, 2019. 12(11): p. e201900133. 
Xu, M. and L.V. Wang, Universal back-projection algorithm for photoacoustic computed 
tomography. Physical Review E, 2005. 71(1): p. 016706. 
Treeby, B.E. and B.T. Cox, k-Wave: MATLAB toolbox for the simulation and reconstruction of 
photoacoustic wave fields. Journal of biomedical optics, 2010. 15(2): p. 021314. 
Jin, H., et al., Fast and high-resolution three-dimensional hybrid-domain photoacoustic imaging 
incorporating analytical-focused transducer beam amplitude. IEEE transactions on medical 
imaging, 2019. 38(12): p. 2926-2936. 
Aguirre, J., et al., A low memory cost model based reconstruction algorithm exploiting 
translational symmetry for photoacoustic microscopy. Biomedical optics express, 2013. 4(12): p. 
2813-2827. 
Yao, L., L. Xi, and H. Jiang, Photoacoustic computed microscopy. Scientific reports, 2014. 4: p. 
4960. 
Deán-Ben, X.L., et al. Three-dimensional modeling of the transducer shape in acoustic resolution 
optoacoustic microscopy. in Photons Plus Ultrasound: Imaging and Sensing 2014. 2014. 
International Society for Optics and Photonics. 
Mitsuhashi, K., K. Wang, and M.A. Anastasio, Investigation of the far-field approximation for 
modeling a transducer's spatial impulse response in photoacoustic computed tomography. 
Photoacoustics, 2014. 2(1): p. 21-32. 
Ding, L., X.L. Deán-Ben, and D. Razansky, Efficient 3-D model-based reconstruction scheme for 
arbitrary optoacoustic acquisition geometries. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2017. 
36(9): p. 1858-1867. 
Drozdov, G., A. Levi, and A. Rosenthal, The Impulse Response of Negatively Focused Spherical 
Ultrasound Detectors and Its Effect on Tomographic Optoacoustic Reconstruction. IEEE 
transactions on medical imaging, 2019. 38(10): p. 2326-2337. 
Arridge, S., et al., Accelerated high-resolution photoacoustic tomography via compressed 
sensing. Physics in Medicine & Biology, 2016. 61(24): p. 8908. 
Frikel, J. and M. Haltmeier, Efficient regularization with wavelet sparsity constraints in 
photoacoustic tomography. Inverse Problems, 2018. 34(2): p. 024006. 
Ding, L., et al., Constrained inversion and spectral unmixing in multispectral optoacoustic 
tomography. IEEE transactions on medical imaging, 2017. 36(8): p. 1676-1685. 
Hauptmann, A., et al., Model-based learning for accelerated, limited-view 3-d photoacoustic 
tomography. IEEE transactions on medical imaging, 2018. 37(6): p. 1382-1393. 
Matthews, T.P., et al., Parameterized joint reconstruction of the initial pressure and sound speed 
distributions for photoacoustic computed tomography. SIAM journal on imaging sciences, 2018. 
11(2): p. 1560-1588. 

40. 

41. 

42. 

43. 

44. 

45. 
46. 

47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

53. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 

60. 

61. 

Özbek, A., X.L. Deán-Ben, and D. Razansky, Optoacoustic imaging at kilohertz volumetric frame 
rates. Optica, 2018. 5(7): p. 857-863. 
Ding, L., D. Razansky, and X.L. Deán-Ben, Model-based reconstruction of large three-dimensional 
optoacoustic datasets. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2020. 
Shan, T., et al., GPU-based acceleration and mesh optimization of finite-element-method-based 
quantitative photoacoustic tomography: a step towards clinical applications. Applied optics, 
2017. 56(15): p. 4426-4432. 
Yao, J. and L.V. Wang, Photoacoustic microscopy. Laser & photonics reviews, 2013. 7(5): p. 758-
778. 
Rosenthal, A., V. Ntziachristos, and D. Razansky, Acoustic inversion in optoacoustic tomography: 
A review. Current Medical Imaging, 2013. 9(4): p. 318-336. 
Hansen, P.C., Discrete inverse problems: insight and algorithms. 2010: SIAM. 
Davoudi, N., X.L. Deán-Ben, and D. Razansky, Deep learning optoacoustic tomography with 
sparse data. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2019. 1(10): p. 453-460. 
Arridge, S.R., et al., On the adjoint operator in photoacoustic tomography. Inverse Problems, 
2016. 32(11): p. 115012. 
Estrada, H., et al., Intravital optoacoustic and ultrasound bio-microscopy reveal radiation-
inhibited skull angiogenesis. Bone, 2020. 133: p. 115251. 
Lutzweiler, C., X.L. Deán‐Ben, and D. Razansky, Expediting model‐based optoacoustic 
reconstructions with tomographic symmetries. Medical physics, 2014. 41(1): p. 013302. 
Lou, Y., et al., Analysis of the use of unmatched backward operators in iterative image 
reconstruction with application to three-dimensional optoacoustic tomography. IEEE 
Transactions on Computational Imaging, 2019. 5(3): p. 437-449. 
Han, Y., et al., Three-dimensional optoacoustic reconstruction using fast sparse representation. 
Optics letters, 2017. 42(5): p. 979-982. 
Jeon, S., et al., A novel 2-D synthetic aperture focusing technique for acoustic-resolution 
photoacoustic microscopy. IEEE transactions on medical imaging, 2018. 38(1): p. 250-260. 
Jin, H., et al., Frequency Domain Based Virtual Detector for Heterogeneous Media in 
Photoacoustic Imaging. IEEE Transactions on Computational Imaging, 2020. 6: p. 569-578. 
Deán-Ben, X.L., et al., Non-contact optoacoustic imaging with focused air-coupled transducers. 
Applied Physics Letters, 2015. 107(5): p. 051105. 
Ma, H., et al., Noncontact photoacoustic angiography with an air-coupled ultrasonic transducer 
for evaluation of burn injury. Applied Physics Letters, 2019. 114(13): p. 133701. 
Seeger, M., et al., Pushing the boundaries of optoacoustic microscopy by total impulse response 
characterization. Nature Communications, 2020. 11(1): p. 1-13. 
Bu, S., et al., Model-based reconstruction integrated with fluence compensation for 
photoacoustic tomography. IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering, 2012. 59(5): p. 1354-
1363. 
Brochu, F.M., et al., Towards quantitative evaluation of tissue absorption coefficients using light 
fluence correction in optoacoustic tomography. IEEE transactions on medical imaging, 2016. 
36(1): p. 322-331. 
Abbe, E., Beiträge zur Theorie des Mikroskops und der mikroskopischen Wahrnehmung. Archiv 
für mikroskopische Anatomie, 1873. 9(1): p. 413-468. 
Sigal, Y.M., R. Zhou, and X. Zhuang, Visualizing and discovering cellular structures with super-
resolution microscopy. Science, 2018. 361(6405): p. 880-887. 
Vilov, S., B. Arnal, and E. Bossy, Overcoming the acoustic diffraction limit in photoacoustic 
imaging by the localization of flowing absorbers. Optics letters, 2017. 42(21): p. 4379-4382. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

66. 

67. 

68. 

69. 

70. 

71. 

72. 

73. 

Dean-Ben, X.L. and D. Razansky, Localization optoacoustic tomography. Light: Science & 
Applications, 2018. 7(4): p. 18004-18004. 
Zhang, P., et al., In vivo superresolution photoacoustic computed tomography by localization of 
single dyed droplets. Light: Science & Applications, 2019. 8(1): p. 1-9. 
Deán-Ben, X.L., et al., Noninvasive three-dimensional optoacoustic localization 
microangiography of deep tissues. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.00372, 2020. 
Li, X., et al., A multi-frame image super-resolution method. Signal Processing, 2010. 90(2): p. 
405-414. 
Yang, J., et al., Image super-resolution via sparse representation. IEEE transactions on image 
processing, 2010. 19(11): p. 2861-2873. 
Egolf, D.M., R.K. Chee, and R.J. Zemp, Sparsity-based reconstruction for super-resolved limited-
view photoacoustic computed tomography deep in a scattering medium. Optics letters, 2018. 
43(10): p. 2221-2224. 
Deán-Ben, X.L., et al., Acoustic scattering mediated single detector optoacoustic tomography. 
Physical review letters, 2019. 123(17): p. 174301. 
Cox, B.T., et al., k-space propagation models for acoustically heterogeneous media: Application 
to biomedical photoacoustics. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 2007. 121(6): p. 
3453-3464. 
Queirós, D., et al., Modeling the shape of cylindrically focused transducers in three-dimensional 
optoacoustic tomography. Journal of biomedical optics, 2013. 18(7): p. 076014. 
Paige, C.C. and M.A. Saunders, LSQR: An algorithm for sparse linear equations and sparse least 
squares. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS), 1982. 8(1): p. 43-71. 
Beck, A. and M. Teboulle, A fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm for linear inverse 
problems. SIAM journal on imaging sciences, 2009. 2(1): p. 183-202. 
Ayachit, U., The paraview guide: a parallel visualization application. 2015: Kitware, Inc. 

 
