0
2
0
2

t
c
O
4
1

]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
9
6
1
7
0
.
0
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Eﬀects of Aspect Ratio on Rolling and Twisting Foils

Andhini N. Zurman-Nasution, Bharathram Ganapathisubramani, and Gabriel D. Weymouth∗
University of Southampton, Boldrewood Innovation Campus, Burgess Road, Southampton, SO16 7QF.
(Dated: November 28, 2021)

Flapping ﬂight and swimming are increasingly studied both due to their intrinsic scientiﬁc richness
and their applicability to novel robotic systems. Strip theory is often applied to ﬂapping wings,
but such modeling is only rigorously applicable in the limit of inﬁnite aspect ratio ((cid:65)) where the
geometry and kinematics are eﬀectively uniform. This work compares the ﬂow features and forces of
strip theory and three dimensional ﬂapping foils, maintaining similitude in the rolling and twisting
kinematics while varying the foil (cid:65). We ﬁnd the key inﬂuence of ﬁnite (cid:65) and spanwise varying
kinematics is the generation of a time-periodic spanwise ﬂow which stabilizes the vortex structures
and enhances the dynamics at the foil root. An aspect-ratio correction for ﬂapping foils is developed
analogous to Prandtl ﬁnite wing theory, enabling future use of strip theory in analysis and design
of ﬁnite aspect ratio ﬂapping foils.

CONTENTS

I. Introduction

II. Methodology

II.1. Geometry and kinematics
II.2. Numerical methods

III. Results

III.1. Vortex structures
III.2. Aspect-ratio eﬀects
III.3. Spanwise ﬂow

IV. Discussion

V. Conclusion

Acknowledgments

Appendix: grid convergence

References

1

2
2
2

3
4
4
7

7

8

9

9

9

I.

INTRODUCTION

Biologically inspired robotic systems oﬀer beneﬁts in
their ﬂexibility, maneuverability, energy savings, and
speed. However, development of bio-inspired micro air
vehicles (MAVs) and autonomous underwater vehicles
(AUVs) requires a detailed understanding of unsteady
three-dimensional ﬂuid mechanics of propulsive ﬂapping
at intermediate Reynolds-number (Re ≈ 1000 − 10000).
Because of the cost and complexity of three-dimensional
(3D) simulations, most propulsive ﬂapping studies are
conducted using a strip theory approach which assumes
a simpliﬁed two-dimensional (2D) ﬂow across the wing
sections. However, this approach can lead to poor en-
gineering predictions for the forces and eﬃciency due to

∗ A.N.Zurman-Nasution@soton.ac.uk

the inherently 3D nature of the geometry, motion, and
ﬂow structures [1].

The key 3D ﬂuid dynamic eﬀects on a ﬁnite ﬂapping
foil undergoing 3D motion are spanwise ﬂow, tip vortices,
and 3D instabilities of the vortex wake. Spanwise ﬂow
promotes the ﬂuid dynamic interaction between sections
of the wing which can result in high lift generation [2–4].
The exact mechanism of this high lift on bird or insect
wings is still highly debated between the spanwise ﬂow
[3, 5, 6] and downwash-induced ﬂow caused by the tip [7–
9]. In addition, the tip of a ﬁnite foil deﬁnitely produces
non-planar wakes which have been shown to inﬂuence
stall on an impulsively translated ﬂat plates [10], pitch-
ing ﬂat plates [11], revolving wings [12–15] and a ﬁnite
foil undergoing 2D kinematics [16]. Finally, even on an
inﬁnite wing with no tip eﬀect or mean spanwise ﬂow,
3D evolution of the vortex wake limits strip theory ap-
plications. Zurman-Nasution et al. [17] showed there is
only exist a narrow band of kinematics, for instance at
Strouhal number ≈ 0.15 − 0.45 for heaving-pitching mo-
tion, where the wake remains two-dimensional and 2D
force predictions are accurate.
In this 2D range, the
motion of the foil stabilize the spanwise-perturbed 3D
structures found in the separated wake of a stationary
foil, but 3D structures reappear when the amplitude of
motion increases the shed vortex circulation above a 2D
viscous stability limit. This secondary instability along
spanwise-aligned vortex tubes also causes the transition
from 2D to 3D ﬂow in circular cylinder wakes [18, 19].
Despite the importance of these eﬀects, wake analysis for
ﬁnite foils undergoing 3D kinematics is still rare because
of the greatly reduced simulation cost when using 2D
strip theory.

The key geometric parameter in the ﬂow and forces on
3D ﬂapping foil is the aspect ratio, (cid:65), deﬁned as the
square of total wing span length over the planform area.
Chopra [20] provided potential ﬂow calculations indicat-
ing that decreasing (cid:65) would reduce thrust coeﬃcient and
eﬃciency. On the contrary, move recent experiments by
Fu et al. [21] show that the circulation over the tip ve-
locity increases with (cid:65) but drops at (cid:65) = 4, potentially
explaining why many insects have low (cid:65) wings. These
contradicting results show the need for simulations de-

 
 
 
 
 
 
tailing the (cid:65) inﬂuence on the ﬂow and forces of wings
undergoing 3D kinematics. For a ﬁnite wing undergoing
simple 2D pitching motion, pressure and thrust coeﬃ-
cient data are found to scale well with 1/(1 + c(cid:48)(cid:65)) where
c(cid:48) is a constant [22, 23]. This is similar to Prandtl ﬁ-
nite wing theory although Smits [24] emphasizes that this
added mass scaling is somehow misleading because it ne-
glects the circulatory forces. In addition, these studies
and others such as [25, 26] which use purely 2D kinemat-
ics cannot study the contributions of 3D kinematics on
the ﬂow features and force scaling.

The ability to make 3D predictions from 2D simula-
tions using analogous concepts to Prandtl’s ﬁnite wing
theory is an intriguing approach for speeding up compu-
tations, but it must be based on a strong understanding
of the inﬂuence of (cid:65) on the unsteady 3D ﬂow. In this
work, we provide a detailed analysis using 3D simula-
tions of rolling and twisting foils; a combination of 3D
kinematics that imitates the natural ﬂapping motion of
animal’s ﬂippers [27, 28] but can also be directly mapped
to simple pitch and heave motion of each section. The
addition of 3D twist to the foil kinematics also relates the
current work to previous studies which indicate improved
lift [29, 30] and thrust coeﬃcients [31, 32] for ﬂexible foils.
The instantaneous and phase-averaged vortex structures
in the tip ﬂow and wake, the spanwise ﬂow along the foil,
and the unsteady sectional forces on the foil are studied
while aspect ratio is varied. Finally, we relate the sec-
tional forces on the 3D foils to Prandtl ﬁnite-wing the-
ory in order to scale the 2D strip theory force predictions
onto 3D ﬂapping wings.

II. METHODOLOGY

II.1. Geometry and kinematics

This study uses a NACA0016 foil with chord length
C, thickness D = 0.16C, pivot point at 0.25C from the
leading edge, a rectangular planform section with span
length S, and a tapered elliptic tip with a length of 1C
as shown in Fig. 1. We will characterize the aspect ratio
by S/C which is varied from 1 . . . 6. The foil is placed
in a uniform ﬂow with constant inﬂow speed U∞ and
a ﬂuid density ρ and the chord-based Reynolds number
Re = U∞C/ν = 5300.

The 3D foil is prescribed to move in either pure roll
or a combination of roll and twist, where roll is deﬁned
as rigid rotation around the streamwise axis x and twist
is rotation around the spanwise axis z with linearly in-
creasing amplitude towards the tip, Fig. 1.

In a strip theory approach, these 3D kinematics are
converted into 2D kinematics for each section along the
span. The 2D sectional kinematics can be linearized for
small amplitude roll to simple heave H(t) and pitch θ(t)
motion in each spanwise plane, with functional form

H(t) = a sin(2πf t)

θ(t) = θ0 sin(2πf t + ψ) + θbias

(1)

(2)

θ0 = sin−1 (cid:0)a/(0.75C)(cid:1)

2

(3)

where f is the cycle frequency of ﬂapping and a and θ0
are the amplitudes of heave and pitch at each section.
The term θbias = 10◦ is a pitch bias angle used to en-
sure non-zero average mean lift as in Zurman-Nasution
et al. [17] and the phase diﬀerence is set to ψ = 90◦ to
maximize performance [33]. In order to isolate the ampli-
tude (which varies section by section) from the frequency,
these motions are characterized as

StD =

Df
U∞

AD =

2a
D

(4)

where StD is the thickness-based Strouhal number, AD
is the thickness-based amplitude and in this work we ﬁx
StD = 0.3. Combining these two gives the commonly
used amplitude-based Strouhal number StA = StD · AD
[34] which is proportional to the maximum heave velocity
on a section ˙Hmax = 2πf a scaled by the incoming ﬂow
velocity.

Strip theory assumes that both the geometry and the
motions change slowly along the span. The geometric
constraint is unavoidably violated at the tip, but the
kinematic condition is still a concern over the rectan-
gular region of the planform. Slowly varying kinemat-
ics are contingent on large aspect ratio; a relationship
that can be made explicit by noting that the pitch am-
plitude at each section is θ0 = θT z/S where θT is the
twist amplitude at the foil tip, Fig. 1. Therefore the
scaled spanwise derivative of the 2D strip theory kine-
matics is C∂zθ0 = θT C/S. The larger the aspect ratio,
the smaller this derivative, and the better strip-theory
should apply. Similarly, for small roll amplitude arc-
length R, the sectional heave amplitude is a = Rz/S
and therefore ∂za = R/S. To focus on the aspect ratio
eﬀect, we prescribe a constant roll amplitude R = 0.3C
from which all other amplitudes are determined.

Another way to measure the spanwise change in 2D
kinematics along the foil, used recently by [5], is the sec-
tional angle-of-attack α

α(t) = tan−1 (cid:0) ˙H(t)/U∞)(cid:1) − θ(t)

(5)

˙H(t) increases towards the tip, so do the sec-
Because
tional angle-of-attack α and it’s time derivative ˙α. Fig.
2 shows ˙αmax increases linearly along the span, while
trigonometry causes the change in αmax to taper oﬀ near
the tip. In either case, the spanwise derivative of these
parameters depend inversely on S/C and we show they
strongly impact the ﬂow three-dimensionality.

II.2. Numerical methods

The computational package used for this research is
the Boundary Data Immersion Method (BDIM). Wey-
mouth and Yue [35] introduced BDIM using a robust
and eﬃcient Cartesian grid with implicit LES (iLES)

3

(a)

(b)

FIG. 1: (a) Kinematic illustration for a 3D foil undergoing rolling and twisting motions whose cross sections are
comparable to 2D foil experiencing linearly increased heave and pitch amplitude along the span. (b) Illustration of 4
phases in one cycle period (T) for pure rolling kinematic and twisting-rolling combination.

simulation. The domains extend from the pivot point to
4C at the front, 11C at the rear, 5.5C at the top and
bottom. Meanwhile, the tip distance to maximum span-
wise domain is 3.5C. A grid convergence study with an
inﬁnite foil with span length of 3C and periodic spanwise
boundary conditions and a 2D foil are used to verify the
grid convergence for the lift and drag coeﬃcients

CL =

Fy
0.5ρSpU 2
∞

CD =

Fx
0.5ρSpU 2
∞

(6)

where Fx, Fy are the integrated ﬂuid force in the global
coordinate directions and Sp = CS + π
4 C 2 is the foil plan-
form area. Fig 12 in the appendix shows the standard
deviation of the forces predicted using C/∆x = 128 are
within 3% of simulations with double the resolution in
both 2D and 3D and this resolution is used for all results
presented in this work.

III. RESULTS

In this section, we compare the ﬂow-structure evolu-
tions and forces of foil undergoing rolling and twisting-
rolling motions over one cycle, across four aspect ratios.

FIG. 2: The gradient of maximum angle of attack αmax
(π rad) towards the tip is positive with linear rate ˙αmax
(π rad/t).

solver. BDIM uses analytic meta-equations for an im-
mersed body in multi-phase ﬂow with a smoothed inter-
face domain using an integral kernel. BDIM has been
validated, proved suitable for moving bodies and capable
of resolving the ﬂow at Re = 105 within 5% error for
thrust prediction [36].

For computational consistency, the 2D and 3D simu-
lations use the same solver. Symmetric conditions are
enforced on both spanwise boundaries for the ﬁnite foil

III.1. Vortex structures

Roll

Twist-roll

4

This section presents the qualitative features of the
ﬂow structures induced by the 3D kinematics on the ﬁ-
nite foil. As a representative result, Fig. 3 visualizes
an instantaneous snapshot of the turbulent vortex wake
using λ2 iso-contours colored by the spanwise vorticity
ωzC/U∞ for an intermediate aspect ratio S = 3C and
for both 3D kinematics. The small turbulent structures
indicating vortex breakdown are present for both kine-
In order to focus on the most important as-
matics.
pects of the wake, the ﬂow was phase-averaged at phases
t/T = 0, 1/4, 1/2, 3/4. Fig. 4 shows this simpliﬁes the vi-
sualization, revealing the dominant structures which oc-
cur every cycle and removing higher frequency turbulent
structures related to vortex breakdown. The pure roll
and twist-roll cases have distinct vortex structures due
to their diﬀerent kinematics, but the periodic formation
of the vortices such as the leading-edge (LEVs), trailing-
edge (TEVs) and tip vortices are much more clear in the
phase-averaged representation.

Both the instantaneous ﬂow (Fig. 3) and the phase-
averaged ﬂow (Fig. 4) show strong three-dimensionality
in their vortex structures along the span. Because the
amplitude of motion increases linearly along the span, the
sectional Strouhal StA increases linearly as well. Start-
ing from the root, we see the vortices are initially co-
herent and skewed obliquely, tilted further downstream
as you progress towards the tip. This is especially clear
in the near phase-averaged wake, where coherent struc-
tures persist all the way to the tip. Both the coherence
and skew are in direct contrast to the complete 3D vor-
tex breakdown found in the wake of inﬁnite foils heaving
and pitching with the same amplitudes [17], and there-
fore this must be due to the spanwise derivative of the
kinematics not present in the inﬁnite foil case. Indeed,
the oblique near-wakes resembles the vortices of delta
or swept wing and hints that the spanwise derivative of
the kinematics induces a stabilizing spanwise ﬂow —as
found in swept wings and rotating foils at low revolu-
tion angles [13]. For this ﬁnite foil, the far wake vortex
structures break down into 3D non-periodic turbulence
above section z/S = 0.27. This corresponds to a sectional
StA = 0.3 where 2D uniform structures were observed for
both pure heaving and heaving-pitching combination for
the inﬁnite foil cases in Zurman-Nasution et al. [17].

Contrasting the pure roll to the twist-roll case, we see
that the tip vortex ﬂow is much cleaner in the twist-
roll case. The correspondence between the instantaneous
and phase-averaged plots shows that the LEV vortex is
essentially periodic near the foil, and does not breakdown
until further downstream in the wake. This is due to the
twist motion being out of phase with roll, reducing the
angle of attack on the tip, Fig 2, and thereby reducing
the strength of the tip vortices. This is further quantiﬁed
in the next section.
In contrast, the pure rolling TEV
begins to breakdown as soon as it separates, see Fig. 3
and supplementary videos. This also implies that the foil
tip is more lightly loaded in the roll-twist case, reducing

FIG. 3: Instantaneous vortex wake visualization at
t/T = 0.5 for both kinematics and S = 3C. Vortices are
visualized with isocontours of λ2 colored by
dimensionless spanwise vorticity ωzC/U∞. Free-stream
ﬂow U∞ is ﬂowing right to left and spanwise scale given
in z/S.

the lift forces that can be achieved at compared to rolling
kinematics, as will be discussed further in the following
sections.

III.2. Aspect-ratio eﬀects

This section presents results on the inﬂuence of (cid:65) on
the ﬂow and forces. Fig. 5 compares the instantaneous
wake structures for S = 3C and S = 6C for a foil un-
dergoing pure roll. Note that the 2D kinematics on each
z/S slice match between these cases, e.g. StA = 0.3
on z/S = 0.27 for both foils. Therefore the strip the-
ory solution is identical for the two cases, while the 3D
simulations show obvious important diﬀerences. Because
the span is twice as long, the spanwise derivatives of the
kinematic parameters StA, α, ˙α are half as strong, weak-
ening the three-dimensionality of the ﬂow. First, the
turbulent tip ﬂow and wake breakdown is less uniform
in the S = 6C case, with a few clean vortex structures
identiﬁable over a longer span length. In addition, the
center-line (z = 0) reversed K´arm´an vortex street is com-
pletely diﬀerent between the 3C and 6C cases. As the foil
is motionless at the centerline, these vortices would not
even appear in a strip theory approach, and as they are
far from the tip, they isolate the inﬂuence of the span-
wise derivative of the kinematics on the 3D ﬂow. Fig. 5
shows that the S = 6C foil allows characteristics of the
inﬁnite foil to appear, including very weak and 3D vortex
structures in regions with very low amplitude [17]. This
area is dominated by the stationary foil vortex-shedding
induced only by the bias angle of attack θbias = 10◦.

These eﬀects are reiterated and quantiﬁed in Fig.6

Motion

t/T = 0

t/T = 0.25

t/T = 0.5

t/T = 0.75

5

Roll

Twist-
Roll

FIG. 4: Phase-averaged velocities for pure rolling and twisting-rolling motions for S = 3C. Visualization as in Fig. 3.

(a)

3C

6C

FIG. 5: Instantaneous ﬂow at t/T = 0.5 for ﬁnite foils
undergoing the same pure roll kinematics. Labels
contrast the relatively weaker wake vortices on the
centerline (z = 0) and less turbulent tip ﬂow on the
S = 6C foil compared to S = 3C. Visualization as in
Fig. 3.

which shows the phase-averaged ﬂow across the full range
of tested S/C. As before, the kinematics for each z/S
slice match across the foil sizes. The plot also quantiﬁes
the viscosity scaled circulation of the tip vortices (Γx)

and centerline vortices (Γz). The circulation is computed
by integrating the phase-averaged vorticity over a rectan-
gular slice through the vortex cores (see Fig.6 insets) and
are kept the same size as span is varied, but not between
Γz and Γx. The tip vortices are seen to dominate a larger
portion of the ﬂow as (cid:65) is reduced, as expected. How-
ever, the relative strength of the tip vortices only grows
by a factor of 2 as the span is reduced from S = 6C to
S = C for either motion type. A much stronger eﬀect
is observed in the center-line (z = 0) circulation of the
vortices in the reversed K´arm´an street. Fig.6 quantiﬁes
that these vortices strengthen by an order of magnitude
when the span is reduced from S = 6C to S = C for the
pure roll case, and nearly two orders of magnitude for
the twist-roll case.

To further quantify the impact of (cid:65) on the ﬂow,
Fig.7 shows the phase-averaged pressure coeﬃcient Cp =
P/(0.5ρU 2
∞) at three slices along the span for the twist-
roll case. The roll case is similar and so not shown. We
ﬁnd that all (cid:65) produce a similar Cp distribution near
the tip (z/S = 1), whereas the near-root pressure coeﬃ-
cient is substantially higher for lower aspect ratios. This
is in agreement with the wake circulation ﬁndings and
supports that the near-root sections are dominated by
the spanwise derivative in the kinematics.

Finally, Fig. 8 shows the phase-averaged lift coeﬃcient
CL for all span lengths and both pure roll and twist-
roll kinematics over a motion cycle. First, we note that
the relative magnitude of the lift is substantially reduced
when adding twist to the kinematics. This is because
twist is out of phase with roll, reducing the angle of at-
tack (Fig. 2) and therefore unloading the foil. Comparing

Motion

1C

2C

3C

6C

6

Roll

Twist-roll

FIG. 6: Phase-averaged ﬂow for pure roll and twist-roll motions for diﬀerent aspect ratios at t/T = 0.5. Flow
visualization as in Fig. 3. Inset ﬁgure I1 shows the spanwise vorticity on a center-line slice and I2 shows the
streamwise vorticity on a slice through the tip. The inset tables give the viscosity-scaled circulation of the shed
vortices.

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 7: Phase-averaged pressure coeﬃcient of twisting-rolling foil for cross sections z/S = (a) 0.02, (b) 0.27 and (c)
1.0, at t/T = 0.5 for upper and lower side of the foil. Section close to tip is kinematic dominated, whereas the one
close to root is gradient dominated.

7

(a)

(b)

FIG. 9: Sectional spanwise velocity normalized by the
heave velocity at each z/S section for (a) roll, and (b)
twist-roll at t/T = 0.5. Solid/dashed lines indicate ﬂow
on the upper/lower side of the foil. Positive values
indicate ﬂow towards the tip and vice versa.

S = 6C at z = S shown in Fig. 9 marks the location
of strong vortex breakdown in Fig. 5 and indicates that
the small spanwise derivative of the kinematics for this
large aspect ratio case is not suﬃcient to overcome the
spanwise vortex instabilities found on an inﬁnite foil [17].

IV. DISCUSSION

The spanwise derivative in the 3D ﬂapping foil kine-
matics has been shown to induce a spanwise ﬂow of
proportional strength and this has a strong impact on
the ﬂow ﬁeld. This spanwise ﬂow overwhelms the doc-
umented behaviour of ﬂapping inﬁnite foils where the
vortex strength is proportional to the scaled kinematic
velocity StA, and vortex instabilities leading to 3D struc-
tures are found at both very low and high StA [17]. On a
ﬁnite wing undergoing 3D kinematics, the spanwise ﬂow
helps distribute vorticity along the span, greatly increas-
ing the strength of the vortices at the root and increasing
the LEV stability for foils with short spans. Only the
longest span length S = 6C shows similar behavior to
inﬁnite foils since the spanwise derivatives and spanwise
ﬂow are small. Nominally these values will falls to zero
as the span length grows inﬁnitely. Even for S = 6C
the vortex structures are generally 3D and it is only safe
to apply 2D strip theory to cross sections experiencing
medium Strouhal number StA ∼ 0.3.

However, the forces on the foil are much less sensitive
to (cid:65) than the wake, implying that it could possible for a
simple model to modify 2D strip-theory sectional forces
to approximately predict 3D ﬁnite foil loading. Con-

(a)

(b)

FIG. 8: Phase-averaged lift coeﬃcient CL evolution for
various S/C of foil undergoing (a) roll and (b) twist-roll
motions over one cycle.

the results within each kinematic case, we can see that
despite the large diﬀerences in the ﬂow and the Cp dis-
tribution, the lift coeﬃcients are quite similar.

A clear diﬀerence in the force response shown in Fig. 8
is the large bumps in CL on the shortest foil at around
t/T = 0.4, 0.9 during roll and t = 0.6, 0.1 during twist-
roll. These large lift forces are due to the LEV remaining
near the foil longer, and thereby reducing the local pres-
sure substantially.

III.3. Spanwise ﬂow

The previous section shows that foils with the strongest
spanwise derivatives in their kinematics have stronger
three dimensionality which increases the strength of their
wake vorticities and increases the stability of their LEV,
both of which increase pressure forces. Previous work in
revolving wings suggests that spanwise ﬂow helps stabi-
lize and keep LEVs attached by draining their vorticity
outboard [13, 37] and we next investigate if spanwise ﬂow
is induced by the kinematic derivatives on 3D ﬂapping
wings.

±

= 1
C

We deﬁne the sectional spanwise ﬂow velocity over the
(cid:82) C
0 US(x±)dx where US is the
foil surface as US
ﬂow velocity tangent to the foil surface and perpendicular
to the free stream direction, x is the position on C, and
± represents either the velocity on the upper or lower
surface of the section. Fig. 9 plots this quantity scaled
by the maximum sectional heave velocity ˙Hmax ∝ z/S
at each section along the span.

The ﬁgure shows US is roughly proportional to ˙Hmax ∝
z/S from the mid span to the tip for both pure roll
and twist-roll. As the span length increases (i.e.
for
higher (cid:65)) this relatively ﬂat region occurs earlier and
the strength of the spanwise velocity decreases, both of
which indicate a more 2D ﬂow. Close to the root, both
the heave velocity and spanwise velocity go to zero by
symmetry, but their ratio is ﬁnite and ∼ 1 . Also note the
strength of the spanwise velocity for twist-roll is smaller
than for pure roll due to relative decrease in the kinematic
derivative in that case. The drop in spanwise velocity for

8

(a)

(b)

FIG. 10: Peak sectional lift coeﬃcients against U 2

max/U 2
of diﬀerent spans. Strip theory results from 2D foils with the same kinematics are also shown.

∞ for (a) roll and (b) twist-roll kinematics for 3D foils

k = ˙H2

TABLE I: 3D slope (a3D) change based on aspect-ratio compared to a2D for t/T = 0.5. The slopes are measured
using best-ﬁt linear trend lines to the peak sectional lift from the root up to z/S = 0.8. Data from t/T = 0 produce
the same trend (not presented here).

Roll at t/T = 0.5, a2D = 6.52 Twist-roll at t/T = 0.5, a2D = 5.55

s/c ARef f a3D(pred) a3D(sim) |(cid:15)| (%)
6
3
2
1

24.8
0.2
3.9
9.5

4.06
4.37
4.13
3.74

5.07
4.37
3.97
3.38

7.2
4.2
3.2
2.2

a3D(pred) a3D(sim)

4.46
3.92
3.59
3.10

4.47
4.10
3.81
3.18

|(cid:15)| (%)
0.2
4.4
5.9
2.5

sider the sectional lift coeﬃcient Cl(z/S) = (cid:72) Cpnyds/C,
where s is the 1D path around the z/S foil section, such
that CL ∝ (cid:82) S
0 Cldz/S. Fig. 10 shows the peak Cl at
each section along the span of the ﬁnite wings as well as
from 2D simulations with the same sectional kinematics.
The kinematics at each value of z/S match for all 3D
and 2D simulations but the sectional coeﬃcients do not,
meaning the strip theory predictions must be modiﬁed
to represent ﬁnite wing sectional forces.

2 ρ ˙H2

The unsteady Bernoulli equation suggests that the
peak sectional lift should scale with the peak kinetic en-
ergy of the foil section, i.e. 1
max. Fig. 10 tests this
scaling by plotting peak Cl against a normalized sectional
k = ( ˙Hmax/U∞)2 ∝ St2
kinetic energy U 2
A. We see that
this scaling hold linearly for the 2D strip theory, and
monotonically for the 3D sectional lift. Indeed, the slope
of the peak sectional lift a3D = dCL/d(U 2
k ) changes with
the aspect ratio, tending towards the strip theory slope
as S/C increases. This lift-curve slope, a3D can be de-
termined using Prandtl’s lifting line theory[38] as,

a3D =

a2D
1 + a2D/π(cid:65)

(7)

where a2D is the lift-curve slope of the 2D case. This
ﬁnite-length correction developed for steady ﬂow works
surprisingly well to correct the peak sectional lift on ﬂap-

ping foils, Tab. I. The only deviation greater than 10% is
the S = 6C roll case, where the lack of signiﬁcant span-
wise ﬂow to stabilize the extremely strong tip vortices
has greatly reduced the sectional lift on the end of the
In contrast, the corrected strip theory prediction
foil.
have less than 6% error for all the 3D foils undergoing
twist-roll case because of its more moderate loading.

In addition to the slope, the peak sectional Cl at the
root (z = 0) also depends on S/C, as isolated in Fig. 11.
The forces for ﬁnite S/C ﬁt a simple power law extremely
well, tending to zero as S/C becomes large in agreement
with the strip theory result.

V. CONCLUSION

In this work, we analyze the vortex structures and force
characteristics of foils with prescribed rolling and twist-
ing kinematics. Using three-dimensional Navier-Stokes
simulations and matched kinematics per cross-section,
we study the inﬂuence of increasing (cid:65)s up to an ide-
alized inﬁnite span and compare it with the strip theory
(2D analysis). If the (cid:65) is suﬃciently long, the ﬂow in-
duced by a ﬁnite foil undergoing 3D kinematics shows
characteristics of the inﬁnite foil ﬂow. However, this ﬂow
is still generally 3D and strip theory is only applicable

9

promotes more stable vortex structures and possibly im-
proves force production.

The forces on the ﬁnite wings are also sensitive to (cid:65),
but the impact is less extreme than on the ﬂow struc-
tures. We ﬁnd the peak sectional Cl scales with local
St2
A, recognized as the added mass scaling [39, 40], and
this scaling becomes linear in the limit of inﬁnite (cid:65).
The slope dCl/d(St2
A) surprisingly follows the Prandtl
lower slope for low (cid:65) and vice
ﬁnite-wing trend, i.e.
versa. This aspect ratio scaling has been reported to ﬁt
the circulatory force by varying aspect ratios [22, 23, 41],
but this scaling has not been previously used to scale 3D
forces from 2D strips. We ﬁnd strip theory predictions
with an (cid:65) correction have error below 6% for a ﬁnite
wing undergoing twist-roll motion, indicating it is possi-
ble to scale the sectional forces experienced by 3D foils
based on results from 2D strips using a version of Prandtl
ﬁnite-wing theory.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Indonesia Endowment Fund
for Education (LPDP), IRIDIS High Performance Com-
puting Facility with its associated support services at the
University of Southampton and the Oﬃce of Naval Re-
search Global award N62909-18-1-2091 for the comple-
tion of this work.

APPENDIX: GRID CONVERGENCE

FIG. 11: Peak sectional Cl at the root z/S = 0.

to the sections experiencing Strouhal numbers with 2D
characteristics StA ≈ 0.3 [17]. By decreasing the (cid:65), the
spanwise derivative in the applied kinematics increases,
inducing a strong spanwise ﬂow on both upper and lower
sides of the foil (in opposite directions) which promotes
ﬂow interaction between the sections. The shortest as-
pect ratio (S/C = 1) therefore produces much stronger
vortices, particularly at the root where they are 10-90
times stronger than the longest ﬁnite foil (S/C = 6) de-
pending on the kinematics applied.

Overall, we ﬁnd that adding a 90◦-lag twist can reduce
the vortex breakdown produced by pure rolling motion
near the tip. Twist also delays the LEV detachment.
It indicates that small chordwise ﬂexibility towards the
tip, as seen in the animal’s ﬂipper or bird’s wing, likely

[1] R. Mittal and S. Balachandar, Eﬀect of

three-
dimensionality on the lift and drag of nominally two-
dimensional cylinders, Physics of Fluids 7, 1841 (1995).
[2] Y. Hong and A. Altman, Lift from spanwise ﬂow in simple
ﬂapping wings, Journal of Aircraft 45, 1206 (2008).
[3] C. P. Ellington, C. vandenBerg, A. P. Willmott, and
A. L. R. Thomas, Leading-edge vortices in insect ﬂight,
Nature 384, 626 (1996).

[4] T. Maxworthy, The formation and maintenance of a
leading-edge vortex during the forward motion of an an-
imal wing, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 587, 471 (2007).
[5] J. G. Wong, B. P. laBastide, and D. E. Rival, Flow sep-
aration on ﬂapping and rotating proﬁles with spanwise
gradients, Bioinspir Biomim 12, 026008 (2017).

[6] J. D. Eldredge and A. R. Jones, Leading-edge vortices:
Mechanics and modeling, Annual Review of Fluid Me-
chanics, Vol 51 51, 75 (2019).

[7] D. Lentink and M. H. Dickinson, Rotational accelerations
stabilize leading edge vortices on revolving ﬂy wings, J
Exp Biol 212, 2705 (2009).

[8] J. M. Birch and M. H. Dickinson, Spanwise ﬂow and the
attachment of the leading-edge vortex on insect wings,
Nature 412, 729 (2001).

[9] Y. Lu and G. X. Shen, Three-dimensional ﬂow structures
and evolution of the leading-edge vortices on a ﬂapping
wing, J Exp Biol 211, 1221 (2008).

[10] K. Taira and T. Colonius, Three-dimensional ﬂows
around low-aspect-ratio ﬂat-plate wings at low reynolds
numbers, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 623, 187 (2009).

[11] C. Hartloper and D. E. Rival, Vortex development on
pitching plates with lunate and truncate planforms, Jour-
nal of Fluid Mechanics 732, 332 (2013).

[12] R. R. Harbig, J. Sheridan, and M. C. Thompson,
Reynolds number and aspect ratio eﬀects on the leading-
edge vortex for rotating insect wing planforms, Journal
of Fluid Mechanics 717, 166 (2013).

[13] T. Jardin, Coriolis eﬀect and the attachment of the lead-
ing edge vortex, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 820, 312
(2017).

[14] D. Kim and M. Gharib, Experimental study of three-
dimensional vortex structures in translating and rotating
plates, Experiments in Fluids 49, 329 (2010).

[15] D. J. Garmann and M. R. Visbal, Dynamics of revolving
wings for various aspect ratios, Journal of Fluid Mechan-
ics 748, 932 (2014).

[16] H. Dong, R. Mittal, and M. Bozkurttas, Wake struc-
ture and performance of ﬁnite aspect-ratio ﬂapping foils,
in 43rd AIAA Aerospace Science Meeting and Exhibit,
edited by AIAA (Nevada, 2005).

[17] A. N. Zurman-Nasution, B. Ganapathisubramani, and
G. D. Weymouth, Inﬂuence of three-dimensionality on
propulsive ﬂapping, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 886
(2020).

10

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 12: Grid convergence statistics for 3D and 2D simulations of inﬁnite foils in a combination of heaving-pitching
motion at Re = 5300, AD = 1.0, StD = 0.3 and θbias = 10◦. The statistics are presented in zero-mean standard
deviation σ0 for (a) 2D CL, (b) 2D CT , (c) 3D CL, and (d) 3D CT . (cid:15) is relative error to C/∆x = 256.

[18] G. E. Karniadakis and G. S. Triantafyllou, Three-
dimensional dynamics and transition to turbulence in the
wake of bluﬀ objects, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 238, 1
(2006).

[19] C. H. K. Williamson, Three-dimensional wake transition,

Journal of Fluid Mechanics 328, 345 (2006).

[20] M. G. Chopra, Hydromechanics of lunate-tail swimming

propulsion, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 64, 375 (2006).

[21] J. J. Fu, C. Heﬂer, H. H. Qiu, and W. Shyy, Eﬀects of
aspect ratio on ﬂapping wing aerodynamics in animal
ﬂight, Acta Mechanica Sinica 30, 776 (2015).
[22] M. A. Green and A. J. Smits, Eﬀects of

three-
dimensionality on thrust production by a pitching panel,
J Fluid Mech 615, 211 (2008).

[23] F. Ayancik, Q. Zhong, D. B. Quinn, A. Brandes, H. Bart-
Smith, and K. W. Moored, Scaling laws for the propul-
sive performance of three-dimensional pitching propul-
sors, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 871, 1117 (2019).

[24] A. J. Smits, Undulatory and oscillatory swimming, Jour-

nal of Fluid Mechanics 874, 1 (2019).

[25] D. E. Calderon, Z. Wang, I. Gursul, and M. R. Visbal,
Volumetric measurements and simulations of the vortex
structures generated by low aspect ratio plunging wings,
Physics of Fluids 25, 067102 (2013).

[26] T. O. Yilmaz and D. Rockwell, Flow structure on ﬁnite-
span wings due to pitch-up motion, Journal of Fluid Me-
chanics 691, 518 (2011).

[27] B. D. Clark and W. Bemis, Kinematics of swimming of
penguins at the detroit zoo, Journal of Zoology 188, 411
(1979).

[28] J. Davenport, S. A. Munks, and P. Oxford, A compar-
ison of the swimming of marine and freshwater turtles,
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B.
Biological Sciences 220, 447 (1997).

[29] T. Van Buren, D. Floryan, and A. J. Smits, Bio-inspired

underwater propulsors (2018).

[30] D. J. Cleaver, I. Gursul, D. E. Calderon, and Z. Wang,
Thrust enhancement due to ﬂexible trailing-edge of
plunging foils, Journal of Fluids and Structures 51, 401
(2014).

[31] D. J. Cleaver, D. E. Calderon, Z. Wang, and I. Gursul,
Lift enhancement through ﬂexibility of plunging wings at
low reynolds numbers, Journal of Fluids and Structures
64, 27 (2016).

[32] C. J. Barnes, M. R. Visbal, and R. E. Gordnier, High-
ﬁdelity simulations of a ﬂexible heaving ﬁnite-aspect-
ratio wing (2013).

[33] K. Isogai, Y. Shinmoto, and Y. Watanabe, Eﬀects of dy-
namic stall on propulsive eﬃciency and thrust of ﬂapping
airfoil, Aiaa Journal 37, 1145 (1999).

[34] M. S. Triantafyllou, G. S. Triantafyllou, and R. Gopalkr-
ishnan, Wake mechanics for thrust generation in oscil-
lating foils, Physics of Fluids a-Fluid Dynamics 3, 2835
(1991).

[35] G. D. Weymouth and D. K. P. Yue, Boundary data im-
mersion method for cartesian-grid simulations of ﬂuid-
body interaction problems, Journal of Computational
Physics 230, 6233 (2011).

11

[36] A. P. Maertens and G. D. Weymouth, Accurate
cartesian-grid simulations of near-body ﬂows at interme-
diate reynolds numbers, Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering 283, 106 (2015).

[37] J. G. Wong and D. E. Rival, Determining the rela-
tive stability of leading-edge vortices on nominally two-
dimensional ﬂapping proﬁles, Journal of Fluid Mechanics
766, 611 (2015).

[38] J. D. Anderson, Fundamental of Aerodynamics, 6th ed.,
McGraw-Hill series in aeronautical and aerospace engi-
neering (McGraw-Hill, New York, 2017).

[39] I. E. Garrick, Propulsion of A Flapping and Oscillating
Airfoil, Tech. Rep. (Langley Memorial Aeronautical Lab-
oratory, 1936).

[40] T. Van Buren, D. Floryan, and A. J. Smits, Scaling and
performance of simultaneously heaving and pitching foils,
AIAA Journal 57, 3666 (2019).

[41] K. W. Moored and D. B. Quinn, Inviscid scaling laws of
a self-propelled pitching airfoil, AIAA Journal 57, 3686
(2019).

