Design of achromatic augmented reality visors based 
on composite metasurfaces 
ELYAS BAYATI 1, *, ANDREW WOLFRAM 1, SHANE COLBURN 1, LUOCHENG HUANG1, 
ARKA MAJUMDAR1,2 
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Washington Seattle, WA-98195 
2Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA-98195 
*Corresponding author: elyasb@uw.edu 

A compact near-eye visor (NEV) system that can guide light from a display to the eye could transform augmented reality (AR) 
technology.  Unfortunately,  existing  implementations  of  such  an  NEV  either  suffer  from  small  field  of  view  or  chromatic 
aberrations. See-through quality and bulkiness further make the overall performance of the visors unsuitable for a seamless 
user experience. Metasurfaces are an emerging class of nanophotonic elements that can dramatically reduce the size of optical 
elements while enhancing functionality. In this paper, we present a design of composite metasurfaces for an ultra-compact 
NEV. We simulate the performance of a proof-of-principle visor corrected for chromatic aberrations while providing a large 
display field of view (>77° both horizontally and vertically), good see-through quality (>70% transmission and  less than a 
wavelength root mean-square (RMS) wavefront error over the whole visible wavelength range), as needed for an immersive 
AR experience

1. Introduction 
Augmented  reality  (AR)  technology  has  recently  attracted 
considerable attention and could revolutionize technologies 
ranging from applications in the military and navigation, to 
education  and  entertainment.    Using  these  devices,  we  can 
effectively integrate computer-generated virtual information 
into the real world. AR can be implemented in various ways, 
including  smartphone  displays,  head-up  displays  (HUDs), 
and head-mounted displays (HMDs) [1]. Among the various 
approaches,  see-through  head-mounted  near-eye  displays 
(AR  glasses)  have  been  of  primary  focus  because  of  their 
potential to provide an extremely high sense of immersion. 
One of the most vital components in a head-mounted display 
(HMD) is a near-eye visor (NEV). Current implementations of 
NEVs  can  be  broadly  classified 
into  two  categories: 
reflection-based, where light from a display placed near the 
eye is reflected off a freeform visor to enter the eye [2-3]; and 
waveguide-based,  where 
is  passed  through  a 
waveguide  and  projected  to  the  eyes  using  a  grating  [4-6]. 
While  reflective  visors  can  provide  higher  efficiency  and 
transparency,  they  are  often  bulky  and  suffer  from  a  small 
eye-box, and in general need to be placed far away from the 
eyes to achieve a wide field of view (FOV). Waveguide-based 
NEVs  can  provide  a  much  more  compact  form-factor  with 
sufficient eye-box expansion, although they often have lower 
FOV  and  efficiency.  They  also  suffer  from  strong  chromatic 
aberrations in both the image passed through the waveguide 
as well as in see-through mode as the gratings are diffractive 
in nature. The core of a waveguide NEV consists of the input 
and  output  couplers.  These  can  be  either  simple  prisms, 
micro-prism  arrays,  embedded  mirror  arrays  [7],  surface 
relief gratings [8], thin or thick holographic optical elements 

light 

(HOEs)  [6],  or  diffractive  optical  elements  (DOEs)  [5].  The 
out-coupling  efficiency  of  the  gratings  is,  however,  low, 
making  the  energy-efficiency  of  these  waveguide-based 
visors poor relative to reflection-based visors. A closer look 
at reflective visors reveals that the trade-off between size and 
FOV of the NEV primarily originates from the fact that current 
NEVs rely on geometric reflections and refractions to  bend 
light. 
In recent years, sub-wavelength diffractive optics, commonly 
known  as  metasurfaces,  have  emerged  as  a  versatile 
candidate to create ultra-thin, flat optical elements [9]. These 
metasurfaces  are  quasiperiodic  arrays  of  subwavelength 
optical  antennas  that  can  modify  the  phase,  amplitude,  or 
polarization  of  an  incident  optical  wavefront.  This  enables 
the creation of arbitrary optical surfaces, including those for 
[10].  Unlike  conventional 
freeform  optical  elements 
diffractive  optics,  the  subwavelength  scatterers 
in  a 
metasurface  preclude  higher-order  diffraction,  resulting  in 
higher  efficiency  as  all  the  light  can  be  funneled  into  the 
zeroth order [11]. As diffraction can bend light by an angle 
more than reflection and refraction, it is possible to bring a 
metasurface closer to the eye, while maintaining a wide FOV. 
Recently,  the  first  silicon  metasurface  freeform  visor  was 
designed by our group [12], providing a large field of view for 
virtual reality (VR) applications (77.3° both horizontally and 
vertically) when placed only 2.5 cm away from the eye. This 
metasurface visor, however, severely distorts the real-world 
view,  has  strong  chromatic  aberrations  and 
is  not 
transparent  for  AR  applications.  In  addition  to  our  group, 
several  other  metasurface-based  visor  designs  have  been 
reported  in  the  literature  for  achieving  large  FOV,  lighter 
designs  and  better  see-through  quality,  including  designs 
based  on  combinations  of  a  metalens  and  dichroic  mirrors 

 
 
 
[13-14], Pancharatnam-Berry phase  metalenses [15], and  a 
compact  light  engine  based  on  multilayers-metasurface 
optics [16]. 

In  this  paper,  we  propose  a  metasurface  freeform  optics-
based NEV, that will circumvent real-world distortions and 
eliminate chromatic aberrations, as needed for an immersive 
AR  experience.  For  this  purpose,  we  propose  to  use  a 
composite metasurface: one of the metasurfaces reflects light 
from the display to project the virtual world to the user’s eye 
while the second metasurface circumvents the distortion of 
the  real-world  due  to  the  first  metasurface.  The  first 
metasurface  is  designed  to  have  multi-chrome  operation, 
which  two  metasurface  together  preserves  the  color 
information in transmission. The resultant display FOV of the 
is  more  than  77°  both 
composite  metasurface  NEV 
horizontally  and  vertically  which  is  better  than  current 
existing  AR  visors  and  also  it  has  acceptable  see-through 
quality  over  the  visible  range  (less  than  a  wavelength  RMS 
wavefront error). 

2. Paired Phase Masks 
First, we design and model the single metasurface NEV that 
can guide light from a display at the HMD to the human eye 
via ray optical simulation (ZEMAX-OpticStudio). The size of 
the visor is assumed to be 4 𝑐𝑚×4 𝑐𝑚 to maintain a compact 
form-factor comparable to that of ordinary sunglasses while 
still having a large field of view when placed only 2.5 cm away 
from the eyes. The display is placed between the visor and 
the eye: 1cm away and 1.5 cm upwards from the visor with 
an angle of 45° with respect to the optical axis. The display is 
initially  assumed  to  be  monochromatic  (540  nm).  The  eye 
model  which  we  use  here  for  simulation  is  the  widely 
accepted model proposed by Liou & Brennan [17]. Here, it is 
assumed that the eye is looking out through an optical system 
so the retina is the image surface. We model the visor phase-
mask with Zernike standard polynomials [18]. We find that 
the first 6 Zernike terms converge in a reasonable time and 
are sufficient to guide light from the display to the human eye 
in  an  acceptable  manner.  A  schematic  of  a  ray  tracing 
simulation from our reflective metasurface is shown in Fig. 
1A.    The  first  metasurface  (near  the  eye)  will  be  partially 
reflective, and the design principle will follow the ray tracing 
approach of sending light from each point on the display to 
the  eye.  The  virtual  display  FOV  from  our  simulation  is 
estimated  to  be  77.3°  along  both  vertical  and  horizontal 
directions.  Fig.  1B  illustrates  the  reflective  phase-mask 
obtained  from  the  Zernike  standard  polynomials  from  the 
first metasurface of our visor.  
After  designing  the  single  metasurface  near-eye  visor,  we 
design a pair of metasurfaces, where the second metasurface 
(located further from the eye) corrects any distortion of the 
real-world  scene  caused  by  the  first  metasurface.  The  gap 
size  between  two  metasurfaces  is  assumed  to  be  500  μm 
which is fixed to facilitate future fabrication on both sides of 
a  glass  wafer.  The  corrective  phase-mask  of  the  second 
is  also  designed  using  Zernike  standard 
metasurface 
polynomials.  This  phase  mask  is  designed  to  minimize  the 
RMS wavefront error [19] for light transmitted through two 
metasurfaces  to  ensure  good  see-through  quality.  Without 

using the corrective phase-mask the RMS wavefront error for 
light on the retina after passing through both metasurfaces is 
14.8λ.  Such  wavefront  errors  represent  the  see  through-
quality, and with greater than wavelength rms error leads to 
a  highly  distorted  view.  However,  after  using  the  second 
metasurface  to  correct  the  distortion 
from  the  first 
metasurface, the RMS wavefront error is reduced to 0.9λ. We 
also calculated the RMS wavefront error of a freeform visor 
developed in [20] to compare to our see-through quality. The 
RMS wavefront error of the freeform visor is 1.17λ, which is 
better  than  a  single  metasurface  but  worse  than  our 
corrected composite metasurface visor.  
Fig. 1 shows the optimized metasurface NEV phase profiles, 
where the first metasurface (Fig. 1B) distorts the light field, 
but in conjunction with the second metasurface (Fig. 1C), the 
optical  wavefront  error  is  minimized.  Once  the  phase-
functions  are  optimized,  we 
them  using 
metasurfaces, which is explained in more detail later in the 
paper.  

implement 

Figure 1.  Metaform Visor (A) Schematics of metasurface NEV and its ray 
tracing  simulation  in  ZEMAX.  (B)  Reflective  phase-mask  from  first 
metasurface  of  our  visor.  (C)  Corrective  phase-mask  for  second 
metasurface of our visor. The size of the visor is assumed to be 4 cm×4 
cm. 

We also evaluate the modulation transfer function (MTF) and 
the grid distortion cause by the NEV to estimate the image 
quality.  The  MTF  of  the  system  along  the  tangential  and 
sagittal plane is shown in Fig. 2A., exhibiting a value greater 
than 0.3 at 33 cycles/mm, which is a sufficient resolution for 
a  human  visual  system  [4]  and  satisfying  the  Nyquist 
resolution  for  a  15μm  pixel  size.  The  grid  distortion  is  less 
than 5.9% which is sufficient for human intelligibility [4] (Fig. 
2B.).  Additionally,  we  simulate  an  image  of  the  green 
crossbars  (based  on  our  operating  wavelength  design)  in 
Zemax to evaluate the see-through quality before and after 
using  the  second  phase-mask,  as  shown  in  Fig.  2C.    The 
projected image of the crossbars is shown in the right side of 
Fig.  2C,  which  is  the  image  reproduced  on  the  retina  after 
passing  through  the  phase-masks  and  the  eye  model.  The 
image distortion is clearly observed without our corrective 
phase-mask. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
incidence  from  40°  to  50°.  It  is  necessary  for  us  to  get  the 
whole 0-2π phase coverage at these angles as well which is 
presented in more detail in Appendix A.  

Figure 2. (A) MTF of the NEV calculated in ZEMAX on tangential and 
sagittal plane. (B) Grid distortion of the NEV corresponds to 10mm × 
10mm  display  size.  Highest  calculated  distortion  is  5.9%  at  the 
corners. The corresponding operation wavelength here is 540 nm. (C) 
Image simulation of the green cross bars passing through NEV using 
Zemax. The left figure is the original image that is seen in real world. 
The right figure is the simulated image as seen by the person using 
NEV before and after adding corrective phase-mask. 

3. Metasurface Implementation 
So far, we assumed the NEV to be made of bilayer, ideal phase 
masks.  In  practice,  these  masks  will  be  implemented  using 
metasurfaces. The proposed stack of metasurfaces are shown 
in Fig. 3A. The partially reflective metasurface is designed by 
placing  silicon  nitride  nano-scatterers  on  a  partially 
reflective four-layer distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) [21]. 
The resulting phase and amplitude of the reflected light as a 
function of pillar diameter (duty cycle) are shown in Fig. 3B. 
Note  that  the  amplitude  of  the  reflected  light  is  ~30%, 
whereas  the  phase  covers  the  full  0-2π  range.  The  second 
metasurface will be a transmissive one, whose transmission 
parameters  are  shown  in  Fig.  3C.  The  sharp  resonances 
observed in the phase and amplitude correspond to guided 
mode resonances and are excluded when designing the final 
metasurface by selecting pillar diameters off resonance. The 
design  process  involves  selecting  the  appropriate  spatial 
phase  profile  for  the  specific  optical  component,  arranging 
the  scatterers  on  a  subwavelength  lattice,  and  spatially 
varying  their  dimensions.  Inset  figure  of  Fig.  3B.  and  3C. 
shows cylindrical post formation including their substrates. 
The  DBR  structure  in  Fig.  3B.  is  designed  for  540  nm 
wavelength so their thickness is 67.5 nm for SiN and 90 nm 
for oxide. The metasurface periodicity p and thickness t for 
both  metasurfaces  here  are  set  to  443  nm  and  700  nm 
respectively.  All  the  simulations  that  we  have  done  so  far 
were for normal incident angle as shown in Fig. 3. However, 
based on our design schematic and display position in Fig. 1., 
our  reflective  metasurface  will  experience  an  angle  of 

Figure  3.  Metasurface  (MS)  implementation  of  the  phase-masks:  (a) 
schematic of the metasurface stack; the simulate phase and amplitude 
response of the (B) light reflected from the first metasurface and (C) 
light  transmitted  through  the  second  metasurface.  These  plots  are 
calculated using rigorous coupled wave analysis. 

4. Multi-wavelength Metasurface  
One  of  the  major  issues  facing  metasurfaces  is  their  strong 
chromatic aberrations. For example, a metalens will produce 
a focused image at one wavelength and an unfocused image 
at  another  [22].  A  successful  AR  visor,  however,  must 
produce focused images at multiple wavelengths, specifically 
red,  green,  and  blue  in  order  to  display  images  for  all 
perceivable  colors.  Much  work  has  been  done  to  produce 
multiwavelength  achromatic  metalenses  (MAM)  including 
multiplexing different functionalities in a single metasurface 
[23]  or  dispersion  engineering  [24],  but  until  recently 
previous methods either have not been shown to work in the 
visible spectrum or have limitations on device size and  the 
phase  shift  that  can  be  imparted.  Furthermore,  such 
approaches  have  worked  well  for  high-contrast  scatterers 
(like silicon scatterers working in the infrared with refractive 
index n~3.5), as the light remains tightly confined inside the 
scatterer, and thus the coupling between different scatterers 
is  minimized.  Unfortunately,  our  application  at  visible 
wavelengths precludes silicon as the material of choice, and 
we have to rely on silicon nitride (n~2) and silicon dioxide 
(n~1.5),  both  of  which  are  transparent  and  low  index 
materials  relative  to  silicon.  The  method  described  in  Ref. 
[25],  however,  showed  that  it  is  possible  to  produce  a 
metalens  that  operates  at  discrete  wavelengths  with  large 
differences  in  the  required  phase  shift  at  each  wavelength. 
Our  metasurface  design  employs  this  same  method  and 
demonstrates that guided mode resonances (GMR) can give 
rise  to  numerous  0-2π  phase  shift  cycles  observed  for  the 
duty cycle range for pillars using silicon nitride.  
Our  metasurface  visor  has  a  target  phase  profile  at  each 
wavelength  that  is  position  dependent.  The  pillar  at  any 
position  on  the  visor  must  match  the  desired  phases  of  all 
three wavelengths (R (700 nm), G (540 nm), B (460nm)) at 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it 

imparts  at  other  wavelengths 

that position simultaneously. Typically, for a monochromatic 
metasurface,  when  the  phase  shift  of  a  pillar  is  chosen,  the 
is  then 
phase  that 
determined as well. Said another way, for a given phase shift, 
there is typically only one corresponding pillar size at each 
wavelength  that  imparts  that  phase  shift.  However,  by 
scatterer  design,  we  can  have  multiple  pillar  sizes  at  each 
wavelength that impart the desired phase shift. This enables 
us to better match phase profiles at different wavelengths as 
we  can  keep  the  phase  shift  at  one  wavelength  fixed  while 
selecting  a  different  pillar  size  that  may  better  match  the 
phase  profile  at  another  wavelength.  This  one-to-many 
relationship  between  phase  and  pillar  size  is  achieved  by 
choosing pillar parameters such that the imparted phase shift 
spans  0-2π  multiple  times  over  the  range  of  possible  pillar 
sizes  (Fig.  4.).  The  greater  number  of  0-2π  cycles  at  each 
wavelength,  the  better  we  can  design  a  metasurface  that 
matches the phase profiles of all wavelengths. This approach 
is  aided  by  the  occurrence  of  GMR,  which  cause  sudden, 
abrupt phase shifts that increase the number of pillar sizes 
available to fulfill a target phase shift.  
Using  rigorous  coupled  wave  analysis  (RCWA)  [26], 
reflection  coefficients  and  phases  for  pillars  ranging  in 
diameter  from  10  to  90  percent  of  the  periodicity  were 
calculated for each wavelength. The lattice periodicity p and 
thickness  t  at  all  wavelengths  here  are  set  to  443  nm  and 
1500 nm, respectively, to achieve multiple 0-2π cycles at all 
three wavelengths. Pillars with reflection coefficients below 
0.3 at any wavelength were removed from consideration as 
we  want  to  strike  a  balance  between  transmission  and 
reflection  to  maintain  a  partially  reflective  visor.  For  each 
discretized  position  in  a  phase  mask,  the  remaining  pillars 
were assigned an error weight calculated as the square of the 
difference between the phase mask at that position and the 
pillar's  phase  shift  at  that  phase  mask's  wavelength.  The 
metasurface in our proposed structure was then designed by 
selecting pillars with the smallest cumulative error (𝜖) across 
the three phase masks at each position, which is given by: 

n

2
ϵ(x, y, r) = ∑ √(𝜙(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝜆𝑖) − 𝑓(𝑟, 𝜆𝑖))

i=1

Where  (𝑥, 𝑦)  is  the  position  on  the  phase  mask,  𝜆𝑖 is  the 
design wavelength, 𝑟 is the pillar radius, and 𝑛 is the number 
of wavelengths (here 𝑛 = 3). The desired phase is given by 𝜙 
and the calculated phase shift for each pillar is given by 𝑓. The 
final  radii  distribution  of  our  multi-wavelength  reflective 
metasurface visor is shown in Fig. 4A. We emphasize that, in 
this method, we are primarily designing a metasurface that 
works  at  certain  specific  wavelengths,  and  true  broadband 
operation is not expected. Hence, we need to rely on a display 
that  supports  only  discrete  wavelengths,  such  as  a  laser-
based display [27]. 
We  then  validated  our  design  of  a  reflective  metasurface 
visor by importing the phase profiles that is provided by our 
final optimized scatterer distribution into the NEV structure 
via  ray  optic  simulation  which  is  shown  in  Fig.1.  Table  1 
provides  the  modulation  transfer  function  (MTF)  for  three 
colors  at  33  cycles/mm  (via  Zemax).  The  MTFs  for  the 

multiwavelength metasurface are comparable to that of the 
monochrome  design,  exhibiting  minimal  degradation  in 
performance. This clearly demonstrates that the multi-color 
metasurface does not degrade the performance of the visor 
compared to monochromatic metasurface one. 
We also analyzed the bandwidth of the light-source for the 
display and we found that the MTF does not fall very quickly, 
and at least works for over a ~20 nm bandwidth. We define 
the bandwidth by the range of wavelengths over which the 
MTF  exceeds  0.3  at  33  cycles/mm  (Appendix  B).  Hence,  in 
some  cases,  we  also  can  use  a  narrowband  light  emitting 
diodes (LEDs), such as an organic LED, instead of a laser for 
the display. 

through  a 

Figure  4.  A)  Final  radii  distribution  of  our multi-wavelength reflective 
metasurface  visor  using  our  optimization  method.  The  diameter  of 
nanopillars are changing from 46 nm to 398 nm. B) Phase of the reflected 
light 
function  of 
duty cycles of nanopillar at wavelengths of 460, 540, and 700 nm. As the 
pillar width changes, the corresponding phase undergoes multiple 0-2π 
phase  cycles.  The  sharp  phase  jumps  reflect  the  excitation  of  guided 
mode resonance (GMR).  

scatterer  using  RCWA  as  a 

Table  1.  AR  visor  performance  in  terms  of  MTF  before  and  after 
RGB optimization 

Wavelength (𝒏𝒎) 
Single wavelength 
metasurface  visor 
(cycles/mm) 
multi-wavelength 
metasurface visor 
(cycles/mm) 

𝟒𝟔𝟎 

𝟓𝟒𝟎 

𝟕𝟎𝟎 

𝟎. 𝟔𝟏 

𝟎. 𝟒𝟗 

𝟎. 𝟓𝟑 

𝟎. 𝟓𝟏 

𝟎. 𝟒𝟕 

𝟎. 𝟒𝟗 

Once we finalize the multi-wavelength reflective visor design, 
we  then  optimize the  design  for  the  second  metasurface  at 
the  central  wavelength.  We  found  that  while  the  second 
metasurface  is  designed  to  negate  the  effect  of  the  first 
metasurface, such negation happens over the full wavelength 
range simulated. As can be seen in Fig. 5, the RMS wavefront 
error is minimal over a broad optical bandwidth (simulated 
for different angles).  
Additionally, we simulate an image of the white crossbars in 
Zemax to evaluate the see-through quality, as shown in Fig. 
5.B.  The  projected  image  of  the  crossbars  is  shown  in  the 
right side of Fig. 5B, which is the image reproduced on the 

 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in 

6. Conclusion 
Our work explored the possibility of using a metasurface to 
design and create a compact near-eye visor which provides a 
large  field  of  view  and  also  reasonable  see-through  quality 
for an immersive AR experience. The proposed metasurface 
visor  does  not  suffer  from  chromatic  aberrations,  while 
providing a large display field of view (>77° both horizontally 
and  vertically),  and  good  (>70%  transmission  and  no 
distortion) see-through quality. 
The current visor includes two layers of metasurfaces which 
have  different  phase  masks.  The  scatterers 
the 
metasurface  near  the  eye  (which  is  reflecting  the  virtual 
world to the eye) are designed to have 30% reflectivity and 
multi-chrome  behavior,  whereas  the  scatterers  in  the 
metasurface further from the eye (which helps improve the 
to  have  100% 
see-through  quality)  are  designed 
transmission.  The  main  idea  behind  our  multi-chrome 
behavior is that we start with the desired phase profiles for 
each  color,  and  then  find  the  scatterer  distribution  that 
provide the phase profiles closest to the desired one. 
In  this  work,  we  focused  on  design  and  simulation  of  the 
whole AR metasurface visor due to the complexity of design. 
Additionally, there are many other relevant factors for high-
quality  immersive  AR  experience  including  large  eye-box, 
high  efficiency,  broadband  operation  and  tunability  (to 
mitigate  VAC)  which  are  not  specified  in  our  current 
architecture.  However,  we  believe  that  the  demonstrated 
multi-layer metasurface visor is capable of addressing those 
issues. 

7. Appendices 

A. Angle dependency 
All  the  RCWA  simulations  for  the  phase  and  amplitude 
calculation  (in  reflection  and  transmission  mode)  were 
performed  under  normal  incidence  as  shown  in  Fig.  3. 
However, based on our design schematic and display position 
in Fig. 1., our reflective metasurface will experience an angle 
of incidence from 40° to 50°. It is necessary for us to get the 
whole  0-2π  phase  coverage  at  these angles  as  well.  As  it  is 
shown in Fig. 6., at these angles we still get multiple wraps of 
0-2π phase change which is ideal for our multi-wavelength 
design  approach.  Here,  the  operation  wavelength  for  angle 
dependency simulation is 540 nm.  

retina after passing through the metasurface layers and the 
eye  model.  We  can  clearly  observe  that  the  rainbow  effect 
caused  by  chromatic  aberration  of  these  metasurfaces  are 
negligible. 

Figure 3.  
Figure  5.  A)  RMS  wavefront  error  in  visible  range  calculated  for  the 
transmitted  light  through  the  visor  (light  that  passes  through  two 
metasurfaces)  in  five  different  incident  angles.  B)  Image  simulation  of 
the white cross bars passing through NEV using Zemax. The left figure is 
the  original  image  that  is  seen  in  real  world.  The  right  figure  is  the 
simulated image as seen by the person using NEV. 

for  our  current  visor 

5. Discussion 
The proposed composite metasurface visor can overcome the 
bulkiness,  FOV  limitations,  chromatic  aberrations,  and  see-
through  quality  of  existing  NEVs.  Using  our  proposed 
structure, we can make the eye-wear devices flat and ultra-
thin  and  close  to  eye,  while  maintaining  a  large  FOV  for 
virtual world. However, there are some challenges with the 
current  design,  including  small  eye-box  and  large  area 
fabrication.  The  eye-box 
is 
2.5mm×2.5mm  (denoting  exit  pupil  diameter  without  any 
expansion)  which  is  lower  than  current  waveguide-base 
visors [28], although there are some solutions to increase the 
eye-box  by  multiplexing  different  phase-masks  into  one 
metasurface [29].  
Another remaining issue is fabrication. While the fabrication 
of  the  current  design  is  challenging,  fabrication  methods 
already exist that show that such large-area fabrication using 
Deep  Ultra-Violet  (DUV)  Lithography  is  possible  with  high 
throughput.  We  also  have  simulated  the  tolerance  of  the 
metasurfaces to lateral misalignment in terms of acceptable 
RMS wavefront error range (Appendix C). 
We can also increase the efficiency of our current design by 
making our visor reflective only at certain display angles and 
totally transmissive at all other angles. Another limitation of 
the current proposed metasurface visor will be the vergence-
accommodation conflict (VAC) which is common in current 
AR  glasses.  However,  a  recent  study  shows  that  by  using  a 
tunable focal length lens, the VAC can be reduced [30-31]. By 
integrating  metasurface 
intro  micro-
electromechanical  systems  such  tunability  can  be  achieved 
which can mitigate the VAC [32-33]. 

structures 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wavelength is 540 nm and the angle of incidence is assumed 
to be normal. We are looking for changes in RMS wavefront 
error in see through mode. We found out that up to 100μm 
misalignment, error remains below one wavelength, which is 
still close to our current RMS at normal incident angle.  

Figure 8.  Analysis of lateral tolerance in terms of the RMS wavefront 
error  in  the  transmitted  light.  Up  to  ~100μm  misalignment,  error 
remains  below  one  wavelength.  The  operation  wavelength  here  is 
540nm and the angle of incidence is assumed to be normal. The blue 
box represents the first metasurface (Reflective phase-mask), and the 
green  represents  the  second  metasurface  (Corrective  phase-mask). 
The  arrow  mark  shows  us  which  side  of  the  metasurface  is  up 
compared to our eye view. 

Funding. The research is supported by the Samsung Global 
Research  Outreach  (GRO)  grant,  and  the  UW  Reality  Lab, 
Facebook, Google, and Futurewei. 

Acknowledgment.  We thank Optics studio (Zemax) corporation for 
the available ray tracing simulation and optimization method.  

Disclosures.  The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 

References 
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Azuma,  R.,  Baillot,  Y.,  Behringer,  R.,  Feiner,  S.,  Julier,  S.,  & 
MacIntyre, B. (2001). Recent advances in augmented reality. 
IEEE computer graphics and applications, 21(6), 34-47.  
Hu, X., & Hua, H. (2014). High-resolution optical see-through 
multi-focal-plane  head-mounted  display  using  freeform 
optics. Optics express, 22(11), 13896-13903. 
Pan,  J.  W.,  Che-Wen,  C.,  Huang,  K.  D.,  &  Wu,  C.  Y.  (2014). 
Demonstration  of  a  broad  band  spectral  head-mounted 
display with freeform mirrors. Optics express, 22(11), 12785-
12798. 
Yang,  J.,  Twardowski,  P.,  Gérard,  P.,  &  Fontaine,  J.  (2016). 
Design  of  a  large  field-of-view  see-through  near  to  eye 
display  with  two  geometrical  waveguides.  Optics  letters, 
41(23), 5426-5429. 

Figure  6.   Angle  dependency  RCWA  simulation  from  0 to  2π  for one 
wavelength  (540  nm).  Duty  cycle  is  defined  as  the  ratio  of  the  post 
diameter  to  the  periodicity.  Parameters  of  pillars  are  the  same  for 
Fig.3.  

B. Bandwidth Tolerance 
As we mentioned in section 4, we have primarily designed a 
metasurface that works at certain specific wavelengths, and 
true broadband operation is not expected here. However, we 
also  analyzed  the  bandwidth  of  the  light-source  for  the 
display and we found that the MTF does not fall very quickly, 
and at least works for over a ~20 nm bandwidth. We define 
the bandwidth by the range of wavelengths over which the 
MTF exceeds 0.3 at 33 cycles/mm (Fig. 7.). Hence, we can use 
an LED instead of a laser for the display. 

Figure 7.  The MTF of the blue, green and red color for the reflective 
visor  at  33  cycles/mm  in  tangential  plane.  MTFs  above  0.3  at  33 
cycle/mm are our evaluation point for acceptable bandwidth. 

C. Fabrication Tolerance 
While  the  fabrication  of  the  current  design  is  challenging, 
fabrication methods already exist that show that such large-
area fabrication using DUV Lithography is possible with high 
throughput  as  we  discussed  in  section  5.  One  of  the 
challenging  tasks  will  be  to  align  two  metasurfaces  during 
fabrication on both side of a quartz substrate. Here, we have 
simulated  the  tolerance  of  the  metasurfaces  to  lateral 
In  this  test  simulation,  the  operation 
misalignment. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
periodic 

Computer 

Chen, W. T., Zhu, A. Y., & Capasso, F. (2020). Flat optics with 
dispersion-engineered  metasurfaces.  Nature  Reviews 
Materials, 1-17. 
Shi, Z., Khorasaninejad, M., Huang, Y. W., Roques-Carmes, C., 
Zhu, A. Y., Chen, W. T., ... & Devlin, R. C. (2018). Single-layer 
metasurface  with  controllable  multiwavelength  functions. 
Nano letters, 18(4), 2420-2427. 
Liu, V., & Fan, S. (2012). S4: A free electromagnetic solver for 
layered 
Physics 
structures. 
Communications, 183(10), 2233-2244. 
Chellappan, K. V., Erden, E., & Urey, H. (2010). Laser-based 
displays: a review. Applied optics, 49(25), F79-F98. 
Miller, J. M., De Beaucoudrey, N., Chavel, P., Turunen, J., & 
Cambril, E. (1997). Design and fabrication of binary slanted 
surface-relief  gratings  for  a  planar  optical  interconnection. 
Applied optics, 36(23), 5717-5727. 
Kim,  S.  B.,  &  Park,  J.  H.  (2018).  Optical  see-through 
Maxwellian  near-to-eye  display  with  an  enlarged  eyebox. 
Optics letters, 43(4), 767-770. 
Padmanaban,  N.,  Konrad,  R.,  Stramer,  T.,  Cooper,  E.  A.,  & 
Wetzstein, G. (2017). Optimizing  virtual reality for all users 
through  gaze-contingent  and  adaptive  focus  displays. 
Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences,  114(9), 
2183-2188. 
Wang, Y. J., Lin, Y. H., Cakmakci, O., & Reshetnyak, V. (2020). 
Varifocal  augmented  reality  adopting  electrically  tunable 
uniaxial plane-parallel plates. Optics Express, 28(15), 23023-
23036. 
Han,  Z.,  Colburn,  S.,  Majumdar,  A.,  &  Bohringer,  K.  (2020). 
MEMS-actuated  Metasurface  Alvarez  Lens.  arXiv  preprint 
arXiv:2001.07800. 
Arbabi, E., Arbabi, A., Kamali, S. M., Horie, Y., Faraji-Dana, M., 
&  Faraon,  A.  (2018).  MEMS-tunable  dielectric  metasurface 
lens. Nature communications, 9(1), 1-9. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

limitations. 

In  Digital  Optics 

Liu, Z., Pan, C., Pang, Y., & Huang, Z. (2019). A full-color near-
eye augmented reality display using a tilted waveguide and 
diffraction gratings. Optics Communications, 431, 45-50. 
Yoshida, T., Tokuyama, K., Takai, Y., Tsukuda, D., Kaneko, T., 
Suzuki,  N.,  ...  &  Machida,  A.  (2018).  A  plastic  holographic 
waveguide combiner for light‐weight and highly‐transparent 
augmented  reality  glasses.  Journal  of  the  Society  for 
Information Display, 26(5), 280-286. 
Kress, B. C. (2019, July). Optical waveguide combiners for AR 
headsets:  features  and 
In  Digital  Optical 
Technologies  2019  (Vol.  11062,  p.  110620J).  International 
Society for Optics and Photonics. 
Waldern, J. D., Grant, A. J., & Popovich, M. M. (2018, May). 
DigiLens  switchable  Bragg  grating  waveguide  optics  for 
augmented  reality  applications. 
for 
Immersive  Displays  (Vol.  10676,  p.  106760G).  International 
Society for Optics and Photonics. 
Yu,  N.,  &  Capasso,  F.  (2014).  Flat  optics  with  designer 
metasurfaces. Nature materials, 13(2), 139-150. 
Zhan, A., Colburn, S., Dodson, C. M., & Majumdar, A. (2017). 
Metasurface  freeform  nanophotonics.  Scientific  reports, 
7(1), 1-9. 
Stork, W., Streibl, N., Haidner, H., & Kipfer, P. (1991). Artificial 
distributed-index  media  fabricated  by  zero-order  gratings. 
Optics letters, 16(24), 1921-1923. 
Hong, C., Colburn, S., & Majumdar, A. (2017). Flat metaform 
near-eye visor. Applied Optics, 56(31), 8822-8827. 
Lee, G. Y., Hong, J. Y., Hwang, S., Moon, S., Kang, H., Jeon, S., 
...  &  Lee,  B.  (2018).  Metasurface  eyepiece  for  augmented 
reality. Nature communications, 9(1), 1-10. 
Lan, S., Zhang, X., Taghinejad, M., Rodrigues, S., Lee, K. T., Liu, 
Z., & Cai, W. (2019). Metasurfaces for near-eye augmented 
reality. ACS Photonics, 6(4), 864-870. 
Moon, S., Lee, C. K., Nam, S. W., Jang, C., Lee, G. Y., Seo, W., 
... & Lee, B. (2019). Augmented reality near-eye display using 
Pancharatnam-Berry phase lenses. Scientific reports, 9(1), 1-
10. 
Kamali,  S.  M.,  Arbabi,  E.,  &  Faraon,  A.  (2019,  February). 
Metasurface-based compact light engine for AR headsets. In 
Optical  Design  Challenge  2019  (Vol.  11040,  p.  1104002). 
International Society for Optics and Photonics. 
Atchison, D. A., & Smith, G. (2000). Optics of the human eye. 
Butterworth-Heinemann. 
Von F, Z. (1934). Beugungstheorie des schneidenver-fahrens 
und seiner verbesserten form, der phasenkontrastmethode. 
physica, 1(7-12), 689-704. 
Shannon,  R.  R.  (1995).  Optical  Specification.  Handbook  of 
Optics, 1, 35-1. 
Cheng, D., Hua, H., & Wang, Y. (2012). U.S. Patent Application 
No. 13/318,864. 
Sheppard,  C.  J.  R.  (1995).  Approximate  calculation  of  the 
reflection  coefficient  from  a  stratified  medium.  Pure  and 
Applied Optics: Journal of the European Optical Society Part 
A, 4(5), 665. 
Colburn,  S.,  Zhan,  A.,  &  Majumdar,  A.  (2018).  Metasurface 
optics 
imaging.  Science 
advances, 4(2), eaar2114. 
Arbabi, E., Arbabi, A., Kamali, S. M., Horie, Y., & Faraon, A. 
(2016).  Multiwavelength  metasurfaces  through  spatial 
multiplexing. Scientific reports, 6, 32803. 

full-color  computational 

for 

