Monte Carlo simulation of resonance eﬀects of
electron transport in a spatially modulated electric
ﬁeld in Ar, N2 and their mixtures

A. Albert1, D. Boˇsnjakovi´c2, S. Dujko2, Z. Donk´o1
1Institute for Solid State Physics and Optics, Wigner Research Centre for Physics,
1121 Budapest, Konkoly Thege Mikl´os str. 29-33, Hungary
2Institute of Physics, University of Belgrade, Pregrevica 118, 11080 Belgrade, Serbia

E-mail: donko.zoltan@wigner.hu

Abstract. The relaxation of the distribution function of the electrons drifting under
the inﬂuence of a homogeneous electric ﬁeld in noble gases is known to take place
over an extended spatial domain at ‘intermediate’ values of the reduced electric ﬁeld,
E/N . We investigate the transport of electrons in Ar and N2 gases, as well as in their
mixtures at such E/N values (∼ 10–40 Td). After discussing brieﬂy the basic scenario
of relaxation in a homogeneous electric ﬁeld, the major part of work concentrates on
the properties of transport in an electric ﬁeld that is spatially modulated within a
ﬁnite region that obeys periodic boundaries. The spatial distribution of the mean
velocity, the mean energy, and the density of the electrons, the importance of the
excitation channels, as well as the electron energy distribution function are obtained
from Monte Carlo simulations for various lengths of the computational domain, at
diﬀerent mean values and degrees of modulation of the reduced electric ﬁeld. At low
modulations, the spatial proﬁles of the mean velocity and mean energy are nearly
harmonic, however their phases with respect to the electric ﬁeld perturbation exhibit
a complex behaviour as a function of the parameters. With increasing modulation, an
increasing higher harmonic content of these proﬁles is observed and at high modulations
where an electric ﬁeld reversal occurs, we observe trapping of a signiﬁcant population
of the electrons. The eﬀect of mixing a molecular gas, N2, to Ar on the transport
characteristics is also examined. Transition to local transport at high N2 admixture
concentrations and long spatial domains is observed.

0
2
0
2

t
c
O
9
1

]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
3
8
7
9
0
.
0
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

2

1. Introduction

Under hydrodynamic conditions, the velocity distribution function (VDF) of electrons
subjected to a homogeneous and stationary electric ﬁeld is a unique function of the
reduced electric ﬁeld, E/N . Up to moderate values of E/N (typically up to few hundred
Townsends, 1 Td = 10−21 V m2) the VDF of electrons in noble gases generally exhibits
only a small anisotropy, i.e. it can be well approximated by an isotropic part and small
anisotropic part. This behaviour, which is the basis of the two-term approximation,
stems from the eﬀect of frequent elastic collisions of the electrons with the gas atoms
that randomize the directions of velocities and thus their characteristic thermal velocity
strongly exceeds the average (directed) velocity. In the hydrodynamic regime, the energy
gain and loss of the electrons compensate each other exactly, however, in diﬀerent ways
depending on the strength of the reduced electric ﬁeld [1, 2].

Considering noble gases, at very low E/N ((cid:46) 10 Td) the energy loss of electrons is
mostly due to elastic collisions. In such events, a fraction of their energy proportional to
the electron/atom mass ratio (m/M ) is lost. For an electron energy of 1 eV, e.g., such
a collision results in a loss of ≈ 10−5 eV, in the case of argon gas. At somewhat higher
E/N values (∼tens of Td-s), where the energy of the electrons reaches the threshold for
inelastic processes (∼ 10 eV), the main channels of the energy loss become the excitation
processes. At such conditions the lowest excited levels can be reached ﬁrst. With
increasing E/N , the number of these channels increases and at some point ionization
becomes possible, too. Above ∼ 100 Td the latter process is usually appreciable.

The spatial evolution of the electron VDF in non-hydrodynamic regimes is also
remarkably diﬀerent for the E/N rages distinguished above [3–6]. Non-hydrodynamic
transport establishes under various conditions: (i) when the electric ﬁeld varies over a
characteristic length that is short compared to the mean free path of the electrons, (ii)
when the temporal change of the ﬁeld is quicker than the mean time between electron-
neutral collisions, (iii) in the presence of sources/sinks of electrons and/or (iv) in the
presence of boundaries. In the latter case, even in the presence of a homogeneous and
stationary electric ﬁeld, the VDF and the transport parameters (mean velocity, mean
energy, etc.) of the electrons vary in space. A classical example of this scenario is an
electrode that emits electrons with a certain initial velocity distribution that is deﬁned
by the emission process (e.g. photoemission). This VDF is clearly diﬀerent from that
acquired by the electrons under hydrodynamic conditions for the given E/N that is
present in the volume considered. This implies that a transition region (”equilibration
region”) must exist within which the VDF transforms from its initial shape to the
equilibrium shape, see e.g [7, 8].

The fundamental experiment of Franck and Hertz [9], which provided evidence
for the existence of quantised energy levels of the atoms, actually utilised this eﬀect.
Speciﬁcally, this experiment focused on the early phase of the equilibration, where a
prominent periodic structure in the mean energy of the electrons was present. The
experiment was operated in the ”window” of E/N values where such behavior prevails.

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

3

The electron kinetics in this experiment has been investigated in a number of works,
e.g. [10–13].

We note that both at low and high E/N values no, or less prominent periodic
structures can be observed, respectively, due to the smooth transition mediated by
elastic collisions, and due to the rapid randomisation of the electron energy in the
presence of a high number of inelastic energy loss channels and the possibility of
ionization that creates additional particles. The extended spatial structures formed
at intermediate E/N values have attracted much attention [14–16]. The equilibration
of an electron swarm in argon gas at E/N values at few tens of Td-s was as well observed
experimentally recently in a scanning drift tube apparatus [17] that makes it possible
to follow the spatio-temporal development of electron swarms.

Under the conditions, where the electric ﬁeld is spatially modulated a strong
modulation of the electron transport characteristics appears at some E/N values as
revealed in studies based on the solution of the Boltzmann equation by Golubovsky et
al. [18, 19]. In the presence of appreciable charge density, the spatial variation of the
transport characteristics can itself give rise to a perturbation of the electric ﬁeld. As this
interplay may be self-amplifying, stationary or moving spatial structures can show up in
discharge plasmas. Such structures, often termed as ”striations” have thoroughly been
investigated for several decades, see, e.g., the review by Kolobov [20]. The early studies
based on analytic approaches [21, 22] have later been replaced by kinetic treatment
of the electrons [23, 24]. Striations, caused by diﬀerent mechanisms, are present in a
variety of plasma sources, like dc glow discharges [25], plasma display panels [26], and
inductively coupled radiofrequency discharges [27]. Despite the extensive work done in
this ﬁeld [28, 29], the complex dynamics of striations is still subject of intensive current
research, e.g. [30–33].

Most of the investigations of the electron kinetics have been based on the solution
of the Boltzmann equation [1, 34], particle based simulations were used only in a fewer
number of cases. As examples for the latter, studies of striations in inductively coupled
[35] and capacitively coupled electronegative [36] plasmas, and in ionization waves in
barrier discharges [37] may be mentioned. Due to the rapid development of computing
hardware such particle based methods became equally suited as the numerical solutions
of the Boltzmann equation, for studies of particle transport in spatially varying ﬁelds
due to their ability to capture fully the nonlocal kinetic eﬀects appearing in various
In this paper, we use Monte Carlo simulation (e.g. [38, 39]) to investigate
settings.
certain aspects of the transport of electrons in spatially varying electric ﬁelds.

The simulation method is discussed in section 2. In section 3, we brieﬂy introduce
some important physical quantities, the characteristic momentum and energy relaxation
frequencies and lengths, that help understanding the relaxation and resonance eﬀects to
be discussed later on. The presentation of the results in section 4 starts with illustrating
the spatial relaxation of electron swarms in Ar and in Ar-N2 mixtures in a homogeneous
electric ﬁeld. These ﬁndings aid choosing the proper parameter range of the reduced
electric ﬁeld for which the studies of the transport in a periodically modulated electric

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

4

ﬁeld are conducted. The results of these simulations for Ar are presented in section
4.2. We analyse the spatial proﬁles of the mean electron energy, velocity and density for
various values of the average E/N and illustrate the eﬀect of the modulation of E/N
on these proﬁles. Additionally, we investigate the spatial distribution of the electron
energy distribution function and the distribution of the excitation channels (reaction
rates). Fourier analysis of the proﬁles of the mean velocity and energy (i) reveals the
phase between them and the modulated ﬁeld (at low modulation) and (ii) shows how
their harmonic content increases at high modulation. In section 4.3 the eﬀect of an N2
admixture on the electron transport characteristics is addressed. A brief summary is
given in section 5.

2. Simulation method

Our studies are based on the Monte Carlo (MC) description of the motion of electrons
in (i) homogeneous and (ii) spatially modulated electric ﬁeld E(x). We use the
well-established MC algorithm for charged particle transport (e.g. [8]) and solve the
discretised version of the equation of the motion of the electrons,

m¨r = qE(x),

(1)

using the Velocity-Verlet method, with constant time steps of ∆t =1 ps. Here, m and
q are the mass and the charge of the electrons. The probability of a collision to occur
during the ∆t time step is

Pcoll = 1 − exp[−N σtot(v)v∆t],

(2)

where the total cross section σtot is the sum of the cross sections of all possible collision
processes. Whenever a collision occurs, its type is chosen randomly, taking into account
the values of all cross sections at the actual velocity of the colliding electron.

The electron - Ar atom cross section set is based on [40], includes the elastic
momentum transfer cross section, excitation to 25 distinct Ar levels, and the ionisation
cross section. The cross section set for electron - N2 molecule collisions are taken
from [41]. The set includes the elastic momentum transfer cross section, excitation to
several vibrational and electronic states of N2, as well as the ionisation cross section. As
calculations are performed for E/N (cid:29) 1 Td, the cross sections for rotational excitations
are not included in the present study. Ionisation is treated here as a conservative process,
i.e. just like an excitation event, to ensure that the number of electrons does not grow
in the simulations. This approach is justiﬁed at the E/N values considered here, where
ionisation has a very small rate (which is conﬁrmed by the results). This simpliﬁcation
could easily be omitted when necessary, e.g. at higher E/N values. All collisions are
assumed to result in isotropic scattering, the thermal motion of the background gas
atoms is disregarded (i.e., the ”cold gas approximation” is adopted). The electrons do
not interact with each other, i.e. we study classical swarm conditions at low charged
particle density. The simulations are conducted at a pressure of p = 100 Pa and at the
ambient temperature of Tg = 300 K, i.e. at a neutral density of N ∼= 2.42 × 1016 cm−3.

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

5

Except for the study of swarm relaxation in a homogeneous electric ﬁeld, the
particles are restricted to move within a simulation domain that obeys periodic boundary
conditions, as shown in ﬁgure 1(a). Particles leaving this domain in the ±x directions
are re-injected into the domain at the opposite sides. The periodic boundaries emulate
an inﬁnite system with spatially periodic modulation of E/N .

Figure 1. (a) In the case of a modulated electric ﬁeld, the electrons’ motion is followed
in a simulation box having a width L, with periodic boundaries. The system is exposed
to a sinusoidally spatially modulated electric ﬁeld as shown in (b) for the case of an
average reduced electric ﬁeld of (E/N )0 = 20 Td (indicated by the dashed horizontal
line) and a modulation depth M = 0.1.

The electric ﬁeld points in the −x direction, consequently, the electrons drift in
the +x direction. In the following, we omit the negative sign of E. In the case of a
modulated electric ﬁeld, the form

E(x) = E0[1 + M sin(kx)],

(3)

is adopted, where E0 is spatial average of the electric ﬁeld, M ≥ 0 is the modulation
depth, and k = 2π/L, with L being the length of the spatial period of modulation (see
ﬁgure 1(b)). The voltage drop over the length L is U = (E/N )0 N L, i.e.

U [V] = 0.242 · (E/N )0[Td] · L[cm].

(4)

At a given (E/N )0 this relation connects the length of the computational domain and
the voltage drop over this domain. We primarily examine the range of the parameters

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

6

(E/N )0 and L, where the energy corresponding to the voltage drop over the simulation
domain, q U , is in the order of the excitation levels of Ar, the lowest being 11.55 eV.

We present results for the spatial proﬁles of the mean electron velocity v(x),
the mean energy ε(x), the electron density n(x), the electron energy distribution
function (EEDF) f (x, ε). These characteristics are studied as a function of the reduced
electric ﬁeld and the length of the computation cell (that equals the wavelength of the
modulation of E(x).) They are ”measured” within 200 slabs with equal width, covering
the simulation domain of length L. A lower spatial resolution is used for the analysis
of the excitation rates and of the spatial distribution of the EEDF, to ensure a better
statistics.

At low values of modulation, the system is expected to give a linear response
the latter are foreseen to exhibit a
i.e.
for the space-dependent scalar quantities,
harmonic spatial proﬁle. With increasing perturbation, a nonlinear response is expected
to establish. Taking as an example the mean velocity v(x), the harmonic content as
well as the phase shift of the individual harmonics contributing the spatial proﬁle can
be obtained via Fourier analysis, which allows to construct v(x) as

v(x) =

(cid:88)

s

vs sin(s k x − ϕs),

(5)

where vs and ϕs are, respectively, the amplitude and the phase delay of the s-th
harmonic. This analysis helps, e.g., identifying the conditions when local transport
in the case of low modulation (as long as v and ε are monotonically
is approached:
increasing functions of E/N ) we expect vs → 0, ∀s > 1 and ϕ1 → 0, as E(x) contains
only a dc component and one (perturbing) harmonic with s = 1. Any deviation from this
behaviour is the signature of the non-local character of the transport and the nonlinear
response of the system to the electric ﬁeld perturbation. We note that this analysis of
the phase shifts of the ”macroscopic quantities”, like v(x) and ε(x) with respect to E(x)
does not oﬀer an explanation for the resonance eﬀects, as these are kinetic by nature.
We also need to notice that the dependence of v on E/N is not necessarily monotonic,
this scenario is called Negative Diﬀerential Conductivity (NDC) [42], which typically
occurs in gas mixtures, including Ar-N2 mixtures that are also studied here [43].

3. Relaxation frequencies and lengths

Before presenting our results it is useful to illustrate the behaviour of few important
quantities that have major inﬂuence on the relaxation and resonance eﬀects to be
discussed. These are the momentum and energy dissipation frequencies, νm and νe,
respectively, as well as the mean free path λm and the energy relaxation length λe. We
have computed these quantities according to the expressions given in [1] and display
them in ﬁgure 2. Panel (a) shows the energy dissipation frequency (νe) and the
momentum dissipation frequency (νe) for both Ar and N2. We ﬁnd νm to be signiﬁcantly
higher than νe over the whole range of energies considered. νe is especially low for Ar
below the threshold energy for inelastic loss channels, as in elastic collisions the fractional

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

7

energy loss of the electrons is in the order of the electron/atom mass ratio, as already
mentioned in section 1. Rapid changes of νe with ε can be observed for both gases.
Whenever the energy distribution of the electrons spans a range that includes such a
change, parts of the electron population with diﬀerent energies will behave dissimilar in
terms of energy relaxation, as explained in [1].

The momentum relaxation frequency does not exhibit abrupt changes as a function
of the energy, except for Ar at low energies, due to the Ramsauer-Townsend minimum
in the elastic collision cross section. Regarding the relaxation lengths in pure gases,
ﬁgure 2(b) reveals that the energy relaxation length (λe) exceeds considerably the mean
free path (λm). Below the inelastic excitation threshold in Ar, e.g., their ratio amounts
about two orders of magnitude. Under such conditions the relaxation of the energy in a
swarm is expected to take place over an extended spatial scale, where a high number of
collisions is required for equilibration. The diﬀerence between λe and λm for Ar decreases
as the energy is increased, at 20 eV the ratio between them drops to a factor of two. As
around this energy the sum of inelastic cross sections approaches the value of the elastic
momentum transfer cross section energy relaxation becomes eﬃcient. As to N2, λe and
λm are relatively close to each other, meaning that energy relaxation takes place over a
few free ﬂight lengths of the electrons, except at low energies (below 2 eV) and within
the 3 eV≤ ε ≤ 8 eV interval, where the collision cross sections are low.

Due to the large disparity of the relaxation frequencies and lengths in Ar vs.
in
N2, even a small amount of the latter causes a signiﬁcant change of these parameters,
as illustrated in ﬁgure 2(c) for the case of λe. With respect to the case of pure Ar the
strongest decrease of λe occurs in the 2 eV≤ ε ≤ 3 eV and 8 eV≤ ε ≤ 11 eV domains of
the electron energy as a result of the addition of N2 to Ar. This is caused by, respectively,
the vibrational and electronic excitation of N2 molecules. In the ﬁrst domain, even 1%
of N2 decreases λe by a factor of 10 as it can be seen in ﬁgure 2(c). At electron energies
above ≈ 15 eV the eﬀect of N2 on λe becomes negligible due to the availability of a high
number of inelastic loss channels.

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

8

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2. (a) Momentum and energy dissipation frequencies νm and νe, as well as
(b) mean free path λm and the energy relaxation length λe in Ar (solid lines) and N2
(dashed lines). (c) Dependence of the energy relaxation length on the concentration
of N2 in the Ar+N2 mixture. p = 100 Pa and Tg = 300 K.

4. Results

4.1. Homogeneous electric ﬁeld

To illustrate the equilibration of electron swarms in a homogeneous electric ﬁeld, in
ﬁgure 3 we depict the mean velocity and the mean energy of the electrons for a steady
state scenario when electrons are continuously emitted from an electrode at x = 0 and
drift in the gas. In this simulation, the electrons are emitted with an initial energy of

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

9

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 3. Relaxation of the mean velocity (left column) and the mean energy (right
column) of electrons in a homogeneous electric ﬁeld. The electrons are emitted at x
= 0 with an initial velocity pointing into the x direction and corresponding to 1 eV
initial energy. p = 100 Pa and Tg = 300 K. (a,b) Pure Ar at various values of E/N ,
(c,d) Ar-N2 mixtures at E/N = 20 Td and diﬀerent N2 concentrations. Note that the
domain shown in (c,d) is much shorter. The dashed red lines in (a,b) correspond to 20
Td, with the x scale 10x zoomed.

1 eV and an initial velocity directed towards the x direction. Such an initial velocity
distribution is very clearly far from the equilibrium distribution that is expected to be
nearly isotropic with a small drift component. Figures 3(a) and (b) show the case of pure
Ar. Here, the ensemble of the electrons requires rather signiﬁcant ”ﬂight” lengths to
acquire a steady-state mean velocity, for the whole range of E/N covered. The periodic
structures seen during this equilibration phase originate from repetitive energy gain -
energy loss cycles of the electrons: gain occurs due to acceleration in the electric ﬁeld,
loss occurs primarily due to inelastic collisions. This is especially well seen in the graph
of ε(x) for the 20 Td case, for which the x scale is 10x zoomed (red dashed line): here
saw-tooth like patterns appear, expressing the slow energy gain and rapid energy loss.
While the peaks of this function appear nearly at the same position as those of v(x),
the functional forms appear to be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. The oscillations of the mean
velocity persist for the longest spatial domain for the 20 Td case, both at lower and
higher ﬁelds we observe equilibration on a shorter length scale.

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

10

Figures 3(c,d) illustrates the behaviour of the swarm in Ar-N2 mixtures, as a
function of the N2 concentration, at ﬁxed E/N = 20 Td. The equilibration of the
transport takes place on a much shorter length scale, as compared to that in pure Ar.
Already 1% of N2 shrinks the equilibration domain by a factor of ∼ 10. At higher
admixture concentrations equilibrium becomes close to monotonic. This behaviour
originates from the wide range of energies (due to processes with low threshold energies,
e.g. vibrational channels) of inelastic loss channels in N2 as compared to Ar. We can note
that an increasing N2 concentration results in a remarkable increase of the steady-state
mean velocity and a remarkable decrease of the steady-state mean energy.

Whenever pronounced structures in transport coeﬃcients are seen, it is expected
that in a spatially modulated electric ﬁeld resonances may appear at certain conditions,
as it has been recognised in several earlier studies, e.g. [44]. This is indeed the foreseen
behaviour in pure Ar, while N2 is expected to have a converse inﬂuence on this eﬀect.
The data presented above help setting the proper range of E/N for the studies of
the transport in spatially modulated ﬁelds and the timing of the data collection in the
simulations (see below).

4.2. Transport in periodically modulated electric ﬁeld in argon

Below, we present the results for the transport properties in spatially modulated electric
ﬁeld for pure Ar gas. The simulations are initialized by placing N = 2000–5000 electrons
at random positions within the simulation box (of length L) with a velocity v0=0.
First, the electrons are traced for ∆T1 = 900 µs, and subsequently for an additional
∆T2 = 100 µs, during which the transport data are collected (unless stated otherwise).
This timing ensures the decay of the initial transients: at 20 Td, e.g., the relaxation
length seen in ﬁgure 3 is ∼ 1 m and the mean stationary velocity is about v0 ≈ 1.8 × 104
m/s, resulting in a characteristic relaxation time of ≈ 55 µs (cid:28) ∆T1.

First, we analyze the results obtained at (E/N )0 = 20 Td as the longest relaxation
length was observed (in ﬁgure 3) for this value of the reduced electric ﬁeld. Figure 4
shows the eﬀect of the length of the simulation domain, L, for this (E/N )0 and for a
modulation of M = 0.2. Panel (a) shows the mean velocity v(x), (b) the normalised
electron density n/n0 (where n0 is the spatial average of the electron density), and (c)
the mean energy ε(x). L is varied between 2 cm and 3 cm, in 0.1 cm steps. Recall that
the eﬀect of L translates directly to the eﬀect of the voltage drop over the simulation
for the present conditions the voltage is in the 9.68 V ≤ U ≤
cell, U , via eq. (4), i.e.
14.52 V range.

The characteristics of the spatial proﬁle of the quantities shown in ﬁgure 4(a-c)
(i.e. the amplitude and shape of the curves as well as the positions of their extrema)
vary in a complicated manner with L. As regards to of v, in the limit of small L values
we observe a weak modulation around the equilibrium value of v0 ≈ 1.8 × 104 m/s, with
a peak close to the edge of the cell. A notable increase of the amplitude and a shift
of the maximum to higher x/L appear at L = 2.6 cm, while the highest modulation is

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

11

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 4. Spatially resolved mean velocity (a), normalized density (b) and mean
energy (c) of the electrons at (E/N )0 = 20 Td and M = 0.2, as a function of L. (n0
is the spatial average of the electron density.) The identiﬁcation of the curves in (c) is
the same as in (b). The dashed black lines in each panel show the spatial variation of
E/N , these curves are given without units. (d) Amplitudes (left scale, solid lines) and
phases (right scale, chain lines) of the ﬁrst ac component of the proﬁles of the mean
velocity and the mean energy, as a function of L. The amplitudes of v1 and ε1 are
given in units of 104 m/s and eV, respectively.

Figure 5. EEDF-s at diﬀerent spatial locations, at (E/N )0 = 20 Td and M = 0.2
and L = 2.7 cm.

observed at L = 2.7 cm, which is, however, accompanied by a ”backward” shift of the
proﬁle. At L > 2.7 cm we observe a decreasing amplitude of the proﬁle, with maxima
approaching x/L = 0. For the given strength of modulation, M = 0.2, the higher
harmonic content of the proﬁles is limited. Therefore the strength of the ”response”

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

12

of v to the perturbing electric ﬁeld variation is characterized by the amplitude and the
phase of the ﬁrst Fourier component, v1 and ϕ1, in ﬁgure 4(d). This ﬁgure conﬁrms the
visual observation of a resonance at L = 2.7 cm (corresponding to U = 13.07 V), where
v1 exhibits a sharp peak. The phase of the proﬁle is near −80◦ both at low and high L
and shows a peak at ϕ1 ≈ 0◦ at L = 2.6 cm. As the system is conservative, i.e. there
are no sources and losses, nv = const. holds due to ﬂux conservation (∇ · (nv) = 0).
Therefore, the electron density obtained from the simulation (and shown in ﬁgure 4(b)
is directly related to the mean velocity. The dependence of the spatial proﬁle of the
mean electron energy, ε(x) as a function of L is similar to that of the mean velocity, as
it can be seen in ﬁgure 4(c). The phases of the v(x) and the ε(x) proﬁles are, however,
quite diﬀerent as revealed quantitatively in ﬁgure 4(d). The phase of the latter exhibits
a monotonic decrease with the increase of L and passes through 0◦ at L = 2.6 cm, near
the resonance.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 6. Spatial maps of the EEDF for (E/N )0 = 20 Td and M = 0.2, at various
values of L.

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

13

The Electron Energy Distribution Function (EEDF) exhibits marked changes as a
function of the position when M > 0. An example of this is shown in ﬁgure 5 for (E/N )0
= 20 Td and M = 0.2, at L = 2.7 cm, i.e. for the resonant case. It is remarkable that
the strongest high-energy tail of the EEDF develops at the spatial position of x/L =
0.4, where, actually the mean energy has a minimum (cf. ﬁgure 4(b)). This is not a
contradiction as low-energy part of the EEDF at this position is also highly populated.
On the other hand, this observation points out the importance of the whole EEDF in
determining the characteristics of the transport. Revoking ﬁgure 2(b) we can note that
the EEDF-s are populated at energies both below and above the energy where a sudden
drop in the energy relaxation length occurs. Therefore, as pointed out in [1] the low-
and high-energy parts of the electron population behave in a quite diﬀerent ways at
this resonance. Below the inelastic excitation threshold of Ar (11.55 eV) λe is in the
order of several cm-s while this drops to several mm-s when the energy is higher than
this threshold. The long λe at low ε assists the electrons to gain energy from the ﬁeld,
without dissipating it. The short λe at ε > 11.55 eV, on the other hand, allows the
electrons to dissipate their energy quickly. Actually, at ε = 11.55 eV, λe =2.79 cm.
The energy accumulation for the resonant case (L = 2.7 cm) is clearly indicated by the
slanted structure in panel (b) of ﬁgure 6 that shows the complete spatial evolution of
the EEDF. Remains of this structure are also seen in ﬁgures 6(a) and (c), however, these
are far less pronounced.

(a)

(b)

Figure 7. (a) The eﬀect of modulation depth on the spatially resolved mean velocity.
The dashed black line shows the spatial variation of E/N , this curve is given without
units. (b) Harmonic composition of v(x) (solid lines, left scale) and the phase of the
ﬁrst ac component, ϕ1 (chain curve, right scale) as a function of the modulation depth
of the electric ﬁeld. L = 2.7 cm and (E/N )0 = 20 Td.

The eﬀect of the modulation depth, M , on the spatial variation of the mean velocity
is depicted in ﬁgure 7(a). At the lower values of L, the v(x) curves are nearly harmonic,
an increasing anharmonicity can be observed with increasing modulation. Figure 7(b)
shows the harmonic composition of v(x) as a function of M for the case of L = 2.7 cm
and (E/N )0 = 20 Td. Besides the harmonic amplitudes, vs, the phase of the principal
component of the ”response”, ϕ1 is also shown. At low modulation, only v1 diﬀers
signiﬁcantly from zero, however, with increasing M the harmonic content increases.

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

14

The phase is ϕ1 ≈ −40◦ for all M . We can note that the s = 0 component slightly
increases with M , i.e. the ”dc component” vs=0 of v(x), which is the spatially averaged
velocity of the electrons, increases as an eﬀect of the modulation.

Counting the number of the diﬀerent electron-Ar atom reactions spatially resolved
allows construction of a matrix that shows the collision frequencies associated with the
various collision processes. The computational results are shown in ﬁgure 8 for the case
of (E/N )0 = 20 Td and L = 2.7 cm, obtained at M = 0.0 (panel a) and M = 0.2 (panel
b). In these plots, excitation processes are identiﬁed by numbers 1...25, ionisation is
process 26. The number of elastic collisions is orders of magnitude higher, thus this
(process 0) is omitted from the plots. The highest excitation rates are observed (in
both cases) for the four lowest excited levels of Ar, for processes 1–4, corresponding
to excitation to the 1s5, 1s4, 1s3, and 1s2 levels (Paschen notation), respectively. The
energy of these levels is between 11.55 eV and 11.83 eV. At M = 0, signiﬁcant rates
are also observed for the whole domain for processes 5 and 6 (2p10 and 2p9 levels),
8–10 (2p7,6,5,4 levels), and 13–15 (2p1, 3d5,6 and 3d3 levels). The excitation threshold of
the latter is 13.90 eV. Ionisation (process 26) is not present with an appreciable rate,
justifying our approach of treating this process as a conservative one, for the rare events
of occurrence.

(a)

(b)

Figure 8. The spatial distribution of collision frequency (in arbitrary units) of
individual inelastic collision processes at (E/N )0 = 20 Td and L = 2.7 cm (U =
13.07 V), for (a) M = 0.0 and (b) M = 0.2. (Note, that for these conditions ionisation
(process #26) is negligible.)

At M = 0.0 (ﬁgure 8(a)) the spatial distribution of the excitation events is
homogeneous, as expected. At M = 0.2, however, the modulation of the electric ﬁeld
causes a major perturbation to the excitations [45]. We ﬁnd that (i) the majority of
excitation events is concentrated within the 0.25 ≤ x/L ≤ 0.6 spatial domain with a
pronounced maximum near x/L = 0.4, where the most notable high energy tail for the
EEDF was found for the same conditions, (cf. ﬁgure 5) and (ii) the acceleration of the
electrons in the modulated ﬁeld also opens excitation channels with higher thresholds:
in ﬁgure 8(b) we observe processes with appreciable rates up to #18, which corresponds
to levels 3d1” and 2s5, with a threshold energy of 14.06 eV [40].

While in the cases described before, the modulation was kept at moderate levels,

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

15

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 9. Spatially resolved mean velocity (a), mean energy (b) and normalised
density (c) of the electrons at (E/N )0 = 20 Td and L = 2.7 cm, for M = 1.1. The
curves correspond to diﬀerent data collection time windows, as indicated. The legend
shown in (c) is valid for panels (a) and (b), too. Note the slow evolution of the features
with time within the domain of the reversed ﬁeld, centered around x/L = 0.75. The
dashed black lines show the potential energy of the electrons, with zero value set at x
= 0. (d) The dependence of the normalised electron density on L at (E/N )0 = 20 Td
and M = 1.1. These data were collected in the default, 900-1000 µs time window.

here we brieﬂy examine the case of higher modulation, when the electric ﬁeld changes
sign within a certain domain (at M > 1). As the presence of a region with a reversed
electric ﬁeld gives rise to a potential well, electrons can accumulate within these regions.
For (E/N )0 = 20 Td, L = 2.7 cm, and M = 1.1, e.g., the depth of this potential well is
≈ 0.1 V. As electrons may undergo such collisions in these regions when their remaining
kinetic energy is less than 0.1 eV, such electrons will be trapped as their energy cannot
increase anymore to overcome the barrier. Consequently, after a suﬃciently long time
all electrons are expected to be trapped in our simulation.

While the presence of the reversed ﬁeld bears some similarity with the case of the
negative glow region of dc glow discharges [46–48], in that setting fast electrons arriving
from the sheath can interact with the trapped population and can eventually increase
the energy of some of the electrons, enabling them this way to get released from the
trap. This eﬀect is the result of Coulomb collisions, which are however, not included
in the present simulation. Nonetheless, our simulations can follow the time dependence
of the trapping phenomenon. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 9(a-c), where the results (for
the mean velocity, mean energy and normalised density) are shown as a function of
time. The data were collected in 100µs-wide time windows at diﬀerent start times, as
indicated. The graphs indeed exhibit pronounced structures around x/L = 0.75, where

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

16

the reversed electric ﬁeld peaks. They show that a slow change follows after an initial
high rate of trapping. From this it follows that the spatial modulation of E actually
slows down the trapping process by ”moving” most of the inelastic collisions from a
random distribution to spatial positions that exclude the domain of reversed ﬁeld, as
shown in ﬁgure 8. In accordance with this it is also interesting to note that the least
signiﬁcant trapping for otherwise same conditions is observed for the resonant case of
L = 2.7 cm, as revealed in ﬁgure 9(d). For other values of L, we observe a much more
signiﬁcant collection of the electrons within the region of the ﬁeld reversal and more
signiﬁcant depletion of the density outside this domain. As electrons are less likely to
undergo inelastic collisions in the regions with reversed electric ﬁeld, complete trapping
takes place on a time scale much longer than accessible by our simulations. Inclusion
of the Coulomb collisions [49] and/or thermal contribution of the background gas are
clearly necessary to model correctly the stationary state of our system at such high
modulations.

(a)

(b)

Figure 10. Mean electron velocity at diﬀerent (E/N )0 values: (a) 10 Td cm, (b) 40
Td. The dashed black lines in both panels show the spatial variation of E/N , these
curves are given without units.

After presenting the results obtained for (E/N )0 = 20 Td, we analyse cases with
lower and higher values, (E/N )0 = 10 Td and 40 Td. The results for these cases are
shown in ﬁgures 10(a) and (b), respectively. At (E/N )0 = 10 Td, the proﬁle of the mean
velocity changes smoothly with increasing L, without any signiﬁcant resonance. The
phase of the ﬁrst ac component v1, changes however, in the same way as it was found

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

17

Figure 11. The phase of the ﬁrst ac component of the mean velocity at the (E/N )0
values indicated, as a function of the voltage drop (related to the other parameters via
eq.(4)) over the computational cell. M = 0.2.

previously for 20 Td. This is presented in ﬁgure 11, where ϕ1 is shown as a function
of the voltage drop U (in order to make the data obtained at diﬀerent (E/N )0 values
comparable). The maximum of the phase occurs at a higher voltage drop (higher L)
compared to the higher ﬁelds. At (E/N )0 = 40 Td, the behaviour of the phase is very
similar to that at 20 Td (a strong peak at ≈ 12.5 V). The inspection of the amplitude
of v(x) in ﬁgure 10(b) does not show a strong resonance unlike in the case of 20 Td.
This may be explained by the higher number of inelastic loss channels at an expanded
energy range of the electrons at the higher accelerating ﬁeld. Note, that at E/N = 40
Td a faster spatial relaxation was found also in the homogeneous ﬁeld, as compared to
20 Td, see section 4.1.

4.3. Transport in periodically modulated electric ﬁeld in Ar-N2 mixtures and in N2

As discussed above, the pronounced response of the electron transport parameters on
the spatial modulation of the accelerating electric ﬁeld in argon gas is due to the fact
that the number of energy loss channels is limited (excitation predominantly occurs to
a few excited states as conﬁrmed by the results presented in the previous section). As
in a molecular gas, like N2 the possible values of the energy loss in a collision span a
much wider domain as compared to atomic gases, the response of the system to the
modulated electric ﬁeld is expected to diminish when even small amounts of molecular
gases are added to Ar.

Figure 12(a) shows v(x)/v0 for various percentages of N2 between 0% and 100%, for
(E/N )0 = 20 Td, M = 0.2, and L = 2.7 cm. The data are normalised by the equilibrium
velocity v0, which varies (as shown in ﬁgure 12(c)) as a function of the N2 content in the
gas mixture. (In the case of 0% N2 the data are the same as shown in ﬁgure 4.) With an
increasing N2 percentage the phase of the ﬁrst harmonic of v(x) ﬁrst slightly decreases at
low nitrogen content, and then increases rapidly to ϕ1 ≈ −20◦ above 5% N2 (see ﬁgure
12(d)). The velocity proﬁles practically overlap at ≥ 40% N2 content indicating that

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

18

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 12. Spatial proﬁles of the mean electron velocity (v(x)) (a) and mean electron
energy (ε(x)) (b) as a function of the N2 concentration. The legend in (a) also holds
for (b). The data in (a) are normalised by the equilibrium velocity of electrons (v0)
that varies as a function of the Ar/N2 mixing ratio as shown in (c). The results of our
calculations are cross checked with the data of [50]. (d) Phase of the ﬁrst harmonic of
v(x) and ε(x) as a function of the N2 content. (E/N )0 = 20 Td, M = 0.2, and L =
2.7 cm. The dashed black lines in (a) and (b) show the spatial variation of E/N , this
curve is given without units.

excitation of Ar is strongly suppressed at these molecular gas concentrations. Some of
the data points belong to the parameter range where Negative Diﬀerential Conductivity
in the Ar-N2 mixture is present. As revealed from ﬁgure 4 of [43], NDC at E/N =
20 Td occurs between N2 concentrations of approx. 5% and 15%. This eﬀect may
have an inﬂuence on the behaviour of ϕ1, clariﬁcation of this is, however, left for future
work that needs to consider a broader domain of the parameters especially the spatial
wavelength of the modulation. The addition of N2 eﬃciently cools the electrons, as the
proﬁles of the mean energy, shown in ﬁgure 12(b) conﬁrm. Besides the value of ε the
modulation of its spatial proﬁle decreases as well and the phase of the proﬁle changes
also signiﬁcantly as shown in ﬁgure 12(d).

The presence of N2 in the mixture has a dramatic eﬀects on the EEDF as well,
as shown in ﬁgure 13. Already at 1% N2 content, the marked spatial modulation of
the EEDF observed in pure Ar (cf. ﬁgure 6(b)) vanishes almost completely. With the
addition of more N2, the low energy part of the EDDF gets gradually more populated

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

19

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 13. Spatial maps of the EEDF for (E/N )0 = 20 Td and M = 0.2, and L =
2.7 cm, for N2 concentrations of (a) 1 %, (b) 5 %, and (c) 20 %.

as a result of the low-threshold-energy processes in N2.

Finally we present results for the case of pure N2. Figures 14(a,b) display spatial
proﬁles of the mean electron velocity for as a function of L, while panel (c) of the same
ﬁgure shows the behaviour of the mean electron energy. At large L (i.e. at L >2 cm),
both the v(x) and ε(x) proﬁles approximate the spatial dependence of the electric ﬁeld.
For these conditions, the phases of the ﬁrst harmonic of both of these proﬁles approaches
zero, as it is revealed from ﬁgure 14(d). These are signatures of the local character of
the transport. For large L, we indeed ﬁnd a very slight spatial modulation of the EEDF
as well, as it can be seen in ﬁgure 15(c) for L = 4 cm. The only observable signature
there is a small modulation of the high energy cutoﬀ with x/L, around ε ≈ 2.5 eV. The
vast majority of the electrons have energies less than 2 eV. For such energies, as ﬁgure
2(b) reveals, the energy relaxation length is in the order of λe ≈ 1-2 cm. For any L
exceeding this value we expect that the swarm properties reﬂect the local value of the
electric ﬁeld, as it is actually conﬁrmed in ﬁgure 14(a).

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

20

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 14. (a,b) Normalized mean electron velocity in pure N2 at (E/N )0 = 20 Td
and M = 0.2, for various values of L, given in the legends. (c) Proﬁles of the mean
electron energy for the same conditions. The dashed black lines in each panel show the
spatial variation of E/N , this curve is given without units. (d) Phase of ﬁrst harmonic
of v1 and ε1.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 15. Spatial maps of the EEDF in pure N2, for (E/N )0 = 20 Td and M = 0.2,
and various values of L.

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

21

5. Summary

In this work, we have investigated via Monte Carlo simulation the characteristics of
electron transport in a stationary, spatially modulated electric ﬁeld. The computations
have been executed for Ar and N2 gases and their mixtures at (spatially averaged)
reduced electric ﬁelds in the 10-40 Td range. Particles have been traced in a ﬁnite
spatial region subjected to periodic boundary conditions.

Within the range of the reduced electric ﬁeld considered, a strong response of the
transport parameters to the electric ﬁeld modulation was observed. At low modulation
depths, the spatial proﬁles of the mean electron velocity and energy exhibited a harmonic
shape. The phase angle between the electric ﬁeld and the above quantities, as well
as the harmonic content of the latter at higher modulation depths were revealed by
Fourier analysis. All the quantities analysed showed highly nonlocal transport, except
for the case of pure N2 at long modulation wavelength, where signatures of local electron
transport were observed.

At conditions, where the high modulation depth of E/N resulted in the appearance
of a region where the direction of the electric ﬁeld is reversed, we observed trapping of
the electrons. The stationary case, where all electrons are supposed to be trapped was
not reached due to the slow accumulation of the electrons. The latter was found to be
caused by the fact that the modulation of the electric ﬁeld favours inelastic collisions
(that represent high energy loss) outside the domain of the reversed ﬁeld. For a realistic
description of any experimental setting the inclusion of either Coulomb or thermal
collisions is necessary.

Understanding the transport characteristics requires the analysis of the spatial
variation of the electron energy distribution function (EEDF). We have computed this
function for various parameter combinations and have found pronounced structures at
the resonance condition where the potential drop over the simulation box is ≈ 13 V
in pure Ar. The strongest resonance was found for (E/N )0 = 20 Td. At lower reduced
electric ﬁeld, elastic collisions play a more prominent role in the electron energy balance,
while at higher ﬁeld more excitation channels are open due to the higher electron energy,
and this adversely aﬀects the synchronisation of the kinetics of individual electrons. The
analysis of the rates of the inelastic collision processes at 20 Td showed that for these
conditions only few levels of the Ar atom are preferentially excited.

Even small amounts of N2 admixtures were found to lead to the vanishing of the
structures in the EEDF due to the wider range of excitation energies of the N2 molecule.
Further directions of the present study include (i) the clariﬁcation of the combined
eﬀects of the modulated electric ﬁeld and the Negative Diﬀerential Conductivity on
the transport characteristics in the case of Ar-N2 mixtures, (ii) investigations of the
transport properties in the presence of non-sinusoidal perturbation of the electric ﬁeld
strength, (iii) inclusion of Coulomb collisions for an accurate prediction of the properties
of the trapped part of the electron population in regions with reversed electric ﬁeld, and
(iv) the introduction of the self-consistent computation of the electric ﬁeld distribution

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

22

from the perturbed densities of the electrons via the Poisson equation in order to predict
the range of existence of standing striations.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Hungarian National Oﬃce for Research, Development
and Innovation (NKFIH) via the grant 119357. DB and SD are supported by the
Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia
and the Institute of Physics (Belgrade).

References

[1] Winkler R, Loﬀhagen D, Sigeneger F 2002 Applied Surface Science 192 50
[2] Kumar K, Skullerud H R and Robson R E 1980 Aust. J. Phys. 33 343
[3] Robson R E, White R D and Petrovi´c Z Lj 2005 Rev. Mod. Phys. 77 1303
[4] Pitchford L C, Boeuf J-P, Segur P and Marode E 1990 in Non-equilibrium Eﬀects in Ion and

Electron Transport, ed. Gallagher J W (Plenum, New York)

[5] Tsendin L D 1995 Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 4 200
[6] Kudryavtsev A A, Morin A V and Tsendin L D 2008 Tech. Phys. 53 1029
[7] Malovi´c G, Strini´c A, ˇZivanov A, Mari´c D, Petrovi´c Z 2003 Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 12 S1
[8] Donk´o Z 2011 Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 20 024001
[9] Franck J, Hertz G 1914 Verh. Deut. Phys. Ges. 16 457
[10] Robson R E, Li B and White R D 2000 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 33 507
[11] Sigeneger F, Winkler R, Robson R E 2003 Contrib. Plasma Phys. 43 178
[12] White R D, Robson R E, Nicoletopoulos P, Dujko S 2012 Eur. Phys. J. D 66 117
[13] Robson R E, White R D, Hildebrandt M 2014 Eur. Phys. J. D 68 188
[14] Loﬀhagen D, Winkler R, Donk´o 2002 Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys. 18 189
[15] Dujko S, White R D, Petrovi´c 2008 J. Phys. D 41 245205
[16] White R D, Robson R E, Dujko S, Nicoletopoulos P, Li B 2009 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 42 194001
[17] Donk´o Z, Hartmann P, Korolov I, Jeges V, Boˇsnjakovi´c V, Dujko S 2019 Plasma Sources Sci.

Technol. 28 095007

[18] Golubovsky Yu B, Porokhova I A, Behnke J, Nekutchaev V O 1998 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 31

2447

[19] Golubovskii Y B, Maiorov V A, Porokhova I A, Behnke J 1999 Journal of Physics D: Applied

Physics 32 1391

[20] Kolobov V I 2006 Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 39 R487
[21] Klarfeld B N 1952 Sov. Phys.-JETP 22 66
[22] Pekarek L, Krejˇc´ı 1962 Cechoslovackij ﬁziceskij zurnal B 12 450
[23] Sigeneger F, Sukhinin G I, Winkler R 2000 Plasma Chemistry and Plasma Processing 20 87
[24] Sukhinin G I, Fedoseev A V 2006 High temperature 44 157
[25] Raizer Yu P, Shneider M N 1997 High Temp. 35 19
[26] Iza F, Yang S S, Kim H C, Lee J K 2005 Journal of Applied Physics 98 043302
[27] Stittsworth J A, Wendt A E 1996 IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science 24 125
[28] Sigeneger F, Golubovskii Yu B, Porokhova I A, Winkler R 1998 Plasma Chemistry and Plasma

Processing 18 153

[29] Sigeneger F, Winkler R 2000 Plasma Chemistry and Plasma Processing 20 429
[30] Liu Y X, Schuengel E, Korolov I, Donk´o Z, Wang Y N, Schulze J 2016 Physical Review Letters

116 255002

[31] Arslanbekov R A, Kolobov V I 2019 Phys. Plasmas 26 104501

Resonance eﬀects of electron transport

23

[32] Kolobov V I, Arslanbekov R A, Levko D, Godyak V A 2020 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. accepted

manuscript JPhysD-123530.R1

[33] Hartmann P, Rosenberg M, Juhasz Z, Matthews L S, Sanford D L, Vermillion K, Reyes J C,
Hyde T W 2020 Plasma Sources Science and Technology http://iopscience.iop.org/10.1088/1361-
6595/abb955

[34] Golubovskii Yu B, Kolobov V I, Nekuchaev V O 2013 Physics of Plasmas 20 101602
[35] Denpoh K 2012 Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 51 106202
[36] Liu Y-X, Donk´o Z, Korolov I, Schuengel E, Wang Y-N, Schulze J 2019 Plasma Sources Science

and Technology 28

[37] Shvydky A A, Khudik V N, Nagorny V P, Theodosiou C E 2006 IEEE Transactions on Plasma

Science 34 878

[38] Sato N, Tagashira H 1985 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 18 2451
[39] Boeuf J P and Marode E 1982 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 15 2169
[40] Hayashi M, Nagoya Institute of Technology Report IPPJ-AM- 19 (unpublished).
[41] Biagi database, www.lxcat.net, retrieved on July 23, 2020
[42] Petrovi´c Z Lj, Crompton R W, Haddad G N 1984 Aust. J. Phys. 37 23
[43] Dyatko N A, Kochetov I V, Napartovich A P 2014 Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 23 043001
[44] Nicoletopoulos P, Robson R E, White R D 2012 Phys. Rev. E 85 046404
[45] Aleksandrov N L, Kochetov I V 1996 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 29 1476
[46] Loﬀhagen D, Sigeneger F, Winkler R 2004 Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys. 25 45
[47] Boeuf J P, Pitchford L C 1995 J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 28 2083
[48] Kudryavtsev A A, Nisimov S U, Prokhorova E I, Slyshov A G 2011 Technical Physics Letters 37

838

[49] Weng Y, Kushner M J 1990 Phys. Rev. A 42 6192
[50] Jovanovi´c J V, Basurto E, ˇSaˇsi´c O, Hern´andez- ´Avila J L, Petrovi´c Z L, De Urquijo J 2009 Journal

of Physics D: Applied Physics 42 045202

