0
2
0
2

t
c
O
5

]
x
e
-
p
e
h
[

1
v
0
9
3
2
0
.
0
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Measurement of Diﬀerential Cross Sections for νµ-Ar Charged-Current Interactions
with Protons and no Pions in the Final State with the MicroBooNE Detector

P. Abratenko,36 M. Alrashed,15 R. An,14 J. Anthony,4 J. Asaadi,35 A. Ashkenazi,19 S. Balasubramanian,39
B. Baller,11 C. Barnes,20 G. Barr,24 V. Basque,18 L. Bathe-Peters,13 O. Benevides Rodrigues,32 S. Berkman,11
A. Bhanderi,18 A. Bhat,32 M. Bishai,2 A. Blake,16 T. Bolton,15 L. Camilleri,10 D. Caratelli,11 I. Caro Terrazas,9
R. Castillo Fernandez,11 F. Cavanna,11 G. Cerati,11 Y. Chen,1 E. Church,25 D. Cianci,10 J. M. Conrad,19
M. Convery,29 L. Cooper-Troendle,39 J. I. Crespo-Anad´on,10, 6 M. Del Tutto,11 D. Devitt,16 R. Diurba,21
L. Domine,29 R. Dorrill,14 K. Duﬀy,11 S. Dytman,26 B. Eberly,31 A. Ereditato,1 L. Escudero Sanchez,4
J. J. Evans,18 G. A. Fiorentini Aguirre,30 R. S. Fitzpatrick,20 B. T. Fleming,39 N. Foppiani,13 D. Franco,39
A. P. Furmanski,21 D. Garcia-Gamez,12 S. Gardiner,11 G. Ge,10 S. Gollapinni,34, 17 O. Goodwin,18
E. Gramellini,11 P. Green,18 H. Greenlee,11 W. Gu,2 R. Guenette,13 P. Guzowski,18 E. Hall,19 P. Hamilton,32
O. Hen,19 G. A. Horton-Smith,15 A. Hourlier,19 E.-C. Huang,17 R. Itay,29 C. James,11 J. Jan de Vries,4
X. Ji,2 L. Jiang,37 J. H. Jo,39 R. A. Johnson,8 Y.-J. Jwa,10 N. Kamp,19 G. Karagiorgi,10 W. Ketchum,11
B. Kirby,2 M. Kirby,11 T. Kobilarcik,11 I. Kreslo,1 R. LaZur,9 I. Lepetic,27 K. Li,39 Y. Li,2 A. Lister,16, ∗
B. R. Littlejohn,14 D. Lorca,1 W. C. Louis,17 X. Luo,3 A. Marchionni,11 S. Marcocci,11 C. Mariani,37
D. Marsden,18 J. Marshall,38 J. Martin-Albo,13 D. A. Martinez Caicedo,30 K. Mason,36 A. Mastbaum,27
N. McConkey,18 V. Meddage,15 T. Mettler,1 K. Miller,7 J. Mills,36 K. Mistry,18 A. Mogan,34 T. Mohayai,11
J. Moon,19 M. Mooney,9 A. F. Moor,4 C. D. Moore,11 J. Mousseau,20 M. Murphy,37 D. Naples,26
A. Navrer-Agasson,18 R. K. Neely,15 P. Nienaber,28 J. Nowak,16 O. Palamara,11 V. Paolone,26 A. Papadopoulou,19
V. Papavassiliou,22 S. F. Pate,22 A. Paudel,15 Z. Pavlovic,11 E. Piasetzky,33 I. D. Ponce-Pinto,10 D. Porzio,18
S. Prince,13 X. Qian,2 J. L. Raaf,11 V. Radeka,2 A. Raﬁque,15 M. Reggiani-Guzzo,18 L. Ren,22 L. Rochester,29
J. Rodriguez Rondon,30 H. E. Rogers,5 M. Rosenberg,26 M. Ross-Lonergan,10 B. Russell,39 G. Scanavini,39
D. W. Schmitz,7 A. Schukraft,11 M. H. Shaevitz,10 R. Sharankova,36 J. Sinclair,1 A. Smith,4 E. L. Snider,11
M. Soderberg,32 S. S¨oldner-Rembold,18 S. R. Soleti,24, 13 P. Spentzouris,11 J. Spitz,20 M. Stancari,11 J. St. John,11
T. Strauss,11 K. Sutton,10 S. Sword-Fehlberg,22 A. M. Szelc,18 N. Tagg,23 W. Tang,34 K. Terao,29
C. Thorpe,16 M. Toups,11 Y.-T. Tsai,29 S. Tufanli,39 M. A. Uchida,4 T. Usher,29 W. Van De Pontseele,24, 13
B. Viren,2 M. Weber,1 H. Wei,2 Z. Williams,35 S. Wolbers,11 T. Wongjirad,36 M. Wospakrik,11
W. Wu,11 T. Yang,11 G. Yarbrough,34 L. E. Yates,19 G. P. Zeller,11 J. Zennamo,11 and C. Zhang2
(The MicroBooNE Collaboration)†
1Universit¨at Bern, Bern CH-3012, Switzerland
2Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), Upton, NY, 11973, USA
3University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, 93106, USA
4University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0HE, United Kingdom
5St. Catherine University, Saint Paul, MN 55105, USA
6Centro de Investigaciones Energ´eticas, Medioambientales y Tecnol´ogicas (CIEMAT), Madrid E-28040, Spain
7University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA
8University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, 45221, USA
9Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, 80523, USA
10Columbia University, New York, NY, 10027, USA
11Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL), Batavia, IL 60510, USA
12Universidad de Granada, Granada E-18071, Spain
13Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
14Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT), Chicago, IL 60616, USA
15Kansas State University (KSU), Manhattan, KS, 66506, USA
16Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YW, United Kingdom
17Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), Los Alamos, NM, 87545, USA
18The University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom
19Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA
20University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA
21University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 55455, USA
22New Mexico State University (NMSU), Las Cruces, NM, 88003, USA
23Otterbein University, Westerville, OH, 43081, USA
24University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3RH, United Kingdom
25Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL), Richland, WA, 99352, USA
26University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA
27Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA
28Saint Mary’s University of Minnesota, Winona, MN, 55987, USA

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

29SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA, 94025, USA
30South Dakota School of Mines and Technology (SDSMT), Rapid City, SD, 57701, USA
31University of Southern Maine, Portland, ME, 04104, USA
32Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, 13244, USA
33Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 69978
34University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, 37996, USA
35University of Texas, Arlington, TX, 76019, USA
36Tufts University, Medford, MA, 02155, USA
37Center for Neutrino Physics, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, 24061, USA
38University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom
39Wright Laboratory, Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 06520, USA
(Dated: October 7, 2020)

We present an analysis of MicroBooNE data with a signature of one muon, no pions, and at least
one proton above a momentum threshold of 300 MeV/c (CC0πNp). This is the ﬁrst diﬀerential cross
section measurement of this topology in neutrino-argon interactions. We achieve a signiﬁcantly lower
proton momentum threshold than previous carbon and scintillator-based experiments. Using data
collected from a total of approximately 1.6 × 1020 protons-on-target, we measure the muon neutrino
cross section for the CC0πNp interaction channel in argon at MicroBooNE in the Booster Neutrino
Beam which has a mean energy of around 800 MeV. We present the results from a data sample
with estimated eﬃciency of 29% and purity of 76% as diﬀerential cross sections in ﬁve reconstructed
variables: the muon momentum and polar angle, the leading proton momentum and polar angle,
and the muon-proton opening angle. We include smearing matrices that can be used to “forward-
fold” theoretical predictions for comparison with these data. We compare the measured diﬀerential
cross sections to a number of recent theory predictions demonstrating largely good agreement with
this ﬁrst-ever data set on argon.

I.

INTRODUCTION

A comprehensive understanding of neutrino interac-
tions is one of the core needs of neutrino oscillation ex-
periments [1]. These measurements are an important
component of systematic uncertainties in both existing
neutrino oscillation experiments, such as T2K [2] and
NOvA [3], and future programs and experiments such as
SBN [4], DUNE [5], and Hyper-Kamiokande [6]. In many
oscillation analyses, for example [2, 3], a lack of under-
standing of neutrino interactions is limiting the precision
of such measurements. At this time, the interaction infor-
mation available is predominantly on light targets such
as carbon. For future experiments, an accurate modeling
of neutrino interactions with argon is required; this is a
primary goal of the MicroBooNE experiment [7]. We re-
port on the ﬁrst diﬀerential cross-section measurement of
CC0πNp interactions on argon, including measurements
of proton kinematics.

The understanding of neutrino interactions comes
through cross-section measurements of various channels.
The charged-current quasielastic (CCQE) interaction [1]
is considered to be very important because it forms a sig-
niﬁcant contribution in many accelerator-based neutrino
oscillation experiments, and because the ﬁnal state topol-
ogy is simple with an easily identiﬁable lepton. Early
experiments on deuterium targets, e.g.
[8] were able to
identify true CCQE interactions by identifying hadrons

∗ Now at University of Wisconsin–Madison
† microboone info@fnal.gov

in the ﬁnal state. These were the ﬁrst measurements of
the axial form factor. More recent experiments, K2K [9],
used nuclear targets and detection of hadrons in the ﬁnal
state with more advanced detectors. They still focused
on the goal of measuring the nucleon axial form factor.
MiniBooNE [10] pioneered many of the analysis methods
used today. It is located along the same neutrino beam as
MicroBooNE, but with a mineral oil (CH2) target. The
interpretation of these data was complicated because of
the presence of other interactions such as multinucleon
(2p2h) interactions [11, 12] where the primary interaction
is with two nucleons, and pion production where the pion
is absorbed in the residual nucleus. These data provided
evidence for the importance of the 2p2h interaction in
neutrino interactions. Events from these alternate mech-
anisms have diﬀerent proton multiplicities and kinematic
distributions compared with CCQE events. When only
the muon is detected, the event can be easily mistaken as
a CCQE interaction leading to a bias in neutrino energy
estimations.

To avoid this problem, a common signal deﬁnition used
is CC0π or “CCQE-like” where the ﬁnal state has one
muon and any number of protons but no pions above
the detection threshold of the experiment. Components
of 2p2h and pion production, followed by pion absorp-
tion, are then included. As a result of using a broader
signal deﬁnition, backgrounds are easier to handle and
the associated model dependence in the result is greatly
decreased.

Recent MINERvA [13, 14] and T2K [15] CC0π results
use this signal deﬁnition and include events where pro-
tons are required as one component of the signal to better
diﬀerentiate between models. One MINERvA measure-

ment [13] using a range of targets (carbon, iron, and lead)
showed growing problems describing the magnitude of
the data with increasing atomic number. Along with the
CC0π cross section measurement, T2K published proton
momenta and multiplicity distributions in their most re-
cent paper [15]. Each experiment has a characteristic
proton detection threshold: 450 MeV/c (kinetic energy
of 102.3 MeV) for MINERvA [13, 14], and 500 MeV/c
(kinetic energy of 124.9 MeV) for T2K [15]. A recent
MicroBooNE measurement focused on single proton ﬁnal
states in a region of phase space where CCQE is expected
to dominate [16]. The largest diﬀerences between data
and predictions were seen at forward muon angles.

Pion production interaction events are also included
in the event sample for this measurement. Both experi-
mental and theoretical understanding of pion production
processes are needed [1].
In addition, the component
of these events that satisfy the signal deﬁnition of this
measurement is not well understood because models of
both pion production and pion absorption in the nuclear
medium are required.

Theoretical development has beneﬁted from previous
work for electron interactions where many of the same
reaction mechanisms are used. The 2p2h mechanism
was developed for electron interaction modeling [17] and
then imported to neutrino models [11]. Although all
event generator Monte Carlo algorithms now include
2p2h mechanisms, neutrino data give only indirect ev-
idence for it, in contrast with electron scattering where
the evidence is more conclusive. Relevant neutrino data
were published by ArgoNeuT including kinematics for
a two-proton sample [18]. Because their sample size is
small, they could select and analyze events through a
combined manual and automated analysis that enabled
an impressively low threshold of 21 MeV in proton ki-
netic energy. However, there is still a strong need for
more detailed information about the protons in the ﬁnal
state of neutrino interactions.

This article presents an analysis of a sample of charged-
current events with one muon and at least one proton in
the ﬁnal state in argon. Measuring the outgoing proton
increases the sensitivity to nuclear eﬀects relative to a
measurement of inclusive muon kinematics such as [19]
while keeping a more inclusive signal deﬁnition than the
aforementioned analysis of one-proton ﬁnal states [16] re-
tains a higher statistics data sample. According to the
signal deﬁnition adopted, the highest energy (leading)
proton must have a momentum between 300 MeV/c and
1200 MeV/c ( see Sec. V A for details), the muon must
have a momentum greater than 100 MeV/c, and there
must be no pions or other mesons in the ﬁnal state. Any
number of ﬁnal state neutrons is permitted. We refer to
this signal deﬁnition as CC0πN p (where N ≥ 1) for the
remainder of this article. Events from this CC0πN p sig-
nal deﬁnition are primarily populated by CC quasi-elastic
interactions, but with signiﬁcant components from mult-
inucleon interactions (2p2h) and events where pions are
produced but then absorbed in the nucleus. These dif-

3

ferent components have diﬀerent signatures in the ﬁve
kinematic variables we measure, and as such, these data
can be used to build and test models in interaction gen-
erators.

The cross-sections presented here are measured diﬀer-
entially in the kinematics of the muon and leading proton
in each event. In addition to the muon momentum and
angle, measured distributions of the leading proton mo-
mentum and angle, and opening angle between the muon
and leading proton are presented. By presenting these
spectra for CC0πNp events, a broad picture of muon
neutrino interactions in argon is provided and model de-
pendence in these results is decreased. To best describe
these data, comparisons need to include all contributing
mechanisms listed in the signal deﬁnition (in the preced-
ing paragraph) and should be folded with the smearing
matrices provided because the data are not corrected for
detector resolution eﬀects. A breakdown according to
the interactions implemented in the Monte Carlo pro-
gram used in this data analysis and comparisons with
various event generator codes is presented in Sec VIII.

II. MICROBOONE EXPERIMENT

The MicroBooNE experiment [7] consists of a liquid ar-
gon time projection chamber (LArTPC) in the Fermilab
Booster Neutrino Beam (BNB). The detector consists of
a cylindrical cryostat ﬁlled with approxiamately 170 tons
of liquid argon. Inside this cryostat is a 10.36 m (L) ×
2.56 m (W) × 2.32 m (H) rectangular TPC, shown in Fig-
ure 1, which is sensitive to charge produced in 85 tons
of the liquid. The TPC operates at an electric ﬁeld of
273 V/cm, provided by a cathode held at −70 kV and
kept uniform by a ﬁeld cage around the TPC, though
the local electric ﬁeld is modiﬁed by up to 15% by the
presence of positive ions in the detector, known as the
space charge eﬀect [20, 21]. Ionization electrons drift in
this electric ﬁeld towards three planes of wires forming
the anode. It takes 2.3 ms for an electron to drift from
the cathode to the ﬁrst anode plane. The innermost two
planes of wires are angled at ±60◦ from the vertical and
detect induced signals from electrons as they drift past
the wire planes. The ﬁnal plane has vertical wires that
collect drifting ionization electrons.
In total there are
8192 wires with a separation of 3 mm between any two
adjacent wires and between each wire plane. The de-
tector coordinate system is deﬁned with the TPC elec-
tron drift direction oriented in the negative x-direction,
y-direction vertically aligned, and the z-direction parallel
to the neutrino beam. The coordinate system origin is
at the upstream edge of the anode wires and equidistant
between the top and bottom ﬁeld cage, and the axes form
a right-handed set. We also deﬁne the polar angle from
the z-axis, θ, and the azimuthal angle around the z-axis,
φ.

Behind the anode plane is an array of 32 8-inch Hama-
In front of each PMT is an acrylic disc

matsu PMTs.

4

The protons exit the Fermilab Booster accelerator at an
energy of 8 GeV where they impinge on an air-cooled
beryllium target. The resulting mesons are focused by
a single magnetic horn and directed into a 50 m long
decay pipe. Decays of these focused mesons, as well as
secondary decays of muons produced in meson decays,
produce a neutrino beam with a broad energy spectrum
with a mean of around 800 MeV and a long tail at higher
energies. The beam is over 99% muon-ﬂavor neutrinos,
with around 10% of the 99% being muon antineutrinos.
The data used in this analysis were collected between
February and July 2016, totalling 1.6×1020 protons-on-
target. A total of 72 million external triggers are used for
cosmic background estimation — approximately double
the number of beam triggers collected.

The MicroBooNE detector is 470 m from the beam
target and slightly below the surface in the open-cut pit
of the LAr Test Facility building. There is no substantial
shielding above the detector and, for the data used in this
analysis, there was no external cosmic tagger though one
has since been installed [22].

III. EXPERIMENT SIMULATION

Monte Carlo simulation is essential to provide accurate
modeling of eﬃciency, resolution, backgrounds, and sys-
tematic uncertainties. The MicroBooNE collaboration
has developed a full suite of simulations for beam, de-
tector, and material surrounding the detector. The neu-
trino beam properties are simulated by a GEANT4-based
algorithm [23] developed by MiniBooNE [24], which is
valid for all Fermilab experiments on the BNB beam
line. Neutrino interactions in the ﬁducial volume and
all surrounding material are simulated by GENIE [25]
v2.12.4 (called “GENIE v2” in this article). Propagation
of particles through the detector volume are handled by
GEANT4 [26]. The software framework, LArSoft [27],
is used to simulate the detector response including light
production and propagation, charge production and drift,
and wire response, as well as the electronics response and
digitization. All these software packages are in common
use for LArTPC neutrino experiments.

A. Event Generation

The GENIE generator simulates the interaction of all
neutrino ﬂavors at a wide variety of energies with all sta-
ble nuclei. GENIE is in common use among many neu-
trino experiments and has been well validated. At the
neutrino energies applicable to this experiment (Eν <
2 GeV), the dominant interactions are through quasielas-
tic (QE), multi-nucleon processes (called by the general
term 2p2h, or two particle-two hole processes here), and
pion production processes (with (RES) or without (NON-
RES) nucleon resonances). Coherent pion production is
included in the generator codes but doesn’t contribute to

FIG. 1. A schematic drawing of the MicroBooNE LArTPC
as installed inside cryostat.

coated in tetraphenyl butadiene (TPB). The 128 nm scin-
tillation light produced by argon excited by charged par-
ticles is shifted to visible wavelengths by this TPB coat-
ing, allowing detection by the PMTs. The PMTs have a
time resolution of a few nanoseconds which is several or-
ders of magnitude smaller than the TPC drift time. The
timing information from the PMTs is used initially to
provide a trigger for data collection, and later the PMT
signals are associated with TPC activity to further reject
cosmic-ray background.

Data collection begins with a hardware trigger, which
comes either from the Fermilab accelerator complex or
from a function generator in the detector’s electronics
racks (known as the “external trigger” and used for cos-
mic background estimation). Accelerator signals veto the
external triggers so there is a one-to-one match between
accelerator spills and MicroBooNE beam triggers during
data taking. Once a hardware trigger is received, the
data acquisition system reads in the PMT data and de-
termines if there is light consistent with the presence of
a neutrino interaction during the 1.6 µs neutrino beam
spill, or an equivalent time window for external triggers.
Data is only saved if suﬃcient light is observed within
this window. This PMT trigger algorithm is estimated
to be over 99.9% eﬃcient for the signal deﬁnition used in
this analysis and reduces cosmic backgrounds by a factor
of 10. The PMT and TPC data are recorded for 1.6 ms
prior to the trigger and 3.2 ms after the trigger, though
the TPC data are later truncated to include 400 µs of
time before the neutrino arrival and another 400 µs after
the last possible time drifting electrons from beam inter-
actions can arrive at the anode in order to reduce the
data processing time.

The BNB operates at an average repetition rate of 5 Hz
with approximately 4 × 1012 protons in each 1.6 µs spill.

the simulated samples for this measurement. Interactions
can occur via charged-current (CC) and neutral-current
(NC) processes.

Quasielastic interactions are particularly sensitive to
the nuclear model used. The relativistic Fermi gas
model with a high momentum nucleon-nucleon correla-
tion tail [28] is used for all nuclei. A ﬁxed-value binding
energy (29.5 MeV for argon) is applied. Interaction with
a single nucleon produces a lepton and a single nucleon
which is then propagated through the residual nucleus.
The Llewellyn-Smith model [29] with M QE
A =1.04 GeV
is used for CC and NC interactions. 2p2h processes in-
volve interactions with two nucleons, producing two nu-
cleons at the initial interaction vertex which are both
then subject to ﬁnal state interactions (FSI). A compo-
nent of these processes is also known as meson exchange
currents (MEC). The version of GENIE used in simula-
tion uses an empirical 2p2h model [30] with parameters ﬁt
to MiniBooNE data [10]. Nucleon resonance production
is governed by the Rein-Sehgal model [31] which includes
a wide range of short-lived nucleon excited states. The
∆(1232) state is the most important nucleon resonance
for this experiment. Small contributions from coherent
pion production [32], non-resonant pion production, and
deep inelastic scattering (DIS) [33] processes are also rel-
evant.

All hadrons produced during event generation in GE-
NIE are subject to FSI. GENIE v2 uses a data-driven em-
pirical model that is tuned to hadron-nucleus data [34].

Overlaid cosmic rays in the same detector readout
as the neutrino interaction are simulated with COR-
SIKA [35], but cosmic backgrounds where there is no
neutrino interaction in the detector are measured using
data collected in between beam spills (“external” trig-
gers).

Particles produced by either GENIE or CORSIKA are

transported through the detector by GEANT4.

B. Detector Simulation

The simulation of the MicroBooNE detector uses the
LArSoft framework. This simulates the production of
ionization charge and scintillation photons, followed by
their transport through the detector. Where possible,
data-driven techniques are used to constrain the de-
tector response including position-dependent wire re-
sponses [36], non-responsive channels[37], and the eﬀect
of a non-uniform electric ﬁeld due to the build up of pos-
itive ions in the detector volume [20, 21]. The produc-
tion of signals on the wires uses a simple model whereby
charge is assumed to either induce currents or collect on
the nearest wire. Known deﬁciencies in this model are
considered as part of the uncertainty in detector model-
ing.

5

IV. EVENT RECONSTRUCTION

A. TPC Reconstruction

The ﬁrst

step in event

reconstruction is noise-
ﬁltering [37] and deconvolution [36] of wire signals.
In
this step the intrinsic response of the wires and electron-
ics is deconvolved from the raw signals and wire wave-
forms to become a series of Gaussian peaks. A threshold
is applied to remove residual noise and the peaks are
ﬁt with Gaussian curves to form “hits”. These hits lie
in a 2-dimensional plane corresponding to wire location
and arrival time, with the position along the wire un-
known. Based on the known drift velocity and assuming
hits originate from a neutrino interaction (which occurs
in a known very narrow time window immediately after
the event trigger), the position in the x-direction (cor-
responding to the drift direction) can be calculated. At
this point, hits are allowed to have unphysical x-positions
(i.e. outside of the detector boundaries) which will be
used later to tag cosmic activity.

The Pandora software package [38] is used for all fur-
ther steps of the TPC reconstruction. Hits are grouped
into clusters, separately on each plane, based on prox-
imity in time and space. These clusters can be matched
across planes using time information and knowledge of
wire crossing points.

Once TPC clusters have been matched across planes,
it is possible to ﬁt particle trajectories through them,
giving each 2D hit a 3D position in the detector. Pan-
dora contains distinct algorithms for ﬁtting clusters that
it deems track-like and shower-like. For this analysis we
do not rely on these algorithms, but consider all clusters
to be track-like and rely on particle identiﬁcation meth-
ods to remove showering particles such as electrons and
photons.

Reconstructed tracks are not perfectly straight, but fol-
low slightly curved paths due to multiple Coulomb scat-
terings (MCS). The fact that particles undergo multiple
scattering and that this eﬀect is largest at low momentum
is used in two ways in this analysis. By comparing the
average angular deﬂection observed as a function of po-
sition along the track to a prediction for a given particle
momentum and direction, a likelihood can be assigned for
that hypothesis. By selecting the momentum value with
the maximumum likelihood, we achieve a momentum res-
olution from MCS as low as a few percent for contained
muons and up to 15 percent for exiting muons (depen-
dent on the initial momentum and contained length) [39].
Additionally, by comparing the likelihood for both direc-
tions along the track, it is possible to diﬀerentiate be-
tween tracks that enter from outside and stop in the de-
tector from those produced in the detector and then exit.
For contained tracks, particle identiﬁcation is applied
and the momentum is estimated from the total length of
the track path (in general longer than the start-end dis-
tance) based on the continuous slowing down approxima-
tion (CSDA). Using range, the proton momentum resolu-

tion is around 60 MeV/c across all measurement bins in
this analysis. For contained muons, the momentum reso-
lution from range information alone is around 10% below
0.3 GeV/c, dropping to below 5% above 1 GeV/c. For
both protons and muons, the momentum reconstructed
from range is more likely to be underestimated than over-
estimated, as tracking algorithms sometimes stop before
the end of a track but rarely continue past the end.
For exiting muons where the momentum is reconstructed
based on MCS, the resolution is more symmetric.

B. Light Reconstruction

The waveforms from each PMT are ﬁrst formed into
optical hits using a simple threshold algorithm. Hits from
many PMTs are combined to form “ﬂashes” by integrat-
ing over a ﬁxed time window of 8 µs. The integration
window is intended to be long enough to capture the both
the fast and slow components of argon scintillation light.
Each ﬂash is primarily characterised by the number of
photoelectrons observed by each PMT and a start time.
As the PMTs form a 2D plane, PMTs each have a z-
position and a y-position and ﬂashes have a mean value
and width in each of those dimensions calcualted from
the PE-weighted mean and RMS position of the PMTs
that register a response.

Because the ﬂash time integral is longer than the beam
spill, only one ﬂash can be observed within the time win-
dow associated with the neutrino beam and this is re-
ferred to as the “beam ﬂash”.

C. Charge-light Matching

Due to the long drift length, the low drift velocity in
liquid argon, and the location of the detector on the
Earth’s surface, many cosmic-induced muons are ob-
served within any readout of the TPC. When a neu-
trino interaction occurs in the detector, the event ac-
tivity is seen in conjunction with cosmic muons in the
TPC data. By using the fast timing information pro-
vided by the PMTs, the time of any activity can be re-
constructed much more precisely to eliminate these cos-
mic backgrounds. In order to do this, TPC activity must
be matched to the PMT signals. This matching is used
in multiple places in this analysis.

Given a collection of TPC tracks which are believed
to have originated from the same initial interaction (and
thus were produced at the same time), a prediction can
be made for how much light would be observed by each
PMT. This hypothesis for the number of photoelectrons
seen by PMT i is denoted Hi. Although neutrinos all
interact at approximately the trigger time, cosmic back-
grounds can occur at any time. It is therefore not safe to
assume that the x-position of the tracks is correct. As the
x-position impacts the predicted ﬂash, such prediction is
calculated for several x positions: Hi = Hi(x).

6

FIG. 2. The observed ﬂash photoelectrons (PE) distribution
over the 32 PMTs in one data event and two hypothesis dis-
tributions from candidate TPC clusters. The ﬁrst hypothesis
(shown in green) is selected as the best match to the observed
ﬂash. The PMT z-position generally increases with increasing
PMT number.

This prediction can be used to produce a “match-
ing likelihood” between an observed and predicted ﬂash
given by:

−LL(x) = −

32
(cid:88)

i=1

ln (P (Oi|Hi(x))) ,

(1)

where Oi is the PE measurement for PMT i, and P is a
Poisson pdf with parameter Hi(x) evaluated at Oi.

After the minimization, a minimum point xmin gives
the position of the TPC object along x and the collection
with the smaller value of −LL(xmin) is identiﬁed as the
neutrino candidate.

Figure 2 shows the observed ﬂash and two hypotheses
from one event. In this case one hypothesis is clearly a
much better match than the other.

D. Cosmic Rejection

Pandora operates in two “passes”. The ﬁrst pass eﬃ-
ciently reconstructs cosmic-induced tracks, then tags the
hits in those clusters that are identiﬁed as highly likely
to be cosmic-induced, such that they can be ignored by
the second pass which attempts complete reconstruction
of a neutrino interaction. A number of algorithms are
used for this cosmic tagging.

Firstly, any cluster which contains hits reconstructed
outside of the TPC boundaries in the drift direction is
assumed to be cosmic-induced as it must have passed
through the detector at a diﬀerent time than the neutri-
nos. Additionally, clusters are tagged as cosmic-induced
if they come within 30 cm of both the top and bottom
faces of the TPC.

The algorithms in section IV C form the basis for
optical-based cosmic rejection. Clusters are removed if

0102030PMT Number100200300400500Number of photoelectronsObserved data flashHypothesis 1Hypothesis 2MicroBooNE7

the Bethe-Bloch formula. Particles that stop in the de-
tector leave a characteristic Bragg peak that allows the
In MicroBooNE,
identiﬁcation of the particle species.
neutrino interactions rarely produce kaons or particles
heavier than protons that have ranges above the mini-
mum length for tracking (approximately 6 mm). Addi-
tionally, the resolution at which the energy loss can be
measured is not suﬃcient to distinguish muons and pions
with their very similar masses. Because of this, particle
identiﬁcation in this analysis is reduced to determining
whether a track is a proton or not.

To calculate the energy loss as a function of track po-
sition, we take the hit charge and divide by the 3D dis-
tance between hits. This charge is calibrated to account
for varying wire response, electron attenuation from im-
purities in the drift region, and the impact of space
charge [40]. Using the modiﬁed Box model - with param-
eters ﬁt to MicroBooNE data [40] - recovers the energy
loss per unit length, dE/dx, at that position. Using the
Bethe-Bloch formula to predict the dE/dx for a proton
as a function of the residual range, or distance from the
stopping point, we construct a discriminator, PIDprot,
by comparing measurements over the last 30 cm of the
track to this prediction (or over the full track, if less than
30 cm in length). Low values of PIDprot are proton-like.
In Fig. 3, a scatter plot of dE/dx vs. residual range for
selected proton tracks is shown for Monte Carlo events.
For most hits from proton candidates, good agreement
with the expectation is seen for protons. Some disagree-
ment is visible at very low residual range. This is because
dE/dx estimation is unreliable for the last hit on a track
due to the uncertainty on the exact stopping point of
the particle — these hits are neglected when computing
PIDprot.

Values of PIDprot for data and Monte Carlo are shown
in Fig. 4. Tracks with PIDprot < 88 are accepted as
protons. The charge response has a wider distribution
in data than simulation, due to the impact of induced
charge on the collection wires which is not modeled (but
is accounted for in detector uncertainties which is dis-
cussed in Sec. VII). This leads to a wider distribution of
PIDprot in data at very low values. The impact of this
eﬀect is small near the cut value.

they are clearly inconsistent with the beam ﬂash. This
means the distance from the hypothesis mean z-position
to the measured z-position must be larger than the ﬂash
width, and at least one PMT must have a predicted num-
ber of PEs more than 3σ above the measured PE re-
sponse.

Then, a speciﬁc search is made for clusters which ap-
pear to pierce either the anode or cathode plane and ei-
ther the top or bottom face of the TPC. Clusters are
moved in x until one end touches either the anode or cath-
ode, and based on this x-position and the known drift ve-
locity we reconstruct the time that the particle must have
traversed the TPC. If there is a ﬂash observed within 7 µs
of this time that is not the beam ﬂash, the identiﬁed ﬂash
z-position is consistent with the track’s z-position, and
the geometry is consistent with a downwards-going par-
ticle, the cluster is tagged as cosmic-induced.

Tracks that enter through the top and stop in the de-
tector are tagged as cosmic-induced by tailored searches
for a decay (Michel) electron or a Bragg peak at the con-
tained end of the track.

Finally, for muon candidates that cross one detector
boundary, and could therefore be assumed to be either
entering or exiting, we perform a multiple-scattering ﬁt
for the muon momentum under both the assumption that
it originates in the detector and exits, and the assump-
tion that it originates outside the detector but stops in
the detector. If the likelihood for the incoming case is
signiﬁcantly better than the likelihood for the outgoing
case, the track is tagged as cosmic-induced.

E. Neutrino Reconstruction

The second reconstruction pass of Pandora is tailored
to reconstruct neutrino interaction topologies as precisely
as possible. This second pass begins again from cluster-
ing hits but with a reduced set of hits that have not been
tagged as belonging to cosmics in the ﬁrst pass. Clus-
ters are then matched across planes and tracks formed
from them. Tracks that have a start or end point in
close proximity to others are clustered together as neu-
trino interaction candidates with speciﬁc algorithms ﬁt-
ting the exact vertex position close to the point at which
the tracks meet.

Shower-like clusters that point back to the initial neu-
trino vertex and could be from a neutral pion decay are
grouped with the neutrino interaction, although then for
this analysis they are ﬁt as tracks.

F. Particle Identiﬁcation

Particles traversing liquid argon lose energy in char-
acteristic ways. Electrons and photons form electromag-
netic showers, while muons, charged pions, protons, and
kaons all tend to move in approximately straight lines,
losing energy primarily through ionization according to

ticles is primarily driven by choices made in the event
selection to reject backgrounds, rather than fundamental
limitations of the detector, as discussed in Sec. V A.

8

V. EVENT SELECTION

A. Summary of Event Selection

There are three primary classes of background that
this event selection strives to eliminate, while retain-
ing eﬃciency for the CC0πNp events of interest. The
largest two backgrounds are cosmic-induced — a com-
bination of events where there is a neutrino interaction
in the cryostat but cosmic-induced tracks are selected in-
stead (labeled as “Cosmics (Overlay)” in the ﬁgures) and
events where there are only cosmic-induced tracks and
no neutrino interaction in the cryostat (labeled as “Cos-
mics (Data)” in the ﬁgures). The ﬁnal background class
is neutrino-induced backgrounds (labeled as “ν-induced
Background” in the ﬁgures), which consist of neutral cur-
rent interactions, wrong-sign (antineutrino) interactions,
interactions in the active detector but outside of the ﬁdu-
cial volume, and muon neutrino interactions that either
do not produce a proton above threshold or that produce
additional particles such as pions.

We begin with an inclusive selection of νµ charged-
current neutrino interactions [19]. This selection searches
for interactions in a relatively restrictive ﬁducial volume
(to mitigate the eﬀects of unresponsive wires and space-
charge distortions close to boundaries). After the cos-
mic rejection and neutrino reconstruction algorithms de-
scribed in Sec. IV, there are in general still several neu-
trino candidates in any event, most of which are of cosmic
origin. To select the best neutrino candidate from these,
we again utilize the TPC-PMT matching. The match-
ing likelihood with the beam ﬂash is calculated for all
neutrino candidates and the candidate with the highest
matching likelihood is selected. The beam ﬂash is re-
quired to have a magnitude of at least 50 PE, and a veto
is placed on the presence of more than 20 PE of optical
activity integrated over the 2.0 µs before the beam spill -
a requirement that rejects michel electrons from cosmics
immediately before the beam.

The selected neutrino candidate is then veriﬁed for ad-
ditional consistency with the beam ﬂash by requiring that
the ﬂash-matching best likelihood doesn’t occur far away
from the x-position assumed for a neutrino interaction.
Additionally, the hypothesis ﬂash position in z must be
within 75 cm of the measured ﬂash position.

This selection then classiﬁes the muon candidate as the
longest track in the set of tracks associated with the neu-
trino interaction candidate and applies additional qual-
ity checks on this track candidate, such as requiring that
the charge deposition along the track is consistent with
a mimimally ionising particle and that the spatial distri-
bution of hits is consistent with a track-like, rather than
shower-like, particle. Finally, for contained muon can-

FIG. 3. Scatter plot of dE/dx vs. residual range in Monte
Carlo events for non-muon tracks after proton identiﬁcation
cuts. Curves for the mean expectation for protons, muons,
and minimum ionizing particles are shown overlaid.

FIG. 4. Values of PIDprot for data and Monte Carlo events.
The Monte Carlo events are subdivided according to particle
type and have been scaled to the data exposure of 1.6 × 1020
P.O.T.

G. Particle Thresholds

The Pandora reconstruction package is able to form
tracks from particles that produce hits on only a few
wires, meaning they can have ranges of less than 1 cm.
In order to ensure accurate particle identiﬁcation, we re-
quire at least 5 hits on the collection plane. This leads
to an absolute minimum track length of 1.2 cm.

For protons that do not travel parallel to the z-axis,
the length required to produce 5 hits increases. Based
on this, it is reasonable to expect that a 2 cm proton
track can be reconstructed and identiﬁed. This leads to
an expected momentum threshold of around 300 MeV/c.
The eﬃciency for proton identiﬁcation as a function of
momentum and the subsequent signal thresholds are dis-
cussed in Section V A.

For muons and pions, detection thresholds are signiﬁ-
cantly lower — around 30 MeV/c. For this analysis, the
ability to reconstruct and positively identify these par-

didates, the momentum reconstructed from range and
from a multiple scattering ﬁt are required to be within
0.2 GeV/c of one another.

For the further selection of CC0πN p events from this
inclusive pre-selection, we retain the same muon candi-
date (the longest track) and then consider all other tracks
to be proton candidates. All proton candidates must be
at least 10 cm from of the edge of the TPC in order to
identify them as protons and measure their momenta.

The longest proton-candidate track is required to have
at least 5 hits on the collection plane and a proton-like
value of PIDprot < 88. Figure 5 shows the distribution of
the number of collection plane hits for proton candidates
before these two requirements. It is then required to be
reconstructed with a range-based momentum above the
threshold of 300 MeV/c.

FIG. 5. The number of collection-plane hits on the leading
proton candidate, for contained proton candidates after the
pre-selection with no PID requirement. Tracks with no col-
lection plane information are not included. The distribution
is truncated at 30 for clarity and the Monte Carlo events have
been scaled to the data exposure of 1.6 × 1020 P.O.T.

Secondary proton candidates are then considered. The
PID method employed becomes less reliable with fewer
than 5 hits, so any additional proton candidate with fewer
than 5 hits on the collection plane cannot be positively
identiﬁed as a proton. Due to the tiny number of particles
that make such short tracks at the vertex, these tracks are
overwhelmingly produced by protons. For this reason,
secondary proton candidates with fewer than 5 collection
plane hits are assumed to be protons while those with
5 or more collection plane hits are required to have a
proton-like value of PIDprot.

The eﬃciency of this event selection as a function of
leading proton momentum is shown in Fig. 6, for a sig-
nal deﬁnition that has no explicit particle thresholds. As
expected from particle ID studies discussed in Sec. IV G,
the eﬃciency drops rapidly below 300 MeV/c. Based
on where the eﬃciency at low proton momentum re-
mains above 5%, we include a threshold of 300 MeV/c
on the leading proton in the signal deﬁnition and require
the proton candidate to have a reconstructed momentum

9

FIG. 6. The eﬃciency of this event selection for simulated
CC0πN p events with no threshold requirement, as a func-
tion of proton momentum. The eﬃciency drops signiﬁcantly
for protons below 300 MeV/c or above 1200 MeV/c, so we
exclude them from our signal deﬁnition.

above 300 MeV/c. A complete discussion of the eﬃciency
of this selection is included in Sec. VI.

Using the same 5% eﬃciency requirement, the muon
candidate is required to have a reconstructed momentum
greater than 100 MeV/c, and the leading proton candi-
date is required to have a reconstructed momentum less
than 1.2 GeV/c. These last requirements, along with the
leading proton momentum threshold, form part of the
deﬁnition of the signal for this analysis. They are re-
quired primarily to avoid a region of phase space where
the proton forms a longer track than the muon, lead-
ing to the proton being misidentiﬁed as the muon candi-
date, and then failing the muon PID requirements for the
longest track. Additionally, at high momentum protons
are contained less often and have a high probability of
re-interacting and not forming a Bragg peak.

B. Event Selection Performance

Within the phase space limits of this analysis, the event
selection has an average eﬃciency of 29% and a purity
of 71% (76% excluding cosmics measured in data). Ta-
ble I shows the number of ﬁnal selected data events and
the predicted backgrounds. The neutrino-induced back-
grounds make up 57% of background events and are ap-
proximately evenly split between events where the in-
teraction occurred outside of the ﬁducial volume bound-
aries and those where a pion was produced but either
not reconstructed or misidentiﬁed. A small number of
the selected events are neutral current or wrong-sign (an-
tineutrino) backgrounds. The dominant cause of out-
of-ﬁducial neutrino backgrounds is the space-charge ef-
fect that distorts reconstructed positions close to detector
boundaries. All neutrino-induced backgrounds are esti-
mated from simulation, as is the uncertainty associated
with subtracting them.

Collection Plane Hits51015202530Events0100200300400500600DataCosmics (Data)NppCC0Cosmics (Overlay)-induced BackgroundnMicroBooNE P.O.T20 10·1.6 True Leading Proton Momentum [GeV/c]00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.8Efficiency00.050.10.150.20.250.30.35MicroBooNE Simulation10

FIG. 7. Momentum distribution of the muon candidate. The
Monte Carlo events have been scaled to the data exposure of
1.6 × 1020 P.O.T.

FIG. 10. Cosine of the track polar angle (θ) with respect to
the beam for the leading proton candidate. The Monte Carlo
events have been scaled to the data exposure of 1.6 × 1020
P.O.T.

FIG. 8. Momentum distribution of the leading proton candi-
date. The Monte Carlo events have been scaled to the data
exposure of 1.6 × 1020 P.O.T.

FIG. 11. Track azimuthal angle φ with respect to the beam
(π/2 is upward going) for the muon candidate. The Monte
Carlo events have been scaled to the data exposure of 1.6 ×
1020 P.O.T.

FIG. 9. Cosine of the track polar angle (θ) with respect to
the beam for the muon candidate. The Monte Carlo events
have been scaled to the data exposure of 1.6 × 1020 P.O.T.

FIG. 12. Track azimuthal angle φ with respect to the beam
(π/2 is upward going) for the leading proton candidate. The
Monte Carlo events have been scaled to the data exposure of
1.6 × 1020 P.O.T.

sample
Data
Cosmics (Data)
Signal
Cosmics (Overlay)
ν-induced Background

number of events
4736
393.1
3773
416.0
750.8

TABLE I. The number of selected data events, scaled oﬀ-
beam data events, and scaled MC signal and background
events.

The muon momentum, pµ, is calculated from range
when the track is fully contained and by MCS ﬁtting
when it escapes. The proton momentum, pp, is always
calculated from range as the proton is always required to
be contained in the MicroBooNE detector. The cosine of
the muon (proton) polar angle θµ (θp) is determined with
respect to the neutrino beam direction, and the angle φ
is computed as the angle around the beam direction with
φ = 0 aligned with the positive x-axis and φ = π/2
aligned with the positive y-axis. Finally, we determine
the µ-p opening angle, θµp.

Figures 7-12 show the event distributions as a func-
tion of the reconstructed momentum, polar angle, and
azimuthal angle for the muon and leading proton can-
didates. Figure 13 shows the reconstructed 3D opening
angle between the two tracks. There are a few discrep-
ancies between the data and the Monte Carlo simulation
prediction (GENIE v2). The most striking of these dis-
crepancies shows up at the most forward muon angles in
Fig. 9. This region is dominated by low Q2 events which
is an area where older models are known to be deﬁcient.
A similar discrepancy at low Q2 was also observed in the
MicroBooNE CC inclusive sample. [19] Additionally, at
φ of 0,π, and −π for both the muon and proton can-
didates a small data deﬁcit is seen - this is due to the
eﬀects of induced charge on neighboring wires, which is
not simulated but is accounted for in our detector un-
certainties. In general, the MC here does a reasonable
job at describing the data and as such is adequate for
estimating the eﬃciencies and background rates for this
analysis. Diﬀerences between the data and a variety of
predictions are discussed in detail in Sec. VIII.

Residual cosmic backgrounds appear in a small region
of angular phase space with the muon and proton close
to back-to-back that corresponds to an approximately
upward-going muon and an approximately downward-
going proton. In these events, a cosmic muon entering
the detector from the top is reconstructed as two tracks.
This topology is rare, but the exposure to cosmic muons
is large, meaning that a number of these instances re-
main. The same regions show a drop in signal eﬃciency
because tracks at those angles do not cross many collec-
tion plane wires making PID challenging.

In the ﬁnal data sample, 72% of events contain only
one reconstructed proton, with 22% containing two re-
constructed protons, 5% containing three reconstructed
protons, and 0.1% being observed to produce four visible

11

FIG. 13. Distribution of angle between the muon candidate
and the leading proton candidate. The Monte Carlo events
have been scaled to the data exposure of 1.6 × 1020 P.O.T.

protons.

VI. CROSS-SECTION EXTRACTION

These cross-section measurements are presented in “re-
constructed” quantities. This avoids the ill-posed prob-
lem of trying to correct for detector smearing to present
a result in true kinematics (known as unfolding [41]).
Instead, theoretical predictions must be smeared to com-
pare to the data; this process called forward-folding and
has been used by T2K [42].

To simplify the procedure for others wishing to com-
pare predictions with our data, a single smearing ma-
trix is provided for each measurement. Resulting sys-
tematic uncertainties in the resolution and eﬃciency are
estimated and included with the ﬁnal data. This means
that the data are corrected for an eﬀective eﬃciency, as
a function of a reconstructed variable.

The smearing matrix is calculated as

Sij = N sel

ij /N sel
j

,

(2)

where N sel
is the number of selected events in recon-
ij
structed bin i, which come from true bin j, and N sel
is
the total number of selected events from true bin j. De-
ﬁned in this way, a binned histogram multiplied by this
smearing matrix leads to a smeared distribution with the
same normalization.

j

In order for the data to be compared to such a predic-
tion, they must be corrected for ineﬃciency. We deﬁne an
eﬀective eﬃciency, ˜(cid:15)i which can be applied as a function
of reconstructed variables:

˜(cid:15)i =

(cid:80)M

j=1 SijN sel
j
j=1 SijN gen

j

(cid:80)M

,

(3)

12

j

is deﬁned above, N gen

where N sel
is the number of gen-
erated signal events in true bin j, and M is the total
number of true bins used.

j

It is known that there are limitations to this method.
The primary limitation here is that uncertainties on the
resolution are not fully encapsulated, but the uncertainty
on the resolution in this particular measurement is neg-
ligible.

To determine the ﬁnal diﬀerential cross sections, both
signal and background event rates, as well as eﬃciencies,
are binned as a function of each variable; the single dif-
ferential cross section in bin i is then calculated as (using
pµ as an example):

(cid:19)

(cid:18) dσ
dpµ

=

i

Ni − Bi
˜(cid:15)i · Ntarget · Φνµ · (∆pµ)i

,

(4)

FIG. 14. Eﬃciency as a function of reconstructed pµ in simu-
lated CC0πN p events. Statistical error bars are too small to
be seen.

where Ni, Bi, and ˜(cid:15)i are the the number of candi-
date events (Sec. V A), the expected number of back-
ground events (Sec. V A), and the eﬃciency smeared by
resolution in reconstructed bin i, respectively. Ntarget
is the number of argon atoms in the ﬁducial volume
(2.61 × 1031 [19]), and Φνµ is the integrated ﬂux of muon
neutrinos passing through the detector ﬁducial volume
(1.17 × 1011cm−2 for this dataset [19]).
(∆pµ)i is the
bin width for bin i in the pµ distribution, which was op-
timised based on a consideration of available statistics
and detector resolution. The other variables (cos(θµ),
pp, cos(θp), and cos(θµp)) are handled in a similar way.
To determine if the cross section extraction technique
was dependent upon the use of GENIE v2, a sample of
simulated events was generated with an alternate GENIE
model. The alternate GENIE sample was then treated as
observed data, and cross sections extracted using the de-
scribed technique in the previous paragraphs. The study
showed that the cross section extraction is not dependent
upon the model used for making the measurement.

Systematic uncertainties (discussed in Sec. VII) on the
eﬃciency and resolution propagate to uncertainties on
the ﬁnal measurement through this procedure, allowing
a simple comparison with a smeared theory prediction.

The eﬀective eﬃciencies and smearing matrices are
crucial inputs to the cross section, and are produced from
Monte Carlo simulation. The eﬃciencies and smearing
matrices showed minimal model dependence in fake data
tests and in our systematic uncertainty evaluation.

As an example, the eﬃciency as a function of muon
momentum is shown in Fig. 14 and the equivalent smear-
ing matrix is shown in Fig. 15. Plots for the other pri-
mary variables and the smearing matrices are found in
the Appendix. Eﬃciency values peak at roughly 35% for
all variables; this limit is primarily caused by the need
to suppress cosmic-ray background and identify stopping
protons. Good eﬃciency is seen for proton with a mo-
mentum above 300 MeV/c (see Fig. 38). The appendix
contains ﬁgures that demonstrate the relatively high ef-
ﬁciency of wide angle tracks, giving the analysis 4π cov-
erage of outgoing particles from interactions.

FIG. 15. Migration matrix between true and reconstructed
bins for reconstructed muon momentum (pµ) in simulated
CC0πN p events.

VII. SYSTEMATIC UNCERTAINTIES

Four categories of systematic uncertainties were con-
sidered in the analysis of the data: detector modeling,
neutrino interaction modeling, neutrino beam ﬂux pre-
dictions, and modeling of secondary hadronic interaction
following the primary neutrino interaction.

A. Methodology

To determine the impact of an uncertainty, two dif-
ferent formalisms were used. Most uncertainties were
evaluated by applying an event-based reweighting fac-

 [GeV/c]recomp00.20.40.60.811.2Efficiency00.10.20.30.40.5MicroBooNE Simulationtor to the primary simulated neutrino interaction events,
and determining the impact on the measured result. For
other uncertainties, the generation of re-simulated sam-
ples was necessary. For the neutrino interaction model-
ing, beam ﬂux predictions, and secondary hadronic in-
teraction modeling, the systematic uncertainty was de-
termined by applying reweighting factors to simulated
events. The use of these weights allows for the com-
plete sampling of the systematic phase space and con-
struction of correlated uncertainties between diﬀerential
cross-section bins. In the case of the GENIE uncertainty
parameters, some parameters have nonlinear dependen-
cies and therefore must be varied simultaneously. De-
tector modeling uncertainties were estimated by a series
of re-simulated samples based on parameters discussed
later. In all cases, covariance matrices are produced cap-
turing the bin-to-bin correlations between uncertainties
(a non-negligible eﬀect in these data), which must be
used for detailed comparisons with the data.

Uncertainties determined with reweighting factors
were evaluated in either a “multisim” or a “unisim” ap-
proach. The multisim approach varies all parameters
from an uncertainty category together and applies the
product of all reweighting factors to simulated events as
a single weight. On the other hand, the unisim or “1σ”
approach varies each parameter by a shift up or down
of one standard deviation individually. The ﬁnal analy-
sis uses the multisim approach for neutrino interactions,
beam ﬂux uncertainties, and secondary hadronic interac-
tions using 1000 sampled universes for each set of uncer-
tainties.

After determining the systematic uncertainty from
each of the four categories, the four uncertainties are then
added in quadrature as they are assumed to be fully un-
correlated to each other. The covariance matrices are
available in the supplemental material and data release.
The uncertainties as a function of our measured vari-
ables are shown in Figs. 16 (pµ), 17 (cos(θµ)), 18 (pp),
19 (cos(θp)), and 20 (θµp). Each ﬁgure shows the four
main sources of systematic uncertainty, as well as the
statistical uncertainty and total uncertainty for each bin.

B. Detector Modeling Uncertainties

A variety of eﬀects related to the ability to analyze
events in LAr were examined, using actual data whenever
possible. To account for uncertainties in the modeling
of ionization yield and drifting of electrons, uncertain-
ties were determined for the following parameters: space
charge eﬀect, drift-electron diﬀusion both transverse and
longitudinal, drift-electron lifetime, and drift-electron re-
combination. We vary the magnitude of the space charge
eﬀect based upon early measurements of the spatial dis-
tortions at the edge of the TPC, extrapolated to the
bulk ﬁeld. The nominal drift-electron transverse and lon-
gitudinal diﬀusion parameters are set to be the central
value of measurements in liquid argon and the variations

13

are based upon the spread of those measurements [43].
The drift-electron lifetime was changed from the nom-
inal value (100 ms) to the lowest measured lifetime of
any run period of the detector operations (10 ms) and
scaled to the 10% of the data represented by that low life-
time. Drift-electron recombination uncertainty was esti-
mated by comparing the nominal simulation which mod-
els electron-ion recombination using the modiﬁed box
model with parameters ﬁt to ArgoNeuT data [44] to the
variation which substitutes the Birks model [45] with pa-
rameters tuned to ICARUS data [46].

The shapes of signals on the detector anode wires has
uncertainties from dynamically induced charge, intrinsic
anode wire and electronics response, and the existence
of unresponsive channels. Dynamically induced charge
is the creation of electronic signals on anode wires other
than the wire closest to the path of drifting electrons, in-
cluding collection plane wires. In the default simulation
this eﬀect is not included, and the variation adds simu-
lation of induced signals on the 10 closest wires. Anode
wire response was measured in data [36], and the nomi-
nal width is increased based upon the 1σ uncertainty of
that measurement. The map of unresponsive channels
was used to completely remove any response from those
channels which don’t respond in data.

To account for uncertainties in the response of the de-
tector to light, uncertainties were determined for light
yield, photo-electron noise in PMTs, and light production
outside of the TPC. The light yield was varied to cover
the diﬀerences in scintillation light production in liquid
argon based upon modeling diﬀerent particles types in-
stead of exclusively electrons. The photo-electron noise
in the PMTs was varied by ±1σ of the measured yield
from data. The production of light outside of the TPC
may be incorrectly modeled so a sample with light yield
outside the TPC increased by 50% was generated.

The uncertainties from detector modeling are esti-
mated using the unisim method. For each of the listed
detector modeling parameters, the same simulated GE-
NIE v2 neutrino sample of events is reprocessed through
GEANT4 with the modiﬁed detector parameter. The
uncertainty for that parameter is determined by taking
the diﬀerence in the measured cross section using the
nominal measurement or the modiﬁed sample and treat-
ing this diﬀerence as a 1σ Gaussian uncertainty for the
cross section. For parameters that have both an upward
and a downward variation, we conservatively take the
variation that leads to the largest uncertainty and treat
this as a 1σ uncertainty on the cross-section measure-
ment. The various detector modeling uncertainties are
then added in quadrature to determine the total detec-
tor uncertainty. The largest single uncertainty - leading
to an uncertainty of 18% on the integrated cross sec-
tion and up to 40% at cos θreco
µ = 0 - comes from the
modeling of dynamically induced charge on the induc-
tion wires of the anode. These induced signals can inter-
fere with the “primary” signal, leading to cancellation of
induction plane signals and smearing of collection plane

signals, reducing the tracking eﬃciency in some regions
of angular phase space and degrading the charge reso-
lution. This eﬀect is more successfully modeled in later
detector response simulations and will be less signiﬁcant
in future measurements. The detector uncertainty is on
average approximately 30% but can be as high as 50-60%
in some speciﬁc regions of phase space.

C. Neutrino Interaction Uncertainties

GENIE provides a reweighting framework for the eval-
uation of the uncertainties from parameters contained
in the GENIE models. The GENIE authors provide es-
timated uncertainties for various parameters which are
mostly determined from ﬁts to external data. For a
given parameter P , GENIE provides a modiﬁed event
weight based upon uncertainty σP that is applied to
the sample events and creates a systematically varied
distribution. The full list of parameters varied within
the GENIE framework can be found in [47]. Beyond
the uncertainties on parameters provided in the GENIE
model, two additional uncertainties in the neutrino inter-
action modeling were considered for this measurement.
We reweight events as a function of true energy trans-
fer and true momentum transfer, according to the ratio
of our nominal model (GENIE v2, see Sec. III A) and
the Valencia model [48, 49]. This is done separately for
CCQE and 2p2h events, and each uncertainty is added in
quadrature to the multisim GENIE uncertainties to ob-
tain the total uncertainty from neutrino interaction mod-
eling. This sum is labeled as “Interaction” in Fig. 16-20.
The impact of these uncertainties on the detection ef-
ﬁciency or resolution is very small; the largest impact
from these uncertainties is due to changes in background
components which we do not constrain. As the dominant
backgrounds are out-of-ﬁducial-volume and overlaid cos-
mics, which both scale linearly with the total event rate,
the dominant uncertainties are those that change the to-
tal rate of predicted neutrino interactions in the Micro-
BooNE detector. Parameters that change the shapes of
signal or background kinematics, including ﬁnal state in-
teractions, do not lead to substantial uncertainty on the
ﬁnal measurement. The neutrino interaction uncertainty
is approximately 6% for most bins of diﬀerential cross
section with the largest contribution to uncertainty in
the lowest bin of muon momentum at 25%.

D. Beam Flux Uncertainties

14

FIG. 16. Uncertainties for muon candidate momentum (pµ).

FIG. 17. Uncertainties for cosine of the muon polar angle
(cos θµ).

tainty from focusing horn current measurements is es-
timated using a unisim approach where the beamline is
re-simulated with the horn current set at a value 1σ away
from the nominal. The multisim hadron production rate
uncertainty and the unisim horn current uncertainty are
then added in quadrature to give a total beam ﬂux un-
certainty. The overall uncertainty on the neutrino ﬂux
is dominated by an approximately 11% uncertainty on
the absolute normalization, with small uncertainties on
the ﬂux shape [24]. For this reason, the largest impact
these uncertainties have on the ﬁnal cross section mea-
surement is a fully correlated normalization uncertainty
of 11%. Second order eﬀects from the background sub-
traction increase this to 15% in low-purity bins and one
bin as high as 25%.

There are two major sources of systematic uncertainty
in predicting the neutrino beam ﬂux: hadron produc-
tion rates and horn focusing eﬀects. The hadron pro-
duction rate uncertainties cover the rate of particles pro-
duced from protons striking the horn target with vari-
ations in π+, π−, K +, K −, and K 0. These variations
are addressed using the multisim approach. The uncer-

E. Secondary Hadronic Interaction Modeling

Protons and charged pions can scatter, both elastically
and inelastically, in the detector through hadronic inter-
actions with nuclei. These interactions can lead to the
production of additional particles or large angle changes

 [GeV/c]recomp00.511.522.5Fractional Uncertainty00.20.40.60.81MicroBooNE SimulationInteractionFluxDetectorStatisticalTotalrecomqcos1-0.5-00.51Fractional Uncertainty00.20.40.60.8InteractionFluxDetectorStatisticalTotalMicroBooNE Simulation15

FIG. 18. Uncertainties for leading proton candidate momen-
tum (pp).

FIG. 20. Uncertainties for the opening angle between muon
candidate and leading proton candidate (cos θµp).

impact of proton reinteraction uncertainties is largest at
high proton momenta. The uncertainty from proton rein-
teractions is 8% at the highest proton energies. Events
with high proton momemtum tend to have high energy
transfer from the lepton, meaning this uncertainty at
high proton momentum impacts the measurement of low
muon momenta and backwards muon angles. When this
eﬀect is averaged over other variables, the estimated un-
certainty from secondary hadronic interaction modeling
is 2%.

In Figs.

16 - 20 these uncertainties are added in

quadrature to the detector uncertainty.

FIG. 19. Uncertainties for cosine of the polar angle of the
leading proton candidate (cos θp).

VIII. RESULTS

in particle trajectories that may lead to reconstruction
algorithms failing to form a single, well-reconstructed
track. Interactions such as these can impact the signal
eﬃciency or the background rejection rate, and uncer-
tainties on the rates of these hadronic interactions are
propagated to uncertainties on the cross-section mea-
surement. Studies were performed separately for elastic
and inelastic interactions, and elastic-scatter uncertain-
ties were found to have negligible impact.

GEANT4 is used to propagate all hadrons through
the detector medium based on a semi-classical cascade
model [26]. Events with inelastic hadronic interactions
are reweighted independently for interactions containing
protons, positive pions, and negative pions. For each
particle type, the total inelastic cross section is varied
around its mean by 30%, independent of the particle’s
energy. The pion interaction rate has a negligible im-
pact on the analysis - less than 1%, while the proton
interaction probability does have an impact on the event
selection eﬃciency. The probability that a proton under-
goes an inelastic interaction somewhere along its length
increases with trajectory length, so it follows that the

The signal deﬁnition for this measurement includes
contributions from three processes: CCQE, 2p2h, and
pion production followed by pion absorption in the same
nucleus. All of these processes can be further modiﬁed
by Fermi motion and intranuclear rescattering. Although
there is no attempt to isolate any of them, the Monte
Carlo events that survive the analysis criteria can pro-
vide insight into how these processes are distributed in
the interaction variables provided. The relative size and
shape of these processes is shown in Figs. 21-25 for GE-
NIE v2, see Sec. III A for details), the model used for
backgrounds and systematic uncertainty determination.
True CCQE is predicted to be the largest component,
contributing 50% of the total and it is the largest frac-
tion in most bins. There are no contributions from other
sources such as coherent pion production or production
of other mesons.

The subdivision of simulated events as a function of
muon momentum is shown in Fig. 21. GENIE predicts
all underlying processes to have a similar shape in this
variable. At low proton momentum in Fig. 22, the CCQE
contribution is large and growing as pp decreases. Sim-
ulations show that events at both low pp and θµp are
predominantly due to FSI. For both muon and proton

 [GeV/c]recoprotonp00.20.40.60.811.2Fractional Uncertainty00.20.40.60.81InteractionFluxDetectorStatisticalTotalMicroBooNE Simulationrecoprotonqcos1-0.5-00.51Fractional Uncertainty00.20.40.6InteractionFluxDetectorStatisticalTotalMicroBooNE Simulation [rad]reco,pmq0123Fractional Uncertainty00.20.40.6InteractionFluxDetectorStatisticalTotalMicroBooNE Simulationcos(θ) spectra, very forward angle bins have a large com-
ponent of 2p2h events. Although CCQE scattering is the
dominant reaction mechanism at opening angles of about
90◦ as expected from the 2-body kinematics, the small-
and large-angle regions are an interesting combination of
interactions which will have to be understood through
further theoretical and experimental studies.

16

FIG. 21. Breakdown of interaction components of cross sec-
tion as a function of pµ according to GENIE v2.
Interac-
tion types of CCQE, 2p2h, and pion production are shown;
the pion production events are further divided into resonant
(RES) and nonresonant (NONRES) channels. As a result of
the signal deﬁnition, there are no coherent pion production
events in the ﬁnal simulation sample. The number of events
per bin is shown with arbitrary normalization.

FIG. 23. Breakdown of interaction components of cross sec-
tion as a function of cos θµ according to GENIE v2. The
number of events per bin is shown with arbitrary normaliza-
tion.

FIG. 24. Breakdown of interaction components of cross sec-
tion as a function of cos θp according to GENIE v2. The
number of events per bin is shown with arbitrary normaliza-
tion.

FIG. 22. Breakdown of interaction components of cross sec-
tion as a function of pp according to GENIE v2. The number
of events per bin is shown with arbitrary normalization.

A. Model Comparisons

FIG. 25. Breakdown of interaction components of cross sec-
tion as a function of θµ,p according to GENIE v2. The number
of events per bin is shown with arbitrary normalization.

Models of neutrino interactions are improving rapidly
and experiments must make a choice of models to use for
eﬃciency and background estimation at the time of an
analysis. For this MicroBooNE measurement, GENIE

v2 is used. However, data are compared with GENIE
v3.0.6 with tune G18 10a 02 11a (labelled as “GENIE

truemp0.511.522.5Events/GeV/c [arb. norm.]QE2p2hNONRESRESMicroBooNE Simulation [GeV/c]truepp0.40.60.811.21.4Events/GeV/c [arb. norm.]QE2p2hNONRESRESMicroBooNE Simulation)truemqcos(1-0.5-00.51Events [arb. morm.]QE2p2hNONRESRESMicroBooNE Simulation)truepqcos(1-0.5-00.51Events [arb. norm.]QE2p2hNONRESRESMicroBooNE Simulation [rad]truepmq0123Events/rad [arb. norm.]QE2p2hNONRESRESMicroBooNE Simulationv3”), NuWro 19.02.1 [50], NEUT 5.4.0.1 [51], and GiBUU
2019 [52]. As described in Sec. VI, each calculation was
folded with our smearing matrix before comparing with
data.

GENIE, NuWro, and NEUT are developed by sepa-
rate groups who often implement the same models in
In this case, each code uses the local
diﬀerent ways.
Fermi gas (LFG) momentum distribution and a binding
energy correction which can be constant (GENIE and
NEUT) or derived from a potential (NuWro) for sampling
the struck nucleon properties. Each code uses a similar
CCQE model, but apply diﬀerent empirical RPA correc-
tions. GENIE also applies a Coulomb correction [48] on
the outgoing muon. All modern codes contain a multinu-
cleon mechanism. GENIE v3, NuWro, and NEUT all use
the Valencia 2p2h model [49]. The new models are built
to agree with MiniBooNE data [10], which uses the same
beamline as MicroBooNE but a hydrocarbon target.

Both NEUT and GENIE use the Kuzmin-Lubushkin-
Naumov [53] and Berger-Sehgal[54] model for resonance
and the Berger-Sehgal model for coherent [55] scattering.
Implementation diﬀers in the cutoﬀ in total hadronic en-
ergy in the nucleon rest frame W between resonance and
DIS models, e.g. ﬁxed cutoﬀ value of 1.9 GeV (GENIE)
and 2.0 GeV (NEUT). NuWro is a little diﬀerent, using
the Adler-Rarita-Schwinger model [56] for the ∆(1232)
resonance and a smooth transition to DIS at 1.6 GeV. All
use form factors ﬁt to data. In addition, each code uses
a similar extrapolation of DIS processes to πN thresh-
old [33, 57] to model non-resonant processes. Hadrons
produced at the neutrino interaction vertex undergo FSI
which are governed by models based on the impulse ap-
proximation with nuclear medium corrections. Here, FSI
includes both pion and nucleon interactions with most
generators using separate models to simulate the two
types of interaction. NEUT and NuWro use the Salcedo-
Oset model [58] for pions which includes nuclear medium
eﬀects. GENIE uses a more empirical model [30] for pi-
ons which has no nuclear medium corrections. NuWro
and GENIE use nuclear medium corrections for nucleon
FSI [59] while the NEUT code is strictly impulse approx-
imation for nucleon FSI.

GiBUU [52] was developed from a ﬁrst principles ap-
proach as opposed to the greater emphasis on empiri-
cal models with other generators. Although the interac-
tions covered are very similar to the generators described
above, the details are diﬀerent as all of the components
were developed as a coherent package. Instead of a semi-
classical approximation for propagating hadrons as is
used in the models described above, a transport equation
is solved [52]. Nucleon momenta come from an LFG dis-
tribution, then hadrons propagate through the residual
nucleus in a nuclear potential that is consistent between
initial and ﬁnal state. The CCQE interaction is han-
dled with a spectral function that has separate momen-
tum and energy dependence. All resonances propagate
as particles and interact according to best available mod-
els. Version 2019 is used here; a recent publication [60]

shows comparisons of this version with the T2K CC0π
data [15].

17

B. Cross-Section Results

The ﬁrst set of comparisons between the extracted
CC0πNp cross section to both GENIE v2 and GENIE
v3 is shown in Figs. 26-30. The purpose is to show the
evolution of generator models from the time the anal-
ysis was started to the time it was ﬁnished. For the
muon momentum and polar angle, the overall magnitude
in GENIE v3 is about 20% smaller than v2 and in bet-
ter agreement with these data even though no tuning to
these data was performed. A signiﬁcant change is also
seen in the shape of these inclusive distributions, partic-
ularly for forward muon angles where eﬀects such as 2p2h
and nucleon-nucleon correlations (e.g. the RPA correc-
tion) are important, and at low proton momentum where
both FSI eﬀects and the contribution of 2p2h are domi-
nant. These are eﬀects that are widely considered to be
at the forefront of interest for modelers and it is clear
that the updated models in GENIE provide a better de-
scription of these data.

Calculations of χ2 using the covariance matrices de-
rived for this measurement allow a more quantitative as-
sessment. There is an improvement of at least 25% and
over 50% in some cases for the calculated χ2 when chang-
ing from GENIE v2 to GENIE v3. The exception is pp
where GENIE v3 is better at low momentum, but the
overall χ2 is lower for GENIE v2.

FIG. 26. Measured cross section as a function of pµ(GeV)
compared with GENIE v2 and v3 (see Sec. VIII A for details)
from a data exposure of 1.6 × 1020 P.O.T. Error bars include
all contributions from statistical and systematic sources in the
ﬁnal analysis.

 (GeV/c)recomp00.511.522.5/GeV/nucleus)2 cm-37 (10recom/dpsd00.511.522.53Data/dof=40.8/62cGENIE v2, /dof=19.0/62cGENIE v3, MicroBooNE18

FIG. 27. Measured cross section as a function of pp compared
with GENIE v2 and v3 (see Sec. VIII A for details).

FIG. 29. Measured cross section as a function of cos θp com-
pared with GENIE v2 and v3 (see Sec. VIII A for details).

FIG. 28. Measured cross section as a function of cos θµ com-
pared with GENIE v2 and v3 (see Sec. VIII A for details).

FIG. 30. Measured cross section as a function of θµ,p com-
pared with GENIE v2 and v3 (see Sec. VIII A for details).

Figures 31-35 contain comparisons of the data with
GENIE v3, NuWro, NEUT, and GiBUU. These codes
had similar evolution in models as was seen in GENIE
for Figs. 26-30, but here only the most recent results are
shown. Although agreement between calculations varies
widely, the strongest sensitivity appears to be at the most
forward muon and proton angles and lowest proton mo-
menta.

The muon momentum distribution (Fig. 31) has the
largest χ2 values in comparison with the calculations,
ranging from about 3-7 units of χ2 per degree of freedom
(dof). These large χ2 values are driven by the highest
momentum bin, which has a relatively small uncertainty

and is in tension with all predictions.

The leading proton momentum distribution (Fig. 32)
in an inclusive spectrum is seldom seen in the literature
for neutrino experiments. Data at low leading proton
momentum is most sensitive to FSI and nuclear eﬀects
and where new sensitivity is shown in this work. At the
lowest momenta in this measurement (pp < 500 MeV/c),
the models show considerable variation, with NEUT fur-
thest from the data, followed by GiBUU, GENIE v3, and
ﬁnally NuWro predicting the lowest bin almost perfectly.
For χ2/dof , all calculations have values of around 1 or
lower.

At forward angles, the muon polar angle cross sections

 (GeV/c)recopp00.20.40.60.811.2/GeV/nucleus)2 cm-37 (10recop/dpsd012345Data/dof=5.1/102cGENIE v2, /dof=7.1/102cGENIE v3, MicroBooNErecomqcos1-0.5-00.51/nucleus)2 cm-37 (10recomq/dcossd012345Data/dof=36.9/122cGENIE v2, /dof=12.8/122cGENIE v3, MicroBooNErecopqcos1-0.5-00.51/nucleus)2 cm-37 (10recopq/dcossd00.511.522.533.5Data/dof=9.0/92cGENIE v2, /dof=7.0/92cGENIE v3, MicroBooNE [rad]recopmq00.511.522.53/nucleus)2 cm-37 (10recopmq/dsd00.511.52Data/dof=12.4/62cGENIE v2, /dof=5.9/62cGENIE v3, MicroBooNE19

FIG. 31. Measured cross section as a function of pµ compared
with GENIE v3, NuWro, NEUT, and GiBUU (see Sec. VIII A
for details) from a data exposure of 1.6 × 1020 P.O.T. Error
bars include all contributions from statistical and systematic
sources in the ﬁnal analysis.

FIG. 33. Measured cross section as a function of cos θµ com-
pared with various models. See Fig. 31 and Sec. VIII A for
more details.

FIG. 32. Measured cross section as a function of pp of the
leading proton candidate compared with various models. See
Fig. 31 and Sec. VIII A for more details.

(Fig. 33) have shown sensitivity in the past [14, 15] be-
cause this is where nuclear eﬀects such as nucleon-nucleon
correlations are strongest. Model results vary by about
30% at forward angles. It is interesting that none of the
calculations have the turnover at the most forward muon
angle bin that is seen in the data. At the beam energies
of this measurement, both muons and protons are dom-
inantly produced at forward angles due to the Lorentz
boost. The data at negative values of cos(θreco
proton) are

FIG. 34. Measured cross section as a function of cos θp of the
leading proton candidate compared with various models. See
Fig. 31 and Sec. VIII A for more details.

particularly interesting as Monte Carlo simulations show
that the protons at backward angles are almost totally
due to FSI. The proton polar angle cross section and
comparison with model calculations is shown in Fig. 34.
According to Monte Carlo simulation, both muons and
protons at forward angles are dominated by the CCQE
interaction channel. GiBUU has the highest χ2 value for
the muon angle and the lowest χ2 for proton angle.

The opening angle between the muon and the leading
proton (Fig. 35) can show diﬀerent features for CCQE
and other mechanisms because it is more strongly peaked
at about 90◦ for CCQE and ﬂatter for the other mecha-

 (GeV/c)recomp00.511.522.5/(GeV/c)/nucleus)2 cm-37 (10recom/dpsd00.511.522.53Data/dof=19.0/62cGENIE v3, /dof=29.5/62cNuWro, /dof=42.1/62cNEUT, /dof=39.5/62cGiBUU, MicroBooNE (GeV/c)recopp00.20.40.60.811.21.4/(GeV/c)/nucleus)2 cm-37 (10recop/dpsd012345Data/dof=7.1/102cGENIE v3, /dof=1.7/102cNuWro, /dof=7.0/102cNEUT, /dof=12.3/102cGiBUU, MicroBooNErecomqcos1-0.5-00.51/nucleus)2 cm-37 (10recomq/dcossd012345Data/dof=12.8/122cGENIE v3, /dof=19.5/122cNuWro, /dof=25.6/122cNEUT, /dof=28.5/122cGiBUU, MicroBooNErecopqcos1-0.5-00.51/nucleus)2 cm-37 (10recopq/dcossd00.511.522.533.5Data/dof=7.0/92cGENIE v3, /dof=7.6/92cNuWro, /dof=13.5/92cNEUT, /dof=3.1/92cGiBUU, MicroBooNE20

is demanded of the muon track; if the muon is not con-
tained, its momentum is determined by MCS [39]. The
signal deﬁnition has no limits on proton or muon angle.
Particle identiﬁcation cuts ensure that protons in the ﬁ-
nal selections stop inside the detector volume and very
few of them interact in the detector volume. We present
distributions for the muon momentum and polar angle,
leading proton momentum and polar angle, and the an-
gle between the muon and leading proton. These data
have a low proton threshold compared other neutrino ex-
periments, and the high statistics measurement down to
300 MeV/c allows improved model testing. The loose
signal requirement increases the statistical precision over
a large phase space enabling a more precise measurement
of kinematic shapes.

Comparisons between GENIE v2 (used for background
determination, eﬃciencies and systematic uncertainties)
and GENIE v3 (Sec.VIII A) in Figs. 26-30 show signiﬁ-
cant improvement for GENIE v3 in the ability to describe
these data.

Further comparisons are made to modern versions
of neutrino-interaction models often used in predicting
and simulating neutrino events for neutrino experiments.
While GiBUU has paid more attention to theoretical de-
tails of a calculation in a nuclear environment, the other
event generators have adopted models that are often sim-
ilar to each other. As a result, the diﬀerences in their
ability to match the data stem primarily from subtle
implementation and tuning diﬀerences. Diﬃculties for
models to describe the muon forward angle spectrum in
the MINERvA [14] CC0π data, the MicroBooNE CCin-
clusive measurement [19], and the MicroBooNE CCQE
measurement [16] are now also seen in this measurement
(see Fig. 33). Most of the calculations predict a larger
cross section in the two most forward bins by between
1σ and 2σ. Although the prediction from GiBUU is clos-
est to the data in these bins than the other predictions,
it has the largest overall χ2 for this distribution when
considering the full shape. In general the shape is more
constrained than the normalization in the covariance ma-
trices for these data.

In addition to diﬃculties in describing the muon angu-
lar spectrum, interaction models are challenged to pre-
dict the rate of production of low energy protons from
a heavy target. A large variation in the calculations of
proton momentum below roughly 600 MeV/c (175.4 MeV
kinetic energy) is seen with most of the results overpre-
dicting the cross section. This is a stringent test of var-
ious components of the model, particularly proton FSI.
While NEUT has the worst agreement below 600 MeV/c,
GiBUU has the largest χ2 for this distribution (1.2 per
dof). NuWro has the best agreement in the low momen-
tum bins and the lowest χ2 value (0.7 per dof).

The opening angle (θµp) distribution (Fig. 35) tests the
underlying reaction mechanism in the most detailed way.
Since the spectrum peaks at values of about π/2 radi-
ans, this is a strong indication that CCQE interactions
dominate this data set, as expected. There is a large

FIG. 35. Measured cross section as a function of θµ,p com-
pared with various models. See Fig. 31 and Sec. VIII A for
more details.

nisms that are expected to contribute to these data (see
Fig. 25). The measured cross section in the lowest and
highest angular bins is approximately 10% of the cross
section at the peak. Simulations indicate the small open-
ing angle data is populated entirely by events with FSI.
All the calculations have the two alternate mechanisms,
2p2h and RES, and tend to follow the data. The peak
position in the calculations shows large variation. Sim-
ulations with GENIE v3 show the peak position of the
data is sensitive to FSI and binding energy eﬀects. The
largest χ2/dof value is for NEUT (2.0) and the smallest
value is for GiBUU (0.25).

In general NEUT and GENIE v2 both overpredict the
cross section, with the other predictions closer to the
measured data. However the χ2/dof values are sensi-
tive to shape as well as normalization, showing that in
some variables NEUT predicts the shape much better
than some other generators.

IX. CONCLUSIONS

New muon neutrino cross section data for the CC0πN p
interactions on argon from the MicroBooNE experiment
are presented. The simultaneous presentation of these
distributions (covering a wide phase space) in muon and
leading proton momentum and angle is a ﬁrst for neu-
trino interactions in liquid argon. The signal deﬁnition
was chosen to minimize model dependence and allow
straightforward theoretical comparisons. We specify that
at least one proton above 300 MeV/c momentum must be
detected, there are no protons with momentum greater
than 1,200 MeV/c, and the muon momentum must be
greater than 100 MeV/c. No containment requirement

recopmq00.511.522.53/nucleus)2 cm-37 (10recopmq/dsd00.511.52Data/dof=5.9/62cGENIE v3, /dof=7.5/62cNuWro, /dof=11.9/62cNEUT, /dof=1.5/62cGiBUU, MicroBooNE21

FIG. 36. Eﬃciency as a function of reconstructed muon polar
angle (cos(θµ)). Statistical error bars are too small to be seen.

FIG. 37. Migration matrix between true and reconstructed
bins for cos(θµ) in simulated CC0πN p events.

variation in χ2 among the calculations with GiBUU hav-
ing the best (0.25 per dof) and NEUT the worst (2.0 per
dof) values.

The largest χ2 values are seen for pµ. The largest
contribution comes from the highest momentum bin and
agreement with data in the peak region is acceptable.

These data signiﬁcantly enhance the ability to assess
understanding of the neutrino interaction in argon at en-
ergies of roughly 1 GeV. Overall, there is no dramatic
disagreement of calculations with these data. However,
problems previously seen with calculations for carbon
targets that predict larger cross sections than observed in
the forward muon angular spectrum are conﬁrmed here
for argon. This work provides new information about the
diﬃculties in describing the forward scattering region and
low energy proton production in argon. All calculations
describe the overall trend of the distributions with widely
varying ability to describe the details accurately. An
overarching conclusion is that newer calculations which
have shown improved agreement with light target data
(CH or CH2) also describe data from a heavier target
(Ar) with similar accuracy.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This document was prepared by the MicroBooNE col-
laboration using the resources of the Fermi National Ac-
celerator Laboratory (Fermilab), a U.S. Department of
Energy, Oﬃce of Science, HEP User Facility. Fermilab is
managed by Fermi Research Alliance, LLC (FRA), act-
ing under Contract No. DE-AC02- 07CH11359. Micro-
BooNE is supported by the following: the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy, Oﬃce of Science, Oﬃces of High Energy
Physics and Nuclear Physics; the U.S. National Science
Foundation; the Swiss National Science Foundation; the
Science and Technology Facilities Council of the United
Kingdom; and The Royal Society (United Kingdom).

Appendix A: Supplementary Information -
Eﬃciencies, Migration Matrices

Sec. VI contained the eﬃciency plot for muon momen-
tum. Eﬃciency plots for muon polar angle (Fig. 36),
leading proton momentum (Fig. 38), leading proton polar
angle (Fig. 40), and muon-leading proton opening angle
(Fig. 42) are shown below. The Monte Carlo predictions
have been smeared with the migration matrices described
in Sec. VI. Each distribution peaks at roughly 35% eﬃ-
ciency with no bin having an eﬃciency less than 10%.

Plots of migration matrices for muon polar angle
(Fig. 37), leading proton momentum (Fig. 39), leading
proton polar angle (Fig. 41), and muon-proton opening
angle (Fig. 43) are also shown below. These matrices
are all close to diagonal, showing that the bin choices
correspond to the resolutions of the observed quantities.

recomqcos 1-0.5-00.51Efficiency00.10.20.30.40.5MicroBooNE Simulation22

FIG. 38. Eﬃciency as a function of reconstructed proton mo-
mentum (pp) in simulated CC0πN p events.

FIG. 41. Migration matrix between true and reconstructed
bins for reconstructed proton polar angle (cos(θp)) in simu-
lated CC0πN p events.

FIG. 39. Migration matrix between true and reconstructed
bins as a function of reconstructed proton momentum in sim-
ulated CC0πN p events.

FIG. 42. Eﬃciency as a function of reconstructed muon-
proton opening angle (θµp) in simulated CC0πN p events.

FIG. 40. Eﬃciency as a function of reconstructed proton polar
angle cos(θp) in simulated CC0πN p events.

 [GeV/c]recoprotonp0.20.40.60.811.2 Efficiency00.10.20.30.40.5MicroBooNE Simulationrecoprotonqcos 1-0.5-00.51Efficiency00.10.20.30.40.5MicroBooNE Simulation [Rad]reco,pmq0123Efficiency00.10.20.30.40.5MicroBooNE Simulation23

FIG. 43. Migration matrix between true and reconstructed
bins for reconstructed opening angle (θµp) in simulated
CC0πN p events.

24

[1] L. Alvarez-Ruso et al. (NuSTEC), Prog. Part. Nucl.

Phys. 100, 1 (2018).

[33] A. Bodek and U. K. Yang, J. Phys. G29, 1899 (2003).
[34] S. A. Dytman and A. S. Meyer, AIP Conf. Proc. 1405,

[2] K. Abe et al. (T2K Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 121,

213 (2011).

171802 (2018).

[3] M. A. Acero et al. (NOvA Collaboration), Phys. Rev.

Lett. 123, 151803 (2019).

[35] D. Heck, J. Knapp, J. N. Capdevielle, G. Schatz, and
T. Thouw, CORSIKA: a Monte Carlo code to simulate
extensive air showers. (1998), FZKA-6019.

[4] M. Antonello et al. (MicroBooNE, LAr1-ND, ICARUS-

[36] C. Adams et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration), J. of In-

[5] B. Abi

WA104) (2015), arXiv:1503.01520.
al.
arXiv:2002.03005.

et

(DUNE Collaboration)

[6] K. Abe et al. (Hyper-Kamiokande proto-collaboration),
KEK preprint (2016), URL https://lib-extopc.kek.
jp/preprints/PDF/2016/1627/1627021.pdf.

[7] R. Acciarri et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration), J. of In-

(2020),

[37] R. Acciarri et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration), J. of In-

strum. 13, P07007 (2018).

strum. 12, P08003 (2017).

[38] R. Acciarri et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration), Eur.

Phys. J. C78, 82 (2018).

[39] P. Abratenko et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration), J. of

Instrum. 12, P10010 (2017).

strum. 12, P02017 (2017).

[40] C. Adams et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration), J. of In-

[8] T. Kitagaki et al., Phys. Rev. D 28, 436 (1983).
[9] R. Gran et al. (K2K Collaboration), Phys. Rev. D 74,

052002 (2006).

[10] A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al. (MiniBooNE Collaboration),

Phys. Rev. D 81, 092005 (2010).

[11] M. Martini, M. Ericson, and G. Chanfray, Phys. Rev. C

84, 055502 (2011).

[12] J. Nieves, I. Ruiz Simo, and M. J. Vicente Vacas, Phys.

Rev. C83, 045501 (2011).

strum. 15, P03022 (2020).

[41] G. D’Agostini, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A362, 487 (1995).
[42] L. Koch, J. of Instrum. 14, P09013 (2019).
[43] Y. Li, T. Tsang, C. Thorn, X. Qian, M. Diwan, J. Joshi,
S. Kettell, W. Morse, T. Rao, J. Stewart, et al., Nuclear
Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A:
Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated
Equipment 816, 160 (2016), ISSN 0168-9002.

[44] R. Acciarri et al. (ArgoNeuT Collaboration), J. of In-

[13] M. Betancourt et al. (MINERvA Collaboration), Phys.

strum. 8, P08005 (2013).

Rev. Lett. 119, 082001 (2017).

[14] D. Ruterbories et al. (MINERvA Collaboration), Phys.

Rev. D99, 012004 (2019).

[15] K. Abe et al. (T2K Collaboration), Phys. Rev. D98,

032003 (2018).

[16] P. Abratenko et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration), Phys.

Rev. Lett. In-Print (2020), arXiv:2006.00108.

[17] G. Megias, J. Amaro, M. Barbaro, J. Caballero, T. Don-
nelly, and I. Ruiz Simo, Phys. Rev. D 94, 093004 (2016).
[18] R. Acciarri et al. (ArgoNeuT Collaboration), Phys. Rev.

D90, 012008 (2014).

[45] J. B. Birks, Proc. Phys. Soc. A64, 874 (1951).
[46] S. Amaruso et al. (ICARUS Collaboration), Nucl. In-

strum. Meth. A 523, 275 (2004).

[47] C. Andreopoulos, C. Barry, S. Dytman, H. Gallagher,
T. Golan, R. Hatcher, G. Perdue, and J. Yarba (2015),
arXiv:1510.05494.

[48] J. Nieves, J. E. Amaro, and M. Valverde, Phys.
[Erratum: Phys. Rev. C

Rev. C70, 055503 (2004),
72,019902(2005)].

[49] R. Gran, J. Nieves, F. Sanchez, and M. J. Vicente Vacas,

Phys. Rev. D88, 113007 (2013).

[19] P. Abratenko et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration), Phys.

[50] T. Golan, C. Juszczak, and J. T. Sobczyk, Phys. Rev.

Rev. Lett. 123, 131801 (2019).

C86, 015505 (2012).

[20] C. Adams et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration), J. of In-

strum. 15, P07010 (2020).

[21] P. Abratenko et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration) (2020),

arXiv:2008.09765.

[22] C. Adams et al. (MicroBooNE Collaboration), J. of In-

strum. 14, P04004 (2019).

[23] J. Allison et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A835, 186 (2016).
[24] A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al. (MiniBooNE Collaboration),

[51] Y. Hayato, Acta Phys. Polon. B 40, 2477 (2009).
[52] O. Buss, T. Gaitanos, K. Gallmeister, H. van Hees,
M. Kaskulov, O. Lalakulich, A. B. Larionov, T. Leitner,
J. Weil, and U. Mosel, Phys. Rept. 512, 1 (2012).
[53] K. S. Kuzmin, V. V. Lyubushkin, and V. A. Naumov,

Phys. Part. Nucl. 35, S133 (2004).

[54] Ch. Berger and L. M. Sehgal, Phys. Rev. D76, 113004

(2007).

Phys. Rev. D 79, 072002 (2009).

[55] Ch. Berger and L. M. Sehgal, Phys. Rev. D79, 053003

[25] C. Andreopoulos et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A614, 87

(2009).

(2010).

[56] K. M. Graczyk and J. T. Sobczyk, Phys. Rev. D 77,

[26] D. H. Wright and M. H. Kelsey, Nucl. Instrum. Meth.

053003 (2008), 0709.4634.

A804, 175 (2015).

[27] E.L. Snider and G. Petrillo, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 898,

042057 (2017).

[28] A. Bodek and J. L. Ritchie, Phys. Rev. D23, 1070 (1981).
[29] C. H. Llewellyn Smith, Phys. Rept. 3, 261 (1972).
[30] T. Katori, AIP Conf. Proc. 1663, 030001 (2015).
[31] D. Rein and L. M. Sehgal, Ann. Phys. 133, 79 (1981).
[32] D. Rein and L.M. Sehgal, Phys.Lett.B 657, 207 (2007).

[57] U. K. Yang and A. Bodek, Eur. Phys. J. C13, 241 (2000).
[58] L. L. Salcedo, E. Oset, M. J. Vicente-Vacas, and

C. Garcia-Recio, Nucl. Phys. A484, 557 (1988).

[59] V. R. Pandharipande and Steven C. Pieper, Phys. Rev.

C45, 791 (1992).

[60] U. Mosel and K. Gallmeister, Phys. Rev. C97, 045501

(2018).

