Developing Augmented Reality based Gaming Model to 
Teach Ethical Education in Primary Schools 

Mohammad Ali  
Computer Science and Engineering 
United International University 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
mali122013@bscse.uiu.ac.bd

Abstract—  Education  sector  is  adopting  new  technologies 
for  both  teaching  and  learning  pedagogy.  Augmented  Reality 
(AR)  is  a  new  technology  that  can  be  used  in  the  educational 
pedagogy  to  enhance  the  engagement  with  students.  Students 
interact  with  AR-based  educational  material  for  more 
visualization  and  explanation.  Therefore,  the  use  of  AR  in 
education 
is  becoming  more  popular.  However,  most 
researches  narrate  the  use  of  AR  technologies  in  the  field  of 
English, Maths, Science, Culture, Arts, and History education 
but the absence of ethical education is visible. In our paper, we 
design  the  system  and  develop  an  AR-based  mobile  game 
model  in  the  field  of  Ethical  education  for  pre-primary 
students.  Students  from  pre-primary  require more interactive 
lessons than theoretical concepts. So, we use AR technology to 
develop  a  game  which  offers  interactive  procedures  where 
students  can  learn  with  fun  and  engage  with  the  context. 
Finally,  we  develop  a  prototype  that  works  with  our  research 
objective. We conclude our paper with future works. 

Keywords—  Augmented  Reality,  AR  Game,  Ethics 

Education, Primary School 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

than 

Technology  is  growing  rapidly  and  modernizing  every 
sector of our daily life. The education sector is one of them 
and it has been adopting new technologies to resolve current 
issues.  Digital  materials  such  as  audio,  video,  e-book,  and 
simulations have already been introduced to teach students in 
an  effective  way  and  the  result  shows  that  students  learn 
better 
there  are  some 
interaction and engagement issues while teaching with those 
digital  materials  [1]  [2].  Augmented  Reality  (AR)  is  a  new 
technology  that  can  be  used  to  resolve  those  issues.  AR 
creates  3D  virtual  object,  projects  it  in  the  real  physical 
world  by  smart  devices  like  the  smartphone  with  a  camera. 
Therefore,  it  can  be  used  in  educational  content  with 
interaction and engagement capabilities [3]. 

traditional  methods.  But 

that  presents 

Many  researchers  have  conducted  and  showed  that  AR 
has  an  effective  visualization  of  real-world  events  that 
enhance  the  capabilities  of  learning.  Researchers  built  an 
AR-based  educational  device 
realistic 
replication  of  earth  processes  in  the  field  of  geoscience 
education. Researchers prove that it helps students to develop 
critical  thinking  and  improve  engagement  in  a  geoscience 
classroom  [4].  In  the  paper[5],  researchers  show  visual 
impacts of temperature on the human inside a house by using 
AR  technology  which  is  a  context  from  the  textbook  for 
architecture  students.  Students  use  phone-based  Augmented 
Reality  technology  to  change  the  parameters  of  a  house 
which  reflects  energy 
the 
temperature  inside  the  room.  AR  technology  can  be  also 

transformation  and  affects 

useful  for  students  with  disabilities,  researchers  propose  an 
AR-based solution for deaf readers which can enhance their 
vocabulary  learning.  The  device  captures  the  image  and 
detects  the  word  located  above  the  student’s  fingertip,  an 
OCR  algorithm  identifies  the  meaning  of  the  word  and 
matches  the  definition  from  the  Sign  Language  library,  and 
show  the  video  to  the  student  [6].  AR  technology  is  also 
using for training and other educational purposes, a research 
work  proposes  a  game-based  AR  concept  to  teach  users 
about  the  library  instruction  system  and  proves  that  users’ 
knowledge can be enhanced and it gives the same results in 
the  same  learning  performance  as  conventional  library 
instruction  [7].  So,  AR  technology  has  lots  of  benefits  in 
education regardless of the level of students and level of the 
institution. 

In this paper, our target group students are primary level 
students  because  primary  level  students  have  the  best 
capturing  capabilities.  AR-based  digital  books  related  to 
Science, Culture, Arts, and History improve engagement and 
enjoyment  during  their  learning  process  as  well  as  easy 
understudying of the subject [8]. AR-based interactive games 
also  have  the  potential  for  pre-primary  students  to  increase 
their  logical  and  mathematical  skills  [9]  [10],  students  can 
explore  old  historical  architectures  using  the  game  with 
different AR activities supported by their textbook [11]. 

Our  paper  describes  how  to  use  AR  technologies 
effectively for pre-primary students to improve their learning 
experience  in  the  field  of  ethical  education.  We  develop  a 
mobile-based  AR  model  where  students  can  learn  some 
ethical  parts:  Conflict  Resolution,  Ethical  Action,  Justice, 
Respect,  Responsibility,  and  Self-esteem  in  an  interactive 
way.  We  also  develop  a  prototype  on  a  particular  ethical 
topic:  Justice  to  show  how  theoretical  model  can  be  more 
interactive with AR technology. 

II.  RELATED WORK 

A  study  proposes  a  framework  that  intends  to  help  the 
students  build  metaphors  that  correlate  body  motions  and 
gesture  mnemonics  with  mathematical  elements.  Therefore, 
they  use  an  existing  novel  curriculum,  integrate  with  AR 
technology to teach mathematics in an interactive way [12]. 
In  another  work,  researchers  take  context  from  children’s 
books to propose a method to integrate AR technology with 
text,  sound,  and  pop-up  cartoon 
to  present  different 
information  based  on  the  learning  objectives  to  enhance 
learning  [3][13].  So,  it  is the  best practice  to  work  with the 
existing curriculum to modify with new technologies. 

A  Research  undertook  the  project  ETHIKA  for  ethical 
in  pre-primary  and  primary  schools  for  a 

education 

 
 
  
 
sustainable  and  dialogic  future  to  address  the  needs  of  pre-
primary, primary, and lower secondary school students. The 
main outputs of the framework are educational materials and 
tools  that  are  prepared  with  the  previous  User  Needs 
Analysis (UNA) on students. Students learn important ethical 
principles  and  values,  ethical 
reflection,  awareness, 
responsibility,  and  intellectual  capabilities.  This  framework 
also helps to build a classroom or school environment as an 
ethical community [14]. 

Materials and Tools 

Educational Methods 

Key learning Outcomes 

• 
• 
• 
• 

Printed Flash Cards 
Smartphone/Tablet 
Philosophy for and with children 
Holistic ethical learning 

Encourage children to: 
• 
• 
• 

Think about justice 
Realize what injustice is 
Realize the harmfulness of injustice 

III.  PROBLEM ANALYSIS 

aesthetic 

expression, 

There are some curriculums or frameworks like ETHIKA 
has developed to teach ethical and moral values to students. 
Educational  institutions  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  emphasize 
moral and values education to develop student’s strengths in 
technological 
problem-solving, 
competence,  personal  development.  They  propose  some 
recommended topics for values education curriculum during 
the infant and childhood years such as Peace, Respect, Love, 
Responsibility,  Happiness,  Cooperation,  Honesty,  Humility, 
Tolerance,  Unity,  Freedom,  Gratitude,  Cleanliness,  and 
Friendship  [15].  Some  international  organizations  like  BBC 
also  featured  some  ethical  issues  such  as  Introduction  to 
Ethics,  Abortion,  Charity,  Forced  Marriage,  Slavery,  and 
Ethics  of  War  [16].  But  there  is  a  common  issue  which  is 
no/less 
those 
theoretical lessons to the students. Students from pre-primary 
and  primary  may  require  more  interactive  lessons  to  learn 
about those theoretical concepts. AR technology may help to 
develop  such  interactive  lessons  where  students  can  learn 
with fun and highly engaging will be ensured. 

involvement  of 

to  represent 

technology 

IV.  PROPOSED MODEL 

We  use 

the  curriculum  ETHIKA  and  select  an 
educational  resource  called  Tomato’s  Feeling  from  the 
Topic: Justice [17]. Initially, we design a system and develop 
a  model  where  students  play  an  AR  game  through  a 
tablet.  We  also  need  four  flashcards 
smartphone  or 
containing pictures of tomatoes: a happy face, a sad face, an 
angry face, and a surprised face describes in Fig 2.We have 
to  keep  those  cards  separately  on  the  table.  A  group  of 
students  plays  the  AR  game  with  the  guidance  of a  teacher. 
Some random question appears on the game interface related 
their feelings, students react to those questions by raising one 
of  the  four  tomatoes.  AR  game  shows  an  animated  video 
based on the flashcard and records student’s flashcard value. 
Then  the  teacher  asks  the  student,  “Why  does  this  sentence 
make you feel this way?”. AR Game gives better feedback or 
suggestion  if  the  answer  is  not  appropriate.  This  gameplay 
creates raw data for every student involved in the game and 
those data can be used to know the progress status of ethical 
development for students. Table 1 shows the key attributes of 
our proposed model. 

TABLE II.  

QUESTIONS WITH PROBABLE ANSWERS 

Questions 
It is raining today. I forget to bring my 
umbrella so, I wet my dress when coming to 
school.  
I had a chocolate but my friend ate it while I 
went to other room. 
Look! What a beautiful cat it is. 
I gave a ball to a friend to mine but he threw 
it in the garbage. He did not like it.  
My friend threw a toy out of the window 
and our teacher blamed me.  
My brother was naughty and I didn’t get the 
ice cream because of him. 
I lost my favorite toy. 
Today I cleaned up my room and my mother 
were very happy about it and praised me. 

Probable Answers 
Sad/Angry 

Sad/Angry 

Happy/Surprised 
Sad 

Angry 

Angry/Sad 

Sad 
Happy 

My father brought me my favorite football. 

Happy 

Wow, I just love my dress which my father 
gave me in my Birthday! 

Surprised/Happy 

V.  SYSTEM DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT 

A.  Gameplay Steps 

•  Step  1:  Teacher  selects  the  particular  class  and 
student  id/name  from  the  game  menu  before  student 
plays the game 

•  Step  2:  Pick  a  random  question  from  the  Table  2, 
display  it on phone’s display,  student  understand the 
question  and  place  the  camera  above  the  particular 
flash card 

•  Step  3:  AR  game  detects  the  flashcard  and  shows  a 

video related to the flash card’s emotion 

•  Step 4: AR game give better feedback or suggestion if 

the answer is not appropriate 

•  Step  5:  Repeat  Step  2,  3  and  4  until  all  question 

finishes 

TABLE I.  

KEY ATTRIBUTES FOR THE AR GAME 

•  Step 6: Go to Step 1 if all student plays the game 

Focusing Area 

Justice 

Schooling Level 

Primary Level School 

Class 

Age Range 

Pre-primary 

4 to 5+ 

Participants 

5 to 10 Students 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.  Gameplay Flowcharts 

Fig. 1.  Flowchart of gameplay 

C.  Development 
  We use Unity - a cross-platform game engine to develop 
our AR prototype game. Unity has options to develop games 
in  both  2D  and  3D  and  it  offers  various  plugins  and  game 
resources  for  robust  development  [18].  Vuforia  is  an 
augmented  reality  software  development  kit  (SDK)  that 
enables the AR environment in the Unity game engine [19]. 
Vuforia  creates  AR  markers  for  our  tomato  flashcards  and 
Unity set conditions that which video is needed to show for a 
particular  marker.  We  export  our  game to  Android  Package 
Kit (APK) which runs most of the Android smartphones. 

VI.  PROTOTYPE AND RESULT 

After  compilation  and  build,  our  AR  game  successfully 
runs  on  an  android  based  smartphone.  Figure  3,  shows  that 
the  AR  game  successfully  detects  different  flashcards  and 
shows the expected result based on the flashcards. 

Fig. 2.  Flashcards for the AR game 

Fig. 3.  Detecting flashcard by AR Game 

VII. PROTOTYPE AND RESULT 

We  develop  an  augmented  reality-based  mobile  game 
model  that  enhances  the  engagement  capability  of  the 
existing  curriculum  in  the  field  of  ethical  education.  The 
model  simplifies  holistic  ethical 
learning  and  ethical 
philosophy with the help of augmented reality. Students also 
understand  and  learn  about  justice, realize  what  is  injustice, 
and the harmfulness of injustice through the AR game in an 
interactive way. 

So far, we have developed the system design model and a 
prototype for the AR game. We need to develop the full AR 
game  in  the  future  with  the  gamification  technique.  After 
developing the game, we need to test the game in the schools 
to  justify  the  effectiveness  of  the  game.  We  also  need  to 
design and develop the database for the game which may be 
needed to identify and track the progress in ethical education 
for a particular student. 

REFERENCES 

[1]   I.  Radu  and  A.  Antle,  "Embodied  Learning  Mechanics  and  Their 
Relationship to Usability of Handheld Augmented Reality," in IEEE 
Virtual  Reality  Workshop  on  K-12  Embodied  Learning  through 
Virtual & Augmented Reality, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2017.  

[2]   J.  Chauhan,  S.  Taneja  and  A.  Goel,  "Enhancing  MOOC  with 
Augmented  Reality,  Adaptive  Learning  and  Gamification,"  in  IEEE 
3rd International Conference on MOOCs, Innovation and Technology 
in Education, Amritsar, India, 2015.  

[3]   L.-K. Lee, C.-H. Chau, C.-H. Chau and C.-T. Ng, "Using Augmented 
Reality  to  Teach  Kindergarten  Students  English  Vocabulary,"  in 
International  Symposium  on  Educational  Technology,  Hong  Kong, 
China, 2017.  

[4]   S.  N.  Kundu,  N.  Muhammad  and  F.  Sattar,  "Using  the  Augmented 
Reality Sandbox for Advanced Learning in Geoscience Education," in 
IEEE  6th  International  Conference  on  Teaching,  Assessment,  and 
Learning for Engineering (TALE), Hong Kong, China, 2017.  

[5]   V.  Ferrer,  A.  Perdomo,  H.  R.  AIi,  C.  Fies  and  J.  Quarles,  "Virtual 
Humans  for  Temperature  Visualization  in  a  Tangible  Augmented 
Reality Educational Game," in IEEE Virtual Reality Workshop on K-
12  Embodied  Learning  through  Virtual  &  Augmented  Reality,  Los 
Angeles, CA, USA, 2017.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[6]   M. Jones, N. Bench and S. Ferons, "Vocabulary Acquisition for Deaf 
Readers using Augmented Technology," in 2nd Workshop on Virtual 
and  Augmented  Assistive  Technology  (VAAT),  Minneapolis,  MN, 
USA, 2014.  

[7]   Y.-S.  Wang,  C.-M.  Chen,  C.-M.  Hong  and  Y.-N.  Tsai,  "Interactive 
Augmented  Reality  Game  for  Enhancing  Library  Instruction  in 
Elementary  Schools,"  in  IEEE  37th  Annual  Computer  Software  and 
Applications Conference Workshops, Japan, 2013.  

[8]   C.  A.  Eleftheria,  P.  Charikleia,  C.  G.  Iason,  T.  Athanasios  and  T. 
Dimitrios,  "An  Innovative  Augmented  Reality  Educational  Platform 
Using  Gamification  to  Enhance  Lifelong  Learning  and  Cultural 
Education," in IISA, Piraeus, Greece, 2013.  

[9]   R. A. Roberto, M. M. O. d. Silva, D. Q. Freitas, Y. C. C. A. Lima, V. 
E.  M.  Silva,  C.  C.  Araujo,  J.  M.  X.  N.  Teixeira  and  V.  Teichrieb, 
"Voxar  Puzzle  Motion:  An  Innovative  AR  Application  Proposed 
Using Design Techniques," in IEEE Virtual Reality Workshop on K-
12  Embodied  Learning  through  Virtual  &  Augmented  Reality 
(KELVAR), Greenville, SC, USA, 2016.  

[10]  I.  Radu,  B.  McCarthy  and  Y.  Kao,  "Discovering  Educational 
Augmented  Reality  Math  Applications  by  Prototyping  with 
Elementary-School  Teachers," 
in  IEEE  Virtual  Reality  (VR), 
reenville, SC, USA, 2016.  

[11]  G. Singh, D. A. Bowman, D. Hicks, D. Cline, J. T. Ogle, E. D. Ragan, 
A. Johnson, R. Zlokas and T. Tucker, "CI-Spy: Designing A Mobile 
Augmented  Reality  System  for  Scaffolding  Historical  Inquiry 
Learning," 
in  IEEE  International  Symposium  on  Mixed  and 
Augmented  Reality  -  Media,  Art,  Social  Science,  Humanities  and 
Design, Fukuoka, Japan, 2015.  

[12]  A. Barmpoutis, Q. Ding, L.  Anthony, W. Eugene and M. Suvajdzic, 
"Exploration of Kinesthetic Gaming for Enhancing Elementary Math 
Education using Culturally Responsive Teaching Methodologies," in 

IEEE Virtual Reality Workshop on K-12 Embodied Learning through 
Virtual  &  Augmented  Reality  (KELVAR),  Greenville,  SC,  USA, 
2016.  

[13]  P.  Vate-U-Lan,  "An  Augmented  Reality  3D  Pop-Up  Book:  the 
Development  of  a  Multimedia  Project  for  English  Language 
Teaching,"  in  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Multimedia  and 
Expo, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 2012.  

[14]  B. Ćurko, E. Schlenk, F. Feiner, S. Pokorny, P. G. Sola, M. Centa, E. 
Linares, B. Arenas, M. Kragić and V. Strahovnik, "ethics and values 
education  curriculum  proposals  and  training  courses  for  teachers,"  7 
April 
http://www.ethics-
education.eu/resources/ETHIKA_EVE%20Curriculum_Proposal_EN.
pdf. [Accessed 20 Octoer 2018]. 

Available: 

[Online]. 

2017. 

[15]  "Core  Curriculum  Guide  for  Strengthening  Morals  and  Values 
Education in Educational Institutions in Trinidad And Tobago," 2006. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://moe.gov.tt/Documents/Curriculum/Primary/Morals_and_Value
s_Curriculum_Prim.pdf. [Accessed October 2018]. 

[16]  "Featured 

ethical 

issues," 

2014. 

[Online]. 

Available: 

http://www.bbc.co.uk/ethics/guide/. [Accessed 20 October 2018]. 

[17]  "Educational  Resoruce:  Tomato's  Feelings,"  2015. 

Available: 
5_TeacherManual_TomatosFeeling_EN.pdf. 
2018]. 

[Online]. 
http://www.ethics-education.eu/tools/Justice_3-
[Accessed  September 

[18]  "Unity  User  Manual  (2018.2),"  Unity,  October  2018.  [Online]. 
[Accessed 

Available:  https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/index.html. 
October 2018]. 

[19]  "Getting  Started  with  Vuforia  Engine  in  Unity,"  Vuforia,  October 
2018. 
Available: 
[Online]. 
https://library.vuforia.com/articles/Training/getting-started-with-
vuforia-in-unity.html. [Accessed October 2018]. 

 
 
 
