Influence of ion induced secondary electron emission on the 

stability of ionisation vacuum gauges 

I. Figueiredo1, N. Bundaleski1*, O.M.N.D. Teodoro1 

K. Jousten2, C. Illgen2 

1 CEFITEC, Department of Physics, Faculty of Sciences and Technology, Nova University of 

Lisbon, 2829-515 Caparica, Portugal 
2Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB), Abbestr. 2-12, 10587 Berlin, Germany 

*Corresponding author – e-mail address: n.bundaleski@fct.unl.pt 

Keywords: ion induced secondary electron emission, ionisation vacuum gauges, XPS 

Abstract 

Surface  modification  of  different  materials  exposed  to  an  environment  typical  for  hot  cathode 

ionisation vacuum gauges was investigated. Such environment has been generated in a specially 

designed  setup  which  simulates  conditions  in  a  Bayard-Alpert  ionisation  vacuum  gauge. 

Characterisations by means of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and work  function study have 

been performed before and after the sample exposure to Ar and H2 gas discharges. The majority 

of studied materials, such as molybdenum, gold or stainless steel, are considered to be of interest 

as ion collectors. In addition, experiments with copper and graphite revealed the major processes 

that are taking place during the exposure to an ionisation vacuum gauge environment. Since the 

stability  of  ionisation  vacuum  gauges  can  be  affected  by  the  change  of  secondary  electron 

emission  properties  of  ion  collectors  during  the  operation,  the  corresponding  electron  yield 
induced by bombardment of low energy Ar+ ions was measured. Results show that exposure to 

ionisation  vacuum  gauge  environment  contributes  to  development  of  hydrocarbon  layers, 

independently  from  the  collector  material  or  the  dominant  species  in  the  gas  discharge. 

Therefore, ion induced secondary  electron  yield of clean materials will be changing during the 

gauge operation and eventually reach saturation regardless of the collector material. The results 

also show that the hydrocarbon layer cannot be desorbed by standard vacuum baking procedures, 

whilst ion bombardment will even increase the rate of the hydrocarbon layer formation. 

1 

 
 
 
1. Introduction 

The  pressure  indication  in  ionisation  vacuum  gauges  (short:  ionization  gauges)  is 

obtained by measuring a current of ions onto a collector produced from neutral gas molecules by 

electron impact ionisation. In these devices ions are accelerated towards the collector. Energetic 

ions  impinging  on  the  ion  collector  surface  can  cause  secondary  electron  emission,  which  will 

increase the measured current according to the following expression: Imeas = Iion∙(1 + γe,ion). The 

primary  ion  current  is  Iion,  and  γe,ion  is  the  ion  induced  secondary  electron  yield  (IISEY).  This 

yield is surface dependent and one of the major causes of instability of sensitivity of these gauges 

[1].  For  this  reason,  we  investigated  the  IISEY  from  materials  relevant  for  ion  collector  in 

ionisation vacuum gauges in some detail. 

In the energy range of interest (typically up to 250 eV) there are two mechanisms of the 

secondary  electron  emission.  When  an  ion  approaches  few  angstrom  from  a  surface,  a 

neutralization accompanied by emission of an Auger electron may take place. The corresponding 

energetic condition, that the ionisation potential of a projectile is more than two times larger than 

the work function, is fulfilled by the majority of ion-surface systems. If the electron manages to 

escape the material, the result is known as potential electron emission since potential energy of 

an ion was used to excite the electrons [2],[3].  

The  second  mechanism  is  subthreshold  kinetic  electron  emission.  It  is  based  on  the 

electron  promotion  in  a  binary  collision  of  impinging  ions  with  target  atoms  [3],[4],[5].  After 

such a collision, one of the electrons may end up in a highly excited (autoionising) state, and the 

deexcitation  then  takes  place  via  an  Auger  electron  emission.  The  kinetic  energy  threshold  for 

such  process  is  defined  by  the  maximum  distance  of  closest  approach  between  the  collision 

partners which will allow an electron promotion. 

Due  to  the  high  probability  of  Auger  neutralization  (inverse  of  the  probability  rate  is 
typically about 10-15 s, being of the same order as the collision time) potential electron emission 

is apparently restricted to the first atomic layer. The situation is different for subthreshold kinetic 

electron emission, since the electron promotion may also take place in deeper layers. Ionisation 

of one of the collision partners is a direct consequence of electron promotion. Ions formed in this 

way can be neutralized in an Auger process, so that potential electron emission will occur also in 

the  sample  interior.  Consequently,  this  type  of  kinetic  electron  emission  is  rather  complicated 

and  should  be  considered  as  a  three-step  process  (similarly  to  electron  induced  secondary 

electron  emission  [6]):  creation  of  internal  secondary  electrons,  their  transport  through  the 
2 

 
 
 
 
material  including  energy  losses,  and  electron  emission.  We  stress  that  the  first  step  is  now 

particularly complex since several phenomena are in play: atomic collision dynamics (including 

development  of  cascades  of  projectile-target  and 

target-target  collisions),  projectile 

backscattering  into  vacuum,  electron  promotion  in  a  binary  collision  yielding  in  eventual 

electron  emission,  etc.  The  situation  becomes  even  more  complicated  when  the  sample  is  not 

monoatomic. These are probably the reasons why, to our knowledge, a model encompassing the 

mentioned effects has not yet been developed.   

Potential  and  subthreshold  kinetic  electron  emission  can  be  distinguished  by  the 

dependence of γe,ion on the primary projectile energy and charge. Pure potential electron emission 

does  not  depend  on  the  kinetic  energy.  Electron  yield  caused  by  kinetic  electron  emission 

increases with the kinetic energy.  With the energies of ions in an ionisation vacuum gauge, both 

processes  are  restricted  to  the  first  several  atomic  layers  of  a  target  material.  This  implies  that 

non-stable surface conditions will be detrimental for γe,ion of ion collector in ionisation gauges. 

Typical values of IISEY from metals in this energy range span from 1 to 20%, depending on the 

ion/collector system and on the collector surface condition. 

Secondary  electron  emission  from  a  collector  will  directly  affect  gauge  sensitivity  and 

cannot be avoided in common ionisation vacuum gauges (e.g. Bayard-Alpert type). Nevertheless, 

it will not affect gauge stability as long as the collector surface properties are not changing with 

time. However, the environment in ionisation vacuum gauges is highly reactive, containing not 

only  ions  and  electrons  but  also  soft  X-rays  and  reactive  neutrals.  When  exposed  to  such  an 

environment, the collector surface may be changing during the gauge operation, just as its γe,ion. 

The reactive environment may therefore be a serious source of gauge instabilities, i.e. changes of 

both gauge sensitivities and relative sensitivity factors during the long-term operation. An earlier 

investigation evidences this change of gauge sensitivity for 10% and 3% in the case of W and Pt-

clad Mo ion collectors, respectively, which was attributed to the change of γe,ion [7]. 

The major goal of this investigation is to get insight into the contribution of γe,ion to the 

instability of sensitivity of ionisation gauges in order to estimate their measurement uncertainty 

due  to  this  effect.  In  addition,  we  would  like  to  gain  information,  if  a  conditioning  procedure 

and/or the selection of collector materials may help to improve the stability of γe,ion in  ionisation 

gauges. To this end, an experimental setup was built enabling exposure of sample surfaces to an 

environment  similar  to  that,  which  can  be  expected  in  ionisation  gauges.  This  system,  that  we 

call  ionisation  gauge  simulator  (IGS),  was  mounted  in  the  preparation  chamber  of  an  existing 

3 

 
 
 
surface  science  setup,  enabling  to  perform  surface  characterization  by  means  of  X-ray 

Photoelectron  Spectroscopy  (XPS),  Work  Function  change  (WF)  and  IISEY  measurements 

before and after the sample exposure to IGS environment without breaking the vacuum envelope. 

The samples used in this study are technical materials of interest for ion collectors in ionisation 

gauges (e.g. Mo, Au, stainless steel), prepared in a way typical for production of such devices. 

While such a preparation is not perfectly suitable for performing fundamental investigations, it is 

relevant for understanding the properties of ionisation gauges.  

2. Experimental procedures 

2.1 Ionisation gauge simulator (IGS) 

The  scheme  of  the  ionisation  gauge  simulator  is  presented  in  Fig.  1.  Its  construction  is 

very similar to Bayard-Alpert ionisation gauges, gas ionisers of residual gas analyzers (RGA) or 

ion  sources  based  on  electron  impact  ionisation.  A  circular  hot  filament,  thoriated  tungsten 

(ThW) or yttria coated iridium (YIr), is placed outside the positive cylindrical grid as an electron 

emitter. The filament is 5 cm long and 0.15 mm in diameter. The grid consists of 2 mm spaced 

0.3  mm  thick  W  vertical  posts  spot  welded  on  a  thin  Mo  disc  and  a  Mo  ring.  Electrons  are 

accelerated  and  enter  into  the  grid  volume,  where  they  can  ionize  a  gas  introduced  along  the 

axial direction. The whole assembly is placed into the outer Mo cylinder, which is held on the 

filament potential. Ions are extracted axially from the grid volume through the aperture of bottom 

Mo disc by  a stainless steel extraction electrode. The latter is a 7  mm thick disc with aperture 

diameter of 15 mm, placed 5 mm below the bottom of the grid. The insulating parts are made of 

aluminium oxide and macor. 

4 

 
 
ionisation gauge simulator (IGS). 
Figure 1. Schematic of the ionisation gauge simulator (IGS).
Figure 1. Schematic of the 

2.2 Experimental setup 

upgraded  KRATOS  XSAM  800 
IGS  was  assembled  in  the  preparation  chamber  of  an  upgraded  KRATOS  XSAM  800 
IGS  was  assembled  in  the  preparation  chamber  of 

system produced by Kratos analytical

, which also contains a quadrupole mass spectrometer 
produced by Kratos analytical [8], which also contains a quadrupole mass spectrometer 

for residual gas analysis and a sample holder allowing translation in three directions and rotation 
for residual gas analysis and a sample holder allowing translation in three directions and rotation 
for residual gas analysis and a sample holder allowing translation in three directions and rotation 

(i.e. with the IGS turned 
around the axis passing through the sample surface. The base pressure (i.e. with the IGS turned 
around the axis passing through the samp

off) inside the preparation chamber was 2

side the preparation chamber was 2∙10-8 mbar during these experiments
these experiments. 

Analysis chamber of this setup contains

nalysis chamber of this setup contains, among other devices, non-

-monochromatic X-ray 

gun  with  Al  and  Mg  electrodes,  elec

tron  energy  spectrometer  with  a  hemispherical  energy 
with  Al  and  Mg  electrodes,  electron  energy  spectrometer  with  a  hemispherical  energy 

radius), an ion gun that can be used for sputter cleaning but also for 
analyzer (127 mm main path radius), an ion gun that can be used for sputter cleaning but also for 
radius), an ion gun that can be used for sputter cleaning but also for 

of  both  thermal  irradiation  and 
IISEY  measurements  and  sample  annealing  system  by  means  of  both  thermal  irradiation  and 
IISEY  measurements  and  sample  annealing  system  by  mea

A  sample  transfer  system  allows  introduction  of  samples  and  their 
electron  bombardment.  A  sample  transfer  system  allows  introduction  of  samples  and  their 
A  sample  transfer  system  allows  introduction  of  samples  and  their 

transport  between  the  fast  entry  lock  chamber,  preparation  chamber  and  the  analysis  chamber 
transport  between  the  fast  entry  lock  chamber,  preparation  chamber  and  the  analysis  chamber 
transport  between  the  fast  entry  lock  chamber,  preparation  chamber  and  the  analysis  chamber 

The base pressure in the analysis chamber is in the low 
without breaking the vacuum envelope. The base pressure in the analysis chamber is in the low
without breaking the vacuum envelope.
10-10 mbar range.  

XPS  measurements  were  performed  using  the  Mg  Kα  X-ray  source  (photon  energy  of 
ray  source  (photon  energy  of 
XPS  measurements  were  performed  using  the  Mg  K

resolution spectra  were taken in a fixed analyzer transition mode 
1253.6 eV). Survey  and  high-resolution  spectra  were taken in a fixed analyzer transition mode 
1253.6 eV). Survey  and  high

ding energy axis was calibrated 
with the pass energy of 40 eV and 20 eV, respectively. The binding energy axis was calibrated 
with the pass energy of 40 eV and 20 eV, respectively.

5 

 
        
 
 
 
from the positions of the Au 4f7/2 line (83.96 eV) and Cu 2p3/2 line (932.4 eV) and the modified 

Auger parameter of copper (1851.2 eV) taken from sputter cleaned Au and Cu metallic samples. 

High resolution spectra were fitted using the pseudo-Voigt symmetric profiles after removing a 

background  of  Shirley  type,  unless  otherwise  stated.  Surface  composition  was  estimated  using 

the atomic sensitivity factors from [9], corrected for the anisotropic part of the photoionisation 

cross  section  since  the  angle  between  the  directions  of  the  X-ray  beam  and  the  detected 

photoelectrons in this setup is 69°. This correction was made using the asymmetry parameters of 

photoelectron lines from [10]. Since quantification with sensitivity factors is applicable only for 

uniform samples, which was not the case here, the percentages obtained by this approach should 

be considered just to follow the general trends of surface modifications with sample treatments. 

In  addition,  we  were  applying  in  some  cases  another  model  suitable  for  in-depth  non-uniform 

samples [11] to estimate thickness of a hydrocarbon overlayer at the processed samples.   

Work  function  measurements  were  performed  by  monitoring  low  energy  cutoff  of  the 

secondary electron emission spectra induced by X-ray irradiation of samples biased to -20.0 V. 

This cutoff is  equal to the sample  work  function from  which biasing voltage and spectrometer 

work  function  are  subtracted  [12].  While  this  approach  cannot  provide  absolute  value  of  the 

work function, one can monitor its change with the precision of few tens of meV [13].  

Ion  induced  secondary  electron  yield  measurements  are  performed  in  the  analysis 

chamber of the Kratos setup, using a sputter ion gun. Ions are impinging the sample surface at 

45° with respect to the surface normal. IISEY was calculated using the quotient method without 

a collector [14], i.e. from the currents measured on the biased sample irradiated by an ion beam, 

similarly  to  [15].  When  the  sample  is  biased  to +15  eV,  secondary  electrons  are  recaptured  so 
that the measured current I+ equals the true ion current Ip. Negative biasing to -20 V repels the 

secondary  electrons  and  prevents  that  tertiary  electrons  (electrons  produced  when  secondary 

electron  from  the  sample  impinge  the  chamber  walls)  return  to  the  sample.  The  corresponding 
current  I-  therefore  equals  the  sum  of  Ip  and  the  secondary  electron  contribution  γe,ion∙Ip. 

Consequently, IISEY can be calculated as 

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4) =

(cid:6)(cid:7)
(cid:6)(cid:8)

=

(cid:6)(cid:9)
(cid:6)(cid:10) − 1. 

 (1) 

Since  the  distance  between  the  exit  from  the  ion  gun  and  the  sample  is  about  20  cm,  sample 

biasing has negligible effect on the ion current at the exit from the ion gun. Critical point in such 

a measurement is securing that ions primarily hit sample surface (and not e.g. the sample holder). 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
In that respect, particularly important part of the system upgrade is computer control of the ion 

beam  deflection  voltages,  enabling  formation  of  an  image  of  a  sample  mounted  on  the  sample 

holder:  horizontal  and vertical deflection voltages define the coordinates  of a point in a  graph, 

whilst  the  measured  current  determines  its  brightness.  This  functionality  allows  observation  of 

the relative position of a beam spot at the sample surface, which allows mechanical positioning 

of  a  sample  so  that  the  beam  hits  its  centre  for  zero  deflection  voltages.  The  latter  condition 

secures that the position of the beam spot is not changing with the ion energy. Ion energies are 

estimated  as  the  difference  between  the  potential  of  the  ion  source  anode  and  the  negatively 
biased sample potential. All IISEY measurements were performed using Ar+ ions in the energy 

range from 120 eV to 320 eV, where the lower part of this range is typical for ionisation gauges. 

2.3 Sample preparation and exposure conditions 

Several samples of potential interest in ionisation gauges were used in this investigation: 
polycrystalline molybdenum (Plansee, 0.15 mm thick foil, 10×10 mm2, 99.97% purity) and gold 
(Goodfellow,  0.1  mm  thick  foil,  10×10  ×1  mm2,  99.999%),  as  well  as  mechanically  polished 
austenitic stainless steel (type 304, 0.5 mm thick, 10×15 mm2). Besides, Cu(100) single crystal 

(MaTeck, 10  mm diameter, 1  mm thick)  was  also used for studying the  mechanism of surface 

contamination  in  the  ionisation  gauge  environment.  After  cleaning  by  isopropyl  alcohol  and 

distilled water in an ultrasonic bath, the copper sample was sputter cleaned before each exposure 

experiment in order to remove the surface impurities accumulated during a preceding treatment. 

Other samples were only cleaned in the same solvents as the copper sample. Such a procedure, 

not  suitable  for  surface  science  experiments,  was  applied  to  the  technical  surfaces  in  order  to 

achieve  the  initial  conditions  that  could  be  expected  at  ion  collector  surface  of  an  ionsation 

gauge. Due to the same reason, Mo and Au samples were not mechanically polished, aiming to 

preserve their original surface morphologies. In addition we were also studying graphite sample 

obtained  by  spraying  a  graphite  lacquer  GRAPHIT  33  (Kontakt  Chemie)  directly  onto  the 

stainless  steel  sample  holder.  The  spray  contains  graphite  powder  and  a  lacquer  dissolved  in 

isopropanol. After drying in air, the sample was introduced in vacuum where it was annealed to 

about 140 °C for 30 min. This procedure removed efficiently the lacquer, as confirmed by XPS, 
leaving practically only carbon at the surface with very high sp2 content.  

Sample exposures to the IGS environment were performed by igniting a gas discharge at 
the  pressure  of  1.0∙10-5  mbar,  measured  by  an  ionisation  gauge  mounted  in  the  preparation 

7 

 
 
 
chamber. Most of the experiments were performed with Ar gas, although some exposures to H2 
gas  discharge  were  also  made.  The  gas  line  was  pumped  in  the  low  10-2  mbar  range  before 

introducing high purity  gases (having a  few ppm contamination level) to the pressure of about 
1500  mbar.  This  procedure  secured  partial  pressure  of  impurities  in  the  low  10-10  mbar  range, 

being about 2 orders of magnitude below the base pressure. The electron emission current was 5 

mA, voltage between the grid and the filament was Uem = 80 V and the grid potential was Uex = 
200 V (cf. Fig. 1). Such conditions secure Ar+ ion current density of 0.5 μA/cm2 at the sample 

surface. In order to keep similar operating pressure as in the case of Ar discharge, the operating 
pressure, measured by a Bayard-Alpert gauge, was fixed to about 3.1∙10-6 mbar due to ~2.8 times 

smaller  gauge  sensitivity  for  H2  as  compared  to  Ar.  Ion  current  density  of  hydrogen  ions 
achieved with these parameters was about 0.21 μA/cm2. All exposures to IGS environment were 

performed under these conditions, unless otherwise stated.  

In order to estimate at which pressure one could expect Ar ion current density of about 
0.5  μA/cm2,  let  us  consider  a  hypothetical  Bayard  Alpert  ionisation  gauge  operating  with 
electron emission current Iem = 1 mA having a sensitivity of S = 20 mbar-1. If the ion collector 

has diameter of 0.1 mm and length of 10 cm, the total ion current would be about Ii = 157 nA. 
Then, we estimate that this ion current would be achieved at a p = Ii/Iem/S ≈ 8∙10-6 mbar.  

Several sets of measurements, consisting of surface characterization (XPS, WF, IISEY), 

sample  exposure and surface  characterization, have been performed for all samples in order to 

check  the  reproducibility  of  the  measurements.  Occasionally,  the  samples  were  annealed  and 
sputter cleaned by 1.5 keV Ar+ ion beam in order to reduce the amount of surface hydrocarbons 

due to the previous exposures and/or air exposure. 

3. Results and discussion 

3.1 Gas composition in the operating IGS 

After  turning  on  the  filament  of  the  IGS  the  pressure  rises  for  about  one  order  of 
magnitude and then stabilizes to about 4∙10-8 mbar. The residual gas mass spectrum with the IGS 

fitted with yttria coated iridium filament under steady state operational conditions is presented in 

Fig. 2.  Mass spectrum taken right after the filament is  turned off is also presented in the  same 

figure. It should be noted that the mass spectra taken with tungsten filament are very similar both 

qualitatively and quantitatively. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Residual gas mass spectrum in the preparation chamber with IGS filament turned on 
and off. The base pressure, measured by a Bayard-Alpert ionisation gauge was 3 to 4∙10-8 mbar.  

and  hydrogen,  we  also  see  pronounced  peaks  at  masses  19  (F+),  31  (CF+),  50  (CF2

Apart from the expected peaks in this pressure range attributed to water vapour, CO, CO2 
+)  and  69 
+),  which  we  attributed  to  macor.  The  peak  at  20  amu  is  most  probably  related  to  HF+, 

(CF3

although it can also be to some extent an artefact that is sometimes encountered in the case of 

intense  H2O  signal.  Particularly  interesting  information  can  be  obtained  from  the  peaks  with 
significantly reduced intensities right after the IGS is turned off. First of all, the intensities of H+, 
+ peaks strongly decreased. Peaks corresponding to masses 12 (C+), 15 
CO+ and particularly H2
+)  are  reduced  to  the  noise  level.  Peaks  related  to  the  water 
+),  29  (C2H5

+),  and  44  (CO2

(CH3

vapour are also reduced, as well as masses 19, 20, 31, 50 and 69 that we attributed to fluorine 

species from macor. We therefore conclude that operation of IGS increases the partial pressure 

of hydrocarbon species,  H2O, CO and CO2, which can be also expected in the case of any hot 

cathode gauges. In addition we observe some species characteristic to macor, hence specific to 
our experimental setup. Nevertheless, since the overall pressure rises by only 2∙10-8 mbar due to 

the  IGS  operation,  relative  contribution  of  these  species  to  the  overall  pressure  during  the 
samples’ exposure to Ar discharge is only 0.2 %, since the operating pressure was 1∙10-5 mbar 

during the sample exposures. 

9 

 
 
3.2 Effect of exposure to IGS environment on surface composition  

In the first tests we performed XPS analysis of Mo, Au and stainless steel samples before 

and after an exposure to the IGS environment with Ar gas for 15 min. These experiments were 

performed with the ThW filament. The samples were not sputter cleaned prior to the experiment, 

which was suggested as conditioning procedure before a measurement with an ionisation gauge. 

XPS  measurements  reveal  presence  of  carbon,  oxygen  and  the  corresponding  metals  at  the 

surface.  From  the  analysis  of  the  O  1s  lines  and  the  characteristic  photoelectron  lines  of  the 

detected  metals,  we  identified  metallic  oxides,  pure  metals  and  C-O  bonds.  The  dominant 

contribution  of  the  C  1s  line  was  attributed  to  C-C  and  C-H  bonds  in  saturated  hydrocarbons 

accompanied  with  a  minor  contribution  of  C-O  bonds  shifted  for  about  1.5  eV  towards  higher 

binding  energies  [16].  The  analyzed  samples  are  typical  examples  of  in-depth  non-uniform 

surfaces,  consisting  of  a  metallic  bulk,  an  oxide  layer  (except  in  the  case  of  Au)  covered  by  a 

layer of hydrocarbon impurities. 

The results of the composition analysis are summarized in Table 1. High relative amount 

of  carbon  is  common  to  all  samples,  implying  relatively  thick  hydrocarbon  overlayer  on  their 

top. After the IGS exposure, the dominant contribution of the C 1s line further increases, whilst 

the contribution of C-O bonds diminishes and eventually disappears after prolonged exposures to 

the IGS environments. This result implies that IGS exposure of all samples increases thickness of 

the hydrocarbon overlayer dc, in which the amount of oxygen is becoming reduced with time.  

Besides  the  increase  of  the  hydrocarbon  overlayer  thickness,  IGS  exposure  may  also 

influence  metallic  oxide  layer.  We  illustrate  this  on  the  example  of  the  molybdenum  sample. 

High resolution spectra of Mo 3d line taken before and after the IGS exposure are presented in 

Fig. 3. The main contribution in both spectra, with Mo 3d5/2 line at 228.3 eV, can be attributed to 

metallic molybdenum [17]. The secondary contributions correspond to MoO3 (Mo 3d5/2 at 232.9 

eV [17]) and  Mo2O5 (Mo 3d5/2 at 231.7 eV [18]) in the spectra  taken before and after the IGS 

exposure,  respectively.  Besides  that,  the  relative  contribution  of  the  oxide  phase  in  the  Mo  3d 

line  decreased  from  25  to  21%  by  the  exposure,  implying  that  the  oxide  layer  was  partially 

sputtered away. This suggestion is further supported by the oxide phase reduction from Mo(VI) 

to Mo(V), which can be explained by well-known preferential sputtering of oxygen in different 

oxides of heavy metals (cf. [19] and references therein). Therefore, this result is a strong hint that 
additional  hydrocarbon  contamination  during  the  IGS  exposure  is  accompanied  by  Ar+  ion 

sputtering of the sample surface. 

10 

 
 
 
Table 1. XPS composition analysis and position of the low energy cutoff of Au, Mo and stainless 
steel samples before and after the exposure to the IGS environment. 

Element 

Gold 

Molybdenum 

Stainless steel 

before 

after 

Before 

after 

before 

after 

C 

O 

Au 

Mo 

Fe 

Cr 

72.6% 

78.0% 

48.3% 

58.7% 

50.0% 

57.1% 

16.8% 

13.0% 

38.9% 

26.7% 

41.2% 

34.1% 

10.5% 

8.9% 

12.8% 

14.6% 

5.2% 

3.5% 

5.3% 

3.5% 

Ecutoff (eV) 

19.71 

19.97 

20.12 

20.01 

20.34 

20.00 

Figure 3. High resolution XPS spectra of Mo 3d line taken (a) before and (b) after the IGS 

exposure, and the corresponding line fittings.  

In  contrast  to  molybdenum,  IGS  exposure  of  stainless  steel  apparently  increases  the 

thickness of the oxide layer. We present in Fig. 4 fittings of the Fe 2p3/2 line taken from stainless 

steel  sample  before  and  after  the  IGS  exposure.  Since  this  line  has  very  complex  shape  in  the 

case of iron oxides due to the multiplet splitting effect, it is fitted as a superposition of symmetric 

pseudo-Voigt  peaks  with  relative  positions,  intensities  and  widths  constrained  according  to  the 

measurements performed on reference compounds [20]. Therefore, although the line is fitted to 

the  superposition  of  several  peaks,  the  only  free  parameters  per  chemical  phase  are  just  the 

position and the intensity of the first peak. By applying this approach we identified two phases of 

iron:  metallic  iron,  described  by  a  single  asymmetric  peak  (with  a  profile  proposed  in  [20])  at 

706.4  eV  and  FeO  with  the  first  peak  at  709.3  eV  (Fig.  4(a))  and  708.3  eV  (Fig.  4(b)).  The 
11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relative  contribution  of  the  metallic  phase  decreased  from  24.4%  to  12.4%  after  the  IGS 

exposure, in contrast to the Mo sample.  While the FeO contribution is at the expected position 

after the IGS exposure [20], this is not the case for the spectrum at Fig. 4 (a). Since the overall 

line shape fits much better to that of FeO than e.g. Fe2O3 and that we observe similar shift of the 

corresponding O 1s line contribution, we consider that the oxide layer is differentially charged 

due to the X-ray irradiation and limited conductivity of the oxide layer in this case.  

Figure 4. High resolution XPS spectra of Fe 2p3/2 line taken a) before and b) after the IGS 

exposure, and the corresponding line fittings. 

Low energy cutoffs Ecutoff of the secondary electron spectra measured before and after the 

IGS  exposure  are  also  presented  in  Table  1  for  the  exposed  samples.  The  initial  maximum 

difference between Ecutoff of the three samples of 0.63 eV is strongly reduced after the exposure 

to  only  0.04  eV,  which  is  in  the  frame  of  the  experimental  uncertainty.  The  fact  that  the  three 

work functions are becoming the same after the exposure indicates that the first layer of the three 

samples  became  very  similar  after  the  exposure.  Having  the  same  work  function  after  the 

exposure regardless of the material would be particularly important if potential electron emission 

is  dominant  contribution  to  IISEY.  The  direct  consequence  would  be  that  γe,ion  becomes 

independent of the electrode material. In addition, this result supports the XPS findings that all 

three samples are covered with a similar hydrocarbon layer after the exposure. 

3.3 The mechanism of surface contamination  

The results from the previous section show that exposures to environments like those in 

our experiments enhance surface contamination by saturated hydrocarbons, i.e. species that were 

also detected in the residual gas. At the same time we see on the example of Mo surface that ion 

12 

 
 
 
 
sputtering of exposed surfaces, which might also contribute to hydrocarbon removal, cannot be 

ruled  out.  Therefore,  a  set  of  experiments  was  performed  with  the  goal  of  revealing  the 

mechanism of hydrocarbon contamination and particularly to understand the contribution of ion 

bombardment to the overall process. Copper single crystal was used as a sample due to its high 

purity  and  low  surface  roughness,  which  allows  much  more  efficient  sputter  cleaning  as 

compared  with  the  samples  used  in  previous  experiments.  The  previously  cleaned  sample  was 

exposed to a) Ar gas, b) Ar gas with the IGS filament on but without applying grid voltage that 

could accelerate electrons and provide gas ionisation and c) Ar gas with the IGS filament on and 

grid voltage applied (Ar discharge). The exposure time and the Ar pressure was the same in the 
three experiments, namely, 15 min and 1∙10-5 mbar, respectively. The aim of the experiment a) 

was to find the contribution of the gas residuals, from the preparation chamber and the gas line, 

to  the  overall  surface  contamination.  In  experiment  b)  the  contribution  of  outgassing,  mainly 
from the filament, was identified. In experiment c) the contribution of Ar+ ion bombardment on 

the contamination process was expected to be revealed.  

XPS  measurements of the Cu sample were performed before  and after the exposure. In 

each  spectrum  only  lines  characteristic  to  copper  and  carbon  were  observed,  as  well  as  some 

traces of fluorine. The sample surface can be modeled as a flat copper bulk covered by the thin 

film  of  saturated  hydrocarbons.  In  order  to  provide  proper  quantification  of  such  surface,  the 

hydrocarbon  layer  thickness  dc  was  determined  rather  than  the  surface  composition  using  the 

atomic sensitivity factors. The former can be evaluated from the measured ratio of C 1s and Cu 

2p3/2 line intensities IC and ICu if the compositions of the overlayer and the bulk are known.  

(cid:6)(cid:13)
(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:14)

=

(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:15)
(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:15)

∙

(cid:9)

(cid:20)(cid:21)
(cid:21)
(cid:22)(cid:13)

(cid:17)(cid:18)(cid:19)

(cid:9)

(cid:20)(cid:21)
(cid:21)
(cid:22)(cid:13)(cid:14)

(cid:19)

, 

 (2) 

where IC0 and ICu0 are line intensities in the case of uniform hydrocarbon and  copper samples, 
c  are  effective  attenuation  lengths  of  C  1s  and  Cu  2p3/2  lines  in  hydrocarbon 

c  and  LCu

while  LC

layer, respectively. IC0 and ICu0 depend on the atomic concentration of carbon and copper, their 

photoionisation cross sections [21] and asymmetry parameters [10], as well as the transmission 
c  were  obtained  from  the 

function  of  the  energy  spectrometer  [8].  The  parameters  LC

c  and  LCu

corresponding  NIST  database  [22]  for  the  known  composition  of  the  contamination  overlayer. 

Their  values  are  3.07  nm  and  1.9  nm,  respectively.  Similar  to  [11],  we  model  the  layer  of 

saturated  hydrocarbons  as  paraffin,  which  allows  us  to  determine  all  parameters  in  the 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
transcendent  eq.  (2),  thus  leaving  only  dc  as  unknown  magnitude.  Therefore,  by  solving  this 

equation, the change of dc due to the IGS exposure can be estimated from the measured ratios of 

carbon and copper line intensities.  

Table 2. Change of the hydrocarbon layer thickness from the XPS results, calculated using the 
single layer model 
sample 

Exposure 

texp (min)  Δdc (nm) 

Cu 

Cu 

Cu 

Cu 

Au 

Au 

Ar gas at 1·10-5 mbar 
Ar gas at 1·10-5 mbar with IGS ThW filament on 
Ar gas discharge in IGS (ThW filament) at 1·10-5 mbar 
Ar gas discharge in IGS (ThW filament) at 1·10-5 mbar 
Ar gas discharge in IGS (ThW filament) at 1·10-5 mbar 
H2 gas discharge in IGS (YIr filament) at 1·10-5 mbar 

15 

15 

15 

60 

15 

60 

0.05 

0.2 

1.83 

4.58 

0.52 

0.85 

The results of the experiments are given in Table 2. Exposure just to the Ar gas with the 

ThW  filament  turned  ON  or  OFF  yielded  in  modest  or  negligible  increase  of  dc.  However, 

acceleration  of  electrons,  which  enables  ionisation  and  consequently  ion  bombardment  of  the 

sample surface, increases the rate of contamination for almost one order of magnitude! When the 

exposure time was four  times longer, the  estimated increase of dc was  about 2.5 times  greater. 

However,  we  should  be  aware  that  the  method  we  apply  to  estimate  dc  has  modest  precision 

when the overlayer thickness becomes much greater than the effective attenuation lengths. The 

same  effect  was  also  observed  in  the  case  of  gold,  although  the  hydrocarbon  growth  rate  was 

about 3.5 times slower. Effective attenuation length of Au 4f7/2 line in paraffin calculated using 

the NIST database was 3.6 nm. In addition, hydrocarbon layer was growing on gold also in the 

hydrogen discharge operating with YIr filament, although with even slower rate.  

At first sight, enhancement of hydrocarbon layer growth by ion bombardment, instead of 

its suppression due to the sputtering, is a counterintuitive result. As the matter of fact, this is an 

effect known for a long time [23],[24],[25],[26],[27]. Surface adsorption of hydrocarbon species 

will  inevitably  take  place  when  they  are  present  in  the  residual  gas,  due  to  the  high  sticking 

coefficient and considerable desorption energy. When such surface is bombarded by a photon or 

electron beam, previously adsorbed hydrocarbon molecules will dissociate into free radicals. The 

latter  will  then  make  cross-links,  thus  forming  chemically  inert  polymer-like  structures.  In  the 

case of ion bombardment the two opposite effects will be taking place: removal of hydrocarbon 

species  by  ion  sputtering  and  the  enhancement  of  their  polymerization.  Which  process  will 
14 

 
 
prevail depends on the sputtering  yield and the partial pressure of hydrocarbons in the residual 

gas [23]. The flux of Ar ions impinging the surface, calculated from the ion current density, is 
about 3.1∙1012 cm-2s-1. Assuming the partial pressure of CH4 of about 3∙10-9 mbar (about 10% of 
the total base pressure), the corresponding atomic flux will be ~6∙1012 cm-2s-1 i.e. about 2 times 

higher than that of Ar ion flux. In addition, 200 eV Ar ions have too low energy to form collision 

cascades which is usually the dominant sputtering process. Momentum transfer to target atoms 

by  direct  knock-on  collisions  is  still  possible,  but  the  incident  angle  is  not  suitable  to  promote 

this sputtering mechanism. Therefore, very low sputtering  yield is expected, which all together 

results in enhancement of the hydrocarbon layer growth. The latter takes place even in the case 

of  hydrogen  discharge,  although  hydrogen  atoms  also  perform  chemical  sputtering  of 

hydrocarbons [28]. As a matter of fact, this is a possible reason why the hydrocarbon growth rate 

is lower in the case of hydrogen as compared to argon. In addition, it should be also noted that 

the current density of hydrogen ions was about 2.5 times smaller than that of Ar ions (cf. Section 

2.3). 

It should be emphasized that the residual gas composition can have significant influence 

on the hydrocarbon layer growth. Usual sources  of carbon in vacuum systems are hot tungsten 

filaments [29]. Carbon atoms, dissolved in the bulk  of the filament, segregate to the surface at 

high  temperature.  These  atoms  then  react  with  the  residual  gas,  thus  forming  volatile  species 

such as CO, CO2 and small hydrocarbon molecules. Formation of hydrocarbon in vacuum can be 

closely related with the original residual gas composition: presence of hydrogen precursors, such 

as  H2  or  H2O,  will  promote  formation  of  hydrocarbons.  Therefore,  in  systems  with  smaller 

amounts  of  hydrogen  precursors,  the  hydrocarbon  growth  rate  can  be  reduced  and  even 

suppressed.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  other  hydrocarbon  species  in  the  residual  gas  (e.g. 

different from small alkane molecules), surface exposure to other hydrogen precursors (namely 

H2 and H2O, which are clearly present in the residual gas) might also contribute to the formation 

of saturated hydrocarbons at the sample surface. 

When a sample is not homogeneous in depth, which we have in the case of hydrocarbon 

layer  covering  all  samples  including  gold  and  copper,  other  effects  may  play  a  role.  It  is  well 

known that sputtering yield is directly proportional to the ion energy deposited practically in the 

first nanometer. If atomic mass of bulk atoms is much larger than that of argon, as in the case of 

Au, ion energy is efficiently deposited into the hydrocarbon layer. Consequently, the sputtering 

yield of hydrocarbons will be enhanced, which is known as sputtering yield amplification [30]. 

15 

 
 
 
These  conditions  are  not  met  in  copper  sample:  Ar  ions  will  efficiently  transfer  energy  to  Cu 

atoms due to the  more similar  masses, thus reducing energy  confinement into the hydrocarbon 

overlayer. Therefore, sputtering yield amplification could be responsible for the smaller growth 

rate (i.e. higher sputtering rate) of the hydrocarbon layer on Au as compared to Cu. 

3.4 The consequences of the IGS exposure on IISEY 

Knowing that secondary electron emission induced by low energy ions is related to first 

few atomic layers of the surface, it is to be expected that IGS exposure will change IISEY. Time 

evolution of γe,ion may be followed particularly  well on surfaces that can be efficiently  cleaned 

e.g. by vacuum annealing, such as graphite, which we consequently tested. Prior to the exposure 

experiments, the graphite sample was annealed to 350 °C for 20 min,  yielding in a high purity 

surface containing about 1% of O. In Figs. 5 (a) and (b) we present high resolution spectra of the 
C  1s  photoelectron  line  taken  before  and  after  the  IGS  exposure  to  Ar  discharge  (pAr  =  1∙10-5 

mbar) for 15 min. 

The peak fitting model was built by fitting the C 1s line taken from the highly oriented 

pyrolytic  graphite,  which  was  used  as  a  reference  for  pure  graphite:  we  apply  Doniach-Šunjić 

profile with the asymmetry parameter of 0.01, convoluted by pseudo-Voigt profile in the form of 

product of Gaussian (30%) and Lorentzian (70%) (having a standard notation GL(70)). C 1s line 

fitting  confirms  very  high  purity  of  the  freshly  annealed  sample.  About  91%  of  carbon  atoms 
make sp2 i.e. pure graphitic bonds, accompanied with 5% of sp3 and 4% of C-O bonds. Finally, a 
broad  peak  at  about  290  eV,  representing  π-π*  shake  up  satellite,  is  another  fingerprint  of  the 

graphitic structure.  

After  the  IGS  exposure  the  relative  amount  of  carbon  decreases  to  88%,  accompanied 

with  equal  relative  amounts  of  oxygen  and  fluorine.  The  latter  is  present  in  the  form  of  C-F 

bonds (F 1s line is situated at 688.7 eV) [31]. However, the greatest change was observed in C 1s 
line (Fig. 5(b)). The relative amount of sp2 dropped to only 54%, whilst a contribution that we 

attribute to C-C and C-H bonds in saturated hydrocarbons increased to 32.4%. C-O contribution 

at 286.3 eV [31] increased to 8%, whilst additional contributions appeared at 287.8 eV (3.5%) 

and 291 eV (2.2%). They can be attributed to C=O and CF3 bonds, respectively [31].    

16 

 
 
 
Figure 5. High resolution XPS spectra of the C 1s line taken from the graphite sample a) before 
and b) after the IGS exposure; c) energy dependence of IISEY of Ar+ ions from the graphite 

sample before and after the IGS exposure. 

Highly reproducible IISEY data for Ar+ ions taken from the graphite sample before and 

after the IGS exposure are presented in Fig. 5(c). First of all, we notice obvious dependence of 

γe,ion on the ion energy, which proves that the dominant process is subthreshold kinetic electron 

emission. The two sets of IISEY points practically overlap up to 150 eV. At higher energies, γe,ion 

from the exposed sample becomes distinctly higher. This energy could represent a threshold for 

an  additional  channel  for  secondary  electron  emission.  Existence  of  an  energy  threshold  is 

another fingerprint of kinetic electron emission: it is related to the distance of closest approach 

between  two  collision  partners  at  which  a  particular  electron  promotion  process  becomes 

possible.  

17 

 
 
 
 
Measurement  of  Ar+  induced  secondary  electron  yield  from  clean  highly  oriented 

pyrolytic graphite at Utah state university show very different result: in this energy region γe,ion is 

practically energy independent, being about 25±15%, evidencing dominance of potential electron 

emission  [32].  Significant  discrepancy  of  the  two  measurements  can  hardly  be  explained  by 
different  measurement  geometries:  as  previously  stated,  incident  angle  of  the  Ar+  beam  in  our 

measurements was 45°, in contrast to normal incidence in [32].  

IISEY  measurements  induced  by  Ar+  ions  from  Au  and  Mo  samples  contaminated  by 

IGS exposure and subsequently annealed (cf. next section) are presented in Figure 6. As in the 

case of the graphite sample, energy dependence of γe,ion is clearly pronounced, evidencing strong 
contribution  of  the  kinetic  electron  emission.  Ar+  induced  secondary  electron  emission  from 

clean  Mo  surface  in  this  energy  region  is  practically  energy  independent,  typical  for  potential 

electron  emission,  having  γe,ion  of  about  11%  [33].  Other  groups  report  slightly  lower  values 
(~8% [34] and  ~9% [35]). The same trend was  observed in the  case of  γe,ion of Ar+ from  gold, 

although IISEY is only about 5% in the same energy range [4]. In the case of tungsten, another 

metal frequently used for ion collectors, low energy γe,ion equals about 9% and shows the same 

energy independence [33]. 

Review  of  various  experimental  results  reveals  that  hydrocarbon  layer  growth  on  clean 

metals  contributes  to  energy  dependent  IISEY:  for  energies  typically  below  ~200  eV  γe,ion  is 

lower,  while  at  higher  energies  the  yield  is  higher  than  that  of  clean  metals  [36].  The  latter  is 

consistent  with  our  results.  It  should  be  also  noted  that  γe,ion  of  Mo  at  220  eV  in  Fig.  6  is 

11.3±0.5%, being close to the low energy values obtained for the clean metal. Finally, increased 

slope of γe,ion(E) from graphite after the surface contamination (i.e. due to the sample exposure to 

the  Ar  discharge),  as  can  be  seen  in  Fig.  5c,  further  supports  our  assumption  that  pronounced 

kinetic electron emission is caused by the hydrocarbon layer growth. While the slope of γe,ion(E) 

is  approximately  the  same  for  contaminated  Mo,  Au  and  graphite  surfaces,  all  the  values  of 

graphite  are  lower  by  about  4-5%.  A  possible  explanation  could  be  dissimilar  contributions  of 

the potential electron emission. 

18 

 
Figure 6. Energy dependence of IISEY of Ar+ ions from Mo and Au samples previously 

contaminated by IGS exposures. 

According  to  the  XPS  analyses,  the  Au  and  Mo  samples  can  be  approximated  by  a 

metallic bulk covered with a hydrocarbon layer. By applying the single layer model introduced 

in Section 3.3, we estimate that dc on Au and Mo samples is about 3.9 and 2.8 nm, respectively. 

IISEY  data  practically  overlap  for  the  two  samples  in  the  frame  of  the  experimental  error 

(although the points of gold are systematically below those of molybdenum), which is consistent 

with the surface  nature  of the electron emission and our previous finding that different sample 

surfaces  are  becoming  similar  after  the  IGS  exposure.  The  only  difference  is  the  hydrocarbon 

growth rate, which appears to be lower for more inert surfaces (e.g. gold or graphite). 

Significance  of  the  observed  γe,ion  change  of  materials  by  their  exposure  to  Ar  ion 

bombardment is in the fact that namely this kind of treatment is frequently used to improve the 

stability  of  the  pressure  reading  in  ionisation  gauges  [37].  It  is  generally  assumed  that  this 

empirically established procedure contributes to surface cleaning by intense sputtering of surface 

impurities from ion collectors. Unexpectedly, its role appears to be in promoting the growth of a 

stable  hydrocarbon  layer.  Having  in  mind  that  the  inelastic  mean  free  path  of  electrons  with 

energy below 10 eV is rather large, constant γe,ion will be reached when the layer is sufficiently 

thick to secure that all secondary electrons are emitted exclusively from this region. Since the ion 

range increases with the ion energy and decreases with the atomic number, the thickness should 
be larger than the range of the most energetic H+ ions. When this thickness is achieved, standard 

operation will contribute to further  growth of the hydrocarbon layer, but  leave the ion induced 

19 

 
 
secondary electron yield constant. This phenomenon will be taking place in any ionisation gauge, 

regardless  of  its  design  or  the  electrode  materials.  Related  to  our  experiments,  we  have 

performed  Monte  Carlo  simulations  of  100  and  300  eV  Ar  ions  impinging  paraffin  (32.5%  C, 
67.5% of H, density of 0.96 g/cm3) using well known SRIM code [38], version SRIM-2013. It 

appears that all Ar ions stopped within first 3 nm (implantation profile maximum at 1.4 nm) and 

5  nm  (implantation  profile  maximum  at  2.3  nm)  in  the  case  of  100  eV  and  300  eV  ions, 

respectively. Small difference between the evaluated Ar ion ranges in paraffin and the estimated 

thickness  dc  of  Au  and  Mo  samples  from  which  IISEY  measurements  were  performed  explain 

rather small difference between the electron yields.    

3.5 Influence of sample annealing on the hydrocarbon layer 

Another  issue  of  interest  in  vacuum  technology  is  how  vacuum  baking  affects  the 

hydrocarbon layer previously grown on the surface of an ion collector. In that respect we were 

determining  change  of  dc  on  Au  and  Mo  samples  due  to  the  sample  annealing  from  the  XPS 

analyses and the previously introduced single layer model. Each annealing was performed at 350 

°C for 20 min. Assuming that organic species are non-dissociatively desorbed according to the 

Langmuir model with the desorption energy of 1.5 eV, their desorption rate at this temperature is 

four  orders  of  magnitude  greater  than  at  180  °C  (the  latter  being  a  typical  vacuum  baking 

temperature).  Thus,  we  can  roughly  say  that  annealing  a  sample  for  20  min  at  350  °C  is 
equivalent  to  vacuum  baking  for  20×104  min  (≈139  days)  at  180°C.  Both  samples  were 

previously  exposed  several  times  to  the  Ar  discharge,  yielding  to  initial  hydrocarbon  layer 

thicknesses of about 6 nm (Au) and 4.5 nm (Mo). This annealing procedure decreased dc of Au 

and  Mo  to  about  4  nm  and  3.3  nm,  respectively.  Repeated  annealing  of  Mo  under  the  same 

condition reduced further dc to 2.8 nm, whilst additional annealing cycles did not show any effect 

on  the  hydrocarbon  layer.  At  the  same  time,  IISEY  measurements  performed  between  the 

annealing cycles were identical in the frame of the experimental error. 

From  these  experiments  we  can  conclude  that  hydrocarbon  layers  formed  at  metallic 

surfaces are too stable to be affected by standard baking procedures. The latter is well known in 

experimental surface science: the only efficient way to remove hydrocarbons from a surface is by 

ion sputtering. Consequently, once an ion collector is exposed to the operating conditions in an 

ionisation gauge, its γe,ion should not be strongly affected by vacuum baking and/or low energy 

ion bombardment. 

20 

 
It should be stated, however, that the latter is not true for highly inert surfaces such as 

graphite. According to our experience, graphite sample previously exposed to IGS environment 

is efficiently cleaned by annealing at 350 °C for 20 minutes.      

4. Conclusion 

Our investigation showed that, depending on the material, its surface conditions and the 
ion energy, γe,ion of an ion collector induced by Ar+ ions can have values in the range 3-20%. The 

first  direct  consequence  of  this  fact  is  that  experimental  determination  of  ionisation  gauge 

sensitivity  may  be  strongly  affected  by  secondary  electron  emission  since  the  true  current  of 

collected ions cannot be measured in typical ionisation gauge arrangements without a suppressor 

grid in front of a suitably designed ion collector [39]. Thus, comparison of sensitivities obtained 

theoretically  or  by  simulations  with  experimental  ones  has  to  take  into  account  this  unknown 

quantity. 

The  most  important  conclusion  of  this  research  is  that  exposure  of  electrodes  to  an 

environment  characteristic  to  ionisation  gauges  at  room  temperature  inevitably  leads  to  the 

growth  of  hydrocarbon  layers.  The  contamination  is  triggered  by  particle  bombardment  of 

electrode surfaces: electrons and ions in the case of the grid and the ion collector, respectively. 

Such process is clearly observable as a brown colour of electrodes in ionisation gauges operating 

for only few tens of hours. Formation of a few nanometer thin hydrocarbon layer on the surface 

of an ion collector will already change γe,ion sufficiently to affect the gauge sensitivity. This can 

potentially  produce  a  drift  in  the  reading  of  ionisation  gauges  during  the  process  of  the 

hydrocarbon  layer  growth.  Growth  of  hydrocarbons  seems  to  take  place  regardless  of  the 

discharge gas. It was experimentally observed in highly inert (Ar) or hydrogen rich atmosphere, 

although exposure to the latter should contribute to chemical sputtering of hydrocarbons. 

Vacuum baking up to 200 °C or Ar+ bombardment will not remove the hydrocarbon layer 

formed at the ion collector surface. On the contrary, the latter will probably further increase its 

growth  rate.  Another  procedure  of  cleaning  ionisation  gauge  electrodes,  provided  by  many 

ionisation  gauge  controllers,  is  "degassing".  In  the  case  of  the  ion  collector,  it  represents 

electrode  heating  by  electron  bombardment,  reaching  very  high  temperatures  that  will  likely 

affect  the  hydrocarbon  layer  formed  at  the  surface  of  an  ion  collector.  The  consequences  of 

degassing on IISEY of ion collectors will be studied in a later work. 

21 

 
 
 
In spite of different cleaning procedures of ionisation gauges, hydrocarbon layers will be 

re-established  during  the  normal  operation  of  a  gauge.  This  work  shows  that  accuracy  of 

ionisation gauges does not depend on how ‘clean’ is the ion collector surface, but how stable is 

its IISEY. Assuming that the surface morphology of an ion collector is not changing during the 

operation,  its  γe,ion  will  likely  be  constant  and  independent  of  the  electrode  material  and  the 

general design of the ionisation gauge once a uniform and sufficiently thick hydrocarbon layer is 

formed. Possible consequence of the formation of such layer could be a more stable sensitivity, 

since  we  found  that  sufficiently  thick  hydrocarbon  layers  have  relatively  stable  secondary 

electron  yield.  Since  the  growth  rate  of  hydrocarbon  species  seems  to  be  increasing  with  the 

surface reactivity, ion collectors made of transition metals should have shorter transition period 

of unstable secondary electron yield as compared to inert materials such as gold or graphite. In 

addition, it can be recommended that before measurement with an ionisation gauge, after a bake-

out  a  conditioning  procedure  of  operating  the  gauge  for  at  least  an  hour  at  a  few  mPa  Ar  is 

introduced.  This  procedure  builds  up  a  hydrocarbon  layer  and  stabilizes  the  ion  induced 

secondary electron yield and the reproducibility of the sensitivity of the gauge.   

Alternatively,  stable  γe,ion  could  be  achieved  by  using  chemically  inert  electrodes 

operating  at  high  temperature.  Both,  high  temperature  and  low  reactivity  of  the  substrate  will 

reduce  equilibrium  surface  concentration  of  adsorbed  hydrocarbon  species.  Consequently,  the 

probability  of  formation  of  free  radicals  by  ion  bombardment,  which  can  then  cross  link  and 

polymerize, will be much lower. In other words, the conditions for the hydrocarbon layer growth 

will  not  be  fulfilled  under  such  circumstances,  contributing  to  stable  γe,ion  during  the  gauge 

operation (equal to that of a clean surface). This strategy was indeed applied in [40], where high 

stability of an ionisation gauge with gold coated electrodes operating at 250 °C was reported.    

Acknowledgments 

This  work  has  received  funding  from  the  EMPIR  programme  (project  16NRM05  ‘Ion  gauge’) 

co-financed  by  the  Participating  States  and  from  the  European  Union's  Horizon  2020  research 

and innovation programme, and the Portuguese National Funding Agency for Science, Research 

and  Technology  in  the  framework  of  the  project  UID/FIS/00068/2019.  The  authors  also  thank 

Mihail  Granovskij  and  other  colleagues  from  VACOM,  for  providing  the  yttria  coated  iridium 

filament used in our experiments. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
Conflicts of interest: “The authors declare no conflict of interest.” 

References 

[1]  K. Jousten, F. Boineau, N. Bundaleski, C. Illgen, J. Šetina, O.M.N.D. Teodoro, M. Vičar, M. 

Wüest, A review on hot cathode ionisation gauges with focus on a suitable design for 

measurement accuracy and stability, Vacuum 179 (2020) 109545   

[2]  H.D. Hagstrum, Low energy deexcitation and neutralization processes near surfaces, in: N.H. 

Tolk, J.C. Tully (Eds.), Inelastic ion-surface collisions, Academic Press, New York, 1977 

[3]  P. Varga, H. Winter, Slow particle-induced electron emission from surfaces, in: G. Hohler, 

E.A. Niekisch (Eds.), Springer Tracts in Modern Physics Vol. 123: Particle induced electron 

emission II, Berlin, Springer Verlag, 1992 

[4]  G. Lakits, F. Aumayr, M. Heim, H. Winter, Threshold of ion-induced kinetic electron 

emission from a clean metal surface, Phys Rev A, 49 (1990) 5780–5783.  

[5]  N. Bajales, S. Montoro, E.C. Goldberg, R.A. Baragiola, J. Ferron, Identification of 

mechanisms of ion induced electron emission by factor analysis, Surf. Sci. 579 (2005) L97–

L102. 

[6]  R.F. Egerton, Electron-Energy Loss Spectroscopy in the Electron Microscope 3rd ed. 

Springer, New York, 2011 

[7]  C.P. Gopalaraman, R.A. Armstrong, P.A. Redhead, Sensitivity variations in Bayard-Alpert 

gauges caused by Auger emission at the collector, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. 7 (1970) 195–198. 

[8]  J. Trigueiro, W. Lima, N. Bundaleski, O.M.N.D. Teodoro, XPS spectrometer transmission 

function optimization by the differential evolution algorithm, J. El. Spec. Relat. Phenom. 222 

(2018) 122-132 

[9]  C.D. Wagner, L.E. Davis, M.W. Zeller, J.A. Taylor, R.M. Raymond, L.H. Gale, Empirical 

atomic sensitivity factors for quantitative analysis by electron spectroscopy for chemical 

analysis, Surf. Interface Anal. 3 (1981) 211–225. 

23 

 
 
 
[10] 

 J.J. Yeh, I. Lindau, Atomic subshell photoionization cross sections and asymmetry 

parameters: 1 ≤ Z ≤ 103, Atom. Data Nucl. Data 32 (1985) 1–155 

[11] N. Bundaleski, I. Radisavljević, N. Ivanović, Z. Rakočević, M. Medić Ilić, N. Romčević, 

O.M.N.D. Teodoro, Local, electronic and surface structure of multicomponent Fe-doped 

CdTe(S) systems, Surf. Sci. 681 (2019) 76-86 

[12] H. Oechsner, Scanning Work Function Microscopy, Fresenius’ J. Anal Chem. 355 (1996) 

419-424 

[13] J. Trigueiro, N. Bundaleski, O.M.N.D. Teodoro, Monitoring dynamics of different processes 

on rutile TiO2(110) surface by following work function change, Vacuum 152 (2018) 327-

329 

[14] D. Hasselkamp, Kinetic electron emission from solid surfaces under ion bombardment, in: 

G. Hohler, E.A. Niekisch (Eds.), Springer Tracts in Modern Physics Vol. 123: Particle 

induced electron emission II, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1992 

[15] M.I. Patino, R.E. Wirz, Electron emission from carbon velvet due to incident xenon ions, 

Appl.Phys.Lett. 113 (2018) 041603 

[16] B.P. Payne, M.C. Biesinger, N.S. McIntyre, The study of polycrystalline nickel metal 

oxidation by water vapour, J. El.Spec.Rel.Phenom. 175 (2009) 55-65 

[17] D.O. Scanlon, G.W. Watson, D.J. Payne, G.R. Atkinson, R.G. Egdell, D.S.L Law, 

Theoretical and Experimental Study of the Electronic Structures of MoO3 and MoO2 J. Phys. 

Chem. C 114 (2010) 4636-4645  

[18] J. Baltrusaitis, B. Mendoza-Sanchez, V. Fernandez, R. Veenstra, N. Dukstiene, A. Roberts, 

N. Fairley, Generalized molybdenum oxide surface chemical state XPS determination via 

informed amorphous sample model, Appl. Surf. Sci. 326 (2015) 151-161. 

[19] M.P. Seah, T.S. Nunney, Sputtering yields of compounds using argon ions, J.Phys. D: 

Applied physics 43 (2010) 253001 

[20] M.C. Biesinger, B.P. Payne, A.P. Grosvenor, L.W.M. Lau, A.R. Gerson, R.St.C Smart, 

Resolving surface chemical states in XPS analysis of first row transition metals, oxides and 

hydroxides: Cr, Mn, Fe, Co and Ni, Appl.Surf.Sci. 257 (2011) 2717-2730 

24 

 
[21] J.H. Scofield, Hartree-Slater subshell photoionization cross-sections at 1254 and 1487 eV, J. 

Electron Spectrosc. 8 (1976) 129–137 

[22] C.J. Powell, A. Jablonski, NIST Effective Attenuation Length Database, Version 1.3, SRD 

82, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 2011 

[23] E.H. Hirsch, The growth of carbonaceous contamination on surfaces undergoing ion 

bombardment, J. Phys. D. 10 (1977) 2069-2076.  

[24] E.P. Eernisse, Light ion bombardment sputtering, stress buildup, and enhanced surface 

contamination, J. Nucl. Mater. 53 (1974) 226–230.  

[25] J. Taniguchi, N. Ohno, S. Honda, Utilizing of hydrocarbon contamination for prevention of 

the surface charge-up at electron-beam assisted chemical etching of a diamond chip, Nucl. 

Instr. Meth. B 121 (1997) 507–509.  

[26] F.K. Naehring, A. Schmidt, J. Schöneich, Ion Induced Carbon Contamination and Recoil 

Implatation, Phys. Status solidi 141 (1977) 141–145.  

[27] A. Dolgov, D. Lopaev, C.J. Lee, E. Zoethout, V. Medvedev, O. Yakushev, F. Bijkerk, 

Characterization of carbon contamination under ion and hot atom bombardment in a tin-

plasma extreme ultraviolet light source, Appl. Surf. Sci. 353  (2015) 708–713. 

[28] C. Hopf, A. von Kaudell, W. Jacob, Chemical sputtering of hydrocarbon films, J. Appl. 

Phys. 94 (2003) 2373-2380 

[29] K. Jousten, Total Pressure Vacuum Gauges, in: K. Jousten (Ed.), Handbook of Vacuum 

Technology, 2nd edition, Weinheim, Wiley-VCH Verlag, 2016 

[30] S. Berg and I. V. Katardjiev, Preferential sputtering effects in thin film processing, J. Vac. 

Sci. Technol. A 17 (1999) 1916-1924 

[31] G. Beamson, D. Briggs, High Resolution XPS of Organic Polymers – The Scienta ESCA300 

Database, Wiley Interscience, New York 1992 

[32] J.R. Dennison, C.D. Thomson, J. Kite, V. Zavyalov, J. Corbridge, Materials characterization 

at Utah state university: facilities and knowledgebase of electronic properties of materials 

applicable to spacecraft charging, Tech. rep., Utah State University, 2003 

25 

 
[33] H.D. Hagstrum, Auger Ejection of Electrons from Molybdenum by Noble Gas Ions, Phys. 

Rev. 104 (1956) 672-683 

[34] P. Mahadevan, J. Layton, D. Medved, Secondary electron emission from clean surface of 

molybdenum due to low-energy noble gas ions, Phys. Rev. 129 (1963) 79-83 

[35] U. A. Arifov, R. R. Rakhimov, Kh. Dzhurakulov, Secondary Emission in the Bombardment 

of Molybdenum by Neutral Atoms and Argon Ions  Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 143 (1962) 

309-311 (in Russian). 

[36] A.V. Phelps, Z. Lj. Petrović, Cold-cathode discharges and breakdown in argon: surface and 

gas phase production of secondary electrons, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 8 (1999) R21–

R44. 

[37] H. Ave, H.-U. Becker, G. Messer, Stabilisierung der Empfindlichkeit von Heißkathoden-

Ionisationsvakuummetern, PTB-Mitteilungen 95 (1985), 20. 

[38] J.F. Ziegler, M.D. Ziegler, J.P. Biersack, SRIM – The stopping and range of ions in matter, 

Nucl. Instr. Meth. B 268 (2010) 1818-1823 

[39] F. Watanabe, Ion spectroscopy gauge: Total pressure measurements down to 10-12

 Pa with 

discrimination against electron-stimulated desorption ions, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 10 (1992) 

3333-3339. 

[40] H. Gentsch, J. Tewes, G. Messer, An improved ion gauge with gold coated electrodes for 

reliable operation in reactive gases and for use as reference standard, Vacuum 35 (1985) 

137–140. 

26 

 
 
 
