Mid-infrared quantum cascade laser frequency combs with a 
microstrip-like line waveguide geometry 

Filippos Kapsalidis,1, a) Barbara Schneider,1 Matthew Singleton,1 Mathieu Bertrand,1 Emilio Gini,2 Mattias 
Beck,1 and Jérôme Faist1
1) Institute for Quantum Electronics, ETH Zürich, Switzerland 
2) FIRST - Center for Micro- and Nanoscience, ETH Zürich, Switzerland 

(Dated: 16 December 2020) 

In this work, a design for a mid-infrared quantum cascade laser (QCL) frequency comb source that enhances the high 
frequency response and the comb characteristics of the device is presented . A state-of-the-art active region (AR), grown 
on a heavily n-doped InP:Si substrate, was processed into a buried heterostructure with a microstrip-like line waveguide. 
As a result, the repetition rate frequency frep, around 11.09 GHz, can be locked to an injected narrow-linewidth radio 
frequency (RF) signal, over a range of more than 200 kHz with -10 dBm of injected power, which outperforms normal 
buried heterostructure schemes by an order of magnitude. Moreover, under RF injection at powers higher than 20 dBm, 
the lasing spectrum is flattened and significantly broadened, from 24 cm−1 to 65 cm−1 in bandwidth, while at the same 
time the coherence of the comb is maintained and verified. 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Quantum cascade lasers (QCLs) are unipolar semiconduc- 
tor  devices,  based  on  intersubband  transitions  in  coupled 
quantum wells and barriers systems, which have become the 
dominant light source in the mid-infrared part of the electro- 
magnetic  spectrum1  and  are  rapidly  becoming  serious  con- 
tenders  for  the  terahertz  (THz)2,3.  These  devices  are  mono- 
lithic, electrically pumped, and they naturally operate as fre- 
quency  combs  in  both  the  mid-infrared4  and  THz5,  making 
them  prized  devices  for  coherent  spectroscopy6–9  in  those 
spectral  regions.  The  characteristics  of  a  QCL  device  oper- 
ating as a frequency comb are a broad and phase-locked opti- 
cal spectrum of equidistant modes, together with a strong nar- 
row radio frequency (RF) beatnote generated by the beating 
of these optical modes4. 

One unique property of QCLs is their ultrafast carrier  re- 
laxation  lifetimes,  which  are  in  the  order  of    picoseconds 
(ps),  mainly  influenced  by  phonon  assisted  intersubband 
scattering10. This means that carrier populations can track the 
intracavity  beating  between  the  optical  modes,  which,  com- 
bined with an intrinsic cut-off in the tens of GHz10,11, permits 
the electronic beat signal at the repetition rate frequency frep 
to be observed on the bias line. This logic applies vice versa, 
allowing a coupling between the optical modes and an injected 
RF signal12–14. 

High  frequency  modulation  and  injection  locking  is  ex- 
tremely interesting for the field of QCL frequency combs and 
dual-comb  spectroscopy.  It  has  been  experimentally  proven 
that  by  injecting  a  microwave  signal  at  the  cavity  frep  it  is 
possible  to  further  stabilize  the  comb15.  It  is  also  an  impor- 
tant element for active mode locking of QCLs, demonstrated 
in the THz range13,16,17 but also in the mid-infrared for inter- 
band cascade lasers18 and QCLs19. 

In this work, we are interested in further exploring the re- 
sponse and prospects of controlling the QCL comb state when 

a)Electronic mail: fkapsali@phys.ethz.ch 

the source laser geometry has been optimized for external mi- 
crowave  modulation.  One  of  the  key  factors  for  efficiently 
injecting  a  fast  external  modulation  signal,  and  using  it  to 
dynamically control the QCL comb, is ultimately the device 
package, that is, the device geometry, and its biasing network, 
used to inject the external signals. In this aspect, we designed 
a scheme for a mid-infrared QCL waveguide, similar to a mi- 
crowave microstrip, where a dielectric is sandwiched between 
two metallic layers acting as a microwaves waveguide. That 
approach, commonly known in the QCL community as "dou- 
ble metal" configuration, while extensively used in the THz20, 
for  mid-infrared  QCLs  has  shown  limited  performance  and 
devices operated only at cryogenic temperatures21–23, as hav- 
ing metallic layers in proximity to the active region introduces 
a great deal of optical losses24. 

II.  DEVICE CONCEPT, DESIGN AND  FABRICATION 

In contrast to previous double-metal designs, instead  of 
using  metallic  layers  for  the  top  and  bottom  contacts,  and 
wafer bonding the device on a substrate, a different approach 
is  taken: the  device  waveguide  is  monolithically  fabricated 
on  a  very  heavily  n-doped  InP:Si  substrate,  together  with  a 
likewise heavily n-doped upper cladding, designed to replace 
both metallic microstrips, thereby controlling and  minimiz- 
ing the optical losses. The epitaxial topside of the  devices is 
reduced in size, aiming to decrease parasitic capacitance, to 
extend the cut-off frequency and therefore improve the elec- 
trical response to RF signals, and to enhance the coupling be- 
tween the optical comb formation and the  carrier transport25. 
A schematic of the conceived device is illustrated in Fig. 1(a). 
The  device  substrate  is  a  heavily  n-doped  InP:Si,  with  a 
doping  concentration  of  8  1018cm−3. In order  to avoid 
high  optical  losses  induced  by  the  many  free  carriers,  the 
QCL active region (AR) is not directly grown on the sub- 
strate.    Instead, firstly a buffer of  two  lower  doped  (2 
× 
1016  1   1017cm−3) InP:Si layers is grown by metal-organic 
vapor epitaxy (MOVPE). After the InP buffer layer,  the 
QCL  active  region  structure  is  grown  by  means  of  molecu- 

− × 

× 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Top contact (InP:Si) 

Au (inj) 

Au (GND) 

InP:Si Abctuivffeerre(g~io10n16  cm-3) 

Cladding (InP:Fe) 

Au (GND) 

(c) 

Heavily doped InP:Si substrate (~8e18 cm-3) 

Au 

(b) 

(e) 

2 

(d) 

Circulator 

Fixed 

FTIR 

RF Signal 
Generator 

Amplifier 

DC Source 

QCL 

BS 

Scanning 

RF Signal Generator 

Mixer 

Am  

lifier 

Lock-in 
(I/Q-demodulation) 

BS 

QWIP 

MCT 

DC Source 

(f) 

(g) 

-3dB cut-off 

FIG. 1. (a) Schematic of a QCL frequency comb with a microstrip-like line waveguide geometry. (b) SEM micrograph of a finalized fabricated 
device. (c) The |Z|-probe in contact with the microstrip-like QCL. (d) The experimental setup:  the RF signal generation and modulation is  
in  the  red  shaded  area  and  the  coherent  detection  in  the blue  shaded  area.  The  optical  signal  from  the  QCL  is  detected  by  both an  MCT 
(Mercury  Cadmium  Telluride  detector)  and  a  QWIP  (Quantum  Well  Infrared  Photodetector)  behind  an  interferometer  in  a  folded  Mach- 
Zehnder configuration. The electrical beatnote is extracted via a bias-tee. A circulator is used to enable simultaneous injection and detection.(e) 
The simulated (red) and measured (blue) curves of the group velocity dispersion (GVD) around the relevant spectral span. Inset: the simulated 
mode at 1220 cm−1. (f) LIV characteristic curves at -25, -15 and -5◦C. (g) Normalized rectification voltage for two kinds of devices: normal 
buried heterostructure frequency comb QCL (blue curve), microstrip-like line waveguide QCL optimized for RF injection (orange curve). 

lar beam epitaxy (MBE). It consists of a strain compensated 
In0.592Ga0.408As  /  In0.36  Al0.65As  heterogeneous  stack  of  two 
bound-to-continuum active regions26, covering two different 
wavelength regions at 8.02 µm (1247 cm−1) and 8.45 µm 
(1183 cm−1). 

The rest of the n-doped InP:Si top cladding is grown addi- 
tionally by MOVPE. The layer sequence can be found in Table 
S1 in the supplementary document. The strategy adopted for 
the top cladding was to gradually increase the n-doping con- 
centration further away from the QCL active region, aiming to 
increase overlap with the optical mode, to keep optical losses 
to a minimum and the group velocity dispersion (GVD) flat 
and close to zero27,28. A simulation of the expected GVD of 
the fundamental optical mode is shown in Fig.1 (e, red curve). 
The grown material is then fabricated into QCL buried het- 
erostructure  devices29,30,  with  AR  widths  between  6  and  8 
µm. The devices are then further processed into a microstrip 
line waveguide configuration with parallel ground electrodes: 
the  sides  of  the  laser  ridge  are  etched  down  by  16  µm  to 
reach  the  heavily  doped  InP:Si  substrate,  leaving  a  40  µm 
wide  topside  central  contact.  In  the  etched  trenches,  metal- 
lic layers are also deposited, to work as ground contacts, each 
at  a  lateral  distance of  15  µm  from  the  central  metallic  top 

≈ 

contact. Finally, a 4 µm thick layer of gold is electroplated on 
all of the metallic contacts, to improve heat extraction, device 
robustness and contact with the probe electrodes. See in Fig. 
1(b) a SEM micrograph of a finished device. 

The  devices  are  lapped  down  to  190  µm  and  a  metallic 
layer is deposited to the bottom side, to help with soldering 
and heat extraction. The devices are finally soldered epitaxial 
side up on copper mounts. 

≈ 

As  a  reference,  QCL  combs  with  the  same  active  ma- 
terial  were  fabricated  with  a  normal  buried  heterostructure 
configuration26.  Those  devices  were  mounted  epitaxial  side 
down on AlN substrates. For the electrical injection scheme, 
SMA connectors with wire bonding were used, as is the stan- 
dard method in the QCL comb and dual-comb spectroscopy 
community. 

III.  EXPERIMENTAL METHODS -  CHARACTERIZATION 

In  order  to  fully  exploit  the  high  frequency  response  of 
the  microstrip-like  devices,  the  use  of  wire  bonds  for  bias- 
ing the devices is altogether avoided, as they introduce addi- 
tional inductive contributions,  and thus limit the modulation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bandwidth  at  higher  RF  injection  frequencies.  Instead,  the 
DC-current  and  RF  injection  is  realized  by  a  three  terminal 
RF probe (FormFactor |Z| Probe Power, model Z040-P-GSG- 
250), compatible  with the device geometry (Fig. 1 (b,c)). A 
bias tee separates the DC and RF components, and a circula- 
tor  ( 20  dB  isolation)  allows  for  simultaneous  injection  and 
monitoring of the electrical beatnote. 

∼ 

For  spectral  analysis  in  the  RF  and  mid-infrared,  a  ded- 
icated  setup  was  built  as  shown  in  the  schematic  drawing     
in  Fig.  1  (d).  The  optical  output  from  the  laser  is  colli-  
mated  into  a  home-made  Fourier  Transform  Infrared  Spec- 
trometer (FTIR) mounted in a folded Mach-Zehnder config- 
uration,  with  a  resolution  down  to  0.015  cm−1.  The  optical 
output of the FTIR is split and shined onto a sensitive Mer- 
cury  Cadmium  Telluride  (MCT)  detector  to  collect  the  DC 
autocorrelation traces, and a fast Quantum Well Infrared De- 
tector (QWIP), which is used for measurement of RF correla- 
tion traces. 

A.  Device Performance 

The light-current-voltage (LIV) characteristics of a 4 mm 
long  and  6.5  µm  wide  device,  operating  in  CW  at  -25,  -15 
and -5  ◦C are shown on Fig.  1 (f) with a  maximum optical 
power of 200 mW at -25  ◦C. For higher operating tempera- 
tures the performance rapidly deteriorates.  This is due to  the 
large width of the active region,  the reduced size of the top 

contact, and the epitaxial side up mounting of the device, all of 
which reduce the thermal extraction efficiency. The heatsink 
was fixed at -25◦C for all following experiments. 

The GVD of the device is measured below the lasing thresh- 
old, at 600 mA, using a Fourier transform of the interferogram 
of the amplified spontaneous emission31. The obtained values 
are  shown  in  Fig.  1  (e)  with  the  blue  curve.  The  values  of  
the dispersion are between -1000 to -2000 fs2/mm around the 
spectral area of lasing. The discrepancy to the simulated GVD 
(red curve) is attributed to limitations of our model for accu- 
rately calculating the dispersion of the refractive index of the 
active region. 

To assess the RF response of the microstrip-like devices at 
high modulation frequencies, a microwave rectification tech- 
nique is used25,32. A lock-in amplifier  measures the DC rec- 
tification  while  the  device  is  driven  simultaneously  with  a 
DC current source and an amplitude modulated (AM) signal 
whose carrier frequency is being swept across the whole fre- 
quency range of the RF source. The frequency chosen for the 
AM modulation signal is set at 50 kHz, its modulation depth 
at 10% and sweeping step at 100 MHz. The current density of 
both reference and microstrip-like lasers was set subthreshold 
at 2.2 kA/cm2. 

In Fig. 1 (g)  we compare the response of a reference BH 
QCL  comb  (blue  curve)  and  the  microstrip-like  QCL  comb 
(orange curve). For the reference device there is a sharp re- 
duction in the response at around 2 GHz  modulation, as in- 
dicated by the 3 dB cut-off (red dashed line). The resonance 
peak at 3.5 GHz is attributed to cavity effect induced by the 
wire bond connection between the laser substrate and the con- 

3 

tact pads. For the microstrip-like device, there is not such  a 
sharp cut-off as with the reference. The trend of the curve af- 
ter 6 GHz is showing a smooth decay, with a slope of -0.89 
dB/decade. The 3dB limit is passed at 13 GHz, with the trend 
continuing until 30GHz, where the slope is -4.40 dB/decade. 
For this device, the rectification is no higher than one order of 
magnitude at 40 GHz, compared to three orders of magnitude 
of that of the reference device. This demonstrates the appli- 
cability of the microstrip-like line waveguide design and the 
probe for efficient RF injection and control of the device. 

B. 

Injection-locking and SWIFTS 

Injection  locking  is  a  physical  mechanism  that  occurs  in 
systems of coupled harmonic oscillators. If the coupling be- 
tween  the  two  is  strong  enough,  and  oscillation  frequencies 
are similar, then the primary oscillator can force the secondary 
into  synchronisation;  this  means  that  properties  of  the  pri- 
mary,  such  as  the  oscillation  frequency  -  and  by  extension, 
linewidth - are transferred onto the secondary. If instead the 
coupling  is  weak  or  the  frequencies  are  further  away  from 
each other, injection pulling (of the secondary’s frequency to- 
wards the primary’s) is instead observed. The frequency range 
over  which  the  locking  between  the  primary  and  secondary 
oscillators is maintained, is given by Adler’s equation33: 

∆ωlocking = 

2ωf ree Pin j  

Q 

Pf ree 

(1) 

Here, ωf ree is the frequency of the free running (secondary) 
oscillator, Pin  j and Pf  ree are the powers of the injected (pri- 
mary) signal and the free running oscillator respectively, and 
Q the quality factor of the free running oscillator resonator. 

In  Fig.  2  (a)  the  behavior  of  the  device  during  RF  injec- 
tion  locking  at  an  injection  power  of  -11  dBm  is  reported. 
Here,    we  indeed  observe  the  predicted  behavior  where  at  
ωin  j  ωf  ree  >>  ∆ωlocking  the  position  of  the  laser  RF  beat- 
|  −
note remains unperturbed but sidebands at integer multiples 
| 
of  ωin  j  ωf  ree  are generated.  As ωin  j  approaches ωf  ree, 
|  −
the  beatnote  is  pulled  towards  the  injected  signal  and  once 
| 
ωin j ωf  ree < ∆ωlocking the beatnote follows the injected sig- 
|  −
nal until it leaves the locking range again. The locking range 
| 
of the microstrip-like devices can stably reach more than 200 
kHz. 

Comparing the locking bandwidth for low injection powers 
of microstrip-like comb devices with that of reference buried 
heterostructure ones with a similar active region, as shown in 
Fig. 2 (b), there is more than an order of magnitude difference. 
It should be noted that here the values of the instrument are 
reported as the injection power. The solid lines represent fits 
of equation 1, which agree quite well with the recorded data. 
From the fit of the microstrip device, and since it is shown that 
for this injection frequency range the response of the device is 
enhanced, one can then reliably extract the values of the qual- 
ity factor Q of the resonator.  In this case, the extracted value 
is 7.42 ×107, same order of magnitude as when  free-running 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(  f  /∆  f  =1.11  107,  inset  of  Fig.  2(b)).  The  above  demon- 
strate clearly that the microstrip-like line design has lead to an 
increased RF injection efficiency. 

× 

solid: SWIFTS-spectrum, dashed: spectrum product 

0 

(a) 

4 

35 dBm 

25 dBm 

15 dBm 

5 dBm 

-5 dBm 

-11 dBm injection power 
DC bias: 950 mA, -25 °C 

y
t
i
s
n
e

t

n

I

]
.
u
.
a
[

−25 

0 

−25 

0 

−25 

0 

−25 

0 

−25 

0 

−25 

1180 

1200 

0.3 

(b) 

0.2 

0.1 

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

]
1
-

m
c
[

r
e
b
m
u
n
e
v
a
W

0.0 
1275 

1250 

1225 

1200 

1175 

1220 

1240 

Wavenumber [cm-1] 

No Injection 

1260 

(c) 

25 dBm 
No Injection 

(a) 

(b) 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 
Roundtrip Period t / TRT

2.0 

FIG. 3.    Results of SWIFTS measurements at 950 mA DC bias and 
-25◦C: (a) Injection power dependent mode intensities of SWIFTS 
signal  and  the  spectrum  product  derived  from  the  DC-signal  mea- 
sured with the MCT detector. (b) Reconstructed instantaneous inten- 
sity and (c) instantaneous frequency of laser output with no and 25 
dBm  injection  power.  The  solid  lines  are  the  result  of  treating  the 
raw data with a smoothing filter. 

tion powers, without a clear loss in coherence, expect for the 
case of 35 dBm injection, where part of the lasing spectrum 
becomes  unstable  at  the  transition  from  the  main  lobe  to  a 
smaller shoulder towards higher frequencies. Similar results 
of spectral bandwidth broadening, but without proof of comb 
operation or retained coherence, have been shown for opera- 
tion  at  cryogenic  temperatures  in  earlier  studies12,14,23.  The 
fact that the coherence in the additionally generated sections 
of the spectra is not lower than that towards the center, fits well 
with the explanation of amplified four-wave-mixing (FWM) 
within the cavity23. Through this process  new sidebands  are 
generated  at  the  distance  corresponding  to  the  injected  RF 
frequency.  Compared  to  free-running,  the  noise  floor  of  the 
SWIFTS  spectrum  is  noticeably  lower  for  the  RF  injection 
cases.  This  can  be  interpreted  as  a  stabilization  of  the  beat- 
note without impacting the overall coherence. 

In  Fig.  3  (b)  &  (c)  the  reconstructed  instantaneous  inten- 
sity and frequency are shown for the free-running (red) and 
for 25 dBm (blue) injection power for two repetition periods 

FIG. 2. (a) Electronic RF spectrum of current modulation inside the 
QCL cavity as a function of frequency, for -11 dBm RF generator 
output  power.  (b)  Locking  ranges  of  a  microstrip-like  line  device 
(orange dots) at different RF generator output powers, compared to 
those for a reference buried heterostructure QCL comb mounted epi- 
taxial side down and contacted with wire bonds (blue dots). Inset: 
Free-running RF beatnote of the microstrip device. 

We  assess  the  comb  properties  and  coherence  of  the 
microstrip-like device output via the shifted wave interference 
Fourier  transform  spectroscopy  (SWIFTS)5,34.Additionally, 
the time dependent instantaneous intensity and frequency of 
the coherent part of the laser output are  reconstructed5,15,34. 

In Fig. 3 (a), the SWIFTS spectra, and the respective spec- 
trum products, are shown for injection powers between -5 and 
35 dBm in steps of 10 dBm, along with the free-running case. 
They have been normalized such that the relative powers of 
the two traces scale the same between measurements. A spec- 
tral bandwidth broadening from the free-running width of  24 
cm−1  to  a  width  of  65  cm−1  is  observed  along  with  a  flat- 
tening of the amplitude distribution, for increasing RF  injec- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the time domain. The solid lines are the result of treating 
the raw data with a smoothing filter. In free-running, the re- 
constructed time trace during a round-trip period can roughly 
be split into three lobes, whereas at 25 dBm injection the in- 
tensity modulation during a round-trip is closer to having only 
one main intensity-maximum per round-trip, showing an over- 
all  amplitude  modulation.  The  instantaneous  frequency  of  
the free-running device has pronounced steps where the fre- 
quency jumps between the two spectral high-power sections 
during one round-trip period. For the RF injection case, these 
sections have been  washed out and correspondingly, the  in- 
stantaneous frequency is much closer to a linear chirp than in 
the free-running. 

IV.  CONCLUSION -  OUTLOOK 

The presented work demonstrated that a microstrip-like line 
waveguide geometry for mid-infrared QCL combs, can indeed 
enhance  the  comb  properties,  in  terms  of  an  extended  lock- 
ing range under RF injection, and a broadened optical spec- 
trum, without detriment to the comb coherence. The fact that 
monolithically grown heavily doped semiconductors are used, 
instead of  wafer bonding on  metals, leads to  more compact 
devices and improved performance, with operation closer to 
room temperature, in contrast to previous attempts of similar 
designs. 

In  order  to  further  improve  these  devices  and  make  them 
even more effective for practical applications, such as portable 
dual-comb  spectroscopy, there are is a number of steps  that 
can be taken: narrower active regions, as well as a packaging 
scheme which can allow the epitaxial side down mounting of 
the device combined with an efficient RF matched circuitry, 
can surely lead to even better performance, and a more com- 
pact solution that wouldn’t require an RF probe. In addition, 
this kind of device, combined with separated passive or active 
sections for RF modulation, could be excellent candidates for 
active mode-locking applications. 

FUNDING INFORMATION 

The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from 
the  BRIDGE  program,  funded  by  the  Swiss  National  Sci- 
ence Foundation and Innosuisse, under the project CombTrace 
(20B2-1_176584/1). 

Financial  support  from  the  Qombs  Project  funded  by  the 
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro- 
gram  under  Grant  Agreement  No. 820419  is  also  gratefully 
acknowledged. 

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 

5 

DATA AVAILABILITY 

The data that support the findings of this study are available 

from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The  authors  would  like  to  thank  the  staff  as  well  as  the 
equipment  responsibles  of  FIRST  -  Center  for  Micro-  and 
Nanoscience cleanroom at ETH Zürich for the use of facili- 
ties and continued assistance 

The  authors  would  like  to  thank  Zhixin  Wang  for  proof 

reading the manuscript. 

1J. Faist, F. Capasso, D. Sivco, C. Sirtori, A. Hutchinson, and A. Cho, 
“Quantum Cascade Laser,” Science 264, 553–556 (1994). 
2R. Kohler, A. Tredicucci, F. Beltram, H. E. Beere, E. H. Linfield, A. G. 
Davies, D. A. Ritchie, R. C. Iotti, and F. Rossi, “Terahertz semiconductor- 
heterostructure laser,” Nature 417, 156–159 (2002). 
3A. Khalatpour, A. K. Paulsen, C. Deimert, Z. R. Wasilewski, and Q. Hu, 
“High-power portable terahertz laser systems,” Nature Photonics (2020), 
10.1038/s41566-020-00707-5. 
4A. Hugi, G. Villares, S. Blaser, H. C. Liu, and J. Faist, “Mid-infrared 
frequency comb based on a quantum cascade laser,” Nature (2012), 
10.1038/nature11620. 
5D. Burghoff, T. Y. Kao, N. Han, C. W. I. Chan, X. Cai, Y. Yang, D. J. Hay- 
ton, J. R. Gao, J. L. Reno, and Q. Hu, “Terahertz laser frequency combs,” 
Nature Photonics 8, 462–467 (2014). 
6G. Villares, A. Hugi, S. Blaser, and J. Faist, “Dual-comb spectroscopy 
based on quantum-cascade-laser frequency combs,” Nature Communica- 
tions (2014), 10.1038/ncomms6192. 
7Y. Yang, D. Burghoff, D. J. Hayton, J.-R. Gao, J. L. Reno,  and Q. Hu, “Ter- 
ahertz multiheterodyne spectroscopy using laser frequency combs,” Optica 
3, 499 (2016). 
8J. Westberg, L. A. Sterczewski, F. Kapsalidis, Y. Bidaux, J. M. Wolf, 
M.  Beck,  J.  Faist,  and  G.  Wysocki,  “Dual-comb  spectroscopy  using 
plasmon-enhanced-waveguide  dispersion-compensated  quantum  cascade 
lasers,” Optics Letters 43, 4522 (2018). 
9M. Gianella, A. Nataraj, B. Tuzson, P. Jouy, F. Kapsalidis, M. Beck, 
M.  Mangold,  A.  Hugi,  J.  Faist,  and  L.  Emmenegger,  “High-resolution  
and gapless dual comb spectroscopy with current-tuned quantum cascade 
lasers,” Optics Express (2020), 10.1364/oe.379790. 

10R. Paiella, R. Martini, F. Capasso, C. Gmachl, H. Y. Hwang, D. L. Sivco, 
J.  N.  Baillargeon,  A.  Y.  Cho,  E.  A.  Whittaker,  and  H.  C.  Liu,  “High- 
frequency modulation without the relaxation oscillation resonance in quan- 
tum cascade lasers,” Applied Physics Letters 79, 2526–2528 (2001). 

11R. Martini, C. Gmachl, J. Falciglia, F. G. Curti, C. G. Bethea, F. Capasso, 
E. A. Whittaker, R. Paiella, A. Tredicucci, A. L. Hutchinson, D. L. Sivco, 
and A. Y. Cho, “High-speed modulation and free-space optical audio/video 
transmission using quantum cascade lasers,” Electronics Letters 37, 191– 
193 (2001). 

12R. Paiella, F. Capasso, C. Gmachl, H. Y. Hwang, D. L. Sivco, A. L. Hutchin- 
son, A. Y. Cho,  and H. C. Liu, “Monolithic active mode locking of quantum 
cascade lasers,” Applied Physics Letters 77, 169–171 (2000). 

13P.  Gellie,  S. Barbieri,  J.-F.  Lampin,  P.  Filloux,  C. Manquest, C. Sirtori, 
I.  Sagnes,  S.  P.  Khanna,  E.  H.  Linfield,  A.  G.  Davies,  H.  Beere,    and 
D.  Ritchie,  “Injection-locking  of  terahertz  quantum  cascade  lasers  up  to 
35GHz using RF amplitude modulation,” Optics Express 18, 20799 (2010). 
14M. R. St-Jean, M. I. Amanti, A. Bernard, A. Calvar, A. Bismuto, E. Gini, 
M.  Beck,  J.  Faist,  H.  C.  Liu,  and  C.  Sirtori,  “Injection  locking  of  mid- 
infrared quantum cascade laser at 14 GHz, by direct microwave modula- 
tion,” Laser and Photonics Reviews 8, 443–449 (2014). 

15J. Hillbrand, A. M. Andrews, H. Detz, G. Strasser, and B. Schwarz, “Co- 

See supplementary material for additional information. 

herent injection locking of quantum cascade laser frequency combs,” Na- 
ture Photonics 13, 101–104 (2019). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16A. Mottaghizadeh, D. Gacemi, P. Laffaille, H. Li, M. Amanti, C. Sirtori, 

G. Santarelli, W. Hänsel, R. Holzwart, L. H. Li, E. H. Linfield, and S. Bar- 
bieri, “5-ps-long terahertz pulses from an active-mode-locked quantum cas- 
cade laser,” Optica 4, 168 (2017). 

17S. Barbieri, M. Ravaro, P. Gellie, G. Santarelli, C. Manquest, C. Sirtori, S. P. 
Khanna, E. H. Linfield, and A. G. Davies, “Coherent sampling of active 
mode-locked  terahertz quantum  cascade  lasers and  frequency  synthesis,” 
Nature Photonics 5, 306–313 (2011). 

18J. Hillbrand, M. Beiser, A. M. Andrews, H. Detz, R. Weih, A. Schade, 

S. Höfling, G. Strasser, and B. Schwarz, “Picosecond pulses from a mid- 
infrared interband cascade laser,” 6 (2019), 10.1364/OPTICA.6.001334. 
19J. Hillbrand, N. Opacˇak, M. Piccardo, H. Schneider, G. Strasser, F. Capasso, 
and  B.  Schwarz,  “Mode-locked  short  pulses  from  an  8  µm  wavelength 
semiconductor laser,” Nature Communications 11 (2020), 10.1038/s41467- 
020-19592-1. 

20B. S. Williams, “Terahertz quantum-cascade lasers,” Nature Photonics 1, 

517–525 (2007). 

21K. Unterrainer, R. Colombelli, C. Gmachl, F. Capasso, H. Y. Hwang, A. M. 
Sergent, D. L. Sivco, and A. Y. Cho, “Quantum cascade lasers with double 
metal-semiconductor waveguide resonators,” Applied Physics Letters 80, 
3060–3062 (2002). 

22A. Calvar, M. I. Amanti, M. Renaudat St-Jean, S. Barbieri, A. Bismuto, 

E. Gini, M. Beck, J. Faist, and C. Sirtori, “High frequency modulation of 
mid-infrared quantum cascade lasers embedded into microstrip line,” Ap- 
plied Physics Letters 102, 1–4 (2013). 

23E. Rodriguez, A. Mottaghizadeh, D. Gacemi, M. Jeannin, Z. Asghari, 

A.  Vasanelli,  Y. Todorov,  Q.  J.  Wang,  and  C.  Sirtori,  “Tunability  of  the 
Free-Spectral Range by Microwave Injection into a Mid-Infrared Quantum 
Cascade Laser,” Laser & Photonics Reviews 14, 1900389 (2020). 

24E. Strupiechonski, D. Grassani, D. Fowler, F. H. Julien, S. P. Khanna, L. Li, 
E.  H.  Linfield,  A.  G.  Davies,  A.  B. Krysa,  and R.  Colombelli,  “Vertical 
subwavelength mode confinement in terahertz and mid-infrared quantum 
cascade lasers,” Applied Physics Letters 98, 101101 (2011). 

25B. Hinkov, A. Hugi, M. Beck, and J. Faist, “Rf-modulation of mid-infrared 
distributed  feedback  quantum  cascade  lasers,”  Optics  Express  24,  3294 
(2016). 

6 

26P. Jouy,  J.  M.  Wolf,  Y. Bidaux,  P. Allmendinger,  M.  Mangold,  M.  Beck, 
and  J.  Faist,  “Dual  comb  operation  of  λ  8.2  µ  m quantum cascade  laser 
frequency  comb  with  1  W  optical  power,”  Applied  Physics  Letters  111, 
141102 (2017). 

27Y. Bidaux, I. Sergachev, W. Wuester, R. Maulini, T. Gresch, A. Bismuto, 
S. Blaser, A. Muller, and J. Faist, “Plasmon-enhanced waveguide for dis- 
persion  compensation  in  mid-infrared  quantum  cascade  laser  frequency 
combs,” Optics Letters 42, 1604 (2017). 

28Y. Bidaux, F. Kapsalidis, P. Jouy, M. Beck, and J. Faist, “Coupled- 

Waveguides for Dispersion Compensation in Semiconductor Lasers,” Laser 
& Photonics Reviews 12, 1700323 (2018). 

29M. Beck, D. Hofstetter, T. Aellen, J. Faist, U. Oesterle, M. Ilegems, E. Gini, 
and H. Melchior, “Continuous wave operation of a mid-infrared semicon- 
ductor laser at room temperature,” Science 295, 301–305 (2002). 

30M. Süess, R. Peretti, Y. Liang, J. Wolf, C. Bonzon, B. Hinkov, S. Nida, 

P. Jouy,  W. Metaferia,  S.  Lourdudoss,  M.  Beck, and  J.  Faist,  “Advanced 
Fabrication of Single-Mode and Multi-Wavelength MIR-QCLs,” Photonics 
3, 26 (2016). 

31D. Hofstetter and J. Faist, “Measurement of semiconductor laser gain and 
dispersion curves utilizing Fourier transforms of the emission spectra,” 
IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 11, 1372–1374 (1999). 

32H. C. Liu, J. Li, M. Buchanan, and Z. R. Wasilewski, “High-frequency 

quantum-well infrared photodetectors measured by microwave-rectification 
technique,” IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics 32, 1024–1028 (1996). 
33R. Adler, “A Study of Locking Phenomena in Oscillators,” Proceedings of 

the IEEE 61, 1380–1385 (1973). 

34M. Singleton, P. Jouy, M. Beck, and J. Faist, “Evidence of linear chirp in 

mid-infrared quantum cascade lasers,” Optica 5, 948 (2018). 

 
 
