Draft version December 21, 2020
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX63

Peeking Between the Pulses: The Far-UV Spectrum
of the Previously Unseen White Dwarf in AR Scorpii

Peter Garnavich,1 Colin Littlefield,1 Maxim Lyutikov,2 and Maxim Barkov2, 3, 4

1University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
2Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
3RIKEN, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan
4Institute of Astronomy, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 119017 Russia

(Accepted for publication in the Astrophysical Jorunal, December 16, 2020)

ABSTRACT

The compact object in the interacting binary AR Sco has widely been presumed to be a rapidly
rotating, magnetized white dwarf (WD), but it has never been detected directly. Isolating its spectrum
has proven diﬃcult because the spin-down of the WD generates pulsed synchrotron radiation that far
outshines the WD’s photosphere. As a result, a previous study of AR Sco was unable to detect the
WD in the averaged far-ultraviolet spectrum from a Hubble Space Telescope (HST) observation. In an
eﬀort to unveil the WD’s spectrum, we reanalyze these HST observations by calculating the average
spectrum in the troughs between synchrotron pulses. We identify weak spectral features from the
previously unseen WD and estimate its surface temperature to be 11500±500 K. Additionally, during
the synchrotron pulses, we detect broad Lyman-α absorption consistent with hot WD spectral models.
We infer the presence of a pair of hotspots, with temperatures between 23000 K and 28000 K, near
the magnetic poles of the WD. As the WD is not expected to be accreting from its companion, we
describe two possible mechanisms for heating the magnetic poles. The Lyman-α absorption of the
hotspots appears relatively undistorted by Zeeman splitting, constraining the WD’s ﬁeld strength to
be (cid:46)100 MG, but the data are insuﬃcient to search for the subtle Zeeman splits expected at lower
ﬁeld strengths.

Keywords: interacting binary stars; white dwarfs; magnetic ﬁelds, pulsars; AR Sco;

1. INTRODUCTION

The unique interacting binary system AR Scorpii
(AR Sco hereafter) has been called a white dwarf “pul-
sar” because its bright electromagnetic ﬂashes appear to
be generated by the spin-down energy of its degenerate
primary stellar component (Marsh et al. 2016; Stiller et
al. 2018; Gaibor et al. 2020). The binary consists of a
low-mass red dwarf star and a rapidly spinning magne-
tized white dwarf (WD) orbiting over a 3.56-hour period.
The spectacular pulsed emission is seen over a broad
range of wavelengths from radio to soft X-rays (Marsh
et al. 2016; Takata et al. 2018; Marcote et al. 2017; Stan-
way et al. 2018) and it is related to the 1.95-minute spin
period of the WD and its magnetic interaction with the
red dwarf secondary. The pulsed emission does not ap-
pear to be dominated by accretion onto the WD (Marsh
et al. 2016) as is seen in intermediate polar-type (IP)
cataclysmic variable stars (CVs). A study of the polar-
ized emission by Buckley et al. (2017) showed that the

pulses are consistent with synchrotron radiation coming
from near the WD, although where and how the elec-
trons are accelerated remains an interesting question.

There have been several models proposed to explain
the observed synchrotron pulses. For example, a direct
interaction between the WD magnetic ﬁeld with the sec-
ondary star or its wind has been suggested (Geng et
al. 2016; Katz 2017). Garnavich et al. (2019) identiﬁed
slingshot prominences from the red dwarf star and spec-
ulated that magnetic reconnection events between the
WD and secondary star ﬁelds are the source of the en-
ergetic electrons. These models require extremely high
WD ﬁeld strengths of more that 200 MG to generate
suﬃcient interaction energy near the surface of the red
dwarf.

Recently, Lyutikov et al. (2020) has argued that the
surface magnetic ﬁeld of the WD in AR Sco must be
only about 10 MG to have been able to spin-up during
a period of rapid mass accretion. This ﬁeld strength is

0
2
0
2
c
e
D
7
1

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
8
6
8
9
0
.
2
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Figure 1. A sample of the COS/HST light curve of AR Sco
showing ﬁve individual exposures (obtained over two binary
orbits). The dashed line indicates where the division between
pulsed photons and trough photons were made in re-sampling
the spectra.

similar to what is seen in IPs and that AR Sco may be
an IP in a propeller mode where the spinning WD ﬁeld
drives away the gas donated by the red dwarf. AE Aqr
is the only conﬁrmed case of an IP in a propeller state,
but it does not generate synchrotron pulses at the spin
period of its WD.

The Lyutikov et al. (2020) model places the site of
the interaction well inside the WD magnetosphere by
allowing mostly neutral gas from the secondary to fall
toward the WD before it is ionized and swept away by
the spinning magnetic ﬁeld. They estimate that the tem-
perature of the WD needed to photoionize the gas is at
least 12000◦K. Marsh et al. (2016) could not directly see
evidence of the WD in the AR Sco spectra, but placed
a rough limit of 9750◦K on WD surface temperature.

Here, we will attempt to test the Lyutikov et al. (2020)
model by better constraining the WD surface tempera-
ture. We analyze the archival AR Sco spectra obtained
in 2016 by the Hubble Space Telescope’s (HST ) Cosmic
Origins Spectrograph (COS) with the goal separating
the pulsed emission from the inter-pulse light. Reduc-
ing the synchroton background by isolating the emission
between pulse may reveal the presence of the WD.

2. DATA

The far-ultraviolet (FUV) region of the spectrum is a
good place to search for emission from the WD surface
in cataclysmic variable stars (e.g. G¨ansicke 1999). The
FUV ranges between 1100 ˚A and about 2000 ˚A and con-
tains the Lyman-α absorption feature that can be easy
to spot in DA type WDs. In AR Sco, however, there are
other sources of emission that may interfere in charac-
terizing its WD. For example, the COS/HST FUV pho-

Figure 2. Comparison between the COS/HST spectra
obtained during the pulses and the light curve minima
(troughs). The pulsed spectrum shows a blue continuum
while the trough spectrum is rather red. The emission lines
are thought to arise from the irradiated face of the red dwarf
and are similar in strength for both subsets of data.

tometry published by Marsh et al. (2016) shows strong
synchrotron pulses, just as observed in the optical (see
Figure 1), as well as a brightness modulation over an
orbit.

To reduce the contribution of the pulses to the FUV
spectrum, we have reanalyzed the COS/HST data for
AR Sco by selecting time-tagged photons that arrived
between pulses. We call the period around the minimum
between pulses the “trough”. Using the routine split-
tag1, we divide the 16 corrtag exposures in the dataset
into pulse-dominated phases and trough-dominated ones
with the division occurring at approximately 2×10−15
erg cm−2 s−1 ˚A−1 as shown in Figure 1. It is not pos-
sible to set a single ﬂux value for the division between
pulse and trough because, as in the optical, there is an
orbital modulation in the FUV light curve. The orbital
modulation (e.g., Gaibor et al. 2020) has an amplitude
of more than a magnitude at optical and FUV wave-
lengths and it peaks around orbital phases2 of 0.4 to
0.5.

The time-tag photons were divided into 172 pulses
(both primary and secondary pulses were included) and
169 troughs. These sub-exposures are typically between
20 seconds and 40 seconds in length. Each corrtag sec-

1 https://justincely.github.io/AAS224/splittag tutorial.html
2 Zero orbital phase, φ, is deﬁned as inferior conjunction when the

red dwarf is between the Earth and the WD

tion was converted to an extracted spectrum using the
x1dcorr routine. The individual pulsed spectra were
combined using the splice 3 routine and the same was
done for all the trough spectral pieces. The resulting
average spectra are shown in Figure 2. The emission
lines are thought to come from the heated face of the
secondary star and are of similar strength in both spec-
tra. The pulsed spectrum has a blue continuum while
the trough spectrum increases into longer wavelengths.

3. ANALYSIS

3.1. The Trough Spectrum

The spectrum of the troughs shown in Figure 2 should
provide some limits on the WD properties. However,
the orbital light curve modulation seen in the optical
also contributes to the FUV light. The orbital variation
is likely linked to the heated face of the secondary star.
At inferior conjunction the the heated face is partly ob-
scured by the secondary itself, while a half orbit later the
emission is seen unimpeded. To determine how large this
contribution is in the FUV, we further sub-divided the
trough spectra by orbital phase. The peak of the orbital
modulation occurs between orbital phase 0.4 < φ < 0.5.
We re-binned the trough spectra into orbital phases with
−0.25 < φ < 0.25 (centered on inferior conjunction) and
phases 0.25 < φ < 0.75 (centered on superior conjunc-
tion). The resulting spectra are shown in Figure 3.

The trough spectrum obtained around superior con-
junction clearly shows more ﬂux at the longer wave-
lengths than at the spectrum around inferior conjunc-
tion. We attribute this emission to our better view of
the irradiated face of the secondary star during supe-
rior conjunction. The spectrum appears to peak around
1900 ˚A corresponding to a black body temperature of
approximately 15000◦K.

The trough spectrum around inferior conjunction con-
tains the minimum contamination from the synchrotron
pulses and heated face of the secondary star, and there-
fore it should provide the best constraint on the prop-
erties of the WD in the system. We compare the spec-
trum with Koester (2010) models assuming a WD mass
of 0.8 M(cid:12) and logg = 8.5, scaled to the distance of
AR Sco. The choice of logg = 8.5 for this mass WD
is consistent with the recent study by Chandra et al.
(2020). Diﬀerent choices for the mass or gravity are
possible as these are not well constrained.

Further, a signiﬁcant surface magnetic ﬁeld will re-
duce the apparent strength of absorption features due

3 https://www.stsci.edu/itt/review/dhb

2013/COS/ch5 cos analysis4.html

3

Figure 3. Comparison between trough spectra taken around
inferior and superior conjunction. For the spectra taken near
superior conjunction the there is a red continuum peaking at
approximately 1900 ˚A, corresponding to a black body tem-
perature of 15000◦K. The emission lines are also signiﬁcantly
brighter implying they originate near the irradiated face of
the secondary. The spectrum around inferior conjunction is
relatively ﬂat.

to Zeeman splitting. For example, the Lyman-α feature
for a DA WD with surface magnetic ﬁelds over 100 MG
can divide into multiple absorptions lines that may be
diﬃcult to detect (e.g. Burleigh et al. 1999). For now,
we will assume the surface magnetic ﬁeld is suﬃciently
low that component splitting is small compared with
the WD line width. Therefore, the Lyman absorption
equivalent widths should not be strongly impacted by
Zeeman splitting (e.g. Schmidt et al. 2003). Even these
low ﬁelds strengths of a several MG, Zeeman splitting
will tend to slightly broaden the line widths and result
in underestimates of the surface temperatures based on
observations of Lyman-α.

As seen in Figure 4, the model spectra alone are a poor
match the observed trough spectrum. The observed con-
tinuum is rather ﬂat with no strong features while the
DA models have a deep Lyman-α absorption. At sur-
face temperatures of 13000◦K and hotter, the predicted
WD model ﬂuxes exceed the trough spectrum contin-
uum and must be ruled out for our assumed mass and
surface gravity.

The trough spectrum does show a shallow mini-
mum around Lyman-α, but the depth clearly does not
match uncontaminated hydrogen-rich (DA) WD models.
There is also a weak step in the continuum between 1600
and 1700 ˚A, where there is a dip in the model spectra

4

Figure 4. The trough spectrum around inferior conjunc-
tion compared with hydrogen-rich WD spectra from Koester
(2010) ranging in surface temperature from 11000◦K to
14000◦K. All the models assume log(g) = 8.5 and a mass
for the WD of 0.8 M(cid:12). The models have been scaled to
the distance of AR Sco. The lack of strong features in the
observed spectrum shortward of 1700 ˚A suggests that a sin-
gle temperature hydrogen-rich WD is not a good match to
the data. Additional sources of emission are required. But
DA models with temperatures greater than 13000◦K are ex-
cluded by this analysis.

at temperatures less than 14000◦K. This feature results
from the quasi-molecular absorption by H2 (Koester et
al. 1985), and its depth is sensitive to temperature in
this regime. In fact, the presence of the 1600 ˚A feature
in the observed spectrum implies that the WD must
have a temperature of less than 14000◦K as the quasi-
molecular absorption is too weak to detect above this
temperature.

A narrow dip in the model spectra at 1400 ˚A is due to
quasi-molecular absorption by H+
2 . No dip is seen the
trough spectrum, but strong Si IV emission interferes
with the continuum at that wavelength.

The lack of a deep Lyman-α feature in the trough
spectrum suggests, despite our attempts isolate it, that
the light from the WD in AR Sco remains diluted by
another source. In creating the trough spectra, we were
forced to include some the fading and rising sections of
the pulsed emission centered around the minima, so we
expect that the contamination is partly due to resid-
ual pulsed light. We can take the spectral shape of the
pulses, add them to the WD models and attempt to
match the trough spectrum. The WD models nearly go
to zero ﬂux at the bottom of the Lyman α line, and

Figure 5. The trough spectrum of AR Sco (light grey line)
compared to WD models diluted by the pulsed spectrum
(green dotted line). The pulsed spectrum has been scaled by
a factor of 0.2 to match the observed spectrum at 1216 ˚A. Di-
luted WD models with temperatures of 11000◦K, 11500◦K,
12000◦K, are shown as solid lines plotted over the observed
spectrum. The weak dip observed at 1600 ˚A is well matched
by the models, but the models fall below the data shortward
of 1200 ˚A. (see Lyutikov et al. (2020))

this provides the scale to ﬁx the pulse contamination.
The sum of the scaled pulse spectrum and WD models
around 11500◦K are compared with the observed trough
spectrum in Figure 5. The results are encouraging and
suggest that the WD temperature is 11500◦ ± 500◦K.
This is somewhat dependent on the assumed slope of the
contaminating spectrum. Still, the observed dip around
1600 ˚A is well matched by the sum of a WD model
around 11500◦K added to an additional source with a
blue continuum.

3.2. The Pulsed Spectrum

The diﬀerence between the average pulse and trough
spectra should contain pure synchrotron light with a
minimum of contamination from stellar components.
The diﬀerence spectrum is shown in the top panel of
Figure 6 and a strong blue continuum is apparent. The
slope in νF ν is relatively ﬂat as modelled by Singh et
al. (2020) for the low-magnetic ﬁeld synchrotron source
(their synchrotron-1 region).

Surprisingly, there appears a dip in the continuum at
the wavelength of Lyman-α, when we would expect the
synchrotron emission to be featureless. The broad ab-
sorption appears like the Lyman-α feature from the WD
we expected to ﬁnd in the trough spectrum. Taking the

diﬀerence between the pulsed and trough spectra should
have removed the stellar components if their contribu-
tions were constant over a WD spin period. The pulsed
spectrum without subtracting the trough (lower panel
of Figure 6) also shows an obvious broad Lyman-α ab-
sorption around the geocoronal emission. This is puz-
zling since the trough spectrum is four times fainter than
the pulse around 1200 ˚A and, the trough spectrum it-
self shows little evidence of Lyman-α from the WD. The
strength of Lyman-α feature during the pulses implies
that the WD thermal emission contributes about 20%
to the average pulse ﬂux around 1200 ˚A. In this data,
the WD must be signiﬁcantly brighter during the pulses
than between pulses.

For Koester (2010) models with temperatures of
18000◦K< Tef f < 30000◦K, the full-width at half min-
imum (FWHM) of the Lyman-α absorption is approxi-
mately linear with surface temperature for a ﬁxed sur-
face gravity. For this range of temperatures, we normal-
ized the model continua and ﬁt the absorption with a
Gaussian. This provides the relation:

Tef f = 37170 − 221.7 × W ,

where W is the measured FWHM in ˚A. This linear rela-
tion reproduces the model temperatures with a standard
deviation of 360◦K. We then measured the FWHM of
the Lyman-α absorption in the pulsed spectra. The ﬁt of
the Gaussian from the HST data is poorly constrained
due to the geocoronal emission (and some Lyman-α
emission from AR Sco) that prevents a clear determi-
nation of the minimum, so uncertainties are large. For
the pulse spectrum W = 55 ± 4 ˚A corresponding to a
temperature of 25000±1000◦K. The diﬀerence spectrum
gives a somewhat lower FWHM of W = 39 ± 5 corre-
sponding to a temperature of 28500±1100. The width
of the Lyman-α absorption line suggests that the WD
temperature during a pulse is a factor of two larger than
seen during a trough.

No WD spectral features other than Lyman-α are seen
during the pulses, supporting the assertion that surface
temperatures are in excess of 15000◦K where the quasi-
molecular hydrogen features are no longer signiﬁcant.

We also compared the Koester (2010) WD models
directly with the pulsed spectrum as shown in Fig-
ure 6. We assume the ﬂux below the Lyman-α minumum
comes from a non-thermal power-law which is added to
a WD spectral model. The best results are for WD tem-
peratures of 20000◦K (pulse) and 23000◦K (pulse minus
trough). These are slightly lower than the temperatures
estimated using the absorption width alone, which may
mean the assumption of a Gaussian line shape was not
ideal. In these models, the WD ﬂuxes need to be reduced

5

by a factor of 16 (pulse) and 40 (pulse minus trough).
The dilution suggests that the high temperatures do not
cover the full WD surface area and may be localized hot
regions or hot magnetic polar caps. Because we do not
have a good picture of their temperature structure or
extent, We will refer to these regions as “hotspots”.

The presence of a clear, single, Lyman-α absorption
that appears to be symmetric about 1215 ˚A implies
that the surface magnetic ﬁeld on the WD is less than
(cid:46)100 MG. Zeeman splitting becomes quite apparent
above this ﬁeld strength as seen in AR UMa (G¨ansicke
et al. 2001). This is a fairly conservative limit, but the
geocoronal emission in the AR Sco data could hide sub-
tle eﬀects of Zeeman splitting at lower ﬁeld strengths.

3.3. The Visibility of the Hotspots

The apparent hotspots on the WD inferred from these
data are seen primarily during the beat pulses and are
not prominent during the inter-pulse periods. However,
we expect the temperature variations on the WD to be
seen at its spin period, while the pulses are observed
at the beat period. The combination of beat and spin
pulses was modelled by Stiller et al. (2018), who showed
how the interference of the beat and spin modulations
shapes some of the properties of the optical light curve.
They note that constructive interference between these
two signals occurs at orbital phase 0.25 < φ < 0.35 and
at half an orbit later. Destructive interference is great-
est near φ ∼ 0.05 and φ ∼ 0.55. Similar orbital phasing
between these signals is seen in the FUV light curve. As
a result, we would expect the hotspots to be contribut-
ing to the trough light at certain orbital phases, while
during other parts of the orbit, they would coincide with
the synchrotron pulses. Yet evidence for the >20000◦K
temperatures is seen in the pulse spectrum and not in
the trough spectrum.

There are two reasons for the hotspots to have been
predominately visible during the pulses. First, the bi-
nary orbital sampling by HST was not uniform. The
observation consists of ﬁve spacecraft orbits each tak-
ing 95 minutes, with gaps caused by Earth occultations
that last 45 minutes. This resulted in the data skipping
binary orbital phases near φ ≈ 0.1 and φ ≈ 0.6 while
phases around φ ≈ 0.35 and φ ≈ 0.8 were covered twice.
So the phases when the spin and beat destructively inter-
fere were poorly sampled and the constructive sections
overly represented in the data. By chance, this meant
the beat pulses tended to contain spin peaks caused by
the hotspots. Conversely, the cool regions of the WD
tended to be visible during the troughs.

The second bias against including the hotspots in the
inter-pulse regions is that when the spin was out of phase

6

Figure 6. top: The diﬀerence between the average pulse
and trough spectra. The emission lines and geocoronal fea-
tures are not completely subtracted leaving the spikes. The
broad absorption at Lyman-α is surprising because taking
the diﬀerence between the pulse and trough spectra should
eliminate the stellar contributions and leave only the spec-
trum of the pulsed emission. The solid red line is a model
made from the sum of a power-law and a 23000◦K WD model
with logg = 8.5 reduced in luminosity by a factor of 0.05.
The dashed line shows the power-law added to the WD model
to match the overall continuum. bottom: The pulse spec-
trum with emission lines extracted. The thick vertical band
indicates where the geocoronal Lyman-α dominates the ﬂux.
The solid red line is a model as described above, but using a
20000◦K WD model.

with the beat, the troughs tended to be too bright to in-
clude in the average. As discussed in Section 2, troughs
were deﬁned as periods with ﬂuxes fainter than about
2×10−15 erg cm−2 s−1 ˚A−1, while the peaks of the spin
modulation would push the light curve in the inter-pulse
regions above that limit. Thus, the trough spectra were
biased against including the hotspots.

The Lomb-Scargle power spectrum of the FUV light
curve (Marsh et al. 2016) shows that there is almost
no power at the fundamental WD spin frequency, but
the very strong peak at twice the spin frequency implies
that the temperature of the two hotspots is very similar.
From the power spectrum, the average amplitude of the
spin peaks is about 20% to 30% of the primary beat
pulse amplitudes. This is consistent with what we see
in the spectra where the Lyman-α depth is suggests the
hotspots add 20% to the pulse ﬂux.

In the optical, there is little contribution of the
hotspots to the observed spin modulation. Extrapolat-
ing a 23000◦K WD model at the distance of AR Sco and
diluted by a factor of 40 implies a SDSS−r-band bright-
ness for the hotspot contribution to be only ≈ 21 mag.
The SDSS − r brightness of AR Sco ranges between
14 mag and 16 mag (Gaibor et al. 2020). Thus, the am-
plitude of the hotspot modulation in the optical would
amount to a few percent of the total ﬂux and be lost in
the other variations in the system. Instead, the linear
polarization at the spin frequency observed by Potter
& Buckley (2018) implies some non-thermal source of
emission is important to the spin modulation at optical
wavelengths.

3.4. Spin Color Variability

The spectral changes of the WD over the expected
temperature range is particularly dramatic in the FUV.
For the relatively cool 11500◦K the quasi-molecular ab-
sorption severely decreases the ﬂux short-ward of 1600 ˚A
(see Figure 4). In contrast, the >20000◦K spectrum is
quite blue and unaﬀected by quasi-molecules. Splitting
the FUV spectra into two bands divided at 1600 ˚A, we
predict a large color modulation as the WD rotates.

For the AR Sco FUV data, we construct a blue band-
pass running between 1150 ˚A and 1500 ˚A and a red
bandpass between 1600 ˚A and 2000 ˚A. We convert the
average ﬂux in each bandpass to a magnitude and con-
struct a color in the standard convention by subtracting
the red magnitude from the blue. The resulting color
curve shows a large modulation at a period of around
one minute.

Using the Koester (2010) WD models scaled to the
distance of AR Sco, We can estimate the expected
color modulation from the 11500◦K rotating WD with
hotspots around 23000◦K. The median ﬂux level for the
HST /COS light curve is 3.0×10−15 erg cm−2 s−1 ˚A−1
which we add to the model spectra before calculating
the colors using the same prescription as for the real
data. The diﬀerence in color between the uniform WD
and the WD with hotspots amounts to 0.23 mag, so we

expect the color modulation of the spinning WD to have
approximately this peak-to-peak amplitude.

To separate the beat and spin color modulations, we
calculate the color Lomb-Scargle power spectrum in Fig-
ure 7 and compare it to the ﬂux power spectrum. Twice
the spin frequency, 2ω, shows the highest peak and this
corresponds to a color amplitude of 0.30±0.02 mag. This
is fairly consistent with what we expect from the hotspot
model. The very low power at the native spin frequen-
cies suggest that the double peaks viewed each cycle are
nearly equal in amplitude.

Double the beat frequency, 2(ω − Ω), also has
signiﬁcant power corresponding to an amplitude of
0.20±0.02 mag. This color modulation at may corre-
spond to variations in the FUV power-law slope of the
synchrotron emission during both the primary and sec-
ondary beat pulses.

4. DISCUSSION

4.1. Comparison to AE Aqr

Our analysis suggests that during the pulsed emission,
the WD in AR Sco has a surface temperature above
20000◦K, while during the inter-pulse segments the sur-
face temperature is around 11500◦K. This can be ex-
plained with a hotspot near the magnetic poles com-
bined with a cooler equatorial band. Accreting mag-
netic WDs such as in the proto-type AM Her have
been observed to have hotspots at their magnetic poles
(G¨ansicke et al. 2006). Hotspots also explain the fast
brightness variations in the propeller-state IP AE Aqr
(Eracleous et al. 1994). The 33s UV variability in
AE Aqr is the consequence of temperature variations
on the surface of the spinning WD in the system. The
spectrum of the pulse peaks shows a broad Lyman-α
absorption and a continuum consistent with a WD tem-
perature of 26000◦K. Eracleous et al. (1994) found an
excellent ﬁt to the continuum variability by assuming
a minimum temperature of 14000◦K. These are very
close to the range of temperatures we have estimated
for AR Sco. In AE Aqr, the UV light curve on short
time-scales is completely dominated by the temperature
variations on the WD.

For AR Sco, the UV variations result from the com-
bination of the WD surface hotspots and non-thermal
pulsed emission. The WD temperature dipole variations
contribute 20% to the pulses around 1200 ˚A and a de-
creasing fraction at longer wavelengths. As discussed in
the previous section, there are times when the hotspots
are out of phase with the pulses, but the gaps in the
existing COS/HST data and the way we extracted the
troughs tended to avoid times when the poles would be
more cleanly separable from the pulses.

7

Figure 7. top: The power spectrum of the color curve cre-
ated by dividing the FUV spectra into a short wavelength
band (1150-1500 ˚A) and a long wavelength band (1600-
2000 ˚A). The strongest peak corresponds to twice the spin
frequency and it has an amplitude of 0.30 mag. bottom:
The power spectrum of the total FUV ﬂux. The weak peaks
near each of the major peaks result from the way HST sam-
pled the light curve.

The temperature structure on the WD in AE Aqr is
similar to what we expect in AR Sco. This color change
on the spin period should be directly visible on AE Aqr
since it does not have a large beat pulse confusing the
spin variations. Indeed, Eracleous et al. (1994) divided
the FUV spectra into several wavelength bins and found
the highest amplitude for the spin modulation in the
FUV was at the 1340 ˚A and 1450 ˚A bins and lowest at
2000 ˚A. From their plots we ﬁnd a color amplitude of
between 0.2 and 0.4 mag.
In the previous section we
showed a color amplitude of 0.30 mag for AR Sco, in
excellent agreement with that for AE Aqr.

For AE Aqr, the FUV ﬂux modulation at the spin
period shows two unequal amplitude peaks suggesting
that the magnetic axis and viewing angle conspire to dim
our view of one of the hotspots (Eracleous et al. 1994).
In contrast, the FUV ﬂux power spectrum for AR Sco
implies that the spin modulation is very symmetric so
that the magnetic axis is nearly perpendicular to the
spin axis and that the hotspots in AR Sco are very close
to the WD equator.

4.2. Origin of the Hotspots

8

Some isolated magnetic WDs show low-amplitude os-
cillations at their spin period due to spots on their sur-
face (e.g. Hoard et al. 2018).
It has been suggested
that brightness modulations can be caused by strong
magnetic ﬁelds or localized abundance enhancements
that result in surface temperature variations (Holberg &
Howell 2011). While these modulations are only a few
percent in the optical, the temperature variations may
have a larger impact in the FUV. In mass-transfer bi-
nary systems, such as AE Aqr, direct accretion on to the
magnetic poles is also a possible cause of WD hotspots.
Marsh et al. (2016) constrained the WD accretion rate
in AR Sco to be less than 1.3 × 10−11 M(cid:12) yr−1 and
pointed out that accretion near that rate would result
in broad emission lines distinct from the narrow lines
observed on the secondary star. Accretion at a lower
rate has not been ruled out and could be a source of
some heating. Because of the unique nature of AR Sco,
we present two new models to explain the apparent tem-
perature gradients on its WD.

4.2.1. Hot spots on the WD due to synchrotron heating?

Potter & Buckley (2018) described a model in which
relativistic electrons following the ﬁeld lines produce
synchrotron radiation beamed in the direction of the
WD. The opening angle for the beam was quite large,
so that only a small fraction of the energy would irradi-
ate the surface of a WD at its magnetic poles.

Assuming equilibrium, the thermal energy emitted by
the hotspots should match the synchrotron energy ab-
sorbed on the poles.
In the previous section, we es-
timated that at 23000◦K, a hotspot would cover 2.5%
of the WD surface. This hotspot is above the typical
surface temperature of 11500◦K and generates an ex-
cess luminosity of 1.7×1030 erg s−1 that must be re-
plenished through heating. Marsh et al. (2016) esti-
mated that the synchrotron production in AR Sco is
Lsyn = 1.3 × 1032 erg s−1, meaning that only 1% of the
generated energy needs to be absorbed at a magnetic
pole to maintain the hotspot temperature.

Barkov et al. (2020) has modelled the particle motions
in the WD magnetosphere and included eﬀects of radia-
tive damping and adiabatic mirroring. These results
suggest that synchrotron emission from energetic elec-
trons approaching the magnetic poles is unlikely to pro-
duce localized heated region on the WD. As non-thermal
electrons move from their acceleration zone along mag-
netic ﬁeld lines towards the poles, they increase their
pitch angle α (see Kelner et al. (2015)). As a result, at
the mirror point, where the emissivity is maximal, the
emissivity diagram is very wide, predominately in the
direction normal to the magnetic ﬁeld lines. Thus, this

thin cone of synchrotron emission will mostly miss the
WD surface. For some combinations of initial pitch an-
gles and lepton Lorentz factors, the emission cone will
touch the WD surface, but it would irradiate nearly the
entire WD hemisphere.

Thus, emission from energetic electrons trapped in the
WD magnetosphere is unlikely to be the source of local-
ized heating on the WD surface.

4.2.2. Baryonic Bombardment

Another possible source of heating of the polar caps
may be by the leaking of protons trapped on closed
ﬁeld lines of the WD’s magnetosphere. Trapping occurs
through turbulent scattering, also known as radial diﬀu-
sion in the case of the Earth magnetosphere. One of the
most important processes will be magnetic reﬂection due
to the conservation of the ﬁrst adiabatic invariant. As
a result, only a small fraction of baryons can reach the
WD surface δ ≈ 1/8(BW D/BA)−1 ≈ 1/8(RW D/RA)3 ≈
10−6 for each cycle of magnetospheric oscillations.

In the model suggested by Lyutikov et al. (2020)
the matter ﬂow from the red dwarf secondary inter-
acts with the WD magnetosphere at a radius of about
RA ≈ 2 × 1010 cm. At this point electrons and baryons
are accelerated in magnetic reconnection events. As
electrons propagate within the magnetosphere of the
WD, they experience strong radiative cooling,
losing
their energy to synchrotron emission. As baryons do
not emit eﬃciently, their energy is conserved.

The captured baryons will oscillate on the magnetic
ﬁeld lines between the magnetic poles, forming analogs
of Earth’s van Allen radiation belts. Scattering on tur-
bulent ﬂuctuations will lead to a changing pitch angle.
After approximately N ∼ 103 oscillations they will be
scattered into the loss cone and will hit the WD.

Another process limiting the baryons’ lifetime in the
WD magnetosphere is the escape from the magneto-
sphere at a characteristic time of tes ∼ 2πη/ω, here ω is
WD angular velocity and η ∼ 1 is the factor which takes
into account probability for non-thermal (NT) particle
to escape 4, so the number of oscillations per baryon is
N ∼ tesc/πRA.

The polar cap heating rate can be estimated as
LN T δN ∼ few×1030 erg/s, where LN T (cid:38) Lsyn is proton
acceleration rate. This heating rate is close to the ob-
served hotspot luminosity. We note that the randomiza-
tion from many oscillations through the magnetosphere
will result in approximately equal amounts of energy de-
posited on the two poles. Indeed, an appealing feature

4 Even for 103 oscillations the synchrotron cooling time is negligible

for baryons with energy bellow 1 TeV.

of this mechanism is that it naturally explains how the
observed hotspots have such similar temperatures (see
Figure 7).

4.3. Implications for theoretical models of AR Sco

Lyutikov et al. (2020) have proposed a mechanism to
explain the observed characteristics of AR Sco that does
not require accretion on to the WD. They predict that
neutral gas leaving the secondary will reach into the WD
magnetosphere before being ionized and ejected through
the propeller mechanism. To do this, they estimate
that the WD requires a surface temperature of at least
12000◦K for suﬃcient ionization of the secondary’s gas.
Here, we ﬁnd that during the time between pulses the
WD surface temperature is consistent with their predic-
tion within our range of uncertainty.

However, there are several results here that may com-
plicate Lyutikov et al. (2020) interpretation. For exam-
ple, the magnetic poles of the WD appear to have tem-
peratures in excess of 20000◦ which would ionize the gas
coming from the secondary before it reaches the inner
magnetosphere of the WD. Our analysis of the trough
spectrum shows that the inner face of the secondary may
already be at a temperature of ≈15000◦K and likely to
have a high ionization fraction before heading toward
the WD. Indeed, optical spectra have already found HeII
4686 ˚A emission located on the secondary star’s inner
face (Garnavich et al. 2019) implying heating through
irradiation or magnetic interaction.

From these spectra, we cannot directly estimate the
magnetic ﬁeld strength on the WD surface. All we can
do is note that there is no clear Zeeman splitting of the
Lyman-α absorption which suggests that the ﬁelds are
less than about 100 MG (G¨ansicke et al. 2001). While
rather high, this limit puts pressure on models where the
WD magnetic ﬁeld is in the 200 G range at the red dwarf.
Such models require WD surface ﬁelds of > 200 MG (e.g.
Takata et al. 2018; Garnavich et al. 2019). Likewise, our
constraint challenges a scenario proposed in Buckley et
al. (2017) wherein the WD ﬁeld strength could be as
high5 as ∼1000 MG.

5. CONCLUSION

In order to constrain the temperature of the WD in
AR Sco, we reanalyzed the FUV spectral data obtained
with COS on HST in 2016. The average spectrum ob-
tained over two binary orbits does not show clear evi-

5 The original estimate in Buckley et al. (2017) was ∼500 MG, but
per their Eq. 1, this value needs to be doubled due to improved
measurements of the spin-down power from subsequent studies
(Stiller et al. 2018; Gaibor et al. 2020).

9

dence of emission from the WD in the system. We di-
vide up the observations in time to build up an average
“trough” spectrum from the minima between pulses. We
further sub-divide the trough spectra by orbital phase
to minimize emission sources that contaminate the WD
signal.

From the trough spectra averaged around inferior
conjunction, we ﬁnd plausible evidence for a quasi-
molecular hydrogen absorption band and ﬂux con-
straints that imply a WD surface temperature of
11500±500◦K.

The trough spectra obtained around superior con-
junction shows broad excess emission peaking around
1900 ˚A. This emission corresponds to the peak of the
orbital modulation and it is likely coming from the ir-
radiated face of the secondary star that is best viewed
around orbital phase 0.5. The spectral peak implies a
hot region on the irradiated face of the secondary at
about 15000◦K.

An average spectrum of the pulsed emission shows a
strong Lyman-α absorption that is not obvious between
pulses. The pulsed spectrum is well ﬁt by a power-law
pulse continuum added to a WD spectrum with a tem-
perature of 23000±3000◦K. The WD ﬂux contributes
20% to the total pulsed light around 1200 ˚A. We con-
clude that hotspots are present on the WD and visible
primarily during the pulses.

Magnetic WDs in polars often have hotspots due to
direct accretion of gas lost by their companion stars.
Some direct accretion on to the WD in AR Sco has not
been ruled out, and may be a source of the observed lo-
calized heating. Another possible heating source comes
from the Potter & Buckley (2018) model that has the
synchrotron beams approximately aimed in the direction
of the WD magnetic poles, suggesting that the hotspots
result from absorption of a fraction of the synchrotron
energy. More detailed modelling of electron emission in
the WD magnetosphere (Barkov et al. 2020) described
in section 4.2.1 suggests that the synchrotron beams are
unable to provide the desired localized heating. Here, we
present a new scenario where non-thermal proton bom-
bardment deposits energy at the WD magnetic poles.
These trapped protons make many oscillations between
the poles that naturally provides an explanation for the
similar temperatures of the two observed hotspots.

The FUV spectra do not strongly constrain the surface
magnetic ﬁeld on the WD. Geocoronal emission makes
it diﬃcult to detect details in proﬁle of the Lyman-α
line. From this data we only conclude that there is no
strong Zeeman splitting visible and constrain the ﬁeld
to less than 100 MG. Still, this means the WD ﬁeld at
the surface of the red dwarf is less than about 50 G.

10

Our results support the Lyutikov et al. (2020) model
in that the WD temperature is suﬃcient to ionize gas
from the red dwarf as it approaches the inner magne-
tosphere. In fact, the temperature of the WD hotspots
may be so high that gas is signiﬁcantly ionized close to
the secondary. We see evidence for 15000◦K gas on the
irradiated face of the secondary, implying a fairly high
ionized fraction near the L1 point. While this does not
rule out the Lyutikov et al. (2020) model, it does sug-
gest that the interaction mechanism between these two
stars requires further investigation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research is based on observations made with the
NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope obtained from the
Space Telescope Science Institute, which is operated by
the Association of Universities for Research in Astron-
omy, Inc., under NASA contract NAS 5–26555. These
observations are associated with program GO14470, PI:
Gaensicke. This work had been supported by DoE grant
DE-SC0016369, NASA grant 80NSSC17K0757 and NSF
grants 1903332 and 1908590. ML would like to thank
organizers and participants of the conference “Compact
White Dwarf Binaries” for enlightening discussions.

REFERENCES

Barkov, M., Lyutikov, M., et al. 2020, in preparation
Buckley, D. A. H., Meintjes, P. J., Potter, S. B., Marsh, T.
R., & G¨ansicke, B. T. 2017. Nature Astronomy, 1, 29.
Burleigh, M. R., Jordan, S., & Schweizer, W. 1999, ApJL,

510, L37

Kelner, S. R., Prosekin, A. Y., & Aharonian, F. A. 2015,

AJ, 149, 33

Koester, D. 2010, Mem. Soc. Astron. Italiana, 81, 921
Koester, D., Weidemann, V., Zeidler-K. T., E. M., et al.

1985, A&A, 142, L5

Chandra, V., Hwang, H.-C., Zakamska, N. L., et al. 2020,

Lyutikov, M., Barkov, M., Route, M., et al. 2020,

arXiv:2007.14517

arXiv:2004.11474

Eracleous, M., Horne, K., Robinson, E. L., et al. 1994, ApJ,

Marcote, B., Marsh, T. R., Stanway, E. R., Paragi, Z., &

433, 313

G¨ansicke, B. T. 1999, Annapolis Workshop on Magnetic

Cataclysmic Variables, 157, 261

G¨ansicke, B. T., Schmidt, G. D., Jordan, S., et al. 2001,

ApJ, 555, 380

G¨ansicke, B. T., Long, K. S., Barstow, M. A., et al. 2006,

ApJ, 639, 1039

Gaibor, Y., Garnavich, P. M., Littleﬁeld, C., et al. 2020,

MNRAS, 496, 4849

Garnavich, P., Littleﬁeld, C., Kafka, S., et al. 2019, ApJ,

872, 67.

Geng, J.-J., Zhang, B., & Huang, Y.-F. 2016, ApJL, 831,

L10

Hoard, D. W., Howell, S. B., Roettenbacher, R. M., et al.

2018, AJ, 156, 119

Holberg, J. B. & Howell, S. B. 2011, AJ, 142, 62
Katz, J. I. 2017, ApJ, 835, 150

Blanchard, J. M. 2017, A&A, 601, L7

Marsh, T., G¨ansicke, B., H¨ummerich, S., Hambsch, F.,

Bernhard, K., & Lloyd, C. et al. 2016. Nature,
537(7620), 374-377.

Potter, S. B., & Buckley, D. A. H. 2018b, MNRAS, 481,

2384

Schmidt, G. D., Harris, H. C., Liebert, J., et al. 2003, ApJ,

595, 1101

Singh, K. K., Meintjes, P. J., Kaplan, Q., et al. 2020,

Astroparticle Physics, 123, 102488

Stanway, E. R., Marsh, T. R., Chote, P., et al. 2018, A&A,

611, A66

Stiller, R. A., Littleﬁeld, C., Garnavich, P., et al. 2018, AJ,

156, 150.

Takata, J., Hu, C.-P., Lin, L. C. C., et al. 2018, ApJ, 853,

106

