AR-based Modern Healthcare: A Review 

Jinat Ara1, Hanif Bhuiyan2*, Yeasin Aafat Bhuiyan3, Salma Begum Bhyan4, 
Muhammad Ismail Bhuiyan5 

Abstract 

        The  recent  advances  of  Augmented  Reality  (AR)  in  healthcare  have  shown  that 
technology  is  a  significant  part of  the  current  healthcare  system.  In  recent  days,  augmented 
reality  has  proposed  numerous  smart  applications  in  healthcare  domain  including  wearable 
access, telemedicine, remote surgery, diagnosis of medical reports, emergency medicine, etc. 
The  aim  of  the  developed  augmented  healthcare  application  is  to  improve  patient  care, 
increase efficiency, and decrease costs. This article puts on an effort to review the advances 
in AR-based healthcare technologies and goes to peek into the strategies that are being taken 
to  further  this  branch  of  technology.  This  article  explores  the  important  services  of 
augmented-based  healthcare solutions and throws  light on recently  invented ones as well as 
their  respective  platforms.  It  also  addresses  concurrent  concerns  and  their  relevant  future 
challenges.  In  addition,  this  paper  analyzes  distinct  AR  security  and  privacy  including 
security  requirements  and  attack terminologies.  Furthermore, this  paper  proposes  a  security 
model  to  minimize  security  risks.  Augmented  reality’s  advantages  in  healthcare,  especially 
for operating surgery, emergency diagnosis, and medical training is being demonstrated here 
thorough  proper  analysis.  To  say  the  least,  the  article  illustrates  a  complete  overview  of 
augmented reality technology  in the  modern healthcare sector by demonstrating  its  impacts, 
concludes  with 
advancements, 
recommendations to a new direction for further research. 

vulnerabilities; 

challenges, 

current 

future 

and 

Keywords:  Augmented  reality  (AR),  Healthcare  applications,  Healthcare  challenges,  AR-
based healthcare security issues, Dynamic security solution. 

1 

Introduction 

Augmented Reality (AR) stands  for the comprehension of  modern technology that performs 
through  detection  and  identification  of  critical  intuitive  and  provides  competitive  services. 
Nowadays  Augmented  reality  is  considered  as  one  of  the  prominent  advanced  technology 
throughout  the  world  [1].  The  augmentation  prototype  enhanced  its  effectiveness  and 
influenced  almost  every  aspect  of  life  such  as  emergency  service,  healthcare  management, 
industrial  implementation and  many  more [2, 3]. To generate more effective AR prototypes 
several researches have been undertaken and shown great achievements [4, 5]. According to 
Urakov,  AR  enhances  the  visualization  of  3-dimensional  holographic  image  through 
sophisticated  glasses  [6].  Again,  El-hariri  suggested  that  augmented  reality  is  the 

1Department of CSE, Jahangirnagar University, Savar, Dhaka, Bangladesh 
2 Data61 CSIRO, CARRS-Q, Queensland University of Technology, Queensland, Australia,    
3 Institute of Business Administration, Dhaka University, Dhaka, Bangladesh 
4 School of Science and Engineering, University of the Sunshine coast, Australia 
5 Sylhet MAG Osmani Medical College, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
*Contact: hanif.bhuiyan@data61.csiro.au 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
visualization process of 3-D  imagining data [7]. In some other studies, conducted by Vavra 
and  Kim, augmented reality was described as a projection and  interaction-based technology 
to interact and project computer-generated images  in a real environment [8, 9]. Current AR 
related  researches  have  resulted  in  several  advanced  prototypes,  which  promote  AR  as  a 
prominent technology  and  call  for  future research to  explore the  unexplored  prototypes  and 
strategies [10, 11]. 

These days, the advancement of AR technology  in healthcare has become highly significant 
with  its  wide  arrays  of  applications.    AR-based  healthcare  systems  are  being  incorporated 
with  computer  vision,  object  detection  and  identification,  image  processing,  image 
segmentation  [12]  and  cloud  computing  technology  [13-16].  AR-based  healthcare  solution 
has achieved several prominent advancements, such as more secure connectivity and privacy 
across  individual  patients  [17],  more  speed,  while  providing  quality  diagnosis  &  treatment 
with  more  reliability.  Wireless  services,  early  diagnosis,  real-time  monitoring,  online-
consultation,  tumor  detection,  diagnosis  specialization,  m-health  service  and  personal 
assessment  are  the  emerging  prototypes  of  AR-based  healthcare  solution  as  shown  in 
Figure1.  Similarly,  Medication  adherence  and  rehabilitation  treatment  have  also  enhanced 
through its utilization. Recently, modern healthcare society introduced e-health policy for the 
implementation  of  prominent  augmented  devices:    AR  headset  and  smart  glasses  has  been 
recognized as remarkable advancements by healthcare professionals [18, 19]. 

Figure 1: Current trends of augmented reality in healthcare platform 

Because  of  its  growing  popularity,  more  and  more  works  are  being  proposed  towards  its 
development.  Majority  of  the  proposed  solutions  developed  are  concerned  with  AR-based 
healthcare applications [20], some of which describe the potentiality and impacts of modern 
AR-  healthcare  applications.  With  keen  observation,  we  concluded  that  the  majority  of 
proposed  works  study  the  development  of  AR-based  m-health  and  clinical  applications 
instead  of  their  development  strategy,  advanced  healthcare  services,  challenges  and 
limitations  [21,  22].  Although,  a  comprehensive  explanation  of  the  application  security  and 
functionalities could enhance the accuracy of future development approaches. By addressing 
these issues, this paper investigates the impacts of augmented reality in the healthcare system 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
trends,  advanced  services,  current  opportunities  and 
considering  current  healthcare 
limitations.  This  paper  can  be  effective  in  having  insights  of  current  augmented-based 
healthcare applications. For a further study of AR and healthcare solutions, interested readers 
are being referred to [23-25]. 

This  article  has  been  organized  as  following:  Several  AR  healthcare  application  services 
including  mobile application and clinical approaches are demonstrated in section 2. Various 
aspects  of  the  AR  healthcare  applications  development  structure  being  presented  in 
section3.Several  AR  healthcare  applications  related  current  issues  and  security  are  being 
described  in  section  4  and  5  respectively.  The  article  is  being  summed  up  with  a  through 
conclusion and a recommended direction of future research. 

2  The AR Healthcare Services and Applications 

Nowadays, AR technology has attracted significant attention to developing applications that 
are directly used by healthcare professionals and patients. AR-based healthcare solutions can 
be  applied  to  a  diverse  array  of  fields.    In  this  section,  we  are  going  to  describe  the  AR 
service platform and then will describe the available services and applications.  

Figure 2: The process of augmented healthcare application services 

The  AR service platform refers to a framework that  focuses on healthcare  information. The 
health  information  shared  by  public  health  centers  and  some  hospitals  are  being  made 
available  for  the  medical  specialists  or  doctors.  It  provides  services  through:  information 
acquisition  layer, data organization  layer, data support layer and service providence  layer as 
shown  in  Figure  2.  The  health  information  acquisition  layer  refers  to  the  organization  of 
healthcare  information  or  patient  health  report.  Data  organization  layer  focuses  on  various 
databases  such  as  patient  health  record  database  or  cloud  environment.  These  databases 
provide  services  for  healthcare  applications  during  data  examination  or  visualization.  The 
data support layer provides services through user registration, data availability and accessing 
opportunity.  To  ensure  authentication  service  and  to reduce  unknown  threat  it  prerequisites 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the  registration  panel.  Based  on  authenticity  confirmation,  it  ensures  data  availability  and 
accordingly  grants  access.  Finally  the  service  providence  layer  delivers  the  appropriate 
services.  This  way  Augmented  based  healthcare  application  ensures  the  complete  services. 
According to the context of healthcare, no standard definition of AR healthcare services can 
be found.  As a result, it gets difficult to categorize these services. Still we have summarized 
the available AR healthcare applications and their services as following Table 1. 

Table 1: AR technology-based healthcare applications and services 

Applications 

Services 

Eye diagnosis 

Cardiac treatment 

Cancer Detection 

Brain Tumor 
Detection 
Smart physical 
rehabilitation 

-Identifies  the  patient's  exact  eye  diseases:  Glaucoma,  dry  eye  -
condition, etc. 
-Using  digital  contact  lens  measures  blood  sugar  levels  through 
multi-sensor for retinal implanted people. 
-To understand cardiac inner and deeper structure. 
-Analyzes  the  heart  condition  according  to  normal,  murmur  and 
extra-systolic sound. 
-Cardiac  data  examination,  prediction  and  cardiac  arrhythmia 
treatment. 
-Used  to  diagnosis  breast  cancer  in  sentinel  lymph  nodes  and 
prostate cancer in prostatectomy specimens. 

-Identifying skin incision, skull craniotomy and tumor location. 

-Provides  inpatients  and  outpatient  rehabilitation  facilities  for 
musculoskeletal,  neurological,  r-hematological  and  cardiovascular 
systems. 

Surgical procedure 

Monitoring and 
guidelines 

-Helps orthopedic surgeon to examine the abnormal joint function. 
-Identify  skin  incision,  skull  craniotomy  and  tumor  location  for 
Choledochoscopy surgery. 
-Prevents damaging tissues, blood vessels and dental  nerves during 
dental surgery. 
-Identifies  the  bone  structure  through  3D  computed  tomography 
(CT) data for orthopedic surgery. 
-Helps in Endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal surgery. 
-Used 
treating  orbital 
hypertelorism,  hemifacial  microsomia,  mandibular  angle  split 
osteotomy related abnormalities. 

for  craniofacial  surgery  applied 

in 

-Provides exact guidelines about healthy food. 
-Provides information about allergic food, low-fat diets, and general 
caloric intake. 
-Support for medication plan and medication restrictions. 
-Provides feedback on lung conditions and used for the diagnosis of 
respiratory disease. 
-Continuously  monitors glucose level,  insulin dosages and suggests 
appropriate foods. 
-Helps hearing impaired people for museum visits. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3  The  AR  Healthcare  Application  Development 
Strategies 

Nowadays,  stakeholders  and  software  developers  are  interested  to  develop  augmented 
healthcare  solutions  for  its  advanced  prototypes  and  services.  To  develop  advanced 
augmented healthcare application with full functionalities, development strategies are indeed 
needed.  Focusing on this issue, in this section we are going to demonstrate the AR healthcare 
application  development  structure  including  effective  communication  and  organization  of 
numerous  prototypes  or  entities.  The  development  strategies  are  described  through:  data 
acquisition, data streaming, network or security, application development,  and user interface 
as shown in Figure3. 

Figure 3: Augmented healthcare application development interfaces 

3.1  Data Initializing 

It  is  the  primary  layer  of  AR-based  healthcare  application  development  process.  This  layer 
supports  data  acquisition,  preprocessing  and  model  creation  as  shown  in  Figure  3.  Data 
acquisition is the primary step in AR healthcare application development process. Generally, 
healthcare or hospital authority collects health data and stores them on the hospital database. 
Then  data  preprocessing  is  performed  to  reduce  the  noise  in  data  and  is  performed  on 
patient's data such as MRI, X-ray. Finally  model  creation  helps to create a visual object for 
the effective organization of 3-D data [26]. This process allows the generation of a 3-D model 
from 2-D or 3-D health  images or data. Some popular and user-friendly  software for digital 
model creation are such as GLSL, ZBrush, AutoCAD, Blender, cinema4D, OpenGL and 3Ds 
studio max. 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2  Data Streaming  

Data  streaming  provides  the  benefits  of  transferring  real-world  information  into  a  virtual 
environment such as cloud environment (Figure 5). Cloud environment or cloud server refers 
to  the  organization  of  information  (health  data)  like  files  and  the  storage  of  these  on  the 
server [27].  

3.3  Application Development 

A  framework,  simply  SDK,  used  for  application  development  that  provides  a  coding 
environment to define the functionality, several frameworks are being described in Table 2. 

Table 2: Frequently used augmented healthcare application development frameworks 

Framework 

Property and functionalities 

ARKit  

ARCore 

Apple  developed  the  world’s  biggest  augmented  platform  named  ARKit. 
Motion  tracking  feature,  back  &  front  camera,  generation  of  2-D  or  3-D 
content  and  integration  on  real-time  make  it  more  interactive  and  effective. 
Generally,  ARKit  is  used  for  motion  capturing,  scene  capturing,  image 
processing and rendering. 

Google developed this SDK to provide services on iOS and android platforms. 
Motion  tracking,  environment  understating  and  light  estimating  are  the  major 
functionalities  of  ARCore  framework.  3-D  holographic  anatomy  is  the  most 
significant healthcare application of the ARCore framework. 

Wikitude AR  

Wikitude  AR  framework  is  being  developed  for  Android,  iOS  and  Windows 
platforms.  Objects  tracking,  overlaying  images,  scene  capturing,  geographical 
location tracking are some of the significant functionalities of this framework. 

Vuforia  

EasyAR 

 Vuforia  supports  Android,  windows,  iOS  and  smart  glass.  It  assists  to  track 
images  and  3D  objects  in  real-time  and  overlay  virtual  3D  objects  on  real-
world  objects  at  the  camera  screen.  Visualizing  anatomical  structure  and 
detection  of  brain  tumor  through  this  make  the  surgical  procedure  easier  and 
safer. 

For android, iOS, Mac and Windows users, EasyAR is an effective framework. 
Image  recognition,  3D  object  recognition,  environment  perception,  cloud 
recognition,  smart  glass  solution,  screen  recording,  app  cloud  packaging, 
content  and  integration  support  are  the  prime  functionalities  of  the  EasyAR 
framework. 

ARToolKit  

ARToolKit  is  open-source  augmented  framework  that  supports  iOS,  Mac, 
android  and  windows  users.  Viewpoint  tracking  and  virtual  object  interaction 
are the major functionalities of this SDK. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.4  Network Security 

Network interface ensures security of numerous prototypes during communication. The entire 
prototype  of  AR  healthcare  application  communicates  through  the  network  layer  which 
ensures  security  through  network  platforms  and  network  protocols  (Figure  5).  Network 
platform  is  the  medium  that  generates  frequencies  for  communication.  Third-generation 
technology  (3G)  and  fourth-generation  technology  (4G)  are  the  most  popular  network 
platform  or  network technologies  for  AR-based  healthcare  applications.  Managing  data  and 
ensuring secure connectivity are the prior responsibilities of network protocols. Two widely 
used protocols are User Datagram Protocol (UDP) and Transmission Control Protocol (TCP). 
UDP  and  TCP  are  both  responsible  for  data  transmission  where  UDP  is  connectionless; 
reliable and TCP, errorless. 

3.5  User Interface 

 User interface allows the extraction of virtual environment data according to availability and 
accessibility.  This  layer  also  called  the  process  of  data  collaboration.  It  helps  healthcare 
specialist to overlay the  virtually created imagining  model on real-time patient's  body using 
AR devices, shown in Figure 3.During surgery or diagnosis, on-demand health data accessing 
is the prime objective of this interface.  

Majority of healthcare solutions are using smart display or glass. To detect object, image or 
text projection, Head Mounted Display and Holographic Display device are effective. HMD 
is being implemented in various healthcare solutions like, surgery, diagnosis, assessment, etc. 
Some  prominent  functionality  of  it  includes  recognizing  voice  comments,  tracking  eye 
movements  and  gestures  movements.    At  present,  the  most  powerful  and  prototype-based 
HMD  devices  are  OHMDs  and  OST-HMD.  Similarly,  Holographic  display  is  a  lighting 
technology that visualizes a three-dimensional image of objects with better accuracy. Among 
several  holographic  displays,  HoloLens  and  Oculus  rift  are the  most  used one  in  healthcare 
applications.  In  contrast,  smart  glass  is  a  wearable  hands-free  control  system  that  collects 
patient's physical  information and provides accurate solutions during surgery  and diagnosis. 
It  helps  to  take  pictures,  record  videos,  recognize  voice  instruction  and  to  lessen  the 
requirement of looking on a different screen while examining medical test report [28]. Smart 
glasses  are  being  categorized  as  optical  glass  and  video  glass  for  this  study.  It  is  worth 
mentioning  that the  majority  of  AR-based  healthcare  application  uses  optical  glasses  for  its 
augmented functionality. The  most prominent optical glasses are VuFine and Google Glass. 
Video  glasses  are  called  personal  media  viewers  as  they  provide  hands-free  convenience. 
Video glasses are categorized into Vuzix, Epson Moverio and Atheer air. 

4  The AR Healthcare Current Issues 

One primal focus of this research is to propose solution for the technological and architectural 
problems associated with AR based healthcare. In addition, we noticed several other present 
and future possible challenges associated with augmented healthcare applications. 

Figure  4  shows  that, the  most  challenging  issue  of  augmented  platform  is  data  security.  To 
ensure data security, implementation of network connection encryption is essential. Ensuring 
completely encrypted or protected data transferring environment for healthcare applications is 
difficult  but  adequately  needed.  Another  important  issue  is  to  launch  a  specialized  platform 
that  refers  to  applications  package  interface  (APIs),  framework,  and  appropriate  libraries.  It 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
helps  application  designers  and  developers  to  manage  effective  code  and  classes,  effective 
documentation,  and  creation  of  the  template  to  build  an  AR-healthcare  application.  The 
Healthcare  Leadership  Council  (HLC)  published  several  guidelines  related  to  healthcare  IT 
interoperability.  For  accessing  and  sharing  information,  special  security  measures  are  a  big 
concern.  Generally,  augmented  healthcare  application  is  the  reflection  of  integrated  digital 
components.  These  integrated  digital  components  might  introduce  some  technical  barriers, 
especially  for the healthcare specialist and the end-user. Overcoming the technical  barrier  is 
one  of  the  major  challenges.  Furthermore, the  development  and  implementation  cost of  the 
AR  healthcare device  is another  important issue.  Due to the high development cost, several 
healthcare  providers  disagree  to  reconstruct their healthcare  platform.  Also,  a  high  range  of 
implementation  costs  raises  the  barrier  on  introducing  modern  and  digital  technology  into 
healthcare solutions. The current augmented platform is committed to provide a user-friendly 
environment  with  fluent  functionality.  But  sometimes  issues  associated  with  improving 
consistency and reducing errors can be more viable. Overcoming this challenge may help to 
increase the device’s acceptability. Developing an application with effective functionalities is 
a relatively focusable issue for AR technology.  

Figure 4: Current issues of AR-based healthcare discipline 

Due to inappropriate prototypes, sometimes, unexpected abnormalities such as inappropriate 
recognition,  lack of semantic  meaning, and complex  functionalities reduce the effectiveness 
of augmented healthcare applications. Consequently, for introducing effective prototypes and 
making the application more convenient, more effective future research his required.  Instead 
of numerous services of AR application, providing constant services or long-duration services 
such  as  surgery  visualization,  projection,  and  interaction  for  as  long  as  9-12  hours  in  a 
constant  manner  is  relatively  difficult  and  challenging.  Real-time  geometry  awareness  is 
another  major  issue  for  researchers  and  developers.  It  associates  with  the  process  of 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
annotation,  tracking  location,  object  detection,  and  appropriate  measurement  [29].  As 
majority  of  abnormalities  arise  during  geometry  transformation,  awareness  regarding  real-
time geometry can be a challenging issue for AR platform. 

5  The AR Healthcare Security 

Among  several  current  AR  healthcare  issues,  ensuring  data  security  is  one  of  the  major 
concerns.  Generally,  augmented  healthcare  application  provides  services  through  a  physical 
layer  with  overlaid  computer-generated  information  [30].  Therefore,  it  is  not  free  from 
external  threat  and  even  cyber  security  risk  can  be  introduced  on  the  physical  layer.  AR 
healthcare  applications  should  address  these  external  threats  and  common  security 
vulnerabilities  during  the  development  phase.  To facilitate the  AR  technology  in  healthcare 
domain,  and 
including  security  requirements,  and 
issues 
vulnerabilities, a threat model is critical. This section discusses several security requirements, 
terminologies  of  external  attacks,  and  provides  a  security  model  that  might  help  prevent 
threats or network attacks. 

the  security 

identify 

to 

5.1  Security Requirements 

Security requirements of augmented healthcare applications refer to the property that protects 
the  application  platform  from  unexpected  attack  or  threats.  Figure  5  shows  some  security 
requirements that should be considered during application development to ensure application 
effectiveness and modality. For example, during the collaboration of virtual objects and real-
time  data,  an  intruder  may  attack.  Augmented  platform  should  provide  security  during  the 
collaboration of virtual and real-time object. At present, the number of augmented healthcare 
devices  has  increased  and  is  connected  to  the  network.  To  provide  medical  data  security, 
augmented  platform  should  ensure  confidentiality  which  forbids  or  prevent  unregistered 
access  to  medical  information.  However,  the  assorted  number  of  things  can  modify  data 
during  accessing  or  transmitting  time.  Healthcare  solution  should  introduce  integrity  to 
ensure  the  security  of  medical  information  or  health  data  that  are  not  altered.  Another 
important requirement is resiliency that ensures a protective environment if health devices are 
compromised. Another major security issue of current healthcare applications is availability. 
It  ensures  that  data  are  stored  and  available  in  a  secure  environment  and  used  by  the 
registered authority under secure networks. To increase efficiency and to protect patient data 
from  untraceable  attack,  ensuring  the  tracking  functionality  of  all  the  activities  having 
authorized detector is essential. For majority of the time, lack of awareness about DoS attacks 
can creates opportunities for malicious attackers to hamper data safety while transmitting. So 
security  awareness  should  be  focused.  As  we  previously  mentioned,  augmented  healthcare 
devices  are  wearable  technologies,  so  they  may  connect  to  network  anywhere.  Hence, 
deriving  security  model  for  dynamic  network  topology  is  highly  required.  Designing  a 
dynamic  security  protocol  could 
the  security  of  augmented  applications. 
Surprisingly,  augmented  Reality  Markup  Language  (ARML)  has  a  lack  of  security  control 
policy. Lack of security issues and Limited standardization make it vulnerable which in turn 
can  introduce  security  vulnerabilities.  In  recent  days,  augmented  reality  is  using  computer-
aided  object  provided  by  third-party  vendors  that  paves  way  for  threats  such  as  spoofing, 
sniffing,  data  manipulation,  and  man-in-middle  attacks.AR  platforms  should  be  aware  of 
these  threats  and  be  sure  of  the  authenticity  of  the  generated  content  during  transmission 
process  to  make  the  application  reliable.  As  augmented  healthcare  application  often  uses 
various unprotected web browsers, it can lead to security breach too.  

increase 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Security requirements of AR platform 

5.2  External Attack Terminology 

Augmented  platform  is  not  free  from  external  attacks.    Attackers  may  introduce  several 
security  threats  and  affect  both  existing  and  future  augmented  healthcare  applications, 
devices, and networks. Sometimes these threats are predictable while some are hard to detect 
or  predict.  In  this  section,  we  are  going  to  mention  several  external  threats  that  reduce 
application  and  network  effectiveness.  Figure  6  shows  some  attack  terminologies  that  can 
make  systems  vulnerable  and  reduce  effectiveness.  For  example,  by  data-stealing  or 
spreading malicious codes during data transmission or communication, intruders may replace 
original  data  or  make  it  unreliable.  Through  unauthorized  access  attackers  may  modify  the 
data and create confusion and reduces network performance. Also, false information may get 
injected  to  the  network  and  reduce  data  reliability,  affect  hardware  platform  by  altering 
program  code,  information  or  reprogramming.  Sometimes  attack  can  be  introduced through 
software platforms such as operating systems or software applications and take advantage of 
software vulnerabilities that cause buffering, resource destruction or loss. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Possible attacks for security threats 

5.3  The Proposed Security Model 

Augmented  reality-based  developed  healthcare  applications  and  services  are  not  yet  robust 
but continuing to develop. Therefore, summing up the entire possible vulnerabilities, threats, 
and attacks associated with augmented medical solutions are difficult. With the expansion of 
healthcare devices, networks, and applications, a number of unknown or unseen threats may 
be initiated during communication or data transmission or data storage in the cloud. 

To  mitigate  these  unseen  security  issues  especially  in  data  transmission,  security  service 
should  be  designed  with  dynamic  properties.  An  artificial  intelligence-based  dynamic 
algorithm  might  be  capable  of  identifying  these  types  of  attacks.  A  security  model  for  AR-
based  healthcare  solutions  has  been  proposed  here.  The  proposed  model  operates  through 
knowledge based services. Figure7 presents the proposed scheme that performs by following 
three  security  layers:  threat  detection  layer, threat  reduction  layer  and  data  protection  layer. 
Threat  detection  layer  is  designed  to  receive  healthcare  data  from  healthcare  devices  and 
network and analyzes captured information to identify the presence of any threats. The threat 
reduction  layer  is  designed  to reduce the  attack. Data  protection  layer  helps  protect  data  by 
defending all identified attacks. This security layer performs through dynamic algorithms and 
provides  a  shield  against  the  attacks.  Upon  detection,  threat  detection  layer  issues  action 
commands and shares detection experience with threat reduction layer. Threat reduction layer 
defends  threat  using  threat  redundant  mechanism.  Finally,  data  protection  layer  eliminates 
detected threats and protect the valuable data.  

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Proposed Intelligent Security model 

6  Discussion 

Throughout  the  world,  researchers  are  vigorously  working  to  invent  better  technological 
solution to enhance the modern health care system. The motive of these inventions is to bring 
a dramatic change in the healthcare sector and reduce the existing complexities. In this paper, 
a brief analysis was performed on various AR-based healthcare services and applications that 
deal  with  numerous  medical  data.  A  broad  view  of  the  recent  development  strategies 
regarding present healthcare application architecture and health data processing and accessing 
procedure  has  been  laid  out.  The  article,  to  some  extent,  tried  to  facilitate  further 
development  by  pointing  out  several  uncovered  issues  regarding  concurrent  security 
requirements  and  future  challenges.  The  discussion  performed 
this  article  on 
standardization,  data  availability,  service  quality,  and  data  protection  may  help  in  several 
ways  for  future  research  on  AR-based  healthcare  applications  and  services.  Moreover,  this 
paper  also  illustrated  the  importance  of  augmented  reality-based  healthcare  applications, 
backed  up  with  present-day  market  data,  which  may  increase  the  contribution  of  several 
stakeholders for further development. At the end, this review in many ways can be useful to 
researchers, health care professionals, policymaker, and several end-users working in the area 
of augmented technology and healthcare solution. 

in 

References 

[1]  White  G,  Cabrera  C,  Palade  A,  Clarke  S.  Augmented  reality  in  IoT.    Procedings  of 

International Conference on Service-Oriented Computing; 2019; Springer, 149-160. 

[2] 

Jeong  B,  Yoon  J.  Competitive  intelligence  analysis  of  augmented  reality  technology  using 
patent information.  Sustainability 2017; 9(4): 497. 

[3] 

Agrawal D, Mane SB, Pacharne A, Tiwari S. IoT Based Augmented Reality System of Human 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Heart:  An  Android  Application.  Procedings  of  2nd  International  Conference  on  Trends  in 
Electronics and Informatics (ICOEI); 2018; IEEE, 899-902. 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

Riva  G,  Baños  RM,  Botella  C,  Mantovani  F,  Gaggioli  A.  Transforming  experience:  The 
potential  of augmented reality and virtual reality for  enhancing personal and clinical change. 
Frontiers in psychiatry 2016; 7: 164. 

Sutherland  J,    Belec  J,  Sheikh  A,  Chepelev  L,  Althobaity  W,  Chow  BJW  et  al.  Applying 
Modern Virtual and Augmented Reality Technologies to Medical Images and Models. Journal 
of Digital Imaging 2019; 32(1): 38-53.  

Urakov TM, Wang MY, Levi AD. Workflow Caveats in Augmented Reality–Assisted Pedicle 
Instrumentation: Cadaver Lab.  World neurosurgery 2019; 126: e1449-e1455. 

El-Hariri H, Pandey P, Hodgson AJ, Garbi R. Augmented reality visualisation for orthopaedic 
surgical  guidance  with  pre  and  intra-operative  multimodal  image  data  fusion.    Healthcare 
Technology Letters 2018; 5(5): 189-193. 

Vávra  P,  Roman  J,  Zonvca  P,  Ihnat  P,  Nvemec  M,  Kumar  J  et  al.  Recent  Development  of 
Augmented Reality in Surgery: A Review. Journal of healthcare engineering 2017; 2017. 

Kim SK, Kang SJ, Choi TJ, Choi MH, Hong M. Augmented-reality survey: From concept to 
application. KSII Transactions on Internet & Information Systems 2017; 11(2): 982-1004. 

[10]  Frajhof    L,  Borges  J,  Hoffmann  E,  Lopes  J,  Haddad  R.  Virtual  reality,  mixed  reality  and 
augmented reality in surgical planning for video or robotically assisted thoracoscopic anatomic 
resections for treatment of lung cancer.  Journal of Visualized Surgery 2018; 4:143-143. 

[11]  Mahmood  F,    Mahmood  E,  Dorfman  RG,  Mitchell  J,  Mahmood    FU,  Jones  S,  et  al. 
Augmented  Reality  and  Ultrasound  Education:  Initial  Experience.  Journal  of  cardiothoracic 
and vascular anesthesia 2018; 32(3):1363-1367. 

[12]  Wilhelm  D,    Vogel  T,  Ostler  D,    Marahrens  N,  Kohn  N,  Koller  S,  et  al.  Enhanced 
Visualization:  From  Intraoperative  Tissue  Differentiation  to  Augmented  Reality.  Visceral 
medicine 2018; 34(1): 52-59. 

[13]  Liu  Y,  Tang  P.  The  prospect  for  the  application  of  the  surgical  navigation  system  based  on 
artificial intelligence and augmented reality.  Procedings of IEEE international conference on 
artificial intelligence and virtual reality (AIVR); 2018; IEEE, 244-246. 

[14] 

Jones  LD,  Golan  D,  Hanna  SA,  Ramachandran  M.  Artificial  intelligence,  machine  learning 
and the evolution of healthcare: A bright future or cause for concern?.  Bone & joint research 
2018; 7(3): 223-225. 

[15]  Chen  M,  Ling  C,  Zhang  W.  Analysis  of  augmented  reality  application  based  on  cloud 
computing.  Procedings  of  4th  International  Congress  on  Image  and  Signal  Processing  2011; 
IEEE, 2: 569-572. 

[16]  Ahad  MAR,  Kobashi  S,  Tavares  JMRS.  Advancements  of  Image  Processing  and  Vision  in 

Healthcare. Journal of Healthcare Engineering 2018; 2018:3-6. 

[17]  Pereira  N,  Kufeke  M,  Parada  L,  Troncoso    E,  Bahamondes  J,  Sanchez  L,  et  al.  Augmented 
Reality Microsurgical Planning with a Smartphone (ARM-PS): A dissection route map in your 
pocket. Journal of Plastic, Reconstructive & Aesthetic Surgery 2019; 72(5):759-762. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[18]  Khor WS, Baker B, Amin K, Chan A, Patel K, Wong J, et al. Augmented and virtual reality in 
surgery-the digital surgical environment: Applications, limitations and legal pitfalls. Annals of 
translational medicine 2016; 4(23): 1-10. 

[19]  Pereira-Azevedo NM, Venderbos LDF. eHealth and mHealth in prostate cancer detection and 

active surveillance. Translational and urology 2018; 7(1): 170-181. 

[20]  Viglialoro  RM,  Condino  S,  Turini  G,  Carbone  M,  Ferrari  V,  Gesi  M,  et  al.  Review  of  the 

augmented reality systems for shoulder rehabilitation. Information 2019; 10(5): 154. 

[21]  Garrett  BM,  Anthony  J,  Jackson  C.  Using  Mobile  Augmented  Reality  to  Enhance  Health 
Professional Practice Education.  Current Issues in Emerging eLearning 2018; 4(1): 10. 

[22]  Wong  K,  Yee  HM,  Xavier  BA,  Grillone  GA.  Applications  of  Augmented  Reality  in 
Otolaryngology: A Systematic Review. Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery 2018; 159(6): 
956-967. 

[23]  Yoon JW, Chen RE, Kim EJ,  Akinduro OO, Kerezoudis  P, Han PK, et al. Augmented reality 
for the surgeon: Systematic review.  International Journal  of Medical Robotics and Computer 
Assisted Surgery 2018; 14(4): 1-13. 

[24]  Belmustakov  S,  Bailey  C,  Weiss  CR.  Augmented  and  Virtual  Reality  Navigation  for 
Interventions in the Musculoskeletal System. Current Radiology Reports 2018; 6(9): 1-10. 

[25]  Uppot RN, Laguna B, McCarthy  CJ, De NG, Phelps A, Siegel E, et al. Implementing virtual 
and augmented reality tools for radiology education and training, communication, and clinical 
care. Radiology 2019; 291(3): 570-580. 

[26]  Rabbi  I,  Ullah,  S,  Khan  SU.    Augmented  Reality  Tracking  Techniques:  A  Systematic 
Literature Review Protocol.   IOSR Journal of Computer Engineering (IOSRJCE) 2012; 2(2): 
23-29. 

[27]  Pflugi S, Lerch T, Vasireddy R, Boemke N, Tannast M, Ecker  TM, et al. Augmented Marker 

Tracking for Peri-acetabular Osteotomy Surgery: A Cadaver Study. CAOS 2017; 1: 49-54. 

[28]  García-Cruz  E,  Bretonnet  A,  Alcaraz  A.  Testing  Smart  Glasses  in  urology:  Clinical  and 
surgical  potential  applications.    Actas  Urologicas  Espanolas  (English  Edition)  2018;  42(3): 
207-211. 

[29]  Nakamoto  M,  Ukimura  O,  Faber  K,  Gill  IS.  Current  progress  on  augmented  reality 

visualization in endoscopic surgery. 2012; 22(2):121–126. 

[30]  Daher S. Optical see-through vs. Spatial augmented reality simulators for medical applications. 

Procedings of IEEE Virtual Reality (VR) conference 2017; 417–418. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
