1
2
0
2

b
e
F
9

]
s
c
i
t
p
o
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
1
8
9
4
0
.
2
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Broadband cavity-enhanced ultrafast spectroscopy

Myles C. Silﬁesa, Grzegorz Kowzanab, Neomi Lewisa, and Thomas K. Allison∗a

Broadband ultrafast optical spectroscopy methods, such as transient absorption spectroscopy and 2D
spectroscopy, are widely used to study molecular dynamics. However, these techniques are typically
restricted to optically thick samples, such as solids and liquid solutions. In this article we discuss a
cavity-enhanced ultrafast transient absorption spectrometer covering almost the entire visible range
with a detection limit of ∆OD < 1 × 10−9, extending broadband all-optical ultrafast spectroscopy
techniques to dilute beams of gas-phase molecules and clusters. We describe the technical innovations
behind the spectrometer and present transient absorption data on two archetypical molecular systems
for excited-state intramolecular proton transfer, 1’-hydroxy-2’-acetonapthone and salicylideneaniline,
under jet-cooled and Ar cluster conditions.

The spectra of polyatomic molecules that undergo ultrafast dy-
namics are inherently broad, due both to the energy-time uncer-
tainty principle and also the large number of degrees of free-
dom usually involved in the dynamics. Thus, in general the
spectral "blobs" observed in the so-called linear spectra of poly-
atomic molecules in the visible and ultraviolet are not particu-
larly informative regarding the underlying dynamics. Ultrafast
spectroscopy techniques attempt to address this problem by ob-
serving dynamics directly in the time domain. Put another way,
by using a nonlinear spectroscopy, in which the molecule inter-
acts with multiple photons, one tries to “parse the blob" into sub-
components which may distinguish themselves with different ki-
netics, orientational dynamics, or spectral correlations in the case
of 2D spectroscopy. However, even the parsed blob, for exam-
ple broken down into constituent parts by global analysis 1, still
often leaves much room for interpretation in assigning the com-
ponents of ultrafast spectra and extracting the relevant physical
quantities.

Spectral assignments aside, even interpreting the seemingly
simplest aspect of ultrafast spectroscopy data—extracting ki-
netic time constants from the decay of signals with increasing
pump/probe delay—is not simple. Although thousands of such
“lifetimes" are published every year, the measurement does not
actually give an excited-state lifetime. Rather, when a time-
dependent excited state Ψ(t) is probed in a pump/probe exper-
iment, what is actually recorded are projections:

S f (t) ∝ (cid:12)

(cid:12)(cid:104)Ψ f | ˆµ|Ψ(t)(cid:105)(cid:12)
2
(cid:12)

(1)

a Departments of Chemistry and Physics, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY
11790-3400, USA; E-mail: thomas.allison@stonybrook.edu
b Institute of Physics, Faculty of Physics, Astronomy and Informatics, Nicolaus Coperni-
cus University in Toru´n, ul. Grudziadzka 5, 87-100 Toru´n, Poland

where the Ψ f are ﬁnal states and ˆµ is the dipole operator that
connects the molecule to the electromagnetic ﬁeld. For exam-
ple, “energy windowing" effects can have a large impact on the
kinetic time constants observed in time-resolved photoelectron
spectroscopy experiments 2–5. Even without windowing effects,
in general, any ultrafast experiment in polyatomic molecules nec-
essarily projects dynamics with many active degrees of freedom
onto an observable with far fewer dimensions, resulting in signif-
icant information loss. The nature of the chosen projection can
then have a profound impact on interpreting the results.

Ideally, to get maximum information, one would project the
state of interest Ψ(t) onto as many ﬁnal states as possible and
make comparisons between systems prepared differently using
the same observables. It has also recently emerged that it is criti-
cal to compare the experimental signals with theory that directly
simulates the experiment by calculating the relevant observables,
performing the same projections (Eq. (1)) in silico that are done
by the experiments in the lab 2,3,5–7. Comparisons with ab ini-
tio theory are most robustly done for gas-phase systems, but the
bulk of ultrafast spectroscopy is done in solutions, and almost
always with very different observables than gas-phase studies.
The current paradigm is illustrated in ﬁgure 1. Optical meth-
ods, such as transient absorption (TAS) and 2D spectroscopy, are
well-established for solution-phase work (Ψ f = neutral states).
In contrast, gas-phase experiments, particularly in the physical
chemist’s playground of molecular beams, rely almost exclusively
on photionization methods such as time-resolved photoelectron
spectroscopy (TRPES) 8 – action spectroscopies that project the
system onto the 1-electron continuum (Ψ f = free electron +
cation).

Comparing results using these different observables can be
very difﬁcult. A good example is the problem of internal con-
version processes in nucleo-bases, responsible for the UV photo-

1–10 | 1

Journal NameJournal Name, [year], [vol.], 
 
 
 
 
 
ducible transient absorption spectroscopy data with ∆ OD < 10−9
using this optical technology has also required signiﬁcant inno-
vation which we detail in this paper, where we present the ﬁrst
spectroscopy results from this system. To our knowledge, this also
the ﬁrst cavity-enhanced comb spectroscopy of any kind (ultrafast
or otherwise) using a widely tunable platform.

This work establishes CE-TAS as a new broadly applicable
technique for gas-phase chemical physics, and creates a missing
link between gas-phase and solution-phase studies shown in ﬁg-
ure 1. For gas-phase molecules, UV-visible CE-TAS provides an-
other projection of the dynamics complimentary to gas-phase TR-
PES, with a dataset that is directly comparable to solution-phase
work via the common observable. Cluster studies enabled by CE-
TAS also allow probing intermediate levels of solvation. We note
that others pursue a similar linking path via attempting TRPES on
molecules in solution via the liquid micro-jet approach 17, as also
illustrated in ﬁgure 1. Sensitivity is also the challenge in these
experiments to move beyond neat liquids or ultra-concentrated
solutions to pump/probe experiments on more chemically rele-
vant systems 17.

In addition to ﬁlling the gap illustrated in ﬁgure 1, we believe
these broadband CE-TAS methods can also be adapted for work
on solids, ultra-dilute solutions, or sparsely covered surfaces that
would beneﬁt from improved sensitivity.
In the sections below
we describe the many unique aspects of the spectrometer and a
detailed analysis of its performance.

1 Experimental Setup

1.1 Light Sources and Enhancement Cavity

The optical setup is illustrated in ﬁgure 2a). We derive the ini-
tial frequency comb at 1064 nm from a 1550 nm Er:ﬁber oscil-
lator (Menlo Systems Ultra-Low-Noise variant), shifted to 1064
nm using dispersive-wave generation in a short highly nonlin-
ear ﬁber 18. We then amplify the shifted Er:ﬁber comb to 10 W
average power in a home-built large-mode-area Yb-doped pho-
tonic crystal ﬁber ampliﬁer previously described 19. The 100 MHz
repetition-rate ( frep) ampliﬁed pulse train from this laser is fre-
quency doubled and tripled (2+1) in critically phase-matched
lithium trioborate (LBO) and beta barium borate (BBO) crys-
tals, respectively. We use the third harmonic at 355 nm from
this setup, with approximately 500 mW of average power, for the
pump in the CE-TAS measurements presented here. In the present
measurements, working with molecules with relatively large ex-
citation cross sections, we obtain sufﬁcient signal to noise with-
out employing an enhancement cavity for the pump to boost the
pump power, as was done in Reber et al. 13, but it would be rela-
tively straightforward to implement a pump enhancement cavity
if even higher sensitivity were needed. We use the residual second
harmonic (4.5 W) to pump a home-built tunable synchronously-
pumped optical parametric oscillator (OPO) with subsequent in-
tracavity doubling for both the signal and idler 15. Using the 532
nm pump as well to cover the gap near OPO degeneracy, this pro-
vides tunable combs over the range of 420-720 nm, as described
in ref. 15.

We couple the tunable combs from the OPO to a broadband

Fig. 1 Overview of ultrafast spectroscopy methods. By measuring
the same observable as most solution-phase ultrafast spectroscopy
studies, but on jet-cooled molecules and clusters, cavity-enhanced
ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy (this work) establishes
a link between gas-phase methods based on photoionization and
solution-phase ultrafast dynamics studies based on optical probes.

protection of DNA 9,10. Researchers studying isolated gas-phase
molecules using TRPES 2,10,11 report quite different dynamics
than those studying solution-phase molecules with TAS 9 or 2D
spectroscopy 12. Undoubtedly, the dynamics are different in solu-
tion, but the very different observables and disparate data sets
obtained with the different experimental techniques cloud the
comparison, to the point where the practitioners of the different
measurements almost form separate communities with their own
separate review papers 9,10.

In a previous article, Reber, Chen, and Allison 13 described the
extension of ultrasensitive direct absorption techniques to fem-
tosecond time-resolved experiments, reporting cavity-enhanced
all-optical measurements in a dilute molecular beam that are si-
multaneously ultrasensitive and ultrafast. Using frequency combs
and optical resonators, cavity-enhanced transient absorption (CE-
TA), or pump-probe, measurements were demonstrated with a
time resolution of 120 fs and a detection limit for changes in sam-
ple absorbance of ∆OD = 2 × 10−10, an improvement over the pre-
vious state of the art 14 by nearly four orders of magnitude. This
large advance in sensitivity can enable many measurements pre-
viously thought impossible. However, this previous demonstra-
tion operated at only one wavelength (530 nm). One wavelength
does not make a spectrum, and the inherently broad spectra of
chemically-relevant molecules undergoing ultrafast dynamics de-
mand wide spectral coverage.

In this article, we report the development of a broadband
cavity-enhanced ultrafast transient absorption spectrometer (CE-
TAS) operating across the wavelength band of 450-700 nm—a
bandwidth greater than 7900 cm−1 (240 THz) covering almost
the entire visible spectral range. To go from CE-TA to CE-TAS
has involved considerable innovation, since many of the necessary
components did not exist prior to our work. We have previously
published results regarding aspects of the optical technology crit-
ical to CE-TAS, namely the development of widely tunable, low
noise, high-power frequency combs 15 and the enhancement of
these widely-tunable combs in a femtosecond enhancement cav-
ity with custom mirror coatings 16. Achieving reliable and repro-

2 |

1–10

Well-established
methodsWell-established
methodsLiquid microjet
TRPESThis WorkMolecular
beam expt.Optical probesPhotoionization probesSolution
Expt.Journal Name, [year], [vol.],Fig. 2 a) Optical layout of the broadband cavity-enhanced transient absorption spectrometer. Tunable frequency combs are derived from a syn-
chronously pumped optical parametric oscillator (OPO) and coupled to a 4-mirror broadband dispersion-managed enhancement cavity. The third
harmonic of the Yb:ﬁber comb at 355 nm is used for molecule excitation in the current experiments. More details regarding the optical components
are in the main text and references 15,16. b) OPO (dashed) and cavity-enhanced (solid) spectra across the OPO 450-700 nm tuning range. Broadband
spectra are assembled from pump/probe traces recorded with diﬀerent OPO wavelengths.

enhancement cavity with custom mirror coatings optimized to
manage group-delay dispersion (GDD) over a wide tuning range,
as described in detail in ref. 16. Figure 2b) shows representative
OPO and enhanced intracavity spectra across the tuning range.
The intracavity spectrum are narrower that the OPO spectra due
to residual GDD of the enhancement cavity. This sets the limit
to the simultaneous intracavity bandwidth, and thus intracavity
pulse duration, that can be attained irrespective of the incident
comb bandwidth 20,21. The cavity is in a bow-tie conﬁguration
with two plane mirrors for the input and output couplers (nomi-
nal 0.3% transmission), and two high reﬂectors with 50 cm radius
of curvature. With most of the cavity loss coming from the input
and output couplers, the cavity is close to the impedance-matched
condition 22. We calculate the beam size (1/e2 radius) to be wprobe
= 65 µm at 532 nm using the ABCD matrix formalism, and this
λ 23. The
only scales weakly with probe wavelength as wprobe ∝
cavity has a nominal ﬁnesse (F ) varying from 600 to 1400 across
the range of 450-700 nm. OPO output wavelengths outside this
range are not used due to the limits of the cavity mirror high-
reﬂectance band. We focus the 355 nm pump beam to a waist
size of approximately wpump =150 µm and overlap the pump fo-
cus with the enhancement cavity focus above the molecular beam
source, as illustrated in ﬁgure 2. The pump beam is chopped at
a frequency between 3 and 4 kHz, well inside the enhancement
cavity’s minimum linewidth of 70 kHz (above which the cavity
would low-pass ﬁlter the CE-TA signal unless higher-order modes
are used 22,24), but above the lab’s 1/ f noise.

√

Although the residual OPO pump (532 nm), doubled signal
(2s), and doubled idler (2i) combs follow the same optical path,
there are substantial differences to the setup for using each of
these three combs. First of all, the OPO optical-phase transfer re-
lations we discovered in ref. 15 necessitate that the three differ-
ent combs are frequency-locked to the enhancement cavity using

three different schemes with different actuators, as detailed in
ref. 16. Furthermore, there are substantial differences in the rel-
ative intensity noise (RIN) spectra of the intracavity light before
the common-mode noise rejection scheme described below is ap-
plied 16. Also, we change the mode-matching optics between the
OPO and the enhancement cavity when changing between out-
put combs to account for different spatial modes and divergence
from the OPO. Despite all these differences, comparable CE-TAS
performance can be obtained using all three combs as we show in
section 2.

1.2 Vacuum System and Supersonic Expansion

The enhancement cavity is mounted on a 60 cm × 120 cm bread-
board inside a rectangular vacuum chamber. The breadboard is
supported via legs that protrude through the bottom of the cham-
ber via bellows down to the optical table. In this way the bread-
board is isolated from vibrations of the vacuum chamber or ﬂex-
ure of the vacuum chamber upon pump out.

Molecules are introduced at the common focus of the probe
cavity and the pump beam using a continuously-operating slit
nozzle. A planar expansion, as opposed to an axisymmetric ex-
pansion from a pinhole, is used to attain a higher column density
of molecules and also facilitate cluster studies 25. The gas load
of the continuous planar expansion is handled by a three-stage
pumping system consisting of two Roots pumps (5000 m3/hr and
1400 m3/hr) in series backed by a two-stage 100 m3/hr oil-sealed
rotary vane pump.

To prevent cavity mirror contamination, the supersonic ex-
pansion takes place in a small inner chamber inside the main vac-
uum chamber, as shown in ﬁgure 3. The inner chamber is main-
tained at ∼100 mTorr via the Roots pumping system. The inner
chamber is connected to the main chamber via two 3 mm holes
that allow the laser beams to pass through. We then ﬂow Argon

1–10 | 3

Journal Name, [year], [vol.],modulation frequency, such that the CE-TAS signal is given by

∆S(τ) =

π
F

∆I(τ) − ∆I(τ + 5 ns)
Iprobe

≡ β [∆I(τ) − ∆I(τ + 5 ns)]

(2)

where τ is the pump/probe delay, Iprobe is the intracavity light
intensity for the probe beam, the ∆I are pump-induced changes
in the intracavity light intensity, and the factor π/F is the in-
verse of the cavity enhancement cavity for impedance-matched
cavity and our experimental geometry 29. The subtraction accom-
plishes two critical tasks. First and most important is common-
mode noise subtraction. The probe (∆I(τ)) and reference (∆I(τ +
5 ns) ≈ ∆I(5 ns)) share mostly the same noise, but have different
pump/probe delay-dependent signals due to their timing with re-
spect to the pump pulse train. Since at τ + 5 ns all fast dynamics
have subsided, the subtraction retrieves the femtosecond-delay
dependent signal from the noise. Figure 4b) shows the effect of
this common-mode noise rejection scheme on the relative inten-
sity noise (RIN) of the intracavity light. With autobalanced sub-
traction, the noise ﬂoor of the measurement is within one order
of magnitude (20 dB in RIN) of the quantum noise limit.

Second is that the ∆I(τ + 5 ns) reference signal also contains
any signal due to repetitive pumping of the sample or molecu-
lar excitation that lives longer than 1/ frep = 10 ns. Another way
to think of this is that due to the 100 MHz repetition rate, in
steady state ∆I(τ = 5 ns) = ∆I(τ = −5 ns) such that the subtrac-
tion of the reference signal removes any signal due to preceding
pump/probe pulse sequences. This is relevant since for a molecu-
lar beam speed of 500 m/s (e.g. for an Ar supersonic expansion),
each molecule sees approximately frep × (300 µm/500 m/s) = 60
pump pulses. The problem can be exacerbated via velocity slip
between the sample molecule and the carrier gas, and even for
molecules with short-lived excited states, a ground-state bleach
signal may persist. Subtraction of any persistent signal enables
CE-TAS to work even with these complications. For most purposes
∆S(τ) can be regarded as the femtosecond to picosecond compo-
nent of the true TAS signal induced by a single pump pulse, simply
with a DC offset subtracted. However, one must be aware of sub-
tleties. For example, since the absolute signal size is reduced via
subtraction of ∆I(5 ns), care must be taken in considering signal
ratios as discussed in section 2.

The polarization of the probe light is horizontal (p). The
pump polarization is controlled to be either p or s (vertical)
with a zero-order half wave plate to give pump/probe signals
for both parallel (∆S(cid:107)) and perpendicular (∆S⊥) polarization
conditions, respectively. We construct magic-angle signals, in-
sensitive to molecular orientation or rotational coherences, via
∆SMA = (∆S(cid:107) + 2∆S⊥)/3 30,31. Another interesting subtlety of CE-
TAS is that magic-angle data cannot be recorded simply by ori-
enting the pump polarization 54.7◦ to the probe, as is usually
done in transient absorption spectroscopy. This is due to the fact
that the non-zero angles of incidence on the enhancement cavity
mirrors causes the p and s eigenmodes of the cavity to be non-
degenerate. Thus light scattered into an s mode of the cavity by
a magic angle pump would not be exactly on resonance, leading
to increased noise and also a different signal enhancement. Us-

Fig. 3 Molecular beam setup and ﬂuorescence monitor. The ﬂuorescence
Inset shows
detection scheme is described in detail in the main text.
a cutaway of the nozzle assembly. The inner chamber surrounding the
heated nozzle contains the sample molecule near the pump/probe overlap
region.

gas into main chamber which creates a ﬂow of Ar into the inner
chamber via these 3 mm holes. This steady purging ﬂow pre-
vents sample molecules from exiting the inner chamber. Argon
is used instead of nitrogen to avoid possible artifacts due to non-
resonantly excited rotational coherences 26. Typical argon pres-
sures in the main chamber are ∼ 10 mbar, which is sufﬁcient to
prevent mirror contamination, but small enough that it does not
produce enough group delay dispersion to narrow the enhanced
comb bandwidth 27. A small ﬂow of oxygen is also directed at
each cavity mirror to further help mitigate hydrocarbon contami-
nation.

For introducing non-volatile molecules to the experiment,
molecules are sublimed at temperatures up to 150◦ C in a cell
external to the vacuum chamber and then entrained in a ﬂow of
noble carrier gas. The supersonic nozzle assembly and associated
gas feedline are also heated to prevent molecule condensation.
Typical sample consumption rates are 0.5-3 g/hr.

1.3 Procedure for Individual CE-TA Pump/Probe Trace Accu-

mulation

When recording transient absorption measurements using any of
the three combs, we couple a delayed reference pulse train to the
cavity in a counter-propagating direction as shown in ﬁgure 2a).
The resulting pulse sequence at the molecular beam is shown in
ﬁgure 4a). The reference beam pulses arrive ∼5 ns later than
the probe and pump. The normalized pump/probe CE-TA signal
(∆S) at each OPO wavelength is recovered via autobalanced sub-
traction (probe−reference) 28 and lock-in detection at the pump

4 |

1–10

PMTCameraLensHeatedmirrorInner chamberand nozzleLaser beamsDetail of innerchamber/nozzleassemblyApertureTo PumpsJournal Name, [year], [vol.],clean ring-down signals, we use the ﬁrst-order diffracted beam
from the AOM. The AOM is driven by a 2 frep radio-frequency sig-
nal derived from the Er:ﬁber comb. Using an integer multiple of
frep to drive the AOM ensures that the frequency-shifted diffracted
comb is still resonant with the enhancement cavity.

To control for potential variations in pump power and sam-
ple molecule density at the focus, we record ﬂuorescence from
the pump/probe interaction region using the scheme shown in
ﬁgure 3. A mirror in the supersonic expansion path reﬂects ﬂu-
orescence out of the chamber. The mirror is heated to prevent
sample molecule condensation. To eliminate scattered light back-
ground, we then use an f = 10 cm lens to image the pump/probe
overlap region to an adjustable aperture which rejects light from
elsewhere. The remaining light from the pump/probe overlap
region is recorded with a photomultiplier tube (PMT) using lock-
in detection at the pump modulation (chopper) frequency. This
scheme produces a background-free ﬂuorescence signal that is
proportional to the column density of excited molecules in the fo-
cal region, and this ﬂuorescence signal can then used to normal-
ize and combine pump/probe data accumulated over extended
periods of time.

2 Results

2.1 Individual CE-TA Measurements
For the present demonstration of the instrument, we present
results on 1’-hydroxy-2’-acetonaphthone (HAN), and Salicyli-
deneaniline (SA), two archetypal systems for excited-state in-
tramolecular proton transfer (ESIPT) shown in ﬁgure 5. These
molecules have previously been studied using both solution-phase
TAS 32,33 and gas-phase TRPES 34,35, so they serve as good sys-
tems to benchmark the instrument.

Figure 6a) and b) show typical pump/probe data recorded
in HAN using the 2i and 2s combs respectively. Each trace is
the average of three scans. Near time zero, a large polarization
anisotropy is seen, but this rapidly decays as the many rotational
coherences excited by the pump pulse dephase from each other 31
in this asymmetric top molecule. Thinking about the problem
classically (which is also appropriate here given the large num-
ber of rotational states involved) one can think that the pump
pulse preferentially excites molecules with their transition dipole
oriented along the pump polarization, but then these molecules
freely rotate in random directions leading to an isotropic dis-
tribution. We note that if one attempts to use the CE-TAS sig-
nal (equation 2) to calculate a normalized anisotropy parameter
r(cid:48)(τ) = (∆S(cid:107) − ∆S⊥)/(∆S(cid:107) + 2∆S⊥) = (∆S(cid:107) − ∆S⊥)/(3∆SMA), this pa-
rameter need not be bounded in the usual range of (−0.2, 0.4)
due to the subtraction of the long-lived TAS signal sampled by

Fig. 5 Molecules in the present experiments. HAN = 1’-hydroxy-2’-
acetonapthone. SA = salicylideneaniline

1–10 | 5

Fig. 4 a) Pulse sequence at the sample. The reference pulse records any
steady-state pump/probe signal ∆I(5 ns) and contains nearly identical
noise to the probe for common mode subtraction. b) Noise spectrum
of the intracavity light and subtracted signal using 469 nm (2s) light.
Rejection of common-mode noise using the autobalanced subtraction
scheme allows for the ultrafast molecular signal to be detected at the
pump modulation frequency of 4 kHz. Also shown is the shot-noise (or
quantum noise) limit calculated from the measured photocurrent.

ing only s and p pump polarizations ensures that the intracavity
probe light remains p-polarized by symmetry.

1.4 Constructing Transient Absorption Spectra
The probe bandwidth of each individual CE-TA measurement de-
scribe above, with the OPO output tuned to a particular wave-
length, is less than 10 THz (ﬁgure 2b). We thus assemble broad-
band transient absorption spectra by combining a collection of
measurements taken at different wavelengths. Controlling sys-
tematics is then of the utmost importance to assemble reliable
and reproducible CE-TAS spectra, as several parameters affecting
the signal size vary intrinsically with wavelength and can also
vary with time over the course of an experimental run.

To control for cavity ﬁnesse variation, we periodically per-
form in-situ cavity ring-down measurements at each wavelength
in between pump/probe delay scans. We do this by inserting an
acousto-optic modulator (AOM) in the reference beam to quickly
(∼ 20 ns) turn off the reference beam while the Pound-Drever-
Hall lock between the comb and cavity is maintained using the
probe beam. To achieve 100% turn-off of the reference beam for

OCH3OHNOHHANSAJournal Name, [year], [vol.],Fig. 7 Spectrometer FWHM time resolution across the tuning range
found by ﬁtting the rising edge of HAN signal to an error function as-
suming instrument-limited response. Error bars are from ﬁt.

With the assumption that the enol-keto tautomerization and
the corresponding appearance of excited-state absorption and
redshifted stimulated emission in HAN happen much faster than
our time resolution 32, we estimate the time resolution of the in-
strument by ﬁtting the rising edge of the CE-TA traces with an er-
ror function. Figure 7a) shows the resulting extracted instrument
response FWHM as a function of wavelength. Impulse response
widths less than 275 fs are attained across the tuning range, with
somewhat better time-resolution observed using the 2i comb.

We now discuss the sensitivity of the instrument. There are
two main sources of uncertainty (i.e. noise) to consider. The ﬁrst
is the optical noise ﬂoor of the system (ﬁgure 4b) due to resid-
ual un-subtracted noise on the intracavity light and uncorrelated
quantum noise in probe/reference detection. The second is drifts
of the instrument over longer time scales required to assemble
a full data set. Both can be quantiﬁed using an Allan deviation
analysis 22,38. Figure 8a) shows the Allan deviation calculated
from data sets where the same signals are scanned repeatedly.

The intrinsic noise performance of the optical setup is cap-
tured by data taken without any sample (triangles on ﬁgure
8a). Without sample, the Allan deviation comes down with a
slope of −1/2 on the log-log plot which indicates white-noise-
limited performance (i.e. no drift). We observe this behavior
for as long as we have averaged for and have seen noise down
to ∆OD= 2.6 × 10−11 (off the chart) after 90 minutes of integra-
tion without sample, with a corresponding normalized sensitivity
of ∆OD = 2 × 10−9/
Hz. Similar results with the 2i comb (not
shown) give a sensitivity of ∆OD = 3 × 10−9/
Hz. These results
are consistent with the optical noise ﬂoor of the subtracted signal
observed in ﬁgure 4 and comparable to the single-color result of
Reber et al. 13 of ∆OD = 1 × 10−9/
Hz 13, despite the signiﬁcant
additional complexity of the current setup, showing the intrinsic
robustness of CE-TAS method.

√

√

√

When accumulating an actual molecular signal, the uncer-
tainty in ∆S (circles on ﬁgure 8a)) becomes dominated by drift
for long accumulation times. These data are accumulated by re-
peated scanning of a pump/probe signal (parallel polarizations,
469 nm, 88 points, 0.5 s/point) such that the same pump/probe
delay is re-encountered every 44 seconds. In this case, the Allan
deviation differs (circles in 8a) from white-noise performance 22
and actually increases with averaging time for real accumulation
times longer than 10 minutes. The main source of drift is varia-

Fig. 6 Example transient absorption traces for λprobe = 636 nm (a)
and 494 nm(b) combs recorded from HAN excited at 355 nm. The
positive signal in a) corresponds to excited-state absorption and the neg-
ative signal in b) to stimulated emission. The parallel and perpendicular
polarization data are each the average of three scans with 1s integra-
tion time per pump/probe delay. Magic angle data is constructed via
∆SMA = (∆S(cid:107) + 2∆S⊥)/3. c) Full 700 ps magic angle data showing the
long decay of the transient signal including single-exponential ﬁts (dashed
black lines).

the reference beam. The numerator (a simple difference) gives
no artifact, but even if the anisotropy decays to zero at long de-
lays, the denominator of the expression for r(cid:48)(t) is still reduced
by 3β ∆IMA, throwing off the ratio. This is particularly acute for a
molecule like HAN, with a ﬂuorescence yield of approximately 1%
and a radiative decay rate of 1/(10 ns) 36, for which the steady-
state excited state population in the focal volume can build up
over multiple pump pulses. Indeed, r(cid:48)(τ = 0) for the data shown
in ﬁgure 6b) is 0.6, suggesting a steady-state magic angle back-
ground signal of ∆IMA(5 ns) = 0.3∆IMA(τ = 0), which is reasonable
under our experimental conditions.

Figure 6c) shows magic-angle pump/probe traces for HAN
over the full 700 ps delay range accessible with our delay stage.
Fitting these data with a single exponential + offset gives a time
constant of 70 ps for internal conversion in HAN, in agreement
with previous TAS measurements in cyclohexane 32 and ﬂuores-
cence measurements in the gas phase 36,37. However, we note
that the observed time constant is quite different than the previ-
ous gas-phase ultrafast spectroscopy measurement based on TR-
PES 34, which reported 30 ps decay time constants even when
using longer excitation wavelengths closer to the origin of the S0
→ S1 transition. This shows the impact of the observable on the
measurement of the kinetic time constants discussed in the intro-
duction.

6 |

1–10

01020probe = 636 nma)|| polarizations polarizationsMagic angle0246810-10-50S [OD  10-8]probe = 494 nmb)0100200300400500600700Delay [ps]-5051015c)636 nm494 nm450500550600650700Probe Wavelength [nm]150200250300Time Resolution [fs]Journal Name, [year], [vol.],Fig. 8 a) Allan deviation recorded using repetitive scans at 469 nm 0.5
s of integration per pump/probe delay. Without sample (triangles), the
noise averages down with the inverse square root of the measurement
time for as long as we have recorded data, following the dashed line
with a slope of -1/2. With molecular signal, drift in the molecular col-
umn density on the ∼10 minute time scale causes the main limitation to
averaging (circles), but this drift can be remedied to some extend using
ﬂuorescence normalization (diamonds). b) Two pump/probe traces taken
days apart can largely be brought into coincidence using normalization
to the ﬂuorescence signal.

Fig. 9 a) Magic-angle transient absorption map for jet-cooled HAN ex-
cited at 355 nm constructed from 12 probe wavelengths. Stimulated
emission is observed on the blue side of the spectrum and excited state
absorption on the red. b) Comparison of TA spectra from jet-cooled
HAN (magenta) and HAN in cyclohexane (green) from reference 32 at
1 ps (solid), 5 ps (long-dashed), and 50 ps (short-dashed) delays. The
solution-phase data has been multiplied by one overall scale factor to
make the comparison. c) Noise-levels attained as a function of wave-
length for this full TA-map measurement.

tion in the sample molecular column density, which can be miti-
gated using the ﬂuorescence monitor as we describe below.

Figure 8b) demonstrates ﬂuorescence normalization for an
extreme case. The two scans, both at a probe wavelength of 455
nm and at equivalent sample backing pressures, were recorded
several days apart. On the second day, there was less HAN re-
maining in the sample cell which resulted in reduced ﬂuorescence
and CE-TA signal. Scaling the day 2 data by the ratio of ﬂuores-
cence signals brings the two TA signals back into coincidence. The
Allan deviation of CE-TA data normalized using the ﬂuorescence
monitor is shown as diamonds on ﬁgure 8a)). With normaliza-
tion, individual CE-TA pump/probe traces can be accumulated
with a noise level of ∆OD = 6 × 10−10 with repetitive scans over a
real accumulation time of 22 minutes. This corresponds to a S/N
of 167 for this particular data set.

2.2 CE-TAS Spectra

In ﬁgure 9a), we show a constructed magic angle transient ab-
sorption map for HAN in a He-seeded supersonic expansion (0.25
Bar stagnation pressure) working 3 mm from the nozzle. This
spectrum is sampled at the same 12 discrete probe wavelengths
as in ﬁgure 7 and the same delay axis as ﬁgure 6c). For each

wavelength, we take three scans for parallel and three scans for
perpendicular pump/probe polarizations with an integration time
of 1 s/delay. With 260 points/scan distributed over pump/probe
delays out to 700 ps, each scan then takes 260 s = 4.3 minutes.
Thus, we are accumulating data for a total of 26 minutes per
wavelength. The entire spectrum comprising 12 wavelengths is
collected over the course of a day. Figure 9c) shows the noise
level for the magic angle signals, using ﬂuorescence normaliza-
tion, obtained under these practical conditions as a function of
wavelength.

In ﬁgure 9b), we extract TA spectra of the molecule at 1, 5,
and 50 ps delay and compare them to the TAS data reported by
Lochbrunner et al. for HAN in cyclohexane 32. The most obvious
difference between our results from the jet-cooled molecule and
the cyclohexane data is a solvatochromic blueshift of the TA data
by ∼25 nm going from cyclohexane to gas-phase, similar (but not
identical) to the 15 nm shift for ﬂuorescence reported by Cata-
lan et al. 36. Furthermore, the differences in the TA spectra are
not fully explained only by a solvatochromic shift. A more com-
prehensive analysis of the full HAN data is beyond the scope of
this paper but will be the subject of a future publication including
global analysis and comparison to ab initio theory 39.

1–10 | 7

110Integration time per point [s]10-9Allan deviationa)Raw ScansFluorescence norm.No sample110Number of  scans110Accumulation time [min]0246810Delay [ps]-15-10-50S [OD  10-8]b)Day 1Day 2Day 2 fluorescence scaleda)0100200300Delay [ps]-10-5051015S [OD  10-8]-10010S [OD10-8]1 ps5 ps50 psb)500550600650Probe Wavelength [nm]0246MA Noise [OD  10-9]c)Journal Name, [year], [vol.],2.3 Clusters
Working 3 mm from the 200 µm slit nozzle, we can easily gener-
ate clusters with sufﬁcient column density for CE-TAS studies and
we demonstrate this here. Figures 10a) and b) shows an example
of this for SA recorded at λprobe = 455 nm expanded in helium
and argon, respectively. Using He carrier gas, we observe the
rotational anisotropy to decay in ∼10 ps, whereas for Ar carrier
gas, the parallel and perpendicular polarizations data do not con-
verge to the same signal until ∼50 ps. In the optimized ground
state geometry calculated by Pijeau et al. 40, the rotational con-
stants of SA are A = 0.066 cm−1, B = 0.0091 cm−1, and C =
0.0082 cm−1, making the molecule nearly a symmetric top. For
a symmetric top, the width of the rotational anisotropy transient
BT 41, indicating a large change in the rotational
scales as 1/
constant is required to explain the 5x increase in the width of the
rotational anisotropy transient.
It is important to note that for
the case of SA, with much faster internal conversion than HAN
and much smaller ﬂuorescence yield of ∼ 10−4 33, the rotational
anisotropy parameter r(cid:48)(t) constructed from the CE-TAS signals
∆S is free from the aforementioned complications due to reference
subtraction and is bounded by (−0.2, 0.4). Assuming the tempera-
ture is similar in the two expansions, from the increased width of
the rotational anisotropy, we estimate that the SA molecules have
gained on average 24 Ar atoms, although actually this number
should be taken as a lower bound since excitation of the molecule
may promptly evaporate many Ar atoms, as commonly exploited
in tag-loss spectroscopy 42.

√

The effect of Ar clustering on the internal dynamics of the
molecule can be seen in the magic angle data shown in ﬁgure
10c). For He expansions, where no clustering is expected, we
observe fast decays of the TA signal in agreement with previous
solution-phase TAS 33 and gas-phase TRPES 35. However when
forming large Ar clusters, the internal conversion is shut off and
the excitation is long-lived, as shown in ﬁgure 10. A correspond-
ing large increase in the ﬂuorescence signal is also observed, fur-
ther supporting a suppression of internal conversion pathways in
the Ar cluster. Also shown for direct comparison is TRPES data
from Sekikawa et al. 35, which shows a much faster decay of the
observable than TAS, similar to what we have also observed in
HAN. More detailed analysis of the SA data, along with full spec-
tra are the subject of a forthcoming paper 43.

3 Discussion

In this article, we have described the performance of a broad-
band ultrasensitive spectrometer for recording transient absorp-
tion spectra with ultrafast time resolution. The overall perfor-
mance of the spectrometer is comparable to a previous 1-color
13, despite
demonstration of the main concept in molecular I2
the signiﬁcant additional complexity of both the optical setup
and molecular beam system necessary to go past demonstrations
and record data on chemically relevant systems. We have also
demonstrated the linkages shown in ﬁgure 1 by directly compar-
ing cavity-enhanced transient absorption data to solution-phase
TA measurements and gas-phase TRPES for two example systems.
We expect a wealth of information can be extracted from such
comparisons going forward, given the large body of high-quality

8 |

1–10

Fig. 10 Parallel and perpendicular polarization CE-TAS data for SA
excited at 355 nm in a 0.25 bar He expansion a) and 2.2 bar Ar expansion
b). The polarization anisotropy transient decays much more slowly in the
Ar data, indicating the formation of large Ar clusters. c) Magic angle
data for the Ar expansion and He expansion compared to previous TRPES
data recorded in jet-cooled SA from ref. 35.

data existing from these well-established techniques. Further-
more, performing CE-TAS measurement on clusters can enable
a detailed microscopic understanding of the effect of the solvent
on molecular dynamics, as has been done for linear spectroscopy.
For electronically excited molecules, UV-VIS CE-TAS offers a
complimentary ultrafast observable to those provided by well-
established TRPES methods, with the idea that via comparison
to theory more information can be extracted from the combina-
tion than can be had from either observable alone. This multi-
observable approach has recently been promoted by others for
the combination of diffraction and spectroscopy data 5.

The methods described here can also be implemented in the
mid-infrared to study purely vibrational dynamics on the elec-
tronic ground state, and we are actively working on develop-
ing cavity-enhanced two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy (CE-
2DIR) 24. It is important to note that in contrast to the current
work, which provides a complimentary view of the dynamics of
gas-phase molecules after electronic excitation, for which other
action-based spectroscopy methods exist, an action-based analog
of 2DIR with ultrafast time resolution does not currently exist. In
many ways, we expect CE-2DIR spectroscopy to be less techni-
cally challenging than the current demonstration due to the re-
duced bandwidth requirements of 2DIR and also less difﬁculties
with mirror contamination due to the absence of UV light crack-
ing residual hydrocarbons in the vacuum system.

Finally, we note that the methods demonstrated here can be
adapted to solids, liquids, and sparsely covered surfaces, as has
been done for cavity-enhanced linear spectroscopy 44. For exam-

0204060b)ParallelPerpendicular0510Delay [ps]00.51S [a.u.]a)0246810Delay [ps]00.20.40.60.81S [a.u.]c)2.2 bar Ar0.25 bar HeSekikawa et al.Journal Name, [year], [vol.],ple, inclusion of a reﬂection off a glass/liquid interface into the
cavity could be used to perform cavity-enhanced ultrafast atten-
uated total reﬂectance spectroscopy on molecules at the inter-
face. Translating the current sensitivity to a molecular ﬁlm indi-
cates that coverages below 10−4 monolayer could be investigated.
The challenges in adapting CE-TAS to condensed-phase contexts
are 1) managing the dispersion and loss of additional intracav-
ity elements and 2) managing sample excitation and refresh rate.
While it is likely that compromises regarding 1) and 2) would
reduce performance, CE-TAS methods could still ﬁnd applicabil-
ity for small-signal condensed phase measurements inaccessible
with other techniques.

4 Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the U. S. National Science Foun-
dation under award number 1708743 and the U. S. Air Force
Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research under grant number FA9550-20-1-
0259. M. C. Silﬁes acknowledges support from the GAANN pro-
gram of the U. S. Dept. of Education. G. Kowzan acknowl-
edges support from the National Science Centre, Poland schol-
arship 2017/24/T/ST2/00242. The authors thank S.A. Diddams,
H. Timmers, A. Kowligy, N. Nader, and G. Ycas for assistance with
developing the dispersive-wave-shifted Er:ﬁber comb.

Notes and references

1 I. H. van Stokkum, D. S. Larsen and R. van Grondelle,
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Bioenergetics, 2004,
1657, 82 – 104.

2 H. R. Hudock, B. G. Levine, A. L. Thompson, H. Satzger,
D. Townsend, N. Gador, S. Ullrich, A. Stolow and T. J.
Martínez, The Journal of Physical Chemistry A, 2007, 111,
8500–8508.

3 H. Tao, T. K. Allison, T. W. Wright, A. M. Stooke, C. Khurmi,
J. van Tilborg, Y. Liu, R. W. Falcone, A. Belkacem and
T. J. Martinez, The Journal of Chemical Physics, 2011, 134,
244306.

4 S. Adachi, T. Schatteburg, A. Humeniuk, R. Mitri´c and
T. Suzuki, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 13902–13905.
5 Y. Liu, S. L. Horton, J. Yang, J. P. F. Nunes, X. Shen, T. J. A.
Wolf, R. Forbes, C. Cheng, B. Moore, M. Centurion, K. Hegazy,
R. Li, M.-F. Lin, A. Stolow, P. Hockett, T. Rozgonyi, P. Mar-
quetand, X. Wang and T. Weinacht, Phys. Rev. X, 2020, 10,
021016.

6 T. K. Allison, H. Tao, W. J. Glover, T. W. Wright, A. M. Stooke,
C. Khurmi, J. van Tilborg, Y. Liu, R. W. Falcone, T. J. Martinez
and A. Belkacem, The Journal of Chemical Physics, 2012, 136,
124317.

7 M. S. Schuurman and A. Stolow, Annual Review of Physical

Chemistry, 2018, 69, 427–450.

8 A. Stolow, A. E. Bragg and D. M. Neumark, Chemical Reviews,

2004, 104, 1719–1758.

9 C. T. Middleton, K. de La Harpe, C. Su, Y. K. Law, C. E. Crespo-
Hernández and B. Kohler, Annual Review of Physical Chem-
istry, 2009, 60, 217–239.

10 H. Saigusa, Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology C:

Photochemistry Reviews, 2006, 7, 197 – 210.

11 S. Ullrich, T. Schultz, M. Z. Zgierski and A. Stolow, Phys.

Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 2796–2801.

12 C.-h. Tseng, P. Sándor, M. Kotur, T. C. Weinacht and S. Mat-
sika, The Journal of Physical Chemistry A, 2012, 116, 2654–
2661.

13 M. A. R. Reber, Y. Chen and T. K. Allison, Optica, 2016, 3,

311–317.

14 C. Schriever, S. Lochbrunner, E. Riedle and D. J. Nesbitt, Rev.

Sci. Inst., 2008, 79, 013107.

15 Y. Chen, M. C. Silﬁes, G. Kowzan, J. M. Bautista and T. K.

Allison, Applied Physics B, 2019, 125, 81.

16 M. C. Silﬁes, G. Kowzan, Y. Chen, N. Lewis, R. Hou, R. Baehre,
T. Gross and T. K. Allison, Opt. Lett., 2020, 45, 2123–2126.
17 T. Suzuki, The Journal of Chemical Physics, 2019, 151,

090901.

18 D. L. Maser, G. Ycas, W. I. Depetri, F. C. Cruz and S. A. Did-

dams, Applied Physics B, 2017, 123, 142.

19 X. Li, M. A. R. Reber, C. Corder, Y. Chen, P. Zhao and T. K.
Allison, Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, 2016, 87, 093114.

20 R. J. Jones and J. Ye, Opt. Lett., 2004, 29, 2812–2814.
21 R. J. Jones and J. Ye, Opt. Lett., 2002, 27, 1848–1850.
22 W. Nagourney, Quantum Electronics for Atomic Physics, Oxford

University Press, 2010.

23 A. Siegman, Lasers, University Science Books, 1986.
24 T. K. Allison, Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Op-

tical Physics, 2017, 50, 044004.

25 D. Miller,

in Atomic and Molecular Beam Methods, ed.

G. Scoles, Oxford University Press, 1988.

26 W. Jarzeba, V. V. Matylitsky, A. Weichert and C. Riehn, Phys.

Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 451–454.

27 I. Pupeza, X. Gu, E. Fill, T. Eidam, J. Limpert, A. Tünnermann,
F. Krausz and T. Udem, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 26184–26195.

28 P. C. D. Hobbs, Appl. Opt., 1997, 36, 903–920.
29 Cavity Enhanced Spectroscopy and Sensing, ed. G. Gagliardi

and H.-P. Loock, Springer, 2013.

30 A. Weiner, Ultrafast Optics, Wiley, 2009.
31 P. M. Felker and A. H. Zewail, The Journal of Chemical Physics,

1987, 86, 2460–2482.

32 S. Lochbrunner, A. Szeghalmi, K. Stock and M. Schmitt, The

Journal of Chemical Physics, 2005, 122, 244315.

33 M. Ziółek, J. Kubicki, A. Maciejewski, R. Naskrecki and
A. Grabowska, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 4682–4689.
34 S. Lochbrunner, T. Schultz, M. Schmitt, J. P. Shaffer, M. Z.
Zgierski and A. Stolow, The Journal of Chemical Physics, 2001,
114, 2519–2522.

35 T. Sekikawa, O. Schalk, G. Wu, A. E. Boguslavskiy and
A. Stolow, The Journal of Physical Chemistry A, 2013, 117,
2971–2979.

36 J. Catalan and J. C. del Valle, Journal of the American Chemical

Society, 1993, 115, 4321–4325.

37 A. Douhal, F. Lahmani and A. H. Zewail, Chemical Physics,

1996, 207, 477–498.

38 D. W. Allan, Proceedings of the IEEE, 1966, 54, 221–230.

1–10 | 9

Journal Name, [year], [vol.],39 A. Mehmood, M. C. Silﬁes, G. Kowzan, N. Lewis, T. K. Allison

42 N. Heine and K. R. Asmis, International Reviews in Physical

and B. G. Levine, in preparation, 2021.

Chemistry, 2015, 34, 1–34.

40 S. Pijeau, D. Foster and E. G. Hohenstein, The Journal of Phys-

ical Chemistry A, 2018, 122, 5555–5562.

43 M. Silﬁes and et al., in preparation, 2021.
44 C. Vallance and C. M. Rushworth, in Cavity-Enhanced Spec-

41 P. M. Felker, J. S. Baskin and A. H. Zewail, The Journal of

troscopy and Sensing, Springer-Verlag, 2014.

Physical Chemistry, 1986, 90, 724–728.

10 |

1–10

Journal Name, [year], [vol.],