1
2
0
2

b
e
F
7
1

]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
9
8
7
8
0
.
2
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Ion dynamics in capacitively coupled argon-xenon
discharges

M. Klich1, S. Wilczek1, J. F. J. Janssen2, R. P. Brinkmann1, T.
Mussenbrock1, J. Trieschmann3
1Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Science, Ruhr University
Bochum, D-44780, Bochum, Germany
2PlasmaMatters B.V., De Groene Loper 19, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
3Electrodynamics and Physical Electronics Group, Brandenburg University of
Technology Cottbus-Senftenberg, Siemens-Halske-Ring 14, 03046 Cottbus, Germany

Abstract. An argon-xenon (Ar/Xe) plasma is used as a model system for complex
plasmas. Based on this system, symmetric low-pressure capacitively coupled radio-
frequency discharges are examined utilizing Particle-In-Cell/Monte Carlo Collisions
(PIC/MCC) simulations. In addition to the simulation, an analytical energy balance
model fed with the simulation data is applied to analyze the ﬁndings further. This
work focuses on investigating the ion dynamics in a plasma with two ion species and
a gas mixture as background. By varying the gas composition and driving voltage of
the single-frequency discharge, fundamental mechanics of the discharge, such as the
evolution of the plasma density and the energy dispersion, are discussed. Thereby,
close attention is paid to these measures’ inﬂuence on the ion energy distribution
functions at the electrode surfaces. The results show that both the gas composition
and the driving voltage can signiﬁcantly impact the ion dynamics. The mixing ratio
of argon to xenon allows for shifting the distribution function for one ion species from
collisionless to collision dominated. The mixing ratio serves as a control parameter
for the ion ﬂux and the impingement energy of ions at the surfaces. Additionally, a
synergy eﬀect between the ionization of argon and the ionization of xenon is found and
discussed.

1. Introduction

Radio-frequency capacitively coupled plasmas (RF-CCPs) operated at low-pressures are
a core part of modern technology [1–3]. Especially for semiconductor fabrication, plasma
processes like ion-assisted etching [4, 5] and ion implantation [6–8] are key technologies.
Plasma tools help to achieve an integration depth of only a few nanometers [9–11]. One
major challenge of these processes is to control the energy and ﬂux of impinging ions
on the wafer separately [1–3, 12–16].

Techniques using multiple driving frequencies, such as voltage waveform tailoring
[12], succeed to independently control the plasma generation and the ion bombardment
energy [17, 18]. The plasmas investigated in these studies are predominantly argon
plasmas [13, 16, 19]. However, industrially relevant etching plasmas consist of rather

 
 
 
 
 
 
Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

2

complex gas mixtures like CF4/H2 [20–22] or SF6/O2 [23, 24]. For these plasmas, the
interplay of several charged and neutral heavy species impacts the ion dynamics. The
ion dynamics in the plasma eventually determine how ions reach the walls. Here, both
the quantitative (e.g., how many ions reach the target/substrate?) and the qualitative
perspective (e.g., how are the ions aﬀected by collisions?) need to be considered.

Researching complex plasma chemistry in RF-CCPs is a tedious task. Experimental
studies show that the ion energy distribution functions (IEDFs) at the electrodes
become rather complicated [25–29]. Commonly used tools such as the retarding ﬁeld
analyzer ﬁlter the incident ions by energy and do not diﬀerentiate between the ion
species [25, 29, 30]. There is recent and ongoing work to utilize ion mass spectrometry
to overcome these issues [31]. Nevertheless, this technique is currently not widely
applied as a diagnostic tool to analyze plasmas. Therefore, theoretical studies and
simulations are necessary to help to interpret and to understand the measured data.
However, the inherently complex chemistry renders a complete simulation cumbersome.
The commonly used kinetic Particle-In-Cell/Monte Carlo collisions (PIC/MCC) method
typically avoids complex chemistry mainly due to lack of cross section data (although
conceptually possible). The reasoning is to keep the number of species and superparticles
traceable [32]. Otherwise, the computational load of PIC/MCC simulation would not
be feasible.

Combining complex discharge chemistry with the multi-frequency approaches
mentioned above makes a detailed assessment of ion dynamics’ features too cumbersome
to conduct collectively. Hence, we decide to investigate the fundamental principles of
a discharge with two ion species for this study. The mixture of the noble gases argon
and xenon has some history of being an adequate model for complex chemistry. In low-
pressure plasmas, the plasma chemistry of noble gases becomes relatively simple [35,36].
Therefore, studies on ion acoustic waves [33,34] and a generalized Bohm criterion [35–37]
depicted this mixture as a simple example for a multi-ion discharge. Recent studies by
Kim et al. [38] and Adrian et al. [39] contributed to those discussions using or referring
to Ar/Xe plasmas.

Apart from being a model system, there are some academic applications of Ar/Xe
plasmas (e.g., as trace gas for mass spectrometry [40, 41], for the diagnostics of the
electron temperature [42], or in halide lamp simulations [43]). Furthermore, the mixture
has had great success as the illuminant [44] or as part of the illuminant mixture [32,45,46]
of plasma display panels (PDPs). This historical background causes both gases to
be relatively well researched. This fact entails many valuable data for theory and
simulation.

This work aims to add to the existing studies conducted for various gas mixtures
[47–50], investigating their intrinsic mixture dynamics. This knowledge will eventually
enable the adaptation of the known means of plasma control to the complex discharges
of industrial relevance. In contrast to the existing studies, our work is focused on the
impact of the gas mixture composition on the ion dynamics. We will show that the gas
composition is a suitable control parameter for the ion dynamics (e.g., the impingement

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

energy of ions at the surface).

3

This manuscript presents our ﬁndings as follows:

in section 2, we introduce our
simulation framework and a model for the missing cross section data. Moreover, we
introduce an energy balance model for CCPs with multiple ion species. The ﬁndings of
these models are interpreted in section 3. We ﬁrst discuss the inﬂuence of a variation
of the gas composition on the ion dynamics. Then, we validate the energy balance
model with our simulation data. Afterward, we apply this energy balance model to
support and to analyze our gas composition variation ﬁndings. We conclude section 3 by
discussing and examining the inﬂuence of a variation of the gas composition combined
with a variation of the driving voltage on the ion dynamics. Finally, in section 4,
we summarise our ﬁndings, draw a conclusion, and set this work into the context of
industrial applications.

2. Methods and models

2.1. Particle-In-Cell Simulation

The ﬁrst particle simulations were introduced in the 1940s [51], and the PIC/MCC
scheme was developed in the 1960s [52]. Since then, the PIC/MCC method became
a commonly used tool to self-consistently simulate low-pressure plasmas [32, 52, 53].
Despite having the disadvantage of a substantial computational load, its most signiﬁcant
advantage is the statistical representation of distribution functions in phase-space,
allowing the method to capture non-local dynamics [53, 54].

For this work, a benchmarked PIC/MCC implementation called yapic1D [56] is
used to generate the results. The original code is modiﬁed to include two background
gases and multiple ion species. Aside from that, diagnostics for the energy balance
model mentioned above is added to the original code.

This simulation setup is taken to be fully geometrically symmetric (compare
for details [54]). 1d3v electrostatic simulations are executed using a
Wilczek et al.
Cartesian grid with 800 grid cells representing an electrode gap of 25 mm. The resulting
cell size ∆x meets the requirement to resolve the Debye length λD [52,54,56]. Similarly,
the single harmonic driving frequency fRF “ 13.56 MHz is sampled with 3000 points per
RF period. The time step ∆t is suﬃciently small to fulﬁll the requirement regarding the
electron plasma frequency ωpe [52, 54, 56]. Several other studies mention the inﬂuence
of the number of superparticles on the statistics and the plasma density [56–58]. For
this work, we did not include individual weighting for diﬀerent particle species. To have
an acceptable resolution for each ion species at all values of the xenon fraction xXe, we
simulated about 800.000 super-electrons for each case. The advantage of this choice is
that an average of 3000 converged RF-cycles provides satisfactory results.

The ideal gas law deﬁnes the neutral species’ total density, and the neutral fraction
xi is varied. Thereby, the gas pressure pgas is kept constant at 3 Pa, and the gas
temperature Tgas at 300 K. First, we choose the amplitude of the RF voltage VRF to be

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

# reaction
e´ + Ar Ñ e´ + Ar
1
e´ + Ar Ñ e´ + Ar˚
2
e´ + Ar Ñ 2 e´ + Ar`
3
e´ + Xe Ñ e´ + Xe
4
e´ + Xe Ñ e´ + Xe˚
5
e´ + Xe Ñ 2 e´ + Xe`
6
Ar` + Ar Ñ Ar` + Ar
7
Ar` + Ar Ñ Ar + Ar`
8
Ar` + Xe Ñ Ar` + Xe
9
10 Xe` + Xe Ñ Xe` + Xe
11 Xe` + Xe Ñ Xe + Xe` resonant charge exchange
12 Xe` + Ar Ñ Xe` + Ar

process name
elastic scattering
electronic excitation
ionization
elastic scattering
electronic excitation
ionization
isotropic scattering
resonant charge exchange
isotropic scattering
isotropic scattering

isotropic scattering

4

εthr [eV] data source

-
11.5
15.8
-
8.32
12.12
-
-
-
-
-
-

Phelps
Phelps
Phelps
Phelps
Phelps
Phelps
Phelps
Phelps
LJ pot
Phelps
Phelps
Viehland

Table 1. Plasma chemistry and collision processes considered in the simulation.
Meaning of the data sources: “Phelps” refers to the cross section data found initially
in the JILA database [59] and now distributed by the LXCat project [60–62]. “LJ pot”
refers to a cross section obtained based on a phenomenological Lennard-Jones potential
as described by Laricchiuta et al. [63]. “Viehland” marks a cross section calculated
from an interaction potential given by Viehland et al. [67]. Details of the calculations
can be found in section 2.3.

100 V. Later in section 3.3, we discuss the implications of a voltage variation between
100 V and 1000 V on the ion dynamics. All the parameters presented in this section are
typical for baseline studies of RF-CCPs [14–16, 54, 56].

2.2. Discharge chemistry

For PIC simulations to provide a realistic representation of the particle distribution
functions and physics in a low-pressure discharge, collisions need to be considered. The
method of choice is the Monte Carlo collision technique [52–54] that is combined with
a so-called null collision scheme [54–56]. Both techniques require the knowledge of
momentum transfer cross sections.

The chemistry set for argon and xenon is in line with the work of Gu(cid:19)mundsson et
al. [35,36]. All reactions can be seen in detail in table 1. In contrast to Gu(cid:19)mundsson et
al., we decide to take advantage of the commonly used and acknowledged [19, 54, 56, 68]
cross section data obtained by Phelps. The data was initially distributed via the JILA
database [59] and is now available at the LXCat project website [60–62]. Phelps
combines the cross sections for all electronically excited states into one “eﬀective
excitation” cross section. This eﬀective excitation reduces the total number of reactions
and the numerical load.

The second diﬀerence compared to Gu(cid:19)mundsson et al.

is our treatment of the
missing cross section data for Ar`/Xe and Xe`/Ar. Both conclude to neglect charge
transfer collisions between argon and xenon due to it being a non-resonant process that

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

5

requires a third particle to ensure momentum and energy conservation. The disparity lies
in our treatment of the remaining scattering process. They assume the cross sections
for processes 7 and 9 and the cross sections for processes 10 and 12, respectively, to
be equal. We adopt a physical model to procure the necessary cross sections from
interaction potentials. In this way, we create individual cross sections for processes 9
and 12. The details of how to calculate these cross sections will be presented in the
following section.

The cross section data used for this work are depicted in ﬁgure 1. It is noticeable
that the cross sections of processes involving xenon species generally have higher values
than corresponding processes that involve argon species.
In terms of a hard-sphere
model [1], this deviation is explained by the diﬀerent covalent atom radii of argon and
In terms of a
xenon [69]. Xenon is, compared to argon, simply the bigger target.
more sophisticated collision model [1], one, for example, needs to consider the atomic
polarisability of the neutral particle. Nevertheless, such a view leads to the same insight.
Xenon has a higher atomic polarisability than argon [69] and stronger interaction with
charged particles. Correspondingly, the cross section for charged particles interacting
with xenon has to be larger than the cross section for the interaction of charged particles
and argon.

2.3. The calculation of the cross sections

On an elementary level of theory, all cross sections are based on an interaction potential
between the colliding particles.
If the literature does not provide a cross section, a
possible solution is to make it the modeler’s task to develop an interaction potential by
making several assumptions. A classic example of this is the Langevin capture cross
section [72] used in studies to make up for unknown cross sections [73]. Despite the
Langevin cross section’s advantages, a complete implementation is numerically extensive
and leads to anisotropic scattering [74, 75]. The cross sections given by Phelps are a
kind of momentum transfer cross sections [59]. There, the scattering angles are found
in an isotropic manner [52]. Hence, it is questionable to apply anisotropic scattering for
two collisions while the other collisions are treated isotropically. We perceive another
approach to be more suitable for this work.

The approach used in this work is based on Laricchiuta et al. [63], who use a

phenomenological potential to describe a two-body interaction given by

Vijpxq “ (cid:15)p,ij

«

m
nij pxijq ´ m

ˆ

1
xij

˙

nij pxij q

´

nij pxijq
nij pxijq ´ m

ﬀ

˙

m

ˆ

1
xij

,

(1)

where the standard exponents of the Lennard Jones potential, 12 and 6, are replaced
by npxijq and m. Depending on the type of interaction, m is either 4 for neutral-ion
interactions or 6 for neutral-neutral interactions. In this work, the potential is applied
to neutral-ion interactions only. Hence, m is always equal to 4. The dimensionless
coordinate x “ r{rm,ij depends on the parameterized position of the potential well

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

6

Figure 1. Cross sections for the electron and ion collisions used in this work. a) shows
the cross section of collision processes from electrons with argon neutrals. b) shows
the cross sections of collision processes from electrons with xenon neutrals. c) shows
cross sections of the collisions of Ar+ ions. d) shows cross sections of the collisions
of Xe+ ions. The data source and a detailed description of each process are found
in table 1. Abbreviations used in the legend: ela = elastic collision electron/neutral,
exc = electronic excitation electron/neutral, ion = electron impact ionization, iso =
isotropic scattering ion/neutral as deﬁned by [59], back = backscattering ion/neutral
as deﬁned by [59].

rp,ij. The potential itself is scaled by the parameterized potential well depth (cid:15)p,ij. Both
parameterizations are empirical approximations that depend on atomic properties like
the polarizability. More details related to the exact empirical formulas can be found in
Laricchiuta et al. [63], Cambi et al. [64], Cappelletti et al. [66], and Aquilanti et al. [65].
Two additional steps are required to obtain the cross section. The ﬁrst step is

calculating the scattering angle, χij according to

χij p(cid:15)ij, bq “ π ´ 2b

ż

8

r0

r2

b

dr
r2 ´ V prq
1 ´ b2

(cid:15)ij

(2)

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

7

with (cid:15)ij the kinetic energy in the center of mass frame, b the impact parameter, r the
distance between the particles, and r0 the distance of closest approach. The scattering
angles are calculated using a program that is based on Colonna et al. [71]. The second
step is calculating the cross section σij
ż

σplq
ij p(cid:15)ijq “ 2π

0

8

‰
“
1 ´ cosl χij p(cid:15)ij, bq

bdb,

(3)

with l an integer that indicates which type of cross section is calculated. In this work, we
used l “ 1, which corresponds to the momentum transfer cross section. The cross section
is integrated based on an algorithm developed by Viehland [70]. Finally, the scattering
angle corresponding to the obtained momentum transfer cross sections is consistently
taken to be isotropic in our simulations.

2.4. Energy balance model

The conservation of energy is one of the central continuity equations of physics and so
knowing how the energy disperses into a system is key to understanding the process. In
terms of low-temperature plasma physics, a frequently used model as given by Lieberman
and Lichtenberg [1] for a geometrically symmetric situation reads:

Sabs “ 2 ns uB εtot “ 2 ΓB εtot “ 2 e ΓB pεe ` εc ` εiq.

(4)

Sabs denotes the total energy ﬂux into the system, ns the plasma density at the sheath
edge, uB denotes the Bohm velocity, ΓB is the ion ﬂux at the Bohm point, and εtot is the
total energy loss in eV. The last transformation in equation (4) shows that the energy
loss per electron-ion pair created may be split into an energy loss due to electrons hitting
the bounding surface (εe), an energy loss due to collisions (εc), and an energy loss due
to ions impinging at the bounding surface (εi). The loss terms εe and εi describe an
averaged energy loss of the system per lost particle (neglecting particle reﬂections). The
third term εc is treated diﬀerently. It represents the collisional losses per newly created
electron/ion pair.

Previous work [76] has shown that an adaptation of equation (4) gives insight into
the system’s electron dynamics by calculating all necessary terms from a PIC/MCC
simulation. An essential insight is that, due to ﬂux conservation, the Bohm ﬂux ΓB can
be exchanged by the electron ﬂux Γe,el or the ion ﬂux Γi,el at the electrode.

In detail, the energy conversion through collisions εc consists of an electron εc,e
and an ion contribution εc,i. For low-pressure plasmas, it is argued that the energy loss
due to ion collisions εc,i is often negligible [1]. However, a PIC/MCC study by Jiang
et al. [77] showed that εc,i can signiﬁcantly impact the energy balance of low-pressure
plasmas.

Using both insights, we evolve equation (4) into an energy balance model for two

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

8

Figure 2. The trend of the plasma density while varying the background gas
composition. a) shows the development of the time and space averaged total ion
density. b) shows the fraction of Xe+ ions in the discharge. (conditions: pgas “ 3 Pa,
lgap “ 25 mm, VRF “ 100 V, fRF “ 13.56 MHz)

ion species, here explicitly given for our case of an Ar/Xe mixture:

Sabs,tot “ Sabs,e ` Sabs,Ar` ` Sabs,Xe`
Sabs,e “ 2 pΓe εe ` ΓAr` εc,e,Ar ` ΓXe` εc,e,Xeq,
Sabs,Ar` “ 2 ΓAr` pεi,Ar` ` εis,Ar` ` εcx,Ar`q
,
Sabs,Xe` “ 2 ΓXe` pεi,Xe` ` εis,Xe` ` εcx,Xe`q

.

,

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

For this and more complex systems, it is useful to split the total energy ﬂux Sabs,tot into a
separate term for each species. This separation is done in equation (5). Besides, we split
the collisional losses to the background gas for ions, εc,i, into two terms. One represents
the losses due to charge exchange collisions for Ar+ ions (εcx,Ar`) and Xe+ ions (εcx,Xe`).
The other term gives the losses caused by the remaining isotropic scattering. It separates
the isotropic losses for Ar+ ions (εis,Ar`), and Xe+ ions (εis,Xe`). This distinction is
based on the nomenclature of Phelps [59] and will prove useful for understanding the
ion dynamics.

The terms for the electron ﬂux (Γe), the Ar+ ion ﬂux (ΓAr`) and the Xe+ ion ﬂux
(ΓXe`) in this model are obtained from the PIC/MCC simulation at the surface of the
electrodes.

3. Results and Discussion

3.1. Inﬂuence of the neutral gas composition on the discharge

Initially, the inﬂuence of the gas composition on the discharge is investigated by varying
the Ar/Xe density ratio. Figure 2 a) shows the total ion density ni,tot as a function of

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

9

the xenon gas fraction xXe or the argon gas fraction xAr, respectively. Here, the total
ion density ni,tot is deﬁned as the sum of the spatially and temporally averaged number
densities of Ar+ and Xe+ ions. The gas fractions of argon and xenon are deﬁned by
the ratio of the respective species density and the total gas density. In analogy to this
deﬁnition, we deﬁne an ion fraction, e.g., the fraction of Xe+ ions xXe`, as the ratio
of the number density of Xe+ ions and the total ion density ni,tot. Figure 2 b) depicts
this Xe+ ion ratio as a function of the xenon gas fraction xXe or argon gas fraction xAr,
respectively.

When varying the gas mixture from pure argon to pure xenon by successively
increasing the xenon fraction xXe, the plasma density rises signiﬁcantly over about one
order of magnitude (ﬁg. 2 a)). The ratio of Xe+ ions (ﬁg. 2 b)) reveals that even small
admixtures of xenon to an argon gas produce a high amount of Xe+ ions. A xenon
fraction of xXe « 0.15 is already suﬃcient for Xe+ ions to become the dominant ion
species. Xenon admixtures of about 30 percent (xXe “ 0.3) produce a strongly Xe+
dominated discharge (xXe` Á 0.8). Both the development of the plasma density and the
fraction of Xe+ ions in the discharge as a function of the gas composition show non-linear
relations. Hereby, the trend of ﬁgure 2 a) approximates a compressed parabola whilst
the trend of 2 b) resembles the function of the square root. In the following, the overall
dominance of Xe+ ions will be examined and explained in more detail. The diﬀerence in
the ionization energies gives a basic explanation of the observed behavior. The ionization
threshold for xenon (εthr,i,Xe “ 12.12 eV) is much smaller than the threshold for argon
(εthr,i,Ar “ 15.8 eV) (comp. tab. 1). This disparity allows lower energetic electrons to
ionize xenon in contrast to argon. Additionally, the ionization cross section of xenon
σi,Xe is about one order of magnitude bigger than the corresponding cross section σi,Ar
for argon (comp. ﬁg. 1 a) and b)). As a result, Xe+ ions are prevalent, even for low
xenon admixtures, and dominate the discharge for a wide mixture range. This result
agrees with previous works [48, 50] that, for diﬀerent mixtures, have shown at least one
dominant ion species for a wide range of admixtures.

The inﬂuence of the gas composition also directly manifests in a variation of the
IEDFs for both ion species. The plots of ﬁgure 3 show IEDFs for both Ar+ and Xe+
ions at the electrode surface. The energy, plotted on the abscissa, is given in eV. The
ordinate shows the IEDF normed on the respective ion ﬂux Γi,s at the electrode. Each
row of ﬁgure 3 represents results for both ion species and the same case. The cases are
distinguished by the xenon fraction xXe as indicated. Here, the plots in the right column
show IEDFs of Ar+ ions, and the results for Xe+ ions are shown in the right column.

In section 2.2, we argue that the charge exchange between Ar+/Xe and Xe+/Ar,
respectively, is a non-resonant process and a three-body collision. We conclude that this
process is negligible. As a result, a variation of the gas composition changes the ions’
probability to perform charge exchange collisions. Therefore, Ar+ ions, for high argon
fractions xAr, show an IEDF clearly dominated by collisions. This IEDF becomes a
collisionless distribution for small argon admixtures to a xenon background (ﬁg. 3 left).
The IEDF of Xe+ ions shows a similar trend except that Xe+ ions have a less distinct

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

10

Figure 3.
Ion energy distribution function (IEDF) at the electrode for diﬀerent
compositions of the background gas. The left column shows distribution functions
for Ar+ ions. The corresponding distributions for Xe+ ions are on the right side of the
plot. (conditions: pgas “ 3 Pa, lgap “ 25 mm, VRF “ 100 V, fRF “ 13.56 MHz)

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

11

Figure 4. Evaluation of the energy balance equations (eq.
(5) - (8)) for various
gas compositions. All parameters have been calculated by means of a PIC/MCC
simulation. (conditions: pgas “ 3 Pa, lgap “ 25 mm, VRF “ 100 V, fRF “ 13.56 MHz)

a

bimodal behaviour for the cases with high argon fraction. This diﬀerence is explained
by the scaling of the width of the bimodal peak being proportional to
[2, 28].
Besides, an argon fraction xAr of 0.2 and 0.3 or, vice versa, a xenon fraction xXe of 0.2 and
0.3 creates an intermediate or hybrid regime. A signiﬁcant number of ions experiences
the discharge as being collision dominated, while the remaining ions cross the sheath
collisionlessly. In ﬁgure 3, the described regime is visible for argon at xXe “ 0.2 and
xenon at xXe “ 0.8. Several distinct peaks are visible at low energies that stem from
charge exchange collisions, and at high energies, the characteristic collisionless bimodal
peak is clearly established. In these cases, particularly, the scaling of the bimodal peak
width can be observed. For both cases, Xe+ ions establish a bimodal peak narrower
than the bimodal peak formed by Ar+ ions.

m´1
i

3.2. Revision and analysis of the energy balance model

For a fundamental understanding of the energy distribution within the system, the
energy balance model resembled by eqs.
(5) - (8) may be used, as shown in ﬁgure
4. We calculate all parameters and properties by means of a PIC/MCC simulation
averaged over 3000 RF periods. The plot shows two bars for each of the chosen gas
compositions. The grey bar on the left-hand side represents the total absorbed energy
ﬂux Sabs,tot. The colored bars on the right-hand side resolve the diﬀerent channels of
energy dissemination in detail. The colors blue (electron energy lost at the electrode

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

12

9 εe), red (averaged energy consumption per e/Ar+-pair 9 εc,e,Ar), and green (averaged
energy consumption per e/Xe+-pair 9 εc,e,Xe) represent the right-hand side of equation
(6). The right-hand side of equation (7) is depicted in pink (Ar+ ion energy loss at
the electrode 9 εi,Ar`), cyan (energy loss by isotropic scattering 9 εis,Ar`), and purple
(energy loss by backscattering 9 εcx,Ar`). The remaining colors olive (Xe+ ion energy
loss at the electrode 9 εi,Xe`), brown (energy loss by isotropic scattering 9 εis,Xe`),
and orange (energy loss by backscattering 9 εcx,Xe`) visualize the right-hand-side of
equation (8).

At ﬁrst, it is noticeable that ﬁgure 4 shows a roughly square-root-shaped increase
of the absorbed energy ﬂux density Sabs as a function of the xenon fraction xXe. This
trend is a consequence of the boundary conditions in combination with the varied
gas composition. The PIC/MCC simulations considered in this work use a single-
frequency voltage source as a boundary condition for calculating the electric ﬁeld. The
energy ﬂux density is calculated self-consistently according to the plasma state. At low
xenon fractions xXe, xenon neutrals and Xe+ ions successively provide additional loss
mechanisms, and the energy consumption increases rapidly. Whereas at higher xenon
fractions, xenon already dominates the discharge, and the energy consumption slowly
saturates. Lieberman and Lichtenberg present the scaling law ns9 Sabs [1]. In section
3.1, we discussed that the trend of the plasma density ni,tot as a function of the xenon
fraction xXe (comp. ﬁg. 2 a)) is approximated by a parabola. Combined with the
square-root-shaped trend of the absorbed energy ﬂux density Sabs as a function of the
xenon fraction xXe, we see the resulting trend of ni,tot and Sabs match the anticipated
scaling.

The results calculated for pure argon (xXe “ 0.0) and pure xenon (xXe “ 1.0)
discharges resemble the classical model given by equation (4). The results demonstrate
that all individual loss terms sum up to the total energy ﬂux and thus prove the models’
exact energy conservation. Both the argon case and xenon case reveal that the energy
loss due to colliding ions (argon: cyan and purple, xenon: brown and orange) has a
signiﬁcant contribution to the energy balance (argon: « 31.1 % of the total energy,
xenon: « 35.6 %). These ﬁndings are similar to the study of Jiang et al. [77].

The remaining bars of ﬁgure 4 review the modiﬁed energy balance model presented
in equation (5) to (8). It shows, for some exemplary gas mixtures, that the suggested
balance for multiple ion species is complete and that each species’ energy transfer can be
traced individually. Furthermore, the results show that for a complete energy balance for
plasmas with two ion species, colliding ions’ energy transfers are at least as important
as they are in mono ionic plasmas [77]. Especially, the energy losses due to charge
exchange collisions (εcx,Ar` -purple- or εcx,Xe` -orange-, resp.) make up for a signiﬁcant
amount of the transferred energy.

Both the individual energy transfers of each particle species and the exact resolution
of speciﬁc loss channels will in the following prove useful to understand and analyze the
discharge. To make the results comparable, we decide to switch the representation of the
energy ﬂux density Sabs from absolute units to relative units (comp. ﬁg. 5). Thereby,

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

13

Figure 5. The energy balance equations (5) - (8) applied for the background gas
variation. All properties are calculated from a PIC simulation and referred to the total
absorbed energy ﬂux Sabs,tot. All plots show the right-hand side of their corresponding
equation in relative units. a) represents equation (5), b) equation (6), c) equation
(7) and d) equation (8).
(conditions: pgas “ 3 Pa, lgap “ 25 mm, VRF “ 100 V,
fRF “ 13.56 MHz)

we refer to the energy ﬂuxes of each case individually with respect to the total energy
ﬂux Sabs,tot.

Figure 5 shows a rearrangement of the data of ﬁgure 4 in the relative representation
explained before. Each of the subplots a) to d) respectively present the right-hand side
of equations (5) to (8). The abscissa of all plots mark energy ﬂux densities in relative
units, and the ordinates are in units of the gas fractions (xXe or xAr, resp.). The color
schemes for ﬁgures 5 b), c), and d) are similar to the ones used in ﬁgure 4. Figure 5 a)
introduces a new color scheme for the total energy ﬂuxes absorbed by electrons (bright
blue), Ar+ ions (fuchsia), and Xe+ ions (lime green).

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

14

In section 3.1, we point out two observations. First, Xe+ ions are for a wide range
of mixtures the dominant ion species. Second, for constant gas pressure, collisional
features of the IEDF depend on the gas composition, and even a collisional/collisionless
hybrid regime can be reached. Both observations are conﬁrmed and explained by the
energy balance. Figure 5 a) shows that for a xenon fraction xXe between 0.15 and 0.2,
Ar+ ions and Xe+ ions absorb an equal amount of energy (30 % of Sabs or « 3 W/m2).
Simultaneously, the production of Xe+ ions is more eﬀective than the production of
Ar+ ions. This increased eﬀectiveness is due to the lower ionization energy of xenon
(εthr,Xe “ 12.12 eV) compared to argon’s ionization energy (εthr,Ar “ 15.8 eV).

The case for a xenon admixture of 20 percent (xXe “ 0.2) serves as the best example
for this ﬁnding. There are, with a Xe+ ion fraction xXe` « 0.7 (comp. ﬁg. 2), more Xe+
ions than Ar+ ions inside the discharge. Nevertheless, more energy per electron-ion pair
is consumed to produce Ar+ ions (red) than for the generation of Xe+ ions (green) (ﬁg.
5 b)). This ﬁnding is explained by the lower excitation and ionization levels of xenon
compared to argon. Simultaneously, these lower excitation and ionization levels open
up new loss channels for the electrons inside the system. Raising the xenon fraction xXe
yields more and more electrons that are not energetic enough to participate in inelastic
processes in an argon discharge. Thus, the averaged electron energy εe drops when going
from an argon discharge to a xenon discharge. The decreasing loss term εe (blue) in
ﬁgure 5 b) hints at the average electron energy of the system and gives evidence of this
explanation. All in all, this shows that the production of Xe+ ions ﬁlls an unoccupied
energetic niche where numerous low energetic electrons can participate. Therefore, a
signiﬁcant production of Xe+ ions is observed even for low xenon fractions xXe and Xe+
ions are the dominant ion species for the majority of the possible Ar/Xe mixtures.

The trends observed in the IEDFs (ﬁg. 3) and the conclusions drawn from this
observation are conﬁrmed by the energy balance as well (ﬁg. 5 c) and d)). Looking at
the losses due to charge exchange collisions εcx,i for both Ar+ ions (ﬁg. 5 c), purple)
and Xe+ ions (ﬁg. 5 d), orange), it becomes apparent that the collisional features
are switched between Ar+ and Xe+ ions when going towards more argon, or xenon
respectively, dominated gas mixtures. The losses due to charge exchange for Ar+ ions
εcx,Ar` monotonically fall as a function of the xenon fraction xXe (ﬁg. 5 c), purple) while
the corresponding term for Xe+ ions εcx,Xe` monotonically raises, when displayed as the
same relation (ﬁg. 5 d), orange). The slight diﬀerence in the trends is explained by
the dominance of the Xe+ ions in the discharge. While the density of Xe+ ions rapidly
increases, when adding small amounts of xenon to an argon background (comp. ﬁg.
2 a)), the density of Ar+ ions vanishes as fast among the dominant Xe+ ions. Hence,
there are not enough Ar+ ions present in discharges dominated by Xe+ ions, so that the
losses of Ar+ ions in total cannot signiﬁcantly contribute to the energy absorbed by the
discharge (ﬁg. 5 a), fuchsia).

In addition to this, the mean energy of Xe+ ions at the electrode εi,Xe` shows a
in 5 d), olive). Instead of
very diﬀerent trend than all the collisional quantities (ﬁg.
monotonically rising with the xenon fraction xXe as the corresponding Ar+ term does

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

15

as a function of the argon ratio xAr (comp. ﬁg. 5 c), pink), the Xe+ curve shows a
maximum at xXe “ 0.4. This maximum is closely connected to the dominance of Xe+
ions. At 40 percent xenon admixture (xXe “ 0.4), Xe+ ions already make up for about
90 percent of the ions in the discharge (ﬁg. 2 a)). At the same time, argon is the
dominant background rendering Xe+ ions more or less incapable of doing a relevant
amount of charge exchange collisions. This lack of charge exchange collisions is seen in
the IEDF of Xe+ ions, that even for a xenon fraction xXe “ 0.5 shows a characteristic
collisionless single bimodal peak (ﬁg. 3, right). For lower xenon fractions xXe, the
number density nXe` and the ﬂux density ΓXe` are lower and fewer Xe+ ions reach the
electrode. This decrease results in a lower energy loss. For higher xenon fractions xXe,
the charge transfer collision of Xe/Xe+ becomes more and more probable. This trend
manifests in the IEDFs (ﬁg. 3, right) and the trend of the loss term for charge exchange
εcx,Xe` (ﬁg. 5 d), orange). Thus, the energy loss of Xe+ ions to the surface ﬁnally drops
because the energy gets dissipated more strongly to the neutral gas via charge exchange
collisions.

The minimum of the total energy ﬂux density absorbed by electrons Sabs,e (ﬁg. 5 a),
bright blue) has a similar explanation. For a xenon fraction xXe “ 0.5, electrons absorb
the lowest amount of energy. Under these conditions, Xe+ ions make up for almost all
the ions in the discharge. Figure 2 b) shows that for a xenon fraction xXe “ 0.5 the
Xe+ ion fraction xXe` is approximately 0.9. At the same time, xenon atoms make up
for just 50 percent of the background gas. The amount of collisions with argon or xenon
particles respectively is, as argued before, signiﬁcantly reduced compared to mixtures
with a high amount of either of the gases. Thus, for xenon fractions xXe ă 0.5, the
production of Ar+ ions causes electrons to absorb and invest more energy. For xenon
fraction xXe ą 0.5, collisions with xenon neutrals become successively more probable,
and the production of Xe+ ions consumes more energy (comp. ﬁg. 5 b), green) without
signiﬁcantly changing the discharge conditions any more (comp. ﬁg. 2).

Additionally, ﬁgure 3 shows that xXe “ 0.5 is optimal for producing high energetic
ions. Both ion species establish the characteristic collisionless bimodal peaks and impact
the surface with high energies. Therefore, the relative amount of energy brought by ions
to the surface is maximal. For lower xenon fraction (xXe ă 0.5), the IEDF of Ar+ ions
is visibly aﬀected by collisions and vice versa for higher xenon fraction (xXe ą 0.5).

3.3. Inﬂuence of the driving voltage on the discharge

In terms of our simulation, a raised driving voltage equals, if all other parameters (gas
composition, pressure, etc.) are kept constant, raising energy input to the system.
Figure 6 a) shows a semi-logarithmic representation of the time and space averaged
total plasma density ni,tot as a function of the gas fractions (xXe or xAr, resp.). The
diﬀerent colors diﬀerentiate the data for diﬀerent RF amplitudes (black = 100 V, red =
250 V, blue = 500 V, green = 1 kV). The black curve shows the same data as ﬁgure 2 a).
Due to the aforementioned higher input energy, the plasma density is raised in general

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

16

Figure 6. The trend of the plasma density while varying the background gas
composition and driving voltage. a) shows the development of the time and space
averaged total ion density. b) shows the relative fraction of Xe+ ions in the discharge.
(conditions: pgas “ 3 Pa, lgap “ 25 mm, fRF “ 13.56 MHz)

while the several curves’ general trend is kept.
Independent of the driving voltage,
argon discharges have a signiﬁcantly lower plasma density than xenon discharges, and
the transition while varying the gas composition shows the same non-linear trend. In
sections 3.1 and 3.2, we discuss that in this context, non-linear means parabolic.

Apart from this, a varied driving voltage alters the dominance of Xe+ ions. Figure
6 b) shows a similar plot to ﬁgure 2 b). The Xe+ ion fraction is presented as a function
of the gas fraction (xXe or xAr, resp.). The colors have the same meanings as in ﬁgure 6
a), and the black curve was also presented before (see ﬁg. 2 b)). Figure 6 b) shows that,
for a ﬁxed xenon fraction xXe, a raised voltage reduces the fraction of Xe+ ions xXe`
present in the discharge. The case for xXe “ 0.2 is a good example of this observation.
When increasing the driving voltage from 100 V to 1 kV, the ratio of Xe+ ions xXe`
drops from approximately 0.7 to roughly 0.6.

Once again, the energy balance (ﬁg. 7) explains the discharge mechanisms governing
how an increased driving voltage raises the plasma density. Similar to ﬁgure 5, terms
on the right-hand side of the energy balance equations (5) - (8) are shown in relative
units and as a function of the gas fractions (xXe or xAr, resp.). In contrast to ﬁgure 5,
each panel of ﬁgure 7 represents just one term of the respective equation’s right-hand
side. The diﬀerent curves represent data for diﬀerent driving voltages VRF, ranging from
VRF “ 100 V to VRF “ 1000 V. The color scheme is analog to ﬁgures 4 and 5. Figure 7 a)
shows the total energy ﬂux density absorbed by electrons (Sabs,e) in bright blue. Figure
7 b) depicts the total energy ﬂux density absorbed by Ar+ ions (Sabs,Ar`) in fuchsia, and
ﬁgure 7 c) presents the total energy ﬂux density absorbed by Xe+ ions (Sabs,Xe`) in lime
green. Together ﬁgures 7 a) - c) show the right-hand side of equation (5). Therefore,

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

17

Figure 7. The energy balance equations (5) - (8) applied for both the variation of
the background gas and the driving voltage VRF. All properties are calculated from a
PIC simulation and referred to the total absorbed energy ﬂux Sabs,tot. All plots show
one term on the right-hand side of their corresponding equation in relative units. a)
shows the electron’s part Sabs,e of eq. (5). a1) - a3) show the three terms of equation
(6) and add up to the respective curve of a). b) represents the Ar+ ions’ part Sabs,Ar`
of equation (5). b1) - b3) present the three terms of equation (7) and sum up to the
respective curve of b). c) shows the Xe+ ions’ part Sabs,Xe` of equation (5). c1) - c3)
depict the three terms of equation (8), and their addition gives the respective curve of
c). (conditions: pgas “ 3 Pa, lgap “ 25 mm, fRF “ 13.56 MHz)

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

18

the corresponding data points horizontally always add up to give 100 % (or the total
energy ﬂux density Sabs,tot, resp.). Vertically the details of each particle species’ power
absorption are presented. Figures 7 a1) - a3) each show one term of the right-hand side
of equation (6). The average energy loss of electrons at the electrodes εe is shown in
ﬁgure 7 a1) in blue. The averaged amount of energy needed to create an electron/Ar+
ion pair (εc,e,Ar) is found in panel a2) in red, and the related term for electron/Xe+ ion
pairs (εc,e,Xe) is depicted in panel a3) in green. The individual terms of the right-hand
side of equation (7) are shown in ﬁgures 7 b1) - b3). They reveal the details of the Ar+
ion dynamics by presenting the average energy loss by Ar+ ions at the electrodes (εi,Ar`,
ﬁg. 7 b1), pink), the energy loss of Ar+ ions caused by isotropic scattering (εis,Ar`, ﬁg.
7 b2), cyan), and the energy loss of Ar+ ions due to backscattering (εcx,Ar`, ﬁg. 7 b3),
purple). Similarly, ﬁgures 7 c1) - c3) show the right-hand side of equation (8). They
unravel the details of the Xe+ ion dynamics by showing the average impingement energy
of Xe+ ions at the electrodes (εi,Xe`, ﬁg. 7 c1), olive), the energy lost by Xe+ ions in
isotropic scattering collisions (εis,Xe`, ﬁg. 7 c2), brown), and the energy lost by Xe+ ion
in backscattering collisions (εcx,Xe`, ﬁg. 7 c3), orange). Vertically, the sum of the data
in the subscript labeled panels gives the curves of the non-subscript labeled one (e.g.,
panels a1) - a3) sum-up to panel a)).

In general, it is apparent that a raised driving voltage reduces the ratio of energy
coupled to the electrons (ﬁg. 7 a)) and raises the fraction absorbed by both Ar+ and
Xe+ ions (ﬁg. 7 b) or ﬁg. 7 c), resp.). The increased energy consumption into the ion
contribution mainly consists of two parts. First, a raised driving voltage VRF increases
the voltage drop across the boundary sheaths, and ions gain higher impingement energies
after crossing the sheath collisionlessly. This is shown in ﬁgure 7 b1) for Ar+ ions and
in ﬁgure 7 c1) for Xe+ ions. Second, an increased energy gain for the ions inside the
sheath goes along with an increased energy loss caused by charge exchange collisions.
The corresponding terms εcx,Ar` for Ar+ ions (ﬁg. 7 b3)) and εcx,Xe` for Xe+ ions (ﬁg.
7 c3)) support this hypothesis. Furthermore, the cross sections for charge exchange
dominate the ones for isotropic scattering at high energies (comp. ﬁg. 1 c) and d)).
Correspondingly, the already low energy losses by Ar+ ions (εis,Ar`, ﬁg. 7 b2)) and Xe+
ions (εis,Xe`, ﬁg. 7 c2)) caused by isotropic scattering decrease due to the increased
driving voltage VRF. The maximum of ﬁgure 7 c1) was discussed in section 3.2. The
energy-eﬃcient production of Xe+ ions already creates a high amount of Xe+ ions for
small xenon fractions xXe. Thus, there are optimal parameters for Xe+ ions to bombard
the surface with the least collisional loss (xXe “ 0.4 for VRF “ 100 V, sec. 3.2). The
aforementioned enhanced role of backscattering and decreased inﬂuence of isotropic
scattering causes the optimal parameters for higher driving voltages VRF to shift to
higher xenon fractions xXe (e.g., XXe “ 0.5 for VRF “ 1000 V, ﬁg. 7 c1)).

In terms of ion production, the previous assessment shows that the higher the
driving voltage is set, the smaller the fraction of the energy consumed for creating new
electron/ion pairs becomes. Furthermore, the maximal amount of energy consumed for
creating Xe+ ions in a pure xenon background (xXe “ 1.0, ﬁg. 7 a3)) is always lower than

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

19

Figure 8. The trend of the ion densities while varying the background gas composition
and driving voltage. a) shows the development of the time and space averaged Ar+
ion density. b) shows the development of the time and space averaged Xe+ ion density.
(conditions: pgas “ 3 Pa, lgap “ 25 mm, fRF “ 13.56 MHz)

the corresponding maximum for Ar+ ions in a pure argon background (xAr “ 1.0, ﬁg. 7
a2)). As argued before, this ﬁnding correlates with the fact that the threshold energies
of all inelastic processes involving xenon are signiﬁcantly lower than those involving
argon. This observation additionally reveals why Xe+ ions dominate the discharge for
most conditions. It becomes best visible by comparing the pure argon case (xXe “ 0.0,
ﬁg. 7 a2)) with the pure xenon case (xXe “ 1.0, ﬁg. 7 a3)) for a driving voltage of
1 kV. Here, roughly eight percent of the total energy ﬂux density is used to produce
an electron/Ar+ ion pair (ﬁg. 7 a2)). For the corresponding pure xenon case, only ﬁve
percent of the total energy is used to produce an electron/Xe+ ion pair (ﬁg. 7 a3)).
Simultaneously, the xenon case’s plasma density is more than one order of magnitude
higher than in the argon case (comp. ﬁg. 6 a)).

Since the production of Xe+ ions remains more eﬀective for all applied driving
voltages, there has to be another reason why the dominance of Xe+ ions is reduced. A
close examination of ﬁgures 7 a1) and 8 explains the observed. Both panels of ﬁgure
8 are similar in structure to ﬁgure 6 a), but show the individual ion densities (nAr` in
ﬁg. 8 a) or nXe` in ﬁg. 8 b), resp.) as a function of the gas fraction (xXe or xAr, resp.).
The diﬀerent colors again mark diﬀerent values of the driving voltage VRF, and the color
scheme is the same as in ﬁgure 6 a). The trend of the Ar+ ion density in ﬁgure 8 a)
already reveals the underlying process responsible for the decreased dominance of Xe+
ions. Even for the base case (VRF “ 100 V), the maximum of the density of Ar+ ions is
found for a xenon fraction xXe “ 0.2 and not for a xenon fraction xXe “ 0.0 as it is vice
versa the case for Xe+ ions (comp. ﬁg. 8). This maximum is shifted by a raised driving
voltage to a xenon admixture of 30 percent (xXe “ 0.3, ﬁg. 8 a)). Recalling ﬁgure 6 a), it

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

20

was observed that adding xenon to an argon background is equivalent to monotonically
raising the plasma density. Therefore, a small xenon admixture to an argon discharge
means creating more electrons that will mostly collide with an argon atom. As a result,
the probability of ionization of an argon atom is higher than it is in a case with no or
lower xenon admixture, that is, without these additional electrons. Thus, the density of
Ar+ ions is higher than in a discharge without xenon admixture. This eﬀect aﬀects the
Ar+ ions for low voltages as long as most neutrals are argon atoms. A raised driving
voltage shifts the maximum of the Ar+ ion density and the beneﬁts of this synergy eﬀect
to higher xenon fractions.

For Xe+ ions, on the other hand, this synergy eﬀect cannot be observed (ﬁg. 8 b)).
This observation is due to the higher ionization energy of argon. Figure 7 a1) helps to
understand this observation by showing the energy lost by electrons at the electrodes
εe. The general trend of the curves for εe is a reduction by a raised driving voltage (ﬁg.
7 a1)). An equivalent conclusion is that energy is dissipated more eﬃciently inside the
volume of the discharge. In terms of our non-equilibrium low-pressure discharge, there
are just two ways for electrons to lose energy. Either they interact inelastically with the
background or transfer their energy to the surface by arriving at the electrodes. The ﬁrst
option was discussed before (ﬁg. 7 a2) and a3)), and the second option is discussed here.
Both processes similarly respond to the increased driving voltage, which means that a
higher driving voltage increases the ion production eﬃciency. Simultaneously, the energy
dissemination eﬃciency is increased the more xenon is added to the background gas. In
section 3.1, we discuss that an increased amount of xenon atoms in the discharge provides
lower energetic electrons with the opportunity to get involved in inelastic processes
compared to a discharge with lower or no xenon addition (see ﬁg. 5 d)). In ﬁgure 7 a1),
the same trend is observed for all depicted driving voltages. As a function of the xenon
fraction xXe, the energy lost by electrons at the electrode εe is monotonically falling.
Vice versa, argon has higher thresholds for inelastic processes, especially ionization, than
xenon (comp. tab. 1). Thus, adding argon to a xenon background cannot produce a
higher electron density that would cause more ionization of xenon. The synergy eﬀect
does not take place for Xe+ ions that beneﬁt from additional ionization of argon.

Figures 9 and 10 show, similar to ﬁgure 3, IEDFs normalized to the respective
particle ﬂux densities at the electrode surface. The diﬀerence between ﬁgure 9 and 10
is in the gas composition (ﬁg. 9: xXe “ 0.1, ﬁg. 10 xXe “ 0.9). Both ﬁgures contain
IEDFs for Ar+ ions in the left column panels and IEDFs for Xe+ ions in the right one.
The diﬀerence between each ﬁgure’s four rows is the altered amplitude of the RF voltage
VRF given on each panel’s top. Panels of the same row share the same voltage.

The ﬁgures show that for the IEDF, a raised driving voltage, ﬁrst of all, means
that the averaged sheath voltage xφsy increases. This increase manifests in the width
of the characteristic collisionless single bimodal peak. Its width scales with VRF and
a
xφsptqy { xsptqy [28, 78]. Kawamura et al. [28] give the averaged sheath width xsptqy in

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

21

Figure 9. Ion energy distribution function (IEDF) at the electrode for diﬀerent driving
voltages. The left column shows distribution functions for Ar+ ions. The corresponding
distributions for Xe+ ions are on the right side of the plot. (conditions: pgas “ 3 Pa,
xXe “ 0.1, lgap “ 25 mm, fRF “ 13.56 MHz)

terms of the collisionless Child-Langmuir law:
ˆ

˙

ˆ

xsptqy “

1{2

2
3

2 e
mi

˙

ε0
xjiptqy

xφsptqy3{4

(9)

with e the elementary charge, mi the ion mass, ε0 the vacuum permitivity, and xjiptqy the
averaged ion current inside the sheath. For argon, the increased bimodal peak’s width
is found in ﬁgure 10 (left) and for xenon in ﬁgure 9 (right). From top (VRF “ 100 V) to

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

22

Figure 10.
Ion energy distribution function (IEDF) at the electrode for diﬀerent
driving voltages. The left column shows distribution functions for Ar+ ions. The
corresponding distributions for Xe+ ions are on the right side of the plot. (conditions:
pgas “ 3 Pa, xXe “ 0.9, lgap “ 25 mm, fRF “ 13.56 MHz)

bottom (VRF “ 1000 ), the width of the highest energetic bimodal peak increases (Ar+
ions: ﬁg. 10 left, Xe+ ions: ﬁg. 9 right).

At the same time, a higher driving voltage at a constant pressure produces higher
energetic ions. Higher kinetic energy enlarges the mean free path of those ions since
the mean free path is energy-dependent [2] and the collision cross sections fall at high
energies (see ﬁg. 1). Thus, the distance between the peaks in the low energetic part of
the IEDFs that are connected to charge exchange collisions is increased with the driving

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

voltage [26, 79].

23

Furthermore, a raised driving voltage causes the emergence of multiple bimodal
structures within the IEDFs. These structures have ﬁrst been reported as double
peaks by Wild et al. [79]. For our scenario, they become visible for VRF “ 500 V
and VRF “ 1000 V and establish both for Ar+ (ﬁg. 9) and Xe+ ions (ﬁg. 10). Here,
charge exchange collisions are responsible for the appearance of the low energetic peak.
Section 3.1 discusses that low energetic peaks vanish for Ar+ ions when the xenon
fraction xXe is raised and vice versa. For a second or third bimodal peak to establish,
two requirements have to be met. First, ions have to be able to react to the sheath
electric ﬁeld. Second, there has to be some sort of hybrid regime that we discussed
in section 3.1. Combining these requirements also means that only charge exchange
collisions that happen clearly above the averaged sheath position can establish an
additional bimodal structure. Under these conditions, the slow ions produced through
charge exchange experience the sheath’s modulation that eventually determines their
impingement energy. A charge exchange collision inside the sheath during the collapsing
phase causes the ions to gain slightly lower impingement energy than a charge exchange
during the expanding sheath phase.

According to Lieberman and Lichtenberg [1], there is a weak dependency between
the average position of the sheath edge and the voltage amplitude (sm9 V 1{4
RF ). Thus,
it is more likely for the collisional structures of IEDFs at higher voltages to show
bimodal structures. The IEDFs of Xe+ ions at a xenon fraction xXe “ 0.9 (ﬁg. 10)
are the best example for this conclusion of our study. For VRF “ 100 V, the results
clearly show a single bimodal peak and several non-bimodal charge exchange peaks. For
VRF “ 250 V, the main bimodal peak is centered around « 110 eV, and at least one
additional bimodal peak around 87 eV is visible. At 500 V, the IEDF has at least four
bimodal peaks (centered around « 130 eV, « 170 eV, « 180 eV, and « 210 eV). The case
for VRF “ 1000 V shows at least four bimodal peaks as well (centered around « 190 eV,
« 260 eV, « 325 eV, and « 410 eV). For that case, solely charge exchange collisions that
take place deep inside the boundary sheath and close to the electrode do not show any
sign of bimodal features.

The hybrid regime of the IEDFs itself is also inﬂuenced by a raised driving voltage
VRF. For a voltage amplitude VRF “ 250 V, a slightly higher voltage than that of the
base case, the hybrid regime appears for lower admixtures of xenon (ﬁg. 9) or argon,
respectively (ﬁg. 10). Here, the broadening and ampliﬁcation eﬀects of a raised driving
voltage prevail. Thus, the hybrid regime establishes earlier than for lower voltages.

The IEDFs for even higher driving voltages (see VRF “ 500 V and VRF “ 1000 V in
ﬁg. 9 and 10) are again more collision-dominated and show a diﬀerent trend. For 500 V,
the bimodal part of the distribution function is less populated than the low energetic
part. For 1000 V, the highest energetic peak for both Ar+ (ﬁg. 9) and Xe+ ions (ﬁg.
10) are damped compared to the lowest energetic peaks. This trend arises from the fact
that the cross section for charge exchange collisions for high energies drops much slower
than the cross sections for isotropic scattering (comp. ﬁg. 1 c) and d)). Therefore,

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

24

charge exchange is the preferred process at high energies. For driving voltages much
higher than 100 V, the hybrid regime is shifted back to higher mixing ratios.

4. Conclusion

The objective of this work was to investigate the ion dynamics of plasmas containing two
ion species. This investigation was conducted by simulating a low-pressure capacitively
coupled plasma with a mixture of argon and xenon as the background gas. The overall
result is that the gas composition serves as a means to control the collisionality of
the ion species and thus the ion dynamics. Section 3.1 shows that the gas composition
(more speciﬁcally the argon fraction xAr or xenon fraction xXe, respectively) signiﬁcantly
aﬀects the discharge, especially the ion dynamics. The eﬀect on the discharge resembles
a parabolic function of the plasma density and the xenon fraction xXe (comp. ﬁg. 2).
A complete energy balance that we self-consistently calculate based on a PIC/MCC
simulation helps understand this eﬀect.
Inelastic processes in xenon (e.g., ionization
with εi,Xe “ 12.12 eV) have signiﬁcantly lower energetic thresholds. Thus, electrons
distribute their energy more eﬃciently when the xenon fraction xXe is raised. We show
that especially the ionization process in xenon is energetically more favorable than in
argon. This disparity leads to Xe+ ions being the dominant ion species for a broad range
of xenon fractions xXe.

For the ion dynamics, we present that the gas composition controls the collisional
characteristics of the IEDF. Between argon and xenon, only non-resonant charge transfer
collisions are possible. Three-body collisions do not occur in relevant amounts in the
low-pressure regime. Therefore, a varied xenon fraction xXe shifts the multiple low
energetic peaks (characteristic for charge exchange and a collision dominated regime)
from argon (most pronounced at xXe “ 0, ﬁg. 3 left) to xenon (most pronounced at
xXe “ 1, ﬁg. 3 right). Additionally, a collisional/collisionless hybrid regime is present for
speciﬁc gas fractions. Some ions experience the discharge within this hybrid regime as
collision dominated while others traverse the boundary sheath without collisions. The
analysis of the energy balance helps to understand these eﬀects as well. It reveals that
charge exchange is, even at low-pressures, a relevant energy loss process for ions. A
raised xenon fraction xXe depletes (Ar+ ions) or contributes to (Xe+ ions) this process
for the respective ions (ﬁg. 5). Thus, the addition of xenon increases (Ar+ ions) or
decreases (Xe+ ions) the impingement energies of the respective ions. Furthermore,
the energy balance reveals optimal parameters for the impingement energy of ions in
this mixture. In this context, optimal refers to overall minimal collisional losses for the
ions, thus desirable conditions for processes (e.g., ion-assisted etching). For xXe “ 0.4,
the combined fraction of the total energy that ions lose at the surface is maximal.
This example shows that the gas compositions allow tailoring the discharge to the
requirements of speciﬁc applications.

A variation of the driving voltage VRF attenuates the dominance of the Xe+ ions
(sec. 3.3). The reason for this observation is a synergy eﬀect. The argon’s ionization

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

25

process beneﬁts from additional electrons created during the ionization of xenon. An
extensive analysis of the energy balance is needed to understand this synergy eﬀect
and diﬀerentiate why it only occurs for Ar+ but not Xe+. Furthermore, it is presented
that the increased driving voltage VRF intensiﬁes structures (e.g., broadens the width of
bimodal peaks) and further complicates the IEDFs (e.g., by creating multiple bimodal
peaks). The energy dependence of the cross section for charge exchange causes the
hybrid regime to shift to diﬀerent mixing ratios when solely varying the driving voltage.
Both observations are supported by the analysis of the energy balance too. Overall,
the energy balance has proven to be a practical and impactful diagnostic. The results
of section 3.3 show that the gas composition controls the ion dynamics over a wide
range of driving voltages. However, the eﬀect of varied gas compositions is not entirely
independent of the driving voltage.

Future work based on this study will develop in two directions. On the one hand,
the model system Ar/Xe needs to be left behind. The presented basic principles have
to be investigated in more complex and process relevant gas mixtures like Ar/CF4 or
CF4/H2. The energy balance model can be adapted to and should be tested for these
gas mixtures. On the other hand, based on this work’s ﬁndings, the inﬂuence of a
combination of multi-frequency discharges and a varied gas composition on the ion
dynamics should be investigated. For example, a multi-frequency approach could be
used to optimize the ion production, which at VRF “ 100 V was found to be optimal for
a xenon fraction xXe “ 0.4, further.

Another open research question is: How does the addition of secondary electron
emission and realistic surface coeﬃcients alter the ion dynamics? The argon ionization’s
synergy eﬀect, especially, could be signiﬁcantly aﬀected when secondary electrons cause
an ampliﬁcation of the ionization process. To our best knowledge, there are no published
experimental results that analyze the inﬂuence of the gas mixture on the IEDFs. Nor
are there studies that experimentally report about the hybrid regime or the synergy
eﬀect within the ionization of argon. All of these studies would be crucial to validate
our ﬁndings and simulation.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) via Collaborative
Research Centre CRC 1316 (Project ID: 327886311), Transregio TRR87 (Project-ID:
138690629), and project MU 2332/6-1.

ORCID IDs

M. Klich: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3913-1783
S. Wilczek: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0583-4613
T. Mussenbrock: http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6445-4990
J. Trieschmann: http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9136-8019

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

References

26

[1] M. A. Lieberman and A. J. Lichtenberg 2005, Principles of Plasma Discharges and Materials

Processing, 2nd. ed., Wiley Interscience, NJ: Wiley

[2] P. Chabert and N. Braithwaite 2011 Physics of Radio-Frequency Plasmas Cambridge
[3] T. Makabe and Z. L. Petrovic 2014, Plasma Electronics: Applications in Microelectronic Device

Fabrication, CRC Press

[4] R. J. Shul and S. J. Pearton 2000 Handbook of Advanced Plasma Processing Techniques, Springer,

Berlin, Heideberg

[5] Y. Tu, T. J. Chang and H. F. Winters 1981 Physical Review B 23 823
[6] J. W. Mayer 1973 International Electron Devices Meeting, Washington, DC, USA
[7] M. A. Lieberman 1998 Journal of Applied Physics 66 2926
[8] J. R. Conrad, J. L. Radtke, R. A. Dodd, Frank J. Worzala, and Ngoc C. Tran 1987 Journal of

Applied Physics 62 4591

[9] B. R. Rogers and T. S. Cale 2002 Vacuum 65 267-279
[10] F. Schwierz 2010 Nature Nanotechnology 5 487–496
[11] E. G. Shustin 2017 Journal of Communications Technology and Electronics 5 454-465
[12] S.-B. Wang and A. E. Wendt 2000 Journal of Applied Physics 88 643
[13] J. K. Lee, O. V. Manuilenko, N. Yu Babaeva, H. C. Kim and J. W. Shon 2005 Plasma Sources

Sci. Technol. 14 89–97

[14] B. G. Heil, U. Czarnetzki, R. P. Brinkmann and T. Mussenbrock 2008 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 41

165202

[15] J. Schulze, E. Sch¨ungel, Z. Donk´o and U. Czarnetzki 2011, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 20 015017
[16] T. Laﬂeur 2016 Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 25 013001
[17] J. Schulze, T. Gans, D. O’Connell, U. Czarnetzki, A. R. Ellingboe and M. M. Turner 2007 J. Phys.

D: Appl. Phys. 40 7008–7018

[18] T. Laﬂeur, P. Chabert and J. P. Booth 2014 Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 23 035010
[19] F. Kr¨uger, S. Wilczek, T. Mussenbrock and J. Schulze 2019 Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 28

075017

[20] J. W. Coburn, and H. F. Winters 1979 Journal of Applied Physics 50 3189
[21] M. J. Kushner 1982 Journal of Applied Physics 53 2923
[22] Da Zhang and M. J. Kushner 2001 Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A 19 524
[23] R. d’Agostino and D. L. Flamm 1981 Journal of Applied Physics 52 162
[24] H. M. Anderson, J. A. Merson and R. W. Light 1986 IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science 14

no. 2, pp. 156-164

[25] A. D. Kuypers and H. J. Hopman 1988 Journal of Applied Physics 63 1894
[26] C. Wild and P. Koidl 1991 Journal of Applied Physics 69 2909
[27] J. K. Olthoﬀ, R. J. Van Brunt, S. B. Radovanov, J. A. Rees, and R. Surowiec 1994 Journal of

Applied Physics 75 115

[28] E. Kawamura, V. Vahedi, M. A. Lieberman and C. K. Birdsall 1999 Plasma Sources Sci. Technol.

8 R45–R64

[29] D. Gahan, B. Dolinaj and M. B. Hopkins 2008 Rev. Sci. Instrum. 79 033502
[30] A. D. Kuypers and H. J. Hopman 1990 Journal of Applied Physics 67 1229
[31] T. H. M. van de Ven, P. Reefman, C. A. de Meijere, R. M. van der Horst, M. van Kampen, V. Y.

Banine, and J. Beckers 2018 J. Appl. Phys. 123 063301

[32] H. C. Kim, F. Iza, S. S. Yang, M. Radmilovi´c-Radjenovi´c and J. K. Lee 2005 J. Phys. D: Appl.

Phys. 38 R283

[33] A. M. Hala, and N. Hershkowitz 2001 Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 72 2279
[34] L. Oksuz, D. Lee and N. Hershkowitz 2007 Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 17 015012
[35] J. T. Gu(cid:19)mundsson and M. A. Lieberman 2011 Physical Review Letters 107 045002
[36] J. T. Gu(cid:19)mundsson and M. A. Lieberman 2011 64th Gaseous Electronics Conference, Salt Lake

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

City, Utah, USA

27

[37] D. Lee, G. Severn, L. Oksuz and N. Hershkowitz 2006 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 39 5230
[38] N. Kim, J. Song, H. Roh, Y. Jang, S. Ryu, S. Huh and G. Kim 2017 Plasma Sources Sci. Technol.

26 06LT01

[39] P. J. Adrian, S. D. Baalrud and T. Laﬂeur 2017 Phys. Plasmas 24 123505
[40] F. G. Smith, D. R. Wiederin and R. S. Houk 1991 Anal. Chem. 63 1458-1462
[41] T. M. Bricker, F. G. Smith and R. S. Houk 1995 Spectrochimica Acta Part B 50 1325-1335
[42] K. H. Bai, H. Y. Chang and H. S. Uhm 2001 Appl. Phys. Lett. 79 1596
[43] A. N. Bhoj and M. J. Kushner 2004 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 37 2510
[44] M. D. Crisp, D. C. Hinson, R. A. Benkett and J. I. Siegel 1975 IEEE Trans. on Electron Devices

9 681-685

[45] J. Galy, K. Aouame, A. Birot, H. Brunet and P. Millet 1993 J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 26

477

[46] J. H. Seo, W. J. Chung, C. K. Yoon, J. K. Kim, and Ki-W. Whang 2001 IEEE Trans. on Plasma

Sci. 5 824-831

[47] H. Kobayashi, I. Ishikawa and S. Suganomata 1994 Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 33 5979
[48] I. Ishikawa, S. Sasaki, K. Nagaseki, Y. Saito and S. Suganomata 1997 Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 36 4648
[49] K. Aoyagi, I. Ishikawa, K. Nagaseki, Y. Hirose, Y. Saito and S. Suganomata 1997 Jpn. J. Appl.

Phys. 36 5286

[50] Y. Hirose, I. Shikawa, S. Sasaki, Y. Saito and S. Suganomata 1998 Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 37 5730
[51] R. W. Hockney and J. W. Eastwood, 1981, Computer Simulation Using Particles, McGraw-Hill,

New York

[52] C. K. Birdsall 1991 IEEE Trans. on Plasma Sci. 19 65
[53] J. P. Verboncoeur 2005 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 47 A231–A260
[54] S. Wilczek, J. Schulze, R. P. Brinkmann, Z. Donk´o, J. Trieschmann and T. Mussenbrock 2020 J.

Appl. Phys. 127 181101

[55] H R Skullerud 1968 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 1 1567
[56] M. M. Turner, A. Derzsi, Z. Donk´o, D. Eremin, S. J. Kelly, T. Laﬂeur, and T. Mussenbrock 2013

Physics of Plasmas 20 013507

[57] H. C. Kim, F. Iza, S. S. Yang, M. Radmilovi´c-Radjenovi´c and J. K. Lee 2005 J. Phys. D: Appl.

Phys. 38 R283

[58] E. Erden and I. Rafatov 2014 Contrib. Plasma Phys. 54 No.7, 626-634
[59] A. V. Phelps 1994 J. Appl. Phys. 76 747; JILA cross section data base
[60] S. Pancheshnyi, S. Biagi, M. Bordage, G. Hagelaar, W. Morgan, A. Phelps, and L. Pitchford 2012

Chem. Phys. 398 148–153

[61] L. Alves 2014 Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 565, 012007, IOP Publishing
[62] L. C. Pitchford, L. L. Alves, K. Bartschat, S. F. Biagi, M.-C. Bordage, I. Bray, C. E. Brion, M. J.
Brunger, L. Campbell, A. Chachereau et al. 2017 Plasma Processes Polym. 14 1600098
[63] A. Laricchiuta , G. Colonna, D. Bruno, R. Celiberto, C. Gorse, F. Pirani and M. Capitelli 2007

Chem. Phys. Letters 445 133–139

[64] R. Cambi and D. Cappelletti, G. Liutti and F. Pirani J. Chem. Phys. 95 1852
[65] Vincenzo Aquilanti and David Cappelletti and Fernando Pirani Chemical Physics 209 299-311
[66] D. Cappelletti and G. Liuti and F. Pirani, Chem. Phys. Let. 183 297-303
[67] L. A. Viehland, B. R. Gray and T. G. Wright 2010 Molecular Physics 108:5 547-555
[68] Z. Donk´o 2011 Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 20 024001
[69] W. M. Haynes, D. R. Lide, T. J. Bruno, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 97th ed., CRC

Press, Boca Raton

[70] L.A. Viehland, Y. Chang, Computer Physics Communications 181 1687-1696
[71] G. Colonna, A. Laricchiuta Computer Physics Communications 178 809-816
[72] P. Langevin 1905 Annales de chimie et de physique 5:245–288
[73] Z. Donk´o, S. Hamaguchi and T. Gans 2018 Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 27 054001

Ion dynamics in Ar/Xe CCPs

28

[74] K. Nanbu and Y. Kitatani 1995 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 28 324-330
[75] K. Nanbu 2000 IEEE Trans. on Plasma Sci. 28 (3):971
[76] S. Wilczek, J. Trieschmann, J. Schulze, E. Schuengel, R. P. Brinkmann, A. Derzsi, I. Korolov, Z.

Donk´o and T. Mussenbrock 2015 Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 24 024002
[77] W. Jiang, H. Wang, S. Zhao and Y. Wang 2009 J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 42 102005
[78] P. Benoit-Cattin and L. Bernard 1968 J. of Appl. Phys. 39 5723
[79] C. Wild and P. Koidl 1989 Appl. Phys. Lett. 54 505

