Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. main
Wednesday 26th May, 2021

©ESO 2021

1
2
0
2

y
a
M
4
2

]
E
H
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

2
v
7
0
5
1
0
.
2
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Three-dimensional morphological asymmetries in the ejecta of
Cassiopeia A using a component separation method in X-rays

A. Picquenot1, F. Acero1, T. Holland-Ashford2,3, L. A. Lopez2,3, and J. Bobin1

1 AIM, CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
2 Department of Astronomy, The Ohio State University, 140 W. 18th Ave., Columbus, OH 43210, USA
3 Center for Cosmology and AstroParticle Physics, The Ohio State University, 191 W. Woodruﬀ Ave., Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Wednesday 26th May, 2021

ABSTRACT

Recent simulations have shown that asymmetries in the ejecta distribution of supernova remnants can still reﬂect asymmetries from
the initial supernova explosion. Thus, their study provides a great means to test and constrain model predictions in relation to the
distributions of heavy elements or the neutron star kicks, both of which are key to better understanding the explosion mechanisms in
core-collapse supernovae.
The use of a novel blind source separation method applied to the megasecond X-ray observations of the well-known Cassiopeia A
supernova remnant has revealed maps of the distribution of the ejecta endowed with an unprecedented level of detail and clearly
separated from continuum emission. Our method also provides a three-dimensional view of the ejecta by disentangling the red-
and blue-shifted spectral components and associated images of the Si, S, Ar, Ca and Fe, providing insights into the morphology
of the ejecta distribution in Cassiopeia A. These mappings allow us to thoroughly investigate the asymmetries in the heavy elements
distribution and probe simulation predictions about the neutron star kicks and the relative asymmetries between the diﬀerent elements.
We ﬁnd in our study that most of the ejecta X-ray ﬂux stems from the red-shifted component, suggesting an asymmetry in the
explosion. In addition, the red-shifted ejecta can physically be described as a broad, relatively symmetric plume, whereas the blue-
shifted ejecta is more similar to a dense knot. The neutron star also moves directly opposite to the red-shifted parts of the ejecta
similar to what is seen with 44Ti. Regarding the morphological asymmetries, it appears that heavier elements have more asymmetrical
distributions, which conﬁrms predictions made by simulations. This study is a showcase of the capacities of new analysis methods to
revisit archival observations to fully exploit their scientiﬁc content.

Key words.
dynamics – ISM: structure

ISM: supernova remnants – ISM: individual objects: Cassiopeia A – ISM: lines and bands – ISM: kinematics and

1. Introduction

Cassiopeia A (hereafter, Cas A) is among the most studied as-
tronomical objects in X-rays and is arguably the best-studied su-
pernova remnant (SNR). Investigation of the distribution of met-
als on sub-parsec scales is possible because it is the youngest
core-collapse (CC) SNR in the Milky Way (about 340 years old;
Thorstensen et al. 2001), its X-ray emission is dominated by the
ejecta metals (Hwang & Laming 2012), and it is relatively close
(3.4 kpc, see Reed et al. 1995; Alarie et al. 2014). Cas A beneﬁts
from extensive observations (about 3 Ms in total by Chandra),
making it an ideal laboratory to probe simulation predictions re-
garding the distribution of ejecta metals.

In the last few years, three-dimensional simulations of CC
supernovae (SNe) have begun to produce testable predictions of
SNe explosion and compact object properties in models using
the neutrino-driven mechanism (see Janka et al. 2016; Müller
2016; Burrows et al. 2019; Burrows & Vartanyan 2021). In par-
ticular, explosion-generated ejecta asymmetries (Wongwatha-
narat et al. 2013; Summa et al. 2018; Janka 2017) and neutron
star (NS) kick velocities (DeLaney & Satterﬁeld 2013) appear
to be key elements in CC SN simulations that Cas A’s data can
constrain. Although it is challenging to disentangle the asym-
metries produced by the surrounding medium from those inher-
ent to the explosion, Orlando et al. (2016) have explored the

evolution of the asymmetries in Cas A using simulations be-
ginning from the immediate aftermath of the SN and including
the three-dimensional interactions of the remnant with the in-
terstellar medium. Similar simulations presenting the evolution
of a Type Ia SNR over a period spanning from one year after
the explosion to several centuries afterward have been made by
Ferrand et al. (2019), showing that asymmetries present in the
original SN can still be observed after centuries. The same may
go for the CC SNR Cas A, and a better knowledge of its three-
dimensional morphology could lead to a better understanding of
the explosion mechanisms by providing a way to test the simu-
lations.

An accurate mapping of the diﬀerent elements’ distributions,
the quantiﬁcation of their relative asymmetries, and their rela-
tion to the NS motion would, for example, allow us to probe
the simulation predictions that heavier elements are ejected more
asymmetrically and more directly opposed to the NS motion than
lighter elements (Wongwathanarat et al. 2013; Janka 2017; Gess-
ner & Janka 2018; Müller et al. 2019). On this topic, this paper
can be viewed as a follow-up to Holland-Ashford et al. (2020), a
study that aimed to quantitatively compare the relative asymme-
tries of diﬀerent elements within Cas A, but which was hindered
due to diﬃculties in separating and limiting contamination in the
elements’ distribution. Moreover, in that analysis, the separation

Article number, page 1 of 14

 
 
 
 
 
 
A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

of the blue- and red-shifted parts in these distributions was not
possible.

Here, we intend to ﬁx these issues by using a new method
to retrieve accurate maps for each element’s distribution, allow-
ing us to further investigate their individual and relative physical
properties. This method is based on the General Morphological
Components Analysis (GMCA, see Bobin et al. 2015), a blind
source separation (BSS) algorithm that was introduced for X-
ray observations by Picquenot et al. (2019). It can disentangle
both spectrally and spatially mixed components from an X-ray
data cube of the form (x, y, E) with a precision unprecedented in
this ﬁeld. The new images thus obtained suﬀer less contamina-
tion by other components, including the synchrotron emission. It
also oﬀers the opportunity to separate the blue- and red-shifted
parts of the elements’ distribution, thereby facilitating a three-
dimensional mapping of the X-ray emitting metals and a com-
parison of their relative asymmetries. Speciﬁcally, the GMCA
is able to disentangle detailed maps of a red- and a blue-shifted
parts in the distributions of Si, S, Ca, Ar, and Fe, thus providing
new and crucial information about the three-dimensional mor-
phology of Cas A. This is a step forward as previous studies
intending to map the distribution of the individual elements and
study their asymmetries in Cas A in X-rays (Hwang & Laming
2012; Katsuda et al. 2018; Holland-Ashford et al. 2020) were
not able to separate red- and blue-shifted components.

This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we will de-
scribe the nature of the data we use (Section 2.1), our extraction
method (Section 2.2), our way to quantify the asymmetries (Sec-
tion 2.3), and our method to retrieve error bars (Section 2.4). In
Section 2, we will present the images resulting from the appli-
cation of our extraction method (Sections 3.1 and 3.2), and we
will discuss the interpretation of the retrieved images as blue- or
red-shifted by looking at their associated spectra (Section 3.3),
and will present the results of a spectral analysis on these same
spectra (Section 3.4). Lastly, we will discuss in Section 4 the
physical information we can infer from our results. Section 4.1
will be dedicated to the interpretation of the spatial asymmetries
of each line emission, while Sections 4.2 and 4.4 will focus re-
spectively on the mean direction of each line’s emission and on
the NS velocity. A comparison with the NuSTAR data of 44Ti will
ﬁnally be presented in Section 4.5.

2. Method

2.1. Nature of the data

Spectro-imaging instruments, such as those aboard the current
generation of X-ray satellites XMM-Newton and Chandra, pro-
vide data comprising spatial and spectral information: The de-
tectors record the position (x, y) and energy E event by event,
thereby producing a data cube with two spatial dimensions and
one spectral dimension. For our study, we used Chandra obser-
vations of the Cas A SNR, which was observed with the ACIS-S
instrument in 2004 for a total of 980 ks (Hwang et al. 2004).
We used only the 2004 data set to avoid the need to correct for
proper motion across epochs. The event lists from all observa-
tions were merged in a single data cube. The spatial (of 2(cid:48)(cid:48)) and
spectral binning (of 14.6 eV) were adapted so as to obtain a suf-
ﬁcient number of counts in each cube element. No background
subtraction or vignetting correction has been applied to the data.

Article number, page 2 of 14

2.2. Image extraction

The main concept of GMCA is to take into account the morpho-
logical particularities of each component in the wavelet domain
to disentangle them, without any prior instrumental or physical
information. Apart from the (x, y, E) data cube, the only input
needed is the number n of components to retrieve, which is user-
deﬁned. The outputs are then a set of n images associated with
n spectra. Each couple image-spectrum represents a component:
The algorithm makes the assumption that every component can
be described as the product of an image with a spectrum. Thus,
the retrieved components are approximations of the actual com-
ponents with the same spectrum on each point of the image.
Nevertheless, Picquenot et al. (2019) showed that when tested
on Cas A-like toy models, the GMCA was able to extract mor-
phologically and spectrally accurate results. The tested spectral
toy models included power-laws, thermal plasmas, and Gaussian
lines. In particular, in one of these toy models, the method was
able to separate three components: two nearby partially overlap-
ping Gaussian emission lines and power-law emission. The en-
ergy centroids of both Gaussians were accurately retrieved, de-
spite their closeness. Such a disentangling of mixed components
with similar neighboring spectra cannot be obtained through
line-interpolation, and ﬁtting of a two-Gaussian model region by
region is often time consuming, producing images contaminated
by other components with unstable ﬁtting results.

In the same paper, the ﬁrst applications on real data of Cas A
were promising, in particular concerning asymmetries in the el-
ements’ distribution. For Si, S, Ar, Fe and Ca, the GMCA was
able to retrieve two maps associated with spectra slightly blue-
or red-shifted from their theoretical position. The existence of
blue- or red-shifted parts in these elements’ distribution was pre-
viously known, and the Fe maps from Picquenot et al. (2019)
were consistent with prior works but endowed with more details
(see Willingale et al. 2002a; DeLaney et al. 2010). Thus, they
constitute a great basis for an extensive study of the asymme-
tries in the elements’ distribution in Cas A.

In this paper, we will use a more recent version of the
GMCA, the pGMCA, that was developed to take into account
data of a Poissonian nature (Bobin et al. 2020). In the precedent
version of the algorithm, the noise was supposed to be Gaus-
sian. Even with that biased assumption, the results were proven
to be reliable. However, a proper treatment of the noise is still
relevant: It increases the consistency of the spectral morpholo-
gies of the retrieved components and makes the algorithm able
to disentangle components with a fainter contrast.

The mathematical formalism is similar to that of the GMCA,
presented in Picquenot et al. (2019). The fundamental diﬀerence
is that instead of a linear representation, the pGMCA uses the
notion of a Poisson-likelihood of a given sum of components to
be the origin of a certain observation. The problem solved by
the algorithm is thus essentially the same kind, the main diﬀer-
ence being a change in the nature of the norm that needs to be
minimized. A more precise description of this new method is
available in Bobin et al. (2020).

The use of the pGMCA is also highly similar to that of the
GMCA. One notable diﬀerence is that the pGMCA is more sen-
sitive to the initial conditions, so it needs a ﬁrst guess for conver-
gence purposes. The analysis therefore consists of two steps: a
ﬁrst guess obtained with the GMCA and a reﬁnement step using
the Poissonian version pGMCA.

The aforementioned workﬂow was applied to the Cas A
Chandra observations by creating data cubes for each energy
band shown in Fig. 1. These energy bands were chosen to be

Picquenot et al.: Morphological asymmetries in the ejecta of Cassiopeia A in X-rays

are to be compared simultaneously to ascertain the asymmetries
in diﬀerent images.

Here, as we want to compare asymmetries in the blue- and
red-shifted part of the elements’ distribution, the method is
slightly modiﬁed. In a ﬁrst step, we calculate the P2/P0 and
P3/P0 ratios of each element’s total distribution by using the sum
of the blue- and red-shifted maps as an image. Its centroid is then
an approximation of the center-of-emission of the considered
element. Then, we calculate the power ratios of the blue- and
red-shifted images separately using the same center-of-emission.
Ultimately, we normalize the power ratios thus obtained by the
power ratios of the total element’s distribution:

Pi/P0 (shifted / total) =

Pi/P0 (red or blue image)
Pi/P0 (total image)

,

(1)

where i = 2 or 3 and Pi/P0 (red or blue image) is calculated us-
ing the centroid of the total image. That way, we can compare the
relative asymmetries of the blue- and red-shifted parts of diﬀer-
ent elements, without the comparison being biased by the origi-
nal asymmetries of the whole distribution.

2.4. Error bars

As explained in Picquenot et al. (2019), error bars can be ob-
tained by applying this method on every image retrieved by the
GMCA applied on a block bootstrap resampling. However, as
was shown in that paper, this method introduces a bias in the
results of the GMCA. We show in Appendix B that the block
bootstrap method modiﬁes the Poissonian nature of the data,
thus impacting the results of the algorithm. Since the pGMCA
is more dependent than GMCA on the initial conditions, the bias
in the outputs is even greater with this newer version of the al-
gorithm (see Fig. B.3). For that reason, we developed a new re-
sampling method we named "constrained bootstrap," presented
in Appendix B.4.

Thus, we applied pGMCA on a hundred resampled data
cubes obtained thanks to the constrained bootstrap and plotted
the diﬀerent spectra we retrieved around the ones obtained on
real data. As stated in Appendix B.4, the spread between the re-
samplings has no physical signiﬁcance but helps in evaluating
the robustness of the algorithm around a given set of original
conditions. The blue-shifted part of the Ca line emission, a very
weak component, was not retrieved for every resampling. In this
case, we created more resamplings in order to obtain a hundred
correctly retrieved components. The faintest components are the
ones with the largest relative error bars, as can be seen in Fig. 3
and Fig. 4, highlighting the diﬃculty for the algorithm to re-
trieve them in a consistent way on a hundred slightly diﬀerent
resamplings.

To obtain the error bars for the PRM plot of the asymme-
tries, we applied the PRM to the hundred images retrieved by the
pGMCA on the resamplings. Then, in each direction we plotted
error bars representing the interval between the 10th and the 90th
percentile and crossing at the median. We also plotted the PRM
applied on real data. Although our new constrained bootstrap
method ensures the Poissonian nature of the data to be preserved
in the resampled data sets, we see that the results of the pGMCA
on real data are sometimes not in the 10th-90th percentile zone,
thus suggesting there may still be some biases. It happens mostly
with the weakest components, showing once more the diﬃculty
for the pGMCA to retrieve them consistently out of diﬀerent

Article number, page 3 of 14

Fig. 1: Spectrum of Cas A obtained from the combination of the
deep Chandra 2004 observations. The source separation algo-
rithm was applied in each individual energy band band, which
are represented by the shaded regions.

large enough to have the leverage to allow the synchrotron con-
tinuum to be correctly retrieved and to be narrow enough to
avoid contamination by other line emissions. The pGMCA be-
ing a fast-running algorithm, the ﬁnal energy bands were chosen
after tests to ﬁnd the best candidates for both criteria. For each
band, the initial number of components n was 3: the synchrotron
emission and the blue- and red-shifted parts of the line emis-
sion. We then tested using 4 and 5 components to ensure extra
components were not merged into our components of interest.
We also tested with 2 components to verify our assumption on
the presence of blue- and red-shifted parts was not imposing the
apparition of a spurious component. For each emission line, we
then chose n as the best candidate to retrieve the most seemingly
meaningful components without spurious images.

For each analysis, the algorithm was able to retrieve a com-
ponent that we identify as the synchrotron emission (a power-law
spectrum and ﬁlamentary spatial distribution, not shown here)
and multiple additional thermal components with strong line
features. We were able to identify two associated images with
shifted spectra from the theoretical emission line energy for all
these line features except O, Fe L, and Mg.

2.3. Quantiﬁcation of asymmetries

We use the power-ratio method (PRM) to quantitatively ana-
lyze and compare the asymmetries of the images extracted by
pGMCA. This method was developed by Buote & Tsai (1995)
and previously employed for use on SNRs (Lopez et al. 2009a,b,
2011). It consists of calculating multipole moments in a circular
aperture positioned on the centroid of the image, with a radius
that encloses the whole SNR. Powers of the multipole expansion
Pm are then obtained by integrating the mth term over the circle.
To normalize the powers with respect to ﬂux, they are divided
by P0, thus forming the power ratios Pm/P0. For a more detailed
description of the method, see Lopez et al. (2009b).

The P2/P0 and P3/P0 terms convey complementary infor-
mation about the asymmetries in an image. The ﬁrst term is the
quadrupole power-ratio and quantiﬁes the ellipticity/elongation
of an extended source, while the second term is the octupole
power-ratio and is a measure of mirror asymmetry. Hence, both

0.51234567Energy (keV)104105106107Counts0FeLMgSiSArCaFeKA&A proofs: manuscript no. main

data sets presenting slightly diﬀerent initial conditions. How-
ever, even when the results on real data are not exactly in the
10th-90th percentile zone, the adequation between the results on
real and resampled data sets is still good, and the relative posi-
tioning for each line is the same, whether we consider the results
on the original data or on the resampled data sets.

3. Results

3.1. Images retrieved by pGMCA

By applying the pGMCA algorithm on the energy bands sur-
rounding the eight emission lines shown in Fig. 1, we were able
to retrieve maps of their spatial distribution associated with spec-
tra, successfully disentangling them from the synchrotron emis-
sion or other unwanted components. The O, Mg, and Fe L lines
were only retrieved as single features, each associated with a
spectrum, whereas Si, S, Ar, Ca, and Fe-K were retrieved as two
diﬀerent images associated with spectra that we interpret as be-
ing the same emission lines slightly red- or blue-shifted. Fig. 2
shows the total images for all eight line emissions, obtained
by summing the blue- and red-shifted parts when necessary. It
also indicates the centroid of each image that is adopted in the
PRM. Fig. 3 shows the red- and blue-shifted parts of ﬁve line
emissions, together with their associated spectra, while Fig. 4
presents the images of O, Mg, and Fe L together with their re-
spective spectra. Fig. 2 is similar to Fig. 10 from Picquenot et al.
(2019), but the images here are more accurate and less contam-
inated by other components thanks to a proper treatment of the
Poisson noise, and the associated spectra not shown in our ﬁrst
paper are presented here in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4.

3.2. Discussion on the retrieved images

The fact that our algorithm fails to separate a blue-shifted from a
red-shifted part in the O, Mg, and Fe L images is not surprising.
At 1 keV, we infer that a radial speed of 4000 km s−1 would lead
to a ∆E of about 13 eV, which is below the spectral bin size of
our data. We see in Fig. 2 that while the O and the Mg images
are highly similar, they are both noticeably diﬀerent from the
images of the other line emissions. Both the O and Mg images
exhibit similar morphology to the optical images of O ii and O iii
from Hubble (Fesen et al. 2001; Patnaude & Fesen 2014). The
intermediate mass elements share interesting properties: Their
spatial distributions appears similar in Fig. 2, and the division
into a red- and a blue-shifted part (as found by the pGMCA)
allows us to investigate their three-dimensional morphology. We
also notice that the maps of Si and Ar are similar to that of the
Arii in infrared (DeLaney et al. 2010).

As the reverse shock has not fully propagated to the inte-
rior of Cas A (Gotthelf et al. 2001; DeLaney et al. 2010), our
images may not reﬂect the full distribution of the ejecta. How-
ever, Hwang & Laming (2012) estimates that most of the ejecta
mass has already been shocked: we can thus conclude that our
images capture the bulk of the ejecta and our element images are
likely similar to the true ejecta distributions. In addition, our Fe
red-shifted image matches well with the 44Ti image, produced
by radioactive decay instead of reverse-shock heating (see Sec-
tion 4.5).

Hence, we can quantify the asymmetries in the ejecta dis-
tribution by using the PRM method described in Sect. 2.3 on
our images. Fig. 5 presents the quadrupole power-ratios P2/P0
versus the octupole power-ratios P3/P0 of the total images from
Fig. 2. Fig. 6 shows the quadrupole power-ratios versus the oc-

Article number, page 4 of 14

Fig. 2: Total images of the diﬀerent line emission spatial struc-
ture as retrieved by the pGMCA. The blue symbol represents the
image centroid adopted in the PRM analysis. The color-scale is
in square root.

tupole power-ratios of the red- and blue-shifted images presented
in Fig. 6 normalized with the quadrupole and octupole power-
ratios of the total images (Fig. 2) as deﬁned in Eq. 2.3.

3.3. Discussion on the retrieved spectra

As stated before, it is the spectra retrieved together with the
aforementioned images that allow us to identify them as "blue-"
or "red-shifted" components. Here we will expand on our rea-
sons for supporting these assertions.

The spectra in Fig. 3 are superimposed with the theoretical
positions of the main emission lines in the energy range. In the
case of Si, the retrieved features are shifted to lower or higher
energy with respect to the rest-energy positions of the Si xiii and
Si xiv lines. Appendix A shows that this shifting is not primarily
due to an ionization eﬀect as the ratio Si xiii/Si xiv is roughly
equal in both cases. The same goes for S, where two lines corre-
sponding to S xv and S xvi are shifted together while keeping a
similar ratio.

A word on the Ca blue-shifted emission: This component is
very weak and in a region where there is a lot of spatial overlap,
making it diﬃcult for the algorithm to retrieve. For that reason,
the retrieved spectrum has a poorer quality than the others, and

SiFe KMgFe LArCaSOPicquenot et al.: Morphological asymmetries in the ejecta of Cassiopeia A in X-rays

Fig. 3: Red- and blue-shifted parts of the Si, S, Ar, Ca, and Fe line emission spatial distribution and their associated spectrum as
found by pGMCA. The spectra in red correspond to the application of the algorithm on real data, while the dotted gray spectra
correspond to the application on a hundred constrained bootstrap resamplings illustrating statistical uncertainties. The x-axis is in
keV and the y-axis in counts. The dotted vertical lines represent the energy of the brightest emission lines for a non-equilibrium
ionization plasma at a temperature of 1.5 keV and ionization timescale of log(τ) = 11.3 cm−3 s produced using the AtomDB (Foster
et al. 2012). These parameters are the mean value of the distribution shown in Fig.2 of Hwang & Laming (2012).

it was imperfectly found on some of our constrained bootstrap
resamplings. Consequently, we were compelled to run the algo-
rithm on more than a hundred resamplings and to select the ac-
curate ones to obtain a signiﬁcant envelop around the spectrum
obtained on the original data.

3.4. Spectral analysis

Using the spectral components retrieved for each data subset
shown in Fig. 3, we carried out a spectral ﬁtting assuming a
residual continuum plus line emission in XSPEC (power-law +

Article number, page 5 of 14

Red-shiftBlue-shiftSiSArCaFe KA&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Fig. 5: Quadrupole power-ratios P2/P0 versus the octupole
power-ratios P3/P0 of the total images of the diﬀerent line emis-
sions shown in Fig. 2. The dots represent the values measured for
the pGMCA images obtained from the real data, and the crosses
the 10th and 90th percentiles obtained with pGMCA on a hun-
dred constrained bootstrap resamplings, with the center of the
cross being the median.

Fig. 4: Images of the O, Mg, and Fe L line emission spatial
structures and their associated spectra as found by pGMCA. The
spectra in red correspond to the application of the algorithm on
real data, while the dotted gray spectra correspond to the applica-
tion on a hundred constrained bootstrap resamplings. The x-axis
is in keV and the y-axis in counts.

Line

Si xiii
Si xiii∗
S xv
Ar xvii
Ca xix
Fe complex

Erest
keV
1.8650
1.8730
2.4606
3.1396
3.9024
6.6605

Ered
keV
1.860
1.860
2.439
3.110
3.880
6.599

Eblue
keV
1.896
1.896
2.489
3.180
3.967
6.726

∆V
km/s
5787
5762
6092
6684
6684
5716

Vred Vblue
km/s
km/s
4983
804
3681
2081
3460
2632
3858
2826
4963
1721
2948
2768

Table 1: Spectral ﬁtting on individual lines and resulting veloc-
ities. Si and Fe line rest energy are taken from DeLaney et al.
(2010). The Si XIII∗ uses a diﬀerent rest energy, the one needed
to match the ACIS and HETG Si velocities discussed in DeLaney
et al. (2010), to illustrate possible ACIS calibration issues.

Gauss model). In this analysis, the errors for each spectral data
point are derived from the constraint bootstrap method presented
in Appendix B. This constrained bootstrap eliminates a bias in-
troduced by classical bootstrap methods and that is critical to
pGMCA, but underestimates the true statistical error. Therefore,
no statistical errors on the line centroids are listed in Table 1 as,
in addition, systematic errors associated with ACIS energy cali-
bration are likely to be the dominant source of uncertainty.

The resulting line centroid and equivalent velocity shifts are
shown in Table 1. To transform the shift in energy into a velocity
shift, a rest energy is needed. The ACIS CCD spectral resolu-

Article number, page 6 of 14

Fig. 6: Quadrupole power-ratios P2/P0 versus the octupole
power-ratios P3/P0 of the red- and blue-shifted images of the
diﬀerent line emissions shown in Fig. 3, normalized with the
quadrupole and octupole power-ratios of the total images. The
dots and error bars are obtained in the same way as in Fig. 5

tion does not resolve the line complex and cannot easily disen-
tangle velocity and ionization eﬀects. However, given the range
of ionization state observed in Cas A (with ionization ages of
tau ∼ 1011 − 1012 cm−3 s, see Fig. 2 of Hwang & Laming 2012),
there is little eﬀect of ionization on the dominant line for Si, S,
Ar, and Ca, as discussed in more details in Appendix A. The line
rest energy was chosen as the brightest line for a non-equilibrium
ionization plasma with a temperature of 1.5 keV temperature and
log(τ) = 11.3 cm−3 s, the mean values from Fig. 2 of Hwang &
Laming (2012).

For the speciﬁc case of the Si xiii line, a very large asym-
metry in the red/blue-shifted velocities is observed. This could
be due to possible energy calibration issues near the Si line as
shown by DeLaney et al. (2010) in a comparison of ACIS and
HETG line centroid, resulting in a systematic blue-shift eﬀect

OMgFe LFe KCaOFe LArSMgSiMirror AsymmetryElliptical AsymmetrySiSArCaFe KSiSArCaFe KMirror AsymmetryElliptical AsymmetryPicquenot et al.: Morphological asymmetries in the ejecta of Cassiopeia A in X-rays

ements. In contrast to Holland-Ashford et al. (2020) and Hwang
& Laming (2012), our Mg image (as shown in Fig. 4) presents
a morphology highly diﬀerent from that of the Fe L; we believe
that the pGMCA was able to retrieve the Mg spatial distribution
with little continuum or Fe contamination.

Fig. 6 presents the relative ellipticity/elongation and mirror
asymmetries of the blue- and red-shifted ejecta emission com-
pared to the total ejecta images (Fig. 2). A value of “1” in-
dicates that the velocity-shifted ejecta has equivalent levels of
asymmetry as the full bandpass emission. In the cases where
we can clearly disentangle the red- and blue-shifted emission
(i.e.Si, S, Ar, Ca, and Fe-K, described in previous paragraphs),
we see that the red-shifted ejecta emission is less asymmetric
than the blue-shifted emission. This holds true both for elliptical
asymmetry P2/P0 and mirror asymmetry P3/P0. Thus, we could
physically describe the red-shifted ejecta distribution as a broad,
relatively symmetric plume, whereas the blue-shifted ejecta is
concentrated into dense knots. This interpretation matches with
the observation that most of the X-ray emission is from the red-
shifted ejecta, as we can also see in the ﬂux ratios shown in Ta-
ble 2 and in the images of Fig. 3, suggesting that there was more
mass ejected away from the observer, NS, and blue-shifted ejecta
knot. We note that there is not a direct correlation between ejecta
mass and X-ray emission due to the position of the reverse shock,
the plasma temperature and ionization timescale, but the indica-
tion that most of the X-ray emission is red-shifted is consistent
with our knowledge of the 44Ti distribution (see Sect. 4.5 for a
more detailed discussion).

Furthermore, in all cases, the red-shifted ejecta emission is
more circularly symmetric than the total images, and the blue-
shifted ejecta is more elliptical and elongated than the total im-
ages. Moreover, the red-shifted ejecta is more mirror symmet-
ric than the blue-shifted ejecta, though both the red-shifted and
blue-shifted Si are more mirror asymmetric than the total image.
The latter result may suggest that the red-shifted and blue-shifted
Si images’ asymmetries sum together such that the total Si im-
age appears more mirror symmetric than the actual distribution
of the Si.

4.2. Three-dimensional distribution of heavy elements

Fig. 7 shows the centroids of the blue- and red-shifted parts of
each emission line relative to the center-of-explosion of Cas A,
revealing the bulk three-dimensional distribution of each compo-
nent. We note that this ﬁgure was only made using the centroids
of the red- and blue-shifted images retrieved by pGMCA, with-
out using the PRM method. We can see the red-shifted ejecta
is mainly moving in a similar direction (toward the northwest),
while all the blue-shifted ejecta is moving toward the east. As
discussed in Section 4.5, this result is consistent with previous
works on Cas A investigating the 44Ti distribution with NuSTAR
data (Grefenstette et al. 2017).

The blue-shifted ejecta is clearly moving in a diﬀerent direc-
tion than the red-shifted ejecta, but not directly opposite to it.
The angles between the blue- and red-shifted components are all
between 90◦ and 140◦. This ﬁnding provides evidence against a
jet and counter-jet explosion mechanism being responsible for
the explosion and resulting in the expansion of ejecta in Cas A
(e.g., Fesen 2001; Hines et al. 2004; Schure et al. 2008). How-
ever, this could support the idea of a jittering jets mechanism,
wherein multiple jets can be launched in diﬀerent directions, as
described in Bear & Soker (2018). In the same paper, it is ar-
gued that jets clear out ejecta material, so a NE-SW jet would be
consistent with our identiﬁed ejecta motions, as it would be per-

Article number, page 7 of 14

Fig. 7: Centroids of the blue- and red-shifted parts of each line
emission and their distance from the center of explosion of
Cas A. For reference, we added the direction of motion of the
44Ti in black, as shown in Fig. 13 of Grefenstette et al. (2017).
Only the direction is relevant as the norm of this speciﬁc vector
is arbitrary.

in ACIS data. The Si xiii∗ line in Table 1 uses a corrected rest
line energy to illustrate systematic uncertainties associated with
calibration issues.

For the Fe-K complex of lines, we rely on the analysis of
DeLaney et al. (2010) who derived an average rest line energy
of 6.6605 keV (1.8615 Å) by ﬁtting a spherical expansion model
to their three-dimensional ejecta model. We can note that with
this spectral analysis, what we measure here is the radial veloc-
ity that is ﬂux weighted over the entire image of the associated
component. Therefore, we are not probing the velocity at small
angular scale but the bulk velocity of the entire component.

With the caveats listed above, we notice an asymmetry in the
velocities where ejecta seem to have a higher velocity toward us
(blue-shifted) than away from us, even in the case of Si xiii after
calibration corrections. A comparison of those results with pre-
vious studies and possibles biases are discussed in Sect. 4.3. The
large uncertainties associated with the energy calibration and the
choice of rest energy has little impact on the delta between the
red- and blue shifted centroids and hence on the ∆V. We note
that all elements show a consistent ∆V of ∼6000 km s−1.

4. Physical interpretation

4.1. Quantiﬁcation of ejecta asymmetries

Fig. 5 shows that the distribution of heavier elements is generally
more elliptical and more mirror asymmetric than that of lighter
elements in Cas A: O, Si, S, Ar, Ca, and Fe emission all exhibit
successively higher levels of both measures of asymmetry. This
result is consistent with the recent observational study of Cas A
by Holland-Ashford et al. (2020), suggesting that the pGMCA
method accurately extracts information from X-ray data cubes
without the complicated and time-consuming step of extracting
spectra from hundreds or thousands of small regions and analyz-
ing them individually.

Similar to the results of Holland-Ashford et al. (2020) and
Hwang & Laming (2012), Mg emission does not follow the ex-
act same trend as the other elements : it has roughly an order of
magnitude lower elliptical asymmetry (P2/P0) than the other el-

SiSArCaFe KSiSArCaFe KCenter of explosion20 arcsecNeutron starTi44A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

pendicular to our redshifted ejecta and still at a 45 degree angle
from our blueshifted ejecta.

We can also note a trend where heavier elements exhibit in-
creasingly larger opening angles than lighter elements, from Si
showing a 90◦ angle to Ca and Fe that show opening angles of
about 130 − 140◦.

4.3. Velocities of red- and blue-shifted structures

By ﬁtting the line centroids, we obtained the velocities discussed
in Sect. 3.4. As stated before, the eﬀects of ionization on possible
"imposter velocities" are discussed in Appendix A. Our derived
velocities showed higher values for the blue-shifted component
than for the red-shifted one for all elements. Those results are in
disagreement with spectroscopic studies and in agreement with
some others. On the one hand, the X-ray studies of individual
regions Willingale et al. (2002b) (Fig. 8, XMM-Newton EPIC
cameras) and DeLaney et al. (2010) (Fig. 10 and 11, Chandra
ACIS and HETG instruments) indicate higher velocities for the
red-shifted component. But on the other hand, the highest veloc-
ity measured in the 44Ti NuSTAR analysis is for the blue-shifted
component (Table 3 of Grefenstette et al. 2017). We note that the
comparison is not straightforward as the methods being used are
diﬀerent. Our method measures a ﬂux weighted average velocity
for each well separated component whereas in the X-ray studies
previously mentioned, a single gaussian model is ﬁtted to the
spectrum extracted in each small-scale region. In regions where
both red- and blue-shifted ejecta co-exist (see Fig. 3), the Gaus-
sian ﬁt will provide a ﬂux weighted average velocity value of the
two components as they are not resolved with ACIS. As the red-
shifted component is brighter in average, a systematic bias that
would reduce the blue velocities could exist. This could be the
case in the southeastern region where most of the blue-shifted
emission is observed and where a signiﬁcant level of red-shifted
emission is also seen. Besides this, calibration issues may also
play an important role. Although the GMCA method was suc-
cessful in retrieving the centroid energy of nearby emission lines
using a simple toy model (Picquenot et al. 2019, Fig. 7 in ), we
do not rule out that the higher velocity of the blue-shifted com-
ponent is an artifact of the method. Further tests of the method
with the help of synthetic X-ray observations using numerical
simulations could shed light on this issue.

4.4. Neutron star kick direction

The NS in Cas A is located southeast of the explosion site, mov-
ing at a velocity of ∼340 km s−1 southeast in the plane of the
sky (Thorstensen et al. 2001; Fesen et al. 2006). In Hwang &
Laming (2012) it was stated that, contrary to expectations, the
Fe structure was not observed to recoil in the opposite direc-
tion to the NS. Here, thanks to our ability to disentangle red-
and blue-shifted structures, we ﬁnd that the red-shifted ejecta is
moving nearly opposite the NS : The angles between the red-
shifted structures and the NS tangential motion range between
154◦ (Fe) and 180◦ (Si). Table. 2 also shows that the bulk emis-
sion is from red-shifted ejecta (consistent with Milisavljevic &
Fesen 2013). This correlation is consistent with theoretical pre-
dictions that NSs are kicked opposite to the direction of bulk
ejecta motion, in adequation with conservation of momentum
with the ejecta (Burrows & Hayes 1996; Nordhaus et al. 2010,
2012; Wongwathanarat et al. 2013; Müller 2016; Bruenn et al.
2016; Janka 2017). Wongwathanarat et al. (2013); Janka (2017)
also proposed the existence of a "gravitational tugboat mecha-

Article number, page 8 of 14

Fig. 8: Counts image of the Fe-K red-shifted component over-
laid with the extraction regions used for the 44Ti NuSTAR study
of Grefenstette et al. (2017). The regions 19 and 20, which dom-
inate our image in terms of ﬂux, have respective velocities mov-
ing away from the observer of 2300 ± 1400 and 3200 ± 500 km
sec−1.

nism" where the NS is gravitationally accelerated by the slower
moving ejecta clumps, opposite to the bulk ejecta motion. How-
ever, in the simulations of Nordhaus et al. (2012), the direction
of the NS is mainly due to recoil, and the eﬀects of gravitation
are negligible. The asymmetric neutrino emissions can also play
a role in generating a NS kick opposite to the bulk ejecta motion
(Nagakura et al. 2019; Fujimoto & Nagakura 2019, 2021). How-
ever, the Zn distribution, that we could not observe in this study,
would be a better marker to test this last hypothesis.

It is impossible to calculate the NS line-of-sight motion by
examining the NS alone as its spectra contains no lines to be
Doppler-shifted. However, limits on its three-dimensional mo-
tion can be placed by assuming it moves opposite the bulk
of ejecta and examining the bulk three-dimensional motion of
ejecta. Grefenstette et al. (2017) studied Ti emission in Cas A
and found that the bulk Ti emission was tilted 58◦ into the plane
of the sky away from the observer, implying that the NS is mov-
ing 58◦ out of the plane of the sky toward the observer. This
ﬁnding is supported by three-dimensional simulations of a Type
IIb progenitor by Wongwathanarat et al. (2017) and Jerkstrand
et al. (2020), which suggested that the NS is moving out of the
plane of the sky with an angle of ∼ 30◦.

The results of this paper support the hypothesis that, if the
NS is moving away from the bulk of ejecta motion, the NS is
moving toward us. Furthermore, we could tentatively conclude
that the NS was accelerated toward the more slowly moving
blue-shifted ejecta, which would further support the gravitational
tugboat mechanism or a kick only caused by momentum conser-
vation. The strong levels of asymmetry exhibited by the blue-
shifted emission combined with the lower ﬂux would imply that
the blue-shifted ejecta is split into relatively small ejecta clumps,
one of which would possibly be the source of the neutron star’s
gravitational acceleration. However, the velocities determined
in Table 1 contradict this hypothesis as the blue-shifted clumps
seem to move faster.

01040911622543664986518241036353430294328272019Picquenot et al.: Morphological asymmetries in the ejecta of Cassiopeia A in X-rays

Red-shifted part Blue-shifted part

Si
S
Ar
Ca
Fe-K

0.60
0.61
0.63
0.80
0.70

0.40
0.39
0.37
0.20
0.30

Table 2: Fractions of the counts in the total image that belong to
the red-shifted or the blue-shifted parts, for each line.

4.5. Comparison with 44Ti

44Ti is a product of Si burning and is thought to be synthesized
in close proximity with iron. The 44Ti spatial distribution has
been studied via its radioactive decay with the NuSTAR tele-
scope and revealed that most of the material is red-shifted and
does not seem to follow the Fe-K X-ray emission (Grefenstette
et al. 2014, 2017). In our study, we have found that 70% of the
Fe-K X-ray emission (see Table 2) is red-shifted and that the
mean direction of the Fe-K red-shifted emission shown in Fig. 7
is compatible with that of the 44Ti as determined in Fig. 13 of
Grefenstette et al. (2017). Yet, we can see the mean 44Ti direc-
tion is not perfectly aligned with the mean red-shifted Fe-K di-
rection. This may be caused by the fact that the Fe-K emission
is tracing only the reverse shock-heated material and may not
reﬂect the true distribution of Fe, whereas 44Ti emission is from
radioactive decay and thus reﬂects the true distribution of Ti.

In Fig. 8, we overlay the ten regions where Grefenstette et al.
(2017) detected 44Ti with our red-shifted component image. The
regions 19 and 20 (which dominate our Fe-K red-shifted compo-
nent image) have respective 44Ti velocities of 2300 ± 1400 and
3200 ± 500 km s−1, values that are compatible with our mea-
sured value of ∼2800 km s−1 shown in Table 1.

Concerning our Fe-K blue-shifted component map, its X-ray
emission is fainter and located mostly in the southeast of the
source (see Fig 3). This southeastern X-ray emission is spatially
coincident with region 46 in the Fig. 2 NuSTAR map of Grefen-
stette et al. (2017), not plotted in our Fig 8 as the 44Ti emission
was found to be below the detection threshold.

We note that blue-shifted 44Ti emission is harder to detect
for NuSTAR than a red-shifted one as it is intrinsically fainter.
In addition, any blue-shifted emission of the 78.32 keV 44Ti line
places it outside the NuSTAR bandpass, precluding detection of
one of the two radioactive decay lines in this case.

5. Conclusions

By using a new methodology and applying it to Cas A Chan-
dra X-ray data, we were able to revisit the mapping of the heavy
elements and separate them into a red- and a blue-shifted parts,
allowing us to investigate the three-dimensional morphology of
the SNR. These new maps and the associated spectra could then
be used to quantify the asymmetries of each component, their
mean direction and their velocity. The main ﬁndings of the pa-
per are consistent with the general results found in the previous
studies cited in Part 4, and are summarized below:

– Morphological asymmetries: An extensive study of the
asymmetries shows the distribution of heavier elements is
generally more elliptical and mirror asymmetric in Cas A,
which is consistent with simulation predictions. For the ele-
ments we were able to separate into a red- and a blue-shifted
parts (Si, S, Ar, Ca, Fe), it appears that the red-shifted ejecta
is less asymmetric than the blue-shifted one. The red-shifted

ejecta can then be described as a broad, relatively symmetric
plume, while the blue-shifted ejecta can be seen as concen-
trated into dense knots. Most of the emission from each el-
ement is red-shifted, implying there was more mass ejected
away from the observer, which agrees with past studies.
– Three-dimensional distribution: The mean directions of
the red- and blue- shifted parts of each element are
clearly not diametrically opposed, disfavouring the idea of
a jet/counter-jet explosion mechanism, but not that of a jit-
tering jets mechanism.

– NS velocity: We ﬁnd that the NS is moving most opposite to
the direction of the red-shifted ejecta that forms the bulk of
the ejecta emission. This supports the idea of a recoil mech-
anism generating NS kicks through a process consistent with
conservation of momentum between NS and ejecta, possibly
including gravitational acceleration from the slower moving
clumps ("Gravitational Tug Boat Mechanism"), or the eﬀects
of asymmetric neutrino emissions. This result implies that
the NS is moving toward us, which is consistent with the
ﬁndings of past studies. However, we ﬁnd the blue-shifted
clumps to be faster than the red-shifted ones, which is not
consistent with the gravitational tug-boat mechanism’s pre-
diction that the NS is moving opposite to the faster ejecta.
– Comparison with 44Ti: Our ﬁnding that the bulk of ejecta is
red-shifted and moving NW is consistent with the 44Ti distri-
bution from NuSTAR observations. Its direction is similar to
that of the red-shifted Fe-K emission, but a slight diﬀerence
could be explained by the fact that the Fe-K only traces the
reverse shock-heated ejecta and not the full distribution of
the Fe ejecta.

The component separation method presented here enabled a
three-dimensional view of the Cas A ejecta despite the low en-
ergy resolution of the Chandra CCDs by separating entangled
components all at once, without the need of a detailed spec-
tral analysis on hundreds of regions. In the future, X-ray mi-
crocalorimeters will enable kinematic measurements of X-ray
emitting ejecta in many more SNRs. In its short operations, the
Hitomi mission demonstrated these powerful capabilities. In par-
ticular, in a brief 3.7-ks observation, it revealed that the SNR
N132D had highly red-shifted Fe emission with a velocity of
∼800 km s−1 without any blue-shifted component, suggesting
the Fe-rich ejecta was ejected asymmetrically (Hitomi Collab-
oration et al. 2018). The upcoming replacement X-ray Imaging
and Spectroscopy Mission XRISM will oﬀer 5–7 eV energy res-
olution with 30(cid:48)(cid:48) pixels over a 3(cid:48) ﬁeld of view (Tashiro et al.
2018). In the longer term, Athena and Lynx will combine this su-
perb spectral resolution with high angular resolution, fostering
a detailed, three-dimensional view of SNRs that will revolution-
ize our understanding of explosions (Lopez et al. 2019; Williams
et al. 2019). While the new instruments will provide a giant leap
forward in terms of data quality, development of new analysis
methods are needed in order to maximize the scientiﬁc return of
next generation telescopes.

Acknowledgements. This research made use of Astropy,1 a community-
developed core Python package for Astronomy (Astropy Collaboration et al.
2013; Price-Whelan et al. 2018) and of gammapy,2 a community-developed core
Python package for TeV gamma-ray astronomy (Deil et al. 2017; Nigro et al.
2019). We also acknowledge the use of Numpy (Oliphant 2006) and Matplotlib
(Hunter 2007). Thanks also to Adam Burrows and Hiroki Nagakura for their
precious help during the redaction of the revised version.

1 http://www.astropy.org
2 https://www.gammapy.org

Article number, page 9 of 14

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

References

Alarie, A., Bilodeau, A., & Drissen, L. 2014, MNRAS, 441, 2996
Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, 558,

A33

Bear, E. & Soker, N. 2018, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
Bobin, J., Hamzaoui, I. E., Picquenot, A., & Acero, F. 2020, IEEE Transactions

on Image Processing, 29, 9429

Bobin, J., Rapin, J., Larue, A., & Starck, J.-L. 2015, IEEE Transactions on Signal

Processing, 63, 1199

Bruenn, S. W., Lentz, E. J., Hix, W. R., et al. 2016, ApJ, 818, 123
Buote, D. A. & Tsai, J. C. 1995, ApJ, 452, 522
Burrows, A. & Hayes, J. 1996, Phys. Rev. Lett., 76, 352
Burrows, A., Radice, D., Vartanyan, D., et al. 2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal

Astronomical Society, 491, 2715–2735

Burrows, A. & Vartanyan, D. 2021, Nature, 589, 29
Deil, C., Zanin, R., Lefaucheur, J., et al. 2017, in International Cosmic Ray Con-
ference, Vol. 301, 35th International Cosmic Ray Conference (ICRC2017),
766

DeLaney, T., Rudnick, L., Stage, M. D., et al. 2010, ApJ, 725, 2038
DeLaney, T. & Satterﬁeld, J. 2013
Dewey, D. 2010, Space Sci. Rev., 157, 229
Efron, B. 1979, Volume 7, Number 1, 1-26
Ferrand, G., Warren, D. C., Ono, M., et al. 2019, The Astrophysical Journal, 877,

136

Fesen, R. A. 2001, ApJS, 133, 161
Fesen, R. A., Hammell, M. C., Morse, J., et al. 2006, The Astrophysical Journal,

645, 283

Fesen, R. A., Morse, J. A., Chevalier, R. A., et al. 2001, AJ, 122, 2644
Foster, A. R., Ji, L., Smith, R. K., & Brickhouse, N. S. 2012, ApJ, 756, 128
Fujimoto, S.-i. & Nagakura, H. 2019, MNRAS, 488, L114
Fujimoto, S.-i. & Nagakura, H. 2021, MNRAS, 502, 2319
Gessner, A. & Janka, H.-T. 2018, The Astrophysical Journal, 865, 61
Gotthelf, E. V., Koralesky, B., Rudnick, L., et al. 2001, ApJ, 552, L39
Greco, Emanuele, Vink, Jacco, Miceli, Marco, et al. 2020, A&A, 638, A101
Grefenstette, B. W., Fryer, C. L., Harrison, F. A., et al. 2017, ApJ, 834, 19
Grefenstette, B. W., Harrison, F. A., Boggs, S. E., et al. 2014, Nature, 506, 339
Hines, D. C., Rieke, G. H., Gordon, K. D., et al. 2004, ApJS, 154, 290
Hitomi Collaboration, Aharonian, F., Akamatsu, H., et al. 2018, PASJ, 70, 16
Holland-Ashford, T., Lopez, L. A., & Auchettl, K. 2020, ApJ, 889, 144
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science & Engineering, 9, 90
Hwang, U. & Laming, J. M. 2012, ApJ, 746, 130
Hwang, U., Laming, J. M., Badenes, C., et al. 2004, ApJ, 615, L117
Janka, H.-T. 2017, ApJ, 837, 84
Janka, H.-T., Melson, T., & Summa, A. 2016, Annual Review of Nuclear and

Particle Science, 66, 341

Jerkstrand, A., Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H. T., et al. 2020, arXiv e-prints,

arXiv:2003.05156

Katsuda, S., Morii, M., Janka, H.-T., et al. 2018, ApJ, 856, 18
Lopez, L., Williams, B. J., Saﬁ-Harb, S., et al. 2019, BAAS, 51, 454
Lopez, L. A., Ramirez-Ruiz, E., Badenes, C., et al. 2009a, ApJ, 706, L106
Lopez, L. A., Ramirez-Ruiz, E., Huppenkothen, D., Badenes, C., & Pooley, D. A.

2011, ApJ, 732, 114

Lopez, L. A., Ramirez-Ruiz, E., Pooley, D. A., & Jeltema, T. E. 2009b, The

Astrophysical Journal, 691, 875

Milisavljevic, D. & Fesen, R. A. 2013, ApJ, 772, 134
Müller, B. 2016, Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia, 33, e048
Müller, B., Tauris, T. M., Heger, A., et al. 2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal

Astronomical Society, 484, 3307–3324

Nagakura, H., Sumiyoshi, K., & Yamada, S. 2019, ApJ, 880, L28
Nigro, C., Deil, C., Zanin, R., et al. 2019, A&A, 625, A10
Nordhaus, J., Brandt, T. D., Burrows, A., & Almgren, A. 2012, Monthly Notices

of the Royal Astronomical Society, 423, 1805–1812

Nordhaus, J., Brandt, T. D., Burrows, A., Livne, E., & Ott, C. D. 2010, Physical

Review D, 82

Oliphant, T. E. 2006, A guide to NumPy, Vol. 1 (Trelgol Publishing USA)
Orlando, S., Miceli, M., Pumo, M. L., & Bocchino, F. 2016, ApJ, 822, 22
Patnaude, D. J. & Fesen, R. A. 2014, ApJ, 789, 138
Picquenot, A., Acero, F., Bobin, J., et al. 2019, A&A, 627, A139
Price-Whelan, A. M., Sip˝ocz, B. M., Günther, H. M., et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 123
Reed, J. E., Hester, J. J., Fabian, A. C., & Winkler, P. F. 1995, ApJ, 440, 706
Schure, K. M., Vink, J., García-Segura, G., & Achterberg, A. 2008, ApJ, 686,

399

Summa, A., Janka, H.-T., Melson, T., & Marek, A. 2018, ApJ, 852, 28
Tashiro, M., Maejima, H., Toda, K., et al. 2018, in Society of Photo-Optical In-
strumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 10699, Space Tele-
scopes and Instrumentation 2018: Ultraviolet to Gamma Ray, 1069922
Thorstensen, J. R., Fesen, R. A., & van den Bergh, S. 2001, AJ, 122, 297
Williams, B., Auchettl, K., Badenes, C., et al. 2019, BAAS, 51, 263
Willingale, R., Bleeker, J. A. M., van der Heyden, K. J., Kaastra, J. S., & Vink,

J. 2002a, A&A, 381, 1039

Willingale, R., Bleeker, J. A. M., van der Heyden, K. J., Kaastra, J. S., & Vink,

J. 2002b, A&A, 381, 1039

Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T., & Müller, E. 2013, A&A, 552, A126
Wongwathanarat, A., Janka, H.-T., Müller, E., Pllumbi, E., & Wanajo, S. 2017,

ApJ, 842, 13

Article number, page 10 of 14

Picquenot et al.: Morphological asymmetries in the ejecta of Cassiopeia A in X-rays

Appendix A: Ionization impact on line centroid

At the spectral resolution of CCD type instruments, most emis-
sion lines are not resolved and the observed emission is a blurred
complex of lines. The centroid energy of emission lines can shift
either via Doppler eﬀect or when the ionization timescale in-
creases and the ions distribution in a given line complex evolves
(Dewey 2010; Greco, Emanuele et al. 2020). In Fig. A.1
we compare the spectral model pshock at diﬀerent ionization
timescales with the spectra that we labeled red- and blue-shifted
in Fig. 3. The temperature of the model was ﬁxed to 1.5 keV
based on the temperature histogram of Fig. 2 of Hwang & Lam-
ing (2012). The eﬀective area and redistribution matrix from ob-
servation ObsID: 4634 were used. We can see that as the ioniza-
tion timescale τ increases the line centroid, which is a blend of
multiple lines, shifts to higher energies. This is most visible in
the Fe-K region where a large number of lines exists. We note
that the spectral component that we labeled as blue-shifted is
well beyond any ionization state shown here and reinforces the
idea that this component is dominated by velocity eﬀect. The
situation is less clear for the red-shifted component where the
shift in energy is not as strong. We also do not precisely know
which reference line it can be compared to. It is interesting to
note that for the purpose of measuring a velocity eﬀect while
minimizing the confusion with ionization eﬀects, the Ar and Ca
lines provide the best probe. Indeed for τ > 1011 cm−3 s, the cen-
troid of the main Ar and Ca lines shows no evolution given the
CCD energy resolution. The Fe K centroid strongly varies with
τ and the choice of a reference ionization state and reference en-
ergy limits the reliability of this line for velocity measurements
in non-equilibrium ionization plasma.

Appendix B: Retrieving error bars for a nonlinear
estimator applied on a Poissonian data set

Appendix B.1: Introduction

The BSS method we used in this paper, the pGMCA, is one of
the numerous advanced data analysis methods that have recently
been introduced for a use in astrophysics, among which we can
also ﬁnd other BSS methods, classiﬁcation, PSF deconvolution,
denoising or dimensionality reduction. We can formalize the ap-
plication of these data analysis methods by writing Θ = A(X) ,
where X is the original data, A is the nonlinear analysis operator
used to process the signal and Θ is the estimator for which we
want to ﬁnd errors (in this paper for example, X is the original
X-ray data from Cas A, A is the pGMCA algorithm and Θ rep-
resents the retrieved spectra and images). Most of these methods
being nonlinear, there is no easy way to retrieve error bars or a
conﬁdence interval associated with the estimator Θ. Estimating
errors accurately in a nonlinear problem is still an open ques-
tion that goes far beyond the scope of astrophysical applications
as there is no general method to get error bars from a nonlin-
ear data-driven method such as the pGMCA. This is a hot topic
whose study would be essential for an appropriate use of com-
plex data analysis methods in retrieving physical parameters, and
for allowing the user to estimate the accuracy of the results.

Appendix B.2: Existing methods to retrieve error bars on

Poissonian data sets

Our aim, when searching for error bars associated with a certain
estimator Θ on an analyzed data set, is to obtain the variance of
Θ = A(X) , where the original data X is composed of N elements.

Fig. A.1: Comparison of our red and blue spectra (dotted curves)
presented in Fig. 3 versus pshock Xspec models with diﬀerent
ionization timescales for kT =1.5 keV. The y-axis is in counts.

When working on a simulation, an obvious way to proceed in or-
der to estimate the variance of Θ is to apply the considered data
analysis method A on a certain number of Monte-Carlo (MC)
realizations Xi and look at the standard deviation of the results

Article number, page 11 of 14

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

data that could be successfully used to evaluate the accuracy of
certain estimators.

In particular, Poissonian data sets, including our X-rays data
of Cas A, are not consistently resampled by current resampling
methods such as the block bootstrap. A Poissonian data set X can
be deﬁned as a Poisson realization of an underlying theoretical
model X∗, which can be written:
X = P(X∗),
where P(.) is an operator giving as an output a Poisson realiza-
tion of a set.

A look on the histogram of a data set resampled from a Pois-
sonian signal shows the block bootstrap fails to reproduce ac-
curately the characteristics of the original data. Fig. B.2, top,
compares the histogram of the real data X, a simple image of a
square with Poisson noise, with the histograms of the resampled
data sets ˜Xboot
, and highlights the fact that the latter are more
similar to the histogram of a Poisson realization of the origi-
nal data P(X) = P(P(X∗)) than to the actual histogram of the
original data X = P(X∗), where X∗ is the underlying model of
a square before adding Poisson noise. This is consistent with
the fact that the block bootstrap is a random sampling with re-
placement, which introduces uncertainties of the same nature as
a Poisson drawing.

i

Fig. B.2, bottom, shows the comparison between the his-
togram of the toy model Cas A image and the histograms of the
data sets resampled with a block bootstrap. We can see the re-
sampling is, in this case too, adding Poissonian noise and gives
histograms resembling P(P(X∗)) rather than P(X∗). The same
goes with our real data cube of Cas A: Fig. B.3 shows an obvi-
ous instance of this bias being transferred to the results of the
pGMCA, thus proving the block bootstrap cannot be used as
such to retrieve error bars for this algorithm.

Appendix B.4: A new constrained bootstrap method

Bootstrap resamplings consisting in random drawings with re-
placement, it is natural that they fail to reproduce some charac-
teristics of the data, among which the histogram that gets closer
to the histogram of a Poisson realization of the original data than
to the histogram of the actual data. The block bootstrap method
is therefore unable to simulate a MC centered on the original
data: the alteration of the histogram strongly impacts the nature
of the data, hence the diﬀerences in the morphologies observed
by looking at the wavelet coeﬃcients. It is then necessary to ﬁnd
a new method in which we could force the histogram of the re-
sampled data sets to be similar to that of the original data.

A natural way to do so would be to impose the histogram we
want the resampled data to have before actually resampling the
data. To allow this constraint to be made on the pixel distribu-
tion, we can no longer consider our events to be the individual
elements of X or a block assembling a random sample of them.
We should directly work on the pixels and their values, the pix-
els here being the basic bricks constituting our data. Just as the
block bootstrap, our new method can work with data of any di-
mension. In the case of images, the "basic bricks" correspond to
actual pixels values. In the case of X-rays data cubes, they are
tiny cubes of the size of a pixel along the spatial dimensions,
and the size of an energy bin along the spectral dimension. The
same goes for any dimension of our original data. The method
can also be adapted for uni-dimensional data sets. The key of
our new method is then to work on the histogram of the data
presenting the pixels’ values rather than on the data itself,
event by event.

Fig. B.1: Example of bootstrap resampling. Each square repre-
sents a diﬀerent event, each color a diﬀerent value. N events are
taken randomly with replacement from the original data to create
each of the two bootstrap resamplings.

Θi = A(Xi). The variance of the Θi provides a good estimation
of the errors. Yet, this cannot be done with real data as only one
observation is available: the observed one. Thus, a resampling
method such as the jackknife, the bootstrap (see Efron 1979)
or its derivatives, able to simulate several realizations out of a
single one, is necessary. Ideally, the aim is to obtain through this
resampling method a number of ”fake” MC realizations centered
on the original data: new data sets variating spatially and repro-
ducing the spread of MC drawings with a mean equal or close to
the mean of the original data.

The mechanisms at stake in jacknife or bootstrap resam-
plings are similar. Jacknife and bootstrap resampling methods
produce n resampled sets ˜Xi by rearranging the elements of X,
and allow us to consider the variance of Θi = A( ˜Xi) for i in (cid:126)1, n(cid:127)
as an approximation for the variance of Θ. As jacknife and boot-
strap methods are close to each other, and the bootstrap and some
of its derivatives are more adapted to handle correlated data sets,
we will in this Appendix focus on a particular method, repre-
sentative of other resampling methods and theoretically suited
for astrophysical applications: the block bootstrap, which is a
simple bootstrap applied on randomly formed groups of events
rather than on the individual events.

In the case of a Poisson process, the discrete nature of the
elements composing the data set can easily be resampled with
a block bootstrap method. The N discrete elements composing a
Poissonian data set X will be called "events." In X-rays for exam-
ple, the events are the photons detected by the spectro-imaging
instrument. The bootstrap consists in a random sampling with
replacement from the current set events X. The resampling ob-
tained through bootstrapping is a set ˜Xboot of N events taken ran-
domly with replacement amid the initial ones (see Fig. B.1). This
method can be repeated in order to simulate as many realiza-
tions ˜Xboot
as needed to estimate standard errors or conﬁdence
intervals. In order to save calculation time, we can choose to re-
sample blocks of data of a ﬁxed size instead of single events:
This method is named block bootstrap. The block bootstrap is
also supposed to conserve correlations more accurately, making
it more appropriate for a use on astrophysical signals. The data
can be of any dimension but for clarity, we will only show in this
Appendix bi-dimensional data sets, that is images.

i

Appendix B.3: Biases in classical bootstrap applied on

Poissonian data sets

The properties of the data resampled strongly depends on the na-
ture of the original data. Biases may appear in the resampled data
sets, proving a block bootstrap can fail to reproduce consistent

Article number, page 12 of 14

Original dataFirst bootstrap resamplingSecond bootstrap resamplingPicquenot et al.: Morphological asymmetries in the ejecta of Cassiopeia A in X-rays

Fig. B.2: Data sets and their associated histogram in two cases:
on top, the very simple case of a Poisson realization of the image
of a square with uniform value 10; on the bottom, a toy model
Cas A image obtained by taking a Poisson realization of a high-
statistics denoised image of Cas A (hereafter called toy model).
On the right, the black histogram correspond to the original data
X = P(X∗). The red histograms are those of the data sets ˜Xboot
obtained through resampling of the original data and the blue
ones are the histograms of a Poisson realization of the original
data P(X) = P(P(X∗)). It appears that the resampled data sets
have histograms highly similar to that of the original data with
additional Poisson noise.

i

Fig. B.3: Spectrum of the synchrotron component retrieved by
pGMCA on the 5.5-7.5 keV energy band on real data and on a
set of 30 block bootstrap resamples. There is an obvious bias in
the results, the resampled data spectra being consistently under-
estimated.

We can either change the value of a pixel or exchange the
value of a pixel for that of another one. The ﬁrst operation si-
multaneously adds and subtracts 1 in the corresponding columns
of the global histogram while the second operation does not pro-
duce any change in it. A good mixture of these two operations
would then allow us to obtain the histogram we want to impose
in our resampled data sets, and following a Poisson probability

Fig. B.4: Scheme resuming the two steps of our new constrained
bootstrap method.

Fig. B.5: Histograms and standard deviations of the original and
resampled data sets. On the left, histograms of the original data,
the resampled data sets and the MC realizations of the toy model
Cas A image. On the right, the standard deviations of the resam-
pled data sets and MC realizations bin by bin of the histogram
on the left. We can notice the great adequation between the stan-
dard deviations of the resampled data sets and that of the MC
realizations.

law to select the pixels to exchange would introduce some spatial
variations, in order to reproduce what a MC would do.

Our new constrained bootstrap method is thus composed of

two steps, that are described below and illustrated in Fig. B.4:

Firstly, obtaining the probability density function of the ran-
dom variable underlying the observed data histogram using the
Kernel Density Estimation (KDE), and randomly generating n
histograms from this density function with a spread around the
data mimicking that of a MC, with a constraint enforcing a Pois-
sonian distribution of the total sums of pixel values of the n his-
tograms.

Secondly, producing resampled data sets associated with the
new histograms by changing the values of wisely chosen pixels
in the original image.

During these steps, the pixels equal to zero remain equal to
zero, and the nonzero pixels keep a strictly positive value. This
constraint enforces the number of nonzero pixels to be constant
and avoids the creation of random emergence of nonzero pixels
in the empty area of the original data. While this is not com-
pletely realistic we prefer constraining the resampled data sets in
this way than getting spurious features. We could explore ways
to release this constraint in the future.

Fig. B.5 highlights the similarities between the original his-
togram and those obtained through MC realizations and our new
constrained bootstrap resamplings, while Fig. B.6 and the spec-
tra in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 show that even after being processed by

Article number, page 13 of 14

0510152025100101102Pixel values100101102103Number of pixelsX=(X*)Xbooti((X*))0255075100125150175100101102Pixel values100101102103104Number of pixelsX=(X*)Xbooti((X*))5.505.756.006.256.506.757.007.257.50E (keV)20004000600080001000012000140001600018000Total countsReal dataResampled dataStep 1 :Step 2 :Original imageDeﬁning a new histogramImposing the new histogram on the original image100101102103Pixel values101100101102103104105Number of pixelsConstrained bootstrapMonte-CarloOriginal data100101102103Pixel values101100101102Standard deviationConstrained bootstrapMonte-CarloA&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Fig. B.6: Spectrum of the synchrotron component retrieved by
pGMCA on the 5.5-7.5 keV energy band on real data and on a set
of 100 constrained bootstrap resamples. The bias we observed in
Fig. B.3 between the real Cas A data and its block bootstrap re-
samples has been suppressed with our new constrained bootstrap
method.

the sensitive pGMCA algorithm, this resampling method shows
little to no biases. Hence, our new constrained bootstrap method
brings a ﬁrst and successful attempt at solving the problem of
biases in bootstrapping Poissonian data sets.

The comparison of our resampled data sets to a group of
MC realizations of the same simulation of Cas A appears to
be promising for the variance induced by our method. However,
when applying a complex estimator such as the pGMCA on both
the MC realizations and our resampled data sets, it appears that
the variances obtained through our method fail to accurately re-
produce those of the MC realizations. For that reason, the error
bars retrieved by our constrained bootstrap method do not have a
physical signiﬁcation. Nevertheless, they constitute an interest-
ing way to assess the robustness of our method around a certain
line emission. The diﬀerent resamplings explore initial condi-
tions slightly diﬀerent from the original data, thus evaluating the
dependence of our results on the initial conditions. Fig. 3 and
Fig. 4 indeed show that for some line emissions, the dispersion
between the results on diﬀerent resampled data sets is far greater
than for others.

This new constrained bootstrap method is a ﬁrst and promis-
ing attempt at retrieving error bars for nonlinear estimators on
Poissonian data sets, a problem that is often not trivial. In nonlin-
ear processes, errors frequently cannot be propagated correctly,
so the calculation of sensitive parameters and the estimation of
errors after an extensive use of an advanced data analysis could
beneﬁt from this method. We will work in the future on a way to
constraint the variance of the results to be more closely related
to that of a set of MC realizations in order to ensure the physical
signiﬁcation of the obtained error bars.

Article number, page 14 of 14

5.505.756.006.256.506.757.007.257.50E (keV)20004000600080001000012000140001600018000Total countsResampled dataReal data