Recoil Implantation Using Gas-Phase Precursor Molecules  

Angus Gale1, Johannes E. Fröch1,*, Mehran Kianinia1, James Bishop1, Igor Aharonovich1,2, 
Milos Toth1,2,* 

1School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Technology 

Sydney, Ultimo, New South Wales 2007, Australia 

2ARC Centre of Excellence for Transformative Meta-Optical Systems (TMOS), University of 

Technology Sydney, Ultimo, New South Wales 2007, Australia 

Corresponding Author: johannes.froech@uts.edu.au, milos.toth@uts.edu.au   

ABSTRACT  

Ion implantation underpins a vast range of devices and technologies that require precise control 

over  the physical,  chemical,  electronic, magnetic  and  optical  properties  of  materials.  A variant 

termed “recoil implantation” – in which a precursor is deposited onto a substrate as a thin film and 

implanted  via  momentum  transfer  from  incident  energetic  ions  –  has  a  number  of  compelling 

advantages, particularly when performed using an inert ion nano-beam [Fröch et al.,  Nat Commun 

11,  5039  (2020)].  However,  a  major  drawback  of  this  approach  is  that  the  implant  species  are 

limited to the constituents of solid thin films. Here we overcome this limitation by demonstrating 

recoil implantation using gas-phase precursors. Specifically, we fabricate nitrogen-vacancy (NV) 

color centers in diamond using an Ar+ ion beam and the nitrogen-containing precursor gases N2, 

NH3 and NF3. Our work expands the applicability of recoil implantation to most of the periodic 

table, and to applications in which thin film deposition/removal is impractical. 

 
INTRODUCTION 

Ion implantation techniques are commonly used to alter material properties for a wide range of 

applications.  For  instance,  it  has  critically  underpinned  the  advancement  of  semiconductor 

industries  towards  our  technology  standard  today,1  and  research  in  fields  such  as  solid  state 

chemical engineering, optoelectronics, and quantum science have benefitted from the development 

of reliable implantation technologies.2, 3 Due to their importance, there remains intense interest in 

improving implantation methods, particularly advances in mask-free, direct-write implantation at 

precisely-located sites, and fabrication of dopant gradients. For example, in the field of nano and 

quantum photonics, precise placement of optical dopants in photonic and optoelectronic devices 

is required, and deterministic ion implantation techniques are therefore highly sought after.  

While conventional ion implanters offer a wide range of possible implantation energies and source 

ions, they are unable to achieve localized implantation on submicron scales without the need for 

masking procedures.4, 5 Therefore, several methods are commonly used in material science, based 

on equipment beyond standard broad-beam ion implanters. This equipment includes focused ion 

beam (FIB) systems, which produce highly-focused, nanoscale beams. However, the ion species 

are limited by the ion source, which is typically a liquid metal ion source6-8, a plasma source9, or 

a gas field ionization source.10 A recent demonstration has expanded this to a Paul trap, where ions 

are captured in an electrostatic trap and then accelerated towards a target,11, 12 and techniques such 

as implantation through a pierced AFM tip have been used to achieve precise spatial localization.13, 

14 In addition, a more specialized technique was demonstrated recently using a scanning electron 

microscope and gas-phase precursor molecules.15  

Further  to  the  above,  we  have  recently  demonstrated  the  use  of  recoil  implantation16-18  in 

combination with a standard FIB system.19 In that work, momentum transfer from inert ions in a 

nano-scale  beam  to  a  thin  film  was  used  for  implantation  of  the  film  constituents.  This  was 

demonstrated by implanting group IV elements into a bulk diamond substrate, which resulted in 

the  creation  of  group  IV  color  centers.  These  centers  have  characteristic  photoluminescence 

emissions,20 which were distinctly identified by confocal photoluminescence measurements. The 

recoil implantation technique provides control over dopant density using the ion beam irradiation 

and  scanning  parameters,  and  enables  ultra-shallow implantation,  with  the  majority  of  dopants 

located within the first 2 nm of the surface.19 Hence, this technique allows for a wide range of 

implant species using a single ion source, as well as beam-directed control over the location and 

density  of  the  dopants.  However,  it  is  limited  to  the  use  of  solid-state  precursors  that  can  be 

deposited in the form of a removable film. Here we eliminate this limitation by replacing solid thin 

films  with  gases  that  are  injected  into  the  system  during  FIB  irradiation.  We  showcase  this 

approach  by  creating  NV  centers21  in  a  diamond  substrate  by  using  N2,  NH3  and  NF3  as  the 

implantation precursor species.  

We note that whilst undesired recoil implantation of gas-phase oxygen impurities by broad ion 

beams  has  been  observed  previously22,  this  process  has  not  been  used  to  engineer  functional 

material  properties  such  as  the  generation  of  NV  spin  defects  in  diamond  demonstrated  in  the 

present work. Our results expand the technique of FIB-directed recoil implantation to encompass 

the vast majority of the periodic table, demonstrates the use of both inert and reactive precursor 

molecules, and negates the need for thin film deposition and removal steps that may be difficult 

depending on the properties of the substrate.  

 
RESULTS and DISCUSSION  

The method uses a standard dual beam microscope (DBM - Thermo Fisher Scientific Helios G4), 

a tool that is commonly available in microscopy and material science laboratories for purposes of 

cross  sectioning, 

lamella  preparation  for 

transmission  electron  microscopy,  and  for 

nanofabrication.23, 24 The same system is typically  equipped with a gas injection system (GIS), 

where a capillary is placed within 500 µm of the substrate and used to locally deliver precursor 

molecules  for  gas-assisted  nanofabrication,  e.g.  chemical  vapor  deposition  or  chemically-

enhanced etching of the surface. Here, the same system is utilized for sub-surface implantation of 

gas molecule constituents, achieved by injecting and delivering nitrogen-based precursor gases to 

a local area of a substrate during FIB irradiation, as is schematically shown in Figure 1(a). As the 

gas molecules are injected and directed towards the sample, a proportion will adsorb on the surface. 

These  gaseous  molecules  will  either  diffuse  on the  surface  or undergo  thermal  or  FIB-induced 

desorption,  characterized  by  the  diffusion  path  length  and  the  mean  desorption  time, 

respectively.25, 26 Within this timeframe, high energy primary ions can interact with the adsorbates, 

transfer momentum to the molecules, and thus implant their constituents into the substrate. 

The substrate used in this work is electronic-grade diamond (N < 5 ppb) purchased from Element 

Six, cleaned prior to experiments by ultrasonication in acetone, isopropanol and piranha solution 

(H2SO4:H2O2 (30%) 2:1 at 150 °C,  2 hours). This sample was then placed  without  any  further 

modification in the DBM. For the gas supply (either N2, NF3, or NH3), the GIS was connected to 

an  external  gas  line,  through  a  connector  at  the  capillary.  The  gas  was  then  delivered  to  the 

capillary through a gas line, where a liquid nitrogen cold trap was used to minimize residual water 

content in the gas stream delivered to the sample.27 Figure 1 (b) shows a charge coupled device 

(CCD) image of the setup during the experiment, where the GIS needle was placed within 500 µm 

of the sample surface for optimal gas flux at the surface. During the experiments the background 

chamber pressure increased from 1.3 x 10-6 mBar to 9.0 x 10-5 mBar.  We note that the pressure 

increase is measured at a peripheral point relative to the substrate – however, the local pressure 

increase in the vicinity of the processing area is known to be substantially higher, as typically used 

for applications in electron/ion beam induced deposition (IBID).25 We then used a (4.7 ± 0.3) pA, 

30 keV Ar+ beam to initiate the recoil implantation of the gas adsorbate. We note that we used Ar+ 

instead of Xe+, because the momentum transfer is maximized when the atoms are similar in mass, 

and thus can achieve better implantation conditions.16 Furthermore, Ar is lighter than Xe, causing 

less collateral damage to the host crystal. Unlike Xe, Ar is not known to produce any luminescent 

color center in diamond, hence it should act as a truly inert primary ion in this system. By using 

the scanning and precise timing control capabilities of the FIB system, a straightforward variation 

of the irradiation fluence was achieved by altering the number of passes per unit area scanned by 

the beam. In each pass, the beam is scanned in a serpentine pattern with a Dwell Time of 200 ns, 

a Point Pitch of 200 nm, and a Defocus of 50 µm, which yields a fluence of ~ 1.7 x 1010 cm-2 for 

a single pass. Due to the volatile nature of the adsorbates, we also applied a refresh time, which 

was set to 10 ms between passes in order to facilitate sufficient time for the precursor molecules 

to replenish around the processing site.28 Specifically, as the ion beam irradiates the sample, the 

precursor  gas  may  either be  implanted by  recoil, auto-desorb or undergo  stimulated  desorption 

caused  by  the  ions  and  secondary  electrons  emitted  from  the  substrate.29  Hence,  during  FIB 

radiation,  adsorbates  at  the  implantation  site  are  depleted  and  their  concentration  has  to  be 

replenished  continuously.30  We  emphasize  here  that  for  this  version  of  recoil  implantation,  no 

deposition of a thin film in any form is required, which also removes the need for post-implantation 

sample treatments that are needed to remove such films.   

Figure 1. Experimental setup. a) Schematic illustration of the setup used in the experiments with 

stylized N2 molecules and a focused ion beam. b) CCD image of the experimental setup used for 

all implantations with false coloring applied to labelled components. 

After irradiation, the sample was annealed at 850 °C for 2 hours in high vacuum (< 2 x 10-6 mBar) 

and cleaned in piranha solution as described above. A lab-built confocal photoluminescence (PL) 

setup with a 532 nm excitation laser was then used to investigate the irradiated regions at room 

temperature. The resulting PL map of an area irradiated with the precursor NF3 can be seen in 

Figure 2 (a). An ion fluence of 7.0 x 1013 cm-2 is required to clearly see the patterned 4 x 4 µm2 

squares in the confocal PL map. This is higher than but comparable to our previous work using 

solid  metallic  precursors,  where  a  fluence  of  less  than  1  x  1012  cm-2  was  needed  to  observe 

patterned regions of the same size.19 The values obtained in this study are higher because of the 

lower concentration of adsorbates on the surface compared to a solid thin film and the ability for 

the  gaseous  precursors  to  desorb  or  diffuse  unlike  the  solid  metallic  precursor.  This  naturally 

results  in  a  lower  probability  of  the  recoil  process,  and  therefore  requires  higher  total  fluence 

 
values.  Moreover,  these  values  are  also  significantly  higher  than  using  direct  nitrogen  ion 

implantation which often require fluences of ~1.0 x 1010 cm-2 as there is an added requirement for 

momentum transfer between the primary ion and precursor.4, 5 As is common for all forms of ion 

implantation, we also observe here, the PL intensity increases up to a maximum and then saturates 

or declines as ion fluence is increased. The maximum PL intensity is obtained at a fluence of 7.0 

x 1014 cm-2 at which point it begins to decrease in the center of the irradiated region. This is related 

to the increased amount of collisions within the sample, which leads to irreparable damage in the 

crystal and therefore quenching of the emission. 

Figure 2(b) shows individual PL spectra from the square centers, clearly showing the increased 

intensity of NV- emission with a pronounced broad phonon sideband (PSB) and a characteristic 

zero phonon line (ZPL) at ~ 638 nm. Furthermore, in the spectrum a distinct Raman line at 573 

nm is observed, corresponding to the F2g mode (1332 cm-1) of the sp3 bond, characteristic for the 

crystal structure of diamond. A further peak is observed at 582 nm, assigned partially to the G 

band, indicating some degree of damage in the material, as well as the NV0 emission, which is 

typically present at 575 nm.  

We now briefly discuss the non-trivial kinetics arising from the interplay of momentum transfer 

processes and gas diffusion above and on the surface. First, we note that our choice of a diamond 

substrate and PL analysis of NV centers prove conclusively that the nitrogen is implanted below 

the surface and embedded in a diamond crystal – i.e., the ion irradiation did not merely generate a 

thin  film  of  nitride  that  can  form  on  some  materials  as  a  result  of  beam-stimulated  chemical 

reactions between adsorbates and a surface. Next, we point out that the appearance of distinct box 

shapes in Figure 2 (a) with clear edges blurred only by the resolution of the confocal PL imaging 

system is a direct indicator that the implantation is initiated by momentum transfer to adsorbed gas 

molecules  rather  than  the  less-probable  process  of  momentum  transfer  to  gas-phase  molecules 

above the sample. If the latter was the case, the angular distribution resulting from non-head-on 

collisions between primary ions and gas molecules would inevitably result in blurred, overlapping 

implantation sites. Finally, we highlight that the FIB irradiation conditions that we employed do 

in  fact  lead  to  net  nitrogen  implantation,  which  is  not  negated  by  the  net  competing  effect  of 

sputtering and desorption stimulated by the ions and emitted secondary electrons.  

Figure 2. Photoluminescence map and spectra of implanted arrays of NV- centers. a) A room 

temperature  confocal  photoluminescence  map  of  square  NV-  arrays  implanted  using  NF3 

precursor.  The  scale  bar  corresponds  to  5  µm.  b)  Spectra  taken  from  irradiated  areas  in  (a) 

corresponding to ion fluences in the range of 7.0 x 1013 cm-2 – 7.0 x 1014 cm-2. The NV- zero phonon 

line (ZPL), phonon side band (PSB) and diamond Raman line are labelled for clarity. The spectra 

have been normalized to the Raman peak at 573 nm. 

We now turn to a comparison of implantation from different gas species and characterization of 

the  optically  detected  magnetic  resonance  (ODMR)  signal.21  First,  Figure  3  (a)  shows  spectra 

obtained using different nitrogen-based precursors, namely N2, NF3 and NH3, each of which was 

 
irradiated using an ion beam fluence of 3.5 x 1014 cm-2, at a chamber pressure of 9.0 x 10-5 mBar. 

Within the different regions, NF3 showed the brightest PL, followed by N2 and NH3 respectively. 

These variations in efficacy are likely a result of the complex interplay between residence times 

of  the  precursor  molecules,  ion-adsorbate  interaction  cross-sections,  adsorbate  dissociation 

mechanisms  and  chemical  effects  of  reactive  H  and  F  species.  As  an  example,  NF3  and  NH3 

molecules have longer surface residence times than N2. In turn, it can be expected that NH3 would 

more likely lead to H-mediated chemical etching of diamond, as it has been shown that hydrogen 

containing precursors can etch carbon. This may directly explain the order of the PL intensity, with 

NF3, the highest due  to  long residence times, while  for  NH3 the additional etching  mechanism 

leads to slow beam-induced volatilization of the surface.31, 32 Moreover, due to co-implantation of 

hydrogen,  the  NV-  center  can  be  depleted  and  become  optically  inactive.33  Besides  the 

characteristic PL emission we also observed a clear PL contrast when applying a microwave field, 

a signature of the NV- optically detectable magnetic resonance (ODMR). Specifically, a microwire 

was placed in the vicinity (~ 20 µm) of an irradiated square region (7.0 x 1014 cm-2 fluence, N2 

precursor) and the PL contrast was recorded as the microwave frequency was sweeped across the 

range 2.75 – 2.96 GHz. As shown in the inset of Figure 3(a) a PL contrast of ~ 1.5 % was observed 

at 2.87 GHz, corresponding to the zero-field splitting of the system, separating the electron spin 

|0>  and  |±1>  sublevels  of  the  ground  state.  We  note  that  the  ODMR  peak  is  relatively  broad, 

indicative of strain in the sample. Nevertheless, the ODMR measurement shows the capability of 

this technique to generate spin defects in diamond.  

Finally, to exclude the possibility that the NV- centers were generated by ion beam processing of 

native nitrogen impurities in the diamond substrate (N <  5 ppb), or from nitrogen impurities in the 

Ar+ beam, we compared the implanted regions to areas that were irradiated by the beam in the 

absence of a precursor gas. As is shown by the blue spectrum in Figure 3(a), the characteristic NV- 

emission was absent from such regions, irradiated using the same ion fluence, confirming that the 

observed NV centers were generated through recoil implantation. We did, however, observe bright 

square arrays in panchromatic PL maps of the areas irradiated in the absence of a precursor gas 

(Fig.  3(b)).  However,  these  emissions  were  unstable  –  focusing  the  laser  spot  onto  such  an 

irradiated area and taking a further PL map results in a dim spot (Fig. 3(c)). Therefore, we attribute 

the bright square to carbon deposition via an IBID process stemming from residual hydrocarbon 

species on the sample surface.25 The laser dwelling removes the contamination, which leads to PL 

quenching in that spot. This illustrates that the low ion flux used for the irradiation resulted in a 

favorable 

regime  between 

the  competing  processes  of  sputtering, 

implantation  and 

desorption/replenishment.  

Figure 3. Comparison of photoluminescence spectra using different nitrogen-based precursors. 

a) Room temperature photoluminescence spectra of the implanted regions using a fluence of 3.5 x 

1014 ions cm-2. A reference spectrum of a region irradiated in the absence of a precursor gas is 

 
shown for comparison. The NV- zero phonon line (ZPL), phonon side band (PSB) and diamond 

Raman line are labelled for clarity.  The spectra are normalized to the diamond Raman line at 573 

nm. (Inset) ODMR contrast measurement of the area irradiated with nitrogen gas precursor. b, c) 

Confocal panchromatic PL maps of regions generated by ion beam irradiation in the absence of 

a precursor gas obtained before and after the laser spot was dwelled over the circled area for 2 

mins. Scale bars correspond to 5 µm. 

In summary, we used a succinct set of experiments – namely, site-selective fabrication of NV- 

centers in diamond using three precursor gases – to show that: 

  Optically-active defects can be fabricated in the substrate lattice below the sample surface. 

  The implantation proceeds through momentum transfer to surface-adsorbed gas molecules. 

  Our  irradiation  conditions  lead  to  implantation  at  a  rate  that  overcomes  the  competing 

processes of autodesorption, stimulated desorption and sputtering. 

  The ion beam scanning can be used to control both the location and the local dose of the 

implanted species. 

  Both inert and reactive gases can be used as implantation precursors. 

CONCLUSION 

We have extended the range and suitability of the recoil implantation technique and demonstrated 

its applicability to elements which are available from a gaseous molecular state. By delivering gas-

phase molecules to the substrate surface by means of a GIS capillary we achieve a region of locally 

high adsorbate concentrations, which acts as a source of target atoms that can be implanted through 

momentum transfer from an energetic ion beam. The principle of this extension was proven by 

patterning  regions  of  optically-active  NV-  centers  in  bulk  diamond,  by  flowing  a  nitrogen 

containing  gas  over  the  surface  during  ion  beam  patterning.  After  annealing,  the  characteristic 

signature  of  the  NV-  color  center,  including  the  spectrum  and  ODMR  signal  with  zero-field 

 
splitting at 2.87 GHz were observed. Beyond the expansion recoil implantation to a wider range 

of the periodic table, we have also simplified the material preparation steps by utilizing a gas phase 

precursor, where  no  chemical  removal  of  the  target  film  after  implantation  is  required.  Such  a 

process is therefore more appealing to materials that are chemically unstable or would be affected 

by the wet chemical removal process after ion irradiation.  

ACKGNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors thank the Australian Research Council (DP180100077, DP190101058, LP170100150, 

CE200100010) for financial support. We would also like to thank Mark Lockrey for his assistance 

with the Focused Ion Beam microscope. 

REFERENCES 

Tsukamoto, K.; Kuroi, T.; Kawasaki, Y., Evolution of Ion Implantation Technology and Its 

Atatüre, M.; Englund, D.; Vamivakas, N.; Lee, S.-Y.; Wrachtrup, J., Material Platforms for 

Scarabelli,  D.;  Trusheim,  M.;  Gaathon,  O.;  Englund,  D.;  Wind,  S.  J.,  Nanoscale 

1. 
Contribution to Semiconductor Industry. AIP Conference Proceedings 2011, 1321, 9-16. 
2. 
Spin-Based Photonic Quantum Technologies. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2018, 3, 38-51. 
Bilek, M. M. M., Biofunctionalization of Surfaces by Energetic Ion Implantation: Review of 
3. 
Progress on Applications in Implantable Biomedical Devices and Antibody Microarrays. Applied 
Surface Science 2014, 310, 3-10. 
4. 
Engineering of Closely-Spaced Electronic Spins in Diamond. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 4982-4990. 
5. 
Bayn, I.; Chen, E. H.; Trusheim, M. E.; Li, L.; Schröder, T.; Gaathon, O.; Lu, M.; Stein, A.; 
Liu,  M.;  Kisslinger,  K.;  Clevenson,  H.;  Englund,  D.,  Generation  of  Ensembles  of  Individually 
Resolvable  Nitrogen  Vacancies  Using  Nanometer-Scale  Apertures  in  Ultrahigh-Aspect  Ratio 
Planar Implantation Masks. Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 1751-1758. 
6. 
Schröder, T.; Trusheim, M. E.; Walsh, M.; Li, L.; Zheng, J.; Schukraft, M.; Sipahigil, A.; 
Evans, R. E.; Sukachev, D. D.; Nguyen, C. T.; Pacheco, J. L.; Camacho, R. M.; Bielejec, E. S.; 
Lukin, M. D.; Englund, D., Scalable Focused Ion Beam Creation of Nearly Lifetime-Limited Single 
Quantum Emitters in Diamond Nanostructures. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 15376. 
7. 
Wang, J.; Zhou, Y.; Zhang, X.; Liu, F.; Li, Y.; Li, K.; Liu, Z.; Wang, G.; Gao, W., Efficient 
Generation  of  an  Array  of  Single  Silicon-Vacancy  Defects  in  Silicon  Carbide.  Physical Review 
Applied 2017, 7, 064021. 
Zhou, Y.; Mu, Z.; Adamo, G.; Bauerdick, S.; Rudzinski, A.; Aharonovich, I.; Gao, W.-b., 
8. 
Direct Writing of Single Germanium Vacancy Center Arrays in Diamond. New Journal of Physics 
2018, 20, 125004. 
9. 
Lesik, M.; Spinicelli, P.; Pezzagna, S.; Happel, P.; Jacques, V.; Salord, O.; Rasser, B.; 
Delobbe, A.; Sudraud, P.; Tallaire, A.; Meijer, J.; Roch, J.-F., Maskless and Targeted Creation of 

 
 
Bassim,  N.;  Scott,  K.;  Giannuzzi,  L.  A.,  Recent  Advances  in  Focused  Ion  Beam 

Becker,  S.;  Raatz,  N.;  Jankuhn,  S.;  John,  R.;  Meijer,  J.,  Nitrogen  Implantation  with  a 

Sigmund, P., Recoil Implantation and Ion‐Beam‐Induced Composition Changes in Alloys 

Arrays of Colour Centres in Diamond Using Focused  Ion Beam Technology. 2013, 210, 2055-
2059. 
10. 
Technology and Applications. MRS Bulletin 2014, 39, 317-325. 
11. 
Groot-Berning,  K.;  Kornher,  T.;  Jacob,  G.;  Stopp,  F.;  Dawkins,  S.  T.;  Kolesov,  R.; 
Wrachtrup, J.; Singer, K.; Schmidt-Kaler, F., Deterministic Single-Ion Implantation of Rare-Earth 
Ions for Nanometer-Resolution Color-Center Generation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019, 123, 106802. 
12. 
Groot-Berning, K.; Jacob, G.; Osterkamp, C.; Jelezko, F.; Schmidt-Kaler, F., Fabrication 
of $^{15}\Textrm{Nv}^{-}$ Centers in Diamond Using a Deterministic Single Ion Implanter. arXiv 
e-prints 2021, arXiv:2101.01979. 
Pezzagna,  S.;  Wildanger,  D.;  Mazarov,  P.;  Wieck,  A.  D.;  Sarov,  Y.;  Rangeow,  I.; 
13. 
Naydenov, B.; Jelezko, F.; Hell, S. W.; Meijer, J., Nanoscale Engineering and Optical Addressing 
of Single Spins in Diamond. Small 2010, 6, 2117-2121. 
14. 
Jung, T.; Görlitz, J.; Kambs, B.; Pauly, C.; Raatz, N.; Nelz, R.; Neu, E.; Edmonds, A. M.; 
Markham, M.; Mücklich, F.; Meijer, J.; Becher, C., Spin Measurements of Nv Centers Coupled to 
a Photonic Crystal Cavity. APL Photonics 2019, 4, 120803. 
15. 
Scanning Electron Microscope. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 32. 
Nelson, R. S., The Theory of Recoil Implantation. Radiation Effects 1969, 2, 47-50. 
16. 
17.  Möller,  W.;  Eckstein,  W.,  Ion  Mixing  and  Recoil  Implantation  Simulations  by  Means  of 
Tridyn. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with 
Materials and Atoms 1985, 7-8, 645-649. 
18. 
and Compounds. Journal of Applied Physics 1979, 50, 7261-7263. 
19. 
Fröch, J. E.; Bahm, A.; Kianinia, M.; Mu, Z.; Bhatia, V.; Kim, S.; Cairney, J. M.; Gao, W.; 
Bradac, C.; Aharonovich, I.; Toth, M., Versatile Direct-Writing of Dopants in a Solid State Host 
through Recoil Implantation. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 5039. 
20. 
Nanophotonics with Group Iv Defects in Diamond. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 5625. 
21. 
L., The Nitrogen-Vacancy Colour Centre in Diamond. Physics Reports 2013, 528, 1-45. 
22.  Wittmaack, K.; Blank, P., The Influence of Recoil Implantation of Absorbed Oxygen on the 
Entrapment  of  Xenon  in  Aluminum  and  Silicon.  In  Ion  Implantation  in  Semiconductors  1976, 
Springer: 1977; pp 363-374. 
23. 
Bulletin 2007, 32, 389-399. 
24. 
Li, P.; Chen, S.; Dai, H.; Yang, Z.; Chen, Z.; Wang, Y.; Chen, Y.; Peng, W.; Shan, W.; 
Duan,  H.,  Recent  Advances  in  Focused  Ion  Beam  Nanofabrication  for  Nanostructures  and 
Devices: Fundamentals and Applications. Nanoscale 2021, 13, 1529-1565. 
25. 
Utke, I.; Hoffmann, P.; Melngailis, J., Gas-Assisted Focused Electron Beam and Ion Beam 
Processing and Fabrication. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B: Microelectronics and 
Nanometer Structures Processing, Measurement, and Phenomena 2008, 26, 1197-1276. 
26. 
Electron Beam Induced Processing. Beilstein Journal of Nanotechnology 2015, 6, 1518-1540. 
27.  Martin, A. A.; McCredie, G.; Toth, M., Electron Beam Induced Etching of Carbon. Applied 
Physics Letters 2015, 107, 041603. 
Fowlkes, J. D.; Rack, P. D., Fundamental Electron-Precursor-Solid Interactions Derived 
28. 
from  Time-Dependent  Electron-Beam-Induced  Deposition  Simulations  and  Experiments.  ACS 
Nano 2010, 4, 1619-1629. 

Volkert, C. A.;  Minor, A.  M., Focused Ion Beam Microscopy  and Micromachining.  MRS 

Doherty, M. W.; Manson, N. B.; Delaney, P.; Jelezko, F.; Wrachtrup, J.; Hollenberg, L. C. 

Toth,  M.;  Lobo,  C.;  Friedli,  V.;  Szkudlarek,  A.;  Utke,  I.,  Continuum  Models  of  Focused 

Bradac,  C.;  Gao,  W.;  Forneris,  J.;  Trusheim,  M.  E.;  Aharonovich,  I.,  Quantum 

29. 
van Dorp, W. F.; Hansen, T. W.; Wagner, J. B.; De Hosson, J. T. M., The Role of Electron-
Stimulated  Desorption  in  Focused  Electron  Beam  Induced  Deposition.  Beilstein  journal  of 
nanotechnology 2013, 4, 474-480. 
30.  Winkler, R.; Fowlkes, J.; Szkudlarek, A.; Utke, I.; Rack, P. D.; Plank, H., The Nanoscale 
Implications of a Molecular Gas Beam During Electron Beam Induced Deposition. ACS Applied 
Materials & Interfaces 2014, 6, 2987-2995. 
Bishop, J.; Fronzi, M.; Elbadawi, C.; Nikam, V.; Pritchard, J.; Fröch, J. E.; Duong, N. M. 
31. 
H.; Ford, M. J.; Aharonovich, I.; Lobo, C. J.; Toth, M., Deterministic Nanopatterning of Diamond 
Using Electron Beams. ACS Nano 2018, 12, 2873-2882. 
32. 
Etching and Imaging in Gaseous Nh3environments. Nanotechnology 2012, 23, 375302. 
33. 
Stacey,  A.;  Karle,  T.  J.;  McGuinness,  L.  P.;  Gibson,  B.  C.;  Ganesan,  K.;  Tomljenovic‐
Hanic, S.; Greentree, A.  D.; Hoffman, A.; Beausoleil, R. G.; Prawer, S., Depletion of Nitrogen‐
Vacancy Color Centers in Diamond Via Hydrogen Passivation. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2012, 100, -. 

Lobo,  C.  J.;  Martin,  A.;  Phillips,  M.  R.;  Toth,  M.,  Electron  Beam  Induced  Chemical  Dry 

 
