Reduced Microwave Brightness Temperature in a Sunspot Atmosphere due to 
Open Magnetic Fields 

A. Vrublevskis, B.I. Ryabov, and S.M. White 

Abstract Motivated by dark coronal lanes in SOHO / EIT 284 Å EUV observations we construct and 
optimize an atmosphere model of the AR 8535 sunspot by adding a cool and dense component in the 
volume of plasma along open field lines determined using the Potential Field Source Surface (PFSS) 
extrapolation.  Our  model  qualitatively  reproduces  the  observed  reduced  microwave  brightness 
temperature in the northern part of the sunspot in the VLA observations from 13 May 1999 and provides 
a  physical  explanation  for  the  coronal  dark  lanes.  We  propose  application  of  this  method  to  other 
sunspots  with  such  observed  dark  regions  in  EUV  or  soft  X-rays  and  with  concurrent  microwave 
observations to determine the significance of open field regions. The connection between open fields 
and  the resulting  plasma  temperature  and  density  change  is  of  relevance for  slow  solar  wind  source 
investigations. 

1. 

Introduction  

No scientific consensus exists on an effective solar atmosphere model (see Loukitcheva et al. 
(2017) for an overview). This issue is relevant for the resolution of the well-known coronal 
heating problem. Active region (AR) sunspot observations in microwave wavelengths can be 
used for solar atmosphere density and temperature profile investigations. In this paper, for the 
AR 8535 sunspot we further relate the observed decrease in microwave intensity to open field 
lines and thereby demonstrate the additional contribution of high angular resolution microwave 
observations to magnetic field connectivity determination. 

Significant  contribution  to  the  microwave  radiation  from  large  sunspots  is  from  the 
gyroresonance emission of electrons in the strong (compared to surrounding quiet Sun) sunspot 
magnetic fields. Two features make this emission of particular use in investigating the active 
region atmosphere: (1) the emitted radiation is in local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE) with 
the  plasma  hence  the  brightness  temperature  derived  from  the  observed  electromagnetic 
radiation  flux  in  the  cases  of  sufficient  optical  depth  represents  the  actual  local  electron 
temperature, and (2) for gyroresonance emission plasma is of significant optical depth only in 
thin layers where the emission frequency is close to the gyrofrequency or its harmonic. As a 
result then gyroresonance emission brightness temperature observations represent the plasma 
temperature  at  select  heights  in  the  atmosphere.  A  successful  “inversion”  of  the  microwave 
observations  could  then  provide  information  on  the  atmosphere  and  the  magnetic  fields  of 
sunspots. 

_________________ 

A. Vrublevskis  
Ventspils International Radio Astronomy Centre and Ventspils University of Applied Sciences, 
Inzenieru iela 101, Ventspils LV-3601, Latvia  
e-mail: arturs.vrublevskis@venta.lv  

B. I. Ryabov  
Ventspils International Radio Astronomy Centre and Ventspils University of Applied Sciences, 
Inzenieru iela 101, Ventspils LV-3601, Latvia  
e-mail: ryabov@latnet.lv 

S. M. White 
Space Vehicles Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory, Kirtland AFB, NM, USA 
e-mail: stephen.white.24@us.af.mil  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Since the realization of the relevance of the gyroresonance emission mechanism to the 
observed  microwave  emission  from  sunspots  (Zheleznyakov,  1962;  Kakinuma  and  Swarup 
1962),  numerous  attempts  with  varying  successes  have  been  made  in  investigating  active 
regions  using  such  observations  (for  review,  see  Gary  and  Keller  (eds.),  2004;  Lee,  2007). 
Arguably, the most straightforward approach is to use a model for the sunspot magnetic field 
(based on either a photospheric magnetic field extrapolation or a dipole model) together with 
an  assumed  atmosphere  model  (usually  plane-parallel)  to  calculate  the  microwave  emission 
which is then compared to observations. Such approach can be successful for sufficiently simple 
sunspots yet numerous exceptions exist. 

In some cases authors concluded that the field above the sunspot is not a potential field 
(Alissandrakis, Kundu, and Lantos, 1980; Nindos et al., 1996; Brosius et al., 2002) and a more 
involved magnetic field model was necessary. 

In other cases, it was suggested that a general low temperature plasma volume overlies 
some parts of the sunspot. In particular, several authors (Alissandrakis and Kundu 1982; Strong, 
Alissandrakis, and Kundu, 1984; White, Kundu, and Gopalswamy, 1991; Zlotnik, Kundu, and 
White, 1996; Zlotnik, White, and Kundu, 1998; Bezrukov et al., 2011; Bezrukov, Ryabov, and 
Shibasaki, 2012) invoked low temperature plasma above the center of the sunspot and at the 
relevant gyroresonance levels to explain the observed reduction in emission more pronounced 
than expected due to the small angle between the magnetic field  and the line of sight there. 
Brosius  and  White  (2004)  additionally  directly  observed  enhanced  transition  region  EUV 
emission (“sunspot plume”) at the location of reduced microwave emission in coordinated EUV 
observations with SOHO/CDS. 

First  Gary  and  Hurford  (1994)  and  most  recently  Tun,  Gary  and  Georgoulis  (2011) 
analyzed  spatially  resolved  microwave  spectra  of  active  regions  without  relying  on  any 
magnetic  field  models  and  discovered  locations  with  spectra  with  positive  slopes  -  higher 
brightness  temperatures  at  higher  frequencies  -  that,  again,  imply  lower  temperature  plasma 
higher  in  the  solar  corona  than  the  underlying  high  temperature  plasma.  An  important 
distinction is that in these cases the cool plasma is in loops high in the corona and not necessarily 
at the relevant gyroresonance levels. 

Finally, Vourlidas, Bastian, and Aschwanden (1997) explained microwave observations 
using  a  model  that  encompassed  both  concepts  –  lower  temperature  plasma  at  certain 
gyroresonance layers and constrained to particular loops. 

For  completeness,  it  should  be  mentioned  that  observations  in  other  parts  of 
electromagnetic spectrum – optical and UV spectral lines – are also used to construct sunspot 
atmosphere models. The “inversion” is more complicated since the radiative transfer then is a 
non-LTE  process  and  emission  depends  on  the  abundance  and  ionization  equilibrium  of 
particular  atoms.  Nevertheless,  numerous  models  have  been  constructed  and  we  refer  to 
Loukitcheva  et  al.  (2017)  for  an  overview  of  the  models  and  their  correspondence  to  radio 
observations. 

Despite the aforementioned advances, research on sunspot atmosphere modelling using 
microwave  observations  continues.  Goals  include  better  agreement  between  models  and 
observations as well as justification or elimination of model assumptions. Thus, more recently, 
Stupishin et al. (2018) iteratively varied a plane-parallel atmosphere profile to use with non-
linear force-free reconstructed magnetic field to model RATAN-600 1-D sunspot observations. 
Also for modelling RATAN-600 observations, Alissandrakis et al. (2019) in turn employed an 
inversion  of  the  differential  emission  measure  from  SDO/AIA  observations  to  obtain  the 
atmosphere profile to be used together with potential field extrapolations.  

As  for  a  physics-based  justification  of  the  empirical  models,  Lee  et  al.  (1998)  set 
different temperature profiles for plasma along different magnetic field lines depending on the 
current along the given field line. More recently, Mok et al. (2016) modelled volumetric plasma 
heating in an active region as dependent on magnetic field strength, length of field lines, and 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
plasma density. However, there authors simulated and compared to observations radiation in 
the  EUV  rather  than  radio  range.  Nita  et  al.  (2018)  have  developed  an  IDL-based  software 
package  GX_Simulator  in  SolarSoft  for  calculating  the  expected  microwave,  X-ray,  and 
EUV emission of model ARs.  

In this paper  we  focus  on AR  8535 observed on  13 May 1999 using the VLA radio 
telescopes. This particular sunspot exhibits features in microwave observations that cannot be 
reproduced  with  a  simple  -  plane-parallel  -  atmosphere  model.  In  particular,  the  microwave 
emission is reduced in the northern part of the sunspot and there is an inversion in brightness 
temperature with respect to frequency in several regions which are brighter in 8 GHz band than 
in the 5 GHz band. As already described, this is suggestive of cool plasma overlaying hotter 
lower layers and such an interpretation for this spot was suggested and investigated by Brosius 
and White (2004) who associated the depression with a sunspot plume detected in coordinated 
EUV observations with SOHO/CDS. This particular plume was further described in Brosius 
and Landi (2005). It should be noted that the above authors refer to this active region as AR 
8539. 

Ryabov and Shibasaki (2016) investigated this same sunspot in microwave, EUV, and 
X-ray  ranges  and argued  that the observed reduced brightness in microwaves,  dark lanes in 
EUV and X-ray images, regions of open field lines, and regions of outflows all overlap and are 
related. Their interpretation was that hot coronal plasma had been evacuated along the open 
field  lines leaving  a volume of cooler plasma that  is  seen as a depression in  the microwave 
observations.  Their  work  extends  previous  work  by  Ryabov  et  al.  (2015)  where  authors 
provided similar arguments to explain reduced microwave brightness at 17 GHz frequency in 
the peripheral areas of five other select sunspots. 

Our  goal  in  this  paper  is  to  model  the  sunspot  atmosphere  containing  such  low 
temperature plasma along open field lines to obtain an agreement with microwave observations. 
Plasma outflow along open field lines then would have significant observational consequences 
and would be a physical mechanism to include in justifying empirical models. 

While information on the atmosphere and magnetic fields of active regions is of interest 
in itself, our hypothesis is of additional significance since it implies that active regions contain 
open field regions that can act as sources of slow solar wind with observational signatures in 
microwaves. The rich surrounding coronal magnetic field structure of the AR 8535 sunspot is 
investigated in detail in Ryabov and Vrublevskis (2020) with evidence presented from solar 
wind modelling and measurements in favor of outflows. The reader is referred to Abbo et al. 
(2016) for a comprehensive review of observations and current theories regarding sources of 
slow solar wind.  

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present the observations followed 
by a description of our modelling of the sunspot atmosphere to match microwave data in Section 
3. We then draw conclusions and discuss the results in Section 4. 

2.  Observations 

NOAA active region 8535 was observed on 13 May 1999 with multiple instruments. The active 
region included a positive polarity sunspot that is the object of present investigation. During the 
observations the sunspot was located to the northwest of the disk center. Overview data from 
the MDI instrument (Scherrer et al., 1995) at 24:00 UT and the EIT instrument (Delaboudinière 
et al., 1995) at 19:06 UT (both aboard the SOHO satellite) are presented in Figure 1. 

In the left panel we show the white light image from the MDI instrument. We use it to 
mark the sunspot umbra and penumbra. The obtained contours are then overlaid for reference 
in panel (b) and in the following figures. Contours from the MDI white light data at 19:06 UT 
(not shown) were used in panel (c). 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
The middle panel displays the measured photospheric longitudinal magnetic field. The 
maximum value is 2760 G, which is sufficient for relevant gyroresonance harmonic layers to 
be present in the sunspot atmosphere. 

The  right  panel  contains  the  image  of  EUV  284  Å  observations  with  the  EIT.  Of 
particular  interest  is  the  dark  region  emanating  northward  from  the  sunspot  suggestive  of 
absence of hot coronal plasma. 

Figure 1 AR 8535 observed on 13 May 1999. (a) MDI white light image and (b) MDI photospheric 
longitudinal magnetic field measurements taken at 24:00 UT. (c) EUV 284 Å image from EIT at 19:06 
UT. Contours of the sunspot umbra and penumbra are overlaid in panels (b) and (c). 

Importantly this sunspot was also observed using the Very Large Array (VLA) radio 
telescopes as an interferometer between 20:00 and 24:00 UT. Observations at three frequencies 
– 4.535, 8.065, and 14.665 GHz – and in both the right circular and the left circular polarizations 
are  presented  in  Figure  2  where  the  microwave  brightness  temperature  is  plotted.  Since  the 
sunspot  is  of  positive  polarity  then  the  right  and  left  circular  polarizations  predominantly 
correspond to correspondingly the extraordinary and ordinary modes of microwave emission. 
With the VLA telescopes in the “D” configuration the spatial resolution (beam width) for the 
three frequencies is estimated at 15’’, 10’’, and 5’’ respectively. Note the different color bar 
scale  for  the  15  GHz  data.  The  R  mode  images  in  panels  (a-c)  are  clipped  and  the  actual 
measured  brightness  temperatures  reach  3.2,  3.3,  and  1.6  MK  correspondingly  (see  Section 
3.1.).  For  better  alignment  with  model  data,  which  are  based  on  MDI  magnetic  field 
measurements from 24:00 UT, the VLA data have been shifted 33.4’’ to the west and 2.0’’ to 
the south. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Brightness temperatures of AR 8535 measured on 13 May 1999 using VLA at three frequencies 
and in both the right (R) and left (L) circular polarizations. The dashed line in (d) shows the cross cut 
used in quantitative comparisons with model results. The cross in (d) marks the location that is further 
analyzed in the text where R mode brightness temperature larger in 8 GHz than in 5 GHz. Contours of 
the sunspot umbra and penumbra are overlaid in panels (b) and (c). 

3.  Modelling of the Microwave Observations 

3.1. MODEL SETUP 

From Figure 2 the following peculiar observational features that inform the proposed model 
can be noted: 

I.  The sunspot displays an irregular shape in the microwave data. Most clearly in the 8 
GHz R mode measurements three bright areas can be distinguished that can be traced 
to the 5 GHz data as well. The sunspot is particularly irregular in the 15 GHz R-mode 
data where a 1.6 MK bright spot exists to the north-east from the sunspot center while 
the brightness temperature is less than 0.3 MK in the rest of the sunspot; 

II.  A pronounced region of reduced brightness temperature can be observed in the northern 

III. 

part of the sunspot around (360’’, 400’’) in the 5 and 8 GHz R mode data; 
Four  areas  exist  where  the  sunspot  brightness  temperature  in  the  R  mode  in  8  GHz 
exceeds the brightness temperature in 5 GHz (blue in Figure 10a). Three of these areas 
correspond to the bright areas described as part of feature I above. The fourth area near 
(360’’,  396’’)  (location  marked  with  a  cross  in  Figure  2d)  is  within  the  reduced 
brightness temperature area that is feature II. 
We first focus on the three bright areas from features I and III. The higher brightness 
temperature at 8 GHz than at 5 GHz is unusual since in a typical sunspot the 5 GHz optically 
thick gyroresonance layers would lie higher in the atmosphere where there is higher electron 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
temperature than at the corresponding 8 GHz gyroresonance layers. As was already pointed out 
in the Introduction, one possible explanation as invoked by Gary and Hurford (1994) and more 
recently Tun, Gary and Georgoulis (2011) is that cool coronal loops overlay these areas. Since 
the  optical  depth  for  free-free  emission  by  a  given  cool  loop  plasma  volume  is  inversely 
proportional to the square of the frequency then 5 GHz emission from lower and hotter layers 
is absorbed more than the 8 GHz emission. However, it is then a special coincidence that these 
cool  loops  from  feature  III  are  overlaying  exactly  the  areas  from  feature  I  that  are  of 
significantly higher brightness temperatures than other areas of the sunspot. 

An alternative explanation adopted here is that in this particular case at the locations of 
the bright areas in feature I the plasma actually is not hotter at the higher 5 [GHz] gyroresonance 
layers  than  at  the  lower  8  GHz  gyroresonance  layers.  We  adopt  this  explanation  without 
explicitly establishing the cause for this temperature inversion. The image sizes of the bright 
areas  are  comparable  to  the  beam  widths  at  these  frequencies.  Thus  while  it  cannot  be 
determined with certainty, the locations of the bright areas in the images at different frequencies 
are consistent with an interpretation that each bright area represents a flux tube that is observed 
at different heights in different frequencies. Presumably then due to some process plasma is of 
increased electron temperature along three flux tubes (feature I) with greater temperature at the 
lower  heights  of  the  8  GHz  gyroresonance  layers  (feature  III).  Our  goal  is  to  model  the 
presumably unperturbed by this process sunspot atmosphere outside these flux tubes. 

Unusual  is  also  feature  II.  The  optical  depth  of  gyroresonance  emission  has  strong 
dependency on the angle between the magnetic field and the line of sight and approaches zero 
as  this  angle  is  decreased.  Thus  for  a  sunspot  with  symmetric  magnetic  field  a  decrease  in 
brightness temperature is expected closer to the disk center, which in our case is to the southeast 
from  the  sunspot  center.  The  opposite  is  observed  whereby  the  decreased  brightness 
temperature is to the northwest of the sunspot center. 

Inspired  by  the  EUV  observations  (Figure  1c),  similar  soft  X-ray  observations  (not 
shown), and previous work by Ryabov et al. (2015) and Ryabov and Shibasaki (2016), we pose 
the hypothesis that open magnetic field lines are present in the northern part of the sunspot. Due 
to  increased  plasma  transport  along  these  open  field  lines  one  could  then  expect  reduced 
amounts of hot coronal plasma in the corresponding atmosphere volume. 

To  model  such  a  case  we  constructed  a  model  atmosphere  volume  centered  on  our 
sunspot  at  (360’’,  382’’)  and  consisting  of  41x41x2401  rectangular  cuboid  voxels  with 
horizontal spacing of 0.002058 R (equivalent to 1.9638’’ or 1432 km) and vertical spacing of 
117 km (equivalent to 0.000168 R). In the vertical direction (Z-axis) the volume is along the 
line of sight. We aligned the X-axis with the heliocentric west direction and the Y-axis with the 
heliocentric north direction.  

3.2. MAGNETIC FIELD MODEL 

We employ the Potential Field Source Surface (PFSS) extrapolation of the measured surface 
magnetic field (Altschuler and Newkirk, 1969; Schatten et al., 1969) to specify the magnetic 
field at each voxel. 

PFSS  extrapolation  assumes  that  magnetic  field  is  completely  radial  at  a  “source 
surface”  at  some  radius  RSS  which  is  a  model  parameter  traditionally  set  at  RSS  =  2.5  R. 
However, other values of this parameter have been used to better match observations. Lee et al. 
(2011) obtained better agreement with observations with RSS ≈ 1.9 R and RSS ≈ 1.8 R for the 
minimum periods of cycles 22 and 23 respectively. More recently, Bale et al. (2019) used RSS 
as low as RSS = 1.2 R in order to reproduce some of the magnetic field features observed in 
situ  by  the  Parker  Solar  Probe  at  36  to  54  solar  radii  in  October-November,  2018.  A  lower 
source-surface increases the volume of the atmosphere with open field lines. With that in mind 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
below we focus on PFSS extrapolations and the resulting atmosphere models with RSS = 1.8 
R, exploring the RSS = 2.5 R case afterwards.  

Since the reduced brightness region (feature II) that we claim to be caused by open field 
lines  is  of  0.5  heliospheric  degree  characteristic  size  then  a  high-resolution  magnetic  field 
reconstruction is necessary to model and trace magnetic field lines in our model atmosphere 
volume. At the same time, a global model is necessary to accurately identify field lines as open 
or closed. We achieve these dual goals by following these steps: 

1.  We start with the precalculated 384 x 192 data point global surface radial magnetic 
field  map  from  LMSAL  (Schrijver  and  Derosa,  2003)  that  is  based  on  6-hour 
cadence observations at 00:04 UT on 14 May 1999. We interpolate the field to a 
finer 3874 x 1937 data point grid which is roughly double the spatial resolution of 
the 96-min. cadence full-disk MDI longitudinal magnetic field measurements. 
2.  We use such 96-min. cadence longitudinal field measurements from 24:00 UT on 
13 May 1999 (see Figure 1b) and calculate the radial magnetic field for 161 x161 
data points from the sun disk corresponding to the area between 242’’ and 557’’ 
along X-axis and between 264’’ and 579’’ along Y-axis. This high-resolution radial 
field is likewise interpolated to the grid from step 1 and is used as a substitution for 
the lower-resolution radial field data near our sunspot. 

3.  We  perform  PFSS  extrapolation  using  appropriately  modified  routines  from  the 
pfss  package  (Schrijver  and  Derosa,  2003)  in  SolarSoft.  Magnetic  field  is 
calculated on a grid in spherical coordinates with uniform π / 1937 = 0.00162 rad 
spacing in angular coordinates and the same 117 km (equivalent to 0.000168 R) 
spacing  in  the  radial  coordinate  for  a  volume  that  encompasses  the  model 
atmosphere volume. Crucially, the number of spherical harmonics used is kept large 
in order to ensure high-resolution magnetic field reconstruction. In particular, we 
implement  the  same  somewhat  arbitrary  limit  as  in  the  SolarSoft  pfss  package 
routines that the number of spherical harmonics ℓ used for reconstructing the field 
at a radial coordinate r (expressed in  R) is such that  rℓ < 106 and no larger than 
1937. 

4.  We  use  trilinear  interpolation  to  obtain  magnetic  field  values  for  the  model 
atmosphere  volume.  Here  it  is  assumed  that,  due  to  the  fine  coordinate  spacing 
compared to the curvature radius, for interpolation purposes each voxel in spherical 
coordinates can be approximated as rectilinear. 

5.  For the global field calculations, we use the default routines and the grid from the 
LMSAL precalculated fields only with extrapolations performed using our modified 
surface radial magnetic field map and with our chosen RSS values. 

Since the observed gyroresonance emission is strongly dependent on the angle between 
the  magnetic  field  and  the  observer  then  in  explaining  the  reduced  microwave  brightness 
temperature (feature II) one must differentiate between the effects of the proposed cool plasma 
volume and of any smaller scale field irregularities with field aligned closer to the line of view 
than expected for a regular sunspot. To address this issue in Figure 3b for the atmosphere model 
volume we have plotted  the magnetic field  magnitude at  a relevant height  of  1400 km  with 
contours (going inwards) for harmonics: 540 G for 5 GHz s=3; 810 G for 5 GHz s=2; 960 G 
for 8 GHz s=3; 1441 G for 8 GHz s=2. The contours are to a great extent symmetric suggesting 
that  magnetic  field  irregularities  are  not  present  to  a  sufficient  extent  for  the  magnetic  field 
structure alone to account for the decreased brightness temperature in the northern part of the 
sunspot. 

The general existence of open field lines can be demonstrated by tracing representative 
field lines from the surface in the global magnetic field model as shown in Figure 3a where the 
green  field  lines are open while the black are  closed.  In order to identify  - using  the  global 
model - voxels in our atmosphere model volume that lie on open magnetic field lines we first 

7 

 
 
choose a reference height in the atmosphere model volume where we would relate the high-
resolution atmosphere model volume field connectivity to the global model field connectivity. 
We choose 90 Mm  above the sunspot center. Then for each voxel  in  the atmosphere model 
volume we trace  a field  line starting from  that voxel  and determine the  pixel (if any) at  the 
reference height that the field line intersects. For the global model, we trace field lines from 
coordinates corresponding to each of the pixels at the reference height and determine if the field 
line is open or closed. Then all of the voxels that are magnetically connected to the reference 
height pixels in the atmosphere model volume that are in turn determined to lie on open field 
lines in the global model are considered to also lie on open field lines. 

For magnetic field line tracing purposes we used a model volume extended westward 
and northward to 81x81x2401 pixels in order to properly identify as open field lines that leave 
the nominal atmosphere model volume. 

Figure 3 (a) Indicative open and closed field lines from select points in AR 8535. (b) Magnetic field 
magnitude at the relevant height of 1400 km with contours for magnetic field magnitudes corresponding 
to gyroresonance harmonics (going inwards): 5 GHz s=3; 5 GHz s=2; 8 GHz s=3; 8 GHz s=2. 

Overall,  we  divide  all  of  the  atmosphere  model  volume  into  two  sub  volumes  or 
components. One – the open field component – corresponds to the voxels lying along open field 
lines. The other – the bulk component – corresponds to the rest of the volume. One can envision 
distinguishing  additional  components  in  order  to  model  the  flux  tubes  corresponding  to  the 
bright areas in the VLA data. The open field component is shown in Figures 4a and 4b from 
different viewpoints with respect to the atmosphere model volume, the Sun surface, and the 
sunspot. Note that Z-axis is not to scale in Figure 4a.  In Figure 4c borders of the open field 
component at  different  atmosphere model volume heights  along  Z-axis are shown. Near the 
surface of the Sun at Z = 40 Mm the border of the open field component (solid line in Figure 
4c)  is  in  the  northern  part  of  the  sunspot  atmosphere  and  is  remarkably  coincident  with  the 
region  of  reduced  brightness  temperature  (feature  II)  in  the  microwave  observations  (see 
Figures  2a  and  2b).  The  open  field  lines  initially  continue  northward  and  the  open  field 
component occupies only the northern part of the model volume at Z = 120 Mm (dash-dotted 
line  in  Figure  4c).  With  increasing  height  the  open  field  lines  spread  out  and  eventually  a 
significant portion continue southward across the model volume. At Z = 200 Mm the open field 
component occupies already half of the model volume cross-section. 

8 

 
 
 
 
Figure 4 (a)-(b) The model atmosphere volume shown from different viewpoints. Dark red - the open 
field component, yellow - Sun surface, black contours - the sunspot umbra and penumbra. Z-axis is not 
to scale in (a). (c) Borders of the open field sub volume at different atmosphere model volume heights 
along Z-axis: solid – 40 Mm; dash-dotted – 120 Mm; dashed – 200 Mm. Background: MDI white light 
image for reference. 

3.3. ATMOSPHERE MODEL 

Having established the two sub volumes, we then set atmosphere parameters – electron 
temperature  and  density  –  as  a  function  of  height  h  above  Sun  surface  for  each  of  the 
components. We use the model of Alissandrakis, Kundu, and Lantos (1980) that parametrizes 
the  atmosphere  above  the  chosen  transition  temperature  of  T0  =  100 000  K  using  three 
parameters: (1) height h0 for this transition temperature, (2) pressure at this transition point, and 
(3) conductive heat flux FC in the atmosphere above the transition point. For convenience in 
our  case  we  vary  the  related  quantity  -  electron  density  n0  -  instead  of  pressure.  Above  the 
transition height the temperature increase is assumed as that for constant conductive heat flux 
FC while for density we assume hydrostatic equilibrium and ignore variation of specific gravity 
with height. We allow the temperature to increase up to a maximum coronal temperature TCOR 
= 8 MK. The exact upper limit is not important since corona becomes optically thin at these 
heights.  

Quantitatively in cgs units we then have (Alissandrakis, Kundu, and Lantos, 1980): 

7
2⁄
𝑇(ℎ) =   [𝑇0

+

7

2

𝐹𝐶
𝐴

2
7

(ℎ − ℎ0)]

and 

(1) 

𝑛(ℎ) = 𝑛0 (

) exp [−

1

𝑡(ℎ)

(𝑡(ℎ)

5
2⁄ − 1)]  ,  

282
𝐹𝐶

 (2) 

where A = 1.1 × 10-6 erg cm-1 s-1 K-7/2 and t(h) = T(h) / T0 . 

At  heights  below  h0  we  assume  constant  temperature  of  5000  K  and  density  of  1011  

cm-3. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With magnetic field and plasma temperature and density defined in the model volume
 we calculate the expected brightness temperature at the three observational frequencies. 
We model two kinds of emission mechanisms – thermal gyroresonance and free-free emission 
(i.e. thermal bremsstrahlung). We adapted code from the FORWARD package (Gibson et al., 
2016)  in  SolarSoft.  The  opacity  κ  at  frequency  f  due  to  free-free  emission  is  calculated 
approximately according to the simplified formula (Dulk, 1985; Gelfreikh, 2004): 

𝜅 = 0.2

𝑛2
𝑇3/2(𝑓±𝑓𝐵|cos 𝜃|)2 , 

(3) 

where  fB  is  the  gyrofrequency  at  the  given  voxel  location  and  θ  is  the  angle  between  the 
magnetic field direction and the line of sight. The plus sign is for the ordinary mode, the minus 
– the extraordinary. From opacity the optical depth dτ due to a layer of geometrical depth ds 
can be calculated according to: 

dτ = κ ds 

(4) 

For thermal  gyroresonance, instead the optical depth due to  a gyroresonance layer is 
directly calculated for voxels where these layers are crossed. In the FORWARD package this 
is done using the approximations from Robinson and Melrose (1984). Effectively then within 
our  model  the  width  of  all  gyroresonance  layers  is  117  km.  We  should  also  note  that  we 
modified the FORWARD routines and for the magnetic field scale length estimate used the 
derivative along the line of sight of the magnetic field magnitude B rather than of the component 
of the field along the line of sight Bz: LB = B×|dB/dz|-1 instead of LB = Bz×|dBz/dz|-1.  

The  total  optical  depth  at  the  given  frequency  for  the  given  voxel  is  the  sum  of  the 
optical  depths  due  to  both  mechanisms.  Knowing  the  optical  depth,  the  radiative  transfer 
equation is integrated along each of the 41x41 vertical columns within the atmosphere model 
volume. Passing through each voxel some of the incident radiation with brightness temperature 
TB is absorbed while some with the voxel electron temperature Te is emitted depending on the 
optical thickness of the layer dτ and according to the formula: 

𝑇𝐵

′ = 𝑇𝐵𝑒−𝑑𝜏 + 𝑇𝑒(1 − 𝑒−𝑑𝜏) ,   

(5) 

where TB’ is the brightness temperature of the radiation exiting the given voxel. 

After calculating the brightness temperatures for each individual column we then apply 
Gaussian smoothing to account for beam width for a comparison with the observed data to be 
made. 

For  a  given  atmosphere  model  the fit  to  observations  is  evaluated by  calculating the 

χ2

pol, f for each polarization and frequency as well as the combined χ2 according to formulas: 

∑ (𝑇𝑝𝑜𝑙,𝑓

𝐵,𝑜𝑏𝑠(𝑖) − 𝑇𝑝𝑜𝑙,𝑓

𝑖

2
𝐵,𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙(𝑖))

1
𝐵,𝑜𝑏𝑠]

[𝑇𝑝𝑜𝑙,𝑓

𝑚𝑎𝑥

2
𝜒𝑝𝑜𝑙,𝑓

=

and 

𝜒2 = ∑

𝑝𝑜𝑙,𝑓

2
𝜒𝑝𝑜𝑙,𝑓

 ,  

(6) 

(7) 

where  “pol”  stands  for  either  the  R  or  the  L  polarization  and  “f”  for  one  of  the  three 
observational frequencies. The comparison and the summation is done for image points indexed 
with “i”. “TB, obs” refers to the brightness temperature image from observations while “TB, model” 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
–  to  the  corresponding  image  from  the  atmosphere  model.  For  the  given  frequency  and 
polarization “[ ]max” designates the maximum brightness temperature observed among all of the 
image points indexed with “i” and used in the comparison. 

Since the observed images include bright areas (feature I) that we do not model, then 
for the model fit  evaluation  instead of using the  complete image  we  choose  just  a  cross cut 
starting south of the sunspot, directed first northward towards the center of the sunspot, and 
then continuing to the north-west across the region of reduced brightness temperature (feature 
II). The cross cut is illustrated with a dashed line in Figure 2d. The southern part of the cross 
cut  would  correspond  to  the  sunspot  atmosphere  largely  unperturbed  by  the  open  field  line 
region while the northern part would be representative of it. At 5 GHz we chose a total of 46 
points spaced 1.9638’’ apart along the cross cut. To account for the higher spatial resolution in 
the 8 GHz and 15 GHz observations, the number of points are 69 and 138 with 1.309’’ and 
0.655’’ spacing respectively. 

In  the  model  of  Alissandrakis,  Kundu,  and  Lantos  (1980)  for  our  atmosphere  model 
volume  which  consists  of  two  components  a  total  of  six  parameters  would  be  necessary  to 
specify the temperature and density throughout the volume. However, we assume that the height 
h0 of the transition temperature is the same for both components set by horizontally uniform 
processes below this height rather than affected by the plasma outflow along the open field lines 
in the corona. This is a simplifying assumption since it ignores the Wilson depression. Within 
our model for the optimized parameters afterwards we checked the impact of varying the height 
h0 for the open field component and found the effect insignificant. 

Qualitatively, the open field component must be modelled with low temperature in order 
for  the  brightness  temperatures  to  be  lower  than  in  the  bulk  component.  This  necessitates 
smaller conductive heat flux values so that the temperature increase with height is more gradual 
and remains low in the heights effectively sampled by the gyroresonance mechanism. For the 
density  of  the  open  field  component,  both  low  and  high  values  can  potentially  produce  the 
desired effect and must be explored – lower values would lead to lower brightness temperatures 
through  absence  of  plasma  while  higher  values  can  be  beneficial  if  higher  brightness 
temperature emission from lower atmosphere layers is to be absorbed at higher layers. 

We initially calculated a total of 52 000 models. For the bulk component we explored 
10 different n0 values (in cm-3 log n0 between 7.4 and 11), 8 FC values (in erg cm-2 s-1 log FC 
between  5.4  and  8.2),  and  10  h0  values  between  800  km  and  2600  km.  For  the  open  field 
component: 13 different n0 values (in cm-3 log n0 between 7.4 and 12.2) and 5 FC values (in erg 
cm-2 s-1 log FC between 0.0 and 1.6). For these parameters the best agreement was obtained for 
log FC = 0.0 for the open field component which is effectively an isothermal plasma. In such 
case the exact value of the chosen transition temperature T0 gains additional significance and 
must be explored. 

We  thus  calculated  additional  864  models.  For  the  bulk  component  we  varied 
parameters  near  the  minimum  already  found  while  for  the  open  field  component  we  fixed  
log Fc = 0.0 and varied T0 between 8 different values 60 000 to 200 000 K. The explored and 
fitted parameter values are listed in Table 1. 

In Figure 5a the model atmosphere temperatures and densities with height for the bulk 
and open field components using the fitted parameters values are plotted while in Figures 5b 
and 5c respectively the temperature and density along the cross cut used in the fitting are shown. 
The cut is not along a straight line (see Figure 2d) and the location where the direction of the 
cut changes is shown with a vertical dashed line at Y = 384’’. Z-axis is not to scale. The contours 
in black represent (with decreasing height) gyroresonance layer locations for harmonics: 5 GHz 
s=3; 5 GHz s=2; 8 GHz s=3; 8 GHz s=2. 

11 

 
 
 
 
Component 
Bulk 

Open field 

Parameter 

Value range 

Fitted value 

log n0 (cm-3) 
log FC (erg cm-2 s-1) 
h0 (km) 
T0 (K) 

8.2; 8.6; 9.0 
6.2; 6.6; 7.0 
1200; 1400; 1600 
100 000 

8.6 
6.6 
1400 
100 000 (fixed) 

log n0 (cm-3) 
log FC (erg cm-2 s-1) 
h0 (km) 
T0 (K) 

9.0; 9.4; 9.8; 10.2 
0.0 
1400 
60 000; 80 000; …; 200 000  140 000 

9.4 
0.0 (fixed) 
1400 (fixed) 

Table 1 The parameter ranges and the fitted with respect to the observations values for the atmosphere 
model bulk and open field components. 

Figure 5 (a) Temperature and density with height for the bulk and open field components. (b) and (c) 
Temperature  and  density  respectively  along  the  cross  cut  used  in  the  fitting.  The  contours  in  black 
represent (with decreasing height) gyroresonance layer locations for harmonics: 5 GHz s=3; 5 GHz s=2; 
8 GHz s=3; 8 GHz s=2. Z-axis is not to scale. 

3.4. MODEL RESULTS 

Below  we  present  the  atmosphere  model  results  using  the  fitted  with  respect  to  the 
observations  values  from  Table  1.  Figures  6  and  7  show  the  model  brightness  temperature 
images  at  the  frequencies  and  polarizations  of  the  VLA  observations.  In  Figure  6  Gaussian 
smoothing to account for VLA beam widths has been applied and represents the data used in 
the quantitative comparison with the observations as described above. Figure 7 is the same data 
before smoothing useful for analysis below. 

Figure 8 presents in more detail the observed and model brightness temperatures along 
the cross cut shown in Figure 2d and used in the fitting. As in Figure 5, the vertical dashed line 
marks the location where the direction of the cut changes. The solid line corresponds to the 
observed temperatures, the dashed - to the atmosphere model. For comparison, also shown with 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a dotted line are the brightness temperatures in an atmosphere model where all of the volume 
is  parametrized  as  a  bulk  component  only  leading  to  a  completely  plane-parallel  single-
component model. The model brightness temperatures images for this single-component model 
are shown in Figure 9. 

We note the following regarding the model results in comparison to observations: 
1.  As can be seen in Figures 6a,b and 8a,b the model reproduces a decrease in brightness 
temperature in R mode at 5 and 8 GHz in the northern part of the sunspot. The location 
as  judged  from  the  images  before  smoothing  (Figure  7a,b)  is  in  agreement  with  the 
observations.  However,  in  the  smoothed  images  the  area  of  reduced  brightness 
temperature is less pronounced than observed (Figure 2a,b). 

2.  At the same image area in R mode at 15 GHz before smoothing the model (Figure 7c) 
leads to a relatively small increase of 7000 K compared to the single-component model 
(not  shown)  in  the  maximum  brightness  temperature.  The  increase  is  even  less  with 
smoothing  applied.  In  observations  (Figures  2c,  8c),  a  pronounced  peak  of  nearly  
TB, obs
R, 15 GHz = 100 000 K is observed in the northern part of the sunspot (Figure 8c) 
compared to TB, model
R, 15 GHz = 33 000 K in the model after smoothing. 

3.  The single-component model does not adequately reproduce the observations – there is 
no  brightness  temperature  decrease  in  the  northern  part  of  the  sunspot.  Instead,  as 
theoretically  expected,  brightness  temperature  is  lower  in  the  southeast  part  of  the 
sunspot towards the Sun disk center (Figure 9d) due to the smaller angle between the 
magnetic field and the line of sight there. This furthers supports the claim already made 
based on the magnetic field magnitude contours at 1400 km above the Sun surface in 
Figure 3b that any magnetic field irregularities are not present to a sufficient extent for 
the magnetic field structure alone to account for the decreased brightness temperature 
in the northern part of the sunspot within plane-parallel atmosphere models. 

4.  The  discrepancies  between  the  model  and  observed  brightness  temperatures  in  the 
southern part of the sunspot (see Figure 8c,d) suggest that even with the use of a cross 
cut  the  impact  of  the  bright  areas  on  perturbing  the  brightness  temperature  is  not 
completely avoided. 

13 

 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Model brightness temperature images at the three VLA observation frequencies and in both 
the  right  (R)  and  left  (L)  circular  polarizations.  Overlaid  are  contours  of  the  sunspot  umbra  and 
penumbra. 

14 

 
 
Figure 7 Model brightness temperature images at the three VLA observation frequencies and in both 
the  right  (R)  and  left  (L)  circular  polarizations  before  the  application  of  the  Gaussian  smoothing  to 
account for VLA beam widths. Overlaid are contours of the sunspot umbra and penumbra. 

15 

 
 
 
 
Figure 8 The observed (solid) and model (dashed) brightness temperatures at the three VLA observation 
frequencies and in both the right (R) and left (L) circular polarizations along the cross cut used in the 
fitting. Also shown (dotted) the brightness temperatures for a single-component plane-parallel model. 

16 

 
 
 
 
Figure 9 Model brightness temperature images at the three VLA observation frequencies and in both 
the right (R) and left (L) circular polarizations for a single-component plane-parallel model. Overlaid 
are contours of the sunspot umbra and penumbra. 

R, 5 GHz - TB

In the observational data in Section 2 we noted feature III – an area near (360’’, 396’’) 
(location marked with a cross in Figure 2d) within the broader reduced brightness temperature 
area in the northern part of the sunspot where the sunspot brightness temperature in the R mode 
in 8 GHz exceeds the brightness temperature in 5 GHz. In Figure 10 we show the difference 
TB
R, 8 GHz between the R mode brightness temperature in 8 GHz and in 5 GHz for 
data  from:  (a)  the  VLA  observations;  (b)  our  model  before  the  application  of  the  Gaussian 
smoothing  in  accordance  with  VLA  beam  widths;  and  (c)  our  model  after  smoothing. 
Qualitatively – before smoothing – our model reproduces the brightness temperature inversion 
at  this  location.  However,  as  with  the  overall  reduced  brightness  temperature  area  in  the 
northern part of the sunspot, the application of the Gaussian smoothing to account for the beam 
width diminishes the effect. 

17 

 
 
 
Figure 10 Images of the difference between the R mode brightness temperature in 8 GHz  and in 5 GHz 
for  data  from:  (a)  the  VLA  observations;  (b)  the  model  atmosphere  before  Gaussian  smoothing  in 
accordance  with  VLA  beam  widths;  and  (c)  the  model  atmosphere  after  smoothing.  Overlaid  are 
contours of the sunspot umbra and penumbra. 

For  this  same  location  (marked  with  a  cross  in  Figure  2d)  of  brightness  temperature 
inversion with frequency within the area of reduced brightness temperature, in Figure 11 we 
investigate in more detail the formation with height of the model brightness temperatures which 
then allows for establishing the physical reasoning for the model results and the obtained fitted 
atmosphere models. Shown in the panels with respect to height along Z-axis above the surface 
of the Sun are (from top): electron density; temperature; integrated from the surface according 
to Eq. 5 brightness temperatures in the VLA observation frequencies and polarizations; the free-
free  (dashed)  and  thermal  gyroresonance  (solid)  opacities  in  R  mode  at  the  three  VLA 
observation frequencies. The vertical dashed lines mark locations of gyroresonance layers as 
listed on the top. 

Focusing on the R mode as in Figure 10, it can be seen from Figure 11a,b that in our 
model at this location the open field component lies at heights between 8 and 27 Mm above the 
surface of the Sun. The relevant s = 2, 3, and 4 gyroresonance layers at 5 GHz sample the low 
temperature  open  field  component  leading  to  the  corresponding  brightness  temperature  of 
TB,  model
R, 5  GHz  = 140 000 K  at  this sunspot location  before image  smoothing.  At 8 GHz the  
s = 2 harmonic is at the height of 3 Mm and is optically thick within the hot bulk component. 
As a result, the brightness temperature reaches 1 MK. The optical thickness both of the higher 
gyroresonance  layers  lying  within  the  open  field  component  as  well  as  due  to  the  free-free 
emission in the dense plasma is insufficient to significantly decrease the brightness temperature 
with height and it remains at  TB, model
R, 8 GHz = 900 000 K before smoothing. At 15 GHz the 
model  brightness  temperature  is  set  by  the  free-free  emission  within  the  dense  open  field 
component leading to a steady increase with height to TB, model

R, 15 GHz = 12 000 K. 

18 

 
 
 
 
Figure  11  Model  (a)  electron  density,  (b)  electron  temperature,  (c)  integrated  from  the  surface 
brightness  temperatures  in  the  VLA  observation  frequencies  and  polarizations,  and  the  free-free 
(dashed)  and  thermal  gyroresonance  (solid)  opacities  in  R  mode  at  the  three  VLA  observation 
frequencies  (d)-(e)  with  height  along  Z-axis  above  the  surface  of  the  Sun  near  (360’’,  396’’)  at  the 
location of inverted with frequency brightness temperature. The vertical dashed lines mark locations of 
gyroresonance layers as listed on the top. 

The physical explanation for the existence of an optimal fit with respect to the electron 

density and temperature of the open field component is as follows: 

1.  The  model  brightness  temperature  decrease  in  the  northern  part  of  the  sunspot 
predominantly due to optically thick gyroresonance emission from gyroresonance layers 
within the open field component will be more pronounced the smaller is the electron 
temperature there. 

2.  Within the model of Alissandrakis, Kundu, and Lantos (1980) – Eqs. 1 and 2 above - an 
isothermal temperature profile leads to a density profile that is exponentially decreasing 
with height (see Figure 5a) where the exponent is inversely proportional to temperature. 
Thus, a lower temperature leads to a more rapidly decreasing density. 

3.  Further north of the previously investigated location, now within the area of reduced 
brightness temperature in penumbra – near (360’’, 400’’) - the open field component 

19 

 
 
 
starts  sufficiently  high  in  the  atmosphere  (see  Figures  4a,b  and  5b)  that  the  5  GHz  
s = 2 harmonic layer is located lower in height and within the hot bulk component. This 
leads  to  large  brightness  temperature  that  is  then  reduced  due  to  free-free  emission 
within the dense open field component. Since opacity increases with density then the 
density must be sufficiently large to significantly reduce the brightness temperature and 
for the reduced brightness area thus extend north beyond the sunspot umbra and include 
penumbra. 

4.  Since at 15 GHz the brightness temperature is determined by the free-free emission from 
the  dense  open  field  component,  then  larger  density  leads  to  an  increase  in  model 
brightness temperature at 15 GHz in the northern part of the sunspot. At even larger 
densities  such  bright  area  however  extends  northward  even  beyond  the  sunspot 
penumbra in disagreement with observations.  

The  above  listed  four  counteracting  effects  lead  to  an  optimal  fit  electron  temperature  and 
density for the open field component within our atmosphere model. 

As described, an increase in the open field density leads to an increase in the brightness 
temperature  at  15  GHz.  Thus,  within  our  model it  is  possible  to  qualitatively  reproduce  the 
observed (Figures 2c, 8c) brightness temperature increase in the northern part of the sunspot at 
15 GHz. Within the fitting framework used, however, the optimal fit taking into account all 
frequencies and polarizations is at a lower density with a peak in brightness temperature smaller 
R, 15 GHz = 100 000 K is observed compared to TB, model
than observed: TB, obs
R, 15 GHz = 33 000 K 
in the model after smoothing. 

As already was noted in the Introduction, Brosius and White (2004) and Brosius and 
Landi  (2005)  observed  a  plume  at  the  location  of  the  reduced  microwave  emission  for  this 
sunspot  in  coordinated  EUV  observations  with  SOHO/CDS.  For  the  plume  they  report 
temperatures between 1.6 × 105 and 5.0 × 105 K. In our model the best fit is obtained with a 
slightly smaller temperature of 1.4 ×  105 K. As for the density then  the previously reported 
value for the logarithm of the electron density is 9.4±0.2. In our model the density of the open 
field component exponentially decreases from log n0 = 9.4 with the characteristic values of log 
n0 ~ 9 at the relevant heights. 

The above analysis used a magnetic field model based on a PFSS extrapolation with  
RSS  =  1.8  R.  The  source-surface  was  purposefully  chosen  lower  than  the  standard  
RSS = 2.5 R since  it leads  to  an  increase in  the open field  line atmosphere  volume  and  the 
features of reduced brightness temperature in model images due to the open field component 
already are almost unresolved after smoothing. Below in Figure 12 we illustrate the results of 
using a magnetic field model based on a PFSS extrapolation with RSS = 2.5 R and the same 
fitted atmosphere parameters from Table 1. Figure 12a is the same as Figure 4c only for an RSS 
= 2.5 R extrapolation. Open fields are still present and at the same location within the sunspot 
only here at the lower heights (solid line) the volume is narrower than with RSS = 1.8 R. The 
open  field  lines  again  initially  continue  northward,  spread  out  with  increasing  height  and 
eventually  a  significant  portion  continue  southward  across  the  model  volume  (not  shown). 
However,  this  takes  place  at  larger  heights  as  is  expected  with  an  increased  source-surface 
height  

Figures 12b and 12c show the model brightness temperature images before and after 
smoothing respectively in R mode at 5 GHz with RSS = 2.5 R magnetic field extrapolation and 
with  the  same  fitted  atmosphere  parameter  values  as  for  RSS  =  1.8  R.  Qualitatively  the 
atmosphere model still produces reduced brightness temperature area in the northern part of the 
sunspot  at  the  correct  location  of  the  observational  feature  II.  However,  the  area  is  even 
narrower than in the RSS = 1.8 R model before smoothing (compare Figures 12b and 7a) and 
the effect is barely noticeable in the image after smoothing. 

20 

 
Figure 12 For the magnetic field extrapolation with  RSS = 2.5 R: (a) borders of the open field sub 
volume at different atmosphere model volume heights along Z-axis: solid – 40 Mm; dash-dotted – 120 
Mm; dashed – 200 Mm. Background: MDI white light image for reference; (b) and (c) model brightness 
temperature images in R mode at 5 GHz before and after smoothing to account for the VLA beam width. 
Overlaid are contours of the sunspot umbra and penumbra. 

4. 

Discussion and Conclusions  

We have constructed a model volume for the atmosphere above the sunspot of AR 8535. We 
performed high-resolution PFSS reconstruction to determine the magnetic field for the volume 
while  also  identifying  an  open  magnetic  field  line  sub  volume.  We  use  the  model  of 
Alissandrakis,  Kundu,  and  Lantos  (1980)  to  parametrize  the  atmospheres  of  the  two  sub 
volumes or components – the bulk component and the open field component. For the latter to 
achieve  better  agreement  with  observations  we  further  explored  the  subcase  of  isothermal 
plasma and varied the temperature parameter. The bulk component determines the overall size 
and temperature of the sunspot in microwaves. Varying the density and temperature of the open 
field  component  produces  opposing  effects  in  different  frequencies  and  sunspot  areas  thus 
allowing for optimization. We emphasize the following results and conclusions: 

1.  In our high resolution magnetic field modelling we identify an open field line volume 
spatially coincident with the location of reduced brightness temperature in the VLA 5 
and 8 GHz R mode images (compare Figures 4c and 12a with Figures 2a,b).  

2.  Our  model  that  includes  a  dense  low-temperature  isothermal  component  in  the  open 
field  line  sub  volume  qualitatively  accurately  reproduces  the  brightness  temperature 
decrease in the northern part of the sunspot in the VLA 5 and 8 GHz R mode images. 
3.  The reduced brightness temperature feature in the model images becomes significantly 
less distinct and is less pronounced in comparison to the observations after Gaussian 
smoothing  to  account  for  VLA  beam  width  has  been  applied  to  the  images.  This 
suggests that the atmosphere sub volume with dense low temperature plasma is broader 
than  modeled  and  was  the  motivation  for  performing  the  PFSS  magnetic  field 
extrapolation with the source-surface at RSS = 1.8 R. As stated in Section 3.2., while 
such  a  choice  is  not  unprecedented,  the  required  broader  low  temperature  plasma 
volume beyond that predicted by the standard RSS = 2.5 R modelling may be instead 
due to cold, dense or intermediate between the two components plasma along closed 
loops  neighboring  the  open  field  volume.  As  shown  in  Figure  12,  modelling  with  

21 

 
 
 
 
 
RSS = 2.5 R still reproduces the open field volume and reduced brightness temperature 
in the northern part of the sunspot though not as extensive as observed. 

4.  The sunspot microwave images contain three areas of increased brightness temperature 
that also correspond to areas of brightness temperature inversion with frequency. Due 
to this coincidence and likely magnetic linkage between gyroresonance layers for the 
different frequencies corresponding to these bright areas we postulate that physically 
these represent flux tubes with higher electron temperature at higher atmosphere layers. 
This is different from the cases of Gary and Hurford (1994) and most recently Tun, Gary 
and Georgoulis (2011) where brightness temperature inversion with frequency was due 
to cool overlaying loops. While here we do not further elaborate on the nature or source 
of  these  flux  tubes  such  an  investigation  is  warranted  including  a  relation,  possibly 
through magnetic reconnection, to the neighboring open fields that we establish. 

5.  The atmosphere model bulk component alone leads to brightness temperature images 
(Figure 9) that do not reproduce the brightness temperature decrease in the northern part 
of the sunspot. As is also suggested by the featureless magnetic field magnitude contours 
in  Figure  3b,  then  it  is  unlikely  that  the  brightness  temperature  decrease  is  due  to 
magnetic  field  irregularities  alone  and  is  not  reproducible  with  a  single-component 
plane-parallel atmosphere model. 

6.  We conclude that the at least for this particular sunspot of AR 8535 the low temperature 
plasma  that  had  already  been  observed  and  described  generally  as  a  sunspot  plume 
(Brosius and White, 2004) is also consistent with the alternative interpretation of low 
temperature plasma lying along open field lines. 
We did not attempt to model the areas of increased brightness temperature – feature I 
from Section 3.1. Hence, for the model fit evaluation we used cross cuts instead of the complete 
images. However, Figures 8c,d suggest that the impact of the bright  areas on perturbing the 
brightness  temperature  has  not  been  completely  avoided.  More  complete  accounting  for  the 
bright areas may allow for more accurate model fitting. 

The presented model is empirical and limited. While within the employed atmosphere 
model  both  bulk  and  open  field  components  are  in  hydrostatic  equilibrium,  no  equilibrium 
considerations between the two components are investigated. Likewise, no flows are modeled 
even though such may be of importance with open field lines. 

Our present investigation was limited to a single sunspot but we propose repeating the 
analysis for other sunspots with radio observations in several frequencies that have either been 
determined to contain a low temperature plasma volume (see Introduction) or that display dark 
lanes in EUV and X-ray images. 

The connection between open fields and the resulting plasma temperature and density 
decrease is of relevance for slow solar wind source research and suggests further investigation 
of plasma flows in the atmosphere of this sunspot and with respect to our presented atmosphere 
structure. 

Overall, we demonstrate that radio images of the sunspot of AR 8535 provide a wealth 
of information regarding its atmosphere which in our interpretation contains flux tubes with 
higher temperature higher in the atmosphere and open field lines with dense low temperature 
plasma. 

Acknowledgements  Magnetic  field  and  EUV  data  provided  by  the  SOHO  MDI  and  EIT  consortia. 
SOHO is a project of international cooperation between ESA and NASA. Karl G. Jansky Very Large 
Array (VLA) is a component of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, which is a facility of the 
National  Science  Foundation  operated  under  cooperative  agreement  by  Associated  Universities,  Inc. 
A.V.  is  supported  by  the  ERDF  Postdoctoral  research  aid  project  No.  1.1.1.2/16/1/001  research 
application No. 1.1.1.2/VIAA/1/16/079 «Understanding Solar Magnetic Atmosphere» (USMA). A.V. 
and B.I.R. are thankful to the Ventspils City Council for support. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
References  

Abbo, L., Ofman, L., Antiochos, S.K., Hansteen, V.H., Harra, L., Ko, Y.-K., Lapenta, G., Li, 
B., Riley, P., Strachan, L, von Steiger, R., Wang, Y.-M.: 2016, Space Sci. Rev. 201, 55 

Alissandrakis, C.E., Kundu, M.R.: 1982, Astrophys. J. 253, L49 
Alissandrakis, C.E., Kundu, M.R., Lantos, P.: 1980, Astron. Astrophys. 82, 30 
Alissandrakis, C.E., Bogod, V.M., Kaltman, T.I., Patsourakos, S., Peterova, N.G.: 2019, Solar 

Phys. 294, 23 

Altschuler, M.D., Newkirk, G.: 1969, Solar Phys. 9, 131 
Bale, S.D., Badman, S.T., Bonnell, J.W., Bowen, T.A., Burgess, D., Case, A.W., Cattell, 

C.A., Chandran, B.D.G., Chaston, C.C., Chen, C.H.K., Drake, J.F., Dudok de Wit, T., 
Eastwood, J.P., Ergun, R.E., Farrell, W.M., Fong, C., Goetz, K., Goldstein, M., 
Goodrich, K.A., Harvey, P.R., Horbury, T.S., Howes, G.G., Kasper, J.C., Kellogg, 
P.J., Klimchuk, J.A., Korreck, K.E., Krasnoselskikh, V.V., Krucker, S., Laker, R., 
Larson, D.E., MacDowall, R.J., Maksimovic, M., Malaspina, D.M., Martinez-
Oliveros, J., McComas, D.J., Meyer-Vernet, N., Moncuquet, M., Mozer, F.S., Phan, 
T.D., Pulupa, M., Raouafi, N.E., Salem, C., Stansby, D., Stevens, M., Szabo, A., Velli, 
M., Woolley, T., Wygant, J.R.: 2019, Nature, 576, 237 

Bezrukov, D.A., Ryabov, B.I., Shibasaki, K.: 2012, Baltic Astronomy 21, 509 
Bezrukov, D., Ryabov, B., Peterova, N., Topchilo, N.: 2011, Latv. J. Phys. Tech. Sci. 48, 56 
Brosius, J.W., Landi, E.: 2005, Astrophys. J. 632, 1196 
Brosius, J.W., White, S.M.: 2004, Astrophys. J. 601, 546 
Brosius, J.W., Landi, E., Cook, J.W., Newmark, J.S., Gopalswamy, N, Lara, A.: 2002, 

Astrophys. J. 574, 453 

Delaboudinière. J.-P., Artzner, G.E., Brunaud, J., Gabriel, A.H., Hochedez, J.F., Millier, F., 

Song, X.Y., Au, B., Dere, K.P., Howard, R.A., Kreplin, R., Michels, D.J., Moses, J.D., 
Defise, J.M., Jamar, C., Rochus, P., Chauvineau, J.P., Marioge, J.P., Catura, R.C., 
Lemen, J.R., Shing, L., Stern, R.A., Gurman, J.B., Neupert, W.M., Maucherat, A., 
Clette, F., Cugnon, P., Van Dessel, E.L.: 1995, Solar Phys., 162, 291 

Dulk, G.A.: 1985, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 23, 169 
Gary, D.E, Hurford, G.J.: 1994, Astrophys. J. 420, 903 
Gary, D.E., Keller, C.U. (eds.): 2004, Solar and Space Weather Radiophysics – Current 

Status and Future Developments, Kluwer, Dordrecht 

Gelfreikh, G.B.: 2004, in Gary, D.E., Keller, C.U. (eds.): Solar and Space Weather 

Radiophysics – Current Status and Future Developments, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 115 

Gibson, S.E., Kucera, T.A., White, S.A., Dove, J.B., Fan, Y., Forland, B.C., Rachmeler, L.A., 
Downs, C., Reeves, C.: 2016, Frontiers in Astronomy and Space Sciences, 3, 8 

Kakinuma, T., Swarup, G.: 1962, Astrophys. J. 136, 975 
Lee, C.O., Luhmann, J.G., Hoeksema, J.T., Sun, X., Arge, C.N., de Pater, I.: 2011, Solar 

Phys. 269, 367 

Lee, J.: 2007, Space Sci. Rev. 133, 73 
Lee, J., McClymont, A.N., Mikić, White, S.M., Kundu, M.R.: 1998, Astrophys. J. 501, 853 
Loukitcheva, M.A., Iwai, K., Solanki, S.K., White, S.M., Shimojo, M.: 2017, Astrophys. J. 

850, 35 

Mok, Y., Mikić, Z., Lionello, R., Downs, C., Linker, J.A.: 2016, Astrophys. J. 817, 15 
Nindos, A., Alissandrakis, C.E., Gelfreikh, G.B., Kundu, M.R., Dere, K.P., Korzhavin, A.N., 

Bogod, V.M.: 1996, Solar Phys. 166, 55 

Nita, G.M., Nicholeen, M.V., Klimchuk, J.A., Loukitcheva, M.A., Gary, D.E., Kuznetsov, 

A.A., Fleishman, G.D.: 2018, Astrophys. J. 853, 66 
Robinson, P.A., Melrose, D.B.: 1984, Aust. J. Phys. 37, 675 
Ryabov, B.I., Shibasaki, K.: 2016, Baltic Astronomy 25, 225 

23 

 
 
Ryabov, B.I., Vrublevskis, A.: 2020, Solar Phys. 295, 4  
Ryabov, B.I, Gary, D.E., Peterova, N.G., Shibasaki, K., Topchilo, N.A.: 2015, Solar Phys. 

290, 21 

Schatten, K.H., Wilcox, J.M., Ness, N.F.: 1969, Solar Phys. 6, 442 
Scherrer, P.H., Bogart, R.S., Bush, R.I., Hoeksema, J.T., Kosovichev, A.G., Schou, J., 

Rosenberg, W., Springer, L., Tarbell, T.D., Title, A., Wolfson, C.J., Zayer, I., MDI 
Engineering Team: 1995, Solar Phys. 162, 129 

Schrijver, C.J., DeRosa, M.L.: 2003, Solar Phys. 212, 165 
Strong, K.T., Alissandrakis, C.E., Kundu, M.R.: 1984, Astrophys. J. 277, 865 
Stupishin, A.G., Kaltmann, T.I., Bogod, V.M., Yasnov, L.V.: 2018, Solar Phys. 293, 13 
Tun, S.D., Gary, D.E., Georgoulis, M.K.: 2011, Astrophys. J. 728, 1 
Vourlidas, A., Bastian, T.S., Aschwanden, M.J.: 1997, Astrophys. J. 489, 403 
White, S.M., Kundu, M.R., Gopalswamy, N.: 1991, Astrophys. J. 366, L43 
Zheleznyakov, V.V.: 1962, Sov. Astron. 6, 3 
Zlotnik, E.Y., Kundu, M.R., White, S.M.: 1996, Radiophys. Quantum Electron. 39, 255 
Zlotnik, E.Y., White, S.M., Kundu, M.R.: 1998, in Alissandrakis, C.E., Schmieder, B. (eds.) 
Second Advances in Solar Physics Euroconference: Three-Dimensional Structure of 
Solar Active Regions, ASP Conf. Series, vol. 155, 135  

24 

 
 
 
Figure captions 

Figure 1 AR 8535 observed on 13 May 1999. (a) MDI white light image and (b) MDI photospheric 
longitudinal magnetic field measurements taken at 24:00 UT. (c) EUV 284 Å image from EIT at 19:06 
UT. Contours of the sunspot umbra and penumbra are overlaid in panels (b) and (c). 

Figure 2 Brightness temperatures of AR 8535 measured on 13 May 1999 using VLA at three frequencies 
and in both the right (R) and left (L) circular polarizations. The dashed line in (d) shows the cross cut 
used in quantitative comparisons with model results. The cross in (d) marks the location that is further 
analyzed in the text where R mode brightness temperature larger in 8 GHz than in 5 GHz. Contours of 
the sunspot umbra and penumbra are overlaid in panels (b) and (c). 

Figure 3 (a) Indicative open and closed field lines from select points in AR 8535. (b) Magnetic field 
magnitude at the relevant height of 1400 km with contours for magnetic field magnitudes corresponding 
to gyroresonance harmonics (going inwards): 5 GHz s=3; 5 GHz s=2; 8 GHz s=3; 8 GHz s=2. 

Figure 4 (a)-(b) The model atmosphere volume shown from different viewpoints. Dark red - the open 
field component, yellow - Sun surface, black contours - the sunspot umbra and penumbra. Z-axis is not 
to scale in (a). (c) Borders of the open field sub volume at different atmosphere model volume heights 
along Z-axis: solid – 40 Mm; dash-dotted – 120 Mm; dashed – 200 Mm. Background: MDI white light 
image for reference. 

Figure 5 (a) Temperature and density with height for the bulk and open field components. (b) and (c) 
Temperature  and  density  respectively  along  the  cross  cut  used  in  the  fitting.  The  contours  in  black 
represent (with decreasing height) gyroresonance layer locations for harmonics: 5 GHz s=3; 5 GHz s=2; 
8 GHz s=3; 8 GHz s=2. Z-axis is not to scale. 

Figure 6 Model brightness temperature images at the three VLA observation frequencies and in both 
the  right  (R)  and  left  (L)  circular  polarizations.  Overlaid  are  contours  of  the  sunspot  umbra  and 
penumbra. 

Figure 7 Model brightness temperature images at the three VLA observation frequencies and in both 
the  right  (R)  and  left  (L)  circular  polarizations  before  the  application  of  the  Gaussian  smoothing  to 
account for VLA beam widths. Overlaid are contours of the sunspot umbra and penumbra. 

Figure 8 The observed (solid) and model (dashed) brightness temperatures at the three VLA observation 
frequencies and in both the right (R) and left (L) circular polarizations along the cross cut used in the 
fitting. Also shown (dotted) the brightness temperatures for a single-component plane-parallel model. 

Figure 9 Model brightness temperature images at the three VLA observation frequencies and in both 
the right (R) and left (L) circular polarizations for a single-component plane-parallel model. Overlaid 
are contours of the sunspot umbra and penumbra. 

Figure 10 Images of the difference between the R mode brightness temperature in 8 GHz  and in 5 GHz 
for  data  from:  (a)  the  VLA  observations;  (b)  the  model  atmosphere  before  Gaussian  smoothing  in 
accordance  with  VLA  beam  widths;  and  (c)  the  model  atmosphere  after  smoothing.  Overlaid  are 
contours of the sunspot umbra and penumbra. 

Figure  11  Model  (a)  electron  density,  (b)  electron  temperature,  (c)  integrated  from  the  surface 
brightness  temperatures  in  the  VLA  observation  frequencies  and  polarizations,  and  the  free-free 
(dashed)  and  thermal  gyroresonance  (solid)  opacities  in  R  mode  at  the  three  VLA  observation 
frequencies  (d)-(e)  with  height  along  Z-axis  above  the  surface  of  the  Sun  near  (360’’,  396’’)  at  the 
location of inverted with frequency brightness temperature. The vertical dashed lines mark locations of 
gyroresonance layers as listed on the top. 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12 For the magnetic field extrapolation with  RSS = 2.5 R: (a) borders of the open field sub 
volume at different atmosphere model volume heights along Z-axis: solid – 40 Mm; dash-dotted – 120 
Mm; dashed – 200 Mm. Background: MDI white light image for reference; (b) and (c) model brightness 
temperature images in R mode at 5 GHz before and after smoothing to account for the VLA beam width. 
Overlaid are contours of the sunspot umbra and penumbra. 

26 

 
 
