A ﬁnal focus system for injection into a laser plasma accelerator at the ARES linac

S. Yamin∗
DESY, Notkestrasse 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany. Also at University of Hamburg, 20148, Hamburg, Germany

R. Assmann, F. Burkart, A. Ferran Pousa, F. Lemery, B. Marchetti, and E. Panofski
DESY, Notkestrasse 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany

W. Hillert
University of Hamburg, 20148, Hamburg, Germany
(Dated: February 18, 2021)

ARES (Accelerator Research Experiment at SINBAD) is a linear accelerator at the SINBAD
(Short INnovative Bunches and Accelerators at DESY) facility at DESY. ARES was designed to
combine reproducible beams from conventional RF-based accelerator technology with novel but
still experimental acceleration techniques. It aims to produce high brightness ultra-short electron
bunches in the range of sub fs to few fs, at a beam energy of 100-150 MeV, suitable for injection into
novel acceleration experiments like Dielectric Laser Acceleration (DLA) and Laser driven Plasma
Acceleration (LPA). This paper reports the conceptual design and simulations of a ﬁnal focus system
for injecting into a LPA experiment at ARES, including permanent magnetic quadrupoles (PMQ),
suﬃcient longitudinal space for collinear laser and electron transport, space for required diagnostics
and a LPA setup. Space-charge eﬀects play a signiﬁcant role and are included. Simulation results
on the focusing of the ARES electron bunches into and their transport through the laser-driven
plasma are presented. The eﬀects of several errors have been simulated and are reported.

I.

INTRODUCTION

SINBAD acronym for Short INnovative Bunches and
Accelerators at DESY, is an accelerator R&D facility at
DESY on its Hamburg site [1]. It includes research in the
ﬁeld of ultrashort electron bunches and will host multi-
ple independent experiments [2] on laser driven advanced
high gradient acceleration techniques such as Dielectric
Laser Acceleration (DLA) [3], Laser Plasma Accelera-
tion (LPA) [4] and THz-driven acceleration in the AX-
SIS project [5]. The ARES (Accelerator Research Ex-
periment at SINBAD) linear accelerator (linac) at SIN-
BAD is based on conventional S-band technology with
a photo-injector gun [6][7].
It is designed to provide
ultrashort high brightness electron beams for injection
into novel accelerators. The FWHM length of electron
bunches is expected to reach a few fs and potentially sub
fs values. The electron gun relies on a conventional ra-
dio frequency (RF) accelerator technology for producing
the electron bunches. This has several advantages. The
ARES linac on one hand will allow advancing R&D on
the “conventional” production of high brightness ultra-
short electron bunches. On the other hand, the well-
characterized bunches can be used to explore compact
novel accelerators, characterized by accelerating ﬁelds
with short wavelengths and therefore require the injec-
tion of short “acceleration buckets”. The ARES bunches
have been designed to constitute excellent probes to mea-
sure the energy gain and the quality of the acceleration.
At ARES, the electron bunches can be compressed ei-
ther via velocity bunching or by using a magnetic bunch

∗ sumera.yamin@desy.de

compressor or by using a hybrid scheme to achieve the de-
sired bunch lengths in the range of sub fs to few fs [8][9].
The characterization of such ultra-short bunches is a re-
search ﬁeld in itself and ARES will also serve as a test
bench for novel diagnostic devices in the low to medium
charge range of up to 30 pC and with sub-fs to few fs
bunch length [10][11]. All these features contribute in
making ARES a promising candidate where LPA exper-
iments with external injection could be performed. This
potential was explored as a part of a PhD project.

LPAs can provide an accelerating gradient in the range
of ≈100 GV/m, which is several orders of magnitude
higher than what can be achieved with conventional RF
technology. This reduces the size of the acceleration
channel from meters to millimeters, to achieve GeV en-
ergy range, and hence oﬀers the possibility of compact
and cost-eﬀective accelerators.
In a LPA, strong laser
pulses propagating in a plasma generate charge separa-
tion through the excitation of wakeﬁelds, inducing strong
electric ﬁelds. Since the LPA concept was ﬁrst introduced
[12], it has been a subject of extensive studies with sig-
niﬁcant progress in recent years [13][14]. Many impor-
tant milestones have been demonstrated such as achiev-
ing GeV energies in only cm scale [15]. Today’s focus
for these devices is to reach beam stability, similar to
established RF accelerators, by deploying feedback con-
trol systems. Recently another milestone has been suc-
cessfully demonstrated at DESY with 24 hours of stable
operation of laser plasma acceleration [16]. The external
injection LPA experiment studied for ARES, investigated
a possible step towards usable LPA from a combination
of reproducible conventional RF-based accelerator tech-
nology with the high gradient ﬁelds from plasma wake-
ﬁelds [17]. The RF-based technology allows for a precise

1
2
0
2

b
e
F
7
1

]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
8
7
8
8
0
.
2
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
manipulation of the phase space of the electron bunches
before entering the plasma hence, providing independent
control and quality adjustments as well as optimization of
the plasma experiment. The beam quality in novel accel-
erators depends on the detailed parameters and quality of
the injected beam e.g. bunch shape, bunch length, emit-
tance, arrival time stability and beam energy. ARES pro-
vides the option of widely tunable working points (WP)
and bunch shapes for external injection LPA accelerator
R&D. External injection of electron beam into an LPA,
however, has its own technical challenges [7]. The syn-
chronization of laser and electron beam can be the most
crucial aspect of this experiment.

The present status of ARES is shortly summarized. Its
5 MeV RF gun and linac has been commissioned [18] and
ﬁrst electrons have been produced at the end of 2019 [19].
The installation of the subsequent experimental chamber
and diagnostic beam line is ﬁnished [19]. The prepara-
tions for a DLA experiment are ongoing and simulation
studies have been performed for a potential LPA exper-
iment [20]. In this paper, we present design studies for
a ﬁnal focus system that could fulﬁll the requirements of
external injection of ARES bunches into a LPA setup.
In the following sections, the layout of the ARES linac
and the experimental area for the simulated LPA ex-
periment are described, followed by the requirements for
beam matching into the plasma cell. The results for de-
sign and optimization of the ﬁnal focus system and for
electron beam tracking through the lattice are presented.
Tolerance studies for the ﬁnal focus system are presented
and discussed.

II. LAYOUT OF ARES LINAC

A schematic overview of the ARES linac with a po-
tential LPA acceleration experiment is shown in Fig. 1.
The main beam parameters are summarized in Table 1.
The ARES linac consists of a 5 MeV RF gun followed
by two travelling wave structures (TWS) with space re-
served for a third travelling wave structure for a possible
future energy upgrade [7]. This space will be temporar-
ily used as ﬁrst experimental area (EA). This is followed
by a matching section into a magnetic bunch compressor
(BC). At the exit of the BC the electron bunches have a
duration of a few fs or below [21]. The BC is followed by
a drift space that provides space for the laser incoupling.
Further downstream, we have a high energy diagnostic
beamline followed by the matching optics for the second
experimental area. This area could host LPA experi-
ment and could combine the electron beam from ARES
with high power laser pulses from the high repetition
high power laser KALDERA currently under construc-
tion at DESY [22]. The matching scheme is designed for
the low charge WP of the ARES linac that will provide
0.8 pC electron bunches with smallest arrival time jitter
of about ≈10 fs rms. It uses a pure magnetic compres-
sion scheme and is designed for ultimately sub fs bunch

2

TABLE I. Parameters for the RF systems and the electron
beam at the ARES linac

Parameter
RF Frequency
Repetition rate
Beam Energy
Upgraded beam energy
Bunch Charge
Bunch Length
Arrival Time Jitter stability

Values
2.998 GHz
50 Hz
100 MeV (155 MeV on crest)
150 MeV (230 MeV on crest)
0.5-30 pC
sub to few fs
10fs to few tens of fs

length. The WP has been discussed in detail in [23]. The
electron bunches from this setup provide a time resolu-
tion in sub fs range and can serve as probe particles for
plasma wakeﬁelds or ﬁelds in dielectric structures.

In this paper, we present the results for the higher
charge 10 pC WP of the ARES linac. It features a longer
bunch length of 10 fs FWHM or 4.3 fs rms. The peak
current in this case is 1 kA, approaching the requirements
of several use cases [24].
It is noted that this WP is
similar to a WP studied at the BELLA facility in LBNL
for which a broad energy spread electron bunch of ≈ 100-
200 MeV energy, 6.25 pC charge and 3.3 fs rms length
was used for injection into a second stage LPA [25].

III. TECHNICAL CONSTRAINTS FOR THE
MATCHING BEAM LINE

In the external injection LPA experiment, the laser
beam and the electron beam are collinearly injected into
the plasma channel. The collinear electron and laser
beam lines, along with required beam diagnostic ele-
ments, introduce strict constraints on both the transverse
and longitudinal dimensions for the design of the ﬁnal fo-
cusing system. The system must be compact and must
provide gradients high enough to tightly focus the beam
into the plasma cell. Those constraints led to choosing a
PMQ triplet as ﬁnal focusing system.

The key parameters for the laser system are presented
in table II. The schematic of the laser beam at its waist
and the parameter deﬁnitions are shown in Fig. 2. For
this study a Gaussian laser beam is assumed. Since the
divergence of the laser beam depends on the beam waist
wo, the design of the laser beamline and hence in turn the
space constraints for our ﬁnal focus system are strongly
dependent on the laser parameters.

TABLE II. Key parameters for the Laser setup

Parameters
Wavelength λo
Vector potential ao
Beam waist wo
Pulse Energy (E)
Peak Power (P)
Pulse length (∆tFWHM)

Units Values

µm
1.4
µm
J

0.8

42.4
3

TW ∼100

fs

30

3

FIG. 1. Schematic of ARES

The technical design considerations for the PMQ
triplet have been discussed in detail in [26]. The required
mirror is housed in a beam pipe having diameter of 10 cm.
The beam pipe size is chosen to accommodate the mirror
dimensions required for focusing the 100 TW peak power
laser beam. A hole in the mirror allows the electron beam
transmission and, collinearly to the laser beam, the elec-
tron beam enters the plasma cell. At the focal point,
the laser beam has a design waist of 42.4 µm. For the
external injection experiment, the laser beam also has to
pass through the PMQ triplet to reach the plasma cell.
Hence the free aperture, deﬁned by the distance of the
magnetic pole tips of the PMQ should be bigger than the
laser spot size at the position of quadrupoles. Consider-
ing the laser beam evolution from Fig. 2, the aperture
of PMQ is chosen to be 10 mm. The laser parameters
and the laser beam line design dictate the limits for the
physical dimensions of the PMQ inner and outer radii,
the length of the total triplet and also set constraints to
the positions of the focusing magnet. The distance be-
tween the exit of the BC and the entrance of the plasma
cell is ≈3.3 m to account for the space required for di-
agnostics, the vacuum system and for focusing the laser
beam. Since the divergence of the laser beam depends on
the beam waist wo, the design of the laser beamline and
hence in turn space constraints for our ﬁnal focus system
have a strong dependence on the laser parameters.

IV. MATCHING CRITERION

For preserving the beam emittance, it is required to
match the externally injected electron beam to the fo-
cusing ﬁelds of the plasma accelerator. The matching

FIG. 2. Evolution of the laser beam along the direction of
beam propagation. The origin here is set at the focal point of
the laser beam which is the entrance position of the plasma
cell. A Gaussian laser beam is assumed.

conditions depend on the focusing strength of the plasma
channel, essentially given by the plasma density [27]. For
the LPA experiment studied, the matched Twiss param-
eter is βx,y ≈ 1 mm in case of a step function of the longi-
tudinal plasma density proﬁle. The density of the plasma
channel is 1017 cm−3. This requirement was relaxed by
proper shaping of the longitudinal plasma density proﬁle
(upramps) as discussed in [28] and [29]. The longitudinal
plasma density proﬁle given by Eq. 1 was implemented to

match the electron beam into the plasma focusing ﬁeld
and thus to control the emittance growth of the beam in
the plasma section:

np,r =

np,o

(cid:16)

1 + z
Lr

(cid:17)2

(1)

where np,r is the plasma density, np,o is the density of
the plateau, z is the distance to the plateau and Lr is the
length parameter which determines how fast the density
decreases with z. Such a ramp has been found to have
good performance as illustrated in [28]. The optimiza-
tion of the plasma ramps was done via FBPIC simula-
tion scans in which diﬀerent values for Lr were simulated
and optimized. For the present case, Lr = 2 mm was
used. The calculation of the necessary Twiss parameters
at the plasma entrance were obtained by back-tracking
a matched beam at the plateau entrance, through the
ramp. The back-tracking in this case implies that the
beam was propagated through a downramp identical to
the upramp. The approach was to calculate the beta
function needed at the beginning of the plateau using the
focusing ﬁelds there. Then a Gaussian bunch was gen-
erated with this beta and alpha = 0 and then tracked,
including the laser driver, through a plasma down ramp
which has the same shape as the up ramp. This is equiv-
alent to back propagating the bunch through the plasma.
A similar approach has been used in [30]. The required
matched twiss parameters for a laser spot size of 40 µm
are then β x,y = 11.8 cm and α x,y = 4.4. Through-
out the article, the entrance of plasma cell refers to the
start of plasma ramps for which this matching criterion
is deﬁned.

V. DESIGN STUDY FOR THE MATCHING
BEAMLINE

The beam dynamics simulations for the matching
beamline after the BC have been performed using Elegant
(without space charge) [31] and then ASTRA [32] to opti-
mize and include the eﬀects of 3D space charge (SC). The
optimization parameters for the PMQ triplet are lengths,
strengths and distances between the quadrupoles. Based
on the laser beamline layout, as shown in Fig. 2, the con-
straints for the ﬁnal focus system were the quadrupole
aperture, the outer diameter corresponding to size of the
quadrupoles and the focal length. The focal length must
take into account space for diagnostic screens allowing
laser and electron beam proﬁling between the last mag-
net of the triplet and the plasma cell. We set the origin
of our simulations at the exit of the last magnet of the
BC and the beamline is simulated from this point until
the entrance of the plasma cell corresponding to the start
of plasma upramp as deﬁned by the matching criterion
in Section IV.

The key parameters for the working points at the BC
exit and at the entrance of the plasma cell are summa-

4

rized in Table III. The full beam distribution is included
in the calculation of statistical parameters. The three
quadrupoles of the triplet have lengths of 0.055 m, 0.033
m and 0.040 m with strengths of 50 m-2, -180 m-2 and
130 m-2 respectively. The distance between the last mag-
net and the plasma cell is 0.25 m which is suﬃcient to
place screens for laser and electron beam proﬁling. Fig. 3
shows the evolution of the electron beam parameters over
the drift space and through the PMQ triplet from the
BC to the plasma cell. The transverse and longitudinal
phase spaces of the electron beam at the BC exit and at
the entrance of plasma cell are shown in Fig. 4. From
Fig. 3 and 4 it is evident that at the start of plasma
ramp, the electron beam is well matched with preserved
transverse emittance and bunch length shorter than the
accelerating wavelength in the plasma. The transverse
phase space distributions show that the beam is sym-
metric in both planes as required by LPA. The PMQ
triplet also ensures to maintain the current proﬁle from
the longitudinal phase space with ≈1 kA of peak current.
Detailed simulation studies on beam tracking in the ex-
perimental beamline through the PMQ triplet show that
the optimized settings for the PMQ triplet provide a good
quality working point. The electron beam can be trans-
ported and matched into the plasma cell with the PMQ
triplet while preserving the beam quality. The trans-
verse and longitudinal phase space distributions show
good beam proﬁles for injecting into LPA. The symmet-
ric beam distributions with a peak current of 1 kA would
be suﬃcient for eﬃcient beam loading in the plasma cell.

TABLE III. Bunch Parameters at the BC exit (I) and of
matched beam at the entrance of plasma cell (II)

I
150
10

II
150
10

Parameters
Energy (MeV)
Bunch Charge (pC)
Bunch length FWHM/rms (fs) 11.8/4.38 11.9/4.30
εx (π.mm.mrad)
εy (π.mm.mrad)
βx (cm)
βy (cm)
αx
αy
σx
σy
RMS energy spread (%)
Peak Current (kA)

0.59
0.29
15.3e2
47.22e2
-1.7
-1.7
175.8
124.9
0.2
1

0.57
0.31
11.8
11.9
4.5
4.4
15.2
11.2
0.16
1

VI. ERROR ANALYSIS OF THE PMQ TRIPLET
AND THE INCOMING BEAM

The experimental conditions may vary from the ideal
design parameters discussed in the previous sections due
to temporal and spatial jitter in the beam. Moreover,
there are additional sources of errors in the quadrupoles,
arising during the manufacturing and installation of the

5

FIG. 3. Evolution of the electron beam parameters along the beam line from the exit of the BC until the entrance of the
plasma cell. The origin here is set at the exit of the last magnet of the BC. The parameters shown are the Twiss parameters
in (a) βx,y and in (b) αx,y, in (c) the normalized transverse emittance εx,y, in (d) the rms transverse beam sizes σx,y, in (e)
the energy spread σE and in (f) the bunch length σz

FIG. 4. Evolution of the transverse and longitudinal phase spaces at (a) the BC exit and matched beam at (b) the entrance of
the plasma cell. Color scales indicate normalized electron density.

ﬁnal focus system. For example, oﬀsets between the mag-
netic ﬁeld center of the quadrupoles and the ideal beam-
line can lead to emittance growth and betatron oscilla-
tions in the plasma. A basic tolerance study for the ﬁnal
focus system was performed to estimate the eﬀects of
several error sources.

We consider two sources of errors in our system. One
set of errors can arise from spatial and temporal jitter
in the electron beam. The other set of errors is intro-
duced from positioning errors in the quadrupole triplet.
In simulation parameters in the beam distribution after
the bunch compressor were varied and analyzed. In addi-
tion, perturbations from transverse oﬀsets xoﬀ and yoﬀ in
the quadrupole triplets, from rotation errors xrot in the
x-z plane, from rotation errors yrot in the y-z plane, from
rotation errors zrot in the x-y plane, from longitudinal oﬀ-
set errors zoﬀ and from errors in the focusing strength K
were included. The quadrupole parameters under study
were varied according to Eq. 2

A = Aref ± Aof f (±tol)

(2)

where A represents an input parameter, Aref is the
design parameter of the quadrupole and Aoﬀ (± tol) is
the variation of the design parameter within the given
tolerances range. All quadrupoles were assigned the same
error as one would realistically expect if errors arise from
a common power supply or a common support girder. For
example, mounting errors between single elements on a
common girder are usually much better corrected than
oﬀsets or drifts of the whole girder in the tunnel.

For the tolerance studies for jitter in the input beam,
the beam properties were perturbed according to Eq. 3.
Included were transverse oﬀsets in electron bunch posi-
tion in both transverse planes (x and y), errors in bunch
size in both transverse planes, the beam momentum and
divergence, bunch charge, bunch length as well as longi-
tudinal oﬀset in z, all deﬁned at the exit of the bunch
compressor:

∆bi = bi,ref ± bof f (±tol)

(3)

where bi,ref is the reference beam parameter at the exit
of BC given in Table III and boﬀ is the error in the beam
parameter at the same location.

The observables in simulation include transverse nor-
malized emittance, transverse beam sizes, beam diver-
gence in both planes, Twiss parameters, bunch length
and energy spread at the entrance of the plasma cell.

In order to assess the robustness of the PMQ triplet

solution, 10,000 cases were simulated for two cases.

Mismatch case 1: Errors are randomly assigned. This
includes ±10 µm errors in bunch position at the BC exit
and 10% errors in beam size, bunch length and bunch
charge. For the quadrupole triplet transverse and lon-
gitudinal oﬀsets were varied within ± 10 µm, rotational
oﬀsets within ± 10 µrad and the strength were varied

6

by ± 10% of the design value. The minimum tolerance
range of 10 ±m was chosen according to the precision
range of hexapods which can be used for the positioning
of the quadrupole triplet [33].

Mismatch case 2: A same set of simulations were car-
ried out in which the tolerance range for transverse and
rotational oﬀset of quadrupole was 100 µm and 100 µrad
respectively.

The position for observing the ﬁnal beam parameters
in both cases was ﬁxed at the matched case position of
Table III, which is the entrance of plasma cell as ex-
plained in section IV. Fig. 5 summarizes the simulated
beam parameters at the plasma entrance, as obtained in
the two error cases. From Fig. 5, it can be concluded that
the mismatch case 1 is an acceptable scenario, since the
beam with this set of variations still enters the plasma cell
well matched in the transverse plane with only a small
increase in emittance. It is worthwhile to note again that
this also includes the variation in input beam parameters.
It can be safely inferred that the PMQ triplet design is
robust and can be used for matching the electron beam
to the plasma channel under less than ideal experimental
conditions as well.

VII. SIMULATED ACCELERATION THROUGH
A PLASMA CELL

The simulated beam matched to the plasma entrance
(reference case from Section V) was further tracked
through a laser-driven plasma cell (LPA) using the
FBPIC code [34]. A plasma cell model, with density of
1017 cm−3 is used to accelerate the beam. Fig. 7 shows
the simulated beam evolution through the plasma cell.
The density proﬁle and the evolution of the Twiss param-
eter βx, the normalized emittance εx, the beam energy
and the energy spread σE are shown. Fig. 6(a) shows
the simulated transverse and longitudinal phase spaces
after the beam has been accelerated through the LPA.
It is seen that we obtain an emittance of around 0.5 µm
with a ﬁnal beam energy of 1 GeV. A three-sigma cut
was applied in the determination of the various observ-
ables, leading to 1% of the total number of particles being
cut (particles far out in the tail would otherwise bias the
calculated observables).

Achieving emittance preservation and a small energy
spread is essential for a usable beam quality from a LPA.
The slice energy spread for the beam after the plasma cell
is very good and amounts to 0.3% in our case which is
still on the high side compared to facilities like FLASH
[35]. However, for applications such as FEL, large en-
ergy spread can be tolerated by reducing the slice en-
ergy spread by means of bunch decompression as demon-
strated in [36]. Recently, a scheme has been proposed to
diminish the energy spread by using a chicane between
two plasma stages [24].

A perturbed beam, according to mismatch case 1 of
Fig. 5, was also simulated through the plasma cell. In

7

FIG. 5. Variation in observed beam parameters at the plasma entrance for the two error scenarios deﬁned in the text (mismatch
case 1 and 2) and each 10,000 random cases simulated

8

this mismatch case, the oﬀsets were introduced in the
beam parameters at the exit of BC as well as in the
quadrupole triplet. Fig. 7 shows the beam evolution of
the mismatched beam in comparison to the matched case.
In both cases, the slice emittance is still below 0.5 µm as
shown in Fig. 6. From Fig. 7 and 6, it is seen that the
proposed tolerances in the mismatch case 1 are suﬃcient
to match the electron beam coming from the chicane to
the plasma cell and to transport it with somewhat dete-
riorated but still good quality through a LPA.

VIII. CONCLUSION

The design for a ﬁnal focus system, an experimental
beamline and a LPA with external injection has been
developed for the ARES linac in the SINBAD facil-
ity at DESY. Detailed numerical simulations show that
the electron beam can be transported and focused to
a plasma cell. The studies include the eﬀects of space
charge. The electron beam has adequate transverse sym-
metry and is well matched into a plasma channel with
plasma ramps. The longitudinal phase space is preserved
with a 1 kA peak current, as approaching the require-
ments for several use cases. We have performed a sensi-
tivity analysis of the PMQ triplet for understanding the
tolerances and to mitigate the eﬀect of imperfections of
the ﬁnal focus system. The performed error analysis,
which is speciﬁc to the system under study but could be
generalised for any quadrupole triplet, gives a useful es-
timate about the performance of the ﬁnal focus system
and suggests critical parameters in the implementation
of the experiment. A plasma simulation shows that ex-
ternal injection of short electron bunches into a LPA at
ARES can achieve high beam quality and can constitute
a stepping stone towards a staged multi GeV high per-
formance plasma accelerator.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors acknowledge valuable discussions with K.
Floettmann, D. Marx, F. Mayet and F. Jafarinia. Special
thanks to W. Leemans for his support and discussion.
The authors would also like to acknowledge the FBPIC
developers and contributors.

FIG. 6. Simulated evolution of beam parameters through a
LPA plasma cell in the ARES linac for the matched beam and
the mismatched beam considered in this study

FIG. 7. Simulated evolution of beam parameters through a
LPA plasma cell in the ARES linac for the matched beam and
the mismatched beam considered in this study

[1] R. Aßmann, C. Behrens, R. Brinkmann, U. Dorda,
K. Fl¨ottmann, B. Foster, J. Grebenyuk, M. Gross,
I. Hartl, M. H¨uning, F. K¨artner, B. Marchetti,
Y. Nie, J. Osterhoﬀ, A. R¨uhl, H. Schlarb, B. Schmidt,
F. Stephan, A. M¨uller, M. Schuh, F. Gr¨uner, B. Hid-
ding, A. R. Maier, and B. Zeitler, SINBAD - A
Proposal
for a Dedicated Accelerator Research Fa-
in Proc. 5th International Parti-
cility at DESY,
cle Accelerator Conference (IPAC’14), Dresden, Ger-
many, June 15-20, 2014 , International Particle Accel-
erator Conference No. 5 (JACoW, Geneva, Switzerland,

2014) pp. 1466–1469, https://doi.org/10.18429/JACoW-
IPAC2014-TUPME047.

[2] U. Dorda, B. Marchetti, J. Zhu, F. Mayet, W. Kuropka,
T. Vinatier, G. Vaschenko, K. Galaydych, P. A. Walker,
D. Marx, R. Brinkmann, R. Assmann, N. H. Matlis,
A. Fallahi, and F. X. Kaertner, Status and objectives
of the dedicated accelerator r & d facility sinbad at desy,
Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A 909,
239 (2018).

[3] F. Mayet, R. Assmann, J. B¨odewadt, R. Brinkmann,
U. Dorda, W. Kuropka, C. Lechner, B. Marchetti, and

01np[1017cm3]102x[m]matched casemismatched case0.60.7n,x[m]5001000Energy [MeV]05101520z [cm]0.51.01.5E[%]J. Zhu, Simulations and Plans for Possible DLA Experi-
ments at SINBAD, Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics
Research, A 909, 1 (2018).

[4] B. Marchetti, R. Assmann, U. Dorda, and J. Zhu, Con-
ceptual and Technical Design Aspects of Accelerators for
External Injection in LWFA, Applied Sciences 8(5), 757,
1 (2018).

[5] F. K¨artner, F. Ahr, A.-L. Calendron, H. C¸ ankaya,
S. Carbajo, G. Chang, G. Cirmi, K. D¨orner, U. Dorda,
A. Fallahi, A. Hartin, M. Hemmer, R. Hobbs, Y. Hua,
W. Huang, R. Letrun, N. Matlis, V. Mazalova, O. M¨ucke,
E. Nanni, W. Putnam, K. Ravi, F. Reichert, I. Sarrou,
X. Wu, A. Yahaghi, H. Ye, L. Zapata, D. Zhang, C. Zhou,
R. Miller, K. Berggren, H. Graafsma, A. Meents, R. Ass-
mann, H. Chapman, and P. Fromme, Axsis: Explor-
ing the frontiers in attosecond x-ray science,
imaging
and spectroscopy, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in
Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers,
Detectors and Associated Equipment 829, 24 (2016),
2nd European Advanced Accelerator Concepts Workshop
- EAAC 2015.

[6] E. Panofski et al., Status Report of the SINBAD-
ARES RF Photoinjector and LINAC Commission-
ing,
in Proc. 10th International Particle Accelerator
Conference (IPAC’19), Melbourne, Australia, 19-24
May 2019 , International Particle Accelerator Confer-
ence No. 10 (JACoW Publishing, Geneva, Switzerland,
2019) pp. 906–909, https://doi.org/10.18429/JACoW-
IPAC2019-MOPTS026.

[7] B. Marchetti, R. Assmann, R. Brinkmann, F. Burkart,
U. Dorda, K. Floettmann, I. Hartl, W. Hillert, M. Huen-
ing, F. Jafarinia, S. Jaster-Merz, M. Kellermeier,
W. Kuropka, F. Lemery, D. Marx, F. Mayet, E. Panof-
ski, S. Pfeiﬀer, H. Schlarb, T. Vinatier, P. A. Walker,
L. Winkelmann, and S. Yamin, SINBAD-ARES - a
photo-injector for external injection experiments in novel
accelerators at DESY, Journal of Physics: Conference Se-
ries 1596, 012036 (2020).

[8] B. Marchetti, R. Assmann, U. Dorda, J. Grebenyuk, and
J. Zhu, Compression of an Electron-Bunch by Means of
Velocity Bunching at ARES, in Proc. of International
Particle Accelerator Conference (IPAC’15), Richmond,
USA, 3-8 May, 2015 (JACoW, Geneva, Switzerland,
2015) pp. 1472–1475.

[9] J. Zhu, R. W. Assmann, M. Dohlus, U. Dorda, and
B. Marchetti, Sub-fs electron bunch generation with sub-
10-fs bunch arrival-time jitter via bunch slicing in a
magnetic chicane, Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams 19, 054401
(2016).

[10] S. Jaster-Merz, R. W. Assmann, F. Burkart, U. Dorda,
J. Dreyling-Eschweiler, L. Huth, U. Kr¨amer, and
M. Stanitzki, Development of a beam proﬁle monitor
based on silicon strip sensors for low-charge electron
beams, Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1596,
012047 (2020).

[11] D. Marx, R. W. Assmann, P. Craievich, K. Floettmann,
A. Grudiev, and B. Marchetti, Simulation Studies for
Characterizing Ultrashort Bunches Using Novel Polariz-
able X-band Transverse Deﬂection Structures, Scientiﬁc
Reports 9(19912), 1 (2019).

[12] T. Tajima and J. M. Dawson, Laser electron accelerator,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 267 (1979).

[13] W. P. Leemans, B. Nagler, A. J. Gonsalves, C. Toth,
K. Nakaruma, C. G. R. Geddes, E. Esarey, C. B.

9

Schroeder, and S. M. Hooker, GeV electron beams from
a centimetre-scale accelerator, Nature Physics 2, 3909
(2006).

[14] M. Litos, E. Adli, J. M. Allen, W. An, C. I. Clarke,
S. Corde, C. E. Clayton, J. Frederico, S. J. Gessner, S. Z.
Green, M. J. Hogan, C. Joshi, W. Lu, K. A. Marsh, W. B.
Mori, M. Schmeltz, N. Vafaei-Najafabadi, and V. Yaki-
menko, 9 gev energy gain in a beam-driven plasma wake-
ﬁeld accelerator, Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion
58, 034017 (2016).

[15] A. J. Gonsalves, K. Nakaruma, J. Daniels, C. Benedetti,
C. Pieronek, T. C. H. Raadt, S. Steinke, J. H. Bin, S. S.
Bulanov, J. V. Tilborg, C. G. R. Geddes, C. B. Schroeder,
C. Toth, E. Esarey, K. Swanson, L. Fan-Chiang, G. Bag-
dasarov, N. Bobrova, V. Gasilov, G. Korn, P. Sasorov,
and W. P. Leemans, Petawatt Laser Guiding and Elec-
tron Beam Acceleration to 8 GeV in a Laser-Heated
Capillary Discharge Waveguide, Physical Review Letters
122(084801), 1 (2019).

[16] A. R. Maier, N. M. Delbos, T. Eichner, L. H¨ubner,
S. Jalas, L. Jeppe, S. W. Jolly, M. Kirchen, V. Ler-
oux, P. Messner, M. Schnepp, M. Trunk, P. A. Walker,
C. Werle, and P. Winkler, Decoding sources of energy
variability in a laser-plasma accelerator, Phys. Rev. X
10, 031039 (2020).

[17] J. Grebenyuk, R. W. Assmann, U. Dorda, and
B. Marchetti, Laser-Driven Acceleration with External
Injection at SINBAD, in Proc. of International Particle
Accelerator Conference (IPAC’14), Dresden, Germany,
15-20 June, 2014 (JACoW, Geneva, Switzerland, 2014)
pp. 1515–1518.

[18] B. Marchetti, R. W. Assmann, S. Baark, F. Burkart,
U. Dorda, K. Floettmann, I. Hartl, J. Hauser, J. Her-
rmann, M. Huening, L. Knebel, O. Krebs, G. Kube,
W. Kuropka, S. Lederer, F. Lemery, F. Ludwig, D. Marx,
F. Mayet, M. Pelzer,
I. Peperkorn, F. Poblotzki,
S. Pumpe, J. Rothenburg, H. Schlarb, M. Titberidze,
G. Vashchenko, T. Vinatier, P. A. Walker, L. Winkel-
mann, K. Wittenburg, S. Yamin, and J. Zhu, Status
of the ARES RF Gun at SINBAD: From its Char-
acterization and Installation towards Commissioning,
in Proc. 9th International Particle Accelerator Confer-
ence (IPAC’18), Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 29-
May 4, 2018 , International Particle Accelerator Confer-
ence No. 9 (JACoW Publishing, Geneva, Switzerland,
2018) pp. 1474–1476, https://doi.org/10.18429/JACoW-
IPAC2018-TUPMF086.

lederer, F.

[19] F. Burkart, R.W.Assmann, U. Dorda, J. Hauser,
B. Marchetti, W. Kuropka, S.
lemery,
F. Mayet, E. Panofski, and P. Wiesener, The Ex-
in Proc.
perimental Area at
10th International Particle Accelerator Conference
(IPAC’19), Melbourne, Australia, 19-24 May 2019 ,
International Particle Accelerator Conference No. 10
(JACoW Publishing, Geneva, Switzerland, 2019) pp.
867–870, https://doi.org/10.18429/JACoW-IPAC2019-
MOPTS014.

the ARES LINAC,

[20] E. Svystun, R. Aßmann, U. Dorda, B. Marchetti,
and A. M. de la Ossa, Numerical Studies on Electron
Beam Quality Optimization in a Laser-Driven Plasma
Accelerator with External Injection at SINBAD for
ATHENAe, in Proc. 10th International Particle Accel-
erator Conference (IPAC’19), Melbourne, Australia, 19-
24 May 2019 , International Particle Accelerator Confer-

ence No. 10 (JACoW Publishing, Geneva, Switzerland,
2019) pp. 3628–3631, https://doi.org/10.18429/JACoW-
IPAC2019-THPGW023.

[21] F. Lemery, R. W. Assmann, U. Dorda, K. Flotte-
mann, J. Hauser, M. Huning, G. Kube, M. Lantschner,
S.
lederer, B. Marchetti, N. Mildner, M. Pelzer,
M. Rosan, J. Tiesses, and K. Wittenburg, Overview
in
the ARES Bunch Compressor at SINBAD,
of
Proc. 10th International Particle Accelerator Confer-
ence (IPAC’19), Melbourne, Australia, 19-24 May
2019 ,
International Particle Accelerator Conference
No. 10 (JACoW Publishing, Geneva, Switzerland,
2019) pp. 902–905, https://doi.org/10.18429/JACoW-
IPAC2019-MOPTS025.

[22] W. Leemans, High average power laser plasma accelera-
tor project at desy (2019), european Advanced Acceler-
ator Conference.

[23] S. Yamin, R. W. Assmann, U. Dorda, F. Lemery,
B. Marchetti, E. Panofski, and P. A. Walker, Design con-
siderations for permanent magnetic quadrupole triplet
for matching into laser driven wake ﬁeld acceleration ex-
periment at SINBAD, Journal of Physics: Conference
Series 1596, 012010 (2020).

[24] A. Ferran Pousa, A. Martinez de la Ossa, R. Brinkmann,
and R. W. Assmann, Compact multistage plasma-based
accelerator design for correlated energy spread compen-
sation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 054801 (2019).

[25] J. van Tilborg, S. K. Barber, F.

Isono, C. B.
Schroeder, E. Esarey, and W. P. Leemans, Free-
electron lasers driven by laser plasma accelerators,
AIP Conference Proceedings 1812, 020002 (2017),
https://aip.scitation.org/doi/pdf/10.1063/1.4975838.
[26] S. Yamin, R.W.Assmann, U. Dorda, F. Lemery,
B. Marchetti, E. Panofski, and P. Walker, Design Con-
siderations for Permenant Magnetic Quadrupole Triplet
for Matching Into Laser Driven Wake Field Accel-
in Proc. 10th In-
eration Experiment at SINBAD,
ternational Particle Accelerator Conference (IPAC’19),

10

19-24 May 2019 ,

Melbourne, Australia,
Interna-
tional Particle Accelerator Conference No. 10 (JA-
CoW Publishing, Geneva, Switzerland, 2019) pp.
143–146, https://doi.org/10.18429/JACoW-IPAC2019-
MOPGW027.

[27] X. Li, A. Chanc´e, and P. A. P. Nghiem, Preserving emit-
tance by matching out and matching in plasma wakeﬁeld
acceleration stage, Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams 22, 021304
(2019).

[28] X. L. Xu, J. F. Hua, Y. P. Wu, C. J. Zhang, F. Li,
Y. Wan, C.-H. Pai, W. Lu, W. An, P. Yu, M. J. Hogan,
C. Joshi, and W. B. Mori, Physics of phase space match-
ing for staging plasma and traditional accelerator compo-
nents using longitudinally tailored plasma proﬁles, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 116, 124801 (2016).

[29] K. Floettmann, Adiabatic matching section for plasma
accelerated beams, Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 17,
054402 (2014).

[30] I. Dornmair, K. Floettmann, and A. R. Maier, Emittance
conservation by tailored focusing proﬁles in a plasma ac-
celerator, Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 18, 041302 (2015).
[31] M. Borland, elegant: A Flexible SDDS-Compliant Code
for Accelerator Simulation, APS LS-287, September
2000, .

[32] K. Floettmann, ASTRA - A Space Charge Tracking Al-

gorithm, http://www.desy.de/~mpyflo, .

https://www.smaract.com/

[33] Smaact

hexapods,
positioning_systems.

[34] R. Lehe, M. Kirchen, I. A. Andriyash, B. B. Godfrey, and
J. L. Vay, A spectral, quasi-cylindrical and dispersion-
free particle-in-cell algorithm, Computer Physics Com-
munications 203, 10.1016/j.cpc.2016.02.007 (2016).
[35] Flash accelerator at DESY, https://flash.desy.de/

accelerator/.

[36] A. R. Maier, A. Meseck, S. Reiche, C. B. Schroeder,
T. Seggebrock, and F. Gruner, Demonstration scheme
for a laser plasma driven free electron laser, Phys. Rev.
X 2, 031019 (2012).

