ArXiv.org 

Performance Optimization of Surface 
Electromyography (sEMG) based Biometric Sensing 
System for both Verification and Identification  

Ashirbad Pradhan, Jiayuan He, Member, IEEE, and Ning Jiang*, Senior Member, IEEE 

(TD) 

Abstract—  Recently,  surface  electromyography 

(sEMG) 
emerged as a novel biometric authentication method. Since EMG 
system parameters, such as the feature extraction methods and 
the  number  of  channels,  have  been  known  to  affect  system 
performances, it is important to investigate these effects on the 
performance  of  the  sEMG-based  biometric  system  to  determine 
optimal  system  parameters.  In  this  study,  three  robust  feature 
extraction  methods,  Time-domain 
feature,  Frequency 
Division  Technique  (FDT),  and  Autoregressive  (AR)  feature,  and 
their  combinations  were  investigated  while  the  number  of 
channels varying from one to eight. For these system parameters, 
the  performance  of  sixteen  static  wrist  and  hand  gestures  was 
systematically 
two  authentication  modes: 
in 
verification  and  identification.  The  results  from  24  participants 
showed 
(p<0.05)  and 
consistently outperformed FDT and AR features for all channel numbers. The results also showed that the performance 
of a four-channel setup was not significantly different from those with higher number of channels. The average equal 
error rate (EER) for a four-channel sEMG verification system was 4% for TD features, 5.3% for FDT features, and 10% for 
AR features. For an identification system, the average Rank-1 error (R1E) for a four-channel configuration was 3% for 
TD features, 12.4% for FDT features, and 36.3% for AR features. The electrode position on the flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU) 
muscle had a critical contribution to the authentication performance. Thus, the combination of the TD feature set and a 
four-channel  sEMG  system  with  one  of  the  electrodes  positioned  on  the  FCU  are  recommended  for  optimal 
authentication performance. 

features  significantly 

investigated 

the  TD 

that 

Index  Terms—  biometrics,  gesture  recognition,  surface  electromyogram  (sEMG),  feature  extraction,  electrode 

configuration, user verification, user identification. 

I.   INTRODUCTION 

A 

uthentication 

systems  are  critical  and 

integral 
components of modern societies, can be found in personal 
electronic  devices,  law  enforcement,  and  airport  security  [1]. 
Modern authentication systems usually operate on two modes: 
knowledge (of a unique code) and biometrics, respectively [2]. 
The knowledge-based authentication mode usually takes in the 
form  of  a  unique  code,  known  only  to  the  genuine  user. 
Passwords  and  PIN  (personal  identification  number)  are  the 
most common choices of this authentication mode. On the other 
hand,  the  biometrics-based  authentication  mode  utilizes  traits 
and characteristics that are uniquely specific to an individual, 
such  as  fingerprints  or  iris.  These  two  modes  can  be 
incorporated  separately  but  also  be  combined  to  provide  a 
higher level of security. 

 This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering 

Research Council of Canada (Discovery Grant: 072169). 

AP,  JYH  and  NJ  are  with  Engineering  Bionics  Lab,  Department  of 
Systems  Design  Engineering,  Faculty  of  Engineering,  University  of 
Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada.  

(*Corresponding author: ning.jiang@uwaterloo.ca) 

In  the  biometric  mode,  there  are  two  applications:  1) 
verification and 2) identification. Verification is the application 
of  accepting  or  rejecting  the  claim  of  a  user  by  comparing 
his/her  biometric  traits  to  that  of  the  user’s  enrollment  data 
stored in the system. Identification is the application of finding 
the closest match of a presented biometric trait(s) among all the 
enrollment data stored with the system. In general, verification 
applications  have  a  higher  requirement  for  the  uniqueness  of 
biometric traits than verification applications. 

Ideally,  a  system  with  both  authentication  modes 
(knowledge  and  biometrics)  would  be  preferred  to  maximize 
security,  as  either  mode  has  inherent  drawbacks.  One  of  the 
advantages  of  the  knowledge-based  mode  is  that  the  code 
(password  or  PIN)  can  always  be  regenerated.  On  the  other 
hand,  common  biometric  traits,  such  as fingerprint  and  facial 
information,  cannot  be  changed  once  they  are  compromised, 
posing a lifetime risk for the genuine user [3]. As such, a system 
with  a  dual  authentication  mode  with  simultaneously 
knowledge-based  and  biometric 
is  highly 
desirable.  

information 

Recently,  various  biosignals  such  as  electroencephalogram 
(EEG), electrocardiogram (ECG), and electromyogram (EMG) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ArXiv.org 

compared 

from the brain, heart, and the muscle, respectively have been 
used as biometric traits [3-6]. These biosignals are suggested to 
be used as an auxiliary biometric trait  because they have two 
important  disadvantages 
to  well-developed 
well-established  biometric traits. First of all, the  performance 
accuracy  is  considerably  lower  [7].  Secondly,  they  are  less 
robust against  conditions such as  illness, physical and mental 
activities, and the time interval between the training session and 
the  real-time  authentication  session  [8,  9].  As  such,  research 
efforts  have  been  undertaken  to  improve  the  accuracy  and 
robustness of biometric systems based on biosignals. It is likely 
that  they  will  find  applications  in  low-risk  authentication 
scenarios,  complementary  to  other  well-established  biometric 
modalities.  Although multiple studies have investigated EEG 
and ECG as a  biometric trait, there have been limited studies 
that use surface electromyogram (sEMG) from the forearm and 
hand muscles while performing hand gestures [6, 10-12]. Due 
to the characteristic property that different movements result in 
distinctive EMG patterns, sEMG has been predominantly used 
for accurate hand gesture recognition [13-15]. However, while 
training  with  multiple  users,  individual  differences  were 
observed [16, 17]  which motivated the biometric studies based 
on  sEMG.  One  crucial  advantage  of  sEMG  over  other 
biometric traits is its potential for the dual-mode authentication 
system  described  above.  With  sEMG,  the  knowledge-based 
information  can  be  implemented  by  gesture  recognition,  in 
which hand/wrist gesture can be used as authentication ‘code’. 
The  biometric 
individual 
characteristics  embedded  in  sEMG.  As  the  concept  of  using 
sEMG  as  an  authentication  method  is  relatively  new,  the 
existing  literature  is  limited.  Initial  studies  focused  on  the 
classification of individuals using different pattern recognition 
algorithms  and  only  reported  the  classification  accuracy 
[18-20]. This made the results difficult to establish sEMG as a 
biometric trait by comparing it to current biometric traits, such 
as  fingerprints,  iris,  and  face.  A  different  sEMG-based  study 

is  based  on 

information 

the 

Fig. 1.  Positions of the sixteen monopolar electrodes on the forearm 
(dorsal  view).  In  each  ring,  eight  electrodes  (grey  rectangles  on  the 
forearm) are evenly placed, and one electrode is placed in the centerline 
of the elbow crease. The distance between the centers of the two rings 
was 2 cm, and the proximal ring was placed one third of the forearm 
length between the elbow crease and the upper ring. 

utilized  the  two  applications  of  biometrics,  verification  and 
identification, and reported an equal error rate (EER) of lower 
than  10%  [6].  The  study  involved  24  participants  who 
performed 16 hand gestures. The frequency division technique 
(FDT) was used for the feature extraction method [21]. Other 
studies used a High-density sEMG (HD-EMG) setup where 64 
channels were placed in a grid formation on the dorsal side of 
the  hand  [10,  11].  The  feature  extraction 
involved  a 
combination of time-frequency-spatial domain features as well 
as  HD-EMG  decomposition-based  features.  A  recent  study 
utilized  only  one  electrode  placed  on  the  flexor  digitorum 
superficialis muscle while the participants performed a phone 
unlock  pattern  with  contractions  of  their  fingers  [12].  The 
time-domain  feature  extraction  method  was  employed  on  the 
sEMG signals. All these above studies showed a low error rate 
(<15%)  of  average  authentication  performance,  indicating 
sEMG  as  a  promising  biometric  trait.  However,  considering 
many  parameters  of  sEMG  processing  system,  especially  the 
feature  extraction  methods  and  the  number  of  electrode 
channels  [22,  23]  can  change  the  system  performance,  it  is 
important  to  investigate  their  effects  on  the  authentication 
performance  and 
to  determine  an  optimal  processing 
configuration of using sEMG based biometric applications.  

[24], 

[25-27], 

frequency  domain 

A.  Feature Extraction Methods: 
The  three  main  categories  of sEMG  feature  extraction  are: 
time  domain 
and 
time-frequency  domain  [25,  28,  29].  Additionally,  there  are 
non-linear  feature  extraction  methods  [30]  that  adhere  to  the 
non-stationary  and  complex  nature  of  the  sEMG  signals. 
However, it has been shown that for a short time contraction, 
the  sEMG  signals  satisfy  the  stationary  assumptions  [31]. 
Therefore, for a short duration, isometric contractions suitable 
for  biometric  applications  [10-12],  the  time  domain  and 
frequency  domain  features  are  ideal  for  feature  extraction  as 
their mean and variances have minimal variations [32]. These 
include  Hudgin’s  time-domain  (TD)  feature  set  [24]  and  two 
frequency  domain  feature  sets:  Frequency  division  technique 
(FDT) [21, 26] and Autoregressive coefficients (AR) [27, 33]. 
Time  Domain  (TD)  features  are  computed  using  the  signal 
amplitude  values.  The  computed  features  namely  mean 
absolute value (MAV), slope sign changes (SSC), zero crossing 
(ZC), and waveform length (WL) are a quantification of sEMG 
waveform  amplitude,  frequency,  and  duration.  Due  to  their 
relatively lower computational cost, they have been preferred 
as  a  feature  set  in  multitudes  of  pattern  recognition-based 
research  [13].  The  frequency-domain  category  of  features  is 
based on the principle that the sEMG spectrum varies with limb 
movements and has shown robustness in real-time myoelectric 
control  of  prosthetic  functions  [34,  35].  The  AR  feature  set 
includes the coefficients of the nth order autoregressive model 
of the sEMG signal [27, 33, 36] and has shown to be stable over 
varying  muscle  force  levels  and  shifts  in  electrode  location 
[37]. To the best of our knowledge, there is no existing research 
on  the  comparison  of  feature  extraction  methods  for  sEMG 
based  authentication.  Therefore,  it  is  crucial  to  determine  the 
best  feature-set  that  not  only  has  good  gesture  recognition 
accuracy  but  also  considers  individual  differences  between 
users. 

 
 
ArXiv.org 

B.  Number of Channels 
In addition to the feature extraction method, the number of 
channels is also an important factor affecting the performance 
of  sEMG  based  gesture  recognition.  It  has  been  shown  that 
increasing  the  number  of  channels,  as  well  as  the  use  of  HD 
grids  provides  a  more  accurate  gesture  recognition  [38,  39]. 
However, space limitation, power consumption, and viability in 
a practical scenario hinder the use of a large number of sEMG 
channels.  In  this  regard,  previous  studies  have  analyzed  the 
effect of channel reduction on gesture recognition performance 
[40, 41]. It was shown that four to six channels are sufficient for 
gesture  recognition  [41].  It  has  been  shown  that  a  uniform 
electrode  positioning  of  five  electrodes  around  the  forearm, 
regardless  of  muscle  anatomical  location  provided  a  high 
accuracy  of  gesture  recognition  [42].  Therefore,  research  on 
channel reduction is important to assess performance in sEMG 
based authentication systems, thus facilitating the development 
of  easy-to-use  wearable  sensors.  The  findings  of  the  study 
helped determine the best feature set in terms of performance 
accuracy and computational complexity as well as the optimal 
number of channels necessary to make accurate authentications 
using sEMG.  

Therefore  the  purpose  of  the  study  was  1)  to  compare 
different  sEMG  feature  extraction 
techniques  and  their 
combinations on the authentication performance, 2) to study the 
effect of channel reduction on the authentication performance, 
3)  to  determine  the  optimal  configuration  (feature  extraction 
method and the number of channels) for accurate authentication 
performance using sEMG based biometrics. 

II.  METHODS 

A.  Participants 
Twenty-four healthy participants (13  males and 11 females, 
age:  19-30  years)  were  recruited  for  the  study.  The  average 
forearm  length  (measured  from  the  styloid  process  to  the 
olecranon) was 25.4 ± 1.46 cm. Participants were informed that 
they  may  withdraw  from  the  study  at  any  time  during  the 
experiment  session.  The  experiment  protocol  was 
in 
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by 
the  Office  of  Research  Ethics  of  the  University  of  Waterloo 
(ORE#: 22391). Additionally, data  from 20 participants (age: 
22-30), publicly available through the NinaPro DataBase DB7, 
was used in the analysis [43].  

B.  Experimental Protocol 
The 

in 

seated 

comfortably 

participants  were 

a 
height-adjustable chair in an upright position with both of their 
upper  limbs  in  a  resting  position  and  pointing  towards  the 
ground.  Sixteen  monopolar  sEMG  electrodes  (AM-N00S/E, 
Ambu, Denmark) were placed in the  form of two rings, each 
consisting  of  eight  electrodes  equally  spaced  around  the 
forearm  and  forming  bipolar  pairs  (Fig.  1).  To  make  the 
electrode position more uniform across all participants, one of 
the electrodes in each ring was positioned  in the centerline of 
the  elbow  crease.  The  center-to-center  distance  was  2  cm 
between the two rings, and the proximal ring was at a distance 
of  one-third  the  forearm  length  from  the  elbow  crease.  A 
computer screen placed in front displayed visual instructions to 
help  the  participant perform  the  defined  gestures.  The  sEMG 

signals  were  acquired  using  a  commercial  amplifier  (EMG 
USB2+, OT Bioelettronica, Italy). The sampling rate was 2048 
Hz, and a bandpass setting of the device was set at 10 Hz and 
500  Hz.  Eight  bipolar  channels  were  created  from  data  by 
taking  the  differential  of  each  paired  electrode  from  the  two 
rings and used for subsequent processing. 

The following sixteen hand and wrist gestures were included 
in  the  current  study  (Fig.  2):  lateral  prehension  (LP),  thumb 
adduction  (TA),  thumb  and  little  finger  opposition  (TLFO), 
thumb  and  index  finger  opposition  (TIFO),  thumb  and  little 
finger  extension  (TLFE),  thumb  and  index  finger  extension 
(TIFE), index and middle finger extension (IMFE), little finger 
extension (LFE), index finger extension (IFE), thumb extension 
(TE),  wrist  flexion  (WF),  wrist  extension  (WE),  forearm 
supination (FS), forearm pronation (FP), hand open (HO), hand 
close  (HC).  Each  gesture  was  repeated  seven  times  and  five 
seconds of recording was performed each repetition. To avoid 
sEMG  signals  from  transitory  movements,  the  participants 
were  asked  to  start  the  contraction  a  little  bit  earlier  than  the 
beginning  of  the  recording.  A  five-second  rest  period  was 
provided  between  two  consecutive  contractions  to  avoid 
muscle fatigue. The order of the gestures was randomized for 
each  participant.  For  the  public  dataset  (NinaPro  DB7), 
participants  performed  17  isometric  and  isotonic,  hand  and 
finger gestures. Six repetitions of each gesture were performed 
and 5 seconds of data were recorded using a Delsys Trigno IM 
Wireless EMG system [43]. 

C.  Signal Processing and Feature Extraction Methods 
The bipolar surface EMG signals were first windowed with a 
window length of 200 ms and an overlap of 150 ms, i.e. 50 ms 
overlap between two consecutive windows. Each window was 
processed  subsequently  using  three  commonly  used  EMG 
feature extraction techniques: 1) Hudgin’s Time Domain (TD) 
feature extraction [24], 2) Frequency Division Technique [21], 
and  3)  the  autoregression  (AR)  technique  [27].  For  the  TD 
feature  set,  time-domain  features  (mean  absolute  value,  zero 
crossing,  slope  sign  changes,  and  waveform  length)  were 
extracted  from  filtered  data.  The  mathematical  form  of  these 
features for the signal 

 is provided below 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

RMS=q1NPNi=1x2iSSC=PN¡1i=2f(xi¡xi¡1)(xi¡xi+1)f(x)=(1;ifxTh0;otherwiseWL=PN¡1i=1jxi¡1¡xijZC=PNi=1sgn(xixi+1)\(xixi+1)xThsgn(x)=(1;ifxTh0;otherwise 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ArXiv.org 

Fig.  2.    Sixteen  gesture  classes  investigated  in  the  study:  (A)  lateral 
prehension  (LP),  (B)  thumb  adduction  (TA),  (C)  thumb and little  finger 
opposition  (TLFO),  (D)  thumb  and  index  finger  opposition  (TIFO),  (E) 
thumb  and  little  finger  extension  (TLFE),  (F)  thumb  and  index  finger 
extension (TIFE), (G) index and middle finger extension (IMFE), (H) little 
finger  extension  (LFE),  (I)  index  finger  extension  (IFE),  (J)  thumb 
extension  (TE),  (K)  wrist  flexion  (WF),  (L)  wrist  extension  (WE),  (M) 
forearm  supination  (FS),  (N)  forearm  pronation  (FP),  (O)  hand  open 
(HO), (P) hand close (HC). 

For  FDT,  the  signals  from  each  channel  were  divided  into 

specific frequency sub-bands [21] as given by:  

(5) 

where 

 is  a  nonlinear 
logarithm, to ensure the smoothness of the values. 

transformation,  normally 

AR model is a prediction model defined as: 

For  the  AR  feature  set,  the  6th  order  autoregression 
coefficients  (ap)  were  used  for  it  was  widely  adopted  in 
previous  studies  [27].  Therefore,  the  three  different  feature 
vectors  (TD,  FDT,  and  AR)  were  analyzed  separately  for 
authentication  performance.  Additionally,  the  combination  of 
the 
time  domain  and  frequency  domain  features  was 
investigated  using  the  following  feature  sets:  TD+FDT  and 
TD+AR.  For  a  given  feature  vector  sample  p  (the  input),  its 
similarity score, namely  Si.j, with  the  ith gesture  and   the  jth 
user,  was  defined  as  the  Mahalanobis  distance  between  the 
sample and the class centroid is 

(7) 
where  µi,j  is  the  centroid  of  the  gesture  th  class  and  the  th 
user and 
 is the covariance matrix for the specific gesture 
and  user  class  Both  the  parameters  are  calculated  from  the 
system training data and the sample p is from the system testing 
data.  The  similarity  score  was  used  to  compare  the  true  user 
with  the  imposter.  The  leave-one-out  (LOO)  cross-validation 
scheme was used, where  six  trials were  used for training and 
testing.  The  performance  evaluation  was 
one 

trial  for 

(6) 

performed  separately  for  the  two  biometrics  applications: 
verification and identification. 

D.  Channel selection and reduced channel set 
In the current study, eight bipolar channels resulting from the 
two rings of electrodes placed on the forearm. This hardware 
configuration  might  not  be  feasible  for  more  practical 
applications  in  which  a  smaller  number  of  electrodes  as 
possible should be used. A channel selection algorithm based 
on the sequential forward selection (SFS) method [citation] was 
implemented  to  examine  system  performance  when  only  a 
subset of the available sEMG channels is used. The procedure 
of the SFS is described below. Two channel-sets were defined: 
) 
the applied channel set A (initially empty, i.e. 
i.e. 
and 
the  remaining  electrode  set  R  (initially  full, 
). The number 
 is 
 is the size of A, 
the size of the R, and N is the total number of available channels 
(8 in the current study). 

In each iteration, a union of A and one of the channels from 
,  was  used  for  feature  extraction  and  subsequent 
R,  i.e. 
authentication system evaluation.  This step is repeated for all 
channels in  R. Then, the channel that produces the minimum 
EER in the case of the verification system and minimum RkE 
(k=1,5)  in  the  case  of  the  identification  system  was  chosen, 
respectively.  These  errors  are  discussed  in  the  following 
sections. Thus, for the jth iteration: 

(8) 

(9) 

(10) 

The applied set and remaining set are updated as  

The iterations are repeated till R is empty and A contains all 
N  channels.  The  authentication  system  evaluation  parameters 
(EER and RkE, k=1,5) in each iteration stage are reported for 
analysis.  Also,  the  range  namely  r,  which  is  the  difference 

FDTi=FPNij=1jX(fi;j)j;i=1;2:::LSi;j(p)=q(p¡¹i;j)>§¡1i;j(p¡¹i;j)rj=argmaxriEERA[frig:EERA[frig=fEER(A[frig)forr=1;2:::R(n)rj=argmaxriRkEA[frig:RkEA[frig=fRkE(A[frig)k=1;5&forr=1;2:::R(n)A=A[frjg;R=Rnfrjg;m=m+1;n=n1;forj=1;2:::Nxi=PPp=1apxi¡p+wi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ArXiv.org 

between the maximum and minimum error for every iteration is 
reported  to  analyze  the  distribution  of  error.  Therefore,  EERr 
for the verification systems R1Er and R5Er for the identification 
system  were  reported,  respectively.  The  error  ranges  are  a 
measure  of  electrode  location  significance  (for  a  particular 
iteration  of  channel  selection,  the  higher  the  error  range,  the 
more significant is the specific channel selected). 

E.  Performance Evaluation of the Verification System 
The  performance  analysis  of  the  verification  system  was 
performed  using  the  detection  error  tradeoff  curve  (DEC), 
where  false  rejection  rate  (FRR)  was  plotted  against  false 
acceptance  rate  (FAR)  for  various  Mahalanobis  distance 
thresholds  (for  accepting  or  rejecting  the  claim).  FRR 
represents the likelihood of a legitimate request from the true 
user  is rejected. FAR represents the likelihood of  illegitimate 
access  requests  (from  imposter)  is  granted.  Two  standard 
metrics were calculated from the DEC: the area under the curve 
(AUC) and the equal error rate (EER). AUC refers to the area 
under  the  DEC  [2]  and  EER  refers  to  the  point  on  the  DEC 
curve where FAR is equal to FRR [2]. The lower the AUC and 
EER value the better the authentication performance. 

   ‘A code’ in the current framework is a gesture performed 
by a user (either the authorized user or an imposter). Therefore, 
to  facilitate  subsequent  presentation  and  discussion,  the  two 
words  ‘code’  and  ‘gesture’  are  used  equivalently.  This 
nomenclature  is  also  followed  for  the  analysis  of  the 
identification system. In the current study, the code length was 
fixed at one gesture. All the codes were evaluated individually. 
Assuming  a  user  uses  a  specific  gesture  for  authentication, 
which  is  called  the  authentication  gesture,  three  possible 
scenarios  would  arise  in  the  verification  system:  1)  Normal 
Test, in which the authentication gesture was known only to the 
authorized  user,  and  the  imposter  attempts  to  guess  the 
authentication  gesture  and  gain  access,  i.e.  the  code  was  a 
secrete  and  not  compromised;  2)  Leaked  Test,  in  which  the 
authentication gesture was known to an imposter who tries to 
use  it  to  gain  access,  i.e.  the  authentication  code  was 
compromised;  and  3)  Self  Test,  in  which  the  authorized  user 
forgets  the  authentication  gesture  and  tries  to  gain  access  by 
performing  other  known  gestures  to  the  system.  In  all  three 
scenarios, the genuine data is the data from the authentication 
gesture of  the  authorized  user. For the  Normal  Test scenario, 
the imposter data was the data from all the other gestures and all 
the other users. For the Leaked Test scenario, the imposter data 
was the data from the authentication gesture of all other users. 
Lastly, for the Self Test scenario, the imposter data was the data 
from the other gestures of the true user. 

F.  Performance  Evaluation  of 

the 

Identification 

System 

In  the  literature,  the  authentication  performance  of  the 
identification  system  was  quantified  by  the  rank-k  error  [6]. 
The rank-k error represents the likelihood of the authorized user 
is  not  among  the  top  k  users  returned  by  the  identification 
system.  In  this  study,  the  smaller  the  similarity  score  is,  the 
higher  it  would  be  ranked  by  the  identification  system.  The 
rank-k error is a decreasing function with respect to the value of 
k  as  a  property  of  the  cumulative  match  characteristic  curve, 
which plots  rank-k error against k. In this study, rank-1 error 

(R1E), which is a crucial index when only one code is used, was 
reported  for  this  study.  Additionally,  the  rank-5  error  (R5E) 
was  reported  for  comparison  with  previous  studies  [6].  The 
cumulative match characteristics (CMC) curve was plotted for 
the optimal configuration of sEMG system. 

G.  Statistical Analysis 
The purpose of this study was to determine  the best feature 
extraction method and the optimal number of channels for both 
the  biometric  authentication  systems  (verification  and  the 
identification)  based  on  sEMG.  The  non-parametric  Kruskal 
Wallis  test  was  employed  to  determine  if  the  two  factors, 
feature extraction methods (five levels, i.e. FDT, TD, and AR, 
TD+FDT, TD+AR) and the number of channels (eight levels, 
i.e.  from  1  to  8),  have  significant  effects  on  the  performance 
metrics, EER, AUC, R1E, and R5E. In case of significance in 
either of the two factors, the level of the other factor was fixed, 
and  the  Wilcoxon  rank-sum  test  was  performed  on  the  other 
factor.  

For  the  optimal  configuration,  performance  metrics  were 
reported for the best feature extraction method and the optimal 
number  of  channels  (for  both  verification  and  identification). 
The  performance  of  optimal  parameters  were  then  compared 
with  the  NinaPro  DB7.  All  statistical  tests  were  performed 
using RStudio 1.0.136 (RStudio, Boston, MA). 

III.  RESULTS 

A.  Performance Evaluation of Verification System 
Fig.  3  shows  the  distribution  of  the  median  EER  and  the 
median AUC across all participants, respectively for the three 
feature  extraction  methods  (FDT,  TD,  and  AR), 
their 
combinations (TD+FDT and TD+AR), and a different number 
of  channels  (1-8).  Median  EER  for  the  FDT  method  and  for 
eight  channels  was  0.76%  (Q1=0.1%,  Q3=2.93%)  for  the 
Normal Test, 2.8% (Q1=0.3%, Q3=5.45%) for the Leaked Test, 
and 4.86% (Q1=2.1%, Q3=9.89%) for the Self Test (where Q1 
is the 25th percentile and Q3 is the 75th percentile). While using 
a  TD  feature  extraction  method  for  the  eight  channels,  the 
median  EER  reduced  to  0.27%  (Q1=0.002%,  Q3=2.47%) for 
the Normal Test and 0.48% (Q1=0.001%, Q3=3.51%) for the 
Leaked Test. The Self Test using the TD feature set resulted in 
a  median  error  of  6.68%  (Q1=2.76%,  Q3=14.04%).  The 
combined feature sets along with TD feature set are illustrated 
in Fig. 4. For the Leaked Test scenario, it was observed that the 
median EER for TD+FDT and  TD+AR was 0.16% (Q1=10-4%, 
Q3=0.25%)  and  0.18%  (Q1=10-4%,  Q3=0.25%).  The  AUC 
followed  a  very  similar  pattern  to  the  EER  for  scenarios 
(reported in the next paragraph). When the number of channels 
was higher than four, the verification system’s EER reached a 
plateau. These values are similar to other verification systems 
reported  in  the  literature  [6].  For  the  three  feature  extraction 
methods (FDT, TD, and AR) the initial channel (n=1) EERr was 
higher than 0.05 for all the scenarios. The EERr using the TD 
and  FDT  method  decreased  with  an  increasing  number  of 
channels  and  it  reached  a  plateau  (EERr  <0.01)  when  the 
number  of  channels  was  higher  than  two.  A  similar  plateau 
(EERr <0.01) was reached for the AR method with the number 
of channels higher than three (n>3). The combined feature sets 

 
ArXiv.org 

Fig. 3. (A and B) The median AUC and the median EER for the three feature extraction methods (FDT, TD and AR) and number of channels (1-8) for 
the Normal Test (left column), Leaked Test (middle column) and Self Test (right column) scenario of the verification system. Each line indicates the 
respective median values, and shaded area indicates the corresponding middle 50 percentile (25% to 75%). (C)The range of EER values (EERr) for the 
feature extraction methods (FDT, TD and AR) and number of channels (1-8) for the Normal Test, Leaked Test,  and Self Test scenario of the verification 
system. The range is calculated as a part of the sequential forward selection algorithm at the end of every iteration. 

(TD+FDT and TD+AR) had similar EERr to the TD feature sets 
for all number of channels (n=1-8).    

Feature Extraction Methods: In the Normal Test scenario, 
the median EER was significantly lower for TD than both FDT 
and  AR  methods  (p<0.05,  Fig.  3(A))  regardless  of  channel 
numbers. The AR method had the highest AUC than the other 
two methods (p<0.05). Similarly, the median AUC for the TD 
method was significantly lower  than FDT, which was in turn 
significantly lower than AR (p<0.05). In the Leaked Test, the 
EER and AUC both had similar outcomes as the Normal Test: 
TD outperforms FDT, which in turn outperformed AR (p<0.05, 
Fig.  3(B)).  For  Self  Test,  the  EER  and  AUC  were  not 
significantly  different  between  the  TD  and  FDT  methods 
(p>0.05,  Fig.  3(C))  regardless  of  the  channel  numbers. 
However, other than the single-channel case, the EER and AUC 
of  AR  were  significantly  higher  than  the  other  two  methods 
(p<0.05). For all three scenarios, the EERr of the TD method 
was higher than FDT and AR for lower channel lengths (1-2) 
(Fig. 3(C)). The EERr was very similar for all the methods for 
channel lengths (3-8). For a combination  of TD  with spectral 
features it was observed that TD+FDT and TD+AR had similar 
values  in  all  the  three  scenarios  and  for  different  channel 
lengths (p>0.05). It was observed that for the Normal Test and 

Leaked Test, TD+FDT and TD+AR had a significantly lower 
(p<0.05)  EER  than  the  TD  feature  set.  However,  the  median 
EER values were similar for the three methods: for a 4-channel 
configuration, the EER for TD method was 0.2% (Q1=10-3%, 
Q3=0.54%),  the  EER  for  TD+FDT  was  0.1%  (Q1=10-3%, 
Q3=0.42%)  and  EER  for  TD+AR  was  0.1%  (Q1=10-3%, 
Q3=0.42%). For the Self Test scenario, there was no significant 
difference  (p>0.05)  between  the  three  feature  sets  for  all 
number of channels. 

Number  of  Channels:  As  expected,  there  was  a  general 
decreasing trend in both EER and AUC values with increasing 
channel numbers (Fig. 3) in all the scenarios. For the Leaked 
Test,  the  decrease  in  AUC  was  significant  from  one  to  four 
channels  (p<0.05),  for  all  feature  extraction  methods.  The 
decrease  was  not  significant  when  more  channels  were 
included  (5-8,  p>0.05).  The  EER  had  similar  results,  with  a 
significant  decrease  in  the  lower  number  of  channels  (1-4, 
p<0.05)  for  FDT  and  AR  methods.  However,  for  the  TD 
method,  the  decrease  in  EER  was  only  significant  from  one 
channel  to  three  channels  (p<0.05,  Fig.  3(A)).  Similar 
outcomes  were  observed  in  the  Normal  Test  scenario  for  all 
three methods. When the channel numbers were smaller, there 
was a significant decrease with increasing channel number: the 

 
 
ArXiv.org 

Fig. 4. (A and B) The median AUC and the median EER for the combined feature sets (TD, TD+FDT and TD+AR) and number of channels (1-8) for 
the Normal Test (left column), Leaked Test (middle column) and Self Test (right column) scenario of the verification system. Each line indicates the 
respective median values, and shaded area indicates the corresponding middle 50 percentile (25% to 75%). (C)The range of EER values (EERr) for the 
feature  sets  (TD,  TD+FDT and  TD+AR)  and  number of  channels  (1-8)  for  the  Normal Test, Leaked  Test,   and  Self Test  scenario  of  the  verification 
system. The range is calculated as a part of the sequential forward selection algorithm at the end of every iteration. 

AUC  and  EER  decreased  significantly  for  smaller  channel 
numbers (1-4, p<0.05) for TD and FDT methods and from one 
to three (p<0.05) for the AR method. For the Self Test scenario, 
the  AUC  and  EER  significantly  decreased  when  the  channel 
number increased from one to two (  p<0.05) for all the three 
feature extraction methods, and the decrease was not significant 
for  the  channel  numbers  (2  to  8,  p>0.05).  For  all  the  feature 
extraction methods the EERr decreased from channel length 1 
to 8, consistently across all analysis scenarios (Fig. 3(C)). The 
decrease  in  range  was  minimal  (EERr)  when  the  number  of 
channels was between three and eight.  

B.   Performance Evaluation of Identification System  
R1E  and  R5E  were  used  to  quantify  the  authentication 
performance  with  different  feature  extraction  methods  and 
channel numbers. Fig. 5(A) shows the distribution of the R1E 
and R5E for the different methods and the number of channels. 
Median R1E for the FDT method and eight channels was 2% 
(Q1=0%,  Q3=12%)  and  Median  R5E  was  0%  (Q1=0%, 
Q3=0.2%)    for  the  identification  system,  which  was  in 
agreement with a previous study having a similar experimental 
setup.  The  TD  feature  set  had  a  comparatively  lower  median 
R1E of 0.2% (Q1 = 0%, Q3= 4.6%) and a similar R5E of 0% 
(Q1=0%, Q3=0.1%). The AR feature set had a median R1E of 

18.8% (Q1=7.4%, Q3=57.9%). For the combined feature sets, 
the median R1E for TD+FDT was 0.06% (Q1 = 0%, Q3= 2.9%) 
and median R1E for TD+FDT was 0.2% (Q1 = 0%, Q3= 4.6%). 
It  was  evident  that  the  R1E  reached  a  plateau  (median 
R1E≤3%)  when  the  number  of  channels  used  was  four  and 
higher.  Fig.  5(b)  shows  the  R1Er  and  R5Er  for  the  feature 
extraction methods and the number of channels. Both the R1Er 
and R5Er decreased with an increasing number of channels. For 
the TD feature extraction method, the R1Er for one channel was 
0.17 and the  R1Er for two channels was 0.09. Thereafter, the 
R15r was lower than 0.02 and reached a plateau for more than 
three  channels.  The  FDT  had  an  R1Er  of  0.076  (n=1),  0.072 
(n=2)  and  0.05  (n=3)  and  thereafter  it  plateaued  with 
R1Er<0.015. The AR had an R1Er of 0.057 (n=1), 0.045 (n=2) 
and  0.028  (n=3)  and  reached  a  plateau  for  more  than  three 
channels.  The combined feature sets (TD+FDT and TD+AR) 
had R1Er similar to the TD feature sets for number of channels 
higher than two (n>2). The R5Er showed a similar distribution 
for the feature extraction methods and the number of channels. 
Feature  Extraction  Methods:  The  R1E  was  significantly 
lower for the TD method (p<0.05) than FDT and AR for all the 
number of channels (n=1-8). Also, the FDT was significantly 
lower  (p<0.05)  than  AR  for  all  the  channels.  For  the  R5E 
analysis, the difference between the feature extraction methods 

 
 
ArXiv.org 

Fig. 5. (A and B) The median R1E and the median R5E for the processing methods (FDT, TD, AR), their combinations (TD, TD+FDT, TD+AR) and 

number of channels (1-8) for the identification system. Each line indicates the respective median values, and shaded area indicates the corresponding 
middle 50 percentile (25% to 75%). (C and D) The range of the R1E (R1Er) and R5E (R5Er) for the feature extraction methods (FDT, TD and AR) and 
the combined feature sets (TD, TD+FDT,TD+AR) for different number of channels (1-8) for the identification system. The range is calculated as a part of 
the sequential forward selection algorithm at the end of every iteration 

(TD, FDT, and AR) was seen for the lower number of channels 
(1-3).  The  TD  method  had  a  significantly  lower  R5E  for  1-2 
number  of  channels.  However,  for  the  inclusion  of  more 
channels (3-8), there was no difference between the R5E for TD 
and FDT, but the AR had a significantly higher R5E than TD 
and  FDT  (p<0.05).  For  a  combination  of  TD  with  spectral 
features  it  was  observed  that  the  R1E  for  TD+FDT    was 
significantly  lower  (p<0.05)  than  the  TD+AR  and  TD  for 
different  channel  lengths.  For  a  4-channel  configuration,  the 
EER  for  TD+FDT  was  0.7%  (Q1=10-4%,  Q3=7.58%),  which 
was significantly (p<0.05) lower than the R1E for TD method 
(Median=3%,Q1=10-3%,  Q3=14.3%),  and  R1E  for  TD+AR 
(Median=3.8% (Q1=10-3%, Q3=11.2 %). The R1Er was higher 
for  the  TD  method  for  the  number  of  channels  one  and  two 
(1-2) and was the lowest from channel length (3-8, Fig. 5(C)). 
The  R5Er  was  the  highest  for  the  TD  method  for  the  first 
channel  number  and  was  the  lowest  from  2-8.  The  R1Er was 
higher  for  the  FDT  method  than  the  AR  method  for  a  lower 
number  of  channels  (1-3)  and  thereafter  the  R1Er  dropped 
below 0.02 for both the methods.  

Number  of  Channels:  The  R1E  for  the  TD  method 
decreased significantly for the number of channels one to four 
(1-4,  p<0.05).  There  was  no  significant  decrease  in  further 
addition. For  the  FDT and AR method, the R1E significantly 
decreased  for  the  number  of  channels  one  to  three  (1-3, 
p<0.05). The R5E significantly decreased for all three methods 
(p<0.05)  for  channels  1-2.  From  3-8  the  error  was  almost 
constant with the TD and FDT having a median R1E of zero. 
For  all  the  methods,  the  R1Er  decreased  from  the  number  of 

channels  1-8,  however,  the  decrease  was  minimal  from 
channels 4-8. For all the methods, the R5Er also decreased from 
the number of channels 1-8, however, the R5Er plateaued from 
channels 3-8.  

For  both  the  verification  and  identification  system  (the 
optimal  parameters  (TD  Feature  selection  and  4  electrode 
channels, as discussed in section IV.(C)) were used to test the 
performance of NinaPro DB7 (shown in Table I). The results 
show  that  the  EER  for  Normal  Test  was  6.4%  (Q1=3.4%, 
Q3=11.2%),  the  EER  for  Leaked  Test  was  6.8%  (Q1=3.2%, 
Q3=11.9%) and the EER for Self Test was 23.5% (Q1=18.2%, 
Q3=29.7%). The R1E for the identification system was 10.9% 
(Q1=4.5%, Q3=21.9%). 

IV.  DISCUSSION 

in 

the 

This paper systematically investigated the effects of feature 
extraction  methods  and  the  channel  reduction  using  EMG  to 
achieve  optimal  authentication  performance 
two 
application  systems:  user  verification  and  user  identification. 
The main advantage of using EMG over other biosignals is the 
high  accuracy  of  dual-mode  authentication  with  both 
knowledge-based 
authentication 
information. The ability to use sEMG for recognizing accurate 
gestures allows the user to choose unique gestures as their own 
authentication code. In the verification system, the Normal Test 
scenario fully utilizes this dual-mode authentication property of 
sEMG. The Normal Test scenario represents the authentication 
system  with  both  the  layers  of  protection  (knowledge-based 
and  biometrics-based).  In  the  Leaked  Test  scenario,  only 

biometrics-based 

and 

 
 
 
ArXiv.org 

TABLE I 
TD FEATURE EXTRACTION AND  
FOUR-CHANNEL EMG CONFIGURATION 

Verification 
(EER) 
Normal Test 
Leaked Test 
Self Test 

Current Study 
Q1 

NinaPro Database 
Med 
Q3  Med 
Q3 
Q1 
0.012  0.001  0.040  0.064  0.034  0.112 
0.032  0.119 
0.055  0.068 
0.020  0.001 
0.182  0.297 
0.172  0.235 
0.093  0.048 

Identification 
(R1E) 

Current Study 
Q1 

NinaPro Database 
Med 
Q3 
Q1 
Q3  Med 
0.030  0.001  0.143  0.109  0.045  0.219 

TD: Time domain feature set, EER: Equal error rate,  
R1E: Rank-1 Error, Q1: 1st quartile (25%) Q3: 3rd quartile (75%) 

the  code 

is  available  as 

biometric-based  protection 
is 
compromised. And the Self Test scenario further illustrated the 
unique  authentication  power  of  the  sEMG-based  system,  in 
which  the  authentication  code  is  forgotten  but  the  legitimate 
user can be still verified by performing other gestures (codes). 
With  a  typical  combination  of  four-channel  and  FTD  feature 
set, the median EER of the Leaded Test (5.4%) was higher than 
that  of  the  Normal  Test  (3%),  indicating  a  2.4%  additional 
protection  provided  by  the  user-defined  authentication  code 
(Fig. 3 (A and B)). The nature of the verification system makes 
it challenging to get a low error (specifically R1E). The genuine 
user must be always predicted as rank-1 or else it is considered 
an error. The median R1E for a four-channel system was 12.4% 
(FDT feature set), 3% (TD feature set), and 36.4% (AR feature 
set).  Clearly,  the  TD  feature  set  had  the  best  authentication 
performance which is discussed in the next section.  

A.  Feature extraction methods 
The  TD  feature  extraction  method  resulted  in  better 
authentication performance than FDT and AR for two scenarios 
of  the  verification  system  (the  Leaked  test  and  Normal  Test, 
shown in Fig. 3) and the identification system (Fig. 5). For the 
Self Test, both the TD and FDT had similar performance across 
all channel numbers and outperformed the AR method, which 
had  the  poorest  performance  in  all  number  of  channels.  This 
was in agreement with the previous studies that compared AR 
with  the  TD  and  FDT  methods  [44].  For  the  identification 
system,  the  TD  feature  set  had  a  significantly  lower  median 
R1E  (3%)  than  that  of  the  FDT  (12.4%).  Therefore,  the  TD 
feature set has an overall superiority in performance over FDT 
for both verification and identification systems. This  outcome 
suggests  that  the  TD  feature  set  is  likely  more  sensitive  to 
individual-differences 
for  biometric 
applications.  Previous  studies  developing  a  generalized 
multiuser  model  found  that  common  spatial-spectral  analysis 
(CSSA)  and  spectral  moments,  both  similar  to  FDT,  have 
higher  accuracy  than  the  TD  features  [17,  45].  These  studies 
suggest  that  these  features  are  less  user-dependent,  which 
means  they  capture  fewer  individual  characteristics  than  TD 
features, and might explain the finding in this study that the TD 
feature performing better than FDT and AR feature sets. 

in  sEMG,  crucial 

While  comparing  TD  with  the  combined  feature  sets,  the 
average  EER of TD (4%) was higher than TD+FDT (2.67%) 
and TD+AR (2.7%) for the verification system, and the average 

Fig. 6. CMC curve for the  identification system using 4 channels sEMG 
and TD Feature extraction. 

R1E for TD (3%) was higher than TD+FDT (0.7%) and lower 
than  TD+AR(3.8%)  for 
identification  system.  The 
the 
difference  in  performance  for  the  TD  feature  set,  although 
significant 
(p<0.05),  was  considered  acceptable  while 
comparing  to  other  biometric  traits  [7].  Due  to  the  superior 
performance  of  the  TD  feature  set  and  the  relatively  lesser 
computational  complexity  than  the  combined  features,  it  was 
considered  as  the  optimal  feature  extraction  technique  for 
biometric applications. 

The median EER for the TD feature set and an eight-channel 
setup  was  0.27%  (Normal Test),  0.48%  (Leaked Test),  lower 
than  those  reported  by  a different  study  (Leaked  Test  EER  = 
14.96%) which used 64 channels and a combined feature set of 
frequency, 
(sample  entropy, 
waveform 
[10].  This 
corroborates  our  findings  and  suggests  that  TD  feature  set 
would have superior performance than other feature extraction 
methods even with a disadvantage of the number of channels. 

spectral  entropy,  median 
root  mean  square) 

length,  and 

B.  Number of channels and channel reduction 
As expected, the median EER reduced while increasing the 
number of channels for all scenarios of the verification system 
and for the identification system. This is in accordance with the 
previous gesture recognition studies that investigated channel 
reduction [22, 40, 41]. It is evident from Fig. 3 (A,B) and Fig. 5 
(A,B),  a  four-channel  setup  was  considered  to  provide  a 
balance  between  overall  authentication  performance  and 
complexity (i.e. channel numbers). The error values for the TD 
feature set are comparable to those reported in previous sEMG 
biometric-related studies [6, 10, 12]. A previous study used 64 
channel  HDEMG  [10].  Our results  indicated  that  there  might 
not  be  a  need  for  high-density  EMG  as  four-channel  setup 
provided  similar  authentication  performance.  While  a 
one-channel  (on  the  FDS  muscle)  configuration  was  used  in 
[12], the half total error rate (HTER) of less than 90% was not 
sufficient for any practical authentication system. 

The error range parameters EERr, R1Er, and R5Er were used 
in  the  study  to  determine  if  the  channel  location  has  a 
significant impact. For all the scenarios it was observed that the 
first  electrode  has  a  higher  error  range  than  the  remaining 
channels as shown in Fig. 3 (C) and Fig. 5 (C and D). In the 
sequential  forward  selection,  the  lowest  error  channel  was 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ArXiv.org 

selected in every iteration. Therefore, for the one channel setup 
(first  iteration)  the  higher  error  range  suggests  a  significant 
impact  on  the  first  channel  location.  As  observed  in  all  the 
scenarios,  the  electrode  placed  on  the  Flexor  Carpi  Ulnaris 
(FCU)  consistently  contributed 
the 
authentication  performance.  This  was  in  agreement  with  the 
study that determined the best forearm muscle to control a soft 
robotic glove [46]. From channels 2-8, the impact was shown to 
be  lower,  thus  indicating  the  remaining  electrodes  could  be 
placed  irrespective  of  specific  muscle  locations,  a  desirable 
feature in practical applications.  

the  most 

towards 

C.  Optimal configuration. 
The EER and R1E for the four-channel setup and TD feature 
extraction are listed in Table I. From the above findings, it can 
be seen that the combination of a four-channel sEMG setup, of 
which  one  is  attached  on  FCU,  and  the  TD  feature  set,  the 
average  EER  for  the  Normal  Test  (1.2%),  Leaked  Test  (2%) 
and  Self  Test  (9.3%)  can  satisfy  the  requirement  of  a 
verification  system  (shown  in  Table  I).  The  identification 
system  R1E  was  3%  for  this  setup.  These  values  are 
comparable  to  another  study  that  reported  an  error  of  0.5%, 
however, they used 64 channels and a combination of different 
features  [11].  Another  study  used  an  eight-channel  forearm 
bracelet  and  a  combination  of  frequency  domain  and  time 
domain features and obtained a FAR of 0.2% and FRR of 2.9% 
[47]. A different study using an eight-channel setup and FDT 
feature  set  reported  an  R1E  error  of  9%  [6].  In  the  present 
study, a very low R1E of 0.2% can be achieved while using an 
8-channel  configuration  and  TD  feature  extraction.  Fig.  6 
presents the cumulative match characteristics (CMC) curve for 
such  an  identification  system.  It  was  observed  that  with  an 
increase in rank (k) of the system, the recognition error (RkE) 
reduced,  thus  improving  the  performance.  The  analysis  was 
repeated  for  the  NinaPro  DB7  database  consisting  of  20 
participants and performing 17 hand and finger gestures [43]. It 
was found that for a similar set of parameters (4 channels and 
TD  feature  set)  the  performance  was  slightly  lower  than  the 
present  study  for  the  Leaked  Test  (EER=6.4%)  and  Normal 
Test (EER=6.8%, reported in Table II). The lower performance 
observed  with  the  Self  Test  (EER=23.5%)  and  Identification 
System (R1E=10.9%) might be due to the partly isotonic nature 
of the hand gestures, suggesting further investigation of feature 
sets specific for dynamic contractions. Therefore, the optimal 
configuration  for  an  sEMG  authentication  system  consists  of 
four sEMG channels and a TD feature set. If there is a higher 
performance  requirement,  using  8-channel  setup  will  provide 
enhanced  performance.  The  findings  of  the  study  helped 
determine the best feature set in terms of performance accuracy 
and  computational  complexity  as  well  the  optimal number  of 
channels  necessary  to  make  accurate  authentications  using 
sEMG. 

The performance reported in Table II was comparable to the 
other  commonly  used  biometric  traits  (fingerprint,  iris,  and 
facial recognition) reviewed in a previous study [7]. The sEMG 
based  biometrics  has  two  similar  functionalities  as  ECG  and 
EEG:  hidden  nature  and  liveness  detection.  The  sEMG 
possesses unique knowledge-based security which allows users 
to  customize  their  access  codes  as  different  gestures.  This 
feature, although not available in ECG  can be achieved using 

for 

this 

[48], 

is  almost 

impossible 

EEG  by  using  different  mental  states  for  codes.  As  only 
accuracy >70% has been achieved for  classifying two mental 
real-world 
states 
applications. The Leaked Test verification which is a measure 
of the biometric-based security achieved a median EER of 2%. 
This  was  comparable  to  the  reported  EER  of  ECG  and  EEG 
biometrics which was 0.1% to 5% [3], and 1% to 20% [4, 5]. 
For the Identification system, the median R1E was 3% which 
was in range with the R1E reported for ECG and EEG, 0%-20% 
[3] and 1% to 20% [4, 5], respectively. This suggests that the 
four-channel  sEMG  with  TD  feature  extraction  can  achieve 
comparable  if  not  better  biometric  performance  than  other 
biosignals. 

improve 

significantly 

D.  Limitation and Future work 
While discussed earlier in a previous study, a combination of 
gestures  may 
authentication 
performance.  It is important to note that  the results presented 
here only used one gesture, i.e. a single code. Including more 
than  more  code  will  certainly  further  improve  the  system 
performance, which is the topic of a subsequent study. Also, the 
present  study 
involved  data  from  24  participants.  A 
significantly  larger  participant  pool  will  be  used  for  future 
studies. Another limitation of the present study was the effect of 
time was not investigated, as all the sessions were performed on 
the same day, partly due to the COVID constraints currently in 
place at the University of Waterloo. A multi-session study will 
be  performed  to  validate  the  robustness  of  an  sEMG  based 
authentication system. 

V.  CONCLUSION 

The  TD  features had  improved  authentication  performance 
than  FDT  features  and  AR  features  for  the  Leaked  test  and 
Normal test of User Verification System and for all number of 
channels (n=1:8). The TD features had better performance than 
the FDT feature set in the User Identification System and for all 
number  of  channels  (n=1:8).  For  all  the  feature  sets,  four 
channels had a plateau in performance for a higher number of 
channels  for  both  the  verification  and  identification  system. 
Therefore,  the  TD  feature  set  and  the  four-channel  sEMG 
configuration  is  found  to  be  ideal  for  optimal  authentication 
performance using sEMG systems. The range of error was high 
for  the  first  channel  and  reduced  for  the  inclusion  of  further 
channels.  This  indicates  that  one  location  on  the  FCU  is 
important  and  the  remaining  could  be  placed  irrespective  of 
muscle  location.  This  finding  motivates  the  design  of  an 
easy-to-wear arm-band with four equally spaced electrodes and 
the  placement  is  recommended  in  a  way  that  one  of  the 
electrodes  is  right  on  top  of  the  FCU  for  best  authentication 
performance.  Therefore, 
based 
an 
authentication  system  for  biometric  applications  can  be 
designed  using  a  TD  feature  extraction  method  and  four 
equi-spaced electrodes with one of them positioned directly on 
the FCU muscle. 

accurate 

sEMG 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

Q.  Xiao,  "Technology  review-biometrics-technology,  application, 
challenge,  and  computational 
IEEE 
Computational Intelligence Magazine, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 5-25, 2007. 

intelligence  solutions," 

 
 
ArXiv.org 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 

[15] 

[16] 

[17] 

[18] 

[19] 

[20] 

[21] 

Jiang 

et  al., 

recognition," 

R.  M.  Bolle,  J.  H.  Connell,  S.  Pankanti,  N.  K.  Ratha,  and  A.  W. 
Senior, Guide to biometrics. Springer Science & Business Media, 
2013. 
J.  R.  Pinto,  J.  S.  Cardoso,  and  A.  Lourenço,  "Evolution,  current 
challenges,  and  future  possibilities  in  ECG  biometrics,"  IEEE 
Access, vol. 6, pp. 34746-34776, 2018. 
Q.  Gui, M.  V. Ruiz-Blondet,  S.  Laszlo,  and  Z.  Jin,  "A  survey on 
brain biometrics," ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1-38, 
2019. 
P.  Campisi  and  D.  La  Rocca,  "Brain  waves  for  automatic 
biometric-based  user 
IEEE  Transactions  on 
Information  Forensics  and  Security,  vol.  9,  no.  5,  pp.  782-800, 
2014. 
J.  He  and  N.  Jiang,  "Biometric  From  Surface  Electromyogram 
(sEMG): Feasibility of User Verification and Identification Based 
on  Gesture  Recognition,"  Frontiers 
in  Bioengineering  and 
Biotechnology, vol. 8, p. 58, 2020. 
G.  Dahia,  L.  Jesus,  and  M.  Pamplona  Segundo,  "Continuous 
authentication  using  biometrics:  An  advanced  review,"  Wiley 
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 
vol. 10, no. 4, p. e1365, 2020. 
R. D. Labati, V. Piuri, R. Sassi, F. Scotti, and G. Sforza, "Adaptive 
ECG biometric recognition: a study on re-enrollment methods for 
QRS  signals,"  in  2014  IEEE  symposium  on  computational 
intelligence in biometrics and identity management (CIBIM), 2014, 
pp. 30-37: IEEE. 
F. Agrafioti, F. M. Bui, and D. Hatzinakos, "Secure telemedicine: 
Biometrics for remote and continuous patient verification," Journal 
of Computer Networks and Communications, vol. 2012, 2012. 
X. 
"Neuromuscular  Password-based  User 
Authentication,"  IEEE  Transactions  on  Industrial  Informatics, 
2020. 
X.  Jiang,  K.  Xu,  X.  Liu,  D.  Liu,  C.  Dai,  and  W.  Chen, 
"High-Density  Surface  Electromyogram-based  Biometrics  for 
Personal  Identification,"  in  2020  42nd  Annual  International 
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society 
(EMBC), 2020, pp. 728-731: IEEE. 
Q. Li, P. Dong, and J. Zheng, "Enhancing the Security of Pattern 
Unlock  with  Surface  EMG-Based  Biometrics,"  Applied  Sciences, 
vol. 10, no. 2, p. 541, 2020. 
E. Scheme and K. Englehart, "Electromyogram pattern recognition 
for control of powered upper-limb prostheses: state of the art and 
challenges for clinical use," Journal of Rehabilitation Research and 
Development, vol. 48, no. 6, 2011. 
K. Englehart and B. Hudgins, "A robust, real-time control scheme 
for  multifunction  myoelectric  control,"  IEEE  Transactions  on 
Biomedical Engineering, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 848-854, 2003. 
J. He, D. Zhang, N. Jiang, X. Sheng, D. Farina, and X. Zhu, "User 
adaptation 
training: 
implications  for  EMG  pattern  recognition  in  prosthesis  control," 
Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 12, no. 4, p. 046005, 2015. 
T. Matsubara and J. Morimoto, "Bilinear modeling of EMG signals 
to  extract  user-independent  features  for  multiuser  myoelectric 
interface," IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 60, 
no. 8, pp. 2205-2213, 2013. 
R.  N. Khushaba,  "Correlation analysis  of electromyogram  signals 
for multiuser myoelectric interfaces," IEEE Transactions on Neural 
Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 745-755, 
2014. 
R. Shioji, S.-i. Ito, M. Ito, and M. Fukumi, "Personal authentication 
and  hand  motion  recognition  based  on  wrist  EMG  analysis  by  a 
convolutional  neural  network,"  in  2018  IEEE  International 
Conference on Internet of Things and Intelligence System (IOTAIS), 
2018, pp. 184-188: IEEE. 
S.  Shin,  J.  Jung,  and  Y.  T.  Kim,  "A  study  of  an  EMG-based 
authentication algorithm using an artificial neural network," in 2017 
IEEE SENSORS, 2017, pp. 1-3: IEEE. 
H. Yamaba et al., "On applying support vector machines to a user 
authentication  method  using  surface  electromyogram  signals," 
Artificial Life and Robotics, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 87-93, 2018. 
J. He, D. Zhang, X. Sheng, J. Meng, and X. Zhu, "Improved discrete 
fourier transform based spectral feature for surface electromyogram 
signal  classification," 
International 
Conference  of  the  IEEE  Engineering  in  Medicine  and  Biology 
Society (EMBC), 2013, pp. 6897-6900: IEEE. 

long-term,  open-loop  myoelectric 

in  2013  35th  Annual 

in 

[22] 

[23] 

[24] 

[25] 

[26] 

[27] 

[28] 

[29] 

[30] 

[31] 

[32] 

[33] 

[34] 

[35] 

[36] 

[37] 

[38] 

[39] 

G.  Li,  A.  E.  Schultz,  and  T.  A.  Kuiken,  "Quantifying  pattern 
recognition—Based  myoelectric  control  of  multifunctional 
transradial prostheses," IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and 
Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 185-192, 2010. 
A.  Phinyomark,  P.  Phukpattaranont,  and  C.  Limsakul,  "Feature 
reduction  and  selection  for  EMG  signal  classification,"  Expert 
Systems with Applications, vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 7420-7431, 2012. 
B.  Hudgins,  P.  Parker,  and  R.  N.  Scott,  "A  new  strategy  for 
IEEE  Transactions  on 
multifunction  myoelectric  control," 
Biomedical Engineering, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 82-94, 1993. 
A. Subasi, "Classification of EMG signals using combined features 
and  soft  computing  techniques,"  Applied  soft  computing,  vol.  12, 
no. 8, pp. 2188-2198, 2012. 
J.  He,  D.  Zhang,  X.  Sheng,  S. Li, and  X.  Zhu,  "Invariant  surface 
EMG  feature  against  varying  contraction  level  for  myoelectric 
control based on muscle coordination," IEEE Journal of Biomedical 
and Health Informatics, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 874-882, 2014. 
D. Graupe, J. Salahi, and K. H. Kohn, "Multifunctional prosthesis 
and orthosis  control via  microcomputer  identification of temporal 
pattern  differences  in  single-site  myoelectric  signals,"  Journal  of 
Biomedical Engineering, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 17-22, 1982. 
T.  Tuncer,  S.  Dogan,  and  A.  Subasi,  "Surface  EMG  signal 
classification using ternary pattern and discrete wavelet transform 
based  feature  extraction  for  hand  movement  recognition," 
Biomedical  Signal  Processing  and  Control,  vol.  58,  p.  101872, 
2020. 
A.  Subasi  and  S.  M.  Qaisar,  "Surface  EMG  signal  classification 
using  TQWT,  Bagging  and  Boosting  for  hand  movement 
recognition,"  Journal  of  Ambient  Intelligence  and  Humanized 
Computing, pp. 1-16, 2020. 
N.  V.  Iqbal  and  K.  Subramaniam,  "Robust  feature  sets  for 
contraction  level  invariant  control  of  upper  limb  myoelectric 
prosthesis," Biomedical Signal Processing and Control, vol. 51, pp. 
90-96, 2019. 
M.  Bilodeau,  M.  Cincera,  A.  B.  Arsenault,  and  D.  Gravel, 
"Normality  and  Stationarity  of  EMG  Signals  of  Elbow  Flexor 
Isometric,"  Journal  of 
Muscles  During  Ramp  and  Step 
Electromyography and Kinesiology, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 87-96, 1997. 
M.  A.  Oskoei  and  H.  Hu,  "Support  vector  machine-based 
classification  scheme  for  myoelectric  control  applied  to  upper 
limb," IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 55, no. 
8, pp. 1956-1965, 2008. 
Y.  Huang,  K.  B.  Englehart,  B.  Hudgins,  and  A.  D.  Chan,  "A 
Gaussian  mixture  model  based  classification  scheme 
for 
myoelectric  control  of  powered  upper  limb  prostheses,"  IEEE 
Transactions  on  Biomedical  Engineering,  vol.  52,  no.  11,  pp. 
1801-1811, 2005. 
B.  Tolooshams  and  N.  Jiang,  "Robustness  of  Frequency  Division 
Technique  for  Online  Myoelectric  Pattern  Recognition  Against 
Contraction  Level  Variation,"  Frontiers  in  Bioengineering  and 
Biotechnology, vol. 5, p. 3, 2017. 
A.  Pradhan,  N.  Jiang,  V.  Chester,  and  U.  Kuruganti,  "Linear 
robust 
regression  with 
simultaneous and proportional myoelectric control during medium 
and high contraction-level variation," Biomedical Signal Processing 
and Control, vol. 61, p. 101984, 2020. 
A.  D.  Chan  and  K.  Englehart,  "Continuous  classification  of 
myoelectric signals for powered prostheses using Gaussian mixture 
models," 
in  Proceedings  of  the  25th  Annual  International 
Conference  of  the  IEEE  Engineering  in  Medicine  and  Biology 
Society (IEEE Cat. No. 03CH37439), 2003, vol. 3, pp. 2841-2844: 
IEEE. 
D.  Tkach,  H.  Huang,  and  T.  A.  Kuiken,  "Study  of  stability  of 
time-domain  features  for  electromyographic  pattern  recognition," 
Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 21, 
2010. 
C.  L.  Pulliam,  J.  M.  Lambrecht,  and  R.  F.  Kirsch,  "EMG-based 
neural  network  control  of  transhumeral  prostheses,"  Journal  of 
Rehabilitation  Research and  Development,  vol. 48, no.  6, p.  739, 
2011. 
H.  Daley,  K.  Englehart,  L.  Hargrove,  and  U.  Kuruganti,  "High 
density electromyography data of normally limbed and transradial 
amputee  subjects  for multifunction prosthetic  control,"  Journal of 
Electromyography  and  Kinesiology,  vol.  22,  no.  3,  pp.  478-484, 
2012. 

frequency  division 

technique 

for 

 
ArXiv.org 

[40] 

[41] 

[42] 

[43] 

[44] 

[45] 

[46] 

[47] 

[48] 

H. Huang, P. Zhou, G. Li, and T. A. Kuiken, "An analysis of EMG 
electrode  configuration  for  targeted  muscle  reinnervation  based 
neural  machine  interface,"  IEEE  Transactions  on  Neural  Systems 
and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 37-45, 2008. 
A.  J.  Young,  L.  J.  Hargrove,  and  T.  A.  Kuiken,  "Improving 
myoelectric  pattern  recognition  robustness  to  electrode  shift  by 
changing interelectrode distance and electrode configuration," IEEE 
Transactions  on  Biomedical  Engineering,  vol.  59,  no.  3,  pp. 
645-652, 2011. 
C.  Castellini,  E.  Gruppioni,  A.  Davalli,  and  G.  o.  P.-P.  Sandini, 
"Fine detection of grasp force and posture by amputees via surface 
electromyography," Journal of Physiology-Paris, vol. 103, no. 3-5, 
pp. 255-262, 2009. 
A.  Krasoulis,  I.  Kyranou,  M.  S.  Erden,  K.  Nazarpour,  and  S. 
Vijayakumar,  "Improved  prosthetic  hand  control  with  concurrent 
use  of  myoelectric  and  inertial  measurements,"  Journal  of 
neuroengineering and rehabilitation, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1-14, 2017. 
A.  Phinyomark  and  E.  Scheme,  "An  investigation  of  temporally 
inspired  time  domain  features  for  electromyographic  pattern 
recognition," in 2018 40th Annual International Conference of the 
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 2018, 
pp. 5236-5240: IEEE. 
X. Sheng, B. Lv,  W. Guo, and X. Zhu, "Common spatial-spectral 
analysis  of  EMG  signals  for  multiday  and  multiuser  myoelectric 
interface,"  Biomedical  Signal  Processing  and  Control,  vol. 53,  p. 
101572, 2019. 
H.  K.  Hameed  et  al.,  "Identifying  the  Best  Forearm  Muscle  to 
Control  Soft  Robotic  Glove  System  by  Using  a  Single  sEMG 
Channel," 
in  Science  and  Engineering 
Technology  International  Conferences  (ASET),  2020,  pp.  1-4: 
IEEE. 
S.  Said,  A.  S.  Karar,  T.  Beyrouthy,  S.  Alkork,  and  A.  Nait-ali, 
"Biometrics  Verification  Modality  Using  Multi-Channel  sEMG 
Wearable  Bracelet,"  Applied  Sciences,  vol.  10,  no.  19,  p.  6960, 
2020. 
L.  Yao,  J.  Meng,  D.  Zhang,  X.  Sheng,  and  X.  Zhu,  "Combining 
motor  imagery  with  selective  sensation  toward  a  hybrid-modality 
BCI," IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 61, no. 
8, pp. 2304-2312, 2013. 

in  2020  Advances 

 
 
