1
2
0
2

r
a

M
4
1

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
6
3
9
7
0
.
3
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Anti-reﬂection Coated Vacuum Window for
the Primordial Inﬂation Polarization ExploreR (PIPER) balloon-borne
instrument

Rahul Datta,1 David T. Chuss,2 Joseph Eimer,1 Thomas Essinger-Hileman,3 Natalie N. Gandilo,3 Kyle Helson,3, 4
Alan J. Kogut,3 Luke Lowe,3 Paul Mirel,3 Karwan Rostem,3 Marco Sagliocca,3 Danielle Sponseller,1
Eric R. Switzer,3 Peter A. Taraschi,3 and Edward J. Wollack3
1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, 3701 San Martin Drive, Baltimore,
MD 21218 USA a)
2)Department of Physics, Villanova University, 800 Lancaster Avenue, Villanova, PA 19085 USA
3)NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, 8800 Greenbelt Road, Greenbelt, MD 20771 USA
4)The Center for Space Sciences and Technology, The University of Maryland Baltimore County, 1000 Hilltop Cir, Baltimore,
MD 21250

(Dated: 16 March 2021)

Measuring the faint polarization signal of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) not only requires high optical
throughput and instrument sensitivity but also control over systematic effects. Polarimetric cameras or receivers used
in this setting often employ dielectric vacuum windows, ﬁlters, or lenses to appropriately prepare light for detection
by cooled sensor arrays. These elements in the optical chain are typically designed to minimize reﬂective losses
and hence improve sensitivity while minimizing potential imaging artifacts such as glint and ghosting. The Primordial
Inﬂation Polarization ExploreR (PIPER) is a balloon-borne instrument designed to measure the polarization of the CMB
radiation at the largest angular scales and characterize astrophysical dust foregrounds. PIPER(cid:48)s twin telescopes and
detector systems are submerged in an open-aperture liquid helium bucket dewar. A fused-silica window anti-reﬂection
(AR) coated with polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE) is installed on the vacuum cryostat that houses the cryogenic detector
arrays. Light passes from the skyward portions of the telescope to the detector arrays though this window, which utilizes
an indium seal to prevent superﬂuid helium leaks into the vacuum cryostat volume. The AR coating implemented
reduces reﬂections from each interface to < 1% compared to ∼ 10% from an uncoated window surface. The AR
coating procedure and room temperature optical measurements of the window are presented. The indium vacuum
sealing process is also described in detail and test results characterizing its integrity to superﬂuid helium leaks are
provided.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Vacuum windows are widely used in astronomical
measurement systems in the radio through the terahertz
wavebands that employ cryogenically cooled detectors and
optics. Common application examples include use in radio
astronomy receivers, airborne remote sensing systems, and
suborbital
instruments for characterization of the cosmic
microwave background (CMB). These receiver systems
require a physical barrier or window that is transparent over
the desired waveband at the interface between the external
ambient environment and the instrument’s internal vacuum
space. This window interface simultaneously holds vacuum
against ambient pressure and enables the desired optical
observations.

The window’s geometry, service environment, and optical
response are intimately tied to the material properties
used in the design. Over the observing band, minimal
in-band dielectric absorption and low total emissivity is
preferred. An anti-reﬂection (AR) coating is often employed
to mitigate the loss of sensitivity and image artifacts arising
from reﬂections.
there is a trade between
the magnitude of the dielectric function of the window

In practice,

a)Electronic mail: rdatta2@jhu.edu

material and the number of layers or complexity of the
AR coating structures required to provide high transmission
over a desired bandwidth1,2. In addition, the window needs
to provide a reliable mechanical barrier to withstand the
pressure differential at the vacuum–ambient interface and
accommodate thermally induced stresses in the assembly.
Two basic implementation strategies, the use of transparent
deformable membranes and rigid structural elements, are
commonly encountered in practice.

Prior deformable vacuum window designs have primarily
relied upon the use of low index polymeric materials.
include high-density polyethylene (HDPE)3,4
Examples
and reinforced ultra-high-molecular-weight polyethylene
(UHMWPE)5 ﬁlms, which are well-suited for
room
temperature instrument window interfaces operating at
microwave through sub-millimeter wavelengths. Composite
window structures using low-density closed-cell foams to
provide structural support for relatively thin plastic vacuum
barriers can also be found in this setting6,7. While successfully
deployed in the ﬁeld, cold ﬂow, gas permeability, and changes
in material properties with temperature present potential
challenges for reliable cryogenic application of this design
strategy.

Structural vacuum window implementations tend to utilize
higher index materials with low attenuation, high thermal
conductivity, and high mechanical strength.
Sapphire,
alumina, diamond, and compensated silicon have been

 
 
 
 
 
 
considered for cryogenically cooled windows in high-power
millimeter-wave applications8.
In the microwave through
sub-millimeter wavebands z-cut crystalline quartz windows
instrumentation9.
have been widely used in astronomical
Similarly, commonly available industrial grade fused silica
glass has also been used as a window material for ground
based CMB applications10. It is notable that crystalline media
are generally preferred over amorphous dielectric media in
this spectral regime from a dielectric loss perspective at
cryogenic temperatures11–13.
In this approach, the optical
path loss is essentially dictated by the window thickness
required to prevent failure of the window structure14. For
cryogenic applications, differences in the coefﬁcient of
thermal expansion between the window and the AR coating
can present an implementation concern.
If unaddressed,
the resultant thermally induced stress can potentially lead to
delamination of the AR coating or compromise the barrier’s
structural integrity.

The speciﬁc window implementation presented here is
intended for use on the Primordial Inﬂation Polarization
ExploreR (PIPER) balloon-borne instrument15,16.
This
system is designed to map the polarization of the CMB on
the largest angular scales and characterize dust foregrounds
by observing a large fraction of the sky in four frequency
bands in the range 200–600 GHz17. The PIPER receiver18,19
is submerged in liquid helium, which becomes a superﬂuid
during ﬂight due to the low ambient pressure at balloon
altitudes, and represents additional challenges for realization
of the vacuum window assembly. The window and all of its
interfaces need to be impervious to superﬂuid helium and able
to reliably survive multiple thermal cycles.

This work focuses on the window and vacuum seal
implementation for PIPER’s 200 GHz observing band.
The paper is organized as follows:
in Section II, design
considerations for
the proposed system application are
discussed. The optical model used for evaluation of the
window and AR-coating response is described in Section III.
In Section IV, experimental characterization of the optical
materials in use and the ﬁnal AR-coated window assembly is
presented. The window installation employing a vacuum seal
robust to superﬂuid helium leaks is described in Section V.
The setup for thermal cycling tests and characterization of the
vacuum window leakage rates are presented in Section VI. A
summary can be found in Section VII.

II. WINDOW DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

2

FIG. 1. A simpliﬁed ray trace of the PIPER optics.
PIPER
employs twin telescopes for simultaneously measuring Stokes
Q and U, only one of the two independent optical paths is
PIPER’s reﬂective fore-optics are in an off-axis
shown here.
Gregorian-like conﬁguration20 with a Variable-delay Polarization
Modulator (VPM)21 as the ﬁrst optical element, primary mirror,
folding ﬂat mirror, and secondary mirror. The light is focused
onto the detectors by silicon re-imaging optics comprising two
anti-reﬂection coated silicon lenses1. The superﬂuid-tight vacuum
vessel houses the receiver, which contains the second silicon lens,
sub-Kelvin cooled detector package, cold readout components, and
the cooling system18. The vacuum vessel houses both focal planes,
with separate windows for each path.

A ray trace schematic of the PIPER optics is shown in Fig. 1
highlighting the main optical components20. Light is focused
onto the detectors by two silicon lenses, one in front of the
vacuum window and the other just after the window within
the superﬂuid helium tight vacuum vessel that contains the
focal plane arrays18. The window is located at an intermediate
focus and illuminated by incidence angles ranging from 0 to
16◦ with the optical axis normal to its surface.

Noting that the materials commonly used in deformable
impervious to superﬂuid helium, a

membranes are not

rigid structural element is adopted for the window design.
Crystalline quartz and fused silica were the primary
candidates considered due to their optical and mechanical
properties in the bulk form. Their modest index of refraction
allows implementation of an AR coating operating over
∼30% fractional bandwidth with a single layer realized from
a readily available polymer such as PTFE9. A survey of
the dielectric properties of amorphous silica and crystalline
quartz and a discussion of their microwave through infrared
absorption can be found in Cataldo et al.22.

3

FIG. 2. Top Left: Schematic representation of the AR-coating layers on a dielectric half-space used to model the reﬂectance of the window.
For simplicity lossless materials are adopted in this simulation. Bottom Left: Analytical reﬂectance at normal incidence (black) from a window
AR-coated with a 254 µm thick layer of PTFE. The simulation assumes a 12.7 µm thick bond layer. For reference, the ﬁlter-stack transmittance
for the PIPER instrument’s 200 GHz channel is indicated in green. The grey shaded region represents the ﬁlter’s half-power bandwidth, which
spans 171–233 GHz. The design tolerances to ±10% deviation in the PTFE layer thickness are also shown in red and blue, respectively. The
horizontal lines represent the reﬂectance averaged over the band of interest shown in grey. Right: Analytical reﬂectance at 15 degree oblique
incidence for Transverse Magnetic (TM, top panel) and Transverse Electric (TE, bottom panel) modes of polarized light for the nominal PTFE
layer thickness as well as ±10% deviation from nominal. The horizontal grey lines in all three plots correspond to the reﬂectance in the
absence of an AR coating.

Industrial grade fused silica glass substratei was selected
over crystalline quartz as the transparent structural material
for the PIPER vacuum windows due to its availability in
the aperture size of interest. The diameter of the window
clear aperture is 19.1 cm driven by the size of the optical
beam, which spans 15.2 cm in diameter at the location of
the window. The thickness of the fused silica window is
approximately 9.5 mm, chosen so as to support a pressure of
an atmosphere with a margin of safety of three. The coated
section of the window should span the beam which sets the
lower limit on the coating diameter of 15.2 cm. In order to
ensure a proper vacuum seal, the edge of the window should
be clear and smooth, which sets an upper limit on the coating
diameter of approximately 17.2 cm. A nominal diameter of
16 cm for the AR-coated region of the window was targeted
in fabrication.

i www.mcmaster.com; fused quartz window 7.500(cid:48)(cid:48) diameter, 0.375(cid:48)(cid:48) thick
(part number 1357T999)

III. WINDOW AND AR COATING OPTICAL MODEL

In designing a layered AR structure, the index of refraction
and thickness of the coating layers are chosen such that
the reﬂection amplitudes arising from dielectric interfaces
destructively interfere. For a lossless single-layer AR coating
between vacuum and a substrate with refractive index n,
perfect cancellation at normal incidence occurs when the
√
n and thickness provides a
layer’s refractive index is
quarter-wavelength optical delay. The refractive index of
PTFE23 is ≈1.42, close to
n for fused silica, and a suitable
choice as a single-layer AR coating.

√

In practice, an analytical model is used for evaluation of
the window’s optical response and to explore the sensitivity
of the nominal design parameters to fabrication tolerances.
The reﬂectance is computed for a plane-parallel stack of m
dielectric layers of physical thickness tm illuminated by a
collimated beam. The net reﬂectance for normal incidence

4

the window surface. The etching processii involved surface
treatment using a mixture of sodium and ammonia that is
formulated to create a bondable surface. The bond is realized
with Epo-Tekiii 301-2 epoxy9 and adhesion promoter28 Lord
AP-134 iv. This combination improves adhesion of the AR
coating to the silica substrate and has been observed to enable
the optical structure to survive multiple cryogenic cycles.
The dielectric function of the Epo-Tek 301-2 epoxy in the
far-IR, ˆεr (cid:39) 3.7 + 0.1i, is reported in Munson et al.29 and was
adopted for modeling purposes.

From the available physical thicknesses of PTFE, 0.010(cid:48)(cid:48)
(254 µm) is very close to quarter-wavelength electrical delay
at 200 GHz. Using this nominal value for the coating
thickness the response of the window was modeled assuming
notional parameters for the bond layer. The model was
evaluated to investigate the inﬂuence of PTFE thickness
variations and sensitivity to incident polarization.
For
simplicity, lossless dielectrics were adopted. See Fig. 2 (top
left panel) for a schematic of the modeled window geometry
and index of refraction for each layer. The bottom left panel
of Fig. 2 shows the predicted reﬂectance at normal incidence
assuming nwindow = 1.95, nPTFE = 1.42, tPTFE = 254 µm,
nbond =
In all the responses
evaluated, the reﬂectance averaged over the 171–233 GHz
half-power bandwidth was well below 1%.

3.7, and tbond = 12.7 µm.

√

IV. REFLECTION AND TRANSMISSION
MEASUREMENTS

In this section, reﬂection measurements of bulk silica
samples and experimental methods employed are described.
Measurements of the complex dielectric function of the PTFE
used for the coating are also presented. The reﬂectance from
a prototype silica vacuum window anti-reﬂection coated on
both sides with a layer of PTFE is measured. The procedure
for applying the coating is described in detail in Appendix A.
In comparing these measurements of the AR-coated window
structure to the modeled optical response, the derived material
properties of bulk dielectric samples are used as constraints.
All the measurements described were carried out at room
temperature. Given the materials in use are amorphous, their
dielectric response will change by a perturbation related to the
change in density upon cooling to cryogenic temperatures32.

A. Dielectric Characterization: Bulk Silica

The reﬂectance and transmittance of bulk fused silica
samples of various thicknesses were measured using an
Agilent PNA-X vector network analyzer (VNA) coupled
to the free space quasioptical setup24 shown in Fig. 3.

ii www.professionalplastics.com/TEFLONETCHED
iii Epoxy Technology, Inc. (www.epotek.com)
iv www.chemical-concepts.com/lord-ap-134.html

FIG. 3. (Adapted with permission from D. T. Chuss, K. Rostem, E.
J. Wollack, L. Berman, F. Colazo, M. DeGeorge,K. Helson, and M.
Sagliocca, Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, Vol. 88, Page 104501,
(2017),24.) Reﬂection and transmission measurement setup using a
Vector Network Analyzer (VNA). The sample-under-test was placed
approximately at the focus between the ellipsoidal mirrors.

at the j-th interface is given by the recursion relation25:

Γj =

ρj + Γj+1e−2ikjtj
1 + ρjΓj+1e−2ikjtj
ˆnj−1 − ˆnj
ˆnj−1 + ˆnj

where, ρj =

,

j = m, m − 1, ...., 1

, kj =

2π ˆnj
λ

,

ˆn0 = ˆnm+1 = 1 (1)

and initialized by Γm+1 = ρm+1.
In Eq. 1 the complex
refractive index, ˆn ≡ n + iκ is related to the relative dielectric
function, ˆεr ≡ ε (cid:48) + iε (cid:48)(cid:48), by the following relation:

ˆn2 = (n2 − κ 2) + i2nκ = ˆεr.

(2)

is in general

ˆεr,
The dielectric permittivity,
frequency
dependent, however, over the relatively narrow spectral range
considered here, ε (cid:48) and ε (cid:48)(cid:48) can be considered constants. The
ratio of the imaginary to the real part of the relative dielectric
function gives a measure of the dissipation in the medium,
commonly referred to as the loss tangent of the material:

tan δe = ε (cid:48)(cid:48)/ε (cid:48) = 2nκ/(n2 − κ 2).

(3)

The model deﬁned in Eq. 1 can be readily extended to
accommodate oblique incidence25 and was used to investigate
the polarization dependence of the dielectric stack. An
alternative optical modeling approach to the one adopted
in this work is the transmission line or ABCD matrix
method23,26,27.

In specifying the window optical response the goal was
frequency
to minimize reﬂectance over
single
a
bandwidth while
(e.g.,
commercially-available thickness of PTFE sheet
discrete thicknesses of 2, 4, 5, 10, 15, etc. in thousandths of
an inch) uniformly etched on one surface to aid adhesion to

the instrument
to
coating

limiting

the

5

FIG. 4. Top: Measured reﬂectance (red dots) from a 1.64 mm thick bulk fused silica sample along with the best-ﬁt analytical model (grey
line) with parameters ε (cid:48), ε (cid:48)(cid:48), and thickness t. The ﬁt values are noted in the legend. Bottom: Measured reﬂectance (red dots) from a 9.69 mm
thick sample and the corrected reﬂectance (green dots), which accounts for the difference between the modeled plane wave illumination of the
sample and a focused beam30 in the measurement setup. The correction follows the prescription outlined in Section IV.A. The analytical model
(grey line) assumes ε (cid:48) to be ﬁxed, its value given by the best-ﬁt value for the thin sample in the top panel. The numerical coefﬁcients in the
correction function, ε (cid:48)(cid:48), and thickness t are free parameters while ﬁtting an analytical model scaled by the inverse of the correction function to
the data. The correction function determined from the ﬁt is then applied back to the raw measured data (red dots) to get the corrected measured
reﬂectance (green dots). The same exercise is repeated with two additional samples. The complex dielectric function of the bulk silica as
inferred from the ﬁts to these measurements is ˆεr = (3.84±0.02) + (0.0021±0.0007)i, where the uncertainty in ε (cid:48)(cid:48) is the error on the mean
from the individual ﬁts to the data from the four bulk samples measured. The reﬂectance spectra as well as the analytical model have identical
sampling and are smoothed with an 11-point (i.e., 0.9075 GHz) Savitsky-Golay ﬁlter31 for the purpose of presentation.

A multi-tier calibration procedure was employed following
Chuss et al.24. The VNA was calibrated at the waveguide
ports using WR05 Thru-Reﬂect-Line (TRL) standards over a
spectral range spanning 140–220 GHz. The test system was
aligned by adjusting the position and orientation of the mirrors
to maximize the observed transmission prior to insertion of the
sample. A translation stage with a digital micrometer readout
was used to hold the sample and measure the reﬂectance over
a discrete set of free space delays corresponding to 0, 0.2λ0,
0.4λ0, 0.6λ0, 0.8λ0, and λ0, where λ0 = 1670 µm is the free
space wavelength at the center of the VNA spectral range.
This calibration procedure enables the instrumental response
of the free space VNA test conﬁguration to be separated and
removed from the sample-under-test.

In the measurement setup,

the sample-under-test was

placed approximately at the location of an output waist of
the beam focused by an ellipsoidal mirror. The beam is at
its narrowest with a spot size of radius w0 at the output beam
waist. The beam diverges away from the waist approximately
following quasi-optical propagation of Gaussian beams23.
Deviations from the plane-wave approximation near the focus
leads to a systematic error in the determination of dielectric
parameters30, which increases in relative magnitude as
ε (cid:48) → 1, and with increasing sample thickness and decreasing
beam waist radius relative to wavelength, kowo = 2πwo/λ .
For the measurements presented, kowo ≈10.4 at 180 GHz,
which is large compared to unity. This enables a perturbative
correction to the measured reﬂectance data, Γmeas, following

TABLE I. Best-ﬁt model parameters for the measured bulk fused silica samples. The measurements are averaged readings obtained with a
micrometer over six locations on the sample. The uncertainties are standard errors on the ﬁt parameters. For sample 1 the magnitude ε (cid:48) is
derived from ﬁt and then adopted as a parameter for the other samples.

6

measured t (mm)
ﬁt t (mm)
ε (cid:48)
ε (cid:48)(cid:48) × 103
tan δe × 104

sample 1
1.64±0.01
1.619±0.002
3.84±0.01
1.7±0.1
4.4±0.2

sample 2
6.16±0.02
6.130±0.01
(ﬁxed)
1.7±0.1
4.4±0.2

sample 3
9.69±0.03
9.632±0.02
(ﬁxed)
1.7±0.1
4.5±0.2

sample 4
12.73±0.03
12.753±0.03
(ﬁxed)
3.1±0.1
8.3±0.3

of the thicker samples after scaling the model by the inverse
of the correction function. Physically this corresponds to
adopting a common dielectric function for all of the samples
characterized. The free parameters while performing these
ﬁts were ε (cid:48)(cid:48), thickness t, and the numerical coefﬁcients in the
correction function.

In the data reduction procedure described, the observations
are effectively mapped from a focused to collimated space,
which allows a direct comparison to the modeled plane wave
response. In practice, the reﬂectance response is bounded by
focused and collimated cases. In the ﬂight conﬁguration of
the PIPER telescope, the vacuum window is neither at a focus
nor at a pupil, albeit closer to the collimated case. Table I
lists the best-ﬁt model parameters for the bulk samples of four
different thicknesses and Fig. 4 shows measurements for two
of the samples along with the analytical models.

.

(4)

B. Dielectric Characterization: Bulk PTFE

FIG. 5. The measured reﬂectance (red) and transmittance (blue) for
a 76.2 mm long WR28 E-plane split-block ﬁxture ﬁlled with the
stack of 13 etched-PTFE sheets. The solid lines represent the best-ﬁt
model.

Petersson and Smith (e.g., see Eq. 57)30,

Γcorr = Γmeas ·

1 −





a2
(kowo)4

a1
(kowo)2 +
1
1 +
(kowo)4





The derivation of this expression does not account for
the variation in beam waist
radius as a function of
wavelength at the position of the sample. This effect was
accounted for by replacing kowo in the above equation with
(cid:112)1 + (c(z)/kowo)2, where c(z) = 2z/wo is a function of
kowo
the beam waist position, z, relative to the surface of the sample
for the optical test conﬁguration23. Given the measurement’s
limited spectral range c(z) was treated as a third constant, a3,
in the analysis of the data.

A least squares ﬁt was performed in log space to accurately
identify the locations of the nulls in reﬂectance. In ﬁtting the
data to extract the detailed optical response a simple analytical
model was ﬁt at normal incidence with free parameters ε (cid:48),
ε (cid:48)(cid:48), and thickness t. The thinnest sample is least prone to the
systematic bias described above and was used to extract ε (cid:48),
which was adopted for the subsequent analysis. The analytical
model was then used to ﬁt the measured reﬂectance of each

of

the

dielectric

Multiple measurements

loss
tangent of
fused silica over 90 to 250 GHz spanning
0.00028 < tan δe < 0.0026 have been reported23, with the
IR grade fused silica measured in Komiyama et al.33 being
at the lower end of this distribution. The measurements of
the loss in the industrial grade fused silica glass presented are
consistent with this range.

The AR coating material that employed, a PTFE sheet
etched on one surface, was also measured. The sheet was
measured to have a nominal thickness of 271 µm. The sample
was cut into strips 7.1 mm wide and the resulting sheets
were inserted into an E-plane split-block waveguide ﬁxture
76.2 mm in length. After insertion the material was trimmed
ﬂush to the waveguide ﬂanges. The ﬁnal stack consisted of a
total of 13 layers with the etched surfaces of the PTFE facing
the same direction. The VNA was calibrated with WR28
waveguide TRL (Thru-Reﬂect-Line) standards and used to
measure the response of the Fabry-Perot resonator formed by
the impedance contrast between empty guide and the ﬁxture
ﬁlled with layers of PTFE over a spectral range spanning
26–40 GHz.

Following the experimental methods described in Wollack
et al.34 the structure’s frequency response was evaluated
as a function of complex dielectric function of the PTFE,
ˆεr,PTFE. The minimum deviation between the model and

7

FIG. 6. Measured reﬂectance (red) and corrected reﬂectance (green) from the AR-coated window with measured total thickness 10.16 mm.
The best-ﬁt analytical model is also shown. The model is plotted up to 233 GHz which is the upper half-power band edge of the PIPER 200
GHz observing band. The reﬂectance spectra as well as the analytical model have identical sampling and are smoothed in the same way as
Fig. 4.

TABLE II. Physical and electrical thicknesses at 180 GHz of the
various layers in the dielectric stack. For the window, it is the
measured thickness. For the AR and bond layers, the values are of
the target thicknesses.

t (mm)
0.254
0.013
9.58

ε (cid:48)
2.02
3.7
3.84

2πt

√

ε (cid:48)/λ0 (rad)
1.4
0.1
70.2

AR (PTFE)
Bond layer
Window

observations indicates ˆεr,PTFE = 2.01 + 0.0009i (i.e., tanδe ≈
0.0004) in agreement with prior measurements23. Fig. 5
shows the measured reﬂectance and transmittance along with
the best-ﬁt model. Measurement of a waveguide sample in
a ﬁxture 50.8 mm long yielded a consistent result for ˆεr,PTFE.
Chemically etching the PTFE increases the material’s porosity
and lowers the effective index of the layer’s surface35,36. If
residues of the etchant remain in the pores or delinkage of the
polymer structure leads to changes in the material properties,
an increase in loss could also occur.

C. AR-Coated Window Measurement and Model Fitting

A prototype silica window AR-coated on both surfaces was
characterized using the same VNA test conﬁguration shown
in Fig. 3. Using the best-ﬁt complex dielectric function of the
bulk silica and the PTFE from above as well as the measured
layer thicknesses to set constraints on the model parameters,
an analytical model applicable for normal incidence was
ﬁt to the measured reﬂectance data with the various layer
thicknesses and real parts of the dielectric function, ε (cid:48), as
free parameters and the imaginary parts, ε (cid:48)(cid:48), ﬁxed. A
multiplicative correction function, see Eq. 4, was applied to
the measured reﬂectance spectra prior to ﬁtting the data.

When the electrical delay in the material, 2πt

√

ε (cid:48)/λ0, is

on the order of a wavelength or smaller, the relative error in
the inferred ε (cid:48) is negligible30. See Table II for a summary
of the layers in the dielectric stack. The aforementioned
error should be negligible for the relatively thin AR and glue
layers, whereas for the much thicker silica window, the error
needs to be corrected. Therefore, the correction function for
the 9.69 mm thick bulk sample (i.e, closest to the prototype
AR-coated sample) was used to scale the measured reﬂectance
data prior to ﬁtting an analytical model.

The AR-coated window was modeled as a ﬁve-layer
structure where the net reﬂectance for normal incidence at the
j-th interface of a stack of multiple dielectric plane parallel
layers is given by the recursion relation25 deﬁned in Eq. 1. In
order to reproduce the observed response while minimizing
the number of free parameters, the symmetry in dielectric
function for layers in the optical stack was enforced, however,
it was determined to be necessary to allow differing bond layer
and AR layer thicknesses in ﬁtting the data. Fig. 6 shows
the measurement along with the best-ﬁt model, and Table
III lists the best-ﬁt model parameters. The data primarily
constrains the total loss in the dielectric stack. To address this
degeneracy, the imaginary components of relative dielectric
functions derived from measurements of the bulk samples
were adopted as priors in modeling the data.

The AR coating bond layer, which is effectively comprised
of the Epo-Tek 301-2 epoxy,
the Lord AP-134 adhesion
promoter and deﬁned by the surface roughness of the etched
PTFE, was best ﬁt by ˆεr,bond (cid:39) 3.27. For comparison, the value
reported for a bulk sample of Epo-Tek 301-2 epoxy in Munson
et al.29 is (cid:39) 3.7. While it is challenging to precisely quantify
the effective dielectric function in this setting, the inferred
value is in reasonable agreement considering the media as a
dielectric mixture35,36.

The PIPER 171–233 GHz instrument bandwidth is not fully
covered by the 140–214 GHz spectral range of the VNA
measurement. The minimum in the envelope of the measured
reﬂectance occurs around 188 GHz. This is shifted to a lower

TABLE III. Best-ﬁt model parameters for the various layers in the dielectric stack representing the AR-coated window. The imaginary
component of relative dielectric function for each layer is held ﬁxed during ﬁtting and values from the measurement of bulk materials were
adopted as priors. The uncertainties on t and ε (cid:48) are standard errors on the ﬁt parameters.

8

Layer 1 (AR, PTFE)
Layer 2 (Bond layer)
Layer 3 (Window, fused silica)
Layer 4 (Bond layer)
Layer 5 (AR, PTFE)

t (mm)
0.265±0.002
0.042±0.004
9.595±0.03
0.048±0.003
0.267±0.002

ε (cid:48)
2.02±0.01
3.27±0.03
3.78±0.04
3.27±0.03
2.02±0.01

ε (cid:48)(cid:48) × 103
0.9
100
1.7
100
0.9

tan δe ×104
4±0.1
310±3
4±0.1
310±3
4±0.01

frequency than the targeted ∼200 GHz center frequency for
the coating and can be attributed to the properties of materials
employed and the realized layer thicknesses. However, the
fraction of the power reﬂected averaged over the 171–233
GHz half-power bandwidth as computed from the best-ﬁt
model is < 9.6 × 10−3 at normal incidence. Using the
best-ﬁt model parameters listed in Table III the estimated
fraction of incident power absorbed by the AR-coated window
at 200 GHz is ∼0.1.

V. WINDOW INSTALLATION ON THE RECEIVER AND
SUPERFLUID-TIGHT INDIUM SEAL

Vacuum windows appropriate for use with a receiver
that is submerged in liquid helium require seals that are
In this work an O-ring
impervious to superﬂuid helium.
geometry with an indium wire seal was adopted to provide
this function.
Indium O-ring seals have been widely used
in cryogenic systems due to their reliability and ease of
construction. Early investigations by Belser et al37 considered
the adhesion of indium to a variety of materials including
silicon, quartz, and aluminum oxide. Cryogenic vacuum-tight
seals for metal-to-glass joints have been developed for a
variety of instrumentation applications and reported in the
literature38–44. More recently, Döge and Hingerl45 described
the use of a hydrogen-tight cryogenic vacuum seal employing
indium wire gaskets for amorphous silica windows. A review
of design considerations for indium O-ring seals can be found
in Turkington and Harris-Lowe46.

The key steps in the window assembly and installation
procedure used here are summarized in Fig. 7. A clean pure
indium wire 1.27 mm in diameter was arranged in the circular
groove as shown in panel (a) of Fig. 7. At the location where
the ends of the wire overlap, the wire was cut on a long slant
and the cut ends were overlapped and pressed together to form
a ﬁrm ring. An alignment ring was positioned on the seal area.
The window was lifted using a suction cup as shown in panel
(b) of Fig. 7 and inserted through the alignment ring, making
contact with the indium as evenly as practicable.

The alignment ring was then carefully removed taking
special care not to bump the window out of its centered
position on the indium wire ring and window aperture. Fig. 7
panel (c) shows the window in place and the alignment
ring removed. Window mount frames can be designed
to compensate for the differential coefﬁcient of thermal

expansion (CTE) of the windows and frame47 both radially
and in thickness. However,
the required
compensation washer results in a large mount frame that
interferes with the beam.

in this case,

Therefore, the design described achieves compliance in
the frame using four stacked belleville washers in series.
The bellevilles both provide sufﬁcient force to compress
the indium seal and retain necessary spring travel to take
up differential CTE in cryogenic operation without losing
compliance and mechanically constraining the frame against
the window. The interface between the window and frame
has an aluminum washer to prevent force concentrations at
any roughness or contamination at the mount interface. Fig. 7
panel (d) shows the retaining ring secured with fasteners to
complete the window installation. A complete step-by-step
window assembly sequence can be found in Appendix B.

VI. WINDOW SEAL LEAK TESTING AND THERMAL
CYCLING

The window was installed on a test vessel using a indium
wire ring seal described in Section V. The test vessel was
mounted in a liquid helium (LHe) test dewar, surrounded by
a reservoir inside the dewar. The test vessel was pumped
out to create a vacuum and subsequently connected to a leak
detector. Fig. 8 shows a schematic of the leak-test setup.
The window was then cycled 50 times from ambient to liquid
nitrogen (LN2) temperatures without window or seal failure,
as conﬁrmed by helium gas leak detection rates undetectable
above the measurement ﬂoor of 10−8 mbar L/s at ambient
temperature after cycling.

Next, the vacuum seal to superﬂuid helium was tested.
The test procedure went as follows. The test dewar was
partially ﬁlled with LHe and pumped out to simulate the
ambient pressure at balloon altitudes. The superﬂuid helium
was then pumped into the upper reservoir using a superﬂuid
fountain-effect pump until its level rises above the window
test unit. After waiting for several minutes (i.e., to enable the
possibility of superﬂuid helium leakage into the test vessel),
the superﬂuid was pumped back out of the upper reservoir.

The window test unit was subsequently heated to mobilize
any helium inside the test vessel. Then the heat was turned
off, the leak rate was noted, and the above steps were repeated.
Helium liberated in the heat mobilization was consistent with
residual adsorbed gas in the test device, and diminished with

9

FIG. 8. Setup for testing the superﬂuid helium tight window seal.
The window was installed on a test vessel. The test vessel was
mounted in a liquid helium (LHe) test dewar and the test vessel
volume wass pumped out to create a vacuum. A leak detector was
then connected to the test vessel.

consistent with the analytical model presented and conﬁrmed
the reduction in net reﬂectance at the window to below
a percent averaged over
the 171–233 GHz half-power
bandwidth of the instrument observing in the 200 GHz band.
The window survived multiple thermal cycling tests down to
liquid nitrogen temperatures. Leak rate measurements met
the operational requirements. A quasi-optical measurement
technique in a focused beam was developed and used to
validate the AR-coated window optical performance. A
vacuum seal that is robust to superﬂuid helium leaks was
realized using indium wire ring. The window assemblies were
installed on the receiver and operated successfully during
PIPER’s ﬂight48 from New Mexico in October, 2019.

FIG. 7. Vacuum window installation on the receiver: (a) indium
wire ring being laid out in the groove on the window mount frame
after cleaning the indium and all surfaces, (b) an alignment ring
was positioned and the cleaned AR-coated window was lifted using
a suction cup and carefully inserted through the alignment ring to
evenly make contact with the indium, (c) alignment ring removed,
and ﬁnally (d) the retaining ring was aligned and secured using the
fastening conﬁguration described in Appendix B.

each test cycle. The observed leak rates gives a time scale on
the order of several hundreds of days for the receiver to reach
up to a pressure at which it would no longer function.

VII. SUMMARY

An anti-reﬂection coated fused silica vacuum window has
been demonstrated for the PIPER balloon-borne instrument.
Laboratory measurement of the AR-coated window was

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

R. Datta(cid:48)s research was supported by an appointment
to the NASA Postdoctoral Program at the NASA Goddard
Space Flight Center (GSFC), administered by Universities
Space Research Association under contract with NASA.
K. Helson’s research was supported by NASA under
award number 80GSFC17M0002.
PIPER is supported
by the grant 13-APRA13-0093. Support for development
the microwave instrumentation and metrology was
of
provided by the GSFC Internal Research and Development
(IRAD) program. The authors acknowledge the collective
contributions of the anonymous reviewers which greatly
improved the clarity of the ﬁnal presentation. This article
may be downloaded for personal use only. Any other use
requires prior permission of the author and AIP Publishing.
This article appeared in Rev. Sci. Inst. Volume 92, Issue 3
and may be found at https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0029430.

10

placed and centered on top of the prepared window surface
with the etched side facing down. A plastic (LDPE) sheet was
placed on top to protect from epoxy spill outside the PTFE
edges. The aluminum disc ∼17 cm in diameter was then
placed on top while centering it by eye.

An aluminum pressure distribution plate was placed on the
foot of the press and a ceramic insulator tile was placed on
the plate. A heater pad from McMaster Carr was placed
on top of the tile and used to decrease the curing time of
the epoxy. The entire prepared stack from the previous
paragraph was then inverted and placed on top of the heater
pad and another ceramic insulator tile was placed on top of
the stack followed by a second aluminum pressure distribution
plate. A thermocouple was taped to the side of the ∼17 cm
diameter aluminum disc. A pressure of 1500 Torr was applied
from the top with the hydraulic press and the stack was left
to cure under heat for at least 12 hours. The temperature
was controlled using a PID controller set to 650C and a
variable AC transformer (Variacvi). Once done, the stack was
disassembled and inspected, and the coating was repeated on
the other side.

Appendix B: Window Installation Procedure

The sequence and techniques used for

installing the
AR-coated window on the PIPER receiver are described here.
When installing for the ﬁrst time on the machined stainless
the parts were ﬁrst degreased by
steel receiver structure,
wiping down with 1:1 Crystal Simple Green and deionized
water, then with acetone, and then with isopropanol. Both the
exposed silica surface of the window and the stainless steel
in the area of the indium groove were cleaned using wipes
and cotton swabs, paying particular attention to the indium
groove.

Pure indium wire 1.27 mm in diameter was cleaned with
wipes and isopropanol and arranged in the groove. At the
location where the ends of the wire overlap, the wire was cut
on a long slant using a razor blade that has been wiped down
with isopropanol. The cut ends were overlapped and pressed
together using ﬁrm ﬁnger pressure to weld the ends, with the
weld positioned high on lid face at 12 o(cid:48)clock. An alignment
ring was positioned on the seal area. The window was lifted
using a suction cup and inserted through the alignment ring,
making contact with the indium as evenly as practicable as
shown in step 3 of Fig. 10. Then, the alignment ring was
carefully removed taking special care not to bump the window
out of its centered position on the indium wire ring and
window aperture.

A thin (127 µm) foil (aluminum 1100) compliance washer
was placed between the glass and a retaining ring. The foil
surface-compliance washer was put in to take up any variation
in the inside surface of the retaining ring left over from the
machining process. This provides protection against dust

FIG. 9. Schematic of the stack of materials in the hydraulic press
used for applying the PTFE AR coating layer on the window. Only
one surface of the window (i.e., the bottom surface) was coated at a
time. The thickness of the thin layers in the stack are exaggerated for
clarity.

Appendix A: AR Coating Procedure

The procedure adopted for applying the AR coating on the
fused silica windows is described here. The AR coating layer
was glued to the window under pressure using a hydraulic
press in two steps for the two surfaces. Fig. 9 shows a
schematic of the various components in the stack. After
wiping down all surfaces of the window with acetone and
isopropanol, it was placed on a ∼23 cm diameter aluminum
disc with the surface to be coated facing up. A Kaptonv tape
sheet was then applied covering the entire window surface.
Next, an aluminum ring (outer diameter = 19 mm, inner
diameter = 16.5 cm) was placed on top such that the outer edge
of the ring lined up with the edge of the window. Then, the
Kapton was cut out along the inner diameter of the aluminum
ring with a razor blade and peeled off. The aluminum ring was
removed and the exposed surface of the window was again
cleaned with acetone and isopropanol. The Kapton tape sheet
was to protect the edges of the window from excess epoxy
ﬂowing into the seal area.

A 16 cm diameter sheet of the 254 µm thick etched PTFE
was cut out and both surfaces were cleaned with acetone and
isopropanol. The PTFE was placed on another aluminum disc
of diameter ∼17 cm with the etched surface facing up. Next,
the Lord AP-134 adhesion promoter was applied to both the
window surface to be coated and the etched surface of the
PTFE separately using a syringe to dispense the Lord AP-134.
A foam-tipped applicator was used to quickly spread it around
the surface leaving only a thin (1-5-2.5 µm) layer. This
step required care as the AP-134 starts to cure and become
tacky relatively quickly. These items were left undisturbed
for an hour. The Epo-Tek 301-2 epoxy was then mixed in the
recommended proportions of 3.0 g of Part A per 1.05 g of Part
B and outgassed under vacuum for an hour. Approximately
0.75 mL of the epoxy was spread on the window surface in
a spiral pattern starting at the center using a syringe. This
amounts to approximately 4 µL/cm2. The PTFE sheet was

v www.dupont.com/electronic-materials/kapton-polyimide-ﬁlm.html

vi www.variac.com

11

FIG. 10. Window assembly sequence. Schematics of a cutaway of the vacuum window frame along with the indium wire ring, the window
alignment ring, the aluminum compliance washer, and the PTFE-coated window are labelled. The numbering of the panels are indicative of
the stepwise window installation procedure described in the text.

thick) in series on each no.

particulates from reaching the region between window and
the retaining ring during assembly. The retaining ring was
mounted to a tapped thermometer mounting hole. Compliance
in the frame was achieved with a stack of four Number 8
belleville disk springsvii (302 stainless, 0.190(cid:48)(cid:48)/0.375(cid:48)(cid:48) ID/OD,
0.020(cid:48)(cid:48)
8-32(cid:48)(cid:48) black oxide
coated stainless steel socket cap head screw. The pre-load
as a function of displacement on the belleville washers was
determined using an annular load cell from Omegaviii, the
LC8200-500-3K, and a dial indicator. A single Belleville
washerix was observed to be entirely ﬂattened by a 65 N load.
A stack of three washers, all with the cone pointed towards
the head of the screw and the same pre-load, had 36 µm of
remaining travel. This was sufﬁcient for thermal compliance,
but to provide increased margin, a fourth washer in the same
orientation was added to the stack. A small amount of NS-10
anti-seize lubricant from Bostik, Inc.x was applied to the
threads of the screws, both during testing and during window
installation on the ﬂight receiver, to try to get consistent torque
to pre-load behavior. One drop was applied near the threaded
end, smeared around the circumference. New washers were
used for each installation.

A fastening conﬁguration was required that would provide
consistent loading of the indium seal in the 2 K to 300 K
temperature range. Lack of compliance in the fastening led
to window failure at warm up during initial testing. Sufﬁcient
pre-load to compress the indium seal was also required and
it was desirable to leave the fasteners in high pre-load after
compression.

The fastener installation procedure adopted for the window
assembly is described next. The distance from the threaded
surface to the head of the screw was 19.5 mm when the
washers were uncompressed. That left 5.9 mm length of
engagement, which was about seven threads. Each screw
was lightly ﬁnger tightened, alternating between screws
across the window diameter to keep the loading even. An
over-torque-slip type torque screwdriver was used to apply
torque to groups of four screws as illustrated in step 6 of
Fig. 10. The level of torque was incrementally raised as
follows: 0.14, 0.28, 0.42, 0.56, 0.70, 0.70 (repeated) N-m.
During visual inspection, the criteria for good seal formation
was the observation of shiny indium extrusions, clearly wet
to the surface of the window, to greater than three times the
diameter of the indium wire. A compression force of 145 lbs
(650 N) at each screw, using the careful tightening sequence
as described above, was appropriate. For the 32 screws, that
created a total load of 4600 lbs (20,700 N). The pressure on
the ﬁnal seal was 1400 PSI (72,400 Torr).

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

vii www.mcmaster.com/catalog/125/1336
viii www.omega.com
ix www.mcmaster.com/metal-belleville-spring-washers
x www.bostik.com

The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

12

1K. P. Coughlin, J. J. McMahon, K. T. Crowley, B. J. Koopman, K. H. Miller,
S. M. Simon, and E. J. Wollack, “Pushing the Limits of Broadband and
High-Frequency Metamaterial Silicon Antireﬂection Coatings,” Journal
of Low Temperature Physics 193, 876–885 (2018), arXiv:1804.08368
[astro-ph.IM].
2A. Nadolski, A. M. Kofman, J. D. Vieira, P. A. R. Ade, Z. Ahmed,
A. J. Anderson, J. S. Avva, R. Basu Thakur, A. N. Bender, B. A.
Benson, J. E. Carlstrom, F. W. Carter, T. W. Cecil, C. L. Chang, J. F.
Cliche, A. Cukierman, T. de Haan, J. Ding, M. A. Dobbs, D. Dutcher,
W. Everett, A. Foster, J. Fu, J. Gallichio, A. Gilbert, J. C. Groh, S. T.
Guns, R. Guyser, N. W. Halverson, A. H. Harke-Hosemann, N. L.
Harrington, J. W. Henning, W. L. Holzapfel, N. Huang, K. D. Irwin,
O. B. Jeong, M. Jonas, A. Jones, T. S. Khaire, M. Korman, D. L. Kubik,
S. Kuhlmann, C. L. Kuo, A. T. Lee, A. E. Lowitz, S. S. Meyer, D. Michalik,
J. Montgomery, T. Natoli, H. Nguyen, G. I. Noble, V. Novosad, S. Padin,
Z. Pan, J. Pearson, C. M. Posada, W. Quan, A. Rahlin, J. E. Ruhl,
J. T. Sayre, E. Shirokoff, G. Smecher, J. A. Sobrin, A. A. Stark, K. T.
Story, A. Suzuki, K. L. Thompson, C. Tucker, K. Vanderlinde, G. Wang,
N. Whitehorn, V. Yefremenko, K. W. Yoon, and M. R. Young, “Broadband
anti-reﬂective coatings for cosmic microwave background experiments,” in
Millimeter, Submillimeter, and Far-Infrared Detectors and Instrumentation
for Astronomy IX, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
(SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 10708, edited by J. Zmuidzinas and J.-R.
Gao (2018) p. 1070843, arXiv:1809.00030 [astro-ph.IM].
3E. H. Sharp, D. J. Benford, D. J. Fixsen, S. F. Maher, C. T. Marx, J. G.
Staguhn, and E. J. Wollack, “Design and performance of a high-throughput
cryogenic detector system,” in Millimeter and Submillimeter Detectors and
Instrumentation for Astronomy IV, Vol. 7020, edited by W. D. Duncan,
W. S. Holland, S. Withington, and J. Zmuidzinas, International Society
for Optics and Photonics (SPIE, 2008) pp. 710 – 716.
4D. A. Harper, M. C. Runyan, C. D. Dowell, C. J. Wirth, M. Amato,
T. Ames, M. Amiri, S. Banks, A. Bartels, D. J. Benford, M. Berthoud,
E. Buchanan, S. Casey, N. L. Chapman, D. T. Chuss, B. Cook, R. Derro,
J. L. Dotson, R. Evans, D. Fixsen, I. Gatley, J. A. Guerra, M. Halpern,
R. T. Hamilton, L. A. Hamlin, C. J. Hansen, S. Heimsath, A. Hermida,
G. C. Hilton, R. Hirsch, M. I. Hollister, C. F. Hostetter, K. Irwin, C. A.
Jhabvala, M. Jhabvala, J. Kastner, A. Kov–cs, S. Lin, R. F. Loewenstein,
L. W. Looney, E. Lopez-Rodriguez, S. F. Maher, J. M. Michail, T. M.
Miller, S. H. Moseley, G. Novak, R. J. Pernic, T. Rennick, H. Rhody,
E. Sandberg, D. Sandford, F. P. Santos, R. Shafer, E. H. Sharp, P. Shirron,
J. Siah, R. Silverberg, L. M. Sparr, R. Spotz, J. G. Staguhn, A. S. Toorian,
S. Towey, J. Tuttle, J. Vaillancourt, G. Voellmer, C. G. Volpert, S.-i.
Wang, and E. J. Wollack, “Hawc+, the far-infrared camera and polarimeter
for soﬁa,” Journal of Astronomical Instrumentation 07, 1840008 (2018),
https://doi.org/10.1142/S2251171718400081.
5D. Barkats, M. I. Dierickx, J. M. Kovac, C. Pentacoff, P. A. R. Ade,
Z. Ahmed, R. W. Aikin, K. D. Alexander, S. J. Benton, C. A. Bischoff,
J. J. Bock, R. Bowens-Rubin, J. A. Brevik, I. Buder, E. Bullock, V. Buza,
J. Connors, J. Cornelison, B. P. Crill, M. Crumrine, L. Duband, C. Dvorkin,
J. P. Filippini, S. Fliescher, J. A. Grayson, G. Hall, M. Halpern, S. A.
Harrison, S. R. Hildebrandt, G. C. Hilton, H. Hui, K. D. Irwin, J. Kang,
K. S. Karkare, E. Karpel, J. P. Kaufman, B. G. Keating, S. Kefeli, S. A.
Kernasovskiy, C. L. Kuo, K. Lau, N. A. Larsen, E. M. Leitch, M. Lueker,
K. G. Megerian, L. Moncelsi, T. Namikawa, H. T. Nguyen, R. O’Brient,
R. W. O. IV, S. Palladino, C. Pryke, B. Racine, S. Richter, R. Schwarz,
A. Schillaci, C. D. Sheehy, A. Soliman, T. S. Germaine, Z. K. Staniszewski,
B. Steinbach, R. V. Sudiwala, G. P. Teply, K. L. Thompson, J. E. Tolan,
C. Tucker, A. D. Turner, C. U. A. G. Vieregg, A. Wandui, A. C. Weber,
D. V. Wiebe, J. Willmert, C. L. Wong, W. L. K. Wu, H. Yang, K. W. Yoon,
and C. Zhang, “Ultra-thin large-aperture vacuum windows for millimeter
wavelengths receivers,” in Millimeter, Submillimeter, and Far-Infrared
Detectors and Instrumentation for Astronomy IX, Vol. 10708, edited by

J. Zmuidzinas and J.-R. Gao, International Society for Optics and Photonics
(SPIE, 2018) pp. 355 – 368.
6A. R. Kerr, N. J. Bailey, D. E. Boyd,
and N. Horner, “A study of
materials for a broadband millimeter-wave quasi-optical vacuum window,”
National Radio Astronomy Observatory MMA MEMORANDUM and 90,
also distributed as EDIR No. 292 (1992).
7M. C. Runyan, P. A. R. Ade, R. S. Bhatia, J. J. Bock, M. D. Daub,
J. H. Goldstein, C. V. Haynes, W. L. Holzapfel, C. L. Kuo, A. E. Lange,
J. Leong, M. Lueker, M. Newcomb, J. B. Peterson, C. Reichardt, J. Ruhl,
G. Sirbi, E. Torbet, C. Tucker, A. D. Turner, and D. Woolsey, “Acbar: The
arcminute cosmology bolometer array receiver,” The Astrophysical Journal
Supplement Series 149, 265 (2003).
8V. V. Parshin, R. Heidinger, B. A. Andreev, A. V. Gusev,
and V. B.
Shmagin, “Silicon as an advanced window material for high power
gyrotrons,” Int. J. of Infr. and Millimeter Waves 16, 863–877 (1995).
9D. Koller, A. R. Kerr, G. A. Ediss,
and D. Boyd, “Design
and fabrication of quartz vacuum windows with matching layers
for millimeter-wave receivers,” National Radio Astronomy Observatory
ALMA MEMORANDUM No.377 (2001).

10B. G. Keating, P. A. R. Ade, J. J. Bock, E. Hivon, W. L. Holzapfel, A. E.
Lange, H. Nguyen, and K. W. Yoon, “BICEP: a large angular-scale CMB
polarimeter,” in Polarimetry in Astronomy, Vol. 4843, edited by S. Fineschi,
International Society for Optics and Photonics (SPIE, 2003) pp. 284 – 295.
11V. L. Gurevich and A. K. Tagantsev, “Intrinsic dielectric loss in crystals,”

Advances in Physics 40, 719–767 (1991).

12J. Petzelt and S. Kamba, “Submillimetre and infrared response of
microwave materials: extrapolation to microwave properties,” (2003).
13M. N. Afsar and K. J. Button, “Millimeter and submillimeter wave
measurements of complex optical and dielectric parameters of materials,”
International Journal of Infrared and Millimeter Waves 3, 929–939 (1982).
theory, analysis, and

14T. K. Eduard Ventsel, “Thin plates and shells :

applications,” (2001).

15S. Pawlyk, P. A. R. Ade, D. Benford, C. L. Bennett, D. T. Chuss,
R. Datta, J. L. Dotson, J. R. Eimer, D. J. Fixsen, N. N. Gandilo, T. M.
Essinger-Hileman, M. Halpern, G. Hilton, G. F. Hinshaw, K. Irwin,
C. Jhabvala, M. Kimball, A. Kogut, L. Lowe, J. J. McMahon, T. M. Miller,
P. Mirel, S. H. Moseley, S. Rodriguez, E. S. III, P. Shirron, J. G. Staguhn,
D. F. Sullivan, E. R. Switzer, P. Taraschi, C. E. Tucker, A. Walts, and E. J.
Wollack, “The primordial inﬂation polarization explorer (PIPER): current
status and performance of the ﬁrst ﬂight,” in Millimeter, Submillimeter, and
Far-Infrared Detectors and Instrumentation for Astronomy IX, Vol. 10708,
edited by J. Zmuidzinas and J.-R. Gao, International Society for Optics and
Photonics (SPIE, 2018) pp. 1 – 11.

16N. N. Gandilo, P. A. R. Ade, D. Benford, C. L. Bennett, D. T. Chuss, J. L.
Dotson, J. R. Eimer, D. J. Fixsen, M. Halpern, G. Hilton, G. F. Hinshaw,
K. Irwin, C. Jhabvala, M. Kimball, A. Kogut, L. Lowe, J. J. McMahon,
T. M. Miller, P. Mirel, S. H. M. Jr., S. Pawlyk, S. Rodriguez, E. S. III,
P. Shirron, J. G. Staguhn, D. F. Sullivan, E. R. Switzer, P. Taraschi, C. E.
Tucker, and E. J. Wollack, “The Primordial Inﬂation Polarization Explorer
(PIPER),” in Millimeter, Submillimeter, and Far-Infrared Detectors and
Instrumentation for Astronomy VIII, Vol. 9914, edited by W. S. Holland
and J. Zmuidzinas, International Society for Optics and Photonics (SPIE,
2016) pp. 372 – 379.

17A. Kogut, P. Ade, T. Baildon, N. Bellis, D. Benford, C. Bennett,
D. Chuss, R. Datta, J. Eimer, D. Fixsen, N. Gandilo, T. Essinger-Hileman,
M. Halpern, G. Hilton, K. Irwin, C. Jhabvala, M. Kimball, J. Lazear,
L. Lowe, J. McMahon, T. Miller, P. Mirel, S. Moseley, S. Pawlyk,
S. Rodriguez, E. Sharp, P. Shirron, J. Staguhn, D. Sullivan, E. Switzer,
P. Taraschi, C. Tucker, A. Walts, and E. Wollack, “The primordial inﬂation
polarization explorer (piper): Science goals,” Bulletin of the AAS 52
(2020), https://baas.aas.org/pub/aas236-337p04-kogut.

18E. R. Switzer, P. A. R. Ade, T. Baildon, D. Benford, C. L. Bennett,
D. T. Chuss, R. Datta, J. R. Eimer, D. J. Fixsen, N. N. Gandilo,
T. M. Essinger-Hileman, M. Halpern, G. Hilton, K. Irwin, C. Jhabvala,
M. Kimball, A. Kogut, J. Lazear, L. N. Lowe, J. J. McMahon, T. M. Miller,
P. Mirel, S. H. Moseley, S. Pawlyk, S. Rodriguez, E. Sharp, P. Shirron,
J. G. Staguhn, D. F. Sullivan, P. Taraschi, C. E. Tucker, A. Walts, and
E. J. Wollack, “Sub-Kelvin cooling for two kilopixel bolometer arrays in
the PIPER receiver,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 90, 095104 (2019),
arXiv:1909.06440 [astro-ph.IM].

13

19E. Switzer, P. Ade, T. Baildon, N. Bellis, D. Benford, C. Bennett,
D. Chuss, R. Datta, J. Eimer, D. Fixsen, N. Gandilo, T. Essinger-Hileman,
M. Halpern, G. Hilton, K. Irwin, C. Jhabvala, M. Kimball, A. Kogut,
J. Lazear, L. Lowe, J. McMahon, T. Miller, P. Mirel, S. Pawlyk,
S. Rodriguez, E. Sharp, J. Staguhn, D. Sullivan, P. Taraschi, C. Tucker,
A. Walts, and E. Wollack, “The primordial inﬂation polarization explorer
(piper): Receiver design and performance,” Bulletin of the AAS 52 (2020),
https://baas.aas.org/pub/aas236-337p03-switzer.

20J. R. Eimer, P. A. R. Ade, D. J. Benford, C. L. Bennett, D. T. Chuss, D. J.
Fixsen, A. J. Kogut, P. Mirel, C. E. Tucker, G. M. Voellmer, and E. J.
Wollack, “The Primordial Inﬂation Polarization Explorer (PIPER): optical
design,” in Ground-based and Airborne Telescopes III, Vol. 7733, edited by
L. M. Stepp, R. Gilmozzi, and H. J. Hall, International Society for Optics
and Photonics (SPIE, 2010) pp. 1182 – 1191.

21D. T. Chuss, J. R. Eimer, D. J. Fixsen, J. Hinderks, A. J. Kogut, J. Lazear,
P. Mirel, E. Switzer, G. M. Voellmer, and E. J. Wollack, “Variable-delay
polarization modulators for cryogenic millimeter-wave applications,”
Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 85, 064501 (2014), arXiv:1403.1652
[astro-ph.IM].

22G. Cataldo, E. J. Wollack, A. D. Brown,

and K. H. Miller, “Infrared
dielectric properties of low-stress silicon oxide,” Opt. Lett. 41, 1364–1367
(2016).

23P. F. Goldsmith, “Quasioptical systems: Gaussian beam quasioptical
(Wiley-IEEE Press, New York, 1998)

propogation and applications,”
Chap. 3, pp. 39–58.

24D. T. Chuss, K. Rostem, E. J. Wollack, L. Berman, F. Colazo, M. DeGeorge,
K. Helson, and M. Sagliocca, “A cryogenic thermal source for detector
array characterization,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 88, 104501
(2017), arXiv:1707.05879 [astro-ph.IM].

25S. J. Orfanidis, “Electromagnetic waves and antennas,” (2016) Chap. 6,8,

pp. 186–188, 304–309.

26P. Yeh, “Optical waves in layered media,” (John Wiley and Sons, New

York, 2005) Chap. 5, pp. 102–117.

27S. J. Byrnes, “Multilayer optical calculations,” arXiv: Computational

Physics (2016).

28J. Lau, J. Fowler, T. Marriage, L. Page, J. Leong, E. Wishnow,
R. Henry, E. Wollack, M. Halpern, D. Marsden,
and G. Marsden,
“Millimeter-wave antireﬂection coating for cryogenic silicon lenses,” Appl.
Opt. 45, 3746–3751 (2006).

29C. D. Munson, S. K. Choi, K. P. Coughlin, J. J. McMahon, K. H. Miller,
L. A. Page, and E. J. Wollack, “Composite reﬂective/absorptive ir-blocking
ﬁlters embedded in metamaterial antireﬂection-coated silicon,” Appl. Opt.
56, 5349–5354 (2017).

30L. E. R. Petersson and G. S. Smith, “An estimate of the error caused by the
plane-wave approximation in free-space dielectric measurement systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation 50, 878–887 (2002).

31A. Savitzky and M. J. E. Golay, “Smoothing and differentiation of data by
simpliﬁed least squares procedures,” Analytical Chemistry 36, 1627–1639
(1964).

32J. Lamb, “Miscellaneous data on materials for millimetre and submillimetre
optics,” International Journal of Infrared and Millimeter Waves 17,
1997–2034 (1996).

33B. Komiyama, M. Kiyokawa, and T. Matsui, “Open resonator for precision
dielectric measurements in the 100 ghz band,” IEEE Transactions on
Microwave Theory and Techniques 39, 1792–1796 (1991).

34E. J. Wollack, D. J. Fixsen, R. Henry, A. Kogut, M. Limon,

and
P. Mirel, “Electromagnetic and Thermal Properties of a Conductively
Loaded Epoxy,” International Journal of Infrared and Millimeter Waves 29,
51–61 (2008).

35G. A. Niklasson, C. G. Granqvist, and O. Hunderi, “Effective medium
models for the optical properties of inhomogeneous materials,” Appl. Opt.
20, 26–30 (1981).

36A. Shivola, “Electromagnetic mixing formulae and applications (ieee
electromagnetic waves series, 47),” (The Institution of Engineering and
Technology, New York, 1999).

37R. B. Belser,

“A technique

of

ﬁlms,” Review of Scientiﬁc
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1771017.

soldering
25,

to
180–183

thin metal
(1954),

Instruments

38J. Willis,

“Low-temperature
80-k,” Review of Scientiﬁc

optical window seal

at
Instruments 29, 1053–1053 (1958),

used

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1716058.

39N. H. Horwitz and H. V. Bohm, “Metal-to-glass vacuum seal for low
temperatures,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 32, 857–858 (1961),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1717535.

40F. R. Lipsett,

seal,” Review of Scientiﬁc
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1720139.

“Cold welded indium low temperature window
(1966),

Instruments

229–229

37,

41L. R. Lucas and H. P. Hernandez, “Inﬂatable gasket for the 72-in.
bubble chamber,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 30, 941–942 (1959),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1716391.

42B. M. Abraham and C. M. Falco, “Demountable 4he ﬁlm stopper for
dilution refrigerators,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 47, 253–254
(1976), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1134600.

43C. C. Lim, “Indium seals for low-temperature and moderate-pressure
applications,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 57, 108–114 (1986),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1139130.

44R. H. Haycock, S. Tritchew, and P. Jennison, “Compact indium seal for
cryogenic optical windows,” in Cryogenic Optical Systems and Instruments
IV, Vol. 1340, edited by R. K. Melugin and G. R. Pruitt, International
Society for Optics and Photonics (SPIE, 1990) pp. 165 – 175.

14

and J. Hingerl,
sample

45S. Döge
transparent
cryogenic
transmission
for
measurements,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 89, 033903 (2018),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4996296.

“A hydrogen leak-tight,

ultracold-neutron

container

46R. R. Turkington and R. F. Harris-Lowe, “Note on the design of simple
indium o-ring seals,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 55, 803–805 (1984),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1137806.

47Y. Miura, “An optical window with thermal contraction free seal for low

temperature use,” Cryogenics 22, 374–375 (1982).

48T. Essinger-Hileman, P. A. Ade, T. Baildon, N. Bellis, D. Benford,
C. Bennett, D. Chuss, R. Datta, J. Eimer, D. Fixsen, N. Gandilo,
M. Halpern, G. Hilton, K. Irwin, C. Jhabvala, M. Kimball, A. Kogut,
J. Lazear, L. Lowe, J. McMahon, T. Miller, P. Mirel, S. Moseley,
S. Pawlyk, S. Rodriguez, E. Sharp, P. Shirron, J. Staguhn, D. Sullivan,
and E. Wollack,
E. Switzer, P. Taraschi, C. Tucker, A. Walts,
“The
2019
(piper):
polarization
ﬂight and telescope performance,” Bulletin of the AAS 52 (2020),
https://baas.aas.org/pub/aas236-244p01-essinger-hileman.

primordial

inﬂation

explorer

