1
2
0
2

r
a

M
7
2

]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[

1
v
5
8
9
4
1
.
3
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Tale of Two Representations: Energy and Time in Photoabsorption

A. R. P. Rau∗
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803, USA
(Dated: March 30, 2021)

Abstract This essay is based on a talk at Advances in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Sciences
2020 (AAMOS20) in a symposium honoring Prof. S. T. Manson’s decades-long contribution to
photoabsorption studies. Quantum physics introduced into physics pairs of conjugate quantities
bearing a speciﬁc complementary relationship, energy and time being one such pair. This gives rise
to two alternative representations, a time-dependent and a time-independent one, seemingly very
diﬀerent but both capable of embracing the same physics. They give complementary descriptions and
insight, with technical questions, theoretical and experimental, determining which may be the more
convenient and practicable at any juncture. Two recent topics, Cooper minima in photoabsorption
in Cl− and Ar, and angular-momentum barrier tunneling of f photoelectrons from Se in WSe2,
provide illustrative examples, also of the role that technological developments over the past ﬁve
decades played in our approach to and understanding of phenomena.

PACS numbers: 03.65.Xp, 31.10.+z, 32.70.-n, 32.80.Fb, 32.80.Gc

I.

INTRODUCTION

The recognition a century ago of the quantum nature of our Universe introduced into physics that concepts such
as position and momentum, linear or angular, and energy and time, that had been thought of as independent were
conjugate pairs in a well-deﬁned sense. With a universal constant, Planck’s (cid:126), characterizing our Universe, already on
dimensional grounds alone, such pairs could be seen as gradients with respect to one another. Indeed, had physicists
ﬁrst encountered quantum and not classical physics, they might have been deﬁned as such, that there is only energy,
momentum, etc., the corresponding time and space being their gradients, respectively, with a multiplicative (cid:126). In
each pair, the opposite choice is equally valid except that since we have fundamental conservation laws of energy,
momentum, and angular momentum, they could more properly be regarded as the basic entities whereas time, position,
and angle coordinate, respectively, are their derived gradients in energy and momentum space.

But the conjugacy of itself raises immediately another question, especially when coupled with the deﬁnition of the
state of a system. Setting aside quantum ﬁeld theories, non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the domain of atomic
physics discussed in this essay, describes the state as a complex entity, an abstract Dirac bra or ket, or as a wave
function, which cannot simultaneously be prescribed in terms of both members of the conjugate pair. Unlike in classical
mechanics of an assembly of particles where the state is deﬁned by the coordinate positions and momenta of each of
the particles, that is precluded in quantum mechanics because, once again, (cid:126) sets a limitation on such simultaneous
prescription of entities whose commutator is non-zero. Only mutually commuting entities can be ﬁxed simultaneously
and used to deﬁne physical states. This points then to choosing either one but not both of a non-commuting pair. The
very ﬁrst step into quantum mechanics introduces students to either a wave function in coordinate or in momentum
space, even for the ﬁrst elementary examples of a free particle or a harmonic oscillator.

Similarly, either energy or time may be invoked which hearkens back already to the pairing in classical physics of
frequency and time as Fourier conjugates. One can deal with a function of time or, alternatively, in Fourier conjugate
space as a function of frequency. It is but one immediate next step from frequency to energy with (cid:126) again as an
agent of that translation. Waves may be described either as real standing waves of sines and cosines or as travelling
waves of complex exponentials, each set satisfying the wave equation and any one of them expressible as a linear
superposition of members of the other set. Stationary states of ﬁxed energy played a central role in the development
of quantum physics. Bohr’s description of stationary states of the hydrogen atom accounted for both atomic sizes and
energies and for their stability as per their very name. The time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation for them can be
reduced immediately to the real time-independent Schr¨odinger equation at ﬁxed E. In such a state, in keeping with
the uncertainty relationship, time becomes irrelevant, the electron persisting in that state over all time. Time occurs
as a background in a generally ignorable pure phase factor of the wave function.

While not necessary, with either representation capable of handling all quantum physics or atomic phenomena, it
became customary to view bound states in t-independent terms and with real quantities, while invoking t explicitly
and complex quantities for collision or scattering. Even in quantum mechanics, the very words of the language we

∗ e-mail: arau@phys.lsu.edu

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

use invoke time when discussing scattering. This equally so for the toy ones of scattering from a one-dimensional
potential barrier or three-dimensional scattering of electrons, protons, or other elementary particles at our most
energetic accelerators. We talk of the particle, or the plane wave representing it, going in from a distant collimator
source and then leaving the scatterer to be captured by detectors at inﬁnity, possibly with other fragments. This
picture is one of an evolution in time. Thus, it is almost standard and adopted without saying so for the beginning
student to see bound states whether in simple potential wells or complex situations in one way, as energy eigenstates,
while collisions or scattering are handled another way as evolving in time. Yet, for the real Schr¨odinger equation with
real energies and potentials, sines and cosines suﬃce for both bound states and scattering. Reﬂection and transmission
coeﬃcients for the latter, or phase shifts in more complicated situations, all of them real and the only experimentally
accessible quantities, can be obtained without invoking time. And the analysis can be kept real throughout, the
imaginary element i making an appearance only through boundary conditions imposed at inﬁnity. See, for instance,
section 1.5 of [1].

Spectroscopy, the domain of bound states, together with transitions between them caused by coupling to the
electromagnetic ﬁeld, and scattering involving asymptotic states with the electron reaching inﬁnity, are best viewed
on the same footing, as states of the same atomic Hamiltonian.
Its stationary states embrace both bound and
continuum states. Also, phenomena involving the latter whose asymptotic states involve the free electron include
elastic or inelastic scattering and photoionization, so that they are intimately related. The last item is but “half-
scattering,” diﬀering from electron-atom/ion scattering in involving only the “outgoing” half of electron moving from
small r to inﬁnity and not the “ingoing” bit of incident electron from inﬁnity onto the atom/ion. Resonances are also
uniﬁed into the same framework. Phase shifts in the scattering domain can be connected across ionization thresholds
to quantum defects [2], which are parameters of the bound states on the other side of that threshold [1, 3]. Oscillator
strengths for photoabsorption to excited bound states can be naturally continued into the photoionization region
above threshold, the combined distribution providing the total response of the atomic system to radiation (Fig. 2.1
of [1]). Many such connections between the two domains become natural in this uniﬁed view of spectroscopy and
scattering [1].

A contrast between statics and dynamics was already made in physics and engineering long before quantum physics.
The former dealt with the structure of the system on its own with time mostly irrelevant whereas dynamics dealt
with motion of the physical system in space as a function of time. In retrospect, the static system could also have
been considered as stationary but being translated unchanged along the time axis (counterpart of the exp(−iEt/(cid:126))
as a backdrop for stationary states in quantum physics). With absolute motion having no meaning in physics, only
relative motion and relative velocities being meaningful, and especially with Special Relativity’s placing all inertial
frames on an equal footing, the distinction between statics and dynamics is artiﬁcial, all physics being transformations
in space-time. See, for instance, [4]. Quantum physics only sharpens this further. Quantum ﬁeld theories go to the
most extreme of seeing coordinate position and time as mere markers, while ﬁelds and their derivatives become the
dynamical operators. All particles and waves are seen as excitations when the operators act on the vacuum state [5],
with the classical limit of waves only for massless bosons, all others as particles in that limit [6].

II. PHASE SHIFTS AND THEIR DERIVATIVES

Since its beginnings about a century ago, it has been a quest of spectroscopy in atomic physics to reach higher
and higher energy resolution, both in experimental observation and in theoretical calculation. States of deﬁnite E
are studied with increasing precision, that is, with increasingly smaller ∆E, for both bound (E < 0) and scattering
(E > 0) stationary states. Synchrotrons and lasers of increasing sophistication and reach in wavelength and intensity
on the experimental side and analytical and numerical calculations on the theoretical side have aimed to attain
increasingly smaller values of ∆E. With the non-relativistic energy-momentum relation for the free electron at
inﬁnity, E = ((cid:126)k)2/2m, the wave vector k is chosen by convention for negative energies as k = iκ. In spherical polar
coordinates, with angular dependence factored out in spherical harmonics Y(cid:96)m for orbital angular momentum (cid:96), a pair
(f (r), g(r)) of regular and irregular solutions of the radial equation are asymptotically proportional to sin(kr − (cid:96)π/2)
and − cos(kr − (cid:96)π/2), respectively (chapter 5 of [1]). In the presence of interactions at small and intermediate r, the
electron’s asymptotic wave function is given by a superposition of them,

f sin δ(cid:96) − g cos δ(cid:96) ∼ sin(kr −

1
2

(cid:96)π + δ(cid:96)),

(1)

with phase shifts δ(cid:96) that are functions of E. All eﬀects of interactions are contained in them, these being the only
accessible objects at inﬁnity through contact with experimentally measured cross sections.

To obtain these cross sections, diﬀerential in energy, angles, spin, and other parameters, or total integrated cross
sections, the full wave function for electron scattering or photoionization has to be constructed (section 7.9 of [1]) by

3

superposing diﬀerent (cid:96) of Eq. (1) with appropriate outgoing (+) or ingoing (-) wave boundary conditions, respectively.
In enforcing these boundary conditions, the asymptotic wave function in Eq. (1) has to be cast in terms of outgoing
and ingoing spherical waves, exp(ikr) and exp(−ikr), respectively (the choice of the time dependence exp(−iEt/(cid:126))
implicit here even in deﬁning the terms of out/in). The ratio of their coeﬃcients exp(±iδ), namely exp(2iδ), is the
S-matrix (sections 4.3 and 4.5 of [1]). The similar ratio of two “Jost matrices” applies for multi-channels (section 5.3
of [1]). The required outgoing wave boundary condition is that the ingoing piece match the corresponding one in the
incident plane wave along a particular (cid:126)k, and all the other outgoing waves present provide the scattered piece. Thus,
S-1, namely,

is the scattering amplitude. Its modulus-square, together with the dimensional element provided by k and the 4π of
three-dimensional space, gives the scattering cross-section (section 4.6 of [1])

e2iδ − 1 ∝ eiδ sin δ

(2)

σ = (4π/k2)

(cid:88)

(cid:96)

(2(cid:96) + 1) sin2 δ(cid:96).

(3)

Note the weight factor and sum in Eq. (3) to reﬂect isotropic degeneracy and the equal contribution of all m values
in an (cid:96) manifold.

Bound states when k = iκ are given by the condition necessary to have the coeﬃcient of exp(−ikr) vanish as
required for ﬁnite, normalizable wave functions, that is, exp(−iδ) = 0. Extension to a multi-channel generalization for
a complex atom is straightforward. The superposition in Eq. (1) has in place of the sine and cosine the Jost matrices
J ±. For scattering, the relevant combination is the so-called S-matrix of structure J +(J −)−1, and its diﬀerence
from the unit matrix enters the expressions for cross sections. Photoionization is obtained through (J +)−1 and the
multi-channel rendering of bound states is J − = 0. All physical observables are expressed in terms of these phase
shifts or Jost matrices (section 7.3 of [1]).

The phase shifts are in general E-dependent and contain all the information about the interaction. They, and tan δ
may be of either sign, positive for repulsive and negative for attractive interactions. Their energy dependence may
be smooth and gradual or rapid over certain energy intervals, reﬂected correspondingly in the cross sections. A rapid
climb through π over some energy interval Γ around Er, and accompanying rise and fall of cross section, denotes a
“resonance” of width Γ at that energy Er. At this point, time may be invoked, through (cid:126)/Γ as a “lifetime” of a
state at that energy. The most ready physical situation and interpretation of a resonance is of a quasi-bound state
at energy Er that is embedded in a continuum and thus degenerate with it. Unlike a strict stationary bound state,
there is a necessary uncertainty Γ in its energy. Correspondingly, it may be viewed in terms of the ﬁnite lifetime
of that quasi-bound state. Doubly-excited states such as 2s2p 1P o of the He atom or the H− negative ion provide
an example, such a state degenerate with a background continuum of singly ionized 1sEp 1P o. Upon exciting both
electrons into such a state, say by photoabsorption from the ground state (with a photon of ≈ 65 eV in He and ≈
11 eV in H−), one of the electrons can be ejected to inﬁnity, the other simultaneously dropping down to the ground
state in the phenomenon of auto-ionization. It is the Coulomb coupling between the electrons that is responsible for
this process with corresponding lifetimes of 10−12 s for the doubly-excited conﬁguration.

Going further in analyzing the energy dependence of phase shifts and their interpretations in terms of time, split
δ(E) into a slowly-varying δa(E) and more rapidly-varying δb(E), and use trigonometric identities for sines and
tangents,

sin2(δa + δb) = sin2 δa(− cot δa − cot δb)2/(1 + cot2 δb).

(4)

Deﬁning a reduced energy (cid:15) = (E − Er)/ 1
Eq. (4) can be written in the form (Eq.(8.1) and Eq.(8.2) of [1], and Eqs.(5) and (6) of [7])

2 γ = − cot δb and a background parameter q = − cot δa, the cross section in

σ = σ0 + σa(q + (cid:15))2/(1 + (cid:15)2),

(5)

with σ0 a background and one partial wave showing a resonance structure. The use of cotangents allows mapping of
energy values from smaller than Er to larger into a variation of δb from 0 to π as the cotangent goes from −∞ to ∞.
Γ sets the scale for the rapidity in rise of the phase shift, the smaller the Γ the more rapid the climb and narrower
(in E) the rise and fall of σ, with an attendant longer auto-ionization lifetime.

4

The above general form of the resonance cross section depends on three parameters, Er, Γ, and q. These are the
energy position, width, and “Fano proﬁle parameter” (may have either sign), respectively. The resonance structure is
called a “Beutler-Fano” proﬁle and is asymmetric about Er, with a zero at (cid:15) = −q [8, 9]. It reduces to a symmetric
“Breit-Wigner” form [10] for large |q|, the resulting energy dependence then entirely in the Lorentzian (1 + (cid:15)2)−1. See,
for instance, diﬀerent proﬁles in Fig. 27 of [11] and Fig. 1 in [9]. In the interpretation of a quasi-bound state embedded
in a background continuum, a quantum superposition results in constructive and destructive interference across the
proﬁle as one traverses the two wings of the resonance. The position of the zero, that is, completely destructive
interference, occurs at an energy less than or greater than Er depending on the sign of q. Although not necessary
in the above derivation, if δa is slowly-varying, q is sensibly a constant independent of energy and even common to
entire Rydberg series of resonances in a channel [12]. This is often seen in atomic spectra. For this purpose, the
decomposition of the identity in Eq. (4) is instructive, the ﬁrst factor of sin2 δa smoothly varying and even possibly
constant as the phase shift climbs through π at successive values of Er along the series. But that factor and thereby q
itself may vary, perhaps even change sign as in “q-reversal” [13] along a series, depending on the variation of − cot δa
with energy. That could be seen as a further decomposition of that factor itself as per the same identity into smoother
and more rapidly varying pieces.

Extending further into continuous variations, and as with lifetime deﬁned from (cid:126) with an energy interval Γ in the
denominator, time itself may be introduced into a stationary state analysis through a diﬀerential in energy. This is
the Wigner-Eisenbud-Smith [14, 15] “time delay” (section 4.4 of [1])

τ = 2(cid:126) dδ/dE,

(6)

the factor of 2 reﬂecting the two-way traversal from inﬁnity to small r and back to inﬁnity in scattering. The half-
scattering interpretation would argue for dropping the factor of 2 when considering photoionization. The terminology
of a time delay stems from interpreting the rise in δ through π at a quasi-bound state as a temporary trapping
into that conﬁguration (such as 2s2p) before the electron again emerges back in the 1sEp continuum. But, as with
phase shift itself, its energy-derivative and, therefore, time delay may be of either sign. A drop in the phase shift
with increasing energy would be a negative time delay or time “advance.” Interestingly, while time delay can take
arbitrarily large values (the quasi-bound state almost bound), a causality argument limits how negative the advance
can be [14]. That magnitude cannot exceed twice the traversal time of the electron with speed v of the range of
the interaction. That limit is attained when the incident electron is repelled by an inﬁnite hard-sphere repulsion at
that point. With e2/(cid:126) = αc, where α is the ﬁne-structure constant (≈ 1/137), setting a scale of atomic speeds, and
a0 = (cid:126)2/me2 an atomic unit of distance, this gives an atomic unit of time of (cid:126)3/me4 ≈ 45 attosec.

The time delay τ (E) is itself energy-dependent, reﬂecting residual energy dependences beyond the ﬁrst derivative
in the phase shifts. Depending as it does on a derivative, it may be a more sensitive measure of energy dependence
of scattering and its use has been advocated for this purpose not only at resonances but also in other circumstances.
An example is in photoabsorption in the region of a “Cooper minimum” in the cross section for many atoms and
negative ions (section 4.5 of [11] and section 12 of [16]). Such a minimum in the photoionization cross section a little
above threshold was ﬁrst observed [17] in alkali atoms and attributed to a change in sign of the dipole matrix element
governing the process [18, 19]. It has been observed in many atomic systems and systematics of the phenomenon
were established by Cooper [20, 21]. By convention, radial wave functions are deﬁned as positive near the origin, and
therefore the matrix element starts positive as well at threshold. At higher energies, however, the matrix element
may be negative and thus a zero in between can cause an abnormally small cross section around that point. Among
conditions necessary for this is that of the two dipole allowed (cid:96) → (cid:96) ± 1 transitions, the dominant one of (cid:96) + 1 exhibits
this zero for absorption from n(cid:96) when the state n, (cid:96) + 1 is an allowed conﬁguration but un-ﬁlled. This means that for
photoionization from the p shell of rare gases, Ne does not but higher rare gases show a Cooper minimum. Whereas
n = 2 does not have a d, larger n of the higher rare gases do and it is unoccupied in the valence shell. Similarly,
photoabsorption from the 3d of Kr does not but from 4d of Xe does display such a minimum with 4f allowed but
unﬁlled. See Figs. 5 and 11 of [16].

At energies just above threshold, photoabsorption diﬀers radically for negative ions and neutral atoms. The Wigner
threshold law [22] applies for the former with σ ∝ E(cid:96)+ 1
2 , thus starting at zero at the threshold for photodetachment.
On the other hand, the photoionization cross section for neutral atoms is a constant at threshold, independent of (cid:96)
because of the long range Coulomb ﬁeld seen by the escaping photoelectron. A recent detailed study by Manson and
collaborators [23] through relativistic random phase calculations of Ar and its isoelectronic negative ion Cl− 3p →
Ed, Es documents these features, and especially dramatically the sensitivity of the time delay τ . More so than the
cross section σ, matrix element, or phase shift, it is τ that has the most pronounced structure in both Ar and Cl−
around the Cooper minimum lying 45 eV above threshold. Near its photodetachment threshold, Cl− is very diﬀerent
with its 3p → Es channel that dominates there starting at zero, leave alone the even more suppressed 3p → Ed. By
contrast, in Ar, both begin with a ﬁnite value at threshold. But, in the vicinity of 30 - 50 eV, both Ar and Cl− are

very similar in their Cooper minimum. The time delay is nearly constant (that is, phase shift ﬂat in energy) around
zero for several eV on either side but with a sharp drop, a time advance of several hundred attosec, in a narrow energy
range. See Figs. 1-3 of [23].

5

Turning from energy dependence, time elements can also be introduced into the dependence of phase shifts on
angular momentum. First, the Wigner threshold laws referred to above may be viewed in terms of the angular
momentum barrier experienced by the electron. In classical mechanics, for some energy E or linear momentum k, the
angular momentum involves in addition a lever arm so that higher (cid:96) values are kept further away in r from the origin.
This is more acute at small E and k. Angular momentum appears correspondingly in the radial equation of quantum
mechanics as an eﬀective potential (cid:96)((cid:96) + 1)(cid:126)2/(2mr2) that keeps the electron away from the origin. The higher the (cid:96),
the larger this barrier and the more suppressed the wave function at small r with an r(cid:96) dependence. Especially for a
low energy electron, the classical turning point rcl = ((cid:96) + 1
2mE separates an inner and outer region and there
is a similar suppression of the probability for the electron to tunnel past it from near the origin to larger r. Indeed,
a JWKB expression for this tunneling probability gives precisely the k2(cid:96)+1 dependence of the phase shift that is the
basis of Wigner threshold laws [24].

2 )(cid:126)/

√

The elastic scattering phase shift or tan δ(cid:96) has such a dependence and its square enters in Eq. (3) for σel, elastic
scattering involving two-way traversal from large to small r and back. For inelastic cross sections, the (cid:96) of the
outgoing partial wave similarly involves the E(cid:96)+ 1
2 of their threshold behavior as noted above for photodetachment
of Cl−. However, in the presence of an attractive Coulomb ﬁeld that is of longer range than 1/r2, and thereby is
the dominant factor at low energies, the tunneling and dependence on (cid:96) drops out [24]. This is also manifest in the
zero-energy radial wave function’s behavior, J2(cid:96)+1((cid:112)8Zr/a0), that is energy-independent for all (cid:96). (For a repulsive
Coulomb potential, the tunneling suppression is enhanced leading to an exponentially reduced cross section with the
form exp(−c/

E), with c an energy-independent constant.)

√

In complex atoms beyond hydrogen, the angular momentum barrier takes on even richer structure upon combination
with the Coulomb potentials felt by the electron. In hydrogen, that combined radial potential for the electron has
a smooth, monotonic dependence on r with a single minimum. In a more complex atom, the photoelectron in its
passage from near the origin and nucleus of charge Ze to asymptotic r sees a complicated many-body interaction with
all the other electrons that may be viewed as an eﬀective potential that interpolates between the −Ze2/r at very
small r to −e2/r at inﬁnity. In between, therefore, it falls faster and indeed can be well described by a faster 1/r2
that is also the dependence of the angular momentum contribution. The combination of nearly equal and opposite
terms can, in some instances, lead to a near cancellation or even go positive for a certain range of r. This results
in a “two-valley” potential with an inner deep attractive well and a shallow outer well separated by an intervening
positive barrier. This is, of course, more likely with larger (cid:96). That barrier can inﬂuence strongly low-energy electrons
either incident from large r in their penetration to the inner region or electrons on their passage out from the inner
well to inﬁnity.

Already in the 1930s, Fermi [25] and Mayer [26] had linked a variety of atomic properties to this two-valley potential
as, for instance, the nature of transition elements and lanthanides and actinides. The ﬁlling of the corresponding d
and f shells is aﬀected by the intervening barrier so that it is only when the barrier drops in La (57) as compared to Xe
(54) that the 4f shell starts to ﬁll and does so through the lanthanide series to Lu (71). All fourteen of those elements
with the f shell getting ﬁlled in the inner well are otherwise similar in the outer regions which is at the root of their
occupying a single spot in The Periodic Table. In working with the Thomas-Fermi model as a one-electron potential
across The Periodic Table, the barrier was observed for f electrons but not d [26]. But, with the advent of numerical
Hartree-Fock calculations across the elements, a Hartree-Slater (exchange) potential became available in the 1960s
for all Z and all r [27]. This is more accurate and displays atomic shell structure unlike the Thomas-Fermi potential.
Even subtleties such as dips at half-ﬁlling of d and f shells are exhibited (see Fig. 1 of [28]), again in conformity with
observed properties along transition elements and lanthanides. The plot of an eﬀective one-electron potential for all
Z as a function of r showed these changes and were reﬂected in calculations of photoabsorption spectra displaying
similar non-monotonic changes from one atom to the next and especially an extremum at Au [29]. The two-valley
potential also showed non-monotonic dependences in Z since the intermediate region is one of a balance between two
nearly equal but opposite 1/r2 contributions, so that variations in either can be consequential (see Fig. 2 of [28]).
The two-valley potential occurs for both d and f electrons and has since been investigated extensively [30].

The barrier region at intermediate r that separates the inner well, where the photoelectron is initially excited upon
absorption from a ground or lower energy state, from the outer Coulomb well can at low energies suppress electron
escape and thus the cross section. Generally, higher (cid:96) have larger cross sections both because of the higher statistical
weight and because of larger overlap of radial wave functions. See, for instance, Fig. 19 of [11], Figs. 5 and 11 of [16],
and [31, 32]. In the Ar example discussed above, the 3p → Ed is suppressed just above threshold by the barrier, later
to increase rapidly. The tunneling probability involves barrier width and height in an exponent so that changes in
them with even small changes in E can be reﬂected in large changes in the cross section that involves that exponential.
In combination with the later fall oﬀ in E, the cross section shows a peak in such 3p → Ed, or in 4d → Ef in Xe, and

6

these are termed “shape” resonances (section 4.5 of [11]) to distinguish them from quasi-bound state or “Feshbach”
resonances discussed earlier [33, 34]. The latter occur just below a corresponding threshold (E < 0) whereas the
former lie above (E > 0) and arise from the shape of the potential that gives them their name. The photodetachment
of H− in the vicinity of the n = 2 threshold at 10.95 eV provides a particulary nice example with one very sharp 1P o
Feshbach resonance just below and a broad shape resonance just above [35, 36].

With the advent of attosecond measurement technology through streak cameras [37, 38], a recent experiment [39]
made a direct measurement of photoelectrons from tungsten diselenide WSe2. Electrons from the conduction band
and from the ﬁlled 3d shell of Se were recorded to arrive at diﬀerent times at the detector. The Ep electrons from
that shell have no angular momentum barrier of a two-valley potential as do the Ef photoelectrons. Interpreted as
an extra tunneling time for them, values of ≈ 20 attosec were measured consistent with that expected for tunneling
through the intervening barrier [39]. As in Fig. 2 of [28], the d-wave barrier builds up from Sc to the completion of
the 3d shell at Cu and remains for the subsequent elements through Se to Kr.

Alternatives to the streak camera can also reach attosec scales such as direct measurement of the phase of the
photoionization amplitude with free electron lasers [40]. All these measurements now possible of very short time
scales allow the probing of Fano resonances in the time domain, following their very build up [41–44] in time. See
also a pedagogical treatment in [45]. Remarkably, even shorter time scales can now be measured. While the time for
an atomic electron to travel the length of a Bohr radius is, approximately, 45 attosec, the corresponding light travel
time is shorter by the ﬁne-structure constant, that is, of the order of 300 zeptosec. This transit time between the two
hydrogen atoms in the H2 molecule has recently been measured [46].

III. HYBRID DESCRIPTIONS AND THE ROLE OF TECHNOLOGY

Our description of energy and time as two alternative representations may be seen as limiting extremes, and one
can envisage hybrids in between. Indeed, in sound and acoustics, besides the Fourier conjugates of frequency and
time domains, western music notation had invoked from its beginnings a representation/language that involves both.
Notes of frequencies within an octave on some tempered scale are also grouped in a linear time sequence on the page.
Correspondingly, ﬁnite wave trains or “wavelets” have also a long history in mathematical physics [47–49]. In atomic
structure calculations too, uses of such basis sets or of B-splines, even if over-complete, have been shown to improve
convergence [50].

An aspect of which of energy or time representations to use is the role played by what is technologically convenient
or indeed possible. This is part of a more general theme of the importance of technology in making advances
in fundamental science, sometimes forgotten against the more commonly advanced claims made for basic science
leading to new technologies. That is indeed so, but equally, available technologies of the day drive what can even
be investigated and how. Thus, with the estimate above of a few ten attosec for photoelectrons to tunnel through
angular barriers or escape the atom, direct measurements of such short times were outside the reach of experiment
in the ﬁrst decades of the ﬁeld. In its place, more accurate energy measurements and higher resolution and time
delay as per Eq. (6) allowed such access. The advent of very short laser pulses, ﬁrst on the femto second scale of
molecular transformation and then of attoseconds, along with streak cameras and such techniques, have only recently
permitted such direct access to the very short times involved as noted above. Angular momentum barriers that were
ﬁrst mapped out [28] in the mid-1960s had to wait a half-century for direct measurements of tunneling time through
them [39]. Already, even that mapping became possible only because of early computer calculations [27] such as
Hartree-Fock-Slater that made possible study across the Periodic Table with more accuracy than the Thomas-Fermi
model of the previous 30 years. And for theoretical calculations, the very high speed numerical calculations now
feasible with supercomputers allow meaningful direct integration of the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation with
very small time steps, without being restricted to time-independent calculations with basis state expansions for the
stationary states of ﬁxed E.

The alternative descriptions of phenomena as evolution in time or as a single snapshot at an instant exist also
outside of physics in other sciences and even general intellectual activity and philosophy. Astronomy, in particular,
always had to resort to the latter because of the great mis-match between time scales for evolution of stars, galaxies
and the entire Universe as compared to the human lifespan. Instead of following one star or galaxy from birth to
death, one observes an entire collection as available at this particular epoch, capturing various similar objects at
diﬀerent stages of their evolution. The ﬁnite, and diﬀerent, times it takes for light to reach us helps in this regard.
In biology, today we can through fast cameras and time-lapse photography follow a single moth or butterﬂy from
egg through larva to caterpillar, pupa, and emergent insect. (In some butterﬂies such as the monarch, there are even
several cycles of the ﬂying insect stage between the ﬁrst and the return to the breeding trees in Mexico from the in-
between wanderings over North America.) But, as an alternative to following an individual, botanical and zoological
illustrations can capture on one plate the entire life cycle as depicted simultaneously by diﬀerent individuals. An early

7

example were the canvases of the N¨urnberg artist, Maria Sybille Merian, who uniquely for her time painted such life
cycles embracing caterpillar and moth that she had seen in Surinam [51, 52].

IV. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The perspectives one develops of a ﬁeld owe much to several discussions with colleagues over many years. My
studies in photoabsorption began in the ﬁrst days of graduate school under the tutelage of Prof. Ugo Fano. Just
weeks later, I met and started discussing with Steve Manson, an interaction that has continued for over ﬁfty years.
This article in honor of his contributions to the ﬁeld is also oﬀered as a tribute to others with whom I discussed from
those ﬁrst months and extending over decades but who have now, sadly, passed away: Philip Altick, John Cooper,
Ugo Fano, Mitio Inokuti, Yong-Ki Kim, and Anthony Starace.

[1] Fano U and Rau A R P 1986 Atomic Collisions and Spectra (New York: Academic)
[2] Rau A R P and Inokuti M 1997 Am. J. Phys. 65 221-225
[3] Seaton M J 1983 Rep. Prog. Phys. 46 167-257
[4] Sudarshan E C G and Mukunda N 1974 Classical Dynamics: A Modern Perspective (New York: Wiley)
[5] Sakurai J J 1994 Advanced Quantum Mechanics (Reading: Addison-Wesley)
[6] Peierls R E 1979 Surprises in Theoretical Physics (Princeton: Princeton Univ Press)
[7] Rau A R P 2004 Phys. Scripta 69 C10-13
[8] Beutler H 1935 Zeit. f. Phys. 93 177
[9] Fano U 1961 Phys. Rev. 124 1866-1878

[10] Perkins D H 1987 Introduction to High Energy Physics (Reading: Addison-Wesley) section 4.8
[11] Fano U and Cooper J W 1968 Rev. Mod. Phys. 40 441-507
[12] Schulz K, Kaindl G, Domke D, Bozek J D, Heimann P A, Schlachter A S, and Rost J M 1996 Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 3086-3089
[13] Friedrich H 1994 Theoretical Atomic Physics (Berlin: Springer), section 3.3.3
[14] Wigner E P 1955 Phys. Rev. 98 145-147
[15] Smith F T 1960 Phys. Rev. 118 349-356
[16] Starace A F 1982 Handbuch der Physik Vol XXXI, ed. Mehlhorn W (Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag) 1-121
[17] Ditchburn R W, Tunstead J, and Yates J G 1943 Proc. R. Soc. A 181 386-399
[18] Bates D R 1946 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 106 432-445
[19] Seaton M J 1951 Proc. R. Soc. A 208 418-430
[20] Cooper J W 1962 Phys. Rev. 128 681-693
[21] Cooper J W 1964 Phys. Rev.Lett. 13 762-764
[22] Wigner E P 1948 Phys. Rev. 73 1002-1009
[23] Saha S, Jose J, Deshmukh P C, Aravind G, Dolmatov V K, Kheifets A S, and Manson S T 2019 Phys. Rev. A 99 043407
[24] Rau A R P 1984 Comments At. Mol. Phys. 44 285-306
[25] Fermi E 1962 in Collected Papers of Enrico Fermi (Chicago: University of Chicago Press) p. 291
[26] Goeppert-Mayer M 1941 Phys. Rev. 60 184-187
[27] Herman F and Skillman S 1963 Atomic Structure Calculations (Englewood Cliﬀs: Prentice-Hall)
[28] Rau A R P and Fano U 1968 Phys. Rev. 167 7-10
[29] Manson S T and Cooper J W 1968 Phys. Rev. 165 126-138
[30] Connerade J P 1998 Highly Excited Atoms (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.Press)
[31] Manson S T 1969 Phys. Rev. 182 97-103
[32] Fano U, Theodosiou C E, and Dehmer J L 1976 Rev. Mod. Phys. 48 49-68
[33] Kleppner D 2004 Phys. Today 57(8) 12
[34] Rau A R P 2005 Phys. Today 58(2) 13
[35] Lin C D 1975 Phys. Rev. Lett. 35 1150-1153
[36] Bryant H C, Dieterle B D, Donahue J, Shariﬁan H, Tootoonchi H, Wolfe D M, Gram P A M, and Yates-Williams M A

1977 Phys. Rev. Lett. 38 228-230

[37] Itatani J, Quere F, Yudin G L, Ivanov M Yu, Krausz F, and Corkum P B 2002 Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 173903
[38] Cavalieri A L, Mueller N, Uphues Th, Yakovlev V S, Baltuska A, Horvath B, Schmidt B, Bluemel L, Holzwarth R, Hendel

S, Drescher M, Kleineberg R, Krausz F, and Heinzmann U 2007 Nature 449 1029-1032

[39] Siek F, Neb S, Bartz P, Hensen M, Strueber, Fiechter S, Torrent-Sucarrat M, Silkin V M, Krasovskii E E, Kabachnik N
M, Fritzsche S, Muino R D, Echenique P M, Kazansky A K, Mueller N, Pfeiﬀer W, and Heinzmann U 2017 Science 357
1274-1277

[40] You D, Ueda K, Gryzlova E V, Grum-Grzhimailo A N, Popova M M, Staroselskaya E I, Tugs O, Orimo Y, Sato T, Ishikawa
K L, Carpeggianai P A, Csizmadia T, Fuele M, Snasone G, Karoju P K, DElia A, Mazza T, Meyer M, Callegari C, Di

8

Fraia M, Plekan O, Richter R, Giannessi L, Allaria, E, De Ninno G, Trovo M, Badano L, Diviacco B, Gaio G, Gauthier
D, Mirian N, Penco G, Ribic, P R, Spamapinati S, Spezzani C, and Prince K C 2020 Phys. Rev. X 10 031070

[41] Chu W C and Lin C D 2010 Phys. Rev. A 82 054315
[42] Wickenhauser M, Burgdoerfer J, Krausz F, and Drescher M 2005 Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 023002
[43] Kaldun A, Blaettermann A, Stooss V, Donsa S, Wei H, Pazourek R, Nagele S, Ott C, Lin C D, Burgdoerfer J, and Pfeifer

T 2016 Science 354 738-741

[44] Gruson V, Barreau L, Jimenez-Galan A, Risoud F, Caillat J, Maquet A, Carre B, Lepetit F, Hergott J F, Ruchon T,

Argenti L, Taieb R, Martin F, and Salieres P 2016 Science 354 734-738

[45] Bin Yan and Greene C H 2017 Phys. Rev. A 95 032706
[46] Grundmann S, Trabert D, Fehre K, Strenger N, Pier A, Kaiser L, Kircher M, Weller M, Eckart S, Schmidt L P H, Trinter

F, Jahnke T, Schoeﬄer M S, and Doerner R 2020 Science 370 339-341

[47] Gabor D 1946 J. Inst. Elec. Engineers 93 429-441
[48] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ingrid Daubechies
[49] Aerts D and Daubechies I 1979 Lett. Math. Phys. 3(1) 11-17
[50] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B-spline
[51] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maria Sibylla Merian
[52] Pieters F F J M and Winthagen D 1999 Archives of Natural History 26(1) 1-18

