Measuring Presence in Augmented Reality Environments: 

Design and a First Test of a Questionnaire 

Holger Regenbrecht 

Thomas Schubert 

DaimlerChrysler Research and Technology 

Friedrich-Schiller-University 

Ulm, Germany 

regenbre@igroup.org 

Jena, Germany 

schubert@igroup.org 

Keywords: sense of presence, augmented reality 

Introduction 

Augmented Reality (AR) enriches a user’s real environment by adding spatially aligned virtual objects 

(3D models, 2D textures, textual annotations, etc) by means of special display technologies. These are 

either worn on the body or placed in the working environment. From a technical point of view, AR faces 

three major challenges: (1) to generate a high quality rendering, (2) to precisely register (in position and 

orientation)  the virtual objects (VOs) with the real environment, and (3) to do so in interactive real-time 

(Regenbrecht, Wagner, & Baratoff, in press). The goal is to create the impression that the VOs are part 

of the real environment. Therefore, and similar to definitions of virtual reality (Steuer, 1992), it makes 

sense to define AR from a psychological point of view: Augmented Reality conveys the impression that 

VOs are present in the real environment. In order to evaluate how well this goal is reached, a 

psychological measurement of this type of presence is necessary. In the following, we will describe 

technological features of AR systems that make a special questionnaire version necessary, describe our 

approach to the questionnaire development, and the data collection strategy. 

Finally we will present first results of the application of the questionnaire in a recent study with 385 

participants. 

1. 

Technology and Type of Presence 

AR systems can be categorized regarding the display and interaction technology used as well as the 

reference relationships between real world, virtual (augmented) world, and the user's body or body parts 

(esp. hands). In addition to that one should distinguish between single and multi user applications. 

Widely used are systems with an HMD as a display device, either as an optical-see-thru system, where 

the user is looking through the glasses of the HMD into the real environment, or video-see-thru systems, 

 
 
 
 
where the real world is mediated by a video stream captured by a head-mounted mini camera. The whole 

system can be used in a stationary setup or as a wearable technique (Azuma, 1997). A second category 

of AR systems uses (stereo) projection techniques (e.g. CAVE-like environments, stereo projection 

screens) in addition to real world objects (e.g. Bimber et. al., 2001). A third category uses hand-held 

devices with a Through-the-lens metaphor to augment VOs onto the real environment seen through the 

display (Regenbrecht & Specht, 2000, Mogilev et. al., 2002). 

Although from a technical perspective these systems are very different, they share a common feature, 

namely that it is the real environment that the VOs are placed in. Therefore, the common approach to 

measure presence in virtual environments, questions on the experience whether one has the sense of 

being there in the VE, does not work. AR elicits a different sense of presence: "It is here" presence 

(Lombard & Ditton, 1997). We know of no previous attempts to develop a scale for this experience.  

2. 

Questionnaire Development  

We have developed a first version of a questionnaire to measure the experienced presence of VOs in the 

real environment. Our approach was based on a previous theoretical model of presence in virtual 

environments that is easily generalizable to presence of VOs in augmented reality (Schubert, Friedmann, 

& Regenbrecht, 2001). We argue that presence of VOs develops when we mentally represent bodily 

actions on the VOs as potential bodily actions. In order to develop these representations, it is necessary 

to devote attention to them and actively construe them on the basis of their visual representation. Related 

to the experience that the VOs are present in the real space, but by no means identical to it, is the 

experience that they achieve a certain sense of realness (Banos et al., 2000). In our previous research, we 

have found that presence and realness judgments differ, and that they are predicted by different variables 

(Schubert, Friedmann, & Regenbrecht, 1999). 

On the basis of this reasoning, we developed items that assessed (a) the experienced presence of VOs in 

the real space, (b) experienced co-location of VOs and body in the same space, (c) experienced realness 

of the VOs, (d) synaesthetic experiences and behavioral confusion, as well as (e) experienced control 

over the interaction and (f) experienced effort for mental construal. We also added items on previous 

experience with similar technologies and enjoyment of the interaction. After a first round of data 

collection with the technologies mentioned below (N=16), items with very low variance were excluded. 

Although preliminary, these data already suggested that the division between presence and realness also 

holds for AR. 

 
 
3. 

Data collection 

The final questionnaire, with 26 questions related to facets (a) through (f), was recently applied to users 

of four different applications, out of each of the realms described above: 1) HMD-based single user 

application "MagicDesk" (Regenbrecht, Baratoff, & Wagner, 2001), 2) the interactive two user 

Through-the-lens demonstration "AR Pad" and HMD-based "MagicMeeting" (Regenbrecht & Wagner, 

2002), and 3) the single/multi user projection system "IllusionHole" at Bauhaus University Weimar, and 

4) the special projection system "Virtual Showcase" using the "Raptor" application. These applications 

feature the following interactions: MagicDesk: In front of an HMD-wearing user stands a turnable plate 

(CakePlatter) on a table with a virtual scaled car model on it. Using a pointing device with a knob on it 

the participants can texture car parts (like door or roof) by pointing a virtual ray towards the desired part 

and pushing the button. The texture to be used currently is "photographed" with a knob on the HMD 

before. AR Pad: Two user, each holding a LCD screen with a camera attached to it. Mounted to this 

device is a "SpaceOrb" device for 3DOF rotation and selection. The users sit vis-a-vis on a table. 

Between the users textured cubes are placed in virtual (augmented) space. Each side of a cube is 

textured different. The task is to puzzle in 3D. MagicMeeting: This is the collaborative version of 

MagicDesk, in our case a two user version. The users sit side by side on the same table looking onto one 

shared model with collaborative interactions. The interaction tasks are lighting the model, a real 

transparent acryl clipping plane (virtually clipping the model) and annotation cards to color the model. 

IllusionHole: Between one and four users look at a large horizontal computer monitor screen, wearing 

shutter glasses. The position of their heads are tracked. Each user sees a specific part of the screen, on 

which the VOs are presented correctly aligned for his or her perspective. The partition of the screen 

space is reached by a hole in a plane placed above the screen. The hole is a circle, with a diameter of 

approximately 20 cm. The VOs appear to flow in the space left by the hole, and extend up to 10 cm 

below and above the hole. Participants can interact with the objects using tracked pens. Raptor: One or 

more users are standing around a table with a half-silvered mirror cone on top of it. Within the cone a 

real (exhibition) object is placed, in this case the skull of a dinosaur. This object is lit with projectors in a 

very special technological way, so that some parts (like muscles) can be spatially augmented. The 

exhibition was supplemented by audio narration.    

In each environment, users interact at least 5 minutes with the environment. Because of the very simple 

and natural interfaces no detailed instructions are needed. Participants can use the systems immediately. 

We currently collect data using the questionnaire and will present results from principal components 

 
 
analysis and regressions on the other measures at the conference. We will especially discuss (a) the 

relation between "it is here" presence and realness, (b) the relation to the experienced control over the 

interaction, and (c) the similarities and differences to presence in virtual environments. 

4. 

Raptor Study 

The first comprehensive application of the questionnaire developed took place at the conference / fair 

SIGGRAPH 2002. We describe this survey a little bit more in detail, although the questionnaire was 

applied in a very special setup: the Virtual Showcase Raptor environment. 

Participants 

In total, 385 participants filled in the questionnaire. The experimenter conducting the study marked 19 

of them as invalid due to insufficient language abilities or non-serious participation. Additional 13 

participants were excluded due to missing values in the factor-analysed variables. Thus, 353 participants 

remained in the analysed sample. Of them, 80.5% were male. Mean age was 34.8. 

Method 

The participants were wearing tracked 3D shutter glasses to experience the augmented 3D space. After a 

couple of minutes of exploring the Raptor model (skull with augmented muscles) with recorded audio 

explanations they filled in the questionnaire on the experiences and attitudes toward the system. Of 

importance to the present purposes, there were 7 items on presence-related experiences, 3 items on 

previous experiences with virtual reality, artificial reality, and computer games, an item on how 

comfortable the HMD was, an item on whether the recorded audio narration was helpful, and 5 items on 

the acceptance of the system (whether they would try a similar technology again, whether they deemed 

the technology as suitable for a museum, whether they would be willing to pay a higher entrance fee, 

how much they would pay in addition, whether they would prefer to go to such an exhibition). All items 

were answered on 7 point Likert type items. 

Factor Analysis 

The sample was suitable for a principal component analysis, as indicated by a KMO score of .70. Three 

components had an Eigenvalue above 1. A first strong component explained 30.9% of the variance, the 

second (15.9%) and third (14.68%) component explained considerably less variance. We nevertheless 

extracted 3 components since a test with 2 components showed that these 2 did not form coherent scales, 

but that the items of the third components would again fall out. The components were obliquely rotated 

(Direct Oblimin).  

 
 
Table 1 shows the structure matrix. Component 1 combines items related to how real the virtual objects 

seemed and how well they integrated with the real objects. Component 2 combines 2 items on the 

3dness of the virtual objects. Component 3 taps experiences of the perceptual process itself - whether the 

difference between real and virtual drew attention, and whether the perception of the virtual object was 

needed effort. We call the first component realness, the second component spatial presence, and the 

third component perceptual stress. 

Component 

1 

2 

3 

P3  Was watching the virtual objects just as natural as 

.746 

.292 

watching the real world? 

P2  Did you have the impression that the virtual objects 

-.745 

.228 

belonged to the real object 

(dinosaur skull), or did they seem separate from it? 

P4  Did you have the impression that you could have 

.686 

.346 

-.126 

touched and grasped the virtual objects? 

P5  Did the virtual objects appear to be (visualized) on a 

.187 

.828 

screen, or did you have the impression that they were 

located in space? 

P6  Did you have the impression of seeing the virtual 

.271 

.801 

-.203 

objects as merely flat images or as three-dimensional 

objects? 

P7  Did you pay attention at all to the difference between 

-.220 

.785 

real and virtual objects? 

P8  Did you have to make an effort to recognize the virtual 

-.318 

.714 

objects as being three-dimensional? 

Table 1: Component structure matrix 

We then explored the relation between these presence factors and the acceptance of the AR system. For 

components 1 and 2, mean scores were computed (Alphas = .56 and .60, respectively). Component 3 

was dropped since the Alpha (.27) and the intercorrelation of the 2 items (r=.16) was insufficient. 

 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Furthermore, we created an average score of the acceptance items (Alpha=.65). We then regressed the 

acceptance score on realness and spatial presence, previous experiences with AR, VR, and computer 

games, the comfort of the HMD, helpfulness of the audio narration, age, and gender. Stepwise 

regression was used. The final regression model explained a significant amount of variance, 

F(4,303)=18.97, p<.001 (lower N due to missing values). Significant positive predictors were realness, 

spatial presence, narration helpfulness, and HMD comfort, ts > 2.4, ps<.017. All experience scores, age, 

and gender dropped out.  

Discussion 

In the component analysis of items assessing presence of augmented reality, we found distinct factors 

for the experienced realness of the virtual objects, and the spatial presence of these objects. Whether the 

virtual objects are experienced as three-dimensional and in space is distinct from whether they seem to 

be real and well integrated with the real environment. The two components are correlated (r=.299), but 

distinct in the component analysis. Furthermore, it seems that perceptual stress comes out as a third 

factor, but the two items on it correlate not highly, making this a very preliminary finding. A regression 

analysis showed that both realness and spatial presence contribute to the acceptance of an AR system.  

The distinction between realness and spatial presence reminds of previous results finding the same factor 

for immersive virtual environments (Schubert et al., 2001). There, the perception of the VE as 

surrounding the body (spatial presence) and the perception of the VE as real were also distinct from each 

other. The distinction becomes even more important in AR, where real objects have to be perceptually 

integrated with virtual objects. 

5. 

Acknowledgments 

We'd like to thank Michael Wagner, Mark Billinghurst, Oliver Bimber, Bernd Fröhlich, and Miguel 

Encarnacao for their support. 

6. 

References 

Azuma, R (1997). A Survey of Augmented Reality. Presence:Teleoperators and Virtual 

Environments, 6(4), 355-385. 

Banos, R. M., Botella, C., Garcia-Palacios, A., Villa, H., Perpina, C., Alcaniz, M. (2000). Presence 

and reality judgment in virtual environments: A unitary construct? CyberPsychology and Behaviour, 

3(3), 327-335. 

 
 
Bimber, O., Fröhlich, B., Schmalstieg, D., and Encarnacao, L.M. (2001). The Virtual Showcase, 

IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 21(6), 48-55. 

Lombard, M., & Ditton, T. At the heart of it all: The concept of presence. Journal of Computer-

Mediated Communication, 3(2), http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol3/issue2/lombard.html. 

Mogilev, D., Kiyokawa, K., Billinghurst, M., and Pair, J. (2002). AR Pad: An Interface for Face-to-

Face AR Collaboration. Extended Abstract in Proceedings of CHI 2002, April 20-25, 2002, 

Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. ACM, 654-655. 

Regenbrecht, H., Baratoff, G., & Wagner, M. (2001). A tangible AR desktop environment. 

Computers & Graphics, 25(5), 755-763. 

Regenbrecht H.T. & Specht, R. (2000). A mobile Passive Augmented Reality Device - mPARD. 

Short Paper at International Symposium on Augmented Reality IEEE ISAR2000, Munich/Germany, 

October 5-6, 2000. 

Regenbrecht, H. & Wagner, M.(2002). Interaction in a Collaborative Augmented Reality 

Environment. Extended Abstract in Proceedings of CHI 2002, April 20-25, 2002, Minneapolis, 

Minnesota, USA. ACM, 504-505.  

Regenbrecht, H., Wagner, M., & Baratoff, G. (in press). MagicMeeting - a Collaborative Tangible 

Augmented Reality System. Virtual Reality - Systems, Development and Applications, 6(3). 

Schubert, T., Friedmann, F., & Regenbrecht, H. (1999). Embodied Presence in Virtual Environments. 

In Ray Paton & Irene Neilson (Eds.), Visual Representations and Interpretations (pp. 269-278). London: 

Springer-Verlag. 

Schubert, T., Friedmann, F., & Regenbrecht, H. (2001). The experience of presence: Factor analytic 

insights. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 10(3), 266-281.  

Steuer, J. S. (1992). Defining virtual reality: Dimensions determining telepresence. Journal of 

Communication, 42(4), 73–93. 

 
 
