1
2
0
2

r
a

M
2

]
P
E
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
0
3
9
1
0
.
3
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

SOLAR WIND-DRIVEN DAY-TO-DAY EFFECTS ON
THE MARTIAN THERMOSPHERE/EXOSPHERE
COMPOSITION

Kamsali Nagaraja1, Praveen Kumar Basuvaraj1, S. C. Chakravarty1, K. Praveen Kumar2

1Department of Physics, Bangalore University, Bengaluru 560056 India

2Space Science Programme Ofﬁce, ISRO Headquarters, Bengaluru 560094 India

Correspondance: Kamsali Nagaraja (kamsalinagaraj@bub.ernet.in)

Abstract

Since the ﬁrst in-situ measurements of the altitude proﬁle of upper atmospheric
density and composition carried out by the Viking lander missions during 1976,
similar data were continuously gathered by MAVEN and MOM spacecraft orbiting
Mars since September 2014 with a mass spectrometer and other related payloads.
Using near-simultaneous observations by the two orbiters, we show that both data
sets conﬁrm signiﬁcant day-to-day variations of Argon (Ar) density proﬁles in the
Martian thermosphere/exosphere during 1-15 June 2018 when the solar EUV radi-
ation did not show any appreciable change. We extend this study to include the
parent atmospheric constituents (CO2, Ar, He, N2) and the photochemical products
(O, CO) to examine the effect of solar wind plasma (e/H+) velocities and ﬂuxes dur-
ing the above time interval. Density proﬁles of these constituents show signiﬁcant
effects due to the additional electron impact dissociation and ionisation during the
ﬁrst week of June 2018, which subside in the next week returning to normal condi-
tions. These ﬁrst-time results are interpreted based on a number of relevant neutral
and ion chemical reactions. This result provides a vital input to future modelling
efforts of Martian thermosphere/exosphere composition studies and the solar EUV
related variations due to the Schwabe cycle.

Keywords: MOM, MAVEN, solar wind, photodissociation, photoionisation, NGIMS,
MENCA

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Nagaraja et al. (2021)
Introduction

Preprint of the Manuscript

Considerable progress has been made to conduct in-situ observations of Martian sur-
face and atmospheric parameters using orbiters, landers and rovers. Near-surface me-
teorological data has been analysed and consolidated in terms of diurnal, seasonal and
inter-annual variations for more than 20 Martian years (Martínez et al., 2017). How-
ever, till recently, the measurements of upper atmospheric composition and density of
Mars have been limited to the two sets of observations taken by the Viking landers
while traversing down through its thin atmosphere (Nier and McElroy, 1976; Nier
et al., 1976; Owen et al., 1977) and hence it has not been possible to study its character-
istic variations.

In September 2014, the Mars Atmosphere and Volatile Evolution (MAVEN) and the
Mars Orbiter Mission (MOM) spacecraft entered into Martian orbit and placed in el-
liptical orbits around Mars with one of the main objectives to gather continuous data
on spatial and temporal proﬁles of various upper atmospheric neutral/ion density
and composition parameters (Jakosky et al., 2015; Arunan and Satish, 2015).

Mars has a well-mixed region of the homosphere with the homopause at ≈120 km al-
titude; the thermosphere is deﬁned as the region above where the gases diffusively
separate with individual gas species following their scale heights. This region ﬁ-
nally merges into the exosphere, where the lighter gases may get energised to at-
tain escape velocities. Usually, this loss process starts from around 220 km, called the
exobase, where the scale heights and mean free paths are comparable. The dynam-
ics of this region is driven by the energy and momentum ﬂuxes from planetary and
tidal waves propagating through the lower atmosphere and by solar extreme ultravi-
olet (EUV) radiation, ﬂare induced energetic particles and variable solar wind plasma
ﬂuxes (Valeille et al., 2009; Medvedev et al., 2015). For Mars, the energetic charged
particle interaction with atmospheric constituents, especially in the thermosphere-
exosphere region, can change the electromagnetic radiation dominated dissociation
and ion chemical reactions considerably due to the lack of any Earth-like magneto-
sphere.

The results obtained from both MAVEN using NGIMS (Neutral Gas and Ion Mass
Spectrometer) payload and MOM using MENCA (Mars Exospheric Neutral Composi-
tion Analyser) payloads have so far provided new information about the spatial varia-
tion of the upper atmospheric gas constituents and ion species delineating their verti-
cal and horizontal distributions and also the effect of the solar zenith angles with day-
night, latitude and solar longitude variations (Mahaffy et al., 2015b; Nagaraja et al.,
2020).

The primary purpose of this paper is to search and examine the effect of variation of
solar wind plasma energetics on the short period day-to-day vertical distribution and
density changes of different thermosphere-exosphere constituents based primarily on
NGIMS/MAVEN data with near-simultaneous observations using MENCA/MOM
for comparison.

2

Nagaraja et al. (2021)
Theory, Data and Method of Analysis

Preprint of the Manuscript

Above the homopause, the individual atmospheric neutral species follow the altitude-
density proﬁle according to their molecular masses; hence heavier ones with shorter
scale heights (H∗) decrease rapidly with altitude as given by the following relation
derived from the condition of the hydrostatic equilibrium of the atmospheric pres-
sure/density:

ps(z) = ps(z0) exp(−

z − z0
H∗ )

(1)

where ps is the pressure of species s, z and z0 are heights and reference height respec-
tively and, H∗ is the scale height which is given by:

H∗ =

kT
msg

(2)

where k is Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, ms the molecular mass of species
s and g is the acceleration due to gravity.

Like on Earth, the upper atmosphere of Mars gets ionised mainly by solar EUV ra-
diation, and the ionosphere gets formed with the peak electron density around 120
km, varying with solar activity. As the electron-ion Coulomb collisions increase with
height and the ion/electron-neutral collisions decrease, the electron and ion tempera-
tures increase. The supra-thermal electrons produced by the EUV ionisation of neutral
species above the ionisation peak height cause the enhanced plasma temperatures in
this region above the homopause.

For Mars, another critical aspect is the direct interaction of solar energetic particle ra-
diation or the non-thermal (as compared to electrons/ions in the ionosphere, which
are thermalised through collisions) electrons and protons in the continuous ﬂow of
solar wind with the thermalised neutral and charged atmospheric species resulting in
additional molecular dissociation, ionisation, recombination and charge exchange pro-
cesses. These phenomena are critical to consider as they modify the equilibrium con-
dition of the vertical distribution of neutral and charged species in the thermosphere-
exosphere region and add to the escape of gases.

The electron impact dissociation and ionisation take place as in the following example:

3

Nagaraja et al. (2021)

Preprint of the Manuscript

CO2 + e∗ → CO + O + e∗
O2 + e∗ → O + O + e∗
2 + e∗ + e
CO2 + e∗ → CO+
O2 + e∗ → O+
2 + e∗ + e
O + e∗ → O+ + e∗ + e

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

where e∗ denotes energetic solar wind electron and e the thermalised electron as ob-
tained from electron impact ionisation.

The electron impact ionisation frequency may be computed from the following equa-
tion:

(cid:90)

Iei =

σei(E)φe(E)dE

(8)

where σei is the electron impact cross-section and φe the solar wind electron ﬂux;
both being functions of energy E. Similarly, the electron impact dissociation product
densities can be estimated using appropriate reaction crossections.

Solar wind energetic protons enable charge exchange reactions by colliding with the
exospheric constituents, which result in important changes in the exospheric distribu-
tion of neutral and ionic species, examples of which are given below:

psw
psw

+ + H → H+ + H( f ast)
+ + O → O+ + H( f ast)

(9)
(10)

where psw

+ is the solar wind proton.

Knowing the charge exchange cross-section and the solar wind ion density and veloc-
ity, the production of new species can be estimated.

As mentioned earlier, here we search and explore the Martian thermosphere/exosphere
composition data along with solar EUV and SW parameters obtained near-simultaneously
from multiple payloads of MAVEN and MOM to study any effect of changing so-
lar EM and charged particle radiation on the atmospheric density and composition
mainly in thermosphere/exosphere region. The period June 1-15, 2018, has been se-
lected for this study because with this MAVEN data, a few days of observation with
the MENCA instrument is also available for any comparison. The selection of these
days is also based on avoiding the second half of June 2018, which was affected by the
Planet Encircling Dust Event (PEDE). The effect of the global dust storm on thermo-
spheric densities has been studied using the available MENCA and NGIMS data for

4

Nagaraja et al. (2021)
Preprint of the Manuscript
June 2018 and demonstrated the asymmetry between the daytime and nighttime ob-
servations of both the spacecraft (Venkateswara Rao et al., 2020). Bhardwaj et al. (2016)
has given the instrumentation, calibration, sensitivity, and measurement limitations of
the MENCA/MOM instrument.

The NGIMS instrument of the MAVEN spacecraft has been utilised to determine the
structure and composition of the upper atmosphere’s neutral and ionic species, in-
cluding the isotopes and supra-thermal ions in a range of 2 to 150 amu (Mahaffy
et al., 2015a). NGIMS science-mode observation covers below 500 km to periareion
(inbound) and periareion to 500 km (outbound) during each orbit lasting for ≈600 s for
each leg, with a spatial resolution of ≈1 km. The level-2 data-sets of NGIMS-MAVEN
have been retrieved from MAVEN Science Data Center to analyse and display results.

The archived MENCA data consists of total pressure and partial pressure values in
Torr with a variable time resolution of ≈12 to 30 s. This data is used for scientiﬁc stud-
ies after incorporating calibration and normalisation factors and time tagging with
ancillary information like latitude, longitude, altitude, and solar zenith angle derived
using SPICE kernel ﬁles provided through the payload team of ISRO. The data sets are
identiﬁed and arranged concerning different orbit numbers of MOM.

The Extreme UltraViolet Monitor (EUVM) instrument on MAVEN measures the solar
irradiance at Mars using three photometers sensitive to the wavelengths 0.1-7 nm, 17-
22 nm and 121.6 nm. Apart from heating the Martian thermosphere/exosphere, the
solar EUV radiation spectrum is responsible for the production and losses of chem-
ical species through photodissociation, photoionisation, and suprathermal electrons
(Eparvier et al., 2015). The EUV ﬂuxes in the wavelength band 17-22 nm have been
analysed for the study period.

The Solar Energetic Particle (SEP) instrument on MAVEN consists of two dual, double-
ended solid-state telescopes with four look directions per species, optimised for paral-
lel and perpendicular Parker Spiral viewing of energetic ions (25 keV to 12 MeV) and
electrons (25 keV to 1 MeV) with 1 s time resolution. SEP can measure energy ﬂuxes
that range from 10 to 106 eV/(cm2 s sr eV) to characterise solar energetic particles in an
energy range that affects the upper atmosphere and ionosphere of Mars through sput-
tering, heating, dissociation, excitation, and ionisation. SEP has a mechanical pinhole
attenuator that protects against overheating when the Sun is in its ﬁeld of view (Lar-
son et al., 2015). SEP measured solar wind electron and H-ion velocities and densities
during the same period cover the canonical Parker spiral directions around which so-
lar energetic particle distributions are typically centred. The data of the hydrogen-ion
velocities and ﬂuxes have been analysed for the same days of June 2018.

The analysis is carried out by developing computer codes to handle high-resolution
voluminous data for sorting, compressing, averaging and generating result oriented
plots for visualisation, intercomparison and depicting scientiﬁc phenomena.

5

Nagaraja et al. (2021)
Results and Discussion

Preprint of the Manuscript

The repetitive coverage of altitudes near MOM’s periareion is less frequent than that
of MAVEN due to large differences in orbital periods of about ≈67 hr and ≈4.5 hr
respectively. The mean density proﬁles of Argon (Ar) measured by both the space-
craft on a few typical days during June 2018 are shown in ﬁgure 1 for comparison.
The MENCA data on the Argon proﬁle were retrieved from the published results of
Venkateswara Rao et al. (2020) on the effect of PEDE on Mars thermosphere, as men-
tioned earlier.

Figure 1: Mean denity proﬁles of Argon in the thermosphere of Mars as measured by
NGIMS/MAVEN and MENCA/MOM during a few selected days of June 2018.

The ﬁgure shows the thermospheric variation of Ar density up to the exobase. While
the primary trend of the density proﬁles for the four selected days measured by NGIMS
and MENCA are comparable, the absolute values are understandably different due to
the measurements carried out at two opposite points of the dawn-dusk terminator.
The slopes of the proﬁles are similar to the exobase as can also be derived using equa-
tions 1 and 2 with modelled thermospheric temperature structure. Signiﬁcant day-to-
day variation of the overall thermospheric density is observed, and it is found that Ar
densities are lower in the early days of June 2018 than towards the middle. Except for
its ionisation by solar EUV radiation (Ar + hν → Ar+ + e) ; Ar is considered to be
a stable constituent and may only vary signiﬁcantly due to any temperature changes
brought about by variations in solar EUV radiation, gravity wave dissipation and dust
storm-driven aerosol warming.

Since the heating effect of the PEDE peaked towards the end of June 2018, we further

6

Nagaraja et al. (2021)
Preprint of the Manuscript
explore the state of the natural and photochemically produced constituents from the
thermosphere into the exosphere during June 01-15, 2018. Here we search for effects
other than solar activity, particularly the solar wind plasma energetics, which is vari-
able on a day-to-day basis. The altitude proﬁles of densities of CO2, Ar, N2, CO, O,
and He are shown for single MAVEN orbit on 03 June 2018, in ﬁgure 2.

Figure 2: Density proﬁles of gas constituents in the thermosphere/exosphere of Mars
as measured by NGIMS/MAVEN during morning hours of the local solar time of 03
June 2018 for either side of passage through the periareion altitude.

It can be seen from the ﬁgure 2 that there are differences in proﬁle shapes for the
two epochs with post-periareion curves (frame on the right-side), indicating more ex-
tended scale heights in the exospheric region due to the increase in the mean free path
of the gases. In further analysis, we use the post-periareion part of the measurement.

During June 01-15, 2018, on average, 4-5 passes of MAVEN per day have produced
useful data with minimal variation of solar zenith angle, local solar time, latitude and
longitude from one pass to another and hence it is well suited to study short term
variations of density proﬁles. Figure 3 shows the result of such an analysis for four
selected days to highlight the diurnal as well as the day-to-day variation of the density
proﬁles of Ar, He, CO2 and O.

The ﬁgure 3 shows that the gas concentrations have signiﬁcant diurnal variation,
but the day-to-day changes are also present, evidenced by a relatively larger diur-
nal spread of density variations on 08 and 13 June 2018. The elevation of the CO2 − O
cross-over altitude from an average of 200 km to ≈230 km on 13 June 2018 is quite
prominent in the ﬁgure. We need further to study this day-to-day effect and its possi-
ble causes. Since the early 1970’s 1D photochemical and 3D general circulation based
models of the thermosphere-exosphere of Mars are being developed and continuously
improved using new observations from space probes, including landers and orbiters,
these models provide the values of neutral and ionic composition, densities and tem-
peratures with possible modulation for diurnal, seasonal and solar cycle variation
(Krasnopolsky, 2002; Bougher et al., 2015). While these models are potentially suited

7

Nagaraja et al. (2021)

Preprint of the Manuscript

Figure 3: Density proﬁles of some gas constituents on a few selected days of June 2018
for all available orbital traverses of MAVEN/NGIMS through the periareion altitude.

for projecting mean day-to-day variation brought about by solar wind plasma, EUV,
etc., these would need veriﬁcation with observed data. Here we emphasise to explore
this aspect of the Martian phenomenon from the relevant in-situ measurements.

Figure 4 shows average daytime proﬁles of a few crucial parents and photochemically
produced constituents in the thermosphere-exosphere of Mars during the selected
days of June 2018.

The constituents selected in the plots are in two groups, the ﬁrst with CO2, O and CO;
the other with He, N2 and Ar. It is interesting to see that over the short interval be-
tween 03-13 June 2018, except for N2 and CO, all other constituents show a shift of
proﬁle density values either towards an increasing or decreasing trend. For example,
CO2 increases and O decreases; He decreases, but Ar increases as we go from 03 to 13
June 2018 in time. These results indicate the competing effects of change in thermo-
spheric temperature and efﬁciency of photochemical reactions discussed earlier. More
details of the variations of individual constituents are given in ﬁgure 5.

It can be noted that there is only a minimal variation of the density proﬁles of N2 and
CO as compared to CO2, O, He and Ar. The direction of change in densities is also
reversed between CO2-O and He-Ar. Many inferences can be drawn from this ﬁrst of
its kind result. Before going into the details of interpretation, we plot the solar EUV
radiation ﬂuxes, solar wind proton velocities and ﬂuxes using the EUVM and SEP
instruments’ data onboard MAVEN during the same period the ﬁrst half of June 2018

8

Nagaraja et al. (2021)

Preprint of the Manuscript

Figure 4: Daytime mean density proﬁles of a few parent and photochemically
produced atmospheric constituents for four seleted days during June 2018 using
MAVEN/NGIMS data covering Mars’ thermosphere and lower exosphere.

as shown in ﬁgures 6 and 7.

The combined results of ﬁgures 6 and 7 show that while, on average, the solar EUV
radiation has not changed, the solar electron/proton velocities show a steady decrease
between 01-15 June 2018. It can be seen from ﬁgure 7 that the solar EUV radiation
ﬂuxes for each observation scan are a function of wavelengths between 17 to 22 nm, so
there are six values in one wavelength scan, which are renewed in time after two such
scans with the change in the orbit of MAVEN covering the whole day. These sets of
six EUV values corresponding to each wavelength in a set are not seen to be changing
between different days of the period 01-15 June 2018. The two lower panels of ﬁgure
6 and the four sub-plots of ﬁgure 7 show a deﬁnite decreasing trend of the solar wind
proton velocities and ﬂuxes from beginning to middle of June 2018. This aspect of
considerable variations in solar wind particle kinetic energy without similar variations
of the solar EUV radiation provides exciting insights to the results on density changes
shown in ﬁgures 4 and 5.

In the 1D atmospheric model developed by Krasnopolsky (2002), many possible pho-
tochemical and ion-chemical reactions have been considered. The model provides
variations of thermospheric constituents, some of which have been measured and
compared under similar solar and geometric conditions. In the background of this
model, for our purpose to explain the special event, we consider the parent species
as CO2, N2, Ar, He and their photochemical products as O and CO. Since here we
are not directly dealing with the escape of gases from Mars, we have not considered
Hydrogen, Deuterium and related species. Similarly, the primary ions taken here are
CO+
2 , Ar+ and He+. In the ﬁrst row of ﬁgure 5, the variations of CO2,

2 , O+, CO+, N+

9

Nagaraja et al. (2021)

Preprint of the Manuscript

Figure 5: Daytime mean density proﬁles of a few thermospheric/exospheric con-
stituents during the same four selected days of June 2018 using MAVEN/NGIMS ob-
servations.

CO and O indicate that while CO concentration in the upper thermosphere extending
to the exosphere has remained nearly constant during the period of study, CO2 and O
show clear increasing and decreasing trends in the density values respectively.

Since these variations have taken place when solar EUV radiation has remained nearly
constant, and the PEDE effect started signiﬁcantly towards end of June 2018, the dif-
ferences are attributable to the distinctly changing characteristics of the solar wind
charged particle radiation energy ﬂuxes. As explained by Bougher et al. (2015), the
solar wind plasma can provide electron impact energy to dissociate or ionise the gas
constituents in the Martian thermosphere/exosphere. Taking this energy input from
electrons/protons, the following sequence of reactions (extending the set of equations
3 to 7 above) would result in enhanced O and reduced CO2 concentrations as given
below:

O+ + CO2 → O+
2 + CO
2 + O → O+
CO+
2 + CO
O+
2 + e → 2O
CO + e∗ → CO+ + e + e∗
CO + e∗ → C+ + O + e + e∗

(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)

These interactions initiated by solar wind energetic plasma lead to different densities
of O and CO, as shown in equations 11–13. However, CO further dissociates (equa-
tions 14 and 15), and hence there is no net change in its concentration as expected with

10

Nagaraja et al. (2021)

Preprint of the Manuscript

Figure 6: Top Panel: Solar EUV radiation ﬂuxes for the channel 17-22 nm with 1 nm
resolution and two values during each orbit to cover the 24 hr period of each day dur-
ing selected days of June 01-15, 2018; Bottom (Left Panel): Solar wind proton veloc-
ities at MAVEN orbit to cover the 24-hour duration of the same days; Bottom (Right
Panel): Solar wind proton ﬂuxes at MAVEN for the same hours and days.

decreasing values of solar wind plasma energy and ﬂuxes. Hence the steady increase
of CO2, a decrease of O and relative constancy of CO densities with the decrease of so-
lar wind plasma velocities/ﬂuxes between the beginning till the middle of June 2018
observed by NGIMS/MAVEN can be explained by the set of 15-equations given in
this paper. This short period solar wind plasma variation and the combined response
of CO2, O and CO is a ﬁrst-time result. This indicates that in addition to the density
changes between minimum to maximum solar cycle predicted by various models, the
day-to-day solar wind variations of plasma energy and ﬂux also produce observable
density variations of Martian thermospheric and exospheric gaseous concentrations,
and these should be detectable in future models predictions. Unlike on Earth, this phe-
nomenon is possible due to the absence of a global magnetic ﬁeld of Mars, enabling
direct interaction of solar wind charged particles with upper atmospheric gases.

Coming back to the four plots of the ﬁrst row of ﬁgure 4, we notice that the cross-
over altitude between CO2 & O density proﬁles progressively moves up from ≈190

11

Nagaraja et al. (2021)

Preprint of the Manuscript

Figure 7: Solar proton/Hydrogen-ion velocities and integrated ﬂuxes for canonical
Parker spiral directions signifying solar wind variation at MAVEN orbit during 04-14
June 2018.

to ≈240 km during 03-13 June 2018. This can be realised from the effect explained
for ﬁgure 5 where CO2 concentration increased and that of O decreased for the same
period resulting in the cross-over altitude’s upward movement.

The plots in the second row of ﬁgure 5 show that N2 densities are not appreciably
affected by the solar wind plasma variations for the days under study. We note the
following possible ionisation reactions involving N2 :

2 + e∗ + e
N2 + e∗ → N+
2 + CO2 → N2 + CO+
N+

2

(16)
(17)

The regeneration of N2 through equation 17 is very fast, and hence even if N2 gets
ionised by energetic electrons, its overall density remains almost constant throughout
the period.

To understand the observed decreasing He and increasing Ar proﬁle trends shown in
ﬁgure 5, we consider the following reactions:

12

Nagaraja et al. (2021)

Preprint of the Manuscript

He + e∗ → He+∗ + e∗ + e
Ar + e∗ → +Ar+ + e∗ + e
+
Ar+ + CO2 → Ar + CO2

(18)
(19)
(20)

where He+∗ denotes energetic He ion.

Helium is a very light gas constituent, gets not only ionised by solar wind plasma
but also gets energised to enhance its kinetic energy, resulting in higher densities as
inferred from equations 1 and 2. The temperature rise would lead to higher pressure
and density, assuming that the velocities are still less than Helium’s escape velocity.
On the other hand, Argon gets ionised to produce Ar ions, which amount to a loss to
Ar concentration even though only some of them get converted into Ar atoms with
a relatively slow reaction rate (equation 20). So like CO2, Ar shows an increase in
density in the tapering of solar wind particle radiation energetics. Now getting into
ﬁgure 4 again, the rise of the cross-over altitude between He and Ar densities is caused
because Ar density increases, but He density decreases as the solar wind energy and
ﬂux decrease during 03-13, June 2018.

So it is possible that the day-to-day changes in solar wind plasma can affect the ther-
mosphere/exosphere density of gaseous constituents in a signiﬁcant way.

Conclusion

Measurements made using the mass spectrometric technique onboard MAVEN and
MOM orbiter missions around Mars for Ar gas in the thermosphere/exosphere indi-
cate variations of its density proﬁles within a short period of 15-days during June 01-
15, 2018. This study has been extended by using further data from NGIMS/MAVEN
on the variations of parent species (CO2, N2, Ar and He) as well as photochemical
products O and CO. The solar EUV ﬂux and solar wind plasma velocity and ﬂux
data were obtained for the same period from the scientiﬁc experiments EUVM and
SEP onboard the MAVEN probe orbiting Mars. Because the solar wind plasma ve-
locities and ﬂuxes showed considerable enhancement at the beginning of June 2018
and later returned to typical average values by the middle of June 2018. In compar-
ison, the solar EUV ﬂuxes (λ= 17-22 nm) remained nearly constant during the same
period; possible effect due to this solar energetic plasma variation alone on the ther-
mosphere/exosphere density proﬁles measured by NGIMS payload was examined.
The results show that the energetic plasma of solar wind affected CO2, O, Ar and
He but N2 and CO densities remained nearly constant. While CO2 and Ar densities
showed increasing trends in the thermosphere/exosphere region during June 03-13
(concurrent with the decreasing kinetic energy and density of solar wind plasma), the
reverse was the case for O and He. In other words, with the enhanced solar wind’s en-
ergy and density during the ﬁrst week of June 2018, CO2 and Ar densities were lower

13

Nagaraja et al. (2021)
Preprint of the Manuscript
compared to their densities in the second week of June 2018. The reverse is the case
for O and He. We have tried to interpret this new result by considering the role of a
large number of electron impact dissociation and ionisation reactions initiated by the
solar wind plasma. The observed variation of the cross-over altitude between CO2 and
O proﬁles and Ar and He proﬁles are also explained based on these theoretical con-
siderations. Future models providing the structure and composition of Martian ther-
mosphere/exosphere would need to incorporate computations of solar wind plasma
driven composition changes in addition to the solar EUV related variations.

Acknowledgements

This work was funded by the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) under Mars
Orbiter Mission’s Announcement of Opportunity Program through the research project,
Observation and Modeling Studies of the Atmospheric Composition of Mars (OMAC),
vide ref: ISRO:SPL:01.01.33/16. We greatly acknowledge the use of MENCA data
from MOM, archived at Payload Operation Center, Space Physics Laboratory, Vikram
Sarabhai Space Centre, Thiruvananthapuram, India and at the Indian Space Science
Data Center (ISSDC), Bengaluru, India https://www.issdc.gov.in/. The NGIMS,
SWIA, EUVM and SEP datasets of MAVEN used for this study were publicly available
on MAVEN Science Data Center at LASP https://lasp.colorado.edu/maven/sdc/
public/ as well as the Planetary Data System http://pds.nasa.gov. The MAVEN
mission is supported by NASA through the Mars Exploration Program. This research
work was carried at Atmospheric and Space Science Research Lab, Department of
Physics, Bangalore University, Bengaluru, India.

References

Arunan, S. and Satish, R. (2015). Mars orbiter mission spacecraft and its challenges.

Current Science, 109(6):1061–1069.

Bhardwaj, A., Thampi, S. V., Das, T. P., Dhanya, M. B., Naik, N., Vajja, D. P., Pradeepku-
mar, P., Sreelatha, P., Supriya, G., K., A. J., Mohankumar, S. V., Thampi, R. S., Yadav,
V. K., Sundar, B., Nandi, A., Padmanabhan, G. P., and Aliyas, A. V. (2016). On the
evening time exosphere of mars: Result from menca aboard mars orbiter mission.
Geophysical Research Letters, 43(5):1862–1867.

Bougher, S. W., Pawlowski, D., Bell, J. M., Nelli, S., McDunn, T., Murphy, J. R., Chizek,
M., and Ridley, A. (2015). Mars global ionosphere-thermosphere model: Solar cycle,
seasonal, and diurnal variations of the mars upper atmosphere. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Planets, 120(2):311–342.

Eparvier, F., Chamberlin, P., Woods, T., and Thiemann, E. (2015). The solar extreme

ultraviolet monitor for maven. Space Science Reviews, 195(1-4):293–301.

14

Nagaraja et al. (2021)
Preprint of the Manuscript
Jakosky, B. M., Lin, R. P., Grebowsky, J. M., Luhmann, J. G., Mitchell, D. F., Beu-
telschies, G., Priser, T., Acuna, M., Andersson, L., Baird, D., Baker, D., Bartlett,
R., Benna, M., Bougher, S., Brain, D., Carson, D., Cauffman, S., Chamberlin, P.,
Chaufray, J. Y., Cheatom, O., Clarke, J., Connerney, J., Cravens, T., Curtis, D., De-
lory, G., Demcak, S., DeWolfe, A., Eparvier, F., Ergun, R., Eriksson, A., Espley, J.,
Fang, X., Folta, D., Fox, J., Gomez-Rosa, C., Habenicht, S., Halekas, J., Holsclaw,
G., Houghton, M., Howard, R., Jarosz, M., Jedrich, N., Johnson, M., Kasprzak, W.,
Kelley, M., King, T., Lankton, M., Larson, D., Leblanc, F., Lefevre, F., Lillis, R., Ma-
haffy, P., Mazelle, C., McClintock, W., McFadden, J., Mitchell, D. L., Montmessin,
F., Morrissey, J., Peterson, W., Possel, W., Sauvaud, J. A., Schneider, N., Sidney, W.,
Sparacino, S., Stewart, A. I. F., Tolson, R., Toublanc, D., Waters, C., Woods, T., Yelle,
R., and Zurek, R. (2015). The mars atmosphere and volatile evolution (maven) mis-
sion. Space Science Reviews, 195(1-4):3–48.

Krasnopolsky, V. A. (2002). Mars’ upper atmosphere and ionosphere at low, medium,
and high solar activities: Implications for evolution of water. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Planets, 107(E12):11–1–11–11.

Larson, D. E., Lillis, R. J., Lee, C. O., Dunn, P. A., Hatch, K., Robinson, M., Glaser,
D., Chen, J., Curtis, D., Tiu, C., et al. (2015). The maven solar energetic particle
investigation. Space Science Reviews, 195(1-4):153–172.

Mahaffy, P. R., Benna, M., Elrod, M., Yelle, R. V., Bougher, S. W., Stone, S. W., and
Jakosky, B. M. (2015a). Structure and composition of the neutral upper atmosphere
of mars from the maven ngims investigation. Geophysical research letters, 42(21):8951–
8957.

Mahaffy, P. R., Benna, M., King, T., Harpold, D. N., Arvey, R., Barciniak, M., Bendt,
M., Carrigan, D., Errigo, T., Holmes, V., et al. (2015b). The neutral gas and ion mass
spectrometer on the mars atmosphere and volatile evolution mission. Space Science
Reviews, 195(1-4):49–73.

Martínez, G., Newman, C., De Vicente-Retortillo, A., Fischer, E., Renno, N., Richard-
son, M., Fairén, A., Genzer, M., Guzewich, S., Haberle, R., et al. (2017). The modern
near-surface martian climate: A review of in-situ meteorological data from viking to
curiosity. Space Science Reviews, 212(1-2):295–338.

Medvedev, A. S., González-Galindo, F., Yi ˘git, E., Feoﬁlov, A. G., Forget, F., and Har-
togh, P. (2015). Cooling of the martian thermosphere by co2 radiation and gravity
waves: An intercomparison study with two general circulation models. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Planets, 120(5):913–927.

Nagaraja, K., Basuvaraj, P. K., Chakravarty, S. C., and Kuttanpillai, P. K. (2020). Study
of exospheric neutral composition of mars observed from indian mars orbiter mis-
sion. New Astronomy, 77:101349.

Nier, A. O., Hanson, W. B., Seiff, A., McElroy, M. B., Spencer, N. W., Duckett, R. J.,
Knight, T. C. D., and Cook, W. S. (1976). Composition and structure of the martian
atmosphere: Preliminary results from viking 1. Science, 193(4255):786–788.

15

Nagaraja et al. (2021)
Preprint of the Manuscript
Nier, A. O. and McElroy, M. B. (1976). Structure of the neutral upper atmosphere of

mars: Results from viking 1 and viking 2. Science, 194(4271):1298–1300.

Owen, T., Biemann, K., Rushneck, D. R., Biller, J. E., Howarth, D. W., and Laﬂeur,
A. L. (1977). The composition of the atmosphere at the surface of mars. Journal of
Geophysical Research (1896-1977), 82(28):4635–4639.

Valeille, A., Combi, M. R., Bougher, S. W., Tenishev, V., and Nagy, A. F. (2009). Three-
dimensional study of mars upper thermosphere/ionosphere and hot oxygen corona:
2. solar cycle, seasonal variations, and evolution over history. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Planets, 114(E11).

Venkateswara Rao, N., Gupta, N., and Kadhane, U. R. (2020). Enhanced densities in
the martian thermosphere associated with the 2018 planet-encircling dust event: Re-
sults from menca/mom and ngims/maven. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets,
125(10):e2020JE006430. e2020JE006430 2020JE006430.

16

