The gas flow pattern through small size Resistive Plate Chambers with 2mm 
gap 

Yousef Pezeshkian*1, Amir Kiyoumarsioskouei2, Majid Ahmadpouri1, Ghasem Ghorbani1 

1Department of Physics, Sahand University of Technology, Tabriz, East Azerbaijan, 51335-1996, Iran 

2Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Sahand University of Technology, Tabriz, East Azerbaijan, 51335-
1996, Iran 

Abstract 

A prototype of a single-gap glass Resistive Plate Chamber (RPC) is constructed by the authors. 
To  find  the  considerations  required  for  better  operation  of  the  detector's  gas  system,  we  have 
simulated  the  flow  of  the  Ar  gas  through  the  detector  by  using  computational  fluid  dynamic 
methods. Simulations show that the pressure inside the chamber linearly depends on the gas flow 
rate  and  the  chamber's  output  hose  length.  The  simulation  results  were  compatible  with 
experiments. We have found that the pressure-driven speed of the gas molecules is two orders of 
magnitude  larger  in  the  inlet  and  outlet  regions  than  the  blocked  corners  of  a  14×14  cm2 
chamber, and most likely seems to be higher for larger detectors and different geometries. 

Keywords: Resistive Plate Chamber, gas flow, Computational Fluid Dynamics. 

1   Introduction 

     Resistive Plate Chambers (RPCs) are widely used gaseous detectors in experimental particle 
physics with growing applications in medical and industrial imaging [1]. RPCs are attractive not 
only because of their great achievable time and position resolutions and hit rate capabilities but 
also for their simplicity.  Its structure is similar to  a capacitor with dielectrics whose electrodes 
are connected to a high voltage (HV) power supply, and a specific gas mixture is flowing inside 
the gap (between plates of the capacitor). Suitable adjustment of the HV makes this capacitor a 
particle detector, where a passage of a charged particle may ionize few particles of gas molecules 
and initiate an electron avalanche drifting toward the anode. 

     Gaseous detectors, like RPCs, demand gas mixing systems  besides  the main components of 
the detectors [2], [3]. Further considerations regarding the gas flow patterns and their effects on 
the  detector’s  operation  are  needed.  Gas  leakage  from  RPCs  is  essential,  especially  when  an 
experiment requires the operation of detectors for a long time.  

* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: pezeshkian@sut.ac.ir 

1 

 
 
                                                           
     High  Global  Warming  Potential  (GWP)  of  C2H2F4,  the  main  component  of  RPC's  gas 
mixture, recently caused further attention to the gas system of RPCs. In addition to the search for 
new  gas mixtures  with  no  hydrofluorocarbon  (HFC) ingredients [4], [5], several  attempts have 
been  made  to  reduce  the  gas  flow  rate  [6],  [7]  and  even  to  construct  and  test  detectors 
performance when there is no flow of the gas, i.e., sealed RPCs  [8], [9]. Concerns of the RPC 
community encouraged us to simulate the effects of changing gas flows on the performance of 
RPCs.  

     Vanheule,  in  his  thesis,  simulated  the  flow  of  gas  through  the  RPC's  chamber  by  using  the 
Gerris package [11]. Here, we have simulated the flow of the Ar gas through the hoses and the 
chamber  itself  with  a  commercial  ANSYS-Fluent  package  [10].  Since  our  facility  in  the 
laboratory (at the Sahand University of Technology) was not accurate for low flow rates and to 
compare the simulation results with experiments, we did the simulation at relatively higher flow 
rates. 

     We  outlined  the  paper  as  follows:  In  section  2,  we  introduced  RPCs  constructed  at  our 
laboratory. Sections 3 and 4 review the simulation procedure results, respectively. 

2   RPCs constructed at SUT, and the gas leakage test 

     Our primary consideration for constructing RPCs in SUT was to use materials available in the 
near  market  at  a  low  price,  besides  keeping  the  detector’s  performance  in  good  operational 
conditions. In the prototype of this study, we have used commercial glass sheets with dimensions 
of 17×17 cm2 to construct an RPC with an internal volume of 14×14×0.2 cm3. For simplicity, we 
have designed a single 10×10 cm2 pad to read out the signals. High Voltage (HV) electrodes are 2 
cm  wider  than  the  pads  (1  cm  from  each  side)  to  avoid  electric  field  non-uniformities  at  the 
edges of electrodes. We have also utilized the medical infusion hoses for the gas nozzles (Figure 
1) and Ar as the working gas in this study. 

Figure 1 Connection of the infusion hoses from the side of the chamber (left); the top nozzle design (right). 

   In addition to constructing a prototype in which the gas nozzles are located at the sides of the 
RPC chamber (Figure 1 - Left), we build another prototype with nozzles at the top surface of the 
chamber (Figure 1 - Right) to compare it with our primary detector. The side nozzles are easier to 

2 

 
  
 
handle when we have to pack several detectors close together. Here, we wanted to evaluate its 
effect on detector’s performance. 

     The gas leakage is negligible when we glue detectors carefully. In small time scales (about 70 
minutes), we did not observe the gas leakage from the detector. Figure 2 shows the change of the 
pressure difference between inside and outside of the detector by time. A commercially available 
sensor, “BOSCH BMP280”, records the pressure frequently.  

Figure 2 Pressure variation inside the chamber is recorded continuously for 70 minutes 

3 Gas flow simulation  

     We performed a 3D CFD simulation to obtain characteristics of the gas mixture flow regime. 
In the simulation, we assumed that the chamber is initially filled with nitrogen gas.  During the 
simulation  time,  argon  replaces  nitrogen.  The  CFD  model  considers  a  non-stationary  laminar 
compressible  transient  flow.  In  order  to  avoid  excessive  simulation  errors  due  to  the  sharp 
pressure  gradients  in  cells  near  corner  boundaries,  an  inflated  mesh  discretization  was 
performed in the sharp edge situations. The aspect ratio of the quad-cells, the grid size, and the 
time  step  size  were  chosen  fine  enough  to  achieve  mesh  independence  and  ensure  acceptable 
errors  in  flow  simulations.  In  this  study,  both  transient  state  simulation  and  steady-state 
simulation  have  been  utilized.  Transient-state  simulation  is  used  to  obtain  the  preparation  time 
and other unsteady phenomena, where the steady-state simulation is used to obtain the velocity 
distribution  and  pressure  distribution  for  very  long  times  after  the  start  of  the  simulation.  The 
resultant  mesh  has  amounts  between  40-200  thousand  elements  dependent  on  the  size  and 
domain geometry. 

     In  the  solving  model,  the  first-order,  pressure-based,  implicit  solver  was  used  to  solve 
continuity and momentum equations that lead to the pressure and velocity fields.  

3 

 
 
     In this  paper,  we want  to  address  several  questions about the flow of the  gas in  RPCs. The 
first  question  is  that  how  long  the  gas  replacement  takes?  Moreover,  how  does  this  time  vary 
with flow rate or gas pressure inside the chamber? 

    Keeping in mind that the chamber has four holes, the gas comes in from one hole and goes out 
from  another,  and  two  corners  are  blocked  (Figure  3).  We  know  that  the  speed  of  the  gas 
molecules is not homogeneous inside the chamber. The second question is whether the variation 
of the speed of the gas molecules at different positions of the chamber is negligible or not? We 
want to compare this speed with the drift speed of Ar ions during the operation of the RPC. 

     For  toxic  and  flammable  gas  mixtures,  we  have  to  guide  the  exhausted  gas  outside  the 
laboratory. Therefore, using long hoses at the outlet of the chambers seems unavoidable. For a 
constant  flow  rate,  the  gas  pressure  inside  the  chamber  depends  on  the  length  of  the  hose. 
Obtaining a general pattern that displays the chamber’s pressure as a function of the hose's length 
is a crucial question in RPC design and fabrication. 

Figure 3, Setup of experiment and simulation. Numbers show the positions in which gas parameters are obtained by 
simulation (see the text) 

4 Simulation results and discussion 

4.1 The Preparation Time 

     We need to have a variable that indicates the time required to have a uniform distribution of 
the working gas (new gas) inside the chamber. Considering the labels of Figure 3, we defined the 
preparation time as the time needed for the average mole fraction of the Ar gas in regions 2, 4, 
and 5 (the critical corners of the chamber) to reach 0.99, while the mole fraction of Ar was zero 
at the beginning. The preparation time mainly depends on the chamber size and gas flow rate.  

   For the gas flow rate of 200 mL/min and the output hose length of 10 cm, Table 1 shows the 
simulation  results for the preparation time and the gas molecule speeds.  Since the gas  tends to 
travel the shortest route, positions inside the chamber labeled by numbers 1, 3, and 5 in Figure 3 
will be replaced with new gas sooner than the rest. Comparison of the two columns shows that 
the preparation time does not depend significantly on the inlet (outlet) orientations.  

4 

 
 
 
Table 1 Gas molecules speed at five positions of the chamber specified in Figure 3 

Gas inlet position 

Preparation time (s) 

side 

top 

32.36±0.5 

31.635±0.5 

Gas molecules speed 
At specified positions (m/s) 
Figure 3 

1  in              (15mm, 15mm) 

0.237±0.001 

0.638±0.001 

2  blocked   (125mm, 15mm) 

0.005±0.001  0.0025±0.0005 

3  middle    (70mm, 70mm) 

0.017±0.001 

0.017±0.001 

4 barometer  (15mm, 125mm) 

0.002±0.001  0.0025±0.0005 

5  out          (125mm, 125mm) 

0.052±0.001 

0.23±0.001 

     The  simulation  shows  that  the  time  needed  to  fill  regions  1,  3,  and  5  is  less  than  2s  as  the 
mass  transfer  mechanism  in  these  regions  is  mostly  convection,  but  the  diffusion  mechanism 
which is dominant in regions 2 and 5 (as the speed of flow is not significant) causes the increase 
of the preparation time up to 32s.  

     To have an intuition of the gas exchange, we plotted the mole fraction of Ar in the chamber as 
a  function  of  time.  According  to  figure  4,  the  change  proceeds  faster  at  first  and  slows  down 
when we get closer to the state of saturation. 

Figure 4  Time variation of the mole fraction of argon gas inside the RPC chamber 

     The pressure-driven speed of the gas molecules varies from 0.2 m/s at the entrance to 0.002 
m/s at blocked corners of the chamber. The maximum pressure-driven speed of the molecules is 
comparable with  the drift  speed of Ar ions  in the applied electric field. Since the electrons are 
responsible for signals in the RPCs, variation in the speed of ions is irrelevant in the performance 
of these detectors. 

5 

 
 
     Variation in the speed of the gas molecules highly depends on the detector’s dimensions. For 
a chamber with a narrow and long design (similar to a tube), speed would be approximately the 
same  everywhere  in  the  chamber.  While,  for  flat  chambers  with  equal  width  and  length,  the 
speed  was  maximum  near  the  nozzles  and  minimum  in  the  opposite  blocked  corners  of  the 
chamber. Sharper the blocked corners, lower the speed of the gas molecules. 

     In our square shape detector, the pressure-driven speed of the gas molecules varies from 0.2 
m/s  at  the  entrance  to  0.002  m/s  at  the  blocked  corners  of  the  chamber.  The  speed  of  the  gas 
molecules depends on the size and geometry of a detector. According to Bernoulli’s equation, the 
preparation time would be higher for larger detectors and geometries with sharper corners. 

4.2 The pressure, the flow rate, and the Output hose length 

   For six flow rates from 50 to 500 ml/min, we found the pressure of the chamber by simulation 
(Table 2). To validate the simulation results, we measured the pressure for the same flow rates of 
the simulation in the experiment. Adjustment of the flow meter in the experiment was difficult, 
and  despite  our  efforts,  there  was  more  than  10%  inaccuracy.  The  difference  between  values 
obtained for the pressure in the experiment and simulation is less than 15%. By considering the 
operational errors and gas leakage from the chamber in the experiment, we can conclude that the 
results are compatible. 

Table 2- Values obtained by simulation and experiment for pressure of chambers as a function of Flow rates 

Flow rate (mL/min) 

50 

100 

200 

300 

400 

500 

Pressure (sim.) (Pa) 

13.6±0.4 

27.8±0.7 

58.5±1.5 

93.5±2.4 

131.8±3.4 

172.0±4.4 

Pressure (exp.) (Pa) 

27.48±0.88 

37.94±0.44 

58.51±0.65 

108.18±0.85 

140.22±1.24  193.95±0.60 

     In the pressure range usually used for RPCs (i.e., below 300Pa or 3mbar gauge pressure), we 
can fit a linear function to the simulation’s data (Figure 5). The pressure increases linearly by the 
flow rate.  In other words, the flow rate is a good indicator of the pressure inside the chamber. 

6 

 
Figure 5 Pressure inside the chamber as a function of flow rate  for simulation (left) and experiment (right). 

   Since the hose length of the chambers affects the pressure of the detector, and the hose length 
may be very long in some experiments to guide the exhausted gas outside of the laboratory, we 
performed another simulation to understand their relation. Figure 6 shows that the pressure will 
increase linearly by increasing the hose length if we keep the flow rate unchanged (300 mL/min). 
Increasing  the  hose  length  causes  more  resistance  on  the  downstream  side  of  fluid  flow. 
Therefore, more pressure is needed to establish a constant flow rate. 

Figure 6 Pressure inside the chamber as a function of output hose length  

5 Conclusions 

     RPCs  can  work  with  low  gas  flows  unless  we  use  them  in  high  hit  rate  environments. 
Measurement  of  the  flow  rate  for  the  low  Reynolds  numbers,  needs  more  accurate  flowmeters 
than  ours;  we  could  not  reduce  the  flow  below  50  mL/min.  In  the  simulation,  to  be  able  to 

7 

 
 
 
validate results,  we chose the same flows  as experiments.  In the  flow rates between 50 to  500 
ml/min, there was a linear relationship between flow rate and pressure and between pressure and 
hose length. We may extrapolate this linearity for lower flow rates. A more accurate conclusion 
needs further simulations. 

     At the beginning of the experiment, we have to replace the air in the chamber with the RPC’s 
working  gas  (or  gas  mixture).  Suppose  V  is  the  volume  of  the  chamber.  The  time  required  to 
complete the gas  exchange, the preparation time, is more than the time required to flow 1V of 
gas  through  the  detector.  The  flow  rate  of  our  simulation  in  Table  1  is  200  ml/min  or  5.1 
V/minute, which means that every ~12 seconds, 1 V of gas enters the detector. In the same flow, 
the  preparation  time  was  about  32  s,  which  is  ~3  times  the  time  required  to  amount  of  gas 
circulation reaches 1 volume of the chamber. 

     The  gas  density  and  viscosity  play  an  imposing  influence  in  preparation  time  and 
hydrodynamic  parameters  of  the  flow  field.  Increasing  the  gas  density  and  viscosity  caused  a 
significant decrease in  gas flow rate (by the same upstream-side pressure).  Also, more time is 
needed  to  fill  the  chamber  for  more  dense  and  viscous  fluids.  Estimated  calculations  show  a 
notable difference between the R134a and argon preparation time. 

     It is also clear that the fluid type has no effect on the preparation time, which means that other 
gases such as R134a have a similar preparation time to argon. Pressure in the chamber, on the 
other  hand,  is  a  function  of  viscosity  and  gas  density.  So  the  pressure  would  most  likely  be 
different  for  a different  gas  (or  gas mixture). For R134a, the pressure will be lower due to  the 
viscosity ratio between argon and R134a.  

     We have also stated that our studies may not be valid for MRPCs, which have much narrower 
gaps, and we are planning to repeat this study for MRPCs. 

6 References: 

[1]  M. Abbrescia, V. Peskov, and P. Fonte, Resistive gaseous detectors: designs, 

performance, and perspectives. John Wiley & Sons, 2018. 

[2]  A. Joshi, S. D. Kalmani, N. K. Mondal, and B. Satyanarayana, “RPC gas recovery by 

open loop method,” Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, 
Detect. Assoc. Equip., vol. 602, no. 3, pp. 809–813, May 2009. 

[3]  M. Abbrescia et al., “The gas monitoring system for the Resistive Plate Chamber detector 

of the CMS experiment at LHC,” Nucl. Phys. B - Proc. Suppl., vol. 177–178, pp. 293–
296, Mar. 2008. 

[4]  R. Guida, B. Mandelli, and G. Rigoletti, “Performance studies of RPC detectors with new 

environmentally friendly gas mixtures in presence of LHC-like radiation background,” 

8 

 
 
Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip., 
vol. 958, no. March 2019, p. 162073, 2020. 

[5]  A. Bianchi et al., “Environment-friendly gas mixtures for Resistive Plate Chambers: An 

experimental and simulation study,” J. Instrum., vol. 15, no. 9, 2020. 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

S. Kalmani et al., “Preliminary results on optimization of gas flow rate for RPCs,” in XI 
workshop on Resistive Plate Chambers and Related Detectors (RPC2012), 2012, vol. 
2012-Febru, pp. 1–7. 

L. Lopes, P. Fonte, and M. Pimenta, “Study of standalone RPC detectors for cosmic ray 
experiments in outdoor environment,” J. Instrum., vol. 8, no. 3, 2013. 

L. Lopes, P. Assis, A. Blanco, P. Fonte, and M. Pimenta, “Towards sealed resistive plate 
chambers,” J. Instrum., vol. 15, no. 11, 2020. 

S. Basnet et al., “Towards portable muography with small-area, gas-tight glass Resistive 
Plate Chambers,” J. Instrum., vol. 15, no. 10, pp. C10032–C10032, Oct. 2020. 

[10]  S. Nevey, “The ANSYS Fluent package combines deep physics and years of simulation 

development expertise to solve CFD challenges—right out of the box.” 

[11]  S. Vanheule, “Design of a glass resistive plate chamber for the upgrade of the Compact 

Muon Solenoid muon system,” Gent, 2013. 

9 

 
 
