1
2
0
2

t
c
O
3

]
h
p
-
m
o
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

2
v
8
1
8
7
0
.
4
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped
ions from the quantum ground state

D A Hite1, K S McKay1,2, and D P Pappas1
1 National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, Colorado 80305 USA
2 Department of Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309 USA

E-mail: dustin.hite@nist.gov

Abstract. For the past two and a half decades, anomalous heating of trapped
ions from nearby electrode surfaces has continued to demonstrate unexpected results.
Caused by electric-ﬁeld noise, this heating of the ions’ motional modes remains an
obstacle for scalable quantum computation with trapped ions. One of the anomalous
features of this electric-ﬁeld noise is the reported nonmonotonic behavior in the heating
rate when a trap is incrementally cleaned by ion bombardment. Motivated by this
result, the present work reports on a surface analysis of a sample ion-trap electrode
treated similarly with incremental doses of Ar+ ion bombardment. Kelvin probe force
microscopy and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy were used to investigate how the
work functions on the electrode surface vary depending on the residual contaminant
coverage between each treatment. It is shown that the as-fabricated Au electrode is
covered with a hydrocarbon ﬁlm that is modiﬁed after the ﬁrst treatment, resulting
in work functions and core-level binding energies that resemble that of atomic-like
carbon on Au. Changes in the spatial distribution of work functions with each
treatment, combined with a suggested phenomenological coverage and surface-potential
roughness dependence to the heating, appear to be related to the nonmonotonic
behavior previously reported.

Keywords:
microscopy, x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy

trapped ions, electric-ﬁeld noise, surface science, Kelvin probe force

1. Introduction

In electrostatics, metal electrodes are represented as having equipotential surfaces,
which is a valid idealization for most applications. In some cases, however, nonideal
surfaces can inﬂuence surface-sensitive sensors and measurements.
In these cases,
sensitivity to spatial distributions of regions of diﬀerent work functions (or surface-
potential patches) aﬀects a measurement outcome. These patches can originate from
nonuniform composition or a variable coverage of adsorbates on the surface or even from
diﬀerent crystallographic orientations in an otherwise clean polycrystalline electrode.
For example, in Casimir force experiments [1], atomic force sensing measurements [2],

 
 
 
 
 
 
Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 2

and space-based gravitational wave detection tests [3], a residual background potential
becomes a precision measurement problem when it varies spatially. In ion-trap systems,
surface patch potentials can ﬂuctuate temporally causing electric-ﬁeld noise at the
location and motional frequency of the trapped ions [4]. This broad-band electric-ﬁeld
noise couples to the net charge of the trapped ions causing the motional modes of the
ions in the trap to acquire energy. This motional heating is an obstacle to scalability in
trapped-ion quantum information processing (QIP) because absorption of one phonon
during a quantum gate operation ruins the ﬁdelity of the computation.

Exactly which microscopic mechanisms play roles in electric-ﬁeld noise from
surfaces remains unknown and their determination is an active area of experimental
and theoretical research. Various models for the origin of this noise have been put
forth over nearly two decades, but none have been able to fully describe all of the
experimental observations [5]. However, the manner in which the noise spectral density
S(f ) scales with ion-electrode separation d [6, 7, 8, 9, 10], electrode temperature T
[7, 11, 12, 13, 10, 14, 15], frequency f [6, 7, 11, 16, 17, 18, 13, 10], superconducting-
electrode phase transition [19, 12], degree of adsorbate coverage and surface condition
[16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23], and electrode material composition [24, 12], all point to
processes at the surface as the origin of the noise. More than one process may contribute
to the noise at any one time, but not many surface processes would give rise to this type
of electric-ﬁeld noise. For example, local work functions of electrode surfaces vary with
adsorbate coverage [25]. If the coverage was driven to ﬂuctuate temporally, electric-ﬁeld
noise would be present at the location of the ion. Another proposed mechanism is that
of vibrationally ﬂuctuating stationary adsorbate dipoles [26, 27, 28]. Moreover, when
surface diﬀusion of adsorbate dipoles is considered, there is a greater range of electric-
ﬁeld noise due to the atomic site dependence on the electric dipole moment [21]. Another
model to be considered derives electric-ﬁeld noise from dielectric loss in overlayers of
contamination on the electrode surface [29]. Recent experiments have shown that the
bulk eﬀects of a dielectric material positioned near a trapped ion cause motional heating
that ﬁts well to a dielectric model with no free parameters [30]. Teller et al. extrapolate
to a thin ﬁlm and estimate signiﬁcant electric-ﬁeld noise spectral densities that can
potentially hinder scalable quantum computation with trapped ions.

The electric-ﬁeld noise spectral density tends to have a 1/f α-type spectrum;
however, experimentally, a wide range of exponents α has been reported in the
approximate range 0.5 < α < 2 [5]. By measuring the heating rate ˙¯n of a ground-state
cooled trapped ion as a function of the motional-mode frequency f, one can determine
the electric-ﬁeld noise spectral density SE(f ), making use of the relation [6]:

SE(f ) =

4mhf
q2

˙¯n,

(1)

where m and q are the mass and charge of the ion, and h is the Planck constant.
Since SE ∼ 1/f α , then from (1), the frequency scaling of the measured heating rate
goes as ˙¯n ∼ 1/f α+1. Ideally, the frequency scaling of the noise would indicate the type
of responsible mechanism. The noise has been attributed to ﬂuctuations in adsorbate

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 3

contamination; however, how the adsorbates respond to diﬀerent driving forces remains
unknown. Typically, when motional heating rates are measured as a function of some
independent variable, e.g., d, T, or f, the behavior is monotonic. That is, as d or f
are decreased, the heating rate increases; as T is decreased, the heating rate decreases.
Even in some ion traps that have undergone in-situ surface treatments, such as ion
bombardment or laser cleaning, heating rates tend to be reduced by orders of magnitude
with a large enough dose. To understand how motional heating rates depend on the
degree of adsorbate coverage, a study was recently reported where an as-fabricated ion-
trap electrode surface was treated incrementally by ion bombardment to step-wise reduce
the coverage, followed by heating-rate measurements for each residual coverage [21]. In
that work, a nonmonotonic behavior was observed as the coverage was decreased. These
data provide an important clue to understanding the driving mechanism and response
of surface processes giving rise to this anomalous electric-ﬁeld noise.

In this article, variations in the frequency scaling as a function of adsorbate
coverage are presented, as the adsorbate contamination layer is incrementally removed
by Ar+ ion bombardment in situ. These data add to the single-frequency data
presented in [21], where the electric-ﬁeld-noise behavior is nonmonotonic dependent
on the ion-bombardment dose. The frequency dependence of the heating rates for a
given coverage follows a power-law relation over the range of accessible frequencies for
this trap. The variation in the power-law exponent α indicates that there may be
a single [28] or even multiple mechanisms [31] arising from surface treatments or a
change in coverage. Heating rates also are shown to have anisotropic values for the
two orthogonal motional modes parallel to the surface of the trap electrodes. Surface
analysis conducted on a sample electrode (not used for the heating-rate measurements)
is then presented and compared to the model system C/Au(110) [25] because carbon
is a ubiquitous contaminant on Au, commonly used for ion-trap electrodes. Work-
function and core-level measurements show that the initial contamination layer on the
as-fabricated surface-analysis sample electrode is fundamentally diﬀerent from atomic
carbon deposited on Au, however after the ﬁrst ion-bombardment treatment, the average
work function and core-level binding energies of the residual overlayer resemble that of
C/Au(110). Finally, histograms of Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) images are
presented to elucidate the surface-potential “roughness” of the incrementally sputtered
electroplated gold electrodes, in contrast to the smooth surface-potential landscapes
of deposited carbon on Au(110), quantifying work-function patch sizes with wide
distributions of work functions on the electrode surface. These resulting work-function
distributions are not fully explained by the diﬀerent crystalline orientations within the
polycrystalline electrode [32] but may also be the result of morphological eﬀects of a
sputtered and unannealed surface. Finally, a simple model is presented to qualitatively
explain a hypothesized correlation between the nonmonotonic heating rates and the
roughness of the surface-potential maps.

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 4

2. Experimental Details

The experiments were carried out in two separate ultra-high vacuum chambers (∼ 2
× 10−8 Pa base pressure). The ion-trap chamber was equipped with a cylindrical
mirror electron energy analyzer for Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) of the trap-
electrode surfaces and Ar+ ion bombardment facilities including gas handling, valves,
a turbomolecular pump, and a 500 V to 2 kV ion source for treatments to the
trap electrodes. The surface-analysis chamber was equipped with a hemispherical
electron energy analyzer for x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and an atomic
force microscope (AFM) for KPFM with similar ion bombardment facilities. All
measurements were conducted at room temperature.

The surfaces of three diﬀerent samples were studied in this work: 1) the stylus ion-
trap electrodes used for heating-rate measurements, 2) an electroplated sample ion-trap
electrode used in the KPFM/XPS studies, and 3) a Au(110) single crystal with deposited
carbon used as a model system. The as-fabricated stylus electrodes and sample ion-trap
electrode were sputter-treated incrementally to study the removal of the carbonaceous
overlayer. For the C/Au(110) sample, atomic carbon was deposited by sublimation onto
a cleaned Au(110) surface as detailed in [25].

2.1. Heating Rate Measurements

The electroplated-Au ion-trap electrodes for the heating-rate measurements were
designed at NIST and microfabricated by Sandia National Laboratories using
synchrotron-based x-ray lithography techniques, commonly used to form high-aspect
ratio microstructures [33]. These electrodes have a stylus-type geometry with ∼ 60 µm
diameter pillars, extending 180 µm above a 5 mm × 5 mm substrate with interconnect
traces and a large ground plane (ﬁgure 1). The original macroscopic stylus-type radio-
[34], and previous design
frequency (RF) Paul trap was described by Maiwald et al.
[35]
iterations of the microfabricated version have been described by Arrington et al.
and McKay et al. [20].

The trap used in this work is the same as that used by Kim et al.

[21], wherein
individual 25Mg+ ions are conﬁned approximately 63 µm above the center electrode
(ﬁgure 1). Heating-rate data are collected for both ground-state cooled radial modes
(two orthogonal motional modes oriented in a plane nearly parallel to the electrode
surfaces, see ﬁgure 1) for a range of motional frequencies at each step of incremental
treatments by Ar+ ion bombardment for step-wise removal of the contamination layer.
A simpliﬁed description of the heating-rate measurement technique can be found in [24]
adapted from the in-depth description in [4].

The motional-mode frequency is varied by changing the RF potential applied to the
trap electrodes. Five static-potential electrodes are used for adjusting the position of the
ion in the null of the RF ﬁeld and are not used to change the motional frequencies of the
ion. Therefore, changes in the applied RF power are made to vary the motional-mode
frequencies. To conﬁrm a ﬂat response of the heating rate due to various magnitudes

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 5

Figure 1. (a) Top-view layout schematic of a stylus ion trap chip showing the motional
mode axes, Ar+ ion beam direction (red arrow), and Auger beam spot size and location
(green circle), ∼ 1 mm from the trapping center. Other features are described in [35].
(b) Top-view optical image of the trapping center. The light-colored arcs comprise
the RF electrode and the 5 circular electrodes (∼ 60 µm diameter) are DC control
electrodes at RF ground. The electrodes are extruded ∼ 180 µm above a 5 mm × 5
mm ground plane (gold color). 25Mg+ is trapped 63 µm above the center electrode.
The radial motional modes are in a plane nearly parallel to the top electrode surfaces
and the Ar+ beam is oriented at a 30◦ angle with respect to the surface normal.

of applied RF power, three diﬀerent RF-drive resonators (50, 65, 93 MHz resonance
frequencies) were employed to acquire heating-rate measurements with diﬀerent RF
power, but with the same range of motional secular frequencies. Since the x and y
motional modes display diﬀerent frequency scalings, measured to be αx = 1.6 and αy
= 1.1, a frequency-normalized electric-ﬁeld noise spectral density, f αSE, was used to
correct for the diﬀerent mode frequencies ranging from approximately 2 MHz to 7 MHz.
The noise amplitude varied by less than a factor of two over an RF power range of
approximately 8 dB. This conﬁrms the ﬂat response of heating rates to applied RF
power over the operational range in this ion trap.

The surface contamination level, or the degree of carbon coverage, was measured in
situ by AES directly at the trap center (electron beam diameter was ∼ 800 µm) before
the ﬁrst and after the last cleaning treatments to minimize the possibility of adding
contamination from the AES electron gun to the trap electrodes nearest the ion. All
other coverage measurements after each of the incremental treatments were made at a
location about 1 mm away from the trap electrodes nearest the ion. Therefore, coverages
for the heating rate measurements are reported to be estimated for the surfaces that
most aﬀect the ion’s motion. The estimates are based on depth proﬁling studies of
contamination removal in a diﬀerent chamber from similar air-exposed electroplated Au
sample ion-trap electrodes, using the Ar+ ion-beam dose as the referenced quantity.

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 6

Therefore, there is considerable uncertainty in the reported estimated coverage for the
intermediate data points on the order of 50% (± 0.2 ML minimum).

The Ar+ ion beam was positioned at a 30◦ angle with respect to the normal to
the trap surface and directed along the x axis of the trap (see ﬁgure 1). Due to the
three-dimensional structure of the stylus trap electrodes, some regions of the electrodes’
sidewalls are shadowed from the Ar+ ion beam, which could leave regions near the
Mg+ ion untreated ((cid:38) 70 µm distance to the ion), adding to the uncertainty in the
estimated coverage. Typical parameters for the incremental sputter treatments were 2
kV beam voltage, 0.5 µA/cm2 sample-current density at 6 × 10−3 Pa Ar for 5 min to
10 min each. To study the removal of the native contamination on the electrodes, a
pre-assembly treatment, prescribed in [20], was not conducted in this work.

2.2. Surface Analysis Measurements

The sample electrode for surface analysis was made of 8 µm thick electroplated Au,
microfabricated on a sapphire substrate, depicted in [36, 37] and acquired from the same
wafer as the linear surface-electrode trap used for quantum gate experiments described
in [38, 39]. These electrodes and those used for the heating-rate measurements are
nominally the same as they are both air-exposed, initially untreated after fabrication,
and composed of polycrystalline electroplated Au. Diﬀerences in fabrication features
between the samples,
like ﬁlm thickness and interelectrode gap widths, have no
consequence for the surface analysis measurements, except perhaps for the two AES
measurements at the trap center, however no evidence of the substrate was observed
due to the narrow gaps.
In addition, scanning tunneling microscopy data collected
from a nearly duplicate stylus trap showed similar morphologies to the sample electrode
discussed in this work before and after ion-bombardment treatments. Nevertheless,
there are limitations to comparing two diﬀerent surfaces that are initially prepared in
an uncontrolled manner, i.e., ﬁnal steps of cleaning with solvents and air exposure.
As in the heating-rate experiment, the surface-analysis sample is incrementally treated
with Ar+ ion bombardment. The dose for each treatment was approximately 0.3 J/cm2.
Between each treatment, spatially resolved local work functions and residual coverages
were measured with KPFM and XPS, respectively. This allows for the observation of
work-function magnitudes, patch sizes, and spatial distributions as a function of the
residual coverage.

For the work function measurements, a Cr/Pt-coated Si cantilever was employed in
frequency-modulated KPFM to measure the contact potential diﬀerence (CPD) between
the tip of the cantilever and the sample, typically over a 300 nm × 300 nm area. After
each CPD measurement, the work function of the tip was recalibrated using a cleaved
highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) reference sample. The work function of
the HOPG is taken to be 4.6 eV [40]. This accounts for tip changes that may occur
and allows for the relative determination of the sample work function with a spatial
resolution of ∼ 5 nm to 10 nm. Values for the sample work function for a given imaged

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 7

area are reported as the work function for which the image histogram has a peak(s),
ﬁtted with a Gaussian distribution(s) with typical widths of approximately 30 meV
full-width at half-maximum.

The coverage and core-level binding energies were determined by XPS. For these
measurements, x-rays from a Mg anode were used, producing photons at 1253.6 eV.
To calibrate the binding energy, the work function of the electron energy analyzer was
determined using a clean Pd sample providing a large density of states at the Fermi
edge. The energy calibration was performed for two photon energies, 1253.6 and 1486.7
eV. The coverage is estimated from a simple overlayer model that takes into account
the ratios of the peak intensities (for C and Au, in this case) and the exponential
attenuation of electrons from depths within the sample using the inelastic mean free
path for the particular electron kinetic energies [41]. Due to the limitations of this
simple overlayer model and the averaged signal over a 200 µm diameter XPS-analysis
area, the uncertainty in the coverage measurement is estimated to be approximately ±
0.2 monolayers (ML) to account for inhomogeneities on the sample surfaces.

3. Results

3.1. Heating Rate Measurements: Frequency Scalings

Heating rates for several motional mode frequencies in this stylus trap were measured.
Figure 2(a) shows the heating rate at 4.7 MHz as a function of the estimated coverage
for the electrode surfaces closest to the trapped ion. The electric-ﬁeld noise is dominated
by the closest electrode surfaces due to the ∼ 1/d3 distance dependence [8]. These data
are the same as those reported in [21]. The nonmonotonic behavior shows an order
of magnitude increase in the submonolayer regime (∼ 0.5 ML), followed by a nearly
two orders of magnitude decrease as the coverage θ is reduced (by incremental sputter
treatments) from 3 ML toward a nominal coverage of 0 ML.

For various motional-mode frequencies, the heating-rate scaling, characterized by
the 1/f α exponent α, also exhibits a correlated dependence, shown in ﬁgure 2(b). The
exponent α from ﬁtting to both modes is changed from 1.5 toward smaller values (∼
0.4) as the coverage is reduced from 0.5 ML toward 0 ML (cleaned surface). Theoretical
models of independently ﬂuctuating adsorbate dipoles have predicted electric-ﬁeld noise
spectra that exhibit the characteristic 1/f α behavior and also show changes from α ∼
1 to α ∼ 0 [27, 28]. Interestingly, in [28], it is shown that, for a given frequency, if the
adsorbate species is changed, for example, by way of hydrocarbon decomposition, then
the spectrum can change from 1/f α at a higher noise level to white noise at a lower noise
level. However, there are discrepancies in magnitude and frequency ranges compared
with experimental data that led Ray et al. to suggest that additional processes need to
be considered to explain observed heating rates [28]. Recently, a study of the collective
motion of adsorbates with various mechanisms in diﬀerent coverage regimes found 1/f -
type noise extending down into the MHz range with behaviors similar to that report

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 8

(a) Heating rates at a 4.7 MHz motional frequency and (b) frequency-
Figure 2.
scaling exponents α for an incrementally cleaned ion trap as a function of the estimated
residual carbon coverage ﬁt for both directional modes. The data were collected from
high to low coverage after each incremental treatment. The nonmonotonic dependence
on the heating rate was previously reported in [21]. Approximately 50% uncertainty
(0.2 ML minimum uncertainty) in the degree of carbon coverage is due to the indirect
measurement with AES at a position 1 mm from the trap electrode nearest the ion.

here. While not as pronounced as the changes seen in ﬁgure 2(b), other work on in-situ
surface-treated ion traps also reported decreased scaling exponents [18, 16], however
another work did not show a signiﬁcant change in α after achieving low noise levels [17].
In a study of ex situ sputter-treated electrodes, i.e., exposed to air after treatment, α
also was not seen to change from before and then after the treatments [23].

In [42], the polarization of electric-ﬁeld noise from surfaces was investigated to
discern between surface noise and technical noise. In that work, Schindler et al. describe

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 9

Figure 3. Heating rates vs. motional frequency for the x - (squares) and y-
direction (circles) radial modes before and after sputter treatments (5 total treatments).
Anisotropic heating rates become more pronounced in the low-coverage regime (< 0.5
ML). The mode parallel to the sputter beam projection (x ) experiences higher heating
rates. For the second to last treatment, at 3 MHz, the asymmetry heating-rate ratio
R (= ˙¯nx/ ˙¯ny) = 3.5. Error bars are smaller than the data point symbols.

a model to determine the asymmetry between two orthogonal motional modes rotated
through an angle γ with respect to the surface normal. At γ = 0, one mode was
perpendicular to the trap surface (z -direction). Their model predicts a heating-rate
ratio R = ˙¯nz/ ˙¯nx for the two modes to be R = 2. Heating rates were measured as a
function of the rotation angle and the ratio followed the trend of the model, but with a
maximum R = 4.2 [42].

In this work, a distinct asymmetry in heating rates was measured for the two
orthogonal modes in a plane nearly parallel to the electrode surface after the fourth
treatment (dosages of the 5 total treatments are reported in [21]). For the second to
last treatment, at a motional mode frequency of ∼ 3 MHz, the heating-rate ratio (R =
˙¯nx/ ˙¯ny) was measured to be R = 3.5, shown in ﬁgure 3. An anisotropy in the scaling is
observed between the two radial modes before treatments (at ∼ 3 MHz, αx = 1.6 and
αy = 1.1, R = 1.04), but the directionality in heating rates becomes more pronounced
after the incremental sputter treatments and in the low-coverage regime (θ ≤ 0.5 ML).
Dipolar noise sources in ion traps were also investigated theoretically in the stylus-
trap geometry by Galve et al.
it is pointed out that various dipole
orientations can cause diﬀerent noise levels and in diﬀerent directions. The authors
suggested that due to the directionality of a sputter beam, nanochannels generated on
the Au electrode may play a role in the preferential orientation of surface noise sources.
A rippled surface morphology is common to sputtered and unannealed metal surfaces
[44], where the ridges and troughs are oriented perpendicular to the angled (30◦ in this

[43]. There,

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 10

case) sputter-beam direction. While the spatial resolution of KPFM in this work was not
high enough to observe nanochannels in the sample ion-trap electrode, linescans from
the corresponding topography from the higher resolution AFM signal revealed a 4 nm
periodicity in the x -direction over a 50 nm diameter grain. No periodicity was observed
in the y-direction. Considering the relative orientation between the motional mode
directions and that of the sputter beam (ﬁgure 1), higher heating rates were measured
in the direction parallel to the planar projection of the sputter beam. Additional
experimental work is needed to further elucidate this eﬀect.

Noise from technical sources, i.e., other than surface related noise, is a concern
especially when heating from the surface has been reduced by an order of magnitude
by ion bombardment, for example. Tests for technical noise sources, such as Johnson
noise from circuitry, voltage sources, environmental pickup, and stray resonant light,
were routinely conducted in this work. Details of these tests can be found in Appendix
A of [45]. Calculations of Johnson noise are orders of magnitude lower than the noise
inferred from the lowest measured heating rates in this trap. Therefore, technical noise
is ruled out as the cause for the changed exponent α and the asymmetry in heating in
the two motional modes.

3.2. Surface Analysis of a Sample Ion-trap Electrode: Sputter-treated Electroplated Au

The ﬂuctuation of work-function patches on electrode surfaces is a mechanism thought
to play a role in motional heating of trapped ions [6]. Also, it has been shown that the
work function of a Au(110) crystal is strongly dependent on the coverage of deposited
atomic carbon [25]. In the submonolayer regime, the measured work function varies by
approximately 0.8 eV. If a dynamic driving mechanism causes the coverage of various
work function patches to ﬂuctuate spatially and temporally, then electric-ﬁeld noise is
generated above the surface of an electrode. To investigate this eﬀect in relation to the
nonmonotonic heating-rate dependence shown in ﬁgure 2(a), incrementally sputtered
ion-trap sample electrodes were studied with static KPFM.

Work functions for an ion-trap electrode are shown in ﬁgure 4(a), along with the
results of C/Au(110) from [25] for comparison. Initially, the as-fabricated trap electrode
is covered with approximately 2.3 ML of an adventitious carbonaceous layer. This is
presumed to be a hydrocarbon layer, since the work function (∼ 4.3 eV) and the C
1s core-level binding energy (∼ 284.9 eV), shown in ﬁgure 4(b), are consistent with
hydrocarbon values in the literature [46, 47] and are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from that
of atomic carbon on Au [25]. After the ﬁrst sputter treatment to the trap electrode,
the work function and C 1s binding energy approach the values of the model system,
C/Au(110). Measurements after subsequent treatments that stepwise decrease the
coverage, continue to resemble the model system. These data are consistent with the
initial hydrocarbon layer being decomposed by the ﬁrst sputter treatment that leaves
a carbon residue on the electroplated Au surface [48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53]. More work
is needed to further verify this, however it provides a clue about how the electric-ﬁeld

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 11

Figure 4. (a) Work functions and (b) C 1s binding energies vs. carbon coverage for a
sample ion-trap electrode and the model system C/Au(110) for comparison [25]. For
the sample ion-trap electrode (red circles), the data were collected from high to low
coverage after each incremental treatment. These data indicate that the as-fabricated
sample-electrode surface is composed of a 2.3 ML hydrocarbon ﬁlm on Au that becomes
modiﬁed after the ﬁrst sputter treatment to resemble the surface properties of atomic
carbon on Au(110). The solid line in (a) is a spline ﬁt to DFT-calculated data for
C/Au(110) [25].

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 12

Figure 5. Histograms of KPFM images for various coverages for (a) C/Au(110)
and (b) the sample ion-trap electrode. C/Au(110) exhibits narrow work-function
distributions. The sample ion-trap electrode shows broad, multi-peak distributions,
which indicate much greater surface-potential “roughness” and more work-function
states for ﬂuctuations. Representative KPFM CPD images at 0.9 ML for (c)
C/Au(110) and (d) the sample electrode show the patchy nature of the surface
potentials. Images are of 300 nm × 300 nm areas and are plotted on the same (relative)
color scale.

noise above an electrode surface can depend on the composition and coverage of a
contamination layer.

To study this idea in more detail, spatial distributions from KPFM images were
examined and likewise compared to the model system, shown in ﬁgure 5. This provides
additional information, since the work functions discussed previously are average values
of CPD measurements over a given area (300 nm × 300 nm). Due to the patchy nature
of the electroplated Au, the red circle data points in ﬁgure 4(a) should actually be
smeared out areas or regions of distributed work functions. The coverage measurement
is an average over a 200 µm diameter analysis area with no spatial resolution.

4. Discussion

In many analyses of electric-ﬁeld noise from surfaces, models of work-function patches
In actuality,
or adsorbate dipoles are considered to be on atomically ﬂat electrodes.
metal electrodes tend to be rough, particularly electroplated electrodes with a typical
RMS roughness on the order of 10s of nanometers.
In [54], the eﬀects of surface
roughness on electric-ﬁeld noise was investigated theoretically. It was found that, at
low temperatures, heating rates are enhanced or suppressed depending on the adatom
coverage in morphological regions of negative or positive curvature, respectively [54].

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 13

Here, the roughness of the surface potential

is considered, rather than the
topographical roughness, to describe a landscape for mobile dipoles to cause the
In this work,
ﬂuctuation of work-function patches giving rise to electric-ﬁeld noise.
patch dimensions on the sample ion-trap electrode were 50 nm to 100 nm, shown in
ﬁgure 5(d). Since the work function of a given patch depends on the adsorbate coverage,
particularly in the submonolayer regime (see ﬁgure 4), temporal changes in the local
coverage give rise to work-function ﬂuctuations.

The mechanism to drive such adsorbate motion and cause coverage ﬂuctuations
remains unclear. Moreover, the physical ﬂuctuations need to be fast to correspond to
the high-frequency noise measured in ion traps. It was suggested in [8] that ﬁelds or
currents from the trap RF drive may play a role in adsorbate ﬂuctuation.
In those
experiments, heating from samples positioned near a trapped ion (varied between 45
µm and 300 µm) was reasoned to be negligible compared to the low heating rates from
the sputter-treated trap electrodes. It was suggested that, due to the large impedance
of the sample to RF ground, currents and ﬁelds may have been too low at the samples’
In a similar, more recent experiment with modiﬁed sample wiring to lower
surface.
the impedance at the RF-drive frequency, heating from nearby samples was observed,
however tests with additional RF pulses applied to the samples showed no increase to
the measured heating rates [45]. A signiﬁcant challenge to theory and experiment alike
would be to develop and test a model that relates adatom ﬂuctuations driven at the
trap-drive frequency resulting in motion and electric-ﬁeld noise at the lower trapped-
ion motional frequencies. This may involve considerations of complex adatom-adatom,
adatom-substrate and/or cluster interactions at the surface. This is not well understood
and warrants further theoretical and experimental investigation.

To illustrate the surface-potential roughness, histograms of KPFM images as a
function of coverage are shown in ﬁgure 5 for (a) the model system C/Au(110) and (b)
the sample ion-trap electrode. The width of these histograms represents this roughness
and the variation of work functions over a given area. On the one hand, as shown in
ﬁgure 5(a), C/Au(110), prepared by carbon deposition, exhibits narrow distributions
at or below the resolution of the measurement for all coverages shown. These are
histograms of KPFM images collected for the work-function experiments described in
[25]. On the other hand, the electroplated Au electrode, prepared by sputter etching,
exhibits broad and multipeak distributions, indicating a patchy surface whose widths
change nonmonotonically with decreasing coverage (ﬁgure 5(b)). Figs. 5(c, d) show
representative KPFM CPD images for 0.9 ML of C/Au(110) and the treated sample
ion-trap electrode, respectively (same relative color scale).

An electrode with more patches will have a greater work-function noise spectral
density, proportional to the surface-potential roughness, for a given degree of coverage
ﬂuctuations. To relate this to the nonmonotonic heating-rate measurements shown in
ﬁgure 2(a), a simple empirical model, dependent on the adsorbate coverage and the
surface-potential roughness, was used to arrive at a heating-rate trend for the sample
ion-trap electrode. The model assumes a dependence on the coverage θ such that the

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 14

heating rate will tend to zero with decreasing coverage and at higher coverages will
asymptotically approach a maximum value with a characteristic decay constant λ, such
as [1-exp(-θ/λ)]. Ideally, as the coverage is reduced through the low coverage regime
(θ ≤ 0.5 ML), the global work function will approach that of the clean electrode and
coverage ﬂuctuations and hence work function ﬂuctuation will become more dilute with
an approximately linear behavior. As the coverage increases through the high coverage
regime (θ > 0.5 ML), the work function will approach and reach that of the adsorbate
overlayer, like a bulk material, and eventually the noise will cease to increase with
additional adsorbate layers.

The RMS surface-potential roughness σφ, corresponding to the standard deviation

of a CPD image with N pixels per row and M pixels per column, is given by

σφ =

(cid:32)

1
A

M
(cid:88)

N
(cid:88)

m=1

n=1

(cid:33)1/2

(φm,n − ¯φ)2

,

(2)

where φ (= eVCP D) is the work function and A (= M N ·[area/pixel]) is the area of
interest. If one assumes a ﬁrst order dependence on σφ, the empirical heating-rate trend
is given by

˙¯n = C · (1 − e−θ/λ) · σφ + bkg,

(3)

where a prefactor C, λ and an additional background oﬀset (bkg) are found from a
pointwise least-squares ﬁt to the heating-rate data. A Gaussian function, which ﬁts
well to σφ(θ) for the sample electrode, was used to approximate the unknown σφ(θ) for
the stylus-trap electrodes. A modelled ˙¯n can be determined for qualitative purposes by
determining σφ from the KPFM images for each coverage θ. The data from (3) for the
sample electrode, shown in ﬁgure 6, have a C = 4 (quanta per second)/meV, bkg = 4
quanta per second, and λ = 0.2 ML, showing the relevance of the submonolayer regime
to ion heating, previously pointed out in [18]. For example, from the sample ion-trap
electrode shown in ﬁgure 5(d) with θ = 0.9 ML and σφ = 42 meV, equation (3) gives
170 quanta per second, while the C/Au(110) sample, with θ = 0.9 ML and σφ = 11
meV in ﬁgure 5(c), has a value of 48 quanta per second.

Additional experimental work is required to corroborate this model with variations
in trapped-ion heating rates, but it gives a qualitative explanation for the nonmonotonic
heating observed in ion traps with electrodes of various adsorbate coverages. Due to
variability in ion-trap electrode preparation, the metric of surface-potential roughness
could help to understand the spread in heating rates reported throughout the literature
over the past few decades [5]. A future study of KPFM and ion heating rates measured
with the same sample surface will allow for a quantitative analysis of this and other
models. In addition, this simple model suggests that clean electrode surfaces or even
an adsorbate covered surface with a uniform surface-potential landscape may enable
ion-trap systems with low heating rates aiding QIP scalability through miniaturization.

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 15

Figure 6. Plot of the modelled heating rate from (3) using the measured values for the
coverage θ and the surface-potential roughness σφ, where φ is the work function, C is
a scaling constant, and bkg is an additional background oﬀset. The trend qualitatively
agrees with the heating rate data from ﬁgure 2(a).

5. Summary

In this article, the frequency scaling of the electric-ﬁeld noise in an incrementally sputter-
treated ion trap was shown to change from a power-law exponent α of ∼ 1.5 to ∼ 0.4.
This variation is correlated with the nonmonotonic behavior in the heating rate as a
function of carbon coverage on the electroplated Au trap electrodes. These values of α
are consistent with some aspects of adsorbate-dipole models due to the eﬀects of surface
treatments or changes in coverage. In addition, an anisotropy in the heating rates of the
two orthogonal motional modes (parallel to the electrode surfaces) was shown to become
more pronounced in the low-coverage regime. At a motional frequency of 3 MHz, the
mode direction in line with the sputter-beam direction experienced ∼ 3.5 times higher
electric-ﬁeld noise than the mode perpendicular to the sputter beam after four sputter
treatments, possibly pointing to a morphological role in the heating from the surface.

To elucidate these results, a KPFM/XPS study was conducted on a sample ion-
trap electrode, comparing the coverage dependent work function to that of a model
system, atomic carbon on Au(110). The as-fabricated sample electrode was covered
with a hydrocarbon ﬁlm with very diﬀerent properties from C/Au(110). Even though,
after incremental sputter treatments, the sample electrode resembled the average work
functions and C 1s binding energies of the model system, in contrast to deposited carbon
on Au(110), KPFM revealed fundamentally diﬀerent surface-potential maps with work-
function patch dimensions ∼ 50 nm to 100 nm. Finally, measured coverage and surface-
potential roughness were employed in a simple empirical model to qualitatively connect
the morphology of local work functions to the nonmonotonic heating rates observed
from incrementally treated ion-trap electrodes.

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 16

Acknowledgments

The authors acknowledge the following for many fruitful discussions surrounding this
work: D. Leibfried, S. Kotler, H. R. Sadeghpour, A. C. Wilson, D. J. Wineland, and
especially D. H. Slichter for also fabricating and providing the sample ion-trap electrodes.
The authors also thank A. P. McFadden, T. M. Wallis, and R. B. Goldfarb for helpful
comments on the manuscript. K.S.M. acknowledges support as an associate in the
Professional Research Experience Program (PREP) operated jointly by the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the University of Colorado Boulder
under Award No. 70NANB18H006 from the U.S. Department of Commerce, NIST.

References

[1] Jun Xu, G. L. Klimchitskaya, V. M. Mostepanenko, and U. Mohideen. Phys. Rev. A, 97:032501,

2018.

[2] B. C. Stipe, H. J. Mamin, T. D. Stowe, T. W. Kenny, and D. Rugar. Phys. Rev. Lett., 87:096801,

2001.

[3] S. E. Pollack, S. Schlamminger, and J. H. Gundlach. Phys. Rev. Lett., 101:071101, 2008.
[4] D. J. Wineland, C. Monroe, W. M. Itano, D. Leibfried, B. E. King, and D. M. Meekhof. J. Res.

Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., 103(3):259–328, 1998.

[5] M. Brownnutt, M. Kumph, P. Rabl, and R. Blatt. Rev. Mod. Phys., 87(4):1419–1482, 2015.
[6] Q. A. Turchette, D. Kielpinski, B. E. King, D. Leibfried, D. M. Meekhof, C. J. Myatt, M. A.
Rowe, C. A. Sackett, C. S. Wood, W. M. Itano, C. Monroe, and D. J. Wineland. Phys. Rev. A,
61(6):63418, 2000.

[7] L. Deslauriers, S. Olmschenk, D. Stick, W. K. Hensinger, J. Sterk, and C. Monroe. Phy. Rev.

Lett., 97(10):103007, 2006.

[8] D. A. Hite, K. S. McKay, S. Kotler, D. Leibfried, D. J. Wineland, and D. P. Pappas. MRS Adv.,

pages 1–9, 2017.

[9] I. A. Boldin, A. Kraft, and C. Wunderlich. Phys. Rev. Lett., 120(2):023201, 2018.
[10] J. A. Sedlacek, A. Greene, J. Stuart, R. McConnell, C. D. Bruzewicz, J. M. Sage, and J. Chiaverini.

Phys. Rev. A, 97(2):020302, 2018.

[11] J. Labaziewicz, Y. Ge, D. R. Leibrandt, S. X. Wang, R. Shewmon, and I. L. Chuang. Phys. Rev.

Lett., 101(18):180602, 2008.

[12] J. Chiaverini and J. M. Sage. Phys. Rev. A, 89(1):012318, 2014.
[13] C. D. Bruzewicz, J. M. Sage, and J. Chiaverini. Phys. Rev. A, 91(4):041402, 2015.
[14] C. Noel, M. Berlin-Udi, C. Matthiesen, J. Yu, Y. Zhou, V. Lordi, and H¨aﬀner H. Phys. Rev A,

99:063427, 2019.

[15] M. Berlin-Udi, C. Matthiesen, P. N. T. LLoyd, A. Alonzo, C. Noel, C. Orme, C.-E. Kim, V. Lordi,

and H¨aﬀner H. arXiv, page 2103.04482, 2021.

[16] D. T. C. Allcock, L. Guidoni, T. P. Harty, C. J. Ballance, M. G. Blain, A. M. Steane, and D. M.

Lucas. N. J. Phys., 13(12):123023, 2011.

[17] D. A. Hite, Y. Colombe, A. C. Wilson, K. R. Brown, U. Warring, R. J¨ordens, J. D. Jost, K. S.
McKay, D. P. Pappas, D. Leibfried, and D. J. Wineland. Phys. Rev. Lett., 109(10):103001, 2012.
[18] N. Daniilidis, S. Gerber, G. Bolloten, M. Ramm, A. Ransford, E. Ulin-Avila, I. Talukdar, and

H. H¨aﬀner. Phys. Rev. B, 89(24):245435, 2014.

[19] S. X. Wang, Y. Ge, J. Labaziewicz, E. Dauler, K. Berggren, and I. L. Chuang. Appl. Phys. Lett.,

97(24):244102, 2010.

[20] K. S. McKay, D. A. Hite, Y. Colombe, R. J¨ordens, A. C. Wilson, D. H. Slichter, D. T. C. Allcock,

D. Leibfried, D. J. Wineland, and D. P. Pappas. arXiv, page 1406.1778, 2014.

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 17

[21] E. Kim, A. Safavi-Naini, D. A. Hite, K. S. McKay, D. P. Pappas, P. F. Weck, and H. R. Sadeghpour.

Phys. Rev. A, 95:033407, 2017.

[22] R. McConnell, C. Bruzewicz, J. Chiaverini, and J. Sage. Phys. Rev A, 92:020302, 2015.
[23] J. A. Sedlacek, J. Stuart, D. H. Slichter, C. D. Bruzewicz, R. McConnell, J. M. Sage, and

J. Chiaverini. Phys. Rev. A, 98(6):063430, 2018.

[24] D. A. Hite, Y. Colombe, A. C. Wilson, D. T. C. Allcock, D. Leibfried, D. J. Wineland, and D. P.

Pappas. MRS Bull., 38(10):826, 2013.

[25] H. Z. Jooya, McKay. K. S., E. Kim, P. F. Weck, D. P. Pappas, D. A. Hite, and H. R. Sadeghpour.

Surf. Sci., 677:232, 2018.

[26] A. Safavi-Naini, P. Rabl, P. F. Weck, and H. R. Sadeghpour. Phys. Rev. A, 84:023412, 2011.
[27] A. Safavi-Naini, E. Kim, P. F. Weck, P. Rabl, and H. R. Sadeghpour. Phys. Rev. A, 87:023412,

2013.

[28] K. G. Ray, B. M. Rubenstein, W. Gu, and V. Lordi. J. New Phys., 21:053043, 2019.
[29] M. Kumph, C. Henkel, P. Rabl, M. Brownnutt, and R. Blatt. New J. Phys., 18:023020, 2016.
[30] M. Teller, D. A. Fioretto, P. C. Holz, P. Schindler, V. Messerer, K. Sch¨uppert, Y. Zou, R. Blatt,

Chiaverini J., J. Sage, and T. E. Northup. Phys. Rev. Lett., 126:230505, 2021.

[31] B. Foulon, K. G. Ray, C.-E. Kim, Y. Liu, B. M. Rubenstein, and V. Lordi. arXiv, page 2107.01177,

2021.

[32] H. Z. Jooya, X. Fan, McKay. K. S., D. P. Pappas, D. A. Hite, and H. R. Sadeghpour. Mol. Phys.,

117:2157, 2019.

[33] C. K. Malek and V. Saile. Microelectronic J., 35:131, 2004.
[34] R. Maiwald, D. Leibfried, J. Britton, J. C. Bergquist, G. Leuchs, and D. J. Wineland. Nat. Phys.,

5(8):551–554, 2009.

[35] C. L. Arrington, K. S. McKay, E. D. Baca, J. J. Coleman, Y. Colombe, P. Finnegan, D. A. Hite,
A. E. Hollowell, R. J¨ordens, J. D. Jost, D. Leibfried, A. M. Rowen, U. Warring, M. Weides,
A. C. Wilson, D. J. Wineland, and D. P. Pappas. Rev. Sci. Instrum., 84(8):085001, 2013.
[36] Shaun C. Burd. Squeezing and ampliﬁcation of trapped-ion motion. PhD thesis, University of

Colorado, 2020.

[37] R. Srinivas. Laser-free trapped-ion quantum logic with a radiofrequency magnetic ﬁeld gradient.

PhD thesis, University of Colorado, 2020.

[38] R. Srinivas, S. C. Burd, R. T. Sutherland, A. C. Wilson, D. J. Wineland, D. Leibfried, D. T. C.

Allcock, and D. H. Slichter. Phys. Rev. Lett., 122:163201, 2019.

[39] S. C. Burd, R. Srinivas, J. J. Bollinger, A. C. Wilson, D. J. Wineland, D. Leibfried, D. H. Slichter,

and D. T. C. Allcock. Science, 364:1163, 2019.

[40] T. Takahashi, H. Tokailin, and T. Sagawa. Phys. Rev. B, 32:8317, 1985.
[41] M. P. Seah and W. A. Dench. Surf. Interface Anal., 1:2, 1985.
[42] P. Schindler, D. J. Gorman, N. Daniilidis, and H. H¨aﬀner. Phys. Rev. A, 92:013414, 2015.
[43] F. Galve, J. Alonso, and R. Zambrini. Phys. Rev. A, 96:033409, 2017.
[44] R. M. Bradley and J. M. E. Harper. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 6:2390, 1988.
[45] K. S. McKay, D. A. Hite, P. D. Kent, S. Kotler, D. Leibfried, D. H. Slichter, A. C. Wilson, and

D. P. Pappas. arXiv, page 2102.00965, 2021.

[46] M. J. Tarlov. Langmuir, 8:80, 1992.
[47] NIST X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Database, NIST Standard Reference Database Number
20, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg MD, 20899,
(2000),
doi:10.18434/T4T88K., 2000.

[48] Contarini et al. Appl. Surf. Sci, 28:291, 1987.
[49] Marletta et al. Macromolecules, 25:3190, 1992.
[50] Toth et al. Surf. Interfacial Anal., 22:551, 1994.
[51] Iijima et al. Jap. J. Appl. Phys., 33:6325, 1994.
[52] Lesiak et al. Polish J. Chem., 69:141, 1995.
[53] Koizumi et al. Polymer J., 33:621, 2001.

Surface science motivated by heating of trapped ions from the quantum ground state 18

[54] K.-Y. Lin, G. H. Low, and I. L. Chuang. Phys. Rev. A, 94:013418, 2016.

