Congruence and Plausibility, not Presence?! Pivotal Conditions for XR 
Experiences and Effects, a Novel Approach 

Marc Erich Latoschik1*, Carolin Wienrich2 

1Human-Computer Interaction Group, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany 

2Human-Technology-Systems Group, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany 

* Correspondence:  
Marc Erich Latoschik  
marc.latoschik@uni.wuerzburg.de 

Keywords: XR, experience, presence, congruence, plausibility, coherence, theory, prediction  

Abstract 

Presence often is considered the most important quale describing the subjective feeling of being in a 
computer-generated and/or computer-mediated virtual environment. The identification and separation 
of orthogonal presence components, i.e., the place illusion and the plausibility illusion, has been an 
accepted theoretical model describing Virtual Reality (VR) experiences for some time. This 
perspective article challenges this presence-oriented VR theory. First, we argue that a place illusion 
cannot be the major construct to describe the much wider scope of Virtual, Augmented, and Mixed 
Reality (VR, AR, MR: or XR for short). Second, we argue that there is no plausibility illusion but 
merely plausibility, and we derive the place illusion caused by congruent and plausible generation of 
spatial cues, and similarly for all the current model’s so-defined illusions. Finally, we propose 
congruence and plausibility to become the central essential conditions in a novel theoretical model 
describing XR experiences and effects. 

Introduction 

“A review and categorization of definitions of presence has demonstrated that it is an unusually rich 
and diverse concept. […] Presence, and definitions of presence, touch on profound issues involving 
the nature of reality and existence; human cognition, affect and perception; the characteristics, uses 
and impacts of primitive, advanced and futuristic technologies; and the subtleties of interpersonal 
communication and human-technology interaction” (Lombard and Jones, 2015, 30).  

Lombard and Jones highlight the significance of the presence construct. However, they also reflect 
on the wide scope, the potential diversity of definitions, and hence the blurred concreteness of its 
very nature. There are other considerable problems with the presence construct. Biocca’s book 
problem addresses the technology-driven interpretation since presence can be experienced by 
imagination and/or in narratives presented in non-immersive media like books (Schubert and Crusius, 
2002). Then, presence models often expose a sole dependency on other qualia and constructs like the 
place, plausibility, and social presence illusions (Skarbez et al., 2017), or the virtual body ownership 
illusion (Latoschik et al., 2017; Waltemate et al., 2018). Even more, a central focus on a sense of 
“being there” for XR applications does not capture the essence of the many variations of XR covered 
by the Virtuality Continuum (Milgram and Kishino, 1994). In essence, if we want to guide designers 
and developers to create compelling XR applications and experiences as initially motivated by 

 
 
 
 Congruence and Plausibility 

(Heeter, 1992), we need well-defined qualities to strive for, with pragmatic ways to operationalize 
modifications to these qualities, and to provide clear-cut entry-points for a user-centered design 
process. 

Related Work  

There now is a considerable body of knowledge on presence, see excellent overviews in (Lombard et 
al., 2015; Skarbez et al., 2017). We follow (Lombard and Jones, 2015) and start by defining 
presence: The related quale mediated by XR-technology, i.e., the degree one believes that she 
exists within a mediated space (Jerome and Jordan, 2007), including concepts of virtual presence 
(Heeter, 1992) and telepresence: “The biggest challenge to developing telepresence is achieving that 
sense of ‘being there.’” (Minsky, 1980). Heeter concluded, „A question to guide designers of virtual 
worlds is how do I convince participants that they and the world exist?“ (Heeter, 1992). 

Slater and Wilbur proposed immersion as an objectively measurable (system) characteristics and 
stated that presence would be “the potential psychological and behavioral response to immersion” 
(Slater and Wilbur, 1997), opening up a pathway to (technically) manipulate presence experiences. 
Slater later proposed two orthogonal components of presence, the place illusion (PI) and the 
plausibility illusion (Psi) (Slater, 2009), a separation that received wide acceptance. Lately, Skarbez 
et al. extended on this model as depicted in Figure 1 (Skarbez et al., 2017). They define presence as 
the “the perceived realness of a mediated or virtual experience”. They further integrate additional 
constructs into their model, namely copresence and social presence, and specify Psi as well as 
copresence also to affect social presence. Finally, regarding the level of objectively measurable 
characteristics affecting the different presence components, they claim, “that presence arises from 
the immersion of the system (the sensorimotor and effective valid actions it supports), the coherence 

Figure 1: Relationships between presence concepts as proposed by Skarbez et al. (2017, 
96:23); layout re-designed by the authors and framed as “Skarbez-model”. 

Subjective internal 
feelings (qualia)
Function aﬀected by
individual diﬀerences

Objective characteristic
of the virtual experience

Presence

f

f

Social Presence 
Illusion

Place Illusion 
(PI)

f

Plausibility 
Illusion (Psi)

f

Copresence 
Illusion

f

f

Immersion

Company

Coherence

of the scenario, whether the virtual experience offers company to the user, and the individual 
characteristics of the user.” (96:23). 

Pre-print. To appear in Frontiers in VR. 

2 

 
 
 
 Congruence and Plausibility 

Discussion of Current Presence-Oriented XR Theories  

The proposed model by Skarbez (from now on Skarbez-model) is a well-motivated extension of the 
older two-component model by Slater (from now on Slater-model) based on the PI and the Psi, and 
immersion as the sole two objectively measurable (system) characteristic. Specifically, their 
introduction of coherence as a separate (measurable) characteristic opens up interesting perspectives. 
In addition, the identification of the influence of the Psi on social presence is well motivated. The 
Skarbez-model also integrates various findings from the literature about the many different aspects of 
presence, e.g., concerning social and co-presence, and hence fosters the understanding of some of the 
primary constructs relating to the study of virtual experiences. However, we argue that there are still 
potential theoretical and conceptual difficulties with the Skarbez-model, some rooting back to the 
older Slater-model as a precursor, e.g., when we make a distinct argument against the usage of the 
term illusion for qualia. We start the discussion by a set of questions about Skarbez-model’s 
propositions:  

I. Questions about the selection of constructs and their relations 

1.  Why are qualia arranged hierarchically? Shall it imply the feeling of being with someone to 
be less important than the feeling of being there? Any importance does not emerge from a 
theoretical order but from the kind of interaction, the kind of experience per se. Other qualia, 
such as the virtual body ownership illusion (VBOI) seem excluded arbitrarily, despite its 
indicated impact on presence, see, e.g., (Waltemate et al., 2018).  

2.  Why is the Psi affecting presence and social presence but not the PI? We argue that a 

successful PI is affected by the coherence and plausibility of spatial cues. Hence, the Skarbez-
model seems overly restrictive in its integration of plausibility in the overall theory, and, 
similarly, for its integration of coherence only contributing to the Psi. 

 II. Questions about construct layers and construct status 

3.  Why is presence in the Skarbez-model defined based on the perceived realness of an XR 
experience? We agree that realness in the sense of “in coherence with sensory stimuli by 
natural sources” plays a critical role on the sensory layer to achieve sufficient ergonomic 
qualities, e.g., to avoid unwanted effects like cybersickness (Stauffert et al., 2018, 2020). 
However, on higher levels, e.g., the cognitive layer, presence can be evoked via the PI by 
simple line renderings not resembling any real objects by form, color, or detail. 

4.  Why are the specific presence-related constructs called illusions? A quale is by definition a 
subjective conscious experience. From a perceptual point of view, an illusion occurs when a 
subjective perception lacks an objective representation. But XR provides perceivable 
objective representations corresponding to subjective perceptions. In this sense, the Skarbez-
model does identify presence as a quale and not an illusion but fails to do this for the 
contributing qualia, i.e., place illusion, plausibility illusion, social presence illusion, and 
copresence illusion.  

Some of these criticisms go far beyond a mere terminological debate and cannot be counteracted by 
simple extension of the model. For example, when we talk about illusions throughout such models 
then we are conceptually manifesting the overall separation into reality and virtuality as a form 
of deception. However, our models should be capable of convincingly describing where we assume 
the transfer from artificially generated stimuli to qualia occurs, and that the effects on the users are 
indistinguishable from similar effects caused by natural (non-artificial) stimuli. That does not imply 
that people do not know that they are in an artificial environment (as in the film The Matrix). 

3 

 
 
 
 Congruence and Plausibility 

Phenomenological, artificial objects and environments engender a proximate stimulus representation 
that corresponds to subjective perception. Besides, any subjective perception and experience, any 
qualia, must be assumed as real.   

Skarbez et al. (2017, 2020) also reflected on said illusion problem. They defined a quale to focus on 
perceived realness in contrast to actual realness as a function of a system’s ability to provide stimuli 
that match reality, i.e., a function of immersion and coherence. They also suggested discriminating 
between the Place Illusion as an illusory (false) feeling of being in a remote or virtual place and 
placeness as a feeling of being in a real place. We argue that there is nothing like a “false“ feeling. A 
quale is a subjective internal feeling which cannot be false or not real, at least from a 
phenomenological point of view. The sensory stimulations giving rise to a quale can be artificial, but 
do not render the effect “false”, nor do they make the artificial stimulation “false”. It is pragmatically 
just a distinction between the processes that generated said stimuli. Given a sufficient coherence 
between the quality of an artificial stimulus and the required or expected qualities as defined by our 
sensory, perceptual, and cognitive information processing layers, this distinction can subjectively 
vanish. 

Similarly, regarding the second question above, one can argue that the introduced objective 
characteristic of coherence affecting the Psi which then affects the social presence illusion and 
presence but not the PI is motivated by model-specific definitions of the concepts of coherence and 
plausibility. If one restricts the latter ones to only impact on a cognitive level, then it is easier to 
argue that they don’t necessarily also affect the PI. This makes the proposed model valid internally. 
Nevertheless, the introduction of concepts and terms to explain empirical findings should be done 
with care. One can, of course, define specific meanings to chosen terms upfront to precisely describe 
the intended interpretation. However, specifically with terms that have a common and widely used 
meaning, we would argue that it is best to stick with these definitions to strive for easy cognitive 
accessibility and make a model as much self-descriptive as possible. In this sense, we feel the 
Skarbez-model’s concepts of coherence and plausibility to be partly misleading. They seem not to 
capture all potential applications within a presence theory and to be restricted to a subset of concepts. 
For example, coherence of artificial visual stimuli with spatial cues expected on the sensory and 
perception layer can lead to a plausible evocation of spatial self-orientation and – depending on the 
degree of the substitution of visual stimuli from the physical environment around the user – to an 
evocation of the feeling of “being there”. Here, “there” would refer to a cognitive attribution of the 
sum of all spatial stimuli as to belong to an environment different from the physical environment 
around the user. 

We honestly value the models by Skarbez et al. (2017) and by Slater (2009) and any predecessors not 
discussed here. Our criticisms are meant to motivate discussions and advancements in the 
development of theoretical models of XR experiences. From an HCI view, such models should not 
only generate a consistent theory of the interrelation and potential influences of important constructs, 
factors, and characteristics. They should also support guidelines for designers and developers to 
exploit the vast design space of XR experiences and their impact on human behaviors. This includes 
predictable impact paths and systematically measurable and manipulable variables (Wienrich et al., 
2021) to acquire knowledge with practical impact.    

Beyond Presence: Congruence and Plausibility (CaP)  

This section proposes an alternative model of XR experiences. It builds upon Skarbez et al. (2017) 
and Slater (2009), taking the raised criticism into account. It also shifts away from presence, i.e., the 

Pre-print. To appear in Frontiers in VR. 

4 

 
 
 
 Congruence and Plausibility 

sense of “being there” (the PI), as the central quale to capture the many variations of XR covered by 
the Virtuality Continuum (VC) (Milgram and Kishino, 1994). The concept of the PI gets more and 
more blurred once we move along the VC towards the non-simulated real environment. At which 
point do we know that we are dealing with a Place Illusion, i.e., something that is mainly caused by 
simulated content, and when do we have to accept that spatial cues making us feel to be in a place are 
not simulated but stem from the real environment? Hence, in the wider scope of Mixed and 
Augmented Reality (MR & AR), the PI becomes much less prominent. 

Besides, XR technology and application development progress continuously, and its quality should 
likewise be evaluated. XR is already applied as a therapy system, mind, and behavior changer. 
Hence, we already know and accept that XR can bring users (real) experiences and causing (real) 
behavior. It might be comparable to the pragmatic quality in the user experience research. We 
presuppose that a technical device fulfills a specific function, but we are additionally interested in the 
hedonic, eudemonic, or social quality following the interaction with the device (Wienrich and 
Gramlich, 2020).  

We follow Slater (2009) and Skarbez et al. (2017) and adopt plausibility as the first component. 
Valid alternatives for plausibility include acceptance or suspension of disbelief (Cruz-Neira et al., 
1992; Heeter, 1992) but we focus for now on plausibility in analogy to former theoretical models. We 
also further specify coherence as congruence and include it as the second component of our proposed 
Congruence and Plausibility (CaP) model. Here, congruence is describing the objective match 
between processed and expected information on the sensory, perceptual, and cognitive layers.1  

However, in contrast to the discussed presence models, we don’t assume an illusion of plausibility 
but define plausibility as a state or condition during an XR experience that subjectively results 
from the evaluation and congruence of information processed by the sensory, perceptual, and 
cognitive layers. In our CaP-model, congruence and plausibility become central components 
affecting information processing on every level and giving rise to the acceptance and the suspension 
of disbelief (Heeter, 1992). Figure 2 illustrates the conceptual view of the proposed CaP-model 
including the main components and their relations. 

5 
1 Earlier versions of the CaP-model were still relying on coherence as its second component and first published follow-up 
works have adopted this. This is still valid since we see congruence as an ontological specification of coherence.   

 
 
 
 
 Congruence and Plausibility 

manipulation space

condition space

qualia space

n
o
i
t
i
n
g
o
c

n
o
i
t
p
e
c
r
e
p

n
o
i
t
a
s
n
e
s

higher-order
cues

social-cognitive 
processes, e.g., 
expectations

proximal perception 
cues

proximal perception 
experiences, e.g., 
conditioning

habitual sensory 
cues

genetics or life-long 
habitude 
perceptions

sensory
input

}

congruence

congruence

plausibility

congruence

presence

social presence

copresence

placeness

body ownership

}

function of weighted
congruence activations

congruence activations

Figure 2: Relationship between different XR-related qualia (including presence) and the 
contributing sensory information and cues proposed as an alternative new theoretical model 
for XR experiences and the related components. Congruence and plausibility of cues on the 
sensation, perception, and cognition levels take on a central role between the design and 
manipulation space of XR experiences and the evoked qualia. Plausibility emerges from a 
function of weighted congruence activations. 

The model assumes that plausibility arises from the congruence of cues on each of these layers. Each 
layer sets up a frame that defines the congruence conditions of how information is processed and 
interpreted and to which extent cues can be considered congruent. Here, the sensory layer exposes the 
base frame of information processing by setting the boundary conditions of how we transduce 
physical and physiological signals into neural signals. Permanently changing this frame is mainly 
restricted to genetic and epigenetic adaptions or cyber implants. Temporary modulation would 
include neuro-active drugs. The congruence conditions on this layer are accessible from biological 
and physiological knowledge. 

In contrast to the sensory layer, the frames for the interpretation of sensory information on the 
perceptual and cognitive layer exhibit much more accessible plasticity and manipulation space since 
they are additionally also shaped by the recipient's learning, memory, knowledge, mental model, 
expectation, and attention, i.e., proximal perception experiences and social-cognitive processes. 
Imagine simple animated line drawings on a 2D display. If the resulting patterns match comparable 
patterns generated by a perspective projection of forward/backward movements in a 3D tunnel, the 

Pre-print. To appear in Frontiers in VR. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 Congruence and Plausibility 

resulting perceptual congruency evokes vection independently of the underlying process generating 
the percepts, or any degree of realness or vividness. An example of cognitive congruency is a 
potential appearance match of a user’s avatar with her/his real physical appearance. While there is 
evidence that an increased match increases factors of presence or emotional response (Waltemate et 
al., 2018), or acceptance (Latoschik et al., 2017), an absolute congruence is not necessary to accept 
the virtual body as one’s own as demonstrated by the Proteus effect (Yee and Bailenson, 2007). 

Congruency is constituted by relations between the cues and the XR experience itself. The experience 
can be congruent in relation to the habitual sensory cues, proximal perceptual cues, or higher-order 
cognitive cues. Plausibility emerges from a function of weighted congruence activations. A weighted 
process models dynamically changing contributions of congruent and/or incongruent relations. For 
example, the narrative or the use (cognitive layer) of an XR experience can be quite compelling. 
Then lower sensory congruencies might contribute less strongly to plausibility and the corresponding 
quale. Besides, at least the sensory level of maximal congruence is reached at a certain technical 
advancement, since users’ given sensory capabilities can be considered fixed. Thus, with a certain 
level of technological development, the level of congruence stemming from sensory relations is 
constantly high, but the contribution to the plausibility emergence is still variable.   

The distinction into the different sensory information processing layers allows to pinpoint how 
congruence affects evaluation given a respective frame. It provides a clearer picture of the 
interrelated components while it is in line with Slater’s definitions of the PI to be constrained by the 
sensorimotor contingencies, i.e., how the world is perceived, and the Psi as the illusion that the 
scenario being depicted is actually occurring, i.e., what is perceived (Slater, 2009). The different cue 
levels, reaching from bottom-up to top-down, enable prediction and empirical testing of the resulting 
congruence and plausibility conditions. While the bottom-up framed congruence is primarily 
measured objectively and quantitatively, the top-down framed congruence is mostly assessable by 
subjective ratings, qualitative observations, or deceiving behavioral observations. However, the 
suggested XR experience model allows for systematic a priori predictions and post-hoc explanations.    

The proposed model also does not need to further define the resulting qualia’s exact meaning and is 
largely independent of this. In other words, the model is valid for those qualia researchers, designers, 
and developers are interested in. The procedure to predict a priori or explain post-hoc the relation 
between the manipulated cues and the conditions experienced in XR remains the same. For example, 
if a definition requires us to specify a certain degree of realism (as in the Skarbez-model) then it is up 
to the defining instance to specify the assumed layer(s) and respective cues precisely and designers 
can check if they can generate such cues in congruence with the expected qualities on that layer.  

Discussion 

This article proposed the CaP-model of XR experiences based on congruence and plausibility as 
central components. The proposal derived the central ideas and concepts from an analysis of 
promising components and of potential shortcomings of existing models by Slater (2009) and later 
Skarbez et al. (2017). We conclude with an assessment of our model regarding important 
requirements (typeset in italics) of such a model before we discuss limitations.   

In our opinion, the CaP-model possesses predictive and explanatory power of modern XR 
experiences. The manipulation space offers realizable and systematically controllable manipulations. 
Well-defined frames of interpretation of the cues enable congruence checks and then a priori 
predictions or post-hoc explanations of the influence of those cues on the plausibility condition and 

7 

 
 
 
 Congruence and Plausibility 

hence the corresponding qualia. For example, if the sensory layer determines how something is 
sensed, objective congruence tests can assure the desired quality (e.g., to assure a required frame rate 
or similar technical characteristics). On higher levels, user testing might be better suited. However, 
despite testing for the many potential qualia, we now only have to primarily test for plausibility of the 
cues defined upfront as being required to evoke a certain quale.  

Further, our CaP-model integrated the body of knowledge on presence and related XR constructs. 
Simultaneously, it is able to avoid the aforementioned potential shortcomings of the existing 
model(s). It arranges XR experience-related qualia at one level and postulates plausibility as one 
common constituting and pivotal factor and a corresponding testable approach of its emergence. It 
shifts the focus from place illusion and centered three cue layers influencing congruence and 
plausibility and then the considered qualia. Thus, the model proposes the same prediction paths, also 
resolving the question of inter-qualia-correlations. It resolves the often-inefficacious debate about the 
comparison with real-world experiences or the realness of XR experiences by accepting that XR is 
capable of bringing users (real) experiences and causing (real) behavior. In this sense, the proposed 
model identifies presence as a quale and not as an illusion and does this for other contributing qualia, 
such as social presence, copresence, placeness, and body ownership. Notably, we define plausibility 
as a true and for the user real condition during a XR experience rather than an illusion making the 
operationalization much easier. Questions can be formulated directly and do not rely on as-if 
comparisons. 

Similarly, our CaP-model also incorporates the valid and necessary distinction between qualia and 
objectively measurable characteristics (Slater and Wilbur, 1997, 8), e.g., as intended by the 
identification and definition of factors like immersion (Slater, 1999) or company and coherence 
(Skarbez et al., 2017). However, our proposed model essentially simplifies such influences by 
identifying them as variations of just one factor our model integrates as congruence, but in a much 
broader context compared to (Skarbez et al., 2017) since the model incorporates congruence on all 
three layers of sensation, perception and cognition. 

Limitations 

The present contribution is meant as a position paper taking empirical data verifying or falsifying the 
model out of scope. However, the present paper is a solid base for a set of such experiments in the 
future. Similarly, the validity and soundness requirements must be tested in future studies as well. 

Finally, our proposed model simplifies complex processes, as each model that tries to predict and 
explain human experience will have to do to a certain extent. The proposed model purposely does not 
claim any further details about the dependencies or interrelations between the different qualia and the 
resulting structure, e.g., a hierarchy of factors contributing to the overall construct of presence as 
proposed by (Skarbez et al., 2017). As we noted, in a recent experiment, we manipulated presence 
and measured a correlating change in virtual body ownership, and vice versa, giving rise to 
speculation of an additional latent constituting factor affecting both. The latter approach highlights 
how these potential relationships can be investigated and it already hints to a more complex interplay 
of components where the functional dependency is a) not directed unilaterally and/or b) hints to 
additional latent factors yet to be found. However, at this stage our proposed model purposely does 
not try to further highlight any qualia interrelations (on the right side of Figure 2) since it focuses on 
hypothesized congruences evoking plausibility of surrounding space, embodiment, company, social 
interaction, and the like. Simplifications risk implicating imprecision and a lack of detail. However, 

Pre-print. To appear in Frontiers in VR. 

8 

 
 
 
 Congruence and Plausibility 

they simultaneously are a necessary prerequisite for a successful generalization which in turn helps to 
facilitate understanding and practical usage.  

Conflict of Interest 

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. 

Author Contribution 

The authors have contributed equally to this work.  

Funding 

This publication was supported by the Open-Access Publication Fund of the University of Würzburg, 
by the XR Hub Bavaria, the German Ministry of Science and Education (BMBF) in the projects 
ViTraS (grant 16SV8219) and HiAvA (grant 16SV8781), and the EU in the project 
VIRTUALTIMES (grant 824128).  

Literature 

Cruz-Neira, C., Sandin, D. J., DeFanti, T. A., Kenyon, R. V, and Hart, J. C. (1992). The CAVE: 

audio visual experience automatic virtual environment. Commun. ACM 35, 64–72. 
doi:http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/129888.129892. 

Heeter, C. (1992). Being there: The subjective experience of presence. Presence Teleoperators 

Virtual Environ. 1, 262–271. 

Jerome, L. W., and Jordan, P. J. (2007). Psychophysiological perspective on presence: The 
implications of mediated environments on relationships, behavioral health and social 
construction. Psychol. Serv. 4, 75. 

Latoschik, M. E., Roth, D., Gall, D., Achenbach, J., Waltemate, T., and Botsch, M. (2017). The effect 

of avatar realism in immersive social virtual realities. in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM 
Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology (VRST), 39:1-39:10. 
doi:10.1145/3139131.3139156. 

Lombard, M., Biocca, F., Freeman, J., IJsselsteijn, W., and Schaevitz, R. J. (2015). Immersed in 
Media: Telepresence Theory, Measurement & Technology. , eds. M. Lombard, F. Biocca, J. 
Freeman, W. IJsselsteijn, and R. J. Schaevitz Springer International Publishing Available at: 
https://books.google.com/books?id=8dvyCQAAQBAJ. 

Lombard, M., and Jones, M. T. (2015). “Defining Presence,” in Immersed in Media: Telepresence 

Theory, Measurement & Technology, eds. M. Lombard, F. Biocca, J. Freeman, W. IJsselsteijn, 
and R. J. Schaevitz (Springer International Publishing). 

Milgram, P., and Kishino, F. (1994). A Taxonomy of Mixed Reality Visual Displays. IEICE Trans. 

Inf. Syst. E77-D, 1321–1329. Available at: 
http://vered.rose.utoronto.ca/people/paul_dir/IEICE94/ieice.html. 

Minsky, M. (1980). Telepresence. Omni 2, 45–51. 

9 

 
 
 
 Congruence and Plausibility 

Schubert, T., and Crusius, J. (2002). Five theses on the book problem: Presence in books, film and 
VR. in PRESENCE 2002-Proceedings of the fifth international workshop on Presence, 53–59. 

Skarbez, R., Brooks, F. P., and Whitton, M. C. (2020). Immersion and Coherence: Research Agenda 

and Early Results. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 27, 3839–3850. 
doi:10.1109/TVCG.2020.2983701. 

Skarbez, R., Brooks Jr., F. P., and Whitton, M. C. (2017). A Survey of Presence and Related 

Concepts. ACM Comput. Surv. 50, 96:1--96:39. doi:10.1145/3134301. 

Slater, M. (1999). Measuring Presence: A Response to the Witmer and Singer Presence 

Questionnaire. Presence: Teleoper. Virtual Environ. 8, 560–565. 
doi:10.1162/105474699566477. 

Slater, M. (2009). Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic behaviour in immersive virtual 
environments. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 364, 3549–3557. doi:10.1098/rstb.2009.0138. 

Slater, M., and Wilbur, S. (1997). A framework for immersive virtual environments (FIVE): 

Speculations on the role of presence in virtual environments. Presence Teleoperators virtual 
Environ. 6, 603–616. 

Stauffert, J.-P., Niebling, F., and Latoschik, M. E. (2018). Effects of Latency Jitter on Simulator 

Sickness in a Search Task. in Proceedings of the 25th IEEE Virtual Reality Conference (IEEE 
VR), 121–127. 

Stauffert, J.-P., Niebling, F., and Latoschik, M. E. (2020). Latency and Cybersickness: Impact, 

Causes, and Measures. A Review. Front. Virtual Real. 1, 31. Available at: 
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/frvir.2020.582204. 

Waltemate, T., Gall, D., Roth, D., Botsch, M., and Latoschik, M. E. (2018). The Impact of Avatar 

Personalization and Immersion on Virtual Body Ownership, Presence, and Emotional Response. 
IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 24, 1643–1652. 

Wienrich, C., Döllinger, N., and Hein, R. (2021). Behavioral Framework of Immersive Technologies 
(BehaveFIT): How and Why Virtual Reality can Support Behavioral Change Processes. Front. 
Virtual Real. 2, 84. doi:10.3389/frvir.2021.627194. 

Wienrich, C., and Gramlich, J. (2020). appRaiseVR – An Evaluation Framework for Immersive 

Experiences. i-com 19, 103–121. 

Yee, N., and Bailenson, J. (2007). The Proteus effect: The effect of transformed self-representation 

on behavior. Hum. Commun. Res. 33, 271–290. 

Pre-print. To appear in Frontiers in VR. 

10 

 
 
 
 
