1
2
0
2

r
p
A
9
2

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
7
0
6
4
1
.
4
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

The origin and evolution of magnetic white dwarfs in close
binary stars

Matthias R. Schreiber1,2,∗, Diogo Belloni3,1,∗, Boris T. G¨ansicke4, Steven G. Parsons5, Monica

Zorotovic6

1Departamento de F´ısica, Universidad T´ecnica Federico Santa Mar´ıa, Av. Espa˜na 1680, Val-

para´ıso, Chile

2Millennium Nucleus for Planet Formation (NPF), Valpara´ıso, Chile

3National Institute for Space Research, Av. dos Astronautas, 1758, 12227-010, S˜ao Jos´e dos Cam-

pos, SP, Brazil

4Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK

5Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld S3 7RH, UK

6Instituto de F´ısica y Astronom´ıa, Universidad de Valpara´ıso, Av. Gran Breta˜na 1111, Valpara´ıso,

Chile

∗These authors contributed equally to this work

The origin of magnetic ﬁelds in white dwarfs remains a fundamental unresolved problem in

stellar astrophysics. In particular, the very different fractions of strongly (>

∼ 1 MG) magnetic

white dwarfs in evolutionarily linked populations of close white dwarf binary stars cannot

be reproduced by any scenario suggested so far. Strongly magnetic white dwarfs are absent

among detached white dwarf binary stars that are younger than approximately 1 Gyr. In

contrast, in semi-detached cataclysmic variables in which the white dwarf accretes from a

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
low-mass star companion, more than one third host a strongly magnetic white dwarf1. Here

we present binary star evolutionary models that include the spin evolution of accreting white

dwarfs and crystallization of their cores, as well as magnetic ﬁeld interactions between both

stars. We show that a crystallization- and rotation-driven dynamo similar to those working

in planets and low-mass stars2 can generate strong magnetic ﬁelds in the white dwarfs in cat-

aclysmic variables which explains their large fraction among the observed population. When

the magnetic ﬁeld generated in the white dwarfs connects with that of the secondary stars,

synchronization torques and reduced angular momentum loss cause the binary to detach for

a relatively short period of time. The few known strongly magnetic white dwarfs in detached

binaries, including AR Sco3, are in this detached phase.

The vast majority of close binary stars containing at least one white dwarf form through common

envelope evolution4. The emerging detached post common envelope binary stars evolve towards

shorter orbital periods driven by angular momentum loss5 and eventually become semi-detached

cataclysmic variable stars (CVs)6. Despite this clear evolutionary link, the fraction of strongly

magnetic white dwarfs differs drastically between both types of close white dwarf binaries.

We know more than 160 CVs with a strongly (larger than 1 MG) magnetic white dwarf7.

In most of these systems the white dwarf accretes from its Roche-lobe ﬁlling low-mass star com-

panion along the magnetic ﬁeld lines. Due to interactions of the magnetic ﬁelds of both stars,

the rotation of the white dwarf is synchronised with the orbital motion of the secondary star, such

systems are called polars. In a smaller but still important fraction of CVs, the magnetic ﬁeld of the

2

white dwarf disrupts the inner parts of the accretion disk but the magnetic ﬁelds of both stars do

not connect. In these so-called intermediate polars the rotation of the white dwarf and the orbital

motion are therefore not synchronised8. A recent study of a volume-limited sample has shown that

over a third of all CVs contain a magnetic white dwarf, with polars and intermediate polars making

up approximately 29 and 7 per cent of the total population1.

The situation is very different among the detached systems that are believed to be the pro-

genitors of CVs. Only 15 strongly magnetic white dwarfs in close detached binaries are currently

known9, 10 and they make up less than two per cent of the over one thousand known systems11, 12.

All but one of these detached magnetic white dwarf binaries have been identiﬁed due to a pecu-

liar emission line13, which turned out to be the third harmonic of a cyclotron fundamental emitted

by a low-density plasma. This observational ﬁnding is convincingly interpreted as resulting from

wind accretion onto a strongly magnetic white dwarf in a close but detached binary14. Because

angular momentum loss will eventually drive them into a semi-detached CV conﬁguration, these

systems have been termed pre-polars9. The only exception is AR Sco, which was discovered be-

cause of the optical and radio pulses of its rapidly (1.97 min) rotating white dwarf3. AR Sco and

most pre-polars are located in the orbital period range between 3 and 5 hours, their secondary stars

are close to ﬁlling their Roche-lobes (R/RL typically exceeding 80 per cent)10, and the magnetic

white dwarfs are cold with effective temperatures typically below 10,000 K which implies that they

formed at least one Gyr ago. Among younger close detached white dwarf binaries, not a single

strongly magnetic white dwarf has been found15, 16. This puzzling situation, a large fraction (ap-

proximately 35 per cent) of strongly magnetic white dwarfs in CVs and the much smaller fraction

3

of magnetic white dwarfs among the detached systems that are believed to be CV progenitors, was

aptly expressed by Liebert15 who asked Where Are the Magnetic White Dwarfs with Detached,

Non-degenerate Companions? This fundamental question of stellar evolution has remained with-

out an answer for 15 years and the solution must link the evolution of white dwarf binaries and

magnetic ﬁeld generation in white dwarfs.

Several hypotheses have been put forward to explain magnetic ﬁeld generation in white

dwarfs in the last decades.

In their present form, the fossil ﬁeld scenario17, a dynamo operat-

ing during common envelope evolution18, or coalescing double white dwarfs19 face one serious

problem when considered as the main formation mechanism for close magnetic white dwarf bina-

ries. In all these cases the magnetic ﬁelds are generated during the formation process of the white

dwarf, i.e. according to the current versions of these theories also detached post common envelope

binaries containing hot white dwarfs should host strong magnetic ﬁelds which is clearly not the

case16.

As the only mechanism that depends on the age of the white dwarf, a dynamo similar to those

operating in low-mass main-sequence stars and planets2 has been suggested to operate if the white

dwarf is rotating rapidly when the core of the white dwarf is crystallizing20. As a white dwarf

with a Carbon/Oxygen core cools, the ions in the core begin to freeze in a lattice structure. During

crystallization the chemical potential, temperature, and pressure of the liquid and solid phases

must remain equal. As a consequence, in crystallizing white dwarfs the solid phase becomes

richer in oxygen and sinks while the carbon excess mixes with the outer liquid envelope which

4

is redistributed by Rayleigh–Taylor instabilities. This conﬁguration is similar to that found in the

core of the Earth, where the light element release associated with the inner core growth is a primary

driver of the dynamo generating the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld21.

The predicted ﬁeld strengths generated by this dynamo in white dwarfs depend entirely on

the scaling law that is assumed. Applying the same scaling law that is used for planetary magnetic

ﬁelds leads to ﬁeld strengths in white dwarfs of up to approximately 1 MG20. However, taking into

account a likely dependence of the dynamo efﬁciency on the magnetic Prandtl number and that

in white dwarfs this number is orders of magnitudes larger than in planets, one could expect this

dynamo to be able to generated ﬁelds much stronger than 1 MG (for more details see Methods).

Assuming that the crystallization and rotation driven dynamo can generate strong magnetic

ﬁelds we computed evolutionary tracks starting with non-magnetic post common envelope bina-

ries. We incorporated several physical mechanisms in the stellar evolution code MESA22. The

spin-up of the white dwarf due to the accretion of angular momentum23 was included as well as

crystallization of the white dwarf24. We furthermore incorporated the reduction in angular momen-

tum loss through magnetic braking when the magnetic ﬁelds of both stars connect25, a condition

for synchronisation26, and a prescription for angular momentum transfer from the spin of the white

dwarf to the orbit during synchronisation (see Methods for more details).

Figure 1 shows an exemplary evolutionary track resulting from our simulations and a schematic

illustration of the different stages the system passes through. In our model the white dwarf is born

without a strong magnetic ﬁeld which is in agreement with the absence of strongly magnetic white

5

dwarfs in young close detached post common envelope binaries (stage 1). The non-magnetic de-

tached binary star then evolves slowly towards shorter orbital periods and the white dwarf cools.

When the secondary ﬁlls its Roche-lobe the binary becomes a CV, accretion spins up the white

dwarf23 and the core may be crystallizing (stage 2). If this happens, both conditions for the crystal-

lization and rotation driven dynamo are met and a strong magnetic ﬁeld is generated (stage 3). If

the magnetic ﬁeld is strong enough to connect with the ﬁeld of the secondary star the latter provides

a synchronising torque on the white dwarf spin. The spin angular momentum transferred to the

orbital motion due to the synchronising torque causes the secondary to detach from its Roche-lobe.

This effect is supported by the fact that the connection of the two magnetospheres reduces angular

momentum loss due to magnetic wind braking because part of the gas escaping from the secondary

is accreted by the white dwarf along the connected ﬁeld lines, instead of leaving the system25. At

the beginning of synchronisation the system becomes a radio pulsing white dwarf binary, such

as AR Sco, in which a rapidly rotating white dwarf spins down on a relatively short time scale

(stage 4) of approximately 1

−

10 Myr. When the white dwarf spin is synchronised with the orbital

motion of the secondary star, the binary star has evolved into the pre-polar stage in which wind

accretion generates the observed cyclotron emission (stage 5). Angular momentum loss through

reduced magnetic braking and gravitational radiation brings the stars closer together until the sec-

ondary again ﬁlls its Roche-lobe and ﬁnally a polar is formed (stage 6). The detached phase (stage

3-5) occurs preferentially for orbital periods shorter than roughly 5 hr as the reduction of magnetic

braking and the transfer of spin angular momentum to the orbit have less impact at longer periods.

Detached phases occur less frequently at orbital periods shorter than approximately 3 hr because

6

the conditions for magnetic ﬁeld generation are typically met at early stages of CV evolution (see

Methods for a detailed comparison of observations and model predictions).

While a different mechanism such as common envelope merger18 and/or double white dwarf

merger19 is probably required to explain most single white dwarfs with magnetic ﬁeld strengths

exceeding 1 MG (see Supplementary Material for details), the new evolutionary sequence predicted

by our model is in excellent agreement with the observations of close binary stars containing

strongly magnetic white dwarfs. As the conditions for the dynamo are relatively frequently met in

CVs (see Supplementary Material for a discussion of the predicted relative numbers), our model

successfully reproduces the large fraction of CVs containing magnetic white dwarfs. The few

known detached binaries containing magnetic white dwarfs are not progenitors of CVs but instead

systems that have been non-magnetic CVs in the past and where mass transfer stopped because the

ﬁeld was generated. This naturally explains why there is not one single hot and young strongly

magnetic white dwarf in a detached binary. Instead our model predicts that all of them are older

than 1 Gyr with crystallizing cores as is observed (Fig. 2) and also explains why all 15 currently

known close detached binaries containing magnetic white dwarfs are close to Roche-lobe ﬁlling

(Supplementary Figure 1). Furthermore, the observed clustering of pre-polars in the orbital period

range of 3

−

5 hr is well reproduced in our simulations as the detached phase typically occurs in

this range. Finally, our evolutionary sequence predicts short phases of rapidly rotating and strongly

magnetic white dwarfs in detached binaries thereby offering an explanation for the existence of the

radio pulsating system AR Sco. We conclude that a dynamo-driven generation of magnetic ﬁelds

in white dwarfs resolves several long standing problems at once.

7

Fig. 1. Spin period, Roche-lobe ﬁlling factor, and mass transfer rate as a function of orbital period.

The slowly rotating white dwarf (stage 1) in a non-magnetic post common envelope binary is

spun-up due to accretion (stage 2). In case the white dwarf is crystallizing a strong magnetic ﬁeld

is generated by a dynamo (stage 3) and as soon as it connects with the ﬁeld of the secondary the

system becomes detached. At ﬁrst it resembles the radio pulsing white dwarf binary AR Sco (stage

4). When the spin of the white dwarf and the orbital motion are synchronised (stage 5) the system

becomes a pre-polar before mass transfer starts again (stage 6). When the secondary becomes

fully convective, a second short detached phase (between

2.07 and

≈

≈

2.09 Gyr) occurs which

represents a short version of the classical orbital period gap (hatched region).

8

102103104PWD(s)PWD=PorbPWD=0.1PorbPWD=0.01PorbPWD=0.001PorbStage2Stage3Stage4Stage5Stage61.831.861.901.952.43.0Porb(hr)0.920.940.960.981.00R2/RL2Stage1Stage2Stage3Stage4Stage5Stage62.02.53.03.54.04.55.0Porb(hr)10 1110 1010 910 8 ˙M2(M yr 1)Stage1Stage2Stage3&4&5Stage61.551.451.40Age(Gyr)  Stage 2 (non-magnetic CV)Stage 1 (non-magnetic PCEB)Stage 3 (magnetic field generation)Stage 4 (AR Sco)Stage 5 (pre-polar)Stage 6 (polar) Fig.1.Spinperiod,Roche-lobeﬁllingfactor,andmasstransferrateasafunctionoforbitalperiod.144Theslowlyrotatingwhitedwarf(stage1)inanon-magneticpostcommonenvelopebinaryis145spun-upduetoaccretion(stage2).Incasethewhitedwarfiscrystallizingastrongmagneticﬁeld146isgeneratedbyadynamo(stage3)andassoonasitconnectswiththeﬁeldofthesecondarythe147systembecomesdetached.AtﬁrstitresemblestheradiopulsingwhitedwarfbinaryARSco(stage1484).Whenthespinofthewhitedwarfandtheorbitalmotionaresynchronised(stage5)thesystem149becomesapre-polarbeforemasstransferstartsagain(stage6).Whenthesecondarybecomes150fullyconvective,asecondshortdetachedphase(between⇡2.07and⇡2.09Gyr)occurswhich151representsashortversionoftheclassicalorbitalperiodgap(hatchedregion).1528Fig. 2 Observed white dwarf effective temperatures versus their masses for non-magnetic post

common envelope binaries from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (light gray)12, 27, pre-polars (red)10,

and the ﬁrst radio pulsing white dwarf binary AR Sco (blue)3, 28. The errors on the observations

correspond to 1 σ and arrows indicate upper limits. The lines represents the mass fraction of

crystallized matter in the white dwarf interiors. Solid, dashed, dash-dotted and dotted lines show

the temperature for each white dwarf mass corresponding to the onset of crystallization, 10 per cent

of mass is crystallized, 50 per cent and 80 per cent, respectively24. As predicted by our scenario,

magnetic systems host on average much older and more massive white dwarfs than their non-

magnetic counterparts. The trend towards larger masses in magnetic systems is totally consistent

with the observed white dwarf mass distribution in cataclysmic variables29, 30 which ﬁts with the

model prediction that these systems have been CVs in the past. In addition, the white dwarfs in

AR Sco and all pre-polars are consistent with having crystallizing cores.

9

0.20.40.60.81.01.21.4whitedwarfmass(M(cid:12))102030507090whitedwarftemperature(103K)non-magneticpre-polarsARScoMethods

The convective dynamo and scaling laws. The magnetic ﬁelds of Earth and Jupiter, as well

as those of rapidly rotating low-mass stars, are generated by convection-driven dynamos. The

basic ingredients for these dynamos to work are a strong density stratiﬁcation, and an extended

convection zone. To derive the magnetic ﬁeld strength from fundamental properties of a given

planet or star the use of scaling laws is required. In general it is neither clear which quantities need

to be considered in these scaling laws nor whether a single scaling law exists for all planets and stars

whose magnetic ﬁelds are generated by the convective dynamo. In the last decades, several scaling

laws have been proposed, most of them based on the assumption of a balance between Coriolis

force and Lorentz force31. In recent years a scaling law derived from geo-dynamo models32 which

assumes the energy ﬂux to be the dominant parameter has become popular. This scaling law has

been shown to successfully explain the ﬁeld strengths of Earth and Jupiter as well as those of

rapidly rotating fully convective stars2.

In the ﬁrst application of the convective dynamo mechanism to white dwarfs this energy ﬂux

scaling law was assumed20. The vast majority of white dwarfs consist of Carbon and Oxygen.

As a white dwarf cools, the ions in the core begin to freeze in a lattice structure33. The phase

diagram of the carbon–oxygen mixture is of the spindle form34, 35, therefore, as soon as the white

dwarf has sufﬁciently cooled and starts to crystallize, the solid phase becomes richer in oxygen and

sinks while the carbon excess mixes with the outer liquid envelope. As a consequence, an oxygen-

rich core forms which is signiﬁcantly denser than the carbon-rich liquid which is redistributed

10

by the Rayleigh–Taylor instability36, 37. Such a strong density stratiﬁcation in combination with

convection represent the key ingredients for the dynamo generating the Earth’s magnetic ﬁelds and

those of low-mass stars. Assuming the same scaling law that has been successfully applied to the

Earth, Jupiter, and rapidly rotating fully convective stars for crystallizing white dwarfs predicts

ﬁeld strengths of at most a few MG20 which, if true, would exclude the dynamo from being the

mechanism generating the much stronger 1

−

200 MG ﬁelds found in white dwarfs in close binary

stars.

Here we argue that this scaling law is most likely not applicable to white dwarfs. In the

magneto hydrodynamic simulations that led to the energy ﬂux scaling law, the magnetic Prandtl

number (Pm, deﬁned as the ratio between viscous and magnetic diffusivity) is assumed to be equal

to one. However, in both fully convective stars as well as the Earth this number is signiﬁcantly

smaller (10−4

−

10−5 and 10−6, respectively). To quote the discovery paper32 of the energy ﬂux

scaling law “we cannot rule out an additional dependence on other parameters, in particular the

magnetic Prandtl number. Although the suggested dependence is weak, it poses a serious problem.

Given the large range of extrapolation over ﬁve orders of magnitude from our models to planetary

values of Pm, the results obtained from the scaling laws with or without a dependence on Pm

differ substantially.” This early statement has been conﬁrmed more recently by Brandenburg38

who wrote: “This leads to a scaling law that has been veriﬁed over many orders of magnitude

(Christensen et al. 2009). As we have seen, this scaling law must be affected by Pm...”. Given that

the magnetic Prandtl number for crystallizing white dwarfs has been estimated to be 0.5820, i.e.

roughly six orders of magnitude larger than that of the Earth and still 4

5 orders of magnitude

−

11

larger than that of fully convective low-mass stars, the dynamo could be more efﬁcient in white

dwarfs.

In fact, the comparison between predicted and observed ﬁeld strengths of single white dwarfs

presented by Isern et al.20 indeed indicates that observed ﬁelds in crystallizing single white dwarfs

exceed those predicted by the energy ﬂux scaling law. The energy ﬂux scaling law is only appli-

cable in the saturated regime of the dynamo, i.e. it only works for rapidly rotating objects with

Rossby numbers below

∼

0.1. For white dwarfs, this implies spin periods shorter than

90 s20. In

∼

white dwarfs that rotate substantially slower, the generated ﬁelds should be smaller than those pre-

dicted by the energy ﬂux scaling law. All the observed magnetic single white dwarfs within 20 pc

(Table 1 of Isern et al.20) rotate with periods ranging from hours to days. Despite rotating orders

of magnitudes too slow for the energy ﬂux scaling law to be applicable (which is applicable in the

saturated regime), the ﬁeld strengths of these white dwarfs even slightly exceed those predicted by

the energy ﬂux scaling law. This implies that, if a convection driven dynamo works in crystallizing

and rotating white dwarfs, the energy ﬂux scaling law underestimates the ﬁeld strengths of slowly

rotating single white dwarfs. The ﬁeld strengths of rapidly rotating white dwarfs in the saturated

regime should therefore as well largely exceed those predicted by the energy ﬂux scaling law. A

suitably revised scaling law that incorporates the dependence on the magnetic Prandtl number is

therefore likely to predict ﬁelds much stronger than

1 MG for white dwarfs that rotate in the

∼

saturated regime of the dynamo.

Based on the above arguments, we here assumed that a rapidly rotating white dwarf (PWD (cid:39)

12

20

−

30 s) with a fractional crystallized mass between 10 and 80 percent can drive a dynamo that

generates the large magnetic ﬁeld strengths observed in white dwarfs in cataclysmic variables (up

to several 100 MG). We calculate the evolution of close detached white dwarf binaries and cata-

clysmic variables (CVs) using MESA22, taking into account the spin-up due to accretion and crys-

tallization due to cooling of the white dwarf as well as magnetic ﬁeld generation if a crystallizing

white dwarf rotates rapidly.

Spin-up of the white dwarf. If a white dwarf accretes from an accretion disk in a CV its angu-

lar momentum and therefore its angular velocity increases, while during nova eruptions the white

dwarf looses mass and angular momentum. According to King et al.23, the resulting angular mo-

mentum balance for an accreting white dwarf is given by

I

dω
dt

= α (

˙M2 ) (G MWD RWD )1/2 + (1 + (cid:15))

−

(cid:16)

˙M2 η R2

WD ω

(cid:17)

,

(1)

where ω is the white dwarf spin, I its moment of inertia, G the gravitational constant,

˙M2 the mass

transfer rate averaged over nova cycles, and MWD and RWD are the white dwarf mass and radius.

The ﬁrst term in the right-hand part of the equation corresponds to the spin-up due to accre-

tion, while the second term represents the spin-down due to material leaving the white dwarf during

nova eruptions. The parameter 0

α

≤

≤

1 represents the spin-up efﬁciency, which might be smaller

than one due to mass loss processes not considered in equation Eq. 1 (e.g. winds from the inner ac-

cretion disk or jets from the boundary layer/white dwarf). The parameter 0

(cid:15) = ˙MWD/ ˙M2 ≤
relates the mass loss of the white dwarf to the mass transfer rate. The range of possible val-

≤

1

ues reﬂects the fact that the white dwarf mass might decrease over a nova cycle, i.e. more mass

13

might be expelled during a nova eruption than was accreted between two eruptions. The parameter

0

η

≤

≤

1 represents the square of the radius of gyration of the ejected envelope and depends on

the geometry of nova eruptions.

By solving the non-homogeneous differential equation 1, the WD spin as a function of the

donor mass is given by

ω =

C1
C2

+ C3 exp ( C2 M2 ) ,

where M2 is the donor mass in solar masses and the terms C1, C2 and C3 are given by

C1 = α

A
k2

ωbk,0
MWD,0

C2 =

(cid:18)

C3 =

η
k2 MWD
C1
C2

ω0 −

( 1 + ε ) + B ε

(cid:19)

exp (

−

C2 M2,0)

where ωbk is the break-up white dwarf spin, given by
(cid:115)(cid:18) MWD
M(cid:12)

GMWD
R3

ωbk =

= 2 π

(cid:115)

WD

(cid:19)−3

(cid:19) (cid:18)RWD
au

yr−1 .

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

The moment of inertia I is k2MWDR2

WD, with k given by 0.452 + 0.0853 log10 (1

MWD/1.44M(cid:12)),

−

if MWD (cid:46) 1.368 M(cid:12), and

≈

0.275, if MWD (cid:38) 1.368 M(cid:12). The constants A and B are given by

(cid:34)

A =

1

−
1

−

0.61 ( MWD,0/M(cid:12) )4/3
0.61 ( MWD/M(cid:12) )4/3

(cid:35)3/4

,

B =

3

3.05 ( MWD/M(cid:12) )4/3
(cid:104)
1

0.61 ( MWD/M(cid:12) )4/3(cid:105) +

−

1

−

0.051 ( MWD/M(cid:12) )

k [ 1

−

0.69 ( MWD/M(cid:12) )]

.

(7)

(8)

The sub-index 0 in some quantities indicates their initial values just after the common-envelope

evolution.

14

Synchronisation of the white dwarf. In accreting high-ﬁeld magnetic white dwarf binaries the

magnetic ﬁeld dominates the accretion process. For sufﬁciently strong white dwarf magnetic mo-

ments, the overﬂowing material is channelled along the white dwarf’s magnetic ﬁeld lines as soon

as the magnetic pressure dominates the gas ram pressure. For such strong white dwarf magnetic

ﬁelds, the interaction of the magnetospheres of the white dwarf and the donor cause a synchroniz-

ing torque on the white dwarf39.

We assume here that the onset of synchronization occurs when the synchronizing torque is

greater than the accretion torque (assuming that the magnetospheres of the white dwarf and the

donor are connected)26, i.e.

µWD

1033 G cm3 > 1.11

(cid:16) − ˙M2
1016 g/s

(cid:17) (cid:16) Mtot
M(cid:12)

(cid:17)1/3 (cid:16) M2
M(cid:12)

(cid:17)−1 (cid:0) Porb
hr

(cid:1)1/3 (cid:0) B2
100 G

(cid:1)−1 (cid:104)

0.5

0.277 log10

−

(cid:17)(cid:105)2

(cid:16) M2
MWD

(9)

where µWD is the white dwarf magnetic moment, M2 is the donor mass, Mtot = MWD + M2 is

the binary total mass, Porb is the orbital period and B2 is the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld of the

secondary star.

Once the condition provided by Equation 9 is satisﬁed, the spin-down process starts. For

simplicity, we assume that the white dwarf spin decreases exponentially on a given time-scale, i.e.

ω(t) = Ω + Ce−t/τ

(10)

where τ is the synchronisation time-scale, Ω the orbital angular velocity, ω the WD spin, and

C = ω0 −

Ω is a constant (because variations in Ω are negligible during the spin-down phase).

15

This assumption gives

dω
dt

(Ω

=

ω)

.

−
τ

(11)

This equation of course represents a very crude approximation of a very complicated process.

The torque on the primary as a function of asynchronism has been calculated previously in great

detail40, but only for rather small asynchronism. Performing such detailed calculations of the

magnetic ﬁeld interaction for the large asynchronism in our systems, is beyond the scope of this

paper. For the purpose of this paper, we assume that the total angular momentum loss by the white

dwarf is transferred to the secondary, incorporated in the orbital motion, and that this occurs on the

time-scale τ , i.e.

˙Jorb =

d
dt

−

(ωI) = I

Ω)

(ω

−
τ

> 0.

(12)

In this simple model the torque is always decreasing with increasing synchronism which might not

be correct40. However, this should not affect the validity of our model as only the amount of spin

angular momentum transferred to the orbit and the time scale on which this happen are important

for the secular evolution of a given system.

Reduced magnetic braking. For secondary stars still containing a radiative core, angular momen-

tum loss through magnetic wind braking drives mass transfer in CVs6,11. The strength of magnetic

braking depends signiﬁcantly on the extension of wind zones compared to dead zones. The latter

correspond to regions where gas is prevented from escaping the star due to the pressure of closed

magnetic ﬁeld loops, i.e. the magnetic pressure is greater than the thermal pressure41. If the white

dwarf in a CV is strongly magnetic and the magnetospheres of both stars connect, the wind zone is

reduced which leads to a decrease of orbital angular momentum loss due to magnetic braking42, 43.

16

For short orbital periods and/or strong magnetic ﬁelds, angular momentum loss through magnetic

braking can be completely suppressed.

The reduction of magnetic braking for a given µWD can be parametrized with the fraction of

open ﬁeld lines (Φ). In the extreme case of no wind zone, i.e. µWD is strong enough to prevent

any magnetic braking, Φ = 0.0. On the other hand, in case the impact of the magnetic moment

is negligible, the second dead zone does not exist and magnetic braking is not reduced, leading to

Φ = 0.258. This prescription for the reduction of MB depends on the binary parameters and µWD,

and therefore allows us to incorporate the impact of strong WD magnetic ﬁelds in binary evolution

codes42,25.

The resulting angular momentum loss due to magnetic braking in the presence of a strongly

magnetic white dwarf ( ˙JMB,mag) can be written as

˙JMB,mag = ˙JMB,non−mag

(cid:18) Φ

(cid:19)5/3

0.258

,

(13)

where ˙JMB,non−mag is the angular momentum loss due to magnetic braking in non-magnetic CVs.

In this work we used the widely adopted RVJ prescription44, with γ = 3, i.e.

˙JMB,non−mag =

3.8

−

×

10−30

(cid:19)

(cid:18) M2
g

R4
(cid:12)

(cid:18) R2
R(cid:12)

(cid:19)3 (cid:18) Ω2
s−1

(cid:19)3

,

(14)

where R2 is the donor radius and Ω2 is the donor spin, which is the same as the orbital angular

velocity. This reduced magnetic braking model has been incorporated in binary population models

of magnetic CVs and has been shown to convincingly reproduce the orbital period distribution of

magnetic CVs25 and we here implemented the same prescription in MESA.

17

Modelling magnetic CV evolution with MESA. The above described effects were incorpo-

rated in the stellar evolution code Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics (MESA) (ver-

sion r10108)45–48,22. The MESA equation of state is a blend of the OPAL49, SCVH50, PTEH51,

HELM52, and PC53 equation of states. Radiative opacities are primarily from OPAL54, 55, being the

regime low-temperature dominated56 or high-temperature, Compton-scattering dominated57. Elec-

tron conduction opacities are also included58. Nuclear reaction rates are a combination of rates

from NACRE59, JINA REACLIB60, plus additional tabulated weak reaction rates61–63. Screening

is included64 as well as thermal neutrino loss65. Roche lobe radii in binary systems are computed

using Eggleton’s ﬁt66 and mass transfer rates in Roche lobe overﬂowing binary systems are deter-

mined following Ritter’s prescription67.

The parameters of our standard model were set as follows. During the whole CV evolution

we assumed that all material accreted by the WD is lost through nova eruptions. In Equation 1,

this corresponds to setting (cid:15) = 0. For the geometry of nova shells, we assumed that mass leaves

the WD with some asymmetry (i.e. neither completely spherical nor radial), which implies values

of η in Eq. 1 between 2/3 and 1. We set η = 2.5/3. Additional mass loss from the system68, 69

was taken into account by using α = 0.75 in Equation 1. The donor magnetic ﬁeld was assumed

to be B2 = 1 kG, which is consistent with recent measurements of ﬁeld strengths of low-mass

stars70. We ﬁxed the WD mass to 0.8 M(cid:12), which corresponds to the average value found among

observed CVs29,71. For the white dwarf magnetic ﬁeld, we assume BWD = 60 MG, which is

slightly stronger than the average ﬁeld strength of polars7, but corresponds to the average ﬁeld

strength found in pre-polars9. We assumed that the dynamo is efﬁcient only if the core of the

18

white dwarf is crystallizing (between 10 and 80 per cent crystallized) and the spin period of the

white dwarf is

20

−

(cid:39)

30 s. Finally, for the synchronisation time-scale, we set τ = 1 Myr, which

is consistent with the expected rapid spin-down in close binaries harbouring a rapidly rotating

magnetic white dwarf such as AR Sco3.

Using this set of parameters our model can reproduce the observations of magnetic detached

and semi-detached close white dwarf binary stars (Supplementary Figure 1). According to this

model, pre-polars and AR Sco have been CVs in the past and at that time the strong magnetic

ﬁelds of their white dwarfs were generated. This prediction is in perfect agreement with the cool

white dwarf temperatures of these detached systems, with them being close to Roche-lobe ﬁlling,

and with their preferred occurrence in the 3-5 hr orbital period range.

We emphasise that no ﬁne-tuning was required to obtain this agreement. In contrast, the

model naturally explains the observations and variations of the key parameters do not affect the

general predictions (Supplementary Figures 2, 3 and 4). For instance, by changing the spin-up

parameters (i.e. α, η and (cid:15)), the only effect is to accelerate or delay the spin-up of the white dwarf

and slightly change the minimum spin period that can be reached23. For all reasonable values of

these parameters the white dwarf will manage to spin-up to sufﬁciently large spin rates so that the

conditions for generating strong magnetic ﬁelds can eventually be met.

Similarly, varying the synchronisation time-scale τ affects the synchronising torque but does

not change the evolutionary sequence (Supplementary Figure 2). The shorter τ , the stronger the

spin-down torque and therefore the longer the detached phase. Only for τ (cid:38) 100 Myr, the detached

19

phase can be fully prevented if, in addition, the magnetic ﬁeld strength of the white dwarf does not

exceed

∼

200 MG. The latter condition arises as for very strong ﬁelds reduced magnetic braking

alone can cause the system to detach in full analogy to the mechanism producing the classic orbital

period gap.

A slightly stronger constraint on the synchronisation time scale results from the fact that it

should not exceed the duration of the generated detached phase as otherwise the observed syn-

chronised pre-polars would remain unexplained. For white dwarfs rotating near break-up, in order

to have a synchronised system after the detached phase, time scales cannot exceed 30

40 Myr.

−

This maximum time scale is deﬁnitely not a problem for our model, since the synchronisation time

scales for the range of magnetic ﬁeld strengths we consider here, i.e. those of polars, pre-polars

and AR Sco, are expected to be well below 30

40 Myr72.

−

The overall evolution does also not sensitively depend on the assumed white dwarf and sec-

ondary star magnetic ﬁelds. Varying these ﬁeld strengths changes only slightly the condition for

synchronisation (Equation 9). For weaker/stronger B2, this condition becomes more/less restric-

tive.

Increasing or decreasing BWD affects somewhat the orbital period at which synchronism

can be obtained, which is longer for stronger ﬁelds (Supplementary Figure 3). The white dwarf

magnetic ﬁeld strengths also affects the duration of the detached phase. The stronger the white

dwarf magnetic ﬁeld, the more angular momentum loss due to magnetic braking is reduced and

the longer it takes the system to evolve back into a semi-detached conﬁguration.

The largest and most critical assumption in our model certainly are the conditions we assume

20

for magnetic ﬁeld generation which represent a strong but reasonable simpliﬁcation. According

to the most popular scaling law, the dynamo saturates for fast rotation (in white dwarfs for spin

periods below 90 s20) and the produced ﬁeld strength depends then solely on the convective energy

ﬂux. However, as outlined above, the efﬁciency of the dynamo is also expected to signiﬁcantly

depend on the magnetic Prandtl number which is not considered in any currently available scaling

law. As long as a reliable scaling law taking into account this dependency is not available, describ-

ing the evolution of close magnetic white dwarf binaries needs to be based on simple assumptions

such as those made in this paper. As soon as realistic scaling laws for the dynamo operating in

crystallizing white dwarfs are available, we plan to incorporate those together with detailed white

dwarf models into our simulations.

The aim of this paper is to show how the evolution of close white dwarf binaries is affected if,

and that is a reasonable assumption, crystallization and fast rotation can generate a strong magnetic

ﬁeld. We would expect the generated ﬁeld strength in these models to depend on the rotation rate

and the energy ﬂux in the convection zone. Given the large range of orbital periods at the end of

common envelope evolution, and the therefore large variety of evolutionary time scales towards the

CV phase, we expect that such a more detailed model can explain the large range of ﬁeld strength

observed in magnetic CVs including those of intermediate polars. In case of the latter the ﬁeld

is simply not strong enough to synchronise the white dwarf spin with the orbital motion and the

system does not enter a detached phase apart from the usual 2

3 hr orbital period gap.

−

In the Supplementary Information we present a detailed discussion of different evolutionary

21

channels predicted by our model and estimate the fraction of magnetic and non-magnetic white

dwarfs in CVs taking into account important parameters for binary star evolution44, 73–76 as well as

potential accretion heating and chemical impurities of the core of the white dwarf77–79. We also

elaborate on the implications of our scenario for the generation of magnetic ﬁelds in hot single

white dwarfs80 as well as magnetic white dwarfs in wide binaries81. We ﬁnd that these magnetic

ﬁelds are most likely generated by alternative mechanisms such as fossil ﬁelds resulting from main

sequence star mergers82, 83, double white dwarf mergers19, or common envelope mergers18, 84, 85.

22

Correspondence Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.R.S.

(email: matthias.schreiber@usm.cl).

Acknowledgements We thank the referee Chris Tout and two anonymous referees for their helpful com-

ments. M.R.S. acknowledges support from the Millennium Nucleus for Planet Formation (NPF) and Fonde-

cyt (grant 1181404). D.B. was supported by the grant #2017/14289-3, S˜ao Paulo Research Foundation

(FAPESP) and ESO/Gobierno de Chile. B.T.G. was supported by the UK STFC grant ST/P000495. S.G.P

acknowledges the support of a STFC Ernest Rutherford Fellowship. M.Z. acknowledges support from CON-

ICYT PAI (Concurso Nacional de Inserci´on en la Academia 2017, Folio 79170121) and CONICYT/FONDECYT

(Programa de Iniciaci´on, Folio 11170559)

Author contributions All authors contributed to the discussion and writing of this article. M.R.S. and

D.B. developed the idea and carried out the simulations. S.G.P. and B.T.G provided an observational

overview of magnetic white dwarfs and recent observations of pre-polars. M.Z. provided crystallization

temperatures for different white dwarf masses based on published white dwarf evolutionary sequences and

estimated relative numbers of magnetic and non-magnetic CVs using binary population models.

Competing Interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Data availability The data presented in this work is available upon request.

In addition, the MESA

ﬁles required to reproduce our simulations will be publicly available at the MESA Zenodo community

(https://zenodo.org/communities/mesa/).

Code availability MESA is publicly available (http://mesa.sourceforge.net/).

23

Supplementary Discussion and Figures

The fraction of magnetic white dwarfs in CVs. We have shown that a crystallization and rotation

driven dynamo can explain the properties of all close and strongly magnetic white dwarf binaries

and the absence of magnetic white dwarfs in young detached white dwarf binary stars. In what

follows we discuss under which conditions our model is likely to also reproduce the observed

fraction of strongly magnetic white dwarfs in CVs. The measured fraction of strongly magnetic

white dwarfs in CVs is more than one third (15 out of 42 systems within 150 pc1). If the brieﬂy

detached pre-polars and AR Sco are included in this sample (the four pre-polars SDSS 0303+0054,

WX LMi, SDSS J1212+0136, SDSS J1452+2045 and AR Sco are within 150 pc3,10), the fraction of

systems with magnetic white dwarfs further increases to 20 of 47 systems corresponding to 43

6

±

per cent.

At ﬁrst glance, our model might seem to produce too many magnetic white dwarfs in CVs as

every white dwarf in a non-magnetic CV accretes angular momentum and is therefore expected to

become rapidly rotating in a short period of time. In addition, if the white dwarf continuously cools

it should start to crystallize and one might expect that our model predicts every white dwarf in a CV

to eventually develop a strong magnetic ﬁeld. However, accretion can increase the core temperature

of white dwarfs in CVs77 and prevent or delay crystallization. In addition, the generation of a strong

magnetic ﬁeld through the rotational and crystallization driven dynamo only works if fast rotation

and a crystallizing core with an outer convection zone are present at the same time. The strength

of the magnetic ﬁeld generated by this dynamo depends on the convective energy ﬂux2 and most

24

likely also on the magnetic Prantdl number. However, in the absence of a scaling relation including

the dependence on the latter, it remains unclear at which stages of crystallization the conditions

are suitable for generating strong magnetic ﬁelds. In our model we assumed that in addition to fast

rotation at least 10 per cent and not more than 80 per cent of the core need to be crystallized for

the dynamo to be able to generate a strong magnetic ﬁeld but this assumption is rather arbitrary.

In what follows we describe the three different types of CVs that are non-magnetic according to

our model and explain how the critical core mass ratios and other important parameters impact the

predicted relative numbers of magnetic and non-magnetic CVs.

First (channel 1), our model predicts the white dwarfs in CVs that did not yet accrete enough

angular momentum remain non-magnetic. How long this phase takes, and therefore also the rel-

ative number of CVs that are expected to be found in this stage in observed samples, depends on

the efﬁciency of the accretion of angular momentum and the mass transfer rate (see equation 1 in

the main text) which in turn depends on the angular momentum loss. For instance, CVs born with

fully convective secondaries are expected to be driven by gravitational radiation only and typically

have mass transfer rates 1-2 orders of magnitude lower than systems with earlier secondary stars.

Therefore, the white dwarfs born with fully convective secondary stars will take longer to spin up

to near-break velocities than those with earlier secondary stars that start mass transfer at longer

orbital periods. However, as the spin up time scale is in general short compared to the secular time

scale of CVs, we expect binary population synthesis based on our model to predict rather few CVs

to be in this non-magnetic CV state.

25

Second (channel 2), CVs with white dwarfs that did not yet start the crystallization process in

their cores remain non-magnetic CVs until the required condition is reached. How long this takes

determines how many of such systems are predicted to exist in observed samples and depends on

the fraction of crystallized core-mass that is assumed to be necessary to make the dynamo work

(we assumed 10 per cent), on the time it takes the system to evolve from the common envelope

to the CV phase, and whether accretion can heat up the core77,78 to avoid or delay crystallization.

Assuming core heating is inefﬁcient, according to recent white dwarf models24 the time needed for

a 0.6, 0.8 and 1.0 M(cid:12)white dwarf to have 10 per cent of its interior crystallized is approximately

3.2, 1.9 and 1.1 Gyr. This time span might be substantially increased for smaller white dwarf

masses as the magnetic ﬁeld needs to diffuse through a radiative zone which sits on top of the

convective mantle. Only for massive white dwarfs the convective mantle extends close to the

surface20. This implies that detached binaries that emerged from common envelope evolution with

short orbital periods, i.e. close to the start of mass transfer, can remain non-magnetic CVs for

>
∼ 3 Gyr. If core heating due to accretion is efﬁcient and prevents the white dwarf from crystallizing

during the CV phase, these CVs will even remain non-magnetic forever. Therefore a non-negligible

number of non-magnetic CVs descending from short period post common envelope binaries is

predicted to exist in observed samples of CVs.

Finally (channel 3), CVs containing white dwarfs that signiﬁcantly crystallized before being

spun up to fast rotation due to accretion, will not develop a strong magnetic ﬁeld. In other words,

if the white dwarf had enough time too cool so that a large fraction of its core is crystallized before

the secondary ﬁlls its Roche-lobe, the convective energy ﬂux in the outer core will not be sufﬁcient

26

to generate a strong magnetic ﬁeld. These systems will remain non-magnetic forever under the

assumption that core heating due to accretion is inefﬁcient. Even if accretion heating can melt a

signiﬁcant fraction of the core, this process is supposed to take several Gyr78, i.e. the system would

remain non-magnetic for a large fraction of its CV lifetime. Thus, whether a given system becomes

a non-magnetic CV formed through this channel depends mostly on the time it spends between the

white dwarf formation, i.e. the common envelope phase, and the onset of accretion. How many

systems of a predicted CV population spend enough time in this detached white dwarf binary

phase depends sensitively on the crystallized mass fraction (we assumed 80 per cent) at which

the dynamo becomes unable to generate a strong magnetic ﬁeld, on the inter-correlated initial

orbital period, mass ratio, and eccentricity distributions of the progenitor systems, on the common

envelope efﬁciency, and on the strength of angular momentum loss due to magnetic braking.

While the relative number of non-magnetic CVs predicted by our model through channel 1

is most likely very small, we expect that the other two groups of systems can easily explain the

50

−

∼

70 per cent of non-magnetic systems in the observed CV sample. Which of the two

scenarios contributes more to the fraction of non-magnetic CVs depends on several assumptions.

For example, for a large common envelope efﬁciency, relatively inefﬁcient magnetic braking, and

a critical crystallized mass fraction below 80 per cent, the majority of systems will evolve through

channel 3 and will remain non-magnetic for at least several Gyr. In contrast, for a small common

envelope efﬁciency, efﬁcient magnetic braking, a large value for the critical fraction of crystallized

core mass, and inefﬁcient core heating, most CVs will eventually become magnetic but many of

them may spend several Gyr as non-magnetic systems before the dynamo starts operating (channel

27

2).

The parameters (strengths of magnetic braking, critical crystallized mass fractions, common

envelope efﬁciency, efﬁciency of core heating) are essential for predicting the evolution of close

white dwarf binaries and for determining the fraction of strongly magnetic CVs predicted by our

model. Unfortunately, several of these parameters are currently neither theoretically nor obser-

vationally well constrained. The common envelope efﬁciency is most likely relatively small as

indicated by observational surveys of detached white dwarf binaries73 and heating of the core is

likely to play an important role77,78. In contrast, the strength of magnetic braking is unknown6 and

the same is true for the critical mass fractions (as detailed simulations for the dynamo we propose

here do not yet exist). In addition, the initial binary parameter distributions usually assumed in CV

population models are uncorrelated which is inconsistent with observational surveys performed

in the past decades76. These surveys show that the orbital period, primary mass, mass ratio and

eccentricity distributions are inter-correlated. This is important because the combination of these

parameters determines whether a given binary system will survive or not the common-envelope

phase and which of those that survive and become CVs within the Hubble time, have relatively

long or short detached lifetimes (possibly becoming slightly or highly crystallized) before the on-

set of mass transfer.

Based on binary population models we performed in the past74,75, using standard parameters

for CV evolution (common envelope efﬁciency of 0.25, magnetic braking according to Rappaport

et al.44, assuming the critical crystallized mass fractions used in this paper (i.e. 10 and 80 per cent),

28

and ignoring core heating of the white dwarf through accretion, we estimate the predicted fraction

of magnetic systems to be roughly 50 per cent. While this value slightly exceeds the currently ob-

served number of magnetic CVs, relatively small changes in the prescription for magnetic braking

and/or the critical mass fractions of crystallized matter in the core of the white dwarf can easily

bring into agreement the observed fractions and the predictions of our model. For the same as-

sumptions but including efﬁcient core heating, the predicted fraction of magnetic CVs decreases to

20 per cent. This estimate is below the measured fraction but our conclusion remains unchanged

∼

as relatively small changes in uncertain parameters such as critical core mass and magnetic braking

could increase the number of magnetic systems to match the observed fraction.

For the sake of completeness, as an additional unknown parameter, we emphasize that also

the metallicity of the white dwarf progenitor star could play a role since the settling of neutronized

impurities like 22Ne and 56Fe caused by solidiﬁcation can release more energy than the separation

of the C/O mixture which signiﬁcantly affects the cooling of the white dwarf and the crystallization

process79.

As a ﬁnal remark, we state that the small number of observationally discovered pre-polars

and the even smaller number of AR Sco-like systems are in agreement with the relatively short

time scale that our model predicts for these systems.

Implications for single white dwarfs and white dwarfs in wide binaries. The model presented

in this paper describes a new evolutionary sequence for close white dwarf binaries which explains

the origin and the relative numbers of strongly magnetic white dwarfs in these systems. While

29

solving the puzzle for the occurrence of strongly magnetic white dwarfs in close binaries represents

a key result on its own, we here brieﬂy mention the implications for single white dwarfs and white

dwarfs in wide binary stars.

It is clear that the dynamo proposed here to operate in CVs cannot explain all strongly mag-

netic single white dwarfs because it requires fast rotation and crystallization. A non-negligible

number of strongly magnetic single white dwarfs7 are hot and therefore most likely not in the pro-

cess of crystallization and, even worse, several of the highest ﬁeld single white dwarfs are known

to have rather long spin periods7, 80. While ﬁeld strengths of the order of 0.1

1 MG might be

−

generated in crystallizing single white dwarfs with rotation periods of the order of hours or days,

strong magnetic ﬁelds in single white dwarfs must be generated at least partly by a different mech-

anism. The same conclusion holds for the recently discovered strongly magnetic white dwarfs in

wide binaries81. In most cases the separation between the two stars in these binaries exceeds sev-

eral hundred astronomical units and therefore a previous phase of mass transfer and spin-up of the

white dwarf can be excluded.

Similarly, the main mechanism for generating these strong magnetic ﬁelds in young single

white dwarfs and wide binary stars must not be operating in close binaries as we would other-

wise observe strongly magnetic white dwarfs in young detached close white dwarf binaries. The

candidate scenarios that may fulﬁll this conditions are white dwarf mergers19, fossil ﬁelds17, or

the common envelope merger scenario18,84,85. Given that the most likely progenitors of magnetic

white dwarfs according to the fossil ﬁeld scenario are main sequence star mergers82,83, all three

30

scenarios require single magnetic white dwarfs to form from binary stars. This implies that all

scenarios require initial triple star conﬁgurations to produce strongly magnetic white dwarfs in

binaries. As triples are intrinsically less common than binary stars, all three models may produce

more strongly magnetic single white dwarfs than strongly magnetic white dwarfs in close and wide

binaries. Which of the mechanisms is most suitable to explain magnetic single white dwarfs and

magnetic white dwarfs in wide binaries depends on the relatively poorly constraint distribution of

initial triple star conﬁgurations.

We conclude that the crystallization and rotation driven dynamo proposed here explains the

large number of magnetic white dwarfs in CVs, as well as the existence and characteristics of

AR Sco and the pre-polars, and might be complemented by e.g. the double white dwarf merger

and/or the common envelope merger scenario which are good candidates for explaining strongly

magnetic single white dwarfs.

31

Supplementary Figure 1. Comparison of different evolutionary tracks with observations. The de-

tached phases (dashed lines) explain the existence of only cool magnetic white dwarfs in detached

binaries that are close to Roche-lobe ﬁlling because the magnetic ﬁeld was generated during the

CV phase when the white dwarf was old and crystallizing. The model also offers an explanation

for AR Sco which in fact is a progenitor of the pre-polars. In AR Sco, nicely reproduced by the

blue track, the secondary detached from its Roche-lobe but spin and orbital motion are not yet

synchronised. The subsequent detached synchronised phase explains the orbital periods, Roche-

lobe ﬁlling factors, and white dwarf temperatures of pre-polars. To generate the tracks we only

changed the initial orbital period (Pi) and initial secondary mass (M2), as well as the white dwarf

spin period (PWD) when the magnetic ﬁeld is generated. The parameters we used were the fol-

32

102103104105106PWD(s)PWD=PorbPWD=0.1PorbPWD=0.01PorbPWD=0.001Porbpolarspre-polarsARSco2351015Porb(hr)0.850.900.951.00R2/RL2pre-polarslowing Pi = 0.14 days, M2 = 0.17 M(cid:12), PWD = 30 s (purple), Pi = 0.68 days, M2 = 0.55 M(cid:12),

PWD = 15 s (blue), Pi = 0.925 days, M2 = 0.75 M(cid:12), PWD = 20 s (green), Pi = 1.544 days,

M2 = 1.2 M(cid:12), PWD = 30 s (orange).

In all tracks the white dwarf mass was assumed to be

0.8 M(cid:12)

29 and the generated magnetic ﬁeld strengths was assumed to be 60 MG. The errorbars on

the observations correspond to 1σ.

33

Supplementary Figure 2. Evolutionary sequences highlighting the impact of different choices of

the synchronisation time scale. The shorter the time scale, the more pronounced and the longer

the detached phase. For the longest time scales (blue, purple), accretion starts before the system

synchronised. Time scales exceeding 1 Myr are most likely not realistic.

34

102103104PWD(s)2.53.03.54.04.5Porb(hr)0.900.951.00R2/RL230Myr10Myrs1Myr0.1MyrSupplementary Figure 3. Evolutionary sequences highlighting the impact of the white dwarf

magnetic ﬁeld strength. The stronger the generated ﬁeld, the longer the detached phase as angular

momentum loss due to magnetic braking is more reduced. For the weakest ﬁeld strengths (brown,

red), a less pronounced standard gap still occurs when the secondary becomes fully convective.

35

102103104PWD(s)200MG100MG60MG30MG10MG2.53.03.54.04.5Porb(hr)0.900.951.00R2/RL2Supplementary Figure 4. Evolutionary sequences highlighting the impact of different choices of

the white dwarf spin period (PWD) at onset of magnetic ﬁeld generation. The hatched region indi-

cates the locus of the standard orbital period gap. In each track, solid and dashed lines correspond

to semi-detached and detached phases respectively. With the exception of the case PWD = 14 s

(brown curve), a detached phase is generated above the standard orbital period gap, at an orbital

period

≈

3.75 hr. For PWD at least twice the break-up period, magnetic ﬁeld generation starts

at the same period and the slower the spin, the shorter the detached phase. To spin-up the white

dwarf to velocities close to the break-up period (brown track), the spin-up phase is much longer

and therefore the pronounced detached phase occurs at a signiﬁcantly shorter orbital period.

36

102103104PWD(s)2.53.03.54.04.5Porb(hr)0.900.951.00R2/RL290s60s45s30s14s1. Pala, A. F. et al. A Volume-limited Sample of Cataclysmic Variables from Gaia DR2: Space

Density and Population Properties. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 494, 3799–3827 (2020).

2. Christensen, U. R., Holzwarth, V. & Reiners, A. Energy ﬂux determines magnetic ﬁeld

strength of planets and stars. Nature 457, 167–169 (2009).

3. Marsh, T. R. et al. A radio-pulsing white dwarf binary star. Nature 537, 374–377 (2016).

4. Ivanova, N. et al. Common envelope evolution: where we stand and how we can move for-

ward. Astron. Astrophys. Rev. 21, 59 (2013).

5. Schreiber, M. R. & G¨ansicke, B. T. The age, life expectancy, and space density of Post

Common Envelope Binaries. Astron. Astrophys. 406, 305–321 (2003).

6. Knigge, C., Baraffe, I. & Patterson, J. The Evolution of Cataclysmic Variables as Revealed by

Their Donor Stars. Astrophys. J. Suppl. 194, 28 (2011).

7. Ferrario, L., de Martino, D. & G¨ansicke, B. T. Magnetic White Dwarfs. Space Sci. Rev. 191,

111–169 (2015).

8. Norton, A. J., Wynn, G. A. & Somerscales, R. V. The Spin Periods and Magnetic Moments of

White Dwarfs in Magnetic Cataclysmic Variables. Astrophys. J. 614, 349–357 (2004).

9. Schwope, A. D., Nebot Gomez-Moran, A., Schreiber, M. R. & G¨ansicke, B. T. Post common

envelope binaries from the SDSS. VI. SDSS J120615.73+510047.0: a new low accretion rate

magnetic binary. Astron. Astrophys. 500, 867–872 (2009).

37

10. Parsons, S. G. et al. Magnetic white dwarfs in post-common-envelope binaries. Mon. Not. R.

Astron. Soc. in press, arXiv:2101.08792 (2021).

11. Schreiber, M. R. et al. Post common envelope binaries from SDSS. VIII. Evidence for dis-

rupted magnetic braking. Astron. Astrophys. 513, L7 (2010).

12. Rebassa-Mansergas, A. et al. Post-common envelope binaries from SDSS - XIV. The DR7

white dwarf-main-sequence binary catalogue. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 419, 806–816 (2012).

13. Reimers, D., Hagen, H. J. & Hopp, U. HS 1023+3900 - a magnetic CV in the period gap with

a distinct cyclotron emission line spectrum. Astron. Astrophys. 343, 157–162 (1999).

14. Schmidt, G. D. et al. New Low Accretion Rate Magnetic Binary Systems and their Signiﬁ-

cance for the Evolution of Cataclysmic Variables. Astrophys. J. 630, 1037–1053 (2005).

15. Liebert, J. et al. Where Are the Magnetic White Dwarfs with Detached, Nondegenerate Com-

panions? Astron. J. 129, 2376–2381 (2005).

16. Belloni, D. & Schreiber, M. R. Are white dwarf magnetic ﬁelds in close binaries generated

during common-envelope evolution? Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 492, 1523–1529 (2020).

17. Braithwaite, J. & Spruit, H. C. A fossil origin for the magnetic ﬁeld in A stars and white

dwarfs. Nature 431, 819–821 (2004).

18. Tout, C. A., Wickramasinghe, D. T., Liebert, J., Ferrario, L. & Pringle, J. E. Binary star origin

of high ﬁeld magnetic white dwarfs. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 387, 897–901 (2008).

38

19. Garc´ıa-Berro, E. et al. Double Degenerate Mergers as Progenitors of High-ﬁeld Magnetic

White Dwarfs. Astrophys. J. 749, 25 (2012).

20. Isern, J., Garc´ıa-Berro, E., K¨ulebi, B. & Lor´en-Aguilar, P. A Common Origin of Magnetism

from Planets to White Dwarfs. Astrophys. J. Lett. 836, L28 (2017).

21. Lister, J. R. & Buffett, B. A. The strength and efﬁciency of thermal and compositional con-

vection in the geodynamo. Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors 91, 17–30 (1995).

22. Paxton, B. et al. Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics (MESA): Pulsating Variable

Stars, Rotation, Convective Boundaries, and Energy Conservation. Astrophys. J. Suppl. 243,

10 (2019).

23. King, A. R., Regev, O. & Wynn, G. A. Evolution of the white dwarf mass and spin in cata-

clysmic variables. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 251, 30P–32P (1991).

24. B´edard, A., Bergeron, P., Brassard, P. & Fontaine, G. On the Spectral Evolution of Hot White

Dwarf Stars. I. A Detailed Model Atmosphere Analysis of Hot White Dwarfs from SDSS

DR12. Astrophys. J. 901, 93 (2020).

25. Belloni, D. et al. Evidence for reduced magnetic braking in polars from binary population

models. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 491, 5717–5731 (2020).

26. Hameury, J. M., King, A. R., Lasota, J. P. & Ritter, H. The Evolution of Magnetic Cataclysmic

Variables. Astrophys. J. 316, 275 (1987).

39

27. Nebot G´omez-Mor´an, A. et al. Post common envelope binaries from SDSS. XII. The orbital

period distribution. Astron. Astrophys. 536, A43 (2011).

28. Garnavich, P., Littleﬁeld, C., Lyutikov, M. & Barkov, M. Peeking Between the Pulses: The

Far-UV Spectrum of the Previously Unseen White Dwarf in AR Scorpii. Astrophys. J. in

press, arXiv:2012.09868 (2021).

29. Zorotovic, M., Schreiber, M. R. & G¨ansicke, B. T. Post common envelope binaries from

SDSS. XI. The white dwarf mass distributions of CVs and pre-CVs. Astron. Astrophys. 536,

A42 (2011).

30. Schreiber, M. R., Zorotovic, M. & Wijnen, T. P. G. Three in one go: consequential angular

momentum loss can solve major problems of CV evolution. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 455,

L16–L20 (2016).

31. Christensen, U. R. Dynamo Scaling Laws and Applications to the Planets. Space Sci. Rev.

152, 565–590 (2010).

32. Christensen, U. R. & Aubert, J. Scaling properties of convection-driven dynamos in rotating

spherical shells and application to planetary magnetic ﬁelds. Geophysical Journal Interna-

tional 166, 97–114 (2006).

33. van Horn, H. M. Crystallization of White Dwarfs. Astrophys. J. 151, 227 (1968).

34. Segretain, L. & Chabrier, G. Crystallization of binary ionic mixtures in dense stellar plasmas.

Astron. Astrophys. 271, L13 (1993).

40

35. Horowitz, C. J., Schneider, A. S. & Berry, D. K. Crystallization of Carbon-Oxygen Mixtures

in White Dwarf Stars. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 231101 (2010).

36. Isern, J., Mochkovitch, R., Garc´ıa-Berro, E. & Hernanz, M. The Physics of Crystallizing

White Dwarfs. Astrophys. J. 485, 308–312 (1997).

37. Isern, J., Garc´ıa-Berro, E., Hernanz, M. & Chabrier, G. The Energetics of Crystallizing White

Dwarfs Revisited Again. Astrophys. J. 528, 397–400 (2000).

38. Brandenburg, A. Magnetic Prandtl Number Dependence of the Kinetic-to-magnetic Dissipa-

tion Ratio. Astrophys. J. 791, 12 (2014).

39. Campbell, C. G. The maintenance of corotation in the strong polars. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.

215, 509–516 (1985).

40. Campbell, C. G. Magnetospherically induced torques in asynchronous AMHerculis binaries.

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 409, 433–446 (2010).

41. Mestel, L. Magnetic braking by a stellar wind-I. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 138, 359 (1968).

42. Webbink, R. F. & Wickramasinghe, D. T. Cataclysmic variable evolution: AM Her binaries

and the period gap. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 335, 1–9 (2002).

43. Li, J. K., Wu, K. W. & Wickramasinghe, D. T. Reduced Magnetic Braking in Synchronously

Rotating Magnetic Cataclysmic Variables. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 268, 61 (1994).

44. Rappaport, S., Verbunt, F. & Joss, P. C. A new technique for calculations of binary stellar

evolution, with application to magnetic braking. Astrophys. J. 275, 713–731 (1983).

41

45. Paxton, B. et al. Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics (MESA). Astrophys. J.

Suppl. 192, 3 (2011).

46. Paxton, B. et al. Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics (MESA): Planets, Oscilla-

tions, Rotation, and Massive Stars. Astrophys. J. Suppl. 208, 4 (2013).

47. Paxton, B. et al. Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics (MESA): Binaries, Pulsa-

tions, and Explosions. Astrophys. J. Suppl. 220, 15 (2015).

48. Paxton, B. et al. Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics (MESA): Convective

Boundaries, Element Diffusion, and Massive Star Explosions. Astrophys. J. Suppl. 234, 34

(2018).

49. Rogers, F. J. & Nayfonov, A. Updated and Expanded OPAL Equation-of-State Tables: Impli-

cations for Helioseismology. Astrophys. J. 576, 1064–1074 (2002).

50. Saumon, D., Chabrier, G. & van Horn, H. M. An Equation of State for Low-Mass Stars and

Giant Planets. Astrophys. J. Suppl. 99, 713 (1995).

51. Pols, O. R., Tout, C. A., Eggleton, P. P. & Han, Z. Approximate input physics for stellar

modelling. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 274, 964–974 (1995).

52. Timmes, F. X. & Swesty, F. D. The Accuracy, Consistency, and Speed of an Electron-Positron

Equation of State Based on Table Interpolation of the Helmholtz Free Energy. Astrophys. J.

Suppl. 126, 501–516 (2000).

42

53. Potekhin, A. Y. & Chabrier, G. Thermodynamic Functions of Dense Plasmas: Analytic Ap-

proximations for Astrophysical Applications. Contributions to Plasma Physics 50, 82–87

(2010).

54. Iglesias, C. A. & Rogers, F. J. Radiative opacities for carbon- and oxygen-rich mixtures.

Astrophys. J. 412, 752–760 (1993).

55. Iglesias, C. A. & Rogers, F. J. Updated Opal Opacities. Astrophys. J. 464, 943 (1996).

56. Ferguson, J. W. et al. Low-Temperature Opacities. Astrophys. J. 623, 585–596 (2005).

57. Buchler, J. R. & Yueh, W. R. Compton scattering opacities in a partially degenerate electron

plasma at high temperatures. Astrophys. J. 210, 440–446 (1976).

58. Cassisi, S., Potekhin, A. Y., Pietrinferni, A., Catelan, M. & Salaris, M. Updated Electron-

Conduction Opacities: The Impact on Low-Mass Stellar Models. Astrophys. J. 661, 1094–

1104 (2007).

59. Angulo, C. et al. A compilation of charged-particle induced thermonuclear reaction rates.

Nucl. Phys. A 656, 3–183 (1999).

60. Cyburt, R. H. et al. The JINA REACLIB Database: Its Recent Updates and Impact on Type-I

X-ray Bursts. Astrophys. J. Suppl. 189, 240–252 (2010).

61. Fuller, G. M., Fowler, W. A. & Newman, M. J. Stellar weak interaction rates for intermediate-

mass nuclei. IV - Interpolation procedures for rapidly varying lepton capture rates using effec-

tive log (ft)-values. Astrophys. J. 293, 1–16 (1985).

43

62. Oda, T., Hino, M., Muto, K., Takahara, M. & Sato, K. Rate Tables for the Weak Processes of

sd-Shell Nuclei in Stellar Matter. Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables 56, 231–403 (1994).

63. Langanke, K. & Mart´ınez-Pinedo, G. Shell-model calculations of stellar weak interaction

rates: II. Weak rates for nuclei in the mass range /A=45-65 in supernovae environments. Nu-

clear Physics A 673, 481–508 (2000).

64. Chugunov, A. I., Dewitt, H. E. & Yakovlev, D. G. Coulomb tunneling for fusion reactions in

dense matter: Path integral MonteCarlo versus mean ﬁeld. Phys. Rev. D 76, 025028 (2007).

65. Itoh, N., Hayashi, H., Nishikawa, A. & Kohyama, Y. Neutrino Energy Loss in Stellar Interiors.

VII. Pair, Photo-, Plasma, Bremsstrahlung, and Recombination Neutrino Processes. Astrophys.

J. Suppl. 102, 411 (1996).

66. Eggleton, P. P. Approximations to the radii of Roche lobes. Astrophys. J. 268, 368 (1983).

67. Ritter, H. Turning on and off mass transfer in cataclysmic binaries. Astron. Astrophys. 202,

93–100 (1988).

68. Matthews, J. H., Knigge, C., Long, K. S., Sim, S. A. & Higginbottom, N. The impact of

accretion disc winds on the optical spectra of cataclysmic variables. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.

450, 3331–3344 (2015).

69. Coppejans, D. L. & Knigge, C. The case for jets in cataclysmic variables. New Astronomy

Reviews 89, 101540 (2020).

44

70. Reiners, A. & Basri, G. The First Direct Measurements of Surface Magnetic Fields on Very

Low Mass Stars. Astrophys. J. 656, 1121–1135 (2007).

71. McAllister, M. et al. The evolutionary status of Cataclysmic Variables: eclipse modelling of

15 systems. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 486, 5535–5551 (2019).

72. Stiller, R. A. et al. High-time-resolution Photometry of AR Scorpii: Conﬁrmation of the White

Dwarf’s Spin-down. Astron. J. 156, 150 (2018).

73. Zorotovic, M., Schreiber, M. R., G¨ansicke, B. T. & Nebot G´omez-Mor´an, A. Post-common-

envelope binaries from SDSS. IX: Constraining the common-envelope efﬁciency. Astron.

Astrophys. 520, A86 (2010).

74. Zorotovic, M. et al. Monte Carlo simulations of post-common-envelope white dwarf + main

sequence binaries: The effects of including recombination energy. Astron. Astrophys. 568,

A68 (2014).

75. Belloni, D. et al. No cataclysmic variables missing: higher merger rate brings into agreement

observed and predicted space densities. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 478, 5626–5637 (2018).

76. Moe, M. & Di Stefano, R. Mind Your Ps and Qs: The Interrelation between Period (P) and

Mass-ratio (Q) Distributions of Binary Stars. Astrophys. J. Suppl. 230, 15 (2017).

77. Townsley, D. M. & Bildsten, L. Theoretical Modeling of the Thermal State of Accreting White

Dwarfs Undergoing Classical Nova Cycles. Astrophys. J. 600, 390–403 (2004).

45

78. Epelstain, N., Yaron, O., Kovetz, A. & Prialnik, D. A thousand and one nova outbursts. Mon.

Not. R. Astron. Soc. 374, 1449–1456 (2007).

79. Isern, J., Garc´ıa-Berro, E., Hernanz, M. & Mochkovitch, R. The physics of white dwarfs.

Journal of Physics Condensed Matter 10, 11263–11272 (1998).

80. Charpinet, S., Fontaine, G. & Brassard, P. Seismic evidence for the loss of stellar angular

momentum before the white-dwarf stage. Nature 461, 501–503 (2009).

81. Landstreet, J. D. & Bagnulo, S. Discovery of a Sirius-like binary system with a very strongly

magnetic white dwarf. Binarity among magnetic white dwarfs. Astron. Astrophys. 634, L10

(2020).

82. Ferrario, L., Pringle, J. E., Tout, C. A. & Wickramasinghe, D. T. The origin of magnetism on

the upper main sequence. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 400, L71–L74 (2009).

83. Schneider, F. R. N. et al. Stellar mergers as the origin of magnetic massive stars. Nature 574,

211–214 (2019).

84. Wickramasinghe, D. T., Tout, C. A. & Ferrario, L. The most magnetic stars. Mon. Not. R.

Astron. Soc. 437, 675–681 (2014).

85. Briggs, G. P., Ferrario, L., Tout, C. A., Wickramasinghe, D. T. & Hurley, J. R. Merging binary

stars and the magnetic white dwarfs. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 447, 1713–1723 (2015).

46

