Commissioning results and electron beam characterization at the S-band photoinjector
at SINBAD-ARES

E. Panofskia, R.W. Assmanna, F. Burkarta, U. Dordab, L. Genovesea, F. Jafariniaa, S.M. Jaster-Merza,
M. Kellermeiera, W. Kuropkaa, F. Lemerya, B. Marchettic, D. Marxd, F. Mayeta, T. Vinatiera, S. Yamina

aDeutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Notkestraße 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany
bSCK CEN, Boeretang 262, 2400 Mol, Belgium
cEuropean XFEL GmbH, Holzkoppel 4, 22869 Schenefeld, Germany
dBrookhaven National Laboratory, 2 Center St, Upton, NY 11973, USA

1
2
0
2

n
u
J

8
2

]
h
p
-
c
c
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
7
6
8
4
1
.
6
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Over the last years, the generation and acceleration of ultra-short, high quality electron beams has attracted more and
more interest in accelerator science. Electron bunches with these properties are necessary to operate and test novel
diagnostics and advanced high gradient accelerating schemes such as plasma accelerators or dielectric laser accelerators.
Furthermore, several medical and industrial applications require high-brightness electron beams. The dedicated R&D
facility ARES at DESY will provide such probe beams in the upcoming years. After the setup of the normal-conducting
RF photoinjector and linear accelerating structures, ARES successfully started the beam commissioning of the RF gun.
This paper gives an overview of the ARES photoinjector setup and summarizes the results of the gun commissioning
process. The quality of the ﬁrst generated electron beams is characterized in terms of charge, momentum, momen-
tum spread and beam size. Additionally, the dependencies of the beam parameters on RF settings are investigated.
All measurement results of the characterized beams fulﬁll the requirements to operate the ARES linac with this RF
photoinjector.

Keywords: ARES, S-band photoinjector, beam commissioning, SINBAD, DESY

1. Introduction - The ARES Linac at DESY

(Overview and Status)

SINBAD (Short INnovative Bunches and Accelerators
at DESY) [1] is an accelerator R&D platform in the for-
mer DORIS tunnel at DESY, Hamburg.
Its goal is to
demonstrate the generation and acceleration of ultrashort
electron bunches as well as to test advanced acceleration
techniques, such as Laser driven plasma Wake-Field Accel-
eration (LWFA), Dielectric Laser Acceleration (DLA) and
THz-driven acceleration, in multiple independent experi-
ments.

ARES (Accelerator Research Experiment at SINBAD)
[2, 3] at SINBAD represents one of these experiments. The
linear RF accelerator with a target energy of 100-155 MeV
is currently in the construction and commissioning phase.
The facility will provide low-charge, remarkably short elec-
tron probe bunches with excellent arrival-time stability [4].
The design parameters of the electron beam are summa-
rized in Table 1.

The SINBAD-ARES setup hosts a normal conducting
RF photoinjector generating a low charge electron beam,

Email address: eva.panofski@desy.de (E. Panofski)

1

Table 1: Final electron beam parameters planned at ARES.

Repetition Rate [Hz]
Bunch Charge [pC]
Beam Energy [MeV]
Norm. Emittance (rms) [µm rad]
Bunch Length (rms) [fs]
Arrival time jitter (rms) [fs]

1 - 50
0.5 - 30
54 - 155
0.1 - 1
0.2 - 10
<10

which is afterwards accelerated by an S-band linac sec-
tion. The linac, together with a magnetic chicane includ-
ing a slit collimator, will allow the generation of ultra-short
bunches in the fs to sub-fs regime based on the techniques
of velocity bunching and magnetic bunch compression [5].
The high brightness beam will then serve as a test bench
for novel diagnostic devices such as the PolariX TDS, an
advanced modular X-band transverse deﬂecting structure
(TDS) system having the new feature of providing variable
polarization of the deﬂecting force [6, 7, 8]. Furthermore,
the ARES accelerator has the potential to provide a test
beam for next-generation compact acceleration schemes in
the future [9, 10, 11]. ARES will also contribute as a test
facility for machine learning for autonomous accelerators,

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Future layout of the ARES linac at SINBAD.

a project of the Helmholtz Artiﬁcial Intelligence Coopera-
tion Unit (Helmholtz AI) [12].

While SINBAD-ARES is a DESY project, access will
be possible to external researchers via the ARIES transna-
tional access program free of charge [13]. This EU-funded
Integrating Activity project aims to develop European par-
ticle accelerator infrastructures and includes the task to
open research facilities to external users.

It is noteworthy that the ARES linac is sharing sev-
eral diagnostics components, the control architecture and
beam physics challenges of ultra-short, high density elec-
tron beams with the AXSIS ERC Synergy Grant project
[14]. The AXSIS construction is nearing completion in
a neighboring space in the same SINBAD facility where
ARES is located. Part of the work reported here will be
therefore used for training beam instrumentation and pro-
cedures that will also be relied on in the upcoming AXSIS
beam commissioning, thus minimizing the required time.
Figure 1 illustrates the planned layout of the ARES linac
at SINBAD. The setup of the SINBAD-ARES facility is
proceeding in stages. In a ﬁrst step, the RF photoinjector
including a diagnostic line was completely installed in the
ARES tunnel area. The photocathode drive laser system
was prepared as well. After RF conditioning of the gun
cavity, a ﬁrst electron beam was generated and detected
at the end of October 2019. This important milestone in
the ARES project marked the beginning of the RF pho-
toinjector commissioning and ﬁrst electron beam charac-
terization.

This publication gives a detailed overview of the acceler-
ator setup in the ARES gun area followed by the results of
the RF gun conditioning (Sections 2 and 3). Afterwards,
the systematic characterization of the electron beam is pre-
sented in Section 4. The following section introduces a
beam-based alignment tool for the gun solenoid magnet.
Finally, the dark current is described in Section 6.

2. Overview of the ARES Photoinjector

Figure 2 shows the setup of the ARES gun area in the
SINBAD tunnel in January 2020 including infrastructure
and hardware [4]. The 1.5 cell, normal-conducting, S-band
RF cavity made of copper represents the central part of
the setup. The RF is transferred from the klystron to

Figure 2: Layout of the ARES photoinjector. a) Setup of the ARES
photoinjector in the SINBAD tunnel including the RF gun with RF
waveguides, magnets and a diagnostic line. b) Schematic overview
of the ARES gun section with gun, magnets and diagnostics.

the cavity via a waveguide system that is separated from
the cavity itself by a double-coated vacuum window. The
electron beam is generated at the photocathode made of
a metallic or semiconductive material. The photocath-
ode transfer system allows the insertion of the cathode
plug from a cathode box in the back plane of the gun cav-
ity without breaking the vacuum. Electrons are produced
via the photoelectric eﬀect [15], therefore, the photocath-
ode is illuminated by the drive laser. At ARES, the laser
lab is located outside of the tunnel. The laser is guided
through a beampipe under vacuum conditions to the cath-
ode. The chosen cathode materials, molybdenum Mo for
the ﬁrst beam, cesium-telluride Cs2Te for the beam com-
missioning, require UV laser light (257 nm) for electron
generation with maximum eﬃciency [16]. Automated har-
monic generators which are integrated in the Pharos laser
produce the UV light using the 4th harmonic of the near-
infrared photocathode laser [17]. The synchronization be-

2

tween photocathode laser and RF source driving the RF
gun of the ARES linac is on the femtosecond level in order
to fully utilize the potential of ultra-short electron bunches
while probing the novel acceleration techniques [18]. The
electron beam is immediately accelerated in the RF gun
cavity up to 5 MeV in order to counteract space charge
eﬀects.

Several magnets are available to control the electron
beam. A solenoid magnet right after the gun cavity exit
focusses the beam in both transverse directions simulta-
neously. Two dual plane steerer pairs serve for trajectory
corrections in the vertical and horizontal directions. A
spectrometer dipole guides the electron beam to the dis-
persive section, allowing momentum spectrum measure-
ments. The accelerator is supplemented with hardware di-
agnostics. Beam position and beam size measurements can
be done at two screen stations in the forward direction and
one in the dispersive arm [19]. Beside GAGG (gadolinium
aluminium gallium garnet) and LYSO (Lutetium-based
scintillator) screens [20], several grids are available in the
ﬁrst screen station after the gun cavity for the evaluation
of the transverse emittance [21, 22]. Two Faraday Cups
and one cavity based, and hence non-destructive, charge
monitor (DaMon) enable bunch charge and dark current
measurements [23, 24]. The Faraday Cup after the spec-
trometer dipole is also used as a beam dump.

The hardware and diagnostics at ARES are operated by
a control system based on DOOCS [25]. A magnet middle
layer server enables a desired magnetic ﬁeld or transverse
kick angle to be speciﬁed in addition to adjusting the in-
put current [26]. Furthermore, proper machine settings
for diﬀerent applications can be saved with the Sequencer
program. Long-term data acquisition, even for parame-
ters following the repetition rate of up to 50 Hz, is done
with a DAQ server used throughout DESY [27]. Leverag-
ing the numerous possibilities to interface with the control
system (MATLAB, Python, Java,C/C++) the operators
contributed software both for commissioning purposes and
day-to-day operation of the machine.

3. RF Conditioning of the Gun Cavity and RF Sta-

bility

As a ﬁrst step during the accelerator commissioning, the
gun cavity was fully conditioned. Currently, a maximum
RF power of 3.7 MW with an RF pulse length of 4.0 µs
has been achieved during operation. Measurements over
12 hours conﬁrm a stable RF power in the gun cavity with
ﬂuctuations less than 10 kW [see Fig. 3].

The ﬁnal goal is to run the ARES gun at an RF probe
power of 6 MW that will allow acceleration of the electron
beam to more than 5 MeV. A higher beam energy at the
RF gun exit always helps to better control space charge
eﬀects since the transversely defocusing space charge force

Figure 3: Stability measurement of the RF probe power in the ARES
gun over 12 hours.

in a drift scales with 1/γ, with γ being the Lorentz factor
[28]. The current limit to the maximum RF power coupled
to the gun cavity is mainly deﬁned by the maximum power
limit of the klystron, which is given by the quadratic sum
of the forward and reﬂected power that can theoretically
reach the modulator. Due to a high amount of reﬂection,
the sum power comes close to the hard limit of the modula-
tor of 11 MW. Consequently, the forward and therefore the
probe power in the gun cavity cannot be further increased.
Figure 4 illustrates this fact by showing the forward (blue
curve), reﬂected (yellow curve) and the resulting probe
power signal (green curve) measured in the RF gun. The
red curve gives the sum power that nearly reaches the 11
MW limit of the klystron window.
In the future, a cir-
culator will be installed, which will ﬁlter out the reﬂected
part of the power signal, providing a way toward increased
probe power in the gun.

Figure 4: RF power signals in the gun cavity: Displayed are the
forward (blue), probe (green) and reﬂected (yellow) power readout.
The red curve represents the sum power given by the quadratic sum
of forward and reﬂected power.

3

4. Electron Beam Characterization

After the ﬁrst electrons were detected at the end of Oc-
tober 2019, the electron beam was systematically charac-
terized.

4.1. Bunch charge

We started with bunch charge measurements and the de-
pendency of the generated charge on laser pulse energy and
RF parameters. At ARES, the charge can be detected us-
ing a Faraday Cup and a DaMon in the forward direction of
the beamline, as well as an additional Faraday Cup in the
dispersive section. A bunch charge of (16.20±0.03) pC at
the Faraday Cups and (16.70±0.04) pC at the DaMon was
measured at the current maximum RF power (3.7 MW)
and an RF phase -20 deg. The RF phase is always deﬁned
relative to zero-crossing (total RF phase +2 deg) where no
net acceleration occurs and hence, no bunch charge is de-
tected. The charge values that are achieved with the two
diﬀerent measurement techniques agree well.

Following the theory of the photoelectric eﬀect, the pa-
rameters which mainly impact the number of electrons ex-
tracted from the cathode, i.e. the bunch charge qb are: the
pulse energy of the drive laser Elaser and thus the number
of incoming photons, and the quality of the photocath-
ode i.e. the quantum eﬃciency QE. The latter is mainly
deﬁned by the cathode material itself (metal or semicon-
ductor), the surface roughness and the quality of coating
of the cathode plug. The number describes the ratio of
emitted electrons to incoming laser photons.

qb =

eElaser
Eph

QE.

(1)

In Formula 1, Eph describes the photon energy determined
by the laser wavelength.
In addition, the bunch charge
can be increased with a higher RF ﬁeld at the cathode.
Due to this so-called Schottky eﬀect the RF ﬁeld lowers
the eﬀective surface potential of the cathode and more
electrons can escape the photocathode material [29].

While the quantum eﬃciency of the photocathode can-
not be varied in a controlled way during a measurement
without a cathode exchange, the laser pulse energy and the
RF ﬁeld at the cathode can be modiﬁed. Figure 5 shows
the bunch charge that was measured with the Faraday Cup
while the laser pulse energy was continuously changed by
using an attenuator on the laser table. An additional in-
ternal attenuator reduced the outcoming laser energy to
20% and 29.5% respectively in order to limit the emitted
bunch charge to tens of pC (see legend in Fig. 5). The
measurement was repeated for three diﬀerent RF phases,
-20 deg relative to zero-crossing, -35 deg RF phase that cor-
responds to a maximum beam momentum and -65 deg RF
phase that gives maximum charge output. Increasing the
laser energy the bunch charge grows linearly up to a laser

energy of about 2 nJ. The electron emission is limited by
the amount of incoming laser photons and can be described
with Formula 1. For laser energies above 2 nJ, the charge
emission is increasingly space-charge dominated and runs
into the space-charge limit (plateau). The electrons ex-
perience their own image charge at the cathode surface,
which produces a ﬁeld opposing the applied RF ﬁeld. The
electron emission saturates when the electric ﬁeld that is
triggered by space charge equals the RF ﬁeld at the sur-
face of the cathode [30].

Figure 5: Charge measurement during a scan of the photoinjecor
laser pulse energy at the photocathode surface for diﬀerent laser
attenuator positions and RF phases in the gun cavity.

At ARES, a Cs2Te photocathode was used for the beam
characterization measurements. Based on the charge mea-
surement data illustrated in Figure 5 and the theory of
photon limited emission (see Formula 1) the quantum ef-
ﬁciency is calculated as (4.5±0.2)% for an RF phase of
-20 deg and (5.1±0.2)% for an RF phase of -35 deg, respec-
tively. The diﬀerence between these two numbers is due to
the Schottky eﬀect that increases the amount of extracted
electrons from the photocathode at lower RF phase (here
-35 deg.) The calculated quantum eﬃciencies are realis-
tic compared to measurements from other electron sources
[31]. The combination of quantum eﬃciency and avail-
able laser pulse energy is suﬃcient to operate the linac in
the charge range of a few pC to several hundreds of pC
extrapolating the data from the measurements shown in
Figure 5. During the commissioning phase the charge was
limited to tens of pC in order to control the dark current
and to protect diagnostics.

The dependency of the emitted charge on the RF ﬁeld
at the cathode can be illustrated with a Schottky scan.
In the experiment, the RF phase has been continuously
varied during the charge measurement. Figure 6 shows
the result of two Schottky scans done with the DaMon in
the gun area of ARES. A constant RF power of 3.6 MW

4

was used for a rapid acceleration of the electrons starting
from the cathode.

Figure 6: Bunch charge measurement during an RF phase scan
(Schottky scan). Purple colored measurement data were achieved
at a constant solenoid current of -60 A. The solenoid current was op-
timized for maximum charge at the DaMon for the green curve. A
ﬁt with an ASTRA simulation allows the duration of bunch emission
to be estimated [32].

The purple colored curve in Figure 6 displays the Schottky
scan at a constant solenoid current of -60 A. The selected
solenoid ﬁeld allows the full amount of charge to be focused
to the DaMon in an RF phase range from 0 deg to around
-70 deg. For smaller RF phases it becomes necessary to
adjust the solenoid focusing. This was done in a second
measurement run that corresponds to the green data in
Figure 6.

In general, the Schottky curve that displays the mea-
sured bunch charge vs. the RF phase and therefore the
RF ﬁeld at the surface of the photocathode can be ex-
plained as follows: Starting from an RF-phase above 0 deg,
the entire cathode laser pulse impacts the cathode when
the gun ﬁeld is decelerating. Hence, no electrons are ac-
celerated and no charge is detected at the DaMon. Be-
low 0 deg down to -10 deg an increasingly large part of the
laser pulse hits the cathode when the gun ﬁeld is accelerat-
ing. More and more photo-emitted electrons are extracted
and the Schottky curve rises. The bunch reaches its tar-
get bunch length deﬁned by the laser pulse duration at
around -10 deg. Instead of a constant beam current at RF
phases below -10 deg (plateau), an additional increase can
be detected in Figure 6. Further electrons escape from
the photocathode due to the external RF ﬁeld lowering
the potential barrier. A lowered surface barrier enables
non-excited electrons to tunnel into the vacuum and fa-
vors the extraction of excited electrons. At around -70 deg,
the beam momentum becomes too low. Consequently, the
beam is over-focussed at the DaMon by a constant solenoid
current of -60 A and the measured bunch charge drops in

Figure 6 (purple curve). In the case of a variable solenoid
current (green curve) that is adjusted to achieve a maxi-
mum charge at the DaMon, a further increase of the bunch
charge due to Schottky eﬀect up to 14 pC at -90 deg can be
observed. Afterwards, the momentum spectrum becomes
too wide to be fully transported to the detector, which
leads to a decrease in the measured charge also in the case
of variable solenoid currents (green curve). The two peaks
visible on the left side of the scan (purple curve) are due
to electrons travelling back and forth in the gun before ex-
iting and to secondary electrons emitted through cathode
back-bombardment. These electrons can have high enough
energies (namely close enough to the maximum momen-
tum) to be focused by the gun solenoid and collected by
the Faraday cup. Another potential contribution is from
very low energy electrons undergoing multiple foci in the
gun solenoid ﬁeld before exiting it.

The linear slope of the Schottky curve at RF phases
close to zero can be used to estimate the duration of the
electron bunch emission from the photocathode. The curve
in Fig. 6 is calibrated with an ASTRA simulation using a
Gaussian laser pulse as input to simulate the photoelectric
eﬀect and assuming an instantaneous response from the
photocathode [32]. As a result, an emission duration of
(2.5±0.5) ps (RMS) is estimated.

4.2. Beam momentum and momentum spread

The momentum of the electron beam after acceleration
in the ARES gun has been evaluated using two diﬀerent
methods. The spectrometer dipole in the gun section al-
lows the beam momentum to be determined based on the
dipole current that deﬂects the beam by 90 deg. The spec-
trometer dipole was previously calibrated for this measure-
ment.

As an alternative the ﬁrst steerer magnet together with a
screen can be used for a momentum measurement. In this
case the momentum can be calculated using the following
formula

pc =

elLc∆B
∆x

=

elc∆B
∆θ

,

(2)

where e represents the elementary charge and c is the speed
of light. l is the steerer magnetic length, L gives the dis-
tance between the steerer and imaging screen, ∆x is the
displacement of the beam on the screen, ∆B describes the
variation of the steerer magnetic ﬁeld and ∆θ represents
the corresponding kick induced by the steerer. Knowing
the calibration of the steerer, i.e.
the magnetic length
and the relation between steerer current and steerer mag-
netic ﬁeld, the beam momentum pc can be retrieved from
the measurement of ∆x. This technique of determining
the momentum is valid as long as L(cid:29)l and no element
is placed between steerer and screen which could induce
a steerer-dependent kick. These assumptions are valid in
the ARES gun setup. Hence the steerer-based momentum

5

measurement is routinely used as a fast alternative to the
spectrometer measurement.

Since the orbit correction at ARES is done with dual-
plane steerers, the momentum can be determined using
a horizontal as well as a vertical deﬂection. The aver-
age of the results from both planes is calculated and af-
terwards compared with the momentum values obtained
from spectrometer measurements. The momentum mea-
surement has been done for 3 diﬀerent RF power values
and a constant RF phase of -20 deg relative to zero-crossing
using both techniques. Table 2 summarizes the obtained
results.

Table 2: Momentum measurement results for diﬀerent RF powers.

Power [MW]
3.70±0.19
3.26±0.16
2.77±0.14

pc steerer [MeV]
4.63±0.06
4.39±0.06
4.05±0.05

pc dipole [MeV]
4.64±0.04
4.39±0.06
4.09±0.05

The measurement data from both methods are very well
comparable. Diﬀerences are within the error bars.
Table 2 also displays the expected dependency of the beam
momentum on the RF power. A higher RF power increases
the strength of the accelerating ﬁeld that allows higher
electron beam momenta after the gun cavity.

A measurement of the beam momentum during an RF
power scan was done. Figure 7 shows the measurement
data and the corresponding ASTRA simulation at a con-
stant RF phase of -20 deg from the zero-crossing. The ac-
celerating ﬁeld used in the ATSRA simulations is based on
the shunt impedance of the gun and has been determined
via the LLRF law

E(M V /m) = 47.67(cid:112)P (M W ).

(3)

Formula 3 calculates the accelerating gradient E from the
RF probe power P in the gun. The measurement results
ﬁt well with the simulation data from ASTRA and verify
the LLRF law simultaneously.

Besides the RF power, the injection phase of the electron
beam in the RF wave impacts the ﬁnal beam momentum.
An additional scan of the RF phase between -100 deg and
0 deg illustrates this fact (see Fig. 8). Maximum accelera-
tion at this RF power in the gun (3.7 MW), and therefore
maximum beam momentum, is obtained at around -30 deg,
the so called “on-crest” phase. An acceleration gradient be-
tween 90.7 MV/m and 91.8 MV/m can be estimated from
the ASTRA simulations that ﬁts the measurement data
best. An acceleration gradient of 91.7 MV/m can be esti-
mated from the LLRF law.

Furthermore, the spectrometer dipole was used to de-
termine the momentum spread of the electron beam. The
bunch was deﬂected by 90 deg (only particles with target
momentum) in the dipole and afterwards projected on a

Figure 7: Measured beam momentum vs. RF power. The momen-
tum measurement was done using the ﬁrst vertical corrector magnet.
The RF phase was ﬁxed at -20 deg relative to zero-crossing. The
measurement points are compared with ASTRA simulations.

Figure 8: Measured beam momentum vs. RF phase. The accelera-
tion gradient is estimated with around 91 MV/m from ﬁtting ASTRA
simulations.

screen. Particles with deviating momenta are deﬂected by
angles diﬀerent from 90 deg. As a consequence, the hor-
izontal beam width that is recorded on the screen, gives
a measure of the momentum spread. At a maximum RF
power of 3.7 MW and an RF phase of -20 deg from the zero-
crossing, an RMS momentum spread of (8.84±0.09) keV/c
is determined. This value corresponds to 0.19% of the
beam average momentum at these RF settings. The mo-
mentum spread which is obtained in an ASTRA simu-
lation is slightly diﬀerent at 11.9 keV/c. However, the
ASTRA simulation is based on the emission duration of
(2.5±0.5) ps estimated from the Schottky scan as input
parameter. The discrepancy in the measured and simu-
lated momentum spread numbers can well be explained
with the large error on the emission duration of the beam.

4.3. Transverse spot size

The electron beam was projected on the ﬁrst screen
in the ARES beamline, around 1.3 m behind the photo-

6

cathode. Figure 9 displays the corresponding camera im-
age. The RF gun accelerated the (7.5±0.1) pC beam to a
momentum of (4.76±0.07) MeV/c before the solenoid fo-
cused it on the screen. An RMS beam size of around
133 µm was measured. The focus of this measurement
was on a perfectly symmetric beam. RMS beam widths
of σx=(133.1±1.7) µm and σy=(133.5±2.0) µm in x- and
y-direction were obtained with a round laser pulse and fo-
cused by the pre-aligned solenoid magnet. The symmetry
can be also seen in the beam proﬁles along x and y that
are plotted in Figures 10a) and 10b).

Figure 9: Beam size measurement on the ﬁrst screen in the gun
section.

Figure 10: Analysis of the beam proﬁle along x- (a) and y-direction
(b).

Several diﬀerent measurement techniques may be used
to characterize the transverse emittance including metal
grids, a pepper-pot mask and focusing magnets. At the
ARES photoinjector the emittance can be evaluated by
scanning the magnetic strength of the gun solenoid and
measuring the beam size on one of the screens downstream.
Since the solenoid magnet was not completely aligned at
this point of commissioning not enough measurement data
of good quality could be taken. As an alternative a pepper
pot and several metal grids are available in the ARES gun
section, which allow not only an emittance measurement
but the full reconstruction of the 4D phase space. A pep-
per pot cuts small beamlets out of the electron beam that
are afterwards imaged on a screen downstream. The mo-
ments can be calculated from the envelope of the beamlet

peaks, the beamlet widths and their mean positions on the
screen [22]. Similarly, when using metal grids, which are
better suited for low-charge bunches, the shadow image of
the bars on the screen may be analyzed to calculate the
moments. However, due to the initial solenoid misalign-
ment the pointing of the electron beam must be compen-
sated by operating the spectrometer dipole with a small
current. As a consequence, the beam was sheared and
the image of the beamlets on the last screen could not be
analyzed. Further emittance measurements are planned
after the solenoid alignment is fully ﬁnished. Measure-
ment tools and analysis software are available. Meanwhile,
ASTRA simulations were performed to estimate the trans-
verse emittance for diﬀerent laser settings. An emittance
below 0.5 mm mrad is expected for a 10 pC electron beam.

5. Beam-based alignment of the gun solenoid

The beam-based alignment of the gun solenoid repre-
sents an essential step during the RF gun commissioning
[33]. In order to preserve the low emittance of an electron
beam a good alignment of the axis of the focusing element
with the beam trajectory is mandatory.

During our alignment process, the solenoid current was
scanned and the corresponding beam centroid position was
recorded on the ﬁrst screen downstream in the beamline.
The obtained data were ﬁt using an algorithm based on
linear transfer matrices to compute the solenoid misalign-
ment both in terms of oﬀset s and angles [34]. The script
is implemented in a Matlab tool. A Matlab GUI visual-
izes the movement of the beam spot on the screen with
changing solenoid current. In addition, the misalignment
in the solenoid position, calculated by the Matlab script,
is displayed.

In the ﬁrst iteration of the solenoid alignment process,
data were taken and analyzed for two diﬀerent power levels
(3.6 MW and 2.6 MW) with ++ and +- polarity settings of
the double coil gun solenoid respectively. Table 3 gives an
overview of the calculated solenoid oﬀset in x- |dX| and y-
direction |dY| as well as its rotation around the x- |dXrot|
and y-axis |dYrot| averaged over multiple data sets.

Table 3: Results for the solenoid misalignment obtained for both
polarity settings (++, +-) and two RF powers (3.6 MW and 2.6 MW)
from the beam-based alignment tool.

Misalignment
|dX| (mm)
|dXrot| (mrad)
|dY| (mm)
|dYrot| (mrad)

Estimated value
0.81±0.16
1.33±0.27
0.38±0.08
1.98±0.40

In order to check the validity of the results from the align-
ment script, a correction of the x-oﬀset was experimentally

7

applied. The solenoid was moved by 0.8 mm in the hor-
izontal direction. Figure 11 shows a clear improvement
in the beam position on the ﬁrst screen after the beam-
based alignment correction. However, it must be noticed
that the beam position changed not only in the horizontal
but also slightly in the vertical position. It was observed
that the movers of the solenoid are not fully decoupled in
their horizontal and vertical motion. Furthermore, since
the beam position still changes during a solenoid current
scan, further iterations are required in the alignment pro-
cess.
It is foreseen to repeat the procedure in order to
perfectly align the ARES gun setup.

Figure 11: Comparison of the beam position on the ﬁrst screen be-
fore (left) and after (right) the correction of the solenoid position in
the horizontal plane. All other conditions (laser, RF settings) are
identical.

6. Dark Current Characterization

Beside the photo-emitted electrons that form the elec-
tron bunch, a signiﬁcant amount of dark current electrons
was observed. The intensity of the most prominent dark
current spot exceeds the one of the photo-electron beam.
Therefore, a subtraction of the background (including dark
current) is required for the analysis of screen images and
charge measurement data.

The dependency of the dark current on the RF power
is illustrated in Figure 12. A Faraday Cup measured the
dark current charge (integrated dark current over the RF
pulse) while the RF power in the gun cavity was increased.
In order to focus the dark current electrons to the Faraday
Cup and to cover the charge of most of the dark current
spots, a second measurement sequence was performed with
the ARES gun solenoid switched on (see Fig. 12 black col-
ored data). The solenoid current was varied to maximize
the measured dark current charge at each RF power. Fig-
ure 12 conﬁrms that the currently installed RF gun cavity
with a Cs2Te photocathode delivers a dark charge level of
around 1 nC at a maximum RF power of 3.7 MW and an
RF pulse length of 4 µs.

The dark current was further characterized by a mo-
mentum measurement using one steerer magnet. The
momentum of the most signiﬁcant dark current spot is
(4.56±0.06) MeV/c and, thus, close to the maximum mo-
mentum of the electron beam. Therefore, it is assumed

8

Figure 12: Dark charge measurement during an RF power scan. The
data were taken with and without solenoid focusing to the Faraday
Cup.

that the source(s) of the dark current electrons can be
mostly found at the back plane of the gun cavity. Prob-
ably, ﬁeld emitters generate dark current, which also ex-
plains the increase in the charge while the RF power, and
therefore the ﬁeld at the cavity surface, is maximized.

Further investigations of the dark current are planned
and strategies to lower the dark current will be tested in
order to avoid an activation of the machine and to enable
high quality, low charge (sub-pC range) user experiments
at ARES. The gun was exchanged with an upgraded ver-
sion of the ARES gun cavity with a diﬀerent geometry
in spring 2020. This new gun is especially designed for
SINBAD ARES. An additional solenoid can be installed
around the cavity that will allow advanced emittance com-
pensation in a high charge mode. A characterization of the
electron beam as well as of the dark current generated from
the new gun is ongoing.

7. Conclusion and Outlook

This paper summarized the RF photoinjector commis-
sioning results for ARES gun 1. The RF conditioning of
the gun cavity was ﬁnished and the solenoid magnet was
initially aligned. Afterwards, we characterized the beam
quality in terms of charge, momentum, momentum spread
and beam size. Furthermore, we investigated the depen-
dencies of these parameters on RF settings (power, phase).
All measured beam parameters fulﬁll the requirements to
operate the ARES linac with this electron source. How-
ever, the high amount of dark current generated in the RF
photoinjector prompted the exchange of the gun cavity.

After the exchange of the gun with one with an up-
graded design and the subsequent RF conditioning, the
electron beam properties will be measured at the exit of
the RF photoinjector again. As a next step, it is planned
to guide the beam through the two travelling wave struc-
tures of the ARES linac section. Here, the beam can be

accelerated up to 155 MeV. The infrastructure of the linac
is well prepared. The two linac cavities were fully con-
ditioned during the last months. All magnets, including
8 solenoids around the travelling wave structures, several
quadrupoles and steerer magnets, are installed. All di-
agnostics such as screen stations and a toroid for charge
measurements are part of the control system and ready
for operation. Figure 13 shows the complete setup of the
ARES linac section.

Figure 13: Finished setup of the ARES linac section.

In the upcoming months, we aim to continue the commis-
sioning of the ARES linac. The parameters of the high
energy electron beam must be determined after the linac.
First iterations to minimize the bunch length via velocity
bunching are foreseen. Furthermore, the commissioning
of the experimental area is expected for the last quarter
of 2020 [35]. In this area, we will start the test of dielec-
tric structures as ultra-compact particle accelerators in the
context of the ACHIP collaboration [36, 37, 38, 39]. The
setup of the experimental chamber, including the ACHIP
experiment, is ﬁnished and ready for operation.

Beginning in 2021, the installation of a bunch compres-
sor [40] and the Polarix TDS [6] will bring ARES closer
to the goal of generating and characterizing fs to sub-fs
short electron bunches. New diagnostics, such as the low-
charge, beam proﬁle monitor STRIDENAS will be tested
in the future [41].

8. Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge the work of all the DESY
technical groups involved in planning, construction and
operation of the ARES facility. Our special thanks go to
Sven Lederer, Jakob Hauser (MVS group), Stefan Baark,
Olaf Rasmussen (MEA group), Markus Hüning, Ingo
Peperkorn, Jörg Herrmann (MIN group), Sven Pfeiﬀer,
Mikheil Titberidze (MSK group), Lutz Winkelmann,
Caterina Vidoli (FSLA group), Gero Kube, Artem Novok-
shonov, Matthias Werner, Gunnar Priebe (MDI group),

9

Tim Wilksen, Olaf Hensler (MCS group), Christian Hel-
wich, Bastian Belusic (MKK group), Klaus Flöttmann,
Reinhard Brinkmann (MPY group).

In addition, we would like to mention our collabora-
tion partners at ATHENA and ACHIP. The Helmholtz
Association funds the ATHENA project. ACHIP related
activities are partially funded by the Gordon and Betty
Moore foundation (GBMF4744). Access via the ARIES-
TNA program will partially be sponsored via the European
Unions Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation programme
under grant agreement No 730871. The AXSIS project has
received funding from the European Research Council un-
der the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme
(FP/2007-2013) / ERC Grant Agreement n. 609920’.

References

[1] U. Dorda, B. Marchetti, J. Zhu, F. Mayet, W. Kuropka,
T. Vinatier, G. Vashchenko, K. Galaydych, P. Walker, D. Marx,
R. Brinkmann, R. Assmann, N. Matlis, A. Fallahi, F. Kaertner,
Status and objectives of the dedicated accelerator R&D facility
“SINBAD” at DESY, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 909
(2018) 239–242.

[2] B. Marchetti, R. Assmann, R. Brinkmann, F. Burkart,
U. Dorda, K. Floettmann, I. Hartl, W. Hillert, M. Huen-
ing, F. Jafarinia, S. Jaster-Merz, M. Kellermeier, W. Kuropka,
F. Lemery, D. Marx, F. Mayet, E. Panofski, S. Pfeiﬀer,
H. Schlarb, T. Vinatier, P. A. Walker, L. Winkelmann,
S. Yamin, SINBAD-ARES - a photo-injector for external in-
jection experiments in novel accelerators at DESY, J. Phys.:
Conf. Ser. 1596 (2020) 012036.

[3] B. Marchetti, R. Assmann, U. Dorda, J. Zhu, Conceptual and
technical design aspects of accelerators for external injection in
LWFA, Appl. Sciences 8 (2018) 757.

[4] E. Panofski, R. W. Assmann, F. Burkart, U. Dorda,
K. Floettmann, M. Huening, B. Marchetti, D. Marx, F. Mayet,
P. A. Walker, S. Yamin, Status report of the SINBAD-ARES
RF photoinjector and linac commissioning, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser.
1350 (2019) 012019.

[5] J. Zhu, R. W. Assmann, M. Dohlus, U. Dorda, B. Marchetti,
Sub-fs electron bunch generation with sub-10-fs bunch arrival-
time jitter via bunch slicing in a magnetic chicane, Phys. Rev.
Accel. Beams 19 (2016) 054401.

[6] D. Marx, R. Assmann, P. Craievich, K. Floettmann,
A. Grudiev, B. Marchetti, Simulation studies for characteriz-
ing ultrashort bunches using novel polarizable x-band transverse
deﬂection structures, Sci. Rep. 9 (2019) 19912.

[7] P. Craievich, M. Bopp, H.-H. Braun, A. Citterio, R. Fortunati,
R. Ganter, T. Kleeb, F. Marcellini, M. Pedrozzi, E. Prat, S. Re-
iche, K. Rolli, R. Sieber, A. Grudiev, W. L. Millar, N. Catalan-
Lasheras, G. McMonagle, S. Pitman, V. d. P. Romano, K. T.
Szypula, W. Wuensch, B. Marchetti, R. Assmann, F. Christie,
B. Conrad, R. D’Arcy, M. Foese, P. G. Caminal, M. Hoﬀmann,
M. Huening, R. Jonas, O. Krebs, S. Lederer, D. Marx, J. Oster-
hoﬀ, M. Reukauﬀ, H. Schlarb, S. Schreiber, G. Tews, M. Vogt,
A. d. Z. Wagner, S. Wesch, Novel X-band transverse deﬂection
structure with variable polarization, Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams
23 (2020) 112001.

[8] B. Marchetti, A. Grudiev, P. Craievich, R. Assmann, H.-H.
Braun, N. C. Lasheras, F. Christie, R. D’Arcy, R. Fortunati,
R. Ganter, P. G. Caminal, M. Hoﬀmann, M. Huening, S. M.
Jaster-Merz, R. Jonas, F. Marcellini, D. Marx, G. McMonagle,
J. Osterhoﬀ, M. Pedrozzi, E. P. Costa, S. Reiche, M. Reukauﬀ,

S. Schreiber, G. Tews, M. Vogt, S. Wesch, W. Wuensch, Exper-
imental demonstration of novel beam characterization using a
polarizable X-band transverse deﬂection structure, Sci. Rep. 11
(2021) 3560.

[9] B. Marchetti, R. Assmann, C. Behrens, R. Brinkmann,
U. Dorda, K. Floettmann, I. Hartl, M. Huening, Y. Nie,
H. Schlarb, J. Zhu, Electron-beam manipulation techniques in
the sinbad linac for external injection in plasma wake-ﬁeld ac-
celeration, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 829 (2016)
278–283.

[10] J. Zhu, Design study for generating sub-femtosecond to fem-
tosecond electron bunches for advanced accelerator development
at sinbad, Ph.D. thesis, Hamburg University (2017).

[11] F. Mayet, Acceleration and phase space manipulation of rela-
tivistic electron beams in nano- and micrometer-scale dielectric
structures, Ph.D. thesis, Hamburg University (2019).

[12] F. Burkart, et al., DESY news, “accelerate smarter with artiﬁcal

intelligence”, https://www.desy.de/news (06.11.2020).

[13] Accelerator research and innovation for european science and

society, https://aries.web.cern.ch (June, 2021).

[14] N. Matlis, F. Ahr, A.-L. Calendron, H. Cankaya, G. Cirmi,
T. Eichner, A. Fallahi, M. Fakhari, A. Hartin, M. Hemmer,
W. Huang, H. Ishizuki, S. Jolly, V. Leroux, A. Maier, J. Meier,
W. Qiao, K. Ravi, D. Schimpf, T. Taira, X. Wu, L. Zapata,
C. Zapata, D. Zhang, C. Zhou, F. Kärtner, Acceleration of
electrons in THz driven structures for AXSIS, Nucl. Instrum.
Methods Phys. Res. A 909 (2018) 27–32.

[15] W. Spicer, A. Herrera-Gómez, Modern theory and applications
of photocathodes, in: SPIE’s 1993 Interantional Symposium on
Optics, Imaging and Instrumentation, 1993.

[16] D. Dowell, I. Bazarov, B. Dunham, K. Harkay, C. Hernandez-
Garcia, R. Legg, H. Padmore, T. Rao, J. Smedley, W. Wan,
Cathode R&D for future light sources, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
Phys. Res. A 622 (2010) 685–697.

[17] Light Conversion, Pharos sp-06-200-pp, http://www.lightcon.

com/Product/PHAROS.html (June, 2021).

[18] M. Titberidze, M. Felber, T. Kozak, T. Lamb, J. Müller,
H. Schlarb, S. Schulz, C. Sydlo, F. Zummack, First re-
sults on femtosecond level photocathode laser synchroniza-
tion at the SINBAD facility,
in: Proc. 8th International
Beam Instrumentation Conferenc (IBIC’19), 2019, pp. 564–567,
https://doi.org/10.18429/JACoW-IBIC2019-WEPP020.
[19] C. Wiebers, M. Holz, G. Kube, D. Nölle, G. Priebe, H.-C.
Schröder, Scintillating screen monitors for transverse electron
beam proﬁle diagnostics at the European XFEL, in: Proc. In-
ternational Beam Instrumentation Conferenc (IBIC’13), 2013,
pp. 807–810.

[20] G. Kube, S. Liu, A. Novokshonov, M. Scholz, Identiﬁcation and
mitigation of smoke-ring eﬀects in scintillator-based electron
beam images at the European XFEL, in: Proc. Free Electron
Laser Conference (FEL’19), 2019, pp. 301–306.

[21] D. Marx, J. Giner Navarro, D. Cesar, J. Maxson, B. Marchetti,
R. Assmann, P. Musumeci, Single-shot reconstruction of core
4D phase space of high-brightness electron beams using metal
grids, Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams 21 (2018) 102802.

[22] D. Marx, Characterization of ultrashort electron bunches at the
sinbad-ares linac, Ph.D. thesis, Hamburg University (2019).
[23] D. Lipka, W. Kleen, J. Lund-Nielsen, D. Nölle, S. Vilcins, V. Vo-
gel, Dark current monitor for the European XFEL, in: Proc.
10th European Workshop on Beam Diagnostics and Instrumen-
tation for Particle Accelerators (DIPAC 2011), 2011, pp. 572–
574.

[24] D. Lipka, J. Lund-Nielsen, M. Seebach, Resonator for charge
measurement at REGAE, in: Proc. 2nd International Beam
Instrumentation Conference (IBIC’13), 2013, pp. 872–875.
[25] S. Goloborodko, G. Grygiel, O. Hensler, V. Kocharyan,
K. Rehlich, P. Shevtsov, DOOCS: An Object Oriented Control
System as the integrating part for the TTF linac (06 1998).

[26] L. Fröhlich, P. Bartkiewicz, M. Walla, Magnet server and con-
trol system database infrastructure for the European XFEL,
in: Proc. International Conference on Accelerator and Large
Experimental Physics Control Systems (ICALEPCS’15), 2015,
pp. 701–704.

[27] A. Agababyan, A. Asova, G. Dimitrov, G. Grygiel,
B. Fominykh, O. Hensler, R. Kammering, L. Petrosyan,
K. Rehlich, V. Rybnikov, G. Trowitzsch, M. Winde, T. Wilk-
sen, Integrating a fast data acquisition system into the DOOCS
in: Proc. International Conference on Ac-
control system,
celerator and Large Experimental Physics Control Systems
(ICALEPCS’05), 2005.

[28] M. Reiser, Theory and Design of Charged Particle Beams, John

Wiley & Sons, 2008.

[29] D. H. Dowell, J. F. Schmerge, Quantum eﬃciency and thermal
emittance of metal photocathodes, Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams
12 (2009) 119901.

[30] I. V. Bazarov, B. M. Dunham, C. K. Sinclair, Maximum achiev-
able beam brightness from photoinjectors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102
(2009) 104801.

[31] E. Wisniewski, et al., Cs2Te photocathode performance in the
AWA high-charge high-gradient drive gun, in: Proc. 6th Inter-
national Particle Accelerator Conference (IPAC’15), 2015, pp.
3283–3285.

[32] K. Floettmann, ASTRA - a space charge tracking algorithm

(2011).

[33] M. Krasilnikov, J. Bahr, H.-J. Grabosch, J. Han, V. Miltchev,
A. Oppelt, B. Petrosyan, L. Staykov, F. Stephan, Beam-based
procedures for rf guns, in: Proc. 2005 Particle Accelerator Con-
ference, 2005, pp. 967–969.

[34] S. Yamin, R. W. Assmann, B. Marchetti, Study for the align-
ment of focusing solenoid of ARES RF gun and eﬀect of mis-
alignment of solenoid on emittance of space charge dominated
electron beam, J. Physics: Conf. Series 1350 (2019) 012014.
[35] F. Burkart, R. Aßmann, U. Dorda, J. Hauser, S. Lederer,
F. Lemery, B. Marchetti, F. Mayet, E. Panofski, P. Wiesener,
The experimental area at the ARES LINAC, in: Proc. 10th
International Particle Accelerator Conference (IPAC’19), 2019,
pp. 867–870.

[36] R. J. England, R. J. Noble, K. Bane, D. H. Dowell, C.-K.
Ng, J. E. Spencer, S. Tantawi, Z. Wu, R. L. Byer, E. Peralta,
K. Soong, C.-M. Chang, B. Montazeri, S. J. Wolf, B. Cowan,
J. Dawson, W. Gai, P. Hommelhoﬀ, Y.-C. Huang, C. Jing,
C. McGuinness, R. B. Palmer, B. Naranjo, J. Rosenzweig,
G. Travish, A. Mizrahi, L. Schachter, C. Sears, G. R. Werner,
R. B. Yoder, Dielectric laser accelerators, Rev. Mod. Phys. 86
(2014) 1337–1389.

[37] E. Peralta, K. Soong, R. England, E. Colby, Z. Wu, B. Mon-
tazeri, C. Mcguinness, J. Mcneur, K. Leedle, D. Walz, E. Sozer,
B. Cowan, B. Schwartz, G. Travish, R. Byer, Demonstration of
electron acceleration in a laser-driven dielectric microstructure,
Nature 503 (2013) 91.

[38] J. Breuer, P. Hommelhoﬀ, Laser-based acceleration of nonrela-
tivistic electrons at a dielectric structure, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111
(2013) 134803.

[39] F. Mayet, R. Assmann, J. Bödewadt, R. Brinkmann, U. Dorda,
W. Kuropka, C. Lechner, B. Marchetti, J. Zhu, Simulations and
plans for possible DLA experiments at SINBAD, Nucl. Instr.
and Methods in Physics A 909 (2018) 213–216.

[40] F. Lemery, et al., Overview of the ARES bunch compressor
at SINBAD, in: Proc. 10th International Particle Accelerator
Conference (IPAC’19), 2019, pp. 902–905.

[41] S. Jaster-Merz, R. W. Assmann, F. Burkart, U. Dorda,
J. Dreyling-Eschweiler, L. Huth, U. Krämer, M. Stanitzki, De-
velopment of a beam proﬁle monitor based on silicon strip sen-
sors for low-charge electron beams, J. Physics: Conf. Series 1596
(2020) 012047.

10

