Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. main
June 29, 2021

©ESO 2021

1
2
0
2

n
u
J

8
2

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
0
0
8
4
1
.
6
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Determining the source and eruption dynamics of a stealth CME
using NLFFF modelling and MHD simulations

S. L. Yardley1, 2, P. Pagano1, 3, 4, D. H. Mackay1, and L. A. Upton5

1 School of Mathematics & Statistics, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St Andrews, Fife, KY16 9SSe-mail:

sly3@st-andrews.ac.uk

2 Mullard Space Science Laboratory, University College London, Holmbury St. Mary, RH5 6NT, UK
3 Dipartimento di Fisica & Chimica, Università di Palermo, Piazza del Parlamento 1, I-90134 Palermo, Italy
4 INAF-Osservatorio Astronomico di Palermo, Piazza del Parlamento 1, I-90134 Palermo, Italy
5 Space Systems Research Corporation, 1940 Duke Street Suite 200, Alexandria, Virginia, 22314

Received ...

ABSTRACT

Context. Coronal mass ejections (CMEs) that exhibit weak or no eruption signatures in the low corona, known as stealth CMEs, are
problematic as upon arrival at Earth they can lead to geomagnetic disturbances that were not predicted by space weather forecasters.
Aims. We investigate the origin and eruption of a stealth event that occurred on 2015 January 3 that was responsible for a strong
geomagnetic storm upon its arrival at Earth.
Methods. To simulate the coronal magnetic ﬁeld and plasma parameters of the eruption we use a coupled approach. This approach
combines an evolutionary nonlinear force-free ﬁeld model of the global corona with a MHD simulation.
Results. The combined simulation approach accurately reproduces the stealth event and suggests that sympathetic eruptions occur. In
the combined simulation we found that three ﬂux ropes form and then erupt. The ﬁrst two ﬂux ropes, which are connected to a large
AR complex behind the east limb, erupt ﬁrst producing two near-simultaneous CMEs. These CMEs are closely followed by a third,
weaker ﬂux rope eruption in the simulation that originated between the periphery of AR 12252 and the southern polar coronal hole.
The third eruption coincides with a faint coronal dimming, which appears in the SDO/AIA 211 Å observations, that is attributed as
the source responsible for the stealth event and later the geomagnetic disturbance at 1 AU. The incorrect interpretation of the stealth
event being linked to the occurrence of a single partial halo CME observed by LASCO/C2 is mainly due to the lack of STEREO
observations being available at the time of the CMEs. The simulation also shows that the LASCO CME is not a single event but rather
two near-simultaneous CMEs.
Conclusions. These results show the signiﬁcance of the coupled data-driven simulation approach in interpreting the eruption and that
an operational L5 mission is crucial for space weather forecasting.

Key words. Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) — Sun: coronal mass ejections (CMEs) – Sun: magnetic ﬁelds – Methods: data analysis

1. Introduction

Coronal mass ejections (CMEs) are large-scale eruptions of
magnetised plasma that originate from the Sun and are consid-
ered to be the main drivers of space weather (Gosling 1993;
Hapgood 2011; Green & Baker 2015). CMEs are usually associ-
ated with eruptive signatures observed low in the corona such as
the rapid expansion of EUV loops, coronal dimmings, coronal
waves, ﬂares (including ﬂare ribbons and arcades), and ﬁlament
eruptions.

When these structures of magnetised plasma propagate out-
wards from the Sun they are detected in the coronagraph ﬁeld-of-
view (FOV) through the Thomson scattering of photons. CMEs
observed in the plane-of-sky can exhibit a “three-part” structure
that consists of a bright leading edge, a dark cavity, and a bright
core of ﬁlament plasma (Illing & Hundhausen 1985). Past ob-
servations have suggested that only 30 % of CMEs possess this
standard structure (Webb & Hundhausen 1987). However, more
recent studies that utilise multi-viewpoint observations taken by
the STEREO spacecraft, have determined that at least 40 % of
CMEs have a three-part structure (Vourlidas et al. 2013, 2017).
CMEs are the result of a storage-and-release process where
magnetic stress and free magnetic energy are built up in the non-

potential coronal magnetic ﬁeld. Despite decades of observations
the exact physical processes involved in the occurrence of CMEs
remain elusive. However, there are numerous models that ex-
ist to describe the formation and evolution of the pre-eruptive
magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration and the overlying coronal arcade. In
these models, a ﬂux rope, which comprises of twisted magnetic
ﬁeld, either exists prior to or forms during the eruption. If a ﬂux
rope exists prior to the eruption then a CME occurs due to a loss
of equilibrium or an ideal instability such as the kink or torus in-
stability (Forbes & Isenberg 1991; Török & Kliem 2005; Kliem
& Török 2006; Kliem et al. 2014). Alternatively, the ﬂux rope
forms in-situ as a result of magnetic reconnection as described
in the tether-cutting or breakout models (Antiochos et al. 1999;
Moore et al. 2001). However, the pre-eruptive magnetic structure
is most likely a hybrid conﬁguration of sheared and twisted mag-
netic ﬁeld where the nature of the conﬁguration depends upon
the stage of evolution of the pre-eruptive structure (see the re-
cent review by Patsourakos et al. 2020). For in-depth reviews
on the subject of CMEs, their formation and initiation, we refer
the reader to Forbes (2000), Forbes et al. (2006), Chen (2011),
Webb & Howard (2012), Chen (2017), Green et al. (2018) and
references therein.

Article number, page 1 of 17

 
 
 
 
 
 
A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

When CMEs are Earth-directed they are the main source of
intense geomagnetic storms. The interplanetary counterpart of
CMEs (ICMEs), upon arrival in the near-Earth environment, can
cause hazardous space weather eﬀects, which severely impact
our ground and space-based technological systems (Schrijver
et al. 2015; Eastwood et al. 2017). A subset of ICMEs that have
a magnetic ﬂux rope conﬁguration, known as magnetic clouds,
can be particularly geoeﬀective (Zhang & Burlaga 1988; Zhang
et al. 2004). Magnetic clouds are geoﬀective as they can provide
the strong, continuous southward-directed magnetic ﬁeld com-
ponent that is required for signiﬁcant geomagnetic disturbances
to occur (Huttunen et al. 2005; Zhang et al. 2007; Gopalswamy
2008; Richardson & Cane 2013). In-situ signatures of magnetic
clouds include an enhanced magnetic ﬁeld strength, a smooth,
prolonged rotation of the magnetic ﬁeld direction, and a reduc-
tion in proton temperature (Burlaga et al. 1981; Gonzalez et al.
2011; Kilpua et al. 2017).

Stealth CMEs are solar eruptions that have no obvious visi-
ble signatures in the low corona (Robbrecht et al. 2009) however,
are often associated with faint, slow CMEs observed in corona-
graph data, and/or in-situ ﬂux rope signatures. Stealth CMEs typ-
ically have velocities less than 300 km s−1, and generally orig-
inate from quiet Sun locations (Ma et al. 2010) or close to re-
gions of open magnetic ﬂux such as coronal holes (D’Huys et al.
2014; Nitta & Mulligan 2017). These events occur frequently
for example, studies by Ma et al. (2010) and Kilpua et al. (2014)
both examined the source regions of CMEs that were observed
in coronagraph data during two diﬀerent time periods during so-
lar minimum in 2009. These studies found that 33 % and 63 % of
their events were deemed to be stealth CMEs, respectively. The
occurrence of stealth CMEs is therefore quite common however,
their rate of occurrence is still an open topic of discussion.

Another key unanswered question is whether these ‘stealth’
events are physically diﬀerent from standard CMEs. A review of
stealth CMEs by Howard & Harrison (2013) suggests that they
are part of a continuous spectrum of CMEs and their detection is
limited by the capabilities of current instruments. In fact, most
stealth CMEs can be associated with some form of low coronal
signatures but additional processing techniques may be required
to detect them (Alzate & Morgan 2017; Palmerio et al. 2021).

To help answer this question, we can use simulations to
model the source region of the stealth CME. For example, Lynch
et al. (2016) performed a MHD simulation of the stealth CME re-
ported by Robbrecht et al. (2009) using the ARMS code (DeVore
& Antiochos 2008). They were able to reproduce the observed
white-light signatures of the CME, including the ﬂux rope and
three-part structure, and its propagation. Their results support
the view that stealth CMEs are not fundamentally diﬀerent from
CMEs and form part of the lower range of the energy distribution
of CMEs.

Despite stealth CMEs producing no obvious or very weak
low coronal signatures and being faint, slow CMEs these events
can still be geoeﬀective at Earth. Nitta & Mulligan (2017) in-
vestigated the origin of CMEs that showed no clear low coronal
signatures, but were responsible for considerable disturbances at
1 AU during Solar Cycle 24. Out of 17 stealth events, six stealth
CMEs produced moderate storms (minimum Disturbance storm
time (Dst) ≤ −50 nT) and three produced strong storms (Dst
≤ −100 nT), highlighting the signiﬁcance of these events for
space weather forecasting. They found that coronal dimmings
and post-eruption arcades are visible in the AIA observations
only if long duration diﬀerence images of the source regions are
constructed. The lack of the observational detection of stealth
CMEs on the Sun is a huge problem for space weather forecast-

Article number, page 2 of 17

ers as they cannot provide warnings of geoeﬀective events days
in advance as required by many users.

In this paper, we investigate the stealth event of 2015 Jan-
uary 3 presented in the studies of Cid et al. (2016) and Nitta
& Mulligan (2017). The stealth event led to an ICME that re-
sulted in a strong geomagnetic storm upon its arrival at Earth. At
the time of the stealth event there were several possible sources
present on the Sun that could be responsible. Therefore, to anal-
yse the source and eruption of the stealth event, we couple the
global evolutionary nonlinear force-free ﬁeld (NLFFF) model of
Mackay & van Ballegooijen (2006a), which can simulate the so-
lar corona over periods of months to years, to the global MHD
simulations of Pagano et al. (2018).

The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 describes the
remote and in-situ observations of the occurrence of the stealth
event and its possible CME/ICME counterparts. Section 3 de-
scribes the NLFFF evolutionary model used to simulate the coro-
nal magnetic ﬁeld evolution and its results. Section 4 explains
the coupling of the NLFFF evolutionary model with the MHD
simulation and shows the evolution of multiple eruptions in the
MHD simulation. By using the MHD simulation the origin of the
stealth event is determined. Finally, Sect. 5 gives the conclusions
and a discussion.

2. Observations

We will now brieﬂy describe the observations acquired from
the multiple space-based instruments that we use in this study.
The in-situ data are recorded by several spacecraft positioned in
the near-Earth environment at the Lagrange 1 (L1) point. The
magnetic ﬁeld data are taken by the Magnetometer instrument
(MAG) on board the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE;
Smith et al. 1998) while the plasma parameters and Dst index
are provided by OMNI (King & Papitashvili 2005). The time
cadence of the data ranges from 16 s to 1 hr.

The occurrence of CMEs are monitored using the corona-
graph observations taken by the Large Angle and Spectromet-
ric Coronograph (LASCO; Brueckner et al. 1995) on board the
Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO; Domingo et al.
1995). Unfortunately, there are no STEREO observations avail-
able during the time period of our study. The photospheric mag-
netic ﬁeld evolution is analysed using full disk line-of-sight
(LoS) magnetogram data taken from the Helioseismic Magnetic
Imager (HMI; Schou et al. 2012) on board the Solar Dynamics
Observatory (SDO; Pesnell et al. 2012). The coronal evolution is
studied using the Atmospheric Imaging Assembly (AIA; Lemen
et al. 2012) also on board SDO. The AIA instrument provides
observations of multi-thermal plasma, which allows us to anal-
yse the coronal response to changes in the photospheric magnetic
ﬁeld. In particular, we have analysed the 171, 193 and 211 Å
wavebands.

2.1. In-situ observations

On 2015 January 7, between the hours of 06-12 UT, the NOAA
Space Weather Prediction Center recorded a maximum planetary
K-index (Kp) 7 and hence issued an alert for a severe (G3-strong)
geomagnetic storm. Figure 1 shows the disturbance detected in
the magnetic ﬁeld data, plasma data and Dst Index due to the
arrival of an ICME at 1 AU. The disturbance detected is due to
an ICME that arrives at L1 on 2015 January 7 with a duration
of ∼13 hrs. The start and end times of the ICME are given by
the purple dashed lines in Fig. 1 and are taken from the Richard-

S. L. Yardley et al.: Source and Eruption of a Stealth CME

Fig. 1. In-situ data taken between 2015 January 6–9, which shows the presence of an ICME on 2015 January 7. The panels from top to bottom show
the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld (ACE 16 s data), the magnetic ﬁeld components (Bx, By, Bz) in Geocentric Solar Ecliptic (GSE) coordinates
(ACE 16 s data), the solar wind speed (Vp; OMNI 1 hr data), the solar wind density (Np; OMNI 1 hr data), the proton temperature (Tp; OMNI
1 hr data), and the Dst index (OMNI 1 hr data). The purple dashed lines indicate the ICME interval from to 07:00 UT to 20:00 UT taken from the
Richardson and Cane ICME catalog (http://www.srl.caltech.edu/ACE/ASC/DATA/level3/icmetable2.htm#(e)~).

son and Cane online ICME catalogue. The ICME is classiﬁed as
a magnetic cloud due to the enhancement in the magnetic ﬁeld
strength, the smooth rotation of the Bz component of the mag-
netic ﬁeld, and a decrease in the proton temperature. The rota-
tion of the Bz component from south to north and positive Bx,
By suggests that the magnetic ﬁeld is left-handed or has nega-
tive helicity, as stated in Cid et al. (2016). The minimum Dst
index recorded during this interval was −99 nT corresponding to
a moderate geomagnetic storm. Prior to the disturbance, the pro-
ton density is depleted and the proton temperature is high sug-
gesting the arrival of solar wind from the southern polar coronal
hole. However, the moderate velocity of the wind (500 km s−1)
suggests that the wind originates close to the coronal hole bound-
ary. The geomagnetic disturbance was unexpected as no Earth-

directed CMEs were observed and solar activity was at a low
level during this time period. At the time of the storm the only
identiﬁable source of the disturbance was the CME observed in
LASCO/C2 on January 3. This CME was initially believed to
originate from the farside of the Sun as no solar eruptions were
observed on disk. In the present paper we will show that this
CME was not responsible for the geomagnetic storm.

2.2. Photospheric and coronal evolution

The only easily identiﬁable CME that could be responsible for
the disturbance at 1 AU on 2015 January 7 is a partial halo CME
that is detected by LASCO/C2 on 2015 January 3 at 03:12 UT.
This CME is observed in LASCO/C2 at a position angle of

Article number, page 3 of 17

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

bance on January 7. At the time of the CME there are several
possible source regions visible on the solar disk in the south-
ern hemisphere (see panel (b) of Fig. 3), including 7 ARs and a
large, extended polar coronal hole. Cid et al. (2016) discusses the
several possible sources that could be responsible for the ICME
and the associated CME. The possible sources include multi-
ple AR ﬁlaments located in ARs 12251, 12253 and 12254 and
a ﬁlamentary structure located to the east of the southern polar
coronal hole (see Fig. 3 of Cid et al. 2016). However, Cid et al.
(2016) comes to no deﬁnite conclusions as to which of these
sources is responsible. Nitta & Mulligan (2017) suggest that a
faint coronal dimming that is visible in the SDO/AIA 211 Å ob-
servations (dashed ellipse in Fig. 4) is the source region of the
CME. The dimming is most evident in diﬀerence images that
have a long temporal separation (see Fig. 13 of Nitta & Mul-
ligan 2017). The coronal dimming is ﬁrst visible on 2015 Jan-
uary 1 around ∼22:00 UT and starts to develop during January
2. The dimming appears to be connected to the eastern periph-
ery of AR 12252, a relatively simple AR. The structure evolves
and the dimming intensiﬁes at the beginning of January 3. Dur-
ing this time, the dimming structure rapidly expands and merges
into the extended southern polar coronal hole.

The observations from LASCO/C2 and AIA suggest that a
stealth event may have occurred. The stealth event seems to orig-
inate from the region located between the east periphery of AR
12252 and the southern polar coronal hole. The event is stealthy
as only weak eruption signatures, in the form of a faint dim-
ming, are observed in the low corona. The relationship between
this stealth event and the LASCO/C2 CME is however unclear,
even though they occur at approximately the same time. Also,
it is unclear how the CME relates to the ICME. From the inter-
pretation of the observations there were no strong signatures of a
solar eruption on the disk. Due to this, it was initially determined
that the CME originated from the farside of the Sun and an alert
was not issued by space weather forecasters.

There are several questions, regarding the stealth event, that
remain unanswered and cannot be resolved from the analysis of
the observations alone. Firstly, it is unclear whether the single
partial halo observed by LASCO is responsible for the ICME
that caused the geomagnetic disturbance. Secondly, we can not
determine whether the CME originates from the source region
located close to the coronal hole or from a region on the farside
of the Sun. It is also impossible to distinguish whether the CME
is a single partial halo CME or two CMEs that erupt almost si-
multaneously. To answer these questions and to determine the
source and dynamics of the observed eruptions we apply a com-
bined simulation approach by coupling a global NLFFF model
to a MHD simulation. We describe the NLFFF model and the
MHD simulation in the Sections below.

3. NLFFF evolutionary model

To investigate the source region and occurrence of the stealth
event on 2015 January 3 we use a global evolutionary mag-
netofrictional model. This model allows us to study the build-up
of stress and energy in the magnetic ﬁeld during the weeks and
months prior to the eruption of the stealth event. The global evo-
lutionary model has been originally developed by van Ballegooi-
jen et al. (2000) and Mackay & van Ballegooijen (2006a,b) and
applied successfully on numerous occasions to simulate the evo-
lution of the coronal magnetic ﬁeld (Yeates et al. 2008b,a; Yeates
& Mackay 2009b,a, 2012; Mackay et al. 2014, 2018; Yeates et al.
2018).

Fig. 2. Running diﬀerence image taken by LASCO/C2, where the lead-
ing edge and the double-lobed structure of the CME is highlighted by
white arrows. The corresponding SDO/AIA 211 Å image is shown at
the centre.

118◦ with an angular with of 153◦. It is a slow CME with a
diﬀuse front (white arrows in Fig. 2) travelling at 163 km s−1.
The CME is diﬃcult to track in the observations due to its faint
emission and also the presence of a helmet streamer, which ap-
pears saturated in the diﬀerence images. The CME is recorded
as a single partial halo CME however, on close inspection of
the LASCO observations (Fig. 2), the CME has a double-lobed
structure. This raises the question as to whether a single par-
tial halo CME or two near-simultaneous CMEs occurred. To de-
termine the source region of the partial halo CME observed by
LASCO we analyse the photospheric and coronal observations
taken by SDO/AIA and HMI.

The CME occurs during solar maximum in Carrington Rota-
tion (CR) 2158 when the structure of the Sun’s magnetic ﬁeld is
very complex. CR 2158 begins on 2014 December 8 and ends on
2015 January 4. Near the beginning of this rotation on 2014 De-
cember 15, 19 days before the CME, there are 12 active regions
(ARs) observed on the front side of the solar disk (panel (a) of
Fig. 3). These ARs are evenly distributed across the northern and
southern hemispheres. The ARs that are located in the south-
ern hemisphere exhibit signiﬁcant ﬂaring activity and multiple
eruptions during their disk passage. In particular, there is a large
AR complex (black box in panel (a) of Fig. 3) that is the main
source of activity during this period. The AR complex, which
spans almost half of the southern hemisphere, is composed of
ARs 12235, 12237, and 12242 that are embedded in decayed
quiet Sun magnetic ﬁeld. Due to the size of this AR complex,
it most likely survives as it rotates around to the farside of the
solar disk, where it is located behind the east limb of the Sun at
the end of CR 2158. In fact, during the next rotation (CR 2159),
the large AR complex is visible on the disk and is composed of
AR 12259, 12261 and a large area of decayed positive magnetic
ﬁeld.

On 2015 January 3, at the end of CR 2158, a CME occurs,
which is assumed to be responsible for the geomagnetic distur-

Article number, page 4 of 17

LASCO C2 2015-01-03 06:39:23 UTAIA 211Å 2015-01-03 06:48:05 UTS. L. Yardley et al.: Source and Eruption of a Stealth CME

Fig. 3. Full disk images of the Sun in the 211 Å waveband taken by SDO/AIA with the corresponding photospheric magnetic ﬁeld overlaid from
SDO/HMI. Panel (a) shows the coronal emission and surface magnetic ﬁeld near the beginning of CR 2158, where the black box highlights a large
AR complex containing ARs 12235, 12237 and 12242. The image in panel (b) is taken at the end of CR 2158 after the large AR complex has
rotated behind the limb and an eruption occurs close to the southern polar coronal hole. Red (blue) contours represent positive (negative) magnetic
ﬁeld values saturated at ±500 G.

3.1. Initial condition & method

To simulate the occurrence of the stealth event an initial ﬁeld ex-
trapolation was constructed from a synoptic magnetogram taken
on 2014 September 1. Once corrected for diﬀerential rotation
the initial condition was evolved forward in time to simulate
the photospheric and coronal magnetic ﬁeld at future times. One
important aspect of the photospheric simulation is that to main-
tain their accuracy new magnetic ﬂux must be inserted to rep-
resent the emergence of new bipoles. The emergence of new
magnetic bipoles is derived from the Advective Flux Transport
(AFT) model (Upton & Hathaway 2014b,a; Ugarte-Urra et al.
2015). In total, 197 magnetic bipoles were inserted into the sim-
ulation, which runs for 200 days from 2014 September 1 until
2015 March 20, the date of a total solar eclipse. It takes the sim-
ulation around 6-8 weeks (ramp-up phase) to lose the memory of
the initial potential ﬁeld conﬁguration and for non-potentiality to
be built up in the coronal magnetic ﬁeld.

The AFT model uses the line-of-sight magnetic ﬁeld from
HMI magnetograms to simulate the magnetic ﬁeld evolution as
a result of diﬀerential rotation, meridional circulation and small-
scale convective ﬂows. The location and properties of the new
bipoles are then determined from the AFT simulations through
the application of a three-stage semi-automated procedure (see
Appendix B of Yeates et al. 2018). First, successive magne-
tograms are compared every 24 hours to identify new magnetic
bipoles. Second, the properties such as the longitude, latitude,
separation of the magnetic polarities, magnetic ﬂux, and tilt an-
gle of the identiﬁed bipoles are computed using 1 hr data from
the AFT model over a time period of a few days. This includes
the determination of the maximum magnetic ﬂux of the bipole.
The bipoles are then introduced into the NLFFF simulations
mathematically as idealised magnetic bipoles at the time the
bipole reaches its total maximum ﬂux. These bipoles are inserted

into the pre-existing ﬁeld as isolated ﬂux and can contain either
zero, negative or positive self-helicity. Once inserted, the coro-
nal ﬁeld of the bipole relaxes towards a force-free state due to
magnetofriction. In addition, the inclusion of ηj diﬀusion in the
corona allows the bipole to reconnect with the overlying coronal
ﬁeld of the surrounding region.

In the NLFFF model, the driving of the photospheric bound-
ary due to ﬂux transport processes causes the coronal ﬁeld to
diverge from a force-free equilibrium. To return the coronal ﬁeld
to a force-free state we relax the ﬁeld using the magnetofric-
tional relaxation technique of Yang et al. (1986). The relaxation
is achieved by using an artiﬁcial friction term in the induction
equation that sets the plasma velocity to be proportional to the
Lorentz force. In the simulation the photospheric driving and
coronal relaxation are performed simultaneously. Over the en-
tire 6 month period an outﬂow velocity term is also prescribed,
which ensures that the coronal ﬁeld is radial at the location of
the source surface (r = 2.5 R(cid:12)). Two reasons for including this
outﬂow are to allow erupting ﬂux ropes to be removed from the
coronal volume and to simulate the eﬀect of the solar wind along
open ﬁeld lines. The result of the simulation is the generation of
a continuous time sequence of NLFFFs over long time scales.
This particular method allows for the retention of memory of
the previous magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration as well as the build-up
and transport of free magnetic energy and helicity in the simula-
tion. A full description of the computational grid and boundary
conditions used in the simulation can be found in Mackay et al.
(2014).

3.2. NLFFF magnetic ﬁeld evolution

We now present the results of the NLFFF evolutionary model
that will be used to produce a nonpotential initial condition for
the MHD simulations in the next Section. The NLFFF simula-

Article number, page 5 of 17

(a)(b)A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Fig. 4. Sequence of 211 Å full disk images taken by SDO/AIA, which shows a weak coronal dimming in the southern hemisphere. This low
coronal eruption signature is the only observed feature associated with the stealth event. It is indicated by the white dashed ellipse in the central
four panels. The parallelogram in panel (a) indicates the FOV of the online movie that shows the stealth event.

tion can be run with numerous additional parameters to ﬁnd a
best-ﬁt model that can reproduce the observations most accu-
rately. In particular to constrain the model parameters, the loca-
tions of magnetic ﬂux ropes in the NLFFF model can be com-
pared to Hα observations of ﬁlament channels taken on the day
of the eclipse (2015 March 20) to determine the goodness-of-ﬁt.
The NLFFF simulations used in this paper to produce the initial
condition in the MHD simulations are nearly identical to the ‘mf
- evolving magnetofrictional’ simulation found in the review pa-
per of Yeates et al. (2018). The simulation gave the best-ﬁt to the
Hα observations when the magnetic bipoles were inserted with
a twist parameter of ±0.4 with positive (negative) twist assigned
to bipoles that emerged in the southern (northern) hemisphere. In
addition, Ohmic diﬀusion was included in the induction equation
with a resistive coeﬃcient of 60 km2 s−1. This NLFFF simula-
tion was previously used in Meyer et al. (2020) to compare the
large-scale structure of the magnetic ﬁeld from the simulations
with oﬀ-limb SWAP images. While nearly identical, the simula-
tion presented in the present paper is slightly diﬀerent from those
previously published as in the few days prior to the eruption we
deviated from a default value of ±0.4 for the newly emerging
bipoles and assigned a zero twist for ARs 12252 and 12253 to
be more consistent with the untwisted nature of the bipoles in
the observations.

Figure 5 shows the photospheric and coronal magnetic ﬁeld
evolution taken from the global NLFFF evolutionary model dur-
ing the time leading up to the stealth event. The initial condition
of the simulation was a potential ﬁeld extrapolation constructed
on 2014 September 1, which is shown in panel (a) of Fig. 5. The
stealth event is observed to occur on 2015 January 3, which cor-
responds to day 123 of the simulation. As the ramp-up phase of
the simulation is approximately 6-8 weeks the magnetic ﬁeld is
fully nonpotential before the stealth eruption occurs. This is ev-
ident by the build-up of sheared and twisted coronal magnetic
ﬁeld in the computational domain as displayed by Fig. 5.

Figure 6 shows the surface magnetic ﬂux and magnetic ﬁeld
lines taken from the NLFFF evolutionary model on the day of
the stealth event as seen from the L3 perspective i.e. the far-
side of the Sun. In contrast, Figure 7 shows the surface magnetic
ﬂux and magnetic ﬁeld lines taken from the NLFFF evolutionary
model on the days surrounding the time of the stealth event (2015
Jan 3–6) from the L1 perspective. Prior to the stealth event, three
ﬂux ropes have formed in the NLFFF model that we will now re-
fer to as FR1, FR2, and FR3. FR1, FR2, and FR3 correspond to
the light blue, dark blue, and magenta ﬂux ropes shown in Fig-
ures 6 and 7. The ﬁrst ﬂux rope (FR1 in Fig. 6) has formed along
the PIL of the large AR complex that is located behind the east
limb. The second ﬂux rope (FR2 in Fig. 7) has footpoints rooted

Article number, page 6 of 17

S. L. Yardley et al.: Source and Eruption of a Stealth CME

Fig. 5. Magnetic ﬁeld structure taken from the global NLFFF evolutionary model in the time period prior to the eruption of the stealth event
that occurred on 2015 January 3. The panels show the radial magnetic ﬁeld of the photosphere (grey) where white (black) regions correspond to
positive (negative) magnetic ﬁeld. The red lines are representative magnetic ﬁeld lines from the model to show the conﬁguration of the coronal
magnetic ﬁeld. The panels are plotted in a co-rotating frame at the Carrington rate where the corresponding Carrington Rotation is given in the
bottom left. In panel (a), the initial potential condition (day 1) of the model is shown where central meridian is at 215◦ longitude. For panels (b)–(d)
central meridian is at 0◦ longitude.

in the positive photospheric magnetic ﬁeld of the large AR com-
plex located on the east limb and negative polarity quiet Sun
magnetic ﬁeld that is close to the extended polar coronal hole
in the southern hemisphere. The third ﬂux rope (FR3 in Fig. 7)
is located between the eastern periphery of AR 12252, the polar
coronal hole, and a region of positive quiet Sun magnetic ﬂux,
which is adjacent to the western footpoints of FR2. The location
of FR3 matches the location of the faint coronal dimming that

is observed to occur in the observations (see Sect. 2). All three
ﬂux ropes have formed mainly as a result of diﬀerential rotation
and surface diﬀusion that leads to convergence and cancellation,
followed by magnetic reconnection.

In the NLFFF evolutionary model, in the days leading up to
the stealth event and CME on 2015 January 3, reconnection oc-
curs between the footpoints of the two ﬂux ropes FR2 and FR3.
The reconnection continues in the days subsequent to the stealth

Article number, page 7 of 17

2014 Sep 12014 Oct 142014 Nov 112014 Dec 82154215521572158(a)(b)(c)(d)A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Fig. 6. Magnetic ﬁeld lines taken from the global NLFFF evolutionary model that show the presence of a ﬂux rope (FR1) along the PIL of the
large AR complex that is located behind the east solar limb. The panels are plotted using the same coordinate frame as Fig. 5 and the day of the
simulation is given in the bottom left of panel (a). The blue (red) contours represent negative (positive) photospheric magnetic ﬁeld. Panel (a)
shows the entire solar disk as it would be viewed from the farside of the Sun from the L3 perspective with a central meridian longitude of 180◦
and representative ﬁeld lines of FR1 (light blue). Panels (b) and (c) show a close up of the ﬂux rope and the axis of the ﬂux rope in the y-z plane,
respectively.

event and eventually a new ﬂux rope is formed, which is a combi-
nation of FR2 and FR3. At the same time, the overlying magnetic
ﬁeld of the two ﬂux ropes opens up (green magnetic ﬁeld lines in
panel (b) of Fig. 7), which allows the newly formed ﬂux rope to
rise in the domain (see panels (g) and (h) of Fig. 7). The occur-
rence of external reconnection above the magnetic ﬂux rope and
the resulting rising motion of the ﬂux rope suggests that a loss
of equilibrium has occurred and the simulation has successfully
captured the pre-eruptive magnetic conﬁguration of the struc-
ture that results in the stealth event. It also suggests that, due to
the interaction between the two magnetic structures, there is a
connection between the large AR complex and the polar coronal
hole.

The loss of equilibrium of the ﬂux rope (formed from FR2
and FR3) in the NLFFF evolutionary model occurs after the time
of the stealth event in the observations and extends over a longer
time period. This can occur due to a combination of reasons.
Firstly, the build-up of energy in the nonpotential coronal ﬁeld
in the model occurs over a long timescale of months therefore,
we do not expect the eruption to occur in the NLFFF model at the
exact time as in the observations. Although, we would expect the
eruption to occur within a few days. The fact that the eruption is
reproduced within a few days of it occurring in the observations
is a positive result. Secondly, we injected all of the bipoles with
a twist parameter of magnitude 0.4 until a few days prior to the
stealth event. On the Sun, each bipole will have a slightly dif-
ferent twist, which could alter the time of the eruption. Finally,
the longer duration of the processes in the NLFFF simulations is
due to the relaxation approach that dampens the dynamics.

While the magnetofrictional approach is computationally ef-
ﬁcient and provides the pre-eruptive magnetic ﬁeld conﬁgura-
tion in the build-up to eruption over long time scales, to simulate
the complete dynamics of eruptions a full MHD simulation is
required. We therefore take the global magnetic ﬁeld from the
NLFFF evolutionary model, on the day of the stealth event (day

Article number, page 8 of 17

123, which corresponds to 2015 January 3), and use it as the
initial condition of a MHD simulation. This will allow us to con-
sider the true eruption dynamics of the ﬂux ropes. This is de-
scribed in the next Section, where we also consider the eruption
of FR1, FR2, and FR3 in the MHD simulation.

4. Global MHD simulation

The NLFFF evolutionary model described in Section 3 accu-
rately reproduces the build-up of magnetic stress and energy in
the corona over long timescales such as days or months. How-
ever, in order to model the dynamics of solar eruptions on shorter
timescales such as minutes or hours we require full MHD. The
two approaches can be coupled by using the magnetic ﬁeld con-
ﬁguration of the global corona from the NLFFF evolutionary
model as the initial condition in a MHD simulation. Thus provid-
ing a realistic data-driven initial condition to model the eruption.
This combined approach of coupling the two methods has been
successfully adopted in a series of studies focused on advancing
the progress of the data-driven modelling on erupting time scales
(Pagano et al. 2013b; Rodkin et al. 2017; Pagano et al. 2018).

4.1. Initial condition

To combine the NLFFF with the MHD simulation the nonpo-
tential, pre-eruptive magnetic ﬁeld from the NLFFF simulation
must be used as the initial conﬁguration in the MHD simula-
tion. To do this, we ﬁrst import the components of the 3D mag-
netic ﬁeld (Br, Bθ, Bφ) from the NLFFF evolutionary model on
the same day as the stealth event (day 123 of the simulation, 2015
January 3) into the MHD simulation and interpolate the compo-
nents onto the numerical grid of the MHD simulation. The MHD
equations are then solved numerically using PLUTO (Mignone
et al. 2012). However, the domain of the MHD simulation ex-
tends to r = 4R(cid:12) whereas, the domain of the NLFFF evolution-

Large AR complexFR1FR11232015 Jan 3( a )( b )( c )-25-20-15-10Y0246810Z_00100, X= 260.0, V_MAG_YZ, VM=  130.935, C_MAG_X, CM=   96.670, MODS. L. Yardley et al.: Source and Eruption of a Stealth CME

ary model only extends to a source surface of r = 2.5R(cid:12). There-
fore, before performing the simulation we extended the magnetic
ﬁeld conﬁguration taken from the NLFFF evolutionary model to
the outer boundary of the MHD simulation. To extend the mag-
netic ﬁeld conﬁguration we assume a purely radial ﬁeld beyond
the original source surface at r = 2.5R(cid:12)

Br(r > 2.5R(cid:12), θ, φ) = Br(2.5R(cid:12), θ, φ)

(2.5R(cid:12))2
r2

.

(1)

In order to produce a complete set of MHD variables for
the initial condition we must also construct a distribution for the
plasma density and temperature.

To begin with, when we imported the global magnetic ﬁeld
conﬁguration, we adjusted our model to reproduce realistic val-
ues of plasma β, density, and temperature. Through doing this
we aim to construct a plasma distribution that has the follow-
ing key aspects of the density distribution of the solar corona: i)
density and gravity stratiﬁcation, ii) horizontal thermal pressure
balance, and iii) an approximately uniform temperature distribu-
tion in quiet Sun regions. To achieve these key aspects in our
simulation, we constructed the plasma distribution by starting
from a simple static distribution of density ρ, and thermal pres-
sure p. We then modiﬁed this static plasma distribution to dif-
ferentiate regions of strong, highly concentrated magnetic ﬁeld
from quiet Sun magnetic ﬁeld. In the ﬁrst step, the density of the
background corona ρb follows a radial proﬁle given by

ρb(r) = ρph

(cid:33)k

,

(cid:32)

r
R(cid:12)

meaning of the function ω consider a magnetic ﬂux rope that
lies above a PIL. The gradient of the vertical component of the
magnetic ﬁeld is horizontal and perpendicular to the PIL. In con-
trast, the magnetic ﬁeld has a strong axial component that is hor-
izontal and parallel to the PIL. As these two vectors are almost
perpendicular this maximises the vector product in the numera-
tor of Eq.6-8. Moreover, as ω is dependent on the magnetic ﬁeld
intensity its value is large at the solar surface and decreases with
increasing heliocentric distance. We implement ω in the simula-
tions through the following set of functions

ΩB(ω) =

Ωθ(θ) =

Ω =

arctan

(cid:17)

(cid:16) ω−ω(cid:63)
∆ω

π
(cid:16) θ−(π−θ(cid:63))
arctan
∆θ

+ 0.5,
(cid:17)

π
ΩB + Ωθ
2

+

−
|ΩB − Ωθ|
2

π

,

arctan

(cid:17)

(cid:16) θ−θ(cid:63)
∆θ

+ 1,

(9)

(10)

(11)

where Ωθ and ΩB are bound between 0 and 1, and Ω is de-
ﬁned to select the highest value between them. The transition be-
tween 0 and 1 depends upon the function parameters ω(cid:63) and θ(cid:63)
(see Table 1 in Sect. 4.3). The purpose of Ωθ is to avoid bound-
ary eﬀects that occur near the polar regions. For more details see
Pagano et al. (2018).

(2)

Using Eq. 2 we can now construct a temperature distribution

T from Ω, which is deﬁned as

where ρph is the photospheric density and k is the power law
index that describes the steepness of the density proﬁle. The val-
ues of the photospheric density and power law index are given
in Table 1 in Sect. 4.3 along with the values of the remainder
of the MHD parameters applied. The thermal pressure can then
be deﬁned by imposing that the atmosphere is in gravitational
equilibrium as follows

,

= −

GM(cid:12)
r2

∂p
∂r
where G is the gravitational constant and M(cid:12) is the mass of the
Sun. Equation 3 can be solved analytically by using the boundary
condition of the thermal pressure at the outer domain boundary

(3)

p4R(cid:12)

= ρb(4R(cid:12))
µmp

kBTC,

(4)

where TC is the coronal temperature at r = 4R(cid:12).

To account for regions of strong, highly concentrated mag-
netic ﬁeld we use the proxy for magnetic ﬂux rope formation
ω(r, θ, φ), which has previously been deﬁned in Rodkin et al.
(2017), and Pagano et al. (2018, 2019), where

ω =

ωr =

ωθ =

ωφ =

+ ω2
φ,

,

(cid:113)

+ ω2
ω2
r
θ
|B × ∇Br|
|∇Br|
|B × ∇Bθ|
|∇Bθ|
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)B × ∇Bφ
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)∇Bφ
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

,
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

.

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

The function ω is positive deﬁnite and increases for complex
and twisted magnetic ﬁeld structures. To visualise the physical

T = Ω(TFR − TC) + TC,

(12)

where TFR and TC are the ﬂux rope and coronal temperature,
respectively. For highly concentrated magnetic ﬁelds Ω ∼ 1
whereas, Ω ∼ 0 for quiet Sun regions.

To account for the newly deﬁned temperature distribution,

we modiﬁed the thermal pressure such that

ρ = ρb

TC
T

.

(13)

These plasma and temperature distributions result in a solar
corona with cool, dense ﬂux ropes in regions of strongly twisted
magnetic ﬁeld and hot, low density coronal arcades in the back-
ground corona. The ﬁnal conﬁguration is not in hydrostatic equi-
librium as modifying the density distribution in Eq. 13 generates
a force imbalance. However, the time scales over which plasma
displacements that are induced by this imbalance occur are much
longer than the time scales related to the Lorentz forces present
in the domain. In terms of the forces, we found that the unbal-
anced Lorentz force was about 10 times stronger than the pres-
sure gradient and gravity at the locations where the eruptions
are triggered, thus such departure from the hydrostatic equilib-
rium is not suﬃcient to prevent the eruption of unstable magnetic
structures.

4.2. MHD equations

As previously stated, once we have coupled the two techniques
and deﬁned the plasma and temperature distributions in the com-
putational domain, we use PLUTO (Mignone et al. 2012) to

Article number, page 9 of 17

Table 1. Parameters used in the MHD simulation.

Parameter
ρph
k
θ(cid:63)
∆θ
ω(cid:63)
∆ω
TFR
TC

Value
2 × 10−16
-6
0.13
0.005
3
0.3
103
106

Units
g cm−3

rads
rads
G
G
K
K

solve the time-dependent MHD equations

+ ∇ · (ρv) = 0,

+ ∇ · (ρvv) + ∇p −

1
4π

(∇ × B) × B = ρg,

− ∇ × (v × B) = 0,

+ ∇ · [(e + p)v] = ρg · v.

The total energy density (cid:15) is given by

(cid:15) = p
γ − 1

+ 1
2

ρv2 + B2
8π

,

∂ρ
∂t
∂ρv
∂t
∂B
∂t
∂e
∂t

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

as the lower boundary condition in the initial condition of the
MHD simulation. The map shows that there are several active
regions visible on disk during this time period that are also seen
in the observations. In particular, we focus on the AR which is
close to central meridian (AR 12253 in Fig. 3(a) and Fig. 8),
the region directly below the AR, and the large complex of ARs
(12235, 12237, and 12242) in Fig. 3(b)) located behind the east
limb i.e. the region outside of the red circle in Fig. 8. The large
AR complex is therefore not visible in the observations at the
time of the eruption. Figure 8(b) shows the corresponding ra-
dial Lorentz force at the solar surface. The Lorentz force LFr
is generally very small where the corona is close to equilibrium
however, the values of LFr are roughly one order of magnitude
larger at the locations that correspond to AR 12253 and the large
AR complex.

Panels (a) and (b) of Fig. 9 show the distribution of den-
sity and temperature at the lower boundary of the initial condi-
tion of the MHD simulation. The active regions in the simula-
tion are cold and dense compared to the surrounding hot, sparse
solar corona. The initial condition of the simulation is in non-
equilibrium as the magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration imported from
the NLFFF evolutionary model is not force-free as the build-up
of stress and energy leads to the eruption of the ﬂux ropes. As
the solar atmosphere is constructed in such a way that the inten-
sity of the downward-directed gravitational force is always equal
to or larger than the outward-directed thermal pressure gradient,
any upward plasma motion must be due to the presence of the
Lorentz force in the initial condition.

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

where γ = 5/3 is the ratio of speciﬁc heats. The expression for
gravitational acceleration is given by

4.4. Evolution & eruption dynamics

g = −

GM(cid:12)
r2

ˆr,

(19)

where ˆr is the unit vector.

The computational domain is composed of a 112 × 192
× 384 grid in the r, θ, φ directions, with the cell size increas-
ing in the radial direction from ∆ = 0.012R(cid:12) at r = 1R(cid:12), to
∆ = 0.049R(cid:12) at r = 4R(cid:12). The cell size in the θ and φ directions
is uniform. The latitude θ and longitude φ span from θ = 0.75◦
to θ = 179.25◦, and 0 to 360◦, respectively. The boundary condi-
tions were constructed using ghost cells in order to be consistent
with the conditions from the NLFFF evolutionary model. In the
simulation, the outer boundary is open, reﬂective boundary con-
ditions are set for θ, and the φ boundaries are periodic. At the
lower photospheric boundary, we imposed ﬁxed boundary con-
ditions where the plasma and magnetic ﬁeld cannot evolve below
r = 1.03R(cid:12). As no driving is applied at the lower boundary in the
MHD simulation, any dynamics produced were the result of the
forces generated in the NLFFF model.

4.3. MHD simulation initial condition

In order to model the stealth event that occurred in the observa-
tions on 2015 January 3, we imported the global magnetic ﬁeld
from the NLFFF evolutionary model on day 123 (see Figs. 6 and
7 panel (a)) and followed the procedure outlined in Section 4.1.
At this time, a ﬂux rope (FR3 in Fig. 7) has formed in the model
at the location of the stealth event. Two other ﬂux ropes F1 and
F2 have also formed that are connected to the large AR complex
on the farside.

The parameter values used in the MHD simulation are given
in Table 1. Figure 8(a) shows the radial magnetic ﬁeld compo-
nent, imported from the NLFFF evolutionary model, that is used

Article number, page 10 of 17

The coronal density distribution integrated along the line-of-
sight is shown in Fig. 10, as viewed from the Earth (top row), and
above the solar north pole (bottom row). The evolution of three
ﬂux rope structures (light blue, dark blue, and magenta ﬁeld
lines labelled FR1, FR2, and FR3, respectively) is also shown
in Fig 10. These structures correspond to the three ﬂux ropes
identiﬁed in the NLFFF simulation and are associated with the
most signiﬁcant density perturbations in the MHD simulation.
To give an estimation of the spatial size of the ﬂux ropes the
angular distance between the footpoints of the light blue, dark
blue, and magenta ﬂux ropes was calculated to be 11, 31, and 4◦,
respectively.

At t = 13.9 min (Fig. 10 panel (a)), there is clear evidence of
an eruption taking place near the east limb. The eruption consists
of a bright leading edge, dark cavity, and FR1. When viewed
from above the Sun’s north pole (panel (d)) the eruption origi-
nates from a region that is mostly behind the east limb. Taking
into account the results from the observations, NLFFF evolu-
tionary model, and the simulation, the eruption can be associated
with the large AR complex (ARs 12235, 12237 and 12242). At
this time, the coronal density elsewhere remains almost constant,
except for the region associated with FR2, which is partially con-
nected to the large AR complex. At t = 13.9 min, FR2 has also
just started to erupt. This second eruption of FR2 is more evident
at subsequent timesteps (see Fig. 10 panels (b) and (c)).

In the ﬁnal column of Fig. 10, at t = 34.8 min, the density
perturbation due to FR1 has reached the outer boundary of the
simulation located at 4 R(cid:12) while FR2 trails behind. At the same
time, multiple eruptions occur on the solar disk however, only
one has enough energy to leave the lower corona, and achieves a
large enough radial distance to be distinguishable from the back-
ground corona. The structure responsible for the third eruption
is FR3, the location of which is slightly oﬀset from disk centre

S. L. Yardley et al.: Source and Eruption of a Stealth CME

and to the south of AR 12253. The eruption of FR3 occurs at the
same location as the coronal dimming in the observations and is
therefore determined to be responsible for the stealth event.

In order to investigate the propagation of the eruptions into
interplanetary space we show the density distribution at r = 2R(cid:12)
(Fig. 11) at t = 23.2 and 34.8 min. The ﬁrst density perturbation
at t = 23.2 min (see P1 in Fig. 11 panel (a)) covers a large circu-
lar area centred above the AR complex (ARs 12235, 12237 and
12242), which is located behind the east limb. The perturbation
is a result of the eruption of the AR complex, which includes
the ejection of FR1. The majority of the density enhancement
due to this eruption originates from the farside, more than 90◦
away from the Sun-Earth line. This eruption would therefore not
be Earth-directed or be connected to the stealth event. At a later
time of t = 34.8 min, there are two additional small perturbations
in density (P2 and P3 in Fig. 11 panel (b)) that reach the source
surface, while the earlier density perturbation (P1) has expanded.
The two perturbations located at the east limb and near disk cen-
tre (P2 and P3) are a result of the eruptions of FR2 and FR3.
The ﬁrst small density perturbation (P2), which is located at the
east limb and within the original large density perturbation (P1),
is due to the eruption of FR2 in the MHD simulation. The other
additional small density perturbation (P3), located near disk cen-
tre, occurs later than the previous ones and is due to the eruption
of FR3. As the eruption of FR3 is Earth-directed it has the po-
tential to cause a geomagnetic storm at Earth. The sequence of
events suggests that these eruptions could be sympathetic with
the ﬁnal density perturbation (P3), which is located close to disk
centre, being a consequence of the coronal perturbations (P1 and
P2) caused by the ﬁrst and second ﬂux rope (FR1 and FR2) erup-
tions.

In Fig. 12 panel (a) we show the radial velocity vr at r = 2R(cid:12)
at t = 40.6 min in the MHD simulation. It is evident that the three
ﬂux rope eruptions that occur on the farside (FR1), at the east
limb (FR2), and south of disk centre (FR3) generate fast plasma
outﬂows. The simulation also shows some small localised down-
ﬂows at the periphery of the eruptions of FR2, and FR3. These
downﬂows are likely due to small amounts of plasma that fall
back to the surface during the eruption process.

We note that the photospheric density and subsequently the
derived coronal values can signiﬁcantly aﬀect the MHD evolu-
tion in the model and that the outﬂows encountered in our model
are signiﬁcantly higher than the ones measured by LASCO.
Therefore, to understand the full implications of the atmospheric
reconstruction on the eruption dynamics, and in order to reduce
the discrepancies in the observed speeds, we perform a second
simulation where we change the value of photospheric density in
the model. In the second simulation we set ρph = 2×10−15 g cm3,
compared to a density of 2 × 10−16 g cm3 used in the ﬁrst model.
The radial velocity distribution produced by the second simu-
lation is shown in panel (b) of Fig. 12. In this simulation, we
ﬁnd that only the largest eruption from the AR complex of FR1
has produced signiﬁcant plasma outﬂows in the solar corona
whereas, the rest of the corona remains in equilibrium. A vari-
ation in photospheric density of a factor 10 is not unusual and
similar results were found in Pagano et al. (2013a). In this cur-
rent study it is shown that a successful eruption is dependent on
both the density distribution of the atmosphere and the magnetic
ﬁeld conﬁguration. Moreover, these results show that many erup-
tion scenarios are possible and that observational constraints are
crucial in determining the correct scenario. At the same time,
in this model the plasma β is proportional to the density, which
leads to a less accurate description of the coronal physics when β
grows above ∼ 1. Values of β slightly higher than coronal ones,

but still lower than 1, are necessary to allow the plasma to re-
adjust when the NLFFF conﬁguration is imported. We identify
this as an important area for improvement, where in future stud-
ies, we aim to import the NLFFF in two steps to allow for a more
accurate description of the solar atmosphere in terms of plasma
density, plasma β, and eruption outﬂows.

5. Discussion & conclusions

In this study, we have coupled the nonlinear force-free ﬁeld
(NLFFF) evolutionary model with a global MHD simulation in
order to investigate the origin and dynamics of the stealth event
that occurred on 2015 January 3. The NLFFF evolutionary mag-
netic ﬁeld model provides an accurate description of the global
magnetic ﬁeld of the solar corona in the months prior to erup-
tion onset. We used the global magnetic ﬁeld from the NLFFF
evolutionary model taken on the same day as the occurrence of
the stealth event in the observations as the initial condition of
the global MHD simulation. To obtain a full set of variables
for the MHD simulation, we constructed distributions for the
plasma density and temperature. We then use PLUTO (Mignone
et al. 2012) to solve the time-dependent MHD equations in the
computational domain. By coupling the two techniques we pro-
pose the following scenario that successfully describes the oc-
currence and signatures of the stealth event, the CME observed
in LASCO/C2, and the geomagnetic disturbance present in the
remote and in-situ observations. Two magnetic ﬂux ropes (FR1
and FR2 in Fig. 10 panel (b)) erupt ﬁrst producing two near-
simultaneous CMEs both directed away from Earth. A third,
weaker eruption follows that corresponds to the eruption of a
ﬂux rope structure (FR3 in Fig. 10 panel (b)) that is south of AR
12253 and north of the southern polar coronal hole. The weak
eruption due to FR3 is responsible for the geomagnetic storm at
Earth.

In the MHD simulation, the third ﬂux rope eruption orig-
inates from a structure which is less unstable than the ﬁrst
two. This scenario agrees with previous studies that suggest that
stealth CMEs are the result of sympathetic eruptions and the re-
conﬁguration and removal of the overlying, stabilizing magnetic
ﬁeld can trigger a neighbouring CME (e.g. O’Kane et al. 2019).
The scenario put forward by the results from the coupled
simulations is supported by the observations as follows. In the
lead up to the eruption of the stealth event, a large AR complex,
composed of ARs 12235, 12237, and 12242, is visible on the so-
lar disk and rotates around to the farside of the Sun. This large
AR complex is located behind the east limb at the time of the
stealth event and is therefore not visible in the coronal observa-
tions at the time of the stealth eruption.

If we revisit the LASCO observations a single partial halo
CME is recorded at around 03:12 UT on 2015 January 3. When
examining the LASCO/C2 observations in more detail the lead-
ing edge of the CME appears to consist of the combination of
two CME fronts where one is roughly 1 R(cid:12) ahead of the other.
Taking the velocity of the ﬁrst CME to be around 500 km s−1,
this corresponds to a time diﬀerence of ∼30 mins between the
two eruptions, which is consistent with the ﬁrst triggering the
second eruption given an Alfvén speed of 1000 km s−1 and that
they are roughly half a radian apart on the solar disk. A possi-
ble explanation for this, considering the results from the MHD
simulation (see Fig. 10), is that the light blue ﬂux rope (FR1
in Fig. 10) associated with the large AR complex erupts ﬁrst,
immediately followed by the eruption of the dark blue ﬂux rope
(FR2 in Fig. 10), that is partially connected to the large AR com-
plex. In the MHD simulation, the density enhancements (P1 and

Article number, page 11 of 17

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

P2 in Fig. 11) due to the propagation of these eruptions (FR1
and FR2) into space (Fig. 11) are mainly visible behind or at
the east limb. Therefore, the eruptions of FR1 and FR2 would
not be Earth-directed. Due to the optically thin nature of the
observations and the two eruptions occurring almost simultane-
ously, leads to the interpretation that a single partial halo CME
occurred in the coronagraph observations. Unfortunately, there
are no STEREO observations available at this time to observe
the two CMEs from a diﬀerent perspective.

A few days later on 2015 January 7, the signatures of a mag-
netic cloud are observed in the in-situ data, which causes a strong
geomagnetic storm at Earth. While it is diﬃcult to determine the
source region, a faint coronal dimming visible in the SDO/AIA
211 Å observations is thought to be the source of the magnetic
cloud. This is corroborated by the presence of a ﬂux rope struc-
ture (FR3 in Fig. 7) in the NLFFF model at the same location of
the coronal dimming in the observations. This ﬂux rope located
to the south of AR 12253 erupts in the MHD simulation after
FR1 and FR2 (see Fig. 10). We calculated the angular separation
of the footpoints of the magenta ﬂux rope (FR3) in the simula-
tion to be around 4◦, which is much smaller than the other two
erupting ﬂux ropes (11 and 31◦). Given the size, location, and
the very weak eruptive signatures observed in the low corona
associated with the eruption meant that this CME wasn’t visi-
ble in LASCO and the resulting geomagnetic disturbance was
attributed incorrectly to the CME observed in LASCO/C2 by
space weather forecasters. These observations and simulation re-
sults highlight the importance of an operational L5 mission for
space weather forecasting.

Although the faint coronal dimming visible on the disk in
the 211 Å observations is the most probable source of the stealth
event other sources cannot be ruled out. Cid et al. (2016) dis-
cusses several possible sources including several ﬁlament candi-
dates that could be responsible for the stealth event (see Sect. 2).
Nitta & Mulligan (2017) present the possibility that the coronal
dimming is the cause however, they also discuss the possibility
that an area beyond AR 12253 could be involved in the eruption.
This is possible and conﬁrmed by the density distribution and
radial velocity taken from the MHD simulation at r = 2R(cid:12). The
density structure (Fig. 10 (b)) is slightly oﬀset from the loca-
tion of the ﬂux rope structure in the NLFFF evolutionary model.
This oﬀset could be due to deﬂection of the ﬂux rope as it prop-
agates through the corona caused by the open magnetic ﬁeld of
the coronal hole. This made the determination of the region pri-
marily responsible for the stealth event diﬃcult.

Furthermore, the coupling between the NLFFF model and
MHD simulation involves an atmospheric reconstruction that
could be better constrained by the observations. In future studies
we plan to use advanced diagnostic techniques that can constrain
our models using observations. In particular, this will be possible
with the new generation of coronagraphs, such as METIS (An-
tonucci et al. 2017) on board Solar Orbiter (Müller et al. 2020).
For example, white-light observations can be used to constrain
the column density variations during a CME. These constraints
are more accurate when polarised light observations are also
available (Bemporad & Pagano 2015; Pagano et al. 2015). In ad-
dition, it would be possible to constrain the temperature distribu-
tion using Lyman-α observations as outlined in Bemporad et al.
(2018) and the plane-of-the-sky velocity ﬁeld Ying et al. (2019).
The present study does however, illustrate the power in using a
coupled data-driven NLFFF and MHD approach to model erup-
tions on the Sun. Through this we have been able to determine
the origin of both the LASCO CME and a stealth CME, and

Article number, page 12 of 17

shown that while the two are related, they have diﬀerent origin
locations on the Sun.

Acknowledgements. S.L.Y. would like to acknowledge STFC for support via the
consolidated grant SMC1/YST037 and also NERC for funding via the SWIMMR
Aviation Risk Modelling (SWARM) Project, grant number NE/V002899/1. P.P.
would like to thank the ERC for support via grant No. 647214. D.H.M. would
like to thank the STFC for support via consolidated grant ST/N000609/1 and, the
Leverhulme trust, and the ERC under the Synergy Grant: The Whole Sun (grant
agreement no. 810218) for ﬁnancial support. P.P. and D.H.M. would like to thank
STFC for IAA funding under grant number SMC1-XAS012. L.A.U. was sup-
ported by the NSF Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship Program (Award AGS-1624438). We would also like to thank the
ISSI Team led by Nariaki Nitta and Tamitha Mulligan for the useful discussions
on Problem Geomagnetic Storms. This research used version 1.0.2 (https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3779284) of the SunPy open source software
package (SunPy Community et al. 2020) and also JHelioviewer (Müller et al.
2017). The OMNI data were obtained from the GSFC/SPDF OMNIWeb inter-
face at omniweb.gsfc.nasa.gov. We also used data taken from the LASCO CAT-
ALOG (cdaw.gsfc.nasa.gov/CME_list/). This work used the DiRAC@Durham
facility managed by the Institute for Computational Cosmology on behalf of the
STFC DiRAC HPC Facility (www.dirac.ac.uk). The equipment was funded by
BEIS capital funding via STFC capital grants ST/P002293/1, ST/R002371/1 and
ST/S002502/1, Durham University and STFC operations grant ST/R000832/1.
PLUTO was developed at the Turin Astronomical Observatory in collaboration
with the Department of Physics of the Turin University.

References

Alzate, N. & Morgan, H. 2017, ApJ, 840, 103
Antiochos, S. K., DeVore, C. R., & Klimchuk, J. A. 1999, ApJ, 510, 485
Antonucci, E., Andretta, V., Cesare, S., et al. 2017, in Society of Photo-Optical
Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 10566, Proc. SPIE,
105660L

Bemporad, A. & Pagano, P. 2015, A&A, 576, A93
Bemporad, A., Pagano, P., & Giordano, S. 2018, A&A, 619, A25
Brueckner, G. E., Howard, R. A., Koomen, M. J., et al. 1995, Sol. Phys., 162,

357

Burlaga, L., Sittler, E., Mariani, F., & Schwenn, R. 1981, J. Geophys. Res., 86,

6673

Chen, J. 2017, Physics of Plasmas, 24, 090501
Chen, P. F. 2011, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 8, 1
Cid, C., Palacios, J., Saiz, E., & Guerrero, A. 2016, ApJ, 828, 11
DeVore, C. R. & Antiochos, S. K. 2008, ApJ, 680, 740
D’Huys, E., Seaton, D. B., Poedts, S., & Berghmans, D. 2014, ApJ, 795, 49
Domingo, V., Fleck, B., & Poland, A. I. 1995, Sol. Phys., 162, 1
Eastwood, J. P., Nakamura, R., Turc, L., Mejnertsen, L., & Hesse, M. 2017,

Space Sci. Rev., 212, 1221

Forbes, T. G. 2000, J. Geophys. Res., 105, 23153
Forbes, T. G. & Isenberg, P. A. 1991, ApJ, 373, 294
Forbes, T. G., Linker, J. A., Chen, J., et al. 2006, Space Sci. Rev., 123, 251
Gonzalez, W. D., Echer, E., Tsurutani, B. T., Clúa de Gonzalez, A. L., & Dal

Lago, A. 2011, Space Sci. Rev., 158, 69

Gopalswamy, N. 2008, Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics, 70,

2078

Gosling, J. T. 1993, J. Geophys. Res., 98, 18937
Green, L. & Baker, D. 2015, Weather, 70, 31
Green, L. M., Török, T., Vršnak, B., Manchester, W., & Veronig, A. 2018,

Space Sci. Rev., 214, 46

Hapgood, M. A. 2011, Advances in Space Research, 47, 2059
Howard, T. A. & Harrison, R. A. 2013, Sol. Phys., 285, 269
Huttunen, K. E. J., Schwenn, R., Bothmer, V., & Koskinen, H. E. J. 2005, An-

nales Geophysicae, 23, 625

Illing, R. M. E. & Hundhausen, A. J. 1985, J. Geophys. Res., 90, 275
Kilpua, E., Koskinen, H. E. J., & Pulkkinen, T. I. 2017, Living Reviews in Solar

Physics, 14, 5

Kilpua, E. K. J., Mierla, M., Zhukov, A. N., et al. 2014, Sol. Phys., 289, 3773
King, J. H. & Papitashvili, N. E. 2005, Journal of Geophysical Research (Space

Physics), 110, A02104

Kliem, B., Lin, J., Forbes, T. G., Priest, E. R., & Török, T. 2014, ApJ, 789, 46
Kliem, B. & Török, T. 2006, in AAS/Solar Physics Division Meeting #37,

AAS/Solar Physics Division Meeting, 8.20

Lemen, J. R., Title, A. M., Akin, D. J., et al. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 17
Lynch, B. J., Masson, S., Li, Y., et al. 2016, Journal of Geophysical Research

(Space Physics), 121, 10,677

Ma, S., Attrill, G. D. R., Golub, L., & Lin, J. 2010, ApJ, 722, 289
Mackay, D. H., DeVore, C. R., & Antiochos, S. K. 2014, ApJ, 784, 164

S. L. Yardley et al.: Source and Eruption of a Stealth CME

Mackay, D. H., DeVore, C. R., Antiochos, S. K., & Yeates, A. R. 2018, ApJ, 869,

62

Mackay, D. H. & van Ballegooijen, A. A. 2006a, ApJ, 641, 577
Mackay, D. H. & van Ballegooijen, A. A. 2006b, ApJ, 642, 1193
Meyer, K. A., Mackay, D. H., Talpeanu, D.-C., Upton, L. A., & West, M. J. 2020,

Sol. Phys., 295, 101

Mignone, A., Zanni, C., Tzeferacos, P., et al. 2012, ApJS, 198, 7
Moore, R. L., Sterling, A. C., Hudson, H. S., & Lemen, J. R. 2001, ApJ, 552,

833

Müller, D., Nicula, B., Felix, S., et al. 2017, A&A, 606, A10
Müller, D., St. Cyr, O. C., Zouganelis, I., et al. 2020, A&A, 642, A1
Nitta, N. V. & Mulligan, T. 2017, Sol. Phys., 292, 125
O’Kane, J., Green, L., Long, D. M., & Reid, H. 2019, ApJ, 882, 85
Pagano, P., Bemporad, A., & Mackay, D. H. 2015, A&A, 582, A72
Pagano, P., Mackay, D. H., & Poedts, S. 2013a, A&A, 560, A38
Pagano, P., Mackay, D. H., & Poedts, S. 2013b, A&A, 554, A77
Pagano, P., Mackay, D. H., & Yardley, S. L. 2019, ApJ, 883, 112
Pagano, P., Mackay, D. H., & Yeates, A. R. 2018, Journal of Space Weather and

Space Climate, 8, A26

Palmerio, E., Nitta, N. V., Mulligan, T., et al. 2021, arXiv e-prints,

arXiv:2106.07571

Patsourakos, S., Vourlidas, A., Török, T., et al. 2020, Space Sci. Rev., 216, 131
Pesnell, W. D., Thompson, B. J., & Chamberlin, P. C. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 3
Richardson, I. G. & Cane, H. V. 2013, in American Institute of Physics Confer-
ence Series, Vol. 1539, Solar Wind 13, ed. G. P. Zank, J. Borovsky, R. Bruno,
J. Cirtain, S. Cranmer, H. Elliott, J. Giacalone, W. Gonzalez, G. Li, E. Marsch,
E. Moebius, N. Pogorelov, J. Spann, & O. Verkhoglyadova, 422–425

Robbrecht, E., Patsourakos, S., & Vourlidas, A. 2009, ApJ, 701, 283
Rodkin, D., Goryaev, F., Pagano, P., et al. 2017, Sol. Phys., 292, 90
Schou, J., Scherrer, P. H., Bush, R. I., et al. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 229
Schrijver, C. J., Kauristie, K., Aylward, A. D., et al. 2015, Advances in Space

Research, 55, 2745

Smith, C. W., L’Heureux, J., Ness, N. F., et al. 1998, Space Sci. Rev., 86, 613
SunPy Community, Barnes, W. T., Bobra, M. G., et al. 2020, ApJ, 890, 68
Török, T. & Kliem, B. 2005, ApJ, 630, L97
Ugarte-Urra, I., Upton, L., Warren, H. P., & Hathaway, D. H. 2015, ApJ, 815, 90
Upton, L. & Hathaway, D. H. 2014a, ApJ, 792, 142
Upton, L. & Hathaway, D. H. 2014b, ApJ, 780, 5
van Ballegooijen, A. A., Priest, E. R., & Mackay, D. H. 2000, ApJ, 539, 983
Vourlidas, A., Balmaceda, L. A., Stenborg, G., & Dal Lago, A. 2017, ApJ, 838,

141

Vourlidas, A., Lynch, B. J., Howard, R. A., & Li, Y. 2013, Sol. Phys., 284, 179
Webb, D. F. & Howard, T. A. 2012, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 9, 3
Webb, D. F. & Hundhausen, A. J. 1987, Sol. Phys., 108, 383
Yang, W. H., Sturrock, P. A., & Antiochos, S. K. 1986, ApJ, 309, 383
Yeates, A. R., Amari, T., Contopoulos, I., et al. 2018, Space Sci. Rev., 214, 99
Yeates, A. R. & Mackay, D. H. 2009a, ApJ, 699, 1024
Yeates, A. R. & Mackay, D. H. 2009b, Sol. Phys., 254, 77
Yeates, A. R. & Mackay, D. H. 2012, ApJ, 753, L34
Yeates, A. R., Mackay, D. H., & van Ballegooijen, A. A. 2008a, ApJ, 680, L165
Yeates, A. R., Mackay, D. H., & van Ballegooijen, A. A. 2008b, Sol. Phys., 247,

103

Ying, B., Bemporad, A., Giordano, S., et al. 2019, ApJ, 880, 41
Zhang, G. & Burlaga, L. F. 1988, J. Geophys. Res., 93, 2511
Zhang, J., Liemohn, M. W., Kozyra, J. U., Lynch, B. J., & Zurbuchen, T. H. 2004,

Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics), 109, A09101

Zhang, J., Richardson, I. G., Webb, D. F., et al. 2007, Journal of Geophysical

Research (Space Physics), 112, A10102

Article number, page 13 of 17

A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Fig. 7. Magnetic ﬁeld lines taken from the global NLFFF evolutionary model showing the conﬁguration of the magnetic ﬁeld in the time period
surrounding the eruption of the stealth event. Panels (a)–(d) show representative magnetic ﬁeld lines of two ﬂux ropes denoted by FR2 (blue lines)
and FR3 (magenta lines), and also open ﬁeld (green lines). These panels are plotted in the same co-rotating frame as Fig. 5 and the day of the
simulation is given in the bottom left. For panels (a)–(d) the central meridian longitude is 13◦, 0◦, 347◦ and 334◦, respectively. The blue (red)
contours represent negative (positive) photospheric magnetic ﬂux and the locations of ARs 12252, 12253, 12255, and the extended south pole
coronal hole (CH) are given in the ﬁrst panel. The same magnetic ﬁeld lines are shown in the y-z plane in panels (e)–(h).

Article number, page 14 of 17

-50-40-30-20-10Y0102030Z_00100, X= 192.0, V_MAG_YZ, VM=   27.080, C_MAG_X, CM=   22.550, MOD-50-40-30-20-10Y0102030Z_00100, X= 192.0, V_MAG_YZ, VM=   27.573, C_MAG_X, CM=   22.124, MOD-50-40-30-20-10Y0102030Z_00100, X= 192.0, V_MAG_YZ, VM=   27.963, C_MAG_X, CM=   21.715, MOD-50-40-30-20-10Y0102030Z_00100, X= 192.0, V_MAG_YZ, VM=   28.275, C_MAG_X, CM=   21.298, MOD2015 Jan 32015 Jan 4CHFR2FR31231225312252122552015 Jan 52015 Jan 6124FR2FR3125126( a )( b )( c )( d )( e )( f )( g )( h )S. L. Yardley et al.: Source and Eruption of a Stealth CME

Fig. 8. Panel (a) shows the radial magnetic ﬁeld component Br that is taken from the NLFFF evolutionary model and used as the lower boundary
in the initial condition of the MHD simulation. The map of the surface magnetic ﬁeld is shown using Mollweide projection where black (white)
represents positive (negative) magnetic ﬁeld regions. The region of the solar disk visible from SDO/Earth is represented by the red circles, AR
12253 and the large AR complex behind the east limb are labelled in white. Panel (b) is the radial component of the Lorentz force LFr at the solar
surface.

Fig. 9. Plasma (panel (a)) and temperature (panel (b)) distributions of the initial condition of the MHD simulation. The region of the solar disk
visible from SDO/Earth is indicated by the red circles while AR 12253 located near central meridian and the large AR complex behind the east
limb are labelled in white.

Article number, page 15 of 17

Large AR  ComplexAR 12253Large AR  ComplexAR 12253A&A proofs: manuscript no. main

Fig. 10. Coronal density distribution integrated along the line-of-sight taken from the MHD simulation. The density is shown at two diﬀerent
vantage points (as viewed from Earth in panels (a)–(c) and above the solar north pole in panels (d)–(f)) at the times of t = 13.9, 23.2, and 34.8 min.
The blue line (bottom row) represents the plane-of-sky position. The eye symbol in the bottom row indicates the view as seen from SDO/at Earth.
The panels also show the evolution of the magnetic ﬁeld lines (light blue, dark blue, and magenta) of three ﬂux ropes (FR1, FR2, and FR3) that
erupt in the MHD simulation.

Fig. 11. Density distribution taken at r = 2R(cid:12) at t = 23.2 min and t = 34.8 min is shown in panels (a) and (b), respectively. Here, the red circles
illustrate the portion of the Mollweide map that corresponds to the φ coordinates on the solar disk visible from the Earth vantage point. The
density perturbations that are a result of three ﬂux rope eruptions occurring in the MHD simulation are labelled P1, P2 and P3. The light blue, dark
blue, and magenta structures represent the approximate locations of the three ﬂux ropes (F1, F2, F3) and their footpoints taken from the NLFFF
evolutionary model.

Article number, page 16 of 17

( e )( d )( f )( a )( b )( c )FR1FR2FR3P1P2P3P1FR1FR2FR3FR1FR2FR3S. L. Yardley et al.: Source and Eruption of a Stealth CME

Fig. 12. Radial velocity at r = 2R(cid:12) for two diﬀerent simulations where the photospheric density is varied. Panel (a) shows the radial velocity taken
at t = 40.6 min for the simulation previously described where ρph = 2 × 10−16 g cm3. Panel (b) shows the radial velocity from a second simulation
at the later time of t = 112.5 min, where the photospheric density has increased by an order magnitude ρph = 2 × 10−15 g cm3. The red circle
represents the solar disk which is visible at Earth. Red (blue) corresponds to positive (negative) velocities which are saturated at ± 1000 km s−1.

Article number, page 17 of 17

