Effects of Head-locked Augmented Reality on User’s Performance and Perceived 
Workload 

Yalda Ghasemi, Ankit Singh, Myunghee Kim, Andrew Johnson, and Heejin Jeong 
University of Illinois at Chicago 

An  augmented  reality  (AR)  environment  includes  a  set  of  digital  elements  with  which  the  users  interact  while 
performing certain tasks. Recent AR head-mounted displays allow users to select how these elements are presented. 
However, few studies have been conducted to examine the effect of presenting augmented content on user performance 
and workload. This study aims to evaluate two methods of presenting augmented content — world-locked and head-
locked modes in a data entry task. A total of eighteen participants performed the data entry task in this study. The 
effectiveness  of  each  mode  is  evaluated  in  terms  of  task  performance,  muscle  activity,  perceived  workload,  and 
usability. The results show that the task completion time is shorter, and the typing speed is significantly faster in the 
head-locked mode while the world-locked mode achieved higher scores in terms of preference. The findings of this 
study can be applied to AR user interfaces to improve content presentation and enhance the user experience. 

INTRODUCTION 

Augmented reality (AR) has increasingly gained 
popularity  over  the  past  few  decades.  AR  is  an 
interactive experience of the real world superimposing 
computer-generated  elements  as  virtual  information. 
In other words, AR transforms reality by adding digital 
elements  to  the  real  environment.  These  digital 
elements  may 
images,  videos,  global 
positioning system annotations, or other elements that 
do  not  exist  in  the  real  environment.  However,  AR 
provides the ability to interact with these elements in 
the real environment in real-time. 

include 

and 

convenient 

AR  technology  allows  several  tasks  to  be 
performed  through  its  user  interfaces  and  natural 
interactions  (Carmigniani  et  al.,  2011). AR  has been 
used in many areas to assist workers by making tasks 
interactive.  Displaying 
more 
information  is  an  essential  part  of  using  AR. 
Information  in  the  AR  environment  should  be 
displayed to the users properly so that they would be 
able to interact with the content in the most efficient 
way.  There  are  generally  two  ways  of  presenting 
information  in  AR  head-mounted  displays  (HMDs), 
including static view and following view. In the static 
view, also referred to as world-locked, the AR content 
is placed in a fixed position in the environment, and its 
position does not change with the user's movements. 
In  this  mode,  the  AR  system  recognizes  the  user’s 
environment  to  overlay  the  content.    The  overlaid 
content stays in the environment even if the user walks 
around. When there is enough light in an environment 
with a clear texture and the sensors of the HMD are 
not blocked, this method can be applied successfully. 
The static view is usually used as the default mode in 
HMDs. On the other hand, the following view is more 
flexible  and  can  be  adjusted  automatically  based  on 
the user's movements. This method can be divided into 

two modes, i.e., head-locked and body-locked. In the 
head-locked  mode,  the  augmented  content  moves 
based on the user’s head movements, and it is always 
in  the  user’s  field  of  view  (FOV).  In  this  mode,  the 
position  and  rotation  of  the  content  presented  to  the 
user change exactly according to the camera motion. 
The content always follows the user’s head movement 
and stays at the same distance from the camera. In the 
body-locked mode, the content moves with respect to 
the user’s body movements and position. 

In this study, a data entry task was used to explore 
the utility of head-locked content for data presentation 
in an AR environment (Singh et al., 2020). The world-
locked  content  or  static  view  was  also  included  and 
considered  as  the  baseline.  The  data  entry  task  is 
defined  as  a  task  where  the  operator  receives  the 
required information on a screen or paper and enters 
the presented information into a target device (e.g., a 
computer). 

This  study  investigates  which  one  of  these  two 
methods is a better choice for displaying information 
in AR environments by evaluating their effects on the 
user performance and perceived workload of the task. 
In addition, the electromyogram (EMG) test was used 
to  measure  the  muscular  activity  of  the  neck  and 
shoulders for both methods.  

RELATED WORK 

Presenting information in AR has applications in 
many  areas,  such  as  education  (Guntur  et  al.,  2020) 
when 
students  are  experiencing  an  engaging 
classroom  with  overlaid  digital  elements  in  the 
environment or the industrial tasks (Malik et al., 2020) 
for  collaborative  tasks  between  humans  and  robots. 
The  overlaid  AR  content  could  be  fixed  in  the  first 

 
 
 
 
 
 
the  user’s 
displayed  position  or  move  with 
movements. One of the first studies on the evaluation 
of  information  displaying  in  wearable  technologies 
was  conducted  by  Bilinghurst  et  al.  (1998).  In  their 
study,  the  effects  of  head-stabilized  and  body-
stabilized  displays  were  compared.  In  the  head-
stabilized  method,  the  content  is  fixed  to  the  users’ 
viewpoint  and  does  not  change  as  the  users  change 
their position and orientation. However, in the body-
stabilized method, the content is fixed with respect to 
the users’ body position and changes only based on the 
users’ viewpoint orientation. The study suggested that 
the  users'  body-stabilized  method  resulted  in  better 
performance, especially in the search tasks.  

The  impact  of  cybersickness  or  virtual  reality-
induced  symptoms  and  effects 
(VRISE)  was 
investigated  for  rotational  motions  of  the  AR/VR 
interface  (Kemeny  et  al.,  2017).  A  new  head-lock 
navigation method for rotational motions in a virtual 
environment  was  developed  to  generate  a  “Pseudo 
AR”  mode  through  this  study.  Further  experiments 
demonstrated  that  this  novel  navigation  technique 
reduced VRISE in participants significantly. Klose et 
al.  (2019)  proposed  a  text  presentation  for  walking 
dual  tasks  using  both  body-locked  and  head-locked 
content. The results of this study showed that the users 
preferred  the  head-locked  content.  It was  also  found 
that the body-locked content was more distracting for 
the  users.  Fiannaca  et  al.  (2014)  developed  a  head-
locked navigation app for optical HMDs. This system 
is  beneficial  for  blind  people  to  assist  them  by 
providing  feedback  when  a  landmark  is  detected.  In 
this  study,  the  head-locked  content  was  mainly 
designed to prevent users from veering. Fukushima et 
al. (2020) showed that text reading speed in an optical 
see-through  HMD  was  significantly  increased  when 
using  head-locked  content.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
Magic  Leap  AR  device  developers  have  stated  that 
augmenting objects in a 3-dimensional spatial layout 
and  having  them  following  head  movement  with 
differing  amounts  of  lag  negatively  affects  the  user 
experience (Magic Leap Developer, 2020). Also, 
Microsoft  discouraged  using  head-locked  content  by 
stating  that  this  method  could  be  unnatural  and 
uncomfortable  for  the  users  (Turner  &  Coulter, 
2019).  Although  the  head-locked  content  was  the 
subject of many studies, there were not enough studies 
showing  the  difference  between  head-locked  and 
world-locked modes and comparing whether they can 
affect the user performance from cognitive to physical 
aspects.  

This  study  aims  to  reduce  the  amount  of  head 
movement involved in accessing the data from the data 
presentation  interface  and  entering  that  data  into  the 
system. Since the data entry task often causes physical 
and  cognitive  fatigue  in  prolonged  durations  of 

working (Healy et al., 2014), it is vital to address the 
efficiency of information presentation methods when 
performing  the  AR  task.  To  this  end,  we  test  the 
performance  of  the  head-locked  content  for  a  seated 
data  entry  task  and  investigate  how  it  affects 
participants’  performance  compared  to  the  world-
locked  mode.  Having  the  image  follow  the  head 
movement  could  significantly  reduce 
the  head 
movement's  up  and  down  (or  sideward)  movements 
involved  in  accessing  the  information  by  presenting 
the data to the user’s FOV (Jeong et al., 2020). 

The  users'  electromyography  was  measured  to 
identify  which  of  the  two  view  modes  has  less 
muscular activity and less effect on the user fatigue. In 
addition, the usability and perceived workload of both 
methods  were  evaluated  along  with  their  associated 
accuracy,  typing  speed,  and  task  duration.  We 
hypothesized that in a data entry task: 

[H1] Head-locked method reduces workload and has 
better usability metrics for users compared to the head-
lock view mode. 
[H2] Head-locked method improves accuracy, typing 
speed,  and  task  duration  for  the  data  entry  task 
compared to the head-locked view mode. 
[H3]  Head-locked  method  involves  less  muscular 
fatigue  in  the  neck  and  shoulders  than  the  world-
locked view mode. 

METHOD 

To test the hypotheses, a data entry task was used 
to  evaluate  the  AR  content presentation  in two  view 
modes  of  world-locked  and  head-locked.  An 
illustration of the two modes is presented in Figure 1. 

Figure 1. World-locked and head-locked view modes 

In this study, a total of 18 participants consisting 
of  14  males  and  4  females  were  recruited  for  the 
experiment  (mean  age  =  21.9,  SD  =  1.87).  The 
demographic data showed that 5 out of 18 participants 
had  no  prior  experience  using  AR  HMD.  All 
participants had normal vision, and none of them 
wore  glasses  since  this  might  negatively  affect  their 
performance on using the AR device. Images of two 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forms  (e.g.,  US  Passport  Application  and  University 
Faculty Advising) were used for displaying in the AR 
environment.  A  counterbalanced  experiment  was 
designed to prevent any bias toward the order of the 
presentation methods and type of the forms. All of the 
participants experienced each condition (i.e., 4 trials). 
There was no time limit specified, and the participants 
were asked to complete each trial at their own pace. 

The Magic Leap One HMD was used to present 
the AR content to the users. The users were asked to 
enter  the  observed  information  from  the  AR  device 
into  a  computer.  The  users  were  trained  before  the 
experiment  to  become  familiar  with  the  interface. 
While doing the task, a wireless EMG device, Delsys 
Tringo, was used to measure the muscular activity 
of the neck and shoulders. Based on a study by Mclean 
and Urquhart (2002), the upper trapezius muscle is the 
most affected area of the neck and upper shoulder in a 
data entry task. Therefore, the EMG electrodes were 
attached  to  this  area  with  a  5  –  7  cm  distance  to 
measure  the  muscular  activity  in  the  right  and  left 
upper trapezius.   

The  EMG  data  collection  was  done  at  a  rate  of 
1260 HZ, and the signals were stored on the computer 
using  EMGworks®  software.  After  finishing  each 
trial, participants were asked to complete the NASA-
TLX  (Hart  &  Staveland,  1988)  for  rating  their 
perceived workload on a scale of 0 – 100, along with 
a  customized  survey  for  rating  the  usability  of  the 
corresponding modes on a scale of 1 – 7. The survey 
questions  are  presented  in  Table  1.  Finally,  the 
participants  were  asked  to  share  their  feedback  and 
suggestions  for  each  mode  after  filling  out  the 
questionnaires. 

Table 1. Usability Metrics Questionnaire 

Mode 
World-
locked 
(static) 

Head-
locked 
(following) 

Questions 

The use of the AR static interface 
was helpful for data entry tasks. 
The use of the AR static interface 
was easy for me to perform data 
entry tasks. 
I prefer the use of the AR static 
interface for data entry tasks. 
I prefer the use of the AR following 
interface for data entry tasks. 
The use of the AR following 
interface was easy for me to 
perform data entry tasks. 
I prefer the use of the AR following 
interface for data entry tasks. 

In  order  to  conduct  the  data  entry  task,  the 
participants were instructed to wear the AR device that 
augmented  a  scanned  image  in  the  environment  and 

enter the data into the data entry device. The size of 
the augmented content was fitted to the user’s FOV in 
the HMD, and they were able to see the entire length 
of  the  image  without  scrolling  the  content.  Figure  2 
shows the user performing the data entry task using the 
Magic Leap headset. 

Figure 2. The AR interface 

their  heads 

World-locked  (static  view):  In  the  world-locked 
content mode, the images of the forms were positioned 
in the center, above the data entry device. The position 
of  the  scanned  image  was  fixed  on  the  AR  display 
concerning  the  surroundings.  The  participant  had  to 
look  directly  at  the  image  to  obtain  the  information. 
The image was presented only in the display frame for 
the  surrounding  background  of  the  room.  If  the 
participants  moved 
(vertically  or 
horizontally),  the  information  would  disappear  or  be 
partially  visible.  The  entirety  of  the  document  was 
visible  at  one  time  in  the  AR  interface,  and  the 
participants did not need to move their heads to scan 
through the different parts of the document. 
Head-locked  (following  view):  In  the  head-locked 
content  mode,  although  the  position  of  the  scanned 
image  was  fixed  on  the  AR  display  at  the  same 
distance as of the static view mode, the image would 
move  along  with  the  participants’  head  movements. 
The position of the image was augmented to the user’s 
surroundings. It was not fixed to the background, and 
the participants could actually have the image follow 
them to different frames with their head movements. 

RESULTS 

In  this  section,  the  study  results  in  terms  of 
workload,  usability,  muscular  activity,  typing  speed, 
error rate, and task duration are presented. A selection 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the participants’ feedback and suggestions are also 
reported. 

Perceived Workload (NASA-TLX) 

Based on the results of the statistical analysis for 
the  NASA-TLX  questionnaire,  it  was  found  that  the 
two modes of displaying AR content did not show any 
significant difference in their scores (p-value > .05 for 
the  Mann-Whitney  U  test)  in  terms  of  subjective 
workload. In addition to the individual workload, the 
pairwise importance of the six subscales involved in 
the NASA-TLX survey and creating a weighted rating 
of those factors based on the importance of each factor 
as stated by the participants, it could be seen that they 
also  had  no  significant  difference  in  their  scores  (p-
value  >  .05  for  the  Mann-Whitney  U  test).  These 
results do not support the hypothesis [H1]. Therefore, 
the  head-locked  method  has  no  significant  effect  on 
the physical and mental workloads for the data entry 
task compared to the world-locked method. 

Usability - Helpfulness, Ease of Use, and Preference 
The results of statistical analysis of the usability 
questionnaire  showed  that  participants  rated  the 
world-locked mode higher than the head-locked mode 
in  terms  of  preference  (Mean  Rank  for  the  Mann-
Whitney U  test 41.71  >  29.29, p-value  = .009) (Fig. 
3(a)). However, the results indicated that Helpfulness 
and  Ease  of  Use  did  not  show  any  significant 
difference in their scores from each other (p-value > 
.05  for  the  Mann-Whitney  U  test).  Therefore,  these 
results do not support the hypothesis [H1].  It can be 
stated  that  the  head-locked  view  mode  does  not 
significantly 
the  physical  and  mental 
workloads  for  the  data  entry  task  compared  to  the 
world-locked method. 

reduce 

Typing Speed and Error Rate 

It was found that participants’ typing speed was 
higher with the head-locked content compared to the 
world-locked  content  (Mean  Rank  for  the  Mann-
Whitney U  test 42.40  >  27.81, p-value  = .003) (Fig. 
3(b)).  This  result  supports  the  hypothesis  [H2]. 
Therefore,  the  head-locked  content  improves  typing 
speed  for  data  entry  tasks.  The  error  rate  was  not 
significantly different for the two modes (p-value > .05 
for  the  Mann-Whitney  U  test).  This  result  does  not 
support  the  hypothesis  [H2].  Therefore,  the  head-
improve 
locked  content  does  not  significantly 
accuracy for the data entry task compared to the world-
locked content. 

Task Duration 

Statistical analysis showed that the time taken to 
complete  the  data  entry  task  was  higher  when  using 
the  world-locked  mode  than  it  was  when  using  the 

head-locked mode (Mean value for the t-test 133.3 > 
110.5, p-value = .006) (Fig 3(c)). This result supports 
the  hypothesis  [H2].  It  can  be  stated  that  the  head-
locked content significantly reduces task duration for 
the  data  entry  task  compared  to  the  world-locked 
mode. 

Figure 3. Results of usability, typing speed, and task 
duration in two view modes 

EMG Analysis 

The results of the statistical analysis of EMG data 
showed  no  significant  difference  between  the  two 
modes  in  the  case  of  muscle  activity  measured  as 
%MVC (p-value > .05 for the Mann-Whitney U test). 
This  result  does  not  support  the  hypothesis  [H3]. 
Therefore, the head-locked content has no significant 
effect on the physical workload for the data entry task 
compared to the world-locked content. 

Participants’ Feedback and Suggestions 

Participants made suggestions through the open-
ended survey provided to them at the end of the study 
to improve the current version of the AR interface for 
the  two  modes.  The  suggestions  made  by  the 
the  motion 
participants 
sensitivity to the head movements for the head-locked 
mode. 2) it was stated that the head-locked mode was 
more convenient to use than the static view mode. 3) 
developing an interface containing a zoom option was 
also suggested for this type of task. 

include  1) 

improving 

DISCUSSION  

When  comparing  the  head-locked  and  world-
locked  content  in  a  data  entry  task,  the  participants 
perceived  the  similar  workload  for  the  two  modes. 
This can be the result of a general lack of experience 
in using AR devices. Since both modes were equally 
new to the participants, comprehending and working 
with  the  AR  device  may  require  considerable  effort. 
Furthermore, participants had a higher typing speed in 
the head-locked mode. In this mode, the information 
was available to them at all angles and levels, and they 
did not spend additional time in the process of looking 
up to a fixed point above the monitor where the data 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Research. In Advances in Psychology (Vol. 52, pp. 139-183). 
North-Holland. 

Healy,  A.  F.,  Kole,  J.  A.,  Buck-Gengler,  C.  J.,  &  Bourne,  L.  E. 
(2004). Effects of Prolonged Work on Data Entry Speed and 
Accuracy. Journal 
Psychology: 
Applied, 10(3), 188. 

Experimental 

of 

Jeong, H., Singh, A., Kim, M., & Johnson, A. (2020, March). Using 
Augmented  Reality  to  Assist  Seated  Office  Workers’  Data 
Entry Tasks. In 2020 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 
3D User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW) (pp. 293-
294). IEEE. 

Kemeny, A., George, P., Mérienne, F., & Colombet, F. (2017). New 
to  Reduce  Cybersickness. 

VR  Navigation  Techniques 
Electronic Imaging, 2017(3), 48-53. 

Klose,  E.  M.,  Mack,  N.  A.,  Hegenberg,  J.,  &  Schmidt,  L.  (2019, 
for  Augmented  Reality 
March).  Text  Presentation 
Applications 
in  Dual-Task  Situations.  In  2019  IEEE 
Conference  on  Virtual  Reality  and  3D  User  Interfaces  (VR) 
(pp. 636-644). IEEE. 

Magic Leap Developer. Head-Locked Content - Unity. (2020, April 
https://developer.magicleap.com/en-

16). 
us/learn/guides/head-locked-content-tutorial-unreal-engine. 
Accessed 03-04-2021.  

From 

Malik, A. A., Masood, T., & Bilberg, A. (2020). Virtual Reality in 
Manufacturing:  Immersive  and  Collaborative  Artificial-
Reality in Design of Human-Robot Workspace. International 
Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 33(1), 22-37. 
Mclean, L., & Urquhart, N. (2002). The Influence of Psychological 
Stressors  on  Myoelectrical  Signal  Activity  in  the  Shoulder 
Region During a Data Entry Task. Work & Stress, 16(2), 138-
153. 

Singh,  A.,  Huynh,  T.,  Kim,  M.,  Johnson,  A.,  &  Jeong,  H.  (2020, 
December). Can Augmented Reality Assist Data Entry Task? 
A  Preliminary  Study.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Human  Factors 
and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting (Vol. 64, No. 1, pp. 
2113-2113). Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications. 
Turner,  A.,  &  Coulter,  D.  Coordinate  systems  -  Mixed  Reality. 
Mixed  Reality  |  Microsoft  Docs.  (2019,  February  24).  From 
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/mixed-
reality/design/coordinate-systems. Accessed 03-04-2021.  

were displayed. This consequently decreased the task 
duration for performing the data entry using the head-
locked mode, but its effect was not significant on the 
physical  load  of  the  neck  and  shoulders.  Although 
developers  discouraged  using  head-locked  content, 
this  study  showed  that  this  method  cannot  be 
necessarily inferior to the world-locked or static view 
mode.  The  head-locked  method  resulted  in  a  shorter 
task completion time and higher typing speed than the 
world-locked mode. While most of the users preferred 
the world-locked content in terms of preference, there 
was no significant difference between the two modes 
in terms of other measures. 

CONCLUSION 

time  and 

in 
typing  speed  while 

In  this  study,  the  effectiveness  of  two  AR 
presentation  methods  including  head-locked  and 
world-locked  content  has  been  evaluated  in  a  data 
entry  task.  Based  on  the  results,  the  head-locked 
task 
content  displayed  better  performance 
completion 
the 
conventional static view mode achieved higher scores 
in  terms  of  preference.  The  participants  suggested 
introducing a zoomable user interface and enhancing 
the motion sensitivity for the head-locked mode. Since 
there  are  various  applications  of  using  AR,  the 
selection  of  presentation  methods  should  be  made 
according  to  the  purpose  of  the  task.  For  the  seated 
data entry task tested in this study, the results showed 
that the two modes do not have significant differences 
in workload and performance.  

REFERENCES 

Billinghurst,  M.,  Bowskill,  J.,  Dyer,  N.,  &  Morphett,  J.  (1998, 
March).  An  Evaluation  of  Wearable  Information  Spaces.  In 
Proceedings. IEEE 1998 Virtual Reality Annual International 
Symposium (Cat. No. 98CB36180) (pp. 20-27). IEEE. 
Carmigniani, J., Furht, B., Anisetti, M., Ceravolo, P., Damiani, E., 
&  Ivkovic,  M.  (2011).  Augmented  Reality  Technologies, 
and 
Systems 
Applications, 51(1), 341-377.  

and  Applications. Multimedia 

Tools 

Fiannaca,  A.,  Apostolopoulous,  I.,  &  Folmer,  E.  (2014,  October). 
Headlock: A Wearable Navigation Aid that Helps Blind Cane 
Users Traverse Large Open Spaces. In Proceedings of the 16th 
International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers & 
Accessibility (pp. 19-26). 

Fukushima,  S.,  Hamada,  T.,  &  Hautasaari,  A.  (2020,  November). 
Comparing World and Screen Coordinate Systems in Optical 
See-Through  Head-Mounted  Displays  for  Text  Readability 
while  Walking.  In  2020  IEEE  International  Symposium  on 
Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR) (pp. 649-658). IEEE. 
Guntur, M. I. S., Setyaningrum, W., Retnawati, H., & Marsigit, M. 
(2020,  January).  Assessing  the  Potential  of  Augmented 
Reality  in  Education.  In Proceedings  of  the  2020  11th 
International  Conference  on  E-Education,  E-Business,  E-
Management, and E-Learning (pp. 93-97). 

Hart, S. G., & Staveland, L. E. (1988). Development of NASA-TLX 
(Task  Load  Index):  Results  of  Empirical  and  Theoretical 

 
 
 
 
 
 
