USER PERCEPTION OF PRIVACY WITH UBIQUITOUS DEVICES 

Priyam Rajkhowa 

Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru priyamrajkhowa56@gmail.com 

Pradipta Biswas 

Institute of Science, Bengaluru, pradipta.iisc.ac.in 

Privacy is important for all individuals in everyday life. With emerging technologies, smartphones with AR, 
various social networking  applications  and artificial intelligence  driven modes of surveillance,  they tend to 
intrude privacy. This study aimed to explore and discover various concerns related to perception of privacy in 
this era of  ubiquitous technologies.  It employed  online survey questionnaire to study user  perspectives of 
privacy. Purposive sampling was used to collect data from 60 participants. Inductive thematic analysis was 
used to analyze data. Our study discovered key themes like attitude towards privacy in public and private 
spaces, privacy awareness, consent seeking, dilemmas/confusions related to various technologies, impact of 
attitude and beliefs on individuals’ actions regarding how to protect oneself from invasion of privacy in both 
public and private spaces. These themes interacted amongst themselves and influenced formation of various 
actions.  They  were  like  core  principles  that  molded  actions  that  prevented  invasion  of  privacy  for  both 
participant and bystander. Findings of this study would be helpful to improve privacy and personalization of 
various emerging technologies. This study contributes to privacy by design and positive design by considering 
psychological needs of users. This is suggestive that the findings can be applied in the areas of experience 
design, positive technologies, social computing and behavioral interventions.   

Keywords 
Privacy; Types and meaning of privacy; Bystander’s privacy; Privacy concerns; Human Computer 
Interaction; Privacy and quality of life; Qualitative Research; Inductive thematic analysis; Online 
qualitative survey; Privacy risks; Solutions for privacy concerns. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 

INTRODUCTION 

Camera  and  photographic  technology  were  well  documented  by  Han  Chinese  and  Arab 
physicists in mediaeval period. The first commercial digital camera was available in 1975 [7]. 

Today  with  abundance  of  smartphone  and  in-built  high  end  digital  cameras,  new  technical 
possibilities and social habits have emerged. A popular proverb says that a photograph can 

say a thousand words. People often take pictures of themselves, known people, objects and 
makes them accessible to public through social networking websites. New technologies like 

augmented and mixed reality systems use live video feed from ubiquitous devices and serve 
a  plethora  of  purposes  like  navigation,  inspection,  localization  and  so  on.  However,  this 

abundance  of  cameras  and  photographs  also  create  serious  challenges  for  both  user  and 
bystanders’ privacy [50] 

Privacy is a state in which one is not observed and disturbed by other people. It is a state 
of being free from public attention. It is a fundamental right which is important to determine 

autonomy and to protect the dignity of a human being so that it serves as the foundation or 
base  upon  which several  other human rights are built [50]. Privacy plays an integral role in 

every  human  being’s  day  to  day  life.  Communication  privacy  management  theory  (CPM) 
investigates  the  concept  of  privacy  from  multiple  ways  and  explains  privacy  taking  into 

consideration various contexts.  

Communication  privacy  management  theory  (CPM)  was  first  introduced  by  Sandra 

Pedronio in 2002. It is an evidence-based theory which provides explanations of how various 
decisions are made in order to disclose and protect private information. CPM focuses on the 

relationship  that  people  have  with  each  other  in  communicative  text  like  face-to-face 
interactions,  on  social  media,  and  in  dyads  or  groups  [44].  This  theory  is  based  on  a 

communicative social behavioral perspective and argues that because people consider private 
information something that they own, over which they desire control, individuals feel violated 

when  others  find  out  something  about  them  without  their  permission.  CPM  contends  that 
boundaries are multiple in nature, humans regulate ownership and concurrent control for both 

personal and collective boundaries. [44] 

A qualitative study was undertaken to understand perception of privacy in a comprehensive 

manner. There are not many studies done that captures user’s perspective of privacy invasion 
specifically with regard to public and private spaces. This study aimed  to represent various 

attitudes  and  beliefs  held  by  participants  in  both  these  spaces.  It  would  help  to  influence 
negative attitude like considering surveillance as a threat and that privacy is a myth in digital 

era. Moreover, it would facilitate designing ubiquitous devices in a way that would incorporate 
psychological well-being. This study also explored behavioral and attitudinal components of 

privacy perception in public and private spaces. Findings would contribute to designing and 
production  of  enhanced  privacy  products,  developing  socio  technical  solutions  for  privacy 

risks, facilitate adoption of technologies, promote sensitivity towards privacy, design behavioral 
interventions  and  persuasive  technologies.  The  upcoming  section  would  throw  light  on 

literature. 

2  REVIEW OF LITERATURE  

Privacy considerations with emerging ubiquitous technologies is not a new concern. Concerns 
related  to  privacy  of  wearables,  camera,  telecommuting,  live  streaming  are  being  explored 

[63,66,6,16].  Understanding  the  dynamic  nature  of  privacy  along  with  its  implications  is  a 

3 

 
 
bigger  challenge.  In  this study  we  reviewed  research papers,  articles,  webpages  related  to 

meaning  and functions  of  privacy,  theories  of  privacy,  concerns  related to  privacy  invasion, 
users  and  bystanders’  privacy  concerns  and  lastly  technical  solutions  available  to  address 

problems of privacy invasion.  

Privacy is like treasure that all wants to protect. It unlocks aspects of an individual that are 

of utmost importance, intimate and personal that could make anyone vulnerable. Over the past 
centuries, the meaning and definition of privacy has dynamically changed and many privacy 

theorists agreed that it comprised of multiple dimensions. Privacy has evolved from the notion 
of “the right to be alone” [9] to “the condition of not having undocumented personal knowledge 
about one possessed by others.” [53]. There are multiple theories of privacy such as privacy 
regulation  theory,  non-intrusion  theory  of  privacy  [48],  Alan  Westin’s  theory  of  privacy  [47]. 

Privacy is necessary for human well-being and flourishing [49]. It also serves certain functions 
like personal autonomy, emotional release, self-evaluation and protected communication [55]. 

There are risks associated when needs of privacy are not met. Privacy problems may not 
always conform with the definitions of privacy. They could range from adversities related to 

information  collection,  information  processing,  information  dissemination  and  invasion  [67] 
Invasions  could  be  of  various  kinds  like  extraction,  observation  and  intrusion.  [40].  With 

emerging technologies, it was important to address the different kinds of privacy and also find 
solutions  for  the  same.  Finn  et  al.  [24]  described  seven  different  types  of  privacy,  namely- 

privacy  of  the person,  privacy  of  behaviour  and  action,  privacy  of  personal  communication, 
privacy of data and image, privacy of thoughts and feelings, privacy of location and space and 

privacy of association (including group privacy). 

A rising concern for general public was escalating and abundant availability of smartphone 

cameras. A bystander is a person who is present but not taking part in a situation or event and 
is  a chance  spectator. Bystanders’ privacy arises  when a device that collected sensor data 

could be used to identify third-parties (or their actions) when they had not given consent to be 
part of the collection. [57, 58, 59]. Motti et al. [50] undertook a study that found the following 

concerns related to bystander’s privacy  of wearables: facial  recognition, social  implications, 
social media, user’s fears: surveillance and sousveillance, speech disclosure, surreptitious A/V 

recording and location disclosure.  

There  are  multiple  technological  solutions  available  for  privacy  related  problems.  These 

solutions  differ  in  terms  of  effectiveness,  usability  and  power  consumption.  Various 
technological  solutions  available  are  sensor  saturation,  disabling  messages  via  data 

communication interfaces, context-based interfaces [34, 69] to solutions that hide the identity 
of bystanders to avoid their identification. [26,41, 65, 34]. I-Pic [2] was a software platform that 

integrated digital capture with user- defined privacy. The user chose a level of privacy like if 
image  capture  was  allowed  or  not  based  upon  social  context  such  as  public,  with  friends, 

workplace. Moreover, Raval et al. [64] proposed a solution that required physical tagging of 
objects  and  locations.  On  the  other  hand,  Jung  et  al.  [37]  used  explicit  user  actions  like 

gestures which  conveyed the privacy  choices. There are other  methods [80] that combined 
part-based  models  and  deep  learning  by  training  pose-normalized  Convolutional  Neural 

Networks (CNN). It inferred human attributes like gender, hairstyle, clothing style, expression, 
action from images of people under variation of viewpoint, pose, appearance, articulation and 

occlusion.  In  addition,  FacePet  was  a  pair  of  intelligent  goggles  which  used  artificial 
intelligence  (AI)  algorithm  that  prevented  unauthorized  face  detection  operated  via  mobile 

4 

 
application that does not rely on third-party or systems. [58]. There was another solution that 

used  computer  vision  for  locating  all  retro-reflective  CCD  or  CMOS  camera  sensors  in  a 
protected  area.  HideMe  was  a  framework  that  preserved  the  associated  users’  privacy  for 

online photo sharing [42] 

Hatuka [29] conducted an experiment on smartphone users that included interviews and 

the use of a smartphone  android application that combined online tracking  with experience 
sampling. The findings reported that there was a convergence between the online and offline 

worlds (a ‘public’ situation in the offline world is also considered as such in the online world) 
which  was  a  condition  that  contributed  to  the  normalisation of  ‘asymmetrical  visibility’.  This 

possibility  assumed  that  “individuals  are  actively  aware  agents  who  understand  that 
contemporary  visibility  practices  provide  them  with  tools  to  control  their  social  interactions, 

such as setting meetings and messaging as well as ‘crafting’ their appearance in ‘public’, but 
at the same time limit their privacy” [24] 

This study aimed to understand life experiences, beliefs and perception regarding various 
concerns related to protection of privacy. It also explored and understood various actions that 

people  took  to  protect  themselves  from  invasion  of  privacy.  It  examined  why  participants 
choose  certain  methods  of  protecting  themselves  from  invasion  of  privacy.  This  survey 

investigated various actions taken by individuals to prevent privacy invasion. It also explored 
various divergent ways of how people protected their privacy. Open or inductive survey was 

used  in  this  study  to  empirically  search  for  diversity  of  attitude,  beliefs  and  behavior  of 
participants. It provided with an opportunity to recognize various categories and combinations 

of privacy concerns which existed in the mind of the sample group.   

2.1 Ethical Protocols  

Institutional  approval  was  obtained  prior  to  approaching the  sample for  the  research study. 
Informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to commencement of responding to 

the questionnaires. They were also informed of their right to withdraw from the study if they 
wished  to  do  so  at  any  given  point  of  time  along  the  duration  of  the  study.  Privacy  and 

confidentiality of the participants was ensured. It is guaranteed that the participants faced no 
physical or psychological harm as a result of their participation in the study.  

3  METHODOLOGY 

In the upcoming subsections we shall discuss the various methods that was used to conduct 
this research. It would explain the type of research, method of data collection, materials used 

for data collection, analysis of data and the rationale for choosing these methods.  

3.1  Research questions 

Research questions are systematic inquiry that facilitates collecting data from participants. The 
following  research  questions  helped  us  to  gather  information  pertaining  to  participant’s 

experiences and perceptions in line with the objectives of this study.  

•  What are the various attitudes and beliefs that contribute to user perception of privacy 

invasion? 

•  What  are  the  experiences  of  participants  with  invasion  of  privacy  with  context  to 

spaces- public and private? 

5 

 
 
•  What  are  the  various  thoughts  held  on  privacy  risks  held  by  people  in  public  and 

private spaces?  

•  What  are  the  actions  taken  to  protect  oneself  from  privacy  invasion  in  public  and 

private spaces? 

3.2  Paradigm 

Phenomenology approach is an approach used to understand the nature of experience of the 

participants. [18] It emphasises on core experiences and perspectives of participants. It also 
interprets the understanding of their experience. The elementary goal of this approach is to 

arrive at a description of the nature of phenomenon. It tries to cater to what did participants 
experience in terms of the phenomenon and what context influenced these experiences. [18] 

3.3  Objectives 

The  study  aimed  to  understand  experiences  and  discover  attitude  of  individuals  related  to 
privacy  invasion.  It  uncovered  viewpoints  regarding  invasion  of  privacy  and  gained  an 

understanding  between  attitude  and  behaviour  towards  privacy  invasion.  It  also  sought  to 
uncover if any attitude behaviour gap existed. Objective of this research was to understand:  
•  Attitude of participants regarding invasion of privacy. 
•  Experiences of participants related to privacy invasion. 
•  Relationship between attitude and behaviour of privacy invasion. 
•  Attitude behaviour gap of privacy invasion. 

3.4 Sampling procedure 

Purposive sampling was used as it had the advantage of familiarity, comfort, access, easy mode 
of communication was  some of the important considerations around purposive sampling.  Mid-

range sample size (60-99) was chosen to ensure dataset richness address research questions 
[10,11, 23, 25]. 

 3.5 Participants 

A total of 60 participants (24 female, 36 male) undertook this survey. 70% participants belonged 
to  the  25  to  34  years  age  group  category.  10%  participants  belonged  to  35  to  44  age  group 

categories. Figure 1 is a diagram that represented the age, countries of residence and mother 
tongue of the participants. 

A. Age Distribution(in years)

18-24

25-34

35-44

6 

 
 
 
   
 
 
B. Countries of residence

India

USA

Canada

Japan

Australia

Germany

C. Mother Tongue

Hindi

Bengali

Assamese

Telugu

Kannada

Tamil Marathi Malayalam Urdu

Tulu

Russian

Gujarati

Punjabi

Spanish

Figure 1: Sample distribution of participants. 

    Participants were from four different countries- India, Pakistan, Kazakhstan  and  Venezuela. 
95% of participants were from India belonging to states: Karnataka, West Bengal, Assam, Tamil 

Nadu  and  Maharashtra.  75%  of  participants  completed  post-graduation  while  23.33%  of 
participants were undergraduates. Participants were working professionals in the area of service, 
healthcare, marketing and law.   

Only one participant belonged to Hispanic ethnicity. All other participants belonged to Asian 

ethnic community. All could read and write in English language. Mother tongues of participants 
were Hindi, Bengali, Assamese, Kannada, Gujarati, Spanish, Russian languages. 

Informed consent was obtained and confidentiality of the responses and identity was ensured. 

All participants were encouraged to respond honestly and patiently.  

4 PROCEDURES 

Qualitative survey was used as it ensured maximum heterogeneity of samples which focused on 
diversity and not on typicality, it was affordable and large geographically dispersed populations 

was  accessed,  it  encouraged  disclosure  of  sensitive  topics  like  revealing  information  of  what 
respondents does in their private space to prevent invasion of privacy, non-direct contact of the 

participants  and  researcher  enhanced  personal  safety  of  both  parties.  It  did  not  burden 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
participants  who  did  not  have  access  to  great  internet  connectivity.  A  survey  questionnaire  in 

English language was drafted. It consisted of questions that were open, short, clearly explained, 
avoided  ambiguity  and  assumptions.  It  incorporated  the diverse experiences  and  views  of the 

respondents. It comprised of demographic, closed and open-ended questions. [10,11] 

Standard demographic clicks and checked box closed response questions with the option of 

‘other- please specify’ option was used. Closed ended question was followed with a clarificatory 
secondary  question  like  ‘please  explain’.  Open  ended  questions  provided  the  participants  to 

define their thoughts and ideas. These open-ended questions were framed in a broad manner. 
To ensure flow, the questions on similar aspects of a topic were clustered together. The survey 

aimed  to  capture  respondents’  lived  experiences  record.  Ten  questions  on  lived  experiences, 
perceptions  and  actions  were  asked  to  ensure  better  focused  responses  and  to  prevent 

participant disengagement/ fatigue. Participants were encouraged to spend time and reflect on 
their responses. [11, 14, 23, 31] 

The  questionnaire  was  evaluated  by  two  experts  and  was  piloted  on  eight  participants. 
Recommended suggestions and insights from pilot study were incorporated in the final survey 

questionnaire.  

4.1  Data collection  

Data  was collected  at one shot  due to prior knowledge of  the context and constraints of time. 

Google forms was sent out early of March 2021 via e-mail. The questionnaire was also forwarded 
to campus email groups of Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru. Data was collected till the end 

of March 2021. The response rate of the survey was 93.75%.  

4.2 Data analysis 

Inductive thematic analysis was used to analyze data. This meant that analysis was not shaped 

by any existing theory, it was drawn from the collected data. Data was systematically summarized 
and transformed from vast quantity of text into a highly structured and refined result. It was sorted 

into numerous manageable categories on a variety of levels like word phrase, sentence/theme. 
It guided to form meanings and relationships of the words and concepts. [11,13] 

Familiarizing  oneself  with  the  data  was  the  first  step.  The  responses  were  collectively 
organized with respect to each question in Excel sheet. All answers were carefully read through 

multiple  times.  Firstly,  each  individual  survey  questionnaire  was  read  through  thoroughly. 
Secondly,  each  group  of  answers  pertaining  to  sole  questions  was  read  various  times.  This 

enabled  to  get  a  holistic  meaning  of  responses.  Notes  were  made  after  five  to  six  thorough 
reading of all the responses. Initial impression was noted down. Objective was to understand the 

context of the sample population. [11] 

The data was then divided into smaller parts simultaneously ensuring that the core is retained. 

This was done using coding units. A code is a label that most exactly describes what this particular 
condensed meaning is about. They are usually one or two words long. It makes identification of 

connections easier between various meaning units. [11, 18] The coding units were applied to sort 
data into categories. A category is formed by grouping together the codes that are related to each 

other through their content/ context. Commonalities and differences were looked for in the most 
objective and accurate way that the participants responded. Contradictions were identified and 

noted as well. The references, attitudes and characteristics of the responses was identified and 
marked.  The  themes  were  reviewed.  Thematic  map  was  created,  provisional  themes  and 

8 

 
 
  
subthemes  were  explored  and  relationships between  them  was  inspected.  Finally,  the  themes 

were defined,  named  and final analysis was written.  [10,  11] The upcoming  section would  run 
through various themes and subthemes found from the online survey. It would highlight multiple 

contexts of participants and enlist verbatim of participants for better understanding and painting 
a meaningful picture of the patterns observed in data.  

5 Results 

The study aimed to explore and understand experiences related to privacy invasion. The context 
of  participants  is  described  in  the  first  section  and  the  later  part  of  this  section  describes  the 

themes and its sub themes. Discussion section further explores and investigates the themes and 
contextualises them with relevant literature. A short and crisp summary of insights is presented 

after the discussion that would be useful for practitioners.  

5.1  Participant’s context 

This section on participant’s context provided a comprehensive understanding of the participants 

like  self-perception  of  oneself  related  to  various  factors  that  nourishes  attitude  formation  of 
privacy.  Factors  like  perception  of  how  good  one  is  with  usage  of  technology,  if  they  used 

ubiquitous devices like smartphones and laptops regularly, if they clicked pictures of oneself and 
others  in  public  spaces  or  not,  and  so  on  provided  us  with  an  estimation  if  they  would  have 

experienced any sort of privacy invasion. Our study found that: 

•  63.33% of the participants considered themselves to be good with the use of technology. It 
meant that participants knew methods, theory, and practices of various technology. 31.66% 
of  participants  considered  themselves  to  be  tech  savvy.  It  meant  that  they  considered 

themselves to be well learnt, informed about the modern technology and also consciously 
used  their  skills  to  merit  current  technology.  It  also  meant  that  this section  of  population 

used smart devices with diverse software tools and applications in it.  

•  71.66% of the population sample used smartphones on a daily basis. 21.66% participants 
used  laptop.  Other  devices  and  gadgets  used  were  computer  and  portable  Bluetooth 
devices. 

•  Largest number of respondents (33.33 %) frequently took pictures and videos of oneself 
and others. 21.66 % of the respondents clicked pictures of themselves or others once in 15 

days. Very few of them took pictures of themselves and others once a year to rarely. 

•  91.66%  of  the  respondents visited  public  places  like  shopping  malls,  restaurants,  public 
transport,  gyms  and  fitness  centers,  parks.  It  was  noted  that  these  public  places  were 
visited (40%) on a weekly basis, monthly (33.33%) and then daily by respondents. About 

8.33% of the respondents visited public spaces once in 2 days. A few of the public places 
visited by a few respondents were clubs, court and teashops. 

•  66.66% of the respondents admitted that they took pictures and videos in public spaces. 

80% of the respondents reported that they very rarely attended video calls in public. 

•  About 48.33% of the  respondents reported that  they spotted strangers  in pictures  which 
was clicked by them in public spaces. This meant that they may have violated facial privacy 

of bystanders.  

•  Majority 

(21.66%)  of 

the  participants  were  comfortable  being  captured 

in 

photographs/videos  by  their  friends.  8  out  of  60  participants  were  comfortable  being 

9 

 
 
 
captured by a professional photographer. The next choice of people that participants were 

comfortable getting clicked were their colleagues, CCTV camera and media personal. Only 
4 out of 60 participants were comfortable being captured in photographs by a stranger.  
•  93.33%  of  people  confirmed  that  they  had  respected  the  privacy  preferences  of  public 

around them when they clicked pictures/videos. 

•  Participants responded that they would avoid taking pictures of both women and children 
in  public  spaces.  On  the  other  hand,  73.33  %  of  participants  stated  that  they  would 

completely avoid taking pictures of women in public. A few participants mentioned that they 
would avoid taking pictures of any strangers and people belonging to LGBTQ community 

in public spaces.  

•  Public  spaces  where  participants  would  avoid  taking  pictures/videos  were-  restrooms, 

gyms, hospital, movie theatres, places of worship, shopping malls, parks, streets. 

•  Spaces  considered  as  private  by  the  participants:  home,  office  space,  seating  table  in 
restaurants,  washrooms,  private  car,  gym  or  fitness  activity  area,  places  of  worship, 
theatres, trial rooms in shopping malls.  

•  Places like gyms, movie theatre, places of worship were considered both public and private. 

Sources through which participants kept themselves updated about various privacy regulations 

were: curated list of pro- privacy groups on telegram, forums and subreddits dedicated to privacy. 
For example, the subreddit "r/DE google”, blogs, news articles, twitter, google, social media. 30% 

of participants did not keep themselves updated about various privacy regulations.  

5.2 Themes and subthemes: 

The analysis of the online survey questionnaires revealed the following five themes: attitude 
towards privacy invasion, awareness about privacy (risks and regulations), seeking permission, 
dilemmas concerning S3 (safety, surveillance and sousveillance) and actions preventing invasion 
of privacy. The first three themes broadly described thoughts, expectations, beliefs, and desires 

pertaining to attitude of privacy, the fourth theme recounted confusions associated towards privacy 
and the last theme explained actions or behavior undertaken by participants to maintain privacy. 

All  these  themes  were  common  for  both  public  and  private  spaces.  Each  of  these  themes 
constitute of diverse dimensions that was reported as sub-themes. We acknowledged that some 

of  these  themes and their  underpinning  dimensions  may  overlap  to some  degree.  Verbatim  of 
participants was reported under sub themes. They are described below: 

5.2.1 

Attitude towards privacy invasion 

Attitude  towards  privacy  invasion  in  public  space:  Attitude  can  be  defined  as  a  relatively 

enduring and general evaluation of an object, person, group, issue, or concept on a dimension 
ranging from negative to positive. [74]. This theme represented various beliefs and ideas held by 

participants  towards  privacy  invasion  in  public  space.  As  expressed  by  many  participants 
respecting  privacy  of  others  in  public  spaces  was  considered  as  a  moral  responsibility. 

Disrespecting privacy made people feel uncomfortable and disturbed. Participants mentioned that 
they disliked  when they  were photographed by friends  and strangers without their permission.  

Explicit consent was considered essential irrespective of the nature of interpersonal relationship 
one had with bystanders. Consensus of all participants was on the idea that privacy of others had 

to be respected as they expected others to do the same. It was expected that people-maintained 

10 

 
decency in public spaces. Clear and explicit pre-defined rules should be put up on punishment 

when privacy was invaded.  

“It’s  basic  manners that  we  be  respectful  of  others  around as  1.  they  might  not  want  to be 

disturbed and 2. They could be uncomfortable with the thought of being included in the picture.” 

“I personally sometimes do not like if anyone takes a picture of me suddenly out of nowhere 

even if he or she is a friend, especially if I am in an uncomfortable situation. Hence, I keep the 
same thing in mind when it comes to other people too. Everyone has different levels of privacy 

and I respect that and I would never take a picture of someone without taking their consent.” 

Some participants also mentioned that they despised when strangers photobombed in their 

pictures, hence they preferred to wait till strangers in the intended frame cleared out. There was 
a general consensus among participants that pictures taken in public were usually uploaded in 

social media, therefore it was further important to seek permission or consent. Also, as reported 
by  participants,  seeking  permission  was  not  always  possible  so,  they  resorted  to  informing 

bystanders that they were involuntarily going to become a part of a picture. The choice was left 
upon bystanders’ if  they wanted to  be  a  part of the  picture or recording.  It  was expected from 

bystanders  (strangers  and  friends)  to  first  inform  that  they  were  about  to  film/click  picture. 
Participants also mentioned that they would delete pictures if anyone did not want themselves to 

be captured or their pictures be uploaded in social media.  

“Permission should be asked always if we want to click a picture and also if any other person 

is not willing to appear on the picture. As often we click the picture we tend to post in social media 
these days. Hence, it matters whether we respect the privacy or seek permission from the other 

people” 

“If someone doesn't want to be tagged on social media then that choice must be respected for 

we are in a generation that clicks pictures only to be posted on the internet” 

“I would politely inform others (known or unknown) that they are involuntarily becoming a part 

of a picture that I'm taking. Whether to be in it or not, is upto them." 

“I don’t like it when a person gets in the way of my picture so I would rather not take a picture 

if someone’s in the way.” 

Fifty-four participants agreed to respecting others privacy in public space. Seeking permission 

was considered important as participant thought that every individual had their exclusive notion 
of boundaries and it should be respected. Participants believed that not all people in public spaces 

were aware if they were violating privacy of others. So, a few participants considered that due to 
lack of awareness, violation of bystander’s privacy could be a mistake that was not committed on 

purpose.  8.33%  of  the  participants  expected  that  people  in  public  space  should  not  look  over 
bystander’s phone screen. They also had negative attitude towards eavesdropping and starring 

in public space. In shopping complexes, CCTV facing trial rooms were unacceptable. If groups 
were keeping to themselves then their privacy should not be invaded.  

“It is very important to understand boundary and space. People should be respectful towards 

others' privacy and their preferences of being photographed or not.”  

11 

 
“I don't think people do it on purpose, theres just a lack of knowledge etc. As for protecting 

myself, don't have many expectations since nobody has run up with a camera to photograph me 
etc” 

Figure 2: Image depicting multiple types of privacy invasion in public space. 

Two participants mentioned that they would not consider respecting privacy of people in public 
space if bystanders were in the process of committing a crime/ wrongdoing. Three participants 

considered clicking selfies as a private act. When bystanders deliberately captured themselves 
into  frame  of selfie, it  was considered as a violation of  the participant’s personal privacy.  Four 

participants  thought  that  expecting  complete  privacy  in  public  space  was  unreasonable  and 
chaotic. 

“Expecting complete privacy in public spaces is unreasonable, as the space is not meant to 

be private.” 

“The bubble of private space around you must be respected whether it is private or public” 

 Attitude towards privacy invasion in private spaces: Participants preferred to avoid any sort of 

arguments  regarding  privacy  invasion  in  private  space.  Consent/permission  seeking  was 
considered important. They also expressed that approval of consent was equivalently important. 

Bystanders were expected to respect privacy once they were informed about them wanting it. 

12 

 
 
“I expect people to understand that unless I am giving them a thumbs up to come and intrude 

my space whenever they feel like, they should not.” 

“I expect people to be generally considerate and not intrude my privacy if I ask them for some 

privacy. I do not expect people to know my limits of privacy. But I expect them to respect it once 
I let them know.” 

Protecting  oneself  from  privacy  invasion  in  private  space  was  considered  as  a  personal 
responsibility. This thought was fueled by unfamiliar negative consequences that were products 

of  digital  era.  These  consequences  were  not  anticipatory  in  nature.  Participants  wished  that 
widely used applications should be responsible with protection of data. In comparison to public 

spaces,  seven  participants  mentioned  that  they  were  less  vigilant  about  invasion  of  privacy  in 
spaces that they considered private.  

“I should be able to save myself from coming in the pics i don't want too” 

“I would rather not be approached, filmed or bothered in these spaces. I think keeping people 

ought to keep to themselves and not intrude on what others do in these spaces. I don't want to 
be recorded or be compelled to share any information.” 

“Less cautious but still keeping an eye around” 

Two  participants  thought  that  unless  their  mental  peace  was  disturbed  in  private  space, 

invasion of privacy did not matter. They had developed the art of ignoring invasion of their privacy.  
A  few  participants  thought  that  right  to  privacy  in  private  spaces  should  be  based  on 

circumstances. Participants expected to receive auditory privacy from various corporations like 
Amazon. They felt that even if they gave consent, their privacy was being invaded. Protection of 

privacy in private space was considered unsuccessful as the presence of CCTV, facial recognition 
AI and  location tracking through smartphone  was always present. Receiving complete privacy 

was considered an illusion.  

“I’ve developed the art of ignoring things” 

“I  find  it  hard  in  the  times  of  surveillance  to  protect  oneself  from  such  intrusion  by  the 
Government, Corporations etc. Even though the questions above assume visual intrusion and 

privacy, there is also auditory privacy. Amazon Echo uses our voices to train their ML models on 
servers located on unknown indigenous lands. So I don't know how to regulate and make policies 

what is private and what is public anymore?” 

5.2.2 Privacy awareness 

Awareness is based on an individual’s attention, perception and cognition of physical as well as 
non-physical  objects  [61].  It  was  found  that  participants  were  aware  of  unreliable  internet 

platforms,  illegal  and  unethical  hacking,  identity  thefts,  dark  web,  spoof  attacks,  information 
stealing and various other ways how organizations use data to lay schemes, memberships and 

deals.  They  were  also  aware  of  how  Google  history  could  be  misused.  A  few  participants 
expressed about technical problems when any form of data was synced to cloud. Majority of them 

were aware of how social media could negatively impact their life. They were cognizant of ways 
how privacy in various devices could be adjusted to suit their best needs. They mentioned being 

aware of how pictures over Facebook and Instagram were and could be misused. Participants 
additionally  mentioned  they  were  aware  of  how  information  available  online  could  be  used  to 

13 

 
commit crimes in their immediate physical environment hence, establishing physical boundaries 

was  important.  They  were  mindful  of  several  drawbacks  of  surveillance  and  surreptitious 
recording, but also acknowledged the importance of CCTV cameras for vigilance. Participants 

who lived alone were more cautious and observant about surreptitious recording and applications 
in their smartphones that required them to give permission for any kind of recording.  

“Cover my webcam and have great security on my laptop. Avoid dodgy websites and links. 

Be extra careful on social media” 

“Stay of the dark web and spoof attacks” 

“make social media profiles private, installation of cctv cameras to keep vigilance etc” 

5.2.3 Consent or permission seeking 

Consent means to give approval/ compliance in or approval of what is done or proposed by 

another  [44].  Participants  had  a  core belief  that seeking consent and permission  was a moral 
responsibility  (in  public  space)  and  basic  mannerism  (in  both  public  and  private  space). 

Participants desired either seeking permission or informing while clicking pictures in public spaces 
if  there  were  any  chances  of  invading  bystanders’  privacy.  They  also  expressed  that  any 

bystander should seek permission and wait for its approval in private space.  

“I don’t wish anyone to invade my private space without my consent” 

“I expect people to understand that unless I am giving them a thumbs up to come and intrude 

my space whenever they feel like, they should not” 

5.2.4 Dilemma and confusion 

Confusion is a situation in  which a difficult choice has to  be made between  two different things 

one could do; uncertainty about what is happening, intended, or required [73]. Participants had 
confusion if technologies like facial recognition AI, Amazon Echo, CCTV surveillance was of help 

or  invading  privacy.  Reliability  of  these  platforms  was  questioned.  They  felt  that  consent  and 
permission  were  not  always  honestly  taken.  Fear  cultivated  around  the  core  belief  that  rapid 

spread of false information was greatly present. Participants also suspected about hidden camera 
and mic recordings that they were not aware about.  

“Even  though  I  escape  the  cameras  of  people  I  can't  escape  the  CCTV  cameras  of 
Shopping malls that are installed without my permission and are meant for my security in case 

of theft. I find it as a misnomer” 

“The only concerns are hidden cameras or mics, otherwise no issues.” 

“Not to be too loud while discussing something important and maintain distance” 

5.2.5 Behavior or actions 

Actions are self-initiated sequence of movements, usually with respect to some goal. It may 
consist of an integrated set of component behaviors as opposed to a single response [74]. 

Actions taken by participants to protect invasion of privacy in both public and private spaces 
were:  

Participants remarked that if they felt that their privacy was violated then they would politely 
ask the violator to not invade their privacy. They avoided instances in public places where they 

14 

 
thought  that  their  privacy  would  be  violated.  They  avoided  sharing  honest  and  complete 

information about themselves in restaurants and social media. Participants also ensured that 
they  did  not  share  any  kind  of  personal  information  over  Internet  unless  it  was  a  reliable 

platform.  Micro  steps  like  not  revealing  full  name  on  social  media  networks,  not  sharing 
pictures or videos of private life was repeatedly prevalent. Social media accounts were kept 

private  as  well.  A  few  participants  ensured  that  they  have  read  privacy  policies  of  various 
application. Four participants avoided using online banking applications frequently  in public 

spaces  mostly.  In  office  space,  participants  used  password  protection  to  secure  their 
smartphones, laptops and computer. Nine participants avoided using and holding an account 

on  social  media  completely.  They  always  turned  their  Bluetooth  off.  All  kind  of  suspicious 
website and links were avoided, webcams were covered and disabled. Data security software 

was installed on their laptop. The participants refused to sign any schemes and membership 
deals.  They  used  secure  communication  apps,  turned  off  all  Google  history  like  location, 

search, watch, calendar and restricted or deleted all social media that linked them to oneself.  
Privacy in private space was maintained by taking precautions like shutting doors, windows, 

checking surroundings, installing secured lock systems and CCTV cameras.  

 “ do not mention complete details on social media; make sure I move out of frame if some 

one is taking a picture in public; making sure to read privacy of the application I use, ensuring 
that there are no cameras fixed inside public restrooms, hotel rooms before I use them, and 

so on. 

“ I make sure to lock my laptop in office so that my crucial data isn't available to all, also I 

have protected screen lock in my smartphone...” 

Participants undertook the following steps to protect privacy of themselves in public spaces- 

They  established  boundaries  to  prevent  encroachment  of  space,  gadgets  were  secured 
with lock to keep information safe. Forty-three participants revealed that they were always very 

cautious,  vigilant  and  alert  when  they  were  in  public.  They  maintained  distance,  avoided 
crowded  places,  maintained  low  profile  of  oneself  and  maintained  discretion  of  oneself  by 

wearing masks and used earphones. One participant mentioned that they put on a poker face 
so that people mistook them for being unapproachable. Participants reported that they did not 

open applications which required them entering passwords and pins in public space.  

 “Keep my bluetooth off and probably avoid crowded spaces. Trust my intuition.” 

“Less cautious but still keeping an eye around.”  

“Limit yourself giving too much information over the internet” 

Figure  3  below  represent  the  themes  discovered  in  this  study.  This  figure  shows  how  user  perception  is 

formed in both public and private spaces. Attitude, beliefs, ideas towards privacy, awareness about various 

privacy risks and regulations, consent seeking  and various  dilemmas influenced  actions and  behaviour of 

individuals.  Interactions  among  all  the  themes  generated  experiences  which  influenced  to  form  user 
perception towards privacy.   

15 

 
 
Figure  3:  Represents  how  user  perception  is  formed.  It  is  the  interplay  of  attitude,  awareness,  consent, 
confusion and actions that influences in the formation of user perception. 

The next section would explain the themes discovered in this section in a detailed way. These 

themes are contextualized with relevant literature as much as possible.    

6 

DISCUSSION 

Key  themes  identified  in  results  section  were:  attitude  towards  privacy  in  public  and  private 

spaces,  privacy  awareness,  consent  seeking,  dilemmas  or  confusions  related  to  various 
technologies,  impact  of  attitude  and  beliefs  on  individuals’  actions  regarding  how  to  protect 

oneself from invasion of privacy in both public and private spaces. This section provides a rich 
description  and  interpretation  of  the  experiences  of  participants,  pointed  out  related  literature 

supporting and contextualizing themes and drew connection among themes and subthemes by 
identifying similarities, differences and correlations. It would also help to understand the themes 

and their interconnections in a comprehensive way. This survey was conducted amidst pandemic; 
hence responses of participants might have been influenced because of the ongoing events. It 

was intended to collect a representative data from both female and male. All participants were 
educated and familiar with various  ubiquitous technology especially smartphones  and  laptops. 

There were certain places that fell into the grey area (like religious places, gym) and could be 
intercepted as both private and public spaces. Participants respected privacy of  bystanders in 

these ambiguous places. They demonstrated sensitivity in public space and declared that they 
would  not  capture  pictures  of  women,  children  and  people  from  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual, 

transgender and queer or questioning (LGBTQ) community.  

6.1 Attitude towards privacy invasion 

People  held  certain  expectations  regarding  protecting  themselves  from  invasion  of  privacy. 
Expectations  are  thoughts  and  beliefs  that  people  hold  regarding  a  phenomenon.  In  public 

16 

 
 
 
spaces, some of the beliefs, thoughts and expectations of people regarding protecting oneself 

from invasion of privacy were-  

All individual’s actions are guided by interplay of thoughts and feelings. Protecting privacy of 

others  in  public  space  was  considered  a  ‘moral  responsibility’.  This  was  a  core  belief  held  by 
participants [21]. As reported by participants, they had a negative opinion towards photobombing, 

were  uncomfortable  when  they  were  photographed  without  their  knowledge,  had a notion  that 
pictures taken in public were mostly uploaded at various social media platforms and believed that 

every person had personal notions of boundaries. These thoughts guided their action to respect 
privacy  of  others  in  public,  especially  bystander’s  facial  privacy.  So,  whenever  they  wanted  a 

photo in public and there were people around, they waited for them to clear out and then engaged 
into clicking pictures. Also, they ensured to seek permission before clicking pictures in public from 

bystanders as they themselves were uncomfortable when consent was not seeked from them. 
These actions of seeking permission and waiting were guided by empathy and morality which is 

in  accordance  with  the  theory  of  moral  development  proposed  by  psychologist  Lawrence 
Kohlberg. Participants were being respectful of others’ privacy and seek consent because they 

were  conforming  and  complying  to  social  norms.  [21].    These  social  norms  were  respecting 
privacy of others in public, maintenance of decency like not eavesdropping and starring. Only one 

participant reasoned the legal aspect for respecting privacy of people in public. This suggested 
that majority of the participants respected privacy of others considering more of it as fulfillment of 

social norms than legal rights.  

Participants also reported that invading privacy of others in public could also be a mistake as 

there was a lot of ambiguity surrounding the consequences of invading privacy in public spaces. 
For instance, taking a picture in public place in India is not illegal as there’s no such law which 

prohibits photography in public. But photographing somebody without their consent violates their 
right to privacy which is implicit in Art. 21 (Right to Life) of our constitution [15]. Photographing 

somebody is the first violation and then publishing it would lead to another violation. As mentioned 
in the results section, 73.33% of sample population avoided clicking pictures of women, children 

and any stranger in public spaces altogether.  Now, a lot of people may not be aware of the laws 
the  way  a  trained  professional  would  be.  Lack  of  awareness  could  be  because  of  information 

overloading  and  difficulty  to  understand  complex  legal  terminology.  Moreover,  judgement  of 
consequences in India was decided by police and on the basis of evidence. This process involved 

a number of ambiguities into what could be explicitly stated as legal and illegal. In addition to this, 
following up with legal procedures was a time and money straining process. [36] 

In private spaces, consent seeking was considered important, approval of consent/permission 
was desired. In public space consent and approval of consent was considered as same part of 

an action but in private space approval of consent was viewed as a separate sub-action. Negative 
confrontations  occurred  in  private  spaces  but  it  was  not  desirable  by  participants.  They 

considered protecting oneself from invasion of privacy was a personal responsibility. This core 
belief  stemmed  out  because  the  consequences  of  privacy  invasion  in  digital  era  were  viewed 

negatively, ambiguities existed and less control over information was prevalent. So, participants 
were  fearful  of  consequences.  Lack  of  knowledge  about  privacy  risks  and  their  solutions 

contributed to this core belief. According to Richmond Y. Wong, privacy by design was desired 
and expected from widely used applications [51]. According to Fuming Shih, intuitive trust and 

familiarity played an important role in willingness to trust various applications [51]. On the other 

17 

 
hand, a few participants developed apathy towards invasion of privacy in private spaces. This is 

not a new phenomenon. Lack of control could generate feeling of numbness. Some individuals 
coped up and found solutions that best suited them on the other hand others felt loss of control. 

It was necessary to keep in mind that various psychological needs of human beings like need for 
autonomy, relatedness and competence should be fulfilled when one is using various technology 

irrespective of public or private space. [19, 60] Feeling lack of control over online data, malicious 
interface design, ambiguous boundaries in virtual world etc. could be contributing to feelings of 

apathy. [1]  

6.2 Privacy awareness  

Privacy  awareness  of  an  individual  encompasses  the  attention,  perception  and  cognition  of 
whether others receive or  have  received personal information about him/her, his/her presence 

and activities, which personal information others receive or have  received in detail, how these 
pieces of information are or may be processed and used, and what amount of information about 

the presence and activities of others might reach and/or interrupt the individual. [61]. The study 
revealed that participants were aware, respectful and sensitive about privacy of people in public 

spaces. This judgement is on the basis of face validity. In a study conducted by Amon, M. J [4] 
found that people without strong personal privacy preferences were especially likely to want to 

share photos, regardless of how the photo portrayed the subject. It also reported that the privacy 
condition led to a lack of concern with others’ privacy. These findings suggested that developing 

interventions  for  reducing  photo  sharing  and  protecting  the  privacy  of  others  is  a  multivariate 
problem.  Participants  in  our  study  were  aware  about  various  types  of  privacy  like  privacy  of 

behavior  and  action,  privacy  of  communication,  privacy  of  data  and  image.  They  were 
accustomed  with  the  difference  between  violation  and  invasion  of  privacy  and  their  diverse 

consequences  (technical  and  non-technical).  These  were  some  of  the  concerns  that  were 
growing with emerging technologies that could be observed in both private and public spaces. It 

was not possible to gaze to what extent or degree was this awareness. Also, privacy invasion 
perceptions  were  negatively  related  to  continuous  use  intentions  [80].  It  was  observed  that 

participants actually did guide their actions in accordance with their perceptions.  

6.3 Consent or permission 

Both seeking permission/consent and informing was acceptable in public spaces but only seeking 
permission was acceptable in private space. In public space, participants did not mention about 

waiting for approval after seeking permission. This implied that bystanders always considered to 
seek permission and waited for its approval. It was also observed that consent for all the intended 

course of action was necessary in public spaces. This thought escalated from the idea that any 
content could be uploaded in social media without actually seeking permission to upload it. On 

the other hand, in private space inability of bystanders to wait for response from the participant 
was a concern. In public space, when privacy was invaded, it was tolerated to some extent as 

participants held the belief that it could be because one is mistaken but in private spaces tolerance 
for invasion of privacy was reduced.  

6.4 Dilemma and confusion 

Dilemmas and confusion aroused as various emerging technologies came both with advantages 

and disadvantages. Implications of these technologies were heavily dependent on how they were 
used. Spreading awareness and learning about these emerging technologies could be helpful but 

18 

 
not all are  capable of it. As mentioned by some participants, various  technologies  have  made 

people to be hyper-vigilant in this present era. Each of these technologies had capability to disrupt 
as  well  as  contribute  to  our  health  and  wellbeing  (both  physical  and  mental).  Surreptitious 

recording was a big concern with participants as they used smartphones and laptops every day 
that were equipped to record not just visuals but also audio. CCTV and other forms of surveillance 

was  a  growing  concern  as  participants  were  aware  of  various  uses  and  consequences  of  the 
same. They knew about the pros and cons of AI and ML models but not having the skillset to 

prevent  or  control  various  technical  damages  could  lead  to  technological  anxiety.  Awareness 
about  these  in  easy  simple  ways  could  help  to  reduce  technological  anxiety.  Participants 

mentioned that they used social media and read news that helped them to gain an understanding 
of various privacy related topics. These platforms could be effectively used to raise awareness 

about privacy risks, solutions and regulations.  

6.5 Behavior or action 

Thoughts  and  beliefs  influence  every  individual’s  behaviour.  Whenever  conflicting  situations 
related to privacy invasion aroused, participants were assertive and bystanders complied to the 

requests. Anticipated instances in public space where participants felt that there are chances of 
privacy risks, those situations were avoided mostly. This could be because certain human needs 

(like  need for safety)  [74]  were  not  getting fulfilled.  Participants  broadly  used  two  key  ways  to 
protect themselves from invasion of privacy namely avoiding privacy risk situations and discretion 

maintenance. The most preferred way was maintenance of distance and avoidance of crowded 
places.  This  could  be  because  most  participants  engaged  in  flight  response.  When  physical 

distance was maintained, it helped them feel safe and avoid feelings of uncomfortableness. Since 
violation of privacy could happen in multiple ways, participants wanted to feel safe as much as 

they could [17]. Participants claimed that they were more cautious and vigilant when in public. 
Feeling  of  unsafety  could  also  lead  to  inadequate  performance  of  intended  actions.  [18].  This 

feeling may possibly also instigate promotion of dishonest behaviour among people like sharing 
insincere information about oneself in various platforms like digital media and public spaces. This 

can have impact on various advertisement and promotional activities. When bystander’s privacy 
is violated content of photo can be misused. Participants mentioned that any kind of transaction 

activity  and  applications  that  required  entering  of  passwords  and  pins  were  avoided  in  public 
space. It was perceived as risky because actions could be captured or recorded. This thought 

was  contributing  to  usage  of  mobile  payment  in  public  spaces  in  less  frequency.  Mostly  data 
security apps were used in both public and private spaces.    

It  was  found  that  in  public  spaces,  participants  respected  privacy  of  people  around  as  they 
believed that it was their moral responsibility. In private space it was felt that protecting oneself 

from invasion of privacy was a personal responsibility. In both the spaces, seeking consent by 
bystanders  was  desired.  Actions  of  participants  was  in  line  with  their  thoughts.  This  research 

would  contribute  to  understand  user’s  perspective  of  privacy  in  public  and  private  spaces. 
Negative attitude towards surveillance and other privacy concerns can be addressed by various 

organizations by taking into account privacy by design.  These findings could contribute to design 
socio  technical  solutions,  positive  and  persuasive  technologies  and  behavioural  interventions. 

The following section  highlights some of the interesting findings in the upcoming section. This 
section would also briskly discuss the results-  

19 

 
6.6 Summary  

The following bullet points summarized the paper and study: 

Protecting oneself from invasion of privacy was considered as a personal responsibility. 

• 
It  meant  that  participants  wanted  to fulfil  their  need for  autonomy  while  protecting  themselves 
from privacy invasion. This should be considered as a design principle while designing immersive 

technologies.  Participants  trusted  themselves  and  their  intuition  when  it  came  to  protecting 
oneself  and  preventing  invasion  of  privacy.  Figure  4  below  is  a  pie  diagram  that  represented 

various  causes  cited  by  participants  as  to  why  they  should  protect  themself  from  invasion  of 
privacy and considered it personal responsibility. 

% of population on why they thought protecting oneself 
from invasion of privacy is personal responsibility

5%

12%

7%

28%

48%

Data sold to unreliable sources

Not seeking consent for complete plan of action

Not waiting for approval of consent

Misuse of AI & ML

Surveillance

Figure  4:  Pie  diagram  showing  percentage  of  population  as  to  why  they  thought  protecting  oneself  from 

invasion of privacy is personal responsibility 

• 
Social media was  considered a reliable tool to keep oneself  aware of various privacy 
regulations. Increasing awareness of various privacy regulations on social media could build trust 

Participants respected privacy of others in public because they held a core belief that it 

and also influence attitude of participants. 
• 
was a moral responsibility. It was in line with moral development theory.  
• 
their  pictures  irrespective  of  space.  Colleagues  were  preferred  third  amongst  the  choices 

Participants trusted their close friends and professional photographers the most to click 

20 

 
 
  
 
provided. Attitude can be best influenced by targeting these key players. This would be useful for 

advertising, sales and marketing professionals to decide target population criteria. 

Figure 5 below represented percentage of population who were comfortable getting clicked by various people. 

Least  number  of  participants  were  comfortable  getting  clicked  by  media  personals.  On  the  other  hand, 

preference  for  getting  clicked  by  professional  photographer  and  colleagues  had  a  close  margin.  31%  of 

participants were comfortable getting clicked by friends.  

% of population who were comfortable getting clicked by 
the following-

11%

17%

31%

20%

21%

Friends

Professional Photographer

Colleague

CCTV

Media

Figure 5: Pie diagram showing percentage of population who are comfortable getting clicked by various 

sources 

Actions taken to protect oneself from invasion of privacy in digital space were: having 

• 
minimal  presence  online,  maintain  a  pseudonymous  self,  holding  no  social  media  accounts. 
These were the spectrum of behavior which are representative of fear/ negative consequences 

Attitudes that influenced fear of invasion of informational privacy were: data being sold 

surrounding invasion of privacy.  
• 
to unreliable and untrustworthy sites; not seeking consent for entire plan of action. For example- 
seeking consent for clicking picture but not for uploading; seeking consent but not considering 

approval  of  consent;  being  watched  and  monitored  through  webcams  and  hacking;  misuse  of 
machine learning (ML) models and artificial intelligence like facial recognition; invasion of auditory 

privacy  through  ML  models  and  miscellaneous  video  recording  (surveillance).  Transparent 
awareness of various ethics followed concerning to the most commonly occurring fear/ concerns 

of participants can be promoted over the platforms that they choose to keep themselves aware 
of various privacy regulations. 
• 
The  need  for  autonomy  to  protect  oneself  from  invasion  of  privacy  was  because 
participants were less aware about privacy risks. This lack of awareness pushed participants to 

engage in behavior like avoiding public places altogether and their presence in social media.  

It was found that despite the existence and importance laid on privacy risks, participants were not 

aware of the implications in full potential. A number of participants were not aware of how various 

21 

 
 
 
information  is  collected  and  used.  By  understanding  opinions  and  perspectives  from  general 

population,  stakeholders  could  enhance  privacy  in  their  products.  It  would  also  help  to  better 
recognize the cognitive model of user’s privacy needs. There have been privacy concerns since 

decades  but  currently  concerns  related  to  implications  and  impact  of  various  emerging 
technologies are intensely growing. It is important to acknowledgment the fluid nature of privacy 

with respect to spaces and accommodate them in various applications.  

There are different types of privacy. They may be applicable for both public and private spaces 

but  context  changes.  Group  privacy  was  desired  and  eavesdropping  was  unsought  in  public 
spaces.  There  are  no  technical  solutions  available  for  these  concerns  yet.  Also,  there  were  a 

number  of  solutions  to  address  bystanders’  privacy  concern  but  none  of  the  participants 
mentioned  about  using  any  technical  solutions  to  protect  themselves  from  invasion  of  facial 

privacy in public space. A number of participants did use technical solutions to protect their privacy 
in private space.  

7 CONCLUSIONS 

In  the  present  age  of  overwhelming  number  of  ubiquitous  devices  with  in-built  cameras, 

understanding and preserving privacy of users and bystanders are of paramount importance. In 
particular, many vulnerable users like people with disabilities, neo-literate persons and often their 

able-bodied counterparts often do not realize their privacy is compromised. In this context, the 
present study is designed to understand users’ perspective of privacy. Considering the ongoing 

Covid-a9  pandemic,  we  used  an  online  survey  and  qualitative  research  method.  Key  themes 
found in this study were attitude towards privacy in public and private space, privacy awareness, 
consent  and  permission seeking, dilemmas  regarding  S3  and  actions  or  behavior.  Participants 
expressed  that  the  Government  should  come  up  with  rules  that  would  hold  the  perpetrators 

accountable who invaded privacy of others in public space with regard to facial privacy. Explicit 
regulations and policies regarding protection of privacy was required as not many were aware of 

it. Prevalence of confusion regarding what actions to be taken post violation of privacy should be 
well circulated. These findings can help to develop various ubiquitous technologies, positive and 

persuasive  technologies.  Seeking  permission  was  a  widely  practiced  behavior  as  individuals 
wanted to avoid discomfort and negative consequences. It was influenced by the core belief of 

‘respecting privacy is a moral responsibility’.  This study was not representative of gender and 
data from more sample could be collected.  Moreover, this study primarily focused on the opinions 

and thoughts of the educated. Despite trying our best, the online survey might not have been able 
to  address  the  dynamic  nature  of  privacy  invasion.  Future  work  could  be  exploring  and 

understanding implications of privacy invasion on mental health leading to apathy.   

22 

 
 
 
REFERENCES 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

Acquisti,  A.,  Brandimarte,  L.,  &  Loewenstein,  G.  (2015).  Privacy  and  human  behavior  in  the  age  of 
information. Science, 347(6221), 509-514. 
Aditya,  P.,  Sen,  R.,  Druschel,  P.,  Joon  Oh,  S.,  Benenson,  R.,  Fritz,  M.,  ...  & Wu,  T.  T.  (2016,  June).  I-pic:  A 
platform  for  privacy-compliant  image  capture.  In Proceedings  of  the  14th  annual  international  conference  on 
mobile systems, applications, and services (pp. 235-248). 
Aïmeur, E., & Schőnfeld,  D. (2011, July). The ultimate invasion of privacy: Identity theft. In 2011  Ninth Annual 
International Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust (pp. 24-31). IEEE. 
Amon, M. J., Hasan, R., Hugenberg, K., Bertenthal, B. I., & Kapadia, A. (2020, May). Influencing photo sharing 

decisions  on social  media:  A  case  of  paradoxical  findings.  In 2020 IEEE  Symposium on Security  and  Privacy 

(SP) (pp. 1350-1366). IEEE. 

Ashok, A., Nguyen, V., Gruteser, M., Mandayam, N., Yuan, W., & Dana, K. (2014, September). Do not share! 
Invisible light beacons for signaling preferences to privacy-respecting cameras. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM 
MobiCom workshop on Visible light communication systems (pp. 39-44). 
Ayaburi, E. W., & Treku, D. N. (2020). Effect of penitence on social media trust and privacy concerns: The case 
of Facebook. International Journal of Information Management, 50, 171-181. 
Beach,  S.,  Schulz,  R.,  Downs,  J.,  Matthews,  J.,  Barron,  B.,  &  Seelman,  K.  (2009).  Disability,  age,  and 
informational privacy attitudes in quality-of-life technology applications: Results from a national web survey. ACM 
Transactions on Accessible Computing (TACCESS), 2(1), 1-21. 
Benjamin, W. (1972). A short history of photography. Screen, 13(1), 5-26. 
Brandeis, L., & Warren, S. (1890). The right to privacy. Harvard law review, 4(5), 193-220. 

8 
9 
10  Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2013). Successful qualitative research: A practical guide for beginners. sage. 
11  Bryman, A., & Burgess, R. G. (2002). Reflections on qualitative data analysis. In Analyzing qualitative data (pp. 

230-240). Routledge. 

12  Chalghoumi, H., Cobigo, V., Dignard, C., Gauthier-Beaupré, A., Jutai, J. W., Lachapelle, Y., ... & Perrin, M. (2019). 
Information  privacy  for  technology  users  with  intellectual  and  developmental  disabilities:  Why  does  it 
matter?. Ethics & Behavior, 29(3), 201-217. 

13  Chamberlain, K., & Murray, M. (2008). In: The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Research in Psychology. Health 

psychology, 390-406. 

14  Charmaz, Kathy (2007). Grounded theory. In George Ritzer (Ed.), Blackwell encyclopedia of sociology. Blackwell 

Reference Online, http://www.blackwellreference.com/public/ [Date of access: August, 08, 2007]. 

15  Chaudhry,  V.  (2016).  Right  to  privacy  under  the  Indian  constitution. International  Journal  of  Education  and 

Management Studies, 6(4), 454. 

16  Chen, Z. T., & Cheung, M. (2018). Privacy perception and protection on Chinese social media: a case study of 

WeChat. Ethics and Information Technology, 20(4), 279-289. 

17  Clarke, R. (1997). Introduction to dataveillance and information privacy and definitions of terms. www. anu. edu. 

au/people/Roger. Clarke/DV/Intro. html.

18  Creswell,  J.  W.  (2013).  Qualitative  Inquiry  &  Research  Design:  Choosing  among  Five  Approaches  (3rd  ed.). 

Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE. 

19  Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2012). Self-determination theory. 
20  Denning,  T.,  Dehlawi,  Z.,  &  Kohno,  T.  (2014,  April).  In  situ  with  bystanders  of  augmented  reality  glasses: 
Perspectives  on  recording  and  privacy-mediating  technologies.  In Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 2377-2386). 

21  Deutsch, M., & Krauss, R. M. (1965). Social Psychology. New York: Basic Books. 
22  Faklaris, C., Cafaro, F., Blevins, A., O’Haver, M. A., & Singhal, N. (2020, June). A Snapshot of Bystander Attitudes 
about Mobile Live-Streaming Video in Public Settings. In Informatics (Vol. 7, No. 2, p. 10). Multidisciplinary Digital 
Publishing Institute. 

23  Fink, Arlene (2003). The survey handbook. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
24  Finn, R. L., Wright, D., & Friedewald, M. (2013). Seven types of privacy. In European data protection: coming of 

age (pp. 3-32). Springer, Dordrecht. 

25  Frith,  H.,  &  Gleeson,  K.  (2012).  Qualitative  data  collection:  Asking  the  right  questions. Qualitative  research 

methods in mental health and psychotherapy, 55-67.

26  Frome, A., Cheung, G., Abdulkader, A., Zennaro, M., Wu, B., Bissacco, A., ... & Vincent, L. (2009, September). 
Large-scale  privacy  protection  in google  street view.  In 2009 IEEE  12th  international  conference on computer 
vision (pp. 2373-2380). IEEE. 

27  Hasan, R. (2020, April). Reducing Privacy Risks in the Context of Sharing Photos Online. In Extended Abstracts 

of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-11)  

28  Hasan, R.,  Crandall,  D., Fritz, M., &  Kapadia, A. (2020, May).  Automatically detecting bystanders in photos to 

reduce privacy risks. In 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) (pp. 318-335). IEEE. 

29  Hatuka, T., & Toch, E. (2017). Being visible in public space: The normalisation of asymmetrical visibility. Urban 

Studies, 54(4), 984-998. 

23 

 
30  Hoyle, R., Stark, L., Ismail, Q., Crandall, D., Kapadia, A., & Anthony, D. (2020). Privacy norms and preferences 

for photos Posted Online. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), 27(4), 1-27. 

33 

32 

31  Hoyle,  R.,  Templeman,  R.,  Armes,  S.,  Anthony,  D.,  Crandall,  D.,  &  Kapadia,  A.  (2014,  September).  Privacy 
behaviors of lifeloggers using wearable cameras. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference 
on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (pp. 571-582). 
Jain,  V. (2014). 3D model  of  attitude. International Journal of Advanced  Research in  Management and  Social 
Sciences, 3(3), 1-12. 
Jamil, F., Ahmad, S., Iqbal, N., & Kim, D. H. (2020). Towards a remote monitoring of patient vital signs based on 
IoT-based blockchain integrity management platforms in smart hospitals. Sensors, 20(8), 2195. 
Jamil, F., Iqbal, M. A., Amin, R., & Kim, D. (2019). Adaptive thermal-aware routing protocol for wireless body area 
network. Electronics, 8(1), 47 
Jansen, H. (2010). The logic of qualitative survey research and its position in the field of social research methods. 
In Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative Social Research (Vol. 11, No. 2). 
Jauregui, B. (2013). Beatings, beacons, and big men: Police disempowerment and delegitimation in India. Law & 

35 

34 

36 

Social Inquiry, 38(3), 643-669. 

37 

Jung,  J.,  &  Philipose,  M.  (2014,  September).  Courteous  glass.  In Proceedings of the 2014  ACM  International 
Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing: Adjunct Publication (pp. 1307-1312). 

38  Kairam, S., Kaye, J. J., Guerra-Gomez, J. A., & Shamma, D. A. (2016, May). Snap decisions? How users, content, 
and aesthetics interact to shape photo sharing behaviors. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 113-124). 

39  Kapadia,  A.,  Henderson,  T.,  Fielding,  J.  J.,  &  Kotz,  D.  (2007,  May).  Virtual  walls:  Protecting  digital  privacy  in 
pervasive  environments.  In International  Conference  on  Pervasive  Computing (pp.  162-179).  Springer,  Berlin, 
Heidelberg. 

40  Kasper, D. V. (2005, March). The evolution (or devolution) of privacy. In Sociological Forum (Vol. 20, No. 1, pp. 

41 

69-92). Kluwer Academic Publishers-Plenum Publishers. 
Li,  A.,  Li,  Q.,  &  Gao, W.  (2016,  June).  Privacycamera:  Cooperative  privacy-aware  photographing  with  mobile 
phones.  In 2016  13th  Annual  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Sensing,  Communication,  and  Networking 
(SECON) (pp. 1-9). IEEE. 
Li, F., Sun, Z., Li, A., Niu, B., Li, H., & Cao, G. (2019, April). Hideme: Privacy-preserving photo sharing on social 
networks. In IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications (pp. 154-162). IEEE. 
43  Maddi,  S.  R.,  &  Costa  Jr,  P.  T.  (1972). Humanism  in  personology:  Allport,  Maslow,  and  Murray.  Transaction 

42 

Publishers. 

44  Margulis, S. T. (2011). Three theories of privacy: An overview. Privacy online, 9-17. 
45  Marky, K., Voit, A., Stöver, A., Kunze, K., Schröder, S., & Mühlhäuser, M. (2020, October). ” I don’t know how to 
protect  myself”:  Understanding  Privacy  Perceptions  Resulting  from  the  Presence  of  Bystanders  in  Smart 
Environments.  In Proceedings  of  the  11th  Nordic  Conference  on  Human-Computer  Interaction:  Shaping 
Experiences, Shaping Society (pp. 1-11). 

46  Matsumoto, D. E. (2009). The Cambridge dictionary of psychology. Cambridge University Press. 
47  McDonald,  N., & Forte,  A. (2020,  April). The  politics of privacy theories: Moving from norms to vulnerabilities. 

In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-14). 

48  Moor,  J.  H.  (1997).  Towards  a  theory  of  privacy  in  the  information  age. ACM  Sigcas  Computers  and 

Society, 27(3), 27-32. 

49  Moore, A. D. (2003). Privacy: its meaning and value. American Philosophical Quarterly, 40(3),215-227. 
50  Motti, V. G., & Caine, K. (2015, January). Users’ privacy concerns about wearables. In International Conference 

on Financial Cryptography and Data Security (pp. 231-244). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 

51  National  Academies  of  Sciences,  Engineering,  and  Medicine.  (2016). Privacy  research  and  best  practices: 

Summary of a workshop for the intelligence community. National Academies Press. 

52  Palen,  L.,  Salzman,  M.,  &  Youngs,  E.  (2000,  December).  Going  wireless:  behavior  &  practice  of  new  mobile 
phone users. In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work (pp. 201-
210). 

53  Parent, W. A. (2017). Privacy, morality, and the law. In Privacy (pp. 105-124). Routledge.  
54  Parker, R. B. (2017). A definition of privacy. In Privacy (pp. 83-104). Routledge. 
55  Pedersen, D. M. (1997). Psychological functions of privacy. Journal of environmental psychology, 17(2), 147-156. 
56  Perannagari,  K.  T.,  &  Chakrabarti,  S.  (2019).  Factors  influencing  acceptance  of  augmented  reality  in  retail: 

insights from thematic analysis. International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management. 

57  Perez, A. J., & Zeadally, S. (2017). Privacy issues and solutions for consumer wearables. It Professional, 20(4), 

46-56. 

58  Perez, A. J., Zeadally, S., & Griffith, S. (2017). Bystanders' privacy. IT Professional, 19(3), 61-65.  
59  Perez, A. J., Zeadally, S.,  Griffith, S.,  Garcia, L. Y. M.,  & Mouloud, J. A. (2020).  A User Study  of  a Wearable 

System to Enhance Bystanders’ Facial Privacy. IoT, 1(2), 198-217. 

60  Peters, D., Calvo,  R. A., & Ryan,  R.  M. (2018). Designing for motivation,  engagement  and wellbeing in digital 

experience. Frontiers in psychology, 9, 797. 

61  Pötzsch,  S. (2008,  September).  Privacy awareness:  A  means  to  solve the  privacy  paradox?.  In IFIP  Summer 

School on the Future of Identity in the Information Society (pp. 226-236). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 

24 

 
62  Rashidi, Y., Ahmed, T., Patel, F., Fath, E., Kapadia, A., Nippert-Eng, C., & Su, N. M. (2018). " You don't want to 
be the next meme": College Students' Workarounds to  Manage Privacy in the Era of Pervasive Photography. 
In Fourteenth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security ({SOUPS} 2018) (pp. 143-157). 

63  Raval, N., Srivastava, A., Razeen, A., Lebeck, K., Machanavajjhala, A., & Cox, L. P. (2016, June). What you mark 
is what apps see. In Proceedings of the 14th Annual International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, 
and Services (pp. 249-261). 

64  Schiff, J., Meingast, M., Mulligan, D. K., Sastry, S., & Goldberg, K. (2009). Respectful cameras: Detecting visual 
markers  in  real-time  to  address  privacy  concerns.  In Protecting  Privacy  in  Video  Surveillance (pp.  65-89). 
Springer, London. 

65  Schwartz,  C.  E.,  Andresen,  E.  M.,  Nosek,  M.  A.,  Krahn,  G.  L.,  &  RRTC  Expert  Panel  on  Health  Status 
Measurement. (2007). Response shift theory: important implications for measuring quality of life in people with 
disability. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation, 88(4), 529-536. 

66  Solove, D. J. (2007). I've got nothing to hide and other misunderstandings of privacy. San Diego L. Rev., 44, 745. 
67  Steil, J., Koelle, M., Heuten, W., Boll, S., & Bulling, A. (2019, June). Privaceye: privacy-preserving head-mounted 
eye  tracking  using  egocentric  scene  image  and  eye  movement  features.  In Proceedings  of  the  11th  ACM 
Symposium on Eye Tracking Research & Applications (pp. 1-10). 

68  Steil, J., Koelle, M., Heuten, W., Boll, S., & Bulling, A. (2019, June). Privaceye: privacy-preserving head-mounted 
eye  tracking  using  egocentric  scene  image  and  eye  movement  features.  In Proceedings  of  the  11th  ACM 
Symposium on Eye Tracking Research & Applications (pp. 1-10). 

69  Taddicken,  M.  (2014).  The  ‘privacy  paradox’in  the  social  web:  The  impact  of  privacy  concerns,  individual 
characteristics,  and the  perceived social  relevance on  different  forms  of  self-disclosure. Journal  of  Computer-
Mediated Communication, 19(2), 248-273. 

70  Tariq, A., Rana, T., & Nawaz, M. (2018, December). Virtual Reality for Disabled People: A Survey. In 2018 12th 

International Conference on Open Source Systems and Technologies (ICOSST) (pp. 17-21). IEEE. 

71  Tiscareno, V., Johnson, K., & Lawrence, C. (2014). U.S. Patent No. 8,848,059. Washington, DC: U.S. Patent and 

Trademark Office. 

72  Truong, K. N., Patel, S. N., Summet, J. W., & Abowd, G. D. (2005, September). Preventing camera recording by 
designing  a  capture-resistant  environment.  In International  conference  on  ubiquitous  computing (pp.  73-86). 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 

73  Turner, B. S. (2006). The Cambridge dictionary of sociology. 
74  VandenBos, G. R. (2007). APA dictionary of psychology. American Psychological Association 
75  Wagstaff, J. (2004). Using Bluetooth To Disable Camera Phones. English. Visitado el, 24(04), 2015. 
76  Williams, M., Nurse, J. R., & Creese, S. (2017, August). Privacy is the boring bit: user perceptions and behaviour 
in the Internet-of-Things. In 2017 15th Annual Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust (PST) (pp. 181-18109). 
IEEE. 

77  Wojnar, D. M., & Swanson, K. M. (2007). Phenomenology: an exploration. Journal of holistic nursing, 25(3), 172-

180.  

78  Ye,  T.,  Moynagh,  B.,  Albatal,  R.,  &  Gurrin,  C.  (2014,  November).  Negative  faceblurring:  A  privacy-by-design 
approach to visual lifelogging with google glass. In Proceedings of the  23rd ACM International Conference on 
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (pp. 2036-2038). 

79  Zhang, N., Paluri, M., Ranzato, M. A., Darrell, T., & Bourdev, L. (2014). Panda: Pose aligned networks for deep 
attribute modeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 1637-
1644). 

80  Zhu, Y. Q., & Chang, J. H. (2016). The key role of relevance in personalized advertisement: Examining its impact 
on  perceptions  of  privacy  invasion,  self-awareness,  and  continuous  use  intentions. Computers  in  Human 
Behavior, 65, 442-447. 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
A 

 APPENDICES 

Survey Questionnaire  

1. Name?  

2. Gender?  

a) Male  

b) Female 

c) Other 

3. Age (in years) * 

18-24 

25-34 

35-44 

Above 44 

4. Native Place * 

Your answer 

5. Place of current residence * 

Your answer 

6. Mother Tongue * 

Your answer 

7. Ethnicity * 

•  African American 
•  White 
•  Asian 
•  American Indian or Alaska Native 
•  Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander 
•  Hispanic or Latino 

26 

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
8.  Highest educational qualification * 
•  High School ( from class 9 to 12) 
•  Under Graduation 
•  Post Graduation 
•  Other: 

9.How good are you with technology? * 

•  Beginner 
•  Good 
•  Tech Savvy 
9.  Name a gadget that you use most often on a daily basis. * 
•  Smartphone 
•  Laptop 
•  Computer 
•  Television 
•  Gaming devices 
•  Non smart mobile phones 
10.  Name any other gadgets you use on a daily basis. * 
•  Smartphone 
•  Gaming devices 
•  Laptop 
•  Computer 
•  Other: 

11.  How often do you take pictures/videos of oneself and others? * 
•  Frequently 
•  Once in a day 
•  Once in a week 
•  Once in 15 days 
•  Other: 

12.  What public places do you visit the most? (Multiple select question) * 
•  Public transport 
•  Restaurants 
•  Gyms and Fitness centers 
•  Parks 
•  Shopping Malls 

Other: 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
13.  How often do you visit public places (E.g.: Shopping malls, Public transport etc)? * 
•  Daily 
•  Once in two days 
•  Weekly 
•  Monthly 
14.  Do you take pictures and videos in public places? * 
•  Yes 
•  No 
15.  How often do you attend video calls in public? * 
•  Frequently 
•  Once in a day 
•  Once in a week 
•  Once in a month 
•  Very rarely 
16.  How often have you found stranger/s in the pictures that you clicked in public places? * 
•  1 to 3 times 
•  4 to 5 times 
•  More than 5 times 
•  Other: 

17.Are you comfortable being photographed by (can select multiple options)- * 

•  Stranger 
•  Media person 
•  Professional photographer 
•  Friend 
•  Colleague 
•  CCTV Camera 
18.  Are you comfortable with unexpected appearance of oneself in the camera's field of 

view in a picture taken by(can select multiple options) - * 

•  Media 
•  Stranger 
•  Professional Photographer 
•  Friend 
•  Colleague 
•  CCTV 
•  Other: 

19.  As  a  person  clicking  pictures/videos  of  oneself  and  others,  would  you  respect  the 

privacy preferences of other people around you? * 

•  Yes 
•  No 
•  Maybe 

28 

 
 
 
20.  Please support your answer with rationale for the above question! * 

Your answer 

21.  As a person clicking pictures/taking videos would you avoid taking pictures/videos of- * 
•  Children 
•  Women 
•  Other: 

22.  Name a few public spaces where you would like to avoid taking pictures. * 

Your answer 

23.  Name a few places that you consider it as private space? * 

Your answer 

24.  What are your expectations regarding protecting oneself from invasion of privacy in 

your private spaces? * 

Invasion of privacy is the unjustifiable intrusion into the personal life of another without 

consent 

Your answer 

25.  What are your expectations regarding protecting oneself from invasion of privacy in 

public spaces? * 

Invasion of privacy is the unjustifiable intrusion into the personal life of another without 

consent 

Your answer 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26.  Can you please mention a few measures that you personally take to protect your own 

privacy in public spaces? * 

Your answer 

27.  Can you please mention a few measures that you personally take to protect your own 

privacy in private spaces? * 

Your answer 

28.  Please  name  a  few sources through  which  you  stay  updated  about various privacy 

regulations? * 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
