Atomic-Number (Z)-Correlated Atomic Sizes for Deciphering Electron 

Microscopic Molecular Images 

Junfei Xing, Keishi Takeuchi, Ko Kamei, Takayuki Nakamuro, Koji Harano,* Eiichi 

Nakamura* 

Department of Chemistry, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 

113-0033, Japan 

*Correspondence to: harano@chem.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp, nakamura@chem.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp 

Abstract 

With the advent of atomic-resolution transmission electron microscopy (AR-TEM) 

achieving sub-Ångstrom image resolution and submillisecond time resolution, an era of 

visual molecular science where chemists can visually study the time evolution of 

molecular motions and reactions at atomistic precision has arrived. However, the 

appearance of experimental TEM images often differs greatly from that of conventional 

molecular models, and the images are difficult to decipher unless we know in advance 

the structure of the specimen molecules. The difference arises from the fundamental 

design of the molecular models that represent atomic connectivity and/or the electronic 

properties of molecules rather than the nuclear charge of atoms and electrostatic 

potentials that are felt by the e-beam in TEM imaging. We found a good correlation 

between the atomic number (Z) and the atomic size seen in TEM images when we 

consider shot noise in digital images. We propose here Z-correlated (ZC) atomic radii 

for modeling AR-TEM images of single molecules and ultrathin crystals, with which 

1 

 
 
 
 
we can develop a good estimate of the molecular structure from the TEM image much 

more easily than with conventional molecular models. Two parameter sets were 

developed for TEM images recorded under high-noise (ZCHN) and low-noise (ZCLN) 

conditions. The new molecular models will stimulate the imaginations of chemists 

planning to use AR-TEM for their research. 

Main Text 

The world of atoms and molecules invisible to human eyes has been illuminated by the 

development of three-dimensional models, in which atoms represented by spheres are 

connected to each other with appropriate spatial disposition. Here, the choice of the 

radii of the spheres, in addition to coloring, is the most crucial visual identifier of atoms 

and atomic ions, and a variety of useful constructions of radii, either empirical or 

quantum mechanical,1,2 have been proposed in accord with chemical intuition. Whereas 

wire and ball-and-stick models are primitive, showing only bond lengths, bond angles, 

and torsional angles, chemists have implemented further information into molecular 

models. Representing the van der Waals isosurface, a Corey–Pauling–Koltun (CPK) 

model was developed to illustrate the molecular surface for analysis of intermolecular 

interactions.3 Shannon’s ionic model4 is useful for inorganic chemistry. The atomic radii 

chosen in these models reflect the electronic properties of atoms and molecules. 

With the advent of AR-TEM achieving sub-Ångstrom image resolution and 

submillisecond time resolution,5,6,7,8 an era of “visual molecular science” has arrived, 

where chemists can visually study the time evolution of molecular motions and 

reactions at atomistic precision.9,10,11 However, experimental TEM images often differ 

2 

 
 
 
greatly from what chemists expect using their favorite molecular models (cf Figure 1), 

and this discrepancy contributed to reducing the popularity of AR-TEM in molecular 

science. The difficulty is particularly important when we deal with unknown structures 

that are mobile and lack structural periodicity. For example, structure assignment of the 

AR-TEM images of a rotating zinc cluster (Figure 1a) that forms in the synthesis of a 

crystal of a metal–organic framework (MOF; MOF-5)12 was impossible without 

reducing the number of initial guess structures down to several hundred from a total of 

4096 isomers and their rotamers as to the 2-iodo-1,4-phenylene bridges (Figure 1d, e). 

Here, we found the CPK atomic radii (Figure 1b) more confusing than revealing and 

became convinced of a need for new atomic radii that better represent the experimental 

images (compare Figure 1b and 1c). In doing so, we found that the atom size seen in 

TEM images shows a strong correlation to the atomic number (Z), particularly if we 

consider the shot noise in digital images. In a noise-free image, we find little 

correlation, as theory predicts.13 Our idea may be symbolically described as comparing 

the sizes of mountains by measuring the width of the lowest portion of each mountain 

that is visible above a sea of clouds. We report here a set of Z-correlated (ZC) atomic 

radii for deciphering AR-TEM images, with which we can develop a good estimate of 

the molecular structure from the TEM image much more easily than with conventional 

molecular models. Two parameter sets are described: one for TEM images under high-

noise conditions (ZCHN, Figure 2c), and another under low-noise conditions (ZCLN, 

Figure 2d). The former is useful for single-molecule imaging and the latter for an 

ultrathin film such as UiO-66 MOF (Figure 1f).14,15 The ZC radii reflect the relative 

sizes of various elements and help chemists develop an initial estimate of the molecular 

structures. Note, however, that we do not intend the ZC model to reproduce the TEM 

3 

 
images exactly. No chemists expect the CPK model to represent the van der Waals 

properties of the molecule exactly, and molecular models are there to stimulate 

chemists’ imaginations. 

In Figure 2, we compare the atomic radii used in the CPK model, Shannon’s ionic 

model, and the ZCLN and ZCHN models. CPK radii are smaller for transition metals and 

larger for main group elements, and Shannon’s radii decrease with the increasing atomic 

number within the same period. These atomic radii are unsuitable for deciphering AR-

TEM images, where the behavior of the e-beam in the electrostatic potential created by 

atomic nuclei plays a decisive role.16,17 In the ZC model proposed here, the atomic 

radius shows element dependence, changing systematically as Z increases. The ZCHN 

atomic radii (Figure 2c) are smaller in signal size than the ZCLN radii (Figure 2d), show 

large Z-dependence, and are suitable for fast molecular imaging where the level of shot 

noise is large (e.g., Figure 1a–c).18 The ZCLN radii are suitable for images of ultrathin 

crystalline films where the level of shot noise is comparatively low. The atomic sizes 

for the graphical construction of the ZC models are listed in Figure 2e. We anticipate 

that the new molecular model will stimulate the imaginations of chemists planning to 

use AR-TEM for their research. 

4 

 
 
 
Figure 1. Experimental AR-TEM image and atomic-number-correlated molecular 

model (ZC model). (a) Time evolution of TEM image of a MOF-5 precursor, a cubic 

cluster made of Zn2+ and 2-iodoterephthalic acid captured on a carbon nanotube. The 

molecular images are blurred by rotation and vibration. Time is shown in seconds. 

Taken from ref. 12. Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group. (b) A CPK model 

5 

 
 
corresponding to the image at 10.0 s. (c) A ZCHN model also for the image at 10.0 s. (d) 

Chemical structure of the cubic cluster. (e) Schematic illustration of isomers of the 

cubic MOF-5 precursor. Four structures out of 4096 possible isomers are shown. The 

structure seen in Figure 1a is highlighted by a red square. (f) TEM image of an ultrathin 

crystal of UiO-66 (taken from ref. 15). The benzene ring in a benzene dicarboxylate 

linker is indicated by an arrow. Copyright 2018 The American Association for the 

Advancement of Science. (g) A ZCLN model corresponding to f. Scale bars: 1 nm. 

Figure 2. Periodic table of atomic sizes used in molecular models. (a) CPK model. (b) 

Shannon’s ionic parameters. (c) ZCHN model. (d) ZCLN model. Scale bar: 2 Å. (e) List 

of ZCHN radii for single-molecule imaging and ZCLN radii for ultrathin crystals (in Å). 

6 

 
 
Results and Discussion 

Experimental study of individual molecules at an atomistic level has been a challenge 

for chemists. Scanning probe microscopy is largely limited to imaging static specimen 

molecules on a flat substrate.19,20 Utilizing specimens attached to a substrate or those 

comprising a part of a large crystal, the conventional TEM technique has suffered from 

similar limitations. AR-TEM imaging of single molecules in or on a carbon nanotube 

(CNT)10 or on graphene21,22 has realized dynamic molecular imaging against a vacuum 

background, hence opening an avenue to single-molecule atomic-resolution time-

resolved electron microscopic (SMART-EM) imaging.23 Here, we can study the time 

evolution of structural changes and reactions with up to millisecond speed and sub-Å 

spatial resolution.18 The method produces a series of two-dimensional projection images 

where information on three-dimensional locations and properties of atomic nuclei is 

hidden (Figure 1a). Here, we see several dense and large signals, and less dense and 

smaller signals, ascribable to iodine and light atoms, respectively. As applied to a MOF 

named UiO-66, TEM provided an image depicting the zirconium atom as both dense 

and very large spots, and benzene rings as faint and small signals (yellow arrow, Figure 

1f). We felt that this density/size correlation found in these TEM images does not match 

the theory because the signal size should be independent of Z,13 while the signal 

intensity of individual atoms should depend on Z,16,24 empirically, Z2/3.25,26 In the 

present study, we found that the signal size does show significant Z-dependence if we 

take into account the shot noise present in every TEM image.27 We exploited this 

dependence in defining the atom radii for the ZC model. 

7 

 
 
 
For molecules and molecularly thin objects, TEM images largely comprise the phase 

contrast created by interference between the transmitted wave and the wave scattered by 

the atoms.16 We generated theoretically simulated TEM images using the multislice 

simulation software elbis incorporating a shot noise calculation algorithm developed by 

Hosokawa.28 We studied commonly encountered elements between Z = 1 and 83 with 

defocus value (df) = –10 nm and acceleration voltage of 80 kV, which are the 

conditions typical for imaging molecules and their assemblies.29,30,31,32,33 The atomic 

radii in the ZCLN and ZCHN models are defined as described in the following 

paragraphs. 

In Figure 3a, we show the phase contrast without shot noise for group 14 elements 

placed 20 Å away from each other. The intensity profile consists of a triangular peak 

flanked by a series of fringe signals and the height of the triangle increases as Z 

increases, roughly proportional to Z2/3 (Figure 3b, see Figure S1 for simulation images 

of all the elements).25,26 The small undulation of the signal height for each period 

reflects the Z-dependence of nuclear charge.13 

The base of the isosceles triangle, on the other hand, shows little Z-dependence (purple 

arrows, Figure 3a) as reported previously,13 which led us to contemplate the origin of 

the experimentally observed Z-dependence of the image sizes. Some trial-and-error 

studies revealed that the length of the bottom of the triangle shows Z-dependence when 

the triangle is truncated by background noise. An intensity profile of the single-atom 

images overlaid with a background noise corresponding to an electron dose (ED) of 4.5 

´ 106 e– nm–2 frame–1 is shown in Figure 3c, where we see an obvious effect of noise on 

8 

 
 
 
the apparent signal height and also on the apparent radius of the signal, the noise acting 

like the sea of clouds that truncates the view of mountains. Thus, we set the standard 

deviation of the background noise as the threshold for visual recognition.34 Cutting the 

triangle of the noise-free atom signals at low and high noise levels (LN and HN, blue 

and red lines in Figure 3a) produces smaller isosceles triangles, and we use the length of 

the bottom of these triangles (image radius in Figure 3e) as the atomic radii of the ZCLN 

and ZCHN models shown in Figure 2e. The blue line represents the LN conditions of an 

ED of 4.5 ´ 106 e– nm–2 frame–1 and the red line the HN conditions of an ED of 5.0 ´ 

105 e– nm–2 frame–1—a typical dose used for fast molecular imaging using a CMOS 

detector.12 In Figure 3d, we illustrate simulations of atomic images without shot noise 

and with low and high noise, to which the ZCHN and ZCLN models compare favorably 

(see Figures S2 and S3 for simulated images under LN and HN conditions for all the 

elements). 

In Figure 3e, we summarize graphically the image radii calculated by truncating the 

bottom of the atomic signal with three noise threshold values (no, low, and high noise 

level) for all elements for Z = 1 to 83. A small undulation due to variation of effective 

nuclear charge is also seen. Numerical data on the ZC atomic radii are summarized in 

Figure 2e and the atomic images in Figure 2c and 2d. In our previous report,12 we 

empirically found a correlation between Z and apparent atomic radii, and here we 

propose the ZC model on a solid and broad basis. Although the variation of df (–4 to –

15 nm) systematically changes the image radii by less than 20%, the trend of element 

dependence of the radius still holds (Figure 3f).35 Though TEM images may be blurred 

for various reasons such as specimen motions, energy spread of the e-beam, defocus, 

9 

 
 
and pixel, they contribute equally to all elements and hence does not much affect the Z-

dependence of the image radii. Technical improvement will reduce the magnitude of 

blurring in the near future. 

Figure 3. Image size of a single atom in simulated TEM images (80 kV, defocus = –10 

nm). (a) Intensity profile of simulated images without noise of carbon, silicon, 

10 

 
 
 
germanium, tin, and lead atoms (i.e., images taken at an infinitely large ED). The 

intensity is normalized to the background intensity as 1 (purple line). Blue and red lines 

show a noise level corresponding to 4.5 ´ 106 e– nm–2 frame–1 (LN condition, maximum 

ED available in the software), and 5.0 ´ 105 e– nm–2 frame–1 (HN condition), 

respectively. (b) Intensity difference between a peak top and the background for a single 

atom. Periods 2, 4, and 6 are highlighted by light green. (c) Intensity profile of the 

single-atom images shown together with low-level shot noise (shown as light blue). The 

noise level is shown as standard deviation (blue line as in a). (d) Simulated images 

under no-noise, LN, and HN conditions. Corresponding atom models. Scale bar: 5 Å. 

(e) Z-dependence of the no-noise (purple), ZCHN (blue), and ZCLN (red) atomic radii. 

For atoms smaller than Z = 14 (orange line), we scale down the ZCLN sizes because the 

images are so faint that we could not determine the signal size. The TEM simulation 

software elbis outputs the data as pixel images, and hence the data are noncontinuous. 

(f) Defocus-dependence of ZCLN image radii shown for group 14 elements. 

Signal height and the signal radius truncated by shot noise level increase as several 

atoms are overlapped along the axis of an e-beam.36 Figure 4a shows the intensity 

profile of simulated images of five hypothetical cumulene molecules placed along the e-

beam, whereas Figure 4b shows the simulated images. As we impose a shot noise of 5.0 

´ 105 e– nm–2 frame–1 (red line), single C and C–C placed perpendicular to the e-beam 

become hidden behind the noise, while larger molecules remain to be seen above the 

background noise (Figure 4c).37 A similar effect of atom overlap is observed also for 

nitrogen and oxygen. In Figure 1a, we see the effect of overlapping carbon and oxygen 

atoms in the outline of the zinc cluster molecule. 

11 

 
 
Figure 4. Simulated TEM images of overlapping carbon atoms. (a) Intensity profile of 

hypothetical cumulene molecules. The red line shows a noise level corresponding to an 

ED of 5.0 ´ 105 e– nm–2 frame–1 (high noise threshold in Figure 3). (b) Simulated TEM 

images under the no-noise condition. (c) Simulated images under the HN condition. 

Atom sizes of carbon for ZCHN and ZCLN models are also shown. Scale bar: 5 Å. 

In Figure 5, we show several applications of the ZC model to SMART-EM imaging of 

organic and metallic molecular entities, where we use the ZCHN parameters and CPK 

model as a reference. Images in Figure 5a and c were taken on an instrument without 

aberration correction with a CCD camera at 120 kV, the one in Figure 5e on an 

aberration-corrected TEM with a CCD camera at 120 kV, and those in Figure 5b, d, f, 

and g on an aberration-corrected TEM equipped with a CMOS camera at 80 kV. In all 

cases, the ZCHN model that has been designed to represent atomic nuclei looks much 

12 

 
 
 
closer to the TEM image than the space-filling model that represents the molecular 

surface. 

Figure 5a illustrates a fullerene molecule bearing a perfluoroalkyl chain.38 The fullerene 

moiety is elliptical because of vibration of the molecule along the CNT axis during 

imaging (0.5 s frame–1). Figure 5b shows a-cyclodextrin (a-CD), a cyclic hexamer of 

glucose, sliding near the apex of a carbon nanohorn (CNH).7 The ZC model matches the 

TEM image better than the CPK model. The larger size of individual dark spots in the 

TEM image than the ZC atoms is due to blurring caused by motions of the a-CD 

molecule during the 0.5 s exposure time.7 Figure 5c shows a TEM image (0.5 s frame–1) 

of a structurally mobile van der Waals complex involving 1,3,5-tris(4-

bromophenyl)benzene,39 and the mobility is supported by the broad TEM image 

(blurring) as compared with the more compact image of the ZC model. The location of 

eight bromine atoms can be more easily identified by the ZC model than by the CPK 

model. Figure 5d illustrates a trinuclear molybdenum complex attached to a hole on the 

graphitic surface of a CNH.40 The crucial three molybdenum atoms are visible in the ZC 

model, while they are hidden behind oxygen atoms in the CPK model. Figure 5e shows 

an example of a TEM image of thyroxine, an amino acid containing four iodine atoms. 

The molecule interacts with the ammonium ion moiety on the tip of a CNT at 6.0 s, and 

slides gradually downward during 54.0 s, accompanying conformational change around 

the flexible ether linkage. 

The advantage of the ZC model over conventional models such as wire, ball-and-stick, 

and CPK models is best illustrated with transition metal clusters. Figure 5f shows a 

13 

 
 
 
TEM image of a Au24 cluster on amorphous carbon, where the locations of the metal 

atoms are clearly discernable.41 In an image of a [CoSiW11O39]6– polyoxometalate 

cluster in Figure 5g, we find only Co and W metal atoms. Accordingly, the ZCHN model 

shows only the heavy metals, while the CPK model shows only the oxygen atoms on 

the molecular surface. Note that we used the ZCHN radii because the background of the 

carbonaceous substrate acts as background noise in the TEM image. 

In summary, the ZCHN atomic parameters reflecting nuclear charges illustrate the 

features of the TEM images better than the space-filling model reflecting van der Waals 

surfaces. Wire and ball-and-stick molecular models are not better than the space-filling 

model. Outlines of the CNTs appear thick in the TEM images due to the overlapping of 

carbon atoms as shown in Figure 4 using cumulene as an example, and also because the 

CNTs are vibrating faster than the TEM imaging rate.18,42 Note that blur is caused by 

various factors in single-molecule TEM images. Although some factors such as defocus 

blur and energy spread of an e-beam are essentially unavoidable, a pixel blur caused by 

camera scintillation and a motion blur originating from a slow shutter speed will be 

minimized by improvement of the electron detector. 

14 

 
 
Figure 5. Experimental AR-TEM image and ZCHN model. (a) Perfluoroalkyl 

[60]fullerene in a single-walled CNT. See Figure S4 for a comparison of the TEM 

image and the ZCHN model image. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) 

15 

 
 
 
Time evolution of TEM image of a-CD sliding on the CNH. Copyright 2021 American 

Chemical Society. (c) A termolecular van der Waals cluster on the CNH. Copyright 

2012 Nature Publishing Group. (d) A trimolybdenum oxo cluster formed at an oxidized 

defect of the CNH. Copyright 2021 Chemical Society of Japan. (e) Time evolution of 

the TEM image of a thyroxine molecule changing its conformation and orientation on a 

CNH bearing a trimethylammonium ion linker. (f) A Au24 cluster on an amorphous 

carbon film. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (g) A [CoSiW11O39]6– cluster 

on graphene oxide. The silicon atom is hidden behind a tungsten atom. Copyright 2016 

American Chemical Society. Scale bar: 1 nm for a-e and 0.5 nm for f and g. 

The ZCLN parameter is useful for ultrathin crystalline samples as illustrated in Figure 1e 

for UiO-66,15 which consists of a stable network made of [Zr6O4(OH)4] octahedron 

clusters and 1,4-benzene dicarboxylic acid (BDC) ligands. The TEM image in Figure 1e 

obtained by careful adjustment of parameters including contrast transfer function 

beautifully revealed the network structure, highlighted by the image of benzene rings in 

the BDC linker seen as benzene rings superimposed along the e-beam axis. Figure 1g 

shows the ZCLN model based on X-ray crystallographic data,43 and we see the benzene 

ring balanced in size with the Zr atoms (sky blue). Figure 6a and 6b further illustrate 

application to a MOF, HKUST-1 made of dinuclear copper clusters connected by 

benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylate linker molecules.15 The ZCLN model made from a reported 

crystal structure44 in Figure 6c highlights the Cu cluster (orange) seen clearly in the 

TEM image. 

16 

 
 
 
Figure 6d and inset show a TEM image of a crystal of MAPbBr3 (MA = 

methylammonium ion) seen from the [100] axis.15 Large and smaller dots 

corresponding to the atomic columns are arranged alternately in a grid pattern. By 

comparing the TEM image with the ZCLN model based on a reported X-ray crystal 

structure (Figure 6e),45 we can assign the large dots to atomic columns consisting of 

alternating lead (Z = 82) and bromine (Z = 35), and the smaller dots to columns 

consisting of only bromine atoms. The lighter MA molecules are seen off the center of 

the void as smaller dots (indicated by arrows, Figure 6d inset), which are reproduced 

well in the ZCLN model (Figure 6e). In Figure 6f, we show a simulation without shot 

noise, where the lead/bromine and the bromine columns appear similar in size, which 

illustrates the importance of the inclusion of shot noise in TEM simulations. 

Figure 6g shows a TEM image from the [100] axis of a NaCl nanocrystal in CNT.6 The 

alternating overlap of sodium and chloride ions in the depth direction results in an array 

of uniformly sized dots, reflecting the contrast of the chlorine atoms of Z = 17 rather 

than the sodium atoms (Z = 11) (Figure 6h). This is also reproduced in the ZCLN model 

shown in the upper right of Figure 6g and 6i, where the size of the chlorine, but not the 

sodium, is reflected as the size of the atomic column. The atomic size is greatly 

underestimated when we use ZCHN radii (data not shown). We did not develop radius 

parameters for thick crystals, where interference among neighboring columns of atoms 

overwhelms the effects of interference caused by individual atoms. 

17 

 
 
Figure 6. Experimental TEM image and ZCLN model for thin crystals of organic–

inorganic hybrid materials and an ionic salt. (a) TEM image of HKUST-1. Copyright 

2018 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) A magnified view 

of a. (c) ZCLN model corresponding to b, which is also shown in the upper left corner in 

a. (d) TEM image of MAPbBr3 and a magnified view (inset). Arrows indicate MA ions. 

Copyright 2018 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) ZCLN 

18 

 
 
model corresponding to d. (f) TEM simulation corresponding to e without shot noise. 

(g) TEM image of a nanocrystal of NaCl in CNT. Copyright 2021 American Chemical 

Society. (h) A magnified view of g. (i) ZCLN model corresponding to h, which is also 

shown in the upper left of g. 

Conclusion 

In summary, here we proposed ZC atomic radii for molecular modeling of AR-TEM 

images. Experience has taught us that heavier elements appear as both larger and more 

dense spots than lighter elements; though, in theory, their sizes should be essentially the 

same. We have shown that it is the shot noise that causes the Z-dependency of the 

image sizes of various elements, and parameterized the ZC atomic radii by balancing 

the atomic number and the effects of the shot noise inherent to digital imaging. We 

proposed two parameter sets, ZCHN and ZCLN, for analysis of high-noise and low-noise 

AR-TEM images, and found that the former also works well for images where the 

substrate provides “noise” that interferes with the signal of the specimen being studied. 

We expect that the method will be further modified to be better as more cases are 

examined. We expect that the ZC model will accelerate research on visual molecular 

science as an increasing number of chemists gain access to AR-TEM instruments. 

Methods 

TEM image simulation of a single atom. TEM image simulation was carried out using 

elbis software by parallelized computation using a graphics processing unit.28 Image 

simulations are generated in a 16-bit gray scale from an object exit wave function 

calculated with the multislice formalism (slice thickness: 0.010 nm). The atomic 

19 

 
 
 
potential was calculated using inverse Fourier transformation from Weickenmeier–Kohl 

form factors.46 The details of the calculation method are described in detail in previous 

papers.28,35 Computational three-dimensional atomic models of single atoms of all 

elements were constructed in BIOVIA Materials Studio software. Atoms are located in 

the same plane (e.g., the same z value) in three-dimensional space with a separation of 

20 Å, where a contrast from a single atom does not interfere with that of neighboring 

atoms. The parameters for simulation were set to be acceleration voltage = 80 kV, 

spherical aberration constant Cs = –3 µm, pixel size = 0.01054 nm/pixel, defocus value 

= –10 nm (underfocus), which is a typical set of SMART-EM conditions at 2 ´ 106 

magnification. TEM simulation images under a finite ED were generated based on the 

cumulative distribution of probability density47 using an algorithm implemented in the 

software. 

ZCHN and ZCLN atomic radii. The simulated TEM image of a single atom was 

processed using ImageJ 1.53c software to obtain the intensity profile. The intensity 

profile of the simulated atomic image was cut at two noise levels determined for the HN 

and LN conditions, and the length of the bottom of a triangle is defined as the ZCHN and 

ZCLN image sizes in Figure 3e. The HN and LN noise levels were defined as one 

standard deviation of the image intensity generated under the ED of 5.0 ´ 105 e– nm–2 s–

1 for HN and 4.5 ´ 106 e– nm–2 s–1 for LN. We used these image sizes as the ZCHN and 

ZCLN atomic radii in the ZC molecular model. 

Acknowledgments 

We thank Profs. Kunio Takayanagi, Kaoru Yamanouchi, Andrei N. Khlobystov, Yu 

Han, and Dr. Fumio Hosokawa for discussion, Dr. Satori Kowashi for provision of 

20 

 
 
experimental data, and Mr. Shingo Hasegawa for supporting TEM simulation. This 

research is supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) 

KAKENHI (JP19H05459, JP20K15123, and JP21H01758) and the Japan Science and 

Technology Agency (CREST JPMJCR20B2). A part of this work was conducted in the 

Research Hub for Advanced Nano Characterization, The University of Tokyo and 

“Nanotechnology Platform” (project No. 12024046), both sponsored by MEXT. K.K. 

thanks JSPS for a predoctoral fellowship. J.X. and K.K. thank MEXT (ALPS program). 

Author Contributions E.N. and K.H. supervised the project. J.X., K.T. and K.K 

carried out the TEM simulations and analyzed the data with T.N., K.H. and E.N. K.H. 

and E.N. cowrote the paper. All authors discussed the results and commented on the 

manuscript. 

Competing interests: Authors declare no competing interests. 

Supplementary Information 

Supplementary Figures S1–S4. 

References 

1 Brickmann, J.; Exner, T. E.; Keil, M.; Marhöfer, R. J. Molecular Graphics - Trends 

and Perspectives. J. Mol. Model, 2000, 6, 328–340. 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Ospadov, E.; Tao, J.; Staroverov, V. N.; Perdew, J. P. Visualizing Atomic Sizes and 

Molecular Shapes with the Classical Turning Surface of the Kohn–Sham Potential. 

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2018, 115, E11578–E11585. 

3 Corey, R. B.; Pauling, L. Molecular Models of Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins. 

Rev. Sci. Instrum. 1953, 24, 621–627. 

4 Shannon, R. D. Revised Effective Ionic Radii and Systematic Studies of Interatomic 

Distances in Halides and Chalcogenides. Acta Crystallogr. A. 1976, 32, 751–767. 

5 Okada, S.; Kowashi, S.; Schweighauser, L.; Yamanouchi, K.; Harano, K.; Nakamura, 

E. Direct Microscopic Analysis of Individual C60 Dimerization Events: Kinetics and 

Mechanisms. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139, 18281–18287. 

6 Nakamuro, T.; Sakakibara, M.; Nada, H.; Harano, K.; Nakamura, E. Capturing the 

Moment of Emergence of Crystal Nucleus from Disorder. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2021, 143, 

1763–1767. 

7 Hanayama, H.; Yamada, J.; Tomotsuka, I.; Harano, K.; Nakamura, E. Rim Binding of 

Cyclodextrins in Size-Sensitive Guest Recognition. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2021, 143, 5786–

5792. 

8 Harano, K. Self-Assembly Mechanism in Nucleation Processes of Molecular 

Crystalline Materials. Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 2020, 94, 463–472. 

9 Koshino, M.; Tanaka, T.; Solin, N.; Suenaga, K.; Isobe, H.; Nakamura, E. Imaging of 

Single Organic Molecules in Motion. Science 2007, 316, 853. 

10 Nakamura, E. Atomic-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopic Movies for 

Study of Organic Molecules, Assemblies, and Reactions: The First 10 Years of 

Development. Acc. Chem. Res. 2017, 50, 1281–1292. 

22 

 
 
 
11 Skowron, S. T.; Chamberlain, T. W.; Biskupek, J.; Kaiser, U.; Besley, E.; 

Khlobystov, A. N. Chemical Reactions of Molecules Promoted and Simultaneously 

Imaged by the Electron Beam in Transmission Electron Microscopy. Acc. Chem. Res. 

2017, 50, 1797–1807. 

12 Xing, J.; Schweighauser, L.; Okada, S.; Harano, K.; Nakamura, E. Atomistic 

Structures and Dynamics of Prenucleation Clusters in MOF-2 and MOF-5 Syntheses. 

Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 3608. 

13 Kirkland, E. J. Atomic Size. In Advanced Computing in Electron Microscopy 2nd ed; 

Springer, 2010; pp 84–85. 

14 Zhu, Y.; Ciston, J.; Zheng, B.; Miao, X.; Czarnik, C.; Pan, Y.; Sougrat, R.; Lai, Z.; 

Hsiung, C.-E.; Yao, K.; Pinnau, I.; Pan, M.; Han, Y. Unravelling Surface and Interfacial 

Structures of a Metal–Organic Framework by Transmission Electron Microscopy. Nat. 

Mater. 2017, 16, 532–536. 

15 Zhang, D.; Zhu, Y.; Liu, L.; Ying, X.; Hsiung, C.-E.; Sougrat, R.; Li, K.; Han, Y. 

Atomic-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy of Electron Beam-Sensitive 

Crystalline Materials. Science 2018, 359, 675–679. 

16 Williams, D. B.; Carter, C. B. Transmission Electron Microscopy: A Textbook for 

Materials Science; 2nd Ed. ed.; Springer US: New York, 2009. 

17 Yamanouchi, K. Scattering Electrons. In Quantum Mechanics of Molecular 

Structures; Springer, 2013; pp 197–258. 

18 Shimizu, T.; Lungerich, D.; Stuckner, J.; Murayama, M.; Harano, K.; Nakamura, E. 

Real-Time Video Imaging of Mechanical Motions of a Single Molecular Shuttle with 

Sub-Millisecond Sub-Angstrom Precision. Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 2020, 93, 1079–1085. 

23 

 
 
 
19 Gross, L.; Mohn, F.; Moll, N.; Liljeroth, P.; Meyer, G. The Chemical Structure of a 

Molecule Resolved by Atomic Force Microscopy. Science 2009, 325, 1110–1114. 

20 Talirz, L.; Ruffieux, P.; Fasel, R. On‐Surface Synthesis of Atomically Precise 

Graphene Nanoribbons. Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 6222–6231. 

21 Lungerich, D.; Hoelzel, H.; Harano, K.; Jux, N.; Amsharov, K. Y.; Nakamura, E. A 

Singular Molecule-to-Molecule Transformation on Video: The Bottom-Up Synthesis of 

Fullerene C60 from Truxene Derivative C60H30. ACS Nano 2021, 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.1c02222. 

22 Markevich, A.; Kurasch, S.; Lehtinen, O.; Reimer, O.; Feng, X.; Müllen, K.; 

Turchanin, A.; Khlobystov, A. N.; Kaiser, U.; Besley, E. Electron Beam Controlled 

Covalent Attachment of Small Organic Molecules to Graphene. Nanoscale 2016, 8, 

2711–2719. 

23 Nakamura, E. Movies of Molecular Motions and Reactions: The Single-

Molecule, Real-Time Transmission Electron Microscope Imaging Technique, Angew. 

Chem. Int. Ed. 2013, 52, 236–252. 

24 Egerton, R. F. Measurement of Inelastic/Elastic Scattering Ratio for Fast Electrons 

and Its Use in the Study of Radiation Damage. Phys. Status. Solidi. 1976, 37, 663–668. 

25 Kirkland, E. J. Single Atom Images. In Advanced Computing in Electron Microscopy 

2nd ed; Springer, 2010; pp 93–95. 

26 Koizumi, H.; Oshima, Y.; Kondo, Y.; Takayanagi, K. Quantitative High-Resolution 

Microscopy on a Suspended Chain of Gold Atoms. Ultramicroscopy 2001, 88, 17–24. 

24 

 
 
 
27 Rullgård, H.; Öfverstedt, L. ‐G.; Masich, S.; Daneholt, B.; Öktem, O. Simulation of 

Transmission Electron Microscope Images of Biological Specimens. J. Microscopy 

2011, 243, 234–256. 

28 Hosokawa, F.; Shinkawa, T.; Arai, Y.; Sannomiya, T. Benchmark Test of Accelerated 

Multi-Slice Simulation by GPGPU. Ultramicroscopy 2015, 158, 56–64. 

29 Cao, K.; Biskupek, J.; Stoppiello, C. T.; McSweeney, R. L.; Chamberlain, T. W.; Liu, 

Z.; Suenaga, K.; Skowron, S. T.; Besley, E.; Khlobystov, A. N.; Kaiser, U. Atomic 

Mechanism of Metal Crystal Nucleus Formation in a Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube. 

Nat. Chem. 2020, 341, 855. 

30 Koh, A. L.; Wang, S.; Ataca, C.; Grossman, J. C.; Sinclair, R.; Warner, J. H. 

Torsional Deformations in Subnanometer MoS Interconnecting Wires. Nano Lett. 2016, 

16, 1210–1217. 

31 Chuvilin, A.; Khlobystov, A. N.; Obergfell, D.; Haluska, M.; Yang, S.; Roth, S.; 

Kaiser, U. Observations of Chemical Reactions at the Atomic Scale: Dynamics of 

Metal-Mediated Fullerene Coalescence and Nanotube Rupture. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 

2010, 49, 193–196. 

32 Yuk, J. M.; Park, J.; Ercius, P.; Kim, K.; Hellebusch, D. J.; Crommie, M. F.; Lee, J. 

Y.; Zettl, A.; Alivisatos, A. P. High-Resolution EM of Colloidal Nanocrystal Growth 

Using Graphene Liquid Cells. Science 2012, 336, 61–64. 

33 Meyer, J. C.; Eder, F.; Kurasch, S.; Skakalova, V.; Kotakoski, J.; Park, H. J.; Roth, 

S.; Chuvilin, A.; Eyhusen, S.; Benner, G.; Krasheninnikov, A. V.; Kaiser, U. Accurate 

Measurement of Electron Beam Induced Displacement Cross Sections for Single-Layer 

Graphene. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 108, 196102. 

25 

 
 
 
34 Torabi, K.; Sayad, S.; Balke, S. T. Adaptive Image Thresholding for Real‐time 

Particle Monitoring. Int. J. Imag. Syst. Tech. 2006, 16, 9–14. 

35 Gamm, B.; Blank, H.; Popescu, R.; Schneider, R.; Beyer, A.; Gölzhäuser, A.; 

Gerthsen, D. Quantitative High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy of Single 

Atoms. Microsc. Microanal. 2012, 18, 212–217. 

36 Jia, C. L.; Mi, S. B.; Barthel, J.; Wang, D. W.; Dunin-Borkowski, R. E.; Urban, K. 

W.; Thust, A. Determination of the 3D Shape of a Nanoscale Crystal with Atomic 

Resolution from a Single Image. Nat. Mater. 2014, 13, 1044–1049. 

37 Nakamura, E.; Koshino, M.; Tanaka, T.; Niimi, Y.; Harano, K.; Nakamura, Y.; Isobe, 

H. Imaging of Conformational Changes of Biotinylated Triamide Molecules Covalently 

Bonded to a Carbon Nanotube Surface. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130, 7808–7809. 

38 Harano, K.; Takenaga, S.; Okada, S.; Niimi, Y.; Yoshikai, N.; Isobe, H.; Suenaga, K.; 

Kataura, H.; Koshino, M.; Nakamura, E. Conformational Analysis of Single 

Perfluoroalkyl Chains by Single-Molecule Real-Time Transmission Electron 

Microscopic Imaging. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 466–473. 

39 Harano, K.; Homma, T.; Niimi, Y.; Koshino, M.; Suenaga, K.; Leibler, L.; 

Nakamura, E. Heterogeneous Nucleation of Organic Crystals Mediated by Single-

Molecule Templates, Nat. Mater. 2012, 11, 877–881. 

40 Kratish, Y.; Nakamuro, T.; Liu, Y.; Li, J.; Tomotsuka, I.; Harano, K.; Nakamura, E.; 

Marks, T. J. Synthesis and Characterization of a Well-Defined Carbon Nanohorn-

Supported Molybdenum Dioxo Catalyst by SMART-EM Imaging. Surface Structure at 

the Atomic Level. Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 2020, 94, 427–432. 

26 

 
 
 
41 Hasegawa, S.; Takano, S.; Harano, K.; Tsukuda, T. New Magic Au24 Cluster 

Stabilized by PVP: Selective Formation, Atomic Structure, and Oxidation Catalysis. 

JACS Au 2021, 1, 660–668. 

42 Barnard, A. W.; Zhang, M.; Wiederhecker, G. S.; Lipson, M.; McEuen, P. L. Real-

Time Vibrations of a Carbon Nanotube. Nature 2019, 566, 89–93. 

43 Øien, S.; Wragg, D.; Reinsch, H.; Svelle, S.; Bordiga, S.; Lamberti, C.; Lillerud, K. P. 

Detailed Structure Analysis of Atomic Positions and Defects in Zirconium Metal–

Organic Frameworks. Cryst. Growth Des. 2014, 14, 5370–5372. 

44 Yakovenko, A. A.; Reibenspies, J. H.; Bhuvanesh, N.; Zhou, H.-C. Generation and 

Applications of Structure Envelopes for Porous Metal–Organic Frameworks. J. Appl. 

Crystallogr. 2013, 46, 346–353. 

45 Wang, K.-H.; Li, L.-C.; Shellaiah, M.; Sun, K. W. Structural and Photophysical 

Properties of Methylammonium Lead Tribromide (MAPbBr3) Single Crystals. Sci. Rep. 

2017, 7, 13643. 

46 Weickenmeier, A.; Kohl, H. Computation of Absorptive Form Factors for High-

Energy Electron Diffraction. Acta Crystallogr. A 1991, 47, 590–597. 

47 Gilbert, N.; Pollak, H. O. Amplitude Distribution of Shot Noise, Bell Syst. Tech. J. 

1960, 39, 333–350. 

27 

 
 
 
