Exploring extreme magnetization phenomena in directly-driven imploding cylindrical
targets

C. A. Walsh1, R. Florido2, M. Bailly-Grandvaux3, F. Suzuki-Vidal4, J. P. Chittenden4, A. J. Crilly4, M.
A. Gigosos5, R. C. Mancini6, G. P´erez-Callejo7, C. Vlachos7, C. McGuﬀey8, F. N. Beg8, and J. J. Santos7
1Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
2iUNAT - Departamento de F´ısica, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 35017 Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain
3Center for Energy Research, University of California, San Diego
4Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK
5Departamento de F´ısica Te´orica, At´omica y ´Optica,
Universidad de Valladolid, 47071 Valladolid, Spain
6Department of Physics, University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557, USA
7Universit´e de Bordeaux-CNRS-CEA,
Centre Lasers Intenses et Applications (CELIA),
UMR 5107, F-33405 Talence, France and
8General Atomics, San Diego
(Dated: July 29, 2021)

This paper uses extended-magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) simulations to explore an extreme mag-
netized plasma regime realisable by cylindrical implosions on the OMEGA laser facility. This regime
is characterized by highly compressed magnetic ﬁelds (greater than 10 kT across the fuel), which
contain a signiﬁcant proportion of the implosion energy and induce large electrical currents in the
plasma. Parameters governing the diﬀerent magnetization processes such as Ohmic dissipation and
suppression of instabilities by magnetic tension are presented, allowing for optimization of experi-
ments to study speciﬁc phenomena. For instance, a dopant added to the target gas-ﬁll can enhance
magnetic ﬂux compression while enabling spectroscopic diagnosis of the imploding core. In par-
ticular, the use of Ar K-shell spectroscopy is investigated by performing detailed non-LTE atomic
kinetics and radiative transfer calculations on the MHD data. Direct measurement of the core elec-
tron density and temperature would be possible, allowing for both the impact of magnetization on
the ﬁnal temperature and thermal pressure to be obtained. By assuming the magnetic ﬁeld is frozen
into the plasma motion, which is shown to be a good approximation for highly magnetized implo-
sions, spectroscopic diagnosis could be used to estimate which magnetization processes are ruling
the implosion dynamics; for example, a relation is given for inferring whether thermally-driven or
current-driven transport is dominating.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Magnetic ﬁelds are of interest in astrophysics, existing
in the Universe on all scales: from kilometers or less for
compact neutron stars up to millions of light years for
clusters of galaxies. Natural magnetic ﬁelds can exceed
the laboratory magnetic ﬁelds achieved by many orders of
magnitude, with white dwarfs sustaining magnetic ﬁelds
of up to 105 T and the most extreme neutron stars up to
109 T [1]. In such compact stars the magnetic ﬁelds are
strong enough to modify the structure and composition
of the star, as well as its radiation properties [2, 3].

In the laboratory,

laser-driven plasma compression
has been used to amplify initial (seed) magnetic ﬁelds
[4]; to ﬁrst order the magnetic ﬁeld is frozen into the
plasma as it compresses. Proton deﬂectometry has pro-
vided a direct measurement of these compressed mag-
netic ﬁelds up to 4 kT in dedicated cylindrical experi-
ments [5, 6]. Novel techniques to generate strong magne-
tostatic ﬁelds ∼ 1−10s T by either capacitor-bank pulsed
discharges [5, 7–9] or intense laser-driven discharges [10–
15] have stimulated a growing interest in laser-driven,
high-energy-density (HED) systems with embedded mag-
netic ﬁelds.

In Inertial Conﬁnement Fusion (ICF), highly com-

pressed magnetic ﬁelds have been demonstrated to con-
tribute to increase implosion performance [16]. The com-
pressed B-ﬁeld strengths can be enough to magnetize the
electron thermal conduction, reducing the energy losses
from the hot-spot and resulting in hotter fuel [17, 18].
The B-ﬁelds can also eﬀectively conﬁne D-T ions and
thermonuclear α-particles [19], enhancing collisionality
and fusion yield. In addition, large magnetic ﬁelds can
reduce hydrodynamic instabilities through magnetic ten-
sion [17, 18, 20–22], although there are also mechanisms
that increase perturbation growth with magnetization
[18, 23].

Cylindrical geometry provides a simple testbed for ex-
ploring magnetized phenomena in HED plasmas, as mag-
netic ﬁelds can increase asymmetry in spherical implo-
sions [18, 23]. In this scheme, the cylinder axis is parallel
to the applied B-ﬁeld direction. Using this geometry, the
MagLIF concept was ﬁrst proposed at Sandia National
Laboratories (SNL) in 2010 [24]. It consists of laser pre-
heat of cold fuel inside a Z-pinch cylindrical liner (initially
with an axial B-ﬁeld) which is magnetically compressed
by a ∼ 20 MA, 150 ns electrical current. Due to fuel
magnetization and pre-heating, MagLIF aims at near-
adiabatic stable cylindrical compression with lower im-
plosion velocity (∼ 100 km/s, instead of > 300 km/s) and

1
2
0
2

l
u
J

7
2

]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
2
3
0
3
1
.
7
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
lower convergence ratios than conventional ICF. MagLIF
has shown promising results through diﬀerent experimen-
tal campaigns by demonstrating thermonuclear neutron
generation at fusion-relevant conditions, a high enough
fuel magnetization for α-particles trapping [25–27] and
reporting ﬁrst performance scaling studies [28].

A laser-driven approach to MagLIF is being explored
at the OMEGA Laser facility [29–33] to provide a test for
MagLIF scaling. The driving laser energy is 1000× less
than that delivered on the Z-pinch facility at SNL and
therefore the laser targets are 10× smaller than on Z.
Yet, OMEGA provides a signiﬁcantly higher repetition
rate and better diagnostic access, facilitating the para-
metric study of the underlying basic physics. Cylindrical
implosions are easier to perform and oﬀer a clear axis
for diagnostics, as well as for a laser preheat [30] or a
fast ignition beam. A recent series of laser-driven exper-
iments [33] used the improved MIFEDS [5, 9] to deliver
a seed B-ﬁeld of nearly 30 T, which was high enough to
demonstrate the eﬀects of magnetic pressure decreasing
plasma compression. There are prospects to deliver even
higher B-ﬁeld values (∼ 50 T) within the next few years.
The design and interpretation of all above experiments
and applications strongly rely on magneto-hydrodynamic
(MHD) codes. Simulations must include extended-MHD
eﬀects, which represent the transport of energy and
magnetic ﬂux in a plasma [34]. Magnetized plasmas
are thought to exhibit complex behavior in the elec-
tron population and, above resistive-MHD, extended-
MHD additionally accounts for temperature-gradient-
driven transport –such as the Nernst term moving mag-
netic ﬁelds down electron temperature gradients– and
electric-current-driven transport –such as the Hall term
moving magnetic ﬁelds with the ﬂow of charge–. The
Nernst term, in particular, is of great interest to the sci-
entiﬁc community, with importance in a broad range of
experiments [16, 28, 35–37] with expectations of plasma
demagnetization [23, 38–41]. Even with its wide appli-
cability, Nernst advection of magnetic ﬁeld is yet to be
directly measured.

This paper explores the development of extreme mag-
netization phenomena in directly-driven imploding cylin-
drical targets using extended-MHD simulations. The
starting point for the design is a previous laser-driven im-
plosion on OMEGA (without any fuel pre-heat), which
found evidence of signiﬁcant magnetic pressure during
target stagnation [33]. Distinct magnetization phenom-
ena are outlined for this high B-ﬁeld regime, which can
be categorised as related to magnetic ﬁeld ampliﬁca-
tion, electron magnetization or induced electrical cur-
rents; metrics governing which phenomena are signiﬁ-
cant are summarized in Table I. Initial target conditions
are varied to transition between diﬀerent regimes; for ex-
ample, the concentration of a dopant added to the im-
ploding fuel can be increased to amplify magnetic ﬁeld
compression at the expense of electron magnetization,
while enabling a spectroscopic characterization of plasma
In particular, the feasibility of Ar K-shell
conditions.

2

spectroscopy [42–48] for diagnosing the core conditions
in magnetized cylindrical implosions is demonstrated by
post-processing the extended-MHD simulations and per-
forming non-LTE atomic kinetics and radiative transfer
calculations. By using the frozen-in-ﬂow approximation,
a spectroscopic diagnosis of core conditions would allow
for estimates of the magnetization metrics.

This paper is organized as follows. Section II brieﬂy
summarizes the main features of the Gorgon code used
to perform the extended-MHD simulations. Section III
discusses the platform for magnetized direct-drive cylin-
drical implosions and the corresponding nominal target
design. Section IV discusses key magnetization phenom-
ena that may occur in a magnetized compressed hot-spot.
Non-dimensional parameters to quantify the relative im-
portance of diﬀerent physical processes for any given im-
plosion are introduced. Section V uses the metrics de-
ﬁned in Sec. IV to modify the point-of-design to explore
speciﬁc physics regimes and scenarios; e.g. maximizing
the magnetic ﬁeld strength requires a diﬀerent design to
maximizing the electron magnetization. Synthetic im-
ages of time-resolved Ar K-shell spectra are presented in
Section VI in an eﬀort to mimic potential measurements
recorded by a streaked spectrometer. Lastly, the ap-
pendix compares synthetic proton radiographs produced
with Gorgon to experimental data recorded in the cylin-
drical implosions described in Refs. [5, 6], thus validating
the basic magnetic transport processes in the code. Sen-
sitivity of the radiographs to magnetic transport by bulk
plasma motion and Nernst demagnetization is observed.

II. GORGON EXTENDED-MHD CODE

The simulations presented in this paper utilize the Gor-
gon extended-MHD code [41, 49, 50]. Gorgon includes
magnetic transport by temperature gradients (such as
the Nernst term), as well as by electrical currents (such
as the Hall eﬀect), and the analogous terms advecting
electron energy [34]. These processes will be discussed in
more detail in Section IV. The transport coeﬃcients pre-
serve physical behaviour at low magnetization [51], which
can give signiﬁcant diﬀerences [52] to the coeﬃcients cal-
culated by Epperlein & Haines [53]. The thermal con-
duction algorithm is speciﬁcally designed for anisotropic
heat-ﬂow [54, 55]. Biermann battery production of mag-
netic ﬁelds is also taken into account [36, 41].
Impor-
tantly for this work, the plasma dynamics include the
Lorentz force, resistive diﬀusion and Ohmic dissipation.
Gorgon results have been compared with magnetized
cylindrical implosion experiments on OMEGA [5, 6] using
synthetic proton radiography, matching the peak proton
deﬂection (and therefore the compressed magnetic ﬁeld)
–details are shown in the appendix. This provides a cru-
cial benchmark for the code and lends additional conﬁ-
dence in using the Gorgon code for the experimental de-
sign addressed here, where the main diﬀerences are in the
increased applied magnetic ﬁeld and more sophisticated

3

cal implosion is intrinsically two-dimensional in its evo-
lution. It was also found that a magnetic ﬁeld normal
to the ablator surface can increase perturbation growth
from laser non-uniformities [23]. Therefore, by using a
cylindrical target with applied ﬁeld along the axis, these
complications are avoided; the magnetic ﬁeld is allowed
to be everywhere in the plane of the ablator, resulting
in a one-dimensional implosion geometry before realistic
asymmetries are taken into account. Also, while there
is more mass compression in a spherical implosion, the
magnetic ﬁeld is not compressed at the poles, so that ef-
fective magnetic ﬁeld compression is similar between the
two geometries.

The nominal target design from recent laser-driven
MagLIF implosions (mini-MagLIF campaign) performed
i.e. targets are cylindrical
at OMEGA is chosen [33],
shells made of parylene-N with a density of 1.11 g/cm3,
with an outer radius of 290 µm and a wall-thickness of
17 µm. The targets are ﬁlled with deuterium at a pres-
sure of 11 atm, i.e. a mass density of 1.81 kg/m3. Tar-
gets are imploded by 40 OMEGA beams, delivering a
total of 14.5 kJ over 1.5 ns square-shaped pulses. The
laser pointing has been empirically optimized to achieve
a uniform implosion velocity over an axial extent greater
than 600 µm [31, 57]. Figure 1 shows a VISRAD [58]
image with the expected laser power irradiation pattern
on target; this illumination is used as an input to the
Gorgon simulations.

While the present simulation study originates from the
mini-MagLIF platform it is worth noting that, in con-
trast, the goal here is not to ﬁnd the regime of maximum
fusion performance. The approach is to demonstrate that
a regime of extreme magnetization is attainable and in-
vestigate how the variation of diﬀerent target parame-
ters can be used to test complex MHD phenomena. For
instance, in this work fuel pre-heating is intentionally
not considered as it increases the thermal pressure of the
hot-spot at the cost of reducing B-ﬁeld compressibility.
Pre-heating is otherwise essential in the MagLIF design
to enhance the neutron yield [28]. Therefore, the pro-
posed research is distinct –albeit complementary– to the
current mini-MagLIF studies.

As illustration, Fig. 2 shows simulation results for this
setup using a 0.325% argon dopant by deuterium atom.
On the left is the density and electron temperature with-
out an applied magnetic ﬁeld, while the right shows the
same properties when a 50 T seed B-ﬁeld is applied. The
snapshot is at 1.45 ns, which is 50 ps before the time of
peak neutron production. The hot-spot temperature is
greatly enhanced by magnetization, as the electron ther-
mal losses are suppressed perpendicular to the applied
ﬁeld. The core hot-spot density is also greatly decreased
by magnetization; this is due to two factors. Firstly,
changes in thermal conduction do not change the overall
hot-spot thermal pressure [59]. Therefore, an increased
temperature by electron magnetization results in a lower
density. Secondly, the ﬁnal total pressure is the sum of
thermal and magnetic components; as the magnetic pres-

FIG. 1: VISRAD image showing the intensity radiation
pattern delivered by 40 OMEGA beams on a cylindrical
target with an outer radius of 290 µm (see text for
details). A nearly uniform irradiation close to
700 TW/cm2 is expected on the central
∼ 650 µm-length portion along the cylinder axis.

diagnostics (presence of a dopant for spectroscopic pur-
poses). Gorgon simulations of pre-magnetized capsules
with 3D perturbations have also been used to study how
diﬀering magnetization eﬀects impact on short and long
wavelength perturbations, as well as the impact of mag-
netization on stagnation temperatures and yields [18, 23].
The laser drive is modelled using a ray-trace package
and inverse Bremsstrahlung absorption. The simulations
in this paper are predominantly 2D, with two demonstra-
tive 3D simulations in Sec. IV. The 2D simulations are
in cylindrical geometry r − z, such that the axial plasma
end losses are captured.
Gorgon uses a P 1

3 automatic ﬂux-limiting scheme for
the radiation transport [56], which captures both the
free-streaming and diﬀusive limits. As Ar-doped D2 is
used to ﬁll the targets, 100 energy groups are consid-
ered in order to capture the complex dependence of argon
opacity and emissivity on radiation energy, for diﬀerent
concentrations of dopant. It is assumed that the dopant
only aﬀects the radiative properties of the fuel, with any
changes to the equation of state or electron transport
coeﬃcients not incorporated.

Thermal and Nernst ﬂux limiters of 0.1 are used
throughout this paper. The simulations are run with
µm, which is required in order to
a radial resolution of 1
2
resolve the small converged hot-spot size, with ﬁnal hot-
spot diameters on the order of 10 − 20 µm [33]. Gradients
in the axial direction are much shallower, allowing for a
converged resolution of 2 µm.

III. MAGNETIZED CYLINDRICAL
IMPLOSIONS ON OMEGA

While spherical laser-driven implosions are used to ob-
tain high yields, the application of a magnetic ﬁeld re-
sults in anisotropic implosions [18, 23], with the magnetic
ﬁeld normal to the ablator at the pole and in the plane
of the ablator at the waist; i.e. a magnetized spheri-

4

FIG. 2: Density (top) and electron temperature (bottom) for 2D MHD Gorgon simulations of deuterium-ﬁlled
cylindrical implosions with no magnetic ﬁeld applied (left) and a 50 T seed magnetic ﬁeld applied (right). The
deuterium fuel has an argon dopant with a concentration of 0.325% by atom. The data is shown at 1.45 ns, which is
approximately 50 ps before the time of peak neutron production.

sure increases, the stagnated thermal pressure decreases,
reducing hot-spot compression.

Simulations show that the irradiation pattern of Fig. 1
drives an implosion with a central ∼ 400 µm-long portion
for which core conditions show very little variations in
the axial direction. This can be seen in Fig. 2 at the
corresponding time of 1.45 ns, but the same behaviour is
found over the entire implosion evolution.

As the magnetic ﬂux is compressed along with the
plasma, the B-ﬁeld is strongest in the stagnated fuel. The
ﬁeld strength is greater than 10 kT throughout the D2
plasma when an initial 50 T ﬁeld is applied to the target.
While the outer core is denser than its central portion,
i.e.
the hot-spot, the magnetic ﬁeld is able to diﬀuse
over the short radial core length-scales, resulting in a rel-
atively uniform magnetic ﬁeld throughout the fuel.

Figure 3 shows the temporal evolution of the implo-
sions by plotting the instantaneous neutron-averaged ion
the burn-averaged
temperature and mass density, e.g.
ion temperature is the ion temperature that a fusing D-D
reaction sees (a spatial and temporal average). The burn-
average is chosen as it weights the properties to those oc-
curring in the hot-spot, where the extreme magnetization
phenomena typically take place. Cases with and without
a 50 T seed applied ﬁeld are shown, as well as for two ar-
gon dopant concentrations. Clearly the compressed mag-
netic ﬁeld enhances the temperature but signiﬁcantly de-
creases the hot-spot density. The increased dopant also
results in more radiated energy, lowering the temperature
but enhancing the compression of hot-spot mass. When
compared to unmagnetized implosions, the compression

of the imposed B-ﬁeld has a signiﬁcant impact on the
conditions of the imploding core, which leads to diﬀer-
ent regimes of extreme magnetization. This raises the
question about how to measure and characterize the cor-
responding magnetization scenario in an implosion exper-
iment. A detailed assessment about the use of Ar K-shell
spectroscopy for this purpose is addressed in Sec. VI.

IV. MAGNETIZATION PHENOMENA AND
ASSOCIATED METRICS

This section outlines the processes of interest in a mag-
netized implosion. These phenomena can be split into
three categories: the eﬀectiveness of magnetic ﬂux com-
pression, magnetization of the electron population, and
induced electrical currents. Metrics for the relative im-
portance of each phenomenon are presented, with design
changes explored in Sec. V.

Firstly, the process of hot-spot magnetic ﬂux compres-
sion is examined. As the work here is primarily interested
in the ﬁeld strength in the compressed hot-spot, discus-
sion of magnetic transport in the laser absorption region
is avoided. For an in-depth discussion on this issue, see
Refs. [23, 60].

In order to reach a large magnetization regime in the
hot-spot, eﬃcient magnetic ﬂux compression is required.
If the magnetic ﬁeld is completely frozen into the plasma
motion, and the plasma motion is one dimensional, then
the magnetic ﬁeld in the fuel would exactly follow Bz =
B0
. Therefore, to quantify how close the magnetic

ρ
ρ0

utilized:

Λ =

|B|
B0

.

5

(2)

For an implosion with eﬀective magnetic ﬂux compression
(Γ = 1) the ﬁeld compression factor is simply:

Λ =

ρ
ρ0

,

if Γ = 1,

(3)

the more the plasma is compressed, the more the

i.e.
magnetic ﬁeld is compressed.

Once the magnetic ﬁeld is compressed, the electron
population can become magnetized, with each electron
taking a curved path between collisions. The Hall Pa-
rameter ωeτe quantiﬁes the number of orbits a typical
electron takes between collisions. While linked to the
magnetic ﬁeld strength, the magnetization of electrons is
also dependent on the electron temperature and density
[61]:

ωeτe ∝

|B|T 3/2
e
ne

.

(4)

Again, using the frozen-in-ﬂow assumption, the Hall
parameter can be expressed in terms of the initial ﬁll
density of the target as well as the applied ﬁeld strength:

ωeτe ∝

B0
ρ0

T 3/2
e

,

if Γ = 1.

(5)

Magnetizing the electron population typically requires
much lower magnetic ﬁeld strengths than magnetic pres-
sure eﬀects [18]. In magnetized fusion experiments, mag-
netizing the electron population is a primary goal, with
thermal conduction suppression resulting in lower energy
losses from the fusing plasma [62]. The eﬀect of thermal
conduction suppression can be clearly seen in the hot-
spot temperature in Fig. 2 increasing from approximately
1000 eV to 6000 eV when magnetized (although it will be
seen later that a fraction of this increase is due to Ohmic
dissipation). In the hot-spot the simulated Hall param-
eter is in excess of 500, reducing the electron thermal
conduction perpendicular to the ﬁeld lines by a factor of
more than 2 × 106.

The Hall parameter also impacts the transport of
In an extended-
magnetic ﬁelds by the Nernst term.
MHD plasma, Nernst can be approximated as the ad-
vection of magnetic ﬁeld with the electron heat-ﬂow
[34, 52, 63]. Therefore, the extreme magnetizations sim-
ulated in Fig. 2 result in the suppression of Nernst by a
factor greater than 2×106, allowing for reduced magnetic
ﬂux losses from the hot-spot.

Now the focus turns to induced electrical currents
in magnetized implosions. The current takes the form
j = ∇ × B/µ0, where the electric ﬁeld is assumed to vary
slowly. Associated with this current is an electron drift
velocity ve = −j/ene. This drift is expected to result in:
the transport of thermal and magnetic energy at velocity

FIG. 3: Time history of core conditions from 2D
Gorgon simulations of cylindrical implosions as a
function of diﬀerent argon dopant concentrations and
applied ﬁeld strength (see Fig. 2). Shown values are
calculated as instantaneous neutron-averaged quantities,
which results in a weighting towards the hot-spot core.

transport is to being frozen into the plasma during the
implosion, a frozen-in-ﬂow factor is deﬁned:

Γ =

|B|
B0

ρ0
ρ

,

(1)

where a value of Γ < 1 indicates that some magnetic ﬂux
has been lost from the hot-spot. The primary factors that
change the magnetic ﬂux compression from frozen-in-ﬂow
are resistive diﬀusion, Nernst advection of magnetic ﬁelds
down temperature gradients and axial plasma motion. It
will be seen in Sec. V that Γ ≈ 1 for highly magnetized
implosions. In some cases the magnetic ﬂux compression
actually exceeds the frozen-in-ﬂow approximation.

While Γ indicates how much magnetic ﬂux is lost from
the hot fuel, maximizing this value does not necessarily
help to enhance the magnetic ﬁeld strength in the hot-
spot. For this purpose, the ﬁeld compression factor is

ve; a dynamically important force; an additional heat-
ing term as the ﬁnite resistivity of the plasma converts
magnetic energy into electron thermal energy. Observing
these phenomena experimentally would be an interesting
outcome of this platform.

The Lorentz force is recovered by noting that the elec-
tron drift is a movement of electrons in a magnetic ﬁeld
f = (ve × B)ene; a component of this force is the mag-
netic pressure. In an unmagnetized target the implosion
kinetic energy is converted into stagnated thermal energy,
with the plasma retaining some residual kinetic energy
depending on implosion symmetry. When a large mag-
netic ﬁeld is introduced, some of that implosion kinetic
energy converts to magnetic energy instead; the implod-
ing shell decelerates on the magnetic pressure rather than
the hot-spot pressure. To characterize this, the ratio of
the thermal pressure to the magnetic pressure is typically
used:

β =

Pth
Pmag

=

2(Pe + Pi)µ0
|B|2

≈

2(neTe + niTi)µ0
|B|2

,

(6)

where an ideal gas equation of state is assumed for the
gas-ﬁll.

For the simulation with a 50 T applied magnetic ﬁeld
in Fig. 2, the magnetic pressure is approximately equal to
the thermal pressure (β ≈ 1). A combination of the sub-
stantial magnetic pressure and the heat-ﬂow suppression
accounts for the lower hot-spot density in the simulation
when a 50T magnetic ﬁeld is applied.

Equation 6 can be recast in terms of the initial applied
ﬁeld and gas ﬁll density by assuming Γ = 1 (i.e frozen-
in-ﬂow). Also incorporating the assumption that the ion
and electron temperatures are similar gives:

β =

2(1 + Z)ρ2
0Teµ0
miB2
0 ρ

,

if Γ = 1,

(7)

where Z is the average ionization of the core plasma
(Z = 1 for deuterium) and mi is the corresponding ion
mass. According to Eq. 7, a higher temperature hot-spot
enhances the thermal pressure, but more compression of
the plasma (and therefore magnetic ﬁeld) enhances the
magnetic pressure contribution.

Implosions dominated by magnetic pressure have pre-
viously been indirectly inferred in an experiment similar
to the conﬁguration discussed here [33]. The neutron
yield was seen to increase by approximately 50% going
from 0 T to 10 T, primarily due to hot-spot thermal
losses being reduced. However, going from 10 T to 27
T decreased the yield by around 50%. Simulations at-
tributed the decrease to the magnetic pressure increas-
ing in the hot-spot at the expense of the thermal pressure
[33]. While the decrease in thermal pressure is undesir-
able for reaching high neutron yields, the large magnetic
pressure also results in a highly magnetized regime with
large induced electrical currents; these currents are of
interest to the research proposed here.

Simulations anticipate that an initial 50 T ﬁeld is am-
pliﬁed to greater than 2×104 T. Compressing a magnetic

6

ﬁeld in excess of 104 T in a hot-spot of around 10 µm
radius results in a large electric current. For a cylindri-
cal implosion the magnetic ﬁeld remains predominantly
axial, giving a purely azimuthal current that can be ap-
proximated as:

jθ ≈ −

Bz
Rhsµ0

,

(8)

where Rhs is the hot-spot radius. The ﬁnal hot-spot
radius can also be related to the compressed density
with the convergence relation Rhs/R0 = (cid:112)ρ0/ρ,
i.e.
mass conservation assumption. Combining this with the
frozen-in-ﬂow assumption:

jθ ≈ −

(cid:17)3/2

B0
µ0R0

(cid:16) ρ
ρ0

,

if Γ = 1.

(9)

Clearly, a larger initial applied magnetic ﬁeld and greater
plasma compression result in a larger magnitude induced
current.

The electrical resistance of the plasma leads to diﬀu-
sion of the magnetic ﬁeld. The associated drop in mag-
netic energy results in additional energy into the elec-
tron population (through Ohmic dissipation). For the
magnetized simulation in Fig. 2 this contributes to an
enhanced electron temperature that exceeds the ion tem-
perature. When Ohmic dissipation is switched oﬀ in the
code, the peak electron temperature at bang time drops
from 6.0 keV to 4.2 keV.

The resistive diﬀusion timescale is:

tdiﬀ =

R2µ0
η

,

(10)

⊥me/(τeie2ne) is the magnetic diﬀusivity
where η = αc
and αc
⊥ is the dimensionless resistivity that only de-
pends on plasma magnetization and ionization [51]. The
timescale tdiﬀ deﬁnes both the rate of magnetic ﬁeld dif-
fusion as well as the Ohmic heating. For plasmas with
β ≈ 1 and resistive diﬀusion time-scales on the order of
the hot-spot stagnation time (tdiﬀ ≈ tstag), the energy
exchange from magnetic to electron thermal energy will
be signiﬁcant. Therefore, an Ohmic heating factor Π is
deﬁned:

Π =

tstag
tdiﬀ
Using the convergence relation R/R0 = (cid:112)ρ0/ρ and
Eqs. 7, 10 and 11, the Ohmic heating factor can be re-
written:

(11)

1
β

.

Π =

B0
ρ3
0

tstagρ
τeiTe

αc
⊥

m2
i meZ
2(Z + 1)e

,

if Γ = 1.

(12)

Note that the diﬀusion is greatest at the edge of the core,
where the fuel is more dense and lower in temperature.
In addition to the resistive diﬀusion of the magnetic
ﬁeld, the electrical current drives magnetic ﬁeld advec-
tion [34, 64]. Primarily, this is the transport of the mag-
netic ﬁeld at the electron drift velocity ve = j/ene, but

with collisional corrections. The advection of magnetic
ﬁeld with the electron drift velocity is often called the
Hall term. There is a similar transport of the electron
energy at the electron drift velocity, which here will be
called the thermal Hall term. The similarities in the ad-
vection velocities can be made clear by writing [34]:

vjB =

−(1 + δc

⊥)

j
⊥
ene

+ δc
∧(

j
ene

vjUe

= − (1 + βc
(cid:107))

j

(cid:107)
ene

−(1 + βc

⊥)

j
⊥
ene

+ βc
∧(

j
ene

× ˆb)

(13)

× ˆb),

(14)

(cid:107)

where vjB is the advection of magnetic ﬁeld due to elec-
trical currents and vjUe
is the advection of electron en-
ergy due to electrical currents, j
represents the com-
ponent of the current along the magnetic ﬁeld, and j
⊥
is the component perpendicular. ˆb is the magnetic ﬁeld
unit vector. The βc
∧ term is known as the Ettingshausen
heat-ﬂow. Note that there is no advection of magnetic
ﬁeld parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld itself, as this has no
eﬀect on the magnetic ﬁeld. The dimensionless trans-
port coeﬃcients δc and βc [34] provide collisional cor-
rections to the collisionless current-driven phenomena.
The δ∧ coeﬃcient calculated from Epperlein & Haines
[53] gives erroneous behaviour at low magnetization; up-
dated polynomial ﬁts are given in Ref. [51]. Transport
driven by electrical currents has been discussed theoret-
ically in pulsed power plasma experiments [65, 66] and
in low density plasma jets [67] but to the best of the au-
thors’ knowledge has not been measured experimentally.
Current-driven transport has not been shown to be sig-
niﬁcant in dense laser-driven implosions such as those
discussed here.

The Hall (and thermal Hall) velocities are typically
larger than the collisional corrections. An approximate
expression for this velocity can be found by using Eq. 9,
which assumed a purely axial magnetic ﬁeld:

vj ≈

B0
µ0R0

ρ1/2
ρ3/2
0

mi
Ze

.

(15)

The drift velocity is larger for a greater applied magnetic
ﬁeld strength. A lower initial ﬁll density ρ0 also enhances
the velocity, as the magnetic ﬁeld is more easily com-
pressed. Note that these relations must be adapted if
studying spherical implosions, as the magnetic ﬁeld lines
are not everywhere perpendicular to the implosion veloc-
ity.

A dimensionless number Ξ was deﬁned in Ref. [34] as

the ratio of the Nernst velocity to the Hall velocity:

Ξ =

γc
⊥τeiTeeneµ0
|B|me

.

(16)

This ratio is a metric for whether the transport is dom-
inated by temperature gradients or electrical currents.

7

Using burn-averaged quantities the implosion shown in
Fig. 2 has Ξ < 0.002 for an applied ﬁeld of 50 T. While
this shows the current-driven transport dominating over
the thermal transport, this is mainly due to the extreme
suppression of Nernst at such high magnetizations.

For 2D r − z simulations, the induced electrical cur-
rent is purely in the azimuthal direction θ, which means
there is no compression of magnetic ﬁeld by advection
with the current and exactly no change in the electron
energy proﬁle. The collisional corrections to the Hall and
thermal Hall can be in the simulation plane (such as the
Ettingshausen βc
∧ term in Eq. 14), but these are smaller
than the collisionless component. With variations in the
axial direction, the Hall term can induce a twist in the
magnetic ﬁeld proﬁle. This can be seen by decomposing
the change in magnetic ﬁeld due to an advection velocity
directed in θ:

(cid:35)

(cid:34)

∂Bθ
∂t

advection

= Br

∂vjθ
∂r

− Bz

∂vjθ
∂z

.

(17)

Noting that the magnetic ﬁeld is dominated by the
axial component, a time-scale for twisting the magnetic
ﬁeld can be obtained:

ttwist =

Lhs
2vj

,

(18)

where Lhs is the axial length over which the hot-spot is
uniformly driven. Using Eq. 8, Eq. 18 becomes:

ttwist = LhsRhs

1
2

ρ0
B0

µ0eZ
mi

,

(19)

i.e. both a small hot-spot radius Rhs and length Lhs are
required for signiﬁcant magnetic ﬁeld twisting to occur.
For 2D simulations such as those shown in Fig. 2, the
Hall term has been included. Due to the large uniformly-
driven length (Lhs ≈ 600 µm) only marginal twisting of
the magnetic ﬁeld occurs. Over the uniformly-driven
central length the ﬁeld twisting |Bθ|/|B| ≤ 0.01. To-
wards the edges, where 2D eﬀects are most important
|Bθ|/|B| ≤ 0.1.

Once the magnetic ﬁeld is twisted by the Hall term, a
component of the induced current emerges in the 2D r−z
simulation plane. The electron energy is then aﬀected
by the thermal Hall term. A component of the Lorentz
force becomes in the θ direction, which may result in
rotation of the plasma. Simulations where the uniform
hot-spot length Lhs is reduced have been attempted, but
once signiﬁcant Bθ ﬁeld emerges, the simulations become
unstable. This may be related to the natural instability
of Braginskii’s MHD description [68].

The stabilization of perturbation growth by large in-
duced electrical currents is of great interest to magnetized
ICF implosions [17, 18, 22]. The cylindrical implosions
discussed in this paper could be used as a platform for
investigating this behaviour. To demonstrate this, 3D
simulations are initialized from 1D once the ﬁrst shock

8

In the azimuthal direction, however, the perturbation
size is enhanced by magnetization (see bottom panel in
In this orientation the magnetic tension does
Fig. 4).
nothing to suppress the perturbation growth.
Instead,
suppression of electron thermal conduction decreases the
stability, as thermal ablative stabilization is reduced;
there is less ablation of cold plasma into the hot-spot to
stabilize the growth [18]. This process is still occurring in
the axial direction, but the magnetic tension stabilization
dominates.

The eﬀect of an applied magnetic ﬁeld on the pertur-
bation growth is a balance between the magnetic ten-
sion stabilizing axial perturbations and the decreased
thermal ablative stabilization in all directions [18]. The
balance between the two processes is highly dependent
on magnetic ﬁeld strength and the perturbation wave-
length. Shorter wavelengths and higher ﬁeld strengths
are thought to be dominated by magnetic tension, while
intermediate wavelengths and smaller magnetic ﬁelds are
mostly aﬀected by suppression of thermal conduction
[18]. If an artiﬁcial perturbation is applied to these cylin-
drical implosions (for example through contouring of the
shell) then these predictions could be tested experimen-
tally, which would be of great beneﬁt to the magnetized
ICF community.

The signiﬁcance of the magnetic tension stabilizing
perturbations can be quantiﬁed by using linear magne-
tized Rayleigh-Taylor theory [20]. The minimum unsta-
ble length-scale due to the magnetic ﬁeld alone (i.e. ne-
glecting thermal conduction) can be written as:

λB =

|B2|
µ0(ρh − ρl)g

,

(20)

where g is the acceleration of an unstable interface be-
tween a heavy and light ﬂuids of densities ρh and ρl re-
spectively. For a stagnating hot-spot the light ﬂuid is the
hot-spot density ρ, while the heavy ﬂuid is the peak den-
sity ρshell. Again, by assuming frozen-in-ﬂow, the min-
imum unstable wavelength due to magnetic tension can
be written in terms of initial experiment conditions and
stagnation quantities:

λB =

ρ2B2

0 tstag
ρ2
0µ0(ρshell − ρ)Vimp

,

if Γ = 1.

(21)

All the key parameters for quantifying the relevance of
diﬀerent magnetized processes are summarized in Table I;
namely, (a) Γ determines the eﬀectiveness of magnetic
ﬂux compressing with the plasma, (b) Λ is a measure
of how compressed the magnetic ﬁeld becomes, (c) the
magnetization of the electron orbits is captured by ωeτe,
(d) the importance of magnetic pressure to the plasma
dynamics is characterized by β, (e) Π determines the
signiﬁcance of Ohmic dissipation, (f ) Lhs/λB is the axial
mode number above which magnetic tension stabilizes
the hot-spot to linear Rayleigh-Taylor growth, (g) the
twisting factor tstag/ttwist determines whether the Hall

FIG. 4: Areal density at time of peak neutron
production for 3D Gorgon simulations of cylindrical
implosions with an without a 50 T seed magnetic ﬁeld
with artiﬁcial velocity perturbations applied. In the
axial direction (z, top panel) the 50 T seed magnetic
ﬁeld lowers perturbation growth due to magnetic
tension stabilization [18, 20, 22]. However, in the
azimuthal direction (θ, bottom panel) the perturbation
growth is enhanced by magnetization, due to decreased
thermal ablative stabilization [18]. The proposed
experimental platform could be used to investigate the
trade-oﬀ between these two eﬀects for varying
perturbation wavelengths.

converges onto the axis of the implosion. At the time of
initialization the implosion velocity is artiﬁcially modu-
lated by ±1% sinusoidally in both θ and z. A mode 5 per-
turbation is used in θ, which matches the mode number
of the baseline laser asymmetry [33]. In z a perturbation
of 20 µm wavelength is applied.

The top panel in Fig. 4 shows the radially-integrated
density (areal density) as a function of axial position at
the time of peak neutron production, with and without
a 50T magnetic ﬁeld applied. The average areal density
is lower in the magnetized case, as the signiﬁcant mag-
netic pressure decreases the compression. It can be seen
that the size of the axial areal density perturbation is de-
creased with the magnetic ﬁeld applied, as the magnetic
tension stabilizes the perturbation [20].

Description
Frozen-in-ﬂow factor
Field Compression Factor

Electron Hall Parameter

Ratio of Thermal to Magnetic Pressure

Ohmic Dissipation Factor

Maximum Unstable Magnetic Tension Mode

Lhs/λB

Twisting Factor

tstag/ttwist

Ratio of Thermal to Current-Driven Transport Ξ

Symbol Deﬁnition
Γ
Λ

ρ0
ρ

|B|
B0
|B|
B0
3/2
∝ |B|T
e
ne
2(Pe+Pi)µ0
|B|2

ωeτe

β

Π

1
β

tstag
tdiff
µ0(ρh−ρl)gLhs
|B2|

2|j|tstag
Lhsene
γc
⊥τeiTeeneµ0
|B|me

9

Γ = 1 Approximation
1
ρ
ρ0
T 3/2
∝ B0
e
ρ0
2(1+Z)ρ2
0Teµ0
miB2
0 ρ
tstagρ
αc
⊥
τeiTe

m2
i meZ
2(Z+1)e

B0
ρ3
0
Lhsρ2

0µ0(ρshell−ρ)Vimp
0 tstag
mi
µ0Ze

ρ2B2
ρ1/2
2
3/2
Lhs
ρ
0
γc
⊥τeiTeeµ0ρ0Z
mimeB0

B0
R0

TABLE I: Non-dimensional numbers determining the relative importance of diﬀerent physical processes in
magnetized cylindrical implosions. These factors can be used to optimize an experiment to explore speciﬁc
phenomena (see Sec. V) or can be inferred by using the frozen-in-ﬂow approximation along with spectroscopy (see
Sec. VI)

term is expected to cause signiﬁcant twists in the mag-
netic ﬁeld proﬁle, and ﬁnally, (h) Ξ then determines if
thermal or current-driven transport is more important.

V. MAGNETIZATION REGIMES IN
CYLINDRICAL IMPLOSIONS

In this section, modiﬁcations to the nominal experi-
ment are explored through the non-dimensional factors
It is shown that the metrics can be used
in Table I.
to design implosions for diﬀerent regimes where certain
processes dominate magnetic ﬂux compression, thermal
transport and bulk hydrodynamics.

Throughout this section, metrics are taken as their def-
inition and do not utilize the frozen-in-ﬂow (Γ = 1) ap-
proximation. The 2D simulations are reduced to 0D met-
rics by taking the burn-averaged values.

First, the topic of magnetic ﬂux compression is ex-
plored. Fig. 5 plots Γ for a series of 2D simulations with
various ﬁll densities and applied ﬁeld strengths. Note
that varying the fuel density is used to modify the stag-
nation conditions, with all densities quoted as a multi-
ple of the nominal deuterium ﬁll density of 1.81 kg/m3.
While higher densities may not be practical from a tar-
get fabrication standpoint, lowering the ﬁll density in-
creases the implosion convergence ratio to an extent that
is diﬃcult to resolve with current simulations. Increased
convergence may also be undesirable for the onset of hy-
drodynamic instabilities. Higher ﬁll densities could be
achieved by using a foam fuel instead. However, the cur-
rent study keeps the ﬁll composition as D2 in order to
diﬀerentiate the impact of changing ionization state from
changing ﬁll density. The calculation of Γ uses the burn-
averaged density and magnetic ﬁeld strength.

As shown in Fig. 5, low applied ﬁeld strengths result
in the ﬂux compression being far below the frozen-in-ﬂow
approximation. This is primarily due to the Nernst term,
which transports magnetic ﬁeld in the same direction as
the electron heat-ﬂow. Like the heat-ﬂow, the Nernst

FIG. 5: The frozen-in-ﬂow factor Γ = |B|ρ0/B0ρ for 2D
simulations over a range of applied magnetic ﬁeld
strengths and initial gas ﬁll pressures. Γ = 1 means that
the magnetic ﬂux has perfectly compressed with the
plasma density. Low applied ﬁeld strengths result in
extra Nernst de-magnetization of the hotspot. Γ > 1
can be obtained due to 2D motion reducing the plasma
compression while the magnetic ﬂux continues to
compress.

term is suppressed at higher magnetizations. The lower
ﬁll density cases have larger contributions from Nernst,
which is due to a combination of the hot-spot being hotter
and having a smaller radius, both amplifying the temper-
ature gradients.

For higher applied ﬁelds, the Nernst term is almost
completely suppressed. At 50 T, Γ > 1 for all ﬁll densi-
ties simulated, meaning that the magnetic ﬁeld has com-
pressed more than the plasma itself. At ﬁrst this seems
counter-intuitive, as Nernst moves magnetic ﬁeld out of
the hot-spot and resistive diﬀusion acts to lower the ﬁeld
strength. However, here it is actually found that resistive
diﬀusion can increase the ﬁeld strength in the hot-spot
and that axial motion allows for additional magnetic ﬂux

compression, as explained hereafter. It is important to
remember that the compressed ﬁeld and density values
used to calculate Γ plotted in Fig. 5 are burn-averaged
quantities, which means they sample the hot core at the
center more than the hot-spot edge. However, the hot-
spot is lower density than the core periphery, meaning
that the compressed ﬁeld in the former is lower than in
the surrounding plasma. Therefore, resistive diﬀusion
acts to move magnetic ﬂux from the compressed low tem-
perature fuel to the low density hot-spot, increasing the
plasma magnetization in the process.

The axial plasma motion also enhances the magnetic
ﬂux compression. As this is a cylindrical implosion, there
are signiﬁcant end losses out of the hot-spot [33]. These
unconﬁned hot-spots can be compressed to a smaller ra-
dius. While the axial motion removes mass from the
hot-spot, it does not remove magnetic ﬂux, which is pre-
dominantly axial itself. Therefore, more axial motion of
plasma allows higher compression of the magnetic ﬁeld.
In theory, the greatest magnetic ﬂux compression can
be reached by driving extreme axial ﬂows.
If the aim
of the experiment is to reach large electron magnetiza-
tions, however, large axial ﬂows result in lower hot-spot
temperatures and low burn durations. The low ﬁll 50T
simulation has the largest Γ of greater than 1.4, as the
axial ﬂows driven are larger than the higher ﬁll densities.
Note that Γ < 1 is always expected in experiments
where the fuel is laser preheated, such as MagLIF [28].
The fuel becomes hot even before the magnetic ﬂux is
compressed, resulting in low electron magnetizations and
large temperature gradients, allowing Nernst demagneti-
zation to dominate.

Mid- or high-Z dopant mixed into the capsule fuel helps
to increase magnetic ﬁeld compression.
In particular,
Fig. 6 plots the compression factor Λ as a function of
argon concentration –the percentage quoted is per deu-
terium atom– for 2D simulations with 5 T, 30 T and 50 T
applied ﬁelds. While applying a 50 T ﬁeld invariably re-
sults in higher compressed ﬁeld strengths than a 30 T
ﬁeld, the compression factor is always lower. This is be-
cause the higher applied ﬁeld strengths result in lower
hot-spot compression. The reasons for this are twofold.
Firstly, suppression of thermal conduction reduces the
hot-spot compressibility, increasing the temperature at
the cost of the density (giving the same stagnated pres-
sure) [59]. Secondly, the ﬁnal total pressure is the same;
higher magnetic pressure results in a lower thermal pres-
sure [33].

For the 5 T case in Fig. 6, increasing the dopant con-
centration greatly increases the magnetic ﬂux compres-
sion. This is because the hot-spot radiatively cools, re-
ducing the thermal pressure and allowing for more com-
pression. The same is true in principle for the 50 T case.
However, the hot-spot deceleration is not just dominated
by the thermal pressure when 50T is applied, since the
magnetic pressure is signiﬁcant –as will be seen later in
Fig. 8a, the ratio of thermal to magnetic pressure is ∼ 1.
Therefore, the dopant has less of an impact on the mag-

10

FIG. 6: Burn-averaged ﬁeld compression factor
Λ = |B|/B0 for 2D simulations over a range of argon
dopant concentrations and with applied magnetic ﬁelds
of 5 T, 30 T and 50 T. Lower applied ﬁeld strengths are
easier to compress, as electron heat-ﬂow magnetization
results in a high temperature, low density hot-spot. In
addition, large magnetic pressures result in lower
compression. Introducing a dopant to the fuel increases
magnetic ﬁeld compression. For a large initial ﬁeld
strength, the magnetic pressure sets the magnetic ﬁeld
compression (rather than the plasma thermal pressure),
reducing the compression factor dependence on dopant
concentration.

netic ﬁeld compression and leads to the magnetic ﬁeld
compression factor being relatively independent of the
dopant concentration, as seen in Fig. 6.

Figure 7 shows the burn-averaged electron and ion
temperatures of 2D simulations scanning both applied
ﬁeld strength and ﬁll density. For these cases, a dopant
concentration of 0.325% is used. As the magnetic ﬁeld
strength is increased, the thermal conduction from the
hot-spot into the cold fuel is suppressed, raising the core
temperature. For the 50 T low ﬁll density case the elec-
tron Hall parameter reaches a burn-averaged value of over
300, reducing the thermal conductivity perpendicular to
the magnetic ﬁeld to κ⊥/κ(cid:107) = 5 × 10−5.

The higher ﬁll densities reach lower temperatures, re-
ducing the electron magnetization. Therefore, the en-
hancement in temperature is lower for a higher initial ﬁll
density.

An interesting feature in Fig. 7 is the electron tem-
perature being larger than the ion temperature in the
highly magnetized low ﬁll density cases. This is due to
the Ohmic dissipation converting magnetic energy into
electron thermal energy.
In unmagnetized implosions
the electron population loses energy faster than the ions
due to their additional mobility. Typically it is through
electron-ion collisions that the ion population loses its en-
ergy, but in the magnetized case a signiﬁcant proportion

11

(a)

(b)

FIG. 8: Magnetization metrics from Table I for: (a)
varying the applied ﬁeld strength while keeping the
argon concentration at 0.325% by atom; (b) varying the
argon fuel dopant concentration while keeping the
applied ﬁeld strength at 30 T.

the target.

Figure 8b then shows how the induced-current metrics
vary with the argon dopant percentage for an applied
magnetic ﬁeld of 30 T. Again, the added dopant results
in additional radiative losses, allowing the hot-spot to
become more compressed. Similarly, the magnetic ﬁeld
compresses further and gives larger induced currents. As
a result, the magnetic pressure is greater, the Ohmic
heating becomes more important, the magnetic tension
stabilizes more wavelengths, the importance of thermal
transport is reduced and the Hall term twists the mag-
netic ﬁeld more eﬀectively.

VI. ARGON K-SHELL SPECTROSCOPY

Here we address the application of X-ray spectroscopy
for the characterization of core conditions. The Gorgon
MHD simulations show that the compression of the B-

FIG. 7: Burn averaged electron and ion temperatures
for 2D simulations for a range of gas ﬁll pressures and
applied ﬁeld strengths. Larger magnetic ﬁelds reduce
the electron thermal conduction losses from the
hot-spot, raising the temperature. Higher ﬁll pressures
result in lower plasma magnetizations, reducing the
temperature enhancement. In the regime of large
magnetic pressure, the electron temperature can exceed
the ion temperature due to Ohmic dissipation.

of the implosion kinetic energy is used to compress the
magnetic ﬁeld (β ≈ 1). Once the ﬁeld starts to diﬀuse
and relax, this potential energy is transferred to the elec-
trons, which are resistively heated. For B0 = 50 T, the
Ohmic heating factor is Π = 0.13 at the hot-spot edge,
indicating that a signiﬁcant proportion of the magnetic
energy is being transferred into electron thermal energy.
Measuring a higher electron temperature than ion tem-
perature would be a deﬁnitive observation of this process
taking place. However, there may be complications due
to the ion temperature typically being inferred by the
spectra of fusion-produced neutrons [69]. Doppler shift-
ing of the spectra by ﬂuid motion can increase the appar-
ent ion temperature, which may be comparable in size to
the ≈ 500 eV diﬀerence in electron and ion temperatures
reported here.

Figure 8a displays the dependence of a range of met-
rics from Table I on the applied ﬁeld strength. Univer-
sally, these all show the importance of the induced cur-
rent increasing with applied ﬁeld strength. For an applied
ﬁeld of 50 T the hot-spot magnetic pressure is approx-
imately the same size as the thermal pressure, giving a
β ≈ 1. Along with this, the axial mode numbers that are
suppressed by magnetic tension (Lhs/λB) decreases to
12, meaning that all high mode features are expected to
be suppressed in the axial direction. The importance of
thermal transport of magnetic ﬁeld and electron energy is
almost completely suppressed by electron magnetization,
which can be seen from Ξ < 0.001. While the magnetic
ﬁeld twisting factor is still small for a seed B-ﬁeld of 50 T,
this could be enhanced by reducing the driving length of

ﬁeld changes the hydrodynamic behavior, thus producing
a variety of magnetization phenomena whose underly-
ing physics demand a deeper understanding as discussed
in Sec. IV and V. Since changes in the hydrodynam-
ics translate into signiﬁcant variations in the radial pro-
ﬁles of core temperature and density throughout the im-
plosion collapse compared to the unmagnetized case, a
way to bring information about the associated physics is
by diagnosing the conditions of the imploding core. In
this regard, given the success in past experimental cam-
paigns of spherical implosions at OMEGA [42–46] and
also in laser-heated cylindrical plasma experiments per-
formed at Z related to the MagLIF preheat stage [47, 48],
here we propose to rely on time-resolved Ar K-shell spec-
troscopy. This diagnostic exploits two basic properties of
the Ar K-shell spectrum emitted from hot, dense plas-
mas: (1) the Stark-broadened line shapes strongly de-
pend on density and are relatively insensitive to varia-
tions in electron temperature, (2) the relative intensity
distribution of K-shell lines and their associated satel-
lites are sensitive to variations in electron temperature
and density through the dependence to these parameters
on the atomic level population kinetics. The Ar K-shell
spectroscopic technique works properly for plasma elec-
tron densities and temperatures typically in the ranges
of ne ∼ 1023 − 1024 cm−3 and Te ∼ 600 − 2000 eV, since
for these conditions the Stark eﬀect is the dominant line
broadening mechanism, and He-like and H-like Ar are
signiﬁcantly populated so that their corresponding line
emission becomes bright and useful for analysis. In this
regard, Fig. 9 shows the time histories of mass-weighted
average electron temperature and electron density of the
imploded core for diﬀerent argon concentrations obtained
from 2D Gorgon simulations. Overall, average core con-
ditions for the non-magnetized implosions ﬁt well within
the ranges above, while for the magnetized case the tem-
perature can go above 2 keV around stagnation. Still,
since the new physics and main goal here focuses on
exploring and providing evidence on extreme magneti-
zation phenomena, we consider appropriate to use the
well-established Ar K-shell spectroscopic technique and
perform an assessment of its potential application, in or-
der to ﬁnd out how far the technique can be pushed for
the characterization of core conditions in the magnetized
scenario.
It is also worth noting that despite the high
B-ﬁeld values achieved in the compressed core (> 10 kT
around stagnation), Stark-Zeeman spectroscopy cannot
be used to obtain an estimation of compressed B-ﬁeld in
an experimental scenario. Given the range of electron
densities achieved, we performed systematic calculations
of Stark-Zeeman line proﬁles based on molecular dynam-
ics simulations [70] and checked that the broadening of
Ar K-shell lines produced by the Stark eﬀect blurs the
characteristic Zeeman pattern even in the case of the ex-
pected achievable B-ﬁeld. Zeeman features will be fur-
ther washed out by radiation transport eﬀects through
the imploded core and instrumental broadening. Details
of these calculations are beyond of the scope of this paper

12

FIG. 9: Time history of core conditions from 2D Gorgon
simulations of cylindrical implosions as a function of
diﬀerent argon dopant concentrations. Shown values are
obtained as mass-weighted averages within the radial
core boundary and over the central 400 µm-long portion
of the imploded cylinder. Top and bottom panels show
electron temperature and electron density from
non-magnetized and magnetized cases, respectively.

and will be addressed in a forthcoming publication.

In an eﬀort to have a realistic representation of the
time-resolved Ar K-shell spectra to be measured in a real
experiment, we have post-processed the 2D MHD Gorgon
simulations and performed detailed atomic-kinetics and
radiation transport calculations throughout the evolution
of the imploding cylinder. Line of sight is assumed to be
perpendicular to the cylinder axis, so that to compute
the emergent intensity the radiation transport equation
must be solved along chords inside the plasma source
parallel to the line of sight. The solution to this prob-
lem can be well approximated by a system of eﬀective
slabs [71] resulting from the discretization of the cylindri-
cal plasma in a ﬁnite number of cylindrical shells, which
here was chosen to exactly match the radial grid used in
the Gorgon MHD simulations. Temperature and density
conditions of each cylindrical shell are taken as the spa-

1.251.31.351.41.451.51.551.6Time (ns)050010001500200025003000Electron Temperature (eV)1022102310241025Electron Density (cm-3)Ar@0.175%Ar@0.325%Ar@0.650%[solid] temperature[dotted] densityB0 = 0 T1.251.31.351.41.451.51.551.6Time (ns)050010001500200025003000Electron Temperature (eV)1022102310241025Electron Density (cm-3)Ar@0.175%Ar@0.325%Ar@0.650%[dotted] density[solid] temperatureB0= 50 T13

FIG. 10: Comparison of synthetic images of Ar K-shell time-resolved spectra for unmagnetized and magnetized
(B0 = 50 T) implosions. For the non-magnetized case, changes in the spectra due to diﬀerent Ar concentrations are
shown. For the magnetized case, the sensitivity with Ar concentration is lost and only the case for Ar at 0.175% is
displayed –see the text for details–.

tial average for a given time over the central 400 µm-long
portion of the imploded core along the axial direction.
This is a reasonable simpliﬁcation, since according to
MHD simulations –see Fig. 2–, conditions of the imploded
cylinder show little dependence on the axial direction in
the central region. The required emissivities, opacities
and atomic level population distributions were calculated
with the collisional-radiative model ABAKO [72] for each
pair of core electron temperature and density over the
corresponding radial grid as obtained from the Gorgon
MHD output, i.e. no interpolation over pre-calculated
emissivity and opacity databases was applied. Bound-
bound, bound-free and free-free contributions from the
Ar-doped deuterium plasma within the spectral range of
interest were included. In particular, relevant bound-free
cross sections [73] were computed with the LANL suite
of codes [74]. Energy levels and line transitions rates
for the required Ar ion stages were computed with the
atomic structure code FAC [75]. For given plasma con-
ditions, ABAKO explicitly includes all non-autoionizing
and autoionizing states consistent with the correspond-
ing ionization potential depression, which is estimated ac-
cording to the Stewart-Pyatt model [76], modiﬁed to ac-
count for the argon-deuterium mixture. An escape factor
model was used to account for radiation trapping eﬀects
on the atomic-level population kinetics [77]. Importantly
for this application, detailed Stark-broadened line shapes
for Ar Heα, Heβ, Heγ, Lyα, Lyβ, and Lyγ, and associ-
ated satellites were calculated with the MERL line-shape
code [78], including ion-dynamics eﬀects [79]. Recently,
MERL Stark-broadened line shapes of Ar K-shell have
been further validated for spectroscopic diagnosis appli-

cations against full molecular dynamics simulations [80].
Figure 10 shows the time evolution of the computed
Ar K-shell emission, i.e. synthetic streaked images, for
unmagnetized and magnetized cases assuming a seed B-
ﬁeld of 50 T. Besides Doppler and Stark broadening
mechanisms, synthetic spectra also accounts for instru-
mental broadening. Consistently with available streaked
spectrometers on OMEGA for the photon energy range
of interest, a spectral resolution of E/∆E ≈ 500 was
assumed. Main line transitions in He-like and H-like
ions are labeled, i.e. Heα (1s2p→1s2), Heβ (1s3p→1s2)
and Heγ (1s4p→1s2) in He-like Ar, and Lyα (2p→1s),
Lyβ (3p→1s) and Lyγ (4p→1s) in H-like Ar. There
are signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the expected time-
resolved spectra of a non-magnetized implosion and a
magnetized one. Moreover, the metrics analysis of Sec. V
demonstrated that a extreme magnetization regime is al-
ready attainable for a seed B-ﬁeld of 30 T, thus also ex-
pecting noticeable diﬀerences –similar to those shown in
Fig. 10– in the spectral output when compared to the
unmagnetized case. Therefore, based on our simulations,
in a potential experimental realization the observation of
the time-resolved Ar K-shell emission should be able to
distinguish between the unmagnetized and magnetized
scenarios (at least for B0 > 30 T). A detailed analysis of
spectroscopic data would bring further information about
the magnetization state, as pointed out below.

For interpretation, it is useful to correlate the synthetic
streaked images in Fig. 10 with the time histories of elec-
tron temperature and density shown in Fig. 9.
In the
unmagnetized case, line emission turns on at t (cid:38) 1.35 ns
and lasts for (cid:46) 200 ps. Figure 10 shows that, overall,

Hea(1s2p→1s2)Lya(2p→1s)Heb(1s3p→1s2)Heg(1s4p→1s2)Lyb(3p→1s2)B0 = 0 TAr@0.175%B0 = 0 TAr@0.325%B0 = 0 TAr@0.650%B0 = 50 TAr@0.175%as expected, signal intensity increases with time until
stagnation (t = 1.5 ns), when the average temperature
and density reach their maximum values, and decreases
after. Lines are narrower early in time, then gradually
broaden until stagnation time and narrowing down after-
wards, mainly due to Stark-broadening which increases
with increasing electron density. When comparing the re-
sults for diﬀerent Ar concentrations, the ratio of He-like
to H-like for the same type of transition increases with
the Ar amount. This is a result of radiative cooling, i.e.
core temperature decreases and He-like ion population is
favored relative to that of H-like ion. Also, core com-
pressibility is higher for the case of Ar at 0.65%, so we
observe broader lines when compared to the results for
Ar at 0.175%. For Ar at 0.65% the overall spectral inten-
sity drops compared to Ar at 0.175%, which, despite the
density increasing, can be explained because the plasma
cooling remains as the dominant eﬀect; i.e.
for Ar at
0.65%, the core average temperature stays below 700 eV
throughout the implosion and, relative to the case of Ar
at 0.175%, the ion population distribution shifts to lower
ionization stages, so that the number of K-shell ion emit-
ters decreases accordingly.

In the magnetized case, line emission lasts longer (∼
250 ps) and the overall signal intensity is lower than com-
pared to a non-magnetized implosion. Moreover, since
the eﬀect of magnetic pressure reduces the core compress-
ibility, electron density and therefore the impact of Stark-
broadening decrease, which ultimately leads to narrower
lines compared to the unmagnetized scenario. Interest-
ingly, contrary to what was found for unmagnetized im-
plosions, streaked images of K-shell emission show little
sensitivity to the Ar concentration –only the case for Ar
at 0.175% is displayed in Fig. 10 due to this reason–.
This is due to the large gradients in core conditions along
the radial direction throughout the collapse of the implo-
sion for the magnetized case. For illustration, Fig. 11
shows the radial proﬁles at stagnation time of core elec-
tron temperature and density averaged in the axial di-
rection over the central 400 µm-portion of the imploding
cylinder. The temperature radial proﬁles show that, re-
gardless of the Ar amount, a lower bound of ∼ 700 eV
is found at the core periphery. Temperature rises ra-
dially inwards to values far above ∼ 2 keV, where Ar
ions will be fully ionized. Thus, it is clear that K-shell
emission for the magnetized case will be only represen-
tative of the core outermost portion. When tempera-
ture spatial proﬁles are correlated with the correspond-
ing density proﬁles, one realizes that, no matter the Ar
concentration, the radiation transport comes across ba-
sically the same ranges and combinations of core con-
ditions relevant for K-shell line emission. Accordingly,
since a similar behavior is found over the implosion col-
lapse, the resulting time-resolved spectra show little de-
pendence on the Ar amount. No signiﬁcant gradients are
observed in the radial proﬁles for the unmagnetized case.
In Sec. V, the variation of Ar concentration was sug-
gested as a ﬁne-tuning knob for achieving diﬀerent mag-

14

FIG. 11: Radial proﬁles of core conditions at stagnation
time (t = 1.5 ns) for a magnetized cylindrical implosion
(with B0 = 50 T). Results for diﬀerent Ar
concentrations are shown.

netization regimes for a given seed B-ﬁeld value. How-
ever, since the sensitivity with Ar concentration is lost,
our simulations here show that Ar K-shell spectroscopy
would not be useful to distinguish between such regimes.
Still, if ideally multiple spectrometers were available in
the experimental facility to simultaneously measure dif-
ferent spectral ranges, we could keep using the dopant
concentration as a control knob and speculate with dop-
ing the targets with small amounts of diﬀerent dopants,
for instance mixing Ar and Kr. Ar K-shell spectroscopy
seems to work properly for the characterization of core
conditions in the unmagnetized case and, potentially, Kr
K-shell and L-shell spectroscopy could provide a better
characterization of magnetized implosions, even enabling
to retrieve the sensitivity of the emission spectra to the
dopant concentration. This subject is under investigation
and will be published elsewhere.

Figure 12 shows synthetic time-integrated spectra for
the unmagnetized and magnetized cases to evaluate po-
tential data from this diagnostic on OMEGA. Spectra
are shown for a photon energy from 3500 to 4300 eV,
since temperature and density diagnosis based on K-
shell spectroscopy usually relies on the β and γ lines
region of the spectrum –α lines are much more sensi-
tive to spatial gradients and absorption eﬀects than oth-
ers due to their characteristic large optical depths–. As
already discussed, there is little variation with Ar con-
centration for the magnetized case, so that only the case
for Ar at 0.175% is displayed. The comparison of time-
integrated spectra obtained at diﬀerent Ar concentra-
tions for a non-magnetized implosion allows us to an-
swer the question about the optimum dopant concen-
tration for spectroscopic purposes. For Ar at 0.175%,
strong Heβ and Lyβ emissions are observed, which is
critical for a reliable spectroscopic analysis. For Ar at
0.325% the Lyβ emission is almost lost and the situation

012345678Radial Distance (microns)012345678910Electron Temperature (keV)00.511.522.5Electron Density (1024 cm-3)Ar@0.175%Ar@0.325%Ar@0.650%[solid] temperature[dotted] densityB0 = 50 T15

VII. CONCLUSIONS

This paper outlines a cylindrical implosion platform
for studying highly magnetized plasmas on the OMEGA
laser facility.
In the highly magnetized regime the im-
ploding shell decelerates on the magnetic ﬁeld, convert-
ing kinetic energy into magnetic. The highly compressed
magnetic ﬁeld induces large electrical currents in the hot-
spot; ﬁnite plasma resistivity results in Ohmic dissipa-
tion, diﬀusing the magnetic ﬁeld and heating the elec-
tron population. This is expected to result in a higher
temperature in the electron population than in the ions,
which may be diagnosable.

The large induced electrical currents can also cause
Hall physics to be important, which has not been re-
ported in laser-driven implosions to date. The calcula-
tions here estimate that a typical electron in the hot-spot
will undergo a 1/3 rotational drift around the cylindrical
axis within the fusion time frame, advecting the magnetic
ﬁeld and electron energy distribution.

The electrical currents also result in perturbation sta-
bilization in the axial direction, which could be studied
by using a shell with applied corrugations. Experiments
scanning applied ﬁeld strength and perturbation wave-
length would be of great interest to the magnetized ICF
community.

All of these magnetization processes have been sum-

marized as non-dimensional metrics in Table I.

Care has been taken to optimize future potential ex-
periments to reach peak magnetic ﬁeld strengths. By
using a low gas ﬁll, the magnetic ﬁeld is more easily
compressed. However, as the convergence ratio of the
capsule increases, the implosion will be more susceptible
to perturbation growth, limiting the minimum ﬁll den-
sity. Dopants added to the imploding fuel can also be
used to radiatively cool the hot-spot, allowing the mag-
netic ﬁeld to be more compressible. More axial motion,
too, allows for greater ﬂux compression.

X-ray spectroscopy can be used to diagnose the core
electron temperature and density. The core tempera-
ture is anticipated to increase through the application of
a magnetic ﬁeld, while the density will decrease. The
measurement of lower overall core pressure when a large
magnetic ﬁeld is applied would indicate that the magnetic
pressure has become signiﬁcant. By assuming frozen-in-
ﬂow, which has been shown with simulations to be a good
approximation in the highly magnetized regime, many of
the metrics governing which magnetization phenomena
are important can be indirectly inferred.

VIII. APPENDIX

Magnetic ﬂux compression has been measured in previ-
ous cylindrical implosions on the OMEGA Laser Facility
using proton radiography [5, 6]. Here, 2D Gorgon simula-
tions are post-processed to create synthetic proton radio-
graphs to compare with these experiments. Good agree-

FIG. 12: Comparison of synthetic Ar K-shell
time-integrated spectra for non-magnetized and
magnetized (B0 = 50 T) implosions. For the
unmagnetized case, changes in the spectrum due to
diﬀerent Ar concentrations are shown. For the
magnetized case, the sensitivity with Ar concentration
is lost and only the case for Ar at 0.175% is displayed
–see the text for details.

is even worse for Ar at 0.650%. The same conclusion is
found when doing the comparison for time-resolved spec-
tra. Besides the diﬀerence in the absolute signal strength,
time-integrated spectra from unmagnetized and magne-
tized cases mostly diﬀer in the broadening of the lines.
The higher compressibility of the unmagnetized implo-
sion ultimately leads to a signiﬁcant impact of Stark-
broadening, which is not so severe in the magnetized case.
Regarding the overall signal strength, results for non-
magnetized and magnetized implosions diﬀer in a factor
of ∼ 2, and both compare within one order of magnitude
with calculations done in the past for the campaign of
spherical implosions on OMEGA, where the Ar K-shell
emission was successfully recorded. Therefore, for all the
reasons above, an argon concentration of 0.175% seems to
be a good choice for application of K-shell spectroscopy
for the study of the referred direct-drive cylindrical im-
plosions.

Lastly, it is worth noting that, similarly to previous
work, a spectroscopic modelling and analysis of the mea-
sured time-resolved Ar K-shell emission would allow the
determination of the temperature and density of the im-
ploded core throughout the collapse of the implosion.
From these spectroscopic measurements and if the mag-
netic ﬁeld is assumed to be frozen, estimations for the
magnetization metrics in Table I can be obtained. How-
ever, in the magnetized scenario, the spectroscopic diag-
nosis will be more complicated due to the severe gradients
in core conditions. A feasibility assessment of the spec-
troscopic technique based on synthetic data is on progress
and will be published in a forthcoming paper.

350036003700380039004000410042004300Photon Energy (eV)024681012Spectral Energy (103 erg/sr/eV)B0=0T, Ar@0.175%B0=0T, Ar@0.325%B0=0T, Ar@0.650%B0=50T, Ar@0.175%LyHeHeLy16

slowed; by looking only at the protons that have had
their energies lowered by the compressed plasma, the
In the experiment
signal to noise ratio is improved.
analysis, the proton populations in the energy bands
< 14.4 MeV,14.4−14.6 MeV and 14.6−14.8 MeV all show
bumps at around 1.8 cm deﬂection [6]. When the ap-
plied ﬁeld was reversed in direction, the bump moved
to −1.8 cm, which indicates that the feature is from
magnetic ﬁeld deﬂections, not from electric ﬁeld eﬀects.
While the signals for each proton range are relatively
small compared with the background, the consistency of
the feature across several proton energy ranges and across
multiple experiments is encouraging.

Synthetic proton radiographs of 2D Gorgon simula-
tions have been plotted in Fig. 13. These are produced
using a proton tracking code without electric ﬁeld ef-
fects or collisional scattering. A monoenergetic source is
assumed. The protons are reported to be emitted over
a 150 ps burst [6], so a Gaussian emission proﬁle with
standard deviation of 75 ps is used for the synthetic ra-
diographs.

When the Nernst term is included in the simulations
a bump is observed in the radiograph at 1.9 cm, similar
to that seen experimentally. This bump is not found to
be due to the peak ﬁeld strength reached at the centre of
the target, but by the magnetic ﬂux that develops at the
hot-spot edge, ≈ 10 µm from the axis. While the ﬁeld
strength at this radius is lower, deﬂecting the protons
less, the total ﬂux of protons into this region is greater,
increasing the signal. The magnetic ﬁeld strength at the
hot-spot edge is approximately 4000 T, which is consis-
tent with the values inferred by the original experiment
analysis [5].

Without the Nernst term included, the synthetic pro-
ton radiograph does not compare favourably with the
experiment, with a wide spread of proton deﬂections and
no clear bump –see Fig. 13. This is the ﬁrst direct ev-
idence of Nernst in magnetized implosions; Nernst has
been indirectly inferred in MagLIF through observation
that, above a certain laser preheat energy, the neutron
yield plateaus [28]. No sensitivity of the radiograph to a
Nernst ﬂux limiter in the range 0.04-0.1 was found. While
resistive diﬀusion smooths the radiograph, the cases with
and without compare equally favourably to the experi-
ment.

IX. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work performed under the auspices of the U.S.
Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. This
document was prepared as an account of work sponsored
by an agency of the United States government. Neither
the United States government nor Lawrence Livermore
National Security, LLC, nor any of their employees makes
any warranty, expressed or implied, or assumes any le-
gal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, complete-

FIG. 13: Proton radiographs of a cylindrical magnetic
ﬂux compression experiment. The experimental data is
taken from Ref. [6], showing here only the data from the
protons that have slowed through the target (energy
ranges 14.4-14.6 MeV and 14.6-14.8 MeV). The
experimental radiographs show a bump at around
1.8 cm, which is consistent with the simulation including
Nernst advection.

ment is found when the Nernst term is included in the
simulations. These results build conﬁdence in the simu-
lation results in this publication and also (to a lesser ex-
tent) in other non-cylindrical Gorgon simulations where
magnetic ﬂux compression is an important process.

There are signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the target di-
mensions used in the bulk of this paper and the tar-
get used for this magnetic ﬂux compression validation.
Here the target radius is 430 µm, ﬁlled with 3 atm of
D2 gas [6]. A 5 T magnetic ﬁeld was applied, which
is low enough to have relatively little contribution from
magnetic pressure in the hot-spot. The experiment dis-
cussed in this appendix was also carried out before the
laser non-uniformity was optimized [31, 57], resulting in a
lack of axial hot-spot conﬁnement. While this lowers the
electron magnetization, the Gorgon simulations actually
predict an enhancement to the magnetic ﬂux compres-
sion, because the hot-spot is more compressible.

The proton source in the experiment was from an ex-
ploding pusher, which provides a relatively monoener-
getic proton population (∆E/E ∼ 0.03) [6]. This popu-
lation is born at 14.7 MeV, but is accelerated to 15.2 MeV
due to charging of the backlighter [6]. The hot-spot be-
ing imaged is small (≈ 10 µm), meaning that very few
protons hitting the radiograph are signiﬁcantly deﬂected
by the compressed magnetic ﬁeld. On the face of it, this
makes imaging the peak ﬁeld very diﬃcult. However,
the protons passing through the compressed plasma are

17

ness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, prod-
uct, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would
not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein
to any speciﬁc commercial product, process, or service
by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise
does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement,
recommendation, or favoring by the United States gov-
ernment or Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC.
The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do
not necessarily state or reﬂect those of the United States
government or Lawrence Livermore National Security,
LLC, and shall not be used for advertising or product
endorsement purposes.

This work has also been carried out within the frame-
work of the EUROfusion Consortium and has received
funding from the Euratom research and training pro-
gramme 2014-2018 and 2019-2020 under grant agreement
No. 633053. The views and opinions expressed herein do
not necessarily reﬂect those of the European Commission.

The involved teams have operated within the framework
of the Enabling Research Projects: CfP-AWP17-ENR-
IFE-CEA-02 Towards a universal Stark-Zeeman code for
spectroscopic diagnostics and for integration in transport
codes and CfP-FSD-AWP21-ENR-01-CEA-02 Advancing
shock ignition for direct-drive inertial fusion.

This material is based upon work supported by the US
National Nuclear Security Administration under Award
No. DE-NA0003940. The work has also been sup-
ported by the Research Grant No. GOB-ESP2019-13
from ULPGC; and by Research Grant No. PID2019-
108764RB-I00 from the Spanish Ministry of Science and
Innovation.

F.S.-V. acknowledges funding from The Royal Society
(UK) through a University Research Fellowship. C.V.
acknowledges the support from the LIGHT S&T Gradu-
ate Program (PIA3 Investment for the Future Program,
ANR-17-EURE-0027). G. P.-C. acknowledges fund-
ing from the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche
(ANR-10-IDEX-03-02, ANR-15-CE30-0011).

[1] D. Lai, Matter in strong magnetic ﬁelds, Rev. Mod. Phys.

73, 629 (2001).

[2] D. Engel and G. Wunner, Hartree-fock-roothaan calcu-
lations for many-electron atoms and ions in neutron-star
magnetic ﬁelds, Phys. Rev. A 78, 032515 (2008).

[3] B. N. Murdin, J. Li, M. L. Y. Pang, E. T. Bowyer, K. L.
Litvinenko, S. K. Clowes, H. Engelkamp, C. R. Pidgeon,
I. Galbraith, N. V. Abrosimov, H. Riemann, S. G. Pavlov,
H.-W. H¨ubers, and P. G. Murdin, Si:p as a laboratory
analogue for hydrogen on high magnetic ﬁeld white dwarf
stars, Nature Communications 4, 1469 (2013).

[4] M. Hohenberger, P.-Y. Chang, G. Fiksel, J. P. Knauer,
R. Betti, F. J. Marshall, D. D. Meyerhofer, F. H. S´eguin,
and R. D. Petrasso, Inertial conﬁnement fusion implo-
sions with imposed magnetic ﬁeld compression using the
OMEGA Laser, Physics of Plasmas 19, 056306 (2012).
[5] O. V. Gotchev, P. Y. Chang, J. P. Knauer, D. D. Mey-
erhofer, O. Polomarov, J. Frenje, C. K. Li, M. J.-E.
Manuel, R. D. Petrasso, J. R. Rygg, F. H. S´eguin, and
R. Betti, Laser-Driven Magnetic-Flux Compression in
High-Energy-Density Plasmas, Physical Review Letters
103, 215004 (2009).

[6] J. P. Knauer, O. V. Gotchev, P. Y. Chang, D. D. Mey-
erhofer, O. Polomarov, R. Betti, J. a. Frenje, C. K. Li,
M. J.-E. Manuel, R. D. Petrasso, J. R. Rygg, and F. H.
S´eguin, Compressing magnetic ﬁelds with high-energy
lasers, Physics of Plasmas 17, 10.1063/1.3416557 (2010).
[7] B. B. Pollock, D. H. Froula, P. F. Davis, J. S.
Ross, S. Fulkerson, J. Bower, J. Satariano, D. Price,
K. Krushelnick, and S. H. Glenzer, High magnetic
ﬁeld generation for
laser-plasma experiments, Re-
view of Scientiﬁc Instruments 77, 114703 (2006),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2356854.

[8] B. Albertazzi, J. B´eard, A. Ciardi, T. Vinci, J. Albrecht,
J. Billette, T. Burris-Mog, S. N. Chen, D. Da Silva,
S. Dittrich, T. Herrmannsd¨orfer, B. Hirardin, F. Kroll,
M. Nakatsutsumi, S. Nitsche, C. Riconda, L. Romag-
nagni, H.-P. Schlenvoigt, S. Simond, E. Veuillot, T. E.

Cowan, O. Portugall, H. P´epin, and J. Fuchs, Produc-
tion of large volume, strongly magnetized laser-produced
plasmas by use of pulsed external magnetic ﬁelds,
Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 84, 043505 (2013),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4795551.

[9] G. Fiksel, A. Agliata, D. Barnak, G. Brent, P.-Y.
Chang, L. Folnsbee, G. Gates, D. Hasset, D. Lono-
bile, J. Magoon, D. Mastrosimone, M. J. Shoup, and
R. Betti, Note: Experimental platform for magnetized
high-energy-density plasma studies at the omega laser fa-
cility, Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 86, 016105 (2015),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4905625.

[10] S. Fujioka, Z. Zhang, K.

Ishihara, K. Shigemori,
Y. Hironaka, T. Johzaki, A. Sunahara, N. Yamamoto,
H. Nakashima, T. Watanabe, H. Shiraga, H. Nishimura,
and H. Azechi, Kilotesla Magnetic Field due to a
Capacitor-Coil Target Driven by High Power Laser, Sci-
entiﬁc Reports 3, 1170 (2013).

[11] J. J. Santos, M. Bailly-Grandvaux, L. Giuﬀrida,
P. Forestier-Colleoni, S. Fujioka, Z. Zhang, P. Korneev,
R. Bouillaud, S. Dorard, D. Batani, M. Chevrot, J. E.
Cross, R. Crowston, J.-L. Dubois, J. Gazave, G. Gre-
gori, E. d’ Humi`eres, S. Hulin, K. Ishihara, S. Ko-
jima, E. Loyez, J.-R. Marqu`es, A. Morace, P. Nicola¨ı,
O. Peyrusse, A. Poy´e, D. Raﬀestin, J. Ribolzi, M. Roth,
G. Schaumann, F. Serres, V. T. Tikhonchuk, P. Vacar,
and N. Woolsey, Laser-driven platform for generation and
characterization of strong quasi-static magnetic ﬁelds,
New Journal of Physics 17, 083051 (2015).

[12] K. F. F. Law, M. Bailly-Grandvaux, A. Morace,
S. Sakata, K. Matsuo, S. Kojima, S. Lee, X. Vaisseau,
Y. Arikawa, A. Yogo, K. Kondo, Z. Zhang, C. Bellei,
J. J. Santos, S. Fujioka, and H. Azechi, Direct measure-
ment of kilo-tesla level magnetic ﬁeld generated with
laser-driven capacitor-coil target by proton deﬂectome-
try, Applied Physics Letters 108, 091104 (2016).

[13] C. Goyon, B. B. Pollock, D. P. Turnbull, A. Hazi, L. Di-
vol, W. A. Farmer, D. Haberberger, J. Javedani, A. J.

Johnson, A. Kemp, M. C. Levy, B. Grant Logan, D. A.
Mariscal, O. L. Landen, S. Patankar, J. S. Ross, A. M.
Rubenchik, G. F. Swadling, G. J. Williams, S. Fujioka,
K. F. F. Law, and J. D. Moody, Ultrafast probing of mag-
netic ﬁeld growth inside a laser-driven solenoid, Phys.
Rev. E 95, 033208 (2017).

[14] V. T. Tikhonchuk, M. Bailly-Grandvaux, J. J. Santos,
and A. Poy´e, Quasistationary magnetic ﬁeld generation
with a laser-driven capacitor-coil assembly, Phys. Rev. E
96, 023202 (2017).

[15] J. J. Santos, M. Bailly-Grandvaux, M. Ehret, A. V. Are-
ﬁev, D. Batani, F. N. Beg, A. Calisti, S. Ferri, R. Florido,
P. Forestier-Colleoni, S. Fujioka, M. A. Gigosos, L. Giuf-
frida, L. Gremillet, J. J. Honrubia, S. Kojima, P. Ko-
rneev, K. F. F. Law, J. R. Marqu`es, A. Morace, C. Moss´e,
O. Peyrusse, S. Rose, M. Roth, S. Sakata, G. Schau-
mann, F. Suzuki-Vidal, V. T. Tikhonchuk, T. Ton-
cian, N. Woolsey, and Z. Zhang, Laser-driven strong
magnetostatic ﬁelds with applications to charged beam
transport and magnetized high energy-density physics,
Physics of Plasmas 25, 056705 (2018), arXiv:1712.07175
[physics.plasm-ph].

[16] P. Y. Chang, G. Fiksel, M. Hohenberger, J. P. Knauer,
R. Betti, F. J. Marshall, and D. D. Meyerhofer, Fusion
Yield Enhancement in Magnetized Laser-Driven Implo-
sions, Physical Review Letters 035006, 2 (2011).

[17] L. J. Perkins, D. D.-M. Ho, B. G. Logan, G. B. Zim-
merman, M. A. Rhodes, D. J. Strozzi, D. T. Blackﬁeld,
and S. A. Hawkins, The potential of imposed magnetic
ﬁelds for enhancing ignition probability and fusion en-
ergy yield in indirect-drive inertial conﬁnement fusion,
Physics of Plasmas 24, 062708 (2017).

[18] C. A. Walsh, K. Mcglinchey, J. K. Tong, B. D. Appelbe,
A. Crilly, M. Zhang, and J. P. Chittenden, Perturbation
Modiﬁcations by Pre-magnetisation in Inertial Conﬁne-
ment Fusion Implosions, Physics of Plasmas 96, 1 (2019).
[19] H. Sio, J. D. Moody, D. D. Ho, B. B. Pollock, C. A.
Walsh, B. Lahmann, D. J. Strozzi, G. E. Kemp, W. W.
Hsing, A. Crilly, J. P. Chittenden, and B. Appelbe, Diag-
nosing plasma magnetization in inertial conﬁnement fu-
sion implosions using secondary deuterium-tritium reac-
tions, Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 92, 043543 (2021).
[20] S. Chandrasekhar and J. Gillis, Hydrodynamic and Hy-

dromagnetic Stability, Vol. 15 (1962).

[21] T. Sano, T. Inoue, and K. Nishihara, Critical magnetic
ﬁeld strength for suppression of the richtmyer-meshkov
instability in plasmas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 205001
(2013).

[22] B. Srinivasan and X.-Z. Tang, The mitigating eﬀect of
magnetic ﬁelds on Rayleigh-Taylor unstable inertial con-
ﬁnement fusion plasmas, Physics of Plasmas 20, 056307
(2013).

[23] C. Walsh, A. Crilly, and J. Chittenden, Magne-
tized directly-driven ICF capsules: Increased instability
growth from non-uniform laser drive, Nuclear Fusion 60,
106006 (2020).

[24] S. A. Slutz, M. C. Herrmann, R. A. Vesey, A. B. Sefkow,
D. B. Sinars, D. C. Rovang, K. J. Peterson, and M. E.
Cuneo, Pulsed-power-driven cylindrical liner implosions
of laser preheated fuel magnetized with an axial ﬁeld,
Physics of Plasmas 17, 056303 (2010).

[25] M. R. Gomez, S. A. Slutz, A. B. Sefkow, D. B. Sinars,
K. D. Hahn, S. B. Hansen, E. C. Harding, P. F. Knapp,
P. F. Schmit, C. A. Jennings, T. J. Awe, M. Geissel, D. C.

18

Rovang, G. A. Chandler, G. W. Cooper, M. E. Cuneo,
A. J. Harvey-Thompson, M. C. Herrmann, M. H. Hess,
O. Johns, D. C. Lamppa, M. R. Martin, R. D. McBride,
K. J. Peterson, J. L. Porter, G. K. Robertson, G. A.
Rochau, C. L. Ruiz, M. E. Savage, I. C. Smith, W. A.
Stygar, and R. A. Vesey, Experimental demonstration of
fusion-relevant conditions in magnetized liner inertial fu-
sion, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 155003 (2014).

[26] M. R. Gomez, S. A. Slutz, A. B. Sefkow, K. D. Hahn,
S. B. Hansen, P. F. Knapp, P. F. Schmit, C. L. Ruiz,
D. B. Sinars, E. C. Harding, C. A. Jennings, T. J.
Awe, M. Geissel, D. C. Rovang, I. C. Smith, G. A.
Chandler, G. W. Cooper, M. E. Cuneo, A. J. Harvey-
Thompson, M. C. Herrmann, M. H. Hess, D. C. Lamppa,
M. R. Martin, R. D. McBride, K. J. Peterson, J. L.
Porter, G. A. Rochau, M. E. Savage, D. G. Schroen,
W. A. Stygar, and R. A. Vesey, Demonstration of ther-
monuclear conditions in magnetized liner inertial fu-
sion experiments, Physics of Plasmas 22, 056306 (2015),
https://aip.scitation.org/doi/pdf/10.1063/1.4919394.
[27] P. F. Knapp, P. F. Schmit, S. B. Hansen, M. R.
Gomez, K. D. Hahn, D. B. Sinars, K. J. Peterson,
S. A. Slutz, A. B. Sefkow, T. J. Awe, E. Hard-
ing, C. A. Jennings, M. P. Desjarlais, G. A. Chan-
dler, G. W. Cooper, M. E. Cuneo, M. Geissel, A. J.
Harvey-Thompson, J. L. Porter, G. A. Rochau, D. C.
Rovang, C. L. Ruiz, M. E. Savage, I. C. Smith, W. A.
Stygar, and M. C. Herrmann, Eﬀects of magnetiza-
tion on fusion product trapping and secondary neu-
tron spectra, Physics of Plasmas 22, 056312 (2015),
https://aip.scitation.org/doi/pdf/10.1063/1.4920948.
[28] M. R. Gomez, S. A. Slutz, C. A. Jennings, D. J. Ample-
ford, M. R. Weis, C. E. Myers, D. A. Yager-Elorriaga,
K. D. Hahn, S. B. Hansen, E. C. Harding, A. J. Harvey-
Thompson, D. C. Lamppa, M. Mangan, P. F. Knapp,
T. J. Awe, G. A. Chandler, G. W. Cooper, J. R. Fein,
M. Geissel, M. E. Glinsky, W. E. Lewis, C. L. Ruiz, D. E.
Ruiz, M. E. Savage, P. F. Schmit, I. C. Smith, J. D.
Styron, J. L. Porter, B. Jones, T. R. Mattsson, K. J.
Peterson, G. A. Rochau, and D. B. Sinars, Performance
Scaling in Magnetized Liner Inertial Fusion Experiments,
Physical Review Letters 125, 155002 (2020).

[29] J. R. Davies, D. H. Barnak, R. Betti, E. M. Campbell,
P.-Y. Chang, A. B. Sefkow, K. J. Peterson, D. B. Sinars,
and M. R. Weis, Laser-driven magnetized liner inertial
fusion, Physics of Plasmas 24, 062701 (2017).

[30] D. H. Barnak, J. R. Davies, R. Betti, M. J. Bonino, E. M.
Campbell, V. Y. Glebov, D. R. Harding, J. P. Knauer,
S. P. Regan, A. B. Sefkow, A. J. Harvey-Thompson, K. J.
Peterson, D. B. Sinars, S. A. Slutz, M. R. Weis, and P.-Y.
Chang, Laser-driven magnetized liner inertial fusion on
OMEGA, Physics of Plasmas 24, 056310 (2017).

[31] E. C. Hansen, D. H. Barnak, P.-Y. Chang, R. Betti,
E. M. Campbell, J. R. Davies, J. P. Knauer, J. L.
Peebles, S. P. Regan, and A. B. Sefkow, Opti-
implosions on the
mization of laser-driven cylindrical
omega laser, Physics of Plasmas 25, 122701 (2018),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5055776.

[32] J. R. Davies, D. H. Barnak, R. Betti, E. M. Campbell,
V. Y. Glebov, E. C. Hansen, J. P. Knauer, J. L. Peebles,
and A. B. Sefkow, Inferring fuel areal density from sec-
ondary neutron yields in laser-driven magnetized liner
inertial fusion, Physics of Plasmas 26, 022706 (2019),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5082960.

[33] E. C. Hansen, J. R. Davies, D. H. Barnak, R. Betti,
E. M. Campbell, V. Y. Glebov, J. P. Knauer, L. S. Leal,
J. L. Peebles, A. B. Sefkow, and K. M. Woo, Neutron
yield enhancement and suppression by magnetization in
laser-driven cylindrical implosions, Physics of Plasmas
27, 062703 (2020).

[34] C. A. Walsh, J. P. Chittenden, D. W. Hill, and
C. Ridgers, Extended-magnetohydrodynamics in under-
dense plasmas, Physics of Plasmas 27, 022103 (2020).
[35] L. Gao, P. M. Nilson, I. V. Igumenshchev, M. G. Haines,
D. H. Froula, R. Betti, and D. D. Meyerhofer, Precision
Mapping of Laser-Driven Magnetic Fields and Their Evo-
lution in High-Energy-Density Plasmas, Physical Review
Letters 114, 215003 (2015).

[36] P. T. Campbell, C. A. Walsh, B. k. Russell, J. P. Chitten-
den, A. Crilly, G. Fiksel, P. M. Nilson, A. G. R. Thomas,
K. Krushelnick, and L. Willingale, Magnetic signatures of
radiation-driven double ablation fronts, Physical Review
Letters 125, 145001 (2020).

[37] E. R. Tubman, A. S. Joglekar, A. F. A. Bott, M. Borgh-
esi, B. Coleman, G. Cooper, C. N. Danson, P. Durey,
J. M. Foster, P. Graham, G. Gregori, E. T. Gumbrell,
M. P. Hill, T. Hodge, S. Kar, R. J. Kingham, M. Read,
C. P. Ridgers, J. Skidmore, C. Spindloe, A. G. R.
Thomas, P. Treadwell, S. Wilson, L. Willingale, and
N. C. Woolsey, Observations of pressure anisotropy ef-
fects within semi-collisional magnetized plasma bubbles,
Nature Communications 12, 334 (2021).

[38] A. S. Joglekar, C. P. Ridgers, R. J. Kingham, and
A. G. R. Thomas, Kinetic modeling of Nernst eﬀect in
magnetized hohlraums, Physical Review E 93, 043206
(2016).

[39] D. W. Hill and R. J. Kingham, Enhancement of Pres-
sure Perturbations in Ablation due to Kinetic Magne-
tised Transport Eﬀects under Direct-Drive ICF relevant
conditions, Arxiv (2017).

[40] M. Sherlock and J. J. Bissell, Suppression of the Bier-
mann Battery and Stabilization of the Thermomagnetic
Instability in Laser Fusion Conditions, Physical Review
Letters 124, 055001 (2020).

[41] C. Walsh, J. Chittenden, K. McGlinchey, N. Niasse, and
B. Appelbe, Self-Generated Magnetic Fields in the Stag-
nation Phase of Indirect-Drive Implosions on the Na-
tional Ignition Facility, Physical Review Letters 118,
155001 (2017).

[42] S. P. Regan, J. A. Delettrez, R. Epstein, P. A. Jaan-
imagi, B. Yaakobi, V. A. Smalyuk, F. J. Marshall, D. D.
Meyerhofer, W. Seka, D. A. Haynes, I. E. Golovkin,
and C. F. Hooper, Characterization of direct-drive-
implosion core conditions on omega with time-resolved ar
k-shell spectroscopy, Physics of Plasmas 9, 1357 (2002),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1456530.

[43] L. Welser-Sherrill, R. C. Mancini, J. A. Koch, N. Izumi,
R. Tommasini, S. W. Haan, D. A. Haynes, I. E. Golovkin,
J. J. MacFarlane, J. A. Delettrez, F. J. Marshall, S. P.
Regan, V. A. Smalyuk, and G. Kyrala, Spectroscopic de-
termination of temperature and density spatial proﬁles
and mix in indirect-drive implosion cores, Phys. Rev. E
76, 056403 (2007).

[44] R. Florido, R. C. Mancini, T. Nagayama, R. Tommasini,
J. A. Delettrez, S. P. Regan, and B. Yaakobi, Mea-
surements of core and compressed-shell temperature and
density conditions in thick-wall target implosions at the
omega laser facility, Phys. Rev. E 83, 066408 (2011).

19

[45] R. Florido, R. C. Mancini, T. Nagayama, R. Tom-
masini, J. A. Delettrez, and S. P. Regan, Time-
resolved characterization and energy balance analy-
sis of
implosion core in shock-ignition experiments
at omega, Physics of Plasmas 21, 102709 (2014),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4898329.

[46] T. Nagayama, R. C. Mancini, R. Florido, D. Mayes,
R. Tommasini, J. A. Koch, J. A. Delettrez, S. P. Re-
gan, and V. A. Smalyuk, Direct asymmetry measure-
ment of temperature and density spatial distributions in
inertial conﬁnement fusion plasmas from pinhole space-
resolved spectra, Physics of Plasmas 21, 050702 (2014),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4875741.

[47] K. R. Carpenter, R. C. Mancini, E. C. Harding, A. J.
Harvey-Thompson, M. Geissel, M. R. Weis, S. B. Hansen,
K. J. Peterson, and G. A. Rochau, Magnetic ﬁeld impact
on the laser heating in maglif, Physics of Plasmas 27,
052704 (2020).

[48] K. R. Carpenter, R. C. Mancini, E. C. Harding, A. J.
Harvey-Thompson, M. Geissel, M. R. Weis, S. B. Hansen,
K. J. Peterson, and G. A. Rochau, Temperature distri-
butions and gradients in laser-heated plasmas relevant
to magnetized liner inertial fusion, Phys. Rev. E 102,
023209 (2020).

[49] A. Ciardi, S. V. Lebedev, A. Frank, E. G. Blackman, J. P.
Chittenden, C. J. Jennings, D. J. Ampleford, S. N. Bland,
S. C. Bott, J. Rapley, G. N. Hall, F. A. Suzuki-Vidal,
A. Marocchino, T. Lery, and C. Stehle, The evolution of
magnetic tower jets in the laboratory, Physics of Plasmas
14, 10.1063/1.2436479 (2007).

[50] J. P. Chittenden, S. V. Lebedev, C. A. Jennings, S. N.
Bland, and A. Ciardi, X-ray generation mechanisms in
three-dimensional simulations of wire array Z-pinches,
Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 46, B457 (2004).
[51] J. D. Sadler, C. A. Walsh, and H. Li, Symmetric
Set of Transport Coeﬃcients for Collisional Magnetized
Plasma, Physical Review Letters 126, 075001 (2021).
[52] C. A. Walsh, J. D. Sadler, and J. R. Davies, Updated
Magnetized Transport Coeﬃcients:
Impact on Laser-
Plasmas with Self-Generated or Applied Magnetic Fields,
In Submission.

[53] E. M. Epperlein and M. G. Haines, Plasma transport
coeﬃcients in a magnetic ﬁeld by direct numerical solu-
tion of the Fokker–Planck equation, Physics of Fluids 29,
10.1063/1.865901 (1986).

[54] P. Sharma and G. W. Hammett, Preserving monotonic-
ity in anisotropic diﬀusion, Journal of Computational
Physics 227, 10.1016/j.jcp.2007.07.026 (2007).

[55] C. A. Walsh, Extended Magneto-Hydrodynamic Eﬀects in
Indirect-Drive Inertial Conﬁnement Fusion Experiments,
Ph.D. thesis, Imperial College London (2018).

[56] C. Jennings, Radiation Transport Eﬀects in Wire Ar-
ray Z Pinches and Magneto-Hdrodynamic Modlling Tech-
niques, Phd thesis, Imperial College London (2006).
[57] E. C. Hansen, D. H. Barnak, R. Betti, E. M. Campbell,
P.-Y. Chang, J. R. Davies, V. Y. Glebov, J. P. Knauer,
J. Peebles, S. P. Regan, and A. B. Sefkow, Measuring
implosion velocities in experiments and simulations of
laser-driven cylindrical implosions on the OMEGA laser,
Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 60, 054014 (2018).
[58] J. MacFarlane, VISRAD—A 3-D view factor code and
design tool for high-energy density physics experiments,
Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radiative
Transfer 81, 287 (2003).

[59] R. Betti, M. Umansky, V. Lobatchev, V. N. Goncharov,
and R. L. McCrory, Hot-spot dynamics and deceleration-
phase Rayleigh–Taylor instability of imploding inertial
conﬁnement fusion capsules, Physics of Plasmas 8, 5257
(2001).

[60] J. R. Davies, R. Betti, P.-Y. Chang, and G. Fiksel, The
importance of electrothermal terms in Ohm’s law for
magnetized spherical implosions, Physics of Plasmas 22,
10.1063/1.4935286 (2015).

[61] J. B. Huba, NRL FORMULARY (2013).
[62] L. J. Perkins, B. G. Logan, G. B. Zimmerman, and C. J.
Werner, Two-dimensional simulations of thermonuclear
burn in ignition-scale inertial conﬁnement fusion targets
under compressed axial magnetic ﬁelds, Physics of Plas-
mas 20, 0 (2013).

[63] M. G. Haines, Heat ﬂux eﬀects in Ohm’s law, Plasma

Physics and Controlled Fusion 28, 1705 (1986).

[64] S. I. Braginskii, Transport Processes in a Plasma, in Re-
views of Plasma Physics, Vol. 1 (1965) pp. 205–205.
[65] C. E. Seyler, M. R. Martin, and N. D. Hamlin, Heli-
cal instability in MagLIF due to axial ﬂux compression
by low-density plasma, Physics of Plasmas 25, 062711
(2018).

[66] J. P. Chittenden and M. G. Haines, I Nernst and Etting-
hausen eﬀects in the dense Z-pinch: Their impact upon
equilibria and runaway electrons, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys.
J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys 26, 1048 (1993).

[67] N. D. Hamlin, C. E. Seyler, and B. Khiar, The inﬂuence
of the Hall term on the development of magnetized laser-
produced plasma jets, Physics of Plasmas 25, 042906
(2018).

[68] A. R. Bell, R. J. Kingham, H. C. Watkins, and J. H.
Matthews, Instability in a magnetised collisional plasma
driven by a heat ﬂow or a current, Plasma Physics and
Controlled Fusion 62, 095026 (2020).

[69] B. Appelbe and J. Chittenden, Relativistically correct
DD and DT neutron spectra, High Energy Density
Physics 11, 30 (2014).

[70] M. A. Gigosos, D. Gonz´alez-Herrero, N. Lara, R. Florido,
A. Calisti, S. Ferri, and B. Talin, Classical molecular
dynamics simulations of hydrogen plasmas and develop-
ment of an analytical statistical model for computational

20

validity assessment, Phys. Rev. E 98, 033307 (2018).
[71] T. R. Joshi, Hydrodynamic stability and Ti-tracer distri-
bution in low-adiabat OMEGA direct-drive implosions,
Ph.D. thesis, University of Nevada, Reno (2015).

[72] R. Florido, R. Rodr´ıguez, J. M. Gil, J. G. Rubiano,
P. Martel, E. M´ınguez, and R. C. Mancini, Modeling
of population kinetics of plasmas that are not in local
thermodynamic equilibrium, using a versatile collisional-
radiative model based on analytical rates, Phys. Rev. E
80, 056402 (2009).

[73] R. Florido, R. Mancini, T. Nagayama, R. Tommasini,
J. Delettrez, S. Regan, V. Smalyuk, R. Rodr´ıguez,
and J. Gil, Argon k-shell and bound-free emission from
omega direct-drive implosion cores, High Energy Density
Physics 6, 70 (2010).

[74] C. J. Fontes, H. L. Zhang, J. A. Jr, R. E. H. Clark,
D. P. Kilcrease, J. Colgan, R. T. Cunningham, P. Hakel,
N. H. Magee, and M. E. Sherrill, The los alamos suite
of relativistic atomic physics codes, Journal of Physics
B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics 48, 144014
(2015).

[75] M. F. Gu, The ﬂexible atomic code, Can. J. Phys. 86,

675 (2008).

[76] J. C. Stewart and J. Pyatt, Kedar D., Lowering of Ion-
ization Potentials in Plasmas, Astrophys. J. 144, 1203
(1966).

[77] R. C. Mancini, R. F. Joyce, and C. F. Hooper, Escape fac-
tors for stark-broadened line proﬁles, Journal of Physics
B: Atomic and Molecular Physics 20, 2975 (1987).
[78] R. Mancini, D. Kilcrease, L. Woltz, and C. Hooper, Cal-
culational aspects of the stark line broadening of multi-
electron ions in plasmas, Computer Physics Communica-
tions 63, 314 (1991).

[79] D. B. Boercker, C. A. Iglesias, and J. W. Dufty, Radia-
tive and transport properties of ions in strongly coupled
plasmas, Phys. Rev. A 36, 2254 (1987).

[80] M. A. Gigosos, R. C. Mancini, J. M. Mart´ın-Gonz´alez,
and R. Florido, Stark-broadening of ar k-shell lines: A
comparison between molecular dynamics simulations and
merl results, Atoms 9, 10.3390/atoms9010009 (2021).

