1
2
0
2

g
u
A
3
1

]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[

1
v
2
1
1
6
0
.
8
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

EXPERIMENTAL DEMONSTRATION OF HIGH-ENTROPY TIME OF
ARRIVAL BASED OPTICAL QRNG QUALIFYING STRINGENT
STATISTICAL TESTS

A PREPRINT

Anindita Banerjee ∗

Anuj Sethia

Vijayalaxmi Mogiligidda

Rajesh Kumar Krishnan

Meiyappan AR

Sairam Rajamani

Vivek Shenoy

QuNu Labs Pvt. Ltd., M.G. Road, Bangalore, India

ABSTRACT

We report a demonstration of a high-entropy optical quantum random number generator (QRNG)
based on photon arrival time. We have implemented the scheme with high-speed and high-precision
electronics with a time resolution of 1 ps generating 115 Mbps raw data. The random bit generation
efﬁciency is 8 bits per detection. The experimental data is quite consistent with theoretical estimation
showing minimum bias. We apply a real-time information-theoretic randomness extractor to generate
a ﬁnal data rate of 109 Mbps. The randomness is rigorously evaluated against well-known statistical
test suites of NIST, ENT, Diehard, TU-01 and Dieharder.

Keywords Quantum random number generator · Poisson · Entropy · Toeplitz

1

Introduction

The increasing demand for high entropy random numbers for stronger computational capabilities in science, engineering,
and data protection is of global importance. The state-of-the-art random number generators utilize a perfect source of
entropy based on inherent randomness of quantum mechanics [1]. Traditionally, complex mathematical algorithms
generate random numbers, known as pseudo-random number generators (PRNGs). These algorithms consume a short
random seed and produce a long sequence of numbers that appear random. Its security is based on the high entropy and
secrecy of the seed. True random number generators (TRNG) generate numbers by collecting uncorrelated data from
physical processes. QRNGs are a particular class of TRNG, producing random numbers from a quantum process. The
inherent randomness of the quantum process is considered an unconditional and sustainable entropic source.

In 1956, Ishida et al. [2] provided a stepping stone by utilizing the radioactivity of Cobalt-60 as an accessible source of
quantum randomness. Thereafter, several proposals of QRNG came into existence [1]. The most promising QRNGs in
terms of throughput and ﬂexibility relies on quantum optics. The randomness extraction in optical QRNG based on
photon arrival times and the QRNG based on radioactive decay are based on random arrival occurrences of events [1].

Recently, the arrival time information of the photon at the detector is used to generate high-speed random numbers
[3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Compared to the path-based QRNG scheme, whose generation rate is bound by the detector count rate, the
speed of this photon arrival time-based QRNG scheme can reach n-fold higher, where N depends on the time resolution
of the measurement. The N -fold increase in information extraction from a quantum state enables high-speed random
number generator. In these works, photons emitted from a continuous laser diode are measured by a single-photon
detector and the time intervals between successive detection events are recorded as the raw data. However, the arrival
time of photon follows a Poisson distribution hence, to obtain uniform distribution we require post-processing which
reduces the length of ﬁnal random numbers.

∗aninditabanerjee.physics@gmail.com

 
 
 
 
 
 
Experimental demonstration of high-entropy time of arrival based optical QRNG qualifying stringent statistical tests
A PREPRINT

Researchers have investigated different approaches to eliminate this bias and create a uniform distribution. Nie et al.
[8] have generated quantum random numbers relative to an external reference clock. Instead of measuring the time
difference of consecutive photons, the time difference between photon detection and an external time reference is
measured as the raw data. The method generates approximate uniform random digits based on the precision of time
resolution. This quantity is shown to follow a uniform distribution.

In this work, we present a self-contained QRNG device with a raw data throughput of 115 Mbps. This article contains
seven sections. In section 2, we describe the optical source and understand the photon statistics. In section 3, a
mathematical model of randomness source and probability model is described. The experimental setup is explained in
section 4 and the implementation of scheme is presented in section 5. Section 6 discusses the possible sources of bias in
the setup and their countermeasures. In section 7 we calculate the min-entropy for randomness extraction and discuss
the extractor. Section 8 contains results from the stringent statistical test suits applied on the random bit sequence for
multiple runs. We conclude our work in section 9.

2 Optical source

The optical ﬁeld is described at quantum level in terms of photons. Fock states, |n(cid:105) are states that contain n photons
with same frequency, polarization and temporal proﬁle. Coherent states are represented as superposition of Fock states
by:

|α(cid:105) = e

−|α|2
2

∞
(cid:88)

n=0

αn
√
n!

|n(cid:105)

(1)

where, α is a complex number. The amplitude |α|2 is the mean photon number of the state. A coherent state follow
Poisson distribution, with high attenuation they can be approximated as single photon Fock states.

3 Source of randomness

A Poisson process is used to model arrival times, which can be deﬁned as a sequence of random variable (rv)
0 < S1 < S2..Sn where Si < Si+1. Any arrival process (Sn) can be speciﬁed by inter-arrival times {Xi; i ≥ 1} or
counting times {N (t); t > 0} where, {Sn ≤ t} = {N (t) ≥ n}. Sn is the sum of n i.i.d rv each with exponential time
distribution λe−λt. Hence, the density function of arrival time at nth epoch [9] is given by

fSn (t) =

λntn−1e−λt
(n − 1)!

.

(2)

This is a gamma distribution with n and λ parameter. We have considered arrival time of photon relative to an external
reference clock. The exponential distribution of inter-arrival is ﬂattened by choosing an external reference clock with
the period (T), as proposed in [8]. The number of photons arriving within a period T follows Poisson distribution. Thus,
the probability of n photons arriving in time T is given by:

p{N (T ) = n} =

(λT )ne−λT
n!

.

(3)

We further divide the T time period into Nb small time segments called time bin τ1, τ2, τ3....τNb where, Nb is the total
number of divisions and T
is the duration of each time bin. Precisely, (i − 1) tbin ≤ τi ≤ itbin where 1 ≤ i ≤ Nb and
Nb
tbin = T
. Given a photon detection in T , we consider the arrival time of nth photon as Sn = τ . With the detector
Nb
dead-time greater then T, only single detection is possible, hence, N (T ) = 1. The probability distribution function
(PDF) of τi conditioned on single detection at T is given by

P (τi|N (T ) = 1) =

P (N (T − (i − 1)tbin) = 1, N (T − itbin) = 1)
P (N (T ) = 0)

=

tbin
T

.

2

(4)

Experimental demonstration of high-entropy time of arrival based optical QRNG qualifying stringent statistical tests
A PREPRINT

Figure 1: Schematic for system architecture.

Therefore, given a photon detected in T , the photon appears in each bin with equal probability, hence, desired uniform
distribution is achieved.

4 System architecture

In Fig. 1 we have presented the self-contained QRNG architecture. We have divided it into 5 sections: (a) optics
section consists of active and passive optical components, (b) electronics section consists of high speed electronics
comprising of Field programmable gate arrays (FPGA) supporting driving electronics, (c) Data logic section consists of
algorithms generating random number generation, binning, extraction and data validation. In (d) we ﬁnally store the
data and perform key management and key request applications and in (e) we perform up-gradation of the system. In
the optical path, we have used an SFP (small form-factor pluggable module) as a light source with 850 nm wavelength
operating in continuous mode. The optical source [11] is heavily attenuated with an arrangement of ﬁxed and variable
attenuator providing ﬂexibility to ﬁne tune the optical amplitude with the resolution of 1 dbm. The arrangement enables
proper calibration and tuning for desired mean photon number (< 1). We have used high-efﬁciency Silicon based
single-photon detectors from Excelitas Technologies SPCM-AQRH [10]. The particular module under free-running
mode is characterized by a detection efﬁciency of 38%, dead-time of Td = 24 ns, and dark count rate of 64 cps. Once a
photon is detected, SPD transmits an interrupt signal to the time-to-digital converter (TDC) chip. The TDC is conﬁgured
to measure events with a precision of 1 ps. The TDC output is given to phase time extraction to identify and extract the
ﬁne time stamps. Once the time-stamps are recorded, we apply the randomness extraction algorithm where they are
divided into bins and eventually converted into binary and post processing is applied. These algorithms are performed
on FPGA. In validation section, entropy tests and optional (standard test suites) are performed which determines the
pass or fail criterion for generated sequence. If it passes all tests then we store the data. We can retrieve the status
and diagnosis report when required. Raw data or conditioned data can be procured from the system and evaluated
separately. Finally, we have independent ports for key request interface and key management interface. A separate track

3

Experimental demonstration of high-entropy time of arrival based optical QRNG qualifying stringent statistical tests
A PREPRINT

Table 1: Analysis for different conﬁguration of T and Nb.

S. No. NbNbNb
256
256
512
1024
256
512
1024

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

tbin (ps)
tbin (ps) T (ns)
tbin (ps)

CoV

78.125
78
39
19
64
32
16

20
19.968
19.968
19.456
16.384
16.384
16.384

0.018093926
0.009843709
0.012292352
0.022475629
0.009436647
0.011936302
0.019921429

is considered for local up-gradation. The upgrade travels through authentication of device, key validation, upgrade
server. Thereafter, the system is upgraded.

5 Scheme implementation

In the present QRNG, the reference clock period is set to 16.384 ns. The optical power is set such that ηλT = 0.7,
where η is the detector efﬁciency. The ﬁxed clock period, T, is then divided into Nb(= 2n) equal time bins τi as
described in section 3. Measuring the arrival time via an external clock is mathematically similar to performing a
modulo with T. Thus, to achieve high precision and ﬂexibility, a modulo operation of photon arrival time with time
period T is performed.

In section 3, it is proven that the photons arriving in these short time bin τi have a uniform probability distribution of
1/Nb. Thus, the uniform distribution of the random numbers generated via this scheme is theoretically guaranteed
without any post-processing. For single photon detection in period T, it is essential that T ≤ Td. Also, the precision and
jitter of the time measurements determine the upper bound on the number of time bins, Nb. To ﬁnd an optimal value
for T and Nb, we analysed different conﬁgurations on the basis of entropy per bit and coefﬁcient of variance (CoV)
in uniform distribution of number. The results are tabulated in Table 1. We have found that with T = 16.384 ns and
Nb = 256 least bias is observed.

6 Source of Bias

A deeper understanding and further enhancements of present QRNG demands identifying and eliminating various
biases and imperfections in the system. We have listed some of the imperfections in implementation affecting the
randomness and also their countermeasures here:

1. A stable light source in optical QRNG corresponds to a reliable entropy source. Variations in optical power
alter the photon statistic arriving at the detector, resulting in a deviation from the assumed scheme. To avoid
any ﬂuctuations optical source is temperature controlled and is supplied with high ﬁdelity injection current.

2. An untold assumption for a time of arrival QRNG is using a single-photon source. Due to practicality, an
attenuated coherent source is used, creating a non-zero probability of multi-photon. However, we have
considered the mean photon number less than unity, thus, considerably reducing the chances of multi-photon.

3. A practical single-photon detector has a limited detection efﬁciency (η) of less than 100%. For theoretical cal-
culations, η is considered a part of attenuation, while detectors are assumed to be 100% efﬁcient. Equivalently,
the mean photon number equals λη.

4. Non-zero dark count probability is yet another limitation/device-imperfection in SPDs. The dark count rate is
the average rate of registered counts without incident photons. The Silicon based SPD has a dark count rate of
64 clicks per second. For a better implementation of the scheme or uniform distribution of random digits, it
will be appropriate to opt for lower dark count rate.

5. Avalanche-based SPD has a non-zero dead-time after each photon click where, the detector goes blind, limiting
the maximum count rate. Wayne et al. [3] showed that as the count rate approaches the inverse of the dead
time, the majority of the photons will fall into the lower-valued time bins, reducing the entropy per click. The
entropy rate peaks near half the maximum count rate of the detector.

6. Timing jitter is deﬁned as the uncertainty in registering the timing of the photon events. The two sources of
time jitter in the current setup are SPD and TDC. Choosing a bin size higher than the maximum jitter would

4

Experimental demonstration of high-entropy time of arrival based optical QRNG qualifying stringent statistical tests
A PREPRINT

Figure 2: Randomness extraction methodology

eliminate bias due to time-uncertainty of detector. In this work, the randomness is also contributed by the
timing jitter, however, this is not a technology limitation and can be circumvented by upgrading the detector.

7 Randomness estimation and extraction

Evaluating the min-entropy of the raw data helps in quantifying the randomness of the data. The min entropy is deﬁned
as:

Hmin(X) = −log2 (maxx∈0,1N Pr[X = x])

(5)

which can be utilized to estimate the extraction ratio between raw random bits and the ﬁnal random bits. After the
min-entropy evaluation, a Toeplitz hashing is performed to ﬁlter the raw data. Toeplitz hashing is a randomness extractor
function that produces almost uniform string as the output. The extractor makes use of an additional independent
random seed as input called seeded extractors. This function is given by,

EXT : {0, 1}n × {0, 1}d → {0, 1}m

(6)

which takes n bits from the raw sequence as input and a uniform random seed that is of d bits to produce an output of
m bits. We call a (k, (cid:15))-extractor to a function, for any input k source (a raw sequence of at least, min-entropy k), to
produce ﬁnal sequence that is (cid:15)-close to uniform. Given a binary Toeplitz matrix of size m × n, m random bits are
obtained as result of multiplying the matrix and n raw bits. The output sequence of length m depends on the following
parameters:

• n- size of raw data
• k- min-entropy of raw data
• (cid:15)-security parameter

By substituting the above parameters in the equation of leftover hash lemma we could determine the length of m
random bits as

m = n Hmin(X) − 2 log2(1/(cid:15))

(7)

The Toeplitz matrix can be constructed by a sequence of m + n − 1 random bits due to its characteristic that all the
elements of each descending diagonal from left to right are the same. In the usual Toeplitz matrix, its security is based
on the randomness of the elements in the ﬁrst column and the ﬁrst row. In LFSR-based Toeplitz, we only initialize
the ﬁrst column of the Toeplitz matrix with a seed generated from PRNG/in built QRNG, and the LFSR outputs a
sequence that acts as the ﬁrst row of the Toeplitz. The LFSR considers the initialized column and the chosen irreducible
polynomial as input to produce the sequence.

In Figure 2, we have presented an implementation of extraction, where the data of size 115 Mb is divided into 9712
blocks. Each block is of size 11840. The Toeplitz matrix of size 11219 × 11840 has been constructed. Further, the bit(s)
multiplication happens for each of the 9712 blocks with the Toeplitz matrix. Finally, the output of each multiplication
process is concatenated to obtain the ﬁnal output i.e., 11219 bits from each block which results in 11219 × 9712 = 108.9
Mb. The extraction ratio comes out to be 0.94 and the the extraction efﬁciency is 0.89. The corresponding extraction

5

Experimental demonstration of high-entropy time of arrival based optical QRNG qualifying stringent statistical tests
A PREPRINT

Figure 3: Auto correlation plot with Lag = 100.

ratio is smaller than the min-entropy of the raw data. The min-entropy of the raw data ranges from 0.95 − 0.99.
Therefore, the randomness of the extracted quantum random number can be guaranteed. Considering a single block of
Toeplitz implementation, we have chosen m = 11219, n = 11840 and the worst case min-entropy of 0.95 is considered
by substituting the values in the equation of leftover hash lemma one can calculate the information theoretic security
bound ((cid:15)) which is given by 2−15.

8 Randomness evaluation

Assessing randomness of RNG is a well studied subject and numerous statistical tools are present to categorically
determine the quality of randomness. We have adopted a strategy of extensive testing of our QRNG via all the available
stringent test suites including: NIST SP 800-22, Dieharder, ENT and Test U-01. Apart from this we also perform
statistical test like: entropy estimation, auto-correlation and probability distribution. The results of individual tests and
their implication is present below.

8.1 Auto Correlation

Auto correlation is a widely used technique in signal processing to ﬁnd repeating patterns or periodic signal. It ﬁnds the
correlation of a signal with a delayed copy of itself as a function of delay. A similar analysis is also useful to check
the correlation between random number or to identify patterns. We plot (Fig. 3) the correlation of numbers with a lag
(delay) of upto 100 numbers along with 99% bounds.

8.2 Probability distribution

Apart from this, we also plot pi for different bin number as shown in Fig. 4 and calculate the coefﬁcient of variance
for pi. This exercise help us visualise the uniform distribution of the probability and quantify the variance due to
imperfections

8.3 ENT

ENT [12] is a test-suite primarily designed to evaluate randomness of PRNG. First test is entropy which calculates
the number of bits of information contained in the byte(bit). TRNGs are expected to yield greater than 7.9.(1) bits
of information per byte(bit). This decides the compression of the ﬁle which should not be zero. The Chi square test
is the most stringent test to determine the uniformity of data. This is an important metric to indicate bias in system.
The arithmetic mean performs just what the name suggest. We consider it to be 0.5 at bit level and at the byte level it
should be close to 127.5 for the data to be uniform. This test is followed by Monte Carlo method. The serial correlation
coefﬁcient, indicates dependence of the present value with the previous value and it is expected to be as close to 0 and
less than 0.005 for TRNG. In Table 2, we have compared results with expected ideal result.

6

Experimental demonstration of high-entropy time of arrival based optical QRNG qualifying stringent statistical tests
A PREPRINT

Figure 4: Distribution of probability of time bins from 0-255.

Table 2: ENT test results

Variable

Entropy (per bit)
Chi-square distribution
Arithmetic mean value
Monte Carlo value for π
Serial correlation coefﬁcient

8.4 NIST Test Suite

QRNG

1.0000
55.95%
0.4980
3.141513243
0.0000065

Ideal

1.0000
10% ~90%
0.5000
3.1415926536
0.000000

NIST’s STS (SP 800-22 suite) [13, 14] comprises of 15 statistical tests formulated to assess the speciﬁc null hypothesis
of the sequence being random. Analysis of results is approached by two methods namely,

1. proportion of Sequences Passing a Test and

2. uniform distribution of P-values

The NIST standard deﬁnes a range of allowable proportion using the conﬁdence interval,

(cid:114)

p ± 3

p(1 − p)
m

(8)

where p = 1 − α and m is the sample size. If the proportion pitch outside of this space, then there is an indication
that the data is non-random. For a sample size of 1000, with the signiﬁcance level (α) as 0.01, the range of acceptable
proportion deﬁned using the conﬁdence interval is .99 ± 0.0094392 (i.e.,above 980).

Individual test calculates a statistic value using the input data. The test statistic is used to calculate a P-value that
summarizes the strength of the evidence against the null hypothesis. A signiﬁcance level is chosen for the tests. If
P-value is greater than of equal to signiﬁcance value then the null hypothesis is accepted; i.e., the sequence appears to
be random else, the sequence appears to be non-random. Results of the suite averaged over 100 ﬁles of 1 Gb each are
presented in Fig. 5 and the conﬁdence ratio is presented in Fig. 6.

8.5 Diehard

We have evaluated the generated bit stream with Diehard test suite . One billion continuous bit streams were tested and
in Fig. 7 we have presented the results.

8.6 Dieharder

Dieharder [15] is known as the gold standard for evaluating RNG. The Dieharder battery of tests is a collection of 31
individual tests. Similar to NIST test, it returns p-value for the hypothesis testing weather the given sequence is random

7

Experimental demonstration of high-entropy time of arrival based optical QRNG qualifying stringent statistical tests
A PREPRINT

Figure 5: P-value for NIST test results

Figure 6: Conﬁdence plot for NIST test results

Figure 7: P-vale Diehard results

8

Experimental demonstration of high-entropy time of arrival based optical QRNG qualifying stringent statistical tests
A PREPRINT

Figure 8: P-vale Dieharder results

Table 3: Test U-01 test results

Test Name

Rabbit Battery Test
Alphabit Battery Test
FIPS 140-2
Small Crush Battery Tests

Result

All Passed
All Passed
All Passed
All Passed

or not. Additionally, Dieharder convert a set of P-values into a single P-value by comparing their distribution to the
expected one, using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test against the expected uniform distribution of P. Dieharder classiﬁes the
test results as passed, weak or fail. We have summarised the results on our QRNG for over 100 Gb of data in Fig. 8.

8.7 Test U-01

The TestU-01 suite [16] is one of the most stringent collection of tests to assess RNG statistical properties. TestU-01
Small Crush has many tests common with Dieharder, SP 800-22 and FIPS 140-2, and tests recommended under AIS-31
(via appended recommendations documents). The results are presented in Table. 3.

9 Conclusion

Summarizing the experimental results we report generation of high entropy and consistently uniform random numbers
from quantum entropy based on arrival time of photons relative to an external reference time period. In Table 4, we have
compared the results with existing work and it is found it be consistent with the expectations. We have investigated the
randomness of the generator before and after conditioning and examined its sources of bias. We have brieﬂy discussed
Toeplitz hashing implementation in FPGA. We report the statistical distance between the extracted random sequence and
the uniform sequence is bounded by ((cid:15)) which is given by 2−15. The extraction efﬁciency is 0.89. We have validated
the results extensively against stringent randomness test suites namely NIST, ENT, Diehard, Dieharder, TU-01 and the
results are consistently encouraging.

Table 4: Bench-marking the results with existing works.

Banerjee et al.

Nie et al. [8]

Yan et al. [17]

Raw Data (Mbps)
Bit generation efﬁciency
Min-entropy
Conditioned data
Test Suites

109
8
.88
96
NIST, ENT

128
8

NIST

115
8
.95
109
NIST,ENT,
Diehard,TU-01
Dieharder

9

Experimental demonstration of high-entropy time of arrival based optical QRNG qualifying stringent statistical tests
A PREPRINT

References

[1] M. Herrero-Collantes and J. C. Garcia-Escartin, Quantum random number generators, Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 015004

(2017).

[2] M. Ishida, Random number generator, Annals of Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 8 (119–126) 1956.
[3] M. A. Wayne, E. R. Jeffrey, G. M. Akselrod and P. G. Kwiat, Photon arrival time quantum random number

generation, J. Mod. Opt. 56:4, 516–522 (2009).

[4] M. Wahl, M. Leifgen, M. Berlin, T. Röhlicke, H.-J. Rahn and O. Benson, An ultrafast quantum random number
generator with provably bounded output bias based on photon arrival time measurements, Appl. Phys. Lett. 98,
171105 (2011).

[5] S. Li, L. Wang, L.-An Wu, H.-Q. Ma, and G.-J. Zhai, True random number generator based on discretized encoding

of the time interval between photons, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 30, 124 (2013).

[6] M. A. Wayne and P. G. Kwait, Low-bias high-speed quantum random number generator via shaped optical pulses,

Opt. Express 18, 9351 (2010).

[7] Hai-Qiang Ma, Yuejian Xie, and Ling-An Wu, Random number generation based on the time of arrival of single

photons, Appl. Opt. 44, 7760-7763 (2005)

[8] Y. Nie, H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Wang, X. Ma, J. Zhang and J. Pan, Practical and fast quantum random number

generation based on photon arrival time relative to external reference, Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 051110 (2014).

[9] R. G. Gallager, Stochastic processes: theory for applications,Cambridge University Press, 2013.
[10] Excelitas Technologies’ Single Photon Counting Module, https://www.excelitas.com/product/spcm-aqrh
[11] Finisar’s FTLX8574D3BCL 10Gb/s SFP module, https://ii-vi.com/product/10gbase-sr-sw-400m-multimode-

datacom-sfp-optical-transceiver/

[12] J. Walker, ENT: A Pseudorandom Number Sequence Test Program, http://www.fourmilab.ch/random.
[13] NIST:

Random Number

https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/Random-Bit-

Generation

Testing,

and

Generation/Documentation-and-Software.

[14] A. Rukhin, J. Soto, J. Nechvatal, M. Smid, E. Barker, S. Leigh, M. Levenson, M. Vangel, D. Banks, A. Heckert, J.

Dray and S. Vo, NIST Special Publication 800-22 (NIST, 2008), http://csrc.nist.gov/rng/.
[15] G. Marsaglia, DIEHARD: a battery of tests of randomness, http://stat. fsu. edu/geo, 1996.
[16] P. L’Ecuyer and R. Simard, TestU01: AC library for empirical testing of random number generators, ACM

Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS), ACM New York, NY, USA 33(1-40) 2007.

[17] Q. Yan, B. Zhao, Z. Hua, Q.g Liao, and H. Yang, High-speed quantum-random number generation by continuous

measurement of arrival time of photons, Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 86, 073113 (2015)

10

