International Journal of Computing Sciences Research (ISSN print: 2546-0552; ISSN online: 2546-115X) 
Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 595-612 
doi: 10.25147/ijcsr.2017.001.1.63 
https://stepacademic.net 

Concept Paper 
Augmented Reality and Gamification: A Framework for 
Developing Supplementary Learning Tool   

Carlo H. Godoy Jr. 
Technological University of the Philippines, Philippines 
carlo.godoyjr@tup.edu.ph 

Date received: June 5, 2020 
Date received in revised form: November 15, 2020 
Date accepted: December 15, 2020 

Recommended citation: 

Godoy  Jr,  C.  (2021).  Augmented  reality  and  gamification:  A  framework  for 
developing supplementary learning tool. International Journal of Computing Sciences 
Research, 5(1), 595-612. doi: 10.25147/ijcsr.2017.001.1.63 

Abstract  

Purpose  –  The  study’s  main  purpose  is  to  develop  a  supplementary  learning  tool 
framework  by  the  use  of  a  dynamic  mobile  application  using  Unity  AR  and  Vuforia  for 
Senior High School (SHS) students and teachers to help the learning process in SHS Earth 
Science. 

Method  –  The  researchers  will  be  using  the  Software  Development  Life  Cycle  (SDLC) 
Model of methodology to ensure the quality of the software as well as the correctness of 
the development process. 

Results – The expected result of the study is that Augmented Reality and Gamification will 
now be used as a supplementary learning tool in SHS Earth Science.  

Conclusion  –  Augmented  Reality  and  Gamification  can  now  be  used  as  a  supplementary 
learning tool in SHS Earth Science using the designed framework. 

Recommendations – Future studies will focus on the development of the framework and 
the mobile application.  

Research Implications – Since the system has a lot of potential in the education sector and 
due  to  the  effects  of  COVID-19,  the  software  will  serve  as  a  pioneer  to  show  that  a 
supplementary  tool  will  help  students  learn  logically  and  entertainingly  especially  since 
schools nowadays are transitioning with either distance learning or blended learning. 

is 

an  Open  Access 

This 
License 
the 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use,  distribution,  and  reproduction in any  medium,  provided the 
original work is properly credited. 

the  Creative  Commons  Attribution 

article  distributed  under 

terms  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords  –  scavenger  hunt,  science,  earth  science,  augmented  reality,  game-based 
learning,  mathematics,  supplementary  tool,  learning  aid,  chemistry,  physics,  biology, 
physical science 

INTRODUCTION  

An  Augmented  Reality  or  simply  called  AR 

is  a  system  that  allows  an 
electronically-presented material to be introduced within the interaction of the user and 
the real world (Carbonell Carrera & Bermejo Asensio, 2017). During the start of the new 
millennium,  people  are  dreaming  of  this  technology  to  be  available  since  it  was 
overwhelming how this technology works during that era and no existing technology is 
comparable to this aside from fiction movies. As that movie introduces the nation to the 
technology,  it  became  evident  that  people  want  this  to  be  a  reality  and  it  happened 
(Peddie, 2017). From that time, the desire of humanity for that technology gave birth to a 
new  phenomenon  that  nobody  knows  will  be  popular  for  most  of  the  people  in  the 
world.  Nowadays,  the  technology  emerged  on  different  platforms  and  now  it  is  being 
used as a supplement in different industries like healthcare, government, entertainment, 
and  education  (Alkhattabi,  2017;  Mahmood  et  al.,  2017;  Raiff,  Fortugno,  Scherlis,  & 
Rapoza, 2018; Seevinck, 2017). 

The  most  popular  platform  of  Augmented  Reality  is  a  mobile  game  called 
Pokémon  Go  which  became  a  major  form  of  entertainment  (Yang  &  Liu,  2017).  Several 
mobile  games  nowadays  are  being  used  by  the  education  industry  as  a  supplement  for 
learning  in  different  areas  of  education  like  English,  Language,  History,  Science,  and 
Mathematics (Atwood-Blaine & Huffman, 2017; Kukulska-Hulme, 2009; Rivadulla, Jesus, & 
Balahadia, 2017; Tan et al., 2017; Tsai, Cheng, Yeh, & Lin, 2017; ). One of the hardest areas 
of Mathematics, considered by most students is Precalculus and Calculus since there is a 
need  to  apply  a  lot  of  critical  thinking  skills  as  well  as  logical  reasoning  to  prove  the 
answer. Some students majoring in Engineering and started to take these subjects tend 
to either change course or leave the University (Van Dyken & Benson, 2019). In line with 
this, the student's interest and motivation are being affected by studying, not only that 
specific  subject  but  also  the  whole  course  itself  (Van  Dyken  &  Benson,  2019).  If  the 
student  loses  interest  and  motivation  in  learning,  it  will  affect  not  only  the  teacher  but 
also the rate of education a certain country has. Also, students sometimes are not willing 
to study because of the enjoyment of playing electronic games (McBride & Derevensky, 
2016). These problems may result in poor academic performance, change of mood, and as 
well as social conflicts. 

According to BusinessWorld (2019), it is very evident that there is a decline in the 
academic  performance  of  students  in  the  Philippines.  Mobile  game  addiction  of  most 
Filipinos  also  poses  a  great  threat  in  the  future  of  society  just  like  the  declining  rate  of 

596 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
academic  performance  of  the  students  (Fabito  & Yabut,  2018). In  a  study  conducted  by 
the National University of the Philippines, it is identified that mobile game addiction is a 
concern  in  the  Philippines  that  grows  rapidly  which  normally  increases  the  risk  in  the 
physical  as  well  as  the  psychological  health  of  a  certain  individual  (Fabito  et  al.,  2018). 
Based  on  a  report  from  UNESCO  last  2008,  the  Philippines'  Basic  Education  has  low 
participation  and  achievement  rates  because  it  has  fallen  dramatically  (Wilson  Macha, 
Christopher  Mackie,  2018).  Mobile  game  addiction  and  poor  academic  performance  are 
among  two  of  the  most  common  problems  a  student  in  the  Philippines  is  facing  since 
mobile  phones  are  known  to  be  very  affordable  nowadays  that  leads  the  students  to 
spend  more  time  playing  games  or  using  social  media  than  studying,  especially  if  the 
subject  is  Science  as  some  of  the  students  think  of  this  as  a  boring  subject.  As  AR  is 
defined, it is a good avenue to use the mixed reality capability of AR as there are different 
topics in Earth Science that can't be seen without a 3d representation. This paper aims to 
turn around the problem of Mobile Game Addiction into a positive one at the same time 
enhancing the result of their academic performance through an academic game.  

Objectives of the Study 

The  general  objective  of  the  study  is  to  develop  a  supplementary  learning  tool 
framework  by  the  use  of  a  dynamic  mobile  application  using  Unity  AR  and  Vuforia  for 
Senior  High  School  students  and  teachers  to  help  the  learning  process  in  SHS  Earth 
Science. 

REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE AND STUDIES 

An integrated STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) lesson 
requires  participation  and  nurture  students'  interest  in  real-world  circumstances.  While 
real-world STEM situations are naturally incorporated, the embedded STEM contents are 
rarely taught by school educators (Hsu et al., 2017). One of the hardest subjects of that 
track is Mathematics. One example of a Mathematics subject is Solid Geometry. To give a 
better  experience  in  learning  solid  geometry,  a  study  has  been  conducted  to  combine 
Augmented  Reality  (AR)  technology  into  teaching  operations  designing  a  learning 
scheme  that  helps  junior  high  school  learners  learn  sound  geometry  (Liu  et  al.,  2019; 
TeKolste  &  Liu,  2018).  Based  on  the  result  of  the  study,  AR  gives  a  big  leap  in  learning 
solid  geometry.  Another  study  deals  with  the  use  of  AR  in  teaching  and  learning  math 
that  uses  this  technology  to  its  complete  benefit  in  providing  concrete  experience  in 
interacting  with  revolutionary  solids.  At  the  end  of  the  study,  it  was  found  out  that 
Augmented  Reality  is  beneficial  in  the  understanding  of  computing  solids  of  revolution 
volumes  (Salinas  &  González-Mendívil,  2017).  In  this  study,  Augmented  Reality  and 
Gamification  are  the  two  solutions  that  can  be  replicated  by  other  studies  and  be 
transformed into an educational framework. 

597 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According  to  Rouse  (as  cited  in  Jung  &  tom  Dieck,  2018)  Augmented  Reality  or 
simply AR is the integration of information in digital format which includes a live video on 
the real-time environment of a certain user. In augmentation of live videos, integrating a 
video  picture  to  digital  environment  involves  identification  of  an  object  replicated  from 
the physical world features and will be captured as any format that will be considered as a 
video picture which will mean that increasing the responsiveness of the generated video 
picture  to  the  state  needed  to  control  the  object  from  the  physical  world  itself  (Kochi, 
Harding,  Campbell,  Ranyard  &Hocking,  2017).  In  an  augmented  reality  system,  the 
integrated digital information can only be seen using a medium like phone cameras but it 
will not be seen in the real world. This digital information can be represented in different 
forms like a stack of virtual cubes or manipulating a non-real object in many ways possible 
(Hilliges, Kim, Izadi, & Weiss, 2018).  

Gamified  study  or  sometimes  being  called  by  a  lot  of  people  in  the  academy, 
Gamification stands  for  a  term  used  to  define  how game  mechanics  are  integrated  into 
teaching  the  process  to  make  instructions  more  enjoyable  and  engaging  (Fields  et  al., 
2017).  It  can  help  learners  feel  involved  in  learning  through  development  and  progress, 
recognition  and  benefits,  a  greater  objective  to  be  pursued,  and  a  sense  of  teamwork. 
According  to  Kapp  (as  cited  by  Fields,  Lui,  &  Kafai,  2017),  scientists  suggest  that 
gamification or gamified learning can be used as an educational instrument to stimulate 
interest in learning for learners. A lot of games which pretend to have been educational, 
throughout  the  manner  that  as  playing,  individuals  who  play  them  should  learn 
something.  

Many  electronic  games  were  often  intended  for  instructional  reasons.  Also, 
learners  using  a  gamified  e-learning  platform  will  generate  greater  practical  test  results 
relative  to  those  using  the  non-gamified  version.  Knowledge  acquisition  was  the  most 
frequently reported result for games for learning, while entertainment games addressed 
a  wider  variety  of  affective,  behavioral,  perceptual,  cognitive,  and  physiological  results 
(Boyle et al., 2016). Learning through games was discovered in a variety of topics with the 
most common STEM topics and health. A systematic program of experimental job would 
benefit  future  studies  on  digital  games,  examining  in  detail  which  game  characteristics 
are most efficient in fostering participation and learning support (Boyle et al., 2016).  

Augmented Reality (AR) apps have received increasing attention over the previous 
two decades. In the 1990s, AR was first used for apps linked to pilot education as well as 
for  the  training  of  Air  Force  (Akçayır  &  Akçayır,  2016).  AR  generates  fresh  world 
experiences with its data layering over 3D space, suggesting that AR should be embraced 
over the next 2–3 years to give fresh possibilities for teaching, learning, study, or creative 
investigation  according  to  the  2011  Horizon  Report  (Chen  et  al.,  2017).  AR  uses  virtual 
objects or data that overlap physical objects or environments to create a mixed reality in 
which virtual objects and actual environments coexist in a meaningful manner to increase 
learning experiences. According to Chiang, Yang & Hwang (as cited by Akçayır & Akçayır, 

598 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2016)  Augmented  Reality  is  widely  used  now  in  the  K-12  level  in  the  education  industry. 
Ferrer-Torregrosa et al., (2015) stated that Augmented Reality is also being used now by 
different universities.  

As highlighted in the Horizon report, Augmented Reality (AR) is acknowledged as 
one  of  the  most  significant  innovations  in  greater  and  K-12  education  technology 
(Johnson  et  al.,  2015).  Augmented  reality  is  gradually  becoming  integrated  as  an 
emerging  technology  in  the  region  of  inclusive  education  that  adapts  learning  on  equal 
footing through exploration and experience by all (Marín-Díaz, 2017). Johnson (as cited by 
Saltan, 2017)  stated  that  AR  is anticipated  to be  widely  adopted in  higher education  for 
two to three years and in K-12 for four to five years. It is essential to explore how teachers 
and scientists incorporate AR into teaching-learning procedures if this is the present state 
of the art for the use of AR in education. MUVEs and AR became visible in the early 2000s 
and their effectiveness for learning was soon established by educational research (Dede 
et  al.,  2017).  Research  has  shown  that  AR  can  be  more  efficient  in  supporting  teaching 
than other improved settings in technology. If the content is represented as 3D learners, 
objects  can  be  manipulated  and  information  handled  interactively  (El  Sayed,  Zayed,  & 
Sharawy as cited by Buchner & Zumbach, 2018). Rapid technological evolution has altered 
the  face  of education, particularly when technology  has  been coupled with  appropriate 
pedagogical foundations. This combination has developed fresh possibilities to enhance 
teaching and learning experience quality (Nincarean et al., 2013). 

As  a  result  of  discussing  the  different  subjects  that  Augmented  Reality  has  been 
used  already,  it  is  a  great  help  for  students  to  have  an  application  that  has  never  been 
created  to  aid  them  to  have  a  higher  grade.  ScavengEarSci  will  then  prove  that  the 
difficulty  in  studying  can  be  easily  turned  around  and  the  students  will  start  enjoying 
Earth Science. 

PROPOSED METHODOLOGY 

This research uses the Life Cycle of Software Development (SDLC). In each defined 
stage  of  the  SDLC  which  will  define  the  software  development  process,  the  framework 
will  be  described  in  every  part  of  the  process.  It  comprises  a  comprehensive  plan 
describing the development of the scheme.  

599 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) Model 

The  SDLC  comprises  several  clearly  defined  stages,  namely,  Analysis,  Design, 

Development, Test, and Implementation. 

A.  Analysis 

1.  Preparation of questions to be asked to the end-users and technical experts. 
2.  Discussion with end-users like students, teachers, and administrators. 
3.  Discussion with technical professionals, comprising of developers of Android and 

IOS apps, to learn some best practices. 

4.  Reviewing an existing application that has the same goal, issues, methodology and 

identifies its weak points 

5.  Definition of the process flow of the system using a diagram. 
6.  Identification  of  the  needed  tools  and  software  that  will  be  needed  for  the 

development of the application 

B.  Design 

1.  List the system requirements and characteristics 
2.  Build  the  following:  Context  Diagram,  Data  Flow  Diagram  (DFD),  Students  Low-
Level Flowchart, Teachers Low-Level Flowchart, Use Case Diagram, and Interface 
Design. 

3.  Produce interface design layout and mock-up apps to list possible changes 

C.  Development 

1.  Use Vuforia and Unity to convert the final design layout to a working interface. 
2.  Use MySQL to create the database and store processes. 
3.  Use C # to create the API (Application Programming Interface) for the key system 

functionality. 

4.  Use  Vuforia  and  Unity  to  integrate  the  interface  and  API  to  create  one  working 

application. 

600 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Identification of tiny components of apps that are testable called units. 

D.  Testing 
1. 
2.  Test for the correct operation of each unit. 
3.  Test the system's general integrity. 
4.  Test  the  system  based  on  functionality,  reliability,  and  compatibility  using  test 

instances and live testing with actual end-users. 

E.  Implementation 

Request the application to be in Playstore and Apple Appstore. 

Project Design 

ScavengEarSci  will  be  designed  similar  to  Pokemon-Go  but  with  a  twist  of  the 
traditional  scavenger  hunt  game.  This  mobile  game  will  be  investigatory  wherein  the 
learners  will  learn  the  module  from  beginning  to  end  while  solving  the  mystery  of  the 
game. If the mobile game will be designed in a somehow almost perfect manner, a game-
based  learning  approach  for  teaching  Earth  Science  will  control  and  make  use  of  the 
student’s  intrinsic  motivation  together  with  their  interest  in  playing  and  lead  them  in  a 
very interactive way of solving exercises and seat works for the Earth Science subject. 

Figure 3. Use Case Diagram of ScavengEarSci 

Figure  3  shows  the  Use  Case  Diagram  of  the  application  which  is  named  
ScavengEarSci.  This  also  illustrates  and  describes  the  interaction  of  the  users  with  the 
system. The system has two types of users namely Student and Teacher. Both the teacher 
and the student will have the ability to click on the main menu. Once on the main menu, 
the  teacher  can  go  ahead  and  check  the  attendance  and  the  progress  report  of  the 

601 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students. On the other hand, the student will have two options after clicking on the main 
menu.  

The first option of the user is the tutorial mode. In the tutorial mode, the students 
can point out the camera in the physical environment. Once the camera has detected any 
symbol  or  object  related  to  any  topic  in  Earth  Science,  it  will  go  ahead  and  play  the 
tutorial  video  for  that  certain  topic.  The  second  option  for  the  student  is  to  play  the 
ScavengEarSci  Mystery  Game.  The  student  will  walk  around  the  area  and  look  for  a 
TrashChest. Once the student found a TrashChest the option will be to open it or not. If 
the student chooses not to open it, the student will just look for another TrashChest. If 
the student will choose to open it, an Earth Science problem and Tutorial will appear and 
the  student  will  need  to  solve  the  problem  after  the  tutorial.  If  the  student  got  the 
answer  wrong,  the  student  will  need  to  walk  around  again  looking  for  another 
TrashChest.  If  the  student  got  the  answer  right,  the  student  will  get  another  Reward 
letter and will have the chance to go on a quest to complete the Mystery word following 
the  clue  given  by  the  Avatar.  All  of  the  points  garnered  will  be  saved  to  the  progress 
report afterward. 

Figure  4  shows  the  Flowchart  of  the  ScavengEarSci  application  for  both  the 
teachers  and  the  students.  It  illustrates  an  overview  of  the  overall  process  flow  of  the 
system.  The  system's  process  starts  after  verifying  if  the  user  is  a  student  or  a  teacher. 
Once verified, the user when then starts clicking the main menu. If the user is a teacher, 
the  option  will  prompt  the  progress  report  as  well  as  the  attendance  report  of  the 
students  profiled  under  the  teacher.  Once  done  it  will  give  the  teacher  the  option  to 
either quit or go back to the main menu. On the other hand, if the user is a student and 
the main menu has been clicked, three options will appear. The three options are Tutorial 
Mode, Scavenger Hunt, and Reports. The student will have the option to play the mystery 
game or just trigger a tutorial by augmenting an image else the use chose the progress 
report. If the tutorial mode has been chosen, the system will try to recognize a shape in 
the physical world using a shape detection algorithm, once a shape has been detected it 
will  then  compare  if  the  shape  is  in  the  multi-media  database.  If  there  is  a  match,  the 
video  tutorial  will  play  else  it  will  go  back  to  the  shape  detection  algorithm  to  find 
another shape.  

If the user selects the Scavenger Hunt Mode, the system will find the location of a 
trash chest, once the location match, the user will be given an option to either open it or 
not.  If  the  user  decided  not  to  open  it,  the  system  will  let  the  user  walk  and  look  for 
another trash chest. If the user decided to open it an avatar will appear to ask the user to 
solve a problem. If the user decided to answer it, a reward letter and clue will be given if 
incorrect it will ask the user to answer the problem again. The system will loop until all 
the  topics  have  been  completed.  Once  the  topic  is  completed,  it  will  give  the  user  an 
option to either quit the application or go back to the main menu. The third option for the 
user is to check his attendance and progress report. Once done it will give the student the 
option to either quit or go back to the main menu. 

602 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. System Flowchart 

603 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Architecture Design of Location-Based Tracking Algorithm 

Figure  5  illustrates  the  Architecture  Design  of  the  Location-Based  Tracking 
Algorithm. The process will start when the user pointed out the camera to the specified 
location  while  walking.  Then,  when  the  camera  pointed  out  the  location  where  the 
TrashChest is located, it will prompt the user to open it or not. If the user decides to open 
the  TrashChest  and  solve  the  problem  with  a  correct  answer,  the  score  will  then  be 
generated  as  data  to  be  stored  in  the  Cloud  Database.  When  either  the  student  or  the 
teacher will check the generated result, the data analysis tool will then retrieve the data 
from the cloud database and generate a report from the retrieved data. 

Figure 6. Architecture Design of Image Recognition Algorithm 

Figure 6 shows the Architecture Design of the Image Recognition Algorithm. The 
process will start when the user points out the camera on the specified image. The image 
recognition  algorithm  will  then  read  the  image.  The  image  will  be  check  if  it’s  a  circle, 
parabola, hyperbola, or ellipse. Once recognized, the image will then be evaluated. After 
evaluation, it will be compared to the videos stored in the multimedia database. Once the 
video related to the image has been identified, the video will then be retrieved and it will 
start playing as a tutorial video.  

Figure  7  describes  the  procedure 

in  developing  the  Augmented  Reality 
Application.  To  start  the  development  of  the  application,  the  Vuforia  program  will  be 
used to create the database. This database will contain images with different goals that 
can be included in the Picture Target to be detected and identified by the use of an AR 
camera.  Vuforia  will  also  be  utilized  to  produce  the  activation  key,  which  will  be  then 
subsequently used in Unity. The application key will be unique for each project. The Unity 
software  will  then  export  the  objects  from  the  database  created  in  Vuforia  and  will  be 
included  in  the  prefabs  and  which  can  be  a  picture  target  where  the  digital  picture 
elements will then be deployed. For the animation, there are models in Unity that we can 
select.    After  selecting  the  3d  model,  specifying  where  and  when  to  run  the  animation 
must be done. It can be done by using a programming language that can be used in Unity. 
The  programming  language  is  C#,  which  is  very  oriented  to  objects.  By  using  this, 
inserting the animation for the application will be easier. Audios will then be introduced 
to supplement. For this process, using an algorithm that normally detects an image while 
playing  a  sound  corresponding  to  it  will  be  used.    After  that  is  the  development  of  the 

604 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application  for  IOS  and  will  make  sure  that  it  will  be  compatible  with  the  Android 
operating  system  as  well.  It  will  be  done  in  Unity  by  making  sure  that  the  application 
name  will  be  very  unique,  a  characteristic  image  will  need  to  be  created  which  will 
represent the application. 

Figure 7.Summary of the Development of ScavengEarSci 

Figure 8.Proposed Main Menu 

605 

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.Physical Environment 

Figure 10. Physical Environment when pointed a Camera 

Figure 11. Physical Environment when pointed a Camera through Scavengercalc 

Figure 12.Scenario 3 when the player opened the TrashChest 

Figure  8  to  12  shows  the  Graphical  UserInterface  Design  of  ScavengerCalc.  The 
application  will  initially  show  the  main  menu,  where  the  user  can  either  choose  the 
Tutorial Mode, Scavenger hunt, or Reports. If the user will click the Tutorial Mode, it will 
show the camera then it will look for an object like any topic under Earth Science. Once an 
image has been recognized by the Image Recognition algorithm, it will look for a similar 

606 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
topic in the database then it will play the video tutorial. If the user will click the Scavenger 
Hunt  under  the  main  menu, it  will  show  the  AR  Camera  and  the  user  will  need to  work 
around the area looking for a TrashChest.  

Once the student found a TrashChest the option would be to open it or not. If the 
student will choose not to open it, the student will just look for another TrashChest. If the 
student chooses to open it, an Earth Science problem would appear with a funny avatar 
and the student would need to solve the problem. If the student got the answer wrong, 
the  student  would  need  to  walk  around  again  looking  for  another  TrashChest.  If  the 
student got the answer right, the student would get the Reward letter and will go on a 
quest to complete the Mystery word while following the clue given by the Avatar. All of 
the points garnered will be saved to the progress report afterward. On the other hand, if 
the user would click on reports, the attendance and the progress score of the student will 
be seen. 

PROPOSED OPERATION AND TESTING PROCEDURE 

To ensure system quality, a series of tests will be conducted for each module and 
by installing the application in a live environment, the system will be subjected to real-life 
testing. 

Functionality  Test.  The  functionality  test  will  be  used  to  guarantee  that  the 
application  meets  all  the  criteria  and  implements  all  the  functionalities  indicated  in  its 
functional  requirements.  Following  the  creation  stage,  the  investigator  will  take  the 
following measures: 

1.  Prepared test cases for functionality for each module. 
2.  The test cases will be executed. 
3.  Will record the output of the test. 
4.  The failed test cases will be analyzed and remedied. 
5.  Failed test instances will have re-executed to check that the test instances have been 

remedied. 

The  test  cases  will  include  a  set  of  inputs,  execution  preconditions,  and  the 

expected results. The test case form that will be used is illustrated in Table 1. 

Reliability Test. This test will be performed to confirm that for a particular period 
the system can perform the designated tasks correctly. Live testing will be performed to 
check the system's reliability. The system will be implemented and exposed to real-world 
testing in a live setting. The following measures are to be taken: 

1.  Live deployment of the scheme will be initiated. 
2.  Will request possible end-users which will include IT experts, students, teachers, and 
possible administrators to install, use, and to test the application for a certain period. 

607 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Will ask end-users to forward back to the investigator the problems experienced. 
4.  Will collect the outcomes and tabulate them. 

The  investigator  will  also  perform  the  following  measures  concerning  a  live 

application for reliability testing: 

1.  Preparation of test cases for reliability test. 
2.  Will perform every test case. 
3.  Records the output of every test case. 

Any  reliable  test  case  will  be  documented  using  a  test  case  form.  The  found 
problems will be documented in a test incident log and a summary of the execution of the 
reliability test case will be collated. The total number of test cases will be executed and 
will be summarized in a table, to check whether the application is reliable under different 
instances. 

Portability  Test.  Portability  test  will  be  used  to  explore  the  efficiency  and 
effectiveness of the system with distinct devices that have distinct requirements such as 
variants of Android OS and IOS, hardware settings, screen sizes, and kinds or speeds of 
the  network.  The  experiments  will  be  provided  in  Table  8  to  install  and  use  the 
application  in  multiple  kinds  of  settings.  If  all  the  anticipated  behaviors  are  met,  the 
testing is effective. The compatibility tests are provided in the Appendix for each module. 

PROPOSED EVALUATION PROCEDURE 

The following actions will be carried out to evaluate the application performance 

and the study results: 
1. 

Invite panels and evaluators, which will include 10 IT experts and 5 Senior High school 
students, and 5 teachers. 

2.  The application will be downloaded and installed. 
3.  The application will be used after downloading and installation. 
4.  Will  Request  the  panels  and  evaluators  to  rate  the  application  using  the  ISO  25010 
Evaluation  Criteria  for  Software  Materials  and  the  rating  scale  would  range  from  1-5 
where 5 will serve as the highest and 1 will serve as the lowest. 

5.  Collect and tabulate the information to obtain the general mean and mean for each 

criterion. 

Use  the 

interpretation  to 

interpret  the  numerical  value  to  obtain  the 

corresponding descriptive score. 

608 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment 
Android OS Versions 

5.0  
6.0  
7.0  
8.0  

IOS Versions 

Table 1. Portability Testing Summary 

Expected Behavior 

The user has no problem accessing all the modules 
The user has no problem accessing all the modules 
The user has no problem accessing all the modules 
The user has no problem accessing all the modules 

8                                                                          The user has no problem accessing all the modules 
9                                                                          The user has no problem accessing all the modules 
10                                                                         The user has no problem accessing all the modules 
11                                                                          The user has no problem accessing all the modules 

Network 
2G 
3G 
4G (LTE) 
Screen Sizes 

426dp x 320dp 
470dp x 320dp 
640dp x 480dp 
960dp x 720dp 

Hardware Configurations 

RAM 

1GB 
2GB 

CPU 

Dual-core 
Quad-core 
Octa-core 

The user has no problem accessing all the modules 
The user has no problem accessing all the modules 
The user has no problem accessing all the modules 

The user has no problem accessing all the modules 
The user has no problem accessing all the modules 
The user has no problem accessing all the modules 
The user has no problem accessing all the modules 

The user has no problem accessing all the modules 
The user has no problem accessing all the modules 

The user has no problem accessing all the modules 
The user has no problem accessing all the modules 
The user has no problem accessing all the modules 

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 

Game-based  learning  as  proven  by  different  researches  improves  the  learning 
experiences  of  the  student  inside  the  classroom.  This  kind  of  approach  provides  social, 
emotional,  and  cognitive  development  for  the  students.  The  use  of  Augmented  Reality 
based  games  on  the  other  hand  has  been  proven  to  provide  a  partial  solution  to  the 
declining rate of student’s motivation and engagement in different learning areas in the 
Education Sector. The integration of new methods in teaching like gamification and game 
based-learning  approaches  can  help  the  students  to  have  a  higher  grade  in  different 
subjects.  

609 

 
 
 
 
 
 
For  future  studies,  an  Augmented  Reality  Based  mobile  application  named 
ScavengEarSci will be developed by the researcher. The proposed conceptual framework 
and methodology discussed in this study will be used in the development to ensure the 
quality and correctness of the process. Once the mobile application has been developed, 
it must be evaluated by IT experts using ISO 25010. Based on their future assessments the 
application  will  be  improved  if  there  is  a  need  to.  With  this,  it  can  be  assessed  that  the 
application  can  be  a  good  supplementary  tool  in  improving  the  learning  experiences  of 
Senior High school students that have Earth Science. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

The author would like to thank the continued support of the management of the 
Technological University of the Philippines – Manila especially from the College of Science 
and  the  College  of  Industrial  Technology,  particularly  in  their  continued  passion  to 
produce competent researchers in this field. Likewise, gratitude is given to the following 
people  who  provided  financial  support  for  the  publication  of  this  paper  to  support 
research  about  new  normal  education  –  namely:    Danica  Rose  Tiozen,  Lester  Santos, 
Emilyn Saavedra, Samuel John Cruz, Jam Quismundo, Bellie Jay Lasac, Jerome Napalang, 
Judith  Salas  Pascua,  Maria  Victoria  Jazareno,  Reese  Umali,  Reynaldo  Juico,  and  Carlo 
Ryoichi Sakuma. 

REFERENCES 

Akçayır, M., & Akçayır, G. (2016). Advantages and challenges associated with augmented 
reality  for  education:  A  systematic  review  of  the  literature.  Educational  Research 
Review. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2016.11.002 

Alkhattabi, M. (2017). Augmented reality as e-learning tool in primary schools’ education: 
Barriers  to  teachers’  adoption.  International  Journal  of  Emerging  Technologies  in 
Learning, 12(2), 91–100. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet. v12i02.6158 

Boyle,  E.  A.,  Hainey,  T.,  Connolly,  T.  M.,  Gray,  G.,  Earp,  J.,  Ott,  M.,  Lim,  T.,  Ninaus,  M., 
Ribeiro,  C.,  &  Pereira,  J.  (2016).  An  update  to  the  systematic  literature  review  of 
empirical  evidence  of  the  impacts  and  outcomes  of  computer  games  and  serious 
games. 
178–192. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2015.11.003 

Computers 

Education, 

and 

94, 

Buchner,  J.,  &  Zumbach,  J.  (2018).  Promoting  intrinsic  motivation  with  a  mobile 
augmented  reality  learning  environment.  Proceedings  of  the  14th  International 
Conference 
55–61. 
https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-
85052241533&partnerID=40&md5=1161fc6ca92a8ea919a20ab7f112dbd6 

on  Mobile 

2018,  ML 

Learning 

2018, 

1997, 

Carbonell  Carrera,  C.,  &  Bermejo  Asensio,  L.  A.  (2017).  Augmented  reality  as  a  digital 
teaching  environment  to  develop  spatial  thinking.  Cartography  and  Geographic 
Information Science, 44(3), 259–270. https://doi.org/10.1080/15230406.2016.1145556 
Chen,  P.,  Liu,  X.,  Cheng,  W.,  &  Huang,  R.  (2017).  A  review  of  using  Augmented  Reality  in 

Education from 2011 to 2016. 13–18. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-2419-1 

610 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Dede, C. J., Jacobson, J., & Richards, J. (2017). Introduction: Virtual, Augmented, and Mixed 

Realities in Education. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-5490-7_1 

Fabito,  B.  S.,  Rodriguez,  R.  L.,  Macato,  L.  G.  T.,  Diloy,  M.  A.,  &  Trillanes,  A.  O.  (2018). 
Exploring  mobile  game  addiction,  cyberbullying,  and  its  effects  on  academic 
performance  among  tertiary  students  in  one  university  in  the  Philippines.  TENCON 
2018 - 2018 IEEE Region 10 Conference, October, 1859–1864. 

Fabito,  B.  S.,  &  Yabut,  E.  R.  (2018).  Prevalence  of  cyberbullying  and  addiction  in  mobile 
gaming  among  tertiary  students  in  one  University  in  the  Philippines :  An  ethical 
discussion in the lens of consequentialism. 2018 IEEE 10th International Conference on 
Humanoid,  Nanotechnology,  Information  Technology,  Communication,  and  Control, 
1–6. 
Environment, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/HNICEM.2018.8666295 

Management 

(HNICEM), 

and 

Ferrer-Torregrosa,  J.,  Torralba,  J.,  Jimenez,  M.  A.,  García,  S.,  &  Barcia,  J.  M.  (2015). 
ARBOOK:  Development  and  assessment  of  a  tool  based  on  augmented  reality  for 
119–124. 
anatomy. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10956-014-9526-4 

Journal  of  Science  Education  and  Technology, 

24(1), 

Fields, D. A., Lui, D., & Kafai, Y. B. (2017). Teaching computational thinking with electronic 
textiles:  High  school  teachers’  contextualizing  in  exploring  computer  science.  In 
Conference  Proceedings  of  International  Conference  on  Computational  Thinking 
Education. http://www.eduhk.hk/cte2017/doc/CTE2017 Proceedings.pdf#page=78 
Hilliges, O., Kim, D., Izadi, S., & Weiss, M. H. (2017). U.S. Patent No. 9,552,673. Washington, 

DC: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. 

Hsu, Y. S., Lin, Y. H., & Yang, B. (2017). Impact of augmented reality lessons on students’ 
in  Technology  Enhanced  Learning,  12(1). 

STEM 
interest.  Research  and  Practice 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s41039-016-0039-z 

Johnson, L., Adams Becker, S., Estrada, V., & Freeman, A. (2015). New media consortium 
Consortium. 

In  New  Media 

2015  Museum 

Edition. 

horizon 
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED559371 

report: 

Jung,  Timothy;  tom  Dieck,  C.  M.  (2018).  Augmented  reality  and  virtual  reality: 
Empowering  human,  place  and  business.  In  Springer  International:  Vol.  XI  (Issue  5). 
http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=a9h&AN=9084262&login.as
p&site=ehost-live 

Kochi, M., Harding, R., Campbell, D. A., Ranyard, D., Hocking, I. M. (2017). U.S. Patent No. 

9,724,609. Washington, DC: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. 

Liu, E., Li, Y., Cai, S., & Li, X. (2019). The effect of augmented reality in solid geometry class 
on  students’  learning  performance  and  attitudes.  In  Proceedings  of  the  15th 
International Conference on Remote Engineering and Virtual Instrumentation (Vol. 47, 
Issue October 2018). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-95678-7 

Marín-Díaz,  V.  (2017).  The  relationships  between  augmented  reality  and 

inclusive 
in  higher  education.  Bordón.  Revista  de  Pedagogía,  69(3),  125. 

education 
https://doi.org/10.13042/bordon.2017.51123 

McBride,  J.,  &  Derevensky,  J.  (2016).  Gambling  and  video  game  playing  among  youth. 
Journal of Gambling Issues, 2016(34), 156–178. https://doi.org/10.4309/jgi.2016.34.9 

611 

 
 
Nincarean, D., Alia, M. B., Halim, N. D. A., & Rahman, M. H. A. (2013). Mobile augmented 
reality:  The  potential  for  education.  Procedia  -  Social  and  Behavioral  Sciences,  103, 
657–664. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.385 

Peddie,  J.  (2017).  Augmented  reality:  Where  we  all  live.  In  Springer  International. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-54502-8 

Salinas,  P.,  &  González-Mendívil,  E.  (2017).  Augmented  reality  and  solids  of  revolution. 
International  Journal  on  Interactive  Design  and  Manufacturing,  11(4),  829–837. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12008-017-0390-3 

Saltan,  F.  (2017).  The  use  of  augmented  reality  in  formal  education :  A  scoping  review. 
Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education, 13(2), 503-520. doi: 
https://doi.org/10.12973/eurasia.2017.00628a 

Tan,  C.  W.,  Yu,  P.  D.,  Ling,  L.,  Fung,  C.  K.,  Lai,  C.  K.,  &  Cheng,  Y.  (2017).  Teaching 
computational thinking by gamification of k-12 mathematics: Mobile app math games 
in  mathematics  and  computer  science  tournament. Siu-Cheung  KONG  The  Education 
from 
University 
https://www.eduhk.hk/cte2017/doc/CTE2017%20Proceedings.pdf#page=66. 

Retrieved 

55-57. 

Kong, 

Kong, 

Hong 

Hong 

of 

TeKolste,  R.  D.,  &  Liu,  V.  K.  (2018).  Outcoupling  grating  for  augmented  reality  system.  2, 

U.S. Patent Application 10/073,267. 

Van  Dyken,  J.,  &  Benson,  L.  C.  (2019).  Precalculus  as  a  Death  Sentence  for  Engineering 
Majors: A Case Study of How One Student Survived. International Journal of Research 
in Education and Science, 5(1), 355–373. 

Wilson Macha, Christopher Mackie,  and J. M. (2018). Education in the Philippines - WENR. 

Retrieved from https://wenr.wes.org/2018/03/education-in-the-philippines 

Yang,  C.,  &  Liu,  D.  (2017).  Motives  matter:  Motives  for  playing  Pokémon  Go  and 
implications  for  well-being.  Cyberpsychology,  Behavior,  and  Social  Networking,  20(1), 
52–57. https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2016.0562 

Author’s Biography 

Mr.  Carlo  H.  Godoy  Jr  is  certified  Fortinet’s  Associate  Network  Security  Engineer 
(NSE 1 & 2). He is also a Support Analyst for SQL at Human Edge Software Philippines. He 
is  a  former  Escalations  Manager  at  Novartis  Pharmaceutical.  A  Research  Scholar  and  a 
graduating masters in information technology student at the Technological University of 
the Philippines specializing in studies about Emerging Technologies. He has few research 
projects about Augmented Reality and Microprocessor-Based Systems.  

ORCID ID:  HYPERLINK "https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7701-8036" https://orcid.org/0000-

0002-7701-8036 

Web of Science ResearcherID:  HYPERLINK "https://publons.com/researcher/AAO-2785-

2020/" \o "Copy and share this profile's URL" AAO-2785-2020 

612 

 
 
 
 
 
 
