1
2
0
2

l
u
J

8

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
2
2
4
0
.
8
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

End-to-end Malaria Diagnosis and 3D Cell
Rendering with Deep Learning

Vignav Ramesh
Saratoga High School
Saratoga, CA 95070
rvignav@gmail.com

Abstract. Malaria is a parasitic infection that poses a signiﬁcant bur-
den on global health. It kills one child every 30 seconds and over one mil-
lion people annually. If diagnosed in a timely manner, however, most peo-
ple can be eﬀectively treated with antimalarial therapy. Several deaths
due to malaria are byproducts of disparities in the social determinants
of health; the current gold standard for diagnosing malaria requires mi-
croscopes, reagents, and other equipment that most patients of low so-
cioeconomic brackets do not have access to. In this paper, we propose a
convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture that allows for rapid
automated diagnosis of malaria (achieving a high classiﬁcation accuracy
of 98%), as well as a deep neural network (DNN) based three-dimensional
(3D) modeling algorithm that renders 3D models of parasitic cells in aug-
mented reality (AR). This creates an opportunity to optimize the current
workﬂow for malaria diagnosis and demonstrates potential for deep learn-
ing models to improve telemedicine practices and patient health literacy
on a global scale. Our website is accessible here.

Keywords: Malaria diagnosis · Cell rendering · Deep learning.

1

Introduction

1.1 Current Malaria Diagnosis Methods

Malaria is a parasitic infection that poses a signiﬁcant burden on global health.
It kills one child every 30 seconds and over one million people annually [1]. If di-
agnosed in a timely manner, however, most people can be eﬀectively treated with
antimalarial therapy. Several deaths due to malaria are byproducts of disparities
in the social determinants of health. Malaria is endemic to developing regions
such as Sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia, areas of which have limited
access to hospitals and laboratory equipment (microscopes, dyes and indicators,
volumetric ﬂasks, and other common lab apparatus) that enable diagnoses. Even
in areas with adequate medical facilities, current modalities of diagnosis impose
a signiﬁcant ﬁnancial burden on healthcare systems. These geographic and so-
cioeconomic barriers prevent patients with malaria from receiving a diagnosis
and treatment plan within 24 hours, thereby allowing malaria to progress to
fatally severe illness [2].

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

V. Ramesh

Excluding clinical methods, malaria is currently diagnosed in two ways: via
microscopy and via a rapid diagnosis test (RDT). A microscopy test—currently
the gold standard of malaria diagnosis—requires a health professional to identify
a malaria parasite in a blood smear on a microscope slide. Not only does this
require a bulky, expensive microscope, but to ensure accuracy, the blood smear
must be stained (often with the Giemsa stain) to morphologically diﬀerentiate
the nucleus and cytoplasm of the parasite [3]. This stain requires a reagent
(Giemsa powder), methanol, and other agents that most patients do not have
access to and may not have the medical background necessary to work with. For
an RDT, a drop of blood mixed with a lysing agent is placed adjacent to a buﬀer
in an RDT cassette. The blood and buﬀer are mixed with a labeled antibody and
are ﬂushed along the cassette strip; directly proportional to the blood’s antigen
concentration (parasite density), a certain quantity of antigen-antibody complex
will accumulate on the test line of the strip [4]. Patients in low socioeconomic
brackets without immediate access to healthcare professionals may not be able
to obtain the cassettes, lysing agents, buﬀers, and labeled antibodies that RDTs
require.

Moreover, even in areas with access to necessary medical and diagnostic
equipment, a shortage of medical professionals prevents patients from receiving
necessary diagnoses. There is currently a critical shortage of medical professionals
in developing countries; for instance, Africa has 2.3 healthcare workers per 1000
residents, leading to overbooking and inadequate care for many patients [5].
Doctors can provide treatment plans in a shorter time period and to more clients,
however, if the process of diagnosing a given patient for malaria is streamlined.
To this end, we propose the models described in the following section.

1.2 Contributions

In this paper, we present a convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture
that allows for rapid automated diagnosis of malaria, as well as a deep neural
network (DNN) based three-dimensional (3D) modeling algorithm that renders
3D models of parasitic cells in augmented reality (AR) and on our website,
thereby improving current telemedicine practices (as doctors and patients alike
can better visualize and comprehend underlying pathology) while also encour-
aging patient education and health literacy.

This diagnostic tool functions to: 1) empower patients to actively engage
in their own care without having to enter a hospital, and 2) provide patients
with the knowledge and resources to reach out to physicians at the right time.
This is especially useful for two demographics: people living in rural or under-
resourced areas where access to hospitals or microscopes is scarce, and patients
who wish to understand their current condition but may be unable or unwilling
to visit a hospital due to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic
and physician shortage.

End-to-end Malaria Diagnosis and 3D Cell Rendering with Deep Learning

3

2 Methodology and Results

2.1 Data

To complete this study, we utilized a database comprising 27,588 labeled cell-
level images (parasitized and uninfected) from the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) [6]. There were three components to our approach. First, we trained our
model on the NIH data over 25 epochs. Second, we saved the model weights in
Hierarchical Data (H5) format. Third, we used a TensorFlow- and Keras-based
pruning algorithm to to eliminate unnecessary values in the weight tensors and
thus decrease the weight ﬁle’s necessary storage space in order to easily host the
algorithm on our web server. The end result is a deployed online tool for rapid
malaria diagnoses; users can upload cell-level images into our algorithm and will
receive a diagnosis in seconds as shown in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1. Workﬂow of online malaria diagnosis tool.

2.2 CNN Architecture

Our CNN is based upon the concept of deep transfer learning—leveraging an
existing model and applying its knowledge to a diﬀerent context and dataset.
First, we rebuilt the VGG-19 model (a 19-layer CNN as shown in Fig. 2) to
perform feature extraction (a form of dimensionality reduction) by using Ten-
sorFlow to add ﬁve dense layers to the end of the model [7]. This reduces the
overﬁtting present in a basic malaria diagnosis CNN. Next, we used Keras to
apply random transformations to the training images in order to augment the

4

V. Ramesh

Fig. 2. VGG-19 model architecture.

data and further reduce overﬁtting. Finally, we trained the model on the NIH
dataset for 25 epochs.

CNN Evaluation. Our CNN achieved the following results and outperformed
state-of-the-art baselines:

Model
Ours
Rajaraman et al. [8]
Pattanaik et al. [9]
Masud et al. [10]
Shekar et al. [11]

Accuracy
98.0%
95.9%
N/A
97.3%
96.0%

F-score
97.3%
N/A
96.5%
97.0%
96.0%

Moreover, our CNN is more accessible to end users. In the status quo, one
of the most accessible malaria diagnosis algorithms is in the form of an Android
app [12]; our algorithm can be easily used on any electronic device with internet
access as shown in Fig. 1.

2.3 DNN Architecture

Our DNN architecture is adapted from Lin et al.’s work on learning eﬃcient point
cloud generation models for 3D object reconstruction [13]. Using a PyTorch-
based procedural content generation (PCG) model similar to theirs (the model
is founded upon an encoder-based structure generator that learns the general
shape of an object based on a dataset of rendered depth images stored in an
NPY ﬁle, a ﬁle format provided by the Python library NumPy), we convert a
2D image of a parasitic cell into a 3D model of that cell, stored as a Point Cloud
Data (PCD) ﬁle. We then convert that PCD ﬁle into an OBJ ﬁle and load it into
the echoAR API, retrieving the associated QR code that allows users to view

End-to-end Malaria Diagnosis and 3D Cell Rendering with Deep Learning

5

the 3D model in AR [14]. Finally, we upload the OBJ ﬁle to Sketchfab in order
to render it directly on our website and allow users to pan through it.

We aim to improve current telemedicine practices and foster online patient
education by assisting doctors in providing virtual diagnoses and treatment to a
wider array of patients. By viewing 3D models of their patient’s cells in AR and
also panning through those models via our website, doctors can better under-
stand their patients’ conditions and more appropriately address them; they can
then use those models to explain underlying pathology and necessary treatment
to their patients. Through these educational tools, we also hope to improve pa-
tient health literacy, which has been shown to parameterize a patient’s adherence
to treatment.

3 Future Work

3.1 Limitations

While there are numerous beneﬁts to self-diagnosis assisted by electronic devices,
there exist certain drawbacks. Patients who may be less inclined to use or are
intimidated by electronic devices may not be able to properly engage in self-
diagnosis and hence are at greater risk than technologically savvy patients [15].
Moreover, there exists the issue that not all patients in under-resourced areas
or of low socioeconomic brackets can obtain an electronic device with internet
access, rendering them unable to capitalize on our diagnostic and 3D modeling
tools. To solve this problem, our CNN and DNN architectures can potentially be
integrated into a low-cost handheld microscope such as the Foldscope, allowing
patients to engage in end-to-end diagnosis with only a microscope rather than
ﬁrst obtaining an image using a microscope and then uploading that image to
our website via an electronic device [16].

3.2 Next Steps

While our CNN is complete, we are currently working on improving our DNN
and deploying it on our website in the same manner that our CNN has been
deployed.

Our ultimate goal is to distribute our diagnostic and 3D modeling tools. We
hope to build kits that can be distributed to individuals with limited access to
medical facilities, including members of homeless respite centers or residents of
rural, under-resourced regions where equipment such as microscopes is scarce.
We hope to include vaculet blood collection sets for patients to obtain blood
samples as well as low-cost handheld/smartphone microscopes such as the Fold-
scope, which our algorithms are compatible with.

Moreover, our diagnosis and 3D modeling solutions extend far beyond malaria
detection. While our work is disruptive in fully automating the diagnosis of para-
sitic, cell-level diseases, our technologies can be applied to various other maladies.
We believe that strengthening doctor-patient relationships—speciﬁcally in vir-
tual spaces—and empowering patients to take charge of their own health is the
future of medicine.

6

V. Ramesh

4 Code Availability

All of our code and model weights are open source and available on GitHub
under the MIT License at https://github.com/rvignav/E2EMD.

5 Acknowledgement

The author would like to acknowledge Ayaan Haque for his contribution to the
development of the malaria diagnosis CNN. He helped build the dense layers at
the end of the model and took part in training the CNN on the NIH dataset.

6 References

1. “Malaria in Africa.” UNICEF DATA, https://data.unicef.org/topic/child-

health/malaria/. Accessed 6 July 2021.

2. Diagnostic Testing for Malaria. https://www.who.int/teams/control-of-negl
ected-tropical-diseases/yaws/diagnosis-and-treatment/global-malaria-progra
mme. Accessed 6 July 2021.

3. Prevention, CDC-Centers for Disease Control and. CDC - Malaria - Diagno-

sis & Treatment (United States) - Diagnosis (U.S.). 31 Jan. 2019, https://www.
cdc.gov/malaria/diagnosis treatment/diagnosis.html.

4. Cunningham, Jane, et al. “A Review of the WHO Malaria Rapid Diagnostic
Test Product Testing Programme (2008–2018): Performance, Procurement
and Policy.” Malaria Journal, vol. 18, no. 1, Dec. 2019, p. 387. BioMed
Central, doi:10.1186/s12936-019-3028-z.

5. Naicker, Saraladevi, et al. “Shortage of Healthcare Workers in Developing
Countries–Africa.” Ethnicity & Disease, vol. 19, no. 1 Suppl 1, 2009, pp.
S1-60–64.

6. Rajaraman, Sivaramakrishnan, et al. “Performance Evaluation of Deep Neu-
ral Ensembles toward Malaria Parasite Detection in Thin-Blood Smear Im-
ages.” PeerJ, vol. 7, May 2019, p. e6977. DOI.org (Crossref), doi:10.7717/peer
j.6977.

7. Simonyan, Karen, and Andrew Zisserman. “Very Deep Convolutional Net-
works for Large-Scale Image Recognition.” ArXiv:1409.1556 [Cs], 6, Apr.
2015. arXiv.org, http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556.

8. Rajaraman, Sivaramakrishnan, et al. “Pre-Trained Convolutional Neural
Networks as Feature Extractors toward Improved Malaria Parasite Detec-
tion in Thin Blood Smear Images.” PeerJ, vol. 6, 2018, p. e4568. PubMed,
doi:10.7717/peerj.4568.

9. Pattanaik, Priyadarshini Adyasha, et al. “Deep CNN Frameworks Com-
parison for Malaria Diagnosis.” ArXiv:1909.02829 [Cs, Eess], Sept. 2019.
arXiv.org, http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.02829.

10. Masud, Mehedi, et al. “Leveraging Deep Learning Techniques for Malaria
Parasite Detection Using Mobile Application.” Wireless Communications
and Mobile Computing, vol. 2020, July 2020, p. e8895429. www.hindawi.com,
doi:10.1155/2020/8895429.

End-to-end Malaria Diagnosis and 3D Cell Rendering with Deep Learning

7

11. Shekar, Gautham, et al. “Malaria Detection Using Deep Learning.” 2020 4th
International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics (ICOEI)
(48184), 2020, pp. 746–50. IEEE Xplore, doi:10.1109/ICOEI48184.2020.9143
023.

12. Yang, Feng, et al. “Smartphone-Supported Malaria Diagnosis Based on Deep
Learning.” Machine Learning in Medical Imaging, edited by Heung-Il Suk
et al., Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 73–80. Springer Link,
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-32692-0 9.

13. Lin, Chen-Hsuan, et al. “Learning Eﬃcient Point Cloud Generation for
Dense 3D Object Reconstruction.” ArXiv:1706.07036 [Cs], June 2017. arXiv.
org, http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.07036.

14. EchoAR Queries. https://docs.echoar.xyz/queries. Accessed 6 July 2021.
15. Ozdalga, Errol, et al. “The Smartphone in Medicine: A Review of Current
and Potential Use Among Physicians and Students.” Journal of Medical
Internet Research, vol. 14, no. 5, Sept. 2012, p. e128. PubMed Central,
doi:10.2196/jmir.1994.

16. “Foldscope Instruments | Magnify Your Curiosity.” Foldscope Instruments,

https://www.foldscope.com. Accessed 6 July 2021.

