Scaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

Scaling Theory of Three-Dimensional Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

M. Arencibia,1 P. A. Cassak,2 M. A. Shay,3 and E. R. Priest4
1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506,
USAa)
2)Department of Physics and Astronomy and Center for KINETIC Plasma Physics, West Virginia University, Morgantown,
WV 26506, USAb)
3)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware 19716,
USA
4)St Andrews University Mathematics Department St Andrews University St Andrews KY16 8QR UK

We develop a ﬁrst-principles scaling theory of the spreading of three-dimensional (3D) magnetic reconnection of ﬁnite
extent in the out of plane direction. This theory addresses systems with or without an out of plane (guide) magnetic ﬁeld,
and with or without Hall physics. The theory reproduces known spreading speeds and directions with and without guide
ﬁelds, unifying previous knowledge in a single theory. New results include: (1) Reconnection spreads in a particular
direction if an x-line is induced at the interface between reconnecting and non-reconnecting regions, which is controlled
by the out of plane gradient of the electric ﬁeld in the outﬂow direction. (2) The spreading mechanism for anti-parallel
collisionless reconnection is convection, as is known, but for guide ﬁeld reconnection it is magnetic ﬁeld bending.
We conﬁrm the theory using 3D two-ﬂuid and resistive-magnetohydrodynamics simulations. (3) The theory explains
why anti-parallel reconnection in resistive-magnetohydrodynamics does not spread. (4) The simulation domain aspect
ratio, associated with the free magnetic energy, inﬂuences whether reconnection spreads or convects with a ﬁxed x-line
length. (5) We perform a simulation initiating anti-parallel collisionless reconnection with a pressure pulse instead of
a magnetic perturbation, ﬁnding spreading is unchanged rather than spreading at the magnetosonic speed as previously
suggested. The results provide a theoretical framework for understanding spreading beyond systems studied here, and
are important for applications including two-ribbon solar ﬂares and reconnection in Earth’s magnetosphere.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Magnetic reconnection is a fundamental process that con-
verts magnetic energy into kinetic and thermal plasma energy
through a change in magnetic topology1,2. It mediates erup-
tive solar ﬂares3 and geomagnetic substorms4 and is thought
to be an important process in numerous settings in high-
energy astrophysics [e.g.,5,6 and references therein]. Early
models treated reconnection as two-dimensional (2D)7–9, but
naturally-occurring reconnection is a 3D process [e.g.,10,11].

One way the 3D nature of reconnection is manifested is
that the x-line where the magnetic ﬁeld topology changes has
a ﬁnite extent in the direction normal to the plane of recon-
nection. [Note, we use the term "x-line" to refer simply to
the line along which reconnection takes place, regardless of
whether it is a separator, quasi-separator or a squashed 3D
null point12. We do not use the term to mean a line of x-
points, which can arise in 2D systems but is topologically
unstable in 3D.] Spatially conﬁned reconnection regions for
which the extent of the region undergoing reconnection does
not change in time have been studied theoretically and nu-
merically (Refs.13–19 and Pyakurel et al., submitted). Al-
ternately, the region undergoing reconnection can elongate,
which we synonymously call spreading, over time. Such
behavior has been observed in the solar corona during two-
ribbon solar ﬂares20–28 and prominence eruptions29, at Earth’s
magnetopause30–32, in Earth’s magnetotail4,33–35, and in labo-
ratory reconnection experiments36–39, and is thought to occur
in the production of extremely extended reconnection events

in the solar wind17,40,41. Studying how reconnection spreads,
which is the focus of the present study, is important in many
settings because it impacts secondary processes such as par-
ticle acceleration and the global efﬁciency of the release of
large-scale magnetic energy.

There have been many numerical studies of 3D reconnec-
tion spreading in various settings. During anti-parallel quasi-
2D reconnection, the consensus is that spreading occurs in the
direction perpendicular to the reconnection plane at the speed
and direction of the current carriers13,15,42–48. If one species
carries all the current, the spreading is unidirectional; if both
species carry some current the spreading is bidirectional.

A number of physical mechanisms for spreading have been
suggested. It was argued42 that spreading of collisionless re-
connection is caused by electrons convecting the reconnected
magnetic into the region not undergoing reconnection [see
also13,49]. They argued it was caused by a shock-like “recon-
nection wave” and motivated the result using linear theory.
The electron magnetohydrodynamic (eMHD) induction equa-
tion is

∂ B
∂t

=

1
ne

∇ × (J × B),

(1)

where B is the magnetic ﬁeld, n is the number density, e is the
proton charge, J = (c/4π)∇ ×B is the current density, and c is
the speed of light. Linearizing around the out of plane current
proﬁle, the perturbed reconnected (normal) magnetic ﬁeld B1n
is governed by

∂ B1n
∂t

+

J
ne

· ∇B1n = 0.

(2)

a)Electronic mail: miarencibia@mix.wvu.edu
b)Electronic mail: Paul.Cassak@mail.wvu.edu

This shows that the magnetic ﬁeld of the x-line is convected at
a velocity associated with the current carriers, assumed to be

1
2
0
2

l
u
J

1
3

]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
4
9
2
0
0
.
8
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Scaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

2

electrons in their work. When ions carry some of the current,
spreading occurs at the speed of the current carriers in their re-
spective directions13,45,47. If the thickness of the current sheet
is w0, then in the reference frame in which the electrons carry
all the current, the spreading speed vs scales as

,

∼

(3)

vs ∼

= cA

J
ne

di
w0

cBup
4πnew0
where Bup is the upstream reconnecting magnetic ﬁeld
strength, di = c/ωpi = (mic2/4πne2)1/2 is the ion inertial
scale, cA = Bup/(4πnmi)1/2 is the Alfvén speed based on Bup,
and mi is the ion mass. The functional dependence on w0 was
conﬁrmed in simulations13, and it was similarly shown that
the relevant speed of the current carriers is that of the initial
current sheet thickness w0 rather than the kinetic-scale thick-
ness after reconnection has started45,50. Interestingly, if elec-
trons carry all the current for anti-parallel reconnection, it was
shown that reconnection does not spread in the resistive-MHD
model47. Moreover, reconnection can merely convect without
the region undergoing reconnection elongating in the out of
plane direction13.

An alternate mechanism for collisionless anti-parallel re-
connection spreading was presented, based on pressure in-
stead of magnetic ﬁeld43,47. The region where reconnection
occurs was found to be of lower plasma pressure than the non-
reconnecting regions. The low pressure convects with the cur-
rent carriers into the non-reconnecting regions, inducing in-
wards ﬂow which causes reconnection sequentially in the out
of plane direction. A related model was developed to explain
observations of impulsive reconnection in the Magnetic Re-
connection eXperiment (MRX)38,39. In their experiment, the
initial conditions had an electron ﬂow gradient in the out of
plane direction. This gradient requires an inﬂow in an ad-
jacent non-reconnecting region to preserve mass continuity,
producing a sequential onset of reconnection.

Spreading of magnetic reconnection is qualitatively differ-
ent when there is a background out of plane (guide) mag-
netic ﬁeld, which commonly is present in reconnection in so-
lar ﬂares28, the solar wind51, and the dayside magnetopause31.
Laboratory experiments showed that, for a strong guide ﬁeld,
the spreading is bidirectional with a speed given by the Alfvén
speed cAz = B0z/(4πmin)1/2 based on the guide ﬁeld strength
B0z rather than the speed of the current carriers36:

vs = ±cAz.

(4)

Two-ﬂuid simulations found the same scaling with the out-of-
plane (guide) magnetic ﬁeld46,52. The spreading has been de-
scribed as being mediated by Alfvén waves46, whistler waves
and ﬂow induced waves52, and kinetic Alfvén waves50. Re-
cently, it was shown in simulations of guide ﬁeld reconnection
with asymmetric plasma conditions that spreading in current
sheets thinner than ion scales is bidirectional at the Alfvén
speed, but is at the current carrier speed for thicker current
sheets50. The different behavior for different current sheet
thicknesses was attributed to the reduced tearing instability
growth rate for wider current sheets. A guide ﬁeld can also
impede the spreading of reconnection due to the presence of
multiple oblique x-lines53.

This study presents a number of new results on the funda-
mental physics of the spreading of reconnection of ﬁnite ex-
tent. We generalize the theory of anti-parallel reconnection
spreading42, showing that it can be interpreted in the form of
a scaling analysis and showing that the same theory can be
used to derive from ﬁrst principles the scaling of the spread-
ing speed in the strong guide ﬁeld limit, thereby uniting the
understanding of reconnection spreading under a single ﬁrst
principles approach. New results include: (1) We argue that
the key physical aspect of x-line spreading is the induction
of an x-line topology in the non-reconnecting region [see also
Jain et al. (2013)48], which is carried out by the gradient in the
electric ﬁeld in the outﬂow direction at the interface between
the reconnecting and non-reconnecting regions. If an x-line
topology is not induced in a given direction, reconnection does
not spread in that direction. (2) The physical cause of recon-
nection spreading without and with a guide ﬁeld are different,
with convection at the Hall scale and MHD-scale magnetic
ﬁeld bending, respectively, playing key roles. We validate the
theoretical results using 3D two-ﬂuid and resistive-MHD nu-
merical simulations, for both anti-parallel and guide ﬁeld re-
connection. (3) The theory explains why anti-parallel recon-
nection in the resistive-MHD model does not spread47.
(4)
We ﬁnd that a determining factor for whether a current sheet
spreads or convects with a ﬁxed length in a numerical sim-
ulation is the aspect ratio of the domain, which we suggest
is controlled by the amount of free magnetic energy in the
system. (5) Finally, we perform a test of whether the results
obtained herein are dependent on the manner in which recon-
nection is excited in the system. This is important because
it has been suggested54 that reconnection spreads at the fast
magnetosonic speed rather than the speed of the current carri-
ers. Physically, this mechanism could occur if reconnection is
initiated through a pressure pulse squeezing the current sheet.
As simulations typically initiate reconnection using a mag-
netic perturbation, it is important to assess whether the speed
of the spreading depends on the way in which reconnection
is seeded. Using a pressure pulse to initiate reconnection, we
ﬁnd that anti-parallel reconnection spreads at the current car-
rier speed rather than the magnetosonic speed.

The layout of this paper is as follows. In Sec. II, we discuss
the theory of 3D reconnection spreading and derive a number
of key implications about the physical cause of reconnection
spreading and applications to collisionless and collisional sys-
tems with and without a guide ﬁeld. In Sec. III, we discuss our
numerical simulation setup. In Sec. IV, we discuss the results
of our simulations. We offer conclusions and discuss new in-
sights as a result of this work in Sec. V.

II. THEORY OF RECONNECTION SPREADING

A. General considerations

We use a coordinate system in which z is the direction of
the initial current, the current sheet is centered around y = ycs,
and x is the direction of the equilibrium reconnecting magnetic
ﬁeld, with Bx > 0 for y < ycs and Bx < 0 for y > ycs. We

Scaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

3

use a reference frame where the electrons fully carry the out
of plane current. The asymptotic reconnecting magnetic ﬁeld
strength is B0, there may be a guide ﬁeld of strength B0z, and
the current sheet has an initial thickness w0. The system is
sketched schematically in Fig. 1 for the case without a guide
ﬁeld. The y = ycs plane is shown with two dotted lines. At a
given time, reconnection is occurring in a localized part of the
current sheet with ﬁnite out of plane extent 2λ , shown with
orange shading in the ﬁgure, while the parts of the system
shaded blue are not undergoing reconnection.

As in the model reviewed in the Introduction, we consider
the time evolution of the reconnected magnetic ﬁeld By. To
generalize the previous approach42, we begin from Faraday’s
law, ∂ B/∂t = −c∇ × E, where E is the electric ﬁeld. At the
interface between reconnecting and non-reconnecting regions,
gradients in the z direction exceed gradients in the x direction,
so the term that dominates By production is [see also48]

∂ By
∂t

≈ −c

∂ Ex
∂ z

.

(5)

A scaling analysis allows us to ﬁnd a characteristic out of
plane spreading speed vs, given by

vs =

∆z
∆t

≈ −c

∆Ex
∆By

,

(6)

where the spatial ﬁnite difference ∆z is evaluated at the bound-
ary between the reconnecting and non-reconnecting regions,
and we associate ∆z/∆t with the speed of the spreading vs.
We retain the minus sign, as it gives information about the
direction of propagation.

We ﬁrst make contact with previous work. For anti-parallel
collisionless reconnection, it was argued that reconnection
spreading occurs via out of plane convection by the electrons.
The electric ﬁeld associated with this is Ex ∼ −JzBy/nec, from
the Hall term. Using this in Eq. (6) and taking ∆By (cid:39) By at the
interface between reconnecting and non-reconnecting regions
gives

vs ≈

∆(JzBy/ne)
∆By

≈

Jz
ne

.

(7)

This reproduces the result that reconnection spreads at the
speed and direction of the current carriers in Eq. (2). In our
approach, the result follows from a scaling analysis rather than
linear theory.

In what follows, we argue that Eq. (6) is useful for predict-
ing the spreading speed beyond only anti-parallel reconnec-
tion. More generally, the component of the net electric ﬁeld
in the outﬂow direction Ex is given by the generalized Ohm’s
law

vyBz − vzBy
c

JyBz − JzBy
nec

−

+

Ex = −

+ ηJx,
(8)
where v is the (ion) bulk ﬂow velocity, pe is the (scalar) elec-
tron pressure, me is the electron mass, and η is the resistivity.
The right hand side includes the convection term, Hall term,

+

me
ne2

dJx
dt

1
ne

∂ pe
∂ x

electron pressure gradient term, electron inertia term, and re-
sistive term in order of appearance. We show that in differ-
ent settings, different terms can dominate. We ﬁnd the elec-
tron pressure gradient and electron inertia terms do not impact
spreading in current sheets at or above ion inertial scale thick-
nesses.

Before considering speciﬁc systems, we elucidate what our
approach reveals about the physical mechanism for reconnec-
tion spreading. Previous work42 suggested the evolution of
By is what determines spreading. Physically, in order to seed
an x-line in a plane in which there is initially no x-line, one
needs to generate a normal magnetic ﬁeld By with a bipolar
structure of the proper polarity [see also48]. If the x coordi-
nate of the x-line is x(cid:48), then an x-line is seeded if By > 0 for
x < x(cid:48) and By < 0 for x > x(cid:48) for the assumed Bx directional-
ity. From Eq. (5), the signs of the gradient of the electric ﬁeld
Ex at the ends of the region undergoing reconnection deter-
mine whether ∂ By/∂t is locally positive or negative for x < x(cid:48)
and x > x(cid:48), which determines whether an x-line develops over
time in the non-reconnecting region. We argue the sign of the
gradient of the electric ﬁeld in the outﬂow direction is a more
fundamental interpretation of how reconnection spreads via
convection.

We note a subtlety that is important for numerical studies
of reconnection spreading and may be important in naturally
occurring reconnection. Many theoretical developments of re-
connection spreading, including the treatment in this section,
are based on the propagation of a small By into regions not pre-
viously undergoing reconnection. However, the presence of
By is not synonymous with the onset of reconnection. Rather,
the presence of By triggers the tearing instability which makes
By grow in time, and it is only after getting to large amplitudes
that steady reconnection is set up. Thus, there is a time delay
between when By spreads into a region not undergoing recon-
nection and when reconnection begins in earnest. This has
been seen in previous simulation studies42, and more recently
has been noted as an important factor in the spreading of re-
connection in thick current sheets for which the time scale
of the tearing instability is longer50. For the present study,
the time delay between the appearance of By and the onset of
full-ﬂedged reconnection is the same at all locations, so the
spreading speed of reconnection is unchanged by the delay.
Consequently, in this study, it is sufﬁcient to study the spread-
ing speed of the normal magnetic ﬁeld By as a proxy for the
spreading speed of the onset of full-ﬂedged magnetic recon-
nection.

B. Spreading of collisionless anti-parallel reconnection

We exploit the results of the previous subsection to develop
new insight on the physics of spreading for anti-parallel col-
lisionless (Hall) reconnection. In Fig. 1, the dark blue arrows
represent magnetic ﬁeld lines within the blue shaded regions
in which reconnection is not taking place, which are straight
because there is no reconnection to bend them towards the
y = ycs plane. In contrast, the dashed orange arrows depict
the projection of a representative reconnecting magnetic ﬁeld

Scaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

4

FIG. 1. Sketch of a system undergoing anti-parallel reconnection in a localized region in the out of plane direction from −λ < z < λ ,
motivating the physics behind why reconnection spreads in the direction of electron convection. Orange shading denotes the ﬁnite domain
where reconnection is taking place, and it is not taking place in the blue shaded region. The projection of a representative reconnecting magnetic
ﬁeld line in the orange region is shown in the xy plane as the dashed orange line, with a dotted orange X denoting the x-line. The reconnected
components of the magnetic ﬁeld in the orange region are denoted by thick vertical orange arrows. The Hall electric ﬁeld component Ex shown
as purple arrows points away from the x-line in the reconnecting region and is zero elsewhere. The gradient in Ex at the z = −λ interface
produces a normal magnetic ﬁeld By that promotes an x-line topology (black arrows), extending the x-line and causing spreading. At the z = λ
edge, the By produced opposes an x-line topology (black arrows), so reconnection does not spread in that direction.

line in the xy plane within the orange shaded region where re-
connection is occurring, which bend in towards the x-line. As
previously noted13,42, the out of plane current is carried in the
z direction by electrons convecting in the −z direction. Thus,
the x-line topology governed by By, depicted by the thick ver-
tical orange arrows in the region undergoing reconnection, is
convected in the −z direction and reconnection spreads in that
direction (the green arrow) in this reference frame.

We reinterpret this in terms of the electric ﬁeld Ex and the
induced magnetic ﬁeld in the non-reconnecting regions.
In
the region where reconnection is taking place, the out of plane
current Jz (the thick black arrow) in the presence of the recon-
nected magnetic ﬁeld By (the thick orange arrows, negative for
x > x(cid:48), positive for x < x(cid:48)) produces a non-zero component of
the Hall electric ﬁeld in the outﬂow direction Ex ≈ −JzBy/nec,
pointing away from the x-line as denoted by the purple arrows.
This Ex is relatively uniform between z = −λ and z = λ , but
at the boundaries of the reconnecting region at z = ±λ , there
is a non-zero out of plane gradient ∂ Ex/∂ z. From Faraday’s
law, this produces a ∂ By/∂t in the adjacent non-reconnecting
planes, positive for x > x(cid:48), z = λ and x < x(cid:48), z = −λ and neg-
ative for x < x(cid:48), z = λ and x > x(cid:48), z = −λ , represented by the
four thin black arrows in the z = ±λ planes. For the non-
reconnecting plane adjacent to the z = −λ boundary, there
is initially no By, so the presence of a ∂ By/∂t generates a

magnetic ﬁeld that seeds an x-line topology (shown as an
X with black dotted lines), thus promoting the spreading of
the x-line in the direction of electron convection, as expected.
In contrast, in the non-reconnecting plane adjacent to z = λ ,
∂ By/∂t has the opposite polarity, which serves to weaken the
existing By, and thus the x-line and therefore reconnection do
not spread in the +z direction. This provides an alternate,
but equivalent, understanding of why reconnection does not
spread in the direction of the current in the reference frame in
which the electrons carry the current.

C. Lack of spreading of anti-parallel reconnection in
resistive-MHD

In collisional reconnection described by resistive-MHD,
the Hall, electron pressure, and electron inertia terms are
dropped from the generalized Ohm’s law [Eq. (8)]. Then,
the only terms that can produce an Ex are −vyBz/c, vzBy/c,
and ηJx. For anti-parallel collisional reconnection in the ref-
erence frame in which the electrons carry the out of plane
current, Bz and vz are both zero. Thus, there is no spread-
ing in collisional reconnection due to convection in the refer-
ence frame in which the electrons carry the out of plane cur-
rent. This result is consistent with previous resistive MHD

yxz!!≈−$"%#&'(!E!!z>0!E!!z>0!E!!z<0!E!!z<0%%ReconnectionspreadsJ$Initially reconnectingz=−λz=λInitially not reconnectingInitially not reconnecting!!=-promotes x-linetopologyopposes x-linetopology!!=-!!=-!!=-!!Scaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

5

simulations47, and provides a ﬁrst-principles reason for the
absence of spreading in this case. We point out that the re-
sistive term, with Ex = ηJx, can in principle cause spreading.
This spreading is bidirectional, as magnetic diffusion of By at
the boundary between the reconnecting and non-reconnecting
region induces an x-line topology in the non-reconnection
part. Using ∆Ex = ∆(ηJx) ∼ ηcBy/4πLz0, where Lz0 is the
length scale of the transition between the reconnecting and
non-reconnecting regions, Eq. (6) gives

|vs| ∼

ηc2
4πLz0

,

(9)

i.e., the diffusion velocity across the boundary. This mech-
anism may be relevant for spreading in collisional plasmas,
such as the chromosphere or some laboratory experiments.
However, for most settings of heliophysical interest, the resis-
tivity is exceedingly small, so the spreading due to resistivity
is small on dynamical time scales.

D. Spreading of guide ﬁeld reconnection

The physical cause of reconnection spreading with a non-
zero guide ﬁeld B0z is fundamentally different than with no
guide ﬁeld. For simplicity, we consider the limit where the
guide ﬁeld is much larger than the reconnecting magnetic
ﬁeld, B0z (cid:29) B0, and that the current sheet is not sufﬁciently
thicker than the ion gyroscale, at which point the mechanism
for reconnection spreading can change because of the guide
ﬁeld dependence of guide ﬁeld reconnection on the growth
rate of the collisionless tearing instability50. Figure 2 shows a
sketch of reconnection spreading in the large guide ﬁeld limit.
As in Fig. 1, blue regions are not initially undergoing recon-
nection. The magnetic ﬁeld in this region is shown with dark
blue lines, depicted with a strong z component. The region
initially undergoing reconnection with length 2λ is shown in
orange. As reconnection occurs, the upstream magnetic ﬁeld
in this region convects inward towards the neutral line, shown
in dark orange lines. This bends the upstream magnetic ﬁeld,
introducing a kink in the magnetic ﬁeld localized near the
interface of the reconnecting and non-reconnecting regions.
This kinked magnetic ﬁeld provides a curvature force, which
drives a bulk ﬂow in the vertical (±y) direction, depicted as
red arrows near the z = ±λ planes. The ﬂow, therefore, has
a quadrupolar structure in the xz plane. The normal ﬂow in a
region with a guide ﬁeld produces a convective electric ﬁeld
Ex ≈ −vyBz/c, depicted by the purple arrows. It is strongest
in a thin region near the interface, and also has a quadrupo-
lar structure in the xz plane. Since Ex has a gradient in the z
direction, Faraday’s law implies that By is generated in that re-
gion, with the sign of By being given by Eq. (5). The induced
By ﬁelds are depicted by the thin black arrows at z = ±λ . At
both edges, the magnetic topology generated by the induced
By is of an x-line, so the x-line spreads in both out-of-plane
directions. This is consistent with the known result that guide
ﬁeld reconnection spreads bidirectionally. We stress that this
sketch of the physics is valid for both collisionless and colli-
sional reconnection. Essentially, this bending of the magnetic

ﬁeld line is physically similar to a rotational discontinuity or
launching an Alfvén wave. For collisionless reconnection in
current sheets at gyroscales, this ﬁeld line bending becomes a
kinetic Alfvén wave, as was previously elucidated50.

We now perform a scaling analysis to obtain the spreading
speed in the strong guide ﬁeld limit. The bulk ﬂow in the y
direction due to the curvature force from the bent upstream
magnetic ﬁeld is described by the momentum equation

∂ vy
∂t

≈

B0z
4πmin

∂ By
∂ z

.

(10)

In writing this, we use that the large guide ﬁeld limit implies
vyB0z (cid:29) vzBy in the convection electric ﬁeld in Ohm’s law, as
both the out of plane bulk ﬂow vz and the reconnected ﬁeld By
are small during the early stages of reconnection.

A scaling analysis on this equation gives

vy ∼

B0z∆By
4πminvs

,

(11)

where we have taken ∆vy ∼ vy between adjacent reconnect-
ing and non-reconnecting planes and vs = ∆z/∆t as per equa-
tion (6). Then, the relevant term in Eq. (8) gives Ex as

Ex ≈ −

vyB0z
c

∼ −

B2
0z∆By
4πminvsc

,

(12)

and using this result in Eq. (6) reveals

vs ≈ ±

(cid:33)1/2

(cid:32)

B2
0z
4πmin

= ±cAz.

(13)

This reproduces the known result that reconnection with a
large guide ﬁeld spreads bidirectionally at the Alfvén speed
based on the guide ﬁeld cAz in Eq. (4).

III. SIMULATION SETUP

Simulations are carried out using the two-ﬂuid code F3D55,
which updates the continuity, momentum,
induction, and
pressure equations, and can include the Hall, resistive, and
electron inertia terms in the generalized Ohm’s law. Time
is stepped forward using the trapezoidal leapfrog algorithm56
and spatial derivatives are fourth order ﬁnite differences. For
simulations with the Hall term, lengths are normalized to the
ion inertial scale di0 = (mic2/4πn0e2)1/2, time is normalized
to the inverse ion cyclotron frequency Ω−1
ci0 = mic/eB0, veloc-
ities to the Alfvén speed cA0 = B0/
4πmin0, electric ﬁelds to
cA0B0/c, and temperatures to mic2
A0/kB, where B0 is the initial
upstream reversing magnetic ﬁeld magnitude, n0 is the initial
upstream density, and kB is Boltzmann’s constant. When the
Hall term is absent, the only differences to the normalizations
are that lengths are normalized to an arbitrary length LMHD,
times are normalized to LMHD/cA0, and resistivity is normal-
ized to 4πcA0LMHD/c2.

√

Scaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

6

FIG. 2. Analogously to Fig. 1, sketch of a system undergoing guide ﬁeld reconnection in a localized region in the out of plane direction from
−λ < z < λ , motivating the physics behind why guide ﬁeld reconnection spreads bidirectionally. Reconnection between −λ < z < λ convects
the magnetic ﬁeld towards the neutral line, which sets up a strongly bent magnetic ﬁeld at the interfaces. This strong magnetic curvature drives
ﬂow in the normal direction (red arrows). This ﬂow immersed in the guide ﬁeld sets up an Ex, shown as the purple arrows. The gradient in Ex
at the interfaces produces x-lines at both the ±λ boundaries, extending the x-line in both directions.

The computational domain has dimensions Lx × Ly × Lz =
102.4 × 51.2 × 256.0, where x and y correspond to the out-
ﬂow and inﬂow directions in 2D, respectively, and z is per-
pendicular to the 2D reconnecting plane. Boundary condi-
tions are triply periodic, and the system size is chosen to be
large enough that the boundaries do not impact the relevant
dynamics. The grid scale is ∆x × ∆y × ∆z = 0.05 × 0.05 × 1.0.
The lower resolution in the out-of-plane direction has been
used before13,46, and is justiﬁed since out-of-plane dynamics
in our setup change more slowly than dynamics in the recon-
nection plane. When electron inertia is included, the ion-to-
electron mass ratio is mi/me = 25, and we expect the rele-
vant results are independent of this value, since previous work
on the spreading of anti-parallel reconnection has shown that
the dynamics of x-line spreading are insensitive to the mass
ratio13 and the terms in Ohm’s law that contribute to reconnec-
tion spreading in the theory (the Hall and convection electric
ﬁelds) are independent of the mass ratio.

The initial conditions consist of two oppositely directed
current sheets. The x-component of the initial magnetic
ﬁeld is given by B0x = tanh[(y + Ly/4)/w0] − tanh[(y −
Ly/4)/w0)] − 1, where w0 is the initial current sheet thick-
ness. When a guide ﬁeld B0z is included, it is uniform. The
initial density is uniform with a value of 1, and a non-uniform
temperature varying from 1 to 1.5 is used to balance magnetic
pressure in the current sheet. The plasma pressure is provided
fully by ions and is treated as adiabatic, while the electrons
are assumed cold at all times. The electrons carry all of the

initial current.

The resistivity η is identically zero for simulations employ-
ing the Hall term, and is 0.004 for the resistive-MHD simula-
tions. Fourth-order diffusion is included in all equations with
coefﬁcients D4x = D4y = 1.6 × 10−5 and a larger diffusion co-
efﬁcient in the z direction D4z = 1.6 × 10−1 because the grid
scale is larger. The time step is 0.02 for all simulations with
no guide ﬁeld. For simulations with a guide ﬁeld, a smaller
time step of 0.01 and a larger fourth-order diffusion coefﬁ-
cient D4z = 6.4 × 10−1 are used to account for the faster dy-
namics in the out of plane direction. The diffusion coefﬁcient
and time step values are varied in trial simulations to ensure
they do not play any signiﬁcant role in the numerics.

We employ simulations with initial thickness w0 = 1.0. We
repeat the simulation of anti-parallel reconnection with differ-
ent uniform current sheet thicknesses w0 = 0.5, 2.0 and 3.0
and the guide ﬁeld simulation with w0 = 2 to conﬁrm that in
all cases, the local physics remain qualitatively similar to their
w0 = 1 counterparts and that the spreading speeds are consis-
tent with previous work13. When a guide ﬁeld is included, we
use B0z = 3.0, which is sufﬁcient to be in the large guide ﬁeld
limit.

Unless otherwise stated, we initialize the simulations with
a coherent perturbation in the magnetic ﬁeld. To do so, the z

yxz!!≈−.#%"(%ReconnectionspreadsJ$z=−λz=λReconnectionspreads!!=-!!=-!E!!z>0!E!!z<0!E!!z>0!E!!z<0Initially reconnectingInitially not reconnectingInitially not reconnectingv%promotes x-linetopologypromotes x-linetopologyScaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

7

component of the perturbed vector potential is deﬁned as
(cid:18) 2πx
Lx

(cid:18) 4π(y − Ly/4)
Ly

A1z(x, y, z) =

˜B1Lx
4π

1 + cos

(cid:19)(cid:21)

sin

(cid:20)

(cid:19)

f (z)

(14)
for y ≥ 0 and 0 for y < 0, where ˜B1 = 0.005 is a constant and
the envelope f (z) has the form
(cid:18) z + w0pert
2

(cid:18) z − w0pert
2

− tanh

f (z) =

tanh

(15)

(cid:19)(cid:21)

1
2

(cid:19)

(cid:20)

,

where w0pert deﬁnes the initial half-extent of the coherent per-
turbation in the out of plane direction. We use w0pert = 15
unless stated otherwise. The resulting magnetic perturbation
B1 = −ˆz × ∇A1z seeds an x-line/o-line pair in the xy plane
for only the upper current sheet at y = ycs = Ly/4, localized
to −w0pert < z < w0pert . We perturb only the upper current
sheet because doing so prolongs the timescale for the inter-
action between the two current sheets due to ﬂows in the y-
direction and thus ensures the reconnection occurring in the
upper sheet at later times is purely due to reconnection spread-
ing in the upper sheet. To ensure the spreading has no de-
pendence on w0pert , we perform a suite of simulations with
an anti-parallel ﬁeld conﬁguration with w0 = 1 with varying
w0pert of 9, 12, 15, and 30, with all other parameters held the
same. We ﬁnd that w0pert affects the initial extent of the re-
connection region in the z direction at the time of onset, which
is to be expected, but the spreading of reconnection is unaf-
Incoherent noise in the x and y components of the
fected.
magnetic ﬁeld at the 10−5 level is also used to break symme-
try, which prevents secondary magnetic islands from staying
in the initial x-line location55.

IV. RESULTS

A. Anti-parallel collisionless reconnection spreading

We begin by testing the theory in Sec. II B. To do so, we
need to verify the structure and the dominant contributor of
the electric ﬁeld Ex and the time evolution of the magnetic
ﬁeld By near the boundary of the initial reconnecting region.
We investigate the electric and magnetic ﬁeld structure at
t = 10, when the perturbed By is spreading out from its ini-
tial location, but before full-ﬂedged reconnection is going at
its steady rate (which occurs closer to t = 80), as discussed in
Section II A. Figure 3 shows the net electric ﬁeld component
Ex. Planar cuts through the upper (perturbed) current sheet
y = ycs = 12.8 and through the reconnecting planes at z = 2
and z = −20 near the boundaries of where reconnection oc-
curs are shown. These z planes are selected because the x-line
seeded by the perturbation is initially between z = ±15, but
this region drifts in the −z direction, the direction of electron
convection. The initial convection of the perturbed region be-
fore reconnection spreads is consistent with the behavior ob-
served in Fig. 1 of Huba and Rudakov (2002)42, though it was
not discussed in their study.

The red-white-blue color map for the electric ﬁeld Ex
ranges from −0.005 to 0.005. The two zeroes of Ex in the

reconnecting region (in white) at x = x(cid:48) = −25.6 and x = 25.6
coincide with the x-line and o-line, respectively. The elec-
tric ﬁeld Ex is qualitatively similar at later times when the x-
line is signiﬁcantly longer in extent in the −z direction. The
bipolar structure of Ex points outwards from the x-line, con-
sistent with the sketch in Fig. 1. The largest contributor to Ex
is the Hall term EHall
x = −JzBy/nec, as expected42. It has a
maximum magnitude of 0.005 and is two orders of magnitude
larger than the next largest contribution from the convection
term vzBy/c.

x

To quantitatively conﬁrm that the induction of By is caused
, we compute the out of plane gradient ∂ EHall
by EHall
/∂ z at
x
both boundaries of the reconnecting region to the left and right
of the initial x-line, x = −38.4 and x = −12, respectively. We
use least squares to ﬁt a line to EHall
as a function of z through
the center line of the upper current sheet from −28 < z < −20
and 2 < z < 10 to approximate ∂ EHall
/∂ z. We calculate the
local time derivative ∂ By/∂t at the midpoint of the speciﬁed
ranges in z, determined with a time-centered difference be-
tween t = 9 and 11. The results are gathered in Table I. The
similarity between the two terms shows that the main contri-
bution to ∂ By/∂t comes from −∂ EHall

/∂ z, as expected.

x

x

x

The signs of ∂ By/∂t in the z = −24 plane are negative at
x = −12 and positive at x = −38.4, to the left and right of
the zero of By, respectively. This serves to promote an x-line
topology in the z = −24 plane. In contrast, at z = 6, the signs
of ∂ By/∂t oppose the formation of an x-line, consistent with
our explanation of why reconnection does not spread in the
z direction. These results conﬁrm our theoretical predictions
for anti-parallel collisionless reconnection spreading.

B. Guide ﬁeld collisionless reconnection spreading

We now discuss the large guide ﬁeld case. Figure 4 shows
the net electric ﬁeld component Ex at t = 10 for a simula-
tion with guide ﬁeld B0z = 3, again when the perturbed By is
spreading out from its initial location, but before full-ﬂedged
reconnection is going at its steady rate. Planar cuts are shown
at y = ycs through the upper (perturbed) current sheet and the
z = −38 and z = 38 planes near the boundaries between the
reconnecting and non-reconnecting regions. The two zeroes
of Ex at the intersections of the planes (in white) are again
located at approximately x = x(cid:48) = −25.6 and x = 25.6, coin-
ciding with the x-line and o-line, respectively. Note, Ex has a
much larger extent in the y direction than for the anti-parallel
case, which is localized within an ion inertial scale. That Ex
extends far beyond the current sheet to MHD scales is typical
of reconnection with a large guide ﬁeld. When reconnection
is occurring, ion inﬂows vy extend into the upstream region,
well outside the current layer to MHD scales. In the absence
of a guide ﬁeld B0z, the associated convection electric ﬁeld
Ex ∼ vyBz/c in the upstream region is negligible. This is be-
cause the only contribution to Bz is the quadrupolar Hall mag-
netic ﬁeld, which is very small at MHD scales upstream of
the diffusion region. This explains why Ex is localized to the
current layer in the case without a guide ﬁeld (see Fig. 3).
However, if there is a large guide ﬁeld B0z, the electric ﬁeld

Scaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

8

FIG. 3. Electric ﬁeld Ex from a 3D simulation of anti-parallel reconnection with a current sheet of initial thickness 1 at t = 10. Data are plotted
at planes of y = ycs = 12.8, z = 2, and z = −20. The x-line is at x = −25.6, and the o-line is at x = 25.6. The structure of Ex is consistent with
the sketch in Fig. 1, motivating why anti-parallel reconnection spreads only in the direction of the current carriers.

Anti-Parallel (x = −38.4, 2 < z < 10) (x = −38.4, −28 < z < −20) (x = −12, 2 < z < 10) (x = −12, −28 < z < −20)

− ∂ E Hall
x
∂ z
∂ By
∂t

-0.00045

-0.00056

0.00045

0.00058

0.00048

0.00056

-0.00048

-0.00056

TABLE I. Comparison of the out of plane gradient of the Hall electric ﬁeld −∂ EHall
/∂ z and the local time derivative ∂ By/∂t for the w0 = 1
anti-parallel collisionless reconnection simulation at t = 10. The spatial gradient is measured over the speciﬁed ranges in z near the boundaries
of the reconnecting region, and the time derivative is measured between t = 9 and 11 at the midpoint of the speciﬁed ranges in z. The agreement
conﬁrms that the electrons convect the x-line topology in the −z direction for anti-parallel reconnection.

x

Ex ∼ vyBz/c is non-zero, both at Hall scales and beyond the
current layer into MHD scales because of the ion inﬂow, as is
seen in Fig. 4

The largest contributor to the electric ﬁeld Ex during the
initial spreading phase is the convection term Econv
x = vyBz/c,
which has a maximum magnitude of 0.009 and is three times
larger than than the next largest contribution from EHall
x =
JzBy/nec. The quadrupolar structure of Ex points inwards to-
wards the x-line at z = 38 and outwards from the x-line at
z = −38, consistent with the sketch in Fig. 2.

We note that there is a small amplitude oscillatory signa-
ture at the leading edges of the Ex signal. This is reminiscent
of low amplitude oscillatory behavior observed in Jain and
Buchner’s (2017) study52 in the outermost edges of the recon-
necting region, although in our simulation we do not see the

larger amplitude oscillations they observed in between. Un-
derstanding these differences is outside of the scope of the
present study. Regardless, due to the smallness of this os-
cillatory signal in our study (∼ 0.001 compared to ∼ 0.008
for the non-oscillatory signal), it is not playing any signiﬁcant
role in the spreading. To quantitatively conﬁrm the induction
of By is caused by the convective electric ﬁeld, we compute
∂ Econv
/∂ z at both boundaries of the reconnecting region to
x
the left and right of the initial x-line, x = −38.4 and x = −12
respectively, using a similar approach as the previous subsec-
tion, at −48 < z < −38 and 38 < z < 48. We then compare to
∂ By/∂t at the midpoint of the speciﬁed ranges z = −43 and
z = 43, computed as in the previous subsection. The results
are gathered in Table II. The similarity between the two quan-
tities shows that the main contribution to ∂ By/∂t comes from

Scaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

9

Guide Field 3 (x = −38.4, 38 < z < 48) (x = −38.4, −48 < z < −38) (x = −12, 38 < z < 48) (x = −12, −48 < z < −38)

− ∂ E conv
x
∂ z
∂ By
∂t

0.00050

0.00041

0.00026

0.00035

-0.00053

-0.00043

-0.00027

-0.00038

TABLE II. Same as Table I, but for the convective electric ﬁeld at the given locations and times in the guide ﬁeld 3 case. The agreement
conﬁrms that the convection electric ﬁeld gradients propagate the x-line topology in the ±z directions for guide ﬁeld reconnection.

−∂ Econv
/∂ z, as we predict in our scaling of Eq. (12) for the
x
large guide ﬁeld limit. The signs of ∂ By/∂t show that By de-
velops with a negative sign at x = −38.4 and a positive sign at
x = −12, to the left and right of the zero of By, respectively, at
both z = −42 and z = 42. This implies the magnetic topology
is that of an x-line at both z = −42 and z = 42 planes, con-
sistent with the model for why the x-line spreads in both the z
and −z directions.

Additionally, we test the prediction that the bulk ﬂow vy is
driven by the curvature force due to the bent upstream mag-
netic ﬁeld at the boundaries of the reconnecting region by
directly computing the left and right hand sides of Eq. (10)
with simulation data. For the right hand side, we ﬁrst com-
pute ∂ By/∂ z at t = 10 near the ends of the reconnecting re-
gion through y = ycs, using a least squares ﬁt of By as a func-
tion of z from both −42 < z < −35 and 35 < z < 42 and to
the left and right of the x-line at x = −38.4 and x = −12.8,
respectively. Then, the numerical estimate for the curvature
force term is (Bz/n)∂ By/∂ z (in code units). The left hand
side ∂ vy/∂t is then computed locally at the midpoints z = 38
and z = −38 with a time-centered difference between t = 9
and 11. The results are gathered in Table III. The similarity of
the two terms is strong evidence that the curvature force drives
the bulk ﬂows vy near the boundaries of the reconnection re-
gion in guide ﬁeld reconnection. In summary, our simulation
results conﬁrm the predictions about the electric and magnetic
ﬁelds in guide ﬁeld reconnection in Section II D.

C. Spreading of collisional reconnection in resistive-MHD

Here, we study the spreading of collisional reconnection in
resistive-MHD to test the predictions in Sec. II C. For these
simulations, the initial out-of-plane length scale in z of the
transition is Lz0 = 2 from Eq. (15) and η = 0.004, so Eq. (9)
gives a predicted spreading speed of vs (cid:39) 0.002 (in code
units). For the duration of the simulations carried out here, the
distance reconnection would spread from resistive effects is
expected to be negligible. Consequently, we expect no spread-
ing for anti-parallel reconnection, but spreading will occur for
guide ﬁeld reconnection.

We carry out two 3D simulations using the resistive-MHD
model. One has no guide ﬁeld, and one has guide ﬁeld
B0z = 3. The initial current sheet thickness is w0 = 0.32.
All other system properties and initialization parameters are
the same as described in Sec. III. For the anti-parallel recon-
nection simulation, we ﬁnd that reconnection does not spread
up to the simulated time t = 200 LMHD/cA0 (not shown). If
spreading were to occur at the speed of the current carriers
vs = Jz/ne = 1/w0 ≈ 3 cA0, we would expect reconnection

would spread a distance ≈ 600 LMHD in the simulated time.
This would be clearly observable, as this is longer than the
computational domain in the z direction. The region under-
going reconnection also does not convect in the out of plane
direction, as the electrons initially carry all the current. These
ﬁndings are consistent with previous results47. The region
undergoing reconnection also does not convect in the out of
plane direction, as the electrons initially carry all the cur-
rent. With B0z = 3, reconnection spreads bidirectionally (not
shown), as in the collisionless two-ﬂuid simulation. This con-
ﬁrms that, for the parameters of our study, there is no spread-
ing for anti-parallel reconnection in which electrons carry the
current within the resistive-MHD model, that MHD physics
drives the spreading when there is a guide ﬁeld, and that col-
lisions play no important role in reconnection spreading.

D. Dependence of spreading on system aspect ratio

An interesting result arises from comparing our anti-
parallel collisionless reconnection simulation with w0 = 2
(used to conﬁrm the results from the w0 = 1 simulation do not
depend on the current sheet thickness) with previous knowl-
edge.
In particular, we ﬁnd that reconnection spreads with
w0 = 2, while a previous study found that reconnection with
a current sheet of that thickness developed a reconnecting re-
gion of ﬁnite extent in the z direction and simply convected at
the speed of the current carriers rather than spread13; see the
dashed lines of their Fig. 3a. Similar behavior was observed
in other studies of Hall reconnection spreading in relatively
thick current sheets15.

The difference between the present and previous simula-
tions is that the prior studies used a square computational do-
main in the xy−plane, whereas our domain is twice as big in
the x direction than in the y direction. We repeat our simula-
tion with a current sheet of thickness w0 = 2 in a square com-
putational domain with Lx × Ly × Lz = 51.2 × 51.2 × 256.0, as
in Shay et al. (2003)13. We also ﬁnd the x-line remains a ﬁxed
length and convects rather than spreads.

We demonstrate our result graphically using a plot of the re-
connected magnetic ﬁeld By. For a given xy plane we ﬁnd the
reconnection region by ﬁrst ﬁnding the zeroes of By through
the symmetry line of the current sheet in the y = ycs = Ly/4
plane and determine if the magnetic topology is that of an x-
line or an o-line. For a current in the z direction, By changing
from positive to negative with increasing x is an x-line and
If there are multiple
from negative to positive is an o-line.
x-lines, we deﬁne the primary one as that with the largest out-
of-plane current Jz. The strength of the reconnected ﬁeld By
increases from zero away from the reconnection region un-

Scaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

10

Momentum Eqn. (x = −38.4, 35 < z < 42) (x = −38.4, −42 < z < −35) (x = −12, 35 < z < 42) (x = −12, −42 < z < −35)

(cid:16) Bz
n

(cid:17) ∂ By
∂ z

∂ vy
∂t

-0.00021

-0.00021

0.00024

0.00014

0.00026

0.00023

-0.00043

-0.00045

TABLE III. Comparison of the curvature force term (Bz/n)∂ By/∂ z (in code units) and the local acceleration of the bulk ﬂow ∂ vy/∂t, in the
guide ﬁeld reconnection spreading simulation at t = 10. The spatial derivative is averaged over the given ranges in z near the boundaries of
the reconnecting region, and the time derivative is determined from a time-centered difference between t = 9 and 11 at the midpoint in the
speciﬁed ranges in z. This conﬁrms that the curvature force drives the vertical ﬂows.

FIG. 4. Electric ﬁeld Ex from a 3D simulation of guide ﬁeld reconnection with a guide ﬁeld 3 with a current sheet of initial thickness w0 = 1
at t = 10. Data are plotted at planes of y = ycs = 12.8, z = −38, and z = 38. The x-line is at x = −25.6, and the o-line is at x = 25.6. The
structure of Ex is consistent with the sketch in Fig. 2, motivating why reconnection spreads bidirectionally.

til the downstream edge of the electron diffusion region. At
every plane of constant z and at every time t, we use the aver-
age magnitude of By at the left and right downstream edges of
the electron diffusion region as a proxy for the appearance of
reconnection and denote this quantity as ˜By(z,t).

For the distance from the x-line to the downstream edges
of the electron diffusion region, we note that the collision-
less reconnection rate E is typically ∼ 0.1 [e.g.,57–59], which
is also comparable to the aspect ratio of the diffusion region
δ /L, where δ is its thickness (in the y direction) and L is its
length (in the x direction). The thickness of the electron diffu-
sion region2 is the electron inertial scale de, so one expects the
length L of the electron diffusion region to be approximately
10 de. For this study, L ≈ 2 di0 since de = 0.2 di. We validate
this choice by visual inspection of cuts of By, conﬁrming this

choice of L reasonably represents where the strength of the
reconnected magnetic ﬁeld is near its ﬁrst maximum. Conse-
quently, we compute the average reconnected ﬁeld magnitude
˜By(z,t) at the downstream edges of the electron diffusion re-
gion for each xy plane as
(cid:12)
(cid:12)By (x(cid:48) + L, ycs, z,t)(cid:12)

(cid:12)By (x(cid:48) − L, ycs, z,t)(cid:12)
(cid:12)

˜By(z,t) =

,

(16)

(cid:12) + (cid:12)
2

where x(cid:48) is the location of the x-line in the plane in question.
The average reconnected ﬁeld ˜By(z,t) for the upper current
sheet y = ycs = Ly/4 is shown as a stack plot of time t and
out-of-plane coordinate z for the rectangular computational
domain in Fig. 5. The time delay between the spreading of
By and the onset of full-ﬂedged reconnection is apparent as
the white space on the left side of the plot; the reconnection

Scaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

11

needed to test this hypothesis.

E. Dependence on perturbation structure

To test whether the results obtained here are dependent on
the manner in which reconnection is initiated in the system,
we carry out an anti-parallel reconnection simulation with cur-
rent sheet thickness w0 = 1, with the Hall effect and electron
inertia turned on. Instead of perturbing the current sheet with
a coherent perturbation of the magnetic ﬁeld [see Eq. (14)],
we perturb the system with localized regions of higher plasma
pressure localized just upstream of the current sheet. This per-
turbation is designed to drive ﬂow towards the current sheet in
a localized region to seed an x-line. The pressure perturbation
P1 we employ has the form

FIG. 5. Average reconnected magnetic ﬁeld ˜By(z,t), deﬁned in
Eq. (16), as a function of out of plane position z and time t, for
the anti-parallel reconnection simulation with w0 = 2. The triangles
mark where ˜By crosses over 0.04, and the white line gives the best ﬁt
of these points, giving the spreading speed vs.
This plot shows reconnection spreads, in contrast to the results in a
square computational domain in which the x-line convects without
spreading [Fig. 3a of Shay et al. (2003)13].

does not begin at z = −45 until t ≈ 170 even though the per-
turbed By would have reached that location by t = 60. The
triangular shape of ˜By(z,t) is representative of reconnection
that is spreading, and not convecting with a ﬁxed extent. A
reconnecting x-line that is merely convecting without spread-
ing would appear as a diagonal stripe, with a ﬁxed extent in
the z-direction. An example of this is in Fig. 3(a) of Shay
et al. (2013)13; the dashed lines there show a reconnecting x-
line that convects with a ﬁxed length. The interior structures
within the overall triangular region are due to magnetic is-
lands that arise after reconnection at that location has reached
its steady state. To calculate the spreading speed, we deﬁne
onset at a given xy plane to be when ˜By exceeds 0.04. Onset
times for individual xy planes are plotted in Fig. 5 as black tri-
angles for a chosen interval in −100 < z < −50. The spread-
ing speeds are simply the slope of the collection of points de-
noting the onset time. We determine this slope using a least
squares ﬁt. We ﬁnd the spreading speed is vs ≈ −0.51, con-
sistent with Eq. (3), as expected. Moreover, in a separate sim-
ulation with w0 = 3 with the same square domain, we ﬁnd
that fast reconnection does not occur in the simulated time,
whereas reconnection does occur in the rectangular cross sec-
tion domain and spreads at the current carrier speed rather
than merely convecting.

These results suggest that the aspect ratio of the reconnect-
ing plane of the computational domain contributes to whether
reconnection spreads or convects. We hypothesize that recon-
nection in the square domain stops because the reconnection
runs out of free magnetic energy relatively quickly, while in
the rectangular domain there is more free energy and thus the
reconnection persists longer, consistent with the stack plot.
This is only a single simulation, though, so future work is

(cid:40)

P1(x, y, z) = Pi1 exp

−0.5

(cid:18) y − ycs − y0pert
w0y

(cid:19)2

+

(cid:18) y − ycs + y0pert
w0y

(cid:19)2

(cid:34)(cid:18) x − x(cid:48)
w0x
(cid:19)2(cid:35)(cid:41)

+ (17)

f (z),

where Pi1 = 2 is the amplitude of the upstream pressure per-
turbation, x(cid:48) = −Lx/4 is the desired x coordinate of the x-line,
w0x = 4 is the extent of the pressure perturbation in the x di-
rection, ycs = Ly/4 is the y location of the center of the current
sheet being perturbed, w0y = 1 is the thickness of the pressure
perturbation in the y direction, y0pert = 4 is the distance up-
stream of the current layer on each side that the pressure per-
turbation is centered, and f (z) is the same envelope in Eq. (15)
enforcing localization in z between ±w0pert .

A + c2

The pressure perturbation launches a pulse that propagates
out in all directions. The ion pressure Pi in a cut through
y = ycs at t = 20 is shown in Fig. 6(a). The leading edge
of the pressure pulse at this time is at z ≈ ±50, so its ve-
locity is approximately 35 / 20 ≈ 1.75. This compares fa-
s )1/2 =
vorably to the fast magnetosonic speed, vms = (c2
(1 + 5/3)1/2 = 1.63, as expected. The pressure pulse drives
ﬂow toward the current sheet which initiates reconnection, as
desired, and the reconnection does spread in time. The recon-
nected magnetic ﬁeld By in the same plane at the same time
is shown in Fig. 6(b). The ﬁgure shows that reconnection
spreads unidirectionally in the direction of the current carri-
ers, not bidirectionally. The average reconnected ﬁeld ˜By(z,t)
at y = ycs is shown as a stack plot in Fig. 7. Using the same
method described in Sec. IV D, the reconnection spreading ve-
locity is found to be ≈ −0.92, represented as a white line. This
is consistent with the velocity of the current carriers, which is
-1 for this simulation. For reference, two dashed black lines
are sketched representing what the boundaries of the struc-
ture in the stack plot would be if reconnection were to spread
bidirectionally at the fast magnetosonic speed vms ≈ ±1.63,
showing clear disagreement.

We conclude that perturbing the current sheet using a co-
herent perturbation in the magnetic ﬁeld does not introduce
a bias in our theoretical model for anti-parallel reconnection
spreading, at least for the simulation presented here. More re-
search is needed to see whether there are scenarios in which

    050100150200250300t-100-50050100z 0.00 0.04 0.08 0.12 0.16vs = -0.51Scaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

12

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

We study the out-of-plane spreading of 3D magnetic re-
connection that begins localized in the out of plane z direc-
tion. We build off of a previously developed analysis42 for
the spreading of anti-parallel collisionless reconnection.
It
describes the unidirectional spreading as caused by electrons
convecting the reconnected magnetic ﬁeld out of the recon-
nection plane (which they dubbed a “reconnection wave”),
and quantiﬁed by the Hall term in the electron-MHD induc-
tion equation.

In this study, we re-envision the previous model using a
scaling analysis of Faraday’s law using the full generalized
Ohm’s law rather than a linear analysis. We show that the
same analytical approach can be used in a uniﬁed manner
to describe the spreading of collisionless reconnection with
a guide ﬁeld, resulting in the known spreading speed given by
the Alfvén speed and spreading bidirectionally36,46. The same
approach also provides an explanation for why anti-parallel
reconnection in resistive-MHD does not spread47.

Importantly, this new interpretation provides an alternate,
ﬁrst-principles understanding of the mechanism of reconnec-
tion spreading. In this approach, reconnection spreading oc-
curs when the x-line extends, which requires the seeding of
an x-line in the non-reconnecting region [see also Jain et al.
(2013)48]. Thus, if the normal (y) component of the magnetic
ﬁeld is induced in a way that produces an x-line topology,
then reconnection spreads. The normal magnetic ﬁeld subse-
quently grows in time due to the tearing instability [see also
Li et al. (2020)50] until steady-state reconnection is reached,
with some time delay after By enters the region previously not
undergoing reconnection. If no x-line topology is induced at
the interface between reconnecting and non-reconnecting re-
gions, then the x-line does not spread in that direction. The
induction of the normal magnetic ﬁeld is controlled by the
out of plane gradient of the component of the electric ﬁeld
in the outﬂow direction (x). For anti-parallel reconnection in
which electrons carry the current, the Hall term dominates the
Ex contribution due to electron convection. For reconnection
with a strong guide ﬁeld, spreading is caused by the bending
of the upstream magnetic ﬁeld, which occurs predominantly at
the boundary between the reconnecting and non-reconnecting
regions. This sets up a strong magnetic curvature force driving
ﬂows in the y direction. There is an associated electric ﬁeld Ex
due to convection vy through the guide ﬁeld Bz, which induces
the necessary By to produce an x-line topology in both direc-
tions. This mechanism relies only on MHD physics, showing
that collisional guide ﬁeld reconnection can spread similar to
collisionless guide ﬁeld reconnection.

The scaling analysis has other important implications. It re-
veals that collisions can cause reconnection to spread bidirec-
tionally at the diffusion speed, which could be important for
collisional reconnection in the laboratory and some settings
in the Sun. However, in most settings where collisionality is
quite weak, collisions play no important role in reconnection
spreading. We conﬁrm the validity of each of these analyti-
cal results using 3D two-ﬂuid and resistive MHD numerical
simulations.

FIG. 6. Planar cuts through y = ycs from a 3D simulation of anti-
parallel Hall reconnection with a current sheet of initial thickness
w0 = 1 at t = 20. This simulation seeds reconnection with a pressure
pulse instead of a magnetic perturbation. (a) Ion pressure Pi and (b)
reconnected magnetic ﬁeld By. The pressure pulse propagates bidi-
rectionally at the fast magnetosonic speed, but reconnection spreads
in the direction of the current carriers in the current sheet.

FIG. 7. Average reconnected magnetic ﬁeld ˜By(z,t), deﬁned in
Eq. (16), as a function of out of plane position z and time t, for
the anti-parallel reconnection simulation with w0 = 1 initiated with a
pressure perturbation. Dashed lines show the expected x-line bounds
if spreading occurs bidirectionally at the fast magnetosonic speed
vms.
Instead, spreading occurs unidirectionally with electron ﬂow
speed vs in the current sheet, denoted by the white line.

reconnection can spread with the fast magnetosonic speed, as
has been previously suggested54.

   -40-2002040z1.4411.4671.4931.5191.545 a)  -20020x-x’-40-2002040z-0.012-0.006 0.000 0.006 0.012 b)    020406080100120t-100-50050100z 0.00 0.07 0.15 0.22 0.30vs = -0.92vms= ±1.63if spreadingatmagnetosonic speedScaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

13

Our simulation study also reveals two other important as-
pects of reconnection spreading. First, we ﬁnd that recon-
nection with current sheets wider than the ion inertial scale
spread (for current sheets up to thicknesses of 3di), which dif-
fers from prior work in which reconnection convected with a
ﬁxed extent without spreading13,15. We hypothesize that the
reason for the difference is that the prior work employed a
computational domain with a square reconnecting geometry,
while ours employ a rectangular geometry. The difference is
likely caused by the additional free magnetic energy in the
rectangular domain. Assessing this more carefully should be
the subject of future research.

Second, our simulation of anti-parallel reconnection with a
perturbation in the plasma pressure to force reconnection in-
stead of using a magnetic perturbation still results in reconnec-
tion spreading with the direction and speed of the current car-
riers. It does not spread at the faster magnetosonic speed, as
has been previously postulated54. Future research with other
simulation setups are needed to more thoroughly test this pre-
diction.

The results of the present study has a number of important
implications. The analysis carried out here makes it clear that
spreading with and without a guide ﬁeld are dominated by
different physics. Consequently, the MHD description is suf-
ﬁcient to describe the speed and bidirectionality of the spread-
ing in reconnection with a strong guide ﬁeld. In contrast, the
MHD description does not properly describe the spreading of
anti-parallel reconnection, at least for the uniform resistivity
proﬁle employed in the present study. This has important im-
plications for global 3D modeling in coronal and magneto-
spheric settings. Global MHD simulations have historically
been quite common in both settings. Our results suggest that
care is needed when the reconnection is anti-parallel in such
settings.

Another implication is that the present research provides
a formalism to understand reconnection in more general set-
tings than studied here. For example, reconnection spreading
studies have been carried out for current sheets of uniform
thickness. However, this is unlikely to be the case in many ap-
plications, such as the propagation of reconnection between
two solar active regions in sympathetic ﬂares, or in Earth’s
magnetotail or dayside magnetopause. The theory here can be
used to understand spreading in such systems, as will be the
topic of a forthcoming study (Arencibia et al., in preparation).
The theory presented here assumes reconnection spreads
solely by inducing the x-line topology in non-reconnecting re-
gions. An alternate model is that a pressure minimum in the
reconnecting region is convected into the non-reconnecting re-
gion, generating an inﬂow to initiate reconnection and thus
elongate the x-line38,43,47. We note this model would predict
that anti-parallel reconnection in resistive MHD would con-
vect at the speed of the current carriers. However, numerical
simulations in this work and in Nakamura et al. (2012)47 show
no evidence of this. This suggests that induction of the recon-
necting magnetic ﬁeld in the out of plane direction, not the
pressure gradient between reconnecting and non-reconnecting
regions, is the essential ingredient for spreading.

Our result may also be important in the context of recent

results31,50 that the spreading of asymmetric guide ﬁeld recon-
nection at Earth’s dayside magnetopause occurs at Alfvénic
speeds bidirectionally for thin current sheets, but at the slower
speed of the current carriers for thicker current sheets. They
argued that the reason is that the tearing instability is slower in
thicker current sheets, and showed this hypothesis organizes
when the spreading is Alfvénic or dominated by current car-
riers. Then, information about the onset time [alternately the
growth time of the linear tearing mode50] is needed to ﬁnd the
time until reconnection onsets. If too slow, other spreading
mechanisms could be faster. In particular, the present analysis
suggests that different spreading mechanisms are additive, so
convection of the reconnected magnetic ﬁeld by the current
carriers remains an active effect due to the Hall term in the
generalized Ohm’s law even if the convection term that drives
spreading in thin current sheets is small for thicker current
sheets. More research is needed to understand the interplay
between the multiple possible spreading mechanisms.

There are many avenues for future studies. For applica-
tions to the corona or magnetosphere, simulations in a 3D
box may not faithfully capture the geometry of the system, in-
cluding plasma and magnetic ﬁeld asymmetries at the dayside
magnetopause50, curvature of the large-scale magnetic ﬁelds,
and density stratiﬁcation in the corona. As has been previ-
ously pointed out28, some two-ribbon ﬂare spreading events
with nearly anti-parallel magnetic ﬁelds spread in the direc-
tion opposite to that of the inferred current carriers. This
may be related to the global magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration
not captured in the treatment here. More work is needed
to understand spreading in fundamentally 3D reconnection
geometries11. Also, as discussed earlier, it is important to
study the relationship between reconnection regions spread-
ing vs. convecting as a function of system parameters, includ-
ing the computational domain size, the perturbation size and
wavenumber48, the current sheet thickness, and when the gra-
dient in the thickness of the current sheet is very large19. Fur-
ther work is also needed to understand how the spreading is
impacted by the mechanism that reconnection is seeded, es-
pecially with a guide ﬁeld. As anomalous resistivity has been
invoked to explain reconnection in the solar corona60,61, it
is also important to study spreading in with this dissipation
mechanism.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Support

is gratefully acknowledged from NSF Grants
AGS-1460037, AGS-1602769, and PHY-1804428, NASA
Grant NNX16AG76G, DOE Grant DE-SC0020294 (PAC)
and NASA Grants NNX17AI25G, 80NSSC20K0198 and
80NSSC20K1813 (MAS). We acknowledge helpful conver-
sations with M. Hasan Barbhuiya, James Drake, Heli Hi-
etala, Haoming Liang, Dana Longcope, Tai Phan, Jiong Qiu,
Kathy Reeves, and Luke Shepherd. Computational resources
supporting this work were provided by the NASA High-End
Computing (HEC) Program through the NASA Advanced Su-
percomputing (NAS) Division at Ames Research Center and
by the National Energy Research Scientiﬁc Computing Center

Scaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

14

(NERSC), a DOE Ofﬁce of Science User Facility supported
by the Ofﬁce of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy un-
der Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The data that sup-
port the ﬁndings of this study are available from the corre-
sponding authors upon reasonable request.

1J. W. Dungey, “Conditions for the occurrence of electrical discharges in
astrophysical systems,” Phil. Mag. 44, 725 (1953).
2V. M. Vasyliunas, “Theoretical models of magnetic ﬁeld line merging, 1,”
Rev. Geophys. 13, 303 (1975).
3E. Priest and T. Forbes, Magnetic Reconnection (Cambridge University
Press, 2000).
4R. L. McPherron, C. T. Russell, and M. P. Aubry, “Phenomenological
model for substorms,” J. Geophys. Res. 78, 3131 (1973).
5D. A. Uzdensky, “Magnetic Reconnection in Extreme Astrophysical En-
vironments,” Space Sci. Rev. 160, 45–71 (2011), arXiv:1101.2472 [astro-
ph.HE].
6D. A. Uzdensky, “Radiative Magnetic Reconnection in Astrophysics,” in
Magnetic Reconnection: Concepts and Applications, Astrophysics and
Space Science Library, edited by W. Gonzalez and E. Parker (Springer In-
ternational Publishing, Cham, 2016) pp. 473–519.
7P. A. Sweet, “The neutral point theory of solar ﬂares,” in Electromagnetic
Phenomena in Cosmical Physics, edited by B. Lehnert (Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, New York, 1958) p. 123.
8E. N. Parker, “Sweet’s mechanism for merging magnetic ﬁelds in conduct-
ing ﬂuids,” J. Geophys. Res. 62, 509 (1957).
9H. E. Petschek, “Magnetic ﬁeld annihilation,” in Proc. AAS-NASA Symp.
Phys. Solar Flares, NASA-SP, Vol. 50 (1964) pp. 425–439.

10D. I. Pontin, “Three-dimensional magnetic reconnection regimes: A re-

view,” Adv. Space Res. 47, 1508 (2011).

11V. S. Lukin and M. G. Linton, “Three-dimensional magnetic reconnection
through a moving magnetic null,” Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics 18,
871 (2011).

12E. Priest, Magnetohydrodynamics of the Sun (Cambridge University Press,

New York, 2014).

13M. A. Shay, J. F. Drake, M. Swisdak, W. Dorland, and B. N. Rogers, “Inher-
ently three-dimensional magnetic reconnection: A mechanism for bursty
bulk ﬂows?” Geophys. Res. Lett. 30, 1345 (2003).

14M. G. Linton and D. W. Longcope, “A model for patchy reconnection in

three dimensions,” Ap. J. 642, 1177 (2006).

15J. C. Meyer III, Structure of the Diffusion Region in Three Dimensional

Magnetic Reconnection, Ph.D. thesis, University of Delaware (2013).

16Y. L. Sasunov, V. S. Semenov, M. F. Heyn, N. V. Erkaev, I. V. Kubyshkin,
K. Y. Slivka, D. B. Korovinskiy, and M. L. Khodachenko, “A statistical
survey of reconnection exhausts in the solar wind based on the Riemannian
decay of current sheets,” Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics)
120, 8194–8209 (2015).

17L. S. Shepherd, P. A. Cassak, J. F. Drake, J. T. Gosling, T.-D. Phan, and
M. A. Shay, “Structure of exhausts in magnetic reconnection with an x-line
of ﬁnite extent,” Ap. J. 848, 90 (2017).

18Y.-H. Liu, T. C. Li, M. Hesse, W. J. Sun, J. Liu, J. Burch, J. A. Slavin,
and K. Huang, “Three-Dimensional Magnetic Reconnection With a Spa-
tially Conﬁned X-Line Extent: Implications for Dipolarizing Flux Bundles
and the Dawn-Dusk Asymmetry,” Journal of Geophysical Research: Space
Physics 124, 2819–2830 (2019).

19K. Huang, Y.-H. Liu, Q. Lu,

and M. Hesse, “Scaling of magnetic re-
connection with a limited x-line extent,” Geophysical Research Letters 47,
e2020GL088147 (2020).

20H. Isobe, T. Yokoyama, M. Shimojo, T. Morimoto, H. Kozu, S. Eto,
N. Narukage, and K. Shibata, “Reconnection rate in the decay phase of
a long duration event ﬂare on 1997 May 12,” Ap. J. 566, 528 (2002).

21J. Lee and D. E. Gary, “Parallel Motions of Coronal Hard X-Ray Source

and H α Ribbons,” ApJ 685, L87 (2008).

22J. Qiu, “Observational analysis of magnetic reconnection sequence,” Ap. J.

692, 1110 (2009).

23J. Qiu, W. Liu, N. Hill, and M. Kazachenko, “Reconnection and energetics
in two-ribbon ﬂares: A revisit of the Bastille Day ﬂare,” Ap. J. 725, 319
(2010).

24C. Liu, J. Lee, J. Jing, R. Liu, N. Deng, and H. Wang, “MOTIONS OF
HARD X-RAY SOURCES DURING AN ASYMMETRIC ERUPTION,”
ApJL 721, L193–L198 (2010).

25J. X. Cheng, G. Kerr, and J. Qiu, “HARD X-RAY AND ULTRAVIOLET
OBSERVATIONS OF THE 2005 JANUARY 15 TWO-RIBBON FLARE,”
ApJ 744, 48 (2011).

26H. Tian, P. R. Young, K. K. Reeves, B. Chen, W. Liu, and S. McKillop,
“Temporal Evolution of Chromospheric Evaporation: Case Studies of the
M1.1 Flare on 2014 September 6 and X1.6 Flare on 2014 September 10,”
ApJ 811, 139 (2015).

27D. R. Graham and G. Cauzzi, “Temporal Evolution of Multiple Evaporating

Ribbon Sources in a Solar Flare,” ApJL 807, L22 (2015).

28J. Qiu, D. W. Longcope, P. A. Cassak, and E. R. Priest, “Elongation of

Flare Ribbons,” ApJ 838, 17 (2017).

29D. Tripathi, H. Isobe, and H. E. Mason, “On the propagation of brightening
after ﬁlament/prominence eruptions, as seen by SoHO-EIT,” Astron. Astro-
phys. 453, 1111 (2006).

30M. Zhou, M. Ashour-Abdalla, X. Deng, Y. Pang, H. Fu, R. Walker,
and R. Tang, “Observation of Three-
G. Lapenta, S. Huang, X. Xu,
Dimensional Magnetic Reconnection in the Terrestrial Magnetotail,” Jour-
nal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics) 122, 9513–9520 (2017).
31Y. Zou, B. M. Walsh, Y. Nishimura, V. Angelopoulos, J. M. Ruohoniemi,
K. A. McWilliams,
and N. Nishitani, “Spreading Speed of Magne-
topause Reconnection X-Lines Using Ground-Satellite Coordination,” Geo-
phys. Res. Lett. 45, 80–89 (2018).

32Y. Zou, B. M. Walsh, Y. Nishimura, V. Angelopoulos, J. M. Ruohoniemi,
K. A. McWilliams, and N. Nishitani, Local time extent of magnetopause
reconnection using space–ground coordination, Annales Geophysicae 37,
215–234 (2019).

33T. Nagai, “Observed magnetic substorm signatures at synchronous alti-

tude,” J. Geophys. Res. 87, 4405 (1982).

34T. Nagai, I. Shinohara, S. Zenitani, R. Nakamura, T. K. M. Nakamura,
M. Fujimoto, Y. Saito, and T. Mukai, “Three-dimensional structure of mag-
netic reconnection in the magnetotail from geotail observations,” Journal of
Geophysical Research: Space Physics 118, 1667–1678 (2013).

35H. Hietala, J. P. Eastwood, and A. Isavnin, “Sequentially released tilted ﬂux
ropes in the earth’s magnetotail,” Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 56, 064011
(2014).

36N. Katz, J. Egedal, W. Fox, A. Le, J. Bonde,

and A. Vrublevskis,
“Laboratory observation of localized onset of magnetic reconnection,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 255004 (2010).

37J. Egedal, N. Katz, J. Bonde, W. Fox, A. Le, M. Porkolab,

and
A. Vrublevskis, “Spontaneous onset of magnetic reconnection in toroidal
plasma caused by breaking of 2D symmetry,” Phys. Plasmas 18, 111203
(2011).

38S. Dorfman, H. Ji, M. Yamada, J. Yoo, E. Lawrence, C. Myers, and T. D.
Tharp, “Three-dimensional, impulsive magnetic reconnection in a labora-
tory plasma,” Geophys. Res. Lett. 40, 1 (2013).

39S. Dorfman, H. Ji, M. Yamada, J. Yoo, E. Lawrence, C. Myers, and T. D.
Tharp, “Experimental observation of 3-D, impulsive reconnection events in
a laboratory plasma,” Physics of Plasmas 21, 012109 (2014).

40T. D. Phan, J. T. Gosling, M. S. Davis, R. M. Skoug, M. Oieroset, R. P. Lin,
R. P. Lepping, D. J. McComas, C. W. Smith, H. Reme, and A. Balogh, “A
magnetic reconnection X-line extending more than 390 Earth radii in the
solar wind,” Nature 439, 175 (2006).

41J. T. Gosling, S. Eriksson, L. M. Blush, T. D. Phan, J. G. Luhmann, D. J.
McComas, R. M. Skoug, M. H. Acuna, C. T. Russell, and K. D. Simunac,
“Five spacecraft observations of oppositely directed exhaust jets from a
magnetic reconnection X-line extending > 4.26 ×106 km in the solar wind
at 1 AU,” Geophys. Res. Lett. 34, L20108 (2007).

42J. D. Huba and L. I. Rudakov, “Three-dimensional Hall magnetic reconnec-

tion,” Phys. Plasmas 9, 4435 (2002).

43J. D. Huba and L. I. Rudakov, “Hall magnetohydrodynamics of neutral lay-

ers,” Phys. Plasmas 10, 3139 (2003).

44H. Karimabadi, D. Krauss-Varban, J. D. Huba, and H. X. Vu, “On magnetic
reconnection regimes and associated three-dimensional asymmetries: Hy-
brid, Hall-less hybrid, and Hall-MHD simulations,” J. Geophys. Res. 109,
A09205 (2004).

45G. Lapenta, D. Krauss-Varban, H. Karimabadi, J. D. Huba, L. I. Rudakov,
and P. Ricci, “Kinetic simulations of x-line expansion in 3D reconnection,”

Scaling Theory of 3D Magnetic Reconnection Spreading

15

Geophys. Res. Lett. 33, L10102 (2006).

46L. S. Shepherd and P. A. Cassak, “Guide ﬁeld dependence of 3D X-line
spreading during collisionless magnetic reconnection,” J. Geophys. Res.
117, A10101 (2012).

47T. K. M. Nakamura, R. Nakamura, A. Alexandrova, Y. Kubota, and T. Na-
gai, “Hall magnetohydrodynamic effects for three-dimensional magnetic
reconnection with ﬁnite width along the direction of the current,” J. Geo-
phys. Res. 117, 03220 (2012).

48N. Jain, J. Büchner, S. Dorfman, H. Ji, and A. S. Sharma, “Current disrup-
tion and its spreading in collisionless magnetic reconnection,” Phys. Plas-
mas 20, 112101 (2013).

49M. Hesse, M. Kuznetsova, and J. Birn, “Particle-in-cell simulations of
three-dimensional collisionless magnetic reconnection,” J. Geophys. Res.
106, 29831–29841 (2001).

50T. Li, Y.-H. Liu, M. Hesse, and Y. Zou, “Three-dimensional x-line spread-
ing in asymmetric magnetic reconnection,” Journal of Geophysical Re-
search: Space Physics 125, e2019JA027094 (2020).

51J. T. Gosling, R. M. Skoug, D. J. McComas, and C. W. Smith, “Direct evi-
dence for magnetic reconnection in the solar wind near 1 AU,” J. Geophys.
Res. 110, A01107 (2005), 10.1029/2004JA010809.

52N. Jain and J. Büchner, “Spreading of electron scale magnetic reconnection
with a wave number dependent speed due to the propagation of dispersive
waves,” Physics of Plasmas 24, 082304 (2017).

53R. Schreier, M. Swisdak, J. F. Drake, and P. A. Cassak, “Three-dimensional
simulations of the orientation and structure of reconnection X-lines,”

Phys. Plasmas 17, 110704 (2010).

54J. A. Vorpahl, “The triggering and subsequent development of a solar ﬂare,”

ApJ 205, 868 (1976).

55M. A. Shay, J. F. Drake, M. Swisdak, and B. N. Rogers, “The scaling of
embedded collisionless reconnection,” Phys. Plasmas 11, 2199 (2004).
56P. N. Guzdar, J. F. Drake, D. McCarthy, A. B. Hassam, and C. S. Liu,
“Three-dimensional ﬂuid simulations of the nonlinear drift-resistive bal-
looning modes in tokamak edge plasmas,” Phys. Fluids B 5, 3712–3727
(1993).

57M. A. Shay, J. F. Drake, B. N. Rogers, and R. E. Denton, “The scaling
of collisionless, magnetic reconnection for large systems,” Geophys. Res.
Lett. 26, 2163–2166 (1999).

58J. Birn, J. F. Drake, M. A. Shay, B. N. Rogers, R. E. Denton, M. Hesse,
M. Kuznetsova, Z. W. Ma, A. Bhattacharjee, A. Otto, and P. L. Pritch-
ett, “GEM magnetic reconnection challenge,” J. Geophys. Res. 106, 3715
(2001).

59Y.-H. Liu, M. Hesse, F. Guo, W. Daughton, H. Li, P. A. Cassak, and M. A.
Shay, “Why does steady-state magnetic reconnection have a maximum lo-
cal rate of order 0.1?” Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 085101 (2017).

60M. Ugai and T. Tsuda, “Magnetic ﬁeld line reconnexion by localized
enhancement of resistivity, 1, evolution in a compressible mhd ﬂuid,”
J. Plasma Phys. 17, 337 (1977).

61T. Sato and T. Hayashi, “Externally driven magnetic reconnection and a

powerful magnetic energy converter,” Phys. Fluids 22, 1189 (1979).

