Measurement of the (π−, Ar) total hadronic cross section at the LArIAT experiment.
(LArIAT Collaboration)∗

E. Gramellini,22, † J. Ho,6, ‡ R. Acciarri,9 C. Adams,22 J. Asaadi,18 M. Backﬁsh,9 W. Badgett,9 B. Baller,9
V. Basque,13 O. Benevides Rodrigues,10, 17 F. d. M. Blaszczyk,3 R. Bouabid,6 C. Bromberg,14 R. Carey,3
R. Castillo Fernandez,9 F. Cavanna,9, 22 J. I. Cevallos Aleman,6 A. Chatterjee,18 P. Dedin,4 M. V. dos Santos,2
D. Edmunds,14 C. Escobar,9 J. Esquivel,17, † J. J. Evans,13 A. Falcone,18 W. Flanagan,19 B. T. Fleming,22
W. Foreman,6, § D. Garcia-Gamez,13, ¶ D. Gastler,3 T. Ghosh,10 R. A. Gomes,10 R. Gran,15 D. R. Gratieri,4
P. Guzowski,13 A. Hahn,9 P. Hamilton,17 C. Hill,13 A. Holin,20 J. Hugon,12 E. Iwai,11 D. Jensen,9
R. A. Johnson,7 H. Kawai,5 E. Kearns,3 E. Kemp,4 M. Kirby,9 T. Kobilarcik,9 M. Kordosky,21
P. Kryczy´nski,9, ‖ K. Lang,19 R. Linehan,3 S. Lockwitz,9 X. Luo,22 A. A. B. Machado,4 A. Marchionni,9
T. Maruyama,11 L. Mendes Santos,4 W. Metcalf,12 C. A. Moura,1 R. Nichol,20 I. Nutini,9, ∗∗ A. Olivier,12, ††
O. Palamara,9, 22 J. Paley,9 I. Parmaksiz,18 B. Passarelli Gelli,4 L. Paulucci,1 D. Phan,19 G. Pulliam,17
J. L. Raaf,9 B. Rebel,9, ‡‡ M. Reggiani Guzzo,4 M. Ross-Lonergan,9, §§ D. W. Schmitz,6 E. Segreto,4
D. Shooltz,14 D. Smith,3 M. Soares Nunes,4, ¶¶ M. Soderberg,17 B. Soubasis,19, ∗∗∗ F. Spagliardi,13, †††
J. M. St. John,7, † M. Stancari,9 D. Stefan,16 M. Stephens,21 R. Sulej,16 A. M. Szelc,8 M. Tabata,5 D. Totani,9
M. Tzanov,12 D. Walker,12 H. Wenzel,9 Z. Williams,18 T. Yang,9 J. Yu,18 S. Zhang,3 and J. Zhu9
1Universidade Federal do ABC, Santo Andr´e, SP 09210-580, Brasil
2Universidade Federal de Alfenas, Po¸cos de Caldas, MG 37715-400, Brasil
3Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA
4Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, SP 13083-859, Brasil
5Chiba University, Chiba 260, Japan
6University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
7University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221, USA
8University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3FD, UK
9Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, IL 60510, USA
10Universidade Federal de Goi´as, Goi´as, CEP 74690-900, Brasil
11High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK), Tsukuba 305-0801, Japan
12Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA
13University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK
14Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
15University of Minnesota, Duluth, Duluth, MN 55812, USA
16National Centre for Nuclear Research (NCBJ), Otwock 05-400, Poland
17Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244, USA
18University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA
19University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA
20University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK
21William & Mary, Williamsburg, VA 23187, USA
22Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA
(Dated: August 14, 2022)

We present the ﬁrst measurement of the negative pion total hadronic cross section on argon
in a restricted phase space, which we performed at the Liquid Argon In A Testbeam (LArIAT)
experiment. All hadronic reaction channels, as well as hadronic elastic interactions with scattering
angle greater than 5 degrees are included. The pions have a kinetic energies in the range 100-
700 MeV and are produced by a beam of charged particles impinging on a solid target at the
Fermilab Test Beam Facility. LArIAT employs a 0.24 ton active mass Liquid Argon Time Projection
Chamber (LArTPC) to measure the pion hadronic interactions. For this measurement, LArIAT has
developed the “thin slice method”, a new technique to measure cross sections with LArTPCs.
While moderately higher, our measurement of the (π−,Ar) total hadronic cross section is generally
in agreement with the Geant4 prediction.

PACS numbers: 14.40.-n Mesons, 14.40.Be Light mesons (S=C=B=0), 13.75.-n Hadron-induced low- and
intermediate-energy reactions and scattering (energy < 10 GeV)

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

7

]
x
e
-
p
e
h
[

2
v
0
4
0
0
0
.
8
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

∗ lariat authors@fnal.gov
† Present address:

Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory,

Batavia, IL 60510, USA

 
 
 
 
 
 
I. MOTIVATIONS AND INTRODUCTION

This work presents the ﬁrst measurement of the total
hadronic cross section of negative pions on argon (π−,
Ar) in the energy range from 100 to 700 MeV performed
by the Liquid Argon in a Testbeam (LArIAT) experi-
ment. A renewed interest in hadronic cross sections,
particularly cross sections on argon, has arisen within
the modern neutrino experimental landscape due to the
proliferation of Liquid Argon Time Projection Chamber
(LArTPC) neutrino detectors such as DUNE [1] and the
SBN program [2], which beneﬁt from the LArTPC tech-
nology ﬁne-grained tracking, powerful calorimetry and
particle identiﬁcation capabilities.

Neutrino experiments rely on the products of the neu-
trino interactions to identify and reconstruct neutrino
ﬂavor and energy. Pions (π) are common products of
neutrino interactions, especially in resonant scattering,
deep inelastic scattering, and coherent pion production,
and can help identify the neutrino interaction type.

To date, the literature on the hadronic interactions of
the particles produced in neutrino interactions on argon
for energies relevant to the neutrino products, namely be-
low 1 GeV, remains scarce. Measuring these interaction
channels for pions on argon is of particular importance
for neutrino experiments in order to model the behavior
of the pion both inside the nuclear matter and also at the
larger scale of traversing the detector medium. Neutrino
event generators and detector simulation packages base
their pion transportation in argon on interpolations of
the historical cross section measurements of lighter and
heavier nuclei. One of the primary goals of LArIAT’s
dedicated measurement program is to bridge this gap in
data, thus reducing the uncertainties related to pion in-
teractions on argon.

At the neutrino event generator level, assumptions in
the nuclear modeling and interactions of hadrons inside
the nucleus must be made in order to work backward
from the products of the neutrino interaction to recon-
struct the neutrino energy and ﬂavor. Pions produced
in a neutrino interaction will experience hadronic inter-
actions while still within the target nucleus (referred to

‡ Present address: Harvard University, Boston, MA 02138, USA
§ Present address:

Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL

60616, USA

¶ Present address: University of Granada, 18010 Granada, Spain
‖ also Institute of Nuclear Physics PAN, 31-342 Krak´ow, Poland
∗∗ also Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Italy and Gran Sasso

Science Institute

†† Present address: University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627,

USA

‡‡ also University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA
§§ also Durham University, Durham DH1 3LE, UK
¶¶ Present address: Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244, USA
∗∗∗ Present address: Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235,

USA

††† Present address: University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PJ, UK

2

as ﬁnal state interactions) as well as during propagation
through the detector volume. Processes such as pion ab-
sorption and pion charge exchange can greatly modify
the topology of a neutrino interaction in the detector and
potentially lead to modiﬁcations in the event classiﬁca-
tion. Dedicated measurements of pion-argon hadronic
cross sections are needed to constrain the modeling of
both of these eﬀects in experiments reconstructing neu-
trino interactions. The ability to reconstruct the details
of pion interactions inside the detector is essential for
modern argon neutrino experiments to achieve the de-
sign resolution for their key physics measurements [3].

This work is organized in several sections. To start,
we brieﬂy review previous pion hadronic cross section
measurements on lighter and heavier nuclei and deﬁne
the total pion hadronic cross section that is measured in
LArIAT. In the next section, we present a brief overview
of the LArIAT experimental setup, as well as an overview
of the reconstruction and simulation techniques employed
to identify (π−, Ar) interactions. Next, we present a
discussion of the “thin-slice” method, a new method to
measure cross sections on argon in a LArTPC, developed
by the LArIAT collaboration. Finally the (π−, Ar) cross
section measurement and its associated uncertainties are
presented, followed by a brief discussion of the result.

A. Historical Measurements of Pion Hadronic
Cross Sections: Lighter and Heavier Nuclei

Several experiments using pion beams have studied the
hadronic interaction of pions on light and heavy nuclei,
such as He, Li, C, S, Fe, and Pb [4–7]. Most historical
measurements of the pion hadronic cross sections were
performed using “thin targets” with thicknesses much
smaller than the typical interaction length in the ma-
terial. At their core, these experiments are done by im-
pinging a beam of pions of a known ﬂux on a thin slab of
material and recording the outgoing ﬂux. Flux conserva-
tion allows retrieval of the interacting ﬂux, and calcula-
tion of the cross section at a given beam energy.

Regardless of the nuclear medium, the shape of the
pion-nucleus interaction cross section in the energy range
accessible to LArIAT shows the distinct feature of a res-
onance.
Indeed, a delta resonance (∆ 1232) is often
produced in the pion-nucleon interaction, which subse-
quently decays inside the nucleus. Historical experimen-
tal results as the ones reported in Figure 1 for positive
pions show a dependency of the delta resonance shape
as a function of the nuclear mass number [6], typically
parameterized by a Breit-Wigner function. The delta
resonance shape becomes less pronounced and its peak
shifts to lower energies as the nuclear mass number in-
creases. This eﬀect is due to the delta kinematics and
its propagation inside the nuclear medium, as well as to
the nuclear potential on pions. Multiple scattering ef-
fects modify the resonance width, which is larger than
the natural-decay width. This behavior makes interpo-

3

energy of the incident pion is suﬃcient to produce ad-
ditional pions in the collision. In this work, we account
for all exclusive channels, regardless of their ﬁnal state,
in the total hadronic π−-Ar interaction. For the elastic
channel, we measure only interactions whose interaction
angle – deﬁned as the angle of the scattered pion with re-
spect to the incident pion direction – is greater than 5 de-
grees. This phase space restriction is driven by the track-
ing algorithm eﬃciency and the objective of removing
backgrounds from multiple Coulomb scattering (MCS).
This is discussed further in section III C 4. Figure 2 shows
examples of topologies for pion-argon hadronic interac-
tions as they appear in the LArIAT data.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

The LArIAT experiment consists of a LArTPC de-
ployed in a beam of charged particles at the Fermilab Test
Beam Facility, situated in the Meson Center beam line.
During LArIAT’s three seasons of data-taking, the exper-
imental setup changed signiﬁcantly in both its beamline
and LArTPC components. The data used in this work
were acquired during the 24 weeks of data-taking of the
second season, which is referred to as Run II [10]. In the
subsequent sections, we describe the beamline detectors
and LArTPC conﬁguration relevant to the cross section
measurement. Following this discussion, we describe the
essential components of the simulation, beamline event
selection, and LArTPC event reconstruction used in this
analysis. The reference system adopted throughout the
analysis is deﬁned with respect to the LArTPC element.
The coordinate origin is located at the front face of the
LArTPC at middle height on the anonde plane; the z
direction correponds to the LArTPC main axis, pointing
from the front face to the back face, the y direction points
against gravity and x points from the anode to the cath-
ode. We refer the reader to Ref. [10] for a complete and
detailed description of LArIAT’s experimental setup.

A. Beamline

LArIAT utilizes the Fermilab accelerator infrastruc-
ture in order to create a beam of charged particles. The
Fermilab accelerator complex delivers a primary beam of
120 GeV protons with variable intensity to the Meson
Center beam line. This primary beam is focused onto
a tungsten target to create a secondary beam, which is
tuned such that its composition is mostly positive pions.
For the data considered in this work, the tunable momen-
tum peak of the secondary beam was ﬁxed at 64 GeV/c;
this conﬁguration assured stable beam delivery at the
LArIAT experimental hall (MC7).

At MC7, the secondary beam was focused onto a cop-
per target within a steel collimator, creating and deﬁning
the LArIAT tertiary beam. The LArIAT tertiary beam-
line instrumentation identiﬁed the particle type and mea-

FIG. 1. Historical positive pion scattering data for diﬀerent
light and heavy nuclei, reproduced from Reference [6].

lation of the inclusive cross section behavior from lighter
nuclei to heavier nuclei subject to theoretical uncertainty
and further motivates the necessity of such measurements
on argon.

B.

π−Ar Hadronic Interactions: Signal Signatures

Strong hadronic interaction models [8, 9] predict the
pion interaction processes on argon in the hundreds of
MeV energy range. The total hadronic (π−, Ar) cross
section deﬁnes the probability of a single hadronic process
on argon. In measuring the total cross section (σTot), we
consider both the elastic interactions (σElastic) and all
hadronic reaction (σReaction) channels,

σTot = σElastic + σReaction.

(1)

The hadronic reaction channel can be further subdivided
into several exclusive channels with deﬁned topologies:

σReaction = σInelastic + σabs + σchex + σπ prod.

(2)

The term σInelastic deﬁnes hadronic inelastic interac-
tions where the pion interacts with the nucleus with suf-
ﬁcient momentum transfer to cause nucleon knockout or
to create a nuclear excited state with no nucleon emis-
sion, σabs includes pion absorption on the nucleus, σchex
deﬁnes pion charge exchange where the incident charged
pion converts to a neutral pion and the target nucleon
undergoes a similar charge swap (e.g., π−p → π0n), and
σπ prod includes pion production where the interaction

0100200300400500600700800900Laboratory Kinetic Energy [MeV]00.511.522.533.544.5 Total Cross Section [barns]Historic DataLead Data (Carroll et al., 1976)Lead FitTin Data (Carroll et al., 1976)Tin FitIron Data (Carroll et al., 1976)Iron FitSulfur Data (Wilkin et al., 1973)Sulfur FitAluminum Data (Carroll et al., 1976)Aluminum FitOxygen Data (Clough et al., 1974)Oxygen FitClough et al., 1974; Carroll et al., 1976)Carbon Data (Wilkin et al., 1973;Carbon Fit Clough et al., 1974)Beryllium Data (Wilkin et al., 1973;Beryllium FitClough et al., 1974; Carroll et al., 1976)Lithium Data (Wilkin et al., 1973;Lithim FitHelium Data (Wilkin et al., 1973)Helium Fit4

sured the momentum of the particles before they enter
the LArIAT LArTPC. Figure 3 shows a bird’s-eye view of
the LArIAT tertiary beamline in MC7, consisting of two
bending electromagnets (B1 and B2), a set of four wire
chambers (WC1-WC4), and two time-of-ﬂight scintillat-
ing paddles (USTOF and DSTOF). The polarity of the
magnets can be conﬁgured to charge-select the beam, and
the magnetic ﬁeld strength is tuned to select the range of
momenta of particles steered toward the LArTPC. The
combination of magnets and wire chambers forms the
LArIAT spectrometer which measures the particles’ mo-
mentum at the fourth wire chamber, pBeam. Figure 4
shows the distribution of pBeam for the data used in this
work; the momentum range of the two datasets used, one
from a low momentum tune and the other from a higher
momentum tune, spans from ∼ 300 to ∼ 1100 MeV/c.

A scintillator paddle (HALO) with a central hole was
situated between DSTOF and the cryostat, just upstream
of the LArTPC. Its purpose was to identify and reject
particles that entered the LArTPC at a position that is
outside the thin beam window in the cryostat wall. While
information from this element is not used in this analysis,
its passive material is considered when assessing the pion
energy.

B. LArTPC

The LArIAT LArTPC is a box of dimensions 47 cm
(drift) by 40 cm (height) by 90 cm (length) with an ap-
plied electric ﬁeld of 490 V/cm. Two instrumented read-
out wire planes, one induction plane and one collection
plane, along with an uninstrumented shield plane, form
the LArIAT anode. LArIAT’s induction and collection
planes used in this analysis consist of 240 wires, each at
4 mm spacing. The wires are oriented at +/-60◦ from
the horizontal direction, while the beam direction is ori-
ented 3◦ oﬀ the LArTPC’s long axis in the drift direc-
tion. Beamline particles enter the LArTPC roughly at
the center of the front face leaving traces of ionization in
the LArTPC. The ionization signals on the wires are then
recorded by the LArIAT data acquisition system (DAQ),
stored, and processed oﬄine. LArIAT utilizes the LAr-
Soft toolkit [11] for data acquisition, signal processing,
event reconstruction, and LArTPC simulation.

FIG. 2. Candidates for pion-argon interaction topologies as
seen in the LArIAT data (from top to bottom): elastic scatter-
ing, inelastic scattering, pion absorption with emission of nu-
cleons, charge exchange, and production of pions. The event
displays show the raw signals in the time vs. wire space for
the collection plane only, with beam particles entering from
the left. The vertical and horizontal axes are not to the same
scale in each image.

III. RECONSTRUCTION AND SIMULATION

Given LArIAT’s variety of sub-detectors, dedicated re-
construction and simulation techniques are needed to
measure the physics quantities of interest. The next sec-
tions describe the methods used to extract information
from the beamline detectors and from the LArTPC.

5

FIG. 3. Bird’s eye view of the LArIAT tertiary beamline. USCOLL and DSCOLL represent the upstream and downstream
collimators respectively; B1 and B2 represent the bending magnets; WC1, WC2, WC3 and WC4 are the multi-wire propor-
tional chambers; USTOF and DSTOF represent the upstream and downstream time-of-ﬂight scintillators; HALO represents a
scintillator paddle with a central hole to enable vetoes of particles with trajectories incompatible with the beamline path; TPC
shows the technical drawing of the cryostat which surrounds the liquid argon time projection chamber.

FIG. 4. Momentum spectrum in the LArIAT beamline for
Run II negative polarity data, low energy tune in dark blue,
high energy tune in light blue.

A.

Information from the Beamline

Information from the beamline detectors used for
physics analyses corresponds to three main components:
the time-of-ﬂight system, the bending magnets, and the
wire chambers, described in greater detail in Ref. [10].

The LArIAT time-of-ﬂight (TOF) detector system con-

FIG. 5. Distribution of the px to pz momentum ratio for elec-
trons, muons, and pions in the LArIAT beamline for Run II
negative polarity data, low energy tune in dark blue, high
energy tune in light blue. The x component of the particles’
momentum is small, since particles are mostly directed in the
z direction. The px/pz shows an oﬀset of the mean relative
to the beam axis due to the action of the bending magnets.

sists of two scintillator paddles which bracket the beam-
line. The diﬀerence in the signal times of the upstream
and downstream paddles is used to form the measure-

0200400600800100012001400 Momentum [MeV/c]p/m e/0100200300400500600 Entries per 10 MeVNegative PolarityLArIAT Run II DataLow Energy TuneHigh Energy Tune0.1-0.05-00.050.1 [Unitless]z/px Beamline p010002000300040005000600070008000900010000 Entries per 0.2Negative PolarityLArIAT Run II DataLow Energy TuneHigh Energy Tune6

TABLE I. Beamline particle classiﬁcation.

ID
π/µ/e
kaon
antiproton

Selection
350 MeV/c2
mBeam ≤
350 MeV/c2 < mBeam ≤
650 MeV/c2
650 MeV/c2 < mBeam ≤ 3000 MeV/c2

nents of the momentum are obtained using the positions
of the hits in WC3 and WC4. In Figure 5, the deﬂection
of the magnets is apparent in the horizontal component’s
oﬀset of the mean relative to the beam center. The ver-
tical component of the momentum, shown in Figure 6,
is not aﬀected by the magnet bending, and is therefore
symmetrical with respect to the beam center at zero.

By combining the measurement of the particle’s mo-
mentum with the measurement of the TOF, we calculate
an invariant mass hypothesis, mBeam, for the beamline
particle as

mBeam =

pBeam
c

(cid:115)(cid:18) TOF · c

(cid:19)2

(cid:96)

− 1,

(3)

where c is the speed of light and (cid:96) is the length of the par-
ticle’s trajectory between the time-of-ﬂight paddles, typ-
ically 6.65 m. Due to the resolution of the time-of-ﬂight
measurement, an imaginary mass is computed for some
events; for these events, mBeam corresponds to the abso-
lute value of the mass in Equation 3. Figure 7 shows the
distribution of the invariant mass for the entire negative
polarity data set used in this analysis. We classify events
into diﬀerent particle hypotheses as follows according to
the selection in Table I.

B. MC Generation & Simulation

For this analysis, LArIAT employs a Monte Carlo
(MC) simulation to model particle interactions in the
material directly upstream of the LArTPC as well as the
response of the LArIAT LArTPC itself, implemented in
the LArSoft framework.

Simulated particles are generated at the fourth wire
chamber and propagated downstream using a data-driven
technique to match the properties of the real beam. The
measurement of the beamline particles’ momenta and po-
sitions performed on data serve as the basis for the data-
driven Monte Carlo (DDMC) event generation.

The DDMC simulation draws from the joint distribu-
tion of the momentum and position measurements in
data using a 5-dimensional hit-or-miss sampling proce-
dure. This sampling generates the simulated events with
the same momentum and position distributions as data
(e.g., drawing from the distributions shown in Figures 5
and 6), with the additional beneﬁt of accounting for
the correlations among the considered variables. Once
completed, the LArSoft simulation uses the generated
particle distributions to launch single particles from the

FIG. 6. Distribution of the py to pz momentum ratio for elec-
trons, muons, and pions in the LArIAT beamline for Run II
negative polarity data, low energy tune in dark blue, high
energy tune in light blue. The y component of the particles’
momentum is small, since particles are mostly directed in the
z direction. As expected given the absence of magnetic ﬁeld
on the vertical axis, the py/pz is symmetric around the beam
center.

ment of the TOF with a typical resolution of ±1ns.

The bending magnet layout was based upon the MIN-
ERvA beam test, Fermilab T977 [12]; together with the
wire chamber system, they act as a particle spectrometer.
The direction of the magnetic ﬁeld in the center of the
magnets is along the vertical, y-axis, pointing up or down
depending on the polarity of the magnet currents. The
3D positions of the hits in the upstream wire chambers
provide a straight trajectory before the bending mag-
nets, while the positions of the hits in the downstream
wire chambers provide the subsequent straight trajectory.
A charged particle traversing the beamline bends in the
xz-plane. The measurement of the transverse compo-
nent of the particle’s momentum, pxz, is performed using
the bend plane angles, θUS and θDS, of the upstream and
downstream trajectories. The particle’s total momentum
prior to entering the LArTPC, as well as its three sepa-
rate spatial components, can then be calculated from pxz
using the particle’s downstream 3D trajectory.

In data, the reconstruction of beamline events begins
by considering the activity in the wire chambers and the
TOF to form a hypothesized particle trajectory. The re-
construction veriﬁes that a particle’s hypothesized trajec-
tory through the wire chambers is plausible. Events are
rejected if the trajectory from the wire chambers would
cross impenetrable material in the beamline, such as the
steel of the magnet. The horizontal and vertical compo-

0.1-0.05-00.050.1 [Unitless]z/pyBeamline  p020004000600080001000012000140001600018000 Entries per 0.2Negative PolarityLArIAT Run II DataLow Energy TuneHigh Energy Tune7

1. Deconvolution

As is typical in LArTPCs [16], the ﬁrst step in the
LArTPC signal processing chain is deconvolution, which
aims to remove the response of the readout electronics
and to transform the induction and collection signals into
a comparable set of waveforms on all planes presenting
unipolar, approximately Gaussian-like pulses. Induction
and collection plane signals have diﬀerent ﬁeld responses
due to the diﬀerent nature of the signals on these planes.
The wires on the induction planes see the induced sig-
nal of the drifting ionization charge, which moves toward
the wires and then passes by them without being col-
lected, while the wires on the collection planes see the
current derived from the charge entering the conductor
material. Thus, prior to deconvolution, signals on the
induction plane are bipolar pulses and signals on the col-
lection plane are unipolar pulses.

2. Hit Reconstruction

The second stage of the signal processing is the recon-
struction of wire signals which indicate an energy depo-
sition in the detector, known as a “hit”. An algorithm
scans the deconvolved LArTPC waveforms for each wire
over the entire readout time window, searching for peaks
above the waveform’s baseline. These peaks are ﬁt with a
Gaussian function and the best ﬁt parameters are stored,
such as the peak time, height, width, and area under the
Gaussian ﬁt. The area of the Gaussian is proportional to
the charge collected on the wire and the peak time is pro-
portional to the coordinate in the drift direction where
the ionization occurred. The event reconstruction chain
uses the collection of hits to form more complex objects
associated with the particles in the detector.

3. 2D Clustering

Collections of hits, separately for each wire plane,
are grouped together into objects known as “clusters”,
based on their topology. LArIAT identiﬁes line-like ob-
jects through the use of the clustering package known as
Trajectory-Cluster (TrajCluster) [16]. TrajCluster looks
in the wire-time 2D projection for a collection of hits
that can be described with a line-like trajectory. Traj-
Cluster forms this collection by using the ﬁrst two hits
in the beam direction to form a “seed trajectory”. The
algorithm then subsequently steps through the other 2D
hits to gather together points which belong to this as-
sumed trajectory. Several factors determine whether a
hit is added to the trajectory, including, but not limited
to: the goodness of the ﬁt of the single hit, the charge
of the hit compared to the average charge and RMS of
the hits already forming the trajectory, the goodness of
trajectory ﬁt with and without the hit addition, and the
angle between the two lines formed by the collection of

FIG. 7. Distribution of the beamline mass as calculated ac-
cording to Equation 3 for the Run II events reconstructed in
the beamline, for negative polarity runs. The classiﬁcation
of the events into π−/µ−/e−, K−, or antiproton is based on
these distributions, whose selection values are represented by
the vertical red lines.

location of the fourth wire chamber (100 cm upstream
of the LArTPC). The particles are free to decay, inter-
act, and deposit their energy along their path to the
LArTPC according to the Geant4 [13] simulation and
a detailed geometry of the intervening material between
the fourth wire chamber and the LArTPC. When the
DDMC particles arrive to the LArTPC, their simulated
passage through matter is transformed into ionization
signals which mimic the actual data.

The DDMC samples are used in this analysis to prop-
agate the estimated beamline background to the pion
cross section, to calibrate the energy loss upstream of the
LArTPC, and to study the tracking and the calorimetric
performance in the LArTPC.

C. LArTPC Reconstruction

The particles from the beam data and from the DDMC
propagate into the LArTPC. The processing and recon-
struction of LArTPC signals is an active area of con-
tinuing development which spans from more traditional
algorithmic approaches [14] to the use of machine learn-
ing tools [15]. Below, we summarize the processing
and reconstruction chain of the LArTPC signals used in
both LArIAT data and simulation to go from ionization-
induced pulses on the sense wires to the construction
of three-dimensional objects with associated calorimet-
ric information.

020040060080010001200]2Beamline Mass [MeV/c1102103104102Entries per 10 MeV/c/em/pKp/DNegative PolarityLArIAT Run II Datahits before and after the considered hit in the trajectory.
The ﬁnal product of this reconstruction stage is the col-
lection of two-dimensional clusters on each wire plane.

4. 3D Tracking

Collections of 2D clusters are matched between wire
planes to form 3D objects.
In this analysis, the 2D
clusters are used by the 3D tracking algorithms to
form 3D tracks. This algorithm, ﬁrst developed for the
ICARUS collaboration [17], uses pairs of 2D clusters
in the induction plane and collection plane which are
close in time as a starting point to form a 3D track.
It constructs a tentative 3D trajectory using the edges
of the clusters. The algorithm then projects back the
tentative trajectory onto the 2D planes and adjusts the
parameters of the 3D track such that they minimize
the distance between the projections and the track hits
on all wire planes simultaneously. Three-dimensional
tracking can use multiple clusters in one plane, but it can
never break them into smaller groups of hits. The ﬁnal
product of this reconstruction stage is the formation of
three-dimensional objects (tracks) in the LArTPC.

For this analysis, we are primarily interested in recon-
structing the tracks of the pion candidates from their
entry point into the LArTPC’s active volume up to
their interaction point. Since this inclusive cross sec-
tion measurement does not distinguish among the various
hadronic interaction channels, reconstruction of the out-
going particle trajectories is not relevant. Thus, we focus
on “track reconstruction,” which at LArIAT’s beam ener-
gies is generally associated with the presence of hadrons,
as opposed to “shower reconstruction,” which is generally
associated with electromagnetic activity from electrons
or photons in the detector. Since our signal deﬁnition
for a pion interaction includes all hadronic channels, it
is the end point of the primary pion track within the
ﬁducial volume which identiﬁes the interaction location,
regardless of the ﬁnal state topology. The clustering algo-
rithm was tuned to maximize the eﬃciency of ﬁnding all
hadronic interactions [18]. This algorithm decides if an
interaction vertex is found by considering 4 consecutive
hits. The average distance between hits is 4.7 mm, which
corresponds to ∼2 cm of argon. In 2 cm of argon, the ex-
pected MCS for the lower energy pions considered in the
analysis is approximately 2 degrees. The reconstruction
was shown to perform consistently in data and simula-
tion. By deﬁning the signal to only account for elastic
hadronic interactions above 5 degrees, we conservatively
exclude the MCS irreducible background. This choice
of signal deﬁnition also reﬂects our ability to eﬃciently
identify hadronic interactions: with the reconstruction
tune used in the analysis, the eﬃciency of ﬁnding a kink
below 5 degrees is signiﬁcantly lower than the rest of the
phase space.

8

5. Calorimetry

The last step in the event reconstruction chain is
to assign calorimetric information to the track objects.
Calorimetry is performed separately for each of the two
wire planes. A multi-step procedure is needed to retrieve
the energy deposited in the LArTPC from the charge
seen by the wires. For each 2D hit associated with the
3D track object, the calorimetry algorithm calculates the
charge seen on every wire by integrating the area under-
neath the Gaussian ﬁt. This charge is then corrected
to account for relative diﬀerences in wire response am-
plitudes, converted from units of ADC to electrons, and
scaled up to correct for electron drift attenuation due
to impurities. Charge recombination eﬀects are then
accounted for in order to derive the deposited energy.
Lastly, an overall calibration factor is applied, primarily
based on energy deposits from minimum ionizing parti-
cles. Thus the calorimetric energy deposit at every loca-
tion on a given track has been assigned. More details on
the overall calibration are given in Reference [10].

IV. PION CANDIDATES SELECTION

For each of the negative polarity Run II beamline
events, we select particles classiﬁed as π/µ/e by the mag-
netic spectrometer. We apply a series of additional event
selection criteria to isolate the pions from these other
light particles as much as possible.

Pile-up (multiple beamline particles entering the
LArTPC at the same time) and beam halo (additional
particles entering the LArTPC from points outside the
cryostat’s beam window) can aﬀect the accuracy of the
LArTPC track reconstruction. To mitigate these eﬀects,
we place a requirement on the number of tracks entering
the LArTPC: events must have four or fewer tracks in
the ﬁrst 14 cm of the LArTPC active volume.

We project the reconstructed beamline track direction
and position to the front face of the LArTPC in order to
match the beamline pion candidate with a reconstructed
LArTPC track. A match is found when the projection
of the beamline track is within 4 cm of a reconstructed
LArTPC track, and the angle between the beamline and
LArTPC track is less than 8 degrees. Events are required
to have one and only one beamline-to-LArTPC match.

The eﬃciency of matching beamline tracks to LArTPC
tracks has some dependence on the length of the recon-
structed LArTPC track, shown in Figure 8, which has
the potential to bias the ﬁnal cross section measurement.
To minimize bias, we deﬁne a LArTPC ﬁducial volume
in which the beamline-to-LArTPC track-matching ef-
ﬁciency is invariant with respect to the reconstructed
track length. Speciﬁcally we consider only events whose
matched track penetrates to at least 30 cm from the front
face of the LArTPC. Any track which extends to more
than 80 cm from the front face we label as “exiting”.
Only the portions of the tracks within the ﬁducial vol-

9

TABLE II. Expected beamline composition for the selected
events in the two energy tunes.

Low Energy Tune

High Energy Tune

MC π MC µ MC e MC π MC µ MC e

Expected
Composition
in XS sample

92.9% 6.1% 1.0% 91.2% 7.8% 1.0%

±

±

1.6% 1.0%

±

±

1.4% 1.0%

line pion candidates remain in the Run II negative po-
larity data sample after we apply the selection criteria.

We feed beamline candidates

to the “thin slice
method” machinery, discussed in the next section, in or-
der to measure the negative pion total hadronic cross
section.

V. THIN SLICE METHOD

Pion hadronic cross sections have historically been
measured using “thin targets”, where the thickness of
the target is much smaller than the typical interaction
length in the material. While the LArIAT LArTPC as
a whole fails this constraint, its ﬁne-grained tracking al-
lows for the development of a methodology which still
leverages the conditions of thin target experiments.

The pion interaction probability, PInt, for an argon tar-
get of thickness δX is related to the interaction cross
section σTOT by

PInt = 1 − e−σTOT n δX ,

(4)

where n is the density of the target centers. The density
of target centers is deﬁned as n = ρNA
, with argon mass
mA
density (ρ), Avogadro’s number (NA) and argon molar
mass (mA). The probability of pion interaction on the
target, PInt, can be statistically estimated as the ratio of
the number of pions interacting in the thin target, NInt
(interacting ﬂux), and the number of incident pions, NInc
(incident ﬂux). If the interaction length is signiﬁcantly
longer than the thickness of the target, i.e λInt (cid:29) δX,
we can assume that the target centers are uniformly dis-
tributed in the material and that no center of interaction
sits in front of another. This is typically known as the
thin target approximation.

In this approximation, it is possible to ﬁnd a simple
proportional relationship between the cross section and
the interaction probability from the ﬁrst term of a Taylor
expansion of the exponential function:

σTOT =

1
n δX

NInt
NInc

.

(5)

Since the interaction length of pions in liquid argon is
of the order of ∼ 50 cm, the LArIAT LArTPC, with a
length of 90 cm, does not represent a thin target. How-
ever, the granularity of the LArTPC allows us to mea-
sure the kinetic energy of each pion approximately every

FIG. 8. Beamline matching eﬃciency as a function of the
reconstructed LArTPC track length.

ume (in the 30 cm and 80 cm range) are used in the
analysis. This LArTPC ﬁducialization also carries the
beneﬁt of eliminating much of the electron content.

The majority of the remaining electron contamina-
tion is eliminated by placing requirements on the recon-
structed LArTPC tracks. We construct a “shower ﬁl-
ter” by leveraging the topological diﬀerence between the
track-like signal generated by pions and the electromag-
netic showers generated by electrons. When the track re-
construction is applied to electromagnetic activity in the
LArTPC, the result is the reconstruction of numerous
short-length tracks; if more than 5 tracks shorter than
10 cm are present near the matched LArTPC track, the
event is classiﬁed as an electron and is rejected. After
all of the selection requirements are applied, the electron
content is 1 ± 1% for both the low and high energy tune,
as reported in Table II.

These selection criteria unfortunately cannot eliminate
the muon content in the beamline. Muon contamination
is estimated through geometrical and kinematic consid-
erations, exploiting the fact that muons are present in
the beamline only as a product of pion decays. The
pion candidates used in this analysis require a beam-
line trigger (i.e., in-time activity in all four wire cham-
bers and TOF) and a matched reconstructed LArTPC
track, which places geometrical constraints on the decay
angle of muons relative to the direction of their parent
pions in the lab frame. The beamline geometry, taken
together with relativistic particle considerations, results
in a conservative estimate of muon content in the beam-
line: 6.1 ± 1.6% for the low energy tune and 7.8 ± 1.4%
for the high energy tune, as reported in Table II.

Starting from 158396 beamline triggers, 24534 beam-

0102030405060708090100LArTPC Track Length Length [cm]00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9 Beamline Matching EfficiencyNegative PolarityLArIAT Run II Simulation10

Within the jth slice, the pion may or may not undergo a
hadronic interaction. If it does, it also contributes to the
interacting ﬂux at the same energy bin. If the pion does
not interact in the jth slice, it will enter the next slice and
the evaluation of the ﬂuxes is repeated for the new kinetic
energy Ekin
is always greater
than Ekin
j+1 while the pion is traversing the LArTPC. The
contributions to the incident and interacting ﬂuxes of all
the beamline pion candidates are accumulated in the se-
lected sample to obtain NInt and NInc in bins of kinetic
energy.

j+1. The kinetic energy Ekin

j

Thus, the total inclusive interaction cross section can
be measured, independent of the topology of the inter-
action, by taking the ratio of NInt to NInc for all pion-
candidate tracks within the detector ﬁducial volume. In
the next section, we describe how this method is applied
in the analysis.

A. Applying the “Thin-Slice” Method

The tracking and calorimetry algorithms provide mea-
surements of EDep,n, the energy deposited along the
pion’s path at each segment between two 3D points of
the trajectory, where the segment length is known as the
“track pitch” (δX). Figure 10 compares the distribution
of track pitches for the high energy tune data and simula-
tion, which are in agreement with a mean δX of 4.7 mm
and comparable widths (comparable agreement is found
for the low energy tune data). Although the widths of
these distributions are narrow, we assign to each slice a
weight of δX/4.7, which allows us to simplify our ma-
chinery to use the ﬁxed mean value of track pitch in the
equations. The collection plane signals are used to obtain
the measurement of deposited energy in each argon slice,
shown in Figure 11. This per-slice energy deposition, to-
gether with the particle’s momentum measurement from
beamline instrumentation, allows us to assess the kinetic
energy of the matched pion candidate at each point of
the pion’s reconstructed track.

We start by estimating the pion’s initial kinetic energy
Front Face, as

as it enters the front face of the LArTPC, Ekin

Ekin

Front Face =

(cid:113)

Beam + m2
p2

Beam − mBeam − ELoss,

(7)

where pBeam is the momentum measured by the LAr-
IAT spectrometer, the mass of the pion is mBeam =
139.57018 ± 0.00035 MeV [19], ELoss is a correction for
the kinetic energy lost in the uninstrumented material be-
tween the ﬁnal wire chamber (WC4 in Figure 3) and the
LArTPC front face. Figure 12 shows the ELoss distribu-
tion for the simulation of pions in the LArIAT simulation.
The lower of the two peaks is that of particles which pass
through the central hole of the halo scintillator paddle,
while the upper peak is particles that traverse the scin-
tillator plastic body of the halo paddle, where they lose
approximately 7 MeV more energy than the hole-crossing
particles.

FIG. 9. Graphical representation of the thin slice method
and its implementation in the LArIAT LArTPC. The average
slice thickness is determined by the wire angle and spacing in
the readout wire planes (±60◦ from vertical, 4 mm pitch).

4.7 mm along its trajectory in the detector’s active vol-
ume. We may thus treat the argon volume as a sequence
of many adjacent thin targets, as illustrated in Figure 9,
recovering the thin target approximation in each argon
slice.

Each slice of argon, j , represents an independent thin
target experiment for which the incoming pion has a ki-
netic energy of Ekin

, given by the equation:

j

Ekin

j = Ekin

Initial −

(cid:88)

n<j

EDep,n.

(6)

where Ekin
Initial represents the initial kinetic energy the par-
ticle had upon entering the LArTPC, and EDep,n is the
energy deposited in slice n.

The pion loses kinetic energy in each traversed slice via
ionization. Therefore, the same pion will contribute to
subsequent independent thin target experiments at pro-
gressively decreasing energies the further it travels in the
LArTPC. We apply the cross section calculation from
Equation 5 in bins of kinetic energy: when a pion of
kinetic energy Ekin
enters a slice, it contributes to the
incident ﬂux at the energy bin corresponding to Ekin
.

j

j

11

FIG. 10. Pitch distribution for the Run II negative polar-
ity high energy tune data displayed in black, simulation in
red, area normalized. Mean and standard deviation of the
distributions are reported in the legend.

FIG. 11. Per-slice energy deposition distribution for Run II
negative polarity high energy tune data displayed in black,
simulation in red, with Landau ﬁts to determine the most
probable value and width of each distribution. The distribu-
tions are area normalized.

To obtain the kinetic energy at each point of the pion
reconstructed track, we iteratively subtract the measure-
ment of the energy deposited EDep,n from Ekin
Front Face.
This is shown in the application of the thin-slice method
at the jth point of the track Ekin

is given by

j

Ekin

j = Ekin

Front Face −

(cid:88)

n<j

EDep,n.

(8)

B. Thin-Slice Flux Corrections

1. Reconstruction Corrections (ψ)

We rely on the tracking algorithm to identify the in-
coming pion in the LArTPC and its interaction point.
The end point of the track within the ﬁducial volume de-
termines whether or not the pion interacted. The track-
ing algorithm has an intrinsic limitation in resolving shal-
low scattering angles, eﬀectively placing a selection on
the distribution of scattering angles included in the cross
section measurement. Thus, we restrict the measured
cross section to interaction angles greater than 5 degrees.

In the evaluation of the interacting and incident ﬂuxes
as a function of the pion kinetic energy, two corrections
are necessary. The ﬁrst accounts for beamline back-
grounds. For this analysis these are the residual muons
and electrons present in the beamline pion sample. The
second correction accounts for LArTPC event reconstruc-
tion eﬀects in the evaluation of NInt and NInc.
We rewrite Eq. 5 at kinetic energy Ekin

, as a function
of the measured ﬂuxes in data (N Data
), with
the corresponding corrections for beamline backgrounds
(C πMC
), and corrections for reconstruction
Int
Inc
eﬀects (ψInt and ψInc) as follows:

i
and N Data

and C πMC

Inc

Int

σπ−
T OT (Ekin

i

) =

1
n δX

ψInc
C πMC
i
i C πMC
ψInt

Int,i N Data
Int,i
Inc,i N Data
Inc,i

,

(9)

where the subscript i highlights that the quantities are
evaluated separately in each kinetic energy bin.

The interacting and incident ﬂuxes both depend on
the tracking algorithm’s ability to identify the interac-
tion point, albeit in diﬀerent ways. If the tracking does
not stop at an interaction point and instead keeps adding
subsequent hits to the pion trajectory (e.g., hits gen-
erated by an outgoing product of the interaction), the
missed interaction constitutes an ineﬃciency for the in-
teracting ﬂux and the slices corresponding to the extra
trajectory points result in over-counting for the incident
ﬂux. In contrast, if the tracking stops before the actual
interaction point, then the identiﬁed interaction point
constitutes an over-counting for the interaction ﬂux at
an energy higher than the true energy of the interaction,
and the missed subsequent slices represent an ineﬃciency
for the incident ﬂux. We encode both the ineﬃciency and
the over-counting due to the reconstruction of the pion
track in the reconstruction corrections, ψInt
and ψInc
.
We use a sample of DDMC pions to evaluate the recon-

i

i

0.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91X [cm]dTrack Pitch, 00.020.040.060.080.10.120.140.16Normalized Entries per 0.025 cmHigh Energy TuneLArIAT Run II Negative Polarity 0.03 cm–X> = 0.47 d<Data 0.02 cm–X> = 0.47 d<Simulation00.511.522.533.5 Energy Deposited [MeV]00.020.040.060.080.10.120.140.16 Normalized Entries per 0.05 MeVHigh Energy TuneLArIAT Run II Negative PolarityData 0.07 MeV–Data fit: MPV = 0.78 Pion MC Simulation 0.05 MeV–Pion MC fit: MPV = 0.77 12

then apply these corrections to the corresponding kinetic
energy bins in data.

We simulate pions, muons, and electrons with the
DDMC. These are fed into the thin-slice method ma-
chinery, estimating the interacting and incident ﬂuxes
for each particle species. We then calculate the relative
pion content for the interacting and incident ﬂux as

and

C πMC

Int,i =

N πMC
Int,i
N TOT MC

Int,i

C πMC

Inc,i =

N πMC
Inc,i
N TOT MC
Inc,i

(11)

(12)

Int,i

Int,i /C πMC
Inc,i

Int,i and N π

and N TOT MC
Inc,i

Int,i and C πMC

where N TOT MC
are the sum of the MC
pion, muon, and electron contributions to the interacting
and incident ﬂuxes, respectively, while N π
Inc,i
represent only the MC pion contribution. Once we evalu-
ate the correction factors C πMC
Inc,i separately, we
use their ratio to background-correct the measured raw
cross section. The values for C πMC
in each energy
bin and statistical uncertainty are reported in Table III.
Muons represent the biggest contribution to beamline
backgrounds. Without correction, the muon presence in
the sample tends to lower the measured raw cross section.
This is because most of the muons will cross the LArTPC
without stopping, contributing almost exclusively to the
incident ﬂux. Figures 13 and 14 show the distributions
of the interacting and incident ﬂuxes as a function of
the kinetic energy for the low and high energy tunes, re-
spectively. While the agreement of data and simulation
is reasonable, it should be noted that the Monte Carlo
prediction for pions assumes the Geant4 pion interaction
cross section, which is not guaranteed to be correct. In-
deed, these ﬁgures hint that our data will prefer a slightly
diﬀerent energy dependence of the cross section, which
will be shown in the results.

C. Treatment of the uncertainties

We calculate the statistical uncertainty for a given ki-
netic energy bin of the cross section by propagating the
statistical uncertainty on NInt,i and NInc,i. Since the
number of incident particles in each energy bin is given by
a simple counting, we assume that NInc,i follows a Pois-
son distribution with mean and variance equal to NInc,i
in each bin. On the other hand, NInt,i follows a bino-
mial distribution: a particle in a given energy bin might
or might not interact. The variance for the binomial is
given by

Var[NInt,i] = NInc,iPInt,i(1 − PInt,i),

(13)

where PInt,i is estimated by NInt,i
and the number of tries
NInc,i
corresponds to NInc,i. NInc,i and NInt,i are not indepen-
dent.
In fact, populating a given bin for the interact-
ing ﬂux always implies at least populating the same bin

FIG. 12. True energy loss between the fourth wire cham-
ber and the LArTPC front face according to the simulation
of negative polarity events for the high energy tune. Two
populations are visible, depending on the amount of material
traversed by the beamline pion. The HALO scintillator pad-
dle – a rectangular piece with a central hole – is responsible
for the double-peaked distribution. The distribution for the
pions traveling through the central hole (missing the scintil-
lator material) is shaded in purple, and the distribution for
the pions hitting the HALO body is shaded green, the sum of
these distributions is indicated by the black histogram.

struction corrections as follows:

ψInt

i =

Int,i

N Reco MC π
N True MC π

Int,i

and

ψInc

i =

Inc,i

N Reco MC π
N True MC π

Inc,i

,

(10)
where N True MC π
is the expected number of interact-
Int,i
ing pions at the kinetic energy Ekin
according to the
Geant4 10.03.p1 FTFP BERT interaction model and
N Reco MC π
is the number of reconstructed interacting
pions at the same kinetic energy. Analogous deﬁnitions
apply to the correction on the incident ﬂux. The values
for ψInc
in each energy bin, and their corresponding
statistical and systematic uncertainties are reported in
Table III.

i /ψInt

Int,i

i

i

2. Beamline Background Corrections (C)

Pions are by far the largest component in the selected
beamline candidates. However, a residual background
of muons and electrons are present in the sample. We
use simulations to estimate the pion content, C πMC
Int,i and
C πMC
Inc,i , i.e., the percentage of pion entries in the interact-
ing and incident ﬂux at each kinetic energy bin, Ekin
. We

i

1015202530354045505560 [MeV]Loss E0100020003000400050006000700080009000 Entries per 0.4 MeVHigh Energy TuneLArIAT Negative Polarity Simulation 6.4 MeV–All pions, <E> = 28.7  4.0 MeV–Halo hole, <E> = 24.7  5.9 MeV–Halo body, <E> = 32.6 13

FIG. 13.
Interacting and incident ﬂuxes for the low energy
tune. The simulated stacked contributions for pions (dark
blue), muons (light blue) and electrons (purple) are normal-
ized to the number of pion candidates selected in low energy
tune data.

FIG. 14.
Interacting and incident ﬂuxes for the high energy
tune. The simulated stacked contributions for pions (dark
blue), muons (light blue) and electrons (purple) are normal-
ized to the number of pion candidates selected in high energy
tune data.

in the incident ﬂux (and possibly other incident bins at
higher energies). Thus, we conservatively calculate the
statistical uncertainty on the cross section as

T OT (Ekin
δσStat
)
i
T OT (Ekin
σStat
)

i

=

δNInt,i
NInt,i

+

δNInc,i
NInc,i

(14)

where:

(cid:115)

δNInt,i =

NInt,i

(cid:16)

1 −

(cid:17)

NInt,i
NInc,i

δNInc,i =(cid:112)NInc,i.

(15)

(16)

Systematic uncertainties associated with the measured
kinetic energy at each argon slice and with the beam
composition are also evaluated and propagated through
to the cross section. The uncertainty on the kinetic en-

01002003004005006007008009001000 Interacting Kinetic Energy [MeV]02004006008001000120014001600180020002200 Entries per 50 MeVLow Energy TuneLArIAT Run II Negative PolarityLArIAT DataMC pions (93.2%)MC muons (5.7%)MC electrons (1.1%)01002003004005006007008009001000 Incident Kinetic Energy [MeV]020406080100120140310· Entries per 50 MeVLow Energy TuneLArIAT Run II Negative PolarityLArIAT DataMC pions (84.8%)MC muons (15.0%)MC electrons (0.2%)0200400600800100012001400 Interacting Kinetic Energy [MeV]02004006008001000120014001600 Entries per 50 MeVHigh Energy TuneLArIAT Run II Negative PolarityLArIAT DataMC pions (92.9%)MC muons (5.8%)MC electrons (1.3%)0200400600800100012001400 Incident Kinetic Energy [MeV]020406080100120140310· Entries per 50 MeVHigh Energy TuneLArIAT Run II Negative PolarityLArIAT DataMC pions (84.3%)MC muons (15.5%)MC electrons (0.2%)14

contribution to the total cross section was adjusted based
on the diﬀerence between the two elastic scattering mod-
els available in Geant4: G4Elastic and G4DiﬀuseElastic.
In each kinetic energy bin, we conservatively used as the
variation the maximum diﬀerence between those models,
weighted by the angular distribution of the events in that
bin. The corresponding variations for the inelastic model
were derived under the assumption that the overall total
cross section normalization is accurate at the few percent
level. With these shape and normalization variations ap-
plied to the underlying cross sections, the systematic un-
certainty on the ratio ψInc/ψInt in each bin was taken as
the magnitude of the excursion from the ratio obtained
using the nominal cross section model. These uncertain-
ties are reported in Table III.

VI. RESULTS

Figure 15 shows the measured (π−, Ar) total hadronic
cross section, for scattering angles greater than 5 degrees,
as calculated according to Eq. 9 in the 100-700 MeV ki-
netic energy range. Table III summarizes the cross sec-
tion as a function of kinetic energy and the associated to-
tal uncertainty; it also reports the recorded ﬂuxes, beam-
line background corrections, and the corrections due to
pion track reconstruction eﬀects. The lower bound of
the kinetic energy range was chosen to eliminate phys-
ical backgrounds due to non-hadronic interactions such

ergy of a pion candidate at the jth slice of argon is given
by

(cid:115)

δEkin

j =

(δpBeam)2 + (δELoss)2 + (

(cid:88)

n<j

δEDep,n)2,

(17)
where δpBeam is the uncertainty associated with the
beamline momentum measurement, δELoss is the un-
certainty associated with the energy loss in the unin-
strumented material upstream of the LArTPC, and
(cid:80)
n<j δEDep,n is the uncertainty associated with pion en-
ergy deposition in each slice from the LArTPC front face
to the jth slice.

The momentum uncertainty, δpBeam, is estimated to
be 2% pBeam, based on studies of multiple scattering and
beamline geometry reported in Ref. [10].

The uncertainty in the amount of energy lost by parti-
cles traversing uninstrumented materials upstream of the
LArTPC is estimated via the study illustrated in Fig-
ure 12. The two populations visible in the ﬁgure are
due to the path of the particle through the HALO scin-
tillator paddle: particles that pass through the central
hole of the paddle lose approximately 8 MeV less energy
than particles that traverse scintillator plastic. The sum
of those two populations is indicated by the black his-
togram, and we conservatively take its width, 6.4 MeV,
as the uncertainty on this energy loss.

We calculate the uncertainty associated with pion en-
ergy deposition at the jth slice as the sum of δEDep,n up
to that slice; δEDep,n is 0.07 MeV, which corresponds to
the width of the distribution in Figure 11. The measure-
ments of the energy deposited in consecutive slices are
not independent, because the charge collected on a given
wire induces signal on neighboring wires and therefore
contributes to the assessment of the energy deposited in
neighboring slices. For this reason, a conservative simple
sum of the uncertainties on the energy deposited in the
single slice is employed when assessing the uncertainty
on the total energy deposited by the pion.

j

j

We propagate the uncertainty on the kinetic energy
to the cross section by varying the energy measurement,
Ekin
, at each argon slice and evaluating the cross sec-
j
tion in three cases: ﬁrst, we compute the cross section
with the measured central value Ekin
, then with an up-
ward variation Ekin
, and ﬁnally with a downward
variation Ekin
. The systematic uncertainty due
to energy reconstruction is assigned for each bin as the
maximum absolute value of excursion from the central
value of that bin when the cross section is calculated for
the two cases: (Ekin

j − δEkin

j +δEkin

) and (Ekin

j + δEkin

j − δEkin

We assess the systematic uncertainty on the beam com-
position in a similar fashion; we vary the beamline muon
and electron content by the respective uncertainty as re-
ported in Table II, and evaluate the cross section varia-
tion in each case.

).

j

j

j

The systematic uncertainty on the ψ corrections is
evaluated by varying the underlying elastic and inelas-
tic cross sections in our simulation. The elastic scattering

(π−, Ar) total hadronic cross section for scatter-
FIG. 15.
ing angles greater than 5 degrees measured in the LArIAT
low energy and high energy tune Run II data samples. The
Geant4 prediction for the total hadronic cross section for in-
elastic scattering and elastic scattering angles greater than
5 degrees is displayed in green.

0100200300400500600700 Kinetic Energy [MeV]00.511.522.5,Ar) Hadronic Cross Section per 50 MeV [barn]-p  Total (Negative PolarityLArIAT Run II DataLow Energy Tune DataHigh Energy Tune DataElastic Angles > 5 degGeant4.10.03.p1, FTFP BERTas pion decay at rest and pion capture. Since both of
these processes occur at rest, a kinetic energy cut-oﬀ of
100 MeV completely eliminates them.

Our experimental result is presented separately for the
high energy and low energy tune data, which are con-
sistent with each other. For each dataset, the lowest
and highest bins reported are those that contained at
least 100 interactions. We report both the statistical
uncertainty (inner ticks) and the sum in quadrature of
statistical and systematic uncertainty (outer ticks). For
reference, the black curve represents the Geant4 predic-
tion based on the FTFP BERT cascade model for inelas-
tic scattering and elastic scattering angles greater than
5 degrees.
In most bins, statistical uncertainty domi-
nates. Since the low statistics mostly result from the
hard LArTPC ﬁducialization selection, improvements in
the track reconstruction algorithm in future analyses will
have the potential to recover these events. The dominant
systematic uncertainty results from our uncertainty on
the muon background.

Data from the high and low energy tunes was indepen-
dently collected and simulated with dedicated simulated
samples. We applied identical methodology and selec-
tion criteria to each tune. The total cross section mea-
surement for the two samples presents a sizable overlap
in the kinetic energy. In the overlapping energy region
(200-400 MeV), the measured values from the two data
sets agree within statistical uncertainty, providing an in-
ternal validation for the analysis method.

The measurement shows the typical shape caused by
the underlying ∆ resonance production, as expected from
pion interactions below 500 MeV. Our measurement is
found to be in general agreement with the expectation

15

from the Geant4 FTFP BERT cascade model
in the
100-700 MeV region, but with possible diﬀerences in
the energy dependence of the cross section as compared
with the prediction. In the higher energy region (above
400 MeV), the experimental measurement of the (π−,
Ar) cross section is slightly higher than the prediction.
This result represents the ﬁrst dedicated measurement of
the negative pion hadronic interaction cross section on
an argon target.

VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This document was prepared by the LArIAT collabora-
tion using the resources of the Fermi National Accelera-
tor Laboratory (Fermilab), a U.S. Department of Energy,
Oﬃce of Science, HEP User Facility. Fermilab is man-
aged by Fermi Research Alliance, LLC (FRA), acting un-
der Contract No. DE-AC02-07CH11359. We also grate-
fully acknowledge the support of the National Science
Foundation; Brazil CNPq grant number 233511/2014-
8, Coordena¸c˜ao de Aperfei¸coamento de Pessoal de N´ıvel
Superior - Brazil (CAPES) - Finance Code 001, S˜ao
Paulo Research Foundation - FAPESP (BR) grant num-
ber 16/22738-0; Polish National Science Centre grant
Dec-2013/09/N/ST2/02793; the Science and Technology
Facilities Council (STFC), part of the United Kingdom
Research and Innovation; The Royal Society (United
Kingdom); and the JSPS grant-in-aid (Grant Number
25105008), Japan. The collaboration extends a special
thank you to the coordinators and technicians of the Fer-
milab Test Beam Facility, without whom none of this
work would have been possible.

[1] B. Abi et al. (DUNE), JINST 15, T08008 (2020),

[10] R. Acciarri et al. (LArIAT), JINST 15, P04026 (2020),

arXiv:2002.02967 [physics.ins-det].

arXiv:1911.10379 [physics.ins-det].

[2] P. A. Machado, O. Palamara, and D. W. Schmitz, Ann.
Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 69, 363 (2019), arXiv:1903.04608
[hep-ex].

[3] A. Friedland and S. W. Li, Phys. Rev. D 102, 096005

(2020), arXiv:2007.13336 [hep-ph].

[4] C. Wilkin et al., Nucl. Phys. B62, 61 (1973).
[5] A. Clough et al., Nuclear Physics B 76, 15 (1974).
[6] A. S. Carroll et al., Phys. Rev. C 14, 635 (1976).
[7] D. Ashery, I. Navon, G. Azuelos, H. K. Walter, H. J.
Pfeiﬀer, and F. W. Schlep¨utz, Phys. Rev. C 23, 2173
(1981).

[8] T. Ericson and W. Weise, Pions and Nuclei (The In-
ternational Series of Monographs on Physics) (Oxford
University Press, 1988).

[9] G. L. Shaw and D. Y. Wong, Pion-nucleon Scattering

(John Wiley & Sons Inc, 1969).

[11] E. L. Snider and G. Petrillo, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 898,

042057 (2017).

[12] L. Aliaga et al. (MINERvA), Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A
789, 28 (2015), arXiv:1501.06431 [physics.ins-det].
[13] S. Agostinelli et al. (GEANT4), Nucl. Instrum. Meth.

A506, 250 (2003).

[14] G. Barker, Journal of Physics: Conference Series 308,

012015 (2011).

[15] R. Acciarri et al., JINST 12, P03011 (2017).
[16] B. Baller, JINST 12, P07010 (2017), arXiv:1703.04024

[physics.ins-det].

[17] M. Antonello et al., Advances in High Energy Physics

2013, 1 (2013).

[18] E. Gramellini, Measurement of the Negative Pion and
Positive Kaon Total Hadronic Cross Sections on Argon
at the LArIAT Experiment, Ph.D. thesis, Yale U. (2018).
[19] C. Patrignani et al. (Particle Data Group), Chin. Phys.

C40, 100001 (2016).

TABLE III. Results summary, including slice counts and corrections for backgrounds and reconstruction eﬀects.

16

[Ekin

MIN, Ekin
(MeV)

MAX]

σ Geant4
(Barn)

σTOT
(Barn)

Stat (cid:76) Syst
Uncertainty (Barn)

N Data
Int

N Data
Inc

C πMC

Int /C πMC

Inc

ψInc/ψInt

Low E Tune

[100., 150.]
[150., 200.]
[200., 250.]
[250., 300.]
[300., 350.]
[350., 400.]

High E Tune

[200., 250.]
[250., 300.]
[300., 350.]
[350., 400.]
[400., 450.]
[450., 500.]
[500., 550.]
[550., 600.]
[600., 650.]
[650., 700.]

1.61
1.49
1.33
1.21
1.07
0.96

1.33
1.21
1.07
0.96
0.88
0.82
0.80
0.77
0.75
0.73

1.46
1.47
1.41
1.30
1.07
1.03

1.34
1.38
1.19
1.09
0.99
0.98
0.83
0.87
0.91
0.85

+0.10/-0.10
+0.04/-0.05
+0.10/-0.10
+0.10/-0.10
+0.12/-0.10
+0.09/-0.12

+0.22/-0.21
+0.17/-0.17
+0.14/-0.12
+0.11/-0.12
+0.10/-0.10
+0.08/-0.10
+0.12/-0.12
+0.11/-0.11
+0.10/-0.11
+0.14/-0.16

1642
2078
1944
1352
671
227

237
769
1271
1491
1370
1162
779
568
392
222

102070
141574
143522
111641
67668
24041

16760
55680
108371
135718
134715
117560
89095
62669
41301
25790

1.13 ± 0.03
1.11 ± 0.02
1.10 ± 0.03
1.09 ± 0.03
1.08 ± 0.05
1.07 ± 0.08

0.80 ± 0.05
0.89 ± 0.02
0.93 ± 0.05
0.97 ± 0.06
0.99 ± 0.04
1.01 ± 0.02

1.12 ± 0.08
1.14 ± 0.04
1.12 ± 0.03
1.11 ± 0.03
1.10 ± 0.03
1.10 ± 0.04
1.09 ± 0.04
1.10 ± 0.05
1.10 ± 0.06
1.09 ± 0.08

0.83 ± 0.13
0.87 ± 0.09
0.90 ± 0.08
0.88 ± 0.08
0.87 ± 0.08
0.88 ± 0.07
0.86 ± 0.12
0.86 ± 0.11
0.87 ± 0.11
0.90 ± 0.13

