1
2
0
2

p
e
S
6
1

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
1
2
8
7
0
.
9
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Filament Eruption Driving EUV Loop Contraction then Expansion above a
Stable Filament

Ramesh Chandra1, Pascal D´emoulin2,3, Pooja Devi1, Reetika Joshi1, Brigitte Schmieder2,4,5

1 Department of Physics, DSB Campus, Kumaun University, Nainital – 263 001, India

rchandra.ntl@gmail.com

2 LESIA, Observatoire de Paris, Universit´e PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Universit´e, Universit´e de Paris,
5 place Jules Janssen, 92195 Meudon, France

3 Laboratoire Cogitamus, 1 3/4 rue Descartes, 75005 Paris, France

4 Centre for Mathematical Plasma Astrophysics, Department of Mathematics, KU Leuven, 3001
Leuven, Belgium

5 LSUPA, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Glasgow, Scotland

ABSTRACT

We analyze the observations of EUV loop evolution associated with the ﬁlament
eruption located at the border of an active region. The event SOL2013-03-16T14:00
was observed with a large difference of view point by the Solar Dynamics Observatory
and Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory –A spacecraft. The ﬁlament height is ﬁtted
with the sum of a linear and exponential function. These two phases point to different
physical mechanisms such as: tether-cutting reconnection and a magnetic instability.
While no X-ray emission is reported, this event presents the classical eruption features
like: separation of double ribbons and the growth of ﬂare loops. We report the mi-
gration of the southern foot of the erupting ﬁlament ﬂux rope due to the interchange
reconnection with encountered magnetic loops of a neighbouring AR. Parallel to the
erupting ﬁlament, a stable ﬁlament remains in the core of active region. The speciﬁcity
of this eruption is that coronal loops, located above the nearly joining ends of the two
ﬁlaments, ﬁrst contract in phase, then expand and reach a new stable conﬁguration
close to the one present at the eruption onset. Both contraction and expansion phases
last around 20 min. The main difference with previous cases is that the PIL bent about
1800 around the end of the erupting ﬁlament because the magnetic conﬁguration is at
least tri-polar. These observations are challenging for models which interpreted pre-
vious cases of loop contraction within a bipolar conﬁguration. New simulations are
required to broaden the complexity of the conﬁgurations studied.

Subject headings: Sun: Filament – Sun: Flares – Sun: Loop

 
 
 
 
 
 
– 2 –

1.

Introduction

Solar ﬁlaments (or prominences, when observed at solar limb) are cool and dense material
plasma suspended in a million degree hot corona (Mackay et al. 2010; Labrosse et al. 2010; Parenti
2014). They are located above the photospheric inversion line (PIL) of the vertical component of
the magnetic ﬁeld. They are observed in the active as well as in the quiet solar atmosphere or
between two active regions. Since the plasma of ﬁlaments is about a factor one hundred denser
than the coronal plasma it needs to be supported by a force against the action of gravity. The
existence of stable support in magnetic dips was initially proposed by Kippenhahn & Schl¨uter
(1957). Present models typically involved a magnetic structure with the ﬁlament plasma caught
in magnetic dips (see the review by Mackay et al. 2010). Magnetic dips can be present naturally
in potential ﬁelds with a quadrupolar magnetic conﬁguration but not with a bipolar conﬁguration.
Several models have been developed such as the sheared arcade model (Antiochos et al. 1994), and
the ﬂux rope (FR) model (Aulanier & D´emoulin 1998; Priest et al. 1989; Aulanier & Schmieder
2002). Finally, the existence and the evolution of a ﬁlament is strongly linked to the associated
magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration.

Usually, at some point of their evolution ﬁlaments become unstable and erupt. The eruption
can be conﬁned by the overlying magnetic ﬁeld, then is called a failed eruption. In the opposite
case, the ﬁlament, the surrounding coronal magnetic ﬁeld and the plasma become a coronal mass
ejection (CME) which is ejected towards the interplanetary medium (e.g., Gibson & Fan 2006;
Chandra et al. 2010; Schmieder et al. 2013; Kliem et al. 2014). Therefore ﬁlament eruptions are
thought to play a diagnostic role for the origin of CMEs because of their much higher plasma
density than the surrounding corona. Eruptions and associated phenomena, such as the formation
of ﬂare ribbons and their separation with time, were initially explained by the CSHKP model
(Carmichael 1964; Sturrock 1966; Hirayama 1974; Kopp & Pneuman 1976). Later on, this 2–
dimension model was extended into a 3–dimensional model that could explain eruption associated
phenomena including slipping reconnection, circular ribbon formation, and the magnetic shear
evolution of ﬂare loops (Aulanier et al. 2010; Janvier et al. 2015).

Different mechanisms could explain the trigger of eruptions, which include the magnetic
breakout (Antiochos et al. 1999), tether cutting (Moore & Sterling 2006), kink instability (T¨or¨ok
& Kliem 2005) and the torus instability or catastrophe model (Kliem & T¨or¨ok 2006). The ob-
servations and models of both the possible pre-eruptive magnetic conﬁgurations and the eruption
mechanisms have recently been reviewed (Green et al. 2018; Georgoulis et al. 2019; Patsourakos
et al. 2020). As the FR is erupting according to the Lin & Forbes (2000) model, a thin current
sheet (CS) is formed behind the erupting FR. The erupting FR can be ejected from the corona into
the heliosphere thanks to the magnetic reconnection occurring in the current sheet behind the FR.
This reconnection transforms part of the stabilizing magnetic connections passing above the FR

– 3 –

to connections located below the FR (ﬂare loops) and to connections wrapped around the FR, so
further building the FR.

One of the remarkable phenomena accompanying solar eruptions is the evolution of coronal
loops. This phenomenon is reported with various space borne observations in ﬂare loops with
the shrinkage of individual loops while the global loop system expand upwards as further ﬂare
loops are formed (Forbes & Acton 1996; Li & Gan 2006; Sui et al. 2004; Zhou et al. 2008; Joshi
et al. 2009). Moreover, since the launch of SDO in 2010, observational evidences of coronal loop
contraction and expansion, not associated to ﬂare loops, are increasing (Sun et al. 2012; Gosain
2012; Liu et al. 2012; Zhou et al. 2013; Sim˜oes et al. 2013; Shen et al. 2014; Dud´ık et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2018; Dud´ık et al. 2019; Devi et al. 2021). This is a consequence of SDO continuous
high temporal and spatial resolution observations. This phenomena is usually observed together
with eruptive solar ﬂares. These loops are already present before the ﬂare, so they are different
from ﬂare loops which are formed by reconnection during the ﬂare. The speed of the contraction
and expansion is typically between a few km s−1 and 40 km s−1. Furthermore, in some cases the
contracted loops end up oscillating (e.g., Gosain 2012; Liu et al. 2012; Sim˜oes et al. 2013).

To explain the phenomena of the loop contraction two mechanisms were explored. The ﬁrst
mechanism is the “magnetic implosion” conjecture proposed by Hudson (2000). According to this
the energy generated during a solar eruption has its origin in the implosion of the magnetic conﬁg-
uration in a nearby part of the corona. The expansion followed by contraction in coronal loops is
recently simulated in 3D by Wang et al. (2021). The physical interpretation of such implosion has
later changed. For example, Sim˜oes et al. (2013) interpret the observed loop contraction with an
implosion which is a consequence, and not a driver, of the energy release during the event. Later
on, Russell et al. (2015) interpret the loop contraction as the consequence of the reduction of the
magnetic pressure due to the magnetic reconnection occurring in the ﬂare. Several observations
of loop contraction are interpreted as supporting this mechanism (Wang et al. 2018). The second
mechanism is proposed by Aulanier et al. (2010) and Zuccarello et al. (2017). This model is based
on the 3D magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) numerical simulations of the formation then eruption
of a FR in a bipolar magnetic conﬁguration modelling an AR conﬁguration. According to their
model, the loop contraction/expansion is the result of the vortex forming on both sides of erupting
FR legs. These vortex ﬂows drive the coronal loops and as a result of this the contraction/expansion
in loops observed, depending where the loops are in the vortex. The careful analysis of the con-
traction/expansion of loops in some studied eruptions ﬁlament support the conclusion of the MHD
simulations (Dud´ık et al. 2017, 2019; Devi et al. 2021).

Coronal loops can also be excited by propagating coronal waves, in particular fast magneto-
acoustic waves (Wills-Davey & Thompson 1999; Ballai 2007; Ballai et al. 2008). These waves
can be generated by sudden energy release process like the phenomena of solar ﬂares and CMEs.

– 4 –

The propagation of coronal waves can be considered as a freely propagating wavefront which is
observed to interact with coronal loops (see, e.g. Wills-Davey & Thompson 1999; Ballai et al.
2008).

In this paper, we study loop contraction and expansion associated with a ﬁlament eruption on
2013 March 16 observed in EUV wavelengths by the AIA imager aboard SDO and by EUVI aboard
STEREO with a large difference of viewing points. The speciﬁcity of this event is that the loop
contraction and expansion were occurring not only in coronal loops located nearby the end point of
the erupting ﬁlament, but also in loops located over a stable ﬁlament. This ﬁlament is located on the
side of the erupting one with a nearly parallel orientation of most parts of both ﬁlaments, which are
also nearly joining at one end. Then, this is an interesting eruption to study as it broaden the range
of conﬁgurations where the loop contraction and expansion could occur. The layout of the paper is
as follows: Section 2 describes the data sets, the morphology of ﬁlament eruption, the history of the
magnetic conﬁguration of the involved active region (AR), the kinematics of the eruption, and the
observational results related to EUV loop contraction and expansion. The physical interpretation
of the obtained results is given in Section 3. Finally in Section 4, the conclusion of the study is
given.

2. Observations

2.1. Overview of the Event

The ﬁlament eruption on 2013 March 16 was observed by the Atmospheric Imaging Assem-
bly (AIA, Lemen et al. 2012) onboard Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO, Pesnell et al. 2012) at
different EUV wavelengths with pixels of 0.6 (cid:48)(cid:48) and cadence of 12 s. For our present analysis, we
used the AIA data of 304, 171, 193 and 211 ˚A which correspond to the wavelengths where the
eruption is observed the best. For the magnetic conﬁguration of the ﬁlament region, we analyzed
the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld line-of-sight data of Helioseismic Magnetic Imager (HMI, Schou
et al. 2012). The pixel resolution and the temporal resolution of the HMI magnetic ﬁeld data is 0.5
(cid:48)(cid:48) and 45 s respectively. The eruption was also observed by the Solar Terrestrial Relations Obser-
vatory Ahead (STEREO A, Howard et al. 2008) spacecraft with a cadence of 10 min. All the above
mentioned data are processed by the solar soft package. To remove the solar rotation, we rotated
all used AIA analyzed images at 12:30 UT. For this purpose, we used the “drot map” routine avail-
able in solar soft. In order to enhance the contrast of the AIA data, we processed the images with
the Multi-Gaussian Normalization (MGN) method developed by Morgan & Druckm¨uller (2014).
To further outline the evolution we create base-difference movies, both with and without MGN
method, with the base time set at 12:30 UT.

– 5 –

Fig. 1.— Multi-wavelength view of the ﬁlament eruption of 2013 March 16 in AIA 304, 171, 193
and 211 ˚A. The AIA 211 ˚A images are base difference images (base time: 12:30 UT). The location
of the erupting ﬁlament (Fil1), the stable ﬁlament (Fil2) and the ﬂare ribbons are indicated in panels
(a), (d) and (b, c), respectively. The AR involved in the eruption, AR 11690, and the southern one
are indicated in panel (g). The propagating diffuse front above the ﬁlament is shown in panel (j).
Movie of these data is available in the Electronic Supplementary Materials. The animation starts
at 12:30 UT and end at 15:00 UT. The realtime duration of the animation is 25 seconds.

– 6 –

Fig. 2.— Evolution of the ﬁlament eruption with AIA images at 171 ˚A processed with the MGN
method (Section 2.1). The erupting (Fil1) and the stable (Fil2) ﬁlaments are indicated in panel (a).
Speciﬁc characteristics of the erupting ﬁlament are pointed in panels (b) and (d). The consequences
of the main energy release are indicated in panels (c) and (f) with ﬂare ribbons and ﬂare loops (L1),
respectively. The HMI positive/negative polarity contours are overlaid in panel (d) with red/blue
contours (contour level: ±30 G). The loop systems L2 and L3, located above Fil2, are indicated in
panel (b). The reconnected loops, marked in panel (e), are due to the reconnection of the southern
leg of the erupting FR with the magnetic ﬁeld of AR 11691 (located southward of AR 11690, see
Figure 1g). The associated movie is available in the Electronic Supplementary Materials. The
animation starts at 12:30 UT and end at 15:00 UT. The realtime duration of the animation is 25
seconds.

– 7 –

The erupting ﬁlament (Fil1) on 2013 March 16 was located at the north-west border of the
NOAA AR 11690 (Figure 1g). A second stable ﬁlament (Fil2) is present on the main PIL of AR
11690. Both ﬁlaments are indicated with arrows in Figure 1a,d. The evolution of the erupting
ﬁlament Fil1 in AIA 304, 171, 193 and 211 ˚A is summarized with three selected times in Figure 1.
The accompanying movies provide a detailed view of the eruption. The ﬁlament started to move
upwards at ≈ 13:19 UT in the north-west direction (best seen with base-difference movies). Much
later on, at about 13:59 UT, two ﬂare ribbons started to develop below the erupting ﬁlament. The
double ribbons, indicated by arrows in Figure 1b, are well observed in 304, 171, 193, and 211 ˚A.
As the ﬁlament was moving upward, the double ribbons separated from each other as predicted
in the standard ﬂare model (Section 1). Furthermore, J-shaped ribbons are present after 14:29 UT
which indicate the eruption of a FR (D´emoulin et al. 1996; Aulanier et al. 2010). These ribbons
are best seen in the base-difference of AIA 304 ˚A.

The MGN technique is applied to AIA data in order to enhance the coronal structures so that
the morphology and the dynamics of the eruption could be better understood. Figure 2 shows
the evolution with the MGN technique applied to 171 ˚A. Arrows point to the main observational
features. The ﬁlament eruption is observed the best with the 171 ˚A ﬁlter with more contrasted
images which reveal both the EUV absorption by the dense and cold ﬁlament plasma and the
emission of heated plasma (e.g., part of the ﬁlament, ﬂare ribbons and loops).

On mid 2013 March 16 the ﬁlament Fil1 erupted as a coherent structure. This is emphasized
by a sharp leading edge moving as a coherent entity (Figure 2a-c). At the beginning of the ﬁlament
eruption three dark features are extending below the ﬁlament body. They are pointed by three ar-
rows in Figure 2b. These extensions are ﬁlament feet/barbs which have been identiﬁed previously
mostly in quiescent ﬁlaments (Aulanier et al. 1999; Mackay et al. 2010). As the eruption pro-
gresses, the feet of the ﬁlaments become more clearly visible, before getting split with the lower
part falling towards the chromosphere and with the upper part being integrated in the eruptive con-
ﬁguration. During this splitting, the associated plasma is changing from absorption to emission, so
it is heated. They are both indications that magnetic reconnection occurs below the erupting FR.

As the ﬁlament erupts, its two ends stay anchored at low heights (Figure 2a-d). This allows
to identify the two footpoints of the erupting FR which are located in the northward and west-
southward periphery of AR 11690, in negative and positive photospheric polarities, respectively
(Figure 3d). Later on in the eruption, a cusp-like shape appears in emission in 171 ˚A (Figure 2e).
However, the temporal evolution is more compatible with the crossing in projection of two loops
(see associated movie).

The evolution of the southern part of the erupting ﬁlament is complex (see attached movies
in 304, 171, 193 and 211 ˚A). We interpret this evolution as the reconﬁguration of the southern FR
leg. During its upward ejection, the FR expands and reconnects, at least partially, with the main

– 8 –

bipolar ﬁeld of AR 11691. This shifts the FR magnetic anchorage from the positive polarity in
front of AR 11690 to the positive following polarity of AR 11691 as traced by the new connections
pointed in Figure 2e (with “Reconnected Loops”). A part of the dense ﬁlament plasma fall along
and ﬁll partly these new connections as seen the best in 171 and 304 ˚A base-difference movies.
We conclude that the lateral drift of the ﬁlament foot is accomplished via interchange reconnection
with encountered southern magnetic loops. These observations are globally consistence with the
previously reported observations of such lateral drift of the foot of an erupted prominence/ﬁlament
(Hori 2000; van Driel-Gesztelyi et al. 2014; Dud´ık et al. 2019; L¨orinˇc´ık et al. 2019; Zemanov´a
et al. 2019). Another part of the erupted ﬁlament drains to the end region of the J-shaped ﬂare
ribbon in the west (towards polarity P0 in Figure 3), which is near the periphery of the ﬂux rope leg.
This is best seen in AIA higher temperature, e.g. 211 and 193 ˚A, and it implies that the magnetic
conﬁguration of this ﬁlament leg splits.

The ﬂare associated to this ﬁlament eruption is weak as it does not saturate the EUV detectors.
Indeed the GOES instrument does not observe any ﬂux enhancement in X-rays, then this event is
not classiﬁed as an X-ray ﬂare. Still, it presents all the EUV characteristics of a two ribbons ﬂare
with two separating ribbons and an arcade of ﬂare loops, L1, linking them (Figures 2c,f). Both
these ribbons and ﬂare loops are partly hidden by other sets of loops, L2 and L3, located in front
in the AIA images (Figure 2b). These L2 and L3 sets are not part of the ﬂare which is associated
to Fil1 eruption. Rather these L2 and L3 sets are located over the stable ﬁlament Fil2, and they are
studied in Section 2.4.

2.2. Magnetic Conﬁguration

The evolution between 2013 March 11 – 16 of the magnetic ﬁeld in the vicinity of the ﬁla-
ments is displayed in Figure 3 in the local solar frame. The main magnetic polarities are labeled
in panel (e). AR 11690 is mostly in a decaying stage, with the emergence of a bipole in its nega-
tive polarity N1(Figure 3b-d). This induced a reorganization of its leading polarity from 12 to 14
March. More importantly, long-term small scale cancellations of the magnetic ﬂux are observed
at the PIL between N1 and P0 (this is best seen in the associate movie). These cancelations are
induced by the dispersion of the magnetic polarities due to sub-photospheric convection motions
with a time scale of days. This ﬂux cancellation is expected to build the FR which supports the
ﬁlament (van Ballegooijen & Martens 1989). It is also at the origin of the slow evolution of the
magnetic conﬁguration which can bring it to instability (Amari et al. 2010; Aulanier et al. 2010).

The erupting ﬁlament Fil1 is located at north-west side of the AR 11690 as shown with the
red contour of Hα observation co-aligned with the magnetogram (Figure 3d). More precisely the
bottom of the Hα ﬁlament is following the PIL between the AR negative leading polarity N1 and

– 9 –

Fig. 3.— Evolution of the longitudinal component of the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld the ARs
11690 and 11691. The observations are derotated to the central meridian location. The contours
in panel (d) delimitate the location of the two ﬁlaments observed in Hα. The red contour indicates
the erupting ﬁlament Fil1, while the blue contour indicates the stable ﬁlament Fil2. The differ-
ent magnetic polarities are named by P0 (remnant ﬁeld of a previous AR), P1, N1 (AR 11690),
P2, N2, P3, N3 (AR 11691). The locations of the loop foot-points, deﬁned in Figure 6b, are in-
dicated by the pairs A, B and C, D, respectively in panel (f). An associated movie from 2013
March 11 00:00 UT to 2013 March 16 17:00 UT of realtime duration 22 seconds is available in the
Electronic Supplementary Materials.

– 10 –

a dispersed large-scale positive polarity P0 (the remnant of an earlier AR). The ﬁlament extends
on the positive polarity indicating that it is inclined towards the west. The explanation for the
westward inclination of the ﬁlament Fil1 away from its underlying PIL is the asymmetry of the
magnetic ﬁeld strength on both sides of the PIL. This inclination is present in MHD simulation
during the equilibrium phase and even more visible during the eruption phase (Aulanier et al.
2010; T¨or¨ok et al. 2011; Titov et al. 2018, 2021). From coronal observations, such asymmetry
is also known to cause eruptions to be inclined toward the weak-ﬁeld side (e.g., Panasenco et al.
2013; Kay et al. 2015). Next, a narrow stable ﬁlament, Fil2, is located along the main PIL within
AR 11690 (blue contour in Figure 3d). The ﬁlament Fil2 is following well the local PIL and it
is narrower than Fil1 as typically observed for ﬁlaments within ARs compare to ﬁlaments at the
periphery of ARs. Furthermore, both ﬁlaments, Fil1 and Fil2, are on the same PIL located around
the polarity N1. Fil1 is even curving slightly inside AR 11690 in its northern part (Figure 3d).

As mentioned in Section 2.1, the shape of the observed ribbons is reverse J-shaped. Such ori-
entation of the ribbons is an evidence of left handedness in the AR (D´emoulin et al. 1996; Williams
et al. 2005; Chandra et al. 2009). Based on this, we infer the handedness of Fil1 is left-handed.
Another method to determine the handedness of the ﬁlament is as follows. We have identiﬁed the
magnetic polarities at the end points of ﬁlament Fil1 and found that the northern/southern foot-
point are located in positive/negative polarities respectively (Figure 3d). In addition to this, the
eastern/western side of the ﬁlaments are in negative/positive polarities respectively. Using these
identiﬁcations, we have determine the handedness of the ﬁlament (see ﬁgure 5 of Mackay et al.
2010) and conclude that the ﬁlament F1 has a left-handed conﬁguration. The same method is ap-
plied for the ﬁlament F2 which is also found to be in a left-handed conﬁguration. However, this
correspondence of handedness is not sufﬁcient to infer that both ﬁlaments are in a single magnetic
conﬁguration along the same PIL. We found during the quiet phase, before 12:40 UT on March
16, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd a separation between the two ﬁlaments. However, the eruption of Fil1
and not of Fil2 is a clue supporting separated magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration, with the limitation that
ﬁlament plasma outlines only a small fraction of the magnetic conﬁguration. Then, we will ﬁrst
consider below two nearly parallel ﬁlaments, before coming back in Section 3.2 to the details of
this northern part of the PIL where they are nearby.

Finally, another AR, NOAA 11691, is developing southward to AR 11690 and with the same
global bipole orientation (P3-N2, Figure 3). Since AR 11691 is nearby AR 11690 and the erupting
magnetic structure is strongly expanding southward, the coronal ﬁeld of AR 11691 partly recon-
nects with the erupting magnetic ﬁeld (see Figure 2e, related movie, and Section 2.1).

– 11 –

Fig. 4.— (a) AIA 304 ˚A image with the location of slice S1 used for the analysis of the ﬁlament Fil1
height-time evolution. (b) Height-time plot along the slice S1. The height is corrected from solar
rotation. The vertical dashed line indicates the approximate onset time of the ﬁlament eruption.
The black dashed line is the ﬁt of Equation (1) to the ﬁlament apex as traced with the AIA 304
˚A data along slice S1. The blue crosses represent the apex height of the ﬁlament leading edge
derived by triangulation with the data of SDO/AIA and STEREO A/EUVI (see Figures 1 and 5).
The height is set at the same position for the ﬁrst blue cross. During the eruption these heights are
slightly above the AIA 304 ˚A apex and its ﬁt with Equation (1) due to a projection effect.

2.3. Eruption Kinematics

We explore the eruption kinematics using AIA data sets. A global and qualitative view of the
eruption is given by the three movies attached to Figure 1. A quantitative analysis is done with
the slice S1 shown in Figure 4a. We deﬁne the location of slice S1 in AIA images to follow the
ﬁlament leading edge. The measured height is corrected from solar rotation. While the ﬁlament
eruption and its consequences are seen the best with 171 ˚A data, the early part of the eruption is
partly masked with the sets L2 and L3 of coronal loops present in front of the erupting ﬁlament
(middle left of Figure 2 a, b). These loops are not emitting in 304 ˚A, then we privilege this ﬁlter to
study the pre-eruption phase, as well as the whole ﬁlament eruption, while we also apply the same
method to the other ﬁlters for completeness.

The kinematics of the ﬁlament eruption is an important clue for understanding the triggering
mechanism of the eruption. Therefore, in order to analyze the kinematics of the ﬁlament eruption,

– 12 –

we visually select points along the bright tracks of the time-distance plots as shown in Figure 4b.
Cheng et al. (2020) have analyzed 12 eruptions and test several functions to ﬁt the data. They found
that the combination of a linear and exponential time dependences provide the best description of
the full data set, so a lowest χ2 for most eruptions, compare to previously suggested functions (like
a power law of time). The most general equation analyzed by Cheng et al. (2020) is

h(t) = a eb(t−t0) + c t + d .

(1)

Here, we note that t0 is a redundant parameter as the ﬁrst term can be rewritten as a e−bt0ebt = a(cid:48)ebt
so that all the combinations of the three parameters a, b, t0, which provides the same a(cid:48) value, deﬁne
exactly the same function. Said differently, b is deﬁned by the temporal behavior of the data while
changing a in Equation (1) could be exactly compensated by changing t0. Then, we ﬁx t0 to a given
value, 12:45 UT as Cheng et al. (2020) ﬁxed it to their ﬁrst data point. The coefﬁcients a, b, c, and
d are determined by minimizing the reduced χ2, χ2
r, between the data and Equation (1). The ﬁtting
is done using the mpﬁt routine available in the solar software (SSWIDL). The goodness of the
i=1 [hi(t) − Hi(t)]2,
ﬁtting is given by the reduced χ2
where hi and Hi are the ﬁtting and measured heights, respectively and ‘t’ is the time. This formula
is slightly different than the one used by Cheng et al. (2020) since we are not including the error
for each measured height (the minimum found assumed the same error for each measurement).
χ2
Finally we calculated the reduced χ2
r value as
DOF , where DOF is the number of the degree of
freedom. We ﬁnd the minimum (cid:112)χ2
r = 1.4(cid:48)(cid:48). This is only slightly above two pixels of AIA (1.2(cid:48)(cid:48)),
indicating that Equation (1) provides a close representation of the data.

r value obtained. The χ2 is deﬁned by χ2 = (cid:80)N

During the earlier times of Figure 4b, a slow linear increase of the ﬁlament height is present,
deﬁned as the slow-rise phase by Cheng et al. (2020). The ﬁt of Equation (1) to the data provides
c ≈ 2 km s−1 in all AIA channels. This slow-rise phase is typically associated with the presence of
weak brightenings. They are interpreted as the consequence of tether-cutting reconnection which
allow the slow upward motion. Later on, during the acceleration phase, the speed of the eruption
increases exponentially. The maximum speed of the eruption was computed by derivating the
height-time ﬁt of the data. The calculated maximum speed reached up to 300 km s−1 within the
AIA ﬁeld of view. This increase occurs on the time scale 1/b ≈ 9.6 min. This exponential behavior
is characteristic of the linear development of an instability.

The beginning of the eruption is difﬁcult to deﬁne precisely as the ﬁlament top is smoothly
changing from a linear to an exponential rise. Also, there is no characteristics time deﬁned by
Equation (1) as t0 is an ill deﬁned parameter (see above), and then cannot be associated to an onset
time. Indeed, for both a linear and exponential behaviors there is no speciﬁc time which can be re-
ferred to (said differently both function can be shifted in time while keeping the same form). Then,
an extra information needs to be added to deﬁne the beginning of the eruption from Equation (1).
The instability starts at least before the exponential rise is large enough to be detected. This is best

– 13 –

Fig. 5.— Evolution of the ﬁlament observed by STEREO A /EUVI in 304 ˚A at the eastern solar
limb. The view point is on the other side of the ﬁlament as observed with AIA (Figure 4a) with a
longitude difference of 130 ◦ between the spacecraft. The ﬁlament/prominence leading edge apex
is indicated by arrows.

quantiﬁed with the velocity, a b ebt becoming larger than a threshold value vt. Then, the eruption
start time is deﬁned as:

tstart =

1
b

ln

(cid:17)

(cid:16) vt
a b

.

(2)

Taking vt = c sets the exponential velocity equal to the linear velocity, so the growth of the
instability well visible above the linear rise. This occurs at ≈ 13:30 UT. The eruption is expected
to starts even earlier on. The exponential is well detectable over the ﬂuctuations of the slow-rise
phase when it is larger than three times the standard deviation, which is found to be ≈ 0.62 km
s−1. Including this velocity as vt in Equation (2) deﬁnes the eruption start at 13:19 UT, so 11 min
before. This last time is expected to be closer to the real eruption start, which is expected to be
even earlier on when the exponential was too small to be detectable. To be conservative, we set the
starting time at 13:19 UT.

– 14 –

The eruption was also well observed by the STEREO A spacecraft with a different viewing
angle in longitude. The angle between the STEREO A and the SDO on 2013 March 13 was 130◦
and for STEREO A the ﬁlament was located close to the eastern limb. The evolution of the eruption
in 304 ˚A is shown in Figure 5. The arrow points to the leading edge apex of the eruption. This
leading edge is a smooth bent curve at the beginning of the eruption as with SDO observations
(Figures 1 and 2). The ﬁlament feet appearance below the ﬁlament are partly different than the
ones observed by AIA because STEREO A observes the other side of the ﬁlament. As the eruption
proceeds, the ﬁlament becomes bright both because of plasma heating, as described above for AIA
observations, and because the plasma is observed over the limb with a weaker emitting background,
so as a prominence. Next, a large quiescent prominence is present in the background at the eastern
limb (Figure 5). This corresponds to an extended ﬁlament, about one solar radius long, located
in between the diffuse eastern extension of the positive polarity of AR 11690 (well outside the
ﬁeld of view of Figure 3) and another large scale and diffuse negative polarity located further to
the East. No signiﬁcant consequence of the eruption of Fil1 is observed on this large quiescent
ﬁlament (Figure 5).

By combining the data of AIA 304 ˚A and STEREO A 304 ˚A data, these stereoscopic ob-
servations allow to derive the true height of the ﬁlament. The location pointed by the arrow in
Figure 5 is taken for the computation of the ﬁlament top height using the trigonometric triangu-
lation method “ssc measure” available in solar soft. The points selected for the height-time plot
in triangulation method are along the direction of slice S1 for AIA observations. This provides
us an opportunity to compare the calculated speeds derived by the time-distance analysis and the
stereoscopic analysis. For the comparison of the height derived from the triangulation method and
from the AIA time-distance analysis, the common height reference is set before the eruption at the
top of the ﬁlament. The calculated heights are overplotted on the time-distance plot of Figure 4b
with the blue ‘+’ symbol. Using these points, we compute a mean speed of ≈ 180 km s−1. This
derived speed from triangulation methods is about 20 % faster than the speed derived from the
time-distance analysis of the AIA data. This difference is due to projection effects as the velocity
measured with AIA does not include the velocity component out of the plane of sky.

Finally, the ﬁlament eruption produced a CME observed by SOHO/LASCO in the north-west
direction. In LASCO C2 ﬁeld of view the CME appear ≈ 14:48 UT at a height of 4 R(cid:12) and it
is visible in LASCO C3 ﬁeld of view up to ≈ 25 R(cid:12) at 19:54 UT. The CME was a partial halo
having a projected width of 323◦. The measured mean speed within C2 and C3 ﬁelds of view
is ≈ 790 km s−1 (see https://cdaw.gsfc.nasa.gov/CME_list), then the ejection was
further accelerated compare to the above measurements in the low corona.

– 15 –

Fig. 6.— Evolution of the two loop sets located in the neighborhood of the ﬁlament Fil1 eruption
and above Fil2 (seen in the top part of panel (b)). The data are from AIA 171 ˚A processed with the
MGN technic. The white lines are at ﬁxed positions in the solar frame to better visualize the loop
evolution. After the ﬁlament eruption onset at ≈ 13:19 UT, the loops ﬁrst contract (panel b), then
they expand backward towards their initial locations (panels c and d). The two loop systems are
labeled with L3 and L2 in panel (c). The selected loop footpoints are marked with A, B, and C, D,
respectively, in panel (b), and they are reported in Figure 3f

.

– 16 –

2.4. Loops Contraction and Expansion

In this section, we analyse the EUV loop contraction and expansion related to the eruption
of the ﬁlament Fil1 on 2013 March 16. We will not study the shrinkage of ﬂare loops L1 as this
phenomena was already well studied (see Section 1) but rather the evolution of coronal loops which
are not involved in the ﬂare reconnection. This phenomena is observed with 171 and 193 ˚A ﬁlters
in two set of loops (Figure 6). We name these two loop systems as L2 and L3, respectively, as
indicated in Figures 2b and 6c. Both loop systems are rooted in P1 (positive) and N1 (negative)
polarities (Figure 3e,f) of AR 11690. The location of STEREO A compare to SDO is suited for a
triangulation, as done above for Fil1, however this is not possible for the loops of L2 and L3 as they
are hidden behind the ﬁlament Fil1 (Figure 5).

The eastern set, L3, is better observed with loops seen from one side, nearly face on, and
they are well deﬁned over their full length. These loops are located above the location where
ﬁlament Fil1 and Fil2 are nearly joining (Figure 6b,c). They end on both sides of these ﬁlaments
(Figure 3d,f). The geometry of the western set L2 is more difﬁcult to deﬁne from AIA observations
since the direction of observation is nearly along the loops (side on). Moreover, the part closer to
the observer is faint, and the emitted light is mixed with the one of the background coming from
the stable ﬁlament Fil2 and its surrounding brightenings. Still, the bottom part of these legs of the
loop system L2 can be seen on the front side of the ﬁlament Fil2. Then, the loops L2 are rooted
on both sides of ﬁlament Fil2, as the loop system L3 (Figure 3d,f). The corresponding co-aligned
photospheric magnetograms, e.g., Figure 2d, on March 16 conﬁrm that both sets of loops are rooted
in the magnetic polarities surrounding the stable ﬁlament and the end of the erupting one. With
a space ﬁlling coronal magnetic ﬁeld (low plasma β conditions), L2 and L3 belong to the same
magnetic arcade passing over Fil2 and extending all along polarities P1 and N1. The heating is
probably not large enough in the arcade middle to create dense enough coronal plasma, then there
is a gap of coronal emission and the appearance of two separate sets of loops. We conclude that
these two sets of loops belong to the magnetic arcade which is overlaying the stable ﬁlament Fil2
outlined with a blue contour in Figure 3d and end above the northern end part of ﬁlament Fil1.

The evolution of these loops during the ﬁlament eruption is shown in Figure 6 at four times
with AIA 171 ˚A ﬁlter. We have drawn two straight lines at the top of the loops at 13:00 UT
(before the eruption onset). These lines are repeated in the next panels with ﬁxed coordinates in
the local reference frame, so by taking into account the solar rotation. Then, these lines allow to
better visualize the loop evolution. We also refer to the attached movies at AIA 171 and 193 ˚A
wavelengths to view the full evolution of these loops. These movies show that all these loops are
contracting in phase. The contraction is maximal about 43 min after the ﬁlament eruption onset
(Figure 6b). Later on their motions reverse and they expand approximately back to their original
positions. No further oscillation is observed.

– 17 –

Fig. 7.— (a) AIA 171 ˚A image processed with the MGN technic. The location of three slices are
shown. Slice S1 is the same as in Figure 4a. It monitors the ﬁlament height versus time. Slices S2
and S3 are monitoring the loop contraction/expansion along the loop systems L2 and L3, respec-
tively (see Figure 6). (b) Height-time plot for the ﬁlament eruption with the ﬁt of Equation (1) to
the AIA 171 data of the ﬁlament leading edge added with a dashed line. (c, d) Height-time plots
along slices S2 and S3 showing the contraction and expansion of the EUV loops during the ﬁlament
eruption. The vertical dashed line indicates the approximate onset time of the eruption. The short
dashed segments outline the loop contraction/expansion of the loops. The derived mean speeds are
added close to each segment. In panel (c) the trace of the ﬂare ribbons and of the developing ﬂare
loops are indicated. In both panels (c, d) the erupting ﬁlament is seen when it emerged from the
occulting coronal loops L2 and L3.

– 18 –

Fig. 8.— Data of AIA 193 ˚A processed with the MGN technic and with the same format as
Figure 7. (a) AIA 193 ˚A image with the same slices (S1, S2 and S3) than in Figure 7a. (b) Height-
time plot for the ﬁlament eruption with the ﬁt of Equation (1) to the AIA 193 data of the ﬁlament
leading edge added with a dashed line. The height has a constant projection factor on the plane
of sky. (c, d) Height-time plots showing the contraction and expansion of the EUV loops after
the ﬁlament eruption along slices S2 and S3. The vertical dashed line indicate the onset time of
eruption. The typical contraction/expansion speeds of the loops are added, as well as the ﬂare
traces.

– 19 –

For a quantitative analysis of these two sets of loops, we show the results obtained along two
slices selected to cross the loop tops nearly orthogonally, so along the loop motion. We name
these slices S2 and S3. They cross the loop sets L2 and L3, respectively. The results of these
space-time analysis is presented in Figures 7 and 8 for the AIA 171 and 193 ˚A data, respectively.
We corrected the height projection from the solar rotation. The results with slice S1, deﬁned in
Figure 4a, are also included in the panels (b). They both conﬁrm the upward motion and velocities
of the ﬁlament Fil1 obtained with the 304 ˚A ﬁlter. In contrast, the stable ﬁlament Fil2 is present
at a nearly constant position in the lower part of panels (c) of Figures 7 and 8. The upward little
drift of Fil2 is not due to the solar rotation as it is removed. We interpret this drift as follows. This
stable ﬁlament is in a decaying AR, and cancelation occurs at the PIL, further building up the FR
conﬁguration. So the FR is slowly moving up towards a nearby equilibrium. Such slow evolution
has been analyzed before for several observed events (e.g., Byrne et al. 2014; Gosain et al. 2016;
Chandra et al. 2017).

The loops L2 crossed by slice S2 are initially stable up to ≈ 13:40 UT when they start contract-
ing (Figure 7c). At that time, the apex of ﬁlament Fil1 was already moving upward at a velocity
≈ 6 km s−1 (Figure 7b). Across slice S2, the erupting ﬁlament Fil1 is partly masked by the fore-
ground set of loops L2 present along the line of sight (Figures 6, 7c). Fil1 is observed in absorption
before and after the crossing of the contracting loops. The contraction of all the loops starts almost
simultaneously ≈ 21 min after the ﬁlament eruption onset. This is in the range 4 to 40 min of
the time difference between the onsets of ﬁlament eruption and loop contraction reported before
(Shen et al. 2014; Dud´ık et al. 2016, 2017; Wang et al. 2018; Devi et al. 2021). The speed of the
contraction varies from 5 to 10 km s−1. This contraction continues for a duration of ≈ 22 min. At
≈ 14:02 UT, these loops change suddenly from contraction to expansion without any signiﬁcant
phase difference between them. The speed of the expansion is in the range 11 to 17 km s−1. This
expansion speed is higher by a factor 2 than the contraction speed. The expansion continues at
least for 15 min, and afterwards these loops L2 are difﬁcult to detect with the 171 ˚A ﬁlter.

A similar loop evolution is present with AIA 193 ˚A (Figure 8). The speeds of the contracting
and expanding loops are comparable to the one observed in AIA 171 ˚A. The small difference in
velocities could have several origins: the difference in the emitting plasma, the diffuse appearance
of the loops, the short and partly different duration of the contraction and expansion phases (as
could be observed when enough emitting plasma was present). Finally, one more loop, with similar
time evolution than others, is detected in 193 ˚A (the lower one in Figure 8c).

The slice S3 analyses a different set of loops, L3, which are located closer to the northern
leg of the erupting ﬁlament Fil1 (Figure 7a). This loop system has a similar behavior as the loop
system L2 except that it shows also a contraction before the ﬁlament eruption onset. We refer this
contraction as ‘earlier loop contraction’. This earlier loop contraction can be clearly seen in the

– 20 –

panels (d) of Figures 7 and 8 respectively (see also the accompanying movie). This contraction
starts between ≈ 12:30 and 13:00 UT and the computed speed for the earlier contraction is about
3–4 km s−1. Next, about 21 min after the eruption onset, the loops in S3 contract as the ones of
slice S2. The contraction speed in the case of 171 ˚A varies from 2 to 8 km s−1 which is comparable
to the speeds deduced from the 193 ˚A ﬁlter (in the range 3 to 10 km s−1). The contraction time
for both wavelengths is about 22 min. As the loops of S2, the contraction changes rapidly to an
expansion at ≈ 14:02 UT. The expansion speed varies from 4 to 8 km s−1 in case of 171 ˚A and from
4 to 9 km s−1 in the case of 193 ˚A so comparable to the contraction speed. For both contraction
and expansion, there is a global tendency of an increasing velocity with height, a tendency which
is also present for slice S2. Next, at the difference with loops L2, loops L3 could be followed much
longer in time. About 20 min after motion reversal, this expansion slows down and it is over by ≈
14:27 UT (panels (d) of Figures 7 and 8). No signiﬁcant evolution is present later on.

The slice S2 shows also the consequences of the ﬂare reconnection (panels (c) of Figures 7
and 8). The ﬂare ribbons start to signiﬁcantly brighten and to separate from each others in slice S2
at ≈ 14:18 UT, while they are detected starting earlier, at ≈ 13:59 UT, close to slice S3 which is
coherent with an eruption starting at the end of Fil1. The ﬂare loops are observed later on, after ≈
14:34 UT in S2. The drift of position observed in panels (c) of Figures 7 and 8 is interpreted as the
formation of higher ﬂare loops as magnetic reconnection proceeds. In slice S3, after 14:00 UT and
for an abscissa < 50 (cid:48)(cid:48)there is a brightening shift to lower S3 abscissa. We have examined this shift
in detail by analyzing the movies and corresponding images. This shift corresponds to the motion
of the southern ﬂare ribbon.

3. Physical Interpretation

3.1. Erupting Magnetic Field Conﬁguration

The evolution of the radial magnetic ﬁeld component is typical on an AR in decay (Figure 3
and associated movie). Magnetic ﬂux is progressively dispersed by super-granules convective cells.
This implies that both magnetic polarities of AR 11690 are growing in extension. This induced
magnetic ﬁeld cancelations around the photospheric level along the internal PIL of the AR. This
evolution is generically expected to build a FR (van Ballegooijen & Martens 1989; Aulanier et al.
2010; Green et al. 2011) where dense plasma could be caught (e.g., Aulanier & D´emoulin 1998),
forming ﬁlament Fil2.

Photospheric magnetic cancelation is also triggered by the ﬁeld dispersion at the AR bound-
ary, especially at the PIL between polarities N1 and P0. Our observations of cancellation of mag-
netic ﬂux at the photospheric level below the ﬁlaments are consistent with the study of the ﬁlament

– 21 –

formation of Wang & Muglach (2007). Two of their studied ﬁlaments were formed at the periphery
of ARs, like Fil1, while the third one was formed inside a decaying AR like Fil2. They concluded
that the ﬁlaments are formed due to the same process of magnetic ﬂux cancellation at photospheric
inversion line. Here, the studied ﬁlaments, Fil1 and Fil2, are around the same magnetic polarity
N1. Before the eruption it is difﬁcult to set the limit between Fil1 and Fil2 but eruption of only Fil1
favours that they have two separated magnetic conﬁgurations.

The main add to the above magnetic diffusion scenario is the emergence of a magnetic bipole
in the leading negative polarity of AR 11690 (Figure 3b-e and associated movie). This bipole has
almost the reverse orientation than the main bipole forming AR 11690 (P1,N1). The emerging
positive polarity mainly cancels with the outer (westward) part of polarity N1. This reconnection
transfers the negative footpoint from N1 to the emerging negative polarity. The coronal implication
of this reconnection depends on the initial coronal connectivity of N1. The part closer to the inter-
nal PIL of AR 11690 is expected to connect to P1. In this case the reconnection brings the negative
footpoint of the reconnected ﬁelds connecting P1 closer to the internal PIL. This decreases the cur-
vature radius of ﬁeld lines, then strengthen the stabilizing magnetic tension force of the magnetic
conﬁguration supporting ﬁlament Fil2. However, the external part of N1 is expected to connect P0
(e.g., as it does with a potential ﬁeld). In this case the reconnection brings the negative footpoint
of the reconnected ﬁelds connecting P0 away from the external PIL. This weaken the stabilizing
tension force of the ﬁlament Fil1, then it is an ingredient to bring the magnetic conﬁguration of Fil1
to eruption. Still, this reconnection was not sufﬁcient since the positive polarity of the emergence
canceled and disappeared on day before Fil1 eruption. These results are in agreement with the
study of Chen & Shibata (2000).

The 3D standard model of eruptive ﬂares is typically developed in a bipolar ﬁeld modeling
an AR with the build up, then eruption, of a FR formed above the internal PIL (e.g., Aulanier
et al. 2010; Janvier et al. 2015). In the case of an external PIL, located at periphery an AR, the
same model could be qualitatively be applied if a ﬁrst coronal reconnection forms a sheared arcade
over this PIL, as shown by T¨or¨ok et al. (2018). The following evolution is mainly driven by the
diffusion of magnetic polarities, as for the case of an internal PIL. The main difference at this stage
is an expected slower process as the spatial region involved around the external PIL is large while
convective cells have typically the same speed.

When the magnetic conﬁguration reaches an instability (as evidenced by the exponential
growth of the ﬁlament height), the ﬁlament trace an erupting FR structure well observed both
with SDO/AIA and STEREO A/EUVI 304 ˚A ﬁlters (Figures 4 and 5 and related movies). Recon-
nection behind the erupting FR leads to the formation of a ﬂare loop arcade ending in two J-shaped
ﬂare ribbons observed in EUV wavelengths. They separate as a function of time as excepted in the
standard 3D eruption model. Then, we conclude that, while located at the periphery of an AR, the

– 22 –

eruption of Fil1 has all the characteristics expected with the 3D standard model of eruptive ﬂares
build for eruptions located in the core of ARs. The main differences are slower processes both for
the formation and the ejection of the FR (due to a weaker magnetic ﬁeld, so weaker forces).

3.2. Contracting and Expanding Loops

The loop system L3 (panel (d) of Figures 7 and 8) shows the earlier contraction as mentioned
in Section 2.4. The data presented here provide no clue about this contraction. We observe small
brightenings at the base of loop system L3 before the eruption and a short description of our anal-
ysis is presented in appendix A since this could be interesting for further studies on the subject. In
present observations the sets of contracting loops, L2 and L3, mostly recover their original heights
they had when the fast contraction started (Figure 6, panels (c) and (d) of Figures 7 and 8). This
evolution is different than for loops located in the elbow of AR sigmoids as, the expansion follow-
ing contraction is frequently not able to recover the pre-eruption location (e.g., Liu et al. 2012;
Sim˜oes et al. 2013; Shen et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2018) while in some cases it does (e.g., Dud´ık
et al. 2017). This behaviour is expected for loops at a remote ﬁlament channel where no energy
release happens. A possibility is that the eruption generates a coronal wave which ﬁrst pushes the
loops L2 and L3 downward, then the loops recover their initial positions after the coronal wave
passage. Indeed, there have been previously studied cases where loops oscillate during the cross-
ing of a coronal wave (e.g., Ballai 2007; Guo et al. 2015; Fulara et al. 2019). In these studies, the
oscillations have at least one cycle. In the present case, a weak coronal wave is associated with the
eruption as visible at http://suntoday.lmsal.com/sdomedia/SunInTime/2013/
03/16/AIAtriratio-211-193-171-2013-03-16T1200.mov.mp4. Due to the weak
nature of coronal wave, it is very difﬁcult to estimate if it interacted with the loops and at which
time. The main observational constraint is that the loops have only half period oscillation with a
triangular shaped amplitude. This is far from the behavior expected from an unforced oscillator,
as summarized e.g., in Figures 2 and 4 of Russell et al. (2015). The observed triangular shape in
Figures 7 and 8 is also well different from oscillations observed in other events (e.g., Gosain 2012;
Liu et al. 2012; Sim˜oes et al. 2013). Then, an excitation of the loops by a coronal wave is doubtful.

An additional possibility for the origin of the loop contraction and expansion is a perturbation
by the lateral expansion of the erupting ﬂux of the ﬁlament. It is known that some eruptions show
a so-called overexpansion, a stronger growth of the minor radius (thickness) of the erupting ﬂux
compared to the major radius (height) (Patsourakos et al. 2010a,b; Veronig et al. 2018). In the
case of Veronig et al. (2018), the lateral overexpansion of the CME bubble ﬁrst pushes neighbor-
ing loops to the side, which leads to very clear oscillations. Subsequently, the bubble acquires a
mushroom-like shape, which presses some loops to the north of the eruption downward, followed

– 23 –

by a recovery of the loops to the original height. Such behavior was so far seen preferentially in
fast or impulsive eruptions. However, a similar dynamics in slower eruptions, like the case here,
might nevertheless be possible. Since the perturbation is temporary, a return of the loops to their
original position would result naturally.

This event shows, as expected by ﬁlament models, that the erupting ﬂux is much thicker
and extends much higher than the ﬁlament in the hotter channel 211 ˚A. A diffuse front is seen
to rise synchronously with the ﬁlament at nearly twice the height (panel (j) of Figure 1). The
synchronous motion suggests that the diffuse front is part of the erupting ﬂux, probably at its top
edge. This implies that most of the erupting ﬂux is already higher than the loops L2 and L3 when
their contraction begins. The lateral expansion of the ﬂux at this stage should perturb the ﬂux
above these loops. When, as the overlying ﬂux is pushed sideward by the CME bubble, the loops
may experience a sideward and downward push. Another possibility of this moving diffuse front
at the top of the erupting FR can be formed by the erupting FR, which collects, compress and heats
surrounding coronal plasma (and magnetic ﬁeld too) in front of the FR. So it could not be a part
of the erupting ﬂux but coronal plasma collected on the way. It is likely the beginning of a sheath
formation, a structure well observed in-situ in front of magnetic clouds and more generally ejecta
far away from the Sun.

We next analyse how other proposed mechanisms may explain these observations. The im-
plosion conjecture is difﬁcult to test since it was so far not quantitatively formalised and moreover
its physical base changed (e.g. from a driver to a consequence of the eruption, see Section 1).
Indeed, this conjecture would have to explain how the loop contraction could occur above the sta-
ble ﬁlament Fil2 located inside an AR, while the eruption of another ﬁlament Fil1 occurs at the
leading border of the same AR. This requires an analysis, with a numerical simulation, which is
outside the scope of present study. Still, the observations show that the northern end of ﬁlament
Fil1 enters slightly within the AR, and reach an end location below L3 loops. Then, the eruption
of Fil1 is clearly involved in this loop contraction while we cannot provide elements in support of
the implosion conjecture. Even more, the evolution of L2 loops above the stable ﬁlament Fil2
and the return of the loops to their initial position are not within the framework of the implosion
conjecture.

The loop contraction model of Zuccarello et al. (2017) explained loop contraction by the
development of magnetohydrodynamic vortexes which develop on the sides of an erupting FR. The
loop contraction, then expansion occurs in the ﬁeld lines overlying the footpoints of the FR. The
numerical simulations study the instability of a FR located in a bipolar ﬁeld simulating a simple
and isolated AR. This conﬁguration is closer to the magnetic conﬁguration of and above the stable
ﬁlament Fil2, than of the one of the erupting ﬁlament Fil1. Still, following the strongly bended
PIL, the contraction/expansion occur on the loops which are next to the northern footpoint of the

– 24 –

erupting FR. Then, the main difference with the simulations of Zuccarello et al. (2017) is that the
PIL is so bent that the contracting loops appear on one lateral side, rather than in the continuation,
of the erupting ﬁlament. Still, an MHD simulation with the observed multipolar conﬁguration
(Figure 3) is needed to test the possibility that magnetohydrodynamic vortexes develop and imply
the loop contraction/expansion as found before with a simple bipolar magnetic conﬁguration.

4. Conclusion

We analyze a ﬁlament eruption of 2013 March 16 located close to the west limb. The ﬁla-
ment, Fil1, was located in between the leading polarity of a decaying active region and a westward
remnant dispersed polarity of opposite sign. In this weak magnetic ﬁeld environment no GOES
ﬂare was reported associated to this eruption. Still, we report an arcade of ﬂare loops and two
separating J-shaped ﬂare ribbons on the opposite sides of the PIL of the erupting ﬁlament. Later
on, the eruption leads to a CME with moderate speed (about 800 km s−1). All these observational
characteristics ﬁt well within the standard 3D model of solar eruptions (Section 1).

The dynamics of the erupting ﬁlament is well ﬁtted with a model adding a linear and an
exponential increases of height with time. This quantiﬁes two erupting phases: a slow rise and an
acceleration phases which characterize two different physical mechanisms. A slow rise is indeed
expected to occur as a consequence of the observed cancelation of the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld
at the PIL. This process is expected to build a FR which is progressively rising in height towards a
new equilibrium. Recurrent brightenings and restructuration are observed at the northern footpoint
of the ﬁlament during this phase. Next, the exponential growth of height during the acceleration
phase characterizes an instability, which is likely the torus instability since no signiﬁcant writhing
of the erupting ﬁlament is observed (as would be present for a kink instability). The onset of
the instability is estimated with the time when the exponential growth of the upward velocity
becomes signiﬁcant on top of the previous nearly constant velocity. Another remarkable aspect of
the ﬁlament eruption was the observations of the drift of southern foot-points of the erupting FR,
which could be explained by the interchange reconnection of the erupting conﬁguration with the
confront magnetic loops of a neighbouring active region. Moreover, we also observe the split
of the eruptive FR above the southern foot-points with plasma tracing the magnetic connections to
two separated magnetic polarities.

Another ﬁlament, Fil2, is present along the internal PIL of the AR. The northern ends of the
ﬁlaments are close by, so that both ﬁlaments encircle almost the leading polarity of the active
region. It is then remarkable that Fil2 stays undisturbed while Fil1 is erupting. About 21 min after
Fil1 eruption onset, the loops L3 suddenly accelerate their contraction speed by a factor 2 to 3.
At the same time the initially stable southern loops L2, located above Fil2, contract in a similar

– 25 –

way. Then, the full coronal loop system contract for a period of 22 min. Later on, the loop motion
reverses suddenly, then they expand for a period of 20-25 min. The amplitude of the contraction
is in between 10 and 20(cid:48)(cid:48). Then, this evolution is well resolved both spatially and temporally by
SDO/AIA observations. Both the contraction and expansion were observed in phase in the full
loop arcade on a signiﬁcant range of projected heights range (about 70 (cid:48)(cid:48)). Afterwards, these loops
set into a stable conﬁguration close to their original positions at the start of the fast contraction
phase. The return of the loops to the original position is naturally expected because they pass over
the end point of Fil1 and over Fil2, where no or only minimal energy release is expected to occur
and the post-eruption equilibrium should be close to the pre-eruption equilibrium.

The characteristics of the loop contraction/expansion in this eruption contrast with previous
studies. First, the loop arcade is located above a stable ﬁlament and extends up to one end of
another erupting ﬁlament. Second, the stable ﬁlament is located mostly parallel to the erupting one.
Third, the stable and erupting ﬁlaments are on the same PIL encircling the leading PIL of an active
region in decay. Finally, the loop evolution starts with a contraction followed by an expansion
recovery phase. This half period oscillation with a triangular shape is an original characteristic of
present event. All these characteristics make this studied event challenging for the models of loop
contraction since such magnetic conﬁguration was not observed or modelled before. In particular,
this case is different than the one simulated by Zuccarello et al. (2017) where the eruption occurs
in the core of the simulated active region, while in present observations the eruption occur at the
leading border of the active region. In summary, numerical simulations are needed with a broader
variety of magnetic conﬁguration in order to understand the results of present observations. In
particular, it is worth studying how strongly the results are depending on the bending of PIL, so on
the fully 3D aspects of the involved magnetic conﬁguration. Such studies can also allow to separate
better the characteristics of the different models proposed so far to interpret the contraction and
expansion of coronal loops.

Acknowledgments

We recognize the collaborative and open nature of knowledge creation and dissemination, un-
der the control of the academic community as expressed by Camille Noˆus at http://www.
cogitamus.fr/indexen.html. The authors thank the open data policy of the SDO and
STEREO teams. RC acknowledges the support from Bulgarian Science Fund under Indo-Bulgarian
bilateral project, DST/INT/BLR/P-11/2019. P.D. is supported by CSIR, New Delhi. We thank the
reviewers for their constructive comments and suggestions.

– 26 –

Fig. 1.— MGN base difference images of AIA 304 and 171 ˚A at 12:51 and 14:09 UT. The base
time for these images is 12:30 UT. The small brightening before the eruption and the elongated
brightening during the eruption are shown in panels (a,c) and (b,d), respectively. These bright-
enings are located at the end of ﬁlament Fil1, close and partly below the L3 loop system (bottom
panels). The associated movie is available in the Electronic Supplementary Materials. The anima-
tion starts at 12:30 UT and end at 15:00 UT. The realtime duration of the animation is 25 seconds.

A. Appendix: Earlier Loop Contraction

In order to understand the earlier contraction of loop system L3 (panels (d) of Figures 7 and
8), we studied based difference movies of AIA 304 and 171 ˚A without and with MGN technique

– 27 –

applied before subtracting the image at 12:30 UT. A main brightening episode is starting at 12:42
UT and is illustrated in the left panels of Figure 1 in the middle of its duration. This local event is
associated with local plasma motions indicating a local restructuration of the magnetic ﬁeld of the
northern end of ﬁlament Fil1. A second brighter event started at 13:30 UT in a close by location,
while more extended both north, along Fil1, and southward inside the AR (Figure 1, right panels).
It shows that, at the beginning of eruption, Fil1 was entering slightly inside the AR (as drawn in
Figure 3d). This event is the activation and reconﬁguration of Fil1 northern end. The start of this
event is later by at least 11 minutes than the eruption onset deﬁne in Figure 4b (Section 2.3). These
local events are best seen in 304 ˚A, while they are also present in 171 ˚A which allows to locate them
well with respect to the loops L3 (Figure 1, bottom panels). We conclude that these brightenings
are the only indications present in the data of magnetic reconﬁguration occurring in the vicinity
of loops L3 during the linear and and early exponential phases of the ﬁlament rise. Then, the data
provide no clue about the earlier contraction of loop system L3. This earlier contraction is possibly
associated to the upward motion of the magnetic conﬁguration of Fil1 in the linear phase. In this
case, it has the same physical origin as the contraction present later on in the exponential phase
(panels (c) and (d) of Figures 7 and 8).

REFERENCES

Amari, T., Aly, J. J., Mikic, Z., & Linker, J. 2010, ApJ, 717, L26, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/

717/1/L26

Antiochos, S. K., Dahlburg, R. B., & Klimchuk, J. A. 1994, ApJ, 420, L41, doi: 10.1086/

187158

Antiochos, S. K., DeVore, C. R., & Klimchuk, J. A. 1999, ApJ, 510, 485, doi: 10.1086/306563

Aulanier, G., & D´emoulin, P. 1998, A&A, 329, 1125

Aulanier, G., D´emoulin, P., Mein, N., et al. 1999, A&A, 342, 867

Aulanier, G., & Schmieder, B. 2002, A&A, 386, 1106, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20020179

Aulanier, G., T¨or¨ok, T., D´emoulin, P., & DeLuca, E. E. 2010, ApJ, 708, 314, doi: 10.1088/

0004-637X/708/1/314

Ballai, I. 2007, Sol. Phys., 246, 177, doi: 10.1007/s11207-007-0415-3

Ballai, I., Douglas, M., & Marcu, A. 2008, A&A, 488, 1125, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:

200809833

– 28 –

Byrne, J. P., Morgan, H., Seaton, D. B., Bain, H. M., & Habbal, S. R. 2014, Sol. Phys., 289, 4545,

doi: 10.1007/s11207-014-0585-8

Carmichael, H. 1964, NASA Special Publication, 50, 451

Chandra, R., Filippov, B., Joshi, R., & Schmieder, B. 2017, Sol. Phys., 292, 81, doi: 10.1007/

s11207-017-1104-5

Chandra, R., Pariat, E., Schmieder, B., Mandrini, C. H., & Uddin, W. 2010, Sol. Phys., 261, 127,

doi: 10.1007/s11207-009-9470-2

Chandra, R., Schmieder, B., Aulanier, G., & Malherbe, J. M. 2009, Sol. Phys., 258, 53, doi: 10.

1007/s11207-009-9392-z

Chen, P. F., & Shibata, K. 2000, ApJ, 545, 524, doi: 10.1086/317803

Cheng, X., Zhang, J., Kliem, B., et al. 2020, ApJ, 894, 85, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab886a

D´emoulin, P., Priest, E. R., & Lonie, D. P. 1996, J. Geophys. Res., 101, 7631, doi: 10.1029/

95JA03558

Devi, P., D´emoulin, P., Chandra, R., et al. 2021, A&A, 647, A85, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/

202040042

Dud´ık, J., L¨orinˇc´ık, J., Aulanier, G., Zemanov´a, A., & Schmieder, B. 2019, ApJ, 887, 71, doi: 10.

3847/1538-4357/ab4f86

Dud´ık, J., Zuccarello, F. P., Aulanier, G., Schmieder, B., & D´emoulin, P. 2017, ApJ, 844, 54,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa7aab

Dud´ık, J., Polito, V., Janvier, M., et al. 2016, ApJ, 823, 41, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/823/

1/41

Forbes, T. G., & Acton, L. W. 1996, ApJ, 459, 330, doi: 10.1086/176896

Fulara, A., Chandra, R., Chen, P. F., et al. 2019, Sol. Phys., 294, 56, doi: 10.1007/

s11207-019-1445-3

Georgoulis, M. K., Nindos, A., & Zhang, H. 2019, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society

of London Series A, 377, 20180094, doi: 10.1098/rsta.2018.0094

Gibson, S. E., & Fan, Y. 2006, ApJ, 637, L65, doi: 10.1086/500452

Gosain, S. 2012, ApJ, 749, 85, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/749/1/85

– 29 –

Gosain, S., Filippov, B., Ajor Maurya, R., & Chandra, R. 2016, ApJ, 821, 85, doi: 10.3847/

0004-637X/821/2/85

Green, L. M., Kliem, B., & Wallace, A. J. 2011, A&A, 526, A2, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/

201015146

Green, L. M., T¨or¨ok, T., Vrˇsnak, B., Manchester, W., & Veronig, A. 2018, Space Sci. Rev., 214,

46, doi: 10.1007/s11214-017-0462-5

Guo, Y., Erd´elyi, R., Srivastava, A. K., et al. 2015, ApJ, 799, 151, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/

799/2/151

Hirayama, T. 1974, Sol. Phys., 34, 323, doi: 10.1007/BF00153671

Hori, K. 2000, ApJ, 543, 1011, doi: 10.1086/317162

Howard, R. A., Moses, J. D., Vourlidas, A., et al. 2008, Space Sci. Rev., 136, 67, doi: 10.1007/

s11214-008-9341-4

Hudson, H. S. 2000, ApJ, 531, L75, doi: 10.1086/312516

Janvier, M., Aulanier, G., & D´emoulin, P. 2015, Sol. Phys., 290, 3425, doi: 10.1007/

s11207-015-0710-3

Joshi, B., Veronig, A., Cho, K. S., et al. 2009, ApJ, 706, 1438, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/

706/2/1438

Kay, C., Opher, M., & Evans, R. M. 2015, ApJ, 805, 168, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/805/

2/168

Kippenhahn, R., & Schl¨uter, A. 1957, Zeitschrift fur Astrophysik, 43, 36

Kliem, B., & T¨or¨ok, T. 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett., 96, 255002, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.96.

255002

Kliem, B., T¨or¨ok, T., Titov, V. S., et al. 2014, ApJ, 792, 107, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/792/

2/107

Kopp, R. A., & Pneuman, G. W. 1976, Sol. Phys., 50, 85, doi: 10.1007/BF00206193

Labrosse, N., Heinzel, P., Vial, J. C., et al. 2010, Space Sci. Rev., 151, 243, doi: 10.1007/

s11214-010-9630-6

Lemen, J. R., Title, A. M., Akin, D. J., et al. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 17, doi: 10.1007/

s11207-011-9776-8

– 30 –

Li, Y. P., & Gan, W. Q. 2006, ApJ, 644, L97, doi: 10.1086/505576

Lin, J., & Forbes, T. G. 2000, J. Geophys. Res., 105, 2375, doi: 10.1029/1999JA900477

Liu, R., Liu, C., T¨or¨ok, T., Wang, Y., & Wang, H. 2012, ApJ, 757, 150, doi: 10.1088/

0004-637X/757/2/150

L¨orinˇc´ık, J., Dud´ık, J., & Aulanier, G. 2019, ApJ, 885, 83, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/

ab4519

Mackay, D. H., Karpen, J. T., Ballester, J. L., Schmieder, B., & Aulanier, G. 2010, Space Sci. Rev.,

151, 333, doi: 10.1007/s11214-010-9628-0

Moore, R. L., & Sterling, A. C. 2006, Washington DC American Geophysical Union Geophysical

Monograph Series, 165, 43, doi: 10.1029/165GM07

Morgan, H., & Druckm¨uller, M. 2014, Sol. Phys.,

289,

2945,

doi: 10.1007/

s11207-014-0523-9

Panasenco, O., Martin, S. F., Velli, M., & Vourlidas, A. 2013, Sol. Phys., 287, 391, doi: 10.

1007/s11207-012-0194-3

Parenti, S. 2014, Living Rev. in Sol. Phys., 11, 1, doi: 10.12942/lrsp-2014-1

Patsourakos, S., Vourlidas, A., & Kliem, B. 2010a, A&A, 522, A100, doi: 10.1051/

0004-6361/200913599

Patsourakos, S., Vourlidas, A., & Stenborg, G. 2010b, ApJ, 724, L188, doi: 10.1088/

2041-8205/724/2/L188

Patsourakos, S., Vourlidas, A., T¨or¨ok, T., et al. 2020, Space Sci. Rev., 216, 131, doi: 10.1007/

s11214-020-00757-9

Pesnell, W. D., Thompson, B. J., & Chamberlin, P. C. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 3, doi: 10.1007/

s11207-011-9841-3

Priest, E. R., Hood, A. W., & Anzer, U. 1989, ApJ, 344, 1010, doi: 10.1086/167868

Russell, A. J. B., Sim˜oes, P. J. A., & Fletcher, L. 2015, A&A, 581, A8, doi: 10.1051/

0004-6361/201525746

Schmieder, B., D´emoulin, P., & Aulanier, G. 2013, Adv. Space Res. , 51, 1967, doi: 10.1016/

j.asr.2012.12.026

– 31 –

Schou, J., Scherrer, P. H., Bush, R. I., et al. 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 229, doi: 10.1007/

s11207-011-9842-2

Shen, J., Zhou, T., Ji, H., et al. 2014, ApJ, 791, 83, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/791/2/83

Sim˜oes, P. J. A., Fletcher, L., Hudson, H. S., & Russell, A. J. B. 2013, ApJ, 777, 152, doi: 10.

1088/0004-637X/777/2/152

Sturrock, P. A. 1966, Nature, 211, 695, doi: 10.1038/211695a0

Sui, L., Holman, G. D., & Dennis, B. R. 2004, ApJ, 612, 546, doi: 10.1086/422515

Sun, X., Hoeksema, J. T., Liu, Y., et al. 2012, ApJ, 748, 77, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/748/

2/77

Titov, V. S., Downs, C., Miki´c, Z., et al. 2018, ApJ, 852, L21, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/

aaa3da

Titov, V. S., Downs, C., T¨or¨ok, T., et al. 2021, ApJS, 255, 9, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/

abfe0f

T¨or¨ok, T., & Kliem, B. 2005, ApJ, 630, L97, doi: 10.1086/462412

T¨or¨ok, T., Panasenco, O., Titov, V. S., et al. 2011, ApJ, 739, L63, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/

739/2/L63

T¨or¨ok, T., Leake, J. E., Titov, V. S., et al. 2018, in AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 2018,

SH12A–04

van Ballegooijen, A. A., & Martens, P. C. H. 1989, ApJ, 343, 971, doi: 10.1086/167766

van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., Baker, D., T¨or¨ok, T., et al. 2014, ApJ, 788, 85, doi: 10.1088/

0004-637X/788/1/85

Veronig, A. M., Podladchikova, T., Dissauer, K., et al. 2018, ApJ, 868, 107, doi: 10.3847/

1538-4357/aaeac5

Wang, J., Jiang, C., Yuan, D., & Zou, P. 2021, ApJ, 911, 2, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/

abe637

Wang, J., Sim˜oes, P. J. A., & Fletcher, L. 2018, ApJ, 859, 25, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/

aabc0e

Wang, Y. M., & Muglach, K. 2007, ApJ, 666, 1284, doi: 10.1086/520623

– 32 –

Williams, D. R., T¨or¨ok, T., D´emoulin, P., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., & Kliem, B. 2005, ApJ, 628,

L163, doi: 10.1086/432910

Wills-Davey, M. J., & Thompson, B. J. 1999, Sol. Phys., 190, 467, doi: 10.1023/A:

1005201500675

Zemanov´a, A., Dud´ık, J., Aulanier, G., Thalmann, J. K., & G¨om¨ory, P. 2019, ApJ, 883, 96,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab3926

Zhou, T., Ji, H., & Huang, G. 2008, Adv. Space Res. , 41, 1195, doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2007.

04.095

Zhou, T.-H., Wang, J.-F., Li, D., et al. 2013, Res. in Astr. and Astrophys., 13, 526, doi: 10.

1088/1674-4527/13/5/004

Zuccarello, F. P., Aulanier, G., Dud´ık, J., et al. 2017, ApJ, 837, 115, doi: 10.3847/

1538-4357/aa6110

This preprint was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v5.2.

