Evidence for unconventional superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene 

Myungchul Oh1,*, Kevin P. Nuckolls1,*, Dillon Wong1,*, Ryan L. Lee1, Xiaomeng Liu1, Kenji 

Watanabe2, Takashi Taniguchi3, Ali Yazdani1,‡ 

1Joseph Henry Laboratories and Department of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 

08544, USA 

2Research Center for Functional Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, 

Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan 

3International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science, 

1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan 

* These authors contributed equally to this work. 

‡ Corresponding author email: yazdani@princeton.edu 

The emergence of superconductivity and correlated insulators in magic-angle twisted 

bilayer graphene (MATBG) has raised the intriguing possibility that its pairing 

mechanism is distinct from that of conventional superconductors1–4, as described by the 

Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory. However, recent studies have shown that 

superconductivity persists even when Coulomb interactions are partially screened5,6. 

This suggests that pairing in MATBG might be conventional in nature and a consequence 

of the large density of states (DOS) of its flat bands. Here we combine tunneling and 

Andreev reflection spectroscopy with the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) to 

observe several key experimental signatures for unconventional superconductivity in 

MATBG. We show that the tunneling spectra below the transition temperature Tc are 

inconsistent with those of a conventional s-wave superconductor, but rather resemble 

those of a nodal superconductor with an anisotropic pairing mechanism. We observe a 

large discrepancy between the tunneling gap ΔT, which far exceeds the mean-field BCS 

ratio (with 2ΔT/kBTc ~ 25), and the gap ΔAR extracted from Andreev reflection 

spectroscopy (2ΔAR/kBTc ~ 6). The tunneling gap persists even when superconductivity is 

suppressed, indicating its emergence from a pseudogap phase. Moreover, the 

pseudogap and superconductivity are both absent when MATBG is aligned with 

hexagonal boron nitride (hBN). These findings and other observations reported here 

provide a preponderance of evidence for a non-BCS mechanism for superconductivity in 

MATBG. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tunneling measurements of the quasiparticle DOS, the energy gap, and electron-

phonon coupling in conventional superconductors have provided key experimental evidence for 

the BCS theory of superconductivity7. Similar measurements on correlated superconductors, 

most notably STM and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, have shown their 

properties to be qualitatively different from those of BCS superconductors8,9. For the high-Tc 

cuprate superconductors, while tunneling spectra in the overdoped regime can be captured by 

the DOS of a BCS-like model with a d-wave order parameter, the yet-to-be-understood 

pseudogap phenomenon at reduced doping causes the spectroscopic properties of the cuprates 

to strongly deviate from this picture9.   

Superconductivity has been observed at remarkably low carrier densities at partial 

fillings of the flat bands of MATBG1–3. Although these qualities suggest an unconventional 

pairing mechanism, conclusive evidence for any mechanism beyond the BCS paradigm is 

absent. We use density-tuned scanning tunneling and point-contact spectroscopy (DT-STS, DT-

PCS) to show that the superconducting phase of MATBG, specifically when hole-doping its flat 

valence band, shares a remarkable number of features with unconventional superconductors. 

Our experiments show a V-shaped gap at low temperatures and an unusual pseudogap 

precursor phase at higher temperatures and magnetic fields from which phase-coherent 

superconductivity emerges. The low-energy region of the V-shaped gap supports an anisotropic 

pairing mechanism with nodes in the superconducting gap function, as anticipated by some 

theoretical studies10–12. The pseudogap state may signify pairing without phase coherence or a 

secondary phase forming above Tc and Bc. Both the pseudogap and superconductivity are 

absent when MATBG is commensurately aligned with the hBN substrate, suggesting that the 

structural characteristics and/or the C2T-symmetry of unaligned MATBG are required for 

stabilizing these ground states. Although we cannot rule out a phonon-based pairing 

mechanism13,14, our results provide key constraints for an accurate theory of superconductivity 

in MATBG. 

We performed our experiments in a homebuilt dilution-refrigerator STM15 on devices 

sketched in Fig. 1a. MATBG, biased at Vs, rests on hBN/SiO2/Si, while a voltage Vg applied to Si 

tunes the carrier density (see Methods). Fig. 1b shows a topographic image16–18 of unaligned 

MATBG/hBN, while Fig. 1c shows DT-STS dI/dV(Vs, Vg) acquired at 250 mK at the center of an 

AA site in Device A (see SI for AB/BA data). Fig. 1c shows that the conduction (valence) flat 

band is pinned to the Fermi energy (EF; Vs = 0 V) when Vg tunes EF above (below) the charge 

neutrality point (CNP; VCNP = 3.7 V), while the valence (conduction) flat band onsets at Vs < -20 

mV (Vs > 20 mV) and displays significant energy broadening due to charge fluctuations19. At 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
millikelvin temperatures, we observe features in DT-STS attributed to a cascade of transitions at 

partial band fillings20–23, but they appear weaker and broader in energy than those observed at 

higher temperatures (T > 4 K), which may be related to high-entropy isospin fluctuations24,25. 

Distinguishing nodal superconductivity 

DT-STS shows several gapped phases (Fig. 1c) starting with band insulators at 𝜈 = ±4, 

where 𝜈 is the electron filling per moiré unit cell relative to the CNP. Here we focus on partial 

fillings of the valence flat band near -3 < 𝜈 < -2, where transport studies1–3 report 

superconductivity in MATBG (Fig. 1c red box). Figures 1d and 1f show tunneling spectra 

dI/dV(Vs, Vg) from two devices (Device A as in Fig. 1c, and Device B), which display a gap at 𝜈 = 

-2 that opens and closes at EF with decreasing Vg, followed by the opening of a new gap that 

persists between -3 < 𝜈 < -2. The density dependence of these gaps is highlighted by dI/dV(Vs = 

0 V) as a function of Vg shown in Figs. 1d and 1f. We observe a clear transition between the two 

gapped phases, consistent with the phase diagram of MATBG from transport studies1–3,5,6 in 

which a correlated insulator (CI) at 𝜈 = -2 transitions into a superconductor that persists for -3 < 

𝜈 < -2. In Figs. 1e and 1g, we plot tunneling gaps for the 𝜈 = -2 CI (red curves) and the -3 < 𝜈 < -

2 superconductor (blue curves) measured in each device. The -3 < 𝜈 < -2 tunneling gap is 

significantly larger than kBTc observed in transport experiments1–3 and is an order of magnitude 

larger than an in-plane tunneling gap observed in an MATBG p-n junction26 (presumably, the 

lateral p-n junction only probes the edge of the superconducting dome adjacent to the CI, 

instead of optimal doping, due to the junction’s doping gradient). Before examining the shapes 

of the tunneling spectra further, we discuss our method for distinguishing between gapped 

insulating and superconducting phases by complementing DT-STS with point-contact 

spectroscopy (PCS) measurements. 

Because both CIs and superconductors show suppressions in dI/dV(Vs = 0 V), we 

require complementary information that distinguishes these two phases. We performed PCS by 

reducing the tip height above the sample until the tip makes point contact with the sample 

surface (sketched in Fig. 2a) and then measuring the two-terminal tip-sample conductance 

G(Vs, Vg) (see Methods; see SI for discussion of possible tip-induced pressure and strain during 

PCS). This measurement is particularly sensitive to the local region beneath the tip (see SI). 

The point-contact zero-bias conductance G(Vs = 0 V, Vg) (PCS-ZBC), plotted in Fig. 2b (Device 

A’ - a different region of Device A) as a function of Vg, vanishes at 𝜈 = ±4 and 𝜈 = ±2, signaling 

the formation of band and correlated insulators (Fig. 2b; red shaded bars). Consistent with 

transport studies1–3, the insulating states are insensitive to application of a weak out-of-plane 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
magnetic field B. In contrast, the PCS-ZBC displays enhanced intensity between -3 < 𝜈 < -2 

(Fig. 2b; green shaded bar) that is suppressed with increasing B, consistent with 

superconductivity in this doping range. More direct evidence for superconductivity is revealed by 

the voltage-bias dependence of PCS G(Vs, Vg) in Figs. 2c-d. These spectra are indicative of 

Andreev reflection27,28, where incoming electrons from the metallic tip are reflected as holes 

while Cooper pairs propagate into the superconducting sample (Fig. 2a). This results in 

enhanced conductance at low biases and “excess current” when the sample is superconducting. 

Signatures of Andreev reflection in PCS G(Vs, Vg) (black boxes in Figs. 2e-f) are limited roughly 

to fillings -3 < 𝜈 < -2, magnetic fields B < Bc ~ 50 mT, and temperatures T < Tc ~ 1.2 K, all of 

which are consistent with transport measurements1–3. A side-by-side comparison of STS and 

PCS (Fig. 2g) at the same sample location shows how PCS can clearly distinguish tunneling 

gaps associated with superconductivity from those associated with insulators. Despite the 

presence of many correlation-driven gaps at EF in STS, only the filling range -3 < 𝜈 < -2 shows 

both a V-shaped gap in STS and a zero-bias conductance peak in PCS. 

Two distinct energy scales & the pseudogap 

Both STS and PCS provide complementary evidence for an anisotropic pairing 

mechanism of superconductivity in MATBG. Moreover, these measurements establish two 

distinct energy scales. Low-energy STS spectra (Fig. 3a) are clearly incompatible with an 

isotropic s-wave pairing symmetry, and the best fits to such a model require introducing 

unphysically large quasiparticle broadening (equivalent to an electron temperature above 2 K; 

for comparison, see SI for STS on superconducting Al). Often STS spectra on MATBG have a 

finite conductance at zero energy, but V-shaped spectra with zero conductance at zero bias 

have also been observed (Fig. 1g). These STS spectra resemble the quasiparticle DOS of a 

nodal superconductor, as for higher angular momentum (e.g. p- or d-wave) pairing with an 

anisotropic gap function (Fig. 3b shows this fit for Device A, Vg = -25.8 V – see SI for fits at other 

Vg). Although the nodal fit describes this spectrum well, one should be cautious about this 

interpretation given the similar appearance of this gap to that of the pseudogap above Tc and Bc 

described below. Nevertheless, we extract an energy scale of ΔT ~ 0.9 meV from this fit, which 

roughly corresponds to half the separation of the shoulders in the spectrum. Similarly, the 

Andreev reflection spectra in PCS resemble predictions from the Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk 

(BTK) model29 using a nodal superconducting gap function (Fig. 3c and SI). However, a BTK-

model fit yields an energy scale ΔAR ~ 0.3 meV (Device A’: Vg = -22.8 V), 3 - 5 times smaller 

than ΔT. For Tc ≈ 1.2 K (measured through PCS), the observed ratio 2ΔT/kBTc ~ 25 (Device A’; 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vg = -22.8 V) is significantly higher than the expected ratio for a tunneling gap of a BCS 

superconductor (2ΔMF/kBTc = 3.53). The Andreev energy-scale ratio 2ΔAR/kBTc ~ 6 also appears 

to be higher than the BCS ratio. As noted above, Andreev reflection disappears when phase-

coherent superconductivity is absent, with both ΔAR and the Andreev excess current vanishing 

above Tc and Bc (Figs. 2d and 3d). In contrast, the STS gap ΔT persists when phase-coherent 

superconductivity vanishes above Tc (see Fig. 3e and SI) and well-above Bc (Fig. 4). 

A similar dichotomy between the energy scales describing tunneling and Andreev 

reflection has been documented for the underdoped cuprate superconductors27, where Andreev 

reflection also tracks the onset of phase coherence at Tc while the tunneling gap persists above 

Tc, as we observe in MATBG (see high-temperature data in SI; see also Ref. 23). Compared to 

studies8,9 that examine the relationship between the pseudogap and superconductivity in the 

cuprates, in MATBG, we have the advantage that application of a relatively weak B > Bc ~ 50 

mT suppresses phase coherence at low temperatures, allowing us to probe the shape of the 

pseudogap spectra with high energy resolution at the lowest temperatures. Such measurements 

in Fig. 4a show that the shapes of the spectra in the pseudogap phase remain remarkably sharp 

and surprisingly similar to those of spectra observed when the sample is superconducting. 

While the 𝜈 = -2 CI is suppressed below 3 T, the pseudogap remains present over most of the 

doping range -3 < 𝜈 < -2 (Fig. 4b). The density dependence of the STS at zero magnetic field 

and up to 3 T (see SI for 1 T data) reveals that the onset of a sharp pseudogap in the absence 

of phase-coherent superconductivity occurs when the van Hove singularity associated with the 

valence band overlaps with EF. In this situation, the gain in the exchange energy may favor the 

formation of an isospin (spin/valley) polarized/coherent ground state (or some other ordered 

state), which may be responsible for the pseudogap with sharp side-peaks shown in Fig. 4a. 

However, given the remarkable resemblance between the shapes of the STS gaps in the 

pseudogap and superconducting phases, it is also possible that such a gap is driven by the 

formation of incoherent pairs for B > Bc and T > Tc

30. Regardless of the origin, the correlations 

responsible for the pseudogap are clearly compatible with the onset of phase-coherent 

superconductivity. 

Quenching pairing and pseudogap with hBN  

Further insight regarding superconductivity and the pseudogap phase in MATBG is 

provided by studying MATBG aligned with hBN. Anecdotally, transport experiments do not 

report superconductivity in MATBG samples that are presumed to be well-aligned with hBN31,32. 

In examining the role of hBN alignment, STM studies are particularly advantageous, as they can 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
directly visualize and distinguish the graphene-graphene (G-G) and graphene-hBN (G-hBN) 

moiré structures. Fig. 5b shows a set of representative topographic images of Device C, taken 

at different Vs and Vg in order to disentangle the different structural roles of the two moiré 

patterns (see SI). Surprisingly, these images show perfect alignment between the AA sites of 

the G-G moiré and the carbon-boron regions of the G-BN moiré. This suggests a propensity for 

MATBG aligned to hBN to undergo a moiré-scale incommensurate-commensurate transition 

when the two moiré length scales are similar. In the schematic in Fig. 5a, we label these 

substrate-modified AA sites as “AAb” sites to reflect this alignment configuration. Likewise, the 

AB/BA sites of MATBG are made inequivalent by the hBN, forming “ABa” (“BAa”) regions where 

atoms in the top (bottom) graphene sheet are in register with atoms in the top hBN layer. This 

incommensurate-commensurate transition contrasts with the formation of a super-superlattice 

due to a long-wavelength interference between the two moiré patterns. 

DT-STS and DT-PCS on Device C show that alignment with hBN dramatically alters the 

electronic properties of MATBG (Figs. 5c-e). In contrast to the semi-metallic behavior we 

observe in unaligned samples at the CNP, STS acquired at the center of an AAb site shows a 

gap (convolved with Coulomb charging effects) at the Dirac point due to sublattice symmetry 

breaking33–35, and the resulting insulating behavior of MATBG at the CNP is directly probed 

using PCS (Figs. 5c and 5e). In agreement with transport studies31,32, we also find correlated 

and Chern insulators at 𝜈 = +2 and +3, respectively (Fig. 5c; see also SI). In contrast with 

unaligned samples, aligned samples show neither a cascade of transitions nor evidence for 

superconductivity or the pseudogap, despite the twist angle of this device (1.08°) being near 

those with the maximal Tc in transport measurements on unaligned devices1,5. Overall, DT-STS 

and DT-PCS show that hBN alignment is detrimental to the formation of both the pseudogap 

and the superconducting phases of MATBG, as evidenced by contrasting data in Figs. 1-2 with 

that of Fig. 5. Furthermore, the ability to identify superconductivity and a pseudogap phase in 

unaligned MATBG and their absence in MATBG aligned to hBN demonstrates the utility of our 

combined DT-STS and DT-PCS technique, since the existence of superconductivity in some 

flat-band materials36 as well as the importance of C2T symmetry37–39 is currently heavily 

contested. 

Discussion 

Cumulatively, our findings provide substantial evidence that pairing in MATBG is 

unconventional and distinct from that of a BCS mechanism. STS does not show an isotropic gap 

with a size consistent with that expected from a Tc ~ 1.2 K s-wave BCS superconductor, but 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shows a V-shaped DOS consistent with that of a nodal superconductor, where the details of the 

spectra vary with twist angle and strain (see SI). The PCS measurements corroborate this 

picture and additionally show an unusual linear suppression of the Andreev excess current 

approaching Tc (Fig. 3d). This behavior is similar to reports in other unconventional 

superconductors40,41 and has been suggested to be related to pair-breaking effects due to 

inelastic scattering from bosonic modes. There are many candidates for bosonic modes in 

MATBG, ranging from phonons to more exotic collective isospin fluctuations42; however, a key 

ingredient for this scenario is the presence of a sign-changing order parameter, which makes 

scattering from such modes pair breaking43. As an aside, if pairing is spin-triplet in nature, the 

ratio of the enhanced conductance near zero bias to the background conductance in the 

Andreev spectra is incompatible with an equal-spin-pairing order parameter (see SI). Moreover, 

like the underdoped cuprate superconductors27, MATBG shows contrasting behavior between 

the energy scales describing tunneling and Andreev reflection. Without further experiments, it is 

difficult to distinguish between different explanations for this dichotomy (i.e. a precursor broken-

symmetry phase or preformed pairing without coherence30). Overall, the experiments presented 

here provide clear constraints for constructing a model of the pairing mechanism in this novel 

electronic material that lies beyond the BCS paradigm. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

1.  Cao, Y. et al. Unconventional superconductivity in magic-angle graphene superlattices. 

Nature 556, 43–50 (2018). 

2.  Yankowitz, M. et al. Tuning superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene. Science 363, 

1059–1064 (2019). 

3.  Lu, X. et al. Superconductors, orbital magnets and correlated states in magic-angle bilayer 

graphene. Nature 574, 653–657 (2019). 

4.  Cao, Y. et al. Correlated insulator behaviour at half-filling in magic-angle graphene 

superlattices. Nature 556, 80–84 (2018). 

5.  Saito, Y., Ge, J., Watanabe, K., Taniguchi, T. & Young, A. F. Independent superconductors 

and correlated insulators in twisted bilayer graphene. Nat. Phys. 16, 926–930 (2020). 

6.  Stepanov, P. et al. Untying the insulating and superconducting orders in magic-angle 

graphene. Nature 583, 375–378 (2020). 

7.  Bardeen, J. Electron-Phonon Interactions and Superconductivity. Science 181, 1209–1214 

(1973). 

8.  Damascelli, A., Hussain, Z. & Shen, Z.-X. Angle-resolved photoemission studies of the 

cuprate superconductors. Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 473–541 (2003). 

9.  Fischer, Ø., Kugler, M., Maggio-Aprile, I., Berthod, C. & Renner, C. Scanning tunneling 

spectroscopy of high-temperature superconductors. Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 353–419 (2007). 

10. Isobe, H., Yuan, N. F. Q. & Fu, L. Unconventional Superconductivity and Density Waves in 

Twisted Bilayer Graphene. Phys. Rev. X 8, 041041 (2018). 

11. Liu, C.-C., Zhang, L.-D., Chen, W.-Q. & Yang, F. Chiral Spin Density Wave and 

$d+id$ Superconductivity in the Magic-Angle-Twisted Bilayer Graphene. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

121, 217001 (2018). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. Kennes, D. M., Lischner, J. & Karrasch, C. Strong correlations and 

$d+\mathit{id}$ superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene. Phys. Rev. B 98, 241407 

(2018). 

13. Wu, F., MacDonald, A. H. & Martin, I. Theory of Phonon-Mediated Superconductivity in 

Twisted Bilayer Graphene. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 257001 (2018). 

14. Lian, B., Wang, Z. & Bernevig, B. A. Twisted Bilayer Graphene: A Phonon-Driven 

Superconductor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 257002 (2019). 

15. Wong, D. et al. A modular ultra-high vacuum millikelvin scanning tunneling microscope. 

Rev. Sci. Instrum. 91, 023703 (2020). 

16. Kerelsky, A. et al. Maximized electron interactions at the magic angle in twisted bilayer 

graphene. Nature 572, 95–100 (2019). 

17. Choi, Y. et al. Electronic correlations in twisted bilayer graphene near the magic angle. Nat. 

Phys. 15, 1174–1180 (2019). 

18. Jiang, Y. et al. Charge order and broken rotational symmetry in magic-angle twisted bilayer 

graphene. Nature 573, 91–95 (2019). 

19. Xie, Y. et al. Spectroscopic signatures of many-body correlations in magic-angle twisted 

bilayer graphene. Nature 572, 101–105 (2019). 

20. Wong, D. et al. Cascade of electronic transitions in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene. 

Nature 582, 198–202 (2020). 

21. Zondiner, U. et al. Cascade of phase transitions and Dirac revivals in magic-angle 

graphene. Nature 582, 203–208 (2020). 

22. Nuckolls, K. P. et al. Strongly correlated Chern insulators in magic-angle twisted bilayer 

graphene. Nature 588, 610–615 (2020). 

23. Choi, Y. et al. Interaction-driven Band Flattening and Correlated Phases in Twisted Bilayer 

Graphene. ArXiv210202209 Cond-Mat (2021). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24. Saito, Y. et al. Isospin Pomeranchuk effect in twisted bilayer graphene. Nature 592, 220–

224 (2021). 

25. Rozen, A. et al. Entropic evidence for a Pomeranchuk effect in magic-angle graphene. 

Nature 592, 214–219 (2021). 

26. Rodan-Legrain, D. et al. Highly tunable junctions and non-local Josephson effect in magic-

angle graphene tunnelling devices. Nat. Nanotechnol. 1–7 (2021) doi:10.1038/s41565-021-

00894-4. 

27. Deutscher, G. Andreev--Saint-James reflections: A probe of cuprate superconductors. Rev. 

Mod. Phys. 77, 109–135 (2005). 

28. Dubouchet, T. et al. Collective energy gap of preformed Cooper pairs in disordered 

superconductors. Nat. Phys. 15, 233–236 (2019). 

29. Blonder, G. E., Tinkham, M. & Klapwijk, T. M. Transition from metallic to tunneling regimes 

in superconducting microconstrictions: Excess current, charge imbalance, and supercurrent 

conversion. Phys. Rev. B 25, 4515–4532 (1982). 

30. Randeria, M., Trivedi, N., Moreo, A. & Scalettar, R. T. Pairing and spin gap in the normal 

state of short coherence length superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2001–2004 (1992). 

31. Serlin, M. et al. Intrinsic quantized anomalous Hall effect in a moiré heterostructure. Science 

(2019) doi:10.1126/science.aay5533. 

32. Sharpe, A. L. et al. Emergent ferromagnetism near three-quarters filling in twisted bilayer 

graphene. Science 365, 605–608 (2019). 

33. Hunt, B. et al. Massive Dirac Fermions and Hofstadter Butterfly in a van der Waals 

Heterostructure. Science 340, 1427–1430 (2013). 

34. Shi, J., Zhu, J. & MacDonald, A. H. Moir\’e commensurability and the quantum anomalous 

Hall effect in twisted bilayer graphene on hexagonal boron nitride. Phys. Rev. B 103, 

075122 (2021). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35. Zhang, Y.-H., Mao, D. & Senthil, T. Twisted bilayer graphene aligned with hexagonal boron 

nitride: Anomalous Hall effect and a lattice model. Phys. Rev. Res. 1, 033126 (2019). 

36. He, M. et al. Symmetry breaking in twisted double bilayer graphene. Nat. Phys. 17, 26–30 

(2021). 

37. Khalaf, E., Chatterjee, S., Bultinck, N., Zaletel, M. P. & Vishwanath, A. Charged skyrmions 

and topological origin of superconductivity in magic-angle graphene. Sci. Adv. 7, eabf5299 

(2021). 

38. Park, J. M., Cao, Y., Watanabe, K., Taniguchi, T. & Jarillo-Herrero, P. Tunable strongly 

coupled superconductivity in magic-angle twisted trilayer graphene. Nature 590, 249–255 

(2021). 

39. Hao, Z. et al. Electric field–tunable superconductivity in alternating-twist magic-angle trilayer 

graphene. Science 371, 1133 (2021). 

40. Goll, G., Löhneysen, H. v., Yanson, I. K. & Taillefer, L. Anisotropy of point-contact spectra in 

the heavy-fermion superconductor ${\mathrm{UPt}}_{3}$. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2008–2011 

(1993). 

41. Laube, F., Goll, G., Eschrig, M., Fogelström, M. & Werner, R. Excess current in 

superconducting Sr2RuO4. Phys. Rev. B 69, 014516 (2004). 

42. Khalaf, E., Bultinck, N., Vishwanath, A. & Zaletel, M. P. Soft modes in magic angle twisted 

bilayer graphene. ArXiv200914827 Cond-Mat (2020). 

43. Millis, A. J., Sachdev, S. & Varma, C. M. Inelastic scattering and pair breaking in anisotropic 

and isotropic superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 37, 4975–4986 (1988). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 

We thank P. Jarillo-Herrero, A. H. MacDonald, and S. A. Kivelson for helpful discussions. We 

thank C.-L. Chiu, G. Farahi, and H. Ding for helpful technical discussions. This work was 

primarily supported by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation’s EPiQS initiative grants 

GBMF9469 and DOE-BES grant DE-FG02-07ER46419 to A.Y. Other support for the 

experimental work was provided by NSF-MRSEC through the Princeton Center for Complex 

Materials NSF-DMR- 2011750, NSF-DMR-1904442, ExxonMobil through the Andlinger Center 

for Energy and the Environment at Princeton, and the Princeton Catalysis Initiative. A.Y. 

acknowledge the hospitality of the Aspen Center for Physics, which is supported by National 

Science Foundation grant PHY-1607611, and Trinity College, Cambridge UK where part of this 

work was carried in with the support of in part by a QuantEmX grant from ICAM and the Gordon 

and Betty Moore Foundation through Grant GBMF9616. K.W. and T.T. acknowledge support 

from the Elemental Strategy Initiative conducted by the MEXT, Japan, grant 

JPMXP0112101001, JSPS KAKENHI grant 19H05790 and JP20H00354. 

Author Contributions 

M.O., K.P.N., D.W., and A.Y. designed the experiment. M.O., D.W., and K.P.N. fabricated the 

devices used for the study. M.O., K.P.N., D.W., and R.L.L carried out STM/STS and PCS 

measurements, with invaluable input from X.L. on the latter. M.O., D.W., and K.P.N. performed 

the data analysis. K.W. and T.T. synthesized the hBN crystals. All authors discussed the results 

and contributed to the writing of the manuscript. 

Figure Captions: 

Figure 1 | Scanning tunneling spectroscopy of the tunneling gap of superconducting 

MATBG. a, Schematic of the experimental set-up. MATBG, biased at Vs, sits atop hBN/SiO2/Si, 

while Vg is applied to Si to tune the carrier density. b, STM topographic image of MATBG. c, 

Tunneling dI/dV(Vs, Vg) taken at the center of an AA site in Device A (1.13°, 0.4% strain) shows 

the conduction and valence flat bands pinned to EF. The red dashed-line box highlights a set of 

gaps in the valence flat band. d, Higher-resolution dI/dV(Vs, Vg) for Device A shows a gap at 𝜈 = 

-2 (CI; correlated insulator) and a gap between 𝜈 = -2 and 𝜈 = -3 (SC; superconductor). A line 

cut of dI/dV(Vg) at Vs = 0 V is shown on the right. e, dI/dV(Vs) spectra for Device A at Vg = -22.6 

V (top) and Vg = -25.8 V (bottom). f, Same as d, except for Device B (1.06°, 0.1% strain). g, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dI/dV(Vs) spectra for Device B at Vg = -19.8 V (top) and Vg = -25.6 V (bottom). See SI for 

tunneling parameters. 

Figure 2 | Point-contact spectroscopy and Andreev reflection for MATBG. a, Schematic of 

the Andreev reflection process measured using density-tuned point-contact spectroscopy (DT-

PCS). The STM tip is brought into point contact with the surface of MATBG, and the two-

terminal conductance G(Vs, Vg) is measured. b, Line cut of point-contact G(Vg) at Vs = 0 V for 

Device A’ (same as Device A, different region; 1.01° twist angle, 0.2% strain) at five magnetic 

field strengths between 0 T and 200 mT. Strong suppressions of G(Vg) occur near 𝜈 = -2, +2, 

and +3 as a result of correlated insulating phases near these integer fillings (CI; red shaded 

bars). A dip in G(Vg) occurs near charge neutrality (CNP; gray shaded bar). An enhancement of 

G(Vg) occurs between 𝜈 = -2 and 𝜈 = -3 as a result of the excess current measured in the 

superconducting phase (SC; green shaded bar). Curves are vertically offset by the horizontal 

black lines for clarity. c, Line cut of point-contact G(Vs) spectra at Vg = -21 V, in the 

superconducting carrier-density range, at five magnetic-field strengths between 0 T and 200 

mT. Curves are offset for clarity. d, Line cut of point-contact G(Vs) spectra at Vg = -21.8 V, in the 

superconducting carrier-density range, at sixteen temperatures between 300 mK and 1.3 K. e, 

Point-contact G(Vs, Vg) and dG/dVs(Vs, Vg) for different values of the out-of-plane magnetic field 

showing the disappearance of Andreev reflection at around 50 mT. f, Point-contact G(Vs, Vg) 

and dG/dVs(Vs, Vg) for different values of the temperature showing the disappearance of 

Andreev reflection at around 1.3 K. g, Side-by-side tunneling dI/dV(Vs, Vg) into an AA site and 

point-contact G(Vs, Vg) in the same location in Device A’. Gaps observed in tunneling marked as 

CI coincide with highly resistive states in G(Vs, Vg), while the tunneling gap marked as SC 

coincides with Andreev reflection. See SI for tunneling and PCS parameters. 

Figure 3 | Tunneling and Andreev reflection spectra curve fits. a, Dynes-function fits to the 

experimental tunneling spectrum (blue curve) measured at Vg = -25.8 V for Device A at 200 mK 

and B = 0 T using the model quasiparticle DOS for a nodeless s-wave superconductor with all 

free parameters (red curve) and with fixed lifetime broadening parameter Γ = 0.07 meV (gray 

curve) (see SI for details). b, Same as a, except using the model quasiparticle DOS for a nodal 

superconductor (e.g. p-, d-, f-wave). c, Andreev reflection spectra (solid curves) obtained in 

Device A’ at Vg = -21.8 V at fifteen temperatures between 300 mK and 1 K, fit with the BTK 

model (dashed curves) with fixed barrier transparency parameter Z = 0.1. d, Excess current Iexc 

and the superconducting energy gap ΔAR extracted from the BTK fits in c (see SI for details). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The excess current shows an anomalous linear dependence on the temperature, indicative of 

unconventional superconductivity. e, Tunneling dI/dV(Vs) spectra acquired at the center of an 

AA site between Vg = -20 V and Vg = -26 V in Device A’’ (same as Device A, different region; 

0.99° twist angle), measured at T = 4.1 K. Curves are offset by 0.6 nS for clarity. A suppression 

of the DOS near EF is observed at temperatures above Tc for superconductivity observed at -3 < 

𝜈 < -2 (See SI for full dI/dV(Vs, Vg) for all observations of the high-temperature pseudogap 

phase). See SI for tunneling parameters. 

Figure 4 | Pseudogap regime and phase diagram of hole-doped MATBG. a, Tunneling 

dI/dV(Vs) spectra at Vg = -25 V taken at the center of an AA site in Device A at B⊥ = 0 T (red 

curve), 0.5 T (purple curve), and 1 T (blue curve), which show the persistence of a prominent 

gap at EF well above Bc for MATBG. b, Tunneling dI/dV(Vs, Vg) and dI/dV(Vs) spectra on an AA 

site in Device B for Vg = -19 V to Vg = -34 V and for B⊥ = 0 T, 3 T, and 6 T. Curves are offset by 

7.5 nS for clarity. At B⊥ = 0 T, a gap opens and closes near 𝜈 = -2 due to the correlated 

insulating (CI) phase, followed by a gap for the superconducting (SC) phase at -3 < 𝜈 < -2. At 

B⊥ = 3 T, the gap at -3 < 𝜈 < -2 is a result of the pseudogap (PG) regime. At B⊥ = 6 T, a series 

of large gaps appear that correspond to correlated Chern insulating (ChI) phases with Chern 

numbers C = -3, -2, -1. See SI for tunneling parameters. c, A proposed schematic phase 

diagram for MATBG as a function of flat-band filling factor 𝜈 and magnetic field B⊥ in the hole-

doped regime. (𝜈𝐿𝐿  is Landau-level filling factor.) Near –3 < 𝜈 < -2, we observe an 

unconventional superconducting phase at low magnetic fields, which transitions into a pervasive 

pseudogap regime at high magnetic fields. 

Figure 5 | DT-STS and DT-PCS on non-superconducting MATBG aligned to hBN. a, STM 

topographic image of MATBG that is perfectly commensurate with the underlying hBN 

substrate. Atomistic schematics show the stacking configurations of carbon, boron, and nitrogen 

for different regions of the moiré pattern. b, STM topographic images of MATBG aligned to hBN 

for different values of Vs and Vg, highlighting the graphene (G-G) moiré pattern and the 

graphene-hBN (G-hBN) moiré pattern. c, Side-by-side comparison of tunneling dI/dV(Vs, Vg) into 

an AAb site and point-contact G(Vs, Vg) for Device C (1.08° G-G twist angle, 0.1% G-G 

interlayer strain, 0.5 ± 0.1° G-hBN twist angle), which uses a graphite gate instead of a silicon 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gate. No signatures of a superconducting gap, pseudogap, or of Andreev reflection can be seen 

in either measurement. d, dI/dV(Vs) spectra from c, offset by 15 nS (left) and 20 nS (right) for 

clarity. e, Tunneling dI/dV(Vg) and PCS G(Vg) line cuts from c for Vs = 0 V. See SI for tunneling 

and spectroscopy parameters. 

Methods 

STM measurements 

STM/STS measurements were performed on a homebuilt dilution-refrigerator STM15 with 

tungsten tips prepared on a Cu(111) surface. The carrier density in MATBG was tuned by a 

gate voltage Vg applied to Si (or a graphite gate for Device C), while Vs is applied to the sample. 

dI/dV is measured through lockin detection of the AC tunnel current in response to an AC 

modulation Vrms added to Vs. Initial tunneling parameters for STS are chosen to avoid phonon-

induced inelastic tunneling44. 

We used two experimental protocols for avoiding unwanted local gating from the tip20. 

First, we used an STM tip that has been freshly prepared (field emission, pulsing, poking) and 

calibrated on a cleaned single-crystal metal, paying particular attention to protecting the tip from 

polymer residue contamination that often lies on the surface of two-dimensional (2D) material 

devices. Second, we use an STM tip and metal crystal that are made of materials (e.g. tungsten 

and copper) that are work-function-matched with graphene. Careful preparation of the tip and 

sample are essential because when polymer residue on the device’s surface attaches to the tip, 

spectroscopic features of the tunnel junction are compromised, and topographic images often 

show “drag patterns” caused by the motion of a particle in the tunnel junction or by flexing of the 

tip apex45–47. Since these drag patterns may be misinterpreted as tip-induced strain effects, we 

provide evidence of our clean and stable tip-sample junctions in Fig. S16 in the Supplementary 

Information. Fig. S16 shows two topographic images without a drag pattern that are essentially 

identical despite a three-orders-of-magnitude change in the junction resistance. 

PCS measurements 

PCS measurements were performed by moving the STM tip a few nanometers (relative 

to the tip height during tunneling) into the MATBG surface. This does not damage the graphene. 

Differential conductance G(Vs, Vg) is then measured through lock-in detection of the AC current 

in response to an AC modulation Vrms added to Vs, while dG/dVs(Vs, Vg) is simply the numerical 

derivative of the measured G(Vs, Vg). We note that the conductance G(Vs), appears to be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
slightly suppressed around zero bias in the metallic state of MATBG at millikelvin temperatures, 

but this suppression vanishes at T = 1.3 K. Since this suppression is present at all Vg and at 

magnetic fields above Bc, we conjecture that this is due to non-Ohmic contact, possibly between 

the graphene and the Ti/Au electrodes. When MATBG is superconducting, the finiteness of the 

critical current and the proximity effect may also contribute to the suppression of the 

conductance around the Andreev peaks48. See the Supplementary Information for more details 

on the PCS measurements. 

The data in Figs. 2b, c, e, and f were acquired together, and the data in Figs. 2d and g 

were acquired together. Between these two sets of data, the tip was withdrawn from the 

surface, and then point contact was re-established in the same location. The temperature-

dependent data in Fig. 2d was acquired by heating the 3He-4He mixture to T = 1.3 K and then 

measuring PCS as the dilution refrigerator is cooled. The temperatures in Fig. 2d are measured 

via a RuO2 thermometer in the STM head. The tip likely drifts relative to the sample during this 

measurement. 

Since Yankowitz et al.2 has shown that superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene can 

be tuned with pressure, we examined the role of tip-induced pressure/strain during a PCS 

measurement. Fig. S6 in the Supplementary Information shows tip-height-dependent PCS, 

showing that the energy scale for Andreev reflection ΔAR is unchanged as the tip is pressed 

further into MATBG. This, along with the fact that the density range, Tc, and Bc of 

superconductivity in PCS match those of transport experiments, verifies the one-to-one 

correspondence of STS and PCS at the same location. See Section D of the Supplementary 

Information for a further discussion. 

Sample preparation 

Devices were fabricated using a “tear-and-stack” method49 in which a single graphene 

sheet is torn in half by van der Waals interaction with hBN. The two halves are rotated relative 

to each other and stacked to form MATBG. As Device B is Device A from Ref. 20, a full 

description of the fabrication procedure can be found therein. To summarize, graphene and hBN 

are picked up with polyvinyl alcohol (PVA). Then, to flip the heterostructure upside down, the 

heterostructure is pressed against an intermediate structure consisting of polymethyl 

methacrylate (PMMA)/transparent tape/Sylgard 184, and the PVA is dissolved via water 

injection. The heterostructure is then transferred to an SiO2/Si chip with pre-patterned Ti/Au 

electrodes. Residual polymer is dissolved in dichloromethane (DCM), water, acetone, and 

isopropyl alcohol (IPA). This chip is annealed in ultra-high vacuum (UHV) at 170 °C overnight 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and 400 °C for 2 hours. Device A is prepared in a similar manner, except the PMMA is replaced 

with Elvacite 2550, and N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) is added as a solvent. For Device C, the 

intermediate structure consists only of Sylgard 184 on a glass slide, and a graphite gate is 

added to the heterostructure. 

44. Zhang, Y. et al. Giant phonon-induced conductance in scanning tunnelling spectroscopy of 

gate-tunable graphene. Nat. Phys. 4, 627–630 (2008). 

45. Hapala, P. et al. Mechanism of high-resolution STM/AFM imaging with functionalized tips. 

Phys. Rev. B 90, 085421 (2014). 

46. Stroscio, J. A. & Celotta, R. J. Controlling the Dynamics of a Single Atom in Lateral Atom 

Manipulation. Science 306, 242–247 (2004). 

47. Wolter, B. et al. Spin Friction Observed on the Atomic Scale. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 116102 

(2012). 

48. Daghero, D. & Gonnelli, R. S. Probing multiband superconductivity by point-contact 

spectroscopy. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 23, 043001 (2010). 

49. Kim, K. et al. van der Waals Heterostructures with High Accuracy Rotational Alignment. 

Nano Lett. 16, 1989–1995 (2016). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supplementary Information: Evidence for an Unconventional 

Mechanism of Superconductivity in MATBG 

Table of contents: 

A.  Additional tunneling and Andreev spectroscopy measurements between 𝜈 = -2 and 𝜈 = -

3 

B.  Analysis of the tunneling gaps & possible pairing symmetries for -3 < 𝜈 < -2 

C.  Locality of the DT-PCS method 

D.  Method and accuracy of DT-PCS measurements 

E.  Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK) fitting of the Andreev spectrum between 𝜈 = -2 and 𝜈 = 

-3 

F.  Temperature-dependence of the excess current in PCS data 

G.  Spatial dependence of tunneling spectroscopy on AA sites and AB/BA sites 

H.  Pseudogap regime for -3 < 𝜈 < -2 at high temperatures 

I.  Topographic analysis of MATBG aligned to hBN 

J.  Zero-field Chern insulator in moiré-commensurate MATBG aligned to hBN 

K.  Summary of the superconducting states in six devices 

L.  Tunneling and PCS parameters for main text figures 

A. Additional tunneling and Andreev spectroscopy measurements between 𝜈 = -2 and 𝜈 = 

-3 

In the main text, we discussed the presence of a V-shaped tunneling gap that appears at 

the same density as an Andreev reflection spectrum acquired at the same location in an 

unaligned MATBG sample. We observed this gap at millikelvin temperatures five times in four 

devices, showing slight variations in shape and size. However, none of these observed gaps 

take the shape of an isotropic s-wave superconducting gap. Fig. S1 shows dI/dV(Vs, Vg) 

displaying the 𝜈 = -2 gap and the -3 < 𝜈 < -2 gap for Device E (angle : 1.10°) and Device F 

(angle : 1.10°, strain : 0.1%). 

The set of 5 total observations of this STS phenomenology in the valence flat band (two 

depicted in main text Fig. 1, one depicted in main text Fig. 2, and two depicted in Fig. S1) shows 

similar realizations of the same basic phase diagram of MATBG (i.e. a correlated insulator near 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
𝜈 = -2 and a superconductor between 𝜈 = -2 and 𝜈 = -3). Theoretically, interlayer strain, which is 

practically unavoidable among devices fabricated with any variation of the classic “tear-and-

stack” method, is thought to strongly influence coupling in various pairing channels of different 

symmetries1, which may explain some of the more detailed difference in spectroscopy in each 

sample. However, our ability to topographically disentangle the roles of the twist angle, the 

interlayer relative strain, and the hBN alignment allows for us to identify the most robust 

spectroscopic signatures of unconventional superconductivity in MATBG. 

In Fig. S2, we show DT-PCS measurements in Device D that show Andreev reflection. 

Using BTK-model fits (Fig. S2c; see also Section E) for a nodal superconducting order 

parameter, the Andreev gap in this device reaches an optimal value of 𝛥𝐴𝑅 = 0.71 meV at filling 

𝜈 = -2.44. In contrast to the data from Device A’ in main text Fig. 2, this data shows a 

suppression of the zero-bias conductance, which is common in PCS junctions with larger barrier 

strength 𝑍.2 

B. Analysis of the tunneling gaps & possible pairing symmetries for -3 < 𝜈 < -2 

To capture the tunneling spectra, we compare our data to that of the density of states 

(DOS) calculated using a modified BCS model, which includes the effect of quasiparticle 

lifetime, as introduced by Dynes3, as well as the possibility of anisotropic and nodal gaps. The 

Dynes model for the DOS for an isotropic s-wave superconductor is given by: 

𝜌(𝐸)   = 𝜌𝑁𝑅𝑒 [

|𝐸 − 𝑖𝛤|

] 

√(𝐸 − 𝑖𝛤)2 − 𝛥2

where the quasiparticle broadening 𝛤 and the superconducting gap size 𝛥 can be free fitting 

parameters. We model the background normal-state DOS 𝜌𝑁 as either a constant or a linear 

function of energy. To include the possibility of a nodal gap in this model, we introduce the 

angular-dependent factor 

𝛥(𝜃) =   𝛥0 cos(𝑙𝜃) 

where 𝑙 is the orbital angular momentum quantum number for the pair wavefunction (i.e. 𝑙 =

1, 2, 3 for p-, d-, and f-wave superconducting order parameters, respectively)4. The energy 

dependence of the DOS for a nodal superconductor is obtained by integrating the DOS at a 

given energy over all angles4: 

𝜌(𝐸) =  

𝜌𝑁
2𝜋

2𝜋

∫ 𝑑𝜃 𝑅𝑒 [
0

𝐸 − 𝑖Γ

]

√(𝐸 − 𝑖Γ)2 − ∆(𝜃)2

For nonzero angular momentum scenarios (𝑙 > 0), we can simplify the equation to the following 

form: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
𝜌(𝐸) =  

𝜌𝑁
2𝜋

2𝜋

∫ 𝑑𝜃 𝑅𝑒 [
0

𝐸 − 𝑖Γ
√(𝐸 − 𝑖Γ)2 − ∆0

]
2 cos2(𝑙𝜃)

=  

𝜌𝑁
2𝜋

2𝜋

∫ 𝑑𝜃 𝑅𝑒 [
0

𝐸 − 𝑖Γ

√(𝐸 − 𝑖Γ)2 − Δ0

2 cos2 𝜃

]

Thus, the tunneling conductance measured between the STM tip and a superconducting sample 

is 

𝑑𝐼
𝑑𝑉

∞

(𝑉) ∝ ∫ 𝑑𝐸

−∞

𝑑𝑓(𝜀)
|
𝑑𝜀
𝜀=𝐸−𝑒𝑉

 𝜌(𝐸)𝜌𝑡𝑖𝑝 

where 𝜌𝑡𝑖𝑝 is the tip DOS, which we assume to be an energy-independent constant. In 

Supplementary Section E below, where we discuss Andreev reflection, we will extend this 

discussion to include the spin orientation of Cooper pairs and its impact on tunneling and 

Andreev spectroscopy.  

The main text Figs. 3a,b show the nodeless s-wave and nodal Dynes-formula fitting 

analyses for the gap observed at Vg = -25.8 V in Device A (this gate voltage was chosen 

because it has the least asymmetric background as the van Hove singularity shifts through EF). 

Using a least-squares regression procedure, we obtain the best fit using 𝛥 = 0.90 meV for the 

nodal model (red curve).  

The nodal-superconductor fit closely matches our experimental results, aptly capturing 

the sharp V-shaped dip in the spectrum near zero bias and the sloped coherence-peak 

structures observed at the edges of the tunneling gap. In contrast, the nodeless s-wave fits 

poorly capture these two aspects of the observed tunneling gap. The quasiparticle lifetime 

broadening required for the best fit to the nodeless s-wave model (red curve in main text Fig. 

3a; 𝛤 = 0.20 meV) is much larger than that required for the nodal case (𝛤 = 0.07 meV). 

Generally, one expects s-wave superconductors to be more robust against impurity scattering 

effects than superconductors with sign-changing order parameters, making the larger 𝛤 for the 

s-wave scenario anomalous (see for comparison, the superconducting gap of Al(100) in Fig. 

S3c). We have found no evidence for impurity scattering in our measurements to justify the 

large broadening needed for the s-wave model. In main text Fig. 3a (gray curve), we show the fit 

to our experimental data using the isotropic Dynes formula for 𝛤 fixed to the same lifetime 

broadening as used for the fit to the nodal model (𝛤 = 0.07 meV). The comparison between 

main text Fig. 3a (both nodeless fits) and main text Fig. 3b (the nodal fit) clearly shows the 

superiority of the nodal model in capturing the features of our data. 

We also performed the same analysis on the tunneling spectrum in Device B and Device 

F (Figs. S3a and S3b). In both cases, the nodal-superconductor fits capture the features in the 

experimental curves better than for the s-wave fits. As with Device A, fits to the s-wave model 

for the data from these devices require large lifetime broadening parameters (Γ ~ 0.3 Δ). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We note that the electron-hole symmetry present in the lower panels of main text Figs. 

1e,g is not present throughout the gate-voltage range of the gap. When analyzing spectroscopy 

as a function of gate voltage in both main text Fig. 1d from Device A and main text Fig. 1f from 

Device B, we observe a van Hove singularity (vHs) below the Fermi level at fillings 𝜈 > -2, 

appearing at negative Vs. At fillings near 𝜈 = -3, this vHs appears at positive Vs, having passed 

through the Fermi level between 𝜈 = -2 and 𝜈 = -3. This high DOS feature is responsible for 

causing electron-hole asymmetry in the normal-state DOS, upon which the tunneling gap is 

superimposed at these fillings. 

In main text Fig. 3a, we chose to analyze a spectrum that is electron-hole symmetric out 

of convenience: we can fit this spectrum to a modified BCS DOS spectrum without needing to 

make assumptions about the normal-state DOS. At other gate voltages, the spectrum still 

appears V-shaped, but has significant electron-hole asymmetry that makes the fitting analyses 

less straightforward. Nevertheless, we can still do fitting analyses despite this electron-hole 

asymmetry by fitting only the low-energy portion of the spectroscopic gap (Fig. S4). A similar 

analysis to ours was used in STS studies of the high-temperature cuprate superconductors, 

where electron-hole asymmetry is consistently seen5. In Fig. S4, the nodal fits are consistently 

superior to the s-wave fits, with each nodal fit having a lower 𝜒2 value than the s-wave fit to the 

same spectrum. 

C. Locality of the DT-PCS method 

DT-PCS is a highly spatially local method that is most sensitive to the region directly 

underneath the tip. Here we present experimental observations and an idealized model that 

support the idea that regions far away from the tip do not contribute significantly to the DT-PCS 

signal. 

First, the side-by-side STS-PCS of Device A’ in main text Fig. 2g shows an 

unambiguous correspondence between spectroscopic gaps in tunneling dI/dV(Vg) and 

resistance features in point-contact G(Vg). This remarkable correspondence occurs despite 

significant spatial inhomogeneity in Device A’, from which measurements in main text Fig. 1c 

(1.13°), main text Fig. 2 (1.01°), and main text Fig. 3e (0.99°) are derived. A Nomarski 

differential interference contrast (DIC) image of Device A’ in Fig. S5b shows a sample with an 

area that is roughly 4400 μm2 (the twisted graphene covers the entire hBN substrate). If PCS 

was a measurement that averaged over the entire sample, the correspondence between STS 

and PCS seen in Fig. 2g of the main text would be absent. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second, Figs. S5c,d show two PCS G(Vg) data sets at Vs = 0 V, obtained roughly 200 

nm away from each other in Device C. These two data sets show different transport 

phenomenology near 𝜈 = -1. The electronic structure of moiré heterostructures is highly 

sensitive to properties such as twist angle, strain, and moiré-commensurability that can spatially 

vary across a sample. Here we have demonstrated that PCS can detect an insulating state at 𝜈 

= -1 in the region probed in Fig. S5d while not detecting an insulating state only 200 nm away in 

Fig. S5c. 

Third, we can understand the locality of DT-PCS by considering an idealized model on 

an azimuthally symmetric sample (schematic diagram in Fig. S5a). While this model is idealized, 

it nevertheless provides a reasonable explanation for why regions far from the tip have little 

influence on the PCS signal. Consider a two-dimensional, circular sample of radius 𝑅 centered 

at the origin (0,0) and an STM tip touching the origin with point-contact radius 𝑅0   <<  𝑅. 

Consider a voltage 𝑉 applied to the metallic STM tip, while the outer edge of the sample is held 

at ground 𝑉 = 0. What is the voltage drop across a sample of resistivity 𝜌(𝑟, 𝜃) ≡ 𝜌(𝑟) as a 

function of radius? 

Kirchoff’s current law requires that the total current passing through every radial ring 

around the origin must be the same. Thus, for a radially symmetric current density distribution 

𝐽(𝑟) at two radii 𝑟1,  𝑟2, we know that 

2𝜋
𝐼1 = 𝑟1 ∫ 𝐽(𝑟1)𝑑𝜃
0

2𝜋
= 𝑟2 ∫ 𝐽(𝑟2)𝑑𝜃

= 𝐼2 . 

0

Using Ohm’s law (𝐸(𝑟) = 𝜌(𝑟) 𝐽(𝑟)), we find a relationship between the electric field at these two 

radii: 

𝑟1𝐸(𝑟1)
𝜌(𝑟1)

=

𝑟2𝐸(𝑟2)
𝜌(𝑟2)

 . 

Thus, the voltage at a point in the sample at radius 𝑟 is as follows: 

𝛥𝑉 ≡ 𝑉(𝑅0) − 𝑉(𝑟) = − ∫ 𝐸(𝑟′)𝑑𝑟′

= −

𝑟

𝑅0

𝑅0 𝐸(𝑅0)
𝜌(𝑅0)

𝑟
∫
𝑅0

𝜌(𝑟′)
𝑟′ 𝑑𝑟′

 . 

The radial factor in the denominator of the integral is key to the locality of this technique. 

Regions near the tip (i.e. small 𝑟′) contribute the most to this integral. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D. Method and accuracy of DT-PCS measurements 

i. Additional details for DT-PCS method 

To perform PCS measurements using the STM, the STM tip is first placed within 

tunneling range of the sample using a closed current feedback loop configuration (setpoint 

parameters: Vs = -98 mV, I = 10 pA). The back gate of the sample is set to a voltage for which 

the MATBG sample is metallic. We often use a very large negative gate voltage (e.g. for a Si-

gated device, Vg ~ -60 V), which places the chemical potential of MATBG deep within the 

metallic remote band below the flat bands. This will be used later to determine whether or not 

tip-sample contact has been made. After some time (~10 minutes), once the piezoelectric 

scanner drift has reduced significantly, the current feedback loop is opened and the sample 

voltage is reduced to 1 - 2 mV. Then, the tip is manually displaced in the z-direction by a few 

nanometers, in increments of one angstrom at a time, until the current I increases to a value of 

tens of nanoamps and is stable over several minutes. The exact value of I is logged and used 

as a benchmark for achieving the same transparent barrier conditions for PCS measurements in 

different locations with the same tip. 

ii. Accuracy of DT-PCS 

For tunneling and PCS measurements, we use a passive voltage divider (1:100 for the 

DC component of Vs and 1:1000 for the Vrms lock-in modulation) for increasing the energy 

resolution by reducing the voltage noise from voltage sources. In the circuit diagram depicted in 

Fig. S7a, we use resistors for the voltage divider. For tunneling measurements, since the tip-

sample junction resistance RJ is on the order of gigaohms, the voltage-divider output is well-

approximated by  

𝑉𝑜𝑢𝑡 ≈

𝑅2
𝑅1 + 𝑅2

𝑉𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒 , 

for R2 = 1 kΩ. For the PCS measurement, however, the junction resistance RJ becomes 

comparable to R2, so the voltage across the total device resistance RT (contact resistance RC + 

junction resistance RJ) is 

𝑅2𝑅𝑇
(𝑅1 + 𝑅2)(𝑅𝑇 + 𝑅𝑐𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒) + 𝑅1𝑅2
where Rcable is the cryostat cable resistance (there are two 200 Ω stainless steel cables to and 

𝑉𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒 , 

𝑉𝑇 =

from the device in the dilution refrigerator). 

Comparing 𝑉𝑇 to the voltage expected from a simple voltage divider  

the voltage error in the limit 𝑅1/𝑅2 ≫ 1 is as follows: 

𝑉𝑠 =

𝑅2
𝑅1 + 𝑅2

𝑉𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒 , 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(𝑅1 + 𝑅2)𝑅𝑐𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒 + 𝑅1𝑅2
(𝑅1 + 𝑅2)(𝑅𝑇 + 𝑅𝑐𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒) + 𝑅1𝑅2
Fig. S7b analyzes the RT-dependence of this voltage error. In our measurements, RT is between 

𝑅𝑐𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒 + 𝑅2
𝑅𝑇 + 𝑅𝑐𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒 + 𝑅2

𝑉𝑆 − 𝑉𝑇
𝑉𝑆

𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟  =

  =

≈

 . 

10 kΩ ~ 25 kΩ, indicating that the Andreev gaps 𝛥𝐴𝑅 may be overestimated by as much as 

~10%. 

iii. Tip-induced pressure and strain 

Pressure6 and strain7 influence the electronic properties of twisted bilayer graphene. For 

example, Yankowitz et al.6 showed that GPa pressures are able to induce superconductivity in a 

non-magic-angle sample (1.27°) that did not superconduct at zero pressure. In principle, 

because the narrow magic-angle condition arises from fine-tuning of the energies of the 

interlayer and intralayer hopping processes8, it is possible that applied pressure converts a 

superconducting magic-angle sample into a sample without superconductivity. Hence, it is 

important to consider whether pressure and strain induced by the tip during a PCS 

measurement affects the electronic properties of MATBG. In our study, we can identify that our 

sample is magic-angle through STM topography and spectroscopy, and yet the point-contact 

measurement still shows Andreev reflection, indicating that pressure from the tip did not 

extinguish superconductivity in our devices. Moreover, Fig. S6a shows that the Andreev energy 

scale does not change even when we push the STM tip 5 nm deeper into the sample. 

We note that the remarkable correspondence between DT-STS and DT-PCS in main 

text Fig. 2g seems to indicate that pressure and strain from the tip does not have a significant 

effect on the overall phase diagram of our device. This can be explained by the fact that the 

easily deformable STM tip (the apex of which is mostly copper) bends into the surrounding 

empty space as the tip is pushed into the sample. 

Mesple et al.9 documents the influence of tip-induced strain in twisted bilayer graphene 

in the tunneling regime. Figs. 3a, b, and c in Mesple et al. show a series of topographic images 

at different tunnel resistances (1.75 GΩ, 0.55 GΩ, and 0.15 GΩ) to demonstrate the impact of 

bringing the tip closer to the surface. Under our tip conditions (see Methods for information on 

how we prepare our STM tip), we do not observe the tip-induced strain reported by Mesple et al. 

Fig. S16 shows topographic images at tunneling resistances 20 GΩ and 0.02 GΩ that are 

essentially identical-looking. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK) fitting of the Andreev spectrum between 𝜈 = -2 and 𝜈 

= -3 

To fit PCS spectra, we employ a modified version of the Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk 

(BTK) fitting function, which can also include the possibility of an anisotropic superconducting 

order parameter. Because the Andreev reflection process is sensitive to the phase of the 

superconducting order parameter, the propagation direction of impinging electrons upon a 

normal-superconductor junction, with respect to the crystallographic axes of the superconductor, 

greatly affects the theoretically predicted PCS spectrum. MATBG is a 2D system, and the tip-

sample junctions in PCS are only made along the axis that is normal to the plane (the so-called 

“c-axis”). This forbids contributions of any sign-changing Andreev reflection processes towards 

the measured Andreev spectrum10. 

Andreev reflection spectra of an anisotropic superconductor are characterized by the 

BTK formula10,11, which gives the normalized, dimensionless conductance 𝜎𝑅(𝐸) at the 
quasiparticle energy 𝐸 as a function of the quasiparticle lifetime broadening 𝛤 at a given incident 

angle 𝜃 of an electron: 

𝜎𝑅(𝐸) =  

1 + 𝜏𝑁|Γ+|2 + (𝜏𝑁 − 1)|Γ+Γ−|2
|1 + (𝜏𝑁 − 1)Γ+Γ− exp(𝑖𝜑− − 𝑖𝜑+)|2  . 

Here Γ± =

(𝐸−𝑖Γ)−Ω±
|∆±|

2
 , and 𝛺± = √(𝐸 − 𝑖𝛤)2 − |𝛥±|

. 𝛥+ and 𝛥− are effective pair potentials, 

which are felt by hole-like quasiparticles and electron-like quasiparticles, respectively, and 𝜑+ 

and 𝜑− are their corresponding phases. We use the 1D-BTK limit, where the barrier 

transparency parameter contains no geometrical factors: 

𝜏𝑁 =

1
1 + 𝑍2  . 

In the c-axis PCS analysis, 𝛥+ = 𝛥−, 𝜑+ = 𝜑− and 𝛤+ = 𝛤−. In the nodeless s-wave case (Fig. 

S9b, left panel), the order parameter is isotropic, so pair potentials become 𝛥+ = 𝛥− = 𝛥0. In the 

nodal d-wave case (Fig. S9b, right panel), the order parameter is anisotropic, so the effective 

pair potential is 𝜋-periodic in the azimuthal plane: 

The total conductance is obtained via integration over azimuthal angles: 

 𝛥+ = 𝛥− = 𝛥0 cos(2𝜙).  

𝜎(𝐸) =

2𝜋
∫ 𝜎𝑅𝜏𝑁𝑑𝜙
0
2𝜋
∫ 𝜏𝑁𝑑𝜙
0

  . 

For the spin-triplet case, we consider a 2 x 2 matrix form for the gap function12,13: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
∆̂(𝑘) = (

∆↑↑(𝑘) ∆↑↓(𝑘)
∆↓↑(𝑘) ∆↓↓(𝑘)

)  . 

In an equal-spin-pairing (ESP) spin-triplet (or ferromagnetic) superconductor, ∆↑↑(𝑘) or ∆↓↓(𝑘) =
Δ0(𝑘)  and ∆↑↓(𝑘) = ∆↓↑(𝑘) = 0. In this situation, the DOS of one spin population is given by the 

Bogoliubov-quasiparticle DOS, while the DOS of the other spin population is given by the 

normal-state DOS. 

In an ESP superconductor, the tunneling conductance in the gap is due to the existence 

of the normal-state tunneling channel. This makes the conductance minimum no smaller than 

half of the normal-state DOS. By the same analogy, Andreev reflection occurs only for electrons 

of one spin-type, so the maximum conductance of the Andreev reflection spectrum in the gap 

cannot exceed 1.5 times the normal-state conductance. This is in contrast to the zero-bias 

conductance doubling expected for spin-singlet superconductors.  

In main text Figs. 1e and 1g, the zero-bias conductance of the tunneling gap is much 

lower than half of the background conductance, while in the PCS spectroscopy in Fig. S9c, the 

maximum conductance of the normalized conductance is more than 50% larger than the 

background conductance. These observations rule out an ESP triplet superconductor scenario 

in MATBG. Thus, in the spin-triplet case, we use the opposite spin pairing (OSP) gap function, 

∆̂(𝑘) = (

0
∆(𝜃)

∆(𝜃)
0

). 

The dimensionless conductance 𝜎𝑅↑,↓(𝐸) for each spin and the total conductance 𝜎(𝐸) are12 

𝜎𝑅↑(𝐸) = 𝜎𝑅↓(𝐸) =  

1 + 𝜏𝑁|Γ+|2 + (𝜏𝑁 − 1)|Γ+Γ−|2
|1 + (𝜏𝑁 − 1)Γ+Γ− exp(𝑖𝜑− − 𝑖𝜑+)|2  , 

𝜎(𝐸) =

2𝜋
∫ (𝜎𝑅↑ + 𝜎𝑅↓)𝜏𝑁𝑑𝜙
0

2𝜋
∫ 2𝜏𝑁𝑑𝜙
0

  . 

We use the gap function 𝛥+ = 𝛥− = 𝛥0 cos 𝜙 for the p-wave case and 𝛥+ = 𝛥− = 𝛥0 cos(3𝜙) for 

the f-wave case. The functional form becomes analytically equal to that of the d-wave case for a 

c-axis PCS measurement. Since the d-wave Dynes function fully captures the tunneling 

spectrum calculated from a d-wave BTK theory, the p- or f-wave Dynes function used in 

Supplementary Section B also provide a reasonable model to analyze the tunneling data. 

At finite temperature, the point-contact conductance of the superconducting state 𝜎𝑆(𝑉) 

can be represented by: 

∞

𝜎𝑆(𝑉) = 𝜎𝑁 ∫ 𝑑𝐸

−∞

𝑑𝑓(𝜀)
|
𝑑𝜀
𝜀=𝐸−𝑒𝑉

 𝜎(𝐸) . 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We compensate for the normal-state tip-sample resistance and non-ohmic electrode-sample 

contact resistances (or ‘spreading resistance’) by normalizing each spectrum using data 

obtained when the sample is in the normal state at B = 0.5 T > Bc. The normalized conductance 

can be represented as: 

𝜎𝑆(𝑉)
𝜎𝑁(𝑉)
where 𝜎𝑆, 𝜎𝑁, 𝜎𝐶 and 𝐺 are the tip-sample junction conductance in the superconducting state, 

𝜎𝑁 + 𝜎𝐶
𝜎𝑆 + 𝜎𝐶

𝐺(𝑉)
𝐺𝑁(𝑉)

=

 , 

⋅

the tip-sample junction conductance in the normal state, sample-electrode contact conductance, 

and the total (contact + junction) conductance, respectively. 

We can acquire the normalized point-contact conductance 𝜎𝑆/𝜎𝑁 and rule out contact 

conductance effects (that is, omitting the second multiplicative factor above) when the 

contribution of the contact conductance is dominant in the second multiplicative factor above. 

We show the tip-sample junction conductance to be much smaller than the sample 

contact conductance by using the normalized zero-bias conductance as a direct indicator of the 

quality of our sample contact. In the limit of a perfectly transparent tip-sample junction (𝑍 = 0) at 

T = 0 and 𝛤 = 0,  

Experimentally, we find a smaller value for this ratio: 

𝜎𝑆(𝑉 = 0 )/𝜎𝑁(𝑉  =  0) = 2.  

𝜎𝑆(𝑉 = 0 )/𝜎𝑁(𝑉  =  0) ≈ 1.6.  

Thus, in the worst-case scenario, 𝜎𝐶 > 3𝜎𝑁, which indicates that contact conductance 

dominates junction conductance in the second multiplicative factor, and normalized 

conductance  

𝐺(𝑉)
𝐺𝑁(𝑉)

≈

𝜎𝑆(𝑉)
𝜎𝑁(𝑉)

 . 

A comparison between the nodeless s-wave fit and the nodal-superconductor fit is 

depicted Fig. S9c. There are two dip features near Vs = ±0.5 mV that are not captured by the 

BTK model, which are thought to originate from critical current effects14. Besides this shared 

discrepancy, both fits match the measured data at large bias voltages, but only the nodal fit 

matches near zero bias. Thus, these fits of the Andreev spectrum, considered in conjunction 

with fits of the tunneling spectra presented in previous sections and in the main text, indicate a 

nodal nature of the superconducting order parameter in this system. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Temperature-dependence of the excess current in PCS data 

For a perfectly transparent (𝑍 = 0) point-contact junction between a normal-metal tip and 

a superconducting sample, Andreev reflection results in a two-fold increase in the conductance 

at zero-bias, measured with respect to the normal state, due to the conversion of impinging 

electrons into transmitted Cooper pairs and reflected holes at the boundary. In the point-contact 

measurement in ballistic limit, this process enhances the current flowing through the circuit 

when 𝑉 > 𝛥, which is called the “excess current”15. According to the BTK theory, the excess 

current in an isotropic BCS superconductor should be proportional to 𝛥𝜎𝑁, which is determined 

by the barrier strength parameter 𝑍. The data in main text Fig. 3c shows a temperature-

dependent dip in the normal conductance around Vs = ±0.75 mV, which makes it difficult to 

extract the excess current contribution directly from the measured sample current. In addition, 

we would like to neglect critical current effects described in Section E at higher bias voltages, 

which would also impede the extraction of the pure excess current from Andreev reflection. 

In order to remove the combined conductance contribution from the normal-state and the 

critical current effect in the excess current, we estimate the excess current at Vs = 2𝛥𝐴𝑅, as 

extracted from the BTK fit performed at optimal doping, base temperature, and zero magnetic 

field. The excess current, shown in main text Fig. 3c, makes use of an estimate of the normal-

state conductance via a linear interpolation between two spectra taken when MATBG is 

metallic: one taken at 200 mT and 299 mK, and one taken at 0 T and T = 1.3 K (Fig. S10a). 

These spectra do not show signatures of Andreev reflection. By subtracting each linearly 

interpolated normal conductance estimate from each Andreev spectrum at a given temperature, 

and subsequently integrating this new spectrum from Vs = 0 V to Vs = 2𝛥𝐴𝑅, the excess current 

is calculated as follows: 

𝐼𝑒𝑥𝑐(𝑉𝑠) = 𝐼𝑆(𝑉𝑠) − 𝐼𝑁(𝑉𝑠) = ∫ (𝜎𝑆(𝑉′) − 𝜎𝑁(𝑉′)𝑑𝑉′

𝑉𝑠

 . 

0

This plot shows a linear temperature-dependence of the excess current in MATBG 𝐼𝑒𝑥𝑐 ∼

(1 −

𝑇
𝑇𝐶

), which does not agree with the isotropic BCS expectation, where 𝐼𝑒𝑥𝑐,𝐵𝐶𝑆 ∼ √1 −

𝑇
𝑇𝐶

. To 

confirm that this linearity shown in main text Fig. 3d does not come from the normal-state 

conductance interpolation, we plot the 𝐼𝑆(𝑉𝑠 = 2𝛥𝐴𝑅) in Fig. S10b, which also shows a linear-in-T 

dependence of the excess current. 

In addition, we extract the energy gap 𝛥𝐴𝑅 using a BTK fitting analysis of the 

temperature-dependent point-contact spectra shown in Fig. 2d of the main text. We employ a 

similar background subtraction to the second method discussed above, this time dividing by the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
linearly interpolated normal-state conductance spectrum for each Andreev spectrum (the BTK 

model accepts the dimensionless input 𝐺/𝐺𝑁(𝑉)). We fix the barrier transparency parameter 𝑍 = 

0.1, which was extracted from the base-temperature Andreev spectrum (Fig. S10c). Fig. 3d of 

the main text show 𝛥𝐴𝑅 extracted from this BTK fitting analysis, where error bars represent one 

standard deviation. We find excellent agreement between the Andreev energy gap estimate of 

Tc ≈ 1.1 K and the linear excess current estimate of Tc ≈ 1.15 K, which provides internal 

consistency for our interpretation. 

We note that the temperature values in Fig. 2d of the main text are readings from a 

calibrated RuO2 thermometer embedded in the STM head a few centimeters away from the 

sample. The T = 1.3 K and T = 300 mK PCS measurements are steady-state temperatures. 

However, the PCS measurements at intermediate temperatures are not steady-state, but are 

acquired while slowly cooling the microscope from 1.3 K to base temperature (i.e. spectra for 

intermediate temperatures are acquired without settling at each individual temperature). 

However, as soon as the thermometer value reached 300 mK, the measured PCS zero-bias 

conductance immediately stopped increasing in intensity (i.e. the Andreev spectrum stopped 

changing), implying good agreement between the sample and thermometer temperatures. 

G. Spatial dependence of tunneling spectroscopy on AA sites and AB/BA sites 

To examine the spatial dependence of the tunneling spectroscopy, we acquired STS on 

different AA sites within a region of our device with a uniform twist angle and strain condition. 

The tunneling spectra in Fig. S12 b-e do not show significant spatial dependence. The energy 

and the shape of the tunneling gaps are similar to each other. These are indicative of the 

homogeneity of our spectroscopic measurements across the moiré superlattice, and helps us 

correlate our measurements to those of global transport measurements. We also measured 

tunneling spectra on AB/BA sites in Device B (Fig. S13a and S13b). Tunneling spectroscopy on 

AB sites also show a tunneling gap between -3 < 𝜈 < -2 that is quite similar to that observed on 

AA sites. Figs. S13c-e show the results of a spectroscopy line cut across an AA site (from an 

AB site to a BA site). The size of the -3 < 𝜈 < -2 tunneling gap is independent of the spatial 

position. 

H. Pseudogap regime for -3 < 𝜈 < -2 at high temperatures 

At millikelvin temperatures, we observe a V-shaped gap in STS that is coincident with an 

Andreev reflection spectrum in PCS within the superconducting density regime of MATBG. In 

several samples, we have identified a suppression of the DOS at the Fermi level in this density 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
range at temperatures above the critical transition temperature of MATBG. Figs. S14a-c show 

tunneling dI/dV(Vs,Vg) acquired at high temperatures, all above 4.1 K, that show a suppression 

in the valence band at EF. We interpret this suppression as a signature of a high-temperature 

pseudogap phase. 

I. Topographic analysis of MATBG aligned to hBN 

We acquired STM topographic images (main text Fig. 5b) at various values of the 

sample bias and gate voltage in order to distinguish the G-G and G-hBN moiré patterns. When 

the MATBG flat bands are emptied (Vg = -8 V), topographic images of the filled states highlight 

the G-hBN moiré (main text Fig. 5b; bottom left). This image shows the typical triangular lattice 

of darkened regions (carbon-boron sites) that are seen when monolayer graphene is aligned to 

hBN16–20, while the AA sites of the G-G moiré are significantly less prominent because the 

spectral weight of the flat bands (which are empty) are highly localized to the AA sites. On the 

other hand, when the MATBG valence flat band is filled (Vg = 0 V), the AA sites of the G-G 

moiré are highly prominent (main text Fig. 5b, top right). This image shows the typical triangular 

lattice of bright regions (AA sites) that is seen in twisted bilayer graphene. From the moiré 

length scale seen in these images, we deduce that the G-G twist angle is 1.08°, while the G-

hBN twist angle is 0.5 ± 0.1° (assuming a graphene-hBN atomic lattice constant ratio of 

1.01721). 

Overall, these topographic images show that when the G-G and G-hBN moiré length 

scales are similar, perfect commensurability between the two moiré patterns is a physically 

possible scenario, in contrast to the formation of a super-superlattice documented previously22. 

Theoretical studies21,23,24 have suggested that moiré-commensurability is important for realizing 

a zero-magnetic-field Chern insulating state, which we discuss in Section J. 

J. Zero-field Chern insulator in moiré-commensurate MATBG aligned to hBN 

In the main text, we noted that the insulating gap at 𝜈 = +3 has a Chern number C = 1. 

We provide evidence for this claim here through a method presented in Refs.25,26. Figs. S15a,d 

show two dI/dV(Vs, Vg) data sets (acquired on AAb sites) from two similar regions of Device C 

that are both moiré-commensurate, and Figs. S15b,c are zoomed-in dI/dV(Vs, Vg) near 𝜈 = +3. 

Fig. S15e shows the 𝜈 = +3 gap moving to higher gate voltages as the out-of-plane magnetic 
field is increased from 0 T to 4 T. Since 𝑑𝑛
𝑑𝐵

 (where 𝛷0 is the magnetic flux quantum) 

𝜎𝑥𝑦
𝑒

=

=

𝐶
𝛷0

for an insulating phase27, we conclude the 𝜈 = +3 gap corresponds to a C = +1 insulating phase 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
at zero magnetic field, in agreement with a previous transport study28. In addition, we also 

observe an insulating phase with C = -2 of unknown origin. 

K. Summary of the superconducting states in six devices 

A summary of the experimental data of the superconducting states shown in this study are listed 

here: 

Device 

Angle (°) 

Vg (V) 

Tc (K) 

Bc (mT) 

2ΔT (meV) 

2ΔAR (meV) 

A 

A' 

B 

D 

F 

G 

1.13 

1.01 

1.06 

1.06 

1.1 

1.17 

-25.8 

1.8 

-22.8 

1.2 

50 

2.8 
(2ΔT/kBTc = 27) 

0.6 
(2ΔAR/kBTc = 5.8) 

-25.6 

-30.5 

-25.6 

200 

2.9 

1.3 

-30 

1.2 

75 

1.4 

0.6 

L. Tunneling and PCS parameters for main text figures 

The tunneling setpoint and PCS parameters for the main text figures are listed here: 

Figure 

Vs (mV) 

I (nA) 

Vg (V) 

Vrms (mV) 

frms (Hz) 

T (mK) 

B (T) 

-25.8 

-70 

-80 

-80 

-80 

-80 

-80 

-80 

1b 

1c 

1d 

1e (upper) 

1e (lower) 

1f 

1g (both) 

2b, 2c, 2e, 
2g-PCS 

0.3 

0.8 

1.8 

1.8 

1.8 

1.5 

1.5 

0.5 

1262.7 

0.15 

0.15 

0.05 

0.2 

0.06 

0.05 

1262.7 

1262.7 

1262.7 

4121 

4121 

381.7 

250 

200 

200 

200 

200 

200 

270 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2d, 2f 

2g-STS 

-80 

3e 

4a 

4b 

5a 

5b 

-100 

-80 

-70 

-80 

-80 

-80 

-80 

-400 

-300 

-100 

-300 

-100 

5c-STS 

-80 

5c-PCS 

0.5 

0.5 

1.8 

1.7 

1.5 

1.5 

1.5 

1.0 

0.1 

0.01 

0.01 

0.01 

0.01 

1.5 

8 

0 

0 

-8 

-8 

0.05 

381.7 

0.5 

0.5 

0.15 

0.15 

0.15 

0.2 

0.2 

0.2 

1262.7 

381.7 

1262.7 

1262.7 

1262.7 

4121 

4121 

4121 

280 

4.1 

200 

185 

250 

200 

200 

200 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0.5 

1 

0 

3 

6 

1 

0.2 

381.7 

381.7 

190 

255 

0 

0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

1.  Wu, F. & Das Sarma, S. Identification of superconducting pairing symmetry in twisted 

bilayer graphene using in-plane magnetic field and strain. Phys. Rev. B 99, 220507 (2019). 

2.  Deutscher, G. Andreev--Saint-James reflections: A probe of cuprate superconductors. Rev. 

Mod. Phys. 77, 109–135 (2005). 

3.  Dynes, R. C., Narayanamurti, V. & Garno, J. P. Direct Measurement of Quasiparticle-

Lifetime Broadening in a Strong-Coupled Superconductor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 1509–1512 

(1978). 

4.  Ozyuzer, L., Zasadzinski, J. F., Gray, K. E., Kendziora, C. & Miyakawa, N. Absence of 

pseudogap in heavily overdoped from tunneling spectroscopy of break junctions. Europhys. 

Lett. 58, 589–595 (2002). 

5.  Fischer, Ø., Kugler, M., Maggio-Aprile, I., Berthod, C. & Renner, C. Scanning tunneling 

spectroscopy of high-temperature superconductors. Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 353–419 (2007). 

6.  Yankowitz, M. et al. Tuning superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene. Science 363, 

1059 (2019). 

7.  Huder, L. et al. Electronic Spectrum of Twisted Graphene Layers under Heterostrain. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 120, 156405 (2018). 

8.  Bistritzer, R. & MacDonald, A. H. Moiré bands in twisted double-layer graphene. Proc. Natl. 

Acad. Sci. 108, 12233 (2011). 

9.  Mesple, F. et al. Heterostrain Determines Flat Bands in Magic-Angle Twisted Graphene 

Layers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 126405 (2021). 

10. Kashiwaya, S., Tanaka, Y., Koyanagi, M. & Kajimura, K. Theory for tunneling spectroscopy 

of anisotropic superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 53, 2667–2676 (1996). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. Daghero, D., Tortello, M., Pecchio, P., Stepanov, V. A. & Gonnelli, R. S. Point-contact 

Andreev-reflection spectroscopy in anisotropic superconductors: The importance of 

directionality (Review Article). Low Temp. Phys. 39, 199–210 (2013). 

12. Yamashiro, M., Tanaka, Y., Tanuma, Y. & Kashiwaya, S. Theory of tunneling conductance 

for normal metal/insulator/triplet superconductor junction. Phys. C Supercond. 293, 239–243 

(1997). 

13. Li, H. & Yang, X. Tunneling spectrum in triplet p-wave superconductor-silicene junctions. 

Eur. Phys. J. B 92, 275 (2019). 

14. Sheet, G., Mukhopadhyay, S. & Raychaudhuri, P. Role of critical current on the point-

contact Andreev reflection spectra between a normal metal and a superconductor. Phys. 

Rev. B 69, 134507 (2004). 

15. Blonder, G. E., Tinkham, M. & Klapwijk, T. M. Transition from metallic to tunneling regimes 

in superconducting microconstrictions: Excess current, charge imbalance, and supercurrent 

conversion. Phys. Rev. B 25, 4515–4532 (1982). 

16. Xue, J. et al. Scanning tunnelling microscopy and spectroscopy of ultra-flat graphene on 

hexagonal boron nitride. Nat. Mater. 10, 282–285 (2011). 

17. Decker, R. et al. Local Electronic Properties of Graphene on a BN Substrate via Scanning 

Tunneling Microscopy. Nano Lett. 11, 2291–2295 (2011). 

18. Jung, J., DaSilva, A. M., MacDonald, A. H. & Adam, S. Origin of band gaps in graphene on 

hexagonal boron nitride. Nat. Commun. 6, 6308 (2015). 

19. Freitag, N. M. et al. Electrostatically Confined Monolayer Graphene Quantum Dots with 

Orbital and Valley Splittings. Nano Lett. 16, 5798–5805 (2016). 

20. Yankowitz, M., Watanabe, K., Taniguchi, T., San-Jose, P. & LeRoy, B. J. Pressure-induced 

commensurate stacking of graphene on boron nitride. Nat. Commun. 7, 13168 (2016). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21. Shi, J., Zhu, J. & MacDonald, A. H. Moiré commensurability and the quantum anomalous 

Hall effect in twisted bilayer graphene on hexagonal boron nitride. Phys. Rev. B 103, 

075122 (2021). 

22. Wong, D. et al. Local spectroscopy of moiré-induced electronic structure in gate-tunable 

twisted bilayer graphene. Phys. Rev. B 92, 155409 (2015). 

23. Zhang, Y.-H., Mao, D. & Senthil, T. Twisted bilayer graphene aligned with hexagonal boron 

nitride: Anomalous Hall effect and a lattice model. Phys. Rev. Res. 1, 033126 (2019). 

24. Lin, X., Su, K. & Ni, J. Misalignment instability in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene on 

hexagonal boron nitride. 2D Mater. 8, 025025 (2021). 

25. Nuckolls, K. P. et al. Strongly correlated Chern insulators in magic-angle twisted bilayer 

graphene. Nature 588, 610–615 (2020). 

26. Choi, Y. et al. Correlation-driven topological phases in magic-angle twisted bilayer 

graphene. Nature 589, 536–541 (2021). 

27. Streda, P. Theory of quantised Hall conductivity in two dimensions. J. Phys. C Solid State 

Phys. 15, L717–L721 (1982). 

28. Serlin, M. et al. Intrinsic quantized anomalous Hall effect in a moiré heterostructure. Science 

(2019) doi:10.1126/science.aay5533. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S1 

Figure S1 | Two additional observations of the tunneling gaps near 𝜈 = -2 and between -3 

< 𝜈 < -2. a, Tunneling dI/dV(Vs, Vg) and spectroscopy line cut at Vg = -22.7 V acquired at the 

center of an AA site in Device E (angle : 1.10°) at zero magnetic field. An insulating gap with 

Coulomb charging effects opens near Vg = -15 V and closes near Vg = -19 V (i.e. surrounding 𝜈 

= -2). A second gap reopens below 𝜈 = -2 and persists to near 𝜈 = -3. The gap between -3 < 𝜈 < 

-2 is less clear due to the slightly compromised tip condition. b, Similar tunneling dI/dV(Vs, Vg) 

and spectroscopy line cut at Vg = -26.2 V acquired at the center of an AA site in Device F 

(angle : 1.10°, strain : 0.1%) at zero magnetic field. A gap with Coulomb charging effects opens 

near Vg = -18 V and closes near Vg = -23 V (i.e. surrounding 𝜈 = -2). A second gap reopens 

below 𝜈 = -2 and persists to near 𝜈 = -3. Between -3 < 𝜈 < -2, spectra show prominent 

coherence peaks that flank both sides of the gap. In both spectroscopy line cuts in a and b, the 

tunneling gaps do not show conventional s-wave features. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S2 

Figure S2 | Large Andreev energy gap in point-contact spectroscopy in Device D. a, Point-

contact spectra G(Vs) in Device D (angle : 1.06°) at T = 200 mK, B = 0 T, and at nine gate 

voltages between Vg = -26 V and Vg = -34 V. In this device, the Andreev spectrum onsets 

smoothly, widening in energy to an optimal doping near Vg = -30.5 V, and then closes. b, Point-

contact spectroscopy G(Vs,Vg) in Device D at four magnetic-field strengths between 0 T and 300 

mT. The critical magnetic field, as measured by the Andreev spectrum, is slightly higher than 

200 mT. A persistent zero-bias suppression at 300 mT may indicate residual resistance in either 

the tip-sample junction or the sample contact electrode. c, BTK fitting analysis of the normalized 

zero-field Andreev spectrum at optimal doping, fit with s-wave and nodal gap symmetries. d, 

Extracted Andreev energy gaps 𝛥𝐴𝑅 as a function of gate voltage Vg from s-wave and nodal fits, 

which show an expected dome shape. The gap in this device reaches an optimal value of 

𝛥𝐴𝑅,𝑠−𝑤𝑎𝑣𝑒 = 0.50 meV and 𝛥𝐴𝑅,𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑎𝑙 = 0.71 meV at filling 𝜈 = -2.44. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S3 

Figure S3 | Dynes-function fitting analysis of the tunneling gap between -3 < 𝜈 < -2. a, s-

wave-superconductor fit (left) and nodal-superconductor fit (right) of the tunneling spectrum 

dI/dV(Vs) at Vg = -25.6 V in Device B using the Dynes function. The energy gap 𝛥 and the 

quasiparticle lifetime broadening 𝛤 are free parameters. b, same as a, but at Vg = -26.2 V in 

Device F. In both cases, nodal-SC fits capture spectroscopic features better than the s-wave 

fits. c, BCS s-wave fit of tunneling data on a superconducting Al(100) surface at base 

temperature using the Dynes function. 𝛥, 𝛤, and T are all free fitting parameters. Aluminum has 

a superconducting transition temperature similar to MATBG. The broadening observed in this 

tunneling spectra was used as a calibration of the energy resolution (~50 μeV) of our homebuilt 

dilution-refrigerator STM. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S4 

Figure S4 | Dynes-function fitting analysis of the low-energy parts of tunneling spectra at 

various gate voltages throughout the -3 < 𝝂 < -2 gap. a, Tunneling dI/dV(Vs) spectra on an 

AA site in Device A at 200 mK and zero magnetic field, shown for gate voltages between Vg = -

20 V and Vg = -40 V. Curves are offset by 10 nS for clarity. The dashed-line box highlights a set 

of gaps between -3 < 𝜈 < -2. b, s-wave superconductor fits and c, nodal-superconductor fits of 

the low-energy part of eleven tunneling spectra taken from a from Vg = -24 V to Vg  = -28 V. 

Curves are offset by 6.7 nS for clarity. For evaluating the goodness of each fit, 𝜒2 divided by the 

number of degrees of freedom (𝜒2/𝑑𝑓) is evaluated for each curve. When comparing s-wave 

and nodal fits performed on the same spectrum at every gate voltage, the nodal fits are 

consistently superior, with each nodal fit showing a lower 𝜒2/𝑑𝑓 value than the corresponding s-

wave fit. d, same as b, but with quasiparticle lifetime broadening 𝛤 of nodal fit for corresponding 

Vg.  e, quasiparticle lifetime broadening factors 𝛤 estimated from s-wave fits and nodal fits. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S5 

Figure S5 | The local nature of density-tuned point-contact spectroscopy (DT-PCS). a, 

Schematic diagram of the simple intuition model for the locality of our PCS method. A voltage 𝑉 

is placed on an STM tip of contact radius 𝑅0, which touches the center of a circular sample of 

radius 𝑅, whose outer perimeter is held at ground (𝑉 = 0 V). b, Nomarski differential 

interference contrast image of Device A. c, Point-contact G(Vg) at Vs = 0 V, taken in aligned 

Device C. A very weak suppression of the conductance is observed at 𝜈 = -1 at this location. d, 

Point-contact G(Vg) at Vs = 0 V, taken in aligned Device C. A strong, nearly complete 

suppression of the conductance is observed at 𝜈 = -1 at this location, roughly 200 nm away from 

the data location in c. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S6 

Figure S6 | Point-contact measurement vs. tip depth. a, Point-contact spectra G(Vs) 

obtained at Vg = -30 V, B = 0 T, and T = 200 mK in Device D. Between each spectrum, the STM 

was vertically displaced by 1-2 nm. Here, Δz is the tip height relative to the bottom curve (i.e., 

the largest tip-sample separation shown). As the STM tip comes into contact with the 

superconducting MATBG sample, the V-shaped dip transforms into a double-peaked Andreev 

spectrum. The barrier strength parameter Z for this tip contact is larger than that of main text 

Fig. 2 but similar to that of Fig. S2. The energy difference of the two peaks of the Andreev 

spectral feature which is around ~2Δc and is independent of the vertical tip displacement over 

Δz ~ 5 nm (spectra labeled “3 nm” to “8 nm”). b, Point-contact spectra G(Vs) obtained at Vg = -

30.4 V, B = 0 T, and T = 265 mK in Device G. Larger values of Δ𝑧 correspond to the tip 

displaced deeper into the surface. The evolution of the PCS with Δ𝑧 is nonmonotonic, possibly 

because the tip deforms as it is pressed into the surface. c, PCS line cuts at select values of Δ𝑧 

indicated by the dashed lines in b. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S7 

Figure S7 | Circuit diagram for the point-contact measurement. a, Circuit diagram for the 

point-contact measurement. R1 = 100 kΩ and R2 = 1 kΩ for the 1:100 voltage divider for the DC 

source voltage Vsource, Rcable = 400 Ω is the cryostat cable resistance, and RC and RJ are the 

electrode-device contact resistance and the tip-sample junction resistance, respectively. We 

refer to the series combination of RC and RJ as RT. In PCS, RT is comparable to R2, so the 

output voltage of the voltage divider Vout can be smaller than 1/100 of the source voltage. b, The 

voltage error with respect to the expected sample bias voltage Vs = Vsource/100, plotted as a 

function of RT. In our measurements, RT falls within the range between 10 kΩ and 25 kΩ, which 

may cause overestimation of Andreev energy gaps by ~10%. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S8 

Figure S8 | Tunneling spectroscopy and point-contact spectroscopy at -3 < 𝜈 < -2 in 

Device A’. a, Side-by-side tunneling dI/dV(Vs, Vg) into an AA site and point-contact G(Vs, Vg) in 

the same location in Device A’. dI/dV(Vs, Vg) shows the opening and closing of the correlated 

insulating and superconducting phases at the Fermi level. G(Vs, Vg) allows us to differentiate 

between the origins of these two tunneling gap region, where Andreev reflection (orange peak 

near EF) occurs only in the superconducting phase, in contrast to the gapped spectroscopic 

feature (purple dip near EF) that marks the onset of the correlated insulating phase. b, Tunneling 

spectroscopy of the correlated insulator gap at Vg= -18 V. c, Tunneling spectroscopy of the 

superconducting gap at Vg= -22.8 V. Point-contact spectrum (inset in c) of the corresponding 

tunneling gap of the superconducting phase shows a clear difference between the two energy 

scales 𝛥𝐴𝑅 and 𝛥𝑇. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S9 

Figure S9 | Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK) fitting analysis of the Andreev reflection 

spectrum at -3 < 𝜈 < -2. a, Point-contact spectrum G(Vs) at Vg = -21 V at B = 0 T (blue) and B = 

0.5 T (red) in Device A’. The blue curve is peaked at zero-bias, indicative of the Andreev 

reflection process at B = 0 T. The red curve shows a weak minimum at zero-bias, indicative of 

residual resistance in the tip-sample junction or the sample contact, as the sample has entered 

the normal state at B = 0.5 T. Normalized data 𝐺/𝐺𝑁 for the BTK model is obtained by dividing 
the 0 T superconducting-state data by the 0.5 T normal-state data. b, Comparison of BTK 

simulations of c-axis transport between a normal-metal tip and an s-wave (left) or nodal (right) 

superconducting sample, plotted for various barrier strength parameters 𝑍. The s-wave model 

shows a flat-top-shaped spectrum when 𝐸  <  𝛥 with a doubled conductance at 𝑍  = 0, while the 

nodal-superconductor (nodal-SC) model shows a point-shaped spectrum with a doubled 

conductance only at 𝐸 = 0 and 𝑍 = 0. c, BTK-model fitting of a normalized spectrum from the 

data in a, using an s-wave (left) and a nodal (right) superconducting order parameter. 𝛥, 𝛤, and 

𝑍 are free fitting parameters. Red dashed-line boxes highlight the apex of the peaks in each 

plot, where there is the largest discrepancy between the s-wave and the nodal fits (insets). In 

addition, the broadening in the s-wave scenario is large (𝛤 > 0.2𝛥), while the broadening in the 

nodal scenario is reasonable (𝛤 ≈ 0.08𝛥). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S10 

Figure S10 | Temperature-dependent (BTK) fitting analysis of the Andreev reflection 

spectrum at -3 < 𝜈 < -2. a, Normal state point-contact spectra G(Vs) estimated via linear 

interpolation between a spectrum taken in Device A’ at T = 299 mK, B = 250 mT and a spectrum 

taken at T = 1.3 K, B = 0 T. The excess current depicted in main text Fig. 3d is calculated by 

subtracting the integral of each Andreev spectrum with respect to the bias voltage from the 

integral of these interpolated normal-state spectra. b, Temperature dependence of the 

superconducting-state current Is at V = 2𝛥0, where 𝛥0= 0.3 meV is the gap size extracted from 

the PCS data at 299 mK. This shows a linear relationship between Is and T. c, BTK fits of the 

normalized PCS spectra at T = 299 mK, used to estimate the barrier strength parameter 𝑍 in s-

wave (left) and nodal (right) superconductor scenarios, with free fitting parameters 𝛥, 𝛤 and 𝑍. 

 Nodal superconductor fits better than s-wave. Thus, we use nodal superconductor fits with Z ~ 

0.1 extracted from this fit for temperature dependent BTK analysis in main text Fig. 3c.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S11 

Figure S11 | Tunneling spectroscopy at 1 T in Device B and comparison of tunneling 

spectra at various magnetic fields. a, Tunneling dI/dV(Vs, Vg) and spectroscopy line cuts 

acquired at the center of an AA site in Device B for Vg = -19 V to Vg = -34 V and for B⊥ = 1 T. 

Curves are offset by 7.5 nS for clarity. Although this is above the critical magnetic field for 

superconductivity in MATBG, we observe a suppression of the zero-bias conductance, 

indicating the presence of the high-field pseudogap state discussed in the main text between -3 

< 𝜈 < -2. Initial tunneling parameters: Vs = -80 mV, I = 1500 pA, Vrms = 0.2 mV at 4.121 kHz, T = 

200 mK. b, Direct comparison of tunneling spectra dI/dV(Vs), normalized for their linear 

background, observed in Device A at Vg = -25 V. Only the spectrum observed at B⊥= 0 T was 

acquired in the superconducting state. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S12 

Figure S12 | Tunneling spectroscopy at the center of different AA sites. a, Topographic 

image of Device A. b, Tunneling dI/dV(Vs, V g) and dI/dV(V s) specra from an AA site, obtained at 

B = 0 T in Device A for Vg = -20 V to Vg = -40 V, obtained at the spot labeled “A” in a. c-e, same 

as b, but for spot B (c), spot C (d), and spot D (e) obtained at B⊥ = 0.5 T. In b-e, curves are 

offset for clarity by 10 nS, 12.8 nS,16 nS and 12.8 nS, respectively. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S13 

Figure S13 | Tunneling spectroscopy at AA and AB(BA) site, and spatial dependence of 

the -3 < 𝝂 < -2 tunneling gap. a, Tunneling dI/dV(Vs, V g) obtained from an AA site in Device B’’ 

(angle : 1.07°). b, same as a, but from an AB (or BA) site. Both show tunneling gaps at -3 < 𝜈 < 

-2. c, Topographic image near AA site in Device A. d, Line cut of dI/dV(Vs) along the blue line 

drawn in c at Vg = -25.8 V at B⊥ = 0.5 T. Tunneling gap sizes are almost independent on the 

location. Gray dashed lines highlight the location of the AB(BA) site (distance = 0 nm) and the 

AA site (distance = 6 nm). e, dI/dV(Vs) spectra at AA site (top), and dI/dV(Vs) spectra at AB(BA) 

site (bottom). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S14 

Figure S14 | Tunneling spectroscopy of the pseudogap phase at temperatures above 4 K. 

a, Tunneling dI/dV(Vs,Vg) acquired at the center of an AA site in Device A'' (0.99°) at zero 

magnetic field and T = 4.1 K. A spectral suppression near EF appears in the valence flat band 

around 𝜈 < -2, which we attribute to a high-temperature pseudogap state at this temperature. b, 

Tunneling dI/dV(Vs,Vg) acquired at the center of an AA site in Device E' (very nearly the same 

area as Device E millikelvin data; 1.01°) at zero magnetic field and T = 6.7 K. A spectral 

suppression near EF appears in the valence flat band around -3 < 𝜈 < -2, which we attribute to 

the pseudogap state. c, Tunneling dI/dV(Vs,Vg) acquired at the center of an AA site in Device B' 

(different area in Device B; 1.08°) at zero magnetic field and T = 4.2 K. A gap-like spectral 

suppression near EF appears in the valence flat band around -3 < 𝜈 ≤ -2, which we attribute to 

the pseudogap state. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S15 

Figure S15 | Tunneling spectroscopy and Chern characterization of moiré-commensurate 

MATBG aligned to hBN. a, Tunneling dI/dV(Vs,Vg) acquired at the center of an AAb site in a 

moiré-commensurate region of Device C (1.08° G-G twist angle, 0.1% G-G interlayer strain, 0.5 

± 0.1° G-hBN twist angle). A 𝐶2-symmetry-broken gap, a correlated insulator gap, and a 

correlated Chern C = +1 gap appear near 𝜈 = 0, +2, and +3, respectively. b, Zoomed-in 

dI/dV(Vs,Vg) from a to highlight the observed zero-field Chern C = +1 gap. c, Zoomed in 

dI/dV(Vs,Vg) from d to highlight the observed zero-field Chern C = +1 gap. d, Tunneling 

dI/dV(Vs,Vg) acquired at the center of an AAb site in Device C’ (same as Device C, at a different 

sample location; 1.10°. A 𝐶2-symmetry-broken gap and a correlated Chern C = +1 gap appear 

near 𝜈 = 0 and +3, respectively. e, Tunneling dI/dV(Vs,Vg) at five different magnetic-field 

strengths between 0 T and 4 T, at around 𝜈 = +3. We observe a correlated Chern C = +1 state 

at and emanating from 𝜈 = +3. We also observe weaker signatures of a topological gapped 

phase with Chern number -2, which is first resolved at 1 T. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE S16 

Figure S16 | Topographic images at different tunneling setpoints. a, Topographic image of 

Device G’ (1.18°) at I = 10 pA, Vs = -200 mV (20 GΩ tunnel resistance). b, Same as a except at 

I = 500 pA, Vs = -10 mV (0.02 GΩ tunnel resistance). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
