1
2
0
2

p
e
S
7

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
5
5
3
3
0
.
9
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Draft version March 2, 2022
Typeset using LATEX modern style in AASTeX63

Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoﬂares: Modeling
Sherry Chhabra ,1, 2 James A. Klimchuk ,2 and Dale E. Gary 1

1Center for Solar-Terrestrial Research, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102, USA
2NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA

(Received; Revised; Accepted September 1, 2021)

Submitted to ApJ

ABSTRACT

There is a wide consensus that the ubiquitous presence of magnetic reconnection
events and the associated impulsive heating (nanoﬂares) is a strong candidate for
solving the solar coronal heating problem. Whether nanoﬂares accelerate particles
to high energies like full-sized ﬂares is unknown. We investigate this question by
studying the type III radio bursts that the nanoﬂares may produce on closed loops.
The characteristic frequency-drifts that type III bursts exhibit can be detected using
a novel application of the time-lag technique developed by Viall & Klimchuk (2012)
even when there are multiple overlapping events. We present a simple numerical
model that simulates the expected radio emission from nanoﬂares in an active region
(AR), which we use to test and calibrate the technique. We ﬁnd that in the case of
closed loops the frequency spectrum of type III bursts is expected to be extremely
steep such that signiﬁcant emission is produced at a given frequency only for a rather
narrow range of loop lengths. We also ﬁnd that the signature of bursts in the time lag
signal diminishes as: (1) the variety of participating loops within that range increases;
(2) the occurrence rate of bursts increases; (3) the duration of bursts increases; and
(4) the brightness of bursts decreases relative to noise. In addition, our model suggests
a possible origin of type I bursts as a natural consequence of type III emission in a
closed-loop geometry.

1. INTRODUCTION

Understanding the physics of the heating of the solar corona to several million
K, three orders of magnitude higher than the observed surface temperature, is a
challenge that has stirred solar research for decades. The high temperature of the
active region corona is maintained by an input energy ﬂux rate of ≈ 107 ergs cm−2

Corresponding author: Sherry Chhabra
sc787@njit.edu

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Chhabra et al.

s−1, and that of the quiet Sun by ≈ 3 × 105 ergs cm−2 s−1, which is the energy
ﬂux required to oﬀset the radiation losses, mainly in the form of extreme ultraviolet
(EUV) and X-rays (Withbroe & Noyes 1977). One of the plausible mechanisms that
may be responsible for this comprehensive phenomenon is the energy produced from
dissipation of waves (Alfv´en or magneto-acoustic). This is referred to as alternating
current (AC) heating (see Alfv´en 1947; Parker 1958; Osterbrock 1961). On the other
hand, Parker (1983, 1988) argued that small scale photospheric convective motions
stress the magnetic strands in the corona, which then break via magnetic reconnection
to give impulsive energy releases known as ‘nanoﬂares.’ This is known as direct current
(DC) heating. Further investigations have revealed that nanoﬂares are ubiquitous in
the solar atmosphere, and despite releasing relatively low energy as compared to
a full-sized ﬂare, may still heat the corona collectively due to their sheer numbers
(Parker 1988; Klimchuk 2006, 2015, and references therein). A major challenge we
face is the lack of direct detection of individual nanoﬂares, due in part to their small
amplitude and in part to the confusion from line-of-sight overlap of the optically-thin
structures. Therefore, the existence and properties of nanoﬂares must be inferred from
their collective eﬀects. A variety of diﬀerent methods have been used (Klimchuk &
Hinode Review Team 2019).

During a nanoﬂare life-cycle, the EUV emission from the heating phase is much
less than that from the slower cooling phase (Bradshaw & Klimchuk 2011). This
property of nanoﬂares leaves a unique signature in multi-wavelength observations.
As the plasma cools, the loop appears ﬁrst in a hot channel, subsequently showing
up in cooler channels which, in turn, reach their peak intensities with some time
delay. The powerful technique developed by Viall & Klimchuk (2012) can identify
cooling patterns in large ensembles of loops by detecting even the minutest variability
in light curves. They use high-cadence observations from the Atmospheric Imaging
Assembly onboard the Solar Dynamic Observatory (SDO/AIA; Boerner et al. 2012;
Lemen et al. 2012) spacecraft to measure the time-lag between two coronal channels.
This is accomplished by computing the cross correlation of the light curves with
diﬀerent amounts of imposed temporal oﬀset and determining which oﬀset maximizes
the correlation (see Viall & Klimchuk 2012, 2017). The technique not only detects
time lags that can be identiﬁed by eye in observationally distinct loops, but also
works well when there are countless overlapping coronal strands in observations of
the diﬀuse corona, where the time lags are not obvious to the eye. Viall & Klimchuk
(2013) simulated the composite emission from 10,000 strands heated randomly by
nanoﬂares, as expected in a real solar observation. The light curves exhibit only
small ﬂuctuations, yet the time-lag technique correctly identiﬁes the cooling that is
known to be present in the simulations.

Full-sized ﬂares are extremely eﬃcient at accelerating particles to high energy.
Whether this is also true of nanoﬂares is unknown (Vievering et al. 2020). A lead-
ing theory of particle acceleration involves collapsing plasmoids (Drake et al. 2006).

Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

3

The theory predicts that the eﬃciency of acceleration depends on the magnetic ﬁeld
geometry - in particular, whether there is a strong guide ﬁeld component (Dahlin
et al. 2015). Because nanoﬂares and ﬂares have diﬀerent geometries, determining
whether particle acceleration occurs in nanoﬂares would be an important test of the
theory.
Instinctively, we turn to hard X-ray observations to answer this question.
Such observations place a rather low upper limit on the quantity of highly nonther-
mal electrons. However, large numbers of mildly nonthermal electrons are not ruled
out in active regions, because their emission would be dominated by much brighter
thermal emission in HXR, rendering the nonthermal component undetectable. For
quiet Sun, although the temperatures are low enough that no thermal emission is ob-
served to dominate HXR energies, nonetheless, the lack of sensitivity of the current
instruments does not place any limits on the mildly energetic particles. (Hannah et al.
2007, 2010; Ishikawa & Krucker 2019). Therefore, understanding particle acceleration
from nanoﬂares requires a diﬀerent approach.

Figure 1. Composite dynamic spectrum from the Bleien telescope, the Nancay Decametre
Array, WIND/WAVES RAD2, and RAD1 exhibiting traditional interplanetary type III
radio bursts observed on January 28th, 2014 (Reid & Ratcliﬀe (2014), Figure 1). Reprinted
with permission from Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics

Radio emission on the Sun is not constrained by these limitations. Type III radio
bursts (coronal and interplanetary) especially are an important tool for understand-

11:30            11:50         12:10                                   UT Time, 28 Jan 2014Frequency [MHz]0.11.010.0100.01000.04

Chhabra et al.

ing accelerated electron beams. These bursts, often associated with ﬂares, have been
observed to be prevalent in a broad range of frequencies (10 kHz–1 GHz). Energetic
electron beams of semi-relativistic speeds (≈ 0.1–0.5 c) produce a bump-on-tail in-
stability as they propagate along the magnetic ﬁeld, creating electrostatic Langmuir
ne Hz (Ginzburg & Zhelezniakov
waves at the local plasma frequency, νp = 8980
1958). Non-linear particle-wave and wave-wave interactions generate electromagnetic
emission at this local plasma frequency and its second harmonic, respectively. Because
there is typically a density gradient along the beam’s path, they show a characteris-
tic frequency drift in the radio dynamic spectrum (Wild & McCready 1950; Reid &
Ratcliﬀe 2014, and references therein).

√

Figure 1 shows an example of traditional type III radio bursts as the particles
move away from the Sun into interplanetary space. The dynamic spectrum combines
data from the Bleien telescope covering the frequency range of 900–200 MHz (Benz
et al. 2009), the Nancay Decametre Array (Lecacheux 2000) covering the range of 80–
15 MHz, and the RAD1 and RAD2 receivers onboard the WIND spacecraft (Bougeret
et al. 1995) covering 14–0.1 MHz. The frequency axis is inverted (decreasing upward)
to give the impression of the electron beam propagating away from the Sun. As the
electrons propagate outward along open ﬁeld lines, they encounter decreasing density,
and the emission is ﬁrst detected at a higher frequency, followed by progressively lower
frequencies. The time delay between the two deﬁnes the frequency drift rate of the
burst. Sometimes beams travel up and then down along closed ﬁeld lines (i.e., loops)
where they encounter ﬁrst decreasing then increasing density, which is manifested as
inverted ‘U’ or ‘J’ shaped structures in the dynamic spectrum, with frequency drifts
in both directions.

While these traditional type IIIs are observed as individual bursts, in groups or
sometimes as type III storms with hundreds of bursts occurring over a period of a
few hours, the ever-present nanoﬂares may produce hundreds or thousands of bursts
per second, which will not be identiﬁable as individual burst features in the dynamic
spectrum. Rather, they may present themselves as a quasi-continuous ‘radio haze.’
The collective emission from these small bursts will not be as intense, and small but
real ﬂuctuations may be misinterpreted as mere noise. One such example is seen in
the recent work by Mondal et al. (2020) that observed ubiquitous weak radio bursts
from the quiet solar corona. Moreover, the emission from these bursts coming from
the closed corona will exhibit frequency drifts in both directions, similar to those seen
in the stronger ‘U’ or ‘J’ bursts noted above.

In this paper, we attempt to identify signatures of type III radio bursts that may
be produced by nanoﬂares using the time-lag technique. Similar to correlating light
curves in pairs of EUV channels, we will correlate light curves in pairs of radio fre-
quencies. The radio drift of overlapping type III bursts shows up like the EUV cooling
signature from overlapping magnetic strands, although on much shorter timescales.
We construct a simple numerical model simulating emission produced by these type

Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

5

III bursts at diﬀerent frequencies, which are then cross-correlated to measure time-
lags for each frequency pair. We add increasing complexity to the model to more
closely approximate the real corona, and at each step we evaluate the eﬃcacy of the
time-lag technique. Section 2 gives the detailed formalism for the loop model along
with the methodology used to populate loops with nanoﬂares and simulate type III
emission. We discuss our results in section 3. The Appendix summarizes various
additional factors that may aﬀect the cross-correlation results. Subsequent papers
are planned that apply these results to observations at these frequencies from the
FIELDS experiment on Parker Solar Probe, the Very Large Array (VLA), and the
Low-Frequency Array (LOFAR).

2. MODELING

2.1. Loop Model Formulation

The basic building block of our model is a symmetric loop in static equilibrium.
Following Martens (2010), we obtain solutions to the one-dimensional energy equa-
tion:

(cid:18)

d
ds

κoT 5/2 dT
ds

(cid:19)

+ Q − P 2

o χoT −(2+γ) = 0

(1)

where s and T are the spatial coordinate and temperature along the loop, κo(= 1.1 ×
10−6 erg cm−1 s−1 K−7/2) is the coeﬃcient of thermal conductivity, Q is the volumetric
heating rate, Po is the gas pressure, taken to be constant along the loop due to the
large gravitational scale height, and χo(=1012.41) & γ(= 0.5) (Martens et al. 2000) are
parameters of the optically-thin radiative loss function in c.g.s. units. The heating
function is taken to have a power-law dependence on pressure and temperature:

which is further reduced to

Q = HP β

o T α

Q = H

(2)

(3)

assuming α = β = 0 for a uniformly heated loop, where H is a constant of propor-
tionality.

Although nanoﬂare heating is inherently impulsive, we believe it is reasonable to as-
sume steady heating and static equilibrium for this initial evaluation of the feasibility
of detecting overlapping type III bursts. Furthermore, nanoﬂares are believed to recur
on individual ﬁeld lines with a range of repetition frequencies (Klimchuk & Hinode
Review Team 2019, and references therein). High-frequency nanoﬂares are eﬀectively
similar to steady heating, and loops heated by low-frequency nanoﬂares spend much
of their time in a phase that is not greatly diﬀerent from static equilibrium conditions.
Static equilibrium loops obey well-known scaling laws. With uniform heating, we

have (Martens 2010, equations 28 & 30):

6

and

Chhabra et al.

PoL = T 3
a

(cid:18) κo
χo

(cid:19)1/2 √
2
5

B

(cid:19)

(cid:18)6
5

,

1
2

(4)

1
2
where L is the loop half-length, Ta is the temperature at loop apex, and B is the beta
function.

Q ≈

(5)

κo

T 7/2
a
L2

Magnetic strands become entangled and braided as they are churned by chaotic
photospheric motions. One promising idea is that nanoﬂares occur when the angle
between adjacent misaligned strands reaches a critical value. As discussed in Mandrini
et al. (2000), this leads to a volumetric heating rate that scales with the loop length
according to Q = cL−3, where c is a constant. Adopting this dependence in the
scaling laws (Equation 5) above, we obtain a value for constant, c, for a typical loop
length of 30, 000 km with an apex temperature of 2 MK. Further, using the IDL
routine BETALOOP.PRO developed by Martens (2010), we can construct density
and temperature proﬁles for loops with a variety of diﬀerent lengths. Note that the
temperature and density proﬁles thus obtained come from the above model and satisfy
the energy balance equation (Equation 1). Example density proﬁles for three loops
of diﬀerent lengths (electron density, n, vs. distance, s, along the loop) is shown in
Figure 2a. As is characteristic of all loops, the gradients are shallow in the corona
and steep in the transition region (TR) near the base. The temperature proﬁle has
these same properties, being essentially the inverse of the density proﬁle due to the
constant pressure.

2.2. Type III logistics

As already noted, a beam of energetic electrons will generate radio emission at
the local plasma frequency, νp ∝ n1/2. This involves complex nonlinear interactions
among the ambient ions or ion-acoustic waves and Langmuir waves that are gener-
ated by the beam. Detailed simulations of these processes have been performed in
the context of the magnetically open corona and solar wind (Kontar & Reid 2009;
Ratcliﬀe et al. 2014; Reid & Kontar 2018). We do not attempt that here. Rather,
we assume that the type III emission from a given location turns on, maintains a
constant brightness, and turns oﬀ during the time that the beam is passing that
spot. Although, substantial work has been done to understand the eﬀects of density
ﬂuctuations, scattering and refraction on the brightness temperature and source sizes
of traditional type IIIs (Steinberg et al. 1984; Thejappa & MacDowall 2008; Kontar
et al. 2019), how the brightness may depend on parameters such as the density and
energy of the beam, the ambient density, or the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld are
largely unknown . We therefore assume that the emissivity (emission rate per unit

Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

7

volume) is the same for all events and all loop positions. This approach is consistent
with our goal of demonstrating the feasibility of the technique in this initial study.

Radio spectral observations usually sample the emission in frequency bins, or chan-
nels, of equal size, ∆ν. We do the same when generating synthetic spectra from our
models. Because density varies along the loop, each frequency bin corresponds to a
small range of densities, ∆n, which in turn corresponds to a ﬁnite section of the loop,
∆s, as shown schematically in Figure 2d. We refer to this as a volume element, under
the assumption of constant cross-sectional area (Klimchuk 2000).

Depending on the beam duration and hence the beam length, volume elements may
be partially or fully ﬁlled by the beam. Longer elements near the apex tend to be
partially ﬁlled, while shorter elements in the lower legs tend to be fully ﬁlled. We
assign an intensity to frequency νi that is proportional to either the beam length Lb
or the length of the corresponding volume element ∆si for elements that are longer
and shorter than the beam, respectively. Elements are centered on si where the local
plasma frequency is νi. We also take into account the ﬁnite time required for the front
and back of the beam to traverse the element; the light curve at a given frequency
ramps up linearly as the beam enters the element, has a ﬂat section, and ramps down
linearly as the beam exits. The frequency bin size ∆νi is the same for all frequency
bins (all i).

Note that for a suﬃciently long beam length Lb, such that all volume elements ∆si
along the loop are shorter than Lb, the intensity at all frequencies νi will be directly
proportional to their respective volume elements ∆si.

The size of a volume element and its associated intensity vary inversely with the
local density gradient, as shown in Appendix A. Gradients are very small near the loop
apex and increase steadily down the legs, becoming very large near the footpoints.
Consequently, the intensity is a strong function of frequency (Figure 2c). Lower
frequencies come from high in the loop and are bright, while higher frequencies come
from low in the loop and are faint. This is indicated in Figure 2b,c. Appendix A
shows that for a constant conductive ﬂux, which is a crude approximation to an
equilibrium coronal loop, the intensity varies as n−4 and therefore as ν−8. The very
steep spectrum has important implications, as we discuss below. Keep in mind that
this is the spectrum of a single loop. The composite spectrum from many loops with
diﬀerent density proﬁles is much more uniform.

Referring to Figure 2, consider two frequencies ν1 and ν2 occurring high and low in
the loop, respectively. The frequency bins ∆ν1 and ∆ν2 centered on ν1 and ν2 have
the same width, but the corresponding volume elements ∆s1 and ∆s2 are diﬀerent;
∆s1 > ∆s2 because of the smaller density gradient. The intensity is therefore brighter
at ν1. The shading in Figure 2e indicates the total emission coming from each volume
element . The diﬀerences are due entirely to the variations in volume. Our model
assumes that emissivity is uniform along the loop. Similarly, the intensity plotted in

8

Chhabra et al.

Figure 2. Loop properties for three diﬀerent loop lengths: a) Density proﬁle for three
loops: L0, L1 and Ln as marked in Fig. 6, as a function of distance, b) Relative Intensity, I,
in frequency bins of equal size as a function of distance along the loop for a type III burst,
c) Relative Intensity as function of local plasma frequency along the loop. d) ∆νi bins of
same width occupy a much larger volume of the loop in the upper corona compared to the
TR. e) Intensity variation for a burst vs. location in the loop. Note that this is not a rigid
scale intended to show intensity along the loop in the ﬁgures that follow. It is only meant
to illustrate the trend of intensity variation along the length of any loop.

Figure 2b is not the emission per unit volume at position s, but rather the intensity
of the volume element that is centered at s.

We now explore the light curves (intensity versus time) expected when a beam of
energetic electrons propagates along the loop. Diﬀerent frequencies will light up at
diﬀerent times. By cross correlating the light curves with diﬀerent imposed temporal
oﬀsets, we generate a Cross-COrrelation Power Spectrum (CCOPS) 1. We want to
know whether the CCOPS reveals a signature of the beam that might be used to
identify type III bursts from nanoﬂares. We start with very simple scenarios and add
increasing complexity to more closely mimic the actual Sun.

2.3. Single-Loop Model

Model 1 : First consider a single loop with half-length L, as depicted in Figure 3.
Sample frequencies ν1, ν2, and ν3 correspond to the positions indicated. The loop
is symmetric, so each frequency is present in both legs. We now imagine that a

1 The term “Power Spectrum” refers to the variation of the amplitude of the cross-correlation coef-
ﬁcient as a function of time-oﬀset and should not be confused with the Fourier transform of the
auto-correlation function.

d)e)b)c)a)L1LnL0L1LnL0L1LnL0Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

9

nanoﬂare occurs at three diﬀerent locations, which we refer to as cases A, B and C.
These produce the light curves shown in Figure 4, ordered so frequency increases from
top to bottom to reﬂect the relative heights within the loop. The red ’stars’ indicate
the position and timing of the three diﬀerent nanoﬂares.

Figure 3. Case A: nanoﬂare at the loop top with particles moving downward to the foot-
point; Case B: nanoﬂare high in the loop leg with particles moving downward only; Case
C: nanoﬂare low in the loop leg with particles moving in both directions.

Case A: The nanoﬂare occurs at the loop apex ensuring all particles only propagate
downward (Fig. 3a). The ejected beam of electrons is assumed to be mildly non-
thermal with a ﬁxed energy of 2 keV, hence moving with a constant velocity of
2.65 × 109 cm/s (∼ 0.1c). The duration of the beam represents the time that the
emission stays ’on’ at a given location, and is chosen to be 80 ms for these examples.
As the beam propagates along the ﬁeld, we expect to see emission ﬁrst at ν1 followed
by ν2 and then ν3. The features in the light curves joined by the blue arrows in
Figure 4 clearly demonstrate this systematic behavior.

Figure 4. Light curves for the three chosen frequencies, showing time oﬀsets as per Cases
A, B, and C. The ‘red star’ marks the relative position along the loop where each nanoﬂare
occurred.

Case B : Here we assume that the nanoﬂare occurs partway down the left leg and
that particles propagate downward only. Following from the sketch for case B (Fig.
3b), it is evident that only ν2 and ν3 will show any emission (features joined by the

Densityabc01×1072×1073×10701×1072×1073×107Relative Intensity [a.u.]01234Time [sec]01×1072×1073×107ABC10

Chhabra et al.

red arrows) since the nanoﬂare lies below ν1 and the downward moving particles never
pass that location. Emission appears in ν2 and ν3 with the same delay as in Case
A. We classify this as a positive delay, because the higher frequency occurs after the
lower frequency.

Case C : The nanoﬂare now occurs lower in the loop leg and particles propagate
in both directions (Fig. 3c). Downward propagating particles produce no emission
at any of the three frequencies. Upward propagating particles produce emission in
ν3 followed by ν2 and then ν1 (green arrows in the ﬁgure) as they travel up the leg.
These are negative delays because the higher frequency occurs ﬁrst. As the particles
pass the apex and travel down the opposite leg, they produce emission sequentially
in ν1, ν2, and ν3, the reverse order. These are positive delays. This reversing of the
frequency drift is the same eﬀect observed in U-type bursts mentioned earlier.

The time-lag technique easily identiﬁes the expected delays in these simulations
with each nanoﬂare corresponding to cases A, B, and C. The CCOPS has spikes
at the temporal oﬀsets discussed above. However, in addition to ﬁnding correlations
between two frequencies occurring in the same leg, the technique also ﬁnds correlations
with longer delays when the burst arrives at the opposite leg. This is illustrated in
the example CCOPS in Figure 5 corresponding to case C from above. We consider
frequencies ν1 and ν2 that occur at higher altitudes. As indicated in the sketch on the
right, there are four combinations of ν1–ν2 positions. ν2 on the left side of the loop
pairs with both ν1 on the left and ν1 on the right. Both delays are negative, but the
ﬁrst is shorter than the second. ν1 on the left pairs with ν2 on the right, producing
a long positive delay. Finally, ν1 on the right pairs with ν2 on the right, producing
a short positive delay.
It is clear that the same pattern will hold for nanoﬂares
occurring near the right footpoint, with the beam traveling right to left. In general,
we expect the CCOPS to have peaks at four temporal oﬀsets: positive and negative
short delays and, positive and negative long delays. This is exactly what we ﬁnd in
our simulation, as shown on the left of Figure 5. There will always be peaks at ±∆t1
and ±∆t2 whenever some nanoﬂares occur at altitudes below the higher frequency,
ν2.

The situation is modiﬁed if nanoﬂares occur only at higher altitudes in the loop.
There will be only positive delays, both short and long, if the nanoﬂares are dis-
tributed at locations above the higher frequency, and only positive short delays if
they are restricted to the very top of the loop, above the lower frequency.

The above examples concern a single loop. In reality, of course, many loops with
diﬀerent density proﬁles are observed at the same time, with nanoﬂares occurring
randomly along the loop lengths, and this adds enormous complexity to the CCOPS.
There are estimated to be ∼500,000 individual strands (unresolved loops) in a typical
AR (Klimchuk 2015). The characteristic delay between successive nanoﬂares in a
given strand is ∼1000 s (Klimchuk & Hinode Review Team 2019), implying an oc-
currence rate of ∼500 nanoﬂares/s across the AR. Even with high spatial resolution

Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

11

Figure 5. Left: CCOPS for ν1 − ν2 from light curves obtained using a generalization of
case C. Right side demonstrates the multiple time-lags that peak in the CCOPS

observations, the line of sight passes through many loops of diﬀering lengths, heating
rates, and density structures. We expect the CCOPS to contain a huge number of
peaks, which merge together to produce a smooth spectrum. Meaningful patterns in
the envelope may nonetheless persist, as we now discuss. We ﬁrst consider the eﬀect
of multiple loops and then consider the eﬀect of the type III burst occurrence rate.

2.4. Multiple Loops

Loop half-lengths in an AR typically vary between ∼10,000–150,000 km (Mandrini
et al. 2000) and can have apex temperatures between ∼1–4 MK (Warren et al. 2012),
giving a wide range of density proﬁles and therefore a broad band of plasma frequen-
cies that can be observed. However, the precipitous fall in intensity as a function
of frequency shown in Figure 2c has important implications. Systematic time delays
between any two frequencies are only expected for the emissions coming from a single
loop. Emissions from diﬀerent loops are physically uncorrelated and therefore have
random delays. The rapid drop in intensity for a single loop means that we expect
an observable signal from that loop only for frequencies that are closely spaced. If
the spacing is too great, at least one of the frequencies will be too weak to produce
a meaningful signal. Because we require a reasonable signal in both frequencies, we
need concern ourselves only with loops having a rather narrow range of apex densities
(uniquely determined by their lengths in our simpliﬁed model). All other loops will
be faint at these frequencies. This also shows that in order to consider emission from
all loops in an active region, multiple diﬀerent pairs of frequencies will need to be
considered.

2.4.1. Loop Distribution

Consider the spectra of several loops with equally spaced lengths ∆L shown in
Figure 6a. Note that the intensity scale is logarithmic. Four of the loops are color
coded and labeled L0 through L3. The ∆L increment of loop lengths is determined

12

Chhabra et al.

Figure 6.
a. Low-density (η = 1) distribution of loops generated for the chosen loop-
length range from frequencies ν1 and ν2. b. Loop distribution with 3 times the lowest loop
density (η = 3). c. CCOPS for loop density η = 1 with color-coded dashed lines overlaid to
represent the expected time-oﬀsets for each loop. d. CCOPS for loop density η = 3 (purple
line), with color coded dashed-lines representing expected time-oﬀsets for the additional
loops as well. The CCOPS for loop density η = 1 is overlaid illustrating the drop in power
due to the addition of new loops.

by the following choice of frequencies. Frequency ν1 occurs just below the apex of L1
(red), and frequency ν2 occurs a short distance down the leg, where the intensity is

−2−1012Time Offset [sec]0.00.10.20.30.4Cross−correlation Power−2−1012Time Offset [sec]0.00.10.20.30.4Cross−correlation Power0.1570.1580.1590.1600.1610.1620.163Plasma Frequency, νp [GHz]1051061071080.1570.1580.1590.1600.1610.1620.163Plasma Frequency, νp [GHz]105106107108Relative Intensity [a.u.]Relative Intensity [a.u.]L0L1L2L3Lna)c)d)b)Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

13

reduced by a factor of 10. The plasma frequency at the apex of L0 (brown) is slightly
larger than ν2, so neither frequency occurs in that loop. The longest loop shown
(labeled Ln at the bottom) is approximately 100 times fainter than L1 at frequency
ν1. We assume that all loops longer than this are so faint that they can be safely
ignored in our simulations.

Figure 7. Relative position of frequencies along loops of varied lengths. As the loop
become shorter from right to left, the density at the loop-top increases such that only one
of the frequencies, ν2 exists along the shortest loop. For a loop even shorter, the density
will increase further such that neither of the frequencies exist along the loop anymore.

Figure 7 is a schematic representation of the loops. The middle loop is similar to
L1, with both frequencies being relatively bright. The long loop would correspond to
one of the unlabeled grey loops in Figure 6a, where both frequencies are relatively
faint. Finally, the short loop represents a loop falling between L1 and L0, for which
ν2 is bright, but ν1 does not occur in the loop.

Loops having a given range of lengths can occur at multiple locations within an
active region, and they need not have similar orientations. This is indicated schemat-
ically in Figure 8a to emphasize that the loops need not be nested as in a single,
simple arcade. The intensity as a function of distance along the loop for individual
loops is shown in Figure 8b & c for two extremes of relative beam length. Figure 8b
shows ﬂattening of the intensity near the loop top for the case where the chosen beam
length is shorter than the volume elements, ∆si > Lb as mentioned in section 2.2, so
the intensity near the loop apex is proportional to Lb. Figure 8c shows the same plot
for a beam length that is longer than the volume elements everywhere along the loop
i.e. ∆si < Lb with the intensities proportional to ∆si even near the loop apex.

The corona has a continuous distribution of loop lengths, but we imagine that only
a fraction of loops experience nanoﬂares. We consider three diﬀerent population
densities of such loops. The loop length spacing is ∆L/η, where ∆L is the spacing in
Figure 6a.

Model 2.1 (Low Loop Population Density): We ﬁrst examine the case η = 1, corre-
sponding to a low population density (Figure 6a). There are 23 loops in the chosen
range of loop lengths. Assuming 500 nanoﬂares/s in an entire active region, we esti-
mate 30 nanoﬂares/s over this range. All nanoﬂares are assumed to produce electron

Density14

Chhabra et al.

a) Cartoon showing multiple loops in an AR with diﬀerent orientations and
Figure 8.
lengths. (b-c) Corresponding plots for Relative Intensity as a function of distance along the
loop I vs s for two cases, with short beam length b) and long beam length c).

beams lasting 20 ms. This is shorter than the typical travel time between the two
frequencies.

The nanoﬂares occur at random times and random locations within the loops. Elec-
tron beams are assumed to propagate in both directions. We run the simulation for
1200 s, during which time 36,000 nanoﬂares are initiated. Figure 6c shows the CCOPS
for the frequency pair ν1 − ν2, where we have used all except the ﬁrst and last 10 s of

Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

15

the light curves. The dashed vertical lines indicate the expected time-lags for loops
L1, L2, and L3, color-coded to match the spectra in Figure 6a. There are clear peaks
at the expected locations, especially for L1 (red). It is not surprising that this loop
dominates, as it produces the brightest emission at both frequencies, but especially ν1,
which comes from near the apex. The CCOPS peaks are much weaker for L2 (green)
and L3 (blue), with L2 being somewhat stronger because it is somewhat brighter.

Figure 9. Left: Light curves for the three chosen frequencies, ν1, ν1a, ν2 for high-density
loop distribution with 30 nanoﬂares occurring per second all generating type III bursts.
Right: Corresponding CCOPS for each pair.

All loops except L0 will produce 4 peaks in the CCOPS, since at least some
nanoﬂares occur below the location of ν2 in each case. Notice that the short de-
lay, ±∆t1, is smaller for L2-Ln than for L1. Similarly, the long delay, ±∆t2, is bigger.
This is easily understood based on the sketches in Figure 7, where the intermediate
loop represents L1 and the long loop represents L2 and L3. The conjugate frequency
positions in the right legs are not shown.

There is a low level of “noise” in the CCOPS. This is not due to true noise in the
light curves, which will be discussed later. Rather, it is due to ν1 from one nanoﬂare
in one loop correlating with ν2 from a diﬀerent nanoﬂare in a diﬀerent loop. There
is no temporal relationship among the nanoﬂares, and so the power associated with
these “false” correlations is spread roughly evenly over the range of oﬀsets. Note that
the power can be both positive and negative, as expected based on the deﬁnition of
the cross correlation (see Appendix B).

Model 2.2 (Moderate Loop Population Density): Now consider the situation where
the loop population density is three times greater: η = 3. This is shown in Figure
6b and d. There are 69 loops in total, spanning the same range of lengths as before.
New peaks appear in the CCOPS that were not present previously. We expect three
times as many, though most are not visible. The amplitudes of the peaks that are
common to both simulations are reduced (lower cross-correlation power), as discussed
in Appendix B.

---16

Chhabra et al.

Notice that the spectra for the two loops between L0 and L1 in Figure 6b do not
have meaningful peaks in the CCOPS because they only emit at frequency ν2. That
emission is quite strong, however, and exacerbates the problem with false peaks. This
is a primary reason why the amplitudes of the true peaks are reduced compared to
the ﬁrst simulation.

Model 2.3 (High Loop Population Density): Our ﬁnal example has a much higher
population density that approximates a truly continuous distribution of loop lengths:
η = 50, resulting in 1150 loops. This is essentially equivalent to every ﬁeld line in
a continuous distribution having the opportunity of experiencing a nanoﬂare. We
include a third frequency for the analysis, ν1a, that lies between ν1 & ν2, marked by
the dotted line in Figure 6a,b. For this simulation we expect a forest of peaks in the
CCOPS. Light curves for the three frequencies are shown in Figure 9, left panel. The
associated CCOPS for each pair are shown in the right panel. We note that the power
of the cross-correlation has reduced drastically. Even so, a signature is visible above
the 3σ level for at least the pair ν1–ν1a. There is a noticeable dip at ‘zero’ lag that
increases towards both positive and negative time oﬀsets, peaks at a certain lag, and
then decreases again. This ‘M’ shaped pattern is the result of a nest of peaks from
multiple loops with very similar time-lags. The peaks for longer delays corresponding
to ± ∆t2 from Figure 5 are visible for a few of the brightest loops only.

A similar pattern is also visible in the CCOPS for the other two pairs of frequencies,
but it is important to note here that the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the power is
quite low.

Figure 10. Left: Light curves for the three chosen frequencies, ν1, ν1a, ν2 for the high
loop density distribution with 30 nanoﬂares occurring per second but only a tenth of them
generating type III bursts (3 bursts/s). Right: Corresponding CCOPS for each pair.

The distinctive dip in power at zero lag can be understood on the basis of Figure 7.
Small lags are produced in loops where both frequencies are close to the footpoint.
The intensity is greatly reduced at these locations, so the cross correlation power is
weak.

---Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

17

Figure 11. Left: Light curves for the three chosen frequencies, ν1, ν1a, ν2 for high-density
loop distribution with 30 nanoﬂares occurring per second but only a hundredth of them
generating type III bursts (0.3 bursts/sec). Right: Corresponding CCOPS for each pair.

2.4.2. Burst-Frequency

The three simulations above assume that nanoﬂares occur at a rate of 30 per second
across the range of loop lengths considered, and that every nanoﬂare produces a type
III burst. It is certainly possible that only a fraction of nanoﬂares accelerate energetic
electrons, and so the rate of type III bursts could be much less. We therefore repeat
M odel 2.3 above (high loop population density), but with a ten times smaller type III
burst rate: 3 bursts/sec. The light curves for all three frequencies are shown on the
left in Figure 10, and the CCOPS for three frequency pairs are shown on the right.
Note that the CCOPS here are not very diﬀerent from the ones shown in Figure 9.
An ‘M’ shaped pattern and dip at zero lag are still present.

The results from a still-further decrease in the burst frequency to one in every

hundred nanoﬂares (0.3 bursts/sec) is shown in ﬁgure 11.

Figure 12 a) shows CCOPS from Figure 11 and b) shows CCOPS from Figure 9
corresponding to 30 bursts/sec and 0.3 bursts/sec respectively with the expected
time-lags overlaid. The orange dot-dashed lines clearly show how the M-shaped pat-
tern arises from a clustering of expected peaks at the shorter time-lags ∆t1. The
longer time-lags ∆t2 are marked by the green dot-dashed lines. For a high burst
frequency (panel a), the longer lags have waned due to the sheer number of bursts,
however many of the individual peaks are prominent at the expected positions for the
low burst frequency (panel b).

An observation to make is that as we reduce the burst frequency to one-tenth and
then further to one-hundredth of the chosen nanoﬂare rate, there is an increase in
power of the cross-correlation peaks. Note that we expect fewer ‘false’ correlations
within the range of oﬀsets shown (see Appendix B). The average interval between
bursts is 3 seconds in the lowest frequency simulation, which is outside the range of
-2 to +2 s in the ﬁgure. The overall level of “noise” is therefore reduced. Nonetheless,
some of the distinctive narrow peaks in the CCOPS are false peaks associated with

---18

Chhabra et al.

Figure 12. a. CCOPS for 30 bursts/s with expected time-lags overlaid. b. CCOPS for
0.3 bursts/s with expected time-lags overlaid. The orange dashed lines mark the expect
time-lags ∆t1 and the green dashed lines mark the expected time-lags ∆t2

pairs of closely spaced events that occur near the apex of two diﬀerent loops and are
therefore relatively bright at both frequencies.

2.4.3. Duration of the Bursts

Traditional type III bursts in the inner heliosphere may last for a few tens of minutes
(Reid & Ratcliﬀe 2014), however for type IIIs occurring in the closed corona, the

a)b)------Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

19

Figure 13. Left: CCOPS for the three chosen pairs of frequencies for a burst duration of
200 ms. Right: CCOPS for the same frequency-pairs for a burst duration of 1 s.

observed durations are much shorter (Chen et al. 2018). The burst duration depends
on both the lifetime of the acceleration process and any other eﬀects such as the
decay time of the Langmuir waves or scattering in the volume. We present our model
as though the beam is an emitting object, but it is understood that the duration of
emission from a given point in space includes these other eﬀects, i.e., our ’beam’ is a
column of emission that is longer than the electron beam. The duration of the burst
at each frequency νi then depends on the time it takes for the beam to propagate
through the ∆si volume element associated with the central frequency νi. For all
multi-loop models discussed above, the duration of the beam was chosen to be 20 ms.
Most of the expected time lags between the frequency pairs are longer than this
duration.

We now evaluate how well the technique performs when the beam duration is com-
parable to or longer than the expected time lags. Figure 13 shows the CCOPS for
M odel 2.3 (comparable to Figure 9) except with beam durations of 200 ms and 1 s.
As the duration increases, the peaks in the CCOPS broaden and begin to merge.
The dip at zero lag ﬁlls in, and the ‘M’-shaped pattern disappears, though a hint
remains for frequency pair ν1a − ν2 at a duration of 200 ms. The individual peaks and
‘M’-shaped pattern are broadened to produce a pronounced hump centered at zero
lag. Although this removes the direct delay signature of the type III bursts, because
such a hump could instead be a result of in-phase variability at the two frequencies,
the width and the shape of the hump may still provide evidence for drifting (type
III) bursts if its width is substantially greater than the combined durations of the
variations in the light curves, as discussed in Appendix B.

2.4.4. The Role of Noise

The ﬁnal test is to model the technique with an additional level of noise. For
this purpose, we use M odel 2.3 again. To add a realistic level of noise to the light
curves we need to understand the various factors that aﬀect the sensitivity of a radio

------20

Chhabra et al.

(a) Flux density for a brightness temperature T = 1012 K at frequencies
Figure 14.
ν1, ν1a, ν2 for the high loop density case with 0.3 bursts/s. Random Gaussian noise with
an rms of 0.09 sfu is added to each of the light curves. (b) The CCOPS corresponding to
the light curves in (a). (c) Same as (a) for a higher rate of 30 bursts/s. (d) The CCOPS
corresponding to the light curves in (c).

interferometer. At frequency ν, the ﬂux density associated with a given antenna
temperature2 is given as:

S =

2kTaν2
c2

dΩ,

(6)

where k is the Boltzmann constant, Ta is the antenna temperature due to a hot source
ﬁlling the antenna primary beam (ﬁeld of view), c is the speed of light, and dΩ is the
solid angle subtended by the beam. If a hot source of temperature T does not ﬁll
the beam, the antenna temperature is reduced (Ta < T ) by the beam dilution factor
(ratio of the angular area of the source to the beam area). The noise associated with
a radio antenna is a combination of this antenna temperature due to the source and
the noise generated internally by the receiving system, Tsys. Crane & Napier (1989)
showed that the sensitivity for an array of such antennas is given by:

2 This is not the antenna’s physical temperature but the temperature that a blackbody would have

in order to provide the equivalent power received by the antenna.

a)c)b)d)------Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

∆T =

(cid:20)T 2

a + TaTsys + Tsys
∆ντ N (N − 1)

(cid:21)1/2

2/2

,

21

(7)

where ∆ν is the channel width of the instrument and τ is the cadence, and N (N −1) is
the number of baselines. For a bright source such as the Sun, Ta >> Tsys. Simplifying
Eq. (7) and using Eq. (6), we have the noise associated with a source of ﬂux density
S as

∆S =

S
(cid:112)∆ντ N (N − 1)

.

(8)

Therefore, for a source with ﬂux density S, the sensitivity has a direct dependence
on Ta and an inverse dependence on the frequency bandwidth ∆ν, integration time
τ , and number of baselines.

Figure 15.
temperature, T = 1013.3 K.

Same as Figure 14 for bursts with an order of magnitude higher brightness

Anticipating a future analysis of P -band (245–450 MHz) solar observations we have
in hand, taken with the Very Large Array (VLA)(Perley et al. 2011), we estimate a
level of noise as follows. The calibration procedure for P -band data from the period
of interest has not yet been ﬁnalized, so we adopt an average ﬂux of 25 sfu at 245 MHz

a)c)b)d)------22

Chhabra et al.

Figure 16. Same as Figure 14 for bursts with three orders of magnitude higher brightness
temperature, T = 1014 K.

based on values reported in the NOAA catalogue for times of similar activity. Using
numbers appropriate to our existing P -band observations, ∆ν = 125 kHz, τ = 0.01 s
and number of antennas in the subarray N = 14, equation 8 gives an uncertainty of
∆S = 0.0524 sfu.

An independent estimate of the uncertainty can be obtained from the data by taking
the root mean square (RMS) intensity diﬀerence between two frequencies that are so
closely spaced that any real diﬀerences in source ﬂux density are likely to be negligible,
although ﬂuctuations due to source confusion (Zirin et al. 1978) may still be present.
Because of possible cross-talk between adjacent channels, we use channels separated
by one intervening channel. Lacking calibrated P -band data, we use data near 1
GHz from the L-band, which are calibrated. The RMS diﬀerence is 3.5 times larger
than the uncertainty given by Equation 8 using the values appropriate to that band.
This suggests the presence of additional sources of random variations, perhaps akin
to those reported by Zirin et al. (1978). We assume that they are also present at
about the same level in the P -band data, so we multiply the 245 MHz uncertainty
above by the same factor of 3.5 to obtain ∆S = 0.186 sfu, which we apply to our
models.

All intensities from M odel 2.3 are ﬁrst converted to a ﬂux density using equation
6 above, where the solid angle dΩ is calculated for each nanoﬂare at frequency ν

a)c)b)d)------Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

23

with a volume element ∆s and assuming a width of ≈ 200 km for the magnetic
strand (Klimchuk 2015). Since the brightness temperatures of these nanoﬂares are
unknown, we repeat the calculation for three temperatures, viz. 1012, 1013.3 and,
1014 K. Randomly generated Gaussian noise with an rms of 0.186 sfu is then added
to the light curves of each frequency and the CCOPS computed.

Figures 14, 15 and 16 show ﬂux densities computed at temperatures T = 1012, 1013.3
and 1014 K at all three frequencies for 0.3 bursts/s and 30 bursts/s in panels a and
c, respectively, with the noise added. The corresponding CCOPS for each pair of
frequencies are shown in panels b and d. Light curves in Figure 14 computed for
temperature T = 1012 K are completely dominated by noise and show no meaningful
peaks in the CCOPS. The rather speciﬁc value T = 1013.3 K was chosen as an example
where there are only minimal excursions above the noise in the light curves (Fig. 15
a), yet the CCOPS (panel b) shows a hint of the ‘M’-shaped pattern. The ﬂux
densities of the higher burst frequency case in panel c have a substantial increase in
the signal above the noise, and hence the CCOPS now look very similar to Figure 9
with a very slight decrease in the power.

Any further increase in the brightness temperature signiﬁcantly increases the signal-
to-noise ratio for both cases of burst frequencies and consequently resuscitates the
CCOPS to their former shapes with a slight reduction in the cross-correlation am-
plitude that is caused by the noise. The light curves and corresponding CCOPS for
such a case with T = 1014 K are shown in Figure 16.Despite such an increase in the
brightness of the bursts, the fraction of total ﬂux density due to nanoﬂares is only
0.055.

3. CONCLUSION

We perform numerical modeling to simulate idealized emission from type III radio
bursts that may be generated by particle acceleration from nanoﬂares. For the sake
of simpliﬁcation, our model makes the following assumptions: (i) our model loops
are symmetric; (ii) all bursts produce electrons of the same velocity, which remains
constant as the beams propagate along the loops; (iii) the burst emission is generated
instantaneously as the beam is ejected from the nanoﬂare site; (iv) the emissivity for
all bursts is taken to be the same at all loop positions; (v) the decay time of the
Langmuir waves is independent of frequency.

Relaxing assumption (i), loop symmetry, would aﬀect the time delay symmetry
shown in Figure 5. Regarding assumption (ii), modeling of type IIIs by Reid &
Kontar (2018) shows that the velocity of the bursts eventually decreases as the beam
moves away from the Sun, however the evolution of beam speeds in closed loops is
unknown. Assumption (iii) ignores the fact that it may take time for the beam to
develop a two-stream instability and hence produce Langmuir waves, but this should
not aﬀect our results unless nanoﬂares occur strongly preferentially at the apex of
loops, since we have shown that emission on closed loops is expected to be dominated

24

Chhabra et al.

by loop-top emission from beams originating at any location. Assumption (iv) would
alter the intensity curves of Figure 2, but the intensity dependence is so strong that
only extreme violations of this assumption in favor of loop leg emission would make
much diﬀerence. Assumption (v) should not be signiﬁcant unless the decay time has
a strong dependence on frequency, since only closely spaced frequencies contribute
signiﬁcantly to the CCOPS. Some aspects of assumption (v) were explored in our
study by showing how diﬀerent durations of bursts will aﬀect the CCOPS.

Once the light curves are obtained from our model, the simulated light curves at
chosen radio frequencies are then cross-correlated to identify time-lags between diﬀer-
ent pairs, using a novel application of the Viall & Klimchuk (2012) time-lag technique.
We ﬁnd that the signature of the bursts depends very much on the rate and dura-
tion of nanoﬂares and on the fraction of loops that are involved. Individual peaks
dominate the CCOPS when only a small subset of loops experience nanoﬂares that
accelerate energetic particles. When many loops experience such nanoﬂares, the sig-
nature varies depending on whether the beam duration is short or long compared to
the particle travel time associated with the two frequencies. Short durations produce
a quasi-continuous ‘M’-shaped pattern with a distinctive dip at zero lag. Long dura-
tions produce a broad hump centered at zero lag. These diﬀerences can be exploited
to determine the likelihood of particle acceleration and the properties of the beam,
and therefore better understand the acceleration mechanism.

In general, the signatures are stronger for pairs of frequencies that are closely spaced,
indicating that high frequency resolution observations must be used. This is due to
the extremely steep slope of the type III spectrum of an individual loop, which is
related to the highly nonuniform density gradient along the loop. In order for the
intensities to be reasonably strong, both frequencies must occur relatively high in the
loop. Emission from the lower leg and transition region is comparatively negligible.
False peaks can appear in the CCOPS, especially if the burst rate is high. These are
due to correlations between diﬀerent nanoﬂares occurring in diﬀerent loops. The value
of the time lag of such peaks is not meaningful, but their mere existence would be
indicative of radio bursts and therefore would be an important observational feature.
Whether type III bursts from nanoﬂares are detectable depends on the SNR. Our
noise tests based on estimates of noise for VLA data reveal that for type IIIs with a
low brightness temperature, the noise will completely wash out any emission and the
CCOPS will show no correlation. Given a high enough brightness temperature for
the events, the emission does rise above the noise level and although the power of the
cross-correlation peaks in the CCOPS remains small, the change in the widths of the
peaks in comparison to the CCOPS computed for a noise-dominated simulation itself
is an indication of the presence of bursts. We note that for an instrument with higher
sensitivity compared to VLA, the power of the peaks in the CCOPS will improve.

A possible criticism of the central idea of this paper, that nanoﬂares may produce
type III emission on closed loops, lies in the apparent fact that observations provide

Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

25

little evidence for type III emission on closed loops beyond relatively rare ‘U’ or
‘J’ bursts. However, our analysis of the expected emission from equilibrium loops
reveals that such emission should be extremely strongly concentrated at the loop
apex (Figure 2c). Remarkably, this predicts that the observational signature of type
III bursts in closed loops is a bright, narrow-band feature with perhaps a faint high-
frequency tail, which ﬁts the description of the very commonly observed type I bursts.
The narrow spread is expected if the burst occurs in a single loop or several adjacent
loops with similar apex densities, and the emission frequency would directly provide
the loop apex density. Thus, our model suggests a possible origin of type I bursts as
a natural consequence of type III emission in a closed-loop geometry. We emphasize
that the extreme variation in brightness is a consequence of the density proﬁle that
we expect in a closed-loop geometry. This modeling approach, however, is applicable
to other density proﬁles, such as those in ﬂux tubes that are part of magnetically
open coronal holes and the solar wind. As we will report in a future paper, the type
III brightness variation is much more moderate in this case, both in frequency and
spatial location. We suggest that classic ‘U’ and ‘J’ bursts occur on open ﬂux tubes
with signiﬁcant bend or on giant closed loops where the constant conductive ﬂux
model is no longer appropriate. Finally, we note that Del Zanna et al. (2011) have
suggested that both distinguishable type III bursts and noise storms can be produced
together by interchange reconnection at the boundary between open and closed ﬁeld
lines. To our knowledge, we have oﬀered the ﬁrst explanation for why the type Is
have a narrow frequency spread.

We have begun to apply the knowledge gained from these simulations to actual
observations. Results from ground-based radio observatories and the FIELDS instru-
ment on Parker Solar Probe will be reported in upcoming papers.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Nicholeen Viall for valuable discussions on various aspects of the time-lag
technique and Golla Thejappa for his constructive comments and valuable insights
in understanding the theoretical aspects of type III bursts. We also thank the re-
viewer for their thorough review and comments. This work was supported in part by
the NSF grants AST-1615807, AGS-1654382, and AST-19010354; the NASA grants
80NSSC18K1128 and 80NSSC17K0660 to New Jersey Institute of Technology; the
Internal Scientist Funding Model (competitive work package program) at Goddard
Space Flight Center; and the FIELDS experiment on Parker Solar Probe.

APPENDIX

26

Chhabra et al.

A. TYPE III INTENSITY VARIATION

Under the assumption that the intensity, I for a constant frequency bin ∆ν along
the loop is directly proportional to the volume ∆s that the particles traverse, we
have:

I ∝ ∆s =

∆n
dn/ds

where ∆n is the density bin corresponding to the frequency bin ∆ν.

The plasma frequency, ν ∝ n1/2, which gives us:

∆ν =

dν
dn

∆n

(A1)

(A2)

(cid:19)−1

I ∝ 2ν

⇒ ∆n ∝ 2ν∆ν
(cid:18) dn
ds
Note that, as mentioned in Section 2.2, this relation is true for all frequencies νi for
which the respective volume element is smaller than the beam length, i.e. ∆si < Lb.
For any element ∆si > Lb, the intensity, I is directly proportional to the beam length,
Lb. The intensity thus calculated is used to create the light curves for each frequency
based on their position along the loop.

(A3)

(A4)

∆ν

To visualize the above relation better, let us look at it in terms of temperature, T

along the loop. From equation A4, for a constant volume element ∆ν, we have,

I ∝ ν

(cid:19)−1

(cid:18)dn
ds
(cid:18) dn
ds

∝ n1/2

(cid:19)−1

(A5)

The structure of a static equilibrium loop is reasonably well represented by a con-

stant conductive ﬂux at constant pressure. For a constant conduction ﬂux Fc

Fc ∝ T 5/2

(cid:19)

(cid:18) dT
ds
(cid:18) P
n
1
n2

−

(cid:19)

(cid:19) dn
ds

∝ T 5/2 d
ds
(cid:18)

∝ T 5/2

assuming constant pressure along the loop.

Substituting this back in equation A5, we get

⇒

dn
ds

∝ T −5/2n2

(A6)

(A7)

Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

I ∝ T 5/2 n−2 n1/2
∝ T 5/2 T 2 T −1/2

⇒ I ∝ T 4 ∝ n−4 ∝ ν−8

27

(A8)

(A9)

The above equations clearly exhibit the precipitous fall in intensity I as the density
n increases downward along the loop and the T decreases.

B. FACTORS AFFECTING THE CCOP

The basis of the time-lag technique (Viall & Klimchuk 2012, 2017) is to compute
the cross-correlation between a pair of light curves for two diﬀerent channels as a
function of imposed temporal oﬀset, l. For some studies, such as the cooling of
nanoﬂare-heated loops, only the lag of maximum correlation is important. For the
purpose of this study, we are interested in the complete spectrum of cross-correlation
power. The equation used to calculate the cross-correlation power, P for a negative
lag is given as:

P (l < 0) =

For a positive lag,

P (l > 0) =

(cid:80)N −|l|−1
k=0

(cid:113)(cid:80)N −1

(xk+|l| − ¯x)(yk − ¯y)

k=0 (xk − ¯x)2 (cid:80)N −1

k=0 (yk − ¯y)2

(cid:80)N −l−1
k=0

(cid:113)(cid:80)N −1

(xk − ¯x)(yk+l − ¯y)

k=0 (xk − ¯x)2 (cid:80)N −1

k=0 (yk − ¯y)2

(B10)

(B11)

where xk and yk are the intensities in the chosen frequencies at time k, ¯x and ¯y are
the means of the intensity light curves for x and y respectively, and N is the number
of data points in the light curves.

Now, following from equations B10 & B11 note that the product of deviations from
the mean, i.e. (xi − ¯x)(yi − ¯y) will be positive only when xi and yi both lie on the same
side of their respective means. Therefore, if xi and yi are simultaneously greater or
less than their respective means, the cross-correlation power P (l) will be positive, and
if one is greater while the other is less, the power will be negative. While summing
over the product for all data points, the negative products will contribute in reducing
the power of the cross-correlation.This eﬀect is quite apparent from the equations
above. However, additional factors such as the duration and number of the bursts
also aﬀect the power of the cross-correlation.

Let us consider example light-curves for x and y as shown in Figure 17a. Each
panel in the plot represents a key diﬀerence between the light curves. In the top-
most panel, the two light curves vary in intensity but the duration of the bursts is

28

Chhabra et al.

Figure 17. a) Light curves for two frequencies x and y overlaid on one plot for three
diﬀerent scenarios; Top: The event has the same duration but diﬀers in intensity for the
two frequencies, Middle: the event has same intensities but diﬀerent durations and, Bottom:
Both intensities and durations diﬀer, but now two peaks are present at each frequency as the
particles move in both directions (same as Case C in Section 2.3). b) CCOPS corresponding
to each scenario from a). c) Light curves for frequencies x and y overlaid on one plot showing
two events, Event 1 and Event 2, on diﬀerent loops (with electron beams moving downward
only). d) CCOPS corresponding to then scenario from c). The overlaid dashed line shows
individual CCOPS for Event 1 in the absence of Event 2 and vice versa.

exactly the same.
In the middle panel, the duration varies but intensities are the
same, and in the bottom panel, along with the variation in intensity and duration, we
introduce emission in two places. The last case is very similar to the one seen in Case
C from Section 2.3 (particles moving in both directions). To compute the CCOP,
imagine moving one of the light curves with respect to the other until their centers
are perfectly aligned and then moving away in the opposite direction. As the peaks in
the light-curves start overlapping, the power of the cross-correlation increases until it
reaches a maximum when their centers are perfectly aligned and then reduces again.
Figure 17b shows the CCOPS corresponding to each panel in 17a. For the top
panel, the maximum power of the cross-correlation is unity at the time-diﬀerence
required to perfectly align the two light-curves. Their diﬀerence in intensity does

0.80.91.01.11.21.31.40.00.40.81.2Relative Intensity, I [a.u.]0.80.91.01.11.21.31.40.00.40.81.2Relative Intensity, I [a.u.]0.60.81.01.21.4Time [sec]0.00.40.81.20.60.81.01.21.4Time [sec]0.00.40.81.2Cross−correlation Power−0.4−0.20.00.20.4Time Offset [sec]−0.20.20.61.0−0.20.20.61.0-0.00.40.81.21.21.31.41.51.61.71.80.00.40.81.2−0.4−0.20.00.20.4−0.20.20.61.0−0.4−0.20.00.20.4a)b)0.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.60.00.40.81.2Relative Intensity, I [a.u.]0.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.60.00.40.81.2Relative Intensity, I [a.u.]−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.5−0.20.20.61.0Cross−correlation PowerTime Offset [sec]Time [sec]c)d)Event 1Event 2B1R1B2R2Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

29

not aﬀect the CCOP. To see this, imagine that one of the peaks becomes enhanced.
The deviation from the mean is then larger throughout the light curve. It is positive
and substantially larger at the location of the peak, and it is negative and minimally
larger outside the peak. The net eﬀect is no change in the CCOP.

In the middle panel, the maximum power never reaches one. This is simply due to
the diﬀerent durations of bursts in the two light curves, even when they are centered
one above the other. Also note that the width of the cross correlation curve is equal
to the sum of the burst durations in the two frequencies. In the bottom panel, the
maximum power for each time-lag has become much smaller. As one intensity peak
in x is centered above one of the peaks in y, the misalignment in the other peaks of
the light-curves further reduces the power in addition to the diﬀerent durations.

Lastly, panel 17c shows light curves for frequencies x and y for two events. Each
event occurs in a diﬀerent loop and the particles only move downward. The physically
interesting correlations are those between peaks of the same event, i.e. B1 with R1,
and B2 with R2. Correlations of one burst with another, i.e. B1 with R2 and B2
with R1, also exist but are what we term “false” peaks. The corresponding CCOPS
(solid line) in panel d also have the dashed line overlaid showing individual CCOPS
for Event 1 (cyan) in the absence of Event 2 and vice versa (orange). The CCOPS
(solid line) show two important implications of the presence of multiple bursts in the
light curves:

1. Contrary to the ﬁrst example (top panel) in panel a), the high intensity from
event 1 in x will shift the mean ¯x such that the faint peak B2 in x will have a
smaller positive deviation from the mean. Consequently, the CCOPS will now
be aﬀected by the diﬀerence in intensity between the two events. The CCOPS
peak at ∼ 0.31 s with the highest power corresponds to a cross-correlation
between B1 and R1. Note that its magnitude is lower than it would have
been in the absence of Event 2. Also note that the power of cross-correlation
betweenB2 and R2 at an oﬀset of ∼ 0.22 s is far smaller than its unity value in
the absence of Event 1.

2. The second brightest peak in the CCOP, at a time oﬀset of ∼ 1.2 s, corresponds
to a cross-correlation between B1 and R2, i.e. events from two diﬀerent loops,
and hence is a “false” peak. The second false peak at the oﬀset of ∼ −0.75
s from R1 and B2 also has a small power due to the reason mentioned in the
previous point.

This tells us that the CCOP in the presence of multiple bursts will be aﬀected by the
dominant intensity peaks in the light curves as they skew the value of mean; and that
the same dominant peaks are also responsible for a high CCOP at false time–lags.
This eﬀect is enhanced with an increase in the burst frequency.

REFERENCES

Alfv´en, H. 1947, MNRAS, 107, 211,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/107.2.211

Benz, A. O., Monstein, C., Beverland, M.,
Meyer, H., & Stuber, B. 2009, SoPh,
260, 375,
doi: 10.1007/s11207-009-9455-1

30

Chhabra et al.

Boerner, P., Edwards, C., Lemen, J.,

—. 2015, Philosophical Transactions of

et al. 2012, SoPh, 275, 41,
doi: 10.1007/s11207-011-9804-8

Bougeret, J. L., Kaiser, M. L., Kellogg,

P. J., et al. 1995, SSRv, 71, 231,
doi: 10.1007/BF00751331

Bradshaw, S. J., & Klimchuk, J. A. 2011,

ApJS, 194, 26,
doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/194/2/26
Chen, B., Yu, S., Battaglia, M., et al.

2018, ApJ, 866, 62,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aadb89
Crane, P. C., & Napier, P. J. 1989, in
Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc
Conference Series, Vol. 6, Synthesis
Imaging in Radio Astronomy, ed. R. A.
Perley, F. R. Schwab, & A. H. Bridle,
139

Dahlin, J. T., Drake, J. F., & Swisdak, M.
2015, Physics of Plasmas, 22, 100704,
doi: 10.1063/1.4933212

Del Zanna, G., Aulanier, G., Klein, K. L.,
& T¨or¨ok, T. 2011, A&A, 526, A137,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201015231
Drake, J. F., Swisdak, M., Che, H., &
Shay, M. A. 2006, Nature, 443, 553,
doi: 10.1038/nature05116

Ginzburg, V. L., & Zhelezniakov, V. V.

1958, Soviet Ast., 2, 653

Hannah, I. G., Hudson, H. S., Hurford,

G. J., & Lin, R. P. 2010, ApJ, 724, 487,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/724/1/487
Hannah, I. G., Hurford, G. J., Hudson,
H. S., Lin, R. P., & van Bibber, K.
2007, ApJL, 659, L77,
doi: 10.1086/516750

Ishikawa, S.-n., & Krucker, S. 2019, ApJ,

876, 111,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab13a1

Klimchuk, J., & Hinode Review Team.

2019, Publications of the Astronomical
Society of Japan, 71, 47,
doi: 10.1093/pasj/psz084

Klimchuk, J. A. 2000, SoPh, 193, 53,
doi: 10.1023/A:1005210127703

—. 2006, SoPh, 234, 41,

doi: 10.1007/s11207-006-0055-z

the Royal Society of London Series A,
373, 20140256,
doi: 10.1098/rsta.2014.0256

Kontar, E. P., & Reid, H. A. S. 2009,

ApJL, 695, L140,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/695/2/L140
Kontar, E. P., Chen, X., Chrysaphi, N.,

et al. 2019, ApJ, 884, 122,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab40bb
Lecacheux, A. 2000, Washington DC

American Geophysical Union
Geophysical Monograph Series, 119,
321, doi: 10.1029/GM119p0321

Lemen, J. R., Title, A. M., Akin, D. J.,

et al. 2012, SoPh, 275, 17,
doi: 10.1007/s11207-011-9776-8
Mandrini, C. H., D´emoulin, P., &

Klimchuk, J. A. 2000, ApJ, 530, 999,
doi: 10.1086/308398

Martens, P. C. H. 2010, ApJ, 714, 1290,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/714/2/1290
Martens, P. C. H., Kankelborg, C. C., &
Berger, T. E. 2000, ApJ, 537, 471,
doi: 10.1086/309000

Mondal, S., Oberoi, D., & Mohan, A.

2020, ApJL, 895, L39,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab8817

Osterbrock, D. E. 1961, ApJ, 134, 347,

doi: 10.1086/147165

Parker, E. N. 1958, ApJ, 128, 664,

doi: 10.1086/146579
—. 1983, ApJ, 264, 635,
doi: 10.1086/160636
—. 1988, ApJ, 330, 474,
doi: 10.1086/166485

Perley, R. A., Chandler, C. J., Butler,

B. J., & Wrobel, J. M. 2011, ApJL, 739,
L1, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/739/1/L1

Ratcliﬀe, H., Kontar, E. P., & Reid,
H. A. S. 2014, A&A, 572, A111,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201423731
Reid, H. A. S., & Kontar, E. P. 2018,

ApJ, 867, 158,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aae5d4
Reid, H. A. S., & Ratcliﬀe, H. 2014,

Research in Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 14, 773,
doi: 10.1088/1674-4527/14/7/003

Signatures of Type III Solar Radio Bursts from Nanoflares

31

Steinberg, J. L., Hoang, S., Lecacheux,

A., Aubier, M. G., & Dulk, G. A. 1984,

A&A, 140, 39

Thejappa, G., & MacDowall, R. J. 2008,

ApJ, 676, 1338, doi: 10.1086/528835

Viall, N. M., & Klimchuk, J. A. 2012,

ApJ, 753, 35,

doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/753/1/35

—. 2013, ApJ, 771, 115,

doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/771/2/115

—. 2017, ApJ, 842, 108,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa7137

Vievering, J. T., Glesener, L., Athiray,
P. S., et al. 2020, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2011.04753.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.04753
Warren, H. P., Winebarger, A. R., &
Brooks, D. H. 2012, ApJ, 759, 141,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/759/2/141
Wild, J. P., & McCready, L. L. 1950,
Australian Journal of Scientiﬁc
Research A Physical Sciences, 3, 387,
doi: 10.1071/PH500387

Withbroe, G. L., & Noyes, R. W. 1977,

ARA&A, 15, 363, doi: 10.1146/
annurev.aa.15.090177.002051

Zirin, H., Hurford, G. J., & Marsh, K. A.

1978, ApJ, 224, 1043,
doi: 10.1086/156455

