Kinetics and Nucleation Dynamics in Ion-Seeded Atomic Clusters

M. G. Rozman,1 M. Bredice,1, ∗ J. Smucker,1 H. R. Sadeghpour,2 D. Vrinceanu,3 R. Cote,4 and V. Kharchenko1, 2
1Department of Physics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA
2ITAMP, Center for Astrophysics | Harvard & Smithsonian, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
3Department of Physics, Texas Southern University, Houston, TX 77004, USA
4UMass-Boston, Department of Physics, Boston, MA 02125, USA
(Dated: January 24, 2022)

The time-dependent kinetics of formation and evolution of nano-size atomic clusters is investigated
and illustrated with the nucleation dynamics of ion-seed ArnH+ particles. The rates of growth
and degradation of Ar-atomic shells around the seed ion are inferred from Molecular Dynamics
(MD) simulations. Simulations of cluster formation have been performed with accurate quantum-
mechanical binary interaction potentials. Both the nonequilibrium and equilibrium growth of ArnH+
are investigated at diﬀerent temperature and densities of the atomic gas and seed ions. Formation
of Arn≤40 shells is the main mechanism which regulates the kinetics of nano-cluster growth and
the diﬀusive ﬂuctuations of the cluster size distribution. The time-evolution of the cluster intrinsic
energy and cluster size distributions are analyzed at the non-thermal, quasi-equilibrium, and thermal
equilibrium stages of ArnH+ formation. We’ve determined the self-consistent model parameters for
the temporal ﬂuctuations of the cluster size and found coeﬃcients of the diﬀusive growth mechanism
describing the equilibrium distribution of nano-clusters. Nucleation of haze and nano-dust particles
in astrophysical and atmospheric ionized gases are discussed.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The nature and characteristics of phase transitions in
atomic and molecular systems strongly depend on the
inter-particle interactions. These binary interactions de-
termine how rapidly new phases form, and speciﬁcally
regulate a nucleation of solid or liquid particles from
gas and liquid phases. The Classical Nucleation The-
ory (CNT) [1–4] was developed and successfully applied
to the analysis of nucleation processes in macroscopic
and submicron systems under conditions of thermal equi-
librium. CNT predictions of the nucleation kinetics
are essentially based on the Gibbs statistical rule and
on stochastic (diﬀusive) formation of critical nucleation
sizes[1, 2].

In contrast to CNT, theoretical modeling of nucleation
and growth of nano-particles under local nonequilibrium
and non-homogeneous conditions requires precise knowl-
edge of inter-atomic forces and a detailed description of
relaxation processes. We found that non-homogeneous
nucleation of noble gas atoms, seeded by ions, is reg-
ulated via building up of ion-atom clusters from a se-
quence of stable atom shells. On the other hand, we ob-
serve large size ﬂuctuations of nano-clusters under ther-
mal equilibrium which resemble the diﬀusive growth of
critical clusters in CNT models. Nucleation of nano-
size particles in ionized gases is an important process
for a wide range of areas in physics, chemistry, astro-
physics, and atmospheric sciences. Analysis of formation
of nano-size haze and ice particles in the upper atmo-
sphere of planets, satellites, exoplanets, and within debris
disks is critically important for investigations of spec-

∗ mitchell.bredice@uconn.edu

tral properties of these atmospheres[5–10] and circum-
stellar disks [11–13]. Ions and charged nano-dust parti-
cles are major agents stimulating haze and ice cloud for-
mations in the Earth upper atmosphere. The MD simula-
tions, performed with accurate potentials of inter-particle
interaction, can successfully describe both nonequilib-
rium and equilibrium processes of nucleation of nano-
size clusters. Previous investigations were focused on the
nucleation[14, 15], structural properties[16], and phase
transitions of pure argon clusters[17, 18]. Meanwhile,
there is a signiﬁcant amount of nano-cluster research us-
ing supersonic beam experiments analyzing abundances
of clusters with diﬀerent numbers of atoms[19–29]. The
theoretical analyses of cluster structure, ArnH+[19, 30–
32] and small Lennard-Jones (LJ) clusters [33], have been
concentrated on the explanation of diﬀerent ”magic num-
bers” obtained in diﬀerent experiments. There is also
signiﬁcant work on small noble gas clusters focused on
their fragmentation after ionization due to electron or
proton impact [34–38]. Although nonequilibrium energy
relaxation of excited clusters and following fragmenta-
tion involve the same binary potentials as cluster nucle-
ation, the dynamics of these processes diﬀer signiﬁcantly.
In our research, the formation and growth of nano-size
ArnH+ clusters is initiated by ionization of H atoms in
the Ar and H gas mixture and is simulated with the use
of the Large Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Sim-
ulator (LAMMPS) [39]. The nucleation of ArnH+ clus-
ters have been investigated using the results of the MD
simulations performed with quantum-mechanically cal-
culated potentials and in the canonical (NVT) ensemble
with Nos´e-Hoover thermostat [39]. The time-dependent
kinetics of the nucleation and growth of critical ArnH+
clusters and their approach to thermal equilibrium have
been inferred from the results of our MD simulations. A
role of ion seed particles in a phase transition has been

2
2
0
2

n
a
J

1
2

]
s
u
l
c
-
m
t
a
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

3
v
1
4
1
9
0
.
9
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
analyzed in detail employing data of our simulations per-
formed with diﬀerent parameters of the Ar bath gas and
densities of H+ ions.

II. SHELL STRUCTURE, ENERGY, AND
STABILITY OF NANO-SIZE CLUSTERS

The accurate binary potentials of the Ar-Ar and Ar-H+
interactions have already been used in our investigations
of nucleation and growth of ArnH+
m solid or liquid parti-
cles; where large size clusters include many protons [40].
We brieﬂy provide information on the major characteris-
tics of these potentials.

A. Binary interaction potentials

The comprehensive description of the binary interac-
tion potentials used in our simulations is given in [40]. To
summarize the details, the Ar-Ar binary interaction is a
LJ 6-12 short-range van der Waals potential with a well
depth of 0.012 eV and an equilibrium atomic separation
of 3.75 ˚A. The Ar-H+ interaction at its deepest is more
than 4 eV and it asymptotically leads to a r−4 polariza-
tion potential. This interaction is much stronger than the
Ar-Ar interaction due to the ion Coulomb ﬁeld polarizing
the neutral atom. Thus, Ar-H+ potential creates the bulk
of the inter-particle attraction in our simulations, while
the Ar-Ar interaction does not substantially contribute to
any attraction forces in our simulations of ArnH+ cluster
growth with n ≤ 40. On the other hand, the short range
Ar-Ar repulsion together with Ar-H+ potential controls
parameters of the Ar-shells. The ion-ion interaction is
Debye shielded and is modeled as a Yukawa-type inter-
action in LAMMPS. A sketch of the potentials is given in
Fig.1. All potentials used in our modeling do not include
explicit three-body or higher many-body contributions.

B. Geometrical structures and cluster energies:
emergence of primitive symmetry structures.

Nucleation of nano-size clusters has been studied in
detail for neutral noble gases [41]. Neutral atoms at low
temperatures form cluster shells minimizing the cluster
energy. Larger cluster shells with increasing numbers of
atoms can be transformed to regular crystal structures,
if the reservoir temperature is below the melting point.
Stability of nano-cluster shells and their geometrical pa-
rameters are sensitive to characteristics of inter-atomic
potentials [41]. Nucleation of atoms seeded by ions or
charged nano-particles diﬀers signiﬁcantly from cluster
formation in homogeneous neutral gases. The strong at-
traction force between a seed ion and Ar atoms domi-
nates the dynamics during the initial stages of ArnH+
formation. This ionic force creates tighter conﬁnement
of the ArnH+ cluster with larger binding energies for Ar

2

FIG. 1. Potential energy curves for the MD simulations. The
screened H+-H+ interaction is Debye shielded and modeled
as a Yukawa-type potential, due to the electron and proton
ﬁelds. The Ar-Ar interaction is modeled by a LJ potential
and describes the short-ranged vdW interaction between Ar
atoms. The Ar-H+ interaction asymptotically leads to a r−4
polarization potential and is the longest range attraction in
our simulation. The repulsion and attraction energies of the
Ar-Ar and Ar-H+ interactions are approximately equalized at
∼ 2.5˚A.

atoms in close proximity to the H+. The distance be-
tween Ar atoms and ion, i.e. the shell radius r, is the
same for all atoms belonging to the same shell, and the
shell radius r practically does not depend on the number
of atoms in the shell. The number of Ar atoms ns in the
speciﬁc shell is restricted due to conditions minimizing a
cluster potential energy. The maximal value ns occurs
for the closed shells with ns=4,6, .... The speciﬁc geo-
metrical conﬁgurations, tetrahedral and octahedral, are
the primitive symmetry conﬁgurations around the cen-
tral seed ion that minimize the potential energy U (n)
of clusters with closed shells. The primitive symmetry
of the ﬁrst Ar atomic shell, tetrahedral, disagrees with
the structure found in the literature [19, 30–32], which
has the innermost layer of the cluster being a linear Ar-
H+-Ar cluster. Nevertheless, we expect that simulations
of the cluster growth and cluster size distributions can-
not be aﬀected strongly by the semiclassical approxima-
tion used in our MD model. This is because in the both
semi-classical and quantum-mechanical models, the clus-
ter growth of Arn−1H+ + Ar → ArnH+ occurs via cap-
tures of Ar atoms into highly excited conﬁguration states
with a following relaxation of the cluster intrinsic energy
to the ground states. The energies, U (n), which corre-
spond to the minimal total energies at zero temperature,
are given in Table 1 together with an indication of the
symmetry of the cluster conﬁgurations (shells), Ar-H+
inter-atomic distances r, and shortest Ar-Ar distances
within each shell that provide these minima.

Cluster
Ar4H+
Ar8H+
Ar14H+

Symbol
1T4
1T42T4
1T42T43O6

¯r (˚A)
1.69
1.69, 3.57
1.69, 3.58, 4.29

rAr−Ar (˚A)
2.76
2.76, 5.83
2.76, 5.84, 6.07

3

U (n) (eV)
-10.2333
-10.6406
-11.1789

TABLE I. The minimal potential energy U (n), average radii r, and shortest Ar-Ar (within each shell) are shown for the
cluster structure with closed cluster shells 1T4 with the number of Ar atoms nS=4, 1T42T4 with nS=8, and 1T42T43O6 with
nS=14. The shell symmetries are contained in the notation, T = Tetrahedral, O = Octahedral. The shell radius r practically
does not depend on the number of atoms in the speciﬁc shell and has same values for closed and open shells. Details of
geometrical structure of the small nano-size clusters and their minimal energies can be found in https://www.phys.uconn.
edu/~kharchenko/clusters/

.

The Ar atoms from the same shell have identical
such as binding energy or an aver-
parameters,
aged distance from the cluster ion r . The mini-
mal energies u(n) of Ar atoms in the cluster shell,
u(n) = U (n) − U (n − 1) = dU/dn, were calculated for
small Arn<25H+ clusters and results are shown in Fig.2
as a function on n. The detachment energy required
to remove an Ar atom from a ArnH+ cluster is |u(n)|.
The values of u(n) take into account the mean potential
ﬁeld created by all cluster Ar atoms and the H+. The
single particle energy u(n) plays the role of the chemical
potential at T = 0. The value of u(n) at n≤4 rises
sharply with n and then plateaus at n ≥4. The four Ar
atoms form the stable tetrahedral shell of atoms closest
to the seed ion. The energy required to remove any of
the Ar atoms from the Ar4H+ shell at T=0 is u(n = 4) (cid:39)
0.64 eV that corresponds to the temperature ∼ 7300 K.
This energy is signiﬁcantly higher than thermal energies
considered here, and the Ar4H+ clusters are therefore
stable in our simulations. A detachment of an Ar atom
from the next tetrahedral shell (2T4 in Table.1) requires
0.1 eV∼ 800 K. This shell should be stable at low
temperatures (T∼90 K) but can be depopulated under
thermal equilibrium at T∼200 K at suﬃciently dilute Ar
densities [42]. The ion ﬁeld removes the diﬀusion barrier
[2, 3] of nucleation for small clusters and accelerates their
nucleation. The charge-induced growth of small clusters
occurs via the capture of free Ar atoms into cluster
shells. The growth of ArnH+ particles is restricted by
thermal detachment of Ar atoms from cluster shells or
by formation of new phases;
for example, the stable
ArnH+
m large clusters or crystals at low temperatures
[40]. In our current simulations, the stable cluster shells
with large number of Ar atoms were not observed at
low densities or high temperatures. This is because the
rate of evaporation of cluster-bound Ar atoms increases
under these conditions signiﬁcantly with respect to the
shell growth rate causing depopulation of outer shells.

FIG. 2. The energies u(n) of Ar-particle in the cluster shells,
u(n) = U (n)−U (n−1) = dU/dn, as a function of the number
of Ar atoms n in the cluster. The minimal energy required at
T=0 to remove an Ar atom from the ArnH+ cluster is |u(n)|.
The sharp increase of u(n) function at n ≤ 4 corresponds to
construction of the deepest 1T Ar shell. The plateau at n ≥
5 shows that shell energies u(n) of larger clusters are weakly
sensitive to the value of cluster size n. The energy |u(n)| is the
maximal energy which can be transferred to the thermostat
in Arn−1H+ +Ar → ArnH+ transitions. The irregular oscilla-
tions of u(n), shown in the insert, reﬂect energy n-alternation
of Ar atoms in the open shells. The value of these oscillations
is reduced at n (cid:29) 1.

III. METHODS AND RESULTS OF MD
SIMULATIONS OF ArnH + CLUSTER
FORMATION

Each MD simulation begins by randomly generating
coordinates for the atoms and ions; the atoms and ions
are separated by a minimum of 3 ˚A. The simulations are
run at temperatures, 90 < T < 600K, with a variable
number of ions from 0 to 200, and contain a ﬁxed num-
ber of Ar atoms (1000) in the simulation box. Ar atom
velocities are initialized with the Maxwell-Boltzmann dis-
tribution appropriate to the selected temperature, using
LAMMPS built in ”create velocity” function, but the ini-

510152025n1.41.21.00.80.60.40.2u(n) (eV)5811141720230.100.090.08tial velocity of the H+ ions is assigned to be 0. To achieve
diﬀerent densities of Ar atoms and H+ ions the size of the
simulation box is adjusted, with the majority of the sim-
ulations performed at the Ar atom density of 1020 cm−3.
This density is chosen to represent a dense gas and al-
lows for a faster convergence of the cluster growth. All
simulations are run using the canonical ensembles (NVT)
with the Nose-Hoover thermostat function contained in
LAMMPS. The time step for our simulations was 1 fs
and the thermostat temperature damping timescale was
100 fs to avoid sharp changes of the kinetic energies of
atomic particles.

A. Cluster Deﬁnition

The method to extract the clusters from the results of
simulations is done in two stages, by ﬁrst a geometrical
selection of groups of close atoms, clusters, using the DB-
scan algorithm[43], with its implementation in the Julia
programming language through the Clustering.jl pack-
age, and next computation of the cluster intrinsic ener-
gies to verify that all atoms in these clusters are bound.
Stage 1: The DBscan algorithm searches for neighbors
around every atom in the simulation, and if another atom
is within a deﬁned cutoﬀ distance d then it is selected to
be a part of a possible geometric ArnH+ cluster. In this
ﬁrst step we only search for clusters that include a sin-
gle ion and use a cutoﬀ distance of d=4 ˚A. This cutoﬀ
was chosen from the energy minimization calculations,
to ensure that the outer Ar shells with n < 40 can be
detected. The geometric cutoﬀ selection could include
”false” selections, e.g. a group of atoms and ions which
are accidentally close to each other in one speciﬁc snap-
shot of the simulation, but not the next. Such groups of
unbound particles are dissolved in a short time. These
candidates for the ArnH+ clusters can be analyzed and
rejected on the second stage of the cluster-veriﬁcation
process.

Stage 2: We implement another step to our deﬁnition,
that the cluster total energy in the Center of Mass (CM)
frame must be negative, since this would indicate a truly
bound system. The Stage 2 veriﬁcation yields values of
atomic binding energies; this allows the comparison to
the minimal cluster energies obtained in minimization
calculations for each cluster size (Fig.2). The irregular
n-variations of u(n) reﬂect the reconstruction of cluster
shells with the addition of new atoms. The n-variations
of the optimal conﬁguration of cluster shells have been es-
tablished in classical and quantum calculations of atomic
binding energies [19, 30, 31]. These variations should
vanish at “n → ∞” when u(n) provides the minimal
potential energy of atomic particle on the surface of a
macroscopic Ar crystal at T=0. The real total poten-
tial energies for clusters obtained in our simulations are
slightly larger than the minimum potential energy. The
intrinsic cluster energy obtained in simulations is typ-
ically a few percent higher than the minimal potential

4

energy. This excess of the intrinsic energy arises from the
vibration of Ar atoms in the cluster (the kinetic energy
of thermal motion), since our minimal potential energy
is calculated at T=0.

B. Simulations of the Nucleation Kinetics

We have performed a set of MD simulations of the
ArnH+ cluster growth at diﬀerent temperatures and
concentrations of Ar atoms and charged particles H+.
Nascent H+ ions produced at t=0 in the thermal Ar gas
quickly become centers of cluster nucleation. The for-
mation of ﬁrst atomic shells around charge centers is ac-
companied by a local release of signiﬁcant energy. This
initial stage of the nucleation process can be described as
a non-thermal phase of the cluster formation. The large
fraction of released energy is transferred to light particles,
the protons, and later distributed between atomic parti-
cles and absorbed by the LAMMPS thermostat. Growth
of cluster shells leads to diminishing binding energies of
Ar atoms in ArnH+ clusters. Thus, the energy release
is reduced with cluster growth and the entire system (Ar
gas and ArnH+ clusters) approaches thermal equilibrium.
The MD simulations provide near complete informa-
tion about spatial and velocity distributions of all atomic
particles in the free Ar gas and in ArnH+ clusters. Ev-
ery time interval δt = 20 ps, data is dumped for the
entire simulation.This value of δt allows to observe dif-
ferent phase space conﬁgurations at considered densities
and temperatures of atomic particles. Analysis and cal-
culations of physical and geometrical parameters are per-
formed using these 20 ps-snapshots.

C. Cluster formation and velocity distributions of
Ar and H+ particles

The initial stages of cluster growth occur in a nonequi-
librium regime, lasting for the ﬁrst ∼ 1-5 ns. The dura-
tion of this nonequilibrium stage depends on the initial
conditions, the Ar gas parameters, and density of H+
ions. This is apparent from the analysis of Ar and H+
velocity distributions. We see that after the ﬁrst few
steps (each step is 20 ps long), the Ar and H+ velocity
distributions are non-Maxwellian. In each case the ma-
jority of the atoms/ions have small velocities, but with
long high-velocity tails. The energy source for the hot
particles in high-velocity tails is the formation of small
clusters: capture of free Ar atoms into an open ArnH+
cluster shells with n ≤ 8 is an exothermic process with
a large energy release, as shown in Fig.2. Energy release
decreases with growth of outer cluster shells and becomes
comparable with values of typical thermal energy kT .

As the simulation progresses, the peak of the velocity
distribution shifts until the distribution becomes nearly
Maxwellian. Although an insigniﬁcant tail of high veloc-
ities persists in the v-distributions for the entire duration

of the simulations, the bulk of the atoms/ions remain in
the thermalized Maxwellian-type distribution. The time-
evolution of Ar and H+ velocity distribution functions are
show in Fig.3a and Fig.3b. The argon atoms appear cold
at 200 ps due to the large energy losses: Ar atoms transfer
their kinetic energy to the initially ”frozen” light parti-
cles (the ions) at the beginning of the simulation. This
speciﬁc aspect of the velocity relaxation does not inﬂu-
ence formation of the ﬁrst ArnH+ shell, because atomic
binding energies in the cluster shell are roughly two or-
ders of magnitude larger than thermal energies.

FIG. 3. The time-evolution of Ar gas velocity distributions,
a), and H+ ions, b), during growth of ArnH+ clusters at 200K.
The Ar atom density is 1020cm−3 with 1000 Ar atoms and
60 H+ ions in the simulation box. The small fraction of Ar
atoms/H+ ions in the high velocity tail are omitted. The
distributions are normalized to the unity. The theoretical
Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distributions are shown for 100K
(dashed line), and 200K (solid line) together with results of
simulations at 3 ns. These ﬁgures illustrate the time scale
required for the relaxation of velocity distribution functions.

5

D. Nonequilibrium and Equilibrium Stages of
Cluster Nucleation and Growth

1. Stages of ArnH+ cluster formation

Analysis of the results of MD simulations shows at least
three diﬀerent phases in a formation of nano-size ArnH+
clusters. In our cluster growth simulations, all small clus-
ters with n ≤ 40 have distinct shell structures minimising
their potential energies.

The growth of the cluster size n corresponds to a con-
sequent ﬁlling of unoccupied ArnH+ shells described in
Section 2B. In Figs.4a and 4b, we show an example of
the ArnH+ growth and degradation for the time t ≤ 100
ns after 200 H atoms have been ionized and mixed with
the Ar gas. The numbers of clusters Nc(n, t) with the
speciﬁed number of Ar atoms n are shown as functions
of the time t with the regular snapshot interval of 20 ps.
Simulations have been carried at the Ar atom density of
1020 cm−3 and the temperature T= 200K. In Figs.4a and
4b; we can identify three distinct phases of nano-particle
nucleation and growth. The ﬁrst phase of nucleation is:
(a) Nonequilibrium nucleation (t (cid:46) 2 ns ).

During this stage, Ar atoms are ”captured” into the
deepest shells. Protons create a strong potential ﬁeld,
and the process of capturing Ar atoms into closest clus-
ter shells releases energies comparable with u(n). Ther-
mal energy ﬂuctuations cannot detach Ar atoms from the
ﬁrst deeply bound shell (Fig.2). The stage (a) is an ir-
reversible nonequilibrium process of the formation of the
inner atomic shells of ArnH+. The reduction of small
cluster population Nc(n, t) for n = 1 − 3 shown in Fig.4a
is explained by a capture of free Ar atoms into the closed
cluster shells 1T4. Outer cluster shells are formed at
around t ∼0.1 - 1 ns. The cluster nucleation dynamics
can be illustrated by the time-dependent abundance of
ArnH+ (1 ≤ n ≤ 10) clusters shown in Figs.4a and 4b.
At large t, non-signiﬁcant populations of larger clusters
with n ≥ 5 reﬂect an eﬃcient thermal evaporation of Ar
atoms from outer cluster shells at T=200 K. Ar5H+ clus-
ters are more abundant than other states of 2Tn shells
due to the n−diﬀusive behaviour of the relatively stable
Ar4H+ clusters. Details of the diﬀusive regime will be
described in the Section IV.

(b) Quasi-equilibrium growth ( 2 ns (cid:46) t (cid:46) 60 ns ).
The second stage in the interval between 2 ns < t < 60
ns, is characterized by distinct ﬂuctuations of the clus-
ter size shown in Fig.4a. During this quasi-equilibrium
stage of the nucleation kinetics, the tetrahedral Ar4H+
clusters became the most abundant particles. The ﬂuc-
tuations of the cluster abundances relate to captures and
losses of Ar atoms into speciﬁc cluster shells. Averaging
of these ﬂuctuations over statistically signiﬁcant time-
intervals with values between 10 ns and 20 ns, yields
the smooth functions describing the average number of
clusters N c(n, t) with n Ar atoms. The number of clus-
ters depicted in Fig.4a have been averaged over statis-
tically signiﬁcant interval ∆t=10ns and obtained results

6

FIG. 5. MD simulations of number of Ar atoms n(t) in a
single Arn(t)H+ cluster. The simulation time is t= 100 ns
and the Ar gas temperature is T= 90 K and the number of
Ar atoms in the simulation box N=103. The dashed line is the
theoretical curve for an average cluster size n(t) as a function
of time. The time delay parameter td = 3.2 ns and the scaling
relaxation time is tT = 1.4 ns.

ﬂuctuations. The time boundaries for these stages, in
Figs.4a and 4b, are given as approximates; since the ac-
tual time-boundaries between stages depend on Ar and
H+ densities and temperatures used in each speciﬁc sim-
ulation.

2. Dynamics of the independent growth of ArnH+ clusters

Under conditions of the independent growth of ArnH+
clusters, the averaged time-dependent characteristics of a
single cluster describe parameters of the ensemble of inde-
pendent protons. This ergodic statement is not valid for
interacting clusters, when consolidation of ArnH+ clus-
ters leads to formation of a new phase like large ArnH+
m
nano-crystals or liquid droplets [40]. The nucleation and
growth of independent clusters have been simulated for
a single H+ ion at diﬀerent temperatures and at the
constant number of Ar atoms N =103 in the simula-
tion box. Nucleation of the smallest ArnH+ clusters and
consequent growth of Ar shells have been studied up to
t = 100 ns.
In Fig.5, the actual time-evolution of the
cluster size n(t) is shown for a single Arn(t)H+ cluster
at T= 90 K. The dashed red curve shows the theoreti-
cal data on the cluster growth based on a simpliﬁed two
state approximation [44]. In this model, the shell growth
and cluster size oscillations are described by transitions
between two states: the state of free Ar atoms in the
simulation box of volume V and the bound state of Ar
atoms in the outer shell of the cluster of size n(t). We
only consider the binding energies (cid:15)(n) of Ar atoms in
the outer cluster shells and substitute instead n(t) its
values averaged over ﬂuctuations: n → n(t). The (cid:15)(n)
energy in a speciﬁc shell depends on a mean-ﬁeld created
by H+ and all Ar atoms attached to the ion. The self-

FIG. 4. The abundances Nc(n, t) of ArnH+ clusters with dif-
ferent number of Ar atoms n (n ≤ 5 in Fig.4a, 6 ≤ n ≤ 9
and the cumulative abundance of n ≥ 10 in Fig.4b) as func-
tions of time t. Clusters are formed by an ensemble of 200 H+
ions embedded into the equilibrium Ar gas at the temperature
T= 200 K and the atom density of 1020 cm−3. H atoms have
been ionised at the time t=0.The inset axes in Fig.4a show
the abundances Nc(n, t) of ArnH+ (2 ≤ n ≤ 5) averaged over
the interval ∆t = 10ns.

for N c(n, t) are shown in Fig.4a’s inset axes. The steady
growth of N c(n = 4, t) of tetrahedral clusters during the
stage (b) can be considered as a quasi-equilibrium nucle-
ation and growth of a new phase.

(c) Thermal equilibrium growth and size evolution (t (cid:38)

60 ns).

The growth of N c(n = 4, t) is stopped in the stage (c)
at t ≥ 60 ns, when the system {free Ar atoms + ArnH+
clusters } has reached the steady state regime in cluster
nucleation and evaporation, i.e. the system has relaxed
to the state of full thermal equilibrium between diﬀer-
ent phases (Fig.4a). The averaged number of ArnH+
remain constant for the entire duration of stage (c) 60 ns
< t < 100 ns, and typical ﬂuctuations of the n-number
of Ar atoms bound by H+ ions are described by thermal

consistent energy u(n) is an essential part of the binding
energy (cid:15)(n), though (cid:15)(n) may include contributions of
diﬀerent shell conﬁgurations mixed by thermal ﬂuctua-
tions. We assume, for simplicity, that cluster growth oc-
curs in subsequent captures/detachments of a single Ar
atom n(t) → n(t) ± 1 and the number of Ar atoms in the
gas is large N (cid:29) n(t). For the two states model, each Ar
atom can occupy the outer shell of the Arn(t)H+ cluster
or stays in the free gas state. The partition function Z
of an ensemble of Ar atoms can be written as:

Z =

zN
Ar
N !

,

zAr = V /λ3

T + g(n(t)) exp

(cid:20)

−

(cid:21)

(cid:15)(n(t))
kT

, (1)

where zAr is the partition function for a Ar atom un-
der condition of the Maxwell-Boltzamnn statistics, and
λT = (cid:112)2π(cid:126)2/mkT is the thermal de-Broglie wave of Ar
atoms. The ﬁrst term in the expression for zAr corre-
sponds to the occupied number of states in the classi-
cal gas with the ﬁxed temperature and particles density
(N (cid:29) n(t)), and the second one corresponds to the con-
tribution of the outer cluster shell with the energy (cid:15)(n(t))
and statistical weight g(n(t)). The values of g(n(t)) are
approximately proportional to the product of geometri-
cal cluster volume Vc(n(t)) and the thermal momentum
space volume: g(n(t)) ∼ Vc(n(t))/λ3
T . The presence of
NH + independent H+ ions in the simulation box could
increase the cluster statistical weight by NH + times.

The two-state approximation describes the populations
of these states via the eﬀective chemical potential µef f ,
deﬁned for Ar atoms in the outer cluster shell. The µef f -
value takes into account diﬀerent statistical weights of the
gas and cluster states [44]. Our simulations include the
strong nonequilibrium initial condition: all deep cluster
shells are empty at t = 0. Under this condition, the value
of µef f , regulating population of the cluster shells should
depend on time: µef f (t) = µef f (N, T, t). This eﬀective
chemical potential will asymptotically approach the equi-
librium value µ(N, T ) when the relaxation processes are
accomplished. The population of cluster shells n(t) can
be expressed as:

n(t) = N

exp [−∆(t, T )]
1 + exp [−∆(t, T )]

(cid:39) nc

exp

1 + exp

(cid:105)

(cid:104) (t−td)
tT
(cid:104) (t−td)
tT

(cid:105) , (2)

7

accurate initial conditions at t=0, but it describes well
an evolution of n(t) for the entire time of simulations.

The reduction of the absolute value |µef f (t)| with time
leads to the population of cluster shells with smaller bind-
ing energies |(cid:15)(n)| and thus stimulates an increase of the
average cluster size n(t). At t → ∞ the asymptotic value
of µef f (t) matches to the equilibrium chemical potential
µ(N, T ): µef f (t) → µ(N, T ), and n(t → ∞) → nc. In
Fig.5, the value of µef f (t) has been shifted up to ener-
gies (cid:15)(n) of ArnH+ clusters with n ∼ 10 − 14 for the
time interval of few units of scaling time td, i.e approx-
imately for 3td ∼10 ns. This reﬂect the process of the
time-dependent population of the three deepest cluster
shells of Ar atoms. From Eq.2 we can conclude, that at
t = td an average size n(t) has to be about 50% of its
thermal equilibrium value nc = 21.6 at T=90K. The val-
ues of kinetics parameters, td (cid:39) 3.2 ns and tT = 1.4 ns,
are inferred from the data depicted in Fig.5. To illustrate
the eﬃciency of the two state model, we show in Figs.6a
and 6b the initial stages of cluster growth for two time
intervals 0 < t (cid:46) 2 ns and 0 < t (cid:46) 10 ns.

The nonequilibrium stage (0 < t (cid:46) 2 ns) in Fig.6a
does not indicate any detachments of Ar atoms from the
ﬁrst, deepest cluster shell. This nonequilibrium stage of
growth cannot yield notable ﬂuctuations of the cluster
size n(t) because the binding energies of Ar atoms in
small clusters (n ≤ 8) are signiﬁcantly larger than the
thermal energy at T=90K and thermal ﬂuctuations can-
not remove Ar atoms from these shells. Rare changes of
n(t) in Fig.6a are considered as attempts to increase the
cluster size. Time of formation of the ﬁrst two tetrahe-
dral shells is estimated as 1 - 1.5 ns. The scaling value
of thermalization time tT =1.4 ns is in good agreement
with our evaluation of the velocity relaxation time of Ar
atoms. The tT value can be identiﬁed in Figs.4a, 4b, 5,
6a, and 6b as the onset of the fast and strong up- and
down- ﬂuctuations of the cluster size n(t) with a simulta-
neous steady increase of the mean cluster size n(t). The
quasi-equilibrium stage of cluster growth begins after 1.5
- 2 ns. The mean cluster size n(t) increases slowly until
it shows a saturation at 10 - 15 ns since the beginning of
the nucleation process, as is depicted in Figs.5 and 6b.

kT

where nc = n(t → ∞) is the average number of Ar atoms
in the cluster under condition of thermal equilibrium,
and ∆(t, T ) = (cid:15)(n(t))−µef f (t)
. The parameter tT repre-
sents the scaling time of cluster growth during the non-
Maxwellian and quasi-equilibrium stages of nucleation.
The scaling time-shift parameter td takes into account
a time-delay in formation of ﬁrst tetrahedral shells and
formally describes a motion of µef f (t) towards the up-
per cluster shells with the atomic binding energy (cid:15)(n).
The full derivation of the time-delay in the formation of
ArH+, Ar2H+, and Ar3H+ molecules needs to include an
accurate analysis of few-body collisions, which are out of
the scope of the simple two-state model. Thus, the sim-
pliﬁed time-dependence of n(t) from Eq.2 cannot provide

IV. EQUILIBRIUM SIZE DISTRIBUTION OF
INDEPENDENT ArnH + CLUSTERS AND
CLUSTER FLUCTUATIONS

The size distribution of solid or liquid nano-particles
is a fundamental characteristic required for analysis and
modeling of many astrophysical and atmospheric phe-
nomena. The size-distribution of small clusters depends
on inter-atomic interactions and the nucleation kinetics.
The attachment and detachment of atoms or molecules
create time-dependent ﬂuctuations of the cluster size
even under the thermal equilibrium condition. Detailed
analysis of these ﬂuctuations can provide information on
the cluster size distribution in an ensemble of indepen-

dent particles.

A. Fluctuations of cluster size under the thermal
equilibrium condition

The ”ﬂat” behavior of n(t) at large time t and in-
tensive ﬂuctuation regime are indicators of the thermal
equilibrium between ”cluster-bound” and free Ar atoms.
The number of Ar atoms n(t) in a ArnH+ cluster are
shown in Fig.7a for two clusters formed by two indepen-
dent protons under the thermal equilibrium conditions.
Two ”trajectories” of MD simulations n1(t) and n2(t) for
this independent clusters are shown as functions of time
inside the time interval between 40 ns and 44 ns. Cluster
size ﬂuctuations are characterized by diﬀerent time scales
and amplitudes. Averaging of n(t)-function over diﬀer-
ent time-intervals shows separate typical frequency and

FIG. 6. The number of Ar atoms n(t) in the single H + ion
cluster as a function of the time in the nonequilibrium stage of
nucleation: (a) Formation of the deep shells in ArnH+ clusters
for the time interval t= 0 - 2 ns after creation of the H+ ion
in the argon bath gas; (b) The intermediate stage of ArnH+
growth and development of the thermal ﬂuctuations of n(t)
inside the time interval 0 < t < 10 ns. The gas temperature
and density are T= 90K and ng= 1020 cm−3 respectively.
Theoretical curve is computed using thermodynamic formula
for the two state approximation given by Eq.2 with the kinetic
parameters td (cid:39) 3.2 ns, tT = 1.4 ns, and nc=21.6.

8

amplitudes of cluster size-ﬂuctuations. For example, the
results of averaging (ﬁltering) of the cluster size ﬂuctua-
tions are shown in Fig.7b for diﬀerent Gaussian ﬁltering
intervals 2σ = 40 ps, 0.2 ns, and 1 ns. Fast ﬂuctuations
correspond to the thermal attachment/detachment of Ar
atoms from cluster shells. Slow ﬂuctuations can be at-
tributed to a long-term relaxation of thermo-dynamical
parameters of the gas environment around clusters. The
long-term ﬂuctuations exist for all ArnH+ clusters and
they have similar scale of typical ﬂuctuations, but hap-
pen at diﬀerent times and cluster locations.

The ﬂuctuation pattern of the cluster size-distribution
Nc(n, t) has also been found in simulations of cluster
growth for an ensemble of H+ ions embedded into Ar gas
(Figs.4a and 4b). Diﬀerent stages of nucleation processes
shown in Figs.4a and 4b for the ensemble of 200 H+ ions
and thermal ﬂuctuations of the cluster population can be
investigated in detail using data of the cluster formation
by individual H+ ions. Strong time-ﬂuctuations of n(t)
near the average equilibrium value illustrate the diﬀusive
nature of cluster growth under the thermal equilibrium
conditions. The scale of cluster ﬂuctuations shown in
Figs.7a and 7b provides accurate information on the sta-
tionary equilibrium distribution of ArnH+ cluster sizes
at diﬀerent temperatures.

B. Equilibrium size-distribution of ArnH+ clusters

Parameters of the time evolution of the average clus-
ter size n(t) and time-dependent ﬂuctuations, n(t)- n(t),
around the average value yield unique information on the
cluster size distribution during the quasi-equilibrium and
equilibrium stages of the cluster growth. Fluctuations
can be considered as the bases for the diﬀusion process
in the parametric {n}-space of the ArnH+ clusters [1–4].
Exchange of Ar atoms between cluster shells and free Ar
gas during the quasi-equilibrium or equilibrium stages of
nucleation is an example of a random walk in the space
of cluster size n.

The diﬀusion characteristics of the ArnH+ growth and
the stationary cluster size distributions P (n, T ) have
been inferred from the results of MD simulations at dif-
ferent temperatures and ion concentrations. The em-
pirical probabilities to detect ArnH+ cluster with n
Ar atoms during speciﬁed time interval τ is given by
the normalized Probability Distribution Function (PDF)
P (n, t, τ, T ). The empirical probability P (n, t, τ, T ) =
N (n, t, τ, T )/N (t, τ, T ) is deﬁned as a ratio of the num-
ber of N (n, t, τ, T ) realization of ArnH+ clusters with n
atoms for the time interval τ to the total number of real-
ization N (t, τ, T ) = (cid:80)
n N (n, t, τ, T ). The time-interval
τ has been selected to be high enough for an accurate sta-
tistical evaluation of n-distributions. The deﬁned PDF
does not depend on the time, under condition of the ther-
mal equilibrium and describes stationary thermal proba-
bilities P (n, T ).

We have computed P (n, t, τ, T ) at diﬀerent time t to

9

FIG. 8. The empirical probability P (n, t, τ, T ) to ﬁnd the
ArnH+ clusters with n Ar atoms in the cluster shells. The
total simulation time t= 100 ns for a single H+ ion at T=90K.
The curves A, B, and C are shown at diﬀerent times: curve A,
the earlier stage of cluster formation 0≤ t ≤20 ns, curve B just
after thermalization 20≤ t ≤60 ns, and curve C 60≤ t ≤100
ns at the end of the MD simulation process. The averaging
interval for the later distributions is τ =40 ns, and for the
early stage A is 20 ns. The 0-20 ns time interval includes
essentially nonequilibrium stage of the cluster nucleation and
this causes a visible fraction of small clusters in the empirical
probability given by the curve A.

These probabilities are controlled by the distribution
of the cluster Ar-detachment energies u(n), which
have deeper local minima near n ∼ 19-23 as it is
shown in Fig.2. The low temperature T=90K allows
Ar atoms to occupy outer cluster shells. These shells
intensively exchange by Ar atoms with the thermal
Ar gas creating large n ﬂuctuations (Fig.5) with the
standard deviation σ(n, T ) (cid:39) 4 Argon atoms. The value
of σ(n, t), inferred from the analysis of time-dependent
ﬂuctuations at the thermal equilibrium stage, allows
to compute the theoretical value of the full width at
half maximum (FWHM) of the thermal distribution:
FWHM(cid:39) 2.34 σ(n, t) (cid:39) 9.3. This matches well to the
simple estimation of the FWHMC value of the thermal
distribution P(n,T) (curve C in Fig.8): FWHMC (cid:39)10,
if the n-distribution of the C-curve is approximated by
a Gaussian. The peak of P (n, t, τ, T ) = P (n, T ) around
the minimal values of u(n) at the region n ∼ 19 − 23
and strong n-ﬂuctuations are mostly formed at t > 20 ns.

V. KINETICS OF THE CLUSTER FORMATION
FOR ENSEMBLE OF H+ IONS

The kinetics of cluster nucleation and their thermal
equilibrium parameters can be modiﬁed by the mutual
inﬂuence of ArnH+ in the cluster formation process.
At high concentration of H+ ions, the capture of free

(a) The number of Ar atoms n1(t) and n2(t) in
FIG. 7.
two independent clusters, 1 and 2, are shown as functions of
the time t under the thermal equilibrium conditions inside
the time interval t= 40 ns - 44 ns. The gas temperature and
density are T= 90K and ng= 1020cm−3 respectively. (b) The
time-scale ﬁltering of ﬂuctuations are shown in Fig.7b; the
smoothed curves in Fig.7b are shown for the cluster 2 from
Fig.7a. The averaging time for the Gaussian ﬁlters are 2σ =
40 ps, 0.2 ns, and 1 ns for solid, dot-dashed, dashed curves
respectively.

investigate the kinetics of the independent cluster growth
under quasi-equilibrium and equilibrium conditions. Re-
sults are shown by curves A, B, and C in Fig.8. The
error bars in Fig.8 indicate a standard deviation of the
MD simulation results. Cluster size distributions at dif-
ferent times t reﬂect diﬀerent phases of the cluster shell
formation. A long tail of small clusters with n ≤ 16
as is shown in Fig.8 (curve A), is formed during earlier
stages of cluster growth under nonequilibrium conditions
and this is clearly reﬂected in P (n, t, τ = 20ns, T ) for
t ≤ 20. More detailed information about the cluster n-
distributions at short time t ≤ 20 ns requires signiﬁcantly
shorter intervals τ due to the fast non-thermal growth of
clusters (Fig.5) and so, an increasing number of indepen-
dent simulating trajectories {n(t)}.

The quasi-equilibrium and equilibrium stages of
the cluster formation arise after t ≥ 20 ns (B and
C curves in Fig.8). They show broad distributions
of the cluster sizes n between 15 and 30 Ar atoms.

4041424344051015202530Time(ns)NumberofArAtomsn(t)Cluster2Cluster1(a)T=90K4041424344051015202530Time(ns)NumberofArAtoms(b)T=90K10

FIG. 9. The probability distribution function P (n, NH+ ) to
ﬁnd ArnH+ clusters with n Ar atoms in the cluster shells as
a function the number of argon atoms n. ArnH+ clusters
are formed by the initial ensemble of NH+ ions. The total
simulation time is t= 100 ns. The gas temperature T= 90 K,
with either NH+ =1 (circles), or NH+ =20 (triangles) H+ ions,
all at Ar density 1020 cm−3. Data is averaged over the time
interval 60-100 ns, error bars for the 20 H+ ion curve are on
the order of the marker size. The introduction of more ions
leads to a reduction of the mean cluster size compare with
the independent proton growth.

FIG. 10. The thermal equilibrium probability P (n, NH+ , T )
to detect the ArnH+ clusters with the n Ar atoms for the
ensembles of NH+ = 1 and 200 H+ ions. The results of the
independent H+ ion growth are show for T=200K (hexagons,
left vertical axis) and T= 90K (circles, right vertical axis).
The cluster size distribution P (n, NH+ = 200, T = 200K)
for the averaged value over the ensemble of 200 H+ ions at
the single snapshot at t=80 ns are shown (squares, left ver-
tical axis) with corresponding error bars. The triangles (left
vertical axis) show results of P (n, NH+ = 200, T = 200K)
obtained with time and ensemble averaging. The error bars
for this case is smaller than the marker size.

Ar atoms by diﬀerent clusters becomes a competitive
process. Additional complexity of nucleation arises at
low gas temperature, when strong correlations between
ArnH+ clusters lead to their aggregation to a new phase,
the large scale ArnH+
m droplet or nano-crystal [40]. This
transition may occur via several paths, such as consolida-
tion of strongly-bound Ar4H+ clusters or as a coalescence
process of absorption of small and medium clusters by
larger nano-particles [1]. We have simulated the cluster
nucleation using diﬀerent initial ensembles of H+ ions,
NH + from 1 to 200 H+ ions at the temperatures T=90K
and 200K.

To clarify the inﬂuence of an increasing H+ density on
the nucleation process, we have performed simulations
of the ArnH+ nucleation at NH +=1 and 20 H+ ions at
the temperature T=90K and the constant number of Ar
atoms NAr=103 in the simulation box. Results are shown
in Fig.9. The signiﬁcant increase of the number of H+
ions (triangles in Fig.9 for NH += 20) leads to a reduction
of the mean cluster size compared with the independent
proton growth (circles). At T=90K, the 20 H+ ions have
captured about 36% of free argon atoms. The density
of the free Ar gas became around 64% of the initial gas
density and that shifts the negative chemical potential of
free Ar atoms down towards Ar cluster binding energies
on the value ∆µgas(T ) (cid:39) ln[0.64] kT (cid:39) - 0.45 kT. Argon
atoms from the largest size clusters are easily evaporated
due to such shifts. In this simpliﬁed estimations we have
neglected changes of the mean ﬁeld potential.

The cluster size distribution for the ensemble of 200

H+ ions has been inferred from our MD simulations at
the temperature T=200K and results are shown in Fig.10
by the triangles obtained with time and ensemble aver-
aging. The squares with corresponding error bars shows
the same data for T=200K averaged only over the en-
semble of 200 H+ at the single snapshot of t=80 ns. This
narrow size-distribution is peaked around Ar4H+ clus-
ters. Clusters with large atomic shells cannot be ob-
served at high temperatures, because thermal ﬂuctua-
tions destroy these shells. For example, at the temper-
ature T=200K only small cluster with the typical size
between 2-7 Ar atoms in the shells can be stable. For
comparisons between multi-proton and single proton nu-
cleation, the equilibrium distribution function of the clus-
ter size P (n, T = 200K) has been inferred from the single
H+ ion simulations of the independent cluster growth at
T= 200K and the results are shown in Fig.10 with red
down-triangles. The narrow P (n, T = 200K) distribu-
tion is sharply peaked at n=4 (the tetrahedral clusters)
in contrast with the low temperature P (n, T = 90K),
which is favorable to a broad range of larger cluster size
with n ∼ 15-30. For comparison, the low temperature
n-distribution of independent clusters at T=90K is also
shown in Fig.10 by circles.

The similarity of the high-temperature distributions
for the single H+ and 200 H+ ions at T= 200K shows
that although the cluster chemical potentials are sensi-
tive to both the density of the H+ ions and Ar atoms; the
large value of the Ar binding energy of the Ar4H+ cluster

causes the cluster size distribution to be weakly sensitive
to the proton density in the speciﬁc interval of temper-
ature around 200K considered in the article. Therefore,
cluster growth at chosen parameters can be seen mostly
as a nucleation kinetics of independent small size clusters.
This statement is strongly supported by results of time
dependent kinetics of cluster nucleation in the ensemble
of 200 seed H + ions previously shown in Fig.4a and 4b.
The abundances (n-distribution) of all small clusters with
sizes n ≤10 have reached their equilibrium values around
2 ns. However, the quasi-equilibrium stage of nucleation
(the orange circles and gold upside-down triangles (curve
in Fig.4a for the clusters Ar4H+ and Ar5H+respectively)
shows the steady growth of stable tetrahedral clusters
(the circles in Fig.4a). The development of thermal ﬂuc-
tuations is clearly seen in Fig.4a for Ar4H+ and Ar5H+
clusters. The anti-phase of Ar4H+ and Ar5H+ ﬂuctua-
tions results in an eﬀective single Ar atom exchange be-
tween the tetrahedral clusters and free Ar gas. Any cap-
ture of free Ar atoms by Ar4H+ leads to formation of new
Ar5H+ clusters and to reduction of Ar4H+. The thermal
equilibrium detachment of a single Ar atom from Ar5H+
produces a new stable tetrahedral cluster. The thermal
energy ﬂuctuation cannot destroy the deepest shell even
at T=200 K. The Ar4H+ are most stable and abundant
clusters for both the single- and multi-proton nucleation
process as it is shown in Fig.10.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

Our analysis of MD simulations provide a consistent
scenario for a new nucleation phase initiated by ions in
neutral gases. The growth of ion clusters occurs via the
formation of atomic shells around the ion seed particle.
MD simulations show evidence for three distinct stages
of cluster nucleation: nonequilibrium, quasi-equilibrium,
and equilibrium stages. In the ﬁrst nonequilibrium stage,
the strong ion ﬁeld removes the barriers to nucleation;
thus, the probability to capture a gas atom into the
deeply cluster-bound states (1T and 2T) is signiﬁcantly
higher than the probability for all detachment processes.
This leads to the build up of inner shells during this stage.
When a gas atom is captured into inner shells, a local
release of high kinetic energies occurs. This causes the

11

energy distributions of the atomic particles to become
non-Maxwelllian. Once these energy distributions relax
to a Maxwellian like distribution; the system moves into
the second quasi-equilibrium stage. During this stage
the equilibrium between the new phase (clusters) and the
free gas has yet to be established. Thus, we see a steady
growth of the cluster size and number of clusters in multi-
ion systems, up to the ﬁnal thermal equilibrium stage.
The notable feature of the quasi-equilibrium stage is the
onset and evolution of fast and strong ﬂuctuations of the
atom number. The size of the cluster increases with si-
multaneous decrease of binding energies in the outer clus-
ter shells. This stimulates detachment processes and the
exchange of atoms between the clusters and the free gas.
Then system moves into the ﬁnal thermal-equilibrium,
stage, where the cluster size distribution reaches a steady
state value. The density of gas and ions, temperature,
and parameters of cluster shell structures regulate the
cluster size-distribution. The time-dependent ﬂuctua-
tions of the cluster size can be used to predict parameters
of the steady state distribution, speciﬁcally, the cluster
size dispersion in an ensemble of growing clusters.

Nucleation of nano-particles in astrophysical and plan-
etary environments include more complicated physics of
the cluster formation in molecular gases, such as N2,
CO2, H2O, CH4 and others; due to the internal molecular
structure and more complicated intermolecular and in-
tramolecular interactions. We intend to investigate kinet-
ics of nano-cluster formation in important astrophysical
gases and apply new theoretical parameters of nucleation
for modeling observational data. Our results, reported in
this article, will be useful in analysis of the cluster growth
rates and size distributions of charge-seeded clusters as
function of the gas parameters and molecular structures.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The work of MB, JS, and RC on this project was
supported via the UCLA grant ONRBAA13-022, HRS
and VK acknowledge support from the NSF through a
grant for ITAMP at Center for Astrophysics | Harvard
& Smithsonian. One of the authors (DV) is also grateful
for the support received from the National Science Foun-
dation through grants PHY-1831977 and HRD-1829184.

[1] E.M.Lifshitz and L. Pitaevskii, Physical Kinetics (IOP

Publishing Ltd, 2010).

[2] Y. Zeldovich, Selected Works of Yakov Borisovich Zel-

dovich, Vol. 1 (Princeton University Press, 1992).

[3] E. Cloet, Asm handbook vol. 22a, fundamentals of mod-
eling for metals processing (ASM International, 2009) pp.
203–219.

[4] S. Karthika, T. K. Radhakrishnan, and P. Kalaichelvi,

Crystal Growth & Design 16, 6663 (2016).

[5] W. Grundy, T. Bertrand, R. Binzel, M. Buie, B. Buratti,
A. Cheng, J. Cook, D. Cruikshank, S. Devins, C. Dalle
Ore, A. Earle, K. Ennico, F. Forget, P. Gao, G. Glad-
stone, C. Howett, D. Jennings, J. Kammer, T. Lauer,
I. Linscott, C. Lisse, A. Lunsford, W. McKinnon,
C. Olkin, A. Parker, S. Protopapa, E. Quirico, D. Reuter,
B. Schmitt, K. Singer, J. Spencer, S. Stern, D. Strobel,
M. Summers, H. Weaver, G. Weigle, M. Wong, E. Young,
L. Young, and X. Zhang, Icarus 314, 232 (2018).

[6] A. Wellbrock, A. J. Coates, G. H. Jones, V. Vuit-
ton, P. Lavvas, R. T. Desai, and J. H. Waite,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 490,
2254 (2019), https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-
pdf/490/2/2254/30257387/stz2655.pdf.

[7] P. Gao, D. P. Thorngren, E. K. H. Lee, J. J. Fortney,
C. V. Morley, H. R. Wakeford, D. K. Powell, K. B.
Stevenson, and X. Zhang, Nature Astronomy 4, 951
(2020).

[8] A. D. James, J. S. A. Brooke, T. P. Mangan, T. F. Whale,
J. M. C. Plane, and B. J. Murray, Atmospheric Chemistry
and Physics 18, 4519 (2018).

[9] A. V. Egorov, E. N. Brodskaya, and A. Laaksonen, Col-

loid Journal 80, 484 (2018).

[10] X. Yang and A. W. Castleman Jr., Journal of Geophysical

Research: Atmospheres 96, 22573 (1991).

[11] A. V. Krivov, I. Mann, and N. A. Krivova, A&A 362,

1127 (2000).

[12] Krivov, A. V., L¨ohne, T., and Sremcevi´c, M., A&A 455,

509 (2006).

[13] I. Mann, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Soci-
ety A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
375, 20160254 (2017).

[14] K. Laasonen, S. Wonczak, R. Strey, and A. Laakso-
nen, The Journal of Chemical Physics 113, 9741 (2000),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1322082.

12

[23] P. W. Stephens and J. G. King, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 1538

(1983).

[24] H. Buchenau, E. L. Knuth, J. Northby, J. P. Toennies,
and C. Winkler, The Journal of Chemical Physics 92,
6875 (1990), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.458275.

[25] I. A. Harris, R. S. Kidwell, and J. A. Northby, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 53, 2390 (1984).

[26] I. Harris, K. Norman, R. Mulkern, and J. Northby, Chem-

ical Physics Letters 130, 316 (1986).

[27] T. M¨ark and P. Scheier, Chemical Physics Letters 137,

245 (1987).

[28] M. Lezius, P. Scheier, A. Stamatovic, and T. D. M¨ark,
The Journal of Chemical Physics 91, 3240 (1989),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.456898.

[29] W. Miehle, O. Kandler, T. Leisner, and O. Echt,
The Journal of Chemical Physics 91, 5940 (1989),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.457464.

[30] D. C. McDonald, D. T. Mauney, D. Leicht, J. H.
Marks, J. A. Tan, J.-L. Kuo, and M. A. Duncan,
The Journal of Chemical Physics 145, 231101 (2016),
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4972581.

[31] K. T. Giju, S. Roszak, and J. Leszczynski, The
(2002),
of Chemical Physics 117,

Journal
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1485956.

4803

[32] J. A. Tan and J.-L. Kuo, The Journal of Physical Chem-

istry A 124, 7726 (2020).

[15] T. Kraska, The Journal of Chemical Physics 124, 054507

[33] K. Vafayi and K. Esfarjani, Journal of Cluster Science

(2006), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2162882.

26, 473 (2015).

[16] V. V. Hoang and T. Odagaki, Phys. Rev. B 77, 125434

(2008).

[17] R. S. Dumont, S. Jain, and A. G. Basile, The Journal of

[34] I. Janeˇcek, P. Naar, M. Stachoˇn, F. X. Gadea, and
R. Kalus, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 19, 2778 (2017).
[35] F. Calvo, D. Bonhommeau, and P. Parneix, Phys. Rev.

Chemical Physics 102, 4227 (1995).

Lett. 99, 083401 (2007).

[18] C. Rey, L. Gallego, M. I˜niguez, and J. Alonso, Physica

B: Condensed Matter 179, 273 (1992).

[19] M. Gatchell, P. Martini, L. Kranabetter, B. Rasul, and

[36] D. Bonhommeau, N. Halberstadt, and U. Buck, Interna-
tional Reviews in Physical Chemistry 26, 353 (2007).
[37] D. Bonhommeau, N. Halberstadt, and A. Viel, The Jour-

P. Scheier, Phys. Rev. A 98, 022519 (2018).

nal of Chemical Physics 124, 184314 (2006).

[20] H. Sch¨obel, P. Bartl, C. Leidlmair, S. Deniﬂ, O. Echt,
T. D. M¨ark, and P. Scheier, The European Physical Jour-
nal D 63, 209 (2011).

[38] E. Surdutovich and A. V. Solov’yov, The European Phys-

ical Journal D 73, 241 (2019).

[39] S. Plimpton, Journal of Computational Physics 117, 1

[21] T. Kurzthaler, B. Rasul, M. Kuhn, A. Lindinger,
Journal
(2016),

and A. M. Ellis, The
064305

P.
of
145,
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4960611.

Scheier,
Chemical

Physics

[22] M. Kuhn, M. Renzler, J. Postler, S. Ralser, S. Spieler,
M. Simpson, H. Linnartz, A. G. G. M. Tielens, J. Cami,
A. Mauracher, Y. Wang, M. Alcam´ı, F. Mart´ın, M. K.
Beyer, R. Wester, A. Lindinger, and P. Scheier, Nature
Communications 7, 13550 (2016).

(1995).

[40] O. C. F. Brown, D. Vrinceanu, V. Kharchenko, and H. R.

Sadeghpour, Molecular Physics 118, e1767813 (2020).

[41] B.M.Smirnov and R. Berry, Phase Transitions of Simple

Systems (Springer, 2007).

[42] E.M.Lifshitz and L. Pitaevskii, Statistical Physics,v.5 of
Course of Theoretical Physics by. L.D.Landau and E.M.
Lifshitz (Elsevier, 2010).

[43] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu (AAAI

Press, 1996) pp. 226–231.

[44] J. F. D.A.R. Dalvit and I.D.Lawrie, Problems on Statis-

tical Mechanics (Elsevier, 1999).

