Molecular Dynamics Study on the Role of Ar Ions in the Sputter

Deposition of Al Thin Films

Tobias Gergs,1 Thomas Mussenbrock,1 and Jan Trieschmann2

1Chair of Applied Electrodynamics and Plasma Technology,

Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Science,

Ruhr University Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany∗

2Theoretical Electrical Engineering, Department of Electrical and Information Engineering,

Kiel University, Kaiserstraße 2, 24143 Kiel, Germany†

(Dated: April 5, 2022)

2
2
0
2

r
p
A
4

]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[

2
v
6
5
3
0
0
.
0
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract

Molecular dynamics simulations are often used to study sputtering and thin ﬁlm growth. Com-

pressive stresses in these thin ﬁlms are generally assumed to be caused by a combination of forward

sputtered (peened) built-in particles and entrapped working gas atoms. While the former are as-

sumed to hold a predominant role, the eﬀect of the latter on the interaction dynamics as well as

thin ﬁlm properties are scarcely clariﬁed (concurrent or causative). The inherent overlay of the ion

bombardment induced processes render an isolation of their contribution impracticable. In this

work, this issue is addressed by comparing the results of two case studies on the sputter deposition

of Al thin ﬁlms in Ar working gas. In the ﬁrst run Ar atoms are fully retained. In the second

run they are artiﬁcially neglected, as implanted Ar atoms are assumed to outgas anyhow and not

alter the ongoing dynamics signiﬁcantly. Both case studies have in common that the consecu-

tive impingement of 100 particles (i.e., Ar+ ions, Al atoms) onto Al(001) surfaces for ion energies

in the range of 3 eV to 300 eV as well as Al/Ar+ ﬂux ratios from 0 to 1 are considered. The

surface interactions are simulated by means of hybrid reactive molecular dynamics/force-biased

Monte Carlo simulations and characterized in terms of mass density, Ar concentration, biaxial

stress, shear stress, ring statistical connectivity proﬁle, Ar gas porosity, Al vacancy density, and

root-mean-squared roughness. Ultimately, implanted Ar atoms are found to form subnanometer

sized eventually outgassing clusters for ion energies exceeding 100 eV. They fundamentally gov-

ern a variety of surface processes (e.g., forward sputtering/peening) and surface properties (e.g.,

compressive stresses) in the considered operating regime.

∗ tobias.gergs@rub.de
† jt@tf.uni-kiel.de

2

I.

INTRODUCTION

Physical vapor deposition (PVD) refers to a group of methods that are based either on

the evaporation or sputtering of atoms from a target material, their transport through the

gas phase and the subsequent growth at the substrate. Sputtering describes the ejection

of surface atoms as a result of a collision cascade that is spawned by an energetic ion

bombardment. The projectiles are often mainly ions created from the inert background gas

(e.g., argon). The ions are accelerated towards the walls when leaving the plasma bulk by

the electric ﬁeld due to the electric potential drop in the plasma sheaths. This manifests in

minor or substantial kinetic energies at the substrate or target, depending on this electric

potential diﬀerence. In addition to the removal of surface atoms, the energetic ions eventually

cause densiﬁcations of the just grown thin ﬁlms, as well as forward sputtered (peened) point

defects [1–4]. These defects are assumed to be the predominant reason for compressive

stresses within sputter deposited thin ﬁlms. The concurrent incorporation of heavy inert

gas atoms causes distortions of the surrounding lattice structure and provides recoil centers

that result in higher sputter yields. However, detailed investigations of their holistic role

during sputtering or growth processes are unavailable to the best of our knowledge [1, 3]..

A simple scenario is used in this work to facilitate the required isolation of eﬀects that

are related to the entrapment of the working gas, that is Ar in sputter deposited Al thin

ﬁlms. It is particularly relevant, as Al is also utilized as one elemental or composite target

material for the sputter deposition of hard ceramics, e.g., TiAlON and VAlON [5].

Ion implantation studies revealed that incorporated Ar atoms tend to form bubbles within

the Al matrix due to their insolubility [6–11]. However, substantially higher ion energies

compared to the typical case of PVD are used and this phenomena is argued to be ion en-

ergy and dose dependent [12]. Hence, its occurrence may be less prominent during sputter

deposition. Growth and sputtering processes are often investigated by means of classical

or reactive molecular dynamics (RMD) simulations [13, 14]. The former has been used by

Valkealahti and Nieminen to investigate the Ar bombardment of Al surfaces with kinetic

energies of 200 eV and 400 eV. Subsequent to each individual collision cascade, the temper-

ature of the total surface slab has been adjusted by velocity rescaling over the course of 200

timesteps. The Morse, Lennard-Jones (LJ) and Ziegler-Biersack-Littmark (ZBL) potentials

have been used for Al-Al, Ar-Ar and Al-Ar pair interactions, respectively. [15]

3

In this work, the scenario of Ar ion impingement and incorporation on Al(100) is studied

for two cases as outlined below. The applied methods are described in Section II, wherein

speciﬁcally the interaction potentials are summarized in Section II A. The considered case

studies (i.e., with and without implanted Ar atoms) as well as the routine for modelling

the consecutive impingement of particles is detailed in Section II B. Section II C covers the

corresponding evaluation procedure. The results of both case studies are then compared and

discussed in Section III. The eﬀect of implanted Ar atoms on the surface state and ongoing

dynamics is assessed. Finally, in Section IV conclusions are presented.

II. METHODS

The open source molecular dynamics code LAMMPS is used to simulate the surface in-

teractions considered in this work [16, 17]. The therefor used and combined interaction

potentials (i.e., COMB3, LJ, ZBL) are laid out ﬁrst. Second, the case studies (i.e., with and

without implanted Ar atoms) are deﬁned. The corresponding surface interactions are subdi-

vided into individual model steps and highlighted consecutively. Finally, the methodology for

the evaluation of the surface state (i.e., density, stoichoimetry, stress, defect structure) and

some additional information (i.e., Ar gas porosity, Al vacancy density, root-mean-squared

roughness) are presented.

A.

Interaction potentials

Aluminum complexes are modeled by means of the Charge-Optimized Many-Body

(COMB3) potential, which consists of electrostatic and short-range interactions, as well

as contributions depicted by Legendre polynomial terms [18, 19]. The charge of any atom is

assumed to be described by an eﬀective point core charge Z in combination with a rigid 1s

Slater type orbital for the remaining charge q − Z, q being the net charge of the atom. The

short-range interaction is deﬁned by the sum of a pairwise repulsion and scaled attraction

term. This scale is the mean bond order of both atoms, being functions of their individual

local atomic environment. The contributions due to the Legendre polynomials are meant to

favor certain bond angles energetically and, hence, ease for instance the distinction of face-

centred cubic (fcc) and hexagonal close-packed (hcp) phases. A more thorough description

4

of the COMB3 formalism can be found elsewhere [19].

A combination of the COMB3 with the ZBL potential is introduced to account for high-

energy collisions during the ion bombardment [20]. All two or many body potential functions

are modiﬁed by tapering with 1−fC to have them gradually decrease to zero for pair distances
from 2 ˚A to 1 ˚A, fC being the Tersoﬀ cutoﬀ function. Correspondingly, the ZBL function is

also scaled with fC to continuously increase its impact and have it eventually take over once
the distance between two atoms becomes smaller than 1 ˚A. However, the routine for the bond

order computation is chosen to not be aﬀected by this modiﬁcation. This means that two
Al atoms with a pair distance of less than 1 ˚A still are aware of each other bond-order-wise.

The LJ potential (with a cutoﬀ radius of 8.5 ˚A) and the ZBL potential are tapered in a
similar manner from 2.25 ˚A to 3.05 ˚A, utilizing again the Tersoﬀ cutoﬀ function as tapering

function [20]. The depths of the LJ potential well (cid:15) are 0.02026 and 0.0104 for Al-Ar and
Ar-Ar atom pairs, respectively. The zero-crossing distances σ are 3.01 ˚A and 3.40 ˚A for

Al-Ar and Ar-Ar interactions, respectively [15, 21].

The implementations are veriﬁed by comparing the integrated force with the correspond-

ing potential energy as well as the tapered with the non-tapered potentials for a variety of

cases.

B. Surface interaction

In the following, the workﬂow, the methods, and the inherent approximations are pre-

sented that are used during the surface interaction simulations. Initially general considera-

tions are discussed. Thereafter, an iterative scheme is proposed to loop through the process

of individual particle-surface interactions.

The incoming particle ﬂuxes as well as the simulation setups are deﬁned as follows. The

case study consists of 5 diﬀerent Γin

Ar+ ﬂux ratios (i.e., 0.0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 and 1.0), as
well as 20 ion energies in the range of 3 eV to 300 eV. Thermal Ar neutrals (Al ions) are

Al/Γin

assumed to have a negligible eﬀect on the surface dynamics due to their low momentum

(rare occurrence), respectively. Both species are neglected in this work. Each case consists

of the consecutive impingement of 100 particles, so that in total 10000 surface interactions

with 100 diﬀerent energy/ﬂux ratio combinations are studied.

The Ar+ ion energies of the diﬀerent cases are distributed equidistantly following a square

5

root energy axis (resembling a linear axis in velocity/momentum and related processes).

Hence, the considered list of ion energies starts with [3 eV, 6.52 eV, 11.38 eV, . . . ] and ends

at 300 eV. Ar ions are assumed to hit the Al(001) surface perpendicularly with both lateral

velocity components equal to zero. The surface dimensions are chosen as a function of the

impinging ion energies, that is 5 × 5 × 6, 6 × 6 × 7, 7 × 7 × 8, and 8 × 8 × 9 unit cells for

ion energies in the range of [3 eV, 50 eV], (50 eV, 150 eV], (150 eV, 250 eV] and (250 eV,

300 eV], respectively.

The required lattice constant at the given temperature (i.e., 300 K) is evaluated by

performing a simulation of an Al bulk system consisting of a 8 × 8 × 8 sized supercell

over the course of 500 ps with a timestep of 0.2 fs. The open-source molecular dynamics

code LAMMPS [16, 17] and the therein implemented Nose-Hoover style non-Hamiltonian
equations of motion are utilized to determine the lattice constant to be 4.065 ˚A by sampling

from the isothermal-isobaric (NPT) ensemble during the production run (i.e., within the

last 200 ps) [16, 17, 22–26]. The damping constants for the thermostat and barostat are

chosen to be 0.1 ps and 1.0 ps, respectively.

The Al(001) surface slab is created by cleaving the bulk system in [001] direction and
increasing the simulation box height by 21 ˚A, out of which 11 ˚A are equal to the COMB3
cutoﬀ radius and 10 ˚A serve as a buﬀer for recognizing sputtered particles. Two bottom

layers of the slab are excluded from the time integration and, hence, are kept immobile.

The remaining, active Al atoms are equilibrated at the targeted temperature (i.e., 300 K)

for 50 ps by applying a Langevin thermostat with damping coeﬃcient of 0.1 ps [27, 28]. Ar

atoms are excluded from the thermostats. The Langevin thermostat is chosen here and in

the following in favor of, for instance, the Nose-Hoover and Berendsen thermostat. This

is reasoned by the circumstance that the former is sampling the system’s internal state

and, hence, equilibrates less well for a varying number of degrees of freedom, while the

latter provides only a bias for matching the temperature but not necessarily for fulﬁlling

the equipartition theorem.

In the frame of the Langevin thermostat, however, a viscous

background medium is implied, which drags kinetic energy from each atom individually and

heats them up by having solvent atoms randomly bump into them.

It has been argued

that this and the required parameters can be interpreted and reasoned by means of electron

phonon coupling [29]. A varying number of degrees of freedom provides no issues and the

thermostat pushes the system inherently towards the fulﬁllment of the equipartition theorem,

6

Figure 1. The estimated process time tp for a typical dcMS Al thin ﬁlm deposition (I=348 mA,

P = 100 W, At= 63.6 cm2 detailed elsewhere [30]) is displayed as a function of the Ar ion energy

Ein

Ar+ as well as the ratio of the Al/Ar+ ﬂuxes towards the surface Γin

Al/Γin

Ar+.

at the cost of possibly altered vibrational motion.

The process time for the diﬀerent energy/ﬂux ratio combinations may be estimated by

dividing the number of bombarding Ar ions by the Ar ion impinging rate, tp = N (1 −

0.5Γin

Al/Γin

Ar+)/(Γin

Ar+ARMD). Therein, N = 100 is the total number of projectiles and ARMD
is the considered RMD surface area. A typical Ar ion ﬂux onto the target for the example of

direct current magnetron sputtering (dcMS) and Al thin ﬁlm deposition [30] can be estimated

as a function of the current I=348 mA, the target area At= 63.6 cm2 and the ion-induced
secondary electron emission coeﬃcient γSE=0.091 following Γin
Ar+ = wrtI/((1 + γSE)eAt) =
6.26 · 1020 m−2s−1 [30, 31]. Therein wrt ≈ 2 is a scaling factor taking into account the

inhomogeneous ion ﬂux distribution over the racetrack. The estimated process time is

depicted in Figure 1.

1. Atom generation

The dimensions of the simulation box are initially set up as a function of energy as spec-

iﬁed above. The simulation domain is subsequently extended in vertical direction to include

7

21 ˚A above the uppermost Al atom. The impinging particle (i.e., Al or Ar+) is positioned
11 ˚A above this Al atom (10 ˚A below the upper simulation box bound). However, if the

atom would take longer than 1 ps to reach the surface (i.e, its vertical velocity component vz
is smaller than -11 ˚A/ps) the position is lowered to 3.7 ˚A+vz · 1 ps above the uppermost Al

atom. This means that the atom is put within the surface atoms’ interaction radii. However,
the lower bound of 3.7 ˚A ensures that at least no Al atom instantaneously contributes any
kind of short range interaction, whose outer cutoﬀ radius is 3.7 ˚A for Al complexes. The

lateral coordinates are sampled from uniform distributions over the unit interval U(0,1) and

scaled with the particular simulation box dimensions.

The absolute velocity v of individual (sputtered) Al neutrals are sampled from

v =

(cid:112)−ln(U(0, 1))
β

(1)

with β =

(cid:113) m

2kbTsp

being the inverse of the most probable molecular speed (ﬂux towards the

surface), m is the particular atom mass, kb is the Boltzmann constant and kbTsp refers to

the kinetic energy of sputtered and subsequently thermalized Al atoms, which is estimated

to be approximately 7 eV by averaging the Sigmund–Thompson distribution [32–35]. The

azimuthal angle φ is sampled from a scaled U(0,1) distribution, φ = 2πU(0,1). The pro-

portion of the z component (in surface normal direction) is determined by cos(θ) = U(0, 1)

and vz = cos(θ)v. The polar component sin(θ) and the lateral components vx as well

as vy are consequently computed by vx = cos(φ) sin(θ)v and vy = sin(φ) sin(θ)v with
sin(θ) = (cid:112)1 − cos(θ)2.

The species of each individual atom is randomly determined for the given ﬂux ratio by

applying Monte Carlo accept-reject sampling (rejection sampling).

2.

Impact and relaxation

During the phase of particle approach and impact, the timestep size is adjusted every 100

steps with an upper bound of 0.2 fs to ensure that the maximum displacement of any atom
does not exceed 0.01 ˚A per timestep. To avoid an alteration of the sputtering dynamics

due to the applied Langevin thermostat, atoms within a sphere with radius rth around the

impinging atom are excluded from the thermostat. Once excluded, they remain so during
this phase. The radius rth is 8.0 ˚A, 10 ˚A, 12 ˚A and 14 ˚A for ion energies in the range of [3 eV,

8

50 eV], (50 eV, 150 eV], (150 eV, 250 eV] and (250 eV, 300 eV], respectively. The sphere

and list of bypassed atoms is updated every 100 timesteps, which allows for a maximum
displacement of any atom of 1 ˚A.

Sputtered, desorbed, or reﬂected atoms that approach the upper bound of the simulation
box by less than 10 ˚A are excluded from the time integration and, hence, are kept immobile

to evaluate them later. The simulation time for the impact and the corresponding relaxation

of the eventually spawned collision cascade is chosen to be a function of the individual kinetic

energy of each atom: 1.5 ps + 0.005Ekin ps/eV.

For the second case study, any implanted Ar atom is removed from the system, assuming

that the majority of them outgas anyhow or do not alter the surface state and interactions

signiﬁcantly. Its inﬂuence will be detailed later.

3. Relaxation and diﬀusion

This phase is meant to relax artiﬁcial, high pressure that is a consequence of introducing

a new particle every few picoseconds to the system and to account for diﬀusion processes

by applying the time-stamped force-bias Monte Carlo (tfMC) method [36–38]. The force

acting on each individual atom is therein used to sample the atoms’ displacements without

integrating Newton’s equations of motion. As a result, longer simulation times per step

may be reached by utilizing tfMC in favor of RMD. The system wide parameter ∆, which

represents the maximum displacement of the lightest atom (i.e., Al) during a single tfMC
step is chosen to be 0.2 ˚A (approximately 10 % of the nearest neighbor distance in case of

an Al interstitial). The corresponding value for Ar atoms is scaled with the square root of

the mass ratio,

(cid:113) mAl
mAr

. The simulation is run for 104 steps at 300 K.

4. Evaluation of desorbed, sputtered, and reﬂected particles

To diﬀerentiate between surface and gas phase atoms, an instantaneous cluster analysis
with a cutoﬀ radius of 3.3 ˚A is performed. The group of surface atoms is updated and the

type as well as velocities of the gas phase atoms are stored prior to their removal from the

system.

9

5. Phase space relaxation

The tfMC simulation implies distortions in the phase space, which are larger than those

that typically occur during RMD steps. Hence, the atoms have to be relaxed to obtain a

suited phase space representation before another atom impinges the surface. An artiﬁcial

accumulation of defects as well as an enhancement of sputtered particles may otherwise be

the consequence. This is dealt with by coupling the whole mobile system to the Langevin

thermostat again and performing a simulation for 0.5 ps. The resulting system state is then

written to a binary restart ﬁle to evaluate the surface properties later, after the surface

interactions of 50 and 100 particles have been simulated.

C. Evaluation of surface properties

The mobile Al atoms of the reloaded surface slab are coupled to a Nose-Hoover thermostat

with a damping constant of 0.1 ps and are equilibrated for 100 ps, out of which the last 50

ps are used to evaluate the herein considered surface properties. The short simulation time

of the equilibration phase and the production run are a compromise to reduce the overall

computational burden. Hence, the obtained properties may be regarded as estimates.

The surface state is assumed to be described by the stoichoimetry, density, stress, and

defect structure. The ﬁrst quantity is described by the particular Ar concentration xAr. The

mass density ρ is computed by dividing the net mass of the system by the corresponding

volume. The latter is obtained from the point-like particles by utilizing the alpha-shape
algorithm with a cutoﬀ radius of 3.3 ˚A, which is implemented in the OVITO python module
[39, 40]. This volume is also used to extract the biaxial stress σxx+σyy

and the shear stress

2

τxy from the volume times stress tensor product, which has been computed with LAMMPS

during the production run [16, 17, 41]. The defect structure is described by means of ring

statistics. Rings are closed paths that consist of nodes (atoms) and bonds. Two Al atoms
that are less than 3.0 ˚A apart from each other are considered as neighbors and, hence, are

interconnected with a bond. This does not imply any ionic or covalent characteristic and is

solely used for the network analysis. The strong rings criterion is applied and means that no

ring can be described by the combination of multiple smaller rings [42, 43]. This allows for a

continuous description from zero dimensional point defects (e.g., vacancies, interstitials, anti-

10

sites) up to three dimensional amorphous defect clusters. The ring networks are described

by the connectivity proﬁle of rings with n ∈ [3, 6] nodes. It consists of the number of rings

per cell normalized by the number of nodes in the network RC,n, the proportion of nodes at

the origin of at least one ring with n nodes PN,n, the proportion of nodes for which the n

sized rings represent the shortest closed paths Pmin,n and longest closed paths Pmax,n [44–46].

The connectivity proﬁle is computed with the R.I.N.G.S. code [47].

In addition, the Ar gas porosity φAr, the Al vacancy density NVAl, and the root-mean
squared roughness R are determined. The ﬁrst quantity is described by the particular

Ar fraction of the surface slab’s volume, whose computation is based on the alpha-shape

algorithm introduced in the preceding paragraph [39, 40]. The same methodology is applied

to each species separately. The volume which is occupied by Ar atoms is computed as the

average of the Ar atoms’ volume and the total surface slab’s volume minus the Al atoms’

volume. The Al vacancy density is the number of vacant fcc lattice sites (amorphous regions

are neglected) normalized by the beforehand mentioned slab volume. Vacant Al sites that

are occupied by Ar atoms are not considered as Al vacancies. However, their occurrence is

quantiﬁed by means of the connectivity proﬁle (defect structure characterization). The root-

mean squared roughness is computed as the square root of the ensemble averaged variance

of the surface atoms’ surface normal coordinate [48]. This group of atoms is also identiﬁed

with the alpha-shape algorithm.

III. RESULTS

The case study outlined in section II B is performed twice: (i) maintaining the implanted

Ar atoms as is and (ii) removing implanted Ar atoms from the system in the second run and

assuming that those atoms either outgas anyhow or have a negligible eﬀect on the subsequent

dynamics. The validity of these assumptions as well as the role of Ar ions in general for

Al-based sputter deposited thin ﬁlms is meant to be addressed in this section by comparing

the results of both cases for the impingement of the 1st and 2nd set of 50 particles each.

The ﬂux of Al atoms that have been sputtered or reﬂected Γout
Al

is normalized to the Ar+

ion ﬂux bombarding the surface Γin

Ar+ for any herein considered ion energy and Γin

Al/Γin

Ar+

ﬂux ratio. The result is shown in Figure 2 for the scenarios with and without implanted

Ar atoms. Both cases agree with each other and also with experimental ﬁndings [49]. For

11

Figure 2. The Al ﬂux from the Al(001) surface Γout

Ar per Ar+ ion ﬂux towards the surface Γin

Ar+ is

displayed as a function of the Ar ion energy Ein

Ar+ and Al/Ar ﬂux ratio Γin

Al/Γin

Ar+ for the 1st and

2nd set of impinging particles as well as with and without implanted Ar atoms. Circles resemble

experimental references for the sputter yield (Γin

Al = 0) [49].

the case including Ar incorporation, the Ar atoms function as additional recoil centers, but
also keep the surrounding Al atoms at a distance of approximately 3.0 ˚A, which eventually

distorts the fcc lattice structure locally.

For this case, the ﬂux of Ar atoms that have been reﬂected or released from the surface Γout
Ar
Ar+ and shown in Figure 3.
Higher ion energies result in deeper and more probable Ar implantation. This likelihood

is similarly normalized to the Ar+ ion ﬂux hitting the surface Γin

is decreased during the 2nd set of impinging particles due to the gradual saturation of the

surface slabs with enclosed Ar atoms. Notably, this process has still not reached a steady

state, which would be indicated by a balance of incoming and outgoing Ar ﬂuxes, Γout
Ar ≈
Ar+. The collision cascades caused by the Ar+ ion bombardment allow for a continuous
Γin
reordering that enables isolated and otherwise rather immobile Ar atoms to eventually form

small clusters. Their size and depth is a function of the Ar concentration, distribution

and, hence, of the Ar ion energy. At 98.73 eV and 115.71 eV these subnanometer sized

clusters are covered by only one or two layer of Al atoms, which are gradually removed due

to the ongoing ion bombardment until the entrapped Ar atoms outgas. This event causes

12

Figure 3. The Ar ﬂux from the Al(001) surface Γout

Ar per Ar+ ion ﬂux towards the surface Γin

Ar+ is

displayed as a function of the Ar ion energy Ein

Ar+ and Al/Ar ﬂux ratio Γin
2nd set of impinging particles. Implanted Ar atoms are taken into account.

Al/Γin

Ar+ for the 1st and

the two spikes (cid:0)Γout

Ar /Γin

Ar+ > 1(cid:1) that are depicted in the 2nd set of Figure 3 for Γin

Al/Γin

Ar+

ﬂux ratios of 0 and 0.25. This reasoning is conﬁrmed from the atom structure prior to the

outgassing event as shown in Figure 4. For the remaining Γin

Ar+ ﬂux ratios (i.e., 0.5,
0.75, 1.0) more Al atoms are deposited than sputtered from the surface per incoming Ar ion
(cid:1) as presented in Figure 2. Hence, the thin layers of Al atoms which
(cid:0)Γin

Al/Γin

Al/Γin

Ar+ > Γout

Al /Γin

Ar+

cover the small Ar clusters become thicker over time. In case of higher ion energies a larger

surface area (smaller dose) is considered and, furthermore, the Ar atoms are distributed

deeper within the surface slab, so that it may take more time (impinging atoms) until the

outgassing of the entrapped Ar clusters may be observed. The doses per set Γint = 50/ARMD

for ion energies in the range of [3 eV, 50 eV], (50 eV, 150 eV], (150 eV, 250 eV] and (250 eV,
300 eV] are 12.10 atoms/˚A2, 8.41 atoms/˚A2, 6.18 atoms/˚A2, 4.73 atoms/˚A2, respectively.

The corresponding Ar concentration xAr is shown in Figure 5a. The change from the 1st

to the 2nd set for cases with ion energies greater than approximately 100 eV indicate that

Ar concentration on the Γin

those have not reached a steady state yet. This can also be noted by the dependency of the
Ar+ ﬂux ratio and, hence, Ar+ ion dose (more bombarding Ar
ions lead to a larger fraction of implanted Ar atoms). This conclusion is in agreement with

Al/Γin

13

Figure 4. Depiction of the atom structure prior to the outgassing of enclosed Ar clusters
Ar+ = 0.0(cid:1). Grey and purple spheres indicate Al and Ar atoms, re-
(cid:0)Ein

Ar+ = 115.71 eV, Γin

Al/Γin

spectively. The graphic is rendered with OVITO [39].

the previous observation.

The Ar atoms are either isolated or partially clustered within the surface slab. The volume

fraction which is occupied by Ar clusters is expressed by means of the gas porosity φAr and

shown in Figure 5b. At the end of the 1st set, the majority of Ar atoms are distributed

apart from each other. When the Ar concentration is further increased during the 2nd set,

for cases with ion energies greater than approximately 100 eV the formation of Ar clusters is

observed. The occupied volume is expected to decrease the density of the ﬁlm. The Ar gas

porosity and concentration have a similar dependency on the Γin

Ar+ ﬂux ratio. It may
be inferred that a critical Ar concentration is required for the formation of subnanomenter

Al/Γin

sized Ar clusters beneath the surface layer. This concentration is found to be approximately

2 %, which notably relates to the supercell dimensions in surface normal direction chosen

here.

The bombarding of the surface with energetic ions leads to collision cascades which in

addition to sputtering of surface atoms and implantation of Ar atoms cause a series of Al

Frenkel defects. The majority of these vacancies and interstitials recombine, but some Al

atoms are moved atop so that the remaining Al vacancies are the most dominant point defect

14

(a) Ar concentration xAr.

(b) Ar gas porosity φAr.

Figure 5. The Ar concentration xAr and gas porosity φAr is displayed as a function of the Ar

ion energy Ein

Ar+ and Al/Ar ﬂux ratio Γin
Implanted Ar atoms are taken into account.

Al/Γin

Ar+ for the 1st and 2nd set of impinging particles.

structure. The corresponding porosity is however also diminished by recoil implantation and

forward sputtering (peening) which densiﬁes the surface slab. The Al vacancy density NVAl
is shown in Figure 6a. Higher ion energies lead to more Frenkel pairs and, hence, to more

Al vacancies. This trend can be observed for both cases with and without Ar implantation,

but is more prominent when incorporated Ar atoms are neglected. The latter function as

recoil centers when colliding with Ar and Al atoms due to elastic and inelastic collisions,

respectively. These, however, also cause a more even redistribution of the collision cascades’

momentum and the formation of fewer Frenkel pairs. The atomic stress and strain due to

the implanted Ar atom distribution further reduce the stability of such vacancy interstitial

pairs and facilitate their recombination.

The mass densities for cases with and without implanted Ar atoms are shown in Figure 6b.

The density is decreased for higher ion energies in spite of the peening when enclosed Ar

atoms are neglected due to the accumulation of more Al vacancies. In the opposite case

retaining implanted Ar atoms, the smaller Al vacancy density in combination with the weight

of the Ar atoms, their induced strain, and surface reconstruction leads to an approximately

15

(a) Al vacancy density NVAl.

(b) Mass density ρ.

Figure 6. The Al vacancy density NVAl and mass density ρ is displayed as a function of the Ar ion

energy Ein

Ar+ and Al/Ar ﬂux ratio Γin

Al/Γin

Ar+ for the 1st and 2nd set of impinging particles as well

as with and without implanted Ar atoms.

constant mass density for any herein considered ion energy and Γin

Ar+ ﬂux ratio during
the 1st set of impinging particles. During the 2nd set the system with implanted Ar become

Al/Γin

less dense for ion energies greater than 100 eV due to the clustering of otherwise isolated Ar

atoms and the corresponding volumetric partitioning, i.e., Ar gas induced porosity (shown

in Figure 5b).

The biaxial stress σxx+σyy

2

is shown in Figure 7a for cases with and without implanted

Ar atoms. The biaxial stress is increased slightly for the latter scenario with higher ion

energies, which is attributed to the increasing Al vacancy density (in spite of the peening

process). Forward sputtered (peened) Al atoms (interstitials) predominantly recombine

with vacant lattice sites. The surface slab experiences even more tensile stress for higher ion

energies, even though the stress is expected to become compressive [1–3, 50]. This trend is

conﬁrmed when enclosed Ar atoms are not neglected but taken into account. The cause is

a combination of forward sputtered (peened) Al atoms (interstitials), porosity annihilation,

and entrapped Ar atoms, whereas the last hinder the recombination of the ﬁrst with the Al

vacancies. Notably, surface interaction with a higher dose is required to obtain the steady

16

(a) Biaxial stress σxx+σyy

2

.

(b) Shear stress τxy.

Figure 7. The stress is displayed as a function of the Ar ion energy Ein

Ar+ and Al/Ar ﬂux ratio

Al/Γin
Γin

Ar+ for the 1st and 2nd set of impinging particles as well as with and without implanted Ar

atoms.

state biaxial stress.

The shear stress τxy is shown in Figure 7b for cases with and without implanted Ar

atoms. It is smaller than the particular biaxial stress in both scenarios. However, it does

not reveal any particular trend, neither with/without implanted Ar atoms nor with ion

energy or Γin

Al/Γin

Ar+ ﬂux ratio.

The root-mean-squared roughness R is shown in Figure 8. It is approximately constant

for any herein considered combination of process parameter. The evolution of this quantity

is however anyhow restricted by the surfaces’ lateral dimensions.

The description of the defect structure by means of the connectivity proﬁle (ring statis-

tics) is used in this work to support visual ﬁndings on the surface slabs’ structural changes

(i.e., vacancies, interstitials, Ar clusters, surface reconstructions). These require the consid-

eration of rings with 5 and 6 nodes, while rings with 3 and 4 nodes are already suﬃcient to

characterize the ideal fcc bulk lattice and Al(001) surface structure. Hence, the proportion

of atoms at the origin of at least one ring with 3 or 4 nodes PN,3 and PN,4 equal approxi-

mately 1 for any herein considered combination of process parameters. The number of rings

17

Figure 8. The root-mean-squared roughness R is displayed as a function of the Ar ion energy Ein

Ar+

and Al/Ar ﬂux ratio Γin

Al/Γin

Ar+ for the 1st and 2nd set of impinging particles. Implanted Ar atoms

are neglected.

with 3 and 4 nodes normalized to the number of atoms RC,3 and RC,4 is slightly decreased

for higher ion energies due to the accumulation of vacancies in either case, which is shown

in Figures 9a and 9b, respectively. This trend is ampliﬁed when incorporated Ar atoms are

taken into account due to the deviations from the ideal fcc lattice structure, so far discussed

in this section.

Surface reconstruction and forward sputtered (peened) Al atoms (interstitials) can be

related to the rings with 5 nodes by means of RC,5 and PN,5, which are shown in Figure 9c

and Figure 10a, respectively. Up to 55.43 % of the Al atoms are at the origin of at least

one ring with 5 nodes when ion energies of 300 eV are considered. Hence, more than half

of the atoms in the surface slabs are part of at least minor structural changes. The lack of

distorted surface layers or Al interstitials in case of neglected Ar implantation, therefore,

results in a diminishing, process independent number of rings with 5 nodes.

Rings with 6 nodes are caused by Al vacancies and their amount is increased by implanted

Ar atoms, which also occupy vacant Al lattice sites (if considered). Hence, greater ion

energies lead to greater RC,6 and PN,6 in cases with or without implanted Ar atoms, which

is shown in Figure 9d and Figure 10b. As expected, overall the ion energy dependencies of

18

(a) Rings with 3 nodes (n = 3).

(b) Rings with 4 nodes (n = 4).

(c) Rings with 5 nodes (n = 5).

(d) Rings with 6 nodes (n = 6).

Figure 9. The proportion of rings with n nodes per atom RC,n is plotted against the Ar ion energy

and Al/Ar ﬂux ratio for the 1st and 2nd set as well as with and without implanted Ar atoms.

the described defect structure (connectivity proﬁle) resemble the ones of the biaxial stresses,

which are shown in Figure 7a.

19

(a) Rings with 5 nodes (n = 5).

(b) Rings with 6 nodes (n = 6).

Figure 10. The proportion of atoms at the origin of at least one ring with n nodes PN,n is displayed

as a function of the Ar ion energy Ein

Ar+ and Al/Ar ﬂux ratio Γin

Al/Γin

Ar+ for the 1st and 2nd set of

impinging particles as well as with and without implanted Ar atoms.

IV. CONCLUSION

The sputter yield of Ar+ ions bombarding Al(001) surfaces is found to be insensitive to

the implantation of Ar atoms due to a balance of having additional recoil centers but also

disturbing the uppermost surface layers’ lattice structure. Ar atoms are distributed apart

from each other within the surface slabs when the ion energies are below approximately 100

eV, occupying vacant Al lattice sites. Surrounding Al atoms are pushed away to keep an
averaged distance of 3 ˚A to the Ar atoms. For ion energies that exceed 100 eV the forma-

tion of Ar clusters is observed due to the deeper implantation, increased Ar concentration as

well as collision cascade induced structural reordering. The outgassing of these Ar clusters

is eased when the number of sputtered Al atoms exceeds the number of built-in Al atoms
(cid:1), due to the gradual removal of the enclosing
per impinging Ar ion (cid:0)Γin

Al/Γin

Ar+ < Γout

Al /Γin

Ar+

surface layers. Incorporated Ar atoms interrupt the evolution of the collision cascades and

distribute their momenta more evenly, which in combination with the induced stress and

strain eventually hinders the formation of Al vacancies. Simultaneously they stabilize for-

20

ward sputtered (peened) Al atoms (interstitials) by balancing the tensile surface stress. The

eﬀect of peened Al atoms on compressive thin ﬁlm stresses may dominate the Ar atoms’

contribution. But if it were not for implanted Ar atoms Al Frenkel pairs would readily

diﬀuse, rearrange and recombine. This would result in thin ﬁlms under even more tensile

stresses the greater the ion energy. Ar atoms, Al vacancies and Al interstitials are found to

balance each other with respect to the mass density, which is approximately constant unless

larger Ar cluster form. These ﬁndings are supported by an analysis of the defect structure

by means of a connectivity proﬁle (ring statistics). Rings with 3 and 4 nodes per atom,

which are suﬃcient to describe the ideal fcc lattice structure, are replaced by rings with 5

nodes (reconstructed surface layer and interstitials) and 6 nodes (vacancies and Ar atoms

on vacant Al sites). This trend is more distinct with greater ion energies. An expected

correlation of the defect structure with other surface properties (e.g., biaxial stress) can be

identiﬁed.

Diﬀerent doses complicate the interpretation of the simulation results, so that future in-

vestigations of similar kinds may rather set up case studies with a constant dose or impinging

Ar rate (estimated process time) instead of a constant number of impinging particles. The

lateral dimensions of the surface slab are limited by computational costs and, hence, ﬁdelity,

but ultimately do now allow for signiﬁcant size eﬀects. It is for instance assumed that the

evolution of the surface roughness is limited by the considered surface areas.

The results ultimately encourage the explicit consideration of implantation of even small

Ar concentrations when studying growth or sputtering processes (by means of molecular

dynamics simulations). The assumption that Ar atoms either outgas anyhow or do not

signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the ongoing dynamics is found to be invalid.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation)

– Project-ID 138690629 (TRR 87) and Project-ID 434434223 (SFB 1461).

21

ORCID IDS

T. Gergs: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5041-2941

T. Mussenbrock: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6445-4990

J. Trieschmann: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9136-8019

[1] G. Abadias, E. Chason, J. Keckes, M. Sebastiani, G. B. Thompson, E. Barthel, G. L. Doll,

C. E. Murray, C. H. Stoessel, and L. Martinu, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A:

Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films 36, 020801 (2018).

[2] F. d’Heurle and J. Harper, Thin Solid Films 171, 81 (1989).

[3] H. Windischmann, Critical Reviews in Solid State and Material Sciences 17, 547 (1992).

[4] P. Sigmund, in Sputtering by particle bombardment I (Springer, 1981) pp. 9–71.

[5] J. S.-L. Gibson, S. Rezaei, H. Rueß, M. Hans, D. Music, S. Wulﬁnghoﬀ, J. M. Schneider,

S. Reese, and S. Korte-Kerzel, Materials Research Letters 6, 142 (2018).

[6] A. Vom Felde, J. Fink, T. M¨uller-Heinzerling, J. Pﬂ¨uger, B. Scheerer, G. Linker,

and

D. Kaletta, Physical review letters 53, 922 (1984).

[7] A. Tyagi, R. Khanna, and G. Rao, Scripta metallurgica 20, 1245 (1986).

[8] S. Donnelly and C. Rossouw, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section

B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 13, 485 (1986).

[9] C. Godet, V. M. da Silva Santana, and D. G. David, Thin Solid Films 659, 70 (2018).

[10] R. Dhaka and S. Barman, Physical review letters 104, 036803 (2010).

[11] R. Dhaka, C. Biswas, A. Shukla, S. Barman, and A. Chakrabarti, Physical Review B 77,

104119 (2008).

[12] C. Biswas, A. Shukla, S. Banik, S. Barman, and A. Chakrabarti, Physical review letters 92,

115506 (2004).

[13] E. C. Neyts and P. Brault, Plasma Processes and Polymers 14, 1600145 (2017).

[14] D. B. Graves and P. Brault, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 42, 194011 (2009).

[15] S. Valkealahti and R. Nieminen, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section

B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 18, 365 (1986).

[16] S. Plimpton, Journal of Computational Physics 117, 1 (1995).

22

[17] A. P. Thompson, H. M. Aktulga, R. Berger, D. S. Bolintineanu, W. M. Brown, P. S. Crozier,

P. J. in’t Veld, A. Kohlmeyer, S. G. Moore, T. D. Nguyen, et al., Computer Physics Commu-

nications 271, 108171 (2022).

[18] K. Choudhary, T. Liang, A. Chernatynskiy, Z. Lu, A. Goyal, S. R. Phillpot, and S. B. Sinnott,

Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 27, 015003 (2014).

[19] T. Liang, T.-R. Shan, Y.-T. Cheng, B. D. Devine, M. Noordhoek, Y. Li, Z. Lu, S. R. Phillpot,

and S. B. Sinnott, Materials Science and Engineering: R: Reports 74, 255 (2013).

[20] J. F. Ziegler and J. P. Biersack, in Treatise on heavy-ion science (Springer, 1985) pp. 93–129.

[21] H. Sha, R. Faller, G. Tetiker, and P. Woytowitz, AIChE Journal 64, 338 (2018).

[22] A. Dullweber, B. Leimkuhler, and R. McLachlan, The Journal of chemical physics 107, 5840

(1997).

[23] G. J. Martyna, D. J. Tobias, and M. L. Klein, The Journal of chemical physics 101, 4177

(1994).

[24] W. Shinoda, M. Shiga, and M. Mikami, Physical Review B 69, 134103 (2004).

[25] M. E. Tuckerman, J. Alejandre, R. L´opez-Rend´on, A. L. Jochim, and G. J. Martyna, Journal

of Physics A: Mathematical and General 39, 5629 (2006).

[26] M. Parrinello and A. Rahman, Journal of Applied physics 52, 7182 (1981).

[27] T. Schneider and E. Stoll, Physical Review B 17, 1302 (1978).

[28] B. D¨unweg and W. Paul, International Journal of Modern Physics C 2, 817 (1991).

[29] Q. Hou, M. Hou, L. Bardotti, B. Pr´evel, P. M´elinon, and A. Perez, Physical Review B 62,

2825 (2000).

[30] J. Trieschmann, S. Ries, N. Bibinov, P. Awakowicz, S. Mr´az, J. M. Schneider, and T. Mussen-

brock, Plasma Sources Science and Technology 27, 054003 (2018).

[31] D. Depla, G. Buyle, J. Haemers, and R. De Gryse, Surface and Coatings Technology 200,

4329 (2006).

[32] G. A. Bird, Molecular gas dynamics and the direct simulation of gas ﬂows (1994).

[33] M. W. Thompson, Philosophical Magazine 18, 377 (1968).

[34] P. Sigmund, Physical review 184, 383 (1969).

[35] P. Sigmund, Physical review 187, 768 (1969).

[36] E. C. Neyts and A. Bogaerts, in Theoretical Chemistry in Belgium (Springer, 2014) pp. 277–

288.

23

[37] K. M. Bal and E. C. Neyts, The Journal of chemical physics 141, 204104 (2014).

[38] M. J. Mees, G. Pourtois, E. C. Neyts, B. J. Thijsse, and A. Stesmans, Physical Review B 85,

134301 (2012).

[39] A. Stukowski, Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering 18, 015012

(2009).

[40] A. Stukowski, Jom 66, 399 (2014).

[41] A. P. Thompson, S. J. Plimpton, and W. Mattson, The Journal of chemical physics 131,

154107 (2009).

[42] X. Yuan and A. Cormack, Computational materials science 24, 343 (2002).

[43] K. Goetzke and H.-J. Klein, Journal of non-crystalline solids 127, 215 (1991).

[44] D. Drabold et al., Physical Review B 71, 054206 (2005).

[45] M. Cobb, D. Drabold, and R. Cappelletti, Physical Review B 54, 12162 (1996).

[46] X. Zhang and D. Drabold, Physical Review B 62, 15695 (2000).

[47] S. Le Roux and P. Jund, Computational Materials Science 49, 70 (2010).

[48] Y. Lou and P. D. Christoﬁdes, Computers & chemical engineering 29, 225 (2004).

[49] N. Laegreid and G. Wehner, Journal of Applied Physics 32, 365 (1961).

[50] S. Kim, H. Choi, and S.-K. Choi, Thin Solid Films 322, 298 (1998).

24

