EXPLORING AUGMENTED REALITY GAMES IN ACCESSIBLE
LEARNING: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW

1
2
0
2

v
o
N
6
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
1
2
8
0
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Minghao Cai, Gokce Akcayir, Carrie Demmans Epp
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada
{minghao3, akcayir, demmanse}@ualberta.ca

ABSTRACT

Augmented Reality (AR) learning games, on average, have been shown to have a positive impact on
student learning [1]. However, the exploration of AR learning games in special education settings,
where accessibility is a concern, has not been well explored. Thus, the purpose of this study is to
explore the use of AR games in accessible learning applications and to provide a comprehensive
understanding of its advantages over traditional learning approaches. In this paper, we present our
systematic review of previous studies included in major databases in the past decade. We explored the
characteristics of user evaluation, learning effects on students, and features of implemented systems
mentioned in the literature. The results showed that AR game applications can promote students’
learning activities from three perspectives: cognitive, affective, and retention. We also found there
were still several drawbacks to current AR learning game designs for special needs despite the positive
effects associated with AR game use. Based on our ﬁndings, we propose potential design strategies
for future AR learning games for accessible education.

Keywords Special Education · Augmented Reality · Game · Systematic Review · Human-computer Interaction

1

Introduction

Due to the wide adoption of smart mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets, as well as the availability of
Augmented Reality (AR) technology, the past decade has witnessed a rapid growth in the popularity of AR applications
in various areas of our lives [2]. The type of AR interactions that superimpose layers of digital contextualized
information over physical settings offer new opportunities for educational experiences. Some studies have found
positive effects of AR technology on people’s learning [3, 4].

Separate from the investigation of AR in education, many researchers have been studying the use of educational games
and have found that this technology can make learning tasks entertaining while providing learning value [5]. These
studies also showed improved learning when a series of goals, rules, and rewards that are lacking in standard learning
approaches were provided through the technology [6].

As mentioned above, the positive effects of AR technology and game design in promoting learning performance have
been demonstrated. Recently, researchers have started to explore the combination of AR technology and games in
education for students who have been designated as requiring adaptation of the learning environment to meet their
needs. These students often participate in special-education programs and receive a variety of supports based on their
speciﬁc needs.

In a review study examining research on technology use in special education between 2008 and 2012, only one study
was found to include AR [7]. In contrast to this study, a recent review that examined technology use in special education
between 2014 and 2018 found AR or virtual reality (VR) to be the most frequent multimedia support [8]. This shows
that research on AR use in special education has increased over time. Additionally, AR was found to be an effective
learning tool in special education when both group [9] and single-subject designs [10] were used. Similarly, game
use in special education has been increasing [11] and has been found to be effective [12]. Despite the demonstrated

 
 
 
 
 
 
Exploring Augmented Reality Games in Accessible Learning

affordances and increasing prevalence of both AR and game use in special education, we could not ﬁnd a review study
exploring the impact of AR learning games as an assistive learning medium compared to traditional learning tools.
To ﬁll this gap, we conducted a systematic literature review to provide a comprehensive understanding of using AR
games as accessible learning media and what successful design strategies for such assistive systems would be. The
main question is “what is the current stage of AR learning games in accessible education for students with disabilities
considering studies in the past decade?”.

To answer this question, we review studies of existing AR learning game systems for students who have the special
education designation. We consider the general characteristics of user studies, effects on student learning performance,
and experimental setup including hardware as well as software and the evaluation techniques used. We collected
literature from journals and proceedings which are included in major databases, published from 2010 to 2020. This
search identiﬁed six research articles that presented AR-game-based accessible learning tools.

Considering the rapid development of AR technology and applications that follow from the continuous upgrading of
software and hardware, various deﬁnitions of AR have been used. Building on prior work, we describe our speciﬁc
deﬁnition of “AR” and “AR Learning Game” below.

• AR is a technology allowing the superimposition or integration of digital content with physical spaces or
objects. It may include the use of technology to provide additional information through the sensory mechanisms
of a user.

• An AR Learning Game is an AR technology that incorporates game play.

The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of the methodology and the process
of literature search and analysis. Section 3 presents our ﬁndings. Section 4 describes our suggestions for designing
AR-game-based assistive tools based on our ﬁndings. We close the paper with our conclusions.

2 Methodology

We adopted the guidelines and steps used in previous systematic review research from related domains [13, 14, 15] and
followed the below steps:

• Study planning

– Formulate research question for the review
– Decompose this main question into preliminary categories

• Identifying criteria

– Describe database sources for the literature
– Deﬁne the inclusion and exclusion criteria
– Deﬁne search terms

• Data collection

– Preliminary search results
– Applying inclusion and exclusion criteria
– Data extraction and coding

• Analysis
• Results interpretation and reporting

In the following sections, we describe and report each step.

2.1 Study Planning

To explore the current stage of AR learning games in accessible education for students with disabilities, the following
sub-questions were deﬁned:

• RQ1: What are the general characteristics (i.e., curriculum subject, learning domain, age group, and learning

environment) of the reviewed research?

• RQ2: What are the common kinds of effects of AR learning games for student with disabilities?
• RQ3: What kinds of elements or system features are commonly used in AR learning games for student with

disabilities?

• RQ4: What are the current drawbacks of using AR learning games for students with disabilities?

2

Exploring Augmented Reality Games in Accessible Learning

2.2

Identifying Criteria

2.2.1 Database Sources

To collect as many related journal and proceedings articles as possible, four major interdisciplinary databases were
selected as article sources: Web of Science (WoS) Core Collection, ACM Digital Library, IEEE/IEE Electronic Library
(IEL) Online, and Education Resources Information Center (ERIC). WoS, ACM, and IEL are important sources covering
peer-reviewed scientiﬁc articles [16]. The ERIC database covers more than 1200 journal titles and is an authoritative
collection of journal articles for the ﬁeld of education [17]. These databases are recognized for their coverage and
indexing. They are commonly used in literature review research. Thus, they are considered suitable sources for
providing a comprehensive article set for our research topic.

2.2.2 Identifying Criteria

Three researchers created a codebook that describes the inclusion and exclusion criteria (see below). Two of them
participated in the preliminary extraction and coding.

Initially, we conducted a pilot search where all three read a subset of papers and collaboratively created an initial
codebook to use for analyzing the papers. After getting a draft codebook, under the supervision of the third researcher,
the two separately analyzed the same small subset of the articles and compared their results to reduce the impact of
possible personal bias until the Cohen’s kappa inter-coder agreement was 0.91. Once we had decided on the codebook,
the remaining papers were split between two researchers, each reading and coding about a half of the remaining papers.

2.2.3 Criteria for Literature Inclusion

We conducted searches between 2010 and 2020 to identify relevant studies in the literature; 2010 was selected as a
starting point because using AR for educational purposes gained momentum in 2010 [18], even though AR technology
dates back to 1990’s. So, literature included in our review were studies of educational applications, prototypes, or
frameworks that were also AR games between 2010 and 2020. The target population was students with disabilities.
More speciﬁcally, the below criteria needed to be met for inclusion.

• Studies reporting user evaluations or experiments to compare how human learning differs between AR-game

and non-AR-game environments.

• Studies having outcome measures to indicate the effect of AR-game experience.
• Studies reporting the success of the interventions.
• Studies that included hypothesis testing to investigate learning differences.

Studies were excluded when

• papers did not include the term “Augmented Reality” or “AR””or “Mixed Reality” or “MR”,
• pure VR designs were used although the paper claimed to have AR factors,
• statistical analyses were not reported, and
• the work was not conducted in an educational context.

2.3 Data Collection

Figure 1 shows the overview of the approach used to identify the relevant papers. There are three main phases. We
found that due to the diversity of diagnoses, some relevant papers would not contain general words about accessible
learning such as “universal design” and “accessible” in the title or abstract description. To include as many relevant
articles as possible, we did not search for keywords related to games or special education.

Figure 1: Summary of the analysis process

Phase 1: We performed a search in our target databases with keywords based on the criteria above. We used search
terms in two categories: (1) AR keywords: “Augmented Reality”, “Augmenting Reality”, “Mixed Reality”; and (2)

3

Exploring Augmented Reality Games in Accessible Learning

education keywords: “learning”, “education”, “training”, “teaching”, “instruction”, “student”, “learner”, “teacher”,
“instructor”, “educative”, “teach” ,“learn”. All papers that had more than just an abstract were included, resulting in
5034 total papers.

Phase 2: We conducted an initial screening to ﬁlter articles based on the abstract: 1606 papers remained after this phase.

Phase 3: We conducted a two-round review based on the full text of the remaining articles. First, a rough scan of
the articles was performed. This scan served to eliminate research that did not have a user study or did not meet our
deﬁnition of AR, and it left 351 papers for further analysis. Following this scan, we reviewed the full text of the article
and selected only those papers that fully met the requirements. After completing this process, 6 papers remained: 3
from the Web of Science, 1 from the ACM Library, 1 from IEEE/IEE Electronic Library, and 1 from the Education
Resources Information Center. These 6 research papers were included in our analysis.

2.4 Analysis

After we had a ﬁnal set of papers that met our inclusion and exclusion requirements, we read through and coded
the papers. This coding focused on measures of application performance, including learning objectives and types of
outcome; system features; experimental implementation, including hardware and software; and the assessment approach
that the paper detailed in the user studies. See Table 1 for the codes.

Criteria

Learning

Table 1: Code table for analysis

Description

Domain

Concept

Effect

The domain of learning in the user study

The concept covered in the user study
The type of learning effect measured in the
study

Pedagogies

How were the concepts learnt in the study?

Disabilities

Type

Platform

Did the system aim to help people with a
speciﬁc type of disability? If so, what is it?
The platform of the learning tool

Adaptivity

How did the system support adaptivity?

Experimental
Medium

AR Type

The type of AR used in the system

Interaction

The type of interaction input for users

Input sensor

Registration
type
Game

Assessment

Approach

3

Findings

Did they use a special AR input device or senor
to capture users’ input? If yes, what was it?
The type of registration technique they used to
register virtual content in the real world.
The type of game
What kind of approach was used to measure
learning?

Examples
Mathematics, Geometry, Social
skills
Numeracy skills
Technical knowledge, Psychom-
-otor ability, Motivation
Lecture-based, Project-based,
Simulation-based
Dyscalculia, Attention deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Desktop, Phone, Tablet
Based on user levels, Based
on actions
Location-based, Superimposi-
-tion-based, Recognition-based
Touch, Gestures, Body move-
-ments
Handheld controller, Depth
sensor

Marker-based, Marker less-based

Serious game, Board game
Post-study survey, Scores on
tests , Completion time

In this section, we describe the results of analyzing the AR learning games that have been used to support accessible
learning in educational contexts. We report our detailed answers to the research questions.

3.1 The common general characteristics of AR learning games for students with disabilities

Table 2 shows the distribution of subjects, age groups, learning environments, and the types of disabilities observed
across the reviewed user studies.

According to the reviewed studies, we found that accessible learning games were most commonly applied to mathematics
teaching (67%), half of which aimed to help students learn knowledge about geometry and the other half aimed to
enhance numeracy skills. These mathematical skills are considered to be the basis for meeting the general demands of

4

Exploring Augmented Reality Games in Accessible Learning

Table 2: General characteristics

Characteristics Details

Subjects

Age group

Environments

Disabilities

Mathematics
Others
6-12 years old
12-18 years old
School classroom
Other indoor places (not speciﬁed)
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
Attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Dyscalculia
Down syndrome
Not speciﬁed

The number of papers
4
2
5
1
4
2
2
1
1
1
1

Table 3: Learning Effect Types

Effect Type
Cognitive

Affective

Samples effects in search
Increase learning gain, Enhance cognitive skills
Enhance learning motivation, Enhance willingness to interact, Enhance
learning attention, Enhance engagement, Improve self-conﬁdence,

Psychomotor Motor skills
Retention

Learning gain over time, Motivation over time

Num
4

5

0
2

daily life and learning other domains of knowledge [19]. The remaining studies involved training systems designed to
enhance core life skills, such as daily life management skills [20] and social skills [21].

Consistent with these core skill foci, we found that all the research collected was aimed at children and adolescents
(<18 years old). Most of the students participating in the experiments were between 6 and 12 years old, and the rest
were between 12 and 18 years old.

With respect to the learning environment, most studies were carried out in school classrooms (67%). The remaining
studies did not specify the experiment environment although most of them were conducted indoors with instructors.

With respect to the types of disabilities, we found that ﬁve of the studies reported speciﬁc information about user
abilities. Only one study that served students with varied disabilities did not provide speciﬁc information. In the
reviewed work, Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) was the most commonly reported diagnosis.

3.2 The common types of learning effect

In educational application studies, learning effects can be categorized into three domains: the cognitive domain which
refers to knowledge and mental skills, the psychomotor domain which refers to motor skills, and the affective domain
which refers to feelings and attitudes [22]. In addition, we analyzed retention effects since this is a core focus in
educational research. We categorized the types of effects of learning into these four main types. The results can be
found in Table 3.

3.2.1 Increased cognitive achievement

Regarding cognitive learning effects, more than half of the reviewed studies (67%) reported that AR learning games led
to increased learning achievement in terms of content knowledge. The positive effects included enhanced cognitive skills
(e.g., improved mathematical reasoning and processing speed [21], enhanced problem-solving skills [23], improved
communication skills [24]) and learning gains [25]. All these studies reported a positive signiﬁcant difference except
one. In the paper reporting this exception, Lorenzo et al. [24] describe an AR game that is delivered on mobile phones
for enhancing the social skills of children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Their preliminary study showed no
signiﬁcant difference in students’ general social skill scores between the AR-game and non-AR-game conditions.

3.2.2 Affective improvement

Among the three main domains, affective learning was the most common kind of effect explored when introducing AR
learning game applications for students with disabilities.

5

Exploring Augmented Reality Games in Accessible Learning

Table 4: Assessment approach

Effect

Cognitive & Psychomotor

Affective

Approach
Post-test only
Pre-test and post-test
Questionnaire
Observation

The number of papers
5
1
4
2

Regarding the affective learning effect, most of the reviewed studies explored using AR learning games for stimulating
a positive effect on the learners’ attitude towards or experience with the learning content. The detailed effects include
attention, engagement, curiosity, enjoyment, self-conﬁdence, and willingness to participating in learning activities. A
number of previous studies in education for general users have reported that students tend to have joyful, fun, and
playful learning experiences when they play AR games to acquire academic knowledge [26, 27]. A similar result was
found when analyzing the reviewed studies of AR learning game applications for learners with disabilities. Most of the
studies (83%) reported that AR learning games led to positive affect, and all of them reported signiﬁcantly different
results when comparing AR learning games to traditional environments. A study by Avila-Pesantez et al. [20] described
an AR serious game to enhance the daily life functioning of those with Attention Deﬁcit-Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD). This study reported the system could motivate the emotional competencies and provide continuous interest for
problem-solving which could lead to academic success in the long term. Another study for students with Dyscalculia
[21] also showed similar results; the AR game could not only help players maintain continuous interest in mathematical
problem-solving tasks but also encouraged students to take an active role in their learning activities. Moreover, in the
AR numeracy game for teenagers with Down Syndrome, constructed by Salah et al. [25], players tended to have a
signiﬁcantly higher engagement level than those using a regular computer-based setup. In addition to the above effects,
AR learning games were also demonstrated to have a positive impact on attention [24] and concentration [23].

3.2.3 Long-term retention effects

The reviewed research indicated that AR learning games could help students with disabilities retain what they had
learned for a longer time and maintain their interest in learning longer than was seen in non-AR-game learning
experiences.

In our analysis, more than half of the reviewed studies (67%) measured the outcome results right after the use of an AR
learning game. The rest of the studies (33%) explored relatively long-term impacts on the learners: one study showed a
gradual improvement in learning performance and learning motivation in mathematics over a four-week experiment
[21]. The study by Lorenzo et al., reported that the training system led to an affective improvement for children with
ASD following a twenty-week intervention [24].

3.3 The common types of measurement

We further classiﬁed the research methods used to measure the learning effects in the reviewed studies into two
categories shown in Table 4. We did this in the context of the types of effect being measured (see Section 4.2). Because
the measurement approaches for cognitive and psychomotor effects are often similar, we merge the two together in this
categorization.

According to the reviewed studies, we found that the most commonly used method to measure cognitive and psychomotor
effects was “Post-test only” (83%) which compared student’s performance or knowledge gain with the intervention of
AR learning games to those using traditional learning setups such as paper materials and normal computers

For the affective learning effects, our review revealed that the most used main approach was a questionnaire (67%); the
remaining studies used observation. Although the main method of questionnaires was chosen, one of the studies still
reported some of the details of student’s behaviors observed by the researchers [28]. It is worth mentioning that except
for one study that used an existing user-speciﬁc model [21], in most of the reviewed studies researchers designed and
used their own special-purpose questionnaire.

3.4 The elements and system features commonly used in AR learning game for special education

As a relatively complex technology, AR leaning games help to deliver learning content through a medium that is
relatively different from traditional learning media (e.g., paper based, physical teaching aids). The beneﬁcial effects
discussed in the above sections could come from two aspects of the novel experience (AR and the game) that do not
occur in a traditional educational setup. In this subsection, our review sought to explore the different features and

6

Exploring Augmented Reality Games in Accessible Learning

Table 5: AR factors

System feature

AR sensing device

User interaction

AR type

Registration technique

Categories
RGB Camera
Depth sensor
Interactive wall
Gesture / Body movements
Touch
Manipulate physical objects
Recognition-based
Superimposition-based
Markerless-based
Marker-based

The number of papers
3
2
1
3
2
1
3
3
5
1

elements, which might lead to the different learning outcomes we mentioned above and identify what factors may
inﬂuence the learning results.

3.4.1 Augmented Reality features

The system features are decomposed into the AR sensing device used to support motion capture or preset markers, AR
type used to tie digital content with the physical world, Registration technique used to deploy digital elements into a
physical space, and User interaction, which refers to the type of input students use to achieve play. Table 5 presents
information about the use of these different AR features.

In terms of AR sensing device, we found RGB camera is one of the most commonly used devices (50%) according
to the reviewed studies. This may be because it is easily accessible and relatively inexpensive compared to other
sensors on the market. A similar balance was found in a previous review on AR-based application use learning by the
general population [29]. Regarding the other types of devices, we combined the Depth sensor (33%) and Interactive
wall together because they share a similar function that supports recognition of students’ hand gestures and body
movements to realize an intuitive user interface, which makes gesture/body movement (50%) the most common type
of user interaction in the reviewed study. One possible explanation for this difference is a researcher tendency to use
the presence of an interactive factor to promote spontaneous interaction which might be inhibited due to students’
abilities. High interaction rates are considered a positive aspect of learning games as they give the learner the sense
of freedom and enjoyment that creates a better learning experience without being bored or unchallenged. Also, the
types of physical movement that such interaction techniques support can help students with certain types of disabilities
enhance their comprehension of cognitive concepts. As previously found [21], using Kinect sensors to capture students’
body movements as physical input enhances students’ assimilation of arithmetic concepts, encourages their permanent
interest, and maintains highly spontaneous interactions within the learning game. Another study [20], pointed out that
providing a natural interface that combined users’ interaction with the objects in a real scenario could stimulate students’
emotional competencies, which would be another beneﬁt to support body movement input in accessible learning. The
Interactive wall design [25] showed a similar effect where the interactivity increased learning engagement and was
associated with increased enjoyment. In addition to the above, touch interaction was commonly used when mobile
phones or tablets were used as display devices. In only one study, the system recognized paper materials and then
overlaid instruction information on top of them to assist student manipulation of physical objects.

3.4.2 Game features

The system features related to Game factors are decomposed into the Platform used to build the learning game, Game
type, and Adaptivity that refers to the type of strategies adopted in the game. Table 6 presents this analysis.

For system platform, we found that the most commonly used platform among the reviewed studies was the desktop
PC (67%), although lightweight mobile AR applications are becoming easily accessible and practical in daily life for
enjoyment and demonstration purposes [30]. Several possible reasons could explain this ﬁnding. First, complicated
learning systems usually require powerful computing power, and desktop PCs can have stronger performance than
mobile devices. In one study [21], when the computer ran a mechanics game with multiple models and calculation
rules, it also drove additional AR sensor devices which currently requires more computation than would be available in
commercial mobile devices. Second, some emerging sensing devices (e.g., Kinect and interactive project) can only
be driven by computers. Third, in a classroom or lab environment, it is easier to ﬁnd a number of desktop PCs with a
uniﬁed speciﬁcation, which makes design and management more convenient for the educator.

7

Exploring Augmented Reality Games in Accessible Learning

Table 6: Gaming factors

Platform

System feature Categories
Desktop PC
Mobile phone/tablet
Projector
Serious game
Simulation game
Puzzle game
Multiple user levels
Based on user actions/decisions

Game type

Adaptivity

The number of papers
4
1
1
2
2
2
3
4

Regarding the application’s game type, Serious game, Simulation game, and Puzzle game account for equal proportions
(33%) of the studies.

Adaptivity is one of the features of game mechanics that can promote learning activities. We found two main types
of strategies used according to the reviewed studies. More than a half of the reviewed games (67%) support multiple
paths to achieve learning goals according to learners’ actions or decisions. It is argued that learning occurs when
students solve well-ordered problems and subconsciously push themselves to achieve the preset goals [31]. Half of the
studies provided multiple difﬁculty levels which change the task and system reactions depending on each player’s skills
and capabilities. Such adaptative design is beneﬁcial because students may tend to reach higher enjoyment when the
challenge matches their skills, according to the theory of ﬂow proposed by Csikszentmihalyi et al. [32]. For example,
one system would present more complex addition questions when the user level increased [25]; this was constructed to
support “transfer learning” that would help enhance the student’s ability to apply the learned knowledge in different
situations for those with Down Syndrome.

3.5 Current drawbacks of using AR learning games for student with disabilities

In this subsection, we discuss the limitations and challenges of AR learning games for accessible leaning based on the
observations from the analyzed articles.

First, AR learning game systems that support more complex functions often require a desktop computer platform and
high-end hardware to support powerful computing. Connection to additional devices including sensors and display
devices would be needed for providing multi-modal interaction in learning. Thus, at this stage, a complete set of
equipment will be relatively expensive. A need for more affordable solutions poses challenges to popularization. In the
meantime, the large and cumbersome equipment reduces portability and limits the promotion of these approaches to
other areas in the learner’s life. As a result, many such systems remain at the experimental stage and can only be used
in speciﬁc research environments, even if the system provides excellent learning aids. This limitation could be reduced
by the rapid development of lightweight and high-performance computing equipment and sensing equipment.

Second, the AR-game learning method brings new challenges to teachers. As mentioned in some of the studies [23, 28],
the introduction of new technology requires curriculum designers to acquire speciﬁc computer knowledge. At the
same time, the lecturer also needs more time to master certain knowledge to ensure the smooth use of the system when
delivering learning content. Potential solutions include optimizing the interactive interface or forming a template of
skill sets to help teachers master basic technical skills in advance.

Third, the diversity and particularity of the needs of students with disabilities makes system design difﬁcult. Design
elements that are common in other educational settings may pose challenges when used with certain groups of people.
As one study involving students on the autism spectrum shows [28], technologies requiring learner autonomy may
not work because of the often-cited dependence of these students on their teachers and the important role that their
relationship plays in learning. To solve this problem, we may need more intelligent AR technologies that can better
accommodate variable needs in learning. Investigating and summarizing technical models suitable for certain patterns
of needs can also improve design efﬁciency.

Fourth, in the reviewed studies, most of the participants had no relevant experience with AR or similar technologies
before participating in the experiment. This suggests we cannot rule out a potential novelty effect of introducing a new
technology, especially when considering affective outcomes. More research should be done focusing on exploring the
potential correlation.

8

Exploring Augmented Reality Games in Accessible Learning

4 Suggestions for Design Strategy

In this section, we present our main suggestions on the design of AR games in accessible learning applications based on
our previous discussion.

4.1 Clarify the Learning Effect

From our analysis, the impact of AR games on special education is multifaceted, including various aspects from
cognitive acceleration to affective enhancement. Corresponding to different design goals, there will be different system
characteristics. For example, supporting three-dimensional virtual display can help students understand complex
geometric content and supporting natural interaction methods, such as gesture input, often has good results when
promoting student participation. Therefore, when designing the system, the designer should ﬁrst clarify the type of
learning effect that is desired in order to select the corresponding design elements.

4.2 Understand Individualized Needs

In our reviewed work, most of the systems were oriented towards an isolated group of students with a speciﬁc type of
disability. This makes sense from a research perspective but is not always useful if we want systems to be integrated
into classrooms. Many special education classrooms have a mixture of students, each with their own differentiated
abilities and supports. Since the system design may affect different groups of learners in different ways, it is important
to consider who will and will not beneﬁt from that design. It is also challenging to ﬁnd a truly diverse design that will
be effective for all students. Therefore, designers need to consider the types of approaches that they will use if they are
to meet the speciﬁc needs of target users. Given the highly differentiated needs of these students it may be advisable to
support conﬁguration and adaptivtiy based on student abilities.

4.3 Differentiate the Impact of System Characteristics

From our ﬁndings, we can see that the diverse combinations of AR and Game technologies contribute to the observed
diversity of system functions and features. From the perspective of AR, for example, designs can be divided into
marker-based and markerless-based and can also be divided into superimposition-based and recognition-based. From
the perspective of game mechanics, they can be divided into simulation games, strategy games, and a variety of other
types of games. The existing designs often contained more than one system feature, but there are very few studies
investigating the learning impact of a single feature. Therefore, designers should consider and study the multi-faceted
inﬂuence of one element and the joint effect of multiple different elements on student’s learning when building the
system.

5 Limitations

Although our literature review gave us an understanding of the use of AR games for current accessible education
research, we were unable to conduct further quantitative analysis due to the limited number of papers that were of
sufﬁcient quality to enable meta-analysis. Considering the four major databases that were searched and the 10-year
period we used, our search can be described as comprehensive. So, a lack of high-quality research that focuses on the
outcomes of AR game use in special education is probably the issue. To fully understand the design approaches used
independent of their effectiveness, relevant products that are publicly available can be examined. Such analyses would
then only include design attributes and not their inﬂuence on student outcomes. Given the current state of work in this
area, the results of our analysis provide constructive guidance for future research and design.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we conducted a systematic review of previous studies to provide a comprehensive understanding of
the use of AR games in accessible learning. Our analysis summarizes common experimental elements and system
characteristics mentioned in the literature and further discusses the multi-faceted impact of AR games. The ﬁndings
indicate that AR learning games could be implemented to help students with special needs by increasing their learning
abilities and improving their learning performance for different learning purposes. It was also found that using AR
learning games can positively impact student affect during learning activities. Furthermore, our review reveals several
limitations and challenges that are associated with current designs. Finally, based on our ﬁndings, we suggest three
design strategies for future studies that could help us maximize the positive effects of AR learning games. In light

9

Exploring Augmented Reality Games in Accessible Learning

of these ﬁndings, we can say that AR game applications hold potential for supporting the speciﬁc needs of learners.
However, considering the special education context and the variability in learners’ needs, it is known that one size
does not ﬁt all. For this reason, there is a need for a vast number of studies exploring the design, implementation, and
evaluation of AR games for learners with differentiated needs.

References

[1] Nikolaos Pellas, Panagiotis Fotaris, Ioannis Kazanidis, and David Wells. Augmenting the learning experience in
primary and secondary school education: A systematic review of recent trends in augmented reality game-based
learning. Virtual Reality, 23(4):329–346, 2019.

[2] Pranav Parekh, Shireen Patel, Nivedita Patel, and Manan Shah. Systematic review and meta-analysis of augmented
reality in medicine, retail, and games. Visual computing for industry, biomedicine, and art, 3(1):1–20, 2020.

[3] Mustafa Sırakaya and Didem Alsancak Sırakaya. Augmented reality in stem education: A systematic review.

Interactive Learning Environments, pages 1–14, 2020.

[4] Peng Chen, Xiaolin Liu, Wei Cheng, and Ronghuai Huang. A review of using augmented reality in education

from 2011 to 2016. Innovations in smart learning, pages 13–18, 2017.

[5] Mary Jo Dondlinger. Educational video game design: A review of the literature. Journal of applied educational

technology, 4(1):21–31, 2007.

[6] Michael D Hanus and Jesse Fox. Assessing the effects of gamiﬁcation in the classroom: A longitudinal study on
intrinsic motivation, social comparison, satisfaction, effort, and academic performance. Computers & education,
80:152–161, 2015.

[7] Gi-Zen Liu, No-Wei Wu, and Yi-Wen Chen. Identifying emerging trends for implementing learning technology in
special education: A state-of-the-art review of selected articles published in 2008–2012. Research in developmental
disabilities, 34(10):3618–3628, 2013.

[8] Oluwabunmi Adewoyin Olakanmi, Gokce Akcayir, Oluwbukola Mayowa Ishola, and Carrie Demmans Epp. Using
technology in special education: current practices and trends. Educational Technology Research and Development,
68(4):1711–1738, 2020.

[9] Reem Sulaiman Baragash, Hosam Al-Samarraie, Louise Moody, and Fahed Zaqout. Augmented reality and
functional skills acquisition among individuals with special needs: A meta-analysis of group design studies.
Journal of Special Education Technology, page 0162643420910413, 2020.

[10] Reem Sulaiman Baragash, Hosam Al-Samarraie, Ahmed Ibrahim Alzahrani, and Osama Alfarraj. Augmented
reality in special education: A meta-analysis of single-subject design studies. European Journal of Special Needs
Education, 35(3):382–397, 2020.

[11] Shu-Chen Cheng and Chiu-Lin Lai. Facilitating learning for students with special needs: a review of technology-

supported special education studies. Journal of computers in education, pages 1–23, 2019.

[12] McKenzi James. The impact of game-based learning in a special education classroom. 2020.

[13] Paul Glasziou, Les Irwig, Chris Bain, and Graham Colditz. Systematic reviews in health care: a practical guide.

Cambridge University Press, 2001.

[14] Jairo Quintero, Silvia Baldiris, Rainer Rubira, Jhoni Cerón, and Gloria Velez. Augmented reality in educational

inclusion. a systematic review on the last decade. Frontiers in psychology, 10:1835, 2019.

[15] Barbara Kitchenham. Procedures for performing systematic reviews. Keele, UK, Keele University, 33(2004):1–26,

2004.

[16] Philippe Mongeon and Adèle Paul-Hus. The journal coverage of web of science and scopus: a comparative

analysis. Scientometrics, 106(1):213–228, 2016.

[17] Tarah Wright and Sarah Pullen. Examining the literature: A bibliometric study of esd journal articles in the
education resources information center database. Journal of Education for Sustainable Development, 1(1):77–90,
2007.

[18] Juan Garzón and Juan Acevedo. Meta-analysis of the impact of augmented reality on students’ learning gains.

Educational Research Review, 27:244–260, 2019.

[19] Rhonda Faragher and RI Brown. Numeracy for adults with down syndrome: it’s a matter of quality of life. Journal

of Intellectual Disability Research, 49(10):761–765, 2005.

10

Exploring Augmented Reality Games in Accessible Learning

[20] Diego Avila-Pesantez, Luis A Rivera, Leticia Vaca-Cardenas, Stteffano Aguayo, and Lourdes Zuñiga. Towards
the improvement of adhd children through augmented reality serious games: Preliminary results. In 2018 IEEE
Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON), pages 843–848. IEEE, 2018.

[21] Diego Fernando Avila-Pesantez, Leticia Azucena Vaca-Cardenas, Rosa Delgadillo Avila, Nelly Padilla Padilla,
and Luis A Rivera. Design of an augmented reality serious game for children with dyscalculia: a case study. In
International Conference on Technology Trends, pages 165–175. Springer, 2018.

[22] M Enamul Hoque. Three domains of learning: Cognitive, affective and psychomotor. The Journal of EFL

Education and Research, 2(2):45–52, 2016.

[23] Chien-Yu Lin, Hua-Chen Chai, Jui-ying Wang, Chien-Jung Chen, Yu-Hung Liu, Ching-Wen Chen, Cheng-Wei
Lin, and Yu-Mei Huang. Augmented reality in educational activities for children with disabilities. Displays,
42:51–54, 2016.

[24] Gonzalo Lorenzo, Marcos Gómez-Puerta, Graciela Arráez-Vera, and Alejandro Lorenzo-Lledó. Preliminary study
of augmented reality as an instrument for improvement of social skills in children with autism spectrum disorder.
Education and Information Technologies, 24(1):181–204, 2019.

[25] Jailan Salah, Slim Abdennadher, and Shery Atef. Galaxy shop: Projection-based numeracy game for teenagers
with down syndrome. In Joint International Conference on Serious Games, pages 109–120. Springer, 2017.
[26] Su-Ju Lu and Ying-Chieh Liu. Integrating augmented reality technology to enhance children’s learning in marine

education. Environmental Education Research, 21(4):525–541, 2015.

[27] Steven K Ayer, John I Messner, and Chimay J Anumba. Augmented reality gaming in sustainable design education.

Journal of Architectural Engineering, 22(1):04015012, 2016.

[28] Katyayani Singh, Ayushi Shrivastava, Krishnaveni Achary, Arindam Dey, and Ojaswa Sharma. Augmented
reality-based procedural task training application for less privileged children and autistic individuals. In The 17th
International Conference on Virtual-Reality Continuum and its Applications in Industry, pages 1–10, 2019.
[29] Panagiotis Fotaris, Nikolaos Pellas, Ioannis Kazanidis, and Paul Smith. A systematic review of augmented reality
game-based applications in primary education. In Memorias del XI Congreso Europeo en Aprendizaje Basado en
el Juego Graz, pages 181–191, 2017.

[30] Dimitris Chatzopoulos, Carlos Bermejo, Zhanpeng Huang, and Pan Hui. Mobile augmented reality survey: From

where we are to where we go. Ieee Access, 5:6917–6950, 2017.

[31] James Paul Gee. Learning by design: Games as learning machines. Interactive educational multimedia: IEM,

pages 15–23, 2004.

[32] ALYI CSikszentmih and M Flow. The psychology of optimal experience, 2008.

11

