2
2
0
2

r
p
A
2
1

]
x
e
-
p
e
h
[

2
v
8
7
4
0
1
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

A New Model of Intranuclear Neutron-Antineutron Transformations in 16

8O

J. L. Barrow∗
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Physics,
77 Massachusetts Avenue, Building 4, Room 304, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA†

A. S. Botvina‡ and E. S. Golubeva§
Institute for Nuclear Research, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Prospekt 60-letiya Oktyabrya 7a, 117312 Moscow, Russia

J.-M. Richard¶
Institut de Physique des 2 Inﬁnis de Lyon, Universit´e de Lyon,
CNRS-IN2P3–UCBL, 4 rue Enrico Fermi, Villeurbanne, France
(Dated: April 13, 2022)

There has been much work in recent years pertaining to viability studies for the intranuclear
observation of neutron-antineutron transformations. These studies begin ﬁrstly with the design and
implementation of an event generator for the simulation of this rare process, where one hopes to
retain as much of the underlying nuclear physics as possible in the initial state, and then studying how
these eﬀects may perturb the ﬁnal state observable particles for detector eﬃciency studies following
simulated reconstruction. There have been several searches for intranuclear neutron-antineutron
transformations, primarily utilizing the 16
8O nucleus, and completed within large underground water
Cherenkov detectors such as Super-Kamiokande. The latest iteration of a generator is presented here
for use in such an experiment. This generator includes several new features, including a new radial
(position) annihilation probability distribution and related intranuclear suppression factor for 16
8O,
as well as a highly general, modern nuclear multifragmentation model with photonic de-excitations.
The latter of these may allow for improved identiﬁcation of the signal using large underground
detectors such as Super-Kamiokande and the future Hyper-Kamiokande, potentially increasing the
overall signal eﬃciencies of these rare searches. However, it should be noted that certain fast photonic
de-excitations may be washed out by π0 decays to photons. These new features implemented in
these ¯n15
8O simulations increase the overall physical realism of the model, and are easily portable
to other future searches such as to extranuclear ¯n12
6C for the ESS NNBAR experiment, as well as
intranuclear ¯n39

18Ar used in DUNE.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Baryon number (B) must be violated via the Sakharov
conditions [1] in order to explain the baryon asymme-
try of the universe. This is the case despite the fact
that within the Standard Model (SM) B is accidentally
conserved [2] at perturbative scales, and is only inﬁnites-
imally violated within nonpertubative regimes [3]. Even
though it is a key beyond Standard Model (BSM) pre-
diction, it has yet to be observed through the now classic
|∆B| = 1 proton decay [4]. Furthermore, it has been
shown that many BSM theories do not require such de-
cays [5, 6], and many actually prefer |∆B| = 2 opera-
tors [7] such as those associated with dinucleon decays
and neutron-antineutron transformations (n → ¯n) [8–
11].
It may also be said that, generically, only B − L-
violating processes may contribute to the baryon abun-
dance [7, 12], as all primordial B asymmetries originating

∗ jbarrow@fnal.gov
† Also at Tel Aviv University; formerly at The University of Ten-

nessee, Knoxville.

‡ botvina@inr.ru
§ golubeva@inr.ru
¶ j-m.richard@ipnl.in2p3.fr

from higher scale interactions are usually washed out via
sphalerons; this is not the case in models of leptogene-
sis [13–15].

Post-sphaleron baryogenesis [10, 11] provides a testable
framework through the potential observation of n → ¯n,
predicting both lower and upper limits to the charac-
teristic mean free transformation (oscillation) time, τn¯n.
Any observation of n → ¯n by one instrument, be it in an
intranuclear or extranuclear context, requires conﬁrma-
tion studies in complimentary experiments using diﬀerent
techniques (such as with a free n beam) or within diﬀer-
ent nuclei. The relation of the mean intranuclear trans-
formation time, τM , to τn¯n is τM = TR τ 2
n¯n and requires
the computation of an intranuclear suppression factor,
TR; deviations from these relations may also yield signs
of new physics [16], though of course require an initial
observation above backgrounds.

A series of recent workshops and associated reports
have served as both a nursery and a stage for much of
this collective progress, and have inspired this work; for
those interested, consider [7, 17–27].

The work discussed here is aimed at creating a model
for describing the n → ¯n transition’s initial position
within the nucleus, along with its subsequent annihilation
on a constituent nucleon within 16
8O. Such a generator is
useful to large underground water Cherenkov detectors

 
 
 
 
 
 
such as the Super-Kamiokande experiment. Within de-
tectors such as these, reconstruction of nuclear remnant
de-excitation photons are in principle possible at appro-
priate energies, and current searches for B-violation in
Super-Kamiokande [4] include these de-excitations within
their simulations. Given these distinctive experimental
capabilities, the inclusion of simultaneous break-up and
associated γ de-excitations have been added to this ver-
sion of the model, improving on the de-excitation simu-
lations already implemented in previous iterations; this
also increases the overall physical realism of the genera-
tor.

This paper is organized as follows:

Sec. II will
shortly summarize the main features of the latest model,
and will highlight some of the main contrasts between
this work and the model currently used within Super-
Kamiokande [23]. In Sec. III, a new calculation describ-
ing the transition and subsequent annihilation of an ¯n
in 16
8O is considered, permitting the computation of its
In Sec. IV,
associated intranuclear suppression factor.
a newly added statistical model for the de-excitation of
nuclear remnants resulting from the annihilation is de-
scribed, taking into account the emission of photons.
Sec. V will present some details for the simulation of
intranuclear n → ¯n in 16
8O most useful for large under-
ground Cherenkov detectors such as Super-Kamiokande
and the future Hyper-Kamiokande, followed by some con-
clusions.

II. REVIEW OF THE MONTE CARLO MODEL

A. The current generator

Over the last several years, the core members of this
working group have improved the underlying physical
modeling of both extranuclear and intranuclear ¯n anni-
hilation following an n → ¯n transition [19, 28]. Con-
sider now some of the main features of this model and
some important diﬀerences with the Monte Carlo gener-
ator currently used by Super-Kamiokande (MCSK).

6C and ¯n12

1. The initial annihilation position is taken from the-
oretical calculations for both extranuclear and in-
tranuclear annihilations; examples of this past work
include extranuclear ¯p12
6C [28] (the for-
mer of which has been compared to available data),
and for the intranuclear case in ¯n39
18Ar [19]. The
calculation of the radial dependence of the annihi-
lation position for 16
8O will be presented in Sec. III.
In all cases, calculations indicate the predominately
peripheral nature of the annihilation, which aﬀects
the number of ﬁnal state interactions (FSIs) for the
simulation. Within the current MCSK, and in con-
trast to the model discussed here, it is assumed that
the annihilation occurs with equal probability over
the entire volume of the nucleus [23].

2

a local, degenerate Fermi gas of nucleons enclosed
within a spherical potential well with a radius equal
to the nuclear radius. To take into account the dif-
fuse boundary of the nucleus, the nuclear density
distribution is split into seven concentric zones1,
within which the nucleon density is considered to be
constant. The momentum distribution of the nucle-
ons in individual zones will be the same as for a de-
generate Fermi gas, although corresponding to an
ith-zone’s boundary Fermi momentum value [28].
Thus, in this model, there is a correlation between
the radius and momentum of intranuclear nucleons,
as the Fermi boundary energy is higher the larger
the density of the nuclear medium, and so is local
in character.
In the MCSK, the Fermi motion is
simulated via a nonlocal spectral function sourced
directly from experimental measurements [23].

3. The phenomena of ¯N N annihilation can lead to the
creation of many particles through many possible
(at times ∼ 200) exclusive reaction channels [28].
Many neutral particles may be present, which can
make experimental study quite diﬃcult, and so
experimental information for exclusive channels is
known only for a small fraction of possible anni-
hilation channels. For this reason, semi-empirical
tables of annihilation channels are employed for use
in the modeling of the annihilation. These are ob-
tained as follows: First, all experimentally mea-
sured channels are included. Then, by using iso-
topic relations, probabilities were found for those
channels which have the same conﬁgurations but
diﬀerent particle charges. Finally, the predictions
of a statistical model with SU(3) symmetry pro-
duces the remaining intermediate channels.
It is
considered that channels for ¯nn are identical to
¯pp channels, and that annihilation channels for
¯np are charge conjugated to ¯pn channels [19, 28].
The ¯pp simulation results of this model are com-
pared with experimental data on ¯pp annihilation
at rest, where Table I shows the average multi-
plicity of mesons formed therein. The simulation
results are within the range of experimental uncer-
tainties. From these simulation results, it follows
that more than 35% of all pions have been formed
by the decay of heavy mesonic resonances. The de-
cays of ω and η mesons also act as sources of high-
energy photons. In the current MCSK, a smaller
(but greatly expanded [29]) portion of these possi-
ble annihilation channels [23] are utilized.

4. The propagation and interaction of annihilation
mesons in the nuclear medium are simulated in
great detail within the Intranuclear Cascade (INC)

1 In addition, an eighth zone at high radii beyond the periphery

2. The Monte Carlo generator describes the nucleus as

takes on an an extremely low density.

model [28]. The model similarly includes eﬀects
related to the inﬂuence of the nuclear environment
via the introduction of an antinucleon potential and
“oﬀ-shell” masses for both the ¯n and annihilation
partner nucleon [19]. This approach demonstrates
a good description of the few available experimen-
In Ta-
tal data on ¯pA annihilation at rest [28].
ble II, the experimental multiplicities of the emit-
ted ﬁnal state annihilation-generated pions and the
energy carried away by those pions and photons
(from heavy resonance decays) are shown. It can be
seen that the simulation results are in good agree-
ment with the experimental data, which allows us
to conclude that the proposed model as a whole cor-
rectly describes both the annihilation process and
the FSIs of annihilation-generated mesons; thus, it
is expected that there should be small uncertainties
associated with the simulation of an intranuclear
¯n15

8O annihilation.

5. During the propagation of

cascade particles
(mesons and nucleons), the nucleus accumulates
excitation energy. The ﬁnal stage of ¯nA annihi-
lation is thus the de-excitation of the residual nu-
cleus. In Sec. IV, a new implementation describ-
ing de-excitations of residual nuclei with γ emis-
sion is presented for the ﬁrst time. A de-excitation
model, taking into account gamma emission, does
currently exists within MCSK.

TABLE I. Meson multiplicity comparisons for elementary p¯p
annihilation using this generator [19, 28] and available data
sets [30, 31].

M (π)
M (π±)
M (π0)
M (η)
M (ω)
M (ρ+)
M (ρ−)
M (ρ0)

¯pp Sim.
4.95
3.09
1.86
0.09
0.27
0.19
0.18
0.18

¯pp Exp.
4.98 ± 0.35 [32], 4.94 ± 0.14 [33]
3.14 ± 0.28 [32], 3.05 ± 0.04 [32], 3.04 ± 0.08 [33]
1.83 ± 0.21 [32], 1.93 ± 0.12 [32], 1.90 ± 0.12 [33]
0.10 ± 0.09 [34], 0.07 ± 0.01 [32]
0.28 ± 0.16 [34], 0.22 ± 0.01 [35]
—–
—–
0.26 ± 0.01 [35]

III. NUCLEAR EFFECTS IN 16

8O

A. Annihilation density for 16

8O

The formalism of intranuclear n → ¯n has been ex-
plained in several papers [19, 36–38]. Thus, we restrict
ourselves here to a brief reminder of key features of the
physics at play. The model of the 16
8O nucleus is described
in terms of an eﬀective and realistic shell model, tuned
to describe its main properties. Each n shell is character-
ized by its radial number, n, orbital angular momentum,

3

(cid:96), and total angular momentum, J (after suitable spin-
orbit coupling), resulting in the radial equation

−

u(cid:48)(cid:48)
i (r)
2 µ

+

(cid:20) (cid:96)((cid:96) + 1)

2 µ r2 + Ui(r) − (cid:15)i
ui(0) = ui(∞) = 0 ,

(cid:21)

ui(r) = 0 ,

(1)

where i collectively stands for the quantum numbers
{n, (cid:96), J}, and µ is the reduced mass of the neutrons with
respect to the rest of the nucleus. A small ¯n component,
vi(r), is attached to each n shell, which, to the ﬁrst non-
vanishing order, is given by the inhomogoneous equation

−

v(cid:48)(cid:48)
i (r)
2 µ

+

(cid:20) (cid:96)((cid:96) + 1)

2 µ r2 + V (r) − (cid:15)i

(cid:21)

vi(r) = γ ui(r) ,

(2)

vi(0) = vi(∞) = 0 .

Once the ¯n radial wave function vi is calculated, its con-
tribution Γi to the width is given by

−

Γi
2

=

∞
(cid:90)

0

|vi(r)|2 Im V dr = γ

∞
(cid:90)

0

ui(r) Im vi(r) dr . (3)

The inputs considered here for the calculation of the ra-
dial annihilation probability distribution are the n wave
functions ui(r), given by the eﬀective shell model [39, 40],
the corresponding shell energies (cid:15)i, and the complex
antineutron-nucleus potential V . The strength δ of the
transition is δ = 1/τn¯n (which is unknown), and the po-
tential V is determined by a ﬁt to data on antiprotonic
atoms and antiproton-nucleus scattering; for a review
and references, see, e.g., [41].

In the present calculation, a simple form for the optical

potential V has been adopted, where

V (r) = −

4π
µ

ρ(r) b ,

(4)

where ρ(r) is the local nuclear density calculated by the
radial functions ui(r) and their analogs for protons, and
b is an eﬀective scattering length taken as b = 1.3 +
i 1.9 fm [38].

The most remarkable property of Eq. (3) is its stability
with respect to changes in the ¯n potential; Fig. 1 shows
how the width varies in a simple model when the real
(xr) and imaginary (xi) parts of the ¯n potential V are
varied, namely V → [xr Re(V ) + i xi Im(V )], where xi,r
are continuous factors representing a percentile change.
Another concern is the use of antiproton-nucleus data
to determine the ¯n interaction, U . The optical potential
V results from folding the antinucleon-nucleon ( ¯N N ) am-
plitude M with the distribution of the nucleons within
the nucleus. However, it is known that M is weakly
isospin dependent, as shown by the smallness of the
charge-exchange cross-section ¯pp → ¯nn which is governed
by MI=0 − MI=1.

The most comforting observation is that the n → ¯n and
the subsequent ¯nN annihilation occurs at the surface of

TABLE II. A list of updated multiplicities from experimental data and the model for ¯p12
6C, taking into account all annihilation
branching ratios, the intranuclear antinucleon potential, and an associated nuclear medium response [19, 28]. Averages are
shown for 100,000 events.

¯pC Experiment
¯pC Calculation

M (π)
4.57 ± 0.15
4.60

M (π+)
1.25 ± 0.06
1.22

M (π−)
1.59 ± 0.09
1.65

M (π0)
1.73 ± 0.10
1.73

Etot (MeV)
1758 ± 59
1762

M (p)
—–
0.96

M (n)
—–
1.03

4

nuclear part of the calculation is viewed to be rather safe.

B. Comparisons of intranuclear suppression factors
for 16

8O

From the above formalism, one obtains a suppres-
sion factor (averaged over all neutrons) of TR = 0.65 ×
1023 s−1, which is comparable with the estimates 0.65 ×
1023 s−1 discussed in [38] and 0.8 × 1023 s−1 in the early
calculation by Dover et al. [37]. Adopting the second
model of that latter reference,

V = −

UR + i UI
1 + exp[(r − R)/a)]

,

(5)

with UR = 107 MeV, UI = 222 MeV, R = 2.388 fm and
a = 0.523 fm, one arrives at exactly the same TR = 0.65×
1023 s−1. This implies that the small discrepancy with
respect to [37] comes here from a choice of better n wave
functions.

Note that the eﬀective scattering length used in [38]
has been adopted; however, in this work, a ﬁnite range is
introduced for the folding with the nuclear density. It has
been checked that, indeed, increasing the size of the op-
tical potential somewhat reduces the suppression factor
TR. Moreover, it has been checked that the antinucleon
wave functions and the radial annihilation distribution,
such as the one shown in Fig. 2, are very similar to the
ones displayed by Friedman and Gal [38].

IV. STATISTICAL DESCRIPTION OF
NUCLEAR DISINTEGRATION

Statistical approaches have proven very successful for
describing the evolution of excited nuclei. According to
the statistical hypothesis, any initial dynamical interac-
tions between nucleons lead to a redistribution of the
available energy among many degrees of freedom, and the
nuclear system evolves towards equilibrium. The most
famous example of such an equilibrated nuclear system
is the ‘compound nucleus’ introduced by Niels Bohr in
1936 [42]. However, as was more recently established, the
further evolution of thermal nuclear systems depend cru-
cially on their excitation energy and mass number. The
standard compound nucleus picture is valid only at low
excitation energies and for large nuclei when sequential

FIG. 1. The change in the width Γr for a simple model when
the real part of the antineutron-nucleus potential is modiﬁed
by a factor xr and its imaginary part by xrmi.

the nucleus, precisely the same region probed by antipro-
tonic atoms and antinucleon scattering experiments. An
illustration is given in Fig. 2 for the case of the 1P1/2 shell
for 16
8O. The ¯n, generated `a la Eq. (3), is clearly seen to
be outside the n distribution. However, the ¯n requires
some partner to annihilate with, and so as a compromise
the annihilation takes place at the surface.

FIG. 2. Radial distributions for the 1P1/2 shell of 16
8O: n,
¯n, and annihilation. The units are arbitrary for the vertical
axis. The full annihilation density shown in dashed black is
the same as will be shown later in Fig. 5.

Altogether, from these and past studies [19, 38], the

evaporation of light particles and ﬁssion are the domi-
nant decay channels [43–45]. The concept of the com-
pound nucleus cannot be applied at high excitation en-
ergies, E∗ >
∼ 3 MeV/nucleon, the reason being that time
intervals between subsequent fragment emissions can be-
come very short at ∼ 10 fm/c ∼ 3.3×10−23 s. In this case
there will not be enough time for the residual nucleus to
reach equilibrium between subsequent emissions. More-
over, the nuclear fragments produced will be in the vicin-
ity of each other, and, therefore, should interact together
strongly. Thus, the rates of particle emission generally
calculated for an isolated compound nucleus will not be
reliable in this situation.

There are many other theoretical and experimental ar-
guments in favour of a simultaneous break-up at high
excitation energy for light excited nuclei [43, 44]. Since
after an intranuclear ¯nN annihilation one can expect a
spectrum of excitation energies from low to very high
energies, the de-excitation code used here it taken to be
the Statistical Multifragmentation Model (SMM), mainly
described in review [43]. This model includes all de-
excitation processes which can be present in such excited
nuclei: the multifragmentation of larger nuclei at high
energies, their evaporation and ﬁssion at low energies,
and the simultaneous break-up of light excited nuclei (so
called Fermi-break-up). All these processes are properly
connected and self-consistent within the code. The code
has demonstrated a very good description of various ex-
perimental data [43, 46–52].

At high excitation energies, the SMM assumes statis-
tical equilibrium of the nuclear system with mass num-
ber A0, charge Z0, and excitation energy E0 within a
low-density freeze-out volume. This volume can be pa-
rameterized as V = V0 + Vf , so the baryon density is
ρ = A0/V ; here, V0 is the volume of the system at a
normal nuclear density ρ0 ≈ 0.15 fm−3, and Vf is the so-
called free volume available for any translational motion
of nuclear fragments. In the excluded volume approxi-
mation, Vf may be taken as a constant for all break-up
channels; however, under more realistic assumptions, it
is known to depend on the nuclear fragment multiplicity,
M , within each of the channels [43]. The model consid-
ers all break-up channels (an ensemble of partitions {p})
composed of nucleons and excited fragments, all taking
into account the conservation of baryon number, elec-
tric charge, and energy. An important advantage of the
SMM is that besides its many multifragment break-up
channels, it also includes compound nucleus decay chan-
nels, and accounts for the rate competition between all
these channels.

For the freeze-out volume, light nuclei with mass num-
bers A ≤ 4 and charges Z ≤ 2 are treated as elementary
stable particles with masses and spins taken from the
nuclear tables (a “nuclear gas”). Only the translational
degrees of freedom of these particles contribute to the en-
tropy of the system. Fragments with A > 4 are treated as
heated nuclear liquid drops; in this way, one may study
the coexistence of both nuclear liquid-gas phases in the

freeze-out volume. Their individual free energies FAZ are
parameterized as a sum of the bulk, surface, Coulomb,
and symmetry energy contributions:

5

FAZ = F B

AZ + F S

AZ + EC

AZ + Esym
AZ .

(6)

c − T 2)5/4(T 2

The standard expressions for these terms are: F B
AZ =
(−W0−T 2/(cid:15)0)A, where T is the temperature, the param-
eter (cid:15)0 is related to the level density, and W0 = 16 MeV
is the binding energy of inﬁnite nuclear matter; F S
AZ =
B0A2/3(T 2
c + T 2)−5/4, where B0 = 18 MeV
is the surface coeﬃcient, and Tc = 18 MeV is the critical
temperature of inﬁnite nuclear matter; EC
AZ = cZ 2/A1/3,
where c = (3/5)(e2/r0)(1 − (ρ/ρ0)1/3) is the Coulomb
parameter (obtained in the Wigner-Seitz approxima-
tion) [43], with the charge unit e and r0 = 1.17 fm;
Esym
AZ = γ(A − 2Z)2/A, where γ = 25 MeV is the symme-
try energy parameter. These parameters are those of the
Bethe-Weizs¨acker formula, corresponding to the assump-
tion of isolated fragments with normal density in the
freeze-out conﬁguration; such an assumption has been
found to be quite successful in many applications [43]. It
is to be expected, however, that in a more realistic treat-
ment one must expand this description, whereby primary
nuclear fragments will have to be considered not only ex-
cited but also subject to a nuclear interaction between
them. These eﬀects can be accounted for in the frag-
ment free energies by changing the corresponding liquid-
drop parameters. The Coulomb interaction of fragments
in the freeze-out volume is described within the Wigner-
Seitz approximation; see ref. [43] for details.

As is well known, the number of partitions of medium
and heavy systems (A0 ∼ 100) is enormous [43]. In order
to take these into account, the SMM uses a few prescrip-
tions. At small excitation energies, the standard SMM
code [43] uses a microcanonical treatment, though taking
into account a limited number of disintegration channels:
as a rule, only partitions with total fragment multiplicity
M ≤ 3 are considered. This is a very convenient ap-
proximation at low temperature, wherein the compound
nucleus and low-multiplicity channels dominate, permit-
ting a smooth transition into these channels. Recently, a
full microcanonical version of the SMM using a Markov
Chain Monte Carlo method was introduced [53]. Thus,
it can be used for exploring all partitions without limita-
tion.

Within the microcanonical ensemble, the statistical

weight of a partition p is calculated as

Wp ∝ eSp ,

(7)

where Sp is the corresponding entropy; this further de-
pends on fragments in this partition, as well as on the
excitation energy E0, mass number A0, charge Z0, and
volume V of the residual nuclear system. In the standard
treatment, a description which corresponds to an ap-
proximate microcanonical ensemble is followed; namely,
a temperature Tp characterising all ﬁnal states in each
partition p is introduced. This is determined from the

energy balance equation taking into account the total
excitation energy E0 [43].
In the following, Sp for the
calculated Tp is determined by using conventional ther-
modynamical relations [43]. In the standard case, it can
be written as









Sp = ln



(cid:89)

gA,Z

 + ln



A3/2

 − ln

(cid:89)

A,Z

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

A3/2
0

A,Z


(cid:89)

− ln



A,Z



nA,Z!

 + (M − 1) ln

(cid:33)

(cid:32)

Vf
λ3
Tp

(8)

+ 1.5(M − 1) +

(cid:18) 2TpA
(cid:15)0

−

∂F S

AZ(Tp)
∂Tp

(cid:19)

,

(cid:88)

A,Z

where nA,Z as the number of fragments with mass A
and charge Z in the partition, gA,Z = (2sA,Z + 1) is
the spin degeneracy factor, λTp = (cid:0)2π(cid:126)2/mN Tp
is
the nucleon thermal wavelength (mN ≈ 939 MeV is the
average nucleon mass), and the summation is performed
over all fragments of the partition p. One may enumerate
all considered partitions and select one of them according
to its statistical weight by the Monte Carlo method.

(cid:1)1/2

At very high excitation energy, the standard SMM
code makes a transition to the grand-canonical ensem-
ble [43] since the number of partitions with high prob-
ability becomes too large.
In the grand canonical for-
mulation, after integrating out translational degrees of
freedom, one can write the mean multiplicity of nuclear
fragments with A and Z as

(cid:104)nA,Z(cid:105) =

gA,ZVf A3/2
λ3
T

e−(FAZ (T,V )−µA−νZ)/T .

(9)

Here, the temperature T can be found from the total
energy balance of the system by taking into account all
possible fragments with A from 1 to A0, and with Z from
0 to Z0 [43]. The chemical potentials µ and ν are found
from the mass and charge constraints:

(cid:88)

(cid:104)nA,Z(cid:105)A = A0,

A,Z

(cid:88)

A,Z

(cid:104)nA,Z(cid:105)Z = Z0 .

(10)

In this case, the grand canonical occupations (cid:104)nA,Z(cid:105) are
used for Monte-Carlo sampling of the fragment parti-
tions [43]. These two methods of partition generation are
carefully adjusted to provide a proper transition from the
low energy to the high energy regimes [43].

After the Monte-Carlo generation of a partition, the
temperature, excitation energy, and momenta can be
found for “hot” fragments from the energy balance equa-
tion. In this approach, the temperature may slightly ﬂuc-
tuate from partition to partition since the total energy of
the system E0 is always conserved. At the next stage,
Coulomb acceleration and propagation of the nuclear
fragments must be taken into account. For this purpose,
the fragments are placed randomly across the freeze-out
volume V (without overlapping), and their positions are

6

adjusted by taking into account that their Coulomb in-
teraction energy, which must be equal to the value calcu-
lated in the Wigner-Seitz approximation [43]. Note that,
in the case of the Markov Chain SMM version [53], this
adjustment is not necessary since the positions of the
nuclear fragments are sampled directly. Subsequently,
the method employed here re-solves the Hamilton equa-
tions of motion for all of the nuclear fragments from these
initial positions in their mutual Coulomb ﬁeld. At this
stage, a possible collective ﬂow of nuclear fragments can
be also taken into account [43]. Usually this is done by
adding supplementary radial velocities to the fragments
(proportional to their distances from the centre of mass)
at the beginning of Coulomb acceleration. The energy
and momentum balances are strictly respected during
this dynamical propagation.

The secondary de-excitation of the primary hot frag-
ments (including the compound nucleus) involves several
mechanisms. For light primary nuclear fragments (with
A ≤ 16), even a relatively small excitation energy can be
comparable to the fragments’ total binding energies. In
this case, it is assumed that the principal mechanism of
de-excitation is an explosive decay of the excited nucleus
into several smaller nuclei (the Fermi break-up) [43, 54].
In this decay, the statistical weight of the channel p con-
taining n particles with masses mi (where i = 1, · · · , n)
in a volume Vp can be calculated in the microcanonical
approximation as:

∆Γp ∝

S
G

(cid:18) Vp

(cid:19)n−1 (cid:18) (cid:81)n

(2π(cid:126))3
(2π) 3
Γ( 3

2 (n−1)
2 (n − 1))

×

i=1 mi
m0

(cid:19)3/2

(11)

(cid:0)Ekin − U C

p

(cid:1) 3

2 n− 5

2 ,

where m0 = (cid:80)n
i=1 mi is the mass of the decaying nucleus,
S = (cid:81)n
i=1(2si + 1) is the degeneracy factor (si is the i-
th particle spin), G = (cid:81)k
j=1 nj! is the particle identity
factor (nj is the number of particles of kind j), Ekin
is the total kinetic energy of particles at inﬁnity (which
can be found through the energy balance by taking into
account the fragment excitation energy), and U C
p is the
Coulomb barrier for the decay. Slight modiﬁcations to
this model have been made by including nuclear fragment
excited states which may remain stable with respect to
any nucleon emission but which instead can decay via
γ-emission afterwards. Also, some long-lived unstable
nuclei (like 5He, 5Li, 8Be, 9B) are included, which decay
later on.

The successive particle emission from the primary hot
fragments with A > 16 is assumed to be the fundamen-
tal de-excitation mechanism, as in the case of a com-
pound nucleus’ decay. Due to the high excitation energy
of these fragments, the standard Weisskopf evaporation
scheme [43] was modiﬁed to take into account any heav-
ier ejectiles up to 18O (besides light particles such as
nucleons, d, t, α) in ground and particle-stable excited
states [54]. The decay width for the emission of a particle
j from the compound nucleus (A, Z) is given by:

used [43, 46–52]. Other important details of the code one
can ﬁnd in Refs. [43, 45].

7

Before connecting the SMM into simulations of ¯nN
annihilation, all these models for de-excitation were rig-
orously tested by numerical comparisons to experimental
data on decays of compound nuclei with excitation ener-
gies less than 2-3 MeV per nucleon. It is important that
after all stages the SMM provides event-by-event simula-
tion for the whole break-up process, and allows for direct
comparison with experimental events. Furthermore, like
the parent intranuclear ¯nN simulation, this code is mod-
ular and generic, allowing for many future isotopes to be
studied.

The abundant production of many nuclei in ground
and excited states can be used for potentially improved
identiﬁcation of an intranuclear n → ¯n event; some of
these can be seen in Fig 3. The subsequent decays of
nuclear remnants provide photons with diﬀerent energies
and diﬀerent decay times, and can be in principle rec-
ognized with the advanced experimental methods. As
an example, some population within the the high, nar-
row peaks shown in Fig. 4 at γ energies of 0.43 MeV and
0.47 MeV correspond to the ﬁrst excited levels of 7Be and
7Li nuclei, each expected with the very short decay times
of 133 fs and 77 fs, respectively2.

n
(cid:88)

Γj =

(cid:90) E∗

AZ −Bj −(cid:15)(i)

j

i=1

0

µjg(i)
j
π2(cid:126)3 σj(E)

(12)

×

ρA(cid:48) Z(cid:48) (E∗

AZ − Bj − E)
AZ)

ρAZ(E∗

EdE .

j = (2s(i)

Here, the sum is taken over all ground and particle-stable
excited states (cid:15)(i)
(i = 0, 1, · · · , n) of the nuclear frag-
j
ment j, g(i)
j + 1) is the spin degeneracy factor
of the i-th excited state, µj and Bj correspond to the
reduced mass and separation energy, E∗
AZ is the excita-
tion energy of the initial nucleus, E is the kinetic energy
of an emitted particle in the centre-of-mass frame, ρAZ
and ρA(cid:48) Z(cid:48) are the level densities of the initial (A, Z) and
) compound remnant nuclei, and σj(E) is the
ﬁnal (A
cross section of the inverse reaction (A
) + j = (A, Z)
calculated using the optical model with a nucleus-nucleus
potential [54]. The evaporation process was simulated via
the Markov Chain Monte Carlo, method and the conser-
vation of energy and momentum is strictly controlled in
each emission step.

, Z

, Z

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

At very low excitations when a nucleon emission is not
possible, emission of photons is permitted. The decay
width for the evaporation of γ-quanta from the excited
remnant nuclei is taken in the statistical approximation
as:

Γγ =

(cid:90) E∗

AZ

0

E2
π2c2(cid:126)2 σγ(E)

ρAZ(E∗

AZ − E)
AZ)

ρAZ(E∗

dE .

(13)

This integration is performed numerically, and a dipole
approximation for the photo-absorption cross section is
used:

σγ(E) =

σ0E2Γ2
R
R)2 + Γ2

RE2 .

(E2 − E2

(14)

Here, E is the γ energy, and the empirical parameters
of the giant dipole resonance take values σ0 = 2.5A mb,
ΓR = 0.3ER, and ER = 40.3/A0.2 MeV.

An important channel for the de-excitation of heavy
nuclei (A > 100) is ﬁssion. This process competes with
particle emission, and it is also simulated within this
Monte-Carlo method. Following the Bohr-Wheeler sta-
tistical approach [43], the partial width for a compound
nucleus’ ﬁssion is assumed to be proportional to the level
density at the saddle point ρsp(E):

Γf =

1
2πρAZ(E∗

AZ)

E∗

AZ −Bf
(cid:90)

0

ρsp(E∗

AZ −Bf −E)dE , (15)

where Bf is the height of the ﬁssion barrier determined
from the Myers-Swiatecki prescription [43]. For an ap-
proximation of ρsp, the results of an extensive analysis
of nuclear ﬁssility and Γn/Γf branching ratios have been

2 Note as well that, as seen from the chart of Fig. 3, many nuclei
in the ground state can decay as well; for example, 11C under-
goes a positron emission decay, emitting a positron, and travels a
short distance before colliding with an electron within the detec-
tor medium, producing a pair of gamma rays simultaneously in
nearly opposite directions with an energy of 511 keV each. This
half-life is around 20 minutes. Another nucleus in the ground
state, 7Be, will decay via the electron capture with a half-life
of around 53 days. All these processes provide an additional
possibility for studying the phenomenon. These time scales are
not necessarily useful for large underground liquid detectors due
to ﬂuid circulation and puriﬁcation, but similar predictions for
other nuclei could be useful within solid-state detectors as a con-
ﬁrmation of future activity at a potential vertex position of a
candidate event.

8

FIG. 3. A correlation plot showing all intranuclear n → ¯n
derived remnant nuclei with A ≥ 1 following the breakup of
the 16
8O nucleus. On average, when ignoring evaporative par-
ticles with A < 2, there are roughly two residual nuclei per
annihilation event. Lack of A = 5 nuclei is due to fast decays
via strong interactions, and so do not produce photons; exam-
ples include 5He→4He+n, 5Li→4He+p, and 8Be→4He+4He.
Shown for 500,000 generated events; note that some statisti-
cal ﬂuctuations occur and populate rare states, for instance
at (A, Z) = {(11, 8), (13, 9)}.

V. GENERATOR VALIDATION

Here, some main features of the intranuclear ¯n15

8O an-
nihilation simulation are discussed and presented. Con-
sider again Fig. 2 and its new cousin Fig. 5, where the
radial distribution of nuclear density and of annihilation
probability for diﬀerent variants of the simulation are
presented. It is seen that the radial annihilation proba-
bility is diﬀerent for various generator assumptions and is
dependent upon the value (depth) of ¯n potential [19, 55],
a free parameter of the model. Fig. 5 shows a solid blue
histogram of the radial distribution of the relative nuclear
density for the oxygen nucleus used in the model along-
side three variants of radial annihilation probability dis-
tributions in arbitrary units. In orange, a modern quan-
tum mechanical formalism [19] is employed as discussed
in Sec. III, and the distribution is calculated for a well
depth value of V¯n(r = 0) = −140 MeV for the attractive
antinucleon potential. In purple a curve is shown simu-
lating the same value of V¯n(r = 0) = −140 MeV, but the
annihilation probability follows directly from the nuclear
density, i.e. the quantum mechanical dynamics are not
taken into account; without the antinucleon potential,
this is somewhat similar to MCSK. In grey, the distribu-
tion shown is calculated for a value of V¯n(0) = −210 MeV
using the same modern formalism. It follows from these
curves that the annihilation preferentially occurs within
the diﬀuse peripheral layers of the nucleus, largely in-
dependent of these parameters. Importantly, though, it
is seen that a higher ¯n potential shifts the annihilation
distribution further outside the nucleus. This is some-

FIG. 4. The single emission de-excitation photon spectrum
of remnant nuclei (with A ≥ 2) arising from the nuclear de-
cay and evaporative processes following intranuclear n → ¯n
in 16
8O, shown in linear and logarithmic scales (labeled with
some predominant nuclear isotopes for clarity). There do ex-
ist simulated events where ≥ 2 photons are emitted, though
these are produced exceedingly rarely and are not included
here for simplicity. Shown for 500,000 generated events.

what counter-intuitive, but has an interesting explana-
tion: if one has a weakly attractive potential, increasing
its strength will gradually pull the wave function of a
given particle inside. However, if one maintains a very
strong absorptive potential, it repels the wave function.
This is obvious for a strong repulsion; however, for a
strong attraction, it creates nodes in the low-energy so-
lution, and is eﬀectively equivalent to a repulsion. Thus,
this can actually force the ¯n further out of the nucleus.
This point is a critical one, especially in understanding
how annihilation generated pions might avoid ﬁnal state
interactions.

With this in mind, now consider the histograms of
Fig. 6. Within this model of the nucleus, the momen-
tum distribution of the nucleons within individual con-
centric nuclear zones are the same as for a degenerate
Fermi gas; thus, the probability of a nucleon taking on a
momentum p in the i-th zone depends from it’s bound-
ary Fermi momentum, which in turn depends upon the
local nuclear density. The nucleons located in the central

9

FIG. 7. The initial total annihilation energy of the ¯nN pair
and resulting annihilation-generated mesons within the nu-
cleus are shown for several models of the ¯n potential [19]
and associated radial annihilation probability distribution
(see again Fig. 5), including the modern annihilation den-
sities with V¯n(r = 0) = −140 MeV (orange), V¯n = −210 MeV
(grey), and an annihilation distribution derived from the nu-
clear density (purple); note that the model derived from the
nuclear density also assumes V¯n(r = 0) = −140 MeV. Each is
shown for 500,000 generated events.

particular concentric zone, the greater the contribution
to the ﬁnal state pions’ momentum spectra from the
(anti)nucleons participating in the annihilation. Thus,
in this model, there is a local correlation of the momen-
tum with nuclear density, and, respectively, with the ra-
dius (for details, see [28]). The green and red histograms
of Fig. 6 show the momentum distributions of the nu-
cleons which are the annihilation partners within 15
8O.
The initial intranuclear momentum distribution for the
¯n species following its transition (yet before the annihi-
lation) is also presented in blue in Fig. 6. Because of the
introduction of an antinucleon potential and an associ-
ated oﬀ-shell mass for the ¯n, this distribution extends to
higher momenta of ∼ 500 MeV/c [19]. Note that the his-
tograms plotted here are considered for the annihilation
density distribution derived from a potential well depth
of V¯n(r = 0) = −140, as seen in the orange curve of
Fig. 5. Now consider the total energy available to the
annihilation as presented in Fig. 7. The plot shows that
the total annihilation energy limit is independent of the
depth of the antinucleon potential used and are indeed
identical, as it must be from the energy conservation law
E¯n = En for any potential well depth following the n → ¯n
transition. The average values of the total annihilation
energy are close for all calculation options (from 1.851-
1.857 GeV), however, the shape of the distributions diﬀer
from one assumption for the antinucleon potential to an-
other, due to how the ¯nN annihilation pair populations
diﬀer across various the nuclear radius (see again Fig. 5).
From this, it can be interpreted that the more attractive
the potential and peripheral the annihilation process is,
the larger the proportion of events with high energy val-
ues, independent of ﬁnal state interactions.

FIG. 5. The radial annihilation probability distribution is
shown for 16
8O using several models of the ¯n potential well
depth, including V¯n(r = 0) = −140 MeV (orange), V¯n =
−210 MeV (grey), and an annihilation distribution derived
from the nuclear density (purple). Each of these are com-
pared to the ﬁtted, eight-zoned nuclear density distribution
of 16
8O in solid blue; see [19] for a discussion. All plots use an
arbitrary vertical axis.

FIG. 6. The initial momenta of intranuclear (anti)nucleons
are shown for 500,000 generated events for an assumed ¯n po-
tential of V¯n(r = 0) = −140 MeV (orange in Fig. 5). V¯n
aﬀects the annihilation probability distribution (Fig. 5) and
is clearly visible from the larger Fermi momentum of the ¯n.
The peaks throughout each nucleon momentum distribution
are caused by the concentrically zoned structure of the nu-
cleus, each with their own Fermi momentum; this structure
becomes somewhat smeared out in the ¯n case due to the pres-
ence of the extra antinucleon potential.

zone of the nucleus have the maximum value of boundary
Fermi momenta, pF N , and generate the high-momentum
part of the spectrum. Conversely, the nucleons located
within the peripheral zone of the nucleus take on mo-
menta of ∼ 40–100 MeV/c; the most diﬀuse zone (beyond
the periphery) occupies even lower initial values [28]. Of
course, the larger the annihilation probability within any

10

FIG. 8. Top left: The initial total vector momentum of annihilation generated mesons is shown; by conservation, these
distributions are equivalent for the initial annihilation pair. Top right: The ﬁnal state total vector momentum of subsequent
pions and photons is shown following heavy mesonic resonance decays and the intranuclear cascade. Bottom left: The initial
total invariant mass of annihilation generated mesons is shown, where strengths of the expected peaks around ∼ 1.9 GeV
critically depend on the strength of the antinucleon potential. Bottom right: The ﬁnal state total invariant mass of subsequent
pions and photons is shown following heavy mesonic resonance decays and the intranuclear cascade; due to rescattering and
absorptive processes, many events move toward a lower valued tail. The hierarchy of peaks among the models remains, owing
to the their progressively peripheral annihilations and thus avoidance of FSIs. All plots shown include the modern annihilation
densities with V¯n(r = 0) = −140 MeV (orange), V¯n = −210 MeV (grey), and an annihilation distribution derived from the
nuclear density (purple); note that the model derived from the nuclear density also assumes V¯n(r = 0) = −140 MeV. Each is
shown for 500,000 generated events.

Now consider the total vector momentum and invariant
mass distributions of the mesonic annihilation products
at the annihilation point and after leaving the nucleus
following FSIs. The top left plot of Figs. 8 shows the ¯nN
annihilation pair momentum distributions for all vari-
ants of the antinucleon potential and associated annihila-
tion probability distributions available to the simulation,
just as presented in Fig. 5; by conservation, this is ex-
actly the initial total vector momentum distribution of all
annihilation-generated mesons at the annihilation point,
before FSIs. These distributions are simply the vector
sum of ¯n and N species (see again Fig. 6), and their
high momentum tail depends on the potential V¯n(r = 0)
depth. One might think that the greater the depth of the
antinucleon potential, the greater the mass defect of the
antinucleon, and thus the greater the momentum the an-
nihilating pair can attain within the nucleus. However,
as can be seen, this is not necessarily the case once the

antinucleon potential grows to larger values, which actu-
ally leads to more peripheral annihilations and thus shifts
to a lower total initial vector momentum. The bottom
left plot of Figs. 8 shows the distribution of the total in-
variant mass of annihilation products before FSIs for all
simulation variants. At the initial annihilation stage, the
result signiﬁcantly depends on the annihilation radius,
which, as discussed, is itself a function of the simulation
parameters (Fig. 5). For example, the deeper the antin-
ucleon potential, the further annihilation occurs at the
periphery of the nucleus, and so one should expect more
events with greater invariant mass. Thus, Fig. 7 and the
left Figs. 8 collectively demonstrate how the initial en-
ergy, momentum and invariant mass of the annihilation
depend on the potential, a free parameter of the model.
At the same time, when the dynamics of the annihilation
process and associated modiﬁcations connected to the
nuclear medium are taken into account in these simula-

tions [19], the shape of the spectra changes signiﬁcantly.
In this way, an important distinguishing feature of this
work is the maintenance of correlation between the values
of momentum and invariant mass with the annihilation
radius.

Further, consider now how FSIs aﬀect the expected dis-
tributions of observable momentum and invariant mass.
It can be seen from the right plots of Figs. 8 that FSI,
even with the pronounced peripheral character of anni-
hilation, signiﬁcantly reduces the diﬀerences between the
simulation options in all but the highest invariant mass
region. This is due to the relative isotropy of the nuclear
medium, wherein a large proportion of the particles em-
anating from the annihilation generated meson ”stars”
are still forced to move through the nucleus and undergo
rescattering and absorption.

A visual demonstration of the ¯n and the ¯nN annihi-
lation pair’s total momentum correlation with the an-
nihilation radius is presented in Figs. 9 for the variant
of the calculation with V¯n(r = 0) = −140 MeV because
from our point of view, the most reasonable value of the
potential is V¯n(r = 0) = −140 MeV; thus, all following
ﬁgures are presented for calculations utilizing this option.
(see again Fig. 5).

Furthermore, in Figs. 10, we see a parameter space
showing the invariant mass of annihilation-generated
mesons in the initial and ﬁnal state as a function of anni-
hilation radius. Critically, it is seen that a large propor-
tion of the events are peripheral in character; more im-
portantly, this is seen to drastically increase the predicted
invariant mass in the ﬁnal state (bottom). In contrast
to the assumption of a uniform annihilation probability
across the whole nucleus, due to the lessened FSIs, this
simulation predicts a greater potential signal observation
viability.

The ﬁnal state, constructed following intranuclear
transport of annihilation-generated pions and photons
generated from heavy mesons decays as well as the de-
excitation of all nuclear remnants, can also be investi-
gated via iteration over the available model conﬁgura-
tions. Figs. 8 show the eﬀect of increases in the antin-
ucleon potential, where when combined with peripheral
annihilation allow for a higher reconstructed invariant
mass and similarly lower total vector momentum. Note
that the invariant mass can decrease due to loss of par-
ticle, while this can thus increase (cause greater imbal-
ance) to the total vector momentum. Though some of
these diﬀerences appear marginal in one dimension, the
local correlations of these variables together can greatly
aﬀect the observability of the signal.

The mesonic parameter space (total momentum vs. to-
tal invariant mass of annihilation-generated mesons) is
informative of the initial annihilation dynamics and the
eﬀects of ﬁnal state interactions on the signal, and is
In the top plot of Figs. 11, the
presented in Figs. 11.
initial condition of the annihilation generated mesons is
shown before intranuclear transport; here, the invariant
mass decreases due to of-shell mass defects in correla-

11

FIG. 9. Top: The local nature of the ¯n momentum is shown,
with little to no visible zoned structure. Bottom: The local
nature of the annihilation pair total vector momentum for in-
tranuclear ¯np annihilation is shown. Each is shown for 500,000
generated events for an ¯n potential of V¯n(r = 0) = −140 MeV.

tion with radial position. The bottom plot of Figs. 11
shows the same parameter space, though now after the
mesons’ intranuclear propagation and fast decays of ρ, ω,
and η mesons. Note that this model includes photons in
the ﬁnal state from η and ω resonance decays. The dis-
connected regions toward the left of the plots are signs
of single pion emission after at least one or more meson
absorptions.

In Figs. 12 the pions’ (top), resonance decay photons’
(middle), and ﬁnal state nucleons’ (bottom) momentum
spectra are shown. Note here that the decay photons
arise primarily via processes such as η → 2γ with a
branching fraction of 39.3%, η → π+π−γ at 4.9%, and
ω → π0γ at 8.7% [28].

All of these plots are well summarized in Table III,
which shows the average multiplicities of pions, photons,
and nucleons emitted by the oxygen nucleus as a result
of the n → ¯n intranuclear transition. It can be seen that
the closer the annihilation occurs to the center of the nu-
cleus, the more signiﬁcant the role FSIs play via the ab-
sorption of pions and, accordingly, the smaller the num-
ber of pions which exit the nucleus; correspondingly, this

TABLE III. A list of ﬁnal state particle multiplicities from three versions of the model for intranuclear ¯n15
8O, taking into account
all annihilation branching ratios, the intranuclear antinucleon potential, and an associated nuclear medium response [19, 28].
Based on simulations of 500,000 events with diﬀerent intranuclear antinucleon potential depths. Nucleon multiplicities include
evaporative processes.

Simulation
8O w/ V¯n = |210| MeV
8O w/ V¯n = |140| MeV
8O w/Nuclear Density

¯n15
¯n15
¯n15

M (π)
4.37
4.33
4.23

M (π+)
1.56
1.54
1.49

M (π−)
1.12
1.10
1.07

M (π0)
1.68
1.68
1.67

M (γres.
dec.)
0.08
0.08
0.07

M (γnuc.
rem.)
0.34
0.31
0.27

M (p)
2.14
2.28
2.59

M (n)
1.44
1.54
1.78

12

FIG. 10.
Top: The initial state’s invariant mass of
annihilation-generated mesons and photons vs. radius is seen
before FSIs, showing the local eﬀects of the (anti)nucleon po-
tential and associated mass defects. Bottom: The same for
the ﬁnal state’s truth invariant mass of all pions and photons
following FSIs, showing the importance of taking account of
both the (anti)nucleon potential and radial position of the an-
nihilation to avoid excessive FSIs. Each is shown for 500,000
generated events for an ¯n potential of V¯n(r = 0) = −140 MeV.

FIG. 11. The initial and ﬁnal state mesonic parameter space
is shown for all mesons and photons generated from the an-
nihilation. Top: Decrease of invariant mass is due to the
oﬀ-shell nature of the annihilating (anti)nucleons. Bottom:
Final state interactions cause the rescattering of and losses of
mesons, generating a less constrained parameter space. Each
is shown for 500,000 generated events for an ¯n potential of
V¯n(r = 0) = −140 MeV.

creates a higher number of nucleon knock-outs. The sim-
ilar multiplicity of heavy-resonance decay photons across
the model conﬁgurations is due to limited rescattering
of these short-lived species and lack of photon absorp-
tion processes within the intranuclear cascade. A pro-
gressively decreasing de-excitation photon multiplicity is
observed as the annihilation position becomes more inte-

rior; this is due to the increasingly violent breakup of the
nucleus, reducing the overall number of potential nuclear
remnants with A ≥ 2 and excitation energies conducive
to photon emission.

Each of these can have critical implications for any
deﬁnitive observation of an intranuclear n → ¯n event
in 16
8O. Also, the three models presented (with diﬀerent
values of the intranuclear ¯n potential V¯n [19]) can help

VI.

IMPLICATIONS

13

Through the above discussions, one comes to realize
the important interplay between a few key variables: the
strength of the antinucleon potential, the annihilation ra-
dius, along with the total momentum and the total invari-
ant mass of initial and ﬁnal state mesons and photons.
Though the annihilation potential and radius cannot be
determined from what may in the end be but a single
observed event, the dependence of the two other deﬁni-
tive observables on these variables is critical. Namely,
even when accounting for quantum eﬀects which pro-
duce a more peripheral annihilation, a stronger antin-
ucleon potential together yields still fewer ﬁnal state in-
teractions, thus increasing the possibility of reconstruct-
ing a pionic-photonic system with higher invariant mass
and lower total vector momentum; this makes the ob-
servation of an n → ¯n event more probable in that it
is likely to occur within a more localized (and arguably
more reconstruction-stable) part of the mesonic param-
eter space.
Ignoring these important correlations can
thus act to limit the ﬁnal experimental lower limit sen-
sitivities one extrapolates from current measurements,
even when overcome by irreducible atmospheric neutrino
backgrounds. The qualia of these observables become
still more important as the ﬁeld adopts more automated
techniques, such as with machine learning [55–57].

VII. FUTURE WORK

set

This

improvements
of
to
the underlying
can be applied to
antineutron-annihilation model
other nuclei, including for nuclei relevant for the Deep
Underground Neutrino Experiment (40Ar) and the Eu-
ropean Spallation Source’s HIBEAM/NNBAR program
(12C). The addition of de-excitation photons to this
model add extra potentially observable qualities to the
expected signal, possibly cutting background still fur-
ther. Secondarily, given the modularity of the new ﬁnal
state interactions code, it may be possible to apply such
computational techniques other types of interactions via
their generated initial state four-momenta, allowing for
more consistent comparisons between various signals
and backgrounds, such as atmospheric neutrinos and
cosmogenic muons. There is interest in extending this
work toward modeling of proton decay inside a nucleus.

VIII. CONCLUSIONS

A new set of simulations of intranuclear ¯n annihila-
tion within the 16
8O nucleus have been completed with
the addition of a modern statistical nuclear disintegra-
tion model capable of predicting the de-excitation pho-
ton spectra of nuclear remnants. While the addition of
these de-excitation photons and nuclear remnants to the

FIG. 12. Top: Momentum spectra for all ﬁnal state pion
species. Middle: Heavy mesonic resonances can arise follow-
ing an ¯nN annihilation within the nucleus, some of which may
decay into photons; see [28] for branching fractions. These
occur for only (cid:46) 10% of events. Bottom: Final state momen-
tum spectra for neutrons (blue) and protons (red), shown with
(solid) and without (dashed) the consideration of fragmentary
and evaporative processes.

to estimate potential uncertainties in the event generator
beyond those discussed within Sec. II and [19, 28].

14

model make it more physically complete and in princi-
ple create still more handles to discriminate signal from
background, this will likely prove diﬃcult within water
Cherenkov detectors given their high hadronic thresholds
and expected π0 → γγ decays dominating the detector.
The nuclear disintegration technique is portable to other
nuclei of interest, and it is hoped that such additional re-
alistic outputs from the model will permit more sensitive
searches for n → ¯n transformations at current and fu-
ture experiments such as Super- and Hyper-Kamiokande,
NNBAR at the European Spallation Source, and the
Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment. Further, a
modern quantum mechanical radial ¯n annihilation prob-
ability distribution has been calculated for the 16
8O nu-
cleus, predicting an associated intranuclear suppression
factor of TR = 0.65 × 1023 s−1,
in line with past es-
timates. This annihilation probability distribution has
been integrated into the intranuclear annihilation simu-
lation framework, allowing for prediction of novel ﬁnal
states of annihilation-generated pions. Critical among
the ﬁndings of this work is the important interplay of
the initial annihilation position within the nucleus de-
pending on the strength of the antinucleon potential, and
from this the ﬁnal states pions’ observable total momen-
tum and invariant mass. It is likely that the peripheral
character of the annihilation will increase potential sen-
sitivities to dinucleon decay signals, as fewer ﬁnal state
interactions occur when these correlations are properly
accounted for. Samples of 500,000 events or more are
available upon request to the authors.

IX. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

JLB’s initial work on this project was partially sup-
ported by the Visiting Scholars Award Program of the
Universities Research Association. Any opinions, ﬁnd-
ings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not neces-
sarily reﬂect the views of the Universities Research Asso-
ciation, Inc. JLB would also like to thank The University
of Tennessee at Knoxville Department of Physics and As-
tronomy, as well as the Zuckerman Institute, for partial
support of this work at various later stages. JLB is a
Zuckerman Postdoctoral Scholar. ASB acknowledges the
support of RFBR (Russia) of this work through research
Project No. 18-02-40084.

[1] A. D. Sakharov, Violation of CP Invariance, C
asymmetry, and baryon asymmetry of the universe,
Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 5, 32 (1967),
[Usp. Fiz.
Nauk161,no.5,61(1991)].

[2] M. C. Gonzalez-Garcia and Y. Nir, Neutrino Masses and
Mixing: Evidence and Implications, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75,
345 (2003), arXiv:hep-ph/0202058.

[3] G. ’t Hooft, Computation of the Quantum Eﬀects Due
to a Four-Dimensional Pseudoparticle, Phys. Rev. D 14,
3432 (1976), [Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 18, 2199 (1978)].
[4] A. Takenaka et al. (Super-Kamiokande), Search for pro-
ton decay via p → e+π0 and p → µ+π0 with an enlarged
ﬁducial volume in Super-Kamiokande I-IV, Phys. Rev. D
102, 112011 (2020), arXiv:2010.16098 [hep-ex].

[5] J. M. Arnold, B. Fornal, and M. B. Wise, Simpliﬁed mod-
els with baryon number violation but no proton decay,
Phys. Rev. D 87, 075004 (2013), arXiv:1212.4556 [hep-
ph].

[6] S. Nussinov and R. Shrock, n - ¯n oscillations in models
with large extra dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 171601
(2002), arXiv:hep-ph/0112337.

[7] |∆B| = 2: A State of the Field, and Looking Forward–A
brief status report of theoretical and experimental physics
opportunities (2020) Proc. Amherst Workshop, 3-6 Au-
gust 2020F, arXiv:2010.02299 [hep-ph].

[8] V. A. Kuzmin, CP violation and baryon asymmetry of
the universe, Pisma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 12, 335 (1970).
[9] V. A. Kuzmin, V. A. Rubakov, and M. E. Shaposhnikov,
Anomalous Electroweak Baryon Number Nonconserva-
tion and GUT Mechanism for Baryogenesis, Phys. Lett.
B191, 171 (1987).

[10] K. Babu, R. Mohapatra, and S. Nasri, Post-Sphaleron
Baryogenesis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 131301 (2006),
arXiv:hep-ph/0606144.

[11] K. Babu, P. S. B. Dev, E. C. Fortes, and R. Mohapatra,
Post-Sphaleron Baryogenesis and an Upper Limit on the
Neutron-Antineutron Oscillation Time, Phys. Rev. D 87,
115019 (2013), arXiv:1303.6918 [hep-ph].

[12] A. D. Dolgov, NonGUT baryogenesis, Phys. Rept. 222,

309 (1992).

[13] M. Fukugita and T. Yanagida, Baryogenesis Without

Grand Uniﬁcation, Phys. Lett. B 174, 45 (1986).

[14] S. Pascoli, J. Turner, and Y.-L. Zhou, Baryogenesis via
leptonic CP-violating phase transition, Phys. Lett. B
780, 313 (2018), arXiv:1609.07969 [hep-ph].

[15] E. J. Chun et al., Probing Leptogenesis, Int. J. Mod.
Phys. A 33, 1842005 (2018), arXiv:1711.02865 [hep-ph].
[16] Z. Berezhiani, Neutron–antineutron oscillation and bary-
onic majoron:
low scale spontaneous baryon violation,
Eur. Phys. J. C76, 705 (2016), arXiv:1507.05478 [hep-
ph].

[17] A. Young and J. Barrow, Future searches for free and
bound n → ¯n transformations, EPJ Web Conf. 219,
07005 (2019).

[18] A. Addazi et al., New high-sensitivity searches for neu-
trons converting into antineutrons and/or sterile neu-
trons at the HIBEAM/NNBAR experiment at the Eu-
ropean Spallation Source, J. Phys. G 48, 070501 (2021),
arXiv:2006.04907 [physics.ins-det].

[19] J. L. Barrow, E. S. Golubeva, E. Paryev, and J.-
M. Richard, Progress and simulations for intranuclear

15

neutron-antineutron transformations in 40
D 101, 036008 (2020), arXiv:1906.02833 [hep-ex].
[20] F. Oosterhof, B. Long, J. de Vries, R. G. E. Timmermans,
and U. van Kolck, Baryon-number violation by two units
and the deuteron lifetime, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 172501
(2019), arXiv:1902.05342 [hep-ph].

18Ar, Phys. Rev.

[21] E. Rinaldi, S. Syritsyn, M. L. Wagman, M. I. Buchoﬀ,
C. Schroeder, and J. Wasem, Neutron-antineutron oscil-
lations from lattice QCD, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 162001
(2019), arXiv:1809.00246 [hep-lat].

[22] E. Rinaldi, S. Syritsyn, M. L. Wagman, M. I. Buchoﬀ,
C. Schroeder, and J. Wasem, Lattice QCD determina-
tion of neutron-antineutron matrix elements with phys-
ical quark masses, Phys. Rev. D 99, 074510 (2019),
arXiv:1901.07519 [hep-lat].

[23] K. Abe et al. (Super-Kamiokande), Neutron-Antineutron
Oscillation Search using a 0.37 Megaton·Year Exposure
of Super-Kamiokande, Phys. Rev. D 103, 012008 (2021),
arXiv:2012.02607 [hep-ex].

[24] S. Girmohanta, Nucleon and dinucleon decays to lep-
tonic ﬁnal states in a left-right symmetric model with
large extra dimensions, Eur. Phys. J. C 81, 143 (2021),
arXiv:2005.12952 [hep-ph].

[25] S. Girmohanta and R. Shrock, Nucleon decay and n-¯n
oscillations in a left-right symmetric model with large
extra dimensions, Phys. Rev. D 101, 095012 (2020),
arXiv:2003.14185 [hep-ph].

[27] B. Abi et al.

[26] B. Abi et al. (DUNE), Prospects for Beyond the Stan-
dard Model Physics Searches at the Deep Underground
Neutrino Experiment, (2020), arXiv:2008.12769 [hep-ex].
(DUNE), Deep Underground Neu-
(DUNE), Far Detector Technical
(2020),

trino Experiment
Design Report, Volume II DUNE Physics,
arXiv:2002.03005 [hep-ex].

[28] E. S. Golubeva, J. L. Barrow, and C. G. Ladd, Model of
¯n annihilation in experimental searches for ¯n transforma-
tions, Phys. Rev. D 99, 035002 (2019), arXiv:1804.10270
[hep-ex].

[29] K. Abe et al. (Super-Kamiokande), The Search for n-
¯n oscillation in Super-Kamiokande I, Phys. Rev. D 91,
072006 (2015), arXiv:1109.4227 [hep-ex].

[30] P. Salvini et al. (OBELIX), ¯pp annihilation into four
charged pions at rest and in ﬂight, Eur. Phys. J. C 35,
21 (2004).

[31] C. Amsler et al. (Crystal Barrel), Annihilation at rest
of antiprotons and protons into neutral particles, Nucl.
Phys. A 720, 357 (2003).

[32] E. Klempt, C. Batty, and J.-M. Richard, The
Antinucleon-nucleon interaction at low energy : Annihi-
lation dynamics, Phys. Rept. 413, 197 (2005), arXiv:hep-
ex/0501020.

[33] E. D. Minor, T. A. Armstrong, R. Bishop, V. Harris,
R. A. Lewis, and G. A. Smith, Charged pion spectra and
energy transfer following anti-proton annihilation at rest
in carbon and uranium, Z. Phys. A 336, 461 (1990).
[34] G. Levman, R. Singer, and T. Fields, Study of Prompt
e+e−, η0, and ω0 Production in Low-energy ¯pp Annihi-
lations, Phys. Rev. D 21, 1 (1980).

[35] R. Hamatsu et al. (Bombay-CERN-College de France-
Madrid), Inclusive Production of Nonstrange Mesons in
anti-p p Annihilations, Nucl. Phys. B 123, 189 (1977).

[36] P. G. H. Sandars, Neutron to anti-neutron transitions in

nuclei, J. Phys. G6, L161 (1980).

[37] C. B. Dover, A. Gal, and J.-M. Richard, Neutron anti-
neutron oscillations in nuclei, Phys. Rev. D27, 1090
(1983).

[38] E. Friedman and A. Gal, Realistic calculations of nuclear
disappearance lifetimes induced by n¯n oscillations, Phys.
Rev. D78, 016002 (2008), arXiv:0803.3696 [hep-ph].
[39] M. Bolsterli, E. O. Fiset, J. R. Nix, and J. L. Norton, New
Calculation of Fission Barriers for Heavy and Superheavy
Nuclei, Phys. Rev. C 5, 1050 (1972).

[40] F. Ajzenberg-Selove, Energy levels of light nuclei A =

16–17, Nucl. Phys. A 281, 1 (1977).

[41] J.-M. Richard, Antiproton physics, Front. in Phys. 8, 6

(2020), arXiv:1912.07385 [nucl-th].

[42] N. Bohr, Neutron Capture and Nuclear Constitution, Na-

ture 137, 344 (1936).

[43] J. P. Bondorf, A. S. Botvina, A. S. Ilinov, I. N. Mishustin,
and K. Sneppen, Statistical multifragmentation of nuclei,
Phys. Rept. 257, 133 (1995).

[44] A. S. Botvina and I. N. Mishustin, Statistical descrip-
tion of nuclear break-up, Eur. Phys. J. A 30, 121 (2006),
arXiv:nucl-th/0510081.

[45] N. Eren, N. Buyukcizmeci, R. Ogul, and A. S. Botvina,
Mass distribution in the disintegration of heavy nuclei,
Eur. Phys. J. A 49, 48 (2013).

[46] A. S. Botvina et al., Multifragmentation of spectators in
relativistic heavy ion reactions, Nucl. Phys. A 584, 737
(1995).

[47] R. P. Scharenberg et al. (EOS), Comparison of 1-A-GeV
Au-197 + C data with thermodynamics: The Nature
of phase transition in nuclear multifragmentation, Phys.

16

Rev. C 64, 054602 (2001), arXiv:nucl-ex/0107015.
[48] M. D’Agostino et al., Statistical multifragmentation in
central Au + Au collisions at 35-MeV/u, Phys. Lett. B
371, 175 (1996), arXiv:nucl-ex/9512003.

[49] N. Bellaize et al., Multifragmentation process for diﬀer-
ent mass asymmetry in the entrance channel around the
Fermi energy, Nucl. Phys. A 709, 367 (2002), arXiv:nucl-
ex/0203009.

[50] S. P. Avdeyev et al., Comparative study of multifrag-
mentation of gold nuclei induced by relativistic protons,
4He, and 12C, Nucl. Phys. A 709, 392 (2002), arXiv:nucl-
ex/0207001.

[51] L. Pienkowski et al., Breakup time scale studied in the
8 GeV/c π− + 197Au reaction, Phys. Rev. C 65, 064606
(2002).

[52] M. D’Agostino et al., Thermodynamical features of mul-
tifragmentation in peripheral Au + Au collisions at 35-
A/MeV, Nucl. Phys. A 650, 329 (1999), arXiv:nucl-
ex/9902007.

[53] A. S. Botvina and I. N. Mishustin, Statistical evolution
of isotope composition of nuclear fragments, Phys. Rev.
C 63, 061601 (2001), arXiv:nucl-th/0011072.

[54] A. S. Botvina, A. S. Iljinov, I. N. Mishustin, J. P. Bon-
dorf, R. Donangelo, and K. Sneppen, Statistical simula-
tion of the breakup of highly excited nuclei, Nucl. Phys.
A 475, 663 (1987).

[55] J. L. Barrow, Towards Neutron Transformation Searches,

Ph.D. thesis, U. Tennessee, Knoxville (2021).

[56] J. E. T. Hewes, Searches for Bound Neutron-Antineutron
Oscillation in Liquid Argon Time Projection Chambers,
Ph.D. thesis, Manchester U. (2017).

[57] Y.-J. Jwa, To be released, Ph.D. thesis, Columbia Uni-

versity (2022).

