Draft version November 29, 2021
Typeset using LATEX manuscript style in AASTeX63

1
2
0
2

v
o
N
5
2

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
4
7
1
3
1
.
1
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Partial Eruption, Conﬁnement, and Twist Buildup and Release of a Double-decker

Filament

Jialin Chen,1, 2 Yingna Su,1, 2 Rui Liu,3, 4 Bernhard, Kliem,5 Qingmin Zhang,1 Haisheng, Ji,1, 2
and Tie Liu1, 2

1Key Laboratory of Dark Matter and Space Astronomy, Purple Mountain Observatory, CAS, Nanjing, Jiangsu

210023, China

2Department of Astronomy and Space Science, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026,

China

3CAS Key Laboratory of Geospace Environment, Department of Geophysics and Planetary Sciences, University of

Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China

4Collaborative Innovation Center for Astronautical Science and Technology, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China

5Institute of Physics and Astronomy, University of Potsdam, D-14476 Potsdam, Germany

(Received Oct 28, 2020; Revised Sep 6, 2021; Accepted xxx x, xxxx)

Submitted to ApJ

ABSTRACT

We investigate the failed partial eruption of a ﬁlament system in NOAA AR 12104

on 2014 July 5, using multiwavelength EUV, magnetogram, and Hα observations, as

well as magnetic ﬁeld modeling. The ﬁlament system consists of two almost co-spatial

segments with diﬀerent end points, both resembling a C shape. Following an ejection

and a precursor ﬂare related to ﬂux cancellation, only the upper segment rises and

then displays a prominent twisted structure, while rolling over toward its footpoints.

Corresponding author: Yingna Su
ynsu@pmo.ac.cn

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Chen et al.

The lower segment remains undisturbed, indicating that the system possesses a double-

decker structure. The erupted segment ends up with a reverse-C shape, with material

draining toward its footpoints, while losing its twist. Using the ﬂux rope insertion

method, we construct a model of the source region that qualitatively reproduces key

elements of the observed evolution. At the eruption onset, the model consists of a ﬂux

rope atop a ﬂux bundle with negligible twist, which is consistent with the observational

interpretation that the ﬁlament possesses a double-decker structure. The ﬂux rope

reaches the critical height of the torus instability during its initial relaxation, while the

lower ﬂux bundle remains in stable equilibrium. The eruption terminates when the ﬂux

rope reaches a dome-shaped quasi-separatrix layer that is reminiscent of a magnetic fan

surface, although no magnetic null is found. The ﬂux rope is destroyed by reconnection

with the conﬁning overlying ﬂux above the dome, transferring its twist in the process.

Keywords: Sun: corona — Sun: ﬂares — Sun: ﬁlaments, prominence — Sun: magnetic

ﬁelds

1. INTRODUCTION

Filaments, also called prominences when they appear above the solar limb, are a cool plasma

material that is suspended in the solar corona, supported and conﬁned by the coronal magnetic ﬁeld.

Filaments are closely related to the most violent solar activities, i.e., ﬁlament eruptions, solar ﬂares,

and coronal mass ejections (CMEs). In many cases, but not all, a ﬁlament is identiﬁed to exist in

the core of a CME (Hundhausen 1999). Thanks to high-resolution observations, a growing number

of recent studies suggest that ﬁlaments sometimes consist of a double-decker or even multistranded

structure before erupting (Liu et al. 2012; Li et al. 2017; Awasthi et al. 2018; Su et al. 2018; Pan

et al. 2021). If two ﬁlaments are associated with the same magnetic polarity inversion line (PIL)

and separated in height, such a system is called a double-decker structure (Liu et al. 2012). The two

ﬁlaments may erupt together or sequentially (e.g., Zhu et al. 2015), or in some cases, the upper one

3

erupts outward while the lower one stays almost unchanged (Liu et al. 2012; Zhu & Alexander 2014;

Zheng et al. 2019).

Solar ﬁlament eruptions have been classiﬁed into three categories, i.e., full, partial, and failed

eruptions.

In a full eruption, the entire magnetic structure erupts with most of the preeruptive

ﬁlament mass (Tang 1986; Plunkett et al. 2000). While in a failed ﬁlament eruption, the ﬁlament

initially shows an eruptive-like rise, and then falls back toward the Sun after reaching a maximum

height (e.g., Ji et al. 2003; Alexander et al. 2006; Liu et al. 2018b). Only part of the ﬁlament

structure has erupted in a partial ﬁlament eruption (Tang 1986; Gilbert et al. 2000; Gibson et al.

2002; Pevtsov 2002). For a detailed classiﬁcation of ﬁlament eruptions, we refer to Gilbert et al.

(2007). The full and partial eruptions are generally larger in scale and more energetic, while the

failed eruptions are often restricted to a local area; though, the association with GOES M or X-class

ﬂares has also been reported in some cases.

Solar eruptions are suggested to be initiated by ideal MHD instabilities or, alternatively, by nonideal

fast magnetic reconnection. The torus instability and the helical kink instability are two ideal MHD

instabilities of a ﬂux rope or current channel often reported as trigger mechanisms for eruptions. In

a general deﬁnition (Priest 2014, Ch. 2.9.1), a magnetic ﬂux rope is a twisted ﬂux tube, with the

boundary of the ﬂux tube being given by a set of ﬁeld lines that intersect a simple closed curve. Torus

instability occurs when the overlying ﬁeld of a ﬁlament attenuates fast enough with height (Kliem

& T¨or¨ok 2006). The ﬁlament will then rise faster and faster, and it may eventually erupt into the

interplanetary space. The threshold for the onset of torus instability is deﬁned in terms of the decay

index of the external poloidal ﬁeld at the position of the current channel, i.e., n = −∂ ln Bex/∂ ln h.

The canonical values of the critical decay index are 1.5 and 1.0 for toroidal and straight current

channels, respectively (Bateman 1978; van Tend & Kuperus 1978). In theoretical calculations and

numerical simulations by Kliem & T¨or¨ok (2006), Fan & Gibson (2007), Aulanier et al. (2010), and

D´emoulin & Aulanier (2010), the critical decay index has been found to lie between 1.0 and 2.0.

The helical kink instability will occur if the magnetic ﬁeld supporting the ﬁlament accumulates a

suﬃciently strong twist, e.g., Φcr = 2.5π for a uniformly twisted, line-tied ﬂux rope (Hood & Priest

4

Chen et al.

1979) and Φcr ∼ 3.5π for more realistic ﬂux rope models as expected on the Sun (Fan & Gibson 2003,

2004; T¨or¨ok et al. 2004). Exceeding this threshold, the ﬂux rope will erupt, and part of its twist will

transfer into writhe. The instability then saturates quickly; however, when it lifts the rope above the

critical height for the onset of the torus instability, a full eruption can result.

In a conﬁned or failed eruption, the ﬁlament ﬁrst rises, then halts, and ﬁnally falls back toward

the Sun (e.g., Ji et al. 2003). Several mechanisms can explain the conﬁnement of the eruption; see

Hassanin & Kliem (2016) for a detailed review. The two most frequently inferred mechanisms are

the following.

In eruption models based on ideal MHD instability (van Tend & Kuperus 1978),

the eruption fails when the condition for the torus instability is not met in a height range at some

distance above the initial destabilization of the ﬂux (e.g., T¨or¨ok & Kliem 2005; Guo et al. 2010). On

the other hand, a failed ﬁlament eruption can also occur due to the magnetic reconnection between

the erupting and overlying ﬂux, which is facilitated by the existence of a coronal magnetic null point

spanning a dome-shaped magnetic fan surface above the eruption site (e.g., Wang & Liu 2012).

In this work, we study the failed eruption of a ﬁlament system with double-decker structure. The

activities which occurred near the northwestern footpoint of the lower ﬁlament are found to be crucial

in the evolution of the system imbalance and the eruption of the upper ﬁlament. We analyze the

morphology and evolution of this ﬁlament system in detail, in order to ﬁgure out what initiates the

eruption and why the eruption fails. This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the

data set and instruments. Observational analysis and results are presented in Section 3. Magnetic

modeling of the double-decker system and evolution of the eruption are presented in Section 4. We

discuss the initiation and conﬁning mechanisms of the failed eruption in Section 5. A summary and

the conclusions are given in Section 6.

2. DATA SET AND INSTRUMENTS

A failed eruption of a double-decker ﬁlament system occurs in NOAA AR 12104 on 2014 July 5.

This eruption is associated with a C2.5-class solar ﬂare, but does not produce a CME. The Solar

Dynamics Observatory (SDO) satellite (Pesnell et al. 2012) observes the whole eruption. EUV and

magnetic ﬁeld observations are provided, respectively, by the Atmospheric Imaging Assembly (AIA;

Lemen et al. 2012) and the Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI; Schou et al. 2012) onboard

SDO. The AIA images have a temporal resolution of 12 s, and a pixel size of 0(cid:48)(cid:48).6. The HMI line

of sight (LOS) and vector magnetograms have a temporal resolution of 45 s and 720 s, respectively,

and their pixel size is 0(cid:48)(cid:48).5. The Hα images are provided by the Global Oscillation Network Group

(GONG). The spatial and temporal resolutions are about 1(cid:48)(cid:48) per pixel and 1 minute, respectively.

5

3. OBSERVATIONS

3.1. Activities Prior to the Eruption

The GOES light curve of the event is presented in Figure 1(a). Between about 4 and 1.5 hr before

the eruption, ﬁlament oscillations occur then decay (Figure 1(b)). This is followed by the C1.3-class

precursor ﬂare. Both of the ﬁlament oscillations and the precursor ﬂare are closely related to the

intermittent, bright ejections from the northwestern footpoint of the lower ﬁlament, and the ejections

are associated with ﬂux convergence and cancellation in the photosphere. These series of preﬂare

activities are presented in Figures 1–2 and described in detail in the following.

3.1.1. Intermittent Bright Ejections

Prior to the eruption, both ﬁlament segments in the double-decker structure exhibit a C shape,

aligned along the same PIL in the outer (northeastern) part of the active region, and largely overlap

each other (Figures 1(c)–(d)). However, the northwestern footpoints of the two ﬁlaments show a clear

separation. The location and shape of the upper ﬁlament change dramatically during the eruption,

as shown in Figures 1(e)–(f). It is not possible to determine how much the ﬁlaments separate in

height before and after the eruption, because data from a side view are not available. However,

there is evidence suggesting the independence of the two ﬁlaments already before the eruption, in

addition to the separation of their northwestern footpoints. Bright material is repeatedly ejected

along the lower ﬁlament from its northwestern footpoint toward the northeast, selected examples

of which are marked with white arrows in Figures 1(g)–(j). While the lower ﬁlament is disturbed

by such intermittent ejections, the upper ﬁlament remains stable until the onset of the eruption,

suggesting that the upper ﬁlament is suﬃciently separated from the lower one, i.e. a double-decker

6

Chen et al.

conﬁguration. Further evidence is provided by signatures of reconnection in the space between the

ﬁlaments at the onset of the eruption (see Section 3.2).

3.1.2. Oscillations and Slow Displacement of the Upper Filament

The upper ﬁlament begins to oscillate longitudinally after the bright ejection at 18:30 UT, which

might have triggered the oscillation. The time–distance plot in Figure 1(b) shows that the oscillation

lasts at least ﬁve periods, and the oscillation periods are not uniform, ranging from 30 to 40 minutes.

The nonuniformity of the oscillations may be due to disturbances by the intermittent ejections. As

soon as the oscillations totally disappear at about 21:10 UT (about an hour before the C1.3 precursor

ﬂare), a slow westward displacement of the upper ﬁlament becomes apparent, suggesting the onset

of a slow-rise phase. The projected velocity is estimated from Figure 1(b) to be ≈37 km s−1.

3.1.3. Precursor Flare

After the ﬁlament oscillation, intermittent bright ejections are still ongoing along the lower ﬁlament.

A particularly strong ejection around 22:05 UT from the northwestern footpoint of the lower ﬁlament

coincides with the onset of the C1.3 precursor ﬂare, which peaks at 22:20 UT, as shown in Figures

1(k)–(n). The ﬂare begins with the appearance of two bright ﬂare ribbons (R1 and R2), located on

the two sides of the lower ﬁlament, at 22:12 UT. The lower ﬁlament does not change signiﬁcantly,

whereas the upper ﬁlament continues its slow westward displacement. The bright ejection clearly

moves under the upper ﬁlament to the outer side of the ﬁlament channel and largely parallel to the

lower ﬁlament in this northern leg of the C-shaped structure. After reaching the outer side of the

ﬁlament channel, the bright ejected material rises and wraps around the upper ﬁlament (white arrows

in Figures 1(i)–(n)). This provides strong evidence that the upper ﬁlament is embedded in twisted

ﬂux. This could be a ﬂux rope or a ﬂux rope in formation, but not a magnetic arcade. The observed

upward turn of the ejected material can only be enforced by the magnetic ﬁeld. Due to the very

small values of the plasma beta with a low height in active regions (Gary 2001), moving plasma must

usually follow the existing ﬁeld direction, which here reveals left-handed twist. From its position

above the upper ﬁlament, the ejected material immediately begins to drain toward the central region

7

surrounded by the ﬁlaments, which suggests that the ﬂux rope embedding the upper ﬁlament is not

yet fully coherent. Associated with the curved ejection is the brightening of another ribbon (R3 in

Figure 1(n)). The ribbon R3 forms at the periphery of a simultaneously developing dimming area,

which it fully encloses from 22:17 UT (Figure 1(n)). The dimming suggests that an expanding ﬂux

rope is rooted in this area. This is also supported by the draining of the ejected material toward this

ribbon: the ejected material appears to be guided by the outer layers of the magnetic ﬂux holding

the upper ﬁlament.

3.1.4. Evolution of the Photospheric Magnetic Field

To understand the cause of these activities, we examine the evolution of the photospheric magnetic

ﬁeld observed by SDO/HMI as shown in Figure 2 and the associated animation. The left panel of

Figure 2 shows an 171 ˚A image taken by AIA overlaid with red and black contours representing

positive and negative polarity in the magnetogram, respectively. The right panel of Figure 2 presents

the temporal evolution of the total unsigned magnetic ﬁeld strength (red) and the averaged horizontal

magnetic ﬁeld (blue) within the region enclosed by the white box in the left panel of Figure 2. The

pink dashed and solid lines mark the peak times of the precursor ﬂare (22:20 UT) and main ﬂare

(22:43 UT), respectively. The gray dashed lines refer to the time of each bright ejection identiﬁed

in the EUV channels and shown in Figures 1(g)–(j). Prior to the eruption, two small magnetic

polarities are observed to gradually converge and cancel each other at the source region of the bright

ejections as enclosed by the white box. The total unsigned magnetic ﬂux within this source region

ﬁrst increases then begins to decrease about 10 minutes before the precursor ﬂare. These changes

are due to ﬂux convergence into the selected area and subsequent ﬂux cancellation. The horizontal

component of the magnetic ﬁeld within this source region increases rapidly after the peak of the

precursor ﬂare, and then gradually decreases as the main ﬂare and the total unsigned magnetic ﬂux

decay. An increase of the horizontal magnetic ﬁeld component during or after eruptions has been

reported, e.g., by Wang et al. (2012) and Liu et al. (2018a), and suggested to be a back-reaction of the

photosphere and inner part of the Sun to the ﬂares or CMEs. Alternatively, Barczynski et al. (2019)

8

Chen et al.

argued that photospheric horizontal ﬁelds are enhanced by the reconnection-driven contraction of

sheared ﬂare loops in the corona.

3.2. Failed Filament Eruption and Main Flare

Immediately after the onset of the precursor ﬂare, the bright ejected material wraps around the

upper ﬁlament, and then drains toward the central region surrounded by the ﬁlaments (see bottom

row of Figure 1). Simultaneously (at ∼22:15 UT) the rise of the upper ﬁlament accelerates, associated

with a C2.5 ﬂare that starts during the decay phase of the precursor and peaks at 22:43 UT; see

Figure 3 and the associated animation. Again, the lower ﬁlament remains nearly unchanged. By

∼22:20 UT, several brightened threads appear along the northern leg of the C-shaped structure, and

then wrap about the erupting upper ﬁlament in a left-handed sense similar to the bright ejection,

and also pass under the ﬁlament, which excludes the possibility that they outline ﬂux overlying the

ﬁlament channel. Their rapid brightening must result from heating by reconnection, which most

likely involves ambient ﬂux in the space between the ﬁlaments in the standard manner of a two-

ribbon ﬂare. The energy deposition into the two ribbons next to the lower ﬁlament also indicates

such reconnection, which additionally implies that the two ﬁlaments reside in separate magnetic

structures already by the onset of the eruption, at least along the northern leg of the C-shaped

ﬁlament channel. The threads show that the ﬂux added to the upper ﬁlament by the reconnection

carries twist. When it starts to rise, the ﬁlament has a straight and slim C shape with only minimal

indications of twist. However, it rolls in a way resembling a twisted ribbon (∼22:30 UT), consisting

of at least two major intertwined threads (∼22:35 UT; white arrow in Figure 3(f)), revealing that

the upper ﬁlament is also internally twisted.

From a point early in the rise (∼22:20 UT), the erupting ﬁlament also shows a motion in the

direction to its footpoints. This rolling motion stops at 22:50 UT after the ﬁlament has acquired

a reverse-C shape, and subsequently ﬁlament material drains toward the Sun. Many brightenings

appear intermittently within and below the erupting ﬁlament during this ﬁnal stage of the eruption

(Figures 3(c) and (g)). The ﬁlament threads become more or less straightened, indicating that

the ﬁlament loses essentially all of its twist during the draining (Figure 3(d)). This implies that

9

the erupted ﬂux reconnects with ambient ﬂux, diﬀerent from the standard 2D ﬂare model. Such

reconnection is also suggested by the fact that the draining to the negative-polarity side proceeds

toward two separate footpoint areas: mostly toward the same region as during the precursor and

also toward the southwestern end region of the ﬁlament channel. When the upper ﬁlament is close

to its maximum height, a ﬂare ribbon at the eastern outer side of the ﬁlament channel begins to

brighten at 22:37 UT. The ribbon then gradually extends and evolves into a full C-shaped ribbon

(i.e., outer ribbon R4) enclosing the ﬁlament system; see Figures 3(c)–(d). The ﬂare loops (pink

arrows in Figures 3(h) and (l)) rooted in this ribbon connect to a small cusp-shaped ribbon (R5 in

Figures 3). Similar to ribbon R3 of the precursor ﬂare, ribbon R5 is part of the strongly variable

brightening that develops in the periphery of the dimming area. Thus, both ribbons form in the

footpoint area of the erupting upper ﬁlament. The ﬂare loops rooted in R5 additionally imply that

the erupting ﬂux of the upper ﬁlament reconnects. The reconnection involves ambient ﬂux rooted in

Ribbon R4.

4. MODELING AND RESULTS

To understand the morphology and evolution of the double-decker ﬁlament system, we model the

magnetic ﬁeld using the ﬂux rope insertion method developed by van Ballegooijen (2004). This

method is proved to be capable of reproducing nonlinear force-free ﬁelds before eruption, as well

as unstable magnetic conﬁgurations during the early phase of a successful eruption, allowing the

stability of ﬁlaments to be analyzed (e.g., Su et al. 2011, 2015; Li et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018d).

A detailed description of the methodology and its application can be found in the literature (van

Ballegooijen 2004; Su 2019, and references therein). First, a potential ﬁeld is computed from the

high-resolution (HIRES) HMI magnetogram embedded in a low-resolution HMI global synoptic map.

The HIRES region as shown in Figure 4 spans about 29◦ in both longitude and latitude, and the

spatial resolution in the low corona is 0.001 R(cid:12). The resolution of the global ﬁeld is about 1◦. Both

HIRES and GLOBAL regions extend from the solar surface (r = R(cid:12)) up to a source surface (r ∼

1.7 R(cid:12)) above which the magnetic ﬁeld is assumed to be radial. Then we create cavities and insert

two ﬂux bundles with a double-decker structure along the observed ﬁlament paths. The resulting

10

Chen et al.

conﬁguration is not in a force-free equilibrium, so the last step is to allow the ﬁeld to relax through

magnetofrictional relaxation (Yang et al. 1986; van Ballegooijen et al. 2000). For an unstable model,

like the one considered below, relaxation and instability compete in the evolution. Eventually, the

instability wins out, which is manifested as a gradual rise of the unstable ﬂux. The magnetofrictional

modeling also captures key topological changes but not in the real time scale of the evolution (e.g.,

Su et al. 2011; Janvier et al. 2016).

4.1. Potential Field Model

We investigate the structure of the potential ﬁeld by computing the squashing factor Q, which is

a measure of the gradient in ﬁeld line mapping on a surface or between two surfaces (Titov et al.

2002). Quasi-separatrix layers (QSLs), deﬁned by high Q values, are known to be the preferred

locations for the occurrence of reconnection, and often exhibit a complex three-dimensional structure

(Demoulin et al. 1996). The intersection of two QSLs, a generalization of a two-dimensional magnetic

X structure, is referred to as a hyperbolic ﬂux tube (HFT). We investigate magnetic connectivities by

tracing ﬁeld lines point-wise with a fourth-order Runge–Kutta method, and use footpoint positions

of ﬁeld lines in the photosphere to calculate Q. The results of the potential ﬁeld modeling and their

comparison with SDO/AIA observations are shown in Figure 5. We ﬁnd that the overlying ﬁeld of

the ﬁlament system is similar to the dome-plate geometry presented in Chen et al. (2020). This is

diﬀerent from the widely accepted model for circular-ribbon ﬂares (Masson et al. 2009; Wang & Liu

2012), since no null point is identiﬁed around the expected location, but the large-scale structure

of the ﬁeld possesses considerable analogy. Underlying this analogy is the fact that the C-shaped

ﬁlament channel encloses an area of (negative) polarity and is nearly completely surrounded by the

opposite (positive) polarity (Figure 4). Figures 5(d)–(f) show the Q factor isosurfaces of the potential

ﬁeld, computed using the method by Liu et al. (2016). The magnetic conﬁguration appears to be in

agreement with the conjecture by Wang et al. (2014) that a quasi separator separates the dome in

two parts.

4.2. Non-potential Field Model

11

We have constructed 30 models in total, and then checked the relaxed models against the observa-

tions, in order to constrain the axial (Φaxi) and poloidal ﬂuxes (Fpol) of the inserted ﬂux bundles. The

relaxation is performed with a similar setting to Relaxation 1 as shown in Table 2 of Su et al. (2011).

The range of the parameter variations in this grid of models is the following: Φaxi = [2, 6] × 1020 Mx;

Fpol = [−1, 1] × 1010 Mx cm−1. Based on visual inspection, the best-ﬁt model is determined by com-

paring the selected model ﬁeld lines with the observed ﬁlament before, during, and after the eruption

as shown in the ﬁrst column of Figure 6. Some parameters, e.g., footpoint location and length of the

inserted ﬂux bundle, are well constrained by observations. For other parameters, there is a moderate

freedom, e.g., for the most important parameter Φaxi, we ﬁnd a range Φaxi = [3, 4] × 1020 Mx to be

consistent with the observations. The values Φaxi = 3 × 1020 Mx (lower ﬂux bundle) and 4 × 1020

Mx (upper ﬂux bundle) yield the overall best agreement with the data. Yet other parameters are

not well constrained by the data; in particular, the relaxed conﬁgurations are similar in the whole

considered range of Fpol.

4.2.1. Conﬁned Partial Eruption

Figures 6–8 present results of the best-ﬁt model with two ﬂux bundles inserted along the blue paths

shown in Figure 4. The ﬂux bundle FR1 connecting the footpoints L1 and L2 corresponds to the

lower ﬁlament, above which is the shorter ﬂux bundle FR2 (connecting the footpoints U1 and U2)

corresponding to the upper ﬁlament, whose footpoint in the negative polarity is chosen to lie near

the area of draining ﬁlament material. The initial poloidal ﬂuxes of the inserted ﬂux bundles are set

to be 0 Mx cm−1, i.e., both ﬂux bundles initially contain no twist, to minimize the inﬂuence of the

insertion procedure on the resulting twist. The axial ﬂuxes of FR1 and FR2 are 3 × 1020 Mx and

4 × 1020 Mx, respectively.

The ﬁrst column of Figure 6 presents three AIA images in 304 ˚A before, during, and after the failed

ﬁlament eruption. From the second to the fourth column, the individually selected ﬁeld lines and the

distribution of current density in the model are displayed after diﬀerent numbers of magnetofrictional

iterations. A comparison of the images in the ﬁrst and second columns shows that the selected ﬁeld

lines after 5000, 30,000, and 90,000 iterations do qualitatively match the observed ﬁlaments before,

12

Chen et al.

during, and after the eruption. The side view of the same ﬁeld lines in the third column and the

current density distribution and ﬁeld vectors in the cross section in the forth column show that the

upper ﬂux bundle FR2 rises to near the top of the separatrix dome from 5000 to 30,000 iterations,

showing an eruption as observed. At the same time, the upper ﬂux bundle acquires twist. The

resulting state conforms to the projected position and the twisted appearance of the erupted upper

ﬁlament (Figure 3f). Subsequently, the twisted ﬂux bundle stops its rise under the separatrix dome

and is largely eroded (see fourth column), which will be analyzed in detail in Section 4.2.3. The

remaining ﬂux under the top of the dome shows an untwisted ﬂux bundle with a slight inverse C

shape (second column), also largely similar to the observed draining ﬁlament. The lower ﬂux bundle

remains nearly unchanged throughout the relaxation, which also agrees with the observations. After

90,000 iterations, it is only slightly shorter and lower than at 5000 iterations. After 5000, 30,000 and

90,000 iterations, the free magnetic energy in the best-ﬁt model is 1.08 × 1031 erg, 6.16 × 1030 erg,

and 3.54 × 1030 erg, respectively, as listed in the fourth column of Figure 6. Therefore, the evolution

of the observed ﬁlament eruption corresponds to the decrease of free magnetic energy. This results

from the decrease of the current ﬂowing through the upper ﬂux rope as the rope rises and likely also

from magnetic reconnection between the inserted ﬂux bundles and the surrounding ﬁelds, which is

enabled by numerical diﬀusion and considered in more detail below.

4.2.2. Magnetic Topology versus Observations

The top two rows of Figure 7 show the evolution of log Q in the photosphere and in the vertical

cross section along the yellow line marked in panel (a). The platelike shape extending from the top of

the dome-like structure (Figure 5) is the analog of the outer spine in a classical null-point topology.

It is seen as the nearly straight high-Q line marked by green arrows in Figures 7(d)–(f). The log Q

maps show signiﬁcant changes during the relaxation process. The dome-like structure, outlined as

a high-Q arch in the cross section, ﬁrst expands and rises, and then shrinks. Simultaneously, the

plate gradually moves toward the open side of the C-shaped structure, in a similar direction as the

erupting ﬁlament.

13

After 90,000 iterations, the log Q map at a height of 2 Mm above the solar surface and the compar-

ison with an image observed in 304 ˚A are presented in the bottom row of Figure 7. Their comparison

shows that the eastern outer ribbon of the main ﬂare, R4, compares favorably with the eastern arc

of high-Q lines in the log Q map (marked by a red arrow).

4.2.3. Twist Evolution

A ﬂux rope is a group of helical ﬁeld lines collectively winding around a common axis (Priest 2014;

Liu 2020), which is called the magnetic axis. The winding is measured by the twist angle of the ﬁeld

lines about the axis, which can be expressed through the local axial and azimuthal ﬁeld components

Bz(r) and Bθ(r), the length of the axis, l, and the distance from the axis, r, as φ(r) = lBθ/(rBz), if the

ﬂux rope is cylindrically symmetric. Often, a radial average, φ, is referred to as the twist of the ﬂux

rope. The twist number is N = φ/(2π). In practice, ﬂux ropes are often complex structures, so that

it is diﬃcult to precisely locate the axis and perform the radial average. It is far more straightforward
to compute a local twist number of each individual ﬁeld line Tw = (cid:82) (∇ × B) · B/(4πB2)dl, where

dl is the line element along a ﬁeld line (Berger & Prior 2006). This quantity measures how the ﬁeld

lines in an inﬁnitesimally small vicinity wind about the considered ﬁeld line, i.e., it does not refer to

the axis of the ﬂux rope. In the vicinity of the axis, Tw is close to N , and agrees with N if the rope

is axially symmetric. As an indication, moderate diﬀerences of N being smaller than Tw by ∼0.5–1

have been found in two speciﬁc solar cases (Liu et al. 2016; Kliem et al. 2021). If there exists a ﬂux

rope, a map of Tw should generally reveal its existence and location, and provide a rough estimate

of its twist φ. However, one has to be careful in the interpretation of such maps, because Tw is

nonzero also in current layers, which complicates the interpretation. We map Tw by integrating its

local density, α/4π, where α = µ0J(cid:107)/B is the force-free parameter, along each ﬁeld line, using the

code package provided by Liu et al. (2016). The calculated Tw maps after 5000, 30,000, and 90,000

iterations are presented in the left, middle, and right columns of Figure 8, respectively. The green

and pink contours indicate the areas with local twist number |Tw| > 1 and |Tw| > 1.75, respectively.

As mentioned above, no twist (i.e., no poloidal ﬂux) is carried by either of the inserted ﬂux bundles

initially. After 5000 iterations, i.e., at the moment before the eruption, twist has accumulated

14

Chen et al.

signiﬁcantly in the upper ﬂux bundle, as shown in Figures 8(a) and (d). The local twist in the upper

ﬂux bundle Tw < −1 (blue area; blue arrows) has its sign in agreement with the prevailing helicity in

the ﬁlament channel as revealed by the erupted ﬁlament and the brightenings preceding the eruption.

The area of highest |Tw| is close to a swirl in the in-plane ﬁeld vectors in Figure 8(g), so the formation

of a ﬂux rope is indicated, with Tw here largely representing true twist about the axis in the center

of the swirl.

The maximum local twist of the upper ﬂux rope reaches Tw ≈ −1.75 (roughly corresponding to

φ ≈ −3.5π). This is close to the threshold of the helical kink instability (Fan & Gibson 2003; T¨or¨ok

et al. 2004). However, the average local twist (Tw ≈ −1.45) remains clearly lower and may be even

lower if N < Tw. Therefore, the modeling suggests that the helical kink instability did not commence,

in agreement with the indication from the observations that lack clear signatures of the development

of writhe.

The local twist accumulated by the lower ﬂux bundle is far weaker and positive (0 < Tw < 1;

red area and green arrows). The in-plane ﬁeld vectors in Figure 8(g) do not show any indication of

swirl in this area, so the local twist Tw here does not indicate any true twist about a magnetic axis.

Overall, we ﬁnd that the ﬁlament channel contains a ﬂux rope atop a ﬂux bundle with negligible

twist. This bears some similarity to another active region analyzed in Awasthi et al. (2019), whose

structure was conﬁrmed by mass motions.

After 30,000 iterations, the area with Tw < −1.75 has built up clearly in the upper ﬂux rope

(Figures 8(b) and (e)) and continues to enclose the magnetic axis (Figure 8(h)). The increase of

the twist is also clearly seen in the ﬁeld line plots in Figure 6. In contrast, the local twist number

stays at low positive values, Tw < 1, in the original area of the lower inserted ﬂux bundle. The ﬁeld

lines started in this area continue to show a ﬂux bundle of negligible twist that runs along the whole

C-shaped ﬁlament channel (Figure 6, middle row). Additionally, an elongated region of positive Tw

appears between the upper ﬂux bundle and the dome, and acquires a higher local twist of Tw ∼ 1,

which is often considered to indicate a ﬂux rope. However, there continues to be no support for

the presence of a ﬂux rope structure from the map of the in-plane ﬁeld vectors (Figure 8(h)). The

15

elongated shape and location of this relatively high-Tw area are instead suggestive of a current layer

steepened between the dome and the rising upper ﬂux bundle. Overall, the stable lower ﬁlament

is modeled by the ﬂux bundle of negligible twist that stays at its original height, and the erupting

upper ﬁlament is modeled by a rising ﬂux rope of increasing twist.

A comparison of the middle and right columns of Figure 8 shows a signiﬁcant decrease of the twist

in the upper ﬂux bundle during the further evolution from 30,000 to 90,000 iterations. At the same

time, the twist number increases signiﬁcantly in the ﬂare ribbons R4 and R5 of the main eruption

(black arrows). This evolution suggests that the twist of the upper ﬂux rope is transferred to the

post-ﬂare arcade ﬁeld whose footpoints are highlighted by these ﬂare ribbons. In these locations,

the increase in the local twist Tw indicates the steepening of a current layer (a QSL according to

Figure 7(c)), rather than the buildup of another ﬂux rope.

The buildup of twist in the upper ﬂux bundle is a natural result of the magnetofrictional evolution

after the insertion of the ﬂux bundle along the PIL. The ambient potential ﬁeld points essentially

perpendicularly to the PIL and the ﬂux bundle. The magnetofrictional relaxation is a strongly

diﬀusive process that creates a transition layer of smoothly changing ﬁeld directions between these

ﬂux systems, with the current (which represents the free energy) mainly ﬂowing in this layer. The

ﬁeld directions in the transition layer are intermediate between the axial and perpendicular directions,

therefore yielding helical ﬁeld lines that wrap around the inserted ﬂux bundle, which becomes a ﬂux

rope.

Initially, the layer forms as an annulus around each of the inserted ﬂux bundles and can be seen

in cross-sectional maps of the current density, Q, and Tw. However, the layer largely diﬀuses away

around the lower bundle in the ﬁrst few thousand iterations and becomes less well deﬁned in maps of

the current density compared to Tw maps. This results from the present model’s tendency to develop

its current density in the volume of the inserted ﬂux bundles, not only in the surface layer. The Tw

map becomes the most sensitive diagnostic of the annulus, which is still well deﬁned for the ﬂux rope

at 5000 iterations and still indicated at 30,000 iterations (Figures 8(d)–(e)). This magnetofrictional

16

Chen et al.

buildup of the current density and twist in the ﬂux rope proceeds at scales of several 104 iteration

steps, i.e., continues into the rise phase of the rope (Figure 6).

In the magnetofrictional evolutionary model, the twist of the ﬂux rope is built up in place by

diﬀusion of the magnetic information from the inserted and the ambient ﬂux, into the layer between

them. There is no bodily transport of twisted ﬂux into the layer. This diﬀers from the relevant

path of MHD evolution of a nearly ideal magnetoﬂuid, which represents the conditions in the corona.

In this case, twist can be transported along a ﬂux rope or added at the surface as new layers of

twisted ﬂux. The former would occur if the ﬂux rope is in the process of emergence (Parker 1974)

or if a vortex would act at its footpoint(s); however, neither of these is observed in the course of

the present event. The latter results from the standard ﬂare reconnection underneath an erupting

ﬂux rope and, in the present event, is not only expected but also indicated by the bright threads

wrapping around the upper ﬁlament during its rise. Despite the diﬀerence in the way the twist is

built up, the underlying reason is the same, i.e., the conversion of mutual-helicity into self-helicity

during the interaction of the ﬂux rope with the ambient ﬁeld.

Table 1 lists various quantities of the best-ﬁt model after diﬀerent relaxation iterations, all computed

in the HIRES region. The average degree of local twisting, (cid:104)Tw(cid:105)box, is computed by integrating the

absolute values of Tw over the bottom area of the HIRES volume and dividing this by twice the

bottom area (because the local twist of each ﬁeld line is summed up twice, once at each footpoint).

Tw at the bottom plane is the value integrated over each individual ﬁeld line rooted in the bottom

plane, i.e., Equation (7) in Liu et al. (2016). Therefore, the change of Tw in the bottom plane

represents the change of magnetic twist in the relevant three-dimensional volume. Berger & Field

(1984) established the relative magnetic helicity, Hr, as a relevant physical quantity in magnetically

open volumes, like the solar corona. Hr measures the linkage of magnetic ﬂux tubes in the system,

and is calculated following Appendix B in Bobra et al. (2008). Table 1 shows that all of the global

non-potential measures, including the free magnetic energy divided by the potential ﬁeld energy,

the ﬂux-normalized relative magnetic helicity, the average degree of local twisting of the HIRES

region, and the average twist of the ﬂux rope, decrease weakly with increasing iteration numbers.

17

From i=30,000 to i=90,000, 27% of (cid:104)Tw(cid:105)box and 14% of the ﬂux-normalized relative magnetic helicity,

Hr/F 2

u , where Fu is the unsigned magnetic ﬂux through the bottom plane, have decayed by numerical

diﬀusion.

In order to understand the role of magnetic reconnection in the twist release of the upper ﬂux

rope, we investigate the change of the ﬁeld lines in the model between 30,000 and 90,000 relaxation

iterations in Figure 9, using a procedure similar to that presented by Aulanier & Dud´ık (2019). At

30,000 iterations, we trace the ﬁeld lines inside the erupted ﬂux rope from a vertical slice to their

photospheric footpoints (panels (a)–(c)). The ﬁeld lines are then traced from the footpoints in the

negative polarity (red asterisk), which lie near the observed ribbon R5 shown in Figure 3, in the

model after 90,000 iterations (panels (d)–(f) of Figure 9). The comparison and the online animation

associated with Figure 9 show that these ﬁeld lines of the ﬂux rope have changed into ﬁeld lines

representing ﬂare loops that connect the main ﬂare ribbons (pink arrows in Figure 3). This evolution

demonstrates magnetic reconnection between the rising ﬂux rope and ambient arcade-like ﬂux that

is rooted in the outer ribbon R4. The reconnecting ﬂux rope ﬁeld lines obtain a new footpoint in the

large ribbon R4 and produce ﬂare loops, as termed ar-rf reconnection by Aulanier & Dud´ık (2019).

The upper ﬂux rope begins to lose twist when this reconnection occurs near the intersection of the

dome- and plate-shaped QSLs. This transfer of twist from the ﬂux rope to the ﬂare loops (twist

release) is clearly seen in the twist maps in Figures 9(c) and (f) as a decrease of Tw at the footpoint

areas of the ﬂux rope and a simultaneous increase of Tw at the footpoint areas of the reconnected

ﬁeld lines. In addition to this transfer of twist, there is a reduction of the average twist in the box,

due to the numerical diﬀusion of the magnetofrictional scheme (Table 1).

To compare the transfer of twist by reconnection with the loss of twist by numerical diﬀusion, we

compute the average degree of local twisting in the remote footpoint area of the ﬂux rope, (cid:104)Tw(cid:105)FR,

at i=30,000, marked by a green box in Figure 9(c), and its change by i=90,000. Diﬀerent from

the ﬂux in the footpoint area marked with the asterisk in Figure 9, the ﬂux rooted in the remote

footpoint area does not connect to the places that the twist is transferred to, therefore providing a

measure of the twist released from the ﬂux rope. The integral of Tw(x, y) in the remote footpoint

18

Chen et al.

area is divided by the footpoint area for the correct average.

It is found that 89% of (cid:104)Tw(cid:105)FR at

i=30,000 is released by i=90,000. This is much larger than the average decrease (27%) of (cid:104)Tw(cid:105)box by

numerical diﬀusion in the same period. This lends support to our conjecture that a magnetofrictional

description can capture some essential structural changes of a magnetohydrodynamic evolution, such

as those changes due to magnetic reconnection. However, comparative studies of magnetofrictional

vs. MHD modeling are needed to obtain a deeper understanding of their respective capabilities.

4.2.4. Eﬀect of Evolving Magnetogram

In our simulation, the normal component of the magnetic ﬁeld in the bottom plane is ﬁxed during

the magnetofrictional evolution, but the magnetic ﬁeld in the solar surface does change somewhat

during the relatively long-lasting eruption (i.e., from 22:02 UT to 22:52 UT). In order to investigate

the eﬀect of the magnetic ﬁeld change on the modeling results, we have also constructed both a

potential and a non-potential magnetic ﬁeld model based on the LOS photospheric magnetogram

taken at 22:52 UT and performed the corresponding topological analysis. We ﬁnd that the values

and shape of the high-Q and high-Tw volumes do change, but the key features remain solid.

In

particular, the structure of a ﬂux rope atop a ﬂux bundle of negligible twist and the buildup and

release of twist of the erupting upper ﬂux rope are essentially the same.

5. DISCUSSION

5.1. Initiation of Eruption

Kliem et al. (2014) have discussed three possible trigger mechanisms for the eruption of the upper

part in a double-decker ﬁlament: (1) a weakening of the overlying ﬁeld, or a transfer of ﬂux from the

lower to the upper ﬁlament; (2) a tether-cutting reconnection at the HFT between two ﬁlament ﬂux

ropes, which also transfers ﬂux to the upper rope; and (3) the buildup of supercritical twist for onset

of the helical kink instability only in the upper ﬂux rope.

In our case, most of the intermittent bright ejections ﬂow along the lower ﬁlament. Only the

strongest one, which leads to the precursor ﬂare, also shows an upward displacement, in addition to

its motion along the lower ﬁlament, before wrapping around the upper ﬁlament. This ejection may

19

transfer some ﬂux from the lower to the upper ﬁlament. Since the main eruption evolves seamlessly

out of this ejection, it is possible that the ejection plays the role of the ﬁnal drop, destabilizing a

structure on the verge of instability.

The same triggering mechanism can be provided by the reconnection of ambient ﬂux between the

ﬁlaments during the C1.3 precursor ﬂare, which is suggested by the occurrence of brightened threads

wrapping around the upper ﬁlament and by the ribbon pair R1 and R2 marked in Figure 1(n)

(Section 3.2). Such reconnection is in line with the ﬁndings reported by Liu et al. (2012) and Zhu

et al. (2015).

The maximum twist angle of the upper ﬂux rope after 5000 iterations in our model reaches ∼ 3.5π

(provided N is not signiﬁcantly smaller than Tw), which is close to the threshold of the helical kink

instability. However, the average twist is lower, and the observations show no signature of twist-

to-writhe conversion, which is the typical telltale sign that the kink instability is involved in the

destabilization of a ﬂux rope. Therefore, the occurrence of this instability in the event is unlikely.

One must keep in mind that the ﬁrst compelling sign of evolution toward eruption, i.e., the onset

of a slow westward displacement of the upper ﬁlament, suggestive of a slow-rise phase, occurs before

the above potential triggers. The only associated process in the corona is the decaying ﬁlament

oscillation, which fails to trigger the eruption in the present event. Therefore, the displacement

may result from long-lasting, tether-cutting reconnection driven by photospheric ﬂux cancellation

(Section 3.1.4).

In instability models for eruptions, a trigger may only push the magnetic structure across the

boundary of stability, but the subsequent onset of instability drives the eruption. Therefore, we

have to ask whether an ideal MHD instability could have followed the potential triggers identiﬁed

above. While the helical kink is not supported, our modeling does support the occurrence of the

torus instability.

The canonical value of the critical decay index for the onset of the torus instability is ncr =

1.5 (Kliem & T¨or¨ok 2006), which is considered as a reference in our analysis. We ﬁnd that the

corresponding critical height, computed from the horizontal component of the potential ﬁeld, varies

20

Chen et al.

signiﬁcantly along the eruption trajectory. At the eruption onset, the estimated axis height of the

upper ﬂux rope (the center of the swirl in the magnetic vector distribution) of 21 Mm exceeds the

critical height for the torus instability (16 Mm; magenta asterisk); see Figures 8(g) and 10. This

suggests that the instability initiates the upper ﬁlament eruption. Similarly, the magnetic ﬂux rope

axis in the best-ﬁt model after 30,000 iterations has a height of ∼ 41 Mm, slightly above the critical

height of 36 Mm; see Figures 8(h) and 10. This is fully consistent with the status in the course of

the eruption.

As a further potential eruption mechanism, the double arc instability (DAI) has been proposed as

a precursor process or as an alternative to the torus instability (Ishiguro & Kusano 2017; Kusano

et al. 2020). This instability can result when tether-cutting reconnection merges two arc-shaped ﬂux

bundles into a double-arc shape, which implies an additional upward Lorentz force in the bent ﬂux at

the reconnection point. The data of the event suggest the occurrence of topologically similar tether-

cutting reconnection at the HFT between the two ﬁlaments from the brightening of multiple sheared

loops during the precursor ﬂare (see Section 3.1.3, Section 3.2, and the animation of the AIA 171 ˚A

data in Figure 2). However, the multiple loops represent a layer of ﬂux wrapping around the upper

ﬁlament, sharing its magnetic axis; they do not represent a new, double-arc-shaped ﬂux bundle and

current channel, which is the prerequisite equilibrium structure of the DAI. The only clear ﬂux rope

structure suggested by the observations and the modeling is the upper ﬁlament, which maintains the

structure of a single arc throughout the event. On the other hand, the Lorentz force in the upper

reconnected ﬂux (visualized by the brightened multiple sheared loops) points upward and supports

the subsequent eruption, similar to the action of a DAI.

5.2. Conﬁnement

Various mechanisms can stop an eruption. Observations and simulations reveal that conﬁned

eruptions may occur because the strong overlying magnetic loops form a conﬁning cage

that can prevent the escape of ﬂux ropes (T¨or¨ok & Kliem 2005; DeVore & Antiochos 2008; Guo

et al. 2010; Amari et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2019). Such a strong strapping ﬁeld above

the eruption site provides a torus-stable regime above a torus-unstable one (see examples in Wang

21

et al. 2017). In addition, a ﬂux rope is unable to erupt successfully if the tension force of a guide ﬁeld

is suﬃciently strong (Kliem et al. 2014; Myers et al. 2015). Alternatively, conﬁned eruptions

often occur below a dome-shaped magnetic fan surface with a coronal magnetic null

point. (e.g., Masson et al. 2009; Liu et al. 2018c; Yang & Zhang 2018). A magnetic null facilitates

the onset of magnetic reconnection because oppositely directed ﬂux exists there in close proximity.

In our case, the erupting ﬁlament is surrounded by a QSL of similar dome-plate geometry (see the

opposite ﬁeld directions in Figure 5(b)). When the rising upper ﬁlament meets the overlying ﬂux at

the dome region (Figures 7–8), magnetic reconnection between them indeed occurs (Figure 9), which

erodes the ﬂux in the rope. This changes the forces in the rope and can halt the eruption (e.g., T¨or¨ok

& Kliem 2005; Hassanin & Kliem 2016).

Our analysis indicates that the conﬁnement of the erupted upper ﬁlament in the investigated event

can be due to a combination of the aforementioned two main mechanisms. Certainly the reconnection

with overlying ﬂux is important, as demonstrated by the draining of the ﬁlament material in the

observations and as corroborated by the model.

The observations and the potential ﬁeld computation indicate that the tension force of the overlying

ﬂux is also important, providing a conﬁning cage. The animation of the AIA data (Figure 3) shows

that the ﬁrst signs of the reconnection with ambient ﬂux—the formation of new connections in the

area of the original negative footpoint—occur only after 22:39 UT. At this time, the ﬁlament has

already nearly reached its ﬁnal position. This indicates that the ﬁlament is strongly decelerated by

the downward tension force of overlying ﬂux, and the deceleration process is also in agreement with

the large-scale structure of the overlying ﬂux as revealed by the potential ﬁeld. Figure 10 shows that

the ﬂux above the QSL dome provides an extended height range where n < 3/2. A rising ﬂux rope

can be stopped in such a torus-stable height layer if the layer contains a suﬃcient amount of ﬂux

(DeVore & Antiochos 2008). We expect that this happened in the investigated event. The two ﬂux

systems pressing against each other are also likely to reconnect, and this is indeed indicated by the

observations during the draining of the stopped ﬁlament. On the other hand, in the magnetofrictional

22

Chen et al.

evolution of the model ﬂux rope, reconnection with overlying ﬂux is the dominant process that stops

the rise, due to the high diﬀusion inherent in this approximation.

The torus-stable height layer in the present active region has also been found by Filippov (2020).

Assuming that a strapping ﬁeld of opposite direction above a magnetic null would exert an upward

Lorentz force on the rising ﬂux rope, this author concluded that “the most reasonable force that

terminate the ﬁlament ascending above the null point is the gravity force.” This would be valid in

vacuum ﬁelds. However, in MHD, a ﬂux rope rising into a region of oppositely directed strapping

ﬁeld will never penetrate into this ﬂux; thus, it will not feel such a Lorentz force. Rather, the rope

will either stretch this ﬂux upward, creating a downward magnetic tension force (DeVore & Antiochos

2008; Kliem et al. 2016), or will reconnect with this ﬂux, which erodes the ﬂux rope, weakening its

upward Lorentz force (T¨or¨ok & Kliem 2005; Hassanin & Kliem 2016).

6. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

We investigate the failed partial eruption of a C-shaped double-decker ﬁlament system, which

occurred in AR 12104 in the southern solar hemisphere on 2014 July 5. The ﬁlaments enclose a

region of negative ﬂux that is nearly completely surrounded by positive ﬂux. Before the eruption, a

sequence of interrelated activities are observed: intermittent bright ejections, oscillation of the upper

ﬁlament, and a C1.3 precursor ﬂare. The eruption of the upper ﬁlament is associated with the main

C2.5 ﬂare with a C-shaped ﬂare ribbon surrounding the stable lower ﬁlament and a compact ribbon

forming in the enclosed polarity. The upper ﬁlament displays a prominent twisted structure when

it is undergoing a failed eruption and rolls over toward the open side of the C shape during the

eruption. The rise of the ﬁlament then halts; it transforms to a reversed-C shape and subsequently

drains, partly to places diﬀerent from its original footpoints.

A careful examination of the photospheric magnetic ﬁeld suggests that the intermittent ejections are

due to ﬂux cancellation between two small converging polarities near the northwestern footpoint of

the ﬁlament. Long-lasting ﬁlament oscillations are often observed before the onset of solar eruptions;

therefore, these oscillations were proposed as a precursor leading to eruption (Chen et al. 2008).

However, the ﬁlament oscillation that lasts about 2 hr in the present case does not directly lead to

23

an unstable state of the system because it completely decays about an hour before the onset of the

precursor ﬂare.

The double-decker structure of the ﬁlament system, i.e. the trapping of the ﬁlaments in two sepa-

rate magnetic structures, is indicated by the diﬀerent dynamic behavior of the ﬁlaments during both

the precursor activities (intermittent ejections disturbing only the lower ﬁlament; Section 3.1.1) and

the main eruption (reconnection between the ﬁlaments, producing bright threads between them; Sec-

tion 3.2). This is further supported by the successful model that employs a double-decker structure.

To understand how the eruption initiates and why it fails, we construct magnetic ﬁeld models using

the ﬂux rope insertion method that involves magnetofrictional relaxation. The magnetofrictional

evolution has no intrinsic time scale, as the velocities used in the magnetofrictional scheme are not

real ﬂuid velocities. However, the spatial structures, including the magnetic topology, are realistic and

even data constrained; thus the resultant magnetic conﬁguration can help understand the observations

(Cheung & DeRosa 2012; Savcheva et al. 2015, 2016; Guo et al. 2016).

Topological analysis of the potential ﬁeld shows that the overlying ﬁeld of the ﬁlament system

possesses a QSL of dome-plate geometry but without an embedded magnetic null point. A high-Q

plate separates the dome into two parts. Our modeling of the non-potential coronal ﬁeld reproduces

the observed failed eruption of the upper ﬁlament, with the lower ﬁlament remaining essentially

undisturbed. This includes the accumulation and subsequent release of twist in the upper ﬁlament

during the eruption. The magnetic conﬁgurations after 5000, 30,000, and 90,000 magnetofrictional

iterations rather closely match the observed ﬁlament system before, during, and after the eruption,

respectively. The evolving model also shows a decrease of free magnetic energy, as required for an

eruption.

After 5000 iterations, the magnetic ﬁeld evolves into a conﬁguration with a ﬂux rope atop a ﬂux

bundle with negligible twist, which appears to closely match the observed double-decker ﬁlament at

the eruption onset. Although both ﬂux bundles were inserted without an azimuthal ﬁeld component,

the upper one acquires twist. The twist continues to increase until the termination of the rise after

30,000 iterations. Consistent with the observations, the twist in the upper ﬂux rope shows a signiﬁcant

24

Chen et al.

decrease subsequently. At the same time, the non-potentiality indicated by the photospheric Tw map

increases substantially in the area of the main ﬂare ribbons, suggesting a twist or current transfer

from the erupted ﬂux rope to the surrounding ﬁeld, which results from the reconnection of the ﬂux

rope with the surrounding magnetic ﬁeld at the high-Q dome. The ribbons take the form of an

extended C on the outer side of the ﬁlament channel and of a compact area inside, respectively. The

C-shaped outer ribbon coincides with lines of high squashing factor Q in the photosphere, similar

in shape to the footpoint area of the magnetic dome in a null-point conﬁguration. The compact

inner ribbon forms at the periphery of the erupting ﬂux rope of the upper ﬁlament, as indicated by

a developing dimming. This is located near the footpoint area of the magnetic spine.

Previously, it has been found that the magnetofrictional relaxation process is capable of emulating

the observed evolution of an eruption in the early phase (Su et al. 2011; Savcheva et al. 2016; Liu

et al. 2018d). For the ﬁrst time, this study shows that the magnetofriction method can also emulate

qualitatively emulate the conﬁned partial eruption and the observed twist evolution (due to the

reconnection with overlying ﬂux) in a ﬁlament. However, cautions must be taken in applying the

method and in interpreting the modeling result. For instance, because the method cannot describe

any MHD waves (fast mode, Alfven mode, nor slow mode waves), it works as a reliable approximation

of the MHD evolution only when the dynamics are well subsonic and sub-Alfvenic, in particular, for

quasi-static evolutions. When eruptive dynamics with strong acceleration of plasma are considered,

a careful comparison between the magnetofrictional evolution and the observational data or an MHD

model is still required for a representative number and range of case studies. Our magnetofrictional

modeling yields magnetic reconnection of erupting ﬂux in qualitative agreement with the observed

twist release from the erupting ﬂux and the brightening of the main ﬂare ribbons, but it does not

yield a long, thin current sheet between the erupting and overlying ﬂux systems (Guidoni et al. 2016),

similar to previous applications of the method (Su et al. 2011; Savcheva et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2018d).

This suggests that such modeling yields the large-scale consequences but not the detailed dynamics

of reconnection.

The main results of our observational and modeling analysis of the failed eruption can be summa-

rized as follows:

1. The double-decker ﬁlament is structured as a ﬂux rope atop a ﬂux bundle with negligible twist.

25

2. Prior to the eruption, one of the strongest intermittent ejections from an area of ﬂux cancellation

in the ﬁlament channel appears to transfer ﬂux into the upper ﬁlament, which weakens its

stability. Additionally, magnetic reconnection of the ambient ﬁeld in the space between the two

ﬁlaments, indicated by brightened threads immediately following the precursor ﬂare, transfers

further ﬂux to the upper ﬁlament and simultaneously reduces the constraint imposed by the

overlying ﬁeld. Both mechanisms contribute to the observed slow rise and destabilization of

the ﬁlament, which eventually erupts, once reaching the critical height of the torus instability.

On the other hand, the ∼ 2 hr ﬁlament oscillation before the eruption occurs in a stable state

of the system is unlikely to trigger the eruption.

3. Both observations and magnetic modeling indicate that the erupted ﬂux is considerably twisted,

but the twist does not reach the threshold of the helical kink instability. The ﬁlament threads

trace preexisting twist, which becomes apparent during the expansion and disintegration of the

ﬁlament. Additional twist is added to the erupting ﬂux in the course of the rise as a result of

tether-cutting reconnection of ambient ﬂux under the rising ﬂux. Once reaching the overlying

dome-shaped QSL, the twist of the upper ﬁlament is transferred to the post-ﬂare arcade ﬁeld

whose footpoints are highlighted by the ﬂare ribbons surrounding the lower ﬁlament. The

transfer results from magnetic reconnection with the overlying ﬁeld. Both the rise of the upper

ﬁlament and its subsequent untwisting lower the free magnetic energy of the conﬁguration.

4. The conﬁnement of the eruption is caused by one or both of the following eﬀects. (a) Motion

of the erupting ﬂux from a torus-unstable to a torus-stable height range, the latter of which

is located just above the intersection of the dome- and plate-shaped QSLs.

(b) Erosion of

the erupted ﬂux rope by reconnection with overlying ﬂux at the dome-shaped QSL. This is

26

Chen et al.

suggested by the draining of the ﬁlament to partly new footpoint locations, which immediately

follows the termination of its rise, and directly observed in the model.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank the SDO and the GONG teams for providing the valuable data. We thank Jun

Chen for kindly oﬀering the code package for calculating Tw and the Q factor and Drs. Yang Guo

and Xin Cheng for valuable discussions. We also gratefully acknowledge constructive comments by

the referee which have stimulated a deeper analysis, especially of the reconnection in the model and

of the diﬀerences in the magnetofrictional and MHD descriptions of eruptive processes. This work is

supported by the following Chinese foundations: the National Natural Science Foundation of China

(NSFC; 41761134088, 11473071, 11790302, 11790300, 11773079, 41774150, 11925302, and U1731241),

and the Strategic Priority Research Program on Space Science, CAS (grant No. XDA15052200

and XDA15320301). B.K. acknowledges support by the DFG in the joint Sino-German program

NSFC41761134088/DFG KL817.8-1.

REFERENCES

27

Alexander, D., Liu, R., & Gilbert, H. R. 2006,

Chen, P. F., Innes, D. E., & Solanki, S. K. 2008,

ApJ, 653, 719, doi: 10.1086/508137

A&A, 484, 487,

Amari, T., Canou, A., Aly, J.-J., Delyon, F., &

doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:200809544

Alauzet, F. 2018, Nature, 554, 211,

Cheung, M. C. M., & DeRosa, M. L. 2012, ApJ,

doi: 10.1038/nature24671

757, 147, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/757/2/147

Aulanier, G., & Dud´ık, J. 2019, A&A, 621, A72,

D´emoulin, P., & Aulanier, G. 2010, ApJ, 718,

doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201834221

Aulanier, G., T¨or¨ok, T., D´emoulin, P., & DeLuca,

E. E. 2010, The Astrophysical Journal, 708,

314, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/708/1/314

Awasthi, A. K., Liu, R., Wang, H., Wang, Y., &

Shen, C. 2018, ApJ, 857, 124,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aab7fb

Awasthi, A. K., Liu, R., & Wang, Y. 2019, ApJ,

872, 109, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aafdad

Barczynski, K., Aulanier, G., Masson, S., &

Wheatland, M. S. 2019, ApJ, 877, 67,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab1b3d

Bateman, G. 1978, MHD Instabilities (MIT Press,

Cambridge, MA)

Berger, M. A., & Field, G. B. 1984, Journal of

Fluid Mechanics, 147, 133,

doi: 10.1017/S0022112084002019

Berger, M. A., & Prior, C. 2006, Journal of

Physics A Mathematical General, 39, 8321,

doi: 10.1088/0305-4470/39/26/005

1388, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/718/2/1388

Demoulin, P., Henoux, J. C., Priest, E. R., &

Mandrini, C. H. 1996, A&A, 308, 643

DeVore, C. R., & Antiochos, S. K. 2008, ApJ, 680,

740, doi: 10.1086/588011

Fan, Y., & Gibson, S. E. 2003, The Astrophysical

Journal, 589, L105, doi: 10.1086/375834

—. 2004, The Astrophysical Journal, 609, 1123,

doi: 10.1086/421238

—. 2007, ApJ, 668, 1232, doi: 10.1086/521335

Filippov, B. 2020, MNRAS, 494, 2166,

doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa896

Gary, G. A. 2001, SoPh, 203, 71,

doi: 10.1023/A:1012722021820

Gibson, S. E., Fletcher, L., Del Zanna, G., et al.

2002, ApJ, 574, 1021, doi: 10.1086/341090

Gilbert, H. R., Alexander, D., & Liu, R. 2007,

Solar Physics, 245, 287,

doi: 10.1007/s11207-007-9045-z

Gilbert, H. R., Holzer, T. E., Burkepile, J. T., &

Hundhausen, A. J. 2000, ApJ, 537, 503,

Bobra, M. G., van Ballegooijen, A. A., & DeLuca,

doi: 10.1086/309030

E. E. 2008, ApJ, 672, 1209, doi: 10.1086/523927

Guidoni, S. E., DeVore, C. R., Karpen, J. T., &

Chen, J., Liu, R., Liu, K., et al. 2020, ApJ, 890,

Lynch, B. J. 2016, ApJ, 820, 60,

158, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab6def

doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/820/1/60

28

Chen et al.

Guo, Y., Ding, M. D., Schmieder, B., et al. 2010,

Kliem, B., T¨or¨ok, T., Titov, V. S., et al. 2014,

ApJL, 725, L38,

The Astrophysical Journal, 792, 107,

doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/725/1/L38

doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/792/2/107

Guo, Y., Xia, C., & Keppens, R. 2016, ApJ, 828,

Kusano, K., Iju, T., Bamba, Y., & Inoue, S. 2020,

83, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/828/2/83

Science, 369, 587, doi: 10.1126/science.aaz2511

Hassanin, A., & Kliem, B. 2016, The

Astrophysical Journal, 832, 106,

doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/832/2/106

Lemen, J. R., Title, A. M., Akin, D. J., et al. 2012,

SoPh, 275, 17, doi: 10.1007/s11207-011-9776-8

Li, S., Su, Y., Zhou, T., et al. 2017, ApJ, 844, 70,

Hood, A. W., & Priest, E. R. 1979, Solar Physics,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa78f5

64, 303, doi: 10.1007/BF00151441

Liu, C., Cao, W., Chae, J., et al. 2018a, ApJ, 869,

Hundhausen, A. 1999, in The many faces of the

sun: a summary of the results from NASA’s

Solar Maximum Mission., ed. K. T. Strong,

21, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaecd0

Liu, L., Cheng, X., Wang, Y., et al. 2018b, ApJL,

867, L5, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aae826

J. L. R. Saba, B. M. Haisch, & J. T. Schmelz,

Liu, R. 2020, Research in Astronomy and

143

Ishiguro, N., & Kusano, K. 2017, ApJ, 843, 101,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa799b

Janvier, M., Savcheva, A., Pariat, E., et al. 2016,

A&A, 591, A141,

doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201628406

Ji, H., Wang, H., Schmahl, E. J., Moon, Y. J., &

Jiang, Y. 2003, The Astrophysical Journal, 595,

L135, doi: 10.1086/378178

Kliem, B., Chintzoglou, G., Torok, T., Zhang, J.,

& Downs, C. 2016, in AGU Fall Meeting

Abstracts, SH13B–2292

Astrophysics, 20, 165,

doi: 10.1088/1674-4527/20/10/165

Liu, R., Chen, J., & Wang, Y. 2018c, Science

China Physics, Mechanics, and Astronomy, 61,

69611, doi: 10.1007/s11433-017-9147-x

Liu, R., Kliem, B., T¨or¨ok, T., et al. 2012, The

Astrophysical Journal, 756, 59,

doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/756/1/59

Liu, R., Kliem, B., Titov, V. S., et al. 2016, The

Astrophysical Journal, 818, 148,

doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/818/2/148

Liu, T., Su, Y., Cheng, X., van Ballegooijen, A., &

Ji, H. 2018d, The Astrophysical Journal, 868,

Kliem, B., Lee, J., Liu, R., et al. 2021, ApJ, 909,

59, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aae692

91, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abda37

Masson, S., Pariat, E., Aulanier, G., & Schrijver,

Kliem, B., & T¨or¨ok, T. 2006, PhRvL, 96, 255002,

C. J. 2009, The Astrophysical Journal, 700, 559,

doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.96.255002

doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/700/1/559

29

Myers, C. E., Yamada, M., Ji, H., et al. 2015,

Su, Y.-n. 2019, ChA&A, 43, 305,

Nature, 528, 526, doi: 10.1038/nature16188

doi: 10.1016/j.chinastron.2018.09.011

Pan, H., Liu, R., Gou, T., et al. 2021, ApJ, 909,

Tang, F. 1986, SoPh, 105, 399,

32, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abda4e

doi: 10.1007/BF00172056

Parker, E. N. 1974, ApJ, 191, 245,

doi: 10.1086/152961

Titov, V. S., Hornig, G., & D´emoulin, P. 2002,

Journal of Geophysical Research (Space

Pesnell, W. D., Thompson, B. J., & Chamberlin,

Physics), 107, 1164, doi: 10.1029/2001JA000278

P. C. 2012, Solar Physics, 275, 3,

doi: 10.1007/s11207-011-9841-3

Pevtsov, A. A. 2002, SoPh, 207, 111,

doi: 10.1023/A:1015589802234

Plunkett, S. P., Vourlidas, A., ˇSimberov´a, S., et al.

2000, SoPh, 194, 371,

doi: 10.1023/A:1005287524302

Priest, E. R. 2014, Magnetohydrodynamics of the

Sun (Cambridge, UK: CUP),

doi: 10.1017/CBO9781139020732

Savcheva, A., Pariat, E., McKillop, S., et al. 2016,

ApJ, 817, 43, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/817/1/43

—. 2015, ApJ, 810, 96,

doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/810/2/96

Schou, J., Scherrer, P. H., Bush, R. I., et al. 2012,

SoPh, 275, 229, doi: 10.1007/s11207-011-9842-2

Su, Y., Liu, R., Li, S., et al. 2018, The

Astrophysical Journal, 855, 77,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaac31

Su, Y., Surges, V., van Ballegooijen, A., DeLuca,

E., & Golub, L. 2011, ApJ, 734, 53,

doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/734/1/53

T¨or¨ok, T., & Kliem, B. 2005, The Astrophysical

Journal, 630, L97, doi: 10.1086/462412

T¨or¨ok, T., Kliem, B., & Titov, V. S. 2004, A&A,

413, L27, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20031691

van Ballegooijen, A. A. 2004, ApJ, 612, 519,

doi: 10.1086/422512

van Ballegooijen, A. A., Priest, E. R., & Mackay,

D. H. 2000, ApJ, 539, 983, doi: 10.1086/309265

van Tend, W., & Kuperus, M. 1978, SoPh, 59,

115, doi: 10.1007/BF00154935

Wang, D., Liu, R., Wang, Y., et al. 2017, ApJL,

843, L9, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa79f0

Wang, H., & Liu, C. 2012, The Astrophysical

Journal, 760, 101,

doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/760/2/101

Wang, H., Liu, C., Deng, N., et al. 2014, ApJL,

781, L23, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/781/1/L23

Wang, S., Liu, C., Liu, R., et al. 2012, ApJL, 745,

L17, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/745/2/L17

Yang, S., & Zhang, J. 2018, ApJL, 860, L25,

doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aacaf9

Su, Y., van Ballegooijen, A., McCauley, P., et al.

Yang, S., Zhang, J., Song, Q., Bi, Y., & Li, T.

2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 807, 144,

2019, ApJ, 878, 38,

doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/807/2/144

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab1f67

30

Chen et al.

Yang, W. H., Sturrock, P. A., & Antiochos, S. K.

Zhu, C., Liu, R., Alexander, D., Sun, X., &

1986, ApJ, 309, 383, doi: 10.1086/164610

McAteer, R. T. J. 2015, The Astrophysical

Zheng, R., Yang, S., Rao, C., et al. 2019, The

Journal, 813, 60,

Astrophysical Journal, 875, 71,

doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/813/1/60

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab0f3f

Zhu, C., & Alexander, D. 2014, Solar Physics, 289,

279, doi: 10.1007/s11207-013-0349-x

31

Table 1. The Evolution of Free Energy, Helicity, and Local Twist

Efree/Epoten Hr/F 2

u < Tw >box < Tw >FR

Iteration

(10−3)

(10−4)

( 10−2)

(10−2)

5000

30,000

90,000

9.77

5.60

3.22

-3.89

-3.86

-3.32

7.39

5.29

3.84

-24.87

-20.49

-2.32

Note. Global non-potential measures including: magnetic free energy (Efree) divided by the potential ﬁeld energy, ﬂux-normalized

relative magnetic helicity (Hr/F 2

u ), average local twist of the HIRES region (< Tw >box), and average twist of the ﬂux rope of the best-ﬁt

model (< Tw >FR) after diﬀerent iterative relaxations. The potential ﬁeld energy is 1.1 × 1033 erg.

32

Chen et al.

Figure 1. Overview of the activities prior to the main ﬂare. (a) GOES 1 − 8˚A soft X-ray light curve

from 19:00 UT to 23:59 UT. The gray dashed lines refer to the start (19:10 UT) and end (21:08 UT) time

of the ﬁlament oscillation. The black dashed and solid lines represent the peak time of the precursor and

main ﬂares. (b) Time–distance plot of the ﬁlament oscillation. (c)–(f) Images of the double-decker ﬁlaments

(white arrows) before and after the eruption in 304 ˚A (AIA) and Hα (GONG). The white dashed line in

panel (d) shows the position of the selected slit for the plot in panel (b). (g)–(j) Intermittent bright ejections

(white arrows) from the northwest footpoint of the lower ﬁlament towards the northeast, observed in 131 ˚A

(AIA) before the eruption. (k)–(n) Evolution of the precursor ﬂare observed in AIA 304 ˚A.

20406080100120X (arcsec)-220-200-180-160-140-120Y (arcsec)upper filamentlower filamentAIA 304 18:44:45 UT(Pre-eruption)-40-200204060-220-200-180-160-140-120-100GONG/Hα18:45:14 UT(Pre-eruption)6080100120140160-220-200-180-160-140-120lower filamentupper filamentAIA 304 22:52:09 UT(Post-eruption)-40-200204060-220-200-180-160-140-120-100GONG/Hα22:50:14 UT(Post-eruption)lower filamentupper filament20406080100120140X (arcsec)-220-200-180-160-140-120Y (arcsec)AIA 131 19:58:46 UT406080100120140-220-200-180-160-140-120AIA 131 20:52:46 UT406080100120140160-220-200-180-160-140-120AIA 131 21:48:34 UT406080100120140160-220-200-180-160-140-120AIA 131 22:08:58 UT406080100120140160X (arcsec)-220-200-180-160-140-120Y (arcsec)AIA 304 22:13:31 UT406080100120140160-220-200-180-160-140-120AIA 304 22:15:55 UTwrapping406080100120140160-220-200-180-160-140-120AIA 304 22:17:07 UTR1R2406080100120140160-220-200-180-160-140-120AIA 304 22:21:45 UTR3R1R2(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h)(i)(j)(k)(l)(m)(n)33

Figure 2. Left panel: AIA 171 ˚A image overlaid with red (positive) and black (negative) contours rep-

resenting the LOS photospheric magnetic ﬁelds observed by HMI. Right panel: temporal evolution of the

total unsigned LOS magnetic ﬁeld strength (red) and the average horizontal magnetic ﬁeld strength (blue)

within the region enclosed by the white box in the left panel. The pink lines mark the peak times of the

precursor ﬂare (22:20 UT) and the main ﬂare (22:43 UT), respectively. The gray dashed lines refer to the

time of the intermittent ejections shown in the third row of Figure 1. An animation of the AIA 171 ˚A images

overlaid with red (positive) and black (negative) contours representing the LOS photospheric magnetic ﬁelds

observed by HMI with the same ﬁeld of view as the left panel, covering the time interval from 18:29 UT on

July 5 to 05:58 UT on July 6, is available. The real time duration of the animation is 15 s.

(An animation of this ﬁgure is available.)

34

Chen et al.

Figure 3. Twisted internal structure of the erupting ﬁlament and release of twist during the main ﬂare.

Four snapshots in 304, 335, and 94 ˚A taken by AIA are presented in the top, middle, and bottom rows,

respectively. First column: the eruption begins and the upper ﬁlament starts to rise. Second column: the

erupting upper ﬁlament nearly reaches its maximum height. A clearly twisted structure (white arrow) is

best seen in AIA 335 ˚A. Third column: the erupted ﬁlament untwists during its draining from the terminal

position at the west side of the C-shaped ﬁlament channel. Fourth column: after the eruption, the upper

ﬁlament evolves into a much less twisted structure. The C-shaped (outer) and inner ribbons of the main

ﬂare are marked as R4 and R5, respectively, and the corresponding ﬂare loops are marked with pink arrows

in the bottom row. An animation of the AIA 304, 335, and 94 ˚A images with the same ﬁeld of view as the

ﬁrst column of this ﬁgure, covering the time interval from 22:05 UT to 23:00 UT, is available. The real time

duration of the animation is 4 s.

(An animation of this ﬁgure is available.)

20015010050R5R5R5R5R5R535

Figure 4. Longitude–latitude map of the radial component of photospheric magnetic ﬁeld in the HIRES

region of the model taken by SDO/HMI at 22:00 UT. The blue lines ending in circles show the selected

ﬁlament paths for inserting the ﬂux ropes. The yellow line (start location marked as a red asterisk) refers

to the location of the vertical slices in Figures 6–8. Positive and negative polarity are shown in white and

black, respectively. The white box marks the approximate ﬁeld of view (FOV) of Figures 5(a)–(b) and the

FOV of the left two columns of Figure 6, and the FOV of Figure 8(h). The left and right magenta asterisks

mark the positions of the solid and dashed curves representing the decay index in Figure 10.

S=0*U1U2L1L2SDO/HMI 2014−07−05 22:00 UT**36

Chen et al.

Figure 5. Results from the potential ﬁeld model. (a) Selected ﬁeld lines from the potential ﬁeld model

overlaid on the AIA image in the 304 ˚A channel taken at 22:02 UT. The same ﬁeld lines viewed from

anther angle are shown in (b). The red and green contours represent the positive and negative photospheric

magnetic ﬁeld at 22:00 UT, respectively. (c) Photospheric log Q map for the potential ﬁeld model. (d)–(f)

Diﬀerent views of three-dimensional high-Q (log Q = 4) isosurfaces. The ﬁeld of view of the X − Y plane is

similar to that in panel (c), and the Z-axis unit is the cell size of our model (1 cell ∼ 0.7 Mm).

(e)(f)(c)(b)SDO/AIA 304 2014−07−05 22:02 UT(a)(d)37

Figure 6. The ﬁrst column shows three AIA images in 304 ˚A before, during, and after the failed ﬁlament

eruption. Top and side views of selected ﬁeld lines from the best-ﬁt model after 5000, 30,000, and 90,000

relaxation iterations are presented in the second and third columns. The ﬁeld lines were selected for each

iteration individually. The fourth column displays the corresponding distribution of the current density

(gray-scale image) and magnetic vectors (black and white) in a vertical slice at the position of the yellow

line in Figure 4. The intersections of the ﬁeld lines with the plane of the slice are marked with white dots.

The red and green contours represent the positive and negative polarities observed by HMI at 22:00 UT,

respectively. The axis unit in the right column is the cell size of our model.

SDO/AIA 304 2014−07−05 22:35 UTE_free=1.08e31 ergE_free=6.16e30 ergE_free=3.54e30 ergSDO/AIA 304 2014−07−05 22:52 UTUpperLowerLowerUpperUpperLowerLowerUpperUpperUpperLowerLowerUpperLowerUpperLowerSDO/AIA 304 2014−07−05 22:02 UTi=5000i=5000i=5000i=30000i=30000i=30000i=90000i=90000i=9000038

Chen et al.

Figure 7. Maps of log Q for the best-ﬁt model and comparison with observations. log Q maps at a height

of z = 1.8 Mm (top row) and vertical slices of log Q map (middle row) after diﬀerent magnetofrictional

iteration steps along the yellow line with the start point marked as a black asterisk, which is the same as

the yellow line in Figure 4. The axis unit in the middle row is the cell size of our model. Bottom row: log Q

map for the model after 90,000 iterations of relaxation at a height of 2 Mm above the solar surface (g) and

the same log Q map (blue) superimposed in the image observed in 304 ˚A by AIA (h). Green arrows in the

middle row mark the plate-shaped QSL. The red arrow in the bottom row marks the high-Q area on the

eastern side of the inserted ﬂux ropes.

39

Figure 8. Evolution of local magnetic twist Tw in the non-potential model. (a)–(c) Photospheric Tw maps

after diﬀerent iterations of the magnetofrictional relaxation. (d)–(f) Corresponding vertical Tw maps along

the yellow line marked in Figure 4. Green contour: |Tw| = 1.0; Pink contour: |Tw| = 1.75. (g)–(i) Vertical

maps of the current density in the same vertical slice overlaid with in-plane ﬁeld vectors. The approximate

axis positions of the upper and lower ﬂux bundle are marked with blue and green arrows, respectively. The

critical height for the onset of the torus instability is shown by a magenta asterisk, in (g)–(h). The axis unit

in the bottom two rows is the cell size of our model.

UpperUpperLowerLower(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)LowerLowerLowerLowerUpper(g)(h)(i)UpperUpperUpper**40

Chen et al.

Figure 9. Change of the selected ﬁeld lines with ﬁxed southern footpoints (marked with a red asterisk)

from 30,000 (top row) to 90,000 iterations (bottom row). The left and middle columns show the ﬁeld lines

going through the vertical log Q and Tw maps of Figures 7 and 8. The bottom image in each panel shows

the LOS photospheric magnetogram taken at 22:00 UT by HMI. The right panel shows the selected ﬁeld

lines overlaid on the photospheric Tw maps from the observation view angle. An animation of the ﬁeld line

plots with the same ﬁeld of view as the third column of this ﬁgure, covering the time interval from i=5000

to i=90,000, is available. The real time duration of the animation is 2 s.

(An animation of this ﬁgure is available.)

Figure 10. Decay index height proﬁles (left panel) computed from the horizontal component of the potential

ﬁeld (right panel). The positions of the solid and dashed curves relevant at i=5000 and i=30,000, respectively,

are marked as magenta asterisks in Figures 8(g) and (h), as well as in Figure 4.

(d)(b)(e)**i=30000i=90000(f)(c)(a)