FACEATLASAR: ATLAS OF FACIAL ACUPUNCTURE 
POINTS IN AUGMENTED REALITY 

Menghe Zhang1, Jürgen P. Schulze2, and Dong Zhang3 

1,2Department of Computer Science, University of California, San Diego 
1mez071@ucsd.edu, 2jschulze@ucsd.edu 
3Qilu University of Technology, Shandong, China 
jnzd156@163.com 

ABSTRACT 

Acupuncture is a technique in which practitioners stimulate specific points on the body. Those points, called 
acupuncture points (or acupoints), anatomically define areas on the skin relative to specific landmarks on 
the  body.  However,  mapping  the  acupoints  to  individuals  could  be  challenging  for  inexperienced 
acupuncturists.  In  this  project,  we  proposed  a  system  to  localize  and  visualize  facial  acupoints  for 
individuals in an augmented reality (AR) context. This system combines a face alignment model and a hair 
segmentation model to provide dense reference points for acupoints localization in real-time (60FPS). The 
localization  process  takes  the  proportional  bone  (B-cun  or  skeletal)  measurement  method,  which  is 
commonly operated by specialists; however, in the real practice, operators sometimes find it inaccurate 
due to the skill-related error. With this system, users, even without any skills, can locate the facial acupoints 
as a part of the self-training or self-treatment process. 

KEYWORDS 

Augmented reality; Acupuncture point; Face alignment; Hair segmentation 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

Acupuncture [1] is a form of alternative medicine and a key component of traditional Chinese 
medicine  (TCM).  Based  on  the  symptoms,  acupuncturists  stimulate  specific  anatomic  sites 
commonly  by  needling,  massaging,  or  heat  therapy.  Scientific  studies  have  proved  that 
acupuncture may help ease types of pain that are often chronic such as low-back pain, neck pain, 
and osteoarthritis/knee pain. The acupoints on the face can help with a variety of conditions both 
on and off the face, such as jaw tension, headaches, anxiety, and stomach conditions. 

However, acupuncture practice relies on experienced acupuncturists to locate the acupoints from 
body  acupuncture  maps.  Individuals,  who  want  to  help  themselves  relieve  symptoms  with 
acupoints  stimulation,  usually  find  it  confusing  to  localize  the  targets  by  natural  language 
description or pictures of a standard model. 

With the help of augmented reality, we designed a system to display facial acupoints on the top 
of  the  user’s  face  to  accurately  view  and  localize  facial  acupuncture  points.  Specifically,  we 
employ a deep learning model to annotate 3D landmarks and on a user’s face together with hair 
segmentation in real-time to gather reference points for acupuncture points localization. We then 
align  the  reference  point  with  acupuncture  points  defined  by  proportional  bone  measurement 
method. The whole process is implemented via MediaPipe [2], a framework for building cross-
platform machine learning solutions. Our system works perfectly on phones with a front camera, 
without any extra hardware, users could pinpoint and interact with the target acupoints. There are 
three benefits to this application: 

 
• 

• 
• 

It takes a conventional localization method while originally defines a scheme to transform 
the natural language descriptions to mathematical logic expressions. 
It adopts MediaPipe framework to run across platforms in real-time. 
It adapts to different head poses to be robust for users to locate acupoints in different 
regions. 

With FaceAtlasAR, people who have little or no experience in localizing facial acupuncture points 
can  use.  Potential  use  scenarios  for  our  applications  are  varied,  for  example,  acupuncture 
education, communication, and self-healing. 

2.  RELATED WORK 

2.1. Acupuncture Points Localization 

Existing works of acupuncture training applications on AR devices are limited. In 2015, H. Jiang 
et al. [3] proposed the first acupuncture training application, Acu Glass, on a head-mount display 
device (HMD) based on Google Glass. They generated the frontal face acupoints based on the 
height and the width of the input face, plus the distance between the eyes. However, their face 
landmarks for reference are too limited to adapt to different people and different poses of the face. 
Other  acupoints  localization  methods  like  Chen  et  al.  [4][5]  fit  a  3D  Morphable  Face  Model 
(3DMM) [6] to a 2D image and combine facial landmarks and image deformation to estimate 
acupoints. Although 3DMM is a powerful tool to build polygonal mesh, the range of possible 
predictions  is  limited  by  the  linear  manifold  spanned  by  the  PCA  basis,  which  is  in  turn 
determined  by  the  diversity  of  the  set  of  faces  captured  for  the  model  [7].  Therefore,  manual 
annotation on a standard 3D model may not correctly fit all kinds of people. Moreover, acupoints 
are officially defined relative to landmarks, while the deformation process does not guarantee the 
relativeness. 

As  for the localization methods  in  practice,  Godson  and  Wardle  [8]  screened 771  studies  and 
summarized  the  methods  as  Directional(F-cun)  method,  Proportional  method,  palpation  for 
tenderness,  electronic  point  detectors,  and  anatomical  locations.  Usually,  more  accurate 
approaches are the next steps to less accurate ones and require extra hardware. For example, one 
can roughly locate a target by the directional method and then use electronic point detectors to 
measure the electrical resistance of the skin. There is research related to this topic and acupoint 
probing devices available in the market. 

2.2. Face Alignment 

Face alignment is a computer vision technology for identifying the geometric structure of human 
faces in digital images. Bulat and Tzimiropoulos [9] reviewed 2D and 3D face alignment and 
landmark  localization.  Existing  2D  and  3D  datasets  annotate  a  limited  set  of  landmarks.  For 
example,  300-W  [10],  the  most  widely  used  in-the-wild  dataset  for  2D  alignment,  containing 
LFPW  [11],  HELEN  [12],  AFW  [13],  and  iBUG  [10],  annotates  only  68  landmarks  per  face. 
These landmarks either have distinct semantics of their own or participate in meaningful facial 
contours. Works based on them are not suitable for our cases. We finally adopted the work of 
Kartynnik et al. [7], which estimates 3D mesh with 468 vertices in real-time. The vertices are 
selected manually according to expressive AR effects, thus well suitable for our requirements. 

3.  SYSTEM OVERVIEW 

Our facial localization solution utilizes the MediaPipe machine learning pipeline consisting of an 
off-line stage and an on-line stage (Fig.1). 

Figure 1: Workflow of the proposed system 

During the off-line stage: 

•  Model selection: Based on the definition of the referenced points on a face, we choose 
to blend a pre-trained face alignment model and a pre-trained hair segmentation model. 
This  is  because  a  single  model  cannot  cover  the  whole  set  of  target  regions,  while 
different parts of the regions are in the different reference systems. 

•  Acupoints  localization:  We  firstly  localize  facial  anatomical  landmarks,  which  are 
designated by the National Standard of the People’s Republic of China. We then use the 
proportional bone (B-cun or skeletal) measurement method to locate all acupoints on the 
face. 

•  Data  file  generation:  The  file  contains  all  the  information  needed  for  each 
acupoint/reference point, including name, region, relative location towards a landmark or 
a reference point. The file is readable for non-technical users, for example, acupuncturists, 
to correct less accurate acupoint descriptions by natural language. 

Then at the on-line stage, the system gets face landmarks together with hair segmentation and 
merges those results into acupoints generator. The generator gives out the requested acupoints on 
this frame based on the prior knowledge and then draw on the input face. 

We fit the whole process into MediaPipe’s perception pipeline as a graph of modular components. 
Each  component,  called  Calculator,  solves  an  individual  task  like  model  inference,  data 
transformation, or annotation. We will talk about the implementation details in the next section. 
We show the graph for our FaceAtlasAR in Figure 2. 

The graph consists of two subgraphs: one for face alignment (FaceLandmarkFrontGpu) and the 
other  for  hair  segmentation  (HairSegmentationGpu). From the  graph,  we  see the  FlowLimiter 
guards the whole pipeline process. By connecting the output of the final image to the FlowLimiter 
with a backward edge, the FlowLimiter keeps track of how many timestamps are currently being 
processed. The system will down-sample and transform the original image before fusing the input 
to machine learning models but will draw the results onto the original frames. The next section 
will show the implementation of each module in detail. 

4.  IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1  Face Alignment 

We adopted a pre-trained TFLite model [7] to infer an approximate 3D mesh representation of a 
human face. 

 
Figure 2: The graph of FaceAtlasAR 

This process comprises of majorly three steps: 

•  Face detection: The whole frame is first processed by a lightweight face detector to get 
the face bounding box and several landmarks, thus, to get the rotation matrix of the face. 
This step only runs until the system finds a face to track or when the system loses tracking. 

• 

Image transformation: The image is then cropped by the bounding box and resized to 
fit into the next step. After this step, the target region is centered and aligned. 

•  Face landmarks generation: The pre-trained model produces a vector of 3D landmark 
coordinates,  which  subsequently  gets  mapped  back  into  the  original  image  coordinate 
system. 

Then from a canonical face mesh model, we extract those vertices with semantic meaning as the 
reference points (Fig.3). 

Figure 3: The generated mesh topology(a), its vertices with index(b), and viewed in AR(c) 

4.2. Hair Segmentation 

Since the center of the frontal hairline is a critical facial anatomical landmark according to the 
national standard, we adopted a pre-trained model [14] to get the hair segmentation mask. Similar 
to the face alignment process, the previously generated mask can be fed back to help accelerate 
the process. Specifically, the mask from the previous round of inference will be embedded as the 
alpha channel of the current input image (Fig.4). 

 
 
RGB Image(current frame) 

Concatenated RGBA image, 
alpha from last frame 

Mask prediction 

Figure 4: Hair segmentation module 

4.3. Facial Acupoints Localization 

Given the hair mask together with face landmarks, we now could locate facial acupoints based on 
the B-cun method. This refers to the method of measuring the length and width of each part of 
the body with the body surface condyles as the main landmark and determining the position of 
acupoints. Then, a unit “cun” is the length between the set two bone nodes divided into certain 
equal parts as the basis for setting acupoints. The facial acupoints bank on the unit cun’s definition 
of the head as shown in Figure 5. To start with, we locate three facial anatomical landmarks in 
consonance with the national standard. In order to differentiate these three points to acupoints, 
we group them in the channel named RHD: 

•  RHD1, Yintang: The midway between the medial ends of the eyebrows. 

•  RHD2,  Middle  of  anterior  hairline:  Intersection  of  anterior  hairline  and  anterior 

midline. 

•  RHD3, Pupils 

                         (a) B-cun on the font face 

(b) B-cun on the side face 

Figure 5: B-cun on the head from National Standard of the People’s Republic of China, 
Acupoints [15]. Pictures from [16]. 

Table 1: Information of an example acupoint Sibai (ST2) in the data file. 

Channel Name 
ST 

ID 
2 

NameE 
Sibai 

Region 
eye 

FaceMeshX 
GetX(RHD3) 

FaceMeshY 
GetY(ST1)+0.5*U 

IsSymmetry 
TRUE 

Comments 
- 

 
 
 
From Fig.5b, the distance from Yintang to Middle of anterior hairline,  d = (pRHD1 - pRHD2),  decides 
the unit cun as 𝑢𝑐 = 𝑑/3. 

On that occasion, like RHD points definition, we could locate all facial acupoints. Table1 shows 
an example of what information we keep for each acupoint. All points’ information finally makes 
up to a data file. 

There is one more aspect we want to specify, the channel name, which refers to a unique meridian 
channel. The meridian system[17] is a concept in TCM about a path through which the life-energy 
is known as "qi" flows. There are 12 standard and 8 extraordinary meridians, while acupoints are 
the chosen sites on the meridian system. We group the acupoints on the same meridian channel 
and connect them by the flow. For example, the previously stated acupoint, Sibai, belongs to the 
ST(Foot’s Yang Supreme Stomach Meridian) channel. Acupoints on the ST channel and their 
flow are illustrated in the Figure 6. 

Figure 6: Illustration of ST channel on the head. Picture from [18] 

5.  RESULTS 

We achieve real-time performance on both desktop and mobile devices by designing the pipeline 
properly.  We  show  the  final  application  below  and  compare  the  performance  on  different 
platforms. 

5.1. Android Application 

Figure 7: Android application screenshots for displaying acupoints grouped by meridian system 
in different poses 

 
 
Figure  7  presents  the  screenshots  from  our  FaceAtlasAR  android  app.  Here  we  show  the 
visualization  of  acupoints  grouped  by  meridian  channels  in  different  poses.  Thanks  to  the 
robustness  of  face  alignment  towards  occlusion,  users  would  not  find  problems  pointing  or 
pressing a target acupoint (Fig. 8). 

Figure 8: User presses an acupoint on ST meridian channel 

5.2. Accuracy 

We setup an experiment on Samsung S10(2280 × 1080) to valid the accuracy of our 
FaceAtlasAR to localize 4 reference points and 69 acupuncture points on face by comparing the 
mean pixel errors between ground truth positions and the localization results. Initially, we 
assign all the target positions into three groups by the localization complexity as shown in the 
Table 2. 

Table 2: Data file parsing performance 

Quantity 

Reference points 
Acupoints 

Directly from face 
alignment results  

One-time proportional 
localization 

Multiple-times 
proportional localization  

3 
38 

1 
16 

0 
15 

We then investigate the mean pixel errors in 3 groups. For each localization points, we measure 
the pixel errors in 4 different poses: frontal face (0o), pitch (X-axis +10o), roll (Y-axis +10o), 
yaw (Z-axis +10o) to get the mean value. The results are shown in Figure 9. 

 
 
 
Figure 9: Mean pixel errors of localization 

From the results we found that some of the localizations are less precise than others. Especially, 
the system performs worse on group 2 than group 1 and group 3 than group 2. Accordingly, 
multiple times of proportional calculations that rely on the cun system add inaccuracy to the 
results. The system tolerates to different angles to some extent. However, a target point will be 
more well localized when it is point straight to the camera without any angles. 

5.3. Performance 

We evaluate the performance of our pipeline in three major components: face alignment, hair 
segmentation,  and  acupoints  generation.  Since  the  application  runs  on  multiple  platforms,  we 
compare its performance on a desktop with Nvidia GeForce RTX 2070 SUPER and on a Samsung 
S10. The input images for two TFLite models are both in full size 512×512. We see that in this 
case, Samsung S10 still runs in full frame rate (60FPS). More detailed comparison is as in Table 
3. We also evaluate the performance of data file parsing (Table 2), which only runs once at the 
setup stage. 

Table 3: Data file parsing performance 

Device/Time, ms 

Desktop 
Samsung S10 

File parser 
0.102 
0.279 

Table 4: Application performance on a desktop and a mobile device 

Device/Time(ms)  Hair segmentation 

Desktop 
Samsung S10 

1.188 
50.279 

Face alignment 
3.376 
14.673 

Generation 
0.135 
0.512 

Overall 
10.56 
84.758 

6.  DISCUSSION 

From the results we could see that: 

 
 
•  Our system can properly display the requested acupoints on selected meridian channels. 

•  The system tolerates movements very well, while endures tilt and rotation to some degree. 

•  The benefit from head rotation is that: when the acupoints are hidden in one view, they 
will  be  visible  and  more  accurate  in  another  one.  For  example,  the  frontal  face  hides 
acupoints in the ear region; thus, to view them around the left ear properly, the user needs 
to turn his/her head so that the left ear faces the camera. 

Our next step is to improve the face alignment performance on the side of the head. There are 
dozens of acupuncture points around the ears that represent specific domain and functions of the 
body. However, most face alignment jobs only require a small set of landmarks. Even though the 
model we adopted can estimate 3D mesh with 468 vertices, it still neglects both sides of the head 
and loses some accuracy at the cheeks and chins. Therefore, we could only roughly estimate those 
acupoints’ positions based on the proportional relations to other landmarks on face, which is less 
meticulous.  

7.  CONCLUSION 

In this paper, we proposed FaceAtlasAR, an end-to-end facial acupoints tracking solution that 
achieves real-time performance on mobile devices. Our pipeline integrates a face alignment model 
with a hair segmentation model. The high accuracy of the estimation and the robustness of the 
system  empower  users  with  little  experience  in  acupuncture  to  interact  with  facial  acupoints. 
Future  work  comes  to  improving  the  accuracy  even  further  in  the  ear  region  since  the  face 
alignment  only  gives  a  little  information  towards  the  face  edge  near  the  ear  region.  Also,  3D 
interaction should be considered for users to gain a more immersive experience. For example, we 
could track users’ hands/fingers while they are interacting with a target acupoint. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Wikipedia. Acupuncture. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acupuncture#cite_note-3. 2020. 

[2]  Camillo Lugaresi et al. “Mediapipe: A framework for building perception pipelines”. In: 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08172 (2019). 

[3] 

Fang  Li  et  al.  “What  is  the  Acupoint?  A  preliminary  review  of  Acupoints”.  In:  Pain 
Medicine 16.10 (2015), pp. 1905–1915. 

[4]  Yi-Zhang  Chen  et  al.  “Localization  of  Acupoints  using  Augmented  Reality”.  In: 

Proceedings of the 8th ACM on Multimedia Systems Conference. 2017, pp. 239–241. 

[5]  Kun-Chan Lan, Guan-Sheng Li, and Jun-Xiang Zhang. “Toward Automated Acupressure 
Therapy”. In: Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor 
Systems. 2018, pp. 384–385. 

[6] 

Patrik Huber et al. “A multiresolution 3d morphable face model and fitting framework”. 
In: 
Proceedings of the 11th International Joint Conference on Computer Vision, Imaging and 
Computer Graphics Theory and Applications. 2016. 

[7]  Yury  Kartynnik  et  al.  “Real-time  Facial  Surface  Geometry  from  Monocular  Video  on 

Mobile GPUs”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.06724 (2019). 

[8]  Debra R Godson and Jonathan L Wardle. “Accuracy and precision in acupuncture point 
location: a critical systematic review”. In: Journal of acupuncture and meridian studies 
12.2 (2019), pp. 52–66. 

[9]  Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos. “How far are we from solving the 2d & 3d 
face alignment problem?(and a dataset of 230,000 3d facial landmarks)”. In: Proceedings 
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision. 2017, pp. 1021–1030. 

[10]  Christos Sagonas et al. “A semi-automatic methodology for facial landmark annotation”. 

In: 
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition 
workshops. 2013, pp. 896–903. 

[11]  Peter N Belhumeur et al. “Localizing parts of faces using a consensus of exemplars”. In: 
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 35.12 (2013), pp. 2930– 
2940. 

[12]  Vuong  Le  et  al.  “Interactive  facial  feature  localization”.  In:  European  conference  on 

computer vision. Springer. 2012, pp. 679–692. 

[13]  Xiangxin  Zhu  and  Deva  Ramanan.  “Face  detection,  pose  estimation,  and  landmark 
localization  in  the  wild”.  In:  2012  IEEE  conference  on  computer  vision  and  pattern 
recognition. IEEE. 2012, pp. 2879–2886. 

[14]  Andrei Tkachenka et al. “Real-time Hair Segmentation and Recoloring on Mobile GPUs”. 

In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.06740 (2019). 

[15]  Unknown.  National  Standard  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  Acupoints.  https:// 

musculoskeletalkey.com/ynsa-basic-points/. 2005. 

[16]  Unknown. YNSA Basic Points. https://musculoskeletalkey.com/ynsa-basic-points/. 2017. 

[17]  Wikipedia.  Meridian 

(Chinese  medicine). 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meridian_ 

(Chinese_medicine). 2020. 

[18]  Unknown. Atlas Of Acupuncture Points. www.AcupunctureProducts.com. 2007. 

Authors 

Menghe Zhang  

Graduate student, University of California, San Diego 

Jürgen P. Schulze 

Associate Research Scientist, Qualcomm Institute, UCSD 

Associate Adjunct Professor, Department of Computer Science, UCSD 

Dong Zhang 

Research Scientist, Qilu University of Technology 

 
 
 
 
 
 
