Recognition of Tactile-related EEG Signals
Generated by Self-touch

Myoung-Ki Kim
Dept. Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Korea University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
LG Display
kim mk@korea.ac.kr

Jeong-Hyun Cho
Dept. Brain and Cognitive Engineering
Korea University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
jh cho@korea.ac.kr

Hye-Bin Shin
Dept. Brain and Cognitive Engineering
Korea University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
hb shin@korea.ac.kr

1
2
0
2
c
e
D
4
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
2
1
7
0
.
2
1
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Touch is the ﬁrst sense among human senses. Not
only that, but it is also one of the most important senses that
are indispensable. However, compared to sight and hearing, it
is often neglected. In particular, since humans use the tactile
sense of the skin to recognize and manipulate objects, without
tactile sensation,
it is very difﬁcult to recognize or skillfully
manipulate objects. In addition, the importance and interest
of haptic technology related to touch are increasing with the
development of technologies such as VR and AR in recent
years. So far, the focus is only on haptic technology based on
mechanical devices. Especially, there are not many studies on
tactile sensation in the ﬁeld of brain-computer interface based
on EEG. There have been some studies that measured the
surface roughness of artiﬁcial structures in relation to EEG-
based tactile sensation. However, most studies have used passive
contact methods in which the object moves, while the human
subject remains still. Additionally, there have been no EEG-based
tactile studies of active skin touch. In reality, we directly move
our hands to feel the sense of touch. Therefore, as a preliminary
study for our future research, we collected EEG signals for tactile
sensation upon skin touch based on active touch and compared
and analyzed differences in brain changes during touch and
movement tasks. Through time-frequency analysis and statistical
analysis, signiﬁcant differences in power changes in alpha, beta,
gamma, and high-gamma regions were observed. In addition,
major spatial differences were observed in the sensory-motor
region of the brain.

Keywords—brain-computer interface, electroencephalography,

neurohaptics, tactile, touch, active touch, skin

I. INTRODUCTION

Brain-computer interface (BCI) is a technology that pro-
vides means of communication and enables device control by
reﬂecting the user’s intentions through communication with
various computers and machines based on the user’s brain
signals [1]. Non-invasive BCI systems can also be used for
diagnosis [2], [3]. Electroencephalography (EEG) is the most
commonly used modality for recording brain signals in BCI
systems because it is non-invasive and has a high temporal

Research was funded by Institute of Information & Communications Tech-
nology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government
(No. 2017-0-00451, Development of BCI based Brain and Cognitive Com-
puting Technology for Recognizing User’s Intentions using Deep Learning;
No. 2019-0-00079, Artiﬁcial Intelligence Graduate School Program, Korea
University).

resolution. Non-invasive BCI systems have been studied using
various types of EEG modality such as error-related potential
(ErrP) [4], event-related potential (ERP) [5], [6], steady-state
visual evoked potential (SSVEP) [7]–[9], and steady-state
somatosensory evoked potential (SSSEP) [10]–[12], motor
imagery (MI) [13]–[15], and motor execution (ME) [16], [17].

Most BCIs are driven only by visual feedback and there
is no somatosensory feedback, whereas humans have multi-
ple sensory channels. Among the ﬁve human senses (sight,
hearing, taste, smell, and touch), the sense of touch is the
most extensive and the ﬁrst to develop when the fetus is in
the womb [18]. The sense of touch of humans has gained
relatively less attention than sight and hearing. However,
with the recent development of technologies such as VR and
AR, the importance and interest in haptic technology related
to touch are increasing. In particular, regarding EEG-based
tactile sensation, there have been several studies [19]–[24]
that measured the surface roughness of artiﬁcial structures.
However, most studies have used passive contact methods in
which the objects move, while the human subject remains still.
To date, there has been no EEG-based BCI research on active
skin touch, whereas, in reality, humans mostly employ active
touch for tactile exploration.

In this study, we collected EEG signals for tactile-related
brain changes upon skin contact based on active touch. The
brain signal changes according to the movement and the
touch were compared and analyzed. Signiﬁcant differences
were observed through time-frequency analysis and statistical
analysis. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study
to investigate the changes in brain dynamics upon active skin
touch, which will serve as an important basis for our future
research direction.

The rest of this document is organized as follows: Section
II provides a description of the experimental protocol, EEG
signal acquisition, and data analysis. Section III provides the
results of the time-frequency analysis and statistical analysis
and a discussion of our work. In session IV, conclusion are
described.

 
 
 
 
 
 
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS

A. Participants

Six participants (4 males; 2 females; all right-handed; age
26±6 years) were recruited for this study. The participants had
no history of neurological, psychiatric, or tactile problems.
This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board
at Korea University (KUIRB-2020-0013-04), and written in-
formed consent was obtained from all participants before the
experiments. The experiments were conducted in accordance
with the Declaration of Helsinki.

B. Experimental Setup

During the experimental protocol session, each participant
was asked to sit on a comfortable chair in front of the
experimental table. A screen for cues and ﬁxation was installed
on the table. In order to minimize the movement of the
participants’ eyes and upper bodies, we asked them to ﬁx
their gaze on the ﬁxation of the screen during the experiments.
Black barriers were installed on the front and left and right
sides of the participant. This barrier is intended to prevent
participants from receiving external visual stimuli during the
experiments.

The experimental procedure was performed according to
a random crossover design. Participants placed their hands
on the table and maintained a comfortable position. The
experiments consisted of touch tasks and movement tasks. In
the touch task, participants were asked to gently touch their left
arm with their right hand. In the movement task, participants
were asked to perform the same actions as in the touch task,
without actually touching them. In both the touch task and
the movement task, hand movements except for actual touch
were asked to maintain the same motion. Participants were
given sufﬁcient time to rest between each task to minimize
fatigue.

C. Data Acquisition

EEG data were recorded using a BrainAmp (BrainProduct
GmbH, Germany) ampliﬁer. It was collected at a sampling rate
of 2,500 Hz using 64 Ag/AgCl electrodes following the 10-20
international system. At the same time, a 60Hz notch ﬁlter was
used to eliminate power frequency interference. FCz was used
as the reference electrode and FPz was used as the ground
electrode. The impedance of all electrodes was maintained
below 10 kΩ.

D. Data Analysis

The EEG data were analyzed using MATLAB R2020b with
BBCI toolbox and EEGLAB toolbox (version 2021.1). The
EEG signals were downsampled to 500 Hz and bandpass
ﬁltered from 0.5 to 120 Hz. Independent component analysis
was performed to remove noise including ocular and muscle
artifacts.

We conducted a comparative analysis after dividing the EEG
signals collected during (i) touch task and (ii) movement task
to analyze changes in the brain related to tactile sensations
that occur when the skin was touched. The preprocessed EEG

Fig. 1. ERSP for channels C1, C2, C3, and C4 during the touch tasks of
subject 4.

Fig. 2. ERSP for channels C1 and C2 channels during the touch tasks and
the movement tasks of subject 6.

signals were explored in six frequency bands as follows: delta
(0.5–4 Hz), theta (4–8 Hz), alpha (8–13 Hz), beta (13–30 Hz),
gamma (30–50 Hz), and high-gamma ( 50–80 Hz) bands.

1) Time-frequency Analysis:

In order to understand the
variance of power in the alpha, beta, and gamma bands,
we performed time-frequency analysis for each channel of
the data collected from the touch tasks and movement tasks.
We analyzed the change in spectral power with event-related
changes at each time-frequency during each task using the
event-related spectral perturbation (ERSP) method [25]. To
investigate the brain regions reported in tactile and motor
related studies [26], we selected 22 channels (AF3, AF4, F3,
F1, Fz, F2, F4, C3, C1, Cz, C2, C4, CP3, CP1, CPz, CP2,
CP4, P3, P1, Pz, P2, and P4). The baseline for calculating the

Fig. 3. Differences in spectral power between touch and movement tasks. The upper line shows the spectral power differences between the touch and
movement tasks when the touch task is taken as a baseline, and the lower row shows the spectral power differences between the movement and the touch tasks
when the movement task is taken as a baseline. The statistical results represent t-values in each frequency band for differences between touch and movement
tasks using a paired-samples t-test. The white asterisk indicates a signiﬁcant electrode in spectral power between the touch and movement tasks (p < 0.05
with Bonferroni’s correction).

ERSP was taken from the last 500 ms of the rest-phase before
the touch tasks and the movement tasks. The data between 0 to
3,000 ms based on the onset point were used for the analysis.
Frequency ranges were calculated from 0.5 to 50 Hz and from
4 to 120 Hz.

2) Spectral Power Analysis: We performed the power spec-
tral density (PSD) analysis to analyze the spectral power
of each channel for the touch task and the movement task
[26], [27]. We extracted seven frequency bands using the
fast Fourier transform that transforms from time to frequency
domain. The seven frequencies are as followed: delta, theta,
alpha, beta, alpha-beta, gamma, and high-gamma bands [28],
[29]. Spectral power was calculated for each trial and then
averaged across trials for each participant [30].

3) Statistical Analysis: A one-way analysis of variance
was applied to spectral powers to investigate the comparative
differences between touch tasks, movement tasks, and baseline
(rest). Paired t-test with Bonferroni’s correction was used for
post-hoc analysis. All signiﬁcance levels in this study were
α = 0.05.

remarkable differences in power change according to the
frequency domain related to tactile sensation and movement.
The ERSP results during the touch tasks mainly resulted in
power reduction in the alpha and beta bands in the C1, C2,
C3, and C4 channels. In all subjects, a decrease in power in
the beta band was observed, but in some cases, a decrease
in power in the alpha band was not observed. Although there
was a difference in the degree of activation depending on the
subject and task, the degree of activation mainly at C2 and
C4 tended to be more prominent. Also, an increase in power
occurred in the gamma and high-gamma bands. This tended
to be more pronounced, mainly in the degree of activation at
C1 and C3 (Fig. 1).

The ERSP results during the motor tasks were similar to
those of the touch tasks: reduction of power in the alpha and
beta bands, mainly in the C1, C2, C3, and C4 channels. A
decrease in power in the alpha and beta bands was observed
in all subjects. However, no increase in power occurred in
the gamma and high-gamma bands (Fig. 2). Changes in
gamma and high-gamma bands were identiﬁed as the biggest
differences between the touch tasks and the movement tasks.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

B. Statistical Analysis

A. Neurophysiology Analysis

We collected tactile-related brain changes as EEG signals
upon skin touch based on active touch. In addition, in order
to distinguish the difference between movement and tactile
sensation caused by active touch, the active touch task and the
movement task were comparatively analyzed. We focused on
the time-frequency differences for each channel during touch
and movement tasks (Fig. 1, Fig. 2). Speciﬁcally, signiﬁcant
changes in power were observed in the selected 22 channels.
Among them, channels C1, C2, C3, and C4 channels showed

We compared the spatial-spectral power difference at 7
frequency bands through the PSD analysis for each channel
for the touch tasks and the movement tasks(Fig. 3). Statistical
differences were identiﬁed in 7 frequency bands. Compared
with the previously analyzed ERSP results, statistical dif-
ferences were conﬁrmed in alpha, alpha-beta, gamma, and
high-gamma in the signiﬁcant areas. Signiﬁcant differences
in spectral power were observed mainly in the central and
parietal regions, which are known to be related to touch and
movement.

In the results for the alpha-beta area, we can see that the
right sensory-motor area of the brain shows a major statistical
difference. In particular, it can be seen that the power change
in the C4 channel is large. It can be seen that the PSD value
of the touch tasks is larger than the movement task in the C4
channel.

In the results for the high-gamma regions, it can be seen
that the difference in power change in the C3 region is large.
This is consistent with the results of ERSP, and it can be seen
as the effect of power activation in the contralateral motor area
by the movement of the right hand.

IV. CONCLUSION

We collected EEG signals for brain changes related to
tactile sensation upon skin touch based on active touch. In
addition, changes in the brain caused by movement according
to active touch and changes in the brain according to tactile
sensation were compared and analyzed. Signiﬁcant differences
were observed by performing time-frequency analysis and
statistical analysis. The spatial power change and difference
were observed in the sensory-motor area. Also, the difference
in power change was observed in the alpha, beta, gamma, and
high-gamma regions. To the best of our knowledge, These
results of our research are the ﬁrst results of skin touch studies
based on active touch, and this will serve as a major basis for
our future research direction.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors thank to G.-H. Shin, B.-H. Kwon and H.-J. Ahn

for help with the useful discussions of the experiment.

REFERENCES

[1] J.-H. Jeong, K.-H. Shim, D.-J. Kim, and S.-W. Lee, “Brain-controlled
robotic arm system based on multi-directional cnn-bilstm network using
eeg signals,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 28, no. 5, pp.
1226–1238, May 2020.

[2] Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Chen, S.-W. Lee, and D. Shen, “Hybrid high-
order functional connectivity networks using resting-state functional mri
for mild cognitive impairment diagnosis,” Sci. Rep., vol. 7, no. 1, pp.
1–15, Jul. 2017.

[3] Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Chen, M. Liu, X. Zhu, S.-W. Lee, and D. Shen,
“Strength and similarity guided group-level brain functional network
construction for mci diagnosis,” Pattern Recogni., vol. 88, pp. 421–430,
Apr. 2019.

[4] M. Sp¨uler, M. Bensch, S. Kleih, W. Rosenstiel, M. Bogdan, and
A. K¨ubler, “Online use of error-related potentials in healthy users and
people with severe motor impairment increases performance of a p300-
bci,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 123, no. 7, pp. 1328–1337, Jul. 2012.
[5] S.-K. Yeom, S. Fazli, K.-R. M¨uller, and S.-W. Lee, “An efﬁcient ERP-
based brain-computer interface using random set presentation and face
familiarity,” PLoS One, vol. 9, no. 11, pp. e111157, Nov. 2014.

[6] D.-O. Won, H.-J. Hwang, D.-M. Kim, K.-R. M¨uller, and S.-W. Lee,
“Motion-based rapid serial visual presentation for gaze-independent
brain-computer interfaces,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.,
vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 334–343, Feb. 2018.

[7] M.-H. Lee, J. Williamson, D.-O. Won, S. Fazli, and S.-W. Lee, “A high
performance spelling system based on EEG-EOG signals with visual
feedback,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 26, no. 7, pp.
1443–1459, Jul. 2018.

[8] D.-O. Won, H.-J. Hwang, S. Dahne, K. R. M¨uller, and S.-W. Lee, “Effect
of higher frequency on the classiﬁcation of steady-state visual evoked
potentials,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 016014, Feb. 2016.

[9] N.-S. Kwak, K.-R. M¨uller, and S.-W. Lee,

“A convolutional neural
network for steady state visual evoked potential classiﬁcation under
ambulatory environment,” PLoS One, vol. 12, pp. e0172578, Feb. 2017.
[10] K.-T. Kim, H.-I. Suk, and S.-W. Lee, “Commanding a brain-controlled
wheelchair using steady-state somatosensory evoked potentials,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 654–665, Aug.
2016.

[11] L. Yao, X. Sheng, D. Zhang, N. Jiang, D. Farina, and X. Zhu, “A BCI
system based on somatosensory attentional orientation,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 78–87, Jan. 2017.
[12] S. Su, G. Chai, X. Shu, X. Sheng, and X Zhu, “Electrical stimulation-
induced SSSEP as an objective index to evaluate the difference of tactile
acuity between the left and right hand,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 17, no. 1,
pp. 016053, Feb. 2020.

[13] T.-E. Kam, H.-I. Suk, and S.-W. Lee, “Non-homogeneous spatial ﬁl-
ter optimization for ElectroEncephaloGram(EEG)-based motor imagery
classiﬁcation,” Neurocomputing, vol. 108, pp. 58–68, May 2013.
[14] O.-Y. Kwon, M.-H. Lee, C. Guan, and S.-W. Lee, “Subject-independent
brain-computer interfaces based on deep convolutional neural networks,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 10, pp. 3839–3852,
Oct. 2020.

[15] T. Yu, J. Xiao, F. Wang, R. Zhang, Z. Gu, A. Cichocki, and Y. Li,
“Enhanced motor imagery training using a hybrid BCI with feedback,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1706–1717, Feb. 2015.

[16] J.-H. Kim, F. Bießmann, and S.-W. Lee, “Decoding three-dimensional
trajectory of executed and imagined arm movements from electroen-
cephalogram signals,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 23,
no. 5, pp. 867–876, Sep. 2015.

[17] L. Wang, C. Yu, H. Chen, W. Qin, Y. He, F. Fan, Y. Zhang, M. Wang,
K. Li, Y. Zang, T. Woodward, and C. Zhu,
“Dynamic functional
reorganization of the motor execution network after stroke,” Brain, vol.
133, no. 4, pp. 1224–1238, Apr. 2010.

[18] T. Field, Touch (2nd), A Bradford Book, 2014.
[19] A. Greco, A. Guidi, M. Bianchi, A. Lanata, G. Valenza, and E.P.
Scilingo, “Brain dynamics induced by pleasantunpleasant tactile stimuli
conveyed by different fabrics,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health., vol. 23, no. 6,
pp. 2417–2427, Nov. 2019.

[20] A. Pisoni, L. J. Lauro, A. Vergallito, O. Maddaluno, and N. Bolognini,
“Cortical dynamics underpinning the self-other distinction of touch: A
TMS-EEG study,” Neuroimage, vol. 178, pp. 475–484, Sep. 2018.

[21] M.-K. Kim, J.-H. Cho, and J.-H. Jeong,

“Classiﬁcation of tactile
perception and attention on natural textures from EEG signals,” in Int.
Winter Conf., Jeongseon, Korea, Feb. 2021, pp. 1–5.

[22] J.-H. Cho, J.-H. Jeong, M.-K. Kim, and S.-W. Lee, “Towards Neurohap-
tics: Brain-computer interfaces for decoding intuitive sense of touch,”
in Int. Winter Conf., Jeongseon, Korea, Feb. 2021, pp. 1–5.

[23] A. Moungou, J. Thonnard, and A. Mouraux, “EEG frequency tagging to
explore the cortical activity related to the tactile exploration of natural
textures,” Sci. Rep., vol. 6, no. 20738, pp. 1–9, Feb. 2016.

[24] M. Chen, D. Fu, J. Boger, and N. Jiang,

“Age-related changes in
vibro-tactile EEG response and its implications in BCI applications:
A comparison between older and younger populations,” IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 603–610, Apr. 2019.
[25] A. Delorme and S. Makeig, “EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for
analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component
analysis,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 134, no. 1, pp. 9–21, Mar. 2004.
[26] B. M. Adhikari, K. Sathian, C. M. Epstein, B. Lamichhane, and
M. Dhamala, “Oscillatory activity in neocortical networks during tactile
discrimination near the limit of spatial acuity,” NeuroImage, vol. 91, pp.
300–310, May 2014.

[27] J. S. Kumar and P. Bhuvaneswari, “Analysis of electroencephalography
(EEG) signals and its categorization–a study,” Procedia Eng., vol. 38,
pp. 2525–2536, Jan. 2012.

[28] E. Bas¸ar, C. Bas¸ar-Eroglu, S. Karakas¸, and M. Sch¨urmann, “Gamma,
alpha, delta, and theta oscillations govern cognitive processes,” Int. J.
Psychophysiol., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 241–248, Jan. 2001.

[29] B. J. Roach and D. H. Mathalon, “Event-related EEG time-frequency
analysis: An overview of measures and an analysis of early gamma band
phase locking in schizophrenia,” Schizophrenia Bull., vol. 34, no. 5, pp.
907–926, Aug. 2008.

[30] M. Lee, G.-H. Shin, and S.-W. Lee, “Frontal eeg asymmetry of emotion
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 107200–

for the same auditory stimulus,”
107213, Jun. 2020.

