DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

UDC 004.853:373 

Valentyna V. Kovalenko  
PhD of Pedagogical Sciences,  
Senior Researcher of the Department of Cloud-Oriented Systems of Education Informatization 
Institute of Information Technologies and Learning Tools of NAES of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine 
ORCID ID 0000-0002-4681-5606 
valyavako@gmail.com 

Maiia V. Marienko  
PhD of Pedagogical Sciences,  
Senior Researcher of the Department of Cloud-Oriented Systems of Education Informatization 
Institute of Information Technologies and Learning Tools of NAES of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine 
ORCID ID0000-0002-8087-962X 
popelmayal@gmail.com 

Alisa S. Sukhikh  
PhD of Pedagogical Sciences,  
Senior Researcher of the Department of Cloud-Oriented Systems of Education Informatization 
Institute of Information Technologies and Learning Tools of NAES of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine 
ORCID ID 0000-0001-8186-1715 
alisam@ukr.net 

USE OF AUGMENTED AND VIRTUAL REALITY TOOLS IN A GENERAL 
SECONDARY EDUCATION INSTITUTION IN THE CONTEXT OF  
BLENDED LEARNING 

Abstract. The study examines the problem of using augmented and virtual reality in the process of 
blended learning in general secondary education. Analysis of recent research and publications has 
shown that the use of augmented and virtual reality in the educational process has been considered 
by  scientists.  However,  the  target  group  in  these  studies  is  students  of  higher  education 
institutions. Most of the works of scientists are devoted to the problem of introducing augmented 
reality into the traditional educational process. At the same time, the use of augmented and virtual 
reality  technologies  in  the  process  of  blended  learning  remains  virtually  unexplored.  The  study 
analyzes the meaning of the concept of "blended learning". The conceptual principles of blended 
learning are considered. It has been found that scholars differ in their understanding of the concept 
of  "blended  learning".  Sometimes  researchers  distinguish  between  the  components  of  blended 
learning:  full-time  and  online  learning.  The  study  presents  the  special  advantages  of  blended 
learning  and  the  taxonomy  of  blended  learning.  It  was  found  that  there  are  some  difficulties  in 
implementing  blended  learning.  The  article  outlines  the  practical  use  of  virtual  and  augmented 
reality. The definition of augmented and virtual reality is given. The mixed reality is considered as 
a separate kind of notion. Separate applications of virtual and augmented reality that can be used 
in the process of blended learning are considered (MEL Chemistry VR; Anatomyou VR; Google 
Expeditions;  EON-XR).  As  a  result  of  the  study,  the  authors  propose  possible  ways  to  use 
augmented reality in the educational process. The model of using augmented and virtual reality in 
blended  learning  in  general  secondary  education  institutions  was  designed.  It  consists  of  the 
following  blocks:  goal;  teacher’s  activity;  forms  of  education;  teaching  methods;  teaching  aids; 
organizational forms of education; pupil activity and results. Based on the model, the methodology 
of  using  augmented  and  virtual  reality  in  blended  learning  in  general  secondary  education  was 
developed.  The  methodology  contains  the  following  components:  target  component,  content 
component,  technological  component  and  resultant  component.  The  methodology  is  quite 
universal and can be used for any subject in general secondary education. The types of lessons in 
which  it  is  expedient  to  use  augmented  (AR)  and  virtual  reality(VR)  are  determined. 
Recommendations  are  given  at  which  stage  of  the  lesson  it  is  better  to  use  AR  and  VR  tools 
(depending on the type of lesson). 

Keywords:blended learning; augmented reality; virtual reality; general secondary education. 

© Valentyna Kovalenko, Maiia Marienko, Alisa Sukhikh, 2021. 

70 

 
 
 
 
 
 
DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Formulation  of  the  problem.  Today,  as  the  digital  transformation  of  education  has 
become a challenge to the educational system in Ukraine, the introduction of modern digital 
learning  technologies  and  tools,  in  particular,  the  tools  of  augmented  and  virtual  reality,  is 
among the most crucial issues.The Ministry of Health of Ukraine has announced the criteria 
for  the  transition  to  distance  learning  during  the  Covid-19  pandemic.  The  "red"  level  of 
epidemic danger (high incidence) implies that general secondary schools stay open provided 
that at least 80% of their staff are vaccinated. Otherwise, education takes place in other forms, 
including distance learning. 

"Hybrid 

learning",  "distance 

learning",  "distance  education",  "e-learning",  "e-
education",  "blended  learning",  "distance  learning"  are  the  most  common  forms  of  learning 
during quarantine restrictions around the world. All of these terms are associated with the use 
of digital technology in teaching, but at the same time, "blended learning" is most commonly 
used. The need for the mass introduction of blended and distance learning led to their "forced" 
large-scale  testing,  which  made  it  possible  to  identify  their  new  features.  Concepts  and 
techniques  of  blended  and  distance  learning,  which  were  developed  much  earlier,  are  now 
useful. Cloud  technologies, in  particular means of communication, have  made it possible to 
implement blended learning technologically. 

For the current  generation of  general  secondary school  pupils,  the educational  process 
using  the  means  of  augmented  and  virtual  reality  is  more  understandable.  Such  tools  are 
motivating  pupils  in  mastering  new  knowledge,  allow  the  teacher  to  organize  the  learning 
process, if necessary, adjust this process and monitor the success of each pupil  [1]. Besides, 
the use of augmented and virtual reality tools  provides an opportunity to track the nature of 
the  pupil’s  mistakes  and  automatically  determines  the  type  of  help  needed.  The  teacher 
immediately  notices  the  mistakes  that  the  pupil  makes.  Thanks  to  the  use  of  AR,  VR  and 
teamwork, errors can be seen immediately. Not only the teacher but also other pupils can help 
to  correct  the  mistake.  That  is,  the  learning  environment  adapts  to  the  level  of  pupils’ 
knowledge,  their  needs,  acquired  knowledge,  experience,  and  speed  of  perception  of  new 
material  [2]. Teachers together with  pupils will be able (according to  the  available tools) to 
determine jointly the sequence and pace of learning the material. 

With the promotion of distance and blended learning, teachers are more interested [3] in 
new  services  for  better  perception  of  information  by  pupils.  If  cloud  services  are  a  tool  for 
blended  learning,  then  virtual  and  augmented  reality  will  help  to  present  information  in  an 
engaging  way.  Augmented  reality  is  a  tool  for  using  and  demonstrating  theory  during  the 
lesson. The use of virtual and augmented reality applications will help the teacher to illustrate 
how  theoretical  knowledge  can  be  used  in  practice.  The  teacher  will  be  a  tutor  for  pupils, 
providing  direction  to  their  learning  trajectory.  This  will  help  pupils  find  the  necessary 
knowledge on their own, be attentive to detail. The teacher and pupils act as members of the 
same team. The use of AR / VR is used to form students' practical skills in real conditions and 
life situations. It is easy to organize project activities and implement teamwork. Teachers can 
start with simpler topics and gradually focus on more complex ones. AR and VR provide an 
experience  that  pupils  usually  do  not  have  access  to.  The  latest  technologies  also  play  an 
important role in educating children with physical, social or cognitive impairments. 

That is, we need to work on creating new teaching methods and improving the skills of 
older  teachers.  Limited  resources  in  educational  institutions  still  remain  a  serious  problem. 
However,  budgets  for  upgrading  school  equipment  are  gradually  increasing.  It  is  important 
that  when  choosing  equipment,  educational  institutions  pay  attention  to  the  scenarios  of  its 
use. 

71 

DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

Analysis of recent sources and publications. Today, blended learning has become one 
of the most popular pedagogical concepts in education. It is a process that is supported by an 
effective combination of different teaching methods and learning styles. Although the concept 
itself appeared in the 1960s, it was not until the 2000s that it was studied in detail and actively 
implemented. 

According  to  A. Stryuk,  Y. Trius,  V. Kukharenko  [4],  "blended  learning"  is  a 
purposeful  process  of  acquiring  knowledge,  skills  and  abilities  in  terms  of  integration  of 
pupils’  classroom  and  extracurricular  educational  activities  based  on  implementation  and 
mutual complementarity of traditional, electronic, distance and mobile learning technologies 
in the presence of pupils’ self-control over the time, place, routes and pace of learning. 

Researchers  J. E. Prescott,  K. Bundschuh,  E. R. Kazakoff  and  P. Macaruso  studied  the 
implementation of a blended learning program for literacy in a kindergarten and up to the 5th 
grade in elementary school, including pupils learning English [5]. 

According  to  R. P. Murtikusuma,  Hobri,  A. Fatahillah,  S. Hussen,  R. R. Prasetyo,  and 
M. A. Alfarisi,  the  organization  of  blended  learning  using  Google  Classroom  will  diversify 
the learning process, make it more engaging and enjoyable for both pupils and teachers [6]. 

The benefits described by L. B. Ni [7], which become available through computers and 
smartphones, are relevant to both school teachers and pupils. Blended classrooms, which use 
both  traditional  and  technological  teaching  methods,  have  become  the  norm  for  many 
educators. Using Google Classroom gives pupils access to online learning. 

I. Melnyk, N. Zaderei, and G. Nefodova[1] conducted a study of the main features and 
differences  of  virtual  reality  (VR),  augmented  reality  (AR),  and  mixed  reality  (MR).  The 
scientists have considered applications of augmented and virtual reality in modern educational 
process.  

O. R. Oleksyuk  considered  the  application  of  augmented  reality  technology  in 
education.  The  study  [2]  revealed  the  meaning  of  the  concept  of  augmented  reality  and 
considered the benefits of using augmented reality in the educational process. O. R. Oleksyuk 
analyzes  the  use  of  individual  applications  for  different  age  groups  of  pupils  and  gives 
examples of the use of applications in teaching specific disciplines. 

S. O. Semerikov, 

O. V. Syrovatskyi, 

and 
S. O. Zelinska  performed  a  historical  and  technological  analysis  of  the  experience  of  using 
augmented  reality  tools  for  the  development  of  interactive  learning  materials.  In  their  study 
[8]  they  described  the  software  for  designing  augmented  reality  tools  for  educational 
purposes.  

Yu. V. Yechkalo, 

Ye. O. Modlo, 

V. V. Tkachuk,  Yu. V. Echkalo,  A. S. Taraduda,  and  I. P. Steblivets  in  the  study  [9] 
theoretically  substantiated  the  feasibility  of  using  augmented  reality  as  a  means  of  distance 
learning  in  quarantine.  The  scientists  have  identified  a  tool  for  visualizing  laboratory 
equipment,  namely  the  mobile  application  Electricity  AR.  In  [10]  the  elements  of  the 
methodology of using the mobile application Electricity AR in the process of laboratory work 
were developed. Since augmented reality in this paper is considered in the process of distance 
learning,  further  research  should  focus  on  the  feasibility  of  using  augmented  reality  in  the 
process of blended learning.  

According to J. J. Stephan, A. S. Ahmed, A. H. Omran [11] there is a need to improve 
and develop the theory of blended learning through the use of a virtual reality environment to 
make it more effective. Pupils need to be able to experience the atmosphere of the lecture and 
overcome  the  difficulties  that  arise  as  a  result  of  using  blended  or  traditional  learning. 
Research  [11]  found  that  pupils  are  most  bored  after  10  minutes  of  the  lecture.  Adding 
elements of virtual reality can add variety and thus make the lecture more interesting. In case 
of missing a lecture or the need to listen to it again, pupils can access the proposed website 
and view the lecture again using the virtual reality function. 

72 

DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

In  a  study  by  G. Thorsteinsson  and  T. Page  [12],  blended  learning  is  seen  as  a 
pedagogical  approach.  European  educators  in  the  FISTE  Comenius  2.1  project  have  used  a 
number of training measures to help improve in-service teacher education. The combination 
of lectures,  visual  diagrams,  assessments  and  group classes today is  the basis of learning in 
the classroom. Blended learning is a combination of all these approaches and the use of VR 
and AR. 

In  a  study  [13]  K. Mumtaz,  M. M. Iqbal,  S. Khalid,  T. Rafiq,  S. M. Owais,  M. Al 
Achhab  compared  the  level  of  students’  understanding  in  two  scenarios:  class  lectures  and 
lectures based on AR. The result showed that there is a difference between classroom teaching 
and  AR  teaching.  The  AR  experience  has  a  positive  effect  on  student  learning.  In  addition, 
students' confidence and motivation to learn are achieved. 

The analysis of the existing research on the subject has shown that the idea of using the 
means  of  augmented  and  virtual  reality  in  the  process  of  blended  learning  in  general 
secondary education remains practically unexplored. Most research relates to higher education 
and vocational education. 

The aim of the study. The article aims to develop and substantiate the model of using 

the augmented and virtual reality tools in blended learning in general secondary education. 

2. PRESENTATION OF THE MAIN MATERIAL 

2.1. Conceptual principles of blended learning 

Blended learning has become relevant and is actively developing, both in Ukraine and 
around the world, technologies of this teaching model are being introduced, so researchers are 
trying to reach a consensus in determining the characteristics of blended learning. Researchers 
define  "blended  learning"  in  different  ways.  Attempts  by  scientists  to  outline  this  concept 
demonstrate their different understanding of its content. Let us consider some of the existing 
views. 

O. Krivonos  and  O. Korotun  [14]  understand  blended  learning  as  an  educational 
concept  in  which  the  pupil  acquires  knowledge  both  independently  (online)  and  in-person 
(with  a  teacher),  which  allows  controlling  the  time,  place,  pace,  and  way  of  studying  the 
material. 

M. Oliver  and  K. Trigwell  [15]  note  that  blended  learning  has  certain  components, 

namely: a combination of face-to-face and online learning, technology, and methodology. 

In  their  definitions,  researchers  believe  that  blended  learning  usually  consists  of  two 
main components: face-to-face and online learning in different proportions. If we present the 
range of learning between offline and online, blended learning will be in the middle between 
them (see Fig. 1). 

Fig. 1. The range of learning between offline and online (for blended learning)[16] 

73 

 
DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

Blended  learning  is  a  combination  of  a  traditional  environment  where  learning  takes 
place face-to-face between teachers and pupils and online learning, which allows pupils to use 
learning materials without physical presence (Fig. 2) [17]. 
The special advantages of blended learning are: 
1. There  is  an  opportunity  to  create  a  model  of  the  educational  process  (for  example, 

rotary, flexible, self-modified and in-depth virtual). 

2. Asynchronous mode of operation. 
3. The use of productive teaching methods - research methods, learning in small groups, 

business games, test technologies. 

4. Organization  of  the  system  of  control  and  self-control,  initial  and  final  control  of 

knowledge. 

5. Development and provision of meaningful learning in electronic form, creation of a 

basis for independent mastering of the course. 

6. Combination  of  lecture  classes  with  online  training  and  networking  (consultations, 

blogs, forums, chats). 

There  is  a  large  number  of  blended  learning  models:  simple,  complex,  more  or  less 
popular,  and  others.  Most  general  secondary  education  institutions  introduce  more  than  one 
blended  learning  model  for  their  pupils.  In  blended  learning,  both  synchronous  and 
asynchronous modes of communication can be used. 

Synchronous  mode  involves  interaction  between  the  participants  of  distance  learning, 
during  which  they  are  simultaneously  in  an  electronic  educational  environment  and 
communicate through audio and video conferencing. 

Fig. 2. Taxonomy of blended learning [17] 

Asynchronous mode means the interaction between the participants of distance learning, 
in  which  they  interact  with  each  other  with  a  delay  in  time,  using  interactive  educational 
platforms, e-mail, forums, chats, social networks, and so on.  

According  to  the  Regulation  on  distance  learning  in  general  secondary  education, 
approved by the order of the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine of September 8, 
2020,  No. 1115[18],  in  Ukraine  at  least  30  percent  of  the  study  time  provided  by  the 

74 

 
DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

educational  program  is  organized  synchronously  and  asynchronously  during  quarantine 
restrictions.  The  teacher  and  the  administration  of  the  educational  institution  independently 
determine the model of a combination of synchronous and asynchronous modes of education, 
and it is possible to fill these components with educational activities in different ways. There 
are certain difficulties in the implementation of blended learning, which are considered from 
several sides in [10]:  
Technical: 

  providing  participants  with 

technologies 

- 

the  step-by-step 

introduction  of 

 

technologies from simple to more complex; 
resisting  the  desire  to  use  technology  simply  because  it  is  available  is  an  important 
move. 

Organizational: 

  overcoming  the  prejudice  that  blended  learning  is  not  as  effective  as  traditional 

classroom teaching; 

  management  and  monitoring  of  progress  –  all  elements  of  blended  learning  must  be 

controlled and monitored. 

Educational design: 

  careful  planning  should  determine  at  what  stages  cooperation  is  necessary,  when  to 

work online and when in the classroom; 

  compliance with the best delivery environment to achieve the goal - it is necessary to 
carefully  define  the  goals  using  Bloom’s  taxonomy  and  only  then  on  this  basis  to 
determine the method of delivery; 
introduction  of  online  interactive  offers  –  after  10-20  minutes.  Watching  a  video  or 
participating in a webinar, the pupil must complete a learning activity; 

 

  providing  participants  with  requirements  for  performance  evaluation  in  individual 

tasks and the course as a whole; 

  ensuring  coordination  of  all  elements  of  the  course  –  the  guidelines  should  give 
answers  to  standard  questions,  contact  information,  schedule,  and  procedure  for 
studying the course material. 

However,  there  is  currently  a  confusion  of  concepts.  Due  to  the  pandemic,  most 
Ukrainian schools were forced to implement distance or blended learning. In blended learning 
there is a combination of distance and full-time work. 

Therefore,  virtual  or  augmented  reality  can  be  very  relevant  and  necessary  here.  But 
there is a problem of correct justified use of these technologies. This requires techniques that 
should be developed and implemented in the learning process. 

2.2. Practical use of virtual and augmented reality 

According  to  study  [1],  virtual  reality  (VR)  is  an  artificially  created  environment  that 
can be accessed using special technology. A specific property of virtual reality is considered 
to be the maximum impact on most senses: touch, sight, smell, and hearing. 

Augmented  reality  (AR)  is  artificial  supplementing  a  real  environment  with  extra 
information (images, audio, etc.). On the other hand, digital technology complements the real 
user  environment,  while  virtual  reality  tries  to  completely  transfer  the  user  to  an  artificial 
environment. 

I. Melnyk,  N. Zaderei,  and  G. Nefodova  in  their  study  [1]  in  a  separate  section 
investigate  mixed  reality  (MR),  which  combines  augmented  and  virtual  reality  with  the 
physical environment. In this reality, the boundaries between these concepts are blurred. 

The active use of virtual VR and augmented AR reality in different areas forms a single 
reality (mixed reality, MR), in which the boundaries between augmented, virtual and physical 

75 

DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

worlds  are  blurred.  Ericsson  Consumer  Lab’s  research  came  to  this  conclusion  after 
examining the impact of AR and VR technologies on user habits and preferences. 

The future of the physical real world will be shaped using the combined reality of MR, 

based on augmented (AR) and virtual reality (VR) [1]. 

Let us look at some applications of virtual and augmented reality that can be used in the 

process of blended learning. 

MEL Chemistry VR is a course in chemistry lessons in virtual reality that corresponds 
to specific topics of the school curriculum, where virtual reality turns learning into an exciting 
process  of  learning  the  basics  of  chemistry,  using  scientific  games  and  the  method  of 
immersion. Lessons are available in English only. 

Anatomy VR is a mobile learning application that presents the anatomy to the user from 

a different perspective. 

Using  virtual  reality,  the  user  becomes  part  of  one  of  the  anatomical  structures 
(observing the processes from the inside), having the opportunity to navigate along with these 
structures: blood, respiratory, digestive, urinary, lacrimal, and reproductive systems. 

The  application  contains  free  access  to  some  navigation  routes  in  almost  any  of  the 
mentioned systems. Additional content that can be purchased is offered in the section of the 
program sold through the application. 

Anatomy VR can be used in two different modes: virtual reality and full-screen mode. 
In  virtual  reality  mode,  a  mobile  device  (smartphone)  must  be  inserted  into  a  virtual 
reality  gadget  to  master  certain  learning  material.  The  user  can  interact  with  navigation 
controls and anatomical information elements (by selecting one of them). 

Although  Anatomy  VR  provides  the  best  virtual  reality  experience,  the  user  can  also 
enjoy and learn with this mobile application in full screen without the need for a virtual reality 
gadget. 

Google Expeditions is an educational tool that allows you to travel in the virtual world 
and explore objects in augmented reality. There are modes of studying historical monuments, 
exploring objects at the level of atoms, swimming near sharks, or going into outer space. 

In Google Expeditions, a teacher becomes a guide who goes on a video tour with a class 
or group or shows augmented reality objects. They can use special tools for detailed study of 
individual subjects. You do not have to be part of a group to immerse  yourself in virtual or 
augmented reality,  and users can  do it on their own. The application contains the following 
functions: 

  Explore the world around you with your phone, tablet, or virtual reality device. 
  The teacher will be able to become a guide for small groups of users who connect to 

your expedition from their mobile devices. 

  You  can  join  other  guides’  expeditions  to  explore  the  virtual  world  and  explore 
objects in augmented reality. To do this, use, for example, glasses Google Cardboard 
or Daydream. 

  Connect  your  device  to  the  same  Wi-Fi  network  as  the  group.  If  the  guide 
downloaded the expedition, you do not need an Internet connection to participate. 
  Choose expeditions from an extensive catalog - more than 800 virtual or augmented 
reality  video  tours.  Each  of  them  consists  of  carefully  selected  materials  and  is 
provided with descriptions, information blocks, and questions. 

EON-XR  is  an  augmented  or  virtual  reality  application  equipped  with  features  for 

distance learning and training in a practical environment. 

Lessons  and  training  can  be  conducted  in  AR  or  VR  modes  either  individually  or  in 

groups, providing all the requirements for teachers, pupils, or groups of pupils. 

With the EON-XR, users can quickly create compelling content on their phones, tablets, 
computers,  and  headsets  using  the  EON  Reality  library  with  more  than  1  million  digital 

76 

DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

assets, as well as importing or buying assets from other sources. The main characteristics of 
the service are: 

  creation,  publication,  demonstration,  recording,  and  evaluation  of  lessons  and  their 

content using a smartphone or tablet; 

  gathering teachers and pupils for virtual interaction with the lesson in a safe virtual 

space; 

  intuitive platform without code, designed to encourage pupils and teachers to create 

content for deeper learning and collaboration; 

  embedded  asynchronous  video  with  3D  models  and  360°  environments  to  provide 

self-learning anytime, anywhere; 

  evaluating  the  effectiveness  of  pupils  or  groups  of  pupils  through  assessment  and 

quizzes to effectively track the level of mastery of educational material. 

The following tools are available: 
  Availability of several regions for the EON-XR meeting. 
  Playlist function. 
  Pupil assessment function. 
  Create Express 360 lessons. 
  General optimization, including playback mode. 
  There is a Russian localization. 

2.3. Technological component of the use of virtual reality services 

Types  of  virtual  reality  are  identified  in  the  publication  [19].  The  authors  identify  the 

following types of virtual reality: 

  VR technologies with the effect of full immersion, providing a plausible simulation 
of  the  virtual  world  with  a  high  degree  of  detail.  Their  implementation  requires  a  high-
performance  computer  capable  of  recognizing  user  actions  and  responding  to  them  in  real-
time, and special equipment that provides the effect of immersion; 

  VR technologies without immersion. These include simulations with images, sound, 
and  controllers  that  are  broadcast  on  the  screen,  preferably  widescreen.  Such  systems  are 
considered virtual reality, because, in terms of the degree of impact on the viewer, they by far 
surpass other means of multimedia, although they do not fully implement the requirements of 
VR; 

  VR  technologies with  common infrastructure. These include Second  Life  - a three-
dimensional virtual world with elements of a social network, which has more than a million 
active  users,  the  game  Minecraft  and  others.  Such  worlds  do  not  provide  full  immersion 
(however,  Minecraft  already  has  a  virtual  reality  version  that  supports  the  Oculus  Rift  and 
Gear VR helmets). But in virtual worlds, interaction with other users is well organized, which 
is often lacking in the products of "true" virtual reality; 

  Virtual worlds are used not only in the gaming industry: thanks to platforms such as 
3D  Immersive  Collaboration,  you  can  organize  work  and  study  3D  spaces  -  this  is  called 
"collaboration  with  the  effect  of  presence."  Ensuring  full  immersion  and,  at  the  same  time, 
user interaction in virtuality is one of the important areas of VR development; 

  VR based on Internet technologies. These include primarily Virtual Reality Markup 
Language, similar to  HTML. Now, this technology is  considered obsolete, but  it is  possible 
that in the future virtual reality will be created, including the use of Internet technology. 

It is known that a person receives 80% of the information through sight. Therefore, the 
developers of BP systems pay great attention to the devices that provide image formation. As 

77 

DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

a rule, they are supplemented by stereo devices, work on tactile influences, and even imitation 
of odors. The effect on taste buds has not yet been reported [19]. 

Virtual  reality  helmet.  Modern  virtual  reality  helmets  (HMD-display,  head-mounted 
display, video helmet) contain one or more displays that display images for the left and right 
eyes, a system of lenses to adjust the geometry of the image, as well as a tracking system that 
tracks  the  orientation  of  the  device  in  space.  In  appearance,  they  now  look  like  glasses,  so 
they  are  increasingly  called  VR  headsets  (VR  headsets)  or  just  virtual  reality  glasses.  They 
can be divided into three groups: 

1. Glasses  in  which  image  processing  and  output  are  provided  by  a  smartphone 
(Android,  iPhone,  Windows  Phone).  Modern  smartphone  is  a  high-performance  device 
capable  of  processing  three-dimensional  images.  Smartphone  displays  have  a  fairly  high 
resolution. Almost every smartphone is equipped with sensors that allow you to determine the 
position of the device in space. 

2. Glasses  in  which  image  processing  is  provided  by  an  external  device  (PC,  Xbox, 
PlayStation,  etc.).  The  external  device  must  be  high-performance,  and  the  glasses  are 
equipped with position sensors. 

3. Autonomous  virtual  reality  glasses  (Lenovo  Mirage  Solo,  together  with  Google, 

Oculus Quest from Facebook, Samsung Gear VR, etc.). 

Helmets are the main component of VR with full immersion, as they not only provide a 
three-dimensional  image  and  stereo  sound  but  also  partially  isolate  the  user  from  the 
surrounding reality [19]. 

MotionParallax3D  displays.  Such  displays  use  the  inherent  mechanism  of  human 
perception of volume-motion parallax. To do this, at each point in time for the viewer, based 
on  its  position  relative  to  the  screen,  a  corresponding  projection  of  the  three-dimensional 
object  is  generated.  Moving  around  the  scene,  the  user  can  view  it  from  all  sides,  while  all 
objects of the scene will move relative to each other. The phenomenon of parallax repeatedly 
enhances the perception of volume. Unlike 3D cinema and 3D TV, which use only binocular 
vision, MotionParallax3D technology allows the user to view the 3D scene from all sides as if 
all its objects were real. Shifting the viewer relative to the screen, which violates the effect of 
volume  in  3D  cinema,  in  the  MotionParallax3D  system  only  enhances  the  effect.  A  system 
that uses a parallax mechanism must capture the smallest movements of the user’s head and 
track them with  high speed  and accuracy so that the brain  does  not  detect  distortions  in  the 
geometry of objects caused by delayed image changes. 

Virtual reality gloves (information gloves, datagloves). These gloves have sensors that 
allow you to monitor the movement of the wrists and fingers. Technically, this can be done in 
a  variety  of  ways:  using  fiber  optic  cables,  strain  gauges  or  piezoelectric  sensors,  and 
electromechanical devices (such as potentiometers). For example, scientists at EPFL and ETH 
Zurich have developed ultralight gloves (weighing less than 8 grams each finger and only 2 
mm  thick).  They  provide  extremely  realistic  tactile  feedback  and  thus  give  unprecedented 
freedom of movement [19]. 

Virtual  reality  costume.  This  suit  should  monitor  the  change  of  position  of  the  whole 
body  of  the  user  and  transmit  tactile,  temperature,  and  vibration  sensations,  and  in 
combination with a helmet - visual and auditory. 

Control devices. To interact with the virtual environment, special joysticks (gamepads, 
wands) are used, which contain built-in position and motion sensors, as well as buttons and 
scroll wheels, like a mouse. Now such joysticks are increasingly made wireless [19]. 

In  Ukraine,  the  above  mentioned  technologies  are  used  in  small  quantities  today, 
because these devices and their software are too expensive for most educational institutions. 
Therefore,  the  use  of  virtual  and  auxiliary  reality  technologies  in  the  educational  process  is 
poorly understood, but nevertheless relevant for further research. 

78 

DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

2.4. Recommendations for the use of augmented and virtual reality in the process 
of blended learning 

Blended  learning  is  a  solution  for  education  in  an  era  of  revolutions  and  an  ideal 
learning model for experiments with AI, VR, and AR. Teachers and pupils are adapting to the 
new  forms  of  distance  education  and  the  difficulties  that  arise  with  it,  but  it  is  also  a  great 
opportunity  to  explore  interactive  technologies  that  are  ideal  for  virtual  learning.  Modern 
teachers  explore  and  experiment  with  ways  to  incorporate  these  technologies  into  practices 
that enrich the educational experience for all participants. 

Augmented  reality  is  an  integral  part  of  the  educational  process  of  the  future, 
characterized  by  a  combination  of  virtual  technology  and  the  real  world.  AR  technologies 
make  it  possible  to  explain  abstract  concepts,  certain  theories,  or  things  that  cannot  be 
represented. One of the distinctive features is the conversion of 2D images into 3D to make 
them  look  realistic  and  improve  the  existing  environment  with  animation  and  sounds.  The 
effectiveness of this format of learning has been proven: pupils perceive and remember visual 
images much faster. The use of such interactive technologies in class increases the motivation 
to learn. 

It is noted [20] that among the most promising elements of this technology is its ease of 
use and continuous integration into the curriculum. Teachers can simply insert QR codes into 
their learning materials (such as PowerPoint slides, LMS, or handouts) to give pupils instant 
access.  Pupils  can  then  scan  the  code  using  their  phones  or  tablets  to  liven  up  the  AR 
experience in their own homes or view an interactive 3D model from their desktop, laptop, or 
Chromebook. You do not need expensive hardware like headsets, or complicated software or 
applications. 

With the help of augmented reality, you can expand the opportunities for learning in any 
subject  of  the  school  curriculum.  The  teacher  can  also  suggest  that  the  pupils  continue  to 
study the material independently, doing interactive homework. 

Let's  outline  the  possibilities  of  using  augmented  or  virtual  reality  during  blended 

learning: 

1. Visualization  of  educational  material  and  diversification  of  the  educational  process. 
Abstract  topics  and  concepts  can  be  made  more  interesting  and  understandable.  After  all, 
most mistakes pupils make when they do not fully understand all the properties of what they 
are currently studying. A flat image cannot be held or viewed from all sides. Augmented and 
virtual reality can be a great opportunity to master complex topics. 

2. Organization  of  group  or  project  work.  In  this  case,  it  will  not  be  a  formalized 
division into groups or micro-groups of pupils in the class, but full-fledged teamwork. In this 
case, the result of certain tasks depends on each participant. Project work involves solving a 
problem by a pupil or a group of pupils, which includes, on the one hand, the use of various 
methods,  teaching  aids,  and  on  the  other  -  the  integration  of  knowledge  and  skills  from 
different fields of science, technology, creativity. Pupils have the opportunity not only to use 
knowledge of the discipline but also to learn to negotiate and make decisions together, to be 
responsible according to their role in the educational team and to interpret the results of their 
activities.  And  the  teacher  acts  as  a  tutor,  mentor,  and  team  leader  (leader)  and  is  a  full 
member of the group of pupils. 

3. Use  of  the  most  modern  technologies.  Augmented  and  virtual  reality  technologies 
should be used in cases where it is most difficult to understand the training material. At the 
same  time,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  all  possibilities  of  their  use  in  advance.  Learning 
material should be available to every pupil, free and understandable.  

4. Additional tools for assessing academic achievement. Independent work, control, or 
test task can be organized using augmented or  virtual  reality (for example, in  the form  of  a 

79 

DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

quest or performing tasks in the form of a game). This format is interesting and encourages 
the knowledge of additional facts, a deeper understanding of the subject. 

As  these  and  other  forms  of  new  technologies  are  introduced  into  education,  blended 
learning options will continue to expand, leading to the formation of the class of the future, 
which  provides  an  open  educational  platform  with  interdisciplinary  and  innovative 
approaches using digital technologies that improve the educational process focused on pupils. 
And  this  is  convincing  because  the  emerging  technologies  have  the  potential  to  enrich 
education. Therefore, a  model was designed to use augmented and virtual reality in blended 
learning in general secondary education (Fig. 3). 

The  main  purpose  of  using  virtual  and  augmented  reality  in  blended  learning  is  to 
acquire knowledge and practical skills, form digital and research competence of students. The 
teacher can choose a convenient model of blended learning, prepare the necessary materials 
and teaching aids to effectively combine online learning with classroom learning. 

When  organizing  blended  learning  in  a  group  or  individually,  the  teacher  uses  in 
addition  to  standard  technical  means  also  means  of  AR  and  VR.  The  method  of  training  is 
chosen depending on the lesson plan: lecture-monologue, modeling, brainstorming. 

During  the  study,  the  student  acquires  knowledge,  skills  and  abilities  in  a  particular 
subject. The result of blended learning involving AR and VR is the acquisition of digital and 
research competencies in different formats of learning. 

Fig. 3. The model to use augmented and virtual reality in blended learning in general 
secondary education 

Based on the designed model, the methodology of using augmented and virtual reality 

in blended learning in general secondary education was developed. 

The  structure  of  the  methodology  of  using  augmented  and  virtual  reality  in  blended 

learning in general secondary education: 

Target component. 
Purpose: acquisition of knowledge and practical skills, formation of digital and research 

competence of the pupils. 

Target group: teachers, pupils. 
Content component. 

80 

 
 
DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

Teacher's  activity:  choice  of  model  of  blended  learning;  preparation  of  necessary 
materials  and  teaching  aids;  an  effective  combination  of  online  learning  with  classroom 
learning. 

Pupils’ activity: mastering knowledge, skills and abilities. 
Technological component. 
Teaching methods: lecture-monologue (offline/online); modeling; brain storm. 
Forms of training: group, project. 
Learning tools: augmented and virtual reality tools. 
Organizational forms of learning: blended learning. 
Resultant  component:  formed  digital  and  research  competencies  in  a  mixed  learning 

format. 

As can be seen, the methodology is quite universal and can be used for any subject in 
general secondary education. The key mode of learning is blended learning. This is due to the 
use of augmented and virtual reality tools. The use of these teaching aids must be combined 
with  traditional  ones.  For  example,  theoretical  material  may  be  effectively  presented  using 
augmented  and  virtual  reality.  The  flexibility  of  the  methodology  is  provided  by  the 
variability of the use of one or another tool of augmented and virtual reality. 

Here are the examples of augmented or virtual reality software products: 
  for physics and chemistry: MEL Chemistry VR; 
  for anatomy: Anatomy VR; 
  for geography: Google Expeditions; 
  for the organization of the educational process using AR, VR: EON-XR. 
There  are  many  possible  ways  of  using  augmented  or  virtual  reality  in  general 

secondary education, but the purpose of our study is not to describe all the available tools.  

It  is  better  to  plan  the  lesson  using  separate  tools  from  AR  and  VR,  because  full 
immersion  in  virtual  reality  will  lead  to  a  change  in  the  organizational  form  of  learning 
(distance learning). 

The use of separate AR and VR tools is best used for the following types of lessons: 
  a lesson of learning new knowledge; 
  lesson of formation of abilities and skills; 
  lesson of generalization and systematization; 
  combined lesson. 
It is best to use AR and VR tools to support the following processes: 
  pupils’  perception  and  awareness  of  factual  material  (lesson  of  learning  new 

knowledge, combined lesson); 

  understanding  the  connections  and  dependencies  between  the  elements  of  the 

learning (lesson of learning new knowledge, combined lesson); 

  creative  transfer  of  knowledge  and  skills  to  new  situations  (lesson  of  formation  of 

abilities and skills); 

  generalization and systematization of basic theoretical  principles and  relevant  ideas 

of science (lesson of generalization and systematization). 

The use of AR and VR is considered not only in theoretical terms, but also has a practical 
implementation. The teachers’ readiness to use augmented reality in the educational process was 
studied in [21]. The use of gamification and modeling as cognitive technologies, as well as social 
networks as a synthetic environment for social development is described in [22]. 

In  2021,  the  Institute  of  Information  Technologies  and  Learning  Tools  of  the  National 
Academy of Pedagogical Sciences of Ukraine launched a study "The use of digital technologies in 
the  process  of  blended  learning  in  general  secondary  education"  and  obtained  the  following 
results: 

81 

DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

  developed  criteria  and  indicators  for  the  selection  of  digital  technologies  in  the 

process of blended learning; 

  substantiated and developed methods of using digital technologies in the process of 

blended learning in general secondary education; 

  developed  a  method  of  using  augmented  and  virtual  reality  in  blended  learning  in 

general secondary education. 

The results of the research were implemented and approved within the following scientific 

and practical events: 

January  27,  2021  –  Webinar  on  the  topic:  "Information  technology  in  science  and 

education", Vinnytsia Mykhailo Kotsyubynsky State Pedagogical University, Vinnytsia. 

February  11,  2021  –  Reporting  scientific  conference  of  the  Institute  of  Information 
Technologies and Teaching Aids of the National Academy of  Pedagogical Sciences of Ukraine, 
Kyiv. 

February  24,  2021  –  Master  class  "Preparation  of  mathematics  teachers  for  blended  and 

distance learning of students", Kryvyi Rih State Pedagogical University, Kryvyi Rih. 

April  7,  2021  –  All-Ukrainian  scientific  seminar  "Security  of  the  individual  in  the  digital 
environment:  legal,  psychological  and  technological  aspects",  State  Research  Institute  of  the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs of Ukraine, Kyiv. 

August 19, 2021 – All-Ukrainian August Forum "Education of Ukraine 30 without barriers: 
vectors  of  quality  and  success",  strategic  session  "NEW  UKRAINIAN  SCHOOL:  innovative 
dimensions of teaching, learning, and education". 

The  empirical  testing  showed  an  increase  in  the  ICT  competence  of  learners  during  the 

proposed training and master classes. 

5.  CONCLUSIONS AND PROSPECTS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH 

Thus,  in  the  context  of  the  digital  transformation  of  education  in  Ukraine,  the  use  of 
digital  technologies  in  the  educational  process  opens  wide  prospects  for  improving  the 
efficiency of the educational process. And the orientation of educational institutions towards 
modern pedagogical trends will help to increase the motivation of learners, in particular, the 
development of their digital and research competence. 

We believe that virtual augmented and mixed reality technologies have a wide range of 
impact on human perception of the surrounding, in particular, the use of the above mentioned 
technologies will significantly enrich the educational process and contribute to the formation 
of pupils’ digital and research competence. 

The  use  of  augmented  and  virtual  reality  technologies  provides  pupils  with  new 
opportunities  and  prospects  focused  on  the  acquisition  of  practical  skills,  promotes  the 
development  and  self-education  of  each  pupil,  gives  them  the  opportunity  to  gain  the  latest 
knowledge  and  get  practical  training.  The  use  of  AR  and  VR  technologies  brings  science 
closer  to  life,  recreates  real-life  situations,  helps  to  create  artificial  spaces  for  unsolved 
problems.  This  creates  new  opportunities  for  mastering  practical  skills,  provides  research 
experience, makes learning a vivid process, prevents distractions from learning and increases 
motivation  to  learn,  helps  to  better  understand  the  set  of  concepts,  definitions,  theorems, 
properties that pupils deal with when learning certain topics. 

The study described the special benefits of blended learning. It has been found that there 
are different models of blended learning. The model of using augmented and virtual reality in 
blended  learning  in  general  secondary  education  is  proposed.  It  consists  of  the  following 
blocks:  goal;  teacher’s  activity;  forms  of  education;  teaching  methods;  teaching  aids; 
organizational  forms  of  education;  pupil  activity  and  result.  Based  on  the  model,  the 
methodology of using augmented and virtual reality in blended learning in general secondary 

82 

DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

education was developed. The methodology is quite universal and can be used for any subject 
in general secondary education. The key organizational form of learning is blended learning. 
The flexibility of the technique is provided by the variability of the use of one or another tool 
of augmented and virtual reality.  It is better to plan the lesson using separate tools from AR 
and VR, because full immersion in virtual reality will lead to a change in the organizational 
form of learning (distance learning). 

The possible ways to use augmented reality suggest: 
  the  need  to  transform  expensive  technologies  into  budget  options  suitable  for 

smartphones and simple computers; 

  augmented reality technologies should be aimed at acquiring skills, transferring and 

controlling knowledge. 

We see the prospects of further research in the elaboration of guidelines on the use of 

augmented reality in the process of blended learning in general secondary education.  

FINANCING 

The article presents the results of the study "Use of digital technologies in the process of 
blended learning in general secondary education", the winner of the competitive selection for 
2021  applied  research  to  support  young  scientists  working  (studying)  in  subordinate 
institutions  of  NAES  of  Ukraine  (Resolution  of  the  Presidium  of  NAES  of  Ukraine  of 
February  1,  2021,  No  1-2  /  2-13).  The  authors  of  the  article  are  performers  of  the  applied 
research. 

REFERENCES (TRANSLATED AND TRANSLITERATED) 

[1] 

I. Melnyk, N. Zaderei, and G. Nefodova,“Augmented reality and virtual reality as the resources of pupils’ 
educational activity”,in Proceedings of the International Scientific Conference "Information Technology 
and Computer Modeling", 2018, pp. 61-64. 

[2]  O. R. Oleksyuk,“Application  of  augmented  reality  technology  in  the  field  of  education”,inEducation  of 
the  XXI  century:  realities  and  prospects  of  development.Coll.  Thesis  All-Ukrainian.  Scientific-practical 
conf., Ternopil, 2020, pp. 177-179. 

[3]  Т. А. Vakaliuk,  and  М. В. Marienko,  “Experience  of  using  cloud-oriented  open  science  systems  in  the 
process  of  teaching  and  professional  development  of  natural  and  mathematical  teachers”,  Information 
Technologies and Learning Tools, vol. 81, no. 1, pp. 340-355, Feb. 2021. 

[4]  V. M. Kukharenko, 

“Blended 

learning. 

Webinar”, 

2014.[Online]. 

Available: 

http://vladimirkukharen.wiziq. com/online-class/2190095-intel-blended.Accessed on: Sept. 12, 2021. 
[5]  J. E. Prescott, K. Bundschuh, E. R. Kazakoff, and P. Macaruso,“Elementary school-wide implementation 
of  a  blended  learning  program  for  reading  intervention”,  The  Journal  of  Educational  Research, 
vol. 111,no. 4, pp. 497-506, 2018. doi: 10.1080 / 00220671.2017.1302914. 

[6]  R. P. Murtikusuma  et  al,  “Development  of  blended  learning  based  on  Google  Classroomwith  osing 
culture  theme  in  mathematics  learning”,  Journal  of  Physics:  Conf.  Series,  vol. 1165,  no. 012017,  2019. 
doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1165/1/012017. 

[7]  L. B. Ni,  “Blended  Learning  through  Google  Classroom”,  International  Journal  of  Educational  and 

Pedagogical Sciences,vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 220-226, 2020. 

[8]  O. V. Syrovatskyi,  S. O. Semerikov,  Y. O. Modlo,  Y. V. Yechkalo,  andS. O. Zelinska,“Augmented 
reality software design for educational purposes”,in Proceedings of the 1stPupil Workshop on Computer 
Science & Software Engineering (CS&SE@SW2018), vol. 2292, Kryvyi Rih, 2018, pp. 193-225. 

[9]  V. Tkachuk,  Y. Yechkalo,  A. Taraduda,  and  I. Steblivets,“Augmented reality as a distance learning tool 
under  quarantine  conditions”,  Educational  Discourse:  collection  of  scientific  papers,  pp. 43-53, 
2020.doi:10.33930/ed.2019.5007.22(4)-4. 

[10]  J. Hofmann,  “Top  10  challenges  of  blended 

their  solutions!)”,  2014.[Online]. 
Available:http://blog.insynctraining.com/top-10-challenges-of-blended-learning.  Accessed  on:  Sept.  12, 
2021. 

learning  (and 

83 

DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

[11]  J. J. Stephan, A. S. Ahmed, and A. H. Omran, “Blended Learning Using Virtual Reality Environments”, 

Iraqi Journal for Computers and Informatics IJCI, vol. 43 (1), pp. 6-13, 2017. 

[12]  G. Thorsteinsson,  and  T. Page,  “Blended  learning  approach  to  improve  in-service  teacher  education  in 

Europe through the FISTE Comenius 2.1 project”, Educatia, vol. 21, pp. 291-297, 2008. 

[13]  K.  Mumtaz,  M.  M.  Iqbal,  S.  Khalid,  T.  Rafiq,  S.  M.  Owais,  M.  Al  Achhab,  “An  E-Assessment 
Framework  for  Blended  Learning  with  Augmented  Reality  to  Enhance  the  Student  Learning”,  Eurasia 
Journal  of  Mathematics,  Science  and  Technology  Education,  vol.  13  (8),  pp.  4419-4436,  2017.  doi: 
https://doi.org/10.12973/eurasia.2017.00938a. 

[14]  O. Krivonos,  and  O. Korotun,“Mixed  learning  as  a  basis  for  the  formation  of  ICT  competence  of 
teachers”,Scientific notes, Kirovograd State Pedagogical University named after Vladimir Vynnychenko. 
Series:  Problems  of  methods  of  physical-mathematical  and  technological  education,  vol. 8,  pp. 43-53, 
2015. 

[15]  M. Oliver,  and  K. Trigwell,  “Can  ’blended  learning’  be  redeemed?”,  E-learning,  vol. 2,  pp. 17-26, 

2005.doi:10.2304/elea.2005.2.1.17. 

[16]  J. Stein,  and  C. Graham,“A  strategy  of  iterative  development”,Essentials  for  Blended  Learning:  A 

Standards-Based Guide, Routledge, New York, 2014. 

[17]  H. Staker, 

and  M. Horn, 

“Classifying 

k–12 

blended 

learning”, 

2012. 

[Online]. 

Available:https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Classifying-K-12-Blended-Learning.-Staker-
Horn/9152c8230740e218c3ff5120b4d7bfb2f2fd603f. Accessed on: Sept. 12, 2021. 

[18]  Ministry  of  Education  and  Science  of  Ukraine.  (2020,  Feb.,  2).1/9-609,  Letter  of  the  Regarding  the 

organization of distance learning. [Online]. Available:https://osvita.ua/legislation/Ser_osv/77298/. 
[19]  Virtual  Reality  (VR):  Best  Practices,  2018.[Online].  Available:https://www.it.ua/ru/articles/virtualnaja-

realnost-vr-luchshie-praktiki. Accessed on: Sept. 12, 2021. 
reality 

to  use  augmented 

[20]  J. Bradbury,  “3  ways 

in  hybrid 

learning”,  2020. 

Available:https://www.teachercast.net/3-ways-to-use-augmented-reality-in-hybrid-learning/. 
on: Sept. 12, 2021. 

[Online]. 
Accessed 

[21]  S. G. Lytvynova,  O. Y. Burov,  and  S. O. Semerikov,  “Conceptual  approaches  to  the  use  of  augmented 
reality meanswithin the educational process”, Modern informational technologies and innovative methods 
in  professional  training:  methodology,  theory,  experience,  problems,  vol. 55,  pp. 46-62,  2020.  doi: 
10.31652/2412-1142-2020-55-46-62. 

[22]  O. P. Pinchuk,  S. G. Lytvynova,  and  O. Y. Burov,  “Synthetic  educational  environment  –  a  footpace  to 
new education”, Information Technologies and Learning Tools, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 28-45, Sep. 2017. 

Text of the article was accepted by Editorial Team 12.09.2021  

ВИКОРИСТАННЯ ІНСТРУМЕНТІВ ДОПОВНЕНОЇ ТА ВІРТУАЛЬНОЇ 
РЕАЛЬНОСТІ В ЗАКЛАДІ ЗАГАЛЬНОЇ СЕРЕДНЬОЇ ОСВІТИ В УМОВАХ 
ЗМІШАНОГО НАВЧАННЯ 

Коваленко Валентина Володимирівна 
кандидат педагогічних наук,  
старша наукова співробітниця відділу хмаро орієнтованих систем інформатизації освіти 
Інститут інформаційних технологій і засобів навчання НАПН України, м. Київ, Україна 
ORCID ID 0000-0002-4681-5606 
valyavako@gmail.com 

Мар’єнко Майя Володимирівна 
кандидат педагогічних наук,  
старша наукова співробітниця відділу хмаро орієнтованих систем інформатизації освіти 
Інститут інформаційних технологій і засобів навчання НАПН України, м. Київ, Україна 
ORCID ID 0000-0002-8087-962X 
popelmayal@gmail.com 

Сухіх Аліса Сергіївна 
кандидат педагогічних наук,  
старша наукова співробітниця відділу хмаро орієнтованих систем інформатизації освіти 
Інститут інформаційних технологій і засобів навчання НАПН України, м. Київ, Україна 
ORCID ID 0000-0001-8186-1715 
alisam@ukr.net 

84 

DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

Анотація.  У  статті  досліджується  проблема  використання  доповненої  та  віртуальної 
реальності під час змішаного навчання в закладі загальної середньої освіти. Аналіз останніх 
досліджень та публікацій показав, що використання доповненої та віртуальної реальності в 
навчальному  процесі  вже  розглядалося  вченими.  Однак  цільовою  групою  у  цих 
дослідженнях  є  студенти  закладів  вищої  освіти.  Водночас  більшість  праць  науковців 
присвячена  проблемі  впровадження  доповненої  реальності  у  традиційний  освітній  процес. 
Однак  використання  технології  доповненої  та  віртуальної  реальності  під  час  змішаного 
навчання залишається практично не дослідженим. У проведеному дослідженні аналізується 
зміст  поняття  "змішане  навчання".  Розглянуто  концептуальні  принципи  змішаного 
навчання.  Було  виявлено,  що  в  поняття  "змішане  навчання"  вчені  привносять  різні 
трактування,  тому  їх  визначення  дещо  відрізняються.  Іноді  дослідники  розрізняють 
компоненти  змішаного  навчання:  очне  та  онлайн  навчання.  Дослідження  розкриває 
особливості та  переваги змішаного навчання та  принципи організації змішаного навчання. 
Було  виявлено,  що  існують  певні  труднощі  у  впровадженні  змішаного  навчання.  У  статті 
викладено практичне використання віртуальної та доповненої реальності. Дано визначення 
доповненої  та  віртуальної  реальності.  Змішана  реальність  розглядається  як  окремий  вид 
поняття «віртуальна реальність». Розглядається використання окремих додатків віртуальної 
та  доповненої  реальності,  які  можна  застосовувати  під  час  змішаного  навчання  (MEL 
Chemistry  VR;  Anatomyou  VR;  Google  Expeditions;  EON-XR).  У  результаті  дослідження  автори 
наводять  можливі  способи  використання  доповненої  реальності  в  навчальному  процесі. 
Була спроєктована модель використання доповненої та віртуальної реальності у змішаному 
навчанні  в  загальній  середній  освіті.  Вона  складається  з  таких  блоків:  мета;  діяльність 
учителя;  форми  навчання;  методи  навчання;  засоби  навчання;  організаційні  форми 
навчання;  активність  учнів  та  результат.  На  основі  моделі  розроблено  методику 
використання  доповненої  та  віртуальної  реальності  у  змішаному  навчанні  в  закладі 
загальної  середньої  освіти.  Методика  містить  такі  компоненти:  цільовий,  змістовий, 
технологічний, результативний. Методика універсальна і може бути використана для будь-
якого  предмета  загальної  середньої  освіти.  Визначено  типи  уроків,  на  яких  доцільно 
використовувати  доповнену  (AR)  та  віртуальну  реальність  (VR).  Дано  рекомендації,  на 
якому етапі уроку краще використовувати інструменти AR та VR (залежно від типу уроку). 

Ключові  слова:  змішане  навчання;  доповнена  реальність;  віртуальна  реальність;  заклади 
загальної середньої освіти. 

ИСПОЛЬЗОВАНИЕ ИНСТРУМЕНТОВ ДОПОЛНЕННОЙ И ВИРТУАЛЬНОЙ 
РЕАЛЬНОСТИ В СРЕДНЕМ ОБЩЕОБРАЗОВАТЕЛЬНОМ УЧЕБНОМ 
ЗАВЕДЕНИИ В УСЛОВИЯХ СМЕШАННОГО ОБУЧЕНИЯ 

Коваленко Валентина Владимировна 
кандидатпедагогических наук,  
старший научный сотрудник отдела облачно ориентированных систем информатизации образования 
Институт информационных технологий и средств обучения НАПН Украины, г. Киев, Украина 
ORCID ID 0000-0002-4681-5606 
valyavako@gmail.com 

Марьенко Майя Владимировна 
кандидат педагогических наук,  
старший научный сотрудник отдела облачно ориентированных систем информатизации образования 
Институт информационных технологий и средств обучения НАПН Украины, г. Киев, Украина 
ORCID ID 0000-0002-8087-962X 
popelmayal@gmail.com 

Сухих Алиса Сергеевна 
кандидат педагогических наук,  
старший научный сотрудник отдела облачно ориентированных систем информатизации образования 
Институт информационных технологий и средств обучения НАПН Украины, г. Киев, Украина 
ORCID ID 0000-0001-8186-1715 
alisam@ukr.net 

85 

DOI: 10.33407/itlt.v86i6.4664                ISSN: 2076-8184. Information Technologies and Learning Tools, 2021, Vol 86, №6. 

Аннотация.  В  исследовании  рассматривается  проблема  использования  дополненной  и 
виртуальной реальности в процессе смешанного обучения в средних общеобразовательных 
учреждениях.  Анализ  последних  исследований  и  публикаций  показал,  что  использование 
дополненной  и  виртуальной  реальности  в  образовательном  процессе  уже  рассматривалось 
учеными.  Однако  целевая  группа  в  этих  исследованиях  –  студенты  высших  учебных 
заведений.  При  этом  большая  часть  работ  ученых  посвящена  проблеме  внедрения 
дополненной реальности в традиционный образовательный процесс. Однако, использование 
технологий  дополненной  и  виртуальной  реальности  в  процессе  смешанного  обучения 
остается  практически  неизученным.  В  исследовании  анализируется  значение  понятия 
«смешанное  обучение».  Рассмотрены  концептуальные  принципы  смешанного  обучения. 
Показано, что ученые рассматривают разные трактовки к пониманию термина  «смешанное 
обучение»,  поэтому  их  определения  несколько  различаются.  Иногда  исследователи 
различают  компоненты  смешанного  обучения:  очное  и  онлайн-обучение.  В  исследовании 
представлены  преимущества  смешанного  обучения  и  модели  смешанного  обучения. 
Исследование  показало, что существуют  некоторые трудности при внедрении смешанного 
обучения.  В  статье  речь  идет  о  практическом  использовании  виртуальной  и  дополненной 
реальности.  Дано  определение  дополненной  и  виртуальной  реальности.  Смешанная 
реальность  рассматривается  как  отдельное  понятие.  Рассмотрены  некоторые  приложения 
виртуальной  и  дополненной  реальности,  которые  можно  использовать  в  процессе 
смешанного обучения (MEL Chemistry VR; Anatomyou VR; Google Expeditions; EON-XR). В 
результате исследования авторы приводят возможные способы использования дополненной 
реальности в  учебном процессе.  Была спроектирована  модель использования дополненной 
и  виртуальной  реальности  в  смешанном  обучении  в  среднем  общеобразовательном 
учреждении. Она состоит из следующих блоков: цель; педагогическая деятельность; формы 
обучения;  методы  обучения;  средства  обучения;  организационные  формы  обучения; 
ученическая  активность  и  результат.  На  основе  модели  разработана  методика 
использования  дополненной  и  виртуальной  реальности  в  смешанном  обучении  в  среднем 
общеобразовательном  учреждении.  Методика  содержит  следующие  компоненты:  целевой, 
содержательный,  технологический,  результативный.  Методика  достаточно  универсальна  и 
может  применяться  к  любому  предмету  общего  среднего  образования.  Определены  виды 
уроков,  в  которых  целесообразно  использовать  дополненную  (AR)  и  виртуальную  (VR) 
реальность.  Даны  рекомендации,  на  каком  этапе  урока  лучше  использовать  инструменты 
AR и VR (в зависимости от типа урока). 

Ключевые слова: смешанное обучение; дополненная реальность; виртуальная реальность; 
средние общеобразовательные учреждения. 

ThisworkislicensedunderCreativeCommonsAttribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 InternationalLicense. 

86 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
