Polarized helium gas-jet target

A high-density polarized 3He gas-jet target for laser-plasma applications
P. Fedorets,1 C. Zheng,2 R. Engels,3 I. Engin,4 H. Feilbach,5 U. Giesen,6 H. Glückler,6 C. Kannis,7 F. Klehr,6
M. Lennartz,6 H. Pfeifer,2 J. Pfennings,8 C.M. Schneider,2 N. Schnitzler,2 H. Soltner,6 R. Swaczyna,5 and
M. Büscher2, 9
1)National Research Centre "Kurchatov Institute", RU 117218 Moscow
2)Peter Grünberg Institute (PGI-6), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, D 52425 Jülich
3)Nuclear Physics Institute (IKP-2), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, D 52425 Jülich
4)Sicherheit und Strahlenschutz (S-A), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, D 52425 Jülich
5)Peter Grünberg Institute (PGI-JCNS-TA), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, D 52425 Jülich
6)Central Institute for Engineering, Electronics and Analytics (ZEA-1), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH,
D 52425 Jülich
7)Nuclear Physics Institute (IKP-4), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, D 52425 Jülich
8)Institute of Biological Information Processing (IBI-TA), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH,
D 52425 Jülich
9)Laser and Plasma Physics Institute, Heinrich Heine University, D 40225 Düsseldorf

(*Electronic mail: m.buescher@fz-juelich.de)

(Dated: 1 February 2022)
A laser-driven spin-polarized 3He2+-beam source for nuclear–physics experiments and for the investigation of polarized
nuclear fusion demands a high-density polarized 3He gas-jet target. Such a target requires a magnetic system providing
a permanent homogeneous holding ﬁeld for the nuclear spins plus a set of coils for adjusting the orientation of the
polarization. Starting from a transport vessel at a maximum pressure of 3 bar, the helium gas is compressed for a
short time and can be injected into a laser-interaction chamber through a non-magnetic opening valve and nozzle, thus
forming jets with densities of about a few 1019 cm−3 and widths of about 1 mm. The target comprises a 3D adjustment
system for precise positioning of the jet relative to the laser focus. An auxiliary gas system provides remote target
operation and ﬂushing of the gas lines with Ar gas, which helps to reduce polarization losses. The design of the target,
its operation procedures and ﬁrst experimental results are presented.

PACS numbers: 29.25.Lg,29.90.+r,52.38.Kd

I.

INTRODUCTION

Nuclear polarized 3He gas has many applications in basic
research and technology development.
It can, for example,
be used as a polarized neutron target1 for studying the neu-
tron structure in scattering experiments, e.g. with polarized
electrons2. The development of compact polarized 3He-ion
sources3–6 provides additional options for the study of spin
degrees of freedom in nuclear and particle physics. For laser-
induced nuclear fusion reactions, spin-polarized fuel has the
potential to provide a higher energy output. For example, cal-
culations for the isospin-symmetric D(T,n)4He reaction with
fully polarized fuel predict an increase of the nuclear fusion
cross-section by a factor of 1.5, while the energy gain in-
creases by about 45 %7. In case of the D-3He reaction a re-
duction of the required laser driver energy for ignition of about
60 % has been predicted as compared to unpolarized fusion8.
A crucial question in the ﬁeld of laser-induced particle ac-
celeration is the inﬂuence of strong electro-magnetic laser and
plasma ﬁelds on the spin polarization of the created particle
beams. In simple words, two scenarios are conceivable: ei-
ther the interaction times are long compared to the Larmor
frequencies in the local ﬁelds and the spin orientation of a
pre-polarized target is affected and destroyed, or the short (up
to few ps) laser pulses (and the plasma) have only little effect
on the spin alignment, and the polarization is conserved. For a
detailed theoretical study of these effects we refer to the paper
by Thomas et al.9. Therefore, an experimental proof of nu-

clear spin-polarization conservation inside a (laser-induced)
plasma is of high relevance also for fusion science.

In order to address the above mentioned questions, exper-
iments with nuclear polarized targets are needed. Such stud-
ies are very challenging since the energy differences of spin
states in the strong plasma ﬁelds are of the order of meV
only and, thus, much smaller than the typical thermal energies
in the keV regime. As a ﬁrst step of an experimental cam-
paign, a measurement of proton distributions and their polar-
ization, accelerated from ("standard") unpolarized foils, was
performed at the Arcturus laser at Heinrich Heine University
Düsseldorf, Germany10. As a second step, ion energy spec-
tra and their angular distributions were measured with unpo-
larized 3,4He gas jets at the PHELIX laser, GSI Darmstadt,
Germany11–13. Concluding experiments with polarized 3He
gas require the development of a novel target system, which is
the subject of this article (n.b.: 4He nuclei cannot be polarized,
since they carry no spin).

II. POLARIZATION AND RELAXATION OF THE
NUCLEAR SPIN

3He gas has several advantages as compared to other po-
larizable materials. It can rather easily be polarized through
optical pumping14 and stored over a long time at room tem-
perature in moderate (mT) holding ﬁelds. The polarization of
the 3He gas decays exponentially with a relaxation time con-

2
2
0
2

n
a
J

1
3

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
1
7
0
3
1
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Polarized helium gas-jet target

2

stant that is governed by several effects, i.e. the gradient of the
magnetic ﬁeld, dipolar relaxation, gas impurities, and surface
relaxation on the walls of the storage vessel.

The homogeneity of the magnetic ﬁeld is extremely impor-
tant for achieving long relaxation time constants15–19. There-
fore, all disturbing factors must be excluded or their inﬂuence
at least minimized. All components in the vicinity of the po-
larized 3He gas should be made from non-magnetic materials,
even if they are not in direct contact with the gas. Since also
all electro-magnetic excitations have to be avoided, standard
magnetic valves (e.g. driven by solenoids) must not be used in
the gas lines.

Dipolar relaxation is the intrinsic polarization decrease due
to magnetic dipole-dipole interactions between two 3He nu-
clei. This effect is thus proportional to the gas pressure inside
the vessel and the gas lines1,20. Glass vessels with a maximal
allowed pressure of 3 bar are typically used for the storage of
polarized 3He. The relaxation-time constant is typically about
270 h.

An admixture of paramagnetic oxygen drastically decreases
the relaxation time21–24. Therefore, careful cleaning, ﬂush-
ing and pumping procedures are mandatory for the gas lines
before the operation with polarized 3He. Surface relaxation
is caused by the contact of the 3He nuclei with molecules of
wall materials via adsorption and diffusion effects. Accord-
ing to Refs.25,26, both effects are proportional to the surface-
to-volume ratio of the gas vessel. Thus, spherical balloons
produced at Mainz Univ. from Cs-layered glass can provide a
relaxation-time constant in the range 430–570 h25–27.

The standard 3 bar pressure of the polarized 3He gas in stor-
age vessels is not sufﬁcient for the experiments with laser-
induced plasmas. Here, pressures in the range 20–30 bar are
needed to drive the gas through the nozzle and to achieve
the required densities at the laser-plasma interaction point12.
Therefore, additional compression of the polarized helium is
required. Due to the increased depolarization, the duration of
this compression should be as short as possible and be applied
only to a minimal fraction of the polarized gas needed for the
laser-induced ion-acceleration process.

III. STATIC MAGNETIC HOLDING FIELD

A constant homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld is required to
maintain the polarization of the 3He gas over sufﬁciently long
time (i.e. many hours). This can, in principle, be achieved by
two set-ups, Helmholtz coils or permanent magnets. We chose
permanent magnets due to speciﬁc conditions of future appli-
cations, like operation of the system in the vacuum of laser-
interaction chambers and the presence of huge EMPs from the
laser-plasma interactions. Under such conditions, Helmholtz
coils require a speciﬁc cooling system and the inﬂuence of
EMPs on the magnetic ﬁeld gradient is unclear. Clearly, the
construction of the magnet system must fulﬁll the geometrical
boundary conditions imposed by the vacuum chamber, in our
case it has been adapted to the one of PHELIX.

All these issues could be realized with a set of permanent
magnets arranged in the geometry of a Halbach cylinder. In

FIG. 1. Layout of the permanent magnet system.

this geometry, each permanent magnet is oriented in such way
to form a resulting common homogeneous ﬁeld in the desired
direction inside the cylinder. To be more speciﬁc, the mag-
net system consists of 48 NdFeB permanent magnets com-
bined in eight vertical columns arranged in a circle with di-
ameter 1100 mm31–33. The distance between the columns is
420.95 mm. Each NdFeB magnet has an octagonal cross-
section with an energy product of 45 MGOe34. Figure 1 shows
a sketch of the magnet system. There are 6 magnets in each
column divided into two groups (2×3 magnets), with a ver-
tical distance of 471.71 mm between the group centers (blue
color). In this way, two rings of magnets are created. The
resulting ﬁeld is oriented horizontally and in the volume of
the polarized 3He its magnitude amounts to about 1.3 mT (at
the center of the system). The estimated dominant relative
ﬁeld gradient in the horizontal direction is (δ Bz/δ z)/B0 ≈
3.5 × 10−4 cm−1, cf. Ref.32. The quality of the magnetic sys-
tem was veriﬁed with a glass vessel containing polarized 3He
located at the center of the system. Four calibrated ﬂux-gate
magnetometers35 with a measurement range 0.1–200 nT were
used pairwise36–38 to observe any ﬁeld changes during the op-
eration. The measured relaxation time constant of polarized
3He inside the magnet system was 21 h32. This is sufﬁcient
for one working day at the planned experiments, where a fresh
vessel with polarized 3He gas is used per day.

IV. COIL SYSTEM

In order to minimize the systematic error of the measured
3He2+ beam polarization, it is mandatory to change the spin
orientation of the prepolarized 3He gas for different laser shots
relative to the laser-propagation direction. This is realized by
a secondary magnet system composed of four concentric coils
which provide a better ﬁeld homogeneity than a Helmholtz
set-up comprising just a pair of coils, see Fig. 2. The ﬁeld
direction is also oriented horizontally, but perpendicular to the

Polarized helium gas-jet target

3

FIG. 2. Arrangement of the magnet system with permanent magnets
and four concentric coils. The transport vessel with 3He (gray sphere)
can be seen at the center and the compressor below. The PHELIX
laser beam is indicated by the red cone.

FIG. 4. Glass ball, manufactured at FZ Jülich, for the storage of
polarized 3He.

FIG. 3. Fully assembled magnet system in the laboratory.

ﬁeld of the permanent magnets. The resulting magnetic ﬁeld
of both systems can thus be rotated in the horizontal plane by
changing and/or reversing the current in the coils.

Each coil is made of a coiled Cu sheet with a cross sec-
tion of 40×40 mm2. The housing has a width and thickness
of 56 mm, and the outer and inner diameters are 803 mm and
695 mm, respectively. The magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld
at the center of the concentric coils system as function of the
driving current was calibrated with a ﬂux-gate magnetometer
ﬁne-adjusted perpendicular to the permanent magnetic ﬁeld.
The dependence is linear and described by B = 503 × I, where
B (in µT) is the common magnetic ﬁeld generated by the four
concentric coils at the center of the system, and I (in A) is
the current applied to the coils. The planned current of 10 A
corresponds to a ﬁeld strength of 5.03 mT. In this case the re-
sulting magnetic ﬁeld will be rotated by 75.5◦ relative to the
original direction of the permanent magnetic ﬁeld. Figure 3
shows the fully assembled magnet system in the laboratory.

FIG. 5. Magnetic transport box19 with a single glass ball for polar-
ized 3He gas. Alternatively, boxes are available that can accommo-
date three glass balls at the same time.

V. GENERATION AND TRANSPORT OF POLARIZED
3HE GAS

The nuclear-polarized 3He gas is obtained by Metastable
Optical Pumping (MEOP)14, which is then stored in a ball-
shaped glass vessel19 shown in Fig. 4. The glass material is
GE 180. The diameter of the ball is 130 mm, which corre-
sponds to a volume of 1.15 liter. The glass ball is ﬁlled with
3He gas to a typical pressure of 3 bar.
In order to preserve
the polarization of 3He gas on the way from the polarizer (lo-
cated in a different building of FZ Jülich) to the laboratory, the
glass ball is transported inside a transport box19 (see Fig. 5),
which again provides a homogeneous magnetic holding ﬁeld
induced by permanent magnets.

Polarized helium gas-jet target

VI. GAS COMPRESSOR WITH NOZZLE

The pressure of the delivered polarized 3He gas from the
polarizer is limited to 3 bar as upper limit in the transport ves-
sel. On the other hand, for the PHELIX experiments a typical
maximum particle density of a few 1019 cm−3 at the interac-
tion point with the laser pulse is required12. This value de-
pends on several parameters, like the backing pressure of the
gas in front of the nozzle exit, the shape and the minimal di-
ameter of the nozzle, and the distance between the nozzle exit
and the laser focus. For given other parameters (see below)
the pressure in front of the nozzle should be in the range of
18–27 bar. This requires an additional compression of the po-
larized 3He gas for a short time duration, directly before the
laser shot. The completely non-magnetic compressor shown
in Fig. 6 was developed and built for this particular applica-
tion.

One of the main requirements is the use of non-magnetic
materials for such a compressor device. Any magnetizable
material — even stainless steel — will cause an instantaneous
reduction of the 3He polarization. While in the past a simi-
lar compressor had completely been built from aluminium40,
in our case, a composite design from titanium and aluminium
was chosen due to the required higher pressures. Titanium
was used for the compression chamber (top part) as the vol-
ume with the high pressure and for the piston. The housing of
the compressor is made from (cheaper) aluminium.

For sealing O-rings made from the Flexible 80A Resin from
Formlabs are used. The piston moves up and down by a pneu-
matic gas pressure of 6 bar. This operation gas must not con-
tain any oxygen in order to avoid depolarization of the 3He
gas in case of leakages into the compressor i.e. into the polar-
ized 3He gas. Therefore, standard pressurized air is prohibited
and cheap industrial gases like nitrogen or argon can be used
instead. Both gases were used during preparatory tests, but
later argon was selected since it is easily removed from the
recycled 3He gas by cryogenic puriﬁcation methods.

The upper part of the compressor is equipped with a pre-
valve in the 3He input tube, and a fast valve with a nozzle at
the exit (see below). The operation cycle starts with the lower
position of the piston. The polarized 3He gas is ﬁlled into the
compression chamber with a maximum pressure of 3 bar. Un-
der realistic conditions the input pressure is not higher than
2.5 bar due to losses by the ﬁlling of the input gas lines and
their covolume. During subsequent compression cycles the
input pressure decreases step by step, due to the ﬁnite, resid-
ual amount of the 3He gas in the transport vessel. Figure 7
shows the decrease of the input pressure after each compres-
sion for two possible options: either with removal of the un-
used 3He gas from the lines between two ﬁllings or without
removal. The ﬁrst scenario leads to a faster pressure reduc-
tion, but it is needed for most laser-acceleration applications.
High-intensity lasers like PHELIX have a minimum time in-
terval between two shots of 1.5 h. During this time, the polar-
ized 3He gas in the lines would basically lose its polarization
due to the contact with the material of the thin gas lines (bad
surface-to-volume ratio and hence many collisions with the
tube walls) and due to magnetic ﬁeld inhomogeneities since

4

FIG. 6. Top: Drawing of the compressor unit (edited ﬁgure from
Ref.39). The piston is in the upper position, i.e. the 3He gas is com-
pressed. Bottom: Photo of the compressor unit with the nozzle
mounted on the top.

Polarized helium gas-jet target

5

the lines are not located at the center of the magnet system
with the glass ball, where the magnetic ﬁeld conditions are
best. Therefore, it is mandatory to evacuate unused gas from
the lines and reﬁll them again from the glass ball shortly be-
fore the next laser shot, which reduces the amount of usable
gas. Without the evacuation, an input pressure of 1.5 bar is
reached at the 8th compression, and with evacuation proce-
dure, only 5 compressions are possible in total. The pneumatic
(radial diaphragm) pre-valve — which is able to stay closed at
pressures up to 50 bar — in the input line prevents back-ﬂow
of compressed gas into the vessel. Like all the screws needed
for its mounting it is also made from titanium to ensure polar-
izion conservation.

Short-pulse laser applications like ion acceleration require
operation in vacuum. Therefore, it is necessary to provide a
high-density gas jet for a short time only, just before the laser
pulse, to minimize deterioration of the vacuum conditions.
The valve should completely be opened within a few-ms time
window to form a sharp density proﬁle. In our case, conven-
tional electromagnetic valves are prohibited since they would
reduce or completely destroy the helium polarization due to
magnetic ﬁeld gradients and hydraulic or pneumatic valves
would be too slow. Piezo elements may provide the fast open-
ing of the valve, however, commercial standard piezo-driven
valves work at much lower pressures (up to 12 bar). There-
fore, a new fast opening valve was designed and built. A piezo
actuator P-60241 with an adjustment range of 1 mm at a max-
imum frequency of 150 Hz was chosen. In order to increase
this range up to 2 mm, two such actuators were combined.

Figure 8 shows the measured reaction time (∼ 6.6 ms) of
the piezo element. The piezo-valve piston is mounted inside
the top of the compressor to avoid additional dead volume.
The piston is made from titanium and has a cylindrical rubber
sealing on top. The distance between the opening aperture of
the valve and the nozzle has been minimized to a few mm.
When the compressor is idle (most of the time of the experi-
ment) the piezo elements have no applied voltage and, hence,
the piston is down and the valve is opened. Directly before
compression, a voltage is applied to the piezo elements which
causes a displacement, the piston moves up and the valve is
closed. The ﬁlling with the (polarized) 3He gas, the compres-
sion and the opening of the piezo valve are integrated into the
common trigger sequence of the laser-shot procedure.

With the compressor piston in its lower position the vol-
ume of the compression chamber is 90 ml. After compression
the volume is reduced to about 5.5 ml. The compression fac-
tor is expected to be 16.4 and for an input pressure of 3 bar
a working pressure of 49 bar should be achievable. In reality,
the connection with the pre-valve and the nozzle added some
volume, which is difﬁcult to calculate precisely. Therefore,
a calibration procedure was carried out for the compressor,
where the calibration was done with Ar as compressed gas
and pressurized air at 6 bar as operation gas. Figure 9 presents
the calibration function between the pressures of compressed
and input gas. The drop at input pressures above 7 bar is due to
backward ﬂow in the pneumatic pre-valve. Short tests with a
higher input pressure of 10 bar in the pneumatic line revealed
recovery of the linear relation between input and output pres-

FIG. 7. Decrease of the input pressure after each compression for
two possible options. Step 0 corresponds to the initial pressure of
3 bar in the glass ball.

FIG. 8. Time characteristics of the piezo element P-60241 used for
the fast opening valve.

FIG. 9. Dependence of the compressed gas pressure on the input
gas pressure (edited ﬁgure from Ref.39).

Polarized helium gas-jet target

6

FIG. 11. Sketch of the Mach-Zehnder interferometer for the mea-
surement of the gas-density proﬁle42

FIG. 10. Nozzle mounted on the top of the compressor. The cone-
shaped grooves follow the direction of the laser beam. At the lower
left side of the nozzle a needle for focus adjustment can be placed.

sures.

The density distribution in the gas jet is one of the key
parameters for laser-plasma experiments. Our previous mea-
surements at PHELIX12 revealed that this density should not
fall below 4 × 1018 cm−3, otherwise the number of laser-
accelerated ions becomes too small for the polarimetry. For
this reason the useful gas-jet density was chosen to be in the
range of (3 − 4) × 1019 cm−3. The particle density proﬁle
is basically determined by the nozzle geometry, a ﬂat proﬁle
with sharp edges — which is most favorable for ion accelera-
tion — can be generated by a supersonic de-Laval nozzle. Our
nozzle with Mach numbers of Msuper ≈ 3.44 and Msub ≈ 0.14,
a minimum diameter of 0.5 mm and nozzle exit of 1 mm is
made from titanium11. The nozzle ﬂange is mounted directly
above the outlet of the piezo valve, see Fig. 10.

The density distribution of the gas jets was measured and
calibrated with the help of a Mach-Zehnder interferometer
(see Fig. 11 in Ref.42) For these tests the compressor was
placed in a vacuum chamber with glass windows for the laser
beam and the interferometric images were recorded with a
CCD camera. Figure 12 shows examples of such images with-
out and with the jet. The data analysis procedures and extrac-

Interferometric images above the nozzle (black area at the
FIG. 12.
lower edges) before gas-jet opening (left) and at 47.2 bar backing
pressure 32 ms after triggering (right).42

tion of the density distributions are described in Ref.42.

Figure 13 shows a measured horizontal proﬁle of the jet
density 500 µm above the nozzle edge. The expected plateau
shape is conﬁrmed. The particle density depends linearly on
the backing pressure (see Fig. 14) and, thus, also on the 3He in-
put pressure. The density of the jet decreases with the distance
from the nozzle, see Fig. 14. Figure 15 presents the temporal
evolution of the particle density for different heights above the
nozzle edge at 27.1 bar backing pressure. The gas jet reaches
its maximum density at 14 ms after the trigger for opening
the piezo valve42 and remains stable for at least 30 ms after
that. The main results of the interferometric measurements
are summarized in Table I. It is seen that the desired gas-jet
density range of (3 − 4) × 1019cm−3 is achievable with the
gas from the transport vessel, but the input pressure should not
drop below 1.5 bar. This limits the operation with one glass
ball to ﬁve compressions with evacuation of 3He gas from the
tubes between the laser shots. This is well suited for experi-
ments at the PHELIX laser, which permits a maximum of six
shots per day.

VII. ADJUSTMENT SYSTEM

For laser-plasma applications, such as ion acceleration, it
is mandatory to adjust the gas jet (i.e. the upper nozzle edge)
with sub-mm precision relative to the laser focus. The typical
required accuracy is given by the diameter of the laser focus,
at PHELIX this amounts to 15–20 µm. Also the vertical sepa-

Polarized helium gas-jet target

7

FIG. 13. Horizontal distribution of the particle density at 27.1 bar
and 500 µm above the nozzle edge, 32 ms after valve opening43.

FIG. 14. Maximum particle density for different backing pressure
values between 17.8 and 53.4 bar42. The data are for 500 µm (blue
dots) and for 1000 µm above the nozzle edge (brown dots).

ration of 0.5 mm between the laser beam axis and nozzle exit
has to be controlled with high accuracy, since a smaller dis-
tance causes rapid degradation of the nozzle surface by the
formed plasma and, consequently, of the jet quality. In addi-
tion, the gas jet must be precisely aligned with the collimator
apertures of the 3He2+ polarimeters, which are mounted at 90◦
relative to the laser propagation direction.

All these issues were realized through the movement of the
nozzle with the whole compressor unit, which has a mass of
about 10 kg. The compressor unit rests on the adjustment sys-
tem providing linear movements in any direction. This is pro-
vided by three linear actuators with stepper motors. Move-
ment in the horizontal X-Y plane is achieved via linear actu-
ators. The vertical displacement is realized by a horizontal
actuator with a wedge connection. Figure 16 shows a drawing
of the adjustment system.

A set of three distance laser sensors NCDT1700 was used
for the control of the movement. A LabVIEW-based soft-
ware receives the information from the sensors and sends the
signals to the stepper motors. Independent movement of the
compressor in all three directions is possible in step sizes from
1 µm up to 2 mm. The total range of the movement is ±20 mm
in X and Y , and ±2.5 mm in Z direction.

FIG. 15. Time proﬁle of the particle density for different heights
above the nozzle edge at 27.1 bar backing pressure42.

Initial pressure
(bar)

Backing pressure
(bar)

1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
7

14.2
17.8
20.7
24.1
27.1
30.8
33.9
37.4
41.1
44.0
47.2
53.4

den-
Particle
sity at 500 µm
(cm−3)
1.72 × 1019
2.75 × 1019
3.13 × 1019
3.31 × 1019
4.06 × 1019
2.97 × 1019
5.16 × 1019
5.18 × 1019
6.06 × 1019
5.99 × 1019
6.95 × 1019
8.13 × 1019

density
1000 µm

Particle
at
(cm−3)
1.38 × 1019
1.61 × 1019
2.17 × 1019
2.73 × 1019
3.09 × 1019
1.99 × 1019
3.76 × 1019
4.19 × 1019
4.41 × 1019
4.37 × 1019
5.52 × 1019
6.41 × 1019

TABLE I. Achievable gas densities at 500 µm and 1000 µm above
the nozzle for various values of the input and backing pressures in
the compressor42.

(X and Y directions) lasers and images from CCD cameras.
The ﬁne positioning was performed with the image of a needle
with a 50 µm tip. The needle was mounted on the top of the
nozzle ﬂange (see Fig. 17).

VIII. AUXILIARY GAS SYSTEM

For its use at a laser facility, the whole target must be ready
for operation in a surrounding vacuum chamber. This includes
the transfer of the polarized gas from the vessel to the com-
pressor, as well as the supply of the operating Ar gas to the
compressor. Also all components and pipes that are in contact
with the polarized gas must be carefully cleaned shortly be-
fore target operation by repeated pumping and ﬂushing with
Ar. All this requires a system of auxiliary gas lines, vacuum
pumps and valves.

The position of the nozzle was observed and veriﬁed with
an additional diagnostics system based on two perpendicular

Most critical are those valves which are in direct contact
with the polarized gas. For their remote control inside a

Polarized helium gas-jet target

8

FIG. 16. Adjustment system with the compressor.

50 liter aluminum tank is connected to the output of a scroll
pump. The evacuation of the 3He gas from the gas lines and
its recycling should be made before each disconnection of the
transport vessel from the gas system or any other opening of
the system.

The operating gas system consists of several sub-units for
3He and Ar gas, vacuum lines, as well as recycling and pneu-
matic systems. A schematic overview can be found in Fig. 18.

IX. CONTROL SYSTEM

Remote control of the system is needed for operations in-
side the vacuum chamber and for implementation of a trig-
ger commands sequence on a ms time scale for synchroniza-
tion with the accelerating laser. The corresponding electron-
ics is located inside a rack supplied with additional protection
against the EMP signals from the laser–plasma interactions.
The rack contains all the external pneumatic valves, a power-
supply unit for the concentric coils, a power supply for the
piezo units, trigger control unit and computer with a touch
screen for hand operation during preparatory procedures. The
control software is based on LabView and consists of three
units: for adjustment of the nozzle position, for applying the
selected values of the current to the concentric coils and for
operation of the pneumatic system with the compressor and
the piezo valve. Figure 19 shows the rack with the control
system as well as the magnetic system located inside a model
of the laser vacuum chamber.

FIG. 17. Nozzle with the needle for ﬁne adjustment.

vacuum chamber electromagnetic drivers are prohibited since
they would distort the polarization. Therefore, tailored pneu-
matic valves produced from non-magnetic materials were de-
signed and produced28, which are operated by compressed Ar
instead of air. Outside the vacuum chamber and far from the
polarized gas commercial pneumatic Bürkert valves29 types
5420 and 6013 are used for the pneumatic system and com-
mercial hand valves30 for the vacuum pipes.

Due to its high price of 2200 EUR/liter the used 3He gas
needs to be collected in recycling tanks. For this purpose a

Polarized helium gas-jet target

9

FIG. 18.
indicated by the gray rectangle. The 3He, Ar and vacuum lines are represented by different colors.

Schematic view of the gas system. The components that are located in the magnet system and inside the vacuum chamber are

X. TEST OPERATION WITH TWO GLASS VESSELS

For commissioning, debugging and a full-scale test of the
target system a set of preparatory experiments has been car-
ried out. The main goal was to study the factors inﬂuencing
the polarization of the 3He gas in the jet after compression
and vacuum injection. Measurements of the initial and ﬁnal
polarizations of the helium gas were achieved by the nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) method. This equipment is a part
of the helium polarizer. In order to perform these measure-
ments, the used 3He gas was collected in a second identical
glass vessel, which was also located inside the homogeneous
magnetic ﬁeld just above the input ball. The second ball was
connected to the compressor through a short gas line with an
adapter (instead of the nozzle) on top of the compressor. This
test set-up is shown in Fig. 20.

One of the ﬁrst tasks was the search for a safe transfer pro-
cedure of the transport (input) vessel into the magnetic sys-
tem without destroying the initial helium polarization. The
problem is to avoid the zero-transition points of the magnetic
ﬁeld created by the Halbach cylinder geometry, since here the
polarization would immediately disappear. The ﬁrst option

to achieve a safe transfer is to apply a high current to the
concentric coils and to create a dominating strong magnetic
ﬁeld, which keeps its orientation far outside the magnet sys-
tem without any zero transitions on the way from the transport
box. In this case it should be possible to insert the glass ball
from the side along the ﬁeld direction. Our tests show that
such a ﬁeld is possible to create, but smallest deviations from
the central trajectory lead to an essential loss of polarization
when passing through two neighbouring permanent magnets.
Another option is the transfer of the glass vessel from above
(through a ﬂange in the lid of the PHELIX vacuum chamber).
The Halbach arrangement of permanent magnets has no zero
crossing along this direction31. This idea was successfully
conﬁrmed during the tests.

As the next step, the preservation of the 3He gas polarization
was ensured for the input vessel at its nominal position inside
the holding ﬁeld. For this test the vessel was kept for one hour
with closed output valve and without contact of the gas with
the gas lines. The following NMR measurement did not show
any reduction of polarization.

The tests were then repeated with operation of the concen-
tric coils in order to check the inﬂuence of changing magnetic

Polarized helium gas-jet target

10

ﬁeld on the polarization losses. The current was smoothly
increased up to 10 A, was kept constant for 10 min and after-
wards smoothly decreased back to zero. No inﬂuence on the
degree of polarization was found.

After these initial studies polarization conservation during
complete compression cycles was tested. In each of these tests
9 compressions were carried out using polarized 3He gas from
the input vessel with 3 bar. Each compression cycle includes
the downward movement of the compressor piston, the ﬁlling
of the compressor volume, the compression up to pressures
of 18–24 bar and the rapid opening of the piezo valve. Af-
terwards the pressures in the input and the second glass ball
are almost identical and amount to around 1.4 bar (some gas
remains in the gas lines). Then the polarization of the helium
was measured in both vessels and compared. This relative
measurement allows us to exclude any unnoticed loss effects
during transport of the input vessel from the 3He polarizer.
The tests reveal that the polarization is very sensitive to any
contact of the 3He gas with various materials on the way from
the transport to the second glass vessel. Even if these materi-
als are not obviously magnetic (like stainless steel or brass),
they can induce an essential loss of polarization. Most of the
gas lines and valves thus consist of plastic, Teﬂon or titanium,
but several (relatively small) elements are made from stain-
less steel. For a more detailed investigation of this effect the
transport glass ball was kept inside the magnetic system and
connected to the gas lines with opened output valve. Thus
the polarized 3He gas was in contact with few of the stainless-
steel elements without compression. Afterwards the output
valve was closed and the polarization inside the glass ball was
measured by NMR. Most of the gas stayed in the glass ball,
only 4–5% remained in the gas line. During a duration of 1
or 2 hours the polarization loss turned out to be in the range
of 35–38% and does not depend on the gas pressure (1.6 or
3 bar).

After a whole series of further tests and implementation of

FIG. 20. Test with polarized 3He. The input vessel with 3 bar is the
lower one and the collection glass ball above.

improvements, a degree of 3He polarization after compression
in the range 38–44% (compared to the remaining initial gas in
the input vessel) was achieved. It should be noted that these
numbers were obtained with the Ti nozzle exchanged against
an adapter from brass to conduct the polarized gas to the sec-
ond glass ball. This additional component also contains a few
stainless-steel elements and thus contributes to the reduction
of polarization in the second glass ball. This effect — its ex-
tent is difﬁcult to quantify — will be absent in laser-plasma
experiments. Further studies to increase the degree of polar-
ization in the gas jet are under way. One important detail is
that another valve must be implemented directly behind the
hand valve of the glass ball. The reason is that before the tar-
get operation is started the complete vacuum chamber must
be pumped for hours and in this time a rather long part of the
gas lines is open to the 3He gas reservoir. During this time
the volume-to-surface ratio is decreased and the polarization
lifetime of the gas in the ball drops.

XI. CONCLUSION

FIG. 19. Rack with the control system (left side) and the magnetic
system located inside a model of the laser vacuum chamber (right).

A target providing nuclear polarized 3He gas jets for laser-
plasma applications has been designed, built and tested in the

Polarized helium gas-jet target

11

laboratory. Jet densities of (3 − 4) × 1019 cm−3 at the laser-
interaction point have been achieved. The measured degree
of 3He polarization is sufﬁcient for proof-of-principle polar-
ization experiments at high-power laser facilities. First such
measurements have been carried out in August 2021 at the
PHELIX facility, GSI Darmstadt. The data are still being an-
alyzed and the results will be topic of a separate publication.
In the meantime laboratory tests are continued with the goal
to further increase the achievable degree of jet polarization.
Another improvement can be the implementation of an NMR-
system to measure the 3He polarization directly at the appara-
tus. For this purpose the permanent homogeneous magnetic
ﬁeld of 1.5 mT would induce a Larmor frequency of about 30
kHz that can be easily detected.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work has been carried out in the framework of the
JuSPARC (Jülich Short-Pulse Particle and Radiation Center)
project44 and has been supported by the ATHENA consortium
(Accelerator Technology HElmholtz iNfrAstructure) in the
ARD programme (Accelerator Research and Development)
of the Helmholtz Association of German Research Centres.
Special thanks go to W. Heil (retired Professor from Johannes
Gutenberg-University Mainz) for providing the 3He polarizer
and for answering many emergency calls, and to V. Bag-
noud, B. Zielbauer (PHELIX group) for valuable discussions.
P.F. acknowledges ﬁnancial support by FZ Jülich (cooperation
with NRC "Kurchatov Institute", Moscow).

1J. Krimmer, M. Distler, W. Heil, S. Karpuk, D. Kiselev, Z. Salhi, and
E.W. Otten, “A highly polarized He-3 target for the electron beam at
MAMI”, Nucl. Instr. Meth., A 611, no. 1, 18 (2009).
2M. Tanaka, “Review from experimentalists: The role of polarized 3He in
the next century”, Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys. Research, A 402, 492 (1998).
3D.O. Findley, S. D. Baker, E. B. Carter, and N. D. Stockwell, “A polarized
3He+ ion source”, Nucl. Instr. Meth., vol. 71, issue 2, 125 (1969).
4W.E. Burcham, O. Karban, S. Oh, and W. B. Powell, “A source of polarized
3He ions”, Nucl. Instr. Meth., vol. 116, issue 1, 1 (1974).
5R.J. Slobodrian, “New method for the production of polarized 3He ions
based on the 23 S1 state of 3He”, Nucl. Instr. Meth., vol. 185, issue 1-3, 581
(1981).
6J. Maxwell, R. Milner, and C. Epstein, “Development of a polarized 3He
ion source for RHIC”, Physics of Particles and Nuclei, vol. 45, no. 1, 301
(2014).
7M. Temporal, V. Brandon, B. Canaud, J. Didelez, R. Fedosejevs, and
R. Ramis, “Ignition conditions for inertial conﬁnement fusion targets with a
nuclear spin-polarized DT fuel”, Nucl. Fus., vol. 52, no. 10, 103011 (2012).
8T. Honda, Y. Nakao, Y. Honda, K. Kudo, and H. Nakashima, “Burn charac-
teristics of inertially conﬁned D- 3He fuel”, Nucl. Fus., vol. 31, no. 5, 851
(1991).
9J. Thomas, A. Hützen, A. Lehrach, A. Pukhov, L. Ji, Y. Wu, X. Geng, and
M. Büscher, "Scaling laws for the depolarization time of relativistic particle
beams in strong ﬁelds", Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams 23, 064401 (2020).

10N. Raab, M. Büscher, M. Cerchez, R.Engels, I. Engin, P. Gibbon, P. Greven,
A. Holler, A. Karmakar, A. Lehrach et al., “Polarization measurement of
laser-accelerated protons“, Physics of Plasmas 21, 023104 (2014).

11I. Engin, “Towards Polarization Measurements of Laser-accelerated

Helium-3 Ions”, PhD Thesis, University Düsseldorf, (2015).

12I. Engin, Z. Chitgar, O. Deppert, L. Lucchio, R. Engels, P. Fedorets,
S. Frydrych, P. Gibbon, A. Kleinschmidt, A. Lehrach et al., “Laser-induced
acceleration of Helium ions from unpolarized gas jets“, Plasma Physics and
Controlled Fusion 61(11), 115012 (2019).

13V. Bagnoud B. Aurand, A. Blazevic, S. Borneis, C. Bruske, B. Ecker,
U. Eisenbarth, J. Fils, A. Frank, E. Gaul et al., "Commissioning and early
experiments of the PHELIX facility", Appl. Phys. B 100, 137 (2010).

14C. Mrozik, O. Endner, C. Hauke, W. Heil, S. Karpuk, J. Klemmer, and
E.W. Otten, “Construction of a compact 3He polarizing facility”, J. Phys.
Conf. Ser., vol. 294, no. 1, Art. no. 012007, (2011).

15L. D. Schearer and G. K. Walters. “Nuclear spin-lattice relaxation in the
presence of magnetic-ﬁeld gradients”, Phys. Rev., vol. 139, A1398 (1965).
16G. D. Cates, S. R. Schaefer, and W. Happer, “Relaxation of spins due to
ﬁeld inhomogeneities in gaseous samples at low magnetic ﬁelds and low
pressures”, Phys. Rev. A, vol. 37, 2877 (1988).

17G. D. Cates, D. J. White, T.-R. Chien, S. R. Schaefer, and W. Happer, “Spin
relaxation in gases due to inhomogeneous static and oscillating magnetic
ﬁelds”, Phys. Rev. A, vol. 38, 5092 (1988).

18K. C. Hasson, G. D. Cates, K. Lerman, P. Bogorad, and W. Happer, “Spin
relaxation due to magnetic-ﬁeld inhomogeneities: Quartic dependence and
diffusion-constant measurements”, Phys. Rev. A, vol. 41, 3672 (1990).
19S. Hiebel, T. Großmann, D. Kiselev, J. Schmiedeskamp, Y. Gusev, W. Heil,
S. Karpuk, J. Krimmer, E. Otten, and Z. Salhi, “Magnetized boxes for
housing polarized spins in homogeneous ﬁelds”, Journal of Magnetic Res-
onance, vol. 204, no. 1, 37 (2010).

20N. R. Newbury, A. S. Barton, G. D. Cates, W. Happer, and H. Middleton,
“Gaseous 3He-3He magnetic dipolar spin relaxation”, Phys. Rev. A, vol. 48,
4411 (1993).

21B. Saam, W. Happer, and H. Middleton, “Nuclear relaxation of 3He in the

presence of O2”, Phys. Rev. A, vol. 52, 862 (1995).

22A. J. Deninger, B. Eberle, M. Ebert, T. Großmann, W. Heil, H.-U. Kauczor,
L. Lauer, K. Markstaller, E. Otten, J. Schmiedeskamp et al., “Quantiﬁca-
tion of Regional Intrapulmonary Oxygen Partial Pressure Evolution during
Apnea by 3He MRI”, Journal of Magnetic Resonance, vol. 141, no. 2, 207
(1999).

23A. J. Deninger et al., “3He-MRI-based measurements of intrapulmonary
pO2 and its time course during apnea in healthy volunteers: ﬁrst results,
reproducibility, and technical limitations”, NMR in Biomedicine, vol. 13,
no. 4, 194 (2000).

24S. Hiebel. “Methodische und technische Weiterentwicklung der 3He-
MRT im Hinblick auf erweiterte lungendiagnostische Anwendungs-
Johannes Gutenberg University
möglichkeiten”,
Mainz,
2014-11-30, URL http://ubm.opus.hbz-
(2006). Accessed:
nrw.de/volltexte/2007/1250/pdf/diss.pdf.

thesis,

Ph.D.

25A. Deninger, W. Heil, E. W. Otten, M. Wolf, R. K. Kremer, and A. Simon,
“Paramagnetic relaxation of spin polarized 3He at coated glass walls”, The
European Physical Journal D, vol. 38, no. 3, 439 (2006).

26J. Schmiedeskamp, W. Heil, E. W. Otten, R. K. Kremer, A. Simon, and
J. Zimmer, “Paramagnetic relaxation of spin polarized 3He at bare glass
surfaces”, The European Physical Journal D, vol. 38, no. 3, 427 (2006).
27D. R. Rich, T. R. Gentile, T. B. Smith, A. K. Thompson, and G. L. Jones,
“Spin exchange optical pumping at pressures near 1 bar for neutron spin
ﬁlters”, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 80, no. 12, 2210 (2002).

28B.E.S.T. Fluidsysteme GmbH. Available:

https://www.swagelok-

duesseldorf.de

29Christian Bürkert GmbH & Co. KG. Available: https://www.burkert.com
30Leybold GmbH. Available: https://www.leybold.com
31H. Soltner and P. Blümler. "Dipolar Halbach magnet stacks made from iden-
tically shaped permanent magnets for magnetic resonance." Concepts in
magnetic resonance part A 36.4, 211 (2010).

32H. Soltner, M. Büscher, P. Burgmer, I. Engin, B. Nauschütt, S. Maier, and
H. Glückler, “A Permanent-Magnet Array to Maintain 3He Gas Polariza-
tion Inside a Glass Vessel for Applications in High-Energy Laser Physics.”,
IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 26(4), 0603704 (2016).
33P. Burgmer, “Auslegung und Bau eines magnetischen Systems für die Er-
haltung der Polarisation von 3He bei Laser-induzierter Teilchenbeschleuni-
gung”, Bachelor thesis, FH Aachen, (2014).

34ChenYang Technologies GmbH & Co. KG, Finsing, Germany. Available:

http://www.chenyang.de/.

35Fluxmaster by Stefan Mayer Instruments. Available: http://www.stefan-

mayer.com/en/products/magnetometers-and-sensors/ﬂuxmaster.html.

36B. T. Nauschütt. "Messung der Polarisation von 3He und Bestimmung der

Relaxationszeit", Bachelor thesis, FH Aachen, (2014).

Polarized helium gas-jet target

37S. Maier, “Messung der zeitabhängigen Polarisation von 3He-Gas mit Stör-

feldkompensation”, Bachelor thesis, HAWK Göttingen, (2015).

38M. Wohlgemuth, „Development of a Measurement Method of Hyperpolar-

ized Gases“, Bachelor Thesis, University Düsseldorf, (2017).

39P. Spiller, “Charakterisierung einer Kompressor-Piezoventileinheit für
Laserbeschleunigungsexperimente”, Bachelor thesis, FH Aachen, (2018).
40D.S. Hussey, D.R. Rich, A.S. Belov, X. Tong, H. Yang, C. Bailey,
C.D. Keith, J. Hartﬁeld, G.D.R. Hall, T.C. Black et al., ”Polarized 3He gas
compression system using metastability-exchange optical pumping”, Rev.

41Physik

Sci. Instrum. 76, 053503 (2005).
Instrumente
www.physikinstrumente.com

(PI) GmbH und Co. KG,

12

available

at

42S. Noorzayee, ”Interferometrical Characterization of a Gas Source for
Laser-Acceleration Experiments”, Bachelor Thesis, University Düsseldorf,
(2018).

43S. Noorzayee, private communication.
44M. Büscher, R. Adam, C. Tusche, A. Hützen, C. Wiemann, Y.-J. Chen,
C.M. Schneider, "JuSPARC — The Jülich Short-Pulsed Particle and Radi-
ation Center", J. Large-Scale Res. Fac. 6, A138 (2020).

