Spatio-temporal evolution of emission and absorption signatures in a
laser-produced plasma

S.S. Harilal,1 E.J. Kautz,1 and M.C. Phillips2
1)Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington 99352, USA
2)James C. Wyant College of Optical Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721,
USA

(*Electronic mail: hari@pnnl.gov)

(Dated: 26 January 2022)

We report spatio-temporal evolution of emission and absorption signatures of Al species in a nanosecond (ns) laser-
produced plasma (LPP). The plasmas were generated from an Inconel target,which contained ∼ 0.4 wt. % Al, using
1064 nm, ≈ 6 ns full width half maximum pulses from an Nd:YAG laser at an Ar cover gas pressure of ≈ 34 Torr. The
temporal distributions of the Al I (394.4 nm) transition were collected from various spatial points within the plasma
employing time-of-ﬂight (TOF) emission and laser absorption spectroscopy and they provide kinetics of the excited
state and ground state population of the selected transition. The emission and absorption signatures showed multiple
peaks in their temporal proﬁles, although they appeared at different spatial locations and times after the plasma onset.
The absorption temporal proﬁles showed an early time signature representing shock wave propagation into the ambient
gas. We also used emission and absorption spectral features for measuring various physical properties of the plasma.
The absorption spectral proﬁles are utilized for measuring linewidths, column density and kinetic temperature while
emission spectra were used to measure excitation temperature. A comparison between excitation and kinetic temper-
ature were made at various spatial points in the plasma. Our results highlight that the TOF measurements provide
a resourceful tool for showing the spatio-temporal LPP dynamics with higher spatial and temporal resolution than is
possible with spectral measurements, but are difﬁcult to interpret without additional information on excitation temper-
atures and linewidths. The combination of absorption and emission TOF and spectral measurements thus provides a
more complete picture of LPP spatio-temporal dynamics than is possible using any one technique alone.

Keywords: Laser-produced plasma, plasma diagnostics, emission spectroscopy, absorption spectroscopy

I.

INTRODUCTION

Laser-produced plasmas (LPPs) are used in numerous ap-
plications ranging from analytical to inertial conﬁnement fu-
sion, and plasma diagnostics plays an important role in under-
standing the fundamental properties of the LPP as well opti-
mizing their properties for various applications. Compared
to other man-made plasmas in the laboratory (e.g., steady-
state discharge plasmas), there are several challenges in an-
alyzing complex LPPs due to its transient nature and spatial
inhomogenity. For example, the fundamental properties of an
LPP change rapidly with space and time over several orders
in magnitude.1 Hence, for comprehensive characterization of
an LPP, the selected diagnostic tool should possess high time
and space precision. In addition to these, because of the ex-
istence of large gradients in temperature and density, multiple
diagnostic tools are required to monitor the plasma physical
conditions at various times of its evolution (or distances from
the target) due to sensitivity issues related to the selected di-
agnostic tool.2

Among the plasma diagnostic methods, optical emission
spectroscopy (OES) is the most utilized tool for LPP char-
acterization and this can be related to its experimental sim-
plicity as a non-intrusive technique.3–5 Besides, the combina-
tion of LPP and OES is the basis of well-known analytical
tool laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) which is
an established technique for several applications.6,7 Hence a
large amount of works are available in the literature for the
characterization of the LPP using OES.8–10 However, there

exists certain limitations for using OES for LPP characteriza-
tion, most prominent being that the LPP emits line radiation
only within a certain temporal window during its evolution.
At very early times of LPP evolution, the free-free and free-
bound radiation dominate over bound-bound transitions and
hence OES may not be a good tool for LPP characterization.
Similarly, at later times of LPP evolution, the temperature of
the plasma drops signiﬁcantly so that the electronic excitation
process becomes weak or nonexistent.

Active sensing methods such as laser absorption spec-
troscopy (LAS) and laser induced ﬂuorescence (LIF) spec-
troscopy, which utilize the ground or lower level popula-
tion, are useful for measuring properties of an LPP at later
times of its evolution where the electronic excitation is not
favored.11–21 Although absorption spectroscopy is a well-
established technique for gas sensing, its use for LPP char-
acterization is limited and it is partly due to its active nature
that necessitates the use of a light source such as laser,22 arc
lamp,16 or frequency combs17 for probing the absorption by
the LPP species. The properties of the probe light source also
dictate the experimental methodology as well as information
gathered. For example, AS employing tunable lasers provides
extremely high spectral resolution, but its spectral band is lim-
ited to the scanning range of the laser system used and hence
it is a highly a selective method.23–25 Instead, the AS employ-
ing arc lamps provides broadband capability, but the spectral
resolution available in this method is limited to the resolution
of the detection system (e.g., spectrograph) which is similar
to emission spectroscopy.16 AS employing frequency combs,

2
2
0
2

n
a
J

5
2

]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
5
2
5
0
1
.
1
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
which is a relatively new technique, provides both spectral
resolution and broadband capability.17,26

The major aim of this work is to evaluate and compare
the spatio-temporal evolution of both excited and ground
state populations in an LPP by combining OES and LAS.
Since emission and absorption methods are complementary,
by combining these two techniques, fundamental properties
of the plasma can be measured at early and late times of LPP
evolution as well as from various spatial positions. For exam-
ple, the emission predominates at early times when the plas-
mas are hotter, whereas AS is better suited for LPP charac-
terization when the plasmas cool down at later times. Sim-
ilarly, thermal excitation predominates at closer positions to
the target in an LPP, while cooler conditions exist at farther
distances from the target, but both the atomic number density
and temperature distributions evolve in time after formation of
the LPP. The spatial analysis of LPP was reported extensively
in the literature using emission spectroscopy.3,8,27,28 However,
nearly all previously reported absorption spectroscopic stud-
ies of LPPs to date were carried out at a certain distance from
the target and the selection of the distance was based on op-
timizing the signal to noise ratio (SNR).17,29,30 To the best of
the authors’ knowledge, no studies exist on the spatial map-
ping of the ground state population of an LPP system with
high temporal precision and a direct comparison to the excited
state population. We measured optical time of ﬂight (TOF)
emission and absorption signatures at various spatial points in
the plasma to investigate the population kinetics of excited and
ground states of an Al atomic transition. The time-resolved
emission and absorption spectral features are also monitored
at various distances from the target surface to infer plasma
properties.

II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS

A schematic of the experimental set-up is given in Fig. 1.
The plasmas were produced on an Inconel alloy target which
contained 0.4 wt. % Al using 1064 nm, 6 ns Full Width Half
Maximum (FWHM) pulses from an Nd:YAG laser (Contin-
uum, Surelite III). The laser beam was attenuated using a com-
bination of a half-wave plate and a cube polarizer. A f = 15
cm lens was used for focusing. The laser energy and spot
size used were ≈ 50 mJ and ≈ 0.9 mm and the correspond-
ing laser ﬂuence and power density were ≈ 10 J/cm2 and ≈
2 GW/cm2. The repetition rate of the laser was 10 Hz. The
Inconel target was positioned in a vacuum chamber, which
contained glass/quartz windows for ablation and probe laser
entrance. A motorized x-y-z translation stage was holding the
the target chamber so that fresh target surfaces can be exposed
during ablation events. The experiments were performed in ≈
34 Torr ﬂowing (≈ 3 l/min) Ar gas.

For performing LAS,

frequency-doubled tunable
a
Ti:Sapphire laser (M-Squared, Solstis and Solstis ECD-X)
was used as the probe, which possessed a linewidth ≤ 100
kHz. The probe laser with ≈ 0.75 mm diameter was directed
through the plasma. The frequency of the probe laser was
monitored using a wavemeter (HighFinnesse WS-6). Al I

2

0

394.401 nm (3s24s2S1/2 → 3s23p2P1/2
, 0 - 25,347.756 cm−1,
log(gf) = -0.623) transition is selected for this study. All
spectroscopic information of the selected Al I transition is
well documented in the literature.31 This line provided excel-
lent emission and absorbance SNR at various times during
the plasma evolution as well as from various spatial points in
the plasma. The transmission signal was measured using a a
Si photodiode with 200 ns rise time (Thorlabs PDA36A). A
combination of a prism and several bandpass and absorptive
ﬁlters were used for ﬁltering the spontaneous emission from
the plasma and for attenuating the probe beam reaching the
detector. A 16-bit analog-to-digital converter (ADC, National
Instruments) at a 2 MHz sampling rate was used for signal
digitization. The real-time analysis of the time-resolved
absorbance and absorption spectrum were monitored using a
LabVIEW program. For recording the absorption spectrum,
the probe laser wavelength is stepped across the selected Al
transition over ≈ 25 GHz. The time of ﬂight absorbance was
recorded using a 1 GHz oscilloscope when the probe laser
wavelength is kept at the peak of the selected transition. The
spatial analysis was performed by moving the chamber and
the laser focusing lens in the z-direction by maintaining the
probe beam alignment.

For carrying out OES, the spontaneous light emitted from
the plasma is collected and imaged onto the slit of a 0.5 m
Czerny-Turner spectrograph (f/6.5, Acton Spectrapro 2500i)
using an optical system consisting of two plano-convex lenses.
The spectrometer system consists of two detectors – an in-
tensiﬁed CCD (ICCD, Princeton Instruments PiMAX4) - a
multi-channel detector with 1024 × 1024 pixels (pixel size
≈ 13 µm × 13 µm) for recording the broadband spectrum,
and a single channel photo-multiplier tube (PMT, Hamamatsu
R955, rise time ≈ 2.2 ns) for measuring the temporal proﬁles
of emission signal. A divertor mirror was used to change the
optical path of the wavelength-dispersed signal to ICCD or
PMT. The spectral resolution available for the spectrometer
was ≈ 0.04 nm with the use of a 2400 g/mm holographic grat-
ing. The spectrometer-PMT combination was used to record
the kinetic distribution of selected Al atomic transition in the
plume. For obtaining spatially resolved optical time of ﬂight
(OTOF) data, the plasma plume from different regions is im-
aged onto the spectrometer slit, and the PMT signal is fed to a
1 GHz oscilloscope.

III. RESULTS

Spatially and temporally resolved analyses of various
species in an LPP are very important for understanding its ki-
netics. We analyzed the kinetics of excited and lower levels
populations of a selected Al atomic transition at various dis-
tances from the target by combining the OES and LAS. The
temporal distribution of a species in the plume at a certain dis-
tance from the target surface, commonly referred to as time-
of-ﬂight (TOF) emission32–34 or absorption signal35,36 pro-
vides information about the persistence of the chosen species
in the plume and the peak arrival/delay time at the selected
spatial position and hence the expansion velocity.

3

FIG. 1: Experimental set-up for LPP-LAS and LPP-OES.
Acronyms given in the schematic are deﬁned as follows: M:
mirror, FM: folding mirror, A: aperture, DPSS: diode pump
solid-state laser, D: frequency doubler, P: prism; F: ﬁlter, PD:
photodiode, DAQ: data acquisition unit, ICCD: intensiﬁed
CCD, C: cube polarizer, WP: waveplate, PMT:
Photomultiplier tube

For performing the spatial analysis of lower-level popula-
tion, time-resolved probe transmission was recorded at vari-
ous distances from the target surface when the probe laser was
ﬁxed at the peak of the Al I transition at λ0 = 394.4 nm. The
recorded probe transmission I(λ0,t) was then converted to
absorbance using the relation A(λ0,t) = − ln[I(λ0,t)/I0(λ0)]
where I0(λ0) is the transmitted intensity before the LPP onset.
The measurements were averaged over six laser shots, and the
results are given in Fig. 2.

The absorption temporal proﬁles showed signiﬁcant varia-
tion with respect to the distance from the target. The maxi-
mum peak absorbance is observed closer to the target. The
absorbance temporal proﬁles showed a sharp ’dip’ immedi-
ately after the laser-plasma onset which was present for all
distances. A short duration peak in the absorption is seen
to appear soon after ablation, with arrival time dependent on
distance from the sample, as shown in the inset to Fig. 2.
These features will be analyzed in the discussion section. The
maximum absorbance at various spatial positions in the LPP
plumes is given in Fig. 3. The peak absorbance signal showed
two maxima: closer to the target (≈ 1 mm), and at ≈ 4 mm.
The key points from the spatially and temporally resolved ab-
sorption proﬁles are as follows: (1) the maximum absorbance
is observed closer to the target although its arrival time is de-
layed, (2) with increasing distance from the target, the ab-
sorbance signal is found to decrease up to ≈ 2 mm from the
target, followed by a slow increase up to ≈ 4 mm and then
decays with increasing distance, (3) multiple peak structures
in temporal proﬁles are evident at farther distances (≥ 5 mm),
(4) the LAS signal persistence is increased with distance and
at farther distances LAS signals lasted more than 2 ms, (5) the
absorbance signal is negligible at early times for distances ≥
7 mm.

For monitoring the temporal proﬁles of emission signals at

FIG. 2: LAS-TOF at various distances from the target. Inset
provides examples of absorbance signal early time evolution
showing a dip at the plasma onset (dotted line) and a
propagating wave.

FIG. 3: The peak absorbance signal at various distances are
given.

various spatial locations in the plasma, optical TOF emission
proﬁles of Al I (394.4 nm) were recorded using the combina-
tion of the monochromator and PMT, with results given in Fig.
4. Such OTOF proﬁles provide the delay as well as the persis-
tence of an emitting species in the plume and provide informa-
tion on the excited level population of the selected transition.
All OTOF proﬁles show a prompt peak (sharp, at early times),
followed by a sharp rise in signal intensity that is steepest at
closer distances to the target. The OTOF proﬁles also showed
multiple peak structures at shorter distances (≤ 4 mm). Some
of the notable differences between the absorbance and emis-
sion signals are: (1) although absorbance signals are observed
for distances up to ≈ 14 mm, the emission signal is found to
be very weak after ≥ 8 mm; (2) the emission signal persisted
much shorter time compared to absorbance signals, typically
by an order in magnitude; (3) the multiple peaks in the TOF
proﬁles are more apparent in emission signals compared to

4

FIG. 5: 2D and 3D contour showing TRAS for Al I
transition at 394.401 nm recorded at a distance 1 mm from
the target. The measurements were performed by stepping
the tunable laser wavelength across the selected transition.
Each spectrum corresponds to six laser shot averaging.

Fig. 8 and the linewidth given is for each hyperﬁne transition.
It must be noted that the experimentally measured linewidth
is found to be broader than the FWHM given in Fig. 8 due to
the overlap of the unresolved hyperﬁne transitions. For shorter
distances from the target (≤ 5mm), the linewidth showed a re-
duction with time (≤ 100 µs), and it leveled off at later times.
But, at farther distances (e.g., 7 mm and 9 mm), the FWHM
showed insigniﬁcant variation. The Voigt linewidths are ap-
proaching ≈ 3 GHz for all distances studied at times ≥ 600
µs. The uncertainty in the spectral analysis is found to be high
at the earliest and later times due to low absorbance levels.

Under the assumption of spatially uniform conditions along
the probe beam path, each absorbance spectrum given in Fig.
7 is expressed as the product of an absorption coefﬁcient
α(ν,t) and an optical path length L : A(ν,t) = α(ν,t) × L.
Here the absorption coefﬁcient is the product of the absorp-
tion cross-section with the difference in population density
between lower and upper states of the probed transition, and

(cid:21)

(cid:20) ni
gi

−

n j
g j

is given by: αi j(ν) = ˜σ0gi fi j

χ(ν) where ˜σ0 =

e2/4ε0mec is a constant equal to 2.654 × 10−6m2s−1, i( j) de-
notes the lower (upper) level of the transition, gi is the level
degeneracy of the i-th level,
fi j is the transition oscillator
strength, ni is the number density in the i-th level (m−3), and
χ(ν) is a normalized lineshape function with unit area. For
the LPP conditions measured, which follow thermal distribu-
tions through Boltzmann statistics, n j << ni, in which case
the above equation is simpliﬁed to: A(ν,t) = αi j(ν,t) × L =
˜σ0 fi jχ(ν,t)ni(t) × L. According to the above equation, the
spectrally integrated area of the absorbance peak is propor-
tional to the path-integrated lower state number density or
column density of the selected transition. Hence the col-
umn density ni × L for Al is calculated for each time step

FIG. 4: Emission TOF at various distances from the target.

absorption signals.

The emission and absorption TOF proﬁles give information
on the temporal distribution of the excited and ground state
population of the selected Al transition at various distances
from the target. However, the TOF proﬁles are useful only
for monitoring the relative populations, and it is not useful
for inferring the plasma’s fundamental properties (e.g., tem-
perature, density). Hence, time and space resolved spectro-
scopic studies are carried out. An example of 2D and 3D time-
resolved absorbance spectra (TRAS) contour plot is given in
Fig. 5. The measurement was taken at a distance 1 mm from
the target and by stepping the wavelength of the probe laser
across the selected Al transition and 6 laser shots were aver-
aged for each step. The peak absorbance at the line center was
≈ 0.7.
The

time-resolved absorption spectroscopy contours
recorded at additional distances from the target are given
6. Qualitatively the TRAS results show similar
in Fig.
features as the LAS-TOF results; namely, a delayed onset of
absorption and a longer persistence of absorption at larger
distances from the target. It is also apparent that the spectral
broadening changes with time, especially in regions closer
to the target. Additional information may be obtained by
spectral ﬁtting of the measurements and investigating how the
ﬁt parameters change with time and space.

The experimental spectra given in Figs. 5 and 6 were ﬁt
using Voigt proﬁles for determining FWHM, peak areas, and
Gaussian linewidth. Examples of spectral ﬁts are shown in
Fig. 7 for various distances from the target and for two se-
lect times (300 µs and 1000 µs). The spectral ﬁts also ac-
counted for the hyperﬁne structure of the 27Al I transition,
which was modeled using sums of Voigt functions with equal
widths. Further details about the spectral ﬁtting approach can
be found elsewhere.18 The quality of the spectral ﬁts is highly
dependent on the SNR of the experimental data; therefore, the
poor ﬁts obtained at the extremes of distance/times were dis-
carded due to low signals and high uncertainties.

The time evolution of FWHM of Al I transition measured
from the absorption spectra for various distances are given in

5

FIG. 6: 2D and 3D contours showing TRAS for Al I transition at 394.401 nm for the following distances: (a) 3 mm, (b) 5 mm,
(c) 7 mm, and (d) 9 mm.

wg = 7.16 × 10−7λ0(Tk/m)1/2 where λ0 is the wavelength in
nm, m is the mass of the species in amu and Tk is in K. Re-
sults on spatial and temporal dependence of column density
and kinetic temperature are shown in section IV.

Emission spectral features were collected from various
times after the plasma onset and distances from the target sur-
face for measuring the excitation temperature (Te). The In-
conel target contains ≈ 19 % (by wt.) Cr and several Cr I tran-
sitions were used for this study. The Boltzmann plot method
was used for measuring excitation temperatures using the fol-
lowing Cr I transitions: 394.15 nm, 396.37 nm, 398.39 nm,
399.11 nm, 400.13 nm, 520.451nm, 520.6 nm, and 520.84
nm. The spectroscopic constants for the lines were obtained
from literature.31 An example of optical emission spectral fea-
tures collected at 1 mm from the target with a gate delay/width
of 1µs/1µs is given in Fig. 9. The time evolution of the ex-
citation temperature measured at various distances from the
target is presented in section IV.

FIG. 7: Examples of measured absorption spectra (open
circles), best ﬁt spectra (solid lines), and ﬁt residuals
(magenta lines) are given for various distances. (a) measured
at 300 µs and (b) at 1000 µs.

using the relation (cid:82) α(ν)Ldν = 2.654 × 10−6 f12niL, where
the left-side of the equation is the spectrally integrated ab-
sorbance as determined from the peak areas. The Gaussian
FWHM contribution (wg (nm)) in the spectral proﬁles is used
for measuring the kinetic temperature (Tk) using the relation

IV. DISCUSSION

Optical TOF is a powerful technique for investigating ve-
locity distribution of various species in the plasma and sev-
eral authors previously used it for optimizing pulsed laser

6

by combining emission and absorption TOF combined with
analysis of TRAS and OES measurements. The transition se-
lected for this study is a resonance line (Al I at 394.4 nm) and
hence coupled to the ground level, allowing absorption to be
detected for conditions of low excitation temperature at later
times of plasma evolution. However, the Al transition selected
for this study is prone to self-absorption.39 So, the contribu-
tion of self-absorption in the emission temporal proﬁles can-
not be ruled out in the present experiment. Self-absorption
will be absent in the absorption temporal proﬁles.

The TOF proﬁles showed multi-component structures
for both absorption and emission signatures and similar
structures in the TOF proﬁles were reported previously in
absorption38,40,41 and emission proﬁles32,42. The plume split-
ting phenomena in LPPs were reported extensively in the lit-
erature at moderate ambient pressure levels using 2D photog-
raphy where two or more emission intensity maxima were
observed and moved with different velocities. Some of the
reported explanations given for plume splitting include snow-
plow effect and subsequent deceleration of plume front, multi-
ple scattering of plume particles by the ambient medium, am-
bipolar effect, and slowly propagating nanoparticles.43–46

Many of the differences in temporal proﬁles and persis-
tence of emission and absorption signals can be understood
by considering excitation temperature, which determines the
fractional populations of upper and lower states with tem-
perature. Under local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE)
the level populations follow a Boltzmann distribution: ni =
ntot giZ(Tex)−1exp(−Ei/kTex), where E, g and ntot are the en-
ergy, degeneracy and the total atomic number density, and
Z(Tex) = Σgiexp(−Ei/kTex) is the partition function. The cal-
culated fractional population versus excitation temperature for
upper and lower energy levels of Al I 394.4 nm are given in
Fig. 10. According to Fig. 10, the ground state of Al transition
will be populated at lower temperatures while higher plasma
temperatures are required to populate the upper energy level
of Al. A signiﬁcant reduction in the lower state population
is also noticeable when the temperature of the plasma sys-
tem is ≥ 10,000K. Hence, under conditions of high excitation
temperature the absorption signal from the ground state is re-
duced. Likewise, for low excitation temperatures the emission
signal from the excited state decreases rapidly.

Compared to absorption, the emission signals peaked early
and decayed rapidly after the plasma onset. The emission sig-
nal depends on the excited state population, and it requires
electronic excitation, which happens only when the temper-
ature of the plasma system is high enough (see Fig.10). Ac-
cording to Boltzmann distribution, the fractional population of
the upper energy level becomes largest when the temperature
is ≥ 10000 K. The temporal absorption proﬁles were recorded
at farther distances from the target (up to 14 mm), while the
emission signals were found to be weaker for distances ≥ 8
mm. These combined observations indicate that the temper-
ature of the plasma at farther distances and later times is too
low to support signiﬁcant excited state population, and thus
most of the Al atoms are in the ground level. As shown be-
low, measurements of the excitation and kinetic temperatures
support this conclusion.

FIG. 8: The time evolution of linewidth (FWHM) for
various distances from the target.

FIG. 9: An example of Cr I spectral lines used for excitation
temperature measurement is given. The given spectrum is
recorded from a distance 1mm and using a gate delay/width
of 1 µs/1 µs.

deposition (PLD) ﬁlm quality and understanding plasma
chemistry.21,32,33,35,37,38 Emission and absorption TOF pro-
ﬁles will also provide important parameters related to the evo-
lution of laser ablated materials such as the arrival/delay time,
velocity distribution, the signal intensity and persistence at
various spatial positions in the plasma. In this article, a com-
prehensive evaluation of kinetics of excited and ground popu-
lation of Al species at various spatial points in an LPP is made

7

A. Temporal evolution 0-2 µs

The spatio-temporal evolution of emission and absorption
signal proﬁles at times ≤ 2µs after the laser-plasma onset are
given in Fig. 11. Note that the spatial scales given for emis-
sion and absorption signals are different. The emission signal
showed a prompt signature appearing immediately after abla-
tion for all distances from the target and persisting for ≈ 200
ns. After the prompt signal decays, the emission signal shows
a rapid expansion and formation of a spatially distinct plume
structure, peaked at a distance of ≈ 3.5 mm from the target.

FIG. 10: The fractional population of upper and lower
energy levels of Al I 394 nm transition based on Boltzmann
equation.

The emission and absorption TOF proﬁles were line-of-
sight averaged.
It must be mentioned here that the LPP is
an inhomogeneous medium, and signiﬁcant variation in tem-
perature and density exist in both expanding directions viz.
orthogonal and parallel to the target surface. Hence, the TOF
proﬁles recorded at various spatial points represent the aver-
age excited and ground state distribution of Al atoms along
the line-of-sight. Both absorption and emission TOF pro-
ﬁles showed several structures in their temporal proﬁles, but
it changed signiﬁcantly with the time of observation. So a
direct comparison between emission and absorption temporal
proﬁles at various times during the plasma evolution is made
for understanding its kinetics and relation to plume expansion.

The following subsections discuss in more detail the spatio-
temporal dynamics of emission and absorption TOF signals,
as well as the column density and kinetic temperature deter-
mined from analysis of the TRAS measurements. The dis-
cussion is divided into different temporal regions depending
on the relevant dynamics of the LPP. To better visualize the
spatial evolution of the plume, the TOF axes given in Figs.
4 and 7 are transposed. For comparison with the TOF re-
sults, the column density and kinetic temperatures determined
from the spectral ﬁts are plotted similarly to show spatial vari-
ations as a function of time. Fit results are not plotted for
spatial/temporal regions with poor ﬁt quality due to low ab-
sorption levels. In all plots, the lines show spline ﬁts to the
discrete data points to highlight trends in the spatial depen-
dence of the plume with time.

It is also noted that the emission TOF proﬁles have smaller
time steps compared to the absorption TOF proﬁles due to the
differences in the data collection sampling rate (50 MHz vs
2 MHz). The response time of the detector used for emis-
sion (PMT) was faster (≈ 2 ns) compared to the detector used
for absorption measurement (≈ 200 ns). Likewise, the time
steps for the TRAS results are larger (500 ns) due to differ-
ences in data acquisition hardware for the spectrally-resolved
measurements.

FIG. 11: The spatio-temporal evolution of emission and
absorption signals for times ≤ 2 µs after the laser-plasma
onset.

The absorption TOF shows the immediate appearance of
a negative absorption signal at all distances from the target,
which is consistent with detection of a short-lived prompt
emission signal during these times. As the emission signal
decays, a spatially-localized absorption signal appears and be-
gins propagating away from the sample. This localized ab-
sorption signal is consistent with formation of a shock-wave
propagating away from the target, as detailed further in Sec-
tions IV B and C. A negative absorption region (dip) is also
apparent behind the shock front. The measured absorption
spectra at these times (not shown) showed no evidence of res-
onant absorption due to Al atoms. However, the the spectra
did show a prompt negative-going absorption signal for all
distances, appearing immediately after ablation and persisting
for ≈ 2 µs, which is also consistent with detection of an emis-
sion signal. No dependence on laser wavelength was observed

for this prompt signal detected in the absorption.

The prompt signature observed in both emission and ab-
sorption immediately after ablation in (Fig. 11) is observed
to be nearly independent of distance from the target. In con-
trast to ablation under vacuum conditions, the presence of an
ambient gas prevents free expansion of atoms from the tar-
get, and thus it is highly unlikely the prompt signal arises
from atoms ejected from the sample surface. Instead, previous
reports documented the existence of an ambient gas plasma
when an LPP is generated in an ambient gas medium.47–49
To investigate this further, emission features were collected
in the spectral window 390-465 nm at a distance of 6 mm
from the target at very early times and results are given in
Fig.12. The gate width of the measurement was 3 ns and the
delay times used were 0 ns, 10 ns and 20 ns after the peak
of the laser pulse. The spectral features showed intense emis-
sion from Ar+ lines immediately after the laser-plasma onset
and the prominent Ar+ lines are marked in the spectrum. The
Ar+ spectral intensity decays rapidly and at 20 ns the col-
lected spectrum shows a broad continuum-like emission. The
spectrum contains no Al lines from the plasma generated at
the target, which will reach the observation window at later
times. These results indicate that when an LPP is generated
in an ambient gas medium, the plasma from the target may be
preceded by excitation of an ambient gas plasma. There exists
a controversy on explaining the mechanisms leading to this
prompt excitation and ionization of ambient gas. Some of the
suggested mechanisms are excitation by the prompt electrons
generated by the plasma49,50 and photo-ionization caused by
the high energy photons (e.g., VUV emission)51.

8

FIG. 12: The spectral features recorded at 6 mm at various
times show ambient gas excitation and ionization. A gate
width of 3 ns was used for the measurement. The time delays
given (0 ns, 10 ns and 20 ns) correspond to the time after the
peak of the laser pulse.

B. Temporal evolution 0-10 µs

The spatio-temporal evolution of emission and absorption
proﬁles recorded at times ≤ 10µs after the laser-plasma on-
set are given in Fig. 13. Emission proﬁles showed that the
spatial extent of plume from the target is ≈ 8 mm within 10
µs. The peak emission signal decays and the spatial proﬁle
expands during this time period as well. An apparent reduc-
tion in emission signal is visible near the center of the plume
proﬁle which become less pronounced over time.

The absorption TOF shows the shock-wave feature contin-
uing to propagate away from the target, with a decreasing
velocity. A negative absorption region is visible behind the
shock-front. From 2-10 µs, a spatially localized absorption
signal develops which is centered near 4 mm and clearly dis-
tinct from the propagating shock-wave feature. During this
time period, the Al absorption spectrum was too weak for re-
liable ﬁtting and so ﬁt parameters are not shown. However,
effects of the shock-wave were visible in the absorption spec-
tral data and were consistent with observations from the TOF
data.

The lack of absorption for t ≤ 2 µs while strong emission
is observed is consistent with conditions of high excitation
temperature. Fig. 14 shows the excitation temperature deter-
mined from OES. The measured excitation temperature is ≈
14,000 K at 1 µs after ablation and decays to ≈ 7000-9000 K

within 10 µs. Due to the considerations presented in Fig. 10,
the decrease in excitation temperature over this time period is
also expected to result in decreasing emission and increasing
absorption signals, consistent with the TOF results.

The similar spatial proﬁles observed in both emission and
absorption for t ∼ 2-10 µs indicate that over this time period
the plume is spatially offset from the sample surface, i.e. with
a lower Al number density near the target. The similar proﬁles
observed in absorption and emission also rules out high exci-
tation temperature as a primary cause for the lower absorption
near the surface. The spatial dependence of the absorption
and emission may indicate an increased atomic density in the
boundary region between the expanding plume and the ambi-
ent gas (due to the snowplow effect).

C. Temporal evolution 10 µs - 20 µs

The spatio-temporal evolution of emission and absorption
TOF proﬁles recorded at times between 10 µs and 20 µs af-
ter the laser-plasma onset is given in Fig.15. The emission
and absorption proﬁles from the plume remain centered at a
distance offset from the target surface. The absorption TOF
proﬁles show that the shock wave feature leaves the measure-
ment region in this time period. Near the target surface, the
absorption spectra become strong enough for reliable ﬁts dur-

9

FIG. 13: The spatio-temporal evolution of emission and
absorption signals for times ≤ 10µs after the laser-plasma
onset.

FIG. 15: The spatio-temporal evolution of (a) emission and
(b) absorption signals for times between 10 µs and 20 µs.

FIG. 14: The time evolution of excitation temperature
measured at various spatial points in the plasma is given.

ing this time period, and Fig.16 shows the column density and
kinetic temperatures determined from the ﬁt parameters.

The column density results conﬁrm that the plume is spa-
tially located away from the sample surface, and the high-
est kinetic temperatures are measured near the plume center.
Qualitatively, the spatial proﬁles of the kinetic temperature
from LAS in Fig. 16 match those of the excitation temperature

FIG. 16: The spatio-temporal evolution of (a) column
density and (b) kinetic temperature measured from the LAS
spectral ﬁt parameters are given for times between 10 µs and
20 µs after the laser-plasma onset.

from OES shown in Fig. 14, which also shows a higher tem-
perature at 3 mm versus 1 mm and 5 mm. However, the mag-
nitude of measured excitation temperatures are signiﬁcantly
higher than the measured kinetic temperatures. As discussed
in prior references3,18, this behavior is expected due to the spa-
tial integration along the measurement path and differences in
measurement of emission versus absorption. Speciﬁcally, the
emission measurement is weighted toward spatial regions of
higher temperature (where the emission signal is stronger),
whereas the absorption measurement is weighted toward spa-
tial regions of colder temperature (where the absorption sig-
nal is stronger). Thus, a measurement of excitation tempera-
ture from emission is expected to be higher than a correspond-
ing measurement of kinetic temperature from absorption, es-
pecially during early times of plasma evolution when large
spatial gradients are present. Both emission and absorption
measurements are intrinsically path-integrated, and hence the
differences in temperature along the line-of-sight provide an
effective “weighting” to the measurement via the level num-
ber densities.

Fig. 17 shows results from additional analysis of the ex-
panding plume, plotted as a distance-time (R-t) plot for the
shock wave and plume front components obtained from emis-
sion and absorption TOF. Here, the plume front is deﬁned as
the 50% of the maximum signal intensity at each time step.
The location of the peak for the shock wave feature in the ab-
sorption TOF data is plotted versus time, along with a ﬁt to a
shock model. Due to the experiment being performed in 34
Torr Ar ambient gas, a strong shock wave is expected to form
during the LPP expansion, and the good agreement between
the experiment and model conﬁrms this to be the case. The
observed transient increase in absorption as the shock wave
propagates through the laser beam path could be due to beam
steering effects, reducing the amount of light reaching the
detector. Likewise, the negative absorption peak behind the
shock wave may also be due to beam steering or lensing ef-
fects, causing the light reaching the detector to increase. Typi-
cally, the shock waves moving outward into the ambient from
an LPP is accompanied by a rarefaction wave moving inward
(towards the target). However, we note that the exact reasons
for the observation of negative absorption signal is unknown
at this point and will require additional study.

Fig. 17 also shows the positions of the expanding plume
front obtained from the emission and absorption signals. Be-
fore ≈ 2 µs, the shock waves recorded using absorption TOF
propagates together with the emission plume front and after
≈ 2 µs the shock front is detached and propagates away from
the emission plume front. Similar observations were made on
laser-produced air detonation plasma where the plasma and
shock waves expanded with similar velocities until ≈1 µs and
then the shock wave became decoupled to the plasma and ex-
panded away.52 The absorption plume front appears to lag be-
hind the emission plume front, although this may reﬂect dif-
ferences in absorption versus emission strength due to exci-
tation temperature effects. Nevertheless, in both absorption
and emission the plume front appears to stop expanding at a
distance of ≈ 6 mm from the sample, and at a time between
10-20 µs. LPPs typically expand very rapidly at early times

10

FIG. 17: The distance-time (R-t) plot for the absorption
shock, the emission plume front, the absorption plume front
are given. The smooth black line represents the R ∝ t0.42 ﬁt.

immediately after the laser-plasma onset regardless of the am-
bient pressure due to large plasma ram pressure, which could
be ≥1000 atm,53 and the plume front decelerates later when it
interacts with the ambient gas medium. Hence the decelera-
tion seen the emission and absorption fronts at later times are
due to plasma conﬁnement.

D. Temporal evolution 0-100 µs

Spatio-temporal evolution of emission and absorption pro-
ﬁles recorded at times up to 100 µs after the laser-plasma on-
set are given in Fig.18. The emission signal extends from
the target to ≈ 8 mm and persists to ≈ 100 µs. The emis-
sion signal strength decreases from 0-40 µs. By comparing
with the absorption signal, the reduction in emission signal
is not driven by a decrease in number density, as shown by
nearly constant absorption over this time period. Instead, the
decrease in emission strength is driven by the reduction in ex-
citation temperature over this time period. The absorption sig-
nal shows a spatially localized signal centered near ≈ 4 mm
and extending to ≈ 7 mm from the target. A second absorp-
tion component near the target appears at ≈ 20 µs and grows
in amplitude beyond 100 µs; this feature is not apparent in the
emission signal.

The spatio-temporal evolution of column density and ki-
netic temperature for times ≤ 100 µs are given in Fig. 19.
The column density determined from LAS shows a notable
difference from the absorption TOF signals. In particular, for
t ≥ 40 µs the column density is highest near the sample sur-
face and shows a monotonic decay with distance away from
the sample. In contrast, the TOF absorption signal continues
to show a peak centered near ≈ 4 mm, with an apparent sec-
ond peak increasing near the sample surface. This apparent
discrepancy can be resolved by considering that the TOF ab-
sorption measures the absorption signal at the peak of the Al
I spectral proﬁle. As shown in Fig. 8, the spectral width de-

11

FIG. 18: The spatio-temporal evolution of emission and
absorption signals for times 0- 100 µs after the laser-plasma
onset are given.

creases signiﬁcantly over the time period up to 100 µs. There-
fore, over these time periods the peak height is not indicative
of the actual column density (which scales with peak area).
In this situation, the spectral measurement is essential for in-
terpreting the TOF results. Nevertheless, the TOF results are
valuable for showing the overall plume extent especially for
spatial regions and times with low absorption signals (where
spectral ﬁts cannot be performed reliably).

Due to the large decrease in excitation temperature over this
time period, the emission signal is reduced in magnitude and
eventually becomes undetectable. In contrast, the absorption
signal from the ground state remains strong over this time
period. The column density and kinetic temperature results
show that the plume continues to expand over this time pe-
riod, which leads to the number density and temperatures be-
ing highest near the sample surface starting at t ≈ 40 µs. From
40-100 µs, the plume continues to expand away from the sam-
ple surface and the kinetic temperature continues to decrease.
We note that in Fig. 19, some points are absent in the kinetic
temperature but are present in the column density. This occurs
because the peak area could be obtained from the spectral ﬁts
whereas the Gaussian component of the spectral width could
not be determined with conﬁdence, due to low SNR at these
spatial/temporal points.

FIG. 19: The spatio-temporal evolution of (a) column
density and (b) kinetic temperature are given for times ≤ 100
µs.

E. Temporal evolution 100-1000 µs

The spatio-temporal evolution of emission for times 100-
200 µs and absorption 100-1000 µs after the laser-plasma on-
set are given in Fig. 20. The spatio-temporal evolution of
column density and kientic temperature during this time win-
dow are given in Fig. 21. The emission signal could not be
detected in this time period, due to the low excitation tempera-
tures. The absorption signal continued to evolve with time and
the peak center moved outward from the sample. At ≈ 500 µs,
the absorption signal near the surface has again disappeared,
with a similar behavior observed in the column density. The
spatial proﬁle from absorption and column density then con-
tinues to move to larger distances over time, indicating a slow
diffusion of the plume away from the target. The kinetic tem-
perature also continues to decrease over this time period and
becomes more uniform with distance.

The R-t plot of the absorption signal front at all times during
the plume lifetime is given in Fig. 22 which showed a com-
plex propagation pattern. The absorption plume front exhibits
a rapid expansion at early times until ≈ 20 µs, followed by
an apparent stagnant region for times between ≈ 20-160 µs).
At later times, the absorption plume front continues to prop-
agate away from the target but with a slower velocity. When
an LPP interacts with a cover gas, the plume species will be
decelerated until the plume pressure becomes similar to cover
gas pressure. Hence, the propagation of the absorption signal
front at very late times of plume evolution could be related to
shock wave collapse and diffusion of the plasma species into

12

FIG. 20: The spatio-temporal evolution of absorption for
times 100- 1000 µs after the plasma onset is given.

FIG. 22: The R-t plot of the absorption signal front at all
times during the plume lifetime .

tiple peaks in their temporal proﬁles are observed both in the
emission and absorption TOF proﬁles. The peak absorbance
with distance showed two maxima: one closer to the target
and the second one at ≈ 4 mm away from the target. The peak
absorbance signal is also found to be delayed closer distances
from the target surface. The difference between the kinetics of
absorbance and emission signals were explained based on the
temperature dependence of Boltzmann distribution and effects
of time-varying spectral absorption linewidths.

The measured FWHM (Fig. 8) showed an overall decrease
with time and distance from the target. The spectral lines in
an LPP get broadened due to various mechanisms. Typically
the Stark effect, contributed by charged particles, is promi-
nent only in early times of plasma evolution (≤ 2 µs) and
closer distances when the electron densities are higher.1 The
Doppler effect, contributed by the thermal motion of species
with respect to the observer, becomes prominent at later times
of plasma evolution. Van der Waals pressure broadening con-
tributes to the Lorentzian linewidth, but is relatively small
(≈ 10-20 % of the Gaussian widths) at the low pressures
used in these experiments.22 In all spatial positions studied,
the FWHM of the Al transition approaches ≈ 3 GHz. The
changes in the linewidth is also found to be marginal at later
times of plasma evolution ≥ 300 µs and at larger distances
from the target (≥ 7 mm).

The spatio-temporal evolution of ground state column den-
sity showed a rapid rise and decay at early times. It is im-
portant to note that the measured column densities represent
the ground level population rather than deﬁning the entire Al
atomic number density in the plasma system. Since the se-
lected transition is a resonance line, a signiﬁcant population
exists at lower temperature plasma conditions. At early times,
the plasma excitation temperature is high and the ground state
of the Al I transition is depopulated. However, at late times
of plume evolution, the excited state population becomes neg-
ligible and hence the absorption measurement more closely
represents the total atomic column density. We also noticed
a marked difference between the spatio-temporal evolution
of absorbance signal and the column density at intermediate
times. It indicates the TOF absorption proﬁles recorded by

FIG. 21: The spatio-temporal evolution of (a) column
density and (b) kinetic temperature are given for times
100-1000 µs.

the ambient medium.54

V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

The excited and ground state population kinetics of the
Al I (394.4 nm) transition showed several interesting fea-
tures. Both emission and absorption TOF evolution showed
a prompt signature immediately after the laser-plasma onset
and this is caused by the ambient gas excitation and ioniza-
tion. The absorption TOF proﬁles showed an early time sig-
nal which matches well with shock wave propagation. Mul-

keeping the probe beam at the peak center is not necessarily
a true representation of atom density. The number density is
measured using the peak area which in turn depends on both
peak height and width. The varying temperature with time
and space may inﬂuence the width of the spectral proﬁle.

Both excitation and kinetic temperatures decayed with time
when the measurements were made at shorter distances from
the target although rapid decay was observed for excitation
temperature. The reduction in kinetic temperature with time
is also noticeable at later times. When an LPP is generated
in vacuum, the temperature of the system will decay rapidly
with time.55 In the present experiment, an ambient gas with a
pressure of 34 Torr was present. The presence of the ambient
or cover gas reduces the plume expansion and conﬁnes the
plasma, which effectively reduces the rapid temperature decay
seen in vacuum environment.56 The kinetic temperature with
distance showed a maximum at 3 mm which is consistent with
excitation temperature measurements.

The measured temperatures using emission and absorption
spectroscopy under the assumption of LTE showed differ-
ences in magnitudes. In general, LTE is considered a valid
assumption in LPPs on the time scales of 100 ns to several
microseconds57; its validity at late times in plasma evolution
has not been conclusively established. Under the assumption
of LTE, the plasma should be collisionally-dominated, and
hence, all temperatures should be similar at a spatial position
in the plasma and a certain time during its evolution. However,
such a difference in temperature is not unexpected for an LPP,
considering its inhomogeneous nature. It has to be mentioned
that the kinetic temperature is measured using spectral pro-
ﬁles of Al I 394 nm, and the excitation temperature was mea-
sured using emission features of several Cr I transitions which
originated from signiﬁcantly higher excited levels. Hence, the
excitation temperature was determined using emission spec-
troscopy is expected to be higher from the hotter regions of
the plasma. Similarly, the kinetic temperature is measured us-
ing neutral Al I, whose absorption will be highest from cooler
plasma regions.

In summary, the present work provided a comprehensive
comparison between the spatio-temporal evolution of excited
and lower level atom density distributions in an LPP system
by combining emission and tunable laser absorption spec-
troscopy and TOF measurements. The TOF measurements
provided information on spatio-temporal evolution of excited
state populations (emission) and ground state populations (ab-
sorption) over multiple time scales. Emission from ambient
gas excitation was evident, followed by shock-wave propa-
gation and the rapid initial expansion and stagnation of the
LPP from the target surface, and ﬁnally a slower diffusion of
the LPP away from the target surface. Additional measure-
ments of emission spectra provided information on excitation
temperatures at early times of LPP evolution, while analysis
of absorption spectra provided information on column densi-
ties and kinetic temperatures at later times of LPP evolution.
The spectral measurements and analysis were shown to be es-
sential for interpretation of the TOF results by providing ad-
ditional information on temperatures and spectral linewidths.
Nevertheless, the TOF measurements were highly efﬁcient for

13

showing the spatio-temporal LPP dynamics with higher spa-
tial and temporal resolution than is practical with full spectral
acquisition and ﬁtting. Furthermore, the TOF data could be
measured in time/space regions where the SNR is too low for
reliable spectral analysis. Overall, the combination of absorp-
tion and emission TOF and spectral measurements provides a
more complete picture of LPP spatio-temporal dynamics than
is possible using any one technique alone.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was partially supported by the Department of the
Defense, Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) under
award number HDTRA1-20-2-0001. The content of the infor-
mation does not necessarily reﬂect the position or the policy
of the federal government, and no ofﬁcial endorsement should
be inferred. Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory is a multi-
program national laboratory operated by Battelle for the U.S.
Department of Energy under Contract DE-AC05-76RL01830.

VI. AUTHOR DECLARATIONS

A. Conﬂicts of Interest

MCP is a part-time employee of a small business Opticslah,

LLC.

B. Data availability

The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available

upon reasonable request to corresponding author.

REFERENCES

1S. S. Harilal, B. E. Brumﬁeld, N. L. LaHaye, K. C. Hartig, and M. C.
Phillips, “Optical spectroscopy of laser-produced plasmas for standoff iso-
topic analysis,” Appl. Phy. Rev. 5, 021301 (2018).
2I. N. Hutchinson, Principles of Plasma Diagnostics (Cambridge University
Press, New York, 2005).
3J. A. Aguilera and C. Aragon, “Characterization of a laser-induced plasma
by spatially resolved spectroscopy of neutral atom and ion emissions. com-
parison of local and spatially integrated measurements,” Spectrochim. Acta
B 59, 1861–1876 (2004).
4J. Hermann, D. Grojo, E. Axente, C. Gerhard, M. Burger, and V. Craciun,
“Ideal radiation source for plasma spectroscopy generated by laser abla-
tion,” Phys. Rev. E 96, 053210 (2017).
5S. Gurlui, M. Agop, P. Nica, M. Ziskind, and C. Focsa, “Experimental
and theoretical investigations of a laser-produced aluminum plasma,” Phys.
Rev. E 78, 026405 (2008).
6J. P. Singh and S. N. Thakur, Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (Ele-
siver, Amsterdam, 2020).
7S. Musazzi and U. Perini, Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy – Fun-
damentals and Applications, Vol. 182 (Springer Series in Optical Sciences,
2014).
8E. J. Kautz, M. C. Phillips, and S. S. Harilal, “Unraveling spatio-temporal
chemistry evolution in laser ablation plumes and its relation to initial plasma
conditions,” Analytical Chemistry 92, 13839–13846 (2020).

9A. Chen, Y. Jiang, T. Wang, J. Shao, and M. Jin, “Comparison of plasma
temperature and electron density on nanosecond laser ablation of cu and
nano-cu,” Phys. Plasmas 22, 033301 (2015).

10E. N. Rao, P. Mathi, S. A. Kalam, S. Sreedhar, A. K. Singh, B. Jagatap,
and S. V. Rao, “Femtosecond and nanosecond libs studies of nitroimida-
zoles: correlation between molecular structure and libs data,” J. Anal. At.
Spectrom. 31, 737–750 (2016).

11M. Miyabe, M. Oba, H. Iimura, K. Akaoka, A. Khumaeni, M. Kato, and
I. Wakaida, “Ablation plume structure and dynamics in ambient gas ob-
served by laser-induced ﬂuorescence imaging spectroscopy,” Spectrochim.
Acta B 110, 101–117 (2015).

12J. Merten and B. Johnson, “Pseudocontinuum source atomic absorption
spectroscopy: absolute quantitation of the ground state with nanosecond
time resolution in laser-induced plasmas,” Spectrochim. Acta B 139, 38
(2018).

13S. S. Harilal, C. M. Murzyn, M. C. Phillips, and J. B. Martin, “Hyper-
ﬁne structures and isotopic shifts of uranium transitions using tunable laser
spectroscopy of laser ablation plumes,” Spectrochim. Acta B 169, 105828
(2020).

14T. Duffey, T. McNeela, T. Yamamoto, J. Mazumder, and A. Schawlow,
“Absorption spectroscopic measurements of plume density and temperature
in production of nanocrystalline NbAl3 by laser ablation deposition,” Phys.
Rev. B 51, 14652 (1995).

15B. Smith, I. Gornushkin, L. King, and J. Winefordner, “A laser ablation–
atomic ﬂuorescence technique for isotopically selective determination of
lithium in solids,” Spectrochim. Acta B 53, 1131–1138 (1998).

16E. N. Weerakkody and N. G. Glumac, “Quantitative absorption spec-
troscopy of laser-produced plasmas,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 54, 125201
(2021).

17R. R. D. Weeks, M. C. Phillips, Y. Zhang, S. S. Harilal, and R. J. Jones,
“Measurement of Gd I oscillator strengths using dual-comb absorption
spectroscopy in laser-produced plasma,” Spectrochim. Aca B 181, 106199
(2021).

18N. L. LaHaye, S. S. Harilal, and M. C. Phillips, “Early- and late-time dy-
namics of laser-produced plasmas by combining emission and absorption
spectroscopy,” Spectrochim. Acta B 179, 106096 (2021).

19B. A. Bushaw and N. Anheier Jr, “Isotope ratio analysis on micron-sized
particles in complex matrices by laser ablation-absorption ratio spectrome-
try,” Spectrochim. Acta B 64, 1259–1265 (2009).

20J. Merten and B. Johnson, “Massing a laser-induced plasma with atomic

absorption spectroscopy,” Spectrochim. Acta B 149, 124–131 (2018).

21E. J. Kautz, E. Weerakudy, M. Finko, D. Currelie, B. Koroglu, T. P. Rose,
D. G. Weisz, J. C. Crowhurst, H. B. Radousky, M. DeMagistris, N. Sinha,
D. A. Levin, E. L. Dreizin, M. C. Phillips, N. G. Glumac, and S. S. Har-
ilal, “Optical spectroscopy and modeling of uranium gas-phase oxidation:
Progress and perspectives,” Spectrochim. Acta B 185, 106283 (2021).

22S. S. Harilal, E. J. Kautz, and M. C. Phillips, “Time-resolved absorption
spectroscopic characterization of ultrafast laser-produced plasmas under
varying background pressures,” Phys. Rev. E 103, 013213 (2021).

23M. Miyabe, M. Oba, H. Iimura, K. Akaoka, Y. Maruyama, H. Ohba,
M. Tampo, and I. Wakaida, “Absorption spectroscopy of uranium plasma
for remote isotope analysis of next-generation nuclear fuel,” Applied
Physics A 112, 87–92 (2013).

24B. Smith, A. Quentmeier, M. Bolshov, and K. Niemax, “Measurement of
uranium isotope ratios in solid samples using laser ablation and diode laser-
excited atomic ﬂuorescence spectrometry,” Spectrochim. Acta B 54, 943–
958 (1999).

25S. S. Harilal, E. J. Kautz, R. J. Jones, and M. C. Phillips, “Spectro-temporal
comparisons of optical emission, absorption, and laser-induced ﬂuores-
cence for characterizing ns and fs laser-produced plasmas,” Plasma Sour.
Sci. Technol. 30, 045007 (2021).

26Y. Zhang, R. R. D. Weeks, C. Lecaplain, S. S. Harilal, J. Yeak, M. C.
Phillips, and R. J. Jones, “Burst-mode dual-comb spectroscopy,” Opt. Lett.
46, 860–864 (2021).

27E. R. Wainwright, F. De Lucia, T. P. Weihs,

and J. L. Gottfried,
“Spatiotemporal and emission characteristics of laser-induced plasmas
from aluminum-zirconium composite powders,” Spectrochim. Acta B 183,
106270 (2021).

28E. Mal, R. Junjuri, M. K. Gundawar, and A. Khare, “Spatial characteriza-
tion of ns-laser induced tungsten plasma in air using laser induced break-

14

down spectroscopy,” Fus. Engg. Des. 173, 112839 (2021).

29E. N. Weerakkody, D. G. Weisz, J. Crowhurst, B. Koroglu, T. Rose,
H. Radousky, R. L. Stillwell, J. R. Jeffries, and N. G. Glumac, “Time-
resolved formation of uranium and silicon oxides subsequent to the laser
ablation of U3Si2,” Spectrochim. Acta B 170, 105925 (2020).

30M. C. Phillips, B. E. Brumﬁeld, N. L. LaHaye, S. S. Harilal, K. C. Hartig,
and I. Jovanovic, “Two-dimensional ﬂuorescence spectroscopy of uranium
isotopes in femtosecond laser ablation plumes,” Scientiﬁc Reports 7, 3784
(2017).

31NIST Atomic Spectra Database, https://www.nist.gov/pml/atomic-spectra-

database.

32J. Thomas, H. C. Joshi, A. Kumar, and R. Philip, “Observation of ion
acceleration in nanosecond laser generated plasma on a nickel thin ﬁlm
under rear ablation geometry,” Phys. Rev. E 102, 043205 (2020).

33C. J. Druffner, G. P. Perram, and R. R. Biggers, “Time-of-ﬂight emission
proﬁles of the entire plume using fast imaging during pulsed laser deposi-
tion of YBa2Cu3O7,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 76, 093101 (2005).

34M. Skoˇci´c, D. Doji´c, and S. Bukvi´c, “Consideration of optical time of ﬂight
measurement in laser induced plasmas,” Spectrochim. Acta B 165, 105786
(2020).

35M. Tarallo, G. Iwata, and T. Zelevinsky, “Bah molecular spectroscopy with

relevance to laser cooling,” Phys. Rev. A 93, 032509 (2016).

36X. Yang, Y. Tang, X. Liu, and Q. Qin, “Spatially and temporally resolved
absorption studies of YO in the plume of laser-ablated Y2O3,” Appl. spec-
tro. 53, 278–282 (1999).

37M. J. Ying, X. X. Wang, W. Cheng, B. Liao, and X. Zhang, “Time-of-ﬂight
spectroscopy characterization of the plasma plume from a laser-ablated
potassium titanyl phosphate crystal,” Physica B 466, 96–100 (2015).

38H. Sakeek, T. Morrow, W. Graham, and D. G. Walmsley, “Optical absorp-
tion spectroscopy study of the role of plasma chemistry in YBa2Cu3O7
pulsed laser deposition,” Appl. Phy. Lett. 59, 3631–3633 (1991).

39A. El Sherbini, T. M. El Sherbini, H. Hegazy, G. Cristoforetti, S. Legnaioli,
V. Palleschi, L. Pardini, A. Salvetti, and E. Tognoni, “Evaluation of self-
absorption coefﬁcients of aluminum emission lines in laser-induced break-
down spectroscopy measurements,” Spectrochim. Acta B 60, 1573–1579
(2005).

40M. Miyabe, M. Oba, H. Iimura, K. Akaoka, Y. Maruyama, H. Ohba,
M. Tampo, and I. Wakaida, “Doppler-shifted optical absorption charac-
terization of plume-lateral expansion in laser ablation of a cerium target,” J.
Appl. Phys. 112, 123303 (2012).

41N. Cheung, Q. Ying, J. Zheng, and H. S. Kwok, “Time-resolved resonant
absorption study of 532-nm laser-generated plumes over YBa2Cu3O7 tar-
gets,” J. Appl. Phys. 69, 6349–6354 (1991).

42S. S. Harilal, “Expansion dynamics of laser ablated carbon plasma plume

in helium ambient,” Appl. Surf. Sci. 172, 103–109 (2001).

43A. N. Volkov, “Splitting of laser-induced neutral and plasma plumes: hy-
drodynamic origin of bimodal distributions of vapor density and plasma
emission intensity,” J. Phys. D 54, 37LT01 (2021).

44N. M. Bulgakova, A. V. Bulgakov, and O. F. Bobrenok, “Double layer
effects in laser-ablation plasma plumes,” Phys. Rev. E 62, 5624 (2000).
45C. Focsa, S. Gurlui, P. Nica, M. Agop, and M. Ziskind, “Plume splitting and
oscillatory behavior in transient plasmas generated by high-ﬂuence laser
ablation in vacuum,” Appl. Surf. Sci. 424, 299–309 (2017).

46R. Wood, K.-R. Chen, J. Leboeuf, A. Puretzky, and D. Geohegan, “Dynam-
ics of plume propagation and splitting during pulsed-laser ablation,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 79, 1571 (1997).

47S. S. Harilal, B. O’Shay, Y. Z. Tao, and M. S. Tillack, “Ambient gas effects
on the dynamics of laser-produced tin plume expansion,” J. Appl. Phys. 99,
083303 (2006).

48D. Wu, L. Sun, J. Liu, X. Yu, R. Hai, C. Feng, Z. Wang, and H. Ding, “Dy-
namics of prompt electrons, ions, and neutrals of nanosecond laser ablation
of tungsten investigated using optical emission,” Phys. Plasmas 26, 013303
(2019).

49R. C. Issac, P. Gopinath, G. K. Varier, V. Nampoori, and C. Vallabhan,
“Twin peak distribution of electron emission proﬁle and impact ionization
of ambient molecules during laser ablation of silver target,” Appl. Phy. Lett.
73, 163–165 (1998).

50S. Amoruso, M. Armenante, R. Bruzzese, N. Spinelli, R. Velotta, and
X. Wang, “Emission of prompt electrons during excimer laser ablation of
aluminum targets,” Appl. Phy. Lett. 75, 7–9 (1999).

51S. Ratynskaia, G. Dilecce,

and P. Tolias, “Nitrogen optical emission
during nanosecond laser ablation of metals: prompt electrons or photo-
ionization?” Appl. Phys. A 117, 409–413 (2014).

52S. S. Harilal, B. E. Brumﬁeld, and M. C. Phillips, “Lifecycle of laser-

generated air sparks,” Phy. Plasmas 22, 063301 (2015).

53S. S. Harilal, G. V. Miloshevsky, P. K. Diwakar, N. L. LaHaye, and A. Has-
sanein, “Experimental and computational study of complex shockwave dy-
namics in laser ablation plumes in argon atmosphere,” Phys. Plasmas 19,
083504 (2012).

54S. S. Harilal, B. E. Brumﬁeld, B. Cannon, and M. C. Phillips, “Shock
wave mediated plasma chemistry of alo formation in laser ablation plumes,”
Analytical Chemistry 88, 2296–2302 (2016).

15

55D. Schaeffer, A. Bondarenko, E. Everson, S. Clark, C. Constantin, and
C. Niemann, “Characterization of laser-produced carbon plasmas relevant
to laboratory astrophysics,” J. Appl. Phys. 120, 043301 (2016).

56C. Aragón and J. A. Aguilera, “Characterization of laser induced plasmas
by optical emission spectroscopy: A review of experiments and methods,”
Spectrochim. Acta B 63, 893–916 (2008).

57G. Cristoforetti, A. De Giacomo, M. Dell’Aglio, S. Legnaioli, E. Tognoni,
V. Palleschi, and N. Omenetto, “Local thermodynamic equilibrium in laser-
induced breakdown spectroscopy: beyond the mcwhirter criterion,” Spec-
trochim. Acta B 65, 86–95 (2010).

