The use of AR elements in the study of foreign languages 
at the university 

129 

Rostyslav O. Tarasenko1[0000-0001-6258-2921], Svitlana M. Amelina1[0000-0002-6008-3122], 
Yuliya M. Kazhan2[0000-0002-4248-4248] and Olga V. Bondarenko3[0000-0003-2356-2674] 

1 National University of Life and Environmental Sciences of Ukraine 
15 Heroiv Oborony St., Kyiv, 03041, Ukraine 
r_tar@nubip.edu.ua, svetlanaamelina@ukr.net 
2 Mariupol State University, 129a Budivelnykiv Ave., Mariupol, 87500 Ukraine  
y.kazhan@mdu.in.ua 
3 Kryvyi Rih State Pedagogical University, 54 Gagarin Ave., Kryvyi Rih, 50086, Ukraine 
bondarenko.olga@kdpu.edu.ua 

Abstract.  The  article  deals  with  the  analysis  of  the  impact  of  the  using  AR 
technology in the study of a foreign language by university students. It is stated 
out that AR technology can be a good tool for learning a foreign language. The 
use of elements of AR in the course of studying a foreign language, in particular 
in  the  form  of  virtual  excursions,  is  proposed.  Advantages  of  using  AR 
technology  in  the  study  of  the  German  language  are  identified,  namely:  the 
possibility of involvement of different channels of information perception, the 
integrity  of  the  representation  of  the  studied  object,  the  faster  and  better 
memorization  of  new  vocabulary,  the  development  of  communicative  foreign 
language  skills.  The  ease  and  accessibility  of  using  QR  codes  to  obtain 
information about the object of study from open Internet sources is shown. The 
results of a survey of students after virtual tours are presented. A reorientation of 
methodological  support  for  the  study  of  a  foreign  language  at  universities  is 
proposed.  Attention  is  drawn  to  the  use  of  AR  elements  in  order  to  support 
students with different learning styles (audio, visual, kinesthetic). 

Keywords: augmented reality, foreign language, QR code, virtual tour, 
communicative competence. 

1 

Introduction 

1.1  The problem statement 

One of the main tasks of educational institutions at the present stage is the search for 
new  educational  technologies  that  can  help  increase  the  efficiency  of  information 
assimilation, acquisition of professional knowledge, development of abstract thinking, 
the  search  for  innovative  solutions,  etc.  It  should  cause  qualitative  changes  in  the 
implementation  of  the  competency-based  approach  to  the  organization  of  the 
educational process [14]. Undoubtedly, such educational technologies should be based 

___________________ 
Copyright © 2020 for this paper by its authors. Use permitted under Creative Commons License 
Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0). 

130 

on  the  use  of  information  technologies,  since  their  potential  capabilities  are 
inexhaustible in the processes of cognition of the surrounding world and which today 
can  fundamentally  change  the  traditional  approaches  to  the  presentation  of  learning 
objects, the ways of their study and research, the mapping of connections in real and 
virtual  dimensions.  One  aspect  of  the  combination  of  virtual  and  real  is  augmented 
reality  (AR).  Using  AR  technology  allows  a  person  to  quickly  find  and  receive 
information about real objects, which can be represented in a symbolic, sound, graphic 
or animated form. 

In  production,  AR  fundamentally  changes  the  processes  of  designing  and 
manufacturing technologically complex products, while increasing labor productivity 
and reducing errors. A special effect, as already shown by the practice of some large 
companies, is achieved by training personnel or improving their qualifications. In this 
case,  first,  timesaving  is  achieved  because  employees  learn  directly  during  work.  In 
addition, the hint system is more understandable and accessible, since it can provide 
not  only  the  provision  of  explanatory  information,  but  even  simulate  the  finished 
product based on its individual elements. Using such technologies in the professional 
training of specialists in higher education institutions, we can apply the latest forms of 
methodological support of the educational process, which will directly accompany the 
process of cognition and research. 

The  purpose  of  the  article  is  to  analyze  the  impact  of  the  application  of  AR 
technology in the study of a foreign language by university students (using the German 
language as an example), to determine the advantages and possible difficulties of using 
this technology to develop students’ foreign language communication skills. 

To achieve this goal, a number of methods were used. The analysis of scientific and 
methodological sources showed the relevance of the issue selected for the study. Based 
on the comparative analysis method, the advantages of using augmented reality tools 
in the study of a foreign language were determined. The observation method during the 
execution of the task of preparing a virtual tour made it possible to see the difficulties 
encountered by students. The questionnaire method provided the basis for determining 
the attitude of students to the implementation of augmented reality elements in the study 
of a foreign language. The generalization method was used for a concise presentation 
of the research results. 

1.2  Literature review 

The technology of AR is not only increasingly used in various industries and fields of 
science, but attempts have already been made to apply it in the educational process. 
Features  of  using  AR  technology  augmented  in  a  higher  education  institutions  are 
presented  by  Ukrainian  researchers  Albert  A.  Azaryan  [24],  Anna  V.  Iatsyshyn  [7], 
Tetiana  H.  Kramarenko  [10],  Olena  O.  Lavrentieva  [11],  Yevhenii  O.  Modlo  [17], 
Vladimir  N.  Morkun  [15],  Pavlo  P.  Nechypurenko  [16],  Vladimir  N.  Soloviev  [18], 
Andrii M. Striuk [21], Elena V. Vihrova [25], Yuliia V. Yechkalo [9] and others. The 
use of  augmented  reality  technology  is quite  common  in foreign universities,  and  is 
reflected  in  a  number  of  publications  by  scientists.  In  particular,  according  to Omer 
Sami  Kaya  and  Huseyin  Bicen  [8],  AR  applications  can  be  used  in  almost  any 

131 

educational environment, and their use in the educational process increases the level of 
students’ knowledge. 

According to Matt Bower, Cathie Howe, Nerida McCredie, Austin Robinson and 
David  Grover  [4],  AR  can  cause  a  profound  transformation  of  modern  education. 
Overlay multimedia on the real world to see via web devices such as phones and tablet 
devices, means that information can be made available to students at any time and in 
any place. Scientists believe that this can also reduce students’ cognitive overload. 

Japanese  researchers  Marc  Ericson  C.  Santos,  Angie  Chen,  Takafumi  Taketomi, 
Goshiro Yamamoto, Jun Miyazaki and Hirokazu Kato [19] identified the benefits of 
AR  technology,  which  included  real  annotation,  contextual  visualization,  and  haptic 
visualization.  Scientists  substantiate  these  advantages  with  several  latest  theories  – 
multimedia learning, experimental learning and the theory of animation visualization. 
In the context of our study, the developments of scientists and practical teachers on 
the use of AR in the study of foreign languages are of particular interest. In particular, 
Robert  Godwin-Jones  [6]  focuses  on  the  links  between  AR  and  modern  theories  of 
foreign  language  learning,  which  emphasize  localized,  contextual  learning  and 
semantic  connections  with  the  real  world.  The  researcher  considers  this  possibility 
using mobile games created using the ARIS platform (AR and Interactive Storytelling), 
a free open source game editor of the University of Wisconsin. From his point of view, 
there are various ways for teachers to use the AR, because it is advisable to study the 
language in connection with expanded digital spaces. 

Pei‐Hsun Emma Liu and Ming‐Kuan Tsai [12] focused on building written writing 
skills  in  English  at  Taiwan  universities  using  AR  through  the  use  of  multimedia 
documents (such as photographs and videos) in the process of learning English with 
computer support to improve students’ language skills, which are necessary for their 
written assignments (writing an essay). 

Murat Akçayir and Gökçe Akçayir investigated the students’ attitude to their use of 
AR  applications  in  learning  English,  in  particular,  for  learning  new  vocabulary. 
According  to  the  results  of  the  study,  they  found  that  the  technology  saves  time  by 
simplifying  the  search  for  a  new  word.  In  addition,  AR  programs  help  students 
remember words. The problem that students encountered during the study, the authors 
indicated the recognition of the QR code. According to students, the small screens of 
mobile phones make it difficult to use them in teaching and learning a language [1]. 

Considering  the  search  by  scientists  for  ways  to  intensify  the  study  of  foreign 
languages and the insufficient development of this problem in terms of the use of AR 
technology  in  general  and  in  the  study  of  foreign  languages,  in  addition  to  English, 
where some attempts have already been made, the problem of using AR technology in 
the process of learning foreign languages is relevant and requires a separate study. In 
addition, as the analysis of the above works shows, the application of AR technology 
in  the  study  of  English  is  mainly  concentrated  on  the  study  of  vocabulary,  which 
significantly limits the use of this technology, because its potential is much greater. 

132 

2 

Result and discussion 

2.1  The use of elements of augmented reality for the formation of 

communicative competence through a virtual tour 

The process of gaining knowledge usually requires the use of different methods and 
tools for working with information, depending on the technological possibilities and 
basic didactic and pedagogical models. The development of cognitive didactics has led 
to the emergence of a new concept of learning, based on taking into account the way 
people  process  information.  At  the  same  time,  the  main  attention  is  paid  to  such 
cognitive  structural  and  process  components  of  learning  as  thinking,  perception  and 
problem  solving.  In  the  process  of  training  aimed  at  obtaining  new  knowledge, 
cognitive  structures  should  change  taking  into  account  motivational  and  affective 
factors. 

New technologies, which are becoming more accessible today, contain new didactic 
potential  regarding  the  possibilities  of  working  with  information  in  the  process  of 
studying  certain  topics.  In  particular,  the  study  of  a  foreign  language  is  impossible 
without  the  inclusion  in  the  educational  material  of  linguistic  and  geographical 
information  related  to  the  country  of  the  language  being  studied,  its  traditions,  the 
specific historical or cultural influence of the representatives of this country and the 
reflection  of  all  these  aspects  in  the  students’  native  country  or  city.  Since  it  is  not 
always  possible  to  carry  out  a  real  excursion  to  a  specific  region  or  to  a  particular 
attraction, and sometimes this is impractical due to lack of time, there is the possibility 
of  a  virtual  excursion  that  can  thematically  present  the  contents  of  the  excursion 
regardless  of  time,  logistic  and  human  resources.  The  essence  of  modern  cognitive 
excursion  didactics  is  the  orientation  to  independent  actions,  which  accelerates  the 
process of acquiring knowledge. An addition, due to its specificity, the excursion has a 
positive  motivating  effect  [20].  This  can  increase  motivation  to  learn  a  foreign 
language, which ultimately leads to a higher efficiency of learning it. 

Based  on  the  above  considerations,  we  chose  to  create  a  virtual  tour  for  students 
learning German, concentrating on the topic “Traces of German architects in the history 
of Kyiv” [3]. It is worth noting that, since Kyiv is an attractive city for German-speaking 
tourists, several virtual tours in German have already been developed. In particular, this 
is the Reisen Kiew project of the Kiewer Stadtführer, which covers the most famous 
historical  monuments  of  the  Ukrainian  capital.  However,  we  invited  students  to 
consider the outstanding sightseeing objects of the city from a different angle, namely, 
as indicated in the topic – in terms of the contribution of German architects to their 
design and construction. 

At the initial stage, the selection of objects for a virtual tour was carried out. For this 
purpose,  a  number  of  materials  were  analyzed  regarding  historical  objects  in  the 
territory of the city of Kyiv. The following architectural monuments were selected: 

1. St.  Volodymyr’s  Cathedral.  The  construction  of  the  cathedral  began  in  1862  and 
lasted 40 years. Its construction involved several architects and painters. In 1853-
1859,  the  prominent  architect  of  German  origin,  Ivan  Strom,  designed  the  St. 
Volodymyr’s Cathedral; architects P. Sparro, A. Beretti and V. Nikolaev amended 

133 

the  design.  Later, German  engineer  Berengardt was  involved  in solving  technical 
problems. 

2. St. Sophia’s Cathedral. The cathedral, built in 1037, was destroyed several times. In 
1736-1740,  the  Ukrainian  architect  of  North  German  origin,  Johann  Gottfried 
Schedel reconstructed the main bell tower. He also built a stone wall around the St. 
Sophia’s  Monastery,  very  successfully  combining  Western  style  elements  with 
elements of the Cossack Baroque and folk motifs. 

3. Kyiv  Pechersk  Lavra.  Until  1745,  the  architect  and  engineer  Johann  Gottfried 
Schedel worked on the construction of the bell tower of the Kyiv Pechersk Lavra, 
which became  one  of  the  best  bell  towers in  Eastern  Europe  of  the  18th  century. 
Schedel developed a project in a transitional style from baroque to classicism. The 
bell tower of the Assumption Cathedral was built according to his design in the form 
of an octagonal four-tier tower with a height of 96.5 meters. 

4. St. Andrew’s Church. The foundations of St. Andrew’s Church were built according 
to the design of I.G. Schedel; however, the design of the temple itself, submitted by 
him, was not approved. Carved details of the iconostasis, according to sketches and 
drawings  by  F.-B.  Rastrelli,  created  by  the  master  (J.  Domash,  A. Karlovsky,  M. 
Manturov,  D.  Ustars,  H.  Oreidah,  J. Zunfer),  among  which  there  were  several 
Germans. German master Johann Friedrich Grot led installation work. 

5. National Opera of Ukraine. After the old theater building burned down in 1896, an 
international  architectural  competition  for  the  design  of  a  new  opera  house  was 
announced. More than twenty well-known architects from different countries – Italy, 
Germany,  Russia  and  France  –  attended  the  competition,  and  the  winner  was  the 
project of the architect of German-Baltic origin Victor Schröter, a representative of 
the rational direction of eclecticism in architecture. The new city theater was built 
from 1898 to 1901 in the style of rationalism, baroque and neo-Romanesque style. 
6. Klov  Palace.  The  architects  J.  G.  Schedel  and  P.  I.  Neyelov  built  Klov  Palace  in 
1756. The German painter and jeweler Benedict Friedrich performed a number of 
works, in particular, the painting of the ceiling in the large hall of the Klov Palace. 
Тhe German garden master Johann Blech worked on the Klovsky garden. 

7. Kyiv  Polytechnic  Institute.  Famous  architects  took  part  in  the  competition  for 
construction projects at the Polytechnic Institute, including Germans and Austrians, 
in particular: Benoit, Gauguin, Kitner, Kobelev, Pomerantsev, Tsender and Schröter. 
The  jury  recognized  the  best  project  of  Professor  I.  S.  Kitner,  under  the  motto 
“Prestissimo”  (“Very  Fast”).  The  construction  of  six  university  buildings  in  the 
Romanesque style began on August 30, 1898 and was completed in 1901. 

After  determining  the  content  of  the  future  virtual  tour,  that  is,  the  selection  of  the 
outstanding  architectural  structures  of  Kyiv  associated  with  the  work  of  German 
architects, engineers and decoration painters, information resources were identified that 
students  can  use  to  prepare  and  conduct  a  virtual  tour.  Providing  students  with 
assistance in information resources was determined, on the one hand, by the desire to 
reduce the time for them to complete the task, since local history aspects are only part 
of  the  German  language  classes,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  limit  the  amount  of 
information for processing by directing it to certain subtopics. Interactivity, a variety 

134 

of materials and multimedia play an important role in creating a virtual tour. Another 
important aspect was also the understanding that when integrating information into a 
virtual  tour,  we  should  respect  copyrights,  that  is,  use  only  those  sources  that  are 
publicly available or those for which a permit is granted. 

First,  we  suggested  that  students  include  the  use  of  a  digital  map  of  Kiev  in  the 
structure of a virtual tour, since the maps provide an understanding of the integrity of 
the territory with objects located on it and possible connections between them. They 
form a sense of scale and improve spatial orientation. Using digital maps, students can 
easily  create  virtual  sightseeing  tours,  combining  sightseeing  objects  with  routes 
according to certain signs: the chosen topic, the chronological period, the place of a 
historical event, the sequence of location, the logic of movement. In our study, we used 
the  Google  Maps  application  as  a  tool  for  creating  a  virtual  tour  map.  One  of  the 
advantages of this tool is the ability to clear the position of the excursion object on the 
map  using  built-in  search  tools  based  on  addresses.  Colored  markers  were 
superimposed  on  automatically  identified  points  on  a  digital  map  to  conveniently 
identify each virtual tour object. At the location of the excursion objects, we applied 
color marking for convenient use (fig. 1). 

Fig. 1. Digital map of Kyiv with printed objects proposed for a virtual tour (Google resource). 

The main task of students was to develop their own excursions based on the use of the 
proposed  map.  At  the  same  time,  each  group  selects  one  of  the  characteristics  for 
building the route. As already noted, the virtual tour was to maximize the achievement 
of the main goal, in particular, the deepening of the study of the German language by 

 
 
135 

acquaintance  with  architectural  monuments  built  with  the  participation  of  German 
architects. In this case, the informative part about the objects of the virtual excursion 
had  to  combine  text,  photo  and  video  information  into  a  single,  complementary 
information  case  [2;  22;  23],  formed  using  AR  technologies.  Guided  by  these 
conditions,  access  to  the necessary  information on  mapped  architectural  monuments 
should be provided throughout the tour. One of the ways to obtain information, quickly 
and conveniently, in various forms is the use of modern mobile devices that are capable 
of  reproducing  multimedia  information  concentrated  on  various  web  pages.  An 
important issue remains the search for the right information and quick access. 

We  asked  students  to  solve  this  problem  by  creating  a  system  of  QR  codes  that 
provide information support for a virtual tour, providing quick access to information 
about a particular object of the tour in different forms. It is known that a QR code can 
be generated for textual information, a URL, an e-mail, a phone number, etc. They can 
be easily and stably scanned by special scanners and provides quick access to encoded 
information.  

At  the  initial  stage,  we  conducted  a  training  for  students  to  develop  the  skills  of 
generating  QR  codes  for  these  types  of  information  using  freely  available  systems. 
After  that,  students  processed  open  Internet  resources  with  text,  photo  and  video 
information about the objects of the excursion, selected the most successful of them, 
and then, using QR-code generators, formed the corresponding set of codes. We show 
an example of a set of QR codes for information about one of such excursion objects, 
the bell tower of the Kyiv Pechersk Lavra (fig. 2). 

Fig. 2. A set of QR codes with text (a), graphic (b) and video (c) about the bell tower of the 
Kyiv Pechersk Lavra. 

The main condition for the preparation of textual information was that it should be in 
German. One of the sources that students used for this purpose was the open electronic 
encyclopedia Wikipedia (fig. 3). This approach had a double effect, since students, on 
the one hand, processed German sources in the process of searching and selecting the 
necessary  information,  and  on  the  other  hand,  created  the  opportunity  to  receive 
extended information in German about objects during the virtual tour for her “visitors”, 
which were students from other groups. 

However,  for  many  people,  information  in  the  form  of  a  graphic  image  is  more 
informative than text. In particular, many facts can be presented more fully and clearly 
in  the  photograph  than  in  words.  Therefore,  in  a  virtual  tour  the  use  of  images  is 

 
136 

especially important. In order for the image to be used in a virtual tour, they must be 
presented in digital form. The range of such images can be very diverse and range from 
simple photographs to interactive maps, managed panoramic images, 3D images and 
the like. Image types such as satellite images are also well suited for inclusion in virtual 
tours. The use of mobile devices in the process of conducting virtual excursions with 
access  to  images  about  the  object  has  significant  advantages  compared  to  providing 
these images in print, primarily due to the possibility of increasing images, changing 
their brightness and contrast, making even small details visible. When preparing virtual 
excursions,  students  sought  to  provide  access  through  a  QR  code  not  to  individual 
images about the object, but to a collection of photographs that would allow them to 
get the most out of a particular architectural landmark (fig. 4). For this purpose, students 
used the resources of Google Images, Wikiway and the like. 

Fig. 3. A fragment of a web page with textual information about the bell tower of the Kyiv 
Pechersk Lavra, access is generated by a QR code. 

The  advantages  of  video  resources  are  that  the  presentation  of  information  on  the 
corresponding excursion space is almost realistic and relatively uncomplicated. Like 
photographs, especially panoramic photographs, films and videos very closely convey 
the atmosphere of real visits to places of excursion objects. In addition, in the case of 
using video, there is not only visual perception, but also perception of information by 
ear. 

On this basis, when designing virtual excursions, students integrated thematic films 
and videos by linking to video portals such as You Tube and Google Video. We show 
an  example  of  a  link  to  the  corresponding  video  fragment  encoded  by  a  QR  code 
(fig. 5).  Topically  relevant  videos  can  be  quickly  found  using  targeted  keyword 
searches. As with photographs, we also need to respect copyrights regarding videos and 
films. 

It  is  worth  noting  that  the  communication  of  the  group  members  during  the 
preparation  of  the  virtual  tour  also  contributed  to  the  formation  of  teamwork  skills 
among  students  and  provided  them  with  the  opportunity  to  develop  communication 
skills in foreign languages. In addition, working together on one topic and intending to 

 
 
achieve a common goal, students learned from each other to build sentences of different 
types with the correct word order, learned conversational vocabulary options, trained 
pronunciation of individual words and phrases. 

137 

Fig. 4. A fragment of a web page with graphic information about the bell tower of the Kyiv 
Pechersk Lavra, access is generated by a QR code. 

2.2  Augmented reality as a modern educational solution for studying foreign 

languages  

Upon completion of the development of virtual tours of each group, students who did 
not  take  part  in  their  preparation  tested  them.  After  passing  these  excursions,  a 
questionnaire was proposed, which was aimed at assessing the effectiveness of a virtual 
excursion with elements of AR in studying the German language. This questionnaire 
contained questions grouped into four blocks: motivational, informative, linguistic and 
technological.  39  people  attended  the  survey.  The  results  of  the  answers  to  the 
questionnaire are shown in table 1. 

The results of the survey indicate that the use of virtual excursions with elements of 
AR aroused interest among students, which manifested itself to different degrees and 
in different aspects when studying the German language. In particular, this approach 
has  most  positively  affected  the  substantive  aspect  of  this  process.  A  rather  high 
percentage  of  students  (76.9%)  noted  that  the  elements  of  AR  provided  them  with 
extended information about the excursion objects presented. 

It is gratifying to note that the level of positive answers in the technological unit was 
also  quite  high  (58.1%),  which  indicates  students’  readiness  for  new  forms  of 
organizing  the  study  of  a  foreign  language.  However,  some  aspects  of  this  process 
caused quite serious technological difficulties. In particular, 61.5% of students were not 

 
 
138 

able to use fully the capabilities of the proposed elements of AR due to insufficient 
technical characteristics and an inappropriate software set for their own smartphones. 

Fig. 5. A fragment of a web page with video information about the bell tower of the Kyiv 
Pechersk Lavra, access is generated by a QR code (Reisen Kiew). 

An undoubtedly positive result of using virtual tours is the desire expressed by 79.5% 
of students to learn German, including in this way. Therefore, it is advisable for teachers 
to  use  the  influence  on  the  motivation  to  learn  a  foreign  language,  which  is  created 
using AR elements in the educational process. 

Another confirmation of the advisability of using elements of AR in the study of a 
foreign language is the low level of positive answers to the questions of the linguistic 
block of the questionnaire. This indicates that the general level of students’ linguistic 
knowledge  is  quite  low  and  therefore  needs  to  be  improved,  including  through  the 
search for new approaches and forms of learning a foreign language. 

Thus,  the  use  of  AR  technology  contains  great  potential  for  the  formation  of  a 
holistic,  realistic  view  of  objects  outside  the  classroom.  Owing  to  the  student’s 
independent  actions  and  his  emotional  impression,  when  perceiving  the  educational 
object, an active approach of the educational content to the student occurs, which leads 
to better assimilation and longer memorization of knowledge. 

Improving  the  effectiveness  of  training  and  longer  memorization  of  the  studied 
content is achieved through higher motivation for learning, active, and direct interaction 
with a real educational object based on AR technology. Since there are different types 

 
 
139 

of  students  depending  on  the  channel  of  perception  of  information  (audial,  visual, 
kinesthetic, mixed types, etc.) [5; 13], thanks to the holistic representation of objects 
based on AR technology, a higher level of assimilation of educational information and 
the formation of multimodal representations can be achieved. 

Table 1. Results of answers to questionnaire questions. 

Question 

Response rate 

Motivational block 
Did the virtual tour contribute to the desire to learn German? 
Are you ready to continue learning the language this way? 
Have you been encouraged by the existing elements of AR 
to  depth  study  of  information  in  German  about  the  excursion 
objects presented? 
Content block 
Have  elements  of  AR  provided  you  with  enhanced 

information about the excursion objects presented? 

Did  German  videos  provide  understanding  of 

the 

information about the object of the excursion? 

Were the text materials sufficient to obtain information on 

the topic of the tour? 
Linguistic block 
Did the information presented in the form of elements of AR 
make  it  easier  for  you  to  understand  excursion  materials  in 
German? 

Did elements of AR help to understand the meaning of new 

words in context? 

Have  elements  of  augmented  reality  contributed  to  better 

memorization of terms? 
Technological block 
Were  there  new  ways  for  you  to  obtain  additional 

information using QR codes? 

Have you possessed sufficient skills in using smartphones to 

receive information presented as elements of AR? 

Did the specifications and software set of smartphones make 
it  possible  to  utilize  fully  the  capabilities  of  the  proposed 
elements of AR? 

Yes 

66.7 
79.5 
66.7 

53.8 

77.8 

76.9 

74.4 

82.1 

53.8 

61.5 

56.4 

43.6 

58.1 

71.8 

64.1 

No 

33.3 
20.5 
33.3 

46.2 

22.2 

23.1 

25.6 

17.9 

46.2 

38.5 

43.6 

56.4 

41.9 

28.2 

35.9 

38.5 

61.5 

The  use  of  AR 

technology  requires  appropriate  methodological  didactic 
reorientation, which will create the opportunity for students to independently organize 
research, collect, evaluate, process and present information, apply complex hypertext 
structures,  develop  network  thinking,  work  within  flexible,  group,  project-oriented 
forms of training. 

 
140 

3 

Conclusions  

In the course of the study, a number of advantages of using AR technology in the study 
of the German language were identified. In our opinion, such advantages can be used 
in the process of learning other foreign languages, in particular: 

─  The technology of AR allows to achieve a higher level of assimilation of educational 
material, since various channels of perceiving information are involved, because it 
is important for studying a foreign language what type of perception of information 
the student belongs to, whether he is an audial, visual, kinesthetic, and the like. 
─  Due to the integrity of the representation of the studied object, the student can get a 
more complete picture of it, and then learn, for example, a larger amount of new 
lexical material, since memorizing new words, especially terminology, takes place 
faster and remains in memory longer when new words are not used in isolation, but 
in context. 

─  Based on the application of AR technology, students can familiarize themselves with 
objects, unique  or  inaccessible  due  to  spatial  remoteness (for  example,  located  in 
another country). It helps them to understand the essence or purpose of these objects 
and to remember the vocabulary associated with them, which would be much more 
difficult to use other information sources. 

─  Faster memorization of new vocabulary is also facilitated by the parallel presentation 
of information case together with selected objects for study, which allows students 
to quickly receive extended information using AR technologies. 

─  The use of AR technology, in particular in the form of a virtual tour, which involves 
working  in  a  group,  allows  students  to  develop  communicative  foreign  language 
skills. 

─  AR technology can be a good tool for learning a foreign language, because it allows 
the student to learn at his own pace. The assimilation of new knowledge and skills 
takes  place  based  on  previous  knowledge  of  the  language,  the  level  of  which,  as 
shown  by  pedagogical  practice,  is  very  different  even  within  the  same  academic 
group. 

The  main  problem  of  using  AR  technology  when  learning  a  foreign  language  by 
organizing virtual tours, in our study, as in other cases of using digital information, is 
the dependence on the technical infrastructure and software. Since each student used 
his own smartphone with different technical characteristics and his own software set, 
sometimes  this  led  to  problems  with  receiving  and  reproducing  information  in 
accordance with the used technology. Most of these problems were related to ensuring 
stable access to the Internet, improper operation of QR scanners and the lack of some 
software installation skills. 

In order to understand better the transfer of knowledge through virtual and AR and 
to be able to develop appropriate methods for using these technologies, further research 
is  needed.  In  particular,  it  is  advisable  to  compare  augmented  and  virtual  reality 
technologies with traditional teaching methods and other latest information processing 
tools, as well as study and compare various methods that offer augmented and virtual 
reality. 

141 

References 

1.  Akçayir,  M.,  Akçayir,  G.:  Üniversite  Öğrencilerinin  Yabancı  Dil  Eğitiminde  Artırılmış 
Gerçeklik  Teknolojisi  Kullanımına  Yönelik  Görüşleri.  Erzincan  Üniversitesi  Eğitim 
Fakültesi Dergisi 18(2), 1169–1186 (2016). doi:10.17556/jef.86406 

2.  Amelina,  S.M., Tarasenko,  R.O.,  Azaryan,  A.A.:  Information and  technology case  as  an 
indicator of information competence level of the translator. In: Kiv, A.E., Soloviev, V.N. 
(eds.) Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Cloud Technologies in Education (CTE 2018), 
Kryvyi Rih, Ukraine, December 21, 2018. CEUR Workshop Proceedings 2433, 266–278. 
http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2433/paper17.pdf (2019). Accessed 10 Sep 2019 

3.  Amelina, S.M.: Types of tasks in the didactization of materials to trace the German in the 
history of Kiev. Educational Dimension 54(2), 7–19. doi: 10.31812/educdim.v54i2.3851 
4.  Bower,  M.,  Howe,  C.,  McCredie,  N.,  Robinson,  A.,  Grover,  D.:  Augmented  Reality  in 
education  –  cases,  places  and  potentials.  Educational  Media  International  51(1),  1–15 
(2014). doi:10.1080/09523987.2014.889400 

5.  Dónaill, C. Ó.: Multimedia-assisted content and language integrated learning. Multimedia-

Assisted Language Learning 16(4), 11–38 (2013) 

6.  Godwin-Jones, R.: Augmented reality and language learning: From annotated vocabulary 
to  place-based  mobile  games.  Language  Learning  &  Technology  20(3),  9–19  (2016). 
doi:10125/44475 

7.  Iatsyshyn, Anna V., Kovach, V.O., Lyubchak, V.O., Zuban, Yu.O., Piven, A.G., Sokolyuk, 
O.M., Iatsyshyn, Andrii V., Popov, O.O., Artemchuk, V.O., Shyshkina, M.P.: Application 
of  augmented  reality  technologies  for  education  projects  preparation.  CEUR  Workshop 
Proceedings 2643, 134–160 (2020) 

8.  Kaya, O.S., Bicen, H.: Study of Augmented Reality Applications Use in Education and Its 
Effect  on  the  Academic  Performance.  International  Journal  of  Distance  Education 
Technologies 17(3), 25–36 (2019). doi:10.4018/IJDET.2019070102 

9.  Kiv, A.E., Shyshkina, M.P., Semerikov, S.O., Striuk, A.M., Yechkalo, Yu.V.: AREdu 2019 
– How augmented reality transforms to augmented learning. CEUR Workshop Proceedings 
2547, 1–12 (2020) 

10.  Kramarenko,  T.H.,  Pylypenko,  O.S.,  Zaselskiy,  V.I.:  Prospects  of  using  the  augmented 
reality application in STEM-based Mathematics teaching. CEUR Workshop Proceedings 
2547, 130–144 (2020) 

11.  Lavrentieva, O.O., Arkhypov, I.O., Kuchma, O.I., Uchitel, A.D.: Use of simulators together 
with  virtual  and  augmented  reality  in  the  system  of  welders’  vocational  training:  past, 
present, and future. CEUR Workshop Proceedings 2547, 201–216 (2020) 

12.  Liu, P.-H.E., Tsai, M.-K.: Using augmented-reality-based mobile learning material in EFL 
English composition: An exploratory case study. British Journal of Educational Technology
44(1), E1–E4 (2013). doi:10.1111/j.1467-8535.2012.01302.x 

13.  Mayer,  R.E.,  Heiser,  J.,  Lonn,  S.:  Cognitive  constraints  on  multimedia  learning:  When 
presenting more material results in less understanding. Journal of Educational Psychology
93(1), 187–198 (2001). doi:10.1037/0022-0663.93.1.187 

14.  Modlo, Ye.O., Semerikov, S.O., Shmeltzer, E.O.: Modernization of Professional Training 
of  Electromechanics  Bachelors:  ICT-based  Competence  Approach.  CEUR  Workshop 
Proceedings 2257, 148–172 (2018) 

15.  Morkun, V.S., Morkun, N.V., Pikilnyak, A.V.: Augmented reality as a tool for visualization
of  ultrasound  propagation  in  heterogeneous  media  based  on  the  k-space  method.  CEUR 
Workshop Proceedings 2547, 81–91 (2020) 

142 

16.  Nechypurenko, P.P., Starova, T.V., Selivanova, T.V., Tomilina, A.O., Uchitel, A.D.: Use 
of Augmented Reality in Chemistry Education. CEUR Workshop Proceedings 2257, 15–23
(2018) 

17.  Nechypurenko, P.P., Stoliarenko, V.G., Starova, T.V., Selivanova, T.V., Markova, O.M., 
Modlo, Ye.O., Shmeltser, E.O.: Development and implementation of educational resources 
in chemistry with elements of augmented reality. CEUR Workshop Proceedings 2547, 156–
167 (2020) 

18.  Rashevska, N.V., Soloviev, V.N.: Augmented Reality and the Prospects for Applying Its in 
the Training of Future Engineers. CEUR Workshop Proceedings 2257, 192–197 (2018) 
19.  Santos, M.E.C., Chen, A., Taketomi, T., Yamamoto, G., Miyazaki, J., Kato, H.: Augmented 
Reality  Learning  Experiences:  Survey  of  Prototype  Design  and  Evaluation.  IEEE 
Transactions on Learning Technologies 7(1), 38–56 (2014). doi:10.1109/TLT.2013.37 
20.  Schmidt, D., Lindau, A.K., Finger, A.: Die virtuelle Exkursion als Lehr- und Lernumgebung 
in Schule und Hochschule. Hallesches Jahrbuch für Geowissenschaften 35, 145–157 (2013)
21.  Striuk,  A.M.,  Rassovytska,  M.V.,  Shokaliuk,  S.V.:  Using  Blippar  Augmented  Reality 
Browser in the Practical Training of Mechanical Engineers. CEUR Workshop Proceedings 
2104, 412–419 (2018) 

22.  Tarasenko,  R.O.,  Amelina,  S.M.,  Azaryan,  A.A.:  Features  of  the  use  of  cloud-based 
translation  systems  in  the  process  of  forming  information  competence  of  translators.  In: 
Kiv, A.E., Soloviev, V.N. (eds.) Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Cloud Technologies 
in  Education  (CTE  2018),  Kryvyi  Rih,  Ukraine,  December  21,  2018.  CEUR  Workshop 
Proceedings 2433, 322–335. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2433/paper21.pdf (2019). Accessed 10
Sep 2019 

23.  Tarasenko, R.O., Amelina, S.M., Azaryan, A.A.: Integrated testing system of information 
competence  components  of  future  translators.  In:  Kiv,  A.E.,  Shyshkina,  M.P.  (eds.) 
Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Cloud Technologies in Education (CTE 2019), Kryvyi 
Rih,  Ukraine,  December  20,  2019.  CEUR  Workshop  Proceedings  2643,  376–391. 
http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2643/paper22.pdf (2020). Accessed 20 Jul 2020 

24.  Zelinska,  S.O.,  Azaryan,  A.A.,  Azaryan,  V.A.:  Investigation  of  Opportunities  of  the 
Practical  Application  of  the  Augmented  Reality  Technologies  in  the  Information  and 
Educative  Environment  for  Mining  Engineers  Training  in  the  Higher  Education 
Establishment. CEUR Workshop Proceedings 2257, 204–214 (2018) 

25.  Zinonos, N.O., Vihrova, E.V., Pikilnyak, A.V.: Prospects of Using the Augmented Reality 
for Training Foreign Students at the Preparatory Departments of Universities in Ukraine. 
CEUR Workshop Proceedings 2257, 87–92 (2018) 

 
