An optimized TEM specimen preparation method of quantum nanostructures 

Hongguang Wang*, Vesna Srot, Bernhard Fenk, Gennadii Laskin, Jochen Mannhart, 

 Peter A. van Aken 

 Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany 

* hgwang@fkf.mpg.de 

Abstract 

Electron transparent TEM lamella with unaltered microstructure and chemistry is the prerequisite 

for  successful  TEM  explorations.  Currently,  TEM  specimen  preparation  of  quantum 

nanostructures, such as quantum dots (QDs), remains a challenge. In this work, we optimize the 

sample-preparation routine for achieving high-quality TEM specimens consisting of SrRuO3 (SRO) 

QDs grown on SrTiO3 (STO) substrates. We demonstrate that a combination of ion-beam-milling 

techniques can produce higher-quality specimens of quantum nanostructures compared to TEM 

specimens  prepared  by  a  combination  of  tripod  polishing  followed  by  Ar+  ion  milling.  In  the 

proposed  method,  simultaneous  imaging  in  a  focused  ion-beam  device  enables  accurate 

positioning of the QD regions and assures the presence of dots in the thin lamella by cutting the 

sample inclined by 5° relative to the dots array. Furthermore, the preparation of TEM lamellae 

with  several  large  electron-transparent  regions  that  are  separated  by  thicker  walls  effectively 

reduces  the  bending  of  the  specimen  and  offers  broad  thin  areas.  The  final  use  of  a  NanoMill 

efficiently removes the amorphous layer without introducing any additional damage.  

Keywords: Quantum nanostructures, Focused ion beam, Tripod polishing, Ion milling, NanoMill 

 
Introduction 

Quantum  matter  nanostructures  offer  possibilities  for  artificial  manipulation  of  novel  electron 

systems (Boschker and Mannhart, 2017; Harrison and Valavanis, 2016), which have been playing 

an  important  role  in  applications  like  quantum  computing  and  sensing  (Senellart  et  al.,  2017). 

Among them, zero-dimensional electron systems, also known as quantum dots (QDs), attract great 

attention due to their size confinement (Alivisatos, 1996; Mannhart et al., 2016), which splits the 

electron energy levels  and generates intriguing quantum phenomena.  In our previous work, we 

showed that the magnetic Curie temperature of SRO QD nanostructures increases if the dot size is 

reduced to 30 nm (Laskin et al., 2019). Atomically resolved investigations of their structure and 

chemistry are crucial for the understanding of their fundamental physical mechanisms. 

A transmission electron microscope (TEM) is a superior tool used for nanoscale characterization 

of QDs. Particularly after the invention of aberration correctors, TEM enables the observation of 

microstructure, electronic structure, and local chemistry at the atomic scale (Pennycook and Nellist, 

2015). However, the quality of TEM specimens is often a major limiting factor (David B. Williams, 

2009; Srot et al., 2014). Uniformly thin TEM specimens with a clean surface and a thickness of 

up to 50 nm are prerequisites for TEM observations (Brydson, 2011). Due to the small size of QDs 

(down to 15 nm) (Laskin et al., 2019; Wolfsteller et al., 2010), it is particularly difficult to obtain 

electron  transparent  lamellae,  where  QDs  have  been  cut  through  their  central  part.  TEM 

investigations of 80 nm SRO QDs were reported (Ruzmetov et al., 2005), displaying an extensive 

amorphous layer covering SrRuO3 (SRO) QDs and a noticeable shape change caused by the TEM 

specimen preparation procedure. Due to technological advancements, the size of QDs has been 

decreasing  over  the  years,  making  TEM  specimen  preparation  even  more  challenging  and 

demanding. 

In  this  work,  by  utilizing  aberration-corrected  (scanning)  transmission  electron  microscopy 

((S)TEM), we compare the quality of TEM specimens that were prepared by (i) tripod polishing 

followed by  Ar+ ion  milling (TP&IM) and (ii)  focused ion  beam  cutting  with subsequent low-

energy milling and cleaning in a Fischione NanoMill (FIB&NM).  

Experimental methods 

  Sample preparation 

SRO quantum-dot nanostructures were obtained by patterning an epitaxial SRO thin film grown 

on a STO substrate by electron beam lithography (JEOL JBX6300) with an electron-beam energy 

of 100 keV.  The dot size and spacing are controlled during the patterning process. Figure 1(a) 

shows a sketch of the SRO QD nanostructures. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of 

the patterned SRO QDs on the STO substrates are shown in Fig. 1(b, c). Here, the SRO QDs with 

30 nm diameter are periodically arranged with a spacing of about 100 nm.  

 
Figure 1. (a) Sketch of a SRO QD array on a STO substrate. (b) SEM image of the SRO QDs nanostructure. 

(c) Magnified SEM image of the region within the rectangle marked in (b). 

  TEM specimen preparation 

In this work, we have prepared electron-transparent TEM lamellae by two combinations of two 

different methods, tripod polishing followed by Ar+ ion milling (TP&IM) and focused ion beam 

cutting with subsequent low-energy milling and cleaning in a Fischione NanoMill (FIB&NM). All 

prepared cross-sectional samples were observed by (S)TEM along the [100] direction of the STO 

substrate. 

(i)  Tripod polishing with subsequent Ar+-ion milling 

Samples were cut into slabs of 0.5 mm width and 1.5 mm length with a wire saw (Well, Model 

3242), as shown in Figs. 2(a-c). A thin layer of glass was mounted to the surface of the slab with 

glue (Epoxy bond 110)  to protect  the surface structure from  contamination and  damage during 

further  processing.  Then,  the  samples  were  attached  to  a  Pyrex  specimen  holder  using  Crystal 

Bond  thermoplastic  wax  for  mechanical  polishing.  An  Allied  MultiPrep  System  was  used  for 

automated tripod polishing of the samples in cross-sectional geometry (Srot et al., 2014; Voyles et 

al., 2003). Diamond lapping films (DLF) with grain sizes of 3.0, 1.0, 0.5, and 0.1 µm were used. 

Firstly, one side was  flatly polished until  the sample  thickness  was  below 250 µm. During  the 

polishing of the second side, a wedge angle of 1° was introduced as the thin part of the wedge was 

below 70 µm. Finally, the thin part of the wedge was polished down to about 10 µm using a 0.1 

µm  DLF  (Fig.  2(d)).  The  polished  samples  were  removed  from  the  holder  and  glued  to  a 

molybdenum  half-ring  with  M-Bond  610  epoxy  (Fig.  2(e)).  During  the  mechanical  polishing 

process,  the  sample  thickness  was  regularly  checked  with  an  optical  microscope.  A  Gatan 

Precision Ion Polishing System (PIPS II, Model 695) was used for Ar+ ion milling of the samples 

at  liquid  N2  temperature.  To  thin  the  sample  and  to  reduce  the  ion-beam-induced  damage,  the 

acceleration voltage during Ar+ ion milling was progressively lowered from 3.3 kV to 2.0 kV and 

0.3 kV. The central region of the thin part of the wedge was milled using the ion beam at an angle 

of 8°. An optical microscopy image (Zeiss AxioCam HRc) of the final TEM specimen is shown 

in Fig. 2(f). Optical interference fringes indicate that the thickness close to the curved region is 

thin enough for TEM observation (Hudson et al., 2004). The edges marked by arrows in Fig. 2(f) 

are the regions of interest, where (S)TEM investigations were performed. 

Figure 2. Schematic diagram of TEM sample preparation by tripod polishing followed by Ar+ ion 

milling (TP&IM). (a–c) Cutting slabs of 1.5 mm width and 0.5 mm thickness using a wire saw. (d) 

Preparation of wedge-shaped specimen by tripod polishing. (e) Attaching a tripod-polished sample 

 
to a molybdenum half ring. (f) Milling the central region of the thin part of the wedge by Ar+ ion 

milling to obtain the finalized TEM specimen. The white arrows mark the areas of interest; the 

blue arrow marks the glass layer. 

(ii) Focused ion beam cutting followed by Ar+ ion thinning and polishing in a Fischione 

NanoMill system 

The  focused  ion  beam  system  (Zeiss  CrossBeam  XB  1540)  makes  use  of  a  combination  of  a 

focused  ion  beam  (FIB)  and  an  electron  beam  for  scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM).  This 

combination allows for site-specific preparation of the samples (Mayer et al., 2011; Wang, 2013) 

and thus is ideally suited for TEM specimen preparation of quantum nanostructures. To ensure the 

presence of central-cut SRO QDs in the electron transparent lamellae, the cutting direction needs 

to be precisely determined. The spacing between the dots is 100 nm, the QD size is 30 nm, and the 

final sample thickness is ca. 20 nm. Since the width of every thinned region in the lamellae will 

be around 2000 nm, the cutting angle for our sample should be between arctan(130nm/2000nm) = 

3.7° and arcsin(25nm/130nm) = 11.1° for a dot size of 30 nm in order to have at least one central-

cut  dot  for  TEM  observations  along  the  [100]  direction.  Here,  we  used  a  cutting  angle  of  5° 

between the cutting direction and the parallel rows of QDs. 

 
 
 
 
Figure 3. TEM sample preparation with a focused ion beam (FIB). (a) Deposition of a Pt protective 

layer on the bulk surface via electron-beam and ion-beam induced deposition. The straight Pt strap 

is deposited at an angle of 5° with respect to the QD rows. (b) Cutting of two trenches on both 

sides of the Pt strap with a Ga+ ion beam leaving a thin section of material isolated at the center. 

(c) Separation of the lamella from the bulk with an U-shaped undercut by an in-situ lift-out of the 

specimen with a micromanipulator (Kleindiek MM3A). (d) Attaching of the FIB lamella to a half-

moon-shaped copper (Cu) grid (Omniprobe 3 post lift-out grid) using Pt. (e) Upper part: Imaging 

of the QDs by high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-

STEM) of the yellow box region marked in (d). Bottom part: A sketch of the cutting geometry of 

QDs at different positions. (f) Thinning of the FIB lamella from two sides (top view). Eight regions 

of interest were set for fine thinning. (g) Backscattered electron image of the final FIB lamella, 

that was thinned from both sides. 8 regions are separated by thicker walls. (h) Thickness map of 

the lamella  based on the backscattered  electron signal, where the  STO  substrate  was used as a 

reference for the thickness evaluation.  

Before FIB preparation, we pretreated the SRO QD nanostructure. The surface of the sample was 

firstly wiped by an organic solvent (acetone) to clean possible surface contaminations, which is 

necessary to reduce artifacts of preferential milling (Langford and Petford-Long, 2001). Then, the 

sample was coated with a 30 nm thick carbon layer by thermal evaporation (Leica EM ACE 600 

coater system) to protect the surface of the sample and to make it conductive for reducing charging 

effects (Schaffer et al., 2012). Next, we deposited a Pt protection layer by electron-beam induced 

deposition (EBID) and ion-beam induced deposition (IBID), successively. This protection layer 

with a size of 30  m x 2  m is inclined by 5° with respect to the SRO QD rows. As shown in Fig. 

3(a), a Pt strap was deposited on the surface of the sample. Two trenches on both sides of the Pt 

strap were milled with the Ga+ ion beam at 30 kV and 10 nA followed by milling at 30 kV and 2 

nA (Fig. 3(b)). A U-shaped undercut separated the lamella from the bulk. Thereafter, the in-situ 

micromanipulator needle (Kleindiek MM3A) was attached to the edge of the lamella (Fig. 3(c)), 

and the sample was lifted out and fixed to a a half-moon-shaped copper (Cu) grid using Pt. The 

SEM image of the obtained FIB lamella is shown in Fig. 3(d). The geometry of QDs in the obtained 

FIB lamella appears different due to the applied cutting angle, as shown in the ADF-STEM image 

and the sketch in Fig. 3(e). According to the gradual variation of the geometry of the QDs in this 

row, one can easily find the central-cut QD, which periodically appears in different areas of the 

FIB lamella. Red-colored regions (the sketch in Fig. 3e) indicate the remaining part of QDs. This 

FIB lamella was additionally milled by Ga+ ion from both sides (Fig. 3(f-g)). Then FIB milling 

was performed at an acceleration voltage of 30 kV by using a beam current of 200 pA for coarse 

milling, which was gradually reduced to 50 pA for fine thinning with the milling angle reduced 

from 2° to 1.2°. Eight regions were set for fine thining and thick walls lie in-between, which is 

beneficial to minimize bending effects during TEM characterization. Among them, region 1 was 

further milled at an acceleration voltage of 3.0 kV using a beam current of 50 pA at a milling angle 

of  5°.  The  thickness  map  of  the  finalized  FIB  lamella  (Fig.  3(h))  was  obtained  by  the  Zeiss 

SmartEPD software package via analyzing the backscattered intensity using STO as a reference 

(Drouin et al., 2007; Salzer et al., 2009). The thickness of region 1 is about 30 nm. The thickness 

of regions 2 to 8 ranges from 50 nm to 70 nm. Region 2 to 8 were additionally thinned and cleaned 

using  a  Fischione  Model  1040  NanoMill  TEM  specimen  preparation  system  (E.A.  Fischione 

Instruments, Inc.) at liquid nitrogen temperature. This sample treatment using the NanoMill is ideal 

for post-FIB processing  (Cerchiara et  al., 2011; Dienstleder et  al., 2017; Giannuzzi and Stevie, 

1999; Nowakowski et al., 2017), since it efficiently removes amorphized material and implanted 

Ga+ ions caused by FIB preparation using a highly focused Ar+ ion beam (as small as 1 µm in 

diameter). With the Nanomill, the FIB lamella was milled from both sides, starting with an ion-

beam acceleration voltage of 900 V, which was gradually reduced to 700 V for thinning and finally 

to 400 V  for cleaning with a beam current starting from 100 pA and being reduced to 50 pA.  

In  this  work,  we  employed  three  different  ion-milling  machines  (NM,  FIB,  and  PIPS).  The 

experimental conditions, including the ion energy, the angle between the ion beam and specimen, 

the direction of the ion beam, the ion current density, and the specimen temperature, determine the 

ion-beam-induced damage. The resulting details of our experiments are displayed in Table 1. Their 

effects on the quality of the final TEM specimen will be discussed in the following parts.  

Table  1.  Experimental  details  for  the  different  ion  milling  processes.  D  (dot)  –  S  (substrate) 

represents the ion beam direction from the dot to the substrate and vice versa. The current density 

(current per unit area) of the electron beam has been calculated using the formula I/π(d/2)2, where 

I is the beam current and d is the beam diameter. 

  TEM characterization 

High-resolution  TEM  (HRTEM)  imaging  was  performed  at  200  kV  with  a  JEOL  ARM200F 

(JEOL  Ltd.) microscope  equipped  with  a CETCOR image  corrector  (CEOS  GmbH). HAADF-

STEM imaging was carried out at 200 kV with a JEOL ARM200F (JEOL Ltd.) equipped with a 

DCOR probe corrector (CEOS GmbH). Both microscopes are equipped with a cold-field emission 

gun (CFEG) and a Gatan GIF Quantum ERS imaging filter (Gatan Inc. Pleasanton, USA) with 

dual-EELS  acquisition  capability.  For  STEM  imaging,  the  microscope  was  operated  at  a 

 
convergence  semi-angle  of  20.4  mrad,  resulting  in  a  probe  size  of  0.8  Å.  Collection  angles  of 

70−300 mrad were used to obtain the HAADF-STEM images. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectra 

(EDX) were obtained by acquiring area scans using a 100 mm2 JEOL Centurio SDD-EDX detector 

and the Thermo Noran System 7 EDX system (Thermo Fischer Scientific Inc.). Relative thickness 

(t/λ)  measurements  were  performed  by  acquiring  low-loss  EEL  spectra  at  a  dispersion  of  0.25 

eV/channel using the routine implemented in Digital Micrograph (Gatan), where t is the absolute 

sample thickness and λ the inelastic mean free path. 

Results and discussions 

Fig. 4(a) displays the low-magnification HAADF-STEM image of SRO QDs on a STO substrate 

acquired from the TEM specimen prepared by TP&IM, showing a regular arrangement of QDs. 

The  HAADF-STEM  image  of  a  single  SRO  QD  is  shown  in  Fig.  4(b).  It  can  be  seen  that  an 

amorphous layer is present on the top of the dot, which may result from a surface damage layer 

induced by the patterning process. EDX measurements performed from 3 regions marked in Fig. 

4(b) are shown in Fig. 4(c). The chemical composition measured from regions 1 and 2 is from the 

STO substrate. Since the signal intensity of the HAADF image in the same material is proportional 

to  the  thickness,  the  difference  in  image  contrast  between  these  two  areas  is  attributed  to  the 

thickness differences of the TEM specimen. Since the etching process during the QD preparation 

extends to the STO substrate, either the TEM specimen thickness is larger than the dot size (30 

nm) or the thickness difference between region 1 and region 2 originates from a non-central cutting 

of the dot. As expected, in the QD (position 3) only the elements Sr, Ru, and O are detected.   

 
 
Figure  4.  (a)  Low-magnification  HAADF-STEM  image  of  the  nanostructure  cross-section 

prepared  by  tripod  polishing  followed  by  Ar+  ion  milling.  (b)  HAADF-STEM  image  of  an 

individual SRO QD with a relative thickness of t/λ ≈ 0.25. The superimposed profile represents 

the line profile of the relative thickness t/λ across the center of the dot along growth direction as 

indicated with the white line. (c) Corresponding EDX spectra measured from regions (1-3) marked 

in (b). 

For the TEM sample preparation of QD nanostructures, TP&IM has certain technical drawbacks 

that cannot be overcome: 

a)  Only  a  limited  number  of  QDs  are  present  in  areas  that  are  thin  enough  for  TEM 

observations. Therefore, the possibility of finding a complete QD structure that was sliced 

through its center is significantly reduced. 

 
 
b)  Since  the  QDs  cannot  be  located  during  the  TEM  sample  preparation  process,  their 

presence in the final TEM lamellae is by mere chance. 

Figure 5. (a) Low-magnification BF-TEM image of a thick region (t/λ ≈ 0.7) in a FIB-prepared 

lamella. (b), (c) are close-up images of a single SRO QD acquired from thick (t/λ ≈ 0.7)  and thin 

regions (t/λ ≈ 0.3) in a FIB-prepared lamella, respectively. The line profiles on the left and right 

sides correspond to averaged intensity profiles of the relative thickness t/λ across the center of the 

dots along the epitaxial direction as indicated in (b) and (c). Red dotted curves circle the regions 

of SRO QD and the blue dotted curves circle the SRO QDs surrounded by damaged SRO material 

(marked by orange arrows).  

Fig. 5(a). shows a bright-field (BF)-TEM image of a thick region (region 2 to region 8 in Fig. 3(g)) 

of the FIB lamella. The close-up image of a single SRO QD is displayed in Fig. 5(b). Shadows 

appear at the right and left sides of the SRO QD. One area of the FIB lamella (marked as region 1 

in Fig. 3(g)) was further thinned by Ga+ ions to obtain a thickness below 30 nm. The TEM image 

 
 
of a single SRO QD acquired from the thin region is shown in Fig. 5(c). It can be seen that shadows 

are still present, which are in similar shape as the shadow in Fig. 5(b). As shown in Fig. 5(b) and 

Fig. 5(c), both QDs are inside the carbon protection layer, revealing that shadows mostly result 

from the patterning process during the fabrication of QD nanostructures.  

We employed a NanoMill to further thin and fine polish the FIB-prepared lamella. The measured 

relative sample thickness t/λ of the Nanomill-processed FIB lamella is 0.25, which is similar to the 

thickness of the specimen prepared by TP&IM. The estimated mean free path λ of SRO is about 

80 nm (Iakoubovskii et al., 2008; Malis et al., 1988), giving an absolute thickness (t) of SRO of 

around  20  nm.  With  the  combination  of  FIB  and  NM,  we  can  easily  find  the  locations  of  the 

central-cut dots and produce high-quality TEM specimen for high-resolution STEM studies with 

high accuracy and high precision.  

Next,  we  compare  the  quality  of  TEM  specimens  obtained  with  different  TEM  specimen 

preparation methods using atomically resolved HAADF-STEM images, as shown in Figs. 6(a) and 

6(b). As discussed before, the different contrast in the STO region of Fig. 6(a) is attributed to a 

thickness step in the STO substrate during specimen prepared by TP&IM (Fig. 6(a)). Such a step 

is absent for the QD cut through its center, which has been prepared by FIB&NM, as shown in Fig. 

6(b). Furthermore, the signal intensity of the STO substrate in Fig. 6(b) is more homogeneous than 

in Fig. 6(a). In order to compare the quality of TEM specimens, we normalize the signal intensities 

of two images according to the formula: Inormalized=2·(I–Imean)/(Imax–Imin), where Imean is the mean 

value, Imax is the maximum and Imin is the minimum value of the signal intensity. Using this formula, 

the  HAADF  signal  is  normalized  between  1  and  -1.  The  quality  of  the  TEM  specimen  can  be 

evaluated by observing the signal oscillation around 0 in the normalized signal intensity profiles. 

Fig. 6(c) and Fig. 6(d) represent the normalized intensity profiles of a region in the STO substrate 

(12 nm to the interface) marked with the red box in Fig. 6(a) and 6(b). We observe that the signal 

oscillations in Fig. 6(d) are more uniform than those of Fig 6(c). The average maximum values are 

1.00±0.08  and  1.00±0.04  for  Fig.  6(c)  and  Fig.  6(d),  respectively.  Besides,  the  corresponding 

minimum is -0.61±0.08 and -0.69±0.03. In contrast to Fig. 6(c), the standard deviation in Fig. 6(d) 

is smaller, revealing that the TEM specimen prepared by FIB&NM has a better quality compared 

to that by TP&IM. The SRO part of Fig. 6(b) appears cleaner without obviously damaged regions 

compared to Fig. 6(a). Fig. 6(e) and 6(f) correspond to the normalized intensity profiles extracted 

from a region (4 nm to the interface) marked with blue boxes in Fig. 6(a) and 6(b), respectively. 

The  averaged  maximum  for  Fig.  6(e)  and  Fig.  6(f)  are  0.87±0.11  and  0.90±0.08,  respectively. 

Moreover, the corresponding averaged minimum is -0.52±0.12 and -0.45±0.10. In contrast to Fig. 

6(e),  the  standard  deviation  of  the  signal  intensity  in  Fig.  6(f)  is  smaller,  revealing  a  better 

specimen quality in the SRO part. The proposed sample preparation by FIB&NM enables us to 

find the central-cut dots in the FIB lamella and thus minimizes the influence of the dead surface 

layer  on  the  image  contrast  during  the  TEM  characterization.  The  NanoMill  can  substantially 

reduce the beam damage and produce  a sample with clean surfaces using a focussed argon-ion 

beam  with  a  low  beam-current  density  (Table  1).  Based  on  the  presented  data,  we  have 

demonstrated that the optimized procedures through a combination of FIB and NM  can indeed 

produce high-quality TEM specimens of QD nanostructures.  

Figure  6.  HAADF-STEM  images  of  individual  SRO  QDs  prepared  by  (a)  tripod  polishing 

followed by  argon ion  milling  (TP&IM)  and by (b) focused ion  beam  preparation followed by 

milling with a NanoMill (FIB&NM). The corresponding normalized intensity profiles of a region 

(14 nm ×5 nm) of STO substrates (12 nm to the interface) marked with red boxes in (a, b) are 

shown  in  ((c)  TP&IM,  (d)  FIB&NM).  The  corresponding  normalized  intensity  profiles  ((e) 

TP&IM, (f) FIB&NM) of the SRO region (14 nm ×5 nm) located at 4 nm to the interface marked 

with blue boxes in (a, b).  

Summary and conclusions 

In this work, we report two methods, TP&IM and FIB&NM, for the preparation of TEM specimens 

of QD nanostructures. We demonstrate that our optimization of the combination of FIB&NM has 

 
 
several advantages that can be applied for efficiently preparing high-quality and damage-free TEM 

specimens consisting of QDs: 

a)  A FIB lamella offers large thin regions and therefore enhances the probability of finding a 

complete dot structure in TEM specimens. Thinning of multiple regions effectively reduces 

the bending of the sample, which is beneficial for TEM characterization. 

b)  The probability for the presence of QD structures cut through their centers is increased, 

when cutting the lamella at an angle of 5° with respect to the dot arrays, where the ideal 

cutting  angle  is  closely  correlated  to  the  size  and  spacing  of  the  dots  and  needs  to  be 

adjusted accordingly. 

c)  The Fischione NanoMill was used to additionally thin and polish the thick FIB lamellae 

from both sides. The surface contamination and amorphous layers were gently removed by 

using  Ar+  ions  at  a  low  current  density,  resulting  in  a  flat  and  clean  TEM  specimen 

consisting of SRO QDs on the STO substrate.  

With  the  obtained  high-quality  TEM  specimen,  one  can  carry  out  more  precise  structural  and 

chemical studies of QD nanostructures for unraveling the underlying mechanism of their emergent 

phenomena. The reported settings are practically useful for TEM sample preparations with TP, IM, 

FIB,  and  NM.  We  believe  that  our  optimization  of  the  combined  methods  (FIB&NM)  has 

significant implications not only for preparing TEM specimens of quantum dots but also for other 

emerging quantum nanostructures.  

 
 
References 

Alivisatos, A.P., 1996. Semiconductor Clusters, Nanocrystals, and Quantums Dots. Science 271, 

933-937. 

Boschker, H., Mannhart, J., 2017. Quantum-Matter Heterostructures. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter 

Phys. 8, 145-164. 

Brydson,  R.,  2011.  Aberration-Corrected  Analytical  Transmission  Electron  Microscopy.  John 

Wiley & Sons. 

Cerchiara, R., Fischione, P., Liu, J., Matesa, J., Robins, A., Fraser, H., Genc, A., 2011. Raising the 

standard of specimen preparation for aberration-corrected TEM and STEM. Microsc. Today 19, 

16-19. 

David B. Williams, C.B.C., 2009. Transmission Electron Microscopy. Springer. 

Dienstleder, M., Fisslthaler, E., Gspan, C., Kothleitner, G., 2017. Low energy argon ion sample 

preparation  for  HRSTEM  analysis,  7.  ASEM  workshop  of  the  Austrian  Society  of  Electron 

Microscopy. 

Drouin, D., Couture, A.R., Joly, D., Tastet, X., Aimez, V., Gauvin, R., 2007. CASINO V2. 42—a 

fast  and  easy‐to‐use  modeling  tool  for  scanning  electron  microscopy  and  microanalysis  users. 

Scanning 29, 92-101. 

Giannuzzi, L.A., Stevie, F.A., 1999. A review of focused ion beam milling techniques for TEM 

specimen preparation. Micron 30, 197-204. 

Harrison, P., Valavanis, A., 2016. Quantum wells, wires and dots: theoretical and computational 

physics of semiconductor nanostructures. John Wiley & Sons. 

Hudson,  M.,  Benedict,  J.,  Flaitz,  P.,  2004.  TEM  Specimen  Preparation  Technique  For  Small 

Semiconductor Devices. Microsc. Today 12, 38-41. 

Iakoubovskii, K., Mitsuishi, K., Nakayama, Y., Furuya, K., 2008. Thickness measurements with 

electron energy loss spectroscopy. Microsc. Res. Tech. 71, 626-631. 

Langford,  R.,  Petford-Long,  A.,  2001.  Preparation  of  transmission  electron  microscopy  cross-

section specimens using focused ion beam milling. J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A 19, 2186-2193. 

Laskin,  G., Wang,  H., Boschker, H.,  Braun, W., Srot, V., van Aken, P.A., Mannhart, J., 2019. 

Magnetic Properties of Epitaxially Grown SrRuO3 Nanodots. Nano Lett. 19, 1131-1135. 

Malis,  T.,  Cheng,  S.C.,  Egerton,  R.F.,  1988.  EELS  log-ratio  technique  for  specimen-thickness 

measurement in the TEM. J. Electron Microsc. Tech. 8, 193-200. 

Mannhart,  J.,  Boschker,  H.,  Kopp,  T.,  Valenti,  R.,  2016.  Artificial  atoms  based  on  correlated 

materials. Rep. Prog. Phys. 79, 084508. 

Mayer, J., Giannuzzi,  L.A., Kamino, T., Michael,  J., 2011. TEM Sample Preparation and FIB-

Induced Damage. MRS Bull. 32, 400-407. 

Nowakowski, P., Bonifacio, C., Campin, M., Ray, M., Fischione, P., 2017. Accurate Removal of 

Implanted Gallium and Amorphous Damage from TEM Specimens after Focused Ion Beam (FIB) 

Preparation. Microsc. Microanal. 23, 300-301. 

Pennycook, S.J., Nellist, P.D., 2015. Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy Imaging and 

Analysis. Springer. 

Ruzmetov, D., Seo, Y., Belenky, L.J., Kim, D.M., Ke, X.L., Sun, H.P., Chandrasekhar, V., Eom, 

C.B.,  Rzchowski,  M.S.,  Pan,  X.Q.,  2005.  Epitaxial  magnetic  perovskite  nanostructures.  Adv. 

Mater. 17, 2869-2872. 

Salzer, R., Graff, A., Simon, M., Altmann, F., 2009. Standard free thickness determination of thin 

TEM samples via backscatter electron image correlation. Microsc. Microanal. 15, 340-341. 

Schaffer, M., Schaffer, B., Ramasse, Q., 2012. Sample preparation for atomic-resolution STEM at 

low voltages by FIB. Ultramicroscopy 114, 62-71. 

Senellart,  P.,  Solomon,  G.,  White,  A.,  2017.  High-performance  semiconductor  quantum-dot 

single-photon sources. Nat. Nanotechnol. 12, 1026-1039. 

Srot,  V.,  Gec,  M.,  van  Aken,  P.A.,  Jeon,  J.H.,  Ceh,  M.,  2014.  Influence  of  TEM  specimen 

preparation on chemical composition of Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3-PbTiO3 single crystals. Micron 62, 37-

42. 

Voyles, P., Grazul, J., Muller, D., 2003. Imaging individual atoms inside crystals with ADF-STEM. 

Ultramicroscopy 96, 251-273. 

Wang, Z.M., 2013. FIB nanostructures. Springer. 

Wolfsteller,  A.,  Geyer,  N.,  Nguyen-Duc,  T.K.,  Das  Anungo,  P.,  Zakharov,  N.D.,  Reiche,  M., 

Erfurth, W., Blumtritt, H., Werner, P., Gosele, U., 2010. Comparison of the top-down and bottom-

up approach to fabricate nanowire-based Silicon/Germanium heterostructures. Thin Solid Films 

518, 2555-2561. 

