DYNAMIC OBJECT COMPREHENSION: 
A FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATING ARTIFICIAL VISUAL PERCEPTION 

Scott Y.L. Chin*t, Bradley R. Quinton*t 

*Singulos Research Inc. 
t Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia 
Email: scottc@singulosresearch.com; bradq@singulosresearch.com  

ABSTRACT 

Augmented  and  Mixed  Reality  are  emerging  as  likely 
successors to the mobile internet.  However, many technical 
challenges  remain.  One  of  the  key  requirements  of  these 
systems is the ability to create a continuity between physical 
and  virtual  worlds,  with  the  user’s  visual  perception  as  the 
primary interface medium. Building this continuity requires 
the system to develop a visual understanding of the physical 
world.  While  there  has  been  significant  recent  progress  in 
computer  vision  and  AI 
image 
classification and object detection, success in these areas has 
not yet led to the visual perception required for these critical 
MR and AR applications.  A significant issue is that current 
evaluation criteria are insufficient for these applications. To 
motivate and evaluate progress in this emerging area, there is 
a need for new metrics. In this paper we outline limitations of 
current evaluation criteria and propose new criteria.  

techniques  such  as 

Index Terms— artificial intelligence, augmented reality, 

computer vision, mixed reality, machine learning 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Mixed-Reality  (MR)  is  an  environment  where  physical 
and digital objects can co-exist and interact [1].  A possible 
criterion  for  an  MR  system  is  the  ability  for  effortless 
integration of data between the physical and digital objects in 
either direction  

[2]. The MR applications that we currently see deployed 
in  society  typically  fall  into  the  category  of  Augmented 
Reality  (AR)  [3].  AR  can  be  described  as  a  point  on  the 
Mixed-Reality Spectrum [4]. 

Augmented Reality systems are commonly implemented 
on  mobile  handheld  devices  or  head-mounted  displays 
(HMD)  [5]. The user is typically provided an egocentric view 
[6] of the physical world through a display on the device, and 
digital objects are overlayed onto this view in real-time as the 
user moves through the physical world. To align the digital 
objects with the physical world in this view, AR systems are 
configured with sensors to gather data regarding the physical 
environment.  The most common sensors are video cameras 
inertial  sensors  (accelerometers,  gyroscopes,  and 
and 

such  as  Visual-Inertial 
magnetometers).  Techniques 
Odometry [7] can then be used to determine the position and  
orientation of the observing view in the 3D physical world. 

The MR/AR systems that we see today generally do not 
yet achieve the goal of effortless integration of data between 
the  physical  and  digital  worlds  because  they  are  not  yet 
capable  of  acquiring  a  detailed  understanding  of  their 
physical environment.  In specific scenarios, they can align 
digital  objects  within  the  physical  world,  but  only  once 
physical objects or locations are first identified by the user.  
The  resulting  interactions  between  the  worlds  are  typically 
very limited and quite static.  In other words, these systems 
do not understand the world around them, instead they ask 
the  MR  user  to  explain  it  to  them.  In  a  move  towards 
addressing  this  limitation,  recent  devices  are  beginning  to 
include depth sensors (e.g., time-of-flight, lidar) that can help 
with and spatial mapping [8], and frameworks to help with 
structural  scene  understanding  [9][10]  (e.g.,  the  location  of 
planes and surfaces). These advancements provide a coarse 
geometrical understanding of the physical environment.   

To  achieve  effortless  integration  of  data  between  the 
physical and digital worlds, MR systems require a real-time 
Semantic  Comprehension  of  the  physical  objects  in  the 
physical  environment.  Semantic  Comprehension  includes, 
but is not limited to, understanding what an object is, where 
the  object 
the  physical  environment,  and  an 
understanding  of  the  properties  of  the  object.  Modern 
computer  vision  and  machine  learning  techniques  would 
seem  to  be  able  to  serve  as  the  backbone  to  Semantic 
Comprehension  engines.  These  techniques  include  image 
classification  [11-14],  object  detection  [15-17],  object 
tracking [18][19] and object segmentation [20-22].   

in 

is 

However, there are notable omissions in the definition of 
the goal of these techniques, when applied to Mixed Reality.   
One  is  the  consideration  that  the  world  and  its  objects  are 
three-dimensional. The aforementioned techniques generally 
operate on 2D images – projections of the 3D world onto 2D 
sensors.  Research has also focused on working with 3D data 
directly such point-clouds [23] and voxels [24].  But 3D data 
is  not  as  ubiquitous  nor  as  dense  as  visual  data.  A  new 
approach which fundamentally acknowledges that we desire 
a Semantic Comprehension of 3D objects that exist in a 3D 
world interpreted through 2D data is desirable.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, current evaluation metrics are insufficient to 
measure overall “visual perception” from a MR user’s point 
of view. AI researchers report systems that surpass human-
level  accuracy  [25]  [26].    And  yet  we  see  few,  if  any, 
examples of robust deployments of MR systems that achieve 
real-time  Semantic  Comprehension  in  real-life  scenarios. 
Clearly these metrics alone are not sufficient for evaluating 
or driving AI-based computer vision for these applications.  
The key short comings are: 1) a failure to evaluate latency 
compared to human ability/expectation (i.e. how quickly do 
we  need  to  get  to  an  answer),  2)  failure  to  evaluate  3D 
localization (i.e. understanding the location of an object in the 
world co-ordinate system rather than in the image), 3) failure 
to account for object types that don’t need to be supported by 
the system, and 4) failure to consider object ambiguity caused 
by  object  orientation,  occlusion,  camera  focus,  resolution 
limitations, and lighting conditions. New metrics are needed. 
The contributions of this paper are as follows.  First, we 
discuss  existing  evaluation  metrics  for  relevant  computer 
vision technologies and their limitations when applied to real-
life  MR  Semantic  Comprehension.  We  introduce  Dynamic 
Object  Comprehension  as  a  new  paradigm  that  creates  a 
continuity  between  physical  and  digital  worlds  by  building 
visual perception of the physical world over time and space. 
Finally, we describe a new set of evaluation goals for systems 
that implement Dynamic Object Comprehension. 

2. IMAGE CLASSIFICATION METRICS 

Metrics allow us to compare the relative quality of solutions, 
and they essentially define the objectives for solving a target 
problem. A metric that does not properly embody the desired 
traits  of  a  solution  would  motivate  the  development  of 
suboptimal  or  wrong  solutions.  A  great  example  is  in  the 
dramatic  evolution  of  image  classification  solutions  that 
emerged from the ImageNet Competition (ILSVRC) [11-14]. 
The goal of the competition was to classify images into one 
of  1000  possible  classes.    Using  the  metrics  of  Top-1  (and 
Top-5) Error would seem like a reasonable choice. With these 
metrics,  it  has  been  reported  that  systems  have  surpassed 
human-level  accuracy  in  image  classification  for  general 
purpose [25] and domain-specific [26] applications. Yet, we 
do not see robust systems in real-life scenarios.  

The  problem  is  that  Top-1  Error  rewards  systems  that 
make guesses in the face of uncertainty instead of allowing 
the system to say that it doesn’t know.  There is no penalty 
for  being  wrong  but  there  is  reward  for  being  right.  This 
behaviour  is  further  advantageous  for  improving  the  Top-1 
Error  metric  due  to  the  ILSVRC  evaluation  methodology 
where test images always belong to one of the 1000 classes. 
What  emerges  are  systems  that  carve  the  input  space  (the 
space  of  all  possible  input  images)  into  1000  partitions  (a 
behaviour  typically  imposed  via  the  SoftMax  activation 
function).  When such a system is presented with an image 
that does not belong to one of the supported classes (this does 
not occur in the competition but would in real-life scenarios),  

Fig  1.  Intersection  over  Union.  Green  is  the  ground-truth 
bounding-box and red is the predicted bounding-box 

the system by definition will make a mistake because it can 
only classify the image into one of the supported classes. 

that 

reflect 

Now that these technologies are mature enough to attempt 
real-life  deployment,  metrics 
real-life 
requirements  are  needed.  For  example,  new  metrics  should 
encourage systems that can predict that the image does not 
belong to any of the known classes.  We refer to this as an 
Out-of-Scope  (OOS)  prediction.  To  achieve  this,  we  first 
define the following terms: 
•  True Positive (TP): When the predicted class matches the 
ground-truth class, and the class is a known class. 
•  False Positive (FP): When the predicted class does not 
match the ground-truth class and the predicted class is a 
known class. 

•  False Negative (FN):  When the prediction is for OOS, 
but the ground-truth class is one of the known classes. 
•  True  Negative  (TN):  When  the  prediction  is  for  OOS, 

and the ground-truth class is OOS.   

A  metric  and  evaluation  framework  for  the  classification 
aspects of MR Semantic Comprehension should consider TP, 
FP, FN, TN.  Top-1 Error, for example, only considers TP. 

3. OBJECT DETECTION METRICS 

Object  Detection  seems  like  a  close  fit  for  providing 
Semantic Comprehension for MR systems.  Similar to Image 
Classification, competitions have been a powerful driver of 
research  in  this  area.    Some  notable  competitions  include 
PASCAL  VOC  [27],  COCO  Detection  Challenge  [28], 
Google  Open  Images  [29].  The  metrics  used  by  these 
competitions have directly influenced the course of research.   
The  goal  of  an  Object  Detection  system  is  to  find  the 
objects  of  interest  in  an  image.  More  specifically,  it  is 
common that a detection from such a system be described by 
a  bounding-box  (BBox)  that  encompasses  the  object  of 
interest within the image, a classification of the object, and a 
confidence score. Assessing the accuracy of the classification 
component is similar to the Image Classification problem.  

Assessing the accuracy of the BBox prediction requires a 
definition  of  correctness.  Standard  practice  is  to  use  the 
Intersection over Union (IoU). The IoU of a BBox prediction 
is the ratio of the area of overlap between the predicted BBox 
and the ground-truth BBox, and the area of the union between 
the  detected  BBox  and  the  ground-truth  BBox.  This  is 
illustrated  in  Fig  1.    If  the  IoU  is  above  some  evaluation 

 
  
 
 
 
 
threshold, then the BBox prediction is deemed correct. The 
following terms can then be defined: 
•  True Positive (TP): When a BBox with sufficient IoU is 

predicted for a labelled object in the image 

•  False  Positive  (FP):  When  a  BBox  is  predicted  for  an 

object not in the image  

•  False  Negative  (FN):    When  a  BBox  prediction  is  not 

made for a labelled object in the image 

•  True  Negative  (TN):  When  a  BBox  prediction  is  not 

made for an object not in the image.  

It is then common to define the Precision and Recall metrics: 

𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 	

𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑃

											𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 = 	

𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁

The  intuition  is  that  by  achieving  high  Recall,  the  detector 
would  detect  all  labelled  objects  (FN=0),  and  by  achieving 
high Precision the detector would not incorrectly detect non-
existent  objects  (FP=0).  To  develop  a  single  metric,  the 
widely accepted approach is to use some variant of Average 
Precision  (AP).  AP  is  an  evaluation  of  the  Area  Under  the 
Curve  (AUC)  of  the  Precision/Recall  relationship.  Further 
details and examples can be found in [30]. Of notable interest 
TN is generally not used because it is argued that there are 
infinite TN scenarios in Object Detection [30].  We believe 
this to be an important metric, but it is difficult to implement 
using  BBoxes  and  IoU.  Overall,  these  metrics  are  not 
sufficient for evaluating MR Semantic Comprehension. 

4. OBJECT SEGMENTATION AND OBJECT 
TRACKING METRICS 

Due to space, we will not go into detail about metrics related 
to Object Segmentation [31] and Object Tracking [18]. The 
concepts and limitations that will be discussed generally also 
apply.    We  refer  the  reader  to  the  referenced  literature  for 
details  of  those  metrics.  However,  as  they  share  a  lot  of 
characteristics  with  the  already  discussed  metrics,  we  will 
discuss their limitations in the following sections as well. 

5. LIMITATIONS OF CURRENT METRICS AND 
PROPOSED NEW METRICS  

An intuitive approach to MR Semantic Comprehension may 
be  to  apply  Objected  Detection  or  Object  Segmentation  to 
each frame of the MR system’s video data.  In this context, 
we discuss how existing evaluation metrics are insufficient. 

5.1. Acceptable Detection Latency and Accuracy 

Using  the  previously  discussed  Object  Detection  accuracy 
metric  means  that  the  ideal  solution  would  achieve  perfect 
detection  for  all  objects  on  each  frame.    However,  this  is 
generally not required for MR Semantic Comprehension.   
    We  first  define  a  new  concept  called  the  Acceptable 
Detection Latency (ADL). First, Detection Latency is the  

Fig 2. MR System for identifying toy blocks [33] 

time between when an object of interest enters the view of the 
MR  system  for  the  first  time,  until  the  time  that  the  MR 
system  achieves  Semantic  Comprehension  for  the  object.  
ADL is the acceptable Detection Latency. ADL is a function 
of two human perception components: 1) the latency between 
when  observable  change  occurs  and  when  the  change 
registers in the mind of the observer [32], and 2) the human 
expectation  for  system  responsiveness.  The  latter  may  be 
affected  by  elements  such  as  User  Experience  and  User 
Interface Design.  
    ADL embodies the requirement for how quickly the system 
must get to an answer before the user experience is negatively 
impacted.  Consider Fig 2. where an MR System is observing 
a  scene  which  contains  a  variety  of  blocks  and  tiles  from 
various toy building systems. Consider that the MR System 
needs to identify the type and 3D location of blocks from one 
of the building systems as the user looks around the scene.  
The ADL for this scenario may be on the scale of seconds as 
opposed to on the scale of the video capture framerate (on the 
scale of milliseconds).  
    We can augment an accuracy metric with ADL. Detections 
no  longer  need  to  be  complete  on  each  frame.  An  accurate 
detection is only required to manifest within the ADL. This 
unlocks a new trade-off not previously possible.  Exploring 
this new trade-off enabled by ADL is a new area of research. 

5.2. Ambiguity 

Existing metrics fail to consider Ambiguity caused by object 
orientation, observing perspective, occlusion, camera focus, 
resolution limitations, and/or lighting conditions. Simply put, 
under certain conditions, there is not enough information to 
understand  an  object.  For  example,  consider  the  case  of 
Ambiguity caused by observing perspective as illustrated in 
Fig. 3. We have objects from two supported classes (cube and 
rectangular cube). When observing the rectangular cube from 
certain  perspectives,  it  is  impossible  to  determine  to  which 
class the object belongs.  This is an ambiguous scenario.  
    In  existing  frameworks,  the  ground-truth  class  label  for 
such  a  projection  may  be  the  rectangular  cube  class.    A 
system that correctly predicts this label is only doing so by 
chance and should not be counted as an accurate prediction 
in the end metric.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 3. Ambiguity due to observing perspective 

5.3. Out-of-Scope Predictions 

In  real-life  applications,  the  number  of  classes  that  an  MR 
system  must  understand  is  often  quite  small.  The  set  of 
classes  is  often  constrained  by  the  goals  of  the  application 
and/or the environment. Consider again the application from 
Fig. 2. The number of different block types that need to be 
understood  may  be  only  on  the  order  of  10s  or  100s.  
Furthermore, using such a concrete example, it does not make 
sense to partition the entire input space into only the class of 
supported  block  types.  This  example  further  highlights  the 
importance of an OOS prediction. With the concept of OOS, 
accounting for True-Negatives (a limitation discussed earlier) 
can be implemented. New metrics that consider the impact of 
OOS predictions are needed. 

5.4. Localization and Tracking in 3D 

2D BBoxes are the wrong tool. In terms of localization, the 
main goal of MR Semantic Comprehension is to understand 
object locations in the 3D world coordinate system, and not 
where they reside in a 2D projection. The latter is a means 
and not an end. BBoxes are also assumed to be aligned with 
the  2D  image  coordinate  axes.  But  this  is  arbitrary  when 
considering  the  MR  user’s  (i.e.,  the  camera’s)  6DoF  when 
moving through the world.  Consider Fig 4. Which illustrates 
an MR user with a HMD  viewing a scene.  The BBox for the 
laptop changes dramatically with a slight head tilt. It is hard 
to imagine how the BBoxes in the projected images matter 
when building MR Semantic Comprehension.  

3D BBoxes have been proposed [23] because it is a natural 
extension to 2D BBoxes. In the case of 3D bboxes, the goal 
is to understand the 3D position and also the orientation of 
the object. Many MR applications do not need the orientation 
information  (again  one  example  is  shown  in  Fig.  2).    We 
propose that BBoxes be abandoned completely. If orientation 
is desired, then a separate method to deliver that information 
is more appropriate.   
Although  we  did  not  discuss  metrics  for  Object  Tracking 
research  in  detail,  common  metrics  for  Object  Tracking 
precision (e.g., tracking error) and robustness (e.g., ability to 
recover from occlusion or when objects move out of view), 
are of relevance to MR Semantic Comprehension. However,  

Fig 4. Change in bounding-box due to observing perspective 

they also suffer from similar limitations of operating in the 
the 2D image coordinate system and deal with BBoxes [18].  
  Since BBoxes are such a fundamental aspect to Object 
Detection  and  Tracking,  new  metrics  are  needed  once  we 
move away from the bounding-box and focus on localization, 
orientation, and tracking in the 3D world.   

6. DYNAMIC OBJECT COMPREHENSION  

Existing  computer  vision  techniques  such  as  image 
classification,  object  detection,  object  segmentation  and 
object  tracking  are  not  directly  suitable  for  providing 
Semantic Comprehension for MR systems.  Aspects of these 
techniques will no doubt play a role.  However, we propose 
that a new paradigm be defined from the ground-up to address 
this need without the hindrance of trying to transform other 
tools that are not quite the perfect fit for the problem.    

The goal is to achieve real-time Semantic Comprehension 
of 3D objects that exist in a 3D world interpreted through 2D 
data. We call this Dynamic Object Comprehension.  

More specifically, Dynamic Object Comprehension is the 
simultaneous, real-time, identification, localization, tracking, 
and Semantic Comprehension of one or many 3D objects of 
interest across many object classes, within a 3D environment. 
The  motivating  application  is  Mixed-Reality  such  as  to 
enable  real-time  interaction  between  physical  and  virtual 
worlds and unlocking next generation applications.  

An  example  of  Dynamic  Object  Comprehension  can  be 
found  here  [33]  and  with  a  specific  example  of  a  real 
operating system here (https://vimeo.com/678457978).  

7. CONCLUSION 

In  this  paper,  we  discussed  how  evaluation  metrics  for 
relevant  computer  vision 
techniques  such  as  Image 
Classification,  Object  Detection,  Object  Segmentation  and 
Object Tracking are not appropriate for the problem of MR 
Semantic  Comprehension.  We  described  in  detail  desirable 
traits of possible new metrics. Furthermore, we propose that 
we  should  stop  trying  to  retrofit  existing  computer  vision 
metrics  when 
evaluate  MR  Semantic 
to 
Comprehension  problem  because  this  may  lead  to  sub-
optimal  solutions.  Instead,  we  proposed  a  new  paradigm 
called  Dynamic  Object  Comprehension  with  the  hope  of 
motivating new research and new solutions, and we invite the 
community to consider this new line of exploration. 

trying 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. REFERENCES 

[1]    Milgram  P,  Kishino  F.  A  taxonomy  of  mixed  reality  visual 
displays.  IEICE  TRANSACTIONS  on  Information  and  Systems. 
1994 Dec pp.1321-9. 

[2] A. Fuller, Z. Fan, C. Day and C. Barlow, "Digital Twin: Enabling 
Technologies,  Challenges  and  Open  Research,"  in  IEEE  Access, 
vol. 8, pp. 108952-108971, 2020 

[3] Van Krevelen DW, Poelman R. A survey of augmented reality 
technologies,  applications  and  limitations.  International  journal  of 
virtual reality. 2010 Jan, pp. 1-20. 

[4]  Milgram  P,  Takemura  H,  Utsumi  A,  Kishino  F.  Augmented 
reality:  A  class  of  displays  on  the  reality-virtuality  continuum. 
InTelemanipulator and telepresence technologies 1995 Dec 21 (Vol. 
2351, pp. 282-292). International Society for Optics and Photonics. 

[5] Zhou F, Duh HB, Billinghurst M. Trends in augmented reality 
tracking, interaction and display: A review of ten years of ISMAR. 
In2008  7th  IEEE/ACM  International  Symposium  on  Mixed  and 
Augmented Reality 2008 Sep 15 (pp. 193-202) 

[6] N. C. Martins, P. Dias and B. S. Santos, "Egocentric viewpoint 
in  mixed 
and 
opportunities,"  2020  24th  International  Conference  Information 
Visualisation (IV), 2020, pp. 9-15 

situated  visualization: 

challenges 

reality 

[7]  Leutenegger  S,  Lynen  S,  Bosse  M,  Siegwart  R,  Furgale  P. 
Keyframe-based  visual–inertial  odometry  using  nonlinear  optim-
ization. Int’l Journal of Robotics Research. 2015 Mar pp314-34 

[8]  Hübner  P,  Clintworth  K,  Liu  Q,  Weinmann  M,  Wursthorn  S. 
Evaluation  of  HoloLens  tracking  and  depth  sensing  for  indoor 
mapping applications. Sensors. 2020 Jan;20(4):1021. 

[9]  Visualizing  and  Interacting  with  a  Reconstructed  Scene, 
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/arkit/content_anchors/
visualizing_and_interacting_with_a_reconstructed_scene 

[10] ARCore, https://developers.google.com/ar/ 

[11] Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton GE. Imagenet classification 
with  deep  convolutional  neural  networks.  Advances  in  neural 
information processing systems. 2012;25. 

[12] Simonyan K, Zisserman A. Very deep convolutional networks 
for large-scale image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556. 
2014 Sep 4. 

[13] Szegedy C, Liu W, Jia Y, Sermanet P, Reed S, Anguelov D, 
Erhan  D,  Vanhoucke  V,  Rabinovich  A.  Going  deeper  with 
convolutions.  InProceedings  of  the  IEEE  conference  on  computer 
vision and pattern recognition 2015 (pp. 1-9). 

[14] He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J. Deep residual learning for image 
recognition.  InProceedings  of  the  IEEE  conference  on  computer 
vision and pattern recognition 2016 (pp. 770-778). 

[15] Zhao ZQ, Zheng P, Xu ST, Wu X. Object detection with deep 
learning:  A  review.  IEEE  transactions  on  neural  networks  and 
learning systems. 2019 Jan 28;30(11):3212-32 

[16]  S.  Mahurkar,  "Integrating  YOLO  Object  Detection  with 
Augmented  Reality  for  iOS  Apps,"  2018  9th  IEEE  Annual 
Ubiquitous  Computing,  Electronics  &  Mobile  Communication 
Conference (UEMCON), 2018, pp. 585-589 

[17]  Bahri,  Haythem  &  Krcmarik,  David  &  Kočí,  Jan.  (2019). 
Accurate  Object  Detection  System  on  HoloLens  Using  YOLO 
Algorithm. Pp.219-224 

[18] Luo W, Xing J, Milan A, Zhang X, Liu W, Kim TK. Multiple 
object tracking: A literature review. Artificial Intelligence. 2021  

[19]  Liu  L,  Li  H,  Gruteser  M.  Edge  assisted  real-time  object 
detection  for  mobile  augmented  reality.  InThe  25th  Annual  Int’l 
Conf. on Mobile Computing and Networking 2019 Aug 5 (pp. 1-16) 

[20]  Ko  TY,  Lee  SH.  Novel  method  of  semantic  segmentation 
applicable to augmented reality. Sensors. 2020 Jan;20(6):1737. 

[21] Tanzi L, Piazzolla P, Porpiglia F, Vezzetti E. Real-time deep 
learning  semantic  segmentation  during  intra-operative  surgery  for 
3D augmented reality assistance. International Journal of Computer 
Assisted Radiology and Surgery. 2021 Sep;435-45. 

[22] Siam M, Gamal M, Abdel-Razek M, Yogamani S, Jagersand 
M.  Rtseg:  Real-time  semantic  segmentation  comparative  study. 
In2018  25th  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Image  Processing 
(ICIP) 2018 Oct 7 (pp. 1603-1607). IEEE. 

[23] Simony M, Milzy S, Amendey K, Gross HM. Complex-yolo: 
An euler-region-proposal for real-time 3d object detection on point 
clouds.  InProceedings  of  the  European  Conference  on  Computer 
Vision (ECCV) Workshops 2018 

[24] Zhou Y, Tuzel O. Voxelnet: End-to-end learning for point cloud 
based 3d object detection. InProceedings of the IEEE conference on 
computer vision and pattern recognition 2018 (pp. 4490-4499). 

[25]  He  K,  Zhang  X,  Ren  S,  Sun  J.  Delving  deep  into  rectifiers: 
Surpassing  human-level  performance  on  imagenet  classification. 
InProceedings  of  the  IEEE  international  conference  on  computer 
vision 2015 (pp. 1026-1034). 

[26] Esteva A, Kuprel B, Novoa RA, Ko J, Swetter SM, Blau HM, 
Thrun S. Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep 
neural networks. nature. 2017 Feb;542(7639):115-8. 

[27] Everingham M, Eslami SM, Van Gool L, Williams CK, Winn 
J,  Zisserman  A.  The  pascal  visual  object  classes  challenge:  A 
retrospective.  International  journal  of  computer  vision.  2015 
Jan;111(1):98-136. 

COCO 

[28] 
https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/20794 

Challenge 

Detection 

(bounding 

box) 

[29] 
https://www.kaggle.com/c/open-images-2019-object-detection 

Images 

Object 

Open 

2019 

– 

Detection, 

[30] Padilla R, Netto SL, Da Silva EA. A survey on performance 
metrics  for  object-detection  algorithms.  In2020  international 
conference  on  systems,  signals  and  image  processing  (IWSSIP) 
2020 Jul 1 (pp. 237-242). IEEE. 

[31] Perazzi F, Pont-Tuset J, McWilliams B, Van Gool L, Gross M, 
Sorkine-Hornung  A.  A  benchmark  dataset  and  evaluation  meth-
odology  for  video  object  segmentation.  IEEE  conference  on 
computer vision and pattern recognition 2016 (pp. 724-732) 

[32]  Mania  K,  Adelstein  BD,  Ellis  SR,  Hill  MI.  Perceptual 
sensitivity  to  head  tracking  latency  in  virtual  environments  with 
varying  degrees  of  scene  complexity.  Symposium  on  Applied 
Perception in Graphics and Visualization 2004 Aug 7 (pp. 39-47). 

[33] Perceptus AI Platform, https://www.perceptusai.com 

 
