AIP/123-QED

Modulation of Spin Seebeck Eﬀect by Hydrogenation

K. Ogata,1 T. Kikkawa,2 E. Saitoh,2, 3 and Y. Shiomi1, 4
1)Department of Integrated Science, University of Tokyo, Meguro, Tokyo 153-8902,

Japan

2)Department of Applied Physics, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8656,

Japan

3)Institute for AI and Beyond, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8656,

Japan

4)Department of Basic Science, University of Tokyo, Meguro, Tokyo 153-8902,

Japan

(*Electronic mail: yukishiomi@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp)

(Dated: 9 February 2022)

We demonstrate the modulation of spin Seebeck effect (SSE) by hydrogenation in Pd/YIG

bilayers. In the presence of 3% hydrogen gas, SSE voltage decreases by more than 50

% from the magnitude observed in pure Ar gas. The modulation of the SSE voltage is

reversible, but the recovery of the SSE voltage to the prehydrogenation value takes a few

days because of a long time constant of hydrogen desorption. We also demonstrate that the

spin Hall magnetoresistance of the identical sample reduces signiﬁcantly with hydrogen

exposure, supporting that the observed modulation of spin current signals originates from

hydrogenation of Pd/YIG.

2
2
0
2

b
e
F
8

]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[

1
v
4
7
7
3
0
.
2
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Hydrogen is an energy carrier which can be produced by an environmentally clean process and
therefore has a positive impact on decarbonization1. To utilize hydrogen as a clean and renewable

alternative to carbon-based fuels, hydrogen safety sensors are also critical to assure the develop-
ment of hydrogen systems2. Metal-hydride systems have been widely studied for the potential of

solid-state hydrogen storage and sensing. In particular, Pd is frequently used as a catalyst for hy-

drogen dissociation and adsorption. A hydrogen molecule decomposes into independent hydrogen

atoms when the molecule approaches a Pd surface due to the strong interaction between Pd and H

atoms. As the smallest single atom, a H atom can easily diffuse into the interstices of the Pd lattice

and cause lattice expansion. As a result, hydrogen adsorption changes the density of states of Pd
near the Fermi energy3,4, signiﬁcantly modulating its electrical and optical properties.

The hydrogenation of Pd ﬁlms also impacts spintronic effects. Pd is known to exhibit a

strong spin-orbit coupling and has been used in many spintronic experiments. Magnetic multi-

layers and super-lattices which include Pd layers have been of particular interest. It was reported

that in Co/Pd bilayers which possess a strong interfacial perpendicular magnetic anisotropy,

the magnetic anisotropy and ferromagnetic resonance are reversibly modulated by hydrogen

exposure5–11. Efﬁcient hydrogen sensing based on magnetization dynamics was also reported
in similar materials5,12,13. Moreover, the inverse spin Hall effect (ISHE) induced by spin pumping
was successfully modulated by hydrogen exposure in Co/Pd bilayers14,15. Absorption of hydrogen

gas at 3% concentration in the Pd layer reduces the ISHE voltage by 20%15. This decrease in ISHE

signals in the presence of hydrogen gas was attributed to the decrease in spin diffusion length due

to enhanced scatterings to hydrogen atoms in the Pd layer. After the hydrogen gas is ﬂushed out

of the setup, the ISHE voltage returns to the prehydrogenation value; hence the observed effect is

reversible.

The studies of hydrogen effects on spintronic materials have been carried out for the combi-

nation of Pd layers with itinerant magnetic ﬁlms. For the measurement of ISHE in ferromag-

netic/nonmagnetic metallic bilayers, however, it is known that the precise estimation of ISHE

voltage is difﬁcult because of spurious spin rectiﬁcation effects such as anisotropic magnetoresis-

tance and anomalous Hall effect which couple the dynamic magnetization to microwave currents
in the ferromagnetic layer16. Hence magnetic insulators such as Y3Fe5O12 (YIG) should be more
suitable to investigate hydrogen effects on pure ISHE signals17.

In this letter, we demonstrate the reversible manipulation of the spin Seebeck effect (SSE) by

hydrogen exposure in Pd/YIG bilayers. The SSE is the generation of a spin current as a result of

2

a temperature gradient applied across a junction consisting of a magnet and a metal18,19. The spin

current injected into a metal can be converted into a voltage by ISHE. Since the ISHE induced by

SSE is a transverse thermoelectric effect, it can be employed to realize transverse thermoelectric

devices, which could potentially overcome the inherent limitations of conventional thermoelectric
devices20,21. Moreover, SSE is expected to be utilized for ﬂexible heat-ﬂow sensors22. The ma-

nipulation of SSE by hydrogenation demonstrated below may open up new device potentials in

spin caloritronics.

We used epitaxial YIG ﬁlms with 2 micron thickness grown by liquid phase epitaxy on

Gd3Ga5O12 (111) substrates. The YIG surfaces were mechanically polished, and then 5-nm-thick

Pd ﬁlms were sputtered at room temperature. The Pd layer is 5 mm long and 0.5 mm wide. For
the Pd/YIG bilayers, the SSE measurements in the longitudinal conﬁguration18 were performed

at room temperature using an electromagnet (3470 Electromagnet System, GMW Associates).

The bilayer sample was placed between sapphire and copper plates. A 1-kΩ resistive heater was

attached to the upper sapphire plate and the lower copper plate is a heat sink. To facilitate hydro-

genation of the Pd layer, a breathable tape (TBAT-252, TRUSCO) was inserted between the upper

plate and the sample [Fig. 1(a)]. The temperature gradient is generated by applying an electric

current to the heater. Two-pairs of leads were attached to the Pd layer to measure not only the
SSE but also the spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR)23 in the same setup. The distance between

the voltage terminals is 2.5 mm. The thermoelectric voltage due to the ISHE induced by SSE

was monitored with a Keithley 2182A nanovoltmeter. SMR was measured by lockin detection

using Anfatec USB Lockin Ampliﬁer 250; the frequency and amplitude of ac electric current are

111 Hz and 0.8 mA. The sample was loaded into a small chamber to control the atmosphere. For

hydrogenation measurements, the samples were ﬁrst measured in pure Ar gas (>99.9999 vol.%)

at atmospheric pressure followed by a 3%/97% H2/Ar gas mixture. Before the measurements in
Ar-H2 gas, we waited 20-40 minutes for the Pd layer to be completely hydrogenated15,24 after the

chamber was ﬁlled with 1 atm Ar-H2 gas.

First, we measured SSE voltage VSSE of Pd/YIG in Ar atmosphere. Figure 1(b) shows the

magnetic-ﬁeld (H) dependence of VSSE measured at several heater power levels. Here symmetric

components of the output voltage with respect to H are subtracted and antisymmetric components

are plotted; note that the symmetric components which are not to be attributed to the effect under

study are almost independent of H in our measurements. When the heater is off, VSSE is almost

zero in the entire H range in Fig. 1(b). As the heater power P increases from zero, the clear

3

FIG. 1. (a) Measurement setup of the SSE. A breathable tape was inserted between Pd/YIG and the heater

part to facilitate hydrogen absorption and desorption in the Pd ﬁlm. (b) Magnetic ﬁeld (H) dependence of

the SSE voltage (VSSE ) measured in 1 atm of Ar. The heater power (P) was changed from 0 mW to 100 mW.

(c) Heater power (P) dependence of the SSE voltage (VSSE ) at 200 mT. The raw data is shown in (b).

SSE signals appear and their magnitudes increase with P. The sign of VSSE is the same as that
reported for Pt/YIG18. The saturated magnitude of VSSE is plotted against P in Fig. 1(c). The

VSSE magnitude increases linearly with the heater power, which indicates that VSSE is proportional

to temperature gradient generated across the Pd/YIG junction. The temperature difference ∆T
generated at P = 100 mW is estimated to be ∼1.5 K (see Fig. S1 in Supplementary Material).

Next, the effect of exposing the 3% H2 mixture on the Pd/YIG sample is investigated in Fig. 2

(see also Fig. S2 in Supplementary Material for additional experimental results). Here the heater

power P is kept constant at 100 mW during the series of measurements. After the initial SSE

measurement in pure Ar gas at atmospheric pressure already shown in Figs. 1(b) and 1(c), the

sample chamber was ﬁlled with H2 3% H2/Ar mixture and the SSE measurement was performed.

As shown in Fig. 2, the magnitude of VSSE is found to be reduced by more than 50% in the

presence of H2 gas. After completing the SSE measurement in Ar-H2 atmosphere, the sample

was then remeasured in pure Ar. The VSSE magnitude returned to the pristine value as shown

in Fig. 2. Note that this data was taken 2.5 days after the chamber was reﬁlled with Ar. The

observed decrease in the SSE signal is safely ascribed to the presence of hydrogen in Pd/YIG, and

4

FIG. 2. Magnetic ﬁeld (H) dependence of the SSE voltage (VSSE) measured before hydrogenation, during

exposure to hydrogen gas, and after the hydrogen gas is ﬂushed out of the setup. The heater power is kept

at 100 mW.

importantly, the change is reversible.

It is well known15,25 that upon hydrogenation, Pd thin ﬁlms undergo two stages of lattice ex-

pansion depending on the hydrogen gas concentration. For light concentration levels up to 2-3 %,

the lattice constant grows by approximately 1% in the out-of-plane direction only. This expansion

is reversible. In the second stage, the lattice constant grows by up to 4% in both out-of-plane and

in-plane directions. These changes are irreversible, causing structural changes to the Pd lattice.

In our SSE measurements under 3% hydrogen gas, the sample should undergo the ﬁrst stage of

lattice expansion and the SSE is thereby reversible. Note that we conﬁrmed by x-ray diffraction
that the Pd ﬁlms are (111) oriented as in the literature25 (see Supplementary Material).

Though the modulation of SSE by hydrogen absorption/desorption is reversible, the recovery

5

FIG. 3. (a) Magnetic ﬁeld (H) dependence of the SSE voltage (VSSE ) measured 1.7-66 hours after Ar gas is

reﬁlled in the measurement chamber. The heater power is kept at 100 mW. (b) Time dependence of the SSE

voltage (VSSE) at 210 mT measured after Ar gas is reﬁlled in the measurement chamber. The selected raw

data is shown in (a). The black curve is a ﬁt to the experimental data (see text).

time of the SSE signal due to hydrogen desorption is as long as 2.5 days. It was reported that
the hydrogen desorption takes a long time in contrast to the quick hydrogen absorption9, and the

response time depends signiﬁcantly on materials. The time for hydrogen desorption is typically at
most several tens of minutes for Co/Pd5–11, while the completion of the entire desorption requires
at least a few days at 10−3 mbar for FePd alloys26. Our Pd/YIG also includes Fe and Pd, and the

situation looks similar to FePd alloys.

We then take a closer look on the dehydrogenation process by the time dependent measurement

of SSE in Fig. 3. Figure 3(a) shows VSSE curves measured at different times after the measurement

chamber is reﬁlled with pure Ar gas. The VSSE magnitude is approximately 0.5 µV just after the

gas is replaced with Ar, and increases monotonically with time. After 50 hours, the VSSE magnitude
is almost saturated at ∼ 1 µV.

The time dependence of VSSE at 210 mT is plotted in Fig. 3(b). The VSSE magnitude increases

monotonically with time, as already shown in Fig. 3(a). We ﬁt the experimental data by a standard
relaxation function: VSSE ∝ 1 − e−t/τ, where t is the measurement time and τ is a time constant
of hydrogen desorption. The ﬁtting curve matches the experimental data very well, meaning that

the hydrogen desorption follows an exponential function. The same function was adopted for the

hydrogenation effect on magneto-optical effects in Pd/Co/Pd ﬁlms9. The ﬁt in Fig. 3(b) yields
τ ≈ 25 hour. Such a long time constant was not observed in the spin pumping measurement for

6

FIG. 4. Magnetic ﬁeld (H) dependence of the magnetoresistance (MR) ratio (ρ(H)/ρ(H = 0)−1) measured

before hydrogenation (a), during exposure to hydrogen gas (b), and after the hydrogen gas is ﬂushed out of

the setup (c).

Pd/Co bilayers15.

In contrast to the spin pumping measurements, the attachment of the heater to the Pd surface is

required in the SSE measurements, which may adversely affect the absorption/desorption of hy-

drogen because of small numbers of exposed surface atoms. To conﬁrm that spin current signals

in the Pd layer is indeed modulated by hydrogenation, we also perform the measurement of SMR

(spin Hall magnetoresistance) for the same sample in the same setup. The SMR is a magnetoresis-

tance effect related to a nonequilibrium proximity effect caused by the simultaneous action of the
SHE and ISHE23,27; the absorption/reﬂection of spin current at the ferromagnet/metal interface re-

sults in magnetoresistance, since the spin-dependent scattering at the metal/ferromagnet interface

depends on the angle between the polarization of spin Hall current and the magnetization of the

attached magnetic layer. The experimental setup is illustrated in the inset to Fig. 4(a). Magnetic

ﬁeld is applied perpendicular to the electric-current direction in the ﬁlm plane.

Figure 4 shows the hydrogen effects on SMR in the Pd/YIG bilayer. Here, since the size of

SMR is very small, the magnetoresistance measurements were repeated several times and aver-

aged. The error bars stand for the standard errors. Before hydrogenation [Fig. 4(a)], a negative

magnetoresistance effect is observed. The magnetic-ﬁeld dependence of resistance change follows

the magnetization process of the YIG layer, consistent with the SMR23. The size of SMR is about
1 × 10−3%. This magnitude is about ten times smaller than that in Pt/YIG23. A small SMR of
about 10% compared to Pt/YIG was also reported in the literature28.

During the exposure to 3% hydrogen gas, the SMR magnitude decreases signiﬁcantly as shown

7

in Fig. 4(b). Although quantitative analysis is difﬁcult because of the large error bars, the suppres-

sion of SMR ratio by hydrogenation looks more than 50%, consistent with the modulation in SSE

voltages (Figs. 2 and 3). After the hydrogen gas is ﬂushed out of the chamber and pure Ar gas is

reﬁlled, we conﬁrmed that the size of SMR returns to the initial value [Fig. 4(c)].

An important ﬁnding in the SMR measurement is that the SMR ratio has already returned to its

original value 30 minutes after reﬁlling Ar gas. Namely, the time constant of hydrogen desorption

in the SMR measurement is much shorter than that in the SSE measurement. Since both the

measurements were performed for the same sample in the same setup, the long time constant of

hydrogen desorption in the SSE measurement cannot be attributed to impurities/defects in the Pd
layer, surface oxidation, surface morphology9, or moisture which may trap hydrogen atoms and
hinder the hydrogen desorption29,30.

In our measurements of SSE and SMR, spin current signals are signiﬁcantly suppressed by

hydrogen exposure as shown in Figs. 2-4. The decrease in the spin Hall signals with hydrogen
exposure is consistent with the previous spin pumping measurements for Co/Pd14,15. Scatterings

of conduction electrons to hydrogen atoms in the Pd layer decrease the spin diffusion length due

to the enhanced Elliot-Yafet relaxation mechanism, and result in the decrease in spin-pumping
signals15. This mechanism should be also applicable to SSE and SMR. Since the theory has

shown that both effects depend on spin diffusion length and spin Hall angle of the Pd layer19,27, the
signal variation by hydrogenation can be attributed to the decrease in the spin diffusion length15.

On the other hand, it is notable that magneto-optical Kerr signals are enhanced by hydrogenation
in Co/Pd bilayers9,10, in contrast to the decrease in the spin current signals14,15.

In transport

measurements such as (inverse) spin Hall effects, enhanced electron scatterings due to interstitial

hydrogen impurities are likely to play a dominant role in the hydrogenation effect. The signiﬁcant

scattering effect due to hydrogen atoms is also evidenced by the reduction of the anomalous Hall
signal in hydrogenated CoxPd1−x ﬁlms12.

The decrease in the VSSE magnitude (> 50%) by hydrogen exposure is noticeably greater than
the change in ISHE signals reported in the spin pumping measurements15; the decrease in the spin-

pumping voltage in H2/Ar mixture with 3% of hydrogen was only 20%. The larger signal change in

our results suggests that there may be other factors for the reduction of VSSE besides hydrogenation

of the Pd layer. The ﬁrst possibility is imperfect separation of ISHE signals from spin rectiﬁcation

effects in metallic Co/Pd bilayers14,15. Another possible origin is different interfacial stresses to

the Pd layer between YIG and Co. It is known that electrical resistivity of single-layer Pd grown on

8

Si substrates increases upon hydorogenation, while it tends to decrease for bilayer cases15 because

of the interfacial compressive stress from the underlying layer. The interfacial stress can also affect

the interface spin mixing conductance, modulating the injection efﬁciency of spin currents. Note

that the resistivity of the Pd ﬁlm on YIG decreases by hydrogenation, but the change in resistivity

is as small as 1% (Fig. S3 in Supplementary Material), which cannot explain the large variation

(> 50%) of SSE voltage by hydrogen exposure.

Moreover, since the SSE also depends on bulk spin transport in the YIG layer31,32 in contrast

to the spin pumping, hydrogen effects on YIG may contribute to the signiﬁcant reduction in the

VSSE magnitude. Hydrogen diffusion in YIG was indeed reported for annealed samples in H2
atmosphere33–35. The hydrogen diffusion in the YIG layer can suppress the magnon and phonon

transport, which should reduce the VSSE. Also the interface spin-exchange coupling can be weak-

ened by hydrogen around the interface, leading to the decrease in the interface spin-injection

efﬁciency.

The presence of hydrogen effects on the YIG layer is also suggested by the different recovery

time constants between SSE and SMR. Our measurements in Figs. 3 and 4 showed that the time

constant for the signal recovery of SSE is much longer than that of SMR. The different recovery

time constants are attributable to different bulk sensitivity of these effects. In SMR, spin-dependent

scattering at the Pd/YIG interface is essential. In contrast, bulk thermal spin current also plays an
important role in the SSE voltage31,32 in addition to the interfacial spin coupling. Bulk properties

of magnetic materials such as bulk magnetization, thermal conductivity, and magnon transport

coefﬁcient contribute to the SSE signals, but not to SMR or spin pumping. Also in the case of

magneto-optical effects of Pd/Co frequently studied before for hydrogenation effects, the variation

of perpendicular magnetic anisotropy originates from interface effects5,9. Hence the SSE is a rare

spintronic phenomenon that depends not only on interface properties but also on bulk properties

of magnons and phonons in the magnetic layer. Hydrogen effects on YIG could be related to the

reduction of VSSE and also the long time constant for hydrogen desorption in SSE.

In conclusion, we experimentally demonstrated the reversible modulation of SSE and SMR by

hydrogenation in Pd/YIG bilayers. Absorption of hydrogen results in the decrease in both SSE

and SMR signals by more than 50%. Enhanced scatterings of conduction electrons to hydrogen

atoms in the Pd layer are partly responsible for the decrease in the spin-current signals, as reported

in the previous spin pumping experiments. The modulation of SSE voltage is reversible, but the

time constant for the signal recovery is longer than 2 days. The long time constant for hydrogen

9

desorption in the SSE measurement is in contrast to the case of SMR, in which the SMR ratio

already returned to the prehydrogenation value 30 minutes after the chamber was reﬁlled with

pure Ar. We speculate that the signiﬁcant decrease in the SSE magnitude by hydrogen exposure

and the long time constant for hydrogen desorption in SSE are related to the hydrogen modulation

of bulk properties of the YIG layer, since the SSE depends not only on interfacial spin couplings

but also on bulk properties of the magnetic layer. We hope that the present results will stimulate

further research on hydrogen effects on Pd ﬁlms grown on insulating magnetic oxides.

See the supplementary material for additional SSE data, x-ray diffraction data, and resistivity

change by hydrogen exposure.

We thank Y. Miyazaki for the experimental help of sample preparation and Dr. T. Yok-

ouchi for the fruitful discussion. This research was supported by JST CREST (JPMJCR20C1

and JPMJCR20T2), Institute for AI and Beyond of the University of Tokyo, and JSPS KAK-

ENHI Grant Numbers JP20H05153, JP20H02599, JP20H04631, JP21K18890, JP19H05600, and

JP19H02424.

The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available from the corresponding author

upon reasonable request.

REFERENCES

1Etienne Rivard, Michel Trudeau, and Karim Zaghib. Hydrogen storage for mobility: A review.

Materials, 12(12), 2019.
2William J. Buttner, Matthew B. Post, Robert Burgess, and Carl Rivkin. An overview of hydrogen

safety sensors and requirements. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 36(3):2462–2470,

2011. The Third Annual International Conference on Hydrogen Safety.
3Steven G. Louie. Hydrogen on pd(111): Self-consistent electronic structure, chemical bonding,

and photoemission spectra. Phys. Rev. Lett., 42:476–479, Feb 1979.

4P. Jena, F. Y. Fradin, and D. E. Ellis. Models of electronic structure of hydrogen in metals: Pd-h.

Phys. Rev. B, 20:3543–3551, Nov 1979.
5Crosby S. Chang, Mikhail Kostylev, and Eugene Ivanov. Metallic spintronic thin ﬁlm as a

hydrogen sensor. Applied Physics Letters, 102(14):142405, 2013.
6Wen-Chin Lin, Cheng-Jui Tsai, Xin-Ming Liu, and Adekunle O. Adeyeye. Critical hydrogena-

10

tion effect on magnetic coercivity of perpendicularly magnetized co/pd multilayer nanostruc-

tures. Journal of Applied Physics, 116(7):073904, 2014.

7K. Munbodh, F. A. Perez, C. Keenan, D. Lederman, M. Zhernenkov, and M. R. Fitzsimmons.

Effects of hydrogen/deuterium absorption on the magnetic properties of co/pd multilayers. Phys.

Rev. B, 83:094432, Mar 2011.

8Satoshi Okamoto, Osamu Kitakami, and Yutaka Shimada. Enhancement of magnetic anisotropy

of hydrogenated pd/co/pd trilayers. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, 239(1):313–

315, 2002. International Symposium on Physics of Magnetic Materials/Internat ional Sympo-

sium on Advanced Magnetic Technologies.
9Wen-Chin Lin, Cheng-Jui Tsai, Bo-Yao Wang, Chao-Hung Kao, and Way-Faung Pong. Hydro-

genation induced reversible modulation of perpendicular magnetic coercivity in pd/co/pd ﬁlms.

Applied Physics Letters, 102(25):252404, 2013.

10Wen-Chin Lin, Cheng-Jui Tsai, Han-Yuan Huang, Bo-Yao Wang, Venkata Ramana Mudinepalli,

and Hsiang-Chih Chiu. Hydrogen-mediated long-range magnetic ordering in pd-rich alloy ﬁlm.

Applied Physics Letters, 106(1):012404, 2015.

11Satoshi Akamaru, Takashi Matsumoto, Mikako Murai, Katsuhiko Nishimura, Masanori Hara,

and Masao Matsuyama. Sensing hydrogen in the gas phase using ferromagnetic pd–co ﬁlms.

Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 645:S213–S216, 2015. Supplement Issue: Proceedings from

the 14th International Symposium on Metal-Hydrogen Systems: Fundamentals and Applica-

tions, 2014 (MH2014).

12A. Gerber, G. Kopnov, and M. Karpovski. Hall effect spintronics for gas detection. Applied

Physics Letters, 111(14):143505, 2017.

13Jaw-Yeu Liang, Yun-Chieh Pai, Tu-Ngoc Lam, Wen-Chin Lin, Ting-Shan Chan, Chih-Huang

Lai, and Yuan-Chieh Tseng. Using magnetic structure of co40pd60/cu for the sensing of hydro-

gen. Applied Physics Letters, 111(2):023503, 2017.

14Stuart Watt, Rong Cong, Chris Lueng, Manu Sushruth, Peter J. Metaxas, and Mikhail Kostylev.

Impact of hydrogen gas on the inverse spin hall effect in palladium/cobalt bilayer ﬁlms. IEEE

Magnetics Letters, 9:1–4, 2018.

15Stuart Watt and Mikhail Kostylev. Manipulation of the inverse spin hall effect in palladium by

absorption of hydrogen gas. Phys. Rev. B, 101:174422, May 2020.

16Ryo Iguchi and Eiji Saitoh. Measurement of spin pumping voltage separated from extrinsic

microwave effects. Journal of the Physical Society of Japan, 86(1):011003, 2017.

11

17Y Kajiwara, K Harii, S Takahashi, Jun-ichiro Ohe, K Uchida, M Mizuguchi, H Umezawa,

H Kawai, Kazuya Ando, K Takanashi, et al. Transmission of electrical signals by spin-wave

interconversion in a magnetic insulator. Nature, 464(7286):262–266, 2010.

18Ken-ichi Uchida, Hiroto Adachi, Takeru Ota, Hiroyasu Nakayama, Sadamichi Maekawa, and

Eiji Saitoh. Observation of longitudinal spin-seebeck effect in magnetic insulators. Applied

Physics Letters, 97(17):172505, 2010.

19Ken-ichi Uchida, Hiroto Adachi, Takashi Kikkawa, Akihiro Kirihara, Masahiko Ishida, Shinichi

Yorozu, Sadamichi Maekawa, and Eiji Saitoh. Thermoelectric generation based on spin seebeck

effects. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104(10):1946–1973, 2016.

20Min Young Kim, Sang J. Park, Gi-Yeop Kim, Si-Young Choi, and Hyungyu Jin. Designing

efﬁcient spin seebeck-based thermoelectric devices via simultaneous optimization of bulk and

interface properties. Energy Environ. Sci., 14:3480–3491, 2021.

21T. Kikkawa, D. Reitz, H. Ito, T. Makiuchi, T. Sugimoto, K. Tsunekawa, S. Daimon, K. Oyanagi,

R. Ramos, S. Takahashi, Y. Shiomi, Y. Tserkovnyak, and E. Saitoh. Observation of nuclear-spin

Seebeck effect. NATURE COMMUNICATIONS, 12(1):4356, JUL 16 2021.

22Akihiro Kirihara, Koichi Kondo, Masahiko Ishida, Kazuki Ihara, Yuma Iwasaki, Hiroko

Someya, Asuka Matsuba, Ken-ichi Uchida, Eiji Saitoh, Naoharu Yamamoto, et al. Flexible

heat-ﬂow sensing sheets based on the longitudinal spin seebeck effect using one-dimensional

spin-current conducting ﬁlms. Scientiﬁc reports, 6(1):1–7, 2016.

23H. Nakayama, M. Althammer, Y.-T. Chen, K. Uchida, Y. Kajiwara, D. Kikuchi, T. Ohtani,

S. Geprägs, M. Opel, S. Takahashi, R. Gross, G. E. W. Bauer, S. T. B. Goennenwein, and

E. Saitoh. Spin hall magnetoresistance induced by a nonequilibrium proximity effect. Phys.

Rev. Lett., 110:206601, May 2013.

24D Lederman, Y Wang, EH Morales, RJ Matelon, GB Cabrera, UG Volkmann, and AL Cabrera.

Magnetooptic properties of fe/pd and co/pd bilayers under hydrogen absorption. Applied physics

letters, 85(4):615–617, 2004.

25Takashi Harumoto, Yusuke Ohnishi, Keishi Nishio, Takashi Ishiguro, Ji Shi, and Yoshio Naka-

mura. In-situ x-ray diffraction study of hydrogen absorption and desorption processes in pd thin

ﬁlms: Hydrogen composition dependent anisotropic expansion and its quantitative description.

AIP Advances, 7(6):065108, 2017.

26Po-Chun Chang, Tzu-Hung Chuang, Der-Hsin Wei, and Wen-Chin Lin. Thermally modulated

hydrogenation in fexpd1-x alloy ﬁlms: Temperature-driven peculiar variation of magnetism.

12

Applied Physics Letters, 116(10):102407, 2020.

27Yan-Ting Chen, Saburo Takahashi, Hiroyasu Nakayama, Matthias Althammer, Sebastian T. B.

Goennenwein, Eiji Saitoh, and Gerrit E. W. Bauer. Theory of spin hall magnetoresistance. Phys.

Rev. B, 87:144411, Apr 2013.

28Li Ma, Lili Lang, Jeongwoo Kim, Zhe Yuan, Ruqian Wu, Shiming Zhou, and Xuepeng Qiu.

Spin diffusion length and spin hall angle in pd1−xptx/YIG heterostructures: Examination of
spin relaxation mechanism. Phys. Rev. B, 98:224424, Dec 2018.

29Deepa Jose and Balaji R. Jagirdar. Nature of hydrogen atom trapped inside palladium lattice.

International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 35(13):6804–6811, 2010. ISMF-09.

30S. Kishore, J.A. Nelson, J.H. Adair, and P.C. Eklund. Hydrogen storage in spherical and platelet

palladium nanoparticles. Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 389(1):234–242, 2005.

31Ryo Iguchi, Ken-ichi Uchida, Shunsuke Daimon, and Eiji Saitoh. Concomitant enhancement

of the longitudinal spin seebeck effect and the thermal conductivity in a pt/yig/pt system at low

temperatures. Phys. Rev. B, 95:174401, May 2017.

32Er-Jia Guo, Joel Cramer, Andreas Kehlberger, Ciaran A. Ferguson, Donald A. MacLaren, Ger-

hard Jakob, and Mathias Kläui.

Inﬂuence of thickness and interface on the low-temperature

enhancement of the spin seebeck effect in yig ﬁlms. Phys. Rev. X, 6:031012, Jul 2016.

33E. Milani and P. Paroli. Optical study of hydrogen diffusion in yttrium iron garnet. Journal of

Applied Physics, 55(6):2173–2175, 1984.

34E. Milani, P. Paroli, and P. DeGasperis. Hydrogen diffusion in yttrium iron garnet ﬁlms. Thin

Solid Films, 126(1):73–76, 1985.

35A. Leiberich, E. Milani, P. Paroli, and R. Wolfe. Comment on “hydrogen depth proﬁles in

ion-implanted magnetic bubble garnets”. Journal of Applied Physics, 60(2):836–837, 1986.

13

