2
2
0
2

b
e
F
0
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
2
7
6
0
.
2
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Experimental Augmented Reality User Experience

Josef Spjut
NVIDIA

Fengyuan Zhu
NVIDIA
University of Toronto

Xiaolei Huang
NVIDIA
New York University

Yichen Shou
NVIDIA
University of Pennsylvania

Ben Boudaoud
Omer Shapira
Morgan McGuire
NVIDIA

Figure 1: Example AR Applications. From left to right, sticky notes, smart home control and online shopping preview.

ABSTRACT
Augmented Reality (AR) is an emerging field ripe for experimen-
tation, especially when it comes to developing the kinds of ap-
plications and experiences that will drive mass adoption of the
technology. While we aren’t aware of any current consumer prod-
uct that realize a wearable, wide Field of View (FoV), AR Head
Mounted Display (HMD), such devices will certainly come. In or-
der for these sophisticated, likely high-cost hardware products to
succeed, it is important they provide a high quality user experience.
To that end, we prototyped 4 experimental applications for wide
FoV displays that will likely exist in the future. Given current AR
HMD limitations, we used a AR simulator built on web technology
and VR headsets to demonstrate these applications, allowing users
and designers to peer into the future.

ACM Reference Format:
Josef Spjut, Fengyuan Zhu, Xiaolei Huang, Yichen Shou, Ben Boudaoud,
Omer Shapira, and Morgan McGuire. 2019. Experimental Augmented Real-
ity User Experience. In Proceedings of Technical Report 2019 (Technical Re-
port). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.
nnnnnnn

1 OVERVIEW
We refer to Augmented Reality (AR) as combined real-world (phys-
ical) and virtual (rendered) content. This work focuses on AR Head

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
Technical Report, 2019,
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

Mounted Displays (HMDs), and more specifically non-occlusive,
optical pass-through designs, which can only add light to that
of the real-world "scene" as opposed to completely reproducing
scenes through a camera/display (often referred to as "video pass-
through"). Current optical pass-through AR HMD products like
Microsoft Hololens, Magic Leap One, and nReal are examples of
such AR HMDs and provide a relatively low Field of View (FoV) of
<60◦. Products like Meta 2 and open source Leap Motion Project
North Star both provide wider FoV (90-110◦) but have not yet hit
the mass market. We believe the arrival of wide FoV AR HMDs is
eminent.

We used AR-SIM (a tool we developed separately) as our devel-
opment platform, allowing us to use commercially available Virtual
Reality (VR) hardware to experiment with experiences (roughly)
as they would appear in AR. This aallows us to emulate a VR "real
world" as well as the additive-only blending implied by an optical-
pass through design with Leap Motion hand tracking or controllers
for interaction. After several experiments to determine which sort
of effects work well in the optical pass-through AR context, we de-
veloped 4 applications and an application manager to examine how
well interaction modalities work for users. The application manager
uses a forearm-based interaction method. The 4 applications are as
follows:

(1) Sticky Notes: Create custom sized floating/docked canvases,

write or draw on them, move them around the space
(2) PreviewAR: An online shopping companion, preview 3D
items in physical space by dragging them from your phone
(3) Walking Navigator: An AR navigation system with virtual

street signs and ground-based display

(4) Control Anything: An AR smart home system connecting

virtual inputs to physical outputs

 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical Report, 2019,

Spjut, et al.

Figure 2: A forearm located application manager

Figure 3: An AR walking navigator application

2.4 Control Anything
The explosion of smart home devices with remote connectivity
offers an interesting challenge and opportunity for AR devices.
Lights, appliances, electronic devices and more can now offer virtual
controls and indicators embedded in the real world. The center
image of figure 1 shows our control anything application. This
application allows the user to create and relocate controls (buttons,
switches, and sliders), map them to smart objects (lamp, radio,
television), then use them for control of these devices in daily life.

3 CONCLUSION
Through implementing these prototype applications we learned
several valuable lessons about designing user experiences for op-
tical pass-through AR. Possibly most importantly, we are more
convinced of the significance of developing wider FoV AR HMDs
than ever before. At times, even the wide FoV of VR HMDs limited
our design, in particular keeping objects near the feet of the user
forces the user to look down before the content becomes visible. In
addition, development for AR requires careful consideration of real
world environmental factors, even when that "real world" is itself a
virtual reality.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge input and support from many others who con-
tributed to the design of these experiments. This list includes David
Luebke, Ziyang Shan, Melinne Hay, Antoine Torossian, Milan Singh,
Rachel Albert, Alexander Majercik, and Michael Stengel.

REFERENCES

2 APPLICATION DETAILS
An important aspect of interacting with any application-based
device is having the ability to start new applications, switch between
running applications and close applications when they are no longer
useful. Figure 2 shows our application manager, which is placed
on the (virtual) left forearm of the user and allows the user to slide
to unlock functionality on the top of the arm. Once unlocked, the
user can launch, show, hide, and close applications as desired on
the bottom of the arm.

2.1 Sticky Notes
The left-most picture in Figure 1 shows the first application devel-
oped, a simple note tool that allows the user to place reminders and
drawings in the space around them. A user is able to create a new
note by placing their controllers or pinched fingers on the corners
of a rectangle then releasing the button or pinch to create the note.
An extended finger or controller pointer can be used to draw on the
note. A few simple tools were also included to change the size of
writing point, clear the note’s contents and delete the note entirely.

2.2 PreviewAR
The right-most picture in Figure 1 shows PreviewAR, an online
shopping assistant. The application allows a user to browse a catalog
of products as they normally would on a phone or tablet. When the
user identifies an object of interest, she or he can select/examine a
(small) 3D preview of that object just outside the shopping device
display, then drag this object into the real world. As the preview is
moved away from the shopping device, it expands to 1:1 scale and
can be placed where the user likes. This allows users to gauge both
spatial and stylistic constraints before buying.

2.3 Walking Navigator
Figure 3 shows our walking navigation application. This application
attempts to balance a natural, clutter-free, safety-first navigation
experience with the level of navigation information we have come
to expect from our smart devices. A set of minimal, virtual, "street
sign"-style navigation markers are coupled with an informative
ground-based display that provides remaining time/distance, ETA,
and turn-by-turn updates. There’s also an optional 2D, hand held
mini-map for more detailed exploration. Through this mix we hope
to create an experience that can be easily tailored to users with
various interests/levels of familiarity with the area.

