2
2
0
2

r
a

M
3
2

]
h
t
-
l
c
u
n
[

1
v
8
0
3
2
1
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

The SuSAv2 model for inelastic neutrino-nucleus scattering

J. Gonzalez-Rosaa, G. D. Megiasa,b, J. A. Caballeroa,c, M. B. Barbarod,e,f
aDepartamento de F´ısica at´omica, molecular y nuclear, Universidad de Sevilla, 41080 Sevilla, Spain
b Research Center for Cosmic Neutrinos, Institute for Cosmic Ray Research,
University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8582, Japan
c Instituto de F´ısica Te´orica y Computacional Carlos I, Granada 18071, Spain
dDipartimento di Fisica, Universit´a di Torino, 10125 Torino, Italy
e INFN, Sezione di Torino, 10125 Torino, Italy and
f IPSA Paris, 94200 Ivry-sur-Seine, France
(Dated: March 24, 2022)

The susperscaling model SuSAv2, already available for charged-current neutrino-nucleus cross
sections in the quasielastic region, is extended to the full inelastic regime. In the model the reso-
nance production and deep inelastic reactions are described through the extension to the neutrino
sector of the SuSAv2 inelastic model developed for (e, e(cid:48)) reactions, which combines phenomeno-
logical structure functions with a nuclear scaling function. This work also compares two diﬀerent
descriptions of the ∆ resonance region, one based on a global scaling function for the full inelastic
spectrum and the other on a semi-phenomenological ∆ scaling function extracted from (e, e(cid:48)) data
for this speciﬁc region and updated with respect to previous work. The results of the model are
tested against (e, e(cid:48)) data on 12C, 16O, 40Ca and 40Ar and applied to the study of the charged current
inclusive neutrino cross-section on 12C and 40Ar measured by the T2K, MicroBooNE, ArgoNEUT
and MINERvA experiments, thus covering several kinematical regions.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The enormous eﬀort made in recent years in the de-
velopment of neutrino oscillation experiments has moti-
vated many theoretical analyses devoted to obtain accu-
rate descriptions of neutrino-nucleus reactions. These are
needed in order to reduce one of the leading experimen-
tal uncertainties, that associated to nuclear eﬀects, for
the determination of oscillation parameters and the vio-
lation of the charge-parity symmetry in the neutrino sec-
tor [1]. Many neutrino experiments [2–9] (MiniBooNE,
MicroBooNE, T2K, NOvA, MINERvA, ArgoNEUT and,
in future, DUNE and HyperK) operate in the 0.5-10 GeV
region, where several mechanisms contribute to the nu-
clear response: from the excitation of collective states at
the lowest transferred energies up to the deep inelastic
scattering (DIS) process at the highest kinematics, em-
bracing also the quasi-elastic (QE) regime, associated to
one-nucleon knockout, the emission of two nucleons, com-
monly denoted as two-particle-two-hole (2p2h) channel,
and the resonance region, corresponding to the excita-
tion of nucleon resonances followed by their decay and
associated production of pions and other mesons.

Most of these experiments are focused on the measure-
ments of CC0π (or “quasielastic-like”) events, which are
deﬁned as charged-current (CC) interactions, character-
ized by having no pions (0π) detected in the ﬁnal state.
These events are dominated by the QE and 2p2h chan-
nels and, in accordance, many theoretical studies of these
contributions have been carried out in recent years [10–
21]. The inelastic region, corresponding to resonant and
non-resonant meson production and DIS, is of relevance
in the CC-inclusive process, where all reaction channels,
including inelasticities, are considered.
It also plays a
role in the experimental analysis of CC0π measurements,

where it can represent an important background [22, 23].
However, the nuclear models are not yet as well devel-
oped for the inelastic region as for the quasi-elastic one
and current theoretical eﬀorts on this way are being car-
ried out [24–32].

Within the inelastic regime, the excitation of nucleon
resonances is one of the most relevant channels. It is re-
lated to larger energy transfers than the one correspond-
ing to the QE process, and involves higher hadronic in-
variant masses in the ﬁnal state. The most important
contribution comes from the ∆(1232) resonance. Prelim-
inary studies carried out by some of the authors of this
paper have been presented in previous works [33–35], but
contributions associated to nuclear eﬀects still need fur-
ther investigation. Also, there is a lack of knowledge
about heavier resonances which belong to the so-called
Shallow Inelastic Scattering (SIS) region, i.e. the transi-
tion region between resonance excitations and DIS. The
SIS region can also contribute signiﬁcantly to the deter-
mination of neutrino oscillation parameters as it can be
relevant for both signal and background estimates. The
analysis of the resonance form factors and inelastic struc-
ture functions of the nucleons mainly comes from the
study of electron scattering data, which introduces some
limitations in the neutrino sector due to the missing axial
response in electron-nucleus reactions. This requires re-
lying on diﬀerent approaches, such as QCD calculations,
quark models and Parton Distribution Functions (PDFs)
or phenomenological models [22, 36–40]. However, most
of these approaches are aﬀected by large uncertainties
and some kinematical limitations, which make diﬃcult
to obtain a consistent description of the inelastic regime.
The SIS and DIS regions are thus a subject of continuing
study where more experimental and theoretical eﬀorts
are required.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Several measurements of CC inclusive neutrino-nucleus
scattering cross sections have been performed recently
by various experiments. In the case of T2K [4, 41], Mi-
croBooNE [2] and SciBooNE [42] the neutrino energy is
peaked around 0.6 GeV, which makes quasielastic scat-
tering, one pion production and 2p2h excitations the
main contributions to the cross section, being the QE
regime the dominant one. On the other hand, other
recent experiments, such as MINERvA, NOvA or Ar-
goNEUT and the future DUNE [7, 8, 43, 44], present
a signiﬁcant number of events at energies higher than 3
GeV where inelasticities play an important role. With in-
creasing neutrino energies, an accurate description of the
inelastic spectrum is becoming more and more impor-
tant, thus motivating the development of new analyses
of the nucleon structure functions and sophisticated nu-
clear models to address these contributions and reduce
the large uncertainties in current studies.

Several models have been developed to describe the
inelastic region, mainly pion production in nuclei, which
provide diﬀerent treatments of the initial nuclear state,
the production of pions on a bound nucleon, and the in-
teraction of the pions and nucleons in the residual nu-
cleus. Although some older studies are based on the
Fermi gas of non-interacting nucleons [29, 45], recently
diﬀerent groups have developed more sophisticated de-
scriptions that incorporate the relativistic mean ﬁeld the-
ory [24, 25, 30], Random Phase Approximation calcula-
tions [26] or spectral functions [27, 46].

In this work we extend the SuperScaling model
SuSAv2, previously applied to the study of quasielas-
tic neutrino scattering and brieﬂy summarized in Sect.II,
to the inelastic regime, following what has been done in
Refs. [47–49] for electron scattering. In the case of neu-
trino reactions the main diﬃculty arises from the poor
knowledge of the weak inelastic structure functions, in
particular the axial one W3, across the full inelastic spec-
trum. In the present study we explore two diﬀerent op-
tions. The ﬁrst one focusses on the ∆ resonance, for
which the experimental information on the weak form
factors is better established, and combines the elemen-
tary cross section ν +N → l+∆ (N being the hit nucleon
and l the outgoing lepton) with a semi-phenomenological
scaling function f ∆ to be used only in the ∆ region. The
function f ∆ is extracted from the analysis of inclusive
electron scattering on 12C by subtracting from the data
the QE and 2p2h contributions evaluated in the SuSAv2
model; it carries information on the nuclear dynamics in
this region and on the propagation of the resonance in the
medium. This approach was taken in Refs. [33, 35] and is
now revisited using an updated version of the model for
the QE and 2p2h regions. The resulting model, labeled as
”SuSAv2-∆”, is presented in Sect. III. The second option
is the extension of the SuSAv2 model to the complete in-
elastic spectrum - resonant, non-resonant and DIS - and
represents a generalization of what has been done in the
case of electrons in Ref. [47]. This model will be referred
to as ”SuSAv2-inelastic” and is described in detail in

2

Sect. IV together with an analysis of diﬀerent inelastic
weak structure functions. In Sect. V we compare both
the SuSAv2-∆ and SuSAv2-inelastic models with elec-
tron scattering data as a solid benchmark to test their
validity before their application to the neutrino sector.
In Sect. VI we show a comparison of the previous mod-
els with CC neutrino-nucleus scattering data from several
experiments, diﬀerent nuclei, and at diﬀerent kinematics.
In Sect. VII we draw our conclusions.

II. THE SUPERSCALING APPROACH

The SuperScaling Approach (SuSA), based on the su-
perscaling properties exhibited by inclusive electron scat-
tering [50], has been successfully applied to the analysis
of both electron and neutrino cross sections [49, 51–53]
for several nuclei. This model, which was originally de-
veloped as a semi-phenomenological approach for the QE
and ∆-resonance regions [33], was subsequently extended
to the full inelastic regime [48] for electron-nucleus re-
actions. The model was later updated (SuSAv2) using
Relativistic Mean Field (RMF) ingredients to develop
a theory-based approach to the QE regime [54] and in-
cluding a fully relativistic calculation of 2p2h contribu-
tions [55, 56], improving the description of nuclear eﬀects
and the agreement with data [49].

Although the detailed description of the SuperScaling
model and its formalism can be found in several refer-
ences – see [57, 58] for recent reviews – here we recall its
main features before introducing the new ingredients of
the model.

The SuSA model has its foundations in the analysis of
the inclusive electron-nucleus cross sections. In the QE
region, it has been observed that the global (e, e(cid:48)) inclu-
sive cross section data exhibit a general independence of
the transferred momentum (scaling of 1st kind) and of
the nuclear species (scaling of 2nd kind) when divided
by the single-nucleon cross section and multiplied by the
corresponding Fermi momentum kF . The simultaneous
occurrence of both kinds of scaling is called superscal-
ing. The above-mentioned ratio deﬁnes a scaling function
f QE(ψ) of the scaling variable ψ = ψ(ω, q), given by the
following combination of the energy (ω) and momentum
(q) transferred to the nucleus [59]:

ψ =

1
√
ξF

(cid:113)

λ − τ
(1 + λ)τ + κ(cid:112)(1 + τ )τ

,

(1)

where the dimensionless transferred momentum (κ ≡
q/2mN ), energy (λ ≡ ω/2mN ) and four-momentum
τ ≡ κ2 − λ2 (τ = Q2/4m2
N ) and the dimensionless Fermi
kinetic energy (ξF ≡ (cid:112)1 + (kF /mN )2 − 1) have been
introduced in terms of the nucleon mass mN . By deﬁ-
nition, this scaling function embeds most of the nuclear
dynamics and thus it can be extended from electron to
neutrino reactions.

Since some longitudinal and transverse (with respect
to the momentum transfer q) separated (e, e(cid:48)) data exist
in the QE regime [60], based on the Rosenbluth separa-
tion, one can also deﬁne and analyze the longitudinal and
transverse scaling functions, deﬁned as

f QE
L,T = kF

RQE
L,T
GQE
L,T

,

(2)

L = f QE

where RQE
L,T are the longitudinal and transverse nuclear
responses and GQE
L,T the corresponding single-nucleon re-
sponses (see [61] for their explicit expressions). The data
analysis performed in [50] shows that in the QE peak
the longitudinal scaling function (2) superscales, i.e.
it
only depends on a single variable ψ, for all nuclei and
most kinematics except for very low densities and mo-
menta (roughly q ≤ 300 MeV/c). On the contrary, the
transverse scaling function exhibits some scaling viola-
tions due to other contributions that can play a signiﬁ-
cant role in the QE region and that are mainly transverse,
such as 2p2h and ∆ resonance. In its ﬁrst version [33]
the SuSA approach assumed f QE
T = f QE (scal-
ing of 0-th kind), namely that the superscaling function
was the same in the longitudinal and transverse chan-
nels, and applied a phenomenological ﬁt of the longitudi-
nal (e, e(cid:48)) data to construct the model. Later, this phe-
nomenological description was improved using the micro-
scopic RMF model, as it was observed that the theoret-
ical scaling functions derived from this theory matched
with the (e, e(cid:48)) scaling data. In this microscopic approach
(“SuSAv2”) the RMF scaling functions are employed to
describe both electron and neutrino reactions [54]. The
SuSAv2 model has the merit of reproducing both the
height and the shape of the longitudinal scaling function
while predicting a slight enhancement of the transverse
scaling function, which is supported by the separate L/T
data analysis [60] and related to the relativistic nature
of the RMF model. In the RMF theory the initial nu-
cleon’s wave function is a bound solution of the Dirac
equation in presence of two strong scalar and vector rela-
tivistic potentials, while the ﬁnal nucleon is a scattering
eigenstate of the same Hamiltonian: as a consequence
Pauli blocking and binding energy eﬀects are intrinsically
taken into account in this model [20]. The unrealistically
strong eﬀect of the RMF potentials at high kinematics,
where the distorsion of the nucleon wave function due
to ﬁnal state interactions (FSI) should instead disappear
and the Relativistic Plane Wave Impulse Approximation
(RPWIA) limit be recovered, is corrected in the SuSAv2
model by implementing a transition function between the
RMF and RPWIA quasielastic scaling functions [49, 62].
The extension of the SuperScaling approach to the in-
elastic regime is based on the assumption that a scal-
ing function f = f QE can be used also at higher en-
the
ergy transfers to describe the nuclear dynamics:
corresponding nuclear responses are obtained by folding
f with the appropriate elementary structure functions.
In particular, the SuperScaling Approach has been ap-

3

plied to the analysis of the full inelastic regime in the
case of electron scattering in [34, 48], where phenomeno-
logical electromagnetic structure functions, W1 and W2,
have been used to describe the elementary inelastic pro-
cesses. This approach has been recently improved using
the RMF theory (SuSAv2-inelastic model [62]) in the QE
region. Moreover, a semi-phenomenological treatment
of the ∆-resonance region has been developed within
the SuSA model for both electron and neutrino reac-
tions (SuSA-∆ model [33, 35]). In the next sections we
present an improved, more accurate version of the semi-
phenomenological SuSA-∆ model and an extension of the
SuSAv2-inelastic model to the neutrino sector.

Finally, in order to describe the full spectrum, 2p2h
excitations induced by Meson Exchange Currents (MEC)
have also been implemented in the SuSAv2 model for
both electron and neutrino scattering using the results of
the microscopic calculations [56, 63–65].

III. THE SUSAV2-∆ MODEL

In this section we introduce a model to describe the
electron- and CC neutrino-nucleus reactions associated
to the ∆ excitation based on the SuperScaling approach
described in the previous section. This approach allows
one to handle the QE and ∆ regions in a uniﬁed frame-
work and can be applied to high energies due to its rela-
tivistic nature.

The idea of using SuperScaling to model the ∆-
resonance region in neutrino-nucleus scattering was pro-
posed in Ref. [33] and further developed and compared
with data in Ref. [35]. In particular it was shown that the
residual strength obtained after subtracting the QE and
2p2h contributions from the experimental (e, e(cid:48)) cross
section measured at diﬀerent kinematics displays a scal-
ing behaviour similar to the one observed in the quasielas-
tic channel, provided a new scaling variable associated to
the ∆ production is introduced:

ψ∆ =

1
√
ξF

(cid:113)

λ − τ ρ∆
(1 + λρ∆)τ + κ(cid:112)τ (1 + τ ρ2
∆)

,

(3)

where

ρ∆ = 1 +

1
4τ

(µ2

∆ − 1)

is the inelasticity parameter and

µ∆ =

m∆
mN

(4)

(5)

the dimensionless ∆ mass. The ∆ scaling variable (3)
vanishes when the energy transfer corresponds to the
excitation of a ∆ resonance on a free nucleon at rest
(ω = (cid:112)q2 + m2
∆ − mN ), which coincides with the center
of the ∆-resonance peak, and it reduces to the quasielas-
tic scaling variable (1) for m∆ → mN . More speciﬁcally,
by dividing the cross section

(cid:19)∆

(cid:18) d2σ
dΩedω

≡

(cid:18) d2σ
dΩedω

(cid:19)exp.

−

(cid:18) d2σ
dΩedω

(cid:19)SuSA−QE

−

(cid:18) d2σ
dΩedω

(cid:19)2p2h

,

4

(6)

where the QE and 2p2h contributions are evaluated us-
ing the SuSA model, by the elementary N → ∆ cross
section [33], one obtains a function

f ∆(ψ∆) = kF

(cid:19)∆

(cid:18)

d2σ
dΩedω

σM ott(υLG∆

L + υT G∆
T )

,

(7)

which approximately depends only on the variable ψ∆.
This result indicates that this region is dominated by
the ∆ resonance excitation and that the nuclear eﬀects

acting in this regime can be eﬀectively embodied in a
scaling function. However, this ∆ scaling is valid only for
ψ∆ (cid:46) 0, while in the right part of the peak it is broken
due to the opening of higher inelastic channels, namely
the higher resonances (HR) and DIS contributions.

In this work we revisit this procedure by using the
last version of the SuSAv2-QE and 2p2h models. A fur-
ther substantial improvement of the model consists in
employing the SuSAv2-inelastic model (see next Section)
to remove from the inclusive electron scattering data con-
tributions beyond the ∆ resonance, namely the HR and
DIS channels, in such a way that the ∆-resonance peak is
better isolated. Accordingly, we modify Eq. (6) as follows

(cid:19)∆

(cid:18) d2σ
dΩedω

≡

(cid:18) d2σ
dΩedω

(cid:19)exp.

−

(cid:18) d2σ
dΩedω

(cid:19)SuSAv2−QE

(cid:19)2p2h

−

(cid:18) d2σ
dΩedω

−

(cid:18) d2σ
dΩedω

(cid:19)HR+DIS

(8)

and, using Eq. (7), we obtain an improved ∆ scaling func-
tion.

In ﬁg. 1 we show the semi-phenomenological scaling
function obtained by using Eqs. (7) and (8) applied to
12C data from [66]. When we compare with the previous
∆ scaling function obtained in [35], as expected, a similar
behavior is shown at negative ψ∆ values (below the ∆
peak). However, at kinematics above the ∆ peak (ψ∆ >
0) there is a reduction of f ∆ in the new approach due to
the subtraction of the HR+DIS contributions.

IV. SUSAV2-INELASTIC MODEL

While the above described model is restrained to two
particular reaction mechanisms, i.e., ∆ production and
QE scattering, in this section we extend the formalism
based on the SuperScaling Approach and the RMF the-
ory to the full inelastic regime.

Following previous studies on the inelastic RFG and
scaling modeling [34], an extension of the SuSAv2-QE
formalism to the complete inelastic spectrum - resonant,
non-resonant and deep inelastic scattering - has been pro-
posed in [49] for the analysis of electron reactions. This
was carried out by employing phenomenological ﬁts to
the single-nucleon inelastic structure functions together
with an extension of the SuSAv2-QE scaling functions to
the inelastic regime, yielding a very good agreement with
inclusive electron scattering data at high energies. Here
we extend this description to the neutrino sector.

proach has been presented in [49], here we summarize its
main features, emphasizing its extension to the neutrino
case.

The expression for the CC double diﬀerential neutrino

cross section is given by

d2σ
dΩldωl

=

G2
F pl
4π2Eν

LµνW µν,

(9)

being Lµν and W µν the leptonic and the inelastic
hadronic tensor, respectively [67]. The term pl (Eν)
refers to the outgoing lepton momentum (neutrino beam
energy) and GF is the Fermi constant.

The inelastic nuclear responses are obtained by inte-
grating the nuclear responses depending on the ﬁnal-state
invariant mass WX over all possible ﬁnal hadronic states
[34, 49]

Rinel

K (κ, τ ) =

N m3
N
k3
F κ

ξF

(cid:90) µmax

X

µmin
X

dµX µX f model(ψX )Ginel
K ,

(10)

being N the number of nucleons, µX the dimensionless
invariant mass

µX =

WX
mN

,

(11)

Ginel
K the inelastic response of a single nucleon and K an
index related to the diﬀerent longitudinal and transverse
channels.

Although the general formalism describing inclusive in-
elastic lepton-nucleus reactions within the SuSAv2 ap-

The inelastic nuclear responses are deﬁned in terms
of the diﬀerent components of the hadron tensor W µν,

5

FIG. 1. Experimental values of f ∆(ψ∆) together with a phenomenological ﬁt of the ∆ scaling function. Data are labeled by
the corresponding electron beam energy and scattering angle.

which is deﬁned as

in the following way:

RCC = W 00
(cid:0)W 03 + W 30(cid:1)

RCL = −

1
2

RLL = W 33

RT = W 11 + W 22

;

;

;

;

RT (cid:48) = −

i
2

(cid:0)W 12 − W 21(cid:1) ,

for the neutrino case, and

RL = W 00
RT = W 11 + W 22 ,

(13)

(14)

(15)
(16)

(17)

(18)
(19)

for electromagnetic interactions. The expression for the
inelastic nucleon tensor Gµν in terms of the inelastic
structure functions Wi(τ, ρX ) is given by

W µν

inel(κ, τ ) =

N m3
N
k3
F κ

ξF

(cid:90) µmax

X

µmin
X

dµX µX f model(ψX )Gµν

inel,

(12)

Gµν

inel(κ, τ, ρ) = −

(cid:20)
W1(τ, ρX ) +

1
2

W2(τ, ρX )D(κ, τ, ρX )

(cid:21) (cid:18)

gµν +

(cid:19)

κµκν
τ

+ W2(τ, ρX )

(cid:20)
1 + τ ρ2

D(κ, τ, ρX )

3
2

X +
(cid:20)(cid:18) 1
2

(cid:21) aµaν
τ
(cid:19) aακβ
κ

∓ iW3(τ, ρX )(cid:15)µναβ

((cid:15)F + (cid:15)0) + λρX

(cid:21)

− ρX κακβ

,

with aµ = (κ, 0, 0, λ), κµ = (λ, 0, 0, κ) and ρX the inelas-

ticity parameter deﬁned as

ρX ≡ 1 +

1
4τ

(µ2

X − 1) .

The D term is a relativistic correction given by:

(20)

(21)

D(κ, τ, ρ) = ξF

(cid:0)1 − ψ2

X

(cid:1)

(cid:20)
1 + ξF ψ2

X −

λ
κ

ψX

(cid:113)

ξF (2 + ξF ψ2

X ) +

τ
3κ2 ξF

(cid:0)1 − ψ2

X

(cid:1)

(cid:21)

.

6

(22)

The ∓ sign associated to the W3 function in Eq. (20)
refers to neutrino and antineutrino, respectively. Note
that for electromagnetic interactions, the W3 term van-
ishes. More details about the SuSA inelastic formalism
can be found in [47, 62].

The integration limits in (12) are given by the appro-
priate kinematical restrictions and considering that WX
should be above the pion-production threshold. Then the
full inelastic spectrum is limited by

predictions provided by the full SuSAv2-inelastic model
for electrons with the ones corresponding to the SuSAv2-
∆ model together with the SuSAv2-DIS approach, i.e.,
the SuSAv2-inelastic model excluding the ∆ resonance
contribution.1

A. Extension of the SuSAv2-DIS model to weak
interactions

µmin

X = 1 +

mπ
mN
Eshif t
mN

µmax

X = 1 + 2λ −

,

,

(23)

(24)

The single-nucleon hadronic responses for electromag-
netic interactions depend on two inelastic structure func-
tions W1 and W2 [68] that can be written in a dimension-
less form

where Eshif t is related to the energy necessary to extract
one nucleon from the nucleus . The function f model is re-
ferred in this approach to the SuSAv2-inelastic scaling
function, which exhibits the same functional form of the
SuSAv2-QE one but depends on a diﬀerent scaling vari-
able and is weighted by the invariant mass. The inelastic
scaling variable ψX is deﬁned as

ψX ≡

1
√
ξF

(cid:113)

λ − τ ρX
(1 + λρX )τ + κ(cid:112)τ (τ ρ2

X + 1)

,

(25)

being ρX given in Eq. (21).

Within this formalism, we can also replace the SuSAv2
inelastic scaling function in Eq. (12) by a generic one,
f model, so that other nuclear models where a scaling func-
tion can be obtained, such as the RFG, are also appli-
cable. Here we make use of the SuSAv2 scaling function
that takes into account RPWIA and RMF ingredients,
being less simplistic than the RFG approach.

As shown in Eq. (24), the inelastic nuclear response ac-
commodates the whole inelastic spectrum: ∆ resonance,
shallow and deep inelastic scattering. However, the inte-
gration limits can be modiﬁed to exclude some particular
contributions. We explore this possibility by excluding
the ∆-resonance region from the SuSAv2-inelastic model,
so that this approach can be combined with other models
for the ∆ production, for example the SuSAv2-∆ model
(Section III) or the RMF-1π model [20], without overlap-
ping. In particular, this is carried out by selecting as the
lower limit of integration a value above the ∆ invariant
mass (after the ∆ peak, when the ∆ contribution starts
to decline), µmin
X > µ∆ (µ∆ + 1.5%µ∆), in such a way
that only nucleon resonances heavier than the ∆ and DIS
contribute to the cross section. In Eq. (8), the HR+DIS
cross section refers to this approach, i.e., the inelastic re-
sponses have been evaluated by performing the integral
with the lower integration limit being above the ∆ in-
variant mass. In the results section (V), we compare the

F1 = mN W1,
F2 = νW2,

(26)
(27)

where ν is a Lorentz invariant2 coinciding with the trans-
ferred energy ω in the laboratory frame.
In the deep
inelastic regime the two structure functions F1 and F2
(likewise W1 and W2) are linked by the Callan-Gross re-
lation [69] F2 = 2xF1, where x = 1/ρX is the Bjorken
scaling variable.

3 (W ν

The description of the deep-inelastic regime for weak
interactions implies the knowledge of an additional struc-
ture function, F ν
3 ), related to the parity violat-
ing contribution associated to the vector-axial interfer-
ence. An accurate determination of this function is hard
to achieve from neutrino experiments as well as from
parity-violating electron scattering [70] due to the large
uncertainties associated to the cross section measure-
ments. However, some relationships among the electro-
magnetic and weak structure functions and between F ν
2
and F ν
3 [36, 71] can be established within the quark-
parton model. This is based on the assumption that
the corresponding structure functions Wi can be written
in terms of quark Q and antiquark ¯Q distributions [71].
This approximation is valid in moderate-large x-values,
where we neglect strange and charm quarks [22, 37, 72]:
(cid:19)
(cid:18)

2 = νW ν
F νN

2 = Q + ¯Q = x

u(x) + d(x) + ¯u(x) + ¯d(x)

,

xF νN

3 = xνW ν

3 = Q− ¯Q = x

u(x)+d(x)− ¯u(x)− ¯d(x)

(cid:18)

(28)
(cid:19)
,

(29)

1 SuSAv2-DIS indicates the SuSAv2 treatment of HR+DIS con-

tributions.

, where H µ is the 4-momentum of the on-shell nucleon

2 ν ≡ H·Q
mN

and Qµ the transferred 4-momentum.

where u(¯u) and d( ¯d) are the parton distribution func-
tions (PDFs) for the up and down quarks (antiquarks),
respectively.

For electron scattering, the isoscalar F2 structure func-

tion of the nucleon, deﬁned as the average of the proton
and neutron structure functions, is given (at leading or-
der in αs and for two ﬂavors) by

7

F eN

2 =

1
2

(F ep

2 + F en

2 ) =

u(x) + ¯u(x) + d(x) + ¯d(x)

(cid:19)

.

(cid:18)

5x
18

(30)

The quark distributions are deﬁned to be those in the
proton and the factor 5/18 arises from the squares of the
quark charges.

In this region, the weak and electromagnetic F2 struc-
ture functions, Eq. (30) and Eq. (28), approximately sat-
isfy

F νN

2 ≈

18
5

F eN
2

.

(31)

Note that this relation is deduced within a quark-parton
model from the quark distributions at moderate-large x-
values, therefore it is applicable in the regime of very high
inelasticity, but fails in the resonance region.

K of Eq. (12).

Thus, under this assumption, which has been tested
with experimental results [73–76], one can readily ob-
tain the weak inelastic single-nucleon structure functions
which are implicit in the terms Ginel
In
this work we describe the structure functions in two dif-
ferent ways. First, we make use of empirical ﬁts of the
inelastic electron-proton and electron-deuteron cross sec-
tions together with a phenomenological antiquark dis-
tribution to extrapolate accurate electromagnetic ﬁts to
the neutrino case. The ﬁts employed are Bodek-Ritchie
(BR) [38, 71, 77, 78] and Bosted-Christy (BC) [39, 40].
The BR parameterization ﬁts the SLAC data published
in [77], covering a Q2-range from 0.1 to 30 GeV2. The BC
ﬁt is constrained by the high precision longitudinal and
transverse (L/T) separated cross section measurements
from JLab Hall C [79] in the kinematic range of four-
momentum transfer 0 ≤ Q2 ≤ 8 GeV2 and ﬁnal state
invariant mass 1.1 < WX < 3.1 GeV, thus going roughly
from the pion production region to the highly-inelastic
region.

The second option we explore is to deﬁne the inelastic
structure functions in terms of the Parton Distribution
In particular, we make use of
Function (PDF) model.
the Gl¨uck-Reya-Vogt GRV98 model [36].
In this case,
the structure functions are extracted from deep inelastic
and other hard scattering processes at high energies. As a
consequence, this parameterization works better at very
high values of Q2 and W (cid:38)3 GeV.

In ﬁg. 2 we present the results for the two inelastic elec-
tromagnetic structure functions F eN
provided
by the three parameterizations discussed above, denoted
as BR, BC and PDF. As observed, both BR and BC
show the structure of the resonances at lower values of
Q2, whereas PDF does not, as should be expected. This

and F eN

2

1

is consistent with the limitations of the PDF approach
at low kinematics. On the contrary, at higher kinematics
(panel on the right), the resonance structure is lost and
the three models lead to rather similar results although
the implementation of the BC ﬁt in the SuSAv2-inelastic
model has shown better agreement with (e, e(cid:48)) data than
the BR one [49, 57]. By combining Eq. (28) and Eq. (29),
the additional structure function in weak interactions, i.e.
F3(W3), can be written as

xF νN

2 − 2 ¯Q(x),

3 = F νN

(32)
where the antiquark distribution, ¯Q(x), can be deﬁned
in terms of PDF. However, note that this approach is
of limited relevance for current neutrino oscillation ex-
periments where the region of intermediate energies con-
tributes signiﬁcantly. Another option is to deﬁne the
antiquark distribution in terms of the empirical ﬁts of
electron scattering from BR parameterization [71], which
works at low-intermediate kinematics.
In the analysis
that follows we make use of this second option, unless
otherwise stated.

3

These methods of extending electromagnetic inelastic
structure functions cannot properly handle the ∆-region
in the case of neutrinos.
The results for xF νN

(top panels) and ¯QνN (bottom)
In the case of ¯QνN we compare
are shown in ﬁg. 3.
the predictions corresponding to Bodek-Ritchie (solid red
line) and GRV98 (dashed red line). As noticed, a signif-
icant discrepancy is observed, particularly at the low-
est value of Q2 (left-bottom) where BR shows the struc-
ture associated to the nucleon resonances whereas GRV98
does not. On the contrary, at higher Q2 the BR and
GRV98 curves behave similarly although the latter is sig-
niﬁcantly larger. These results are consistent with the
PDF model that only works at high values of the trans-
ferred four-momentum. Similar comments also apply to
results shown for xF νN
, although here the BR result ex-
ceeds the GRV98 one in the maximum at high kinematics.
For completeness, we also present the results for xF νN
evaluated using eq. (32), but with parameterization and
the antiquark distribution, Q(x), calculated with BR
(blue solid line) and GRV98 (blue dashed). In this case
the nucleon resonance structure at low-intermediate Q2
is clearly shown with similar results for the two prescrip-
tions. Moreover, although diﬀerences are observed with
the previous calculations (red lines), the general behavior
of the results follows a similar trend for all the models.

3

3

8

FIG. 2. Electromagnetic inelastic nucleon structure functions F1 and F2 at Q2 = 0.2 GeV2 (left), 1.0 GeV2 (center) and 10
GeV2 (right) versus the Bjorken scaling variable x .

FIG. 3. Weak inelastic nucleon structure xF3 at Q2 = 0.2 GeV2 (left), 1.0 GeV2 (center) and 10 GeV2 (right).

V. RESULTS

The description of inclusive electron and/or neutrino
scattering processes requires to take into account the con-
tribution of diﬀerent reaction channels. These are sum-
marized in Table I together with the theoretical mod-
els used to describe them. Also included are the cor-
responding abbreviations written in the legends of the
subsequent graphs. At transferred energy ω (cid:39) Q2/2mN ,
the dominant process is quasielastic (QE) scattering that

is described with the SuSAv2 superscaling model intro-
duced in the previous section. As the value of ω increases,
2p2h states can be excited via Meson Exchange Currents
(MEC). This is modelled within the framework of the
Relativistic Fermi Gas (RFG-MEC). At higher energy
transfer a pion can be emitted through the excitation of
the ∆ resonance (∆). This process is described by the
SuSAv2-∆ model introduced in Section III. Finally, the
deep inelastic scattering (DIS) region that occurs at the
highest energies is accounted for by the SuSAv2 inelastic
model (Section IV). Notice that by DIS we denote not

0.20.400.511.520.5100.20.40.60.811.20.5100.511.50.10.20.300.511.50.5100.510.5100.510.10.20.300.10.200.5100.510.510.20.40.6only the process in which the probe interacts with the
partons, but also the region where nucleon resonances
heavier than the ∆ are excited. We also present results
where the SuSAv2 inelastic model is used to describe the
full inelastic (e, e(cid:48)) spectrum, i.e., including also the con-
tribution of the ∆ resonance.

A. Electron Scattering

As a ﬁrst step we test the models presented in the pre-
vious section versus inclusive electron scattering data,
(e, e(cid:48)). Here we show results for some representative
choices of kinematics, similar to those involved in neu-
trino scattering processes, and diﬀerent nuclei.

In ﬁg. 4 we show the electron-carbon cross section ver-
sus the energy transfer ω for electron beam energies rang-
ing from 560 to 2130 MeV and diﬀerent scattering angles.
At these kinematics the dominant processes are QE scat-
tering and ∆ production. This is clearly illustrated in the
ﬁgure by the two broad peaks. The dip region between
the two peaks is ﬁlled by the 2p2h contribution. While
the QE and MEC contributions are calculated using the
SuSAv2 and RFG models, respectively, we explore diﬀer-
ent options for the treatment of the inelastic processes,
corresponding to the diﬀerent curves in each plot. We
observe that the total result obtained using ∆+DIS pro-
vides a reasonably good description of the data, indepen-
dently of the parameterization used for the elementary
structure functions - BR, BC or PDF. On the contrary,
the full inelastic model gives good agreement with the
data only in the case of the BC parameterization, while
BR underestimates the data in the region of the ∆ peak.
This can be explained by noticing that at these kinemat-
ics the value of Q2 is below 1 GeV. As shown in ﬁg. 2, in
this region the results of the two prescriptions are signiﬁ-
cantly diﬀerent. Note also that the kinematics considered
are not appropriate to use the full inelastic model with
PDF [36].

Fig. 5 shows the comparison between our predictions
and data at much higher electron energy, E∼4 GeV. In
this case the ∆ and DIS channels give a very sizeable
contribution, becoming dominant as the scattering angle
increases.

As already mentioned, we use two diﬀerent methods
to get the inelastic cross section. One consists in us-
ing the superscaling function folded with the inelastic
BC structure functions to describe the full inelastic spec-
trum, the other combines the scaling function f ∆ in the
∆ resonance region (“SuSAv2-∆”) and the DIS model
(“SuSAv2 inelastic”) beyond (with BC and PDF). As no-
ticed, the prediction provided by the full inelastic model
(QE+MEC+Full inelastic) ﬁts nicely the data in most of
the kinematics situations, although in some cases, i.e.,
intermediate values of the scattering angle, 37 and 45
degrees, the theoretical models tend to overpredict data.
The combination of SuSAv2-∆ and SuSAv2 inelastic in-
troduces a band due to the uncertainty of the statistical

9

analysis in the determination of the ∆ scaling function.
Here the results, presented by the red band correspond-
ing to BC clearly overestimate the data at the smaller
angles, whereas the agreement improves signiﬁcantly for
larger values, i.e., 55 and 74 degrees. In the case of PDF
(blue band), the predictions are below the other two pa-
rameterizations underestimating the data for 45, 55 and
74 degrees and it shows a similar behavior to BC at lower
angles.

In ﬁg. 6 we extend our analysis to other diﬀerent nu-
clear systems: oxygen, argon and calcium. In each case
we compare the data with the predictions of our models,
QE+MEC+∆+DIS and QE+MEC+Full inelastic, with
the two parameterizations for the inelastic single-nucleon
structure functions: BR and BC. As observed, although
the general behaviour of data is successfully described
by the models, signiﬁcant discrepancies between them
are shown. In the case of the QE+MEC+Full inelastic,
BC and BR prescriptions lead to very diﬀerent results
in the region where the ∆ gets its maximum, being BC
much larger and closer to the data. On the contrary,
the discrepancy between the two models - BC and BR-
associated to the QE+MEC+∆+DIS description is sig-
niﬁcantly smaller. In some cases the two bands overlap
providing in general a good description of the data. In
fact, these predictions agree with the ones corresponding
to the QE+MEC+Full inelastic using BC.

In general, the QE + MEC + Full inelastic model with
BC describes well the electron scattering data. However,
this model cannot be properly extended to neutrinos as
stated in section IV. In the case of QE + MEC + ∆ +
DIS, the three models considered for the DIS contribution
provide predictions that agree with electron scattering
data. This gives us conﬁdence in their applicability to
the analysis of neutrino-nucleus scattering reaction. This
analysis is presented in the next subsection.

B. Neutrino Scattering

In this section we apply the models summarized in Ta-
ble I and tested against electron scattering to the analy-
sis of inclusive neutrino-nucleus scattering processes cor-
responding to diﬀerent experiments: T2K, MINERvA,
MicroBooNE and ArgoNEUT. We compare our predic-
tions with the data for a very wide range of kinemati-
cal regimes.
In spite of the good description provided
by the QE+MEC+Full inelastic model for electron scat-
tering data, here we restrict our attention to the use of
the QE+MEC+∆+DIS. The use of the QE+MEC+Full
inelastic model applied to neutrino reactions in the full
inelastic regime can be questionable as the approach con-
sidered to get the weak inelastic Wi structure functions
from the electromagnetic ones relies on the quarks de-
scription which is suited for the DIS regime, but fails in
the resonance region.

10

Abbreviation
QE

Contribution
Quasielastic

MEC
∆
DIS

Full Inelastic

2p2h excitations
∆ resonance
Higher resonances
and deep inelastic
Whole inelastic spectrum

Model
SuSAv2
superscaling
RFG-MEC
SuSAv2-∆
SuSav2 inelastic

SuSAv2 inelastic

TABLE I. Channels that contribute to the reaction mechanism with the notation followed in the text and the model used to
evaluate the cross section. The chosen inelastic structure functions are given by the Bodek-Ritchie (BR), Bosted-Christy (BC)
or Parton Distribution Functions (PDF) prescriptions.

1. T2K

culation [80] does not include inelastic channels beyond
one-pion production.

In the T2K experiment, the neutrino ﬂux is peaked
at 0.6 GeV and the target used in the near detector is
carbon [4]. In ﬁg. 7 we show the CC-inclusive νµ−12C
double-diﬀerential cross section per nucleon versus the
muon momentum, pµ, for diﬀerent angular bins, folded
with the T2K ﬂux. The diﬀerent channels that contribute
to the cross section are shown separately. As observed,
the QE dominates the cross section for values of the scat-
tering angle (cid:38) 30◦, corresponding to values of muon mo-
mentum (cid:46) 1.5 GeV (panels on the ﬁrst and second rows).
As more forward kinematics are explored the muon mo-
mentum values allowed by kinematics get larger and the
relative contribution of the DIS is more and more impor-
tant (although not directly displayed in the ﬁgure, the
signiﬁcant contribution of this channel is clearly visible
by subtracting from the total prediction the contributions
of the other channels). This is clearly shown by observing
the panels on the lower rows. On the other hand, notice
that the contribution of the ∆, although smaller than the
QE + MEC one, is clearly visible for all kinematics.

Finally, the results shown by the red, blue and green
bands correspond to the sum of all channels using the
BC, BR and PDF parameterizations, respectively. As
observed, the predictions of the three models are rather
similar (only departing for some particular kinematics
at forward angles) and provide excellent agreement with
most of the data. Only at the most forward angles the
models tend to overstimate the data in the region of the
QE peak at the most forward angles and low pµ where
the scaling approach may fail. This can be addressed
using the RMF model.

In a recent work by Martini et al. [80] the same data
were analyzed using a model based on Random Phase
Approximation within the basis of a local Fermi gas cal-
culation. While the results of this study are very similar
to the ones presented here for cos θµ (cid:46)0.9, in spite of the
diﬀerent theoretical approach, at very forward angles a
better agreement with the data is achieved around the
QE peak, signalling that long-range RPA correlations,
which are absent in our model, play an important role at
these kinematics. On the other hand at high values of pµ
we get a better description of the data because the cal-

2. MINERvA

In MINERvA experiment the target is hydrocarbon
and the neutrino energy ﬂux is peaked at 3.5 GeV [43].
This value is much larger than the one corresponding to
T2K, so the contribution of the inelastic channel is ex-
pected to be much stronger in MINERvA. Here the data
are given in function of the longitudinal and transverse
muon momentum that are deﬁned as pL = pµ cos θµ and
pT = pµ sin θµ, with θµ the muon scattering angle. Ac-
cording to the MINERvA acceptance, the muon scatter-
ing angle is limited to θµ <20o and the muon momentum
to 1.5 GeV < pL <20 GeV, pT <2.5 GeV.

In ﬁgs. 8 and 9 we show the CC-inclusive νµ−12C
double-diﬀerential cross section per nucleon versus the
longitudinal or transverse momentum, pL, pT , for diﬀer-
ent momentum bins, folded with the MINERvA ﬂux. Re-
sults are very similar for the two parameterizations, BC
and BR, of the inelastic single-nucleon structure func-
tions. For this reason, we only show BC and PDF param-
eterizations. As the transverse momentum - and hence
the scattering angle - increases the DIS channel becomes
more important. This is clearly shown in the results pre-
sented in both ﬁgs. 8 and 9, and it is also consistent
with the behaviour shown in ﬁg. 5 for electron scatter-
ing. Notice that the theoretical predictions agree with
the general shape shown by the data, although a signiﬁ-
cant discrepancy is observed in the region where the QE
dominates (calculations underestimate data by around
25-30%).

In ﬁg. 10 we present the CC-inclusive νµ−12C single-
diﬀerential cross section per nucleon folded with the
MINERvA ﬂux. The panel on the left (right) shows
the cross section of the transverse pT (longitudinal pL)
component of the muon momentum. As in the previous
case for the double diﬀerential cross section, the model
QE+MEC+∆+DIS has been considered with two pa-
rameterizations, BC and PDF, for the inelastic nucleon
structure functions. The separate contributions of the
It
diﬀerent channels, QE + MEC and ∆ are shown.

11

FIG. 4. Double-diﬀerential inclusive cross section for e-12C scattering at given beam energies and scattering angles (labeled in
the panels). It is displayed in function of the transferred energy. The notation in the legend refers to Table I. Data from [66].

should be pointed out the relevance of the DIS contri-
bution in the whole range of momentum explored.
Its
contribution in the maximum of the cross section is of
the same order of even larger than the QE+MEC re-

sponse. Furthermore, whereas the DIS maximum is
clearly shifted to the right in the left panel (larger values
of pT ) compared with the QE+MEC and/or ∆, the oppo-
site occurs for pL (right panel), although here the shift

12

FIG. 5. Same as ﬁg. 4, except now showing the separate contributions for QE+MEC and ∆. Data from [66].

is much less pronounced. On the other hand, the two
prescriptions, BC and PDF, lead to minor discrepancies.
The diﬀerence between both bands are more noticeable
in ﬁg. 8 at higher transverse momenta, where the peak
is lower for PDF parameterization. In other cases, they
tend to overlap.

Finally, regarding the comparison with the experiment,
we observe that the models reproduce the general shape
and behavior of the data, although a signiﬁcant discrep-
ancy is shown in the maximum of the cross section. The-
oretical predictions underestimate data by ∼ 20%. This
result is consistent with the double diﬀerential cross sec-

13

FIG. 6. Same as ﬁg. 4, except now for oxygen (top panels), argon (middle) and calcium (bottom) and diﬀerent kinematics.
Data from [66].

tions presented in ﬁgs. 8 and 9. Comparing with MnvGe-
nie (tuned) from [43], QE + MEC contributions match
with the results portrayed in the paper and it seems to
indicate that the model predictions for the DIS and/or ∆

are too small for MINERvA kinematics, while they are
doing well for T2K. Although this can be connected with
the very diﬀerent neutrino energies involved in the two
experiments and the energy spectrum explored, further

14

FIG. 7. T2K CC inclusive ﬂux-averaged double-diﬀerential cross section per target nucleon in bins of the muon scattering angle
as function of the muon momentum. Legend as in previous ﬁgures (see Table I). Data taken from [4].

15

The CC-inclusive Minerva ﬂux-folded νµ-12C double diﬀerential cross section per nucleon in bins of the muon
FIG. 8.
transverse momentum. The cross section is displayed as a function of the muon longitudinal momentum. Legend referred to
Table I. Data taken from [43].

16

FIG. 9. Same as in ﬁg. 8, but with the cross section in bins of the muon longitudinal momentum and displayed against the
transverse component, pT . Data taken from [43].

17

FIG. 10. The CC-inclusive Minerva ﬂux-folded νµ-12C single diﬀerential cross section per nucleon as function of the muon
longitudinal (right) and transverse (left) momentum. Legend as in previous ﬁgures (see Table I). Data from [43].

studies are needed to clearly establish the validity of the
models and their applicability regime.

In previous studies [53], the prediction of the SuSAv2-
MEC has been tested versus antineutrino CC QE-like
MINERvA results.
In these cases, the results repro-
duce well the data without underestimation. Nonethe-
less, these data do not contain inelastic channels, unlike
the ones presented here.

3. MicroBooNE

In this experiment, the neutrino beam ﬂux is peaked at
∼ 0.8 GeV, and the target is liquid argon [2]. In ﬁg. 11 we
show the CC-inclusive νµ−40Ar double-diﬀerential cross
section per nucleon versus the muon momentum, pµ, for
diﬀerent angular bins, folded with the MicroBooNE ﬂux.
The same models used for T2K and MINERvA are con-
sidered here, and the isolated contributions of the dif-
ferent channels are also displayed. As observed, the dis-
crepancy introduced by the particular description of the
inelastic nucleon structure functions, BC or PDF, is neg-
ligible, i.e., the two color bands overlap for all kinemat-
ics. Similar results were observed also for BR. Concern-
ing the role played by the diﬀerent channels, it is clearly
shown that the QE regime gives the maximum contribu-
tion, approximately 55 − 60% of the total response. The
remaining 40 − 45% strength comes from the inelastic
channels that result necessary to explain the data. Con-
cerning the speciﬁc role of the ∆ and DIS both produce

a similar contribution in most of the cases. Only at the
most forward angles the ∆ response is around twice the
contribution of DIS. On the opposite, for larger angles,
although the global strength of both channels is similar,
the shape of the curves diﬀers a little, being the DIS
maximum located at smaller values of pµ.

Finally, the models provide in general a reasonable de-
scription of data. Because of the large error bands it is
diﬃcult to draw clear conclusions on the diﬀerent ingredi-
ents involved in the description of the process. However,
it is clearly observed that at backward angles the pre-
diction of the models is slightly shifted to lower values
of pµ compared with data, whereas the reverse occurs at
very forward angles. This behavior is consistent with the
MonteCarlo analysis for MicroBooNE [2] as well as with
the recent results of Ref. [80]. Moreover, the general
agreement between our calculations and data conﬁrms
also previous analyses based on simulations with GENIE
presented in [2].

4. ArgoNEUT

As for MicroBooNE, in the ArgoNEUT experiment the
target is liquid argon, but the neutrino (antineutrino)
beam ﬂux is peaked at much larger values. Results are
presented in ﬁgs. 12 and 13 where two diﬀerent neutrino
energy ﬂuxes have been considered.

In ﬁg. 12 we show the CC-inclusive νµ−40Ar single-
diﬀerential cross section per nucleon displayed in function

00.51.01.52.02.50510152025510152000.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.018

FIG. 11. The CC-inclusive MicroBooNE ﬂux-folded νµ-40Ar double diﬀerential cross section per nucleon in bins of the muon
scattering angle as function of the muon momentum. Legend as in previous ﬁgures (see Table I). Data taken from [2].

of the muon momentum (left), pµ, and the scattering an-
gle (right), θµ, folded with the ArgoNEUT ﬂux that is
peaked at 4.3 GeV. As in all the previous cases, the sep-
arate contribution of the diﬀerent channels is displayed.
The total response is presented as the red and blue bands
corresponding to two diﬀerent descriptions of the inelas-
tic nucleon structure functions: BR (blue band) and PDF

(red band). As observed, the BR prediction is larger.
This is in contrast with the results presented in the pre-
vious cases, and it is probably connected with the very
diﬀerent neutrino energy ﬂux involved in ArgoNEUT. We
do not show results for the BC parameterization as it
has been ﬁtted within a kinematical range, 0 ≤ Q2 ≤ 8
GeV2, much smaller than the Q2-values involved in this

analysis.

In ﬁg. 13 we show the cross sections but with the neu-
trino (antineutrino) beam ﬂux peaked at 9.6 (3.6) GeV.
In the case of neutrinos (left panels) the BR parame-
terization (blue band) leads to signiﬁcantly larger cross
sections. This is in accordance with the results in ﬁg. 12,
although here the relative discrepancy between the two
parameterizations has increased. This is connected with
the much larger value of the neutrino energy where the
ﬂux is peaked, namely 9.6 GeV versus 4.3 GeV. Note
also the signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the shape of the neu-
trino cross sections for the two neutrino ﬂuxes. On the
contrary, there is almost no diﬀerence between the pre-
dictions of the two parameterizations in the case of an-
tineutrinos (right panels).

Regarding comparison with the data, we observe that
the models underestimate neutrino cross sections, while
they agree nicely with antineutrinos. A basic diﬀerence
between both cases comes from the relative contribution
of the QE, MEC and ∆. Whereas these channels con-
tribute signiﬁcantly to the cross section (similarly to the
DIS) in the case of antineutrinos, being their role essen-
tial to explain the data, the opposite occurs for neutri-
nos, particularly with the neutrino beam ﬂux peaked at
larger values (ﬁg. 13). Here, the relative contribution of
QE, MEC and ∆ is very small, of the order of 15% or
less, compared with the DIS response. In the case of the
neutrino ﬂux peaked at smaller values (ﬁg. 12), the rela-
tive contribution of QE, MEC and ∆ channels increases
slightly. These results are consistent with the ones ob-
tained for MINERvA where the QE, MEC and ∆ chan-
nels were shown to play a very minor role compared with
the DIS at some kinematics. However, further analysis is
needed to understand these signiﬁcant discrepancies be-
tween theory and data for neutrinos and antineutrinos.
Diﬀerent models for ∆ contributions and further analysis
for inelastic contribution are presently in progress.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

A theoretical model capable of reproducing electron
scattering data across the whole energy spectrum, from
the quasielastic (QE) region up to deep inelastic scat-
tering (DIS), was developed by our group in Ref. [49].
This model is based on scaling/superscaling and incor-
porates the role of two-particle two-hole excitations (2p-
2h), ∆ and heavier nucleon resonances, as well as the
region of very high inelasticity (DIS). Theoretical predic-
tions have been shown to reproduce with high precision
electron scattering data for a large variety of kinematical
situations.

The superscaling model was also extended to the weak
interaction, but only taking into account the QE, 2p-2h
and ∆ resonance channels. In this work we have included
in the theoretical description new ingredients associated
with heavier nucleon resonances and deep inelastic scat-
tering. This is not straightforward as the axial character

19

of the weak interaction introduces a new inelastic single-
nucleon structure function, W3, which must be modeled
relying on the quark/parton model or other assumptions.
Diﬀerent options have been explored in this work. On the
one hand, we have used diﬀerent parameterizations con-
sidered in the literature, i.e., Bodek-Ritchie (BR) and
Bosted-Christy (BC), not only for the inelastic electro-
magnetic structure functions W1 and W2, but also for
W3, using a relation that connects W3 to W2 and the an-
tiquark distribution. On the other hand, the responses
have been calculated using Parton Distribution Functions
(PDF). Whereas the former SuSAv2-∆ approach is more
appropriate at intermediate-high energies , that is, the
region where the nucleon resonances are located (up to
invariant masses of about 2 GeV), the PDF description
works much better at the largest energy, the DIS region,
while it clearly fails at lower values.

The models have been ﬁrst applied to electron scatter-
ing providing in general a very good description of data
at very diﬀerent kinematics. Then, a systematic analy-
sis of weak processes has been performed by comparing
our predictions with available data for charged current
muon neutrino-nucleus reactions. The models have been
applied to the study of diﬀerent experiments: T2K, MIN-
ERvA, MicroBooNE, and ArgoNEUT. These involve car-
bon and argon as nuclear targets. It has been shown that,
as the neutrino energy ﬂuxes diﬀer signiﬁcantly, the rela-
tive contribution of the diﬀerent channels, QE, 2p-2h, ∆
and DIS strongly depends on the experiment.

For T2K, the channel that dominates is the QE one,
and the data in most of the kinematical situations are
well described by the models. Furthermore, at forward
angles the contribution of DIS gets larger, being crucial
to explain the experiment. Similar comments also ap-
ply to MicroBooNE, although here some discrepancies
between data and theoretical predictions are observed
at both backward and forward angles. This is consistent
with previous studies based on Monte Carlo analyses and
other theoretical calculations.

The situation is diﬀerent for the higher energy exper-
iments MINERvA and ArgoNEUT, where the DIS con-
tribution dominates in most of the kinematics explored.
Here, the theoretical predictions are clearly below the
data in the region where the cross sections reach their
maxima. This is strictly true in the case of neutrinos for
both MINERvA and ArgoNEUT. However, the models
provide an excellent description of ArgoNEUT data for
antineutrinos. This can be connected with the antineu-
trino energy ﬂux, rather diﬀerent from the neutrino ones
(peaked at signiﬁcantly larger values) and the particu-
lar role played by the diﬀerent channels. Whereas all of
them give sizeable (and not so diﬀerent) contributions
for antineutrinos, the DIS channel largely dominates for
neutrinos.

This work should be considered as a ﬁrst step in the
description of neutrino-nucleus scattering including the
energy spectrum ranging from QE up to DIS. This is
crucial to analyze neutrino oscillation experiments where

20

FIG. 12. The CC-inclusive ArgoNEUT ﬂux-integrated νµ-40Ar single diﬀerential cross section per argon nucleon, displayed as
function of the muon momentum (left panel) or the muon scattering angle (right). Legend as in previous ﬁgures (see Table I).
Data taken from [81].

the broad neutrino energy ﬂuxes require knowledge of
the contribution of the diﬀerent reaction channels.
In
this work, several approaches to the problem, particu-
larly concerning the axial W3 inelastic function, have
been explored. The present study shows clearly the appli-
cability of these approaches to describe weak processes,
but also their limitations. Although further studies are
needed with new models implemented, like the dynamical
coupled channels model (DCC) [31], we believe that this
work can provide helpful information for the analyses of
present and future experiments on neutrino oscillations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

the

part

I+D+i

This work

is
of
PID2020-114687GB-I00,
by

project
funded by
with Ref.
MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033,
Span-
the
ish Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovaci´on y Universidades
and ERDF (European Regional Development Fund)
under contracts FIS2017-88410-P and by the Junta de
Andalucia (grants No. FQM160, SOMM17/6105/UGR
and P20 01247) (J.A.C., GDM, JGR); it is supported in
part by the University of Tokyo ICRR’s Inter-University
Research Program FY2020 & FY2021 (J.A.C., M.B.B.,
J.G.R., G.D.M.), by the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme under the
Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 839481
(G.D.M.), by the Project BARM-RILO-20 of University
of Turin and from INFN, National Project NUCSYS
(M.B.B.).

[1] L. Alvarez-Ruso et al. (NuSTEC), Prog. Part. Nucl.

Phys. 100, 1 (2018), arXiv:1706.03621 [hep-ph].

[2] P. Abratenko, C. Adams, M. Alrashed, R. An, J. An-
thony, J. Asaadi, A. Ashkenazi, M. Auger, S. Balasubra-
manian, B. Baller, and et al., Physical Review Letters
123 (2019), 10.1103/physrevlett.123.131801.

[3] A. Filkins et al., Physical Review D 101, 112007 (2020),

arXiv: 2002.12496.

[4] K. Abe, J. Amey, C. Andreopoulos, L. Anthony,
M. Antonova, S. Aoki, A. Ariga, Y. Ashida, Y. Azuma,
S. Ban,
and et al., Physical Review D 98 (2018),
10.1103/physrevd.98.012004.

[5] R. Acciarri, C. Adams, J. Asaadi, B. Baller, T. Bolton,
C. Bromberg, F. Cavanna, E. Church, D. Edmunds,
A. Ereditato, and et al., Physical Review D 89 (2014),
10.1103/physrevd.89.112003.

0369121518212400.10.20.30.40.50.60.70510152025303500.020.040.060.080.10.120.140.160.180.20.2221

FIG. 13. The CC-inclusive ArgoNEUT ﬂux-integrated νµ(¯νµ)-40Ar single diﬀerential cross section per argon nucleon, displayed
as function of the muon momentum (top panels) or the muon scattering angle (bottom). Legend as in previous ﬁgures (see
Table I). Data taken from [5].

22

[6] A. A. Aguilar-Arevalo et al. (MiniBooNE Collaboration),

revc.69.035502.

Phys. Rev. D 81, 092005 (2010).

[7] M. A. Acero et al. (NOvA), Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 151803

(2019), arXiv:1906.04907 [hep-ex].

[8] R. Acciarri et al. (DUNE Collaboration),

(2016),

arXiv:1512.06148 [physics.ins-det].

[35] M. V. Ivanov, G. D. Megias, R. Gonzalez-Jimenez,
O. Moreno, M. B. Barbaro, J. A. Caballero, and T. W.
Donnelly, Journal of Physics G: Nuclear and Particle
Physics 43, 045101 (2016), arXiv: 1506.00801.

[36] M. Gl¨uck, E. Reya, and A. Vogt, The European Physical

[9] K. Abe et al. (Hyper-Kamiokande Proto-Collaboration),

Journal C 5, 461 (1998), arXiv: hep-ph/9806404.

(2018), arXiv:1805.04163 [physics.ins-det].

[10] J. Nieves, I. Ruiz Simo, and M. Vicente Vacas, Phys.

Lett. B 707, 72 (2012).

[11] J. Nieves, I. R. Simo, and M. J. V. Vacas, Phys. Rev. C

83, 045501 (2011).

[37] A. Bodek and U.-k. Yang, arXiv:1011.6592 [hep-ex,
physics:hep-ph, physics:nucl-ex, physics:nucl-th] (2013),
arXiv: 1011.6592.

[38] A. Bodek and J. L. Ritchie, Phys. Rev. D 24, 1400 (1981).
[39] M. E. Christy and P. E. Bosted, Phys. Rev. C 81, 055213

[12] M. Martini, M. Ericson, G. Chanfray, and J. Marteau,

(2010).

Phys. Rev. C 81, 045502 (2010).

[40] P. E. Bosted and M. E. Christy, Phys. Rev. C 77, 065206

[13] M. Martini, M. Ericson, and G. Chanfray, Phys. Rev. D

(2008).

85, 093012 (2012).

[14] K. Gallmeister, U. Mosel, and J. Weil, Phys. Rev. C 94,

035502 (2016).

[15] A. Meucci, M. B. Barbaro, J. A. Caballero, C. Giusti,

and J. M. Ud´ıas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 172501 (2011).

[16] A. Meucci and C. Giusti, Phys. Rev. D 89, 057302 (2014).
[17] N. Rocco, A. Lovato, and O. Benhar, Phys. Rev. Lett.

116, 192501 (2016).

[18] A. Lovato, S. Gandolﬁ, J. Carlson, S. C. Pieper, and
R. Schiavilla, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 082501 (2016).
[19] V. Pandey, N. Jachowicz, M. Martini, R. Gonz´alez-
Jim´enez, J. Ryckebusch, T. Van Cuyck, and N. Van Des-
sel, Phys. Rev. C 94, 054609 (2016).

[20] R. Gonz´alez-Jim´enez, A. Nikolakopoulos, N. Jachowicz,
and J. M. Ud´ıas, Phys. Rev. C 100, 045501 (2019).
[21] R. Gonz´alez-Jim´enez, M. B. Barbaro, J. A. Ca-
ballero, T. W. Donnelly, N. Jachowicz, G. D. Megias,
K. Niewczas, A. Nikolakopoulos, and J. M. Ud´ıas, Phys.
Rev. C 101, 015503 (2020).

[22] M. S. Athar and J. G. Morﬁn, arXiv:2006.08603 [hep-
(2020), arXiv:

ex, physics:hep-ph, physics:nucl-th]
2006.08603.

[23] D. Ruterbories et al., Physical Review D 99 (2019),

10.1103/physrevd.99.012004.

[41] K. Abe et al. (T2K Collaboration), Physical Review D
90, 052010 (2014), publisher: American Physical Society.
[42] Y. Nakajima et al. (SciBooNE Collaboration), Physical
Review D 83, 012005 (2011), publisher: American Phys-
ical Society.

[43] A. Filkins, D. Ruterbories, Y. Liu, Z. Ahmad Dar, F. Ak-
bar, O. Altinok, D. Andrade, M. Ascencio, A. Bashyal,
A. Bercellie, and et al., Physical Review D 101 (2020),
10.1103/physrevd.101.112007.

[44] R. Acciarri et al. (ArgoNeuT Collaboration), Physical

Review D 98, 052002 (2018), arXiv: 1804.10294.

[45] H.-C. Kim, S. Schramm, and C. J. Horowitz, Phys. Rev.

C 53, 2468 (1996), arXiv:nucl-th/9507006.

[46] O. Benhar, N. Farina, H. Nakamura, M. Sakuda, and
R. Seki, Phys. Rev. D 72, 053005 (2005), arXiv:hep-
ph/0506116.

[47] M. B. Barbaro, J. A. Caballero, T. W. Donnelly, and
C. Maieron, Physical Review C 69, 035502 (2004).
[48] C. Maieron, J. E. Amaro, M. B. Barbaro, J. A. Caballero,
T. W. Donnelly, and C. F. Williamson, Physical Review
C 80, 035504 (2009), arXiv: 0907.1841.

[49] G. Megias, J. Amaro, M. Barbaro, J. Caballero, and
T. Donnelly, Physical Review D 94 (2016), 10.1103/phys-
revd.94.013012.

[24] R. Gonz´alez-Jim´enez, K. Niewczas, and N. Jachowicz,

[50] T. W. Donnelly and I. Sick, Physical Review C 60,

Phys. Rev. D 97, 013004 (2018).

065502 (1999).

[25] R. Gonz´alez-Jim´enez, A. Nikolakopoulos, N. Jachowicz,
and J. M. Ud´ıas, Phys. Rev. C 100, 045501 (2019).
[26] M. Martini, M. Ericson, G. Chanfray, and J. Marteau,

Phys. Rev. C 80, 065501 (2009).

[27] E. Vagnoni, O. Benhar, and D. Meloni, Phys. Rev. Lett.

118, 142502 (2017), arXiv:1701.01718 [nucl-th].

[28] M. V. Ivanov, J. M. Udias, A. N. Antonov, J. A. Ca-
ballero, M. B. Barbaro, and E. M. d. Guerra, Physics
Letters B 711, 178 (2012).

[29] S. K. Singh, M. J. Vicente-Vacas, and E. Oset, Phys.
Lett. B 416, 23 (1998), [Erratum: Phys.Lett.B 423, 428
(1998)].

[30] C. Praet, O. Lalakulich, N. Jachowicz, and J. Rycke-

busch, Phys. Rev. C 79, 044603 (2009).

[31] S. X. Nakamura, H. Kamano, and T. Sato, Phys. Rev.

D 92, 074024 (2015).

[32] M. B. Barbaro, A. De Pace, and L. Fiume, Universe 7,

140 (2021), arXiv:2104.10472 [hep-ph].

[33] J. E. Amaro, M. B. Barbaro, J. A. Caballero, T. W.
Donnelly, A. Molinari, and I. Sick, Phys. Rev. C 71,
015501 (2005).

[34] M. B. Barbaro, J. A. Caballero, T. W. Donnelly, and
C. Maieron, Physical Review C 69 (2004), 10.1103/phys-

[51] G. D. Megias, J. E. Amaro, M. B. Barbaro, J. A. Ca-
ballero, T. W. Donnelly, and I. R. Simo, Phys. Rev. D
94, 093004 (2016).

[52] G. D. Megias, M. B. Barbaro, J. A. Caballero, J. E.
Amaro, T. W. Donnelly, I. R. Simo, and J. W. V. Orden,
J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 46, 015104 (2018).

[53] G. Megias, M. Barbaro, J. Caballero,
(2019),

Physical Review D 99
revd.99.113002.

and S. Dolan,
10.1103/phys-

[54] R. Gonzal´ez-Jim´enez, G. D. Megias, M. B. Barbaro, J. A.
Caballero, and T. W. Donnelly, Phys. Rev. C 90, 035501
(2014), arXiv:1407.8346 [nucl-th].

[55] J. E. Amaro, M. B. Barbaro, J. A. Caballero, T. W.
Donnelly, and C. F. Williamson, Phys. Lett. B 696, 151
(2011), arXiv:1010.1708 [nucl-th].

[56] I. Ruiz Simo, J. E. Amaro, M. B. Barbaro, A. De Pace,
J. A. Caballero, and T. W. Donnelly, J. Phys. G 44,
065105 (2017), arXiv:1604.08423 [nucl-th].

[57] J. E. Amaro, M. B. Barbaro, J. A. Caballero,
R. Gonz´alez-Jim´enez, G. D. Megias, and I. R. Simo,
Journal of Physics G: Nuclear and Particle Physics 47,
124001 (2020).

[58] J. E. Amaro, M. B. Barbaro, J. A. Caballero, T. W.

23

Donnelly, R. Gonzalez-Jimenez, G. D. Megias,
and
I. R. Simo, Eur. Phys. J. ST 230, 4321 (2021),
arXiv:2106.02857 [hep-ph].

of Nuclear and Particle Science 51, 189 (2001),
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.nucl.51.101701.132312.
[71] A. Bodek and J. L. Ritchie, Physical Review D 23, 1070

[59] T. W. Donnelly and I. Sick, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3212

(1981).

(1999), arXiv:nucl-th/9809063.

[60] J. Jourdan, Nucl. Phys. A 603, 117 (1996).
[61] M. B. Barbaro, R. Cenni, A. De Pace, T. W. Don-
nelly, and A. Molinari, Nucl. Phys. A 643, 137 (1998),
arXiv:nucl-th/9804054.

[62] G. D. Megias, PhD Thesis (2017).
[63] A. D. Pace, M. Nardi, W. M. Alberico, T. W. Donnelly,
and A. Molinari, Nuclear Physics A 726, 303 (2003).
[64] G. D. Megias, T. W. Donnelly, O. Moreno, C. F.
Williamson, J. A. Caballero, R. Gonz´alez-Jim´enez,
A. De Pace, M. B. Barbaro, W. M. Alberico, M. Nardi,
and J. E. Amaro, Phys. Rev. D 91, 073004 (2015).
[65] I. R. Simo, C. Albertus, J. E. Amaro, M. B. Barbaro,
J. A. Caballero, and T. W. Donnelly, Phys. Rev. D 90,
033012 (2014).

[66] O. Benhar, D. Day, and I. Sick, arXiv:nucl-ex/0603032

(2006), arXiv: nucl-ex/0603032.

[67] W. Alberico, M. Barbaro, S. Bilenky, J. C. C. Giunti,
C. Maieron, E. Moya de Guerra, and J. Ud´ıas, Nucl.
Phys. A 623, 471 (1997).

[68] J. D. Bjorken, Physical Review 179, 1547 (1969).
[69] C. G. Callan and D. J. Gross, Phys. Rev. Lett. 22, 156

(1969).

[70] D. H. Beck and R. D. McKeown, Annual Review

[72] A. G. Tooran, A. Khorramian,
Phys. Rev. C 99, 035207 (2019).

and H. Abdolmaleki,

[73] H. Haider, M. Sajjad Athar, S. K. Singh, and I. Ruiz

Simo, Nuclear Physics A 940, 138 (2015).

[74] J. H. Kim et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3595 (1998).
[75] CCFR Collaboration, J. H. Kim, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.

79, 1213 (1997).

[76] M. Ghermann, R. G. Ross, and M. R. Whalley, J. Phys.

G 25, 12 (1999).

[77] A. Bodek, M. Breidenbach, D. L. Dubin, J. E. Elias, J. I.
Friedman, H. W. Kendall, J. S. Poucher, E. M. Riordan,
M. R. Sogard, D. H. Coward, and D. J. Sherden, Phys.
Rev. D 20, 1471 (1979).

[78] S. Stein, W. B. Atwood, E. D. Bloom, R. L. A. Cottrell,
H. DeStaebler, C. L. Jordan, H. G. Piel, C. Y. Prescott,
R. Siemann, and R. E. Taylor, Phys. Rev. D 12, 1884
(1975).

[79] Y. Liang et al., arXiv:nucl-ex/0410027 (2004).
[80] M. Martini, M. Ericson,
and G. Chanfray,
arXiv:2202.08094 [hep-ph].

(2022),

[81] C. Anderson et al. (ArgoNeuT), Phys. Rev. Lett. 108,

161802 (2012), arXiv:1111.0103 [hep-ex].

