1 

A comprehensive study on the processing of Co:ZnO ceramics: defect 
chemistry engineering and grain growth kinetics  

R. T. da Silvaa, J. M. Morbecb‡, G. Rahmanc†, and H. B. de Carvalhod* 

a Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto – UFOP, 35400-000 Ouro Preto, MG, Brazil. 
b School of Chemical and Physical Sciences, Keele University, Keele ST5 5BG, United Kingdom 
c Department of Physics, Quaid-i-Azam University, 45320 Islamabad, Pakistan. 
d Universidade Federal de Alfenas - UNIFAL, 37130-000 Alfenas, Brazil. 

Corresponding Authors: 
‡ j.morbec@keele.ac.uk 
† gulrahman@qau.edu.pk. 
* hugo.carvalho@unifal-mg.edu.br.  

ABSTRACT:  In this report we present a systematic study on the preparation of Co:ZnO ceramics 
via  standard  solid-state  route  from  different  Co  precursors  (Co3O4,  CoO  and  metallic  Co)  and 
atmospheres (O2 and Ar). Particular emphasis was done on the defect chemistry engineering and 
on the sintering growth kinetics. First-principles calculations based on density functional theory 
were employed to determine the formation energy of the main point defects in ZnO and Co:ZnO 
systems.  Based on the theoretical  results a set of chemical reactions was proposed. A detailed 
microstructural  characterization  was  performed  in  order  to  determine  the  degree  of  Co 
incorporation into the ZnO lattice. The samples prepared in Ar atmosphere and from metallic Co 
presents the highest Co solubility limit (lower apparent Co incorporation activation energy) due to 
the incongruent ZnO decomposition. The determination of the parameters of the sintering growth 
kinetics reveals that Co3O4 is the best sintering additive in order to achieve higher densities in both 
sintering atmospheres. The results give evidences that the sintering in O2 is effective in promoting 
zinc vacancies in the ZnO structure, while the sintering in Ar promotes zinc interstitial defects. 
Our findings give valuable contribution to the understanding of the preparation of Co-doped ZnO 
ceramics and the sintering growth kinetics, what would allow to improve the state of the art on the 
processing of the material at both bulk and nanometric scales. 

KEYWORDS:  Multifunctionality, Zinc oxide, Defect engineering, Growth kinetics.  

1  INTRODUCTION 

ZnO is one of the truly multifunctional material due to its extensive and interesting physical 

and electrochemical properties. The optimization of the ZnO properties for a particular application, 

the ZnO functionalization, takes place mainly via defect engineering, by doping or even by the 

introduction  of  defects  into  the  structural  lattice  in  a  well-controlled  manner  [1].  Specifically, 

transition metal (TM) doped ZnO has been explored as a dilute magnetic semiconductor (DMS) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

to be used as spin injection layer into spintronic semiconductor devices. Spintronics is attracting 

considerable attention in the last decades by potentially implement new data storage and quantum 

computing devices [2-5]. However, the obtained results, regarding the nature of the usual observed 

room  temperature  ferromagnetism  (RTFM),  are  very  controversial.  In  addition  to  the  trivial 

extrinsic  origins  of  the  RTFM  that  result  from  the  ferromagnetic  secondary  phases,  the  main 

theoretical  models  that  are  currently  available  for  describing  the  origins  and  properties  of  the 

observed  RTFM  are  all  linked  to  structural  defects  [6-11].  This  linkage  explains  why  the 

ferromagnetic properties are rarely reproducible. Before elucidating the mechanisms of intrinsic 

FM,  the  measured  magnetic  hysteresis  loops  must  be  classified  as  intrinsic  or  extrinsic. 

Contamination  by  magnetic  elements  [12],  measurement  errors  [13]  and  segregated  secondary 

phases [14, 15] can all cause ferromagnetic signals.  

From  the  theoretical point  of  view,  different  models  have been proposed  to  explain  the 

usual  observed  RTFM  in  DMS’s.  Here,  the  main  accepted  model  for  insulating  systems  is  the 

bound magnetic polaron (BMP) theory [16] were the ferromagnetic exchange coupling among the 

TM doping elements is mediated by shallow donor electrons. These defects form bound magnetic 

polarons, which overlap  to create  a spin-split impurity band.  For the particular case of the Co-

doped ZnO, the Co2+ ions can hybridize effectively with shallow-donor impurity bands in ZnO 

because the states related to the complex Co+ (Co2+ + e−

donor) are also of shallow-donor character 

[17].  Considering  the  question  about  the  nature  of  the  necessary  shallow-donor  defect,  several 

experimental reports argue that the RTFM in the TM-doped ZnO system, explained in terms of 

the BMP model, is associated to oxygen vacancies (VO) [18-21]. In fact, the defect state related to 

VO in the wurtzite ZnO structure has a donor character, however it is a deep-donor state [22, 23]. 

Although  states  of  deeper-donors  can  hybridize  to  magnetic  dopants,  their  smaller  Bohr  radius 

would require relatively  higher dopant and defect concentrations to achieve a necessary spatial 

overlapping,  however  at  such  short-range  antiferromagnetic  superexchange  interactions  would 

take  place.  Instead,  the  most  promising  shallow-donor  defect  in  the  ZnO  structure  is  the  zinc 

3 

interstitials (Zni) [22, 24]. From the experimental point of view, there are a growing number of 

reports in the literature giving clear evidences of  the relation between the  observed RTFM and 

defects at the zinc sites [11, 25-27].  

Nanostructured TM-doped ZnO has also been considered for biomedical applications due 

to its low-toxicity in bioimaging and drug delivery systems [28], and as antibacterial agent [29] . 

However, it is a well-known fact that the incorporation of dopant at nanoscale is a very difficult 

task  [30],  even  for  highly  soluble  dopants,  the  incorporation  of  a  significant  amount  of  dopant 

atoms  during  synthesis  is  not  straightforward.  Even  when  dopants  are  incorporated,  their 

concentration is typically an order of magnitude less than in the growth solution [31]. These results 

have led to theoretical efforts to understand the mechanisms that control the doping process [32]. 

An interesting strategy to overcome this problem is the top-down approach, where the preparation 

of nanostructured materials is performed via, for example, mechanical milling of bulk materials 

[33, 34]. At the bulk scale a homogeneous distribution of the dopants can be achieved before the 

subsequent  reduction  in  the  dimensionality.  The  gridding  would  lead  also  to  surfaces  of  the 

nanoparticles with a high degree of defects, that can enhance particular desired properties, like the 

necessary visible fluorescence in bioimaging [35, 36]. 

Therefore,  the  study  and  determination  of  the phase  diagram  of  ZnO  and  TM  oxides  is 

important  to  assure  the  synthesis  of  TM-doped  ZnO  (Zn1-xTMxO)  magnetic  semiconductor. 

Besides, the controlling of the presence and the density of specific point defects is necessary in 

order to tune the desired properties and functionalities in the development of the aforementioned 

technologies.  Also,  the  knowledge  of  the  sintering  kinetics  parameters  and  its  correlations  are 

fundamental in the processing of bulk material,  and in its eventual reduction of dimensionality 

down to the nanoscale. In this context, the aim of the present report is to give further contribution 

in the understanding of the Co incorporation process into the wurtzite ZnO (w-ZnO) lattice, and 

how it can affect some important properties of the material, such as their sintering kinetics. Here 

Co:ZnO  samples  were prepared  from  different  Co precursor  (Co3O4,  CoO,  and  metallic  Co) in 

  
4 

different sintering atmosphere (oxygen and argon). First-principles calculations were performed 

to  give  support  to  the  defect  chemical  analysis  and  insight  into  the  mechanisms  of  the  Co 

incorporation  in  the  ZnO.  A  detailed  structural  characterization  was  employed  by  conjugating 

several  different  techniques  to  determine  the  structures  of  the  samples,  the  Co  apparent 

incorporation activation energy, and the grain growth kinetic parameters.  

2  EXPERIMENTAL AND THEORETICAL METHODS 

  Polycrystalline  Co:ZnO  samples  were  prepared  via  solid-state  reaction  method. 

Stoichiometric amounts of high purity powders of ZnO (Alfa Aesar 99.99% purity), and different 

Co precursor sources: Co3O4 (Alfa Aeser, 99.7% purity), CoO (Sigma Aldrich 99.99% purity), 

metallic Co (Sigma Aldrich, 99.9% purity). The samples prepared with Co3O4, CoO, and metallic 

Co  was  labeled  as  Co3O4:ZnO,  CoO:ZnO,  and  mCo:ZnO,  respectively.  All  the  samples  were 

prepared with Co atomic concentration of 8 at.% in respect of the cationic sites of a potential single 

phase Zn1-xCoxO (Co-doped w-ZnO), it means x = NCo /(NCo + NZn) = 0.08 (N is the number of 

atoms). The precursors were manually mixed and ground in a planetary ball mill (Retsch PM 100) 

using tungsten carbide jar and spheres at rotation speed of 500 RPM for 4 h, the ratio between the 

masses of the spheres and the powder was kept at 13:1. Isopropyl alcohol was also added to the 

samples in order to optimize a grinding process. The resulting powder was dried and sintered in 

oxygen (O2) or argon (Ar) atmospheres in the temperature range of 600 to 1200 °C for 4 h with 

heat/cooling rate of 10 °C/min. Flowchart in Figure 1 illustrates the procedure employed in the 

preparation of the samples.   

The  crystal  structures  of  the  Co:ZnO  powders  were  investigated  by  X-ray  diffraction 

(XRD) performed in the range of 2θ = 15°−120° in steps of 0.02° at 7 s/step using Cu-Kα radiation 

(λ = 1.542 Å) in a Rigaku Ultima IV diffractometer.  The determination of the lattice parameters 

and  the  occupation  factor  over  the  structure  were  evaluated  using  the  Rietveld  method  as 

implemented  by  the  General  Structure  Analysis  System  (GSAS)  software  package  with  the 

graphical user interface EXPGUI [37, 38]. Raman spectroscopy was also used to add information 

 
5 

about  the  Co  doping  and  the  resulting  lattice  disorder,  as  well  as  to  analyze  the  formation  of 

segregated secondary phases. Photoluminescence (PL) measurements were performed in order to 

directly check the Co incorporation into the w-ZnO lattice. Both Raman and PL measurements 

were carried out at room temperature on a modular spectrometer consisting of an Olympus B-X41 

microscope and a Horiba iHR550 monochromator at the backscattered photon detection geometry. 

A 532 nm B&W Tek solid-state laser was used as source of excitation. The morphology and the 

grain size distribution of the sintered samples were evaluated via scanning electron microscope 

(SEM) in a Hitachi S-4800 FEG-SEM.  

Figure  1.  (a) Flowchart  of  the  preparation  of the  Co:ZnO  samples.  (b)  Schematic representation  of  the 
rotating ball milling showing impact milling actions. 

The defects formation energies in the Co:ZnO system were also investigated by means of 

first-principles  calculations based  on  density  functional  theory  (DFT)  [39].  We  used  the  Siesta 

code  [40],  which  employs  norm-conserving  Troullier–Martins  pseudopotentials  and  linear 

combinations  of  atomic  orbitals 

[41].  We  used  norm-conserving  Troullier-Marting 

pseudopotentials and a double-zet set with polarization functions (DZP) for all atoms with a real-

space energy cutoff of 200 Ry. We considered w-ZnO cluster with 80 atoms (40 Zn and 40 O), 

simulated within the supercell approach with a vacuum of ~10 Å between the cluster and its image. 

The dangling bonds at the surface were kept unsaturated and the atoms were allowed to relax to 

their minimum energy configurations. All atomic positions were fully relaxed until the forces on 

each atom were smaller than 0.02 eV Å−1. 

 
 
 
6 

3  RESULTS AND SISCUSSION 

3.1  First principles calculations and defect chemistry 

The defect chemistry is a power toll in the understanding of the properties of materials and 

in their development, especially for ceramics. Nevertheless, it is a difficult task to determine which 

exact reaction occurs during a specific processing. The case of ZnO is not different. Considering 

the  cobalt  doping  of  the  w-ZnO  lattice  using  different precursors  and  different  temperatures  of 

sintering and atmospheres, several different possible defect chemical reactions are possible. To get 

the  right  direction  and  reach  the  right  chemical  reaction  set  of  equations,  some  theoretical  and 

experimental considerations have to be taken into account.  

Figure 2(a) presents the  calculated  formation energies (Ef)  for the main point defects in               

w-ZnO (most common reported): oxygen vacancy (VO), zinc interstitial (Zni), zinc vacancy (VZn) 

[42, 43], for the cobalt incorporation into the w-ZnO lattice (CoZn), and the same point defects in 

the  presence  of  cobalt  already  incorporated  in  the  w-ZnO  (VO+Co,  Zni+Co  and  VZn+Co).  Zinc 

oxide  is  an  unintentional  n-type  semiconductor,  and  its  conductivity  was considered  for  a  long 

time to be due to zinc excess in the non-stoichiometric compound Znl+δO, with zinc interstitials 

(Zni) been the dominating lattice defects [44]. However, Zni, in spite of been a sallow-donor defect 

[11,  23],    has  a  relatively  high  Ef  in  the  pristine  w-ZnO  lattice  in  both  zinc-  and  oxygen-rich 

conditions. Further theoretical results also demonstrate Zni has a low migration barrier of 0.57 eV 

[23].  Besides,  VO  have  a  relatively  low  Ef,  but  it  is  still  high  in  Zn-rich  condition  (Figure  2). 

Different from Zni, VO is a deep-donor defect [11, 23], and as a consequence it cannot provide 

electrons  to  the  conduction-band  by  thermal  excitation.  Consequently,  the  observed  n-type 

conductivity cannot be attributed to the VO. In fact, the nature of the n-type conductivity in ZnO is 

still a matter of debate. However, unintentional hydrogen doping in ZnO has been considered a 

more likely electron source [45]. The Ef of VZn is relatively higher as compared to that of the VO. 

VZn are deep-acceptor defects [11, 23], and thus it is unlikely that VZn can play any role in p-type 

conductivity.  Our  results  also  demonstrate  that  the  Co  incorporation  into  the  w-ZnO  are 

7 

energetically  favorable  in  both  zinc-  and  oxygen-rich  conditions,  what  explains  the  achieved 

relatively high Co solubility limit in the w-ZnO lattice [46]. Considering the Co-doped w-ZnO, the 

obtained Ef for the analyzed point defects (Zni, VO, and VZn) changes drastically, all of them are 

now  energetically  favorable.  To  address  more  properly  the  changes  Figure  2(b)  presents  the 

difference in the Ef for each point defect between the pristine and the Co-doped w-ZnO systems. 

We observe that the main differences are related to the O-rich condition, and that VZn is the most 

affected defect by the Co-doping in both conditions. These results indicate that the processing of 

the Co:ZnO system would be quite different from that of pure w-ZnO, and it would lead to a quite 

different  defect  structure  and physical-chemical  properties  that  could be  engineered  in  order  to 

achieve functionalities that cannot be possible, or at least difficult, in the undoped w-ZnO.      

Figure 2. (a) Calculated formation energies (Ef) in Zn-rich and O-rich conditions for native point defects 
in pristine ZnO (Zni, VO, VZn and CoZn) and Co-doped w-ZnO (Zni+Co, VO+Co, and VZn+Co). (b) Difference 
between the defect formation energy for pristine ZnO and the Co-doped ZnO (∆Ef = Ef,ZnO – Ef,Co:ZnO). 

Facing these results, we proceed into defining the set of more plausible chemical reactions 

for our set of Co-doped w-ZnO samples. In spite of the calculated high Ef for Zni in both conditions 

(4.27 and 7.44 eV at Zn-rich and O-rich conditions, respectively), experimentally it was observed 

that  under  heat  treatment  between  300−800  °C  and  at  lower  oxygen  partial  pressures,  w-ZnO 

decomposes incongruently by first formatting VO, that has a lower Ef of only 0.7 eV at Zn-rich 

condition, on the surfaces of the material. Once the zinc atoms become mobile (Zni are much more 

mobile than VO [23]), the zinc can be dissolved into the ZnO lattice as Zni according to Equation 

(1) [47, 48]. With the presence of the Co, both defects, Zni and VO, are energetically feasible, and 

 
 
 
 
8 

the ZnO incongruent decomposition (Equation (1)) become more intense. Our previous report on 

the Co-doped ZnO samples confirms, via photoluminescence and dc-electrical measurements, an 

increase of the Zni concentration under heat treatment performed in reducing atmosphere [11]. The 

w-ZnO  incongruent  decomposition  ends  up  leading  to  Zn-rich  environment,  allowing  us  to 

consider the sintering performed in Ar in this work comparable to the Zn-rich condition in our 

theoretical DFT calculations presented above. On the other hand, the sintering in O2 may lead to 

the oxygen adsorption and the formation of mainly VZn as described in Equation (2). Our calculated 

Ef  of  the  VZn  is  relatively  high,  2.83  eV,  which  makes  the  process  described  in  Equation  (2) 

unprobeable.  In  fact,  this  process  would  lead  to  the  creation  of  holes  ( h γ )  in  the  valence  band 

decreasing the w-ZnO n-type conductivity, which has not yet reported. However, with the Co the 

Ef of the VZn changes drastically, assuming the value of −7.1 eV. Thus, we consider the reaction 

described in Equation (2) in support to the following analysis.   

ZnO

↔ +
Zn

γγ
i

1
2

+
O 2
2

e'                                                                   (1)   

1
2

O

2

↔ +
O

×
O

ZnV''

γ

2+

  h                                                                   (2) 

The  CoO-ZnO  solid  solution  is  described  in  Equation  (3).  Once  the  CoO  has  the  same            

w-ZnO stoichiometry, the reaction is independent on the processing atmosphere and on the w-ZnO 

previous defect structure. The Co incorporation into the w-ZnO via CoO as a precursor also does 

not promote any additional specific point defects. In turn, for the Co3O4-ZnO solid solution one 

has  to  take  into  account  the  sintering  atmosphere.  The  Co3O4  crystallize  in  a  normal  spinel 

structure with Co2+ and Co3+ located at tetrahedral and octahedral sites, respectively [49]; and for 

a  defect  chemistry  analysis  it  can  be  thought  as  a  composition  of  CoO  and  Co2O3, 

Co O
3

4

↔

+
CoO Co O
3

2

 [50]. In Ar (low oxygen pressure) with relatively high Zni concentration 

(Equation (1)), the Co incorporation (from Co3O4) is properly described via Equations (3) and (4). 

Here the Co incorporation into the w-ZnO lattice leads to the increase of the electron concentration 

(n). Besides, in O2 atmosphere the main process is related to the oxygen incorporation with the Co 

          
                                                         
 
9 

taking  the  Zn  sites  leading  to  formation  of  VZn.  However,  we  have  also  to  consider  that 

experimentally  it  is  observed  in  Co-doped  w-ZnO  samples  prepared  form  Co3O4  in  O-rich 

condition that the Co3+, taking the place of the Zn2+ in the w-ZnO lattice, undergoes a reduction 

process assuming the +2 oxidation state by taking a free electron from conduction-band, reducing 

the  w-ZnO  n-type  conductivity  [6,  8,  11,  46].  In  such  case,  the  entire  process  is  described  by 

Equations (2), (3) and (5).  

CoO

ZnO
→

Co

+×
Zn

×                                                         (3) 
O
O

Co O
2

3

ZnO
→

2Co

γ
Zn

+

2

e'

+

2O

×
O

+

1
2

O

2

                                            (4) 

Co O 2
3

+ →

e'

2

ZnO

×
2Co
Zn

+

×
3O
O

+

ZnV''                                           (5) 

Considering the metallic Co insertion into the w-ZnO lattice the scenario is quite different, 

the process involves the oxidation of the Co atom. In Ar atmosphere, the Co incorporation takes 

place by sitting in the Zn site and forming VO. Here, we have to consider a probable oxidation of 

the metallic Co once placed in an oxide matrix, and that, as pointed before, VO is a deep-donor 

defect, its ionization is quite unlikely. In such situation, the Co-doping of the w-ZnO lattice can be 

described by Equation (6) with no changes in the w-ZnO n-type conductivity. In the O2 atmosphere 

we infer that the main process corresponds to the oxygen adsorption described in Equation (2), 

followed for the Co filling the zinc vacant site, with the holes compensated by the electrons related 

to the Co oxidation process. These processes are simply described by Equation (7).  

Co  → ZnCo''

ZnO

γγ
+ →
V
O

Co

×
Zn

+

×
V
O

                                                          (6) 

+
3Co 2O

→

Co O
3

4

2

ZnO

→ ZnCo +×

2Co

γ
Zn

4O+

+×
O

ZnV''                               (7) 

In  summary,  the  defect  chemistry  of  the  Co-doped  w-ZnO  is  very  rich  and  diverse, 

depending on the precursor, CoO, Co3O4 or metallic Co, and on the atmosphere. Besides the total 

Co incorporation into the w-ZnO lattice, different point defects are introduced, leading to changes 

of the electron band structure, corresponding to changes in the w-ZnO electrical transport, optical 

and magnetic properties.      

                                                            
                                             
 
                                               
                                                  
 
                                
10 

3.2  Studies on the Co incorporation into the w-ZnO lattice:  

Figure 3 presents the XRD patterns for the mCo:ZnO set of samples prepared in O2 (Figure 

3(a)) and in Ar (Figure 3(b)) up to 1000 °C. The XRD data for all the Co:ZnO set of samples are 

presented in the supplementary file (Figures S1, S2, and S3). The observed diffraction pattern for 

all the samples sintered in O2 and Ar at 1000 ºC and at higher temperatures reveals, within the 

detection limit of the technique, only the characteristic diffraction peaks corresponding to those 

for  w-ZnO  lattice  (ICDD  crystal  chart  no.  36-1451).  No  segregated  phases  were  detected, 

indicating that at around 1000 °C and higher temperatures the Co atoms are taking the place of the 

Zn  in  the  w-ZnO  lattice  forming  the  ternary  compound  Zn1-xCoxO  (substitutive  doping).  For 

samples sintered at temperatures below 1000 ºC, in both atmospheres, it is observed, besides the 

w-ZnO diffraction pattern, the presence of diffraction peaks associated with metallic Co and Co 

oxides  (CoO  and  Co3O4).  Qualitatively,  it  is  observed  that  the  diffraction  peaks  related  to  the 

secondary  phases  decreases  in  intensity  with  increasing  temperature  of  sintering.  However,  the 

dynamics of the Co incorporation into the w-ZnO lattice is distinct as considering the atmosphere 

of sintering and the different precursors, thus indicating that the incorporation is quite sensitive to 

these parameters.  

Figure 3. X-Ray diffraction pattern for the mCo-ZnO set of samples prepared in (a) oxygen (O2) and (b) 
argon (Ar) atmospheres up to 1000 °C.   

Rietveld refinement of the XRD data was performed to quantify the lattice parameters, the 

phase percentages (w-ZnO, metallic Co, CoO and Co3O4) and the elemental occupation factors 

 
 
 
 
11 

into the w-ZnO structure for the  elements Zn, Co and O  for  each set of samples. The obtained 

results are presented in Table S1−S6 in the supplementary file. We observe that the occupation 

factor for the Co into the w-ZnO lattice, which is assumed as the effective concentration of cobalt 

incorporated  into  the  ZnO  matrix  (xE),  increases  as  the  temperature  of  sintering  increases.  It 

reaches the maximum nominal concentration of 8 at.% for temperatures around  900−1000 °C. 

Figure 4 shows the calculated unit cell volume (V in Table S2, S4 and S6) as a function of the 

obtained effective Co concentration incorporated in the w-ZnO lattice in our samples (xE in Table 

S1, S3 and S5). We observe a slight linear increase of V as a function of xE, as expected by the 

Vegard's  law  for  solid  state  solutions,  indicating  the  Co  incorporation  into  the  w-ZnO  lattice. 

Nevertheless, the increase in the cell volume is not expected, since the ionic radii of tetrahedrally 

coordinated  Co2+  (rCo  =  0.58  Å)  is  slightly  smaller  than  that  for  Zn2+  in  the  w-ZnO  structure                 

(rZn = 0.60 Å) [51]. Such kind of behavior was already reported by Kolesnik et al. [52]. Here we 

attribute this unexpected result to the induced structural defects promoted by the Co incorporation. 

However, further studies are necessary to address this point. 

Figure 4. Variation of the w-ZnO lattice volume (V) as a function of the Co effective concentration (xE) 
incorporated into the w-ZnO lattice for the set of samples prepared in (a) oxygen (O2) and (b) argon (Ar) 
atmospheres. The linear behavior of V × xE is consistent with the Vegard’s law. 

In order to complement the structural characterization of the samples we performed Raman 

 
 
 
 
12 

scattering spectroscopy measurements. Figure 5 presents the obtained spectra for the mCo:ZnO 

set of samples prepared in O2 (Figure 5(a)) and in Ar (Figure 5(b)) up to 1000 °C. Figure S4 in the 

supplementary file present the measured spectra for the CoO:ZnO and Co3O4:ZnO set of samples. 

The  modes  at  98,  330,  384  and  435  cm-1  are  associated  with  first  and  second  order  modes 

characteristic of the w-ZnO and correspond to the modes E2L, 2E2L at the M-point of the Brillouin 

zone (BZ), A1(TO) e E2H,  respectively [46, 53]. The modes related to cobalt oxides are also shown 

in Figure 5. The indexation of the cobalt oxide modes was performed after measure the spectrum 

for the raw precursors (Figure S5). An important observed feature is the presence of modes above                             

700 cm-1 and the relative high intensity of the mode at ~522 cm-1 (open stars in Figure 5). As can 

be seen in Figure S5, these features are not present in the raw cobalt oxide precursors, instead, they 

are clearly observed in the spectra for Zn-doped cobalt oxides, indicating an interdiffusion of the 

cations between the w-ZnO and cobalt oxides (CoO and Co3O4) during sample processing.  

Figure 5. Raman scattering spectra for the mCo:ZnO set of samples prepared in (a) oxygen (O2) and (b) 
argon (Ar) atmospheres up to 1000 °C. The spectra were acquired at room temperature and are normalized 
by integrated area of the E2H vibrational mode obtained by gaussian fit of the spectra. The stars (symbols) 
indicate the cobalt oxide related modes. The modes marked with the open stars indicate the Zn-doping of 
the CoO and Co3O4. 

As the temperature of sintering increases the modes related to the cobalt oxides decreases 

indicating a progressive Co incorporation into the w-ZnO lattice. It is also important to note the 

emergence of a broadband between 500 and 600 cm-1 as the temperature of sintering increases. 

This broadband consists of the convolution of several modes, but the main ones are centered ~550 

and ~580 cm-1. The peak in 580 cm-1 is assigned to the overlapping between the A1(LO) and E1(LO) 

 
  
 
 
13 

modes, however the peak in 550 cm-1 cannot be attributed in any of the w-ZnO vibrational modes, 

it is indexed as AM (additional mode) in the spectra. The observation of this broad band and its 

dependence  on  the  dopant  concentration  is  well  report  on  the  literature  for  doped  w-ZnO  with 

different  elements,  including  Mn  [7,  9,  54]  and  Co  [6,  32,  46],  and  its  nature  is  correlate  to 

structural disorder/distortions induced by the incorporation of dopants into the w-ZnO lattice [55]. 

Consequently, the observation of the broadband for our samples and its increase as the temperature 

of  sintering  is  raised  is  an  indication  that  a  growing  fraction  of  the  Co  atoms  is  successively 

incorporated into the w-ZnO lattice as the temperature of sintering increases. 

Figure 6 presents the PL spectra of the mCo:ZnO set of samples prepared in O2 (Figure 

6(a))  and  in  Ar  (Figure  6(b))  up  to  1000  °C  obtained  at  room  temperature  and  excited  with  a            

532 nm (2.33 eV) laser light. The spectra for the other set of samples, Co3O4:ZnO and CoO:ZnO, 

are  presented  if  Figures  S6  and  S7,  respectively.  The  emission  band  at  1.8  eV  (690  nm)  is 

associated with relaxations from excited states to 2E(2G) state, followed by a transition from 2E(2G) 

to the 4A2(4F) ground state of Co2+ in the 3d7 high-spin configuration in a tetrahedral crystalline 

field  formed  by  the  O2− ions  in  its  neighborhood  [56,  57].  The  identification  of  the  PL  spectra 

related to the Co2+ inner transitions is an evidence that the Co ions in our samples are undoubtedly 

incorporated into the w-ZnO lattice. As the temperature of sintering increases the amount of the 

Co ions incorporated the Zn tetrahedral site of the w-ZnO lattice increases, leading to the increase 

of the PL intensity as function of the temperature of sintering observed in Figure 6(a) and 6(b).  

The calculated integrated area under the PL spectrum for each temperature plotted as a function of 

xE  obtained  from  the  Rietveld  structural  refinement  is  presented  in  Figure  6(c)  and  6(d).  It  is 

observed a linear behavior, this result support and validates the calculated values for xE for the 

different  temperatures  of  sintering.  We  can  also  observe  a  redshift  of  the  maximum  of  the  PL 

spectrum as function of the temperature of sintering. Since this emission is related to the structural 

crystalline  field,  the  redshift  can  be  understood  in  terms  of  the  structural  disorder/distortions 

introduced  by  the  increasing  of  the  Co  concentration  incorporated  into  the  w-ZnO  lattice,  in 

concordance with the Raman results, and the calculated changes in the cell parameters obtained 

via the Rietveld structural refinement. 

14 

Figure 6. Room temperature PL spectra for part of the set of samples mCo:ZnO prepared in (a) oxygen 
(O2) and (b) argon (Ar) atmospheres. It was used a 532 nm laser for excitation with optical power density 
of 50 kW/cm2. Integrated area underneath the spectra plotted as a function of the calculated effective cobalt 
concentration (xE) for the samples prepared in (c) O2 and in (d) Ar. 

As previously highlighted, the fraction of incorporated Co into the w-ZnO lattice depends 

on the temperature of sintering, on the atmosphere, and on the Co precursor source, which indicates 

different chemical dynamics for each set of parameters as discussed in the previous section. Here, 

a very important factor that can be extracted from our results is the apparent activation energy (Qi) 

for the Co incorporation into the w-ZnO lattice. Figure 7 present the Arrhenius plot of the xE versus 

the absolute temperature of sintering for each used atmosphere. The obtained Qi for each sample 

is  presented  also  in  Figure  7.  These  results  show  a  substantial  difference  between  the  samples 

sintered in Ar and O2. The Qi for samples sintered in Ar are relatively low as compared to the 

values obtained for the set of samples processed in O2. Considering the precursors, metallic Co 

stands out among the three used ones presenting the lowest Qi in both atmospheres.  

 
 
 
 
15 

Figure  7.  Arrhenius  plot.  Logarithm  of  the  effective  Co  concentration  (xE)  versus  the  inverse  of  the 
temperature of sintering for the set of samples prepared in (a) oxygen (O2) and (b) argon (Ar) atmospheres. 
In the inset it is presented the apparent activation energy (Qi) for the Co incorporation into the w-ZnO lattice 
for each case.   

From  the  Rietveld  refinement  we  can  extract  information  to  understand  the  obtained  Qi 

values.  First,  at  low  temperature  (600  °C)  and  under  O2  atmosphere,  the  CoO  oxidize  almost 

completely to Co3O4. These explain why the Qi for the CoO:ZnO and Co3O4:ZnO set of samples 

sintered in O2 are quite similar. Besides, at Ar atmosphere, in a lesser extent as compared to the 

O2 atmosphere, the CoO (CoO:ZnO set of samples) and the metallic Co (mCo:ZnO) also oxidizes, 

CoO to Co3O4 and metallic Co to CoO and to Co3O4 (Table S3 and S5). The oxidation of the Co 

precursors  in  Ar  indicates  that  the  ZnO  decomposes,  most  probably  via  the  chemical  defect 

reaction described by Equation (1). Therefore, we can infer that the decomposition of the ZnO in 

Ar atmosphere favors the Co incorporation into the w-ZnO lattice, leading to the relatively lower 

Qi for these set of samples. Among the samples sintered at the same atmosphere the CoO:ZnO set 

of samples presents the higher Qi as compared with the others precursor sources. This behavior 

can be addressed to the CoO higher melting point (1930 °C) as compared to that of the Co3O4 (895 

°C) and the metallic Co (1495 °C). It is noteworthy that the fraction of CoO remains in the powder 

mixture even at higher temperature (800 °C) due to the reduction of the formed Co3O4 again into 

CoO in Ar atmosphere at this temperature range (Table S3) [58]. Finally, as mentioned before, the 

    
   
 
 
16 

mCo:ZnO set of samples presents the lowest Qi for both O2 and Ar atmospheres. For instance, at 

700 °C in Ar atmosphere the Co solubility limit achieved with metallic Co is 4.2 at.%, while for 

CoO  and  Co3O4  it  is  2.3  and  2.6  at.%,  respectively  (Tables  S1,  S3  and  S5).  Taking  again  into 

account  the  difference  between  the  melting  temperatures  for  the  Co3O4  (895  °C)  and  for  the 

metallic Co (1495 °C), and considering the entire process of the material dissociation, changing of 

oxidation sate, and lattice incorporation, we can conclude that the oxidation of the metallic Co is 

considerably less energetically expensive than the reduction of the cobalt in the Co3O4 during the 

Co incorporation into the w-ZnO lattice.  

3.3  Studies on the Grain Growth Kinetics of the Co:ZnO Ceramics 

In this section we present the studies concerning the grain growth kinetics for the Co:ZnO 

set of samples prepared with the different precursors: Co3O4 (Co3O4:ZnO), CoO (CoO:ZnO) and 

metallic Co (mCo:ZnO). As a reference, a pure ZnO (ZnO) set of samples were processed at the 

same condition as the Co:ZnO samples. Figure S8 presents representative SEM images acquired 

over  the  surface  of  the  compacted  resulted  powder  mixtures  (ZnO,  Co3O4:ZnO,  CoO:ZnO  and 

mCo:ZnO)  after  the  high-energy  ball  milling  process,  and  before  the  sintering  for  comparison. 

Representative  SEM  imagens  of  the  set  of  sintered  samples  at  different  temperatures                          

(600−1200 °C) in O2 and Ar for 4 hours are presented in Figures S9, S11, S13 and S15 for the 

ZnO,  Co3O4:ZnO,  CoO:ZnO  and  mCo:ZnO,  respectively.  The  histograms  concerning  the 

distribution of the main particle diameters are presented in Figures S10, S12, S14 and S16, and the 

parameters obtained after a statistical analysis performed via log-normal fit of the histograms are 

presented in Tables S7, S8, S9 and S10 also for the ZnO, Co3O4:ZnO, CoO:ZnO and mCo:ZnO, 

respectively.  The  statistical  analysis  gives  us  the  main  diameter  (L)  of  the  particles  and  the 

geometric standard deviation (σg) of the distributions. Grain sizes (G) is obtained directly from the 

L as described by Mendelson [59]: 

The grain size statistical analysis for each mixture presented in Figure S8 reveals a sharp 

=G

1.56  .

L   

                                                              (8) 

                                                                           
17 

distribution with a mean diameter (L) around 100 nm, confirming the nanostructured nature of the 

starting  powders  and  the  efficiency  of  the  high-energy  ball  milling  process  in  reduce  the 

dimensionality  of  the  grain  powder  mixtures  down  to  the  nanoscale.  The  obtained  statistical 

numbers  are  quite  similar,  revealing  a  homogeneous  starting  point  for  the  entire  set  of  studied 

samples.  This  condition is  very  important  in  order  to  compare  the  grain  growth  parameters  for 

each studied cobalt precursor (Co3O4, CoO and mCo). Figure 8 present the grain size (G) for the 

set of samples sintered in (a) O2 and (b) Ar for 4 hours. It is observed that the increase of the grain 

size with temperature has an exponential character, and that the Co3O4:ZnO/ZnO set of samples 

present the highest/lowest growth rate in both O2 and Ar atmospheres. This result indicates that 

the Co3O4 is a good additive for the ZnO sintering in order to achieve larger grains and densities.  

Figure 8. Grain  size  (G)  of  the  samples  sintered  in  (a)  oxygen  (O2)  and  (b)  argon  (Ar).  The  grain  size 
corresponds to the main diameter obtained after a statistical analysis performed via log-normal fit of the 
size  distribution  histograms.  The  data  was  fit  via  an  exponential  function  to  highlight  the  exponential 
character  of  the  grain  growth.  In  the  inset  is  presented  representative  electron  micrographs  of  the 
Co3O4:ZnO  set  of  samples  showing  the  evolution  of  the  grains  size  as  a  function  of  the  sintering 
temperature. The vertical red line at 900 °C separates the low temperature (LT) form the high temperature 
(HT) grain growth regimes.  

.    

Assuming a negligible initial grain size, the grain growth kinetics can be determined using 

the  simplified  phenomenological  kinetics  proposed  by  T.  Senda  and  R.  C.  Bradt  through  the 

Equation (9) [60]. It can be rewriting as in Equation (10) and (11). 

nG

=

K t
 0

exp

(

−

Q RT   

/

.

g

)

                                                 (9) 

 
 
   
 
                                                               
 
 
log

G

=





1
n





log

t

+





1
n









log

K

0

−

0.434

Q
g
RT





.









18 

(10) 

log

n

G
t









=

log

K

0

−

0.434

Q
g
RT





.





                                                  (11) 

Here the main parameters are the grain growth kinetic exponent (n), and the grain growth apparent 

activation energy (Qg). K0 is a pre-exponential constant, t is the time in hours, R is the gas constant                                

(8.31 J/mol·K), and T is the absolute temperature. n can be determined by the inverse of slope of 

the curve as defined in Equation (10) for a set of samples processed at the same T and different t. 

In turn, with the value of n in hands, Qg can be calculated from the slope of the Arrhenius plot of 

the log(Gn/t) versus 1/T for a set of samples processed at the same t and different T (Equation (10)). 

Higher n-values and lower Qg leads to higher grain growth rates, n is related to the mass transport 

mechanism, while Qg holds its standard meaning [61].  

The sintering, and the consequent grain growth, of a starting nanostructured powder has to 

be analysed carefully [48]. Figure S17 and S18 present representative micrographs for the pure 

ZnO and for the mCo:ZnO samples, respectively. The micrographs show the samples before and 

after  sintering  in  the  O2  and  Ar  atmospheres  in  the  temperatures  of  700  °C  and  1200  °C.  We 

observe for the samples  sintered at 700 °C a  relatively small shrinkage of the powder after the 

sintering, besides, for the samples sintered at 1200 °C the shrinkage is quite considerably. From 

this  result  we  can  infer  that  for  the  starting  nanostructured  powders  at  lower  temperatures  the 

coarsening dominates the grain growth process (rearrangement of the particles and formation of 

necks), while at high temperatures, with grains already of the size of the order of micrometres, the 

densification process takes place. Consequently, we can state, as it is expected, that the growth 

mechanism at low temperatures is distinct from that at higher temperatures. For small particles 

and material of high vapor pressure the evaporation-condensation sintering process is favourable, 

and at low temperatures the relatively low activation energy process, like the surface diffusion, 

dominates, what leads to coarsening [62]. At high temperatures, process of high activation energy, 

like grain boundary and bulk diffusion, dominates [60]. Nevertheless, sintering involves several 

mechanisms operating simultaneously over overlapping stages. In fact, there are numerous studies 

                           
  
                                                        
 
 
19 

on  the  grain  growth  kinetics  of  ZnO,  these  studies  have  revealed  that  the  rate  controlling 

mechanism is the Zn2+ diffusion, which proceeds via surface at the LT regime [62] and via bulk at 

the  HT  regime  [60,  63].  Therefore,  here  the  grain  growth  process  is  analysed  in  two  different 

regimes, one below around 900 °C, referred as low temperature regime (LT), and other above 900 

°C, referred as high temperature regime (HT).  

Figure  9  shows  the  plot  of  the  log(G)  versus  log(t)  (Equation  (10))  for  the  entire  set  of 

samples obtained at the 700 °C (LT) and 1200 °C (HT).  Representative SEM imagens of the entire 

set of samples sintered at different times (1, 1.5, 2, 2.5 and 3h), and the histograms concerning the 

distribution of the main particle diameters are presented in Figures S19 to S34. The correspondent 

obtained statistical parameters are presented in Tables S11 to S18 of the supplementary file. Figure 

10 shows the Arrhenius plot of log (Gn/t) versus (1/T) (Equation (11)) for pure ZnO and Co:ZnO 

set of samples sintered for 4h in O2 and Ar.  

Figure 9. Isothermal grain growth of ZnO and Co:ZnO set of samples sintered in (a) oxygen (O2) and (b) 
argon (Ar). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 

The obtained n-values and the grain growth apparent activation energy (Qg) after a linear 

fit of the experimental points are presented in Table 1 and Table 2. First, we call attention to that 

the n-values for samples processed at 700 °C is quite different from those for samples processed 

at 1200 °C in all cases, and it is evident from Figure 10 the difference between the slope of the 

curves  in  the  different  temperature  ranges,  confirming  the  statement  of    the  LT  and  HT  grain 

growth regimes associated to different grain growth mechanisms. Comparing the n and Qg values 

at the LT and HT regime for the same atmosphere we note that Qg is larger at HT regime, as we 

would expect, while n is larger at the LT regime. Besides, both parameters n and Qg are larger for 

the  Co:ZnO  set  of  samples  are  higher  than  those  for  the  pure  ZnO  sintered  in  O2  and  Ar 

atmospheres. Both parameters are also larger for samples sintered in O2 as compared to those for 

samples sintered in Ar. 

Figure 10. Arrhenius plots for the grain growth of ZnO and Co:ZnO set of samples sintered in (a) oxygen 
(O2) and (b) argon (Ar). 

 
 
 
 
 
21 

First, it is important to point that the obtained n and Qg for the pure ZnO system is relatively 

close to those reported in the literature [60, 64-66]. The differences in n and Qg at LT and HT 

ranges  are quite understood in terms of the change of the main growth process in the different 

temperature ranges. As stated before, n is related to mass transport process, and at high temperature 

processes corresponding to higher Qg are activated. For the Co:ZnO it is plausible to infer that the 

Co incorporation into the w-ZnO lattice takes place mainly at the surface of the w-ZnO grains, 

changing  drastically  the  diffusion  and  subsequent  grain  boundary  mobility,  what  leads  to  the 

increasing  of  the  Qg  for  those  samples.  Besides,  the  samples  sintered  in  O2  present  higher                     

n-values due probably to the promoted higher density of VZn, in the same way, the addition of Co 

to the system favor the formation of both VZn and Zni defects (full analysis presented in section 

3.1) increasing Zn2+ diffusion, and leading to a faster growth rate. Finally, both n and Qg is lower 

for the samples sintered in Ar. The relative decrease in n can be interpreted by the suppression of 

the VZn, while the decrease in Qg can be attributed to a higher Co solubility into the w-ZnO lattice 

(full analysis presented in section 3.2), what would lead to more homogeneous distribution into 

the w-ZnO grain and not to a higher concentration at grain surface. The lower Qg for the mCo:ZnO 

set of samples, which presents the lower Qi (Figure 7), corroborates this statement. 

Table 1. Grain growth kinetic parameters obtained in the range of 
temperatures  below  900  °C  (LT  regime):    grain  growth  kinetic 
exponent  (n),  grain  growth  apparent  activation  energy  (QgLT),  and 
log K0 (for completeness). 

Sample 

log K0 

n 

QgLT (kJ/mol) 

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

ZnO 

CoO:ZnO 

Co3O4:ZnO 
mCo:ZnO 
ZnO 

CoO:ZnO 

Co3O4:ZnO 

mCo:ZnO 

4(1) 

8(3) 

7(3) 
13(4) 
2.1(4) 

5(1) 

4(2) 

4(1) 

4.9976 

5.7306 

5.5309 
7.0522 
3.2342 

3.4034 

3.2032 

3.2997 

114(3) 

240(2) 

201(1) 
299(2) 
71.1(7) 

153(2) 

106(2) 

101.8(5) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 

Table 2. Grain growth kinetic parameters obtained in the range of 
temperatures  above  900  °C  (HT  regime):    grain  growth  kinetic 
exponent (n), grain growth apparent activation energy (QgHT), and 
log K0 (for completeness). 

Sample 

log K0 

n 

QgHT (kJ/mol) 

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

ZnO 
CoO:ZnO 
Co3O4:ZnO 
mCo:ZnO 
ZnO 
CoO:ZnO 
Co3O4:ZnO 
mCo:ZnO 

12.8(6) 
23(1) 
27(6) 
30(5) 
7.5(3) 
12.4(8) 
13(1) 
11(1) 

4.0665 
5.2938 
4.7108 
6.3561 
2.4787 
3.0351 
2.1818 
2.5421 

316(2) 
560(3) 
662(5) 
708(3) 
188(1) 
325(2) 
320(2) 
276(1) 

Returning  to  the  results concerning  the  obtained  final  grain  sizes  presented  in  Figure  8. 

Remember that for a given T and t, the grain size (G) depends on both n and Qg (Equation (9)), 

lager  n  leads  to  larger  G,  and  larger  Qg  leads  to  smaller  G.  Our  results  indicate  a  competition 

between  these  parameters.  For  samples  sintered  in  O2,  adding  Co  to  the  system  increases  Qg, 

however n is also increased, with a final effect corresponding to a higher G in comparison to the 

pure ZnO set of samples. For the samples sintered in Ar, Qg decreases in comparison to values for 

the O2 atmosphere, however n also decreases, in such a way that the final G remains almost the 

same as for the samples sintered in O2. Among the samples sintered in Ar, the addition of Co also 

increases n and Qg. 

4  CONCLUSION 

In summary, in this report we presented a systematic study concerning the processing of 

Co:ZnO  ceramics.  Different  Co  precursors  (Co3O4,  CoO  and  metallic  Co)  and  sintering 

atmospheres (O2 and Ar) was analyzed from the theoretical and experimental point of view.  The 

theoretical calculation showed that the main point defects (Zni, VO and VZn) became energetically 

favorable in the presence of cobalt. Based on the theoretical finds a set of defect chemical reaction 

was proposed. The studies on the Co incorporation into the w-ZnO was  conducted  carefully in 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 

order to properly address the Co-doping of the w-ZnO. The analysis showed that the Ar sintering 

atmosphere promotes an incongruent decomposition of the ZnO, leading to a higher Zni density 

and a higher Co solubility. Among the Co precursors the metallic Co proved to be the one with 

higher solubility into the w-ZnO (lower Qi). The evaluation of the grain growth kinetics revealed 

a very rich dynamic. In order to achieve high grain growth and densities the Co3O4 demonstrated 

to be a good additive for the w-ZnO sintering. It was observed that due to the competition between 

different mass transport mechanism (n) and the different Co incorporation degrees (Qg) the final 

grain  size  is  almost  independent  of  the  sintering  atmosphere.  Evidences  showed  that  in  the  Ar 

sintering atmosphere the metallic Co precursor, due to its higher solubility into the w-ZnO lattice, 

leads to a high Co homogeneous distribution over the volume of the w-ZnO grain. Besides, CoO 

precursor present the lowest solubility into w-ZnO lattice and final grain size, being the CoO the 

best  precursor  for  top-down  approach  in  processing  of  Co-doped  w-ZnO  nanopowders.  Our 

findings give valuable contribution to the understanding of the preparation of Co-doped w-ZnO 

ceramics and the sintering growth kinetics, what would allow to improve the state of the art on the 

processing of the material at both bulk and nanometric scales. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Support from agencies  CAPES and FAPEMIG  is gratefully  acknowledged. The authors 
also acknowledge Prof. Dr. A. C. Doriguetto coordinator of the Laboratório de Cristalografia of 
the Universidade Federal de Alfenas were the XRD measurements were performed. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  H.L.  Tuller,  S.R.  Bishop,  Point  Defects  in  Oxides:  Tailoring  Materials  Through  Defect 
Engineering, Annual Review of Materials Research, Vol 41 41 (2011) 369-398. 

[2]  I.  Zutic,  J.  Fabian,  S.  Das  Sarma,  Spintronics:  Fundamentals  and  applications,  Reviews  of 
Modern Physics 76(2) (2004) 323-410. 

[3]  M.  Knobel,  J.C.  Denardin,  H.B.  De  Carvalho,  M.  Brasil,  A.B.  Pakhomov,  F.P.  Missell, 
Magnetic and magnetotransport properties of Co thin films on Si, Physica Status Solidi a-Applied 
Research 187(1) (2001) 177-188. 

[4]  H.B.  de  Carvalho,  M.  Brasil,  J.C.  Denardin,  M.  Knobel,  Transport  and  magnetotransport 
transition of thin Co films grown on Si, Physica Status Solidi a-Applied Research 201(10) (2004) 
2361-2365. 

 
 
24 

[5] M.Y. He, H.M. Sun, Q.L. He, Topological insulator: Spintronics and quantum computations, 
Frontiers of Physics 14(4) (2019). 

[6] H.B. de Carvalho, M.P.F. de Godoy, R.W.D. Paes, M. Mir, A. Ortiz de Zevallos, F. Iikawa, 
M.J.S.P. Brasil, V.A. Chitta, W.B. Ferraz, M.A. Boselli, A.C.S. Sabioni, Absence of ferromagnetic 
order in high quality bulk Co-doped ZnO samples, J Appl. Phys. 108(3) (2010) 033914. 

[7] V.M.A. Lage, R.T. da Silva, A. Mesquita, M.P.F. de Godoy, X. Gratens, V.A. Chitta, H.B. de 
Carvalho,  Influence  of  reducing  heat  treatment  on  the  structural  and  magnetic  properties  of 
MnO:ZnO ceramics, Journal of Alloys and Compounds 863 (2021). 

[8]  M.P.F.  de  Godoy,  A.  Mesquita,  W.  Avansi,  P.P.  Neves,  V.A.  Chitta,  W.B.  Ferraz,  M.A. 
Boselli,  A.C.S.  Sabioni,  H.B.  de  Carvalho,  Evidence  of  defect-mediated  magnetic  coupling  on 
hydrogenated Co-doped ZnO, Journal of Alloys and Compounds 555 (2013) 315-319. 

[9] V.M. de Almeida, A. Mesquita, A.O. de Zevallos, N.C. Mamani, P.P. Neves, X. Gratens, V.A. 
Chitta,  W.B.  Ferraz,  A.C.  Doriguetto,  A.C.S.  Sabioni,  H.B.  de  Carvalho,  Room  temperature 
ferromagnetism  promoted  by  defects  at  zinc  sites  in  Mn-doped  ZnO,  Journal  of  Alloys  and 
Compounds 655 (2016) 406-414. 

[10]  N.C.  Mamani,  R.T.  da  Silva,  A.O.  de  Zevallos,  A.A.C.  Cotta,  W.A.D.  Macedo,  M.S.  Li, 
M.I.B.  Bernardi,  A.C.  Doriguetto,  H.B.  de  Carvalho,  On  the  nature  of  the  room  temperature 
ferromagnetism  in  nanoparticulate  Co-doped  ZnO  thin  films  prepared  by  EB-PVD,  Journal  of 
Alloys and Compounds 695 (2017) 2682-2688. 

[11] M.P.F. de Godoy, X. Gratens, V.A. Chitta, A. Mesquita, M.M. de Lima, A. Cantarero, G. 
Rahman, J.M. Morbec, H.B. de Carvalho, Defect induced room temperature ferromagnetism in 
high quality Co-doped ZnO bulk samples, Journal of Alloys and Compounds 859 (2021) 157772. 

[12]  Y.  Belghazi,  G.  Schmerber,  S.  Colis,  J.L.  Rehspringer,  A.  Dinia,  Extrinsic  origin  of 
ferromagnetism  in  ZnO  and  Zn0.9Co0.1O  magnetic  semiconductor  films  prepared  by  sol-gel 
technique, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89(12) (2006) 122504. 

[13] J.M.D. Coey, Dilute magnetic oxides, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci. 10(2) (2006) 83-92. 

[14]  D.C.  Kundaliya,  S.B.  Ogale,  S.E.  Lofland,  S.  Dhar,  C.J.  Metting,  S.R.  Shinde,  Z.  Ma,  B. 
Varughese,  K.V.  Ramanujachary,  L.  Salamanca-Riba,  T.  Venkatesan,  On  the  origin  of  high-
temperature  ferromagnetism  in  the  low-temperature-processed  Mn-Zn-O  system,  Nat.  Mater. 
3(10) (2004) 709-714. 

[15] M. Tay, Y.H. Wu,  G.C. Han, T.C. Chong, Y.K. Zheng, S.J. Wang,  Y.B. Chen, X.Q. Pan, 
Ferromagnetism in inhomogeneous Zn1-xCoxO thin films, J Appl. Phys. 100(6) (2006) 063910. 

[16]  J.M.D.  Coey,  M.  Venkatesan,  C.B.  Fitzgerald,  Donor  impurity  band  exchange  in  dilute 
ferromagnetic oxides, Nature Materials 4(2) (2005) 173-179. 

[17] K.R. Kittilstved, W.K. Liu, D.R. Gamelin, Electronic structure origins of polarity-dependent 
high-TC ferromagnetismin oxide-diluted magnetic semiconductors, Nature Materials 5(4) (2006) 
291-297. 

[18] M. Ivill, S.J. Pearton, S. Rawal, L. Leu, P. Sadik, R. Das, A.F. Hebard, M. Chisholm, J.D. 
Budai,  D.P.  Norton,  Structure  and  magnetism  of  cobalt-doped  ZnO  thin  films,  New  Journal  of 
Physics 10 (2008). 

[19]  S.  Ramachandran,  J.  Narayan,  J.T.  Prater,  Effect  of  oxygen  annealing  on  Mn  doped  ZnO 
diluted magnetic semiconductors, Applied Physics Letters 88(24) (2006). 

25 

[20] H.S. Hsu, J.C.A. Huang, Y.H. Huang, Y.F. Liao, M.Z. Lin, C.H. Lee, J.F. Lee, S.F. Chen, 
L.Y. Lai, C.P. Liu, Evidence of oxygen vacancy enhanced room-temperature ferromagnetism in 
Co-doped ZnO, Applied Physics Letters 88(24) (2006). 

[21] T. Tietze, M. Gacic, G. Schutz, G. Jakob, S. Bruck, E. Goering, XMCD studies on Co and Li 
doped ZnO magnetic semiconductors, New Journal of Physics 10 (2008). 

[22] P. Xu, Y. Sun, C. Shi, F. Xu, H. Pan, The electronic structure and spectral properties of ZnO 
and its defects, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section B-Beam Interactions 
With Materials and Atoms 199 (2003) 286-290. 

[23] A. Janotti, C.G. Van de Walle, Native point defects in ZnO, Physical Review B 76(16) (2007) 
165202. 

[24]  D.C.  Look,  J.W.  Hemsky,  J.R.  Sizelove,  Residual  native  shallow  donor  in  ZnO,  Physical 
Review Letters 82(12) (1999) 2552-2555. 

[25] H.Y. Zhang, W. Hao, Y.Q. Cao, X.F. Chang, M.X. Xu, X.L. Guo, K. Shen, D.H. Xiang, Q.Y. 
Xu,  Room  temperature  ferromagnetic  Zn0.98Co0.02O  powders  with  improved  visible-light 
photocatalysis, Rsc Advances 6(8) (2016) 6761-6767. 

[26] L.R. Shah, H. Zhu, W.G. Wang, B. Ali, T. Zhu, X. Fan, Y.Q. Song, Q.Y. Wen, H.W. Zhang, 
S.I. Shah, J.Q. Xiao, Effect of Zn interstitials on the magnetic and transport properties of bulk Co-
doped ZnO, Journal of Physics D-Applied Physics 43(3) (2010). 

[27] N. Khare, M.J. Kappers, M. Wei, M.G. Blamire, J.L. MacManus-Driscoll, Defect-induced 
ferromagnetism in co-doped ZnO, Advanced Materials 18(11) (2006) 1449. 

[28]  H.M.  Xiong,  ZnO  Nanoparticles  Applied  to  Bioimaging  and  Drug  Delivery,  Advanced 
Materials 25(37) (2013) 5329-5335. 

[29]  S.B.  Rana,  R.P.P.  Singh,  Investigation  of  structural,  optical,  magnetic  properties  and 
antibacterial activity of Ni-doped zinc oxide nanoparticles, Journal of Materials Science-Materials 
in Electronics 27(9) (2016) 9346-9355. 

[30] D.J. Norris, A.L. Efros, S.C. Erwin, Doped nanocrystals, Science 319(5871) (2008) 1776-
1779. 

[31]  J.F.  Suyver,  S.F.  Wuister,  J.J.  Kelly,  A.  Meijerink,  Luminescence  of  nanocrystalline 
ZnSe:Mn2+, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2(23) (2000) 5445-5448. 

[32] R.T. da Silva, A. Mesquita, A.O. de Zevallos, T. Chiaramonte, X. Gratens, V.A. Chitta, J.M. 
Morbec, G. Rahman, V.M. Garcia-Suarez, A.C. Doriguetto, M.I.B. Bernardi, H.B. de Carvalho, 
Multifunctional  nanostructured  Co-doped  ZnO:  Co  spatial  distribution  and  correlated  magnetic 
properties, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 20(30) (2018) 20257-20269. 

[33]  G.  Gorrasi,  A.  Sorrentino,  Mechanical  milling  as  a  technology  to  produce  structural  and 
functional bio-nanocomposites, Green Chemistry 17(5) (2015) 2610-2625. 

[34] A.S. Bolokang, F.R. Cummings, B.P. Dhonge, H.M.I. Abdallah, T. Moyo, H.C. Swart, C.J. 
Arendse,  T.F.G.  Muller,  D.E.  Motaung,  Characteristics  of  the  mechanical  milling  on  the  room 
temperature  ferromagnetism  and  sensing  properties  of  TiO2  nanoparticles,  Applied  Surface 
Science 331 (2015) 362-372. 

[35]  S.  Kumar,  S.  Chatterjee,  K.K.  Chattopadhyay,  A.K.  Ghosh,  Sol-Gel-Derived  ZnO:Mn 
Nanocrystals: Study of Structural, Raman, and Optical Properties, Journal of Physical Chemistry 
C 116(31) (2012) 16700-16708. 

26 

[36] S.B. Rana, Influence of CTAB assisted capping on the structural and optical properties of 
ZnO nanoparticles, Journal of Materials Science-Materials in Electronics 28(18) (2017) 13787-
13796. 

[37] R.B.V.D. A.C. Larson, General Structure Analysis System (GSAS), Los Alamos National 

Laboratory Report LAUR, 1994. 

[38] B. Toby, EXPGUI, a graphical user interface for GSAS, Journal of Applied Crystallography 
34(2) (2001) 210-213. 

[39] P. Hohenberg, W. Kohn, Inhomogeneous electron gas, Physical Review B 136(3B) (1964) 
B864- B871. 

[40] J.M. Soler, E. Artacho, J.D. Gale, A. Garcia, J. Junquera, P. Ordejon, D. Sanchez-Portal, The 
SIESTA method for ab initio order-N materials simulation, Journal of Physics-Condensed Matter 
14(11) (2002) 2745-2779. 

[41] N. Troullier, J.L. Martins, Efficient pseudopotentials for plane-wave calculations, Physical 
Review B 43(3) (1991) 1993-2006. 

[42] J. Han, P. Mantas, A. Senos, Defect chemistry and electrical characteristics of undoped and 
Mn-doped ZnO, Journal of the European Ceramic Society 22(1) (2002) 49-59. 

[43] G.D. Mahan, Intrinsic defects in zno varistors, Journal of Applied Physics 54(7) (1983) 3825-
3832. 

[44] A.C.S. Sabioni, About the oxygen diffusion mechanism in ZnO, Solid State Ionics 170(1-2) 
(2004) 145-148. 

[45] M. McCluskey, S. Jokela, Defects in ZnO, Journal of Applied Physics 106(7) (2009). 

[46] A. Mesquita, F.P. Rhodes, R.T. da Silva, P.P. Neves, A.O. de Zevallos, M.R.B. Andreeta, 
M.M. de Lima, A. Cantarero, I.S. da Silva, M.A. Boselli, X. Gratens, V.A. Chitta, A.C. Doriguetto, 
W.B.  Ferraz,  A.C.S.  Sabioni,  H.B.  de  Carvalho,  Dynamics  of  the  incorporation  of  Co  into  the 
wurtzite ZnO matrix and its magnetic properties, Journal of Alloys and Compounds 637 (2015) 
407-417. 

[47] P. Bonasewicz, W. Hirschwald, G. Neumann, Influence of surface processes on electrical, 
photochemical,  and 
the 
Electrochemical Society 133(11) (1986) 2270-2278. 

thermodynamical  properties  of  zinc-oxide  films,  Journal  of 

[48] M.W. Barsoum, Fundamentals of ceramics, Taylor & Francis, New York; London, 2003. 

[49]  J.  Jiang,  L.C.  Li,  Synthesis  of  sphere-like  Co3O4  nanocrystals  via  a  simple  polyol  route, 
Materials Letters 61(27) (2007) 4894-4896. 

[50] A.C.S. Sabioni, A. Daniel, R. Metz, A.M. Huntz, F. Jomard, First study of oxygen diffusion 
in a ZnO-based commercial varistor, Defect and Diffusion Forum 289-292 (2009) 339-345. 

[51] R.D. Shannon, Revised effective ionic radii and systematic studies of interatomic distances 
in halides and chalcogenides, Acta Crystallographica Section A 32(5) (1976) 751-767. 

[52] S. Kolesnik, B. Dabrowski, J. Mais, Structural and magnetic properties of transition metal 
substituted ZnO, Journal of Applied Physics 95(5) (2004) 2582-2586. 

[53]  J.  M.  Calleja,  M.  Cardona,  Resonant  Raman  Scattering  in  ZnO,  Physical  Review  B  16(8) 
(1977) 3753-3761. 

27 

[54] M. Schumm, M. Koerdel, S. Müller, H. Zutz, C. Ronning, J. Stehr, D.M. Hofmann, J. Geurts, 
Structural impact of Mn implantation on ZnO, New Journal of Physics 10(4) (2008) 043004. 

[55] B. Sanches de Lima, P.R. Martínez-Alanis, F. Güell, W.A. dos Santos Silva, M.I.B. Bernardi, 
N.L. Marana, E. Longo, J.R. Sambrano, V.R. Mastelaro, Experimental and Theoretical Insights 
into the Structural Disorder and Gas Sensing Properties of ZnO, ACS Applied Electronic Materials 
3(3) (2021) 1447-1457. 

[56]  L.R.  Valerio,  N.C.  Mamani,  A.O.  de  Zevallos,  A.  Mesquita,  M.I.B.  Bernardi,  A.C. 
Doriguetto,  H.B.  de  Carvalho,  Preparation  and  structural-optical  characterization  of  dip-coated 
nanostructured  Co-doped  ZnO  dilute  magnetic  oxide  thin  films,  Rsc  Advances  7(33)  (2017) 
20611-20619. 

[57] P. Koidl, Optical-absorption of Co2+ in ZnO, Physical Review B 15(5) (1977) 2493-2499. 

[58]  K.  Wang,  Q.B.  Yu,  Q.  Qin,  W.J.  Duan,  Feasibility  of  a  Co  Oxygen  Carrier  for  Chemical 
Looping  Air  Separation:  Thermodynamics  and  Kinetics,  Chemical  Engineering  &  Technology 
37(9) (2014) 1500-1506. 

[59]  M.I.  Mendelson,  Average  grain  size  in  polycrystalline  ceramics,  Journal  of  the  American 
Ceramic Society 52(8) (1969) 443-446. 

[60] T. Senda, R.C. Bradt, Grain Growth in Sintered ZnO and ZnO-Bi2O3 Ceramics, Journal of 
the American Ceramic Society 73(1) (1990) 106-114. 

[61] R.M. German, Chapter Seven - Thermodynamic and Kinetic Treatments, in: R.M. German 
(Ed.), Sintering: from Empirical Observations to Scientific Principles, Butterworth-Heinemann, 
Boston, 2014, pp. 183-226. 

[62]  O.J.  Whittemore,  J.A.  Varela,  Initial  sintering  of  ZnO,  Journal  of  the  American  Ceramic 
Society 64(11) (1981) C154-C155. 

[63]  S.-D.  Shin,  C.-S.  Sone,  J.-H.  Han,  D.-Y.  Kim,  Effect  of  Sintering  Atmosphere  on  the 
Densification  and  Abnormal  Grain  Growth  of  ZnO,  Journal  of  the  American  Ceramic  Society 
79(2) (1996) 565-567. 

[64] J. Han, P.Q. Mantas, A.M.R. Senos, Grain growth in Mn-doped ZnO, Journal of the European 
Ceramic Society 20(16) (2000) 2753-2758. 

[65] G. Hardal, B.Y. Price, The Effect of TiO2 and B2O3 Additions on the Grain Growth of ZnO, 
Metallurgical  and  Materials  Transactions  a-Physical  Metallurgy  and  Materials  Science  48A(4) 
(2017) 2090-2098. 

[66] S. Roy, T.K. Roy, D. Das, Grain growth kinetics of Er2O3 doped ZnO-V2O5 based varistor 
ceramics, Ceramics International 45(18) (2019) 24835-24850. 

 
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA 

5 

10 

A comprehensive study on the processing Co:ZnO ceramics: defect 
engineering and grain growth kinetics  

R. T. da Silvaa, J. M. Morbecb‡, G. Rahmanc†, and H. B. de Carvalhod* 

a Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto – UFOP, 35400-000 Ouro Preto, MG, Brazil. 
b School of Chemical and Physical Sciences, Keele University, Keele ST5 5BG, United Kingdom 

c Department of Physics, Quaid-i-Azam University, 45320 Islamabad, Pakistan. 
d Universidade Federal de Alfenas - UNIFAL, 37130-000 Alfenas, Brazil. 

15 

Corresponding Authors: 
‡ j.morbec@keele.ac.uk 
† gulrahman@qau.edu.pk. 
* hugo.carvalho@unifal-mg.edu.br.  

 20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Figure S1. Refined XRD diffractograms of Co3O4:ZnO samples (8 at.%) synthesized at different temperatures 
in atmosphere of  (a) oxygen and (b) argon. Each figure shows the observed pattern (symbols) and in a log scale 
(solid gray line), Rietveld calculated pattern (solid line), and the goodness of the fit or residual pattern (at the 
bottom). Diffraction peak associated with Co3O4 were indicated by the symbol (#). 

5 

        
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S1 - Elemental occupation factor for the Zn, Co (effective concentration, xE) and O present 
in the Co3O4:ZnO wurtzite structure and the fractions of the ZnO, CoO e Co3O4 obtained through 
Rietveld refinement. 

Sample 

Zn 

Mixture 

1.000(1) 

Co 

- 

0.980(5) 

0.9221 

O 

f. ZnO 

f. CoO 

f. Co3O4 

O
n
Z

:
4

O
3
o
C

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

600 ºC 

700 ºC 

800 ºC 

850 ºC 

900 ºC 

1000 ºC 

1200 ºC 

0.998(1) 

0.002(1) 

0.981(4) 

0.9227 

0.990(1) 

0.010(1) 

0.978(5) 

0.9301 

0.982(1) 

0.018(1) 

0.986(4) 

0.9375 

0. 962(1) 

0.039(1) 

0.986(4) 

0.9571 

0.925(1) 

0.075(1) 

0.985(4) 

0.9954 

0.926(1) 

0.080(1) 

0.992(4) 

1.000 

0.922(1) 

0.080(1) 

0.991(5) 

1.000 

Mixture 

1.000(1) 

- 

0.980(5) 

0.9221 

600 ºC 

700 ºC 

800 ºC 

1000 ºC 

1200 ºC 

0.992(1) 

0.008(1) 

0.987(4) 

0.9280 

0.975(1) 

0.026(1) 

0.983(4) 

0.9451 

0.935(1) 

0.065(1) 

0.981(4) 

0.9831 

0.921(1) 

0.081(1) 

0.984(4) 

1.000 

0.919(1) 

0.079(1) 

0.972(5) 

1.000 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

0.0778 

0.0773 

0.0699 

0.0625 

0.0428 

0.0046 

- 

- 

0.0778 

0.0720 

0.0549 

0.0169 

- 

- 

5 

Table S2 - Structural data (a and c) for the Co3O4:ZnO samples obtained through the Rietveld 
refinement. V is the cell volume, χ2 is the square of the goodness-of-fit indicator, and RB is the 
refinement quality parameter. 

Sample 

a (Å) 

c (Å) 

V (Å3) 

Mixture 

3.25095(1) 

5.20885(3) 

47.675(1) 

600 ºC 

700 ºC 

800 ºC 

850 ºC 

900 ºC 

1000 ºC 

1200 ºC 

Mixture 

600 ºC 

700 ºC 
800 ºC 

1000 ºC 

1200 ºC 

3.25105(1) 

5.20868(3) 

47.677(1) 

3.25142(1) 

5.20855(3) 

47.686(1) 

3.25186(1) 

5.20736(2) 

47.688(1) 

3.25229(1) 

5.20737(2) 

47.701(1) 

3.25295(1) 

5.20579(2) 

47.706(1) 

3.25359(1) 

5.20482(2) 

47.716(1) 

3.25288(1) 

5.20709(3) 

47.716(1) 

3.25095(1) 

5.20885(3) 

47.675(1) 

3.25118(1) 

5.20877(3) 

47.681(1) 

3.25168(1) 

5.20792(2) 

47.688(1) 

3.25253(2) 

5.20689(3) 

47.706(1) 

3.25353(1) 

5.20502(2) 

47.716(1) 

3.25304(1) 

5.20663(3) 

47.716(1) 

2χ  

6.9 

3.7 

4.0 

3.2 

2.5 

4.3 

4.2 

6.6 

6.9 

4.1 

3.0 

3.7 

4.7 

5.2 

RBragg 

4.6 

2.9 

4.7 

2.8 

3.1 

3.2 

2.2 

3.6 

4.6 

5.4 

2.6 

2.6 

2.3 

5.0 

O
n
Z

:
4

O
3
o
C

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V                                                           
Figure S2. Refined XRD diffractograms of CoO:ZnO samples (8 at.%) synthesized at different temperatures in 
atmosphere of  (a) oxygen and (b) argon. Each figure shows the observed pattern (symbols) and in a log scale 
(solid gray line), Rietveld calculated pattern (solid line), and the goodness of the fit or residual pattern (at the 
bottom). Diffraction peaks associated with CoO and Co3O4 were indicated by the symbol (∗) and (#), respectively. 

5 

        
 
 
 
 
Table S3 - Elemental occupation factor for the Zn, Co (effective concentration, xE) and O present 
in the CoO:ZnO wurtzite structure  and the fractions of the ZnO, CoO e Co3O4 obtained through 
Rietveld refinement. 

Sample 

Zn 

Mixture 

1.000(1) 

Co 

- 

O 

f. ZnO 

f. CoO 

f. Co3O4 

0.985(7) 

0.9258 

0.0742 

- 

600 ºC 

700 ºC 

800 ºC 

850 ºC 

900 ºC 

1000 ºC 

1200 ºC 

0.998(1) 

0.002(1) 

0.981(4) 

0.9225 

0.992(1) 

0.008(1) 

0.987(5) 

0.9283 

0.981(1) 

0.019(1) 

0.984(4) 

0.9389 

0.960(1) 

0.040(1) 

0.981(4) 

0.9583 

0.922(1) 

0.078(1) 

0.978(4) 

0.9987 

0.921(1) 

0.080(1) 

0.986(4) 

1.000 

0.919(1) 

0.079(1) 

0.995(4) 

1.000 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Mixture 

1.000(1) 

- 

0.985(7) 

0.9258 

0.0742 

0.0775 

0.0717 

0.0611 

0.0417 

0.0013 

- 

- 

- 

600 ºC 

700 ºC 

800 ºC 

1000 ºC 

1200 ºC 

0.996(1) 

0.007(1) 

0.972(5) 

0.9285 

0.0327 

0.0388 

0.977(1) 

0.023(1) 

0.982(4) 

0.9425 

0.0064 

0.0510 

0.935(1) 

0.067(1) 

0.985(4) 

0.9878 

0.0122 

0.921(1) 

0.078(1) 

0.977(4) 

1.000 

0.920(1) 

0.077(1) 

0.978(4) 

1.000 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

:

O
n
Z
O
o
C

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

Table S4 - Structural data (a and c) for the CoO:ZnO samples obtained through the Rietveld 
refinement. V is the cell volume, χ2 is the square of the goodness-of-fit indicator, and RB is the 
refinement quality parameter. 

Sample 

a (Å) 

c (Å) 

V (Å3) 

Mixture 

3.25094(2) 

5.20837(1) 

47.674(1) 

600 ºC 

700 ºC 

800 ºC 

850 ºC 

900 ºC 

1000 ºC 

1200 ºC 

Mixture 

600 ºC 

700 ºC 
800 ºC 

1000 ºC 

1200 ºC 

3.25098(1) 

5.20866(3) 

47.674(1) 

3.25129(1) 

5.20818(3) 

47.679(1) 

3.25185(1) 

5.20732(2) 

47.688(1) 

3.25205(1) 

5.20789(2) 

47.699(1) 

3.25314(1) 

5.20553(2) 

47.709(1) 

3.25376(1) 

5.20429(2) 

47.716(1) 

3.25293(1) 

5.20690(3) 

47.715(1) 

3.25094(2) 

5.20837(1) 

47.674(1) 

3.25108(1) 

5.20850(3) 

47.676(1) 

3.25157(1) 

5.20766(2) 

47.683(1) 

3.25269(1) 

5.20679(2) 

47.708(1) 

3.25356(1) 

5.20487(3) 

47.715(1) 

3.25323(1) 

5.20604(2) 

47.716(1) 

2χ  

5.8 

4.2 

4.3 

5.3 

3.7 

5.2 

3.2 

6.3 

5.8 

2.7 

3.4 

3.6 

4.8 

4.7 

RBragg 

6.8 

2.8 

5.2 

4.8 

5.5 

2.7 

2.0 

3.5 

6.8 

5.2 

2.5 

2.4 

2.4 

2.9 

:

O
n
Z
O
o
C

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

 5 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S3 - Refined XRD diffractograms of mCo:ZnO samples (8 at.%) synthesized at different temperatures in 
atmosphere of  (a) oxygen and (b) argon. Each figure shows the observed pattern (symbols) and in a log scale 
(solid gray line), Rietveld calculated pattern (solid line), and the goodness of the fit or residual pattern (at the 
bottom). Diffraction peaks associated with metallic Co, CoO and Co3O4 were indicated by the symbol (+), (∗) and 
(#), respectively. 

5 

 10 

 
        
 
 
 
 
 
Table S1 - Elemental occupation factor for the Zn, Co (effective concentration, xE) and O present in the 
mCo:ZnO wurtzite structure and the fractions of the ZnO, CoO, Co3O4 and metallic Co obtained through 
Rietveld refinement. 

Sample 

Zn 

Mixture 

0.997(1) 

Co 

- 

0.977(6) 

0.9426 

O 

f. ZnO 

f. CoO 

f. Co3O4 

f. Co 

:

O
n
Z
O
o
C
m

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

600 ºC 

700 ºC 

800 ºC 

850 ºC 

900 ºC 

1000 ºC 

1200 ºC 

0.997(1) 

0.005(1) 

0.978(5) 

0.9236 

0.990(1) 

0.010(1) 

0.977(5) 

0.9305 

0.984(1) 

0.016(1) 

0.986(4) 

0.9371 

0. 960(1) 

0.040(1) 

0.987(4) 

0.9591 

0.922(1) 

0.078(1) 

0.984(4) 

0.9986 

0.920(1) 

0.080(1) 

0.992(5) 

1.000 

0.921(1) 

0.080(1) 

0.992(5) 

1.000 

Mixture 

0.997(1) 

- 

0.977(6) 

0.9426 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

0.0573 

0.0764 

0.0695 

0.0629 

0.0409 

0.0014 

- 

- 

- 

0.0573 

500 ºC 

600 ºC 

700 ºC 

800 ºC 

1000 ºC 

1200 ºC 

0.996(1) 

0.004(1) 

0.977(4) 

0.9267 

0.0113 

0.0589 

0.0029 

0.991(1) 

0.011(1) 

0.973(4) 

0.9318 

0.0096 

0.0586 

0.959(1) 

0.042(1) 

0.986(4) 

0.9593 

0.0195 

0.0211 

0.929(1) 

0.071(1) 

0.984(4) 

0.9904 

0.0064 

0.0032 

- 

- 

- 

0.920(1) 

0.079(1) 

0.974(4) 

1.000 

0.921(1) 

0.080(1) 

0.971(4) 

1.000 

- 

- 

- 

- 

5 

Table S6 - Elemental occupation factor for the Zn, Co (effective concentration, xE) and O present 
in the mCo:ZnO wurtzite structure and the fractions of the ZnO, CoO, Co3O4 and metallic Co 
obtained through Rietveld refinement. 

Sample 

a (Å) 

c (Å) 

V (Å3) 

Mixture 

3.25105(2) 

5.20886(5) 

47.677(1) 

600 ºC 

700 ºC 

800 ºC 

850 ºC 

900 ºC 

1000 ºC 

1200 ºC 

Mixture 

500 ºC 

600 ºC 

700 ºC 

800 ºC 

1000 ºC 

1200 ºC 

3.25108(1) 

5.20856(3) 

47.677(1) 

3.25137(1) 

5.20817(3) 

47.682(1) 

3.25202(1) 

5.20671(2) 

47.687(1) 

3.25248(1) 

5.20685(2) 

47.702(1) 

3.25319(1) 

5.20532(2) 

47.708(1) 

3.25358(1) 

5.20490(3) 

47.716(1) 

3.25328(1) 

5.20586(3) 

47.716(1) 

3.25105(2) 

5.20886(5) 

47.677(1) 

3.25107(1) 

5.20868(3) 

47.677(1) 

3.25130(1) 

5.20873(3) 

47.684(1) 

3.25190(1) 

5.20756(2) 

47.691(1) 

3.25269(1) 

5.20656(2) 

47.705(1) 

3.25356(1) 

5.20491(2) 

47.716(1) 

3.25355(1) 

5.20508(3) 

47.717(1) 

2χ  

8.4 

4.8 

6.4 

5.3 

3.0 

4.4 

5.6 

4.7 

8.4 

4.6 

4.1 

3.3 

4.2 

4.7 

4.1 

RBragg 

4.6 

7.1 

7.5 

7.2 

3.1 

2.3 

2.3 

3.5 

4.6 

4.7 

4.4 

2.1 

2.2 

2.7 

2.6 

:

O
n
Z
O
o
C
m

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  S4.  Raman  scattering  spectra  obtained  at  room  temperature  for the  samples (a)  Co3O4:ZnO  in  O2;  (b) 
Co3O4:ZnO in Ar; (c) CoO:ZnO in O2 and (d) CoO:ZnO in Ar. The spectra were acquired at room temperature 
and are normalized by integrated area of the E2H vibrational mode obtained by gaussian fit of the spectra. 

5 

10 

Figure S5. (a) X-ray diffraction patterns and (b) Raman scattering spectra obtained at room temperature for the 
CoO, Co0.8Zn0.2O (20 at.% Zn-doped CoO), Co3O4, and Co0.24Zn0.6O (10 at.% Zn-doped Co3O4).   

 15 

 
 
 
      
 
      
 
 
      
 
    
 
 
 
 
5 

Figure S6. Room temperature PL spectra for part of the Co3O4:ZnO set of samples prepared in (a) oxygen (O2) 
and (b) argon (Ar) atmospheres. It was used a 532 nm laser for excitation with optical power density of 50 kW/cm2. 
Integrated area underneath the spectra plotted as a function of the calculated effective cobalt concentration (xE) 
for the samples prepared (c) O2 and in (d) Ar. 

10 

15 

Figure S7. Room temperature PL spectra for part of the CoO:ZnO set of samples prepared in (a) oxygen (O2) 
and (b) argon (Ar) atmospheres. It was used a 532 nm laser for excitation with optical power density of 50 kW/cm2. 
Integrated area underneath the spectra plotted as a function of the calculated effective cobalt concentration (xE) 
for the samples prepared (c) O2 and in (d) Ar. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  S8.  Representative  SEM  micrographs  and  obtained  grain  size  statistical  histograms  for  the  powder 
mixtures (a) ZnO pure, (b) Co3O4:ZnO, (c) CoO:ZnO and (d) mCo:ZnO, before the heat treatments.   

  
 
Figure S9 - Representative images by scanning electron microscopy of the surfaces of ZnO samples heat treated 
in  O2  at  (a)  600  ºC,  (b)  700  ºC,  (c)  800  ºC,  (d)  1000  ºC,  (e)  1100  ºC,  (f)  1200  ºC,  and  in  Ar  at  (g)  600  ºC,                      
(h) 700 ºC, (i) 800 ºC, (j) 1000 ºC, (k) 1100 ºC, and (l) 1200 ºC. 
 5 

 
 
Figure S10 - Particle size distribution histograms of the ZnO samples heat treated in O2 at (a) 600 ºC, (b) 700 ºC, 
(c) 800 ºC, (d) 1000 ºC, (e) 1100 ºC, (f) 1200 ºC, and in Ar at (g) 600 ºC, (h) 700 ºC, (i) 800 ºC, (j) 1000 ºC,           
(k) 1100 ºC, and (l) 1200 ºC. The distribution statistic obtained after log-normal fit is also presented in the panels. 
 5 

 10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S7 - Particle size distribution analyses of the ZnO samples. L is the mean value 
of the particle diameter and σg is the geometric standard deviation obtained by the log-
normal  fit  of  particle  size  distribution  histograms  for  each  sample.  N  is  the  total 
number of counted particles. 

O
n
Z

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

Sample 

Mixture 
600 ºC 
700 ºC 
800 ºC 
1000 ºC 
1100 ºC 
1200 ºC 
Mixture 
600 ºC 
700 ºC 
800 ºC 
1000 ºC 
1100 ºC 
1200 ºC 

L (µm) 

0.151(6) 
0.193(1) 
0.309(3) 
0.366(2) 
0.829(4) 
1.47(1) 
2.24(2) 
0.151(6) 
0.214(2) 
0.305(2) 
0.375(2) 
0.901(4) 
1.58(1) 
2.39(1) 

σ g 

1.34(1) 
1.384(6) 
1.255(7) 
1.271(4) 
1.314(6) 
1.239(8) 
1.330(7) 
1.34(1) 
1.33(1) 
1.211(7) 
1.269(5) 
1.314(4) 
1.263(7) 
1.300(5) 

N 

472 
402 
376 
704 
515 
385 
532 
472 
592 
406 
635 
415 
389 
506 

 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S11 - Representative images by scanning electron microscopy of the surfaces of Co3O4:ZnO samples heat 
treated in O2 at (a) 600 ºC, (b) 700 ºC, (c) 800 ºC, (d) 1000 ºC, (e) 1100 ºC, (f) 1200 ºC, and in Ar at (g) 600 ºC, 
(h) 700 ºC, (i) 800 ºC, (j) 1000 ºC, (k) 1100 ºC, and (l) 1200 ºC. 

 
Figure S12 - Particle size distribution histograms of the Co3O4:ZnO samples heat treated in O2 at (a) 600 ºC,               
(b) 700 ºC, (c) 800 ºC, (d) 1000 ºC, (e) 1100 ºC, (f) 1200 ºC, and in Ar at (g) 600 ºC, (h) 700 ºC, (i) 800 ºC,            
(j) 1000 ºC, (k) 1100 ºC, and (l) 1200 ºC. The distribution statistic obtained after log-normal fit is also presented 
in the panels. 

5 

 10 

 15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 

Table  S8  -  Particle  size  distribution  analyses  of  the  Co3O4:ZnO  samples.  L  is  the 
mean value of the particle diameter and σg is the geometric standard deviation obtained 
by the log-normal fit of particle size distribution histograms for each sample. N is the 
total number of counted particles. 

O
n
Z

:
4

O
3
o
C

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

Sample 

Mixture 
600 ºC 
700 ºC 
800 ºC 
1000 ºC 
1100 ºC 
1200 ºC 
Mixture 
600 ºC 
700 ºC 
800 ºC 
1000 ºC 
1100 ºC 
1200 ºC 

L(µm) 

0.091(1) 
0.132(1) 
0.278(2) 
0.326(2) 
1.058(8) 
3.99(3) 
6.29(7) 
0.091(1) 
0.149(1) 
0.299(1) 
0.343(2) 
0.950(5) 
2.92(1) 
6.19(5) 

σ g 

1.601(5) 
1.520(5) 
1.259(5) 
1.244(4) 
1.323(7) 
1.317(7) 
1.37(1) 
1.601(5) 
1.431(2) 
1.229(3) 
1.207(6) 
1.392(5) 
1.334(4) 
1.385(7) 

N 

562 
609 
500 
682 
481 
557 
452 
562 
512 
610 
423 
456 
573 
515 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S13 - Representative images by scanning electron microscopy of the surfaces of CoO:ZnO samples heat 
treated in O2 at (a) 600 ºC, (b) 700 ºC, (c) 800 ºC, (d) 1000 ºC, (e) 1100 ºC, (f) 1200 ºC, and in Ar at (g) 600 ºC, 
(h) 700 ºC, (i) 800 ºC, (j) 1000 ºC, (k) 1100 ºC, and (l) 1200 ºC. 
 5 

 
Figure  S14 -  Particle size distribution  histograms  of the  CoO:ZnO samples  heat treated in  O2  at (a)  600 ºC,               
(b) 700 ºC, (c) 800 ºC, (d) 1000 ºC, (e) 1100 ºC, (f) 1200 ºC, and in Ar at (g) 600 ºC, (h) 700 ºC, (i) 800 ºC,            
(j) 1000 ºC, (k) 1100 ºC, and (l) 1200 ºC. The distribution statistic obtained after log-normal fit is also presented 
in the panels. 

5 

 10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S9 - Particle size distribution analyses of the CoO:ZnO samples. L is the mean 
value of the particle diameter and σg is the geometric standard deviation obtained by 
the log-normal fit of particle size distribution histograms for each sample. N is the total 
number of counted particles. 

:

O
n
Z
O
o
C

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

Sample 

Mixture 
600 ºC 
700 ºC 
800 ºC 
1000 ºC 
1100 ºC 
1200 ºC 
Mixture 
600 ºC 
700 ºC 
800 ºC 
1000 ºC 
1100 ºC 
1200 ºC 

L (µm) 

0.087(1) 
0.147(1) 
0.299(2) 
0.356(3) 
1.001(6) 
1.97(4) 
3.88(5) 
0.088(1) 
0.162(4) 
0.301(2) 
0.397(2) 
0.956(6) 
1.77(1) 
3.49(4) 

σ g 

1.51(1) 
1.56(3) 
1.217(5) 
1.222(9) 
1.418(6) 
1.27(1) 
1.46(1) 
1.616(5) 
1.45(2) 
1.216(8) 
1.308(7) 
1.43(2) 
1.275(7) 
1.44(1) 

N 

612 
428 
430 
454 
545 
509 
414 
612 
440 
390 
402 
410 
553 
575 

5 

 10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S15 - Representative images by scanning electron microscopy of the surfaces of mCo:ZnO samples heat 
treated in O2 at (a) 600 ºC, (b) 700 ºC, (c) 800 ºC, (d) 1000 ºC, (e) 1100 ºC, (f) 1200 ºC, and in Ar at (g) 600 ºC, 
(h) 700 ºC, (i) 800 ºC, (j) 1000 ºC, (k) 1100 ºC, and (l) 1200 ºC. 

 
Figure S16 - Particle size distribution histograms of the mCoO:ZnO samples heat treated in O2 at (a) 600 ºC,               
(b) 700 ºC, (c) 800 ºC, (d) 1000 ºC, (e) 1100 ºC, (f) 1200 ºC, and in Ar at (g) 600 ºC, (h) 700 ºC, (i) 800 ºC,                
(j) 1000 ºC, (k) 1100 ºC, and (l) 1200 ºC. The distribution statistic obtained after log-normal fit is also presented 
in the panels. 

5 

 10 

 15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table S10 - Particle size distribution analyses of the mCoO:ZnO samples. L is the 
mean  value  of  the  particle  diameter  and  σg  is  the  geometric  standard  deviation 
obtained by the log-normal fit of particle size distribution histograms for each sample. 
N is the total number of counted particles. 

O
n
Z
:
o
C
m

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

Sample 

Mixture 
600 ºC 
700 ºC 
800 ºC 
1000 ºC 
1100 ºC 
1200 ºC 
Mixture 
600 ºC 
700 ºC 
800 ºC 
1000 ºC 
1100 ºC 
1200 ºC 

L (µm) 

0.0917(6) 
0.130(1) 
0.296(2) 
0.376(2) 
1.043(6) 
2.82(2) 
4.29(3) 
0.0917(6) 
0.194(1) 
0.320(2) 
0.431(3) 
1.007(8) 
2.32(2) 
4.04(2) 

σ g 

1.477(6) 
1.443(7) 
1.250(7) 
1.224(6) 
1.316(6) 
1.265(8) 
1.291(6) 
1.477(6) 
1.286(4) 
1.194(7) 
1.233(7) 
1.399(8) 
1.270(6) 
1.297(4) 

N 

531 
407 
475 
379 
477 
470 
475 
531 
404 
406 
404 
483 
414 
421 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S17. Representative micrographs for the pure ZnO samples before and after the heat treatments 
in O2 and Ar at the temperatures of 700 °C and 1200 °C. A relatively small shrinkage is observed for the 
heat treatment at 700 °C, while an evident densification occurs at 1200 °C. 
 5 

Figure S18. Representative micrographs for the mCo:ZnO samples before and after the heat treatments 
in O2 and Ar at the temperatures of 700 °C and 1200 °C. A relatively small shrinkage is observed for the 
heat treatment at 700 °C, while an evident densification occurs at 1200 °C. 

10 

    
 
 
    
 
 
Figure S19 - Representative images by scanning electron microscopy of the surfaces of ZnO samples heat treated 
at 700 ºC in O2 for (a) 1.0 h , (b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h, (h) 2.0 h,  
(i) 2.5 h, and (j) 3.0 h.  

5 

 
 
 
 
Figure S20 - Particle size distribution histograms of the ZnO samples heat treated at 700 ºC in O2 for (a) 1.0 h, 
(b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h, (h) 2.0 h, (i) 2.5 h, and (j) 3.0 h.  The line 
in the panels correspond to the log-normal fit. 

5 

 
 
 
Figure S21 - Representative images by scanning electron microscopy of the surfaces of ZnO samples heat treated 
at 1200 ºC in O2 for (a) 1.0 h , (b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h, (h) 2.0 h, 
(i) 2.5 h, and (j) 3.0 h. 
 5 

 
Figure S22 - Particle size distribution histograms of the ZnO samples heat treated at 1200 ºC in O2 for (a) 1.0 h, 
(b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h, (h) 2.0 h, (i) 2.5 h, and (j) 3.0 h.  The line 
in the panels correspond to the log-normal fit. 
 5 

 
 
 
Table  S11  -  Particle  size  distribution  analyses  of  the  ZnO  samples  heat  treated  at              
700 °C at different times. L is the mean value of the particle diameter and σg is the 
geometric  standard  deviation  obtained  by  the  log-normal  fit  of  particle  size 
distribution histograms for each sample. N is the total number of counted particles. 

C
o

0
0
7

–
O
n
Z

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

Sample 

1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 
1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 

L (µm) 

0.221(2) 
0.236(1) 
0.258(3) 
0.262(1) 
0.275(1) 
0.204(2) 
0.239(1) 
0.253(3) 
0.261(3) 
0.297(2) 

σ g 

1.301(6) 
1.300(4) 
1.23(1) 
1.299(4) 
1.274(5) 
1.296(9) 
1.252(6) 
1.26(1) 
1.22(1) 
1.212(8) 

N 

585 
594 
500 
494 
500 
655 
556 
521 
471 
400 

 5 

10 

Table  S12  -  Particle  size  distribution  analyses  of  the  ZnO  samples  heat  treated  at             
1200 °C at different times. L is the mean value of the particle diameter and σg is the 
geometric standard deviation obtained by the log-normal fit of particle size distribution 
histograms for each sample. N is the total number of counted particles. 

C
o

0
0
2
1

–
O
n
Z

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

Sample 

1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 
1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 

L (µm) 

1.43(1) 
1.55(1) 
1.70(1) 
1.79(1) 
1.88(1) 
1.31(1) 
1.55(1) 
1.78(1) 
1.90(2) 
2.03(2) 

σ g 

1.355(8) 
1.316(5) 
1.342(7) 
1.306(7) 
1.422(7) 
1.419(3) 
1.302(7) 
1.391(4) 
1.324(8) 
1.309(8) 

N 

944 
500 
482 
446 
725 
890 
480 
473 
642 
402 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S23 - Representative images by scanning electron microscopy of the surfaces of Co3O4:ZnO samples heat 
treated at 700 ºC in O2 for (a) 1.0 h , (b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h,        
(h) 2.0 h, (i) 2.5 h, and (j) 3.0 h. 
 5 

 
 
Figure S24 - Particle size distribution histograms of the Co3O4:ZnO samples heat treated at 700 ºC in O2 for     
(a) 1.0 h, (b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h, (h) 2.0 h, (i) 2.5 h, and (j) 3.0 h.  
The line in the panels correspond to the log-normal fit. 
 5 

 
Figure S25 - Representative images by scanning electron microscopy of the surfaces of Co3O4:ZnO samples heat 
treated at 1200 ºC in O2 for (a) 1.0 h , (b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h,     
(h) 2.0 h, (i) 2.5 h, and (j) 3.0 h. 
 5 

 
Figure S26 - Particle size distribution histograms of the Co3O4:ZnO samples heat treated at 1200 ºC in O2 for  
(a) 1.0 h, (b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h, (h) 2.0 h, (i) 2.5 h, and (j) 3.0 h.  
The line in the panels correspond to the log-normal fit. 
 5 

 
 
 
Table S13 - Particle size distribution analyses of the Co3O4:ZnO samples heat treated 
at 700 °C at different times. L is the mean value of the particle diameter and σg is the 
geometric  standard  deviation  obtained  by  the  log-normal  fit  of  particle  size 
distribution histograms for each sample. N is the total number of counted particles. 

C
o

0
0
7

–
O
n
Z
:
4

O
3
o
C

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

Sample 

1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 
1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 

L (µm) 

0.218(3) 
0.226(1) 
0.244(2) 
0.265(1) 
0.282(1) 
0.211(1) 
0.237(1) 
0.255(1) 
0.278(2) 
0.296(2) 

σ g 

1.31(1) 
1.304(5) 
1.257(8) 
1.335(5) 
1.278(4) 
1.309(6) 
1.287(5) 
1.273(6) 
1.294(6) 
1.252(7) 

N 

744 
682 
497 
587 
569 
649 
601 
587 
555 
521 

Table S14 - Particle size distribution analyses of the Co3O4:ZnO samples heat treated 
at 1200 °C at different times. L is the mean value of the particle diameter and σg is the 
geometric standard deviation obtained by the log-normal fit of particle size distribution 
histograms for each sample. N is the total number of counted particles. 

C
o

0
0
2
1

–
O
n
Z
:
4

O
3
o
C

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

Sample 

1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 
1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 

L (µm) 

2.82(5) 
2.97(3) 
3.11(6) 
3.35(2) 
3.58(3) 
1.61(2) 
1.91(1) 
2.27(1) 
2.40(2) 
2.67(4) 

σ g 

1.57(1) 
1.36(1) 
1.53(2) 
1.315(8) 
1.498(7) 
1.42(1) 
1.327(7) 
1.435(6) 
1.369(7) 
1.47(1) 

N 

516 
690 
632 
789 
595 
589 
598 
832 
663 
580 

 5 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S27 - Representative images by scanning electron microscopy of the surfaces of CoO:ZnO samples heat 
treated at 700 ºC in O2 for (a) 1.0 h , (b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h,         
(h) 2.0 h, (i) 2.5 h, and (j) 3.0 h. 
 5 

 
 
Figure  S28 -  Particle  size  distribution  histograms  of the  CoO:ZnO  samples  heat  treated  at  700  ºC  in  O2  for            
(a) 1.0 h, (b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h, (h) 2.0 h, (i) 2.5 h, and (j) 3.0 h.  
The line in the panels correspond to the log-normal fit. 
 5 

 
Figure S29 - Representative images by scanning electron microscopy of the surfaces of CoO:ZnO samples heat 
treated at 1200 ºC in O2 for (a) 1.0 h , (b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h,      
(h) 2.0 h, (i) 2.5 h, and (j) 3.0 h. 
 5 

 
 
 
Figure S30 - Particle size distribution histograms of the CoO:ZnO samples heat treated at 1200 ºC in O2 for        
(a) 1.0 h , (b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h, (h) 2.0 h, (i) 2.5 h, and                     
(j) 3.0 h. The line in the panels correspond to the log-normal fit. 
 5 

 
 
5 

10 

Table  S15  -  Particle  size  distribution  analyses  of  the  CoO:ZnO  samples  heat 
treated at 700 °C at different times. L is the mean value of the particle diameter 
and σg is the geometric  standard deviation obtained by the log-normal fit of 
particle size distribution histograms for each sample. N is the total number of 
counted particles. 

C
o

0
0
7

–
O
n
Z
O
o
C

:

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

Sample 

1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 
1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 

L (µm) 

0.219(2) 
0.229(1) 
0.241(2) 
0.251(2) 
0.278(1) 
0.212(2) 
0.227(2) 
0.242(1) 
0.278(2) 
0.293(3) 

σ g 

1.258(8) 
1.242(4) 
1.313(8) 
1.326(7) 
1.245(5) 
1.356(6) 
1.329(7) 
1.302(5) 
1.267(5) 
1.24(1) 

N 

754 
707 
725 
739 
633 
767 
714 
709 
630 
489 

Table  S16  -  Particle  size  distribution  analyses  of  the  CoO:ZnO  samples  heat 
treated at 1200 °C at different times. L is the mean value of the particle diameter 
and σg is the geometric standard deviation obtained by the log-normal fit of 
particle size distribution histograms for each sample. N is the total number of 
counted particles. 

C
o

0
0
2
1

–
O
n
Z
O
o
C

:

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

Sample 

1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 
1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 

L (µm) 

2.204(9) 
2.31(1) 
2.44(2) 
2.55(2) 
2.72(2) 
1.409(9) 
1.534(6) 
1.713(8) 
1.809(2) 
1.99(1) 

σ g 

1.352(4) 
1.322(5) 
1.376(8) 
1.305(6) 
1.481(7) 
1.458(6) 
1.323(4) 
1.376(4) 
1.314(3) 
1.581(6) 

N 

500 
573 
580 
618 
467 
704 
803 
657 
760 
491 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S31 - Representative images by scanning electron microscopy of the surfaces of mCo:ZnO samples heat 
treated at 700 ºC in O2 for (a) 1.0 h , (b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h,            
(h) 2.0 h, (i) 2.5 h, and (j) 3.0 h. 
 5 

 
Figure  S32 -  Particle  size  distribution  histograms  of the  mCo:ZnO  samples  heat  treated  at  700  ºC  in  O2  for            
(a) 1.0 h , (b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h, (h) 2.0 h, (i) 2.5 h, and                       
(j) 3.0 h. The line in the panels correspond to the log-normal fit. 

5 

 
 
Figure S33 - Representative images by scanning electron microscopy of the surfaces of mCo:ZnO samples heat 
treated at 1200 ºC in O2 for (a) 1.0 h , (b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h,    
(h) 2.0 h, (i) 2.5 h, and (j) 3.0 h. 
 5 

 
 
Figure S34 - Particle size distribution histograms of the mCo:ZnO samples heat treated at 1200 ºC in O2 for      
(a) 1.0 h , (b) 1.5 h, (c) 2.0 h, (d) 2.5 h, (e) 3.0 h, and in Ar for (f) 1.0 h, (g) 1.5 h, (h) 2.0 h, (i) 2.5 h, and (j) 3.0 
h.  The line in the panels correspond to the log-normal fit. 
 5 

 
 
 
Table S17 - Particle size distribution analyses of the mCo:ZnO samples heat treated 
at 700 °C at different times. L is the mean value of the particle diameter and σg is the 
geometric standard deviation obtained by the log-normal fit of particle size distribution 
histograms for each sample. N is the total number of counted particles. 

C
o

0
0
7

–
O
n
Z

:
o
C
m

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

Sample 

1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 
1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 

L (µm) 

0.219(1) 
0.225(2) 
0.239(1) 
0.246(1) 
0.256(1) 
0.218(1) 
0.227(2) 
0.239(2) 
0.262(2) 
0.315(2) 

σ g 

1.281(5) 
1.278(6) 
1.259(4) 
1.256(5) 
1.244(5) 
1.309(4) 
1.289(7) 
1.333(6) 
1.297(8) 
1.271(5) 

N 

749 
727 
671 
627 
615 
780 
714 
687 
556 
508 

Table S18 - Particle size distribution analyses of the mCo:ZnO samples heat treated 
at 1200 °C at different times. L is the mean value of the particle diameter and σg is the 
geometric  standard  deviation  obtained  by  the  log-normal  fit  of  particle  size 
distribution histograms for each sample. N is the total number of counted particles. 

C
o

0
0
2
1

–
O
n
Z

:
o
C
m

n
e
g
y
x
O

n
o
g
r
A

Sample 

1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 
1.0h 
1.5h 
2.0h 
2.5h 
3.0h 

L (µm) 

2.44(2) 
2.53(1) 
2.63(3) 
2.73(2) 
2.92(3) 
1.76(1) 
2.10(1) 
2.32(1) 
2.54(3) 
2.71(3) 

σ g 

1.354(8) 
1.280(4) 
1.37(1) 
1.278(7) 
1.42(1) 
1.56(3) 
1.293(6) 
1.348(5) 
1.29(1) 
1.426(9) 

N 

763 
590 
726 
722 
420 
531 
618 
666 
552 
482 

5 

10 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
   
