A cylindrical implosion platform for the study of highly magnetized plasmas at LMJ

G. P´erez-Callejo,1, 2, ∗ C. Vlachos,1, 3 C. A. Walsh,4 R. Florido,5 M. Bailly-Grandvaux,6 X. Vaisseau,7 F.
Suzuki-Vidal,8 C. McGuﬀey,9 F. N. Beg,6 P. Bradford,1 V. Ospina-Boh´orquez,1, 7, 10, 11 D. Batani,1
D. Raﬀestin,1 A. Cola¨ıtis,1 V. Tikhonchuk,1, 12 A. Casner,1, 13 M. Koenig,14 B. Albertazzi,14
R. Fedosejevs,15 N. Woolsey,16 M. Ehret,17 A. Debayle,7, 11 P. Loiseau,7, 11 A. Calisti,18 S.
Ferri,18 J. Honrubia,19 R. Kingham,8 R. C. Mancini,20 M. A. Gigosos,2 and J. J. Santos1, †
1Universit´e de Bordeaux-CNRS-CEA, Centre Lasers Intenses et Applications (CELIA), UMR 5107, F-33405 Talence, France
2Departamento de F´ısica Te´orica, At´omica y ´Optica, Universidad de Valladolid, 47011 Valladolid, Spain
3Institute of Plasma Physics & Lasers, Hellenic Mediterranean University Research Centre, 74100 Rethymno, Greece
4Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, California 94550, USA
5iUNAT–Departamento de F´ısica, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 35017 Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain
6Center for Energy Research, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, United States of America
7CEA, DAM, DIF, F-91297 Arpajon, France
8Plasma Physics Group, The Blackett Laboratory, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK
9General Atomics, San Diego, California 92121, USA.
10University of Salamanca, 37008 Salamanca, Spain
11Universit´e Paris-Saclay, CEA, LMCE, 91680 Bruy`eres-le-Chˆatel, France
12ELI-Beamlines, Institute of Physics, Czech Academy of Sciences, 25241 Doln´ı Brezany, Czech Republic
13CEA-CESTA, CS 60001, 33116 Le Barp Cedex, France
14LULI-CNRS, CEA, Sorbonne Universites, Ecole Polytechnique,
Institut Polytechnique de Paris, F-91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France
15Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, T6G1R1 Alberta, Canada
16Department of Physics, University of York, Heslington YO10 5DD, United Kingdom
17Centro de Laseres Pulsados, Building M5, Science Park, 37185 Villamayor, Salamanca, Spain
18Aix Marseille Universit´e, CNRS, PIIM, F-13013 Marseille, France
19ETSI Aeron´autica y del Espacio, Universidad Polit´ecnica de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain
20Department of Physics, University of Nevada, Reno, Nevada 89557, USA
(Dated: July 4, 2022)

Investigating the potential beneﬁts of the use of magnetic ﬁelds in Inertial Conﬁnement Fusion
(ICF) experiments has given rise to new experimental platforms like the Magnetized Liner Inertial
Fusion (MagLIF) approach at the Z-machine (Sandia National Laboratories), or its laser-driven
equivalent at OMEGA (Laboratory for Laser Energetics). Implementing these platforms at MJ-
scale laser facilities, such as the Laser MegaJoule (LMJ) or the National Ignition Facility (NIF), is
crucial to reaching self-sustained nuclear fusion and enlarges the level of magnetization that can be
achieved through a higher compression. In this paper, we present a complete design of an experi-
mental platform for magnetized implosions using cylindrical targets at LMJ. A seed magnetic ﬁeld
is generated along the axis of the cylinder using laser-driven coil targets, minimizing debris and in-
creasing diagnostic access compared with pulsed power ﬁeld generators. We present a comprehensive
simulation study of the initial B-ﬁeld generated with these coil targets, as well as 2-dimensional ex-
tended magneto-hydrodynamics (MHD) simulations showing that a 5 T initial B-ﬁeld is compressed
up to 25 kT during the implosion. Under these circumstances, the electrons become magnetized,
which severely modiﬁes the plasma conditions at stagnation.
In particular, in the hot spot the
electron temperature is increased (from 1 keV to 5 keV) while the density is reduced (from 40 g/cm3
to 7 g/cm3). We discuss how these changes can be diagnosed using X-ray imaging and spectroscopy,
and particle diagnostics. We propose the simultaneous use of two dopants in the fuel (Ar and Kr)
to act as spectroscopic tracers. We show that this introduces an eﬀective spatial resolution in the
plasma which permits an unambiguous observation of the B-ﬁeld eﬀects. Additionally, we present
a plan for future experiments of this kind at LMJ.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Magnetization is a promising strategy to increase fu-
sion yields and relax ignition criteria in laser-driven In-
ertial Conﬁnement Fusion (ICF) [1], as the presence of a

∗ gabriel.perez.callejo@uva.es
† joao.santos@u-bordeaux.fr

B-ﬁeld strongly modiﬁes fundamental properties of High
Energy Density (HED) plasmas. In ICF implosions, this
concerns (among other key mechanisms) heat transport,
which governs the transfer of the laser energy from the
corona to the ablation front, and becomes anisotropic
[2, 3] in the presence of a strong B-ﬁeld (∼kT ). Seed B-
ﬁelds can be ampliﬁed by ∼ 500 times to strengths up to
B > 10 kT through compression of the plasma [4]. This
increases the fusion yields as it inhibits the thermal en-
ergy transport and reduces the loss of α particles from

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

1

]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

2
v
9
9
0
2
1
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
the hotspot perpendicularly to the B-ﬁeld [1, 4–6]. Ad-
ditionally, magnetized implosions may be less vulnerable
to hydrodynamic instabilities [7, 8] that could lead to
disadvantageous mixing of the hot and cold parts of the
target [9]. Suppressing these instabilities is crucial issue
to reach ignition at the National Ignition Facility (NIF)
[10–12].

A common approach to magneto-inertial fusion is the
use of cylindrical geometries with an axial B-ﬁeld, which
was originally used in the Z-pinch Magnetized Liner In-
ertial Fusion (MagLIF) experiments at the Z-machine
[13, 14]. Proﬁting from the advantages described above,
combined with this favorable geometry, the cylindrical
compression is expected to be near-adiabatic and stable,
with a lower implosion velocity and convergence ratio
than in conventional ICF. To explore this approach with
a higher repetition rate and easier diagnostic access than
on the Z-machine, a laser-driven downscaled MagLIF ap-
proach is being explored at the OMEGA 60 laser facil-
ity [15], thus facilitating investigations of the underly-
ing physics [16–20]. At OMEGA, the axial seed B-ﬁeld
is generated using external capacitive pulsed discharges
with the magneto-inertial fusion electrical discharge sys-
tem (MIFEDS) [21], which can produce B-ﬁelds of up to
∼ 30 T.

However, the MIFEDS system blocks the line-of-sight
that follows the axis of the cylinder, which complicates
the study of radial gradients and instabilities during the
implosion. Additionally, it produces a signiﬁcant amount
of debris that can be damaging to the nearby diagnos-
tics and the facility in general. As an alternative strategy,
the generation of B-ﬁelds using Laser-Driven Coil targets
(LDCs) has recently begun to be investigated for cylin-
drical implosion experiments at OMEGA [22, 23]. This
approach builds upon the demonstration of the compact-
ness and performance of these targets observed in recent
laser-plasma experiments carried out with in laser facili-
ties of more modest energies [24–28]. Laser-driven B-ﬁeld
targets could potentially extend the range of available
magnetization levels that can be reached in the implod-
ing plasma. Additionally, contrary to MIFEDS, they are
practically debris-free, and do not considerably block the
line of sight of diagnostics to the target, thus facilitating
the study of the implosion in both axial and radial direc-
tions. Independently of the method that is used to gener-
ate the seed B-ﬁeld, the extreme magnetization phenom-
ena produced in these cylindrical implosion experiments
have been recently studied using extended magnetohy-
drodynamics (MHD) simulations [29].

In this context we present an experimental design for
studying the dynamics of imploding plasmas under ex-
treme magnetizations at the Laser MegaJoule (LMJ) fa-
cility [30, 31]. The platform described here is scheduled
to be ﬁelded in 2024-2026. We build on the aforemen-
tioned MagLIF experiments at OMEGA 60 using LDCs.
This paper constitutes a ﬁrst report on these experi-
ments.

We present results from using state-of-the-art MHD,

2

FIG. 1. Schematic design of the cylindrical targets, showing
the plastic shell and the gas fuel. This cylinder is 3 mm long,
and the thickness of the CH shell is 55 µm.

atomic physics and radiation transport simulation tools,
which show that it is possible to reach conditions for ex-
treme magnetizations using a relatively low seed B-ﬁeld.
In particular, a 5 T initial B-ﬁeld can be compressed to
> 10 kT, thus allowing unique studies of the impact of
magnetization on electron heat transport, magnetic ﬂux
compression, stagnation temperatures and fusion reac-
tion yields.

The paper is structured as follows. In section II the
experimental conﬁguration is described, including the re-
strictions for target dimensions, and laser pointing. Sec-
tion III presents the expected values of the seed B-ﬁeld
that can be produced within this design. This is ex-
panded upon in the Appendix, which describes the phys-
ical model used to describe the B-ﬁeld generation using
LDCs and details the results and analysis from a recent
experiment at OMEGA in which LDCs were character-
ized in conditions similar to those at LMJ. In section IV,
we present the results from extended MHD simulations
showing the compression of the seed B-ﬁeld and its eﬀect
on the plasma conditions compared to the simulations
for the unmagnetized case. Section V discusses a variety
of diagnostics to characterize the experiment, and ﬁnally,
section VI discusses the conclusions and future perspec-
tives of this work.

II. EXPERIMENTAL CONFIGURATION

The proposed experimental conﬁguration consists of a
D2-ﬁlled plastic cylinder positioned at the Target Cham-
ber Center (TCC), whose axis is aligned with the target
chamber vertical axis. The cylinder is 3 mm long, 750 µm
outer radius – 55 µm thick plastic shells (CH, 1.1 g/cm3)
ﬁlled with D2 at 11 atm (1.81 mg/cm3), as shown in Fig-
ure 1. Targets have been designed to have the minimum
size, while ensuring that the focused LMJ laser beams
are eﬀectively terminated on target.

We propose the use of a dopant in the gas to regulate
the core temperature [29] and, most importantly, to act
as a spectroscopic tracer for characterizing the plasma

3

(a)

(b)

FIG. 2. (2a) VisRad [32] image showing the proposed conﬁguration of the targets, with the 80 active laser beams for cylindrical
compression. The beams’ radius in display corresponds to 99% enclosed beam energy. The cylindrical target position is
displayed by a black dashed line contour. Additionally, the ﬁgure shows the coil targets, mounted around the cylinder, with a
gap distance between coils of 1 mm. In this conﬁguration, the B-ﬁeld generated at the axis of the cylinder is expected to be
∼5-10 T. It can be seen how the coil targets are away from the LMJ beams that irradiate the cylinder. (2b) Laser intensity on
the cylindrical target using the proposed drive conﬁguration. The intensity is (11.6 ± 1.2) × 1014 Wcm−2 over the central 1 mm
region.

conditions. In particular, we propose using argon, kryp-
ton, or rather a combination of the two. Both elements
have been previously used as spectroscopic tracers for
ICF-related experiments [33–37]. While the dopant con-
centration will decrease the obtainable temperature ow-
ing to radiative losses, the choice of dopant will determine
the plasma conditions that can be probed using spectro-
scopic diagnostics. This is discussed further in Section
V.

The cylindrical target is imploded using 80 laser beams
as shown in Figure 2a. These are grouped into twenty
groups (quads), each of which delivers a total energy
of 13.5 kJ using a 3 ns square pulse [38] of 3ω light
(λ = 351 nm). The quads are uniformly distributed in
four rings around the vertical axis of the chamber, with
polar angles 33.2°, 49°, 131°and 146.8°. This generates
an irradiation proﬁle on the cylinder as shown in Figure
2b. Over the central region of the target (±0.5 mm),
the drive is reasonably uniform, with an intensity of
(11.6 ± 1.2) × 1014 Wcm−2. This corresponds to a 6%
variation in the azimuthal direction, and a 4% axial vari-
ation.

Around the cylindrical target, two copper coil tar-
gets in a quasi-Helmholtz conﬁguration are mounted, as
shown in Figure 2a. The purpose of these laser-driven
coils is to generate a seed B-ﬁeld along the axis of the
cylinder [26, 27, 39–43], and magnetize the central re-
gion of the fuel. The coils are positioned at z = −0.5 mm
and z = 0.5 mm, where z = 0 corresponds to TCC (thus
covering the central 1 mm axial length of the cylinder).
The coils’ axes are coincident with the cylinder target

axis and with the vertical axis of the interaction chamber.
Although the exact design of the coil targets (diameter of
the plates, wire length and orientation) can be modiﬁed,
the diameter of the coils must be large enough so that
they are not irradiated by the laser beams driving the
implosion (in Figure 2a, we show the radius of the laser
beams that contains 99% of their energy). We choose
a coil diameter of 4 mm, to minimize the target induc-
tance,yielding 13 nH, while keeping clear of the beams.

Recent experiments at the PALS [44] and LULI [45]
laser facilities using laser-driven coil targets indicate that
the shock generated in the irradiated plate takes ∼ 1 ns
to traverse the thickness of a 50 µm-thick plate (in agree-
ment with hydrodynamic simulations), and that the X-
ray radiation emitted from the back of the plate is too
weak to pre-heat targets on the other side. Nevertheless,
as an additional precaution, in order to avoid direct X-ray
irradiation from these copper plates that could modify
the implosion dynamics, in the design presented here the
plates of the coil targets are oriented so that their surface
normal directions do not intersect with the cylindrical
target. The side-on emission from the plasma generated
between the plates does not intersect with the cylindri-
cal target either. Besides, the thickness of the irradiated
plate must be adapted to the laser pulse duration.

The coil targets are driven by two additional 3ω laser
quads (one per coil target), delivering a total of 13.5 kJ
to each coil target, with a circular focal spot, 375 µm in
diameter (at 1/e intensity), and a minimum pulse length
of 3 ns. This corresponds to a maximum intensity of ∼
4 × 1015 Wcm−2 on the coil plates, although the duration

0100200300Angle (degree)-0.1-0.0500.050.1Axial length (cm)1313.51414.51515.516Log10 Intensity (W/cm2)of the pulse can be extended to tune the initial B-ﬁeld.
These quads are incident at 59.5° and 120.5° from the
vertical axis of the chamber respectively and separated
by an azimuthal angle of 18°.

III. GENERATION OF THE SEED B-FIELD

Each of the LDCs consists of two plates, marked in
green and blue in Figure 2a, connected by a single-loop
coil. Laser beams are focused onto the inner plate (green
in the ﬁgure), thereby ejecting hot electrons towards the
outer plate (blue in the ﬁgure). This process determines
the eﬃciency of generating a current in the coil and the
induced B-ﬁeld.

The underlying physics of LDCs can be described by
the plasma diode model developed by Tikhonchuk et al.
[26], where the coil-targets are considered as a resistor-
inductor (RL) circuit fed by a laser-driven diode current.
The laser is typically of ns-duration and suﬃciently in-
tense to generate a signiﬁcant number of non-thermal
(hot) electrons. The hot electron temperature is ob-
tained as a function of the laser irradiance Iλ2, using
known scaling laws [26]. With respect to the conversion
eﬃciency of laser energy into hot electrons, values in the
literature range from ∼ 1% [46–50] to ∼ 10% [51, 52].
Here we assume a conversion eﬃciency of 1%, following
the recent results from Zhang et al. [50], obtained at the
OMEGA facility for 3ω laser interactions with solid foils.
Further details on this model and the physics behind the
LDCs, are given in the Appendix.

For the conditions at LMJ the predicted hot electron
temperatures are 7.5 keV and 6.5 keV, for 3 and 6 ns laser
pulse drives, respectively. Correspondingly, we estimate
peak currents on the coils of 10 kA and 20 kA. These cor-
respond to a seed B-ﬁeld between 5.5 and ∼10 T at the
center of the quasi-Helmholtz system. For the rest of this
paper we will work with a conservative value of 5 T, to
ensure the feasibility of the platform.

The inductance of the proposed LDCs for LMJ is
13 nH, twice the value of those used at OMEGA (see Ap-
pendix). This is a limiting constraint determined by the
large spatial scale of the experiment. However, the con-
ﬁguration of the LMJ beams allows to place the two coils
in Helmholtz conﬁguration, as shown in Figure 2a, which
allows to amplify the B-ﬁeld over the cylinder volume.

Figure 3 shows the time evolution of the current for the
two laser pulse durations mentioned above (3 and 6 ns),
together with the current that is required for a 5 T ﬁeld at
the center of the Helmholtz system (8.9 kA). Note that,
although the peak current is obtained at the end of the
laser pulse, owing to the RL-circuit behavior, after the
end of the laser the current decreases very slowly, staying
relatively constant over several nanoseconds. The beams
that drive the cylindrical target are activated at the end
of the LDC drive, in order to reach the maximum seed
B-ﬁeld before the main target is imploded.

Although the highest B-ﬁeld is obtained for a longer

4

FIG. 3. Time evolution of the current looping through the
coil targets for this experiment, depending on the duration
of the laser pulse. The timescale corresponds to that of the
laser beams driving the LDCs. The main target beams are
delayed by 3 and 6 ns respectively, so that the seed B-ﬁeld is
maximum prior to their activation.

pulse since the characteristic RL time is still longer than
the laser drive, it should be noted that the pulse cannot
be arbitrarily long, since there are additional physical
processes that will limit the current. If the pulse is too
long, the generated shock will break out on the oppo-
site side of the driven plate, thus leading to a reduction
of the laser-target energy coupling. Additionally, if the
plasma between the plates becomes too dense, it may
short-circuit the coil. Besides, the laser energy will no
longer be deposited in the rear plate.

An example of magnetic ﬁeld distribution is shown in
Figure 4 for the experimental parameters described in
Section II, and a pulse length of 3 ns (the ﬁgure corre-
sponds to the peak B-ﬁeld obtained at the end of the
laser pulse). The solid-lined rectangle corresponds to the
cylindrical target, while the horizontal dashed lines rep-
resent the position of the coils. A vertical lineout along
the cylinder axis (vertical dashed-dotted line) is shown
for clarity on the left of the image. The produced B-
ﬁeld has an acceptably uniform value of ∼ 5.5 T over the
length of the central region of the target (between the
coils). This ﬁeld corresponds to a wire current of 9.8 kA.
Using RADIA [53], the magnetic ﬁeld can be integrated
in a volume around both coil targets to yield a magnetic
ﬁeld energy of

(cid:90) B2
2µ0

dV = 1.4 J.

(1)

Current required for 5T at center3 ns pulse6 ns pulseI (kA)0510152025tLDC (ns)012345675

dopant will lower the overall temperature of the implo-
sion, owing to radiative cooling. This eﬀect will depend
on the initial magnetic ﬁeld and the dopant percentage,
as discussed in depth in our previous paper [29].

The

laser-target

conﬁguration described in this
manuscript is prone to the Cross-Beam Energy Trans-
fer (CBET) parametric instability due to the counter-
propagating beams crossing in a large volume and the
high intensities involved. To account for this eﬀect, the
MHD simulations presented here include an artiﬁcial re-
duction of the laser energy of 30%. In order to check this
estimation of the CBET eﬀect, the temperature and den-
sity maps obtained from the hydrodynamic simulations
were studied with the code IFRIIT [57], including quad-
by-quad interaction in the full 3-dimensional conﬁgura-
tion at diﬀerent stages of the implosion. We found high
CBET gains, with reduction in the laser-target coupling
up to ∼ 30 − 40%, which validates our ﬁrst estimate.

From Figure 2b, it can be seen that the laser irradiation
pattern presents some modulations (4% axially and 6%
azimuthally) which could be ampliﬁed by CBET as well.
However, the ampliﬁcation of low-mode modulations by
CBET is a second order eﬀect, with a much lower impact
on implosion performance than the reduction of the laser
drive itself. Furthermore, recent work on scaling cylindri-
cal implosions to indirect drive facilities has shown how
low-mode instabilities can be minimized [58, 59], thus
reducing the eﬀect of CBET-induced growth. For these
reasons, we do not expect CBET ampliﬁcation of the
laser imprint modulations to signiﬁcantly impact our im-
plosion estimates further than the 30 − 40% reduction
mentioned above. Nevertheless, at the moment, there
are three diagnostics at LMJ that can characterize the
eﬀects of CBET, and further Laser-Plasma Instabilities
(LPI) experiments are currently undergoing, so that prior
to ﬁelding this platform, these estimates will be updated.
In addition to CBET, we expect the laser coupling to
be reduced further owing to scattered light from Stim-
ulated Raman Scattering (SRS). Nevertheless, the hot
electrons generated by this process (∼ 30 − 50 keV) are
not likely to be detrimental to the implosion perfor-
mance, since the areal density of the imploding cylin-
der (< ρR >∼ 7 − 10 mg/cm2) can eﬀectively stop elec-
trons with energies < 70 keV from reaching the core. It
is possible that more energetic electrons are generated
via the Two Plasmon Decay (TPD) mechanism (up to
∼ 100 keV), or by SRS in laser ﬁlaments, which could
eventually preheat the fuel, thus reducing the eﬃciency
of the compression. However, SRS is the dominant mech-
anism in the long scale-lengths plasmas expected in our
conditions, and the laser intensity in not high enough to
lead to signiﬁcant ﬁlamentation and the associated pro-
duction of high-energy hot electrons through SRS [60].

Stagnation occurs at 3.5 ns after the start of the main
drive in both the unmagnetized case and with a 5 T seed
B-ﬁeld. Note that this timescale is diﬀerent from that
shown in Figure 3, since the LDCs are driven prior to
the cylindrical target. Further to this, Figure 3 shows

FIG. 4.
2-dimensional distribution of the seed magnetic
ﬁeld across the cylinder. In this ﬁgure, the horizontal dashed
lines represent the position of the coils, whereas the solid-line
rectangle corresponds to a transverse cut of the cylindrical
target. The seed magnetic ﬁeld across the central region of
the cylinder is uniform, with a value of ∼ 5.5 T.

This corresponds to a fraction of 5 × 10−5 the total laser
drive energy of 27 kJ used to generate the B-ﬁeld.

While the rapid increase of the coil B-ﬁeld could give
rise to eddy currents within the target that would op-
pose the generated seed B-ﬁeld and preheat the target,
this platform is designed to minimize this eﬀect. As men-
tioned in the previous section, the orientation of the irra-
diated plates of the laser-driven coil targets is such that
the X-ray burst that will be generated will not inter-
sect with the target. Additionally, the laser contrast at
LMJ ensures that the intensity of the prepulse is below
∼ 107 W/cm2, which is not suﬃcient to ionize the target
and generate a preplasma. For these reasons, the target
should remain an insulator during the rise-time of the B-
ﬁeld, so that no currents can be induced, and the B-ﬁeld
can soak into the cylinder volume.

IV.

IMPLOSION HYDRODYNAMICS

To characterize the plasma evolution and measurable
outputs from the experiment here proposed, we have per-
formed 2-dimensional extended-MHD simulations using
the code Gorgon [9, 29, 54]. These simulations include ra-
diation transport, magnetized heat transport, Biermann
battery, Nernst eﬀects and updated forms of transport
coeﬃcients [55], which have been shown to reduce the
level of magnetic ﬁeld twisting for pre-magnetized im-
plosion simulations [56]. We have performed simulations
both for a non-magnetized implosion and using a 5 T seed
B-ﬁeld, as predicted by the model in Section III (see Fig-
ure 4).

In these simulations, a 0.3% atomic percentage of Ar
has been added to fulﬁll the role of the spectroscopic
tracer mentioned in Section II. The addition of this

-3-2-10123r (mm)-3-2-10123z (mm)-10-8-6-4-20246810Bz (T)Bz(T)-3-2-10123r (mm)-3-2-10123z (mm)-10-8-6-4-20246810B-field (T)6

FIG. 5. Left panel: 2-dimensional r − z Gorgon simulations showing the density (left side) and temperature (right side)
maps at stagnation (3.5 ns after the start of the main drive) for the case with a 5 T seed B-ﬁeld (top) and the unmagnetized
case (bottom). Right panel: Radial lineouts through the center of the cylinder, of the density, electron temperature and
compressed B-ﬁeld at stagnation for magnetized (blue) and unmagnetized (red) implosions. The dotted vertical lines indicate
the core boundary for both cases. These simulations include radiation transport and Biermann battery eﬀects, along with
Nernst and Hall transport.

that, after the maximum current is reached, the current
stays relatively constant (±10%) for the 3.5 ns required
to reach stagnation. The results at stagnation time are
shown in Figure 5. In this ﬁgure, the left-side images cor-
respond to 2D maps of the predicted conditions, while the
right-side column shows radial lineouts through the cen-
ter of the cylinder. In the 2-dimensional image, the tem-
perature (right) and density (left) of an unmagnetized
(bottom half) and a magnetized (top half) implosion are
compared; whereas the images with the lineouts show the
radial distribution of the compressed B-ﬁeld at stagna-
tion and the mass density, at the top; and the electron
temperature at the bottom for both the magnetized and
the unmagnetized case. The dotted vertical lines indicate
the core boundary for both cases.

It can be seen how, in the magnetized case, the core

is heated up to > 5 keV, compared to ∼1 keV in the un-
magnetized case. On the other hand, when a magnetic
ﬁeld is applied, the density at the center of the core is
7 g/cm3, while in the unmagnetized case it is compressed
up to 40 g/cm3. The former is owed to the fact that
the thermal energy losses are reduced, by magnetizing
the electrons; while the latter is a consequence of the in-
creased magnetic pressure in the core, as well as the fact
that the thermal pressure is increased in a hotter plasma
(P ∝ ρ × T ). Additionally, the initial B-ﬁeld of 5 T is
compressed up to 25 kT across the core of the target.
This corresponds to an ampliﬁcation of the seed B-ﬁeld
by a factor ∼ 5000, while the fuel is compressed by a
factor of (R0/R)2 ∼ 104. Note that the B-ﬁeld seems to
be almost frozen in the plasma ﬂow (the magnetic ﬂux is
conserved throughout the implosion). This is not an ap-

proximation made in the simulations, but rather a direct
consequence of the fact that the plasma compresses the
B-ﬁeld faster than it can diﬀuse away. This is character-
ized by a high value of the magnetic Reynolds number,
which is deﬁned as

RM =

U R
η

(2)

where U is the implosion velocity and R is the plasma
radius at a given time and η is the magnetic diﬀusivity.
From our MHD simulations we calculate RM ∼ 200.

To quantify the eﬀect of the magnetic ﬁeld on the

plasma, we use the following metrics [29]

β =

Pthermal
Pmagnetic

,

χe = ωe · τe,

(3)

(4)

where Pthermal and Pmagnetic are the thermal and mag-
netic pressure respectively, ωe is the electron cyclotron
frequency (eB/me), and τe is the characteristic timescale
of electron-ion collisions (∝ T 3/2
/ne, where Te and ne are
e
the electron temperature and density respectively). With
these deﬁnitions, the β parameter indicates the relative
signiﬁcance of the magnetic ﬁeld for the macroscopic
plasma motion (a value of β (cid:46) 100 already means that
the magnetic pressure plays a signiﬁcant role), whereas
χe (the so-called Hall parameter ) gives an indication of
the role of the B-ﬁeld on the electron energy transport
(a low χe means low magnetization).

The obtained simulation results in the stagnated core
correspond to β ∼ 9 and χe ∼ 40. This means that the
magnetic pressure in the core of the plasma is one ninth
of the thermal pressure, and an electron, on average, does
∼ 40 rotations around the magnetic ﬁeld line before col-
liding with an ion. This indicates that a 5 T seed B-ﬁeld
is enough to signiﬁcantly magnetize the implosion, alter-
ing electron transport (less energy losses perpendicular
to the B-ﬁeld) and pressure balance, thus modifying the
hydrodynamic conditions of the implosion, and of the
plasma at stagnation.

The high value of χe indicates that the electrons be-
come magnetized, with Larmor radius smaller than the
mean free path. This reduces the energy transport rate
due to electron-ion collisions, which can increase elec-
tron temperature signiﬁcantly above the ion tempera-
ture. This has two important eﬀects. Firstly, the heat
conduction becomes anisotropic since it now occurs pref-
erentially along the electrons’ magnetic orbits. This
anisotropy not only modiﬁes the temperature proﬁle (as
seen in Figure 5), but also the heat wave propagation,
localizing the hot plasma in regions of stronger B-ﬁeld.
Secondly, non-local eﬀects (such as the depletion of the
high-energy tail of the electron distribution) are reduced
In addition, large
perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld.
azimuthal currents can be induced, which transport mag-
netic and thermal energy. The magnetic energy is con-
verted into electron energy through resistive diﬀusion

7

and Ohmic heating. As an example consequence, the
large values of the Hall term indicate that the B-ﬁeld it-
self can be twisted azimuthally owing to these induced
currents. Therefore the experimental platform described
here opens the path to observing and characterizing these
eﬀects, which is fundamental to understand this extreme
magnetization regime [29].

V. EXTRACTION OF PLASMA PARAMETERS
THROUGHOUT THE COMPRESSION

A main goal of the proposed experimental platform is
to probe the changes on the hydrodynamic conditions
of the imploding core due to the impact of the com-
pressed magnetic ﬁeld. This can be observed by means
of a spectroscopic tracer. For instance, Ar-doping of ICF
implosions is commonly used to extract the density and
temperature conditions of imploding cores [34, 35, 61–
63]. This technique exploits two basic properties of the
Ar K-shell spectrum emitted from hot and dense plas-
mas: (1) the strong dependence on density of the Stark-
broadened line shapes, and (2) the dependence (through
the atomic population kinetics) of the relative intensity
distribution of K-shell lines and associated satellite tran-
sitions on electron density and temperature. The Ar K-
shell emission is however sensitive to temperatures be-
tween ∼600-2500 eV and, therefore, for an application to
a hotter scenario, a higher-Z spectroscopic tracer, such
as Kr, suits better.

Given the large variations expected for the core condi-
tions in the magnetized case (see Figure 5), in order to
probe the conditions at the diﬀerent regions of the com-
pressed core we propose the use of a combination of Ar
and Kr doping in the deuterium plasma.

As illustration, the top row of Figure 6 shows Ar and
Kr K-shell synthetic spectra for the conditions at stag-
nation for both a non-magnetized (red) and a magne-
tized (blue) case. Owing to the range of energies that
these spectra cover, the Ar K-shell emission (including
n = 2 → 1, 3 → 1 and 4 → 1 line transitions in He-
like and H-like Ar) is shown on the left, and the Kr Heα
(n = 2 → 1) and Heβ (n = 3 → 1) photon energy regions
are shown on the middle and right respectively. Consis-
tently with the Gorgon MHD simulations, an Ar atomic
concentration of 0.3% in the deuterium plasma was used.
Additionally, based on the study conducted in previous
works [29, 36] and in order to keep a low impact of Kr
radiative losses on the hydrodynamics, a 0.01% of Kr was
considered. We note in passing that groups of n = 4 → 2
line transitions in Kr ions –from Be-like to He-like– also
might arise in the Ar K-shell photon energy range shown
in Figure 6. However, mainly due to the diﬀerence on the
concentrations, the referred Kr emission becomes negli-
gible compared to the Ar one.

These spectra were obtained by solving the radiation
transport problem in cylindrical geometry for the radial
proﬁles of temperature and density predicted by Gor-

8

FIG. 6. Top row: Ar (left) and Kr (middle and right) K-shell emission spectra at stagnation, for both a non-magnetized
(red) and a magnetized (blue) case. For the Kr case, the middle ﬁgure shows the Heα emission region, while the right ﬁgure
shows the Heβ lines. These spectra have been obtained using a cylindrical radiation transport model, using the radial proﬁles
of the plasma conditions predicted by Gorgon (as shown in Figure 5). Bottom row: Ar (left) and Kr (middle and right)
K-shell emission spectra at stagnation for the magnetized case. The blue line corresponds to the total intensity, whereas the
green and purple lines correspond to the contributions from regions of the plasma at temperatures below and above 2.5 keV
respectively. This shows that each element probes diﬀerent regions of the core, introducing an eﬀective spatial resolution. The
spectra include contributions from Stark and Doppler broadening, as well as the instrumental broadening corresponding to the
resolution achievable at LMJ (E/∆E ∼ 500).

gon, as indicated in Figure 5. Line of sight was as-
sumed to be perpendicular to the cylinder axis. The re-
quired frequency-resolved emissivities and opacities (in-
cluding bound-bound, bound-free and free-free contri-
butions) and atomic level population distributions were
calculated using the collisional-radiative model ABAKO
[64]. In particular, for this application we used an up-
dated version for multicomponent plasmas. Thus, for
given temperature and density values of the plasma mix-
ture, the population kinetics of the Ar and Kr tracers are
solved self-consistently, with both species sharing a com-
mon free electron pool arising from the ionized deuterium
plasma and their own converged ionization balance [65].
The attenuation of the core emission through the com-
pressed shell was not explicitly taken into account in the
radiation transport calculations presented here. Optical
depth estimations for the plastic shell at stagnation con-
ditions in the Ar K-shell photon energy range suggest
that a correction to account for the attenuation by the
shell –as described in Ref. [35]– might be needed in or-
der to properly analyze the spectra and extract the core

temperature values. The impact of this eﬀect is expected
to be minimum for the higher photon energy range cor-
responding to the Kr K-shell spectrum. In any case, our
estimates indicate that it will be feasible to observe the
tracers’ spectra. Moreover, previous experiments at the
NIF [36, 37] have observed Kr line emission in similar
conditions using 64 µm-thick plastic shells.

Importantly for this spectroscopic application, in an
attempt to obtain a faithful representation of the emer-
gent spectrum, reliable and detailed Stark-broadened line
proﬁles of the most prominent transitions are needed
when performing the radiation transport calculations. In
this regard, the Stark line shapes for the shown parent
transitions in Ar and Kr -i.e. Heα, Heβ, and Heγ, Lyα
and Lyβ in Ar; and Heα and Heβ in Kr- were obtained by
the computer simulation code SIMULA [66]. In this code,
the plasma is described as a collection of independent
particles trapped in a spherical box and the statistics
of relative velocities of the emitters and the perturbing
ions are obtained using the so-called µ-ion model [67].
Calculations are then done using the no-quenching ap-

1515.215.415.6Photon Energy (keV)00.020.040.060.080.1Spectral Intensity per unit length(1016 erg/srscmeV)B0= 0 TB0= 5 T12.812.91313.113.2Photon Energy (keV)00.20.40.60.811.21.41.6Spectral Intensity per unit length(1016 erg/srscmeV)B0= 0 TB0= 5 T33.23.43.63.84Photon Energy (keV)0246810Spectral Intensity per unit length(1016 erg/srscmeV)B0= 0 TB0= 5 T1515.215.415.6Photon Energy (keV)00.020.040.060.080.1Spectral Intensity per unit length(1016 erg/srscmeV)total intensityradial regions with Te > 2.5 keVradial regions with Te < 2.5 keV12.812.91313.113.2Photon Energy (keV)00.20.40.60.811.21.41.6Spectral Intensity per unit length(1016 erg/srscmeV)total intensityradial regions with Te > 2.5 keVradial regions with Te < 2.5 keV33.23.43.63.84Photon Energy (keV)0246810Spectral Intensity per unit length(1016 erg/srscmeV)total intensityradial regions with Te > 2.5 keVradial regions with Te < 2.5 keVLyaHeaLi-likesat.He-likesat.HebLybHegHea(1P)Hea(3P)Li-likesat.Li-likesat.Heb(1P)Heb(3P)Li-likesat.ArKrKrproximation, i.e. ﬁeld mixing between the upper (initial)
and lower (ﬁnal) states was neglected due to the large en-
ergy separation between them. Furthermore, Stark line
proﬁles of the associated satellite transitions with spec-
tator electron in n = 2 and n = 3 were also calculated.
For satellite transitions the calculation by the computer
simulation technique becomes prohibitive due to the high
number of energy states that must be taken into account,
and, therefore, the required line shape database was ob-
tained using a recently developed model that follows
the framework of the Stark-broadening standard theory
[68] and employs an optimized version of the formalism
and numerical methods described in Reference [69]. We
checked that results from this new line shape code agree
within > 99% with those obtained using computer simu-
lations with static ions for some selected and aﬀordable
cases of interest.
It is worth noting that the Zeeman
splitting of the lines cannot be used to directly deter-
mine the compressed B-ﬁeld through spectroscopic obser-
vation, since in these conditions the Stark broadening is
signiﬁcantly larger (as the electron density reaches values
∼ 1025 cm−3) and blurs the Zeeman pattern [27]. Besides
the Stark-broadening mechanism, the spectra shown in
Figure 6 also include Doppler and instrumental broad-
ening. For the latter, we applied a Gaussian convolution
consistent with the spectral resolution achievable at LMJ
(E/∆E ∼ 500).

From Figure 6 it can be seen how the krypton acts like
a temperature gauge. From this temperature increase,
the properties of the B-ﬁeld may be inferred, since no Kr
K-shell emission is observed in the non-magnetized case.
Note that, although the Ar emission is still present in the
magnetized case, the relative line intensities and shapes
are diﬀerent from the non-magnetized case (e.g., the Ar
Lyβ line emission is only noticeable in the magnetized
case). This is owed to the fact that, while in the non-
magnetized case the Ar emission is coming from a roughly
uniform plasma at ∼ 1 keV, in the magnetized case, the
Ar emission is probing a non-uniform plasma, with tem-
peratures up to ∼ 2.5 keV (above this value the Ar line
emission becomes weak). These changes in the line in-
tensity distribution can be used to extract the diﬀerences
in temperature and density when the core is magnetized.
The bottom row of Figure 6 focuses on the magnetized
case, and shows the eﬀective spatial resolution that is ob-
tained when using both Ar and Kr as fuel dopants. Most
of the emission from Ar comes from regions of the plasma
with electron temperatures below 2.5 keV (green lines),
whereas in the Kr spectra, the main contributions are
those from regions with temperatures above this value
(purple lines). Therefore, by looking at the correspond-
ing spatial proﬁles of core conditions at stagnation, it
is clear that while the Ar dopant provides information
about the core periphery, the Kr emission allows us to
gain insight into the conditions at the core center when
the fuel is magnetized.

Owing to the capabilities of the currently available
spectrometers at LMJ, the emission spectra can be ob-

9

tained at diﬀerent times throughout the implosion, pro-
viding a temporal map of the temperature and density
of the plasma, as described above. If the magnetic ﬁeld
is assumed to be frozen into the plasma motion (which
was shown in Section IV to be a good approximation) the
temperature and density values can be used to estimate
a variety of non-dimensional metrics to ultimately deter-
mine the relative importance of diﬀerent magnetization
throughout the implosion collapse [29].

Additional information can be extracted from the neu-
tron emission from the imploded plasma. According to
Gorgon 2D simulations, a 25-fold increase in the neutron
yield from the hot-spot is expected for an implosion with
a 5 T seed B-ﬁeld, compared to a non-magnetized implo-
sion (∼ 5 × 1011 and ∼ 2 × 1010 neutrons respectively).
This yield can easily be detected by the neutronic detec-
tors already available at LMJ (where the threshold for
neutron detection is ∼ 108)[70], providing an additional
signature of the B-ﬁeld eﬀects on the implosion.

The implosion velocity and stability can be diagnosed
with X-Ray Framing Cameras (XRFC) that collect the
self-emission from the imploding targets [19].
In LMJ,
this can be done with both an axial and a radial line of
sight, with time resolutions of 110 and 130 ps, and spatial
resolutions of 35 and 15 µm respectively [71]. Addition-
ally, the PETAL beam [72] can be used to irradiate a
Cu wire, in order to generate an X-ray backlighter and
observe the radial proﬁle of the target through X-ray ra-
diography. This is a common technique used in indirect-
drive ICF to diagnose the stability and symmetry of the
implosion [73, 74].

Finally, diagnosing the seed magnetic ﬁeld is crucial for
understanding the conditions of the experiment. For this
purpose we propose the use of proton deﬂectometry, in
a shot with no gas cylinder (only coil targets), using the
PETAL beam [72] to produce and accelerate protons up
to 51 MeV, via the Target Normal Sheath Acceleration
(TNSA) mechanism [75]. By placing a reference mesh in
the protons’ path, and recording the imprint of the beam
after it traverses the region between the coils, it is possi-
ble to obtain an ‘image’ of the deﬂections caused by the
electric and magnetic ﬁelds around the coil targets. Al-
though axial probing of the coil targets (that is, sending
the protons along the axis of the coils) has been discussed
as an accurate method to characterize the generated B-
ﬁeld [42, 76], owing to the large size and inductance of the
targets presented here, the B-ﬁeld signatures that would
appear in on-axis radiography are indiscernible with the
resolution available at LMJ [77]. For this reason, we
propose probing the targets perpendicular to their axes
[27, 76, 78].

Figure 7 shows a synthetic example image of the ex-
pected proton radiography results, obtained with the
code PAFIN [79] for 14.7 MeV protons.
In this case,
the proton source is 10 mm away from TCC, the ref-
erence mesh has a periodicity of 600 lines/inch and is
placed at 3 mm from the source. The detector is placed
at 150 mm from TCC, which results in a system magni-

10

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

We have presented an experimental platform design for
studying magnetized cylindrical implosions at LMJ. We
propose the use of laser-driven coil targets to generate an
initial 5 T B-ﬁeld along the axis of the cylinder. Eighty
of the LMJ beams will be used to compress the cylindri-
cal target, while eight additional beams will be used to
generate the B-ﬁeld.

The laser-driven coil targets have been modeled fol-
lowing the diode model by Tikhonchuk et al. [26], sug-
gesting that a fairly uniform seed B-ﬁeld of ∼5-12 T can
be achieved over the central 1 mm region of the cylinder.
This magnetic ﬁeld can be experimentally diagnosed by
means of proton radiography using the PETAL laser.

We have presented a hydrodynamic analysis of the con-
ditions achievable during the implosion and how they are
modiﬁed by the magnetic ﬁeld, as it gets compressed
with the target.
It has been shown that the initial B-
ﬁeld value can be compressed up to >10 kT, in a man-
ner which is consistent with the magnetic ﬁeld being
frozen in the plasma ﬂow, as a consequence of the high
magnetic Reynolds number. Extended-MHD simulations
show that the temperature and density of the plasma at
stagnation are heavily aﬀected by the presence of the
magnetic ﬁeld. By doping the fuel, the eﬀects of the
magnetic ﬁeld can then be detected using X-ray spec-
troscopy.

Besides X-ray spectroscopy, we have proposed a set of
diagnostics and their set-up to characterize the evolution
of the implosions and the evolution of the magnetic ﬁeld.
This set-up can be directly implemented in the LMJ fa-
cility without the need for further development.

Future work includes improving both the performance
and understanding of the coil targets, particularly for the
poorly explored parameters of the LMJ laser drive (i.e.
∼ 10 kJ at 3ω). We expect to benchmark the scaling laws
used to estimate the hot electron generation from the
laser-target interaction at diﬀerent laser intensities, and
particularly for 3ω light. Parallel experimental eﬀorts
using lasers of more modest energies, are currently being
made towards simultaneously measuring the plasma den-
sity and the self-generated B-ﬁelds close to the irradiated
plate, in order to characterize the currents that appear
in the plasma. Measuring the target stalk leakage cur-
rent, as well as the plasma impedance between the plates
will also help to understand the operation of the targets,
and the time limitations before shorting the coil circuit.
Furthermore, recent advances in X-ray characterization
techniques will allow for experimental probing of the wire
surface plasma sheath, resolving the spatial distribution
and time evolution of the current.

A comprehensive study of CBET mitigation techniques
will be performed.
It is expected that using lower in-
tensity, longer drive pulses with the same energy, and
adapting the targets to achieve similar compression ra-
tios might reduce signiﬁcantly the CBET impact on the
laser-target coupling.

FIG. 7. Synthetic proton radiography image obtained with
the particle-tracing code PAFIN [79] for 14.7 MeV protons,
using the detector geometry available at LMJ. In particular,
the feature that can be observed at the right of the image
around z = 0 corresponds to the radiochromic ﬁlm (RCF)
holder. The magnetic ﬁeld produced by each coil leaves a
characteristic bulb-like feature on the image, and distorts the
imprint of the reference mesh (a dashed black circle has been
added to point on one of these bulbs). The spatial scale units
on the ﬁgure correspond to those measured at the detector,
so the coils’ dimensions are magniﬁed by a factor of Mc = 16
ensuing proton probing point projection.

ﬁcation of the coil region of Mc = 16, while the mesh
magniﬁcation is Mm ∼ 53. Additionally, the geometry
of the radiochromic ﬁlm (RCF) proton detectors at LMJ
has been used. This can be seen as the 95 mm diame-
ter circular mask, and the white feature at r ∼ 40 mm,
z ∼ 0 mm (which corresponds to the position of the RCF
holder). To produce this ﬁgure, a current of 9.8 kA loop-
ing through the coils is assumed, which corresponds to
the peak current obtained with the model introduced in
Section III and detailed in the Appendix, for a 3 ns square
pulse with an intensity of 4 × 1015 Wcm−2 (as described
in Section II). The electrostatic charge accumulated in
the targets can be estimated to be of the order of few
nC. Given the size of the laser-driven coil targets pre-
sented here, the resulting charge density is suﬃciently
low so that electrostatic eﬀects cannot be discerned in
the proton radiography images. It can be seen how there
is a clear imprint of the magnetic ﬁeld around the coils
on the proton image (this is magniﬁed to z = ±8 mm
on the detector, which corresponds to z = ±0.5 mm on
target).
In particular, we have marked with a dashed
white circle a characteristic bulb-like void feature, which
is indicative of a B-ﬁeld suﬃciently strong to deﬂect all
protons around that region. Its dimensions can be used
to quantify the B-ﬁeld generated by the coil discharge
current.

Prior to LMJ experiments, the analysis of recent sim-
ilar experiments at OMEGA will be used to benchmark
the hydrodynamic simulations, and study the relative
weights of diﬀerent transport mechanisms prior to these
experiments, in order to produce more accurate predic-
tions.

As mentioned in the introduction one of the points of
interest of applying a magnetic ﬁeld is the conﬁnement
of α particles within the core. While not the purpose
of this platform directly (and not yet possible at LMJ),
implosions using DT fuel might as well be investigated.
For the values presented in this paper, the Larmor radius
of the α particles would be larger than the compressed
core, resulting in not a signiﬁcant radial conﬁnement.
However, α particles would still be conﬁned along the
axis of the cylinder, similarly as in MagLIF experiments,
given that their mean-free-path is smaller than the length
of the cylinder. An estimate of this axial conﬁnement is
given by the aspect ratio of the compressed core (R/L,
radius over length). Following the results presented in
this paper, we can estimate a loss fraction of ∼ 1.3% for
the α particles along the axis of the cylinder, which is
comparable with MagLIF experiments, where this ratio
is of the order of 1% [80]. Further in the future, LMJ
is expected to reach energies above 1 MJ. In this case,
it will be possible to drive larger targets, yielding a core
radius at stagnation larger than the Larmor radius of α
particles, for a convergence ratio similar to the presented
setup.

This platform will be ﬁelded experimentally in 2024-
2026. The results from these experiments will help
benchmarking the diﬀerent electron transport and B-
ﬁeld advection/diﬀusion models used in MHD codes, thus
leading to a more accurate understanding of the diﬀer-
ent mechanisms aﬀecting the hydrodynamic evolution of
highly magnetized HED plasmas.

APPENDIX: MODELLING AND
BENCHMARKING THE B-FIELD GENERATION
IN LDCS

When a LDC target is irradiated by a focused laser
beam, initially, a plasma is generated close to the sur-
face of the irradiated plate. While this plasma has not
reached the second plate, the vacuum electron current
between the plates is space-charge-limited by the charge
that builds up on each plate. When the expanding quasi-
neutral plasma reaches the outer plate, which depends on
the plasma fast ion velocity, the charge within the plasma
is compensated and the potential well close to the inter-
action plate is strongly reduced. Hot-electron ejection is
facilitated and super-Alfvenic ejection currents can be es-
tablished as the plasma supports a counter-propagating
return current. In addition to the space-charge limit, the
forward-going current will generate an azimuthal mag-
netic ﬁeld that will pinch the plasma between the plates.
This magnetization limit depends, among other vari-

11

FIG. 8. Schematic design of the experimental setup used at
OMEGA, showing the LDCs and the D3He sphere (light blue
in the ﬁgure), as seen from the CR39 detector.

ables, on the temperature and number of hot electrons.
These two limitations determine the I-V characteristic
of the RL-circuit [26, 81] and, unless the characteristic
time τ ∼ L/R (with R and L the circuit resistance and
inductance) is reached before the end of the laser pulse,
the looping current can increase while the laser keeps
irradiating the plate and feeding the system with hot
electrons.

The current evolution, I(t), can be computed by solv-

ing the following equation,

V = L

dI
dt

+ (Zd + R(t))I,

(5)

where V is the diode potential, Zd is the plasma
impedance between the plates (which accounts for both
the space-charge and magnetization limits of the plasma
diode) and R(t) is the resistance of the external circuit
(the coil wire). Most of the system’s dynamics are ac-
counted for by the transient resistance in Equation 5,
which evolves following the I-V characteristic, as a func-
tion of the wire temperature. The inductance stays rela-
tively constant for the duration of the laser pulse, given
the low expansion velocity of the wire (of the order of
10 µm/ns, as measured by Santos et al. [27]).

Once the current evolution I(t) has been calculated,
the 3D spatial distribution of the B-ﬁeld at any time t0
can be computed for I(t0) using a magnetostatic code,
e.g. RADIA [53], to which the detailed three-dimensional
design of the entire LDC has been previously imported.
There are various physical mechanisms associated with
our laser-driven coil platform which cannot be accounted
for using such an heuristic plasma-diode model of mag-
netic ﬁeld generation. Complications may arise from
dense plasma that bridges the target plates and short-
circuits the coil, driving the outer plate by prompt X-ray
emission from the interaction region, early destruction of
the drive plate or deposition of the laser energy in the

12

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIG. 9.
(9a) and (9c) Example of the obtained proton deﬂectometry images for 3 MeV and 14.7 MeV protons respectively. (9b
and 9d Corresponding synthetic radiographs produced with the code PAFIN. These synthetic images include currents looping
through the targets of 6.5 kA and 8 kA respectively, as well as additional static toroidal charge distributions around the coils
of +4.5 nC and +8 nC respectively.

blow-oﬀ plasma before it reaches the solid target. Main-
taining a static current and B-ﬁeld over the course of a
∼ 3 ns laser-irradiation time must therefore be seen as a
source of risk in these multi-kJ experiments, but previ-
ous results on the OMEGA laser, obtained in conditions
similar to those at LMJ, give us grounds for optimism.

At OMEGA, we ﬁelded a similar conﬁguration to the
one proposed in this manuscript for LMJ, using a pair
of LDCs with 750 µm-radius parallel coils, separated by
2.5 mm (this geometry was constrained by the geometry
of the OMEGA beams). The inductance of each of the
targets was 6.5 nH.

Magnetic ﬁelds inside the LDCs were characterized us-
ing a D3He exploding pusher proton source for deﬂectom-
etry measurements at two diﬀerent energies, 3 MeV and
14.7 MeV [82]. Each target was driven simultaneously
by independent 3ω laser beams of 2 kJ energy and 1.5 ns
duration focused to 1016 W/cm2. This corresponds to an
estimated hot electron temperature of Th ∼ 16 keV [26].
Figure 8 shows an schematic drawing of the conﬁgura-
tion of the LDCs targets at OMEGA, together with the

D3He capsule as viewed from the proton deﬂectometry
detector.

Figures 9a and 9c show an example of proton radiog-
raphy results for 3 MeV and 14.7 MeV respectively. Ac-
counting for the respective proton energies and the delay
between the laser drivers of the LDCs and the pusher,
the corresponding probing times are 1.73 ± 0.15 ns and
1.5 ± 0.15 ns respectively, with respect to the start of the
drive beams. The coil plane was imaged into a CR39 de-
tector with a magniﬁcation of Mc = 16 (the spatial scale
given in each image corresponds to the detector plane).
Teardrop-shaped pinch and void structures are visible
around the coils, characteristic of multi-kA currents. We
measured the currents and charges present in the LDCs
by ﬁtting these images to synthetic radiographs obtained
with the particle-tracing code PAFIN [79]. An example
of these simulations, is shown in Figure 9b for 3 MeV
protons, and Figure 9d for 14.7 MeV protons. These ra-
diographs include a current ﬂowing through the targets
(6.5 and 8 kA respectively), and a toroidal static charge
distributed around the coils themselves (+4.5 and +8 nC

TABLE I. Results obtained at OMEGA for the two diﬀerent proton energies, compared with the predictions from the diode
model. The last column includes the minimum and maximum currents predicted within the time uncertainty of the measure-
ments.

Proton energy (MeV)

Time (ns)

Measured current (kA)

Predicted current (min. -
max. in kA)

14.7
3

1.50 ± 0.15
1.73 ± 0.15

8 ± 2
6.5 ± 2

(10.8 - 11.9)
(11.4 - 11.8)

13

respectively). The values of both the current and the
charge were adjusted iteratively in order to ﬁt the CR39
data. Note that the features observed in the bottom left
corner of the experimental images, are not captured by
the synthetic radiographs. These features correspond to
the plasma between the plates of the LDCs, which is not
included in the particle-tracing PAFIN simulations.

While the value of the current has an eﬀect on the
size of the inner proton void in the images, this cur-
rent alone cannot reproduce the outer caustic feature (the
halo around the voids), since this is an eﬀect of the elec-
trostatic charge. These two features (void and halo size)
can therefore be used to adjust the current and static
charge in the targets separately, with an error of ∼ 2 kA,
arising mostly from uncertainties in the target geometry.
Table I shows the measured currents for both proton en-
ergies, compared with the predictions from the described
diode model. It can be seen that the model agrees with
the measurements (considering the error bars) within a
30%.

If the current path was signiﬁcantly deviated from the
wire loop, this would still be apparent from the perpen-
dicular radiographs. Additionally, our targets are de-
signed to minimize the ingress of plasma into the coil
region, whether from X-ray photoionisation or from the
laser focal spot. Moreover, we do not observe extended
outer voids/bubbles that could be interpreted as a return
current ﬂowing through a surrounding plasma [83].

These results show that currents of order 5 − 10 kA
can be driven in mm-sized coils using 3ω light with ns-
duration pulses, and give us ground for optimism.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

G. P.-C. acknowledges funding from the French Agence
Nationale de la Recherche (ANR-10-IDEX-03-02, ANR-
15-CE30-0011), the Conseil R`egional Aquitaine (INTA-
LAX) and the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innova-
tion through the Margarita Salas funding program. C.V.
and V.O.-B. acknowledge the support from the LIGHT
S&T Graduate Program (PIA3 Investment for the Fu-
ture Program, ANR-17-EURE-0027). F.S.-V. acknowl-
edges funding from The Royal Society (UK) through a
University Research Fellowship.

This work has been carried out within the frame-

work of the EUROfusion Consortium,
funded by the
European Union via the Euratom Research and Train-
ing Programme (Grant Agreements No.
633053 and
No. 101052200 — EUROfusion). Views and opinions
expressed are however those of the author(s) only and
do not necessarily reﬂect those of the European Union
or the European Commission. Neither the European
Union nor the European Commission can be held re-
sponsible for them. The involved teams have operated
within the framework of the Enabling Research Projects:
AWP17-ENR-IFE-CEA-02 Towards a universal Stark-
Zeeman code for spectroscopic diagnostics and for inte-
gration in transport codes and AWP21-ENR-IFE.01.CEA
Advancing shock ignition for direct-drive inertial fusion.
This study has received ﬁnancial support from the
French State in the framework of the Investments for the
Future programme IdEx universit´e de Bordeaux / GPR
LIGHT.

This material is based upon work supported by the
DOE Oﬃce of Science Grant No. DE-SC0022250. The
work has also been supported by the Research Grant No.
CEI2020-FEI02 from the Consejer´ıa de Econom´ıa, Indus-
tria, Comercio y Conocimiento del Gobierno de Canarias;
and by Research Grant No. PID2019-108764RB-I00 from
the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation.

This work was performed under the auspices of the
U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore Na-
tional Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344.
This document was prepared as an account of work spon-
sored by an agency of the United States government. Nei-
ther the United States government nor Lawrence Liver-
more National Security, LLC, nor any of their employees
makes any warranty, expressed or implied, or assumes
any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, com-
pleteness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus,
product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use
would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference
herein to any speciﬁc commercial product, process, or
service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or oth-
erwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its en-
dorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United
States government or Lawrence Livermore National Se-
curity, LLC. The views and opinions of authors expressed
herein do not necessarily state or reﬂect those of the
United States government or Lawrence Livermore Na-
tional Security, LLC, and shall not be used for advertis-
ing or product endorsement purposes.

[1] L. Perkins, B. Logan, G. Zimmerman, and C. Werner,
“Two-dimensional simulations of thermonuclear burn in
ignition-scale inertial conﬁnement fusion targets under
compressed axial magnetic ﬁelds,” Physics of Plasmas,
vol. 20, no. 7, p. 072708, 2013.

[2] D. W. Hill and R. J. Kingham, “Enhancement of pres-
sure perturbations in ablation due to kinetic magnetized
transport eﬀects under direct-drive inertial conﬁnement
fusion relevant conditions,” Physical Review E, vol. 98,
no. 2, p. 021201(R), 2018.

[3] D. Hill, C. Ridgers, R. Kingham, and C. Walsh, “Vlasov–
fokker–planck simulations of pre-magnetized ablating
planar targets,” Physics of Plasmas, vol. 28, no. 9,
p. 092708, 2021.

[4] P. Y. Chang, G. Fiksel, M. Hohenberger, J. P. Knauer,
R. Betti, F. J. Marshall, D. D. Meyerhofer, F. H. S´eguin,
and R. D. Petrasso, “Fusion yield enhancement in mag-
netized laser-driven implosions,” Physical review letters,
vol. 107, no. 3, p. 035006, 2011.

[5] R. Jones and W. Mead, “The physics of burn in mag-
netized deuterium-tritium plasmas: spherical geometry,”
Nuclear fusion, vol. 26, no. 2, p. 127, 1986.

[6] M. Basko, A. Kemp, and J. Meyer-ter Vehn, “Ignition
conditions for magnetized target fusion in cylindrical ge-
ometry,” Nuclear Fusion, vol. 40, no. 1, p. 59, 2000.
[7] T. Sano, T. Inoue, and K. Nishihara, “Critical magnetic
ﬁeld strength for suppression of the richtmyer-meshkov
instability in plasmas,” Physical review letters, vol. 111,
no. 20, p. 205001, 2013.

[8] C. Walsh, “Magnetized ablative Rayleigh-Taylor insta-
bility in three dimensions,” Physical Review E, vol. 105,
no. 2, p. 025206, 2022.

[9] C. Walsh, K. McGlinchey, J. Tong, B. Appelbe, A. Crilly,
M. Zhang, and J. Chittenden, “Perturbation modiﬁca-
tions by pre-magnetisation of inertial conﬁnement fusion
implosions,” Physics of Plasmas, vol. 26, no. 2, p. 022701,
2019.

[10] J. Kline, S. Batha, L. Benedetti, D. Bennett, S. Bhan-
darkar, L. B. Hopkins, J. Biener, M. Biener, R. Bionta,
E. Bond, et al., “Progress of indirect drive inertial con-
ﬁnement fusion in the united states,” Nuclear Fusion,
vol. 59, no. 11, p. 112018, 2019.

[11] A. Kritcher, C. Young, H. Robey, C. Weber, A. Zylstra,
O. Hurricane, D. Callahan, J. Ralph, J. Ross, K. Baker,
et al., “Design of inertial fusion implosions reaching the
burning plasma regime,” Nature Physics, vol. 18, no. 3,
pp. 251–258, 2022.

[12] A. Zylstra, O. Hurricane, D. Callahan, A. Kritcher,
J. Ralph, H. Robey, J. Ross, C. Young, K. Baker,
D. Casey, et al., “Burning plasma achieved in inertial
fusion,” Nature, vol. 601, no. 7894, pp. 542–548, 2022.

[13] S. Slutz, M. Herrmann, R. Vesey, A. Sefkow, D. Sinars,
D. Rovang, K. Peterson, and M. Cuneo, “Pulsed-power-
driven cylindrical liner implosions of laser preheated fuel
magnetized with an axial ﬁeld,” Physics of Plasmas,
vol. 17, no. 5, p. 056303, 2010.

[14] M. R. Gomez, S. A. Slutz, A. B. Sefkow, D. B. Sinars,
K. D. Hahn, S. B. Hansen, E. C. Harding, P. F. Knapp,
P. F. Schmit, C. A. Jennings, T. J. Awe, M. Geissel, D.
C. Rovang, G. A. Chandler, G. W. Cooper, M. E. Cu-
neo, A. J. Harvey-Thompson, M. C. Herrmann, M. H.

14

Hess, O. Johns, D. C. Lamppa, M. R. Martin, R. D.
McBride, K. J. Peterson, J. L. Porter, G. K. Robertson,
G. A. Rochau, C. L. Ruiz, M. E. Savage, I. C. Smith, W.
A. Stygar, R. A. Vesey, “Experimental demonstration of
fusion-relevant conditions in magnetized liner inertial fu-
sion,” Physical review letters, vol. 113, no. 15, p. 155003,
2014.

[15] T. R. Boehly, D. L. Brown, R. S. Craxton, R. L. Keck,
J. P. Knauer, J. H. Kelly, T. J. Kessler, S. A. Kumpan,
S. J. Loucks, S. A. Letzring, F. J. Marshall, R. L. Mc-
Crory, S. F. B. Morse, W. Seka, J. M. Soures, and C. P.
Verdon, “Initial performance results of the OMEGA laser
system,” Opt. Commun., vol. 133, no. 1, pp. 495 – 506,
1997.

[16] J. Davies, D. Barnak, R. Betti, E. Campbell, P.-Y.
Chang, A. Sefkow, K. Peterson, D. Sinars, and M. Weis,
“Laser-driven magnetized liner inertial fusion,” Physics
of Plasmas, vol. 24, no. 6, p. 062701, 2017.

[17] D. Barnak, J. Davies, R. Betti, M. Bonino, E. Campbell,
V. Y. Glebov, D. Harding, J. Knauer, S. Regan, A. Se-
fkow, et al., “Laser-driven magnetized liner inertial fusion
on omega,” Physics of Plasmas, vol. 24, no. 5, p. 056310,
2017.

[18] E. Hansen, D. Barnak, P.-Y. Chang, R. Betti, E. Camp-
bell, J. Davies, J. Knauer, J. Peebles, S. Regan, and
A. Sefkow, “Optimization of laser-driven cylindrical im-
plosions on the omega laser,” Physics of Plasmas, vol. 25,
no. 12, p. 122701, 2018.

[19] E. C. Hansen, D. H. Barnak, R. Betti, E. M. Campbell,
P.-Y. Chang, J. R. Davies, V. Y. Glebov, J. P. Knauer,
J. Peebles, S. P. Regan, and A. B. Sefkow, “Measur-
ing implosion velocities in experiments and simulations
of laser-driven cylindrical implosions on the OMEGA
laser,” Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion, vol. 60,
no. 5, p. 054014, 2018.

[20] E. Hansen, J. Davies, D. Barnak, R. Betti, E. Camp-
bell, V. Y. Glebov, J. Knauer, L. Leal, J. Peebles, A. Se-
fkow, et al., “Neutron yield enhancement and suppression
by magnetization in laser-driven cylindrical implosions,”
Physics of Plasmas, vol. 27, no. 6, p. 062703, 2020.
[21] O. Gotchev, J. Knauer, P. Chang, N. Jang, M. Shoup III,
D. Meyerhofer, and R. Betti, “Seeding magnetic ﬁelds
for laser-driven ﬂux compression in high-energy-density
plasmas,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, vol. 80, no. 4,
p. 043504, 2009.

J.

[22] C. McGuﬀey, M. Bailly-Grandvaux,

Santos,
R. Florido, C. Walsh, F. Suzuki-Vidal, F. Beg,
A. Calisti, J. Davies, S. Ferri, et al., “Implementation
of laser-driven capacitor coil targets to magnetize an
implosion at omega,” in APS Division of Plasma Physics
Meeting Abstracts, vol. 2020, pp. NM11–002, 2020.
[23] M. Bailly-Grandvaux, S. McGuﬀey, F. Beg, S. Ferri,
A. Calisti, J. Davies, R. Florido, M. Gigosos, J. Hon-
rubia, R. Mancini, et al., “An all-optical platform to
characterize strongly magnetized hot dense plasmas at¿
10 kt,” in APS Division of Plasma Physics Meeting Ab-
stracts, vol. 2020, pp. BO07–005, 2020.
Santos, M. Bailly-Grandvaux,

L. Giuﬀrida,
P. Forestier-Colleoni, S. Fujioka, Z. Zhang, P. Ko-
rneev, R. Bouillaud, S. Dorard, D. Batani, et al.,
“Laser-driven platform for generation and characteriza-

[24] J.

tion of strong quasi-static magnetic ﬁelds,” New Journal
of Physics, vol. 17, no. 8, p. 083051, 2015.

[25] K. Law, M. Bailly-Grandvaux, A. Morace, S. Sakata,
K. Matsuo, S. Kojima, S. Lee, X. Vaisseau, Y. Arikawa,
A. Yogo, et al., “Direct measurement of kilo-tesla level
magnetic ﬁeld generated with laser-driven capacitor-coil
target by proton deﬂectometry,” Applied Physics Letters,
vol. 108, no. 9, p. 091104, 2016.

[26] V. T. Tikhonchuk, M. Bailly-Grandvaux, J. J. Santos,
and A. Poy´e, “Quasistationary magnetic ﬁeld generation
with a laser-driven capacitor-coil assembly,” Physical Re-
view E, vol. 96, no. 2, p. 023202, 2017.

[27] J. J. Santos, M. Bailly-Grandvaux, M. Ehret, A. Are-
ﬁev, D. Batani, F. Beg, A. Calisti, S. Ferri, R. Florido,
P. Forestier-Colleoni, et al., “Laser-driven strong mag-
netostatic ﬁelds with applications to charged beam
transport and magnetized high energy-density physics,”
Physics of Plasmas, vol. 25, no. 5, p. 056705, 2018.
[28] M. Bailly-Grandvaux, J. Santos, C. Bellei, P. Forestier-
Colleoni, S. Fujioka, L. Giuﬀrida, J. Honrubia, D. Batani,
R. Bouillaud, M. Chevrot, et al., “Guiding of relativis-
tic electron beams in dense matter by laser-driven mag-
netostatic ﬁelds,” Nature communications, vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 1–8, 2018.

[29] C. Walsh, R. Florido, M. Bailly-Grandvaux, F. Suzuki-
Vidal, J. P. Chittenden, A. Crilly, M. A. Gigosos,
R. Mancini, G. P´erez-Callejo, C. Vlachos, et al., “Explor-
ing extreme magnetization phenomena in directly driven
imploding cylindrical targets,” Plasma Physics and Con-
trolled Fusion, vol. 64, no. 2, p. 025007, 2022.

[30] A. Casner, T. Caillaud, S. Darbon, A. Duval, I. Thfouin,
J. Jadaud, J. LeBreton, C. Reverdin, B. Rosse, R. Rosch,
et al., “Lmj/petal laser facility: Overview and opportu-
nities for laboratory astrophysics,” High Energy Density
Physics, vol. 17, pp. 2–11, 2015.

[31] J. Miquel, C. Lion, and P. Vivini, “The laser mega-joule:
Lmj & petal status and program overview,” in Journal
of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 688, p. 012067, IOP
Publishing, 2016.

[32] J. MacFarlane, “Visrad—a 3-d view factor code and
for high-energy density physics experi-
design tool
ments,” Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and Radia-
tive Transfer, vol. 81, no. 1-4, pp. 287–300, 2003.

[33] R. Florido, T. Nagayama, R. Mancini, R. Tommasini,
J. Delettrez, S. Regan, V. Smalyuk, R. Rodr´ıguez, and
J. Gil, “Analysis of time-resolved argon line spectra from
omega direct-drive implosions,” Review of Scientiﬁc In-
struments, vol. 79, no. 10, p. 10E310, 2008.

[34] R. Florido, R. C. Mancini, T. Nagayama, R. Tommasini,
J. A. Delettrez, S. P. Regan, and B. Yaakobi, “Mea-
surements of core and compressed-shell temperature and
density conditions in thick-wall target implosions at the
omega laser facility,” Physical Review E, vol. 83, no. 6,
p. 066408, 2011.

[35] R. Florido, R. Mancini, T. Nagayama, R. Tommasini,
J. Delettrez, and S. Regan, “Time-resolved characteri-
zation and energy balance analysis of implosion core in
shock-ignition experiments at omega,” Physics of Plas-
mas, vol. 21, no. 10, p. 102709, 2014.

[36] H. Chen, T. Ma, R. Nora, M. Barrios, H. Scott,
M. Schneider, L. Berzak Hopkins, D. Casey, B. Hammel,
L. Jarrott, et al., “On krypton-doped capsule implosion
experiments at the national ignition facility,” Physics of
Plasmas, vol. 24, no. 7, p. 072715, 2017.

15

[37] L. Gao, B. F. Kraus, K. W. Hill, M. B. Schnei-
der, A. Christopherson, B. Bachmann, M. Bitter,
P. Efthimion, N. Pablant, R. Betti, C. Thomas,
D. Thorn, A. G. MacPhee, S. Khan, R. Kauﬀman,
D. Liedahl, H. Chen, D. Bradley, J. Kilkenny, B. Lah-
mann, E. Stambulchik and Y. Maron, “Hot spot evolu-
tion measured by high-resolution x-ray spectroscopy at
the national ignition facility,” Physical Review Letters,
vol. 128, no. 18, p. 185002, 2022.

[38] C. Courtois, C. Robert, D. Bretheau, J. Fariaut, M. Ferri,
I. Geoﬀray, G. Legay, F. Philippe, R. Rosch, G. Soullie,
and B. Villette, “Supersonic-to-subsonic transition of a
radiation wave observed at the lmj,” Physics of Plasmas,
vol. 28, no. 7, p. 073301, 2021.

[39] B. Zhu, Y. Li, D. Yuan, Y. Li, F. Li, G. Liao, J. Zhao,
J. Zhong, F. Xue, S. He, et al., “Strong magnetic
ﬁelds generated with a simple open-ended coil irradi-
ated by high power laser pulses,” Applied Physics Letters,
vol. 107, no. 26, p. 261903, 2015.

[40] G. Fiksel, W. Fox, L. Gao, and H. Ji, “A simple model for
estimating a magnetic ﬁeld in laser-driven coils,” Applied
Physics Letters, vol. 109, no. 13, p. 134103, 2016.

[41] C. Goyon, B. B. Pollock, D. P. Turnbull, A. Hazi, L. Di-
vol, W. A. Farmer, D. Haberberger, J. Javedani, A. J.
Johnson, A. Kemp, M. C. Levy, B. GrantLogan, D. A.
Mariscal, O. L. Landen, S. Patankar, J. S. Ross, A. M.
Rubenchik, G. F. Swadling, G. J. Williams, S. Fujioka, K.
F. F. Law and J. D. Moody, “Ultrafast probing of mag-
netic ﬁeld growth inside a laser-driven solenoid,” Physical
Review E, vol. 95, no. 3, p. 033208, 2017.

[42] J. Peebles, J. Davies, D. Barnak, T. Cracium, M. Bonino,
and R. Betti, “Axial proton probing of magnetic and elec-
tric ﬁelds inside laser-driven coils,” Physics of Plasmas,
vol. 27, no. 6, p. 063109, 2020.

[43] H. Morita, B. B. Pollock, C. S. Goyon, G. J. Williams,
K. Law, S. Fujioka, and J. D. Moody, “Dynamics of laser-
generated magnetic ﬁelds using long laser pulses,” Phys-
ical Review E, vol. 103, no. 3, p. 033201, 2021.

[44] K. Jungwirth, A. Cejnarova, L. Juha, B. Kralikova,
J. Krasa, E. Krousky, P. Krupickova, L. Laska, K. Masek,
T. Mocek, et al., “The prague asterix laser system,”
Physics of Plasmas, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 2495–2501, 2001.

[45] J. Zou, C. Blanc, P. Audebert, S. Janicot, A. Sautivet,
L. Martin, C. Sauteret, J. Paillard, S. Jacquemot,
and F. Amiranoﬀ, “Recent progress on luli high power
laser facilities,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series,
vol. 112, no. 3, p. 032021, 2008.

[46] M. Hohenberger, W. Theobald, S. Hu, K. Anderson,
R. Betti, T. Boehly, A. Casner, D. Fratanduono, M. La-
fon, D. Meyerhofer, et al., “Shock-ignition relevant exper-
iments with planar targets on omega,” Physics of Plas-
mas, vol. 21, no. 2, p. 022702, 2014.

[47] O. Renner, M. ˇSm´ıd, D. Batani, and L. Antonelli,
“Suprathermal electron production in laser-irradiated
cu targets characterized by combined methods of x-ray
imaging and spectroscopy,” Plasma Physics and Con-
trolled Fusion, vol. 58, no. 7, p. 075007, 2016.

[48] G. Cristoforetti, A. Cola¨ıtis, L. Antonelli, S. Atzeni,
F. Baﬃgi, D. Batani, F. Barbato, G. Boutoux,
R. Dudzak, P. Koester, et al., “Experimental observa-
tion of parametric instabilities at laser intensities relevant
for shock ignition,” EPL (Europhysics Letters), vol. 117,
no. 3, p. 35001, 2017.

[49] D. Batani, L. Antonelli, F. Barbato, G. Boutoux,

A. Cola¨ıtis, J.-L. Feugeas, G. Folpini, D. Mancelli,
P. Nicolai, J. Santos, et al., “Progress in understanding
the role of hot electrons for the shock ignition approach
to inertial conﬁnement fusion,” Nuclear Fusion, vol. 59,
no. 3, p. 032012, 2018.

[50] S. Zhang, C. Krauland, J. Peebles, J. Li, F. Beg,
N. Alexander, W. Theobald, R. Betti, D. Haberberger,
E. Campbell, et al., “Experimental study of hot elec-
tron generation in shock ignition relevant high-intensity
regime with large scale hot plasmas,” Physics of Plasmas,
vol. 27, no. 2, p. 023111, 2020.

[51] F. Beg, A. Bell, A. Dangor, C. Danson, A. Fews, M. Glin-
sky, B. Hammel, P. Lee, P. Norreys, and M. Tatarakis,
“A study of picosecond laser–solid interactions up to 1019
w cm- 2,” Physics of plasmas, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 447–457,
1997.

[52] D. F. Price, R. M. More, R. S. Walling, G. Guethlein,
R. L. Shepherd, R. E. Stewart, and W. E. White, “Ab-
sorption of ultrashort laser pulses by solid targets heated
rapidly to temperatures 1–1000 ev,” Physical review let-
ters, vol. 75, no. 2, p. 252, 1995.

[53] P. E. O. Chubar and J. Chavanne, “A three-dimensional
magnetostatics computer code for insertion devices,” J.
Synchrotron Rad., vol. 5, May 1998.

[54] C. Walsh, J. Chittenden, D. Hill, and C. Ridgers,
“Extended-magnetohydrodynamics in under-dense plas-
mas,” Physics of Plasmas, vol. 27, no. 2, p. 022103, 2020.
[55] J. D. Sadler, C. A. Walsh, and H. Li, “Symmetric set of
transport coeﬃcients for collisional magnetized plasma,”
Physical Review Letters, vol. 126, no. 7, p. 075001, 2021.
[56] C. Walsh, J. Sadler, and J. Davies, “Updated magnetized
transport coeﬃcients: Impact on laser-plasmas with self-
generated or applied magnetic ﬁelds,” Nuclear Fusion,
vol. 61, no. 11, p. 116025, 2021.

[57] A. Cola¨ıtis, R. K. Follett, J. P. Palastro, I. Igumenschev,
and V. Goncharov, “Adaptive inverse ray-tracing for ac-
curate and eﬃcient modeling of cross beam energy trans-
fer in hydrodynamics simulations,” Physics of Plasmas,
vol. 26, no. 7, p. 072706, 2019.

[58] J. P. Sauppe, S. Palaniyappan, E. N. Loomis, J. L. Kline,
K. A. Flippo, and B. Srinivasan, “Using cylindrical im-
plosions to investigate hydrodynamic instabilities in con-
vergent geometry,” Matter and Radiation at Extremes,
vol. 4, no. 6, p. 065403, 2019.

[59] S. Palaniyappan, J. Sauppe, B. Tobias, C. Kawaguchi,
K. Flippo, A. Zylstra, O. Landen, D. Shvarts, E. Malka,
S. Batha, et al., “Hydro-scaling of direct-drive cylindrical
implosions at the omega and the national ignition facil-
ity,” Physics of Plasmas, vol. 27, no. 4, p. 042708, 2020.
[60] M. J. Rosenberg, A. A. Solodov, J.F. Myatt, W. Seka,
P. Michel, M. Hohenberger, R. W. Short, R. Epstein,
S. P. Regan, E. M. Campbell, T. Chapman, C. Goyon,
J. E. Ralph, M. A. Barrios, J. D. Moody and J. W.
Bates, “Origins and scaling of hot-electron preheat in
ignition-scale direct-drive inertial conﬁnement fusion ex-
periments,” Physical review letters, vol. 120, no. 5,
p. 055001, 2018.

[61] S. Regan, J. Delettrez, R. Epstein, P. Jaanimagi,
B. Yaakobi, V. Smalyuk, F. Marshall, D. Meyerhofer,
W. Seka, D. Haynes Jr, et al., “Characterization of direct-
drive-implosion core conditions on omega with time-
resolved ar k-shell spectroscopy,” Physics of Plasmas,
vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1357–1365, 2002.

[62] T. Nagayama, R. Mancini, R. Florido, D. Mayes, R. Tom-

16

masini, J. Koch, J. Delettrez, S. Regan, and V. Sma-
lyuk, “Direct asymmetry measurement of temperature
and density spatial distributions in inertial conﬁnement
fusion plasmas from pinhole space-resolved spectra,”
Physics of Plasmas, vol. 21, no. 5, p. 050702, 2014.
[63] K. R. Carpenter, R. C. Mancini, E. C. Harding, A. J.
Harvey-Thompson, M. Geissel, M. R. Weis, S. B. Hansen,
K. Peterson, and G. A. Rochau, “Magnetic ﬁeld im-
pact on the laser heating in maglif,” Physics of Plasmas,
vol. 27, no. 5, p. 052704, 2020.

[64] R. Florido, R. Rodr´ıguez, J. M. Gil, J. G. Rubiano,
P. Martel, E. M´ınguez, and R. C. Mancini, “Modeling
of population kinetics of plasmas that are not in local
thermodynamic equilibrium, using a versatile collisional-
radiative model based on analytical rates,” Physical Re-
view E, vol. 80, no. 5, p. 056402, 2009.

[65] M. E. Sherrill, R. C. Mancini, J. Bailey, A. Filuk,
B. Clark, P. Lake, and J. Abdallah, “Spectroscopic mod-
eling and characterization of a collisionally conﬁned laser-
ablated plasma plume,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 76, p. 056401,
Nov 2007.

[66] M. Gigosos, S. Djurovi´c, I. Savi´c, D. Gonz´alez-Herrero,
Z. Mijatovi´c, and R. Kobilarov, “Stark broadening of
lines from transition between states n= 3 to n= 2 in
neutral helium-an experimental and computer-simulation
study,” Astronomy & Astrophysics, vol. 561, p. A135,
2014.

[67] J. Seidel and R. Stamm, “Eﬀects of radiator motion on
plasma-broadened hydrogen lyman-β,” Journal of Quan-
titative Spectroscopy and Radiative Transfer, vol. 27,
no. 5, pp. 499–503, 1982.

[68] H. Griem, Spectral line broadening by plasmas. Elsevier,

1974.

[69] M. A. Gigosos, “Stark broadening models for plasma
diagnostics,” Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics,
vol. 47, no. 34, p. 343001, 2014.

[70] O. Landoas, V. Yu Glebov, B. Ross´e, M. Briat, L. Dis-
dier, T. C. Sangster, T. Duﬀy, J. G. Marmouget,
C. Varignon, X. Ledoux, T. Caillaud, I. Thfoin, and J.-L.
Bourgade, “Absolute calibration method for laser mega-
joule neutron yield measurement by activation diagnos-
tics,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, vol. 82, no. 7,
p. 073501, 2011.

[71] R. Rosch, C. Trosseille, T. Caillaud, V. Allouche, J. L.
Bourgade, M. Briat, P. Brunel, M. Burillo, A. Casner,
S. Depierreux, D. Gontier, J. P. Jadaud, J. P. Le Breton,
P. Llavador, B. Loupias, J. L. Miquel, G. Oudot, S. Perez,
J. Raimbourg, A. Rousseau, C. Rousseaux, C. Rubbe-
lynck, P. Stemmler, P. Troussel, J. L. Ulmer, R. Wro-
bel, P. Beauvais, M. Pallet, and V. Prevot, “First set of
gated x-ray imaging diagnostics for the laser megajoule
facility,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, vol. 87, no. 3,
p. 033706, 2016.

[72] N. Blanchot, G. B´ehar, J. Chapuis, C. Chappuis, S. Char-
davoine, J. Charrier, H. Co¨ıc, C. Damiens-Dupont,
J. Duthu, P. Garcia, et al., “1.15 pw–850 j compressed
beam demonstration using the petal facility,” Optics Ex-
press, vol. 25, no. 15, pp. 16957–16970, 2017.

[73] J. R. Rygg, O. S. Jones, J. E. Field, M. A. Barrios, L. R.
Benedetti, G. W. Collins, D. C. Eder, M. J. Edwards, J.
L. Kline, J. J. Kroll, O. L. Landen, T. Ma, A. Pak, J. L.
Peterson, K. Raman, R. P. J. Town, D. K. Bradley, “2d
x-ray radiography of imploding capsules at the national
ignition facility,” Physical review letters, vol. 112, no. 19,

p. 195001, 2014.

neering, vol. 8, 2020.

17

[74] E. Dewald, O. Landen, L. Masse, D. Ho, Y. Ping,
D. Thorn, N. Izumi, L. Berzak Hopkins, J. Kroll,
A. Nikroo, et al., “X-ray streaked refraction enhanced
radiography for inferring inﬂight density gradients in icf
capsule implosions,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments,
vol. 89, no. 10, p. 10G108, 2018.

[75] D. Raﬀestin, L. Lecherbourg, I. Lantu´ejoul, B. Vauzour,
P. Masson-Laborde, X. Davoine, N. Blanchot, J. Dubois,
X. Vaisseau, E. d’Humi`eres, et al., “Enhanced ion accel-
eration using the high-energy petawatt petal laser,” Mat-
ter and Radiation at Extremes, vol. 6, no. 5, p. 056901,
2021.

[76] P. Bradford, A. Dearling, M. Ehret, L. Antonelli,
N. Booth, D. Carroll, R. Clarke, K. Glize, R. Heath-
cote, M. Khan, et al., “Measuring magnetic ﬁelds in laser-
driven coils with dual-axis proton deﬂectometry,” Plasma
Physics and Controlled Fusion, 2021.

[77] A. F. A. Bott, L. Chen, G. Boutoux, T. Caillaud, A. Du-
val, M. Koenig, B. Khiar, I. Lantu´ejoul, L. Le-Deroﬀ,
B. Reville, R. Rosch, D. Ryu, C. Spindloe, B. Vauzour, B.
Villette, A. A. Schekochihin, D. Q. Lamb, P. Tzeferacos,
G. Gregori, A. Casner, “Ineﬃcient magnetic-ﬁeld ampli-
ﬁcation in supersonic laser-plasma turbulence,” Physical
review letters, vol. 127, no. 17, p. 175002, 2021.

[78] P. Bradford, M. Read, M. Ehret, L. Antonelli, M. Khan,
N. Booth, K. Glize, D. Carroll, R. Clarke, R. Heathcote,
et al., “Proton deﬂectometry of a capacitor coil target
along two axes,” High Power Laser Science and Engi-

[79] M. Ehret,
in intense
10.13140/RG.2.1.3820.0806, Sept. 2015.

beam transport
and magnetic ﬁelds,” DOI:

“Charged

particle

electric

[80] D. Sinars, M. Sweeney, C. Alexander, D. Ampleford,
T. Ao, J. Apruzese, C. Aragon, D. Armstrong, K. Austin,
T. Awe, et al., “Review of pulsed power-driven high en-
ergy density physics research on z at sandia,” Physics of
Plasmas, vol. 27, no. 7, p. 070501, 2020.

[81] G. Williams, S. Patankar, D. Mariscal, V. Tikhonchuk,
J. Bude, C. Carr, C. Goyon, M. Norton, B. Pollock,
A. Rubenchik, et al., “Laser intensity scaling of the mag-
netic ﬁeld from a laser-driven coil target,” Journal of
Applied Physics, vol. 127, no. 8, p. 083302, 2020.

[82] C. K. Li, F. H. S´eguin, J. R. Rygg, J. A. Frenje,
M. Manuel, R. D. Petrasso, R. Betti, J. Delettrez, J.
P. Knauer, F. Marshall, D. D. Meyerhofer, D. Shvarts,
V. A. Smalyuk, C. Stoeckl, O. L. Landen, R. P. J.
Town, C. A. Back and J. D. Kilkenny, “Monoenergetic-
proton-radiography measurements of implosion dynam-
ics in direct-drive inertial-conﬁnement fusion,” Physical
review letters, vol. 100, no. 22, p. 225001, 2008.

[83] A. Chien, L. Gao, S. Zhang, H. Ji, E. Blackman, H. Chen,
G. Fiksel, K. Hill, and P. Nilson, “Pulse width depen-
dence of magnetic ﬁeld generation using laser-powered
capacitor coils,” Physics of Plasmas, vol. 28, no. 5,
p. 052105, 2021.

