Anomalous time of ﬂight behavior of fast ions in laser produced aluminum
plasma

Garima Arora,1, a) Jinto Thomas,1 and Hem Chandra Joshi1, 2
1)Institute For Plasma Research, Bhat, Gandhinagar,Gujarat, 382428, India
2)Homi Bhabha National Institute, Training School Complex, Anushaktinagar, Mumbai, 400094,
India

(Dated: 13 June 2022)

In this work, dynamics of multi-charged ions emitted from an aluminum plasma produced by Q switched Nd:
Yag laser is studied using time of ﬂight (TOF) measurements from Langmuir Probe (LP) and spectroscopy
(STOF) under Ar ambient of 0.02 mbar. The temporal evolution of multi-charged ions, background neutrals
and ions is systematically studied for varying laser intensities. The temporal evolution shows all the species
have double peak structure for all the laser intensities considered in the study. The fast peak is sharp whereas
the slow peak is broad similar to that observed in previous studies. Moreover, higher charged ions have higher
velocity, indicating acceleration from the transient electric ﬁeld produced at the very initial temporal stages
of expansion. Interestingly, the fast peak gets delayed, whereas the slow peak advances in time with increased
laser intensity, which has not been reported in earlier studies. The observations point towards the possible
role of ambipolar electric ﬁelds in the unexpected observed behavior of the TOF proﬁles.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Laser produced plasma has been studied extensively
because of various applications such as intertial con-
ﬁnement fusion1, laser induced breakdown spectroscopy
(LIBS)2–4,
lithograpghy5, development of ion source6,
extreme ultravoilet light source5 pulsed laser decom-
position (PLD)7, plasma diagnostics8–11, nanoparticle
generation12, etc. Laser ablation is a dynamic process
in which the removed material is converted into vapor
or partially ionized cloud when the laser strikes the sur-
face of the target. The plasma plume, thus formed, is
composed of electrons of few eV and energetic ions of
hundreds and thousands of eV.

The energy distribution of ions far away from the tar-
get can be divided into two groups; (1) low energy ions
comprising of ablated mass and (2) a smaller fraction of
energetic, fast ions. These fast ions from laser produced
plasma form a signiﬁcantly small group of ions that are
the transporters of absorbed laser energy13. The study
of the dynamics of fast ions from laser produced plasma
has signiﬁcant interest for inertial conﬁnement fusion1,
laser-matter interaction14,15 and diﬀerent accelerations
mechanisms16,17. Hence, a systematic study of ion ac-
celeration is naturally quite informative in furthering the
understanding of laser-matter interaction process. Spec-
troscopic time of ﬂight (STOF) appears to be an im-
portant diagnostics for understanding the laser-plasma
interaction18,19.

Acceleration of ions with ns or ultrafast laser pulses
due to ambipolar electric ﬁeld originating from double
layer (DL) structures has already been reported20,21.
Bulgakawa et. al.20 explained the origin of the double-
peak structure in ion collector time of ﬂight distribution

a)Electronic mail: garimagarora@gmail.com

(TOF) in case of vacuum as well as in the presence of
background gas due to self-generated ambipolar electric
ﬁeld or fromation of DL. DL is formed by the spatial
charge separation in the expanding plasma and conse-
quently results in disrupting the quasineutrality condi-
tion. Thus, DL modulates the velocity distribution of
ions into fast and thermal20,22,23 and forms double peak
structure. Wu et. al.22 studied the dynamics of multi-
charged ions emitted from ns laser produced molybde-
num plasma from mass spectrometry. They observed
multi peak structures in time-resolved mass spectroscopy
and linked the velocities of the multi-charged ions to the
acceleration in the transient sheath. Further, they have
reported saturation of kinetic energy of molybdenum ions
with laser intensity. Batool et. al.23 observed two distant
peaks of ions with time delay of nanoseconds and mi-
croseconds due to charge separation between the prompt
electrons and initially emitted ions. Dogar et. al.24 mea-
sured ion ﬂux from TOF ion collector for various metals
using ns laser pulse. They have observed two groups of
fast ions. Further, they reported that early fast peak is
present in case of all the metals used in the study and at-
tributed it to surface contamination. The second group is
suggested to be due to ion acceleration from the prompt
electron emission and is observed only in case of heav-
ier metals. Bhatti et. al.25 suggested that self generated
electric ﬁeld (SGEF) should be responsible for the fast
ions. They observed increase in SGEF with increase in
laser irradiance. Farid et. al.26 reported enhancement in
kinetic energy for both fast and slow ions with increase
in laser ﬂuence which is saturated at higher ﬂuence.

Despite these report works, concerted study of the time
evolution of various charge states appears to be quite
challenging for getting better understanding of the in-
volved processes. Hence, in this work we have system-
atically studied the eﬀect of laser ﬂuence on the charge
states and background argon in laser produced aluminum
plasma with Langmuir probe (LP) and spectral time of

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

0
1

]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

2
v
9
0
2
2
1
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
ﬂight (STOF) diagnostics at a background pressure of
0.02 mbar argon ambient.
In line with earlier works,
double peak structure is observed in the temporal evo-
lution from both the diagnostics. Multi-charged ions ex-
hibiting dependence on arrival time with laser ﬂuence are
also observed. Interestingly in contrast to the anticipated
behavior, the fast ions appear to get delayed with laser
intensity. This peculiar behavior is attributed to possible
decrease in SGEF.
The paper is divided in the following sections. Sec II gives
the details of the experimental setup, laser and plasma
diagnostics used to investigate dynamics of fast ions. Sec
III describes the observations and discussion. Concluding
remarks are in Sec. IV.

II. EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP

Schematic diagram of experimental set-up.

FIG. 1.
(a)
ND:YAG laser,(b) PD photodiode (c) LP single Langmuir
Probe (LP) (d) Rotary Pump (e) Phtot Multiplier Tube
(PMT) (f) Fast Digital Oscilloscope and (g) L1 and L2 lens
system.

Fig.1 shows the schematic diagram of the experimen-
tal set-up used to study the dynamics of ions using LP
and STOF. A Q switched Nd:YAG laser (wavelength
λ = 1064nm, pulse width τ = 8ns) is used to ablate
the target and produce plasma. The energy of the laser
is varied from 100 mJ to 930 mJ by changing the delay
between the ﬂash lamps of the oscillator and ampliﬁer
unit of the laser. The laser is focused on the sample us-
ing a 25 cm plano convex lens and the lens position is
adjusted to get a spot size of ∼ 1mm on the sample re-
sulting in laser intensity in the range of 3-24 GW/cm2. A
fast photodiode (PD) is placed near the focusing lens to
pick part of the reﬂected laser light to record the time of
incidence of the laser on the sample. The PD triggers the

2

fast digital oscilloscope, and ICCD to record the signal.
A cylindrical glass chamber of 100 mm diameter and
600 mm length evacuated by a rotary pump is used for
the experiments. The chamber is ﬁlled with argon gas
to set the desired working pressure. A pirani gauge is
used for measuring the pressure in the chamber. Due
to experimental limitations of the present chamber, the
working pressure is set to 0.02 mbar. A well polished and
cleaned aluminum strip mounted on a vacuum compati-
ble translation stage is used as the target for laser pro-
duced plasma. The translation stage is moved after each
laser pulse so that fresh sample location is used for each
experiment. Multiple acquisitions are performed for each
experiment to reduce the statistical error. Various diag-
nostics such as LP, STOF, 1 m long Czerny-Turner spec-
trograph coupled with ICCD, and fast imaging with dif-
ferent narrow-band interference ﬁlters are used for study-
ing the fast and slow dynamics of the plasma plume.

LP is made of tungsten wire having a diameter of 1
mm and length 10 mm is mounted on a linear motion
feed through to position it accurately within the plasma
plume. It is placed orthogonal to the plasma plume prop-
agation and its tip is placed 2-3 mm away from the laser
beam path to avoid obstruction to the laser path. LP
measurements are performed at 30 mm from the sample
and the probe can be considered almost 90 degree to the
plasma plume propagation. The probe is negatively bi-
ased to -30 V in series with a 50 Ω resistance, and the
current is measured using a high resolution (5V/A) cur-
rent transformer.
An imaging system consisting of two lenses and magniﬁ-
cation 0.5 is used to collect the emission from the plasma
plume into an optical ﬁber. The optical ﬁber is of 600
microns core diameter and provides a spatial resolution
of 1.2 mm for the STOF measurements. The ﬁber is cou-
pled to a monochromator (Hr 460) with slit width ∼ 50
microns. A high gain fast photomultiplier tube (PMT)
is used as the detector. The PMT output is connected to
a buﬀer ampliﬁer and fed to a fast digital oscilloscope to
record the temporal evolution. Another 1 m long Czerny-
Turner spectrograph coupled with ICCD (Andor DH734)
is used to record the emission spectra from the plasma
plume. The LP and STOF data are averaged over ﬁve
plasma shots to reduce the statistical uncertainty in the
measurements.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Time of Flight Measurements

Figure 2 shows the temporal evolution of ion satu-
ration current measured using the LP at a distance of
30 mm from the sample at an ambient pressure of 0.02
mbar for diﬀerent laser intensities. LP is kept normal
to the plume expansion as shown in the ﬁgure. As the
validity of LP measurements depends upon the plasma
plume conditions27, care has to be taken while making

PumpNd:YAGPDAmplifierTPMTL2L11:1 Imaging lensLP(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)3

time of the fast and slow peaks of ion saturation cur-
rent. As mentioned earlier, previous studies using Fara-
day cup23,25 and LP27,28 reported that the fast and slow
peaks of ion current get faster with laser intensity23,25
and ﬁnally become stagnant.22. On the contrary, in our
case the fast ions slow down as the laser intensity in-
creases.

FIG. 2.
Temporal evolution of ion saturation current of
plasma plume for four diﬀerent laser intensities recorded at
30 mm from the target. The plasma plume expands into argon
background pressure of 0.02 mbar. The dotted pink lines are
formed by joining the peaking time of ion current proﬁle to
mark the evolution of peaking times of fast and slow ions.

the measurements. However, in this work the LP sim-
ply used for studying the temporal evolution of the ions.
As can be seen in the ﬁgure, the ion saturation current
has two prominent peaks. The ﬁrst peak observed at a
delay of 100 ns is due to the fast ions generated from
the laser plasma. The fast ions can be attributed to ac-
celerated ions from the electric ﬁeld developed by the
loss of electrons at the initial times as reported in ear-
lier works which are further explained in terms of double
layer formation20. In nanosecond laser generated plasma,
the leading portion of the laser pulse heats, melts, and
vaporizes the target forming a vapor cloud. The trail-
ing part of the laser pulse is absorbed by this vapor
cloud which is mainly by inverse bremsstrahlung (IB)
process. When the laser energy increases, the atoms or
ions are further ionized due to electron impact ioniza-
tion leading to the generation of multiple charge states.
As the electrons gain large kinetic energy from the laser,
they escape from the target. The loss of these highly
energetic electrons leads to charge separation and cre-
ates self-generated electric ﬁeld (SGEF) leading to quasi
neutrality violation. These ions which get accelerated
from this electric ﬁeld and acquire higher kinetic energy
are believed to be responsible for the fast peak observed
from the LP. The second peak which is broad and ex-
tends beyond 1 µs corresponds to ions originating from
slow thermal process. Fig. 2 also shows that the ion sat-
uration current increases with increase in laser intensities
which is in line with earlier reported measurements from
ion saturation current23.

Interestingly, ﬁg. 2 shows a unique observation that
the fast peak appears to be delayed as the laser intensity
increases whereas, the slower peak becomes faster. For
clarity, a pink dotted line marks the variation of peaking

FIG. 3. STOF proﬁles of (a) Al1+ (358.7 nm) ionic line and
(b) Al2+ (451.3 nm) ionic line for four diﬀerent laser intensity.
The argon pressure is 0.02 mbar. The proﬁles are recorded at
30 mm from the target.

To understand the unique behavior of ion saturation
current with laser intensity, STOF measurements are per-
formed for diﬀerent ionic species at the same background
pressure and location. Fig. 3(a) and (b) show the STOF
proﬁles of Al1+ and Al2+ ionic emission for four diﬀer-
ent laser intensities. Similar to the behavior of ion sat-
uration current, the STOF proﬁle of these charge states
also shows a double peak structure with narrow fast peak
and a broad slow peak with increasing amplitude with in-
crease in laser intensity. As can be seen from the ﬁgure,
the behavior of the peaking time, (marked with pink dot-
ted line), is similar as in case of ion saturation current
(Fig.2). The fast peak gets delayed, whereas the slow

Time (s)#10-70246810Ion Saturation Current in A. U.00.20.40.60.824 GW/cm217 GW/cm26 GW/cm23 GW/cm2Time (s)#10-701234567Intensity in A. U.-10-8-6-4-20(a)24 GW/cm217 GW/cm26 GW/cm23 GW/cm2Time (s)#10-701234567Intensity in A. U.-3-2.5-2-1.5-1-0.50(b)24 GW/cm217 GW/cm26 GW/cm23 GW/cm2peak becomes faster as laser intensity increases for both
Al1+ and Al2+. This shows that the observed dynam-
ics of ion saturation current indeed holds with individual
charge species as well.
In order to conﬁrm that the fast peak observed in STOF

4

FIG. 5. STOF ionic proﬁle of Al1+ (358.7 nm), Al2+ (451.3
nm), Al3+ (351.7 nm), Al4+ (338.1 nm) where the plume is
formed by setting laser intensity 24 GW/cm2 at background
pressure of 0.02 mbar . The proﬁles are recorded at 30 mm
from the target.

FIG. 4. Emission spectra of Al2+ ions recorded at 30 mm
from the sample at 0.02 mbar argon atmospheres for ﬁrst
various delays. The integration time is set to 50 ns and the
plume is formed at 24 GW/cm2.

is due to ions from the target itself, the emission spectra
are recorded using a spectrograph (1 meter, Mcpherson)
at 30 mm distance from the sample at early times. Fig. 4
shows the representative lines of Al2+ recorded at diﬀer-
ent delay times within the time range of the ﬁrst peak of
STOF evolution. This conﬁrms that the the STOF spec-
tra recorded from diﬀerent charge states, indeed originate
from the ionic species of the target material itself.

To further investigate the plasma evolution, the tempo-
ral behavior of diﬀerent charge states of aluminum species
produced for laser intensity of 24 GW/cm2 and back-
ground ∼0.02 mbar is compared in Fig.5. It is observed
that both the fast and slow components of the higher
charge state reach earlier as compared to respective com-
ponents of lower charge states indicating that the higher
charge state acquires higher velocity. The increased ve-
locity for higher charge states has been reported earlier
and explained using the double layer20,22 concept where
the highly charged species are expected to have larger
acceleration and hence attain higher velocities.

Fig. 6 (a) and (b) show the trend of velocities and ki-
netic energies of diﬀerent charged species as a function
of laser intensity. The velocity of charged species is esti-
mated from the peaking time of respective STOF proﬁles
and subsequently kinetic energies are estimated. As can
be seen from ﬁgure 6, the velocity of each charged species
decreases with an increase in laser intensity. However,
for a particular laser intensity, the velocities and hence
kinetic energies for higher charge states ions are higher

(a) Velocity (b) Kinetic energy of fast ions of Aln+
FIG. 6.
charged species as a function of laser intensity estimated from
the fast peak of STOF proﬁle of Aln+ ionic lines. The back-
ground pressure is set to 0.02 mbar and STOF proﬁles are
recorded at a distance 30 mm away from the target.

than that for lower charge state ions. This again in-
dicates that the dynamics of charged states should be
governed by the electric ﬁeld in the early stages of the
plasma formation. It is to be noted that in our case, the
energy of the fast ions of Al ions recorded at 30 mm is
10-30 keV which is signiﬁcantly higher as compared to
those reported earlier13,24,29. However, Javed et. al.30
reported 20-160 keV in case of fast Zr ions at 10 mm
from the target for similar laser intensity range.

The ion saturation current recorded by LP is expected
to have contribution from all the charged states of ions.
Fig. 7 (a) (up to 200 ns) and Fig. 7(b) (from 200 ns to
2 µs) show the evolution of fast and slow peaks of ion
saturation current and the STOF proﬁles of individual
charge states of aluminum and argon respectively. The
plots are normalized to the peak values of the respec-
tive species for convenient comparison. The solid blue
line is the probe current, whereas the STOF emission
proﬁles from Al1+,Al2+, Al3+, Al4+, Ar1+ are plotted

Wavelength (nm)450451452453454455Intensity in A. U.#1041.71.751.81.851.950 ns70 ns100 nsTime (s)#10-701234567Intensity in A. U-10-8-6-4-20Al1+Al2+Al3+Al4+Laser Fluence (GW/cm2)0510152025Velocity (cm/sec)#10722.533.544.55(a)Al4+Al3+Al2+Al1+Laser Fluence (GW/cm2)0510152025Kinetic Energy (KeV)5101520253035(b)Al4+Al3+Al2+Al1+with markers joined with lines. One can notice that all
the charged species contribute to the fast peak (shown in
Fig.7(a)). The contribution to the ion saturation current
is expected to be dominated by the charge states of alu-
minum rather than argon, considering the lower ambient
pressure and dense aluminum plasma. As a result, ambi-
ent Ar is likely to be pushed outwards. However, as can
be seen from ﬁgure7(a) Ar1+ is present at the same time
scale as that of aluminum (Al4+) ions. The fast Ar ions
can not be inherently present in the plasma plume at the
same time scale as that of Al1+ due to its heavier mass.
The most probable reason for the presence of Ar1+ in the
same timescale of the fast peak of higher charge states of
aluminum appears to be some kind of collisional process
with highly charged states of aluminum or due to electron
impact ionization. Also, it is evident from the ﬁgure that
the ion saturation current is signiﬁcant even at shorter
time scales than the recorded evolution of charge states,
which indicates that possible higher charge states (not
recorded from STOF) may be present.
As can be seen from Fig.7(b) the slow peak of ion satu-
ration current is broad and appears as a convolution of
multiple peaks merged together, reaching at 3 cm around
300 ns, and persisting up to 1 µs. Here also, all the
charged species are likely to contribute to the ion satu-
ration current, and the ﬁrst peak of the slow peak is pre-
cisely coinciding with the slow peaks of Al1+ and Al2+.
The second slow peak is likely to be the contribution of
all the aluminum ions and also background ions.

FIG. 7.
Temporal evolution of normalized ion saturation
current from LP as well as the normalized STOF from ionic
species Al1+,Al2+,Al3+,Al4+ Ar1+ to show the contribution
of each charged species towards the ion current upto 200 ns
(a) and from 200 ns to 1 µs (b). The plume is formed with 24
GW/cm2 laser intensity with ambient argon pressure of 0.02
mbar. Ion current as well as STOF are recorded at 30 mm
from the target.

To investigate whether the observed delay in the fast
peak with laser intensity is only for charged species, the
time evolution of emission from Al∗ (396.2 nm) recorded
for diﬀerent laser intensities is shown in Fig. 8. It is to be
noted that double peak structure is present in the STOF
of aluminum neutrals also. Akin to aluminum ions, emis-
sion intensity increases with laser intensity. However, as
can be seen from Fig. 8(shown in the inset), the fast
peak at around 160 ns (for low intensity) and the slow
peak at 250 ns again shows behavior same as that of the

5

FIG. 8. STOF proﬁle of Al∗ (396.2 nm) line for four diﬀerent
laser intensities. The ambient argon pressure is 0.02 mbar.
Inset
The proﬁles are recorded at 30 mm from the target.
shows the STOF upto 600 ns to show the trend of fast and
slow peaks with laser intensity.

Al ions i.e.
fast peaks slows down and the slow peaks
become faster as the laser intensity increases. The fast
and slow neutrals are likely to be formed by the recombi-
nation from fast and slow ions of aluminum ions respec-
tively, and hence they appear to follow a similar trend
as exhibited by aluminum ions with intensity. Also it
can be seen from the ﬁgure that STOF for neutral shows
a relatively broad peak at around 3 µs. However, no
emission from ions or signiﬁcant ion saturation current
is observed in this time range. As mentioned, the emis-
sion from aluminum neutrals is likely to originate from
the recombination from Al ions as the plasma tempera-
ture decreases with time. Further, the peaking time of
the broad peak is delayed as the laser intensity increases.
This is because at initial stages the plasma temperature
is higher at higher laser intensity, and the plume lifetime
is longer. Here more ionization is expected resulting in
increased charge states. However, the recombination pro-
cess can occur at longer times when temperature is de-
creased substantially4,8.
The temporal evolution of fast and slow peaks of Ar neu-
trals with an increase in laser intensity are also shown in
Fig. 9. One can notice that the emission from back-
ground argon neutrals persists upto 700 ns in contrast
to Al neutrals which emits up to 6 µs. It is interesting
to see that the STOF proﬁles of Ar neutrals also show
similar trend as that of Al ions. The fast peak from Ar
neutral appears around 90 ns where Al ions with higher
charge states are present, and hence it is expected that
these neutral may be excited by some kind of collisional
process with highly charged aluminum ions although ex-
citation by fast electrons can not be ruled out. Moreover,
the ions show delay in peaking time with intensity and in-
terestingly the fast peak of Ar neutrals appears to follow

(b)(a)6

are present at the boundary. Further, these are excited
by the electron or ion impact processes.

Brieﬂy, from the present work, it is clearly evident that
the velocity of fast ions decreases with increase in laser in-
tensity. Here, it is anticipated that the faster peak due to
self generated electric ﬁelds at initial stage of plasma for-
mation should become more prominent for higher laser
intensities and there should be increase in the velocity
of the charged species depending upon the charge. In-
terestingly, an opposite trend is observed in the present
experiments. Here we would like to mention that in an
earlier work, Wu et. al.22 found that there is a decrease
in the kinetic energy of Mo+1 ions as the laser inten-
sity increases, which, however, it is observed for higher
charge states in our work. They tentatively suggested
that this behavior is likely to occur due to more colli-
sions and recombinations during the expansion process.
They also attributed the decrease in kinetic energy with
intensity due to plasma shielding and absorption. In fact,
the present experiments also have comparable laser in-
tensity. From a simple comparison, a similar reason can
be expected for this observed reduction in kinetic energy
of aluminum charge states. However, we would like to
mention that in our case we have observed decrease in
energy for all the studied charged states. Hence, it can
not be pointed out if there is any substantial evidence of
the role of recombination processes.
Another possibility for the observed decrease in veloc-
ity is the decrease in the ﬁeld strength with increase in
laser inetnsity at the early stages of plasma formation.
It can be expected that the initial plasma plume den-
sity in the self regulating regime10 may restrict the max-
imum plasma density to the critical density which de-
pends on the laser frequency irrespective of the laser in-
tensity. However, at higher laser intensities, the temper-
ature may increase due to the larger IB process. Hence,
it can be anticipated that during the interaction of laser
pulse with the sample, the plasma density remains the
same but the temperature increases as the laser intensity
increases. In this scenario, Debye length of plasma plume
will be larger for the plasma formed with higher laser in-
tensity. As the thickness of the double layer formation
depends on the Debye length, there is a possibility that
the electric ﬁeld strength may be weakened with higher
laser intensity, and subsequent decrease in the velocity of
charged species is expected. It can be mentioned that at
higher peak intensity, the rising edge of the laser pulse be-
comes high enough to result in the plasma expansion and
hence form the electric ﬁeld. However, later the intensity
does not appear to contribute to charge separation prob-
ably due to decreased plasma density or spatial mismatch
between the plasma and the laser focal spot. As a result,
the temporal structure of the laser pulse and evolution
of the laser-plasma interaction can be important.
Third possibility is the presence of bipolar nature of
SGEF with opposite polarities as reported in some of
the recent studies23,25. With an increase in intensity, the
balance between these ﬁelds with opposite polarities is

FIG. 9. STOF proﬁle of Ar∗ (420.1 nm) line for four diﬀerent
laser intensities. The argon pressure 0.02 mbar. The proﬁles
are recorded at 30 mm from the target. Inset shows the STOF
upto 800 ns to demonstrate the trend of fast and slow peaks
with laser intensity.

ICCD images of (a) Al1+ (466.3 nm) (b) Ar1+
FIG. 10.
(434.8 nm) with a delay of 100 ns for an integration time of 5
ns at 0.5 mbar argon pressure. The plume is formed with 24
GW/cm2 laser power density. The ﬁlter transmission spectral
range is 0.2 nm with 60% maximum transmission.

the same trend.

To ﬁnd out the possibility of the ambient Ar penetrat-
ing the plasma plume, we have recorded the images using
interference ﬁlters of Al1+ and Ar1+. As the emission
from Argon is weak at the background pressure of 0.02
mbar, both these images are recorded at higher back-
ground pressure of 0.5 mbar. Fig. 10 (a) and (b) show
the ICCD images of aluminum and argon ions at a time
delay of 100 ns, respectively. It is clearly observed from
the images that the contribution of emission in case of
Al1+ is present in the main plasma plume and its bound-
ary (near to the shock region). However, in case of Ar1+
the emission intensity is conﬁned only to the boundary
(periphery) of the plume even at a higher background
pressures. This further supports the fact that the back-
ground ions do not constitute the main plasma plume and

(a)(b)10 mmlikely to be disturbed and hence a decrease in the ve-
locities of charged species is possible. Here it can be
mentioned that for correctly ascertaining the observed
behavior of the velocity of charged species, more insights
into the plasma parameters and hence electric ﬁelds at
the very early stage of plasma are needed. As the electric
ﬁeld can only be present within the order of few Debye
lengths, the density and temperature of plasma at the
very initial stages of plume expansion is crucial. How-
ever, the existing diagnostics are not capable to get the
plasma parameters at the very early stages of expansion.
Though a clear cut explanation for the observed behavior
can not be given at present, we believe the present work
points towards a peculiar behavior of fast ions which may
lead to further investigations in this direction.
Although it is not possible to exactly arrive at the exact
mechanism of the delay in the fast peak at this stage,
the following possibilities can be argued. As it was not
possible to the experiments in ultra high vacuum, we can
not rule out if background gas has a role in it. However,
delay in the fast peak is observed for higher background
pressures. Second possibility may arise due to the cre-
ation of electric ﬁeld at the rising edge of the laser pulse,
which somehow appears not contributing to charge sep-
aration at higher intensities. This may happen because
of decreased plasma density or spatial mismatch between
plasma and laser focal spot.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

The dynamics of fast and slow ions is studied for dif-
ferent laser intensities using LP and STOF. The ion cur-
rent from LP shows a double peak structure where the
ﬁrst peak is sharp and peaks around 100 ns. However,
the slow peak is broad with peaking time around 400
ns. The ion current increases with laser intensity and
the slow peak advances in time for higher laser intensity,
similar to earlier reported works using ion collector cur-
rent from FC. However in the present study, the fast peak
shows somewhat peculiar behavior with laser intensity i.e
it gets delayed in time with increase in laser intensity.
Further, ion saturation current which can be assumed as
the convolution of the contributions from all the charged
species and conﬁrms the anomaly in the fast peak. STOF
proﬁles of all the charged species show similar trend as
observed in case of LP. The double peak nature is present
in the case of higher charged species in which fast peak is
narrow and slow peak is broad. The decrease in velocity
and hence kinetic energy is also observed in STOF as in
case of LP. The energy of fast ions is the range of 10-40
KeV. The higher charged species have higher velocities
as compared to lower charged species, which conﬁrms the
presence of transient electric ﬁelds. Another interesting
aspect is the dynamics of the background argon in the
expanding plume. Though more detailed investigations
of the early stages of plume expansion are required for
getting ﬁner aspects of the mechanism, we believe the

7

present study brings out some hitherto unexplored in-
teresting features regarding the species present in laser
produced aluminum plasma plume in the presence of am-
bient argon.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that supports the observations of this study
are available from the corresponding author upon reason-
able request.

V. REFERENCES

1H. Hora, “New aspects for fusion energy using inertial conﬁne-
ment,” Laser and Particle Beams 25, 37–45 (2007).
2H. Loudyi, K. Rifai, S. Laville, F. Vidal, M. Chaker, and M. Sab-
sabi, “Improving laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (libs)
performance for iron and lead determination in aqueous solu-
tions with laser-induced ﬂuorescence (lif),” Journal of Analytical
Atomic Spectrometry 24, 1421–1428 (2009).
3R. Noll, C. Fricke-Begemann, S. Connemann, C. Meinhardt,
and V. Sturm, “Libs analyses for industrial applications–an
overview of developments from 2014 to 2018,” Journal of An-
alytical Atomic Spectrometry 33, 945–956 (2018).
4G. Arora, J. Thomas, and H. C. Joshi, “On the delayed emission
from a laser-produced aluminum plasma under an argon environ-
ment,” J. Anal. At. Spectrom. , – (2022).
5U. Stamm, “Extreme ultraviolet light sources for use in semicon-
ductor lithography—state of the art and future development,”
Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 37, 3244 (2004).
6O. Balki, M. M. Rahman, and H. E. Elsayed-Ali, “Optical emis-
sion spectroscopy of carbon laser plasma ion source,” Optics
Communications 412, 134–140 (2018).
7D. Geohegan, D. Chrisey, and G. Hubler, “Pulsed laser depo-
sition of thin ﬁlms,” Chrisey and GK Hubler (eds), Wiely, New
York , 59–69 (1994).
8S. S. Harilal, E. J. Kautz, and M. C. Phillips, “Spatiotempo-
ral evolution of emission and absorption signatures in a laser-
produced plasma,” Journal of Applied Physics 131, 063101
(2022).
9D. Wu, L. Zhang, P. Liu, L. Sun, R. Hai, and H. Ding, “Diagnos-
tic study of laser-produced tungsten plasma using optical emis-
sion spectroscopy and time-of-ﬂight mass spectroscopy,” Spec-
trochimica Acta Part B: Atomic Spectroscopy 137, 70–76 (2017).
10S. Harilal, C. Bindhu, R. C. Issac, V. Nampoori, and C. Val-
labhan, “Electron density and temperature measurements in a
laser produced carbon plasma,” Journal of Applied Physics 82,
2140–2146 (1997).

11B. Verhoﬀ, S. Harilal,

and A. Hassanein, “Angular emission
of ions and mass deposition from femtosecond and nanosecond
laser-produced plasmas,” Journal of Applied Physics 111, 123304
(2012).

12N. Rao, S. Girshick, J. Heberlein, P. McMurry, S. Jones,
D. Hansen, and B. Micheel, “Nanoparticle formation using a
plasma expansion process,” Plasma Chemistry and Plasma Pro-
cessing 15, 581–606 (1995).

13A. M. Elsied, N. C. Termini, P. K. Diwakar, and A. Hassanein,
“Characteristics of ions emission from ultrashort laser produced
plasma,” Scientiﬁc reports 6, 1–10 (2016).

14T. Tajima and G. Mourou, “Zettawatt-exawatt lasers and their
applications in ultrastrong-ﬁeld physics,” Physical Review Spe-
cial Topics-Accelerators and Beams 5, 031301 (2002).

15H. Daido, M. Nishiuchi, and A. S. Pirozhkov, “Review of laser-
driven ion sources and their applications,” Reports on progress
in physics 75, 056401 (2012).

16F. Amiranoﬀ, S. Baton, D. Bernard, B. Cros, D. Descamps,
F. Dorchies, F. Jacquet, V. Malka, J. Marques, G. Matthieussent,
et al., “Observation of laser wakeﬁeld acceleration of electrons,”
Physical Review Letters 81, 995 (1998).

17P. Sprangle, G. Joyce, E. Esarey, and A. Ting, “Laser wakeﬁeld
acceleration and relativstic optical guiding,” in AIP Conference
Proceedings, Vol. 175 (American Institute of Physics, 1988) pp.
231–239.

18S. Harilal, M. Phillips, D. Froula, K. Anoop, R. Issac,

and
F. Beg, “Optical diagnostics of laser-produced plasmas,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2201.08783 (2022).

19S. A. Irimiciuc, S. Chertopalov, M. Novotn´y, V. Craciun, and
J. Lancok, “On the dynamics of transient plasmas generated by
nanosecond laser ablation of several metals,” Materials 14 (2021).
20N. M. Bulgakova, A. V. Bulgakov, and O. F. Bobrenok, “Double
layer eﬀects in laser-ablation plasma plumes,” Physical Review
E 62, 5624 (2000).

21J. Thomas, H. C. Joshi, A. Kumar, and R. Philip, “Observation
of ion acceleration in nanosecond laser generated plasma on a
nickel thin ﬁlm under rear ablation geometry,” Physical Review
E 102, 043205 (2020).

22D. Wu, X. Mao, G. C.-Y. Chan, R. E. Russo, V. Zorba, and
H. Ding, “Dynamic characteristics of multi-charged ions emitted
from nanosecond laser produced molybdenum plasmas,” Journal
of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry 35, 767–775 (2020).

23A. Batool, S. Bashir, A. Hayat, M. Akram, K. Mahmood,
M. Javed, F. Hussain, S. H. Butt, H. Ahmad, Z. Irfan, et al.,

8

“Time of ﬂight measurements of energy and density of laser in-
duced mg plasma ions and investigation of ablated surface mor-
phology,” Physics of Plasmas 28, 013113 (2021).

24A. Dogar, S. Ullah, H. Qayyum, Z. Rehman, and A. Qayyum,
“Characterization of charge and kinetic energy distribution of
ions emitted during nanosecond pulsed laser ablation of sev-
eral metals,” Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 50, 385602
(2017).

25M. U. A. Bhatti, S. Bashir, A. Hayat, K. Mahmood, R. Ayub,
M. Javed, and M. S. Khan, “Energy and ﬂux measurements of
laser induced silver plasma ions by using faraday cup,” Plasma
Science and Technology (2021).

26N. Farid, S. Harilal, H. Ding, and A. Hassanein, “Kinetics of
ion and prompt electron emission from laser-produced plasma,”
Physics of Plasmas 20, 073114 (2013).

27A. Kumar, R. Singh, J. Thomas, and S. Sunil, “Parametric study
of expanding plasma plume formed by laser-blow-oﬀ of thin ﬁlm
using triple langmuir probe,” Journal of Applied Physics 106,
043306 (2009).

28S. A. Irimiciuc, S. Chertopalov, J. Lancok,

and V. Craciun,
“Langmuir probe technique for plasma characterization during
pulsed laser deposition process,” Coatings 11, 762 (2021).

29A. M. Elsied, P. K. Diwakar, M. Polek, and A. Hassanein, “Dy-
namics of low-and high-z metal ions emitted during nanosecond
laser-produced plasmas,” Journal of Applied Physics 120, 173104
(2016).

30M. Javed, S. Bashir, M. Akram, K. Mahmood, R. Ayub, F. Hus-
sain, N. Fatma, and M. Iqbal, “Evaluation and measurement
of laser induced zr-plasma parameters along with self-generated
electric and magnetic ﬁelds under various pressures of ar envi-
ronment,” Optik 246, 167790 (2021).

