                                                                                                         Southeast Asian Journal of STEM Education  

                                                                                                                     Vol 3 No. 1 January 2022 

A Review of Augmented Reality Apps for an AR-Based  
STEM Education Framework 

Carlo H. Godoy, Jr. 
Philippine Navy 
godoy.carlo@navy.mil.ph 

Abstract 

Within the past two decades, Augmented Reality (AR) applications have received increased attention. 
Augmented Reality is now widely used in the education sector at level K-12. AR is expected to be 
generally adopted in two-to-three years in higher education and four-to-five years in K‐12. Applying AR 
technology in the education sector especially in STEM subjects, can result in having a smart campus. In 
adopting a SMART Campus strategy, education practitioners must address many intrinsic issues in 
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) research. For example, in physics, there are 
expensive or insufficient laboratory systems, system faults, and difficulty simulating other experimental 
circumstances; in technology, many schools do not have enough computers; in engineering, there are 
only a few instructors who are knowledgeable in computer-aided design (CAD); and in mathematics, 
few teachers incorporate technology into their lessons often because they believe it is still better to 
teach through the traditional methods. Hence, In this paper we discuss how AR is being used now in 
different learning areas in STEM to open new doors to researchers and teachers as they transition their 
schools into SMART campuses with the use of AR apps. Aligned with this, a suggested framework for 
school administrators and policymakers is proposed based on a review of the positive benefits of 
different AR apps. 

Keywords: Augmented Reality, education, e-learning, mobile game application, game-based 

learning, gamification, science education, technology education, engineering education, mathematics 
education, STEM education 

Author Note: A Review of Augmented Reality Apps for an AR-Based STEM Education Framework is an 
extension study stemming from a previous review that the author conducted. The extension study was 
done to craft a framework for STEM Education that the author hopes will help schools in the Philippines. 

Augmented Reality (AR) apps have received increased attention over the previous two decades. 

AR generates fresh world experiences with its data layering over 3D space, suggesting that AR should 
be embraced over the next 2–3 years to give fresh possibilities for teaching, learning, study, or creative 
investigation according to the 2011 Horizon Report (Chen et al., 2017). This article discusses the 
different augmented reality applications that are being used in STEM education and will then create a 
suggested framework based on the review results. Azuma, as cited by Akçayir and Akçayir (2016), 
states that virtual objects in an Augmented Reality applications appear in coexistence in the same 
space as the objects that are located in the real world, hence it is very well-suited for enhancing STEM 
learning environments. AR is now a common technology used in instructional environments in the 
education sector (Fernandez, 2017).  

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                         Southeast Asian Journal of STEM Education  

                                                                                                                     Vol 3 No. 1 January 2022 

According to Rouse, as cited in Jung and tom Dieck (2018), AR is the integration of information in 
digital format, which includes live video in the real time environment of a certain user. In augmentation 
of live videos, integrating a video picture to a digital environment involves identification of an object 
replicated from features of the physical world. It is then captured as any format that will be considered 
as a video picture. It will mean increasing the responsiveness of the generated video picture to the state 
needed to control the object from the physical world itself (Kochi et al., 2017). In an augmented reality 
system, the integrated digital information can only be seen using devices like phone cameras. Hence, it 
cannot be seen in the real world without using a camera. These digital information forms can be 
represented in different forms like a stack of virtual cubes or manipulating a non-real object in a variety 
of ways (Hilliges et al., 2018). AR can also be used to indicate or layer additional information onto a real 
environment. This supplemental information is considered optional and may not affect the actual user 
of the system itself. The methods being used by an AR system to provide these supplemental 
information are the following: (a) Tracking the user’s point of view, (b) Capturing a camera field of 
perspective, and (c) Obtaining additional data in the field of perspective captured for at least one object 
(Pasquero & Bos, 2017). One example of supplemental information is found in vehicles. In this manner, 
it obtains additional data in the field of a perspective captured for at least one object. Hence, if the 
user’s interest has been captured, the system should present an augmented reality replica of a vehicle 
and cover the user’s environment based on the point of interest (Habashima et al., 2017). 

Augmented Reality for STEM Education 

AR is widely used now in the K-12 level of the education sector (Akçayır & Akçayır 2016). Ferrer-
Torregrosa et al. (2015) stated that AR is also being used now by different universities. The application 
of the technology in the education sector can lead to a “smart campus.” Smart campuses are designed 
to benefit professors and students, handle the resources available and improve the experience of the 
users with proactive services (Ozcan et al., 2017). 

As highlighted in the Horizon report, AR is acknowledged as one of the most significant 
innovations in Higher Education and K-12 education technology (Johnson et al., 2015). AR is gradually 
becoming integrated as an emerging technology in the region of inclusive education that adapts learning 
to provide equal footing through accessible exploration and experiences by all (Marín-Díaz, 2017). 
Johnson et al. stated that AR is anticipated to be widely adopted in higher education in two-to-three 
years and in K-12 in four-to-five years (cited by Saltan, 2017). Consequently, it is essential to explore how 
teachers and scientists incorporate AR into teaching-learning procedures if this is the present state of 
the art for the use of AR in education. AR became visible in the early 2000s and its effectiveness for 
learning was soon established by educational research (Dede et al., 2017).  

Review Methodology 

To share more about the ways in which AR is being used in STEM education, the author 
conducted a focused review of AR in STEM education research. A representation of the strategy 
employed in completing the review is shown in Figure 1. The search procedure started by selecting the 
topic to be reviewed. In this case the topic is AR for STEM Education. The topic selected explored the 
different sectors in STEM that are using Augmented Reality as a tool for teaching and learning. After 
identifying the topic, the next step was to search Google Scholar. About 1,530,000 results were noted 
with 97,600 filtered to explore further. In this part the study was filtered depending on the importance 
of each study. The importance was filtered using exclusion-inclusion criteria, which are shown in Table 1. 
Another filter that needed to be added is the year when the publication was published. It assumed that 

C. H. Godoy   

64 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                         Southeast Asian Journal of STEM Education  

                                                                                                                     Vol 3 No. 1 January 2022 

a five year interval will still make a certain publication valid. Once the filtering was been set, the author 
selected the relevant documents that would build the foundation of the review. This study will only 
focus on how the different disciplines are being used in the education sector and is not deemed as a  
comprehensive review. After knowing the foundation and the outline where the documents would be 
discussed, the DOI (Digital Object Identifier) of each publication was used to be able to access the full 
copy. Once the full study had been acquired, all documents were reviewed. During the review process, it 
was necessary to filter which documents were needed to support the selected topic. Once the important 
facts had been gathered and the studies had been filtered, the review was written. 

Figure 1 

Review Methodology 

Identify the Topic 
to Review 

Go to Google 
Scholar 

Filter Study 2015 
above 

Choose the topic 
that supports the 
review 

Get Important 
Facts 

Read the Study 

Download Full 
Study 

Get DOI 

Write the Facts 
and Citations Info 

Organize Outline 
for Review 

Write the Review 

Ask a Peer to 
Review the Paper 
Review 

 Reviewing Augmented Reality for STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) Education 

After applying the exclusion and inclusion criteria (Table 1), the author selected different literatures that 
helped in the discussion of the review. 

Table 1 

Exclusion and Inclusion Criteria  

Exclusion Criteria 

Inclusion Criteria 

Comparison of GBL to normal and blended learning  Effectiveness of games for educational purpose as 

a supplementary tool 

Games  that  are  not  for  SPED,  Language  Skills  and 
Technical Vocational Education  

The  study  should  either  be  for  SPED,  Language 
Skills or Technical Vocational Education 

Duplicate Studies 

The game should be visually impacting in terms of 
the subject area 

C. H. Godoy   

65 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                         Southeast Asian Journal of STEM Education  

                                                                                                                     Vol 3 No. 1 January 2022 

There was no definite number of articles included but the author has chosen more than 10 

literature reviews and included the most suitable for the review. Below are the results per discipline. 

Science  

Education Professionals must tackle several problems intrinsic in the training of science fields 

such as physics costs or inadequate laboratory equipment, mistakes of equipment, or difficulty in 
simulating certain experimental circumstances (Cai et al., 2017). These normally lead to student’s 
learning achievement in physics to be lower, hence students may have low motivation in learning this 
subject. Augmented Reality can be a successful approach to tackling these problems. A study about 
magnetic field instruction has been conducted in relation to the problems. Results of the analysis 
demonstrated that the movement-sensing software based on AR can enhance the learning attitude and 
learning result of the learners. This research offers a case for applying AR technology to secondary 
education in physics (Cai et al., 2017). In learning about health science, medical anatomy, and 
neurosurgical procedures it is also very helpful to use Augmented Reality as a learning tool. In an 
environment where a required structure needs to be examined from all angles, anatomical learning is 
best performed using a tool that will show these angles (Moro et al., 2017). Augmented Reality is one 
of the best tool to show angles as the developer can easily manipulate how the augmented object will 
rotate and be displayed.  

Compared to traditional pedagogical schemes, Virtual Reality (VR) and AR have the ability to 

produce improved teaching environments. 3D learning environments can increase the 
motivation/engagement of learners, improve the representation of spatial information, improve 
learning contextualization and create superior technical skills (Pelargos et al., 2017). Over the previous 
several centuries, neurosurgical has experienced a technological revolution, from trephination to 
image-guided navigation. Advances in Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality are some of the latest 
ways of integrating into neurosurgical exercise and resident education (Pelargos et al., 2017). Another 
application named Guided Exploration Training MAR software has been tested. Majid et al. (2021) 
conducted a research to test this AR application using a post and pretest method and the result has 
shown a positive feedback. In this study, visualizing each atom’s 3D model helps the students to gain 
more insight into the chemical properties of group one metals. The increase in scores demonstrates 
that in the end complicated materials can be used and learned using the Guided Exploration Training 
MAR software. 

Studies have shown that AR technology can significantly improve learning results in education. 

For example, AR enables learners to participate in real-world explorations such as marine life 
explorations that not everyone has been able to experience (Akçayir et al., 2016). Marine schooling 
includes problems that are rich and multifaceted. Raising awareness of marine settings and problems 
requires fresh teaching materials to be developed. In line with that, a digital game-based learning was 
tailored for primary school learners to design an innovative marine learning program incorporating 
augmented reality (AR) technology (Lu & Liu, 2015). The results of using this technology are the 
following: (a) Learners were extremely confident and satisfactorily viewed the learning operations ; (b) 
Learners obtained target goals for understanding ; and (c) The innovative teaching program specifically 
helps small academic achievements and enhance learning efficiency. Another great application of 
Augmented Reality in science is an AR-based simulation scheme for a cooperative investigation-based 
teaching activity in a science course and which discovered that AR-based simulation could involve 
learners more deeply in the investigatory project activity than traditional simulations could (Hwang et 
al., 2016). 

C. H. Godoy   

66 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                         Southeast Asian Journal of STEM Education  

                                                                                                                     Vol 3 No. 1 January 2022 

Technology  

Augmented reality has attracted great government attention among these techniques because 

it offers a fresh teaching view by enabling learners to visualize complicated spatial relationships and 
abstract ideas (Phon et al., 2015). Research has shown that, owing to a number of factors, many 
Malaysian non-technical learners have low motivation in studying ICT courses, such as absence of 
effective teaching practices and efficient teaching apps. In the outlook of such issue, the research 
teams conducted a quasi-experimental analysis to examine the adverse effect of a new application for 
mobile augmented reality learning (MARLA) on the motivation of learners to learn a topic of an ICT 
course at a university (Hanafi et al., 2017). Another study under the ICT education sector has a goal of 
exploring whether the integration of AR methods would facilitate application for changing the style as 
well as analyzing a distinct outcome in educating the learners, which uses a blended learning approach 
based on online methods and AR (Wang, 2017). It was found that technology instructional scientists 
should take cautious consideration of the educational goal architecture, the data size shown on the 
cellphone monitor, and the teaching machinery and school facilities setting when incorporating AR 
apps into a course in order to obtain an appropriate learning situation.  

The effect of Augmented Reality and QR Code Integration on achievements and views of 
undergraduate students taking computer training was examined by Bal and Bicen (2016). A test study 
group included 50 volunteer students taking a compulsory computer course studying in Near East 
University’s Department of Guidance and Psychological Therapy. The study used experimental research 
design. Students were divided into two classes at the beginning of the term, namely experimental and 
control groups, consisting of 25 students in each group. During the first lecture, a pre-test was given to 
the two groups and a lecture was given using conventional methods, in which computer features were 
described and computer feature functions were explained to the 1st group. Three-dimensional images 
of hardware features in the computer course hardware chapter were demonstrated to the 2nd group by 
means of augmented reality and QR technology a  laboratory environment with screen, projection, and 
voice systems. During the lecture, students examined computer hardware with QR code cards and 
increased reality technology from their own mobile devices, and all lectures were given until the end of 
the semester in this way.  

At the end of the semester, a post-test was given to the experimental and control groups and 
the experimental group also was provided a questionnaire related to the virtual reality and computer 
hardware course application with QR code integration. Results from the study showed that the 
experimental group’s level of achievement was higher. Results showed in this context that computer 
hardware course implementation with augmented reality and QR code integration has a positive 
impact on students and their academic accomplishments with positive views towards this course. 
Based on the findings, the approach used in this study is expected to lead to the introduction of 
technology into education and thus technology and education should be mutually beneficial. 

Engineering  

Augmented reality is very effective in engineering and can have many applications, which 
includes boosting the learner’s motivation in this field. AR may help an engineer or designer to design a 
product in the right environment, enabling them to be mindful of space limitations or other barriers. It 
may also encourage an engineer to incorporate esthetics into their design, making sure that when it is 
done and assembled their product would look pleasing to the eye. Or maybe an engineer may need to 

C. H. Godoy   

67 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                         Southeast Asian Journal of STEM Education  

                                                                                                                     Vol 3 No. 1 January 2022 

build an improvement to an existing component or system, but they do not have the original element 
drawings or models. Considering the size, shape and existing features, AR allows an engineer to design 
directly on the existing item (Heimgartner, 2016). 

A study conducted by Martin-Gutierrez et al., (2014) has provided a clear proof of the positive 

used of AR in Engineering Education. Analysis provides findings that demonstrate how engineering 
students produce better academic outcomes and are more inspired by integrating the latest generation 
of technical resources into the learning process. Twenty-five first year students studying for a degree in 
Mechanical Engineering used AR technology to assist them in the graphic engineering subject matter. A 
control group of twenty-two classmates used conventional class notes during the study. Both these 
students took an analysis and two surveys to provide input on the teaching content: one to find out the 
efficacy and quality of the material itself, along with the student satisfaction level; Another for 
measuring student motivation by using the available technologies during the course of the research. 
The findings revealed a substantial statistical disparity in their academic outcomes and appeared to be 
higher in the experimental community; this community also displayed a higher motivation level than 
the control group. 

Mathematics 

An integrated STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) lesson requires to 

participate and nurture students‘ interest in real-world circumstances, which has been proven to boost 
learner’s motivation in this subject and while real-world STEM situations are naturally incorporated, the 
embedded STEM contents are rarely taught by school educator (Hsu et al., 2017). One of the hardest 
subjects of that track is Mathematics. One example of a Mathematics subject is Solid Geometry. To give 
a better experience in learning solid geometry, a study has been conducted to combine Augmented 
Reality (AR) technology into teaching operations designing a learning scheme that helps junior high 
school learners learn sound geometry (Liu et al., 2019; TeKolste & Liu, 2018). Based on the result of the 
study, AR really gives a big leap in learning solid geometry.  

Castillo (2015) on the other hand has introduced a new software framework for the creation of 

AR applications based on publicly available components. It offers a comprehensive view of the 
subsystems and the tasks involved in developing a mobile AR application. The standard task of plotting 
a quadratic equation was chosen as a case study to gain feasibility insights into how AR could help the 
teaching-learning process, and to analyze the student’s reaction to the technology and the application. 
The pilot study was carried out in a Mexican Undergraduate School with 59 students. To collect 
information on the experience of the students using the AR application, a questionnaire was 
developed, and the review of the results obtained is presented. The findings obtained by applying the 
questionnaire on the use of AR technology indicate that using AR can help enhance the teaching-
learning process in Mexican classrooms and inspire the students and can be an innovative tool to 
revolutionize the learning paradigm. 

Another study deals with the use of AR in teaching and learning math that uses this technology 
to its complete benefit in providing concrete experience in interacting with revolutionary solids. At the 
end of the study, it was found out that Augmented Reality is beneficial in the understanding of 
computing solids of revolution volumes (Salinas & González-Mendívil, 2017). AR techniques are strongly 
linked to calculation capacity and computational calculations, and therefore their evolution is related to 
personal computer development. It is therefore essential to begin by referring to some of the works 
that have been created through the implementation of these techniques at global and national level, 

C. H. Godoy   

68 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                         Southeast Asian Journal of STEM Education  

                                                                                                                     Vol 3 No. 1 January 2022 

primarily in the field of education and teaching (Coimbra et al., 2015). It can be inferred that from the 
birth of AR it was already related to Mathematics. AR makes mathematical ideas simpler to 
comprehend because it provides better visualization and interaction. We can therefore conclude that 
three-dimensional techniques, such as AR, improve mathematics teaching and learning. At the same 
time as the imperative to better comprehend the use of mobile devices for learning mathematics in 
many nations, there is a powerful political will to enhance teaching and learning process in 
mathematics education to support innovation that drives economic growth and create the capacity of 
tomorrow’s workers for future work markets (Bano et al., 2018). 

AR-Based Framework For Stem Education Derived From The Review As A Basis For School 
Administration And Policy Makers 

Figure 2 

AR-Based STEM Framework 

Physical Environment of Students 

AR provides replication of 
Real-life Science Content for 
Lab Activities 

AR provides visualization for 
Math Geographical Objects 
and Fun Activities to Boring 
Calculation Methods 

Augmented 
Reality Apps 

AR provides visualization for 
Technology Lectures 

AR provides Engineering 
Hands-On Opportunity 

Generalization/Application 

A STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) education framework can now be 

derived from the review. STEM lesson requires to participate and nurture students’ interest in real-
world problems and lectures, so the framework shows that Augmented Reality integrates the physical 
environment with the content and activities. The different applications discussed on the review has 

C. H. Godoy   

69 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                         Southeast Asian Journal of STEM Education  

                                                                                                                     Vol 3 No. 1 January 2022 

shown that Augmented Reality has been a successful aid in learning the different subject areas under 
the STEM strand. According to Kelley et al. (2016), enhanced integration of STEM subjects might not be 
more successful if the implementation strategy is not strategic. A well-integrated curriculum, however, 
gives students the ability to learn through more meaningful and engaging ways, promotes the use of 
higher critical thinking skills, enhances problem-solving abilities and increases retention. In that case, 
the above framework serves a guide for school administrators, policy makers and STEM Department 
Heads on how AR-Based Activities can be implemented as a supplementary learning tool as part of their 
blended learning approach. Given this framework, a physics teacher might very well  be able to 
increase the student’s learning ability. 

CONCLUSION 

As shown in the results of the review, AR has been proven to help organizations and teachers in 

teaching different STEM disciplines and can be applied here in the Philippines as well as in other areas of 
the region. Studies have shown that the use of AR can be more efficient in teaching support than other 
technology-enhanced settings. If content is represented as 3D to learners, it is possible to manipulate 
objects and handle the information interactively. Rapid technological evolution changed the face of 
education, especially when technology was coupled with adequate pedagogical foundations. This 
combination has developed fresh possibilities to enhance the quality of teaching and learning 
experiences (Nincarean et al., 2013). 

Based on the findings, Augmented Reality and the framework presented can help boost the 
education sector of the Philippines. The combination of these two processes will definitely lead to a new 
system which will have a major impact on the STEM sector of Education (Phon et al., 2015). In 
implementing this new system, the AR-Based Stem framework is helpful for school administrators, policy 
makers and STEM Department Heads 

Carlo H. Godoy, Jr. is a former Escalations Manager at Novartis Pharmaceutical and 
Support Analyst for SQL at Human Edge Software Philippines. Currently he is a 
Computer Programmer/Sail Plan Manager at the office N6 of the Philippine Navy. He is 
also a Research Scholar at the Technological University of the Philippines in the 
Masters in Information Technology program specializing in studies related to 
educational technology using emerging technologies like augmented reality. Mr. 
Godoy has been in the education sector for eight years. He currently serves as a thesis 
adviser in the Technological University of the Philippines, Manuel L. Quezon 
University, and in STI College Munoz Edsa. 

REFERENCES  

Akçayir, M., Akçayir, G., Pektaş, H. M., & Ocak, M. A. (2016). Augmented reality in science laboratories: 

  The effects of augmented reality on university students’ laboratory skills and attitudes toward 
  science laboratories. Computers in Human Behavior, 57, 334–342. 
  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.12.054 

C. H. Godoy   

70 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                         Southeast Asian Journal of STEM Education  

                                                                                                                     Vol 3 No. 1 January 2022 

Akçayır, M., & Akçayır, G. (2016). Advantages and challenges associated with augmented reality for 

  education: A systematic review of the literature. Educational Research Review. 
  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2016.11.002 

Bal, E. & Bicen, H. (2016). Computer hardware course application through augmented reality and QR 

code integration: Achievement levels and views of students. Procedia Computer Science, 102, 267-
272. 

Bano, M., Zowghi, D., Kearney, M., Schuck, S., & Aubusson, P. (2018). Mobile learning for science and 
  mathematics school education: A systematic review of empirical evidence. Computers and 
  Education, 121(February 2017), 30–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2018.02.006 

Cai, S., Chiang, F. K., Sun, Y., Lin, C., & Lee, J. J. (2017). Applications of augmented reality-based natural 
interactive learning in magnetic field instruction. Interactive Learning Environments, 25(6), 778–

  791. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2016.1181094 

Chen, P., Liu, X., Cheng, W., & Huang, R. (2017). A review of using Augmented Reality in Education from 

  2011 to 2016. 13–18. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-2419-1 

Coimbra, M. T., Cardoso, T., & Mateus, A. (2015). Augmented reality: An enhancer for higher education 

  students in maths learning? Procedia Computer Science, 67 (January 2016), 332–339. 
  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.09.277 

Dede, C. J., Jacobson, J., & Richards, J. (2017). Introduction: Virtual, augmented, and mixed realities in 

  education. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-5490-7_1 

Fernandez, M. (2017). Augmented-Virtual reality: How to improve education systems. Higher Learning 

  Research Communications, 7(1), 1. https://doi.org/10.18870/hlrc.v7i1.373 

Ferrer-Torregrosa, J., Torralba, J., Jimenez, M. A., García, S., & Barcia, J. M. (2015). ARBOOK: 

  Development and assessment of a tool based on augmented reality for anatomy. Journal of 
  Science Education and Technology, 24(1), 119–124. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10956-014-9526-4 

Habashima, Y., Kurosawa, F., Alaniz, A., & Gleeson-May, M. (2017). System and method for providing an 

augmented reality vehicle interface. US patent:  
US9550419B2 - System and method for providing an augmented reality vehicle interface - 
Google Patents 

Hanafi, H. F., Said, C. S., Wahab, M. H., & Samsuddin, K. (2017). Improving students’ motivation in 
 learning ICT course with the use of a mobile augmented reality learning environment. IOP 
 Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 226(1). https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-
899X/226/1/012114 

Heimgartner, J. (2016, April 13). What Is augmented reality and how can engineers and designers use 

 it?  Engineering.com. Https://Www.Engineering.Com/. 
 https://www.engineering.com/DesignSoftware/DesignSoftwareArticles/ArticleID/11873/What-
Is-Augmented-Reality-and-How-Can-Engineers-and-Designers-Use-It.aspx 

C. H. Godoy   

71 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                                                                                                         Southeast Asian Journal of STEM Education  

                                                                                                                     Vol 3 No. 1 January 2022 

Hilliges, O., Kim, D., Izadi, S., & Weiss, M. H. (2018). Grasping virtual objects in augmented reality. 1(12). 
US patent:  US9552673B2 - Grasping virtual objects in augmented reality - Google Patents 

Hsu, Y. S., Lin, Y. H., & Yang, B. (2017). Impact of augmented reality lessons on students’ STEM interest. 

 Research and Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning. US patent:  
https://doi.org/10.1186/s41039-016-0039-z 

Hwang, G. J., Wu, P. H., Chen, C. C., & Tu, N. T. (2016). Effects of an augmented reality-based 

  educational game on students’ learning achievements and attitudes in real-world observations. 

Interactive Learning Environments, 24(8), 1895–1906. 

  https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2015.1057747 

Johnson, L., Adams Becker, S.., Estrada, V., & Freeman, A. (2015). New media consortium Horizon r
  eport: 2015 museum edition. In New Media Consortium. https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED559371 

Jung, Timothy & tom Dieck, C. M. (2018). Augmented reality and virtual reality: Empowering human, 

 place and business. In Springer International: Vol. XI (Issue 5). 
 http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=a9h&AN=9084262&login.asp&site=eh
ost-live 

Kochi, M., Harding, R., Campbell, D.A., Ranyard, D. & Hocking, I. M. (2017). Apparatus and method for 

augmented reality. US patent https://patents.google.com/patent/EP2662838B1/en. 

Liu, E., Li, Y., Cai, S., & Li, X. (2019). The effect of augmented reality in solid geometry class on students’ 
learning performance and attitudes: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on 
  Remote Engineering and Virtual Instrumentation (Vol. 47, Issue October 2018). Springer 

International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-95678-7 

Lu, S. J., & Liu, Y. C. (2015). Integrating augmented reality technology to enhance children’s learning in 

  marine education. Environmental Education Research, 21(4), 525–541. 
  https://doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2014.911247 

Marín-Díaz, V. (2017). The relationships between augmented reality and inclusive education in higher 

  education. Bordón. Revista de Pedagogía, 69(3), 125. 
  https://doi.org/10.13042/bordon.2017.51123 

Moro, C., Štromberga, Z., Raikos, A., & Stirling, A. (2017). The effectiveness of virtual and augmented 
reality in health sciences and medical anatomy. Anatomical Sciences Education, 10(6), 549–559. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ase.1696 

Nincarean, D., Alia, M. B., Halim, N. D. A., & Rahman, M. H. A. (2013). Mobile augmented reality: The 

potential for education. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 103, 657–664. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.385 

Ozcan, U., Arslan, A., Ilkyaz, M., & Karaarslan, E. (2017). An augmented reality application for smart 

campus urbanization: MSKU campus prototype. ICSG 2017 - 5th International Istanbul Smart Grids 
and Cities Congress and Fair, 100–104. https://doi.org/10.1109/SGCF.2017.7947610 

C. H. Godoy   

72 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                         Southeast Asian Journal of STEM Education  

                                                                                                                     Vol 3 No. 1 January 2022 

Pasquero, J. & Bos, J. C. (2017). System and method for indicating a presence of supplemental 

 information in augmented reality. US patent: US9685001B2 - System and method for indicating 
a presence of supplemental information in augmented reality - Google Patents 

Pelargos, P. E., Nagasawa, D. T., Lagman, C., Tenn, S., Demos, J. V., Lee, S. J., Bui, T. T., Barnette, N. E., 
Bhatt, N. S., Ung, N., Bari, A., Martin, N. A., & Yang, I. (2017). Utilizing virtual and augmented 
reality for educational and clinical enhancements in neurosurgery. Journal of Clinical Neuroscience, 
35, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2016.09.002 

Phon, D. N. E., Ali, M. B., & Halim, N. D. A. (2015). Learning with augmented reality: Effects toward 

student with different spatial abilities. Advanced Science Letters, 21(7), 2200–2204. 

Salinas, P. & González-Mendívil, E. (2017). Augmented reality and solids of revolution. International 

Journal on Interactive Design and Manufacturing, 11(4), 829–837. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12008-017-0390-3 

Saltan, F. (2017). The use of augmentedrReality in formal education: A scopingrReview. 8223(2), 503–

520. https://doi.org/10.12973/eurasia.2017.00628a 

TeKolste, R. D. & Liu, V. K. (2018). Outcoupling grating for augmented reality system. U.S. Patent 
Application 10/073,267. https://patents.google.com/patent/WO2018081305A1/en 

Wang, Y. H. (2017). Using augmented reality to support a software editing course for college students. 
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 33(5), 532–546. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12199 

C. H. Godoy   

73 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
