manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

The origin of Earth’s mantle nitrogen: primordial or
early biogeochemical cycling?

H. Kurokawa1, M. Laneuville1, Y. Li1, N. Zhang1, Y. Fujii2, H. Sakuraba3, C.
Houser1, H. J. Cleaves II1,4,5

1Earth-Life Science Institute, Tokyo Institute of Technology
2Division of Science, National Astronomical Observatory of Japan
3Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology
4Blue Marble Space Institute of Science
5Earth and Planets Laboratory, Carnegie Institution of Washington

Key Points:

• We studied two possible origins for mantle nitrogen: the primordial and recycling

scenarios.

• The primordial scenario requires accretion of excess nitrogen and impact erosion

during late accretion.

• The recycling scenario needs eﬃcient N ﬁxation and biotic processing on early Earth.

2
2
0
2

r
p
A
1
2

]
h
p
-
o
e
g
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
2
0
0
4
1
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Corresponding author: H. Kurokawa, hiro.kurokawa@elsi.jp

–1–

 
 
 
 
 
 
manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

Abstract
Earth’s mantle nitrogen (N) content is comparable to that found in its N-rich atmosphere.
Mantle N has been proposed to be primordial or sourced by later subduction, yet its ori-
gin has not been elucidated. Here we model N partitioning during the magma ocean stage
following planet formation and the subsequent cycling between the surface and mantle
over Earth history using argon (Ar) and N isotopes as tracers. The partitioning model,
constrained by Ar, shows that only about 10% of the total N content can be trapped in
the solidiﬁed mantle due to N’s low solubility in magma and low partitioning coeﬃcients
in minerals in oxidized conditions supported from geophysical and geochemical studies.
A possible solution for the primordial origin is that Earth had about 10 times more N
at the time of magma ocean solidiﬁcation. We show that the excess N could be removed
by impact erosion during late accretion. The cycling model, constrained by N isotopes,
shows that mantle N can originate from eﬃcient N subduction, if the sedimentary N burial
rate on early Earth is comparable to that of modern Earth. Such a high N burial rate
requires biotic processing. Finally, our model provides a methodology to distinguish the
two possible origins with future analysis of the surface and mantle N isotope record.

Plain Language Summary

Nitrogen (N) is the main component of Earth’s atmosphere, and essential for life.
The atmospheric N content inﬂuences Earth’s climate and capability to retain its sur-
face water. Primary biological production is limited by bio-available N as well as phos-
phorous on modern Earth. It has been recently recognized that Earth’s interior contains
N comparable to that found in its atmosphere, and thus its origin is important for our
understanding of Earth-life co-evolution. We modeled N partitioning in Earth’s molten
stage and long-term cycling after Earth’s solidiﬁcation. Two scenarios are proposed from
our modeling. One is that Earth’s mantle acquired its modern N content in the earlier
stage due to an excess amount of N Earth accreted, which was later lost to space follow-
ing asteroid impacts. Another is that Earth’s mantle acquired N via subduction of N-
rich sediments, which requires the sedimentary N burial rate on early Earth compara-
ble to the modern value sustained by biological activity. The two scenarios can be tested
with future analysis of the geochemical record of surface and mantle N.

1 Introduction

Nitrogen (N) is the main component of Earth’s atmosphere and essential for the

biosphere as it is an integral part of the building blocks of life. Though molecular nitro-
gen (N2) is transparent in the infrared, its presence in the atmosphere increases the warm-
ing eﬀect of existing greenhouse gases by pressure broadening of their absorption lines
(Goldblatt et al., 2009). The N inventory in the atmosphere is also important for sus-
taining water on planets by the cold-trap mechanism (Wordsworth & Pierrehumbert, 2014).
Primary biological production in modern aquatic environments is mostly limited by ei-
ther ﬁxed N or phosphorus (Zerkle, 2018). Though deﬁcits in biologically-available N can
be mitigated by microbial N ﬁxation on modern Earth, it might have been a limiting fac-
tor for early life on Earth.

Though N was once thought to predominantly reside in the atmosphere and bio-
sphere, it can indeed become incorporated into the geosphere: minerals and rocks (e.g,
Johnson & Goldblatt, 2015). Combined sample analyses with N-40Argon (Ar) geochem-
istry (Marty, 1995) suggest that present Earth’s mantle contains a comparable mass of
N as the atmosphere (Marty & Dauphas, 2003; Halliday, 2013; Bergin et al., 2015; John-
son & Goldblatt, 2015). A mantle which hosts N at a similar level as found in the at-
mosphere has great potential for inﬂuencing the surface environment through ingassing
and outgassing of this mantle reservoir. Determining whether mantle N is a primordial
feature set during the magma ocean stage or evolved with the subduction of sediments

–2–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

by plate tectonics is essential to our understanding of Earth’s formation and early bio-
geochemical cycling.

Mantle N has been proposed to be sourced by subduction of N-bearing sediments
and the altered oceanic lithosphere (Marty & Dauphas, 2003; Barry & Hilton, 2016; John-
son & Goldblatt, 2018; St¨ueken et al., 2021), which would also lead to secular evolution
of atmospheric N partial pressure (pN2 ) (Zerkle & Mikhail, 2017; Laneuville et al., 2018).
Notably, such subducting N on modern Earth has δ15N ∼ +6‰ (Cartigny & Marty, 2013;
Halama et al., 2014; Johnson & Goldblatt, 2018), where δ15N = [(15N/14N)sample/(15N/14N)standard−
1]×1000. Thus, eﬃcient subduction should lead to 15N enrichment in the mantle. Carbon-
bearing deep mantle diamonds have been found to host N with almost exclusively pos-
itive δ15N values (Regier et al., 2020), which might be consistent with an origin from sub-
ducted oceanic sediments.

However, mantle N sampled from mid-ocean ridge basalt (MORB) is rather depleted

in 15N (δ15N ∼ −5‰), which is known as N isotopic disequilibrium (Marty, 1995; Car-
tigny & Marty, 2013). In this regard, several previous studies hypothesized that man-
tle N is predominantly a remnant of planet formation (Cartigny & Marty, 2013; Mallik
et al., 2018; Labidi et al., 2020). In this primordial origin scenario, the isotopic disequi-
librium is attributed to atmospheric escape, which enriches the residual atmosphere in
15N. Another study focusing on N isotopes proposed a recycling origin scenario in which
the N isotope composition of sediments has changed over time (Marty & Dauphas, 2003).
We note that here the preﬁx “re” is given because, in this scenario, the modern man-
tle N is a component once degassed to the atmosphere in the magma ocean stage.

Ar is another tracer of N partitioning and cycling (Marty, 1995). In oxidized magma,

where N exists in the form of N2, N and Ar behave similarly (e.g., Marty & Dauphas,
2003). However, under reducing conditions N exists as NH+
4 , which can substitute for
K+ in mineral phases, allowing for more eﬃcient recycling of N than Ar. The large dif-
ference in 40Ar/36Ar ratios between the modern atmosphere and mantle implies that the
two reservoirs have largely stopped exchanging Ar with each other since early catastrophic
degassing, and radiogenic 40Ar derived from 40K has continued to accumulate in the man-
tle (Ozima & Podosek, 2002, and references therein).

Previous studies which argued either primordial or recycling scenarios have greatly

contributed to our understanding of the origin of mantle N, but they have missed some
important behavior. N partitioning between the atmosphere and magma ocean has been
experimentally investigated by several studies (Libourel et al., 2003; Boulliung et al., 2020),
which concluded that mantle N could be primordial. However, these studies have not
considered N degassing upon magma ocean solidiﬁcation, which might limit N partition-
ing into the solidiﬁed magma signiﬁcantly (Hier-Majumder & Hirschmann, 2017). Mod-
els which treated long-term N cycling after the magma ocean solidiﬁcation did not trace
N isotopic exchange between diﬀerent reservoirs (St¨ueken, Kipp, Koehler, Schwieterman,
et al., 2016; Johnson & Goldblatt, 2018) or introduced a simpliﬁed assumption on the
N isotopic ratio of the upper mantle (Tolstikhin & Marty, 1998) or sediments (Labidi
et al., 2020). These points are covered by this study to further test the two scenarios (see
Section 4.4 for more detailed comparison with these previous studies).

Here we test the primordial and recycling origin scenarios using numerical mod-
els for N partitioning and cycling coupled with Ar and N isotopes. Section 2 presents
our models. Section 3 shows the model results. We discuss the origin of N in the man-
tle and the implications for the future analysis of N isotope record of early Earth and
for other rocky planets in Section 4, and conclude in Section 5.

–3–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

Partitioning model

Cycling model

Dissolution 
equilibrium

Atmosphere

Degassing

Sediment burial

Magma 
ocean

Oceanic crust

Melt trapping, 
partitioning into minerals

subduction

Continental 
crust

Solidified mantle

Mantle

Figure 1.

Schematic view of our models. Reservoirs and exchange ﬂuxes are written in yellow

and black, respectively.

Reservoir

N content [PAN]

δ15N [‰]

36Ar content [PA36Ar]

Atmosphere
Mantle
Continental crust
Oceanic crust

1
0.41–2.53a
0.25–0.43d
0.038–0.15f

0
-10 to -2b
+1 to +10e
+4 to +10g

1
2.8–5.7×10−3 c
–
–

Table 1. Constraints on our model results. 1 present atmospheric N (PAN) = 4.0 × 1018 kg.
1 PA36Ar = 2.1 × 1014 kg. a: Marty and Dauphas (2003); Halliday (2013); Bergin et al. (2015).
b: Marty and Dauphas (2003). c: Bekaert et al. (2021). d: Rudnick et al. (2003); Johnson and

Goldblatt (2015, 2017). e: Busigny and Bebout (2013). f: Johnson and Goldblatt (2015). g:

Cartigny and Marty (2013).

–4–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

ρ

density
diﬀerence between solidus and liquidus ∆T
Cp
heat capacity
∆S
entropy change on melting
φc
disaggregation melt fraction
τ
compaction time
ts
solidiﬁcation time
SN
solubility of N
DN
partitioning coeﬃcient of N
SAr
solubility of Ar
DAr
partitioning coeﬃcient of Ar

PREM a
F-peridotitic model b
1000 [J kg−1 K−1] c
300 [J kg−1 K−1] c
0.3 c
4.35 Myr c
0.2–7 Myr d
Equation A1 e
0.0073, 0.020, 0.0030 f
0.2 [ppm/MPa] g
0.0011 h

Table 2. Parameter values used in our partitioning model. a: Dziewonski and Anderson

(1981). b: Monteux et al. (2016). c: Hier-Majumder and Hirschmann (2017). d: Hamano et

al. (2013); Salvador et al. (2017); Nikolaou et al. (2019). e: Used Boulliung et al. (2020) data (see

Appendix A). f: For upper mantle, transition zone, and lower mantle from Yoshioka et al. (2018).

g: Model of Iacono-Marziano et al. (2010), assuming a bulk silicate Earth (pyrolite) magma

composition (McDonough & Sun, 1995) and 1,700 K. h: Heber et al. (2007).

2 Methods

2.1 Model overview and constraints

We modeled N partitioning in the magma ocean stage and N cycling after magma
ocean solidiﬁcation separately (Figure 1). Our ﬁrst model tested whether N in the mod-
ern mantle could be primordial by computing the N content trapped in the mantle upon
solidiﬁcation. Partitioning was also computed for 36Ar because the discrepancy in N/36Ar
ratios between the present atmosphere and mantle has been used to discuss the origin
of mantle N (Marty & Dauphas, 2003). Our second model tested whether mantle N can
originate from secular subduction. This cycling model explicitly calculates 15N/14N ra-
tios in the surface reservoirs (the atmosphere and continental and oceanic crust) and man-
tle, which can be used as another constraint.

Table 1 summarizes the constraints on model results: N contents, δ15N values, and

36Ar contents in the four largest reservoirs: the atmosphere, continental and oceanic crust,
and mantle. We adapted a N content estimate for the modern mantle derived from N-
40Ar geochemistry by Bergin et al. (2015): 0.41–2.53 times present atmospheric N 4.0×
1018 kg (hereafter PAN, Johnson & Goldblatt, 2015). This range brackets independent
estimates by Marty and Dauphas (2003) (0.41–1.27 PAN) and Halliday (2013) (0.42–1.12
PAN). We adapted the N isotopic composition of the modern mantle of δ15N = −10
to −2‰ as informed from MORB (Marty & Dauphas, 2003). We note that Johnson and
Goldblatt (2015) derived a higher estimate (2–10 PAN) by assuming the existence of the
“high-N mantle,” which is associated with some oceanic island basalts (OIB) and OIB-
related xenoliths. This proposed component is isotopically distinct (δ15N = +5‰, John-
son & Goldblatt, 2015). The high-N estimate was not used in our main results as its pres-
ence is not assumed in the other studies, but we discuss it further in Section 4.3. The
36Ar amounts of modern atmosphere and mantle were adapted from the estimate of Bekaert
et al. (2021).

2.2 Partitioning model

Our partitioning model calculated the N and 36Ar amounts trapped in the solid-
iﬁed mantle upon magma ocean cooling after core-mantle separation (Figure 1). Our model

–5–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

assumes bottom-up solidiﬁcation, but the case for a basal magma ocean is discussed in
Section 4.3. In contrast to previous studies which modeled N partitioning (Libourel et
al., 2003; Boulliung et al., 2020; Gaillard et al., 2022), degassing caused by magma so-
lidiﬁcation, which limits N trapping into the mantle, was considered. We did not calcu-
late N isotopes in this ﬁrst model. Equilibrium degassing enriches the residual melt in
15N by ∼+1‰ (e.g., Dalou et al., 2019). As we discuss quantitatively in Section 4.1, how-
ever, atmospheric escape processes enrich atmospheric 15N easily and should be respon-
sible for the observed isotopic disequilibrium between the current atmosphere and man-
tle in the primordial origin scenario.

2.2.1 N partitioning between reservoirs

Our method is based on the melt-trapping model of Hier-Majumder and Hirschmann

(2017). The relevant parameters are summarized in Table 2. Dissolution equilibrium was
assumed between the atmosphere and magma ocean for each time step, given as (see Ap-
pendix B for derivation),

M i

atm =

M i

atm+mo
1 + ( ¯m/mi)·SiMmog/AE

,

(1)

(2)

M i

atm,

mo = M i

atm+mo − M i
j is the mass of element i (N or 36Ar) in the reservoir j (atm = atmosphere, mo
where M i
= magma ocean, and sm = solidiﬁed mantle), mi is the molecular mass in the atmosphere
(28 and 36 amu for N2 and 36Ar), ¯m is the mean molecular mass of atmospheric gases,
Si is the solubility, g is the gravitational acceleration at the surface, and AE is the to-
tal surface area of Earth. The value without a superscript i to identify an element is the
mass of the reservoir itself (e.g., the mass of magma ocean Mmo). Here we assumed that
the volatile abundances in the magma ocean are constant in depth to derive Equation
1. This assumption is justiﬁed because the viscosity of the magma ocean is so low that
the mixing time scale is much shorter than the cooling timescale (the orders of days to
weeks vs. Myrs, Solomatov, 2015; Nikolaou et al., 2019; Sossi et al., 2020). The mean
molecular mass ¯m was assumed to be 28 amu, assuming CO as the dominant gas. This
assumption is valid for Earth’s magma ocean (Sossi et al., 2020). While S36Ar was as-
sumed to be constant, SN is dependent on N partial pressure, pN2 (= ( ¯m/mN2)·M N
Equation A1). Thus, Equations 1 and A1 were iteratively solved to obtain SN and M N
Our N solubility model, based on Boulliung et al. (2020), assumed atmospheric N is in
the form of N2 (Appendix A), which is expected for the oxygen fugacity range consid-
ered here (e.g., that of Schaefer & Fegley Jr, 2017). As magma solidiﬁes at the bottom
of magma ocean, the volatile content in the solidiﬁed mantle increases as,

atmg/AE,
atm.

sm

dM i
dt

= [Ftl + Di(1 − Ftl)]Ci

dMsm
dt

,

(3)

where t is the time, Ftl is the trapped melt fraction, Di is the partitioning coeﬃcient be-
tween minerals and silicate melt, and Ci is the concentration of the element i in the magma
ocean (Ci ≡ M i
respond to melt trapping and partitioning into minerals, respectively. The trapped mass
is subtracted from the rest of the system, as,

mo/Mmo). The ﬁrst and second terms in the bracket of Equation 3 cor-

dM i

atm+mo
dt

= − dM i
dt

sm

.

(4)

The trapped melt fraction as a function of cooling rate is deﬁned as the fraction of the
solidiﬁed mass trapped as interstitial melt relative to the total solidiﬁed mass (solidiﬁed
interstitial melt plus crystallized minerals), and given by (Hier-Majumder & Hirschmann,
2017),

,

(5)

Ftl = − φcτ
∆T

dTp
dt

–6–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

where φc is the disaggregation melt fraction, Tp is the mantle potential temperature, ∆T
is the diﬀerence between the solidus and the liquidus temperatures at the bottom of magma
ocean, and τ is the compaction time of the mushy layer at the bottom of magma ocean.
The upper limit of Ftl = 0.3 is given by the melt fraction for rheological transition (Hier-
Majumder & Hirschmann, 2017).

2.2.2 Thermal evolution

The thermal evolution of Earth was solved to compute dTp/dt in Equation 5, as

given by (Hier-Majumder & Hirschmann, 2017),

dTp
dt

= −Lint(cid:20)

Cp(ME − Mr(a)) − 4πρTp∆Sa2 da
dt (cid:21)

−1

,

(6)

where Lint is the intrinsic luminosity, ME is Earth’s mass, Mr is the enclosed mass, ρ
and Cp are the density and the heat capacity of the magma, and a is the radius of the
solidiﬁcation front. We derived a ﬁtting formula for a to reproduce Figure 2 of Hier-Majumder
and Hirschmann (2017) as,

RE (Tp < 1810 K),
−1.587 × 10−1T 3
(1810 K < Tp < 2100 K),
Rcore(2100 K < Tp),

p + 8.83571 × 102T 2
p

− 1.641 × 106Tp + 1.0234 × 109 [m]

a(Tp) =





where RE and Rcore are the radii of Earth and the core, respectively. Computing the in-
trinsic luminosity Lint requires a radiative-convective model for the atmospheric struc-
ture with complete description of molecular composition, cloud properties, etc. (e.g., Sal-
vador et al., 2017; Nikolaou et al., 2019). Instead, we assumed a constant value for Lint
estimated from the given solidiﬁcation time ts.

2.2.3 Initial conditions and parameters

The redox state of the mantle inﬂuences N solubility and, consequently, the trapped

N content. Earth’s magma ocean in its ﬁnal stage is thought to be more oxidized than
log10 fO2,∆IW = −1 (Badro et al., 2015; Armstrong et al., 2019; Sossi et al., 2020), where
fO2,∆IW is the oxygen fugacity relative to that of the iron-w¨ustite buﬀer. Following Dalou
et al. (2017), we considered three cases – oxidized (log10 fO2,∆IW = −1), intermediate
(log10 fO2,∆IW = −2), and reduced (log10 fO2,∆IW = −3.5) cases (Table 2), where the
latter two are shown for comparison with the realistic, oxidized model.

We considered ts = 0.2–7 Myrs, which covers the range of estimates in previous

studies which simulated the magma ocean solidiﬁcation (Hamano et al., 2013; Salvador
et al., 2017; Nikolaou et al., 2019).

A fully molten magma ocean (Tp = 2100 K) was assumed for the initial condi-

tion. The assumption maximizes the amount of trapped N. Initially the total N content
(Table 1) was assumed to be in the atmosphere and magma ocean with the dissolution
equilibrium. As we focus on the evolution after the major accretion and core-mantle sep-
aration, we did not model partitioning into alloy which would determine the total N con-
tent in concert with atmospheric loss during the major accretion stage (Hirschmann, 2016;
Grewal et al., 2019, 2021; Sakuraba et al., 2021) before the magma ocean solidiﬁcation
stage we considered here.

2.3 Cycling model

To test the recycling origin scenario, our N cycling model simulated the secular evo-

lution of N masses and isotope ratios in the four major reservoirs: the atmosphere, con-

–7–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

Atmosphere

Sediment deposition, (1-f

pel)F

sed

Arc 
volcanism, F

arc

f

F

pel

sed

Continental 
Crust

Oceanic crust

Weathering, F

wea

Degassing, F

vol

Continental growth, F

ccg

Subduction, F

sub

Mantle

Figure 2. A schematic image of our N cycling model.

tinental and oceanic crust, and mantle (Figure 2). Our model explicitly treats more reser-
voirs than a recent study considering isotopic evolution (Labidi et al., 2020) but is sim-
pliﬁed compared to the N cycling models that were developed based on geophysics and
(bio-)geochemistry (St¨ueken, Kipp, Koehler, & Buick, 2016; Laneuville et al., 2018; John-
son & Goldblatt, 2018). Our model was designed to understand i) the requirement for
realizing the recycling origin, and ii) its isotopic signatures as explained below.

Evolution of N masses and isotopic ratios (15N/14N) in the reservoirs was calcu-

lated by using the following equations (Kurokawa, Foriel, et al., 2018),

dMi
dt

=

Fk −

Fk,

Xsources

Xsinks

d
dt

(MiIi) =

(FkαkIi′ ) −

(FkαkIi),

Xsources

Xsinks

(7)

(8)

where Mi and Ii are the mass and isotopic ratio of N in the reservoir i (atm: atmosphere,
cc: continental crust, oc: oceanic crust, and ma: mantle), and Fk and αk are the ﬂux
of the process k and its isotopic fractionation factor. We considered net isotopic frac-
tionation in sediment deposition (the atmosphere to sediments on the crust, through ﬁxed
N in the oceans). The other processes are known to induce relatively small isotopic frac-
tionation only (typically ≃1‰, Busigny & Bebout, 2013; Cartigny & Marty, 2013). A
potential caveat here is that N isotopic fractionation in the subduction zones and in the
mantle has not been fully understood, which is discussed in Section 4.3.

2.3.1 Sediment burial

Surface N cycling evolved through time (e.g., Shen et al., 2006; St¨ueken, Kipp, Koehler,

& Buick, 2016; Ader et al., 2016). On modern Earth, biology mediates primary N ﬁx-
ation from N2, and dissolved nitrate in the ocean is the main form of bio-available N.
In contrast, abiotic N ﬁxation might have been a dominant source of ﬁxed N on early
Earth (Navarro-Gonz´alez et al., 2001), especially before the development of biological
N ﬁxation (St¨ueken et al., 2015), and nitrate would be limited because of limited bio-

–8–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

logical oxidative nitriﬁcation in anaerobic environments. A fraction of ﬁxed N is contin-
uously removed from the N pool as sedimentary deposits, which is ultimately transported
to the mantle via subduction through time (Figure 2).

Because how the sedimentary N deposition rate changed through time is poorly con-

strained, we simply parameterized the ﬂux as,

Fsed(t) = Fsed,0 × 10Csed(t0−t)/t0,

(9)

where t0 = 4.5 Gyr, F0 is the sediment deposition (N burial) ﬂux on modern Earth (0.455
PAN/Gyr, St¨ueken, Kipp, Koehler, Schwieterman, et al., 2016) and Csed is the power-
law parameter and can be either positive or negative. This parameterization does not
require explicit modeling of the size of biosphere, which inﬂuences surﬁcial N cycling,
but we discuss the implications for the early biosphere by utilizing the obtained values
of Csed (Section 4.2). The majority of sediments is deposited onto continental shelves
(modeled as a part of the continental crust), and the rest onto the oceanic crust as pelagic
sediments. We assumed the fraction of pelagic sediments, fpel, to be 0.038 (Berner, 1982;
St¨ueken, Kipp, Koehler, Schwieterman, et al., 2016).

Sedimentary N can be incorporated into rocks after deposition. This process was
not explicitly included in our model as the crust and overlying sediments are treated as
a single reservoir, but it was implicitly considered as an internal process.

Because there exists an isotopic disequilibrium within the N cycle (Cartigny & Marty,

2013), a successful recycling model should take into account the evolution of the surﬁ-
cial N cycle which controls the net fractionation factor between atmospheric and sed-
imentary N. The net isotopic fractionation factor from the atmosphere to the sediments
was modeled as occurring over four stages.

In Period 1 (>3.2 Ga), ∆15N = −9‰ was assumed (by deﬁnition, 103 ln αsed =
∆15N). This was motivated by lower mean δ15N values (−3.6‰) of organic matter in
the Eo-paleoarchean (e.g., Marty & Dauphas, 2003; Shen et al., 2006). The adapted fac-
tor (∼ −9‰) is the lowest value of the sedimentary record (assuming δ15N = 0‰ for
the atmosphere) as well as the value typically expected for abiotic N-ﬁxation via light-
ning or photochemistry (Moore, 1977; Navarro-Gonz´alez et al., 2001; Kuga et al., 2014;
St¨ueken et al., 2021). Anaerobic processing after N ﬁxation (and thus absence of nitrate)
was implicitly assumed in this stage, as we did not consider 15N enrichment due to den-
itriﬁcation. Abiotically-ﬁxed, 15N-depleted ammonia (Moore, 1977; Navarro-Gonz´alez
et al., 2001) would have been consumed by chemosynthetic bacteria in hydrothermal sys-
tems under anaerobic conditions in this period (Shen et al., 2006).

In Period 2 (3.2–2.75 Ga), ∆15N = 0‰. The environment is still anaerobic, but
biotic N ﬁxation (diazotrophy) began and became the major source of bio available N
in this period (St¨ueken et al., 2015).

During Period 3 (2.75–2.4 Ga), ∆15N = +10.8‰. Aerobic N cycling (coupled ni-
triﬁcation, denitriﬁcation, and assimilation) started in this period (Garvin et al., 2009).
Dissimilatory denitriﬁcation leads to residual nitrate being kinetically enriched in 15N,
and the isotopically enriched nitrate is then reduced to ammonium and converted to or-
ganic matter and ﬁnally trapped in sediments (e.g., St¨ueken, Kipp, Koehler, & Buick,
2016). Larger N fractionation as recorded in organic matter compared to the modern
value can be explained by limited amounts of nitrate (Shen et al., 2006).

In Period 4 (<2.4 Ga), ∆15N = +6‰. The isotopic shift during nitriﬁcation-denitriﬁcation-

assimilation would have decreased to the modern average value due to the formation of
a sizable global nitrate pool (Shen et al., 2006).

–9–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

2.3.2 Continental weathering

Continental N is gradually transported to the oceanic crust via weathering. The

weathering ﬂux is assumed to be proportional to Mcc as,

Fwea =

Mcc
τwea

,

(10)

where τwea is the timescale of weathering. The timescale depends on atmospheric O2 par-
tial pressure, and here modeled as (Johnson & Goldblatt, 2018),

τwea = τwea,0 ·

awea + (1 − awea)
(cid:20)

P ALO2
P ALO2 + kwea (cid:21)

−1

,

(11)

where τwea,0 is the weathering timescale on modern Earth (τwea,0 = 0.3 Gyr), P ALO2
is the atmospheric O2 partial pressure scaled to present atmospheric levels for which we
used the model of Johnson and Goldblatt (2018) developed based on geochemical recon-
struction (e.g., Lyons et al., 2014), awea is the fraction of available material weathered
under anoxic conditions (awea = 0.1), and kwea is the weathering constant (kwea = 10−3),
respectively (Johnson & Goldblatt, 2018). The dependence on P ALO2 is not critical for
the surface-mantle N exchange, but it is important to reproduce the Archean low pN2
record (Marty et al., 2013; Som et al., 2012, 2016, see Section 3.2).

2.3.3 Subduction, arc volcanism, and continental growth

Sedimentary N on the oceanic crust is eventually conveyed to subduction zones.

N is then either returned to the atmosphere via arc volcanism (Farc), incorporated into
the continental crust (Fccg), or transported to the mantle (Fsub). We modeled these ﬂuxes
as,

Fsub,tot ≡ Fsub + Farc + Fccg =

Moc
τsub

,

(12)

where τsub is the subduction timescale. We assumed τsub = 0.1 Gyr, following St¨ueken,
Kipp, Koehler, Schwieterman, et al. (2016). Fast plate tectonics on early Earth, which
leads to the short τsub, was assumed in the past, but recent studies suggest that the plate
speed is nearly constant through time (Korenaga, 2003; Bradley, 2008; Condie et al., 2015;
Pehrsson et al., 2016; Korenaga, 2018).

We note that hydrothermal addition of N to the oceanic crust is not explicitly in-

cluded in our cycling model. In reality, N in the altered crust can also transport N to
the mantle (Mitchell et al., 2010; Halama et al., 2014; Johnson & Goldblatt, 2018). How-
ever, this N in the altered crust is likely sourced from sedimentary organic material de-
posited to the crust (Halama et al., 2014), and thus the conversion does not change the
global N balance.

The ratio Fsub:Farc:Fccg (≡ 1 − farc − fccg:farc:fccg) is highly uncertain (Johnson
& Goldblatt, 2018; Catling & Zahnle, 2020). We evaluated farc and fccg as follows. First,
we assumed farc = fccg, following Johnson and Goldblatt (2018). Then, We evaluated
fccg by considering the mass balance. Assuming a steady state for Mcc and Moc leads
to,

Mcc = Fsedτwea(cid:18)

1
1 − fccg

− fpel(cid:19)

, Moc =

Fsedτsub
1 − fccg

.

(13)

Provided the short τwea after the GOE and τsub, the steady state assumed here to eval-
uate fccg is shown to be valid with our cycling model where the time evolution is explic-
itly solved (Section 3.2). In order to reproduce the modern Mcc and Moc (Table 1) with
Equation 13, fccg needs to be ≃ 0.5. Thus, we assumed fccg = farc = 0.45, and the
rest, 1 − fccg − farc = 0.1, is transported to the mantle.

–10–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

2.3.4 Mantle degassing

The ﬂux of volcanic N degassing from the mantle with time depends on the man-

tle N content, Mma, the thermal evolution (Keller & Schoene, 2018; Korenaga, 2018),
and the redox state (Mikhail & Sverjensky, 2014; Zerkle & Mikhail, 2017) which might
have become oxidized over time (Aulbach & Stagno, 2016; Nicklas et al., 2018, 2019; Aulbach
et al., 2019).

We parameterized the volcanic degassing ﬂux from the mantle as,

Fvol =

Mma
τvol

,

where τvol is the degassing timescale, which was parameterized as,

τvol = τvol,0 × 10Cvol(t0−t)/t0.

(14)

(15)

The power-law parameter, Cvol, can be either positive or negative. The mantle N degassing
timescale, τvol,0, on modern Earth was estimated from the mean value of the estimates
of modern mantle N content 1.47 PAN (Table 1) divided by the modern N degassing ﬂux
(0.018 PAN/Gyr, Busigny et al., 2011).

2.3.5 Initial conditions, parameters, and classiﬁcation of results

We performed Monte Carlo simulations to ﬁnd parameter sets which satisfy the con-
straints on N masses and isotopic compositions of present reservoirs (Table 1). The model
runs which are consistent with these observations are hereafter called “accepted runs.”
The Monte Carlo simulations were repeated until 100 accepted runs were found; this typ-
ically required 106 trials. In accepted runs, we classiﬁed those with Mma(t = 0 Ga) ×
0.5 > Mma(t = 4.5 Ga) as “accepted recycling-origin runs,” and the others as “ac-
cepted primordial-origin runs.”

There are ﬁve Monte Carlo parameters. The total N content is varied from 1.844

to 3.964 PAN (Table 1). The initial mantle N content is from 0 PAN to the total N con-
tent. The N isotopic ratio of initial mantle is from −40 to 0‰ as found in enstatite chon-
drites (Piani et al., 2020, and references therein). We note that such low δ15N values have
been reported for some rare diamonds from Earth’s mantle, which possibly record the
signature of Earth’s N source (Palot et al., 2012). The subduction and degassing param-
eters Csub and Cvol are both from −5 to 5.

The other parameters were ﬁxed during the Monte Carlo simulations, but their in-

ﬂuences were investigated separately. i) The onset time of biological N ﬁxation. Our nom-
inal case assumed that biological N ﬁxation (Phase 2) started at 3.2 Ga. This is based
on the N isotope record which suggests that biological N ﬁxation had already started by
that time (St¨ueken et al., 2015). Phylogenetic data also suggests that the last univer-
sal common ancestor (LUCA) had this function (Weiss et al., 2016). Thus, we tested the
case where Period 2 started 4.5 Ga as another endmember. ii) The onset time of the plate
tectonics. The onset time of the plate tectonics on Earth is controversial (Korenaga, 2013).
In the nominal case, we assumed the initiation time for plate tectonics, tpt,init, to be 3.5
Ga, following Johnson and Goldblatt (2018). We also tested tpt,init = 4.5 Ga. iii) The
onset time of N subduction. Our nominal case assumed fccg = farc = 0.45 and, thus,
10% of N conveyed to subduction zones is transported to the mantle. Because a hot man-
tle might have inhibited N subduction prior to 2.5 Ga (Johnson & Goldblatt, 2018), we
also tested a model where fccg = farc = 0.5 and fccg = farc = 0.45 before and after
2.5 Ga, respectively. However, we ﬁnd that these model variants do not diﬀer signiﬁcantly
(Section 3.2).

Paleo-atmospheric pressure and N2 partial pressure, pN2, have been constrained from
geochemical and geological record (Marty et al., 2013; Som et al., 2012, 2016). These stud-

–11–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

Figure 3. Evolution of the N content in each reservoir in our partitioning model. Blue line:

atmosphere. Red line: magma ocean. Green lines: solidiﬁed mantle (dashed: trapped melt and
minerals, dotted: minerals only). The result for the oxidized case with ts = 0.2 Myrs and the

total content = 2 PAN is shown.

ies suggest low pN2 values in the Archean, which corresponds to 0.64–1.4 PAN at 3.5-
3.0 Ga (Marty et al., 2013) and <0.64 PAN (assuming that N2 is the dominant atmo-
spheric gas) at 2.7 Ga (Som et al., 2012, 2016). Our model did not adapt these constraints
explicitly, but we compared the accepted runs with them. Overall, we ﬁnd that these low
pN2 values are satisﬁed in many, but not all, accepted runs by N sequestration in the crust
(as proposed by St¨ueken, Kipp, Koehler, Schwieterman, et al., 2016).

3 Results

3.1 Partitioning model

First, we studied N partitioning in the magma ocean stage to test the primordial-

origin scenario. Time evolution with ts = 0.2 Myrs and the total N content = 2 PAN
in the oxidized case is shown in Figure 3. N was chieﬂy partitioned into the atmosphere
owing to its low solubility (Equation A1 in Appendix A). As the magma ocean solid-
iﬁed, a fraction of N in the magma ocean partitioned into the solidiﬁed mantle chieﬂy
in the form of N in the trapped melt. Because of its incompatibility (low mineral-melt
partitioning coeﬃcients, DN, Table 2), the contribution of N partitioned into minerals
was small. As a consequence, the mantle right after magma ocean solidiﬁcation is de-
pleted in N (the mantle N content is only ∼0.1 PAN). We note that the ﬁnal mantle N
mantle/Mmantle ≃ pN2SNFtl
content in this low solubility limit is well approximated by M N
(Equation 11 of Kurokawa et al., 2021) with Ftl = 0.3 in this rapid solidiﬁcation case.

–12–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

Figure 4. N partitioning between the atmosphere and mantle at the time of magma ocean

solidiﬁcation. The result of one simulation run corresponds to a single point in the ﬁgure,
and changing two parameters (the solidiﬁcation time ts and the total N content in the system
M N

atm+mo+sm) draws a green patch of solutions. Results are shown for the oxidized, intermedi-

ate, and reduced cases (see text) with increasing transparency. Dashed curves show constant

total-N (1.698 and 4.110 PAN). The shaded areas are the N amounts in the modern surface (the

atmosphere plus continental and oceanic crust, blue) and mantle (red).

–13–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

36Ar partitioning between the atmosphere and mantle at the time of magma ocean
Figure 5.
solidiﬁcation. Dashed curves show constant total-36Ar (1.0028 and 1.0057 PA36Ar). The shaded
areas are the 36Ar amounts in the modern atmosphere (blue) and mantle (red).

–14–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

Figure 6. N partitioning between the atmosphere and mantle at the time of magma ocean

solidiﬁcation in the cases where we assumed larger amounts of total N to reproduce the modern

mantle N content with the oxidized magma ocean model. Results are shown for the oxidized,

intermediate, and reduced cases (see text) with increasing transparency. Dashed curves show con-

stant total-N (8.11 and 152.53 PAN). The shaded areas are the N amounts in the modern surface

(the atmosphere plus continental and oceanic crust, blue) and mantle (red).

–15–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

Figure 4 shows the atmospheric and mantle N contents after magma ocean solid-
iﬁcation for a range of total N content and solidiﬁcation times ts in the oxidized, inter-
mediate, and reduced cases. For a given redox state, increasing the total N content leads
the results to move to the upper right perpendicular to the constant total-N curves, while
increasing ts to the upper left parallel to the curves. If the atmospheric and mantle N
contents obtained in the model match those of the modern surface (N in the atmosphere
plus continental and oceanic crust which is thought to be in the atmosphere when the
magma ocean solidiﬁed) and mantle, the results suggest a primordial origin for mantle
N. However, in both oxidized and intermediate cases, the model mantle N content was
lower than the modern value. Only the reduced case reproduced the lower estimate (.1
PAN) of the modern mantle N content. This is caused by higher N solubilities in reduced
conditions due to chemically-bound N in the magma (Libourel et al., 2003). The man-
tle N amounts in all cases were mainly attributed to trapped interstitial melt (Figure
3). The contribution of N in minerals was smaller by an order of magnitude. A shorter
solidiﬁcation time ts leads to a higher trapped melt fraction Ftl and thus more N in the
solidiﬁed mantle. However, our result with the shortest solidiﬁcation time (ts = 0.2 Myrs)
already reached the maximum value (Ftl = 0.3).

In contrast, the partitioning model reproduced the 36Ar content of the modern man-
tle as well as the atmosphere (Figure 5). Ar behaves similarly to N in the oxidized magma
(e.g., Marty & Dauphas, 2003), and ends up with a similar degree of depletion in the man-
tle. The agreement between the model and observations is due to the fact that the mod-
ern mantle is depleted in 36Ar by two orders of magnitude with respect to N/36Ar ra-
tios compared to the current atmosphere.

To summarize, our partitioning model suggests that the mantle received only ∼10%

of the total N when the magma ocean fully solidiﬁed, unless the magma was reducing.
The reduced magma ocean at the time of solidiﬁcation is not supported from geophys-
ical and geochemical studies (Badro et al., 2015; Armstrong et al., 2019; Sossi et al., 2020).

We also performed model calculations with increased total N content and found

that putting the modern N content into the solidiﬁed mantle in the oxidized case ended
up with 7.7–150 PAN in the atmosphere (Figure 6). The range was derived from uncer-
tainties in the modern mantle N content M N
ts. In Section 4.1, we discuss a primordial-origin scenario for the mantle N by consid-
ering the excess amount of total N, which could have been removed later by atmospheric
escape processes.

mantle and the magma ocean solidiﬁcation time

3.2 Cycling model

–16–

–
1
7
–

Figure 7. Cycling model results for the nominal case where we assumed the onset times of biological N ﬁxation, plate tectonics, and N subduction to be 3.2, 3.5.
and 3.5 Ga, respectively (see Section 2.3.5 for details). Top: Evolution of masses (left) and 15N/14N ratios (right) in the atmosphere (blue), continental and oceanic
crust (purple and green), and mantle (red). Curves show accepted runs whose outcomes are consistent with modern values (shown along the right y-axis). Thick
and thin curves denote accepted recycling- and primordial-origin runs, respectively. Gray boxes indicate pN2 constraints from Som et al. (2016) and Marty et al.

(2013). Bottom: Histograms of Monte Carlo parameters of all accepted runs. Recycling- and primordial-origin runs are shown in red and blue, respectively.

m
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

s
u
b
m

i
t
t
e
d

t
o
G
e
o
c
h
e
m

i
s
t
r
y
,

G
e
o
p
h
y
s
i
c
s
,

G
e
o
s
y
s
t
e
m

s

–
1
8
–

Figure 8. Cycling model results for the case where we assumed Phase 2 (biological N ﬁxation) started 4.5 Ga, while the other settings are the same as in the

nominal case (Figure 7). See Figure 7 caption for details.

m
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

s
u
b
m

i
t
t
e
d

t
o
G
e
o
c
h
e
m

i
s
t
r
y
,

G
e
o
p
h
y
s
i
c
s
,

G
e
o
s
y
s
t
e
m

s

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

3.2.1 Evolution of N contents in reservoirs

Next, we tested the recycling origin for mantle N with our cycling model. We note

that, unless otherwise stated, we refer to the results of the nominal case where we as-
sumed the onset times of biological N ﬁxation, plate tectonics, and N subduction to be
3.2, 3.5. and 3.5 Ga, respectively (see Section 2.3.5 for details). The evolution of N masses
and isotopic ratios in the atmosphere, continental and oceanic crust, and mantle after
the solidiﬁcation of magma ocean was simulated with the nominal parameter set (Fig-
ure 7). Rather than directly adopting the results of the magma-ocean partitioning model,
initial conditions of the cycling model were treated as Monte Carlo parameters, and we
looked for parameter sets which reproduce the modern N contents and isotopic ratios
in the four reservoirs. We compare the results of the two models to discuss possible sce-
narios for N partitioning and cycling in Section 4.

The atmospheric N contents in the runs which started from a few PAN show de-
cline with time to reach a minimum at 2.4 Ga (the top-left panel of Figure 7). The de-
cline is caused by sediment deposition and sequestration in the continental and oceanic
crust. Notably, the constraints on pN2 (Marty et al., 2013; Som et al., 2012, 2016) can
be satisﬁed by many, but not all, accepted runs. The modeled evolution curves also agree
with evidence for a stable atmospheric pN2 reservoir over the Phanerozoic (Berner, 2006).
The initiation of plate tectonics can be seen as the decline of N contents in the oceanic
crust after 3.5 Ga. In contrast, the inﬂuence of subduction on the mantle N contents in
the recycling-origin runs is limited before 2.4 Ga. In some primordial-origin runs, the
mantle N contents even decreased in this period due to degassing.

At 2.4 Ga, which corresponds to the GOE, the rate of continental weathering in-

creased drastically, leading to the decline of N content in the continental crust. The con-
tinental N was ﬁrst transported to the oceanic crust as sediments, and then to the man-
tle via subduction. Owing to the return N ﬂux via arc volcanism, the atmospheric N con-
tents start to increase with time after the GOE.

3.2.2 Evolution of N isotopic ratios in reservoirs

N cycling between the reservoirs is reﬂected to the evolution of isotopic ratio (the
top-right panel of Figure 7). In the recycling-origin runs, the atmospheric δ15N values
increase by ∼+5‰ with time prior to 3.2 Ga. This is caused by deposition of 15N-depleted
sediments in Period 1 (>3.2 Ga, Section 2.3). As the net fractionation factor between
the atmosphere and sediments became zero (Period 2, 3.2–2.75 Ga) to positive (Periods
2 and 3, <2.75 Ga), the atmospheric δ15N values change their trend to decline with time.
The minimum values at 2.4 Ga correlate with the atmospheric N contents at that time.
Following the recovery of pN2 after 2.4 Ga, the atmospheric δ15N values approach asymp-
tote of 0‰.

The δ15N values of the continental and oceanic crust showed secular increase as a

result of the change in ∆15N between the atmosphere and sediments deposited. The rate-
determining process of the continental δ15N evolution is continental weathering whose
timescale is 3 Gyrs and 0.3 Gyrs before the GOE and at present, respectively (Equation
11). The timescale of the evolution of the oceanic crust δ15N values is determined by the
subduction (0.1 Gyrs) after the onset of the plate tectonics. Because this is much shorter
than the timescale of continental weathering, the oceanic crust follows the continents in
terms of δ15N evolution.

Mantle δ15N stays constant before 3.5 Ga because no subduction is assumed in the

nominal case. After the onset of the plate tectonics, these values start to increase due
to subduction of relatively-15N-rich surface N. The rate of change increases after 2.4 Ga.
This is caused by enhanced continental weathering after the GOE, which leads to more
N transported onto the oceanic crust, and consequently, to the mantle.

–19–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

We note that several primordial origin runs showed high δ15N values for the atmo-

sphere and crust initially. These are runs where the Monte Carlo code chose high ini-
tial mantle N contents, so that the mass balance led to high atmospheric δ15N values to
keep the bulk δ15N consistent with the modern value. Because the continental and oceanic
crust receives atmospheric N as sediments, their δ15N values were also high earlier on.
The record of the initial state is eventually lost after ∼1 Gyr.

3.2.3 Monte Carlo parameters in accepted runs

Histograms of Monte Carlo parameters in accepted runs are shown in the bottom
panels in Figure 7. Because our model is not fully physics-based but rather conceptual,
all results should not necessarily be treated as realistic without discussion, but these should
be considered as requirements to reproduce the N contents and isotopic ratios in the mod-
ern reservoirs (see Section 4.2 for discussion on possible scenarios).

In comparing the recycling- and primordial-origin runs, the former show lower to-
tal N masses and lower initial mantle δ15N values than the latter. This is caused by the
ﬁnite ability of the system to transport surface N without increasing the mantle 15N value
too much. The low initial mantle δ15N values in the recycling runs (typically −40 to −20‰)
mean that, even they were classiﬁed as the recycling origin, the initial mantle condition
matters - in terms of the isotopic composition, mantle N cannot be fully of recycling ori-
gin.

The sediment deposition parameter, Csed (positive and negative values mean higher
and lower ﬂuxes in earlier time, respectively), was constrained around zero, which means
that sediment N burial has been nearly constant, for both recycling- and primordial-origin
runs. This is reasonable for the former. Given the modern N subduction ﬂux, ∼0.1 PAN/Gyr
assumed in our model, it takes ∼4 Gyrs to transport ∼0.4 PAN (the lowest estimate for
the modern mantle N mass) to the mantle. Lower sediment N deposition ﬂux on early
Earth (negative Csed) would lead to less N subduction, which would not satisfy the con-
straints of modern mantle N content.

Why Csed is highly constrained even for the primordial-origin runs is not so intu-

itive. In order to understand this behavior, we tested an additional case where we omit-
ted the constraints on the N masses and δ15N values for the modern continental and oceanic
crust (Figure C1). In this case, accepted primordial-origin runs include lower Csed val-
ues down to −5, but these runs show lower N contents in the continental and oceanic
crust. This result indicates that modern crustal N masses rule out low Csed values from
the primordial-origin runs. Importantly, even in this case where the constraints on crustal
N masses are relaxed, the recycling-origin runs showed their Csed values constrained to
be around zero, indicating that sediment N deposition ﬂux on early Earth comparable
to the modern value is a robust requirement for the recycling-origin scenario.

In contrast to Csed, the accepted degassing parameter values, Cvol (positive and

negative values mean longer and shorter earlier degassing timescale, respectively), were
distributed over a wider range. This is likely because mantle degassing has a relatively
minor eﬀect on overall N cycling. The modern degassing ﬂux of mantle N was assumed
to be 0.018 PAN/Gyr (Busigny et al., 2011), which is an order of magnitude lower than
the N subduction ﬂux.

3.2.4 Eﬀects of the onset time of biological N ﬁxation, plate tectonics,

and N subduction

The case where we assumed the onset of biological N ﬁxation (Phase 2) at 4.5 Ga
is shown in Figure 8. There was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence with the nominal case (Figure
7) in the accepted Monte Carlo parameters. However, the diﬀerence of the evolution of
δ15N values is notable. In contrast to the nominal case showing atmospheric δ15N val-

–20–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

Figure 9. The amount of escaped N required to enrich the remnant atmosphere (1 PAN)
in 15N by +6‰ as a function of isotopic fractionation factor. Blue circles and a red square are
estimates for EUV-driven hydrodynamic escape and solar wind-induced ion pickup, respectively.

ues to be ∼+5‰ prior to 2.4 Ga in the recycling-origin runs, the atmospheric δ15N val-
ues stayed nearly constant at 1–4‰ in the early biological-N-ﬁxation case. Because there
is no net-fractionation between the atmosphere and sediments, the crustal δ15N values
stayed equal to the atmospheric values before 2.75 Ga.

Finally, we tested two cases where we assumed the onset of plate tectonics at 4.5
Ga (Figure C2) and all subducted N was returned to the atmosphere and continental
crust before 2.5 Ga due to the hotter mantle of early Earth (Figure C3). Although there
were diﬀerences in the evolution of N contents in the oceanic crust and mantle, no sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerence was found in the accepted Monte Carlo parameters. This is because
the most important mechanisms to determine N cycling are N storage in the crust and
eﬃcient continetal weathering to cause N subduction before and after the GOE, respec-
tively, both of which were satisﬁed in these variants of the nominal case.

4 Discussion

4.1 The origin of mantle N: the primordial excess-N scenario

In Section 3.1, we suggests that magma ocean solidiﬁcation led to depletion of N

in the mantle, unless the magma ocean was reducing (Figure 4). Both high pressure ex-
periments (Armstrong et al., 2019; Sossi et al., 2020) and coupled geochemical and geo-
physical constraints (Badro et al., 2015) point to Earth’s magma ocean at the time of
solidiﬁcation being close to or more oxidizing than IW-1. Therefore, we rule out a sce-

–21–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

Figure 10. Evolution of atmospheric N content during the late accretion in the primordial N-

excess scenario. Green: Enstatite chondrite-like impactors. Yellow: N-depleted “dry” impactors.

Initial N contents are 7.7 PAN (thin curves) and 150 PAN (thick curves), which corresponds to

the atmospheric N content required to put N into the mantle comparable to the current mantle

in the oxidized magma-ocean scenario (Section 3.1 and Figure 6). The horizontal blue line is the

modern surface N content (the atmosphere and crust). The vertical dashed line is the minimum

estimate for the cumulative mass of the late accretion. Note that the thick green and yellow

curves are largely overlapping.

–22–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

nario that reducing conditions led to the primordial origin of N in the mantle, and fo-
cus on the oxidized magma ocean condition.

A possibility we should consider is that primitive Earth right after core-mantle sep-

aration might have a higher bulk N content than it currently does, and thus even pref-
erential partitioning into the atmosphere in the oxidized magma ocean condition could
end up with an amount of N remaining in the mantle suﬃcient to match modern observed
values. If this were the case, the early atmosphere would have an excess amount of N
of 7.7–150 PAN in the oxidized case (Section 3.1 and Figure 6). We name this case the
primordial “excess-N” scenario as a variant of the primordial origin and test whether at-
mospheric escape processes can remove the excess N in the atmosphere.

We estimated the 15N-enrichment eﬀect due to extreme ultraviolet (EUV)-driven

escape and solar wind-induced ion pickup to see how much atmospheric N should be re-
moved to end up with ∼ +6‰ 15N-enrichment in the remnant 1 PAN atmosphere (Fig-
ure 9, see Appendix D for model details). We found that these processes can remove only
0.5 PAN at most even assuming an EUV level 500 times higher than at present, which
is signiﬁcantly smaller than the excess atmospheric N estimated above. This level of EUV
corresponds to so-called fast-rotating young Sun model, but previous studies focusing
on volatile contents on Venus (Lammer, Leitzinger, et al., 2020; Lammer, Scherf, et al.,
2020) and the Moon (Saxena et al., 2019) concluded that the EUV level of the young
Sun is likely to be less active than a moderate rotator, whose EUV level was ≃100 times
that of the current Sun. For this EUV level, neither 14N nor 15N can be removed by EUV-
driven escape. Moreover, the contribution of solar wind-induced ion pickup should be
limited to 0.01 PAN, otherwise the atmosphere would have excess 15N.

Next we estimated how much N can be removed by atmospheric erosion due to late

accretion impacts, using the model of Sakuraba et al. (2019) (Figure 10, see Appendix
E for model details). Impact erosion does not fractionate isotopes, as it removes the bulk
atmosphere well below the homopause. However, we found that impact erosion cannot
remove the excess N (7.7–150 PAN) with the minimum estimate of the late accretion mass
(0.5 wt.% of Earth’s total mass) and N-containing impactors (such as enstatite chondrites)
that have been suggested from the isotopic analysis of siderophile elements in Earth and
the Moon (Dalou et al., 2017; Fischer-G¨odde & Kleine, 2017; Fischer-G¨odde et al., 2020;
Worsham & Kleine, 2021). The excess N can be removed by completely N-depleted im-
pactors or by a higher cumulative mass of late accreting material (Marchi et al., 2018).
We note that here we assumed asteroid-belt-like impactor-size distribution which leads
to eﬃcient impact erosion. Assuming shallower size distribution (more large impactors,
as proposed by Bottke et al., 2010) does not yield suﬃcient atmospheric loss (Sakuraba
et al., 2019, 2021).

From these results shown above, we conclude that the primordial origin scenario

for the mantle N is possible only if Earth at the time of magma ocean solidiﬁcation had
an excess amount of N (>7.7 PAN in the atmosphere), and if the N content, size distri-
bution, and total mass of late accretion impactors allowed eﬃcient loss of the excess N
in the atmosphere to space by impact erosion. The feasibility of this model also depends
on primitive Earth’s total N content after major accretion and core-mantle separation.
Grewal et al. (2021) modeled Earth’s accretion and argued that the N content of the bulk
silicate Earth (Earth minus the core, hereafter BSE) was determined by partitioning into
the core and atmospheric loss during major accretion, which is incompatible with the
excess-N scenario proposed here. In their model, the atmospheres on planetesimals in
each stage of accretion were assumed to be lost completely. In contrast, Sakuraba et al.
(2021) simulated Earth’s accretion with an impact erosion model (Sakuraba et al., 2019).
They showed that atmospheric loss in the main accretion stage before the late accretion
is signiﬁcant but not complete, and thus Earth formed with excess N, which was removed
by late accretion impacts.

–23–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

The excess-N and impact erosion scenario need to reproduce 36Ar/N ratios in Earth’s

atmosphere and mantle. The agreement of the 36Ar partitioning model results with 36Ar
in the modern atmosphere and mantle (Figure 5) suggests that, in contrast to N, there
was no signiﬁcant excess atmospheric36Ar at the time of solidiﬁcation, requiring pref-
erential N removal. However, impact erosion itself is not a fractionation process. A pos-
sibility to reconcile the excess-N scenario with the observed 36Ar/N ratios is late accre-
tion of bodies having a high 36Ar/N ratio on average, as proposed for the cometary con-
tribution to Earth’s atmospheric noble gases (but not to major volatile elements: H, C,
and N, Marty et al., 2016, 2017), while the majority of impactors would be chondritic
or more dry bodies. If this was the case, even though impact atmospheric erosion itself
is not a selective process, the erosion combined with the replenishment of Ar would lead
to a net loss of N preferentially to Ar. This gives another constraint on the impactor com-
position in the primordial scenario.

4.2 The origin of mantle N: the early biogeochemical cycling scenario

In Section 3.2, we showed that the recycling origin scenario requires sediment N
deposition rates on early Earth being comparable to that of modern Earth. The high
sediment N deposition ﬂux is, as discussed below, likely to be sustained by biotic activ-
ity.

A simple solution is that high sediment deposition ﬂux at earlier times has been

sustained by biological N ﬁxation similar to as on modern Earth (as assumed in Figure
8). This scenario might be consistent with the phylogenetic study which suggests that
LUCA was able to ﬁx N (Weiss et al., 2016).

Alternatively, even if N ﬁxation on early Earth was being sustained by abiotic pro-
cesses (as assumed in the nominal case, Figure 7), biotic activity is needed to keep high
N concentration in sediments. Considering the reasonable range of abiotic N ﬁxation ﬂuxes,
adsorbed N content in sediments was estimated to be smaller by more than an order of
magnitude in abiotic conditions than in modern Earth condition (∼10 ppm vs. ∼400 ppm,
St¨ueken, 2016; Busigny et al., 2011). This is the maximum estimate as it assumes that
all NOx is reduced to NH+
4 during hydrothermal circulation or by reaction with ferrous
iron. Another study found that abiotic chemistry signiﬁcantly limits the NOx abundance
in the oceans (Hu & Diaz, 2019) and thus NH+
NH+
4 adsorption is caused by a high NH+
due to the degradation of organic matter (e.g., St¨ueken, 2016). Therefore, here we sug-
gest a scenario that the same mechanism also contributed to the high NH+
4 abundance
in sediments and thus eﬃcient cycling, and that the modern mantle N was sourced by
biogeochemical cycling (either biotic or abiotic N ﬁxation and subsequent biotic process-
ing) developed on early Earth.

4 concentration in pore water of anoxic sediments

4 as well. On modern Earth, the eﬃcient

4.3 Model uncertainties and limitation

As discussed in Section 2, Johnson and Goldblatt (2015) estimated a higher mod-

ern mantle N content (2–10 PAN) than the range assumed in our study (0.41–2.53 PAN).
The higher N content is more diﬃcult to reconcile with partitioning in the magma ocean
stage. In contrast, because the proposed high-N mantle has high δ15N values (∼+5‰)
comparable to modern sediments (Johnson & Goldblatt, 2015), it can be sourced by sub-
duction of sediments after the development of the modern aerobic N cycle, if high sed-
imentary deposition ﬂux is considered (as modeled by Johnson & Goldblatt, 2018). There-
fore, the high-N mantle component, if conﬁrmed, supports the recycling origin for man-
tle N.

Our cycling model assumes monotonic increase or decrease for the sediment depo-
sition ﬂux and the mantle degassing timescale for simplicity, but Earth might have ex-

–24–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

perienced continuous inversions of N subduction and degassing ﬂuxes (Zerkle & Mikhail,
2017). For instance, the N subduction ﬂux has likely been lower and higher before and
after the emergence of life as it enhances NH+
4 adsorption eﬃciency (Section 4.2). Nev-
ertheless, our conclusion for the requirement for the high sediment N burial rate would
be valid as an averaged condition before the onset of aerobic N cycling.

Following St¨ueken, Kipp, Koehler, Schwieterman, et al. (2016), we assumed that
the eﬀects of continental growth (e.g., Korenaga, 2018) on the oﬀshore to onshore ra-
tio of sediment burial (fpel/(1−fpel)) and on the continental weathering timescale (τwea)
were minor. The reader is referred to St¨ueken, Kipp, Koehler, Schwieterman, et al. (2016)
for detailed discussion. Key assumptions of our model were that sediments are mainly
deposited to the continental crust (shelves) through Earth’s history (fpel ≪ 1 and is
assumed to be constant through time) and the long residence time of sediments on the
continental crust before the GOE (τwea ∼1 Gyr). Thus, unless the continental fraction
was extremely small in the Archean to lead fpel ∼ 1, the continental growth curve would
not inﬂuence our model results and conclusions signiﬁcantly. If these assumptions did
not hold, the low pN2 constraints might not be satisﬁed in the recycling scenario.

Our modeling followed the generally-accepted inference that 15N-enriched sedimen-

tary rocks are dominant in subduction ﬂux of N (e.g., Bekaert et al., 2021), and thus there
exists N isotopic disequilibrium between the atmosphere and mantle (Marty & Dauphas,
2003). However, Mitchell et al. (2010) argued that hydrothermally-altered oceanic crust
is the dominant cause of this, and it has a negative δ15N value (-1.8‰) on average. The
negative δ15N value assumed is the case for Mariana trench (Li et al., 2007), and may
not necessarily represent the mean value of the whole oceanic crust. Estimates in other
studies have shown positive δ15N values for the average oceanic crust (Busigny et al.,
2011; Bekaert et al., 2021).

N isotopic fractionation in the subduction zones and in the mantle has not been

fully understood, and thus not considered in our cycling model. Devolatilization during
subduction leads to an increase in residual 15N of metamorphic rocks (Haendel et al.,
1986). The eﬀect is limited on present-day Earth (Cartigny & Marty, 2013), yet its in-
ﬂuence on N cycling through Earth’s history remains to be resolved. Additionally, it is
not yet known whether N isotopes are fractionated during partial melting reactions in
the mantle (Busigny & Bebout, 2013). Better understanding of N isotopic fractionation
in these processes is needed to further test the recycling scenario.

Atmospheric loss processes (EUV-driven escape, ion pickup, and impact erosion)

and replenishment by impactors were not coupled in our model. This would require com-
plete modeling of atmospheric composition and of how escape rates are dependent on
it, the latter of which is not available for ion pickup. A possible scenario to support the
primordial origin scenario by combining those processes is that, EUV-driven escape or
ion pickup ﬁrst removed the large amount of excess N in the atmosphere, and then im-
pact erosion and replenishment later erased the excess 15N signature. Though the com-
parable timescales of those processes (≃100 Myrs) implies that this is not the case, a fu-
ture modeling study is needed to fully test this scenario.

Mineral-melt partitioning of N in the magma ocean solidiﬁcation stage has not been

fully understood. We used the partitioning coeﬃcients estimated by Yoshioka et al. (2018).
This estimation was based on solubility experiments involving minerals and melts co-
existing with a discrete ﬂuid phase, and it is not guaranteed whether the partitioning
coeﬃcients are applicable for lower levels of N concentration. However, our partition-
ing model showed that the contribution of minerals as N hosts is smaller than that of
melt trapping in the cumulate by two orders of magnitude (Figure 3). Thus, unless the
actual mineral-melt partitioning coeﬃcients were more than two orders of magnitude higher,
the inﬂuence of their uncertainties would be minor.

–25–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

Our cycling model does not consider possible N supply from the core, but its con-

tribution for the mantle N content seems to be limited from the following reasons. First,
the N abundance in the core is too low to cause N exsolution from the outer core due
to N saturation induced by cooling and inner core solidiﬁcation. The N solubility in the
core condition is the order of ∼10 wt.% (Speelmanns et al., 2018). In contrast, geophys-
ical constraints limit the N abundance in the core to be ≪ 2.0 wt.% (Bajgain et al., 2019)
and modeling of Earth’s accretion and volatile partitioning has estimated the core N abun-
dance to be ∼10–100 ppm (Sakuraba et al., 2021), both of which are much smaller than
the saturation level. Second, the N exchange at the core-mantle boundary (CMB) would
be insuﬃcient to supply N from the core to explain the modern mantle N abundance.
Occasional observations of core signatures in surface lavas suggest the fraction of silicate
Earth which interacted with the core at the CMB may be the order of ∼1 wt.% (Hernlund
et al., 2015; Lim et al., 2021). In order to estimate the maximum contribution of the core,
here we assume that this fraction of silicate Earth received core N through the interac-
tion at the CMB and released all N to the entire mantle. To explain the modern man-
tle N abundance (∼1 ppm), the mantle portion which interacted with the core needs to
contain ∼100 ppm of N. Although mantle mineral-metal melt partition coeﬃcients have
not been directly measured, adapting an estimated value (∼100, Speelmanns et al., 2018)
leads to the required N abundance in the core side to be ∼1 wt.%, which is much higher
than the above-mentioned estimates (Bajgain et al., 2019; Sakuraba et al., 2021).

Our partitioning model assumed bottom-up solidiﬁcation of an initially-fully-molten
magma ocean, but Earth might have had a long-lived (the order of ∼1 Gyr) basal magma
ocean (Labrosse et al., 2007), which could aﬀect N partitioning and trapping in the man-
tle. Although quantitative modeling of the inﬂuence of the basal magma ocean is beyond
the scope of our study, we expect that, because of the two-step processes discussed be-
low, its primary eﬀect is to reduce the amount of N trapped in the bulk mantle and, con-
sequently, limit the possibility of the primordial scenario. First, the lower cooling rate
of the basal magma ocean compared to that of the surﬁcial magma ocean (the orders
of Gyrs vs. Myrs) would reduce the trapped melt fraction Ftl (Equation 5) signiﬁcantly.
This eﬀect would limit the trapped N content in the solidiﬁed mantle above the basal
magma (We note that for the basal magma ocean its solidiﬁcation proceeds in a top-down
fashion) and the majority of N which was initially in the magma just solidiﬁed would
be released into the residual basal magma ocean. In the slow-cooling limit, the trapped
N content, which is determined by N partitioning into crystallized minerals, would be
smaller than that in the fast-cooling limit by two orders of magnitude (see Figure 3 for
comparison of N contents in minerals and in trapped melt). Second, N which concen-
trated in the residual basal magma ocean would ultimately be lost to the underlying core.
Recent high-pressure experiments performed in graphite-undersaturated conditions (Grewal
et al., 2021) have shown that the metal-silicate melt partitioning coeﬃcient of N is ∼20–
30 for log10 fO2,∆IW = −2 (the oxygen fugacity expected for the core-magma ocean bound-
ary, Armstrong et al., 2019). As a result, the trapped N content in the bulk mantle would
become smaller than that in the case of bottom-up solidiﬁcation without the basal magma
ocean.

4.4 Comparison with previous studies

Several studies on N partitioning in the magma ocean stage have concluded that
Earth’s mantle N is primordial (Libourel et al., 2003; Boulliung et al., 2020), but these
studies did not consider degassing upon solidiﬁcation. The degassing process signiﬁcantly
limits N in the solidiﬁed mantle (Section 3.1), which led us to conclude that the primor-
dial origin scenario is only possible if Earth had an excess amount of N (Section 4.1).

Labidi et al. (2020) simulated the evolution of N masses and isotopic ratios by us-

ing a two-reservoir model (the surface and mantle) where the atmosphere-sediment N
isotopic fractionation factor was assumed to be constant through time. Their preferred

–26–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

model supported the primordial origin for mantle N. In contrast, our cycling model uses
four reservoirs (the atmosphere, continental and oceanic crust, and mantle) and the iso-
topic fractionation factor varied with time following the evolution of surface N biogeo-
chemical cycling, and found that the recycling origin was possible with high sedimen-
tary N deposition rates on early Earth.

Although our N cycling model is simple compared to the two recent models (St¨ueken,

Kipp, Koehler, Schwieterman, et al., 2016; Johnson & Goldblatt, 2018), those most im-
portant results were reproduced: sequestration of N in the continental crust in the Archean
(St¨ueken, Kipp, Koehler, Schwieterman, et al., 2016) and eﬃcient N subduction after
the GOE (Johnson & Goldblatt, 2018). We note that the mechanisms are slightly dif-
ferent. In contrast to St¨ueken, Kipp, Koehler, Schwieterman, et al. (2016) which mod-
eled enhanced crustal weathering after the GOE as the release of N to the atmosphere,
our model assumed the weathering as N-containing sediment transport to the oceanic
crust, following Johnson and Goldblatt (2018). The latter treatment seems to be more
consistent with the picture of global N balance which suggests high N ﬂux from crustal
rocks to sediments (Houlton et al., 2018). As a consequence, whereas weathering mainly
led to increase of pN2 in St¨ueken, Kipp, Koehler, Schwieterman, et al. (2016), our model
showed eﬃcient N subduction after the GOE. Moreover, eﬃcient N subduction after the
GOE in Johnson and Goldblatt (2018) was caused by an increase in primary biological
production at the time, but in our case N transport to the mantle was the result of the
release of the continental crust N, which was a product of N ﬁxation before the GOE.
This diﬀerence in the model assumption allowed our model to meet the low pN2 constraints
(Som et al., 2012, 2016; Marty et al., 2013) in the Archean, while it was diﬃcult with
the nominal model of Johnson and Goldblatt (2018).

4.5 Implications for sample analysis

Our modeling of N isotopic exchange provides a methodology to distinguish pri-
mordial and recycling origins for mantle N. The recycling origin is characterized by large
increase (&+10‰) in the mantle δ15N values with time, while the primordial origin model
showed more limited change (Figures 7, 8, C1, C2, and C3). The surface (the atmosphere
and crust) δ15N record is more complicated because they can vary owing also to N ex-
change between the surﬁcial reservoirs, but combining them with the mantle trend would
help constrain deep N cycling. Moreover, if the surface N cycle had already become slightly
aerobic as assumed in our model (Period 3, Section 2.3), the possible minimum in pN2
around the time of the GOE can be informed from a kink in the surface δ15N values.

Given these results, constraining mantle isotopic evolution informed for example
from diamonds (e.g., Cartigny & Marty, 2013) would oﬀer a more global picture of Earth’s
N cycling and the origin of mantle N. In addition, better determination of the surface
N isotopic composition and particularly more data around the time of the GOE will be
useful.

4.6 Constraints from other volatile elements and isotopes

Comparison to cycling of other volatile elements is potentially useful, but care should

be taken to the importance of redox control on N. Xenon (Xe) isotope studies suggest
limited subduction before 2.5 Ga (Parai & Mukhopadhyay, 2018) and a higher degassing
rate at the time (Marty et al., 2019). If N behaved similarly to Xe, these conditions might
rule out the recycling-origin scenario. However, the crust is an additional reservoir for
N to cause diﬀerent evolution. Furthermore, because both the surﬁcial and mantle re-
dox states chieﬂy inﬂuence N (but not noble gases), the redox control, in addition to the
diﬀerent stability in their host phases, can lead decoupling of N from noble gases. Such
decoupling between volatile elements has already been suggested for sulfur (S) and Xe
(Bekaert et al., 2021). Mass-independent S isotope signatures in the source of various

–27–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

hotspots indicate signiﬁcant recycling occurred prior to 2.5 Ga (Cabral et al., 2013; Dot-
tin III et al., 2020; Bekaert et al., 2021).

A classical interpretation for elementally-depleted and isotopically-fractionated Xe

in Earth’s atmosphere as a result of early hydrodynamic escape (e.g., Pepin, 1991) might
suggest signiﬁcant N loss due to the same process and support the presence of excess N.
However, this interpretation is not supported by recent measurements of paleo-atmospheric
Xe which revealed that Xe isotopic fractionation was progressive through time (Pujol
et al., 2011; Avice et al., 2017, 2018; Bekaert et al., 2018, 2020). Rather, Xe fraction-
ation was likely due to selective loss of Xe+ ions caused by strong coupling with escap-
ing H+ ions with time (Zahnle et al., 2019; Avice & Marty, 2020).

The 40K-40Ar decay system gives another constraints on degassing history as well

as continental growth (Ozima & Podosek, 2002; Pujol et al., 2013; Johnson & Goldblatt,
2018; Guo & Korenaga, 2020). Our cycling model showed that N masses and isotopic
ratios in diﬀerent major reservoirs on modern Earth can be reproduced with a wide range
of the degassing parameter, Cvol (Section 3.2), but it can be constrained by 40Ar data.
Combining these volatile elements and their isotopes in a single model would be impor-
tant for future studies.

4.7 Implications for Venus, Mars, and exoplanets

Venus’ atmosphere has about 3 PAN (Johnson & Goldblatt, 2015), which is com-
parable to BSE N content (Table 1). Whether Venus once possessed an habitable con-
dition and an Earth-like volatile cycle is controversial (e.g., Way & Del Genio, 2020; Krissansen-
Totton et al., 2021), but recent three-dimensional atmospheric simulations (Turbet et
al., 2021) and accretion modeling focusing on the diﬀerence in hydrogen to carbon ra-
tios between Earth and Venus (Sakuraba et al., 2021) suggest Venus never possessed oceans.
This lack of oceans would lead to no N cycling between the surface and mantle. Because
Venus’ magma ocean was likely more oxidized than Earth’s due to hydrogen loss to space
(Wordsworth, 2016), we predict that its mantle right after magma ocean solidiﬁcation
was depleted in N similarly to Earth (Section 3.1). Provided that Venus and Earth have
similar bulk N contents (namely that the atmosphere is the major reservoir of N for Venus),
the comparison with Venus may suggest that N recycling operating only on Earth dif-
fered the distribution of N on the two planets. Alternatively, the diﬀerent distribution
might be caused by the cumulative eﬀect of possible active volcanism on Venus. Con-
straining Venus’ volcanic activity with future missions (e.g., ESA’s EnVision and NASA’s
VERITAS and DAVINCI+, D’Incecco et al., 2021) may provide better understanding
of the partitioning and cycling of N on Venus.

Prolonged N degassing on Mars has been suggested from the atmospheric 15N/14N
ratio being close to the steady state between atmospheric escape and degassing (Kurokawa,
Kurosawa, & Usui, 2018; Lammer, Scherf, et al., 2020). Mars’ small size might have led
to a more reducing condition than Earth during its magma ocean stage (Armstrong et
al., 2019). Our partitioning model predicted &10% of bulk N can be partitioned into the
mantle in the reduced case (Section 3.1). While N recycling driven by plate tectonics has
been absent at least since ∼4 Ga on Mars (e.g., Grott et al., 2013), the N-rich mantle
might have contributed to prolonged degassing. The atmospheric neon abundance which
is likely in balance between atmospheric escape and mantle degassing also suggests abun-
dant volatile elements in Mars’ mantle (Kurokawa et al., 2021).

Our study suggests that the pN2 of extrasolar rocky planets in habitable zones may
provide useful constraints not only on present climate (Vladilo et al., 2013; Wordsworth
& Pierrehumbert, 2014) but also on the biogeochemical processes that have acted on such
planets. The pN2 of extrasolar rocky planets can in principle be constrained from future
observations (e.g., Schwieterman et al., 2015; St¨ueken, Kipp, Koehler, Schwieterman, et
al., 2016) through e.g., N2-N2 dimer absorption, collision-induced absorption involving

–28–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

N2, and/or Rayleigh scattering slope, although the last measurement is prone to the de-
generacy with other parameters. Combined with the estimates for the amount of N that
a planet initially accreted and the amount that has escaped to space, a low pN2 value
may indicate eﬃcient subduction of N, which may be attributed to active tectonics (which
may not necessarily Earth-like plate tectonics but can be mobile lid and episodic resur-
facing for example) with liquid water and perhaps biological N cycling. It would be in-
teresting to look at the pN2 of multiple rocky planets in the same system whose build-
ing blocks can be reasonably considered to be similar; they may show interesting diver-
sity in the pN2 depending on their evolution, similar to the case of Venus, Earth and Mars.
Our model for the recycling origin scenario for mantle N implies that the pN2 of plan-
ets with active tectonics and an anoxic atmosphere anti-correlates with their age, which
can be tested with future observations. In this manner, understanding the origin of Earth’s
mantle N and the surface environments of extrasolar rocky planets is linked with each
other.

5 Conclusions

Two hypotheses for the origin of N in Earth’s mantle were tested with numerical
models constrained by Ar and N isotopes. Our model results for N partitioning in the
magma ocean stage constrained by Ar showed that low solubility and low partition co-
eﬃcients between minerals and silicate melts leads to N depletion in the solidiﬁed man-
tle unless the magma ocean was reducing. The highly reducing magma ocean model may
be relevant to Mars which shows indirect evidence of prolonged degassing of N, but it
is not favored for Earth from high pressure experiments or geochemical and geophysi-
cal constraints. Modeling of impact erosion and isotopic fractionation via EUV-driven
escape and ion pick up suggests that the excess atmospheric N, which is required to put
suﬃcient N into the mantle as comparable as the minimum estimate for the modern man-
tle, can be removed only when eﬃcient net removal is assumed. Our model results for
N cycling between surface reservoirs and mantle constrained by N isotopes showed that
sequestration of N into the crust before the GOE and subsequent eﬃcient weathering
and subduction after the period could have sourced N to the modern mantle. This re-
cycling origin scenario requires high sedimentary N burial ﬂux on early Earth, which was
likely sustained by biotic N utilization. The two hypotheses can be tested by analyzing
the surface and mantle N isotope record. Unveiling the origin of Earth’s mantle N is linked
with understanding the diﬀerence in N contents with Venus and the evolution of surface
environments of extrasolar rocky planets.

Appendix A N solubility model

We developed a model for N solubility as a function of the oxygen fugacity and the

N partial pressure. Solubility data measured by Boulliung et al. (2020) for the terres-
trial magma ocean-like composition (MO2) were ﬁtted by the sum of two terms follow-
ing Libourel et al. (2003) as (Figure A1),

SN[ppm · atm

−1] = 10

−0.6934log10 fO2,∆IW−1.7002 ·

− 1
2

pN2
1 atm (cid:19)

(cid:18)

+ 0.2.

(A1)

The ﬁrst and second terms denote chemical and physical solubilities dominant under re-
ducing and oxidizing conditions, respectively (Libourel et al., 2003; Bernadou et al., 2021).
The ﬁrst term was given with the least squares method for log10 fO2,∆IW < −1.5 data,
assuming p1/2
N2 dependence (Boulliung et al., 2020). The second term was given to much
the data point for the oxidized limit (log10 fO2,∆IW = +4).

–29–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

Figure A1. N solubility model used in this study (Equation A1, purple curve). Two terms in

the ﬁtting formula are also shown (ﬁtting curves 1 and 2, red and yellow lines). Original data are

from Boulliung et al. (2020) (Blue points).

–30–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

Appendix B Derivation of Equation 1

The equation for the solubility equilibrium between the atmosphere and the magma

ocean (Equation 1) is derived from those for hydrostatic equilibrium, the ideal gas, and
the deﬁnition of solubility, which are given by,

and,

dp
dz

= −ρatmg,

pi = nikBT = ρikBT /mi,

pi =

xi
Si

,

(B1)

(B2)

(B3)

where z, ρatm, ni and, xi are the height from the surface, the density of atmospheric gas,
the number density of species i, and the mass fraction of species i in the magma ocean,
respectively. From Equations B1 and B2, we obtain,

d
dz (cid:18)

n
ni

pi(cid:19)

= − n
ni

¯m
mi

ρig.

(B4)

Assuming the mixing ratio ni/n to be constant in the atmosphere, Equation B4 can be
integrated analytically to lead,

pi(z = 0) =

¯m
mi

Matm,i
A

g.

We can rewrite Mmo,i using Equations B3 and B5 and obtain,

Mmo,i = xiMmo =

¯m
mi

Matm,i
A

g · Si · Mmo.

Finally, substituting Equation B6 into Equation 2 leads to Equation 1.

(B5)

(B6)

Appendix C Supplementary results of the cycling model

Figure C1 shows the result of the nominal model runs without the constraints on
the crustal N masses and isotopic ratios. Figures C2 and C3 show the variants of the nom-
inal model, where we assumed the onset time of plate tectonics to be 4.5 Ga (Figure C2)
and the initiation of N subduction at 2.5 Ga (Figure C3), respectively.

–31–

–
3
2
–

Figure C1. Cycling model results for the case where we omitted the constraints on the N content and isotopic ratios of the modern continental and oceanic

crust, while the other settings are the same as in the nominal case (Figure 7). See Figure 7 caption for details.

m
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

s
u
b
m

i
t
t
e
d

t
o
G
e
o
c
h
e
m

i
s
t
r
y
,

G
e
o
p
h
y
s
i
c
s
,

G
e
o
s
y
s
t
e
m

s

–
3
3
–

Figure C2. Cycling model results for the case where the plate tectonics started at 4.5 Ga, while the other settings are the same as in the nominal case (Figure

7). See Figure 7 caption for details.

m
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

s
u
b
m

i
t
t
e
d

t
o
G
e
o
c
h
e
m

i
s
t
r
y
,

G
e
o
p
h
y
s
i
c
s
,

G
e
o
s
y
s
t
e
m

s

–
3
4
–

Figure C3. Cycling model results for the case where N subduction started 2.5 Ga, while the other settings are the same as in the nominal case (Figure 7). See

Figure 7 caption for details.

m
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

s
u
b
m

i
t
t
e
d

t
o
G
e
o
c
h
e
m

i
s
t
r
y
,

G
e
o
p
h
y
s
i
c
s
,

G
e
o
s
y
s
t
e
m

s

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

Appendix D Atmospheric escape models

The isotopic fractionation factor, deﬁned as,

f ≡ F15N/F14N
[15N]/[14N]

,

(D1)

was estimated for EUV-driven hydrodynamic escape and solar wind-induced ion pickup,
where Fi is the escape ﬂux. Then we estimated the amounts of N removed by the escape
processes Mlost to enrich the remnant atmosphere (1 PAN) in 15N by ∆15N = +6‰
(Figure 9), using the Rayleigh dissolution equation,

Mlost =

1
1 − 10−3 × ∆15N (cid:19)

(cid:18)

1
1−f

− 1 [PAN].

(D2)

Escaping hydrogen drags 14N14N and 15N14N mass-dependently, and causes iso-

topic fractionation. The fractionation factor for hydrodynamic escape was estimated us-
ing a model of Lammer, Leitzinger, et al. (2020). In the model, the radii of visible- and
EUV-photospheres are estimated with their Equations 5, 11, and 12. Then escape ﬂuxes
of hydrogen and other minor species are computed with their Equations 10, 14, and 15.
For simplicity, we assumed that the model proto-Earth had a H2 plus N2 atmosphere,
whose mass is 10−3 times Earth’s mass. The mixing ratio of N2 was assumed to be 10−3
considering a primordial dense H2 atmosphere. We assume skin and upper atmospheric
temperatures to be 255 K and 400 K (Watson et al., 1981), respectively. The binary dif-
fusion coeﬃcient between H and N2 was taken from Zahnle and Kasting (1986). EUV
luminosity of the young Sun was taken to be a parameter, and is expected to be 30–500
times the present-day value during the ﬁrst 100 Myrs, depending on its rotation rate (Tu
et al., 2015).

Ion pickup by the solar wind removes N from the exobase level, where heavier 15N
is depleted due to diﬀusive separation. The fractionation factor was estimated by adapt-
ing an isothermal, hydrostatic structure for both 14N14N and 15N14N, given as,

f = exp

GME∆m
kbTexorhomo (cid:18)
where G is the gravitational constant, kb is the Boltzmann constant, ∆m is the mass dif-
ference between 14N14N and 15N14N, Texo is the exospheric temperature, and rhomo and
rexo is the radii of homopause and exobase, respectively. We assumed Texo = 104 K,
rhomo = RE+100 km, and rexo = 12.7RE (Tian et al., 2008; Lichtenegger et al., 2010).

rhomo
rexo

− 1

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(cid:20)

,

(D3)

Appendix E Impact erosion model

Atmospheric loss by impact-induced atmospheric erosion during late accretion was
calculated by using the model of Sakuraba et al. (2019) (Figure 10). The model setting
is the same for the early Earth model of Sakuraba et al. (2019) except for the impactor
composition and the initial N content, for the latter we assumed the estimate from our
partitioning model for the oxidized magma-ocean case (7.7 PAN to 150 PAN).

Here we summarize the main feature of the impact erosion model (see Sakuraba
et al., 2019, for details). The impact erosion model computes the loss and supply of volatile
elements by statistically-averaged impacts. Assuming the carbonate-silicate cycle, we ﬁxed
the background CO2 partial pressure at 1 bar. A trace amount of water vapor (0.017 bar)
was included assuming the saturated vapor pressure. We assumed the surface temper-
ature to be 288 K. The results depend on the assumed temperature only weakly (Sakuraba
et al., 2019, 2021).

We assumed two cases for the N content of impactors: enstatite chondrite-like im-

pactors containing 400 ppm N2 (Hirschmann, 2016; Bergin et al., 2015) and “dry” ob-
jects containing no N. The former is consistent with the N isotopic signatures of Earth

–35–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

and enstatite chondrites (Dalou et al., 2019; Piani et al., 2020). The latter is an extreme
case to maximize the eroded N mass case. We did not compute the case of carbonaceous
chondrite-like impactors, but they are richer in N than enstatite chondrites (e.g., Grady
& Wright, 2003) so that the net eﬀect to remove N from the atmosphere is weaker (Sakuraba
et al., 2019, 2021). Isotopic signatures of siderophile elements in the mantle also point
to the types of late accretion impactors containing a non-negligible amount of N, such
as enstatite or carbonaceous chondtites (Dauphas, 2017; Fischer-G¨odde et al., 2020).

The assumed size distribution of the impactors is dN (D)/dD ∝ D−q with q =
3, where N (D) is the number of objects of diameter smaller than D. The minimum and
maximum sizes are assumed to be D = 10−1.5 km and 103 km, respectively. A steeper
size distribution (larger q) leads to more eﬃcient impact erosion. The assumed size dis-
tribution is similar to that of the asteroid belt (Bottke et al., 2005), and is likely an up-
per limit for q (see, Sakuraba et al., 2021, for discussion).

The cumulative mass of late accretion is constrained by highly siderophile element

concentrations in Earth’s mantle (Chou, 1978; Marchi et al., 2018). We assumed 0.5%
of Earth’s mass as a minimum estimate, but calculated up to 1% to take a larger esti-
mate into account.

Acknowledgments
Data and codes to generate ﬁgures in this paper are available at https://doi.org/10
.6084/m9.figshare.17128421.v1. We thank Bernard Marty and an anonymous reviewer
for constructive comments. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant num-
ber 15H05832, 17H01175, 17H06457, 18K13601, 18K13602, 19H01960, 19H05072, 19K15671,
20K04126, 20KK0080, 21H04514, 20H04608, and 21K13976.

References

Ader, M., Thomazo, C., Sansjofre, P., Busigny, V., Papineau, D., Laﬀont, R., . . .

Halverson, G. P.
of Precambrian sedimentary rocks: Assumptions and perspectives.
Geology, 429 , 93–110.

Interpretation of the nitrogen isotopic composition
Chemical

(2016).

Armstrong, K., Frost, D. J., McCammon, C. A., Rubie, D. C., & Ballaran, T. B.

(2019). Deep magma ocean formation set the oxidation state of Earth’s man-
tle. Science, 365 (6456), 903–906.

Aulbach, S., & Stagno, V. (2016). Evidence for a reducing Archean ambient mantle

and its eﬀects on the carbon cycle. Geology, 44 (9), 751–754.

Aulbach, S., Woodland, A. B., Stern, R. A., Vasilyev, P., Heaman, L. M., & Viljoen,
K. (2019). Evidence for a dominantly reducing Archaean ambient mantle from
two redox proxies, and low oxygen fugacity of deeply subducted oceanic crust.
Scientiﬁc Reports, 9 (1), 1–11.

Avice, G., & Marty, B.

Perspectives on atmospheric evolution from no-
ble gas and nitrogen isotopes on Earth, Mars & Venus. Space Science Reviews,
216 (3), 1–18.

(2020).

Avice, G., Marty, B., & Burgess, R. (2017). The origin and degassing history of the
Earth’s atmosphere revealed by Archean xenon. Nature communications, 8 (1),
1–9.

Avice, G., Marty, B., Burgess, R., Hofmann, A., Philippot, P., Zahnle, K., & Za-

(2018).

kharov, D.
Evolution of atmospheric xenon and other noble gases
inferred from Archean to Paleoproterozoic rocks. Geochimica et Cosmochimica
Acta, 232 , 82–100.

Badro, J., Brodholt, J. P., Piet, H., Siebert, J., & Ryerson, F. J.

(2015).

Core

formation and core composition from coupled geochemical and geophysical
constraints. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112 (40), 12310–

–36–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

12314.

Bajgain, S. K., Mookherjee, M., Dasgupta, R., Ghosh, D. B., & Karki, B. B. (2019).
Geophysical Research Letters,

Nitrogen content in the Earth’s outer core.
46 (1), 89–98.

Barry, P., & Hilton, D. (2016). Release of subducted sedimentary nitrogen through-

out Earth’s mantle. Geochemical Perspectives Letters, 2 , 138–147.

Bekaert, D. V., Broadley, M. W., Delarue, F., Avice, G., Robert, F., & Marty, B.

(2018).
tions for dating the widespread nature of early life.
eaar2091.

Archean kerogen as a new tracer of atmospheric evolution: Implica-
Science advances, 4 (2),

Bekaert, D. V., Broadley, M. W., Delarue, F., Druzhinina, Z., Paris, G., Robert, F.,

. . . Marty, B.
organic matter: A robust indicator of syngenecity?
336 , 105505.

(2020). Xenon isotopes in Archean and Proterozoic insoluble
Precambrian Research,

Bekaert, D. V., Turner, S. J., Broadley, M. W., Barnes, J. D., Halld´orsson, S. A.,

Labidi, J., . . . Barry, P. H.
global mass balance.
37–70.

(2021).

Subduction-driven volatile recycling: A
Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 49 ,

Bergin, E. A., Blake, G. A., Ciesla, F., Hirschmann, M. M., & Li, J. (2015). Tracing
the ingredients for a habitable Earth from interstellar space through planet
formation.
8970.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112 (29), 8965–

Bernadou, F., Gaillard, F., F¨uri, E., Marrocchi, Y., & Slodczyk, A. (2021). Nitrogen
solubility in basaltic silicate melt - Implications for degassing processes. Chem-
ical Geology, 573 , 120192.

Berner, R. A.

(1982).

ocean: its geochemical and environmental signiﬁcance.
States), 282 .

Burial of organic carbon and pyrite sulfur in the modern
Am. J. Sci.;(United

Berner, R. A.

(2006). Geological nitrogen cycle and atmospheric N2 over phanero-

zoic time. Geology, 34 (5), 413–415.

Bottke, W. F., Durda, D. D., Nesvorn`y, D., Jedicke, R., Morbidelli, A., Vokrouh-

lick`y, D., & Levison, H.
asteroid belt. Icarus, 175 (1), 111–140.

(2005). The fossilized size distribution of the main

Bottke, W. F., Walker, R. J., Day, J. M., Nesvorny, D., & Elkins-Tanton, L.

(2010).
Science, 330 (6010),

Stochastic late accretion to Earth, the Moon, and Mars.
1527–1530.

Boulliung, J., F¨uri, E., Dalou, C., Tissandier, L., Zimmermann, L., & Marrocchi, Y.
(2020). Oxygen fugacity and melt composition controls on nitrogen solubility
in silicate melts. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 284 , 120–133.

Bradley, D. C.

(2008). Passive margins through Earth history. Earth-Science Re-

views, 91 (1-4), 1–26.

Busigny, V., & Bebout, G. E. (2013). Nitrogen in the silicate Earth: Speciation and

isotopic behavior during mineral–ﬂuid interactions. Elements, 9 (5), 353–358.

Busigny, V., Cartigny, P., & Philippot, P.

(2011). Nitrogen isotopes in ophiolitic

metagabbros: A re-evaluation of modern nitrogen ﬂuxes in subduction zones
and implication for the early Earth atmosphere. Geochimica et Cosmochimica
Acta, 75 (23), 7502–7521.

Cabral, R. A., Jackson, M. G., Rose-Koga, E. F., Koga, K. T., Whitehouse, M. J.,

Antonelli, M. A., . . . Hauri, E. H.
Anomalous sulphur isotopes in
plume lavas reveal deep mantle storage of Archaean crust. Nature, 496 (7446),
490–493.

(2013).

Cartigny, P., & Marty, B.

emergence of life and the atmosphere–crust–mantle connection.
9 (5), 359–366.

(2013). Nitrogen isotopes and mantle geodynamics: The
Elements,

Catling, D. C., & Zahnle, K. J. (2020). The Archean atmosphere. Science Advances,

–37–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

6 (9), eaax1420.

Chou, C.-L. (1978). Fractionation of siderophile elements in the Earth’s upper man-

tle. In Lunar and planetary science conference proceedings (Vol. 9).

Condie, K., Pisarevsky, S. A., Korenaga, J., & Gardoll, S.

Is the rate of su-
percontinent assembly changing with time? Precambrian Research, 259 , 278–
289.

(2015).

Dalou, C., F¨uri, E., Deligny, C., Piani, L., Caumon, M.-C., Laumonier, M., . . .

(2019).

Ed´en, M.
planetary core formation.
116 (29), 14485–14494.

Redox control on nitrogen isotope fractionation during
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,

Dalou, C., Hirschmann, M. M., von der Handt, A., Mosenfelder, J., & Armstrong,

L. S. (2017). Nitrogen and carbon fractionation during core–mantle diﬀerentia-
tion at shallow depth. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 458 , 141–151.

Dauphas, N.

(2017). The isotopic nature of the Earth’s accreting material through

time. Nature, 541 (7638), 521–524.

Dottin III, J., Labidi, J., Jackson, M., Woodhead, J., & Farquhar, J.

(2020).

Iso-

topic evidence for multiple recycled sulfur reservoirs in the Mangaia mantle
plume. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 21 (10), e2020GC009081.

Dziewonski, A. M., & Anderson, D. L.

(1981). Preliminary reference Earth model.

Physics of the Rarth and Planetary Interiors, 25 (4), 297–356.

D’Incecco, P., Filiberto, J., L´opez, I., Gorinov, D., Komatsu, G., Martynov, A., &

Pisarenko, P. (2021). The young volcanic rises on Venus: a key scientiﬁc target
for future orbital and in-situ measurements on Venus. Solar System Research,
55 (4), 315–323.

Fischer-G¨odde, M., Elfers, B.-M., M¨unker, C., Szilas, K., Maier, W. D., Messling,

N., . . . Smithies, H.
veneer mantle preserved in Archaean rocks. Nature, 579 (7798), 240–244.

(2020). Ruthenium isotope vestige of Earth’s pre-late-

Fischer-G¨odde, M., & Kleine, T.

(2017). Ruthenium isotopic evidence for an inner

Solar System origin of the late veneer. Nature, 541 (7638), 525–527.
Gaillard, F., Bernadou, F., Roskosz, M., Bouhifd, M. A., Marrocchi, Y., Iacono-

Marziano, G., . . . Rogerie, G.
degassing. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 577 , 117255.

(2022). Redox controls during magma ocean

Garvin, J., Buick, R., Anbar, A. D., Arnold, G. L., & Kaufman, A. J.

topic evidence for an aerobic nitrogen cycle in the latest Archean.
323 (5917), 1045–1048.

(2009).

Iso-
Science,

Goldblatt, C., Claire, M. W., Lenton, T. M., Matthews, A. J., Watson, A. J., &

Zahnle, K. J.
Nature Geoscience, 2 (12), 891–896.

(2009). Nitrogen-enhanced greenhouse warming on early Earth.

Grady, M. M., & Wright, I. P. (2003). Elemental and isotopic abundances of carbon

and nitrogen in meteorites. Space Science Reviews, 106 (1), 231–248.

Grewal, D. S., Dasgupta, R., Holmes, A. K., Costin, G., Li, Y., & Tsuno, K. (2019).
Geochimica et

The fate of nitrogen during core-mantle separation on Earth.
Cosmochimica Acta, 251 , 87–115.

Grewal, D. S., Dasgupta, R., Hough, T., & Farnell, A.

(2021). Rates of protoplane-
tary accretion and diﬀerentiation set nitrogen budget of rocky planets. Nature
Geoscience, 14 (6), 369–376.

Grott, M., Baratoux, D., Hauber, E., Sautter, V., Mustard, J., Gasnault, O., . . .

others (2013). Long-term evolution of the Martian crust-mantle system. Space
Science Reviews, 174 (1-4), 49–111.

Guo, M., & Korenaga, J. (2020). Argon constraints on the early growth of felsic con-

tinental crust. Science advances, 6 (21), eaaz6234.

Haendel, D., M¨uhle, K., Nitzsche, H.-M., Stiehl, G., & Wand, U.
variations of the ﬁxed nitrogen in metamorphic rocks.
mochimica Acta, 50 (5), 749–758.

(1986).
Isotopic
Geochimica et cos-

Halama, R., Bebout, G. E., John, T., & Scambelluri, M.

(2014). Nitrogen recycling

–38–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

in subducted mantle rocks and implications for the global nitrogen cycle.
ternational Journal of Earth Sciences, 103 (7), 2081–2099.

In-

Halliday, A. N. (2013). The origins of volatiles in the terrestrial planets. Geochimica

et Cosmochimica Acta, 105 , 146–171.

Hamano, K., Abe, Y., & Genda, H.

(2013). Emergence of two types of terrestrial

planet on solidiﬁcation of magma ocean. Nature, 497 (7451), 607–610.

Heber, V. S., Brooker, R. A., Kelley, S. P., & Wood, B. J. (2007). Crystal–melt par-

titioning of noble gases (helium, neon, argon, krypton, and xenon) for olivine
and clinopyroxene. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 71 (4), 1041–1061.
Hernlund, J., McNamara, A., & Schubert, G. (2015). 7.11: The core–mantle bound-

ary region. Treatise on geophysics, 2 (7), 461–519.

Hier-Majumder, S., & Hirschmann, M. M.

(2017).

The origin of volatiles in the

Earth’s mantle. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 18 (8), 3078–3092.

Hirschmann, M. M.

(2016). Constraints on the early delivery and fractionation of
American Mineralo-

earth’s major volatiles from C/H, C/N, and C/S ratios.
gist , 101 (3), 540–553.

Houlton, B., Morford, S., & Dahlgren, R.

(2018).

widespread rock nitrogen sources in Earth’s surface environment.
360 (6384), 58–62.

Convergent evidence for
Science,

Hu, R., & Diaz, H. D. (2019). Stability of nitrogen in planetary atmospheres in con-

tact with liquid water. The Astrophysical Journal , 886 (2), 126.

Iacono-Marziano, G., Paonita, A., Rizzo, A., Scaillet, B., & Gaillard, F.

(2010).
Noble gas solubilities in silicate melts: New experimental results and a compre-
hensive model of the eﬀects of liquid composition, temperature and pressure.
Chemical Geology, 279 (3-4), 145–157.

Johnson, B. W., & Goldblatt, C.

(2015). The nitrogen budget of Earth. Earth-

Science Reviews, 148 , 150–173.

Johnson, B. W., & Goldblatt, C.

(2017). A secular increase in continental crust ni-

trogen during the Precambrian. Geochemical Perspectives Letters, 4 , 24–28.

Johnson, B. W., & Goldblatt, C.

(2018).

EarthN: A new Earth system nitrogen

model. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 19 (8), 2516–2542.

Keller, B., & Schoene, B.

istry throughout Earth history.
290–304.

(2018). Plate tectonics and continental basaltic geochem-
Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 481 ,

Korenaga, J.

(2003).

Energetics of mantle convection and the fate of fossil heat.

Geophysical Research Letters, 30 (8).

Korenaga, J.

Korenaga, J.

(2013).

Initiation and evolution of plate tectonics on Earth: theories
and observations. Annual review of earth and planetary sciences, 41 , 117–151.
Crustal evolution and mantle dynamics through Earth his-
tory. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physi-
cal and Engineering Sciences, 376 (2132), 20170408.

(2018).

Krissansen-Totton, J., Fortney, J. J., & Nimmo, F.

(2021). Was Venus ever habit-

able? Constraints from a coupled interior–atmosphere–redox evolution model.
The Planetary Science Journal , 2 (5), 216.

Kuga, M., Carrasco, N., Marty, B., Marrocchi, Y., Bernard, S., Rigaudier, T., . . .

Tissandier, L.
of organic solid particles. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 393 , 2–13.
Kurokawa, H., Foriel, J., Laneuville, M., Houser, C., & Usui, T. (2018). Subduction

(2014). Nitrogen isotopic fractionation during abiotic synthesis

and atmospheric escape of Earth’s seawater constrained by hydrogen isotopes.
Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 497 , 149–160.

Kurokawa, H., Kurosawa, K., & Usui, T. (2018). A lower limit of atmospheric pres-
sure on early Mars inferred from nitrogen and argon isotopic compositions.
Icarus, 299 , 443–459.

Kurokawa, H., Miura, Y. N., Sugita, S., Cho, Y., Leblanc, F., Terada, N., & Nak-

agawa, H.

(2021). Mars’ atmospheric neon suggests volatile-rich primitive

–39–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

mantle. Icarus, 370 , 114685.

Labidi, J., Barry, P., Bekaert, D., Broadley, M., Marty, B., Giunta, T., . . . others

(2020).
nitrogen. Nature, 580 (7803), 367–371.

Hydrothermal 15N15N abundances constrain the origins of mantle

Labrosse, S., Hernlund, J., & Coltice, N. (2007). A crystallizing dense magma ocean

at the base of the Earth’s mantle. Nature, 450 (7171), 866–869.

Lammer, H., Leitzinger, M., Scherf, M., Odert, P., Burger, C., Kubyshkina, D., . . .

(2020). Constraining the early evolution of Venus and Earth through

others
atmospheric Ar, Ne isotope and bulk K/U ratios. Icarus, 339 , 113551.
Lammer, H., Scherf, M., Kurokawa, H., Ueno, Y., Burger, C., Maindl, T., . . . others
Loss and fractionation of noble gas isotopes and moderately volatile
Space

(2020).
elements from planetary embryos and early Venus, Earth and Mars.
Science Reviews, 216 (4), 1–50.

Laneuville, M., Kameya, M., & Cleaves, H. J. (2018). Earth without life: a systems

model of a global abiotic nitrogen cycle. Astrobiology, 18 (7), 897–914.

Li, L., Bebout, G. E., & Idleman, B. D.

(2007). Nitrogen concentration and δ15N

of altered oceanic crust obtained on ODP Legs 129 and 185: Insights into
alteration-related nitrogen enrichment and the nitrogen subduction budget.
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 71 (9), 2344–2360.

Libourel, G., Marty, B., & Humbert, F. (2003). Nitrogen solubility in basaltic melt.
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 67 (21),

Part I. eﬀect of oxygen fugacity.
4123–4135.

Lichtenegger, H., Lammer, H., Grießmeier, J.-M., Kulikov, Y. N., von Paris, P.,

Hausleitner, W., . . . Rauer, H.
levels during Earth’s Hadean epoch. Icarus, 210 (1), 1–7.

(2010). Aeronomical evidence for higher CO2

Lim, K. W., Bonati, I., & Hernlund, J. W.

A hybrid mechanism for en-
hanced core-mantle boundary chemical interaction. Geophysical Research Let-
ters, 48 (23), e2021GL094456.

(2021).

Lyons, T. W., Reinhard, C. T., & Planavsky, N. J.

(2014). The rise of oxygen in

Earth’s early ocean and atmosphere. Nature, 506 (7488), 307–315.

Mallik, A., Li, Y., & Wiedenbeck, M. (2018). Nitrogen evolution within the Earth’s
Earth

atmosphere–mantle system assessed by recycling in subduction zones.
and Planetary Science Letters, 482 , 556–566.

Marchi, S., Canup, R., & Walker, R.

(2018). Heterogeneous delivery of silicate and

metal to the Earth by large planetesimals. Nature geoscience, 11 (1), 77–81.
Marty, B. (1995). Nitrogen content of the mantle inferred from N2–Ar correlation in

oceanic basalts. Nature, 377 (6547), 326–329.

Marty, B., Altwegg, K., Balsiger, H., Bar-Nun, A., Bekaert, D. V., Berthelier, J.-J.,

. . . others (2017). Xenon isotopes in 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko show that
comets contributed to Earth’s atmosphere. Science, 356 (6342), 1069–1072.

Marty, B., Avice, G., Sano, Y., Altwegg, K., Balsiger, H., H¨assig, M., . . . Rubin, M.

(2016). Origins of volatile elements (H, C, N, noble gases) on Earth and Mars
Earth and
in light of recent results from the ROSETTA cometary mission.
Planetary Science Letters, 441 , 91–102.

Marty, B., Bekaert, D. V., Broadley, M. W., & Jaupart, C. (2019). Geochemical ev-
idence for high volatile ﬂuxes from the mantle at the end of the Archaean. Na-
ture, 575 (7783), 485–488.

Marty, B., & Dauphas, N.

(2003). The nitrogen record of crust–mantle interaction
and mantle convection from Archean to present. Earth and Planetary Science
Letters, 206 (3-4), 397–410.

Marty, B., Zimmermann, L., Pujol, M., Burgess, R., & Philippot, P.

(2013).

trogen isotopic composition and density of the Archean atmosphere.
342 (6154), 101–104.
McDonough, W. F., & Sun, S.-S.
Geology, 120 (3-4), 223–253.

(1995). The composition of the Earth. Chemical

Ni-
Science,

–40–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

Mikhail, S., & Sverjensky, D. A.

(2014). Nitrogen speciation in upper mantle ﬂuids
and the origin of Earth’s nitrogen-rich atmosphere. Nature Geoscience, 7 (11),
816–819.

Mitchell, E. C., Fischer, T. P., Hilton, D. R., Hauri, E. H., Shaw, A. M., de Moor,

J. M., . . . Kazahaya, K. (2010). Nitrogen sources and recycling at subduction
Geochemistry, Geophysics,
zones: Insights from the Izu-Bonin-Mariana arc.
Geosystems, 11 (2).

Monteux, J., Andrault, D., & Samuel, H. (2016). On the cooling of a deep terrestrial

magma ocean. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 448 , 140–149.

Moore, H.

(1977). The isotopic composition of ammonia, nitrogen dioxide and ni-

trate in the atmosphere. Atmospheric Environment , 11 (12), 1239–1243.

Navarro-Gonz´alez, R., McKay, C. P., & Mvondo, D. N.

(2001). A possible nitrogen
crisis for Archaean life due to reduced nitrogen ﬁxation by lightning. Nature,
412 (6842), 61–64.

Nicklas, R. W., Puchtel, I. S., & Ash, R. D.

(2018).

mantle: evidence from v partitioning in 3.5–2.4 ga komatiites.
Cosmochimica Acta, 222 , 447–466.

Redox state of the Archean
Geochimica et

Nicklas, R. W., Puchtel, I. S., Ash, R. D., Piccoli, P. M., Hanski, E., Nisbet, E. G.,

. . . Anbar, A. D.
Secular mantle oxidation across the Archean-
Proterozoic boundary: Evidence from V partitioning in komatiites and picrites.
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 250 , 49–75.

(2019).

Nikolaou, A., Katyal, N., Tosi, N., Godolt, M., Grenfell, J. L., & Rauer, H.

(2019).

What factors aﬀect the duration and outgassing of the terrestrial magma
ocean? The Astrophysical Journal , 875 (1), 11.

Ozima, M., & Podosek, F. A. (2002). Noble gas geochemistry. Cambridge University

Press.

Palot, M., Cartigny, P., Harris, J., Kaminsky, F., & Stachel, T.

(2012). Evidence

for deep mantle convection and primordial heterogeneity from nitrogen and
carbon stable isotopes in diamond. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 357 ,
179–193.

Parai, R., & Mukhopadhyay, S. (2018). Xenon isotopic constraints on the history of

volatile recycling into the mantle. Nature, 560 (7717), 223–227.
Pehrsson, S. J., Eglington, B. M., Evans, D. A., Huston, D., & Reddy, S. M.

(2016).

Metallogeny and its link to orogenic style during the nuna supercontinent
cycle. Geological Society, London, Special Publications, 424 (1), 83–94.

Pepin, R. O.

(1991). On the origin and early evolution of terrestrial planet atmo-

spheres and meteoritic volatiles. Icarus, 92 (1), 2–79.

Piani, L., Marrocchi, Y., Rigaudier, T., Vacher, L. G., Thomassin, D., & Marty,

(2020).

B.
enstatite chondrite meteorites. Science, 369 (6507), 1110–1113.

Earth’s water may have been inherited from material similar to

Pujol, M., Marty, B., & Burgess, R.

(2011).

archean rocks: A possible signature of the ancient atmosphere.
Planetary Science Letters, 308 (3-4), 298–306.

Chondritic-like xenon trapped in
Earth and

Pujol, M., Marty, B., Burgess, R., Turner, G., & Philippot, P. (2013). Argon isotopic
composition of Archaean atmosphere probes early Earth geodynamics. Nature,
498 (7452), 87–90.

Regier, M., Pearson, D., Stachel, T., Luth, R., Stern, R., & Harris, J.

(2020). The
lithospheric-to-lower-mantle carbon cycle recorded in superdeep diamonds. Na-
ture, 585 , 234-239. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2676-z

Rudnick, R., Gao, S., Holland, H., Turekian, K., et al.

(2003). Composition of the

continental crust. The Crust , 3 , 1–64.

Sakuraba, H., Kurokawa, H., & Genda, H.

(2019).

spheric erosion on Venus, Earth, and Mars during the late accretion.
317 , 48–58.

Impact degassing and atmo-
Icarus,

Sakuraba, H., Kurokawa, H., Genda, H., & Ohta, K.

(2021). Numerous chondritic

–41–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

impactors and oxidized magma ocean set Earth’s volatile depletion.
Reports, TBD , TBD.

Scientiﬁc

Salvador, A., Massol, H., Davaille, A., Marcq, E., Sarda, P., & Chasseﬁ`ere, E.

(2017). The relative inﬂuence of H2O and CO2 on the primitive surface condi-
tions and evolution of rocky planets. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets,
122 (7), 1458–1486.

Saxena, P., Killen, R. M., Airapetian, V., Petro, N. E., Curran, N. M., & Mandell,

A. M. (2019). Was the Sun a slow rotator? Sodium and potassium constraints
from the lunar regolith. The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 876 (1), L16.

Schaefer, L., & Fegley Jr, B.

(2017). Redox states of initial atmospheres outgassed

on rocky planets and planetesimals. The Astrophysical Journal , 843 (2), 120.

Schwieterman, E. W., Robinson, T. D., Meadows, V. S., Misra, A., & Domagal-

(2015). Detecting and constraining N2 abundances in planetary

Goldman, S.
atmospheres using collisional pairs. The Astrophysical Journal , 810 (1), 57.
Shen, Y., Pinti, D. L., & Hashizume, K. (2006). Biogeochemical cycles of sulfur and
nitrogen in the archean ocean and atmosphere. Archean Geodynamics and En-
vironments, 164 , 305–320.

Solomatov, V. (2015). Magma oceans and primordial mantle diﬀerentiation. In Trea-

tise on geophysics: Second edition (pp. 81–104).

Som, S. M., Buick, R., Hagadorn, J. W., Blake, T. S., Perreault, J. M., Harnmeijer,

J. P., & Catling, D. C.
strained to less than half of modern levels. Nature Geoscience, 9 (6), 448–451.

(2016). Earth’s air pressure 2.7 billion years ago con-

Som, S. M., Catling, D. C., Harnmeijer, J. P., Polivka, P. M., & Buick, R.

(2012).

Air density 2.7 billion years ago limited to less than twice modern levels by
fossil raindrop imprints. Nature, 484 (7394), 359–362.

Sossi, P. A., Burnham, A. D., Badro, J., Lanzirotti, A., Newville, M., & O’neill,

H. S. C. (2020). Redox state of Earth’s magma ocean and its Venus-like early
atmosphere. Science advances, 6 (48), eabd1387.

Speelmanns, I. M., Schmidt, M. W., & Liebske, C.

(2018). Nitrogen solubility in

core materials. Geophysical Research Letters, 45 (15), 7434–7443.

St¨ueken, E. E.

(2016). Nitrogen in ancient mud: a biosignature? Astrobiology,

16 (9), 730–735.

St¨ueken, E. E., Boocock, T., Szilas, K., Mikhail, S., & Gardiner, N. J.

(2021). Re-
constructing nitrogen sources to Earth’s earliest biosphere at 3.7 ga. Frontiers
in Earth Science, 9 , 286.

St¨ueken, E. E., Buick, R., Guy, B. M., & Koehler, M. C.

Isotopic evidence
for biological nitrogen ﬁxation by molybdenum-nitrogenase from 3.2 Gyr. Na-
ture, 520 (7549), 666–669.

(2015).

St¨ueken, E. E., Kipp, M. A., Koehler, M. C., & Buick, R.

(2016). The evolution of

Earth’s biogeochemical nitrogen cycle. Earth-Science Reviews, 160 , 220–239.

St¨ueken, E. E., Kipp, M. A., Koehler, M. C., Schwieterman, E. W., Johnson, B.,

(2016).

& Buick, R.
for planetary climates and atmospheric biosignatures.
949–963.

Modeling pN2 through geological time: Implications
Astrobiology, 16 (12),

Tian, F., Kasting, J. F., Liu, H.-L., & Roble, R. G.

(2008). Hydrodynamic plane-
tary thermosphere model: 1. Response of the Earth’s thermosphere to extreme
Journal of
solar EUV conditions and the signiﬁcance of adiabatic cooling.
Geophysical Research: Planets, 113 , E05008.

Tolstikhin, I., & Marty, B. (1998). The evolution of terrestrial volatiles: a view from
helium, neon, argon and nitrogen isotope modelling. Chemical Geology, 147 (1-
2), 27–52.

Tu, L., Johnstone, C. P., G¨udel, M., & Lammer, H. (2015). The extreme ultraviolet
and X-ray Sun in time: high-energy evolutionary tracks of a solar-like star. As-
tronomy & Astrophysics, 577 , L3.

Turbet, M., Bolmont, E., Chaverot, G., Ehrenreich, D., Leconte, J., & Marcq, E.

–42–

manuscript submitted to Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems

(2021).
on Earth. Nature, 598 (7880), 276–280.

Day–night cloud asymmetry prevents early oceans on Venus but not

Vladilo, G., Murante, G., Silva, L., Provenzale, A., Ferri, G., & Ragazzini, G.

(2013).
mospheric pressure. The Astrophysical Journal , 767 (1), 65.

The habitable zone of earth-like planets with diﬀerent levels of at-

Watson, A. J., Donahue, T. M., & Walker, J. C.

(1981). The dynamics of a rapidly

escaping atmosphere: Applications to the evolution of Earth and Venus.
Icarus, 48 , 150-166.
Way, M. J., & Del Genio, A. D.

Venusian habitable climate scenarios:

(2020).

Modeling Venus through time and applications to slowly rotating Venus-like
exoplanets. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 125 (5), e2019JE006276.

Weiss, M. C., Sousa, F. L., Mrnjavac, N., Neukirchen, S., Roettger, M., Nelson-
(2016).

Sathi, S., & Martin, W. F.
universal common ancestor. Nature microbiology, 1 (9), 1–8.

The physiology and habitat of the last

Wordsworth, R. (2016). Atmospheric nitrogen evolution on Earth and Venus. Earth

and Planetary Science Letters, 447 , 103–111.

Wordsworth, R., & Pierrehumbert, R.

(2014).

spheres on terrestrial habitable zone planets.
ters, 785 (2), L20.

Abiotic oxygen-dominated atmo-
The Astrophysical Journal Let-

Worsham, E. A., & Kleine, T. (2021). Late accretionary history of Earth and Moon

preserved in lunar impactites. Science Advances, 7 (44), eabh2837.

Yoshioka, T., Wiedenbeck, M., Shcheka, S., & Keppler, H.

(2018). Nitrogen solu-
bility in the deep mantle and the origin of Earth’s primordial nitrogen budget.
Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 488 , 134–143.

Zahnle, K. J., Gacesa, M., & Catling, D. C.

Strange messenger: A new
history of hydrogen on Earth, as told by Xenon. Geochimica et Cosmochimica
Acta, 244 , 56–85.
Zahnle, K. J., & Kasting, J. F.

(1986). Mass fractionation during transonic escape
Icarus, 68 (3), 462–

and implications for loss of water from Mars and Venus.
480.

(2019).

Zerkle, A. L.

(2018). Biogeodynamics: bridging the gap between surface and deep
Earth processes. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathemat-
ical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376 (2132), 20170401.

Zerkle, A. L., & Mikhail, S. (2017). The geobiological nitrogen cycle: From microbes

to the mantle. Geobiology, 15 (3), 343–352.

–43–

