Updating Industrial Robots for
Emerging Technologies

David Puljiz1, Björn Hein1,2
1 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, david.puljiz@kit.edu
2 Karlsruhe University of Applied Sciences, bjoern.hein@kit.edu

through

smartphones.

In this paper, we shall

Industrial arms need to evolve beyond their
standard shape to embrace new and emerging
first
technologies.
perform an analysis of
four popular but
different modern industrial robot arms. By
try to
seeing the common trends we’ll
extrapolate and expand these trends for the
future. Here, particular
focus will be on
interaction based on augmented reality (AR)
through head-mounted displays (HMD), but
also
Long-term
human-robot interaction and personalization of
said interaction will also be considered. The
interaction has
use of AR in human-robot
proven
and
information exchange. A basic addition to
industrial arm design would be the integration
of QR markers on the robot, both for accessing
information and adding tracking capabilities to
more easily display AR overlays. In a recent
example of information access, Mercedes Benz
added QR markers on their cars to help rescue
workers estimate the best places to cut and
evacuate people after car crashes. One has

communication

enhance

to

also to deal with safety in an environment that
will be more and more about collaboration. The
QR markers can therefore be combined with
RF-based ranging modules, developed in the
EU-project SafeLog, that can be used both for
tracking of human
safety as well as for
positions while in close proximity interactions
with the industrial arms. The industrial arms of
the future should also be intuitive to program
and interact with. This would be achieved
through AR and head mounted displays as well
as the already mentioned RF-based person
tracking.
personalized
interaction between the robots and humans
can be achieved through life-long learning AI
and disembodied, personalized agents. We
propose a design that not only exists in the
physical world, but also partly in the digital
world of mixed reality.

a more

Finally,

Introduction

In particular

Industrial robot design needs to evolve with
the changing technological and social landscape. In
particular,
the design of industrial arms has barely
changed since their first introduction more than 65
years ago. The relatively recent development of
collaborative robots being the only exception to this
rule. The current drive is for more collaborative robots
integrating new safety technology and design rules into
industrial arms.
the introduction of
joint-torque sensors for safety but also for enabling
more intuitive programming through hand guidance.
Other technologies such as touch sensitive and soft
skins have also been introduced. Finally, due to the
ever-increasing proximity of the interaction between
humans and robots, industrial arms are required to
appear friendlier and safer. However, as trends for
better safety sensors, more intuitive programming,
human robot collaboration and indeed miniaturization
there is no drive to go beyond the
continue,
well-established designs and technologies. For the
authors, perhaps the most exciting and important

emerging technology is the Head-Mounted Display
(HMD) and in parallel to it Augmented Reality (AR).
Both of
these can be used to greatly improve
interaction, programming and safety in human-robot
interactions (HRI), due to more intuitive information
display,
localization and mapping capabilities, head
tracking, and other useful sensors. The use of AR also
allows us to put part of the design into the virtual
world, visible through the use of HMDs but also
through smartphones.

Analysis of Current Designs

We shall compare the design elements of four
different industrial arms. One of which (Kuka KR50)
inherently
is a standard industrial robot arm not
designed for collaboration. The other
three are
collaborative robots (Baxter, FANUC CR-35iA and
the UR-16e). The design features that were evaluated
were taken from the technical specifications and
In Fig. 1 we have detailed the
online material.
common design elements as well as the peculiarities of
each robot. In Table 1 we list the design features of
each model alongside the desired effects. One can
immediately see that the Kuka KR50 arm was built
with efficiency in mind and not intended for proximal
HRI, at least not without heavy modification. There
are no features to ease programming and no in-built
safety features to protect a human coworker. On the
other hand, such arms are efficient and have higher
payloads than comparable collaborative robots. The
joint-torque
collaborative robots all have in-built
sensors. These sensors can be used to detect collisions
and limit the force of impact, ensuring the safety of the
human coworker. Additionally, they can be used to
program the arm through hand guidance, also called
lead-through programming. The robot arm can be
programmed by simply grabbing the robot arm and
showing it the trajectory to perform. Hand guidance
can also be used to intervene mid-execution to adapt
on the fly. Collaborative robots are designed to be less
intimidating and more "friendly". For example the

Robot Model

Design Features Effects

KR50

Baxter

CR-35iA

UR-16e

50 kg high
dynamic carry
weight

Mechanically
efficient, large
carry weight

2.2 kg carry
weight,
joint-torque
sensors for
safety in HRI,
screen with
default friendly
face

35 kg carry
weight,
Joint-torque
sensor in base
and rubber skin
for safety in
HRI

16 kg carry
weight,
Joint-torque
sensors in every
joint for safety.
Sensors also
enable better
force control

Safe for HRI,
positive
psychological
effect, better
force control,
easier
programming
through
lead-through
method

Safe for HRI,
positive
psychological
effect

Safe for HRI,
better force
control, easier
programming
through
lead-through
method

Table 1. Design features of different industrial arm
models and relevant effects

Baxter robot

incorporates a screen with a
friendly digital face, while the CR-35iA, although
quite imposing, has a rubber exterior as an additional
layer of protection. The CR-35iA only possesses a
force sensor in the base, meaning that an additional
module is needed for hand guidance. It can also lift up

for

future industrial manipulators,

to 35kg, making it comparable to standard industrial
arms. As we envision human-robot collaboration to be
paramount
the
design elements of the collaborative robots must be
adopted. Many of the more complex elements of such
designs, such as the rubber skin, joint-torque sensors,
the "friendliness" and programming through hand
guidance may be replaced through the use of HMDs,
AR and RF safety sensors.

Proposed future design

The proposed new design combines all of the
elements discussed in the previous section into a single
streamlined robot. The design can be seen in Fig. 2. The
basis of the industrial arm would be the standard,
industrial robot design similar to the Kuka
efficient
KR50. To achieve functional safety, RF modules would
be installed on the surface of the robot, at least two for
each link, as well as carried by the human, as watches
on the wrist and in the form of a vest for the body. The
sensors were developed for functional safety in mind
for the project SafeLog by the partners at Končar and
UNIZG-FER. The working principle of these sensors is
outlined in [1]. In this scenario they would stop the
robot arm if any part gets too close to the human as well
as provide distances between the human-worn sensors
and the sensors mounted on the robot arm. This would
cover all of the safety features of the current designs
while also allowing the robot to know exactly where the
human is.

Adding QR markers on the RF nodes may be
used to gain information about the robot system and
troubleshoot problems on the fly. The QR markers can
also be used for tracking and displaying AR information
through the use of HMDs. To note is that any QR
marker on a fast-moving link of the manipulator will
suffer from motion blur when captured through the
HMD's camera, rendering it unusable for tracking. This
is mitigated by the redundancy of the markers and the
markers on the robot base itself that always provide a
baseline.

Figure 1. Design analysis of common industrial robot arms - (from left to right) Kuka KR-50, Universal Robotics’ UR-16e, FANUC CR-35iA, Rethink Robotics’ Baxter

Figure 2. Proposed design of future industrial robot arms including RF distance modules with QR markers, AR interaction and virtual avatars. Note the darker colors

may also choose a distinct avatar and “personality” for
each robot coworker.

CONCLUSION

We strongly believe that emerging technologies
will have a strong influence on how we perceive and
interact with robots. In this paper we applied some
emerging technologies on the relatively outdated area of
industrial robot arms. We have shown how all of the
current trends can be kept and also expanded through the
use of RF-based safety ranging, HMDs, AR interaction
and smart, customizable avatars. We presented a design
that not only exists in hardware and the physical world,
but also to a great extent in the digital and mixed reality.

REFERENCES

1. Branimir Ivsic, Juraj Bartolic, Zvonimir Sipus, and Josip

Babic. "Uwb propagation characteristics of human-to-robot
communication in automated collaborative warehouse." In
2020 IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and
Propagation and North American Radio Science Meeting,
pp. 1125-1126. IEEE, 2020. DOI:
10.1109/IEEECONF35879.2020.9330058.

2. David Puljiz, Erik Stöhr, Katharina S. Riesterer, Björn
Hein, and Torsten Kröger. "General Hand Guidance
Framework using Microsoft HoloLens." In 2019
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), pp. 5185-5190. IEEE, 2019. DOI:
10.1109/IROS40897.2019.8967649.
Puljiz, D., Krebs, F., Bosing, F. and Hein, B., 2020, May.
What the hololens maps is your workspace: Fast mapping
and set-up of robot cells via head mounted displays and
augmented reality. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) (pp.
11445-11451). IEEE.  DOI:
10.1109/IROS45743.2020.9340879.

3.

the RF modules,

Through the use of

the
localization and hand tracking capabilities of the HMD,
one can recreate the hand-guidance programming of
collaborative robots quite effectively, as was shown in
[2]. In addition, novel methods of programming, such as
adding holographic waypoints, or being able to track
programming tools through the HMD open up a vast
array of intuitive programming methods not available to
current systems. The HMD can also be used to map the
environment of the industrial arm, making set-up fast
and easy, as illustrated by our work [3].

The arm, unlike most current designs, would be
black. The color black in particular is quite appropriate
for HMDS, as they add light but cannot subtract it and,
therefore, have problems with overlaying AR information
on top of bright surfaces. On the other hand, if one
considers the use of infrared depth sensors for spatial
mapping, the black color proves to be a hindrance as the
depth sensors prefer reflective surfaces. A surprising
benefit of the manipulator being “invisible” to depth
sensors is when it comes to workspace mapping. To get a
usable map however, the robot itself needs to be removed
from the map which is a relatively costly process. An
this
invisible
computationally expensive step.

robot would remove

the need for

each

human

Finally,

the personalization and friendliness
aspect would be handled by customizable AR avatars.
their own avatar. This avatar
Each person can select
would not only be visual, but would also have
intelligence, similar to Alexa or Google Assistant. The
virtual avatars would learn preferences and personalities
of
novel
coworker
methodologies of lifelong learning and long-term HRI
concepts. They could also be endowed with their own
personalities (sarcastic, happy, shy etc.). We believe that
the inclusion of such avatars would enhance the trust in
human-robot teams and the safety the human coworker
feels while working with the
companion.
Furthermore, as the avatars are immaterial, as they are
based on AR, they can be carried along and projected to
any robot the human might be working with. The human

through

robot

the

