2
2
0
2

r
p
A
1
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
2
8
9
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Understanding AR Activism: An Interview Study with Creators
of Augmented Reality Experiences for Social Change
Rafael M.L. Silva
Erica Principe Cruz
Daniela K. Rosner
University of Washington
Carnegie Mellon University
University of Washington
Seattle, WA, USA
Pittsburgh, PA, United States
Seattle, WA, USA
rafaelsi@uw.edu
ecruz@cs.cmu.edu
dkrosner@uw.edu

Dayton Kelly
University of Washington
Seattle, WA, USA
bydkelly@gmail.com

Andrés Monroy-Hernández
Snap Inc. & Princeton University
Princeton, NJ, USA
andresmh@princeton.edu

Fannie Liu
Snap Inc.
New York, NY, USA
fannie@snap.com

ABSTRACT
The rise of consumer augmented reality (AR) technology has opened
up new possibilities for interventions intended to disrupt and sub-
vert cultural conventions. From defacing corporate logos to erecting
geofenced digital monuments, more and more people are creating
AR experiences for social causes. We sought to understand this
new form of activism, including why people use AR for these pur-
poses, opportunities and challenges in using it, and how well it can
support activist goals. We conducted semi-structured interviews
with twenty people involved in projects that used AR for a social
cause across six different countries. We found that AR can over-
come physical world limitations of activism to convey immersive,
multilayered narratives that aim to reveal invisible histories and
perspectives. At the same time, people experienced challenges in
creating, maintaining, and distributing their AR experiences to au-
diences. We discuss open questions and opportunities for creating
AR tools and experiences for social change.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI;
Empirical studies in collaborative and social computing.

KEYWORDS
augmented reality, activism, social change

ACM Reference Format:
Rafael M.L. Silva, Erica Principe Cruz, Daniela K. Rosner, Dayton Kelly, An-
drés Monroy-Hernández, and Fannie Liu. 2022. Understanding AR Activism:
An Interview Study with Creators of Augmented Reality Experiences for
Social Change. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’22), April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3517605

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9157-3/22/04.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3517605

1 INTRODUCTION
Augmented Reality (AR) has followed an adoption pattern that re-
sembles prior technologies, i.e., moving from the lab to the home,
and onto the public realm. Most of today’s information technolo-
gies were first embraced by scientists, then consumers and activists.
For example, the internet and the web were initially conceived and
adopted by scientists at DARPA and CERN, respectively. Decades
later, ordinary people embraced these technologies for work, school,
and social life. Upon reaching mass adoption, activists used them to
spread political opinions and help mobilize protests, among other
activities. Scholars describing this pattern of technological adoption
have argued that everyday uses of technology are prerequisites to
its use for activism. For example, Zuckerman [67] posited that mun-
dane online activities, such as posting photos of cute cats on the web,
help people gain fluency with the medium and subsequently enable
them to use it for activism. Furthermore, they argued that these
pervasive uses make censorship a politically harder calculation for
authoritarian regimes.

Although still in early stages, AR has, too, grown into a platform
for activism. Nearly half a century after Sutherland’s 1968 AR pro-
totypes [58], AR has become widely adopted through consumer
applications like Snapchat’s “filters” and location-based games like
Pokémon Go. More recently, AR creators have begun using the tech-
nology for activism. For example, the “Whole Story” project (Figure
1A) created a GPS-enabled app that activates AR monuments of
influential women at historical locations to address gender gap
representation [50]. Similarly, the “Hack de Patria” project (Figure
1B) exposed attempts to defraud voting ballots and overlaid subver-
sive messages over the political propaganda of the Maduro regime
during the 2015 Venezuelan elections [51].

AR is particularly interesting for “activist tech” research because
the technology’s core features are uniquely aligned with key activist
practices. For instance, AR creators and activists are motivated by
a desire to change the world and help people see it in new ways.
Activists aim to alter the physical world and people’s perceptions of
it according to a social cause. Similarly, AR creators change the way
people perceive the world by augmenting what people see and hear.
Furthermore, activists are often tightly connected with the places
and physical things that relate to their causes. AR experiences are
likewise tightly coupled to the physical world because they rely on
the environment’s physical attributes to detect and augment objects,
surfaces, and even plants, animals, and humans. Additionally, unlike

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Silva, et al.

Figure 1: Examples of AR Activism projects: (A) Viewfinder of “Whole Story” app featuring a person standing between physical
and virtual AR statues that highlight gaps in gender representation, (B) “Hack de Patria” project augmenting voting ballots to
expose attempts to mislead voters, and (C) “SweetgrassAR” augmenting a symbolic sculpture with stories about Indigenous
knowledge.

other digital technologies, like social media or virtual reality, AR
moves away from the illusion of digital dualism [30], i.e., the idea
that the online world is somehow separate from the “real world.” AR
breaks that dualism and deeply builds on the interconnectedness
of the physical and digital world. In AR, Barlow’s declaration of
independence for “cyberspace” becomes a fight for independence
in the physical world itself, often a core goal of activists [4].

At the same time, we know little about AR activism, including
what influences people’s decisions to use the technology for social
change, opportunities and challenges in their subsequent experi-
ences, and their ability to achieve their activist goals. To answer
these questions, we conducted 60-minute interviews with twenty
people who participated in AR activism projects (with project start
dates ranging from 2009-2021), based in six different countries. Our
qualitative analysis of these interviews elicited the following key
insights: (1) participants’ decisions to use AR is driven by the
possibility to create rich multilayered narratives, where they
perceived lower technical barriers and physical risks to con-
vey those narratives in the physical world. At the same time, their
decisions were sometimes stymied by uncertainties around short-
and long-term legal and ethical consequences. Furthermore, (2)
participants identified immersion as a central means of changing
people’s perceptions and reshaping the world due to its potential
for embodied storytelling, and interdisciplinary collaboration
as key to achieving high quality immersive experiences. On the
other hand, the AR platforms and collaborations needed to cre-
ate those experiences can come with their own challenges around

resource management and expertise. Lastly, (3) we found that par-
ticipants’ perceptions of AR’s impact on their projects involved
eliciting a strong emotional and physical reaction among their
audiences. However, they struggled to get a broader reach due to
challenges with the distribution and adoption of the technology.

We conclude with a set of open questions and opportunities
around supporting multidisciplinary teams and communities for
AR activism content creation, expanding activist-control by attend-
ing to maintenance and proprietary decision-making, addressing
concerns around broader issues of discoverability and account-
ability in AR, and realizing radical transformations that support
minoritarian groups.

2 RELATED WORK
To set the stage for our study of AR activism and its creators, we
turn to the variety of work on social and civic change that people
enact with and around immersive technology. This scholarship
and practice involves two central bodies of work: (1) digital design
practices for activism, (2) AR-specific social and organizational
change. We review these areas in the sections that follow and outline
core questions they raise for our analysis.

2.1 Design and Digital Activism
Understanding activism and immersive technology involves com-
prehending the specific speculative practices and planning through

ABCUnderstanding AR Activism

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

which people engage with notions of social or political transfor-
mation, a topic commonly termed design activism [17]. Design
activism encompasses a diverse body of work at the intersection
of urban studies, social movement theory, and critical design stud-
ies [35, 40, 65]. To date, this scholarship has examined a range of
phenomena around the conditions for organizing social and politi-
cal change, including the influence of “counternarrative” [20], the
design-specific contours of community organizing [60, 61, 63], and
the importance of communal accountability and care [9, 17]. One
crucial facet of this work concerns the specific forms of intervention
that rely on digital platforms and services. Reviewing this literature,
George and Leidner define digital activism as “digitally mediated
social activism,” where social activism includes “taking action to
create social change.” According to this growing body of scholar-
ship, people engage in a range of digital activist actions at different
levels of engagement. For example, “clicktivism” at the lowest level
includes “liking” a social media post, while “hacktivism” at the
highest “gladiatorial” level involves hacking for a social/political
goal [21].

Social media, such as Twitter and Facebook, are perhaps the most
explored digital media for activism. While George and Leidner sug-
gest that social media can be used at all levels of engagement [21], a
number of HCI researchers have highlighted their ability to coordi-
nate and broadcast messages. By quickly disseminating information
to a large number of people, social media can help raise awareness,
spark discussion, and organize both online and offline movements
around violence [43], corruption [62], accessibility [37], racial in-
equality [11], economic inequality [22], sexual harassment [13],
and more. For marginalized groups in particular, it can play an im-
portant role in democratizing their voices and increasing feelings
of empowerment around their identities [13, 37, 38].

At the same time, several scholars have questioned the impact of
digital activism, especially at the lowest level of “clicktivism.” Such
online actions have been criticized as “slacktivism” for being low-
cost, low-risk, and done in order to feel good despite little to no real-
world effects [44]. Others describe its main purpose as lowering the
barrier for coordination, with primary activist actions happening
in the physical world, such as protests [5, 29]. While recent work
suggests that even low-level actions can lead to or correlate with
real-world impact [36, 42], physically “putting your body on the
line” is still considered highly meaningful among activists [37].

“Hybrid activism” is an emerging form of activism that blends
online and offline action [37, 42]. This activity can include using
online tools to support offline action (e.g., coordinating a protest
on social media) as well as synchronous online and offline action
(e.g., attending a protest through telepresence [37]). Recent activist
actions suggest the emergence of another style of hybrid activism:
using digital media in the physical world for social change, rather
than the two existing separately. For example, recent HCI research
has investigated Internet of Things devices, which equip physi-
cal spaces with sensor technologies, and location-based mobile
technologies for menstrual resource accessibility [18], civic engage-
ment [48, 52], public expression [34], and sustainability [14, 31, 33].
In this work, we explore augmented reality as another such ubiq-
uitous technology, which introduces the layering of digital media
onto physical spaces as a new affordance to hybrid activism. By in-
vestigating people’s decisions and experiences around AR activism,

we seek to understand how this new kind of activism fits into the
broader activism hierarchy.

2.2 Augmented Reality: Digital Activism in the

Physical World

For purposes of this paper, we define AR as a technology that
embeds digital information, such as virtual images and audio, in
physical environments. AR has evolved over the years to become a
widespread consumer technology, with popular mobile phones now
featuring AR capabilities [55]. The wide reach of AR has opened
up possibilities for a range of applications, including AR for educa-
tion [64], collaboration [24, 49], health [3, 45], and, perhaps most
commonly, entertainment [47].

More recently, AR has shown potential for contributing to broad
cultural shifts. In addition to individual groups that focus on direct
action, incubators and collectives offer fundraising, technical sup-
port, and mentorship directed at AR-led structural interventions
(such as overturning physical monuments) [15, 16, 19]. Skwarek sug-
gests that AR can provide an accessible, low-cost yet high-impact
way to achieve activist goals – particularly, spreading messages and
sparking conversation around a relevant physical location or object.
For example, #arOCCUPYWALLSTREET was a global protest at
the New York Stock Exchange and Wall Street area. Since physical
protests were prohibited, activists held tablets using an AR appli-
cation to overlay the area with images and audio submitted from
global protesters. AR on relatively inexpensive devices thus helped
to lower the (literal) physical barrier of protesting, while opening
global participation for those limited by travel costs. In addition
to protests, AR has been used to “hack” buildings, corporate logos,
monuments, nature, and more with subversive messages [53, 57].
AR’s immersive quality could also benefit activism. People can
use AR to tell stories in more expressive ways, transporting audi-
ences into a new reality defined by the creator. Immersive story-
telling in mixed reality more broadly can arouse strong emotional
reactions, including for those with whom people typically struggle
to empathize [27, 32]. AR, being physically tied to the real-world,
could build on these aspects by using stories to intervene on and at
specific objects and places. In particular, recent work suggests the
potential for AR to support placemaking, i.e., the planning, design,
and management of public spaces. For example, Sweetgrass AR
(Figure 1C) is a place-based experience where college students and
Indigenous knowledge keepers collaborated to create experiences
that educate the settler population about the relationship between
Indigenous and the colonized land. At specific locations of interest,
they augment granite sculptures that carry strong symbolism to
tell stories about Canada’s Saddle Lake Cree Nation [41]. Through
overlaid digital content, citizens, especially those from marginalized
groups, have a venue to voice their opinions, discuss and critique
decisions, and even reclaim their identities and histories connected
to specific places [2, 16, 23, 54].

Despite the potential promise of AR activism, we still have a lim-
ited understanding of how people are actually using AR for activism.
What drives people to use AR for activism, and what are their subse-
quent experiences? To what extent do AR creators feel they are able
to achieve their activism goals? As AR is an increasingly ubiquitous

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Silva, et al.

and evolving technology, we must understand both the opportuni-
ties and challenges of using AR for social change. To this end, we
conducted an interview study with people who have created AR
experiences for activism in order to explore the following research
questions:

RQ1: Why do creators use AR for activism?
RQ2: What characteristics of AR do creators find con-
ducive or detrimental to activism?
RQ3: What role does AR play in achieving creator’s
goals?

3 METHODS
3.1 Pilot Study
To ground our interview guide, we ran a pilot interview study with
an initial set of eight activists who use AR and AR-adjacent tech-
nology such as VR. Focusing on U.S.-based creators, the pilot study
examined people’s motivations and understandings of AR platforms
across varied sites of public engagement, from a celebration of a
historical march to community-based youth education initiatives
in a historically Black neighborhood.

Across creators’ reflections on their varied contexts, AR technol-
ogy emerged as a tool with the potential to raise awareness and
spark radical engagements with everyday life. A Chicago-based
artist spoke of the contrast between reading the news about gun
violence and “making it real, truly real” through AR: “the fact that,
my God, I am on the street right now. And there are young people
who are on the street and they’re thinking about, you know, what
might happen to my life [now that] I lost my friend the other day on
the streets.” A Seattle-based artist emphasized the capacity for AR to
make the impossible possible, a process with profound implications
for Black people in a world rife with anti-Black racism. She created
an installation that swapped the sky and the ground for Black and
queer participants, looking to AR’s potential for stretching physical
limitations and visualizing aspects of our world that seem un-fungible:
“the Black community could imagine itself out of the limitations of
our physical reality . . . it’s a radical imagination or reimagining of
blackness and present that does not even imagine us to be here.”
Ultimately the interviewees viewed AR as a tool for prototyping the
realities they wanted to build together, and less as a solution to societal
problems. “Technology is not a savior in this situation,” an intervie-
wee explained. “I don’t think it’s technology that makes a difference,
I think that it’s community that does. And [AR] technology can be
used to build community.”

Based on these responses, we refined our interview guide to dig
deeper into people’s reflection on their experiences creating with
AR technology. In particular, we focused on their hopes, expecta-
tions, and perceived outcomes for what they could accomplish with
it, and the trade-offs they faced while using particular platforms.
We also used the pilot to explore possible limitations to remote
interviews during the pandemic and to inform any shifts in our
recruitment approach, such as focusing more specifically on AR
creators. We describe the subsequent participants and interview
study protocol in the sections that follow.

3.2 Participants
We recruited participants involved in projects that created AR ex-
periences for activism, based on the definitions of “AR” and “social
activism” stated in the previous section. We initially found par-
ticipants through a web search for relevant projects (e.g., using
keywords such as “augmented reality activism”) and referral from
other participants. We aimed to include a wide variety of partici-
pants who engaged in activism projects that ranged across location,
scale, and purpose. Of the 48 people we contacted, 20 people living
across six countries agreed to an interview. These 20 participants
worked on projects for a range of social causes, such as addressing
institutional racism, environmental justice, and more, with some
projects initiated as early as 2009. Our participants are summarized
in Table 1.

3.3 Procedure
We conducted 60-minute semi-structured interviews with partic-
ipants over Google Meet. All participants were interviewed indi-
vidually, with the exception of P1 and P2, who had jointly worked
on a project and asked to be interviewed together. Building on
our pilot study, our interview protocol included questions about
their work background, their understanding of AR activism, their
rationale for using AR, the influence of AR on their project, and
their broader experiences with AR. In exchange for their time, we
offered participants a $50 gift card or a $50 donation to a non-profit
organization1.

3.4 Analysis
We analyzed transcripts of the interview audio files using an in-
ductive analysis approach [59]. We used the ATLAS.ti qualitative
analysis software to code the transcripts. We first generated in-
ductive codes using a subset of transcripts, looking for similarities
across participants’ experiences and labeling the ideas that emerged
(e.g., “making the invisible visible”). We conducted three rounds of
open coding on three transcripts each. We created a codebook from
the generated open codes, focusing on codes that were prominent
across interview transcripts and relevant to our research questions.
Two independent coders validated this resulting codebook on an-
other subset of transcripts, discussing any disagreements to ensure
high inter-rater reliability. After achieving Krippendorff’s 𝛼 above
0.8, the two coders divided and coded the rest of the transcripts. We
then grouped similar codes together to form higher level categories,
which we further discussed and refined to identify cross-cutting
themes around perceptions and use of AR activism. Throughout
this process, we revisited the interview transcripts when necessary
to clarify codes. We organize these themes in the following section
according to our research questions around people’s decisions to
use AR for activism, the characteristics of AR activism, and the
impact of AR activism.

1Participants chose between the American Civil Liberties Union, Habitat for Humanity,
and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People Legal Defense
and Educational Fund

Understanding AR Activism

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Table 1: Participant Table

Participant Project Goal

Augmentation

Country

P1 & P2
P3

P4
P5
P6

P7
P8
P9

P10

P11

P12

P13

P14
P15
P16

P17

P18

P19

P20

Combat political corruption
Expose unethical art donation
sources
Promote free speech
Satirize US foreign relations
Pro-democracy

Counter political misinformation
Sexual violence prevention
Art democratization

Spotlight Asian American identity

Address institutional racism

Promote diversity

Celebrate women of color

Black history awareness
Indigenous culture awareness
Celebrate women of color

Environmental justice and aware-
ness for marginalized groups

Celebrate women of color

Black history awareness

Black history awareness

Overlays text on political campaign advertisements
Overlays textual data, audio, and video stories on museum art USA

Germany

USA
Netherlands

USA

USA

USA
China
USA

Displays cloud-shaped political text in the sky
Distorts the visual appearance of US dollar bills
Juxtaposes historical news images and videos in an art instal-
lation
Overlays textual facts and data on political campaign banners Germany
Overlays text and audio on a physical memorial
Overlays digital guerilla art over physical paintings in a mu-
seum
Overlays digital version of a cultural painting over an iconic
location
Displays holographic historic images and objects at specific
landmarks as part of a tour
Overlays interactive narrative text and animations on one’s sur-
roundings as part an educational game; displays holographic
statues at specific locations
Displays an artistic holographic monument consisting of im-
ages, audio, and animations at a specific location
Overlays videos over specific landmarks as part of a tour
Overlays videos on cultural sculptures to tell stories
Displays artistic holographic monument featuring visual de-
sign and audio at a specific location
Displays holographic objects and avatars in one’s surroundings,
with which one must physically interact as part of a narrative
game
Displays a holographic avatar narrating historical stories at
specific locations
Displays educational holographic sculptures in one’s surround-
ings
Displays holographic avatar guiding a scavenger hunt and city
tour

USA
Canada
USA

USA

USA

USA

USA

USA

UK

4 RESULTS
4.1 Why do creators use AR for activism?
We wanted to understand the factors that influenced participants’
decisions to use AR for their projects. These factors included prior
AR-relevant experience and the perception that AR content is more
engaging and safer to deploy, given today’s undefined legal and ma-
terial constraints. At the same time, participants expressed concerns
around the potential for future legal or ethical repercussions.

4.1.1 Prior AR-relevant experience. Fourteen of our participants
shared that their paths to using AR for activism projects included
their prior experience with AR and/or development of AR-relevant
skills such as programming, design, and storytelling. P3, a profes-
sor of design and computing, outlined their path to using AR for
activism through developing myriad relevant skills:

“My current work explores . . . a lot with AR [and]
experimentation and challenging technocratic
power through . . . creative experimentation and
hacking. I come, really, to AR from starting with

exploring things like cryptography, steganogra-
phy, obfuscation . . . which lead to looking at mul-
tilayered narrative. How can we augment the
physical space with the virtual space, and create
layers of narrative?” - P3

P3’s years of exploration in both emerging technologies, includ-
ing early versions of AR, and steganography (concealing informa-
tion in non-sensitive data, e.g., embedding a message in an image)
motivated their use of AR and enabled them to create multilayered
narratives around “dirty money” in the art world. This experience
manifested in how their project presented previously obfuscated
information to museum-goers, using AR to overlay visual statistics
and audio recordings about the opiod epidemic on top of museum
art bought with opiod money.

Other participants shared diverse experiences influencing their
use of AR that were not necessarily technology-centric. P13, a
historian, artist, educator, and cultural organizer whose project
augmented locations with digital artifacts about a pioneering Black
woman entrepreneur and philanthropist, shared:

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Silva, et al.

“I call myself an unbound artist because I’m not
tied to any one medium. I usually center my work
on a lot of deep research in the world, but then
also research in the books and in a lot of archival
research. My work is really about . . . how do I
take the knowledge that has been ignored from
dominant narratives and create a space for more
people to see it outside of the academic towers.
I’m a memory worker . . . specifically as it relates
to the work that I do with monuments.” - P13

As a “memory worker” who aims to share overlooked histories
with wide audiences, P13 was drawn to AR as a means to com-
bine their skills in history, performance art, and multimedia, using
archival image and audio data to tell stories about a historical figure
and imbue physical locations with new narratives.

As seen in these two exemplars, participants drew from their
background to envision rich multilayered narratives for their ac-
tivism projects. Their prior experiences motivated their use of AR
as a means to compose those narratives through a combination of
skills in technology, history, art, storytelling, and so on.

4.1.2 Ease of creating engaging content. Participants described ex-
periencing a relatively low barrier to creating compelling experi-
ences for activism in AR using modern technology. Twelve partici-
pants had worked with AR before, but described requiring fewer
resources to create AR experiences for activism compared to their
experiences in the past. P10, a multimedia artist who created an
AR installation centered on Asian American identity, described
changes in AR development technology in their experience:

“I think, nowadays, the platform is much [more]
intuitive for artists to adapt. There’s not much
coding. It’s much easier, but at the beginning, it
was a challenge.” - P10

Here, P10 speaks to how modern AR creation programs have
introduced UX features and supporting material (such as prefabri-
cated digital assets and tutorials) that make it easier to create AR
content, even without programming expertise.

Building on this insight, many participants felt that it was easy
to use AR platforms to create new, compelling interactions that
could enhance how they deliver their message, especially when
tied to the physical world. For example, P15 described the ease of
creating an AR experience that layered videos telling stories about
Indigenous heritage onto physical sculptures important to cultural
preservation:

“We didn’t use animation or anything, it was
essentially just an interface where you could click
on videos, and then the video would play but just
layered videos, it’s pretty simple AR. We chose HP
Reveal, [which was] YouTube-style, where you
just upload a simple video.” - P15

P15 felt the AR tools they used enabled them to create a sim-
ple yet rich experience, with which they aimed to create new un-
derstandings and perspectives around the history of Indigenous
communities.

Taken together, participants felt AR is an approachable yet pow-
erful medium for activism, especially with the rise of more novice

and non-programmer friendly platforms and features. The ability
to create immersive content without coding, including the ease
of uploading videos and attaching them to physical objects and
locations, made AR an attractive tool for delivering their message
without specialized skills or expensive resources.

4.1.3 Potential legal and ethical consequences are still being shaped.
Eleven participants noted that AR activism seems less risky than
traditional activism, even as the consequences of those risks spe-
cific to AR remain uncertain and under-defined. P1 and P2, artists
who collaborate on global activist interventions, described how AR
enabled them to accomplish what would be too risky if attempted
through another medium. They remotely created an AR experi-
ence to expose fraud by augmenting the election campaign ads of a
corrupt government. They noted,

“If you would have painted the words on the
posters, I can guarantee you these people would
be imprisoned, if not dead by now . . . ” - P1 & P2
By augmenting posters, rather than physically painting over
them, these participants were able to distribute their message, tied
to physically relevant objects, while avoiding physical risk. With
AR content existing only on a digital rather than physical layer,
creating controversial content feels less high-stakes for activists,
especially compared to the risks of engaging in gladiatorial forms
of traditional activism outside of AR that P1 and P2 mentioned.

At the same time, half of the participants raised concerns over the
lack of certainty about legal ramifications associated with activism
in AR, even if it enabled their work. P7, an innovation art director
who created an AR project that commandeered Trump election
signs, spoke to these uncertainties:

“I was just the whole time, a bit afraid . . . because
the Trump campaign is known to sue anyone
and everyone, and I was a bit afraid of, ‘Where
do we overstep? Can we use this name? Can we
use the look of his sign?’ . . . we also brought [a
law student friend] in to basically double-check
everything just to make sure like what are the
legalities and everything of this project.” - P7

P7 highlights that while activism in AR can mitigate risks as-
sociated with traditional forms of activism, it still brings its own
set of potential negative consequences. The lack of legal precedent
on controversial uses of AR does not eliminate the risk of liability
and prosecution, especially when AR content involves material
typically subject to legal protection outside of mixed reality, such
as US presidential election campaign materials.

Alongside the immediate risk of physical harm and legal liability,
creators worried about long-term ethical repercussions. In particu-
lar, creators struggled to make sense of their use of platforms that
are created, sanctioned, or funded by companies with strong ties to
“anti-social” activity. P15, a settler scholar working with Indigenous
communities on technology development, described the complex
ethical implications of creating accessible digital media based on
Indigenous knowledge:

“I think for the communities I work with, they
need a balance between user friendliness, which
is very important, [and] low costs, hosting fees,

Understanding AR Activism

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

design fees . . . I think the biggest thing is that
control and ownership . . . this Indigenous data
sovereignty is really, really strong now and I think
for Indigenous peoples in particular, where is
their data going? How can you access it? . . . They
have a lot of protocols about even what time of
the year you can access information and stuff
like this. If there was some off-the-shelf platform,
maybe free and open-source that would allow
for local hosting of data, that kind of thing, non-
commercial, I think [they very much] don’t want
to commercialize it unless somehow it benefits
the community.” - P15

For P15 and their team, one of the main criteria for considering
AR and choosing an AR authoring tool relates to the level of control
they felt they had over their own data. Deciding what data to
retain and how, who drives changes to data practices, and who is
responsible for ensuring equitable access was a bigger constraint
than any other technical or logistical barrier.

From well-established democracies to countries governed by
authoritarian regimes, AR activism can appear to lessen risks typi-
cal for traditional activism, though with murky legal and ethical
bounds. On the one hand, participants point out that AR-based ac-
tivism can remove the need to physically alter the world or even be
physically present to augment it, which can reduce associated risks
and make the use of AR more appealing. On the other hand, due to
the emergent nature of AR activism and a reliance on proprietary
and commercial platforms, participants described some hesitance
in using AR due to the lack of understanding around legal risks and
social harms associated with fewer (or selective) restrictions.

4.2 What characteristics of AR do creators find

conducive or detrimental to AR activism?

Participants discussed features of AR that facilitated or limited
their activism projects. This included characteristics of the tech-
nology itself, as well as the development platforms they used and
collaborations they formed to create their projects. In particular,
participants felt that the ability to visually layer narratives in AR
could be beneficial for changing perceptions and reshaping physical
places. At the same time, despite the aforementioned lower barriers
for creating AR content, participants still faced some challenges
when using modern AR development platforms for their projects.

4.2.1 Potential for changing audience perceptions. Like many ac-
tivism projects outside of AR, 15 of our 20 participants aimed to
change people’s perceptions through their AR activism work. Par-
ticipants described how AR could expose audiences to crucial, yet
under-recognized, aspects of their social cause through immersive
narratives. P20, an artist and professor of new media who created a
narrative AR scavenger hunt centered on African American history,
shared how they hoped AR could change perceptions of Black and
Brown women:

“[As] someone who’d like to become a parent, I’d
like the landscape to look different even if it’s
through augmented reality for a young person so

that they can get a vague sense that there’s some-
one who’s really invested in letting them know
that they come out of a legacy of resistance, of ac-
tivism, of agency, of making significant change.
A legacy of people making significant changes
and alterations to the would we live in today. This
world did not come into existence without Black
and Brown people and women, it was made by
them.” - P20

Using AR to overlay videos of reenacted stories about the hid-
den histories at specific murals, plaques, and other physical urban
spaces, P20 designed the scavenger hunt to give people digital win-
dows into the past that could change their existing perceptions
about the city. In particular, they aimed to make the invisible pres-
ence, agency, and work of marginalized individuals, in this case
African Americans, visible in the world.

In addition to making the invisible visible, participants described
a sense of immersion in AR, deeply connected to the multilayered
narratives they created, that could further influence people’s per-
ceptions. P14, a history professor and author, worked on a narrated
AR tour of a historical park in the US where African Americans
flourished during the Reconstruction Era. Though their project
was publicly available, they discussed immersion in the context of
students:

“[I think] this additional layer of reality, it brings
the ability to immerse people in stories. I think
that sort of immersion is what’s important. What
I see happening is a good thing for me because
I see increasing abilities of technology to allow
me as a teacher to immerse my students in the
story. By immersing themselves into the story,
they become part of the story, the story becomes
personal. It is not just something that happened to
somebody else 200 years ago. It’s something that,
in a way, is sort of happening to them. Everything
seems to be self-centered these days. If you can
relate to the story and that helps people learn it,
then I think that’s great.” - P14

P14 hoped that audiences would feel immersed in AR’s “layers
of reality,” and therefore more connected to the historical content
as narratives relevant to themselves. They aimed to establish this
connection in their AR tour by layering aural and visual historical
content (e.g., music, photographs) over key physical areas, such
that people could feel transported to the past where they stood.

Overall, participants felt that the immersive characteristic of
AR, which ties narratives to the physical world, could help their
audiences better understand new perspectives and connect with
their message, such as the importance of forgotten moments and
people of history.

4.2.2 Reshaping the physical world. Beyond surfacing invisible
information to change perceptions, 17 out of 20 participants also
discussed using AR to reshape elements of the physical world, such
as public spaces and objects, by using AR to envision how they
wanted the world to look. P8, for example, contributed to a project

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Silva, et al.

that aimed to reshape a university space associated with sexual
assault:

“We started brainstorming different ways to use
AR like a really lightweight means for someone to
take a fairly ubiquitous technology and be able to
use it to basically modify the space in ways that
they wanted to without needing the prerequisite
political or physical power to be able to modify
that space.” - P8

P8 highlights how the virtual nature of AR can facilitate reshap-
ing a physical space without having to grapple with the typical
requirements for doing so. In their project, they used AR to over-
come the hurdle of campus administration, which had installed a
memorial for a sexual assault survivor but rejected quotes the sur-
vivor proposed for a plaque. Through AR, they could virtually bring
the plaque with the desired quote read in the voice of the survivor
to campus, along with voiced-over letters from other students. This
layering enabled them to reshape the memorial, such that viewers
could better understand its context and meaningfulness.

Similarly, P11, a student who created an AR tour on their uni-
versity campus around legacies of slavery and racism, spoke about
using AR to reshape a part of their campus museum:

“When we did the stop [on the tour] for the mu-
seum where we studied the [a physician who]
collected hundreds of skulls, and organized them
by race, and used different measurements to cre-
ate a racial hierarchy, and medical misinforma-
tion that’s still extant in the medical field today.
We did a kind of dome. Not only are you inside
of a skull, but you’re also being encompassed
by all this information. You’re being surrounded
and immersed by the institution, by the original
things that founded white supremacy, much like
white supremacy surrounds us as a country.” -
P11

By manifesting a large virtual skull that people could walk into,
this participant reshaped the museum on their AR tour to reflect the
hidden structures in the country’s and educational institutions’ his-
tories. Distinct from using stories to reveal or recreate the past, P11
created a new artifact as symbolic representation of the unethical
legacies that the university physically perpetuates on campus. Thus,
participants felt that AR’s virtual nature, unbound by involved pro-
cesses for changing physical space, could help audiences envision
and contextualize spaces in new ways.

Interdisciplinary collaboration and support. As most partici-
4.2.3
pants mentioned, a diversity of backgrounds and skillsets are rele-
vant to crafting activism projects in AR that are high quality and
effective experiences. Seventeen participants reflected that AR ac-
tivism more often than not requires interdisciplinary collaboration
between developers, designers, storytellers, etc. More specifically,
participants described collaborating with independent art groups
(P1, P2, P4, P5, P9, P10, P13, P18, and P19), non-profit organizations
(P6, P19, and P20), academic institutions (P3, P5, P8, P9, P11, P14,
P15, P17, and P20), and private companies (P12, P13, P16, P18, and
P19).

P18, a film and media maker whose project overlays a city with
3D animated renditions of historical figures and buildings to retell
the lived experiences of a civil rights activist, described a large col-
laboration network that facilitated her work. An initial tech fellow-
ship and residency program, as well as starting her own production
company, helped her form connections with technology companies,
the film industry, and artistic partners. Her project collaborations
included a local 3D modeling team, a local historical society to en-
sure historically accuracy of AR content, an award-winning actress
to record voiceovers and motion capture for animations, and a local
AR company to help her put everything together. P18 described
how collaborating across disciplines supported the quality of her
AR activism project:

“Yes, I had companies that . . . would take my de-
sign and bring it to life . . . then having other local
companies do prototypes for me so that I could
see how [the main historical figure] is moving. [I
would ask them] ‘Does the motion capture that I
got really work? Can they add some animation?
Can they add some a flare here, a flare there,
some special effects that enhance where people
are looking and directing their eyes, and getting
them to go to the next step?”’ - P18

P18’s interdisciplinary collaborators all contributed to bringing
P18’s vision for the project to life, and addressed many challenges
she may not have been able to tackle on her own or had limited
expertise in.

However, interdisciplinary collaboration for such projects can
have negative aspects. While P18 appreciated her collaborations,
she also discussed difficulties in the collaboration dynamics:

“Again, these are things that the ebbs and flow
of like, do you have enough money? Do you lose
your space? [Beyond that] I get paired with these
very nice Caucasian companies . . . these white
boys they’re not interested . . . I got a bunch of
work to do to add a layer of, ‘Now I got to con-
vince you that this is important or that maybe
you should stay up another hour to help me get
this done?’ [The project’s main character] doesn’t
strike them as cool, ‘She’s not cool. She’s not that
interesting. Oh, she’s not a superhero. Oh, she
doesn’t have big breasts. She’s not a sexualized
object.’ That’s the stuff that makes me feel like,
‘Oh, I wish I had just not been paired with certain
companies.’ They’re wasting my time and they’re
wasting everybody’s time.” - P18

Here, P18 speaks to how resources like money affect interdisci-
plinary collaboration as well as how racism and sexism, in the face
of her intersectional identity as a Black woman, affects how collabo-
rators treat her. These collaboration issues can become obstacles in
pursuing an AR activism project, as well as more broadly affecting
the creator’s quality of experience. Thus, while many participants
reflected on interdisciplinary collaboration being conducive to their
project’s success (including those who did not have collaborations

Understanding AR Activism

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

but wished they did), P18 illuminates the importance of the collab-
oration being founded on a professional, healthy, and respectful
relationship.

4.2.4 Uncertainties and difficulties in AR development and distri-
bution. Seventeen participants struggled to keep up with shifts in
AR development platforms. AR creators reported using a variety
of development platforms, including ARCore, Artivive, HP Reveal,
LayAR, Lens Studio, Metaio, Reality Composer, Unity3D, Vuforia,
WebAR, and Zappar. P4, a multimedia artist whose AR work dis-
played political messages in the sky, discussed how the varying
lifespans of AR platforms affected their work. They were particu-
larly frustrated with the disappearance of LayAR, their previous
platform of choice:

“[LayAR was] probably the most advanced at the
moment. All of a sudden, they’re gone. All right.
I had a few projects I was using on that platform
too . . . ” - P4

Other participants praised and trusted this platform, and found
that its abrupt end affected not only the continued development of
their work but also its distribution, as people could only experience
the content on this platform. Upon losing a valued tool like LayAR,
creators, especially those without programming expertise or who
have built platform-specific expertise, must spend time and energy
learning how to effectively use another platform. Moreover, trans-
lating their work to new platforms was not always straightforward,
as platforms may not support the same features, e.g. uploading
videos YouTube-style.

Despite improvements in modern AR creation tools for non-
developers (e.g., interfaces to easily attach AR content to the physi-
cal world discussed in 4.1.2), eight participants still described diffi-
culties related to specialized skills aside from coding. P9, who has
experience with various AR development platforms, described how
working with those platforms can be resource-consuming due to
platform-specific development and publishing requirements. How-
ever, P9 also noted that some platforms are considerably easier to
get started in and efficient to use, such as when comparing Unity
and Lens Studio:

“With Unity, I often end up working a lot of time
with . . . things not working . . . There’s so much
‘not working’ in Unity. If you’re a beginner, it’s
difficult . . . [In Lens Studio] you can’t make it
too complicated, so it saves you a lot of time.
If I’m collaborating with somebody in a Unity
project, they keep telling me about things I’ve
never heard of and the good thing with Snap is
that I think I’ve seen most of the tools at hand
now, the mechanisms, and that allows me to be
an expert quite rapidly. With Unity, that’s not
the case, and when you’re an expert with the tool
you can make anything.” - P9

P9 also compared the publishing approach on both platforms:

platform tool . . . it’s a WYSIWYG tool . . . . With
Unity, you always have to think, ‘Okay, what
are the platform-specifics’ and then clients want
high-end renderings and they want baked light-
ing and all this terrible stuff that takes a little
time away from the essence of making something
interactive, something cool, something new.” - P9.
This comparison brings attention to characteristics of AR de-
velopment platforms that can facilitate or hinder the creation of
activism projects in AR. In particular, creators saw “what you see
is what you get” tools, mechanisms, and publishing processes as
enabling efficient completion of projects as well as simplified shar-
ing. Unreliable and unnecessarily complex features and publishing
requirements can detract from building platform expertise and
actually creating content.

At the same time, it is important to note that platforms may
be designed for specific purposes, to which participants had to
adapt for their goals of activism. For example, Lens Studio is a
platform for developing AR filters for Snapchat, while Unity is a
game engine for creating AR in addition to VR, 3D, and 2D games
that can be published to a variety of distribution platforms. Thus,
certain development platforms may be more or less conducive
than others to creators’ goals (barring unforeseen discontinuations)
depending on creators’ experience levels, project complexity and
longevity, and target distribution.

4.3 What role can AR play in achieving

creators’ AR activism goals?

Participants reflected on their projects’ impacts, and how AR may
or may not have contributed to achieving their activism goals. It
is important to note that we discuss impact based on participants’
perceptions, including their aspirations through their work, and
what they heard and observed from people who engaged with their
project. Participants shared that while they feel AR has the potential
to influence physical action and strong emotional reactions, AR
also had limited reach to audiences in terms of awareness of the
project and ability to access and use it as intended.

4.3.1 Eliciting physical action and strong emotional reactions. Four-
teen participants discussed the potential of AR to affect physical
action and/or strong emotional reactions among their projects’ tar-
get audiences. P8, the aforementioned participant who introduced
an interactive AR plaque for a sexual assault survivor at a univer-
sity campus, shared how their project may have contributed to the
university’s decision to install a physical plaque at the memorial:

“What is interesting about the plaque [that the
university physically installed] is that it looks
like the [AR] plaque that we designed for our
project. [Our AR project] ended up being an in-
spiration to what actually ended up happening
in the physical space . . . .” -P8

“With the Snap Lenses, you can say, ‘Well, [the
project is] there, and if you want to use it just
download the app and there you go.’ A lot of the
technical struggles are taken care of by such a

P8 further noted that while they did not issue any official state-
ment with the university, their team did discuss their project with
the university administrators, including its context and the barriers
around installing a physical plaque. They felt that this discussion,

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Silva, et al.

along with the virtual plaque they created, may have contributed
to the ultimate outcome of having a physical plaque installed.

Participants perceived that AR could also elicit strong emotional
reactions in audiences. Because AR is a novel technology, seeing
and hearing an additional layer of reality can be a completely new
and emotional experience for many. P5, a professor of multimedia
filmmaking who used AR to alter US currency to highlight foreign
relations, stated:

audiences in the content without virtually removing them nor their
gaze from the physical world, unlike other forms of technology
that inherently draw attention away from the physical world.

Additionally, a few participants discussed the potential for AR
to elicit strong emotional reactions in marginalized individuals in
particular. P17, for instance, described another interaction they had
with someone who engaged with their project, which focused on
the effects of climate change on marginalized groups:

“Technology is quite emotional for people, our
world being shaken up by what’s possible for you
to see or hear combinations that you can make in
your immediate perception . . . it’s maybe this pos-
itive thing and so we’re still taking this traumatic
moment of things being shaken up for us and the
possibilities and what you thought was possible
in the world being changed, but instead of just
responding with this fear, instead, we have this
strange experience of fascination, of engagement,
of small joy.” - P5

P5 describes a strong emotional experience that they believe
someone can have while engaging with AR, which could make
the user more receptive to content that challenges what they pre-
viously thought or believed. Participants further note that AR’s
novelty alone cannot achieve their activism goals, but paired with
well-crafted content, such as the compelling multilayered narra-
tives participants aimed to integrate, they may produce something
emotionally impactful.

Relatedly, one participant highlighted the unique role they be-
lieved AR played in sparking emotions, based on the experience of
someone who interacted with their project. P17, an artist, activist,
and academic, created a project based on their own lived experience
that exposed how global warming is affecting the lives of the al-
ready most vulnerable. They compared the use of AR in the project
to their previous work on the same topic:

“I didn’t want people to look away from the world,
I wanted people to look at the world, and I thought
that augmented reality was a way to do that
. . . What I want is for people to think about [cli-
mate change] and engage with it and look at
it and face it and face the fact that we have
to do something . . . . [Compared to my previ-
ous web-based game on climate change], I think
that the AR project has a more emotional im-
pact. . . [someone who interacted with it] said to
me that they felt implicated because they had
to move their body to engage with the work. As
opposed to the disconnect of sitting in front of
a screen and just clicking on a mouse, which is
such a familiar feeling that it can be really disem-
bodying, dissociating, disconnecting for people I
think.” -P17

P17’s project required users to physically move around, collect-
ing oxygen capsules and narrated stories about climate change’s
effects while navigating an AR forest. Drawing from their prior
non-AR work and what they learned from users, the participant felt
that the embodied interaction in AR could emotionally immerse

“[She said] she felt just very good [about] hav-
ing felt represented . . . [she said] as somebody
living with chronic respiratory illness, she felt
like nobody had made artwork about having
asthma and being in the middle of a pandemic
or being in the middle of a climate change event.
[My project’s goal] was to point out how climate
change is already harming people and dispro-
portionately harming marginalized people, like
trans people and chronically ill people and im-
migrants. That felt like a real success to me, that
somebody from one of those groups said like, ‘Oh,
I feel seen by this work.”’ - P17

In addition to emotionally engaging people with a social cause,
participants like P17 suggest that AR may have the potential to
empower marginalized individuals. They see AR as intentionally
centering under-recognized narratives and voices in a layer of
reality that blends with the physical world. One participant, an
artist, creative technologist, and educator who created monuments
of Black and Brown historical figures, further envisioned how such
empowerment could have implications for the future:

“Part of the work that we’re doing is . . . being able
to inspire the kids to do their work . . . in the fu-
ture, I see us . . . allow[ing] students to design their
own monuments or design their own experiences
[in AR]. I think just allowing people to see that
they can be more than just a consumer of these
technologies, but they can actually build them,
and scale them up, and be able to create their own
tech companies or whatever, art companies, [etc.].
That’s a big part of [our AR activism project] as
well, and why we’re always speaking and talking,
and why we’re focusing on the kids now.” - P12

Participants thus aspire for AR to not only help people feel seen
and uplifted, but also help people learn about and celebrate the
legacies of those who look like them as sources of inspiration and
affirmation of their own capabilities.

Overall, participants believed that AR could help achieve their
activism goals. For creators aiming to reshape physical spaces, AR
could play the role of raising awareness and prompting people
to consider changing the spaces re-envisioned through AR. By
grounding identity-specific AR content in the physical world, cre-
ators hoped AR could spark highly emotional reactions to their
projects.

Limited reach. While participants saw potential in the impact
4.3.2
of their projects, seventeen participants felt that AR activism still
has a narrow reach. In particular, they felt that AR is not quite

Understanding AR Activism

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

a ubiquitous technology yet, which can limit people’s ability to
understand and interact with it. The aforementioned P12 shared:

“I was showing AR . . . to seniors. It didn’t work
very well. They didn’t understand it. I tried to
explain it and they weren’t getting it. I don’t
think anything I could have said was going to
help them understand it. I feel there’s a blocker
if you’re too old to understand what is going on
in augmented reality on average. I’m not saying
every person who’s a senior can[’t] understand
augmented reality, but that is my experience.” -
P12

Though creators may target a variety of audiences for their
projects, not all audiences are necessarily familiar with AR or rele-
vant technology. This can limit people’s ability to understand their
project and connect with the underlying message. Moreover, par-
ticipants shared that they encountered people who did not know
how to find these experiences in the first place. Some participants
attempted to address this issue by using social media to advertise
and instruct people how to access and experience their projects. For
instance, P19, a lawyer and community organizer who created AR
educational materials centering Black people’s historical achieve-
ments, described how posting on social media helped distribute
their project to wider audiences including adults, children, and
potential partners and supporters:

“We just put it on social media and then a lot
of people . . . picked it up so that I think that also
on social media, it looks really good. [A singer
in the UK] put it up and she [had] over 300,000
followers . . . I think social media was the main
pusher. Then, after that, we had [a big company]
approached us and a couple of these big tech
companies [were interested in the project] . . . ” -
P19

Participants describe challenges in people’s general awareness
and exposure to AR. While social media can be one tool to share
their project to a large network, particularly if they have access
to social media influencers, some populations may struggle with
using and understanding their project even if they engaged with
it. Participants highlight that the varying levels of access to AR
and ability to engage with it can be a major barrier, as being able
to spread their message and reach target audiences is key to their
activism work.

In addition to limited engagement and awareness, seventeen
participants noted that AR distribution platforms can also limit their
reach. P17 described how art venues and distribution platforms can
affect reach:

“I feel like very few people know that my app
exists. I think it got some visibility from being
[featured on an art venue] and winning an award.
Mostly, people just experience my work through
art venues . . . that’s okay with me, but it would be
nice if a lot more people knew about the project.
I put it on the [Apple] App Store. One challenge
is [that it is] artwork that deals with difficult
themes, so I labeled the app in the App Store as 17

and up. It’s for adults, it deals with violence, just
descriptions of violence. That may be a barrier to
people finding it. I think another barrier is that
the way I made [the project] platform-specific, so
it’s only for iOS.” - P17

From art venues to the Apple App Store, AR activism projects
may not gain exposure without being featured or winning an award,
and may only circulate within specific, niche communities, like
multimedia art galleries or museums. Because of limited methods
of distribution, AR activism works may not be able to have the
reach that creators aim for, which could negatively affect achieving
their projects’ goals. It is important to note that even if creators find
publishing on some platforms easy (e.g., Lens Studio, as previously
discussed), they may still be limited by that platform’s distribution
capabilities (e.g., search tags and content restrictions, platform
specificity, and requirements to download and register for specific
apps).

Also potentially affecting reach is that much of AR content,
including some participants’ projects, can only be experienced at
specific locations in the physical world. Our participants discussed
how this could limit exposure to audiences, given the need to travel
to that location, but at the same time make the experience more
special. Specifically, P16, who created an AR monument tied to a
public space in the physical world, reflected on this tension that
surfaced when their project was shared by someone else on social
media:

”[They think,] ‘why do we need to tie [the project]
to a location when there’s no reason to do that?’
In [their] mind, building an AR monument and
then making people go see it when you have your
device right here and I could see it on my desk just
as easily, we’re putting an artificial constraint on
something that doesn’t exist in this medium. I can
totally understand that philosophically, except
that I can also see the value in giving a specialness
to something. . . . what I struggled with about one
of the qualities of AR is it can be anywhere all the
time . . . If we’re talking about monuments and lo-
cations and specific histories, as a medium that’s
ever-present everywhere, does that cheapen it for
me to be able to see it on my desk, or does that
facilitate something for me and make it better? I
don’t know.” - P16

P16 describes how rather than a constraint, location can be an
important design decision or feature that contributes to AR activism
goals. As described in the previous sections, many participants
relied on location to immerse people in content central to where
they stood. At the same time, people may not be able to access
those locations, limiting the content’s overall reach. Keeping these
potential trade-offs in mind, the role of location-specific AR in
creators’ activism goals relies heavily on their specific activism
goals, content, and target audiences.

Overall, participants felt that limited awareness of AR and their
projects, varying audience readiness to engage with AR, distribution
platform constraints, and possibly even location-specific features
can negatively affect their projects’ reach. Limited reach can in turn

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Silva, et al.

hinder their connection with audiences, and thus, their goals of
changing their perceptions of the world. Still, as shared throughout
our results, participants perceived AR as a powerful medium for
activism due to its potential to facilitate the creation of compelling
multilayered narratives that can elicit physical action and strong
emotional reactions.

Returning to our research questions, we learned of a variety
of motivations, values, and expectations that drove creators’ use
of AR for activism, and their subsequent experiences. We found
that creators used AR for activism due to relatively low barriers to
creating compelling content – technically, legally, and physically
(RQ1). Creators highlighted that AR’s ability to immerse people in
narratives that reveal or imagine realities could be conducive to ac-
tivism by changing perceptions and raising awareness. Conversely,
creators discussed challenges that AR introduces which could be
detrimental to activism, including limitations to creating, maintain-
ing, and distributing content (RQ2). Finally, creators described their
perceptions of AR’s role in achieving their goals, specifically in
influencing physical changes in the world and empowering their
audiences. At the same time, they questioned their ability to reach
large audiences given limited access or distribution of their projects
(RQ3). In the following section, we discuss these findings in the con-
text of prior work, and highlight open questions and opportunities
for future research.

5 DISCUSSION
Across our interviews, participants saw AR as an emerging form of
hybrid activism [26] that incorporates digital media in the physical
world for social change. As creators, participants provided a variety
of testimonials, from guerilla installations at museums exposing
questionable art donations to geofenced memorials highlighting the
voices of oppressed people. They perceived AR as an effective tool
for expressing unique and engaging messages, with the potential
to change perceptions and help people reimagine public spaces.
But they also faced several challenges reaching broad and diverse
audiences and noted emerging ethical and legal considerations re-
lated to user control, author responsibility, and platform circulation.
Ultimately participants sought to use AR to elicit strong reactions
and inspire action among their audiences within a fraught and
precarious sociotechnical landscape.

Recalling George and Leidner’s hierarchy of digital activism [21],
our work suggests that project creators view AR activism as en-
abling a high level of engagement, potentially within the gladiatorial
level. Like hacktivism, they see AR activism as requiring technical
skills (e.g. programming knowledge) in order to take action. How-
ever, unlike hacktivism, creators see AR as becoming accessible to
the general public and currently having few legal restrictions. Ad-
ditionally, creators perceive AR as having the potential to generate
high impact by triggering audiences’ emotional reactions, which
might catalyze civic participation. At the same time, creators worry
that the platforms’ limited reach may hinder the impact compared
to hacktivism or other gladiatorial level actions.

5.1 Open Questions and Opportunities
Looking beyond AR’s promise for social change, creators point to
several open questions and opportunities. Below we summarize

these lessons around themes of interdisciplinarity, platform control,
discoverabiity, accountability, and radical change.

Supporting Interdisciplinary AR Content Creation. To create
5.1.1
immersive experiences that could elicit strong reactions, partici-
pants required specialized expertise and engagement with collabo-
rators and organizations from multiple fields. Many participants
established interdisciplinary collaborations to overcome technical
limitations and generally create higher quality and more impactful
projects. At the same time, collaboration can bring challenges in
coordinating resources as well as perspectives around the topic and
vision of the project. Worth noting, and illustrated by P18, these
collaborations can also reproduce unethical patterns (such as racism
and sexism) that are embedded in broader social contexts which
the technology has limited (or no) means to directly address.

Informed by these experiences, we encourage researchers, ac-
tivists, and supporting organizations to reflect on the conditions of
these interdisciplinary collaborations and the values that underlie
these interactions. Within research and activist organizations, this
work involves adapting community-driven strategies that empha-
size long-term engagement, participatory planning, and the place-
ment of technical decision makers in service of existing practices
[7, 8, 10]. For those working specifically on creating AR author-
ing tools, we encourage expanding support for the integration of
well-established standards (e.g. widely used 3D models and video
formats), mechanisms for collaboration (e.g. intuitive data manage-
ment systems, discussion groups, and brainstorming boards), and
greater number of practices and skill sets (e.g. traditional painting,
physical installations, architecture, and informal education) that
are already familiar to a range of potential users. Inspired by efforts
like Mozilla’s WebXR [39], AR development platforms should also
consider the integration of universal and public AR project formats
to facilitate content access and the migration of projects among
platforms, so future activists can have more reliability and flexibility
for their work.

5.1.2 Confronting Maintenance and Proprietary Barriers. Partici-
pants saw the development of impactful AR activism experiences
as just the first step. Although AR offered an entry into civic en-
gagement, they described struggling with the maintenance and
distribution of the projects. Sometimes this concern reflected un-
certainty around the future availability of their projects on partic-
ular AR platforms, which could shut down at any moment. Other
times participants reflected on the consequences of not having full
control over the content and experiences developed using propri-
etary platforms. In addition to losing access to platforms, and thus
losing time and effort, their remarks point to the importance of
platform ownership itself. When creators like P15 centered com-
munity, they sometimes viewed a platform’s capitalistic values as
running counter to their own goals. They expressed feelings of un-
ease about the corporate partner managing their platform and that
decides what could be seen, extracted, recirculated, and more. Their
concerns focused on the potential for surveillance, monetization,
and various harmful structural interventions that lay outside their
control. Even compared to social media platforms like Facebook,
where organizers can share web links that make content accessible
outside the platforms, AR currently tethers organizers to particular

Understanding AR Activism

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

corporate or commercial interests. Participants’ reflections as cre-
ators suggest the degree of control they have over the AR platform
— how the data gets used, where/how it gets circulated, and to/for
whom — is core to understanding AR’s long term potential for
building conditions for social change.

Improving AR Discoverability. Participants suggested that
5.1.3
the distribution of an AR activism project can be as challenging
as the creation of the project itself. Their reflections suggest that
improving the discoverability of AR content would go a long way
toward improving AR access and broadening its impact and reach.
Indeed, discoverability is a known issue with AR technology, where
people may not know about existing applications or realize they
are available, and creators may not actively promote or have the
means to promote their content [12]. While work in e-commerce
has highlighted the need for better calls-to-action while browsing
and better transitions into AR [25], increasing discoverability more
broadly might involve nurturing open source and other grassroots
AR tool-kits that enable more flexibility and adaptability around
access conditions. Conversely, it could involve further integrating
AR authoring and viewing environments into existing social media
platforms (amplifying the surveillance concerns outlined above).
With this integration, AR environments might enable audiences to
communicate back to the broadcaster and with each other, giving
creators a better sense of how audiences react to and engage with
their messages. Such feedback might also generate a limited degree
of accountability, allowing creators to keep track of the impact and
reach of their work, but also raising important questions around
data privacy and control.

5.1.4 Accountability and Co-option. With the recent hype and ad-
jacent criticism surrounding the metaverse, an imagined virtual en-
vironment extending the capacities of AR, we find much overlooked
around questions of accountability. Similar to prior metaverse in-
stantiations like Second Life[6], the parallels drawn between the
social media and AR, in terms of its trajectory [4] and potential [67],
raise questions about its propensity for co-option and expropriation
[46]. What would stop someone from using the same platforms
designed for equity and justice initiatives as tools for hate speech?
How does the lack of legal restrictions shape what corporate plat-
forms might extract? These questions resonate with some notable
elements we found in our data, such as P3’s initiatives to challenge
technocratic power, P15 reluctance to store Indigenous knowledge
within certain platforms, and P18’s bittersweet experience with
collaborators. As creators continue to develop new and different
ties to AR platforms, what allows those platforms to hold onto their
liberatory potential lies less in the tool itself than the institutional
conditions in which its situated. Creators’ reflections suggest that
what matters most is how those platforms are collectively managed
and to whom they are accountable.

5.1.5 Radical Change Driven by Minoritarian Groups. Participants
felt AR may be especially beneficial for activism projects focused
on people disproportionally harmed along existing lines of inequity
(race, class, gender, disability). By causing strong emotional re-
actions and overlaying key aspects of their own identities onto
physical locations, creators believe that members of these groups
could feel empowered and represented. Creators could center their

experiences and feelings within the very environments that tend to
shut them out. We note that a number of participants built experi-
ences around marginalized groups, including recent AAPI struggles
in New York (P10), repairing settler-Indigenous relationships in
Canada (P15), creating monuments for historical Black figures in
Los Angeles (P13), and creating formal and informal AR educational
material about the historical contributions of people of color (P19).
We observed that the immersive potential of AR experiences
encouraged a certain radical imagination among participants. Par-
ticipants used AR tools to help people not only visualize what might
be (making the invisible visible), but also realize the what might
never be (making the impossible possible). The idea of making the
cosmos the ground, and the ocean the sky, a notion we saw in
both our pilot and main study data, came up repeatedly in inter-
views around the particular features of AR platforms that enable
the revising of physical realities. “I think it was very important
for us to create this space where people can actively participate
in that dreaming so it’s like daydreaming. How we might extend
our realities, our concepts of liberation . . . outside of you know,
our limits,” a pilot study participant told us. To push against the
limits of a physical reality mired in structural racism and oppres-
sion, participants found a subtle but profound sense of hope in the
remaking of everyday landscapes. The dollar bill or the street sign
stood for mundane pillars of a pervasive system of social control
that could be meaningfully changed or subverted through artistic
intervention.

This idea of revising the ‘impossible’ undergirds some of the most
compelling and celebrated interventions of 20th century, from the
activism of Ida B. Wells to the artwork of James Luna. The fact that
AR creators also play with this sensibility suggests an important
aesthetic dimension to hybrid activism. By inviting people into
alternative realities, AR authoring environments seemed to ignite
creators’ radical imagination, drawing attention to the mutability
of some of the most fundamental and seemingly permanent fixtures
of our surrounding world.

5.2 Limitations & Future Work
We interviewed a wide variety of participants with different types
of AR activism projects, and learned how they view AR’s potential
as a tool to advocate for social causes. However, several aspects of
our study design limit our findings. We outline these limitations
and explore how they might be addressed in future work.

One limitation of our work is the difficulty of evaluating the im-
pact and effectiveness of AR activism. Our assumptions and claims
are based on creators’ anecdotes and reports. Future work should
consider interviewing or surveying audience members (i.e., people
who viewed the creators’ projects) and other stakeholders (e.g.,
property owners) to understand broader perceptions and experi-
ences with AR activism. Additionally, participants were unaware
of reliable ways to assess or measure their project’s impact. This
limitation is particularly problematic for researchers trying to un-
derstand the ability of AR activism to achieve social change. To
address this shortfall, future work might run longer-term ethno-
graphic fieldwork or controlled studies with both creators and
audiences to test the potential for AR activism experiences to affect

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Silva, et al.

community-driven or prosocial outcomes, such as changed perspec-
tives or attitudes, the strength and type of emotional reactions, or
taking additional action.

A second limitation of this work involves the majority of non-
disabled participants chosen for this study and the corresponding
challenges around centering access. Even with the best intentions
and investments in discoverability, AR faces several barriers to en-
gagement and use that greatly limit its engagement with disability
justice movements and intersectional advocacy [1, 28]. Creators
mentioned the hurdles to participation among groups without tech-
nical know-how, awareness, or familiarity. But they did not discuss
the limitations associated with platforms that disproportionally
exclude people with disabilities, as AR authors and audience mem-
bers. The overwhelming emphasis of AR experiences discussed by
participants was visual—relying on representations with few, if any,
accommodations for blind users, a fact likely related to who and
what we focused on in this study [28, 56, 66]. These overlooked ac-
cess issue suggest the need for additional diversity in the selection
of interviewees, projects, and projects audiences to understand the
limitations to radical imagination in its current visually-oriented
form.

By interviewing a range of contemporary AR activists, our work
has only begun to scratch the surface of their activity. As the tech-
nology and its adoption evolves, this work offers initial insights
into creators’ needs, and the potential opportunities and challenges
of using AR for activism. Future work should build on this analysis
by describing the broader design space of AR activism, including
the impact of different contexts for activism, technologies or de-
vices used, strategies for augmentation, audience perspectives on
participation, and consequentially, considerations around platform
ownership and maintenance in the creation of new AR tools for
social change.

6 CONCLUSION
We contribute, to our knowledge, one of the first studies detailing
creator’s experiences with AR activism, including their decisions,
expectations, and ability to achieve their goals. We interviewed
twenty people who worked on projects that used AR for social
change, ranging from augmenting objects to display truths about
corruption, to augmenting public spaces to reveal hidden histories
of marginalized groups. We found that AR can be a tool with low
barrier to entry and potentially high impact in emotional reactions
to messages. However, limitations in the technology and available
platforms still restrict participants’ abilities to create and distribute
their created experiences to audiences. We discuss open questions
and implications for researchers, activist communities, and AR
platform developers to consider around AR activism.

REFERENCES
[1] Jérémy Albouys-Perrois, Jérémy Laviole, Carine Briant, and Anke M Brock. 2018.
Towards a multisensory augmented reality map for blind and low vision people:
A participatory design approach. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on
human factors in computing systems. 1–14.

[2] Amanda Almond, Rob McMahon, D Janes, Greg Whistance-Smith, Diana Stein-
hauer, and Stewart Steinhauer. 2018. We are all related: Using augmented reality
as a learning resource for Indigenous-settler relations. Northern Public Affairs 6,
2 (2018).

[3] Hiroo Aoyama and Leila Aflatoony. 2020. HomeModAR: A Home Intervention
Augmented Reality Tool for Occupational Therapists. In Extended Abstracts of

the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–7.

[4] John Perry Barlow. 2018. A declaration of the independence of cyberspace.

https://www.eff.org/cyberspace-independence

[5] W Lance Bennett and Alexandra Segerberg. 2012. The logic of connective ac-
tion: Digital media and the personalization of contentious politics. Information,
communication & society 15, 5 (2012), 739–768.

[6] Tom Boellstorff. 2015. Coming of age in Second Life. Princeton University Press.
[7] Andrew Boyd and David Oswald Mitchell. 2013. Beautiful Trouble: A Toolbox For

[8] Sasha Costanza-Chock. 2020. Design justice: Community-led practices to build the

Revolution (Pocket Edition). Or Books.

worlds we need. The MIT Press.

[9] Tomás Sánchez Criado. 2020. Anthropology as a careful design practice?

Zeitschrift fuer Ethnologie 145, 1 (2020), 47–70.

[10] CRL. [n.d.]. "Creative Reaction Lab". https://www.creativereactionlab.com. Ac-

cessed: 2020-08-30.

[11] Munmun De Choudhury, Shagun Jhaver, Benjamin Sugar, and Ingmar Weber.
2016. Social media participation in an activist movement for racial equality. In
Tenth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media.

[12] Marco De Sá and Elizabeth F Churchill. 2013. Mobile augmented reality: A
design perspective. In Human factors in augmented reality environments. Springer,
139–164.

[13] Jill P Dimond, Michaelanne Dye, Daphne LaRose, and Amy S Bruckman. 2013.
Hollaback! The role of storytelling online in a social movement organization.
In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative work.
477–490.

[14] Carl DiSalvo, Jonathan Lukens, Thomas Lodato, Tom Jenkins, and Tanyoung Kim.
2014. Making public things: how HCI design can express matters of concern. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
2397–2406.

[15] Paul Farber, Kara Crombie, Michelle Angela Ortiz, Jamel Shabazz, and Marisa
Williamson. 2019. " Monument Lab: Prototypes/Proposals" Installation Image.
(2019).

[16] Joshua A Fisher. 2021. Augmented and Mixed Reality for Communities. CRC

Press.

[17] Sarah Fox, Catherine Lim, Tad Hirsch, and Daniela K Rosner. 2020. Accounting
for Design Activism: On the Positionality and Politics of Designerly Intervention.
Design Issues 36, 1 (2020), 5–18.

[18] Sarah E Fox, Rafael ML Silva, and Daniela K Rosner. 2018. Beyond the prototype:
Maintenance, collective responsibility, and public IoT. In Proceedings of the 2018
Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 21–32.

[19] John Craig Freeman. 2012. ManifestAR: an augmented reality manifesto. In The
Engineering Reality of Virtual Reality 2012, Vol. 8289. International Society for
Optics and Photonics, 82890D.

[20] Alastair Fuad-Luke. 2013. Design activism: beautiful strangeness for a sustainable

world. Routledge.

[21] Jordana J George and Dorothy E Leidner. 2019. From clicktivism to hacktivism:
Understanding digital activism. Information and Organization 29, 3 (2019), 100249.
[22] Benjamin Gleason. 2013. # Occupy Wall Street: Exploring informal learning
about a social movement on Twitter. American Behavioral Scientist 57, 7 (2013),
966–982.

[23] Kavita Gonsalves, Marcus Foth, Glenda Caldwell, and Waldemar Jenek. 2021.
Radical placemaking: An immersive, experiential and activist approach for
marginalised communities. Connections: Exploring heritage, architecture, cities,
art, media. Vol. 20.1. (2021), 237–252.

[24] Anhong Guo, Ilter Canberk, Hannah Murphy, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, and
Rajan Vaish. 2019. Blocks: Collaborative and persistent augmented reality expe-
riences. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous
Technologies 3, 3 (2019), 1–24.

[25] Aurora Harley. 2020. UX guidelines for augmented-reality shopping tools. https:
//www.nngroup.com/articles/augmented-reality-ecommerce-guidelines/
[26] Michael T Heaney and Fabio Rojas. 2014. Hybrid activism: Social movement
mobilization in a multimovement environment. Amer. J. Sociology 119, 4 (2014),
1047–1103.

[27] Fernanda Herrera, Jeremy Bailenson, Erika Weisz, Elise Ogle, and Jamil Zaki.
2018. Building long-term empathy: A large-scale comparison of traditional and
virtual reality perspective-taking. PloS one 13, 10 (2018), e0204494.

[28] Jaylin Herskovitz, Jason Wu, Samuel White, Amy Pavel, Gabriel Reyes, Anhong
Guo, and Jeffrey P Bigham. 2020. Making mobile augmented reality applications
accessible. In The 22nd International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers
and Accessibility. 1–14.

[30] Nathan Jurgenson. 2011.

[29] Tad Hirsch and John Henry. 2005. TXTmob: text messaging for protest swarms.
In CHI’05 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems. 1455–1458.
Digital Dualism versus Augmented Real-
ity. https://thesocietypages.org/cyborgology/2011/02/24/digital-dualism-versus-
augmented-reality/

[31] Antti Jylhä, Petteri Nurmi, Miika Sirén, Samuli Hemminki, and Giulio Jacucci.
2013. Matkahupi: a persuasive mobile application for sustainable mobility. In
Proceedings of the 2013 ACM conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing

Understanding AR Activism

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

[54] Samaneh Sanaeipoor and Khashayar Hojjati Emami. 2020. Smart City: Exploring
the Role of Augmented Reality in Placemaking. In 2020 4th International Confer-
ence on Smart City, Internet of Things and Applications (SCIOT). IEEE, 91–98.
[55] Dieter Schmalstieg, Tobias Langlotz, and Mark Billinghurst. 2008. Augmented

Reality 2.0. In Virtual Realities.

[56] Kristen Shinohara, Cynthia L Bennett, Wanda Pratt, and Jacob O Wobbrock. 2018.
Tenets for social accessibility: Towards humanizing disabled people in design.
ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing (TACCESS) 11, 1 (2018), 1–31.

[57] Mark Skwarek. 2018. Augmented reality activism.

In Augmented reality art.

Springer, 3–40.

[58] Ivan E Sutherland. 1968. A head-mounted three dimensional display. In Proceed-
ings of the December 9-11, 1968, fall joint computer conference, part I. 757–764.
[59] David R Thomas. 2006. A general inductive approach for analyzing qualitative

evaluation data. American journal of evaluation 27, 2 (2006), 237–246.

[60] Ann Thorpe. 2012. Architecture and design versus consumerism: how design

activism confronts growth. Routledge.

[61] Jasper Tran O’Leary, Sara Zewde, Jennifer Mankoff, and Daniela K Rosner. 2019.
Who gets to future? Race, representation, and design methods in Africatown. In
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1–13.

[62] Zeynep Tufekci and Christopher Wilson. 2012. Social media and the decision
to participate in political protest: Observations from Tahrir Square. Journal of
communication 62, 2 (2012), 363–379.

[63] Otto Von Busch. 2022. Making Trouble: Design and Material Activism. Bloomsbury

Publishing.

[64] Hsin-Kai Wu, Silvia Wen-Yu Lee, Hsin-Yi Chang, and Jyh-Chong Liang. 2013.
Current status, opportunities and challenges of augmented reality in education.
Computers & education 62 (2013), 41–49.

[65] Alison Wylie. 2020. The promise and perils of an ethic of stewardship.

In

Embedding ethics. Routledge, 47–68.

[66] Yuhang Zhao, Cynthia L Bennett, Hrvoje Benko, Edward Cutrell, Christian Holz,
Meredith Ringel Morris, and Mike Sinclair. 2018. Enabling people with visual
impairments to navigate virtual reality with a haptic and auditory cane simulation.
In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems.
1–14.

[67] Ethan Zuckerman. 2007. The connection between cute cats and web censor-
ship. http://ethanz.wpengine.com/2007/07/16/the-connection-between-cute-
cats-and-web-censorship/

adjunct publication. 227–230.

[32] Martijn JL Kors, Gabriele Ferri, Erik D Van Der Spek, Cas Ketel, and Ben AM
Schouten. 2016. A breathtaking journey. On the design of an empathy-arousing
mixed-reality game. In Proceedings of the 2016 Annual Symposium on Computer-
Human Interaction in Play. 91–104.

[33] Stacey Kuznetsov, George Noel Davis, Eric Paulos, Mark D Gross, and Jian Chiu
Cheung. 2011. Red balloon, green balloon, sensors in the sky. In Proceedings of
the 13th international conference on Ubiquitous computing. 237–246.

[34] Stacey Kuznetsov, Eric Paulos, and Mark D Gross. 2010. WallBots: interactive
wall-crawling robots in the hands of public artists and political activists. In
Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems. 208–217.

[35] Christopher A Le Dantec. 2016. Designing publics. MIT Press.
[36] Yu-Hao Lee and Gary Hsieh. 2013. Does slacktivism hurt activism? The effects of
moral balancing and consistency in online activism. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on human factors in computing systems. 811–820.

[37] Hanlin Li, Disha Bora, Sagar Salvi, and Erin Brady. 2018. Slacktivists or Activists?
Identity Work in the Virtual Disability March. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13.

[38] Fannie Liu, Denae Ford, Chris Parnin, and Laura Dabbish. 2017. Selfies as social
movements: Influences on participation and perceived impact on stereotypes.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 1, CSCW (2017), 1–21.
[39] Blair Maclntyre and Trevor F Smith. 2018. Thoughts on the Future of WebXR
and the Immersive Web. In 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and
Augmented Reality Adjunct (ISMAR-Adjunct). IEEE, 338–342.

[40] Thomas Markussen. 2013. The disruptive aesthetics of design activism: enacting

design between art and politics. Design Issues 29, 1 (2013), 38–50.

[41] Rob McMahon, Amanda Almond, Greg Whistance-Smith, Diana Steinhauer, Stew-
art Steinhauer, and Diane P Janes. 2019. Sweetgrass AR: Exploring augmented
reality as a resource for Indigenous–settler relations. International Journal of
Communication 13 (2019), 23.

[42] Jasna S Milošević-Ðorđević and Iris L Žeželj. 2017. Civic activism online: Making
young people dormant or more active in real life? Computers in Human Behavior
70 (2017), 113–118.

[43] Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Danah Boyd, Emre Kiciman, Munmun De Choud-
hury, and Scott Counts. 2013. The new war correspondents: The rise of civic
media curation in urban warfare. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer
supported cooperative work. 1443–1452.

[44] Evgeny Morozov.

2009.

tivism.
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=104302141.

Foreign Policy.

The

new world
brave
Retrieved July 28,

of
2016

slack-
from

[45] Fariba Mostajeran, Frank Steinicke, Oscar Javier Ariza Nunez, Dimitrios Gatsios,
and Dimitrios Fotiadis. 2020. Augmented reality for older adults: Exploring
acceptability of virtual coaches for home-based balance training in an aging pop-
ulation. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1–12.

[46] Lisa Nakamura. 2019. Virtual reality and the feeling of virtue: Women of color
narrators, enforced hospitality, and the leveraging of empathy. In Proceedings of
the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference. 3–3.

[47] Janne Paavilainen, Hannu Korhonen, Kati Alha, Jaakko Stenros, Elina Koskinen,
and Frans Mayra. 2017. The Pokémon GO experience: A location-based aug-
mented reality mobile game goes mainstream. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI
conference on human factors in computing systems. 2493–2498.

[48] Eric Paulos, RJ Honicky, and Ben Hooker. 2009. Citizen science: Enabling partici-
patory urbanism. In Handbook of research on urban informatics: The practice and
promise of the real-time city. IGI Global, 414–436.

[49] Thammathip Piumsomboon, Gun A Lee, Andrew Irlitti, Barrett Ens, Bruce H
Thomas, and Mark Billinghurst. 2019. On the shoulder of the giant: A multi-scale
mixed reality collaboration with 360 video sharing and tangible interaction. In
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems.
1–17.

[50] The Whole Story Project. 2017. WholeStoryProject. Retrieved January 1, 2022
from https://www.commarts.com/project/11275/the-whole-story-project-ar-app
[51] Refratik. 2015. HackDaPatriaProject. Retrieved January 1, 2022 from https:

//refrakt.org/states-of-mind

[52] Flora Salim and Usman Haque. 2015. Urban computing in the wild: A survey
on large scale participation and citizen engagement with ubiquitous computing,
cyber physical systems, and Internet of Things. International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies 81 (2015), 31–48.

[53] Janice Tisha Samuels, Anijo P. Mathew, Chantala Kommanivanh, Daniel Kwon,
Liz Gomez, B’Rael Ali Thunder, Daria Velazquez, Millie Martinez, and Leah
LaQueens. 2018. Art, Human Computer Interaction, and Shared Experiences:
A Gun Violence Prevention Intervention. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Montreal QC, Canada)
(CHI EA ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–4.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3186526

CHI ’22, April 29-May 5, 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA

Silva, et al.

APPENDIX
A INTERVIEW QUESTIONS

A.1 Introduction and Background

(1) Can you provide a brief description of yourself and the work you do?
(2) Tell me more about tools and techniques you used in your work.
(3) Is your work intended to provide a social contribution? If so, why/how?

(a) Would you say your work is connected to ‘activism’? Why or why not?

(4) On your (website, or other), I noticed you’ve described yourself as (an AR activist, or other). Could you explain what that means?

A.2 Decisions around using AR for their project

(5) I’d like to learn more about <insert project name>. Can you tell me about it?

(a) What did you do?
(b) What was the goal of the project?
(c) What audience were you trying to reach (if any)?
(d) What is the history of this project?

(6) How did you incorporate AR in this project?

(a) What tools did you use?
(b) Why did you use these tools?
(c) How was the process for learning to use these tools?

(7) Why did you decide to use AR for this project?
(8) Did you use any other technologies besides AR?

(a) Why or why not?
(b) Were you considering using any other technologies? If yes, why did you decide not to use them?

A.3 How AR influenced the project

(9) What would you change about your project, if anything?
(10) What did you like about using AR, if anything?
(11) What didn’t you like about using AR, if anything?

(a) Did you experience any challenges in using AR for your project?

(12) Was there anything you wish you could have done with AR for this project?

(a) Why?
(b) What barriers did you experience to doing that?

(13) What impact do you believe this project had on <insert audience they described above>?

(a) Were you able to achieve your goal of <insert goal described above>?
(b) (If no) What do you think could have helped you achieve your goal?

(14) How did AR affect the project’s ability to have this impact, if at all?

(a) (alternatively) Do you think the project could have had this impact without AR?
(b) Why or why not?

A.4 Broader experience with AR

(15) Have you used AR in any other project?

(a) Why or why not?
(b) (if not) Have you considered using AR in another project? Why or why not?
(c) Would you consider using it in future projects? Why or why not?

(16) Do you know any other activists who are using AR?

(a) If yes, please explain.
(b) What do you think about their work?
(c) What do you think about how they used AR?

