2
2
0
2

r
p
A
8

]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
9
2
0
4
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

CO2 removal and 1.5◦C: what, when, where, and how?

Solene Chiquier,ab Mathilde Fajardy,c and Niall MacDowell∗ab

The international community aims to limit global warming to 1.5◦C, but little progress has been made to-
wards a global, cost-efﬁcient, and fair climate mitigation plan to deploy carbon dioxide removal (CDR) at the
Paris Agreement’s scale. Here, we investigate how different CDR options — afforestation/reforestation (AR),
bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS), and direct air carbon capture and storage (DACCS) —
might be deployed to meet the Paris Agreement’s CDR objectives. We ﬁnd that international cooperation in
climate mitigation policy is key for deploying the most cost-efﬁcient CDR pathway — comprised of BECCS,
mainly (74%), and AR (26%) —, allowing to take the most advantage of regional bio-geophysical resources
and socio-economic factors, and time variations, and therefore minimising costs.
Importantly, with inter-
national cooperation, the spatio-temporal evolution of the CDR pathway differs greatly from the regional
allocation of the Paris Agreement’s CDR objectives — based on responsibility for climate change, here used as
a proxy for their socio-economically fair distribution. With limited, or no international cooperation, we ﬁnd
that the likelihood of delivering these CDR objectives decreases, as deploying CDR pathways becomes signif-
icantly more challenging and costly. Key domestic bio-geophysical resources include geological CO2 sinks, of
which the absence or the current lack of identiﬁcation undermines the feasibility of the Paris Agreement’s CDR
objectives, and land and biomass supply, of which the limited availability makes them more costly — partic-
ularly when leading to the deployment of DACCS. Moreover, we show that developing international/inter-
regional cooperation policy instruments — such as an international market for negative emissions trading —
can deliver, simultaneously, cost-efﬁcient and equitable CDR at the Paris Agreement’s scale, by incentivising
participating nations to meet their share of the Paris Agreement’s CDR objectives, whilst making up for the un-
even distribution of CDR potentials across the world. Crucially, we conclude that international cooperation —
cooperation policy instruments, but also robust institutions to monitor, verify and accredit their efﬁciency and
equity — is imperative, as soon as possible, to preserve the feasibility and sustainability of future CDR path-
ways, and ensure that future generations do not bear the burden, increasingly costlier, of climate mitigation
inaction.

1

Introduction

1.1 Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) and the Paris Agreement

Through the 2015 Paris Agreement, Parties to the UNFCCC agreed
to hold global warming to "well below" 2◦C and pursue efforts
to limit it to 1.5◦C by reducing global CO2 emissions as soon as
possible and reaching net-zero by mid-century 1. Because of the
near-linear relationship between cumulative anthropogenic CO2
emissions and temperature increase 2–5, halting global warming
to 1.5◦C requires CO2 emissions to stay within a remaining car-
bon budget of about 420 Gt CO2

6–9.

If

future anthropogenic CO2 emissions are not

reduced
promptly enough and “overshoot” this remaining carbon budget,
then negative CO2 emissions will be required to return to it, i.e.
the CO2 emissions level (and the temperature increase target of
1.5◦C) is ﬁrst exceeded and then return to by deploying carbon
dioxide removal (CDR). However, delaying short-term climate
mitigation will ultimately result into a more aggressive mid-term

aCentre for Environmental Policy, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London,
SW7 1NA, UK.
bCentre for Process Systems Engineering, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road,
London, SW7 2AZ, UK.
cCambridge Judge Business School, University of Cambridge, Trumpington Street, Cam-
bridge CB2 1AG, UK.
∗Corresponding author. Email: niall@imperial.ac.uk; Tel: +44 (0)20 7594 9298

transformation of energy systems, higher long-term costs, and
stronger transitional economic and societal impacts 10–13. Partic-
ularly, the increased reliance on CDR might render the feasibility
of the 1.5◦C objective of the Paris Agreement questionable 14–16.
Most Parties have committed to legally-binding net-zero tar-
gets by the second half of this century — mostly 2050 but also,
for instance, 2060 in China or 2070 in India — since the close of
COP26 17,18. However, almost none are on track with their na-
tionally determined contributions (NDCs) 19, which themselves,
moreover and anyway, still fall short of the Paris Agreement’s
1.5◦C ambition 17,20,21. Therefore,
large-scale deployment of
CDR is critical not only 1) to achieve net-zero by compensating
for on-going CO2 emissions, particularly residual ones from hard-
to-abate sectors such as transport or agriculture, but also 2) to
provide net negative emissions to return from any overshoots of
the remaining carbon budget 22.

In Integrated Assessment Models

(IAMs), most 1.5◦C-
consistent scenarios require CO2 emissions to decrease from
2030, reach net zero by 2050, and become net negative after-
wards in order to return from overshoots 6,23. “No or limited over-
shoot” scenarios (categorised as P1, P2 and P3 in the Special Re-
port on Global Warming of 1.5◦C (SR15) published by the IPCC)

1–39 | 1

 
 
 
 
 
 
rely on cumulative CO2 removal of 246–689 GtCO2 by 2100*,
and “higher overshoot” scenarios (categorised as P4) on as much
6,7. Such deployments of CDR are estimated to
as 1,186 GtCO2
start immediately (i.e., between 2020–2030) and reach up to 4–
24 GtCO2/yr in 2100 6,7. For these reasons, this study focuses
on the 1.5◦C-consistent CDR scenarios of the IPCC SR15, rather
than on the mid-century net-zero objectives set out by the Parties’
NDCs.

1.2 The techno-economic challenges of CDR

Various CDR options has been suggested — including afforesta-
tion/reforestation (AR) 24, bioenergy with carbon capture and
storage (BECCS) 25, direct air capture with carbon capture and
storage (DACCS) 26,27, ocean fertilisation 28, enhanced weather-
ing (EW) of minerals 29,30, biochar 31,32 or soil carbon sequestra-
tion 32,33 — but have scarcely been taken up in IAMs. To that
date, they have included mainly AR and BECCS, DACCS as well
(yet only recently), and seldom EW 34–38, and that mainly be-
cause other CDR options are still highly speculative 39. Particu-
larly, only BECCS 40 and DACCS 41,42 have been deployed at the
demonstration scale, yet nowhere near the scales required to de-
liver the Paris Agreement’s 1.5◦C ambition, and whilst AR is a
well-established and mature practice, projects with the aim of re-
moving CO2 from the atmosphere have only recently emerged,
mostly in China 43,44.

The nascent nature of most CDR options has raised heightened
concerns about the feasibility and sustainability of the large-scale
deployments of CDR in 1.5◦C-consistent scenarios, especially if
achieved via such limited portfolios of CDR options (e.g., only
BECCS and AR) 45–48. Particularly, Fuss et al. 45 reduced the CDR
potential of BECCS in 2050 from 8 to 0.5–5 GtCO2/yr for sus-
tainability safeguard, and suggested therefore that BECCS alone
would be insufﬁcient to deliver the Paris Agreement’s most strin-
gent CDR targets, such as in the P4 scenario of the SR15. Despite
the increasing focus on CDR in the academic literature, empha-
sising on CDR potential, cost, and up-scaling, as well as interac-
tions with the sustainable development goals (SDGs), the CDR
efﬁciency and permanence of most CDR options are still uncer-
tain, and remain major challenges to their deployment 45,47,49,50.

1.3 International cooperation and CDR policy

With the principle of "common but differentiated responsibilities
and respective capabilities" lying at the heart of the Paris Agree-
ment, there has been recently an increasing reﬂection on the role
and value of CDR at the national scale and the need for equity
in sharing its global burden 51,52. Different burden-sharing prin-
ciples 53, based on equity, climate change responsibility, or ﬁnan-
cial capacity for instance, have been investigated in the context of
CDR 51,54.

Importantly, the amounts of CDR deployed in global and cost-
optimal IAMs scenarios fail to reﬂect the responsibility of each

* These numbers account for negative emissions arising from both "CCS/Biomass" and

"CO2/AFOLU", as categorised by the IPCC.

2 | 1–39

nation for climate change, or any other socio-economically fair
establishment of its share of the global CDR burden. As the CDR
potentials (as well as feasibilities) of each nation vary due to bio-
geophysical and socio-political factors — including the availabil-
ity of bioenergy resources, geological and/or biogenic CO2 sinks
and low-carbon and affordable energy, and the acceptability of
the various CDR options—, they don’t necessarily match with na-
tional CDR targets, and that, regardless of how the global CDR
burden is shared.

As promoted by the Paris Agreement (in the general context of
climate mitigation), international cooperation would certainly al-
low to deploy most-cost efﬁciently, sustainably, and feasibly CDR
in line with the Paris Agreement 1.5◦C ambition. For instance,
Fajardy et al. 55 emphasised the value of collaboration in deliv-
ering CDR at large-scales, via BECCS, in a most cost-effective
manner. Bauer et al. 56 investigated the trade-off between cost-
efﬁciency and national sovereignty — the nation’s ability to main-
tain governing control of economic resources by limiting inter-
national transfer payment, while contributing to climate mitiga-
tion actions — in delivering the Paris Agreement, and showed the
value of cooperation via an hybrid combination of ﬁnancial trans-
fers and differentiated carbon prices. Finally, Streﬂer et al. 34 also
showed that large international ﬁnancial transfer and strong in-
ternational institutions would be required for delivering CDR at
the Paris Agreement’s 1.5◦C scale, while meeting fairness and sus-
tainability criteria.

Deploying CDR with international cooperation will certainly in-
volve the adoption of international/inter-regional policy instru-
ments, such as markets for internationally transferred mitigation
outcomes (ITMOs) (i.e., transfers between domestic ETS) or vol-
untary emission reductions (VERs) (i.e., international market).
Such market-based approaches have been introduced in the Arti-
cle 6 of the Paris Agreement 1, the rulebook of which was recently
completed at COP26.
Importantly, these instruments should be
combined with a transparent assessment of sustainable develop-
ment implications, e.g. the SDGs of the Paris Agreement, as advo-
cated by Honegger and Reiner 57. For example, at the EU-scale,
Rickels et al. 58 considered the integration of BECCS into the EU
emissions trading system (ETS) and its potential implications for
the EU ETS. It is still unclear, however, how CDR options might be
integrated within such international/inter-regional market-based
approaches, notably do to many challenges around the perma-
nence, additivity, measurability, and veriﬁability of their CDR po-
tentials 59,60.

1.4 Contribution of this study

This study investigates the spatio-temporal potential, composi-
tion, and evolution of a portfolio of CDR options (AR, BECCS
and DACCS) by exploring different climate policy options, while
delivering CDR targets that are consistent with the Paris Agree-
ment’s 1.5◦C objective in the context of 5 regions (Brazil, China,
the EU-28, India and the USA).

By doing so, and considering a range of feasibility and sus-
tainability criteria, we aim to keep within reach the Paris Agree-
ment’s 1.5◦C objective by helping policymakers to understand 1)

the real-world potential, implications and challenges of the dif-
ferent nascent CDR options, and 2) the beneﬁts of international
cooperation policy, at high spatio-temporal resolution. Particu-
larly, we aim to bridge the gap between the IAMs top-down ap-
proach and the CDR assessments bottom-up approach. Note that
this study doesn’t contribute to deﬁne how much CDR should be
required to meet the Paris Agreement’s 1.5◦C objective, nor how
it should be shared, i.e. allocated regionally. It doesn’t either aim
to determine policy design for the integration of negative emis-
sions within carbon markets.

Firstly, Section 2 describes the Modelling and Optimisation of
Negative Emissions Technologies (MONET) framework used in
this study.
In Section 3, cost-optimal CDR pathways (i.e., port-
folios of CDR options), subject to alternative climate policies are
outlined. Section 4 discusses the role and value of international
cooperation in climate policy, via an international market for neg-
ative emissions trading, and Section 5 emphasises the urgency of
shifting towards international cooperation policy, and discusses
the impacts of delaying it. Lastly, we present some conclusions in
Section 6.

2 Methods

In this study, we use the Modelling and Optimisation of Negative
Emissions Technologies (MONET) framework to provide insights
on the composition (i.e., what is deployed?) and spatio-temporal
evolution (i.e., when and where is it deployed?) of cost-optimal
CDR pathways deployed to deliver the Paris Agreement’s 1.5◦C
objective. The MONET framework is spatio-temporally explicit,
and it 1) provides whole-system analyses (e.g., CDR potential,
cost, land use) for different CDR options, and 2) determines cost-
optimal deployment of a portfolio of such CDR options between
2020–2100, subject to long-term CDR targets, CDR deployment
conditions (i.e., build/expansion rates and operating lifetimes),
and bio-geophysical constraints (i.e., land and geological CO2
storage availabilities, maximum water stress). All together, these
constraints aim to encompass criteria of feasibility and sustain-
ability.

The current implementation of MONET describes the deploy-
ment of 3 CDR options — AR, BECCS, and DACCS — across 5 re-
gions — Brazil, China, the EU (EU-27 + UK), India and the USA.
The spatial resolution is at the state/province scale (national scale
for the EU), that is 169 sub-regions, and the temporal resolution
(i.e., time-step) is 10 years. Consistently with 1.5◦C scenarios,
we assume that the worldwide economy transitions towards net-
zero, particularly the electricity and the transport/fuel sectors, as
presented previously 61,62. This is illustrated in Figure 1.

The MONET framework, developed initially for BECCS, has
been presented previously 61–63. Appendix A brieﬂy describes
the key characteristics of the BECCS archetype, as it has been
already implemented in the MONET framework, and further de-
tails the key characteristics of AR and DACCS archetypes. Ap-
pendix B presents the mathematical formulation of the optimisa-
tion model, adapted from previous publications to include AR and
DACCS archetypes, and Appendix C describes the recently added
(or updated) datasets (i.e., land and geological CO2 storage avail-
abilities) used to constraint the optimisation model.

Fig. 1 Transition of the worldwide economy towards net-zero. Following
a decreasing carbon intensity (as projected by the IPCC P2 scenario 6,7,
the electricity system becomes carbon neutral in 2050. Fossil-fuels (i.e.,
diesel and petrol) are progressively replaced by 100% bio-fuels (i.e., bio-
diesel and bio-ethanol) in 2080. Natural gas is switched to 100% wood
as early as 2040 for biomass drying for BECCS.

2.1 Key optimisation constraints
2.1.1 Long-term CDR targets.

Cumulative CDR targets consistent with the IPCC scenarios lim-
iting global warming to 1.5◦C are selected in this study as fol-
lows 6,7. The P3 scenario — a middle-of-the-road scenario, in
which societal and technological development follows historical
trends — is used in our reference scenarios. The P4 scenario —
a fossil-fueled development scenario, in which economic growth
and globalisation lead to the widespread adoption of greenhouse-
gas-intensive lifestyle — is used in sensitivity analysis scenarios,
in which higher CDR targets are imposed (See Appendix E).

However, because of the complexity and sophistication of IAMs,
the spatial resolution of climate mitigation scenarios is necessarily
limited, i.e. the world is usually represented with a limited num-
ber of regions. Particularly, these regions don’t exactly coincide
with the ones considered in this study. Moreover, the different
levels of CDR deployed in IAMs are the result of global and cost-
optimal climate mitigation pathways, and therefore, they don’t
reﬂect on the responsibility for climate change of each nation,
nor on its capability to address it.

For these reasons, we apply here a responsibility-based burden-
sharing principle to allocate regional CDR targets, i.e.
to each
region considered in the MONET framework 64. In both IPCC sce-
narios (P3 or P4), global CDR targets are distributed in proportion
to each region’s cumulative historic GHG emissions 65,66. This is
presented in detail in Table 1. Note that we don’t intend to be
prescriptive in our selection of the burden-sharing principle, but
rather provide a proxy for a socio-economically fair regional dis-
tribution of 1.5◦C-consistent CDR targets. Recognising that the
distribution of the global CDR burden will likely be decided upon
via international negotiations rather than via deterministic ana-
lytical approaches, we direct interested readers to Pozo et al. 54

1–39 | 3

Fossil-fuelBio-fuelNatural GasWoodYearBrazilChinaEUIndiaUSAFuels Shares (%)Electricity Carbon Intensity (kgCO2/MJ)202021002040205020602070208020902030050100150200250020406080100and references therein for a broader discussion of burden-sharing
principles in the context of CDR.

pacity would thus be equivalent to 5.7 GtCO2/yr at the MONET
scale.

Table 1 Implications of the responsibility-based burden-sharing principle
— based on cumulative historic GHG emissions — on the regional allo-
cation of the IPCC P3 and P4 CDR targets in this study. The USA and
the EU are the two largest GHG emitters here, on a cumulative-basis.
They are allocated 21.3% and 19.9% of the IPCC CDR targets, respec-
tively. Conversely, Brazil’s historical GHG emissions are very low, and is
allocated only 1.8% of the IPCC CDR targets.

Cumulative
GHG emissions
1850-2019
(GtCO2)a
47
357
521
128
557

Proportion
of CDR
targets
(%)
1.8
13.7
19.9
4.1
21.3

Cumulative
P3 target
2100
(GtCO2)
7
56
81
20
87

Cumulative
P4 target
2100
(GtCO2)
21
161
235
58
252

1,610

2,612

61.6

100

251

408

727

1,179

Nations

Brazil
China
EU–28
India
USA
Total
MONET
nations
World

a Cumulative historic GHG emissions excluding Land Use, Land Use
Change, and Forestry (LULUCF) between 1850–2019 66, as categorised
by the IPCC 2006 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 67

Particularly, the 5 regions considered in this study are respon-
sible for 62.4% of the cumulative historic GHG emissions 68. To-
gether, they also accounted for 50% of the global population and
68% of the global GDP in 2018 69. Therefore, the case-study pre-
sented here can be reasonably considered representative of the
international landscape, as well as the insights obtained here can
be found valuable for policymakers in climate change mitigation.

2.1.2 CDR deployment rates.

The deployment of CDR options is limited here by lifetime-
operating conditions and deployment rates. We assume that
BECCS and DACCS plants have a lifetime of 30 years. Following
previous work, they are operating base-load 70–73. Conversely, AR
has a "perpetual" lifetime, i.e. once established, forests need to be
maintained in perpetuity in order to avoid any reversal of CO2
emissions back to the atmosphere.

We assume a maximum build rate for BECCS plants of 2 GW/yr
at the sub-region scale, based on the literature surveyed on en-
ergy system and climate mitigation strategy modelling 74. Note
that if BECCS plants were maximally-deployed (i.e., as much is
built as allowed by the build rate constraints), given an average
BECCS CO2 capture capacity of 4.2 MtCO2/yr/plant†, this would
be equivalent to 16.8 MtCO2/yr at the sub-regional scale, and 2.8
GtCO2/yr at the MONET scale.

Because of the relative immaturity of the DAC technology, lit-
tle build rate estimates can be found for DACCS in the literature.
To ensure fair comparison across CDR technologies, a maximum
build rate for DAC plants of 16.8 MtCO2/yr at the sub-regional
scale is also used, i.e. the same rate as BECCS. If both BECCS and
DACCS were maximally-deployed, the maximum CO2 capture ca-

Based on a maximum worldwide deployment rate of 47 Mha/yr
for AR reported in the IPCC SR15‡, we downscaled this number to
8.5 Mha/yr at the MONET scale, then 50 kha/yr at sub-regional
scale (equal sub-regional rates), using forest areas at both the
global and MONET scales 6,75. For context, note that histori-
cal rates between 1990–2020 reported by the FAO are usually
much lower, with afforestation rates of 2,095 kha/yr in China,
470 kha/yr in the EU, 274 kha/yr in India, and 245 kha/yr in the
USA, and with a deforestation rate of 3,076 kha/yr in Brazil 76.

Recognising that the assumptions made here on maximum de-
ployment rates are relatively optimistic in comparison to histor-
ical afforestation/deforestation rates, as well as owing to the
highly speculative and non-commercial status of CDR options, we
also run a sensitivity analysis on higher deployment rates (See
Appendix E).

2.1.3 Land & Biomass availabilities.

Sustainability criteria are also considered here, particularly for
the deployment of land-based CDR solutions, such as AR and
BECCS. AR is limited by the availability of ecologically appeal-
ing areas with a potential for reforestation 77 (RP) (See Appendix
C.2 for a detail overview of the dataset used here). Biomass for
BECCS is restricted to dedicated-energy crops (DEC) cultivated on
marginal agricultural lands 78 (MAL), and agricultural residues ,
particularly wheat straw, collected from harvested wheat areas 79.
Finally, to avoid exacerbating potential water stress and creat-
ing or intensifying water scarcities, the cultivation of biomass for
BECCS is further limited to areas with low water stress, i.e. ar-
eas wherein the overall water risk is less than or equal to 3 on
a 5-point scale 80 as described previously 55,61,62. Therefore, the
production of biomass for BECCS in our study has no negative
impacts on the agricultural sector and its associated food supply.

2.1.4 Geological CO2 storage availability.

Regional geological CO2 storage availability and capacity are used
here to constrain the deployment of geological CDR options, such
as BECCS and DACCS. Quantitative assessments of varying levels
of detail were available for the USA 81 and China 82,83 at the sub-
regional scale, and for the EU 84–87 at the national scale. How-
ever, with the exception of one quantitative study on the Campos
Basin oil ﬁelds in Brazil 88, only qualitative national assessments
were identiﬁed for Brazil 89 and India 90. Therefore, the reference
scenarios presented in this study are based exclusively on quanti-
tative data on geological CO2 storage capacity (See Appendix C.1
for a detail overview of the CO2 storage capacity datasets used
here).

Recognising the current uncertainty surrounding CO2 storage
capacity and availability, especially the strong probability for CO2
storage sites to exist both in Brazil and India, in spite of not being
identiﬁed yet, we also run a sensitivity analysis on higher CO2

† The CO2 capture capacity of a BECCS plant is calculated here for a 500 MW dedi-
cated biomass power plant, with a capture rate of 90%, as presented previously 62.

‡ After comparing all scenarios of the IPCC SR15 (P1, P2, P3 and P4), we found that
the maximum deployment rate for AR was 47 Mha/yr, between 2020–2030, in the
IPCC P2 scenario — a sustainable development scenario 7.

4 | 1–39

storage availability and capacity, based on both quantitative and
qualitative data (See Appendix E).

2.2 Key metrics

We used different metrics in this study to describe the cost-
efﬁciency of the CDR pathways deployed in the different policy
scenarios.

2.2.1 Cumulative total net cost.

The cumulative total net cost — CTNC — quantiﬁes the total net
investment — for the deployment of any CDR pathway, as shown
in Eq. 1. For the BECCS archetype, the CNTC is equal to BECCS
total cost minus the revenues from electricity generation, For AR
and DACCS archetypes, the CNTCs are equal to their total costs
only.

CT NC(t) = CTCAR(t) +CT NCBECCS(t) +CTCDACCS(t)

∀ t (1)

where: CT NC(t) is the cumulative total net cost of the CDR path-
way until the year t ($); CTCAR(t) is the cumulative total cost
of AR until the year t ($); CT NCBECCS(t) is the cumulative to-
tal net cost of BECCS – total cost minus revenues from elec-
tricity generation – until the year t ($); and CTCDACCS(t) is the
cumulative total cost of DACCS until the year t ($). Note that
t ∈ {2020, 2030, ..., 2100}, and by default, CT NC(2020) = 0.

2.2.2 Cumulative net cost of CDR.

The cumulative net cost of CDR – CNC – quantiﬁes the averaged
cost of deploying CDR, as shown in Eq 2:

CNC(t) =

CT NC(t)
CRCO2(t)

∀ t

(2)

where: CNC(t) is the cumulative net cost of CDR until the year
t ($/tCO2); CT NC(t) is the cumulative total net cost of the
CDR pathway deployed until the year t ($); and CRCO2(t) is
the cumulative total CDR until the year t (tCO2). Note that
t ∈ {2020, 2030, ..., 2100}, and by default, CT NC(2020) = 0 and
CRCO2(2020) = 0, therefore CNC(2020) = 0.

2.2.3 Marginal net cost of CDR.

The marginal net cost of CDR – MNC – quantiﬁes the actual/real
cost of deploying CDR, as shown in Eq 3:

MNC(t) =





CT NC(t)
CRCO2(t)

∀ t = 2020

CT NC(t) −CT NC(t − 1)
CRCO2(t) −CRCO2(t − 1)

∀ t > 2020

where: MNC(t) is the marginal net cost of CDR until the year
t ($/tCO2); CT NC(t) is the cumulative total net cost of the
CDR pathway deployed until the year t ($); and CRCO2(t) is
the cumulative total CDR until the year t (tCO2). Note that
t ∈ {2020, 2030, ..., 2100}, and by default, CT NC(2020) = 0 and
CRCO2(2020) = 0, therefore MNC(2020) = 0.

2.3 Alternative policy scenarios
The MONET framework is used here to determine the cost-
optimal co-deployment of AR, BECCS and DACCS to deliver the
Paris Agreement’s 1.5◦C-consistent CDR objectives — here, the
IPCC P3 CDR targets 6,7 — subject to the following alternative
policy options:

• International cooperation policy scenario: In this scenario
(referred as COOPERATION scenario), CDR targets are pur-
sued in an international cooperation paradigm. We assume that
an international policy instrument (such as one of the carbon
market approaches deﬁned in Articles 6.2 and 6.4 of the Paris
Agreement 1) has been developed, allowing regions to share
the effort to meet 1.5◦C-consistent CDR targets. Therefore, the
regions considered in this study can meet the cumulative CDR
targets together, based on their shared (as opposed to individ-
ual) responsibility for climate change (See Section 2.1.1). They
can also trade bio-geophysical resources, particularly biomass,
and therefore deploying inter-regional biomass supply chains
for BECCS.

• "Current policy" scenario: In this scenario (referred as CUR-
RENT POLICY scenario), CDR targets are pursued in a climate
policy paradigm envisaged by the current policy landscape. For
context, domestic emissions trading systems (ETS), such as the
EU ETS, the UK ETS, or the California (USA) ETS, are cur-
rently creating incentives to reduce CO2 emissions via a "cap-
and-trade" principle. However, these ETS are not linked, i.e.
there are no bilateral or multilateral transfers between them,
and negative emissions are not yet integrated within them. In
light of this, we assume that the regions considered in this
study must meet individual cumulative CDR targets, based on
their respective responsibilities for climate change (See Section
2.1.1). Bio-geophysical resources, particularly biomass, can
still be traded inter-regionally (i.e., local or imported biomass
for BECCS). This scenario is equivalent to an international cli-
mate policy landscape in which CDR has been incorporated into
domestic ETS, but cannot be transferred from one to another.

• "National isolation policy" scenario: In this scenario (referred
as ISOLATION scenario), the 1.5◦C-consistent CDR targets are
pursued in a national isolation paradigm. We assume that no
international policy instrument framework has been developed
to distribute the effort to meet the 1.5◦C-consistent CDR targets
(i.e., individual CDR targets), and that there is no inter-regional
trading of bio-geophysical resources (i.e., only local biomass
supply chains for BECCS).

(3)

3 Optimal co-deployment of CDR options

Here, we identify the deployment of cost-optimal CDR pathways
under the 3 policy scenarios described in Section 2.3 in order to
deliver CDR targets that are consistent with the Paris Agreement’s
1.5◦C objective. As discussed, we use the IPCC P3 CDR targets 6,7
for these reference scenarios. The composition of these CDR path-
ways — AR, BECCS and/or DACCS — and their spatio-temporal
evolution — between 2020–2100 and across Brazil, China, the
EU, India and the USA — are discussed in this section.

1–39 | 5

Fig. 2 Cost-optimal CO2 removal from 2020 to 2100, for each CDR option and for each region, under alternative P3-consistent policy scenarios: A)
globally and cumulatively, B) regionally and cumulatively, and C) globally and annually. With international cooperation in climate mitigation policy,
CDR options (i.e., BECCS and AR) are aggressively deployed in most cost-eﬃcient regions — in this study, in China. As a result, the deployment of
CDR diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the regional distribution of the IPCC P3 CDR targets (consistent with the Paris Agreement’s 1.5◦C objective) based on
the responsibility-based burden-sharing principle, used here as a proxy for fair allocation. With little or no cooperation, CDR options are deployed in
regions where individual targets are the greatest — in the USA, the EU and China — but the global 2100 CDR target is missed by 14 GtCO2 in India,
owing to the lack of available and appropriate bio-geophysical resources (i.e., geological and biogenic CO2 sinks). With no cooperation at all, DACCS
is deployed in the EU and the USA to overcome the exhausted local biomass supply for BECCS.

3.1 The international cooperation policy paradigm

In the COOPERATION scenario, CDR is successfully delivered at
the Paris Agreement’s 1.5◦C scale by 2100. This is achieved via
BECCS mainly, with 186 GtCO2 (74%), and AR, with 65 GtCO2
(26%) (Fig 2-A).

Given the anticipated large scale of CO2 removal over the
century (i.e., high CDR targets increasing over time), constrained
here by maximum deployment rates of the different CDR options,
we ﬁnd that the prompt deployment of the CDR pathway,
starting in the 2020s, is required to deliver the Paris Agreement’s
CDR objectives by 2100.
the amount of CDR
achieved is systematically greater than pre-2100 CDR targets.
As illustrated in Fig. 2-C, BECCS starts delivering CO2 removal
straightaway, and increasingly up to 3.2 GtCO2/yr in 2100. This

Particularly,

is equivalent to 154 GW of BECCS capacity. For context, this
is 4% of the current electricity capacity of China, the EU and
the USA, all together (2,200 GW in China in 2020, 1,117 GW
in the USA in 2020 and 946 GW in the EU-28 in 2019) 91–93.
Importantly, AR is also deployed in the early 2020s, but its
CO2 removal is delayed owing to the period of time required
for trees to grow (See Appendix A for a description of the AR
model used here). Then, because of a combination of CO2 sinks
saturation, i.e. trees reach maturity and hit their maximum CDR
trees planted after
potential, and optimisation edge effect, i.e.
2070 would only play an important role in the 22nd century
but not before, AR’s CO2 removal peaks at a rate of approxi-
mately 1.5 GtCO2/yr in 2090 and falls substantially thereafter.
in the COOPERATION scenario (as well as
in any other reference scenario), whilst BECCS plants are

Note that

6 | 1–39

COOPERATION scenarioCURRENT POLICY scenarioIPCC P3 CDR targetsBECCSARDACCS2040–20502050–20602060–20702070–20802080–20902090–21002030–2040ISOLATION scenarioAB2020–2030Global Cumulative CDR (GtCO2)Regional Cumulative CDR (GtCO2)GlobalBrazilChinaEUIndiaUSA050100150250200040801001401206020Global Annual CDR (GtCO2/yr)COOPERATION scenarioCURRENT POLICY scenarioISOLATION scenarioYear20202040210020602080Year2040210020602080BECCSARDACCS012534012534012534CYear202020402100206020802020i.e.

rate,

However,

due to the exhaustion of

as much is built as al-
rarely maximally-deployed,
is
lowed by the build rate constraints, AR deployment
assumed
constrained by its maximum deployment
here to be 50 kha/yr/sub-region.
the sensitiv-
ity analysis carried out in Appendix E showed that higher
AR deployment rates would only increase its CO2 removal
land availability.
moderately,
forward planning and strategic deployment of
Overall,
the different CDR options is thus key to deliver the Paris
Agreement’s 1.5◦C ambition. Whilst all CDR options have
speciﬁc techno-economic and sustainability characteristics, which
inﬂuence the rate and scale at which they can be deployed, they
can also be distinguished by when they start to capture and
remove CO2, and how long they remove and store CO2. CO2
removal efﬁciency, timing and permanence will certainly have
to be carefully and clearly accounted for, when deploying the
different CDR options.

We also ﬁnd that the spatial deployment of the CDR pathway
differs from a CDR option to another. As shown in Fig. 2-B, there
is no silver-bullet to meet the Paris Agreement’s CDR objectives,
as the optimal portfolio of CDR options within a given region, or
even sub-region, varies around the world (See Appendix D.1 for a
detailed overview of the CDR pathway at the sub-regional scale).
AR can be deployed in most parts of the world, given the
combination of available land and appropriate climate — a
balance between warm temperature and humidity. Speciﬁcally,
between 12–21.5 GtCO2 by 2100 are removed via AR in most
regions (Brazil, China, the EU and the USA) whereas only 4
GtCO2 by 2100 are removed in India, where, in spite of the avail-
ability of land and good climates, they usually do not coincide.
Conversely, because of its complex value chain, we observe
that BECCS deployment is more localized than AR deploy-
ment, owing to the combination of several bio-geophysical and
economic factors: well-characterised CO2 storage capacity;
cost-effective biomass supply (i.e., high MAL availability and
DEC yields, high agricultural residues availability, and low-cost
biomass production); and affordable CO2 transport & stor-
age (T&S) infrastructures. Moreover, regions or sub-regions
where electricity prices are anticipated to be high (as assumed
here) also prove to be more advantageous for BECCS deploy-
ment, as they beneﬁt from higher revenues from electricity
generation. Speciﬁcally, by 2100, 68% of CDR achieved via
BECCS is deployed in China, with a further 19% and 12.5%
deployed in the EU and USA, respectively, and 0.5% in Brazil.
local biomass
supply chains are prioritised — 100 GtDM of pellets (85%)
by 2100, of which 63 GtDM are in China alone. Remaining
imported biomass supply chains mostly originate in regions
with limited or no CO2 storage capacity (as identiﬁed here),
These regions contribute thus
such as Brazil and India.
the Paris Agreement’s CDR
indirectly to the delivering of
objectives through the supply of biomass to other regions,
similarly to the current and incumbent global biomass trade.
Note that DACCS is not deployed in this scenario, owing
to its signiﬁcant higher cost, compared to AR and BECCS. For

As illustrated in Fig.

3, where possible,

DACCS to become cost-competitive, current average costs should
decrease to below $100/tCO2, which is equivalent to a cost re-
duction of around 60–70% for liquid solvent DAC technologies 27,
and 90% for solid sorbent technologies 94 (See Appendix D.2).
Overall, adapting the spatial deployment of the CDR pathway
to each CDR option is thus also key to deliver the Paris Agree-
ment’s 1.5◦C ambition.

Finally, we ﬁnd that CO2 removal

is achieved at lowest
cost in the COOPERATION scenario, with a CNC of $57/tCO2
This is because AR and BECCS can be deployed
by 2100.
most cost-efﬁciently, i.e. without being restricted regionally by
individual CDR targets, such as in Brazil and China in the COOP-
ERATION scenario, or conversely without being "over-deployed",
imposed by individual CDR targets and therefore less
i.e.
cost-efﬁciently, such as in the EU and the USA in the CURRENT
POLICY and ISOLATION scenarios.

3.2 The current policy paradigm

In the CURRENT POLICY scenario, the likelihood of delivering
the Paris Agreement is reduced because the extent to which each
region can remove domestically CO2 from the atmosphere is lim-
ited by its own bio-geophysical sinks for CO2, i.e. geological
sites for BECCS and DACCS and land for AR. As in the COOP-
ERATION scenario, the CDR pathway deployed by 2100 is still
composed of BECCS mainly, whose contribution increased to 195
GtCO2 (83%), and of AR, whose contribution decreased to 40
GtCO2 (17%), but the 2100 CDR target is missed by 16 GtCO2.
As shown in Fig 2-B, most regions successfully reach their in-
dividual CDR targets, via exclusively AR in Brazil or BECCS in
China, or via both in the EU and the USA for instance. Note
that DACCS is also not deployed in this scenario.
For it to
become cost-competitive with AR and BECCS, current average
costs should decrease to below $170/tCO2 (See Appendix D.2).
The EU, and in a much lesser extend the USA as well, rely
partly on biomass supply originating in Brazil and India in or-
der to achieve CDR via BECCS (Fig. 3). Speciﬁcally, 38% and
0.2% the pellet use cumulatively by 2100 in the EU and the
USA, respectively, are imported from Brazil mostly, and India.
This is because domestic biomass supply becomes critical and al-
most exhausted, and imported biomass proves then less costly.
However, a few regions, such as India, are much less well en-
dowed with domestic CO2 sinks, yet required to meet individu-
ally CDR targets, and therefore do not meet their individual CDR
targets by the end of the century. By lack of international cooper-
ation or other alternative CDR solutions, individual CDR targets
are missed in India by 16 GtCO2 by 2100. Note that, given the
size of India, the existence of CO2 storage sites within its bor-
ders is very likely. Such CO2 storage sites would ﬁrst need to
be identiﬁed and assessed before deploying geological CDR op-
tions, such as BECCS or DACCS, but then, they could increase In-
dia’s likelihood to reach its individual CDR targets (See Appendix
E for a sensitivity analysis on higher CO2 storage availability).
Finally, because of the mismatch between a socio-economically
fair regional distribution of the Paris Agreement’s CDR ob-

1–39 | 7

Fig. 3 Cost-optimal cumulative pellet trading for BECCS by 2100, in all P3-consistent policy scenarios. Local biomass supply chains are prioritised,
even when biomass trading is allowed (in the COOPERATION and CURRENT POLICY scenarios). When international biomass is allowed, imported
biomass supply chains mostly originate in Brazil and India – where little or no CO2 storage sites have been identiﬁed (and considered here). With
international cooperation in climate mitigation policy (in the COOPERATION scenario), imported biomass is shipped to China, where most of the CO2
is removed from the atmosphere by 2100. With limited international cooperation (in the CURRENT POLICY scenario), imported biomass is shipped
to the EU , or used locally in China, where individual CDR targets must be met domestically by 2100. Without cooperation (in the ISOLATION
scenario), biomass is used locally in the USA, the EU and China, where individual CDR targets must be met domestically by 2100. Where there is
limited or no CO2 storage, such as in Brazil and India, limited or no biomass can be used for BECCS.

jectives, and the regional availability of bio-geophysical sinks
for CO2, we ﬁnd that
the CNC of CO2 removal by 2100
increases by 45% relatively to the COOPERATION scenario.
Thus, this scenario highlights that delivering the Paris Agree-
ment’s 1.5◦C ambition in a climate mitigation policy paradigm
similar to what is envisioned in the current policy landscape is
less likely than in an international cooperation policy paradigm,
and will certainly increase the Paris Agreement’s ﬁnancial burden.

3.3 The national isolation policy paradigm

In the ISOLATION scenario, the likelihood of the Paris Agree-
ment’s CDR objectives is reduced even further than in the CUR-
RENT POLICY scenario. Not only is the 2100 CDR target still
missed by 16 GtCO2, but the CNC of CO2 removal by 2100 in-
creases by 69% relatively to the COOPERATION scenario. As
shown in Fig.
2-A, 80% of CDR is removed from the at-
mosphere via BECCS, 17% via AR, and also 4% via DACCS.
Because BECCS is deployed exclusively using local biomass,
domestic biomass supply becomes rapidly exhausted in the EU
and the USA. Speciﬁcally, 83% and 100% of the available land
in the USA and the EU (MAL and harvested wheat areas),
respectively, are already allocated to biomass production for
BECCS by 2030. This leads therefore to the deployment of
DACCS in the EU from 2080 and up to 0.7 GtCO2/yr in 2100.
increasing the Paris Agreement’s ﬁnancial bur-
the energy consumed annually to deploy DACCS by
den,
2100 is approximately 265 TWh in the ISOLATION sce-
nario.
the EU current elec-
tricity production (3,275 GWh in the EU-28 in 2018) 95.
Thus, this scenario shows that delivering the Paris Agreement’s
1.5◦C ambition in an isolation policy paradigm is highly unlikely.

This is equivalent

to 8% of

Besides

8 | 1–39

It will not only be more expensive than in an international coop-
eration policy paradigm, but also certainly more energy-intensive,
and could thus compromise the sustainability of the CDR pathway
deployed.

3.4 The beneﬁts of international cooperation policy

the most

2-B showed that

the socio-economically fair dis-
Fig.
tribution of
the regional
the IPCC P3 CDR targets at
scale, based here on the responsibility for climate change,
cost-
differs greatly from the deployment of
optimal CDR pathway achieved with international cooperation.
In the COOPERATION scenario, more than half of the CO2 re-
moval by 2100 is delivered in China, in this study the most cost-
effective region to achieve CDR. Speciﬁcally, 140 GtCO2 (56% of
the global CDR achieved by 2100) are removed in China by 2100
in this scenario, via BECCS and AR, whereas China’s individual
CDR target is only 56 GtCO2 (22% of the global 2100 CDR tar-
get). Brazil also provides an additional 15 GtCO2 over and above
its individual CDR target by 2100, almost exclusively via AR.
Establishing of a policy instrument that enables international
cooperation while fulﬁlling the Paris Agreement’s CDR objectives,
via the international trade of negative emissions for instance,
is therefore found to substantially reduces the ﬁnancial burden
of the Paris Agreement by 51–69%. Whilst AR’s CNC of CDR
remains approximately constant in all scenarios (See Appendix
D.2 for a detailed overview of the MNC of CDR achieved via all
CDR options, in all scenarios) — this CDR solution is used to
its full extent in all scenarios —, BECCS becomes signiﬁcantly
more costly in the CURRENT POLICY and ISOLATION scenarios.
This is because the most cost-efﬁcient BECCS value chains be-
come more difﬁcult to deploy, owing to the requirement to meet

COOPERATION scenarioCURRENT POLICY scenarioISOLATION scenario2100 Cumulative Pellets Use & Trading for BECCS (GtDM)14.562.80.60.612.60.3BrazilChinaEUIndiaUSA45.426.5< 0.145.434.936.94.222.312.034.94.2< 0.10.1Fig. 4 Regional cost supply curves and 2100 CDR targets under alternative P3-consistent policy scenarios. The marginal net cost of CDR appears on
the vertical axis, while the CO2 removal achieved and the 2100 CDR targets appear on the horizontal axis. 2100 CDR targets consistent with the IPCC
P3 scenario are ordered from the smallest — 7 GtCO2 in Brazil — to the greatest — 87 GtCO2 in the USA. China delivers the most cost-eﬃcient CDR
– China’s cost supply curve is below all the other regions’ cost supply curves — and therefore the most CDR surplus in the COOPERATION scenario.
Brazil also provides CDR surplus, whereas the EU, the USA ad India beneﬁt from CDR surplus in this scenario. In the EU and the USA’s cases, this
results from a national cost-eﬃciency strategy – the EU and the USA can successfully meet their national CDR targets in the CURRENT POLICY and
ISOLATION scenarios, yet at higher (marginal net) cost — whereas in the case of India, this is because of a lack of national bio-geophysical resources
— India cannot meet its national CDR targets in the CURRENT POLICY and ISOLATION scenarios.

individual CDR targets domestically. In the ISOLATION scenario,
the complete lack of international cooperation forces some re-
gions to resort to more costly CDR options such as DACCS, and
thus drives the CNC of the CDR pathway deployed the most up.
Thus, international cooperation policy is key in delivering the
Paris Agreement’s 1.5◦C ambition in the most cost-efﬁcient man-
ner as it allows for the deployment of a CDR pathway in least-cost
and most "CDR-efﬁcient" regions while still delivering individual
CDR targets.

4 Assessing the value of a negative emissions

trading system

Section 3 highlighted that, despite the feasibility of the Paris
Agreement’s 1.5◦C ambition, CDR pathways reﬂecting either
current policy or national isolation policy paradigms may not
only be more challenging and expensive, but also less likely
to meet the Paris Agreement’s CDR objectives than CDR path-
ways deployed in an international cooperation policy paradigm.
Because CO2 sinks are unevenly distributed across the world,
the most cost-optimal CDR pathway, here in the COOPERATION
scenario, differs greatly from individual CDR targets. It can there-
fore be considered unfair, particularly towards regions achieving
CDR over and above their individual CDR targets. Conversely,
fair CDR pathways aligned with individual CDR targets, here in
the CURRENT POLICY and ISOLATION scenarios, must generate
negative emissions domestically in each region, regardless of the
cost or the availability of CO2 sinks within the region’s borders.
As a result, they are less cost-efﬁcient, and therefore more

costly. Integrating CDR options within an international negative
emissions trading system would address the trade-off between
cost-efﬁciency and equity by allowing regions that are well en-
dowed with bio-geophysical CO2 sinks, and therefore CDR po-
tentials, to trade CDR surplus (i.e., the additional CO2 removal
achieved over and above any given CDR target) with other re-
gions for which delivering CDR is more difﬁcult, or more costly.

4.1 Introducing the concept of a negative emissions trading

system

Conceptually, a negative emissions trading system would work in
a reverse way to any current existing ETS. An inter-regional or
international negative emissions target would be set to be met,
and increased over a given time-period, following the IPCC P3
cumulative CDR targets for instance. Regions would then be al-
located a share of this global negative emissions target, based on
responsibility for climate change for instance. In such trading sys-
tem, "veriﬁed" § CO2 removal would generate negative emissions
credits (NECs) that could be traded between regions as required
"NECs provider"
to meet individual negative emissions targets.
regions could therefore provide CDR surplus and sell NECs to
"NECs beneﬁciary" regions that, themselves, could beneﬁt from
CDR surplus — either because they could not meet their indi-
vidual CDR targets domestically, or because they would ﬁnd it

§ The monitoring, reporting, and veriﬁcation challenges implicit in delivering this ver-
iﬁcation step are non-trivial, and will vary for each CDR option. For simplicity, we
do not address this point further in this study, leaving it for future work.

1–39 | 9

Net Marginal Cost of CDR ($/tCO2)COOPERATION scenarioCURRENT POLICY scenarioISOLATION scenarioCDR options’ configurationsBrazilChinaEUUSAIndiaRegional CDR targetsBrazilChinaEUUSAIndiaCumulative CDR (GtCO2)Cumulative CDR (GtCO2)Cumulative CDR (GtCO2)Admittedly optimistic,

less expensive — and buy NECs from "NECs provider" regions.
The negative emissions price (NEP) — the price at which
in theory, be
NECs are traded between regions — could,
as low as the marginal net cost of generating CDR surplus
in "NECs provider" regions.
this ap-
proach is used here to demonstrate the potential role and
Investigating further cost-
value of a NE trading system.
sharing approaches in the context of CDR, while fulﬁlling
the Paris Agreement’s 1.5◦C ambition, is left for future work.
In this study, we assume the existence of such above-mentioned
negative emissions trading system, within which all CDR sur-
plus can be traded at a unique NEP, calculated as the averaged
marginal net cost of CDR surplus. This is shown in Eq. 4:

NEP =

∑i,k MNC(i, k) ×CDRSurplus(i, k)
∑i,k CDRSurplus(i, k)

(4)

where CDRSurplus(i, k) is the CDR surplus (tCO2) achieved by
the kth conﬁguration of a given CDR option deployed in a region
i, and MNCi,k is the marginal net cost ($/tCO2) at which this con-
ﬁguration is deployed.

4.2 The value of a negative emissions trading system

Fig. 4 shows how the marginal net cost of CDR in all regions in-
creases as more CDR is achieved over the century, for all scenar-
ios. China and Brazil provide CDR surplus on behalf of the EU,
the USA, and India — 85 and 15 GtCO2, respectively — in the
COOPERATION scenario. Particularly, in the case of China, this
is twice as much as China’s individual CDR target by 2100. As-
suming that the cheapest CDR options are ﬁrst deployed to meet
individual CDR targets and then the more expensive ones are de-
veloped to provide CDR surplus, the MNCs of CDR surplus range
between $36–113/tCO2 in China and $28–90/tCO2 in Brazil. Us-
ing Eq. 4, this results in a NEP of $64/tCO2, paid by the USA, the
EU and India to Brazil and China in order to beneﬁt from CDR
surplus — 52, 32 and 16 GtCO2, respectively — in the COOPER-
ATION scenario.

Fig. 5 compares the regional CNCs of CO2 removal by 2100
under the different policy options — in the COOPERATION sce-
including NECs trading, and in the CURRENT POLICY
nario,
and ISOLATION scenarios. We ﬁnd that regions beneﬁting from
CDR surplus with international cooperation, yet capable of meet-
ing domestically their individual CDR targets, deliver the Paris
Agreements’ CDR objectives at least cost in the COOPERATION
scenario, owing to NECs trading between regions. Speciﬁcally,
the CNCs of CDR by 2100 are $66/tCO2 and $74/tCO2 in the
EU and the USA, respectively, in the COOPERATION scenario
In the CURRENT POLICY and ISO-
(including NECs trading).
LATION scenarios, these CNCs increase by 45–105% in the EU
and 58% in the USA, respectively. The EU and the USA are
thus, here, archetypal "independent NECs beneﬁciary" regions,
as trading NECs result from a cost-optimal national strategy.
However, we observe that regions relying on CDR surplus
to meet individual CDR targets deliver the Paris Agreement’s
CDR objectives at highest cost. This is because CDR objectives
are missed with less or no international cooperation, and re-

10 | 1–39

Fig. 5 Regional cumulative total net costs (CNCs) by 2100, including
NECs trading, for all P3-consistent policy scenarios. NECs trading al-
lows for the most cost-eﬃcient distribution of the global CDR targets by
2100, in all regions, with the exception of India (in the COOPERATION
scenario). This is because India can’t reach its individual CDR targets in
the CURRENT POLICY and ISOLATION scenarios.

quire therefore additional costs from the purchase of NECs to
be delivered with international cooperation. Speciﬁcally, the
CNC of CDR by 2100 is $57/tCO2 in India in the COOPER-
ATION scenario (including NECs trading).
India is thus an
archetypal "dependent NECs beneﬁciary" region as it relies es-
sentially, here, on NECs trading with "NECs provider" regions,
such as Brazil or China, to meet its individual CDR targets.
Nonetheless, we recognise that regions such as India contribute
to the delivering of the Paris Agreement in the COOPERATION
scenario, particularly by producing and exporting biomass for
BECCS’s deployment in China (See Fig. 3). This contribution
is neglected economically here, but would be expected to be re-
munerated appropriately in reality, and therefore constitutes an
incentive to participate to such international negative emissions
trading system.

Finally, we observe that regions providing CDR surplus can de-
liver the Paris Agreement’s CDR objectives at similar cost or ben-
eﬁt from a great cost reduction. For instance, because China con-
tributes mostly to the global CDR surplus provided and based
on the assumption made here on a unique NEP, the NEP cal-
culated here is very close to the averaged MNC of all CDR sur-
plus delivered in China (67$/tCO2 on average). Therefore, China
amortizes its additional costs for providing CDR surplus, and its
CNC of CDR by 2100 of $24.5/tCO2 in the COOPERATION sce-
nario (including NECs trading) is similar to the CNCs in the other
scenarios. Brazil also provide CDR surplus, but in a lesser ex-
tent and less cost-efﬁciently. Therefore, it beneﬁts from a NEP
that is 27% lower than the averaged MNC of all CDR surplus
delivered in Brazil ($46/tCO2 on average),
leading therefore
to negative net costs, i.e. net revenues, by 2100. The CNC
of CDR by 2100 in Brazil of -$9/tCO2 is 132% lower than in
the CURRENT POLICY and ISOLATION scenarios, respectively.
Importantly, acknowledging that the current policy landscape
is characterised by international competition, higher NEPs could

Year 2100COOPERATION scenarioCURRENT POLICY scenarioISOLATION scenarioCumulative Net Cost of CDR ($/tCO2)BrazilChinaEUIndiaUSA2100 CDR target not reached014020406080100120reduce even more the cost of CDR for "NECs provider" regions,
leading to higher negative net revenues, and therefore making
the delivering of CDR surplus an economically viable climate mit-
igation action.

Thus, these results emphasise the value of international coop-
eration via the deployment of an international policy instrument,
such as a negative emissions trading system, and the need for
robust institutions to enable monitoring, veriﬁcation and accred-
itation of NECs.

5 Does time matter?

The previous sections established that international cooperation
is key in delivering the Paris Agreement’s 1.5◦C ambition most
cost-efﬁciently. Because the current international policy land-
scape on climate change mitigation is closer to an "isolation" pol-
icy paradigm than a "cooperation" policy paradigm, we investi-
gate here the implications of developing such international co-
operative approach, and we discuss the impacts of delaying its
development.

Figure 6 shows how the total cost of CDR deployment at the
Paris Agreement’s 1.5◦C scale evolves, as the adoption of an in-
ternational policy is further delayed. The COOPERATION sce-
nario and the ISOLATION scenario, described previously, repre-
sent respectively the "earliest" and "latest" scenarios. We ﬁnd
that delaying the adoption of an international cooperation pol-
icy always results in a more expensive deployment of CDR
options — between 11% and 62% more than the CTNC by
2100 in the COOPERATION scenario, as the delay increases.
Whilst we acknowledge that it is already too late to deploy
CDR most cost-efﬁciently, as suggested in the "earliest" scenario
(the COOPERATION scenario) here — it implies the possibility to
trade internationally negative emissions as early as in the 2020s
—, there is an imperative to develop the necessary geopolitical
and economic instruments as soon as possible.

instrument

Aspiring to synchronise the establishment and develop-
ment of such instruments around the world is highly am-
bitious, but starting from existing ETS at the inter-regional,
national, or even regional scales, such as the EU ETS, the
UK ETS or the California (USA) ETS, could show the way
the basics for a future inter-regional, and possi-
and set
for negative emissions trading.
bly international
Importantly, the Article 6 of the Paris Agreement established
a framework for market-based approaches 1 (through Article 6.2
and Article 6.4), within which direct references to negative emis-
sions (i.e., “emission removals”) are made. Negative emissions
could thus, for instance, be included directly within domestic ETS
and then transferred between domestics ETS, as suggested by Ar-
ticle 6.2, or directly included and traded within an international
market, as suggested by Article 6.4. Note that these examples are
not intended to be prescriptive, nor exhaustive.

These results highlight thus that, the longer we wait to es-
tablish and develop geopolitical and economic instruments for
fostering international cooperation in climate change mitigation,
particularly in deploying of CDR, the greater the costs will be.
Given the decreased likelihood of meeting the Paris Agreement’s
CDR objectives without international cooperation, as set out here,

Fig. 6 Cumulative total net costs (CTNCs) between 2030 and 2100
for alternative P3-consistent policy scenarios. SWITCH 20XX scenarios
involve the adoption of an international cooperation policy in 20XX, i.e. a
“switch” from isolation policy to cooperation policy in 20XX, with 20XX
being 2030, 2050, 2070 and 2090. Delaying international cooperation
policy always results in the deployment of more costly CDR pathways.

the greater the associated adaptation costs will be, and thus the
overall challenges to be addressed in the near-future.

6 Conclusions

In line with the Paris Agreement, limiting global warming to
1.5◦C will require CDR to be deployed at large-scale between now
and the end of the century, as indicated in IAMs scenarios. Beside
NDCs, as most UNFCCC Parties have pledged to reach net-zero by
mid-century, it is important to understand what CDR pathways
might look like, as well as when and where they might be sus-
tainably and affordably deployed. Moreover, as might be antic-
ipated, the climate mitigation policy landscape will signiﬁcantly
impact the spatio-temporal composition and evolution of the CDR
pathways deployed. As the Article 6 of the Paris Agreement estab-
lished a framework for carbon market-based approaches within
the context of climate change mitigation, it is all the more crucial
to obtain insights on how international policy would impact such
deployment.

This study has shown that international cooperation in cli-
mate change policy is key for deploying the most cost-optimal
CDR pathway to deliver the Paris Agreement 1.5◦C ambition.
this CDR pathway is prefer-
With international cooperation,
ably composed of BECCS, mainly (78%) and AR (22%). Given
the large scale of CO2 removal over the century, we found
that CDR options must be promptly deployed — particularly
in the case of AR, owing to the time required for trees to
grow. Thus, for sustainability and feasibility safeguards, for-
ward planning and strategic deployment of the different CDR op-
tions is crucial to deliver the Paris Agreement’s 1.5◦C ambition.
More broadly, the issue of time emerges as a contingent to the
discussion on CDR options, such as biochar or EW. Whilst in the
case of biochar, the carbon content slowly decays with time —
issue of permanence — as a function of a soil conditions and
biochar characteristics, there will typically be a delay, in the case

1–39 | 11

00YearCOOPERATION scenarioSWITCH 2030 scenarioSWITCH 2050 scenarioISOLATION scenarioSWITCH 2090 scenarioSWITCH 2070 scenarioCumulative Total Net Cost ($ trillion)2020051015202520302040205020602070208020902100of EW, between the time that the minerals are exposed to the
atmosphere and when the carbonation reaction is completed —
issue of timing. In this case, this delay is a function of soil condi-
tions, such as temperature or pH, or minerals supply chain, such
as particle size. These cases are intended to illustrate the impor-
tance of prompt action to support the commercial deployment of
CDR options, particularly those that enable to prompt removal of
CO2 from the atmosphere, such as BECCS and DACCS.

With international cooperation, we found that the spatio-
temporal evolution of the CDR pathway, most cost-efﬁciently de-
ployed, differs greatly from the regional allocation of the Paris
Agreement’s CDR objectives — based on responsibility for climate
change, here used as a proxy for their socio-economically fair dis-
tribution. Although this is not the case with less or no interna-
tional cooperation in climate mitigation policy — the amount of
CO2 removal deployed regionally, within each region’s borders,
must meet their share of the Paris Agreement’s CDR objectives
—, we found that the resulting CDR pathways are likely to be-
come more challenging and more costly to deploy. This is due to
a more difﬁcult access to cost-efﬁcient bio-geophysical CO2 sinks,
and therefore the use of more costly alternatives, such as DACCS.
Importantly, not only does the likelihood to meet the Paris Agree-
ment’s CDR objectives thus decreases, but associated costs also
increase by 51–69% relatively to the CDR pathway deployed with
international cooperation.

To overcome this challenge — the trade-off between cost-
efﬁciency and equity —, this study has shown that interna-
tional cooperation could be implemented via an international
market for negative emissions trading, in which regions most
well-endowed with CDR potentials could generate CDR sur-
plus, i.e. additional CO2 removal, over and above their indi-
vidual CDR targets, and provide it as a remunerative service
to other less well-endowed regions.
In such market, CDR sur-
plus would generate negative emissions credits (NECs), that
could be traded between regions, and thus enabling the deliv-
ery of the Paris Agreement most cost-efﬁciently and equitably.
Particularly, we found that such market would allow "depen-
dant NECs beneﬁciary" regions — regions that could not meet
their national CDR targets domestically — to successfully deliver
It would
their share of the Paris Agreement’s CDR objectives.
also decrease the ﬁnancial burden of the Paris Agreement for "in-
dependent NECs beneﬁciary" regions — regions that could meet
their national CDR targets domestically — by up to 51–90%. The
design of such market — trading mechanisms such as the alloca-
tion of NECs between participating regions, or the determination
of the price of NECs — is out of the scope of this study, but re-
mains to be investigated further.

Finally, recognising that current policies on climate change
mitigation are far from an "international cooperation" paradigm,
this study has also argued that the later such market for nega-
tive emissions trading would be implemented, the more expen-
sive delivering the Paris Agreement’s CDR objectives would be,
and subsequently imposing more of the associated ﬁnancial effort
on to future generations.
Imminent action towards the estab-
lishment and deployment of multi-regional, or possibly interna-
tional, geopolitical and economic instruments for negative emis-

12 | 1–39

sions trading, and robust institutions to enable their monitoring,
veriﬁcation and accreditation, will therefore be key in deliver-
ing the Paris Agreement’s CDR objectives consistent with a global
warming of 1.5◦C.

Conﬂicts of interest

There are no conﬂicts to declare.

Appendix A

CDR options in MONET

The MONET framework used in this study has been extended to
include AR and DACCS. Their models are described here.

A.1 Afforestation/Reforestation (AR) model
A.1.1 Overview.

Afforestation/reforestation (AR) refers to the process of plant-
ing or facilitating the natural regeneration of trees. Although
afforestation and reforestation can be distinguished by the pe-
riod of time during which the land has not been forested — com-
monly for a period of at least 50 years —, or by the climato-
ecological suitability of the land — forest, shrubland versus grass-
land, savannah — , AR is often jointly categorized in the con-
text of land use change and associated (biogenic) CO2 emis-
sions/sequestration accounting 67. This is also the case in this
study.

We have developed an explicit spatio-temporal model of AR’s
whole-system, in which 5 sub-models are integrated: 1) a forest
growth model, 2) a forest management cycle model, 3) a biogenic
carbon (C) (and CO2) sequestration model and 4) its associated
"ﬁre-penalty" model, and 5) a forestry operations model. Specif-
ically, energy, CO2 (and N2O) and cost balances are carried out
for each step of the forestry operations model. Spatial resolution
of AR’s whole-system model is at the climato-ecological level —
ecological zones¶ — within each State/Province in Brazil, China,
India and the USA and within each country in the EU (EU-27
& UK). Temporal resolution of AR’s whole-system model is dou-
ble: 1) 10 years (decadal), ranging between 2020–2100, and 2) 1
year (annual), over a default 100 years time-period. The decadal
timescale is used for determining the establishment of newly af-
forested stands, then the annual timescale is used for computing
and evaluating AR’s whole-system model.

The different interactions between the AR sub-models are out-

lined in Fig. 7.

A.1.2

Forest growth & forest management cycle models.

Here, we describe in details the forest growth model and its asso-
ciated forest management cycle model. Within the forest growth
model, forest growth curves are characterised by ecological zone
and forest type (broadleaves/conifers), to account for geographic,
climatic and ecological variations 96,97. Both the above-ground
biomass — the vegetation above the soil, such as stems, branches,
foliage or bark —, without (of reference) and with forest manage-

¶ An ecological zone is deﬁned as “a zone or area with broad yet relatively homoge-
neous natural vegetation formations, similar (not necessarily identical) in physiog-
nomy” 96.

Fig. 7 Schematic of the AR’s whole-system model, outlining the interactions between 5 integrated sub-models: 1) a forest growth model, 2) a forest
management cycle model, 3) a biogenic carbon (C) (and CO2) sequestration model, and 4) its associated ’ﬁre-penalty’ model, and 5) a forestry
operations model.

ment (managed), and the below-ground biomass — the roots —
are included in the forest growth model.

Within the forest management cycle model, we assume that
forest stands are subject to a non-intensive forest management —
with reduced or minimum human intervention. The purpose of
this forest management is to maximise and maintain the C (and
CO2) sequestration potential of the forest by clearing the forest
of old and/or sick trees in order to let younger trees grow, more
vigorously and with more space. Although the forest manage-
ment cycle model consists in determining directly the proportion
of above-ground biomass, only, that needs to be thinned for the
aforementioned reasons, it also impacts indirectly the proportion
of below-ground biomass that remains after.

A.1.2.1 Above-ground biomass (of reference). We deﬁne the
above-ground biomass stock of reference BAG
Re f as a sigmoid curve,
which is typical in even-aged stands in the absence of forest man-
agement (without human intervention), as shown in Eqs. 5–8.
Eqs. 5–8 are written as follows:

BAG
Re f (yr) =

BRe f
1 + exp(−kRe f (yr − x0,Re f )

∀ t

(5)

TRe f =

BRe f
GRe f

x0,Re f =

TRe f
2

kRe f =

ln(99)
x0,Re f

(6)

(7)

(8)

where:

• TRe f is the growing period of reference (yrs),

• BRe f is the maximum biomass stock of reference (tDM/ha),

• GRe f

is the average annual biomass growth of reference

(tDM/ha/yr),

• x0,Re f is the mid-point of the reference sigmoid curve (yrs),

• and kRe f is the slope coefﬁcient of the reference sigmoid curve

(tDM/ha/yr).
BAG
Re f

is calculated using the IPCC default values for biomass
stock BRe f and biomass growth GRe f of natural forests 98, as pro-
vided/given in Table 2).

1–39 | 13

InputsModelsOutputsRisk-adjusted CO2capturetonnes CO2/ha or tonnes CO2/tonneDMGHG balance* Forest growth model*• Above-ground biomass stocktonnesDM/ha• Below-ground biomass stocktonnesDM/haBiogenic carbon (and CO2) sequestration model*• Carbon stocktonnes C/ha• CO2stocktonnes CO2/haFire-penalty model• Fire-risk coefficient%Fire frequency         Fire severityForest management cycle model*• Thinnings stocktonnesDM/haFrequencyIntensitytonnes CO2GHG (CO2& N2O) emissions tonnes CO2/ha or tonnes CO2/tonneDMEnergy balance*MJ/ha or MJ/ tonneCO2Forestry operations model*• Forest establishmentLand preparationSeedlings plantingHerbicide applicationFertilizer application• Forest roads construction• Forest roads maintenanceRe-gradingRe-surfacing• Forest maintenanceTree fellingHarvestingForwardingBalingForestry operations data• Fuel requirement, working rate and inputs rate (seedlings density, fertilizer, herbicide).Forest road operations data• Fuel requirement, working rate, road density and inputs rate (road rocks, explosives for rock mining).Biomass/Forest data• Moisture content of wood, basic density, volumetric correction factor, ‘solid:air’ stacked ratio, share of forestry residues, share of residues left on the floor.Cost data• Fuel cost, machinery cost, labour cost and inputs costs (seedlings, fertilizer, herbicide, road rocks).LegendEnergy data• Fuels lower heating value (LHV) and indirect energy requirements for seedlings preparation.Cost balance*$/ha or $/ tonneCO2* Calculated annually over a period of 100 years.Carbon data•  Fuels direct & indirect CO2emissions factors, electricity indirect CO2 emissions factor, indirect CO2emissions from seedlings preparation and N2O emissions from nitrogen (fertilizer, explosives for rock mining).Table 2 IPCC default biomass stock, biomass growth and growing period
of natural forests, characterised by ecological zone 98.

Table 3 Description of the forest growth phases.

Ecological zone

Growing
perioda
(yrs)
43
36
54
70
140
44
54
70
140
41
30
33
50
38
30
a Calculated with the IPCC default values for biomass stock and
biomass growth 98.

Tropical rainforest
Tropical moist deciduous forest
Tropical dry forest
Tropical shrubland
Tropical mountain systems
Subtropical humid forest
Subtropical dry forest
Subtropical steppe
Subtropical mountain systems
Temperate oceanic forest
Temperate continental forest
Temperate mountain systems
Boreal coniferous forest
Boreal tundra woodland
Boreal mountain systems

Biomass
growth
(tDM/ha/yr)
7.0
5.0
2.4
1.0
1.0
5.0
2.4
1.0
1.0
4.4
4.0
3.0
1.0
0.4
1.0

Biomass
stock
(tDM/ha)
300
180
130
70
140
220
130
70
140
180
120
100
50
15
30

Managed above-ground biomass. The managed
A.1.2.2
above-ground biomass stock derives from the above-ground
biomass stock of reference, subject to a forest management cy-
cle. Here, we introduce the concept of forest management cycle
(FMC) and its associated phases, as developed within the forest
management cycle model, and describes how it impacts the forest
growth model.

A.1.2.2.1 Forest growth phases.

In the context of timber
production, a forest growth is usually broken down into 5 phases
— the establishment, initial, full-vigour, mature, and old-growth
phases. These 5 phases constitute the FMC, in which harvesting
(and thinning) operations’ characteristics — the frequency and
the intensity — are set, and speciﬁc to each phase.

Because timber production is evaluated in terms of mer-
chantable biomass volume, forest growth phases are usually de-
termined based on the Mean Annual Increment (MAI) — the av-
erage rate of merchantable volume of biomass growth — and
its Maximum Mean Annual Increment (MMAI). In the context
of (biogenic) CO2 removal, however, both merchantable and
non-merchantable biomass stocks are considered, including both
above-ground biomass and below-ground biomass stocks, and
evaluated in terms of total biomass dry-mass.

The FMC modelled here is developed accordingly to the afore-
mentioned adaptations. We introduce and deﬁne the Mean An-
nual Growth (MAG) — the average rate of dry-mass of above-
ground biomass growth — and the Maximum Mean Annual
Growth (MMAG), which replace, respectively, the MAI and the
MMAI in the determination of the forest growth phases. These
forest growth phases are described in Table 3.

Here, the annual (above-ground) growth (AG) AGAG

MAGAG
Re f and the MMAG MMAGAG
ground biomass stock of reference BAG
below:

Re f , the MAG
Re f are derived from the above-
Re f , as shown in Eqs. 9–11

14 | 1–39

Phase
Establishment

Initial

Full-vigour

Mature

Old-growth

Description
Seedlings are planted to create a new stand of trees.
In this study, this phase is deﬁned as lasting for the
ﬁrst ﬁve years after planting.
Once established, young trees grow from seedlings
and their AG increases. This phase is deﬁned here as
lasting from age 5 up until (and including) the age of
the ﬁrst thinning, as speciﬁed here at 10 years after
planting (age 5 + 10 = 15 years). This phase has
zero thinning.
During this period, trees grow with the highest rate
of AG. This phase is deﬁned as lasting from the age
of the ﬁrst thinning (excluding) until (and including)
the time at which the MMAG occurs. Thinning opera-
tions occur every 5 years, with an intensity of 10% of
the above-ground biomass stock.
During this phase, the rate of AG declines progres-
sively from its maximum value. The phase is de-
ﬁned as lasting from the time at which the MMAG
is reached (excluding) up until (and including) the
time at which the MAG has dropped to 50% of its
maximum value. Thinning operations occur every 10
years with an intensity of 10% of the above-ground
biomass stock.
During this last phase, the biomass accumulation
rate reaches its peak and stabilises — the biomass
stock saturates —, and the AG slowly levels off to
zero. This phase is deﬁned as lasting indeﬁnitely
from the time at which the MAG declines from half
of the maximum (excluding). Stands in this phase
also shift from an even-aged composition to a diverse
structure of ages and sizes. Thinning operations oc-
cur every 15 years with an intensity of 10% of the
above-ground biomass stock.

AG: annual growth; MMAG: maximum mean annual growth; and
MAG: mean annual growth.

AGAG

Re f (yr) =




BAG
Re f (yr)



Re f (yr) − BAG
BAG

Re f (yr − 1)

∀ yr, yr = 1

∀ yr, yr > 1

MAGAG

Re f (yr) =

AGAG
Re f (yr)
yr

∀ yr

MMAGAG

Re f = max
yr

MAGAG

Re f (yr)

(9)

(10)

(11)

Fig. 8 illustrates a forest AG curve, its associated MAG curve

and MMAG point, and its resulting forest growth phases.

A.1.2.2.2 Forest management cycle (FMC).

In the context
of climate mitigation, AR is deployed while prioritising C (and
CO2) sequestration potential over timber production. Therefore,
the FMC model introduced here is only comprised of thinning
operations (no harvesting operations), in order to maximise and
maintain the forest C (and CO2) stock. We assume that: 1) the
frequency of thinning operations decreases with time — from ev-
ery 5 years during the full-vigour phase to every 15 years during
the old-growth phase —, and 2) the intensity is set as 10% of the
above-ground biomass stock at any time.

A schematic of the FMC workﬂow FMC workﬂow is described

in Fig.9, where:

• yrE,END is the last year of the establishment phase (yrs);

AT (yr0) = %T × BAG

BT (yr0))

(14)

Loop (∀yr > yr0): In step c), the following year, BAG
BT (yr0 + 1) has
increased by ∆BAG(yr0 + 1), following BAG
Re f , as shown in Eq. 15.
∆BAG(yr0 + 1) is obtained as shown in Eqs. 16–18 (Fig.10-c). Eqs.
15–18 are written as follows:

BT (yr0 + 1) = BAG
BAG

AT (yr0) + ∆BAG(yr0 + 1)

yrRe f ,1 = BAG−1

Re f

(BAG

BT (yr0))

yrRe f ,2 = yrRe f ,1 + 1

∆BAG(yr0 + 1) = BAG

Re f (yrRe f ,2) − BAG

Re f (yrRe f ,1)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

Lastly, in step d) the above-ground biomass stock, after thin-
ning, BAG
AT (yr0 + 1) is obtained as previously, in step b) (Fig.10-d).
Steps c) and d) are repeated for each yr > yr0. During the years
of thinning operations, %T = 10%, %T = 0% otherwise.

A.1.2.3 Below-ground biomass. The below-ground biomass
stock can be estimated from the above-ground biomass stock with
the use of a "root-to-shoot" ratio. A "root-to-shoot" ratio usually
depends on climate, tree species, soil type and declines with stand
age and/or productivity. Extreme range values of 0.09–1.16 t
rootDM/t shootDM have been reported in the literature, although
average range values of 0.20–0.56 t rootDM/t shootDM might be
more likely 98.

Here, the "root-to-shoot" ratio RRS evolves with the amount of
above-ground biomass stock (before thinning) BAG
BT . Speciﬁcally,
RRS is interpolated from the IPCC default values 98 provided in
Table 4, as shown below in Eq. 19.




R1 × ln(R2 × BAG

BT (yr) + 1)



R1

∀ yr, R2 (cid:54)= 0

∀ yr, R2 = 0

(19)

RRS(yr) =

where:

• RRS(yr) is the "root-to-shoot" ratio (t rootDM/t shootDM),

• and R1 (-) and R2 (-) are the coefﬁcients interpolated from the

IPCC || (See Table 5).
The below-ground biomass stock BBG derives from the man-
AT and the

aged above-ground biomass stock (after thinning) BAG
"root-to-shoot" ratio RRS, as shown below in Eq 20:

BBG = BAG

AT (yr) × RRS(yr)

∀ yr

(20)

A.1.2.4 Total biomass. The total biomass stock BTotal is evalu-
ated as shown below in Eq. 21:

BTotal(yr) = BAG

AT (yr) + BBG(yr)

∀ yr

(21)

Fig. 8 Illustration of a forest annual growth curve (AG), its associated
mean annual growth curve (MAG) and maximum mean annual growth
point (MMAG), and its resulting forest growth phases.

• yrI,END is the last year of the initial phase (yrs);

• MAGBT

ha (yr) is the MAG (before thinning) (tDM/ha/yr),

• MMAG is the MMAG (tDM/ha/yr);

• AT (yr) is the annual thinning stock (tDM/ha/yr);

• %T is the thinning share of the above-ground biomass stock

(%), %T default value is 10%;

• BAG

BT (yr) is the above-ground biomass stock, before thinning
(tDM/ha);

• yrlastFV T is the time at which the last thinning during the full-

vigour phase occurs (yrs);

• and yrlastMT is the time at which the last thinning during the
mature phase occurs (yrs), yE,END and yrI,END default values
are respectively 5 and 15 yrs.

A.1.2.2.3

Managed above-ground biomass. The man-
aged above-ground biomass stock derives from the above-ground
biomass stock of reference BAG
Re f and the annual thinning stock
AT . Here, we evaluate the managed above-ground biomass stock
in two steps — before thinning BAG
AT , as
illustrated in Fig.10.
Initialisation (yr = yr0): The year of initialisation yr0 is deﬁned
as the year of the ﬁrst thinning. In step a), BAG
BT is equal to BAG
Re f ,
as shown in Eq. 12 (Fig.10-a):

BT and after thinning BAG

BT (yr0) = BAG
BAG

Re f (yr0)

(12)

Then, in step b), BAG

AT is obtained by subtracting AT to BAG

BT , as

shown below in Eqs. 13–14 (Fig.10-b):

AT (yr0) = BAG
BAG

BT (yr0) − AT (yr0)

(13)

|| R1 and R2 were obtained by solving a non-linear curve-ﬁtting (data-ﬁtting) problem

in least-squares sense in Python 3.7 (function scipy.optimize.leastsq).

1–39 | 15

Old-GrowthEstablishment020406080100Years12345++15InitialFull-VigourMatureAnnual Growth (AG)Mean Annual Growth (MAG)05204060801005YearsAbove-ground biomass (tonnesDM/ha)MMAGMMAG/2Fig. 9 Schematic of the forest management cycle (FMC) workﬂow used for determining thinning operations’ frequency and intensity.

Table 4 IPCC default "root-to-shoot" ratio, characterised by ecological
zone, forest type and above-ground biomass stock 98.

Above-ground
biomass
(tDM/ha)
-

Ecological zone

Tropical dry forest

Tropical rainforest
Tropical moist deciduous forest < 125
> 125
< 20
> 20
-
-
< 125
> 125
< 20
> 20
-
-

Tropical shrubland
Tropical mountain systems
Subtropical humid forest

Subtropical steppe
Subtropical mountain systemsa

Subtropical dry forest

Temperate oceanic forest,
Temperate continental forest,
Temperate mountain systems

Conifers

Broadleaves

< 50
50–150
> 150
< 75
50–150
> 150

Boreal coniferous forest,
Boreal tundra woodland,
Boreal mountain systems

< 75
> 75

a Used IPCC tropical mountain systems values 98.

"Root-to-
shoot"
ratio (-)
0.37
0.20
0.24
0.56
0.28
0.40
0.27
0.20
0.24
0.56
0.28
0.32
0.27
0.4
0.29
0.20
0.46
0.23
0.24

0.39
0.24

C ﬂow into and out of the AR’s whole system, as modelled here,
as well as between the 5 aforementioned C pools.

A.1.2.2 Dead organic matter C pool. Dead organic matter is
comprised of litter and dead wood. The dead organic matter C
pool is highly variable, site-speciﬁc and time-evolving, depending
speciﬁcally on forest characteristics, forest management and dis-
turbance history, such as ﬁre, hurricanes or pest. For instance,
dead organic matter decay rates range from high in warm and
moist climates to low in cold and dry climates 99. Litter decay has
also been observed to be much faster in deciduous (broadleaves)

Fig. 10 Illustration of the two-step workﬂow used for evaluating the
managed above-ground biomass stock.

A.1.2 Biogenic C (and CO2) sequestration model.

Here, we describe in details the biogenic C (and CO2) sequestra-
tion model and its associated C pools.

A.1.2.1 Biogenic C pools. Growing forests capture CO2 from
the atmosphere via photosynthesis. The sequestrated C — the
CO2 is sequestrated in the form of C — contained in the above-
ground biomass is then partially transferred to the below-ground
biomass, dead organic matter and soil. During harvesting or thin-
ning operations, timber and forest residues are extracted from the
forest stands, and are considered as "harvested wood products".
All together constitute biogenic C pools 98,99. Fig. illustrates the

16 | 1–39

Mature phase ?𝑀𝐴𝐺𝐵𝑇𝐴𝐺𝑦𝑟≤𝑀𝑀𝐴𝐺2StartEndEstablishment phase ?Initial phase ?NoNoNoNoYesYesYesYesYesNo thinningoperationThinning ?𝑦𝑟−𝑦𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑡𝐹𝑉𝑇𝑚𝑜𝑑10Thinning ?𝑦𝑟−𝑦𝑟𝐼,𝐸𝑁𝐷𝑚𝑜𝑑5Thinning ?𝑦𝑟=𝑦𝑟𝐼,𝐸𝑁𝐷Thinning ?𝑦𝑟−𝑦𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑡𝑀𝑇𝑚𝑜𝑑15No thinningoperationYesNoYesYesThinning operation𝐴𝑇𝑦𝑟=%𝑇𝐵𝐵𝑇𝐴𝐺𝑦𝑟Thinning operation𝐴𝑇𝑦𝑟=%𝑇𝐵𝐵𝑇𝐴𝐺𝑦𝑟Update 𝑦𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑡𝑀𝑇Thinning operation𝐴𝑇𝑦𝑟=%𝑇𝐵𝐵𝑇𝐴𝐺𝑦𝑟YesNoNoOld-growth phase ?𝑀𝐴𝐺𝐵𝑇𝐴𝐺𝑦𝑟>𝑀𝑀𝐴𝐺2Thinning operation𝐴𝑇𝑦𝑟=%𝑇𝐵𝐵𝑇𝐴𝐺𝑦𝑟Update 𝑦𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑡𝐹𝑉𝑇NoNo thinningoperationNo thinningoperationNo thinningoperationFull-vigour phase ?𝑀𝐴𝐺𝐵𝑇𝐴𝐺𝑦𝑟≤𝑀𝑀𝐴𝐺∀𝑦𝑟≤100𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠𝑦𝑟≤𝑦𝑟𝐸,𝐸𝑁𝐷𝑦𝑟≤𝑦𝑟𝐼,𝐸𝑁𝐷Phase identificationLegendThinning identificationThinning operationYears+yr+yrmanagedreferenceAbove-ground biomass(tonnesDM/ha)yr + 1++yryryr + 1+Before thinningAfter thinningInitialisation: yr = yr0a)b)c)d)Loop: yr > yr0managedreferencesmanagedreferencemanagedreferenceYearsYearsYearsAbove-ground biomass(tonnesDM/ha)Above-ground biomass(tonnesDM/ha)Above-ground biomass(tonnesDM/ha)Table 5 Interpolated "root-to-shoot" ratios R1 and R2 values.

Ecological zone
Tropical rainforesta
Tropical moist deciduous forest
Tropical dry forest
Tropical shrublanda
Tropical mountain systemsa
Subtropical humid forest
Subtropical dry forest
Subtropical steppe
Subtropical mountain systems
Temperate oceanic forest,
Temperate continental forest,
Temperate mountain systems
Boreal coniferous forest,
Boreal tundra woodland,
Boreal mountain systems

Forest type
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

Conifers
Broadleaves

-

R1
0.37
801
33
0.40
0.27
848
474
0.32
0.27

25
24

25

R2
-
0.00029
0.01113
-
-
0.00028
0.00126
-
-

0.02159
0.02275

0.04466

a Used IPCC "root-to-shoot" value 98.

forests than in evergreen (conifers) forests, owing to humus for-
mation, higher acidity of coniferous litter, and different canopy
density resulting in different amount of light and water reaching
the forest ﬂoor 100.

A range value of 15—150 tCO2/ha, with an average value of
66 tCO2/ha can be found in the literature 101. Although the C
dynamics of the dead organic matter pool are qualitatively well
understood, it is currently difﬁcult to obtain complete set of data
at the national or regional scales. Therefore, we conservatively
simplify the dead organic matter C pool by assuming that all C
transferring from biomass to dead organic matter is directly emit-
ted to the atmosphere.

A.1.2.3 Soil C pool. Both organic and inorganic forms of C are
found in soil, but the soil organic matter C pool is more largely
affected by land-use and management activities, and therefore
mostly investigated in the literature. As the dead organic mat-
ter C pool, the soil organic matter C pool is highly variable and
site-speciﬁc. Depending on forest characteristics, management
regime and disturbance history, the soil organic matter C pool is
also time-evolving, due to differences between C inputs and losses
over time.

The organic C content of mineral forest soils has been reported
between 20–300 tC/ha in the literature 98,102, but current avail-
able data remain largely site- and study-speciﬁc, and are there-
fore still incomplete and highly uncertain at national or regional
scales. Although the conversion of non-forested lands to forested
lands would be expected to increase the organic C content of
newly afforested soils during the ﬁrst decades, we assume con-
servatively that the soil organic matter C pool remains constant
with AR.

A.1.2.4 Biomass C pool. The above-ground biomass C pool is
comprised of all C that is contained in the vegetation above the
soil, such as stems, branches, foliage or bark, and the below-
ground biomass C pool is comprised of the C contained in the
roots. Together, they constitute the biomass C pool, of which the
C stock can be estimated from the biomass stock with the use of
a carbon content factor C f . C f depends on climate, tree specie,
such as conifers or broadleaves, and tree characteristics, such as
age, size or tree parts. Average values have been reported within

Fig. 11 Illustration of the C ﬂow into and out of the AR’s whole system,
as modelled here, as well as between the 5 main carbon pools: 1) the
above-ground biomass, 2) the below-ground biomass, 3) the dead organic
matter, 4) the soil organic matter and 5) the harvested wood products
pools. Adapted from the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse
Gas Inventories 99.

the range of 0.43–0.55 tC/tDM

98.

Here, the (total) biomass C stock CTotal derives from the total
biomass stock BTotal. We use the IPCC default values for carbon
content factor C f

98 given in Table 6, as shown below in Eq. 22.

CTotal(yr) = BTotal(yr) ×C f

∀ yr

(22)

Table 6 IPCC default carbon content factor, characterised by climate
and forest type 98.

Climate

Tropical
Subtropical
Temperate
Boreal

Carbon content (tC/tDM)

Broadleaves
0.47
0.47
0.48
0.48

Conifers
0.47
0.47
0.51
0.51

Then, the total biomass CO2 stock COTotal

derives from the
conversion of C to CO2, based on the ratio of molecular weights
(44/12), as shown below in Eq. 23:

2

COTotal
2

(yr) = CTotal(yr) ×

44
12

∀ yr

(23)

Examples of biomass CO2 stocks show the typical sigmoid pat-
tern of growth in even-aged forest stands and the impact of thin-
ning in Fig. 12. We observe that: 1) not only there is a de-
lay of approximately 10–20 years between the establishment of
new forest stands (in the establishment phase) and their effec-
tive CO2 sequestration potential (in the full-vigour phase), 2) but
these new forest stands also saturates after approximately 40–80

1–39 | 17

LegendIncrease of C stock due to growthTransfer of C between sinksDecrease of C stock due to C leakagesDead organic matterSoil organic matterHarvested wood productsAbove-ground biomassBelow-ground biomassAR’s whole system boundaryyears, which implies that the annual rate of CO2 sequestration is
reduced to approximately zero.

Moreover, because of the higher biomass stock (on a per
hectare basis) in warm climates — tropical climates — compared
to cold climates — boreal climates — (300 tDM/ha in tropical
rainforests compared to 15 tDM/ha in boreal tundra woodlands,
as indicated in Table 2), the CO2 sequestration potential of AR
is greatest in Brazilian States, such as Para than in Northern EU
countries, such as Sweden. By the time forest stands reach ma-
turity (in the old growth-phase), we ﬁnd that the maximum CO2
sequestration potential of AR ranges between 40—709 t CO2/ha.

A.1.2.5 "Harvested wood products" C pool. The duration of
the C contained in the "harvested wood products" pool varies with
the product itself and its uses 103. As a results, there are currently
several different approaches to account for C (and CO2) seques-
tration in wood products.

Here, all C contained in extracted above-ground biomass (re-
sulting from thinning operations) — both thinnings and forest
residues — is included into the "harvested wood products" C pool.
Because thinning operations are carried out in the context of cli-
mate mitigation rather than timber production, the "harvested
wood products" C pool is excluded from the AR’s whole-system
boundaries. All C contained in this pool can therefore be consid-
ered as a "C leakage". This is equivalent to assume conservatively
that all C contained in the "harvested wood products" pool is di-
rectly emitted to the atmosphere, as it is the case in the dead
organic matter or soil organic matter pools.

Moreover, the below-ground biomass stock, proportional to the
above-ground biomass stock, is also affected by thinning oper-
ations. Because all C contained in the affected below-ground
biomass pool should be transferred to the dead organic matter
pool, it is therefore simpliﬁed accordingly, and assumed to be di-
rectly emitted to the atmosphere.

The thinning C stock CT hinning and CO2 stock COT hinning

are es-
timated with the use of the carbon content factor C f and the ratio
of molecular weights between C and CO2. This is shown in Eqs.
24 and 25 below:

2

CT hinning(yr) =

yr
∑
1

AT (yr) ×C f

∀ yr

(24)

COT hinning
2

(yr) = CT hinning(yr) ×

44
12

∀ yr

(25)

From Fig. 12, we ﬁnd that CO2 leakages, via the extraction of
thinnings and forest residues, are estimated to be 43–70% of the
total CO2 sequestrated in forest stands (above-ground and below-
ground biomass CO2) over a 100 years time-period. Although
such time-period is greater than the averaged human life span,
managing intelligently such forest residues supply chain could in-
crease the overall CO2 sequestration potential of AR. Examples
include the use of forest residues as a feedstock for BECCS.

A.1.3.1 Permanence of biogenic CO2 sequestration. Forests
are vulnerable to natural disturbances, such as drought, hurri-
canes, forest ﬁres and pests, or to human-induced reversals, such
as active deforestation. Consequently, the permanence of bio-
genic CO2 sequestration is less reliable than the one of geological
CO2 sequestration, such as in the cases of BECCS or DACCS.

Because the impact of natural disturbances on forest stands can
be catastrophic, both in terms of biodiversity or ﬁnancial losses —
speciﬁcally in the context of timber production —, how the risk of
natural disturbances should be anticipated and integrated in for-
est management has been increasingly investigated. However, the
focus has been predominantly set on maximising timber produc-
tivity and economic value, with or without carbon sequestration
beneﬁts, such as carbon price or carbon tax, and scarcely on min-
imising biomass and resulting CO2 sequestration losses 104–106.

A few risk-accounting methods have been introduced, speciﬁ-
cally for hurricanes or wildﬁres 107–110, although most of the liter-
ature focuses on wildﬁres. In spite of the increasing widespread
use of remote-sensing — the use of satellites to search for and
collect geo-spatial data —, these risk-accounting methods re-
mains site-, region-, or at most, country-speciﬁc. For instance,
the Landscape Fire and Resource Management Planning Tools
(LandFire) Program in the USA has been providing national geo-
spatial datasets (partially or completely based on remote-sensing)
on vegetation distribution, ﬁre regime and other fuel character-
istics 111. The NASA Land Use and Land Cover Program has also
been releasing the MODIS Active Fire Products and Burned Area
Products, ones of the most complete datasets at the global scale,
but insufﬁcient for the evaluation of wildﬁres’ risk 112.

Here, we model the risk of wildﬁres in the form of a penalty
coefﬁcient in order to evaluate the impact of such wildﬁres on
AR’s CO2 sequestration potential.

Wildﬁre-penalty coefﬁcient. We adapt the risk-
A.1.3.1
accounting methodology developed in Hurteau et al. 108 to de-
ﬁne a wildﬁre-penalty coefﬁcient R f ire, characterised by ecolog-
ical zones, and therefore applicable at the global scale. R f ire is
built upon wildﬁres’ severity — the potential biomass loss given a
ﬁre occurrence — and periodicity — the probability of a ﬁre event
occurring during a speciﬁed time period, as shown in Eq. 26. As
in Hurteau et al. 108, wildﬁres’ severity and periodicity are respec-
tively quantiﬁed by the mean ﬁre return interval (mFRI) mFRI —
ranging from 0 years (very frequent) to 1,000 years (very rare)
— and the vegetation departure index (VDep) V Dep — ranging
from 0% (zero potential biomass loss) to 100% (complete poten-
tial biomass loss). Eq. 26 is written as follows:

R f ire =




V Dep × (1 −

mFRI
P

)


0

if mFRI ≤ P

if mFRI > P

(26)

with:

A.1.3

Fire-penalty model.

• R f ire is the ﬁre-penalty (-),

Here, we discuss the permanence of CO2 sequestration via AR,
subject speciﬁcally to the risk of wildﬁres, and describe in details
the resulting ﬁre-penalty model.

• mFRI is the mean ﬁre return interval (yrs),

• V Dep is the vegetation departure index (-),

18 | 1–39

Fig. 12 Examples of total (above-ground and below-ground) biomass CO2 stocks and thinnings CO2 stocks for diﬀerent ecological zones and forest
types over a default period of 100 years.

Table 7 Mean ﬁre return interval mFRI and vegetation departure index
VDep values.

Ecological zone

mFRI
(yrs)

VDep
(%)

Wildﬁre-penalty
coefﬁcient (%)

Tropical rainforesta,
Tropical moist deciduous forest,
Tropical dry foresta,
Tropical shrublanda,
Tropical mountain systemsa
Subtropical humid forest
Subtropical dry forest
Subtropical steppe
Subtropical mountain systems
Temperate oceanic forest
Temperate continental forest
Temperate mountain systems
Boreal coniferous forestb,
Boreal tundra woodlandb,
Boreal mountain systemsb

46

65

65

50
24
52
40
424
165
158

57
30
47
43
61
61
51

72
77
77
74
100
100
100

1,000

0

0

a Used tropical moist deciduous values for mFRI and VDep.
b Used default values of 1,000 and 0 for mFRI and VDep, respectively.

Fig. 13 AR’s maximum CO2 sequestration potential: A) without con-
sidering the risk of wildﬁre, and B) with considering the risk of wildﬁre.

• and P is the permanence (yrs), which represents the length of
time that biogenic carbon must be sequestered to be accounted
as permanent here. P default value is 100 years.

mFRI and VDep are 2 geo-spatial datasets initially developed by
the LandFire Program, and cover the US territory with a 30m ge-
ographic resolution 111. Here, the mFRI and VDep datasets were
aggregated at the ecological scale** First, the existing vegetation
type (EVT) dataset, also developed by the LANDFIRE project 111,
was used to restrict the mFRI and the VDep datasets to forest
vegetation types. Then, the global ecological zone (GEZ) dataset,
developed by the FAO 96, was used to aggregate the restricted

** mFRI and V Dep are processed in ArcGIS 10.6 (ESRI).

mFRI and VDep datasets with ecological zones and ﬁnally extrap-
olate the aggregated and restricted mFRI and VDep datasets at
the global scale. Because all ecological zones are not present on
the US territory, values from “Tropical moist deciduous forest”
were used for the “Tropical rainforest” ecological zone (closest
ecological zone), and default values of 1000 years and 0 were as-
signed to mFRI and V Dep, respectively, in boreal ecological zones
(extremely low risk of wildﬁre in such cold and humid climate).
Resulting values for mFRI, V Dep and R f ire are provided in Table
7.

A.1.3.2 CO2 sequestration potential. AR’s CO2 sequestration
potential COSeq

is evaluated as shown below in Eq. 27:

2

COSeq
2

(yr) = COTotal

2

(yr) × (1 − R f ire)

∀ yr

(27)

The maximal CO2 sequestration potential of AR in Brazil,

1–39 | 19

Tropical rainforest –BroadleavesBrazil (Para)Subtropical humid forest –BroadleavesUSA (Georgia)Temperate oceanic forest -BroadleavesEU (UK)Boreal tundra woodland -ConifersEU (Finland)Biomass Stock (tCO2/ha)Biomass Stock (tCO2/ha)Biomass Stock (tCO2/ha)Biomass Stock (tCO2/ha)YearsYearsYearsYearsAbove-ground biomass (Managed)Below-ground biomassThinningsMaximum CO2sequestration potential(tCO2/ha)< 100< 400< 300< 200< 700< 600< 500ABWithout fire-penaltyWith fire-penaltyChina, the EU, India and the USA, at the regional scale is illus-
trated in Fig. 13. We ﬁnd that AR’s CO2 sequestration poten-
tial is not affected by wildﬁres in boreal and temperate climates,
whereas it decreases by 23–29% in subtropical climates, and up
to 35% in tropical climates.

operations — tree felling, harvesting, forwarding and storage —
resulting in a total loss percentage of 11.6%. This value is con-
sistent with the literature 98,115. As a reference, the IPCC de-
faults values for harvest loss are 10% for broadleaves and 8%
for conifers 98.

A.1.4. Forestry operations model.

A.1.5 Energy balance.

Here, we describes in details the forestry operations model.
Speciﬁcally, AR requires the establishment and the on-going
maintenance of the forest to maximise and maintain CDR. These
include site establishment, forest roads construction and annual
maintenance, and annual forestry (thinning) operations 113–115.

A.1.4.1 Site establishment. The forest is established by land
preparation and planting of new seedlings. For land preparation,
mounding is carried out by an excavator 113,114,116, and herbicide
and fertiliser are applied using a tractor 113,114. Tree seedlings are
prepared in nurseries 117, then planted by hand 113,114,118.

Forest road construction & maintenance. The ac-
A.1.4.2
cess and the maintenance of forests requires forest roads, that are
classiﬁed according to the frequency of their usage. Speciﬁcally,
type A roads are the principal routes, used very frequently and
type B road are secondary routes, only used during speciﬁc ac-
tivities, such as thinning operations. Here, we assume that forest
roads construction (for types A and B roads) involves spreading
blasted rock on top of the soil, and then covering with a layer
of ﬁner, crushed aggregate 113,114,116. Forest roads maintenance
depends on the road type. Type A roads maintenance involves
the re-grading of the road every year, or the re-surfacing — the
re-application of the top layer of aggregate — before thinning
operations, whereas type B roads maintenance only involves the
re-grading and rolling of the remaining aggregate layer before
thinning operations 113,114,116. Mining and crushing of road rock
and aggregate are also included 113,116, as contributing to forest
road construction & maintenance’s indirect GHG emissions.

Annual forestry (thinning) operations. As part of
A.1.4.3
the FMC, a selection of trees is thinned using a cut-to-length
logging system. This involves the felling and the extraction of
trees from the forest site using a combination of harvesters and
forwarders 113,114,119,120. Here, we assume that this selection
of thinned forest biomass is composed of 80% thinnings (whole
tree thinnings and roundwood) and 20% forest residues, such as
branches, foliage or bark 115. Early whole tree thinnings involves
tree felling by harvesters, followed by whole tree removal from
the site to the roadside by forwarders. Harvesting roundwood
requires the use of harvesters that cut and top the trees, leaving
branches and other forest residues on the forest ﬂoor. The round-
wood is then transported to the roadside by forwarders. Lastly,
35% of the residues are left in the forest for ecological reasons 115
— forest residues are left on the forest ﬂoor to maintain the nu-
trient and soil carbon balance —, and the remainder is collected
and extracted by forwarders that compress the forest residues into
bundles. All thinned and extracted forest biomass are then stored
at the roadside to allow for natural drying from 50% to 30% mois-
ture content 113,115.

Dry matter losses are also included at every step of the forestry

20 | 1–39

AR’s total energy requirements include:

• direct energy (energy density) of the combustion of fuels 121 or

the consumption of electricity;

• indirect energy (embodied energy) due to the production of

these fuels 122 and the generation of electricity 123;

• and indirect energy (embodied energy) due to the pro-
agrochemicals 124–127,
such
duction
seedlings 124,125,127,128 or road rock and aggregate 113,116,121.

of materials,

as

A.1.6 CO2 (and N2O) balance model.
AR’s total CO2 (and N2O) emissions COEmissions

2

include:

• direct CO2 emissions from the combustion of fuels 121,

• indirect CO2 emissions due to the production of these fuels 121

and the generation of electricity 95,121;

• indirect CO2 emissions due to the production of materials, such
as agrochemicals 124–127, seedlings 124,125,127 or road rock and
aggregate 113,116,121.

• direct N2O emissions 129–132 arising from the application of
nitrogen-based fertiliser during the forest establishment and
from the use of ammonium nitrate-based explosive for road
rocks extraction;

• and direct and indirect CO2 emissions arising from land-use

change (LUC).

For safeguards of sustainability and biodiversity, we assume
that AR’s deployment is restricted to lands with reforestation po-
tential (LRP), as identiﬁed in Griscom et al. 77 (See Appendix C).
Although the climato-ecological characteristics of LRP are well
detailed, there are little information on the current use of LRP.
Speciﬁcally, because LRP are characterised by low tree cover (and
therefore low biomass density) and current croplands are ex-
cluded from LRP, we assume that: 1) the quality of LRP is similar
to the one of marginal agricultural lands (MAL), and therefore
the direct LUC is equal to 25 kgCO2/ha; and 2) no human activ-
ities are displaced by AR’s deployment on LRP, and therefore the
indirect LUC is null. The methodology used for the accounting
of N2O emissions and LUC (direct & indirect) emissions has been
presented previously 62,63 and will not be repeated here.

Overall, AR’s CO2 balance — AR’s CDR potential — CORemoval
is the difference between AR’s CO2 sequestration potential (dis-
counted by a "ﬁre-penalty" coefﬁcient) COSeq
and AR’s CO2 emis-
sions COEmissions
2

, as shown in Eq. 28:

2

2

CORemoval
2

(yr) = COSeq

2

(yr) −COEmissions
2

(yr)

∀ yr

(28)

tions, or other machinery for road construction and mainte-
nance 139,140;

• the cost of labour, such as ground worker, forest worker, road

operator, etc 141;

• and the cost of feedstocks and materials, such as agrochemi-

cals 142,143, seedlings 144 or road rocks 145.

• and the cost of land.

In this study, costs are expressed in 2018 US $, but disaggre-
gated at the national level. When available in another currency
or another year, costs of energy, machinery and feedstocks are
converted with the use of exchange rate and inﬂation factors re-
spectively 146,147. When only available for one country (often
the USA), costs of energy, machinery and feedstocks are con-
verted with the use of purchasing power parity (PPP) 148, and
costs of labour are converted proportionally to national hourly
compensation costs from the Conference Board, as described pre-
viously 55,62.

Because AR’s deployment is restricted to LRP, of which the
climato-ecological characteristics and the current usage can be
assimilated to the ones of MAL (low quality of land, unused for
crop production), we assume, similarly to MAL, that the cost of
LRP is null.

AR’s initial investment, due to the establishment of the forest
and the construction of forest roads, is levelised with the use of
a capital recovery factor (CRF), itself calculated with an interest
rate of 8% and a ﬁnancial lifetime of 30 years.

Fig. 15 illustrates AR’s CO2 removal costs over a 100 years
time-period in Brazil, China, the EU, India and the USA. Because
of different economies across the world and different AR’s CDR
potentials within these economies, AR’s CO2 removal cost varies
at the global — between the 5 regions considered in MONET —
and national scale — among each of the 5 regions considered in
MONET. Overall, CO2 removal via AR is the most expensive in the
USA, ranging between $77-395/tCO2 whereas it is the cheapest
in India, ranging between $22–139/tCO2, and in Brazil, ranging
between $44–242/tCO2. Finally, AR’s CO2 removal costs between
$52–247/tCO2 in the EU, and between $59–265/tCO2 in China.

Fig. 15 AR’s CO2 removal cost over a 100 years time-period. Because of
diﬀerent economies across the world and diﬀerent AR’s CDR potentials
within these economies, AR’s CO2 removal cost varies at the global and
national scale.

1–39 | 21

Fig. 14 AR’s CO2 removal potential: A) over 30 years, B) over 50 years,
and C) over 100 years.

Fig. 14 illustrates AR’s CDR potential over time-periods of 30,
50 and 100 years in Brazil, China, the EU, India and the USA. AR’s
CDR potential slowly increases during the ﬁrst 30 years, reach-
ing up between 200–250 GtCO2 in Central EU, North-East Brazil,
North-West USA and North-West China. After only 50 years, AR
is deployed up to its maximum CDR potential in most regions of
the world, reaching up to 400–430 GtCO2 in North-East Brazil or
South-West China. After a 100 years time-period, AR’s maximum
CDR potential is reached everywhere across the world, greatest in
Brazil owing to warm and humid climates, and lowest in Northern
EU countries owing to boreal climates, or in India owing to warm,
yet dry climates. Moreover, we ﬁnd that AR’s total CO2 emissions
are negligible compared to AR’s CDR sequestration potential over
a 100 years time-period, ranging between 1.2–4.4 tCO2/ha. Over-
all, although AR: 1) needs at least 10–20 years before effectively
removing CO2 from the atmosphere, and 2) saturates after 40–80
years, AR is found to be signiﬁcantly efﬁcient at removing CO2
from the atmosphere, as much as 88.8–95.8% over 30 years, and
97.5–99.6% over 100 years.

A.1.7 Cost balance model.

AR’s total costs include:

• the cost of energy, such as fuels 133 and electricity 134–138;

• the cost of machinery, such as trucks or excavator for land
preparation, harvester and forwarder for harvesting opera-

ACCO2removal potential(tCO2/ha)< 100< 400< 300< 200< 500B30 years50 years100 yearsCO2removal cost($/tCO2)501002003004000100 yearsBioenergy and Carbon Capture and Storage (BECCS)

A.2
model

Combining bioenergy production with CCS can provide net nega-
tive emissions as the CO2 captured by photosynthesizing biomass
growth is geologically sequestered rather than released to the at-
mosphere during its conversion into energy. BECCS can involve
various biomass feedstocks, such as trees, crops, algae, organic
wastes, and biomass conversion pathways, such as power, liquid
fuel, hydrogen. Usually, BECCS simply refers to: 1) the integra-
tion of growing trees and/or crops that extract CO2 from the at-
mosphere, 2) their combustion in power plants to produce elec-
tricity, and the application of CCS via CO2 capture at the power
plant and 3) the transport and injection of CO2 into geological for-
mations. This study focuses on biomass — woody and herbaceous
crops, agricultural residues and forest residues — combustion for
power.

BECCS’s CDR potential has been shown to highly depend on
biomass supply chain management and LUC 63, and to not not
always ultimately result into negative emissions. Biomass sup-
ply chain — LUC, biomass cultivation, processing and transport
to the power plant — requires energy and emits GHG, and must
therefore be considered in the evaluation of BECCS’s CO2 bal-
ance, in order to ensure BECCS’s carbon negativity. The power
plant technology assumed in this study is a 500 MW dedicated
pulverised biomass thermal power plant, combined with post-
combustion amine-based carbon capture with a CCS efﬁciency of
90%. The CO2 capture capacity of the BECCS plant is approxi-
mately 4.2 MtCO2/yr 63. The BECCS plant is assumed to be in
the vicinity of geological formations, with a distance of 100 km
for CO2 transport. Finally, the production of low-carbon electric-
ity by BECCS is assumed to generate revenues that can, in some
conﬁgurations, be greater than BECCS total cost. These revenues
from electricity sales are received at the region-speciﬁc wholesale
price of electricity. BECCS’s whole-system model has been de-
veloped and presented in previous work 55,61–63, and will not be
repeated here.

A.3 Direct Air CO2 Capture and Storage (DACCS) model
With DACCS, CO2 is directly captured from the atmosphere using
a range of sorbents or solvents, and then transported and injected
into geological formations. Because of the low atmospheric con-
centration of CO2 (approximately 412 ppm 149), DACCS is very
energy intensive — DACCS’s total energy requirements, including
the separation of CO2 from the air and the compression of CO2,
have been reported 4 times greater than conventional CCS’s total
energy requirements 150. Because of this, and the low maturity
of the technology, DACCS’s cost is still uncertain and expensive,
ranging between $30-1,000/tCO2

45,151.

Two archetypal DAC plants are currently being developed at
the demonstration-scale. The ﬁrst one, developed by Carbon En-
gineering Ltd., captures CO2 directly from the air with a potas-
sium hydroxide (KOH) sorbent in the air contactor and stores it
as a carbonate (K2CO3) 26,27. The sorbent is then regenerated
by reacting K2CO3 with a calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2) in the
pellet reactor. Ca(OH)2 is obtained in the slacker by hydrating

22 | 1–39

calcium oxide (CaO), which itself is produced by calcining cal-
cium carbonate (CaCO3) in a kiln (also called calciner), at 900◦C.
The high-temperature heat required by the regeneration process
is currently supplied by the combustion of natural gas, of which
the CO2 emissions are also captured in a CO2 absorber. The sec-
ond one, developed by Climeworks, captures CO2 with an amine-
functionalised sorbent on a ﬁlter 152,153. Once the ﬁlter is sat-
urated, it is heated to 100◦C, and the CO2 is released and col-
lected. The low-temperature heat of the regeneration process can
be provided by the electricity grid. For both DAC plant archetypes,
fans, liquid pumping and CO2 compression also requires power
from the electricity grid. Both archetypes — Carbon Engineering
(DACCS-CE) and Climeworks (DACCS-CW) — have been imple-
mented in this study.

Similarly to BECCS plants, we assume that DAC plants are built
and operating in the vicinity of geological formations that are suit-
able for CO2 storage, at a distance of 100 km.

In this study, we have developed an explicit spatio-temporal
model of DACCS whole-system model, integrating a DAC plant
and CO2 transport and storage (T&S). For each step of the model,
energy, CO2 and cost balances are carried out. Spatial resolution
of DACCS’s whole-system model is at the State/Province in Brazil,
China, India and the USA and at the country in the EU (EU-27 &
UK). Temporal resolution is 10 years (decadal), ranging between
2020–2100.

A.3.1 Energy balance model. DACCS’s total energy require-
ments include:

• direct energy requirements (energy density) from the combus-
tion of natural gas in the case of Carbon Engineering archetype
or from the consumption of electricity in both archetypes’
cases 27,94;

• and indirect energy requirements (embodied energy) from
the production of natural gas 122 in the case of DACCS-CE
archetype, the production of electricity 123, and the T&S of
CO2

154.

A.3.2 CO2 balance model. DACCS’s CDR potential is equal to
the difference between DACCS’s CO2 captured at the DAC plant
– both from the atmosphere and from the combustion of natural
gas in the case of DACCS-CE archetype – and DACCS’s total CO2
emissions. DACCS’s total CO2 emissions include:

• direct CO2 emissions from the combustion of natural gas 121 in

the case of DACCS-CE archetype,

• and indirect CO2 emissions from the production of natural
gas 155,156 in the case of DACCS-CE archetype, the production
of electricity 95,121, and the T&S of CO2

157.

Fig. 16 shows the impact of the energy sector (speciﬁcally the
power sector) decarbonisation on the DACCS’s CDR efﬁciency
for both DACCS archetypes (DACCS-CE and DACCS-CW). Con-
sidering the current — 2020 — carbon intensity of national
(and sub-national) electricity grids, DACCS-CE archetype’s ef-
ﬁciency ranges between 44–88%, whereas the one of DACCS-
CW archetype ranges between -79–92%. Speciﬁcally, DACCS-CE

Fig. 16 DACCS’s CO2 removal eﬃciency for Carbon Engineering and Climeworks archetypes, in 2020 and after 2050.

archetype not only fails at removing CO2 from the atmosphere
in China, in India, and in a few EU countries and US States, but
it even emits more CO2 into the atmosphere. However, as the
power sector follows a complete decarbonisation by 2050, both
archetypes’s CDR efﬁciencies increase, up to 86–88% in DACCS-
CE’s case and 94% in DACCS-CW’s case. The carbon intensity
of DACCS’s energy plays therefore a signiﬁcant and determinant
role in DACCS’s CDR efﬁciency. Crucially, the decarbonisation of
the power sector appears like a necessary prerequisite for the de-
ployment of DACCS.

A.3.3 Cost balance model. DACCS’s total cost includes:

• the cost of energy such as electricity 134–138 and natural

gas 134,137,158–160;

• the CAPEX and OPEX (including labour, operating and mainte-

nance costs) of the DAC plant 27,94,

• the cost of CO2 T&S 161.

For DACCS-CE archetype, DACCS’s CO2 capture cost has been
broken down into energy (natural gas and electricity), CAPEX
and OPEX in Keith et al. 27. Speciﬁcally, after excluding the en-
ergy cost, the levelised CAPEX and the OPEX account respectively
for 69% and 31%, in all conﬁgurations†† In this study, we con-
servatively assume that DACCS’s CO2 capture cost, including the
energy cost, is twice more than suggested around $235/tCO2,
while maintaining the ratio of CAPEX/OPEX as it is. Assum-
ing an interest rate of 8% and a ﬁnancial lifetime of 30 years,
this results into a (non-levelised) CAPEX of $1,600/tCO2 cap-
tured, and an OPEX of $65/tCO2/yr captured. For DACCS-CW
archetype, DACCS’s CO2 capture cost has been reported around

†† In Keith et al. 27, two DAC plant conﬁgurations are investigated. In the ﬁrst, natural
gas is used both for heat and power, whereas in the second, natural gas is replaced
by electricity for power. In this study, we only consider the second DAC plant conﬁg-
uration.

162. Conversely to DACCS-CE archetype, DACCS-CW
$600/tCO2
archetype is a modular process, for which the DAC plant size
is smaller (lower CAPEX), and is operated in a two time-steps,
which requires more maintenance (higher OPEX). Therefore, we
assume that, after excluding the energy (electricity only) cost‡‡,
the (levelised) CAPEX and the OPEX account both for 50% of the
remaining cost of CO2 capture. With an interest rate of 8% and
a ﬁnancial lifetime of 30 years, this results into a (non-levelised)
CAPEX of $1,815/tCO2 captured, and an OPEX of $160/tCO2/yr
captured. Finally, the methodology for evaluating the cost of CO2
T&S has already been presented previous and will not be repeated
here.

Appendix B
timisation model

Equations of the MONET op-

The MONET framework used in this study has been extended to
include AR and DACCS. The initial mathematical formulation of
the MONET optimisation model, described previously 55,62, has
been adapted accordingly. This is described here.

B.1 Overview
The MONET framework is a linear optimisation problem (LP),
that determines the optimal co-deployment of CDR pathways —
AR, BECCS and DACCS — in line with the Paris Agreement’s ob-
jectives of 1.5◦C, subject to the constraints below:

• CDR targets constraints: Cumulative CDR targets are speci-
ﬁed throughout the whole planning horizon, according to the
Paris Agreement’s 1.5◦C objectives. This is discussed in Section
2.1.1.

• Expansion of CDR solutions constraints: Operation condi-
tions, speciﬁc to each CDR pathway, and including lifetime,

‡‡ Because Climeworks’s ﬁrst pilot plant was operated in Switzerland, we used the

electricity price of Switzerland.

1–39 | 23

maximum built rates for BECCS and DACCS and maximum ex-
pansion rate for AR, are speciﬁed.

• Sustainability & Land constraints: Region-speciﬁc bio-
geophysical limits — land and biomass supply availabilities,
water stress — are also speciﬁed.

• Geological CO2 storage constraints: BECCS and DACCS
plants are deployed in the vicinity of geological CO2 storage
— a distance of 100 km — with sufﬁcient CO2 storage capacity
for the lifetime of the technology. CO2 is assumed to be safely
and permanently stored. Maximum CO2 storage capacity for
BECCS and DACCS are speciﬁed, owing to region-speciﬁc lim-
its.

In this study, the MONET framework minimises the total net
cost of the co-deployment of CDR pathways — total capital costs
(CAPEX) and operating costs (OPEX) minus total revenues —.
It assumes perfect foresight over a 2020–2100 planning horizon,
with a 10 years time-step.

B.2 Main equations
Here, we describe in details the main equations of the MONET
optimisation model, including AR, BECCS and DACCS.

B.2.1 Objective function.

The objective function is the total cumulative net cost of CDR tcb
($). Eq. 29 denotes the objective function, which is minimised in
the model formulation.

tcb =

∑
sr(cid:48),ez,t=(cid:48)2100(cid:48),a

cCostAF (sr(cid:48), ez,t,td) × luAF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a)

+ ∑

sr,sr(cid:48),b,l,t

aCostBBECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) × arco2BECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) × 10

aCostDACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) × arco2DACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) × 10

(29)

+ ∑
tk,sr(cid:48),t

where:
• parameter cCostAF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a) is the cumulative cost per hectare
of AR in sub-region sr’ and ecological zone ez, in year t, and
deployed from year a ($/ha);

• parameter aCostBBECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) is the annual cost balance
per tonne of CO2 removed of BECCS with biomass b, cultivated
on land type l in sub-region sr, and transported to sub-region
sr’ in year t ($/tCO2 removed);

• parameter aCostDACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) is the annual cost per tonne of
CO2 removed of DACCS with technology tk, in sub-region sr’ in
year t ($/tCO2 removed);

• decision variable luAF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a) is the land use of AR in sub-
region sr’ and ecological zone ez, in year t, and deployed from
year a (ha);

B.2.2 Cumulative CDR targets constraint.

Eqs. 30–33 introduce the cumulative CDR target constraints on
the deployment of a portfolio of CDR pathways. In the COOPERA-
TION scenario, the total cumulative CO2 removed via AR, BECCS
and DACCS must be greater than or equal to the global CDR
targets gCDRT (t) in year t (tCO2 removed). This is written below:

∀ t ≤ 2100,

∀ t = 2100,

cRCO2AF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a) × luAF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a)

∑
sr(cid:48),ez,a

+ ∑

sr,sr(cid:48),b,l,t

arco2BECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) × 10

arco2DACCS(sr(cid:48),tk,t) × 10 ≥ gCDRT (t)

(30)

+ ∑
sr(cid:48),tk

cRCO2AF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a)luAF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a)

∑
sr(cid:48),ez,a

+ ∑

sr,sr(cid:48),b,l

arco2BECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) × 10

arco2DACCS(sr(cid:48),tk,t) × 10 = gCDRT (t)

(31)

+ ∑
sr(cid:48),tk

where: parameter cRCO2AF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a) describes the cumulative
CO2 removed via AR, in sub-region sr’ and ecological zone ez, in
year t, and deployed from year a (tCO2 removed/ha).

In the CURRENT POLICY and ISOLATION scenarios, national
cumulative CO2 removed via AR, BECCS and DACCS must be
greater than or equal to the national CDR targets CDRT (c,t) in
region c and at time t (tCO2 removed). This is written below:
∀ c, t ≥ 2100,

cRCO2AF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a) × luAF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a)

∑
sr(cid:48)∈c,ez,a

+ ∑

sr,sr(cid:48)∈c,b,l,t

arco2BECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) × 10

arco2DACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) × 10 = CDRT (c,t)

(32)

+ ∑

tk,sr(cid:48)∈c,t

∀ c, t = 2100,

cRCO2AF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a) × luAF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a)

∑
sr(cid:48)∈c,ez,a

+ ∑

sr,sr(cid:48)∈c,b,l,t

arco2BECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) × 10

• decision variable arco2BECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) is the annual CO2 re-
moved via BECCS with biomass b, cultivated on land type l in
sub-region sr, and transported to sub-region sr’ in year t (tCO2
removed/yr);

• and decision variable arco2DACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) is the annual CO2 re-
moved via DACCS with technology tk, in sub-region sr’ in year
t (tCO2 removed/yr).

+ ∑

tk,sr(cid:48)∈c,t

arco2DACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) × 10 = CDRT (c,t)

(33)

In the scenarios discussed in Section 5, in which CDR targets
"switch" from national to global from 2030, 2050, 2070 and 2090,
Eqs. 32–33 are used before the "switch", and Eqs. 30–31 are used
after.

24 | 1–39

B.2.3 CO2 storage constraint.

∀ sr, t, b (cid:54)= wheat or forest residues,

Eq. 34 ensures that the cumulative CO2 removed via BECCS and
DACCS never exceeds the maximum theoretical capacity of the
sites in which it is stored:

∀ sr(cid:48), t,

∑
sr,b,l

aSCO2BECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) × arco2BECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) × 10

∑
ez,a

luAF (sr, ez,t, a) + ∑
sr(cid:48),l,

luscBECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) ≤ MALOW R3(sr)

(LRPOW R3(sr, ez) + LRP&MALOW R3(sr, ez))

+∑
ez

(37)

∀ sr(cid:48), t, b = wheat,

luscBECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) ≤ LHW (sr)

(38)

∑
sr(cid:48),l,

aSCO2DACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) × arco2DACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) × 10

+∑
tk

where:

≤ CO2Smax(sr(cid:48))

where:

(34)

• parameter CO2Smax(sr(cid:48)) is the theoretical CO2 storage capacity

of geological formations in sub-region sr(cid:48);

• parameter aSCO2BECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) is the annual CO2 stored
per tonne of CO2 removed via BECCS with biomass b, cultivated
on land type l in sub-region sr, and transported to sub-region
sr’ in year t (tCO2 stored/tCO2 removed/yr);

• and parameter aSCO2DACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) is the annual CO2 stored
per tonne of CO2 removed via DACCS with technology tk, in
sub-regionsr in year t (tCO2 stored/tCO2 removed/yr).

• parameter LRPowr3(sr(cid:48), ez) is the maximum available LRP (ex-
cluding overlaping LRP with MAL), restricted to low OWR (<
3), in sub-region sr(cid:48) and ecological zone ez;

• parameter MALOW R3(sr) is the maximum available MAL (ex-
cluding overlapping MAL with LRP), restricted to low OWR (<
3), in sub-region sr(cid:48) and ecological zone ez;

• parameter LRP&MALowr3(sr(cid:48), ez) is the maximum available LRP
and MAL (overlapping), restricted to low OWR (< 3), in sub-
region sr(cid:48) and ecological zone ez;

• parameter LHW (sr) is the maximum available LHW in sub-

region sr;

• and variable luscBECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) is the land use of BECCS
biomass supply chain with biomass b, cultivated on land type
l in sub-region sr, and transported to sub-region sr’ in year t
(ha);

B.2.4

Sustainability/Land availability constraint.

B.2.5 AR expansion constraints.

AR and BECCS deployments are constrained by maximum land
availabilities, speciﬁc to the type of biomass grown — forests
in the case of AR, dedicated-energy crops (DEC) or agricultural
residues in the case of BECCS. Speciﬁcally, AR deployment is
bounded by the availability of land with reforestation potential
(LRP) as introduced in Griscom et al. 77 (Eq.
35) whereas
BECCS deployment is bounded by the availability of marginal
land (MAL) 78 for dedicated-energy crops (DEC)
agricultural
(Eq. 36), and by the availability of land with harvested wheat
(LHW) 79 for wheat agricultural residues (Eq. 38). Because LRPs
and MALs are not incompatible, they can sometimes overlap,
and Eq. 37 ensures that there is no double counting. Moreover,
as a safeguard against water stress and scarcity, LRPs and MALs
subject to high or extremely high overall water risk (OWR) 80
— the OWR is greater than or equal to 3 out of a 5-scale — are
excluded. This is written below:

∀ sr(cid:48), ez, t,

AR deployment is also bounded by a maximal annual expansion
rate for newly afforested lands. Because the optimisation model
is solved over a 10 years time-step — decades 2020–2030, 2030–
2040,..., 2090–2100 — it is averaged over a 10 years time-period.
This is shown below in Eq. 39:

luAF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a) ≤ ExpRAF (sr(cid:48)) ×

∑
ez,t=a

∑k=10
k=1 k
10

,

∀ sr(cid:48), t

(39)

where: ExpRAF (sr(cid:48)) is the maximum annual expansion rate of AR
in sub-region sr(cid:48).

Moreove, Eq. 40 ensures that once AR is deployed, it is main-

tained throughout the whole planning horizon.

luAF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a) =

(cid:40)

luAF (sr(cid:48), ez,t = a)

0

∀ sr(cid:48), ez, t ≥ a
∀ sr(cid:48), ez, t < a

(40)

luAF (sr(cid:48), ez, l, a) ≤ LRPowr3(sr(cid:48), ez) + LRP&MALowr3(sr(cid:48), ez) (35)

B.2.6 BECCS expansion constraints.

∑
a

∀ sr, t, b (cid:54)= wheat or forest residues,

∑
sr(cid:48),l,

luscBECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) ≤ ∑

ez

LRP&MALOW R3(sr, ez)

+ MALOW R3(sr)

(36)

It is assumed that once a BECCS plant is built, it is operated
throughout its whole lifetime (30 years).
Total numbers of
BECCS plants npBECCS(sr(cid:48),t) in sub-region sr and in year t
are tracked by BECCS ﬂeet ages — the number of ﬁrst gen-
eration plants (10 years) np1gBECCS(sr(cid:48),t), second generation
(20 years) np2gBECCS(sr(cid:48),t) and third generation (30 years)
np3gBECCS(sr(cid:48),t). The time-period linking BECCS plants balance

1–39 | 25

constraints are shown below in Eqs. 41–44:

∀ sr(cid:48), t :

np1gBECCS(sr(cid:48),t) = npBECCS(sr(cid:48),t) − np2gBECCS(sr(cid:48),t)

np3gDACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) = np2gDACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t − 1),

t > 1

(49)

−np3gBECCS(sr(cid:48),t)

(41)

npDACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) = np1gDACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t),

t = 1

(50)

np2gBECCS(sr(cid:48),t) = np1gBECCS(sr(cid:48),t − 1),

t > 1

(42)

where: parameter aCCO2DACCS(sr(cid:48),tk,t) is the annual CO2 cap-
tured via DACCS in sub-region sr, with technology tk, in year t
(tCO2 captured/tCO2 removed/yr).

Eq. 51 computes the CO2 removal resulting from all operating

np3gBECCS(sr(cid:48),t) = np2gBECCS(sr(cid:48),t − 1),

t > 1

(43)

DAC plants:

∀ tk, sr(cid:48), t :

npBECCS(sr(cid:48),t) = np1gBECCS(sr(cid:48),t),

t = 1

(44)

where: parameter UnitBECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) is the number of BECCS
plants per tonne of CO2 removed, with biomass b, cultivated on
land type l in sub-region sr, and transported to sub-region sr’ in
year t (unit/tCO2 removed).

Eq. 45 computes the CO2 removal resulting from all operating

BECCS plants:

∀ sr(cid:48), t :

npDACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) ×CAPDACCS(tk) =

arco2DACCS(sr(cid:48),tk,t)
aCCO2DACCS(sr(cid:48),tk,t)

(51)

Finally, the deployment of new-built DAC plants of CO2 capture
capacity CAPDACCS is bounded by a maximal built rate BRDACCS of
2 MtCO2/sub-region, averaged over 10 years time-period. This is
shown in Eq. 52:

(np1gDACCS

tk,sr(cid:48),t CAPDACCS

tk

∑
tk

) = BRDACCS ∑k=10
k=1 k
10

∀ tk, sr(cid:48), t

(52)

npBECCS(sr(cid:48),t) = ∑

sr,b,l

arco2BECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t)

×UnitBECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t)

(45)

Finally, the deployment of new-built BECCS plants of 500
MW/yr capacity CAPBECCS is bounded by a maximal built rate
BRBECCS of 2GW/sub-region, averaged over a 10 years time-
period. This is shown below in Eq. 46:

B.3 Additional equations
The scenarios discussed in Section 5 are solved in the opti-
misation using results from the ISOLATION scenario — more
speciﬁcally AR, BECCS and DACCS decisions variables’ outputs
— as an additional constraint to AR, BECCS and DACCS co-
deployments:

∀ sr(cid:48), ez, t < switch, a :

luAF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a) = ISOLluAF (sr(cid:48), ez,t, a)

(53)

np1gBECCS(sr(cid:48),t) =

BRBECCS
CAPBECCS ×

∑k=10
k=1 k
10

,

∀ sr(cid:48), t

(46)

∀ sr, sr(cid:48), b, l, t < switch :

B.2.7 DACCS expansion constraints.

As for BECCS, once built, DAC plants are operated throughout
their whole lifetime (30 years). A similar time-period linking DAC
plants balance constraints are applied where npDACCS
is the total
tk,sr(cid:48),t
numbers of DAC plants of technology tk, in sub-region sr and
in year t, and np1gDACCS
the number
respective of 1G, 2G and 3G DAC plants. This is shown below in
Eqs.47–50:
∀ tk, sr(cid:48), t :

tk,sr(cid:48),t and np3gDACCS
tk,sr(cid:48),t

tk,sr(cid:48),t , np2gDACCS

np1gDACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) = npDACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) − np2gDACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t)

−np3gDACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t)

(47)

np2gDACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) = np1gDACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t − 1),

t > 1

(48)

26 | 1–39

arco2BECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t) = ISOLarco2BECCS(sr, sr(cid:48), b, l,t)

(54)

∀ tk, sr(cid:48), t < switch :

arco2DACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t) = ISOLarco2DACCS(tk, sr(cid:48),t)

(55)

where:

• parameter ISOLluAF

sr(cid:48),ez,t,a is the land use of AR in sub-region sr’
and ecological zone ez, in year t, and deployed from year a, as
projected in the ISOLATION scenario (ha),

• parameter arco2BECCS

sr,sr(cid:48),b,l,t is the annual CO2 removed via BECCS
with biomass b, cultivated on land type l in sub-region sr, and
transported to sub-region sr’ in year t, as projected in the ISO-
LATION scenario (tCO2 removed/yr),

• parameter arco2DACCS
tk,sr(cid:48),t

is the annual CO2 removed via DACCS
with technology tk, in sub-region sr’ in year t, as projected in
the ISOLATION scenario (tCO2 removed/yr),

• switch is the year at which the model ’switches’ from an ISOLA-

TION to a COOPERATION policy paradigm.

Appendix C Datasets of MONET

In this study, AR, BECCS and DACCS deployments are constrained
by bio-geophysical limits. Here, we describes in details the
methodologies applied to obtain estimates of CO2 storage capac-
ity at the sub-regional level, that limit BECCS and DACCS deploy-
ment, and estimates of land with reforestation potential at the
sub-regional level, that limit AR deployment. The methodologies
used to obtain estimates of MAL at the sub-regional level, and ex-
clude lands with higher OWR, that limit BECCS deployment, have
been introduced previously 61,62 and will not be repeated here.

C.1 CO2 storage
C.1.1 Overview.

The deployment of CDR options involving geological CO2 stor-
age (i.e., BECCS and DACCS) relies on the presence of suitable
geological storage sites and the existence of CO2 transportation
methods between the CO2 capture facility and the storage site.
Whilst global aggregated CO2 storage capacity is generally not
considered as a barrier for CCS deployment 163,164, existing re-
gional storage assessments are limited 165.
In addition to the
lack/absence of completeness, regional storage assessments dif-
fer in their methodology, making direct comparisons or summa-
tion of their evaluated CO2 capacities inaccurate 165,166.

Particularly, CO2 storage capacity can be estimated and classi-
ﬁed into theoretical, effective, practical and source-sink matched,
as deﬁned by the “Geologic CO2 storage Resource Capacity Pyra-
mid” classiﬁcation 167. This concept estimates CO2 storage capac-
ity based on physical-geological and engineering/technical lim-
its, legal, regulatory and economic barriers and the presence of
matching CO2 sources. CO2 storage capacity can also be clas-
siﬁed into geological classes: deep saline aquifers, depleted oil
and gas reservoirs, and less frequently unmineable coal seams 167.
Deep saline aquifers have been generally acknowledged as con-
taining the vast majority of geological CO2 storage capacity 165.
Globally, when conducted, the capacity and reliability of re-
gional storage assessments vary signiﬁcantly and may lead to re-
gional storage constraints.

C.1.2 Medium/Base-Case CO2 storage scenario.

Although we recognise the need for further work in developing a
more complete and consistent regionally-disaggregated CO2 stor-
age assessment, our study includes CO2 storage availability and
capacity for Brazil, China, India, the EU (27- UK) and the USA,
at the sub-regional level, based on the existing literature. Data
is obtained from country, regional and basin-scale CO2 storage
assessments. Our study evaluates CO2 storage capacity in deep
saline aquifers and depleted oil and gas reservoirs, and includes
both on-shore and off-shore storage sites. As a result of this, base-
case (medium), low and high scenarios are estimated. Table 8
provides data sources for CO2 storage capacity in this study and
compares our estimates with the ones of recent literature.

Whilst our estimates for India are in accordance with the Global

CCS Institute (GCCSI), our Brazilian estimate is 3 times lower.
This signiﬁcant difference is probably due to our conservative
choice of the default CO2 storage factor when estimating the CO2
storage of Brazil. A sensitivity analysis on this factor indicates
that a less conservative, average value of 3,520 Gt of CO2 could
be obtained. Nevertheless, due to the high incertitude concerning
CO2 storage capacity, we use the conservative value.

C.1.3 Global methodology.

In this study, CO2 storage availability and capacity are assessed
for Brazil, China, India, the EU (-28) and the USA, at the sub-
regional level. In the absence of quantitative CO2 storage capac-
ity assessments, the methodology described in Wildenborg et al.
is applied 179. This method estimates the CO2 capacity of saline
aquifers from the surface area of the basin in which the aquifer is
located, as follows in Equation 56:

VCO2 = A × ACF × SF

(56)

where:

• VCO2 is the CO2 storage capacity (MtCO2)
• A is the basin area (km2)
• ACF is the aquifer coverage factor (-)
• and SF is the storage factor (MtCO2/km2)

Conservatively, it is assumed that a single aquifer is present in
each basin, covers approximately half of the basin area, and is
well sealed. Resulting default values of the ACF and the SF are
respectively 50% and 0.2 MtCO2/km2.

C.1.4 Brazil.

To this date, no country-scale quantitative CO2 storage analysis
has been performed for Brazil. Instead, a qualitative prospection
of 31 Brazilian basins, covering an area of approximately 6.4 mil-
lion km2, was generated through a basin-by-basin analysis, rank-
ing them into three categories: low, medium or high potential
for storage 89. Additionally, one quantitative analysis on the Cam-
pos basin, a depleted oil ﬁeld, off the south-east coast of Brazil,
comprised of 17 off-shore oil ﬁelds was performed, resulting in
88. The method described
a CO2 storage capacity of 950 MtCO2
in Wildenborg et al. 179 is thus applied to the 31 Brazilian basins,
resulting in a CO2 storage capacity estimate of 640 Gt. These
basin-scale estimates are then spatially deﬁned in the software
ArcGIS 10.6 by using the corresponding map, and further aggre-
gated by Brazilian sub-regions.

In this study, the high CO2 storage capacity estimate is equal to
both the basins’ aquifers and the oil ﬁeld CO2 storage capacities,
and the medium and low estimates are equal to the oil ﬁeld CO2
storage capacity only. It is worth mentioning that when using a
value of 2 MtCO2/km2 for the SF (i.e., default value for uncon-
ﬁned aquifers), the CO2 storage capacity of Brazil increases to
6,400 Gt CO2, resulting in a less conservative estimate of 3,520
Gt of CO2.

C.1.5 China.

In China, the national and quantitative CO2 storage capacity in
sedimentary basins 82,83 and in oil & gas ﬁelds 83 was evaluated.

1–39 | 27

Table 8 Geological CO2 storage capacity

Country

Brazil
China
EU
of which UK
India
USA

(GtCO2)
0.95
54
180
78
0
2,565

Low

Data sources
88

168–178

84–86

87

-
81

(GtCO2)
0.95
3,106
180
78
0
8,533

This study
Medium

Data sources
88

82,83

84–86

87

-
81

(GtCO2)
641
3,106
180
78
53
21,865

High

Data sources
88,89

82,83

84–86

87

90

81

GCCSI 163

(GtCO2)
2,000
2,000
300
80
50
8,150

(%)
56-75
75-100
75-100
75-100
56-75
75-100

Overall, 27 saline aquifers, 17 gas ﬁelds and 19 oil ﬁelds were
assessed, resulting in CO2 storage capacities of respectively 3,096
Gt CO2, 5.2 Gt CO2 and 4.6 Gt CO2. In this work, each basin’s
CO2 storage capacity is spatially allocated to its respective basin
in the software ArcGIS 10.6 by using the spatial dataset on sedi-
mentary basins in China from the US Geological Survey (USGS),
and further aggregated by Chinese sub-regions. The resulting val-
ues account for the medium and high estimates in our study.

Numerous region-, basin-, and formation-scale studies have
also been performed.
the Near Zero Emis-
In particular,
sions from Coal (NZEC) project examined CO2 storage projects
on the Sangliao and the Subei Basin 168–170. The CO2 stor-
age capacity of the Songliao basin’s aquifer has been eval-
uated at 593 Mt CO2, and the effective capacities of
the
Daquig and Jilin Oilﬁelds’ at 71.5 Mt and 692 Mt respectively.
Similarly, the Cooperation Action Carbon Capture and Stor-
age China-EU (COACH) project investigated options in the Bo-
hai Basin 171–174. The effective CO2 storage capacity of the Da-
gang ang the Shengli oilﬁelds have been estimated at 22 and
472 Mt CO2 respectively. The largest capacity has been identi-
ﬁed in the aquifers of the Huimin sub-basin within the Jiyang
Depression, with an upper bound estimate of 22 Gt, and lat-
est interest on the Guanyao Formation within the Huimin sub-
basin has resulted in the estimation of 700 Mt of CO2. Signif-
icant uncertainty around these aquifers’ estimates must be ac-
knowledged due to the limited availability of geological data.
Several studies have been also investigated the Ordos basin
CO2 storage potential. An initial upper estimate of 287 Gt CO2
was suggested for the aquifer CO2 storage capacity by Jiao et
al. 175, later re-evaluated around 25 Gt CO2 by Ellet et al. 176.
In the work of Wang et Carr 177, oil & gas ﬁelds CO2 stor-
age capacity were evaluated at 38 Mt and 3.2 Gt respectively.
In the recent work of Zhou et al 178, up to 60 oil ﬁelds were
considered, resulting in a CO2 storage capacity of 1,222 Mt.
Overall, these basin-scale estimates are spatially represented
in the software ArcGIS 10.6 by estimating their geological for-
mation’s surface areas from corresponding maps, provided by the
aforementioned studies. They are then aggregated by Chinese
sub-regions and account for the low estimates in our study.

C.1.6 EU.

The UK storage appraisal project (UKSAP) of the Energy Tech-
nologies Institute (ETI) provided a detailed UK CO2 storage as-
sessment, in which a total CO2 storage capacity of 78 Gt CO2 was
identiﬁed 87.

28 | 1–39

At the EU-scale, the EU GeoCapacity Project and later the
CO2Stop project developed a CO2 storage potential capacity
database 84–86. The GeoCapacity project involved 25 countries
and evaluated a total CO2 capacity of 95.7 Gt in deep saline
aquifers and 20.2 Gt in Hydrocarbon ﬁelds. The CO2StoP project
involved 27 countries and presented a standardised CO2 stor-
age capacity of 157.8 Gt in deep saline aquifers, and 13.3 Gt
in hydrocarbon ﬁelds, which are 1.6 times higher and 0.7 times
lower than the respective estimates provided by the GeoCapac-
ity project. Overall, the CO2StoP identiﬁed CO2 storage capac-
ity is 1.5 times higher than the one of the GeoCapacity project.
Regarding CO2 storage in aquifers, it would appear that the
CO2 storage capacity of France, Germany and Poland in the
GeoCapacity project is equivalently allocated to Poland, only,
in the CO2StoP project.
the reported CO2 stor-
age capacities of Denmark and Norway in the GeoCapacity
in
project are also equivalent to the one of Denmark, only,
the CO2StoP project.
Finally, when subtracting the CO2 ca-
pacity of the UK from the total CO2 capacity in the CO2StoP
project, the resulting total CO2 capacity is only equal to 0.7
of the one in the GeoCapacity project. Regarding CO2 stor-
age in oil & gas ﬁelds, no similar hypotheses can be drawn.
Overall, value ranges vary signiﬁcantly between the two
projects, both at the country-scale and the global-scale, whether
for aquifers, oil & gas ﬁelds, or both. Additionally, in the CO2StoP
project, important differences can also be observed between the
“user-entered”, the “calculations” and the “standardised calcula-
tions”. As a result of this, our study uses the GeoCapacity data,
which accounts for the low, medium and high CO2 storage capac-
ity estimates.

Similarly,

C.1.7

India.

To this date, only a country-scale qualitative CO2 storage analy-
sis has been performed for India, categorising sedimentary basins
into good, fair, and limited 90. The method described in Wilden-
borg et al. 179 is thus applied to 9 “good” and 3 “fair” basins, re-
sulting in a high/upper CO2 storage capacity estimate of 63.3 Gt.
This CO2 storage capacity was further aggregated by Indian sub-
regions in the software ArcGIS 10.6.

C.1.8 USA.

Two national quantitative CO2 storage capacity assessments have
been completed. The USGS provided an estimate of 2,924 (2,135-
4,013) Gt of CO2 storage capacity for 36 sedimentary basins in
the United States 180,181. More recently, the U.S. Department of
Energy’s (DOE) National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL)

published the 5th edition of the Carbon Storage Atlas (Atlas
V), in which 205 (186-232) Gt and 8,328 (2,379-21,633) Gt
of CO2 storage capacity have been identiﬁed in oil & gas ﬁelds
and aquifers respectively 81. Spatial data was also available.
In this study, we aggregate the DOE’s NETL spatial dataset into
U.S. States in the software ArcGIS 10.6. The P5 (min), mean and
P95 (max) estimates accounts respectively for the low, medium
and high estimates.

C.2 Areas with reforestation opportunities

The type of land on which afforestation tales places, also referred
as cover type, is included within the afforestation value chain
framework, thereby impacting afforestation GHG and cost bal-
ance, through the respective contributions of direct & indirect
land use change and land cost.

In this study, afforestation deployment is constrained to ar-
eas with reforestation (RP) potential, as provided by (Griscom
et al.) 77. RP lands are deﬁned by non-forests lands in areas
ecologically appropriate for forests (i.e., areas with a low tree
cover (< 25%) but within the boundaries of a native forest
cover type). Land categorised as grassland or savanna, crop-
land, and land within boreal ecological zones are excluded from
the scope of the dataset respectively to limit negative impacts on
biodiversity, to account for food security, and the albedo effect.
The 740m geographic resolution spatial dataset has been pro-
cessed in the software ArcGIS 10.6 (ESRI) to obtain the avail-
ability of RP land in each sub-region sr and ecological zone gez.
Because of the low tree cover of RP lands, and the little informa-
tion on their current use, we assume that LUC and iLUC factors,
and cost of land are equal to zero.

Appendix D Additional results

D.1 Cost-optimal cumulative CO2 removal
Fig.17 illustrates the cost-optimal CDR pathways in 2100 under
the different P3-consistent policy scenarios discussed in Section
2.3. The amount of CO2 removed cumulatively by 2100 is in-
dicated at the sub-regional scale, and pied charts showing the
contribution of each CDR option (i.e., AR, BECCS, and DACCS)
are at the regional scale. Cumulative imported biomass (pellet)
for BECCS by 2100 are also indicated via arrows at the regional
scale.

D.2 Cost supply curves

Fig. 18 shows the cost-efﬁciency of each CDR option deployed –
how the cost of CDR increases as more CO2 is removed from the
atmosphere – in all P3-consistent policy scenarios.

Appendix E

Sensitivity analysis

The scenarios discussed in Section 3 are dependant on the level
of CDR targets that must be met, globally and nationally. They
also rely on the availability of CO2 storage, and the maximum
deployment rates for AR, BECCS and DACCS.

Here, we investigates and discusses the inﬂuence of varying
CDR targets, CO2 storage availability and maximum deployment
rates on the cost-optimal composition of CDR pathways.

E.1

Increasing CDR targets

IAMs have shown that a diversity of climate mitigation path-
ways were consistent with the Paris Agreement’s 1.5◦C objective,
differing in socio-economic drivers, demand for energy and/or
land, and cumulative GHG emissions, and therefore in tempera-
ture overshoots and resulting CDR achieved. The IPCC classiﬁes
these climate mitigation pathways into four illustrative scenarios,
based on their levels of CDR achieved by the end of the century.
Speciﬁcally, the IPCC P3 scenario aims at being representative of a
middle-of-the-road climate mitigation pathway, in which BECCS
— used as a proxy for CDR solutions — is deployed up to 407
cumulative GtCO2 by 2100. In this study, the IPCC P3 scenario
was used to set out base-case CDR targets between 2020–2100.
Results in Section 3 showed that delivering the Paris Agreement’
CDR objectives at the IPCC P3 scale is feasible, yet challenging —
less feasibly and more expensively — without international coop-
eration policy in climate mitigation. Therefore, we perform/run
a sensitivity analysis on higher CDR targets by using the IPCC
P4 scenario, representative of a fossil-fuel intensive and high en-
ergy demand pathway, and characterised by the aggressive de-
ployment of BECCS — 1,176 cumulative GtCO2 by 2100. As a
reference, the IPCC P3 and P4 annual levels of CDR in 2100 are
equivalent to 12.2 and 35.1 times the current level of CO2 emis-
sions — 33.5 GtCO2 in 2018).

As shown in Fig. 19-A, higher (P4) CDR targets results into
the deployment of DACCS in all scenarios, making up between
12–46% of the CO2 cumulatively removed from the atmosphere
globally by 2100. The Paris Agreement’s CDR objectives are suc-
cessfully delivered at the P4 scale in the COOPERATION scenario,
but the gap by which they are missed in the CURRENT POLICY
and ISOLATION scenarios increases to 191 GtCO2 in 2100, equiv-
alent to 26% of the 2100 global P4 target.

In the COOPERATION scenario, DACCS is deployed in the USA
only, up to 201 GtCO2 in 2100 (Fig. 19-B), and contributes to
overtaking the USA’s 2100 national CDR target by 38%. This
is achieved with the DACCS-CE archetypal conﬁguration only, as
it is cheaper than the DACCS-CW archetypal one, and increases
the (global) cumulative cost of CDR by 3.5 times to $203/tCO2
by 2100. With higher CDR targets, DACCS needs therefore to
be added to the cost-optimal CDR pathway to deliver the Paris
Agreement at scale, whilst taking best advantage of international
cooperation policy, which results inevitably into higher CDR costs.

In the CURRENT POLICY scenario, because of the absence of in-
ternational cooperation in climate mitigation, we ﬁnd that DACCS
is deployed in the EU as early as 2030. However, this is insufﬁ-
cient to reach the EU’s national CDR targets as the EU’s CO2 stor-
age sites are exhausted by 2070. Although less CO2 is removed by
the end of the century than in the previous scenario, both DACCS-
CE and DACCS-Cw archetypal conﬁgurations are deployed, as
the DACCS-Cw archetypal conﬁguration is more efﬁcient to re-
move CO2 from the atmosphere, once the electricity system has
fully transitioned to net-zero. However, the DACCS-Cw archety-
pal conﬁguration is also more expensive than the DACCS-CE one.
Therefore the cumulative cost of CDR also increases to $205/tCO2
by 2100, which is lower than in the previous scenario.

1–39 | 29

Fig. 17 Maps of cost-optimal CDR pathways deployed by 2100, under alternative P3-consistent policy scenarios: COOPERATION, CURRENT
POLICY and ISOLATION scenarios.

The cumulative cost of CDR is the highest in the ISOLATION
scenario — $285/tCO2 by 2100 — as international biomass trad-
ing is not allowed, and therefore leads to a higher contribution of
DACCS to the CDR pathway than in the CURRENT POLICY sce-
nario. This is observed in the USA and in China, where DACCS

displaces BECCS using imported biomass from Brazil and India.

The above emphasises the importance of developing a geopo-
litical framework for negative emissions trading in order to guar-
antee the international ability of delivering the Paris Agreement’s
objectives, even in the pessimistic P4 scenario of the IPCC. How-

30 | 1–39

Fig. 18 Cost supply curves of each CDR option deployed by 2100, under alternative P3-consistent policy scenarios. BECCS delivers the most
cost-eﬃcient CDR – its cost supply curve is below all the ones of the other CDR options – and therefore the most CDR, and that in all scenarios.

ever, as more CO2 will need to be removed from the atmosphere,
the ﬁnancial burden of the Paris Agreement will increase signiﬁ-
cantly, due to the inevitable deployment of DACCS.

E.2

Increasing CO2 storage availabilities & capacities
This study highlighted that CDR solutions involving CO2 storage
play a key role in delivering the Paris Agreement at scale, with
BECCS and DACCS contributing between 74–84% to the total
CO2 removal by 2100, in all scenarios discussed in Section 3.
More speciﬁcally, results in Section E.1 showed the importance of
well distributed CO2 storage sites with high capacity. Speciﬁcally,
nations can be categorised as follows: No or very limited CO2
storage potential — < 1 GtCO2 — such as Brazil and India; lim-
ited CO2 storage potential — ≥ 1 GtCO2 and < 1,000 GtCO2 —
such as the EU; and unlimited CO2 storage potential — ≥ 1,000
GtCO2 — such as China and the USA. Here, we investigate the
effect of a globally better distributed and higher CO2 storage ca-
pacity on the cost-optimal deployment of CDR solutions. The de-
scription of the CO2 storage assessment methodology and the re-
sulting regional CO2 storage estimates are provided in Appendix
B.

Fig. 19-C shows that better distributed and higher CO2 storage
capacities across the world allow for the successful delivering of
the Paris Agreement, under any alternative policy options. This
is because, in the CURRENT POLICY and ISOLATION scenarios,
India’s national CDR target can be met via BECCS, owing to the
availability of CO2 storage site. This also results into a slight de-
crease of the cumulative net cost of CDR by 4–5% to $79/tCO2
and $92/tCO2, respectively. Speciﬁcally, the cumulative cost of
CDR is the lowest in the COOPERATION scenario — $31/tCO2
— owing to the the availability of CO2 storage sites in Brazil,
and thus the ability to deploy the least-cost BECCS conﬁgurations
across the world, and where 58% of the total CO2 removal by
2100 is therefore achieved. This is equivalent to 20 times Brazil’s
2100 national CDR target.

This highlights the importance of well-distributed and high CO2
storage capacity at the national level, as this would unlock the
delivering of the Paris Agreement under any alternative policy
options, and decrease its ﬁnancial burden, speciﬁcally with an
international cooperation policy.

E.3

Increasing deployment rates

The cost-optimal composition of a CDR pathway that is consis-
tent with the Paris Agreement is subject to a set of constraints.
Speciﬁcally, the rate at which each CDR solution can be deployed
in this study is determined by maximum expansion rates — an af-
forestation rate for AR, and built rates for new BECCS and DACCS
plants. There are, however, no historic records for nascent CDR
technologies such as BECCS and DACCS, or for AR for the pur-
pose of CDR, which makes maximum expansion limits, now and
in the future, highly uncertain. This study showed that, AR de-
ployment was partially limited by such expansion constraints, at
the rates speciﬁed as in Section 2.1.2. Here, we perform a sen-
sitivity analysis on higher deployment rates for all CDR options,
in the scenarios discussed in Section 3. Speciﬁcally, AR’s maxi-
mum regional land expansion rate is multiplied by a factor 10,
from 50 kha/yr to 500kha/yr, BECCS’s maximum regional built
rate is increased from 2GW/yr to 5GW/yr — equivalent to a CO2
capture rate of 42 MtCO2/yr in each region — and DACCS’s max-
imum regional built rate is increased accordingly to 42 MtCO2/yr
as well.

As shown in Fig 19-E, higher deployment rates lead to higher,
yet limited, deployments of AR to the detriment of BECCS and
DACCS, and reduce by 7–18% the cumulative cost of CDR to
$47/tCO2, $76/tCO2 and $79/tCO2 in 2100 in the COOPERA-
TION, CURRENT POLICY and ISOLATION scenarios, respectively.
However, this does not improve the ability to meet the Paris
Agreement’s 2100 CDR objectives in the absence of international
cooperation in climate mitigation policy (in the CURRENT POL-
ICY and ISOLATION scenarios).

1–39 | 31

Net Marginal Cost of CDR ($/tCO2)COOPERATION scenarioCURRENT POLICY scenarioISOLATION scenarioCumulative CDR (GtCO2)Cumulative CDR (GtCO2)Cumulative CDR (GtCO2)ARBECCSDACCSCumulative net cost of CDR(Average)++++++++004004080300200100120160200040040803002001001201602000400408030020010012016020000Fig. 19 Sensitivity analysis are performed on: increasing CDR targets, globally (A) and nationally (B); increasing CO2 storage availability, globally
(C) and nationally (D); and on increasing built (i.e., BECCS and DACCS) and expansion (i.e., AR) rates, globally (E) and nationally (F).

In the COOPERATION scenario, in which AR is the most de-
ployed, total CO2 removal via AR increases by 32 GtCO2 in 2100,
but BECCS contribution to the cost-optimal CDR pathway is still

predominant. This is because, even with higher afforestation
rates, AR deployment is bio-geophysically limited by land avail-
ability. In India, 92% of the land with a potential for reforestation

32 | 1–39

A2040–20502050–20602060–20702070–20802080–20902090–21002030–20402020–2030Global cumulative CDR (GtCO2)Regional CumulativeCDR (GtCO2)020030050060001020025035030015050700400100GlobalBrazilChinaEUIndiaUSACOOPERATION scenarioCURRENT POLICY scenarioIPCC P3 CDR targetBECCSARDACCSISOLATION scenarioIPCC P4 CDR targetBBrazilChinaEUIndiaUSACDGlobal cumulative CDR (GtCO2)National cumulative CDR (GtCO2)0501001502502000401001201408020GlobalBrazilChinaEUIndiaUSA60EFGlobal cumulative CDR (GtCO2)National cumulative CDR (GtCO2)050100150250200GlobalBrazilChinaEUIndiaUSA040801001401206020ﬁnancial burden of ﬁnancial burden of the Paris Agreement’s CDR
objectives (high deployment rates), but that the biggest reduction
potential arises from well distributed CO2 storage with high ca-
pacity, with international cooperation in climate mitigation policy
(high CO2 storage capacity).

Acknowledgements

The authors thank thank Imperial College London and the Centre
for Environmental Policy for the funding of a PhD Scholarship.

References

1 U. N. F. C. on Climate Change (UNFCCC), “Adoption of the

Paris Agreement,” dec 2015.

2 A. H. MacDougall and P. Friedlingstein, “The Origin and Lim-
its of the Near Proportionality between Climate Warming
and Cumulative CO2 Emissions,” Journal of Climate, vol. 28,
pp. 4217–4230, may 2015.

3 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate
Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working
Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the In-
tergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Geneva, Switzer-
land: IPCC, 2014.

4 H. D. Matthews, N. P. Gillett, P. A. Stott, and K. Zickfeld,
“The proportionality of global warming to cumulative car-
bon emissions,” Nature 2009 459:7248, vol. 459, pp. 829–
832, jun 2009.

5 K. Zickfeld, M. Eby, H. Damon Matthews, and A. J. Weaver,
“Setting cumulative emissions targets to reduce the risk
of dangerous climate change,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, vol. 106, pp. 16129–16134, sep 2009.
6 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Global
Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of
global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and re-
lated global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context
of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate
change. Press, 2018.

7 D. Huppmann, J. Rogelj, E. Kriegler, V. Krey, and K. Riahi,
“A new scenario resource for integrated 1.5 °C research,”
Nature Climate Change, vol. 8, pp. 1027–1030, dec 2018.
8 H. D. Matthews, J. S. Landry, A. I. Partanen, M. Allen, M. Eby,
P. M. Forster, P. Friedlingstein, and K. Zickfeld, “Estimating
Carbon Budgets for Ambitious Climate Targets,” Current Cli-
mate Change Reports, vol. 3, pp. 69–77, mar 2017.

9 R. J. Millar, J. S. Fuglestvedt, P. Friedlingstein, J. Rogelj,
M. J. Grubb, H. D. Matthews, R. B. Skeie, P. M. Forster,
D. J. Frame, and M. R. Allen, “Emission budgets and path-
ways consistent with limiting warming to 1.5 °c,” Nature
Geoscience, vol. 10, pp. 741–747, oct 2017.

10 G. Luderer, R. C. Pietzcker, C. Bertram, E. Kriegler, M. Mein-
shausen, and O. Edenhofer, “Economic mitigation chal-
lenges: How further delay closes the door for achiev-
ing climate targets,” Environmental Research Letters, vol. 8,
p. 34033, sep 2013.

11 G. Luderer, C. Bertram, K. Calvin, E. De Cian, and E. Kriegler,
“Implications of weak near-term climate policies on long-

1–39 | 33

Fig. 20 Cumulative net cost of CDR in 2100, under all policy options
— ’cooperation’, current policy and ’isolation’ paradigms — in the base-
case and sensitivity analysis scenarios. The sensitivity analysis on higher
CDR targets shows that high aﬀorestation rates can slightly reduce the
ﬁnancial burden of ﬁnancial burden of the Paris Agreement’s CDR objec-
tives. From the sensitivity analysis on higher deployment rates, we ﬁnd
that high aﬀorestation rates can slightly reduce the ﬁnancial burden of
ﬁnancial burden of the Paris Agreement’s CDR objectives, but from the
one on higher CO2 storage capacity, we ﬁnd that the biggest reduction
potential arises from well distributed CO2 storage with high capacity,
with international cooperation in climate mitigation policy.

is already allocate to AR as early as 2050. In Brazil and in the EU,
AR is deployed by 2060 over 89% and 91% of the available land,
respectively. This is also because BECCS is still more cost-efﬁcient
than AR. Overall, we ﬁnd that 98–100% of the total CO2 removed
by 2100 in Brazil and India is achieved via AR, but 45–69% in the
EU and the USA, and only 16% in China.

In the CURRENT POLICY scenario, BECCS is also replaced by
AR, but only by 16 GtCO2. As in the base-case CURRENT POLICY
scenario, this is because of the absence of international coopera-
tion policy in climate mitigation. Even with higher afforestation
rates, BECCS is still more cost-efﬁcient and therefore more de-
ployed than AR by 2100.

Finally, in the ISOLATION scenario, higher deployment rates

results into the full replacement of DACCS by AR.

The above therefore shows that higher deployment rates can
alleviate the Paris Agreement’s ﬁnancial burden by deploying AR
instead of BECCS and DACCS. Without international cooperation
in climate change policy, this is however insufﬁcient to deliver
the Paris Agreement at scale by 2100. In a pessimistic ’isolation’
paradigm, DACCS’s contribution to the CDR pathway is very low,
but could nonetheless still compromise the sustainability of the
CDR pathway by requiring the deployment of new power capacity
as well.

Fig. 20 summarises cumulative net costs of CDR under all
three alternative policy options, for both the base-case scenarios
and the sensitivity analysis.
It emphasises the urgency of miti-
gating climate change as early as possible, to minimise the need
for CDR, and therefore its ﬁnancial burden (high CDR targets).
It also shows that high afforestation rates can slightly reduce the

Year 2100Cumulative Net Cost of CDR ($/tCO2)COOPERATION scenarioCURRENT POLICY scenarioISOLATION scenarioBase-caseHigh CDR targets (P4)High CO2storage capacitiesHigh deployment rates50200150100250term mitigation pathways,” Climatic Change, vol. 136,
pp. 127–140, may 2016.

below 1.5 °c,” Nature Climate Change, vol. 8, pp. 325–332,
apr 2018.

12 B. M. Sanderson and B. C. O’Neill, “Assessing the costs of
historical inaction on climate change,” Scientiﬁc Reports,
vol. 10, pp. 1–12, dec 2020.

13 M. Victoria, K. Zhu, T. Brown, G. B. Andresen, and
M. Greiner, “Early decarbonisation of the European energy
system pays off,” Nature Communications 2020 11:1, vol. 11,
pp. 1–9, dec 2020.

14 D. McLaren, “Quantifying the potential scale of mitigation
deterrence from greenhouse gas removal techniques,” Cli-
matic Change, vol. 162, pp. 2411–2428, oct 2020.

15 J. Hansen, M. Sato, P. Kharecha, K. Von Schuckmann, D. J.
Beerling, J. Cao, S. Marcott, V. Masson-Delmotte, M. J.
Prather, E. J. Rohling, J. Shakun, P. Smith, A. Lacis, G. Rus-
sell, and R. Ruedy, “Young people’s burden: Requirement
of negative CO2 emissions,” Earth System Dynamics, vol. 8,
pp. 577–616, jul 2017.

16 R. Hanna, A. Abdulla, Y. Xu, and D. G. Victor, “Emergency
deployment of direct air capture as a response to the climate
crisis,” Nature Communications 2021 12:1, vol. 12, pp. 1–13,
jan 2021.

17 Climate Analytics and New Climate Institute, “Glasgow’s
2030 credibility gap: net zero’s lip service to climate action -
Warming Projections Global Update,” Tech. Rep. November,
Climate Action Tracker, 2021.

18 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC), “Nationally determined contributions under the
Paris Agreement,” tech. rep., Glasgow, 2021.

19 Climate Analytics and New Climate Institute, “Countries |

Climate Action Tracker,” 2022.

20 A. Geiges, A. Nauels, P. Yanguas Parra, M. Andrijevic,
W. Hare, P. Pﬂeiderer, M. Schaeffer, and C. F. Schleussner,
“Incremental improvements of 2030 targets insufﬁcient to
achieve the Paris Agreement goals,” Earth System Dynamics,
vol. 11, pp. 697–708, aug 2020.

21 J. Rogelj, M. Den Elzen, N. Höhne, T. Fransen, H. Fekete,
H. Winkler, R. Schaeffer, F. Sha, K. Riahi, and M. Mein-
shausen, “Paris Agreement climate proposals need a boost
to keep warming well below 2◦c,” Nature, vol. 534, pp. 631–
639, jun 2016.

22 G. Luderer, Z. Vrontisi, C. Bertram, O. Y. Edelenbosch, R. C.
Pietzcker, J. Rogelj, H. S. De Boer, L. Drouet, J. Emmer-
ling, O. Fricko, S. Fujimori, P. Havlík, G. Iyer, K. Keramidas,
A. Kitous, M. Pehl, V. Krey, K. Riahi, B. Saveyn, M. Tavoni,
D. P. Van Vuuren, and E. Kriegler, “Residual fossil CO2 emis-
sions in 1.5-2 °c pathways,” Nature Climate Change, vol. 8,
pp. 626–633, jul 2018.

23 J. Rogelj, A. Popp, K. V. Calvin, G. Luderer, J. Emmer-
ling, D. Gernaat, S. Fujimori, J. Streﬂer, T. Hasegawa,
G. Marangoni, V. Krey, E. Kriegler, K. Riahi, D. P. Van Vuuren,
J. Doelman, L. Drouet, J. Edmonds, O. Fricko, M. Harmsen,
P. Havlík, F. Humpenöder, E. Stehfest, and M. Tavoni, “Sce-
narios towards limiting global mean temperature increase

34 | 1–39

24 J. G. Canadell and M. R. Raupach, “Managing Forests for Cli-
mate Change Mitigation,” Science, vol. 320, pp. 1456–1457,
jun 2008.

25 M. Obersteiner, C. Azar, P. Kauppi, K. Möllersten, J. Moreira,
S. Nilsson, P. Read, K. Riahi, B. Schlamadinger, Y. Yamagata,
J. Yan, and J.-P. van Ypersele, “Managing Climate Risk,” Sci-
ence, vol. 294, pp. 786b–787, oct 2001.

26 R. Socolow, M. Desmond, R. Aines, J. Blackstock, O. Bolland,
T. Kaarsberg, N. Lewis, M. Mazzotti, A. Pfeffer, K. Sawyer,
J. Siirola, B. Smit, and J. Wilcox, “Direct Air Capture of CO2
with Chemicals: A Technology Assessment for the APS Panel
on Public Affairs,” tech. rep., jun 2011.

27 D. W. Keith, G. Holmes, D. St. Angelo, and K. Heidel, “A Pro-
cess for Capturing CO2 from the Atmosphere,” Joule, vol. 2,
pp. 1573–1594, aug 2018.

28 P. Renforth and T. Kruger, “Coupling mineral carbonation
and ocean liming,” Energy and Fuels, vol. 27, pp. 4199–4207,
aug 2013.

29 T. M. Lenton and C. Britton, “Enhanced carbonate and sil-
icate weathering accelerates recovery from fossil fuel co2
perturbations,” Global Biogeochemical Cycles, vol. 20, no. 3,
p. 3009, 2006.

30 R. D. Schuiling and P. Krijgsman, “Enhanced weathering: An
effective and cheap tool to sequester CO2,” Climatic Change,
vol. 74, pp. 349–354, jan 2006.

31 D. Woolf, J. E. Amonette, F. A. Street-Perrott, J. Lehmann,
and S. Joseph, “Sustainable biochar to mitigate global cli-
mate change,” Nature Communications, vol. 1, p. 1053, aug
2010.

32 P. Smith, “Soil carbon sequestration and biochar as nega-
tive emission technologies,” Global Change Biology, vol. 22,
pp. 1315–1324, mar 2016.

33 B. Minasny, B. P. Malone, A. B. McBratney, D. A. Angers,
D. Arrouays, A. Chambers, V. Chaplot, Z. S. Chen, K. Cheng,
B. S. Das, D. J. Field, A. Gimona, C. B. Hedley, S. Y. Hong,
B. Mandal, B. P. Marchant, M. Martin, B. G. McConkey,
V. L. Mulder, S. O’Rourke, A. C. Richer-de Forges, I. Odeh,
J. Padarian, K. Paustian, G. Pan, L. Poggio, I. Savin, V. Stol-
bovoy, U. Stockmann, Y. Sulaeman, C. C. Tsui, T. G. Vågen,
B. van Wesemael, and L. Winowiecki, “Soil carbon 4 per
mille,” Geoderma, vol. 292, pp. 59–86, April 2017.

34 J. Streﬂer, N. Bauer, F. Humpenöder, D. Klein, A. Popp,
and E. Kriegler, “Carbon dioxide removal technologies are
not born equal,” Environmental Research Letters, vol. 16,
p. 074021, jul 2021.

35 J. Fuhrman, H. McJeon, P. Patel, S. C. Doney, W. M. Shobe,
and A. F. Clarens, “Food–energy–water implications of neg-
ative emissions technologies in a +1.5 ◦ future,” Nature Cli-
mate Change, vol. 10, pp. 920–927, oct 2020.

36 G. Realmonte, L. Drouet, A. Gambhir, J. Glynn, A. Hawkes,
A. C. Köberle, and M. Tavoni, “An inter-model assessment of
the role of direct air capture in deep mitigation pathways,”
Nature Communications, vol. 10, pp. 1–12, dec 2019.

37 J. Streﬂer, N. Bauer, E. Kriegler, A. Popp, A. Giannousakis,
and O. Edenhofer, “Between Scylla and Charybdis: Delayed
mitigation narrows the passage between large-scale CDR
and high costs,” Environmental Research Letters, vol. 13,
p. 044015, mar 2018.

38 A. Marcucci, S. Kypreos, and E. Panos, “The road to achiev-
energy transition and
ing the long-term Paris targets:
the role of direct air capture,” Climatic Change, vol. 144,
pp. 181–193, sep 2017.

39 J. Fuhrman, H. McJeon, S. C. Doney, W. Shobe, and A. F.
Clarens, “From Zero to Hero?: Why Integrated Assessment
Modeling of Negative Emissions Technologies Is Hard and
How We Can Do Better,” Frontiers in Climate, vol. 1, p. 11,
2019.

40 “Drax Group Plc,” 2020.
41 “Carbon Engineering Ltd,” 2020.
42 “Climeworks,” 2020.
43 NASA LCLUC, “Afforestation Along the Gobi Desert’s Margin,

Northern China.”

44 World Bank, “China: Afforestation Project in Shandong Im-

proves Environment and Farmers’ Incomes,” 2017.

45 S. Fuss, W. F. Lamb, M. W. Callaghan, J. Hilaire, F. Creutzig,
T. Amann, T. Beringer, W. De Oliveira Garcia, J. Hartmann,
T. Khanna, G. Luderer, G. F. Nemet, J. Rogelj, P. Smith, J. V.
Vicente, J. Wilcox, M. Del Mar Zamora Dominguez, and J. C.
Minx, “Negative emissions - Part 2: Costs, potentials and side
effects,” Environmental Research Letters, vol. 13, p. 063002,
may 2018.

46 V. Heck, D. Gerten, W. Lucht, and A. Popp, “Biomass-
based negative emissions difﬁcult to reconcile with planetary
boundaries,” Nature Climate Change, vol. 8, pp. 151–155,
February 2018.

47 G. F. Nemet, M. W. Callaghan, F. Creutzig, S. Fuss, J. Hart-
mann, J. Hilaire, W. F. Lamb, J. C. Minx, S. Rogers, and
P. Smith, “Negative emissions - Part 3: Innovation and up-
scaling,” Environmental Research Letters, vol. 13, p. 063003,
may 2018.

48 P. Smith, S. J. Davis, F. Creutzig, S. Fuss, J. Minx,
B. Gabrielle, E. Kato, R. B. Jackson, A. Cowie, E. Kriegler,
D. P. Van Vuuren, J. Rogelj, P. Ciais, J. Milne, J. G. Canadell,
D. McCollum, G. Peters, R. Andrew, V. Krey, G. Shrestha,
P. Friedlingstein, T. Gasser, A. Grübler, W. K. Heidug,
M. Jonas, C. D. Jones, F. Kraxner, E. Littleton, J. Lowe, J. R.
Moreira, N. Nakicenovic, M. Obersteiner, A. Patwardhan,
M. Rogner, E. Rubin, A. Shariﬁ, A. Torvanger, Y. Yamagata,
J. Edmonds, and C. Yongsung, “Biophysical and economic
limits to negative CO2 emissions,” Nature Climate Change,
vol. 6, pp. 42–50, jan 2016.

49 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine,
Negative Emissions Technologies and Reliable Sequestration:
A Research Agenda. Washington, DC: National Academies
Press, 2019.

50 M. Honegger, A. Michaelowa, and J. Roy, “Potential implica-
tions of carbon dioxide removal for the sustainable develop-

ment goals,” Climate Policy, vol. 21, pp. 678–698, may 2021.
51 A. Mohan, O. Geden, M. Fridahl, H. J. Buck, and G. P. Pe-
ters, “UNFCCC must confront the political economy of net-
negative emissions,” One Earth, vol. 4, pp. 1348–1351, oct
2021.

52 D. R. Morrow, M. S. Thompson, A. Anderson, M. Batres, H. J.
Buck, K. Dooley, O. Geden, A. Ghosh, S. Low, A. Njamnshi,
J. Noël, O. O. Táíwò, S. Talati, and J. Wilcox, “Principles
for Thinking about Carbon Dioxide Removal in Just Climate
Policy,” One Earth, vol. 3, pp. 150–153, aug 2020.

53 L. Ringius, A. Torvanger, and A. Underdal, “Burden Shar-
ing and Fairness Principles in International Climate Policy,”
International Environmental Agreements, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–
22, 2002.

54 C. Pozo, Á. Galán-Martín, D. M. Reiner, N. Mac Dowell, and
G. Guillén-Gosálbez, “Equity in allocating carbon dioxide re-
moval quotas,” Nature Climate Change, vol. 10, pp. 640–646,
jul 2020.

55 M. Fajardy and N. Mac Dowell, “Recognizing the Value of
Collaboration in Delivering Carbon Dioxide Removal,” One
Earth, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 214–225, 2020.

56 N. Bauer, C. Bertram, A. Schultes, D. Klein, G. Luderer,
E. Kriegler, A. Popp, and O. Edenhofer, “Quantiﬁcation of
an efﬁciency–sovereignty trade-off in climate policy,” Nature,
vol. 588, pp. 261–266, December 2020.

57 M. Honegger and D. Reiner, “The political economy of nega-
tive emissions technologies: consequences for international
policy design,” Climate Policy, vol. 18, pp. 306–321, mar
2018.

58 W. Rickels, A. Proelß, O. Geden,

J. Burhenne, and
M. Fridahl, “Integrating Carbon Dioxide Removal Into Euro-
pean Emissions Trading,” Frontiers in Climate, vol. 3, p. 62,
jun 2021.

59 M. Brander, F. Ascui, V. Scott, and S. Tett, “Carbon ac-
counting for negative emissions technologies,” Climate Pol-
icy, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 699–717, 2021.

60 M. J. Mace, C. L. Fyson, M. Schaeffer, and W. L. Hare, “Large-
Scale Carbon Dioxide Removal to Meet the 1.5°C Limit:
Key Governance Gaps, Challenges and Priority Responses,”
Global Policy, vol. 12, pp. 67–81, apr 2021.

61 M. Fajardy, S. Chiquier, and N. Mac Dowell, “Investigat-
ing the BECCS resource nexus: delivering sustainable neg-
ative emissions,” Energy & Environmental Science, vol. 11,
pp. 3408–3430, dec 2018.

62 M. Fajardy, Developing a framework for the optimal deploy-
ment of negative emissions technologies. PhD thesis, Imperial
College London, 2020.

63 M. Fajardy and N. Mac Dowell, “Can BECCS deliver sustain-
able and resource efﬁcient negative emissions?,” Energy &
Environmental Science, vol. 10, pp. 1389–1426, jun 2017.
64 M. R. Raupach, S. J. Davis, G. P. Peters, R. M. Andrew,
J. G. Canadell, P. Ciais, P. Friedlingstein, F. Jotzo, D. P. Van
Vuuren, and C. Le Quéré, “Sharing a quota on cumulative
carbon emissions,” Nature Climate Change, vol. 4, no. 10,
pp. 873–879, 2014.

1–39 | 35

65 J. Gütschow, M. L. Jeffery, R. Gieseke, R. Gebel, D. Stevens,
M. Krapp, and M. Rocha, “The PRIMAP-hist national histori-
cal emissions time series,” Earth System Science Data, vol. 8,
pp. 571–603, nov 2016.

66 J. Gütschow, A. Günther, and M. Pﬂüger, “The PRIMAP-hist
national historical emissions time series (1750-2019) v2.3,”
aug 2021.

67 J. Penman, M. Gytarsky, T. Hiraishi, W. Irving, and T. Krug,
“Overview,” in 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse
Gas Inventories, 2006.

68 J. Gütschow, L. Jeffery, R. Gieseke, and A. Günther, “The
PRIMAP-hist national historical emissions time series v2.1
(1850-2017),” 2019.

69 World Bank, “World Development Indicators,” 2020.
70 H. A. Daggash, C. F. Heuberger, and N. Mac Dowell, “The
role and value of negative emissions technologies in de-
carbonising the UK energy system,” International Journal
of Greenhouse Gas Control, vol. 81, no. December 2018,
pp. 181–198, 2019.

71 H. A. Daggash and N. Mac Dowell, “Higher carbon prices on
emissions alone will not deliver the paris agreement,” Joule,
vol. 3, no. 9, pp. 2120–2133, 2019.

72 H. A. Daggash and N. Mac Dowell, “The implications of
delivering the uk’s paris agreement commitments on the
power sector,” International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Con-
trol, vol. 85, pp. 174–181, 2019.

73 H. A. Daggash and N. Mac Dowell, “Structural evolution of
the uk electricity system in a below 2° c world,” Joule, vol. 3,
no. 5, pp. 1239–1251, 2019.

74 C. Heaton, Modelling Low-Carbon Energy System Designs with

the ETI ESME Model, April 2014.

75 “LP DAAC - MCD12Q1.”
76 FAO, Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020. FAO, 2020.
77 B. W. Griscom, J. Adams, P. W. Ellis, R. A. Houghton, G. Lo-
max, D. A. Miteva, W. H. Schlesinger, D. Shoch, J. V. Si-
ikamäki, P. Smith, P. Woodbury, C. Zganjar, A. Blackman,
J. Campari, R. T. Conant, C. Delgado, P. Elias, T. Gopalakr-
ishna, M. R. Hamsik, M. Herrero, J. Kiesecker, E. Landis,
L. Laestadius, S. M. Leavitt, S. Minnemeyer, S. Polasky,
P. Potapov, F. E. Putz, J. Sanderman, M. Silvius, E. Wollen-
berg, and J. Fargione, “Natural climate solutions.,” Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, vol. 114, pp. 11645–11650, oct 2017.

78 X. Cai, X. Zhang, and D. Wang, “Land Availability for Biofuel
Production,” Environmental Science & Technology, vol. 45,
pp. 334–339, jan 2011.

79 Q. Yu, L. You, U. Wood-Sichra, Y. Ru, A. Joglekar, S. Fritz,
W. Xiong, M. Lu, W. Wu, and P. Yang, “A cultivated planet in
2010: 2. the global gridded agricultural production maps,”
Earth System Science Data Discussions, pp. 1–40, 2020.
80 F. Gassert, m. Landis, M. Luck, P. Reig, and T. Shiao, “AQUE-

DUCT GLOBAL MAPS 2.1,” Tech. Rep. April, 2015.

81 USDOE, “Carbon Storage Atlas (5th Edition),” tech. rep.,

2015.

36 | 1–39

82 X. Li, N. Wei, Y. Liu, Z. Fang, R. T. Dahowski, and C. L. David-
son, “CO2 point emission and geological storage capacity in
China,” Energy Procedia, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 2793–2800, 2009.
83 R. T. Dahowski, X. Li, C. L. Davidson, N. Wei, and J. J. Doo-
ley, “Regional Opportunities for Carbon Dioxide Capture and
Storage in China,” Tech. Rep. December, USDOE, 2009.
84 T. Vangkilde-Pedersen, K. L. Anthonsen, N. Smith, K. Kirk,
F. Neele, B. van der Meer, Y. Le Gallo, D. Bossie-Codreanu,
A. Wojcicki, Y.-M. Le Nindre, C. Hendriks, F. Dalhoff, and
N. Peter Christensen, “Assessing European capacity for ge-
ological storage of carbon dioxide – the EU GeoCapacity
project,” Energy Procedia, vol. 1, pp. 2663–2670, feb 2009.

85 T. Vangkilde-Pedersen and GEUS, “Assessing European Ca-
pacity for Geological Storage of Carbon Dioxide - WP2 Re-
port Storage Capacity,” Tech. Rep. Project no. SES6-518318,
2009.

86 N. Poulsen, S. Holloway, F. Neele, N. A. Smith, and K. Kirk,
“CO2StoP Final Report - Assessment of CO2 storage poten-
tial in Europe,” 2014.

87 D. Gammer, “A Picture of CO2 Storage in the UK - Learnings
from ETI’s UKSAP and derived Projects,” tech. rep., Energy
Technologies Institute.

88 G. C. Rockett, J. M. M. Ketzer, A. Ramírez, and M. Van Den
Broek, “CO2 storage capacity of Campos Basin’s oil ﬁelds,
Brazil,” Energy Procedia, vol. 37, pp. 5124–5133, 2013.
89 J. M. M. Ketzer, C. X. Machado, G. C. Rockett, and R. S.
Iglesias, Brazilian atlas of CO2 capture and geological storage.
CEPAC/EDIPUCRS, 2014.

90 S. Holloway, A. Garg, M. Kapshe, A. Deshpande, A. S.
Pracha, S. R. Khan, M. A. Mahmood, T. N. Singh, K. L. Kirk,
and J. Gale, “An assessment of the CO2 storage potential
of the Indian subcontinent,” Energy Procedia, vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 2607–2613, 2009.

91 CEC, “Installed capacity of electric power generation in

China between 2010 and 2020 (in gigawatts),” 2022.

92 U.S. Energy Information Administration, “Electricity ex-
plained - Electricity generation, capacity, and sales in the
United States,” 2022.

93 European Commission, “Cumulative electricity capacity in-
stalled by generation type in the European Union (EU-27)
as of 2019 (in megawatts),” 2022.

94 Climeworks, “Direct Air Capture & Storage (DACS) Factsheet

for Researchers,” 2018.

95 IEA, CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion 2018. OECD/IEA,

2018.

96 FAO, “Global Ecological Zoning for the Global Forest Re-
sources Assessment 2000,” Tech. Rep. 56, Rome, 2001.
97 FAO, “Global Ecological Zones for FAO Forest Repoting:

2010 Update,” tech. rep., Rome, 2012.

98 H. Aalde, P. Gonzalez, M. Gytarsky, T. Krug, W. A. Kurz,
S. Ogle, J. Raison, D. Schoene, N. Ravindranath, N. G. El-
hassan, L. S. Heath, N. Higuchi, S. Kainja, M. Matsumoto,
M. J. S. Sánchez, and Z. Somogyi, “Chapter 4 - Forest Land,”
in Chapter 4 - Forest Land - Volume 4: Agriculture, Forestry
and Other Land Use - 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National

Greenhouse Gas Inventories, 2006.

99 H. Aalde, P. Gonzalez, M. Gytarsky, T. Krug, W. A. Kurz, R. D.
Lasco, D. L. Martino, B. G. McConkey, S. Ogle, K. Paustian,
J. Raison, N. H. Ravindranath, D. Schoene, P. Smith, Z. So-
mogyi, A. van Amstel, and L. Verchot, “Chapter 2 - Generic
Methodologies Applicable To Multiple Land-Use Categories,”
in Chapter 2 - Generic Methodologies Applicable To Multiple
Land-Use Categories - Volume 4: Agriculture, Forestry and
Other Land Use - 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Green-
house Gas Inventories, 2006.

100 C. J. Schulp, G. J. Nabuurs, P. H. Verburg, and R. W. de Waal,
“Effect of tree species on carbon stocks in forest ﬂoor and
mineral soil and implications for soil carbon inventories,”
Forest Ecology and Management, vol. 256, pp. 482–490, jul
2008.

101 B. Berg, P. Gundersen, C. Akselsson, M. B. Johansson,
Å. Nilsson, and L. Vesterdal, “Carbon sequestration rates in
Swedish forest soils - A comparison of three approaches,” in
Silva Fennica, vol. 41, pp. 541–558, 2007.

102 E. G. Jobbágy and R. B. Jackson, “The vertical distribution
of soil organic carbon and its relation to climate and veg-
etation,” Ecological Applications, vol. 10, pp. 423–436, apr
2000.

103 K. Pingoud, K. E. Skog, D. L. Martino, M. Tonosaki, and Z. Xi-
aoquan, “Chapter 12 - Harvested Wood Products,” in Chap-
ter 12 - Harvested Wood Products - Volume 4: Agriculture,
Forestry and Other Land Use - 2006 IPCC Guidelines for Na-
tional Greenhouse Gas Inventories., 2006.

104 G. A. Stainback and J. R. Lavalapati, “Modeling catastrophic
risk in economic analysis of forest carbon sequestration,”
Natural Resource Modeling, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 299 – 317,
2004.

105 L. Hu, G. A. Stainback, and X. Li, “Economic Analysis of Car-
bon Sequestration under Risks in Forest management,” in
Southern Agricultural Economics Association’s 2016 Annual
Meeting, (San Antonio, Texas), feb 2016.

106 S. Couture and A. Reynaud, “Forest management under ﬁre
risk when forest carbon sequestration has value,” Ecological
Economics, vol. 70, pp. 2002–2011, sep 2011.

107 S. G. McNulty, “Hurricane impacts on US forest carbon se-
questration,” Environmental Pollution, vol. 116, pp. S17–
S24, mar 2002.

108 M. D. Hurteau, B. A. Hungate, and G. W. Koch, “Accounting
for risk in valuing forest carbon offsets,” Carbon Balance and
Management, vol. 4, p. 1, jan 2009.

109 E. Chuvieco, I. Aguado, S. Jurdao, M. L. Pettinari, M. Yebra,
J. Salas, S. Hantson, J. De La Riva, P. Ibarra, M. Rodrigues,
M. Echeverría, D. Azqueta, M. V. Román, A. Bastarrika,
S. Martínez, C. Recondo, E. Zapico, and F. J. Martínez-
Vega, “Integrating geospatial information into ﬁre risk as-
sessment,” International Journal of Wildland Fire, vol. 23,
no. 5, pp. 606–619, 2014.

110 D. M. Szpakowski and J. L. Jensen, “A review of the appli-
cations of remote sensing in ﬁre ecology,” Remote Sensing,
vol. 11, no. 22, p. 2638, 2019.

111 “LANDFIRE Program: Data Products - Fire Regime.”
112 L. Giglio, L. Boschetti, D. Roy, A. A. Hoffman, and M. Hum-
ber, “Collection 6 MODIS Burned Area product User Guide,”
tech. rep., August 2016.

113 C. Whittaker, N. Mortimer, R. Murphy, and R. Matthews, “En-
ergy and greenhouse gas balance of the use of forest residues
for bioenergy production in the UK,” Biomass and Bioenergy,
vol. 35, pp. 4581–4594, nov 2011.

114 J. Morison, R. Matthews, G. Miller, M. Perks, T. Randle,
E. Vanguelova, M. White, and S. Yamulki, “Understanding
the carbon and greenhouse gas balance of forests in Britain,”
tech. rep., Forestry Commission Research, 2012.

115 M. Röder, C. Whittaker, and P. Thornley, “How certain
are greenhouse gas reductions from bioenergy? Life cy-
cle assessment and uncertainty analysis of wood pellet-to-
electricity supply chains from forest residues,” Biomass and
Bioenergy, vol. 79, pp. 50–63, aug 2015.

116 C. Whittaker, N. Mortimer, and R. Matthews, “Understand-
ing the carbon footprint of timber transport in the United
Kingdom,” tech. rep., North Energy, apr 2010.

117 Y. Aldentun, “Life cycle inventory of forest seedling produc-
tion — from seed to regeneration site,” Journal of Cleaner
Production, vol. 10, pp. 47–55, feb 2002.

118 V. Timmermann and J. Dibdiakova, “Greenhouse gas emis-
sions from forestry in East Norway,” The International Jour-
nal of Life Cycle Assessment, vol. 19, pp. 1593–1606, sep
2014.

119 S. Berg and T. Karjalainen, “Comparison of greenhouse gas
emissions from forest operations in Finland and Sweden,”
Forestry, vol. 76, pp. 271–284, mar 2003.

120 J. Kenney, T. Gallagher, M. Smidt, D. Mitchell, and T. Mc-
donald, “Factors that Affect Fuel Consumption in Logging
Systems,” in 37th Council on Forest Engineering Annual Meet-
ing, (Moline, Illinois, USA), 2014.

121 E. . I. S. UK Department for Business, “Greenhouse gas re-
full set (for advanced

porting - conversion factors 2020:
users),” 2020.

122 R. Edwards, J.-F. Larivé, D. Rickeard, and W. Weindorf,
“WELL-TO-TANK Report Version 4.a JEC WELL-TO-WHEELS
ANALYSIS,” tech. rep., European Commission Joint Research
Centre Institute for Energy and Transport, 2014.

123 L. Honorio, J.-G. Bartaire, R. Bauerschmidt, T. Ohman, Z. Ti-
hanyi, H. Zeinhofer, J. F. Scowcroft, V. De Janeiro, H. Kruger,
H.-J. Meier, D. Offermann, and U. Langnickel, Efﬁciency in
Electricity Generation. EURELECTRIC/VGB, 2003.

124 G. G. Camargo, M. R. Ryan, and T. L. Richard, “Energy use
and greenhouse gas emissions from crop production using
the farm energy analysis tool,” BioScience, vol. 63, pp. 263–
273, apr 2013.

125 I. Lewandowski, A. Kicherer, and P. Vonier, “CO2-balance for
the cultivation and combustion of Miscanthus,” Biomass and
Bioenergy, vol. 8, pp. 81–90, jan 1995.

126 P. Nixon and M. Bullard, “Planting and Growing Miscanthus:
Best Practice Guidelines for Applicants to DEFRA’s Energy

1–39 | 37

Crops Scheme,” tech. rep., DEFRA, 2001.

feb 2010.

127 M. A. Elsayed, R. Matthews, and N. D. Mortimer, “Carbon
and energy balances for a range of biofuels options,” tech.
rep., Resources Research Unit Shefﬁeld Hallam University,
2003.

128 E. M. Smeets, I. M. Lewandowski, and A. P. Faaij, “The eco-
nomical and environmental performance of miscanthus and
switchgrass production and supply chains in a European set-
ting,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 13,
pp. 1230–1245, aug 2009.

129 C. De Klein, R. S. Novoa, S. Ogle, K. A. Smith, P. Rochette,
T. C. Wirth, B. G. McConkey, A. Mosier, and K. Rypdal,
“Chapter 11 : N2O emissions from managed soils,” in Chap-
ter 11 : N2O emissions from managed soils - Volume 4: Agri-
culture, Forestry and Other Land Use - 2006 IPCC Guidelines
for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, pp. 1–54, 2006.
130 R. Parajuli, S. Løkke, P. A. Østergaard, M. T. Knudsen, J. H.
Schmidt, and T. Dalgaard, “Life Cycle Assessment of district
heat production in a straw ﬁred CHP plant,” Biomass and
Bioenergy, vol. 68, pp. 115–134, 2014.

131 F. Murphy, G. Devlin, and K. McDonnell, “Miscanthus pro-
duction and processing in Ireland: An analysis of energy re-
quirements and environmental impacts,” Renewable and Sus-
tainable Energy Reviews, vol. 23, pp. 412–420, jul 2013.
132 M. M. Mekonnen and A. Y. Hoekstra, “The green, blue and
grey water footprint of crops and derived crop products,” Hy-
drology and Earth System Sciences, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 1577–
1600, 2011.

133 World Bank, “Pump price for diesel fuel (US$ per liter),”

2020.

134 Ministry of Mines and Energy, “Monthly Energy Bulletin -

December 2018,” dec 2018.
135 CEIC, “Price of electricity,” 2020.
136 EUROSTAT, “Electricity prices by type of user (EUR per

kWh),” 2020.

137 Government of India, “Evaluation Report on Rajiv Gandhi
Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana,” tech. rep., New Delhi, may
2014.

138 Energy Information Administration, “Average retail price of

electricity (cents per kilowatthour),” 2020.

139 R. Brinker, J. Kinard, R. Rummer, and B. Lanford, “Machine
rates for selected forest harvesting machines,” tech. rep.,
Auburn University, 2002.

140 J. Johansson, J.-E. Liss, T. Gullberg, and R. Björhe-
den,
forest energy bun-
dles—advantages and problems,” Biomass and Bioenergy,
vol. 30, pp. 334–341, apr 2006.

“Transport and handling of

141 US Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Occupational Employment

and Wage Statistics,” 2019.

142 M. Duffy, “Estimated Costs for Production, Storage and
Transportation of Switchgrass,” tech. rep., Iowa State Uni-
versity, Department of Economics, 2008.

143 M. de Wit and A. Faaij, “European biomass resource poten-
tial and costs,” Biomass and Bioenergy, vol. 34, pp. 188–202,

38 | 1–39

144 ALBA TREES, “ALBA TREES - The UK’s largest producer of

cell grown plants,” 2020.

145 HomeGuide, “How Much Does Crushed Stone or Gravel

Cost?,” 2020.

146 World Bank, “Ofﬁcial exchange rate (LCU per US$, period

average),” 2020.

147 World Bank, “inﬂation, GDP deﬂator (annual%),” 2020.
148 World Bank, “PPP conversion factor, GDP (LCU per interna-

tional $),” 2020.

149 Global Monitoring Laboratory, “Carbon Cycle Greenhouse

Gases,” 2020.

150 H. Herzog, “Direct Air Capture : A Process Engineer ’ s View,”
in MIT Energy Initiative - Low-Carbon Energy Center Webinar
Series, 2021.

151 E. S. Sanz-Pérez, C. R. Murdock, S. A. Didas, and C. W.
Jones, “Direct Capture of CO2 from Ambient Air,” Chemical
Reviews, vol. 116, pp. 11840–11876, oct 2016.

152 J. Wurzbacher, “Capturing CO2 from air,” in Internationaler

Motorenkongress 2017, pp. 499–511, 2017.

153 K. S. Lackner, “Capture of carbon dioxide from ambient air,”
European Physical Journal Special Topics, vol. 176, no. 1,
pp. 93–106, 2009.

154 D. L. Mccollum and J. M. Ogden, “Techno-Economic Models
for Carbon Dioxide Compression, Transport, and Storage,”
tech. rep., oct 2006.

155 P. Balcombe, K. Anderson, J. Speirs, N. Brandon, and
A. Hawkes, “The Natural Gas Supply Chain: The Importance
of Methane and Carbon Dioxide Emissions,” ACS Sustainable
Chemistry & Engineering, vol. 5, pp. 3–20, jan 2017.

156 O. Schuller, B. Reuter, J. Hengstler, S. Whitehouse, and
L. Zeitzen, “Greenhouse Gas Intensity of Natural Gas,” tech.
rep., ThinkStep, 2017.

157 L. J. Smith and M. S. Torn, “Ecological limits to terrestrial bi-
ological carbon dioxide removal,” Climatic Change, vol. 118,
pp. 89–103, may 2013.

158 A. Hu and Q. Dong, “On natural gas pricing reform in
China,” Natural Gas Industry B, vol. 2, pp. 374–382, oct
2015.

159 EUROSTAT, “Gas prices by type of user (EUR per gigajoule),”

2020.

160 Energy Information Administration, “Natural Gas Prices

(Dollards per Thousanf Cubic Feet),” 2020.

161 N. Johnson, N. Parker, and J. Ogden, “How negative can
biofuels with CCS take us and at what cost? Reﬁning
the economic potential of biofuel production with CCS us-
ing spatially-explicit modeling,” in Energy Procedia, vol. 63,
pp. 6770–6791, Elsevier Ltd, jan 2014.

162 S. Evans, “The Swiss company hoping to capture 1% of

global CO2 emissions by 2025,” jun 2017.

163 Global CCS Institute, “The Global Status of CCS 2018,” tech.

rep., 2018.

164 J. J. Dooley, “Estimating the supply and demand for deep
geologic CO2 storage capacity over the course of the 21st

century: A meta-analysis of the literature,” in Energy Proce-
dia, vol. 37, pp. 5141–5150, 2013.

the Bohaiwan Basin, East China?,” Energy Procedia, vol. 4,
pp. 4641–4647, 2011.

165 J. Kearns, G. Teletzke, J. Palmer, H. Thomann, H. Kheshgi,
Y.-H. H. Chen, S. Paltsev, and H. Herzog, “Developing a Con-
sistent Database for Regional Geologic CO2 Storage Capac-
ity Worldwide,” Energy Procedia, vol. 114, pp. 4697–4709,
jul 2017.

166 W. Heidug, S. T. Brennan, S. Holloway, P. D. Warwick, S. Mc-
Coy, and T. Yoshimura, “Methods to assess geological CO2
storage capacity: Status and best practice,” tech. rep., IEA,
2013.

167 S. Bachu, “Comparison between Methodologies Recom-
mended for Estimation of CO2 Storage Capacity in Geolog-
ical Media,” Tech. Rep. April, Carbon Sequestration Leader-
ship Forum, 2008.

168 L. Zhongyang, Z. Jiutian, and K. Burnard, “Near zero emis-
sions coal: A China-UK initiative to develop CCS in China,”
Energy Procedia, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 3909–3916, 2009.

169 J. M. Pearce, M. Li, S. Ren, G. Li, W. Chen, C. J. Vincent,
and K. L. Kirk, “CO2 storage capacity estimates for selected
regions of China - Results from the China-UK Near Zero
Emissions Coal (NZEC) initiative,” Energy Procedia, vol. 4,
pp. 6037–6044, 2011.

170 NZEC, “China-UK - Near Zero Emissions Coal (NZEC) Initia-

tive - Summary report,” tech. rep., 2009.

171 COACH, “COACH - Cooperation Action within CCS China-
EU - Executive Report,” Tech. Rep. Project N◦ 038966, 2009.
172 C. Vincent, S. Dai, C. Wenying, Z. Rongshu, D. Guosheng,
R. Xu, and F. Dalhoff, “Carbon dioxide storage options for
the COACH project in the Bohai,” Energy Procedia, vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 2785–2792, 2010.

173 C. J. Vincent, R. Zeng, W. Chen, G. Ding, M. Li, S. Dai,
and N. E. Poulsen, “A geological storage option for CO 2 in

174 N. E. Poulsen, “Potential for permanent geological storage
of co2 in China: The coach project,” Geological Survey of
Denmark and Greenland Bulletin, no. 20, pp. 95–98, 2010.

175 Z. Jiao, R. C. Surdam, L. Zhou, P. H. Stauffer, and T. Luo, “A
feasibility study of geological CO2 sequestration in the Ordos
Basin, China,” Energy Procedia, vol. 4, pp. 5982–5989, 2011.
176 K. Ellett, Q. Zhang, C. Medina, J. Rupp, G. Wang, and T. Carr,
“Uncertainty in regional-scale evaluation of CO2 geologic
storage resources comparison of the illinois basin (USA) and
the ordos basin (China),” Energy Procedia, vol. 37, pp. 5151–
5159, 2013.

177 G. Wang and T. CARR, “Evaluation of CO2 geological stor-
age capacity in the Paleozoic Formations of the Ordos Basin,
China,” in 2011 GSA Northeastern/North-Central Joint Sec-
tion Meeting WANG, vol. 43, p. 94, West Virginia University,
mar 2011.

178 Y. Zhou, J. Chen, J. Liu, and H. Yuan, “Evaluation of CO2
storage potential of oil reservoirs in Ordos Basin,” IOP Con-
ference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, vol. 514,
no. 2, p. 2, 2020.

179 T. Wildenborg, S. Holloway, C. Hendriks, E. Kreft,
A. Lokhorst, M. Brook, R. Brandsma, P. Egberts, and
M. Larsen, “Building the cost curves for CO2 storage: Eu-
ropean sector,” tech. rep., IEAGHG, 2004.

180 P. D. Warwick, M. S. Blondes, S. T. Brennan, M. D. Corum,
and M. D. Merrill, “U.S. geological survey geologic carbon
dioxide storage resource assessment of the United States,”
Energy Procedia, vol. 37, pp. 5275–5279, 2013.

181 U.S. Geological Survey Geologic Carbon Dioxide Storage
Resources Assessment Team, “National assessment of geo-
logic carbon dioxide storage resources — Results (ver. 1.1,
September 2013),” tech. rep., USGS, 2013.

1–39 | 39

