From PHY to QoE: A Parameterized Framework
Design

Hao Wang, Lei Ji, and Zhenxing Gao
Email: hunter.wanghao@huawei.com {jilei11, gaozhenxing}@hisilicon.com

2
2
0
2

r
p
A
8

]
T
I
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
2
8
3
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The rapid development of 5G communication tech-
nology has given birth to various real-time broadband commu-
nication services, such as augmented reality (AR), virtual reality
(VR) and cloud games. Compared with traditional services,
consumers tend to focus more on their subjective experience
when utilizing these services. In the meantime, the problem
of power consumption is particularly prominent in 5G and
beyond. The traditional design of physical layer (PHY) receiver
is based on maximizing spectrum efﬁciency or minimizing error,
but this will no longer be the best after considering energy
efﬁciency and these new-coming services. Therefore, this paper
uses quality of experience (QoE) as the optimization criterion of
the PHY algorithm. In order to establish the relationship between
PHY and QoE, this paper models the end-to-end transmission
from UE perspective and proposes a ﬁve-layer framework based
on hierarchical analysis method, which includes system-level
model, bitstream model, packet model, service quality model and
experience quality model. Real data in 5G network is used to train
the parameters of the involved models for each type of services,
respectively. The results show that the PHY algorithms can be
simpliﬁed in perspective of QoE.

Index Terms—quality of experience, performance evaluation,

cross layer design, E2E modeling, B5G.

I. INTRODUCTION

With the popularization of smart terminals and the rapid
development of mobile services, user behavior has undergone
tremendous changes [1]. It
is no longer limited to tradi-
tional mobile services, but more immersive services, such
as augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), and cloud
games. Considering the tremendous rate improvement, 5G
radio access network (RAN) may provide a wireless mode
for these services. However, more popular services are still
concentrated in web browsing, video, voice, and traditional
mobile gaming. Even so, the quality of these services is not
entirely dependent on throughput. As user-centric services is
becoming popular, studying the quality of experience (QoE)
of users will be one of the core issues of future beyond 5G
(B5G) wireless networks [2].

Currently, there is no clear and strict deﬁnition of QoE in
academia. In general, QoE is a measurement used to evaluate
services, and it depends on the interaction between users
and services [3], including not only objective factors such
as service type and terminal parameters, but also subjective
factors such as people’s interest and emotion. Therefore, it is
difﬁcult to establish a comprehensive QoE assessment model.
There are two well-known methods to evaluate QoE, which
are subjective evaluation approach and objective evaluation
approach [4]. The subjective evaluation method is based on

the testers’ satisfaction of the service [5], namely the mean
opinion score (MOS), but this method usually has high cost
and poor applicability. Objective methods generally refer to
the use of statistics or machine learning methods to establish
parameterized models, and thus to establish a relationship
between input parameters and QoE. Objective approaches have
relatively high realizability. Currently, there are some relevant
studies on different business types, such as literatures in [6]–
[8]. However, QoE is still an upper-layer criterion, which
cannot be directly used in physical layer optimization.

Cross-layer optimization may give us some inspiration.
Authors in [9] investigated the cross-layer resource alloca-
tion in heterogeneous wireless access network, and formu-
lated the uplink energy-efﬁcient video transmission into a bi-
convex programming problem. Moreover, [10] established an
interference-aware cross-layer scheme for video transmission,
and considered the joint physical layer (PHY) and medium
access control layer (MAC) optimization. In addition, there are
researches focusing on cross-layer rate adaptation mechanism
[11], where the throughput change from PHY to application
layer (APP) is analyzed. To the best of our knowledge, none
of the work in literature formulated the relationship between
PHY and QoE from the perspective of user equipment (UE).
Therefore, to bridge the research gap, this paper focuses on

designing as follows,

• A new QoE-based optimization criterion for PHY algo-
rithm is proposed, which provides new ideas for reducing
complexity and power consumption.

• Different from traditional network modeling, we for-
mulate the end-to-end transmission from perspective of
UE. A ﬁve-layer parameterized model is proposed which
establishes the relationship between PHY and QoE.
• A data packet model based on the loss queuing model is
proposed, which translates the physical layer performance
into packet-level performance.

• This paper uses real 5G terminal test data to calibrate and
verify the proposed model under several popular services.
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, the end-to-end (E2E) protocol process is brieﬂy
introduced. The proposed framework is elaborated in Section
III. Simulation results and analysis are provided in Section IV.
Finally, Section V concludes the whole paper.

II. E2E PROTOCOL PROCESS
Traditional optimization of PHY algorithm often considers
the criterion of maximizing spectrum efﬁciency or minimizing

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Protocol stack of E2E data transmission.

error. When PHY pursues the ultimate performance, it will
inevitably introduce additional complexity and power con-
sumption. In fact, there are several mechanisms of higher
protocol layer to protect the quality of service (QoS), such as
automatic repeat request (ARQ) and integrity protection. On
the other hand, fairness is also a non-negligible factor when
base station schedules resource among multiple users. Above
all, the gains brought by the physical layer algorithm may be
diminished. Before introducing the framework, let us take a
brief look at the E2E protocol process in 5G-RAN.

As depicted in Fig. 1, the sending UE ﬁrst performs uplink
transmission with its associated base station, and maps the
data ﬂow from APP into a QoS ﬂow according to the QoS-
rule issued by the user plane function (UPF). After that,
through service data adaptation protocol (SDAP), packet data
convergence protocol (PDCP), radio link control (RLC), and
MAC layer processing, the data is stored in the buffer in
the form of data packets waiting to be sent. After receiving
the uplink resource grant from the base station, those data
packets in buffer are processed by the PHY and transferred
into a bit stream, and afterwards are transmitted to the base
station through the uu air interface. Once receiving the PHY
bit stream, the base station performs demodulation and decod-
ing according to a predetermined format, and then performs
the reverse unpacking process of the protocol stack. If the
SDAP layer SDU information is successfully acquired, the
GPRS tunnelling protocol for user-plane (GTP-U) and user
datagram protocol / internet protocol (UDP/IP) encapsulation
is performed, and then these packets enter the core network for
routing. If necessary, the data will ﬁrst be routed to data server,
otherwise it is routed directly to the base station associated
with the receiving UE. The base station unpacks IP/UDP,
GTP-U, and then processes the data through SDAP, PDCP,
RLC, and MAC layer protocols, and then the data is once
again buffered in the transmission queue. After obtaining the
downlink resource grant, the data is processed by the PHY and
transmitted to the receiving UE through the uu air interface.

After the reception, UE performs the reverse unpacking of L2,
and the entire process of E2E data transmission is completed.
Please refer to the relevant 3GPP protocol for detailed infor-
mation, which is beyond the scope of this article.

III. FIVE-LAYER FRAMEWORK DESIGN

Refering to the ideas oriented from protocol stack, we
establish a multiple sub-layer parameterized framework, which
includes system-level model, bitstream model, packet model,
service quality model and experience quality model. These
sub-models are cascade-connected as shown in Fig. 2. The
overall problem can be solved step-by-step after each sub-
problem.

A. System-level Model

Function of system-level model

is to acquire the dy-
namic environment of wireless channel of UE considering the
scheduling in multi-cell deployment. The parameters include
channel state parameter, signal to interference plus noise ratio
(SINR), modulation and coding scheme (MCS), and scheduled
time-frequency resources.

In fact, system modeling is a popular research topic, and
there are many related works in the literature. Among which,
interference model and resource scheduling model are the
principle components. Currently, we adopt the closed-form
analytical model based on [12] to acquire the wanted SINR and
scheduled resource in orthogonal frequency division multiple
access networks.

B. Bitstream Model

Bitstream model reﬂects the performance of physical layer.
Input parameters of this part include the output of system-
level model and the parameter set of the algorithms that are
adopted in PHY. Output parameters are the block error rate
(BLER) and throughput of bitstream. In this paper, we use the
popular PHY abstraction method depicted in [13]. By con-
ﬁguring relevant PHY algorithms (mainly including channel
estimation algorithms, demodulation algorithms, and decoding

SDAPMACSending UEData flowPDCP/RLCPHYHigher LayerPHYPacketBit flowPacketBit flowReceiving UEgNodeBgNodeBRANRANSDAPMACPDCP/RLCCore NetworkData serverSchedulingFeedbackQoS flowData flowHigher LayerQoS flowFig. 2. Proposed ﬁve-layer analytical framework.

algorithms) and parameters, the throughput and BLER under
different inputs can be obtained, namely the THP@SINR and
the BLER@SINR curves.

C. Packet Model

Packet model builds the relationship between the bitstream
and data packet. The input parameters of this model are the
throughput and BLER of bitstream. The output of this model
are the packet loss rate and the delay of packet transmission.
Since the packet model only cares about the packet loss rate
and packet transmission delay, we ﬁrst formulate an E2E delay
model.

As shown in Fig. 3,

the total end-to-end delay can be

expressed as:

Tall = Tulharq + TCN + Tdlharq + 2 × Tprotocolproc

(1)

where Tulharq = E (Nretr) × Tsingletr stands for the mean
time consumption of uplink HARQ procedure, and E (Nretr)
is the mean transmission times of a HARQ procedure,

E (Nretr) = 1 +

Nharq max
(cid:88)

i × BLERi−1,

(2)

i=2
where BLERi represents the BLER of the i-th transmission
of the particular transmission block, i = 1 means new-
transmission, Nharq max means the maximize restriction of
transmission times in a HARQ procedure, and Tsingle tr
represents the mean time of a single transmission, and

Tsingle tr = Tulschedule + Tsigproc + Nuu × Tuu,

(3)

where Tulschedule represents the scheduling time of base
station. After the base station has received the scheduling
request (SR), buffer status report (BSR), and power headroom
report (PHR) messages from UE, it completes the resource
scheduling algorithm. The total scheduling time is related
to the amount of service, business priority, and the number
of involved users. Tulschedule can be calculated according
to the average queue length and the average serving time
of the TX, and the detail is shown in Eq. (11). Note that
scheduling is prioritized during retransmission, and time delay
can be ignored. Tsigproc means the time consumption of
signal processing, Tuu stands for the message transmission

and processing time, and Nuu is the number of message
transmission.

TCN is the process and routing time between base stations
and core network. Note that if there is a handover during up-
link transmission or downlink transmission, TCN will increase
by Tho,

TCN = Tnetrelay + Nho × Tho

(4)

where Tnetrelay is the relaying time of network, and it
is related to the network topology, the degree of network
congestion, and the network transmission protocol. We assume
Tnetrelay as constant for simplicity.

Tprotocolproc means the protocol processing time of higher
layer. Tdlharq is similarly deﬁned as Tulharq, and is omitted.
As shown in the bottom of Fig. 3, total E2E packet loss
includes ﬁve component. In this paper, we assume all the
components are independent to each other. As a result, the total
E2E packet loss model is deﬁned in Eq. (5), where Pto1 means
the packet is discarded because the transmit buffer is full. Pul
indicates the probability that the uplink receiver fails to receive
the packet correctly. Pnpl is the packet loss at the network
layer, that is, the probability that a packet is correctly sent
from uplink base station, but fails to reach the peer downlink
base station. Pto2 and Pdl are the corresponding loss rate of
downlink and are similarly deﬁned. Considering the fact that
the value of each component is rather small, we can ignore
the second order terms, expressed as

Pall ≈ Pto1 + Pul + Pnpl + Pto2 + Pdl.

(6)

Assume that the packet arrival follows the Poisson dis-
tribution with the parameter λ, and that the packet buffer
follows the M/M/1/K loss queuing model. Let µ represent
the serving rate of 5G-RAN. Note that ρ = λ
µ ≤ 1 is necessary
to maintain the steady state. Assuming that the maximum
queue length is K, according to the queuing theory [15], the
distribution of the queue length N in a steady state is

pn = P {N = n} = ρnp0,

n = 1, 2, . . . , K

(7)

where

p0 =

(cid:26) 1−ρ

1−ρK+1 , ρ (cid:54)= 1
ρ = 1

1
K+1

,

(8)

System-level modeBitstream modelPacket model Service quality modelEffective SINRTHP,BLERSimulate channel environmentPHY abstractionPLRSub-model  Sub-model  Acquire packet performanceSub-model   Experience quality modelStalling periodAcquire QoS or KQI of serviceSub-model  Influential factorsInfluential factorsPHY algorithmScheduled resourceInfluential factorsInfluential factorsRequired QoS/KQIService typeInfluential factorsService typeModel selectionScheduling modelInterference modelNetwork planningPacket schedulingProtocol stackService type Sub-model  Acquire QoE scorePublic parametersDelayScheduled resourceStallingtime...MOSFig. 3. Flow diagram of proposed packet model.

Pall = Pto1 + (1 − Pto1) Pul + (1 − Pto1 − (1 − Pto1) Pul) Pnpl + (cid:0)1 − Pto1 − (1 − Pto1) Pul − (1 − Pto1 − (1 − Pto1) Pul) Pnpl
(1 − Pto1 − (1 − Pto1) Pul − (1 − Pto1 − (1 − Pto1) Pul) Pnpl − (cid:0)1 − Pto1 − (1 − Pto1) Pul − (1 − Pto1 − (1 − Pto1) Pul) Pnpl

(cid:1) Pto2+
(cid:1) Pto2)Pdl

(5)

and thus we have

Pto1 ≈ pK = ρK ·

1 − ρ
1 − ρK+1 .

(9)

The average packet number Lavg in buffer queue is deﬁned

as

Lavg =

(cid:40) ρ

1−ρ −

ρ(1+KρK)
1−ρK+1

K(K−1)
2(K+1) ,

, ρ (cid:54)= 1,
ρ = 1.

(10)

Now, we can derive Tulschedule. According to Little’s law

[15], the average waiting time Wavg in buffer is

Tulschedule ≈ Wavg =

Lavg
λe

=

Lavg
λ (1 − pK)

,

(11)

where λe indicates the effective packet arrival strength after
discarding the packets that cause the queue length larger than
K.

The packet loss of packet transmission includes two parts.
One is that the receiver fails to receive the correct data packet
due to uu air interface errors, and the other is that the total
delay exceeds the service tolerance window. Hence, the total
packet loss rate is expressed as

Pul = Pe + (1 − Pe) P loss

ul

.

(12)

According to the queuing theory, the average serving time
in the queue system W follows the exponential distribution
of parameter µe − λe. Assume the service tolerance window
of receiver is Trxwin, and then the probability of packet
discarding caused by exceeding the tolerance window is
ul = P {W > Trxwin} = e−(µe−λe)Trxwin.
P loss

(13)

Moreover, assuming the The tolerance window of routing

in network side is Tnetwin, Pnpl can be acquired as

Pnpl = P {TCN > Tnetwin}.

(14)

Note that it is more reasonable if Tnetrelay, Nho and Tho
are random variables. However, we will study this situation in
future work. Pto2 and Pdl can be acquired similarly, and thus
are omitted here.

For services like voice call, video call and mobile game,
packet model shown above is compatible after setting differ-
ent parameters. However, for buffered video stream service,
enough buffer level is often maintained to avoid stalling event.
Therefore, the major problem of this type of service is the
buffer level. Packet model of buffered video stream service is
formulated by utilizing the model depicted in [14]. The model
and parameters are trained using the real 5G terminal test data,
the result is shown in section IV.

UL-UEgNB1Uplink SR、BSR、PHRUL GrantTransmissionTulscheduleNACK...Re-transmissionNACKUplink SR、BSR、PHRUL GrantTsingle_trTulharqRe-transmissionACKUplink SR、BSR、PHRUL GrantgNB25G-CNDL-UEuuuuRoutingDL GrantTransmissionNACKRe-transmissionACKDL GrantForwardingTCNIncluding Handover...TprotocolprocTdlscheduleTdlharqTsigprocTprotocolprocPulPnplPdlPtoPtoTsingle_trTsingle_trD. Service Quality Model

Service quality model is the interface between packet model
and experience quality model. The purpose of this module is
to convert the packet loss rate and transmission delay into
quality indicators, so as to match the input of experience
quality model. Obviously, service quality indicators are differ-
ent according to the type of service. We introduce the model
of video call as an example. The quality indicators include
video bitrate Brk, framerate F rk, deﬁnition Rh ×Rv, average
stalling duration Tk, stalling times Nk, where k is the index
of video segments, and initial buffering time Tinitial. Tk is
acquired by

Tk =

(cid:88)

i∈Fk

P k

i ∗ F rameDuri,

(15)

where i is the index of video frame, F rameDuri
duration of i-th frame, P k
i
i-th frame, and we have

is the
indicates the error probability of

i = 1 − (cid:0)1 − P k
P k

all

(cid:1)Nf ,

(16)

where Nf is the packet number in a video frame. Assuming
the average packet length is Lk bits, Nf is obtained by

Nf =

(cid:24) Brk
F rk · Lk

(cid:25)
.

(17)

For services like voice call and mobile game, the service
quality model are omitted because the input indicators of
models described in [6] and [8] are packet loss rate and delay.

E. Experience Quality Model

The role of the quality of experience model is to obtain a
quantitative score for the subjective experience of the terminal
user. For video services, we use the parameterized QoE model
described in [7]. For voice call services such as VoNR, we use
the E-model as depicted in [6]. For mobile gaming services,
we use the QoE model shown in [8]. We can directly obtain the
MOS score by sending the output of the service quality model
into experience quality model. Consequently, the MOS score
would ultimately be a criterion for algorithm optimization in
PHY. As a result, the purpose of improving user experience
or reducing power consumption while not degrading user
experience may be achieved.

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the training of the pro-

posed framework, and then evaluate the performance.

A. Model Training

TABLE I
TABLE I. PUBLIC PARAMETER VALUE OF POPULAR SERVICES.

Tprotocolproc
1 ms

Tuu
1 ms

Tho
30 ms

Tnetrelay
5 ms

overhead
0.95

We use the real

to train the
parameters of proposed model. The label is the service quality

test data of 5G terminal

TABLE II
TABLE II. PARTICULAR PARAMETER VALUE OF POPULAR SERVICES.

Video call
Buffered video
Voice call
Mobile game

Lk
1000 Bytes
1000 Bytes
123 Bytes
150 Bytes

Trxwin K Nharq max
300 ms
1000 ms
150 ms
300 ms

16
16
10
12

4
4
8
4

TABLE III
TABLE III. TRAINING RESULTS (ACCURACY).

Video call
Buffered video
Voice call
Mobile game

Training data set
0.968
0.964
0.977
0.98

Test data set
0.934
0.898
0.857
0.959

data provided in test data, such as screen recording video,
packet loss rate, delay parameters, etc. The training results
are shown in Table I and II, where part of the parameters vary
according to different services. Moreover, we summarize the
accuracy of the model in both training set and test set, which
are shown in Table III.

B. Evaluation Results

For channel estimation algorithm [16], we compare the
throughput performance (default BLER is 10%) of four pilot
columns and one pilot column, which are labeled as ‘CHE-4’
and ‘CHE-1’ in Fig. 4(a), respectively. Meanwhile, linear de-
modulator and non-linear demodulator [17] are also evaluated
for comparison in Fig. 4(b). Moreover, performance of decod-
ing algorithm [18] is veriﬁed by setting different maximum
iteration number. We set ‘CHE-4’, non-linear demodulator
and ‘Iter-9’ as baseline, respectively, and observe the MOS
reduction by reducing the throughput.

We simulate the MOS of three typical services based on the
throughput results in Fig. 4(a)-(c), and the results are shown
in Fig. 4(d)-(f). Since video call has the highest demand for
data trafﬁc, a decrease in throughput is more likely to cause a
decline in QoE. At the same time, the trafﬁc requirements of
voice call service and mobile game service are relatively small,
but the excessive decrease of throughput will still lead to the
increase of packet loss rate and delay. Thus, the QoE of mobile
games will also worsen because mobile game is sensitive to
packet loss rate and delay. Furthermore, the results also show
that the change of channel estimation algorithm has a greater
impact on MOS than demodulation and decoding algorithm.
The reason is that using single-column pilot will lead to a
large throughput (66.2%) loss, but the simpliﬁed version of
demodulation and decoding algorithm will not cause such huge
throughput loss.

Above all, we can conclude that the deterioration of chang-
ing PHY algorithm is diminished in perspective of QoE,
because the percentage of reduction in MOS is less than
that in throughput. For example, in Fig. 4(f), the average
MOS performance of non-linear demodulator is only 0.065 (
0.27% ) larger than linear demodulator. However, the compu-
tation complexity, namely energy consumption, of non-linear

Fig. 4. Performance comparison of PHY algorithms.

demodulator is nearly twice as lager as linear demodulator.
Therefore, linear demodulator is more energy efﬁcient than
non-linear demodulator in terms of QoE in this scenario. This
result proves that using MOS as PHY criterion is more energy
efﬁcient than traditional criterion, and that the PHY algorithms
can be simpliﬁed in perspective of QoE.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we use QoE as the optimization criterion of the
physical layer algorithm. In order to establish the relationship
between PHY and QoE, we propose a ﬁve-layer framework,
which includes system-level model, bitstream model, packet
model, service quality model and experience quality model.
We use the real data in 5G network to train the parameters
of the involved models for each type of services, respectively.
The results show that the PHY algorithms can be simpliﬁed
in perspective of QoE, which veriﬁes the feasibility of the
proposed framework.

REFERENCES

[1] F. Hu, et al., “A Vision of an XR-Aided Teleoperation System toward
5G/B5G,” in IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 34-40,
January 2021.

[2] A. A. Barakabitze, et al., “QoE Management of Multimedia Streaming
Services in Future Networks: A Tutorial and Survey,” in IEEE Commu-
nications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 526-565, Firstquarter
2020.

[3] Y. Wang, et al., “A Data-Driven Architecture for Personalized QoE Man-
agement in 5G Wireless Networks,” in IEEE Wireless Communications,
vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 102-110, February 2017.

[4] X. Liu, et al., “KQIs-Driven QoE Anomaly Detection and Root Cause
Analysis in Cellular Networks,” in Proc. 2019 IEEE Globecom Workshops
(GC Wkshps), 2019, pp. 1-6.

[5] Recommendation ITU-T P.800.1, Mean Opinion Score (MOS) terminol-

ogy, 2006.

[6] Recommendation ITU-T G.107, The E-model: a computational model for

use in transmission planning, 2015.

[7] Recommendation ITU-T P.1203, Parametric bitstream-based quality as-
sessment of progressive download and adaptive audiovisual streaming
services over reliable transport, 2016.

[8] Recommendation ITU-T G.1072, Opinion model predicting gaming qual-

ity of experience for cloud gaming services, 2020.

[9] L. Xu and W. Zhuang, “Energy-Efﬁcient Cross-Layer Resource Allo-
cation for Heterogeneous Wireless Access,” in IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 4819-4829, July 2018.
[10] J. Tian, et al., “Interference-Aware Cross-Layer Design for Distributed
Video Transmission in Wireless Networks,” in IEEE Transactions on
Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 978-991,
May 2016.

[11] J. Karjee, et al., “5G-NR Cross Layer Rate Adaptation for VoIP and
Foreground/Background Applications in UE,” in IEEE 3rd 5G World
Forum (5GWF), 2020, pp. 80-85.

[12] D. Parruca and J. Gross, “Throughput Analysis of Proportional
Fair Scheduling for Sparse and Ultra-Dense Interference-Limited
OFDMA/LTE Networks,” in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communi-
cations, vol. 15, no. 10, pp. 6857-6870, Oct. 2016.

[13] S. Lagen, et al., “New Radio Physical Layer Abstraction for System-
Level Simulations of 5G Networks,” in Proc. 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC), 2020, pp. 1-7.

[14] V. Burger, et al., “A Generic Approach to Video Buffer Modeling Using
Discrete-Time Analysis,” in ACM Trans Multimedia Comput Commun
Appl. 14(2s), 33:1-33:23, 2018.

[15] A. S. Alfa, Queueing Theory for Telecommunications: Discrete Time
Modelling of a Single Node System. New York, NY, USA: Springer-
Verlag, 2010.

[16] M. K. Ozdemir and H. Arslan, “Channel estimation for wireless OFDM
systems,” in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 9, no. 2,
pp. 18-48, Second Quarter 2007.

[17] H. Kawai, et al., “Adaptive control of surviving symbol replica candi-
dates in QRM-MLD for OFDM MIMO multiplexing,” in IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 1130-1140, June
2006.

[18] V. Savin, “Self-corrected Min-Sum decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc.
2008 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 2008, pp.
146-150

