Astronomy &Astrophysicsmanuscript no. 43577corr_ﬁnal
May 9, 2022

©ESO 2022

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
6

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
1
7
1
3
0
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Horizontal motions in sunspot penumbrae
Michal Sobotka1 ,⋆ and Klaus G. Puschmann2

1 Astronomical Institute of the Czech Academy of Sciences (v.v.i.), Friˇcova 298, 25165 Ondˇrejov, Czech Republic
2 Berlin, Germany

Received 17 March 2022; accepted 13 April 2022

ABSTRACT

Context. A model of penumbral ﬁlaments represented by magnetoconvective cells was derived recently from spectropolarimetric
observations. This model resolves many of the inconsistencies found in the relations between intensity, magnetic, and velocity patterns
in sunspot penumbrae.
Aims. High-resolution observations of horizontal motions in the penumbra are needed to complement the concept of penumbrae
obtained from spectropolarimetry. Time series of intensity images of a large sunspot in AR 10634 acquired with the Swedish Solar
Telescope in the G band and red continuum are analysed. The two simultaneous time series last six hours and ﬁve minutes.
Methods. Horizontal motions of penumbral grains (PGs), structures in dark bodies of ﬁlaments, the outer penumbral border, and
G-band bright points are measured in time slices that cover the whole width of the penumbra and the neighbouring granulation. The
spatial and temporal resolutions are 90 km and 20.1 s, respectively.
Results. In the inner penumbra, PGs move towards the umbra (inwards) with a mean speed of −0.7 km s−1. The direction of motion
changes from inwards to outwards at approximately 60% of the penumbral width, and the mean speed increases gradually in the outer
penumbra, approaching 0.5 km s−1. This speed is also typical of an expansion of the penumbra–granulation border during periods that
typically last one hour and are followed by a fast contraction. The majority of the G-band bright points moves away from the sunspot,
with a typical speed of 0.6 km s−1. High outward speeds, 3.6 km s−1 on average, are observed in dark bodies of penumbral ﬁlaments.
Conclusions. According to the model of penumbral ﬁlaments, it is suggested that the speeds detected in the dark bodies of ﬁlaments
are associated with the Evershed ﬂow and that the opposite directions of PG motions in the inner and outer penumbrae may be
explained by the interaction of rising plasma in ﬁlament heads with a surrounding, diﬀerently inclined magnetic ﬁeld.

Key words. Sun: photosphere, sunspots

1. Introduction

A sunspot penumbra is formed in the presence of a strong
and inclined magnetic ﬁeld. To explain its observed brightness,
some kind of convection must take place within it. This im-
plies a system of vertical and horizontal ﬂows. Upﬂows are
observed predominately in the inner penumbra, while down-
ﬂows are concentrated at the outer penumbral boundary (e.g.
Franz & Schlichenmaier 2009). This results in a strong horizon-
tal radial outﬂow, as discovered by Evershed (1909). The mag-
netic ﬁeld in the penumbra can be characterised by two inter-
lacing systems of ﬁeld lines: one more vertical and one more
horizontal (Solanki & Montavon 1993). Radially elongated parts
of the penumbra with a more vertical and stronger ﬁeld, called
spines (Lites et al. 1993), alternate with a nearly horizontal ﬁeld
in interspines. The more vertical ﬁeld wraps around the more
inclined one, and the spines seem to be a continuation of the
umbral magnetic ﬁeld (Tiwari et al. 2015). Schlichenmaier et al.
(1998a,b) proposed a dynamical model of a ﬂux tube in the in-
terspine with a hot plasma upﬂow at a place observed as a bright
head of a penumbral ﬁlament, oriented towards the umbra: the
penumbral grain (PG; Muller 1973). In the photosphere, the hot
plasma inside the tube is cooled by radiation as it ﬂows horizon-
tally outwards. As long as the ﬂowing plasma is hotter than its
surroundings, it constitutes a bright radial ﬁlament; however, at
a longer distance the ﬁlament becomes gradually dark thanks to

⋆ michal.sobotka@asu.cas.cz

the radiative cooling. The tube constitutes a channel that carries
the Evershed ﬂow.

The classical picture of sunspot penumbrae consisting of
bright and dark ﬁbrils suﬀered from a number of problems and
disagreements, as described, for example, in the extended re-
views by Solanki (2003), Borrero & Ichimoto (2011), and Tiwari
(2017). Particularly, the relations of the intensity structures
to magnetic ﬁeld and Evershed ﬂow channels were found to
be weak and unclear. Recently, Tiwari et al. (2013) presented
a model of a penumbral ﬁlament derived from inversions of
Hinode spectropolarimetric observations. This ﬁlament repre-
sents a magnetoconvective cell, where hot plasma from sub-
photospheric layers enters into the ﬁlament’s head (the PG),
which is the hottest and brightest part of the ﬁlament, with a
magnetic ﬁeld weaker than that in its surroundings (spines) and
moderately inclined. The mass upﬂow of about 5 km s−1 in the
head then becomes horizontal in the ﬁlament’s body, parallel to
the ∼1 kG horizontal magnetic ﬁeld, and leaks laterally, produc-
ing narrow downﬂow regions on the sides of the ﬁlament. The
radial ﬂow along the ﬁlament’s axis generates the Evershed ef-
fect. The ﬁlament’s body becomes gradually darker than its sur-
roundings due to radiative cooling. The ﬂow turns down at the
end of the ﬁlament, producing a strong downﬂow of 7 km s−1
and a local heating in deep photospheric layers. Tiwari’s picture
of a sunspot penumbra consisting of convective ﬁlaments and
spines resolves most of the past issues. However, the volution of
ﬁlaments and related horizontal motions are missing from this

Article number, page 1 of 6

 
 
 
 
 
 
A&Aproofs: manuscript no. 43577corr_ﬁnal

picture due to the limited cadence of Hinode spectropolarimetric
data.

Measurements of horizontal (or proper) motions, using
high-cadence data, can complement the concept of penumbrae
obtained from the spectropolarimetric observations discussed
above. Diﬀerent methods can be applied to time series of inten-
sity images or Dopplergrams to measure speeds of horizontal
motions: local correlation tracking (LCT, November & Simon
1988), feature tracking (e.g. Sobotka et al. 1999), and time
slices. It is necessary to note that the proper motions of inten-
sity or velocity structures may not directly correspond to real
plasma ﬂows.

The LCT method suﬀers from inherent space and time aver-
aging, which reduce the observed velocities, and from its inabil-
ity to distinguish between motions of bright and dark features.
The LCT results of Wang & Zirin (1992), Denker (1998), and
recently Hamedivafa (2015) have revealed that PGs and dark
features in the inner penumbra move towards the umbra (in-
wards) at a typical speed of 0.5 km s−1 with a maximum of
0.7 km s−1, and the elements in the outer penumbra move out-
wards at approximately the same speed with a maximum of
2 km s−1. The inward motion of PGs, reported already by Muller
(1973), was explained in terms of the dynamical ﬂux-tube model
(Schlichenmaier et al. 1998b). The rise of the ﬂux tube causes
the crossing point of the tube with the visible surface, observed
as a PG, to move radially inwards. It is clear that this motion does
not correspond to the upward- and outward-oriented plasma ﬂow
in the tube, so the observed inward motions of PGs are apparent.
The feature-tracking method makes it possible to distinguish
between diﬀerent types of features. It relies on a correct image
segmentation that isolates the objects under study. Sobotka et al.
(1999) and Sobotka & Sütterlin (2001) tracked bright features
identiﬁed as PGs in high-resolution ground-based observations.
They found inward- as well as outward-moving PGs with mean
speeds of 0.4 km s−1 and 0.5–0.8 km s−1, respectively. The
inward-moving PGs dominated the inner penumbra, while the
majority of outward-moving PGs appeared in the outer penum-
bra. These ﬁndings were later conﬁrmed by Zhang & Ichimoto
(2013), who applied their feature-tracking routines to Hinode ob-
servations from space. They reported mean speeds 0.7 km s−1 for
the inward-moving PGs and 0.65 km s−1 for the outward-moving
ones. In principle, the feature-tracking method could also be
utilised to measure motions of dark features, that is, the bod-
ies of penumbral ﬁlaments. However, unlike PGs, dark features
in the penumbra have diﬀuse, largely elongated shapes, and they
do not show clearly deﬁned intensity minima; these properties
make the tracking unreliable.

Time slices are an alternative to the two above-mentioned
methods. They can be easily made from a time series of images
by ﬁxing a certain spatial track in the image plane and mapping
the time evolution of values along this track. Time slices are 2D
images, where the horizontal usually shows positions along the
spatial track and the vertical corresponds to elapsed time. Al-
though the time slices were widely used to depict oscillatory
and wave phenomena, they were seldom applied to the evolution
of penumbral structure. Shine et al. (1994) used this method to
study motions of PGs and places with an increased Doppler sig-
nal of Evershed ﬂow (‘Evershed clouds’) along several penum-
bral ﬁlaments in series of continuum images and Dopplergrams.
They detected the inward motion of PGs (0.5 km s−1) in the inner
penumbra, the fast outward motion (∼4 km s−1) of places with
increased Doppler signal in the outer penumbra, and advection
ﬂows (∼1 km s−1) away from the penumbra in the neighbouring
granulation. Proper motions of Evershed clouds were also mea-

Article number, page 2 of 6

sured by Cabrera Solana et al. (2007) in a time series of Dopp-
lergrams. They obtained outward-oriented speeds in the range
2–4 km s−1.

In this work we apply the time-slice method to a six-hour-
long time series of intensity images with high spatial and tem-
poral resolution to measure proper motions of PGs, dark struc-
tures in the ﬁlaments’ bodies, and G-band bright points (GBPs)
in the neighbouring granulation. The length of the series also
makes it possible to measure the expansion or contraction of
the penumbra–granulation border. We have to note that spec-
tropolarimetric observations were not made in our observing run,
so magnetic-ﬁeld parameters, temperature maps, and Doppler-
grams are not used in our study.

2. Observations and data processing

We observed a large sunspot with the 1-metre Swedish Solar
Telescope (Scharmer et al. 2003a), equipped with adaptive op-
tics (Scharmer et al. 2003b), under excellent seeing conditions
on 18 June 2004. The leading sunspot in AR 10634 was growing
to the maximum phase of evolution, and it was quite stable dur-
ing the observing period, which took place from 07:43 to 15:30
UT. It was located close to the centre of the solar disc (N13, E12,
heliocentric angle ϑ = 13.5◦, cos ϑ = 0.97), so observed proper
motions of sunspot structures were only slightly inﬂuenced by
the projection eﬀect and were practically equal to horizontal mo-
tions.

Broadband images of the spot were acquired simultaneously
in the G band (430.89±0.6 nm), blue continuum (450.8±0.5 nm),
and red continuum (602.0 ± 1.3 nm). Exposure times were 11–
14 ms, and the pixel size was 0′′. 0405 × 0′′. 0405. Image acquisi-
tion in the frame-selection mode resulted in an average time dif-
ference between two selected frames of 20.1 s, which is the time
resolution of our observation. The intensities in each image were
calibrated using dark and ﬂat-ﬁeld frames and then normalised
to the average intensity, Iphot, of a quiet granulation area near the
spot to compensate for changes of transparency and exposure
time. The images were corrected for scattered light in the Earth’s
atmosphere and telescope, and the instrumental proﬁle of the
diﬀraction-limited 1-metre telescope was deconvolved simulta-
neously with noise ﬁltering, using Wiener ﬁlters. The noise sup-
pression started at 0′′. 13 for the G band, 0′′. 11 for the blue contin-
uum, and 0′′. 14 for the red continuum. Regarding the wavefront
correction done by the adaptive optics, these values characterise
the spatial resolution in the best frames. The deconvolved frames
were of very good quality, and further image reconstruction was
not necessary. Then, the image rotation was compensated for and
the frames were aligned and de-stretched. Five-minute oscilla-
tions and a residual jitter caused by the seeing were removed by
a subsonic ﬁlter with a cutoﬀ at 4 km s−1. The data reduction has
been described in detail by Sobotka & Puschmann (2009), who
used this dataset for a study of ﬁne structures in the umbra.

We selected the series of 1090 red-continuum and 1090
G-band images acquired from 08:05 to 14:10 UT for the study
of horizontal motions in the penumbra. The G-band images were
re-aligned to the red ones, and a ﬁeld of view of 32′′ × 31′′ was
selected to cover a part of the umbra, the whole width of the
penumbra, and the neighbouring granulation (Fig. 1). Movies in
both wavelength bands were created and are available online.

In an ideal case, a spatial track in the images that deﬁnes
the time slice should follow the shape of a ﬁlament. Penumbral
ﬁlaments are usually curved, and even though it would be possi-
ble to make a curved track along the ﬁlament axis, the ﬁlaments
evolve but the track is ﬁxed in time. This means that diﬀerent

Michal Sobotka and Klaus G. Puschmann : Horizontal motions in sunspot penumbrae

Table 1. Mean velocities and lifetimes.

Feature
PGs, inner penumbra
PGs, outer penumbra
Dark bodies of ﬁlaments
Border expansion
Border stationary
Border contraction
G-band bright points

n

v [km s−1]
546 −0.7 ± 0.3
126 −0.1 ± 0.7
3.6 ± 0.9
566
0.5 ± 0.2
74
0.0 ± 0.1
18
20 −2.2 ± 1.3
0.8 ± 0.7
241

t [minutes]
19 ± 8
20 ± 9
7 ± 3
60 ± 23
68 ± 32
19 ± 9
16 ± 9

Notes. Symbols: n is the number of measurements, and v and t are the
mean horizontal speed and duration of the features, respectively. A neg-
ative sign for v indicates motion towards the umbra, positive away from
the umbra.

used for measurements of (3) motions of the outer penumbral
border and (4) photospheric GBPs. All the features are seen and
coincide very well in both wavelength bands, but (1) and (2) are
more visible in the less noisy red band and (3) and (4) have a
higher contrast in the G band.

The measurements were made visually using lines drawn
over the position–time traces of the features in the time slices.
We took only clearly deﬁned traces into account and used im-
ages of the time slices enhanced by unsharp masking to draw the
lines. Some examples are shown in Fig. 2. The top row from left
to right shows time slices 16 (red), 8 (red), 8 (G band), and 19 (G
band), with well-marked traces of PGs, dark bodies of ﬁlaments,
GBPs, and positional changes of the outer penumbral border,
respectively. The corresponding enhanced images together with
the lines used to measure speeds and durations are displayed in
the bottom row. These examples show only one type of feature in
each individual slice for better clarity, but we measured all types
of features in each time slice if their well-deﬁned traces were
present. Comparing the values of spatial (0′′. 12 ≃ 90 km) and
time (20.1 s) resolutions with typical travel distances and dura-
tions of features, the relative error of an individual measurement
is estimated to be smaller than 10 %.

3. Results
Mean values of horizontal speeds and durations of diﬀerent fea-
tures are summarised in Table 1. Standard deviations charac-
terise the scatter of individual measurements. We assigned neg-
ative values of speeds to the features moving towards the umbra
(inwards) and positive to those moving away from it (outwards).
The motions of PGs located in the inner half of the penumbra are
directed inwards with an average speed of −0.7 km s−1, while
PGs in the outer half of the penumbra move inwards and out-
wards, showing a larger scatter of speeds. The mean duration
time of PGs of approximately 20 minutes is the same in the inner
and outer penumbrae. Dark features in the bodies of ﬁlaments al-
ways move outwards with speeds in the range 2–6 km s−1, and
the mean speed is 3.6 km s−1. Their mean duration, 7 minutes,
is substantially shorter than that of PGs. Their traces often ap-
pear repeatedly in time slices at approximately the same posi-
tion, with quasi-periods of 10 and 20 minutes estimated from
Fourier analysis. This eﬀect was already found by Shine et al.
(1994) in time slices of Dopplergrams.

It can be observed in the movies that the position of the
penumbra–granulation boundary changes with time. The length
of the time series of 365 minutes makes it possible to follow
these long-term changes. The penumbral border tends to expand
gradually, with a speed of 0.5 km s−1, over one hour on average

Article number, page 3 of 6

Fig. 1. Penumbra and neighbouring granulation of the sunspot observed
in the red continuum, approximately in the middle of the series. Straight
lines depict positions of time slices, identiﬁed by numbers 1–30. The
distance between two neighbouring lines is 0′′. 4. The arrow points to the
disc centre. The temporal evolution of structures in the red continuum
and G band is shown in two movies, available online.

structures can enter the spatial track throughout the time series.
Moreover, it is diﬃcult to distinguish dark bodies of ﬁlaments
from spines when the information about magnetic and Doppler
velocity ﬁelds is missing (cf. Tiwari et al. 2013). To circumvent
these problems, we deﬁned spatial tracks as groups of densely
spaced, straight parallel lines oriented approximately parallel to
the ﬁlaments’ directions. Two such groups, each of 15 lines, are
shown in Fig. 1. The distance between two neighbouring lines
is 0′′. 4, which is half of the typical ﬁlament width according to
Tiwari et al. (2013).

The group of lines covers an area where diﬀerent features,
for example parts of ﬁlaments, are evolving. They coincide with
individual lines more or less randomly, but, in sum, nearly all
of them form traces in the set of time slices of the group. These
traces look like inclined bright or dark paths, the inclination of
which corresponds to the speed of motion, and the vertical ex-
tent characterises the time period when a feature coincides in
position with the line. This duration of a feature in a time slice
is usually shorter than its real lifetime. Although in many cases
an individual trace gives incomplete information on the speed
and lifetime of a given feature, a statistic of numerous measure-
ments can provide plausible results. We created the time slices
from 3D data cubes of red and G-band intensity movies. To re-
duce noise, the intensities at each position along each line were
averaged over an area of 3 × 3 pixels (0′′. 12)2, which is compara-
ble to the resolution limit. The lines begin in the umbra, cross the
whole width of the penumbra, and end in the granulation (Fig. 1).
Their lengths are 26′′. 7 (19.4 Mm, step 29 km) for the group of
horizontal slices, 1–15, and 25′′. 5 (18.5 Mm, step 32 km) for the
group of inclined slices, 16–30.

We measured the speeds of horizontal motions and durations
(lifetimes) of four types of features in the time slices. The red-
continuum series was used to examine (1) PGs and (2) structures
in dark bodies of penumbral ﬁlaments. The G-band series was

A&Aproofs: manuscript no. 43577corr_ﬁnal

Fig. 2. Examples of time slices. Slices 16 and 8 (red continuum) show traces of bright PGs and dark bodies of ﬁlaments, respectively. Slices 8
and 19 (G band) show traces of GBPs and the expansion and contraction of the penumbra–granulation border, respectively. Top row: Original time
slices. Bottom row: Time slices enhanced by unsharp masking together with red lines drawn manually to measure speeds and durations of features.

and then shrinks rapidly when a granule or several granules are
formed nearby. This is demonstrated in the example shown in
the rightmost column of Fig. 2. Sometimes the border remains
stationary. In Table 1 we present, separately, the mean values for
the expansion of the penumbral border (speed v > 0.2 km s−1),
the contraction of the penumbral border (v < −0.2 km s−1) , and
the stationary case (−0.2 < v < 0.2 km s−1).

The tracking of GBPs provides complementary information
about motions of magnetic elements in the vicinity of a sunspot.
It can be seen in the G-band movie that many bright points ap-
pear close to the penumbral border, sometimes at the ends of
penumbral ﬁlaments (Bonet et al. 2004), and they follow the ex-
pansion of the border. Other GBPs appear in intergranular lanes,
and their motions are inﬂuenced by the evolution of neighbour-
ing granules, including the general outﬂow of granules in the
sunspot moat (Muller & Mena 1987; Bonet et al. 2005). Speeds
of GBPs observed in the time slices show a large scatter due to

the interaction with granules, but their mean value, 0.8 km s−1,
is consistent with previous reports.

Histograms of horizontal speeds and durations are displayed
in the top and bottom panels of Fig. 3, respectively. Speeds of
inward-moving PGs in the inner half of the penumbra show a
narrow peak around −0.7 km s−1 (solid black line). In the outer
half of the penumbra, PGs move inwards and outwards with
speeds of approximately −1 to 1 km s−1 (green line), and some of
them are stationary. The broad peak (dash-dot black) with high
positive speeds corresponds to structures in dark ﬁlaments’ bod-
ies. The histogram of displacements of the outer penumbral bor-
der (red) has a strong peak at 0.5 km s−1, corresponding to ex-
pansion, and some scattered contraction speeds (red dots) in the
range −3.5 to −0.5 km s−1. The speeds of GBPs are also mostly
concentrated around 0.5 km s−1, but their histogram (purple) has
a tail of higher speeds of up to 3–4 km s−1. The histograms of the
duration of PGs (black and green) and GBPs (purple) have sim-

Article number, page 4 of 6

Michal Sobotka and Klaus G. Puschmann : Horizontal motions in sunspot penumbrae

Fig. 4. Scatter plot of horizontal speeds versus relative distances of fea-
tures from the umbra–penumbra border. Penumbral grains are marked
by diamonds, structures in dark bodies of ﬁlaments by plus signs, mo-
tions of the outer penumbral border by red multiplication signs, and
GBPs by purple squares. Green lines show average speeds together with
standard deviations. Distances 0 and 1 correspond to time-averaged po-
sitions of the inner and outer penumbral borders, respectively.

The majority of measured PGs (black diamonds) are located in
the inner third of the penumbra. These PGs move inwards, and
their speeds do not depend on d. The speeds of PGs observed
in the outer penumbra have, despite a large scatter, a clear trend
of increasing with increasing d. The mean speed increases from
−0.7 km s−1 (d ≤ 0.4) to 0.4 km s−1 at d = 0.8. The dominant
direction of PG motions changes from inwards to outwards at
d ≃ 0.6. The mean outward speed of 0.5 km s−1 is typical for the
expansion periods of the outer penumbral border (red crosses).
The major part of GBPs (purple squares) move away from the
spot with a mean speed of 0.6 km s−1; outlying speeds higher
than 1.6 km s−1, caused by local granular motions, are not in-
cluded in this average. Moving structures in the dark bodies of
ﬁlaments form a completely diﬀerent system of largely scattered
speeds. They are detected in the whole penumbra, and the major-
ity of them appear at d > 0.6. Their mean speed, 3.6±0.9 km s−1,
is independent of the relative position in the penumbra.

4. Discussion and conclusions

We have measured horizontal motions in the penumbra of a large
stable sunspot. Speeds and duration times of PGs, dark bodies of
penumbral ﬁlaments, GBPs near the sunspot, and the repeated
expansion and contraction of the outer penumbral border were
measured visually in time slices created from red-continuum and
G-band intensity movies of high spatial (90 km) and temporal
(20.1 s) resolutions.

The presented time-slice method has a limitation because the
measured features can move from one slice to another. It can be
seen in the movies that when the penumbral ﬁlaments are curved,
some features, particularly PGs in the inner penumbra, can cross

Article number, page 5 of 6

Fig. 3. Histograms of horizontal speeds (top) and durations (lifetimes)
of the features (bottom). Black lines represent PGs in the inner half
of the penumbra (solid line) and structures in dark bodies of ﬁlaments
(dash-dot), green lines represent PGs in the outer half of the penumbra,
red lines represent the motions of the outer penumbral border, both ex-
pansion and stationary (solid) and contraction (dotted), and purple lines
represent GBPs.

ilar asymmetric shapes, with maxima at shorter durations of 15
and 10 minutes, respectively. The time periods of motions of the
outer penumbral border have a very broad range, but the contrac-
tions (red dots) clearly take much less time than the expansion
and stationary periods (red lines).

The speeds of horizontal motions can be expected to depend
on the positions of features in the penumbra. We deﬁned a scale
of relative distances from the umbra–penumbra border, setting
zero at the inner and one at the outer penumbral boundaries. We
deﬁned the positions of the two boundaries by means of intensi-
ties averaged over the whole time period of 365 minutes for each
individual time slice, adopting the values of 0.35 Iphot for the in-
ner and 0.90 Iphot for the outer penumbral borders. The relative
distance of each feature was then calculated from an average of
the starting and ending horizontal coordinates of the line drawn
over the feature’s trace in the time slice.

A scatter plot of horizontal speeds versus relative distances
from the umbra–penumbra border is displayed in Fig. 4. We
show the mean values and standard deviations of speeds calcu-
lated in 0.1 wide sections of the relative distance, d (green lines).

A&Aproofs: manuscript no. 43577corr_ﬁnal

Academy of Sciences in the Spanish Observatorio del Roque de los Muchachos
of the Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias.

References

Bonet, J. A., Márquez, I., Muller, R., Sobotka, M., & Roudier, T. 2005, A&A,

430, 1089

Bonet, J. A., Márquez, I., Muller, R., Sobotka, M., & Tritschler, A. 2004, A&A,

423, 737

Borrero, J. M. & Ichimoto, K. 2011, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 8, 4
Cabrera Solana, D., Bellot Rubio, L. R., Beck, C., & Del Toro Iniesta, J. C. 2007,

A&A, 475, 1067

Denker, C. 1998, Sol. Phys., 180, 81
Evershed, J. 1909, MNRAS, 69, 454
Franz, M. & Schlichenmaier, R. 2009, A&A, 508, 1453
Hamedivafa, H. 2015, Iranian Journal of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 2, 39
Lites, B. W., Elmore, D. F., Seagraves, P., & Skumanich, A. P. 1993, ApJ, 418,

928

Muller, R. 1973, Sol. Phys., 29, 55
Muller, R. & Mena, B. 1987, Sol. Phys., 112, 295
November, L. J. & Simon, G. W. 1988, ApJ, 333, 427
Scharmer, G. B., Bjelksjo, K., Korhonen, T. K., Lindberg, B., & Petterson, B.
2003a, in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Confer-
ence Series, Vol. 4853, Innovative Telescopes and Instrumentation for Solar
Astrophysics, ed. S. L. Keil & S. V. Avakyan, 341–350

Scharmer, G. B., Dettori, P. M., Lofdahl, M. G., & Shand, M. 2003b, in Society
of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol.
4853, Innovative Telescopes and Instrumentation for Solar Astrophysics, ed.
S. L. Keil & S. V. Avakyan, 370–380

Schlichenmaier, R., Jahn, K., & Schmidt, H. U. 1998a, ApJ, 493, L121
Schlichenmaier, R., Jahn, K., & Schmidt, H. U. 1998b, A&A, 337, 897
Shine, R. A., Title, A. M., Tarbell, T. D., et al. 1994, ApJ, 430, 413
Sobotka, M., Brandt, P. N., & Simon, G. W. 1999, A&A, 348, 621
Sobotka, M. & Puschmann, K. G. 2009, A&A, 504, 575
Sobotka, M. & Sütterlin, P. 2001, A&A, 380, 714
Solanki, S. K. 2003, A&A Rev., 11, 153
Solanki, S. K. & Montavon, C. A. P. 1993, A&A, 275, 283
Tiwari, S. K. 2017, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1712.07174
Tiwari, S. K., van Noort, M., Lagg, A., & Solanki, S. K. 2013, A&A, 557, A25
Tiwari, S. K., van Noort, M., Solanki, S. K., & Lagg, A. 2015, A&A, 583, A119
Wang, H. & Zirin, H. 1992, Sol. Phys., 140, 41
Zhang, Y. & Ichimoto, K. 2013, A&A, 560, A77

two to four slices. This obviously results in an underestimate
of the lifetimes but also of the speeds because the features do
not move parallel to the slices. Nonetheless, the majority of ﬁla-
ments appear radially elongated with minimal deviations, so the
statistical analysis of many measurements can provide realistic
results. Also, the visual measurement is subjective to some ex-
tent because of the visual selection of measured traces of features
and the manual drawing of lines over them. On the other hand,
the time-slice method and visual recognition has the advantage
of avoiding numerous false and noisy identiﬁcations of features,
which often appear in the results of automated feature tracking.
The apparent horizontal-motion speeds and durations of
PGs found in this work are in good agreement with those
obtained previously from feature tracking (Zhang & Ichimoto
2013; Sobotka et al. 1999; Sobotka & Sütterlin 2001), includ-
ing the change of prevailing direction of motions from inwards
to outwards at the relative distance d ≃ 0.6. The mean speed
increases gradually from negative to positive values between
d = 0.4 and 0.8 and matches the mean expansion speed of the
outer penumbral border well. Likewise, the mean outﬂow speed
of magnetic elements represented by GBPs in the sunspot moat
is similar to the mean expansion speed of the penumbral border
(Fig. 4).

Speeds detected in the dark bodies of penumbral ﬁlaments
are consistent with previous measurements of proper motions of
Evershed clouds (Shine et al. 1994; Cabrera Solana et al. 2007).
We have to note that these speeds may be underestimated in our
work because the subsonic ﬁlter used to suppress ﬁve-minute
oscillations and residual seeing eﬀects has a cutoﬀ at 4 km s−1,
causing a reduction in observed speeds. The outward motions in
the bodies of ﬁlaments can be expected to be associated with the
Evershed ﬂow.

According to Tiwari et al. (2013), penumbral ﬁlaments rep-
resent magnetoconvective cells distributed everywhere in the
penumbra and surrounded by a magnetic ﬁeld of spines, the in-
clination of which gradually increases with increasing distance
from the umbra. In the inner penumbra, the magnetic ﬁeld in the
ﬁlament’s head (PG) is more inclined to the normal than that in
its surroundings, but the opposite is true in the middle and outer
penumbrae, as shown in Fig. 6 of Tiwari et al. (2013). The same
ﬁgure also shows that the magnetic ﬁeld in a PG is weaker than
the surrounding one in the inner penumbra but that both ﬁelds
are comparable in the middle and outer penumbrae.

We suggest the following tentative scenario, which, however,
needs to be proven by numerical simulations that are beyond the
scope of this paper. Rising hot plasma surrounded by a stronger
and less inclined magnetic ﬁeld may adapt its trajectory to be
more vertical, which would lead to the inward motion of PGs in
the inner penumbra. Oppositely, in the outer penumbra the rising
hot plasma in the ﬁlament’s head is dragged by the surrounding,
more horizontal magnetic ﬁeld such that its crossing point with
the visible surface (PG) moves outwards. The outer penumbral
border is formed by the ends of ﬁlaments. Its repeated expan-
sion with speeds comparable to that of outward-moving PGs can
be tentatively explained if we assume that the ﬁlaments (mag-
netoconvective cells) in the outer penumbra move outwards as a
whole. The periods of expansion are interrupted by the formation
and growth of granules close to the penumbral border.

Acknowledgements. We thank the referee for constructive comments, which
helped us to improve the paper. We express our thanks to C. Möstl, R. Kever,
and R. Henderson for assisting in the observations and J. Jurˇcák for discus-
sion. This work was done under the institutional support ASU:67985815 of the
Czech Academy of Sciences. The Swedish 1-m Solar Telescope is operated on
the island of La Palma by the Institute for Solar Physics of the Royal Swedish

Article number, page 6 of 6

