Sharing Construction Safety Inspection Experiences and 
Site-Specific Knowledge through XR-Augmented Visual Assistance

Pengkun Liu1*, Jinding Xing1*, Ruoxin Xiong1 and Pingbo Tang1** 

 

Abstract— Early identification of on-site hazards is crucial for 
accident prevention in the construction industry. Currently, the 
construction industry relies on experienced safety advisors (SAs) 
to  identify  site  hazards  and  generate  mitigation  measures  to 
guide field workers. However, more than half of the site hazards 
remain  unrecognized  due  to  the  lack  of  field  experience  or 
site-specific  knowledge  of  some  SAs.  To  address  these 
limitations, 
study  proposed  an  Extended  Reality 
(XR)-augmented visual assistance framework, including Virtual 
Reality  (VR)  and  Augmented  Reality  (AR),  that  enables 
capturing  and  transferring  subconscious  inspection  strategies 
between workers or workers/machines for a construction safety 
inspection.  The  purpose  is  to  enhance  SA’s  training  and 
real-time  situational  awareness  for  identifying  on-site  hazards 
while reducing their mental workloads. 

this 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

The construction site is one of the most hazardous places. 
In the U.S., among all the fatalities in the private sector, more 
than 21% of fatalities occurred in the construction industry in 
2020 [1]. Besides the fatal injuries, the non-fatal injury rate in 
the construction industry is still around 29% higher than in the 
other industries [1]. The cost of these safety incidents exceeds 
$170  billion  each  year  alone  in  the  U.S  [2].  Besides  the 
enormous  economic  loss,  these  safety  incidents  can  result  in 
project  schedule  delays  and  loss  of  reputation  damage  for 
contractors.  

In current practice, safety advisors (SA) perform a routine 
on-site  inspection  to  identify  potential  safety  hazards  and 
generate  mitigation  measures  accordingly.  During  on-site 
visits,  the  SA  firstly  analyzes  the  current  safety  plans,  then 
walks around the job site to check the current safety situation 
of the workers, materials, and equipment. After the visit, the 
SA will report the visit and update the safety plans to mitigate 
unsafe situations and practices [3-5]. 

However, previous studies revealed that about 57% of the 
construction hazards remain unrecognized on the job site [6]. 
The SA’s limited experience or lack of familiarity with certain 
workspaces or certain parts of domain knowledge are possible 
contributors. The insufficient number of experienced SAs and 
the dynamic nature of construction sites further increase SAs’ 
misses of on-site hazards [7]. 

*Contributes Equally 
** Corresponding Author 
Pengkun Liu, Jinding Xing, Ruoxin Xiong and Pingbo Tang is with the 
Department  of  Civil  and  Environmental  Engineering,  Carnegie  Mellon 
University; e-mail: pengkunl, jindingx, ruoxinx, ptang@andrew.cmu.edu. 

Extended Reality (XR), which is an emerging technology 
that melds Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR), 
shows  the  potential  to  help  SA  identify  on-site  hazards 
effectively.  In  XR,  the  SA  can  navigate  or  control  a  digital 
robot to navigate a virtual construction site (VR) and interact 
with a virtual interface that contains safety-related information 
in  real  construction  workspaces  (AR).  Existing  XR-related 
solutions  rely  on  computer  simulations  and  computer  vision 
techniques  to  infer  the  on-site  hazards  [8].  Current  studies 
provide  limited  information  on  less  salient  on-site  hazards, 
such as hazards associated with manual material handling. The 
less salient on-site hazards are often interdependences with the 
construction schedule, physical space, and material properties 
[9].  In  some  cases,  identifying  less  salient  on-site  hazards 
requires  the  SA  has  in-depth  safety-related  knowledge,  rich 
experiences,  and  site-specific  knowledge.  Nevertheless, 
collecting  and reusing  experts’  safety-related  knowledge  and 
site  inspection  experiences  to  identify  less  salient  on-site 
hazards has not been fully explored. 

This  study  presents  an  XR-augmented  visual  assistance 
framework  that  incorporates  the  benefits  of  VR,  expert 
knowledge, and AR to enhance the SA’s situation awareness in 
the  safety  inspection  of  the  construction  site.  The  proposed 
framework  consists  of  three  major  components:  (1)  VR 
environment for capturing expert’s visual trajectories in safety 
inspection;  (2)  inspection  strategy  discovery  through  process 
mining of the captured visual trajectories of a digital drone; (3) 
AR user interface for visualization inspection strategies. 

The contribution of this study to the body of knowledge is 
three  folds:  (1)  review  existing  studies  relevant  to  XR  and 
point  out  the  research  gaps;  (2)  propose  a  framework  that 
captures  and  shares  expert  site-specific  knowledge  and 
inspection  experiences  through  process  mining  and  XR  for 
assisting  SA’s  safety  inspection  on  construction  sites;  (3) 
provide  a  proof-of-concept  model  for  XR-augmented  visual 
assistance  to  the  SA  through  a  case  study  of  fire  safety 
equipment inspection with a digital drone. 

II.  RELATED WORK 

This  section  reviews  recent  work 

that  uses  new 

technologies to enhance safety inspection on site.  

A.   Virtual Reality for Construction  

VR is a graphic representation technology that generates a 
three-dimensional  representation  of  the  construction  field. 
Many  studies  used  VR  to  enhance  SAs’  safety  inspection 
knowledge by asking the SAs to perform inspection tasks on a 
virtual construction site [10, 11]. Particularly, the VR model 
generated  from  the  as-built  3D  point  cloud  provides  the  SA 
with a full experience of the real construction site and can offer 
an effective learning experience for the SA [12]. However, the 

 
 
 
 
VR system does not provide any dynamic highlights to guide 
SAs in discovering safety-critical objects in given scenes. As a 
result,  the  SA  needs  to  interpret  the  scenarios  in  the  virtual 
construction site when performing an inspection on a real site, 
which adds extra cognitive workload to the SA. 

B.   Augmented Reality for Construction 

AR is a promising approach to mitigate the limitations of 
VR. Some other studies used AR as a 3D viewer that overlays 
virtual  objects  and  information  on  the  physical  site  views  to 
help SA identify and recognize hazards [13, 14]. The virtual 
information  generated  from  building  information  modeling 
(BIM)  provides  rich  geometry 
the 
construction project [15]. Such methods help the SA maintain 
better  situational  awareness  of  the  construction  site.  Yet,  the 
virtual information generated from computer simulations of a 
construction  environment  provides  a  limited  reflection  of 
real-world  environments,  such  as  time,  physical  space,  and 
material properties [9]. Often the virtual information helps the 

information  about 

SA infer geometry-related hazards, such as falls, struct by an 
object [16]. It remains challenging for naive SA to identify less 
salient hazards, such as the spreading of chemical hazards and 
fires.  

C.   Extended Reality for Construction 

Some  studies  used  a  combination  of  XR  and  machine 
learning techniques to deliver and visualize hazard information 
to  SAs  [16].  These  studies  use  an  AR  interface  to  visualize 
information  relevant  to  site  hazards  detection.  The  virtual 
information is generated through computer vision techniques 
that  detect  hazardous  scenarios.  Navigation  planning 
algorithms are also used to generate a safe and efficient path 
for  SAs  [17].  The  combined  solution  for  improving  safety 
inspection  on-site  has  been  provided  to  be  very  effective. 
However,  this  solution  overlooked  experts’  experiences  and 
site-specific  knowledge,  which  is  critical  to  identifying  less 
salient hazards in dynamic and cluttered environments. 

Figure 1.   The proposed XR-augmented visual assistance framework for assisting construction safety inspection 

III.  PROPOSED SOLUTION 

This  study  proposed  an  XR-augmented  visual  assistance 
system  aiming  to  learn  and  transfer  implicit  inspection 
strategies  associated  with  subconscious  experiences  and 
site-specific  knowledge  between  SAs  or  SAs/machines  for  a 
construction  safety  inspection  to  enhance  SA’s  situational 
awareness. The proposed system comprises three modules, as 
shown  in  Figure  1:  (1)  inspection  visual  trajectory  capture 
module (VR module): where a SA’s behaviors and inspection 
strategies  are  recorded  through  controlling  a  digital  drone 
reconstructed  digital 
during 
environment in the VR environment; (2) inspection knowledge 
&  experience  learning  module  (learning  module),  where 
process  mining  algorithms  will  be  applied  to  discover 
knowledge  and  inspection  strategies  captured  from  the  VR 
module; (3) and a visualization interface (AR interface), where 
AR-enhanced  SAs  and  digital  drone  collaborate  to  detect 
real-hazards or hazardous scenarios with unsafe combinations 
of objects’ states. Figure 1 shows the overall framework of the 
proposed system. 

interaction  with 

the 

the 

The  VR  module  aims  to  capture  SA’s  observation 
trajectories  in  identifying  on-site  construction  hazards.  The 
inspection  knowledge  and  experience  capturing  module 
includes a virtual construction site generated from a 3D scan of 
the construction site and a virtual drone. The SA can control a 
digital drone from the first perspective to observe and interact 
with the virtual construction site in the VR module, as shown 
in Figure 2. Meanwhile, the virtual drone will record the SA’s 
observation trajectories in the VR environment. 

Figure 2.   Safety inspectors use a digital drone to explore and search hazards 
on the virtual construction site  

 
 
 
The knowledge and experience learning module is tasked 
with collecting multiple SAs’ inspection strategies, especially 
the  object  detection  sequences  and  related  contextual 
information. As shown in Figure 3, the digital drone equipped 
with  laser  for  fire  safety  equipment  detection,  such  as  the 
lights,  fire  alarm  panels  and  so  on. 
emergency  exit 
Furthermore, 
the  point  cloud  segmentation  for  scene 
semantic  mapping  with  building 
understanding  and 
information  modeling  is  also  significant  for  learning  such 
inspection  strategies.  Then  the  knowledge  of  inspection  of 
SA’s observations and related decisions cloud be stored as a 
knowledge graph [18-20].  

through 

collected,  it  will  be  imported  into  Unity  3D  to  rebuild  the 
digital environment. Then in the digital environment, the SA 
can navigate in the environment and carry out fire equipment 
inspection  without  any  guidance.  Then  the  SA’s  inspection 
strategies  would  be  recorded 
the  first-person 
perspective with timestamps, as shown in Figure 2. The blue 
lines demonstrate the SA’s inspection strategies and attention 
division.  Especially,  inspectors  would  spend  more  time 
checking the fire equipment and switching the camera angle to 
look around the surrounding environments. Therefore, the blue 
lines represent the inspection strategies which would be denser 
and clustered near the fire equipment. Once the strategies are 
collected, the SA’s inspection visual trajectory will be used to 
guide the digital drone to navigate and search the objects in the 
digital environment, as shown in Figure 3. In addition, to make 
the  digital  drone  capable  of  sensing,  the  digital  drone  is 
equipped with multiple laser sensors to detect the objects in the 
digital  environment,  as  shown  in  Figure  4.  Therefore,  the 
collected  inspection  trajectories  are  mapped  with  semantic 
information to understand the mechanics of SAs’ observations 
and decisions.   

Finally,  with  the  help  of  AR,  in  the  physical  world,  the 
on-site SA equipped with an iPad could replay the inspection 
strategies  and  check  the  inspection  instructions,  as  shown  in 
Figure 5. The optimal trajectories and instructions representing 
expert  knowledge  could  be  delivered  to  naive  SAs.  For 
example,  in  the  fire  extinguisher  inspection  task,  the  AR 
module  maps 
the 
reconstructed  VR  environment  (the  trajectory  constitutes  of 
blue spheres) to the real world. Such mapping can also show 
detailed inspection instructions, such as checking the test and 
maintenance  dates.  Furthermore,  the  density  of  the  blue 
spheres represents the relative attention time, which means the 
SA  spends  more  time  at  this  place  to  check  the  equipment, 
such  as  the  SA  would  check  the  battery  conditions  of  fire 
alarms and exit signs/lights. 

the  visual 

inspection 

trajectory 

in 

Figure 3.   Digital drone equipped with laser for object detection (emergency 
exit lights and fire alarm panels)  

The AR interface is used to visualize and replay the learned 
inspection strategies and knowledge. This paper developed an 
iOS  app  by  Vuforia  to  facilitate  the  SA’s  safety  inspection 
information  (expert’s 
process.  In 
observation  trajectories  and  relevant  safety  information) 
overlay  in  the  real  construction  site  to  direct  the  SAs  for 
identifying  on-site  hazards  and  increasing  their  situational 
awareness. 

the  app,  augmented 

IV.  CASE STUDY 

This  study  used  a  campus  building  to  test  the  proposed 
system.  The  participants  are  asked  to  perform  fire  safety 
inspections inside the building. During the inspection process, 
SAs  should  check  the  status  of  the  fire  extinguishers,  fire 
alarms, exit signs, and fire rescue equipment as required by the 
current  building  safety  regulations.  Missed  potential  safety 
hazards  can  lead  to  devastating  consequences  in  the  fire 
situation. The goal of the inspection task is to ensure that the 
fire equipment is in functional conditions. 

Figure 4.   Visualization of SA’s inspection histories 

This study used iPad pro 11 to capture the 3D layout of the 
campus  building  and  visualize  the  generated  fire  inspection 
information.  The  first  phase  is  to  create  a  digital  VR  model 
from  the  physical  world  in  Unity  3D.  Given  that,  the  laser 
scanner  is  used  to  capture  the  high-quality  point  cloud  of  a 
campus building. Once the point cloud of the physical world is 

Figure 5.   An inspector navigates to target equipment with  the 
XR-augmented visual assistance platform 

 
 
 
 
 
Therefore,  the  authors  demonstrate  the  potential  of  the 
proposed XR-augmented system for the fire safety equipment 
inspection  tasks  in  a  physical-digital  environment  where  a 
digital  drone  collects  and  learn  from  the  SA’s  inspection 
strategies  and replays  the  searching  strategies  for  SAs  in  the 
physical environment with detailed instructions.  

V.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

The  authors  demonstrated  the  potential  for  increasing  the 
inspectors’  situational  awareness  in  a  fire  equipment  safety 
inspection  task  with  XR.  In  the  case  study,  the  SA  perform 
inspection tasks by controlling a digital drone to navigate in a 
VR construction site. The digital drone could learn from the 
SA’s  inspection  strategies  and  localizes  potential  safety 
hazards  to  assist  safety  inspectors  to  identify  field  hazards. 
Furthermore,  the  AR  module  could  replay  the  inspection 
strategies in the physical world to enhance the SAs’ situational 
awareness. 

from 

the  multiple 

This paper has not fully considered the process mining and 
knowledge  discovery 
inspectors’ 
observation  trajectories.  For  future  work,  this  paper  will 
pattern mining of the SAs’ observation trajectories collected 
in  the  VR  world  and  explore  the  relationship  between  the 
mined  pattern  and  the  BIM  model  to  summarize  the 
knowledge of SAs.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This  material  is  based  on  work  supported  by  the  Nuclear 
Energy University Program (NEUP) of the U.S. Department 
of  Energy  (DOE)  under  Award  No.  DE-NE0008864,  and 
NASA  University  Leadership  Initiative  program  (Contract 
No.  NNX17AJ86A,  Project  Officer:  Dr.  Anupa  Bajwa, 
Principal Investigator: Dr. Yongming Liu). 

REFERENCES 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 

[15] 

[16] 

[17] 

[18] 

[19] 

[20] 

reality 

in  construction:  Current  use, 

to  develop  a  virtual  safety 

F. Dai, A. Olorunfemi, W. Peng, D. Cao, and X. Luo, "Can mixed 
reality  enhance  safety  communication  on  construction  sites?  An 
industry perspective," Safety Science, vol. 133, p. 105009, 2021. 
R.  E.  Pereira,  M.  Gheisari,  and  B.  Esmaeili,  "Using  panoramic 
augmented 
training 
environment,"  in  Construction  research  congress,  2018,  vol. 
2018, pp. 29-39. 
S. Bhoir and B. Esmaeili, "State-of-the-art review of virtual reality 
environment  applications  in  construction  safety,"  AEI  2015,  pp. 
457-468, 2015. 
X.  Li,  W.  Yi,  H.-L.  Chi,  X.  Wang,  and  A.  P.  Chan,  "A  critical 
review of virtual and augmented reality (VR/AR) applications in 
construction  safety,"  Automation  in  Construction,  vol.  86,  pp. 
150-162, 2018. 
R. Sacks, A. Perlman, and R. Barak, "Construction safety training 
using  immersive  virtual  reality,"  Construction  Management  and 
Economics, vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 1005-1017, 2013. 
C. Nnaji and A. A. Karakhan, "Technologies for safety and health 
management 
implementation 
benefits  and  limitations,  and  adoption  barriers,"  Journal  of 
Building Engineering, vol. 29, p. 101212, 2020. 
J.  Ramos-Hurtado,  M.-L.  Rivera, 
J.  Mora-Serrano,  A. 
Deraemaeker, and I. Valero, "Proposal for the Deployment of an 
Augmented  Reality  Tool  for  Construction  Safety  Inspection," 
Buildings, vol. 12, no. 4, p. 500, 2022. 
B.  Schiavi,  V.  Havard,  K.  Beddiar,  and  D.  Baudry,  "BIM  data 
flow  architecture  with  AR/VR  technologies:  Use  cases  in 
architecture,  engineering  and  construction,"  Automation 
in 
Construction, vol. 134, p. 104054, 2022. 
S.  Wu,  L.  Hou,  G.  K.  Zhang,  and  H.  Chen,  "Real-time  mixed 
reality-based  visual  warning  for  construction  workforce  safety," 
Automation in Construction, vol. 139, p. 104252, 2022. 
C.  Reardon,  K.  Lee,  and  J.  Fink,  "Come  see  this!  augmented 
reality to enable human-robot cooperative search," in 2018 IEEE 
International Symposium on Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics 
(SSRR), 2018: IEEE, pp. 1-7. 
A.  Jalali,  "Graph-based  process  mining," 
Conference on Process Mining, 2020: Springer, pp. 273-285. 
G.  Hübscher  et  al.,  "Graph-based  managing  and  mining  of 
processes  and  data  in  the  domain  of  intellectual  property," 
Information Systems, vol. 106, p. 101844, 2022. 
C.  dos  Santos  Garcia  et  al.,  "Process  mining  techniques  and 
applications–A  systematic  mapping  study,"  Expert  Systems  with 
Applications, vol. 133, pp. 260-295, 2019. 

in  International 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

Safety 

event  or 

Occupational 

U.  S.  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics.  Fatal  occupational  injuries  by 
industry  and 
exposure,  all  United  States, 
https://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cftb0340.htm (accessed: May. 
8, 2020 ) 
NSC analysis of data from the BLS CFOI surveillance program. 
2020 
Highlights, 
https://injuryfacts.nsc.org/work/work-overview/work-safety-intro
duction/ (accessed: May.19, 2020 ) 
J. Irizarry, M. Gheisari, and B. N. Walker, "Usability assessment 
of  drone  technology  as  safety  inspection  tools,"  Journal  of 
Information Technology in Construction (ITcon), vol. 17, no. 12, 
pp. 194-212, 2012. 
Q.  Chen  and  R.  Jin,  "A  comparison  of  subgroup  construction 
workers’ perceptions of a safety program," Safety science, vol. 74, 
pp. 15-26, 2015. 
P. Liu, R. Xiong, and P. Tang, "Mining Observation and Cognitive 
Behavior  Process  Patterns  of  Bridge  Inspector,"  arXiv  preprint 
arXiv:2205.09257, 2022. 
P.-C.  Liao,  X.  Sun,  and  D.  Zhang,  "A  multimodal  study  to 
measure 
in 
construction  workplaces,"  Safety  Science,  vol.  133,  p.  105010, 
2021. 
A.  Albert,  M.  R.  Hallowell,  and  B.  M.  Kleiner,  "Experimental 
field testing of a real-time construction hazard identification and 
transmission 
technique,"  Construction  Management  and 
Economics, vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 1000-1016, 2014. 

the  cognitive  demands  of  hazard  recognition 

 
 
 
 
 
