Direct  Hydrogen  Production  from  Water/Seawater  by  Irradiation/Vibration-Activated 
Using Defective Ferroelectric BaTiO3-x Nanoparticles 

Yue  Jiang1*,  Cui  Ying  Toe2,  Sajjad  S.  Mofarah1,  Claudio  Cazorla3,  Shery  L.Y.  Chang1,5, 
Yanting Yin4, Qi Zhang1, Sean Lim5, Yin Yao5, Ruoming Tian5, Yuan Wang6, Tasmia Zaman1, 
Hamidreza  Arandiyan6,7,  Gunther  G.  Andersson4,  Jason  Scott2,  Pramod  Koshy1,  Danyang 
Wang1* and Charles C. Sorrell1* 

1  School  of  Materials  Science  and  Engineering,  UNSW  Sydney,  Sydney,  NSW    2052, 

Australia 

2  Particles and Catalysis Research Group, School of Chemical Engineering, UNSW Sydney, 

Sydney, NSW  2052, Australia 

3  Departament  de  Física,  Universitat  Politècnica  de  Catalunya,  Campus  Nord  B4-B5, 

Barcelona 08034, Spain. 

4  Flinders  Institute  for  Nanoscale  Science  and  Technology,  Flinders  University,  Adelaide, 

South Australia 5042, Australia 

5  Electron Microscope Unit, Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, 

NSW  2052, Australia 

6  Centre  for  Advanced  Materials  and  Industrial  Chemistry  (CAMIC),  RMIT  University, 

Melbourne, VIC  3000, Australia 

7  Laboratory of Advanced Catalysis for Sustainability, School of Chemistry, University of 

Sydney, Sydney, NSW  2006, Australia 

*Corresponding author: 
yue.jiang2@unsw.edu.au; dy.wang@unsw.edu.au; c.sorrell@unsw.edu.au 

Keywords:  Piezo-photocatalyisis; Seawater splitting; BaTiO3; Hydrogen evolution reaction, 
Defect chemistry 

Abstract 

Hydrogen  is  a  promising  fossil-fuel  alternative  fuel  owing  to  its  environmentally  neutral 
emissions and high energy density.  However, the need for purified water and external power 
are critical hindrances to implementation of hydrogen production.  The present work reveals 
the potential to overcome these shortcomings through piezo-photocatalysis of seawater using 
BaTiO3-x (BTO) nanoparticles.  This material was made piezoelectrically active by annealing 
under different atmospheres, including O2, N2, Ar, and H2, the latter of which caused Ti4+ → 
Ti(4-x)+  multiple  reductions  and  structural  expansions  that  stabilized  piezoelectric  tetragonal 
BTO domains.  The resultant defect equilibria combine ionic and electron effects, including Ti 
redox  reactions,  charge-compensating  surface  oxygen  vacancy  formation,  and  color  centre 
alterations.  Further, variety of experimental techniques revealed the effects of reduction on the 
energy band structure.  A strong piezoelectric effect and the presence of self-polarization were 
confirmed  by  piezoresponse  force  microscopy,  while  simulation  work  clarified  the  role  of 
vibration  on  band  bending  deriving  from  the  former.    The  performance  data  contrasted  H2 
evolution using deionized (DI) water, simulated seawater, and natural seawater subjected to 
photocatalysis,  piezocatalysis,  and  piezo-photocatalysis.    An  efficient  H2  evolution  rate  of 
132.4 μmol/g/h was achieved from DI water using piezo-photocatalysis for 5 h.  In contrast, 
piezocatalysis for 2 h followed by piezo-photocatalysis for 3 h resulted in H2 evolution rates of 
100.7  μmol/g/h  for  DI  water,  63.4  μmol/g/h  for  simulated  seawater,  and  48.7  μmol/g/h  for 
natural  seawater.    This  work  provides  potential  new  strategies  for  large-scale  green  H2 

(1) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
production  using  abundant  natural  resources  with  conventional  piezoelectric  material  while 
leveraging the effects of ions dissolved in seawater. 

1.  Introduction 

A hydrogen economy is receiving greater attention as a potential means of dealing with climate 
change and securing a sustainable clean energy resource.  Hydrogen as a sustainable energy 
carrier is a promising alternative to fossil fuels owing to its environmentally neutral emissions 
and high energy density of 142 MJ/kg, which is approximately six times that of coal and triple 
that  of  gasoline  [1,2].    At  present,  most  hydrogen  generation  is  from  natural  gas  by  steam 
reforming using the water-gas shift reaction [3].  However, water splitting is the ideal pathway 
to achieve efficient hydrogen production owing to its cyclic production-oxidation reactions and 
the storage/transport capacities in both liquid and gas forms.  The principal alternative to the 
steam reforming is electrolysis although it has the disadvantages of requiring external power 
input,  necessity  of  separation  of  the  H2  produced  at  the  cathode  by  the  hydrogen  evolution 
reaction (HER) and the O2 produced at the anode by the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), the 
necessity  of  the  use  of  purified  water,  and  limited  freshwater  supplies  [4].    Although 
electrolysis exhibits ~80% efficiency, this can be increased with the use of  electrocatalysts, 
photocatalysts,  piezocatalysts,  or  thermocatalysts  [5,6].    Although  the  associated  catalytic 
processes require energy inputs in the laboratory setting, they can be green and sustainable on 
the 
the  use  of  solar  cells,  sunlight,  wind/tide,  and 
geothermal/concentrated sunlight, respectively.  Further advantage may be gained through the 
combination of two or even more of these catalytic processes [7,8].  Although countries such 
as Australia are poised to leverage all of these processes owing to its high sunlight flux, large 
land mass, and extensive shoreline, it has the disadvantage of limited supplies of freshwater.  
This situation highlights the importance of developing means of the splitting of seawater [9]. 

industrial  scale 

through 

Seawater  is  the  most  abundant  aqueous  feedstock  on  earth  but  there  are  three  principal 
challenges that will determine the feasibility of direct seawater splitting.  First, the similarity 
of the electrochemical potentials of the OER at 1.23 eV and the chlorine evolution reaction 
(CER) at 1.72 eV raises the possibility of the production of chlorine gas [10].  Second, when 
seawater is decomposed, it can generate in solution electron scavengers, such as Na+, and hole 
scavengers,  such  as  Cl–.    Although  Na+  appears  not  to  be  a  serious  shortcoming  [11],  the 
presence of such scavengers is disadvantageous because they can compete with the HER and 
OER  for  catalytically  generated  electrons  and  holes,  respectively  [12].    Third,  the 
microorganisms and other organic matter present in seawater could alter the catalytic process, 
leading to undesirable side-reactions, or foul and deactivate the catalyst.  The preceding risks 
clarify  the  desirability  of  using  DI  water  for  water  splitting  but  they  also  highlight  the 
desirability  of  developing  catalysts  for  green,  sustainable,  efficient,  and  reliable  seawater 
splitting. 

One  approach  to  hydrogen  production  is  solar-driven  seawater  splitting  using  different 
semiconductor photocatalysts.  Simamora et al. [13] used Degussa P25 TiO2 and UV irradiation 
to  contrast  the  photocatalytic  H2  evolution  rates  for  DI  water  (8.5  μmol/g/h)  and  simulated 
seawater (3.1 μmol/g/h).  They also observed that the addition of a CuO co-catalyst increased 
the  range of observed wavelengths and consequent  H2 evolution  rate to  15.7 μmol/g/h.  As 
indicated in Table S1, all of these rates are relatively low.  In a contrasting study, Peng et al. 
[14] prepared CdS/TiO2 nanocomposites for both DI water and simulated seawater splitting 
and demonstrated respective H2 evolution rates of 306.3 μmol/g/h and 456.6 μmol/g/h.  In this 

(2) 

 
 
 
 
work, sacrificial agents (0.1 mol/L Na2S + 0.1 mol/L Na2SO3) were added in order to reduce 
the  recombination  tendency  of  electrons  and  holes  and  thereby  accelerating  the  HER  [15].  
Consequently,  this  combination  of  anions  appears  to  have  achieved  the  intended  aim,  thus 
suggesting that the beneficial effect of S2–/SO3
2– dominated the deleterious effect of Cl–.  The 
summary  offered  in  Table  S1  [13,  16-22]  indicates  that  photocatalytic  seawater  splitting  is 
impacted by a range of issues, including materials design complexity, necessity of the use of 
scavengers, and limited quantum efficiencies [7]. 

A second approach to hydrogen production is via piezocatalysis, although this has been applied 
only to DI water at present [23].  This relatively new mechanism is based on the principle of 
converting cyclic mechanical energy into chemical energy.  Such mechanical vibration exists 
in several easily accessed forms, including tides, as a by-product of wind-generated power, and 
sound/ultrasound systems.  In this process, the piezo-potential induced by mechanical vibration 
causes electronic band bending, which directs the internal charge carrier flow to the catalyst 
surface,  thereby  facilitating  the  catalytic  reaction.    The  band  bending  also  can  improve  the 
photo-generated charge carrier separation by shifting the band edges relative to the HER and 
OER  electrochemical  potentials,  thus  improving  the  photocatalytic  activity  [24].    Several 
piezoelectric  materials  have  been  explored  as  promising  candidates  for  piezocatalysis, 
including BaTiO3 [7,24,25], ZnO [26,27], Na0.5K0.5NbO3 [28], BiFeO3 [29], and Na0.5Bi0.5TiO3 
[30,31]. 

Hong et al. [26] prepared ZnO nanofibers by a hydrothermal method and used these to split DI 
water  using  unspecified  frequency  and  power  level.    This  work  revealed  a  very  high  H2 
evolution rate (2192.2 μmol/g/h) and a notable efficiency of conversion of mechanical energy 
to chemical energy of ~18%.  You et al. [29] synthesized BiFeO3 square nanosheets using a 
hydrothermal  method  and  obtained  a  high  H2  production  rate  of  124.1  μmol/g/h  using 
ultrasound at an unspecified frequency and 100 W.  Tetragonal BaTiO3 is a well known wide-
band-gap  ferroelectric  material  that  has  been  reported  to  exhibit  both  photocatalytic  and 
thermocatalytic functions, although rapid charge carrier recombination hinders its performance 
[32].  An advantage of tetragonal BaTiO3 is that it demonstrates pressure-induced polarization, 
which allows the establishment of a dynamic built-in electric field during vibration, viz., the 
piezoelectric polarization field.  The polarization allows the electrons and holes to maintain 
continuous  separation,  thus  preventing  recombination  and  their  consequent  mobilization  on 
opposite  surfaces,  thereby  making  them  available  for  catalytic  hydrogen  production  [32].  
Recently, Su et al. [25] developed porous and structurally defective BaTiO3 nanoparticles using 
a hydrothermal method and examined them for DI water splitting.  They obtained a high H2 
evolution  rate  of  159 µmol/g/h  at  40 kHz  frequency  and  unspecified  power,  which  they 
attributed to the presence of surface strain, associated enhanced polarization, and high surface 
area. 

A third approach is based on the potential for additive effects by combining the two approaches 
of  photocatalysis  and  piezocatalyis  as  piezo-photocatalysis  of  DI  water.    However,  the 
literature  is  contradictory.    Wang  et  al.  [33]  synthesized  ZnSnO3  nanowires  using  a 
hydrothermal method and examined them for both dye degradation and DI water splitting using 
photocatalysis,  piezocatalysis,  and  piezo-photocatalysis.    The  rhodamine  B  dye  (RhB) 
degradation  efficiency  using  piezo-photocatalysis  was  approximately  1.53  and  2.30  times 
higher  those  photocatalysis  and  piezocatalysis,  respectively.    An  H2  evolution  rate  of 
3882.5 µmol/g/h was obtained by the synergistic piezo-photocatalysis, which was higher than 
those for photocatalysis (3453.1 µmol/g/h) and piezocatalysis (3562.2 µmol/g/h).  These trends 
[34],  who  prepared  Ag-decorated 
are  supported  by 

the  work  of  Xiao  et  al. 

(3) 

 
 
 
Na0.5Bi0.5TiO3-Ba(Ti0.5Ni0.5)O3 composite nanopowder by self-propagating high-temperature 
synthesis.  A high H2 evolution rate of 450 µmol/g/h was obtained using piezo-photocatalysis, 
compared to those of photocatalysis (67.75 µmol/g/h) and piezocatalysis (47.71 µmol/g/h).  In 
contrast, the previously mentioned work by Su et al. [25] on defective BaTiO3 revealed that 
piezo-photocatalysis  exhibited  a  lower  H2  evolution  rate  (103 µmol/g/h)  than  that  of 
piezocatalysis (159 µmol/g/h), although photocatalysis gave nil results.  They attributed this to 
the different charge transfer mechanisms of the two catalyses.  That is, piezocatalysis is driven 
by  the  spontaneous  polarization/depolarization  caused  by  cyclic  compressive  stress 
application/release, respectively, thus establishing a surface piezo-potential.  Photocatalysis is 
inactive owing to insufficient redox potential deriving from the charge carriers.  With piezo-
photocatalysis,  the  large  number  of  charge  carriers,  albeit  of  low  redox  potential,  becomes 
sufficient to enhance photocatalysis but, at the same time, the charge carriers screen the surface 
potential, thus hampering the water splitting process. 

A survey of the literature indicates there are no studies of the application of ferroelectrics for 
piezo-photocatalytic splitting of seawater for H2 production.  Consequently, the present work 
presents  an  initial  investigation  of  seawater  splitting  using  the  simultaneously  applied 
piezocatalytic and photocatalytic properties of BaTiO3 [53].  The role of structural defects was 
investigated through annealing under different atmospheres (O2, N2, Ar, H2) in order to impose 
specific defect chemistries of different extents.  A critical outcome of this strategy was that 
reduction generated unique structural features comprised of tetragonal domains rich in oxygen 
vacancies.    The  observed  Ti4+  →  Ti(4-x)+  multiple  reductions/expansions  and  charge-
compensating oxygen vacancies effectively stabilize these structural features [35,36], which 
are graded coherently within a more stoichiometric cubic matrix.  The role of these tetragonal 
domains was explored through photocatalysis, piezocatalysis, and piezo-photocatalysis using 
dye  degradation  and  water  splitting.    The  BaTiO3  nanopowder  annealed  under  H2  showed 
highly efficient dye degradation of RhB (99% degradation in 30 mins) and H2 evolution rates 
of 96.9 μmol/g/h (piezocatalysis), nil (photocatalysis), and 132.4 μmol/g/h (piezophotcatalysis).  
The comparative H2 evolution rates as a function of water type were 100.7 μmol/g/h (DI water), 
63.4 μmol/g/h (simulated seawater), and 48.7 μmol/g/h (natural seawater).  These data suggest 
that  highly  defective  and  structurally  stable  BaTiO3  offers  the  potential  for  significant 
outcomes in large-scale green and sustainable freshwater purification and hydrogen production 
from seawater. 

2.  Results and Discussion 

Commercial cubic BaTiO3 (BTO) nanoparticles (<100 nm) were modified to vary the defect 
concentrations by heat-treatment under O2, N2, Ar, or H2 at 800°C for 12 h and then cooled to 
room temperature; the respective samples were denoted BTO-O, BTO-N, BTO-A, and BTO-
H.  In contrast with the first three, a significant change in color from white to dark grey was 
observed when the BTO was annealed under H2, thus confirming its greater extent of reduction.  
Schematic  details  of  the  synthesis  are  shown  in  Figure  1(a)  and  described  in  detail  in  the 
Experimental Methods in the Supplementary Information.  Figure 1(b) shows that the X-ray 
diffraction  XRD  diffraction  peaks  of  all  samples  can  be  indexed  to  BaTiO3  crystals  [37].  
Figure 1(c) shows that the representative main (101) peak for BTO-H exhibits a clear shift to 
a lower angle, thus suggesting lattice expansion from the previously mentioned Ti reduction 
(charge compensated by oxygen vacancy formation).  The XRD Rietveld refinement data for 
the BTO structure, which is illustrated in Figure S1(a), are shown in Figure S1(b).  The XRD 
data reveal that the BTO (200) peak exhibits a shoulder at the lower angles, which is indicative 

(4) 

 
 
 
 
of the (002) to (002) + (200) peak splitting and associated onset of the cubic → tetragonal BTO 
phase transformation [37,38]. 

Figure 1.  Synthesis and characterization of defective BTO nanoparticles:  (a) Schematic 
diagram  for  synthesis,    XRD  patterns:    (b)  range  10°-100°  2θ  (identical  pattern  scales),  (c) 

(5) 

 
 
range  30°-35°  2θ  (identical  pattern  scales),  (d)  laser  Raman  microspectroscopy  patterns 
(identical pattern scales), TEM images of BTO-H:  low-magnification bright-field image, (f) 
high-resolution image, (g) SAED image for BTO-H for (f), HAADF-STEM images of BTO-
H:  (h) lower magnification image of entire particle (circled regions indicate oxygen-vacancy-
rich tetragonal domains), (i) higher magnification image particle edge. 

The presence of tetragonal BTO was confirmed by laser Raman microspectroscopy, the spectra 
for  which  are  shown  in  Figure  1(d).    The  main  features  observed  include  a  small  peak  at 
175 cm-1 [A1(TO), E(LO)], a broad peak centered at 265 cm-1 [A1TO], a relatively sharp peak at 
306 cm-1 [B1, E(TO + LO)], a broad sharp peak centered at 520 cm-1 [A1, E(TO)], and a small 
broad peak centered at 720 cm-1 [A1, E(LO)] [39].   It is well established that cubic BTO is 
Raman-inactive  owing  to  the  isotropic  distribution  of  electrostatic  forces  around  the 
centrosymmetric  Ti4+  ion  [37,39,40].    Hence,  the  appearance  of  Raman  peaks  confirms  the 
XRD identification of tetragonal BTO.  The Raman-active nature of tetragonal BTO derives 
from the electronic/ionic polarization caused by the off-centered displacement of the Ti4+ cation 
within the TiO6 octahedron [32], which results in ferroelectric and consequent piezocatalytic 
behavior [25]. 

The  nanoparticles  were  examined  in  greater  detail  using  transmission  electron  microscopy 
(TEM).  Figure 1(e) shows that the BTO-H nanoparticles exhibited monodisperse cuboidal 
morphologies of typically 30-60 nm size shapes after deagglomeration by 30 min sonication.  
The  lattice  fringes  shown  in  Figure  1(f)  extend  throughout  the  individual  grains,  thus 
indicating  that  they  are  well-crystallized  crystals.    The  single-crystal  nature  of  the  particle 
shown in Figure 1(f), is demonstrated by the reflections ([001] zone axis) from the selected 
area  electron  diffraction  (SAED)  pattern  shown  in  Figure  1(g).    That  the  grain  is  highly 
crystalline is demonstrated by the well defined and bright dots.  The tetragonal symmetry is 
confirmed again  by the difference in interplanar  spacing  of the (001) plane (0.402 nm) and 
(100) plane (0.400 nm) [41]. 

The  structural  homogeneity  of  BTO-H  was  examined  using  high-angle  annular  dark-field 
scanning transmission electron  microscopy  (HAADF-STEM).   Figure  1(h) and Figure  1(i) 
reveal regions of dark shading that are consistent with enriched oxygen vacancy concentrations.  
The continuous lattice fringes indicate that these domains are structurally coherent across the 
graded interface with the lighter matrix.  These darker domains, which indicate lower average 
atomic  density,  correspond  to  tetragonal  BTO,  which  is  stabilized  by  the  Ti4+  →  Ti(4-x)+ 
multiple reduction/expansion and charge-compensating oxygen vacancies, the dual presence 
of which is confirmed by the subsequent X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data.  This 
identification is  supported by other work that correlates the stabilization of  tetragonal  BTO 
with increasing oxygen vacancy concentrations [35,36]. 

The structural  homogeneity was  further examined by scanning  electron microscopy (SEM), 
energy  dispersive  spectroscopy  (EDS),  laser  diffraction,  and  the  Brunaeur-Emmett-Teller 
(BET) technique.  The SEM images of Figure S3 show that the as-received nanopowders are 
agglomerated into micron-sized spheres.  However, Figure S1(c) reveals that sonication for 10 
min was sufficient to convert most of the soft agglomerates into  the monodisperse particles 
apparent in Figure 1(e); a small  proportion of more stable hard agglomerates was retained.  
The additional EDS elemental mapping clearly indicates the presence of Ba, Ti, O elements 
which are uniformly distributed in the nanoparticles.  The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) data 
for  specific  surface  areas,  pore  volumes,  and  average  pore  sizes  are  given  for  the  different 
nanoparticles in Table S2.  These data do not show clear correlations between the three sets of 

(6) 

 
 
 
 
data, indicating that the macroscopic pore features are not responsible for the progressively 
increasing trend in surface areas.  That is, since the ionic radii of oxygen and nitrogen are within 
5% of one another [42], then it is likely that the surface area represents a measure of the access 
of  a  nitrogen  ion  to  an  oxygen  vacancy.    Consequently,  the  surface  area  represents  an 
•• ]).    This  relation  is 
alternative  means  of  assessing  the  oxygen  vacancy  concentration  ([VO
further illustrated in Figure S2, which reveals clear correlation between the surface area and 
••] determined by XPS (Table S3).  Further, these data suggest that effectiveness of the 
the [VO
different atmospheres in chemical reduction is in the expected order: 

BTO-O (Negatively Charged O) < BTO-N (Negatively Charged N) < BTO-A (Neutral Ar) << 
BTO-H (Positively Charged H) 

Since  Figures  1(h)  and  (i)  indicate  that  the  distribution  of  the  oxygen-vacancy-stabilized 
tetragonal domains is inhomogeneous, then the parallel trends revealed in Figure S2 suggest 
that the oxygen vacancies are homogeneously distributed across the surfaces of the grains and 
that the tetragonal domains are volumetric and are not limited only to the subsurface. 

As illustrated in Figure S1(a), which is indicated as a simplified projection in Figure 2(a), 
BTO has a typical perovskite structure (ABO3), which occurs as both cubic (space group Pm3̅m) 
and  tetragonal  (space  group  P4mm)  polymorphs,  where  Ba3+  occupies  the  A  site  and  Ti4+ 
occupies the B site.  As what effectively is BaTiO3-x has intrinsic oxygen vacancies (assuming 
ionic charge compensation), the application of O2 probably decreased this concentration while 
the application of the reducing atmospheres (N2, Ar, and H2) increased it.  These atmospheres 
increase the formation of oxygen vacancies generated by electron migration, viz., polarons [43].  
That  is,  the  Ti  reduction  is  caused  by  electron  localization  on  the  Ti  ions  adjacent  to  the 
••  dipole  [43].    The  room-temperature  electron 
vacancies,  thereby  forming  a  Ti4-x- VO
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) scan for the defective BTO in Figure 2(b) reveals signals at g 
•• -Ti3+  complex 
=  2.002,  assigned  to  surface VO
[24,44,45,46].  The BTO-H, which is the sample reduced by H2, exhibits significantly more 
intense peaks than those of the other three samples, the difference between which is supported 
by the trend in Figure S2.  Further, the intensity of the latter peak is significantly higher than 
those reported in the literature [44], indicating the relatively high Ti3+ concentration ([Ti3+]).  
In order to confirm the assignments of these peaks, the EPR was done at 70°C, as shown in 
Figure S4.  While the faster diffusion of the electrons at the higher temperature is consistent 
with the observed signal attenuation [47], the maintenance of the g values confirms that they 
do  not  indicate  anomalous  phenomena  and  hence  are  as  assigned.    Finally,  while  the 
progressive Ti4+ → Ti(4-x)+ reductions are feasible for H2 reduction, no signal for Ti2+ and Ti0 
is possible because they are EPR-inactive [48]. 

•• ,  and  at  g  =  1.973,  assigned  to  the  Ti3+-VO

(7) 

 
 
 
 
Figure  2.    Defect  and  chemical  analyses  of  BTO  nanoparticles:    (a)  Schematic  of 
hypothetical basic defect structure (bulk); (b) Room-temperature EPR spectra (bulk, subsurface, 
surface); XPS spectra:  (c) O 1s (subsurface) and (d) Ti 2p (surface) 

Figures 2(c) and 2(d) show the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra for the BTO 
nanoparticles.  The XPS spectra of the O 1s peak for BTO can be deconvoluted into three peaks 
of 529.6 eV (OL), 530.9 eV (OV), and 531.9 eV (OA), which are ascribed to lattice oxygen, 
••) regions, and adsorbed surface 
nonlattice ionic oxygen associated with oxygen deficient (VO
water and/or hydroxyl molecules, respectively [24,33].  Concerning the critical OV peak, this 
has been attributed to surface-adsorbed O– ions, which have a reduced electron density [49].  
Consequently,  they  alter  the  net  electronic  charge  density  and  so  can  be  detected  by  XPS 
although they often are ascribed nominally to oxygen vacancies [49,50]. 

As shown in Figures S2, 2(b), and 2(c) as well as Table S3, the OV/(OL+OV) ratio of 13.57 at% 
was significantly higher for BTO-H than those of the other samples, viz., BTO-O (9.98 at%), 
BTO-N (10.27 at%), and BTO-A (11.03 at%), thus confirming the role of thermal reduction in 
the generation of structural defects in the form of charge-compensating Ti3+ (and possibly Ti2+) 
and VO

•• (and possibly the other color centers VO

•  and VO

x ). 

The Ba-Ti-O calculated phase diagram shows that the solid solubility homogeneity region for 
barium titanate in the oxygen-deficient region is bounded by TiO (Ti2+) and BaO (Ba2+) [51].  
•• ]  is  determined  by  a  stoichiometry  change  from  Ba2+Ti4+O3  to 
Hence,  the  limiting  [ VO
••] for BTO-H of 13.57 at% indicates 
Ba2+Ti2+O2, so the maximal [VO

••] is 33 at%.  Thus, the [VO

(8) 

 
 
 
 
that the extent of reduction was 41% as this is the proportion of the possible oxygen vacancies 
that could form at the subsurface and in the bulk. 

As shown in Figure 2(d), the XPS spectra for the Ti 2p peaks at 458.10 eV (Ti 2p3/2) and 463.90 
eV (Ti 2p1/2) confirm the dominant presence of Ti4+ [52].  The binding energies were obtained 
by referencing the C1s line to 284.8 eV.  Comparison of BTO-O with the other samples reveals 
that the Ti 2p peaks for the latter shifted to lower binding energies, which is indicative of the 
less-stable  bonding  configuration  Ti4-x-O-Ti4-x.    Although  these  shifts  are  consistent  with 
reduced valences, the shifts are relatively small and within the uncertainty range of the reported 
binding energy measurements [60].  However, these shifts may indicate minor modification of 
the Ti4+ environment in the form of a small shift in its electron density.  Although the most 
likely cause of this would be an increase in electronegativity upon reduction of Ti4+, this is not 
supported by the values for Ti4+ (1.65) and Ti3+ (1.5) [92].  Consequently, this shift is consistent 
with the effect of oxygen vacancies, the absent ions of which have very high electronegativity 
(3.65). 

The depth distribution of structural defects was probed by HAADF-STEM and these data were 
complemented by determination of the corresponding chemical compositions using electron 
energy-loss  spectroscopy  (EELS).    Figure  3(a)  shows  the  atomic  structure  of  a  BTO-H 
nanoparticle viewed along the [002]/[110] orientation, with the Ba and Ti ionic columns clearly 
resolved.    With  the  high-collection  inner  angle  used  for  the  HAADF-STEM  imaging,  the 
locations of the O ions are not visible [55].  The significantly lower contrast of the Ti ions in 
the surface relative to those in the subsurface may be attributed to one or both of two causes. 

General  Effect:    The  structural  distortion  associated  with  the  surface  causes  general  ionic 
displacement,  as  reflected  in  the  projected  thickness.    This  is  revealed  by  the  differential 
contrast between the regions of the surface.  Since the major contrast in brightness is for the 
surface vs subsurface/bulk, this indicates that the lattice termination (subsurface) and the bulk 
are structurally similar and that the surface is more distorted, which are as expected. 

Localised Effect:  The localised distortion associated with the Ti4+ → Ti(4-x)+ reduction causes 
localised Ti orbital distortion and ionic displacement, as reflected in the differential contrast 
with the adjacent Ba ions [56].  The latter mechanism is supported by the XPS data.  Since the 
brightness of the Ba ions are similar for the surface, subsurface, and bulk, this indicates the 
stability of the Ba valence.  However, the clear differences in contrast in brightness between 
the Ba ions and the Ti ions in the surface vs subsurface/bulk indicate that there is significant 
surface Ti4+ → Ti(4-x)+ reduction while this is not the case for the lattice termination (subsurface) 
or the bulk. 

(9) 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Analysis of defect concentrations as a function of depth:  (a) HAADF-STEM 
image of surface, subsurface, and bulk regions of BTO-H; (b) EELS spectra of Ti L edges taken 
from the surface, subsurface and bulk regions of BTO-H; (c) Normalized ARXPS [Ti4-x] for 
BTO-H  extrapolated  to  90°  (extreme  surface);  (d)  Schematic  of  graded-reduction  and 
analytical tool penetration depths from surface to subsurface to bulk for BTO-H based on data 
for (a) to (c) 

(10) 

 
Figure 3(b) shows the EELS data for the Ti-L2,3 edges as a function of depth.  The four peaks 
for the t2g and eg orbitals correspond to the electronic transitions from Ti 2p3/2 (left pair, Ti-L3) 
and Ti 2p1/2 (right pair, Ti-L2) bands [57].  Across the bulk → subsurface, the t2g peak for the 
Ti-L2  edge  shifted  to  a  lower  energy  loss,  which  indicates  the  existence  of  Ti(4-x)+  [25,58].  
Further, the peaks become broader from the core to the surface, indicating increasing defect 
concentrations,  particularly  charge-compensating  oxygen  vacancies  [45].    Across  the 
subsurface  →  surface,  the  principal  difference  is  that  the  peaks  are  even  broader,  thus 
indicating that there is a significant increase in the defect concentrations across this interface.  
The  observation  from  EELS  is  consistent  with  the  angle-resolved  X-ray  photoelectron 
spectroscopy (ARXPS), which are discussed immediately following. 

Figure S5(a) and (b) illustrates the ARXPS data, which were used to examine the valence 
change in BTO-H as a function of depth.  The data for the operating insertion angles of 0°, 30°, 
and 45° differentiate probing depths by ~2-3 nm.  With lower insertion angles, the distances of 
electrons travelling to the surface toward the detector are increased.  Thus, the contributions of 
electrons from the deeper regions are minimised owing to the electron mean free path [59].  
Significantly, the Ti 2p3/2 spectra (three left peaks) reveal majority Ti4+ (458.7 ± 0.15 eV) and 
minority Ti3+ (456.8 ± 0.15 eV), Ti2+ (455.2 ± 0.15 eV), and Ti0 (453.9 ± 0.15 eV) [93-96]. 

Figure  3(c) quantifies these  data  and extrapolates  them to  the  absolute outer surface.  This 
analysis allows two conclusions.  First, in agreement with the EELS data, the inflection at 30° 
suggests the interface between the surface and subsurface, the former of which is estimated to 
be of thickness ~1 nm [54].  It is likely that there is a second inflection at a similar distance 
toward the bulk at a similar distance of ~1 nm (viz., the subsurface thickness), which delineates 
the  bulk/subsurface  interface.    However,  this  cannot  be  detected  as  the  plot  terminates  by 
necessity at 0°.  Second, the presence of Ti0 is limited effectively to the surface and subsurface.  
This suggests a potential means of creating a BTO/Ti0 heterojunction structure, which act as 
electron sinks located on the surface to enhance charge separation.  As the concentrations of 
the  other  three  Ti  ions  are  approximately  constant,  this  suggests  that  the  valence  ratios  are 
consistent throughout the bulk, thus demonstrating the high diffusivity of hydrogen in BTO 
and that the reduction is a bulk effect, not a surface effect. 

Figure 3(d) shows a schematic that combines the conclusions based on the EPR, EELS, and 
ARXPS data in terms of the concentration gradients for surface → subsurface → bulk.  The 
presence of the oxygen-vacancy-stabilized tetragonal domains in the subsurface and bulk, the 
approximate surface and subsurface thicknesses, and the different analytical tool penetration 
depths also are shown. 

The principal reason for the differences in compositions and concentrations between surface, 
subsurface, and bulk are suggested by the ordered nature of the bulk; the semiordered nature 
of the subsurface, which is the lattice termination; and the more disordered nature of the surface.  
In  the  present  case,  these  effects  are  revealed  by  the  origins  of  the  Ti4+,  Ti3+,  Ti2+  and  Ti0.  
Although these ions represent intrinsic defects, they also can be viewed as extrinsic surface 
defects owing to their origin, which would be one or more of the following: 

•  Adsorbates from unwashed raw materials 
•  Unwashed reaction products 
•  Products of inhomogeneous mixing 
•  Products of inhomogeneous reaction 

(11) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Establishment of concentration gradients during precipitation 
•  Establishment of concentration gradients during reaction 
•  Ions forced by stress from the bulk to the surface by segregation 
•  Chemisorbed ions in the subsurface that have detached from stress/repulsion and become 

physisorbed in the surface 

Since EPR probes through the entire volume and  Figure 2(b) demonstrates the presence of 
Ti3+, then this valence is confirmed as being present in the bulk.  However, the presence of Ti2+ 
and  Ti0  in  the  bulk  cannot  be  probed  by  EPR  as  these  valences  are  inactive  [48].    These 
reductions are associated with progressive increases in the ionic radii [42] of Ti4+ (0.0745 nm), 
Ti3+ (0.081 nm), and Ti2+ (0.100 nm), terminating with the metallic radius of Ti0 (0.147 nm).  
The approximate doubling of the radius upon full Ti4+ → Ti0 reduction is likely to the cause of 
the limitation of the metal to the surface and subsurface. 

Figure 4(a) shows the photoluminescence (PL) data for all four samples.  These data reflect 
the presence of point defects that generate energy transitions between ground and excited states 
associated  with  luminescent  centers,  which  are  often  color  or  F  centers  [61].    The  peak 
intensities  are  considered  to  be  inversely  proportional  to  the  rates  of  electron-hole 
recombination, so lower intensities reflect more significant effects, which are controlled by the 
diffusion  distance  (i.e.,),  the  presence  of  trap  states  (i.e.,  defects),  and  the  presence  of 
heterojunctions (i.e., interfaces) [54].  The spectra are comprised of two groupings of broad 
peaks that are attributed to the near-band edge (NBE) and deep-level defect emissions (e.g., 
oxygen vacancies, surface states, OH–, and asymmetry imposed by Ti(4-x)+ [62].  These two 
groupings are comprised of the assignments of five transitions, where the inverse intensities 
are low for the  ionic charge transitions and high for the  electronic  charge transitions.  This 
bimodal distribution is expected as the amount of energy and time required to break bonds (to 
form oxygen vacancies) are greater than those to transfer an electron.  Hence, the energy and 
𝑥))  are  greater  than  those  to  add  an 
time  to  create  a  color  centre  (𝐹0(𝑉𝑂
𝑥).  There are no effects from Ti0 because PL is inactive to metals 
electron (𝑉𝑂
as  each  exhibits  a  continuum  of  electronic  states  around  the  Fermi  level,  so  no  radiative 
transitions are possible between states above and below the Fermi level [91]. 

•), 𝐹++(𝑉𝑂

••), 𝐹+(𝑉𝑂

•• → 𝑉𝑂

• → 𝑉𝑂

•, 𝑉𝑂

(12) 

 
 
Figure 4.  Band structure characteristics of defective BTO nanoparticles:  (a) PL spectra 
(identical pattern scales), (b) AFM topography of BTO-H drop-cast film, (c) Contact potential 
difference (CPD) of BTO-H drop-cast film by KPFM, (d) Kubelka-Munk plots from UV-Vis 
reflectance spectrophotometry data for optical indirect band gap (e) XPS valence band plots, 
(f) Resultant energy band diagrams (pH = 0) 

(13) 

 
These transitions can be described in terms of Kröger-Vink notation applied to the potential 
defect  equilibria.    As  the  present  work  focusses  on  the  passive  reduction  (oxygen  partial 
••, then the 
pressure <21 vol% O2) and active reduction (chemical effect) of BaTiO3 to form  VO
defect  equilibria  are  intrinsic  and  the  possible  charge  compensation  mechanisms  for  the 
••  are  ionic,  electronic,  or  redox  [54,63].    Only  Ti3+  as  the  reductant  is 
formation  of   VO
considered for the sake of simplicity. 

Ionic Charge Compensation 

2BaBa

×  + 2TiTi 

× + 6OO

→     2BaBa

×  + 3VTi

′′′′ + 6VO

•• + 3TiS

× + 3O2 (g) 

× BaTiO3

Electronic Charge Compensation 

BaBa

×  + TiTi 

× + 3OO

→     BaBa

×  + TiTi 

× + 3VO

•• + 6𝑒′ + 1½O2 (g) 

× BaTiO3

Redox-Ionic Charge Compensation 

2BaBa

×  + 2TiTi 

× + 6OO

→      2BaBa

×  + 2TiTi

′  + VO

•• + 5OO

×  + ½O2 (g) 

× BaTiO3

Redox-Electronic Charge Compensation 

BaBa

×  + TiTi 

× + 3OO

→      BaBa

×  + TiTi

×  
′ + ℎ• + 3OO

× BaTiO3

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

••, Equation 4 is anomalous in that reduction to form  VO

•• is 
In terms of the formation of  VO
absent  but  its  presence  would  negate  the  necessity  of  charge  compensation  by ℎ• .    These 
potential  defect  equilibria  demonstrate  that  neither  ionic  (Equation  1)  nor  electronic 
(Equation 2) charge compensation are possible because there is no Ti reduction.  In contrast, 
both of the redox mechanisms are feasible because they include Ti reduction.  That is, redox-
′ )  charge  compensation  and  redox-
ionic  (Equation  3)  combines  ionic  (VO
′ ) charge compensation. 
electronic (Equation 4) combines electronic (ℎ•) and redox (TiTi

••)  and  redox  (TiTi

The formation of oxygen vacancies is unambiguous as this is supported by the XRD, HAADF-
STEM, BET, EPR, XPS, EELS, ARXPS, and PL data.  Since electronic charge compensation 
does not involve oxygen vacancy formation, then the mechanism of charge compensation is 
redox-ionic (Equation 3).  Thus, the representative defect equilibria representing the remaining 
reductions from Ti4+ in BTO to Ti2+ and Ti0 are: 

Redox-Ionic Charge Compensation 

Ti2+: 

Ti0: 

BaBa

×  + TiTi 

× + 3OO

→      BaBa

×  + TiTi

′′  + VO

•• + 2OO

×  + ½O2 (g) 

× BaTiO3

BaBa

×  + TiTi 

× + 3OO

→      BaBa

×  + TiTi

′′′′ + 2VO

•• + OO

×  + O2 (g) 

× BaTiO3

Redox-Electronic Charge Compensation 

Ti2+: 

BaBa

×  + TiTi 

× + 3OO

→     BaBa 

× + TiTi

′′  + 2h• + 3OO
×  

× BaTiO3

(14) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ti0: 

BaBa

×  + TiTi 

× + 3OO

→     BaBa

×  + TiTi

′′′′ + 4h• + 3OO
×  

× BaTiO3

(8) 

In  order  to  investigate  the  effects  of  the  atmosphere  on  the  corresponding  electronic  band 
structures, XPS was used to determine each gap between valence band (VB) and the Fermi 
level (Ef), UV-Vis spectrophotometry was used to determine the optical indirect band gap (Eg), 
and amplitude-modulated Kelvin probe force microscopy (AM-KPFM) was used to determine 
the work function (ɸ).  Figure 4(b) illustrates the topography of the necessary BTO-H drop-
cast film, which generated a contact potential difference (VCPD) shown in Figure 4(c).  The 
value of 107 mV is significantly higher than that of the other samples (Figure S6), indicating 
enhanced adsorption of the free charges (i.e., piezoelectric potential), which were formed from 
the  external  strain,  on  the  polar  surface  of  the  nanoparticles  [25].    The  resultant  improved 
piezoelectric potential facilitates efficient surface reactions. 

The CPD is defined as  

where: 

CPD = 𝛷tip -  𝛷sample 

(9) 

=  Work function of the metallic tip 

𝛷𝑡𝑖𝑝 
𝛷𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒  =  Work function of the sample surface 

The  work  function  of  Si-coated  tips  is  calibrated  using  highly  ordered  pyrolytic  graphite 
(HOPG; 𝜑𝐻𝑂𝑃𝐺  =  4.6  ±  0.1  eV)  [64]  to  convert  the  measured  CPD  to  the  absolute  work 
function.  The absolute surface work function of the sample is calculated as follows: 

𝛷𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒   =  4.6 𝑒𝑉  +  𝐶𝑃𝐷𝐻𝑂𝑃𝐺   −  𝐶𝑃𝐷𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 

(10) 

where: 

𝐶𝑃𝐷𝐻𝑂𝑃𝐺  =  contact potential difference between the AFM tip and the HOPG reference  
𝐶𝑃𝐷𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 =  contact potential difference between the AFM tip and the sample 

Since the measured 𝐶𝑃𝐷𝐻𝑂𝑃𝐺 and 𝐶𝑃𝐷𝐵𝑇𝑂−𝐻 were measured by 123 mV (Figure S6) and 107 
mV (Figure 4(b)), respectively, then the work function for BTO-H is calculated as 4.533 eV 
[64].  The UV-Vis spectra for the optical indirect band gap calculation of BTO-H are shown in 
Figure 4(d).  The Kubelka-Munk method [65] was used to calculate the optical indirect band 
gap of 2.96 eV using the Equation 11: 

(F(R∞)hv) = A(hv - Eg)2 

(11) 

Where: 

𝑅∞  =  Relative diffuse reflectance  
h  =  Planck’s constant  
𝑣  =  Frequency  
A  =  Constant  
Eg  =  Optical indirect band gap 

(15) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The XPS plot for the valence band edge (EVB) of BTO-H of 2.00 eV is shown in Figure 4(e). 

The preceding data for the Eg, EVB, and VCPD for BTO-O, BTO-N, and BTO-A are shown in 
Figure S6. 

On the basis of these data,  the energy band levels were calculated, a schematic of which is 
shown in Figure 4(f).  The key outcomes of these data are that, for the increasing reduction 
from BTO-O to BTO-H, the Eg decreased from 3.13 eV to 2.96 eV and the Ef rose from 0.34 
eV to 0.05 eV, which is in very close proximity to the H2/H2O redox potential (0.00 eV) for 
••), 
HER.  The former (Eg) is attributed to the abundant defect concentrations (Ti3+, Ti2+, Ti0, VO
which are midgap states, that also act as catalytically active sites.  When these midgap states 
are close to the CB (n-type) or close to the VB (p-type), they represent shallow energy levels, 
thus  effectively  reducing  the  Eg  and  enhancing  charge  carrier  separation  by  promoting  the 
diffusion of charge carriers to the surface [63].  The latter (Ef) is attributed to the effect of F 
centers.  It is known that the Ef can be raised significantly by F centers, even to an energy above 
that of the conduction band minimum (CBM) [54].  Consequently, the electrons are trapped 
near the CBM and so they are conducting and have high mobilities.  In effect, the proximity of 
the increased Ef to the redox potential of HER in the defective BTO indicates that the band 
levels are consistent with effective water splitting. 

First-principles  calculations  based  on  density  functional  theory  (DFT)  simulations  were 
undertaken in order to assess the effects of ultrasound vibration on the energy band gap and 
band alignments of BTO.  Periodic compressive and tensile strains associated resulting from 
ultrasound vibrations were simulated statically using negative and positive uniaxial strains, η, 
applied  along  the  polar  axis  of  tetragonal  BTO  (see  Supplementary  Information,  DFT 
Simulations).    The  maximal  strain  amplitude  considered  in  the  DFT  simulations  was  4%.  
Although  this  value  is  likely  to  be  larger  than  experimentally  achieved  with  ultrasound,  it 
allowed  unambiguous  determination  of  the  photocatalytic  trends  induced  by  uniaxial  strain 
applied to BTO. 

Figure 5(a) shows the calculated η (strain) dependence of Eg.  In the absence of strain, the 
computed value of 2.99 eV is in good agreement with present experimental measurement of 
3.12  eV.    It  can  be  seen  that  Eg  is  only  slightly  increased  under  tension  but  it  is  reduced 
significantly under compression.  This is interpreted in terms of the effect of direction on the 
tetragonality, where tension maintains the structure while compression shifts it toward pseudo-
cubic.  Figure 5(b) shows the CB and VB variations estimated for a point located at the center 
of the simulated BTO slab (see Supplementary Information, DFT Simulations) expressed 
as a function of uniaxial strain.  Under tensile strain (η > 0), both the CB and VB levels shift 
linearly toward lower potentials in a similar manner.  These data suggest the presence of an 
internal  electric  field,  Eint,  which  increases  with  η  owing  to  an  increasing  accumulation  of 
charges  at  the  opposite  surfaces.    The  accumulation  of  opposite  charges  derives  from  the 
piezoelectric effect (i.e., Eint = Q/A𝜀, where Q = polarization and piezoelectric surface charge, 
A = surface area, 𝜀 = dielectric  constant) and this produces significant band bending.  Under 
compressive strain (η < 0), the band bending mechanisms are same as under tension except that 
the potential shifts are of opposite direction (i.e., the CB and VB levels shift towards higher 
potentials).    However,  the  Eg  reduction  shown  in  Figure  5(a)  for  η  <  0  reveals  differential 
trends in the CB, where the ascending variation is consistent with electrostatic effect of the 
internal electric field and the descending variation is consistent with the electronic effect of the 
Eg.   Thus,  under  both  compression  and  tension,  the  CB  approaches  the  HER  potential.    In 
contrast,  under  compression,  the  VB  approaches  the  OER  potential  but,  under  tension,  it 

(16) 

 
 
 
 
deviates  away  from  the  OER.    However,  the  slope  under  tension  is  greater  than  that  under 
compression, which is an important distinction as the sum of the two strain conditions during 
amplitude switching must be considered.  These differential η-induced variations in the CB and 
VB potentials are consistent with overall enhancement of the HER by the CB trends, where 
both strain states cause approaches to the HER potential, and overall hindrance of the OER by 
the  VB  trends,  where  the  greater  slope  under  tension  dominates  the  lower  slope  under 
compression. 

Figure 5.  DFT calculated band structure characteristics of defective BTO nanoparticles:  
(a) Band gap change (ordinate scale range = 0.3 eV), (b) Band alignment change (ordinate scale 
range = 4.0 eV); external uniaxial strain range –2% (compressive, delta c < 0) to +2% (tensile, 
delta c > 0); strain level is commensurate with probable maximal lattice distortion imposed by 
ultrasound agitation. 

The local piezoelectric properties of defective BTO were characterized by piezoresponse force 
microscopy (PFM) working in dual AC resonance tracking mode (DART) in order to minimize 
cross-signalling between the topography, PFM amplitude, and phase.  The nanoparticles were 
deposited  on  indium  tin  oxide  (ITO)-coated  glass  substrates  by  drop-casting.    Topography, 
amplitude, and phase image of the defective BTO-H are shown in Figures 6(a-c), respectively.  
A nanoparticle with diameter size of approximately 40 nm can be observed with strong PFM 
amplitude and phase contrast, which is consistent with the results in Figure 1(e) and Figure 
S1(c).  The dark contrast in the BTO-H phase image unambiguously indicates a polarization-
down state prior to exposure to a strong DC electric field, which is consistent with the observed 
positive voltage offset shown in Figure 6(a).  The PFM amplitude-voltage butterfly curve and 
phase-voltage hysteresis loop of a typical BTO-H nanoparticle are shown in Figure 6(d).  The 
strong  ferroelectric  characteristics  of  the  BTO-H  are  indicated  by  the  nearly  180o  phase 
switching, and the unambiguous piezoresponse is evidenced by the classical PFM amplitude 
butterfly loop [66].  The asymmetric loops, which have a voltage offset of ~2 V, suggest the 
presence of significant self-polarization [67].  This often originates from a stress gradient or an 
internal bias field owing to the nonuniform distribution of oxygen vacancies [68].  Figures 6(d) 
and S7 reveal that all four samples exhibit such asymmetries and offsets in the PFM butterfly 
loops  but  they  are  more  pronounced  in  BTO-H  while  those  of  the  other  three  samples  are 
similar.  These results are consistent with and hence are mutually confirmatory of the data in 
Figures S2, 2(b,c), and 3(a). 

(17) 

 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  PFM results of defective BTO-H nanoparticles:  (a) Topography, (b) Amplitude 
and (c) Phase images of a BTO-H nanoparticle, (d) Amplitude-voltage butterfly and phase-
voltage hysteresis loops. 

Figure 7(a) shows the extent of RhB photodegradation, where the degradation increases with 
increasing  irradiation  time  and  that  all  catalysts  show  photoactivity  under  UV  light.    These 
curves can be fit to the generally observed pseudo-first-order kinetics, which are described by 
Equation 12 [69]: 

ln (

C
C0

) =  -kt 

(12) 

where: 

𝑐0  =  Initial concentration of RhB solution 
𝑐  =  Final concentration of RhB solution 
𝑘  =  Rate constant 
𝑡  =  Time 

The catalytic performance with UV irradiation only is in the order BTO-O < BTO-N < BTO-
A < BTO-H and the extent of catalytic degradation for BTO-H was ~99% in 60 mins. 

(18) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  7.    Performance  of  defective  BTO  nanoparticles  following  10  min  sonication:    (a) 
Photo-degradation of RhB as a function of time, (b) Piezo-degradation of RhB as a function of 
time,  (c)  Piezo-photo-degradation  of  RhB  as  a  function  of  time,  (d)  Extent  of  piezo-photo-
degradation of RhB solution after UV irradiation for  30 min, BTO-H:   (e) Extent of piezo-
Piezo-photo-degradation of RhB, MB, and MO solutions after UV irradiation for 30 min, (f) 
Piezo-photodegradation  efficiency  of  RhB  solution  with  different  quenchers  after  UV 
irradiation  for  30  min  (IPA  =  isopropyl  alcohol,  BQ  =  P-benzoquinone,  TEOA  = 
triethanolamine),  (g)  Reusability  testing  after  piezo-photo-degradation  for  four  cycles  (30 
min/cycle), (h) Conceptual energy band diagram for charge separation and transfer in BTO-H 
under irradiation and sonication 

Figure 7(b) reveals that the extents of RhB degradation with only sonication (40 kHz, 100 W) 
exhibit  a  consistent  trend  with  photodegradation,  although  a  maximum  of  only  ~55% 
degradation ratio occurs for BTO-H in 60 min.  Figure 7(c) reveals that the extents of RhB 
degradation with both UV irradiation and sonication (40 kHz, 100W) exhibit differential trends, 
where  the  degradation  of  BTO-H  reached  >99%  in  30  min  but  the  less  defective  samples 
reached a maximum of only ~61%.  However, all four of these performances are superior to 
those of UV irradiation or sonication alone.  Figure 7(d) emphasizes that the RhB degradation 
at the fixed time point of 30 min is considerably superior for BTO-H.  There are many materials 

(19) 

 
 
factors that may affect these data, including phase assemblage, impurities (viz., heterojunction 
formation), crystallinity, crystallite size, electronic band alignment, recombination time, BET 
••], and blockage of active sites [70].  Accordingly, the present work suggests 
surface area, [VO
that the catalytic performance (dye degradation and related water splitting) is associated with 
the following: 

•  The reduced Eg and shift in Ef, which are caused by increased defect concentrations (Ti3+, 
•• )  and  optimized  by  H2  reduction,  result  in  band  alignment  that  establishes 

Ti2+,  Ti0, VO
conditions favorable for dye degradation and related water splitting. 

•  The shallow energy level established by the high Ef and associated lowering of the CBM 
enhances charge carrier separation by promoting the diffusion of electrons to the surface, 
thereby reducing recombination with holes and facilitating higher carrier concentrations and 
efficient charge transfer across the grain surface. 
•  The increased BET surface area and associated [VO

••] are optimized by H2 reduction, thereby 
providing  more  active  sites  for  catalytic  reaction,  although  there  may  be  mitigation  by 
blockage of active sites by species dissolved in the water. 

•  The  application  of  mechanical  vibration  leads  to  displacement  of  charges  (and  possibly 
adsorbed  species),  thereby  inducing  the  piezoelectric  potential  that  facilitates  surface 
reactions. 

•  The sonication and resultant external stress induce the reduced band gap and band bending 
that shifts the conduction band closer to the HER band potential and the valence band further 
away from the OER band potential, thus enabling the former to increase H2 generation from 
water splitting and allowing the latter to decrease O2 generation. 

Figure 7(e) reveals that equivalent testing using MB and MO dyes also showed substantial 
extents of degradation within the same time frame of 30 min.  These dyes were selected for 
comparative  testing  owing  to  differences  in  the  wavelengths  of  maximal  visible  light 
absorption relative to that of RhB.  That is, RhB absorbs maximally in the green range at 554 
nm while MB absorbs most strongly in the red range at 664 nm and MO absorbs most strongly 
in  the  blue range at  464 nm [70].   These  data suggest that absorption may  not  be a serious 
limitation to the decomposition of a wide spectrum of organic contaminants of water purified 
by piezo-photocatalysis.  Figure 7(f) shows the roles of different ROS in the mechanisms of 
RhB  degradation  during  piezo-photocatalysis,  as  revealed  by  the  effects  of  the  scavengers 
triethanolamine (TEOA), P-benzoquinone (BQ), and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) [71].  These three 
⎼ ),  and  the 
scavengers  are  known  to  quench  active  holes  (h+),  the  superoxide  radical  (•O2
hydroxyl radical (•OH), respectively.  These data show that the order of effectiveness of these 
⎼ and •OH 
ROS in piezo-photodegradation is TEOA < BQ < IPA.  These results indicate that •O2
are the principal ROS that contribute to the degradation of RhB.  Figure 7(g) shows the stability 
and  recyclability  data  for  BTO-H  in  terms  of  four-cycle  testing  and  the  reduction  in  the 
degradation extent.  The good cycling stability during piezo-photodegradation is similar to that 
of other studies on BTO done using both piezocatalysis [41,72] and piezo-photocatalysis [7,25].  
Thus, the imposition of a high defect density did not destabilize the material to the point of 
making it susceptible to leaching. 

Figure  7(h)  illustrates  a schematic of  the energy band diagram for the  piezo-photocatalytic 
degradation of organic phases using defective BTO subjected to vibration and irradiation.  The 
⎼ and •OH) and associated electron-hole separation confirm that the 
generation of the ROS (•O2
catalytic performance is enhanced through the combination of the five factors described above.  
Photocatalysis  reactions  are  initiated  by  excitation  from  radiation  energy  (hυ)  equal  to  or 
greater than the Eg.  As a result, photogenerated electrons (e–) are promoted from the VB to the 

(20) 

 
 
CB, leaving a hole (h+) in the VB.  However, the application of ultrasonic stress can enhance 
the rapid generation of electrons further owing to two mechanisms [73].  First, electrons are 
generated from the high pressures (~102 MPa) caused by the collapse of ultrasound-induced 
cavitation bubbles in the solution.  These pressures are sufficient to generate localized external 
temperatures as high as ~5000°C on the grain surface, thereby readily exciting free electrons 
at the catalyst-water interface.  Second, electrons are generated in the bulk owing to the general 
internal thermal excitation induced by vibration. 

The effectiveness of the electrons can be heightened by the strong piezoelectric effect of the 
BTO,  which  establishes  an  internal  electrical  field  that  facilitates  the  migration  of  excited 
electrons  and  holes  to  opposite  surfaces,  thereby  establishing  a  surface  potential  that 
encourages the adsorption of dissociated ions, such as H+ and OH–, which can facilitate both 
ROS production and the water splitting [73].  Further, the accumulation of piezoelectrically-
induced charges on the opposite material surfaces alters the density of states, thus resulting in 
bending of the surface band edges and establishing favorable band edges for the degradation 
of  organic  phases  and  water  splitting.    In  particular,  under  a  static  deformation,  the 
piezopotential drives the opposing mobile charges to continually accumulate on the two polar 
side to  create a  depolarization field which  counters the  piezoelectric polarization effect and 
thus screen band bending [73].  Therefore, an alternating lattice strain is required, such as that 
produced  by  ultrasound,  as  the  accompanied  variation  in  the  piezoelectric  field  enables  the 
internal  mobile  charges  to  be  in  a  metastable  state  rather  than  accumulating  in  an  oriented 
manner,  thereby  preventing  the  band  bending  screen.    While  these  concepts  are  relevant  to 
stoichiometric  BTO,  the  presence  of  oxygen  vacancies  in  defective  BTO  further  enhances 
catalysis  through  both  adsorption  of  O2  and  capture  of  free  electrons,  which  promoted  the 
•• play a 
activation of O2 to •O2
••] in 
critical role in enhancing the preceding processes.  Wang et al. [24] investigated the [VO
••] could efficiently adsorb and active O2 on the surface of 
BTO and shows that increasing [VO
BTO and consequently enhance piezocatalytic activity, which is consistent with present work.  
••] in Na0.5Bi0.5TiO3 by both experiment and simulation, showing 
Liu et al. [74] regulated the [VO
••] provides more free surface charges and facilitates charge transfer, thereby 
that increasing [VO
⎼ 
••] also promotes the adsorption of •O2
improving the piezocatalytic activity.  The increasing [VO
and •OH and also activates the O-O bond and O-H bond to generate more ROS.  Li et al. [75] 
examined  the  piezo-photocatalytic  performance  of  AgNbO3  and  demonstrated  the  principal 
•• in domain switching, facilitating 
positive effect of VO
••]  also  was  observed  to  narrow  the  Eg, 
the  inversion  at  lower  electric  fields.    Increasing  [VO
improve  optical absorbance, and, most  importantly,  promote the separation of  electron-hole 
pairs under an external electric field. 

⎼.  The present work and that of others [24,74,75] shows that VO

••.  This was attributed to the role of VO

The H2 evolution rates by piezocatalytic and piezo-photocatalytic activation of BTO also were 
investigated in the absence of sacrificial agent or co-catalyst.  These data, which are for DI 
water and, for the first time, simulated and natural seawater, are shown in Figures 8(a) and (b).  
These data, which are for piezocatalysis for 2 h followed by piezo-photocatalysis for 3 h, reveal 
that the rates follow the order:  BTO-O < BTO-N < BTO-A < BTO-H.  This trend is consistent 
with the dye degradation data in Figures 7(a-d), again confirming the key role of the increasing 
••) and maximization by H2 reduction.  These data show 
defect concentrations (Ti3+, Ti2+, Ti0, VO
that the H2 evolution rates exhibit approximately linear trends, demonstrating that, at least over 
the time frame of 5 h, the H2 production is constant, with a maximal rate of 100.7 µmol/g/h 
(BTO-H),  which  is  comparable  to  the  rates  reported  by  You  et  al.  [29]  for  BiFeO3 
(124.1 μmol/g/h) and Su et al. [25] for BaTiO3 (159 µmol/g/h). 

(21) 

 
 
 
Figure  8.    Effects  of  test  conditions  on  H2  evolution  by  defective  BTO:    (a)    Data  for 
deionized  water,  (b)  Rates  for  deionized  water,  (c)  Data  for  different  waters,  (d)  Rates  for 
different  waters,  (e)  Data  for  different  activation  methods,  (f)  Rates  for  different  activation 
methods,  (g)  Data  for  different  piezocatalysis  power  levels,  (h)  Rates  for  different 
piezocatalysis power levels 
Figures 8(c) and (d) show the effect of water type (DI water, simulated seawater and natural 
seawater)  for  BTO-H,  revealing  again  that  the  trends  of  the  H2  evolution  rates  were  linear.  

(22) 

 
However, the rate from DI water was significantly greater than those of the seawaters.  These 
data are consistent with the effects of the number of types and concentrations of dissolved ions.  
Whereas simulated seawater contains only dissolved NaCl at a standard concentration of 3.5 
wt%  (plus  K  contaminants),  the  natural  seawater  acquired  from  Coogee  Beach,  Sydney, 
Australia  was  of  similar  salinity  but  with  greater  contamination  level 1 .    It  also  contains 
suspended solids as well as dissolved inorganic and organic carbon.  These data are given in 
Table 1, which provides the relevant concentrations before and after piezo-photo-catalytic H2 
evolution.  In light of Na adsorption and retention on the nanoparticles, these data suggest that 
NaCl  is  the  main  factor  behind  these  differences,  where  Na+  would  cause  electron  (e-) 
scavenging and Cl- would cause hole (h+) scavenging.  The difference between simulated and 
natural seawater is attributed to the greater concentrations of K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, and SO4
2- [10,21].  
Ji et al. [17] showed that Mg2+ can reduce significantly the H2 evolution.  These findings were 
supported  by  those  of  Li  et  al.  [76],  who  showed  that  the  chelation  of  Mg2+  blocks  the 
separation of photogenerated electron-hole excitons and induce charge redistribution, thereby 
negatively impacting on the photocatalytic performance.  Ji  et al. [17] also showed that the 
presence of sulfite and sulfide ions, which act as sacrificial agents, reduce the H2 evolution as 
these ions can cause charge imbalance and resultant irregular ROS generation in the solution, 
thereby  impeding  their  function  as  sacrificial  agents  by  forming  precipitates  [17].    Another 
factor is the blockage of surface active sites by these ions as well as by suspended and dissolved 
species  [10,21].    Solids  suspended  in  seawater  decrease  light  absorption  by  scattering  and 
dissolved species may alter the refractive index and so increase reflection.  These effects also 
can provide the energy to trigger biochemical reactions that can reduce the H2 production as 
well [77]. 

Table 1 also shows that the dissolution of NaCl shifted the pH from slightly basic to notably 
acidic, which might result from the formation of carbonic acid [77].  Table 1 also shows that 
H2 evolution resulted in consistent increases in the pH for all three types of water.  The resultant 
decreases in [H+] would be likely to assist H2 evolution owing to LeChatelier’s principle [78], 
where the chemical gradient would enhance H+ dissolution. 

Table 1 also reveals that [Na] is less than [Cl], although they should be the same.  This apparent 
anomaly  was  examined  by  multiple  washing  and  XPS  analysis  of  the  adsorbates  on  the 
nanoparticles.  These data are given in Table 2 and they reveal that [Na] is consistently greater 
than [Cl], which is the converse for the data for the corresponding solutions.  Consequently, it 
is clear that Na is retained more readily as an adsorbate while the Cl is more readily removed 
by washing, which explains these two sets of oppositely differential data.  This suggests that, 
if blockage of surface active sites is relevant, then the reduction in H2 evolution is a result of 
the effect of Na+ rather than Cl-.  This is consistent with the zeta potential of BaTiO3, which is 
negative  at  almost  all  pH  values  [79].    These  results  suggest  that  the  process,  kinetics,  and 
economics  of  seawater  splitting  can  be  manipulated  through  dilution,  thereby  reducing  the 
effects of the dissolved species (and suspended solids), and the pH control, thereby increasing 
the H+ solubility. 

1 Assessment of the salinity by [Na] is misleading owing to XPS data showing enhanced Na concentration on the 
surfaces of the separated nanoparticles.  Assessment of the salinity by [Cl] should accommodate the assumption 
of the dissolution of K, Mg, and Ca chlorides, which results in [Cl] values within ~2% for simulated and natural 
seawaters. 

(23) 

 
 
 
 
Table 1.  Summary of pH and ICP-OES elemental analyses of different waters before and after piezo-photo-catalytic H2 evolution 

Water Type 

Before or After 
HER 

pH 

Na 
mg/L 
(ppm) 

Cl 
mg/L 
(ppm) 

K 
mg/L 
(ppm) 

Mg 
mg/L 
(ppm) 

Ca 
mg/L 
(ppm) 

S 
mg/L 
(ppm) 

C 
mg/L 
(ppm) 

Deionized Water 

7.44 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

Simulated Seawater 

Before 

5.30 

11,021 

15,916 

7.00 

0.10 

0.79 

0.05 

0.00 

Natural Seawater 

5.84 

11,187 

18,900 

396.80 

1,496.00 

441.00 

925.00 

24.27 

Deionized Water 

8.38 

0.26 

0.16 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

Simulated Seawater 

After 

6.04 

11,084 

19,958 

10.10 

0.08 

0.47 

0.86 

5.55 

Natural Seawater 

6.20 

11,532 

23,159 

399.30 

1,493.00 

433.00 

925.99 

25.77 

(24) 

Table  2.    Summary  of  XPS  elemental  analyses  of  different  powders  after  piezo-photocatalytic 
HER in simulated seawater or natural seawater 

Seawater 

Washing 

Ba (at%) 

Ti (at%) 

Na (at%) 

Cl (at%) 

Simulated 

Natural 

10 mins 
(15 mL) 

40 mins 
(40 mL) 

10 mins 
(15 mL) 

40 mins 
(40 mL) 

10.82 

12.66 

41.53 

34.98 

  9.31 

10.09 

51.29 

29.30 

31.04 

16.99 

41.18 

10.78 

28.61 

39.21 

19.16 

13.01 

Figures  8(e)  and  (f)  show  the  effects  of  the  activation  methods  for  BTO-H,  revealing  the 
following features about the linear H2 evolution rates: 

•  Photocatalysis of BTO is inactive, which is attributed to the very rapid rate of electron-hole 

recombination observed in this material [80]. 

•  Piezocatalysis of BTO is effective, giving H2 evolution rates comparable to those of other 
BTO samples [7,25] and other materials, including BiFeO3 [29], ZnS [81], MoS2 [82], etc.  
This is attributed to the following factors: 

(1)  The  electrons  generated  from  high  pressures  caused  by  the  collapse  of  ultrasound-
induced cavitation bubbles generate localized extremely high temperatures on the grain 
surface and so excite free charges to diffuse to the surface. 

(2)  The electrons generated in the bulk from vibration-induced thermal excitation are given 

sufficient energy to bridge the Eg. 

(3)  The  vibration-induced  lowering  of  the  Eg  from  the  ultrasound  also  facilitates  the 

capacity of the electrons to bridge the Eg. 

(4)  The high electron densities and rapid transfer rates deriving from (2) and (3) result in 

low electron-hole recombination rates. 

(5)  The electron accumulation deriving from (2) and (3) establish the band bending that 

facilitates the HER while suppressing the OER, as discussed subsequently. 

•  Piezo-photocatalysis is more effective giving an H2 evolution rate ~37% greater than that of 
piezocatalysis alone.  This is attributed to the high electron densities, rapid transfer rates, 
and resultant low electron-hole recombination rates in (4), which overcome the hindrance 
to  photocatalysis  in  (1).    Consequently,  piezocatalysis  and  photocatalysis  provide 
synergistic effects in piezo-photocatalysis. 

Figure S8, which reports the O2/N2 molar ratio, provides indicative data for the effects of the 
activation methods on the OER.  These data are tentative owing to the limited accuracy of O2 
volume measurement.  Since the OER data in Figure S8 are consistent with the HER data in 
Figures 8(e) and (f), then this supports the conclusion that the OER data are relatively reliable.  

(25) 

 
 
 
 
Also, the enhancement of the HER in Figures 8(e) and (f) and the suppression of the OER in 
Figure S8 are supported by the band bending indicated in the DFT simulations in Figure 5(b).  
However,  since  OER  occurred  with  piezo-photocatalysis,  then  this  indicates  that  the  band 
bending is relatively small.  However, the HER can remain effective owing to the proximity of 
the Ef to the CB. 

Figures 8(g) and (h) show the effects of ultrasound power alone on the H2 evolution rates for 
BTO-H, which are linear.  These data reveal a logarithmic trend for latter as a function of the 
former.  The governing relation between the power, which is a reflection of the external stress, 
and the HER, which is a reflection of the piezoelectric charge, is given by Equation 13 [29], 
which is linear: 

Q = d·σ 

(13) 

where: 

Q  =  Piezoelectric charge per unit area 
d  =  Piezoelectric coefficient 
σ  =  External stress 

The logarithmic trend of the data in  Figure  8(h) is likely to reflect the effectiveness of the 
power level in deagglomeration, thereby exposing more surface active sites for piezocatalysis, 
where 280 W was less effective than the two higher power levels, which exhibited similar H2 
evolution rates. 

Figure 9 applies the preceding body of data to conceptualize the photocatalytic, piezocatalytic, 
and photo-piezocatalytic H2 evolution reaction mechanisms: 

•  Photocatalysis:  With defective BTO under visible light irradiation, electrons bridge the Eg 
and  reach  the  CB,  thus  forming  corresponding  holes  in  the  VB.    However,  these  charge 
carriers rapidly recombine, thereby preventing HER and OER. 

•  Piezocatalysis:  Defective BTO subjected to ultrasound alone benefits from the mechanical 
force directly excites the electrons to bridge the Eg owing to electron generation from bubble 
cavitation and thermal excitation, lowering of the Eg from vibration, resultant high electron 
densities and rapid transfer rates, and significant band bending.  The net electric field from 
the sum of the self-polarization and the stress-induced polarization, selectively attracts the 
electrons and holes, both of which accumulate and thus lead to band bending.  Ultimately, 
this band bending facilitates the HER while suppressing the OER.  In the absence of OER, 
change balance is maintained by the retention of OH– ions from the splitting of H2O, which 
raises the pH.  Simultaneously, the tendency for the unstable surface Ti2+ and Ti3+ ions to 
oxidize is suppressed by the high electron densities. 

•  Piezo-photocatalysis:  Defective BTO subjected to visible light irradiation and ultrasound 
together experiences benefits similar to those of piezocatalysis except that the process is 
enhanced  through  the  contribution  of  photocatalysis.    The  inactivity  of  BTO  to 
photocatalysis  is  overcome  by  the  high  electron  densities,  rapid  transfer  rates,  and  low 
electron-hole  recombination  rates  established  by  piezocatalysis.    However,  the  charge 
carrier densities are reduced as some of these are utilized in the photocatalysis.  In this case, 
the extent of band bending is reduced, as evidenced by the occurrence of OER with piezo-
photocatalysis.  Fewer OH– ions are produced as some of the H2O is utilized in the OER, so 
the pH would be expected to increase less. 

(26) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  9.    Schematic  illustrations  of  band  bending  of  defective  BTO-H  nanoparticles  as  a 
function of activation method 

3.  Summary and Conclusions 

In present work, cubic BTO was converted to defective BTO nanoparticles by heat-treatment 
under O2, N2, Ar, or H2 at 800°C for 12 h in order to vary the extent of reduction.  The effect 
of  reduction  on  the  crystallography was  examined  by  XRD,  Raman,  SEM-EDS,  and  TEM-
SAED.    These  data  revealed  that  reduction  caused  the  partial  conversion  of  cubic  BTO  to 
tetragonal.    TEM,  SEM  and  laser  diffraction  data  revealed  monodisperse  cuboidal 
morphologies  of  typically  30-60  nm  size  after  deagglomeration  by  30  min  sonication.    The 
images,  which  showed 
crystallographic  data  were  confirmed  by  HAADF-STEM 
inhomogeneously  distributed  darker  domains  of  lower  true  density  that  corresponded  to 
tetragonal BTO.  This expanded structure was stabilized by the expansion resulting from the 
Ti4+ → Ti3+→ Ti2+ multiple reductions, which were charge-compensated by oxygen vacancy 
formation.  These valence changes were confirmed by EPR, XPS, TEM-EELS and ARXPS 
data.  The oxygen vacancy concentrations were determined by XPS and these correlated solely 
with the extent of BET surface area. 

The trends in the TEM-EELS and ARXPS data indicate the expected observation of increasing 
reduction  with  increasing  depth.    The  quantitative  ARXPS  data  suggest  that  the  Ti  valence 
concentration  gradient  across  the  surface  layer  (~1  nm)  is  linear;  the  linearity  of  the  Ti4+ 
concentration  suggests  with  less  certainty  a  similarly  linear  trend  in  the  Ti  valence 
concentration across the subsurface layer (~1 nm).  Critically, these data show for the first time 
that there is a discrete and identifiable interface between the surface and subsurface, which is 
revealed by the inflection in the Ti(4-x)+ concentration gradients.  Further, the extrapolation of 
the  ARXPS  data  to  0°  allows  the  identification  of  the  relative  proportions  of  the  three  Ti 
valences at the absolute surface. 

The EPR, XPS, TEM-EELS, and ARXPS reveal information about the presence of different 
ionic  defects.    However,  the  PL  data  suggest  that  it is  possible  to  differentiate  between  the 
presence of ionic defects and electronic defects.  The latter are associated with all three color 
centers deriving from oxygen vacancies (F0, F+, F++).  These combined data represent a starting 

(27) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
point to propose the relevant defect equilibria, which confirm the natures of the defects and 
their mechanisms of charge compensation, which is redox-ionic, thereby correlating with the 
observation of reduced Ti valences and charge-compensating oxygen vacancy formation. 

The  full  electronic  band  structures  were  determined  on  the  basis  of  XPS-VB,  UV-Vis 
Reflectance,  and  AM-KPFM  data.    These  data  revealed  that  the  significant  H2  reduction 
resulted in a partly decrease in the Eg and a shift in the Ef to nearly the HER potential.  The 
changes in these two parameters strongly suggest that H2 reduction of BTO facilitates the HER 
and hence the possibility of splitting water more effectively.  The DFT simulations suggest the 
effects of ultrasound on the electronic band structure, where the cyclic amplitude switching of 
the ultrasound results in cyclic compressive-tensile strains.  However, the effects of these on 
the potential change are differential.  Compression significantly lowers the Eg while tension 
slightly increases it.  The CB is shifted toward the HER under both compression and tension 
while the different trends in the VB shifts under compression and tension result in an overall 
shift away from the OER from the associated band bending.  Consequently, this band bending, 
which is caused by the self-polarization of the BTO, can facilitate the splitting of water using 
ultrasound.  The directions of band bending are consistent with more efficient generation of 
hydrogen  while  suppressing  the  generation  of  oxygen.    The  PFM  data  confirm  the  strong 
piezoelectric performance as well as significant self-polarization, which derives from the high 
oxygen vacancy concentration deriving from the H2 reduction. 

The  degradation  of  multiple  dyes  and  the  application  of  photocatalysis,  piezocatalysis  and 
piezo-photocatalysis revealed that H2 reduction of BTO facilitated effective RhB degradation 
of 99% in 30 min.  More importantly, this highly defective BTO exhibited a null results with 
photocatalysis but a very efficient H2 evolution rate of 96.9 μmol/g/h with piezocatalysis and 
a highly efficient H2 evolution rate of 132.4 μmol/g/h with piezo-photocatalysis.  These data 
demonstrate that, although photocatalytic water splitting alone had no effect, in combination 
with  ultrasound,  it  contributed  to  the  overall  effect.    This  was  attributed  principally  to  the 
electrons  generated  from  high  pressures  resulting  from  the  collapse  of  ultrasound-induced 
cavitation bubbles.  The high pressures generated extremely high temperatures on  localized 
regions  of  the  grain  surface,  resulting  in  high  electron  densities,  rapid  transfer  rates,  and 
resultant low electron-hole recombination rates, all of which contribute to more efficient water 
splitting. 

The comparative H2 evolution rates as a function of water type were 100.7 μmol/g/h for DI 
water, 63.4 μmol/g/h for simulated seawater, and 48.7 μmol/g/h for natural seawater.  These 
differences were attributed largely to the role of the dissolved ions in seawater through their 
effects  in  charge-carrier  scavenging,  prevention  of  charge  separation,  solution  charge 
imbalance and resultant irregular ROS generation, blockage of active sites by suspended and 
dissolved species, and/or triggered biochemical reactions.  The concentrations of these  ions 
were confirmed by ICP-OES of the solutions and XPS of the solids.  These data suggest that 
the process, kinetics, and economics of seawater splitting can be manipulated through dilution, 
thereby reducing the effects of the dissolved species (and suspended solids), and the pH control, 
thereby increasing the H+ solubility. 

The  present  work  discloses  the  initial  report  of  piezo-photocatalysis  of  seawater  splitting.  
These experimental and simulation data suggest that H2 reduction of BTO result in an energy 
band  structure  and  band  bending  facilitate  efficient  H2  generation  while  contributing  to  the 
suppression of simultaneous O2 generation.  This approach of piezo-photocatalysis represents 
a new strategy for commercial H2 production, potentially using large-scale green technologies, 

(28) 

 
 
 
 
including ultrasound vibrations deriving from wind energy and/or tidal energy (piezocatalysis) 
and sunlight (photocatalysis).  Critically, these technologies can overcome the limited supplies 
of freshwater, the necessity of its purification, and make full utilisation of abundant seawater 
and sunlight as well as geotechnical natural resources (large land masses, extensive shorelines, 
regular tidal patterns, and irregular wind patterns).  These technologies have the potential to 
provide  the  bases  for  novel  systems  aimed  at  a  net  zero  emissions  future  while  driving 
economic growth. 

Conflicts of Interest 

There are no conflicts to declare. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors acknowledge the financial and infrastructural support as follows: 

•  Tuition Fee Scholarship from UNSW Sydney and supplementary support from the China 

Scholarship Council. 

•  Electron Microscope Unit, Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre, UNSW Sydney 
•  Spanish  Ministry  of  Science,  Innovation  and  Universities  under  the  "Ramon  y  Cajal" 

fellowship RYC2018-024947-I. 

•  Microscopy  Australia  (formerly  known  as  AMMRF)  and  the  Australian  National 

Fabrication Facility (ANFF) at Flinders University 

The authors also wish to acknowledge the technical assistance of Dr. Dawei Zhang and Mr. 
Haotian Wen, School of Materials Science and Engineering, UNSW Sydney, for consultations 
and assistance with PFM and HAADF-STEM analysis. 

(29) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes and references 

[1] Chang, J., Wang, G., Yang, Z., Li, B., Wang, Q., Kuliiev, R., Orlovskaya, N., Gu, M., Du, Y., Wang, G. and 
Yang,  Y.,  Dual‐Doping  and  Synergism  toward  High‐Performance  Seawater  Electrolysis.  Adv.  Mater.,  2021, 
33(33), 2101425. 
[2] Hore-Lacy, L., Nuclear Energy in the 21st Century, 2nd Edition, World Nuclear University Press, USA, 2011 
[3] LeValley, T.L., Richard, A.R. and Fan, M. The progress in water gas shift and steam reforming hydrogen 
production technologies–A review. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 2014, 39(30), 16983-17000. 
[4] Kuang, Y, Kenney, M.J., Meng, Y., Hung, W.H., Liu, Y., Huang, J.E., Prasanna, R., Li, P., Li, Y., Wang, L., 
Lin, M.C., McGehee, M.D., Sun, X. and Dai, H., Solar-driven, highly sustained splitting of seawater into hydrogen 
and oxygen fuels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2019, 116(14), 6624-6629. 
[5]  Wang,  S.,  Lu,  A.  and  Zhong,  C.J.,  Hydrogen  production  from  water  electrolysis:  role  of  catalysts.  Nano 
Converg., 2021, 8(1), 1-23. 
[6] Chen, H.L., Lee, H.M., Chen, S.H., Chao, Y. and Chang, M.B. Review of plasma catalysis on hydrocarbon 
reforming for hydrogen production—interaction, integration, and prospects. Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2008, 85(1-
2), 1-9. 
[7] Su, R., Hsain, H.A., Wu, M., Zhang, D., Hu, X., Wang, Z., Wang, X., Li, F.T., Chen, X., Zhu, L., Yang, 
Y.,Yang, Y., Lou, X. and  Pennycook, S.J., Nano‐Ferroelectric for High Efficiency Overall Water Splitting under 
Ultrasonic Vibration. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2019, 58(42), 15076-15081. 
[8] Huang, H., Cho, A., Kim, S., Jun, H., Lee, A., Han, J.W. and Lee, J., Structural design of amorphous CoMoPx 
with abundant active sites and synergistic catalysis effect for effective water splitting. Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 
30(43), 2003889. 
[9]  Hausmann,  J.N.,  Schlögl,  R.,  Menezes,  P.W.  and  Driess,  M.,  Is  direct  seawater  splitting  economically 
meaningful? Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14(7), 3679-3685. 
[10] Krivec, M., Dillert, R., Bahnemann, D.W., Mehle, A., Štrancar, J. and Dražić, G., The nature of chlorine-
inhibition of photocatalytic degradation of dichloroacetic acid in a TiO2-based microreactor. Phys. Chem. Chem. 
Phys., 2014, 16(28), 14867-14873. 
[11] Ji, S.M., Jun, H., Jang, J.S., Son, H.C., Borse, P.H. and Lee, J.S., Photocatalytic hydrogen production from 
natural seawater. J. Photochem. Photobio. A Chem., 2007, 189(1), 141-144. 
[12] Girish, Y.R., Jaiswal, K., Prakash, P. and De, M., 2D-MoS2 photocatalyzed cross dehydrogenative coupling 
reaction synchronized with hydrogen evolution reaction. Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9(5), 1201-1207. 
[13] Simamora, A.J., Hsiung, T.L., Chang, F.C., Yang, T.C., Liao, C.Y. and Wang, H.P., Photocatalytic splitting 
of seawater and degradation of methylene blue on CuO/nano TiO2. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 2012, 37(18), 13855-
13858. 
[14] Peng, S.Q., Liu, X.Y., Ding, M. and Li, Y.X., Preparation of CdS-Pt/TiO2 Composite and the properties for 
splitting sea water into hydrogen under visible light irradiation. J. Mol. Catal., 2013, 27(5), 459e66. 
[15] Li, Q., Li, X. and Yu, J., Surface and interface modification strategies of CdS-based photocatalysts. 
Interface Sci. Technol., 2020, 31, 313-348. 
[16] Gao, M.M.; Connor, P.K.N. and Ho, G.W., Plasmonic photothermic directed broadband sunlight harnessing 
for seawater catalysis and desalination. Energy Environ. Sci. 2016, 9, 3151–3160. 
[17] Ji, S.M., Jun, H., Jang, J.S., Son, H.C., Borse, P.H. and Lee, J.S., Photocatalytic hydrogen production from 
natural seawater. J. Photochem. Photobio. A Chem., 2007, 189(1), 141-144. 
[18] Qiu, B., Zhu, Q., Xing, M. and Zhang, J., A robust and efficient catalyst of CdxZn1−xSe motivated by CoP for 
photocatalytic hydrogen evolution under sunlight irradiation. Chem. Commun., 2017, 53(5), 897-900. 
[19] Li, Y.X.; He, F.; Peng, S.Q.; Lu, G.X. and Li, S.B. Photocatalytic H2 evolution from NaCl saltwater over 
ZnS1–x–0.5yOx(OH)y-ZnO under visible light irradiation. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 2011, 36, 10565–10573. 
[20] Zhu, C., Liu, C.A., Fu, Y., Gao, J., Huang, H., Liu, Y. and Kang, Z., Construction of CDs/CdS photocatalysts 
for stable and efficient hydrogen production in water and seawater. Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2019, 242, 178-185. 
[21]  Maeda,  K.,  Masuda,  H.  and  Domen,  K.,  Effect  of  electrolyte  addition  on  activity  of  (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) 
photocatalyst for overall water splitting under visible light. Catal. Today, 2009, 147(3-4), 173-178. 
[22]  Guan,  X.,  Chowdhury,  F.A.,  Pant,  N.,  Guo,  L.,  Vayssieres,  L.  and  Mi,  Z.,  Efficient  unassisted  overall 
photocatalytic seawater splitting on GaN-based nanowire arrays. J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(25), 13797-13802. 
[23] Tu, S., Guo, Y., Zhang, Y., Hu, C., Zhang, T., Ma, T. and Huang, H., Piezocatalysis and piezo‐photocatalysis: 
catalysts  classification  and  modification  strategy,  reaction  mechanism,  and  practical  application.  Adv.  Funct. 
Mater., 2020, 30(48), 2005158. 
[24] Wang, P., Li, X., Fan, S., Chen, X., Qin, M., Long, D., Tadé, M.O. and Liu, S., Impact of oxygen vacancy 
occupancy on piezo-catalytic activity of BaTiO3 nanobelt. Appl. Catal. B: Environ., 2020, 279, 119340. 

(30) 

 
[25]. Su, R., Wang, Z., Zhu, L., Pan, Y., Zhang, D., Wen, H., Luo, Z., Li, L., Li, F., Wu, M., He, L., Sharama, P. 
and Seidel, J. Strain‐Engineered Nano‐Ferroelectrics for High‐Efficiency Piezocatalytic Overall Water Splitting. 
Angew. Chem., 2021, 133(29), 16155-16162. 
[26] Hong, K.S., Xu, H., Konishi, H. and Li, X., Direct water splitting through vibrating piezoelectric microfibers 
in water. J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1(6), 997-1002. 
[27] Hong, K. S., Xu, H., Konishi, H. and Li, X. (2012). Piezoelectrochemical effect: a new mechanism for azo 
dye  decolorization  in  aqueous  solution  through  vibrating  piezoelectric  microfibers.  J.  Phys.  Chem.  C,  2012, 
116(24), 13045-13051. 
[28] Zhang, A., Liu, Z., Xie, B., Lu, J., Guo, K., Ke, S., Shu, L. and Fan, H. Vibration catalysis of eco-friendly 
Na0.5K0.5NbO3-based  piezoelectric:  an  efficient  phase  boundary  catalyst.  Appl.  Catal.  B:  Environ.,  2020,  279, 
119353. 
[29] You, H., Wu, Z., Zhang, L., Ying, Y., Liu, Y., Fei, L., Chen, X., Jia, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, F., Ju, S., Qiao, J., 
Lam, C.H. and Huang, H., Harvesting the vibration energy of BiFeO3 nanosheets for hydrogen evolution. Angew. 
Chem., 2019, 131(34), 11905-11910. 
[30]  Zhao,  Z.,  Wei,  L.,  Li,  S.,  Zhu,  L.,  Su,  Y.,  Liu,  Y.,  Bu,  Y.,  Lin,  Y.,  Liu,  W.  and  Zhang,  Z.,  Exclusive 
enhancement  of  catalytic  activity  in  Bi0.5Na0.5TiO3  nanostructures:  new  insights  into  the  design  of  efficient 
piezocatalysts and piezo-photocatalysts. J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(32), 16238-16245. 
[31]  Zhang,  R.,  Wu,  X.,  Li,  Y.,  Shao,  W.,  Zhang,  Y.,  Liu,  Z.,  Nie,  J.,Tan,  J.  and  Ye,  W.,  Enhanced  piezo-
photocatalytic  performance  by  piezoelectric  and  visible  light  photoexcitation  coupling  through  piezoelectric 
Na0.5Bi0.5TiO3 micron crystals. RSC Adv., 2020, 10(13), 7443-7451. 
[32]. Zhu, P., Chen, Y. and Shi, J., Piezocatalytic tumor therapy by ultrasound‐triggered and BaTiO3‐mediated 
piezoelectricity. Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(29), 2001976. 
[33]  Wang,  Y.C.  and  Wu,  J.M.,  Effect  of  Controlled  Oxygen  Vacancy  on  H2 ‐ Production  through  the 
Piezocatalysis and Piezophototronics of Ferroelectric R3C ZnSnO3 Nanowires. Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(5), 
1907619. 
[34] Xiao, H., Dong, W., Zhao, Q., Wang, F. and Guo, Y., Visible/near-infrared light absorbed nano-ferroelectric 
for efficient photo-piezocatalytic water splitting and pollutants degradation. J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 416, 125808. 
[35] Zhu, D., Liu, H., Luo, H., Sun, S. and Chen, J., Tetragonal phase and enhanced depolarization temperature 
in Ba-rich (Bi, Na)TiO3–BaTiO3 lead-free piezoelectrics. Ceram. Int., 2020, 46(3), 3708-3714. 
[36] Hagemann, H.J., Loss mechanisms and domain stabilisation in doped BaTiO3. J. Phys. C, 1978, 11(15), 3333. 
[37] Wu, J., Xu, Q., Lin, E., Yuan, B., Qin, N., Thatikonda, S.K. and Bao, D. Insights into the role of ferroelectric 
polarization  in  piezocatalysis  of  nanocrystalline  BaTiO3.  ACS  Appl.  Mater.  Interfaces,  2018,  10(21),  17842-
17849. 
[38] Kim, D.H., Lee, S.J., Theerthagiri, J., Choi, M., Jung, J., Yu, Y., Im, K.S., Jung, H.J., Nam, S.Y. and Choi, 
M.Y.,  In-situ  thermal  phase  transition  and  structural  investigation  of  ferroelectric  tetragonal  barium  titanate 
nanopowders with pseudo-cubic phase. Chemosphere, 2021, 283, 131218. 
[39]  Fuentes,  S.,  Cespedes,  F.,  Munoz,  P.,  Chavez,  E.  and  Padilla-Campos,  L.,  Synthesis  and  structural 
characterization of nanocrystalline BaTiO3 at various calcination temperatures. J. Chil. Chem. Soc., 2013, 58(4), 
2077-2081. 
[40] Adireddy, S., Lin, C., Cao, B., Zhou, W. and Caruntu, G., Solution-based growth of monodisperse cube-like 
BaTiO3 colloidal nanocrystals. Chem. Mater., 2010, 22(6), 1946-1948. 
[41] Wu, J., Qin, N. and Bao, D., Effective enhancement of piezocatalytic activity of BaTiO3 nanowires under 
ultrasonic vibration. Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 44-51. 
[42] Shannon, R.D., Revised Effective Ionic Radii and Systematic Studies of Interatomic Distances in Halides 
and Chalcogenides, Acta Cryst., 1976, A32, 751-767. 
[43]  Tyunina,  M.,  Peräntie,  J.,  Kocourek,  T.,  Saukko,  S.,  Jantunen,  H.,  Jelinek,  M.  and  Dejneka,  A.,  Oxygen 
vacancy dipoles in strained epitaxial BaTiO3 films. Phys. Rev. Res., 2020, 2(2), 023056. 
[44] Wu, K., Sun, Y., Liu, J., Xiong, J., Wu, J., Zhang, J., Fu, M., Chen, L., Huang, H. and Ye, D., Nonthermal 
plasma  catalysis  for  toluene decomposition over  BaTiO3-based  catalysts  by  Ce doping  at  A-sites:  The  role  of 
surface-reactive oxygen species. J. Hazard Mater., 2021, 405, 124156. 
[45]  Baek,  K.,  Lee,  S.Y.,  Doh,  S.G.,  Kim,  M.,  and  Hyun,  J.K.,  Axial  oxygen  vacancy-regulated  microwave 
absorption in micron-sized tetragonal BaTiO3 particles. J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6(36), 9749-9755. 
[46] Lu, D., Ji, L. and Liu, J., Aging-Resistant Behavior and Room Temperature Electron Spin Resonance of Nd3+ 
in Singly and Doubly Doped BaTiO3 Ceramics Associated with Preservation History. Mater., 2019, 12(3), 451. 
[47] Savchenko, D., Vasin, A., Kuz, O., Verovsky, I., Prokhorov, A., Nazarov, A., Lančok, J. and Kalabukhova, 
E.,  Role  of  the  paramagnetic  donor-like  defects  in  the  high  n-type  conductivity  of  the  hydrogenated  ZnO 
microparticles. Sci. Rep., 2020, 10(1), 1-9. 

(31) 

[48] Wissel, K., Dasgupta, S., Benes, A., Schoch, R., Bauer, M., Witte, R., Fortes, A.D., Erdem, E., Rohrer. J. and 
Clemens, O., Developing intercalation based anode materials for fluoride-ion batteries: topochemical reduction 
of Sr2TiO3F2 via a hydride based defluorination process. J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(44), 22013-22026. 
[49] Jain, S., Shah, J., Negi, N. S., Sharma, C. and Kotnala, R. K., Significance of interface barrier at electrode of 
hematite hydroelectric cell for generating ecopower by water  splitting. Int. J. Energy Res., 2019, 43(9), 4743-
4755. 
[50]  Abdullah,  S.  A.,  Sahdan,  M.Z.,  Nayan,  N.,  Embong,  Z.,  Hak,  C.R.C.  and  Adriyanto,  F.,  Neutron  beam 
interaction with rutile TiO2 single crystal (1 1 1): Raman and XPS study on Ti3+-oxygen vacancy formation. Mater. 
Lett., 2020, 263, 127143. 
[51] Meléndez, J.J., Zulueta, Y.A. and Leyet, Y., First-principles study of neutral defects in Fe-doped cubic barium 
titanate. Ceram. Int., 2015, 41(1), 1647-1656. 
[52] Jiang, Y., Chen, W.F., Koshy, P. and Sorrell, C.C., Enhanced photocatalytic performance of nanostructured 
TiO2 thin films through combined effects of polymer conjugation and Mo-doping. J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54(7), 
5266-5279. 
[53] Y. Jiang, P. Koshy, C.C. Sorrell, and D. Wang, “A Piezo Photocatalytic Process for the Production of Hydrogen 
from Water”, Australian Provisional Patent Application No. 2022901443, 27 May 2022.  
[54] Zheng, X., Mofarah, S.S., Cazorla, C., Daiyan, R., Esmailpour, A.A., Scott, J., Yao., Y., Lim, S., Wong, V., 
Chen,  E.Y.,  Arandiyan,  H.  and  Sorrell,  C.C.,  Decoupling  the  Impacts  of  Engineering  Defects  and  Band  Gap 
Alignment Mechanism on the Catalytic Performance of Holey 2D CeO2−x Based Heterojunctions. Adv. Funct. 
Mater., 2021, 31(38), 2103171. 
[55] Zhu, F., Islam, M. S., Zhou, L., Gu, Z., Liu, T., Wang, X., Luo, J., Nan, C.W., Mo, Y. and Ma, C., Single-
atom-layer traps in a solid electrolyte for lithium batteries. Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 1-9. 
[56] Mehmood, R., Mofarah, S.S., Chen, W.F., Koshy, P. and Sorrell, C.C., Surface, subsurface, and bulk oxygen 
vacancies quantified by decoupling and deconvolution of the defect structure of redox-active nanoceria. Inorg. 
Chem., 2019, 58(9), 6016-6027. 
[57] Laskowski, R. and Blaha, P., Understanding the L2,3 x-ray absorption spectra of early 3d transition elements. 
Phys. Rev. B, 2010, 82(20), 205104. 
[58] Barzilay, M., Qiu, T., Rappe, A. M. and Ivry, Y, Epitaxial TiOx Surface in Ferroelectric BaTiO3: Native 
Structure and Dynamic Patterning at the Atomic Scale. Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(18), 1902549. 
[59] Wang, Y., Shen, X., Arandiyan, H., Yin, Y., Sun, F., Chen, X., Garbrecht, M., Han, L., Andersson, G.G. and 
Zhao,  C.,  Tuning  the  surface  energy  density  of  non-stoichiometric  LaCoO3  perovskite  for  enhanced  water 
oxidation. J. Power Sources, 2020, 478, 228748 
[60] NIST Standard Reference Database 78. 
[61] Wang, J., Gürdal, E., Horneber, A., Dickreuter, S., Kostcheev, S., Meixner, A.J., Fleischer, M., Adam, P.M. 
and Zhang, D., Carrier recombination and plasmonic emission channels in metallic photoluminescence. Nanoscale, 
2018, 10(17), 8240-8245. 
[62] Vijayalakshmi, R. and Rajendran, V., Synthesis and characterization of cubic BaTiO3 nanorods via facile 
hydrothermal method and their optical properties. Dig. J. Nanomater. Bios., 2010, 5(5), 511-517. 
[63] Bahmanrokh, G., Cazorla, C., Mofarah, S.S., Shahmiri, R., Yao, Y., Ismail, I., Chen, W.F., Koshy, P. and 
Sorrell, C.C., Band gap engineering of Ce-doped anatase TiO2 through solid solubility mechanisms and new defect 
equilibria formalism. Nanoscale, 2020, 12(8), 4916-4934. 
[64]  Melitz,  W.,  Shen,  J.,  Lee,  S.,  Lee,  J.S.,  Kummel,  A.C.,  Droopad,  R.  and  Yu,  E.T.,  Scanning  tunneling 
spectroscopy and Kelvin probe force microscopy investigation of Fermi energy level pinning mechanism on InAs 
and InGaAs clean surfaces. J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108(2), 023711. 
[65]  Kortüm,  G.,  Braun,  W.  and  Herzog,  G.,  Principles  and  techniques  of  diffuse‐reflectance  spectroscopy. 
Angew. Chem., 1963, 2(7), pp.333-341. 
[66]  Qian,  W.,  Zhao,  K.,  Zhang,  D.,  Bowen,  C.R.,  Wang,  Y.  and  Yang,  Y,  Piezoelectric  material-polymer 
composite porous foam for efficient dye degradation via the piezo-catalytic effect. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 
2019, 11(31), 27862-27869. 
[67] Zhang, Y., Zheng, H., Wang, X., Li, H., Wu, Y., Zhang, Y., Su, H. and Yuan, G., Enhanced photovoltaic 
properties of gradient calcium-doped BiFeO3 films. Ceram. Int., 2020, 46(8), 10083-10088. 
[68]  Guo,  Y.,  Guo,  B.,  Dong,  W.,  Li,  H.  and  Liu,  H.  (2013).  Evidence  for  oxygen  vacancy  or  ferroelectric 
polarization induced switchable diode and photovoltaic effects in BiFeO3 based thin films. Nanotechnology, 2013, 
24(27), 275201. 
[69] Ghauch, A., Tuqan, A.M., Kibbi, N. and Geryes, S., Methylene blue discoloration by heated persulfate in 
aqueous solution. Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 213, 259-271. 
[70] Jiang, Y., Chen, W.F., Ma, H., Ren, H., Lim, S., Lu, X., Bahmanrokh, G., Mofaraha, S.S., Wang, D, Koshy, 
P. and Sorrell, C.C. Effect of Bi/Ti ratio on (Na0.5Bi0.5)TiO3/Bi4Ti3O12 heterojunction formation and photocatalytic 
performance. J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9(6), 106532. 

(32) 

[71] Hayyan, M., Hashim, M.A. and AlNashef, I.M., Superoxide ion: generation and chemical implications. Chem. 
Rev., 2016, 116(5), 3029-3085. 
[72] Xia, D., Tang, Z., Wang, Y., Yin, R., He, H., Xie, X., Sun, J., He, C., Wong, P.K. and Zhang, G., Piezo-
catalytic  persulfate  activation  system  for  water  advanced  disinfection:  Process  efficiency  and  inactivation 
mechanisms. Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 400, 125894. 
[73] Wang, K., Han, C., Li, J., Qiu, J., Sunarso, J. and Liu, S., The Mechanism of Piezocatalysis: Energy Band 
Theory or Screening Charge Effect? Angew. Chem., 2022, 134(6), e202110429. 
[74] Liu, D.M., Zhang, J.T., Jin, C.C., Chen, B.B., Hu, J., Zhu, R. and Wang, F., Insight into oxygen-vacancy 
regulation on piezocatalytic activity of (Bi1/2Na1/2)TiO3 crystallites: Experiments and first-principles calculations. 
Nano Energy, 2022, 106975. 
[75]  Li,  L.,  Ma,  Y.,  Chen,  G.,  Wang,  J.  and  Wang,  C.,  Oxygen-vacancy-enhanced  piezo-photocatalytic 
performance of AgNbO3. Scr. Mater., 2022, 206, 114234. 
[76] Li, L., Zhou, Z., Li, L., Zhuang, Z., Bi, J., Chen, J., Yu, Y. and Yu, J., Thioether-functionalized 2D covalent 
organic framework featuring specific affinity to Au for photocatalytic hydrogen production from seawater. ACS 
Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(22), 18574-18581. 
[77] Lee, C.T., Hung, L.I., Shih, Y.C., Wu, J.C.S., Wang, S.L., Huang, C.W. and Nguyen, V.H., Solar hydrogen 
production from seawater splitting using mixed-valence titanium phosphite photocatalyst. J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 
2021, 9(1), 104826. 
[78] Knox, K., Le Châtelier's Principle. J. Chem. Edu., 1985, 62(10), 863. 
[79] Luan, W. and Gao, L., Influence of pH value on properties of nanocrystalline BaTiO3 powder. Ceram. Int., 
2001, 27(6), 645-648. 
[80] Arandiyan, H., Mofarah, S.S., Sorrell, C.C., Doustkhah, E., Sajjadi, B., Hao, D., Wang, Y., Sun, H., Ni, B.J., 
Rezaei, M., Shao, Z. and Maschmeyer, T., Defect engineering of oxide perovskites for catalysis and energy storage: 
synthesis of chemistry and materials science. Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50(18), 10116-10211. 
[81] Feng, W., Yuan, J., Zhang, L., Hu, W., Wu, Z., Wang, X., Huang, X., Liu, P. and Zhang, S., Atomically thin 
ZnS  nanosheets:  Facile  synthesis  and  superior  piezocatalytic  H2  production  from  pure  H2O.  Appl.  Catal.  B 
Environ., 2020, 277, 119250. 
[82] Su, Y., Zhang, L., Wang, W., Li, X., Zhang, Y. and Shao, D., Enhanced H2 evolution based on ultrasound-
assisted piezo-catalysis of modified MoS2. J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(25), 11909-11915. 
[83] Cazorla, C. The role of density functional theory methods in the prediction of nanostructured gas-adsorbent 
materials. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2015, 300, 142. 
[84] Cazorla, C. and Boronat, B., Simulation and understanding of atomic and molecular quantum crystals. Rev. 
Mod. Phys. 2017, 89, 035003. 
[85]  Brutchey,  R.L.  and  Morse,  D.E.,  Template-free,  low-temperature  synthesis  of  crystalline  barium  titanate 
nanoparticles under bio-inspired conditions. Angew. Chem. 2006, 118(39), 6714-6716. 
[86]  Perdew,  J.P.,  Ruzsinszky, A.,  Csonka,  G.I, Vydrov,  O.A,  Scuseria,  G.E.,  Constantin,  L.A.,  Zhou,  X.,  and 
Burke, K. Restoring the density-gradient expansion for exchange in solids and surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 
100, 136406. 
[87] Kresse, G. and Fürthmuller, J., Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-
wave basis set. Phys. Rev. B, 1996, 54, 11169. 
[88]  Krukau,  A.V.,  Vydrov,  O.A.,  Izmaylov,  A.F.  and  Scuseria,  G.E.,  Influence  of  the  exchange  screening 
parameter on the performance of screened hybrid functionals. J. Chem. Phys. 2006, 125, 224106. 
[89] Moses, P. G., Miao, M., Yan, Q. and Van de Walle, C.G., Hybrid functional investigations of band gaps and 
band alignments for AlN, GaN, InN, and InGaN. J. Chem. Phys. 2011, 134, 084703. 
[90] Lu, X., Chen, W., Yao, Y., Wen, X., Hart, J.N., Tsounis, C., Toe, C.Y., Scoot, J. and Ng, Y.H., Photogenerated 
charge dynamics of CdS nanorods with spatially distributed MoS2 for photocatalytic hydrogen generation. Chem. 
Eng. J., 2021, 420, 127709. 
[91] Erbe, A., Nayak, S., Chen, Y.H., Niu, F., Pander, M., Tecklenburg, S. and Toparli, C., How to probe structure, 
kinetics,  and  dynamics  at  complex  interfaces  in  situ  and  operando  by  optical  spectroscopy.  Encyclopedia  of 
Interfacial Chemistry, 2018, 199-219. 
[92] Smith, D.W., Electronegativity in two dimensions: Reassessment and resolution of the Pearson-Pauling paradox. 
J. Chem. Educ., 1990, 67(11), 911. 
[93] Ermolieff, A., Bernard, P., Marthon, S. and Wittmer, P., Nitridation of polycrystalline titanium as studied by in 
situ angle‐resolved x‐ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Surf. Interface Anal., 1988, 11(11), 563-568. 
[94] Simon, D., Perrin, C. and Bardolle, J., ESCA study of Nb and Ti oxides. Applications to the determination of 
the nature of the superficial films formed during the oxidation of Nb-Ti and Nb-Ti alloys. J. Microsc. Spectrosc. 
Electron.(France),1976, 1(2). 
[95] Gonbeau, D., Guimon, C., Pfister-Guillouzo, G., Levasseur, A., Meunier, G. and Dormoy, R., XPS study of thin 
films of titanium oxysulfides. Surf. Sci., 1991, 254(1-3), 81-89. 
[96] Sleigh, C., Pijpers, A.P., Jaspers, A., Coussens, B. and Meier, R.J., On the determination of atomic charge via 

(33) 

ESCA including application to organometallics. J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom.,1996, 77(1), 41-57. 

(34) 

 
