Eﬀect of relative humidity on the long-term operation of a
single mask triple GEM chamber

S. Chatterjee∗, A. Sen, S. Das, S. Biswas

aDepartment of Physics, Bose Institute, EN-80, Sector V, Kolkata-700091, India

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

8

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
1
5
0
4
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

The characteristic studies of a Single Mask (SM) triple Gas Electron Multiplier (GEM) detector are carried out using Ar/CO2
gas mixture in 70/30 volume ratio in continuous ﬂow mode. A Fe55 X-ray source is used for this work. The gain and energy
resolution are studied from the 5.9 keV X-ray energy spectra. After correcting the eﬀects of temperature and pressure variation, the
eﬀect of relative humidity on the gain and energy resolution of the chamber is investigated. The details of the experimental setup,
measurement methods and results are presented in this article.

Keywords: Single Mask GEM, Gas detector, Gain, Energy resolution, Relative humidity

1. Introduction

Good position resolution (∼ 70 µm) and high rate handling
capability (∼ 1 MHz/mm2) make the GEM detector one of the
advanced members of the Micro Pattern Gas Detector (MPGD)
group and is being used in many High Energy Physics (HEP)
experiments as a tracking device [1]. A proper understanding
of the performance under long-term irradiation is an essential
criterion for any detector used in HEP experiment [2, 3]. In this
study, the eﬀect of temperature, pressure and relative humid-
ity (RH) variation on the performance of a Single Mask (SM)
triple GEM chamber is investigated under continuous irradia-
tion with 5.9 keV X-ray from a Fe55 radioactive source of ac-
tivity ∼ 20 mCi. The chamber is operated with Ar/CO2 gas
mixture in a 70/30 volume ratio in a continuous ﬂow mode.
Conventional NIM electronics are used for detector biasing and
data acquisition.

2. Detector descriptions and experimental set-up

A SM triple GEM chamber of dimension 10 cm × 10 cm is
used for this study. The drift gap, transfer gaps and induction
gap are kept at 3 mm, 2 mm and 2 mm respectively. The bi-
asing of the GEM foils is done by using a resistive chain as
discussed in Ref. [4]. A ﬁlter circuit is introduced between the
high voltage (HV) line and the resistive chain to bypass the ac
components. The readout board of the chamber consists of 256
XY tracks. For this study, the sum-up signal is used instead of
using the individual pad readout. Four sum-up boards are used
in this chamber. The signal from the GEM chamber is fed to
a charge sensitive preampliﬁer having a gain of 2 mV/fC and a

∗Corresponding author
Email address: sayakchatterjee@jcbose.ac.in,

sayakchatterjee896@gmail.com (S. Chatterjee)

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

shaping time of 300 ns [5]. The output of the preampliﬁer is fed
to a linear Fan-In Fan-Out (FIFO) module to create an identical
analog signal at the output. One output from FIFO is fed to a
Single Channel Analyzer (SCA), the output of which above the
noise threshold are counted using the NIM scaler. Another out-
put of the FIFO is fed to a Multi-Channel Analyzer (MCA) for
storing the X-ray spectra on the PC. The gain and energy reso-
lution of the chamber is calculated by ﬁtting the MCA spectra
using a Gaussian distribution. The schematic of the electronic
circuit diagram and method of calculating the gain and energy
resolution of the chamber is discussed in Ref. [3]. The ambient
temperature, pressure and relative humidity are stored using a
data logger built-in house [6].

3. Results

The voltage across each of the GEM foils is kept at ∼ 405 V
and the chamber is irradiated continuously with Fe55 X-ray
at a rate of ∼ 2 kHz/mm2.
It is well known that the gain
of any gaseous detector increases with increasing tempera-
ture (T = t + 273 K) and decreases with increasing pressure
(p atm), or in other words, the gain of the chamber is found to
be positively correlated with T/p variation [7]. It is expected
that the energy resolution will improve with the increased gain
of the chamber, therefore the energy resolution is expected to
be negatively correlated with T/p variations. In Fig. 1, the vari-
ation of gain, energy resolution, T/p and RH is shown as a
function of time. The correlation of gain and energy resolu-
tion with the temperature to pressure (T/p) ratio is shown in
Fig. 2. The gain and energy resolution is parameterized by an
exponential function of the form Aexp(BT/p), where A and B
are the free parameters. The gain and energy resolution of the
chamber is normalised using the parameters obtained from the
correlation curves to eliminate the eﬀects of T/p variations. The
variation of normalised gain and energy resolution is shown in

June 10, 2022

 
 
 
 
 
 
gain and increase in the normalised energy resolution is due to
the charging-up eﬀect of the chamber [4, 8].

To study the eﬀect of RH on the performance of the chamber,
the T/p normalised gain and energy resolution of the chamber is
plotted as a function of RH and shown in Fig. 4. No signiﬁcant

Figure 1: Variation of gain (top), energy resolution (bottom), T/p and RH as a
function of time (colour online).

Figure 4: Variation of normalised gain (top) and energy resolution (bottom) as
a function of RH (colour online).
correlation is observed between the T/p normalised gain and
energy resolution with RH [9].

4. Summary

The characterisation of a SM triple GEM chamber is per-
formed in terms of its gain and energy resolution variation as
a function of temperature, pressure and humidity with Ar/CO2
gas mixture in a 70/30 volume ratio. The eﬀect of relative hu-
midity on the performance of the chamber is investigated af-
ter eliminating the eﬀects of T/p variation on the gain and en-
ergy resolution of the chamber. No signiﬁcant correlation is
observed between T/p normalised gain and energy resolution
with the relative humidity.
5. Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Prof. S. K. Ghosh for valu-
able discussions in the course of this study. The authors would
also like to thank Ms. Shreya Roy for writing the initial analy-
sis code. This work is partially supported by the research grant
SR/MF/PS-01/2014-BI from DST, Govt. of India, and the re-
search grant of the CBM-MuCh project from BI-IFCC, DST,
Govt. of India.
References

[1] F. Sauli, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 386 (1997) 531
[2] S. Chatterjee et al., J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 1498 (2020) 012037
[3] S. Roy et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 936 (2019) 485
[4] S. Chatterjee et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 1014 (2021) 165749
[5] CDT CASCADE Detector Technologies GmbH, www.n-cdt.com
[6] S. Sahu et al., JINST 12 (2017)
[7] M. C. Altunbas et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 515 (2003) 249
[8] S. Chatterjee et al., J. Instrum. 15 (2020) T09011
[9] D. Nag et al., ADNHEAP 2017 Springer Pros. in Phys. 201, 211

Figure 2: Correlation of gain (top) and energy resolution (bottom) with T/p
(colour online).

Fig. 3 as a function of the accumulated charge per unit area.
The method of calculating the accumulated charge per unit area
is taken from Ref. [3]. The initial decrease in the normalised

Figure 3: Variation of normalised gain and energy resolution as a function of
accumulated charge (colour online).

2

