2
2
0
2

l
u
J

5
1

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
7
7
7
0
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Auggie: Encouraging Effortful Communication through
Handcrafted Digital Experiences

LEI ZHANG∗, University of Michigan, USA
TIANYING CHEN∗, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
OLIVIA SEOW∗, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
TIM CHONG, University of Washinton, USA
SVEN KRATZ, Snap Inc., USA
YU JIANG THAM, Snap Inc., USA
ANDRÉS MONROY-HERNÁNDEZ, Snap Inc., USA
RAJAN VAISH, Snap Inc., USA
FANNIE LIU, Snap Inc., USA

Fig. 1. Description of Auggie, an iOS app that enables partners to create handcrafted AR experiences for each
other, based on customizing a 3D character.

Digital communication is often brisk and automated. From auto-completed messages to “likes,” research has
shown that such quick and easy interactions can affect perceptions of authenticity and closeness. On the
other hand, effort in relationships can forge emotional bonds by conveying a sense of caring, and is essential
in building and maintaining relationships. To explore effortful communication, we designed and evaluated
Auggie, an iOS app that encourages partners to create digitally handcrafted AR experiences for each other.
Auggie is centered around crafting a 3D character with photos, animated movements, drawings, and audio for
someone else. We conducted a two-week-long field study with 30 participants (15 pairs), who used Auggie with

∗All authors contributed equally to this research.

Authors’ addresses: Lei Zhang, raynez@umich.edu, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; Tianying Chen, tianyinc@
andrew.cmu.edu, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Olivia Seow, oliviaseow@gmail.com, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA; Tim Chong, tchong@snapchat.com, University of Washinton, Seattle, WA,
USA; Sven Kratz, skratz@snapchat.com, Snap Inc., Seattle, WA, USA; Yu Jiang Tham, yujiang@snap.com, Snap Inc., Seattle,
WA, USA; Andrés Monroy-Hernández, amh@snap.com, Snap Inc., Princeton, NJ, USA; Rajan Vaish, rvaish@snap.com, Snap
Inc., Santa Monica, CA, USA; Fannie Liu, fannie@snap.com, Snap Inc., New York, NY, USA.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
XXXX-XXXX/2022/7-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Lei Zhang, Tianying Chen, Olivia Seow, Tim Chong, Sven Kratz, Yu Jiang Tham, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Rajan Vaish,
and Fannie Liu
2

their partners remotely. Our qualitative findings show that Auggie participants engaged in meaningful effort
through the handcrafting process, and felt closer to their partners, although the tool may not be appropriate
in all situations. We discuss design implications and future directions for systems that encourage effortful
communication.

CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI; Empirical studies in col-
laborative and social computing.

Additional Key Words and Phrases: effort, communication, augmented reality

ACM Reference Format:
Lei Zhang, Tianying Chen, Olivia Seow, Tim Chong, Sven Kratz, Yu Jiang Tham, Andrés Monroy-Hernández,
Rajan Vaish, and Fannie Liu. 2022. Auggie: Encouraging Effortful Communication through Handcrafted Digital
Experiences. 1, 1 (July 2022), 25 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 INTRODUCTION
The strategies originally developed to help computer users rapidly navigate the digital world [2]
have strongly influenced the design of digital social platforms. For instance, single-click reaction
buttons frequently accompany or replace prompts for free response that could include personalized
voice, text, and images [50]. Autocomplete features are also increasingly used, wherein fixed
presets are selected over custom expressions [13]. While low barrier-to-action digital interaction
techniques can allow users to quickly initiate social interaction, too little effort can lead to concerns
around authenticity [45], trust [27], and feelings of support [53, 60]. These are critical elements of
meaningful social connections, which involve emotional impact that can improve the quality of
people’s lives and relationships [40]. For example, “like” buttons are less associated with well-being
improvements than more effortful counterparts, including tailored expressions of support [5, 23].
Moreover, both researchers [18] and popular media [15, 57] have noted that simply triggering more
interactions does not necessarily lead to more meaningful interactions.

To encourage meaningful digital interactions, we draw inspiration from the analog world. People
express genuine affection by putting in effort to handcraft letters, scrapbooks, and gifts [17, 39].
By virtue of the medium alone, the effort in analog expressions translates relatively well to the
receiver. Handwritten letters, for example, are perceived as more effortful than typing a long
email, even if they take the same amount of time and mental energy: they are unique, personal,
physically written and received, and, if properly cared for, even “last centuries” [46]. Better yet, if
the creation process is documented and conveyed along with the analog gift, they can evoke even
more meaningfulness [47].

Yet, as digital communication becomes increasingly mainstream, handwritten letters and hand-
crafted scrapbooks might feel tedious and antiquated, while modern lightweight and automated
communications can feel impersonal in comparison. Research investigating effort-provoking forms
of digital communication, such as lengthy text messages, has had limited results, and findings show
that effort “can be resented just as easily as it could be valued, depending on the manner in which
it arises” [31].

We attempt to address this by lowering procedural barriers to make effort more approachable,
designing a communication system that enables versatile, personal expressions of effort. In this
research, we study the feasibility of encouraging effortful digital communication and its ability
to facilitate meaningful remote interactions. We designed and evaluated Auggie, an iOS app that
encourages partners to create digitally handcrafted Augmented Reality (AR) experiences for each
other (see Fig. 1). Auggie encourages effortful communication by making handcrafting for someone
playful, personal, and engaging. Each experience, or auggie, contains a 3D character that people
can send to partners, along with custom photos, animated movements, drawings, and audio. We

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Auggie: Encouraging Effortful Communication through Handcrafted Digital Experiences

3

designed Auggie’s interface and easy-to-use features to reduce the tedium and perceived expertise
associated with handcrafting while enabling a wide range of creative possibilities for custom
expressions and storytelling. All auggies also contain a “behind-the-scenes” view where recipients
can see the process a sender took to craft it for them, and thus, the effort they put in. We chose
mobile AR because it offers immersive qualities [49] on ubiquitous personal devices, giving us a
widely accessible means to approximate and build on the experience of analog handcrafting on a
digital medium.

This paper describes the design and system architecture of Auggie, along with results from a two-
week-long field deployment with 30 participants (15 pairs) who used Auggie remotely with close
others. Our results show that, on aggregate, Auggie successfully encouraged participants to put
effort into crafting visual narratives beyond what is possible in physical reality. Participants found
themselves inspired to digitally handcraft supportive, funny, and authentic expressions, which
helped facilitate meaningful connection and feelings of presence. At the same time, this research
also uncovered some unresolved challenges of effort, such as creativity blocks and appropriateness
in certain situations.

Taken together, this paper contributes: 1) the design and implementation of an effortful com-
munication system using digital handcrafting in AR; 2) results from a two-week field study that
evaluated this system’s potential to encourage effort on a digital medium through handcrafting
and create meaningful interactions; and 3) implications for future design and research on fostering
effortful communication in relationships.

2 BACKGROUND

2.1 Defining Effort
Effort is sometimes referred to as “the work...done to cope with and overcome demand on physical
and mental capacities” [31]. However, in interpersonal contexts, defining effort in only this me-
chanical sense does not capture the nuances of human connections, including the meaningfulness
of effort for the people involved [31]. For instance, researchers have identified the importance
of effort in relationship maintenance, i.e., the strategies that people employ to maintain and en-
hance their relationships, such as cheerful attempts to make interactions enjoyable and mutual
disclosure [6, 7, 54]. Markopoulos breaks down the effort invested in communication within these
relationships, particularly over technology, into procedural effort and personal effort. Procedural
effort is the effort required to complete a task (e.g., opening a messaging app), which aligns with
the traditional mechanical perspective. On the other hand, personal effort is what makes the task
special for the recipient (e.g., thinking about something to say that they would like). Personal effort
is usually more appreciated than procedural effort [42], but procedural effort can also be valuable
when it reflects the personal effort involved (i.e., one’s willingness to take on procedural tasks) [29].
Kelly et al. further categorized different qualities of personal effort that people value in social
interactions: (1) going out of one’s way for the recipient of their effort, (2) crafting for them, (3)
overcoming personal challenges for them, (4) devoting time for them, and (5) accounting for them
and their beliefs in communication with them [29]. While people can engage in these qualities
within existing communication channels (e.g., sending a personalized text message), few prior
researchers and social platform designers have intentionally designed for these qualities. We
still have limited understanding on both how to encourage meaningful, personal effort in digital
communication systems, and its subsequent effects on relationships. The present research aims to
address this and expand on the design space for effortful communication, exploring the potential
to integrate meaningful qualities of effort, specifically “crafting,” “devoting time,” and “accounting
for the recipient and their beliefs,” into communication technology.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Lei Zhang, Tianying Chen, Olivia Seow, Tim Chong, Sven Kratz, Yu Jiang Tham, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Rajan Vaish,
and Fannie Liu
4

2.2 Supporting Personal Effort in the Digital Realm
Though HCI researchers have acknowledged the need for communication systems to incorporate
effort to improve and enhance relationships [33, 39, 46], few works have explored this space. In one
recent work, researchers created a physically effortful device to browse one’s Twitter feed – a hand
crank that one must turn to scroll. They found that with the manual scroll, people focused more
on the meaningfulness of the posts they read, while also becoming more aware of their Twitter
usage [51]. Although researchers built this project using a social platform, the user’s effort led to an
individual rather than an interpersonal outcome. Moreover, this research increased the procedural
effort, rather than the personal effort, of a task.

Effort explorations in direct interpersonal communication have primarily focused on text mes-
saging. “Message Builder,” for example, is a text-based messaging app that encourages exchanging
increasingly long messages. However, the authors found that while effortfully written lengthy mes-
sages produced some meaningful interactions, participants were frustrated by the inconvenience
of the required procedural effort to access the system and read/write messages [31]. This work
highlights the need to balance design goals with users’ expectations when increasing procedural
effort in a task like text-based messaging. Other research examples in this space include “Lily” [32],
which encourages people to manually revise text messages based on lyrical inspirations, and “Dear-
Board” [19], where communication partners can collaboratively customize message keyboards,
though increasing meaningful effort was not the primary goal of either system.

Our research expands on text-based messaging to explore new modes and opportunities for
designing around personal effort in communication. In particular, we focus on taking an analog
task known to require a high level of personal effort, and make it less procedurally effortful. We
do this through Auggie, a playful system focused on the crafting quality of effort [29], engaging
people in effort through digitally handcrafting gifts. As opposed to “digital craftsmanship”, where
a craftsperson may use software to aid in the fabrication of a physical item [34], our use of
“digital handcrafting” refers to the process of investing personal effort to produce a digital gift-
like experience for another person. In the present work, we use AR as the medium for digital
handcrafting.

We chose to focus on the effort conveyed by “crafting for others” as handicrafts are often perceived
as authentic and “made with love,” which contributes to their value and attractiveness [16, 17]. Love
and authenticity are key elements of interpersonal relationships [4]. Therefore, it is not surprising
that handcrafting something for another person contributes to relationship maintenance [43].
Moreover, gifting handicrafts has long been a key way to convey personal effort [54]. By investing
effort into creating something personal, the craft giver is often viewed as actively investing effort into
the relationship [43]. More uniquely, a handcrafted artifact highlights two layers of meaningfulness:
in the end product itself, and the process that the creator took to bring it to life [41]. For example,
when knitting a sweater, the creator may enjoy the process of picking out the yarn, measuring
the size, and finishing and wrapping up the gift as a whole experience that represents their effort
towards the relationship [43]. The final handcrafted product is imbued with love from the creator’s
hands, which personally and physically interacted with it [17].

In the present work, we investigate whether the meaningfulness of physically handcrafting for
others can effectively translate to the digital realm via an AR representation. We study how we
can encourage personal effort through handcrafting in a digital communication tool. We explore
digital handcrafting as a means to facilitate meaningful social interactions, and employ a qualitative
approach to understand its potential for encouraging effort through Auggie, a mobile application
for handcrafting AR experiences. By evaluating Auggie, we derive design implications for future

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Auggie: Encouraging Effortful Communication through Handcrafted Digital Experiences

5

researchers and practitioners to create digital systems that provoke personal effort to improve
interpersonal outcomes.

3 PRELIMINARY STUDY
To guide our design of an effortful digital communication system, we first sought to understand how
effort is currently conveyed online. Prior research has provided some evidence on how people invest
effort in their online interactions (e.g., carefully written text messages or social media posts) [29].
We expand on this work by surveying people more broadly to understand their perceptions of
effort on a wide range of digital platforms. We aimed to narrow in on characteristics of online effort
that could inform our design direction, such as the frequency at which people engage in it and its
current limitations. We use this preliminary study as a first step to define a set of design goals for
our system.

We conducted a survey with 70 participants who spoke fluent English using the online participant
pool Prolific1. Participants were compensated through Prolific for completing the survey following
Prolific’s recommended compensation guideline2. Participants were asked to describe the last time
they put in extra effort for someone else online (as a “sender” of effort), the last time someone else
put in extra effort for them (as a “receiver” of effort), and if there was anything they wished was
different about those situations. They were also asked about their relationship with the people they
mentioned, and how often they put in extra effort for them and vice versa. After removing extremely
short responses (e.g., one word answers for every question), we obtained 49 valid responses. The
remaining participants included 35 male, 13 female, and 1 non-binary person, with ages ranging
between 18 to 50 (M=25.02 and SD=7.29). 74% of participants identified as White, 10% as Hispanic,
Latino, or Spanish, 8% as Black or African American, 4% as Asian, and 4% as mixed or multi-racial
(self-described as White/Asian and Caucasian/African-American).

We analyzed responses to understand when, with whom, and how people engage in effortful
communication online and its current limitations. We open coded the responses according to the
effort qualities proposed by Kelly et al. [29], as well as the context (e.g., planned or unplanned)
and social goals (e.g., comfort, celebration, thinking of you). Two coders coded a subset of the data
independently until they reached 80% agreement, and then independently coded the rest of the
data. Participants most commonly reported effort conveyed between close friends (38.8%), followed
by spouse and significant others (20.4%), friends (20.4%), family members (10.2%), strangers online
(8.0%), and acquaintances (2.0%). The following insights from the survey guided the design of
Auggie:

Personalization is the most memorable type of effort. The most memorable effortful interactions
for both senders and receivers are those where the sender tailored the end product to the receiver’s
interest. This aligns with the “accounting for the recipient and their beliefs” quality of meaningful
effort described in prior work [29]. The most common forms for this were gifting, sharing memories,
and music. For gifting, senders bought gifts online (e.g., an online game, model kits) that they knew
the receiver would enjoy. Shared memories were strengthened by exchanging photos and videos
of such experiences. Senders would also put effort into personalizing music for the receiver. For
instance, one respondent said their friend sang their favorite song over a call to them to cheer them
up. Based on this finding, we conceptualize a system that allows for personal effort through high
levels of customization [42].

1https://prolific.co/
2https://researcher-help.prolific.co/hc/en-gb/articles/4407695146002-Prolific-s-payment-principles

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Lei Zhang, Tianying Chen, Olivia Seow, Tim Chong, Sven Kratz, Yu Jiang Tham, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Rajan Vaish,
and Fannie Liu
6

Effort is demonstrated day-to-day, not just on special, planned occasions. We found that most
effortful digital interactions occurred in everyday occasions (e.g., sending sentimental songs when
one party was thinking of the other), while only 30% and 15% of responses for effort conveyed and
received, respectively, were for special, planned occasions (e.g., sending a recorded video message
on a birthday). Based on this result, we believe that effortful communication should not only be
designed for special occasions, but also be applicable on day-to-day occasions. As such, we designed
the system to support versatile crafting, where people have the choice to craft simple (e.g., just
saying hi) or complex (e.g., elaborate stories) content that they can contextualize for different
occasions with images, audio, and animations.

Sense of presence is lacking in remote effort. Participants highlighted a deep desire to feel a
greater sense of presence from their remote partners. This aligns with prior literature on social
presence, or “the sense of being with another,” which is well-known to be missing in remote
communication [3]. Respondents remarked that they particularly appreciate the effort from remote
partners in attempting to be “present” through video chats, voice calls, or simply being available
on a digital platform (e.g., a participant noting a friend who was “with them” on a Discord call
for several hours to cheer them up). However, there is still a clear demand for an increased sense
of tangible presence in any form of remote communication. For example, the aforementioned
participant who described their friend singing to them over a call continued to say, “I would like
her to come to my place so I can hug her but she couldn’t cause we live in different cities.” To
address this, we incorporate AR in our system to make use of its immersive qualities and ability to
simulate physical presence [49], further described in Section 4.1.

Based on these findings, our research team underwent several rounds of brainstorming to
generate ideas for an effortful communication system. This involved each team member individually
presenting ideas, followed by group discussion and iteration, and finally narrowing down on specific
concepts that we felt best aligned with the design insights from our preliminary study and prior
work. We also built and user tested several low-fidelity prototypes to further develop our ideas. We
describe the final system design in the following section.

4 AUGGIE SYSTEM
Auggie is an iOS app that allows partners to send digitally handcrafted AR experiences (i.e.,
auggies) to each other in the form of an animated 3D bear. The bear character was inspired by
teddy bears, which are common gifts among close partners. The character also facilitates the
creation of expressive and embodied animation for shared narratives, which can increase feelings of
personalization and presence. This represents one implementation by which we can study the impact
of effort conveyed through an activity typically of high procedural effort (in this case handcrafting,
which usually require time, material costs, and skill) made more personal and approachable.

Senders can craft an AR experience by animating the 3D bear, as well as personalizing its outfit
and adding 3D drawings, background music, and voice notes. The bear then “travels” via an AR
paper airplane to its designated recipient, who can view the AR experience in their own physical
environment. The recipient can also view the sender’s “behind-the-scenes” creation process, which
is automatically compiled by the system.

4.1 Situating Auggie in the Physical World
Auggie integrates AR by enabling users to point their phone camera to a surface in their physical
environment to craft or view the 3D bear and other elements of the experience. We chose AR
as a medium for crafting for several reasons. First, creating and interacting with virtual objects
in AR could stimulate the sense of handcraftedness, since a user is personally and physically

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Auggie: Encouraging Effortful Communication through Handcrafted Digital Experiences

7

(a) Outfit

(b) Animation

(c) 3D Drawing

(d) Background Mu-
sic

(e) Voice note &
Confirm

Fig. 2. Components of crafting personalized auggies. Users can personalize each component of an auggie by
selecting from a set of buttons on the bottom - (a) when outfit is selected, users can attach a picture to the
bear’s t-shirt by selecting from the image gallery or taking a photo; (b) when animation is selected, users
can author the animation of the bear or toggle the partner bear button to animate two bears together; (c)
users can create a 3D drawing by holding the pen button and moving the phone in the physical world; (d)
when music is selected, users can search and select a background music for the auggie; (e) while reviewing
the experience and before sending it, users can add a voice note by pressing the record button.

interacting [17] with an object that feels real [24, 36]. We also aim to make the handcrafted
digital experience more engaging using AR due to its unique and promising potential to facilitate
playfulness [11] and users’ creativity [62]. In addition, the physical and spatial affordances of
AR could enable a heightened sense of presence [49], which is often lacking in remote effortful
communication, as found in our preliminary study. By overlaying the virtual bear on users’ physical
environments, Auggie could provide a subjective sense of a partner “being present” in the experience,
where the bear represents the partner in one’s space. Finally, AR can enhance expressiveness by
enabling users to imagine and create experiences for each other that are otherwise not possible
in the physical world. The ability of AR to superimpose virtual information onto the physical
world has enabled experiences beyond the physical world such as storytelling [1], virtual structure
building [22], and museum touring [12]. We aim to leverage the expressiveness and versatility of
AR experiences to enable high levels of personalization in Auggie, which our preliminary study
suggests is the most memorable type of effort. Altogether, we introduce a unique avenue for
handcrafted digital experiences.

4.2 Crafting Personalized Auggies
Our survey results and prior work both indicate that people value effort in personalization, such as
of gifts, photos, and music. Auggie encourages users to engage in such effortful communication
through crafting personalized AR experiences (or auggies) for another person, as if creating a gift.
To support different occasions and desired levels of effort, users can personalize the experience as
much or as little as they would like, where they could even send “blank” auggies that simply show
the bear. The personalization process consists of five components: outfit, animation, 3D drawing,
background music, and voice note (as seen in Fig. 2).

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Lei Zhang, Tianying Chen, Olivia Seow, Tim Chong, Sven Kratz, Yu Jiang Tham, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Rajan Vaish,
and Fannie Liu
8

4.2.1 Outfit, music, and voice note. Our preliminary study revealed that people appreciated the
effort made to curate photos and hand select music for them. On Auggie, users can select from
the photo gallery or take a photo (Fig. 2a) to personalize the bear’s outfit. Selecting from existing
photos allows users to engage in digital handcrafting with shared memories or shared interests
(e.g., inside jokes). Taking a photo can also draw a connection between the digital and physical
worlds, allowing users to integrate elements from the physical into the digital world and potentially
feel more present with each other [58], further addressing concerns described in the preliminary
study. Users can also set the mood of the experience by selecting background music from the
iTunes music library (Fig. 2d). In addition to adding existing songs, users can attach a voice note to
incorporate more personal and expressive audio (Fig. 2e). We included these audio options based on
our preliminary study results and prior work, which shows that music influences positive emotion,
engagement, and relationships [10].

4.2.2 Animation. We included animation to enable a wide range of expressions (e.g., waving,
sad, jumping) while fostering a sense of handcraftedness. Animations and animated images are
frequently used in the digital communication for storytelling and self-expression through the forms
of GIFs, emojis, and memes [20]. These formats not only facilitate shared expressions and address
the lack of facial and vocal exchanges in text-based communication channels, but also serve as
important strategies to support connectedness and relationship building [25, 56]. Users animate
the 3D bear’s joints by dragging three circles on the screen corresponding to the bear’s spine, left
arm, and right arm (Fig. 2b). Users can also make the bear jump using a single finger vertical swipe,
and rotate the bear using a single finger horizontal swipe. The bear can also walk in the physical
environment, moving when a user taps on a destination on the phone screen. To further increase
perceptions of presence, we also included a feature where users can toggle the appearance of a
partner or companion bear, whose actions are synchronized with the main bear when they are in
close proximity, enabling effects like dancing or hugging.

In other digital animation tools like Autodesk Maya and Cinema 4D, animation is an investment
of time and procedural effort in many aspects, such as learning how to model 3D objects, encode
3D movements, and set up lighting effects. Comparatively, our system has a small set of intuitive
controls, aiming to reduce the amount of procedural effort required to produce aesthetically pleasing
digital animations. At the same time, users are able to create animations that are more complex
and personal compared to selecting from a fixed library of generic emojis or animated stickers. By
creating animations from scratch in their physical environment, users can invest and communicate
effort that feels handcrafted and personal.

3D drawing. Drawing is known to be an expressive way of creating personal and unique
4.2.3
experiences in AR, such as for performances [48] and storytelling [38]. In Auggie, users can press
the draw button and move the phone freely in their physical space to create 3D drawings (Fig. 2c).
We incorporate this feature to allow further personalization as well as the ability to interact with
the physical space. This feature also enables users to create virtual props (e.g., a hat for the bear) as
part of the handcrafted AR experience.

4.3 Sending and Receiving Auggies
After crafting a personalized auggie and before sending it, users may review the whole experience.
To send an auggie, users press the “confirm” button (as seen in Fig. 2e) and view the bear climbing
on a paper airplane in AR (see Fig. 3a). Users then need to blow wind into the phone’s microphone
for the paper plane to take off (see Fig. 4). When receiving an auggie, users can point the rear
camera to a window or mid-air, and the paper airplane will fly into view. Users can then guide the
airplane to land by guiding the camera to a surface. The auggie is then presented in the receiver’s

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Auggie: Encouraging Effortful Communication through Handcrafted Digital Experiences

9

(a) Send-off Scene

(b) Viewing Auggie
in AR

“Behind-the-

(c)
scenes”

(d) Inbox

Fig. 3. Sending and receiving auggies: (a) after confirming, users can blow wind to the microphone to send
off the bear and see the real-time audio wave; (b) receivers can view the auggie in AR and see available
“behind-the-scenes” videos through the top buttons; (c) receivers can also click on one of the four categories
(outfit, animation, drawing, and music) from the top buttons and see a screen recording pop-up of the sender’s
creation process for the selected category; (d) Received auggies are saved in an inbox for users to rewatch.

physical environment (see Fig. 3b). All the received auggies are saved on the phone and can be
rewatched at any time through Auggie’s inbox feature (see Fig. 3d).

Prior work highlights the importance of incorporating analog approaches to gifting. In partic-
ular, “wrapping” a gift in a physical object and mimicking the unwrapping ritual can harbor a
sense of physical presence [37]. Therefore, we intentionally incorporated interactions and visual
representations similar to the physical world (i.e., blowing wind to make a paper plane fly, guiding
its landing) into the sending and receiving process (see Fig. 4).

Fig. 4. To send an auggie, users blow wind at their phone, which triggers an AR paper plane to fly into the
distance, carrying a bear over to their partner.

“Behind-the-scenes” videos. The perception of the effort one puts into a relationship is
4.3.1
essential in determining the satisfaction that one has towards the relationship [54]. Additionally,
demonstrating the creation process of a handmade gift and sending it alongside the gift itself can
allow receivers to interpret the story behind the gift and increase meaningfulness [47].

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Lei Zhang, Tianying Chen, Olivia Seow, Tim Chong, Sven Kratz, Yu Jiang Tham, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Rajan Vaish,
and Fannie Liu
10

However, the effort put into crafting a digital artifact may not be easily deduced from the output.
For example, a person may go through a lengthy process of trial-and-error to craft the artifact,
which is lost in the final result. Prior work has thus explored several design concepts around
revealing effort, centered primarily on text communication, and shown that information about
effort can foster reflection and appreciation [29, 30]. To reveal effort in the realm of AR handcrafting,
Auggie screen records the sender’s “behind-the-scenes” creation process and automatically creates
a timeline consisting of four videos (corresponding to outfit, music, animation, and drawing) that
document the sender’s effort (see Fig. 3c). We chose to reveal effort through screen recordings
since prior work has shown that replaying creation processes can demonstrate authenticity behind
effort (i.e., whether the effort is invested willfully by the sender). That is, recordings can provide
details behind effort such as pauses, which can help receivers “think what senders are thinking”
and feel closer to them [30]. For privacy, we blur out aspects of the “behind-the-scenes” video that
are external to the Auggie app, such as photos in a user’s gallery that may appear during the outfit
selection process.

4.4 Implementation
Auggie is implemented using SwiftUI3, RealityKit4, and ARKit5. Messages are sent and received
through HTTP requests and stored on an AWS6 server. Each message consists of six components:
animation, 3D drawing, images, videos, music, and audio. Animation is encoded using transforms
of the auggie bear’s skeleton on a frame-to-frame basis. 3D drawing is encoded using positions
of spheres generated in each frame. Images, videos, music, and audio are encoded in binary and
uploaded to the server. To replay a message on the receiver’s end, the system downloads and
decodes each component.

5 METHODS
We conducted a field study with 30 participants (15 pairs) who used Auggie for two weeks. We
interviewed participants at the middle and end of the study in order to understand the details of
their experience using Auggie.

5.1 Participants
We recruited participants from a technology company and four universities in the United States
through Slack posts and e-mails. Each participant was asked to select a partner with whom they are
close but not currently cohabiting. We chose this population in order to investigate circumstances
in which digital communication plays an essential role. By disallowing cohabiting participants,
we focus on participants whose main method of communication is digital and reduce the impact
that in-person interactions might have between the pairs. We recruited 50 participants (25 pairs);
however, 10 pairs were removed from the study in the first week due to failing to meet the minimum
study requirements (e.g., cohabitation status, not showing up to interview sessions, and technical
issues such as incompatible iOS versions). This left us 15 pairs of participants in total (n=30). Table
1 shows the demographic information of participants. We compensated each participant with $25
Amazon gift cards at the middle and end of the study, for a total of $50 worth of gift cards.

3https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/
4https://developer.apple.com/documentation/realitykit/
5https://developer.apple.com/documentation/arkit
6https://aws.amazon.com/

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Auggie: Encouraging Effortful Communication through Handcrafted Digital Experiences

11

Table 1. Participant Demographics

Pair IDs Gender Age

Occupations

Relationship

Location

Student Friend
Student Friend

1a
2a
3a
4a
5a
6a
7a
8a
9a
10a 10b F
11a 11b F
12a 12b F
13a 13b F
14a 14b F
15a 15b F

1b M M 21 20 Student
Canada Canada
2b F
US
US
F 22 22 Software Engineer
3b F
China
Planning Manager Significant Other US
M 25 25 Research Intern
4b F
US
US
F 33 30 Marketing Manager Account Director Friend
5b M
US
Property Manager Sibling
F 33 28 Product Manager
US
6b F
US
Product Manager Significant Other US
M 26 28 Student
US
US
7b F
F 24 24 UX Architect
US
US
F 25 25 Student
8b F
US
US
9b M M 30 26 Student
US
US
F 23 24 Student
US
F 22 22 UX Lead
US
US
Student Significant Other US
M 20 20 Student
US
US
F 22 22 Software Engineer
India
US
F 26 20 Student
US
US
F 25 20 Software Engineer

Student Friend
Data Engineer Friend
Pharmacist Sibling
Bather Friend
Technical Lead Friend

Equity Analyst Friend
Student Sibling
Student Sibling

5.2 Procedure
Participants first joined an hour-long onboarding session over Google Meet to receive study instruc-
tions. Prior to this session, they also completed a short entry survey about their background and
relationship with their Auggie partner. During the onboarding, participants were first introduced
to the study and were informed of all the data that would be collected during the study. They were
also informed that participation was voluntary and that they could drop out at any time without
repercussion. All participants signed an informed consent. After obtaining consent, a member of
the study team then introduced Auggie’s functionalities and guided the participants through the
process of creating an auggie. They ensured that participants understood how to use the application
and were able to send and receive auggies during the onboarding session.

During the two-week study, the participants were asked to send at least one auggie to their
partner daily. This instruction was not a strict requirement, but rather a means to encourage
participants to send auggies to each other. All participants were compensated fully regardless of the
number of auggies they sent, and were only excluded from our analyses in extreme cases (e.g., only
sending one default auggie with no changes). While more freely using the app could potentially
reveal how it fits naturally into participants’ lifestyles, we encouraged minimal usage to ensure
enough engagement during the study to inform our understanding of participants’ experiences
with the app.

To understand participants’ experiences, we asked participants to complete brief daily surveys
and two semi-structured interviews during the study. The daily surveys included open-ended
questions about the auggies that they sent and received, their perceptions of effort using Auggie,
and any technical issues they faced (see supplementary materials). We asked participants to fill
out a minimum of three surveys per week. After the first week, the participants completed a
30-60 min semi-structured mid-study interview over Google Meet, which included questions about
participants’ experiences creating and receiving auggies, their perceptions of effort and AR while
using Auggie, and comparisons between Auggie and other communication tools that they used
(see supplementary material). The interviews were also used to clarify and follow-up on responses
to their daily surveys for more detail. At the conclusion of the study, participants were offboarded

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Lei Zhang, Tianying Chen, Olivia Seow, Tim Chong, Sven Kratz, Yu Jiang Tham, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Rajan Vaish,
and Fannie Liu
12

Table 2. Auggie Usage Data

Pair IDs # of Auggies # of Animation # of Voicenote # of Drawing # of Outfit* # of Music

1a, 1b
2a, 2b
3a, 3b
4a, 4b
5a, 5b
6a, 6b
7a, 7b
8a, 8b
9a, 9b
10a, 10b
11a, 11b
12a, 12b
13a, 13b
14a, 14b
15a, 15b

Mean
SD**

8, 8
8, 6
16, 17
12, 8
8, 11
6, 8
7, 9
14, 13
13, 7
17, 15
17, 3
11, 16
21, 25
8, 8
7, 10

11.2
5.0

* Outfit: t-shirt image.
** SD: standard deviation.

8, 7
8, 6
11, 8
11, 8
6, 10
6, 8
7, 8
14, 11
9, 7
17, 12
15, 3
10, 16
20, 25
6, 4
7, 10

9.9
4.8

8, 5
4, 6
11, 17
9, 5
6, 4
6, 4
3, 9
5, 10
8, 1
12, 15
13, 3
1, 0
5, 9
0, 2
7, 4

6.4
4.3

7, 0
1, 0
5, 2
8, 3
1, 3
3, 2
0, 3
6, 5
4, 3
17, 14
4, 1
8, 16
5, 6
4, 5
2, 9

4.9
4.4

7, 5
0, 0
2, 11
3, 1
1, 4
4, 3
2, 1
2, 5
2, 0
16, 13
2, 1
4, 7
3, 0
2, 4
4, 9

3.9
3.9

5, 3
0, 0
0, 1
7, 5
0, 0
1, 1
1, 0
0, 2
0, 0
3, 2
6, 0
6, 4
5, 1
3, 3
1, 3

2.1
2.2

and completed an exit interview and survey, which were similar to the mid-study interview (with
additional questions about any changes in their usage and perceptions of Auggie) and entry survey,
respectively. Throughout the study, we also recorded each user interaction in Auggie with the
corresponding user id, timestamp, and interaction event to track their overall usage of Auggie. Our
study proposal and protocol were reviewed internally by a panel consisting of independent privacy
engineering and legal teams to ensure that the subject matter and approach complied with ethical
standards and that participants’ data was processed appropriately.

5.3 Data Analysis
We analyzed users’ behavioral data and the transcriptions of the mid-study and exit interviews. For
the behavioral data, we parsed and cleaned the system event data and the message content from
the server, forming descriptive results of the usage of Auggie. For the qualitative analysis of the
interview data, we took a grounded theory approach [55]. Two researchers first performed open-
coding on three randomly selected participants’ transcripts, identifying and labeling similarities
across participants’ experiences with Auggie in order to develop a codebook. Three researchers
then refined the codebook on another subset of participant transcripts, individually coding the same
transcripts. The researchers validated the codebook on two additional participants’ transcripts,
meeting frequently to discuss disagreements. After achieving high inter-rater reliability, with a
Krippendorff’s 𝛼 above 0.8, they divided and coded the rest of the transcripts in parallel. Finally,
we performed axial coding to group related codes into themes according to our research questions,
which we refined during the paper writing process.

6 RESULTS
Participants’ experiences using Auggie during the study suggest that they indeed engaged in effort
while crafting animated AR experiences for their partner. As Table 2 shows, participants sent an

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Auggie: Encouraging Effortful Communication through Handcrafted Digital Experiences

13

average of 11.2 auggies, with animations as the most frequently used component (10/11 auggies on
average), but the number of auggies sent varied widely across participants. Based on the interviews,
this was partly due to different perceptions of Auggie usage scenarios, where some participants
perceived everyday usage while others preferred it for special occassions. For instance, P13b, who
sent 25 auggies in total, described Auggie as “similar to Messenger or Snapchat where we’re just
sending little bits of our updates every day.” On the other hand, P11b sent 3 auggies in total, and
described using it for special occasions “like a birthday or an anniversary,” rather than daily, viewing
Auggie as “mostly about creating something new” and not “sharing anything about [themselves].”
Additionally, in line with our design motivations, we found that participants perceived how
much effort their partners put into crafting through “behind-the-scenes” videos. As one participant
pointed out, with this feature, “you know where this person is...you could kind of see if they put
effort into making these auggies or if they didn’t” (P6b).

In the following subsections, we provide more detailed insights into the participants’ usage and
perceptions of Auggie. We center our findings around two major themes: 1) how digital handcrafting
encouraged people to engage in effortful communication, and 2) the effects of handcrafting in the
digital space.

6.1 Encouraging Effort through Handcrafted Digital Experiences
Overall, our results suggest that the design of Auggie encouraged effort by promoting a sense of
agency, creating the feeling of gift-giving, and enabling digital storytelling experiences through
the process of crafting auggies. Participants felt they had control over the creation process, which
encouraged them to invest effort into crafting unique personal experiences for their partner as if it
was a gift. Participants also highlighted the ability to craft stories that allowed them to express
themselves beyond the possibilities of the physical world.

6.1.1 Agency over handcrafting encouraged effort. Agency refers to the awareness and control over
one’s action [59]. Participants reported having agency over crafting their auggies. The design of
Auggie provided participants with a variety of crafting options such as animation to orchestrate a
story, 3D drawing to embellish the environment, music to set the mood, and voice note to express
themselves. These elements together provided wide control over what the final experience would
look like and further enabled users to craft experiences that feel personal:

“It’s a lot more personal compared to all the other apps that are out there, espe-
cially because you control the bear and because you’re able to modify all of its
functions and all the other features. It’s basically, you create it.” -P2b

In addition, participants’ agency over auggies evoked a sense of accomplishment and ownership.
More specifically, participants felt proud of themselves after investing effort and using creativity in
the crafting process, especially given that many of them did not have artistic backgrounds. Through
this process, they could feel like creators, and the experiences they created belonged to them:

“I’m not an artist at heart or anything like that, so drawing a 3D flower and
having it visibly come off as that was really interesting to see. I was really proud
of that to the point I took screenshots myself of it when I finished because I was
really proud of it.” -P10a

“I think it’s just that you have this idea in mind and you pretty much just bring
it into a world by either making the bear do something or by drawing it. It
really brings your thoughts into the real world. I think that that’s also a very big
component and what makes it meaningful is that you created it, so really, it is
yours.” -P12b

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Lei Zhang, Tianying Chen, Olivia Seow, Tim Chong, Sven Kratz, Yu Jiang Tham, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Rajan Vaish,
and Fannie Liu
14

With the benefits of agency, the digital handcrafting process became meaningful to participants,
and sparked joy in the process of creating for someone else. As such, participants became more
willing to invest effort into creation:

“I think the most meaningful part was when I saw it come together as it was
loading in for me to send to my partner. That was the part where I realized that I
had created every single bit of that message...the drawing and the shirt and that
storyline, I created without my own knowledge. That was really meaningful to
me because I’m not outwardly a creative person. I found that in this app, I was
able to explore those features a little more and find some joy in what I created,
even if it wasn’t perfect.” -P10a

6.1.2 Treating the craft as a gift encouraged effort. Many participants treated a crafted auggie like
a gift or a hand-drawn or handwritten card. In particular, participants drew from the agency they
had over handcrafting to treat the craft like a gift. Since they were given several crafting options,
they described the process as similar to spending effort in preparing a gift or a gifting a card to
their partner.

“I feel like it’s like you want to make a gift. Auggie is like you’re trying to create
something. Because the bear is like a small board, and you’re trying to add image,
motions, some actions, musics, voice message, so it’s like you’re trying to create
something... It’s like when you create something, you will take more effort to do
that... to send something that’s very caring for them.” -P8b

Participants also described the process of sending their auggies to their partner as a special

experience, where blowing on the AR airplane felt like taking a “moment” of care:

“I think of when you’re sending it off there’s a really the intentional blow into
your microphone. You send off a little bear, a little airplane. It’s like, ‘Oh yes, it’s
come all the way to me.’ It’s a lot different than this is a text message it’s going
to loop like right across the wireless networks and everything like that. You got
a little considerate moment. That’s like, ‘Oh yes, I’m sending off the little thing.
Goodbye.”’ -P12a

Participant’s perceptions of auggies as a gift were further reinforced by their experiences receiving
auggies from their partner. Participants reported feeling a sense of anticipation and gratitude when
receiving an auggie, similar to feelings they would have when receiving a gift or card in real life.
For example, one participant talked about the excitement of not knowing what the auggie would
bring, comparing the process of viewing it to unwrapping a gift:

“...really just seeing the little story unfold. My partner doesn’t talk to me before I
view it to say, this is what I said or anything. Obviously, it’s a surprise when [I
watch] it. This also goes into gift-giving, it’s almost like unwrapping a present.
It’s a little bit of suspense and seeing like, oh, what’s going to happen here?” -P12b

Participants also described feeling of gratitude when receiving auggies, similar to receiving a

gift, due to the effort they perceived was involved in crafting it:

“I feel like there’s a lot of similarities [between an Auggie and a real-life gift].
I feel like one of the biggest ones is whenever I receive a gift, I feel like a little
bit grateful, that bit of gratitude because you think to yourself like, ‘Oh, man.’
The person who’s giving you a gift or whatever, they’ve put in a lot of work into
it.” -P12a

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Auggie: Encouraging Effortful Communication through Handcrafted Digital Experiences

15

Finally, prior work has found that the motivations of gift-giving include not only social norms
such as birthdays, but also altruism (e.g. showing comfort) [61]. Aligned with this work, we found
that participants felt encouraged to invest effort into crafting auggies like gifts for not only planned
occasions, such as birthdays, but also day-to-day occasions, such as providing emotional support
to their partner:

“As well as it allows for a fun personalized message, which could be used in
that gifting aspect because you could use this incentives to create a personalized
Happy Birthday to someone that you might not see all the time or be able to
express some emotion a little more directly and more personable than via social
media.” -P10a

“Both of us are actually sick at the moment so she stayed home the other day, so
that’s when I sent that [auggie]. I know that that had made her laugh, to see it
jumping around and moving so quickly. I know that it was nice for her to hear
that I missed her even though she was sick.” -P10b

6.1.3 Crafting stories beyond physical limits encouraged effort. Participants were also motivated
to invest effort due to the ability to create stories beyond their physical limits. As mentioned in
the previous section, the design of Auggie provides a set of crafting tools that opens up creative
possibilities. Some participants saw the virtual bear character as a representation of themselves
that they could equip with new abilities or actions that would be physically difficult for them to
achieve in real life. With the new capabilities, participants were encouraged to tell imaginary or
past stories. For example, one participant described an auggie that they created for their friend,
where they animated the bear to go out into the rain when they could not:

“...my friend just moved from [my city] to another city and it is raining. I [made
the] auggie, I [recorded the environment] outside of my window and I made the
bear walk around the grass and I [recorded] a video and sent it... I can’t go out
there if it is raining but the bear can... If I want to jump [on the table], I can’t
jump on the table but the bear can jump on the table.” -P8a

In addition to physically difficult experiences, participants felt encouraged to invest effort since
they could express themselves in new ways that they might not feel comfortable doing in real life.
For example, one participant created an auggie in which the bear banged its head against a wall to
show that they were cringing after a meeting:

“It could be comic relief, and it’s easier to convey the head banging against a wall
with the bear instead of me doing that because it will look strange if I show a
video of myself doing that.” -P2b

Lastly, by blending virtual content with the physical environment, AR offered a sense of embodi-
ment and situatedness, such that participants felt that the virtual content actually exists within
the physical world and could interact with the environment in an unconventional way. Such
interactions triggered serendipitous experiences that motivated them to invest effort in order to
tell a unique story:

“I went to the kitchen, and we [have a] cast iron, so we don’t move it very often.
It was just sitting on the stove, and I pointed the camera at it, it takes a second,
and the [bear] rendered, and it just rendered it directly standing in the pan and I
started laughing. I was like, ‘I’m just–great, I’m going to send this, this is hilarious,
it’s just standing in my pan.’ Yes, so, I drew a heart, I was laughing, I was like, I
swear I’m not cooking the auggie...was like my audio note that went with it. It

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Lei Zhang, Tianying Chen, Olivia Seow, Tim Chong, Sven Kratz, Yu Jiang Tham, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Rajan Vaish,
and Fannie Liu
16

was just funny. Again, it was that real interaction with the environment I think
is what made it special.” -P5a

This potential for unexpected and physically impossible interactions with the physical environ-
ment (e.g., a bear standing on a pan) can trigger users to invest more effort into creating a whole
story and providing context around that interaction, such as adding 3D drawing and voicenotes
while expressing their surprise and joy.

Limits of expressiveness and creativity support discouraged effort. While the design of Auggie
6.1.4
encouraged effort through its gift-like and storytelling crafting process, some participants reported
their unwillingness to invest effort with Auggie due to limitations in its expressiveness for certain
contexts. For example, one participant commented that Auggie is not suitable for serious situations:

“My friend was going through some family stuff the last two weeks. Her dad was
in the hospital, so that’s more of a serious and emotional topic. It didn’t feel very
personal or sensitive to send my communications about that with her through
Auggie, mainly probably because it feels, although Auggie’s an extension of me,
its like coming from an AR bear versus me personally” -P4a

In this case, crafting with our tool could be inappropriate and undesirable to users, where a
different level of personal communication may be necessary. In addition, our system can only send
the virtual bear character in AR, excluding any physical objects from the sender’s environment.
This design discouraged some participants from investing effort into crafting as they were unable
to accomplish the expressions they wanted with their surrounding objects, which they felt were
essential to creating personal stories. For example, one participant described her frustration with
the inability for the bear to interact with their household objects or her cat:

“I would like [to] dance the little bear around my wineglass or have the bear
petting my cat but the cat or the wineglass doesn’t really go to her [experi-
ence]. I’m having the bear do these funny things, but she’s not seeing it in my
environment.” -P4b

Finally, several participants faced eventual creativity blocks in the crafting process. This dis-
couraged effort as participants did not know what to create. For example, one participant reported
having a difficult time coming up with ideas for an auggie, heightened by their static physical
environment over the course of the study:

“I think my problem was I ran out of ideas and I’ve also ran out of new scenery...I
think if I had new scenery, it’d give me more ideas how to use it, but I’m mostly
just sitting in front of my desk every single day so as a result, my auggies, I just
haven’t gotten any new inspiration.” -P1b

6.2 The effects of digital handcrafting
We also sought to understand how the effort encouraged through digital handcrafting might affect
participants’ perceptions of the experience (both as a sender and receiver) and connections with
their partner. We found that the design of Auggie had the potential to influence more authentic
social connection between partners that felt effortful yet lightweight. Participants also reported
feelings of social support and presence through handcrafted digital experiences. We describe these
in detail below.

6.2.1 Personal and authentic connection. Our results suggest that effort through digital handcrafting
can connect people in more personal and authentic ways, specifically by reflecting the creator’s
personal expressions. In Auggie, the bear’s animations and recorded audio felt especially personal,

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Auggie: Encouraging Effortful Communication through Handcrafted Digital Experiences

17

because the creator’s postural and auditory characteristics were embodied in the bear. As previously
mentioned, participants often viewed the bear as representative of themselves; thus, they could
animate it to express their internal feelings or simulate their actions. One participant compared
this process to existing social platforms:

“There is a lot of toxicity found in social media, and this false portrayal of people’s
lives sometimes. With Auggie, I think that removes those from the equation, and
actually allows you to just be yourself by creating what you want to or creating
something for your partner that will be meaningful, without feeling the pressure
of society to do something a certain way or make it look a certain way or anything
like that. You can just purely have fun with it and enjoy your time using it without
those pressures present.... No auggie will be like another auggie. Whereas there
are Snapchat filters where it will make you look like someone that you’ve never
met. With this, you really get to just be yourself and have fun with it.” -P10a

Some also described Auggie’s potential for inside jokes and comic relief (P2a, P12a), enabling
expressions that are comfortably authentic representations of themselves. For example, one par-
ticipant created an animation of the bear leaving work and walking out of the lab, as if it was
themselves:

“The benefit that I really like is the movement of auggies, which is a personified
version of you. It shows your partner or whoever you’re sending it to what
you’re doing. It already feels a little bit more personal [than other communication
tools].” -P2b

6.2.2 Lightweight connection. We found that participants viewed their communication through
digital handcrafting as low-stress and low-urgency due to its resemblance to a letter, greeting
card, or postcard (as described in section 6.1.2). Similar to receiving letters and cards in real life,
receiving an auggie is exciting and meaningful, but does not require an immediate response through
Auggie or other communication means (e.g., text, phone call). Aligned with this, 70% of participants
reported in their surveys that they did not expect an immediate response from their partner for
the auggies they sent. Therefore, despite the effort necessary to create auggies, the asynchronicity
of the handcrafting experience made it feel lightweight, an informal and playful way to convey
something interesting or spontaneously show “I’m thinking of you.”

“I guess it’s just the fact that I’m thinking about a lot throughout the day and
they’re very small, not very important thoughts, they’re random thoughts or
information that I read about online. Just these very small things that maybe are
not important enough to save for later to discuss or stuff can be shown through
this Auggie since they’re a really quick and low commitment.” -P11a

This shows that the feeling of lightweight and low commitment resulted in a casual way of using
our system, similar to a conversation starter. This approach demonstrates further resemblance
to how a postcard is used in communication: effortful in the creation and sending process yet
lightweight enough to serve as a catalyst to deeper conversations. For P11a, they were able to
express random thoughts such as a song that got stuck in their head or a meme they saw online
that they wanted to share with their partner, using tools such as Auggie’s music and customizable
outfit features. While participants could have expressed these ideas through other communication
means, such as messaging apps, P3b commented on the value of crafting them through Auggie:

“[Auggie] may be more like a postcard. [It’s] not quite an instant message. When
you sign it, your partner may check it after a while and your message in Auggie

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Lei Zhang, Tianying Chen, Olivia Seow, Tim Chong, Sven Kratz, Yu Jiang Tham, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Rajan Vaish,
and Fannie Liu
18

is quite vivid, not like other instant communicate [sic] apps like WeChat or
Facebook or something.” -P3b

This aspect of Auggie’s design consequently lead some participants to feel closer to each other
at the end of the study. For example, one participant expressed a greater appreciation between her
and her partner because of these lightweight “conversation starters” (P2b):

“We’ve been getting closer... I definitely felt like she appreciates our time more
or our interactions more and I do too... I think it does add something to our
relationship in an interesting sense. We’ve gotten to talk a lot more because of
it.” -P2b

Feelings of presence. Participants felt that the situatedness of handcrafting in AR and inclusion
6.2.3
of the partner bear character helped enable a sense of presence. Similar to how participants viewed
the bear as a self-representation, participants viewed the partner bear as a representation for their
partner. By superimposing the virtual representations of participants into their partner’s physical
world, the design of Auggie helped create a feeling of “being there”:

“To me, it’s the idea of putting some avatar of yourself for the recipient in the
scene. You know a good analogy is when you want to be with your friends but
one of them is missing and you take a group photo and you hold up your hand
and then you’re like, ‘You should be here, your head should be where my hand
is.’ It’s like that. To me, it’s sort of that idea. It’s like some sense of you should
be here, you would enjoy this or like – yes, that’s really what it resonates as for
me... you make them dance or move around together, or you try to make them
hug or something... that’s where it gives me that connection of like my sister and
I were sitting together in person somewhere....” -P5a

This highlights how the bear character could be used as a proxy for the recipient, enabling
creators to incorporate their partners in the stories they were creating. This included scenarios
where the bear representations of both people could interact with each together, thus contributing
to feelings of togetherness. At the same time, this feeling of presence can have an emotional and
social impact, which helped participants feel closer:

“One thing [about Auggie] was since we stay far apart, it is easier to connect. I
feel like I’m right there with her, so it’s kind of give me the warmth or– When I
miss her, it’s like I’m right there with her. It’s kind of an intimate or warm feeling
that I get from that. That is what I feel like.” -P14b

7 DISCUSSION
Our results demonstrate that the design of Auggie offers a sense of handcraftedness that encourages
digital effort, and subsequently has the potential to encourage feelings of personal connection and
presence. At the same time, our findings suggest that effortful communication should be carefully
designed, as effort in the wrong contexts could lead it to become meaningless and undesirable.

As prior research has pointed out, effort is widely understood as a desirable concept in inter-
personal relationships, as it is interpreted as a sign of mutual affection and care [5]. However,
personal effort invested in communicating within these relationships is frequently entangled with
the concept of procedural effort, referring to the work required to operate an interactive system
[42]. This nuance can be lost in the design of communication systems, where any effort is systemat-
ically perceived as difficult to use, negative, and thus minimized in a system [14]. Message Builder,
for example, involves both personal and procedural effort in accessing and writing lengthy text
messages, but some users perceived the system as demanding and inconvenient [31].

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Auggie: Encouraging Effortful Communication through Handcrafted Digital Experiences

19

In comparison, our approach attempts to provoke effort in a digital context by making the
highly personal effort task of handcrafting less procedurally effortful. Our findings showed that
the experience of using Auggie was indeed perceived as effortful on a personal level, and, despite
investments in time and experimentation, still described as lightweight and approachable on
a procedural level. The results suggest that designers can leverage playfulness, flexibility, and
asynchronicity to integrate effort into communication for greater social connection.

Based on the concept of procedural and personal effort, we highlight the opportunities and
challenges of effortful communication over technology, and discuss design recommendations drawn
from our results. We focus our discussions on these two types of effort within social communication
systems: on the procedural side, making effort approachable by reducing the barrier of interacting
with the system; and on the personal side, making effort meaningful through creating unique and
personal content and expressions for communication.

7.1 Designing for approachable effort
While prior work suggests that procedural effort can be valuable when conveying personal com-
mitment [29], excessive procedural effort can have significant impact on a user’s motivation to
interact with a system [31, 51]. Based on our findings, we discuss implications for design that can
make effort more approachable to people, focused on reducing procedural barriers associated with
interacting with a digital communication system.

7.1.1 Masking the heaviness of effort with playfulness. Excessive procedural effort can have an
innate sense of heaviness or undesirability [42]. We found that the design of Auggie’s effortful
experience, including playful animations and engaging visuals, helped make the procedural aspects
of crafting (i.e., the step-by-step of putting the craft together) fun and enjoyable. This demon-
strates how playful design can distract people from the potential tedium of required effort with
a joyful, more lightweight experience. This aligns with game design research, where designers
who aim to change perceptions or teach about conventionally “heavy” or “boring” topics, like
unconscious biases or cybersecurity, face resistance from users. To solve this, researchers have
created interventions that use playful content, such as entertaining storylines or cute imagery, to
distract from the heaviness of the topic [9, 28]. We suggest that future researchers and practitioners
exploring effortful communication integrate playfulness alongside effort to reduce the barriers of
undesirable procedural work. For example, future effortful communication systems might employ
similar storylines to generate or deliver the content being communicated (e.g., through whimisical
characters or objects), or utilize “gamification” attributes such as stickers or reward systems based
on effort. At the same time, we highlight the importance of carefully designing such playful features
so as not to take away from intrinsic, personal motivations behind effort.

7.1.2 Lowering the skill required to generate content. Communication inherently involves the
generation of content to be communicated, a process that could involve a lot of skill depending
on the content or background of the sender. Moreover, handcrafting that content (e.g., creating
it from scratch) can feel more personal [16, 17], but require greater expertise (e.g., in drawing
or animation). In our research, we aimed to reduce the barrier of entry to content creation by
providing a small and compact set of intuitive creation tools, and found that even people who
self-described as non-artistic were able to create experiences that were personal, relatively complex,
and aesthetically pleasing. This demonstrates the benefits of designing simplified, more widely
accessible tools that can create sophisticated personal content for effortful communication.

Future work might also draw inspiration from past research has that has investigated how
to lower the barrier for creating communication content, particularly involving system support.
For instance, the “Lily” system makes lyrical recommendations to support people in expressing

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Lei Zhang, Tianying Chen, Olivia Seow, Tim Chong, Sven Kratz, Yu Jiang Tham, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Rajan Vaish,
and Fannie Liu
20

affection [32]. For artistic content, researchers have developed systems that can generate digital
outlines to guide novices in drawing [8], or correct imperfections in drawings [26]. At the same
time, polished content could feel less “handcrafted” or personal if the system has a high degree of
control over the output compared to the user, replacing the user’s efforts [27, 45]. Future research
should further explore the appropriate balance for system support versus user agency that can
lower barriers to content creation while retaining authenticity.

7.1.3 Reducing pressure with asynchronicity. The asynchronous design of Auggie helped reduce the
pressure to communicate on both the sender’s and receiver’s side. As suggested by prior work [31],
asynchronicity can ensure that a sender has sufficient time to invest effort in their communication.
Compared to a more synchronous exchange, such as a back-and-forth conversation, participants
could take the time to carefully craft an experience for their partner. Similarly, on the receiver’s end,
participants naturally related receiving auggies to receiving a greeting card, i.e., something that
one can treasure and keep but not necessarily respond to immediately. Consequently, the crafted
content can become a precious moment to be treasured, rather than hogging on one’s mental
capacity. Thus, future researchers and practitioners might consider optimizing for asynchronicity,
where people have time to craft and reflect on the content of their communication. For example, this
could include an asynchronous co-creation process, where people can collaboratively craft content
based on their own time and reflect on each others’ additions to the craft, or virtual “mailbox”
spaces that people can join at any time and create content to leave behind for others.

7.2 Creating meaning in effort
In this section, we highlight design implications for heightening meaningful personal effort in
communication, which, as our results suggest, has the potential to facilitate feelings of connection
and presence. In particular, we focus on characteristics that can help frame communication as a
gifting experience. From our study, participants described finding auggies meaningfully effortful
because they felt like gifts. Interestingly, this is distinct from prior work suggesting that digital gifts
lack specific elements that make physical gifts more meaningful in comparison [37]. Building on
this work, our results suggest that the design of Auggie incorporated key attributes and rituals of
gifting that can build meaningfulness, such as personalization, “physical” wrapping and exchange,
and visible effort [37]. We detail three potential design directions along these dimensions.

7.2.1 Providing channels for personalization. Spence suggests that efforts to personalize a gift and
create shared memories can provide a sense of inalienability, or the sense that the “spirit” of the
gift giver remains with the gift even after it’s sent, making it unique from simply shared content in
communication [52]. Our study suggests that a variety of creation channels that act as a scaffold to
guide effort [31] can help to achieve personalization. The variety of channels allows the participants
to create personalized communication content for the recipient that feel less like a “message” and
more like a story through combinations of different elements, such as characters, animations to
represent actions, drawings for props, and background music for mood.

We encourage future researchers and designers to consider a range of effortful “building blocks,”
where people can invest effort into assembling content that is unique and personal for someone
else. For example, in the context of social media, Snapchat and Instagram emulate this by providing
the function for the users to add in stickers, text, sound, and filters to the photos they share. For text
messaging applications, this personalization could happen in not only the content of the message,
such as through kinetic typography or font options, but also the application background, message
bubbles, and sticker options, and keyboards [20, 21]. Going beyond communication applications
that use 2D content (e.g. images and texts), future work can also explore possible channels of
personalizing 3D content (e.g. 3D scenes and characters) for others, such as customizing facial and

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Auggie: Encouraging Effortful Communication through Handcrafted Digital Experiences

21

postural expressions of virtual characters or customizing elements of the virtual environment like
the background or surrounding objects.

7.2.2 Bridging physicality. Prior work suggests that physicality can bring meaning to gifting, par-
ticularly in the rituals of wrapping and co-located exchange [35, 37]. While Auggie did not involve
physical gift wrapping or co-location, we found that the situatedness and physical interactions
incorporated in the design helped convey a sense of physicality. For example, our results suggest
the process of sending and receiving the content acted as a “hybrid wrapping,” or the wrapping
of digital gifts in physical material and vice versa [35]. Senders took a “considerate moment” in
blowing wind to send their auggie off on an airplane, and receivers landing the airplane and opening
the auggie felt like they were unwrapping a gift. Future work might consider designing similar
physical interactions to emulate this effortful wrapping process, such as body gestures (e.g., tossing
the content into the air) or facial expressions (e.g., opening it with with a smile).

For the content itself, auggies were played in the receiver’s environment, but also included the
sender’s environment as part of the content through the “behind-the-scenes” recordings, which
participants enjoyed viewing for additional context (such as in the case of P5a showing the bear
on a frying pan). Since the physical environment is fluid and unique for every user, the ability to
incorporate any surrounding physical object could be beneficial for encouraging people to craft
more personalized and creative experiences that embed aspects of their environment. At the same
time, nudging senders to consider crafting the content according to the receiver’s environment
(e.g., knowing that the receiver usually sits at their desk during the day and would view the content
there) could demonstrate more personal effort through the quality of accounting for the receiver’s
context.

7.2.3 Explicitly revealing effort. Kwon et al. suggest that people may not value digital gifts when
the effort behind them is not evident [37]. Even if a lot of effort was invested, people may not
recognize this effort when only the final content is visible, rather than the holistic experience of
creating it. Aligned with this, our results suggest that explicitly visualizing effort (e.g., through a
“behind-the-scenes” screen recording) as opposed to expecting recipients to implicitly recognize
effort (e.g., through knowledge about how much effort a system involves) can strengthen the
meaningfulness of the communication content and encourage reciprocation.

Researchers and practitioners should thus consider ways to explicitly reveal sender and receiver
efforts involved in communication. For example, platforms like Honk7 use live messaging to make
the thoughtful composition of a message and revision process more explicit. Kelly et al. proposed
a concept called Craft Box that uses a video replay of the sender’s text composition process to
reveal their interactions in the message creation [29]. Similarly, Auggie uses a screen recording to
show the exact creation process, given the variety of visual elements involved. While making it
easier to understand “authentic” effort, such full recordings may not be desirable for lengthier or
more complex effortful processes, as they may introduce “higher costs” for recipients to interpret
and acknowledge the effort [30]. Senders may also have as privacy concerns with recordings, as
they might not feel comfortable exposing the whole creation context to recipients. A less invasive
approach could involve aggregate statistics that quantify the effort process, such as the time
spent, the number of interactions (i.e., procedural tasks), the number of revisions, and so on to
summarize the effort invested. Visualizing traces of effort, such as strokes indicating gestures used
on an interface, could provide a more abstract view into the content creation process, while also
potentially providing a sense of presence [44].

7https://honk.me

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Lei Zhang, Tianying Chen, Olivia Seow, Tim Chong, Sven Kratz, Yu Jiang Tham, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Rajan Vaish,
and Fannie Liu
22

7.3 Limitations
Our results demonstrate that Auggie encourages effortful handcrafting of digital artifacts, which
subsequently has the potential to support meaningful interactions with close others. However, our
work is not without limitations.

First, while deploying Auggie in participants’ everyday lives enabled evaluating the system in
situ, the nature of a field study limits our ability to control for external variables, such as other
communication channels or effortful practices the participants might have engaged in during
the study. This can subsequently affect our ability to isolate the specific effects of our system.
Future work should consider more controlled experiments or the inclusion of comparison groups to
better measure the impact of effort and digital handcrafting on social connection and interpersonal
relationships.

Second, requesting participants to create at least one auggie a day allowed us to understand
the perceptions of the system under frequent usage. However, this requirement may have limited
the scenarios in which effort was meaningful, as participants noted that this frequency did not
necessarily align with how they believed they would normally use the system. This may explain
the “creativity blocks” discussed in Section 6.1.4 that some participants experienced during the
crafting process, where participants described their everyday environment as unchanging. Future
work should explore how the regularity of such interactions and greater variety of social situations
might affect people’s perception and desire to engage in effort, such as through longer studies
across several months. Additionally, while we did not observe specific novelty effects during the
study, it is possible that it played a role, and a longer study would be beneficial to understand how
people would use systems like Auggie in steady state.

Finally, participants primarily participated with close study partners (i.e., friends, family, sig-
nificant others). While we still gleaned valuable and diverse insights from their usage of Auggie,
participants in different relationship types may have different perceptions of the application. For
example, early stage romantic couples may inherently feel motivated to invest more effort more
frequently, as part of strengthening their relationship. Future researchers should thus consider
investigating the usage and value of effortful communication for different relationship types.

8 CONCLUSION
We introduced Auggie, an iOS app for engaging in effortful communication through digitally
handcrafted AR experiences. Through a two-week long field deployment with 30 participants
(15 pairs), we explored how to encourage meaningful, personal effort in digital communication
systems, and its subsequent effects on relationships. Our research revealed that the design of
Auggie inspired participants to invest effort in crafting personalized experiences by evoking a
sense of agency that enabled them to craft gift-like personal stories beyond physical limits. These
immersive, digitally handcrafted experiences subsequently had the potential to enable authentic,
lightweight connection and feelings of presence between partners. At the same time, we found
that limited expressiveness and creativity support for different situations discouraged people in
engaging in effortful communication. We yield insights and recommendations that provide a
starting point for researchers and practitioners to further explore meaningful personal effort in
digital communication.

REFERENCES
[1] Zhen Bai, Alan F Blackwell, and George Coulouris. 2015. Exploring expressive augmented reality: The FingAR puppet
system for social pretend play. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1035–1044.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Auggie: Encouraging Effortful Communication through Handcrafted Digital Experiences

23

[2] Xinlong Bao, Jonathan L. Herlocker, and Thomas G. Dietterich. 2006. Fewer Clicks and Less Frustration: Reducing
the Cost of Reaching the Right Folder. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces
(Sydney, Australia) (IUI ’06). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 178–185. https://doi.org/10.
1145/1111449.1111490

[3] Frank Biocca, Chad Harms, and Judee K Burgoon. 2003. Toward a more robust theory and measure of social presence:

Review and suggested criteria. Presence: Teleoperators & virtual environments 12, 5 (2003), 456–480.

[4] Amy B Brunell, Michael H Kernis, Brian M Goldman, Whitney Heppner, Patricia Davis, Edward V Cascio, and Gregory D
Webster. 2010. Dispositional authenticity and romantic relationship functioning. Personality and Individual Differences
48, 8 (2010), 900–905.

[5] Moira Burke and Robert E. Kraut. 2016. The Relationship Between Facebook Use and Well-Being Depends on
Communication Type and Tie Strength. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 21, 4 (05 2016), 265–281. https:
//doi.org/10.1111/jcc4.12162 arXiv:https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article-pdf/21/4/265/22316334/jjcmcom0265.pdf
[6] Daniel J Canary and Laura Stafford. 1992. Relational maintenance strategies and equity in marriage. Communications

Monographs 59, 3 (1992), 243–267.

[7] Daniel J Canary and Young-Ok Yum. 2015. Relationship maintenance strategies. The international encyclopedia of

interpersonal communication (2015), 1–9.

[8] Salman Cheema, Sumit Gulwani, and Joseph LaViola. 2012. QuickDraw: improving drawing experience for geometric

diagrams. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1037–1064.

[9] Tianying Chen, Margot Stewart, Zhiyu Bai, Eileen Chen, Laura Dabbish, and Jessica Hammer. 2020. Hacked Time:
Design and Evaluation of a Self-Efficacy Based Cybersecurity Game. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive
Systems Conference. 1737–1749.

[10] Adam M Croom. 2015. Music practice and participation for psychological well-being: A review of how music influences

positive emotion, engagement, relationships, meaning, and accomplishment. Musicae Scientiae 19, 1 (2015), 44–64.

[11] Ella Dagan, Ana María Cárdenas Gasca, Ava Robinson, Anwar Noriega, Yu Jiang Tham, Rajan Vaish, and Andrés
Monroy-Hernández. 2022. Project IRL: Playful Co-Located Interactions with Mobile Augmented Reality. Proceedings of
the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 6, CSCW1 (2022), 1–27.

[12] Areti Damala, Pierre Cubaud, Anne Bationo, Pascal Houlier, and Isabelle Marchal. 2008. Bridging the gap between the
digital and the physical: design and evaluation of a mobile augmented reality guide for the museum visit. In Proceedings
of the 3rd international conference on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and Arts. 120–127.

[13] Wendy Doubé and Jeanie Beh. 2012. Typing over Autocomplete: Cognitive Load in Website Use by Older Adults.
In Proceedings of the 24th Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference (Melbourne, Australia) (OzCHI ’12).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 97–106. https://doi.org/10.1145/2414536.2414553
[14] Ben Fehnert and Alessia Kosagowsky. 2008. Measuring User Experience: Complementing Qualitative and Quantitative
Assessment. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices
and Services (Amsterdam, The Netherlands) (MobileHCI ’08). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 383–386. https://doi.org/10.1145/1409240.1409294

[15] Glenn Fleishman. 2018. How Facebook Devalued The Birthday.

https://www.fastcompany.com/40550725/how-

facebook-devalued-the-birthday

[16] Francielle Frizzo, Helison Bertoli Alves Dias, Nayara Pereira Duarte, Denise Gabriela Rodrigues, and Paulo Hen-
rique Muller Prado. 2020. The Genuine Handmade: How the Production Method Influences Consumers’ Behavioral
Intentions through Naturalness and Authenticity. Journal of Food Products Marketing 26, 4 (2020), 279–296.

[17] Christoph Fuchs, Martin Schreier, and Stijn MJ Van Osselaer. 2015. The handmade effect: What’s love got to do with

it? Journal of marketing 79, 2 (2015), 98–110.

[18] Kristine Gloria. 2020. Lessons in Loneliness. Technical Report. Facebook and Aspen Institute. 28 pages. https:

//www.aspeninstitute.org/blog-posts/future-of-loneliness-social-connection-technology/

[19] Carla Griggio, Arissa Sato, Wendy Mackay, and Koji Yatani. 2021. Mediating Intimacy with DearBoard: a Co-

Customizable Keyboard for Everyday Messaging. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445757

[20] Carla F Griggio, Joanna Mcgrenere, and Wendy E Mackay. 2019. Customizations and expression breakdowns in
ecosystems of communication apps. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, CSCW (2019), 1–26.
[21] Carla F Griggio, Arissa J Sato, Wendy E Mackay, and Koji Yatani. 2021. Mediating Intimacy with DearBoard: a
Co-Customizable Keyboard for Everyday Messaging. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. 1–16.

[22] Anhong Guo, Ilter Canberk, Hannah Murphy, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, and Rajan Vaish. 2019. Blocks: Collaborative
and persistent augmented reality experiences. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous
Technologies 3, 3 (2019), 1–24.

[23] Blake Hallinan. 2018. Like: The Informatization of Affect. In Companion of the 2018 ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (Jersey City, NJ, USA) (CSCW ’18). Association for Computing

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Lei Zhang, Tianying Chen, Olivia Seow, Tim Chong, Sven Kratz, Yu Jiang Tham, Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Rajan Vaish,
and Fannie Liu
24

Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 73–76. https://doi.org/10.1145/3272973.3272977

[24] Juan Luis Higuera-Trujillo, Juan López-Tarruella Maldonado, and Carmen Llinares Millán. 2017. Psychological
and physiological human responses to simulated and real environments: A comparison between Photographs, 360
Panoramas, and Virtual Reality. Applied ergonomics 65 (2017), 398–409.

[25] Sara H Hsieh and Timmy H Tseng. 2017. Playfulness in mobile instant messaging: Examining the influence of emoticons

and text messaging on social interaction. Computers in Human Behavior 69 (2017), 405–414.

[26] Emmanuel Iarussi, Adrien Bousseau, and Theophanis Tsandilas. 2013. The drawing assistant: Automated drawing
guidance and feedback from photographs. In ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST). ACM.
[27] Maurice Jakesch, Megan French, Xiao Ma, Jeffrey T Hancock, and Mor Naaman. 2019. AI-mediated communication:
How the perception that profile text was written by AI affects trustworthiness. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–13.

[28] Geoff Kaufman and Mary Flanagan. 2015. A psychologically “embedded” approach to designing games for prosocial

causes. Cyberpsychology: Journal of Psychosocial Research on Cyberspace 9, 3 (2015).

[29] Ryan Kelly, Daniel Gooch, Bhagyashree Patil, and Leon Watts. 2017. Demanding by design: Supporting effortful
communication practices in close personal relationships. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing. 70–83.

[30] Ryan Kelly, Daniel Gooch, and Leon Watts. 2018. Designing for reflection on sender effort in close personal communi-

cation. In Proceedings of the 30th Australian Conference on Computer-Human Interaction. 314–325.

[31] Ryan Kelly, Daniel Gooch, and Leon Watts. 2018. ’It’s More Like a Letter’ An Exploration of Mediated Conversational

Effort in Message Builder. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW (2018), 1–23.

[32] Taewook Kim, Jung Lee, Zhenhui Peng, and Xiaojuan Ma. 2019. Love in Lyrics: An Exploration of Supporting Textual
Manifestation of Affection in Social Messaging. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3 (11 2019),
1–27. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359181

[33] Simon King and Jodi Forlizzi. 2007. Slow messaging: intimate communication for couples living at a distance. In

Proceedings of the 2007 conference on Designing pleasurable products and interfaces. 451–454.
[34] Tobias Klein. 2015. Digital Craftsmanship. 643–654. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-20898-5_61
[35] Boriana Koleva, Jocelyn Spence, Steve Benford, Hyosun Kwon, Holger Schnädelbach, Emily Thorn, William Preston,
Adrian Hazzard, Chris Greenhalgh, Matt Adams, et al. 2020. Designing hybrid gifts. ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human Interaction (TOCHI) 27, 5 (2020), 1–33.

[36] Eleni Kroupi, Philippe Hanhart, Jong-Seok Lee, Martin Rerabek, and Touradj Ebrahimi. 2014. Predicting subjective
sensation of reality during multimedia consumption based on EEG and peripheral physiological signals. In 2014 IEEE
International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME). IEEE, 1–6.

[37] Hyosun Kwon, Boriana Koleva, Holger Schnädelbach, and Steve Benford. 2017. " It’s Not Yet A Gift" Understanding
Digital Gifting. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social
Computing. 2372–2384.

[38] Germán Leiva, Cuong Nguyen, Rubaiat Habib Kazi, and Paul Asente. 2020. Pronto: Rapid augmented reality video
prototyping using sketches and enaction. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1–13.

[39] Siân E Lindley, Richard Harper, and Abigail Sellen. 2009. Desiring to be in touch in a changing communications
landscape: attitudes of older adults. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1693–1702.

[40] Eden Litt, Siyan Zhao, Robert Kraut, and Moira Burke. 2020. What are meaningful social interactions in today’s media

landscape? a cross-cultural survey. Social Media+ Society 6, 3 (2020), 2056305120942888.

[41] Marketta Luutonen et al. 2008. Handmade memories. Trames 12, 3 (2008), 331–341.
[42] Panos Markopoulos. 2009. A design framework for awareness systems. In Awareness systems. Springer, 49–72.
[43] Yuko Minowa and Stephen J Gould. 1999. Love my gift, love me or is it love me, love my gift: A study of the cultural

construction of romantic gift giving among Japanese couples. ACR North American Advances (1999).

[44] Beatrice Monastero and David K McGookin. 2018. Traces: Studying a public reactive floor-projection of walking
trajectories to support social awareness. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1–13.

[45] Andrés Monroy-Hernández, Benjamin Mako Hill, Jazmin Gonzalez-Rivero, and Danah Boyd. 2011. Computers can’t
give credit: How automatic attribution falls short in an online remixing community. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 3421–3430.

[46] Yann Riche, Nathalie Henry Riche, Petra Isenberg, and Anastasia Bezerianos. 2010. Hard-to-use interfaces considered
beneficial (some of the time). In CHI’10 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2705–2714.
[47] Daniela K Rosner and Kimiko Ryokai. 2010. Spyn: augmenting the creative and communicative potential of craft. In

Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems. 2407–2416.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

Auggie: Encouraging Effortful Communication through Handcrafted Digital Experiences

25

[48] Nazmus Saquib, Rubaiat Habib Kazi, Li-Yi Wei, and Wilmot Li. 2019. Interactive body-driven graphics for augmented
video performance. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–12.
[49] Joachim Scholz and Andrew N. Smith. 2016. Augmented reality: Designing immersive experiences that maximize
consumer engagement. Business Horizons 59, 2 (2016), 149–161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2015.10.003
[50] Lauren Scissors, Moira Burke, and Steven Wengrovitz. 2016. What’s in a Like? Attitudes and behaviors around
receiving Likes on Facebook. In Proceedings of the 19th acm conference on computer-supported cooperative work & social
computing. 1501–1510.

[51] Katherine W Song, Janaki Vivrekar, Lynn Yeom, Eric Paulos, and Niloufar Salehi. 2021. Crank That Feed: A Physical
Intervention for Active Twitter Users. In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1–6.

[52] Jocelyn Spence. 2019. Inalienability: Understanding digital gifts. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human

Factors in Computing Systems. 1–12.

[53] Erin Spottswood and Donghee Yvette Wohn. 2019. Beyond the “like”: How people respond to negative posts on

Facebook. Journal of broadcasting & electronic media 63, 2 (2019), 250–267.

[54] Laura Stafford and Daniel J Canary. 1991. Maintenance strategies and romantic relationship type, gender and relational

characteristics. Journal of Social and Personal relationships 8, 2 (1991), 217–242.

[55] A Strauss and J Corbin. 1998. Basics of qualitative research techniques. (1998). https://doi.org/10.4135/9781452230153
[56] Satomi Sugiyama. 2015. Kawaii meiru and Maroyaka neko: Mobile emoji for relationship maintenance and aesthetic

expressions among Japanese teens. First Monday (2015).

[57] Nick Vega. 2017. I just lost a 159-day Snapchat streak and I couldn’t be happier. https://www.businessinsider.com/

snapchat-streak-lost-couldnt-be-happier-2017-8

[58] David West, Aaron Quigley, and Judy Kay. 2007. MEMENTO: A Digital-Physical Scrapbook for Memory Sharing.

Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 11, 4 (apr 2007), 313–328. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-006-0090-7

[59] George Wilson and Samuel Shpall. 2016. Action. In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.), Edward N.

Zalta (Ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

[60] Donghee Yvette Wohn, Caleb T Carr, and Rebecca A Hayes. 2016. How affective is a “Like”?: The effect of paralinguistic
digital affordances on perceived social support. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 19, 9 (2016), 562–566.
[61] Mary Finley Wolfinbarger. 1990. Motivations and symbolism in gift-giving behavior. ACR North American Advances

(1990).

[62] Fabio Zünd, Mattia Ryffel, Stéphane Magnenat, Alessia Marra, Maurizio Nitti, Mubbasir Kapadia, Gioacchino Noris,
Kenny Mitchell, Markus Gross, and Robert W Sumner. 2015. Augmented creativity: Bridging the real and virtual
worlds to enhance creative play. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2015 Mobile Graphics and Interactive Applications. 1–7.

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: July 2022.

