CaminAR: Supporting Walk-and-talk Experiences for Remote
Dyads using Augmented Reality on Smart Glasses
Victor Chu
Andrés Monroy-Hernández
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey, USA

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

8
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
0
9
3
1
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we propose CaminAR, an augmented reality (AR) sys-
tem for remote social walking among dyads. CaminAR enables two
people who are physically away from one another to synchronously
see and hear each other while going on a walk. The system shows
a partner’s avatar superimposed onto the physical world using
smart glasses while walking and talking. Using a combination of
visual and auditory augments, CaminAR simulates the experience
of co-located walking when dyads are apart.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Collaborative and social
computing design and evaluation methods; Mixed / augmented
reality.

KEYWORDS
HCI, Augmented Reality, Remote Social Walking

ACM Reference Format:
Victor Chu and Andrés Monroy-Hernández. 2022. CaminAR: Supporting
Walk-and-talk Experiences for Remote Dyads using Augmented Reality
on Smart Glasses . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3 pages. https://doi.org/
XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

1 INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we design and discuss an augmented reality remote
social walking experience (CaminAR) that uses smart glasses to su-
perimpose a virtual avatar of a remote partner onto the participant’s
environment. By adding a virtual avatar in front of the participant,
we aimed to create a perception of closeness between them and
their partner beyond audio alone.

We evaluated how CaminAR’s combination of visual and audi-
tory augmentations influenced (1) participants’ ability to have a
conversation while walking, (2) social presence, and (3) connect-
edness between the participant and their partner. We found that
CaminAR helped participants and their partner enter a shared real-
ity space, however participants did not like the avatar’s position
and unrealistic responsiveness.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

Figure 1: Participant walking and seeing an avatar of their remote
partner (left). Actual screen captures of CaminAR (right) on smart
glasses based on various head rotations.

2 RELATED WORK
Prior work on remote social exercise has explored the use of audi-
tory and haptic augmentations. For instance, researchers created a
system that enabled two participants to run at a distance [3] while
experiencing their partner’s relative pace through the spatial audio.
The researchers found that the system created a “psychological
sense of togetherness” among participants [4]. Similarly, other re-
searchers investigated the use of haptic augmentations by creating
a system that allowed participants to feel a remote partner’s gait
through vibrotactile anklets. The researchers found that partici-
pants consistently reported that the vibrotactile devices were able
to effectively convey the presence of a remote companion[2]. These
two research systems show the potential for supporting remote
social walking through digital augmentations.

Research on how immersion and media richness affect a par-
ticipant’s ability to understand another’s thoughts and emotions
(copresence/social presence) has shown that higher media richness
results in increased levels of social presence [5]. Similarly, higher
levels of immersion have been shown to evoke the state of mind of
other people as if they were in the same environment [1]. In this
work, we aim to improve both the sensory fidelity of remote social
walking and the immersiveness of the system by mixing multiple
senses – hearing and sight. We designed our system such that a
steady presence of the virtual avatar in the participant’s visual field
would remind participants of the presence of their remote partner,
improving the connection between the dyads[6].

3 CAMINAR SYSTEM
CaminAR enables a participant using smart glasses to see a digital
avatar representing a remote partner superimposed onto their en-
vironment as they go on a walk at the same time (See Fig. 1). The

 
 
 
 
 
 
participant and their partner can talk using their voices while they
view their partner’s avatar through smart glasses. As the participant
changes their direction, the partner’s avatar stays in front of them.
CaminAR was implemented in Lens Studio1 as an AR application
for the Spectacles smart glasses2.

Before the walk, the participant’s partner selects one of six avail-
able avatars to represent them while they walk. To begin a CaminAR
session, participants schedule a walk with a remote partner. When
both parties are ready to walk, they call each other using earbuds.
Those with smart glasses can then wear them and start the Cami-
nAR app. CaminAR works even if only one of the participants has
smart glasses; however, only the person with smart glasses can see
the visual augmentation.

4 EVALUATION
We recruited seven university students to use CaminAR with a
remote partner of their choosing. We asked participants to schedule
a 20-minute social walk with someone they felt comfortable talking
on the phone for that length of time. On the day of their scheduled
walk, the participants were brought outside to an isolated and flat
area where they would be able to roam while walking. During
the walk, they spent 10 minutes with CaminAR and the other 10
minutes without it. We randomized the order of each condition. We
gave a list of conversation starters, e.g., “what is the last book you
have read?”, to prompt people’s conversations. We then interviewed
participants to learn about their experience. See Appendix for the
interview protocol.

5 STUDY RESULTS
5.0.1 Participants Entered a Shared Reality Space. Four out of seven
participants suggested that the visual augmentations allowed them
to enter into a shared reality space with the remote partner. One
participant noted that ”When there is only audio, you have to imagine
a lot more of the other side of the interaction ... With [CaminAR],
there is less work. You actually can see a person.” (P3). This account
illustrates the potential of visual augments to frame a space that
combines the environment of both the participant and the partner
during a remote social walking experience. In this shared reality,
participants found that CaminAR both increases the presence of the
remote partner and improves their ability to hold a conversation
while walking.

5.0.2 Avatar Position was Awkward for Participants. Three of seven
participants found that facing the avatar’s back, rather than the face,
made them feel disconnected. Participants wanted the experience
to simulate co-located social walking where a friend would walk
beside them and not ahead, which we could not implement due
to the limited field of view. That said, a participant noted that
the avatar was “more of a reminder that you are talking to human-
being rather than being a friend” (P6). Although feedback on avatar
position points to areas of improvement for our implementation, a
comparison of the current system to co-located social walking goes
to show the potential of visual augments in this space.

1Lens Studio is an AR authoring environment available at https://ar.snap.com/
2Spectacles are Snap’s smart glasses available at https://spectacles.com

Chu and Monroy-Hernández

5.0.3 Participants Wanted Avatar to be More Responsive. When we
asked how the system could improve, five of seven participants
noted that they wanted more varied and typical interactions be-
tween the participant and the avatar. Specifically, participants noted
that “it felt weird that [the avatar] didn’t turn towards [the partici-
pant]” (P2), making it hard to see the avatar’s face during the walk.
In our implementation, regardless of the participant’s velocity, direc-
tion, and whether they were speaking, the avatar is always in front
with the back of its head facing the participant. With face-to-face
interaction being considered the baseline for social presence [5],
we learned that CaminAR made participants desire higher levels of
emotional connection.

6 LIMITATIONS
We identified several challenges and opportunities for building
AR systems for social walking, however our findings come from
small and homogeneous group of participants, i.e., college students.
Future work should explore recruiting a broader range of partici-
pants and relationships, e.g., co-workers, and conversations, e.g.,
work-related. Furthermore, all of our studies involved only one of
the dyad wearing smart glasses, future work should involve both
individuals wearing smart glasses.

7 DISCUSSION
The results from our study teach us the tension between expec-
tations and immersiveness. As immersion increases in augmented
reality experiences, comparisons to real-life experiences become
more natural. With these comparisons come heightened expecta-
tions from participants. As seen in our study, participants bring up
comparisons to co-located social walking that would have unlikely
come up if there were only audio augmentations. While there is
much room for improvement as noted by our participants, these
numerous references to co-located walking and a desire for higher
levels of social presence in our study are the biggest indicator of
visual AR’s potential for remote socialization.

To improve upon the current system, we should first explore
designs where the avatar is beside the participant and outside of the
field of view of the smart glasses for most of the experience. While
the avatar is “off camera” when the participant looks straight, the
participant can turn their head to see the avatar walking alongside
them. Such a modification has the potential to allow the avatar
to further increase both social presence and connectedness with
the remote partner compared to just audio alone. We could further
incorporate spatial audio to CaminAR so that the sounds of the
remote partner in the participant’s headphones are oriented to
come from the avatar’s relative position. This way, during the call,
the partner’s voice comes from where the avatar is placed, inviting
the participant to look at the avatar.

REFERENCES
[1] John G. Apostolopoulos, Philip A. Chou, Bruce Culbertson, Ton Kalker, Mitchell D.
Trott, and Susie Wee. 2012. The Road to Immersive Communication. Proc. IEEE
100, 4 (2012), 974–990. https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2011.2182069

[2] Tommaso Lisini, Gianluca Paolocci, Davide Barcelli, and Domenico Prattichizzo.

2020. Wearable Haptics for Remote Social Walking.

[3] Florian Mueller, Shannon O’Brien, and Miles Thorogood. 2007. Jogging over a
distance: supporting a "jogging together" experience although being apart. 2579–
2584. https://doi.org/10.1145/1240866.1241045

CaminAR: Supporting Walk-and-talk Experiences for Remote Dyads using Augmented Reality on Smart Glasses

[4] Florian Mueller, Frank Vetere, Martin Gibbs, Stefan Agamanolis, and Jennifer
Sheridan. 2010. Jogging over a Distance:The influence of design in parallel Exertion
games. Proceedings - Sandbox 2010: 5th ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on Video Games
(07 2010), 63–68. https://doi.org/10.1145/1836135.1836145

[5] Catherine S. Oh, Jeremy N. Bailenson, and Gregory F. Welch. 2018. A Systematic
Review of Social Presence: Definition, Antecedents, and Implications. Frontiers in
Robotics and AI 5 (2018). https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2018.00114
[6] Ruth M. Rettie. 2003. Connectedness, awareness and social presence.

A APPENDIX
A.1 Study Protocol
Below is the process we asked participants to follow during the
study:

(1) Each participant was asked to schedule a phone call with a
remote partner during their scheduled time slot that they
felt comfortable talking with for over twenty minutes.
(2) The participant then asks the remote partner which of the
six provided avatars the partner would like to have represent
them.

(3) During the 20 minutes, participants will spend roughly 10
minutes with CaminAR and the other 10 minutes without
(the order of treatments is randomized).

(4) Afterwards, they will be asked the following questions in a

recorded interview:
• What are your thoughts on the CaminAR experience?
• How did your partner’s avatar’s presence change/influence

your ability to have a conversation while walking?

• Did CaminAR impede your ability to walk around?
• How do you think the position of your partner’s avatar was
connected to yours? How did it affect your experience?
• Currently, your partner’s avatar is mostly set directly in
front of you. If there were no constraints, where would
you want to put your partner’s avatar?

• How do you think the position of your partner’s avatar was
connected to yours? How did it affect your experience?
• Currently, your partner’s avatar is mostly set directly in
front of you. If there were no constraints, where would
you want to put your partner’s avatar?

• Currently, your partner’s avatar adapts to user head-turning/direction

changing by waiting for a couple hundred iterations, then
moving your partner’s avatar smoothly towards the user’s
view. What were your opinions on this feature? How did
this feature impact your walk and talk experience?

• Did you notice how your partner’s avatar “adapts” to your
walking speed? What were your opinions on this feature?
How did this feature impact your walk and talk experi-
ence?

• Are there any general suggestions for the application?

– Are there any ways you would like to interact with your

partner’s avatar that you can’t as of right now?

– Is there anything you would do away with?

