XXXX, 2022.

1

When Internet of Things meets Metaverse:
Convergence of Physical and Cyber Worlds

Kai Li, Yingping Cui, Weicai Li, Tiejun Lv, Xin Yuan, Shenghong Li,
Wei Ni, Meryem Simsek, and Falko Dressler

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
9
2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
0
5
3
1
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—In recent years, the Internet of Things (IoT)
is studied in the context of the Metaverse to provide users
immersive cyber-virtual experiences in mixed reality environ-
ments. This survey introduces six typical IoT applications in
the Metaverse, including collaborative healthcare, education,
smart city, entertainment, real estate, and socialization. In the
IoT-inspired Metaverse, we also comprehensively survey four
pillar technologies that enable augmented reality (AR) and
virtual reality (VR), namely, responsible artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI), high-speed data communications, cost-effective mobile
edge computing (MEC), and digital twins. According to the
physical-world demands, we outline the current industrial
efforts and seven key requirements for building the IoT-
inspired Metaverse:
immersion, variety, economy, civility,
interactivity, authenticity, and independence. In addition,
this survey describes the open issues in the IoT-inspired
Metaverse, which need to be addressed to eventually achieve
the convergence of physical and cyber worlds.

Index Terms—Metaverse, augmented reality, virtual reality,
IoT, responsible artiﬁcial intelligence, data communications,
mobile edge computing, digital twins

I. INTRODUCTION

A. IoT applications in Metaverse

Metaverse aims to enable an integrated network of 3D
virtual and physical worlds, where a single and universal In-
ternet is extended to provide users immersive cyber-virtual
experiences in physical worlds. In particular, two popular
applications, i.e., augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality
(VR), are developed to bring connected immersive digital
experiences and social connections to the Metaverse’s users.
According to Consumer Technology Association’s reports,
AR/VR in the digital health care market is estimated to
grow from $960 million in 2019 to $7 billion in 2026 due
to the COVID-19 pandemic [1]. A comprehensive research

K. Li is with CISTER Research Centre, Porto 4249-015, Portugal,
and also with CyLab Security and Privacy Institute, Carnegie Mel-
lon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA (E-mail: kai@isep.ipp.pt &
kaili2@andrew.cmu.edu).

Y. Cui, W. Li, and T. Lv are with the School of Information and
Communication Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecom-
munications, Beijing 100876, China (E-mail: {cuiyingping,
liweicai,
lvtiejun}@bupt.edu.cn).

X. Yuan, S. Li, and W. Ni are with the Digital Productivity and Services
Flagship, Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research Organization
(CSIRO), Sydney, NSW 2122, Australia (E-mail: {xin.yuan, shenghong.li,
wei.ni}@data61.csiro.au).

M. Simsek is with VMware, Inc., Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA (E-mail:

msimsek@vmware.com).

F. Dressler is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Com-
puter Science, TU Berlin, Berlin 10587, Germany (E-mail: dressler@ccs-
labs.org).

report by Market Research Future shows that AR/VR in the
education market can grow at an 18.2% compound annual
growth rate in the next ﬁve years [2].

To support wireless and seamless connected immersive
digital experiences, the Internet of Things (IoT) can be
leveraged in the Metaverse [3], which maps real-time IoT
data from real
life into a digital reality in the virtual
world. The IoT can supplement the experiential interface
of the users into the virtual world created by AR/VR [4].
Take the health awareness application as an example. The
medical IoT devices can be attached to the user’s body
or a sensor-laden body suit to instrument the user’s state,
such as the health conditions that might elicit a response
in the virtual realm [5]. The IoT can also help improve e-
commerce experiences of the virtual ﬁtting room, where the
IoT devices are used to track the movement of the user’s
body. The personal body information could be updated
through data from photos taken on the user’s smartphone or
smart weighing scales, for instance. This allows the users in
the Metaverse to fully immerse in a virtual representation
of the store, which overcomes the experiencing barriers
of traditional online shopping. In addition, the IoT data
can be utilized by the recent Tactile Internet that builds a
network or network of networks for remotely accessing or
controlling real or virtual objects in real time by humans
or machines [6], [7]. The IoT data can provide context
and situational awareness of physical things to AR/VR
applications, while triggering data exchange between the
digital and physical worlds [8]. For instance, an AR device
can react to the user’s ﬁnger gestures, or trigger a cyber-
physical function driven by an event occurring in the
physical world.

The IoT-assisted interaction between real life and the
virtual world helps create a digital twin, a digital reﬂection
of the physical state and condition of a unique physical
thing [9]. To achieve a practical digital twin, the Metaverse
aims to ensure the reﬂection is as close to the real-time
physical state as possible. Due to this distinct feature,
digital twins grow as one of the fundamental applications in
the Metaverse. In professional settings, digital twins can be
constructed with the Tactile Internet as well as the Haptic
Codecs (IEEE P1918.1.1) [10] to make a group meeting
productive since the users can interact with each other while
operating or demonstrating a replica of the hardware or
software prototype. In technical training programs, digital
twins help engineers directly operate 3D representations of
complex systems [11]. The digital twins can also recreate

 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX, 2022.

2

a complete maintenance workshop with a virtual copy of
serviced devices and some mechanical tools for repairing
the device. The digital twins set up a virtual environment
connected with a real workshop in the physical world,
where the maintenance can be carried out remotely. In
urban planning and construction, the digital twins can virtu-
alize a real-world city, where citizens or economic players
can use visual representation to implement a development
plan and discover future urban projects [12].

The Metaverse can be applied to several transaction sce-
narios in the digital economy application while achieving
a high-efﬁciency trade. Essentially, Figure 1 introduces
the typical 6 application scenarios of the Metaverse, in-
cluding collaborative healthcare [13], education [14], smart
city [15], entertainment [16], real estate [17], and social-
ization [18].

Healthcare: We are hurtling into the age of the meta-
verse. The World Economic Forum has predicted that the
introduction of digital services is expected to be one of
the most critical factors in transforming healthcare over
the next decade [13]. Traditional healthcare is a hands-
on personal encounter where doctors and patients meet
face-to-face for diagnosis and treatment. The Covid-19
pandemic [19] has forced people to look for alternatives
that enable patients to be managed out of the hospital
remotely. Before the pandemic, 43% of healthcare facilities
could provide telehealth, which rose to 95% in 2020 [20].
The Metaverse promises to facilitate the development of
telehealth,
the patients can immerse themselves in the
Metaverse through their avatar to have a health consultation
with their doctors.

The Metaverse can help people with disabilities, or
limited mobility live better. For example, people with
hearing or visual weakness can beneﬁt from the Metaverse
technology (e.g., AR or VR) to communicate better; people
with paraplegia can enjoy a healthy life in the Metaverse.
In addition, AR becomes a promising application to em-
power the skills and knowledge-based medical students. For
instance, many technology companies, such as Microsoft
Hololens [21], are developing surgical assistive tools for
on-demand surgical operations. Moreover, the Metaverse
can help with psychotherapy [18]. A virtual and relaxing
environment can be constructed through the Metaverse in
which people with mental disorders can communicate and
interact with avatars.

Education: In recent years,

the Metaverse technolo-
gies in the education sector have gained signiﬁcant mo-
mentum [14]. AR/VR that emphasizes visualization-based
learning concepts is widely used to transform traditional
teaching approaches [22]. For creating engaging and im-
mersive learning environments for students, the Metaverse
is expected to extend a variety of learning institutions,
which can visualize the teaching content and promote
understanding of the learning content. The Metaverse can
also create virtual, safe, but immersive lab environments.
Moreover, some learning materials are difﬁcult to observe
directly or explain in text [23], e.g., the human body’s
structure and functions of an organ system, or the uni-

verse. To enhance the understandability of the learning
materials, AR/VR can be developed to effectively assist the
students with the required constant practice and experience.
For example, Curiscope, an AR company based in Brno,
Czech Republic, developed Virtuali-Tee, an AR-enabled T-
shirt [24]. Virtuali-Tee allows the students to visualize and
examine the inside of the human body as if they were in
an anatomy lab.

Smart city: As a supporting technology in the Metaverse,
IoT-empowered digital twins can utilize the IoT data to
digitize the objects in the physical world, such as roads
and streets, houses, vehicles, and city infrastructures, and
create virtual cities. This is a useful
tool for building
smart cities [15]. With the digital twins, developers and
constructors can easily build a simulation environment that
comprehensively mirrors the physical world. The digital
twins can capture the elements in the smart city, such as
people, vehicles, trafﬁc lights, and buildings. The IoT data
helps map the physical world to form a visible, controllable,
and manageable digital twins city. Essentially, the Meta-
verse is used in the smart city to optimize the allocation of
facilities and resources. For example, Intel and Siemens in
Germany collaboratively develop a smart parking solution,
where the digital twins-assisted meta-boundary platform is
used to manage the local road trafﬁc [25].

Entertainment: The development of Metaverse-related
technologies has greatly improved the immersion of games,
which can effectively enhance user experience, playability,
and fun. A representative Metaverse game is Roblox relying
mainly on VR technology, which has 150 million monthly
active users [26]. Along with the widespread use of pay-
ments and personal information in the Metaverse, a game
based on blockchain technology has been proposed in [27].
The Metaverse also provides an immersive environment and
can be used for large events such as exhibitions, concerts
and book signings. For example, the Korean pop artists
Asepa and Black Pink released new songs and held fan
signings in the virtual world built by the Metaverse [16].
Real estate: This has been listed as the next promising
application entry in the Metaverse [17]. As one of the
key technologies driving the Metaverse, AR/VR provides
customers with a realistic and immersive experience [28].
For example, real estate agents can harness the power
of VR to provide buyers with an immersive virtual tour
of a property. This offers the customer the advantage of
conducting inspections in all conditions and reduces the
time spent out of the house to zero.

Additionally, with the help of AR/VR and AI technology,
the Metaverse has a strong potential to deploy in the interior
design and architectural ﬁelds since it can provide an im-
mersive virtual world and enable real-time interaction [29].
We can not only experience the full spherical panoramic
view of the interior and exterior of the house, but also
directly change the furniture and internal architectures, and
see our dream home in real-time. For example, Beike offers
a virtual renovation platform [30] where customers can see
what they imagine their renovated home will look like,
which helps consumers see the potential of the house.

XXXX, 2022.

3

Fig. 1: The six typical applications of the Metaverse include healthcare, education, smart city, entertainment, real estate,
and socialization.

Urbanbase has developed “AR Scale”, a 3D cloud-based
augmented reality presentation service [31]. Architectural
professionals do not need to create real models to show
others actual building design solutions. Instead, they just
display 3D models on the actual building site through AR
scale using a 1:1 scale model to check harmony in advance
with the surrounding environment and buildings.

Socialization: The Metaverse opens a new application
ﬁeld in terms of human social forms [18]. The Metaverse
breaks the boundaries of time and space, which can provide
various forms of social interaction, bringing people closer
to each other [32]. People can pursue some higher-level
needs beyond the level of the physical world, such as
virtual ofﬁces, virtual dating, and virtual gatherings. With
the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the importance of
telecommuting and remote social networking has become
apparent [33]. The Metaverse can compensate for the
limitations of traditional models and further improve the
functionality of telecommuting and remote social platforms
to create a more authentic social environment.

B. Key contributions of this survey

In this paper, we comprehensively survey four pillar
technologies with their typical applications in the IoT-
empowered Metaverse, namely, responsible artiﬁcial intel-
ligence (AI), high-speed data communications, and cost-
effective mobile edge computing (MEC), and digital twins.
the
Since building the Metaverse is highly complex,
learning process is turned into what is commonly referred
to as a “black box”, which is difﬁcult to interpret. The
responsible AI can be applied to perceive how the IoT
functions in the Metaverse. Speciﬁcally, the responsible AI
is a technique that helps the engineers or data scientists who
develop AI algorithms explain what is exactly happening
inside the IoT applications and how the AI algorithm
leads to a speciﬁc result
in the Metaverse. Therefore,
the AI decision-making processes can be fully understood
according to the ethical, moral, legal, cultural, and socio-
economic consequences in the Metaverse.

Providing the connected AR/VR immersive experiences
in the Metaverse relies on enormous amounts of data
exchange with ultra-low latency, where the nature of haptic
signals and human perception requires 1 ms of latency
at maximum. Since the bandwidth of 4G-based wireless
networks is scarce, the majority of 4G-based AR/VR ap-
plications cannot undertake real-time data communication
with a large number of IoT devices. For example, LTE
wireless systems can only allow a latency of 25 ms at
the minimum [34]. Therefore, lots of research focuses on
IoT networks with ultra-high-speed data communications
for the AR/VR experience.

Keeping the Metaverse’s users engaged and immersive
is important to provide the same experiences as reality.
Essentially, the latency of the IoT device has to be main-
tained lower than the human perceptible limit. To reduce
the latency, the Metaverse applies MEC as a support, where
MEC allows the IoT devices to utilize the nearby com-
munication infrastructures and computing resources [35]–
[37]. By exploiting the MEC, the Metaverse can offer ultra-
low-latency immersive experiences to satisfy the human
perceptible limit, while powering the virtual 3D realm and
IoT networks. MEC can also enable the Metaverse a cross-
cloud computing that creates an open environment across
multi-vendor cloud platforms [38], [39]. This beneﬁts the
Metaverse’s users with on-demand scalability and enhanced
service quality.

As one of the Metaverse’s core building blocks,
the
digital twins create digital replicas corresponding to prod-
ucts and services in the physical world. The digital twins
can also visualize data analysis and allow business orga-
nizations to carry out simulations based on the physical
world’s conditions before making costly decisions [40],
[41]. Implementing the digital twins requires IoT applica-
tions to incorporate low-latency data collection, precise data
modeling, and fusion of heterogeneous sensory data, which
is challenging. Moreover, the implementation is throughout
the product development life cycle, from designing to post-
to improve product
production monitoring and service,
productivity and proﬁtability. With the connection of sens-

SocializationRealestateEnterainmentSmart cityEducationHealthcareTelehealthMobility limitedAssistsurgeryAssist psychotherapyAR&VR-assistedImmersiveteachingenvironmentSafe laboratory environmentCapturecity’sdataPlantheCityOptimize resource allocationVirtual officeVirtual datingVirtualgathering3D apartment viewingVirtual apartmentdesign  GameConcertExhibitionMetaverse’s applicationsXXXX, 2022.

4

ing networks and two-way ﬂow of information [42], this
technology reﬂects any changes in the physical world to
synchronize the digital environment and the physical world.
The digital twins are inter-dependent computer programs
that integrate the IoT [43], [44], AI [45], [46] and semantic
communication [47], [48] to create simulations and predic-
tions of the performance of products or processes.

Digital twins, which include replicas of building facil-
ities [49], operational processes [40], [42], [46], human-
computer interaction processes [50], and social services
such as healthcare [44] and education [51], provide an entry
point for the Metaverse to connect to the physical world.
By deploying a collection of digital twins, the Metaverse
infrastructure is enhanced, and all the potential Metaverse
applications are easier to be driven into reality.

The rest of this survey is organized as follows. In
Section II, we discuss the existing surveys and tutorials
on the Metaverse. Section III describes current industrial
efforts and the key requirements for enabling IoT with the
Metaverse in daily life. In Section IV, we investigate the
four pillar technologies that support the fundamental appli-
cations of the Metaverse: responsible AI, high-speed data
communications, cost-effective mobile edge computing,
and IoT-empowered digital twins. In Section V, we outline
the open scopes and remaining challenges of applying the
four pillar technologies to the AR/VR applications in the
Metaverse. Finally, Section VI concludes the survey.

II. EXISTING SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

In this section, we review some recent studies on the
applications of AI, MEC, and virtual systems in the Meta-
verse.

A. Recent studies

The Metaverse, integrating social activities and AI meth-
ods, incubates service demands from mobile-based always-
on access to connectivity with reality using virtual currency.
A tutorial in [52] presents a Metaverse taxonomy, which
classiﬁes the technologies based on hardware, software,
contents, user interaction, implementations, and applica-
tions. The taxonomy is applied to three case studies on
Ready Player One, Roblox, and Facebook Research, where
the social inﬂuence and technical limitations of the Meta-
verse are discussed. The authors in [18] survey the Meta-
verse’s development
in terms of network infrastructure,
resource management, connected VR, and its convergence.
Three characteristics of
the Metaverse are introduced,
namely, multi-technology dominance (including AR and
blockchain-based economic systems), sociality (including
cultural and legal systems), and hyperspace (which breaks
the boundary between the virtual world and the real world).
A digital twins-native continuum is presented in [53], which
summarizes the development of the Metaverse as three
steps, i.e., digital twins of humans and IoT, native content
creation, and integration of the physical and virtual worlds.
Several technologies, e.g., AR/VR, human-machine inter-
action, AI, robotics, blockchain, and MEC, are explored to

build the ecosystems in the Metaverse, which can be applied
to the application of content creation, data interoperability,
social acceptability, and security. The survey [54] focuses
on the security and privacy issues of the Metaverse. Similar
to [53], the development of the Metaverse contains three
steps, including digital twins, native content creation, and
the integration of the physical-virtual reality. In an AI-
enabled virtual scene, AR/VR devices equipped with IoT
sensors can collect brain-wave signals, facial expressions,
eye or hand movements, and environmental conditions [61].
Adversaries can invade and control the AR/VR devices to
track the users’ locations, biometric features, and users’
identities, which threatens human safety and critical IoT
infrastructures. Current security protection solutions for
the Metaverse, e.g., identity and data management, avatar
clone, digital footprints, situational awareness, and user-
generated content control, are discussed with regard to the
application requirement.

In [55], the authors review the AI-based frameworks,
e.g., supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and re-
inforcement learning, as well as their functionality in the
Metaverse. Several popular AI techniques, such as natural
language processing, computer vision, blockchain, network-
ing, digital twin, and neural interface, are also studied to
improve the user’s virtual experience in physical applica-
tions, such as health monitoring, intelligent transportation,
industrial production, and online shopping. In [56], future
AI development is outlined at a national level, which can
redeﬁne the economic activities, production, and business
demand in a country. The authors take China as an example
and list the main national AI structures, including National
Open Innovation Platforms, National NGAI Development
Experimental Zones, and Pilot zones for innovative applica-
tion of AI. Most of China’s information technology compa-
nies are involved in the structures to provide AI solutions
for online consumer credit services, autonomous driving,
clinical workﬂow, and customizable virtual conversation
assistants.

The Metaverse applications, e.g., AR/VR, and head-
mounted displays, capture a vast amount of biometrical
data, threatening the users’ privacy and security. Consider-
ing humanity, equality, and diversity, the monitoring tools
should be developed to deal with the user’s misbehavior
in the Metaverse, while the tools also encourage positive
behaviors. Thus, the tutorial in [57] envisions that the ap-
plication design in the Metaverse is guided following three
aspects: privacy, governance, and ethical consideration. The
development of virtual worlds in the past decades, from
the individual text-based environment to the Metaverse, is
presented in [58]. The survey summarizes four features
according to the physical and virtual interaction: realism
(enhancing the immersed experience for the user), ubiquity
(allowing the full system access for the existing IoT devices
while maintaining the user’s virtual identity over different
applications), interoperability (enabling the user to have a
seamless uninterrupted virtual experience), and scalability
(supporting a large number of users to run the Metaverse
applications concurrently).

XXXX, 2022.

5

TABLE I: Existing surveys and tutorials on the Metaverse

Paper
[52]
2022
[18]
2021
[53]
2021
[54]
2022
[55]
2022
[56]
2020
[57]
2022
[58]
2013
[59]
2022
[60]
2022
[25]
2022

This survey
2022

Short description
A taxonomy aims to classify the
AI technologies in the Metaverse
The survey about the development status
of the Metaverse applications
A digital twins-native continuum is presented
to summarize the development of the Metaverse
A survey of the Metaverse architecture,
as well as the security and privacy protection
The AI-based frameworks and their
functionality are reviewed
The AI development is introduced as a
national strategy for technological promotion
An overview of the Metaverse development
in terms of privacy, governance, and ethics
The survey summarizes the four features
according to the physical-virtual interaction
Fusing blockchain and AI for the Metaverse
users to enjoy the veriﬁable services
Blockchain and AI can be applied to
IoT-based healthcare applications
An integration of 6G-assisted
edge AI and the Metaverse
Four pillar technologies that leverage IoT networks
for an integration of the physical and cyber world.
The challenges and open issues of the future
development of the IoT-empowered Metaverse.

Key technologies
Hardware, software, contents,
user interaction, and implementations
Network infrastructure, resource management,
connected AR/VR, and blockchain
AR/VR, human-machine interaction, AI,
robotics, blockchain, and MEC
Digital twins, native content creation,
and the integration of the physical-virtual reality
Natural language processing, machine vision,
blockchain, digital twin, and neural interface
Advanced driver assistance, deep learning,
big data, AI ecosystem
Sensory-level privacy, social interaction
privacy, modular governance and ethics
Visual immersion, digital sound,
activity and interaction identiﬁcation
Data veriﬁcation and consensus,
distributed storage, and smart contract
Communication computing infrastructure,
decentralized storage and computation
6G, edge AI, network architecture,
resource allocation, and blockchain

Applications covered
Ready Player One, Roblox,
and Facebook Research
AR/VR, cultural civilization and
legal systems, and hyperspace
content creation, data interoperability,
social acceptability, and security
Identity and data management,
digital footprints, and content control
healthcare, manufacturing,
smart cities, and gaming
Autonomous driving, IoT,
medical industry, everyday consumers
AR/VR, head-mounted displays,
online games, and social networks
Stereoscopic vision, gesture recognition,
and virtual world audio environment
Digital creation, digital asset,
digital market, and digital currency
Remote surgery, AR surgery,
healthcare facilities, medical therapy
Immersion education, telecommuting
videoconferencing, and production

Responsible AI, RIS, mmWave, NOMA,
FL, edge AI, and IoT with digital twins

Smart healthcare, industry 4.0, smart
agriculture, data visualization, ,

In [59], the authors present how blockchain and AI can
be fused into an economic system composed of digital
creation, digital assets, digital market, and digital currency.
Due to enhanced traceability and conﬁdentiality of the
data,
the users in the Metaverse can enjoy immutable
and veriﬁable services, such as cryptocurrency exchanges,
and low-latency transactions and authentication. Moreover,
blockchain and AI can be applied to IoT-based healthcare
applications [60]. The users’ medical data are stored at
different servers worldwide, where the Metaverse processes
personal data using AI techniques. The decentralized stor-
age and computation can extend the scalability of the
services and prevent malicious attacks.

The survey [25] discusses 6G-assisted AI techniques for
the real-time interaction of the users. A basic architecture
of the Metaverse is studied with a physical layer, a virtual
layer, and a technical layer. For serving large-scale AI
models, three 6G-enabled architectures, i.e., edge cloud-
Metaverse, mobile edge cloud-Metaverse, and decentralized
Metaverse, are presented to improve resource allocation
efﬁciency and computing capabilities.

B. Our Contributions

The existing surveys and tutorials describe the Meta-
verse structure, AR/VR applications, digital twins, AI, and
blockchain technologies. In contrast, our survey speciﬁcally
focuses on the IoT-empowered Metaverse, where the real-
time IoT data are leveraged to map the physical world
into a digital reality in the virtual world. We provide
a ﬁne-grained study of the four pillar technologies that
support fundamental IoT applications in the Metaverse,
including responsible AI, high-speed data communications,
cost-effective MEC, and IoT-empowered digital twins. Fur-
thermore, we expatiate the challenges and open issues of

the future development of the IoT-empowered Metaverse,
such as data processing, security and privacy, real-time
3D modeling, scalable cyber worlds, connected mobile
users’ experience, interoperability and uniformity of virtual
platforms, and the barriers of the physical world (details
refer to Section V).

III. INDUSTRIAL EFFORTS AND KEY REQUIREMENTS
FOR ENABLING IOT WITH METAVERSE IN DAILY LIFE

The Metaverse is a massively scaled, interoperable plat-
form for virtual activities, spatially merges the physical
with the virtual world, but in perceived real-time [62]. It
can provide an experience that spans both the digital and
physical worlds, private and public networks/experiences,
and open and closed platforms. In the Metaverse, an unlim-
ited number of participants with with a sense of individual
presence can synchronously and persistently enjoy the same
or even beyond reality type of experiences they would in
the physical world [53]. Each participant corresponds to an
identity of the Metaverse; and can drop into the Metaverse
to conduct social and spiritual activities, e.g., healthcare
and education [13], ofﬁce [18], social, trading, creation,
and entertainment [59] as needed, and then pop back out
these event spaces are anticipated to be
to reality. All
interoperable, and their data is continuous. The Metaverse
will bring a new level of consistency and immersion to
today’s increasingly popular hybrid event formats.

With the COVID-19 pandemic, people have to stay home
for many activities, which has led an increasing number of
people to rely on media and technology to inform and thus
entertain, educate, and socialize [63]. Consequently, the
Metaverse is realized as the next disruptive technology [55]
and currently attracting enormous attention from around

XXXX, 2022.

6

TABLE II: The representative companies and their typical
products

Game maker

Live entertainment

Social platform

Ofﬁce

Hardware

Platform

Algorithm design
and optimization

Roblox (Roblox);
Tencent (Roblox Chinese ver.);
Meta (Horizon World);
Amazon (AMS Cloud Quest);
Epic Games (Fortnite);
ByteDance (Restart the World).
Disney (Theme park Metaverse);
Avex Business Development and
Digital Motion (Virtual Avex Group).
ByteDance (Pixsoul, Party Island);
Baidu (Land of Hope);
Meta (Facebook Horizon).
Microsoft (Mesh for Teams);
Accenture (One Accenture Park).
Meta (Oculus Quest);
Samsung (Gear VR);
Google (Google Cardboard);
Sony (PSVR2);
Lenovo (ThinkReality).
Nvidia (Omniverse);
Sony and Hassilas (Mechaverse).
Google (DeepMind team);
OpenAI lab;
Baidu (Institute of Deep Learning).

the world, since it enables novel forms of engrossing tele-
presence [64].

Many companies are dedicated to launching various
metadata software types, covering areas such as gam-
ing, video conferencing, game development, and AI face
painting. In Dec. 2021, Meta released the game “Hori-
zon World” [65]. Participants can use virtual reality (VR)
headsets to create their own avatars and interact with other
participants’ avatars in this virtual world. ByteDance is now
testing its ﬁrst Metaverse social app, called “Party Island”,
which creates a parallel online universe where people can
communicate and join events in real-time through avatars.
In addition, some companies work on hardware and oper-
ating systems related to the Metaverse, with VR, AR, and
AI the most, and the application scenarios are mostly about
games and social [66]. There are also companies laying out
Metaverse-related technologies in other areas. For example,
Lenovo proposed the concept of “HoloBoard” [67], an im-
mersive future blackboard that uses holographic projection
to create a more immersive teaching classroom. Moreover,
some companies have started to make efforts in building
and optimize the corresponding technologies,
including
the underlying architecture of the Metaverse (Amazon
and Roblox) [54], [68], compute capability, and algorithm
optimization (Google, Baidu, and Microsoft) [69]–[71]. The
representative companies and their products in the area of
Metaverse are shown in Table II.

The IoT-empowered Metaverse has seven key require-
ments, which are immersion, variety, economy, civility,
interactivity, and authenticity and independence, as listed
in Table III and described in the following. Accordingly,
those requirements demand further development of IoT
technologies.

A. Immersive Experience

For the participants to experience the Metaverse as they
would experience the physical world, the nature of high
immersion is essential to the Metaverse [72]. The Metaverse
can be experienced synchronously and persistently by an
unlimited number of participants with an individual sense
of presence, and with continuity of data, such as identity,
entitlements, objects, history, communications, and pay-
ments [73]. Events of any size can be hosted in the Meta-
verse, such as major trade fairs, exhibitions, etc. Moreover,
the Haptic Codecs and Tactile Internet can be developed
in the Metaverse to exchange multi-modal data, such as
the combination of audio, video and haptic information,
over the Internet. This will enable the users experience
with an enhanced virtual presence, immersing in a remote
environment [74], [75].

B. Anywhere, Anytime and Any participant

The Metaverse is a sustainable, widely covered virtual
world, and user access to the Metaverse is not limited by
location or time [76]. Anywhere has two main meanings,
a) Anywhere in the Metaverse: The Metaverse can model
any scenario and guarantee that the participants successfully
access the location or scenario they want to visit; b) The
participants accessing the Metaverse are not limited by
the location: The Metaverse is decentralized, and each
participant can access the Metaverse from anywhere with a
simple device. Anytime: The participants can access the
Metaverse at any time, since time in the Metaverse is
continuous. Any participant: There is no limit to the identity
and number of concurrent participants in the Metaverse.

C. Variety of Events, Places, and Activities

There will be various events and activities happening
in diverse places in the Metaverse at all times. Everyone
can be a part of the Metaverse and participate in speciﬁc
activities and events together and simultaneously with other
participants. To achieve freedom and diversity beyond
reality, including a feature that cannot be ignored: User
Generated Content [68], the Metaverse should also provide
each participant with an individual sense of “presence”.

D. Fully Functioning Economy

Unlike the traditional economy, the Metaverse has an
independent and fully functioning creator economy within
the system [77]. Participants can create and trade new
assets or experiences in the virtual world created by the
Metaverse while enjoying full ownership [78]. Creators can
use their assets or experiences in the Metaverse and trade
them for desired values. Individuals and businesses can
create, own, invest in, and sell a wide variety of “works”
and be rewarded for the “value” they generate that others
recognize.

XXXX, 2022.

7

TABLE III: The typical requirements of the Metaverse and technical demands of IoT

Requirements of the Metaverse
Immersion
(sustainable, synchronous and live)
Anywhere, anytime and any participant

Variety
(heterogeneity, diverse events, places and activities)
Economy
(fully functioning and independent creator economy)
Civility
(diversity, equality, and inclusiveness)
Interactivity
(seamless connection)

Authenticity and independence
(digital copies of the physical world and parallel space)

Technical demands of IoT
High synchronization, low latency, huge data monitoring, and real-time computing;
Ensure network security, privacy, and trust.
The limitation of the network;
The barrier of the platforms;
Ensure network security, privacy, and trustworthiness;
The contradiction between light-weight and computing power, electricity, and diversiﬁ-
cation;
The need of resources to make this virtual world work.
Ensure interoperability.

High synchronization, low latency, huge data monitoring, and real-time computing;
Ensure network security, privacy, and trust.
Different languages and civilizations, how to communicate? Can we rely on SemCom?
Local semantic knowledge base (Sem-KB) vs. cloud Sem-KB.
High synchronization, low latency, huge data monitoring and real-time computing;
The barrier of the platform;
Ensure interoperability.
The accuracy of introducing the physical world into the Metaverse.

E. Independent and Complete Civilization System

A. Responsible AI

The Metaverse has its own system of civilization [79].
We have a life in it, a few people may form communities,
and communities make up large cities, recognize villages,
cities, and even all kinds of rules. Like a social circle,
the participants with different languages and cultural back-
grounds drive various cultural clusters in the Metaverse.
We make the rules in the Metaverse, follow them, and
then live here together to evolve into a civilized society.
everyone makes common rules and then lives on together
in it, evolving into a civilized society.

F. Interactivity

The Metaverse enables seamless connectivity between
users and users, between users and platforms, between
platforms and platforms, and between operating systems
and operating systems, etc [54], [72]. We can create and
use assets, avatars, and experiences in any accessible Meta-
verse without restrictions. In the Metaverse, data, digital
items/assets, content, etc. can be interoperable in unprece-
dented ways. For example, skins of our guns in Counter-
Strike can also be used to decorate guns in Crossﬁre or
gifted to friends via Facebook.

G. Authenticity and Independence

There are digital copies of the physical world and cre-
ations of the virtual world in the Metaverse [80]. It is a
parallel space closely connected to the external reality and
highly independent. Participants in the Metaverse can not
only do what they can do in the physical world but also
achieve things that transcend reality in space.

IV. FOUR PILLAR TECHNOLOGIES OF METAVERSE

In this section, we present the four pillar technologies
that support fundamental applications of the Metaverse,
namely, responsible AI, high-speed data communications,
cost-effective mobile edge computing, and IoT-based digital
twins.

1) Motivation: While AR/VR is at the forefront of the
Metaverse, AI is an important technology that works behind
the scenes to make miracles happen. AI is most useful for
data computations and predictions. It can help improve al-
gorithms for tasks such as avatar creation, natural language
processing and translation, and world generation. It could
also improve how we interact in VR, as AI monitors sensors
that measure our bioelectricity and muscle patterns. AI also
makes experiences more inclusive by offering services such
as image recognition for visually impaired users.

As many AI techniques and applications bloom in the
Metaverse, it becomes more and more critical to com-
prehend and retrace the functioning of the applied AI
techniques. This can ensure that the Metaverse is working
as expected to meet regulatory standards. Due to the high
complexity of the Metaverse’s construction, the learning
process is turned into what is commonly referred to as a
“black box”, which is difﬁcult to interpret. For example,
deep neural networks are some of the hardest for a human
to understand. These black box models are created directly
from the data. As a result, data processing in the Metaverse
can suffer data biases, resulting from population data,
measurement error, data quality chasm, data re-purposing,
and data augmentation. Such data biases can jeopardize
data quality, fairness, accountability, transparency, and ex-
plainability of the Metaverse. Despite a proactive policy
that can be used to build trust and transparent AI for
ﬁghting against negative social impacts, developing such a
policy craves a deep understanding of AI techniques in the
Metaverse, where the AI decision-making processes have
to be explainable [81].

2) Signiﬁcance: To promote the trust and usability of
the Metaverse, responsible AI [82], as shown in Figure 3,
is developed to fully understand the AI decision-making
processes while considering the ethical, moral, legal, cul-
tural, and socio-economic consequences in the Metaverse.
Moreover, the responsible AI helps the engineers or data
scientists who develop AI algorithms explain what is ex-

XXXX, 2022.

8

Fig. 2: The four pillar technologies that support the IoT applications in the Metaverse. The responsible AI helps
engineers or data scientists explain what exactly is happening inside the AI algorithm; the high-speed data communication
empowers real-time connections based on several promising technologies, such as millimeter wave (mmWave), non-
orthogonal multiple access (NOMA), massive multiple-input and multiple-output (MIMO), terahertz (THz), and visible
light communication (VLC); MEC provides the Metaverse with massive server resources to power the virtual 3D realm,
while providing a network of ultra-low latency communications for imperceptible response times; Digital twins can create
a virtual replica of physical objects or services, which provides users an immersive experience in the physical world.

ingly, responsible urban innovation can be characterized
by sustainability, which is important for planning long-term
urbanization strategies.

3) Key technologies: Several explainable AI-based ap-
proaches [86] are introduced in recent years to strengthen
control and oversight
in case of adverse or unwanted
effects, such as biased decision-making or social discrim-
ination. In [87], deep learning is used to classify drainage
and gully images for ﬂood monitoring in smart cities, where
the image can be labeled to one of the three blockage
tags (No Blockage, Partially Blocked, and Fully Blocked).
Explainable AI combines semantic representation to unveil
relationships between various objects’ coverage within the
image, thus improving the explainability of deep learning
solutions. To assist
the product design and marketing,
explainable AI can be used to characterize competitors’
work and identify potential opportunities to outperform
them [88]. Based on customer-generated reviews, explain-
able AI can extract the competitive factors of the product
and effectively reﬂect customer opinions.

4) Applications in Metaverse: Responsible AI has been
widely used for building smart health systems in the
Metaverse. The capabilities of responsible AI can drive
the healthcare market and enable patients to experience
a dynamically different service environment [89]. Data

Fig. 3: Responsible AI can enable a full understanding of
the AI decision-making processes in the Metaverse.

actly happening inside the IoT applications and how the
AI algorithm leads to a speciﬁc result [83]. Responsible AI
can be applied to various applications, which extends the
responsible guidance on the limits of a learning algorithm,
and describes the training data involved [84]. In [85], a
responsible urbanization framework is studied with the
AI system, which aims to balance the beneﬁts, risks,
and impacts of developing the city. Responsible AI can
consider the effects of machine learning decisions on the
natural environment and future urban planning. Accord-

High-speed data communicationsmm waveResponsible AIDevelopersUsers’ dataMetaverse applicationsHuman-machine interfaceData prediction Service managementRetrace the functionalityXXXX, 2022.

9

sufﬁciency and integrity, algorithmic design, privacy pro-
tection, malfunction correction, and collaborative efforts
are critical factors in shaping responsible AI with the
smart health systems in the Metaverse. The authors in [90]
develop responsible AI with a patient-centric individual-
ized home-based rehabilitation support system. Synthetic
datasets complement experimental observations and mit-
igate bias, where explainable AI-based algorithms com-
bine ensemble learning and hybrid stacking using extreme
gradient boosted decision trees and k-nearest neighbors to
meet individualization, interpretability, and system design
requirements. Socially responsible AI [91] is studied to
prioritize the data and the users of the Metaverse while
eliminating the negative affection of minoritized or disad-
vantaged users. Based on the users’ feedback, socially re-
sponsible AI accomplishes the expected social values of the
data to maximize the long-term beneﬁcial impact. In [92],
explainable AI is extended to recognize early symptoms of
cognitive decline, which explains why a speciﬁc prediction
is generated. The explainable AI-based system is built with
clinical indicators describing subtle and overt behavioral
anomalies, spatial disorientation, and wandering behaviors.
The explainable AI-based system is adaptive to different
individuals and situations to recognize anomalies.

Enabling the Metaverse in industry 4.0 often requires
hyperparameters optimization, ﬁnetuning, computing ca-
pability, and continuous training of huge data. The data
are typically generated and aggregated from millions of
devices. Thus, it is possible that the users’ sensitive data
can be falsiﬁed due to cyberattacks. Thus, more and more
applications in industry 4.0 explore explainable AI with
Metaverse to strengthen the risk assessment, trustworthy
control operation, and automation [93]. Furthermore, a risk
assessment framework [94] is developed for human-sensing
IoT systems, where human attention states are classiﬁed
and mapped into four categories, i.e., low, normal, medium,
and high risks. Explainable AI is developed to classify
abnormal electroencephalogram (EEG) brainwave signals
based on the importance of each feature used in the deep
learning model. In IoT-based smart agriculture, IoT nodes
are deployed in remote farms and sense metrics, such as
temperature or humidity. The sensory data is used to adapt
irrigation control systems. For precise crop monitoring
and automated irrigation, explainable AI can be utilized
to produce interpretable data analysis [95], which enables
users to inspect the model reasoning in the irrigation control
systems.

Taking advantage of 5G networks, COVID-19 can be
detected based on uploaded patients’ medical images or
blood samples. In [96], deep learning models are trained
at
the 5G servers to process the medical data, where
explainable AI is used to allow doctors to understand the
outputs of each layer of the deep learning models. In
the explainable AI, multi-modal datasets, such as CT/X-
rays images and ultrasounds, as well as protease sequence
data, conﬁdence scores, and conﬁguration settings of the
deep learning model, are fused to generate a knowledge
graph. The knowledge graph is able to reveal the data

disruption and the feature adjustment probability. The ex-
planations can also be visualized by a data visualization
method, e.g., the gradient-weighted class activation map-
ping (gradCAM). Explainable AI is promising to quantify
the uncertainty of 5G and beyond networks, especially
understanding training data and AI algorithms concerning
the wireless network performance requirement [97]. Partic-
ularly, the data feature visualization of the explainable AI
can improve the transparency of AI-enabled network layers,
which ensures mission-critical services in 6G networks.
Explainable AI also motivates interactions between AI-
based human-centric systems and 6G networks [98], where
explainable AI aims to build trust between end users and
AI-based machines in radio and resource allocation as well
as network optimization.

B. High-speed data communications

1) Motivation: The Metaverse aims to provide massive
mobile users the connected AR/VR experiences and real-
time services. Providing a networking AR/VR service relies
on enormous amounts of data exchange with ultra-low
latency, where the nature of haptic signals and human
perception requires 1 ms of latency at maximum. However,
most 4G technologies cannot supply real-time data com-
munications for multiple mobile users. For example, it is
hard to reduce the latency of LTE-based wireless systems
below 25 ms [34].

In recent years, 5G is rapidly developed to provide
real-time data exchange to IoT devices [99]. The data
rate of 5G outperforms 4G-based systems while provid-
ing a suitable high-speed communication architecture for
the Metaverse. In particular, 5G networks enable several
promising technologies, such as mmWave [100], [101],
NOMA [102]–[104], and massive MIMO [105]. Based on
the large-scale commercial deployment of 5G networks, 6G
is expected to extend personalized communications to fully
realize the machine-to-machine paradigm, which connects
not just people, but also IoT devices, smart vehicles, wear-
able sensors, and even mobile robots [106], [107]. These
unique additions within high-speed data communications
can empower millions of connected devices and ubiquitous
AR/VR applications, which allows the Metaverse to beneﬁt
from the “anytime-anywhere connectivity” promise of next-
generation wireless mobile networks.

2) Signiﬁcance: High-speed data communications can
improve the reliability of the services as well as the network
capacity and density of the Metaverse. Speciﬁcally, 5G can
boost the data rate of the IoT device or the mobile user to
100 Mbps in a uniform spatial distribution, while the peak
data rate can be 10–20 Gbps [108]. The high data rates
support enhanced mobile broadband for personal mobile
services and large-scale machine-to-machine communica-
tions. Moreover, 5G offers reliability and delay critical
services, where the end-to-end latency is maintained as low
as one millisecond, and the reliability is as high as 99.99%.
Compared with the current 4G techniques, 5G networks
provide a 10-time increase in the network throughput, a 10x

XXXX, 2022.

10

decrease in communication latency, a 100x enhancement
in the trafﬁc capacity, and a 100x growth in the network
efﬁciency.

Based on the existing 5G architecture, 6G can be de-
veloped to fulﬁll the ubiquitous application requirements
in the Metaverse. For example, providing the enhancement
of VR/AR capabilities with the required resources (such
as computing power, storage space, graphics processing
capabilities, and communication resources) through mas-
sive IoT devices [109]. For ultra-high data rate and further
reducing communication latency, 6G is studied to utilize
more frequency bands than 5G and 4G, such as sub-THz
and THz, as well as VLC. Although it is well-known that
a high radio frequency can result in an increased data loss,
6G beneﬁts from the shortened data transmission distance
to support more low-latency applications in the densely-
populated area. To address the issue of limited cover-
age, 6G also applies high-speed and low-latency machine-
to-machine communication techniques and ultra-massive
MIMO [110].

3) Key technologies: To support several gigabits-per-
second high-speed data rates, the working frequency of
the mmWave IoT systems is set between 30 and 300
GHz [111], [112]. Some of the works studied use large-
scale antenna arrays for the high-frequency band of the
mmWave [113]. The antenna elements can be arranged
linearly or in a full-dimensional array (i.e., with both
elevation and azimuth angle resolution capabilities). Due to
the high carrier frequency, the mmWave IoT systems suffer
a more severe propagation loss than the low-frequency
communication technologies, such as LTE. Moreover, it is
difﬁcult for the mmWave signal to penetrate and diffract
around obstacles, such as vehicles and buildings in urban
areas, and molecular (e.g., rain and dust) and atmospheric
(e.g., air density) absorption can also prevent the mmWave
propagation.

Another 5G technology is NOMA which shares non-
orthogonal time and frequency resources via power-domain
or code-domain multiplexing. The power-domain multi-
plexing allocates the IoT devices with different transmit
power adapting to the time-varying channel quality to
achieve a maximized network beneﬁt. Moreover, IoT de-
vices can conduct code-domain multiplexing, which gener-
ates different codes that can be multiplexed over the same
time-frequency resources. Although the code domain multi-
plexing may consume more signal bandwidths than power-
domain multiplexing, the former can improve spreading
gain and shaping gain. NOMA can sustain massive con-
nectivity in the Metaverse, where the number of orthogonal
resources available does not restrain the number of IoT
devices.

To meet the demand of 100 Gbps data rates and 1-
millisecond latency, THz of 6G can be applied to IoT
networks that facilitate massive AR/VR service coverage
and scalability in the Metaverse. Speciﬁcally, the range
of THz is from 300 GHz to 3 THz since most of the
spectrum beyond 100 GHz is still idle. As new technology
develops, THz communication is still facing obstructions.

Fig. 4: The high-speed communication technology enables
“anytime-anywhere connectivity” for the Metaverse appli-
cations, where the AR/VR can be used for virtual design
and manufacture, teaching, and farmland monitoring.

For example, THz signals can be easily attenuated by
weather inﬂuences, such as raining, snowing, or even water
vapor in the atmosphere. Additionally, the propagation loss
increases quadratically with the frequency of long-distance
communication. This can result in a severe free space path
loss in the THz communication, e.g., a 10-meter THz link
suffers 100 dB loss.

4) Applications in Metaverse: Figure 4 presents the
high-speed data communications in the Metaverse, which
provides “anytime-anywhere connectivity” for the IoT ap-
plications, such as virtual design and manufacture, teach-
ing, and farmland monitoring. Speciﬁcally, high-speed data
communication allows students to remotely attend virtual
classes, where teachers anywhere on the planet vividly
demonstrate the content knowledge via the video/audio
stream. The virtual classes can moderate student partici-
pation, enrich the learning experience, and break down the
most common barriers that hinder synchronous learning.

The high-speed data communication can also enable
engineers in different industrial manufacturing companies
to jointly design their products online. Engineers can uti-
lize IoT data and AR/VR to create a shared virtual 3D
model. The Metaverse that takes advantage of high-speed
data communication brings complementary technologies
and industrial design patterns to integrate the physical and
cyber worlds. Moreover, the industrial company focusing
on hardware design can connect with hundreds of certiﬁed
partners who provide software support or supply chain solu-
tions. This will eventually lead to a comprehensive platform
for virtual 3D design and collaboration with physics-based
digital models.

C. Cost-effective Mobile Edge Computing

1) Motivation: It is critical to maintain user engagement
and immersion in the Metaverse to provide the same level

5G/6G tower5G/6G towerData computing and storageData linksVirtual classesVirtual  designVirtual farmlandXXXX, 2022.

11

be resumed by aggregating all the completed subtasks
at a central node.

• Edge Caching: Edge caching helps reduce computa-
tional and communication redundancy, by reducing
repeated access to popular content or computations.
In the Metaverse,
the probabilistic models of ﬁle
popularity distributions (such as ﬁeld of view) can be
learned. The popular ﬁeld of view can then be stored
on edge nodes close to users who need more reduction
in computational cost and rendering latency.

• Privacy-preserving Local model Training: As more
users connect
the risk of data
to the Metaverse,
breaches increases as the attack surface increases.
Federated Learning (FL) is one of the solutions to pro-
tect user privacy [116]. FL represents an approach of
distributed machine learning and learns a global model
by aggregating users’ uploaded models trained on local
devices without directly leaking private information.
4) Applications in Metaverse: Researchers have pro-
posed several solutions to improve the performance of
Metaverse applications by using the latency advantages of
edge computing. For example, the MEC was introduced
into the Metaverse to improve the quality of user ex-
perience [117], where dynamic edge nodes in the MEC
architecture are as close to users, and multiple edge nodes
can be combined to assist in completing the same user’s
instructions, effectively solving the delay issues caused by
user mobility in the Metaverse. However, the cooperation
of multiple edge nodes requires the transmission of user
data, which may lead to serious consequences such as user
privacy leakage and identity crisis in the Metaverse. An FL-
based MEC architecture for the Metaverse was proposed
in [118] to protect users’ privacy, where locally trained
models are transmitted between edge nodes instead of user
data. Furthermore, a directed acyclic graph was established
by the edge nodes to improve the system’s computational
efﬁciency.

The use of MEC to enhance the Metaverse experience
has also attracted wide attention from the academic com-
munity. Dai et al. [114] designed a 360-degree VR caching
system based on view synthesis over MECCache servers
in Cloud Radio Access Network (C-RAN) to promote the
QoE of wireless VR applications. Both Gu et al. [119], and
Liu et al. [120] exploited sub-6 GHz and mmWave links
combined with MEC resources to deal with the constrained
VR HMDs resources and transmission rate bottlenecks of
normal VR and panoramic VR video (PVRV) transmission.

D. IoT-based digital twins

1) Motivation: Digital twins create a virtual replica of
physical objects or services, such as building facilities, op-
erational processes, human-computer interaction, and social
services. In the Metaverse, digital twins are typically used
to provide an immersive shopping experience in the phys-
ical world. Combining digital replicas with physical prod-
ucts and services can also support data analytics, allowing
commercial individuals to utilize physical-world scenarios

Fig. 5: By caching the video contents at the edge server,
MEC offers rapid response time to the computing resource
request from the users’ Metaverse application. Particularly,
the requested data of the user can be fetched directly from
the edge cache/the cloud cache/the AR/VR video source
server or synthesized by the MEC server [114].

of experience as in reality. In this regard, the response time
to user actions should be signiﬁcantly reduced to levels
below the human perceptible limit.

Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) is an emerging technol-
ogy that provides fast response times by hosting a com-
bination of communications infrastructure and computing
resources close to the users. As shown in Figure 5, MEC
extends a network and software platform environment that
can seamlessly approach or even exceed the limits of human
perception of response time. The dynamic and immersive
experience requirements of the Metaverse can be achieved
by adopting MEC. MEC can provide the Metaverse with
massive server resources to power the virtual 3D realm
while providing a network of ultra-low latency communi-
cations for imperceptible response times.

2) Signiﬁcance: As 5G (expected to reduce last-mile
latency to 1ms) and future 6G ﬂourish, MEC is a promis-
ing technology for the Metaverse. It can provide single-
hop edge ofﬂoading services from cellular-connected user
devices to enhance user experience in the Metaverse, such
as AR glasses. MEC is also essential for outdoor Metaverse
services to understand the detailed local environment and
coordinate close collaboration between nearby users or
devices. For example, 5G MEC servers can manage AR
content for nearby users via single-hop packet transmis-
sion and enable real-time user interactions for social AR
applications, e.g., “Pok´emon GO” [115].

3) Key technologies: MEC is implemented based on the

following three key components:

• Edge ofﬂoading and Computing: In addition to of-
ﬂoading rendering computations to the edge nodes,
expensive computation tasks (such as matrix multi-
plication) required for data processing and AI model
training, can also be broken down into subtasks and
ofﬂoaded to edge servers. The computation results can

MEC server with cachesMetaverse cloudAR/VR  serversAR/VR applicationsFiber backhaul5G/6G connectionsView synthesisCache managementXXXX, 2022.

12

Fig. 6: Prediction of digital twins market size.

Fig. 7: The global market share of the digital twins in 2021.

for simulations before making costly decisions. As digital
representations of physical-world entities, digital twins can
synchronize assets, processes, and operating systems with
the real world and everyday actions such as visualization,
analysis, and prediction [121]. The digital twins are central
to how the physical and virtual worlds interact through the
IoT connections [122]. Therefore, changes in the physical
world are refused in the digital world. These unique digital
twins could be one of the fundamental building blocks of
the Metaverse, creating replicas of the physical world, in-
cluding its structure and functionality, to serve as gateways
for users to access and enjoy virtual services. For example,
an engineer could create a 3D representation of a complex
system at different levels of complexity (i.e. descriptive, in-
formational, predictive, holistic, autonomous) for different
functionality. Digital twins enable the engineers and service
providers to clone virtual objects of machines and processes
and perform physical analysis remotely via AI [123].

Since the concept of digital twins was ﬁrst proposed by
David Gelernter in his book [124], digital twins have given
businesses an unprecedented view of how the products are
designed, operated, and performed, which helps make it
easier to provide better products or service.

According to Fortune Business Insights [125], the global
digital twins market size has reached $6.75 billion in 2021
and is projected to reach $96 billion in 2029, at a compound
annual growth rate (CAGR) of 40.6% during the forecast
period, as shown in Figure 6, a major driver is NVIDIA
Corporation unveiling a new platform to expand the user
base, while COVID-19 restricts industry development.

The global market share based on end user in 2021
[125] is illustrated in Figure 7. Among end users,
the
digital twins applications that occupy the largest share are
automotive and transportation. The reason is mainly due
to breakthroughs in advanced technologies such as AI and
the continuous development of the commercial value of
autonomous vehicles. In addition, industrial manufacturing
and aircraft manufacturing account for a high proportion,
both exceeding 20%. The market share of digital twins in IT
and communication, healthcare, and smart homes is around
10%, which are all emerging digital twins applications and
have great development prospects.

Many businesses, such as NVIDIA [126], are investi-

gating the correlation of the Metaverse and digital twins,
introducing new possibilities and experiences for digitally-
driven consumers. LeewayHertz [127] believes that as more
companies and enterprises use digital twins to build prod-
ucts and digital Apps in the Metaverse, they can create
entire ecosystems over time. Due to the high development
cost, the existing digital twins are mainly used for the
construction of complex, multi-level large-scale industrial
products or systems, such as manufacture [128], health-
care [44], engineering, and smart cities [45], [129].

2) Signiﬁcance: Digital twins produce a digital represen-
tation of a physical-world product or service. Implementing
digital twins is an encapsulated software object or model,
where multiple IoT data are aggregated to create compos-
ite views across many physical-world entities. When we
take an object in the physical world and create an exact
copy of the same object in the digital world, this system
allows users and engineers to mimic the behavior of real
objects and predict their movements and reactions. Digi-
tal twins, therefore, enable strategic product development
while avoiding the potential for costly mistakes. Digital
twins are one of the core building blocks of the Metaverse
due to their unique nature. The IoT-empowered Metaverse
helps people create virtual worlds and experiences beyond
the wildest dreams, and build exact replicas of reality that
can bring reality to the digital world.

Digital twins are of little value unless IoT networks are
updated with real-time data, a task that machine learning
and AI have grappled with for quite some time. The
Metaverse is where IoT and digital twins gather and cele-
brate, and users look forward to using some cool AR/VR
applications and experiencing immersive services in 2022
and beyond. First, we have to correct a misconception,
namely, the idea that the virtual scan object is the digital
twins of the Metaverse. A scanned object can be the outlook
of digital twins. Still, it can be used in digital twins only
when the actual metadata & physical-world data feed from
IoT devices are overlaid simultaneously. Linking physics
objects in digital form with overlay data is signiﬁcant in
complex simulations.

3) Key technologies: Digital twins can be divided based
twins,
twins, system twins, and process twins [130], as

on their scale and inclusiveness into component
asset

XXXX, 2022.

13

replicate a virtual representation of agricultural production,
where ML algorithms process the sensory data obtained
from actual sensors in decision support systems.

In California, a visualization of wildﬁre areas was cre-
ated. Fire behavior analysts can use visualizations and data
for predictions that allow ﬁreﬁghters to better extinguish
real-world ﬁres by taking data from simulated experiences
without injury. To detect production errors and mistakes,
enterprises create digital twins of their factories and manu-
facturing plants. Visualizing all aspects of production helps
optimize the design, manufacturing, and labor processes.
Retail and e-commerce companies allow customers to
shop at virtual storefronts at home. Product availability is
updated in real-time, and consumers could interact with
the items they intend to buy. In the Metaverse, client
meetings could be as simple as a client visiting your virtual
headquarters and sitting in your virtual conference room,
eliminating the need for travel, while providing people
with a face-to-face experience. Enriching digital objects
with connections to data sources within the Metaverse can
provide teams with every piece of information they need
about the companies or individuals they will encounter to
gain an edge in meetings and proactively help them.

twins throughout

Metaverse uses digital

the product
development life cycle, from designing to post-production
monitoring and service, to improve productivity and prof-
itability [141], [142]. During the product ideation phase
of Metaverse, digital twins can be used to build virtual
prototypes for Metaverse [50] and generate large amounts
of predictive data about performance outcomes. Before
investing in a physical prototype, make necessary product
improvements based on forecast results to meet pre-set
requirements. This helps businesses save time and cost
by reducing the number of iterations required to bring a
Metaverse product into production.

During the development of Metaverse products, digital
twins help improve the development process in the follow-
ing ways, including process optimization, remote device
diagnostics, and supply management. For example, digital
twins help identify potential failures, troubleshoot remotely,
and ultimately improve customer satisfaction [143]. In
supply chain optimization, the production timing and sup-
ply routes can be optimized by digital twins [135]. New
methods can be discovered by adjusting the digital twins
to optimize production, reduce variance, and aid in root
cause analysis.

Digital twins can also be used in later stages for meta-
verse products, such as cost reduction, predictive mainte-
nance, and service improvement. When commercializing
metaverse products, digital
twins can collect user data
over time to gain insights into product performance and
service experience [144]. This data can help engineers
and designers improve the customer experience through
customized services.

Fig. 8: The hierarchical architecture of digital twins.

illustrated in Figure 8. We also summarize the correspon-
dence between different applications and this development
architecture in Table IV.

1. Component twin: The smallest part of the entire sys-
tem is the component twins [131], which are composed
of key components that affect performance, or other
components with unstable performance To avoid data
redundancy and reduce costs, unimportant components
do not need to be replicated. Azure Digital Twins
(ADT) [132] is a platform developed by Microsoft,
which not only allows the creation of models but
provides a graph API to query and interact with its
twin. Basic examples of a series of 3D component
models of the devices, machinery, infrastructure, and
buildings already exist.

2. Asset twin: Asset twins are higher level than com-
ponent twins [131]. An asset twin is a collection of
information from a component twin, or the component
twin itself. Asset twins identify the potential for im-
provement and turn them into actionable insights by
analyzing performance data, which results from the
interaction of these components. GE Healthcare [133]
states that some asset twins have been used to solve
healthcare problems in hospitals, such as stafﬁng
model design and surgical block schedule optimiza-
tion.

4. Process

3. System twin: System twins operate at the next level,
where different assets are combined to form a fully
functional system, such as a brake system in automo-
bile [128]. System twins provide visibility into asset
interactions, further enhancing performance [134].
high-
Process Twin
performance
optimize
computing methods
equipment and the entire manufacturing process
by integrating multi-dimensional process knowledge
models [40]. By integrating production procedures and
economics, manufacturers can achieve unprecedented
efﬁciency and insight.

leverages
to

twin:

4) Applications in Metaverse: To monitor and analyze
welder behavior, a digital twins system has been designed
with VR and AI technologies in [138]. In [139], a data-
driven digital
twins framework was investigated to im-
prove health diagnosis performance and operation in smart
medical systems. Digital twins were designed in [140] to

XXXX, 2022.

14

TABLE IV: Hierarchical evolution

Scenarios

Architecture

Component twin

Asset twin

Manufacture

Sensor, screw [128]

Engine, pump [128]

Supply chain

Shipments [135]

Healthcare

Surgical equipment

Smart city

Infrastructure [49]

Supply
environment
Hospital [48]

[136]

Campus [49],
hospital [48]

System twin

Electricity,
brake [128]
Individual
stores
Medical
system [137]
Small
community

Process twin

Collaboration [128]

[135]
rescue

Chain
improvement
Emergency
[44]
Efﬁcient city
operation [45], [129]

V. OPEN ISSUES IN THE FUTURE IOT-EMPOWERED
METAVERSE

Despite the studied four pillar technologies can be lever-
aged to empower the Metaverse with IoT, further devel-
opment and implementation of IoT-empowered Metaverse
need to address the following critical open issues.

A. Data processing

The Metaverse applications, such as AR and VR, need to
collect real-time IoT data to analyze the behaviors or states
of the physical world objects or procedures [145]. How
to monitor equipment and collect data from all aspects,
including initial data, monitoring information, operational
information, business data, and program data, are very
challenging [146].

Once the real-time IoT data is collected, the data mining
and data analysis have to be performed. Unlike traditional
simulations [143], the Metaverse can run multiple sim-
ulation processes with real-time data and give real-time
feedback to the source object for improvement. These sim-
ulation processes rely on data modeling techniques, such
as engineering simulations [142], physical analysis [144],
machine learning [48], neuromorphic computing, and data
mining [144] to help users/engineers have a full view into
how the virtual world is performing.

Spatial computing [147], [148] can be applied for the hu-
man interaction with the IoT devices, where the IoT devices
retain and manipulate referents to real objects and spaces.
To utilize the spatial computing, the Metaverse needs to
ensure the data scalability and diversity, for example, room
temperature, service locations, AR/VR equipment details,
users’ health conditions, social connections, hobbies and
interests. Moreover, most commercial AR/VR equipments
have various sensors that generate a huge amount of data
with different modalities and types. Note that the Meta-
verse can take advantage of data fusion techniques from
different data sources to regenerate a comprehensive view
(e.g., car driving and road condition), rather than multiple
separate perspectives [146], [149]. Data management issues
such as storage,
transmission, security, and privacy of
dense information are critical. Constructing a standardized
semantic representation of different data [47], which is
used to communicate between intelligent machines inside
the Metaverse, is a good way to compress transmission
the
information, reduce transmission delay and encrypt
original data. In addition, ensemble learning techniques can

also be considered for data fusion. Data fusion is also a key
to the Metaverse to enhance the interoperability between
different platforms and systems [150].

B. Security and privacy

In the Metaverse, shared user data and 3D virtual spaces
are interweaved with the IoT system and merged for remote
virtualization. The Metaverse is very likely to integrate ser-
vices, applications, or IoT systems from multiple companies
or institutions [151]. As a result, the major security and
privacy concern are due to the fact that the integration of
different IoT devices requires all partners to coordinate and
interact data with each other.

The responsible AI is expected to help the Metaverse
developers and designers understand the “black box” of
AI, which improves the integration efﬁciency of the IoT
systems. However, these explanations also expose extra
information about
the AI decision-making process that
utilizes sensitive users’ private information. Such a privacy
leakage can be utilized by the attacker, for example, to
identify certain users and their health conditions given
attributes such as gender, race, and birth date. The attacker
can also inject a relatively small amount of poisoned data
into the AI model. Since the AI model is typically used to
process the “big data”, detecting the poisoned malicious
data in the Metaverse application is difﬁcult. With the
growth of the training time, such inconspicuous poisoned
data can affect more and more functions in the AI model,
eventually resulting in Metaverse service failures.

Furthermore, the human-machine interface poses secu-
rity and privacy risks to the responsible AI. Especially
when the Metaverse is applied to autonomous vehicles and
industrial manufacturing. Due to the dynamic application
environment, it is difﬁcult for the Metaverse developers and
designers to recognize when the AI model should be over-
ruled, or the human’s decision can override the AI model.
Human judgment can prove faulty in overriding system
results, such as scripting errors, lapses in data management,
or misjudgments in model-training data. Therefore, rigorous
safeguards at the human-machine interface are critical for
the responsible AI, which can protect the Metaverse from
corrupting algorithms or using the AI model in malfeasant
ways.

The Metaverse, as it is imagined today, requires the trans-
fer of huge amounts of personal and/or critical data [152].
Security, privacy, and trustworthiness will be more dif-
ﬁcult in the Metaverse than in the physical world [54],

XXXX, 2022.

15

TABLE V: Data processing

Requirements
Data Collection
Data Modeling

Data Fusion

Challenges
Real-time sensory data, Data transmission
Data mining, Data analysis, and Real-time
feedback
Storage, Transmission, Security and privacy

Potential Technologies
IoT network, Sensor network
Engineering simulations, Physical analysis, Machine
learning, Neuromorphic computing, and Data mining
Intelligent Machine Communication Network, Se-
mantic Communication, Ensemble Learning

thus providing the technical and social means to assert
rights and enforce regulations may not get any easier.
The Metaverse relies on IoT data to operate. Cyber-attacks
and data storage are the major challenges for deploying
the Metaverse applications like gaming, socializing, real
estate, and healthcare [153], [154]. The cybersecurity of
the Metaverse interfaces has to be secured to create a
sustainable Metaverse that can be used in the long term.

C. Real-time 3D modeling

One of the critical components in the Metaverse is 3D
modeling, which aims to stream the AR/VR experiences
like streaming a movie. Typically, AR/VR-based computer
games require powerful gaming computers to process the
data as fast as possible. Moreover, it is a bottleneck in the
communication networks to provide fast access to many
AR/VR online games in parallel. The data exchange delay
between the IoT devices (generally measured in millisec-
onds (ms)) determines the number of frames per second
(FPS) streaming to an IoT device. If the IoT devices slow
the frame rates to 15-30 FPS, when people turn their head
up and down, or left and right, it might make the user
feel dizzy in the AR/VR experience. Therefore, 15-30 FPS
is the minimum for most AR/VR games. In addition, the
frame rates normally should be set to 60 FPS, which is
ideal for AR/VR games. 90 FPS is usually a comfortable
standard and a bare minimum for VR. In particular, current
4G technology supports around 50ms (about 20 FPS) on
average for data communication, which can result in an
uncomfortable immersive experience. The communication
delay in 5G can be reduced to less than 10ms. This can
afford the frame rates of 90 FPS leading to real-time 3D
modeling and a comfortable immersive experience.

The IoT network should ensure that AR/VR applications
of multiple users are highly synchronized with a low la-
tency [155]. This requirement is a guarantee for supporting
the users’ smooth immersive experiences whenever and
wherever possible. This means that, on the one hand, the
network requirements are at least beyond 5G (B5G) or even
6G [156]; on the other hand, huge data monitoring and real-
time computing can further boost the capacity demand in
cloud computing.

D. Scalable cyber worlds

The Metaverse has been listed as one of the top ﬁve
emerging trends and technologies of the next ten years.
Global spending on IoT development is expected to rise
from $12 billion in 2020 to $72.8 billion in 2024. More
than 200 major brands such as Nike, Samsung, and JP

Morgan, have already shifted some of their customer-
oriented activities to the Metaverse. It can be envisioned
that more and more IoT devices will be empowered to
create and populate virtual worlds for users in social media
with relative ease and low barriers to access services.
As the IoT applications grow day by day, scalability is
going to be a major issue with any Metaverse platform.
The Metaverse must be constructed on a decentralized
architecture to enhance its scalability. The user’s location
information and scene status in real-time interaction need
to be stored ofﬂine.

Bandwidth that deﬁnes the amount of data transmitted
over time is a critical requirement for the scalability of
the IoT networks in the Metaverse. The bandwidth re-
quirement is huge for most Metaverse applications, like
AR/VR games. Those applications typically execute many
uploading and downloading operations in video streaming,
transaction, etc. The downloading and uploading demand
increases as more participants join the Metaverse. Millions
of users could use the Metaverse simultaneously, while the
data transfer rate should remain 100 Mbps for the individual
user. To maintain the quality of experience, scalable AI and
communication techniques will be required.

E. Connected mobile users’ experience

Low earth orbit (LEO) satellites are developed to provide
internet services to help achieve universal connectivity.
Compared to a geosynchronous (GEO) satellite, the LEO
satellite shortens the distance that the signal has to travel
and reduces the latency. For example, the TDMA-based
Iridium (by Motorola) and the CDMA-based GlobalStar
are the two typical and operational LEO satellite systems.
However, the LEO satellite system must be built with many
satellites to support connected users’ experience in the
Metaverse. Moreover, the data packet is routed among the
LEO satellites until the data can be forwarded to the end
user. The satellite-to-satellite communication introduces
tremendous forwarding delays.

Unlike the LEO satellite systems, in the ground high-
speed data networks, the communication distance between
the IoT device and the BS is short. In a cellular radio access
network, the BS can tightly schedule when the IoT device
sends or receives data, which increases communication
efﬁciency. The BS can also enable the prioritization of
the application according to different access capacities
and latency. However,
the expense of a
phenomenally complex network management protocol.

this comes at

AR/VR is highly graphics-intensive and is limited by
the power of the IoT device’s processor. The cloud at the

XXXX, 2022.

16

BS can be leveraged for graphic processing. For example,
Google’s Stadia gaming platform allows users to play
online games, while the cloud processes their data and the
user’s IoT device streams the AR/VR output. The latency
has to be highly reduced for the AR/VR application, where
small delays of 30 ms can cause discomfort and even
sickness.

F. Interoperability and uniformity of virtual platforms

Building the Metaverse has to rely on a virtual platform
that allows the developers to implement IoT applications
and services, such as VR/AR, autonomous driving, or E-
shopping. Many Metaverse platforms are launched onto
the market to replace social media in the near future, for
example, Sandbox, Decentraland, Axie Inﬁnity, Metahero,
Bloktopia, etc.
However,

the lack of interoperability and uniformity
between the various Metaverse platforms is one of the
biggest challenges. Due to differences in the API standard,
the current Metaverse platforms do not allow data exchange
with any other platforms. This restricts the IoT applications’
access in different service domains. In an ideal Metaverse,
users in the physical world expect to have an uninterrupted
immersive experience across multiple virtual platforms.
Their physical assets can be transferred from one place to
another without trouble. Since the Metaverse is expected
to provide a variety of digital services, the IoT applications
need to be able to seamlessly switch among the various
interconnected virtual worlds.

Ensuring interoperability requires achieving interoper-
ability between the users and the platforms, between the
platforms, and between the different operating systems.
One of the major advances of the Metaverse is to pro-
pose a virtual world [157] in which the users can join
and work together on different activities such as playing
games, watching movies, and working. From the current
situation, there is more than one company developing the
Metaverse platforms [72], prominent among them are Face-
book, Microsoft, and Apple [66]. The IoT networks also
need different devices to join multiple Metaverse platforms
and interact with different groups. In addition, ensuring
interoperability [158] also includes compatibility between
different activities, locations, and events in the Metaverse,
as well as interoperability of heterogeneous networks in the
platform. Therefore, the future Metaverse has to be built
on an interconnected virtual platform that transcends the
borders of different IoT applications. There will need to be
a web of public and private standards, norms, and rules for
diverse IoT applications to operate across jurisdictions.

G. The barriers of the physical world

To satisfy the “anywhere, anytime and any participant”
requirement in the IoT-empowered Metaverse, a variety
of techniques in terms of the four pillar, such as spa-
tial computing, distributed computing, platforms/solutions
for cross-cloud, have been studied. Those techniques can

enhance the human interaction with the IoT devices that
manipulate referents to real objects and spaces.

Currently, the Metaverse is driven mainly by internet gi-
ants, such as Tencent, Xiaomi, Apple, and Facebook [159].
Due to interests or national policies,
the virtual world
created by the Metaverse is often limited by the platforms
and operating systems. Once the platform is closed or
inaccessible, “anywhere, anytime and any participant” can-
not be realized. Interoperability between different operating
systems, such as IOS and Android [153] users, also has
many problems. To achieve seamless access, breaking down
barriers between the platforms and operating systems is
necessary, which is not easy to achieve.

At present, the Metaverse highly depends on AR/VR
technologies and IoT devices [53]. Most of them are
difﬁcult to adopt because the hardware is not lightweight,
portable, or affordable [160]. Computing power can be
solved by transferring the computing core to the phone or
the cloud, while the battery life is difﬁcult to break through
in a short time [161]. There is also a need to develop diverse
experiences in software and hardware portability [162].
Diversiﬁed devices are not yet lightweight.

To realize the Metaverse, advanced technology and al-
gorithms are essential [55]. Firstly, the Metaverse relies
on high-quality, high-performance models that can achieve
the right retina display and pixel density for a realistic
virtual immersion [163]. Secondly, the Metaverse needs
to be powered by other technologies such as AI, AR/VR,
blockchain, and web [164] to ensure that the Metaverse
can create secure, scalable, and realistic virtual worlds on
a reliable and always-on platform. Thirdly, the Metaverse
services need to be applied to people’s daily life, where the
new IoT technologies and hardwares can be validated and
improved.

VI. CONCLUSION

This paper presents the IoT-inspired applications that
can provide users immersive cyber-virtual experiences in
healthcare, education, smart city, entertainment, real estate,
and socialization. Four pillar technologies are compre-
hensively surveyed with their typical IoT applications in
the Metaverse, including responsible AI, high-speed data
communications, cost-effective MEC, and digital
twins.
The four pillar technologies can be leveraged to bridge
the IoT applications with the Metaverse, which aims to
achieve convergence of physical and cyber worlds. For each
pillar technology, we focus on the motivation, signiﬁcance,
key technologies, and typical applications in the Metaverse.
Furthermore, we extend the discussions about the critical
open issues for further development and implementation
in the IoT-inspired Metaverse in terms of data processing,
security and privacy, real-time 3D modeling, scalable cyber
worlds, connected mobile users’ experience, interoperabil-
ity and uniformity of virtual platforms, and barriers of the
physical world.

XXXX, 2022.

17

REFERENCES

care.

(2020,

Slovick.
health

11) The AR-VR age

[1] M.
in
Resources/i3-Magazine/i3-Issues/2020/November-December/
The-AR-VR-Age-has-Begun-in-Health-Care
06) AR and VR in

[Online]. Available:

begun
has
https://www.cta.tech/

[On-
https://www.marketresearchfuture.com/reports/

education market.

[2] (2022,

line]. Available:
ar-vr-in-education-market-10834

[3] T. G. Kanter, “The metaverse and extended reality with distributed

IoT,” IEEE Internet of Things Magazine (IoT), 2021.

[4] N. Pereira, A. Rowe, M. W. Farb, I. Liang, E. Lu, and E. Riebling,
“Arena: The augmented reality edge networking architecture,” in
2021 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented
Reality (ISMAR).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 479–488.

[5] A. H. Sodhro, S. Pirbhulal, and A. K. Sangaiah, “Convergence
of IoT and product lifecycle management in medical health care,”
Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 86, pp. 380–391, 2018.
[6] N. Promwongsa, A. Ebrahimzadeh, D. Naboulsi, S. Kianpisheh,
F. Belqasmi, R. Glitho, N. Crespi, and O. Alfandi, “A compre-
hensive survey of the tactile internet: State-of-the-art and research
directions,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23,
no. 1, pp. 472–523, 2020.

[7] A. Aijaz and M. Sooriyabandara, “The tactile internet for industries:
A review,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 107, no. 2, pp. 414–435,
2018.

[8] E. Lu, J. Miller, N. Pereira, and A. Rowe, “FLASH: Video-
embeddable ar anchors for live events,” in IEEE International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR).
IEEE,
2021, pp. 489–497.

[9] R. Minerva, G. M. Lee, and N. Crespi, “Digital twin in the IoT
context: a survey on technical features, scenarios, and architectural
models,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 108, no. 10, pp. 1785–1824,
2020.

[10] E. Steinbach, M. Strese, M. Eid, X. Liu, A. Bhardwaj, Q. Liu,
M. Al-Ja’afreh, T. Mahmoodi, R. Hassen, A. El Saddik et al.,
“Haptic codecs for the tactile internet,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 107, no. 2, pp. 447–470, 2018.

[11] N. Stojanovic and D. Milenovic, “Data-driven digital twin approach
for process optimization: An industry use case,” in IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Big Data (Big Data).
IEEE, 2018, pp.
4202–4211.

[12] M. Farsi, A. Daneshkhah, A. Hosseinian-Far, and H. Jahankhani,
Digital twin technologies and smart cities. Springer, 2020.
[13] J. Thomason, “Metahealth-how will the metaverse change health
care?” Journal of Metaverse, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 13–16, Dec. 2021.
[14] B. Kye, N. Han, E. Kim, Y. Park, and S. Jo, “Educational ap-
plications of metaverse: possibilities and limitations,” Journal of
Educational Evaluation for Health Professions, vol. 18, 2021.
[15] T. Ruohom¨aki, E. Airaksinen, P. Huuska, O. Kes¨aniemi, M. Mar-
tikka, and J. Suomisto, “Smart city platform enabling digital twin,”
in 2018 International Conference on Intelligent Systems (IS), 2018,
pp. 155–161.

[16] J. Y. Lee, “A study on metaverse hype for sustainable growth,”
International journal of advanced smart convergence, vol. 10, no. 3,
pp. 72–80, 2021.

[17] K. G. Nalbant and S¸ . UYANIK, “Computer vision in the meta-
verse,” Journal of Metaverse, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 9–12, 2021.
[18] H. Ning, H. Wang, Y. Lin, W. Wang, S. Dhelim, F. Farha, J. Ding,
and M. Daneshmand, “A survey on metaverse: the state-of-the-
technologies, applications, and challenges,” arXiv preprint
art,
arXiv:2111.09673, 2021.

[19] A. M. Maatuk, E. K. Elberkawi, S. Aljawarneh, H. Rashaideh, and
H. Alharbi, “The covid-19 pandemic and e-learning: challenges
and opportunities from the perspective of students and instructors,”
Journal of Computing in Higher Education, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 21–
38, 2022.

[20] H. B. Demeke, S. Merali, S. Marks, L. Z. Pao, L. Romero,
P. Sandhu, H. Clark, A. Clara, K. B. McDow, E. Tindall et al.,
“Trends in use of telehealth among health centers during the covid-
19 pandemic—united states, june 26–november 6, 2020,” Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report, vol. 70, no. 7, p. 240, 2021.
[21] M. G. Hanna, I. Ahmed, J. Nine, S. Prajapati, and L. Pan-
tanowitz, “Augmented reality technology using microsoft hololens
in anatomic pathology,” Archives of pathology & laboratory
medicine, vol. 142, no. 5, pp. 638–644, 2018.

[22] N. Rajagopal, J. Miller, K. K. R. Kumar, A. Luong, and A. Rowe,
“Improving augmented reality relocalization using beacons and
magnetic ﬁeld maps,” in International Conference on Indoor Posi-
tioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–8.

[23] H. S and L. CI, “Research trends on augmented reality education in
korea from 2008 to 2019,” J Educ Technol., vol. 36, pp. 505–528,
2020.

[24] Curiscope, “Virtuali-tee: augmented reality t-shirt.” [Online].

Available: https://www.curiscope.com/

[25] L. Chang, Z. Zhang, P. Li, S. Xi, W. Guo, Y. Shen, Z. Xiong,
J. Kang, D. Niyato, X. Qiao et al., “6G-enabled edge AI for
Metaverse: Challenges, methods, and future research directions,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06192, 2022.

[26] C. Meier, J. Saor´ın, A. B. de Le´on, and A. G. Cobos, “Using the
roblox video game engine for creating virtual tours and learning
about the sculptural heritage,” International Journal of Emerging
Technologies in Learning (iJET), vol. 15, no. 20, pp. 268–280,
2020.

[27] B. Ryskeldiev, Y. Ochiai, M. Cohen, and J. Herder, “Distributed
metaverse: Creating decentralized blockchain-based model for peer-
to-peer sharing of virtual spaces for mixed reality applications,”
in Proceedings of
the 9th Augmented Human International
Conference. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3174910.3174952

[28] H. C. Hou and H. Wu, “Technology for real estate education and
practice: a vr technology perspective,” Property Management, 2020.
[29] M. Izani, S. Aalkhalidi, A. Razak, and S. Ibrahim, “Economical
vr/ar method for interior design programme,” in 2022 Advances
in Science and Engineering Technology International Conferences
(ASET), Feb. 2022, pp. 1–5.

[30] Y. Zhang and L. Yao, “How the leading chinese real estate
brokerage transformed into a digital platform business,” Strategy
& Leadership, 2021.

[31] J. Kim and J. Kim, “Bim to ar matching technology of building

maintenance platform using 5g-based ar,” 2021.

[32] J.-G. Kim, “A study on metaverse culture contents matching
platform,” International Journal of Advanced Culture Technology,
vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 232–237, 2021.

[33] T. Lyttelton, E. Zang, and K. Musick, “Telecommuting and gender
inequalities in parents’ paid and unpaid work before and during
the covid-19 pandemic,” Journal of Marriage and Family, vol. 84,
no. 1, pp. 230–249, 2022.

[34] S. Sukhmani, M. Sadeghi, M. Erol-Kantarci, and A. El Saddik,
“Edge caching and computing in 5G for mobile AR/VR and tactile
internet,” IEEE MultiMedia, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 21–30, 2018.
[35] X. Lyu, W. Ni, H. Tian, R. P. Liu, X. Wang, G. B. Giannakis,
and A. Paulraj, “Optimal schedule of mobile edge computing for
information,” IEEE Journal on
internet of things using partial
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 2606–2615,
2017.

[36] Q. Cui, Z. Gong, W. Ni, Y. Hou, X. Chen, X. Tao, and P. Zhang,
“Stochastic online learning for mobile edge computing: Learning
from changes,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 3,
pp. 63–69, 2019.

[37] X. Lyu, H. Tian, W. Ni, Y. Zhang, P. Zhang, and R. P. Liu,
“Energy-efﬁcient admission of delay-sensitive tasks for mobile edge
computing,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 66, no. 6,
pp. 2603–2616, 2018.

[38] U. Ahmed, I. Raza, and S. A. Hussain, “Trust evaluation in
cross-cloud federation: Survey and requirement analysis,” ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 1–37, 2019.
[39] Y. Elkhatib, “Mapping {Cross-Cloud} systems: Challenges and
opportunities,” in 8th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Cloud
Computing (HotCloud 16), 2016.

[40] “Digital

twin-based process reuse and evaluation approach for
smart process planning | SpringerLink.” [Online]. Available:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00170-018-2748-5
[41] A. Fuller, Z. Fan, C. Day, and C. Barlow, “Digital twin: Enabling
technologies, challenges and open research,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 108 952–108 971, 2020.

[42] R. B. Roy, D. Mishra, S. K. Pal, T. Chakravarty, S. Panda, M. G.
Chandra, A. Pal, P. Misra, D. Chakravarty, and S. Misra, “Digital
twin: current scenario and a case study on a manufacturing
process,” The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology, vol. 107, no. 9, pp. 3691–3714, Apr. 2020. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-020-05306-w

XXXX, 2022.

18

[43] R. Minerva, G. M. Lee, and N. Crespi, “Digital twin in the iot
context: A survey on technical features, scenarios, and architectural
models,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 108, no. 10, pp. 1785–1824,
2020.

[44] H. Elayan, M. Aloqaily, and M. Guizani, “Digital twin for intelli-
gent context-aware iot healthcare systems,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 8, no. 23, pp. 16 749–16 757, 2021.

[45] X. Li, H. Liu, W. Wang, Y. Zheng, H. Lv, and Z. Lv, “Big
twins of
data analysis of the internet of things in the digital
smart city based on deep learning,” Future Generation Computer
Systems, vol. 128, pp. 167–177, 2022. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X21003964

[46] E. ¨Ors, R. Schmidt, M. Mighani, and M. Shalaby, “A conceptual
framework for ai-based operational digital twin in chemical process
engineering,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Engineer-
ing, Technology and Innovation (ICE/ITMC), 2020, pp. 1–8.
[47] X. Li, B. He, Z. Wang, Y. Zhou, G. Li, and R. Jiang, “Semantic-
enhanced digital twin system for robot–environment interaction
monitoring,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measure-
ment, vol. 70, pp. 1–13, 2021.

[48] M. Austin, P. Delgoshaei, M. Coelho, and M. Heidarinejad, “Ar-
chitecting smart city digital twins: Combined semantic model and
machine learning approach,” vol. 36, no. 4, p. 04020026, publisher:
American Society of Civil Engineers.

[49] N. Mohammadi and J. Taylor, Knowledge Discovery in Smart City
[Online]. Available: http://hdl.handle.net/10125/

Digital Twins.
63943

[50] A. A. Malik and A. Bilberg, “Digital

twins of human robot
collaboration in a production setting,” Procedia Manufacturing,
vol. 17, pp. 278–285, Jan. 2018.
[Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2351978918311636

[51] A. Liljaniemi and H. Paavilainen, “Using digital twin technology
in engineering education – course concept to explore beneﬁts and
barriers,” Open Engineering, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 377–385, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1515/eng-2020-0040
[52] S.-M. Park and Y.-G. Kim, “A metaverse: taxonomy, components,

applications, and open challenges,” IEEE Access, 2022.

[53] L.-H. Lee, T. Braud, P. Zhou, L. Wang, D. Xu, Z. Lin, A. Kumar,
C. Bermejo, and P. Hui, “All one needs to know about metaverse:
A complete survey on technological singularity, virtual ecosystem,
and research agenda,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05352, 2021.
[54] Y. Wang, Z. Su, N. Zhang, D. Liu, R. Xing, T. H. Luan, and
X. Shen, “A survey on metaverse: Fundamentals, security, and
privacy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02662, 2022.

[55] T. Huynh-The, Q.-V. Pham, X.-Q. Pham, T. T. Nguyen, Z. Han,
and D.-S. Kim, “Artiﬁcial intelligence for the metaverse: A survey,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.10336, 2022.

[56] F. Wu, C. Lu, M. Zhu, H. Chen, J. Zhu, K. Yu, L. Li, M. Li,
Q. Chen, X. Li et al., “Towards a new generation of artiﬁcial
intelligence in china,” Nature Machine Intelligence, vol. 2, no. 6,
pp. 312–316, 2020.

[57] C. B. Fernandez and P. Hui, “Life, the Metaverse and everything:
An overview of privacy, ethics, and governance in Metaverse,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01480, 2022.

[58] J. D. N. Dionisio, W. G. B. III, and R. Gilbert, “3D virtual worlds
and the Metaverse: Current status and future possibilities,” ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 1–38, 2013.
[59] Q. Ynag, Y. Zhao, H. Huang, and Z. Zheng, “Fusing blockchain
and ai with metaverse: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.03201,
2022.

[60] M. A. I. Mozumder, M. M. Sheeraz, A. Athar, S. Aich, and H.-
C. Kim, “Overview: Technology roadmap of the future trend of
Metaverse based on IoT, blockchain, AI technique, and medical do-
main Metaverse activity,” in International Conference on Advanced
Communication Technology (ICACT).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 256–261.
[61] R. A. Sharma, A. Dongare, J. Miller, N. Wilkerson, D. Co-
hen, V. Sekar, P. Dutta, and A. Rowe, “All that glitters: Low-
power spoof-resilient optical markers for augmented reality,” in
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Information Processing in
Sensor Networks (IPSN).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 289–300.

[62] S. Mystakidis, “Metaverse,” Encyclopedia, vol. 2, no. 1, pp.
486–497, Feb. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/
2673-8392/2/1/31

[63] M. Zallio and P. Clarkson, “Inclusive metaverse. how businesses
can maximize opportunities to deliver an accessible, inclusive, safe
metaverse that guarantees equity and diversity.” 2022.

[64] H. Duan, J. Li, S. Fan, Z. Lin, X. Wu, and W. Cai, “Metaverse
for social good: A university campus prototype,” in Proceedings of
the 29th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 2021, pp.
153–161.

[65] S. Kraus, D. K. Kanbach, P. M. Krysta, M. M. Steinhoff, and
N. Tomini, “Facebook and the creation of the metaverse: radical
business model innovation or incremental transformation?” Inter-
national Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research, 2022.

[66] M. A. I. Mozumder, M. M. Sheeraz, A. Athar, S. Aich, and H.-
C. Kim, “Overview: Technology roadmap of the future trend of
metaverse based on iot, blockchain, ai
technique, and medical
domain metaverse activity,” in 2022 24th International Conference
on Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT), Feb. 2022, pp.
256–261.

[67] J. Gong, T. Han, S. Guo, J. Li, S. Zha, L. Zhang, F. Tian,
Q. Wang, and Y. Rui, “Holoboard: A large-format
immersive
teaching board based on pseudo holographics,” in The 34th
Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and
Technology, ser. UIST ’21. New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2021, pp. 441–456. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3472749.3474761

[68] H. Duan, J. Li, S. Fan, Z. Lin, X. Wu, and W. Cai, Metaverse for
Social Good: A University Campus Prototype. New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, pp. 153–161.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3474085.3479238
[69] K. M. Lewis, S. Varadharajan, and I. Kemelmacher-Shlizerman,
“Vogue: Try-on by stylegan interpolation optimization,” 2021.
[70] Y. Xu, L. Zhu, L. Jiang, and Y. Yang, “Faster meta update strategy
for noise-robust deep learning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
June 2021, pp. 144–153.

[71] Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, H. Hu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, and
B. Guo, “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using
shifted windows,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 10 012–10 022.
[72] S. Mystakidis, “Metaverse,” Encyclopedia, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 486–

497, 2022.

[73] L. David and L. S. Won, “Nft of nft: Is our imagination the only
limitation of the metaverse?” The Journal of The British Blockchain
Association, p. 36444, 2022.

[74] Z. Wang, F. Mei, X. Xu, and E. Steinbach, “Towards subjective
experience prediction for time-delayed teleoperation with haptic
data reduction,” in IEEE International Conference on Robot &
Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), 2022.

[75] M. Strese, L. Brudermueller, J. Kirsch, and E. Steinbach, “Haptic
material analysis and classiﬁcation inspired by human exploratory
procedures,” IEEE transactions on haptics, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 404–
424, 2019.

[76] L. O. Alpala, D. J. Quiroga-Parra, J. C. Torres, and D. H. Peluffo-
Ord´o˜nez, “Smart factory using virtual reality and online multi-
user: Towards a metaverse for experimental frameworks,” Applied
Sciences, vol. 12, no. 12, p. 6258, 2022.

[77] J.-M. Seigneur and M.-A. Choukou, “How should metaverse
augment humans with disabilities?” in 13th Augmented Human
International Conference Proceedings. ACM, 2022.

[78] M. Kaur and B. Gupta, “Metaverse technology and the current

market,” 2021.

[79] Z. Bowen, X. Chao, L. Guangdi, and Y. Bo, “Metaverse application
in power systems,” Power Generation Technology, vol. 43, no. 1,
p. 1, 2022.

[80] S. Hollensen, P. Kotler, and M. O. Opresnik, “Metaverse–the new

marketing universe,” Journal of Business Strategy, 2022.

[81] R. Madhavan, J. A. Kerr, A. R. Corcos, and B. P. Isaacoff,
“Toward trustworthy and responsible artiﬁcial intelligence policy
development,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 103–
108, 2020.

[82] A. B. Arrieta, N. D´ıaz-Rodr´ıguez, J. Del Ser, A. Bennetot, S. Tabik,
A. Barbado, S. Garc´ıa, S. Gil-L´opez, D. Molina, R. Benjamins
et al., “Explainable artiﬁcial
tax-
onomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible ai,” In-
formation fusion, vol. 58, pp. 82–115, 2020.

intelligence (xai): Concepts,

[83] K. Werder, B. Ramesh, and R. Zhang, “Establishing data prove-
nance for responsible artiﬁcial intelligence systems,” ACM Trans-
actions on Management Information Systems (TMIS), vol. 13, no. 2,
pp. 1–23, 2022.

XXXX, 2022.

19

[84] O. R. Wearn, R. Freeman, and D. M. Jacoby, “Responsible ai for
conservation,” Nature Machine Intelligence, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 72–
73, 2019.

[85] T. Yigitcanlar, J. M. Corchado, R. Mehmood, R. Y. M. Li, K. Moss-
berger, and K. Desouza, “Responsible urban innovation with local
government artiﬁcial intelligence (ai): A conceptual framework and
research agenda,” Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market,
and Complexity, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 71, 2021.

[86] S. Mohseni, N. Zarei, and E. D. Ragan, “A multidisciplinary survey
and framework for design and evaluation of explainable ai systems,”
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS), vol. 11,
no. 3-4, pp. 1–45, 2021.

[87] D. Thakker, B. K. Mishra, A. Abdullatif, S. Mazumdar, and
S. Simpson, “Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence for developing smart
cities solutions,” Smart Cities, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 1353–1382, 2020.
[88] J. Han and Y. Lee, “Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence-based com-
petitive factor identiﬁcation,” ACM Transactions on Knowledge
Discovery from Data (TKDD), vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2021.
[89] P. Kumar, Y. K. Dwivedi, and A. Anand, “Responsible artiﬁcial
intelligence (ai) for value formation and market performance in
healthcare: The mediating role of patient’s cognitive engagement,”
Information Systems Frontiers, pp. 1–24, 2021.

[90] I. Vourganas, V. Stankovic, and L. Stankovic, “Individualised
responsible artiﬁcial intelligence for home-based rehabilitation,”
Sensors, vol. 21, no. 1, p. 2, 2020.

[91] L. Cheng, K. R. Varshney, and H. Liu, “Socially responsible ai
algorithms: issues, purposes, and challenges,” Journal of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Research, vol. 71, pp. 1137–1181, 2021.

[92] E. Khodabandehloo, D. Riboni, and A. Alimohammadi, “Healthxai:
Collaborative and explainable ai for supporting early diagnosis of
cognitive decline,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 116,
pp. 168–189, 2021.

[93] I. Ahmed, G. Jeon, and F. Piccialli, “From artiﬁcial intelligence to
explainable artiﬁcial intelligence in industry 4.0: A survey on what,
how, and where,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
2022.

[94] A. Y. Al Hammadi, C. Y. Yeun, E. Damiani, P. D. Yoo, J. Hu, H. K.
Yeun, and M.-S. Yim, “Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence to evaluate
industrial internal security using eeg signals in iot framework,” Ad
Hoc Networks, vol. 123, p. 102641, 2021.

[95] N. L. Tsakiridis, T. Diamantopoulos, A. L. Symeonidis, J. B.
Theocharis, A. Iossiﬁdes, P. Chatzimisios, G. Pratos, and D. Kou-
vas, “Versatile internet of things for agriculture: an explainable
ai approach,” in IFIP international conference on artiﬁcial intelli-
gence applications and innovations. Springer, 2020, pp. 180–191.
[96] M. S. Hossain, G. Muhammad, and N. Guizani, “Explainable ai and
mass surveillance system-based healthcare framework to combat
covid-i9 like pandemics,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 126–
132, 2020.

[97] W. Guo, “Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence for 6g: Improving trust
between human and machine,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 39–45, 2020.

[98] S. Wang, M. A. Qureshi, L. Miralles-Pechua´an, T. Huynh-The, T. R.
Gadekallu, and M. Liyanage, “Explainable ai for b5g/6g: Tech-
nical aspects, use cases, and research challenges,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.04698, 2021.

[99] Z. Zhao, Z. Ding, T. Q. Quek, and M. Peng, “Edge artiﬁcial intel-
ligence in 6G systems: Theory, key techniques, and applications,”
China Communications, vol. 17, no. 8, pp. iii–iv, 2020.

[100] Z. Lin, T. Lv, W. Ni, J. A. Zhang, and R. P. Liu, “Tensor-
based multi-dimensional wideband channel estimation for mmwave
hybrid cylindrical arrays,” IEEE Transactions on Communications,
vol. 68, no. 12, pp. 7608–7622, 2020.

[101] T. Mir, M. Waqas, S. Tu, C. Fang, W. Ni, R. Mackenzie, X. Xue,
and Z. Han, “Relay hybrid precoding in uav-assisted wideband
millimeter-wave massive mimo system,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, 2022.

[102] C. Xiao, J. Zeng, W. Ni, X. Su, R. P. Liu, T. Lv, and J. Wang,
“Downlink mimo-noma for ultra-reliable low-latency communica-
tions,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 37,
no. 4, pp. 780–794, 2019.

[103] J. Zeng, T. Lv, W. Ni, R. P. Liu, N. C. Beaulieu, and Y. J. Guo,
“Ensuring max–min fairness of ul simo-noma: A rate splitting
approach,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68,
no. 11, pp. 11 080–11 093, 2019.

[104] S. Wang, T. Lv, W. Ni, N. C. Beaulieu, and Y. J. Guo, “Joint
resource management for mc-noma: A deep reinforcement learn-

ing approach,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 5672–5688, 2021.

[105] B. Krogfoss, J. Duran, P. Perez, and J. Bouwen, “Quantifying the
value of 5G and edge cloud on QoE for AR/VR,” in International
Conference on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX). IEEE,
2020, pp. 1–4.

[106] M. Giordani, M. Polese, M. Mezzavilla, S. Rangan, and M. Zorzi,
“Toward 6G networks: Use cases and technologies,” IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 55–61, 2020.

[107] X. Chen, Z. Feng, Z. Wei, P. Zhang, and X. Yuan, “Code-division
ofdm joint communication and sensing system for 6g machine-type
communication,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 15,
pp. 12 093–12 105, 2021.

[108] Y. Liu, M. Peng, G. Shou, Y. Chen, and S. Chen, “Toward edge
intelligence: multiaccess edge computing for 5G and internet of
things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 6722–
6747, 2020.

[109] S. Liao, J. Wu, J. Li, and K. Konstantin, “Information-centric
massive IoT-based ubiquitous connected VR/AR in 6G: A proposed
caching consensus approach,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 5172–5184, 2020.

[110] S. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Guo, M. Qi, and N. Kato, “Envisioning device-
to-device communications in 6G,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 3,
pp. 86–91, 2020.

[111] S. Sun, T. S. Rappaport, M. Shaﬁ, P. Tang, J. Zhang, and P. J.
Smith, “Propagation models and performance evaluation for 5G
millimeter-wave bands,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technol-
ogy, vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 8422–8439, 2018.

[112] A. Prabhakara, V. Singh, S. Kumar, and A. Rowe, “Osprey: A
mmwave approach to tire wear sensing,” in Proceedings of the
18th International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications,
and Services, 2020, pp. 28–41.

[113] J. Zhang, X. Ge, Q. Li, M. Guizani, and Y. Zhang, “5G millimeter-
wave antenna array: Design and challenges,” IEEE Wireless com-
munications, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 106–112, 2016.

[114] J. Dai, Z. Zhang, S. Mao, and D. Liu, “A view synthesis-based 360
vr caching system over mec-enabled c-ran,” IEEE Transactions on
Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 30, no. 10, pp.
3843–3855, 2019.

[115] H.-Y. Chen, R.-T. Hsu, Y.-C. Chen, W.-C. Hsu, and P. Huang, “Ar
game trafﬁc characterization: a case of pok´emon go in a ﬂash crowd
event,” in Proceedings of the 19th Annual International Conference
on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services, 2021, pp. 493–494.
[116] Q. Yang, Y. Liu, T. Chen, and Y. Tong, “Federated machine learn-
ing: Concept and applications,” ACM Transactions on Intelligent
Systems and Technology (TIST), vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1–19, 2019.

[117] W. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Zhang, and D. Raychaudhuri, “Towards
efﬁcient edge cloud augmentation for virtual reality mmogs,” in
Proceedings of the Second ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Com-
puting, 2017, pp. 1–14.

[118] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. Jennings, “Mcds: Ai augmented work-
ﬂow scheduling in mobile edge cloud computing systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 2021.

[119] Z. Gu, H. Lu, P. Hong, and Y. Zhang, “Reliability enhancement
for vr delivery in mobile-edge empowered dual-connectivity sub-
6 ghz and mmwave hetnets,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, 2021.

[120] Y. Liu, J. Liu, A. Argyriou, and S. Ci, “Mec-assisted panoramic
vr video streaming over millimeter wave mobile networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1302–1316, 2018.
[121] F. Tao, H. Zhang, A. Liu, and A. Y. C. Nee, “Digital twin in indus-
try: State-of-the-art,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2405–2415, 2019.

[122] D. Chen, D. Wang, Y. Zhu, and Z. Han, “Digital twin for federated
analytics using a bayesian approach,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 8, no. 22, pp. 16 301–16 312, 2021.

[123] M. M. Rathore, S. A. Shah, D. Shukla, E. Bentafat, and S. Bakiras,
“The role of ai, machine learning, and big data in digital twinning:
A systematic literature review, challenges, and opportunities,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 32 030–32 052, 2021.

[124] Mirror Worlds: or the Day Software Puts the Universe in a
Shoebox...How It Will Happen and What It Will Mean. Oxford
University Press.
[125] [Online]. Available:

https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/

digital-twin-market-106246

[126] [Online].

Available:

https://metaverseinsider.tech/2022/03/22/

nvidia-announces-new-technology-for-digital-twin-simulation-and-communications-within-the-metaverse/

XXXX, 2022.

20

[148] S. Greenwold, “Spatial computing,” Massachusetts Institute of

Technology, Master, 2003.

[149] Z. Liu, N. Meyendorf, and N. Mrad, “The role of data fusion
in predictive maintenance using digital twin,” vol. 1949, no. 1,
p. 020023, publisher: American Institute of Physics. [Online].
Available: https://aip.scitation.org/doi/abs/10.1063/1.5031520
[150] W. Y. B. Lim, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, X. Cao, C. Miao, S. Sun,
and Q. Yang, “Realizing the metaverse with edge intelligence:
A match made in heaven,” number: arXiv:2201.01634. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.01634

[151] A. Kuppa and N.-A. Le-Khac, “Black box attacks on explainable
artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI) methods in cyber security,” in Inter-
national Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN).
IEEE,
2020, pp. 1–8.

[152] Y. Cai, J. Llorca, A. M. Tulino, and A. F. Molisch, “Compute-and
data-intensive networks: The key to the metaverse,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.02001, 2022.

[153] K. Menhaji, S. Holtzman, B. Roser, A. Hardart, and K. T. Chen,
“Systematic review of pelvic anatomy ios and android applications
for obstetricians and gynecologists,” Female Pelvic Medicine &
Reconstructive Surgery, pp. 10–1097, 2022.

[154] Y. Bian, J. Leng, and J. L. Zhao, “Demystifying metaverse as a new
paradigm of enterprise digitization,” in International Conference on
Big Data. Springer, 2021, pp. 109–119.

[155] S. Dhelim, T. Kechadi, L. Chen, N. Aung, H. Ning, and L. At-
zori, “Edge-enabled metaverse: The convergence of metaverse and
mobile edge computing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.02764, 2022.
[156] M. H. Alsharif, A. H. Kelechi, M. A. Albreem, S. A. Chaudhry,
M. S. Zia, and S. Kim, “Sixth generation (6g) wireless networks:
Vision, research activities, challenges and potential solutions,”
Symmetry, vol. 12, no. 4, p. 676, 2020.

[157] D.-I. D. Han, Y. Bergs, and N. Moorhouse, “Virtual reality con-
sumer experience escapes: preparing for the metaverse,” Virtual
Reality, pp. 1–16, 2022.

[158] T. R. Gadekallu, T. Huynh-The, W. Wang, G. Yenduri,
P. Ranaweera, Q.-V. Pham, D. B. da Costa, and M. Liyan-
age, “Blockchain for the metaverse: A review,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.09738, 2022.

[159] J. Huang, P. Sun, and W. Zhang, “Analysis of the future prospects
for the metaverse,” in Proceedings of the 2022 7th International
Conference on Financial Innovation and Economic Development
(ICFIED 2022). Atlantis Press, 2022, pp. 1899–1904. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.2991/aebmr.k.220307.312

[160] T. Braud, C. B. Fernandez, and P. Hui, “Scaling-up ar: University
campus as a physical-digital metaverse,” in 2022 IEEE Conference
on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops
(VRW), 2022, pp. 169–175.

[161] D. KIM, “Meta and the metaverse,” 2022.
[162] H. Zhu, “Metaonce: A metaverse framework based on multi-
scene relations and entity-relation-event game,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.10424, 2022.

[163] M. Xu, W. C. Ng, W. Y. B. Lim, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato,
Q. Yang, X. S. Shen, and C. Miao, “A full dive into realizing
the edge-enabled metaverse: Visions, enabling technologies, and
challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05471, 2022.

[164] R. Cheng, N. Wu, S. Chen, and B. Han, “Will metaverse
be nextg internet? vision, hype, and reality,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.12894, 2022.

[127] [Online]. Available: https://www.leewayhertz.com/digital-twin/
[128] J. Bao, D. Guo, J. Li, and J. Zhang, “The modelling and operations
for the digital twin in the context of manufacturing,” Enterprise
Information Systems, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 534–556, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/17517575.2018.1526324
[129] L. Deren, Y. Wenbo, and S. Zhenfeng, “Smart city based on digital
twins,” Computational Urban Science, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 4, Mar. 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s43762-021-00005-y

[130] A. Fuller, Z. Fan, C. Day, and C. Barlow, “Digital twin: Enabling
technologies, challenges and open research,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 108 952–108 971, 2020.

D.

via

Knezevic,

Kapteyn,
D.
K. Willcox,

Tran,
[131] M.
digital
and
reduced-
a
twins
order models,”
2986–3003,
eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/nme.6423.
[Online]. Available:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1002/nme.6423

“Data-driven
of
123,

component-based

library
vol.

physics-based

Huynh, M.

no.

pp.

13,

[132] [Online].

Available:

https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/
internet-of-things-blog/visualizing-azure-digital-twins-in-3d/ba-p/
2898159

[133] [Online]. Available: https://www.gehccommandcenter.com/
[134] A. Rudskoy, I. Ilin, and A. Prokhorov, “Digital

twins in the
intelligent transport systems,” Transportation Research Procedia,
international Scientiﬁc Siberian
vol. 54, pp. 927–935, 2021,
Transport Forum - TransSiberia 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S235214652100332X

[135] K. Shoji, S. Schudel, C. Shrivastava, D. Onwude,

and
T. Defraeye, “Optimizing the postharvest
supply chain of
imported fresh produce with physics-based digital twins,” vol. 329.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0260877422001315

[136] Y. Wang, X. Wang, and A. Liu, “Digital

twin-driven supply
chain planning,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 93, pp. 198–203, 2020,
53rd CIRP Conference
2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2212827120310337

on Manufacturing Systems

[137] A. Croatti, M. Gabellini, S. Montagna, and A. Ricci, “On
the integration of agents and digital
in healthcare,”
vol. 44, no. 9, p. 161. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10916-020-01623-5

twins

[138] Q. Wang, W. Jiao, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Digital twin for human-
robot interactive welding and welder behavior analysis,” IEEE/CAA
Journal of Automatica Sinica, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 334–343, 2021.

[139] H. Elayan, M. Aloqaily, and M. Guizani, “Digital twin for intelli-
gent context-aware iot healthcare systems,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 8, no. 23, pp. 16 749–16 757, 2021.

[140] A. Ghandar, A. Ahmed, S. Zulﬁqar, Z. Hua, M. Hanai, and
G. Theodoropoulos, “A decision support system for urban agri-
culture using digital twin: A case study with aquaponics,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 35 691–35 708, 2021.

[141] B. Schleich, N. Anwer, L. Mathieu, and S. Wartzack, “Shaping the
digital twin for design and production engineering,” CIRP Annals,
vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 141–144, 2017. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0007850617300409

[142] S. Boschert and R. Rosen, “Digital Twin—The Simulation Aspect,”
in Mechatronic Futures: Challenges and Solutions for Mechatronic
Systems and their Designers, P. Hehenberger and D. Bradley, Eds.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp. 59–74.
[143] R. S. Kenett and J. Bortman, “The digital twin in industry 4.0: A
wide-angle perspective,” vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 1357–1366,
eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/qre.2948. [Online].
Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/qre.2948
and O. Kaynak,
twins,” vol. 379, no. 2207,
[Online]. Available:

“Industrial applications of digital
p. 20200360, publisher: Royal Society.
https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/full/10.1098/rsta.2020.0360

Jiang, S. Yin, K. Li, H. Luo,

[144] Y.

[145] A. K. Ghosh, A. S. Ullah, R. Teti, and A. Kubo, “Developing
sensor signal-based digital twins for intelligent machine tools,”
vol. 24, p. 100242. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2452414X21000418

[146] F. Tao, H. Zhang, A. Liu, and A. Y. C. Nee, “Digital twin in indus-
try: State-of-the-art,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2405–2415, 2019.

[147] S. Shekhar, S. K. Feiner, and W. G. Aref, “Spatial computing,”

Communications of the ACM, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 72–81, 2015.

