Evaluating Cardiovascular Surgical Planning
in Mobile Augmented Reality

Haoyang Yang1

Pratham Darrpan Mehta1

Jonathan Leo1

Zhiyan Zhou1 Megan Dass1

Anish Upadhayay1

Timothy C. Slesnick2

Fawwaz Shaw2 Amanda Randles3

Duen Horng Chau1

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
2
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
3
6
0
1
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT

Advanced surgical procedures for congenital heart diseases (CHDs)
require precise planning before the surgeries. The conventional ap-
proach utilizes 3D-printing and cutting physical heart models, which
is a time and resource intensive process. While rapid advances in
augmented reality (AR) technologies have the potential to streamline
surgical planning, there is limited research that evaluates such AR
approaches with medical experts. This paper presents an evaluation
with 6 experts, 4 cardiothoracic surgeons and 2 cardiologists, from
Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta (CHOA) Heart Center to validate
the usability and technical innovations of CARDIACAR, a prototype
mobile AR surgical planning application. Potential future improve-
ments based on user feedback are also proposed to further improve
the design of CARDIACAR and broaden its access.

Index Terms: Human-centered computing—Human computer
interaction (HCI)—Interaction paradigms—Augmented reality

1 INTRODUCTION

Surgical procedures for congenital heart diseases (CHDs) require
the surgeons to have a deep understanding of the complex cardiac
anatomy, necessitating the process of surgical planning [1]. A typical
planning process utilizes a 3D-printed heart model to visualize the
morphological features of the patient’s heart [4]. However, produc-
ing physical models can be time and resource intensive [2, 6]. While
interactive surgical planning tools based on extended reality (XR)
technologies, including virtual reality (VR), mixed reality (MR),
and augmented reality (AR), have the potential to expedite planning,
there is limited work that evaluates such tools with feedback directly
from surgeons and cardiologists [3]. To ﬁll this research gap, we
have conducted a usability evaluation with 6 medical experts for
CARDIACAR [3] (Fig. 1), an iOS application that enables interactive
surgical planning on mobile devices through AR. Built on top of the
iOS mobile ARKit platform, CARDIACAR offers a suite of interac-
tive tools, such as an enhanced AR view of patients’ 3D heart mod-
els in real-life environments (Fig. 1A), real-time omni-directional
slicing of models (Fig. 1B), and virtual annotation (Fig. 1C), to
assist surgical planning. CARDIACAR is open-source and publicly
available at https://github.com/poloclub/CardiacAR. Our
contributions:

• First evaluation of mobile AR surgical planning tool with
medical experts. To the best of our knowledge, this research is
the ﬁrst to evaluate the usability of mobile AR technologies with
medical experts. We recruited four cardiothoracic surgeons and
two cardiologists from Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta (CHOA)
Heart Center. Their positive feedback highlighted mobile AR’s

.

.

1Georgia Institute of Technology. {alexanderyang | pratham | jpleo122 |
zzhou406 | mdass3 | aupadhayay3 | polo}@gatech.edu
2Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta. SlesnickT@kidsheart.com,
Fawwaz.Shaw@choa.org
3Duke University. amanda.randles@duke.edu

Figure 1: CARDIACAR, an iOS augmented reality application that en-
ables users to perform interactive surgical planning on mobile devices.

strong potential to support cardiovascular surgical planning and
beneﬁt real surgery scenarios.

• Technical discoveries enabling mobile AR for surgical plan-
ning. Through developing CARDIACAR and planning for its
evaluation with mobile devices that surgeons commonly use (e.g.,
iPhones, iPads), we made two important technical discoveries that
enabled the study:

1. Innovative real-time omni-directional slicing functionality.
Conventional method of uni-directionally slicing the 3D physi-
cal model is only able to produce a few cross-sectional views
per physical artifact [5]. In contrast, CARDIACAR supports
preview slicing, which provides real-time visualization of the
slicing plane’s orientation and highlights the planar cross sec-
tion with surface shaders. Model slicing is not natively sup-
ported within ARKit or SceneKit. While planar slicing for
simpler solids using software like Unity is possible, the ap-
proach is not compatible with 3D heart models, as they contain
hollow chambers and tubes. We experimented with approaches
such as Boolean operations for 3D solids and voxel arrays but
they are too slow (e.g., seconds per operation) and do not sup-
port hollow geometries like the 3D hearts (forcibly applying
such operations on a heart model often led to anomalous sur-
faces in the resulting model geometry). Thus, we developed our
novel approach that enabled real-time omni-directional slicing
(Fig. 1B) using surface shader to paint the cross section in a
non-reﬂective dark color, highlighting the inner surfaces of the
heart model’s geometry and achieving the correct visual effects.
2. Streamlining deployment process and increasing accessi-
bility of the application. CARDIACAR is developed natively
in XCode and is open-sourced under the MIT license. The ubiq-
uity of iOS mobile AR platform allows us to design interaction
gestures that are familiar and easy to use. CARDIACAR is
released on TestFlight, a widely-available platform that enables
easy distribution and testing over the iterative development
process. Through collaborating with medical experts, we have
discovered that TestFlight’s asynchronous testing capabilities
greatly facilitate the testing and feedback collection process,
essential when working with doctors with busy schedules.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2 USABILITY EVALUATION WITH MEDICAL EXPERTS

In collaboration with Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta (CHOA), we
recruited six medical experts who had extensive knowledge in cardio-
vascular surgeries to evaluate the usability of CARDIACAR— four
were cardiovascular surgeons, and two were cardiologists. CHOA
provided the 3D heart model used in the study; the model was con-
structed by CHOA using a patient’s de-identiﬁed medical imaging
data. The study was approved by Georgia Tech’s IRB, with data
collection in accordance with the ofﬁcial institute policies.

2.1 Procedure

We conducted the user study in person in a quiet room at CHOA, the
participants’ work premises. The study was conducted across two
group sessions. The ﬁrst session was with the four cardiovascular
surgeons, and the second one with the two cardiologists. We origi-
nally planned to conduct the study with each participant individually
but we had adapted our study design to a group-based one due to
their limited availability. Both sessions were recorded using a video
camera, and the devices used were also screen recorded. Before
commencing the study, each participant was asked to review and sign
a consent form. We gave each participant an iOS device (iPhone or
iPad) with the latest iOS version and CARDIACAR installed. Then,
we provided a brief tutorial of the CARDIACAR’s four features,
which they would then try in sequence: (1) importing model: import
a 3D heart model into CARDIACAR, and reposition it using the
“Move” button; (2) model viewing: rotate and resize the model using
ﬁnger gestures; (3) model slicing: switch to slicing mode, rotate
and translate the slicing plane to preview possible slicing angles,
and then conﬁrm a slice; (4) virtual annotation: tap on the model to
create a note. Lastly, the participants had an additional ﬁve minutes
to freely explore the application.

2.2 Results and Key Findings

For each feature, we asked the participants to rate its usability and
usefulness using a 5-point Likert scale (5 being “the best”). We
also asked the participants to elaborate on how the feature may help
with cardiovascular surgery use cases and how they may want the
feature improved. We summarize the participants’ feedback and our
discoveries into the following main categories.

Omni-directional slicing makes visualization of cardiovascular
anatomy easier. Using preview slicing, participants were able to
visualize speciﬁc cross-sections and angles of the heart. Both par-
ticipant groups—surgeons and cardiologists—strongly agreed that
this feature would beneﬁt real-life scenarios of surgical planning,
such as helping them gain a better understanding of the geometry of
the heart than the conventional approach using 3D-printed physical
heart models. They gave an average Likert rating of 4.5 for usability
across the two groups. They found it helpful that CARDIACAR
allowed them to easily preview possible slicing angles and trans-
lations before conﬁrming the slice, enabling them to ﬁnd the best
perspective to perform such a slice; one cardiologist commented that
they could then pass the sliced model to their colleagues for further
inspection and additional slicing. The surgeons suggested that the
gesture sensitivity should be lowered as they initially found it to be
high, which resulted in rapid movements of the model.

Mobile nature of tool facilitates portability. The participants ap-
preciated that CARDIACAR was designed for mobile devices. With
the portability provided by the iPhone and iPad, the participants were
comfortable moving the device across the physical space to “enter”
the model and obtain an “inside” view of the heart model while
viewing and manipulating the model. Both participant groups rated
the ease of use of the model viewing feature positively with rating of
4. All participants rated the ease of use of CARDIACAR’s annotation
feature highly, with a rating of 5. The cardiologists commented that
this feature would be very helpful in practical scenarios for labelling

and demarcating important regions. Both groups suggested that the
annotation feature could be further developed and offered in its own
dedicated “mode” (e.g., similar to the slicing and viewing modes), so
to help separate the annotation interactions from those of the other
features. Finally, all participants commented that CARDIACAR’s
portability and annotation feature would make it a convenient tool
to use in educational settings.
Easy model import supports patient-speciﬁc analysis. The
model import feature was very well received across all participants,
with an average Likert rating of 4.5 for usability across both groups.
The participants believed that this feature would allow them to ex-
plore different heart models from a variety of patients in an efﬁcient
manner. This would facilitate patient-speciﬁc heart diagnosis and
allow surgeons and cardiologists to effectively examine anomalies
present in the heart. The cardiologists added that the ability for
CARDIACAR to directly import models from HIPAA–compliant1
cloud storage solutions, such as Microsoft OneDrive, facilitate col-
laboration with other medical professionals situated in different
locations.
Participants’ technical needs inform different levels of AR im-
mersion. An interesting observation was the difference in AR-
related requirements across both groups. Throughout the study, the
surgeons preferred that the physical world “background” (captured
by the camera) behind the model not be visible so as to maintain fo-
cus on the model. However, the cardiologists had a different opinion
in that they believed that viewing the background helped them better
anchor the model in the physical space, so they can more easily
examine and interact with it.

3 CONCLUSION AND ONGOING WORK
The paper presents a follow-up usability evaluation of CARDIACAR
with medical experts. The user feedback from the evaluation demon-
strates the efﬁcacy of CARDIACAR in helping users improve spatial
understanding of the model while making interactive planning more
convenient and efﬁcient. Based based on feedback from the medical
experts, we have proposed several improvements to the project. Cer-
tain gesture movements and user interface for the slicing plane and
panning feature can be reﬁned. A larger-scale evaluation with more
participants and types of surgeries can also help assess its usability
in different scenarios.

REFERENCES
[1] T. Bartel, A. L. Rivard, A. Jimenez, C. A. Mestres, and S. M¨uller. Medi-
cal three-dimensional printing opens up new opportunities in cardiology
and cardiac surgery. European Heart Journal, 39:1246–1254, 2018.
[2] M. Kappanayil, N. R. Koneti, R. R. Kannan, B. P. Kottayil, and K. Ku-
mar. Three-dimensional-printed cardiac prototypes aid surgical decision-
making and preoperative planning in selected cases of complex congeni-
tal heart diseases: Early experience and proof of concept in a resource-
limited environment. Annals of Pediatric Cardiology, 10:117 – 125,
2017.

[3] J. Leo, Z. Zhou, H. Yang, M. Dass, A. Upadhayay, T. C. Slesnick,
F. Shaw, and D. H. Chau. Interactive cardiovascular surgical planning
via augmented reality. Asian CHI Symposium 2021, 2021.

[4] K. W. Riggs, G. Dsouza, J. T. Broderick, R. A. Moore, and D. L. S.
Morales. 3D-printed models optimize preoperative planning for pediatric
cardiac tumor debulking. Translational Pediatrics, 7(3):196–202, July
2018. doi: 10.21037/tp.2018.06.01

[5] Z. Sun, I. W. W. Lau, Y. H. Wong, and C. H. Yeong. Personalized
three-dimensional printed models in congenital heart disease. Journal
of Clinical Medicine, 8, 2019.

[6] S. J. Yoo, N. Hussein, B. Peel, J. Coles, G. S. v. Arsdell, O. Honjo,
C. Haller, C. Z. Lam, M. Seed, and D. Barron. 3D Modeling and
Printing in Congenital Heart Surgery: Entering the Stage of Maturation.
Frontiers in Pediatrics, 9, 2021.

1Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act

