Deceiving Audio Design in Augmented Environments : A Systematic
Review of Audio Effects in Augmented Reality

Esm ´ee Henrieke Anne de Haas*

Lik-Hang Lee†

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
3

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
6
3
1
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: Examples of audio distractions a user can encounter when using an augmented reality application.

ABSTRACT
Recently, a lot of works show promising directions for audio design
in augmented reality (AR). These works are mainly focused on how
to improve user experience and make AR more realistic. But even
though these improvements seem promising, these new possibilities
could also be used as an input for manipulative design. This survey
aims to analyze all recent discoveries in audio development regarding
AR and argue what kind of “manipulative” effect this could have
on the user. It can be concluded that even though there are many
works explaining the effects of audio design in AR, very few works
point out the risk of harm or manipulation toward the user. Future
works could contain more awareness of this problem or maybe even
systems to protect the user from any possible manipulation or harm.

Keywords: Persuasive technology, Augmented reality, Virtual
reality, Technology addiction, User interfaces

Index Terms: Human-centered computing—Augmented reality—
Augmented reality technologies; Human-centered computing—
Augmented reality—Augmented reality design and evaluation meth-
ods

1 INTRODUCTION

With the rapid development of augmented reality (AR), more
detail in its design becomes important. The design of AR environ-
ments contains many inﬂuential factors like visuals, audio, haptics

*e-mail: ehadehaas@kaist.ac.kr
†e-mail: likhang.lee@kaist.ac.kr

and wearables. When making a design for an AR environment,
the setup of these inﬂuences is important to the design of the AR
environment. In UX design, manipulative design occurs sometimes.
In this case, the design of an interface is intentionally misleading
or harming a user. So naturally, this so-called manipulative design
can also occur in the design of the AR environment, as shown in
Figure 1. But since the AR environment is a 3D environment instead
of a 2D environment there are more possibilities to manipulate the
design. Even though all of the aforementioned inﬂuences could
affect the design of the AR environment, in this survey we study the
effects of one of them: audio. This survey paper aims to research the
effects of audio in manipulative design. The three concepts of audio,
manipulative design and AR are the main focus of this survey.

1.1 The impact of audio in augmented reality
When AR, virtual reality (VR), extended reality (XR), or other
immersive technologies are mentioned, people often ﬁrst consider
its visuals. Deﬁnitions of AR often describe how digital visual
elements shape the technology, however, AR is not merely digital
visuals. Apart from the visuals, these technologies often make use
of audio, haptics, or other sensory triggers like the perception of
touch or smell. While visuals may seem the most important feature
of the AR, VR, or XR virtual environment, audio might be the most
developed one. Before television came, radio, the world has been
using audio a lot longer in their technologies than digital visual
imagery. There is a lot of information available about audio, so it
can be considered that audio can be leveraged more in the case of
perceptive design. Users are anticipated to naturally interact more
with visuals than audio. Deceptive design of audio is harder to detect
by a user than perceptive design in visuals. For this reason, it might
be less obvious to the user. Making this even a bigger threat to user
safety when used improperly.

Audio in AR has a big impact on how reliable a design is, however

 
 
 
 
 
 
it has another signiﬁcant effect. The audio can be used to broaden the
ﬁeld-of-view (FOV) of the user. Marquardt et al. [33] explain that
current AR displays still have a very limited ﬁeld of view compared
to human vision. So in order to localize anything outside the FOV,
audio can be a very effective way to do this. There are other ways to
stimulate a user to go beyond their initial FOV, however, audio is the
most developed choice. Apart from triggering the user to broaden
the FOV, the audio cues can also make a user move into a wider
perspective. Or the audio can be used to speciﬁcally make the user
move in a certain direction, making it a bigger liability again for
perceptive AR design. So even though, audio can improve the FOV
and it brings great beneﬁt to the design of AR, it can also be a risk
factor to the user’s safety. This is why the awareness of the effects
of audio design in this environment is important among designers of
AR environments.

1.2 Recent survey papers

Recent survey papers focus mainly on other inﬂuential factors in AR
or, the audio topics are regarding other immersive technologies than
AR. For example, the work of Bermejo et al. [2] focuses mainly on
haptics and how these technologies inﬂuence the AR environment,
while this survey will be focusing on audio instead of haptics. The
works of Lee et al. [29] focus more on Human-City Interaction and
related technological approaches, by reviewing trends in information
visualization, constrained interfaces, and embodied interaction for
AR headsets. So far, no previous surveys seem to speciﬁcally target
the usage of audio or auditory cues in the AR environment. So in
this survey, the aim is to target these kinds of technologies speciﬁ-
cally. In another work by Fu et al. [15], the authors describe Virtual,
Augmented, and Mixed Reality Game Applications in Healthcare.
This survey paper targets multiple extended reality (XR) technolo-
gies and explains their usage in healthcare environments. However,
this survey will bring new insights speciﬁcally in the area of AR
and audio. Different from the work on haptics used for AR, or a
focus on a broad range of interactions with AR headsets, or speciﬁc
applications in a technical environment, this work will focus on AR
and audio as one domain. As no other surveys have aimed in this
direction yet, it can make a signiﬁcant difference to combine the
pieces. As many works focus on either AR or audio or anything
regarding these topics, this survey can link several works and bring
new knowledge to the effects of audio usage in the design of AR.
With these insights, safer and more user-friendly designs in AR can
be made, considering the risks that come with certain audio setups.

1.3 Contribution and Structure of this survey paper

This survey paper reviews recent works on audio, audio design and
AR to enable new inside on the audio domain in AR environments.
The aim of this work is to highlight the connection between audio
and AR and thus the potential threats or risks to users. Furthermore,
this paper attempts to answer the following research questions: (1)
What tools or technologies are used and how are they used? (2)
What kind of effects does audio have on the user? (3) Is it possible
for these effects to become manipulative designs? (4) In what cases
can manipulative audio design cause a user harm? To answer these
questions, the paper structure is as follows. First, it is explained
what audio in AR does and how manipulation of this audio in AR
can affect the user. Recent surveys are still lacking some speciﬁc
components that are highlighted in this work. Then, in Section 2,
the systematic review methodology of this survey is explained. The
search strategy, data extraction process, the survey results and the
included articles are explained. In Section 3, an explanation is given
of all the necessary terms that make the topic for this survey. After
this, in Section 4, it is explained how these papers contribute to
the survey topic. This will be followed by Section 5, in which it
is explained what the research gap is, according to the collected
papers in the survey, can contribute to future works. Lastly, Section

Table 1: Keywords & search string

- Audio keywords
- Manipulative
design keywords
- AR keywords

Search string

- (audio/ auditory/ ventriloquist effect/
McGurk effect)
- (manipulative design/ dark pattern/
spatial/ motion sickness/ localization/
orientation/ rendering)
- (AR/ augmented reality)
(”audio” OR ”auditory” OR ”ventriloquist
effect” OR ”McGurk effect”) AND
(”manipulative design” OR ”dark pattern”
OR ”spatial” OR ”motion sickness” OR
”localization” OR ”orientation” OR
”rendering”) AND (”AR” OR
”augmented reality”)

5 concludes the survey.

2 METHODOLOGY

To conduct the literature review systematically, the PRISMA
methodology was applied as described by Page et al. [39]. Each pa-
per was individually assessed and analyzed. After the analysis phase,
all papers were summarized and categorized for later reference in
the discussion (Section 4).

2.1 Search Strategy

Keywords. The chosen keywords were in the three dimensions of
audio, manipulative design and AR. The keywords used regarding
audio were as follows: “audio”, “auditory”, “ventriloquist effect”
and “McGurk effect”. To take into account the inﬂuences of manip-
ulative design, the following keywords were used: “manipulative
design”, “dark pattern”, “spatial”, “motion sickness”, “localization”,
“orientation” and “rendering”. For the third dimension, only the key
words “AR” and “augmented reality” were used (See Table 1).
Databases. The ACM Digital Library (ACM DL) and IEEE Xplore
Digital Library were used to ﬁnd literature related to technology and
computer science. A string including all the previously mentioned
keywords was created to search these two databases. The search
speciﬁcations included the keywords of the string in the Title, the
Abstract, or Keywords of the paper. Then, the search was further
deﬁned to a period from 2014 to 2022 for more relevant results. As
a result, 84 and 63 results came up and in the IEEE Xplore Digital
library and ACM Digital Library, respectively, resulting in a total of
147 papers.
Limitations This work mainly focuses on AR and not on other types
of immersive technologies. Because of this, in the search string only
the keywords ”AR” and ”augmented reality”, and other keywords
like immersive technology, XR technology, or MR technologies
were left out. In future work, the effects of audio could be explored
in technologies different than AR. In this survey, the focus is on
audio inﬂuences only. Other surveys covered other inﬂuences in AR.
Thus, this survey speciﬁcally focuses on the inﬂuence of audio in
AR.

2.2 Data Extraction

As previously mentioned, papers would be ﬁltered to cover the years
between 2014 and 2022, this is to ensure the papers included are up
to date and relevant. However, some of the papers may be excluded
from this ﬁlter given their signiﬁcance and relevance. The duplicates
from the 147 results were deleted, leaving 143 papers to screen.
These 143 results were screened by checking their title and abstract.
If the title contained some of the keywords and the abstract included
information that seemed relevant to the subject of the survey, the

Figure 2: The process of data collection according to the PRISMA
method mentioned by Page et al. [39]

paper was collected and saved for later. The remaining results could
be fully reviewed afterwards.

2.3 Survey Results

For the outline of the systematic review process PRISMA, is used as
mentioned in Figure 2. After completing the search, the screening
process started with 147 articles, of which 4 articles were removed as
duplicates. The title and abstract screening process was conducted
for 143 articles, of which 98 were excluded. After the full-text
assessment, another 7 articles were excluded. The justiﬁcations and
the counts (in parenthesis) for excluding the 7 papers are as follows:
focused too much on VR rather than AR (4), focuses more on a
cinematic experience rather than an AR or AR-related experience
(1), does not focus on any kind of immersive technology (1) and is
a poster, not a paper (1). Finally, this resulted in 38 being used for
data extraction (See Figure 3).

Publication year of survey articles. From these remaining 38 pa-
pers, relevant information was extracted for further analysis. The
information analysis was summarized graphically. Further qualita-
tive insights were brought up in the iterative analysis process. The
chosen set of articles dates from the years 2002 until 2022 with
a peak of papers from the years 2020 and 2021. The number of
publications per year can be seen in Figure 3. In the ﬁgure can be
seen that there is an increase in articles regarding this survey’s topic,
however, this could also be caused by the growing accessibility of
AR technologies. As the data extraction took place in mid-2022, the
results for that year are not representative for the whole year.

Frequency of keywords in articles. The articles included in the
survey come from many different scientiﬁc disciplines. Apart from
computer science, other disciplines are medical, systems and educa-
tional sciences, etc. Most frequent keywords mention “augmented
reality”, “audio”, and “auditory” as shown in Figure 4. Only key-
words with a frequency of 3 or higher are shown in this ﬁgure. The
ﬁgure shows that the keywords relating to augmented reality and
audio in some ways seem to have taken the most coverage in this set
of articles. This could be the effect of the manipulative design or
any keywords relating to it not being taken as a threat to the users
yet. The papers focus mostly on exploring what audio can do in
augmented reality rather than its effect on the user(s).

Figure 3: Publication year of articles

Figure 4: Frequency of keywords in articles

2.4 Description of the included articles

The included articles contain mostly papers regarding spatial audio,
audio localization, audio causing motion sickness, and auditory
feedback. These topics are all highly related to the effect of certain
designs in AR. Below some of these works are highlighted to explain
the topic.
Spatial audio. Grani et al. [16] describe the effects of spatial audio
in the creation of (interactive) spatial audio experiences for immer-
sive augmented reality scenarios, and the production and mixing
of the spatial audio, e.g., cinema and music. In addition to this,
Langlotz et al. [26] describe a system where audio is used spatiotem-
porally to ﬁnd a parked car, see the example in Figure 5. The works
of Hansung et al. [23], [11] and Jot et al. [20] describe the inﬂuence
of audio in an AR (/immersive) environment to estimate acoustics,
room reverberation and obstacles. They explain its importance in
creating a realistic AR (or other immersive) environment.
Audio localization Zotkin et al. [50] describe how virtual audio
scene rendering is required for emerging virtual and augmented
reality applications, perceptual user interfaces, and soniﬁcation of
data. Another work by Larsen et al. [27] focuses more on a common
implementation of spatial audio and a head-related transfer function
(HRTF) system implementation in a study in relation to precision,
speed, and navigational performance in localizing audio sources
in a virtual environment rather than spatial audio. And Binetti et
al. [4] explain more of the effectiveness of certain visual cues. They
explain that effectiveness might be reduced if they are placed at a
different visual depth plane to the target they are indicating. To
overcome this visual-depth problem, we test the effectiveness of
adding simultaneous spatialized auditory cues that are ﬁxed at the

Figure 5: Example of the usage of spatial audio as mentioned in the
work by Langlotz et al. [26]

Figure 6: Example of the usage of audio localization as mentioned in
the work of Heller et al. [19]

target’s location. In addition to this, Heller et al. [19] also describe
similar methods. An example of their experimental setup for audio
localization is shown in Figure 6.
Motion sickness because of audio. Dicke et al. [12] mainly focus
on motion sickness and explain that upcoming motion is known
to potentially mitigate sickness resulting from provocative motion.
They experimented to see what kind of effects auditory cues had that
might evoke motion sickness. Also, Kuiper et al. [24] explore the
effect of movement patterns in a spatial sound space on the perceived
amount of simulator sickness, the pleasantness of the experience,
and the perceived workload, an example of this kind of audio setup
from this work is showed in Figure 7
Auditory feedback. Liang et al. [30] explain that although acoustic
features can capture complex semantic information about human
activities and context through human-centered mobile applications
and in smart assistants in the home, continuous audio recording
could pose signiﬁcant privacy concerns. An intuitive way to reduce
privacy concerns is to degrade audio quality such that speech and
other relevant acoustic markers become unintelligible, but this often
comes at the cost of activity recognition performance. The work
of Marquardt et al. [32] uses audio and vibrotactile feedback to
guide search and information localization so that users can be better
guided through with high accuracy using audio-tactile feedback
with speciﬁc settings. And lastly, the work of Yang et al. [49]
explores audio augmented reality (AAR) that augments objects with
3D sounds, which are spatialized virtually but are perceived as
originating from real locations in space. The goal of their research

Figure 7: Example of an audio setup that was used to test if audio can
create motion sickness in AR as mentioned in the work of Kuiper et
al. [24]

is to enhance the people’s intuitive and immersive interactions with
objects in various consumer and industrial scenarios.

3 TAXONOMY

In this section, the taxonomy relating to the survey is explained. It
is explained what audio effects are in AR, what manipulative design
in AR is, and what a combination of these two could be. This is
done to create an overview of the current applications of audio in
AR and to expose the research gap that currently exists regarding
the topic of this survey.

3.1 Audio effects in AR

Audio is an example of an inﬂuence in AR, and with a rapidly
growing need for AR, an improvement of audio cues in AR becomes
more necessary. The recent works as mentioned before in Section 2
explain the need for good audio design by explaining the impact of
spatial audio and audio localization in AR. Some (bad) setups for
audio in AR could even result in motion sickness as also explained
in the works mentioned in Section 2. This indicates that a proper
audio setup can contribute to a good user experience.

3.2 Manipulative design in AR

But as much as a proper audio setup can contribute to a good user
experience, a bad audio setup can also contribute to manipulations in
AR. Recent work [5, 17, 35] explains the effect of so-called dark pat-
terns. We can ﬁnd dark patterns in many scenarios during our daily
lives, such as websites that request users’ consent to use cookies on
their site [3, 31]. Brignull [6] collects on his website a collection of
real-world examples of dark patterns commonly used in websites
and mobile apps. However, so far, very little research exists regard-
ing this sort of manipulation in AR. In this survey, this concept
is applied to the idea that audio can affect the design and can be
manipulated just like in the case of dark patterns.

AR encompasses the technologies that attempt to enhance physi-
cal environments using virtual graphics, such as objects and inter-
faces, through the most common AR devices, including devices,
wearables and haptics [8]. The enriched sensing capability of AR
could expose users to signiﬁcant privacy threats [41]. Thus, attackers
with MAR (e.g., developers and designers) can leverage the enriched
sensing capability to maximize the collection of personal data from
both users and bystanders.

Mhaidli et al. [36] analyze the possibilities of manipulative ad-
vertisements in XR (eXtended Reality: AR, VR, mixed reality
(MR)) [18, 28, 44]. Moreover, AR technologies can also pose threats
to user safety [21, 40, 41]. The ubiquity of MAR apps creates new
opportunities for new variants of dark patterns. Our paper features
an analysis of the mixed combination of virtual and physical objects

in MAR scenarios, which highlight novel malicious designs, and
thus new threats to individuals’ privacy and safety.

3.3 Effects of manipulative audio design in AR

Although audio might not seem to be that important to the AR
environment, a good audio setup could have a very big impact. These
settings are key to guiding the user well throughout the task they are
trying to accomplish in the AR environment, while also contributing
to making the whole experience look more realistic. This survey
paper leverages the collected research papers to expose those audio
settings that could be an inﬂuential factor in manipulating the user
and thus degrading the user experience in AR. This survey paper
addresses existing works in the audio domain and their inﬂuences
on AR, as well as the potential manipulation threat and the current
research gap.

4 DISCUSSION

In the description of the included articles, as mentioned in Section
2.4, there is a lot of information to ﬁnd regarding certain topics/ key
interests for this survey paper subject. This section describes how
these included articles can contribute to the research of the effects
of audio manipulation in AR.

4.1 Audio effects creating motion sickness

One of the major things that can cause harm in AR is the audio set-
tings that can cause motion sickness. As described in the previously
mentioned articles and the other included articles [13] [32] these
audio settings can cause harm to the user. The setting will make
them feel stressed and disorientated and in some very bad cases, it
will make the user feel nauseous or sick. This setting can be used to
manipulate the user. The effect of the audio setting could be used
to manipulate the design in AR. Designers could make a setup in
audio to disorientate the user to trick them into doing a certain action.
However, even though many works mentioned before use these kinds
of effects of audio settings, so far no works seem to mention how
these kind setting could be used to manipulate the user in AR. So
far, we are aware of the effects of audio setups that result in motion
sickness, however, it is yet to apply in an AR setting. This could
have different results and maybe even other audio setups than the
ones already tested could cause motion sickness in AR. This kind
of setup could be dangerous and harmful to the user, even though
the designers of AR are not aware of this. New research regarding
this topic could make a signiﬁcant contribution to developing audio
design in AR.

4.2 Localization of audio

Although the localization of audio might not look as harmful as the
motion sickness, it is still very likely to contribute signiﬁcantly to
the audio manipulation. As the previously mentioned studies and
other included studies [7, 9, 19, 25, 37, 43, 45, 46] showed, users
are able to locate audio very precisely with not too much deviation.
If users are able to locate audio well, it means that users are also
likely to be distracted by sounds coming in from different angles.
Certain sounds could lure a user towards a position that might be
different from the position a user intended to go to in the ﬁrst place.
Considering such scenarios, the design of audio placement could be
really important to the AR environment. In the case of manipulation,
we could also say that this audio setup could be used to manipulate
the users’ movements in the AR environment. Even though in this
case the user is not physically harmed as poorly as in the case of
motion sickness, this method could be much more deceitful and less
noticeable to the user. Following audio can feel like a natural thing
to do or even feel like an instinct, and might not seem that obvious
to a user. This kind of manipulative design could very well have a
big impact on the user, without the user even knowing it.

4.3 Spatial audio

The same idea of manipulation can be applied to the concept of
motion sickness caused by spatial audio and the concept of audio
localization in spatial audio. The work of Langlotz et al. [26] de-
scribes how narrow users can trace back a car by following audio
cues. In the case of a scenario where the user is not situated in a
small environment, the user still seems to be able to locate the audio.
And in the case of motion sickness, the work of Dicke et al. [12]
explains how the user suffers from a sound circling from left to right
in the user’s AR environment. Both cases also show that audio in
different audio spaces can still be affected by poor audio design.
Other works

[1, 10, 14, 22, 42, 47] also describe similar situations that explain
the effects of audio settings in spatial environments. These works
talk about how easy it is to change audio, but they don’t talk about
what kind of effects these different audio settings could have in AR
yet.

4.4 Other included articles

Others works mention the application of audio inﬂuences in the
guidance of museums [19]. Another work [34] mentions the effects
of different stimuli in AR environments. In addition to audio and
visuals, they also mention the effect of smell and results show that
combinations of visuals and other stimuli are a lot more attractive to
the user than just the visuals. This is also a very interesting appli-
cation to the real-world usage of AR. Another work mentions the
manipulation of voice tones [48]. This could be a very important
factor in the usage of virtual assistants. When the virtual assistant
guides the user, the voice tone and pitch might have a big inﬂuence
on the users’ interactions. And lastly, the work of et al. [38] men-
tions the effect of audio mixing in audio AR games. In their results,
it is shown that the mixes that were provided gave better game per-
formance compared to the cases that did not include the audio mix.
These papers all describe effects that could be quite important when
it comes to future work in manipulative audio design in AR.

4.5 Preventive framework

As previously mentioned in Section 1, audio can have different kinds
of effects on the usage of AR. It can be used to enhance the FOV,
but it can also be used to attract the user to the usage of AR. It can
be used to enhance the FOV, but it can also be used to attract the
user to move in a speciﬁc direction. In the previous sections, it was
explained how audio can be localized by users, how audio can be
used spatially, and how audio can be used to create motion sickness
among users. Although it has not yet been mentioned in the works,
audio can be used to deceive users of an AR environment. To prevent
this kind of situation, and protect the users, the design of audio in
an AR environment has to be thoroughly considered. To be able to
do so, the following framework can be presented. Designers have to
consider the following effect of audio in their design:

• Audio effects that cause motion sickness. Some speciﬁc
setups of audio might be very harmful to the user. A new
potential design should be compared to other designs that
resulted in motion sickness, to determine if the new design will
result in motion sickness.

• Audio effects that can be used to localize audio. Audio can
be used as a means to localize an object or to make a user
change its FOV. This setup for the audio in the AR can be
used as an effective way to redirect the user’s behavior, but
it can also be used to trick a user into doing something that
they might not have intended to do. To intercept this design
ﬂaw, designers should consider their setup thoroughly. Audio
should not be used so that a user can localize sound, to lure
them into moving towards a direction they never planned on

be done to develop new design guidelines and to protect the user
from any harm or undesired inﬂuences when moving through the
AR environment. It is important to understand what could be ma-
nipulated in audio design to make any kind of guideline to protect
the user. This survey summarizes all of these works and current
technologies, allowing one to conduct research and attempt to ﬁnd a
way to protect users from harm or manipulative designs.

6 CONCLUSION

This article surveys the area of (manipulative) audio effects in AR.
Speciﬁcally, this survey summarized and categorized the current
tools and technologies (mostly regarding motion sickness caused
by audio, audio localization, and spatial audio). This paper gives a
summary of the known effects on the user and talks about how to
bridge the gap to ﬁnd out what else these effects do. The survey
also explored the possibilities of these audio effects being turned
into manipulative designs in the AR environment. The survey article
ends by presenting a research roadmap and several open research
questions regarding the possible effects of manipulative audio design
in an AR environment and why it is important to develop a protection
system for this to keep the user safe.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Baldwin, S. Seraﬁn, and C. Erkut. Scatar: A mobile augmented
reality application that uses scattering delay networks for room acous-
tic synthesis. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM Symposium on Virtual
Reality Software and Technology, VRST ’17. Association for Comput-
ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2017. doi: 10.1145/3139131.
3141201

[2] C. Bermejo and P. Hui. A survey on haptic technologies for mobile
augmented reality. ACM Comput. Surv., 54(9), oct 2021. doi: 10.
1145/3465396

[3] C. Bermejo Fernandez, D. Chatzopoulos, D. Papadopoulos, and P. Hui.
This website uses nudging: Mturk workers’ behaviour on cookie con-
sent notices. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction,
5(CSCW2):1–22, 2021.

[4] N. Binetti, L. Wu, S. Chen, E. Kruijff, S. Julier, and D. P. Brumby.
Using visual and auditory cues to locate out-of-view objects in head-
mounted augmented reality. Displays, 69:102032, 2021.

[5] M. Boland.

AR Advertising:

2022.
ar-advertising-2-6-billion-by-2022/, 2018.
accessed 10-August-2021].

by
https://arinsider.co/2018/09/04/
[Online;

$2.6 Billion

[6] H. Brignull. Dark Patterns. https://www.darkpatterns.org/,

2019. [Online; accessed 10-August-2021].

[7] I. S. Cardenas, K. Powlison, and J.-H. Kim. Reducing cognitive work-
load in telepresence lunar - martian environments through audiovisual
feedback in augmented reality. HRI ’21 Companion, p. 463–466. As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2021. doi:
10.1145/3434074.3447214

[8] D. Chatzopoulos, C. Bermejo, Z. Huang, and P. Hui. Mobile augmented
reality survey: From where we are to where we go. Ieee Access, 5:6917–
6950, 2017.

[9] S. H. Chon and S. Kim. The matter of attention and motivation –
understanding unexpected results from auditory localization training
using augmented reality. In 2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality
and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 1503–1506, 2019. doi: 10.1109/VR.
2019.8797683

[10] M. Cokelek, N. Imamoglu, C. Ozcinar, E. Erdem, and A. Erdem. Lever-
aging frequency based salient spatial sound localization to improve
360° video saliency prediction. In 2021 17th International Conference
on Machine Vision and Applications (MVA), pp. 1–5, 2021. doi: 10.
23919/MVA51890.2021.9511406

[11] M. Colombo. Vision-based acoustic information retrieval for interactive
sound rendering. In 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed
and Augmented Reality Adjunct (ISMAR-Adjunct), pp. 487–490, 2021.
doi: 10.1109/ISMAR-Adjunct54149.2021.00115

Figure 8: The research gap between audio, manipulative design and
AR visualized

going to. If the designer considers this concept and makes a
design according to this guideline, there will be no conﬂict or
danger to the user.

• Audio effects that can be used spatially. Users can follow
the audio either by following some audio cues that are given.
This also creates an environment that is sensitive to manipula-
tive design. Too many audio cues might overwhelm a user, and
traveling audio might be hard to follow for a user. The number
of audio inputs should therefore be limited in a design, and
the number of iterations in audio design in an AR environment
should also be limited. This is to protect the user and make
sure that the audio is not misused to make the user move to or
from speciﬁc locations in the AR environment.

It can be suggested to create some ethical design guidelines based
on the abovementioned points. As such, users can make use of AR
in a safe and harm-free environment.

5 RESEARCH ROADMAP
A research roadmap and the corresponding open questions to sup-
port this survey topic can be proposed after analyzing the existing
literature in Sections 2 and 3.

5.1 Current research gap
This ﬁeld of research is aware of the importance of audio technolo-
gies like AR, VR, and XR. So far the research shows that we can
inﬂuence the user’s behavior and make a user change its FOV, but not
how the audio setup in AR speciﬁcally affects a user. As mentioned
in Section 3, recent works primarily describe the importance of good
audio setup in AR; however, no work has yet clearly explained what
would happen if these methods were used to manipulate audio setup.
This results in a research gap, as shown in Figure 8. Most of the
effects of the design in neutral settings are explained in the works
on how sound effects can cause motion sickness, how sound can be
localized, and how sounds spread in a user environment. Speciﬁ-
cally, works on audio localization and spatial audio rarely explain
the ”negative” effects of audio settings or how they can harm the
user. The works on motion sickness explain the risk to the user, but
they make no mention of how such audio setups could manipulate
the user in any way.

5.2 Opportunities for future works
There is a gap from research about the effects of (manipulative)
audio setup to the effects of (manipulative) AR design. This could

[12] C. Dicke, V. Aaltonen, and M. Billinghurst. Simulator sickness in mo-
bile spatial sound spaces. In Auditory Display, pp. 287–305. Springer,
2009.

[13] K. A. Dooley. Signiﬁcant infrasound levels a previously unrecognized
contaminant in landmark motion sickness studies. In Proceedings of
Meetings on Acoustics 166ASA, vol. 20, p. 040007. Acoustical Society
of America, 2013.

[14] C. Erkut, J. Holfelt, and S. Seraﬁn. Mobile ar in and out: Towards
delay-based modeling of acoustic scenes. In 2018 IEEE Conference
on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 1–2, 2018. doi: 10.
1109/VR.2018.8446230

[15] Y. Fu, Y. Hu, and V. Sundstedt. A systematic literature review of virtual,
augmented, and mixed reality game applications in healthcare. ACM
Trans. Comput. Healthcare, 3(2), mar 2022. doi: 10.1145/3472303
[16] F. Grani, D. Overholt, C. Erkut, S. Gelineck, G. Triantafyllidis, R. Nor-
dahl, and S. Seraﬁn. Spatial sound and multimodal interaction in
immersive environments. In Proceedings of the Audio Mostly 2015 on
Interaction With Sound, pp. 1–5. 2015.

[17] C. M. Gray, Y. Kou, B. Battles, J. Hoggatt, and A. L. Toombs. The
dark (patterns) side of ux design. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–14, 2018.
[18] S. Greenberg, S. Boring, J. Vermeulen, and J. Dostal. Dark patterns
in proxemic interactions: a critical perspective. In Proceedings of the
2014 conference on Designing interactive systems, pp. 523–532, 2014.
[19] F. Heller, J. Jevanesan, P. Dietrich, and J. Borchers. Where are we?
evaluating the current rendering ﬁdelity of mobile audio augmented
reality systems. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services,
MobileHCI ’16, p. 278–282. Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 2016. doi: 10.1145/2935334.2935365

[20] J.-M. Jot, R. Audfray, M. Hertensteiner, and B. Schmidt. Rendering
spatial sound for interoperable experiences in the audio metaverse.
In 2021 Immersive and 3D Audio: from Architecture to Automotive
(I3DA), pp. 1–15, 2021. doi: 10.1109/I3DA48870.2021.9610971
[21] J. Jung, H. Lee, J. Choi, A. Nanda, U. Gruenefeld, T. Stratmann, and
W. Heuten. Ensuring safety in augmented reality from trade-off be-
tween immersion and situation awareness. In 2018 IEEE International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), pp. 70–79.
IEEE, 2018.

[22] G. Kailas and N. Tiwari. Design for immersive experience: Role of
spatial audio in extended reality applications. In Design for Tomor-
row—Volume 2, pp. 853–863. Springer, 2021.

[23] H. Kim, L. Remaggi, P. J. Jackson, and A. Hilton. Immersive spatial
audio reproduction for vr/ar using room acoustic modelling from 360°
images. In 2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User
Interfaces (VR), pp. 120–126, 2019. doi: 10.1109/VR.2019.8798247
[24] O. X. Kuiper, J. E. Bos, C. Diels, and E. A. Schmidt. Knowing what’s
coming: Anticipatory audio cues can mitigate motion sickness. Applied
Ergonomics, 85:103068, 2020.

[25] M. Kyt¨o, K. Kusumoto, and P. Oittinen. The ventriloquist effect in
augmented reality. In 2015 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed
and Augmented Reality, pp. 49–53, 2015. doi: 10.1109/ISMAR.2015.
18

[26] T. Langlotz, H. Regenbrecht, S. Zollmann, and D. Schmalstieg. Au-
dio stickies: visually-guided spatial audio annotations on a mobile
augmented reality platform. In Proceedings of the 25th Australian
computer-human interaction conference: augmentation, application,
innovation, collaboration, pp. 545–554, 2013.

[27] C. H. Larsen, D. S. Lauritsen, J. J. Larsen, M. Pilgaard, and J. B.
Madsen. Differences in human audio localization performance between
a hrtf-and a non-hrtf audio system. In Proceedings of the 8th audio
mostly conference, pp. 1–8, 2013.

[28] H. Lee, J. Lee, D. Kim, S. Jana, I. Shin, and S. Son. Adcube: Webvr ad
fraud and practical conﬁnement of third-party ads. In 30th {USENIX}
Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 21), 2021.

[29] L.-H. Lee, T. Braud, S. Hosio, and P. Hui. Towards augmented reality
driven human-city interaction: Current research on mobile headsets
and future challenges. ACM Comput. Surv., 54(8), oct 2021. doi: 10.
1145/3467963

[30] D. Liang, W. Song, and E. Thomaz. Characterizing the effect of audio

degradation on privacy perception and inference performance in audio-
based human activity recognition. In 22nd International Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services,
pp. 1–10, 2020.

[31] D. Machuletz and R. B¨ohme. Multiple purposes, multiple problems:
A user study of consent dialogs after gdpr. Proceedings on Privacy
Enhancing Technologies, 2020(2):481–498, 2020.

[32] A. Marquardt, C. Trepkowski, T. D. Eibich, J. Maiero, and E. Kruijff.
Non-visual cues for view management in narrow ﬁeld of view aug-
mented reality displays. In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on
Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), pp. 190–201, 2019. doi: 10.
1109/ISMAR.2019.000-3

[33] A. Marquardt, C. Trepkowski, T. D. Eibich, J. Maiero, E. Kruijff, and
J. Sch¨oning. Comparing non-visual and visual guidance methods for
narrow ﬁeld of view augmented reality displays. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 26(12):3389–3401, 2020. doi:
10.1109/TVCG.2020.3023605

[34] A. Marto, M. Melo, A. Gonc¸alves, and M. Bessa. Multisensory aug-
mented reality in cultural heritage: Impact of different stimuli on pres-
ence, enjoyment, knowledge and value of the experience. IEEE Access,
8:193744–193756, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3032379
[35] A. Mathur, G. Acar, M. J. Friedman, E. Lucherini, J. Mayer, M. Chetty,
and A. Narayanan. Dark patterns at scale: Findings from a crawl of
11k shopping websites. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction, 3(CSCW):1–32, 2019.

[36] A. H. Mhaidli and F. Schaub. Identifying manipulative advertising
techniques in xr through scenario construction. In Proceedings of the
2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp.
1–18, 2021.

[37] N. Miao, X. Peng, X. Chen, G. Ren, and G. Wang. Investigating the
situational awareness with optical see-through augmented reality in iot-
based environments. In 2021 International Conference on Electronic
Communications, Internet of Things and Big Data (ICEIB), pp. 40–43,
2021. doi: 10.1109/ICEIB53692.2021.9686374

[38] N. Moustakas, E. Rovithis, K. Vogklis, and A. Floros. Adaptive audio
mixing for enhancing immersion in augmented reality audio games.
In Companion Publication of the 2020 International Conference on
Multimodal Interaction, ICMI ’20 Companion, p. 220–227. Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2020. doi: 10.1145/
3395035.3425325

[39] M. J. Page, J. E. McKenzie, P. M. Bossuyt, I. Boutron, T. C. Hoffmann,
C. D. Mulrow, L. Shamseer, J. M. Tetzlaff, E. A. Akl, S. E. Brennan,
et al. The prisma 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting
systematic reviews. International Journal of Surgery, 88:105906, 2021.
[40] R. Pierdicca, M. Prist, A. Monteri`u, E. Frontoni, F. Ciarapica,
M. Bevilacqua, and G. Mazzuto. Augmented reality smart glasses
in the workplace: Safety and security in the fourth industrial revolution
era. In International Conference on Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality
and Computer Graphics, pp. 231–247. Springer, 2020.

[41] F. Roesner, T. Kohno, and D. Molnar. Security and privacy for aug-
mented reality systems. Communications of the ACM, 57(4):88–96,
2014.

[42] D. Rumi´nski. Modeling spatial sound in contextual augmented reality
environments. In 2015 6th International Conference on Information,
Intelligence, Systems and Applications (IISA), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2015.

[43] S. Russell, G. Dublon, and J. A. Paradiso. Hearthere: Networked
sensory prosthetics through auditory augmented reality. In Proceedings
of the 7th Augmented Human International Conference 2016, pp. 1–8,
2016.

[44] K. M. Stanney, H. Nye, S. Haddad, K. S. Hale, C. K. Padron, and J. V.
Cohn. extended reality (xr) environments. Handbook of human factors
and ergonomics, pp. 782–815, 2021.

[45] Z. Tang and D. Manocha. Scene-aware sound rendering in virtual and
real worlds. In 2020 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User
Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW), pp. 535–536, 2020. doi:
10.1109/VRW50115.2020.00119

[46] A. Tepljakov, S. Astapov, E. Petlenkov, K. Vassiljeva, and D. Draheim.
Sound localization and processing for inducing synesthetic experiences
in virtual reality. In 2016 15th Biennial Baltic Electronics Conference
(BEC), pp. 159–162. IEEE, 2016.

[47] Y. Vazquez-Alvarez, I. Oakley, and S. A. Brewster. Auditory display
design for exploration in mobile audio-augmented reality. Personal
and Ubiquitous computing, 16(8):987–999, 2012.

[48] T.-Y. Wang, I. Kawaguchi, H. Kuzuoka, and M. Otsuki. Effect of
manipulated amplitude and frequency of human voice on dominance
and persuasiveness in audio conferences. Proceedings of the ACM on
Human-Computer Interaction, 2(CSCW):1–18, 2018.

[49] J. Yang and F. Mattern. Audio augmented reality for human-object in-
teractions. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 2019 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings
of the 2019 ACM International Symposium on Wearable Computers,
pp. 408–412, 2019.

[50] D. N. Zotkin, R. Duraiswami, and L. S. Davis. Rendering localized spa-
tial audio in a virtual auditory space. IEEE Transactions on multimedia,
6(4):553–564, 2004.

