Comparative Study of AR Versus Image and Video for Exercise Learning

Jamie Burns
Birmingham City University

Wenge Xu*
DMT lab
Birmingham City University

Ian Williams
DMT lab
Birmingham City University

Irfan Khawaja
School of Health Science
Birmingham City University

2
2
0
2

p
e
S
5

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
6
1
2
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT

There is inadequate attention to using mobile Augmented Reality
(AR) in ﬁtness, despite mobile AR being easy to use, requiring no
extra cost, and can be a powerful learning tool. In this work, we
present a mobile AR application that can help users learn exercises
with a virtual personal trainer. We conduct a user study with 10
participants to investigate the learning quality of the ARFit (i.e.,
the proposed mobile AR application) in comparison to traditional
methods such as Image-based learning and Video-based learning.
Our results indicate that participants have a higher learning quality
of exercise with mobile AR than (1) Image-based learning among
all exercises selected and (2) video-based learning with exercise that
requires greater spatial knowledge, with the performance evaluated
by a qualiﬁed personal trainer. In addition, ARFit has an excellent
rating in usability, is deemed to be highly acceptable, and is the
preferred exercise learning method by most participants (N=9).

Index Terms: Human-centered computing—Human computer
interaction (HCI)—Interaction paradigms—Mixed / augmented real-
ity; Applied computing—Education—Interactive learning environ-
ments

1 INTRODUCTION

Physical inactivity has been identiﬁed as one of the leading causes
of non-communicable diseases such as cancer, diabetes, respiratory,
and cardiovascular diseases [8]. It is estimated that over 1.6 million
deaths per year can be attributed to physical inactivity [6]. There
are many reasons why the general public is physically inactive, the
literature suggests that possible factors could be a lack of intrinsic
motivation, a lack of enjoyment, concern for perceived physical
appearance, or social anxiety while exercising are contributing to
physical inactivity among younger adults [19]. Additionally, barriers
such as long transportation time/distance to the ﬁtness centre, poor
weather, and high membership fees have also prevented many adults
from regular exercise [15].

Many actions have been established to tackle the problem of
physical inactivity among the general public, including virtual re-
ality (VR) and augmented reality (AR). For instance, several VR
exergames (e.g., FitXR1, VRworkout2, Dance Central3) have been
developed to engage the general public in exercising through ex-
ergaming. Smart mirror has been used to stream unlimited classes
ranging from boxing to yoga, allowing users to exercise at home with
a digital instructor, however, the cost of smart mirrors is expensive
(e.g., Mirror $1.5k, Tonal, $3k, and ProForm Vue $1.5k). Mosta-
jeran et al. [13] presented a HoloLens-based AR coaching system
for older adults to train their balance at home. The results suggest
that older adults ﬁnd the system encouraging and stimulating. The
virtual coach is perceived as an alive, calm, intelligent, and friendly

*corresponding author, e-mail: wenge.xu@bcu.ac.uk

1https://fitxr.com/
2https://github.com/mgschwan/VRWorkout
3https://www.dancecentral.com/

human. However, the cost of such a device (i.e., HoloLens) is not
consumer-friendly ($2k).

One approach that is consumer-friendly, highly acceptable, and
allows users to exercise at home is using smartphone technology.
Research suggests that the smartphone Health & Fitness Market has
already become popular with nearly 100k applications available on
Google Play and about 160k applications on the Apple App Store
in June 2021 [25]. In this work, we aim to implement a mobile
AR application (i.e., ARFit) for learning exercises with a virtual
personal trainer, so that users can learn how to perform the exercise
at home at any time without travelling, paying the membership, and
concerning the poor weather. We then present a user study with
10 participants that compare the learning quality of using ARFit
(AR-based learning) against traditional learning methods such as
paper-based learning and video-based learning. Our results suggest
that (1) participants have a higher exercise learning quality when
using AR than (i) paper-based learning in all exercises and (ii) video-
based learning in the exercise where spatial knowledge is needed, (2)
learning exercises at home with the virtual personal trainer (ARFit)
is preferred, feasible, and acceptable.

2 RELATED WORK

We reviewed the literature on 1) AR and Fitness and 2) AR in
Teaching and Learning.

2.1 Augmented Reality and Fitness

There are some attempts on integrating AR for ﬁtness purposes,
especially for therapeutic exercise. For instance, Luo et al. [9]
implemented an AR system to render the stroke patient’s real hands
inside a virtual environment for them to train their grasp-and-release
ability by grasping and moving virtual objects. In addition, AR
has been used in training balance [13], hand skills [26], and gait
adaptability [21].

Despite these successes in therapeutic exercise, there is still a
very limited attempt to use AR to support, learn, or teach general
exercise [14]. Hsiao developed an AR learning system that com-
bines exercise learning activities with regular academic lessons in
physical education (PE). A 4-week study with 108 university stu-
dents showed that (1) students make signiﬁcant positive progress
after using the AR application for 4 weeks (3 times a week) and (2)
students have higher marks in the AR learning group than in the
traditional teaching group (PowerPoint) [7]. Interviews conducted
with PE teachers indicate that they believe learning exercises in AR
are not only more interesting and attractive, but also raise students’
interests and motivations [7].

Similar results have been observed among seventh-grade students
regarding motor skills learning [3], where AR has been applied as a
complement to video-assisted instruction, students can learn with
interactive 3D models. Findings suggest that AR-assisted instruction
is more effective than video-assisted instruction, and the effects are
better for more difﬁcult motor skills learning. Moreno-Gurrero et
al. [11] have explored the impact of training activities through the
use of AR in high school PR for the development and acquisition of
spatial orientation, as opposed to the traditional exhibition training
method. The results indicate that students (N=140) who participated

 
 
 
 
 
 
in the AR group obtained greater motivation and grades (given by
the teachers), especially in terms of spatial orientation.

Based on this literature, it can be concluded that AR has shown the
potential for ﬁtness training and can be used in teaching and learning.
However, the current attempts are mostly related to therapeutic
exercises, general exercises such as Jumping Jack, Squat, and Sit
Up should also be included. In addition, the current usage of AR
in exercise learning and teaching is limited within the education
context (school and university), there should be an AR application
that allows the general population to learn exercise. Therefore, in
this work, we aim to design and develop a mobile AR application for
the general population to learn and practice exercise before exercise
in a real-life scenario.

2.2 Augmented Reality in Teaching and Learning

The research and development initiatives of AR technology in learn-
ing scenarios have increased rapidly over the last few years. Wagner
et al. have compared mobile AR to Paper and PC in learning art
history and suggested that the mobile AR method is the most enjoy-
able [22]. Chiang et al. [5] have developed a collaborative mobile
AR application for learning natural sciences, where the students (1)
are guided to interact with various learning scenarios, and (2) can
discuss and provide feedback among peers. They found that AR
provided an exciting experience and students gained a high level of
satisfaction and increased motivation and conﬁdence in the tasks pre-
sented. Morillo et al. [12] have developed a mobile AR application
to provide instructions for maintenance operations. Their user study
suggests that AR is the most effective approach to substitute the
typical paper-based instructions in consumer electronics. Moreover,
In a review of 32 papers on the learning effects of AR vs non-AR
applications [17], the author suggests that AR increases content un-
derstanding, motivation, and knowledge retention, when compared
to traditional media approaches like paper or video media.

AR has also been used for learning and teaching in university
education. Shelton and Hedley [18] found that AR can positively
affect undergraduate Geography students’ comprehension of Earth-
Sun relationships. Akcayir et al. [1] suggested that using AR to
provide additional virtual learning content (i.e., texts, audios, videos,
animations, and simulations) explaining how to set up and conduct
the experiment, as well as some of the underlying phenomena can
signiﬁcantly help achieve exam scores than the non-AR condition
where only paper-based laboratory manuals are used. Thees et
al. [20] suggested that learning physics laboratory courses with
AR led to a signiﬁcantly lower cognitive load than the traditional
workﬂow condition (i.e., PC).

Overall, AR has the potential to provide a positive (e.g., moti-
vating, satisfying, engaging) and meaningful learning experience
among all users [16]. In this work, we aim to (1) compare our pro-
posed mobile AR exercise learning application (i.e., ARFit) against
traditional learning methods like Image and Video to test the learn-
ing effectiveness, and (2) evaluate the usability and acceptability of
ARFit.

3 ARFIT: AUGMENTED REALITY EXERCISE LEARNING AP-

PLICATION

This section describes details of the design and implementation of
the proposed mobile AR exercise learning application (i.e., ARFit).
The ARFit is used to augment a virtual personal trainer in the real
world to perform a collection of animations based on the user’s
requirement. Below we describe how we implement the virtual
personal trainer feature and the interaction feature to allow the user
to interact with the virtual personal trainer. A video demonstration
has been provided in the supplement video4.

3.1 Virtual Personal Trainer

A vital part of the ARFit is to have a virtual personal trainer perform
a variety of exercises. This is achieved by using Adobe Mixamo,
which has a range of 3D models and animations to select from and
has 3D model ﬁles speciﬁcally for Unity (i.e., in .FBX format). After
importing the models into Unity, several modiﬁcations are required
to make sure the textures (Unity setting: Location setting in Legacy
and then change to Use Embedded Materials) and rigging (Unity
setting: Animation type as Humanoid) are correctly set up.

We conducted a short pilot study with 16 participants (11 male)
to decide which avatar style (i.e., realistic human, cartoon human,
humanoid, and skeleton; see Fig. 1) should be used in our experi-
ment. Among these avatar styles, most (N=13) participants selected
the realistic human avatar for the virtual personal trainer. The sup-
porting reasons collected are that a realistic human avatar is more
convincing (looks like a real personal trainer), while others argue
that the realistic virtual personal trainer can help them identify which
body part or muscle groups should move while other avatar styles
could be misleading. Based on the positive feedback collected from
this pilot study, we have decided to use the realistic human model as
the default avatar of the virtual personal trainer in ARFit.

Figure 1: Four types of avatar tested in the pilot study: (a) realistic
human, (b) cartoon, (c) humanoid, (d) skeleton.

3.2 Interaction

The ARFit is developed in Unity3D (v2020.3.27f1) with the Vuforia
AR SDK5. Vuforia comes with a variety of prefabs of AR technolo-
gies to provide a starting point for an application, ARFit utilises the
ARCamera, Ground Plane, Plane Finder, and Image Targets prefabs.
The ARCamera acts as the main viewing camera, allowing users
to view the AR feature (i.e., the virtual personal trainer) in ARFit.
The Plane Finder prefab together with the Ground Plane prefab
allows users to track any horizontal surface from ground to smart-
phone to place a virtual personal trainer into the real environment to
show users how to perform exercises. A reset ground plane function
has also been added so that users can reset the plane if they made a
mistake or ﬁnd a better horizontal surface.

One disadvantage of the Ground Plane solution is that users need
to have clear and empty space in their real environment to place the
virtual personal trainer. This may not be feasible for people who are
living in limited spaces. To overcome this issue, we have employed
the Image Target prefab, where users can use their smartphone to
scan the QR code to view the augmentation of the linked 3D model
on top of it (i.e., the virtual personal trainer with different exercise
animations). This process makes use of Vuforia Library’s database
to store the Image Targets (i.e., QR codes).

Once visualized the virtual personal trainer, users have the fol-
lowing interaction control via touchscreen buttons: (1) play/pause
the animation, (2) rotate the 3D model, (3) reset the ground plane,
(4) back to the main menu. In addition, they can walk around with
the phone to change the camera viewport.

4https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3naFbmdCdf4

5https://developer.vuforia.com/

4 EXPERIMENT

To explore the effectiveness of exercise learning, we compared the
ARFit against traditional learning methods such as learning with
images and videos. The usability and acceptability of the ARFit
were also evaluated.

4.1 Experiment Design

To avoid any bias between participants, the study was conducted
using a within-subject design where each participant would interact
with all the required conditions (AR, Video, Image). The order of
the conditions was counterbalanced with a Latin square.

AR. In the AR condition, the participants needed to identify a
horizontal surface ﬁrst, and then place the virtual personal trainer
in the real environment. To gain a better understanding of how to
perform the exercise, participants can rotate the virtual personal
trainer via touch screen or walk around the virtual personal trainer
to ﬁnd their preferred viewing angles. They can also pause or restart
the animation depending on their needs (see Section 3).

Video. To avoid confounding factors, videos used in the experi-
ment were screen recordings of exercises on ARFit. Each exercise
screen recording was recorded in a static position, the exercise shown
in the recording presents a clear procedure on how to perform the
exercise. The quality of the exercise in the video was approved by a
qualiﬁed personal trainer. In this condition, participants were able
to pause or restart the video depending on their needs. Refer to the
supplemented video6 for an example of the Video condition we used
in the experiment.

Image. The step-by-step images used in this condition were
captured based on the videos in the Video condition to avoid con-
founding factors. The step-by-step images covered all essential steps
of how to perform the exercise and were evaluated and approved
by a qualiﬁed personal trainer. Fig. 2 shows an example of the
step-by-step image instructions of the selected exercise used in this
condition.

4.2 Procedure, Tasks, and Apparatus

Before the experiment began, participants needed to read and sign
the information sheet and the consent form. Then, they were required
to ﬁll out a pre-experiment questionnaire that gathered demographic
information (e.g., age, gender, knowledge of exercise).

Before each condition, they were given instructions on how to
use the corresponding learning method. For each condition (AR,
Video, Paper; the order counterbalanced), participants were required
to perform 4 types of exercises (Squat, Sit Up, Jumping Jack, and
Burpee; in random order). For each exercise, they had one minute
to view and remember it, and then, they needed to perform three
repetitions of the corresponding exercise they just watched. Once
they performed these repetitions, they proceeded to the next exercise
until all these exercises were completed. Participants were given
as much time as needed to perform the repetitions and they were
allowed to rest in between exercises.

Participants needed to ﬁll out a system usability questionnaire
after the AR condition. After completing all conditions, they were
required to complete a post-experiment questionnaire (ranking and
acceptability) and participate in a short structured interview to share
their thoughts and provide feedback regarding the study and the
ARFit.

Each experiment lasted approximately 30 minutes and was con-
ducted in safe environments. There was no compensation given to
the participants. We used three devices in this experiment, a laptop
for reading and signing the information sheet and consent form, ﬁll-
ing out the questionnaire, an iPhone 11 for learning exercises, and an
additional phone for recording participants’ exercise performance.

Figure 2: Example of Image learning method where the virtual per-
sonal trainer is performing a Squat.

4.3 Outcome Measure
Learning quality. The learning quality of each exercise was assessed
by a qualiﬁed personal trainer. The personal trainer was asked to
watch the recorded video of a participant performing exercises (e.g.,
Squat, Sit up, Jumping Jack, and Burpee) and then gave a score from
1 (Extremely Bad) to 10 (Extremely Good) based on the quality
of the exercise. We employed a blind review process, where the
personal trainer did not know which learning condition was used
when rating the recording video.

Usability. System Usability Scale (SUS) was used to measure
the usability of the ARFit. SUS score ranges from 0 to 100, where
a score of 100 represents the best usability and a score above 68
is considered positive [2]. This questionnaire was used after the
participants completed the AR condition.

Acceptability. We assessed the acceptability of the ARFit using
a 5 point-Likert scale (1 indicated “Strongly Disagree” and 5 was
“Strongly Agree”) question “How likely are you to recommend this
app to a friend?” [24].

Ranking and Structured Interview. Participants needed to select
their preferred exercise learning method among AR, Paper, and
Video. Once selected their preferred learning method, we conducted
a short structured interview with three open-ended questions, “What
was your reason for your preferred learning method selection?”,
”Was there anything you didn’t like about the mobile AR applica-
tion?”, “Have you performed all the exercises before?”. Answers
were recorded and transcribed in text.

4.4 Participants

We gathered data from 10 participants (5 male), between 20 and
26 years of age (Mean = 22.1, SD = 1.60), recruited from our local
university. 6 of the participants had used an AR application before
but not for exercise. Only 2 participants described themselves as
advanced in terms of their exercise knowledge. These 2 participants
were also regularly exercised.

5 RESULTS

5.1 Statistical Analysis

IBM SPSS 28 for Windows was used for analysing the data. We
used Shapiro-Wilks tests and Q-Q plots to check if the data had
a normal distribution. All tests are with two-tailed p values. For
normally distributed data, we employed One-way repeated-measure
ANOVA with Learning Methods (AR, Video, Image) as the within-
subject factor. Greenhouse-Geisser adjustment was used to correct
violations of the sphericity assumption. For data that were not
normally distributed, a Friedman Test was used and Wilcoxon Signed
Rank Test was used for post-hoc analysis. Bonferroni corrections
were used for all pairwise comparisons.

5.2 Learning Quality

6https://www.youtube.com/shorts/kM2_S1pmD1I

Details of learning quality for each exercise can be found in Fig. 3.

Squat. One-way repeated measure ANOVA determined a statisti-
cally signiﬁcant difference between the Learning Method on Squat
learning quality (F1.986,17.875 = 24.251, p < 0.001). Post-hoc pair-
wise comparison (Bonferroni corrected) suggested learning quality
of squat in AR was found to be signiﬁcantly higher than in Image
(p < 0.001) and Video (p = 0.028) conditions.

Jumping Jack. Friedman test determined a statistically signif-
icant difference between the Learning Methods on Jumping Jack
learning quality (χ 2(2) = 16.800, p < 0.001). Post-hoc pairwise
comparisons revealed that there was a signiﬁcant difference between
AR and Image (Z = −2.692, p = 0.007) and between Video and
Image (Z = −2.687, p = 0.007) on Jumping Jack learning quality,
we could not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant difference between AR and Video.

Sit Up. Friedman test yielded a statistically signiﬁcant effect
of the Learning Method on Sit Up Learning Quality (χ 2(2) =
13.556, p = 0.001). Post-hoc pairwise comparisons indicated that
there was a signiﬁcant difference between AR and Image (Z =
−2.810, p = 0.005) on Sit Up learning quality, but no other signiﬁ-
cant differences were found.

Burpee. Friedman test determined a statistically signiﬁcant dif-
ference between the Learning Methods on Burpee learning quality
(χ 2(2) = 15.793, p < 0.001). The post-hoc analysis yielded that
there was a signiﬁcant difference between AR and Image (Z =
−2.692, p = 0.007) and Video and Image (Z = −2.585, p = 0.010)
on Burpee learning quality, we could not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant difference
between AR and Video.

Figure 3: Mean learning quality score rated by a qualiﬁed personal
trainer for Burpee, Jumping Jack, Sit Up, and Squat among three
learning methods. Error bars indicate a 95% conﬁdence interval.

5.3 SUS and Acceptability

The participant’s mean SUS score was 81.3, which suggests ARFit
has an excellent score regarding usability (score of 68: okay; scores
of 68−80.3: good; scores of >80.3: excellent). of the 10 partici-
pants, 6 participants rated it as excellent, another 3 rated it as good,
and 1 rated it as poor. The lowest SUS score was 65 and the highest
was 90.

In addition, all of our participants agreed (N=2) or strongly agreed
(N=8) that they would love to recommend this app to their friends.

5.4 Ranking and Feedback

Most participants (N=9) selected AR as their preferred method of
exercise learning, only 1 participants selected Video as the preferred
exercise learning method.

Regarding the reasons for selecting AR as their preferred method,
participants provided a range of positive feedback, for instance, easy
to use, clear, more interactive. Below shows selected comments
from participants:

• P1: “Even though the quality of images were clear, it was
hard to understand (how to perform) the correct movements.
Instantly with video, it was a lot easier but with (only) one
angle it was different to see the speciﬁc movements and how
body parts are set up like feet for example.”

• P4: “I found AR a lot more useful because I could see all
the angles and move closer to the character to understand the
form which helped me realise, I needed to keep my feet on
the ﬂoor. It also made me realise I was doing the motion too
quickly as the AR model was clear on the correct speed to do
the exercise.”

• P10: “3D model allowed me to have a full view of exercise

demonstrations allowing me to properly view form.”

Despite choosing Video as the preferred learning method, P9 did

not dislike the AR application and had no issue with it.

All participants mentioned they had no problem with the AR
application. They also suggest that the application could have more
exercise choices.

Regarding whether they have performed all these exercises before,
8 participants mentioned they had performed these exercises before
and 2 participants were new to them. Despite having experience
performing these exercises, participants found the AR version helped
them correct the movement (P2: “(I) have done the exercises before
but I did make changes to my form using the AR version.”). Those
who have never performed also agreed that the AR version was
useful (P4: “(I) have not performed any of the exercises before and
this application was useful to help me understand the correct form
and speeds needed when doing the exercises in an easy to use and
fun application. I am sure it would help me understand many more
exercises.”).

6 DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK

Our results indicate that users learned better with AR than the Image-
based method among all selected exercises, which is in line with
previous literature on learning in physical education [7] and other
contexts such as manual assembly tasks [23], laboratory skills [1],
and navigation skills [10]. Among traditional learning methods,
the Video-based learning was better than the Image-based learning
regarding most exercises (i.e., Squat, Jumping Jack, and Burpee),
which is in line with the literature (e.g., health [4]). This suggests
that videos can be provided as a useful exercise learning method
when AR is not available.

We also observed that users learned better with AR than with
Video in exercises like the Squat, one possible explanation is that
users need to rotate the model to better view the details of the
exercise spatially, which supports [11] that AR is showing spatial
knowledge.

The usability of the app proved excellent from the SUS score
of 81.3 suggesting that the application overall provided an easy-
to-use experience for the user and this was backed by multiple
responses in the interview feedback (e.g., “an easy to use and fun
application”). AR exercise learning app not only took the lead on
scores of learning quality, it was also the preferred learning method
by most participants (9 out of 10).

A list of updates has been made in the latest iteration of ARFit
based on the suggestions provided by participants. For instance,
more exercises have been added, functions such as re-sizing the
virtual personal trainer, changing the avatar of the personal virtual
trainer (e.g., different body sizes), playing exercise animation at a
variety of speeds (slow, normal, fast) to help better understanding,
ﬁltering exercise by body parts and difﬁculty level. An updated
version of ARFit can be found in7.

7https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3naFbmdCdf4

Currently, the presented work only included university students as
our participants, we have started working with wheelchair users and
sports scientists to evaluate and modify the ARFit to make it more
inclusive. A further study with wheelchair users will be conducted
to investigate the feasibility, acceptability, and effectiveness of using
ARFit for learning exercises. Moreover, the current study focused on
plane scanning function and did not evaluate the QR code scanning
function, this will be evaluated as part of our future work.

7 CONCLUSION

Barriers such as long time/distance to the ﬁtness centre, poor weather,
and high membership fees are making it difﬁcult for people to learn
exercises and become physically active. In this research, we have
developed ARFit, a mobile AR ﬁtness application for users (both
physically active and inactive) to learn exercises with a virtual per-
sonal trainer. We have explored the learning quality of ARFit against
traditional learning methods (i.e., Image and Video) and found AR
outperformed Image in learning all selected exercises and outper-
formed Video in exercises where greater spatial information is de-
sired. Our results also suggest that the ARFit has an excellent
usability scale and is highly acceptable by users.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We want to thank all the participants for their time and reviewers for
their advice that helped improve our paper.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Akc¸ayır, G. Akc¸ayır, H. M. Pektas¸, and M. A. Ocak. Augmented
reality in science laboratories: The effects of augmented reality on
university students’ laboratory skills and attitudes toward science labo-
ratories. Computers in Human Behavior, 57:334–342, 2016. doi: 10.
1016/j.chb.2015.12.054

[2] J. Brooke. SUS: A ’Quick and Dirty’ Usability Scale, chap. 21, pp.

189–194. Taylor & Francis, London, 1996.

[3] K.-E. Chang, J. Zhang, Y.-S. Huang, T.-C. Liu, and Y.-T. Sung. Apply-
ing augmented reality in physical education on motor skills learning.
Interactive Learning Environments, 28(6):685–697, 2020. doi: 10.
1080/10494820.2019.1636073

[4] D. L. Chi, J. E. Pickrell, and C. A. Riedy. Student learning outcomes
associated with video vs. paper cases in a public health dentistry course.
Journal of Dental Education, 78(1):24–30, 2014. doi: 10.1002/j.0022
-0337.2014.78.1.tb05653.x

[5] T. Chiang, S. Yang, and G.-J. Hwang. An Augmented Reality-based
Mobile Learning System to Improve Students’ Learning Achievements
and Motivations in Natural Science Inquiry Activities. Educational
Technology and Society, 17:352–365, Oct. 2014.

[6] G. . R. F. Collaborators. Global, regional, and national comparative
risk assessment of 79 behavioural, environmental and occupational,
and metabolic risks or clusters of risks, 1990-2015: a systematic anal-
ysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet (London,
England), 388(10053):1659–1724, Oct. 2016. doi: 10.1016/S0140
-6736(16)31679-8

[7] K.-f. Hsiao. Using augmented reality for students health - case of
combining educational learning with standard ﬁtness. Multimedia
Tools and Applications, 64(2):407–421, May 2013. Num Pages: 407-
421 Place: Dordrecht, Netherlands Publisher: Springer Nature B.V.
doi: 10.1007/s11042-011-0985-9

[8] I.-M. Lee, E. J. Shiroma, F. Lobelo, P. Puska, S. N. Blair, P. T. Katz-
marzyk, and Lancet Physical Activity Series Working Group. Effect of
physical inactivity on major non-communicable diseases worldwide:
an analysis of burden of disease and life expectancy. Lancet (London,
England), 380(9838):219–229, July 2012. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736
(12)61031-9

[9] X. Luo, R. Kenyon, T. Kline, H. Waldinger, and D. Kamper. An
augmented reality training environment for post-stroke ﬁnger exten-
In 9th International Conference on Rehabilita-
sion rehabilitation.
tion Robotics, 2005. ICORR 2005., pp. 329–332, 2005. doi: 10.1109/
ICORR.2005.1501112

[10] D. D. McMahon, C. C. Smith, D. F. Cihak, R. Wright, and M. M.
Gibbons. Effects of digital navigation aids on adults with intellectual
disabilities: Comparison of paper map, google maps, and augmented
reality. Journal of Special Education Technology, 30(3):157–165, 2015.
doi: 10.1177/0162643415618927

[11] A.-J. Moreno-Guerrero, S. Alonso Garc´ıa, M. Ramos Navas-Parejo,
M. N. Campos-Soto, and G. G´omez Garc´ıa. Augmented reality as a
resource for improving learning in the physical education classroom.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health,
17(10), 2020. doi: 10.3390/ijerph17103637

[12] P. Morillo, I. Garc´ıa-Garc´ıa, J. M. Ordu˜na, M. Fern´andez, and M. C.
Juan. Comparative study of AR versus video tutorials for minor mainte-
nance operations. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 79(11-12):7073–
7100, Mar. 2020. doi: 10.1007/s11042-019-08437-9

[13] F. Mostajeran, F. Steinicke, O. J. Ariza Nunez, D. Gatsios, and D. Fo-
tiadis. Augmented Reality for Older Adults: Exploring Acceptability
of Virtual Coaches for Home-Based Balance Training in an Aging
Population, p. 1–12. Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 2020.

[14] Y.-L. Ng, F. Ma, F. K. Ho, P. Ip, and K.-w. Fu. Effectiveness of
virtual and augmented reality-enhanced exercise on physical activity,
psychological outcomes, and physical performance: A systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Computers
in Human Behavior, 99:278–291, Oct. 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2019.
05.026

[15] H. Nikolajsen, L. F. Sandal, C. B. Juhl, J. Troelsen, and B. Juul-
Kristensen. Barriers to, and facilitators of, exercising in ﬁtness centres
among adults with and without physical disabilities: A scoping review.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health,
18(14), 2021. doi: 10.3390/ijerph18147341

[16] D. Nincarean, M. B. Alia, N. D. A. Halim, and M. H. A. Rahman.
Mobile Augmented Reality: The Potential for Education. Procedia
- Social and Behavioral Sciences, 103:657–664, Nov. 2013. doi: 10.
1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.385

[17] I. Radu. Why should my students use AR? A comparative review of the
educational impacts of augmented-reality. In 2012 IEEE International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), pp. 313–314,
Nov. 2012. doi: 10.1109/ISMAR.2012.6402590

[18] B. Shelton and N. Hedley. Using augmented reality for teaching earth-
sun relationships to undergraduate geography students. In The First
IEEE International Workshop Agumented Reality Toolkit,, pp. 8 pp.–,
2002. doi: 10.1109/ART.2002.1106948

[19] I. S´aez, J. Solabarrieta, and I. Rubio. Motivation for physical ac-
tivity in university students and its relation with gender, amount of
activities, and sport satisfaction. Sustainability, 13(6), 2021. doi: 10.
3390/su13063183

[20] M. Thees, S. Kapp, M. P. Strzys, F. Beil, P. Lukowicz, and J. Kuhn.
Effects of augmented reality on learning and cognitive load in uni-
versity physics laboratory courses. Computers in Human Behavior,
108:106316, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2020.106316

[21] L. van de Venis, B. P. C. van de Warrenburg, V. Weerdesteyn, B. J. H.
van Lith, A. C. H. Geurts, and J. Nonnekes. Improving gait adaptabil-
ity in patients with hereditary spastic paraplegia (Move-HSP): study
protocol for a randomized controlled trial. Trials, 22(1):32, Jan. 2021.
doi: 10.1186/s13063-020-04932-9

[22] D. Wagner, D. Schmalstieg, and M. Billinghurst. Handheld ar for col-
laborative edutainment. In Z. Pan, A. Cheok, M. Haller, R. W. H. Lau,
H. Saito, and R. Liang, eds., Advances in Artiﬁcial Reality and Tele-
Existence, pp. 85–96. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2006.

[23] S. Werrlich, A. Daniel, A. Ginger, P.-A. Nguyen, and G. Notni. Compar-
ing hmd-based and paper-based training. In 2018 IEEE International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), pp. 134–142,
2018. doi: 10.1109/ISMAR.2018.00046

[24] W. Xu, H.-N. Liang, N. Baghaei, X. Ma, K. Yu, X. Meng, and S. Wen.
Effects of an immersive virtual reality exergame on university students’
anxiety, depression, and perceived stress: Pilot feasibility and usability
study. JMIR Serious Games, 9(4):e29330, Nov 2021. doi: 10.2196/
29330

[25] Y. Yang and J. Koenigstorfer. Determinants of ﬁtness app usage

and moderating impacts of education-, motivation-, and gamiﬁcation-
related app features on physical activity intentions: Cross-sectional
survey study. J Med Internet Res, 23(7):e26063, Jul 2021. doi: 10.
2196/26063

[26] M. Y. Zhao, S. K. Ong, and A. Y. C. Nee. An augmented reality-
assisted therapeutic healthcare exercise system based on bare-hand
interaction. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction,
32(9):708–721, 2016. doi: 10.1080/10447318.2016.1191263

