2
2
0
2

p
e
S
7

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
6
9
2
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

EXPTRIALMNG: A UNIVERSAL EXPERIMENT TRIAL MANAGER
FOR AR/VR/MR EXPERIMENTS BASED ON UNITY

A PREPRINT

Jinwook Kim
Graduate School of Culture Technology
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
South Korea, Daejeon
jinwook.kim31@kaist.ac.kr

Yee Joon Kim
Institute for Basic Science
South Korea, Daejeon
joon@ibs.re.kr

Jeongmi Lee
Graduate School of Culture Technology
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
South Korea, Daejeon
jeongmi@kaist.ac.kr

September 8, 2022

ABSTRACT

Based on the improvement of recent virtual and augmented reality (VR and AR) Head Mounted
Display (HMD), there have been attempts to adopt VR and AR in various ﬁelds. Since VR and
AR could provide more immersive experimental environments and stimuli than 2D settings in a
cost-efﬁcient way, psychological and cognitive researchers are particularly interested in using these
platforms. However, there is still an entry barrier for researchers who are not familiar with Unity
programming, and current VR/AR HMDs could also cause unexpected errors during the experiment.
Therefore, we developed a Unity library that can be adopted in various experiments universally and
assist researchers in developing their own. Our library provides functions related to trial assignment
and results saving. That way, researchers can easily implement the essential functions of their
psychological experiments. We also made a function that enables proceeding with the experiment
from a speciﬁc trial point to handle unexpected errors caused by HMD tracking loss issues during the
experiment. We expect our library could invite researchers from various disciplines and help them
acquire valuable insights in VR/AR environments.

Keywords cognitive psychology experiment · Trial Management · Unity · 3D Environment

1

Introduction

With the development of immersive devices such as virtual reality and augmented reality, research is being attempted
from a psychological and design perspective rather than a technical point of view. Kim et al. [2022], Peng et al. [2020],
Tregillus and Folmer [2016]. The virtual environment and interactions are mostly developed with 3D programming
tools, such as Unity or Unreal. Compared to PsychoPy, which is a python library that provides GUI programming for
developing psychological experiment Peirce et al. [2019], these tools require high proﬁciency in programming skills to
develop the whole experiment structure. These features could act as an entry barrier for researchers who conduct user
experience or experimental studies based on the design or cognitive science perspective, who are mostly not familiar
with 3D programming tools.

In order to assist these researchers, various frameworks and tool-kits provide source codes on Github that could reduce
the effort of implementing experiments or stimuli in Unity Brookes et al. [2020], Zenner et al. [2021]. However,
those frameworks include heavy functions, such as server connection, which are unnecessary for some experimental

 
 
 
 
 
 
ExpTrialMng

A PREPRINT

Figure 1: The operation ﬂow of ExpTrialMng. Based on the pre-generated CSV ﬁle that includes all trial information, it
delivers each trial setting to the experiment manager. After a trial is completed, it saves the data to an additional CSV
ﬁle and loads the following trial information. In addition, it starts the trial from the point where the results are not ﬁlled.

circumstances. Sometimes this makes it harder to implement experiments from zero bases. Excluding unused functions
could cost more time and effort and lead to serious compatibility issues later. In addition, those frameworks do not
provide functions that resume the experiment from a speciﬁc point. For virtual reality (VR) experiments, various
components could cause errors (i.e., tracking, power and connection issues, etc.) in the middle of the experiment, and in
that case, it needs to be restarted at that speciﬁc point of error, instead of starting from the beginning again.
Therefore, we developed a Unity library1 that provides essential functions for most Human-Computer Interaction (HCI)
studies. It could be adapted universally to VR/AR-based experiments easily. Our Library includes a restart function
from a speciﬁc trial number where an error stopped an experiment, and the trial randomization process is separated by
reading the pre-generated CSV ﬁle. Also, we implemented a function that saves results from each trial into a single CSV
ﬁle. We expect that this library could help researchers focus on their experiment and stimuli design and ease the burden
on those who are not familiar with Unity programming. Eventually, it could invite researchers from various disciplines
into VR/AR and achieve a broader perspective. We propose that our library makes the following contributions:

• It lowers the barriers to conducting HCI experiments within VR/AR environments for researchers who are

unfamiliar with Unity programming.

• It provides a general-purpose package that can be applied to diverse experiment settings with minimized lines

of code.

• It minimizes data loss due to unexpected errors and allows easy resumption by modifying the pre-generated

trial data ﬁle based on the point of interruption.

2 Stimuli Presentation Library

Most psychological and design user experiments commonly require functions that present stimuli in a randomized order
and save the data into a speciﬁc format for analysis Kim et al. [2022], Wang et al. [2022], Bae and Luck [2018], Gehrke
et al. [2019]. Therefore, we focused on these functions and tried to make them universal in various experiment settings.
Also, we minimized the effort of adapting it to user experiments. Our library’s requirements and operation ﬂow are as
follows (see Figure 1).

2.1 Pre-generated Trial Data

Before starting the experiment, the researcher needs to generate a CSV ﬁle containing stimuli information for each trial
and place it in the Asset folder (see Figure 2). We separated this part due to the various methods for randomization.

1https://github.com/jinwook31/Unity-Experiment-Trial-Manager

2

ExpTrialMng

A PREPRINT

Figure 2: An example of a pre-generated CSV ﬁle that includes trial information. The ﬁrst and second columns must be
partiNumber and trialNumber for the library to operate correctly. Column A to F indicates the inputs regarding stimuli
settings for each trial, and column G to I is deﬁned as output columns to save the experiment results.

Therefore, researchers must generate the appropriate CSV ﬁle for their experiment. The CSV must include participant
number (partiNumber) and trial number (trialNumber) in the ﬁrst and second header index in order to initiate the
experiment. Also, the slots for output need to be empty. It will be ﬁlled when the trial is done, or else it will be skipped
when the experiment is restarted.

2.2 Experiment Manager

As Figure 3, researchers need to import the Experiment Manager prefab to their Unity project and set the appropriate
parameters in the TrialData tab. After setting the parameters, the researcher needs to link the code that activates and
manages stimuli (e.g., visual, audio, haptic, etc.) with the trial information in the ’ExperimentManager.cs’ script. We
wrote an example code that could get the trial settings from a pre-generated CSV ﬁle and iterate the trials until it is
ended. Researchers do not need to look into the code in detail and easily adapt these functions by using a few lines of
code. When the experiment is done, they can ﬁnd the results recorded in a CSV ﬁle format in the Asset folder.

3 Discussion & Conclusion

In ExpTrialMng, we implemented a Unity library that includes only the core functions for psychological and design
user test experiments and enables researchers adopt it to their experiment easily and universally. The library delivers the
trial information from a pre-generated CSV ﬁle and saves the experiment results into an additional ﬁle. Also, it includes
a function that enables the experiment to restart from a speciﬁc trial in case of unexpected errors (i.e., HMD controller
battery issue, tracking loss issue after a rest phase). However, several features need to be improved in the future. For
instance, we could add functions that manage the trial process, such as inter-trial interval (ITI) and stimuli presentation
time.

Our library could contribute to inviting researchers from various backgrounds to virtual and augmented reality domain
research. By relieving their burden on programming in Unity and helping them focus on experiment design, we
expect the research that utilizes VR/AR environments will be expanded and new perspectives and improvements in the
academic ﬁeld could be gained.

3

ExpTrialMng

A PREPRINT

Figure 3: The connected scripts in ’Experiment Manager’ Unity prefab. Users need to conﬁgure the appropriate
pre-generated CSV ﬁle name, the number of input and output features in the CSV header, and startFrom index indicating
the trial position where the experiment will start in TrialData tab.

References

Jinwook Kim, Seonghyeon Kim, and Jeongmi Lee. The effect of multisensory pseudo-haptic feedback on perception of

virtual weight. IEEE Access, 10:5129–5140, 2022.

Yi-Hao Peng, Carolyn Yu, Shi-Hong Liu, Chung-Wei Wang, Paul Taele, Neng-Hao Yu, and Mike Y Chen. Walkingvibe:
Reducing virtual reality sickness and improving realism while walking in vr using unobtrusive head-mounted
vibrotactile feedback. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages
1–12, 2020.

Sam Tregillus and Eelke Folmer. Vr-step: Walking-in-place using inertial sensing for hands free navigation in mobile
vr environments. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages
1250–1255, 2016.

Jonathan Peirce, Jeremy R Gray, Sol Simpson, Michael MacAskill, Richard Höchenberger, Hiroyuki Sogo, Erik
Kastman, and Jonas Kristoffer Lindeløv. Psychopy2: Experiments in behavior made easy. Behavior research
methods, 51(1):195–203, 2019.

Jack Brookes, Matthew Warburton, Mshari Alghadier, Mark Mon-Williams, and Faisal Mushtaq. Studying human
behavior with virtual reality: The unity experiment framework. Behavior research methods, 52(2):455–463, 2020.

André Zenner, Hannah Maria Kriegler, and Antonio Krüger. Hart-the virtual reality hand redirection toolkit. In

Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–7, 2021.

Liu Wang, Mengjie Huang, Chengxuan Qin, Yiqi Wang, and Rui Yang. Movement augmentation in virtual reality:
Impact on sense of agency measured by subjective responses and electroencephalography. In 2022 IEEE Conference
on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW), pages 832–833. IEEE, 2022.

Gi-Yeul Bae and Steven J Luck. Dissociable decoding of spatial attention and working memory from eeg oscillations

and sustained potentials. Journal of Neuroscience, 38(2):409–422, 2018.

4

ExpTrialMng

A PREPRINT

Lukas Gehrke, Sezen Akman, Pedro Lopes, Albert Chen, Avinash Kumar Singh, Hsiang-Ting Chen, Chin-Teng Lin,
and Klaus Gramann. Detecting visuo-haptic mismatches in virtual reality using the prediction error negativity of
event-related brain potentials. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pages 1–11, 2019.

5

