2
2
0
2

p
e
S
2
1

]
h
p
-
m
s
a
l
p
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
6
2
3
5
0
.
9
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric
pressure plasma slit jet

K Pol´aˇskov´a1,2,3, D Neˇcas2,3, L Dost´al2, M Kl´ıma2, P Fiala2 and
L. Zaj´ıˇckov´a1,2,3
1 Department of Condensed Matter Physics, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University,
Kotl´aˇrsk´a 2, CZ-61137 Brno, Czech Republic
2 Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Communication, Brno University of
Technology, Technick´a 12, CZ-61600 Brno, Czech Republic
3 Plasma Technologies, Central European Institute of Technology - CEITEC, Brno
University of Technology, Purkyˇnova 123, CZ-61200 Brno, Czech Republic

E-mail: lenkaz@physics.muni.cz

Abstract. The RF plasma slit jet, which produces 150 mm wide streaming plasma
outside the jet body, exhibits exciting self-organization phenomena that resemble the
self-organized patterns of dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) ﬁlaments. Similarly, as in
DBD, the ﬁlaments are surrounded by an inhibition zone that does not allow two
ﬁlaments to come closer to each other. With fast camera imaging, we observed
the ﬁlamentary character of the discharge in all the studied gas feeds (Ar, Ar/N2,
and Ar/O2). Still, the visual appearance of the ﬁlaments in the plasma and their
interaction with a dielectric surface depended signiﬁcantly on the gas feed. As the
breakdown voltage in pure Ar is relatively low compared to the applied one, new
ﬁlaments form frequently. Such newly created ﬁlaments disrupted the characteristic
inter-ﬁlament distance, forcing the system to rearrange. The frequent ignition and
decay processes in Ar led to short ﬁlament lifetimes (0.020–0.035 s) and their high
jitter speed (0.9–1.7 m/s), as determined with an image processing custom code based
on Gwyddion libraries. The number of ﬁlaments was lower in the Ar/O2 and Ar/N2
It was attributed to a loss of energy in the excitation of rotational and
mixtures.
vibrational levels and oxygen electronegativity. Since the probability of low-current
side discharges transitioning into the full plasma ﬁlaments was limited in the gas
mixtures, the self-organized pattern was seldom disrupted, leading to lesser movement
and longer lifetimes. Unlike in Ar or Ar/O2, the constricted ﬁlaments in Ar/N2 were
surrounded by diﬀuse plasma plumes, likely connected to the presence of long-lived
nitrogen species. We demonstrated in the polypropylene treatment that the self-
organization phenomena aﬀected the treatment uniformity.

Keywords: radio frequency plasma jet, plasma ﬁlaments, fast camera imaging, image
date processing, plasma treatment uniformity

Submitted to: Plasma Sources Sci. Technol.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

2

1. Introduction

Until recently, plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) was predominantly
carried out in low, rather than atmospheric, pressure systems because of better control
over the process (thanks to less pronounced eﬀect of gas dynamics and diﬀuse nature
of low pressure discharges), and better ﬁlm quality as assessed from the view of ﬁlm
uniformity and employment of energetic ions. However, atmospheric pressure discharges
oﬀer unique possibilities when creating local structures and utilizing liquid precursors
including biomolecules or drugs [1–3], which are all great advantages in the age of
nanotechnologies and biotechnologies. Therefore, the research of cold atmospheric
pressure (CAP) discharges and related plasma-chemical processes became one of the
leading topics in low-temperature plasma physics.

Two typical conﬁgurations of CAP discharges are planar dielectric barrier
discharges (DBD) and capillary plasma jets. They tend to have ﬁlamentary character
due to the streamer type of breakdown. Although DBDs can be homogeneous in some
special cases such as atmospheric pressure glow discharge (APGD) [4,5] and atmospheric
pressure Towsend discharge (APTD) [5, 6], in a common DBD, individual ﬁlaments
(microdischarges) compete for the available surface area of the dielectric to deposit their
charge patterns. Since they encounter residual charges accumulated on the dielectrics
from previous discharge phases, the memory eﬀect is a dominant feature. There may
be additional memory eﬀects due to residual gas heating and the presence of charged
and excited species left over from the previous half period, if the repetition frequency is
high enough [7].

In a conﬁned geometry, microdischarges with their surface discharges can be quite
regularly arranged due to the memory eﬀects. Guikema et al. [8] demonstrated array of
regularly spaced microdischarges in atmospheric pressure He/Ar one-dimensional DBD.
Regular patterns have also been observed in 2-D barrier discharges for various gases and
conﬁgurations [9–12]. Boeuf et al. [13] created a self-consistent ﬂuid discharge model of
a quasi-1D DBD, similar to the one of Guikema et al. [8], to simulate the complex self-
organization phenomena in DBD over long time scales. Combining the simulation and
fast camera diagnostics, they proposed clear physical description and explanation of the
mechanisms responsible for the generation, annihilation, motion and self-organization
of discharge ﬁlaments in DBDs. They concluded that these mechanisms were triggered
by low-current “side discharges” generated during the same half-cycle in the vicinity of
an isolated ﬁlament beyond the inhibition zone associated with charge spreading along
the dielectric surface.

The self-organization phenomena were also observed in cold plasma jets working at
the atmospheric pressure. Sch¨afer et al. [14] reported on the self–organization eﬀects in
a dielectric barrier plasma jet driven by 27.12 MHz radio frequency (RF) generator. The
dielectrics was a quartz capillary (4 mm in diameter) around which the RF and grounded
electrodes were placed. They observed several regularly repeated arrangements of
plasma ﬁlaments in which the number of ﬁlaments and the stationary or rotating

Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

3

(locked) modes changed depending on the plasma conditions. The regular ﬁlament
patterns observed in the horizontal projection of the RF plasma jet in the stationary
mode resemble the equidistant arrangements of ﬁlaments in the DBDs described above.
We investigated self-organization phenomena in the RF plasma slit jet that
produces wide streaming plasma outside the jet body [15]. This type of atmospheric
pressure discharge uses a diﬀerent conﬁguration than the parallel plate dielectric barrier
discharges or capillary plasma jets discussed above. The coupling is achieved through an
RF coil designed around the dielectric slit inserted in a tunable metal cavity. The plasma
is ignited in argon ﬂow to which other gases can be admixed. Thus, it provides large
area plasma processing capability in the conﬁguration with ﬂexible distance from the
processed surfaces. Fast camera imaging revealed exciting self-organization phenomena
of the plasma ﬁlaments that resembles the self-organized patterns of DBD ﬁlaments.
Similarly, as in DBD, the ﬁlaments are surrounded by an inhibition zone that does
not allow two ﬁlaments to come closer to each other. The ﬁlamentary character of
the discharge was observed with fast camera imaging for all the studied gas feeds (Ar,
Ar/N2, and Ar/O2), but the visual appearance of the ﬁlaments in the plasma and
their interaction with a dielectric surface depended signiﬁcantly on the gas feed. We
also demonstrated in the polypropylene treatment that the self-organization phenomena
aﬀected the treatment uniformity.

2. Experimental details

2.1. RF plasma slit jet and electromagnetic ﬁeld simulation

The RF plasma slit jet (PSJ) conﬁguration is shown in ﬁgure 1. The mica-composite
slit was placed inside a specially designed coil serving as the periodic deceleration
structure. The jet body was situated inside the tunable cavity made of the ﬁxed metal
cover/shielding and movable conductive plates used as a resonance matching circuit.
Therefore, the RF plasma slit jet could be connected directly to the RF generator
(through a coaxial cable), and the set-up does not need a separate matching unit. We
designed the PSJ to work at the frequency of 13.56 MHz in the width of 150 mm. The RF
power of 500 or 600 W was delivered by the CESAR 136 generator (Advanced Energy).
The working gas was injected into the jet through a tube with evenly distributed holes
facing the topmost metal cover. The set-up ensured random ﬂow turbulence. As the
gas started ﬂowing downwards through the slit, it homogenized, leading to the uniform
ﬂow at the slit exit. Three working gas feeds were studied: Ar, Ar/O2 and Ar/N2. Ar
ﬂow rate was set to either 67 or 100 slm. O2 ﬂow rate was 1 slm and the N2 ﬂow rate
was set to 1.5 slm, if not stated otherwise. The distance between the slit exit and the
processed dielectric plate was kept constant at 10 mm.

The electromagnetic ﬁeld was simulated using a wave-theory based numerical model
implemented using
formulated from the reduced Maxwell’s equations. The model,
Ansys EMAG platform, was conceived as a fully non-stationary problem deﬁned on the

Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

4

Figure 1: (a) Schematic drawing of the RF plasma slit jet (side view): 1– aluminum
cover/shielding, 2 – load-bearing element, 3 – coaxial cable, 4 – Ar ﬂow homogenization
region, 5 – mica composite slit body, 6 – slit, 7 – plasma region, 8 – sample, 9 –
resonance coil, 10 – high-voltage radio-frequency electrodes, 11 – system of movable
grounded electrodes, 12 – dielectric plates of an electrical breakdown limiter, 13 – plates
supporting the coil turns, 14 – conductive plates of resonance matching circuit. (b)
Front view of Ar plasma slit jet in contact with a mica composite substrate.

basis of the telegrapher’s equations. The diﬀerential equations were discretized using
the ﬁnite element method and solved in a close-to-real three dimensional geometry
of the PSJ positioned above the grounded plate covered with 3 mm thick dielectric
mica composite. The materials used in the PSJ body were characterized by tabulated
constitutive parameters. As it was not always possible to ﬁnd the values of constitutive
parameters corresponding to MHz frequencies, they were approximated by the ones
measured at the frequency closest to 13.56 MHz. For simplicity, inﬂuence of heating on
the material constants was neglected. The simulations were carried for power 600 W
and the distance between the slit exit and the opposing dielectric plate 10 mm.

2.2. Fast camera imaging of plasma slit jet

Investigation of the ﬁlaments behavior and dynamics of their interaction with the
dielectric surface (mica composite, thickness of 6 mm) was realized by high-speed camera
imaging using two synchronized ultrafast cameras, Photron FASTCAM SA-X2 (side
view) and Olympus i-SPEED 726R (front view). The discharge behavior was monitored
over a time interval of 1.09 s at frame exposure time of 25 µs (40000 frames/second).
The front-view 12bit greyscale video frames had resolution 2048 × 190 pixels with pixel
size approximately 90 µm. The side-view video frame resolution was 512 × 512 pixels
with a slightly smaller pixel size 65 µm.

Video data were processed using custom code based on Gwyddion [16] image
processing libraries. Two regions were analyzed in each video, one where ﬁlaments
formed and another covering the base region where plasma interacted with the
substrate. Several parameters were evaluated from the reconstructed time dependencies

Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

5

of ﬁlament positions: mean and minimum inter-ﬁlament distance, distance upon
formation and decay, ‘jitter’ speed (movement speed as the shortest accessible time
scale), mean ﬁlament lifetime and the rate at which the gap to the nearest neighbors
expanded/contracted upon ﬁlament formation and decay. A more detailed description
of the video data processing is in Supplementary Information (section S2).

2.3. Visualization of plasma-surface interaction by treatment of polypropylene

The plasma treatment uniformity was visualized by treating polypropylene (PP) sheets
(PP-H Natural, Omniplast), 5 mm in thickness, placed on a mica composite substrate
moved by a conveyor belt beneath the PSJ. The PP sheets were cut into 100×25 mm
sized strips. For the experiments, the less rough side of PP was chosen after cleaning with
isopropanol and cyclohexane as described previously [15]. The treatment uniformity was
studied at the constant speed 100 or 250 mm/s.

Water contact angle was measured by the sessile droplet method (3 µl of
demineralized water) using the See System (Advex Instruments). Six PP strips placed
one next to another with the shorter edges oriented parallel to the jet slit were used for
one measurement (ﬁgure 2). It consisted of depositing four lines of six droplets per one
PP sample. Two droplet lines were placed near the short edges of the PP sample and
the remaining two lines were both placed ∼20 mm from the lines at the edges. Overall,
36 droplets per one line were deposited for all 6 strips. The inﬂuence of aging was ruled
out using two sets of samples diﬀering in the movement direction during the treatment
while the order of deposited droplet lines remained the same. The reported WCAs were
calculated as an average of at least six values determined using the three-point method
implemented in the See System 7.0 software. The standard errors were computed for
the 95% conﬁdence interval.

The treated and untreated areas were visualized by the ink test Arcotest – testing
marker QuickTest 38 (TQC). The marker is designed to discriminate polymer surfaces
with the free energy above and below 38 mN m−1. As the WCA measurement modiﬁed
the PP surface, only the area between the 2nd and the 3rd (Figure 2) droplet line was
used for the ink test analysis.

3. Results and discussion

3.1. Initial electromagnetic ﬁeld and RF power coupling

CAP plasma jets are usually based on the capacitive coupling. Diﬀerent conﬁgurations
of electrodes and various excitation frequencies from kHz up to tens of MHz have been
developed and investigated starting from the 90s when ﬁrst conﬁgurations appeared in
the patents [17] or publications [18,19]. The various RF set-ups include the unipolar RF
discharges (13.56 MHz) with an inner hollow RF electrode [17,19,20] or the outer ring RF
electrode on a quartz capillary [21], the conﬁguration with the central pin electrode in a
dielectric capillary and outer grounded ring electrode (kINPen at about 1 MHz [22,23]),

Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

6

Figure 2: Schematics of PP treatment set-up and the WCA uniformity measurement
procedure: 1 – mica composite, 2 – plasma, 3 – ﬁrst line of the droplet deposited on the
PP, 4 – second line of the deposited droplet, 5 – third line of the deposited droplet, 6 –
fourth line of the deposited droplet, 7 – direction in which the droplets were deposited,
8 – a line of sessile droplets deposited on one PP strip.

two ring electrodes on the dielectric capillary [14], and the COST reference microplasma
jet with parallel RF (13.56 MHz) and grounded electrodes [24, 25]. The properties of
high frequency discharges strongly depend on the type of plasma excitation. The RF
plasma slit jet (PSJ) [15] uses a diﬀerent coupling principle than the jets described
above. The coupling is achieved through special elements integrated in the plasma jet,
periodic deceleration structures, consisting of combinations of inductors with speciﬁcally
designed varying geometry and winding.

A simple numerical model of the spatial distribution of the electric and magnetic
ﬁeld of the PSJ positioned above a grounded Al plate covered with dielectric substrate
(ﬁgure 3) has revealed a distribution of electromagnetic (EM) ﬁeld with both the
components having non-negligible intensity (Emax = 1.3 · 104 V/m, Hmax = 2.4 A/m).
The simulation of the PSJ with plasma approximated as a conductor in a quasi-
stationary state yields similar values (see Supplementary Information, section S1).
Higher electric ﬁeld intensity is induced in regions between the winding of high-voltage
RF electrodes and the ground (either the PSJ metal cover or the substrate). The
intensity pattern of the E formed on the slit sides directly below the last turn of the
high-voltage RF electrode winding is similar to the one reported by Bourdon et al. [26]
for the capacitively coupled plasma ignited inside a quartz capillary with a high-voltage
outer ring electrode. Therefore, the PSJ is likely a capacitively coupled discharge.
This conclusion is further conﬁrmed by the comparison of the PSJ simulated E values
(Emax = 1.3·104 V/m) with the electric ﬁeld intensity range E = 104 −106 V/m reported
for various capacitively coupled atmospheric plasma jets [19,25,26]. The simulated PSJ

conveyor beltmovement axisRF plasma slit jetPP samples12345678Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

7

E is at the lower end of the E values in the literature because it only accounted for
the externally applied electric ﬁeld. The reported values, measured or simulated for the
active discharges, were the sum of the externally applied electric ﬁeld and the electric
ﬁeld induced by the charge particles generated inside the plasma column.

According to the simulation, the magnetic ﬁeld H was induced inside the PSJ
body, primarily in the core area of the resonance coil. The maximum H of the PSJ,
2.4 A/m, is three to four orders of magnitude lower than in RF inductively coupled
plasmas H = 103 − 104 A/m [27, 28], yet it is not zero as in the purely capacitively
coupled discharges, suggesting a possibility of the PSJ discharge having a small inductive
component.

Two regions are crucial for the proper function of the PSJ: (i) the higher electric
ﬁeld intensity region between the winding of the high-voltage RF electrode and the
PSJ metal cover and (ii) the lower intensity region formed above the last turn of the
high-voltage RF electrode. The relatively high E in region (i) reveals a potential weak
point in the construction. The calculated electric ﬁeld is not high enough to induce the
breakdown of ambient air ﬁlling the cavity surrounding the discharge slit. However, an
unwanted arc ignition can occur if the resonance matching plate edge comes too close
to the coil winding or if a poorly structured surface reﬂects Ar ﬂow to the region (i).
Therefore, we continuously purge the cavity with nitrogen during the PSJ operation
to limit the possibility of breakdown outside the discharge slit. The region (ii) with
the relatively low electric ﬁeld intensity was created intentionally, through coil turns
orientation and distance variation, to prevent plasma propagation deep into the slit
body.

3.2. Self-organization patterns

For all the studied working gas compositions (Ar, Ar/N2, and Ar/O2), the PSJ discharge
maintained a certain degree of ﬁlamentary character with stationary ﬁlaments situated
at both ends of the slit. The pure Ar PSJ ﬁlaments (the front view in ﬁgure 4a) were
the thinnest (tenths of mm) and the most numerous, 12–15 per the slit length, with the
mean inter-ﬁlament distance of 12 mm (ﬁgures 5a and 6a). In contact with a dielectric
substrate, the ﬁlaments created a 20–30 mm wide base spread equally to both sides (side
view in ﬁgure 4a). The Ar PSJ ﬁlaments changed positions over time, shuﬄing along
the length of the slit at the jitter speed of 0.9–1.7 m/s (ﬁgures 5b and 6b). The variance
in the jitter speed was primarily caused by the varied Ar ﬂow rates. The ﬁlaments
moved faster at the higher Ar ﬂow rate of 100 slm. In addition to the motion, ﬁlament
formation and annihilation events occurred.

The self-organization of ﬁlaments into patterns deﬁned by a characteristic inter-
ﬁlament distance resembles the self-organizing patterns of a quasi-1D DBD described
and explained by Boeuf et al. [13]. Their self-contained ﬂuid discharge model showed
that each DBD ﬁlament was surrounded by an inhibition region formed by charge
spreading along the dielectric surfaces. In this region, the ignition of another ﬁlament

Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

8

Figure 3: Front and side views of the electromagnetic ﬁeld components (E in top,
H in bottom) of the RF plasma slit jet before plasma ignition. It was obtained by the
numerical simulations for power 600 W and frequency 13.56 MHz. The distance between
the slit exit and grounded Al plate covered with 3 mm thick dielectric substrate ((cid:15)r =
6) was 10 mm.

was not allowed, and low-current (Townsend) side discharges were formed on its side
due to the combination of the transverse plasma diﬀusion and ion-induced secondary
emission. The side discharges were essential for ﬁlament generation, annihilation, and
pattern formation.

In the quasi-1D DBD system with boundaries, the existence of inhibition zones
causes ﬁlaments to rearrange following the spatial period intrinsic to the activator-
inhibitor system, i. e., ﬁlaments maintain a characteristic inter-ﬁlament distance. We
observe the same self-organizing behavior in our RF PSJ discharge and, accordingly,
attribute it to the ﬁlaments’ ion sheaths spreading the charges along the dielectric
surface of the slit. The formation of low-current side discharges is likely vital to both
the generation and the motion of PSJ ﬁlaments. Low current side discharges could
evolve into plasma ﬁlaments if the applied voltage is suﬃciently large. As the Ar
PSJ plasma is easy to sustain (applied voltage is much higher than the breakdown),
this transition/new full ﬁlament formation happens frequently. However, such newly
created ﬁlaments disrupt the characteristic inter-ﬁlament distance, forcing the system
to rearrange. If ﬁlaments come too close, one of them usually decays. The frequent
ignition and decay processes led to short ﬁlament lifetimes (0.020–0.035 s), a behavior

100 mmSelf-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

9

speciﬁc to the Ar PSJ discharge (ﬁgure 6a). The observed ﬁlament motion is possibly
a result of the asymmetry in low current side discharges induced by the generation and
annihilation of the fully formed ﬁlaments.

The discharge ignited in the Ar/O2 mixture was similar in appearance to pure Ar
(ﬁgure 4b) with thin, well-deﬁned ﬁlaments. In contact with a dielectric substrate, all
the ﬁlaments in Ar/O2 had a speciﬁc S-like shape with a preferential orientation. The
S-like shape appeared for all the studied conditions (500 or 600 W, Ar ﬂow rate 67
or 100 slm) if oxygen was added (1 slm). The number of ﬁlaments was lower in the
Ar/O2 mixture than in pure Ar discharge, 7–11 per the slit length. Accordingly, the
mean distance of the closest ﬁlaments increased to 15–26 mm (ﬁgures 6a and 7a). The
decrease in the ﬁlament number is connected with the electronegative and molecular
character of O2 plasma. Electrons sustaining the discharge are lost in the attachment
processes and their energy is lost by dissociation and excitation of molecules. Therefore,
the electron density in Ar/O2 discharge should be lower than in pure Ar [29]. Decreasing
the number of electrons while keeping or lowering their energy reduces the number of
ionization collisions they initiate, thus, limiting the number of ﬁlaments sustained by the
given applied power. Unlike the fast-traveling short-lived ﬁlaments of the Ar PSJ, the
ﬁlaments of the Ar/O2 discharge were almost stationary (ﬁgure 7b) with long lifetimes
(ﬁgure 6). The contrasting behavior of the Ar and Ar/O2 PSJ ﬁlaments results from
diﬀerences in plasma sustainabilities. At the studied powers, the probability of low-
current side discharges transitioning into the full plasma ﬁlaments is limited in the
Ar/O2 discharge. Consequently, the self-organized pattern is seldom disrupted, leading
to lesser movement and longer lifetimes.

In the Ar/N2 mixture, the constricted plasma ﬁlaments, typical of other gas feeds,
became shorter (ﬁgure 4c) with the increasing N2:Ar ratio until they sustained only
inside the slit. Simultaneously, a peculiarly-shaped diﬀuse plasma region developed.
Its color was akin to the nitrogen orange afterglow [30, 31].
Contrary to the
expectations based on the appearance of Ar/N2 capillary discharges with visible nitrogen

Figure 4: Front (right) and side (left) views of the RF plasma slit jet discharge ignited
in three diﬀerent gas mixtures at 500 W: (a) 67 slm Ar, (b) 67 slm Ar/1 slm O2, and
(c) 67 slm Ar/1.5 slm N2. The distance between the slit outlet and the dielectric surface
(mica composite, thickness of 6 mm) was kept at 10 mm.

a)b)c)10 mm Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

10

Figure 5: Evaluation of the ﬁlament behavior in the Ar PSJ discharge (67 slm Ar,
500 W) moving at 100 mm/s above the mica composite: (a) ﬁlament entropy distribution
calculated for the interval of 1.1 s at the slit exit (ﬁlament coverage) and contact with
the mica (base coverage); (b) the base coverage plotted over time in the inverted color
scheme (plasma ﬁlaments are dark). The uniformity of the PP treatment determined
for the faster PSJ speed, 250 mm/s, above the PP: (c) WCA dependence on the position
along the slit; (d) treatment uniformity visualized by the ink test, Quicktest 38.

Figure 6: Correlation between the lifetime and (a) the inter-ﬁlament distance or (b) the
average travel speed (jitter speed) of ﬁlaments along the length of the slit for diﬀerent
gas mixtures, RF power, and Ar ﬂow rates when the PSJ was stationary or moving with
100 mm/s relative to the dielectric plate beneath the jet.

 0.01 0.1 1 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26a)Mean lifetime [s]Interfilament distance [mm] 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.80.010.11b)Jitter speed [m/s]GasArAr+O2Ar+N2 Power500 W600 W Ar flow67 slm100 slm Movement0 mm/s100 mm/sSelf-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

11

afterglow [31–33], the diﬀuse plasma was not present directly below the constricted
ﬁlament but on its sides, creating a double plume structure (total diameter of 15–
20 mm).

The structure of the Ar/N2 plasma in contact with the mica dielectric substrate
depended on the length of the constricted ﬁlaments. When they were long enough to
maintain contact with the substrate, the plasma was formed by constricted ﬁlaments,
but unlike in Ar or Ar/O2, they were surrounded by diﬀuse plasma plumes. In the case
of shorter ﬁlaments, their diﬀuse extension merged with the diﬀuse side plumes, leaving
a dark triangular region in the middle (ﬁgure 4c). A plasma vortex could form in the
middle dark triangular region. Its existence and rotational direction depended on the
PSJ settings (Ar ﬂow rate, power, distance between the slit exit and the substrate).
From the side view (right column in ﬁgure 4c), the Ar/N2 diﬀuse plasma formed a
symmetrical base in contact with the mica substrate, its diameter being the smallest of
all the studied gas mixtures (maximum of 10 mm).

Following Boeuf et al. [13], we can describe the appearance of the Ar/N2 discharge
as a central plasma ﬁlament surrounded by an inhibition region with low current
(Townsend) side discharges on the sides. It is consistent with the Ar and Ar/O2 PSJ
discharges, as the same structure was used to described their self-organized ﬁlament

Figure 7: Filament characteristics of Ar/O2 PSJ discharge (67 slm Ar/1 slm O2, 500 W)
moving at 100 mm/s above the mica composite:
(a) ﬁlament entropy distribution
calculated for the interval of 1.1 s at the slit exit (ﬁlament coverage) and contact with
the mica (base coverage); (b) the base coverage plotted over time in the inverted color
scheme (plasma ﬁlaments are dark). The uniformity of the PP treatment determined
for the faster PSJ speed, 250 mm/s, above the PP: (c) WCA dependence on the position
along the slit; (d) treatment uniformity visualized by the ink test, Quicktest 38.

Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

12

patterns, the only diﬀerence being the visibility of the low-current side discharges. In
the Ar and Ar/O2 plasma, the side discharges were invisible, whereas in the Ar/N2 PSJ
they had a form of a red-to-orange colored diﬀuse plasma plumes.

Given the similarities with the nitrogen orange afterglow [30, 31], the formation
of Ar/N2 speciﬁc diﬀuse side plumes is likely connected to the presence of long-lived
nitrogen species, such as ground-state atoms N(4S) or atomic (N(2D), N(2P)) and
molecular (N2(A), N2(B), N2(C)) metastable states. As the named species are neutral,
their diﬀusion is not limited by the electric ﬁeld, allowing them to transverse the
inhibition region freely. Beyond the inhibition zone, they can help to sustain the diﬀuse
Townsend side discharges by inducing secondary emission of electrons from the dielectric
surface of the slit. Such electrons have low energies and, therefore, are incapable of many
ionizing collisions, keeping the charge density of side discharges low and limiting their
development into full ﬁlaments. This process is analogous to the working principle of
the homogeneous DBD in N2 [5, 34]. There, the memory eﬀect (i. e., production of
electrons between the pulses) necessary for a homogeneous DBD formation is driven by
secondary emission induced by N2(A) metastable impacts.

The number of Ar/N2 PSJ ﬁlaments, 8–9, remained constant regardless of the
applied power and the gas feed ﬂow rates. Accordingly, the range of average distances

Figure 8: Filament characteristics of Ar/N2 PSJ discharge (67 slm Ar/1.5 slm N2,
500 W) moving at 100 mm/s above the mica composite: (a) ﬁlament entropy distribution
calculated for the interval of 1.1 s at the slit exit (ﬁlament coverage) and contact with
the mica (base coverage); (b) the base coverage plotted over time in the inverted color
scheme (plasma ﬁlaments are dark). The uniformity of the PP treatment determined
for the faster PSJ speed, 250 mm/s, above the PP: (c) WCA dependence on the position
along the slit; (d) treatment uniformity visualized by the ink test, Quicktest 38.

Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

13

Figure 9: Inter-ﬁlament distance upon formation and decay: (a) comparison of the mean
distance upon formation and decay with the overall mean inter-ﬁlament distance, the
dashed line corresponding to the distances being equal; (b) evolution of the distance
between ﬁlament’s nearest neighbors (gap) during formation and decay.

between the discrete ﬁlaments was narrow, 16 to 18 mm (ﬁgure 6a). The ﬁxed spatial
period of the Ar/N2 ﬁlament system could result from charges deposited on the dielectric
surface by the wide low-current side discharges. Additionally, the studied applied powers
(500 and 600 W) could be too low to generate more than the observed 8–9 ﬁlaments, as
a large part of the supplied energy was likely used to excite numerous rotational and
vibrational levels of N2 molecules rather than generate charged particles. A low charge
density limits the transition of side discharges into a full ﬁlament, resulting in a stable
pattern with long ﬁlament mean lifetimes, 0.25 – 0.1 s, and low jitter speed, 0.4–1 m/s
(ﬁgure 6b).

The overview of self-organization characterized by an inter-ﬁlament distance in all
studied gas feeds (Ar, Ar/O2, and Ar/N2) is illustrated in detail in ﬁgure 9. Figure 9a
gives a static picture, comparing the inter-ﬁlament distance upon formation/decay to
the mean distance. Both formation and decay distances are smaller than the mean
distance, in some cases considerably. The decay distances seem overall slightly smaller
than formation distances. Figure 9b gives a complementary dynamic picture, showing
how the gap between ﬁlament’s nearest neighbors is expanding (positive sign) or
contracting (negative sign) during ﬁlament formation and decay. If the gap expands
during formation and contracts during decay, the data should lie in the fourth quadrant
of the plot. It is only mostly true since in some cases the gap expansion rates have small
values of the opposite sign than expected. Nevertheless, the expansion rates in Figure 9b
have signiﬁcant uncertainties, and all data lie inside or close to the fourth quadrant
(uncertainties in ﬁgure 9a are too small to show). Figure 9b thus still supports the
same conclusions on self-arrangements of ﬁlaments demonstrated above as the minimum
distance in most inter-ﬁlament distance distributions.

 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 0 5 10 15 20 25a)Formation/decay distance [mm]Mean inter-filament distance [mm]ArAr + O2Ar + N2 formationdecay -350-300-250-200-150-100-50 0 50 100 0 100 200 300 400b)Mean gap expansion on decay [mm/s]Mean gap expansion on formation [mm/s]Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

14

3.3. Plasma treatment uniformity

The ﬁlamentary character of the discharge raises the question of plasma treatment
uniformity, which will be discussed in the example of polypropylene. At the lower
movement speed (100 mm/s), the 38 mN/m ink test did not reveal any insuﬃciently
treated areas along the entire length of the slit for any of the tested feed gases. The
water contact angle (WCA) measurement oﬀers more precise information, as the results
can show the whole scale of the surface free energy (SFE) values and not just the
visualization of the part of the surface with the SFE values lower or higher than a
certain number. For the PP treated at 100 mm/s in the Ar/O2 or Ar/N2 mixtures, the
WCA results (ﬁgure 10a) showed slight inhomogeneities that became more pronounced
at the higher movement speed (ﬁgure 10b). At the 250 mm/s, the SFE of these areas
decreased below the 38 mN/m, and their time-dependent evolution across the slit could
be visualized by the ink test results (ﬁgure 7d, 8d).

The plasma treatment of PP in the Ar PSJ discharge was the most uniform one
(ﬁgures 5c,d and 10), despite the discharge’s ﬁlamentary appearance. The analysis of
fast camera images proved to be invaluable for the explanation of these unexpected
results. The time-dependent base coverage plot (ﬁgure 5b) shows that the high
treatment uniformity is a result of the short ﬁlament lifetimes. Quick formation and
decay of ﬁlaments led to a higher degree of randomness in the positions along the
slit and faster jitter speeds caused by the self-organizing nature of ﬁlaments trying to
maintain an ideal inter-ﬁlament distance. The overall base coverage plot (ﬁgure 5a) is
a fast camera analysis analogy to the surface analysis results. For the Ar discharge, it
conﬁrmed the excellent ﬁlament distribution uniformity over the whole slit width. The
narrow jutting peak at ∼60 mm is a result of recurring longer-lived stationary ﬁlaments.
They are ﬁxed at the position by a higher electromagnetic ﬁeld, induced by a slight

Figure 10: Dependence of water contact angles on the position along the jet slit for
(a) 100 mm/s and (b) 250 mm/s treatment speed. A slight shift in the position of the
points measured for Ar/O2 working gas mixture was due to the samples misalignment,
the total length of the samples was 150 mm to the length of the discharge ∼160 mm.

100mm/s250 mm/sSelf-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

15

bump in the otherwise regularly distanced slit.

The plasma treatment in the Ar/O2 mixture was relatively uniform with a few
It resulted from the
less treated areas, namely between 65 and 80 mm (ﬁgure 10).
already mentioned bump inside the slit cavity that ﬁxed a stationary plasma ﬁlament
at the ∼60 mm position. Due to the longevity of Ar/O2 ﬁlaments, anchoring one in
a place had a more substantial inﬂuence on the overall discharge appearance than in
the case of shorter-lived Ar ﬁlaments. The stationary ﬁlament at the narrowed slit
region served as a barrier to the movement of neighboring ﬁlaments (ﬁgure 7b). Their
positions also became ﬁxed, as the self-organizing nature of the discharge kept them at
the ideal interval from the central ﬁlament, and a formation of new ﬁlaments seldom
led to a disruption of the inter-ﬁlament distance around the narrowed slit region. The
less treated area appeared only on the side of the ﬁxed ﬁlament at 60 mm that was
further away from the slit end, i. e., at 65–80 mm (ﬁgure 7d). It probably stems from
a combination of the bump shape and the eﬀect of the ﬁxed ﬁlament at the slit exit,
squishing the other ﬁlaments in the region between 20 and 60 mm together. Likewise,
the anchoring of ﬁlaments to the slit ends lead to a regular appearance of less treated
areas at 25 and 160 mm.

The treatment nonuniformities that sporadically appeared between 80 and 160 mm
(ﬁgure 7d) are created during a ﬁlament number change. Random decay or ignition
events can lead to the formation of brief windows with greater inter-ﬁlament distances
since it takes some time before self-organization is established again.
Interestingly,
the preferred ﬁlament positions are well deﬁned in the overall base coverage plot
(ﬁgure 7a) with a nearly zero coverage in between the intensity peaks. The results are
in strict contrast to treated surface analyses that yielded a much more uniform picture
(ﬁgure 7cd). The discrepancy can be explained by an insuﬃcient dynamic range of the
fast camera images, making the low-intensity plasma in between the ﬁlaments invisible
at the used camera settings. Alternatively, similar to diﬀuse plasma of Ar/N2 discharge,
the surface treatment of the in-between areas could have been induced by a cloud of
non-radiative neutral reactive species (Ar metastables, OH ground-state molecules, etc.).
The Ar/N2 PSJ with the broad diﬀuse plumes was visually the most homogeneous
discharge. However, the surface treatment was the least uniform of all the tested gas
feeds, with less-treated areas (2–5 mm in diameter) present along the whole length of
the slit (ﬁgure 8c,d). A comparison of the Quicktest 28 ink test result (ﬁgure 8d) with
the base coverage map (ﬁgure 8b) correlated the presence of these areas to dark regions
separating the individual ﬁlaments. In contrast to the surface treatment analysis results,
the overall base coverage (ﬁgure 8a) showed only three regions with lower intensity in
the positions next to the permanently ﬁxed ﬁlaments. The presented false uniformity
of the overall coverage is caused by the constant movement of the remaining ﬁlaments
(traveling along the slit and oscillating in place). The WCA results were not so impacted
(high error bars of certain values in ﬁgure 8c) as the treatment time (0.25 s) was short
compared to the fast camera recording interval (1.09 s). Comparing the gas feeds, the
Ar/N2 (ﬁgure 8b) PSJ shared the most features with the Ar/O2 (ﬁgure 7b) discharge,

Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

16

Figure 11: Ar/N2 discharge (100 slm Ar/3 slm N2, 600 W, 100 mm/s – 2x).
Dependence of the WCA on the position along the slit.
treatment visualized by the ink test Quicktest 38.

(a)
(b) The uniformity of the

The above-discussed results on plasma ﬁlament

illustrating that the main factor inﬂuencing the ﬁlament behavior and surface treatment
uniformity is their lifetime (ignoring the inﬂuence of the slit cavity defect at ∼60 mm).
separation and treatment
uniformity in Ar/O2 and Ar/N2 might look contradictory. Even though the Ar/O2
ﬁlaments (ﬁgure 7) are separated by much larger dark region than in the Ar/N2 discharge
(ﬁgure 7), the plasma modiﬁcation uniformity was better using the Ar/O2 PSJ. The
diﬀerence can be explained by a diﬀerence in the reactive gas compositions. The Ar/O2
plasma produces a higher amount of reactive oxygen species (such as O and OH radicals),
whereas reactive nitrogen species dominate the gas chemistry of the Ar/N2 PSJ. The
PP reactivity with nitrogen gas species is much lower than with the oxygen ones [35],
and the nitrogen functional groups are less hydrophilic than oxygen ones. Thus, a
much higher number of reactive nitrogen gas species is needed to induce the same level
of increase in the surface free energy of PP. The nonuniformities observed on the PP
treated in the Ar/N2 discharge were removed by increasing the number of passes to two
(ﬁgure 11). In these conditions, the PSJ was successfully used to increase PP adhesion
to the epoxy glue, and Ar/N2 plasma was the most eﬃcient one [15].

4. Conclusion

The RF plasma slit jet (PSJ) produces 150 mm wide streaming plasma outside the
jet body. The coupling is achieved through an RF coil designed around the dielectric
slit inserted in a tunable metal cavity. The simulation of the electromagnetic ﬁeld
without plasma showed that a high electric ﬁeld is induced in the regions between the
winding of high-voltage RF electrodes and the ground (either the PSJ metal cover or
the substrate). A non-zero magnetic ﬁeld suggests that, besides the primary capacitive

Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

17

coupling, there is a small inductive component. For all the studied gas feeds (Ar, Ar/N2,
and Ar/O2), the PSJ discharge maintained a certain degree of ﬁlamentary character
with stationary ﬁlaments situated at both ends of the slit. The self-organization of
ﬁlaments into patterns deﬁned by a characteristic inter-ﬁlament distance resembles the
self-organized patterns of dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) ﬁlaments. Similarly, as
in DBD, the ﬁlaments are surrounded by an inhibition zone that does not allow two
ﬁlaments to come closer to each other.

The pure Ar PSJ ﬁlaments were the thinnest (tenths of mm) and the most
numerous. As the breakdown voltage in pure Ar is relatively low compared to the
applied one, new ﬁlaments formed frequently. Such newly created ﬁlaments disrupted
the characteristic inter-ﬁlament distance, forcing the system to rearrange. If ﬁlaments
come too close, one of them usually decays. The frequent ignition and decay processes
led to short ﬁlament lifetimes (0.020–0.035 s) and their high jitter speed (0.9–1.7 m/s),
a behavior speciﬁc to the Ar PSJ discharge. The number of ﬁlaments was lower in
the Ar/O2 and Ar/N2 mixtures. It was attributed to a loss of energy in dissociation
and excitation of numerous rotational and vibrational levels and a loss of electrons
due to oxygen electronegativity. Since the probability of low-current side discharges
transitioning into the full plasma ﬁlaments was limited in the gas mixtures, the self-
organized pattern was seldom disrupted, leading to lesser movement and longer lifetimes.
The structure of the Ar/N2 plasma in contact with the mica dielectric substrate
depended on the length of the constricted ﬁlaments. When they were long enough to
maintain contact with the substrate, the plasma was formed by constricted ﬁlaments,
but unlike in Ar or Ar/O2, they were surrounded by diﬀuse plasma plumes. In the case
of shorter ﬁlaments, their diﬀuse extension merged with the diﬀuse side plumes, leaving
a dark triangular region in the middle. The formation of Ar/N2 speciﬁc diﬀuse side
plumes is likely connected to the presence of long-lived nitrogen species.

The plasma treatment of polypropylene (PP) in the Ar PSJ discharge was the most
uniform. The high treatment uniformity results from the short ﬁlament lifetimes and
fast jitter speeds caused by the self-organizing nature of ﬁlaments trying to maintain
an ideal inter-ﬁlament distance. Even though a much larger dark region separates the
Ar/O2 ﬁlaments than in the Ar/N2 discharge, the plasma modiﬁcation uniformity was
better using the Ar/O2 PSJ. The PP reactivity with nitrogen gas species is much lower
than with the oxygen ones, and the nitrogen functional groups are less hydrophilic. The
nonuniformities observed on the PP treated in the Ar/N2 discharge were removed by
increasing the number of passes to two. As published before, in these conditions, the
Ar/N2 PSJ was the most eﬃcient to increase PP adhesion to the epoxy glue.

5. Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the Czech Science Foundation in the frame of
project 20-14105S. CzechNanoLab project LM2018110 funded by MEYS CR is gratefully
acknowledged for the ﬁnancial support of the measurements/sample fabrication at

Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

18

CEITEC Nano Research Infrastructure.

References

[1] J. Sch¨afer, K. Fricke, F. Mika, Z. Pokorn´a, L. Zaj´ıˇckov´a, R. Foest, Liquid assisted plasma enhanced
chemical vapour deposition with a non-thermal plasma jet at atmospheric pressure, Thin Solid
Films 630 (2017) 71–78.

[2] N. D. Boscher, A.-F. Obaton, P. Choquet, D. Duday, Liquid-assisted plasma-enhanced
chemical vapor deposition of α-cyclodextrin/pdms composite thin ﬁlm for the preparation of
interferometric sensors—application to the detection of benzene in water, Journal of Nanoscience
and Nanotechnology 16 (9) (2016) 10097–10103.

[3] C. Lo Porto, F. Palumbo, J. Buxadera-Palomero, C. Canal, P. Jelinek, L. Zajickova, P. Favia, On
the plasma deposition of vancomycin-containing nano-capsules for drug-delivery applications,
Plasma Processes and Polymers 15 (5) (2018) 1700232.

[4] F. Massines, P. Segur, N. Gherardi, C. Khamphan, A. Ricard, Physics and chemistry in a glow
dielectric barrier discharge at atmospheric pressure: diagnostics and modelling, Surface and
Coatings Technology 174 (2003) 8–14.

[5] F. Massines, C. Sarra-Bournet, F. Fanelli, N. Naud´e, N. Gherardi, Atmospheric pressure low
temperature direct plasma technology: status and challenges for thin ﬁlm deposition, Plasma
Processes and Polymers 9 (11-12) (2012) 1041–1073.

[6] M. Eli´aˇs, P. Kloc, O. Jaˇsek, V. Maz´ankov´a, D. Trunec, R. Hrd`y, L. Zaj´ıˇckov´a, Atmospheric
pressure barrier discharge at high temperature: Diagnostics and carbon nanotubes deposition,
Journal of Applied Physics 117 (10) (2015) 103301.

[7] U. Kogelschatz, Filamentary, patterned, and diﬀuse barrier discharges, IEEE Transactions on

Plasma Science 30 (4) (2002) 1400–1408.

[8] J. Guikema, N. Miller, J. Niehof, M. Klein, M. Walhout, Spontaneous pattern formation in an
eﬀectively one-dimensional dielectric-barrier discharge system, Physical Review Letters 85 (18)
(2000) 3817.

[9] D. G. Boyers, W. A. Tiller, Plasma bubble domains: A magnetic bubble analog, Applied Physics

Letters 41 (1) (1982) 28–31.

[10] W. Breazeal, K. Flynn, E. Gwinn, Static and dynamic two-dimensional patterns in self-

extinguishing discharge avalanches, Physical Review E 52 (2) (1995) 1503.

[11] L. Muller, C. Punset, E. Ammelt, H.-G. Purwins, J. Boeuf, Self-organized ﬁlaments in dielectric

barrier glow discharges, IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science 27 (1) (1999) 20–21.

[12] T. Shirafuji, T. Kitagawa, T. Wakai, K. Tachibana, Observation of self-organized ﬁlaments in a
dielectric barrier discharge of ar gas, Applied physics letters 83 (12) (2003) 2309–2311.
[13] J. Boeuf, B. Bernecker, T. Callegari, S. Blanco, R. Fournier, Generation, annihilation, dynamics
and self-organized patterns of ﬁlaments in dielectric barrier discharge plasmas, Applied Physics
Letters 100 (24) (2012) 244108.

[14] J. Sch¨afer, R. Foest, A. Ohl, K. Weltmann, Miniaturized non-thermal atmospheric pressure plasma
jet—characterization of self-organized regimes, Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 51 (12)
(2009) 124045.

[15] K. Pol´aˇskov´a, M. Kl´ıma, Z. Jen´ıkov´a, L. Blahov´a, L. Zaj´ıˇckov´a, Eﬀect of low molecular weight
oxidized materials and nitrogen groups on adhesive joints of polypropylene treated by a cold
atmospheric plasma jet, Polymers 13 (24) (2021) 4396.

[16] D. Neˇcas, P. Klapetek, Gwyddion: an open-source software for SPM data analysis, Central

European Journal of Physics 10 (2012) 181–188. doi:10.2478/s11534-011-0096-2.

[17] M. Kl´ıma, J. Janˇca, V. Kapiˇcka, P. Slav´ıˇcek, P. Saul, CZ Patent 286310 (1 2000).
[18] H. Koinuma, H. Ohkubo, T. Hashimoto, K. Inomata, T. Shiraishi, A. Miyanaga, S. Hayashi,
Development and application of a microbeam plasma generator, Applied Physics Letters 60 (7)
(1992) 816–817.

Self-organization phenomena in cold atmospheric plasma slit jet

19

[19] J. Janˇca, M. Kl´ıma, P. Slav´ıˇcek, L. Zaj´ıˇckov´a, HF plasma pencil - new source for plasma surface

processing, Surf. Coat. Technol. 116-119 (1999) 547–551.

[20] M. Kl´ıma, J. Janˇca, V. Kapiˇcka, P. Slav´ıˇcek, P. Saul, US Patent 6,525,481 (12 2003).
[21] Z. Hubicka, M. Cada, M. Sicha, A. Churpita, P. Pokorn`y, L. Soukup, L. Jastrabik, Barrier-
torch discharge plasma source for surface treatment technology at atmospheric pressure, Plasma
Sources Science and Technology 11 (2) (2002) 195.

[22] G. Gaborit, P. Jarrige, F. Lecoche, J. Dahdah, E. Duraz, C. Volat, L. Duvillaret, Single shot
and vectorial characterization of intense electric ﬁeld in various environments with pigtailed
electrooptic probe, IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science 42 (5) (2014) 1265–1273.

[23] S. Reuter, T. von Woedtke, K.-D. Weltmann, The kinpen—a review on physics and chemistry of
the atmospheric pressure plasma jet and its applications, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics
51 (23) (2018) 233001.

[24] P. Beijer, A. Sobota, E. Van Veldhuizen, G. Kroesen, Multiplying probe for accurate power
measurements on an rf driven atmospheric pressure plasma jet applied to the cost reference
microplasma jet, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 49 (10) (2016) 104001.

[25] Y. Liu, I. Korolov, T. Hemke, L. Bischoﬀ, G. H¨ubner, J. Schulze, T. Mussenbrock, Electron heating
mode transitions in radio-frequency driven micro atmospheric pressure plasma jets in he/o2: a
ﬂuid dynamics approach, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 54 (27) (2021) 275204.
[26] A. Bourdon, T. Darny, F. Pechereau, J.-M. Pouvesle, P. Viegas, S. Is´eni, E. Robert, Numerical and
experimental study of the dynamics of a µs helium plasma gun discharge with various amounts
of n2 admixture, Plasma Sources Science and Technology 25 (3) (2016) 035002.

[27] M. Boulos, Flow and temperature ﬁelds in the ﬁre-ball of an inductively coupled plasma, IEEE

Transactions on Plasma Science 4 (1) (1976) 28–39.

[28] S. Xue, P. Proulx, M. I. Boulos, Extended-ﬁeld electromagnetic model for inductively coupled

plasma, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 34 (12) (2001) 1897.

[29] G. Park, H. Lee, G. Kim, J. K. Lee, Global model of he/o2 and ar/o2 atmospheric pressure glow

discharges, Plasma Processes and Polymers 5 (6) (2008) 569–576.

[30] L. G. Piper, Further observations on the nitrogen orange afterglow, The Journal of Chemical

Physics 101 (12) (1994) 10229–10236.

[31] J. Bravo, R. Rinc´on, J. Mu˜noz, A. S´anchez, M. Calzada, Spectroscopic characterization of argon–
nitrogen surface-wave discharges in dielectric tubes at atmospheric pressure, Plasma Chemistry
and Plasma Processing 35 (6) (2015) 993–1014.

[32] J. Mu˜noz, R. Rinc´on, M. D. Calzada, Spatial distribution of wettability in aluminum surfaces

treated with an atmospheric-pressure remote-plasma, Metals 9 (9) (2019) 937.

[33] S. Yehia, M. Zarif, B. Bita, M. Teodorescu, L. Carpen, S. Vizireanu, N. Petrea, G. Dinescu,
Development and optimization of single ﬁlament plasma jets for wastewater decontamination,
Plasma Chemistry and Plasma Processing 40 (6) (2020) 1485–1505.

[34] F. Massines, N. Gh´erardi, N. Naud´e, P. S´egur, Recent advances in the understanding of
homogeneous dielectric barrier discharges, The European Physical Journal-Applied Physics
47 (2) (2009).

[35] R. Dorai, M. J. Kushner, A model for plasma modiﬁcation of polypropylene using atmospheric

pressure discharges, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 36 (6) (2003) 666.

