Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

2
2
0
2

r
a

M
9
2

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
2
5
3
5
1
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

CUBES Phase A design overview
The Cassegrain U-Band Eﬃcient Spectrograph for the Very Large Telescope

Alessio Zanutta · Stefano Cristiani · David Atkinson · Veronica
Baldini · Andrea Balestra · Beatriz Barbuy · Vanessa Bawden P.
Macanhan · Ariadna Calcines · Giorgio Calderone · Scott Case · Bruno
V. Castilho · Gabriele Cescutti · Roberto Cirami · Igor Coretti ·
Stefano Covino · Guido Cupani · Vincenzo De Caprio · Hans Dekker ·
Paolo Di Marcantonio · Valentina D’Odorico · Heitor Ernandes · Chris
Evans · Tobias Feger · Carmen Feiz · Mariagrazia Franchini · Matteo
Genoni · Clemens D. Gneiding · Miko(cid:32)laj Ka(cid:32)luszy´nski · Marco Landoni ·
Jon Lawrence · David Lunney · Chris Miller · Karan Molaverdikhani ·
Cyrielle Opitom · Giorgio Pariani · Silvia Piranomonte · Andreas
Quirrenbach · Edoardo Maria Alberto Redaelli · Marco Riva · David
Robertson · Silvia Rossi · Florian Rothmaier · Walter Seifert · Rodolfo
Smiljanic · Julian St¨urmer · Ingo Stilz · Andrea Trost · Orlando
Verducci · Chris Waring · Stephen Watson · Martyn Wells · Wenli
Xu · Tayyaba Zafar · Sonia Zorba ·

Received: date / Accepted: date

A. Zanutta, M. Riva, M. Genoni, G. Pariani, S. Covino,
M. Landoni & E.M.A. Redaelli
INAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Brera, via E. Bianchi
46, 23807, Merate (LC), Italy
E-mail: alessio.zanutta@inaf.it

S. Cristiani, V. Baldini, G. Calderone, G. Cescutti, R. Cirami,
I. Coretti, G. Cupani, P. Di Marcantonio, V. D’Odorico,
M. Franchini & S. Zorba
INAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Trieste, via G.B. Tiepolo
11, 34143, Trieste, Italy

A. Balestra
INAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Padova, Vicolo
dell’Osservatorio, 5, 35122, Padova, Italy

A. Calcines
Durham University, Centre for Advanced Instrumentation,
Durham, UK

S. Case, J. Lawrence, D. Robertson, T. Zafar, & T. Feger
Australian Astronomical Optics - Macquarie, Macquarie Uni-
versity, NSW 2109, Australia

D. Atkinson, C. Evans, D. Lunney, C. Miller, C. Waring,
S. Watson & M. Wells
UK Astronomy Technology Centre, Royal Observatory,
Blackford Hill, Edinburgh EH9 3HJ, UK

M. Landoni
INAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Cagliari, via della
Scienza 5, 09047 Selargius (CA), Italy

B. Barbuy, H. Ernandes & S. Rossi
IAG, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo, Rua do Mat˜ao 1226, S˜ao
Paulo 05508-090, Brazil

S. Piranomonte
INAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Roma, Via Frascati 33,
I-00040 Monte Porzio Catone (RM), 00078, Italy

B.V. Castilho, V.B.P. Macanham, C.D. Gneiding & O. Ver-
ducci
Laborat´orio Nacional de Astrof´ısica, MCTI, Rua Estados
Unidos 154, Itajub´a, 37504364, MG, Brazil

R. Smiljanic & M. Ka(cid:32)luszy´nski
Nicolaus Copernicus Astronomical Center, Polish Academy
of Sciences, ul. Bartycka 18, 00-716, Warsaw, Poland

V. De Caprio
INAF - Osservatorio Astronomico di Capodimonte, Salita
Moiariello 16, 80131, Napoli, Italy

W. Seifert, F. Rothmaier, J. St¨urmer, I. Stilz, C. Feiz,
K. Molaverdikhani & A. Quirrenbach
Landessternwarte, Zentrum f¨ur Astronomie der Universit¨at
Heidelberg, K¨onigstuhl 12, 69117, Heidelberg, Germany

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Alessio Zanutta et al.

Abstract We present the baseline conceptual design of
the Cassegrain U-Band Eﬃcient Spectrograph (CUBES)
for the Very Large Telescope. CUBES will provide un-
precedented sensitivity for spectroscopy on a 8 – 10 m
class telescope in the ground ultraviolet (UV), span-
ning a bandwidth of ≥100 nm that starts at 300 nm,
the shortest wavelength accessible from the ground. The
design has been optimized for end-to-end eﬃciency and
provides a spectral resolving power of R ≥ 20000, that
will unlock a broad range of new topics across solar
system, Galactic and extraglactic astronomy. The de-
sign also features a second, lower-resolution (R ∼ 7000)
mode and has the option of a ﬁberlink to the UVES in-
strument for simultaneous observations at longer wave-
lengths.

Here we present the optical, mechanical and soft-
ware design of the various subsystems of the instrument
after the Phase A study of the project. We discuss the
expected performances for the layout choices and high-
light some of the performance trade-oﬀs considered to
best meet the instrument top-level requirements. We
also introduce the model-based system engineering ap-
proach used to organize and manage the project activi-
ties and interfaces, in the context that it is increasingly
necessary to integrate such tools in the development of
complex astronomical projects.

Keywords astronomical instrumentation · Very Large
Telescope · UV spectroscopy · intermediate-resolution
spectroscopy · system engineering · design overview

H. Dekker
Consultant Astronomical Instrumentation, Alpenrosenstr.
15, 85521 Ottobrunn, Germany

W. Xu
Optical System Engineering (OSE), Kirchenstr. 6, 74937,
Spechbach, Germany

C. Opitom
Institute for Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Royal Ob-
servatory, Edinburgh, EH9 3HJ, UK

K. Molaverdikhani
Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Astronomie, K¨onigstuhl 17, D-69117
Heidelberg, Germany & Universit¨ats-Sternwarte, Ludwig-
Maximilians-Universit¨at M¨unchen, Scheinerstrasse 1, D-
81679 M¨unchen, Germany

A. Trost
Department of Physics, University of Trieste, Via A. Valerio
2, 34127 Trieste, Italy

1 Introduction

High-resolution (R > 20000) spectroscopy in the near-
UV regime provides access to a very powerful and rele-
vant observational window that has not yet been deeply
explored from the ground. The current state-of-the art
facility at the European Southern Observatory (ESO)
for high-resolution spectroscopy at wavelengths short-
wards of 400 nm is the Ultraviolet and Visual Echelle
Spectrograph (UVES) [6] on the Very Large Telescope
(VLT), but its eﬃciency is limited to just a few percent
in the near-UV. This means that across a broad range
of diﬀerent scientiﬁc ﬁelds, observations are limited to
small, bright samples of objects.

The ground UV is an immensely rich and important
part of the spectrum for exciting contemporary topics in
solar system, Galactic and extragalactic astronomy and
astrophysics (for background see e.g. [3, 4, 5, 7]). These
range from searching for water in the asteroid belt, to
addressing signiﬁcant questions regarding stellar nucle-
osynthesis of iron-peak and heavy elements, and some
lighter elements (notably Beryllium), to fundamental
studies of the primordial deuterium abundance and the
contribution of galaxies to the cosmic UV background.
Given the strong scientiﬁc motivations to improve
spectroscopic sensitivity at the shortest wavelengths ac-
cessible from the ground, ESO issued a call for a new
UV spectrograph for the VLT, to provide a signiﬁcant
gain in throughput compared to current facilities. Our
assembled consortium responded to that call with the
concept of the Cassegrain U-Band Eﬃcient Spectro-
graph (CUBES).

In the resulting conceptual design (Phase A) study
we developed a design for a Cassegrain spectrograph
that provides excellent throughput and a spectral re-
solving power of R ≥ 20000 over 300 – 405 nm. Many of
the assembled science cases would also beneﬁt from si-
multaneous spectroscopy at longer wavelengths, so the
Phase A design also includes an (optional) ﬁber-feed
system to UVES.

Combining its unprecedented performance and spec-
tral resolution, CUBES will become the UV workhorse
for the VLT and, given its competitiveness at short
wavelengths, will be the blue-eye of the sky alongside
the Extremely Large Telescope (ELT), providing a world-
leading capability for ESO well into the 2030s.

Here we present the results and current design of
CUBES from the Phase A study. This paper is orga-
nized as follows. In Sects 2 and 3 we detail the opti-
cal, mechanical and software design of CUBES and we
give a brief overview of the consortium and construc-
tion schedule for the instrument in Sect. 4. We present
the predicted instrument performance in Sect. 5 and in-

CUBES Phase A design overview

3

troduce our model-based system engineering approach,
adopted from the very beginning, in Sect. 6. Concluding
remarks are given in Sect. 7.

2 The CUBES instrument: requirements and
sub-systems description

2.1 Scientiﬁc motivations

A broad range of motivating cases for high-sensitivity
spectroscopy in the ground UV were developed by the
CUBES Science Team during the Phase A study. An
overview of the science case and the speciﬁc cases which
drive the technical requirements of the instrument is
given elsewhere in this Special Issue [8]. To illustrate
the breadth of the assembled cases, we also refer the
reader to the more detailed articles on cometary sci-
ence [9], accretion and outﬂows in young stellar ob-
jects (YSOs) [10], metal-poor stars [11,12,13], beryl-
lium abundances in globular clusters [14], extragalac-
tic massive stars [15], tracing the baryonic mass in the
high-redshift circumgalactic medium [16], and studies
of molecular hydrogen at high redshift [17].

The cases developed for studies of transients with
CUBES also require simultaneous spectroscopic cover-
age at longer (visible) wavelengths, e.g. with UVES (see
[8]). Similarly, some of the observations envisaged for
studies of YSOs also require simultaneous spectroscopy
with UVES [10]. In the Phase A design we therefore
also explored the option of a ﬁber-link to UVES to en-
able simultaneous spectroscopy of the CUBES targets
at λ > 410 nm. Simultaneous longer-wavelength obser-
vations are required for the transients and YSOs for
astrophysical reasons, but we note that approximately
half of the other cases developed for CUBES will beneﬁt
from simultaneous UVES observations, as they will pro-
vide complementary/supporting data more eﬃciently
than observing separately with the two instruments.

– Eﬃciency: The eﬃciency of the spectrograph, from
slit to detector (included), shall be >40% for 305 –
360 nm (goal >45%, with >50% at 313 nm), and
>37% (goal 40%) between 360 and 400 nm.

– Resolving power (R): In any part of the spec-
trum, R shall be >19000, with an average value
>20000. R is deﬁned R = λ/dλ where dλ is the
full width at half maximum (FWHM) of unresolved
spectral lines of a hollow cathode lamp uniformly
illuminating the CUBES entrance aperture.

– Signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio: In a 1 hr exposure
the spectrograph shall be able to obtain, for an
A0-type star of U = 17.5 mag (goal U ≥ 18 mag), a
S/N = 20 at 313 nm for a 0.007 nm wavelength pixel.
For diﬀerent pixel sizes, the S/N ratio shall scale ac-
cordingly. The S/R value accounts the full light path
eﬃciency (from atmosphere to detector), consider-
ing a telescope Cassegrain ﬂat throughput of 75%
(ESO ETC database). Sky conditions are speciﬁed
the footnote in Section 5.2.

Considering these TLRs, we developed a baseline
design for CUBES. In what follows, we ﬁrst give a brief
overview of the full CUBES system design, then details
on each sub-system.

2.3 CUBES system overview

We organized the instrument into sub-systems and el-
ements in a product-tree fashion, as shown in Fig. 1.
The nine core units are independent in terms of the
breakdown of work packages.

From analysis of the TLRs and taking into account
the assembled science cases, we identiﬁed all the func-
tions that CUBES should implement. The functional
diagram of the instrument is shown in Fig. 2, in which
the light path goes from the telescope Cassegrain inter-
face (top) to the detector (bottom). The baseline design
of CUBES consists of the following components:

2.2 Top Level Requirements (TLRs)

We used the assembled science cases to drive the design
concept by identifying the TLRs that the instrument
shall provide, keeping in mind that these impose limits
on the design choices in terms of the delivered resolving
power (R), eﬃciency, wavelength range, etc. Key TLRs
identiﬁed were:

– Spectral range: CUBES shall provide a spectrum
of the target over the entire wavelength range of
305 – 400 nm in a single exposure (goal: 300 – 420 nm).

– Fore-optics: provides a collimated beam for the
Atmospheric Dispersion Corrector (ADC) and the
magnifying optics to feed the image slicer.

– Acquisition and Guiding (A&G): a separate
camera fed by a fold mirror close to the telescope
focus.

– Image slicers: two interchangeable slicers to en-
able diﬀerent spectral resolutions: a high-resolution
(HR) slicer to reformat the rectangular 1.5 × 10 arcsec
Field of View (FoV) to generate the spectrograph
entrance slit, and a second low-resolution (LR) slicer
with a FoV of 6 × 10 arcsec.

4

Alessio Zanutta et al.

Fig. 1 Sub-system breakdown of the CUBES instrument. Fiber Link Unit is shaded since it is optional and has to be conﬁrmed
in Phase-B.

Fig. 2 Functional scheme of the CUBES system (in which the light path goes from top to the bottom). The following
acronyms are used: DC - dichroic, P - pinhole, Ps - series of pinholes, A&G - Acquisition and Guiding, AFC - Active Flexure
Compensation system, FL - ﬁber link, ADC - Atmospheric Dispersion Corrector. Optional modules (TBD in Phase-B) are
marked with a trefoil sign.

CalMirrorCalibration UnitSpectrographsubsystemForeoptics subsystemInstrument ShutterDetectors & CryoDC2x FocusSpectrographarm2x CCD FFLEDSimcalfibersADC♣ Option TBDFiber Link♣to UVESFL camTip-TiltADCPPsAFCfiberA&GfiltersA&G cameraA&GMirror♣AFC actuatorPxyzTELESCOPELRbox 2HRbox 1ImageslicerDCCUBES Phase A design overview

5

– Spectrograph: includes a dichroic beamsplitter to
spectrally separate the full bandwidth into two arms,
then for each arm:
(cid:5) two fold mirrors;
(cid:5) a collimating lens;
(cid:5) a transmission grating for the necessary spectral

dispersion;

(cid:5) a camera to focus the spectrum on the detectors.
– Detectors: two CCDs (one for each arm) mounted

in separate cryostats.

The light path is as follows. After the telescope fo-
cus and an instrument shutter, there is a calibration
mirror, which is a moving element that can inject the
light from the calibration unit. Next, a pin-hole mask
is included for alignment purposes and to check focus
during operations. An insertable dichroic follows, to re-
lay longer-wavelength light to the FiberLink (FL) unit.
Provision of the FL enables the instrument to operate
in two modes: either using CUBES on its own or in
combination with the FL for simultaneous observations
with UVES at longer visible wavelengths.

Next, a double-position mirror slide can pass light
to the A&G system for the whole FoV or a peripheral
part by moving to a holed position. This provides ini-
tial acquisition of the science ﬁeld and can then be used
for secondary guiding if required. Two counter-rotating
prisms are used to then correct for atmospheric disper-
sion before relaying light to the slicer unit.

The Image Slicer unit reformats the FoV to gener-
ate narrower entrance slits for the spectrograph. This
allows us to achieve the proposed resolution without
the need for adaptive optics (which is not feasible in
the near UV at present) and reduces the size of the
optical components of the instrument. Some of the sci-
ence cases of CUBES require excellent throughput but
spectral resolution is less critical (e.g. some of the cases
developed for observations of comets [9], young stellar
objects [10] and massive stars [15]). The introduction
of a LR option therefore provides a powerful comple-
ment to the primary (HR) option. By increasing the
amount of light from the source entering the eﬀective
slit, the LR option will deliver greater sensitivity. We
incorporated the LR option in the optical design by in-
cluding a second interchangeable unit with physically
larger slices (thus also sampling a larger on-sky area).
The two image slicers enable R ∼ 24000 and ∼ 7000 for
the HR and LR modes, respectively.

After the pseudo-slit the photons are split by an-
other dichroic mirror, feeding the two arms of the spec-
trograph that ﬁnally collimate the beams, provide the
dispersing function using transmission gratings, and use
cameras to focus the spectra on the detectors (see more
details in Sect. 2.4.4).

An Active Flexure Compensation system (AFC) was
considered in the design, in case analysis in the next
phases shows that the required resolving power under a
varying gravity vector cannot be achieved. This is not
included in the baseline design of the instrument, but
could be added in the next phase if needed.

To identify which instrument layout best satisﬁes
the requirements, dedicated simulation tools developed
for CUBES [18], were used to investigate diﬀerent in-
strument conﬁgurations (number of arms, detector type,
presence of ADC and guiding systems, etc.).

The CCDs provisionally selected in the design have
9k × 9k 10 µm pixels. By setting the mean geometrical
projection of the spectral resolution element to ≈ 25 µm,
i.e. 2.5 pixels, allowed the wavelength range of the spec-
trograph design to be maximized to 300 - 405 nm.

2.4 Optical Design

The end-to-end optical scheme of the instrument is pre-
sented in Fig. 3.

2.4.1 Fore-optics

The fore-optics were designed and optimized against
these criteria:

1. transfer and magnify a FoV of 6 × 10 arcsec from
the telescope focus to the Image Slicer at a scale of
0.5 arcsec/mm;

2. correct for atmospheric dispersion over a wavelength
range of 300 – 400 nm for zenith angles of 0-60◦;
3. maintain a stable exit image and pupil at a wave-
length of 346 nm (chosen for calibration purposes
using a Hg light source);

4. position the exit pupil to be 1160 mm before the

slicer image plane.

Nominal environment values of T = 10 ◦C and P = 750

mbar were used in the model optimization.

The full optical train from the telescope focus to the
image slicer focal plane is shown in Fig. 4. The ﬁrst ele-
ment is the A&G pick-oﬀ mirror with a central hole for
the science ﬁeld to pass through to the spectrographs.
A collimator doublet provides the parallel beam for the
double-double prism type ADC, consisting of two fused
silica/CaF2 cemented prism pairs. The input and out-
put faces of the prism pairs are tilted at an angle of
0.90◦ with respect to the rotation axis while the angle
of the common surface is at 25.22◦ to the rotation axis.
The prism pairs are 30 mm in diameter. The camera
lens provides the focus at the input of the image slicer.
All foldings of the science beam are obtained by total
internal reﬂection prisms to maximize the throughput.

6

Alessio Zanutta et al.

Fig. 3 Optical end-to-end model of the CUBES instrument.

2.4.2 Acquisition and guiding (A&G) system

2.4.3 Image slicers

Initial acquisition of the target will be achieved us-
ing the pointing capabilities of the VLT (accurate to
3 arcsec rms). The A&G unit will then provide more
accurate positioning to account for oﬀsets between the
reference frame of the telescope from the FoV of the
instrument.

This sub-system allows selection of the spectroscopic
target from a 90 × 90 arcsec FoV by means of a mirror
(45◦ fold with a central hole) placed oﬀ-center in the
main optical train, to view the full FoV (see Figs 2
and 4, and Sect. 2.3). The distance of the object from
the ﬁeld center (aligned with the Image Slicer entrance
aperture) will be calculated and oﬀsets sent to the tele-
scope by the Telescope Control Software (TCS).

The user will then be asked to conﬁrm a guide star
whose position is periodically measured during integra-
tion and, if necessary, oﬀset commands will be sent au-
tomatically to the telescope. When the science CCDs
are integrating the A&G mirror will be parked in its
observing position that provides a hole to allow the cen-
tral ﬁeld to be transmitted to the spectrograph.

The A&G system will use CCD cameras, selected
from commercial-oﬀ-the-shelf components, based on the
Gigabit Ethernet protocol that comply with the VLT
standards for new instrumentation.

At the magniﬁed telescope focal plane produced by the
fore-optics, an image slicer decomposes the image of
the FoV into six slices, which are re-organized compos-
ing the spectrograph entrance slit. Two image slicers
are proposed to provide the HR (R ∼ 24000) and LR
(R ∼ 7000) modes. Their layouts are conceptually iden-
tical. Both image slicers are a reﬂective sub-system com-
posed of two arrays of six spherical mirrors each, called
slicer mirrors and camera mirrors (Fig. 5 (a)). The slicer
mirrors are thin rectangular powered mirrors, each with
a diﬀerent orientation (tilt angle with respect to the X
and Y axes) to reﬂect a slice of the FoV in a diﬀerent
direction towards a camera mirror. The camera mirrors
are rectangular spherical mirrors, whose power is used
to focus the beams. Thus, each camera mirror generates
an image of its corresponding slice of the ﬁeld of view,
called slitlet, at its focal length (Fig. 5 (b)). Each cam-
era mirror is provided with a tilt angle with respect to
the X and Y axes, which enables control of the distribu-
tion of the slitlets. These six slitlets, separated by ﬁve
gaps between them, compose the spectrograph entrance
slit. The capability of controlling their orientation en-
ables their alignment and the overlapping of the six
exit pupils. The image slicer design is highly eﬃcient,
using the minimum number of surfaces possible (two).

CUBES Phase A design overview

7

Fig. 4 3D optical scheme of the fore-optics sub-system of the CUBES instrument.

These will be made of Zerodur with an optimized dielec-
tric coating to achieve a reﬂectivity of 95% per surface,
with a goal of 97%. Each slicer will be stand-alone and
contained within a housing. The two housings will be
implemented on a motorized linear stage, which will al-
low users to select the resolution. For further details of
the slicer design and layout see [19].

2.4.4 Spectrograph

The current baseline of the spectrograph sub-system
is for two arms with common optics before a dichroic,
which splits the light by reﬂecting the Blue-Arm pass-
band (300 – 352.3 nm) and transmitting the Red-Arm
passband (346.3 – 405 nm).

The input slit consists of six slitlets, one for each
slice in the image slicer (0.25 × 10 arcsec on the sky for
HR mode, and 1 × 10 arcsec for the LR mode) and three
ﬁber sources (two for simultaneous wavelength calibra-
tion and one for the AFC). The layout of the two arms
after the dichroic is similar but the individual compo-
nents and separations diﬀer so as to achieve the required
dispersion, magniﬁcation and image quality for the two
passbands using only fused silica.

CUBES uses ﬁrst-order gratings produced by mi-
crolithographic techniques with an average eﬃciency of

85% over the whole wavelength range (see [20] for fur-
ther details).

The spectrograph camera is composed of four lenses,
the last of which acts as a window to the detector cryo-
stat. Of the eight optical surfaces in these components,
four are spherical and four have modest conic constants
(between −1 and 0.560). To correct for thermal changes
in the focus of the spectrographs the ﬁrst three lenses
in each camera will be moved as a single unit. The sci-
ence CCDs are tilted by 3.80◦ and 2.45◦ for the blue
and red arms, respectively. If needed, the AFC will be
implemented by moving the collimator lenses in X and
Y.

2.5 Mechanical Design

CUBES requires a beam diameter of 160 mm. The in-
strument envelope is therefore fairly large compared to
other Cassegrain instruments (e.g. X-Shooter [21] with
a 100 mm beam diameter). Scaling classical instrument
designs to the required size of CUBES would then ex-
ceed the mass limit of 2500 kg for Cassegrain instru-
ments of the VLT Unit Telescopes (UTs). Therefore,
the mechanical design of CUBES adopts light-weight
construction principles and makes use of modern com-
posite materials. The optical layout was optimized such

8

Alessio Zanutta et al.

Fig. 5 (a) Optical design of the high-resolution (HR) mode image slicer. For both image slicers, the layout is composed of
two arrays of six spherical mirrors each, the slicer mirror array and the camera mirror array. (b) The images of the six slices of
the ﬁeld of view generated by the image slicer, slitlets, compose the spectrograph entrance slit. The distribution of the slitlets,
in order to deﬁne the slit shape and dimension, is enabled by the control of the orientation of the camera mirrors (tilt with
respect to the X and Y axes). Further details about the image slicers design can be found in [19]

that all optical elements of the spectrograph from slit
to detector lie in a single plane, so all the spectrograph
optics can be mounted on a single optical bench of size
1.3 × 1.7 m. This is arguably the most stable conﬁgura-
tion since the dispersion direction of CUBES is parallel
to the stiﬀ surface plane of the optical bench. Another
focus of the mechanical design is to minimize the eﬀects
of gravitational bending of the instrument.

In the current design, the CUBES mechanical struc-

ture is divided into three main components:

1. Telescope adapter: provides a stiﬀ connection be-
tween the Cassegrain telescope ﬂange and the opti-
cal bench assembly of CUBES;

2. Optical bench assembly: provides a stable plat-
form for the spectrograph optics as well as for the
fore-optics;

3. Support frame assembly: provides support for
auxiliary equipment of CUBES such as the elec-
tronic racks, the calibration unit and vacuum equip-
ment. This frame is detached from the optical bench
assembly to mitigate ﬂexure contribution from aux-
iliary equipment.

As for the materials, we plan to use steel for the
telescope adapter and the support frame, and a Carbon-
ﬁber-reinforced polymer (CFRP) for the optical bench.
We plan to make the opto-mechanics of aluminum al-
loys (e.g., AlSi40), to improve the speciﬁc stiﬀness and

lower the mismatch in coeﬃcient of thermal expan-
sion between the opto-mechanical parts and the CFRP
bench (in case thermal analysis in the next phases shows
this is an issue).

Initial ﬁnite element method (FEM) analysis shows
that the global structure (bench + telescope adapter)
has no need for an AFC. However, it requires further
investigation if this assumption holds when taking grav-
itational ﬂexure of individual components (in particular
of the heavy CCD heads) and its interplay with optics
into account.

2.6 FiberLink (FL) Unit

The FL will provide the option of simultaneous obser-
vations with UVES, a two-arm, high-resolution echelle
spectrograph located at the Nasmyth B focus of VLT-
UT2. A similar concept, HiRISE [2], is currently under
development that combines SPHERE and CRIRES+
via optical ﬁbers.

To enable simultaneous observations with UVES,
the CUBES fore-optics will be equipped with a front-
end (FE) module that feeds up to seven optical ﬁbers
with stellar, sky-background, and calibration light. The
optical ﬁbers have a 120 µm core that subtends a 1-
arcsec aperture on the sky. The light is picked-oﬀ us-
ing a dichroic mirror (DM) which can be moved into

CUBES Phase A design overview

9

Fig. 6 Mechanical concept for CUBES: The general layout of the main mechanical components is shown in the upper image.
For reference, the Telescope Adapter has a diameter of about 1.5 m. The Fore-Optics Assembly is located near the center of
the bench, while the spectrograph opto-mechanics are ‘hanging’ on the bottom side of the same bench (lower image).

the telescope beam. The DM diverts light redder than
420 nm into the FE module. The FE module will con-
tain subsystems for ﬁeld stabilization (tip/tilt), an ADC,
and ﬁber guiding (FG). The relay optics of the FE mod-
ule convert the native F/13.41 telescope beam into an
F/3 beam to minimize loss due to focal ratio degrada-
tion (FRD) [1]. A schematic diagram that brieﬂy out-
lines the conceptual design of the FE optics is shown in
Fig. 7.

A 40 m long ﬁber cable installed at the UT2 tele-
scope will transmit light from the Cassegrain ﬂange to
UVES. The UVES pre-slit optics nominally relay the
UT2 Nasmyth beam into its blue (300–500 nm) and

red (420–1100 nm) arms. The injected light from the
CUBES ﬁbers will be directed into the red arm only
through a fold mirror mounted on the back of the dichroic
mirror, which usually splits the light into the two wave-
length bands; this is a similar approach to that used for
the FLAMES ﬁber-feed to UVES, which also only uses
the red arm [28].

2.7 Calibration Unit

The calibration sub-system provides the light sources
necessary to register frames for ﬂat ﬁelding, wavelength

10

Alessio Zanutta et al.

Fig. 7 FiberLink FE module: A doublet (L1), placed behind Fold-1 and dichroic mirror (DM)

collimates the beam, sending it through an ADC while passing a second fold mirror (Fold-2). A fast tip-tilt (TT) mirror,
located in the pupil of L1, folds the optical path towards the camera (L2) which images the ﬁeld at F/3 telecentrically onto
the ﬁber tips.

calibration, the option of simultaneous wavelength cali-
bration, alignment and the AFC option if required. This
unit will be mounted on one of the side cabinets and
will feed light into the spectrograph by means of optical
ﬁbers in two ways: on the fore-optics by using a folding
mirror (for daytime calibrations), and at the slit level
at the sides of the science spectra (for simultaneous,
night time calibrations).

We will use two ThAr lamps (one dimmed for si-
multaneous calibration), one Hg lamp and one Laser
Driven Light Source (LDLS) for a near UV ﬂat and
four QTH lamps for the UVES ﬂat (TBC). In Fig. 8
we show the schematic concept of the calibration unit
showing the two optical-ﬁber bundles, one for the day-
time calibration (including UVES) and alignment, and
the other for wavelength calibration during an observa-
tion and to provide an oﬀset measurement to a ﬂexure
compensation system if this is shown to be necessary to
achieve the required resolving power. In Fig. 9 we show
the concept for the mounting of the lamps and optics
in the calibration box.

2.8 Detector and Electronics

red arms. These are standard silicon, backside illumi-
nated devices, that will use an anti-reﬂection coating
now in development at Teledyne-e2v (with optimized
performance over the 300 – 400 nm range). The detec-
tor control electronics will be the New Generation Con-
troller II (NGCII) that is currently under development
at ESO [24].

The science data on the CUBES arrays will only
occupy a small percentage of the available rows, with
a 14 × 92 mm footprint of the spectra on the detectors.
This equates to the full width of the device but only
1400 rows vertically. This spectral science data will be
projected onto the lower half of the detectors. A region
of the upper half of the devices could be used to support
the AFC system if it is required, with a windowed part
of the array read out at a faster frame rate than the
science data. As such, independent control of the upper
and lower halves of the CCDs is required.

The dark current (DC) of the detectors is a criti-
cal performance requirement. The DC level speciﬁed by
Teledyne-e2v for the CCD290-99 arrays is 3 e−/pix/hr
at 173 K. The target value for CUBES is < 0.5 e−/pix/hr
(to enable, e.g., background-limited performance to i ≥
20 mag for high-redshift galaxies), so the arrays will
need to be cooled to a lower temperature of ≤ 165 K.

The baseline detectors are two Teledyne-e2v CCD290-
99 (9k × 9k) arrays [22,23], one for each of the blue and

The baseline cryostat design is a liquid nitrogen
bath that is similar to others in use at ESO. Individual

CUBES Phase A design overview

11

Fig. 8 Schematic concept of the calibration unit.

Fig. 9 3D mechanical concept for the lamp assembly of the calibration unit.

baths will be ﬁtted to each detector cryostat, adopting a
similar layout to that used for the X-Shooter cryostats.
The evacuated volume of each cryostat is ∼ 3 l, so the
1 - 10 l standard ESO vacuum system will be used. The
cryostat control electronics will control pumping and
venting, detector thermal control, cold ﬁnger thermal
control (used for warm-up and coarse temperature con-
trol), warm-up control, liquid-nitrogen level monitor-
ing, monitoring of the cryostat states and logging data,
and alarms and safety-critical interlocks.

3 Software

3.1 Control Software

The CUBES instrument control software is based on the
ELT Instrument Control Software Framework (IFW),
a new toolkit developed by ESO aimed to help instru-
ment developers implementing the control software for
the ELT instruments. The IFW reuses the proven archi-
tectural and design patterns from the VLT control soft-
ware framework but is implemented using the new tech-
nologies deﬁned by the ELT development standards,
such as the use of Beckhoﬀ Programmable Logic Con-

12

Alessio Zanutta et al.

trollers (PLCs) with OPC-UA as the communication
protocol, C++ 17 and Python as programming lan-
guages, ZMQ as middleware and the use of Nomad and
Consul for the management of the life cycle of the soft-
ware components.

The IFW is composed by the following ELT stan-

dard instrument software subsystems:

– Function Control System (FCS): controls and
monitors the instrument hardware functions and sen-
sors, except the detectors.

– Detector Control System (DCS): carries out all

the tasks to control the detector subsystems.

– Observation Coordination System (OCS): the
highest layer of the control software. It consists of
a Supervisor, responsible for the overall monitor-
ing and supervision of the instrument subsystems,
an Observation Coordination Manager, responsible
for coordinating the scientiﬁc exposure and a Data
Product Manager, responsible for collecting and archiv-
ing the results of the scientiﬁc exposure in the ﬁnal
FITS ﬁle and for sending it to the Online Archive
System.

– Maintenance Software (MS): used for instru-
ment conﬁguration and maintenance procedures.

As CUBES will be installed on one of the VLT UTs,
it will need to interface its ELT IFW-based control
system with the VLT physical environment. To this
end, a dedicated intermediary or gateway, the VLT-
ELT Software Gateway component developed by ESO,
will translate protocols and interfaces between the ELT
and VLT environments, allowing in particular the in-
strument communication with the VLT TCS. For si-
multaneous observations with CUBES and UVES, the
VLT-ELT Software Gateway will provide the synchro-
nization between the CUBES and UVES on-line databases
(OLDBs).

3.2 CUBES software architecture

The CUBES software architecture is shown in Fig. 10.
The Observation Blocks (fundamental scheduling units
of VLT science operations) are transferred from the
(visitor mode) Observing Tool (vOT) hosted on the
Observation Handling Workstation (OH WS) to the Se-
quencer which reads the contents of the Observations
Blocks and executes one by one the templates speci-
ﬁed in there. Each template consists in a sequence of
commands to be sent to the various instrument sub-
systems (OCS, FCS, DCSs and, through the VLT-ELT
Gateway, VLT Telescope Control System (TCS)). The
subsystems then conﬁgure the corresponding hardware
according to the settings that have been selected by the

user. The Observation Coordination Manager (OCM)
coordinates the data acquisition (data coming from the
scientiﬁc detectors), triggers the creation of metadata
from the other instrument subsystems and controls the
data products creation. At the end of the scientiﬁc ex-
posure, the DCS generates the detector data and saves
them in a FITS ﬁle. Then the Data Product Manager,
controlled by the OCM, collects the CUBES data from
the instruments subsystems, creates the ﬁnal FITS ﬁle
and transfers the ﬁle to the Archiving System. A Super-
visor monitors and manages the lifecycle and states of
the diﬀerent subsystems. The two scientiﬁc detectors
are controlled by one dedicated controller (New Gen-
eral detector Controller II, NGCII) and the technical
cameras of the CUBES Acquisition & Guiding (A&G)
System and Fiber Link (FL) Guiding System are con-
trolled by the ESO standard Camera Control Frame-
work (CCF).

3.3 Data Reduction

The Data Reduction Software (DRS) will extract science-
grade spectra from the raw science and calibration frames
produced by the instrument, removing the instrument
signature. The DRS will be written in ANSI C using
the ESO Common Pipeline Library (CPL) and High-
level Data Reduction Library (HDRL). It will be op-
erated through the standard ESO interfaces (EsoRex,
Gasgano, and ESO Reﬂex). An additional Python inter-
face will be developed internally for better integration
within the Python ecosystem, which is now a de-facto
standard for the astronomical community.

3.4 Simulation Tools

An End-to-End (E2E) instrument simulator and an Ex-
posure Time Calculator (ETC) have been developed to
help deﬁne the current baseline design as well as in the
scientiﬁc evaluation of the various observing modes.

The ETC is a tool to predict the global perfor-
mances of the CUBES spectrograph considering the
input instrumental parameters and the environmental
conditions. The ETC predicts the S/N ratio per pixel
that is achievable for a given wavelength, exposure time,
sky conditions, and magnitude (U , V ) of a point source.
It can also provide the exposure time required to ob-
tain a given S/N ratio. The ETC is a Python 3.7.6 script
that is called by a web application written in Java and
JavaScript.

The E2E simulator is a tool which aims to simu-
late the instrument behavior and the astronomical ob-
servations given the ﬂux distribution of the scientiﬁc

CUBES Phase A design overview

13

Fig. 10 CUBES software architecture. For a complete description of the elements refer to the section 3.2.

sources/targets (or calibration sources in the case of
calibration frames) to the output raw-frame data pro-
duced by the CCD(s). Two diﬀerent versions, targeted
for diﬀerent applications and users are under develop-
ment:

formance that it would provide for the Paranal Obser-
vatory, ESO issued a Call for Proposals for such an
instrument in January 2020. In response to this call
we assembled a new consortium to design and build
CUBES, comprising institutes from six countries:

– Science version: for initial science evaluations and

preliminary performances.

– Technical version: for more precise simulations to be
exploited for DRS development and to aid in evalu-
ating the instrument design and performances.

4 Project Organization and Schedule

4.1 Consortium

The current project builds on previous work from a
joint Brazil-ESO Phase A study of a near-UV spectro-
graph undertaken in 2012 [29,7,30]. Unfortunately the
project did not proceed further at the time, but the sci-
ence case is now stronger than ever, as demonstrated
by the range of papers presented in this Special Issue.
Given the clear demand from the community for
such a capability and the unrivalled ground-UV per-

◦ INAF – Istituto Nazionale di Astroﬁsica, Italy (con-

sortium lead).

◦ UK ATC – UK Astronomy Technology Centre (pri-
mary UK partner) and Durham University Centre
for Advanced Instrumentation (secondary UK part-
ner), United Kingdom.

◦ LSW – Landessternwarte, Zentrum f¨ur Astronomie

der Universit¨at Heidelberg, Germany.

◦ NCAC – Nicolaus Copernicus Astronomical Center

of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland.

◦ IAG-USP – Instituto de Astronomia, Geof´ısica e
Ciˆencias Atmosf´ericas (primary Brazilian partner)
and LNA – Laborat´orio Nacional de Astrof´ısica (sec-
ondary Brazilian partner), Brazil.

◦ AAO-MQ – Australian Astronomical Optics, Mac-

quarie University, Australia.

14

4.2 Schedule

The Phase A study commenced in June 2020, with a
close-out review in June 2021. The next phase of the
project will be ∼2.5 yrs for the detailed design, with
two formal review milestones of the Preliminary and
Final Design Reviews. The project will then enter the
Manufacturing, Assembly, Integration, Testing (MAIT)
phase, with the next major milestone being the system
Integration and Test Readiness Review (ITRR), that
will then be closed by the Preliminary Acceptance Eu-
rope (PAE). CUBES will be then moved to Chile, re-
assembled, mounted on the VLT and tested. The com-
missioning phase will be closed when the Provisional
Acceptance Chile (PAC) is granted. Finally, CUBES
will be oﬀered to the community after PAC is granted
and science veriﬁcation is concluded. The MAIT phase
through to science operations in the current plan is en-
visaged for 3 yrs, meaning that it would be available to
the ESO user community in 2028.

5 Instrument performance

5.1 Throughput

For an instrument working in the UV range at the limit
of the atmospheric transmission, a high throughput is
mandatory and needs special attention. The aspects of
this taken into consideration in the Phase A study are
now brieﬂy summarized.

The grating eﬃciency is one of the main factors on
the total throughput of the instrument. A signiﬁcant
gain can be achieved by splitting the covered wave-
length range into two channels, each with an optimized
grating with eﬃciencies of ∼90% over their respective
wavelength ranges.

The eﬃciency requirements also put restrictions on
the selection of the materials of the optical elements
(mainly Fused Silica with a few CaF2 substrates) and
infers the need to minimize the number of surfaces used.
For this reason, special attention was also given to the
selection of the anti-reﬂection (and mirror) coatings.
Moreover, a detailed design was performed of the image
slicer to ensure the highest eﬃciency.

During the conceptual design phase, ﬁrst iterations
with coating companies have been established to pre-
dict and simulate the throughput contributions of each
optical element in the instrument (e.g. lenses, mirrors,
gratings, and image slicer).

In many cases there were uncertainties regarding the
achievable throughput values, so we estimated the end-
to-end eﬃciencies for two scenarios. We therefore con-
sidered the max/min envelopes of the eﬃciencies by de-

Alessio Zanutta et al.

Table 1 Adopted eﬃciencies in the two scenarios considered
for the throughput analysis. ‘AR coating’ (anti-reﬂection)
refers to all transmissive surfaces: lenses, fold prisms, ADC
prism pairs; ‘Cement’ is transmission of the cemented sur-
faces (ADC prisms, collimator lens, camera lens doublets),
‘High reﬂ.’ refers to the high reﬂectivity coating of the two
mirrors in each arm of the spectrograph and of the image
slicer mirrors.

AR coating
Cement
High reﬂ.
mirror coating
Dichroic coating
High reﬂ.
slicer mirror coating

Detector coating

Slicer vignetting
Grating
(w/AR coating
backside)

Optimum case
0.997
0.995

Worst case
0.995
0.99

0.98

0.97

0.97

0.97

0.97

0.95

datasheet
QE [23]

0.98
manufacturer’s
simulation [20]
× 0.95

datasheet
QE [23]
× 0.95
0.97
manufacturer’s
simulation [20]
× 0.90

riving optimum and worst-case values for the through-
put of the optical elements (see Table 1 and Fig. 11).

As shown in Fig. 11, the TLR (black solid line)
lies below both envelopes, suggesting that the baseline
design satisﬁes the formal eﬃciency requirement (see
Sect. 2.2).

5.2 Signal to noise (S/N) ratio

As for the throughput evaluation, we investigated two
scenarios for the potential instrument performance in
terms of the delivered S/N, by considering a set of ref-
erence parameters for the object spectrum, sky and ob-
serving conditions1.

Table 2 Predicted S/N for diﬀerent detector binning (spec-
tral × spatial) for the two performance scenarios for a
1 hr exposure of a U = 17.5 mag. A0-type star at 313 nm
(0.007 nm/bin).

S/N (1 × 1 binning)
S/N (1 × 2 binning)

Goal
case
26
28

Conservative
case
21
23

We ﬁrst considered a ‘goal case’, where the detector
DC = 0.5e−/pix/hr (at 165 K) and the eﬃciency of anti-
reﬂection coatings, cement for doublets, slicer-mirror

1 Reference spectrum deﬁned as MAB = 18.77 mag. The sky
radiance and atmospheric transmission spectra were com-
puted with the ESO skycalc tool, assuming new Moon, air-
mass = 1.16 and a Precipitable Water Vapor of 30 mm.

CUBES Phase A design overview

15

Fig. 11 Calculated detective quantum eﬃciency of the two arms of CUBES (BLUE and RED) for worst and optimum
scenarios. The black line indicates the formal top-level eﬃciency requirement. The throughput was calculated from the telescope
focus, including detector QE, IS vignetting, but excluding atmospheric eﬀects and telescope losses.

reﬂectivity and detector QE are set to the values from
Table 1 that have been assessed as feasible. Secondly,
we investigated a more conservative case in which the
detector DC = 3e−/pix/hr (at 173 K) and all the eﬃ-
ciency values are taken from the manufacturers’ oﬃ-
cial datasheets. The results are shown in Table 2 which
summarizes the trade-oﬀ performed for the HR mode.
These values were used to verify that the perfor-
mance of the instrument baseline design would fulﬁll
the requirements presented in Sect. 2.2.

5.3 Image quality and resolving power

In terms of image quality, spectral resolution and sam-
pling, the two arms of the baseline design are expected
to perform fully within the speciﬁcations from Sect. 2.2.
Detailed ray-tracing of the design (Sect. 2.4) has demon-
strated that the achievable optical point-spread-function
(PSF) is below 1 pixel.

The eﬀective resolving power has been computed
from the FWHM Gaussian ﬁt of the resulting line-spread-
function (LSF), including all major blurring contribu-
tions: optical aberrations (optics PSF = 0.65 px for both
arms), residual ﬂexure (FWHM = 0.5 px) and signal dif-
fusion in the detector (0.9 px). The value of 0.5 px for
residual ﬂexure is the maximum allocated movement
of the spectra on the detector which will be achieved
either by the stiﬀness of the mechanical structure or
using the Active Flexure Compensation system.

The spectral resolving power (R) and spectral sam-
pling (Sx) as a function of the imager slicer modes are

given in Table 3. These results conﬁrm that the baseline
design satisﬁes the requirements of the assembled sci-
ence cases for R ≥ 20000, combined with good spectral
sampling and a broad wavelength coverage from 300 nm
to the goal of >400 nm.

Table 3 Resolving power (R) and spectral sampling (Sx) for
the two slicer modes, i.e. diﬀerent ﬁeld of view and slitwidth.
Sx is computed as the FWHM Gaussian ﬁt of the resulting
line-spread-function (LSF) from the diﬀerent optical blurring
terms convolved with the geometrical sampling. The eﬀective
R is then derived from the LSF FWHM.

FoV (arcsec)
Slitwidth (arcsec)
Rmean (λ/∆λ)
Rmin (λ/∆λ)
Sxmean (pix)
Sxmin (pix)

HR mode
10 × 1.5
0.25
24000
21000
2.43
2.35

LR mode
10 × 6
1
7200
6200
8.35
8.00

6 Model-Based Systems Engineering

A Model-Based System Engineering (MBSE) approach
[25] can help system engineers keep control of complex
projects using the model as primary ‘Source of Truth’
for all system engineering information related to the in-
strument. This approach requires the adoption of a tool
and a modeling language (e.g. Cameo and SysML in our
case [26]). MBSE, however, faces diﬃcult challenges in
projects that are document-centric like those of ESO-

16

Alessio Zanutta et al.

related projects, therefore we also developed tools to
produce the required documents from the model.

Another challenge derives from the interaction with
the various cultures of the engineering disciplines in-
volved, namely: software, electronic, optical and me-
chanical engineers who are all used to diﬀerent tools and
languages to describe their domains. To cope with this
and to avoiding imposing MBSE, which may look like
an attempt to centralize and bureaucratize the project,
we decided to keep the modeling environment restricted
to the system-engineering team while interacting with
the other engineers using traditional Excel ﬁles. This
approach allowed us to both exploit the advantages of
MBSE while not disturbing other engineering domains.
Also, the Excel ﬁle can be used in syncing mode to al-
low data to be entered into the model; it should however
be stressed that the model remains the only ‘Source of
Truth’.

A fundamental role of MBSE is the requirements
analysis. The TLRs from the ESO DOORS database
[27] were imported in Cameo using the reqIf (Require-
ments Interchange Format) format. Analysis and ﬂow-
down of the requirements were then performed using
SysML inside the model.

The use of MBSE in CUBES is laying the founda-
tion for further applications of this approach in future
astronomical projects. The experience accumulated in
this project will be conveyed in a general SysML pro-
ﬁle (AstroMBSE) that will be made available to the
community.

7 Conclusions

We have presented the Phase A design of the Cassegrain
U-Band Eﬃcient Spectrograph (CUBES) for the VLT.
Analysis of the design shows that it will deliver out-
standing (>40%) eﬃciency across its bandpass of 300–
405 nm, at a mean R ∼ 24000 (HR mode) and R ∼ 7000
(LR mode). We have also presented the option of a ﬁber
link to UVES to provide the capability of simultaneous
high-resolution spectroscopy at λ ≥ 420 nm.

With contributions from institutes in six countries,
the CUBES design is well placed to deliver the most
eﬃcient ground-based spectrograph at near-UV wave-
lengths as we move into the construction phase, with
science operations anticipated for 2028. Within this tight
timeline, it is important to keep the system develop-
ment under control by means of dedicated SysML pro-
ﬁles and procedures developed in the MBSE context.
We highlighted the importance of these tools to main-
tain a high level of control and consistency in the in-
strument development.

Acknowledgments

The INAF authors acknowledge ﬁnancial support of
the Italian Ministry of Education, University, and Re-
search with PRIN 201278X4FL and the ”Progetti Pre-
miali” funding scheme. The German authors acknowl-
edge support from BMBF under grant 05A20VHA. R.S.
acknowledges support by the National Science Centre,
Poland, through project 2018/31/B/ST9/01469.

References

1. Ramsey, L. W., ”Focal ratio degradation in optical ﬁbers

of astronomical interest”, ASPC, 3, 26 (1988).

2. A. Vigan, G. P. P. L. Otten, E. Muslimov, K. Dohlen,
M. W. Phillips, U. Seemann, J. -L. Beuzit, R. Dorn, M.
Kasper, D. Mouillet, I. Baraﬀe, A. Reiners, ”Bringing high-
spectral resolution to VLT/SPHERE with a ﬁbre coupling
to VLT/CRIRES+”, arXiv, 1806.10618 (2018).

3. Evans, C. J., Barbuy, B., Castilho, B., et al., ”Revisiting
the science case for near-UV spectroscopy with the VLT”,
Proc. SPIE Vol. 10702, 107022E. doi:10.1117/12.2312022
(2018).

4. Snodgrass, C. & Evans, C. ”The Very Large Telescope in

2030”, 52. doi:10.5281/zenodo.3356322 (2019).

5. Ernandes, H., Evans, C. J., Barbuy, B., et al., Proc. SPIE

Vol. 11447, 1144760. doi:10.1117/12.2562497 (2020).

6. Dekker H., D’Odorico S., Kaufer A., Delabre B., Kot-
zlowski H., ”Design, construction, and performance of
UVES, the echelle spectrograph for the UT2 Kueyen Tele-
scope at the ESO Paranal Observatory,” Proc. SPIE Vol.
4008, Optical and IR Telescope Instrumentation and De-
tectors (2000).

7. Barbuy, B., Bawden Macanhan, V., Bristow, P. et al.,
”CUBES: Cassegrain U-Band Brasil-ESO Spectrograph”,
Astrophys Space Sci 354, 191 (2014).

8. Evans, C., Cristiani, S., Opitom, C. et al.: The CUBES
Science Case, ExA, in press as part of the Special Issue
9. Opitom, C., Snodgrass, C., La Forgia, F. et al.: Cometary
Science with CUBES, ExA, in press as part of the Special
Issue

10. Alcal´a, J. M., Cupani, G., Evans, C. et al.: Accretion and
outﬂows in young stars with CUBES, ExA, in press as part
of the Special Issue

11. Bonifacio, P.: Metal-poor stars: The role of cubes, ExA,

in press as part of the Special Issue

12. Hansen, C. J.: Heavy elements – they came out of the

blue, ExA, in press as part of the Special Issue

13. Ernandes, H., Barbuy, B., Castilho, B. et al.: Simulated
observations of heavy elements with CUBES, ExA, in press
as part of the Special Issue

14. Giribaldi, R. E. & Smiljanic, R.: Beryllium abundances
in turn-oﬀ stars of globular clusters with the CUBES spec-
trograph, ExA, in press as part of the Special Issue

15. Evans, C., Marcolino, W., Bouret, J.-C. & Garcia, M.: A
near-UV reconnaissance of metal-poor massive stars, ExA,
in press as part of the Special Issue

16. D’Odorico, V.: Portraying the missing baryonic mass at
the cosmic noon: the contribution of CUBES, ExA, in press
as part of the Special Issue

17. Noterdaeme, P. & Balashev, S.: Molecular hydrogen in
absorption at high redshifts – Science cases for CUBES,
ExA, in press as part of the Special Issue

CUBES Phase A design overview

17

18. Genoni, M., Landoni, M., Cupani, G. et al., ”The CUBES
Instrument model and simulation tools”, ExA, in press as
part of the CUBES Special Issue.

19. Calcines, A., Wells, M., O’Brien, K. et al., ”Design of the
VLT-CUBES image slicers”, ExA, in press as part of the
CUBES Special Issue.

20. Zeitner, U. D., Dekker, H., Burmeister, F. et al., ”High
Eﬃciency Transmission Grating for the ESO CUBES UV
Spectrograph”, ExA, in press as part of the CUBES Special
Issue.

21. D’Odorico S., Dekker H, Mazzoleni R., Vernet J., et al.,
”X-shooter UV- to K-band intermediate-resolution high-
eﬃciency spectrograph for the VLT: status report at the
ﬁnal design review”, Proc. SPIE 6269, Ground-based and
Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy, 626933 (2006).
22. Jorden, P., Bourke, D., Cassidy, R., Jerram, P., Pratlong,
J., Swindells, I., & Woﬃnden, C., ”Teledyne e2v sensors op-
timised for ground-based and space applications”. In High
Energy, Optical, and Infrared Detectors for Astronomy VIII
(Vol. 10709, p. 1070903). International Society for Optics
and Photonics (2018).

23. CCD290-99 Back Illuminated Scientiﬁc CCD Sensor 9216
x 9232 Pixels, Sixteen Outputs Non-inverted Mode Oper-
ation, e2v technologies (uk) limited, A1A-778871 Version
2, August 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.e2v.com/
resources/account/download-datasheet/1897.

24. George, E. M., Bezawada, N., Ives, D., Mehrgan, L.,
Accardo, M., Alvarez, D., ... & Todorovic, M., ”Detector
systems engineering for extremely large instruments”. In
X-Ray, Optical, and Infrared Detectors for Astronomy IX
(Vol. 11454, p. 114541Y). International Society for Optics
and Photonics (2020).

25. Karban, R., Andolfato, L., Bristow, P., Chiozzi, G., Essel-
born, M., Schilling, M., ... & Zamparelli, M., ”Model based
systems engineering for astronomical projects”. In Model-
ing, Systems Engineering, and Project Management for As-
tronomy VI (Vol. 9150, p. 91500L). International Society for
Optics and Photonics (2014).

26. Casse, O., ”SysML in Action with Cameo Systems Mod-

eler”. Elsevier (2017).

27. Egner, S. E., Herrera, J. G., Bellido-Tirado, O., & Frey,
S., ”Veriﬁcation control using DOORS”. In Modeling, Sys-
tems Engineering, and Project Management for Astronomy
IX (Vol. 11450, p. 114502D). International Society for Op-
tics and Photonics (2020).

28. Pasquini, L., Avila, G., Blecha, A. et al., ”Installation and
commissioning of FLAMES, the VLT Multiﬁbre Facility”,
Msngr, 110, 1 (2002).

29. Barbuy, B., Bawden Macanhan, V., Bristow, P. et al.,
”CUBES: Cassegrain U-band Brazil-ESO spectrograph”,
Ap&SS, 354, 191 (2014).

30. Bristow, P., Barbuy, B., Bawden Macahan, V. et al.,
”Introducing CUBES: the Cassegrain U-band Brazil-ESO
spectrograph”, Proc. SPIE, 9147, 09 (2014).

