Geophysical Electromagnetics: A retrospective, 
DISC 2017, and a look forward 
Douglas W. Oldenburg1, Lindsey J. Heagy1,2 & Seogi Kang1,3 
1 University of British Columbia Geophysical Inversion Facility (doug@eoas.ubc.ca)  
2 University of California Berkeley, Department of Statistics (lheagy@berkeley.edu)  
3 Stanford University, Department of Geophysics (sgkang09@stanford.edu)    

Abstract 

Geophysical  electromagnetics  (EM)  plays  an  important  role  in  mineral  exploration  and  is 
increasingly being used to help solve other problems of relevance to society. In this article we 
reflect, from our perspective at University of British Columbia (UBC), on the development of 
EM  geophysics  over  the  years  and  on  our  attempts  to  enhance  its  understanding,  and  its 
visibility and usefulness to the community. The availability of open-source resources, and a 
shift  within  the  EM  community  towards  collaborative  practices  for  sharing  and  creating 
software and educational resources, has been a driver of progress towards these goals. In 
this article we provide some background about this trajectory and how the SEG Distinguished 
Instructor Short Course (DISC) was a catalyst in our development of software and  resources 
and in our broader goal of creating more collaborative connections within the EM community.  

Introduction 

We  begin  with  some  historical  background  about  development  of  applied  geophysics  at 
University of British Columbia (UBC) and the Geophysical Inversion Facility (GIF). The UBC-
GIF  was  established  in  1989  with  a  mandate  to  serve  as  an  interface  between  academic 
research and industrial applications. At an inaugural open house we invited geoscientists from 
industry, academia and government to participate in presentations and discussion about the 
potential for inversion to enhance the information they were obtaining from geophysical data. 
Figure 1 shows the group associated with this event; of particular note is the presence of Misac 
Nabighian who is an iconic figure in electromagnetic geophysics. 

Figure 1: Founding members of the UBC-GIF at the first UBC-GIF Open House in 1989. Left 
to right: Yaoguo Li, Robert G. Ellis, Misac Nabighian, Doug Oldenburg, Rob Ellis and Greg 
Shore (https://www.eoas.ubc.ca/ubcgif/background/history.html).  

1 

 
Since then, the primary focus for GIF research has been on mineral exploration problems and, 
in  particular,  on  the  development  of  methodologies  and  software  to  invert  various  types  of 
geophysical data. We began with 2D direct current (DC) resistivity and induced polarization 
(IP), followed up with 3D potential fields, 1D electromagnetics (EM), and progressively tackled 
the  computationally  challenging  problems  of  inverting  3D  EM  data  with  many  sources 
(Oldenburg  and  Li,  1994;  Li  and  Oldenburg,  1996;  Farquharson  et  al.,  2003;  Haber  et  al., 
2007; Oldenburg et al., 2012). Our progress has paralleled advances in computational power, 
numerical solvers, and solving optimization problems. The other pillar of our success has been 
the steadfast support of mining companies who have motivated us by supplying problems and 
data, applied our software solutions, and provided feedback about needed improvements or 
functionality. The financial stability of our research program has resulted from the long-term 
commitment  of  the  industrial  sponsors.  Seven1  companies  in  our  current  consortium  have 
continually sponsored our research for the last 30 years, although their names have changed 
because of mergers or acquisitions. 

In addition to research, the GIF Outreach program was designed to disseminate information  
about the fundamentals of inversion and how to apply it to field data. The intended audiences 
have been expert and non-expert geophysicists, as well as engineers and geologists. In our 
formative  years,  we  provided  free  workshops  in  DC/IP  and  magnetic  inversions,  and  had 
booths at Canadian mining conferences.  By reaching a diverse audience, and in particular 
non-geophysicists who would be involved in the decision making process of whether to use a 
geophysical technique, we felt we could increase the use and usefulness of geophysics. As a 
product  of  this  work  we  developed,  in  the  mid-1990’s,  the  IAG  (Inversion  for  Applied 
Geophysics) educational resource. This was a digital textbook which was distributed via a cd-
rom and was also licensed and freely downloadable from UBC. It was meant to help inform 
non-experts (e.g. geologists and engineers) about the physical basis of geophysical surveys 
and  fundamentals  of  inversion;  it  provided  software  targeted  at  educational  purposes,  and 
case histories regarding application. The IAG materials formed a foundation for subsequent 
resources, 
Practicing  Geoscientists; 
https://gpg.geosci.xyz)  which  was  developed  to  be  the  primary  “textbook”    for  an  applied 
geophysics course at UBC taken by geological engineers and geologists. More recently, it has 
been adopted as a course “textbook” by instructors at at least 5 other universities, and has 
been used by 31,000 people in the past year (Sept 2019-Sept 2020). Though many of the 
goals of the GIF Outreach vision have remained the same, advances in the web for sharing 
information and enabling collaboration over the past decade allow us to achieve these goals 
in ways that are far more effective.  

(Geophysics 

the  GPG 

including 

for 

With this background, it is understandable why we were enthusiastic when asked by the SEG 
to present the 2017 Distinguished Instructor Short Course (DISC). The founding philosophy of  
the  DISC,  as  put  forth  by  Peter  Duncan,  is    “to  be  the  crowning  jewel  in  the  SEG’s  CE 
[Continuing Education] program, uniting a world-class instructor with a leading-edge topic to 
create an educational event of global proportions.” The DISC works in the following manner: 

1  The  current  members  are:  Barrick,  Glencore,  BHP,  Vale,  Teck,  Anglo  American,  Rio  Tinto.  The 
original founding members in 1990 were: BHP, CRA Exploration, Cominco, Falconbridge, Hudson 
Bay Exploration and Development, INCO, Kennecott, Newmont, Noranda, Placer Dome, WMC with 
matching funds provided by NSERC. 

2 

 
 
 
 
an  instructor  and  topic  (heretofore  related  to  seismic  and  hydrocarbons)  is  selected;  the 
instructor puts together material for presentation and also writes a book which serves as a 
resource for those attending and which is also later sold through the SEG; the 1-day course 
is taken around the world and local hosts are required to organize the event at their location 
and generate enough participation so that registration fees cover the presentation costs. The 
DISC  has  been  very  successful  in  the  past,  often  reaching  more  than  two  thousand 
participants in ~20+ countries.  

When  asked  by  the  SEG  to  generate  a  course  on  a  non-seismic  topic,  we  saw  this  as  an 
opportunity  to  make  an  impact,  and  increase  the  usefulness  of  EM  in  a  wide  variety  of 
applications  that  span  hydrocarbons,  minerals,  geothermal  energy,  groundwater,  natural 
hazards, environmental and geotechnical problems. 

Why a course on EM? 
The  physical  properties  associated  with  EM  are  electrical  conductivity/resistivity,  magnetic 
permeability (often cast in terms of magnetic susceptibility), and electrical permittivity (cast as 
dielectric constant). These properties can play a valuable role in helping solve many practical 
problems. However, EM is not used to its full potential and, in many cases, has been oversold 
(Constable,  2010)  or  misused  (Hodges,  2005).  Part  of  this  comes  about  through  lack  of 
understanding and incorrectly conceptualizing EM phenomena. In seismic surveys it is intuitive 
to visualize how a wave packet propagates through the medium, reflects/refracts at interfaces, 
and  returns  to  the  surface  as  a  wavelet.  EM  is  unintuitive,  especially  when  working  in  the 
frequency  domain  where  the  signals  are  partitioned  into  “real”  and  “imaginary”  parts. 
Historically, many EM techniques have been oversold with respect to their resolving power 
and their ability to get detailed information using just a few sources and receivers. For a 3D 
earth, just as in seismology, the survey must have 3D acquisition so that the entire volume 
under investigation is illuminated. This requires many sources and receivers which measure 
multiple components of the vector fields. We need lots of high quality data; there is no free-
lunch!  A last important point is that for almost all problems the geologic structure is 3D and 
there is topography. If the data are inverted using 1D or 2D assumptions there can be artefacts 
which, if interpreted geologically, might be quite wrong. Historically this has happened far too 
often and produces a net consequence that the EM geophysical technique “does not work”, 
or that EM doesn’t work. Period! 

The good news is that there have been many achievements over the last decade and we now 
have a “perfect storm” for advancing the application of EM. The components are: (1) there are 
many applications where EM can play a role; (2) advances in instrumentation mean that large 
amounts of high quality data can be collected; (3) advances in computer hardware, HPC/cloud 
computing and computational software (e.g. linear solvers) mean that we can simulate, and 
invert in 3D, almost all types of EM data; (4) advances in web-tools allow us to communicate 
and promote collaboration; (5) there is a new cadre of brilliant young scientists who want to 
use  EM  to  solve  important  societal  problems.  Our  challenge  was  to  design  a  course  that 
consolidated these advances and presented them to a diverse audience world-wide and make 
a long-term impact. Thus we needed to determine our target audience, decide on material and 
how to present it. 

Who is the audience? 
The  diversity  of  applied  problems  we  face  as  a  society  is  immense  and  ranges  from:  (a)  

3 

 
 
 
 
resource  exploration,  production  and  monitoring  (for  minerals,  hydrocarbons,  water);  (b) 
energy (geothermal power); (c)  environmental (contaminants, and disposal or containment of 
nuclear  wastes);  (d)  geotechnical  (tunnels,  infrastructure);  (e)  monitoring  and  evaluating 
effects  of  climate  change.  Some  of  this  diversity  is  provided  in  Figure  2.  Solving  these 
problems requires a multidisciplinary team that could include geophysicists with a variety of 
expertise  and  backgrounds,  as  well  as  geologists,  engineers,  and  other  stakeholders.  EM 
geophysics might play an important role, but it is rare that knowing the 3D distribution of one 
of the EM physical properties (e.g. resistivity), provides a unique trajectory towards a solution. 
The information from EM is only one piece of data that needs to be integrated into a holistic 
perspective of the problem. Since the DISC was to be presented in many countries, each with 
its own geoscience priorities and capabilities, we anticipated the need to provide material what 
would be of use to geophysicists who were well versed in EM, geophysicists who might be 
expert  in  other  areas  of  geophysics  (such  as  seismology),  and  other  geoscientists  from 
academia, industry or government. To make matters more complicated, some of the heavy 
users of EM were specialized in certain areas (e.g. airborne EM) but were unfamiliar with other 
techniques (e.g. grounded source, MT or GPR). There was also a bifurcation between those 
who used time domain (TDEM) and those who used frequency domain (FDEM). In summary, 
we expected a very diverse group! 

Figure 2. A sampling of applications where electromagnetic methods can play a role 

In  a  multi-disciplinary  applied  problem,  it  is  essential  that  all  members  of  the  team  can 
communicate effectively; this means understanding the lexicon and the physical principles of 
EM,  and  also  having  tools  to  communicate.  Here  is  where  having  web-based  tools  for 
collaboration (e.g. GitHub) and for sharing interactive educational resources, such as Jupyter 
Notebooks, play an essential role. These tools allow people to work together, share knowledge 
and  results,  and  be  more  effective  in  solving  the  problem.  The  associated  practices  of 
collaborative development, peer review of work, and open sharing of new developments also 
promotes the building of a community. These are concepts that motivated our approach to the 
2017 DISC and we wanted to share our vision with the community. In the sections below we 
talk about these items. 

The textbook 
A  main  component  of  previous  DISC  presentations  was  the  physical  textbook  that 
accompanied  the  course.  Because  of  the  breadth  of  our  course  material,  and  our  final 
objectives,  we  chose  a  different  route.  Our  goal  was  to  build  an  online,  open-source, 
collaboratively developed resource, EM GeoSci (https://em.geosci.xyz). Its main components 

4 

 
 
 
 
would be a mathematical foundation for EM (modelled closely by the classic chapter by Ward 
and Hohmann (1988)), a conduit for working with interactive simulations, a synopsis for the 
various types of EM surveys, and Case Histories which capture field examples of the use of 
EM  to  solve  an  applied  problem.  All  of  the  content  is  licensed  under  Creative  Commons, 
accessed  through  any  browser,  stored  on  GitHub,  and  anyone  can  contribute.  This  was  a 
massive  undertaking  for  the  GIF  group  and  for  those  geoscientists  outside  of  UBC  who 
contributed case histories. The resource is designed to be used either from the “bottom-up” 
[physics  →  surveys  →  case  history  applications]  or  “top-down”  [case  history  application  → 
relevant  survey  →  underlying  physics].  The  resource  is  also  a  conduit  to  the  apps  which 
facilitate the interactive exploration of the physics of EM and illustrate inversion for obtaining 
a subsurface image from EM data. 

What are apps? 
The apps are self-contained Jupyter notebooks (Pérez & Granger, 2007) that allow the user 
to investigate fundamentals, ask questions, and interact with the physics of EM. Being able to 
plot charge densities, currents, electric and magnetic fields as a function of time, frequency, 
or space allows the user to gain insight and to self-test about his/her understanding. An app 
makes the equations presented in standard textbooks come alive. The apps can be run on the 
cloud through services such as Binder (mybinder.org; Project Jupyter et al., 2018) or they can 
be downloaded and run on a local  machine. At the closure of DISC 2017 we had 26 apps that 
spanned DC resistivity, frequency and time domain, and natural sources. Figure 3 is an app 
for the 3-layer earth model. The user can explore the effects of changing electrode geometries, 
resistivities of the layers, and plotting total or secondary fields, currents, and charges. 

Figure 3. DC 3-layer app allows the user to obtain insight about the relationships of electrode 
geometry, resistivity of the earth, the currents and apparent resistivity value.  

5 

 
 
 
 
What is a Case History? 
A case history demonstrates the use of the EM method to solve a problem.  Our definition of 
case history is the same as what is standardly presented, but we have explicitly divided it into 
a  Seven-Step  procedure:    (1)  Problem,  (2)  Physical  Properties,  (3)  Survey,    (4)  Data,    (5) 
Processing,  (6) Interpretation,  (7) Synthesis. By parsing a case history into these segments, 
it makes a succinct document that facilitates impact and communication. The case histories 
for EM GeoSci.xyz were usually based upon published papers and links to those formative 
documents are provided. Each is a synopsis of the complete work and thus is valuable for 
new-comers to the field who want a quick overview of how an EM survey was beneficial, or 
show to management how a survey has been successful.  

Figure 4 is an image of the EM GeoSci.xyz page for the case history concerning the inversion 
of DC and IP at Mt. Isa. This was one of the first 3D inversions of IP data carried out and in 
this case history the reader is taken through the various steps of survey design, processing, 
inversion and interpretation (Rutely et al., 2001). Throughout the case history there are links 
to other sections of EM GeoSci.xyz that provide background about the physics, field survey 
and equipment and general inversion procedures. The case history also compares the results 
obtained from present-day 3D inversion codes to those from two decades ago.  

Figure 4. Case histories on EM GeoSci.xyz follow a seven step framework. The image on 
the left is the page for the Mt. Isa case history. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
What was DISC 2017? 

A primary goal for the DISC was to inform people about different EM surveys and how they 
might  successfully  be  applied.  We  also  wanted  to  use  this  opportunity  to  find  what  EM 
techniques were being used, and on which problems, in various locations around the world. 
We  wanted  to  provide  an  opportunity  for  local  groups  to  present  their  challenges  and 
accomplishments, have a conversation, and open up channels for (international) collaboration.  
To accomplish this we turned the DISC into a two-day event. The first day was devoted to the 
DISC course, a primarily lecture-based day; the second day was DISC Lab, our addition of a 
day targeted at conversations where participants presented their work and interests in EM. 

DISC Course 

Figure 5. Eight subject elements that made up the DISC course.  

Our course was divided into segments, as shown in Figure 5. For each segment we presented 
the fundamental physics, introduced apps for running numerical simulations and exploring the 
physics,  provided an overview of the applicable EM survey method, and concluded with a 
case history. It was a lot of material (both for the listeners and presenter) but it provided, for a 
first  time  for  many  people,  a  complete  spectrum  of  EM  techniques.  DC  resistivity,  with  its 
understanding in terms of charge buildup, formed a foundation which was useful throughout 
the course.  In EM fundamentals, the apps helped greatly in understanding response functions 
in  the  frequency  and  time  domain,  and  clarified  the  (often  confusing)  aspect  of  frequency 
domain signals that get partitioned into real and imaginary parts. Inductive sources, which are 
the basis for all airborne systems, were next on the list. (See Figure 4) 

Figure 6. Using an app to explore the fundamentals of frequency domain electromagnetics at 
DISC 2017 at Kyoto University.    

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  was  followed  by  grounded  sources,  whose  understanding  required  a  combination  of 
material gained in DC and inductive sources. The energy requirements to excite large deep 
objects (base of salt, volcanoes, tectonic structures) are too big for controlled sources and 
hence natural sources are used. This gives rise to the MT (magnetotelluric) technique as well 
as ZTEM (Z-axis Tipper ElectroMagnetics). All of the EM methods outlined by that stage of 
the course made use of the quasi-static assumption, so that the energy diffuses into the earth. 
Although technically a wave, for frequencies less than 105 Hz, the energy propagates only a 
fraction of a wavelength into the earth before it is severely attenuated, and so diffusive (quasi-
static)  approximations  are  sufficient.  At  high  frequencies  however,  the  energy  travels  as 
waves,  and  EM  radargrams  look  much  like  seismic  sections.  As  in  seismic  surveys, 
information  about  the  substructure  can  be  obtained  by  looking  at  plots  of  the  data.  This 
distinguishes it from the other EM techniques which require that the data be inverted to obtain 
physical  property  models  that  can  reveal  geologic  information.  The  last  technical  topic 
addressed the fact that electrical resistivity can be frequency dependent for some materials. 
In  practise  this  manifests  itself  as  another  set  of  charges  that  are  induced  in  the  earth; 
effectively  the  earth  material  acts  like  a  capacitor.  The  IP  (Induced  Polarization)  survey  is 
designed  to  extract  that  signal  and  invert  it  to  find  chargeable  material,  such  as  in  mineral 
bodies with sulfides.  

Each section ended with one or more case histories that illustrated the use of the technique. 
By  the  end  of  the  DISC  we  had  collected  many  of  these  --  in  large  part  thanks  to  external 
contributions  --  and  so,  at  each  location,  we  were  able  to  select  case  histories  that  were 
relevant to the local audience. Figure 7 illustrates some of these and shows  the countries, 
problems, and the people who generated the formative material from which our case histories 
were built.   

Figure 7: Sampling of Case Histories presented in DISC 2017. 

The  final  section,  “The  Future”  provided  an  opportunity  to  identify  some  of  the  important  
applications for EM and associated research problems that might occur. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
DISC Lab 

Part of our motivation for DISC Lab was to use the DISC as an opportunity to have a two-way 
conversation. The course provided us with an opportunity to transmit information: introduce 
material,  provide  context,  fundamentals,  terminology.  DISC  Lab  went  the  other  way,  giving 
participants a chance to discuss their work. Gaining insight about the problems people are 
working on, and the effectiveness (or not) of EM, was a primary goal.  

The itinerary for the day was flexible and depended upon the audience. At some locations we 
spent the first part of the day providing additional course material and more advanced items, 
such as EM coupling removal for IP data. We then heard from attendees about their work in 
applying  EM  methods  to  problems  of  local  interest.  Generally  these  were  5-15  minute 
presentations followed by discussions. The talks (with permission from the presenter) were 
captured on YouTube, and links to the talks and associated slides are available from our blog 
(https://medium.com/disc2017). The variety of problems of interest in different countries was 
intriguing and insightful. At some locations hydrocarbons were the main interest, at others it 
was tectonics, minerals, geothermal energy, or environmental issues. However, at all locations 
water was a concern. This could be salt water intrusion, delineating aquifers, or using EM to 
build better hydrogeologic models.  

The remaining time in the day was devoted to: (a) showing how to access the apps and show 
how  they  are  developed  in  Jupyter  notebooks;  (b)  an  overview  of  SimPEG  (Cockett  et  al., 
2015; Heagy et al., 2017), a Python-based open-source library for numerical simulation and 
inversion; (c) tutorials for carrying out forward modelling and inversion. We used the recent 
publications in TLE (Kang et al., 2017) for this material. We ended by encouraging attendees 
to contribute to the information content on EM GeoSci.xyz and showing them how that can be 
done.  

What was accomplished? 

We visited 20 countries and provided 24 presentations. Turn-outs were variable and ranged 
from a few 10’s of people to over 100 (Figure 8a,b).  India made the DISC into a special event, 
added a two-day conference, and arranged for people from across the country to attend. In 
Figure 8c, we show a map of where participants in India travelled from to attend the DISC.  
Further synoptic details about the location, date, attendees, and links to the course material, 
DISC lab and the blog site for each site can be found at: https://disc2017.geosci.xyz.   

9 

 
 
Figure 8. (a) locations of DISC 2017, (b) participation by region, and (c) locations where 
participants in India travelled from to attend.   

EM was of interest in all countries visited but the applications were different and thus so were 
the surveys of interest. For instance: applications and countries ranking it as important include: 
(a)  mineral exploration (Canada, Australia,  Chile), (b) off-shore hydrocarbons (Netherlands, 
Malaysia, Brazil), (c) water issues (every country, although some were focussed upon finding 
the resource and others were concerned about contamination), (d) geothermal energy (most 
countries  but  particularly  Chile  and  Germany)  and  (e)  large-scale  tectonics,  particularly  for 
earthquakes (Chile, India, Mexico City).  These motivated the use of different EM surveys that 
had different depths of penetration, resolving power, and capabilities of being applied. Water 
issues made use of ground DC measurements and airborne EM, geothermal energy required 
MT  to  see  deep  structure,  off-shore  hydrocarbons  required  controlled-source  EM  (CSEM), 
environmental problems used galvanic and inductive source EM as well as ground penetrating 
radar, minerals applications used all of the techniques.  

The  audiences  were  diverse  in  their  EM  background  and  interests  for  application,  and  our 
challenge  was  to  provide  some  information  that  would  make  an  impact  and  promote  the 
understanding and use of EM. We had much positive feedback about the course and content 
(and to pick a few of our favourites): 

“Very  good.  I  liked  the  focus  on  establishing  a  collaboration  platform.  The  course  has  the 
potential  of  raising  the  bar  and  establishing  common  terminology.”  —  Yusen  Ley-Cooper, 
Geophysicist, Adelaide Australia 

“The DISC for this year is NOT like a typical lecture in Japan. People are likely to be silent in 
many cases, but in this class, the audience members were very active in communication and 
in Q&A.” — Koji Kashihara (Senior manager of R&D oil company) 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
“Really awesome. I could understand things I never could before. I loved how you showed 
[concepts] by images and videos [of] how the currents and magnetic fields are.” — Daniela 
Montecinos, Santiago, Chile 

It was gratifying for us that attendees said that they learned something new or that the course 
provided  new  insight  about  EM.  To  quote  Dorris  Lessing:  “That  is  what  learning  is.  You 
suddenly understand something you’ve understood all your life, but in a new way.” A superb 
example of this was demonstrated in explaining the existence and interaction of the various 
EM waves that are of relevance in a marine EM survey. In particular the role of the air wave 
has been a source of confusion for many people (especially in early days of the technique). 
However,  simulations  and  movies  that  showed  fields  and  currents  as  a  function  of  time 
(https://youtu.be/p2fjg5pcEQM)  made  the  fundamental  understanding  about  the  process 
simple and intuitive.  Figure 9 shows the four time snapshots of the electric fields illustrating 
the EM wave propagation in the marine EM survey setup. 

Figure 9. Propagation of the electric fields with the presence of the hydrocarbon at four times 
after the source current is turned off: (a) 0.01s, (b) 0.05s, (c) 0.08s, (d) 0.16s. The horizontal 
electric dipole (HED) source is located at the sea bottom. The black arrows indicate the 
direction of the electric field. 

The ability to generate these movies, as well as all of the examples shown in the course, was 
made possible by the development of SimPEG, empymod (Werthmüller, 2017), and the use 
of  Jupyter  Notebooks.  That  has  inspired  others  to  proceed  along  these  lines  and  it  has 
spawned interactions between our research group at UBC and universities abroad. 

The goal of DISC Lab was to discuss local problems for which EM could play a role and see 
how  people  were  attacking  those  problems.  Presentations  spanned  everything  from 
instrument design, including a drone-based frequency domain system to locate vehicles buried 
in a landslide (Toyko, Japan), a time-domain EM system for groundwater (Brisbane, Australia) 
and a DC resistivity cart for soil characterization in vineyards (Vienna, Austria), to theoretical 
work on understanding the physical models of induced polarization (Mexico City, Mexico), to 
data  processing  and  inversion  for  mineral  exploration  (Australia,  Canada,  Chile).  Some 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
presentations revealed new research avenues, and others raised questions that highlighted 
the need for resources on inverse theory -- inversion codes are powerful tools, but obtaining 
a  meaningful  result  requires  an  understanding  of  optimization  problems,  how  the  algorithm 
operates, and the role of various hyperparameters in that algorithm. In many locations, we 
used  some  time  on  DISC  Lab  day  to  work  through  a  hands-on  tutorial  of  inversion  using 
SimPEG.  

In most cases, presenters allowed the material to be  captured and these can be accessed 
through the blog. We were pleased with the engagement of participants and the breadth of 
discussions we had, especially in light of the fact that this was an entirely new format and it 
also required work on behalf of the participants.  

Post DISC 2017 and the future? 

Our  vision  to  foster  the  growth  of  a  community  of  geoscientists  who  use  EM  remains 
undiminished  and  we  continue  to  build  upon  the  DISC  2017  materials  and  the  broader 
collection of open-source resources in the GeoSci.xyz ecosystem. During the year 2017, we 
had a total of 26,744 unique visitors to EM GeoSci (Jan 1, 2017 - 2018). Usage has continued 
to grow and in the year 2019, over 100,000 unique visitors used the site. We have continued 
to  build  resources  and  courses  from  this  material,  including  a  course  on  Airborne 
in  Denmark 
Electromagnetics  held  as  a  part  of 
(https://courses.geosci.xyz/aem2018),  and  our  resources  have  been  adopted  by  others  to 
serve as a textbook resource for graduate courses (Sun, 2018). Since all of the materials are 
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution license, anyone is free to adapt and remix this 
content.  

the  AEM  2018  conference 

The  SimPEG  software,  which  was  the  foundation  for  the  Jupyter  Notebook  “Apps”,  has 
continued  to  grow,  and  so  too  has  the  community  that  contributes  to  its  development  and 
support.  The  DISC  and  inversion  tutorials  that  we  ran  on  DISC  Lab  day  motivated  new 
developments  within  SimPEG,  such  as  the  ability  to  visualize  charges  in  a  DC  resistivity 
simulation. Also, trying to explain computational steps within an educational context revealed 
confusing variable or method names; this prompted some refactoring to improve clarity. In a 
recent Geoscientists Without Borders project, we built upon our learnings from the DISC to 
create a course on groundwater exploration with geophysics in Myanmar (Fan et al., 2020). 
For  that  we  also  generated  presentation  materials  and  a  series  of  Jupyter  Notebooks  that 
focussed  on  the  basics  of  DC  resistivity  and  inversion,  as  well  as  notebooks  that  local 
geoscientists could use to invert their field (Oldenburg et al., 2020). These resources are all 
available through GeoSci.xyz, and we hope they may serve other humanitarian geophysics 
efforts.  

Expanding  the  scope  of  the  DISC  to  a  two-day  event,  developing  a  new  model  for  a 
collaboratively  created  “textbook”  resource,  and  distributing  software  as  a  part  of  the 
presentation  materials  was  a  challenging  endeavor.  However,  the  practices  and  tools  we 
adopted to achieve this have changed how our GIF group carries out research, and illustrates 
the  benefits  to  an  open-source  approach.  Knowing  that  others  may  run  your  code,  and 
potentially build upon it, encourages reproducible practices, including documenting software 

12 

 
 
 
 
dependencies and testing, as well as “upstreaming” of fixes and new developments; this, goes 
beyond the usual practices of writing software that is sufficient to produce results for a scientific 
publication.  Importantly,  research  results  are  achieved  more  quickly,  and  there  is  less 
duplication  of  efforts,  when  modular  components  can  be  reused.  On  GitHub,  the  SimPEG-
research  organization  has  been  created  to  store  Notebooks  that  are  associated  with 
publications and active projects so that results can be reproduced; some particular examples 
include (Astic, 2019; Kang, 2019; Heagy, 2019).  

It is interesting to reflect how the increases in computational power, the advances made in 
forward  modelling  and  inversion,  and  the  advances  in  open  source  infrastructure  have 
changed  the  fabric  of  research  within  our  GIF  group.  Rather  than  being  protective  of 
intellectual  property  connected  with  inversion  software  we  now  realize  that  the  value  of 
technology resides not in the software itself but in those individuals who are making use of the 
codes.  Moreover,  because  the  development  of  software  is  most  expediently  done  through 
collaboration with others, open source resources like EM GeoSci.xyz can play an important 
role. It is encouraging that the benefits of working in an open-source ecosystem are becoming 
widely  accepted  and  numerous  groups  are  contributing  processing,    inversion,  geologic 
modelling, and 3D visualization tools.  

In closing, the problems society faces, from resource management, to water scarcity and the 
broader impacts of climate change, are multidisciplinary challenges where EM can contribute. 
DISC 2017 was an opportunity to introduce participants to this ecosystem and a means for 
connecting the global EM community. Our hope is that the resources we developed, and the 
connections  DISC  2017  enabled,  help  facilitate  collaborations  on  problems  where  EM 
methods can play an important role. 

Acknowledgements 

Thank  you  to  all  of  the  local  hosts  who  arranged  the  course  logistics  and  promoted 
participation  in  DISC  2017.  Thanks  to  the  SEG  DISC  program,  and  in  particular  Melissa 
Presson. We are also grateful for all of the contributors to EM GeoSci.xyz, including those who 
sent us Case Histories.  

References 

Astic, T., & Oldenburg, D. W. (2019). A framework for petrophysically and geologically 
guided geophysical inversion using a dynamic Gaussian mixture model prior. Geophysical 
Journal International. https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggz389 

Bournas, N., & Thomson, D. (2013). Delineation of a Porphyry Copper-Gold system using 
3D DCIP , CSAMT and MT surveys-Case history , the Santa Cecilia Deposit , Chile 
Delineation of a Porphyry Copper-Gold system using 3D DCIP , CSAMT and MT surveys-
Case history , the Santa Cecilia Deposit , (1), 2–4. 

Cockett, R., Kang, S., Heagy, L. J., Pidlisecky, A., & Oldenburg, D. W. (2015). SimPEG: An 
open source framework for simulation and gradient based parameter estimation in 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
geophysical applications. Computers & Geosciences, 85, 142–154. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2015.09.015 

Colombo, D., McNeice, G., Rovetta, D., Sandoval-Curiel, E., Turkoglu, E., & Sena, A. 
(2016). High-resolution velocity modeling by seismic-airborne TEM joint inversion: A new 
perspective for near-surface characterization. Leading Edge, 35(11), 977–985. 
https://doi.org/10.1190/tle35110977.1 

Constable, S., 2010, Ten years of marine CSEM for hydrocarbon exploration: Geophysics, 
75, 75A67-75A81. 

Farquharson, C. G., D. W. Oldenburg, and P. S. Routh, 2003, Simultaneous 1D inversion of 
loop–loop electromagnetic data for magnetic susceptibility and electrical conductivity: 
GEOPHYSICS, 68, 1857–1869. 

Fan, R., Oldenburg, D. W., Maxwell, M., Cowan, D., Kang, S., Heagy, L. J., & Capriotti, J. 
(2020). Improving Water Security in Mon State, Myanmar via Geophysical Capacity Building. 
SEG Annual Meeting. 

Gazoty, A., Fiandaca, G., Pedersen, J., Auken, E., & Christiansen, A. V. (2012). Mapping of 
landfills using time-domain spectral induced polarization data: The Eskelund case study. 
Near Surface Geophysics, 10(6), 575–586. https://doi.org/10.3997/1873-0604.2012046  

Haber, E., Heldmann, S., & Ascher, U. (2007). Adaptive finite volume method for distributed 
non-smooth parameter identification. Inverse Problems, 23(4), 1659–1676. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/0266-5611/23/4/017 

Heagy, L. J., Cockett, R., Kang, S., Rosenkjaer, G. K., & Oldenburg, D. W. (2017). A 
framework for simulation and inversion in electromagnetics. Computers and Geosciences, 
107(July), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2017.06.018 

Heagy, L. J., & Oldenburg, D. W. (2019). Modeling electromagnetics on cylindrical meshes 
with applications to steel-cased wells. Computers & Geosciences, 125, 115–130. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cageo.2018.11.010 

Høyer, A. S., Jørgensen, F., Sandersen, P. B. E., Viezzoli, A., & Møller, I. (2015). 3D 
geological modelling of a complex buried-valley network delineated from borehole and AEM 
data. Journal of Applied Geophysics, 122, 94–102. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jappgeo.2015.09.004  

Hodges, G., 2005, Voodoo Methods: Dealing With The Dark Side of Geophysics: 18th EEGS 
Symposium on the Application of Geophysics to Engineering and Environmental Problems. 

Kang, S., & Oldenburg, D. W. (2019). Inversions of time-domain spectral induced 
polarization data using stretched exponential. Geophysical Journal International, 219(3), 
1851–1865. https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggz401 

Li, Y., and D. W. Oldenburg, 1996, 3-D inversion of magnetic data: Geophysics, 61, 394–

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
408. 

Merz, K., Maurer, H., Buchli, T., Horstmeyer, H., Green, A. G., & Springman, S. M. (2015). 
Evaluation of ground-based and helicopter ground-penetrating radar data acquired across 
an alpine rock glacier. Permafrost and Periglacial Processes, 26(1), 13–27. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ppp.1836  

Oldenburg, D. W., Heagy, L. J., Kang, S., Cowan, D., Capriotti, J., Fan, R., & Maxwell, M. 
(2020). The Role of Open Source Resources and Practices in Capacity Building. SEG 
Annual Meeting, 3361–3365. 

Oldenburg, D. W., E. Haber, and R. Shekhtman, 2012, Three dimensional inversion of 
multisource time domain electromagnetic data: GEOPHYSICS, 78, E47–E57. 

Oldenburg, D., and Y. Li, 1994, Inversion of induced polarization data: Geophysics, 59, 
1327–1341. 

Pérez, F., & Granger, B. E. (2007). IPython: A system for interactive scientific computing. 
Computing in Science and Engineering, 9(3), 21–29. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCSE.2007.53  

Project Jupyter, Bussonnier, M., Forde, J., Freeman, J., Granger, B., Head, T., … Willing, C. 
(2018). Binder 2.0 - Reproducible, interactive, sharable environments for science at scale, 
(Scipy), 113–120. https://doi.org/10.25080/Majora-4af1f417-011  

Rosenkjaer, G. K., Gasperikova, E., Newman, G. A., Arnason, K., & Lindsey, N. J. (2015). 
Comparison of 3D MT inversions for geothermal exploration: Case studies for Krafla and 
Hengill geothermal systems in Iceland. Geothermics, 57, 258–274. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geothermics.2015.06.001  

Rutley A. , Oldenburg D.W. Shekhtman R. (2001) 2-D and 3-D IP/resistivity inversion for the 
interpretation of Isa-style targets. Exploration Geophysics 32, 156-159. 
https://doi.org/10.1071/EG01156  

Strack, K. M., & Pandey, P. B. (2007). Exploration with controlled-source electromagnetics 
under basalt cover in India. Leading Edge (Tulsa, OK), 26(3), 360–363. 
https://doi.org/10.1190/1.2715056 

Sun J., (2018) Graduate Course: Electromagnetic Methods for Exploration, University of 
Houston. 

Viezzoli, A., Auken, E., & Munday, T. (2009). Spatially constrained inversion for quasi 3D 
modeling of airborne electromagnetic data - an application for environmental assessment in 
the Lower Murray Region of South Australia. Exploration Geophysics, 40(2008), 173–183.  

Ward, S. H., & Hohmann, G. W. (1988). Electromagnetic Theory for Geophysical 
Applications. In Electromagnetic Methods in Applied Geophysics (1st ed., pp. 130–311). 
Society of Exploration Geophysicists. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.9781560802631.ch4 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Weitemeyer, K. A., Constable, S., & Tréhu, A. M. (2011). A marine electromagnetic survey to 
detect gas hydrate at Hydrate Ridge, Oregon. Geophysical Journal International, 187(1), 45–
62. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.2011.05105.x  

Werthmüller, D. (2017). An open-source full 3D electromagnetic modeler for 1D VTI media in 
Python: empymod. GEOPHYSICS, 82(6), WB9–WB19. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2016-
0626.1  

16 

 
 
 
