Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

A method to estimate particle sizes using the open
source software OpenPTV.

R.G. Ramirez de la Torre · Atle Jensen

2
2
0
2

r
a

M
4
2

]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
3
4
2
3
1
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract A method to obtain particle sizes from images that are used for particle
tracking velocimetry is proposed. This is an open source method, developed to use
together with the open source software OpenPTV. First, the analysis of diﬀerent
factors that aﬀect the estimation of the particle size is made. Then, a transfor-
mation is proposed to estimate the sizes from information obtained in OpenPTV.
The method requires an extra calibration with a ﬂat target containing circles of
diﬀerent sizes, but if the calibration is successful, the sizes of particles can be
estimated reliable within certain limits. For example, for solid of non-translucent
particles, sizes can be estimated with an error of maximum 10 %, as long as the
particle diameter correspond to at least three pixels width in the obtained images.
For translucent particles some extra assumptions will be needed in the transfor-
mation.

Keywords particle size · particle tracking · open source

1 Introduction

In diﬀerent sciences, the distribution of sizes of observed objects or particles can
be important, for example, in the study of multi phase ﬂows. The distribution
of the sizes can also be important when estimating source functions of droplets
created in the ocean’s boundary layer. In some cases it is also important to com-
bine measurements of the size of particles together with their kinematics, in that
way information of the ﬂow that surrounds them can also be obtained. In this
case, techniques that follow the particles in a ﬂow, can provide the Lagrangian
description of the surrounding ﬂow. Using holography technique, detailed study of
size and relative position of the particles can be done, from where tracking of the

R.G. Ramirez de la Torre
University if Oslo
E-mail: reynar@math.uio.no

A. Jensen
University of Oslo

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

R.G. Ramirez de la Torre, Atle Jensen

trajectories can also be done [10]. Laser based methods also allow the measure-
ment of velocity of the particle simultaneously to the size measurements [2, 1, 11,
6]. The typical accuracy of the optical techniques range between 5 and 15% [2, 20,
12]. Other alternatives to laser or holography can also be explored. Specially in
the case where the experimental setup or location does not allow the use of these
techniques and only simple imaging is available.

In later years open source software has become very popular in the scientiﬁc
community. Open source software has the advantage that the source code and in-
terfaces are made available for the community to explore, modify and distribute.
This is important because it facilitates the sharing of the ideas, reduces the costs
and time necessary to create a new software with the same characteristics and
functionality. In addition, new features can be added and build upon a common
platform, which facilitates the reuse of previous codes rather than individual in-
house development, which is probably redundant throughout diﬀerent research
groups. In this work, the open source software OpenPTV was used. OpenPTV is
the abbreviation for the Open Source Particle Tracking Velocimetry consortium
[5]. The OpenPTV foundation is a collaborative eﬀort of several research groups
to develop a software for Particle Tracking Velocimetry in 3 Dimensions (3DPTV).
The method consists in basically three steps: the identiﬁcation of illuminated tracer
particles from multiple camera views, a triangulation of the probable 3D location
of the particles, and the link of particle locations in time to form probable particle
trajectories. This technique is well-established and have been used for the study
of 3D Lagrangian particle motion in turbulent ﬂows [14, 16, 13]. To reconstruct
particle trajectories, the accurate triangulation of the locations of tracer parti-
cles, and the unambiguous link of particles to form trajectories are needed. The
goal of establishing such particle tracks is often to calculate Lagrangian velocities
and accelerations. Today there exists diﬀerent software with similar algorithms to
perform PTV. But none of them present an extra feature where the sizes of the
particles can be analyzed simultaneously.

In the present work, a methodology to ﬁnd an estimate of the size of particles in
addition to the tracking of their trajectories is presented. The calibration procedure
and the technique are detailed in the following. The code uses Python as primary
coding language and is available to complement the use of the open source software
OpenPTV. The sizing not only complements the tracking by PTV but depends
also on the quality of the tracking. Some of the error sources are analyzed an
presented. This is a ﬁrst approximation of the procedure which has proved to give
large improvements by reducing the error.

2 Methodology

Particle tracking has shown to be a reliable technique to estimate kinematics of
particles moving in a ﬂow. When combined with stereoscopic camera vision, it can
achieve 3 dimensional tracing of the particles. The uncertainties in the positions of
the particles depend primarily on the optical properties of the media involved, the
imaging arrangement and quality of the images, and the quality of the calibration
[7]. Therefore, to obtain a successful tracking setup, it is necessary to perform
a rigorous and high quality calibration. This calibration, when successful, should
allow to obtain an accurate pixel-to-world transformation that can be applied on

Method to estimate sizes with OpenPTV.

3

Fig. 1 Experimental setup where the PTV measurements are performed, the image shows the
array of cameras positioned to visualize approximately the same ﬁeld of view. The multiple
planes for the calibration with a ﬂat target are also depicted, together with the coordinate
system orientation, with z = 0 in the center of the tank, x parallel to the tank length and y
in the vertical. To the right, and example of the obtained images of the ﬂat target with the
camera array.

the retrieved images. Moreover, by using the results of the PTV algorithm we can
determine the position of the particles compared to the focal planes of the cameras
and determine their sizes more accurately using this information.

To perform PTV, the most common setups include illumination by laser, but
in this case the most appropriate illumination technique is back lighting with LED
lamps. By using back lighting we can obtain deﬁned contours of the observed par-
ticles that can be translated in to real size [17, 9, 3]. There are a few disadvantages
of LED-back-illumination. Nonetheless, with an appropriate optical setup, these
eﬀects can be minimized. For example, LED light might saturate the images eas-
ily and without light-camera synchronization, blurry images will be obtained for
particles that travel fast compared to the exposure times, this can be avoided
if a very quick shutter speed is used. The quality of the optical system can be
determined by a series of equations [17, Chapter 2], where we can establish the
minimum measurable particle size.

From the images, the pixel lengths for each particle in the vertical and hori-
zontal axis of the image can be retrieved. From this information we can calculate
the diameter or major and minor axis lengths on x and y. Then, the pixel-to-world
transformation –obtained in the calibration– will be applied to retrieve a length
estimation along x and y. The accuracy of the length estimation will depend on
the image resoultion and quality, the accuracy of the particle tracking and how
well we can deﬁned the optical properties of the system, which depend mainly
in the camera and lens characteristics and the illumination. In the following, a
description of the proposed methodology will be done as a proof of concept for the
development of such measurements.

4

R.G. Ramirez de la Torre, Atle Jensen

2.1 Experimental setup

Figure 1 shows a schematic description of the setup. This study has been con-
ducted in the Hydrodynamics Laboratory of the University of Oslo. The setup is
situated in a wave tank with dimensions 25 × 0.52× 1 m. For the most part of this
development, there has been no water in the tank, because the aim is to visualize
water droplets traveling through air. To retrieve the images, four AOS Promon
U1000 cameras were positioned in one side of the wave tank. The cameras had a
resolution of 1920 × 1080 pixels and produced 8-bit gray scale images with a frame
rate of 167 FPS. The positions of the cameras allowed them to capture a similar
FOV. The illumination was provided by LED lamps in the opposite side of the
tank and a white diﬀusive plastic sheet was used to distribute the light. According
to equations ... this optical system is reliable to measure particles with diameters
Dr > 0.01 mm in a volume of approximately 294 mm.

To calibrate the PTV system, the method known as multiple plane calibration
was used [4, 8]. This method consisted on taking images of a target in diﬀerent
planes of depth, i.e. moving the target in the z coordinate. The target consisted
on a ﬂat acrylic plate with an array of visible holes, evenly spaced every 10 mm.
The positions of the holes in the target in reference to coordinate system (x, y) are
known, therefore by moving the target to diﬀerent z, a swept or scan through the
volume was made and the correlation between pixel location in each image with
real space location was made by deﬁning the epipolar geometry of the space [15].
In the PTV analysis, it is common to use laser illumination and therefore
images with dark background and light particles are produced. In contrast, images
with light background and dark particles were created with this method, which
allowed to obtain deﬁned contours of the particles. To analize the images in the
OpenPTV software, there are two possible paths. One is to modify the code to ﬁnd
light particles in dark background, which is possible with open source software,
and the second option is to invert the gray scale of the images as to obtain light
particles in dark background, then use this images directly in the code. While the
ﬁrst option could be more eﬃcient, it also takes more time to adapt accurately
to the code, and its implementation will require a careful development. Therefore,
for this work we use the direct inversion of the images as to ﬁt the requirements
of the original code. So, the images that are analyzed by the PTV code appear to
have light particles in a dark background.

2.2 Determination of system parameters to estimate sizes in the analysis volume

From the PTV algorithm, nx and ny, the axis lengths in pixels of the diﬀerent
particles in x and y, for each camera in the system, Ci, i ∈ [1, 2, 3, 4], along with the
particles’ positions can be obtained. With the proposed methodology we attempt
to ﬁnd a transformation:

T (nx, ny; (x, y, z), {Ci}) = D,

(1)

where {Ci} are the parameters determined by the optical system, in particular each
camera in the setup Ci, (x, y, z) is the position of the particle and D is the diameter
of the particle in the expected units (millimeter, meter or other). If the shape of
the particles is assumed to be elliptical, we use the unique length measurement to

Method to estimate sizes with OpenPTV.

5

Fig. 2 Example of images taken with the camera array; to the right the ﬂat target with circles
and ellipses of diﬀerent sizes is shown; to the left, the 3D particle array is shown.

identify particles sizes denominated as equivalent diameter, deﬁned as De = (cid:112)lxly,
where lx and ly are the axis lengths of the particle in x and y approximated as an
ellipse in each image. Then, an average of De is obtained for all the images. This
averaged De will be interpreted as the size of the particle.

To obtain such transformation T (nx, ny : (x, y, z), {Ci}), the parameters for
the cameras {Ci} must be found by considering the eﬀects of the optical system.
Once the transformation is deﬁned, the estimation of the particle sizes can be
made and compared to the real values, in such way the accuracy of the method
can be estimated. A validation test was done to estimate the necessary parameters
for the sizing methodology and understand the limits of such technique. The test
consisted on using a ﬂat target with circles and ellipses of diﬀerent diameters from
0.3 mm to 50 mm (Fig. 2), the target was positioned in diﬀerent depths, or z values,
and OpenPTV was used to detect the positions. Then an estimation of their sizes
was made with the proposed procedure and compared to the known sizes. Finally
the methodology is tested against a two diﬀerent 3-dimensional arrays of particles
with diﬀerent sizes distributed over the volume of observation. In the following, the
procedure to ﬁnd some optical parameters will be described and the comparison
of the results to the 3D particles will be shown.

2.3 Sources of error in the validation test

The pixel-to-world transformation in the 3-dimensional space can be aﬀected di-
rectly by the focal depth of the lenses, i.e. the magniﬁcation of the image depending
on the distant to the lens. By using the calibration ﬂat target with equidistant
holes, the eﬀects of the depth on the scale of the image can be estimated. The
relation pixel size to real size depends on the position of the holes compared to
the cameras, in particular the depth position or z coordinate. The depth z is ap-
proximated by the PTV algorithm and with the calibration, the magniﬁcation for
each camera Ci can be estimated as a function of z:

S1(z, Ci) = ζ1,iz + ζ0,i.

(2)

Linear ﬁts as equation 2 were ﬁtted for Ci in the diﬀerent depths. The results
are plotted in ﬁgure 3. Then, images of the test target, with circles and ellipses,
were obtained to obtain the axis lengths for the diﬀerent sizes. Without loss of

6

R.G. Ramirez de la Torre, Atle Jensen

Fig. 3 Left: S1 described in eq. 2, the relation between magniﬁcation and depth z, calculated
for each camera Ci, i ∈ [1, 2, 3, 4] in the array. The graph shows the magniﬁcation change
with the depth (or z coordinate) of the calibration target. Right: a schematic description of
the magniﬁcation in the image for two particles of the same diameter but with diﬀerent z
coordinate.

Fig. 4 Second order polynomial for the gray value per pixel for particles with diameters below
22 pixels (≈ 4.5mm). The graph shows the ratio between the estimated size and the real size,
there is an over estimation of the size for particles with less gray value per pixel. The use of
this polynomial can helps correct the estimation for particles with low contrast .

generality, if we choose a particluar camera Ci, the particle axis lengths in real
units, lx and ly, can be found as:

lx =

nx
S1(z, Ci)

,

ly =

ny
S1(z, Ci)

,

(3)

where nx, ny are the number of pixels in the axis, x and y respectively, of the
particle. Therefore, using the deﬁnition of De, the equivalent diameter of some
particle Dp can be described as:

Dp =

(cid:114) nx

S1(z)

ny
S1(z, Ci)

=

√

nxny
S1(z, Ci)

.

(4)

In image processing, the particles are most commonly deﬁned by the detection
of blobs or edges in the image together with a threshold in the gray level or
intensity. The particles can also be discriminated by pixel area and pixel length

Method to estimate sizes with OpenPTV.

7

Fig. 5 Results of the proposed size estimation applying the transformation T (nx, ny : z, g).
To the left, the estimated size compared to the real size of the diﬀerent circles and ellipses in
the target at diﬀerent depths (z coordinate); to the right, the percentile error of this estimation
compared to the real size.

in the vertical and horizontal direction. These lengths and area are deﬁned by the
intensity or gray scale threshold, a value between 0 and 255 that has been ﬁxed by
the user during the image processing, which therefore has a direct impact in the
approximated size of the particle. In addition, the further the particles are from
the focal plane, the more blurry they get, this means that the detected diameter
exceeds the expected value for a sharp-looking particle and a decrease of the mean
intensity per pixel I will also occur. A particle with diameter Dr at a distance z
of the focal plane will have a detected diameter Dp and mean intensity per pixel
Ip, the value Ip will be smaller than the value of I for a sharp particle close to
the focal plane, and the value Dp will be larger than the value obtained for a
sharp-looking particle of the same size. The ratio of the length estimation between
a sharp-looking particle and a blurred particle can be expressed as S2 = Dp
and
Dr
when plotting this ratio against I of the detected particles, as shown in ﬁgure 4,
the correlation can be approximated by a second order polynomial:

S2(I) = α2I 2 + α1I + α0,

Then, the equivalent diameter of each particle can be estimated as:

De =

√

nxny
S1(z)S2(I)

= T (nx, ny : z, I),

(5)

(6)

the transformation T has been approximated, where the most relevant parameters
have been the depth of the particle and its mean intensity per pixel. In ﬁgure 5
we show the result of using the proposed transformation which gives percentage
errors: |Dr−De|

× 100 ≤ 10%.

Dr

3 Validation on 3 dimensional particles

After obtaining the transformation using the ﬂat target with circles and ellipses, we
can test the new procedure on 3D particles. In this case, an array of solid particles
was created with ﬁshing lead weights of three diﬀerent sizes. The dimensions of the
particles were manually measured to make an equivalent diameter value for each

8

R.G. Ramirez de la Torre, Atle Jensen

Fig. 6 Comparison between real sizes and sizes estimated by PTV for the array with 30
particles, with 3 sets of 10 particles with diﬀerent sizes (≈ 2.5, ≈ 3.5, ≈ 5.5 mm for De).
To the left, the size of the particle compared to the depth and to the right the percentage error
for the diﬀerent sizes. The error is no larger then 10% in all cases.

Fig. 7 Comparison between real sizes and sizes estimated by PTV for the array with 57
particles, with 6 sets of particles with diﬀerent sizes (≈ 1.5, ≈ 2.1, ≈ 4.2, ≈ 5.9, ≈ 7.8,
and ≈ 9.5 mm for De). To the left, the size of the particle compared to the depth and to
the right the percentage error for the diﬀerent sizes. The maximum error is 33%, but all cases
where the error is larger than 20% correspond to small translucent particles.

of the particles. The three particle sizes are approximately 2.5, 3.5 and 5.5 mm.
Images obtained by the camera array for this particle array can be seen in ﬁgure
2. The comparison between the real sizes and the estimated sizes is presented in
ﬁgure 6, in the ﬁrst plot we see the position of the particles in z compared to
the size. And in the second graph the percentage error of the size estimation is
presented. The maximum error value is again 10%, which shows that this ﬁrst
approximation to the sizing problem is reliable within certain limitations.

3.1 Other sources of error

Another 3-dimensional array of particles was made with plastic beads, some of
them transparent and some others opaque. In total, 57 particles of 6 diﬀerent sizes
were distributed in the volume. The same procedure was applied to this array, and
the results are presented in ﬁgure 7. The graph shows that 85% of the particles
were tracked accurately by PTV and the maximum error in the size estimation
is 35 %. The increase in the error is mainly on the particles with smallest sizes,

Method to estimate sizes with OpenPTV.

9

Fig. 8 Comparison between the two 3-D arrays (center and right) and the circle array (left)
for a particle with diameter close to 2.5 mm. The yellow line delimits an area of 30 by 50 pixels.
The intensity plots corresponds to each case above and they show the gray value per pixel in
the center line of the particle, which is equivalent to the pixel length of the particle in the
horizontal direction.

which are the particles that are transparent. This shows that when the particles
are not completely opaque to the light, the correction with the gray level will aﬀect
the estimation. Figure 8 shows a comparison between the two 3-D arrays and the
circle array for a particle (or circle) with diameter close to 2.5 mm. In all cases,
the particle has a similar length in pixels, but in the second 3-d array, where the
particle is translucent, the intensity is lower, and therefore the gray value per pixel
g is lower. For a low g the transformation T assumes a larger correction shown in
ﬁgure 4, which in this case will lead to an underestimation of the size.

When obtaining the transformation, the assumption that all the visible par-
ticles will be opaque to the light (as the circles) was implicit. In this case, intro-
ducing transparent or translucent particles will aﬀect the accuracy of the method.
Nonetheless, in the same way that opaque circles were used to obtain the trans-
formation, an array of translucent circles or other features could be used while
creating the transformation. Moreover, if the optical characteristics of the parti-
cles to analyze are known, the transformation and its correspondent array can be
proposed in a way that it will account for these parameters. The main source of er-
ror will be the parameters that has not been predicted during the transformation’s
acquisition.

4 Concluding remarks

In this paper, we have presented a proof of concept to obtained particle size es-
timation assisted by a PTV algorithm that is open source. This has been a ﬁrst
approximation to the procedure which has proved to give large improvements by
reducing the error of the estimation below 10%. In the future, more sources of
uncertainties can be identiﬁed and the estimation can be further improved. For
example, the warping eﬀects produced by the lens and the sensor can also be taken
in to account to obtain a matrix of pixel-to-world scale for the whole ﬁeld of view.
With this methodology it is possible to perform meaningful analysis on 3D par-
ticle systems. This methodology has been applied in studies of droplet formation

10

R.G. Ramirez de la Torre, Atle Jensen

Fig. 9 Comparison of droplet size distribution obtained by the proposed method with other
studies of droplet size distribution in similar cases. The square markers represent the ex-
perimental data and the solid lines show the distributions proposed by diﬀerent studies: PΓ
represents the droplet distribution proposed for a circular jet with wind forcing [21], PW eib
represents the droplet distributions proposed for a droplet impact in a still pool [18], and PL−N
represents the distribution proposed for droplet production after the impact of a monochro-
matic wave in a vertical wall [22]. De/De is the equivalent diameter divided by the mean of
the ensemble.

by breaking waves [19]. The results showed that the droplet size distribution es-
timated with this method was similar to those found by other studies of droplet
size distribution as shown in ﬁgure 9.

References

1. Bachalo, W., Houser, M.: Phase/doppler spray analyzer for simultaneous measurements

of drop size and velocity distributions. Optical Engineering 23(5), 235583 (1984)

2. Black, D.L., McQuay, M.Q., Bonin, M.P.: Laser-based techniques for particle-size mea-
surement: a review of sizing methods and their industrial applications. Progress in energy
and combustion science 22(3), 267–306 (1996)

3. Br¨oder, D., Sommerfeld, M.: Planar shadow image velocimetry for the analysis of the
hydrodynamics in bubbly ﬂows. Measurement Science and Technology 18(8), 2513 (2007)
URL https://openptv-python.

4. del Castello, L.: Multi-plane calibration (2007).

readthedocs.io/en/latest/add_doc.html

5. Consortium, O., et al.: Openptv (2014)
6. Damaschke, N., Nobach, H., Tropea, C.: Optical limits of particle concentration for multi-
dimensional particle sizing techniques in ﬂuid mechanics. Experiments in ﬂuids 32(2),
143–152 (2002)

7. Dracos, T.: Particle tracking in three-dimensional space. In: Three-dimensional velocity
and vorticity measuring and image analysis techniques, pp. 209–227. Springer (1996)

8. Goumnerov, H.: Openptv.

installation and user manual. (2007).

URL https://

openptv-python.readthedocs.io/en/latest/add_doc.html

9. Hags¨ater, S., Westergaard, C., Bruus, H., Kutter, J.: Investigations on led illumination for
micro-piv including a novel front-lit conﬁguration. Experiments in ﬂuids 44(2), 211–219
(2008)

10. Katz, J., Sheng, J.: Applications of holography in ﬂuid mechanics and particle dynamics.

Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 42, 531–555 (2010)

11. Koothur, V.: Tracking and sizing of particles in the mie scattering regime using a laser

scanning technique (2021)

Method to estimate sizes with OpenPTV.

11

12. Kozul, M., Koothur, V., Worth, N.A., Dawson, J.R.: A scanning particle tracking velocime-
try technique for high-reynolds number turbulent ﬂows. Experiments in Fluids 60(8), 1–14
(2019)

13. L¨uthi, B., Tsinober, A., Kinzelbach, W.: Lagrangian measurement of vorticity dynamics

in turbulent ﬂow. Journal of Fluid mechanics 528, 87–118 (2005)

14. Maas, H., Gruen, A., Papantoniou, D.: Particle tracking velocimetry in three-dimensional

ﬂows. Experiments in ﬂuids 15(2), 133–146 (1993)

15. Maas, H.G.: Contributions of digital photogrammetry to 3-d ptv. In: Three-dimensional
velocity and vorticity measuring and image analysis techniques, pp. 191–207. Springer
(1996)

16. Malik, N., Dracos, T., Papantoniou, D.: Particle tracking velocimetry in three-dimensional

ﬂows. Experiments in ﬂuids 15(4), 279–294 (1993)

17. Raﬀel, M., Willert, C.E., Kompenhans, J., et al.: Particle image velocimetry: a practical

guide, vol. 2. Springer (1998)

18. Roisman, I.V., Horvat, K., Tropea, C.: Spray impact: rim transverse instability initiating
ﬁngering and splash, and description of a secondary spray. Physics of Fluids 18(10),
102104 (2006)

19. de la Torre, R., Vollestad, P., Jensen, A.: Experimental investigation of droplet generation

by post-breaking plunger waves. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.01396 (2021)

20. Tropea, C.: Optical particle characterization in ﬂows. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics

43, 399–426 (2011)

21. Villermaux, E., Marmottant, P., Duplat, J.: Ligament-mediated spray formation. Physical

review letters 92(7), 074501 (2004)

22. Watanabe, Y., Ingram, D.: Size distributions of sprays produced by violent wave impacts
on vertical sea walls. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences 472(2194), 20160423 (2016)

