Improved reproducibility of diﬀusion kurtosis

imaging using regularized non-linear optimization

informed by artiﬁcial neural networks

Leevi Kerkel¨a1*, Kiran Seunarine1, Rafael Neto Henriques2,
Jonathan D. Clayden1, and Chris A. Clark1

1 UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, UK
2 Champalimaud Research, Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, Lisbon, Portugal

* Corresponding author: leevi.kerkela.17@ucl.ac.uk; Developmental Imaging & Biophysics Section, UCL Great Ormond Street
Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, WC1N 1EH, London, UK

April 13, 2022

2
2
0
2

r
p
A
2
1

]
h
p
-
d
e
m

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

2
v
7
2
3
7
0
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

i

 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract

Diﬀusion kurtosis imaging is an extension of diﬀusion tensor imaging that provides scientiﬁcally and

clinically valuable information about brain tissue microstructure but suﬀers from poor robustness to

noise, especially in voxels containing tightly packed aligned axons. We present a new algorithm for

estimating diﬀusion and kurtosis tensors using regularized non-linear optimization and make it publicly

available in an easy-to-use open-source Python software package. Our approach uses fully-connected

feed-forward neural networks to predict kurtosis values in voxels where the standard non-linear least

squares ﬁt fails. The predicted values are then used in the objective function to avoid implausible

kurtosis values. We show that our algorithm is more robust than standard non-linear least squares and

a previously proposed regularized non-linear optimization method. The algorithm was then applied on

a multi-site scan-rescan dataset acquired using a clinical scan protocol to assess the reproducibility of
diﬀusion kurtosis parameter estimation in human white matter using the proposed algorithm. Our results

show that the reproducibility of diﬀusion kurtosis parameters is similar to diﬀusion tensor parameters.

Keywords

Diﬀusion kurtosis imaging; Machine learning; Non-linear optimization; Reproducibility

Abbreviations

AD, axial diﬀusivity; ADC, apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient; AK, axial kurtosis; AKC, apparent kurtosis

coeﬃcient; BFGS, Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno; CV, coeﬃcient of variation; DKI, diﬀusion kurto-

sis imaging; dMRI, diﬀusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging; DTI, diﬀusion tensor imaging; MD,

mean diﬀusivity; MK, mean kurtosis; NLLS, non-linear least squares; PGSE, pulsed gradient spin echo;

RD, radial diﬀusivity; RK, radial kurtosis

ii

1 Introduction

Diﬀusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (dMRI) measures the displacements of water molecules on

a microscopic level and thus can be sensitive to changes in brain tissue microstructure (Johansen-Berg and

Behrens, 2013). Several studies have demonstrated dMRI’s sensitivity to microstructural changes in the

brain associated with normal development during childhood (Barnea-Goraly et al., 2005), ageing (Grieve

et al., 2007), learning (Blumenfeld-Katzir et al., 2011), and neurodegenerative diseases (Zhang et al.,

2009), to name a few examples. dMRI is limited by noise in signal and artefacts that can signiﬁcantly

reduce the accuracy and precision of microstructural parameter estimates. Moreover, in order to measure

small eﬀects, studies with a large number of participants combining data from multiple scan sites may

be needed.

Over the previous two decades, scanners with strong enough magnetic ﬁelds and gradients to support
2-shell acquisition protocols have become increasingly common in both clinical and research settings

(Van Essen et al., 2013; Shafto et al., 2014). Such protocols measure the diﬀusion-weighted signal at two

diﬀerent non-zero b-values, providing more information on tissue microstructure than what conventional

diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI) parameters contain. Diﬀusion kurtosis imaging (DKI) (Jensen et al.,

2005) is an extension of DTI that quantiﬁes how much the diﬀusion propagator deviates from a multi-

variate normal (i.e., Gaussian) distribution. Despite having been shown to be sensitive to clinically and

scientiﬁcally relevant microstructural properties of brain tissue (Falangola et al., 2008; Hui et al., 2012;

Price et al., 2017; Van Cauter et al., 2012; Zhuo et al., 2012), kurtosis tensor estimation using least

squares suﬀers from poor robustness, especially in voxels containing tightly packed aligned axons, such

as the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum, where radial diﬀusivity is very low. In these voxels,

linear and non-linear least squares often produce implausibly low or negative values of diﬀusional kurtosis

(Tabesh et al., 2011; Kuder et al., 2012; Neto Henriques, 2018).

Recently, Henriques et al. (2021b) showed that the robustness of DKI can be improved by using

regularized least squares. They used polynomial regression to predict mean kurtosis (MK) from the

estimated diﬀusion tensor elements and powder kurtosis (i.e., apparent kurtosis coeﬃcient estimated

from data averaged over the acquired diﬀusion encoding directions), and added a regularization term to

the objective function with the aim of preventing the estimated parameters from taking values for which

MK deviates far from the predicted value. Indeed, their method produces a signiﬁcantly smaller number

of voxels with incorrect negative values than standard non-linear least squares (NLLS). However, if the

regularization term only depends on MK, and not also on axial kurtosis (AK) and radial kurtosis (RK),

we hypothesized that it may not suﬃciently penalize the parameters for taking values for which only RK

is negative. This is because, unlike with the diﬀusion tensor, MK is independent of AK and RK (Hansen

et al., 2016).

The aim of this study was to assess the reproducibility of DKI in a clinical setting using regularized

least squares. We implemented a novel algorithm for estimating diﬀusion and kurtosis tensors and made

it publicly available in an easy-to-use open-source software package. Our algorithm uses artiﬁcial neural

networks to predict MK, AK, and RK directly from data by using a training dataset that consists of

voxels where the standard NLLS ﬁt produced only non-negative values of diﬀusional kurtosis. The
predicted values are then used in the objective function to regularize the ﬁt in order to avoid implausible

kurtosis tensor estimates. After showing the advantages of our approach compared to the one proposed

by Henriques et al. (2021b), we investigate the reproducibility of kurtosis parameter estimates in white

1

matter by applying the developed software on a multi-site scan-rescan dataset acquired with an imaging

protocol regularly used in a clinical setting.

2 Theory

Using the cumulant expansion (Kiselev, 2010) until the second order in terms of the applied b-value,

the diﬀusion-weighted magnetic resonance signal acquired with conventional pulsed gradient spin echo

(PGSE) sequences can be expressed as

(cid:32)

S(n, b) = S0 exp

− b

3
(cid:88)

3
(cid:88)

i=1

j=1

ninjDij

+

1
6

b2 (MD)2

3
(cid:88)

3
(cid:88)

3
(cid:88)

3
(cid:88)

i=1

j=1

k=1

l=1

ninjnknlWijkl

(cid:33)
,

(1)

where n is a unit vector aligned with the diﬀusion encoding direction, b is the b-value, S0 is the signal
magnitude without diﬀusion-weighting, Dij is an element of the diﬀusion tensor D (Basser et al., 1994),
MD = Tr (D) /3 is mean diﬀusivity, and Wijkl is an element of the kurtosis tensor W (Jensen et al.,
2005). D is a symmetric rank-3 tensor with shape 3 × 3 and 6 unique elements, and W is a symmetric

rank-4 tensor with shape 3 × 3 × 3 × 3 and 15 unique elements.

Several scalar metrics quantifying relevant properties of W have been introduced (Jensen and Helpern,

2010). Apparent kurtosis coeﬃcient along n is

AKC(n) ≡

(MD)2

(ADC(n))2 ninjnknlWijkl,

where ADC(n) = ninjDij is the apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient along n. Mean kurtosis is

MK ≡

(cid:90)

1
4π

dΩnAKC(n),

where dΩn denotes a solid angle element. Axial kurtosis is

AK ≡ AKC (e1) ,

(2)

(3)

(4)

where e1 is the eigenvector corresponding to the largest eigenvalue of D (i.e., principal diﬀusion direction).
Radial kurtosis is

where δ is the Dirac delta function.

RK ≡

(cid:90)

1
4π

dΩnAKC(n)δ(n · e1),

(5)

2

3 Methods

3.1 Parameter estimation

The right-hand side of Equation 1 was rewritten as exp (Xβ), where X is the design matrix and β
is a column vector containing the model parameters ln (S0), 6 unique elements of D, and 15 unique
elements of W multiplied by (MD)2 (Tabesh et al., 2011). The model parameters were estimated using
an algorithm that consists of the the steps explained below. All computation was performed using Python
software package that is publicly available at https://github.com/kerkelae/dkmri. Python code was
accelerated by using JAX (Bradbury et al., 2018) and Numba (Lam et al., 2015).

3.1.1 Standard non-linear least squares

The following optimization problem was solved using the BFGS algorithm (Nocedal and Wright, 2006):

arg min
β

1
N

(cid:107)S − exp (Xβ)(cid:107)2
2 ,

(6)

where N is the number of acquisitions and (cid:107) (cid:107)2 denotes L2-norm.
by solving the problem with ordinary least squares. The result of the ﬁt was considered successful if

Initial positions were computed

AKC(n) ≥ 0 for all n in a 45-point 8-design (Hardin and Sloane, 1996; Henriques et al., 2021a).

3.1.2 Prediction of kurtosis maps

Using Scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011), a fully-connected feed-forward neural network with rectiﬁed

linear units as activation functions was trained to predict MK, AK, and RK from data in voxels where

the standard NLLS ﬁt was successful. The network had an input layer size equal to the number of

acquisitions, three hidden layers with 50 neurons each, and an output layer with size 3. Initial weights

were randomly generated with a hard-coded pseudorandom number generator seed. Mean squared error

was used as the loss function. Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) was used as the optimizer. Batch size was
200. The training was stopped when the loss did not improve by more than 10−4 for 10 consecutive
epochs. After training, the network was used to predict MK, AK, and RK in all voxels. Training the

network was repeated for each scan.

3.1.3 Regularized non-linear least squares

ut The ﬁnal parameter estimates were obtained by solving the following optimization problem using the

BFGS algorithm:

(cid:32)

1
N

arg min
β

(cid:107)S − exp (Xβ)(cid:107)2

2 + α

(cid:16) (cid:16) ˆMK − m(β)

(cid:17)2

(cid:16) ˆAK − a(β)

(cid:17)2

+

+

(cid:16) ˆRK − r(β)

(cid:17)2 (cid:17)

(cid:33)
,

(7)

ˆMK, and ˆRK are the predicted kurtosis values, α is a constant controlling the magnitude
where ˆAK,
of the regularization terms, and m, a, and r are functions for numerically computing mean, axial, and

3

radial kurtosis, respectively (Henriques et al., 2021a). Initial positions corresponded to axially symmetric

diﬀusion and kurtosis tensors (Hansen et al., 2016) aligned with the principal diﬀusion direction and

with plausible magnitudes computed from the results of the steps described in sections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2.
Following Henriques et al. (2021b), we used α = 0.1 · MSENLLS/MSEMK, where MSENLLS is the median
squared error of the standard NLLS ﬁt and MSEMK and is the median squared error of the MK prediction.

3.2 Image acquisition

Ten healthy volunteers (5 females, 5 males, ages between 26 and 60 years) were scanned on a Siemens

Magnetom Prisma 3T (Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) with a maximum gradient strength

of 80 mT/m, maximum slew rate of 200 T/m/s, and 64-channel head coil at three scan sites: Cardiﬀ

University Brain Research Imaging Centre (CUBRIC), Cardiﬀ, United Kingdom; Wolfson Brain Imaging

Centre (WBIC), Cambridge, United Kingdom; Great Ormond Street Hospital (GOSH), London, United

Kingdom. Ethical approval was given by the research ethics committee and the volunteers gave written

and informed consent prior to the scans.

Each scan was performed using the same clinical protocol. Echo-planar multiband PGSE was used

with the following parameter values: diﬀusion time (∆) = 28.7 ms; diﬀusion encoding time (δ) = 16.7
ms; b-values = 1,000 and 2,200 s/mm2; 60 diﬀusion encoding directions distributed uniformly over half
a sphere for both b-values; 13 images without diﬀusion weighting; echo time (TE) = 60 ms; repetition
time (TR) = 3,050 ms; FOV = 220 × 220 ms; voxel size = 2 × 2 × 2 mm3; slice gap = 0.2 mm; 66
slices; phase partial Fourier = 6/8. In addition, one image was acquired without diﬀusion-weighting and

the phase encoding direction reversed.

3.3 Image preprocessing

Dipy (Garyfallidis et al., 2014) was used to denoise the raw images using patch2self (Fadnavis et al.,

2020), a self-supervised algorithm that learns to separate signal from noise without model assumptions

using oversampled data. MRtrix3 (Tournier et al., 2019) was used to reduce Gibbs ringing artefacts

with a sub-voxel shift algorithm (Kellner et al., 2016) and to correct for distortions induced by motion,

susceptibility, and eddy currents using FSL’s topup and eddy (Andersson and Sotiropoulos, 2016; Smith

et al., 2004).

3.4 Image segmentation

TractSeg’s pre-trained artiﬁcial neural network (Wasserthal et al., 2018) was used to segment white mat-

ter tracts. The following tracts were included in the analysis: arcuate fascicle (AF); anterior thalamic
radiation (ATR); comissure anterior (CA); corpus callosum (CC) and CC divided into rostrum (CC1),
genu (CC2), rostral body (CC3), anterior midbody (CC4), posterior midbody (CC5), isthmus (CC6), and
splenium (CC7); cingulum (CG); corticospinal tract (CST); fronto-pontine tract (FPT); fornix (FX); in-
ferior cerebellar peduncle (ICP); inferior occipito-frontal facicle (IFO); inferior longitudinal fascicle (ILF);

middle cerebellar peduncle (MCP); middle longitudinal fascicle (MLF); optic radiation (OR); parieto-

occipital pontine (POPT); superior cerebellar peduncle (SCP); superior longitudinal fascicle (SLF) I, II,
and III; superior thalamic radiation (STR); uncinate fascicle (UF). TractSeg’s probabilistic outputs were

converted into binary masks by using a threshold of 0.9.

4

3.5 Statistical analysis

To quantify the reproducibility of mean values of DTI and DKI parameters in diﬀerent tracts, a random-

eﬀects model was constructed:

xij = µ + νi + eij,

(8)

where xij is the value of microstructural metric x for subject i in scan j, µ is the grand mean of x, νi
is the subject-level random eﬀect, and eij is the measurement error. It is assumed that νi and eij are
mutually independent and normally distributed: νi ∼ N (cid:0)0, σ2
(cid:1). Point estimates and
95% conﬁdence intervals were estimated for the model parameter using lme4 (Bates et al., 2014; R Core

(cid:1), eij ∼ N (cid:0)0, σ2

ν

e

Team, 2013). A random-eﬀects model was chosen because a mixed-eﬀects model with a scanner-level

ﬁxed eﬀect showed that the scanner-level ﬁxed eﬀect was not signiﬁcant. Coeﬃcients of variation (CV)

quantifying between-subject variability and measurement error were calculated according to the following

equations:

4 Results

CVν =

CVe =

σν
µ
σe
µ

· 100%

· 100%

(9)

(10)

The artiﬁcial neural network learned the mapping from data to kurtosis metrics very well. The coeﬃcient

of determination was 0.99 for MK, 0.97 for AK, and 0.98 for RK when calculated over all training data.

Figure 1 shows example DKI parameter maps computed using standard NLLS (A-C), predicted by
the artiﬁcial neural network (D-F), computed using regularized NLLS with ˆMK (G-I), and computed
using regularized NLLS with ˆMK, ˆAK, and ˆRK (J-L). Standard NLLS produced poor results in several
voxels in the splenium of the corpus callosum, which can be seen clearly in the RK map. Regularized
NLLS with ˆMK produced clean MK maps but produced some implausible RK values in the splenium
of the corpus callosum, motivating the addition of more regularization terms. Indeed, regularized NLLS
with ˆMK, ˆAK, and ˆRK did not suﬀer from this issue.

Importantly, our algorithm estimates full tensors and thus provides more information about tissue

microstructure than just the predicted parameter maps. Visualizations of the estimated tensors in one

of the problematic voxels in the splenium of the corpus callosum are provided in Figure 2 which shows

AKC values along diﬀerent directions.

In voxels containing tightly packed aligned axons, diﬀusion is

most restricted along the directions perpendicular to the axons and AKC along these directions should

be relatively high. However, due to the complicated geometry of the kurtosis tensor, the estimated tensor

can correspond to a correct value of MK and an implausibly low value of RK. A visualization of the

geometry of 100 kurtosis tensors near the splenium of the corpus callosum estimated using our algorithm

is provided in Figure 3.

The results of the reproducibility analysis are shown in Figure 4. Overall, the reproducibility of DKI
metrics, as measured by the estimated variability due to measurement error (CVe), was comparable to
DTI metrics. The relative diﬀerences between the metrics’ reproducibility depended on the tract. The

ratio betwen between-subject variability and measurement error also varied greatly between the tracts.

In large tracts, such as the corpus callosum and longitudinal fascicles, CV values for all metrics were

5

below 5%. In some smaller tracts, such as the fornix and subparts of the corpus callosum, CV values

exceeded 5% for some diﬀusivity and kurtosis metrics.

All the computational steps including training required to compute whole-brain DTI and DKI param-

eter maps took less than 10 minutes per scan on an Intel Xeon CPU E5-1620 v3 3.50GHz x 8.

5 Discussion

The aim of this study was to investigate the reproducibility of DKI parameters in human white matter

using regularized NLLS. Based on MK’s independence of RK and AK, we hypothesized that imposing

regularization only on MK as proposed by Henriques et al. (2021b) may not be enough for robust es-

timation of the kurtosis tensor. We discovered that, despite providing signifcantly better results than

standard NLLS, regularizing only MK can result in kurtosis tensor estimates that have implausibly low

RK. This is due to the fact that the kurtosis tensor can have a complicated shape that corresponds to the

correct value of MK but an implausibly low value of RK. This issue, highlighted in ﬁgures 1 and 2, mo-

tivated us to also regularize kurtosis tensor magnitude along and perpendicular to the principal diﬀusion
direction. Our algorithm has been made publicly available in an easy-to-use open-source Python package

to promote reproducible science and to encourage other researchers to further improve the method.

We chose to use feed-forward artiﬁcial neural networks to learn the mapping from data to DKI param-

eter maps because they are universal function approximators (Hornik et al., 1989) that do not require

manual feature engineering. Depending on the resolution, whole-brain dMRI scans typically contain

between tens of thousands and over a million voxels, providing suﬃcient training data. Our algorithm

assumes that the training data, i.e., the voxels where the standard NLLS ﬁt did not produce negative

AKC values, contains a wide range of diﬀerent tissue types with varying microstructural properties, mak-

ing the trained neural networks generalizable. This is justiﬁed since we know that the standard NLLS ﬁt

tends to fail in speciﬁc edge cases that make up less than 1% of the whole brain, given high enough data

quality. Although the artiﬁcial neural networks learned the mapping from data to kurtosis metrics very

well on our data, worse predictions are expected if the maps are noisier due to lower data quality. This

can be adjusted by changing the network architecture or hypermarameter values.

The results of our statistical analysis show that the reproducibility of the DKI parameters estimated

using our method is comparable to DTI parameters when applied on data acquired using a modern

clinical scan protocol. However, it must be noted that our data was of high quality and preprocessed

using state-of-the-art preprocessing methods. It is expected that our algorithm is less robust if applied

on low-quality data.

A limitation of this work is that we applied our algorithm only on imaging data for which the ground

truth is unknown. Therefore, possible biases must be investigated in future studies. Nevertheless, the

high prediction accuracy suggests that we are not introducing signiﬁcant biases compared to the standard

NLLS ﬁt. Also, since our method is based on the BFGS algorithm, it can end up in a local minimum

and be sensitive to the initial position. Finally, the value of the parameter α, a constant controlling the

relative weights of data points and predicted values in the objective function, must be manually chosen

and its optimal value may depend on the acquisition protocol.

6

Figures

Figure 1: DKI parameter maps computed using standard NLLS (A-C), predicted by the artiﬁcial neural
networks (D-F), computed using regularized NLLS with ˆMK (G-I), and computed using regularized NLLS
with ˆMK, ˆAK, and ˆRK (J-L). The red circles highlight problematic voxels with implausibly low kurtosis
values.

7

Figure 2: Visualization of a kurtosis tensor in the splenium of the corpus callosum computed using
ˆMK (B), and computed using regularized
standard NLLS (A), computed using regularized NLLS with
NLLS with ˆMK, ˆAK, and ˆRK (C). AK = 0.52 for all three tensors. MK = 1.3 for tensor A and 1.6
for tensors B and C. RK = -1.3 for tensor A, RK = 1.1 for tensor B, and RK = 2.0 for tensor C.
The black line denotes the principal diﬀusion direction. The shown surfaces were generated by evaluating
AKC along diﬀerent directions. Negative values were clipped at -4.

8

Figure 3: Visualization of the geometry of kurtosis tensors estimated using the proposed algorithm in
100 voxels near the splenium of the corpus callosum where the standard NLLS ﬁt often fails. The shown
surfaces were generated by evaluating AKC along diﬀerent directions.

9

Figure 4: Estimated CVν and CVe for DTI and DKI parameters in diﬀerent tracts. The black bars
represent 95% conﬁdence intervals.

10

Data and code availability

The code is publicly available at https://github.com/kerkelae/dkmri.

Author credit

Leevi Kerkel¨a: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project

administration, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing - Original Draft. Kiran Seunarine: Data

Curation, Investigation, Writing - Review & Editing. Rafael Neto Henriques: Methodology, Valida-
tion, Writing - Review & Editing. Jonathan D. Clayden: Methodology, Writing - Review & Editing.

Chris A. Clark: Funding acquisition, Project administration, Resources, Writing - Review & Editing.

Acknowledgements

This study has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro-

gramme under grant agreement No 847826. The authors would like to thank John Evans, Marta Correia,

and Steve Eldridge for assisting with data acquisition.

11

References

Andersson, J. L. and Sotiropoulos, S. N. (2016). An integrated approach to correction for oﬀ-resonance

eﬀects and subject movement in diﬀusion mr imaging. Neuroimage, 125:1063–1078.

Barnea-Goraly, N., Menon, V., Eckert, M., Tamm, L., Bammer, R., Karchemskiy, A., Dant, C. C., and

Reiss, A. L. (2005). White matter development during childhood and adolescence: a cross-sectional

diﬀusion tensor imaging study. Cerebral cortex, 15(12):1848–1854.

Basser, P. J., Mattiello, J., and LeBihan, D. (1994). Mr diﬀusion tensor spectroscopy and imaging.

Biophysical journal, 66(1):259–267.

Bates, D., M¨achler, M., Bolker, B., and Walker, S. (2014). Fitting linear mixed-eﬀects models using lme4.

arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.5823.

Blumenfeld-Katzir, T., Pasternak, O., Dagan, M., and Assaf, Y. (2011). Diﬀusion mri of structural brain

plasticity induced by a learning and memory task. PloS one, 6(6):e20678.

Bradbury, J., Frostig, R., Hawkins, P., Johnson, M. J., Leary, C., Maclaurin, D., Necula, G., Paszke,

A., VanderPlas, J., Wanderman-Milne, S., and Zhang, Q. (2018). JAX: composable transformations of

Python+NumPy programs.

Fadnavis, S., Batson, J., and Garyfallidis, E. (2020). Patch2self: Denoising diﬀusion mri with self-

supervised learningI AM HERE!!!!. In Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M. F., and

Lin, H., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 16293–16303.

Curran Associates, Inc.

Falangola, M. F., Jensen, J. H., Babb, J. S., Hu, C., Castellanos, F. X., Di Martino, A., Ferris, S. H., and

Helpern, J. A. (2008). Age-related non-gaussian diﬀusion patterns in the prefrontal brain. Journal of

Magnetic Resonance Imaging: An Oﬃcial Journal of the International Society for Magnetic Resonance

in Medicine, 28(6):1345–1350.

Garyfallidis, E., Brett, M., Amirbekian, B., Rokem, A., Van Der Walt, S., Descoteaux, M., and Nimmo-

Smith, I. (2014). Dipy, a library for the analysis of diﬀusion mri data. Frontiers in neuroinformatics,

8:8.

Grieve, S. M., Williams, L. M., Paul, R. H., Clark, C. R., and Gordon, E. (2007). Cognitive aging,

executive function, and fractional anisotropy: a diﬀusion tensor mr imaging study. American Journal

of Neuroradiology, 28(2):226–235.

Hansen, B., Shemesh, N., and Jespersen, S. N. (2016). Fast imaging of mean, axial and radial diﬀusion

kurtosis. Neuroimage, 142:381–393.

Hardin, R. H. and Sloane, N. J. (1996). Mclaren’s improved snub cube and other new spherical designs

in three dimensions. Discrete & Computational Geometry, 15(4):429–441.

Henriques, R. N., Correia, M. M., Marrale, M., Huber, E., Kruper, J., Koudoro, S., Yeatman, J. D.,

Garyfallidis, E., and Rokem, A. (2021a). Diﬀusional kurtosis imaging in the diﬀusion imaging in

python project. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, page 390.

12

Henriques, R. N., Jespersen, S. N., Jones, D. K., and Veraart, J. (2021b). Toward more robust and

reproducible diﬀusion kurtosis imaging. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine.

Hornik, K., Stinchcombe, M., and White, H. (1989). Multilayer feedforward networks are universal

approximators. Neural networks, 2(5):359–366.

Hui, E. S., Fieremans, E., Jensen, J. H., Tabesh, A., Feng, W., Bonilha, L., Spampinato, M. V., Adams,

R., and Helpern, J. A. (2012). Stroke assessment with diﬀusional kurtosis imaging. Stroke, 43(11):2968–

2973.

Jensen, J. H. and Helpern, J. A. (2010). Mri quantiﬁcation of non-gaussian water diﬀusion by kurtosis

analysis. NMR in Biomedicine, 23(7):698–710.

Jensen, J. H., Helpern, J. A., Ramani, A., Lu, H., and Kaczynski, K. (2005). Diﬀusional kurtosis imaging:

the quantiﬁcation of non-gaussian water diﬀusion by means of magnetic resonance imaging. Magnetic

Resonance in Medicine: An Oﬃcial Journal of the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in

Medicine, 53(6):1432–1440.

Johansen-Berg, H. and Behrens, T. E. (2013). Diﬀusion MRI: from quantitative measurement to in vivo

neuroanatomy. Academic Press.

Kellner, E., Dhital, B., Kiselev, V. G., and Reisert, M. (2016). Gibbs-ringing artifact removal based on

local subvoxel-shifts. Magnetic resonance in medicine, 76(5):1574–1581.

Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.

arXiv preprint

arXiv:1412.6980.

Kiselev, V. G. (2010). The cumulant expansion: an overarching mathematical framework for understand-

ing diﬀusion nmr. Diﬀusion MRI, pages 152–168.

Kuder, T. A., Stieltjes, B., Bachert, P., Semmler, W., and Laun, F. B. (2012). Advanced ﬁt of the

diﬀusion kurtosis tensor by directional weighting and regularization. Magnetic resonance in medicine,

67(5):1401–1411.

Lam, S. K., Pitrou, A., and Seibert, S. (2015). Numba: A llvm-based python jit compiler. In Proceedings

of the Second Workshop on the LLVM Compiler Infrastructure in HPC, pages 1–6.

Neto Henriques, R. (2018). Advanced Methods for Diﬀusion MRI Data Analysis and their Application to

the Healthy Ageing Brain. PhD thesis, University of Cambridge.

Nocedal, J. and Wright, S. (2006). Numerical optimization. Springer Science & Business Media.

Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., Blondel, M., Pretten-

hofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., et al. (2011). Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. the Journal

of machine Learning research, 12:2825–2830.

Price, D., Tyler, L. K., Henriques, R. N., Campbell, K. L., Williams, N., Treder, M. S., Taylor, J. R.,

and Henson, R. N. (2017). Age-related delay in visual and auditory evoked responses is mediated by

white-and grey-matter diﬀerences. Nature communications, 8(1):1–12.

13

R Core Team (2013). R: A language and environment for statistical computing.

Shafto, M. A., Tyler, L. K., Dixon, M., Taylor, J. R., Rowe, J. B., Cusack, R., Calder, A. J., Marslen-

Wilson, W. D., Duncan, J., Dalgleish, T., et al. (2014). The cambridge centre for ageing and neuro-

science (cam-can) study protocol: a cross-sectional, lifespan, multidisciplinary examination of healthy

cognitive ageing. BMC neurology, 14(1):1–25.

Smith, S. M., Jenkinson, M., Woolrich, M. W., Beckmann, C. F., Behrens, T. E., Johansen-Berg, H.,

Bannister, P. R., De Luca, M., Drobnjak, I., Flitney, D. E., et al. (2004). Advances in functional and

structural mr image analysis and implementation as fsl. Neuroimage, 23:S208–S219.

Tabesh, A., Jensen, J. H., Ardekani, B. A., and Helpern, J. A. (2011). Estimation of tensors and tensor-

derived measures in diﬀusional kurtosis imaging. Magnetic resonance in medicine, 65(3):823–836.

Tournier, J.-D., Smith, R., Raﬀelt, D., Tabbara, R., Dhollander, T., Pietsch, M., Christiaens, D., Jeuris-

sen, B., Yeh, C.-H., and Connelly, A. (2019). Mrtrix3: A fast, ﬂexible and open software framework

for medical image processing and visualisation. Neuroimage, 202:116137.

Van Cauter, S., Veraart, J., Sijbers, J., Peeters, R. R., Himmelreich, U., De Keyzer, F., Van Gool, S. W.,

Van Calenbergh, F., De Vleeschouwer, S., Van Hecke, W., et al. (2012). Gliomas: diﬀusion kurtosis

mr imaging in grading. Radiology, 263(2):492–501.

Van Essen, D. C., Smith, S. M., Barch, D. M., Behrens, T. E., Yacoub, E., Ugurbil, K., Consortium,

W.-M. H., et al. (2013). The wu-minn human connectome project: an overview. Neuroimage, 80:62–79.

Wasserthal, J., Neher, P., and Maier-Hein, K. H. (2018). Tractseg-fast and accurate white matter tract

segmentation. NeuroImage, 183:239–253.

Zhang, Y., Schuﬀ, N., Du, A.-T., Rosen, H. J., Kramer, J. H., Gorno-Tempini, M. L., Miller, B. L.,

and Weiner, M. W. (2009). White matter damage in frontotemporal dementia and alzheimer’s disease

measured by diﬀusion mri. Brain, 132(9):2579–2592.

Zhuo, J., Xu, S., Proctor, J. L., Mullins, R. J., Simon, J. Z., Fiskum, G., and Gullapalli, R. P. (2012).

Diﬀusion kurtosis as an in vivo imaging marker for reactive astrogliosis in traumatic brain injury.

Neuroimage, 59(1):467–477.

14

