A  hackable,  multi-functional,  and  modular  extrusion  3D 

printer for soft materials 

Iek Man Lei1,2, Yaqi Sheng1,2, Chon Lok Lei3,4, Cillian Leow1 and Yan Yan Shery Huang1,2* 

1 Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 

2 The Nanoscience Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 

3 Institute of Translational Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Macau 

4 Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom 

* Corresponding: yysh2@cam.ac.uk 

Running title: 

To democratize 3D printing for soft materials, the authors constructed Printer.HM, which can 

perform versatile operations, including liquid dispensing, non-planar printing, and pick-and-

place. Printer.HM was used to create pH-responsive soft actuators, and shaping plant-based 

hydrogels;  thus,  laying  down  future  open  innovations  in  soft,  biological,  and  sustainable 

material architectures.  

Acknowledgement 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  European  Research  Council  (ERC-StG,  758865).  I.M.L. 

acknowledges  the  financial  support  from  the  W.D.  Armstrong  Trust  and  the  Macao 

Postgraduate  Scholarship  Fund. C.L.L.  acknowledges  the  support  from  the  University  of 

Macau via a UM Macao Fellowship and the Clarendon Scholarship Fund. Y.S. acknowledges 

the financial support from the Chinese Scholarship Council. The authors thank Dr Yang Cao 

for her assistance with the cell dispensing experiment, Abby Thompson for her help with the 

3D scanner, Ian Ganney for his help with the machining work, and Dr Clement Chun Lam 

Chan  and  Prof  Silvia  Vignolini  (Department  of  Chemistry,  University  of  Cambridge)  for 

providing the methacrylate hydroxypropyl cellulose solution. 

Conflict of Interest 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 

Three-dimensional (3D) printing has emerged as a powerful tool for material, food, and life 

science  research  and  development,  where  the  technology’s  democratization  necessitates  the 

advancement  of  open-source  platforms.  Herein,  we  developed  a  hackable,  multi-functional, 

and modular extrusion 3D printer for soft materials, nicknamed Printer.HM. Multi-printhead 

modules are established based on a robotic arm for heterogeneous construct creation, where 

ink  printability  can  be  tuned  by  accessories  such  as  heating  and  UV  modules.  Software 

associated  with  Printer.HM  were  designed  to  accept  geometry  inputs  including  computer-

aided  design  models,  coordinates,  equations,  and  pictures,  to  create  prints  of  distinct 

characteristics.  Printer.HM  could  further  perform  versatile  operations,  such  as  liquid 

dispensing,  non-planar  printing,  and  pick-and-place  of  meso-objects.  By  ‘mix-and-match’ 

software  and  hardware  settings,  Printer.HM  demonstrated  printing  of  pH-responsive  soft 

actuators, plant-based functional hydrogels, and organ macro-anatomical models. Integrating 

affordability  and  open  design,  we  envisage  the  Printer.HM  concept  to  widen  open 

innovations for soft, biological, and sustainable material architectures.  

1. Introduction 

The advent of 3D printing offers potential  freedoms to  rapidly  create arbitrarily architected 

matter from a wide variety and combination of soft and functional materials, revolutionising 
diverse research fields, from food to tissue engineering, and soft electronics and robotics1–6. 

Among  different  3D  printing  modalities  for  soft  materials,  extrusion-based  printing  is 

arguably  the  most  widely  used  modality  owing  to  its  broad  material  compatibility,  low 
material  usage,  low  wastes,  and  its  ability  to  spatially  control  the  construct  properties7–11, 
such  as  composition12,  photonic  properties13,  orientation  of  encapsulated  fibres14,15  and 
ferromagnetic  properties16.  However,  ongoing  innovations  in  extrusion  3D  printing  need  to 

overcome the cost barrier and the limited adaptability associated existing commercial systems. 
Although  several  open-source,  custom-made  extrusion  3D  printers  have  been  reported17–21, 

the  printable  materials  and  architectures  were  restricted  by  an  incomplete  set  of  auxiliary 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tools  and  print  path  options  (as  summarized  in  Supplementary  Table  I  and  Supplementary 

Figure 1). To democratize multi-functional extrusion printing, we report the development of a 

multi-printhead,  and  highly  customisable  extrusion-based  3D  printer  for  soft  materials.  We 

name the printer ‘Printer.HM’ herein, where HM stands for Hackable and Multi-functional. 

Printer.HM can readily accept different geometry inputs, such as coordinates, equations, and 

pictures,  in  addition  to  the  conventional  computer-aided  design  (CAD)-G-code  input.  The 

total  costs  of  establishing  a  version  of  Printer.HM  are  between  £900  and  £1900  (taking 

between  2  to  4  hrs  of  installation  time),  depending  on  the  number  of  utilities  equipped. 

Printer.HM  offers  excellent  print  compatibility  with  a  wide  variety  of  liquidous  and  soft 

materials  (from  mPa.s  to  kPa.s);  and  myriad  operations  can  be  performed,  including  liquid 

dispensing,  multi-material  printing,  printing  with  variable  speed,  non-planar  printing  and 

pick-and-place application. By virtue of the modular design of ‘Printer.HM’ and the use of a 

robotic arm as the motion control, users can easily assemble and reconfigure the setup, and 

expand its functionalities, based on individual’s experimental needs. Overall, we foresee the 

hackable,  expandable,  and  affordable  nature  of  Printer.HM  can  promote  the  widespread 

adaptability of extrusion 3D printing technology, facilitating open innovations in the research 

communities which utilise soft, biological, and sustainable materials. 

2. Results and discussion 

A modular extrusion printer based on a robotic arm  

Figure  1  highlights  the  key  features  of  ‘Printer.HM’,  an  extrusion-based  3D  printer  as  an 

affordable  and  hackable  alternative  to  commercial  bioprinters.  The  system  is  built  on  a 

hackable robotic arm (see Supplementary Figure 2, for a real-life setup), which does not rely 

on repurposing an existing fused deposition modelling printer, as their proprietary firmware 

may still limit its customisability and the number of utilities (e.g. printheads and UV module) 
that  can  be  fitted  into  the  system20,22.  Housed  in  an  enclosure  and  built  on  an  aluminium 

breadboard for ease of reconfiguring different modules, the core part of the printer consists of 

dispensing  modules  (i.e.  four  custom-built  piston-driven  printheads);  and  a  stage,  of  which 

motion  control  is  afforded  by  the  robotic  arm.  The  use  of  a  moveable  built  plate  that  is 

controlled  by  a  robotic  arm  here,  instead  of  a  set  of  3-axis  Gantry  linear  stages,  offers 

advantages of compactness and ease of assembly.  

3 

 
 
 
As  the  printing  competency  of  soft  materials  crucially  depends  on  the  rheology  and 

crosslinking  of  the  inks,  ‘Printer.HM’  is  equipped  with  add-on  auxiliary  tools,  including  a 

syringe  heater  a  stage  heater,  and  a  UV  module  for  assisting  printing  of  hydrogels 

(Supplementary  Figure  2).  The  heaters  are  capable  of  controlling  the  temperatures  of  the 
stage and the syringe from room temperatures to ~ 60  oC, which is sufficient for most types 

of hydrogels and elastomeric materials. Various stages were custom-designed to fit different 

sizes of receiving substrates or reservoirs, including standard glass slides, petri dishes (90, 55 

and  35  mm)  and  rectangular  containers  (40  and  30  mm)  (Supplementary  Figure  2b).    The 

printheads  of  ‘Printer.HM’  were  built  from  simple  mechanical  components,  such  as  lead 

screw,  micro-stepper  motors  with  dispensing  resolution  of  0.8  µm  per  step  (see 

Supplementary Note IV) and linear rails for increased stability and compactness. The syringe 

holders of the printheads were 3D printed, enabling customisation for fitting different sizes of 

dispensing  utilities  specific  to  the  users’  experiments.  As  proof-of-concept,  we  customised 

the  printheads  to  accommodate  3  ml  or  1  ml  syringes  that  are  compatible  with  most 

laboratory-based applications. 

Being able to freely tailor the print path is important as it directly controls the properties of 
the  printed  constructs,  such  as  their  mechanical  properties23,  stimuli-responsive  morphing 
behaviour24,25  and the  cell  orientation  in  the  constructs26.  Commercial  and  existing custom-

made  extrusion-based  printers  generally  employ  CAD  models/G-code  as  the  only  option  to 
describe printing designs10,27,28. The lack of geometry input options offered in these systems 

could  restrict  the  design  freedom  and  the  customisability  of  the  print  path  especially  for 
actuator structures29. Thus, printer.HM was designed to accept four different geometry inputs 

for  creating  prints  of  distinct  characteristics.  They  are  coordinates,  equations,  G-codes  and 

pictures. 

Overall, the modular design of ‘Printer.HM’ allows users to reconfigure the setup based on their 

experimental  requirements  and  resource  limitation,  as  well  as  encouraging  the  research 

community to expand the functionalities of the system via designing new modules. As a proof-of-

concept,  four  printheads  were  built  here.  The  total  cost  of  this  fully  equipped  and  four-

printhead system is around ~ £1900, while a single printhead system costs ~ £900. This offers 
significant  cost  saving  compared  to  commercial  bioprinters10.  The  installation  time  of 

‘Printer.HM’ is around 2 to 4 hrs, excluding the time required for 3D printing parts. A step-

4 

 
 
 
by-step instruction of the printer assembly is provided in Supplementary Note III, to promote 

the reproducibility of the system. 

Printing competency  

Compared to the existing open-source printers, the broader set of auxiliary tools associated with 

‘Printer.HM’  greatly  enhances  its  ability  to  construct  different  materials  and  geometry 

combinations  (see  Supplementary  Figure  2  and  Supplementary  Table  1).  To  exemplify, 

Printer.HM  was  used  to  perform  extrusion  printing  of  soft  materials  that  require  different 

gelation  mechanisms,  including thermally-induced  gelation and  photo-induced  crosslinking, 

as  shown  in  Figure  2a.  Thermal-responsive  hydrogels  self-assemble  and  undergo  phase 

transitions  at  their  critical  temperatures  that  are  defined  by  lower  critical  solution  temperature 
(LCST)  or  upper  critical  solution  temperature  (UCST)30,31.  UCST  hydrogels,  including  gelatin 
and agarose, undergo gel formation upon cooling at a temperature below their UCST32,33. On the 

contrary, gelling of LCST (e.g. Pluronic F127) hydrogels occurs when increasing the temperature 
above  their  LCST33.  With  Printer.HM,  the  syringe  heater  assists  the  printing  of  UCST 

hydrogels  (i.e.  gelatin)  via  heating  the  inks  during  extrusion,  while  the  stage  heater  helps 

preserving  the  printed  shape  of  LCST  hydrogels  via  enhancing  its  rheology  at  elevated 

temperature  at  the  built  plate.  The  UV  module  allows  in-situ  crosslinking  of  photo-
polymerizable  hydrogels  (i.e.  methacrylate  hydroxypropyl  cellulose34)  during  printing.  In 

addition,  as  shown  by  Figure  2b,  the  printer  is  capable  of  printing  a  wide  variety  of 

biomaterials,  from  Poly(ethylene  glycol)  diacrylate  (PEGDA,  a  low  viscosity  ink  with 
viscosity  20  mPa.s35),  collagen,  silicone  elastomer  to  a  highly  viscous  solution  of  sodium 

carboxyl methyl cellulose (1500 Pa.s).  

We  further  demonstrate  the  print  resolution  of  ‘Printer.HM’  by  printing  a  line  pattern  with 

Pluronic  F127.  The  test  was  performed  with  Pluronic  F127  here  as  it  is  commonly  used  in 

literature.  Using  a  non-optimised  setting  of  the  operation  parameters,  the  median  Pluronic 

F127  feature  achieved  with  ‘Printer.HM’  was  around  ~150  µm  (Figure  2c),  which  is 
comparable with the resolution typically attained in extrusion-based bioprinting27,36. However, 

it should be noted that the resolution of the printed features is predominantly determined by 

the nozzle size and the ink properties. 

5 

 
 
 
 
Printing with versatile geometry inputs 

Figure 3 illustrates the wide variety of constructs fabricated using different geometry inputs, 

each  with  their  own  strengths  depending  on  the  architecture  requirement.  Being  the  most 

ordinary  form  of  the  geometry  inputs,  coordinates  is  particularly  useful  for  creating  simple 

linear or regular patterns, such as one-dimensional channels (Figure 3a, Supplementary Video 

1).  Meanwhile,  equation  input  enables  the  creation  of  seamless  one-stroke  curvy  patterns, 

however it is not suitable for complex patterns that are not describable by equations (Figure 

3b,  Supplementary  Video  2).  Figure  3b  demonstrates  that  simple  tubular  constructs  can  be 

readily  produced  via  an  equation  of  circle,  without  the  need  to  prepare  CAD  files.  On  the 

other hand, three-dimensional intricate objects can be well-described by 3D CAD models, the 

standard  geometry  format  used  in  3D  printing  (Figure  3c,  Supplementary  Video  3).  Lastly, 

picture input enables the creation of customised motifs via photos of hand-drawn patterns or 

pictures  created  by  any  drawing  software.  By  leveraging  the  picture  input  option,  user-

designed  patterns,  for  example  circuit-  and  vascular-like  patterns,  can  be  readily  fabricated 

(Figure 3d.i, 3d.ii).  

To  further  illustrate  the  benefits  of  having  print  path  customisability,  in  particular  for  soft 

robotics applications, we demonstrated the creation of a soft morphing system made of a pH-

responsive hydrogel by leveraging an anisotropic print path. As showed in Figure 3d.iii and 

Supplementary Video 4, the 2D construct created with a heterogeneous print path exhibited 

an  anisotropic  swelling  response  and  morphed  into  a  flower  shape.  It  is  worthwhile 

mentioning that the operation flexibility does not limit to the four geometry inputs provided 

here. As the control programme is entirely hackable, users can freely amend the programme 

for unprecedented designs. 

Multi-functionalities in one platform  

By  virtue  of  the  customisable  control  programme,  operations  with  ‘Printer.HM’  are  user-

amendable  and  multi-functional.  We  demonstrate  that  operations,  such  as  automated 

dispensing,  printing  with  variable  speed  and  non-planar  printing,  can  be  carried  out  with 

‘Printer.HM’.  To  exemplify,  liquid  handling  always  plays  an  indispensable  role  in  life 

science experiments.  Thus, we transformed ‘Printer.HM’ into  a dispenser by modifying the 

control  programme.  Figure  4a  and  Supplementary  Video  5  show  that  droplets  of  cell 

6 

 
 
 
 
suspension  were  automatically  dispensed  on  a  petri  dish.  The  dispensed  volume  of  the 

droplets  is  controllable  by  the  extrusion  flowrate  and  the  dispensing  duration.  By  simply 

setting  different  duration  of  the  dispensing  time,  droplets  with  various  sizes  were obtained. 

This  capability  might  be  useful  for  automating  the  hanging  drop  method  to  produce  cell 

spheroids and dispensing active ingredients within a printed object.  

Features with continuously narrowing width  can be easily generated with  variable speed of 

the  stage,  as  demonstrated  in  Figure  4b,  which  can  assist  in  creating  hierarchical  vascular 

network. Further, we demonstrate the capability of performing non-planar printing using the 

platform.  As  opposed  to  conventional  commercial  3D  printers  that  rely  on  plane-by-plane 

slicing, non-planar printing requires the ink to be printed on a freeform surface by moving the 

motion part of the printer in all 3 axes at the same time. Figure 4c and Supplementary Video 

6 show a line  pattern was printed on a 3D target  nose  model. The 3D  surface  of  the  target 

object was assessed using a 3D scanner and the line pattern was projected according to the 

non-planar  geometry  using  a  custom-written  code  (further  described  in  Materials  and 

Methods).  With  the  ability  to  deposit  inks  directly  onto  variable  object  surfaces,  novel 

applications of 3D extrusion printing technology could become possible, such as depositing 
freeform circuits37 and functional materials. Lastly, we demonstrate nozzle-based ‘pick-and-

place’  of  meso-objects  in  Figure  5  and  Supplementary  Video  7.  Such  an  operation  enables 

applications for locating cell spheroids between different environments.  

The multiple printheads equipped in ‘Printer.HM’ facilitate the fabrication of multi-material 

constructs. As a demonstration, Figure 6a shows a four-layer construct composed of Pluronic 

F127 inks coloured with different dyes printed in air, and a model of the respiratory system 

with lungs and trachea made of alginate inks printed inside a support bath (Figure 6b). This 

capability  opens  up  future  potential  in  generating  sophisticated  tissue  anatomy,  which  are 

usually multi-component and spatially heterogeneous.  

3. Conclusion 

Extrusion  3D  printing  is  a  promising  approach  for  fabricating  soft  tissue  constructs  and 
biomimetic  soft  actuators10,38.  However,  commercial  printers  could  typically  be  cost-

prohibitive,  and  do  not  allow  ample  customisation.  These  limitations  greatly  hinder  the 

continuous innovation of the technology and its widespread adoption particularly in resource-

7 

 
 
 
 
limited community10. To address these limitations, here, we present an affordable and highly 

customisable  open-source  extrusion  3D  printer,  Printer.HM,  that  is  equipped  with  multiple 

printheads,  heaters  and  UV  module  for  soft  material  printing.  The  printer  was  built  from 

simple  mechanical  components  and  3D  printed  parts  that  can  be  readily-sourced  and 

fabricated. A robotic arm was employed as the motion control as it offers the advantages of 

compactness  and  ease-of-assembly.  Printer.HM  offers  affordability  (£1900  for  a  four-

printhead system), and compatibility with smaller size of syringes that is desirable in small-

scale biological applications. Remarkably, the unconventional geometry input options offered 

in  ‘Printer.HM’  enable  the  fabrication  of  prints  with  distinct  design.  Using  the  picture 

geometry input, users without CAD experience can facilely customise the print path, which is 

particularly  beneficial  for  controlling  the  morphing  behaviours  of  stimuli-responsive 

hydrogels.  Despite  the  low-cost  and  the  custom-made  nature  of  the  system,  ‘Printer.HM’ 

offers  good  printing  competency  with  a  wide  variety  of  soft  materials,  from  hydrogels  to 

silicone  elastomers  over  a  wide  range  of  viscosity  (20  mPa.s  –  1.5  kPa.s).  In  addition,  the 

system  is  capable  of  performing  a  range  of  unconventional  tasks,  such  as  printing  with 

variable speed and non-planar printing.  

Notwithstanding, several limitations are noted in ‘Printer.HM’. First, the design of a moving 

stage system used in ‘Printer.HM’ might potentially compromise the fidelity of low viscosity 

objects that are printed in-air. To reduce the potential impact, a very slow speed of the stage 

can be used when printing delicate structures of low viscosity materials. Second, ‘Printer.HM’ 

does  not  encompass  cooling  systems  that  assist  printing  of  protein-based  inks  and  an  ink 

retraction mechanism that prevent inks from unintentional oozing. Nevertheless, the modular 

design of the system enables easy reconfiguration and the expandability of the system. Users 

can  incorporate  new  functionalities,  such  as  microfluidic  printheads,  coolers  etc.,  to 

‘Printer.HM’  in  future  development.  In  summary,  our  work  established  an  affordable  3D 

extrusion  printer  with  improved  customisability  and  functionalities,  benefitting  the  do-it-

yourself  research  community  and  potentially  facilitating  the  development  of  open  and 

innovative  fabrication  strategies  in  diverse  fields,  such  as  tissue  engineering,  soft  robotics, 

food, and eco-friendly material processing. 

8 

 
 
 
4. Materials and methods 

Mechanical design 

‘Printer.HM’ is an open-source extrusion 3D printer that consists of a commercially available 

open-source robotic arm (uArm Swift Pro Desktop Robotic Arm) and a dispensing module as 

the  core  part,  and  heating  systems,  a  UV  module  and  an  inspection  camera  as  optional 

utilities.  The  robotic  arm  controlled  the  x,  y  and  z  axis  motion  of  the  3D  printed  stage. 

Various  stages  were  custom-designed  to  fit  different  sizes  of  receiving  substrates  or 

reservoirs, including standard glass slides, petri dishes (90, 55 and 35 mm) and rectangular 

containers (40 and 30 mm) (Supplementary Figure 2b). The dispensing module is composed 

of  do-it-yourself  (DIY)  piston-driven  printheads  that  were  built  from  simple  mechanical 

components (i.e. stepper motor, linear rail and ball bearing) and custom-designed 3D printed 

parts. All CAD files of the 3D printed parts of ‘Printer.HM’ are accessible and will be made 

available on Github, thus users can freely amend the parts to better tailor to their applications 

if  needed.  The  3D  printed  parts  were  printed  with  polylactic  acid  (PLA)  or  acrylonitrile 

butadiene  styrene  (ABS)  using  an  Ultimaker  S3  3D  printer.  As  a  proof-of-concept,  four 

printheads were built here and they were designed to accommodate 1 ml or 3 ml syringes, but 

users  can  adjust  the  number  of  printheads  or  amend  the  design  of  the  syringe  holder  to  fit 

other sizes of dispensing tools in accordance with their experimental need.  

The  stage  and  syringe  heating  systems  in  ‘Printer.HM’  are  composed  of  a  custom-made 

aluminium holder that was wrapped with nichrome wires (UMNICWIRE2, Ultimachine) as 

the  heating  element  and  a  K-type  thermocouple  (Z2-K-1M,  Labfacility)  as  the  temperature 

sensor. A UV LED light source (5 W, 365 nm, NSUV365, Nightsearcher) was employed here 

and  was  mounted  onto  the  aluminium  breadboard  of  ‘Printer.HM’.  Meanwhile,  users  can 

select  different  light  sources  based  on  the  choice  of  the  photo-initiators.  An  inspection 

camera  unit  was  mounted  onto  the  aluminium  breadboard  for  in-situ  monitoring  and 

recording  the  printing  process.  The  dispensing  module  and  the  heating  systems  were 

connected  to  Arduino  boards,  while  the  robotic  arm  has  a  built-in  Arduino  for  controlling. 

Assembly instruction of the printer and the electrical circuit of ‘Printer.HM’ is described in 

Supplementary Note III.  

9 

 
 
 
Programme description 

The  printing  operation  was  implemented  by  a  custom-written  Python  programme  that 

synchronously communicates with the Arduino boards of the robotic arm and the dispensing 

module,  whereas  the  heating  modules  were  independently  controlled  by  graphical  user 

interfaces  (GUI)  that  communicate  with  the  Arduino  boards  of  the  heaters  which  users can 

freely  customise  the  programme  for  their  needs.  All  the  operation  programme  used  in  this 

study will be made available on Github. 

Printing operation 

Prior to  printing, the ink was centrifuged at 1000 g for 3  mins to  remove bubbles. The ink 

was drawn into a 1 ml or 3 ml syringe, and the syringe was loaded to the syringe holder of the 

setup. A collecting reservoir, such as petri dish or glass slides, was loaded to the 3D printed 

custom-made  stage.  Four  Python  control  programmes  were  written  for  importing  different 

types  of  geometry  inputs  –  coordinates,  equation,  CAD  model  and  picture  inputs.  Printing 

parameters, such as printing speed, offset position, extrusion flowrate and initial z-position, 

are user-adjustable and can be defined in the control programme. By default, the constructs 

were printed at the centre of the collecting reservoir, unless an offset position was defined.  

Printing with coordinate input 

A  list  of  coordinates  (x  =  [x1,    x2, …  ,  xn],  y  =  [y1,    y2,  …  ,  yn])  was directly loaded  to the 
programme,  where  xn  and  yn  denote  the  x  and  y  coordinates  of  the  nth  point  (see 

Supplementary Figure 8).  

Printing with equation input 

A set of cartesian or parametric equations together with the defined range of the independent 

variable was inputted in the control programme (see Supplementary Figure 9). The curve was 

discretised by at least 100 evenly spaced points, depending on the length of the curve. The 

constructs shown in Figure 3b were fabricated using equations of sine wave, butterfly curve 

and circle. 3D features were produced by printing stacked layers of the 2D curve according to 

the defined object and layer heights. 

10 

 
 
  
 
 
Printing with CAD model input 

3D  CAD  models  were  either  designed  using  Autodesk  Inventor  or  downloaded  from 

GradCAD  (https://grabcad.com/library/software/stl)  or  Thingiverse  (www.thingiverse.com). 

Prior  to  the  printing  process,  the  CAD  model  was  converted  to  a  G-code  file  using  Slic3r 

(https://slic3r.org/)  with  the  user-defined  slicing  parameters  (i.e.  fill  pattern,  fill  density, 

extrusion width and layer height). The G-code file was then imported to the Python control 

programme.  

Printing with picture input 

Pictures  of  the  printing  design  or  photos  of  the  hand-drawn  sketches  were  imported  to 

Inkscape.  They  were  converted  to  G-code  using  the  ‘Gcodetools’  extension  on  Inkscape 

(https://inkscape.org/),  which  was  an  extension  designed  for  CNC  machines.  Step-by-step 

procedure of the conversion can be found in Supplementary Note VI. The generated G-code 

was then imported to the control programme  for picture input, which was written to accept 

the G-code generated by this extension.  

Heating operation 

Syringe  heating  and  stage  heating  were  applied  when  required.  They  were  controlled  by  a 

custom-written  graphical  user  interface  (GUI),  where  users  can  directly  specify  the  desired 

set-point  temperature.  The  acceptable  deviation  from  the  desired  set-point  temperature  was 
defaulted  to  ±  0.5  oC  here.  The  control  programme  for  the  heating  operation  will  be  made 

available on Github. 

Non-planar printing 

A 2D line pattern for printing was designed on Inkscape and was converted to a G-code file. 

The 3D shape of the target object (a nose model made of Ecoflex) was captured using a 3D 
scanner (EinScan H, SHINING 3D®) and was saved as a STL file. To analyse the surface of 

the  target  object,  the  STL  file  of  the  nose  model  was  converted  into  a  G-code  file  using 

Slic3R with the following slicing settings (fill pattern = ‘Hilbert curve’, extrusion width = 0.2 

mm,  fill  density  =  100%  and  layer  height  =  0.2  mm).  A  dense  infill  setting  and  a  Hilbert 

curve infill pattern were used here for precisely describing the target object. The G-codes of 

the target object (the nose model) and the printing pattern (a line pattern) were then imported 

to  a  custom-written  path  planning  Python  programme.  In  the  programme,  the  z-position  of 

11 

 
 
 
 
the printing pattern was projected in accordance with the z-position of the target object at the 

similar x, y positions. By default, the programme assumes that the pattern is printed around 

the centre of the target object, but an offset position can be used if needed. The programme 

outputs a text file of the projected coordinate array, which was then imported to the control 

programme used for Picture input to implement the printing. 

Dispensing of cell suspension 
3T3 mouse embryo fibroblast cell line was cultured in a 25 cm2 flask and was passaged using 

standard  protocol.  Cell  culture  media  used  here  were  10  v/v%  fetal  bovine  serum  (F0804, 

Sigma)  and  1  v/v%  penicillin-streptomycin  (P43333,  Sigma)  in  DMEM  (31885023,  Life 
technologies). A cell suspension with 2 x 106 cells/ml was used in the dispensing experiments, 

with  the  cells  stained  with  Calcein  AM  (C3099,  Fisher  Scientific)  at  2  μM  working 

concentration  for  live  cell  staining.  To  prevent  cell  sedimentation,  immediately  after 

resuspension,  the  cell  ink  was  drawn  into  a  1  ml  luer-lok  syringe  and  was  loaded  into  the 

syringe holder of the printer for dispensing operation. The control programme for dispensing 

operation will be available on Github.  

Ink preparation 

Supplementary  Table  4  summarises  the  inks  and  the  support  baths  used  for  fabricating  the 

constructs demonstrated in this work. The inks used here were SE1700 (Dow), 30 w/v% and 

40  w/v%  Pluronic  F127  (P2443,  Sigma),  a  pre-crosslinked  alginate  ink,  a  pre-crosslinked 

hydroxyapatite-alginate ink, 10 w/v% carboxymethyl cellulose sodium salt (21902, Sigma), 

10% gelatin (G1890, Sigma), 25% polyacrylic acid (450 kDa, 181285, Merck Life), collagen 

(50201, Ibidi), a PEGDA solution, 68 wt% methacrylate hydroxypropyl cellulose and 3 w/v% 

sodium  hyaluronate  (251770250,  Fisher  Scientific).  Some  of  the  inks  were  stained  with 

sodium fluorescein (46960, Sigma) or Rhodamine B (A13572.18, Alfa Aesar). Unless further 

specified,  the  inks  were  prepared  by  dissolving  the  desired  concentration  of  the  chemical 

powder  in  deionised  water.  The  methacrylate  hydroxypropyl  cellulose  ink  was  prepared 
following the method described in our previous study39. The SE 1700 ink was produced by 

mixing the base precursor and the curing agent at a weight ratio of 10:1. The alginate ink was 

prepared by pre-crosslinking a 10 w/v% alginate (W201502, Sigma) solution with a 200 mM 

CaCl2  (C5670,  Sigma)  solution  at  a  10:3  volumetric  ratio.  The  hydroxyapatite-alginate  ink 

was made of 15 w/v% hydroxyapatite (21223, Sigma) dispersed in a 5 w/v% alginate solution, 

12 

 
 
 
which was then pre-crosslinked with a 200 mM CaCl2 solution at a 10:1 volumetric ratio. The 

PEGDA  ink  was  prepared  by  mixing  PEGDA  (Mn  700,  455008,  Merck  Life),  deionised 

water and a 10 w/v% Irgacure 2959 (g/100 ml ethanol, 410869, Sigma) at a 2:8:1 volumetric 

ratio. The supportive baths used here were 1.3% xanthan gum, 1 w/v% Carbopol ETD 2020 

(Lubrizol)  and  4.5  w/v%  gelatin  slurry.  The  Carbopol  and  gelatin  slurry  supportive  baths 
were prepared following the protocols described in previous studies40,41. 

Code Availability 

All codes for the printing operation will be made available on Github.  

Figures 

Figure  1.  Features  of  Printer.HM,  which  consists  of  multi-auxiliary  tools  as  hardware, 

flexible geometry inputs as software, leading to multi-functionalities in one-platform.  

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  2.  a) Figure showing the use of different auxiliary tools for assisting the printing of LCST 
hydrogels (e.g. Pluronic F127), UCST hydrogels (e.g. gelatin), and photopolymerizable hydrogels (e.g. 

methacrylate hydroxypropyl cellulose). Scale bar = 5 mm. b) A wide variety of materials over a large 

viscosity  range  can  be  printed  using  the  setup.  Scale  bar  =  5  mm.  c)  Diameter  distribution  of  the 

printed  Pluronic  F127  filaments.  Median  diameter  =  ~150  μm.  (n  =  120  measurements  over  4 

independent samples). Scale bar = 500 µm. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Versatile geometry input options enable print creation with different characteristics, 

via  a)  coordinates,  b)  equations,  c)  CAD  models  which  were  then  translated  into  G-code,  and  d) 

picture  geometries. The  materials  used  here  can  be  found  in  the  Materials  and  Methods  and 

Supplementary Table 4. Scale bar = 5 mm. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Versatile functionalities of Printer.HM. a) Automated dispensing of cell suspension on 

a petri dish at (a.i) constant droplet volumes and (a.ii) variable droplet volumes. The black arrow in 

(a.ii)  indicates  the  direction  of  the  dispensing  path,  and  the  white  arrows  depict  the  controllable 

droplet  size  variation  from  small  to  large  volume.  b)  A  spiral  curve  made  of  Pluronic  F127  printed 

with variable speed. c) Non-planar printing of a Pluronic F127 line pattern on a 3D nose model. Scale 

bars = 5 mm.  

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  5.  Automatic  pick-and place-operation, showing  i) the  pick-up  locations  of  the  printed 

objects and the targeted micro-wells for object placement, ii) Automatic picking process, where ‘Dish 

1’  was 

translated 

to 

the  printhead 

that  actuated suction 

to  pick  up 

the  structure, iii) 

Automatic placement process, where ‘Dish 2’ was translated to the printhead that actuated dispensing 

to place the structure, iv) Moving to the next target, and v) Completion of the pick-and-place process, 

where all structures were transferred into the targeted microwells after three iterations of the process. 

A UV touch was used for illustrating fluorescent structures in ii – v. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Multi-material printing showing a) In-air printing with Pluronic F127 inks stained with 

different colours, and b) Embedded printing forming a lung structure, with dyed alginate inks printed 

in a xanthan gum bath. 

18 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

1. 

Capel,  A.  J.,  Rimington,  R.  P.,  Lewis,  M.  P.  &  Christie,  S.  D.  R.  3D  printing  for 

chemical,  pharmaceutical  and  biological  applications.  Nature  Reviews  Chemistry  2, 

422–436 (2018). 

2. 

Truby, R. L. & Lewis, J. A. Printing soft matter in three dimensions.  Nature (2016). 

doi:10.1038/nature21003 

3. 

Zhang,  Y.  S.,  Haghiashtiani,  G.,  Hübscher,  T.,  Kelly,  D.  J.,  Lee,  J.  M.,  Lutolf,  M., 

McAlpine,  M.  C.,  Yeong,  W.  Y.,  Zenobi-Wong,  M.  &  Malda,  J.  3D  extrusion 

bioprinting. Nature Reviews Methods Primers 2021 1:1 1, 1–20 (2021). 

4. 

Lei, I. M., Jiang, C., Lei, C. L., de Rijk, S. R., Tam, Y. C., Swords, C., Sutcliffe, M. P. 

F., Malliaras, G. G., Bance, M. & Huang, Y. Y. S. 3D printed biomimetic cochleae and 

machine  learning  co-modelling  provides  clinical  informatics  for  cochlear  implant 

patients. Nature Communications 2021 12:1 12, 1–12 (2021). 

5. 

Kang,  D.  H.,  Louis,  F., Liu,  H.,  Shimoda,  H.,  Nishiyama,  Y.,  Nozawa,  H.,  Kakitani, 

M.,  Takagi,  D.,  Kasa,  D.,  Nagamori,  E.,  Irie,  S.,  Kitano,  S.  &  Matsusaki,  M. 

Engineered whole cut meat-like tissue by the assembly of cell fibers using tendon-gel 

integrated bioprinting. Nature Communications 12, (2021). 

6.  Mantihal, S., Kobun, R. & Lee, B. B. 3D food printing of as the new way of preparing 

food:  A  review.  International  Journal  of  Gastronomy  and  Food  Science  22,  100260 

(2020). 

7. 

Daly,  A.  C.,  Prendergast,  M.  E.,  Hughes,  A.  J.  &  Burdick,  J.  A.  Bioprinting  for  the 

Biologist. Cell 184, 18–32 (2021). 

8. 

Ravanbakhsh, H., Karamzadeh, V., Bao, G., Mongeau, L., Juncker, D. & Zhang, Y. S. 

Emerging  Technologies  in  Multi-Material  Bioprinting.  Advanced  Materials  (2021). 

doi:10.1002/adma.202104730 

9. 

Sun, W., Starly, B., Daly, A. C., Burdick, J. A., Groll, J., Skeldon, G., Shu, W., Sakai, 

Y.,  Shinohara,  M.,  Nishikawa,  M.,  Jang,  J.,  Cho,  D.  W.,  Nie,  M.,  Takeuchi,  S., 

Ostrovidov,  S.,  Khademhosseini,  A.,  Kamm,  R.  D.,  Mironov,  V.,  Moroni,  L.  & 

Ozbolat,  I.  T.  The  bioprinting  roadmap.  Biofabrication  (2020).  doi:10.1088/1758-

5090/ab5158 

10.  Zhang,  Y.  S.,  Haghiashtiani,  G.,  Hübscher,  T.,  Kelly,  D.  J.,  Lee,  J.  M.,  Lutolf,  M., 

McAlpine,  M.  C.,  Yeong,  W.  Y.,  Zenobi-Wong,  M.  &  Malda,  J.  3D  extrusion 

bioprinting. Nature Reviews Methods Primers 2021 1:1 1, 1–20 (2021). 

19 

 
11.  Truby, R. L. & Lewis, J. A. Printing soft matter in three dimensions.  Nature (2016). 

doi:10.1038/nature21003 

12. 

Skylar-Scott, M. A., Mueller, J., Visser, C. W. & Lewis, J. A. Voxelated soft matter 

via  multimaterial  multinozzle  3D  printing.  Nature  (2019).  doi:10.1038/s41586-019-

1736-8 

13. 

Patel,  B. B.,  Walsh,  D.  J., Kim, D.  H., Kwok, J., Lee, B.,  Guironnet, D. &  Diao,  Y. 

Tunable  structural  color  of  bottlebrush  block  copolymers  through  direct-write  3D 

printing from solution. Science Advances (2020). doi:10.1126/sciadv.aaz7202 

14. 

Sydney Gladman, A., Matsumoto, E. A., Nuzzo, R. G., Mahadevan, L. & Lewis, J. A. 

Biomimetic 4D printing. Nature Materials (2016). doi:10.1038/nmat4544 

15.  Raney,  J.  R.,  Compton,  B.  G.,  Mueller,  J.,  Ober,  T.  J.,  Shea,  K.  &  Lewis,  J.  A. 

Rotational 3D printing of damage-tolerant composites with programmable mechanics. 

Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the  United  States  of  America 

(2018). doi:10.1073/pnas.1715157115 

16.  Kim, Y., Yuk, H., Zhao, R., Chester, S. A. & Zhao, X. Printing ferromagnetic domains 

for  untethered  fast-transforming  soft  materials.  Nature  (2018).  doi:10.1038/s41586-

018-0185-0 

17. 

Pusch, K., Hinton, T. J. & Feinberg, A. W. Large volume syringe pump extruder for 

desktop 3D printers. HardwareX (2018). doi:10.1016/j.ohx.2018.02.001 

18.  Mirdamadi, E., Tashman, J. W., Shiwarski, D. J., Palchesko, R. N. & Feinberg, A. W. 

FRESH  3D  Bioprinting  a  Full-Size  Model  of  the  Human  Heart.  ACS  Biomaterials 

Science and Engineering (2020). doi:10.1021/acsbiomaterials.0c01133 

19.  Bessler, N., Ogiermann, D., Buchholz, M. B., Santel, A., Heidenreich, J., Ahmmed, R., 

Zaehres, H. & Brand-Saberi, B. Nydus One Syringe Extruder (NOSE): A Prusa i3 3D 

printer  conversion  for  bioprinting  applications  utilizing 

the  FRESH-method. 

HardwareX (2019). doi:10.1016/j.ohx.2019.e00069 

20.  Engberg, A., Stelzl, C., Eriksson, O., O’Callaghan, P. & Kreuger, J. An open source 

extrusion  bioprinter  based  on  the  E3D  motion  system  and  tool  changer  to  enable 

FRESH and multimaterial bioprinting. Scientific Reports (2021). doi:10.1038/s41598-

021-00931-1 

21.  Garciamendez-Mijares, C. E., Agrawal, P., Martínez, G. G., Juarez, E. C. & Zhang, Y. 

S. State-of-art affordable bioprinters: A guide for the DiY community. Applied Physics 

Reviews 8, 031312 (2021). 

20 

 
22. 

Shen,  E.  M.  &  McCloskey,  K.  E.  Affordable,  high-resolution  bioprinting  with 

embedded 

concentration 

gradients. 

Bioprinting 

(2021). 

doi:10.1016/j.bprint.2020.e00113 

23.  Lin,  S.,  Liu,  J.,  Liu,  X.  &  Zhao,  X.  Muscle-like  fatigue-resistant  hydrogels  by 

mechanical training.  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the  United 

States of America (2019). doi:10.1073/pnas.1903019116 

24.  Roh, S., Okello, L. B., Golbasi, N., Hankwitz, J. P., Liu, J. A. C., Tracy, J. B. & Velev, 

O.  D.  3D-Printed  Silicone  Soft  Architectures  with  Programmed  Magneto-Capillary 

Reconfiguration. 

Advanced 

Materials 

Technologies 

(2019). 

doi:10.1002/admt.201800528 

25. 

Sydney Gladman, A., Matsumoto, E. A., Nuzzo, R. G., Mahadevan, L. & Lewis, J. A. 

Biomimetic 4D printing. Nature Materials (2016). doi:10.1038/nmat4544 

26.  Kim, J. H., Seol, Y. J., Ko, I. K., Kang, H. W., Lee, Y. K., Yoo, J. J., Atala, A. & Lee, 

S.  J.  3D  Bioprinted  Human  Skeletal  Muscle  Constructs  for  Muscle  Function 

Restoration. Scientific Reports (2018). doi:10.1038/s41598-018-29968-5 

27.  Daly,  A.  C.,  Prendergast,  M.  E.,  Hughes,  A.  J.  &  Burdick,  J.  A.  Bioprinting  for  the 

Biologist. Cell 184, 18–32 (2021). 

28.  Capel,  A.  J.,  Rimington,  R.  P.,  Lewis,  M.  P.  &  Christie,  S.  D.  R.  3D  printing  for 

chemical,  pharmaceutical  and  biological  applications.  Nature  Reviews  Chemistry  2, 

422–436 (2018). 

29.  Ravi, P., Shiakolas, P. S., Oberg, J. C., Faizee, S. & Batra, A. K. On the development 

of  a  modular  3d  bioprinter  for  research  in  biomedical  device  fabrication.  in  ASME 

International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition, Proceedings (IMECE) 

(2015). doi:10.1115/IMECE2015-51555 

30.  Athira,  A.  &  Jiya,  J.  Self-assembled  Hydrogels:  An  Overview.  (Springer,  Singapore, 

2021). doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-7138-1_14 

31.  Zhang, Y. S. & Khademhosseini, A. Advances in engineering hydrogels. Science 356, 

(2017). 

32.  Taylor, M. J., Tomlins, P. & Sahota, T. S. Thermoresponsive gels. Gels 3, (2017). 

33.  Klouda,  L.  &  Mikos,  A.  G.  Thermoresponsive  hydrogels  in  biomedical  applications. 

European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 68, 34–45 (2008). 

34.  Lam, C., Chan, C., Lei, M., Van De Kerkhof, G. T., Parker, R. M., Richards, K. D., 

Evans, R. C., Yan, Y., Huang, S., Vignolini, S., Chan, C. L. C., Van De Kerkhof, G. T., 

Parker, R. M., Vignolini, S., Hamied, Y., Lei, I. M., Huang, Y. Y. S., Richards, K. D. 

21 

 
&  Evans,  R.  C.  3D  Printing  of  Liquid  Crystalline  Hydroxypropyl  Cellulose-toward 

Tunable 

and 

Sustainable 

Volumetric 

Photonic 

Structures. 

(2022). 

doi:10.1002/adfm.202108566 

35.  Vuksanović, J. M., Kijevčanin, M. L. & Radović, I. R. Poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate 

as  a  novel  chaotropic  compound  for  design  of  aqueous  biphasic  systems.  Journal  of 

Molecular Liquids (2018). doi:10.1016/j.molliq.2018.04.023 

36.  Reid, J. A., Mollica, P. A., Johnson, G. D., Ogle, R. C., Bruno, R. D. & Sachs, P. C. 

Accessible bioprinting: Adaptation of a low-cost 3D-printer for precise cell placement 

and 

stem 

cell 

differentiation.  Biofabrication 

(2016). 

doi:10.1088/1758-

5090/8/2/025017 

37.  Zhu,  Z.,  Guo,  S.  Z.,  Hirdler,  T.,  Eide,  C.,  Fan,  X.,  Tolar,  J.  &  McAlpine,  M.  C.  3D 

Printed Functional and Biological Materials on Moving Freeform Surfaces. Advanced 

Materials (2018). doi:10.1002/adma.201707495 

38.  Askari, M., Afzali Naniz, M., Kouhi, M., Saberi, A., Zolfagharian, A. & Bodaghi, M. 

Recent  progress  in  extrusion  3D  bioprinting  of  hydrogel  biomaterials  for  tissue 

regeneration: A comprehensive review with focus on advanced fabrication techniques. 

Biomaterials Science (2021). doi:10.1039/d0bm00973c 

39.  Lam, C., Chan, C., Lei, M., Van De Kerkhof, G. T., Parker, R. M., Richards, K. D., 

Evans, R. C., Yan, Y., Huang, S., Vignolini, S., Chan, C. L. C., Van De Kerkhof, G. T., 

Parker, R. M., Vignolini, S., Hamied, Y., Lei, I. M., Huang, Y. Y. S., Richards, K. D. 

&  Evans,  R.  C.  3D  Printing  of  Liquid  Crystalline  Hydroxypropyl  Cellulose-toward 

Tunable 

and 

Sustainable 

Volumetric 

Photonic 

Structures. 

(2022). 

doi:10.1002/adfm.202108566 

40.  Hinton, T. J., Jallerat, Q., Palchesko, R. N., Park, J. H., Grodzicki, M. S., Shue, H.-J., 

Ramadan,  M.  H.,  Hudson,  A.  R.  &  Feinberg,  A.  W.  Three-dimensional  printing  of 

complex  biological  structures  by  freeform  reversible  embedding  of  suspended 

hydrogels. Science Advances 1, e1500758–e1500758 (2015). 

41.  Bhattacharjee, T., Zehnder, S. M., Rowe, K. G., Jain, S., Nixon, R. M., Sawyer, W. G. 

&  Angelini,  T.  E.  Writing  in  the  granular  gel  medium.  Science  Advances  (2015). 

doi:10.1126/sciadv.1500655 

22 

 
  
 
