2
2
0
2

r
a

M
3
2

]
h
p
-
d
e
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

2
v
5
6
6
1
1
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Facilitating Non-HEP Career Transition

Sudhir Malik1, Aneliya Karadzhinova-Ferrer2,3, Julie Hogan4, Rachel
Bray5, Rami Kamalieddin6, Kevin Flood7, Amr El-Zant8, Guillermo
Fidalgo1, David Bruhwiler9, Matt Bellis10
1Physics Department, University of Puerto Rico Mayag¨uez, PR 00682, USA
2Helsinki Institute of Physics, Finland
3Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology, Finland
4Department of Physics and Engineering, 3900 Bethel Dr, St Paul, MN 55112, USA
5CERN, Switzerland
6AllianceBernstein Investment Management,New York, NY
7Physics Department, University of Hawaii, HI 96822, U.S.A; Nalu Scientiﬁc LLC
8Centre for Theoretical Physics, The British University in Egypt, Cairo 11837, Egypt
9RadiaSoft LLC, Boulder, Colorado, CO 80301, USA
10Siena College, 515 Loudon Road, Loudonville, NY 12211, USA

E-mail: sudhir.malik@upr.edu

Abstract. About two-third of Physics PhDs establish careers outside of academia and
laboratories in areas like Software, Instrumentation, Data Science, Finance,
the national
Healthcare, Journalism, Public Policy and Non-Governmental Organization.
Skills and
knowledge developed during HEPA (High Energy Physics and Astrophysics) research as
an undergraduate, graduate or a postdoc level (collectively called early career) have been
long sought after in industry. These skills are complex problem solving abilities, software
programming, data analysis, math, statistics and scientiﬁc writing, to name a few. Given that
a vast majority transition to the industry jobs, existing paths for such transition should be
strengthened and new ways of facilitating it be identiﬁed and developed. A strong engagement
between HEPA and its alumni would be a pre-requisite for this. It might also lead to creative
ways to reverse the ”brain drain” by encouraging alumni to collaborate on HEPA research
projects or possibly come back full time to research. We motivate and discuss below several
actionable recommendations by which HEPA institutions as well as HEPA faculty mentors can
strengthen both ability to identify non-HEP career opportunities for students and post-docs
as well as help more fully develop skills such as eﬀective networking, resume building, project
management, risk assessment, budget planning, to name a few. This will help prepare early
career HEPA scientists for successfully transitioning from academia to the diverse array of
non-traditional careers available. HEPA alumni can play a pivotal role by engaging in this
process.

1. Introduction
HEPA research gives undergraduate or graduate (Masters or PhD) students or postdocs a wide
array of scientiﬁc and technical skills. There are a variety of career paths available to physics
degree holders beyond academia, where these skills are in demand. The academic job market
is such that faculty positions and scientists in universities and other institutions is very stable,
meaning that not many new jobs are being created. According to AIP [1] report [2] more than
two-thirds of Physics PhD recipients accept permanent jobs in industry. Not only does industry
provide the highest number of jobs [3, 4, 5] but also the highest salary. Early career physicists
may exit academia at diﬀerent stages - post undergrad, masters or a PhD or postdoc or even
later. While the time spent in doing PhD in HEPA are typical compared to the other ﬁelds,

 
 
 
 
 
 
postdocs usually tend to spend 5-6 years, a bit on higher side compared to other disciplines,
before landing an academic job or leaving for industry.
Irrespective of stage of ﬁnding the
ﬁrst job, the evolution from academic preparation to the ﬁrst steps in career may not be easy
to predetermine. A smart planning, awareness of various possibilities in industry for jobs,
accompanied with career networking with alumni and colleagues, can facilitate the process of
industry job search at all stages.

There are eﬀorts in the above direction by AIP [6] for all Physics disciplines. However,
networking events for industry careers targeted for HEPA community were set oﬀ at CERN by
the CMS Collaboration [7, 8] a decade ago and later adopted by all CERN Experiments [9, 10]. It
eventually led to the creation of the CERN Alumni Network [11] and the CERN Career Fairs [12].
In the USA there are some eﬀorts in that direction; like those by the Fermilab Student Postdoc
Association [13]. But clearly a more organised eﬀort is required. The creation of targeted
internships with national laboratory partners in the areas of Accelerator Technology, Computer
and Information Science, Detector and Engineering Technology, Environmental Safety and
Health and Radiation Therapies is one way to facilitate the training process for a career in
industry. However, many postdocs and students are not based at National labs where broad
access to the above opportunities exists. Direct involvement from supervisors and mentors in
planning the career of their mentees early on, based on the interest, is another important step
towards success. A commensurate eﬀort in the job search process is also needed. A centralised
method of networking with HEPA alumni would strengthen the job search, skill matching and
hiring process. However, there is a continuing need for new and innovative tools and portals
to be developed and supported. A robust association and collaboration with HEPA alumni on
research projects could also possibly lead to reversing of the “brain drain” from HEPA. Feedback
based on a survey performed in the HEPA community, described below, suggests steps which
can be taken to further develop pathways for eﬃcient and eﬀective transition for HEP scientists,
at all levels,leading to a successful career in industry. The goal of this paper is twofold: ﬁrst
to motivate the need for such improvements, and then to subsequently identify a variety of
mechanisms with which to achieve the above goals.

2. Survey ﬁndings/analysis, anecdotal experiences
The Snowmass Early Career [14] team prepared and conducted a survey between June 28 and
August 15, 2021 for the entire High Energy Physics and Astrophysics (HEPA) community. The
survey was designed to inform the survey team on opinions, experiences, and outlook regarding
several topics; including careers, physics outlook, workplace culture, harassment, racism, visa
policies, the impacts of COVID-19, and demographics. The Community Engagement Frontier
(CEF) Working group (WG) on Career Pipeline and Development (CPD) strategically planned
and structured questions and contributed to this survey to collect feedback related to its own
goals. Some of the results of the survey are discussed in the following sections. The CPD
questions focused on feedback from HEPA community with respect to preparedness for jobs
and career plans outside HEPA and the mentoring received. For HEPA alumini the questions
centered around the diverse occupation in industry, use of skills learned in HEPA, resources in
obtaining the job and possible collaborations. The feedback from the survey informs on the
measures that HEPA community should take to prepare and facilitate the transition to industry
jobs; as early planning, organised networking, and mentoring, and building better relationships
with alumni for mutual beneﬁt. The survey also tells us that most people try their best to
stay in HEPA as long as they can. More than 50% of the participants are aged below 35
years and participants who declared their nationalities were from 60 diﬀerent countries. The
survey ﬁndings presented here are those that are most relevant to this paper. The feedback
from survey results is divided into two groups: from HEPA community and HEPA alumni, as
discussed below.

2

2.1. Survey results from HEPA community
The survey participants from HEPA community were from Undergraduates, Masters and PhD
students, Postdocs, Engineers, Technicians, Teaching faculties, Tenure-track faculties, Tenured
faculties and Scientists or Senior scientists from national lab and universities. Almost half of
these survey participants are considering leaving academia (Figure 1), making it essential to
organise and facilitate this transition. While the ﬁrst preference obviously is research jobs in
academia (university faculty) or national labs (scientist), the preference for being in business or
being an entrepreneur is the least as shown in Figure 2.

Figure 1

Figure 2

Most participants, being young, have accepted or plan to accept academic positions that can
constitute an intermediate step in an academic career ladder; like going from PhD position to
a postdoc, or from a postdoc to a faculty position, as shown in Figure 3, which again indicates
a strong preference to stay in HEPA. The level of unpreparedness for non-HEPA jobs (industry
jobs, teaching positions) is overwhelming, as indicated in Figure 5. To continue to attract
students to research and provide the strongest possible assurance of a secure and interesting
career, we must as a community facilitate the process of transition to positions in industry, as
these form the bulk of the job market available to (and suitable for) HEPA-trained scientists.
This would also provide a pipleline of talent to non-HEPA STEM areas, both within or outside
academia. A free-text response to a question asking to pick a reason to apply for a future
academic or industry job shows the top word used in Figure 4 as ”research”. This implies that
career preference is to do research whether in acedemia or industry.

While it is true that not enough mentoring and preparedness exists, there is a realisation
among the HEPA community that it is important for supervisors and mentors to prepare their
students for career paths in industry, as shown from the survey result in Figure 6. Among
supervisors, there is also strong support for their students and mentees to participate in HEPA-
industry partnerships and mobility programs that would prepare them well for industry jobs,
3

as shown in Figure 7. However, it is also shown that funding for such partnership activities
must come from a source separate from their core HEPA research support. Further interesting
feedback is shown in Figure 8, reﬂecting strong support for collaboration between research and
non-research/undergraduate institutions. This is essential in building and broadening STEM
In
opportunities that would provide a pipeline of scientiﬁc talent to the broader workforce.
general, physics skills are central to the landscape in industry,and oﬀer routes to productive
employment in varied and rewarding careers.

Figure 3

Figure 4

Figure 5

Figure 6

2.2. Survey results from HEPA alumni
Feedback from HEPA alumni provides a sense of the challenges in transitioning from HEPA,
and the measures we can take to ﬁx the current shortcomings. Figure 9 (top left) shows that
almost half of HEPA alumni attempted to ﬁnd direct employment in the ﬁeld. Failing to
4

Figure 7

Figure 8

stay in the ﬁeld reﬂects the shortage of permanent jobs in HEPA and, simultaneously, lucrative
opportunities in industry, particularly higher salaries. Figure 9 (bottom right) shows the variety
of sectors in industry that alumni currently work in, with a majority of them in STEM-related
ﬁelds. Figure 9 (bottom left) shows the ﬁnal involvement level with HEPA before exiting the
ﬁeld. Almost 50% of responding alumni transitioned after the completion of Undergraduate,
Masters or PhD degrees or after postdoc position(s). Figure 9 (top right) shows that the most
important resource to obtain industry jobs were networking and co-workers. Figure 10 shows
that almost all HEPA skills are valuable in the current industry jobs. Another stated goal in
feedback from HEPA alumni was to build synergy between HEPA and its alumni. While it
might be challenging for alumni to return to HEPA as indicated in Figure 11, a large fraction
are willing to participate in projects connecting HEPA and industry, as shown in Figure 12,
and many see value in doing so, as indicated in Figure 13.

3. Career transition points
A career in HEPA is highly desired by early career scientists. However, academic jobs are scarce.
It is diﬃcult to predict the availabilities and the possibility of obtaining a permanent position
in a research institute, lab or university. HEPA researchers and physics degree holders are often
5

Figure 9

Figure 10

forced to transition to non-HEPA careers at diﬀerent career stages and due to various reasons, as
is evident from Figure 9 (bottom left). Career decisions are guided by long-term priorities in life;
such as, e.g., aspirations, interests, values, economic situation, ﬁnancial security and personal
situations among many others. Reasons to pursue a degree or particular area of research may

6

Figure 11

Figure 12

Figure 13

evolve over the course of a degree at the undergraduate, graduate (Masters/PhD), postdoc or
even more senior levels. On the other hand, physics degree holders typically have numerous
job and career opportunities available that apply their skills outside the ﬁeld.
Indeed, new
job openings are continually driven by factors such as e.g. technological advances, automation
of manufacturing industries, IT and internet revolution, environmental challenges requiring
soil conservation and precision agriculture, to name a few examples. Hence, physics degree
holders have a greater than ever opportunity to build a career in industry, and the challenge
is building bridges between those seeking jobs — for whatever reason and whatever level of
seniority — and careers in non-traditional HEPA areas. References [15] and [16] list, by U.S.
state, the employers and ﬁelds of Physics bachelors and their employment sectors, respectively.
Reference [17] shows a ﬂowchart of possible career paths for Physics students with Bachelors,
Masters and PhD degrees. Figure 1 from our Snowmass survey shows that around half of people
7

in our community consider leaving academia and that half of those (Figure 9 top left) who leave
academia try to obtain a job in academia prior to exiting the traditional ﬁeld.

Students with an Undergrad or Masters degree in physics may transition directly to non-
research teaching or industry jobs, or to a diﬀerent ﬁeld of specialisation, and then from there
move on to an academic or industry position. At this level of transition, research may not be
a signiﬁcant experience for the majority. Hence, a HEPA and/or non-HEPA physics research
skill set would not be a signiﬁcant part of their CV or resume, which typically would contain
only educational attainments in the core physics degree program. Physics students getting jobs
after Undergrad or Master levels might not be committed to pursuing research due to economic,
ﬁnancial and/or personal reasons as contributing factors. Even if Masters alumni may have some
advantage over Undergrads with more research experience, arising from an academic curriculum
requiring a thesis in a research topic(s).

A PhD or postdoctoral experience in HEPA or any other physics research area typically
features a signiﬁcant research component.
It is also designed to develop critical research,
analytical and writing skills, as well as the ability to eﬀectively work both independently and
in collaboration with other researchers. This puts those with such experience at a signiﬁcant
higher pedestal of skill set when it comes to seeking jobs in industry or academia. The reasons
for PhD students and postdocs to go for non-HEPA or industry jobs could largely be the same
as for students who exit after an Undergraduate or a Masters degree, but those decisions may
not be very easy to take after investing years into research,especially after a postdoc.

During the course of working in the Snowmass CPD-WG meetings over the past several
months we had presentations and direct discussions with several HEPA-alumni. Most of them
exited the ﬁeld after a PhD degree or postdoc and some of their experiences are presented
here [18, 19, 20]. The most important step was the diﬃcult decision to make up their mind to
leave academia at such relatively late stages, which also connects to personal matters for many.
A professorship comes with its lifetime of studying science, and with a very strong appeal of
a comfortable intellectual life devoted to understanding nature at its most fundamental level.
However, the path to a professorship comes with many challenges and uncertainties in terms of
work/life balance, pressure to publish, competition with scientists across the globe for a limited
number of jobs, limited choice of geographic location, pressure to secure grants, and lesser
material compensation compared to the industry. At the same time, many fulﬁlling career
paths exist for physicists who are willing to embrace a transition to industry. For some, what
is sought is an industry job that is suﬃciently interesting and exciting, so as to allow the use
of current skill set in a creative way, as well as challenging enough to foster the development
of new skills and allow contributions to have a positive impact in the world. Quote from the
presentations says - Even though for the industry transition it may be hard to get ”out of the
box” but the only way to make sense out of ”change” is to plunge into it, move with it, and join
the ”dance”. This applies to exiting the ﬁeld at any level. Though rare but not uncommon for
HEPA physicists to work with non-proﬁt organisations or as science writers [21, 22] or other
[23] when personal passion is a big driving
academic and scholarship activities; for example,
factor. Though even more rare, but even faculty members (tenured or nontenured) may also
seek industry jobs for personal or other reasons.

4. Intersections with other Snowmass groups
As already mentioned, skills developed in HEPA are in demand in industry. The Snowmass
WGs mentioned below highlight how these skills learnt in experiments are not only valuable for
future of HEPA but also serve as basis for future innovation in HEPA and industry. There are
several careers in industry tied to these skills as described here.

AF1: Beam Physics and Accelerator Education [24]: Some of the trained particle physicists
go into full time accelerator physics careers that maintains unique capabilities and develop new
technologies for accelerators. A worldwide exchange of scientists and young researchers between
accelerator institutions can play an invaluable role in training the next generation of accelerator
physicists and engineers, who can then work work towards developing accelerators for the future
HEP. They can also beneﬁt society in fulﬁlling the demand for trained accelerator physicists
8

in the development of high-quality beams and energy-eﬃcient technologies for medicine.
Applications of accelerator science in Medical therapies, photon and particle probes in industry,
material science, chemistry, biology, pharmaceutical development and applied nuclear science
will continue to stimulate demand for the expertise of well-trained specialists in accelerator
science and technology and accelerator related software.
NF05/10: Neutrino properties and Neutrino Detectors [25]: Small scale experiments, like in
neutrino or nuclear physics community, can provide a healthy breeding and training ground
for careers of PhD and postdoc researchers, by providing a unique set of diverse opportunities.
It can serve as a bridge to a gateway of career options in academia or industry. Due to the
typical short span of such experiments young members can take ownership of signiﬁcant aspects
of a project throughout their tenure, and productively contribute to multiple aspects like the
design, construction, operations, and data analysis. This enables early career scientists from
these experiments to enter the job market with a strong and transparent portfolio, in terms
of publications and contributions that may tend to get obscure in big experiments, especially
when applying for jobs within or outside HEPA.
IF/AF6 and CommF3: Instrumentation Frontier [26], Advanced Accelerator Concepts [27]
and Machine Learning [28]: Training in Detector and Instrumentation Technologies and
engagement with the industry in applications and technology transfers from the particle
physics community can greatly enhance career transition to a related industry. Schools like
ISOTDAQ [29], EDIT [30] and ESHEP [31] and the CERN/FNAL Collider Schools [32] can
stimulate young careers that can fuel innovation not only in HEPA but also in industry.
Application of Machine Learning in all aspect of HEPA wherever vast data and its pattern need
to be understood to discover physics or monitor data quality from detector and instrumentation
has a great demand in data science in industry.

5. Existing programs
Many resources currently exist for ﬁnding industry jobs, and resuming building and identifying
career paths for physics degree holders; e.g., [6, 33, 34, 35]. However, one element that is missing
is a platform for networking. As Figure 9 (top right) indicates, networking and coworkers
constitute the most signiﬁcant factor when it comes to ﬁnding industry jobs. For the past four
years, networking events for industry careers have been regularly organised by CERN and have
proven to be a big draw. It is obvious that this is one area where we need to focus more. CERN
conducted a survey in 2020 within its alumni community concerning their expectations of the
Alumni Network. It conﬁrmed that early career community in HEPA have little to no support
for moving out of academia and the idea of working in industry is completely alien to them.
Subsequently, the CERN oﬃce for alumni relations[11] discovered an abundance of goodwill
and enthusiasm on the part of CERN alumni to ’give back’ and share their experience with
a ’younger version of themselves’. A candid conversation, highlighting career trajectories out
of academia to other sectors and focusing on challenges and hurdles through the interviews,
It is worth pointing out that
has been much appreciated by the soon-to-be CERN alumni.
the initial seeds of CERN alumni were sown by the CMS Collaboration [7, 8, 36] around 2013
and, given its subsequent success, it was adopted by all CERN Experiments [9, 10] and grew
into the oﬃcial CERN alumni network. The CERN Alumni program now has over 7500 active
members, 85% of whom are alumni or soon-to-be alumni. Having an annual budget of 35 - 50K
Swiss Franks (most of which is allocated for the alumni.cern platform). To achieve one of its
goals to support those in their early careers, it focuses on the following:

• Experience sharing by alumni on moving out of Academia at events organised by CERN,

spotlights on CERN Alumni focuses on career transitions and experience.

• Jobs board where alumni and companies post job opportunities. The Oﬃce for Alumni
Relations piggybacks on HR career fairs, where companies can hope to recruit from within
the CERN alumni talent pool.

• Virtual Company showrooms where companies having posted job opportunities can take

part in 1 hour events, 30 mins presentation and 30 mins Q & A sessions.

9

• Mentoring module, giving a short video summary of HEPA alumni experience in getting

an industry job.

The Fermilab Student and Postdoc Association (FSPA) [13], among other activities, organises
Career Panel discussions and talks regularly. It also has a linkedin group for networking with
its alumni. In this context, one can exchange job information, share interesting ideas, and build
ones own network. FSPA represents the community of early career researchers at Fermilab,
including all students, postdocs, summer students, and interns.

The HEP national labs represent a quite wide community, encompassing thousands of users
from hundreds of universities and several countries. As demonstrated above, it can serve as a
very strong hub for career networking. We do not discuss here any existing career programs at
academic institutional/universities, such as job fairs or targeted campus visits by business/trade
group, as they are of more general nature. Nonetheless these are still useful to the community
members who happen to be at those institutions.

6. Methods to strengthen existing programs
Getting a tenure track or a scientist position or a job in industry is a process that needs right
preparation. Being in HEPA one may be easily aware of the process of getting a tenure track
or a scientist position. It is also is easy to ﬁnd mentors who can be helpful for that purpose,
being surrounded by established scientists, including one’s own supervisor. However, when it
comes to an industry job in STEM or otherwise, it is an uncharted territory for many, as HEPA
alumni who move to industry are not accessible for guidance due to lack of organised networking
or communications. In fact, HEPA alumni rarely have channels or motivation to connect with
their alma mater.

The existing programs, though few, can be broadly divided into networking and skill building.
HEPA and industry relationship has always been synergistic where sharing and beneﬁting from
technological advances and know-how pushes the envelope of knowledge. However, when it
comes to building relationships with industry in terms of networking, transition to industry
jobs and collaborations with alumni on projects of mutual interest, the realisation and progress
is just beginning. It is clear that there are very few existing programs like at CERN that are
fairly mature in establishing networking structure for industry jobs. Elsewhere, the eﬀorts are
nascent to non-existent and need to be developed and strengthened. One huge advantage in
pursuing these eﬀorts at the national labs is that they serve as the hub of HEPA community
and can have structural as well possible ﬁnancial resources for this common good. Clearly, there
is also a role for U.S. funding agencies to support eﬀorts at career-building through targeted
supplemental funding. The survey results clearly show a need and desire to do so. Seeking
funding to support and strengthen HEPA-industry alumni relations would be a big boost to
early career transition to the industry.

HEP labs technology public-private partnerships [37, 38] with industry exist in Accelerator
Technologies, Computers Information Science, Detector and Engineering Technologies and
also Environment Safety. This can be leveraged to create experience for resident students
and early career scientists and build connections for a future industry career.
Internships
in instrumentation and accelerator know-how can strengthen careers in medical science and
industry. As an example, partnership of University College London’s Centre for Doctoral
Training in Data Intensive Science [39] with the high-tech computing sector is greatly facilitating
the transition to employment in this sector for those who desire it. There, even HEP and
cosmology theorists get internships in industry during their PhD. Such internships can be
beneﬁcial for enhancing hiring pools at HEP labs and within particular industries.

Besides networking and skill building, there are several other factors that determine ﬁnding
jobs in industry and those need to be strengthened too. These are described in the following
section.

10

7. New ideas, new partners
HEPA young careers, while pursuing research, acquire several skills like computing, software,
detector design,
logical thinking, publishing, presenting professional work at conferences,
statistical analysis, simulation, and hardware development. This makes them highly employable
within and outside academia. Such skills can also serve as attractors for students who may not
want to pursue a PhD in HEP or a career in acedemia but use them as a springboard to other
STEM careers in industry. This makes it very important to expand our nascent ongoing eﬀorts
to engage early career HEPA scientists with more senior scientists and facilitate the process of
transition to industry jobs. We must scale up and have a model to sustain these programs. The
experience, survey feedback and eﬀorts described above strongly indicate that HEPA alumni
are more than willing and happy to respond and engage. However, within HEPA we need to be
more motivated and creative on how to realise this engagement.

7.1. Engagement of HEPA supervisors and mentors
Attempting to transition from a completely academic work role to an industry job is a daunting
task. It is not a well-deﬁned path and one needs to take initiative and explore many options.
First and foremost is the direct involvement of HEPA supervisors and mentors in the process.
This is important as HEPA supervisors may not themselves be knowledgeable to advise or
mentor to help pave paths towards industry jobs, and a reluctance to be involved in the process
may also arise from research commitments and related priorities. But their involvement will
create comfortable and supportive environment. They must be sensitised and trained to guide
and be be proactive to support early career scientist’s participation in opportunities that prepare
for careers outside HEPA. They must allow a certain fraction of time to pursue opportunities
and preparation activities for a possible industry career. Indeed, there is overwhelming desire
for this, as shown in Figure 6, Workshops training supervisors to understand the needs of their
mentees and ways to improve methods for job preparation are thus called for.

7.2. Networking
The value of networking and making connections is always high for any job search, and all
the more so for industry jobs. Highly sought after skills like computing, software, detector
design, logical thinking, statistical analysis, simulation, and hardware development are not the
only factors in this process. Networking is an additional personal skill that contributes to
social well-being, exchange of ideas, meeting people at professional levels and boosting one’s
professional conﬁdence. The best career opportunities often come from the connections such
as former classmates and co-workers. Nowadays, companies are increasingly looking towards
universities for fresh talent, and are eager to meet students who are looking for a career in
industry. In addition, reaching out to professors, alumni and other students to get advice and
information about career opportunities puts one at an advantage. We need to develop technical
tools to improve networking. Tools like [11] are required to serve our community of early career
and alumni for jobs as well as mutual connections. Just like CERN experiments, US based HEP
community is also very big, varied and interlinked; for example, in neutrino and dark matter
detections experimental collaborations, and links to astrophysics and related ﬁelds like nuclear
and gravitational physics, with common learnt skills. Hosting a dedicated platform in the US to
connect and engage HEPA with its alumni is required, just like at CERN [11]. This would not
only enable an organised framework, and serve as a hub to facilitate this process, but several
other actions in this direction can be planned and executed on that basis. A DOE lab would
be an ideal place to host it, like Fermilab, which is a hub for US particle physics. However, this
would need a small amount of investment to create a database of alumni and need technical
and personnel support to develop and maintain it.

7.3. Job search process
Many fulﬁlling career paths exist for physicists who are willing to prepare for, and embrace,
a transition to industry. However, translating HEPA abilities and adapting skills to an
11

industry job can require special preparation and many ﬁnd themselves unfamiliar with this
process. Preparing an industry tailored resume is one such important thing. For example,
very few industry job requisitions come with “PhD Physicist” requirement in the title, and one
should consider roles with Engineer, Data Scientist, Algorithm Developer, Quantitative Analyst,
Research Scientist in the title, and convert CV to a resume suitable for each target industry like
ﬁnance, defense, tech, software etc. Focusing on skills that generalize and core competencies that
are relevant to the job search are of far more use; physics jargon tied to previous research, like
“Searched for New Physics or Higgs Properties”, should be strictly avoided. Emphasize research
publications via a link to SPIRES (not enumerating scores of publications and articles), ability
to work in multi-disciplinary team environment and highlighting any distinctions, awards, major
accomplishments in generic terms is essential to be understood by industry hiring panel. Careful
attention must be paid to studying the company proﬁle, past hires, culture of embracing STEM
graduates and PhDs and chances of career advancement. HEPA alumni can be a big boon in
helping out with this preparation, career advice and sharing their own experience.

7.4. Projects and Internships
While there are many examples of internships sponsored by the National Labs and funding
agencies, like DOE and NSF, at the labs or universities, there are signiﬁcantly fewer internship
opportunities for HEPA early career scientists or students in industry. Industry internships can
serve as a very good opportunity to experience industry culture and environment and apply
HEPA skills. The biggest impediment for these internships would be a time oﬀ from core
research to allow a period of time to focus on industry internship. We must look for mechanism
to integrate this in core research curriculum. Most HEPA research is funded by federal grants
and having time-oﬀ from research would require change in funding rules and regulations and
above all, change in mindset of supervisors. While industry internships for students in general
exist, internships for more senior researchers at PhD or postdoc level may not be desired, or
hard to fund, by industry. However, naturally, any industry experience would be very valuable
for industry job and career.

Tailoring an academic experience for a position in industry will help prepare early career
HEP scientists for industry jobs. While industry internships funded by industry may be harder
at PhD or postdoc level, it would be easier for HEPA to create its own focused opportunities at
all levels to train its people for industry jobs. While skills like software are in common use in
HEPA, how they are used and applied in a goal and proﬁt oriented industry setting, with time
bound targets and deliverables, requires dedicated training opportunity. Job prospects in the
medical ﬁeld, like working with particle accelerators for radiation therapy for cancer treatment
and similar applications, might beneﬁt from dedicated experienced with experimental apparatus
like particle detectors and accelerators. Working with detectors leads to a rich experience in
electronics and instrumentation, but the duration of time spent may be short as the end goal
is always to produce physics results which take signiﬁcant time of a researcher and not relevant
for an industry job. Training for industry jobs by HEPA needs careful planning and should not
dilute the focus on core research goals, but at the same time it should prepare those who wish
to transition and are willing to go extra mile to ﬁnd a proper opportunity.

7.5. Collaborations
Alumni are relatively a low cost but a very valuable asset with an abundance of experience
of transitioning from HEPA. Their goodwill to contribute and strengthen ties with HEPA can
be tapped to facilitate industry job transition. Figure 12 and Figure 13 indicate that HEPA
alumni are interested in participating in projects that connect HEPA with industry in case it is
beneﬁcial to their careers as well. Hence, one attractive way to encourage and engage alumni
is to be proactive and creative in collaborating with them on HEPA projects. While several
private companies and enterprises may have legal restrictions against allowing individual level
alumni participation, in cases where it is allowed we must provide opportunities to collaborate.
In this way alumni will feel welcome to their alma mater in a more constructive way than to

12

be just industry job facilitators. This individual collaboration can be extended to the company
of the alumni itself and this can strengthen knowledge transfer from labs and universities and
vice versa; and Work done by HEPA research can beneﬁt companies and vice versa. A recent
example has been the use of Amazon Web Service (AWS) with the CMS experiment workload
through HEP Cloud project [40]. HEP experiments require massive computing resources in
irregular cycles and using commercial clouds is an important ingredient in this, where resources
can expand or contract on demand.These collaborations might also lead to ﬁrst steps towards
reversing the brain drain from industry to HEPA. Survey result Figure 11 indicates a signiﬁcant
interest in alumni to return full time to HEPA, especially if the compensation match as well as
work part-time.

8. Conclusions
A majority of HEPA early career scientists will inevitably transition out of traditional HEPA
careers, due simply to the structural disparity between the relatively few traditional HEPA
career positions available in any given year and the much larger number of available HEPA
early career scientists desiring to ﬁll those positions. Personal factors, such as the larger salaries
potentially available in industry and negative factors such as burnout, can also contribute to the
desire of early career scientists in transitioning out of traditional HEPA roles in academia and
the national laboratories. Whatever the reason, the HEPA community has both a pragmatic
need and an ethical obligation to connect early career HEPA job seekers with the resources and
relationships which will allow them to identify interesting careers and obtain stable positions
that will allow them to advance professionally as well as personally.

Each major milestone along the path from undergraduate to post-doctoral researcher
represents a potential transition point where a young HEPA physicist would ideally be
empowered with the information they need to develop an informed and realistic perspective
on the full breadth of opportunity available to them, within both traditional HEPA as well as
non-traditional careers. Many HEPA students and young scientists arguably continue to pursue
an entirely academic career path out of inertia and lack of awareness of the broader world of
opportunities avaiable outside of traditional HEP because of the relative dearth of resources
connecting non-traditional HEPA industries and employers to the pool of highly skilled HEPA
physicists entering the job market in any given year.

Above, we have identiﬁed, through surveys of early career HEPA scientists, networking and
mentoring relationships with earlier generations of HEPA physicists as the single most eﬀective
tool in communicating career opportunities to junior scientists. Very clearly and self-evidently,
this is a highly eﬀective strategy given that nearly every physics student, when approaching a
career transition point such as graduation or the end of a post-doctoral term, seeks to emulate
their direct supervisor and immediate colleagues by tenaciously pursuing a traditional HEPA
career to the exclusion of all else. We have shown above that it is possible to break out of this
self-reinforcing dynamic through a variety of mechanisms which can nurture and develop bonds
and help establish more broad communities of interest between mid- and late-career HEPA
scientists in non-traditional careers than has been the case throughout much of the history
of HEPA in the United States. Mechanisms such as e.g. alumni networks and opportunities
for internships in non-traditional HEPA settings have achieved great success in structurally
connecting early career job seekers with both the information and the opportunities which they
need in order to eﬀectively pursue a career that is ultimately both professionally and personally
rewarding. In addition, private employers reap the signiﬁcant economic beneﬁts of employing
HEP physicists skilled in both STEM disciplines and related skills such as technical writing
and collaborative working, while the wider society beneﬁts from the diﬀusion of highly talented
physics professionals from academia into the overall economy, strengthening both society at
large as well as improving quality of life for each individual.

While organizations such as the APS and national lab user groups can tailor and oﬀer
programs that meet their speciﬁc goals, it is clear that a more broad and systematic approach
to the marketing of career opportunities to early career physicists is needed beyond the
eﬀorts of such organizations if optimal outcomes at both the structural and personal levels
13

are to be achieved for HEP physics as well as the wider society. However, establishing and
institutionalizing these approaches, as well as socializing them with members of the HEPA
community from the most junior to the most senior levels, will require both dedicated eﬀort
from the community along with relatively modest funding in order to bring early and mid-to-
late career scientists together in environments and settings conducive to formal and informal
networking and the building of relationships that will last a lifetime.

References
[1] 2018 American Institute of Physics https://www.aip.org/
[2] 2018 Physics PhDs Ten Years Later: Movement across Job Sectors https://www.aip.org/sites/default/

files/phd+10-jobsectormovemnt.pdf

[3] 2016 EMPLOYMENT & CAREERS IN PHYSICS https://www.aip.org/statistics/reports/employm

ent-and-careers-physics

[4] 2016 Where do new PhDs work? https://doi.org/10.1063/PT.3.4591
[5] 2017 Preparing physics students for 21st-century careers https://physicstoday.scitation.org/doi/10.

1063/PT.3.3763

[6] 2022 AIP:Career Resources https://www.aip.org/career-resources
[7] 2013 NETWORKING EVENT FOR CMS ALUMNI, STUDENTS, AND POSTDOC https://indico.cer

n.ch/event/280839/

[8] 2013 NETWORKING EVENT FOR CMS ALUMNI, STUDENTS, AND POSTDOC https://cms.cern/i

ndex.php/news/networking-event-cms-alumni-students-and-postdocs

[9] 2016 The 4th ALICE, ATLAS, CMS and LHCb Career Networking Event https://home.cern/news/news/

experiments/4th-alice-atlas-cms-and-lhcb-career-networking-event

[10] 2022 Events for the CERN-based community https://indico.cern.ch/category/12583/
[11] 2022 The CERN Alumni Network https://alumni.cern/
[12] 2022 CERN @ Career fairs https://careers.cern/cern-career-fairs
[13] 2022 Fermilab Student & Postdoc Association (FSPA): Career Activities https://fspa.fnal.gov/career

-activities/

[14] 2020 Snomass2021 Early Career https://snowmass21.org/start/young
[15] 2022 Who’s Hiring Physics Bachelors? https://www.aip.org/statistics/whos-hiring-physics-bachelo

rs

[16] 2022 Careers Toolbox for Undergraduate Physics Students & their Mentors https://www.spsnational.or

g/sites/all/careerstoolbox/

[17] 2022 Flowchart of career paths for graduates with bachelor’s physics degrees https://www-s3-live.kent

.edu/s3fs-root/s3fs-public/careers 1.gif

[18] 2020 Transitioning to Industry https://indico.fnal.gov/event/44789/contributions/193952/attachm

ents/132660/163282/TransitioningToIndustry.pdf

[19] 2020 Application for the TNSF Fellowship: Justin Vasel https://indico.fnal.gov/event/43427/contri

butions/192519/attachments/131958/161806/Vasel-CommF2-TNSF-process.pdf

[20] 2020 2020 Applying to the AAAS Fellowship: Jacob M. Pasner https://indico.fnal.gov/event/43427/
contributions/192518/attachments/132000/161892/Pasner SnowMass AAAS Presentation July 27 2
020.pdf

[21] 2022 Science News: Emily Conover https://www.sciencenews.org/author/emily-conover
[22] 2022 AAAS: Katrina Miller https://www.aaas.org/programs/mass-media-fellowship/katrina-miller
[23] 2021 Several article by Dr. Yangyang Cheng in The Guardian https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ya

ngyang-cheng

[24] 2020 AF1: Beam Physics and Accelerator Education https://snowmass21.org/accelerator/outreach/st

art

[25] 2020 FRONTIERS IN NEUTRINO PHYSICS https://snowmass21.org/neutrino/start
[26] 2020 INSTRUMENTATION FRONTIER https://snowmass21.org/instrumentation/start
[27] 2020 AF6: Advanced AcceleratorConcepts https://snowmass21.org/accelerator/advanced/start
[28] 2020 CompF3: Machine Learning https://snowmass21.org/computational/machine learning
[29] 2020 ISOTDAQ https://home.cern/tags/isotdaq
[30] 2020 Excellence in Detectors and Instrumentation Technologies http://detectors-school.web.cern.ch/
[31] 2020 The European Schools of High-Energy Physics https://physicschool.web.cern.ch/eshep/default

.html

[32] 2022 The CERN-Fermilab Hadron Collider Physics Summer Schools http://hcpss.web.cern.ch/
[33] 2022 Careers in Private Sector https://www.aps.org/careers/physicists/profiles/private.cfm
[34] 2022 Careers in Public Service https://www.aps.org/careers/physicists/profiles/public-service.c

fm

[35] 2022 Physics Today: Jobs https://jobs.physicstoday.org/jobs/
[36] 2013 CMS Alumni Group https://www.linkedin.com/groups/4791918

14

[37] 2022 Fermilab:Partnerships and Technology Transfer https://partnerships.fnal.gov/
[38] 2022 CERN:Partnerships https://home.cern/partnerships
[39] 2022 UCL’s Centre for Doctoral Training in Data Intensive Science http://www.hep.ucl.ac.uk/cdt-dis/
[40] 2016 Experiment that Discovered the Higgs Boson Uses AWS to Probe Nature https://aws.amazon.com/b

logs/aws/experiment-that-discovered-the-higgs-boson-uses-aws-to-probe-nature/

15

