2
2
0
2

r
a

M
1
3

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
6
1
7
1
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

On the Evaluation of NLP-based Models for Software
Engineering

Maliheh Izadi
m.izadi@tudelft.nl
Delft University of Technology
Delft, Netherlands

Matin Nili Ahmadabadi
matin_nili@alumni.ut.ac.ir
University of Tehran
Tehran, Iran

ABSTRACT
NLP-based models have been increasingly incorporated to address
SE problems. These models are either employed in the SE domain
with little to no change, or they are greatly tailored to source code
and its unique characteristics. Many of these approaches are con-
sidered to be outperforming or complementing existing solutions.
However, an important question arises here: Are these models eval-
uated fairly and consistently in the SE community?. To answer this
question, we reviewed how NLP-based models for SE problems
are being evaluated by researchers. The ﬁndings indicate that cur-
rently there is no consistent and widely-accepted protocol for the
evaluation of these models. While diﬀerent aspects of the same task
are being assessed in diﬀerent studies, metrics are deﬁned based on
custom choices, rather than a system, and ﬁnally, answers are col-
lected and interpreted case by case. Consequently, there is a dire
need to provide a methodological way of evaluating NLP-based
models to have a consistent assessment and preserve the possibil-
ity of fair and eﬃcient comparison.

KEYWORDS
Evaluation, Natural Language Processing, Software Engineering

review on evaluation of NLP-based models to understand the un-
derlying patterns, identify the challenges, and recommend future
research direction.

2 METHODOLOGY
We conducted our systematic review using the following protocol.
Our main research question is “How are NLP-based models evalu-
ated in SE?”. Search phrases in the title, abstract or body of a paper
are NLP, natural language processing, code, and evaluation. Papers
must be peer-reviewed, written in English, and be published after
2017 by one of the following SE prominent conferences and jour-
nals: ICSE, ESEC/FSE, ASE, IEEE TSE, ACM TOSEM, and EMSE. We
used Google Scholar as the source, and retrieved 157 papers. Two
of the authors manually inspected all papers to identify the papers
that propose an NLP-based model to solve a SE problem. Finally,
53 papers were excluded because of one or more of the following
reasons: the paper’s scope was unrelated to NLP and SE, the main
proposed model was not based on NLP, or it was a secondary or
duplicate study. Next, we present the result of the review on the
remaining 104 included papers. More information on the protocol
and papers can be found in our GitHub repository.1

ACM Reference Format:
Maliheh Izadi and Matin Nili Ahmadabadi. 2022. On the Evaluation of NLP-
based Models for Software Engineering. In The 1st Intl. Workshop on Natural
Language-based Software Engineering (NLBSE’22), May 21, 2022, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3528588.3528665

1 INTRODUCTION
Researchers have been using NLP-models to solve a diverse set of
SE problems such as code generation, completion, summarization,
bug ﬁxing, question answering, test case generation, documenta-
tion, and many more. As these models attract more researchers
and the number and diversity of studies grows, it is imperative
to have good evaluation measures and techniques to assess them
properly. These measures should be consistent throughout the lit-
erature in order to conduct fair and comparable comparisons. To
understand the evaluation of NLP models, we reviewed the ﬁeld
in the past ﬁve years and report the results here. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to conduct a systematic literature

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
NLBSE’22, May 21, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9343-0/22/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3528588.3528665

3 EVALUATION OF NLP-BASED MODELS
There are two approaches to evaluation intrinsic with a focus on
intermediary goals (sub-tasks), and extrinsic for assessing the per-
formance of the ﬁnal goal. NLP-based models in SE are generally
evaluated with one or more of the following metrics.
(1) Automatically: Automatic evaluation consists of three groups,
namely (i) metrics for assessing the results of classiﬁcation models
such as Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F measure, (ii) metrics for
assessing recommendation lists including 𝑇𝑜𝑝@𝑛 or ranked ver-
sions such as MRR and MAP, and (iii) metrics for analyzing the
quality of generated text or source code including BLEU, METEOR,
ROUGE, CIDEr, chrF, Perplexity, and Levenshtein similarity metrics.
(2) Manually: Manual assessment is more subjective and heeds the
judgment of human participants. Researchers ﬁrst select the rele-
vant metric(s) to evaluate diﬀerent aspects of the proposed model’s
output. Then, they invite a group of experts to assess the results
based on the selected metrics. For instance, for a code summariza-
tion task, researchers use informativeness as an indicator of the
quality of the generated summaries from the developers’ perspec-
tive.

Automatic evaluation is easier, faster, and completely objective
compared to the manual version. Thus most researchers opt to use
automatic evaluation for assessing their models. However, human-
based assessments can potentially convey more information for

1https://github.com/MalihehIzadi/nlp4se_eval

 
 
 
 
 
 
NLBSE’22, May 21, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Izadi and Nili

several aspects of a model, hence, they can be used to complement
automatic evaluation. Recently, Roy et al. [12] conducted an em-
pirical study on the applicability and interpretation of automatic
metrics for evaluation of the. code summarization task. With the
help of 226 human annotators, they assessed the degree to which
automatic metrics reﬂect human evaluation. They claim that less
than 2 points improvements for an automatic metric such as BLEU
do not guarantee systematic improvements in summarization qual-
ity. This makes the role of human assessment salient.

Although automatic measures are uniformly deﬁned in the liter-
ature, manual metrics are harder to deﬁne, interpret and use. These
measures must be properly indicative of a model’s goal and perfor-
mance. Furthermore, their deﬁnitions and usage must be kept con-
sistent to have comparable results. Hence, in the following we re-
view the most popular existing manual assessment measures in the
SE domain and leave the rest of them (such as eﬀectiveness, com-
prehensibility, time-saving, relatedness, rightness, usability, recency,
grammatically correctness, advantageousness, diversity, self-explanatory,
theme identiﬁcation, and more) for a more comprehensive study.
Usefulness: Several studies deﬁne usefulness as how useful partic-
ipants ﬁnd the proposed solution for solving the problem at hand [2,
4, 7, 11, 16]. Others deﬁne usefulness as the tendency or prefer-
ence of users to use their proposed model [17]. Jiang et al. [8] as-
sess the usefulness of its results based on both its accuracy and the
diﬃculty of generating outputs. That is, they focus on how often
the model works when it is indeed needed. Naturalness, Expres-
siveness, Readability, and Understandability: Roy et al. [13]
deﬁne naturalness as how easy it is to read and understand gen-
erated outputs. They also use readability to measure to what ex-
tent the output is perceived as readable and understandable by the
participants. Aghamohammadi et al. [1] deﬁne naturalness as how
smooth, human-readable, and syntactically-correct are their out-
puts. Gao et al. [5] measure naturalness as the grammatical cor-
rectness and ﬂuency of a generated sentence. Zhou et al. [18] use
expressiveness as whether their model’s output is clear and un-
derstandable. Correctness or Content: Huang et al. [6] deﬁne
correctness as whether participants can ﬁnd the correct API using
their proposed tool, while Chen et al. [3] deﬁne it as a measure to
verify the general correctness of the abbreviations and synonyms
in their thesaurus. In Roy et al.’s [13] study, content means whether
a summary correctly reﬂects the content of a test case. Complete-
ness and Informativeness: Uddin et al. [14] deﬁne completeness
as a complete yet presentable summarization of API reviews. Aghamo-
hammadi et al. [1] deﬁne informativeness as how much of the im-
portant parts of a piece of code are covered by a generated sum-
mary. Conciseness: In Roy et al.’s [13] study, concise summaries
do not include extraneous or irrelevant information. Zhou et al.[18]
quantiﬁes conciseness through answering whether the repair rec-
ommendation is free of other constraint-irrelevant information. Rel-
evance or Similarity: Several studies deﬁne relevance as to how
relevant is the model’s output to the reference text or code [2, 5,
11, 16]. Others asked developers to rate the similarity, relatedness,
and contextual or semantic similarity between outputs and refer-
ence texts [9, 10, 15].

4 DISCUSSION, AND FUTURE DIRECTION
We reviewed 104 studies to understand how NLP-based models
are usually evaluated in the SE domain and provided the list of
most used metrics. Next, we provide the main challenges for the
evaluation of NLP-based models. (1) Both automatic and manual
approaches can be utilized to provide a more holistic view of the
performance of an NLP-based model, however, not all of the eligi-
ble studies use both of these approaches. (2) For the manual form
of assessment, there exist numerous and sometimes conﬂicting or
ambiguous evaluation metrics. This problem exacerbates in the
case of measures with multiple deﬁnitions (e.g., informativeness)
or in case of multiple metrics which are overlapping (e.g., natural-
ness, readability, understandability, and expressiveness). Some re-
searchers evaluate diﬀerent aspects of their model, (e.g., complete-
ness, naturalness, or correctness) while others only address one
or two aspects. As there are various aspects to each model, there
should be a methodological way to ﬁrst identify the most impor-
tant aspects of a given SE task and then properly evaluate those
aspects with concretely deﬁned metrics. (3) In addition to the def-
inition and use of the metrics, there is no standard for deﬁning
the set of answers. That is, some use yes/no answers, while others
use 𝑛-point Likert scale or even free-format text answers. (4) Fi-
nally, identifying novel evaluation metrics or techniques can help
SE researchers assess these models more thoroughly and where
it matters. For example, for the automatic code completion task,
predicting an identiﬁer is more valuable and diﬃcult than predict-
ing a keyword. Hence, evaluating models for predicting any to-
ken is not very helpful. Through reviewing the literature, we took
the ﬁrst step toward addressing the challenges of proper evalua-
tion for NLP-based models. We suggest future research focus on
providing a systematic and consistent framework for evaluation
of these models to (1) clearly deﬁne measures, (2) distinguish be-
tween diﬀerent needs of SE tasks, and (3) determine the proper use
of a measure in the context. Hopefully, a systematic way of evalu-
ation makes it possible to conduct fair and correct evaluations for
the NLP-based models in the SE ﬁeld.

REFERENCES
[1] Alireza Aghamohammadi, Maliheh Izadi, and Abbas Heydarnoori. 2020. Gener-
ating summaries for methods of event-driven programs: An Android case study.
Journal of Systems and Software 170 (2020), 110800.

[2] Liang Cai, Haoye Wang, Bowen Xu, Qiao Huang, Xin Xia, David Lo, and Zhen-
chang Xing. 2019. AnswerBot: an answer summary generation tool based on
stack overﬂow. In Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM Joint Meeting on European
Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering. 1134–1138.

[3] Chunyang Chen, Zhenchang Xing, and Ximing Wang. 2017. Unsupervised
software-speciﬁc morphological forms inference from informal discussions. In
2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE).
IEEE, 450–461.

[4] Andrea Di Sorbo, Sebastiano Panichella, Carol V Alexandru, Corrado A Visag-
gio, and Gerardo Canfora. 2017. SURF: summarizer of user reviews feedback. In
2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering Compan-
ion (ICSE-C). IEEE, 55–58.

[5] Zhipeng Gao, Xin Xia, John Grundy, David Lo, and Yuan-Fang Li. 2020. Gener-
ating question titles for stack overﬂow from mined code snippets. ACM Trans-
actions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 29, 4 (2020), 1–37.
[6] Qiao Huang, Xin Xia, Zhenchang Xing, David Lo, and Xinyu Wang. 2018. API
method recommendation without worrying about the task-API knowledge gap.
In 2018 33rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineer-
ing (ASE). IEEE, 293–304.

[7] Maliheh Izadi, Abbas Heydarnoori, and Georgios Gousios. 2021. Topic recom-
mendation for software repositories using multi-label classiﬁcation algorithms.

On the Evaluation of NLP-based Models for Software Engineering

NLBSE’22, May 21, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Empirical Software Engineering 26, 5 (2021), 1–33.

[8] Lin Jiang, Hui Liu, and He Jiang. 2019. Machine learning based recommendation
of method names: how far are we. In 2019 34th IEEE/ACM International Confer-
ence on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 602–614.

[9] Siyuan Jiang, Ameer Armaly, and Collin McMillan. 2017. Automatically generat-
ing commit messages from diﬀs using neural machine translation. In 2017 32nd
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE).
IEEE, 135–146.

[10] Zhongxin Liu, Xin Xia, Christoph Treude, David Lo, and Shanping Li. 2019. Au-
tomatic generation of pull request descriptions. In 2019 34th IEEE/ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 176–188.
[11] Xiaoxue Ren, Xinyuan Ye, Zhenchang Xing, Xin Xia, Xiwei Xu, Liming Zhu, and
Jianling Sun. 2020. API-misuse detection driven by ﬁne-grained API-constraint
knowledge graph. In 2020 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 461–472.

[12] Devjeet Roy, Sarah Fakhoury, and Venera Arnaoudova. 2021. Reassessing auto-
matic evaluation metrics for code summarization tasks. In Proceedings of the 29th
ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium
on the Foundations of Software Engineering. 1105–1116.

[13] Devjeet Roy, Ziyi Zhang, Maggie Ma, Venera Arnaoudova, Annibale Panichella,
Sebastiano Panichella, Danielle Gonzalez, and Mehdi Mirakhorli. 2020. DeepTC-
Enhancer: Improving the readability of automatically generated tests. In 2020

35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering
(ASE). IEEE, 287–298.

[14] Gias Uddin and Foutse Khomh. 2017. Automatic summarization of API reviews.
In 2017 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engi-
neering (ASE). IEEE, 159–170.

[15] Yaza Wainakh, Moiz Rauf, and Michael Pradel. 2021.

IdBench: Evaluating Se-
mantic Representations of Identiﬁer Names in Source Code. In 2021 IEEE/ACM
43rd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 562–573.
[16] Haoye Wang, Xin Xia, David Lo, John Grundy, and Xinyu Wang. 2021. Auto-
matic Solution Summarization for Crash Bugs. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd Interna-
tional Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 1286–1297.

[17] Yu Zhao, Tingting Yu, Ting Su, Yang Liu, Wei Zheng, Jingzhi Zhang, and
William GJ Halfond. 2019. Recdroid: automatically reproducing android appli-
cation crashes from bug reports. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference
on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 128–139.

[18] Yu Zhou, Xin Yan, Taolue Chen, Sebastiano Panichella, and Harald Gall. 2019.
DRONE: a tool to detect and repair directive defects in Java APIs documenta-
tion. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering:
Companion Proceedings (ICSE-Companion). IEEE, 115–118.

