Work-From-Home is Here to Stay: Call for 
Flexibility in Post-Pandemic Work Policies 
Darja Smite1,2, Nils Brede Moe2,1, Jarle Hildrum3, Javier Gonzalez Huerta1, Daniel Mendez1,4 
1 Blekinge Institute of Technology, 2 SINTEF, 3 Telenor, 4 fortiss 

Abstract:  In  early  2020,  the  Covid-19  pandemic  forced  employees  in  tech  companies  worldwide  to  abruptly 
transition from working in offices to working from their homes. During two years of predominantly working from home, 
employees and managers alike formed expectations about what post-pandemic working life should look like. Many 
companies  are  currently  experimenting  with  new  work  policies  that  balance  both  employee-  and  manager 
expectations to where, when and how work should be done in the future. In this article, we gather experiences of the 
new trend of remote work from 17 companies and their sites, covering 12 countries. We share the results of corporate 
surveys of employee preferences for working from home and analyse new work policies. Our results are threefold. 
First, through the new work policies all companies are formally giving more flexibility to the employees with regards 
to working time and work location. Second, there is a great variation in how much flexibility the companies are willing 
to yield to the employees. The variation is related both to industry type, size of the companies, and company culture. 
Third, we document a change in the psychological contract between employees and managers, where the option of 
working from home is converted from an exclusive perk that managers could choose to give to the few, to a core 
privilege that all employees feel they are entitled to. Finally, there are indications that as the companies learn and 
solicit feedback regarding the efficiency of the chosen strategies, we will see further developments and changes of 
the work policies with respect to how much flexibility to work whenever and from wherever they grant. Through these 
findings,  the  paper  contributes  to  a  growing  literature  about  the  new  trends  emerging  from  the  pandemic  in  tech 
companies and spells out practical implications onwards.   

Keywords: Work from home, work from anywhere, remote work, hybrid workplace, post-pandemic, survey. 

Introduction 

In March 2020, employees of most if not all tech companies in the world forced their employees to work 
from home in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, marking the turn of the history in the magnitude of 
experience and perception of work from home (WFH). Almost two years later, with the ease of restrictions 
and periodic attempts to reopen the society we see that the pandemic has left a permanent mark in the 
fundamental  principles  of  the  workplace  as  many  information  workers  express  their  preferences  to 
continue working from home. It’s, thus, fair to assume that WFH is here to stay.  

A large survey of over 30’000 American workers identified five reasons for the large shift in favour of WFH 
(Barrero et al., 2021 a), including better-than-expected WFH experiences, new investments in physical 
and human capital that enable WFH, the change in attitude and stigmatisation of remote workers, lingering 
concerns about crowds and contagion risks, and a pandemic-driven surge in technological innovations 
that support WFH. And although we know that fully remote work from home is not challenge free and is 
not for everybody (Ford et al., 2020; Ralph et al., 2020), there is a growing realisation that the old, good 
days,  in  which  the  notion  of  “being  employed”  was  strongly  associated  with  working  in  the  office,  will 
change.  An  increasing  demand  for  flexibility  from  the  new  hires  during  job  interviews  calls  for  new 
corporate policies regarding working from home. In fact, the degree of flexibility might now become the 
make-or-break point in many employment decisions. The following dialogues between developers (D) and 
managers (M) reflect the actual stories we have heard from our industry partners in the past few months, 
and they show that the rules for retaining and attracting employees are indeed changing.  

 
 
 
Somewhere in Sweden 
M: Now it’s time to return to the office. 
D: No, we will continue working from home. 
M: You must return. 
D: OK, then we quit. 
M: Please, don’t. You can continue working from home. 

Somewhere in Norway 
D: May I work from home; I broke my leg. 
M: Sorry, we just introduced a new policy. You are to be in 
the office 3 days a week.  
D: But my situation is different!? 
M: Sorry, but the rules are equal for everybody. 
D (thinking): Oh, maybe I should start looking for a new job… 

Somewhere in Germany 
D: Since I am working from home during the pandemic, may 
I join my family in India and work from there? 
M: OK, you are allowed to do that, but we will cut your salary 
to the level of the salary in India, since your living standard is 
going to be lower. 
D: (thinking): Oh, maybe I should start looking for a new job… 

Somewhere in Brazil 
D: Can I get a raise? 
M: Not really. It's a tough time now. 
D: OK, then I quit. 
M: Why? Aren’t you satisfied to work for us? 
D: I was, but then I got an offer from a start-up in the US that 
is ready to pay a much higher salary in US dollars.

On the other hand, there is a growing interest in understanding the long-term effects of isolation and remote 
work.  A  Microsoft  study  with  over  60’000  employees  shows  that  firm-wide  remote  work  made  the 
collaboration network more static with fewer new ties being established and heavily siloed, with fewer ties 
that cut across formal business units, as communication shifted from synchronous to asynchronous (Yang 
et al,, 2021). Based on related research that suggests that changes in collaboration and communication 
media impede knowledge transfer and the ability to convey and process complex information, as well as 
reduce  the  quality,  the  authors  further  expect  these  network  changes  to  have  a  negative  impact  on 
productivity  and  innovation  (Yang  et  al,,  2021).  Other  researchers  have  expressed  similar  concerns 
regarding  the  long-term  effects  of  deteriorating  social  ties  (Clear,  2021)  and  decreased  interest  in 
collaborative work when doing it remotely (Kane et al. 2021; Smite et al., 2021).  

One key approach managers are using to tackle these problems is formulating new work policies that set 
the expectation to employees about both office presence and behaviours in a new hybrid work situation. 
While the existence of such policies is nothing new, the fast-growing adoption and variation of such policies 
during the pandemic is huge (Choudury, 2020). In this article, we portray the different trends and the variety 
of options incorporated in the new work policies of 17 companies and discuss how these companies have 
adjusted their strategies to address the demand of the new reality.  

Overview of the cases and data 

The data behind our findings comes from 17 companies that differ in domain and size, from small one-
office companies to large international companies represented by several offices (see an overview of our 
dataset  in  Table  1).  In  this  article,  we  present  the  results  of  23  company-internal  surveys  of  employee 
preferences for working from home or in the office (see the summary in Table 1), and 26 corporate post-
pandemic work policies (see the summary in Table 2).  

Surveys:  Employee  preferences  for  WFH  were  elicited  through  corporate  surveys  designed  in  the 
companies. We had access to the results of 23 surveys from 22 corporate entities (including 2 runs of the 
survey in one company). The summary in Figure 1 portrays the voice of 11’318 respondents. The response 
rates in different companies varied from the min of 15% to the max of 100% with 65% as the median. 
Since the scales of possible response options across surveys varied, we integrated the results using a 
common scale of frequency of WFH: “Never” (meaning only in the office), “Occasionally” (less than once 
a week), “Less than half week” (1-2 days a week), “Half the time”, “More than half week” (3-4 days a week), 
“Occasionally in the office” (less than once a week in the office), and “Always” (see Appendix A for the 
individual survey scales). Notably, not all response options have been available in each of the surveys (for 

 
 
 
 
example,  some  surveys  offered  respondents  to  choose  “50:50%”,  while  others  had  1  day/week,  2 
days/week, etc.). This is why, we recommend looking at the three major trends with respect to the amount 
of responses in favour of primarily office work (“Never” and “Occasionally”), those in favour of primarily 
remote work (“Always” and “Occasionally in the office”), and those who give preference to flexible or hybrid 
work arrangements (“Less than half week”, “Half the time” and “More than half week”).  

Further  detailed  analysis  was  performed  in  selected  cases.  First,  in  two  companies,  we  yielded to  see 
whether  respondents  change  their  preferences  for  WFH  over  time  (presented  in  Figure  2).  We  also 
received results of stratified analysis of role and age in the Storebrand’s survey. Stratified analysis was 
also performed for the survey from Telenor Norway, using ANOVA factor analysis (Allen, 2017), for the 
preferences for WFH, including gender, role, age and commute time (presented in Figure 3). We have 
used n-way ANOVA analyses to identify whether preferences for WFH might be dependent on different 
factors or their interactions and performed Tukey post-hoc tests to identify which groups in a particular 
factor have different preferences. We only report differences on preferences in the stratified analysis when 
they have been found to be statistically significant (! < 0.05	 with ' = 	0.05). In addition, we ran a set of 
logistic  regressions  (Menard  2002)  using  as  the  dependent  variables  binary  measures  of  employees’ 
stated preferences to work from home and the same explanatory variables. Based on these regressions, 
we present the probabilities to work from the office and the related marginal effects of each variable.  

Work policies: Next, we reviewed post-pandemic work policy documents. We have gathered 26 policies, 
some designed to regulate the WFH in a single office, others represent centralised corporate efforts. We 
analysed the options permitted by the corporate policies (summarised in Figure 4), and the exceptions 
from the general rules, if any. Corporate policies were discussed with representatives from each of the 
companies in informal and/or formal interviews. During these interviews, we additionally inquired whether 
it  is  permitted  to  move  within  the  country  or  globally,  and  how  the  companies  support  home  office 
equipment of those working remotely.  

Table 1: Overview of the data collection activities and collected data  
Corporate cases included in the study 

Case 
ID 

‘InterSoft’ (pseudonym): Large international company delivering music 
streaming services. R&D locations.  

‘GlobCo’ (pseudonym): Large multinational company delivering software 
intensive systems for the telecom market. A Swedish site and several Indian 
sites in one business unit and a Chinese site in another business unit. 

Malvacom: Small consultancy company delivering applications and server 
solutions. Whole company 
Storebrand: A large software company leading the Nordic market in long-term 
savings and insurance. Whole company.  
SB1 Utvikling: Large software development company owned by a Norwegian 
alliance of banks. Whole company.  

Sbanken: Scandinavian online-only bank offering financial services. Whole 
company. 

KnowIT: Large consultancy company delivering digital transformation and 
systems development services. One Norwegian site. 

Kantega: Medium-size software company developing bespoke software for 
diverse markets, incl. financial and public sector. Whole company. 

Blank: A small employee-owned consultancy company offering software 
development services and developing own products. Whole company.  

‘KNor’ (pseudonym): A large Norwegian company developing embedded 
software products. One development department.  
Tietoevry: Large multinational technology company delivering software 
solutions to customers worldwide. Detailed analysis of five largest geographic 
locations and a corporate survey from 16 geographic locations. 

Telenor: Large multinational market leading telecom operator. Four business 
units.  

‘FSwed’ (pseudonym): Large software development company delivering 
financial systems and services. Whole company. 

‘SpanCo’ (pseudonym): Part of a large consultancy company developing 
software for the banking sector. A Spanish site. 

GFT: Medium-size European consultancy company delivering software 
solutions for finance and insurance sectors. Detailed analysis from one site, 
and survey data from five Spanish sites. 

A 

BA 

BB 

BC 

C 

D 

E 

F 

G 

H 

I 

J 

KA 

KB 
KC 

KD 
KE 

LA 
LB 

LC 

LD 

M 

N 

O 

Locations 

Size  

Survey of WFH preferences 

WFH policy, status 

Sweden, US, 
the UK 

1’411 

Sweden 

India 

China 

Sweden 

358 
961 

54 

17 

N 
1408  

Rate 
100%  Mar-Apr 2021  “Work from anywhere”, Fall 2021 

Executed 

276  

769 

35 

13  

77% 

80% 

65% 

75% 

Mar 2021 

Mar 2021 

Mar 2021 

Nov 2021 

“Instruction Remote Work in Sweden”, Fall 2021 
“Flexible work guidelines”, Dec 2021 

“Alignment of practice”, Dec 2021 

Policy for remote work, Oct 2021 

Norway 

1’300 

358 

26% 

Jan 2022 

“Future Storebrand”, Spring 2021 

Norway 

355 

Norway 

344  

Norway 

Norway 

175 

172 

Norway 

44 

Norway 

3’676 

Norway 

Sweden 
Finland 

India 
Czech Rep 

Norway 
Sweden 

Denmark 

Finland 

Sweden 

3’881 

3’270 
2’954 

2’542 
3’676 

3’446 
1554 

1’086 

1’487 

589 

230 

224  
209  

65%  Apr-May 2021  “Create rule of conduct together”, Jun 2021 

63% 
61% 

Sep-Oct 2021 
Nov 2021 

“Sbanken post COVID”, Fall 2021 

138  

79% 

Sep-Oct 2021  “Guidelines and recommendations for hybrid 

workday”, Fall 2021 

162 

94% 

Jun 2021 

Principles for future workplace, Fall 2021  

36 

40  

395  

1026  

1102  
793  

593  
390  

2219  

– 

– 

– 

82% 

91% 

58% 

Feb 2021 

Dec 2021 

Flexible work principles (established with the 
company foundation) 

May 2020 

“Guideline for Hybrid Working”, Jan 2022  

28%  Apr-May 2021  Norwegian hybrid working guidelines, Oct 2021 

28% 
24% 

20% 
15% 

65% 

– 

– 

– 

Swedish hybrid working guidelines, Oct 2021 
Finish hybrid working guidelines, Oct 2021 

Indian hybrid working guidelines, Nov 2021 
Czech hybrid working guidelines, Nov 2021 

Guidelines flexibility in ‘TNor’ Group, Aug 2021 
Rules of Engagement, Jul 2021 

“Flexible work”, Jun 2021 

“Flexible work model”, Nov 2021 

2021 

– 

– 

– 

429  

73%  Mar-Apr 2021  WFH update on intranet, Oct 2021  

Spain 

13 

13  

100% 

Employment contract, Sep 2021 

Spain 

1’800 

1045  

72% 

Spring 2021  Policy for remote work, Oct 2018 /2020  

CQSE: Small product development and consultancy company specialised in 
software maintenance and evolution. A German site. 
QualityMinds: A medium-sized consultancy company focusing on software 
quality, quality assurance and development. Whole company. 

P  Germany and 

50 

USA 

Q  Germany and 

250 

Poland 

– 

– 

– 

Flexible remote work  policy, prior to COVID-19 

90  

36% 

Oct 2021 

“QM Company Guide”, 2013 

 
Figure 1: Overview of the employee votes for working from home options.  

 
 
Employee preferences: How much do employees 
want to work from home? 

To understand the future demand for flexibility, we integrated the results of corporate surveys of 
employee preferences for working from home (see Figure 1). What did we find?  

How many want to return to the office?  
Surprisingly, there are not that many employees who will return to the traditional way of working 
“at the office 9 to 5 five days a week” (the median value for employees who opted for “Never at 
home” and “Occasionally from home” options is only 10%). Groups of employees who choose to 
work only from the office reach the maximum of 38% in the special case of the Spanish SpanCo, 
where the employees have been given only the binary choice between full time office work and full 
time remote work, with the Norwegian Blank on the second with 15%.  

How many do not want to return to the office at all?  
Groups  who  want  to  only  work  from  home  (“Always”  category)  vary  from  0%  in  the  Swedish 
Malvacom,  the  Norwegian  SB1  Utvikling  and  Kantega,  to  38%  in  Indian  Tietoevry,  40%  in  the 
German QualityMinds, and 62% in the exceptional case of the Spanish SpanCo, the votes of which 
reflects the binary choice. Interestingly, the median value of employees who opted for “Always” at 
home  and  “Occasionally  in  the  office”  mirrors  the  office  workers  –  10%.  Five  companies  from 
Germany, India and Spain in our dataset report that at least every fifth employee prefers to continue 
to work fully remotely.  

How prevalent is the demand for flexibility?  
The vast majority of respondents in our dataset choose to mix days in the office with days at home, 
which recently gained a label of a hybrid work setup. The main motivation for this trend is that home 
offices  are  typically  associated  with  way  more  superior  conditions  for  concentration  and 
uninterrupted work, while offices are seen as way more superior for collaborative work (Smite et 
al., 2022). There are, however, some exceptions to this trend. A recent survey conducted by the 
Gensler Institute (2021) suggests that younger generations of employees who often live in homes 
unsuited for concentration work are less productive working from home than from the office, and 
want to use the office for uninterrupted work.  

The preferred proportion of time spent in the office vs home varies across companies and within 
companies. In fact, our data suggests that in companies that surveyed their employees several 
times, even the individual opinions have changed over time (see Figure 2). This emphasises that 
the demand for WFH is situational and motivates the high degree of flexibility.  

Figure 2: Changes in preferences for WFH overtime at Blank and SB1 Utvikling. Result: No undecided, 
fewer extremes, more opt for hybrid with more office presence in Blank and less in SB1 Utvikling.  

 
 
Interestingly,  in  Tietoevry,  which  practiced  WFH  since  before  the  pandemic,  we  were  able  to 
compare the pre-pandemic working with the employee preferences for post-pandemic working. To 
our surprise, ⅕ of previously “mostly office” employees would like to visit the office less than once 
a week, while roughly ⅕ of “mostly remotes” would like to go to the office at least 3-4 days/week. 
This means that the attitudes towards remote work have changed significantly and that companies 
cannot predict the employee preferences based on the historical choices. 

Who chooses which preferences?  
Wherever  possible,  we  performed  detailed  analysis  to  check  for  demographic  predictors  of  the 
preference  for  office  or  home  working  (see  Figure  3).  The  candidate  factors  were  age,  tenure, 
gender, managerial role or not, size of the cities, countries and pre-pandemic choices).  

Role:  When  contrasting  engineers’  vs  managers’  choices  in  Storebrand  (see  Figure  3A)  and 
Telenor Norway (see Figure 3B), we found that managers prefer to spend more days at the office 
than other employees. 

Age: In Storebrand (see Figure 3C) and Telenor Norway (see Figure 3D), we checked employee 
preferences for WFH across different age groups, and found that those younger employees (<29 
in Telenor) prefer more office presence than senior employees (>56 in Telenor), who prefer more 
WFH days.  

Commute time might also be one important factor when predicting the willingness of the employees 
to come into the office. In Telenor Norway (see Figure 3E), we analysed employee preferences in 
Oslo, the capital of Norway, compared with smaller Norwegian towns, assuming that the commute 
time in the capital city is longer. We found that the number of employees who want to work in the 
office is three times higher in smaller towns. Unwillingness to spend time commuting was found 
the No 1 reason for employees not present in the office in three other Norwegian companies – SB1 
Utvikling, Storebrand and Sbanken. To exemplify the length of commute, in SB1 Utvikling 36% of 
employees spend 1,5 hours commuting to and from work each time they go to the office. 

Gender: Our analysis of male and female preferences for WFH in TietoEVRY (see Figure 3F) and 
Telenor  Norway  (see  Figure  3G)  did  not  indicate  any  significant  differences  in  preferences  for 
working from home overall. However, when analysing differences within the age-group of 30-40 
years  in  Telenor,  we  find  a  slightly  but  significantly  higher  preference  to  work  from  home  for 
females. As many people in this age-group have small children, one potential explanation is that 
females choose to work from home more than the males for reasons of caring for children.  

This finding is of particular interest because telework historically has been tightly associated with 
gender segregated motivation (Pratt, 1984). For instance, Nguyen and Armoogum (2021) found 
the  gender-divided  preferences  towards  WFH  to  vary,  with  higher  preferences  among  female 
professionals. Such differences have also been found by Bloom et al. (2021, a) who point out that 
among college graduates with young children, females want to work full time from home almost 
50% more than males. Although our analysis of data from Telenor Norway does not account for 
employees having small children, it still aligns with this finding.  

Other candidate predictors that we have not managed to analyze include different family situations 
(living alone vs living with a spouse vs living with a family with kids (further divided into different 
age groups)), which might gravitate people towards working from home or from the office, as well 
as organisational and national cultures, which determine the level of autonomy, family organisation 
and gender-based role differences.   

 
 
Figure 3: WFH preference distributions in different groups of respondents. 

 
Post-pandemic work policies: How much do 
companies allow employees to work from home? 

The next important question is how should companies respond to the increased needs for flexibility 
that  we  have  seen  in  the  employee  surveys.  Motivated  to  find  the  answer,  we  collected  the 
guidelines, strategies, and policies that regulate the extent of permitted work from home from 17 
companies. Figure 4 summarises our findings. 

Most companies have established new WFH policies, instructions or regulations 
Only  a  few  companies  in  our  study  (Norwegian  Blank,  Spanish  GFT,  German  CQSE  and 
multinational Tietoevry) have long traditions of flexible work from the times prior to the pandemic. 
While remote work in these companies has always been a free choice, in many other companies 
it  is  a  new  privilege.  To  regulate  this  privilege,  the  vast  majority  of  our  case  companies  have 
formulated guidelines or policies for the post-pandemic times released for piloting or rolled out in 
the entire company as early as in June 2021 or as late as in January 2022, with the majority being 
communicated in the fall 2021. These include policies, regulations, and instructions for flexibility, 
remote work, or hybrid work (GFT, CQSE, Tietoevry, ‘GlobCo’, Malvacom, Telenor), policy for work 
from  anywhere  (InterSoft),  corporate  rules  such  as  rule  of  conduct  (SB1  Utvikling)  and  rules  of 
engagement  (Telenor  Sweden),  corporate  strategies  such  as  “Future  of  the  Storebrand”, 
“QualityMinds Company guide”, and “Sbanken post COVID”, or principles for flexible/hybrid work 
(Kantega,  Blank,  ‘FSwed’).    The  format  of  the  new  policies  varies  from  separate  contract 
agreements to Word documents (length varies from 4 to 18 pages), collections of slides or simply 
status emails or intranet posts.  

Some companies have centralised restrictions for WFH and some do not 
Slightly more than half of the companies in our dataset decided to restrict the flexibility regarding 
the extent of remote work. Two companies (‘SpanCo’ and ‘KNor’) introduced a special status to 
remote employees, who once choosing that option are expected to be remote (fully in SpanCo and 
2-3 days a week in Knor). Seven companies restricted the proportion of time spent in the office vs 
home. GlobCo headquartered in Sweden permit remote work from home 50% of the time within a 
year motivated by the local regulations in Sweden, which are also applied in the company’s remote 
site in India. Swedish Malvacom limited WFH to max 3 days/week, Sbanken, KnowIT and FSwed 
limited WFH to max 2 days/week, while GlobCo’s Chinese site to only 1 day/week. Additionally, 
Sbanken specifies one mandatory office day for everybody. Finally, five companies (Storebrand, 
Telenor Sweden and Pakistan, SB1 Utvikling and Kantega) stated that being fully remote is not an 
option  and  that  at  least  one  day  per  week  everyone  shall  spend  in  the  office.  In  contrast, 
QualityMinds, CQSE, GFT, all sites in Tieto, InterSoft, Blank, and Telenor in Norway, Denmark and 
Finland do not have any centralised restrictions and provide flexible choices in their work policies. 

Flexible choices are not always fully flexible for individuals 
One may think that flexibility of choice means one can wake up in the morning and freely decide: 
“Today, I want to work in the office”, or from home for that matter. Our analysis suggests this is not 
the case. In some companies, the freedom to make an ad hoc decision about where to work today 
is restricted by the need to align personal choices with other team members or customers. Most 
companies included in our study ask individuals to agree about the extent of working from home in 
the team (see the handshake icon in Figure 3). In Telenor Norway and Telenor Denmark, each 
team is explicitly expected to document their agreement in a document called a “Team Manifesto”, 
in which the members describe which meetings, tasks or functions should preferably be conducted 
virtually, which can be carried out in a hybrid/mixed mode with some co-located participants and 
some  calling  in,  and  which  require  physical  presence  in  the  office.  Further,  team  members  are 
invited  to  discuss  and  agree  on  the  ways  to  ensure  that  no  team  members  get  isolated  or 

systematically left out of discussions taking place at the office, ways to build the team, keep the 
team-spirit and the team culture, and practices to help new hires learn from the more experienced 
ones. Also, the teams define which weekdays all members should come into the office for joint 
meetings. It is important to note that the team manifestos are living documents in which the teams 
make continuous updates as they learn about these new ways of work. At CQSE, the entire team 
is expected to manage their working mode autonomously, including vacations that team members 
shall take, with no formal approval process (e.g. by the team lead). Team-based decisions without 
management approval are also made in Telenor Norway and Sweden, Storebrand, SB1 Utvikling 
and  Sbanken,  while  many  other  companies  require  a  team  lead,  or  an  immediate  manager  to 
approve the team-made choices.  

Besides the need to align with others, some companies make the individual WFH choices binding 
for a longer period of time (typically 12 months). ‘InterSoft’ allows employees to choose whether to 
work predominantly in the office (max 1 day a week from home) or predominantly from home (max 
1 day a week from the office) with a binding period. Similarly, SpanCo, Malvacom, QualityMinds 
and ‘KNor’ employees who choose to work predominantly remotely can sign a special contract, 
which  is  binding  for  an  agreed  time  period.  These  restrictions  are  often  motivated  by  the  local 
legislation  (such  as  insurance  that  must  cover  home  office),  predictability  of  office  presence, 
availability  of  a  personal  work  desk  or  other  office  benefits  (subsidised  lunches,  internet,  or 
electricity).  

WFH is not for everybody 
The rules specified in the future hybrid work policies do not always apply to every single employee 
in the company. Many companies reserved the right to make exceptions from the WFH privilege 
for  specific  roles,  jobs,  or  customers  projects.  Some  companies  (KNor,  Knowit,  Malvacom)  put 
suitable  home  office  equipment  as  a  prerequisite  for  WFH.  Some  others  (QualityMinds,  CQSE, 
‘SpanCo’, ‘GlobCo’, Telenor Denmark) can prohibit work from home if employees underperform or 
fail to collaborate with team members and customers. Employees who carry out technical support, 
customer  support  or  depend  on  security-critical  infrastructure  in  several  companies  may  be 
required to be onsite, or to work in shifts. Finally, ‘GlobCo’ China restricts work from home for newly 
onboarded employees in their first half year of employment. Overall, the main difference between 
the companies is in how high up in the hierarchy the decisions about hybrid work policies are made. 
When decisions are made by the CEO or executive management team, it is hard to cater to the 
different needs of employees as top-level managers do not have the fine-grained information to do 
that. However, a beneficial aspect of organising in this way is that the rules will be the same for 
everybody.  When  decisions  about  hybrid  policies  are  made  on  the  lowest  team-level  in  the 
company, it is easier to cater to individual needs of team members and their tasks. However, such 
an arrangement will lead to different benefits and practices across teams which might be viewed 
as unfair and potentially leading to unhealthy biases.  

Remote rarely means from anywhere 
If working remotely is permitted, can “remotely” mean “from anywhere”? This question is of interest 
for  those,  who  have  moved  into  new  accommodations  during  the  pandemic,  often  further  away 
from the office location, as well as for expats who have moved globally to their homeland countries 
to spend the pandemic with the extended family members. We learned that although not always 
regulated  in  the  policies,  most  companies  participating  in  our  research  had  restrictions  for 
relocation  and  only  allowed  employees  to  move  within  the  same  country,  primarily  due  to  tax 
implications and insurance limitations (see Permanent relocation column in Figure 4). For similar 
reasons, Tietoevry India limits relocation to only within the same economic zone, while Norwegian 
Blank and Storebrand, Swedish ‘GlobCo’ and Telenor Sweden allow employees to move within a 
reasonable commute distance. Following contemporary trends, Storebrand introduced a policy to 

minimise business travel, which is also used as one motivation for why not to allow employees to 
live on a far distance.  

Notably, it is not that surprising that many companies do not permit global relocation, since such 
transitions require awareness of the local regulations. For example, CQSE reports being required 
to  adjust  salaries  to  the  cost  of  living  of  the  employees  when  relocating.  To  “test  the  water”, 
Malvacom has allowed one of remote employees to work from Spain, where he is staying an extra 
week  after  vacation.  The  company  manager  reports  that  if  the  experiment  is  successful,  the 
company will consider opening up an option of broader relocation. 

On the contrary, QualityMinds, CQSE, and ‘InterSoft’ permit global relocation, although upon prior 
approval.  All  practical  questions  related  to  relocation  in  these  companies  are  supported  by  HR 
departments. ‘InterSoft’, which employs engineers from all over the world, restricts the choices of 
relocation to countries with local legal corporate presence, and reports that in 2021, 129 employees 
have already moved globally and 286 employees in the US alone have moved to another state. 
International  relocation  can  be  further  restricted  due  to  customer  needs,  security  regulations, 
access restrictions to infrastructure or if it impedes efficient collaboration.  

Companies take responsibility to ensure ergonomic conditions in home offices 
In many European countries, companies are legally required to ensure an appropriate workplace 
for  their  employees.  But  what  happens  when  the  workplace  is  in  someone’s  home?  Naturally, 
employers do not have access to one’s home to check the suitability of the work environment. In 
some companies, the responsibility for ensuring proper equipment and a good work environment 
lies with the employees who want to work remotely, while some companies condition WFH to the 
ability  of  the  immediate  management  to  check  the  suitability  of  the  home  office,  which  is  made 
explicit  in  special  agreements.  Alternatively,  some  companies  require  employees  who  apply  for 
hybrid working to declare that their home work environment is in line with the national rules and 
regulations and does not entail unfortunate physical strains.  

Notably, many companies in our study support home office equipment beyond the necessary IT 
equipment. Reimbursement programs for home office equipment are active in Storebrand (500€), 
SB1  Utvikling,  ‘InterSoft’,  Sbanken,  ‘KNok’,  Blank  (beyond  budgeting),  Kantega  (1’000€),  and 
CQSE, which provides full equipment either at home or in the office and which has offered 1’000€ 
to purchase office furniture during the pandemic. More advanced support includes covering internet 
fees (Blank, SB1 Utvikling, Tietoevry Norway, KNok (up to 50€), ‘SpanCo’ (10 €/month)), electricity 
(10 €/month in SpanCo), and subsidised lunch benefit (Tietoevry Finland).  

Insurance at work (or home) is also an important question 
The  underlying  problem  with  flexible  working  from  home  is  that  companies  are  responsible  if 
something happens “at work”, which is typically regulated in insurance policies. To address these 
challenges, some companies extended the common insurance to cover flexible work times (24/7) 
and employees’ home addresses. In some countries such insurances are mandatory on a national 
level.  For  example,  German  regulations  for  mobile  workers  extended  the  incident  insurance  to 
cover not only working from home, but employee trips to get a lunch or drop off children in schools 
or daycare, and even smaller “trips” to get a drink in the kitchen or visit a restroom, all of which 
were previously not insured.

Figure 4: Overview of the company policies and regulations for working from home options. 

 
Concluding discussion  

In  this  article,  we  illustrated  the  new  trends  in  the  demands  for  flexibility  among  the  company 
employees and modifications to work policies that are emerging in response to these demands. In 
the following, we discuss a few important implications.  

The demand for flexibility with respect to the privilege to work from home is apparent in our study. 
As  well  as  the  inability  of  the  companies  to  satisfy  all  needs.  This  is  because  the  needs  of  the 
employees vary greatly. The majority of the survey respondents in our study demand flexibility, 
similarly to related surveys from the US (Barrero et al., 2021 a) and the UK (Taneja et al., 2021) 
that suggest that the majority will switch to two or three days per week working from home after 
the  pandemic.  Yet,  there  are  also  the  extreme  groups  of  those  who  want  to  continue  working 
entirely  from  home,  and  those  preferring  to  work  full  time  from  the  office.  Along  with  personal 
preferences,  it  is  fair  to  assume  that  many  employees  will  have  their  preferences  for  others’ 
presence or absence in the office. There will be employees who come to the office to collaborate 
with their teammates and colleagues, as well as recent new hires who are willing to learn from 
more senior colleagues, who will be upset if nobody else is present. This is why we believe that 
the biggest challenge for the companies today is to find a way to accommodate the diverse 
needs of the employees.  

What many companies in our sample saw as the common denominator with respect to WFH is to 
opt for a hybrid workplace – office days mixed with WFH days, often delegating the responsibility 
for agreeing on the office presence to the teams or mediated by the immediate managers. While 
this sounds like a reasonable compromise, the mandatory office presence seems to be looked at 
as a discriminating policy, at least the way it is portrayed in the news. Similarly to the companies 
in our dataset, the big IT giant Apple emphasised the importance of in-the-office collaborations and 
only agreed to let employees work from home two days a week, with limited exceptions. Media 
reports that this decision was received with a great resistance1. This is a huge shift from previously 
well-known  flexibility  stigma  (the  negative  perception  towards  those  who  work  flexibly)  (Chung 
2018). In fact, a study looking into employee retention shows that 40% of employees who currently 
work from home, even if only one day a week, would seek another job if employers require a full 
return to the office (Barrero 2021, b), as well as most workers would accept sizable pay cuts in 
return for the option to work from home two or three days a week (Barrero 2021, a). Further, Barrero 
et al. suggest that the re-sorting of workers with respect to the scope of remote work has already 
started (Barrero 2021, b). Therefore, we observe that in contrast to decades of stigmatisation 
of working-from-home, we might see the rise of stigmatisation of the WFH restrictions. 

But  will  a  hybrid  workplace  be  the  winning  strategy?  After  all,  the  absence  of  colleagues  will 
inevitably upset at least those who prefer to work in the office. One possible development scenario 
is that along with the hybrid workplaces and predominantly remote companies (remote-first), there 
will be predominantly office-based companies (let’s call them office-first). The choice is likely to 
differ depending on industry characteristics and the already existing corporate culture. Our analysis 
of the corporate work policies suggests that such choices might vary on a team level and remote-
first teams and office-first teams are likely to coexist within the same company (we already see the 
evidence of this among our Norwegian industry partners).  Yet, many companies admitted being 
concerned that without employees physically present in the office, the innovation and creativity, 
competence development, knowledge sharing, company culture and the sense of belonging are 
likely to suffer, as also suggested in the large study of remote work at Microsoft (Yang et al, 2021).  
These companies explicitly state in their policies that the office is the main place of work and even 

1 https://www.inc.com/minda-zetlin/apples-remote-work-policy-is-a-complete-failure-of-emotional-intelligence.html 

 
that remote work should not be seen as a right but as an appropriate way to solve or facilitate a 
specific  situation  as  written,  for  example,  in  the  WFH  policies  of  Malvacom  and  QualityMinds. 
These  two  SMEs  both  focus  on  building  strong  teams  in  which  team  members  feel  like  "family 
members"  rather  than  workmates,  and  the  daily  presence  in  the  office  is  considered  as  a 
prerequisite to achieve this. Similarly, the CEO of JP Jamie Dimon, the CEO of JP Morgan Chase, 
recently argued that extensive working from home is incompatible with the culture of his company 
where “hustling” and “creativity” is key. According to him, the remote working format is ill-suited for 
the  kind  of  interactions  characterising  investment  banking  (Reuters,  2021)2.  We  can  therefore 
foresee that in the near future, we might see the rise in popularity of remote-first corporate 
strategies (or team practices), along with the office-first companies/teams occupying the 
niche of companies promoting teamwork and close collaboration as the core company/team 
values, opposed to remote work. 

Finally, we expect companies to change these policies and strategies over time as they accumulate 
experiences with hybrid work. So far, most companies’ experiences with extensive working from 
home derive from the pandemic, when managers had no choice but to let their employees work 
from home. As the pandemic fades and companies experiment with working-from-home policies in 
situations with no social mobility restrictions, we expect they will make changes. These changes 
will be made through a dialogue centred on the “psychological contract” between employees and 
employers.  

At the same time, it is important to note that past decisions on working from home policies are likely 
to shape future ones. As we have emphasised, there has been a shift in the stigma associated with 
working  from  home,  where  the  manager  trying  to  restrict  working  from  home  days  faces  more 
scorn, than employees expressing a wish to work from home. Employees increasingly view working 
from  home  as  an  entitlement,  and  companies  that  decided  relatively  liberal  policies  with  high 
freedom  to  choose  are  likely  to  face  strong  employee  resistance  if  they  choose  to  rein  in  this 
freedom.  

Acknowledgement 

We are thankful for all the companies participating in our study for their engagement and interest 
in the outcome of our research. This research is funded by the Swedish Knowledge Foundation 
within the ScaleWise project (KK-Hög grant 2019/0087), the S.E.R.T. project (research profile grant 
2018/010),  SHADE  project  (KK-Hög  grant    2017/0176),    and  the  Research  Council  of  Norway 
through the 10xTeams project (grant 309344) and the A-team project (grant 267704).  

References 

[1]  Barrero JM, Bloom N and Davis SJ, 2021 (a)  Why working from home will stick (No. w28731). National 

Bureau of Economic Research. 

[2]  Ford D, Storey MA, Zimmermann T, Bird C, Jaffe S, Maddila C, Butler JL, Houck B and Nagappan N, 
2020. A tale of two cities: Software developers working from home during the covid-19 pandemic. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2008.11147. 

[3]  Ralph P, Baltes S, Adisaputri G, Torkar R, Kovalenko V, Kalinowski M, Novielli N, Yoo S, Devroey X, 
Tan X and Zhou M, 2020. Pandemic programming. Empirical Software Engineering, 25(6), pp.4927-
4961. 

[4]  Barrero JM, Bloom N and Davis SJ, 2021 (b). Let Me Work From Home, or I Will Find Another Job. 

University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper, (2021-87). 

2 https://www.reuters.com/article/us-jp-morgan-ceo-idUSKBN2CL1HQ 

 
[5]  Nicks L, Gesiarz F, Hardy T and Burd H, 2021. How many days should we work from home? What 
works  to  improve  gender  equality.  Research  report.  The  Behavioural  Insights  Team,  Government 
Equalities office.  

[6]  Taneja S, Mizen P and Bloom N, 2021. “Working from home is revolutionising the UK Labour market,” 

VoxEU CEPR Policy Portal, 15 March. 

[7]  Yang L, Holtz D, Jaffe S, Suri S, Sinha S, Weston J, Joyce C, Shah N, Sherman K, Hecht B and Teevan 
J,  2021.  The  effects  of  remote  work  on  collaboration  among  information  workers.  Nature  human 
behaviour, pp.1-12.  

[8]  Clear T, 2021. THINKING ISSUES Loosening ties: permanently virtual teams and the melting iceberg 

of relationship. ACM Inroads, 12(3), pp.6-8.  

[9]  Smite  D,  Tkalich  A,  Moe  NB,  Papatheocharous  E,  Klotins  E,  and  Buvik  MP.  Changes  in  perceived 
productivity  of  software  engineers  during  COVID-19  pandemic:  The  voice  of  evidence.  Journal  of 
Systems and Software. 2022, Apr 1; 186: 111197. 

[10]  Smite D, Mikalsen M, Moe NB, Stray V, and Klotins E 2021, From Collaboration to Solitude and Back: 
Remote  Pair  Programming  During  COVID-19.  In  International  Conference  on  Agile  Software 
Development, pp. 3-18. Springer, Cham 

[11]  Kane GC, Nanda R, Phillips A, and Copulsky J, 2021. Redesigning the Post-Pandemic Workplace. MIT 

Sloan Management Review 62(3), pp. 12-14. 

[12]  Choudury  P,  2020.  Our  Work-from-Anywhere  Future.  Best  practices  for  all-remote  organizations. 

Harvard Business Review 98(6): 58-67.  

[13]  Gensler Research Institute, 2021. US Work From Home Survey. https://www.gensler.com/workplace-

surveys/us-work-from-home-survey/2020 

[14]  Chung H, 2018, Gender, flexibility stigma, and the perceived negative consequences of flexible working 

in the UK. Social Indicators Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-018-2036-7.  

[15]  Pratt  JH.  1984.  Home  Teleworking:  A  Study  of  its  Pioneers.  Technological  Forecasting  and  Social 

Change, 25(1): 1-14. 

[16]  Allen M. 2017. The SAGE Encyclopedia to Communication Research. SAGE Publications INC. 
[17]  Nguyen MH, Armoogum J. 2021. Perception and preference for home-based telework in the covid-19 

era: A gender-based analysis in Hanoi, Vietnam. Sustainability, 13 (6). 

[18]  Menard, Scott. (2002) Applied logistic regression analysis. Vol. 106. Sage, London.  

 
 
 
