BEFANA: A Tool for Biodiversity-Ecosystem 

Functioning Assessment by Network Analysis 

Martin Marzidovšek1, 3*, Vid Podpečan1, Erminia Conti2, MarkoDebeljak1,3, Christian Mulder2  

1 Jozef Stefan Institute, Department of Knowledge Technologies, University of Ljubljana (Slovenia) 

2 Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of Catania (Italy) 

3 Jožef Stefan International Postgraduate School (Slovenia) 

Summary 

1.  BEFANA  is  a  free  and  open-source  software  tool  for  ecological  network  analysis  and 

visualisation. It is adapted to ecologists’ needs and allows them to study the topology and 

dynamics of ecological networks as well as apply selected machine learning algorithms.  

2.  BEFANA is implemented in Python, and structured as an ordered collection of interactive 

computational  notebooks.  It  relies  on  widely  used  open-source  libraries,  and  aims  to 

achieve simplicity, interactivity, and extensibility.  

3.  BEFANA  provides  methods  and  implementations  for  data  loading  and  preprocessing, 

network  analysis  and  interactive  visualisation,  modelling  with  experimental  data,  and 

predictive modelling with machine learning. We showcase BEFANA through a concrete 

example of a detrital soil food web of agricultural grasslands, and demonstrate all of its 

main components and functionalities. 

*  Correspondence  author.  E-mail:  martin.marzidovsek@ijs.si.  Present  address:  Jozef  Stefan  Institute, 
Jamova 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

Key-words:  biodiversity,  ecology,  ecosystem,  food  web,  graph  theory,  soil  ecology,  machine 

learning, network analysis, open-source software. 

Introduction  

Unsustainable use of natural resources have been compelling the scientific community to turn its 

interest  to  biodiversity  loss  in  general,  and  to  negative  cascading  effects  in  particular.  Several 

works concerning ecological networks have been published1 but too few of them are mechanistic 

and  predictive,  despite  the  plea  by  Ings  et  al.  (2009).  On  the  other  hand,  online    dataset  

collections  and international research interest is rapidly growing, especially for soil organisms 

(van den Hoogen et al. 2020; Phillips et al. 2021). 

Data on the ecological interactions in food webs are generally represented in four different ways: 

I) Resource-to-consumer food web, where the structural model is either static or dynamic, with 

directed graphs (flow) for functional groups, emphasising energy channels, loops, biomass and 

nutrient cycling (Hunt and Wall 2002; Fitter 2005; Mulder et al. 2005); II) Allometric scaling (size 

spectra), where the resulting power law is often environmentally-driven, showing triangular plots 

for taxa, trophic generality and vulnerability, trophic heights, assimilation efficiency, addressing 

stoichiometric imbalances (Reuman and Cohen 2004; Mulder and Elser 2009); III) Topological 

networks,  with  a  static  biopyramid  for  species,  trophospecies  and/or  functional  groups, 

emphasising structural biodiversity, size-delimited pathways, nested hierarchy, and/or parasitism 

(Cohen, Jonsson, and Carpenter 2003; 2009; Hudson et al. 2013; Mulder et al. 2005) and finally, 

IV)  Interaction  networks  for  species,  trophospecies  and/or  functional  groups,  focusing  on 

connectance, complexity, trophic transfer efficiency, self-damping, distribution of trophic links and 

1 443 papers recorded on Web of Science as of February 15, 2022, using the specific query: AK=(ecological 
network*) AND AB=(ecological network*) AND TI=(ecological network*) NOT AK=(social). 

2 

 
BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

chain lengths, magnitude of feeding relationships etc. (Reuman and Cohen 2004; Kondoh, Kato, 

and Sakato 2010; Bascompte and Jordano 2007). 

This work presents BEFANA, a free and open-source software tool suitable for ecological network 

analysis and visualisation for resource-to-consumer food webs, and topological and interaction 

networks (the aforementioned architectural types I, III and IV). It allows the ecologist  to study the 

topology of the network and its temporal dynamics, identify indirect interactions and more. Ease 

of use, interactivity, and extensibility were the main guidelines when designing and developing 

BEFANA.  As  a  result,  BEFANA  is  implemented  as  a  collection  of  interactive  computational 

notebooks and relies on widely used open-source libraries for network analysis, data science and 

machine  learning.  BEFANA  is  available  through  a  public  web  interface  as  well  as  a  Docker 

container  and  local  installation2.  The  rest  of  the  paper  showcases  selected  parts  of  BEFANA 

through a case study of detrital soil food-web analysis. 

Design and implementation 

The design of BEFANA (Fig. 1) follows the latest advances in developing and sharing of scientific 

software. It is based on the computational notebook paradigm and follows the "batteries included" 

philosophy by providing integration of libraries a user might need in ecological network analysis. 

As  such,  BEFANA  is  an  interactive  software  tool  but  also  a  solid  base  for  creating  custom 

applications and experiments in this and related domains. 

BEFANA  is  implemented  in  the  Python  programming  language,  which  has  become  a  de  facto 

language  of  choice  for  scientific  computing  (Perez  &  Granger  2007).  In  combination  with 

JupyterLab,  an  interactive  development  environment  for  computational  notebooks  (i.e.  Jupyter 

2 MyBinder: https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/MartinMarzi/BEFANA/v1.2.1 
  GitHub: https://github.com/MartinMarzi/BEFANA  

3 

 
 
BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

notebooks), and pandas (McKinney 2010), a Python library for data manipulation and analysis 

offering  optimised  data  structures  and  functions,  it  forms  one  of  the  best  approaches  to  the 

dissemination  of  scientific  programs,  experiments,  data  manipulation  and 

interactive 

computational notebooks. BEFANA is based on an open-source software stack which helps to 

achieve the following three goals: (a) ease of use, (b) interactivity, and (c) extensibility. 

The  libraries  currently  included  in  BEFANA  cover  the  following  topics:  data  input  and  output, 

preprocessing and manipulation, charting, web-based graphical user interfaces, network analysis 

and  visualisation,  and  machine  learning.  It  is  an  open  collection  as  any  other  libraries  can  be 

applied in BEFANA notebooks as long as they implement an interface to the Python interpreter 

or are available as a web service or a command line tool 

Even though it is common for computational notebooks to be run locally, BEFANA goes a step 

further and also provides a public web interface through mybinder.org, a free public service which 

provides a community-led infrastructure deploying the BinderHub technology (Bussonnier et al. 

2018), which allows sharing of interactive code. Local installation of BEFANA is possible using 

Docker or by creating a virtual Python environment where BEFANA can be started.  

Figure 1: Architecture of BEFANA.￼  

4 

 
BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

Tool demonstration through soil food-web analysis 

In  BEFANA’s  computational  notebooks,  code,  interface  and  results,  including  diagrams  and 

graphics  interweave  and  offer  a  uniquely  rich  user  experience.  BEFANA  can  be  used  to 

demonstrate  some  particular  implementation,  to  showcase  an  example,  to  share  charts  with 

results  or  to  provide  network  visualisations.  In  this  section  we  demonstrate  the  application  of 

BEFANA  on  a  case  of  a  soil  food-web  data  where  we  quantify  and  analyse  the  hierarchical 

characteristics of the trophic network at hand.  

A hierarchical directed graph has been constructed, representing the detrital soil food web using 

one regional metaweb of all possible literature-based multitrophic links from a local pool of food 

webs (Mulder et al. 2005; Sechi et al. 2015). The complete analysis consists of the following: (1) 

data  input  and  preprocessing,  (2)  network  construction,  editing  and  network  visualisation,  (3) 

network  analysis,  (4)  network  enrichment  with  experimental  data,  and  (5)  machine  learning.  

Launching BEFANA 

The easiest and recommended way to work with BEFANA is to use the public Binder link3. Local 

deployment using Docker or a Python virtual environment is recommended for advanced users. 

Moreover, BEFANA includes already computed results of the presented soil food web use case 

for each notebook. All BEFANA notebooks ensure that the required libraries are installed prior to 

executing any code. 

3 MyBinder: https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/MartinMarzi/BEFANA/v1.2.1 

5 

 
 
 
BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

Data input and preprocessing 

BEFANA supports several different input formats including csv, Excel, Access and HDF. In our 

example, the input data are loaded as a csv file with headers and a custom separator. If the input 

data requires preprocessing steps such as imputation, filtering, resampling, computing values etc. 

this is the right place to apply them. 

Network construction and editing 

The  data  from  which  a  network  is  constructed  can  be  provided  in  several  different  ways.  For 

example:  (a)  the  network  can  be  loaded  from  a  file  in  one  of  supported  network  description 

languages (e.g. Pajek, GML, JSON), (b) it can be built in the Python code by adding nodes and 

links manually, (c) it can be constructed from a data structure such as the adjacency matrix or 

adjacency  list.  In  our  example  the  network  is  constructed  from  the  adjacency  matrix  of  the 

metaweb, encompassing three local plots, hereafter called A, B, and C (Sechi et al. 2015).  

Network visualisation and exploration 

One of the strongest features of BEFANA is its interactive visualisation of hierarchical networks. 

In ecosystem network analysis visualisation is an essential tool for understanding the structure of 

the network, the interrelations between nodes of interest and for hypothesis formation. BEFANA 

implements interactive visualisation of ecological networks and responds to user events such as zoom 

and drag. A network can be visualised either inline in the notebook or in a new browser tab. Inline 

visualisation follows the computational notebook paradigm and displays a preview of the network 

and few customization options in a notebook cell while the advanced visualisation in a new tab 

offers a multitude of options such as colours, shapes, sizes, fonts, layouts and their optimization 

parameters etc.  

6 

 
 
BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

Figure 2: A hierarchical visualisation of the soil metaweb with a directed graph in BEFANA. Trophic 

levels define the layers of the network and the colouring of nodes provides a visualisation of their 

functional roles. Nodes represent trophic groups and their links to the resources: for example, plant 

roots are present at the bottom and provide food for￼ plant-feeding nematodes, generalist mites, 

omnivore  nematodes,  and  a  number  of  other  trophic  groups.  In  this  way,  omnivores  and  top 

predators that consume from more than one node and/or more than one trophic level are easily 

recognizable.  Colouring  can  be  done  either  at  functional  level  (e.g.  according  to  an  in-degree 

clustering rule as presented in the Network analysis section) or at taxonomic level (for instance, 

different colours at the Kingdom level). The numbers prefixing node names are functional codes 

for  trophic  nodes:  the  first  digit  provides  information  on  the  dominant  feeding  strategy  while  the 

second digit provides cladistic information.  

BEFANA’s visualisation also enables modelling the relationship between network topology and 

network  dynamics,  which  has  implications  in  understanding  stability  and  resilience  of  trophic 

networks  (Dale  2017).  It’s  graphical  user  interface  offers  network  editing,  so  users  can  easily 

perform network modification and analysis cycles. They can remove certain nodes or edges of a 

soil  food  web  and  then  visualise  the  modified  network  to  assess  the  extent  to  which  the 

investigated ecosystem will become destabilised (Murall, McCann, and Bauch 2012), for instance 

7 

 
 
 
BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

by functional biodiversity decline (Conti et al. 2020). This loss of nodes will impact the subsequent 

calculations and will enable us to forecast various scenarios of biodiversity loss.  

Network analysis 

Once  the  network  construction  and  visualisation  are  complete,  a  user  can  proceed  with  the 

network analysis that allows to characterise the form of the ecological network and determine how 

the  functioning  of  the  network  affects  its  structure  (Dale  2017).  While  species  interactions  are 

central,  graph  theory  can  also  reveal  higher  level  (guild  to  guild)  interactions,  such  as  how 

topology of such networks also interacts with the functioning of the ecological system.  

NETWORK CHARACTERISTICS 

Keystone  trophic  groups  and  connections  that  have  a  disproportionate  effect  on  the  network 

function are identified through the combination of various centrality measures that give insight on 

the  nodes/edges  topological  position  and  role  within  the  network  in  a  similar  way  to  Cheddar 

(Hudson et al. 2013). Figure 5 shows a selection of centrality measures. Each measure provides 

different insights on trophic node’s properties or position in the ecological network.  

In addition, the out/in-degree ratio (van den Brink and Rusinowska 2021) has been calculated, 

which  assigns  to  every  node  in  a  directed  graph  its  out-degree  divided  by  its  in-degree  (to  avoid 

dividing by zero, 1 is added to both the out- as well as in-degree of every node). It can be used for 

ranking  nodes  in  a  directed  graph.  This  measure  is  similar  to  the  well-known  Copeland  score  for 

ranked  voting  but  can  give  different  results  in  certain  situations.  Interestingly,  in  our  soil  food  web 

structure one node from the second trophic level (bacterivore nematodes) is ranked the same as one 

of the primary resources (fungi), and higher than other second level nodes. 

8 

 
 
BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

COMPARTMENT AND MOTIF ANALYSIS 

The  soil  food  web  was  analysed  for  common  repeated  structural  elements  and  how  clearly 

separable such compartments are. Pairs of nodes with reciprocal link were identified, which also 

includes cannibalistic relationships. For example, our soil food web contains 9 reciprocal trophic 

interactions (interspecific loops) of which 5 are cannibalistic (intraspecific loops), mostly occurring 

at higher trophic levels. 

All  transitive  triangle  motifs  were  also  discovered,  and  an  example  is  visualised  in  Figure  3. 

Transitivity depends on directional interactions and is related to the consistency of relationships 

among nodes (Dale 2017). Thus, transitive triangles hint on the stability of the trophic network as 

they  demonstrate  the  presence  of  more  stable  combinations  of  trophic  interactions  where  a 

trophic group has more than one resource. Our soil metaweb contains 122 triangles describing 

transitive relationships.  

Strongly connected components can give an indication about the energy flow within the network. 

Interestingly,  our  soil  food  web  contains  exactly  one  strongly-connected  component  spanning 

three nodes, which is shown in Figure 3. Moreover, this component (embedding only groups from 

trophic  level  4)  also  contains  8  of  9  possible  links  which  implies  a  very  high  resistance  to 

biodiversity loss. As such, it contains a cycle spanning all three nodes, two cycles spanning two 

nodes  (reciprocal  links)  and  three  loops  (all  three  trophic  groups  are  cannibalists).  One  of  the 

trophic groups is a generalist consumer while the other two are predators. 

9 

 
 
 
 
BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

Figure 3a: An example of a transitive triangle spanning three trophic levels (the number in square 

brackets denotes trophic level).  

Figure 3b: The most strongly-connected component in our soil food web. 

Finally,  in  order  to  discover  meaningful  subgraphs,  clustering  within  the  network  can  be 

performed. The results of clustering (node partitioning) can also be used in BEFANA’s network 

visualisation. For example, in-degree based node clustering into three clusters where indegree is 

either  0,  1,  or  greater  than  1  yields  clusters  as  shown  in  Figure  2.  Such  clustering  separates 

trophic groups with energy sources from outside of the network, highly vulnerable trophic groups 

having only one source of energy and less vulnerable having more than one source of energy. 

With the exception of substrate ingesting earthworms, bacterivore enchytraeid, and bacterivore 

amoebae all trophic groups on the first level are vulnerable, in contrast to trophic groups on the 

second and third trophic level (the average indegree is 8.2).  

10 

 
 
 
 
 
BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

DERIVED NETWORKS 

An  important  advantage  of  using  BEFANA  on  ecological  networks  is  its  ability  to  identify  the 

existence and strengths of indirect interactions that are derived from the existing trophic network. 

BEFANA’s computational notebook #4 implements the discovery and visualisation of two types 

of derived networks: (1) with shared consumer, and (2) with shared resource. In the analysed soil 

food web (1) was very connected with 83% of nodes linking to over 60% of all the nodes. In (2), 

on the other hand, centrality trends in the derived soil food network were clearer: only three nodes 

had a degree centrality over 60% (omnivore nematode, generalist mite, and omnivore mite). 

Modelling with experimental data 

BEFANA allows the user to embed experimental or field data on the network structure which can 

provide insight on the dynamics of the studied ecosystem. The aggregated biomass, mass and 

abundance per trophic group can be computed and added to the network as node attributes. This 

allows  us  to  easily  compute  the  total  biomass  for  all  trophic  levels.  Any  additional  data 

preprocessing, specific to the problem and data at hand, can be also performed at the same time. 

The network data structure allows for an unlimited number of attributes to be assigned to nodes 

and links. Attributes can also be used in computations provided by the NetworkX library (where 

applicable) simply by providing the name of the relevant attribute. Moreover, experimental data 

can also be used in training machine learning models. 

The abundances, average body-size values and biomass values of trophic groups on all trophic 

levels can be easily computed and ranked. According their biomass, showing that earthworms 

and the three main resources for the plant-driven pathway, the bacterial-driven pathway and the 

fungal-driven  pathway  depict  the  highest  biomass  values  in  each  of  the  three  plots  of  the 

investigated metaweb, whilst the other groups are ranked differently according to the plot, and 

two are not even occurring in all plots (Figure 5). It is worth mentioning that all groups in common 

11 

 
BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

in all separate food webs share a very low coefficient of variation (CV) (less than 25%), in contrast 

to  the  group  ranked  as  21st,  that  although  occupying  the  same  rank  according  to  its  biomass 

values  shares  a  CV  higher  than  100%.  BEFANA  also  implements  quantitative  comparison  of 

ranked lists of biomass values using the rank-biased overlap (RBO) measure (Webber, Moffat, 

and  Zobel  2010)  which  measures  the  similarity  of  potentially  infinite  ranked  lists.  It  has  one 

parameter (p) which determines how top-weighted the measure is: the smaller p, the more it is 

top-weighted.  Applying  RBO  to  the  ranked  list  of  biomass  values  of  all  three  plots  yields  the 

following results. Regardless of the value of p, plot A is always the most similar to plot C. The 

least similar are plots A and B if RBO is top-weighted (low p), or plots B and C, if the tails of the 

biomass value lists are also considered in the comparison (high p). The RBO-based similarity of 

all three plots using different values of p is shown in Figure 4. 

Figure 4: Similarity of ranked lists of biomass values for local plots A, B, and C using the RBO measure and 

different values of its top-weightedness parameter p. 

12 

 
BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

Figure  5.  The  top-left  figure  shows  a  selection  of  centrality  measures  of  top-10  nodes.  The  bottom-left               

figure shows the degree ratio according to in-degree centrality. On the right the ranked biomass averages 

are shown for each separate local plot (A, B and C). The Coefficient of Variation has been computed only 

for the biomass averages of any trophic group ranked at the same position across the metaweb, five trophic 

groups in our case. Each colour (plant: green, fungi: brown, bacteria: blue) resembles the pathway, with 

yellow and reddish for higher trophic level groups (omnivores and predators). 

13 

  
 
 
BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

Representation learning 

To employ network data in predictive and descriptive machine learning tasks (e.g. classification, 

link  prediction,  clustering,  graph  evolution)  the  data  (nodes,  edges)  has  to  be  represented  as 

numerical  vectors  or  node  embeddings.  Node2vec  is  one  of  the  recent  machine  learning 

algorithms  that  learns  such  a  mapping  of  nodes  to  a  low-dimensional  space  of  features  while 

maximising the likelihood of preserving network neighbourhoods of nodes (Grover & Leskovec 

2016).  BEFANA  implements  this  representation  learning  method  and  applies  it  to  the  derived 

network  described  above.  The  results  demonstrate  that  the  topological  information  is  indeed 

encoded in node embeddings, and dimensionality reduction followed by the visualisation in 1D 

space gives a clearer indication of node similarity. As can be seen on Figure 6, one of the primary 

producers  (fungi)  is  further  apart  and  thus  different  from  the  other  two  (bacteria  and  plant 

autotrophs) as its energy source is within the network. The four trophic groups on the far left in 

Figure 6 that are clearly separated from the rest are the only nodes at trophic level 1 sharing fungi 

as resource. 

Figure 6. Visualisation of node embeddings in 1D where the distance between the trophic groups  is 

indicative about node similarity in the derived network. Colours represent the trophic level (e.g. red is for 

primary producers).  

14 

 
BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

Conclusion and future development 

The  paper  presented  BEFANA,  a  free  and  open-source  software  tool  for  ecological  network  

visualisation and analysis. It allows ecologists to take advantage of graph theory and machine 

learning on ecological networks that can help quantifying and testing hypotheses about how a 

network's topology affects its dynamics and how the functioning of the network in turn affects its 

structure.  In  the  future  work,  we  plan  to  upgrade  BEFANA  regularly  with  new  features, 

implementations and datasets. A particular focus will be on machine learning methods optimised 

for ecological networks. Experimental data is important in ecological analysis and to make use of 

them  machine  learning  algorithms  need  to  incorporate  node  and/or  edge  attributes.  While  the 

hierarchical structure of our soil food web makes it unsuitable for representation learning methods, 

we envision that node embeddings for other types of interaction networks could well be used to 

predict links when simulating ecological network disruptions.  

Acknowledgements 

This  work  has  been  supported  by  COST  action  18237  and  project  H2020  project  EMBEDDIA 

(#825153). We thank Prof. Dr. Nada Lavrač for her kind support. 

Conflict of interest 

Nothing to declare. 

Data availability 

Dryad data: http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.t5347. 

15 

BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

Author contributions 

MM and VP designed the software; CM and EC contributed with data and workflow improvements; 

CM, MD and EC verified the outcomes; MM, VP, MD and CM led the writing of the manuscript; all 

authors contributed critically and improved for publication. 

References 

Bascompte, J., & Jordano, P. (2007). Plant-Animal Mutualistic Networks: The Architecture 

of Biodiversity. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 38 (1): 567–593. 

Brink, R. van den, & Rusinowska, A. (2021). The Degree Ratio Ranking Method for 

Directed Graphs. European Journal of Operational Research 288 (2): 563–575. 

Cohen, J.E., Jonsson, T. & Carpenter, S.R. (2003). Ecological Community Description 

Using the Food Web, Species Abundance, and Body Size. Proceedings of the National 

Academy of Sciences 100(4): 1781–1786. 

Cohen, J.E., Schittler, D.N.,Raffaelli, D.G., & Reuman, D.C. (2009). Food Webs Are More 

than the Sum of Their Tritrophic Parts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 

106(52): 22335–22340. 

Conti, E., Di Mauro, L.S., Pluchino, A., & Mulder, C. (2020). Testing for Top-down 

Cascading Effects in a Biomass-Driven Ecological Network of Soil Invertebrates. Ecology 

and Evolution 10(14): 7062–7072. 

Dale, M.R.T. (2017). Applying Graph Theory in Ecological Research. Cambridge University 

Press. 

Fitter, A.H. (2005). Darkness Visible: Reflections on Underground Ecology. Journal of 

Ecology 93(2): 231–243. 

Grover, A., & Leskovec, J. (2016). node2vec: Scalable Feature Learning for Networks. In 

Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery 

16 

BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

and Data Mining, 855–64. KDD’16. New York, NY. 

Hagberg, A., Swart, P., & Chult, D.S. (2008). Exploring Network Structure, Dynamics, and 

Function Using NetworkX. Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM. 

https://www.osti.gov/biblio/960616. 

Hoogen, J. van den, Geisen, S., et al. (2020). A Global Database of Soil Nematode 

Abundance and Functional Group Composition. Scientific Data 7(1): 103. 

Hudson, L.N., et al. (2013). Cheddar: Analysis and Visualisation of Ecological Communities 

in R. Methods in Ecology and Evolution 4(1): 99–104. 

Hunt, H.W., & Wall, D.H. (2002). Modelling the Effects of Loss of Soil Biodiversity on 

Ecosystem Function. Global Change Biology 8(1): 33–50. 

Ings, T.C., et al. 2009. Ecological Networks--beyond Food Webs. Journal of Animal 

Ecology 78 (1): 253–69. 

Kondoh, M., Kato, S., & Sakato, Y. (2010). Food Webs Are Built up with Nested Subwebs. 

Ecology 91 (11): 3123–3130. 

McKinney, W. (2010). Data Structures for Statistical Computing in Python. Proceedings of 

the 9th Python in Science Conference. DOI:10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a 

Mulder, C., & Elser, J.J.. (2009). Soil Acidity, Ecological Stoichiometry and Allometric 

Scaling in Grassland Food Webs. Global Change Biology 15(11): 2730–2738. 

Mulder, C., Cohen, J.E., Setälä, H., Bloem, J., & Breure, A.M. (2005). Bacterial Traits, 

Organism Mass, and Numerical Abundance in the Detrital Soil Food Web of Dutch 

Agricultural Grasslands. Ecology Letters 8(1): 80–90. 

Murall, C.L., McCann, K.S., & Bauch, C.T. (2012). Food Webs in the Human Body: Linking 

Ecological Theory to Viral Dynamics. PLoS One 7(11): e48812. 

Perez, F., & Granger, B.E. (2007). IPython: A System for Interactive Scientific Computing. 

Computing in Science & Engineering. DOI:10.1109/mcse.2007.53. 

Phillips, H.R.P., et al. (2021). Global Data on Earthworm Abundance, Biomass, Diversity 

17 

BEFANA: A Tool for Ecological Network Analysis 

and Corresponding Environmental Properties. Scientific Data 8(1): 136. 

Project Jupyter et al. (2018). Binder 2.0 - Reproducible, Interactive, Sharable Environments 

for Science at Scale. Proceedings of the 17th Python in Science Conference. 

DOI:10.25080/majora-4af1f417-011. 

Reuman, D.C., & Cohen, J.E. (2004). Trophic Links’ Length and Slope in the Tuesday Lake 

Food Web with Species’ Body Mass and Numerical Abundance. Journal of Animal Ecology 

73(5): 852–866. 

Sechi, V., Brussaard, L., De Goede, R.G.M., Rutgers, M., & Mulder, C. (2015). Choice of 

Resolution by Functional Trait or Taxonomy Affects Allometric Scaling in Soil Food Webs. 

American Naturalist 185(1): 142–149. 

Webber, W., Moffat, A., & Zobel, J. (2010). A Similarity Measure for Indefinite Rankings. 

ACM Transactions on Information and System Security 28(20): 1–38. 

18 

 
