        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              1 

DCarbonX Decentralized Application: Carbon  
Market Case Study 

Nida Khan ∗		and Tabrez Ahmad † 
∗Nash fintechX, Luxembourg 
Email: nida.khan@nashfintechx.com 
†ArcelorMittal, Luxembourg 
Email: tabrez.ahmad@arcelormittal.com 

Abstract 

Decentralized applications developed using blockchain technology provide innovative business models to serve the human race 
and solve existing challenges. Climate change is one of the biggest problems humanity is facing and there is a dearth of solutions in 
tackling  this  grave  impediment  to  the  long-term  sustainability  of  our  planet.  Accountability,  greenwashing,  traceability,  impact 
assessment and trading of carbon credits are unresolved issues in the ESG sector. In this paper, we present a novel decentralized 
application  software,  DCarbonX,  that  solves  the  enumerated  problems  using  NFTs  on  the  blockchain  platform,  through  smart 
contracts.  The  paper  describes  the  functional  architecture  of  DCarbonX,  while  elaborating  on  its  salient  features  and  utility  in 
sustainable  finance,  in  particular  green  sukuk.  DCarbonX  is  a  pioneering  software  providing  an  exchange  for  trading  of  carbon 
credits.  The  software  facilitates  logging  of  impact  and  traceable  transactions  in  a  carbon  market,  that  would  help  to  prevent 
duplication of records and greenwashing. The paper discusses the efforts being undertaken to achieve the climate goals as per the 
Paris Agreement and also highlights the pivotal obstacles to achieving carbon neutrality by 2050, as per COP26. The paper also 
encompasses a study on the applications of dapps in DeFi, Web 3.0 and ESG, among other areas and gives a comparative analysis 
of  blockchain  platforms  for  dapp  development.  The  paper  is  also  a  pioneer  in  highlighting  the  challenges  that  plague  dapp 
development, deployment and usage. 

DIFC, blockchain, dapps, COP26, DCarbonX, ESG, Web 3.0, climate change, carbon market, greenwashing, NFT. 

Index Terms 

I. INTRODUCTION 

The advent of blockchains in 2008 [1] with a novel concept of economic incentives for participation in network reliability 
initiated the domain of cryptoeconomics. Blockchain technology garnered considerable interest from domains spanning from 
finance [2] to education [3], with a potential to disrupt existing working models. The pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus 
has established the need for a strong digital infrastructure for governments to ensure that the effects on the economy are 
minimal [4]. Blockchain can assist in deploying this digital infrastructure while providing transparency and data integrity. The 
financial sector is seen as the pivot for blockchain to revolutionize the economy by innovative models of payments [5] and 
banking [6]. Blockchain evolved from a permissionless network in Bitcoin to a permissioned one in Quorum, resonating with the 
existing legacy financial systems to be in synchronization with the needs for data privacy and regulated access. The conception 
of smart contracts in Ethereum [7] heralded a new era of applications, built on top of the underlying decentralised blockchain 
infrastructure, known as decentralised applications (hereafter referred to as dapps). 

Dapps utilize and provide the characteristics of blockchain technology to products and services, majorly using smart contracts 
[8]. Smart contracts find applicability in multiple areas, including but not limited to Islamic capital markets [9], peer-to-peer 
lending [10], supply chain finance [11], insurance [12] and the Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) sector [13]. The 
market  for  dapps  is  expected  to  reach  368.25B  by  2027  spurred  by  the  need  for  secure  peer-to-peer  transactions,  where 
coronavirus  is  seen  as  a  key  influencing  factor  [14].  The  primary  advantages  provided  by  dapps  include  transparency, 
immutability, real time transactions, low cost, absolving of intermediaries and a programmed execution of stipulated terms in 
contractual business relationships. Dapps through smart contracts can also help to adhere to Shariah standards by helping to 
comply with the Shariah law and providing evidence for the same through transparent transactions on the blockchain [15]. 

The  ESG  market  is  facing  multiple  challenges  like  lack  of  transparency,  issues  dealing  with  integration  in  the  existing 
infrastructure, and delivering on ESG commitments [16]. A pertinent area of relevance after COP26 is that of carbon emission 
reductions and countries are being asked to come forward with ambitious 2030 reductions targets to reach ”global net zero by 
mid-century and keep 1.5◦	within reach” [17]. A major requirement to achieve this goal is to have an authentic and accurate 
record of carbon emissions by each country and hence each relevant organisation. Thereafter, there should be an infrastructure 
to provide this record to the country for accounting purposes such that the data is non-repudiated and cannot be corrupted. 
Moreover, an exchange of carbon credits should be facilitated to ensure cooperation between organisations encouraging flow 

        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              2 

from carbon negative entities to carbon neutral and carbon positive entities. The paper conducts a case study on DCarbonX, 
which is a pioneering blockchain-based software, that solves some of the major problems associated with tracking and tracing 
of carbon credits. DCarbonX is developed by Nash fintechX [18], which is a software solutions provider specialising in blockchain 
and artificial intelligence, to provide an accurate recording of carbon credits and a trading market for exchange of carbon credits. 
The  case  study  has  been  discussed  in  Section  IV.  The  case  study  elaborates  on  the  motivation  behind  the  development  of 
DCarbonX, the functional architecture, salient features and the utility of the developed decentralized application software in 
sustainable finance. 

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The related work is given in Section II. Relevant background, where a description 
of  blockchain  technology,  smart  contracts,  dapps  and  a  comparison  of  major  blockchain  platforms  on  which  dapps  can  be 
developed is given in Section III. The paper discusses the applications of dapps in some pertinent domains in Subsection III-E. 
The challenges faced during the development, deployment and usage of dapps, in general, are given in Section V while the 
conclusion is given in Section VI. 

II. RELATED WORK 
Cai et al. in [19] elaborate on the importance of dapps and conduct a survey on state of the art in dapps, whereas in [20], 
Zheng  et  al.  discuss  the  components  of  a  dapp,  while  highlighting  that  there  is  no  single  point  of  failure.  In  this  paper,  we 
elaborate on the issues that are present in the ESG domain, while providing a solution to solve some major impediments to 
achieving carbon neutrality by 2050. In [21], Wu et al. do an empirical study of blockchain-based dapps, provide a summary of 
methodology of usage of smart contracts by dapps to access the underlying blockchain and conduct a descriptive analysis of 
popularity of dapps. The present work differs in focusing on a single decentralized application software, DcarbonX, that provides 
a carbon market for trading of carbon credits. In [22] Mishra et al. discuss the usage of blockchain and dapps to resolve the 
security  issues  around  sharing  of  students’  credentials,  whereas  our  work  deals  with  resolving  issues  around  transparency, 
tracking and accurate accounting of carbon emission reductions. Rupa et al. in [22] utilize a dapp for storage of medical records 
in Ethereum to protect it from unauthorized access by attackers and designed the associated dapp for Industry 5.0. The present 
work utilizes a dapp to help prevent greenwashing and manipulation of the record of issued carbon credits. The present work is 
an application for Web 3.0. Marchesi et al. in [24] define a structured approach to developing dapps using an agile and scrum 
methodology in Ethereum, which is extensible to other blockchains. Our work defines the architecture and gives the platform 
details for DCarbonX, which is a dapp providing a blockchain-based carbon market. In [25], Hamza et al. give an overview of the 
scientific evidence and impact of climate change, indicating the need for solutions to combat it. The present work is a pioneer 
in providing a solution through a dapp, DCarbonX, for assisting in providing an accurate quantitative measurement of the efforts 
to combat climate change. In [26], Chen elaborates on the significance of using blockchain to improve accountability in carbon 
markets and to develop renewable energy microgrids, whereas our work provides a practical evidence of the accountability 
blockchain provides for carbon markets through our decentralized application software, DCarbonX. 

A. Blockchain 

III. BACKGROUND 

Blockchain is a decentralized and distributed database that operates in a peer-to-peer network. The organisation of data in 

a blockchain is in the form of blocks and can be visualized as a singly linked list as given in Figure 1. The singly linked list is a 
series of nodes, where each node contains a data field and the address of the next data node in the list. The last node in the 
list points to null. Blockchain is an ever increasing series of blocks, where the first block is referred to as the genesis block 

 
        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              3 

Figure 1: Singly linked list vs Blockchain. 

and provides a template for all other blocks. All blocks, other than the genesis, contain a reference to the previous block. There 
are conceptual differences between a singly linked list and blockchain. Individual blocks in the blockchain have multiple data 
points in the form of transactions hashed together in a Merkle tree and hash of the previous block in the block header, for 
example, linked together by cryptography and this is not present in a singly linked list. Additionally, the data in a linked list can 
be changed and deleted. In a blockchain, the data is immutable and cannot be corrupted. There is no provision for deleting 
blocks in a blockchain as any change in data needs to be accomplished in all the copies of the database that reside with possibly 
thousands of validators in case of a public blockchain [1]. The blockchain network majorly comprises of: 

•  Users 
•  Validators 
•  Consensus Protocol 
•  Governance Mechanism 

Users use the dapps and payment services provided by the blockchain. Validators are responsible for maintaining the blockchain 
database and participate in validating transactions by virtue of which the data gets recorded on the distributed ledger of the 
blockchain. Consensus protocol has been described in the following subsection. The governance mechanism followed by the 
blockchain network determines how coordinated the various entities in the network are to accomplish the strategic goals of the 
blockchain platform, ensures that the blockchain services are always available and minimises the occurrence of forks [27]. 

1) Consensus: Blockchain is a distributed database where no single entity controls the addition of data but the right to update 
the  database  is  distributed  among  owners  of  computing  power,  stakeholders  or  a  user’s  social  network  [28].  The  universal 
agreement within the blockchain network as to the legitimacy of the data to be added and which validator will add data is 
referred to as consensus. There are different consensus protocols being utilized by blockchain networks based on the economic 
set and the choice of the consensus protocol helps in determining the throughput of the blockchain network, among other major 
parameters governing blockchain networks. The primary consensus protocol, Proof of Work, employed by Bitcoin and Ethereum, 
utilizes a lot of energy and the energy consumption of each Bitcoin transaction is estimated to be equivalent to 1173 kilowatt 
hours  of  electricity,  which  can  ”power  the  typical  American  home  for  six  weeks”  [29].  This  makes  proof  of  work  consensus 
protocol an unsuitable candidate for usage in view of the climate goals outlined in COP26. 

B. Smart contracts 

Smart contracts are computer programs that reside on the blockchain platform and their correct execution is enforced by the 
consensus protocol. They help to formalize and secure relationships on the blockchain network [30]. Smart contracts find usage 
in multiple areas like gaming, finance, supply chain, insurance and notary, among others [31]. A sample smart contract to create 
an NFT (non-fungible token), which are token representations of non-fungible assets, is given in Figure 2. The smart contract 
creates a permanent record of an Eid Al Adha 2021 greeting by Nash fintechX, which depicts a few lessons from the last sermon 
of Prophet Mohammad (Sallalahu Alayhi Wasallam - May peace and blessings of Allah be upon him). The smart contract stores 
the hash of the greeting image that is stored on InterPlanetary File System (IPFS), which is a peer-to-peer distributed file system 
[32]. Nash fintechX made use of Pinata cloud services [33] to ensure the image can be accessed at all times from IPFS. Pinata 
provides pinning services to facilitate a user to host files on the IPFS network. The smart contract is stored on the Rinkeby testnet 
of Ethereum.  

The transaction hash for the NFT from Nash fintechX is: 

 0x136d93be4784b3b4c470337608a8aa1b5f2402fa3edb15128a57a6902669e108 

The transaction hash can be searched in the Rinkeby testnet explorer [34]. Thereafter, the transaction details can be seen to 
verify input data. The input data can be decoded to see the link for the file stored on IPFS, which in turn contains the link of the 
image and other relevant information associated with the NFT. The image that is stored on IPFS is given in Figure 3. 

 
 
        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              4 

Figure 2: An Excerpt from an NFT Smart Contract 

C. Decentralized applications 

Decentralized applications or dapps, as mentioned previously, are developed on the blockchain infrastructure supported by 
smart contracts. The nomenclature is derived from the way existing applications are designated using the environment of their 

Figure 3: Eid Al Adha Greeting 2021 from Nash fintechX - NFT stored on Rinkeby testnet of Ethereum. 

execution as a deciding factor. Hence, applications developed to function on the web are known as web apps whereas those 
that  function  on  smartphones  are  referred  to  as  smartphone  apps.  Similarly  applications  that  function  on  decentralized 
platforms like the blockchain are referred to as decentralized apps or dapps. The difference is that dapps have a backend hosted 
on  a  decentralized  platform,  whereas  web  apps  and  smartphone  apps  are  powered  by  a  centralized  backend  in  AWS  for 
example. Ethereum was the first blockchain platform that provided the functionality of smart contracts [35] in 2015. Majority 
of dapps are on Ethereum [36] with the number being close to 4000 [37]. 

 
 
 
 
        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              5 

Figure 4: Ethereum Dapp Development. 

Figure 4 depicts one of the methodologies of dapp development in Ethereum. The smart contract/s on which the dapp would 
be developed are deployed on Ethereum using Truffle Console [38] through the Linux command line [39]. Truffle console helps 
to deploy the smart contract on the blockchain through an Ethereum client [40]. Once the smart contract has been deployed, 
the user interface (UI) is developed to help the users interact with the smart contract on the blockchain. In Figure 4, the smart 
contract has been deployed on the Ropsten testnet of Ethereum, which simulates the main Ethereum network but offers fake 
cryptocurrencies for testing purposes. The frontend helps the user to interact with the smart contract through the Ethereum 
client using Ethereum JavaScript API [41]. All the changes in data through the dapp are recorded using the smart contract on 
the blockchain platform. The methodology followed in different blockchain platforms by way of software libraries and tools 
used might be different from the one depicted in Figure 4, but conceptually the process will be similar in all blockchain platforms. 

D. Blockchain Platforms for Dapp Development 

Blockchain platforms that enable the functionality of smart contracts can provide the infrastructure to develop dapps. Table 
1 gives a comparison of the main public blockchain platforms that provide the functionality of developing dapps that store the 
execution rules in smart contracts on the blockchain platform. The blockchain provides the database for storage and retrieval 
of data generated through dapps. The metrics depicted were retrieved from various sources and correspond to 13th January, 
2022. 

 Table 1 gives the throughput or the number of transactions per second that the concerned blockchain platform is able to 
achieve and Solana has the maximum throughput with Ethereum being the lowest in terms of performance. The smart contracts 
can be written in multiple programming languages and blockchain platforms, which provide popular programming languages to 
write smart contracts like Solana are more attractive for developers. Similarly the transaction fee is an extremely important 
parameter when developing dapps that will involve a large number of transactions/ users. Stellar has the lowest transaction fee 
but only the base fee has been indicated in Table 1, while the actual transaction fee would depend on the number of operations 
a transaction entails. Solana scores in having minimal transaction fee after Stellar.  

In consideration of the climate goals outlined in COP26, the consensus protocol used by the blockchain platform should not 
be energy intensive, so the usage should not contribute to an increase in the number of carbon emissions. Additionally, the 
hardware requirements for the organization to participate as a validator of transactions must also be researched upon, while 
taking care of the overall budget of the organization. This scenario would arise if the organization intended to participate in the 
transaction validation process in the blockchain platform. The market capitalization (or market cap as indicated in Table 1) gives 
an indication of the investor confidence in the blockchain platform. It is also a prediction of the quality of the technological 
offering as well as the resiliency of the blockchain platform. A large market cap by default indicates a larger window for the 
platform to resolve issues in code, for example, and come forward with a sound offering. 

Table 1: Comparison of Blockchain Platforms for Dapp Development 

 
 
 
 
        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              6 

Blockchain 
platform 
Algorand 
Cardano 
Ethereum 
Solana 
Stellar 
Tezos 

Throughput 
(tps1) 

1000 
250 
13-14 
50,000 
1000 
40 

Smart Contracts 
Programming language 
TEAL2 
Haskell 
Solidity 
C, Rust, C++ 
-NA-6 
Michelson, SmartPy, LIGO 

Consensus 
algorithm 
PoS3 
Ouroboros (PoS) 
PoW4 
Tower (PoH5) 
SCP7 
PoS 

Market Cap 
(USD) 
8.8B 
41.71B 
389.8B 
46.58B 
6.71B 
3.7B 

Transaction 
fee (USD) 
0.0014 
0.4 
6.493 
0.00025 
0.000002748 
0.00232 

Public 

✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 

E. Applications of Dapps in Finance 

The  primary  benefits  of  dapps  encompass  traceability,  data  immutability,  censorship-resistance,  service  availability, 
decentralized servers, source code auditability and divisibility of digital currencies being utilized with dapps. Applications of 
dapps that capitalize on the indicated benefits can be manifold, especially in the finance sector. A few applications have been 
highlighted in this paper, which can be categorised in the following domains: 

1) Decentralized Finance (DeFi): Decentralized finance or DeFi comprises of financial products and services developed using 
the decentralized, distributed ledger infrastructure as in a blockchain [42]. Blockchain absolves the need for intermediaries and 
financial  services  are  provided  through  a  trustless  financial  domain  in  DeFi.  Transactions  happen  in  real  time  and  since 
intermediaries are not required there is cost reduction. This trustless economy is based on the concepts of game theory [43], 
where validators are given economic incentives to maintain the integrity of the blockchain network. Decentralized borrowing 
and lending can be accomplished through dapps. NFTs, cryptocurrencies or fungible assets can be used as a collateral. The rise 
of  DeFi  has  given  rise  to  novel  business  models  [44],  like  decentralized  marketplaces,  automated  settlement  trading, 
tokenization of Islamic bonds, derivatives trading, liquidity pools and yield farming, among others. 

2) Embedded Finance: Embedded finance implies the offering of financial services, through non-financial companies by using 
third-party providers or their own resources, to their clients. Embedded finance provides benefits of time saving within the same 
physical location to the consumers, who do not have to go to a financial service provider if they need credit but can buy the 
product they intend to, through the retailer. The embedded financial provider offers a seamless experience to the consumers 
by integrating the payment mechanism as a part of the service offering itself. Examples of embedded finance are Apple Pay, 
Google  Pay  and  PayPal.  Blockchain  provides  cost  reduction,  faster  transaction  settlement,  transparency  and  an  immutable 
transaction record. All these features of the technology make it a utilitarian technology to implement embedded finance. Every 
DeFi dapp is an embedded financial offering at its core, where users use cryptocurrencies in exchange for fiat to utilize the 
decentralized financial offering. Embedded finance coupled with blockchain-based dapps can offer benefits in multiple areas 
like metaverse, digital commerce, insurance and even gaming [45]. 

3) Web 3.0: Web 1.0 offered users the ability to read data, whereas Web 2.0 enabled users to not just read but also write 
data, contributing to the available content for consumption. Web 3.0 extends Web 2.0 and facilitates the users to read, write 
and execute implying participation by the general population in contributing to the backend of software applications [46]. This 
contribution  enables  decision-making  to  be  transferred  to  the  average  user  and  encompasses  incentives  through  monetary 
rewards for the service provided by the user. This forms the foundation of tokenomics [47], which is powered by blockchain. 
NFTs would pave the way for assigning rights and privileges in the digital world, equivalent to ownership rights in the physical 
world. Metaverse could be powered by a new cryptocurrency. The integration of blockchain, AR (Augmented Reality), VR (Virtual 
Reality), MR (Mixed Reality) and NFTs [48] will change the way businesses are conducted and cause disruption in the financial 
sector. However, the concept is still in its infancy. 

4) Insurance: The insurance industry has been slower to adapt a tech model, in contrast to their companies in retail banking 
and capital markets, but in hindsight it can result in a massive advantage on account of the wider acceptance of the digital 
landscape  and  maturity  in  underlying  technologies.  Insurance  is  now  ripe  for  disruption  as  reflected  in  the  fast  growth  of 
insurtech  deals  [49].  Blockchain  is  a  pivotal  technology  that  can  help  to  automate  tasks  in  the  insurance  industry  [50].  An 

1 transactions per second 
2 Transaction Execution Application Language 
 3 Proof of Stake 
 4 Proof of Work 

                5 Proof of History 

 6 Does not have a smart contract programming language 
 7 Stellar Consensus Protocol 
 8 Base fee 

 
 
 
 
        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              7 

example would be automating claim settlement through smart contracts that get triggered on the occurrence on an event for 
which  an  insurance  cover  exists.  Dapps  that  synchronize  the  activities  associated  with  claim  settlement  and  harmonise  the 
actions  of  various  intermediaries  through  a  common,  decentralized  ledger  for  data  sharing  can  revolutionize  the  insurance 
industry.  Other  applications  also  exist,  whereby  dapps  can  provide  authentic  and  non-repudiated  data  for  AI  (artificial 
intelligence) algorithms to offer customized insurance products for example to the users. Blockchain can help to prevent fraud 
[51] and through the employment of machine learning predict the occurrence of events for each insured individual, based on 
metrics derived from their life. 

5) ESG:  Investors  observe  a  correlation  between  the  financial  performance  of  a  company  and  their  navigation  of 
environmental  challenges/  opportunities  as  per  a  study  conducted  by  Research  in  Finance  [52].  Climate  change,  carbon 
emissions  and  pollution  rank  as  the  major  environmental  concerns  amongst  investors.  Independence  of  board,  executive 
remuneration and diversity in the board composition were foremost in the governance criterion when investors evaluated a 
firm. Rights of workers, equality and diversity were important factors for investors when looking at the social considerations 
[53].  When  we  focus  on  the  environmental  facet  of  ESG  then  an  authentic  impact  assessment  and  measurement  becomes 
extremely important. Blockchain through dapps developed to accommodate the ESG criteria come across as invaluable tools to 
provide a non-repudiated account of the environmental progress achieved to thwart climate change or reduce pollution. The 
European Commission for example intends to use blockchain to fight climate change [54]. Blockchain through the use of smart 
contract, oracles and dapps can interact with real-world data to cope with the impact of climate change [55]. In accomplishing 
transparency in governance, blockchain through smart contracts and dapps can facilitate honest voting on decisions, where all 
concerned  stakeholders  can  participate  with  their  votes  permanently  recorded  on  the  blockchain  [56].  Dapps  that  support 
financial  inclusion  and  provide  tokens  to  record  the  impact  of  a  social  initiative  leverage  on  blockchain  for  a  quantitative 
measurement of the benefits that are being achieved socially [57]. 

IV. DCARBONX: DECENTRALIZED CARBON MARKET APPLICATION SOFTWARE 
DcarbonX,  Nash  fintechX’s  proprietary  software,  brings  to  market  NFT-based  carbon  credit  tracking  and  a  secondary 
marketplace. DCarbonX facilitates secure, real time logging and tracking of carbon credits, while functioning as a marketplace 
on its integrated platform. The DCarbonX platform can be accessed by SMEs as a common marketplace or can be built on top 
of  existing  internal  systems  in  large  enterprises  and  government  institutions.  The  functional  architecture  of  DCarbonX  is 
described in Subsection IV-B. 

The company intends to launch the product in the market in Q3 of 2022 as well as to homologate the solution with climate 
bodies in the main target regions e.g. European Climate Change program, CAMENA and Task Force on Voluntary Carbon Markets 
(TSVCM).  The  target  market  is  VCMs  (Voluntary  Carbon  Markets)  and  NDC  (Nationally  Determined  Contributions)  projects, 
funded by conventional financial institutions and Islamic financial institutions. While, no official estimation of market exists, 
Nash  fintechX’s  internal  analysis  shows  that  a  target  CO2-equivalent  reduction  of  23  GtCO2-equivalent  (including  2.5  GtCO2-
equivalent for VCM project) by 2030 translates to projects worth $66B. Assuming high adoption of blockchain solution in VCM 
projects and low-medium adoption in NDC projects, this translates to $30-40B worth of transactions annually (2030-2050) on 
logging impact and carbon credit sales on the DCarbonX platform. The company intends to work closely with banks, financial 
institutions and Islamic financial institutions for project definition, tracking as well capacity building of internal teams on ESG 
impact topics. There is a major challenge to get the stakeholders aligned on this novel approach, including climate bodies, clients 
executing the project and project auditors. The main revenue will be generated from the transaction fees from NFT issuance 
from the platform and project consultancy. 

A. Motivation 

COP26 was a landmark event in the fight against climate change as all 196 countries at UN signed the international treaty on 
climate change mitigation, commonly known as Paris accord. The primary aim is to keep the rise in mean global temperature to 
below  2◦C  and  preferably  to  1.5◦C.  The  Paris  accord  also  foresaw  countries  to  build  national  plans  known  as  Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDCs) on emission reduction targets every 5 years. The COP26 held in Glasgow in October-November 
2021 saw 194 countries presenting their first NDCs while 143 of them submitted new or updated plans in time for COP26. These 
new, updated plans would lead to total GHG (greenhouse gas) emissions being about 9% lower in 2030 than they were in 2010. 
The UN estimates that the current commitments align with a temperature increase of 2.7◦C by the end of the century. This will 
mean  additional  commitments  on  emission  reduction  on  part  of  member  countries  to  reach  Paris  accord  target  of  average 
temperature increase of 2◦C or preferred target of 1.5◦C. COP26 was also the most significant COP for companies and the finance 
sector, reflecting the growing expectations of both to play key roles in enabling decarbonization in accordance with the Paris 
goals. 

        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              8 

One of the major points of discussion at COP26 related to Article 6, which sets forth a framework for the creation of a voluntary 
international  carbon  credit  trading  market.  The  article  6.2  foresaw  that  countries  will  voluntarily  engage  in  “cooperative 
approaches” involving internationally transferred mitigation outcomes (“ITMOs”, emissions credits transferrable across globe) 
towards their NDCs. The Article 6.2 also provides that, in so doing, countries must apply robust accounting to ensure avoidance 
of double counting of emission credits [58]. 

The goals of article 6.2 are operationalized in article 6.4, which defines a “mechanism” supervised by a body designated by 

the parties to the Paris Agreement to: 

1)  Promote the mitigation of GHG emissions 
2)  Incentivize and facilitate the mitigation of GHG emissions by public and private entities 
Although Article 6 lays the foundation for the creation of a global carbon credit market, it left key implementation details to 
be determined later. There were differences on structural topics including mechanism to avoid double counting and trading of 
older carbon credits. After five years of deliberations, there was fortunately an agreement at COP26 on the ‘rulebook’ for this 
carbon credit market for the states and private entities to generate and trade carbon offset credits. While the agreement is a 
leap forward for transparency on country level NDCs achievements and carbon credit transfer, the big concern remains on lack 
of mechanisms governing private projects outside a country’s NDC or not adjusted for in the country’s carbon budget. These 
emission reductions certificates can still be sold to corporate emitters or other non-state actors, who could use them to claim 
that  they  are  reaching  “climate  neutrality”  without  a  robust  tracking  and  logging  mechanism.  Currently  only  few  voluntary 
carbon markets are established for entities to buy and sell carbon offset credits at their discretion (e.g., to fulfill a voluntary 
commitment to reduce emissions). Lack of standardization in these voluntary markets has raised numerous concerns, including 
with respect to the quality and validity of offsets and the associated credits [58]. 

There has been a flurry of announcements on voluntary contribution on carbon emission reduction in the run-up to COP26 
by  private  entities,  both  in  high  carbon  emitting  sectors  as  well  as  financial  sectors.  The  climate  targets  will  become  a  key 
performance  metric  and  competitive  advantage  for  players  in  their  respective  business.  Thus  a  robust,  secure,  transparent 
carbon tracking and trading system is a big business opportunity in the run-up to the first climate change milestone of 2030. 
DCarbonX aims to fulfil this exploding market need with its blockchain-based emission tracking and trading platform as a market 
pioneer [59]. 

B. Functional Architecture 

Figure 5: Functional Architecture of DCarbonX. 

DCarbonX is a blockchain-based carbon market. It is a decentralized application software that utilizes blockchain to store an 
immutable record of issued and traded carbon credits. It provides a primary and secondary market for trading of carbon credits, 
stored as NFTs on the blockchain platform. These carbon credit are created as NFTs following a similar methodology as was 
employed for Figure 3. 

Figure 5 represents a simplified functional architecture of DCarbonX. The user through the organization that uses DCarbonX 
accesses the NFTs of carbon credit certificates through a dapp. Smart contracts help to create NFTs of uploaded carbon credit 
certificates and also facilitate trading of NFTs. The organization and the users can see analytics related to the issued carbon 
credit certificates, where each carbon credit certificate would list down the owners, indicating the original owner and then all 
the subsequent buyers in the trading market. Additionally, the dashboard developed through a web app working in integration 
with  the  dapp  will  depict  the  total  number  of  issued  carbon  credit  certificates,  total  number  of  uploaded  carbon  credit 

 
 
        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              9 

certificates or NFTs and the number of duplicate requests whereby someone tries to upload a carbon credit certificate that 
already exists on the blockchain. 

C. Minimum Viable Product 

Figure 6 depicts screenshots from the minimum viable product (MVP) of DCarbonX, which has been developed on Solana [60] 
blockchain platform. The screenshot on the left shows a carbon offset NFT on Solana blockchain. The certificate is stored on 
Arweave [61], while the hash is stored on Solana. The hash and the related transaction can be seen by clicking the keyword 
’Solana’ while to traverse the uploaded certificate, ’Arweave’ needs to be clicked. The MVP uses Phantom wallet [62], which can 
be installed on Chrome browser. The Phantom extension helps users to create a blockchain-based wallet, buy and store the 
cryptocurrency of Solana and helps in transaction payments. The screenshot also shows the profile, account balance of the 
concerned  user  and  permitted  functions  for  that  profile,  which  are  to  create  an  NFT,  sell  an  NFT,  buy  cryptocurrency  and 
disconnect from the Phantom wallet. DCarbonX can be developed on any blockchain platform providing smart contracts but our 
analysis revealed that Solana would be an optimum choice considering our need that the blockchain platform should not be 
energy intensive like Ethereum, have a high throughput and should have minimal transaction fee. Our comparison of blockchain 
platforms in Table 1 on which dapps can be developed supports our conclusion in favor of Solana. The screenshot on the right 
shows the listing of NFT in the primary market in the Solana blockchain, which can be reached by clicking the keyword ’Solana’ 
in the screenshot on the left. This provides an immutable record of the carbon offset as an NFT on the blockchain. The DCarbonX 
dapp provides a drag-and-drop GUI (graphical user interface) so the users visualize the carbon market as being similar to the 
existing web apps in simplicity of design, while the backend complexity is hidden from them. 

D. Salient Features 

Figure 6: Screenshots from the MVP of DCarbonX. 

The salient features of DCarbonX together with the advantages it provides can be summarized as follows: 
1)  DCarbonX  is  under  the  control  of  the  issuing  organisation  and  only  registered  entities  can  participate  in  the  carbon 

market. 

2)  The issuing organisation has the sole power to create NFTs whereas all other users can buy and sell them. This can be 

extended to accommodate other issuers, if needed. 

3)  A carbon credit NFT issued by the organisation is listed in the primary market. 
4)  Any purchase and resale of the issued carbon credit NFT lists it in the secondary market. 
5) 
Interface to view all issued carbon credit certificates through the web app dashboard. 
6)  Analytics indicating total number of issued carbon credits through NFTs. 
7)  The NFT of a carbon credit certificate has its entire list of owners listed on the dashboard. 
8)  The issuing organization gains a certain percentage of the profit each time the issued carbon credit NFT is sold in the 

carbon market. 

9)  At any instant of time all the transactions are available on the public blockchain for validation. 
10)  The identity of the registered users is known only to the issuing organization to ensure privacy, whereas transaction 

records are public for transparency. 

11)  An immutable record of issued carbon credit NFTs will prevent duplication of records, thus preventing greenwashing. 
12)  All claims made by an organization related to its positive contribution to achieving carbon neutrality will be backed by 

authentic and non-repudiated records on the blockchain. 

 
 
        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              10 

13)  DCarbonX has a GUI, which hides the complexity of blockchain from the users. 
14)  The  overall  infrastructure  will  provide  the  requisite  accountability,  transparency  and  trading  of  carbon  credits  to 
strengthen  the  efforts  of  achieving  the  climate  goals  outlined  in  COP26,  adhering  to  a  structured  and  quantifiable 
approach. 

15)  Potential deployment of AI on the blockchain data to offer recommendations to traders on which carbon credit NFT to 

buy, indicate the best price for sale and predict demand. 

E. Utility in Sustainable Finance 

One of the biggest challenge in achieving the 1.5◦C Paris accord goal remains the funding for climate projects contributing to 
NDCs and VCMs. A commitment of $100B per year by donors to support low and middle-income countries in tackling climate 
change was among the key goals of COP26. However, there was no explicit agreement at COP26 on the mechanism to fully 
deliver this commitment upto 2025. There has been a push to mobilize private sector financing to bridge this gap and more than 
450 firms totaling $130T in asset base have formed the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ), a forum for financial 
institutions to accelerate the transition to a net-zero global economy. The GFANZ will report progress on financed projects but 
will also define net zero pathways for major sectors, thus aligning efforts from corporates and financial institutions. Large private 
sector banks have joined the fray with Goldman Sachs committing $750B to sustainable finance over the next decade. This 
followed an earlier announcement from JPMorgan Chase to facilitate $200B in sustainable finance in 2020. There still remains 
a financing gap which has to be bridged by innovative, sustainable financing asset classes. Green bond has emerged in recent 
years as a major sustainable financial tool with the issuance touching $500B in 2021. However, continued growth of green bonds 
remains incumbent to solving two major challenges associated with the ESG sector, namely greenwashing and higher issuance 
costs linked to impact assessment and reporting. 

The Islamic principles of moderation in consumption, and avoidance of the wasteful use of natural resources makes faith an 
integral force multiplier in the fight against climate change. This is especially important as 57 member countries of OIC are home 
to almost 24% of world’s population with many of the member countries likely to be heavily impacted by the effect of climate 
change. The Islamic finance products with it’s unique asset-backed, ethical and risk sharing principles lends itself naturally to 
principles of sustainable finance. There has been a greater focus on Green Sukuk as a major asset class to meet climate financing 
needs. The market for green sukuk has grown rapidly with issuance of $3.5B in 2019, driven partly by increased liquidity in 
investor base in MENA and Asia. There has been a diversification in investor base with a push for ESG products in EU and other 
developed regions. However, like its counterpart in conventional finance, green bond, green sukuk also involves rigorous project 
monitoring and impact logging making it difficult to catch up the market appetite. Thus, creating a supply gap. DCarbonX aims 
to solve the problem through early involvement in project selection as indicated in Figure 7 and supporting the project teams 
throughout the project lifecycle. 

Figure 7: DCarbonX and IsDB Green Sukuk Issuance Cycle. 

 
        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              11 

V. CHALLENGES IN DEVELOPMENT, DEPLOYMENT AND USAGE 
Blockchain technology, despite being revolutionary for the finance sector, has still not seen mass adoption. The advent of 
NFTs witnessed an increase in the user base and brought the technology to the realm of the common man for an asset-backed 
productive usage, instead of being an investment vehicle for cryptocurrencies. However, there still exist challenges that need a 
coordinated effort from all stakeholders to deploy the technology to solve existing challenges, for which an alternative solution 
does not exist like for climate change. Some of the challenges related to dapps, demarcated into different categories, have been 
enumerated below: 

A. Development 

•  Limited blockchain experts. Blockchain technology is still in the stage of development with most projects still in the pilot 
phase. On account of this people pursuing advanced studies/ skills in the technology are comparatively few in number. This 
has led to scarcity of requisite talent, leading to a limited number of blockchain experts. 

•  Absence of smart contract auditors. Smart contracts developed on different platforms form the foundation for dapps. Any 
transaction  emanating  through  dapps  is  permanent  with  the  resulting  data  leaving  an  immutable  footprint  in  the 
blockchain platform. Hence the code for the smart contract should be critically analysed for any potential issues and even 
security flaws, which can lead to drainage of funds from a user’s wallet or other similar cybercrimes. This analysis can be 
accomplished  by  smart  contract  auditors  who  are  well  aware  of  the  programming  language  and  the  various  issues 
associated with the use of blockchain. This knowledge in multiple areas has created a need for experts, who are relatively 
fewer in number. 

•  Scarce developer community. Blockchain platforms employ different programming languages to build smart contracts, 
including many new languages native to a particular blockchain platform like Solidity in case of Ethereum. This has led to 
the  need  for  developers  proficient  in  these  languages.  Lack  of  mass  adoption  has  prevented  many  developers,  from 
venturing into the area. Thus, the developer community in blockchain is small. Additionally, the complexity associated with 
the development of a dapp, which requires development skills in not just the requisite blockchain platform but also an 
understanding  of  the  technology  to  ensure  robust  smart  contracts  that  back  dapps,  has  attracted  relatively  fewer 
developers. 

•  High  initial  capital  requirement.  In  consideration  of  scarcity  of  blockchain  experts,  smart  contract  code  auditors  and 
blockchain developers, the development community is in a lot of demand and expense incurred to deploy a blockchain-
based  solution  is  very  high.  Moreover,  there  needs  to  exist  cooperation  between  developers  concerned  with different 
facets pertaining to dapp development like the frontend, smart contract coding, testing, and integration with a centralized 
database/ oracles if needed. This lends complexity to the process requiring comparatively more human resources to bring 
to  realization  the  target  dapp  as  compared  to  a  web  or  a  mobile  app.  Thus,  any  venture  that  undertakes  the  task  of 
developing  a  dapp  requires  a  very  high  initial  capital  to  integrate  and  employ  the  services  of  requisite  experts  and 
developers. 

•  Lack of supporting tools. The smart contract technology is still new and has not attained maturity. Consequently tools to 
support  the  development  of  smart  contracts  and  dapps  that  simplify  the  process  and  help  to  accomplish  the  tasks 
efficiently are still work in progress or non-existent depending upon the blockchain platform. 

•  Inherent bottlenecks in the blockchain platform. Blockchain platforms might deal with different obstacles based on the 
consensus  mechanism  employed  by  them,  among  other  factors.  Scalability  and  throughput  are  dominating  issues  in 
Ethereum  on  account  of  proof  of  work  consensus.  Additionally,  it  involves  considerable  expenditure  of  energy,  like  in 
Bitcoin and many other privacy-preserving blockchain platforms like Monero, Zcash and Dash, which makes it unsuitable 
to be used for ESG purposes. Throughput is a major issue in other blockchain platforms as well, where it is seen that the 
transactions per second, as given in Table 1, in most blockchain platforms is not sufficient to support a large number of 
users in parallel. Credit card companies like Mastercard can settle 5000 transactions per second [63]. 

B. Deployment 

•  Integration  of  KYC.  KYC  or  Know  Your  Customer  is  a  mandatory  requirement  in  financial  services  to  help  validate  the 
identity of the user and authenticate the business relationship. KYC solutions are provided by third-parties or they can be 
developed in-house, which results in an increase in the total costs. The dapp needs to work seamlessly with the KYC services 
already provided by an organisation. Alternatively, if KYC process is not existent in an organisation, then they should be 
integrated during dapp development to ensure that the mandatory requirements are catered to for dapp usage. 

•  Integration with existing legacy systems. In majority of solutions where the dapp caters to deployment by organisations 
and is not meant for direct retail use, there needs to be an integration with the existing infrastructure of the organisation. 
This  integration  can  be  with  the  organisation’s  existing  client  registration  processes,  access  and  retrieval  of  data  from 

        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              12 

centralized databases and updating of existing database in the organisation to populate it with blockchain data for example. 
This integration requires expertise in existing web technologies together with blockchain. 

•  Inadequate regulatory support. Regulatory support is crucial for the sustainable progress of innovations. Regulations have 
an impact on innovation [64] and their existence is necessary to protect the users from malpractices and uncertainties 
associated with a novel technological implementation. Blockchain technology, cryptocurrencies and hence dapps do not 
have the requisite regulatory support in most countries that is essential for their secure deployment and usage [65]. 

•  Non-uniformity in wallet providers. Regional differences exist as to the permissibility of utilizing a blockchain-based wallet 
for a dapp, with some countries permitting a certain wallet provider, whereas other countries prohibiting it. This poses an 
additional constraint during development as the dapp needs to be adapted according to the geographical region of it’s 
offering.  Different  wallet  providers  have  a  different  fee  structure  and  even  a  different  methodology  for  onboarding  of 
clients. 

C. Usage 

•  Security issues and errors in code. Vulnerabilities in smart contract code like coding errors can be exploited to make the 
usage of the concerned dapp insecure. Once the smart contract is deployed on the blockchain, the code cannot be updated 
so any bugs that exist would lead to undesirable effects. The vulnerability in code led to the loss of $50M in the DAO attack 
on Ethereum [66]. 

•  Requirement of cryptocurrencies. All blockchain platforms function by charging a certain fee for the utility they provide. 
This fee must be paid in the native cryptocurrency of the blockchain platform. So any user that utilizes a dapp built on a 
public blockchain needs to have the native cryptocurrency in their wallet that would make transaction payment possible 
for  the  blockchain  platform.  There  can  be  many  dapp  architectures  where  organisations  can  go  for  a  private  or  a 
permissioned  blockchain  and  resort  to  using  fake  tokens  in  exchange  for  fiat  currency,  doing  away  with  the  need  of 
cryptocurrencies.  However,  in  general  whenever  a  public  blockchain  platform  is  used,  which  is  an  optimum  choice 
whenever  immutability  and  transparency  is  at  the  core  of  an  offering  like  the  ESG  sector,  the  user  would  need 
cryptocurrencies. Another alternative can be developed, whereby the organisation pays in the cryptocurrency on behalf of 
the  clients.  However,  the  current  level  of  advancement  that  exists  in  the  technology  as  of  now,  envisages  that  a  user 
requires cryptocurrencies to use a dapp on a public blockchain. This is a challenge as fiat currency is universally accepted 
and so their procurement and management tools are available but cryptocurrencies are a recent embarking and do not 
have the requisite support as of now. 

•  Lack  of  trust  in  the  technology.  Blockchain  is  still  considered  to  be  a  novel  technology.  The  initial  domination  of 
cryptocurrencies  as  an  investment  vehicle,  which  witnessed  massive  fluctuations  in  prices  and  led  to  multiple  scams 
through ICOs has created suspicion in the average user and organisations [67]. The usage of cryptocurrencies in cybercrime 
and the dark web had added to the lack of trust in the ethical nature of the technology [68]. Moreover, the scalability and 
throughput issues that plague the technology [69] have garnered a public opinion that associates lack of efficacy with the 
technology, rendering it as a technology that is still in research and development phase. 

•  Lack of technical literacy. Users are not educated on the various complexities associated with the use of blockchain and 
dapps. There is lack of awareness of the technology itself, with the existing consumers limited to entities with the necessary 
technical knowledge required to use it. However, mass adoption would occur realizing the full benefits that the technology 
offers, once the level of technical literacy that is required and the ease of usage is similar to how users interact with existing 
apps on the web or mobile. 

•  Management  of  keys.  The  public  and  private  keys  associated  with  the  blockchain  wallet  need  to  be  kept  secure  and 
different  management  strategies  exist  like  a  web  wallet,  hot  wallet  or  a  cold  wallet,  among  others.  This  imposes  an 
additional burden on the users in terms of technical awareness. 

VI. CONCLUSION 

Decentralized applications developed utilizing blockchain technology capitalize on and provide all the benefits that accrue 
with blockchain usage. Dapps pave the way for novel business models to be developed that can impact the economy positively, 
considering the focus on a resilient digital infrastructure, instigated by the problems during the coronavirus pandemic. In this 
paper we embark on a case study of a decentralized application software, DCarbonX, which provides the necessary support to 
mitigate the harmful effects of climate change and provides a quantifiable approach to achieving carbon neutrality by 2050, as 
per the outlined goals in COP26. We give the related work on dapps and highlight that a parallel to the present work has not 
been delved upon so far to the best of our knowledge. 

 
        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              13 

The paper gives a comparison of blockchain platforms that can be utilized to develop dapps and highlights the applications of 

dapps in pertinent areas of DeFi, embedded finance, insurance, Web 3.0 and ESG. 

The  main  contribution  of  the  paper  is  the  case  study  of  DCarbonX,  which  depicts  the  practical  implementation  of  a 
decentralized application in the very relevant area of climate change. Climate change remains the biggest challenge confronting 
human race. Climate projects pose the possibility of greenwashing and duplication of impact. Even for NDC projects there is an 
elaborate bureaucratic process on logging and auditing the impact. The current practices thus add to the cost of financing of 
climate projects, while not contributing to the cause of transparency and fast deployment of projects. The paper highlights how 
through DCarbonX, climate projects can be made traceable, their impact can be recorded and how a transparent carbon market 
can be developed using blockchain. 

The paper gives the functional architecture of DCarbonX and defines the salient features of the MVP of DCarbonX. The paper 
also sheds light on the critical role sustainable finance will play in execution of climate projects and specifically the possibility to 
expand green sukuk for meeting the financing gaps. The section also details integration of DCarbonX in the green sukuk issuance 
cycle to ensure a good product design and robust impact tracking. The paper is a pioneer in describing the challenges involved 
in development, actual deployment and usage of decentralized applications. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Dr. Rushdi Siddiqui for his support and invaluable guidance in creating the promotional video 

for DCarbonX, which can be accessed using the YouTube link, https://youtu.be/bBDFC42eq1s. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System,” https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf, 2008. 
[2]  B. C. Chen, Y., “Decentralized Finance: Blockchain Technology and the Quest for an Open Financial System,” https://ssrn.com/abstract=3418557, 2019. 
[3]  A. Machado, M. Sousa, and A. Rocha, “Blockchain technology in education,” in 2020 The 4th International Conference on E-Commerce, E-Business and E-
[Online].  Available: 

ICEEG  2020.  New  York,  NY,  USA:  Association 

for  Computing  Machinery,  2020,  p.  130–134. 

Government,  ser. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3409929.3416793 

[4]  PwC China, “Going Digital during COVID-19 and beyond,” https://www.pwccn.com/en/tmt/going-digital-during-covid-19-beyond-jul2020.pdf, 2020. 
[5]  A. Vijayan, A. M. Ashique, M. K. Karunattu, A. John, and M. J. Pillai, “Digital payments: Blockchain based security concerns and future,” in 2020 International 

Conference on Smart Electronics and Communication (ICOSEC), 2020, pp. 429–435. 

[6]  V.  Naik,  R.  Pejawar,  R.  Singh,  A.  Aher,  and  S.  Kanchan,  “Expeditious  banking  using  blockchain  technology,”  in  2020  International  Conference  on 

Computational Intelligence for Smart Power System and Sustainable Energy (CISPSSE), 2020, pp. 1–6. 

[7]  M. Abdelhamid and G. Hassan, “Blockchain and smart contracts,” in Proceedings of the 2019 8th International Conference on Software and Information 
[Online].  Available: 

for  Computing  Machinery,  2019,  p.  91–95. 

New  York,  NY,  USA:  Association 

Engineering, ser. ICSIE ’19. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3328833.3328857 

[8]  T. Hewa, Y. Hu, M. Liyanage, S. Kanhare, and M. Ylianttila, “Survey on blockchain-based smart contracts: Technical aspects and future research,” IEEE 

Access, 03 2021. 

[9]  N. Khan, B. Kchouri, N. Yatoo, Z. Kraussl, A. Patel, and R. State, “Tokenization of sukuk: Ethereum case study,”¨ Global Finance Journal, p. 100539, 06 2020. 
[10]  V. K. Manda and S. Yamijala, “Peer-to-peer lending using blockchain,” International Journal Of Advance Research And Innovative Ideas In Education, vol. 

6, pp. 61–66, 03 2019. 

[11]  A. Rijanto, “Blockchain technology adoption in supply chain finance,” Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, vol. 16, pp. 3078–

3098, 11 2021. 

[12]  H. Kantur, “How smart contracts can change the insurance industry - benefits and challenges of using blockchain technology,” Ph.D. dissertation, 08 2018. 
[13]  X. Liu, H. Wu, B. Wu, Y. Fu, and G. Q. Huang, Blockchain-Enabled ESG Reporting Framework for Sustainable Supply Chain, 09 2020, pp. 403–413. 
[14]  Global Key Players, “DApps Market Report 2020,” https://www.einnews.com/pr  news/554513183/dapps-market-report-2020-by-global-key-players-typ 

es-applications-countries-size-forecast-to-2027, 2021. 

[15]  N. Alam, L. Gupta, and A. Zameni, Smart Contract and Islamic Finance, 10 2019, pp. 119–135. 
[16]  PwC, “Six key challenges for financial institutions to deal with ESG risks,” https://www.pwc.nl/en/insights-and-publications/services-and-industries/fin 

ancial-sector/six-key-challenges-for-financial-institutions-to-deal-with-ESG-risks.html. 

[17]  United Nations Climate Change, “COP26 Goals - UN Climate Conference UK 2021,” https://ukcop26.org/cop26-goals/. 
[18]  Nash fintechX, “Company Website,” https://nashfintechx.com/index.html. 
[19]  W. Cai, Z. Wang, J. Ernst, Z. Hong, and C. Feng, “Decentralized applications: The blockchain-empowered software system,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 53019–

53033, 10 2018. 

[20]  G. Zheng, L. Gao, L. Huang, and J. Guan, Decentralized Application (DApp), 01 2021, pp. 253–280. 
[21]  K. Wu, Y. Ma, G. Huang, and X. Liu, “A first look at blockchain-based decentralized applications,” Software: Practice and Experience, vol. 51, 10 2019. 
[22]  R. Mishra, A. Kalla, N. Singh, and M. Liyanage, “Implementation and analysis of blockchain based dapp for secure sharing of students’ credentials,” 01 

2020. 

 
 
 
 
        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              14 

[23]  R. Ch., D. Midhunchakkaravarthy, M. K. Hasan, H. Alhumyani, and R. A. Saeed “Industry 5.0: Ethereum blockchain technology based dapp smart contract,” 

18(5): 7010-7027 2021. 

[24]  L. Marchesi, M. Marchesi, and R. Tonelli, “Abcde—agile block chain dapp engineering,” Blockchain: Research and Applications, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 100002, 

2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2096720920300026 

[25]  Y.  Gambo  Hamza,  S.  Ameta,  A.  Tukur,  and  A.  Usman,  “Overview  on  evidence  and  reality  of  climate  change,”  IOSR  Journal  of  Environmental  Science 

Toxicology and Food Technology, vol. 14, pp. 17–26, 07 2020. 

[26]  D. Chen, “Utility of the blockchain for climate mitigation,” The Journal of the British Blockchain Association, vol. 1, pp. 1–9, 07 2018. 
[27]  N. Khan, T. Ahmad, A. Patel, and R. State, “Blockchain governance: An overview and prediction of optimal strategies using nash equilibrium,” 02 2020. 
[28]  Vitalik Buterin, “Ethereum Foundation Blog,” https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/11/25/proof-stake-learned-love-weak-subjectivity/, 2014. 
[29]  S. Tully, “Every single bitcoin transaction—even buying a latte—consumes over $100 in electricity, says a new report,” Fortune, 2021. [Online]. Available: 

https://fortune.com/2021/10/26/bitcoin-electricity-consumption-carbon-footprin/ 

[30]  N.Szabo,“Smart contracts: Formalizing and securing relationships on public network,” First Monday, 1997. [Online]. Available: 

https://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/download/548/469 

[31]  M. Bartoletti and L. Pompianu, “An empirical analysis of smart contracts: platforms, applications, and design patterns,” CoRR, vol. abs/1703.06322, 2017. 

[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.06322 

[32]  IPFS, “IPFS Powers the Distributed Web,” https://ipfs.io/#why. 
[33]  Pinata, “Pinata — Your Home for NFT Media,” https://www.pinata.cloud. 
[34]  Ethereum, “Etherscan — Rinkeby Testnet Explorer,” https://rinkeby.etherscan.io. 
[35]  Ethereum, “Introduction to Smart Contracts,” https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/smart-contracts/. 
[36]  DappRadar, “The world’s Dapp Store,” https://dappradar.com/rankings. 
[37]  State of the DApps, “State of the DApps - DApps Statistics,” https://www.stateofthedapps.com/stats, last accessed: 13/01/2022. 
[38]  Truffle, “Using Truffle Develop and the Console,” https://trufflesuite.com/docs/truffle/getting-started/using-truffle-develop-and-the-console.html. 
[39]  Canonical, “Ubuntu Tutorials,” https://ubuntu.com/tutorials/command-line-for-beginners#1-overview. 
[40]  Ethereum, “Nodes and Clients,” https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/. 
[41]  Ethereum Revision a57dd3c5, “Ethereum JavaScript API,” https://web3js.readthedocs.io/en/v1.5.2/. 
[42]  S. Bose, G. Dong, and A. Simpson, Decentralized Finance, 10 2019, pp. 283–310. 
[43]  K. Iyer and C. Dannen, Crypto-economics and Game Theory, 05 2018, pp. 129–141. 
[44]  Y. Chen and C. Bellavitis, “Blockchain disruption and decentralized finance: The rise of decentralized business models,” Journal of Business Venturing 

Insights, vol. 13, 06 2020. 

[45]  101 Blockchains, “Blockchain and the Rise of Embedded Finance,” https://101blockchains.com/embedded-finance-in-blockchain/. 
[46]  R. Rudman and R. Bruwer, “Defining web 3.0: Opportunities and challenges,” The Electronic Library, vol. 34, pp. 132–154, 02 2016. 
[47]  S. Kampakis, “Three case studies in tokenomics,” The Journal of the British Blockchain Association, vol. 1, pp. 1–4, 12 2018. 
[48]  N. Khan, “NFT Research Report,” https://drive.google.com/file/d/17XVSwnqMxf TNa7UB7AaKdUTBqK9N-UM/view, 2021. 
[49]  L. Lin and C. Chen, “The promise and perils of insurtech,” Singapore Journal of Legal Studies, 01 2019. 
[50]  M. Raikwar, S. Mazumdar, S. Ruj, S. Gupta, A. Chattopadhyay, and K.-Y. Lam, “A blockchain framework for insurance processes,” 02 2018, pp. 1–4.  
[51]  R. Roriz and J. L. Pereira, “Avoiding insurance fraud: A blockchain-based solution for the vehicle sector,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 164, pp. 211–

218, 01 2019. 

[52]  Research in Finance, “2021 UK Responsible Investing Study,”  

https://researchinfinance.co.uk/products_and_service/the-responsible-investment-review-rir/.  

[53]  Bonhill Group, “Investors list their top three ESG concerns,” https://esgclarity.com/investors-list-their-top-three-esg-concerns/. 
[54]  European Commission, “Blockchain for climate action — Shaping Europe’s digital future ,” https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/blockchain -

climate-action, 2021. 

[55]  A. Zhou, “Blockchain can help us tackle climate change ,” World Economic Forum, 2021. 
[56]  F.  Panisi,  R.  Buckley,  and  D.  Arner,  “Blockchain  and  public  companies:  A  revolution  in  share  ownership  transparency,  proxy  voting  and  corporate 
governance?” Stanford Journal of Blockchain Law & Policy, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://stanford-jblp.pubpub.org/pub/blockchain-and-public-com 
panies 

[57]  A. Cernev, E. Diniz, F. Daneluzzi, and D. Rodrigues, “Social cryptocurrencies: Blockchain adoption by social finance organizations,” ICIS 2018 International 

Conference on Information Systems, 2018. 

[58]  COP26, “Agreement reached on international carbon credit trading rules at cop26,” Sullivan and Cromwell LLP, 2021. [Online]. Available: 

https://www.sullcrom.com/files/upload/sc-publication-agreement-reached-on-international-carbon-credit-trading-rules-at-cop26.pdf 

[59]  K. Appunn, “Carbon markets – cop26 closes biggest loopholes but lacks clarity on voluntary trade,” Clean Energy Wire, 2021. [Online]. Available:  

     https://www.cleanenergywire.org/news/carbon-markets-cop26-closes-biggest-loopholes-lacks-clarity-voluntary-trade 

[60]  Solana, “Powerful for developers. Fast for everyone,” https://solana.com. 
[61]  Arweave, “Store data, permanently,” https://www.arweave.org. 
[62]  Phantom, “A friendly wallet built for DeFi & NFTs,” https://phantom.app. 
[63]  R.  Vlastelica,  CryptoWatch,  title  =  Why  bitcoin  won’t  displace  Visa  or  Mastercard  soon,  url  =  https://www.marketwatch.com/story/why-bitcoin-

wontdisplace-visa-or-mastercard-soon-2017-12-15,, 2017. 

[64]  K. Blind, S. Petersen, and C. Riillo, “The impact of standards and regulation on innovation in uncertain markets,” Research Policy, vol. 46, 2016. 
[65]  U. Enwerem and G. Chukwudebe, Regulation and Standardization of Blockchain Technology for Improved Benefit Realization, 2021, pp. 240–253. 
[66]  I.  Mehar,  C.  Shier,  A.  Giambattista,  E.  Gong,  G.  Fletcher,  R.  Sanayhie,  H.  Kim,  and  M.  Laskowski,  “Understanding  a  revolutionary  and  flawed  grand 

experiment in blockchain: The dao attack,” Journal of Cases on Information Technology, vol. 21, pp. 19–32, 2019. 

[67]  D. Zetzsche, R. Buckley, D. Arner, and L. Fohr, “The ico gold rush: It’s a scam, it’s a bubble, it’s a super challenge for regulators,”¨ 

SSRN 

Electronic 

Journal, 2017. 

[68]  M.  Taleby  Ahvanooey,  M.  Zhu,  W.  Mazurczyk,  M.  Kilger,  and  K.-K.  Choo,  “Do  dark  web  and  cryptocurrencies  empower  cybercriminals?”  12th  EAI 

International Conference on Digital Forensics Cyber Crime, 2021. 

[69]  M. Pawar, P. Patil, and P. Hiremath, A Study on Blockchain Scalability, 2021, pp. 307–316. 

        DOHA ISLAMIC FINANCE CONFERENCE (DIFC - VIII), MARCH 2022                                                                                                                                                                                                              15 

Nida Khan is the Founder and CEO of Nash fintechX, Luxembourg. The company provides software solutions, specializing in blockchain 
and AI. She was ranked as the 11th most influential woman in Islamic Business and Finance in 2021. She is also working as a consultant 
on a project on Arab Vision by United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia. She holds a PhD in computer science 
from the University of Luxembourg, Europe and a Master Diploma in Islamic Finance from AIMS, UK. She was accorded the prestigious 
FNR (Luxembourg National Research Fund) grant, given to innovative industrial projects, for her doctoral research on blockchain in 
finance. She has worked on projects in social finance and decentralized finance, including tokenization. She is a pioneer in developing 
a  novel  consensus  mechanism  for  scalable  blockchains  and  ensuring  GDPR-compliant  privacy  preservation  in  blockchains.  She  has 
worked with Tabrez in multiple projects, including pioneering contributions related to giving the economic impact of blockchain-based 
micropayments and proposing a mathematical framework for blockchain governance. Her past achievements include developing two novel iOS and Android 
apps, where the latter had 10K+ installs. Her work appears in diverse publications and she speaks regularly on emerging technologies. Her current research 
interests include artificial intelligence and quantum computing. 

Tabrez  Ahmad  holds  a  Bachelor’s  degree  in  Chemical  Engineering  from  IIT  Kanpur,  India  and  a  Master’s  degree  in  Business 
Administration from IIM Calcutta, India. He is currently working in ArcelorMittal, Europe as the Product Leader for flat steel products, 
where he is responsible for the marketing function in Europe. His prior work experience involves contributing to Internal Consultancy 
and Corporate CTO functions at ArcelorMittal group. Besides his extensive experience in the Metal Sector, he has also worked in an 
Oil  and  Gas  major  in  Sales  and  Marketing  roles.  Tabrez  has  worked  with  Nida  in  developing  a  mathematical  model  for  blockchain 
governance based on Nash equilibrium. The model can be used to predict with accuracy the future growth and majority support in a 
blockchain  fork,  based  on  the  voting  results.  He  has  contributed  to  the  analysis  of  Stellar  blockchain  data  from  a  micropayments’ 
perspective. He, with Nida, is a pioneer in giving the economic impact of blockchain-based micropayments. He recently developed a 
calculator  for  deriving  the  carbon  footprint  of  an  entity,  supporting  it  with  the  requisite  background  information  to  lend  transparency  and  provide 
standardization to the process. His current research interests include artificial intelligence and blockchain. 

