Restoring Vision through Retinal Implants - A Systematic 
Literature Review 

Magali Andreia Rossi 1, Sylviane da Silva Vitor 2 

1São Paulo State Technological College, Fatec Carapicuíba/Fatec Osasco 
2Itau Unibanco S/A 
1mandreiarossi@gmail.com, 2sylvianevitor@gmail.com 

Abstract–This work presents a bunched of promising technologies to treat  blind people: 
the  bionic  eyes.  The  strategy  is  to  combine  a  retina  implant  with  software  capable  to 
interpret  the  information  received.  Along  this  line  of  thinking,  projects  as  Retinal 
Prosthetic  Strategy  with  the  Capacity  to  Restore  Normal  Vision  from  Weill  Medical 
College of Cornell University Project, Update on Retinal Prosthetic Research from The 
Boston  Retinal  Implant  Project,  and  Restoration  of  Vision  Using  Wireless  Cortical 
Implants from Monash Vision Group Project, have shown in different context the use of 
technologies that commits to bring the vision through its use. 

Keywords – Implants, Bionic Eyes, Vision, Brain, Visual Cortex  

1. INTRODUCTION 

The  possibility  to  develop  visual  perception  by  electronically  stimulating  the  brain 

has  been  studied  since  1950,  when  Wilder  Penfield  observed  there  was  a  rational 

map  of  visual  space  onto  the  primary  visual  cortex  (PENFIELD;  RASMUSSEN, 

1950).  Looking  beyond,  cortical  vision  prosthesis  date  from  1999,  when  scientists 

from  University  of  Utah  developed  a  penetrating  electrode  array  to  stimulate  the 

brain and recreate a limited form of functional vision: the phosphenes (NORMANN 

et al., 1999). Bionic eyes and retinal prosthesis nowadays just extend these concepts 

adapting materials and developing an outstanding processing power. 

This  work  subsumes  strategies  and  the  most  recent  technologies  to  restore  vision, 

covering  from  image  processing  appliances  to  retinal  and  cortical  implants.  It  was 

focused  the  analysis  on  three  main  projects:  “Retinal  prosthetic  strategy  with  the 

capacity  to  restore  normal  vision:  Weill  Medical  College  of  Cornell  University 

Project”  (NIRENBERG  et  al.,  2001),  “Update  on  retinal  prosthetic  research:  The 

Boston  Retinal  Implant  Project”  (RIZZO,  2011)  and  “Restoration  of  vision  using 

wireless cortical implants: Monash Vision Group Project” (LOWERY, 2013).  

This  analysis  is  to  comprehend  the  state  of  art  of  retinal  implants  functioning  and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
construct a  background about the technologies developed until nowadays. 

This  work  is  structured  as  follows.  Section  II  presents  related  projects,  relating 

biological  solutions  that  evolve,  in  different  levels,  a  hacking  prospective.  Section 

III presents an explanation of the research projects in which the proposal is restore 

the  vision  through  retinal  implants  and  brain  waves  patterns.  Section  IV  presents 

comparing  results  acquired  from  the  detailed  analysis  of  the  three  main  projects. 

Section  V  discusses  the  target  presented  to  long  of  this  paper. 

2. RELATED PROJECTS 

The  two  following  purposes  manipulate  biological  structures  to  treat  a  series  of 

degenerative  diseases  and,  particularly,  to  eye  diseases.  The  first  one,  Clustered 

Regularly  Interspaced  Short  Palindromic  Repeat/Cas  9  (CRISPR/Cas9)  technology 

is  an  innovative  molecular  analysis  technique  used  to  edit  genomes.  The  CRISPR 

consists of short segments of DNA, composed by nucleotides, each one adjacent to a 

spacer  DNA  –  non-codifying  section  of  DNA  –  inserted  after  contact  with  foreign 

genomes  (SUZUKI  et  al.,  2016).  Combining  CRIPR-Cas9  with  Homology-

Independent  Targeted  Integration  (HITI)  allowed  scientists  to  scientists  improve 

visual  function.  They  tested  the  site-specific  transgene  integration  using  the  Royal 

College of Surgeons rat model for retinitis pigmentosa. The HITI method establishes 

new  avenues  for  basic  research  and  targeted  gene  therapies  (YANG  et  al.,  2013) 

including treatments  for conditions that causes blindness to humans. 

The     second     one,     uses     stem     cells     to     treat     eye     diseases. Stem 

cells  primary  characteristics  are  their  unparalleled  regenerative  capacity  and 

flexibility to grow into different types of cells. Cell-replacement therapy and ex vivo 

gene  therapy  are  two  strategies  that  take  advantage  of  these  properties  to  treat 

degenerative diseases and could be expanded, particularly, to treat eye diseases, such 

as  AMD  and  retinitis  pigmentosa.  The  idea  is  to  explore  neural  stem  cells-

progenitors  properties  for  brain  repair  or  also  retinal  cells  replacement.  Although 

these  techniques  still  depend  on  gathering  information  about  mechanisms  that 

regulate  their  proliferation  and  differentiation;  they  are  promisors  and  another 

biohacking perspective to restore vision. 

 
 
 
 
3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY  

3.1 

Systematic Literature Review 

The  Systematic  Literature  Review  is  defined  as  study  to  map,  to  evaluate,  identify 

gaps, deficiencies,  reinforce as well as find results of primary studies  from research 

developed or in progress in the area. Second Cochrane handbook, define a systematic 

review  as  ‘uses  explicit,  systematic  methods  that  are  selected  with  a  view  to 

minimizing  bias,  thus  providing  more  reliable  findings  from  which  conclusions  can 

be drawn and decisions made’ (HIGGINS; THOMAS, 2019). 

The  use  of  Systematic  Literature  Review  consists  in  looking  for  answers  from 

literature review based on relevant studies. 

3.2  Research Question 

The  focus  of  the  research  question  is  to  verify  and  produce  information  relative  to 

rising  up  proposed  technologies  in  this  area.  Analyzing  medical  approaches  and 

engines  that  explore  innovative  solutions  to  restore  vision  was  a  long  way  journey 

because references are scarce and most of them comprehends only retinal prosthesis, 

which is not capable to develop normal sight yet. The three projects shown in Section 

4, on the other hand, tends to  a new perspective  about  how  engineering engaged to 

medicine  can  promote  encouraging  results,  in  cases  that  simply  pathological 

treatment has no longer effect. 

4. COMPENDIUM OF THE AVAILABLE PROJECTS 

In this section the projects considered as state-of-art are presented. All selected projects 

were analyzed to obtain their technical details that verify the efficiency of use by human 

beings. 

4.1  Weill  Medical  College  of  Cornell  University  Project:  Retinal  Prosthetic 
Strategy with the Capacity to Restore Normal Vision 

Retinal  prosthetics  are  the  only  hope  for  the  vast  majority  of  patients  with 

retinal degenerative  diseases.  Therefore,  improve  prosthetics  performance  is  the  main 

object  of project  developed  by  scientists  from  Weill  Medical  College  of  Cornell 

University. They  focused on a critical factor of prosthetic capability: the retina’s neural 

code.  

This prosthetic tool captures the image transformation that occurs naturally via retinal 

 
processing  and  produces  the  same  patterns  of  action  potentials  that  retina  would 

normally  produce. 

It  consists  of 

two  parts:  an  encoder;  which  makes 

transformations based on these performed by retina and a transducer; which guides the 

ganglion  cells  to  fire  as  the  code  specifies.  This  new  gadget  can  be  used  to  offer 

diversified design solutions, implementing the code into external devices. 

Designing a system composed by the encoder and transducer was only the first step. 

Several  evaluations  had  been  done  to  configure  that  this  retinal  prosthetic  really 

brings the benefits it intends to.  

In  this  case,  animal  testing  was  impracticable,  once  millions  of  test  sets  would 

demand an extremely large number of animals. That is why a standard  mouse  model 

of  retinal  degeneration  has  been  used  to  simulate  blind  retinas. To show the results 

three  sets  of  recordings  were  used.  This  device  has  shown  encouraging  results,  not 

only  quantitatively  but  also  qualitatively.  The  performance  –  quantified  by  the 

fraction  of  times  the  responses  were  correctly  decoded  –  measured  for  the  blind 

retinas  with  the  encoder  was  96%.  Thus,  with  the  standard  method  was  only  25% 

(NIRENBERG; PANDARINATH, 2012). This effectiveness proves that the encoder 

component is critical; without it, tracking responses are random. 

The  most  significant  part  of  this  project  is  not  only  the  dramatically  increase  of 

prosthetic performance but also a new range of possibilities. First, the possibility to, 

instead  of  trying  to  recreate  computations  in  the  retina,  to  make  it  in  an  external 

device: the encoder-transducer system.  

It  allows  significant  upgrades  to  reach  restoration  of  normal  sight.  Even though  the 

high hit rate, over 90%, this micro effectiveness is not able  to  develop  normal  sight 

yet, and still creating just a small impression of spotlights.  It occurs because even if 

the  code  responses  are  very  close  to  normal  ganglion  cell;  the  retina  output  cells 

remain been used to transmit the electrical pulses to the brain.  

That  is,  it  still  demands  their  normal  operation  to  made  prosthetic  functional  and 

patterns  recognition  still  not  able  to  be  properly  transferred  to  where  the  real 

processing occurs: the brain. 

4.1.1 Design 

The duo encoder/transducer may seem uncomplicated at first, but the whole gadget to 

perform  and  deliver  data  as  a  normal  retina  require  a  most  complex  system  and 

computational resources. The Figure 1 represents the design of the components, in a 

 
detailed way. 

Figure 1. Technical Link between the Components of Cornell University Project. 

Font: Adapted from (NIRENBERG; PANDARINATH, 2012) 

The  first  component  –  an  infrared  video  camera.  This  software  (representing  the 

eyes)  ﬁnds  the  horizontal  and  vertical  coordinates  of  the  centers  of  the  corneal 

reﬂection  and  the  pupil  (sampled  at  60  Hz)  and  measures  the  difference  between 

these two points along the horizontal and vertical axes. The image captured by the 

camera  is  delivered  to  the  front  end  preprocessor,  whereby  the  light  level  and 

contrast range are  rescaled to fall within the operating range of the encoders. The 

encoder is a retinal input/output model generated from data taken from the normal 

retina and also where most of the computational resources are hidden. Images that 

come  and  are  convolved  with  a  spatiotemporal  filter,  them  are  passed  through  a 

linear-nonlinear  (LN)  cascade  built  to  capture  stimulus/response  relations  for  a 

broad  range  of  stimuli;  followed  by  a  Poisson  generator,  that  converts  them  to 

spikes. In brief, the model captures in a compact form the processing that the retina 

performs,  including  center-surround  organization,  temporal  ﬁltering,  and  spike 

generation. 

The encoder consists of arrays of smaller encoders, one for each ganglion cell type. 

The different encoders all use the same model structure, the LN cascade, differing 

each other only by the numerical values of the parameters. However, the number of 

parameters  is  too  large  to  resemble  all  ganglion  cell  types  and,  to  address  this 

problem;  scientists  developed  a  machine  learning  approach.  With  a  minimal 

enlargement of the stimulus set (white noise and particular natural scene movies), 

they  obtained  a  linear-nonlinear  cascade  model  that  generalized  broadly  (white 

noise,  gratings,  landscapes,  people  walking,  cars  driving,  faces,  animals,  and 

another one). The pulse patterns  resulted from the encoder work are then converted 

to  blue  light  pulses,  which  are  delivered  to  the  retina  using  a  Mini  Digital  Light 

Projector  -  MINI-DLP,  modified  to  deliver  0.7mW/mm2  of  475  nm  light  at  the 

retina using a Light-Emitting Diode - LED, showed on the third block of Figure 1. 

It  also  contains  a  digital  micromirror  device  - DMD,  which  is  a  grid  of  mirrors 

whose  positions  can  be  switched  with  very  high  spatial and  temporal  resolution. 

This  switching  is  controlled  by  signals  from  the  encoder,  allowing light  from  the 

LED to reach the retina. 

4.2 The Boston Retinal Implant Project: Update on Retinal Prosthetic Research 

Researchers from Boston Retinal Implant Project focused on creating an advanced 

device which risks were justifiable. They developed a wireless device implanted in 

the sub retinal space and created a hermetic system capable to deliver individually 

electrical stimulation  –  controlled  pulses  –  to  each  of  hundreds  of  electrodes.  The 

current  device  is composed  of  both  internal  and  external  parts.  The  external  part 

consists of special glasses equipped with a camera – to record the environment and 

a transmitter – which wirelessly deliver power and the recorded data to the internal 

part:  a  photodiode  situated behind  the  pupil,  which  creates  more  power  and 

transmits  the encoded data to  a small decoder chip  located on retinal  surface that 

sends an electrical current to individual electrodes to stimulate the retina. 

The special glasses are responsible for the “Input”, that is, just capture and transmit 

data.  The  parts  inside  the  eye  are  responsible  by  powering  the  electrodes, 

transforming the images captured into a spatial pattern of controlled electrical pulse 

and delivering these pulses to stimulate the retina (KLAUKE et  al., 2011), which 

will re-process them. In this project, data is differently processed, because instead 

of  reproducing  all  retinal  functions  using  the  photodiode  and  decoder,  the  retina 

still  being  used,  after  stimulus,  to  better  deliver  data  to  the  brain.  The  Boston 

Implant  Project  developed  prototypes  using  two  methods  to  send  data  wirelessly: 

laser light and radiofrequency. There  were  also  two  prosthetic  designs,  differing 

only  in  the number  of  electrodes;  to ascertain the hypothesis that more electrodes 

will  provide  better  vision.  The  device  that  enters  the  eye  is  made  of  polyimide 

 
(plastic) because of its flexibility, necessary to bend  to the retina’s curvature. 

For  the  surgery,  they  developed  a  method  that  requires  only  a  single  slit  in  the 

back  of  the  eye to introduce a 5-mm-diameter electrode array;  the largest  surface 

area  of  an  array  safely  implanted  into  a  living  eye.  This  package  of  changes  is 

responsible  for distinct  results  from  standards  surgical  methods,  overcoming  the 

spotlights perception.  

 Studies  demonstrated  that  most  of  the  implanted  patients  were  able  to  make  out 

spots of light, but  also  tell  the  difference  between them, this is important,  because 

shows  that  the  patterns  are  not  random  anymore.  Patients  with  Retinitis 

Pigmentosa  could  localize  the quadrant of a large stimulus; identify the direction 

of moving lines and some  common objects like forks and cups too (YANAI et al., 

2007). “One of the most encouraging  results was one patient who, after one week 

of  implantation,  was  judged  capable  to  read  letters  and  words  similar  in  size  to 

those  in  newspaper  headlines”  (R IZ ZO,  201 1) .  The  BRIP  reaches  closely 

5%  of  the  patients  with  eye’s  diseases,  almost  2 million people (ALLIANCE 

FOR  AGING  RESEARCH,  2012).  The  complex  system  involving  internal and 

external  parts  has  several  advantages  on  biocompatibility  aspects,  but  makes  the 

costs  even  higher.  The  researchers  noted  some  limitations  that  challenge  the 

device to restore perfect vision, perhaps the most critical ones are: 

1.  Find biocompatible material to  sell hermetically the device that remains intact 

when  implanted. 

2.  Create  an  electrode  array  that  will  not  decay  over  time  because  of  cell 

growth.  

3.  Identify the best areas of retina to stimulate to achieve the highest quality 

vision. 

Only  after  these  improvements,  the  device  would  be  able  to  promote  their  goal, 

allow  patients  to  “navigate  safely  in  an  unfamiliar  environment”  (RIZZO,  2011)  

and to get closer to restore perfect vision. 

4.2.1 Design 

This  project  concerns  different  combinations  of  processing  that  demand  a  more 

meticulous analysis. Understanding the functioning of devices is a valuable way to 

reach this goal, the Figure 2 will be used for this explanation. 

 
Figure 2. Technical Link between the Components of BRIP. 

    Font: Adapted from (RIZZO, 2011). 

The  transmitter  described  in  Figure  2  is  responsible  by  delivering  data  to  the 

implanted  part,  but  this  transmission  is  not  random  and  has  to  follow  several 

specifications. To determine and configure stimulation pulse strength, duration and 

frequency,  a  Peripheral  Component  Interconnect  eXtensions  for  Instrumentation 

(PXI) computer was used, the selection is made using the graphical user interface. 

In  the  first  block  of  Figure  2,  PXI  is  shown  with  two  different  amplifiers  that 

transmit  the  commands  and  power  from  the  external  computer  to  the  implanted 

components by near-field inductive coupling. 

Class  A  amplifier  is  responsible  by  delivering  stimulation  data  with  a  15.5MHz 

carrier, amplitude shift keyed at a 100% modulation index (SUZUKI et al., 2016). 

Data is delivered as 16-bit commands and the 170-bit configuration package, these 

bits  are  encoded  by  pulse  width  modulation,  with  30%  duty cycle  representing  a 

digital  bit  1  and  50%  representing a  digital  bit  0.  Class  D  amplifier  and  a  series 

resonant tank with 125KHz carrier are responsible by delivering power to the dual 

half-wave  rectifier,  shown  inside  the  Photodiode  block  of  Figure  2.  This  power 

creates a ±2.5V anodal and cathodal supply, which is clamped by the 5.1V Zener 

diode  (KELLY  et  al.,  2011).  The  custom  integrated  circuit  receives  the  incoming 

data beyond the telemetry receiver; decodes them, using the decoder, and delivers 

stimulating current to the appropriate electrodes based on the timing of transmitted 

commands,  through  the  primary  and  secondary  coils.  The  chip  can  deliver  up  to 

930μA  per  channel  in  30μA  steps,  using  a  linear  current  Digital-to-Analog 

Converter  (DAC)  and  the  current  driver  away.  The  other  elements,  as  diodes, 

resistor and  capacitors just guarantee the proper functioning of the chip. 

The fourth block of Figure 2  shows the micro fabricated thin-ﬁlm polyimide array 

of  Sputtered  Iridium  Oxide  Film  Electrodes  (SIROF)  that  delivers  electrical 

stimulation  current  to  the  retinal  nerve  cells.  Innovation  takes  place  in  the 

serpentine  design  of  the  electrodes  that  allows  surgeons  to  route  it  under  the 

superior  rectus  and  insert  them  in  the  superior-temporal  quadrant.  All  implanted 

electronics are encased in a titanium enclosure, to sell hermetically the devices and 

also  serve  as  a  current  return  counter  electrode  for  the  stimulation.  The 

computational  power  of  the  PXI,  combined  with  innovative  strategies  to  deliver 

power and data brings BRIP to a new category of retinal devices, but still not the 

most effective way to restore vision. 

4.3  The Monash Vision Group Project: Restoration of Vision Using Wireless 
Cortical Implants 

The  majority  effort  on  restoration  of  sight  has  gone  into  developing  retinal 

implants  to  replace  damaged  photoreceptors  (LOWERY  et  al.,  2015).  Monash 

Vision  Group  researchers  are  developing  another  access  point  to  the  visual 

pathway: the Visual Cortex (V1). They created a bionic eye based on implanting 

small tiles in this region, using penetrating electrodes.  

The electronic system is composed by: a high resolution miniature digital camera 

–  which  captures  the  image  and  send  them  to  a  custom  –  designed  “pocket 

processor”, that extract the most useful features from the image; a wireless  power 

and  data  link,  which  power  and  deliver  data  to  the  multiple implant tiles that 

contain, each one, a receiver coil, tuned to the transmitter.  

A  diode  rectifier  is  used  to  extract  power  and  its  output  and  to  supply  the 

Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC), which contains sufficient registers 

for  each  electrode  be  set  individually via  the wireless  link.  The  Figure 3 shows 

how the top components are related. 

Figure 3. Functionality Diagram of the Monash Vision Group Project. 

Font: Authors. 

External  devices  in  Figure  3  shows  four  phases  of  data  processing:  “Input”  – 

promoted  by  the  camera,  “Pre-process”  and  “Process”  –  by  the  pocket  processor 

 
and also “Output” – by the transmitter. Inside the brain, the second block of Figure 

3 is responsible only by delivering the cortex V1 separately each visual sensation, 

but  this  flexibility  converges  to  a  higher  perception  owing  to  an  effortless 

manipulation  of  data  received  at  “Input”  phase.  The  surgical  technique  is  to 

implant  the  electrodes  through pia mater – a thin and strong covering of the brain. 

To treat individual differences between people’s brain, visual cortex anatomy will 

be imaged using high-resolution Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). The method 

of  stimulation  is  to  inject  a  negative  current  from  the  electrodes  inserted  into  the 

surface of cortex. 

This new purpose expects to increase resolution, that is, to overcome the spotlights 

and really reach normal  vision. Human tests  have been expected, but it is already 

known  that,  for  a  given  spacing  of  electrodes,  it  is  possible  to  obtain  a  20x 

advantage in resolution over a retinal implant (LOWERY et al., 2015).  

Otherwise, provided stimulation is limited to “on and off”, because of the restricted 

electrode number, and other properties that compose perception such as space-time, 

density, texture and another one, still not being contemplate.  

This project brings an electrical engineering approach to a biomedical engineering 

problem, providing a defined image directly to the brain. However, this innovation 

leads  to  a  new  challenge:  how  to  keep  visual  acuity  with  a  2D  image  that,  even 

when  processed  and  provided  by  a  high-definition  camera,  does  not  improve 

resolution? 

4.3.1 Design 

Signal processing computations of images to provide a coded output destined to the 

brain  demands  a  huge  computational  power,  which  lodges  inside  the  Pocket 

Processor, this portable computer, detailed in Figure 4, contains his own operating 

system  and  drivers  for  the  off-the-shelf  digital  video  camera,  wireless  link  and 

programming interfaces. 

This  package  also  includes  a  high  capacity,  lightweight  battery  that  powers  the 

camera, the processor itself and the implant electronics; it can power multiple tiles 

up to 25mm away and consume less than 400mW to maximize battery life (“Ghana 

Health Service Annual Report 2014,” 2015), (DUA; SINGH, 2010). The battery is 

charged using the same socket that is used by the wireless link, so that there is no 

possibility  of  the  user  connecting  the  system  to  the  mains  while  it  is  in  use. 

 
 
Controls are, basically, push buttons with braille labels, haptic and audio feedback; 

allow the user to program the processor to work on three different modes, based on 

the  following  algorithms:  edge  detection  –  shows  the  outlines  of  objects  such  as 

tables and door frames; people detection – identifies the presence of people in the 

user’s environment and ICP – localizes themselves within their environment. 

Figure 4. Technical Link between the Components of MGV Project. 

Font: Adapted    from (LOWERY et al., 2015). 

Intensity Thresholding and Integral Sample  algorithms were also used to extract the 

most  important  features  from  the  images.  The  Pocket  Processor  is  connected  to  a 

wireless  coil,  whose  transmitter  sends  the  coded  output  and  a  clock  signal  to  the 

implant tiles,  defining  when  each  data  bit  has  been  sent.  An  electronic  circuit 

simulation software and a prototype transmitter circuit compose the transmitter, this 

system  converts  signal  received  from  the  processor  to  the  modulation  format:  a 

modified  form of  pulse-width  modulation.  The  fourth  block  in  Figure  4  shows  the 

implant  tiles,  composed  by  a  wireless  receiver,  a  distribution  board,  an  Application 

Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) and 45 platinum-iridium electrodes. The first one 

is  directly  connected  to  the  transmitter  includes  a  digital  logic  circuit  incorporating 

approximately  500,000  transistors  (AUSTRALIAN  RESEARCH COUNCIL,  2011). 

The distribution board is a sub-assembly interface that provides connectivity between 

the ASIC,  the  electrodes and active electronic  components. The  implant themselves 

are also programmed to decode data and recognize the appropriate currents to each of 

their 45 electrodes. 

5. RESEARCH RESULTS 

The  three  main  projects  represent  an  overview  of  the  state  of  art  for  treatments  to 

restore  sight.  To  evaluate  the  variability  of  these  technological  contributions  was 

 
 
 
developed the four following tables. Table 1 shows that, although the projects intend 

to restore vision by purposing a general solution - reestablishing the communication 

channel - they are limited to blindness caused by degenerative diseases and, in Weill 

Medical  College  of  Cornell  University  Project,  to  even  more  specific  cases. 

Moreover, the leading cause of blindness cataract cannot be solved by any of these 

techniques. 

Table 1. Applicability projects on treatment for different blindness causes: 
degenerative diseases, congenital blindness, visual impairments and cataract blindness. 

APPLICABILITY 

Weill Medical 
College of Cornell 
University Project 

Boston Retinal 
Implant Project The 
Monash Vision Group 
Project 

Monash 
Vision Group 
Project 

Degenerative diseases 

Congenital blindness 

Visual impairments 

Cataract blindness 

Font: Authors. 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

On  computational  perspective,  the  processing  algorithms  demand  special  attention, 

considering  that  they  are  responsible  by  most  of  the  quality  of  data transmitted, so 

intrinsically related to the visual acuity delivered.  

The Table 2 shows that, in terms of computational power, none of the projects brings 

up  innovative  solutions,  they  use  algorithms  that,  in  most  cases,  does  not  offer  an 

efficient compression method and even by taking advantage to artificial intelligence, 

does not provide verified efficacy. 

Table 2. Processing algorithms of Weill Medical College projects technical 
information: AI application, language level, compression methods and testability. 

PROCESSING 
ALGORITHMS 

Weill Medical 
College of 
Cornell 
University 
Project 

Boston Retinal 
Implant Project The 
Monash Vision Group 
Project 

Monash 
Vision 
Group 
Project 

AI application 

Yes 

Language 

Low level 

No 

Low level 

Compression methods 

Low effective 

Unknown 

Testability 

Undefined 

Undefined 

Font: Authors. 

Yes 

High level/ 

Low  level 

Medium 
effective 

Low 

 
 
Innovative  implants  are  normally  related  to  outstanding  hardware  approaches  or 

surgical  techniques.  With  this  in  mind,  Table  3  brings  up  that,  in  terms  of 

architecture,  two  projects  still  depend  on  the  external  devices  to  properly 

functioning.  In  addition  to  that,  their  main  workflow  is  the  same:  external  devices 

capture and processes data and internal devices deliver them. 

Table 3. Hardware approaches projects considering external devices, architecture, 
battery life and environment dependence. 

HARDWARE 
APPROACHES 

Weill Medical 
College of 
Cornell 
University 
Project 

Boston Retinal 
Implant Project 
The Monash 
Vision Group 
Project 

External devices 

Yes 

Externally 
dependent 

Undefined 

Low 

Architecture 

Battery life 

Environment 
dependence 

Font: Authors. 

6. DISCUSSION 

Yes 

Externally 
dependent 

Unknown 

Medium 

Monash 
Vision Group 
Project 

Yes 

Biocompatible 

Medium 

Medium 

Restoring  sight  is  a  challenging  goal,  but  also  a  global  health  demand.  This  paper 

spread  throughout  three  projects,  outlining  their  transforming  power  and  results. 

However, an analysis about this progress cost-effectiveness is necessary to evaluate 

which  barriers  we  still  face  to  reach  this  goal.  In  1998  (NORMANN  et  al.,  1999), 

scientists already concerned about retinal implants problems, such as: its limitation 

to  outer  retinal  pathologies;  the  inefficiency  to  provide  discriminable  patterned 

percepts  instead  of  generalized  spots  of  light  and  the  unguaranteed  encoding  of 

spatial, chromatic, intensity and temporal information by device. 

Both software and hardware developed by the three main projects has been carefully 

analyzed by their major aspects (applicability and algorithms), as shown from Table 1 

to  3.  These  evolving  technologies  reveal  a  panorama about how close the scientists 

are to restoring normal vision.  

Projects  that  demonstrate  a  high  level  computational  power  to  process  the  images, 

without regard to how communication channel – hardware – will work are considered 

challengers, because demand large attention to the physical and sometimes biological 

aspects.  In  the  other  hand,  a  complete  hardware,  with  proven  efficacy  to  deliver 

 
 
information,  but  few 

integrations  with  appropriate  processing  algorithms  is 

considered visionary.  

The  solution  which  combines  the  two  aspects,  delivering  high  visual  acuity  is 

classified as outstanding. However, most of the projects still in the regular baseline, 

considering their few innovative and little expressive results,   as shown in Figure 5. 

Figure 5. Magic Quadrant of Projects Innovative Level. 

 Font: Authors. 

REFERENCES 

ALLIANCE FOR AGING RESEARCH. The Silver Book: Vision Loss. [s.l: s.n.]. v. II 

AUSTRALIAN RESEARCH COUNCIL. 2011 Annual report. [s.l: s.n.].  

DUA, H. S.; SINGH, A. D. At a glance. British Journal of Ophthalmology, v. 94, n. 9, p. i–i, 
1 set. 2010.  

Ghana Health Service Annual Report 2014. . Accra: [s.n.].  

HIGGINS, J. P. T.; THOMAS, J. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of 
Interventions. 2nd. ed. [s.l.] Wiley-Blackwell, 2019.  

KELLY, S. K. et al. A hermetic wireless subretinal neurostimulator for vision prostheses. IEEE 
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, v. 58, n. 11, p. 3197–3205, 2011.  

KLAUKE, S. et al. Stimulation with a wireless intraocular epiretinal implant elicits visual 
percepts in blind humans. Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, v. 52, n. 1, p. 
449–455, 2011.  

 
 
 
LOWERY, A. J. Introducing the Monash vision group’s cortical prosthesis. 2013 IEEE 
International Conference on Image Processing. Anais...IEEE, set. 2013.  

LOWERY, A. J. et al. Restoration of vision using wireless cortical implants: The Monash 
Vision Group project. Proceedings of the Annual International Conference of the IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, EMBS, v. 2015- Novem, p. 1041–1044, 2015.  

NIRENBERG, S. et al. Retinal ganglion cells act largely as independent encoders. [s.d.].  

NIRENBERG, S.; PANDARINATH, C. Retinal prosthetic strategy with the capacity to restore 
normal vision. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, v. 109, n. 37, p. 15012–
15017, 11 set. 2012.  

NORMANN, R. A. et al. A neural interface for a cortical vision prosthesis. v. 39, n. December 
1998, p. 2577–2587, 1999.  

PENFIELD, W.; RASMUSSEN, T. The cerebral cortex of man: A Clinical Study of 
Localization of Function. New York: Macmillan, 1950.  

RIZZO III, J. F. Update on Retinal Prosthetic Research: The Boston Retinal Implant Project. 
Journal of Neuro-Ophthalmology, v. 31, p. 160–168, 2011.  

RIZZO, J. F. Update on Retinal Prosthetic Research: The Boston Retinal Implant Project. 
Journal of Neuro-Ophthalmology, v. 31, p. 160–168, 2011.  

SUZUKI, K. et al. In vivo genome editing via CRISPR/Cas9 mediated homology-independent 
targeted integration. Nature, v. 540, n. 7631, p. 144–149, 2016.  

YANAI, D. et al. Visual Performance Using a Retinal Prosthesis in Three Subjects With 
Retinitis Pigmentosa. American Journal of Ophthalmology, v. 143, n. 5, 2007.  

YANG, L. et al. RNA-Guided Human Genome. n. February, p. 823–827, 2013.  

  
 
 
 
 
 
