Building AI Innovation Labs 
together with Companies1 

Jens Heidrich, Andreas Jedlitschka, Adam Trendowicz, Anna Maria Vollmer 

Fraunhofer IESE, Fraunhofer-Platz 1, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany 
{ Jens.Heidrich | Andreas.Jedlitschka | Adam.Trendowicz | Anna-Maria.Vollmer }@iese.fraunhofer.de 

Abstract. In the future, most companies will be confronted with the topic of 
Artificial  Intelligence (AI)  and  will  have  to decide  on  their  strategy  in  this 
regards. Currently, a lot of companies are thinking about whether and how AI 
and the usage of data will impact their business model and what potential use 
cases could look like. One of the biggest challenges lies in coming up with 
innovative solution ideas with a clear business value. This requires business 
competencies on the one hand and technical competencies in AI and data an-
alytics on the other hand. In this article, we present the concept of AI innova-
tion labs and demonstrate a comprehensive framework, from coming up with 
the right ideas to incrementally implementing and evaluating them regarding 
their business value and their feasibility based on a company’s capabilities. 
The concept is the result of nine years of working on data-driven innovations 
with companies from various domains. Furthermore, we share some lessons 
learned from its practical applications. Even though a lot of technical publica-
tions can be found in the literature regarding the development of AI models 
and many consultancy companies provide corresponding services for building 
AI innovations, we found very few publications sharing details about what an 
end-to-end framework could look like. 

1  Motivation 

The topic of Artificial Intelligence (AI)  is everywhere nowadays. Many studies and market research 
institutes highlight the importance and growing economic impact of AI in the future. According to [1], 
it is seen as an engine of productivity and economic growth. It may increase the efficiency of processes 
and stimulate the creation of new products, services, and business models. Accenture predicts that an-
nual economic growth rates may double by 2035 [2]. PwC estimates that global GDP may increase by 
14% by 2030 [3]. The McKinsey Global Institute says that 70% of companies will use AI technologies 
by 2030 [4]. In summary, all studies agree that there is a huge potential that AI can foster innovation 
and well-being if risks such as disruptive effects on the economy and society can be managed. Currently, 
legislators are about to define the general conditions of using AI systems [5] as well as ethics guidelines 
for trustworthy AI [6]. 

Opportunities. Based on our experience from AI-related projects with various companies, combina-
tions of the following aspects drive them to think about using AI: 

•  Operational excellence: AI supports companies in increasing the effectiveness and efficiency 
of core processes. For instance, preventive maintenance of machines in a factory allows detect-
ing issues with production machines early on and planning maintenance intervals. Image anal-
ysis allows finding defective parts more effectively. Typically, an increase in operational excel-
lence results in saving costs and increasing revenues. 

1 To appear in: A. Schmietendorf (Publisher), “ESAPI light 2021.” In: Berliner Schriften zu modernen Integrati-
onsarchitekturen, Shaker-Verlag, Düren, April 2022, Vol. 27, ISBN 978-3-8440-8326-2. 

1 

 
                                                      
• 

Innovation: AI supports companies in coming up with new innovative  products and services 
that were not possible before. For instance, AI allows building highly automated and even au-
tonomous  machines,  such  as  Collaborative  Robots  (Cobots),  which  can  be  used  flexibly  for 
different tasks in close collaboration with humans. Typically, such innovation leads to new busi-
ness models and to new customer groups being addressed. 

•  Customer intimacy: AI supports companies in better understanding their customers (consumers 
as well as other businesses). For instance, AI allows analyzing the buying habits of customers 
or their general interests, and creating custom-tailored offers for them. Typically, this leads to 
more goal-oriented investments into product development and marketing and increases sales 
and revenues. 

All three aspects might be good reasons to start thinking about the impact of AI on a company and about 
building up competencies and an AI strategy. However, there is a fourth aspect that should not be un-
derestimated from the company perspective: competition. Everybody is talking about AI and its oppor-
tunities. There is huge pressure on companies who fear that their traditional markets and customers will 
be disputed by competing companies following a more AI or data-driven business model and thereby 
delivering the same or even better quality of products and services at lower cost or having more direct 
access to potential customers. 

Background. AI itself is defined quite heterogeneously in the literature. We use a combination of the 
AI definitions according to Marvin Minsky [7], one of the founders of AI concepts, and according to 
Nils J. Nilsson [8]. Thus, we define AI as “the science of making machines do things that would require 
intelligence if done by men”, and “… intelligence is that quality that enables an entity to function ap-
propriately and with foresight in its environment.” In addition, in the literature, the term AI may also be 
used as an abbreviation referring to AI methods, AI components, AI technologies, or AI systems. How-
ever, in the context of this article, we use it as an umbrella term including the theoretical background as 
well as practical implementations. 

There are many different approaches aimed at making machines do things that would require intelligence 
if done by  men.  For  instance,  at the  beginning  of  AI  research in the  1960s,  symbolic  AI  [9],  which 
simulates high-level conscious reasoning, was used in attempts to create machines with general intelli-
gence. Nowadays, highly data-based AI approaches, which are largely directed at specific problems with 
specific goals rather than general intelligence are used. The reason for this is the general availability of 
data on the one hand and the technologies available for analyzing this huge amount of data  within a 
reasonable amount of time on the other hand. One approach in this regard is Machine Learning (ML) 
or, more specifically, Deep Learning (DL). The resulting model (e.g., an Artificial Neural Network) is 
generally not comprehensible to humans due to its structure and inherent complexity, and thus the deci-
sions made by DL systems are often difficult to understand. However, in practice, simpler models, such 
as statistical classifications (e.g., Random Forest) may often be sufficient and result in far less complex 
and more transparent models. When we refer to AI approaches in this article, we refer to all data-based 
approaches. 

Challenges.  The  reasons  for  failed  AI  projects  are  manifold  [10].  Often,  failure  is  related  to  being 
aligned neither with the strategic objectives nor with the operational capabilities of a specific organiza-
tion [11]. When companies want to come up with a strategy for dealing with AI, they are typically faced 
with the following challenges (based on projects we did with customers from different industries): 

•  Unclear use case: One of the biggest challenges is finding the right AI use case. If the use case 
is unclear or does not return any value for the organization and return on its investments, AI 
projects are doomed to fail [10]. Companies are tempted to deal with the technologies and in-
frastructure first, and think about the use case second. In fact, it should be the other way around. 
Use cases should be driven by clear business needs and must fit in with the organization's capa-
bilities. 

2 

 
•  Availability of data: Often, there is a lack of data for building AI models or the available data 
has some deficiencies that make it difficult to analyze, or it is simply the wrong data. For exam-
ple, it has been found that 90% of deployed data lakes end up being useless as they are over-
whelmed with information assets captured for uncertain use cases [11]. Furthermore, mapping 
data  from  different  sources  (e.g.,  data from  two  different sensors) is  often  challenging  (e.g., 
because time stamps are not synchronized perfectly). Therefore, it is important to rapidly try out 
potential use cases, build a proof of concept based on available data, and determine what results 
can be obtained realistically from the available data, or what investments could be made into 
collecting new data or improving data quality. 

•  From proof of concept to product/service: Once a use case  has been successfully found and 
promising AI models have been built from the available data, building a product or service based 
on this can also be challenging. AI models often have to be integrated into an existing product 
or service that can be deployed to potential customers. This does not only require data science 
expertise, but also fundamental expertise in software and systems engineering and strong col-
laboration between people having these competencies. 

•  Maintenance of AI systems: If an AI system is used by customers, its performance should be 
monitored. For high-risk AI systems used in critical application cases (such as autonomous driv-
ing functions), this is demanded by law.  However, even for less critical systems, this makes 
sense as it is necessary to monitor the quality of the AI model, detect performance issues, and 
adapt or learn and deploy new models if required. This requires companies  to have the right 
structures and processes in place for DevOps [12] in order to be able to react quickly to issues 
and deploy fixes or new requested features on-the-fly, e.g., via updates over the air (OTA). 
•  Qualification of employees: Last, but not least, there is a lack of necessary knowledge and ex-
perience in companies when it comes to AI and often also when it comes to software engineering 
competencies. Large organizations frequently have their established data science and develop-
ment teams, but for smaller and medium-sized companies not coming from the software domain, 
this is often challenging. Some of these gaps can be compensated for by working with external 
partners. However, depending on the criticality of the intellectual property that goes into an AI 
model, it is often not an option to outsource these critical parts. Competencies must also be built 
up internally by hiring new people or qualifying existing personnel. 

All these challenges are even more critical in the context of collaborative enterprises. In digital ecosys-
tems or digital platforms, data and AI-driven business models and technical solutions must be aligned 
with both the individual and the collective interests of multiple organizations. According to [13], data 
and ecosystems are key drivers of future trends in software engineering. 

Contents. In this article, we want to demonstrate how to address the challenges shown above by intro-
ducing a framework called  AI innovation labs in companies. This framework supports companies in 
coming up with and implementing AI use cases that add real business value instead of them starting to 
invest into infrastructures and tools without a clear purpose. In the remainder of this article, we will first 
describe the framework, then illustrate lessons learned from its practical applications, discuss related 
work, and finally conclude with a brief summary and an outlook on future work. 

2  AI Innovation Labs 

An AI innovation lab is a framework used for systematically creating, implementing, and evaluating AI 
use cases for a company that have a clear business impact. It supports the whole process, from creating 
ideas  via  prototyping  to  rolling  them  out  as  part  of  products  and  services.  It  supports  companies  in 
systematically answering the following key questions: 

•  How to benefit from Artificial Intelligence? What is the added value? What is the impact on the 

business model and the customers? 

3 

 
•  What are meaningful AI use cases? Is the required data available and does it have a sufficient 

level of quality? 

•  What competencies and infrastructures are needed and are they available? 
•  What investments are necessary for deploying an Artificial Intelligence solution? 

In the following sections, the general idea and framework of AI innovation labs will be described. First, 
we will present the general approach for coming up with AI innovation ideas. Second, the innovation 
process for creating, implementing, and evaluating those ideas will be presented. The remaining three 
subsections will go into the details of the conceptual components used in the framework: the definition 
of  business  solutions,  the  implantation  of  technical  solutions,  and  how these  solutions are evaluated 
using a staged labs and prototyping approach. 

2.1  AI Innovation Ideas 
As of today, two main strategies are being followed to exploit data for creating business value: the data-
driven strategy and the business-driven strategy (see Figure 1). Although their starting points are very 
different, both aim at finding innovative ideas for solving business problems or exploiting new business 
opportunities. 

Figure 1: Business- and data-driven AI strategies 

The data-driven strategy takes whatever data is available and explores it using AI or data-based tech-
nical  solutions  built  in  an  ad-hoc  manner  to  gain  business-relevant  knowledge.  The  business-driven 
strategy starts with the business needs and derives potential business cases in order to come up with 
appropriate  technical  solutions  for  gaining  relevant  business  knowledge.  Both  strategies  have  their 
strengths and weaknesses (see Table 1) and should thus be considered as complementary rather than 
competitive in practice. 

One way of combining both strategies in practice is to involve both domain expertise and the results of 
a data analysis in the derivation of potential AI business cases. For example, representatives of business 
experts and analysts can search for innovative ideas during a joint creativity workshop. The business 
experts can contribute their knowledge and understanding of business, whereas the analysts can share 
their knowledge of available data and existing analysis results. Expert knowledge can additionally be 
combined with analyses of already available data – either already existing analyses or simple analyses 
performed in an ad-hoc manner. Innovation ideas can then be concretized in the form of business cases. 

A business case defines the path towards an AI or data-driven business model and provides arguments 
for implementing this path by comparing it to alternative paths, so-called solution options, that are not 
based on AI. Comparison is done systematically based on detailed information including: 

•  Assumptions upon which the solution’s ability to achieve the business outcome is based 
•  Benefits expected after implementing the solution 

4 

Business-driven StrategyWhich data and tools would we need to gain business-relevant knowledge?Data-driven StrategyWhat business-relevant knowledge can we gain based on available data and tools?Business CaseDataTechnical SolutionInnovation Idea 
 
•  Costs estimated for implementing the solution 
•  Time until real benefits are gained from the solution 
•  Risks associated with the implementation and deployment of the solution 

In order to get a chance of being deployed, the selected solution must demonstrate a cost-benefit ratio 
that is significantly better than that of alternative solutions. 

Table 1: Comparison of business-driven and data-driven AI strategies (+ = strength, o = neutral, - = weakness) 

Business-driven Strategy 

Data-driven Strategy 

(+)  Business-oriented:  Solutions  are  driven  by 
business goals and needs and fit the capabilities 
and constraints of a specific organization. 

(+)  Data-oriented:  Solutions  are  driven  by  the 
data to be analyzed and explore insights from the 
data that could lead to business value.  

(-) Tunnel vision: Solutions are more likely to be 
limited  to  the  known  business  context  and  less 
likely to explore completely new fields. 

(o) Open mind: Explorative data analysis has the 
advantage that it may lead to disruptive insights. 
However, ideas are limited to available data. 

(+)  Systematic:  Solutions  are  based  on  well-
founded procedures and selections of alternative 
options and implementation decisions. 

(-) Unsystematic: Data is explored using familiar 
techniques in a trial-and-error process guided by 
experiences and available resources. 

(+) Foreseeable cost-benefit ratio: Potential ben-
efits and  costs  of  implementing  a specific solu-
tion are assessed in advance. 

(-) Unforeseeable cost-benefit ratio: Benefits can 
only be estimated retrospectively after the poten-
tial business value becomes clear. 

(+) Low risk: Solutions are aligned with business 
needs  and  operational  capabilities  in  advance. 
This reduces the risk of failure. 

(-) High risk: The business value of explorative 
analyses can range from disruptive insights to no 
insights at all. This increases the risk of failure. 

(-) High upfront effort: Deriving and evaluating 
AI use cases beforehand requires more effort up-
front before implementing a solution. 

(+) Low upfront effort: Solutions are tried out in 
an ad-hoc fashion and may lead to relevant AI use 
cases. Less upfront effort is required. 

2.2  AI Innovation Process 
Based on the business case, an appropriate prototype for a technical solution can be constructed. This 
includes identifying the necessary data, AI technologies, and infrastructure while considering organiza-
tional capabilities and constraints such as available financial and human resources or already available 
infrastructure  and competencies.  Data and  AI-driven  business  innovation  is  an  iterative  process  (see 
Figure 2) where innovation ideas and the associated technical solutions are evaluated and matured. In 
each iteration, a viable prototype of the innovation ideas and technical solutions is designed and evalu-
ated against success criteria such as business profitability or technical feasibility. Based on the feedback, 
the innovation ideas and technical solutions are improved iteratively. The main objective of these im-
provement cycles is to learn about the underlying problem and to explore alternative solutions. That is, 
the goal is to sort out and reject unpromising ideas as early as possible and to continue focusing on the 
promising ones. 

In each iteration of the innovation cycle, the business potential of a specific solution is assessed regard-
ing the expected business value and the cost it will require to be implemented. This AI innovation pro-
cess supports the derivation, evaluation, and maturation of AI-driven innovations to minimize risk and 
losses caused by investing into the wrong solutions. 

5 

 
 
Figure 2: Business innovation process based on the Lean Startup [14] 

Figure  3 presents an overview of the  conceptual  components used in our AI  innovation process. All 
components are centered around the business case, which defines the path towards an AI-driven business 
model and integrates the outcomes of the surrounding building blocks. 

•  Scope and current situation: First, the organizational scope and the current situation must be 
understood. This typically includes sources of potential business challenges and opportunities 
and factors influencing the feasibility of potential technical solutions as well as the current busi-
ness model pursued. 

•  Business solutions: Based on the current situation, innovation ideas are created. In essence, AI 
or data-driven business solutions are identified that improve the existing business model or lead 
to  new  business  models.  Each  business  solution  is  subjected  to  an  evaluation  regarding  its 
chances of success and organizational readiness to realize it. Based on the outcomes of the eval-
uation, potential business solutions are selected and improved or abandoned. The business so-
lutions with the highest chances of success are summarized in the form of business cases. A 
business case not only documents specific business needs and the proposed business solution, 
but also motivates its  implementation as a technical solution by  demonstrating its advantage 
compared to alternative solutions. 

•  Technical solutions: Only after specific business solutions have been evaluated positively does 
the  innovation  process  continue  with  the  development  of  corresponding  technical  solutions 
(based on AI or data). Technical solutions are developed in an iterative process. With each cycle 
of this process, the technical implementation becomes more mature: from a pure paper-based 
concept to an initial proof of concept (e.g., regarding data and model quality [15]) to a solution 
that is ready to be deployed and rolled out to products and services. After the end of each cycle, 
the readiness of the organization to implement and deploy  a specific technical solution is as-
sessed and the gap between the required and available organizational capabilities is determined. 
A potential capability gap can be addressed by either adjusting the business solution or the as-
sociated technical solution (e.g., in terms of necessary data, analysis methods, and infrastruc-
ture). 

The motivation for developing the business solution first is that it is typically significantly cheaper to 
test and (potentially) fail here than to fail with a technical solution for which prototyping and testing 
already require considerable investments into infrastructure and personnel. Valid business solutions are 
mainly developed as part of an initial potential analysis together with the paper-based concept for cor-
responding technical solutions. In a series of labs and prototyping stages, the technical concept is refined 
and implemented based on real data. If successful, the resulting technical solution is ready to be deployed 
to a product or service. If not successful, it is either rejected or reworked based on the evaluation results 
after each iteration. 

6 

Innovation IdeasBUSINESSSOLUTIONTECHNICALSOLUTIONFEEDBACKImproveDevelopEvaluate 
 
Figure 3: Conceptual components used in the AI innovation process 

2.3  Definition of Business Solutions 
In practice, the ultimate goal of employing AI is business innovation. We aim to use AI to improve an 
existing business model or create a new business model. The success of an AI-driven business model is 
measured by the value it delivers and the cost it requires to be realized, including the implementation of 
a specific technical solution. To be successful, the use of AI must create significantly more value than 
costs. As discussed at the beginning, there are different opportunities in using AI, such as improving 
operational excellence, coming up with new innovative products and services, or getting to know one’s 
customers better (see Figure 4). 

Figure 4: Business value creation areas of a business model 

In  practice,  AI  or  data-driven  business  solutions  are typically  found  using  creativity  techniques  in a 
series of workshops. At the very beginning of the process, current trends and impact factors fitting the 
scope and current situation of a company are presented and discussed. Based on this input, potential (old 
and new) customer groups are identified and pains and gains of these groups are carefully analyzed. A 
systematic approach for documenting this is called Value Proposition Canvas [16]. 

When the pains and gains are known,  business solution ideas are brainstormed using creativity tech-
niques (such as brain storming). The ideas are typically grouped into clusters and then prioritized based 
on predefined criteria (such as innovation degree or customer interest). Those ideas with the highest 
priority are selected to be refined. For this purpose, the implications of the selected solution ideas on the 
existing business model of a company are analyzed. This may lead to a completely new business model 
based on the AI or data-driven solution idea or to the existing business model being adapted accordingly. 

7 

Scope & Current SituationTechnical Solution(AI/Data-drivenSolution)Evaluation & Readiness(Testing, Feedback, Improvement)Business Solution(Business Model)Business CasePotential AnalysisLabSmallLab FullField StudyRoll-OutKeyPartnersKeyActivitiesCustomer SegmentsValue PropositionsCostStructureRevenueStreamsKeyResourcesCustomer RelationshipsChannelsCustomer IntimacyInnovationOperational ExcellenceBusiness Value[© Business Model Canvas by strategizer.com]Business Model Canvas  
 
 
For the description of business models, we typically make use of the Business Modeling Canvas (BMC) 
approach [17]. Figure 4 illustrates the different sections of a BMC and how the different value creation 
areas affect those sections of a business model. For instance, product or service innovations could lead 
to an improved value proposition, allow for new revenue streams, new channels to customers, or im-
proved customer relationships. 

Typically, different groups participate in such creativity workshops: people who understand the business 
of the company (such as mid or high-level management and business developers), people with an un-
derstanding of the current technical solutions and data available in the company (such as CTO, IT or 
software people), and finally people who contribute AI or other data competencies (such as internal or 
external  data  scientists).  At  the  end,  the  success  depends  on  having  mixed  groups  working  together 
bringing in different perspectives. Depending on the number of workshop participants, different groups 
may also compete with each other for the “best” AI or data-driven business solution. For that purpose, 
the solution ideas may further be illustrated by preparing an initial fake product or service name, selling 
pitches to customers, or doing product presentations. 

All elaborated business solutions (business  models) are finally evaluated regarding different aspects, 
including their plausibility, profitability (at least roughly), and expected desire of potential customers. 
A successfully evaluated business solution is documented in a business case, which not only includes 
the previous business model and the new/adapted  AI or data-driven business model, but also the ra-
tionale for pursuing this model, including alternative options that were evaluated in the process. Based 
on the current capabilities of the company, a plan is defined for implementing and evaluating a corre-
sponding technical solution. 

2.4  Implementation of Technical Solutions 
The technical solution is developed based on a business case in an iterative manner. Typically, it starts 
with a theoretical / purely paper-based technical solution concept, which is then implemented and tried 
out in different iterations until its maturity is sufficient to be rolled out as part of a product or service. 

In this regard, we make use of the CRISP-DM process, which stands for Cross-Industry Standard Pro-
cess for Data Mining [18] (see Figure 5). It describes six steps that are essential for data mining and any 
kind of data analytics and is widely used in research and industry: 

•  Business Understanding: The goal of this step is to understand the business objectives of the 
organization, define analysis goals, and set up a project plan. As part of this step, the target 
usage scenario for AI is defined based on the description given in the associated business case. 
Furthermore, the target scenario stakeholders and their information needs are specified.  

•  Data Understanding: The goal of this step is to collect, characterize, und understand the data 
and its meaning and analyze the quality of the available data. Initially, this includes the identi-
fication of data sources in the company and a characterization of the available data as well as 
the data required for the target usage scenario. In later iterations, this includes accessing and 
retrieving data from those data sources and analyzing its quality. If required data is not available 
or of bad quality, an attempt is made to access more data or improve the quality of existing data 
(e.g., by filtering or data healing). If this fails, the usage scenario is disregarded and the focus is 
shifted to a different business case. 

•  Data Preparation: The goal of this step is to select the data to be analyzed and to clean and 
format it. This goes hand-in-hand with analyzing the quality of data during data understanding. 
All  known  deficiencies  of the data (e.g.,  quality  or formatting  issues)  are treated  in the  best 
possible way and the data is prepared for model building. 

•  Modeling: The goal of this step is to choose the right technique for model building, create the 
model, and analyze the quality of the model. This includes trying out different solution ideas, 
that is, AI modeling techniques on the data (such as different Machine Learning algorithms) and 
evaluating  the  quality  of  the  resulting  models  (such  as  precision  or  recall  rates).  During  the 

8 

 
concept stage, potential algorithms are preselected in this step, which are tried out on real data 
in later iterations. 

•  Evaluation: The goal of this step is to evaluate and review the results and determine follow-up 
steps. This step marks the final evaluation of one iteration. During this evaluation, the decision 
is made whether to continue working on the usage scenario, whether some adaptation of the 
business case is required, or whether the model has reached the quality required for deployment. 
•  Deployment: The goal of this step is to plan how to deploy and maintain the model in practice, 
and to document the outcomes and lessons learned. As part of this step, the system and software 
architecture into which the model is to be integrated is defined and set up. Furthermore, steps 
are taken for maintaining the model in the future. This could include, for instance, observing 
the performance of the model during runtime of the product or service, and improving / rebuild-
ing the model in case of issues. In practice, this step can be seen as the touchpoint to a company’s 
traditional software and systems development process. 

Figure 5: Technical solution development based on CRISP-DM 

2.5  Staged Labs and Evaluation of Solutions 
To minimize the risk of failing and reduce potential business losses, the business and technical solutions 
are evaluated and matured throughout several specific lab and piloting stages before they can be de-
ployed in a productive environment (see Figure 6). After each step, the results are evaluated according 
to pre-defined criteria. Note that business solutions and corresponding technical solutions are strongly 
connected with each other. For instance, the accuracy of a prediction algorithm may directly influence 
the reliability of customer-relevant forecasts and thus affect customers’ desire for the realized business 
solution. 

At each stage, the technical solution concept, the associated business solution, and the organizational 
readiness are revised based upon the evaluation outcomes. In the very first stage, an initial technical 
solution concept is blueprinted and evaluated conceptually without any practical implementation. In the 
following stages, specific “in-use” aspects of the technical solution concept are verified after being im-
plemented in test environments. For example, the performance and scalability of the selected data anal-
ysis technologies are evaluated in a lab environment using real or simulated data. Evaluating the inte-
gration with existing infrastructure and processes as well as user acceptance, on the other hand, requires 
piloting the technical solution in the intended target environment. Based on the outcomes of the imple-
mentation, the technical solution and the corresponding business solution are revised and re-assessed 
regarding business impact and organizational readiness. Only if the technical solution has successfully 
run through all intermediate stages is it rolled out into a productive environment. 

9 

Business UnderstandingData UnderstandingData PreparationModelingEvaluationDeploymentDataCRISP-DMRequired data?Data quality needs?Solution architecture?Technologies used? Result quality?Analysis approach?Solution idea?Information needs of stakeholders?Planned usage scenario? 
 
Figure 6: Staged development of business and technical solutions 

Figure 7: Comprehensive evaluation of the business and technical solution 

Figure  7 gives an overview of the evaluation criteria for business and technical solutions. Each step 
shown refers to certain parts of a business model: 

•  Step 1 focuses on the overall plausibility of the model. Therefore, the different elements of the 
BMC are checked for a consistent story line. This includes, for instance, that (1) the defined 
value proposition fits the customer segments, channels, and relationship; (2) all key activities, 
resources, and partners for developing the value proposition are specified; and (3) cost and rev-
enue streams are defined properly. Furthermore, it should be analyzed what parts of the BMC 
rely on known facts and where assumptions are made that must be clarified at a later stage (e.g., 
regarding value streams or cost). 

•  Step 2 focuses on evaluating the profitability of the business model. Therefore, the costs for 
developing the value proposition and the revenue streams from customers are estimated more 
thoroughly. To do so, various scenarios can be considered based on transparent assumptions 
regarding how the market will evolve and how many customers can be attracted. 

•  Step 3 focuses on evaluating the desirability of the business model from a customer’s perspec-
tive.  Therefore, the  attractiveness  of  the  value  proposition  is  assessed  for  current  and  future 
customers. This could be done based on expert judgment or by running market studies or field 
experiments. 

•  Step 4 focuses on evaluating the feasibility of the technical solution that implements the business 
model. Therefore, prototypes of the technical solution are developed and tested in a lab envi-
ronment. This provides feedback regarding the required key activities, resources, and partners. 

10 

Potential AnalysisLabSmallLab FullField StudyRoll-OutDefined and evaluated business case and paper-based technical solution conceptTechnical solution implemented and evaluated on sample dataTechnical solution implemented and evaluated on realistic data(historical data)Technical concept implemented and evaluated on real data in real environmentDeployed technical solution and maintenance approachBusiness SolutionTechnical SolutionStep 1▪Evaluate plausibilityof the overall business model▪Check known facts and assumptionsStep 2▪Evaluateprofitabilityof the business model▪Estimate costs and revenuesStep 3▪Evaluate desirabilityof the business model▪Run market studies or field experimentsStep 4▪Evaluate feasibilityof implementing the business model▪Prototype technical solution and test in lab environmentStep 5▪Evaluate practical viabilityof the technical solution▪Run field pilot testsImproveImproveImproveImprove 
 
 
•  Step 5 focuses on evaluating the practical viability of the developed technical solution as well 
as the overall business model. Therefore, pilot tests are performed with the technical solution in 
the field. 

3  Lessons Learned from Practical Applications 

We applied the AI innovation labs framework in different flavors and development stages with various 
industry companies over the course of the last nine years in various application domains (e.g., [19]). It 
is the nature of innovation processes that the concrete solutions ideas that were created following the 
process contain a lot of intellectual property from the companies. Therefore, for confidentiality reasons, 
we cannot share details about the outcomes, but we summarize some lessons learned from the practical 
application of the approach. 

•  Right culture and  mixture of participants: Even though the approach helps to systematically 
come up with AI or data-driven use cases and solution ideas that are aligned with the business 
models of a company, it largely depends on the participants of the workshops performed during 
the  potential  analysis  how  good  or  bad  those  ideas  are.  Having  the  right  mixture  of  people, 
representing the business know-how, the technical know-how, and the AI know-how working 
together is key to coming up with good ideas. This also depends on the culture of a company 
and how open this culture is to bringing in new ideas and openly sharing thoughts with each 
other. 

•  Data collection and preparation effort: In recent years, some companies worked hard to build 
up data lakes, collecting all sorts of data across the organization. However, depending on the 
identified  AI  use  case,  the  requirements and  quality  demands  for  data  are  quite  different.  In 
practice, we often see that the available data requires a significant amount of cleaning and prep-
aration before it can be used or that investments into collecting high-quality data are required. 
The reason for this is often that the initial reason for collecting the original data was not to build 
data-driven models.  
Integration with software and systems engineering: In order to successfully deploy an AI solu-
tion, it is not sufficient to let a team of data scientists work on its implementation. Typically, an 
AI solution is part of a larger system or service and must be integrated into the software and 
systems architecture. This requires the data science team to cooperate closely with the software 
and systems engineering teams of a company. Involving these people in the endeavor right from 
the beginning is key to its success. 

• 

•  Fail early: When developing AI solutions, it is important to notice that some solution ideas may 
lead to success and some to failure. In our experience, it does not make sense to treat the process 
in a waterfall-like  manner and spend most of the time thinking  about the perfect idea. Most 
innovation  processes rely  more  on  quickly  trying  ideas  out in  an agile,  prototyping-oriented 
manner. Because if an idea is condemned to fail, we want to know this as early as possible in 
order not to spend any further effort and money on it, but redirect these to other ideas. 

•  DevOps: Typically, an AI model requires maintenance over time. Its performance is likely to 
decrease if the real data onto which it is applied changes compared to the training and test data 
used for building the model. Therefore, it makes sense to start thinking about mechanisms for 
updating the model right from the start and to establish a DevOps (also called MLOps specifi-
cally in Machine Learning) approach in which the development and operation of the AI solution 
is brought together by feedback cycles and data regarding its performance in the real world. 
This revision includes the technical as well as the business solution, which might both be im-
pacted by the performance of the AI model. 

In the different incarnations of the AI innovation lab framework we created over time, we tried to address 
these aspects in the best possible way. 

11 

 
4  Related Work 

Of course, the whole field of innovation research is not new and contains a rich set of approaches and 
techniques for different areas such as economics, sociology, and technology management [20]. When 
we started working on the AI innovation lab framework in 2013, there were only bits and pieces availa-
ble, but we found no comprehensive process or concept in the literature for systematically designing and 
developing AI solutions. As stated above, our approach does not try to reinvent the wheel, but builds on 
well-known concepts from Lean Startup [14], creativity techniques [21], Value Proposition Canvas [16], 
Business Model Canvas [17], CRISP-DM [18], and DevOps [12]. It combines those existing concepts 
into  an overall framework  for designing  and  developing  AI  solutions.  In  the first  years  of using  the 
framework, our focus was on innovations from Big Data [22].  

Today, with the continuing rise in popularity of terms related to AI, digital transformation, Big Data, or 
data spaces, we find more approaches focusing specifically on creating innovations related to AI or data. 
Every larger consultancy company offers services around creating ideas and use cases in the context of 
the digital transformation (making more or less use of AI).  We find consultancy companies offering 
their services across domains or focusing on specific application fields, such as Smart Production / In-
dustry 4.0. However, we still believe that there is value in publishing more details in the literature about 
what a successful framework could look like and what can be learned from its application because only 
few details can be found about approaches that are similar to ours (such as the Value Co-Creation pro-
cess by Siemens [23]). 

In  addition  to  approaches  focusing  on  stimulating  innovation,  there  are  also  maturity-oriented  ap-
proaches for evaluating and developing data science competencies in an organization, such as the Data 
Science  Maturity  Model  [24]  or  the  Data  Science  Readiness  Assessment  [25].  Typically,  those  ap-
proaches either focus on the competencies of an organization as a whole or those of an individual within 
the organization. They do not address the development of a specific business case. 

5  Conclusions 

This article introduced the AI innovation labs framework, which aims to find an AI or data-driven tech-
nical solution for a specific business innovation idea that provides a clear return on investment. That is, 
it comes up with a technical solution that delivers the best trade-off between the potential business value 
and the investments required for implementing and deploying it. The development of a suitable solution 
may require several iterations in which both the anticipated business solution and the required technical 
solution are evaluated. From our perspective, this approach has several benefits: 

•  Creativity techniques applied together with all relevant stakeholders (such as domain experts 

and data scientists) help to come up with innovative AI or data-driven solution ideas. 

•  The innovation process helps to provide a clear link between AI or data-driven technical solu-

tions and their actual business value and a transparent decision-making process. 

•  Structured templates help to systematically keep track of all discussed business and technical 

solutions and to have clear rationales for discarding or supporting them.  

•  Evaluation criteria help to focus on plausible business solutions that are profitable and desired 

by customers, and on technical solutions that are actually feasible and viable. 

•  The highly iterative approach guarantees early feedback on solution ideas and prevents wrong 

investments into technical solutions. 

•  The specific lab and piloting stages help to determine the readiness of an organization to pursue 
the desired business cases and the gap where it needs to invest into competencies and infrastruc-
ture. 

The focus of current and future research is on the application of the AI innovation labs framework to-
gether with more industrial partners from different domains. We plan to analyze patterns for typical 

12 

 
business and technical solutions, which could provide good stimuli from which company-specific solu-
tions could be derived. Furthermore, we want to develop a transfer strategy for AI innovation labs using 
train-the-trainer concepts for creating multiplicators in companies. Right now, AI innovation labs are 
largely driven by us as applied researchers. In the future, we want to act as a transfer partner enabling 
companies, and especially SMEs, to build up and operate their own innovation labs. This will hopefully 
lead to more self-reliance of companies in coming up with AI or data-driven solutions and allow them 
to compete with companies newly entering their established markets with an AI or data-driven business 
model. 

Bibliography 

1.  M. Szczepański, “EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service”. Members' Research Ser-

vice PE 637.967 – July 2019. 

2.  M. Purdy, P. Daugherty, “How AI Boosts Industry Profits and Innovation.” White Paper, Ac-

centure, 2017. 

3.  PwC, “Sizing the prize - What’s the real value of AI for your business and how can you capi-

talise?” White Paper, 2017. 

4.  J. Bughin, J. Seong, J. Manyika, M. Chui, R. Joshi, “Notes from the AI Frontier - Modeling the 
Impact of AI on the World Economy.” White Paper, McKinsey Global Institute, McKinsey & 
Company, September 2018.  

5.  European Commission, “Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down 
Harmonised Rules on Artificial Intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) and Amending Certain 
Union Legislative Acts”, Brussels, April 21, 2021. 

6.  High-Level  Expert  Group  on  Artificial  Intelligence  (AI  HLEG),  “The  Ethics  Guidelines  for 
Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence (AI)”, European Commission, Brussels, April 8, 2019. 
7.  Britannica, “Marvin Minsky - American scientist.” Website, retrieved from: https://www.bri-

tannica.com/biography/Marvin-Lee-Minsky (last checked March 14, 2022). 

8.  N. J. Nilsson, “The Quest for Artificial Intelligence: A History of Ideas and Achievements.” 

Cambridge University Press, 2010. 

9.  R. Singh, “The Rise and Fall of Symbolic AI.” Website, retrieved from: https://towardsdatasci-

ence.com/rise-and-fall-of-symbolic-ai-6b7abd2420f2 (last checked March 14, 2022). 

10.  J. Westenberger,  K.  Schuler,  D.  Schlegel, “Failure  of  AI  projects:  understanding  the  critical 

factors.” Procedia Computer Science 196, 2022, pp. 69–76. 

11.  V. Akula, “Why Your AI Project Is Failing To Deliver Value”, Forbes Technology Council, 
Apr  13,  2021,  Website,  retrieved  from:  https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcoun-
cil/2021/04/13/why-your-ai-project-is-failing-to-deliver-value/ (last checked March 14, 2022). 
12.  M.  Loukides,  “What  is  DevOps?”  O'Reilly  Media,  June  7,  2012,  retrieved  from:  http://ra-

dar.oreilly.com/2012/06/what-is-devops.html (last checked March 10, 2022). 

13.  J. Bosch, “Speed, Data, and Ecosystems. The Future of Software Engineering.” IEEE Software, 

vol. 33, no. 1, January/February 2016, pp. 82–88. 

14.  E. Ries, The Lean Startup: How Today's Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to Create 

Radically Successful Businesses. Crown Business; 1 edition, September 2011. 

15.  J. Siebert, L. Joeckel, J. Heidrich, K. Nakamichi, K. Ohashi, I. Namba, R. Yamamoto, M. Ao-
yama, “Towards guidelines for assessing qualities of machine learning systems.” Communica-
tions in Computer and Information Science, 2020, 1266 CCIS, pp. 17-31. 

16.  A. Osterwalder, Y. Pigneur, G. Bernarda, A. Smith, T. Papadakos, “Value Proposition Design: 

How to Create Products and Services Customers Want.” John Wiley and Sons, 2014. 

17.  A. Osterwalder, Y. Pigneur, T. Clark, “Business Model Generation: A Handbook for Visionar-
ies, Game Changers, and Challengers.” Strategyzer series. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons., 
2010. 

13 

 
18.  P. Chapman, J. Clinton, R. Kerber, et al., “CRISP-DM 1.0: Step-by-step data mining guide.” 

White-Paper, PSSS, 2000. 

19.  C. Ebert, J. Heidrich, S. Martinez-Fernandez, A. Trendowicz, “Data science: Technologies for 

better software.” IEEE Software, 2019, 36(6), pp. 66–72. 

20.  S. Gopalakrishnan, F. Damanpour, “A review of innovation research in economics, sociology 

and technology management.” Omega, Volume 25, Issue 1, 1997, pp. 15-28. 

21.  K.D.  Leopoldino,  M.O.  González,  P.D.  Ferreira,  J.R.  Pereira,  M.E.  Souto,  “Creativity  tech-
niques: a systematic literature review.” Product: Management & Development, Vol. 14, No. 2, 
December 2016. 

22.  J. Heidrich, A. Trendowicz, and C. Ebert, "Exploiting Big Data’s Benefits", IEEE Software, 

Volume: 33, Issue: 4, 2016, pp. 111-116. 

23.  Siemens AG, “Value Co-Creation: Working with customers to develop digital fields of busi-

ness.” White Paper, 2017. 

24.  M. Hornick, “A Data Science Maturity Model for Enterprise Assessment.”, Version 2.0, White 

Paper, Oracle, June 16, 2020. 

25.  edX  LLC, 

from: 
https://www.edx.org/course/data-science-readiness-assessment (last checked March 10, 2022). 

“Data  Science  Readiness  Assessment.”  Website, 

retrieved 

14 

 
