Practices to Improve Teamwork in Software Development During 
the COVID-19 Pandemic: An Ethnographic Study 
Ronnie E. de Souza Santos 
 Faculty of Computer Science 
 Dalhousie University 
 Halifax, NS, Canada 

Paul Ralph 
Faculty of Computer Science 
 Dalhousie University 
 Halifax, NS, Canada 

ABSTRACT 
Context. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, software professionals 
had to abruptly shift to ostensibly temporary home offices, which 
affected  teamwork  in  several  ways.  Goal.  This  study  aims  to 
explore how these professionals coped with remote work during the 
pandemic  and  to  identify  practices  that  supported  the  team 
activities.  Method.  Ethnographic  methods,  including  participant 
observation  and  qualitative  data  analysis,  were  used.  Results. 
Three practices were created by the observed team to improve their 
engagement:  costume  meeting,  second-language  day,  and project 
happy  hour.  These  practices  appear  to  increase  individual 
involvement, improve team cohesion, reduce monotony, and create 
opportunities  for  knowledge  acquisition.  Conclusions.  The  three 
observed  practices  may  help  remote  software  teams  cope  with 
adversity. More research is needed to determine if these practices 
work in other settings, including remote-first and hybrid remote / 
on-site teams, post-pandemic.  

KEYWORDS 
COVID-19, software development, remote work, ethnography 

ACM Reference format: 

Ronnie  E.  de  Souza  Santos  and  Paul  Ralph.  2022.  Practices  to  Improve 
Teamwork in the Software Development During the COVID-19 Pandemic: 
An  Ethnographic  Study.  In  CHASE  '22:  Proceedings  of  the  15th 
International Conference on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software 
Engineering (CHASE). May 21–22, 2022. Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 

1  Introduction 
The COVID-19 crisis affected many aspects of our society, forcing 
us  to  adjust  the  way  we  live,  work,  and  interact  with  others.  In 
particular,  the  pandemic  triggered  a  shift  to  remote  work  for 
millions of professionals around the globe [1][2][3].  

Studying this unforeseen scenario is important because this crisis 
might  produce  long-term  changes  in  work-patterns  across  many 
industries [4][5] and because it can give us a window into future 
long-term disasters and crises like climate change. In the context of 
software  engineering,  for 
though  many  IT 
professionals are used to distributed software development, there 
are characteristics of teamwork (especially human-related factors) 
that  vary  depending  on  where  and  how  the  software  process  is 
conducted [6], especially considering the reality of working during 
a worldwide crisis.  

instance,  even 

The human aspects of software development have been addressed 
in many studies over the years because the software development 
process strongly depends on human-based activities [7]. However, 
recent  pandemic-induced  upheaval  casts  doubt  on  much 
conventional wisdom and triggers novel phenomena. For instance, 
when  software professionals  had  to  abruptly  shift  into  ostensibly 
temporary  home  offices  in  the  beginning  of  the  pandemic, 
practitioners  were  forced  to  develop  strategies  to  support  team 
activities [4][5].  

Now, while many workers are returning to offices, more software 
professionals want to continue working from home, motivated by 
more  flexibility  and  improved  work-life  balance  [12][13].  Thus, 
hybrid teams, in which some members work on-site while others 
work remotely, are expected to become more common [6][28][32].  

In  this  study,  we  followed  an  ethnographic  methodological 
approach to accompany the routine of two software teams working 
remotely  during  the pandemic,  and observed practices  created  to 
improve the engagement among team members. Such practices can 
help us to answer the following research question: (RQ) how did 
software professionals and software companies improve teamwork 
during the COVID-19 pandemic?  

From this introduction, the present study is organized as follows. In 
Section 2, we discuss the use of ethnography as a research method. 
In  section  3,  we  present  how  we  designed  and  conduced  our 
ethnography. In section 4, we present our main findings, which are 
discussed  in  section  5.  Finally,  in  section  6,  we  present  our 
conclusions.  

 Ethnographic Studies 

2 
Ethnography  is  a  qualitative  research  method  oriented  by  the 
thorough  observation  of  individuals  and  their  interaction  [11]. 
Ethnographies  differ  from  other  scientific  methods  in  its  focus, 
since it seeks to understand what is and what is not relevant and 
important  for  the  study  participants,  based  on  what  these 
individuals  experienced  in  real  life  [11].  Ethnography  originated 
from anthropology and social sciences; however, its techniques has 
been  successfully  applied  in  many  other  areas  over  the  years, 
allowing the study of cultural and social aspects of organizations 
and groups [15].  

Depending  on  the  place  where  the  research  is  conducted,  an 
ethnography can be classified as [14]: 

• 

Classic: the traditional form of ethnography, originating from 
anthropology,  based  on  in-depth  and  holistic  observation, 
followed by empirical description of experiences [14].  

•  Multi-site:  an  evolution  of  classic  ethnography  focusing  on 
interdisciplinary work (not only the study of a culture), such 
as science and technology [16]. 

• 

Netnography: the study of online communities (e.g., forums 
and  social  media)  by  analyzing  posts,  messages,  and 
interactions among members [17].  

•  Digital  ethnography:  exploring  the  potential  of  computer-
based  storytelling  and  the  perception  of  culture  that  flows 
across  online  environments,  through  virtual  communication 
content,  both  graphic  (e.g.,  images,  emoticons,  videos)  and 
verbal (posts and discussions) [18]. 

Ethnography  can  also  be  categorized  based  on  the  perspective 
targeted by the data collection [19]:   

• 

Life  history  is  based  on  the  individual  viewpoint  that 
participants hold about life events.  

•  Memoir  is  a  well-structured  report  of  everything  that  the 

researcher experienced while observing in the field. 

• 

• 

Narrative  is  an  integration  of  life  history  and  memoir:  the 
researcher  relies  on  observations  of  daily  events  that  affect 
participants’  lives,  including  their  own  perceptions  about 
individual reactions.  

Auto-ethnography: the researcher is the participant and writes 
findings about their own experience.  

Finally, ethnography is based on the researcher’s immersion into 
the participants’ environment, and there are two main categories of 
immersion [20]:  

• 

• 

Participant  observation:  researchers 
the 
participants’ activities, allowing them to experience and feel 
the reality first-hand. 

in  with 

join 

Non-participant observation: researchers observe actions and 
behaviors, but do not practice them during the research. 

In software engineering, the analytical power of ethnography has 
been  overlooked  by  researchers  [15].  However,  ethnography  can 
produce detailed explanation of how software development occurs, 
considering  aspects  of  teamwork  and  highlight  the  reasons  and 
whys  behind  professional’s  actions  towards  practices,  processes, 
and methods. Therefore, in this study, we advocate the relevance of 
applying an ethnographic approach to understand the dynamics of 
the work in software organizations, considering human aspects and 
the process of working from home during the pandemic. 

3  Method 
The present study is part of a broad research initiative focused on 
understanding the effects of the pandemic in the software industry, 
and encapsulating that understanding in parsimonious theories (e.g. 

[6]). However, some of our findings do not contribute directly to 
theory, but can be used directly by practitioners.  

In this article, therefore, we present and discuss practices that were 
created  to  support  teamwork  and  team  engagement  during  the 
pandemic period, and that can potentially be used by hybrid teams 
in the period post-pandemic. These practices were identified in our 
general  research  when  we  applied  techniques  of  ethnography  to 
dive  into  the  reality  of  software  professionals  that  were  working 
remotely during the pandemic.  

We  combined  elements  of  netnography  and  digital  ethnography, 
since  the  data  was  collected  through  digital  environments  (e.g., 
forums  and  discussion  groups),  using  different  sources  of 
information  both  digital  (e.g.,  posts,  discussions,  imagens)  and 
traditional (observation and questionnaire). We adopt a narrative 
perspective  to  identify  the  practices  implemented  by  the  team 
through the observation of events (e.g., virtual meetings) and the 
perspective of professionals (questionnaire). In addition, elements 
of  auto-ethnography  and  participant  observation  were  applied, 
since  the first author of this paper  worked with the teams during 
data collection. As for the methodological phases that guided this 
research,  we  established  the  steps  to  conduct  our  ethnographic 
study  following  the  method  applied  in  previous  ethnographies 
successfully  conducted  in  software  engineering [25][26][27][34], 
as presented below. 

 3.1  Entering the Field 
We  conducted  our  study  on  a  mature  software  company  that 
adopted  an  emergency  work  arrangement  to  move  software 
professionals from the office to their homes at the beginning of the 
pandemic.  This  company  specializes  in  on-demand  software 
development for external clients and has over 1000 employees, of 
which  about 70%  work  directly  with  software  development  (i.e., 
programmers,  QAs,  designers,  analysts,  etc.).  The  company  has 
approximately  50  projects  running  simultaneously  in  several 
business areas. The first author was one of the employees affected 
by the emergency pandemic plan and for 18 months observed the 
dynamics  of  his  team  (e.g.,  rotation  of  team  members  between 
projects,  arrival  of  newcomers,  establishment  of  new  practices) 
while  working  from  home.  More  details  regarding  the  team  are 
presented in Section 4. 

involved  multiple 

3.2  Data Collection 
including 
collection 
Data 
participative observation in virtual environments, field notes, posts 
and discussions, and opinions obtained from a questionnaire.  We 
consistently  collected data focusing on the work of two software 
projects, the introduction of practices to support the team, and its 
effects on participants.  

techniques 

Our  observations  followed  the  fundamentals  of  netnography  and 
digital ethnography, since we were focused on collecting messages, 
posts,  and  media  about  the  practices.  In  addition,  the  participant 
observation happened during virtual meetings of projects (dailies, 
retrospectives)  by  taking  notes  about  the  interactions  within  the 
team.  We  also  used  an  open-ended  questionnaire  about  each 

 
 
 
practice  introduced  in  the  process,  asking  participants  to provide 
their perspectives on the effects of each practice on their work and 
their  team.  The  questions  were  the  following:  (a)  How  did 
[practice] affected your work while you were working from home? 
(b) How did [practice] affected the team while you were working 
from home? 

3.3  Data Analysis 
Data analysis in an ethnography study tends to be challenging due 
to the large amount of qualitative data collected in many formats 
(e.g.,  text,  audio,  images,  notes)  [11][14].  Following  previous 
research and to make the data analysis  feasible, we converted all 
data into text to enable narrative analysis [31]. Hence, digital data 
and media, such as audio, video, images, emoticons, among others, 
were converted into a textual description and combined with field 
notes from the participant observation process. The same analysis 
was  applied  to  the  answers  of  participants  to  the  open-ended 
questions. Finally, we applied narrative analysis [31] to consolidate, 
reduce, and interpret data obtained from the various sources, and 
make sense of them.  

4  Results 
When the emergency measures started in March 2020, we started 
following the everyday events of one team (Project A). This project 
focused on developing and maintaining a mobile application for an 
international company. The team was composed of two developers, 
one quality assurance analyst (QA), one tech leader and one project 
manager. 

In  June  2020,  a  new  project  (Project  B)  was  created  by  splitting 
Project  A  in  two,  due  to  its  expanding  scope.  Project  B  entailed 
developing  a  desktop  application  for  the  same  client.  The  team 
comprised  the  same  software  QA,  tech  leader  and  manager,  plus 
two developers (one from project A and one new employee). Both 
projects A and B used a software process that included some Scrum 
practices, such as sprints and daily meetings. 

In December 2020, both teams started to be drastically modified. A 
rotation  of  professionals  brought  a  new  team  leader  and  a  new 
manager  to  work  in  both  projects.  In  addition,  a  new  QA  (also 
shared by both teams) joined the project, as well as a new developer 
for Project A and two new developers for Project B. In January and 
February  2021,  the  levels  of  engagement  among  team  members 
were  alarmingly  low,  as  the  team  members  had  not  created 
connections  among  them.  Projects  A  and  B  appeared  detached, 
even  though  they  shared the  same  client,  several  team  members, 
and some resources and features.  

The new management began modifying the software development 
process  to  improve  engagement  among  professionals.  These 
practices included changes in the daily meetings, planning, and the 
establishment  of  retrospective  meetings.  However,  since  these 
practices are more related to the process and less related to human 
interaction, the levels of engagement were still not satisfactory. On 
the other hand, there was still a gap between Projects A and B, as 
both projects have their own events.  

The idea to make meetings less formal and create opportunities for 
team members to get to know each other better, arose from the team 
members themselves, as an attempt to improve team engagement, 
cohesion,  and  the  relationship  between  the  two  projects.  To  this 
end, the teams adopted three specific practices: 

Costume  Meeting  -  team  members  turn  on  their  video  feeds  and 
participate  in  daily  meetings  using  an  improvised  costume.  The 
costume  meeting  was  created  to  improve  the  relationship  among 
teammates. Mainly, the strategy to turn on the camera during the 
meeting  helped  professionals  get  to  know  each  other  better.  We 
observed  that  the  costumes  made  individuals  more  interested  in 
knowing their teammates’ behaviors, resulting in improved levels 
of  interaction  among  individuals.  In  addition,  professionals 
reported  that  this  practice  reduced  monotony  and  boredom 
associated to remote work.  

Second  Language  (English)  Day:  team  members  speak  only  the 
second language used by the team during the whole day (e.g., in 
Project  A  and  B,  the official  second  language  was  English).  The 
[Second Language] Day ended up being a practice less related to 
increasing interaction and more related to learning processes. We 
observed  that  professionals  were  extremely  motivated  by  the 
the  collaboration  among 
learning  opportunities  created  by 
teammates.  

Project Happy Hour: the two teams merge for an online happy hour 
meeting  where  speaking  about  work  is  not  allowed.  Participants 
would  turn  on  their  video,  all  using  the  same  background 
(simulating being at the same caffe, bar, party, etc.). Participants’ 
conversation and activities (music, cinema, games, among others) 
focus on topics that the participants like from outside the work. The 
Project Happy Hour was the most successful practice in increasing 
team  engagement.  It  not  only  helped  to  make  connections  that 
support team cohesion, but it also reduced the isolation resulting 
from  remote  work.  After  this  practice,  we  constantly  observed 
increasing  levels  of  interaction  among  teammates.  We  also 
observed  that  professionals  who  have  left  the  team  (and  the 
company) continue to participate of these activities. This is relevant 
because the expected demands for flexibility and remote work tend 
to  intensify  after  the  pandemic.  Therefore,  software  companies 
need  to  create  strategies  to  reduce  turnover  [28]  and  bring 
competent professionals to their teams. As the Project Happy Hour 
practice  seems  to  support  long-term  connections,  companies  can 
strategize ways to explore these networks.  

5  Discussions 
Although these practices were not designed following any formal 
theory,  they  are  share  elements  used  in  gamification  [8]  [9].  All 
three practices had: (1) clear goals—making the workplace fun and 
helping professionals to relax; and (2) included rules participants 
must  follow,  "as  shown  in  Table  1". Thus,  as  we  analyzed  these 
practices  and  the  rules,  we  associate  them  with  aspects  of 
gamification. Gamification is the process of making something that 
isn’t  a  game  more  game-like,  typically  by  adding  elements 
associated with games [8]. Gamification has a spotty track record 

 
 
but enriching activities with game elements can, sometimes, make 
them more fun and engaging [9]. 

Through gamification we can define objectives and rules to guide 
individuals’ actions in a non-game context, allowing the emergence 
of interactions based on personality and behaviors [21]. The list of 
game elements that can be applied in non-game contexts is vast as 
such elements are highly flexible. However, they can be grouped in 
categories  related  to  individual  performance,  environmental 
properties, social interactions, individual sensations, and the use of 
fictional elements [22]. 

Gamification has the potential to improve motivation of software 
professionals [23]. Over the years the gamification elements more 

presented in software processes are related to performance, such as, 
points,  badges,  and  acknowledgment  (awards).  However,  the 
literature also presents evidence on the use of ecological elements 
(i.e., luck, paths) and fictional elements [10].  

The  costume  meeting  carries  gamification  elements  as  it  takes 
advantage of environmental properties (e.g., visual features [22]) to 
create  interaction  among  team  members  (as  if  they  were  game 
players).  Second-language day employs elements of gamification 
as  it  applies  social  aspects  of  games  (cooperation  and  social 
pressure [22]) while it is played around one main rule: everybody 
needs to speak only in the second language. Meanwhile, the project 
happy-hour practice involved elements of storytelling [22]. 

Table 1: Techniques Supporting Remote Work in the Software Industry 

Technique 

Participants’ Quotes 

Game Element 

Effect 

Lessons Learned 

Costume 
Meeting 

“In the beginning of the pandemic 
was  very  interesting,  because  we 
didn’t know several people on the 
team,  so  this  practice  brought  us 
together”. (P05). 

Novelty: use  of  the updates 
within  the  environment  by 
adding new information and 
content  [22]  (e.g.,  different 
costumes every week).  

stimulation 

Sensation: use of sound and 
visual 
to 
improve  experiences  [22] 
(e.g., 
of 
teammates workstation). 

visualization 

It 
Positive: 
increases 
the 
interaction  among 
team  members  and 
supports 
team 
engagement.  

Negative: 
It  can 
become demanding 
over time. 

replaceable 

The  positive  effect  of  this  practice 
tends  to  weaken  over  time,  since  it 
requires  high  levels  of  creativity 
(e.g.,  for  costumes).  We  suggest 
making the use of costumes optional 
different 
and 
accessories  (e.g.,  mugs,  puppets, 
collection  items,  etc.),  or  virtual 
visual 
photos, 
backgrounds, etc.). We also suggest 
reducing 
the 
practice (e.g., biweekly, monthly, or 
special occasions).  

frequency  of 

elements 

(e.g., 

the 

by 

the  use  of 
Cooperation: 
tasks  where  the  users  must 
collaborate 
to  achieve  a 
common  goal  [22]  (e.g., 
keep  speaking  a  different 
the  whole 
idiom  during 
day). 

Positive:  It  creates 
learning 
opportunities, 
which 
increasing 
individual 
motivation. 

helps 

Social  Pressure:  the  social 
interactions  exert  pressure 
on the individual [22] (e.g., 
everybody is forced to keep 
speaking the idiom). 

[22] 

the  story  of 

Storytelling:  elements  are 
added to support a narrative 
the 
telling 
environment 
(e.g., 
discussions 
about  work 
were  discouraged,  while 
team  members  acted  like 
they  were 
another 
environment, such a bar, or 
a casino). 

in 

Negative:  It  is  not 
suitable  for  onsite 
use. 

Positive: 
supports 
cohesion 
reduce 
isolation.  

It 
team 
and 
individual 

Negative: 
observed.  

Not 

This  practice  might  not  be  feasible 
for  office  environments  due 
to 
insecurities  of  professionals  (e.g., 
being  observed  by  professionals 
from  outside  the  team)  and  the 
possibility  of  noisy  conversations 
(e.g.,  people  speaking  loudly  might 
disturb  other 
the 
office).  

individuals  at 

This  practice  could  be  used  by 
software  companies  to  deal  with 
turnovers that are expected to occur 
in  the  period  post-pandemic  as  it 
helps to maintain networking among 
professionals. 

became 

“It 
entertaining 
an 
moment to reduce job monotony.” 
(P01) 

“Besides  making  the  team  more 
also 
relaxed, 
I 
contributed 
team 
cohesion.” (P06)   

believe 
to 

it 
increase 

[Second 
Language] 
Day 

“This  practice  helped  me  to  be 
more confident to talk to the client 
whenever I need.” (P05) 

Project 
Happy Hour 

“Everybody wins, since those who 
are  more  fluent  become  role 
models to those who are learning.” 
(P03) 

“It  stimulates  those  who  don’t 
speak the idiom to become better.” 
(P02) 

“They are helpful moments for our 
these 
health.  Often 
mental 
moments work as therapy for me”. 
(P05) 

“It helps to maintain a harmonious 
and  pleasant  relationship  within 
the team”. (P04) 

“It  makes  people 
feel  more 
connected,  increasing  the  team 
bonding”. (P03) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5  Conclusions and Future Work 
In this study, we present and discuss three practices that were used 
during the COVID-19 pandemic to support software teams while 
working  from  home,  namely,  costume  meeting,  second  language 
day  and  project  happy  hour.  We  observed  that  these  practices 
include some aspects of gamification—they all have explicit goals 
and rules and were created to produce fun and relaxation for team 
members.   

These  practices  appear  effective  in  increasing  team  engagement, 
team cohesion and reducing work monotony. Moreover, working 
from home during a crisis is different from working from home in 
normal conditions [4]. Therefore, we highlight the perspective of 
software  professionals  and  the  applicability  of  these  practices  in 
support to wellbeing. Furthermore, our study has implications for 
the  use  of  ethnographies  in  software  engineering,  since  we 
demonstrated  the  efficacy  of  this  method  to  investigate  human 
aspects of software engineering in the context of remote work.  

Our  research  approach  does  not  support  statistical  generalization 
from a sample to a population. Our findings may be transferable, 
in  the  sense  that  practitioners  in  other  contexts  may  find  these 
practices  useful.  Similarly,  this  kind  of  study  cannot  provide 
objective  evidence  of  causality;  rather,  we  can  only  say  that  the 
practices appear effective to us and to the participants. Moreover, 
given  space  limitations,  our  capacity  for  thick  description  is 
limited.  

This study is part of a broader, ongoing investigation of the effects 
of the pandemic on software development, and how crisis-induced 
problems can be mitigated. The results presented in this paper stand 
alone  in  their  presentation  of  three  specific  practices  and  use  of 
theories of gamification [29][30] and social cohesion [33], to refine 
these practices and improve them in a way that they can support 
remote and hybrid teams.  

REFERENCES 

[1]  Brynjolfsson, E., Horton, J. J., Ozimek, A., Rock, D., Sharma, G., & TuYe, H. 
Y. (2020). Covid-19 and remote work: An early look at us data (No. w27344). 
National Bureau of Economic Research.  

[2]  Collins,  C.,  Landivar,  L.  C.,  Ruppanner,  L.,  &  Scarborough,  W.  J.  (2020). 
COVID‐19 and the gender gap in work hours. Gender, Work & Organization. 
[3]  Craig, L., & Churchill, B. (2020). Dual‐earner parent couples’ work and care 

during COVID‐19. Gender, Work & Organization.  

[4]  Ralph, P., Baltes, S., Adisaputri, G., Torkar, R., Kovalenko, V., Kalinowski, 
M.,  ...  &  Alkadhi,  R.  (2020).  Pandemic  programming.  Empirical  Software 
Engineering, 25(6), 4927-4961. 
 Ford, D., Storey, M. A., Zimmermann, T., Bird, C., Jaffe, S., Maddila, C., ... 
&  Nagappan,  N.  (2021).  A  tale  of  two  cities:  Software  developers  working 
from  home  during  the  covid-19  pandemic.  ACM  Transactions  on  Software 
Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM), 31(2), 1-37. 

[5] 

[6]  Ronnie  E.  de  Souza  Santos;  Paul  Ralph.  (in  press).  A  Grounded  Theory  of 
Coordination  in  Remote-First  and  Hybrid  Software  Teams.  In:  44th 
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2022). 

[7]  Santos, R. E., Da Silva, F. Q., de Magalhães, C. V., & Monteiro, C. V. (2016). 
Building a theory of job rotation in software engineering from an instrumental 
case study. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Software 
Engineering (pp. 971-981).   

[8]  Hamari, J., Koivisto, J., & Sarsa, H. (2014, January). Does gamification work?-
-a literature review of empirical studies on gamification. In 2014 47th Hawaii 
international conference on system sciences (pp. 3025-3034). IEEE.  

[9]  Werbach, K. (2014, May). (Re) defining gamification: A process approach. In 
International  conference  on  persuasive  technology  (pp.  266-272).  Springer, 
Cham.  

[10]  Barreto,  C.  F.,  &  França,  C.  (2021,  May).  Gamification  in  Software 
Engineering:  A  literature  Review.  In 2021  IEEE/ACM  13th  International 
Workshop  on  Cooperative  and  Human  Aspects  of  Software  Engineering 
(CHASE) (pp. 105-108). IEEE. 

[11]  Randall,  D.,  Rouncefield,  M.:  The  Encyclopedia  of  Human-Computer 

Interaction: Ethnography (2012). 

[12]  Chavez-Dreyfuss,  G  (2020).  Permanently  remote  workers  seen  doubling  in 
survey. 

productivity: 

to 
2021 
https://br.reuters.com/article/idUSKBN2772P6.  

pandemic 

due 

[13]  Phillips, S (2020). Working through the pandemic: Accelerating the transition 
to remote working. Business Information Review, v. 37, n. 3, p. 129-134, 2020.  
[14]  Reeves, Scott, et al. "Ethnography in qualitative educational research: AMEE 

Guide No. 80." Medical teacher 35.8 (2013): e1365-e1379. 

[15]  Sharp, Helen; Dittrich, Yvonne and de Souza, Cleidson (2016).  The Role of 
Ethnographic Studies in Empirical Software Engineering. IEEE Transactions 
on Software Engineering, 42(8) pp. 786–804. 

[16]  Marcus, George  E. "Ethnography in/of the world system: The emergence of 
multi-sited ethnography." Annual review of anthropology 24.1 (1995): 95-117. 
[17]  Kozinets, R. V. (2002). The Field Behind the Screen: Using Netnography for 
Marketing Research in Online Communities. Journal of Marketing Research, 
39(1), 61–72. doi:10.1509/jmkr.39.1.61.18935.  

[18]  Kudaibergenova, Diana T. "The body global and the body traditional: A digital 
ethnography of Instagram and nationalism in Kazakhstan and Russia." Central 
Asian Survey 38.3 (2019): 363-380.  

[19]  Suzuki,  L.  A.,  Ahluwalia,  M.  K.,  Mattis,  J.  S.,  &  Quizon,  C.  A.  (2005). 
Ethnography in counseling psychology research: Possibilities for application. 
Journal  of  Counseling  Psychology,  52(2),  206–214.  doi:10.1037/0022-
0167.52.2.206  

[20]  Jorgensen,  D.L.  (1989)  Participant  Observation:  A  Methodology  for  Human 

Studies, Sage Publications Inc. 

[21]  Monteiro, R. H. B., de Almeida Souza, M. R., Oliveira, S. R. B., dos Santos 
Portela,  C.,  &  de  Cristo  Lobato,  C.  E.  (2021,  May).  The  Diversity  of 
Gamification Evaluation in the Software Engineering Education and Industry: 
Trends,  Comparisons  and  Gaps.  In  2021  IEEE/ACM  43rd  International 
Conference  on  Software  Engineering:  Software  Engineering  Education  and 
Training (ICSE-SEET) (pp. 154-164). IEEE. 

[22]  A Toda, A. M., Klock, A. C., Oliveira, W., Palomino, P. T., Rodrigues, L., Shi, 
L., ... & Cristea, A. I. (2019). Analysing gamification elements in educational 
environments  using  an  existing  Gamification  taxonomy.  Smart  Learning 
Environments, 6(1), 1-14. 

[23]  Machuca-Villegas, L., & Gasca-Hurtado, G. P. (2018, October). Gamification 
for improving software project management processes: A systematic literature 
review. In International Conference on Software Process Improvement (pp. 41-
54). Springer, Cham. 

[24]   García-Mireles,  G.  A.,  &  Morales-Trujillo,  M.  E.  (2019,  October). 
Gamification  in  software  engineering:  A  tertiary  study.  In International 
Conference on Software Process Improvement (pp. 116-128). Springer, Cham. 
[25]  Wijaya, S. W., & Nurmalia. (2018). Investigating User Experience with Digital 
Ethnography  Approach:  Principles  and  Guidelines.  2018  10th  International 
Conference on Information Technology and Electrical Engineering (ICITEE). 
[26]   Dingsoyr,  T.,  &  Royrvik,  E.  (2003).  An  empirical  study  of  an  informal 
knowledge repository in a medium-sized software consulting company. 25th 
International Conference on Software Engineering, 2003. 

[27]  Stein, Sebastian. "Softtware Process Improvements in a Small Organisation: 

an Ethnography." (2006). 

[28]  Melin,  A.,  &  Egkolfpoulou,  M.  (2021).  Employees  are  quitting  instead  of 
home. 

giving 
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-06-01/return-to-office-
employees-are-quitting- instead-of-giving-up-work-from-home 

working 

from 

up 

[29]  Amir,  B.,  &  Ralph,  P.  (2014,  May).  Proposing  a  theory  of  gamification 
effectiveness. In Companion Proceedings of the 36th International Conference 
on Software Engineering (pp. 626-627). 

[30]  Deterding, S., Dixon, D., Khaled, R., & Nacke, L. (2011, September). From 
game design elements to gamefulness: defining" gamification". In Proceedings 
of the 15th international academic MindTrek conference: Envisioning future 
media environments (pp. 9-15). 
[31]  Cruzes, D. S., & Dybå, T. (2011). Research synthesis in software engineering: 
A tertiary study. Information and Software Technology, 53(5), 440-455. 
[32]  Miller, C., Rodeghero, P., Storey, M. A., Ford, D., & Zimmermann, T. (2021, 
May). “How Was Your Weekend?” Software Development Teams Working 
From  Home  During  COVID-19.  In 2021  IEEE/ACM  43rd  International 
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) (pp. 624-636). IEEE  
measurement issues. Small group research, 31(1), 89-106. 

[33]  Carron,  A.  V.,  &  Brawley,  L.  R.  (2000).  Cohesion:  Conceptual  and 

[34]  Ralph, P., Ali, N. B., Baltes, S., Bianculli, D., Diaz, J., Dittrich, Y., ... & Vegas, 
S.  (2020).  Empirical  standards  for  software  engineering  research. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2010.03525.

 
 
