2
2
0
2

r
a

M
5
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
8
7
7
0
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Engineering data-driven solutions for future
mobility: perspectives and challenges

Contributors: Daphne Tuncer1, Oytun Babacan2, Raoul Guiazon3, Halima Abu Ali4, Josephine Conway4,

Sebastian Kern4, Ana Teresa Moreno4, Max Peel4, Arthur Pereira4, Nadia Assad4, Giulia Franceschini4, Margrethe

Gjerull4, Anna Hardisty4, Imran Marwa4, Blanca Alvarez Lopez4, Ariella Shalev4, Christopher D’Cruz Tambua4,

Hapsari Damayanti4, Paul Frapart4, Sacha Lepoutre4, Peer Novak5

Technical report

March 2022

1Laboratoire Ville Transport Mobilite, Ecole des Ponts ParisTech, France
2Grantham Institute for Climate Change, Imperial College London, UK
3Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Leeds, UK
4Work carried out as part of the Data Science and Digitalisation of the Energy Sector lecture, SEF MSc pro-

gramme, Imperial College London, UK

5School of Environmental Sciences, University of East Anglia, UK

 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract

The automotive industry is currently undergoing major changes. These include a general shift

towards decarbonised mode of transportation, the implementation of mobility as an end-to-end

service, and the transition to vehicles that increasingly rely on software and digital tools to

function. Digitalisation is expected to play a key role in shaping the future of mobility ecosys-

tems by fostering the integration of traditionally independent system domains in the energy,

transportation and information sectors. This report discusses opportunities and challenges for

engineering data-driven solutions that support the requirements of future digitalised mobility

systems based on three use cases for electric vehicle public charging infrastructures, services

and security.

Contents

1

Introduction

2 E-mobility demand: charging infrastructure planning

2.1 Demand versus supply - a systems view . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Modeling e-mobility user demand: Greater London case study . . . . . . . . .

2.2.1

Survey of the preferences and habits of electric vehicle drivers . . . . .

2.2.2 Consultations with electric vehicle drivers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3

Impact of the e-mobility demand on the infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3.1 Estimation of e-mobility demand components . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.3.2 Discussion .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 Added value e-charging services: incentives and collaboration models

3.1 Accommodating e-charging services through incentives . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.1.1 How can incentives help? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.1.2

Incentives and charging schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2 Reversible charging strategies - Vehicle to Grid integration . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2.1

Smart charging and V2G integration - some deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . .

3.2.2 Technology and infrastructure requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2.3 Overview of proposed V2G strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2.4 Technical and business limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Connected and automated mobility: security and data protection

4.1

Impact of new security standards for connected and automated cars . . . . . . .

4.1.1 Challenges for future vehicle connectivity and data security . . . . . .

4.1.2 Why are standards and regulations needed ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1.3

Steps taken to mitigate cyber risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.1.4

Indirect impact of the regulation and standards

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

7

8

9

10

19

19

19

21

23

23

23

24

26

26

27

28

28

31

31

31

33

34

35

Contents

4.2

Implications of legal frameworks on connected and automated mobility . . . .

4.2.1 What type of data is being collected?

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.2 The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) framework . . . . . .

4.2.3 Data privacy characteristics

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.2.4 Discussion .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.3 Concluding remarks .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

35

36

36

38

40

41

Section 1

Introduction

The automotive industry is going through a paradigm shift that is shaping the future of mobility.

There are several key transformations happening in the automotive domain, which includes

transitioning away from dependency on oil products and introducing innovative technologies

for commuting. These changes are accelerated in the last few years by new political agendas

at the local and international levels that promote climate change mitigation and clean-air policy

goals.

Main changes in automotive are manifesting in three emerging trends: 1) sustainability, 2)

mobility-as-a-service, and 3) connected and autonomous vehicles. These changes range the full

spectrum of mobility, from changes operating at the vehicle level, speciﬁcally under two vec-

tors, i.e., 1) the push for low emission technologies, including vehicle ﬂeet electriﬁcation, and

2) the importance of softwarisation as part of a vehicle’s functionality (e.g., through embedded

sensors, on-board software, etc.), to end user delivered digital services.

A key aspect of the implementation of these transformations is the convergence between

traditionally independent system domains in the energy, transportation and digital sectors,

where Information and Communication Systems (ICSs) act as a focal point. Figure 1.1 de-

picts key domains where stakeholders participate in the delivery of electric mobility services

through an integrated digitalised ecosystem, including (hardware/software) resource vendors,

infrastructure operators and service providers.

Data plays a crucial role in the realisation of inter-operable system domains by acting as

the medium interfacing system operations. In fact, today the mobility ecosystem is witnessing

an unprecedented volume of data [1], which brings novel opportunities but also challenges to

the transportation sector. Domains and their associated stakeholders can harness enriched infor-

mation from the available data that can be used to optimise infrastructure planning, investment

and operation, as well as, to contribute to improving user experience in terms of convenience,

accessibility and added value services. At the same time, critical issues associated with the

Section 1. Introduction

6

Figure 1.1: Integration of stakeholders through ICT.

management of data-driven approaches need to be positioned as central considerations to the

development of future mobility solutions, speciﬁcally issues around data security and privacy.

In this report we discuss opportunities and challenges for engineering data-driven solutions

that have the potential to support future connected and automated mobility. The report does not

aim at providing deﬁnite answers to the issues that the development of data-driven approaches

will inevitably bring in, but instead focuses on exposing perspectives and insights based on

three use cases that we have been working on in the last few years, namely the planning of a

public charging infrastructure for electric mobility (Section 2); the development of added-value

electric vehicle charging services (Section 3); and security and data protection for connected

and automated mobility (Section 4).

Infrastructureprovidertraffic & accessibilityRegulating authoritiesform & maintainresponsibilitiesService provider vehicle distribution logisticsData provider mobility information catalogueEquipmentprovidervehicle systemCharging provider charging stationsEnergy provider electric grid loadInformation & communication systemSection 2

E-mobility demand: charging infrastructure

planning

A wide-spread delivery of electric mobility (e-mobility) services requires cost effective deploy-

ment of a charging infrastructure that consists large connected networks of charging stations.

The electric vehicle drivers today can access charging stations in three different ways: i) private

charging stations that are located at home or in private business premises and whose access is

limited to an exclusive set of drivers; ii) publicly accessible stations usually located at special

point of interests such at commercial parks, shopping centers, train stations, etc. whose access

is often restricted to customers and business operating hours; and iii) public charging stations

that are located in public parking areas or roadside parking space with very few restrictions for

public access.

Understanding the needs and habits of e-mobility users in terms of travelling and charging

helps informing the deployment plan of these charging networks. Tools based on behavioural

modelling, e.g., [2] and [3], and predictive analytics, e.g., [4] and [5], for instance, assist prac-

titioners in assessing user accessibility challenges (e.g., where to deploy new stations), un-

derstanding economic challenges (e.g., deployment and operational costs) and sustainability

concerns (e.g., source of energy supply). They can also be employed to test mechanisms and

create prototypes that would encourage better e-mobility practices, for instance through reward

schemes such as the one presented by Pluntke in [6].

In this context we have been investigating data-based opportunities for expansion planning

of e-mobility charging infrastructure by taking the Greater London area in the United Kingdom

as a use case. In this section, we report on three lines of work we engaged in that domain.

We developed a data model that builds on top of the design of a demand-to-supply system to

characterise the key features of e-mobility (Section 2.1). In addition we ran data collection

studies in order to capture the speciﬁcs of e-mobility users’ habits in the Greater London area

2.1. Demand versus supply - a systems view

8

(Section 2.2). Finally, we developed a framework to estimate the demand factors that affect

how public charging infrastructure would be accessed by e-mobility used (Section 2.3).

2.1 Demand versus supply - a systems view

The usage on an e-mobility infrastructure can functionally be represented as a demand-to-supply

matching system where e-mobility users form a charging demand that is satisﬁed by the oper-

ations of a supply of electric charging stations. The system can be used to evaluate the impact

of the demand on the supply (and vice versa) by modelling features of travelling and charging

habits on one hand, and of the network of charging stations on the other. Fig. 2.1 illustrates

the functionality of the system that is decomposed into three main components: 1) e-mobility

charging demand, 2) e-mobility charging supply, 3) demand-to-supply matching via vehicle-to-

station allocation procedures, e.g., [7].

Figure 2.1: A demand vs. supply system for e-mobility infrastructure usage.

Various aspects of the demand and the supply can impact how the infrastructure is

used. These aspects can be categorised in classes of features representing the different sub-

components of the system, as shown in Table 2.1. Features are described through attributes,

i.e., a charge is described in terms of charging type, a battery level of the vehicle, a charging

behaviour of the user and/or the charger, etc., whose value can be tuned to represent different

characteristics of the demand and/or the supply. It is, for instance, possible to test the inﬂuence

of different trip proﬁles on the need for charging stations in a geographical area by considering

journey characteristics that affect energy consumption of the vehicle, such as the type of road,

the route topology, the presence of trafﬁc lights etc.

The design is based on a plug-in and -out model that makes each sub-component indepen-

Charging demandCharging supplyVehicleTrip ChargeServiceMatcherAvailabilityConnectorsLocationService2.2. Modeling e-mobility user demand: Greater London case study

9

Table 2.1: Classes of demand and supply features.

Demand

Supply

Vehicle Make, charging socket type(s),

Availability

Station real-time occupancy

etc.

status

Trip

characteristics of the journeys

Connector

sockets and plugs available at

in terms of distance, types of

roads, topography, etc.

the station

Charge

both in terms of

type of

Location

geo-coordinates of the post,

charge (rapid, fast, super-fast)

and charging behaviour (bat-

tery level at which the vehi-

cle is charged, battery level

at which the charge is termi-

nated, etc.)

type of premises where the sta-

tion resides (on-street, in a su-

permarket, at a station, etc.)

Service

i.e., indication of service re-

Offered service at location

charge rate (if any), option to

quirements such as subscrip-

tion to a speciﬁc charging

provider, requests for a spe-

ciﬁc charging time and loca-

tion, etc.

reserve a charge slot, restricted

access, etc.

dent. A modular design facilitates the integration of multiple sets of data as part of a single

platform, and as such enables the implementation of customised test scenarios.

2.2 Modeling e-mobility user demand: Greater London case study

Features of the e-mobility demand (e.g., how often a vehicle is charged, its typical journey, etc.)

can be extracted using different data sources. In 2019, we ran a data collection study as part

of the EVOLVE project [8] to qualitatively characterise the travel and charging behaviours of

electric vehicle drivers in Greater London, UK.

To set the context of this case study, we provide here some statistics on the Greater London

region in terms of its administrative structure, urban environment, existing car ﬂeet and charging

infrastructure. This region is organised in 32 boroughs, i.e., inner and outer London boroughs,

and the City of London that has a speciﬁc structure [9]. The urban environment is spread on a

surface of 1572 km2. At the end of 2019, the number of licensed ultra low emission vehicles1

1Ultra low emission vehicles are vehicles that are reported to emit less than 75g of carbon dioxide (CO2) from

2.2. Modeling e-mobility user demand: Greater London case study

10

(ULEV) in Greater London was 38, 632 [10], including 16, 740 licensed ULEV in inner London

boroughs and 21, 827 in outer London boroughs, accounting for 1.3% of all licensed vehicles

in the region [11].

As of November 2020, Greater London counted for 26% the UK charge point connectors2

[13]. These stations are operated by several charging network operators [14].

2.2.1 Survey of the preferences and habits of electric vehicle drivers

We administrated a survey on travelling and charging habits among the community of electric

vehicle (EV) drivers in Greater London in Spring 2019. Our objective was to investigate if it

was possible to extract patterns for drivers in the city that could further be used as inputs to the

sub-components of the demand model presented in Section 2.1. In total the survey consisted in

50 questions related to four main aspects of e-mobility: i) vehicle ownership, ii) travel habits,

iii) charging habits, and iv) charging service preferences. The obtained dataset includes a total

of 166 samples from which 139 are suitable for further analysis3.

2.2.1.1 Vehicle characteristics

We use the vehicle as a discriminator of EV usage in our study. We speciﬁcally focus on two

characteristics: 1) ownership, i.e., how the vehicle is accessed (owned, shared, or rented) and

2) make. While ownership can serve as an indicator of how the vehicle is used over time (i.e.,

successive drives and hence charge from different drivers), the make is needed to associate

patterns of mobility with different energy proﬁles (the make affects the energy consumption).

Figure 2.2a shows the characteristics of the surveyed drivers in terms of EV ownership. A

majority of the sampled respondents declared to own an electric vehicle (more than 80%).

Figure 2.2b provides insights onto the types of EV driven in Greater London at the time of the

survey.

2.2.1.2 Travel habits characteristics

The need for refueling stations (charging in the case of EV) depends on how users travel. The

assessment of travel habits can thus provide important insights onto where infrastructure needs

are likely to be predominant (in terms of the location of charging stations and their availability).

We characterise travel habits through three attributes associated with mobility in an urban en-

vironment: 1) duration of daily trips using an EV, 2) frequency of using an EV as a function of

different purposes, and 3) average trip duration in the context of each purpose. The distribution

the tailpipe for every kilometre travelled [10].

2The UK was covered with 20, 964 charging stations according to Zap-Map [12], the UK reference website

about electric vehicles

3Samples with missing answers or completed in a time to short to be reasonable were discarded.

2.2. Modeling e-mobility user demand: Greater London case study

11

(a) Access to the vehicle (responses in %).

(b) Make of the vehicle (responses in %).

Figure 2.2: EV characteristics.

(a) Daily trip duration (responses in %).

(b) EV usage purpose and frequency (responses in %).

(c) EV usage purpose and trip duration (responses in %).

Figure 2.3: Trip characteristics.

of the results is shown in Figure 2.3.

As shown in Figure 2.3a, the duration of the large majority of daily trips is below 2 hours.

020406080100I lease or rent anEV.I use someone'sEV.I own an EV.051015202530Nissan LeafTesla Model XMercedes Benz C350eTesla Model SNissan LeafNissan e-NV200BMW 225xeRenault ZoeVolkswagen Golf GTEBMW i3Volvo XC-90 Twin EngineMitsubishi Outlander PHEVJaguar I-PaceHyundai IONIQ Plug-inBMW 330eSmart EQ forfourCitroen C-ZeroNot listed here051015202530354045Less than 30minutes30 minutes to 1hour1 - 2 hours2 - 3 hoursLonger than 3hours0102030405060Commuting to workShopping tripsSocial or RecreationalBusinessOtherNeverLess than once a week1-3 times a week4-6 times a weekAlways05101520253035404550Commuting to workShopping tripsSocial or RecreationalBusinessOtherMore than 45 minutesBetween 30-45 minutesBetween 15-30 minutesLess than 15 minutesNone2.2. Modeling e-mobility user demand: Greater London case study

12

(a) Home charger ownership (responses in %).

(b) Home charger type (responses in %).

Figure 2.4: Home charger access.

As a comparison, the average commute times in London is estimated to be around 1h194. More

than 40% of the respondents declared making daily trips between 30 minutes to 1 hour. When

asked about driving purpose(s), respondents indicated a diversity of reasons (Figure 2.3b), with

a predominance in terms of frequency, for social/recreational trips and shopping. These pur-

poses also correspond to the longest declared journeys (Figure 2.3c).

2.2.1.3 Charging habits characteristics

The characteristics of charging habits were qualiﬁed in terms of accessibility and management

of the charge.

Accessibility The ﬁrst set of questions focuses on the accessibility to charging stations,

which is determining to the experience of EV drivers can have. The results in Figure 2.4a show

the percentage of respondents with access to private charging. More than 90% of the surveyed

drivers declared owning a charger at home. A small percentage indicated sharing access to

home charger with a neighbour. The type of charger owned is depicted in Figure 2.4b, with

65% of the respondents owning a 7kW fast charger.

Figure 2.5 focuses on the popularity of charging location, more speciﬁcally home and work

charging. The results show where respondents declared to mostly charge their vehicle over a

period of a week. Home charging is the method used the most on a daily basis.

Figure 2.5: Popularity of charging locations (responses in %).

4https://www.tuc.org.uk/news/annual-commuting-time-21-hours-\

compared-decade-ago-finds-tuc

0102030405060708090100Yes, I own on my own.Yes, I own jointly with myneighbour(s).No, but my neighbour letme use theirs.None of the above.010203040506070Fast Charging –7kWSuper-Fast Charging –22kWI do not knowNot listed hereStandard Charging –3kW01020304050607080At homeAround my homeAt workAround my workAt random stations on my wayNeverLess than once a weekOnce a week2-3 times a week4-6 times a weekDaily2.2. Modeling e-mobility user demand: Greater London case study

13

(a) Public charger usage (responses in %).

(b) Criticality of factors affecting the use of public stations

(responses in %).

Figure 2.6: Access to public charging stations.

The next set of results in Figure 2.6 focuses on the access to public charging networks.

Figure 2.6a shows how often respondents declared to make use of a public charging station

in a week. Figure 2.6b provides insights regarding how critical a factor is for a driver to use

public charging stations (from 1 not critical to 5 highly critical). The proximity of stations to

the destination of the journey is cited as a highly critical factor by 65% of the respondents.

Availability and speed of charging are listed as the second two most important factors.

The access to public charging stations depends on whether drivers are informed about the

location of stations. Figure 2.7a shows how respondents are informed about the location of

public charging stations. For convenience, drivers tend to use the same stations (58% of the

respondents declared to use the same station most of the time). Mobile apps are reported as

the primary source of information by more than 35% of the respondents. Figure 2.7b focuses

on the importance of proximity for charging. The majority of the respondents declared to use

stations that are located less than 15 minutes walk to their destination to charge their vehicle,

and are in general reluctant to walk longer.

Charge management behaviour The second set of questions focuses on the behaviour of

drivers with respect to the management of the charge of their vehicle. Figure 2.8 shows when

respondents tend to charge and how often they recharge their vehicle on a weekly basis. In

line with the fact that home charging is identiﬁed as the predominant charging method in the

0102030405060Daily2 - 3 times per weekLess than once perweek4 - 6 times per weekOnce per week01020304050607012345Finding immediately available stationsPrice of chargingSpeed of chargingProximity to my destination2.2. Modeling e-mobility user demand: Greater London case study

14

(a) Way to locate public charging stations (responses in %).

(b) Proximity between the selected charging station and the destination (responses in

%).

Figure 2.7: Accessibility to public charging stations.

(a) Time of charge (responses in %).

(b) Frequency vehicle charging (responses in %).

Figure 2.8: Charging time and frequency.

collected responses, almost 50% of the surveyed drivers reported to mostly performed charging

at night (Figure 2.8a). The second most popular answer is the absence of a usual time. The

frequency of recharge is shown in Figure 2.8b, with the frequency of 2-3 times per week se-

lected by the largest number of respondents (30%). Interestingly, the daily and once-per-week

frequencies were choosen in almost the same proportions.

Figure 2.9 shows how respondents plan the recharge of their vehicle. While most of the re-

01020304050607080AlwaysMost of the timeSometimesRarelyNeverI drive around until I see one.I learn from other friends or drivers.I find information on websites.I use mobile apps that help me locate one.I always use the same stations.0102030405060Less than 5 minBetween 5-15 minBetween 15-30 minMore than 30 minI am not sure / I rarely useHow long are you willing to walk to your destination?How far are you usually from your destination?0102030405060In the morning(5am - 10am)During the day(10am - 4pm)In the evening(4pm - 8pm)At night (8pm -5am)I don't have ausual time05101520253035Daily4 - 6 times perweek2 - 3 times perweekOnce per weekLess than once perweek2.2. Modeling e-mobility user demand: Greater London case study

15

spondents indicated to plan the recharge most the time, responses are diverse with some drivers

never planning and some drivers always planning.

Figure 2.9: Recharge planning (responses in %).

Figure 2.10 shows the incidence of the battery level on the decision to 1) recharge and

2) stop a charge. Drivers exhibit different behaviours with respect to when they decide to

recharge their vehicle, from highly precautions-type of drivers recharging when the battery

level falls under 75% to adventurous-type of drivers waiting for the battery to run out before

recharging. Most of the respondents indicated to wait for the battery level to fall below 50%

before recharging, with the largest number of replies obtained for a battery level below 25%.

Figure 2.10b focuses on the criteria respondents tend to use for deciding when to stop a charge.

The majority of the respondents indicated to wait for the full charge to stop. This can be put

into perspective with the fact that most respondents use home charger and charge at nights. The

second most popular answer is as much time permits, which applies well in case the charge is

at intermediate stops on a journey.

The results depicted in Figure 2.11 concern charging costs. Figure 2.11a shows how much

respondents declared to spend on charging per month. Charging costs do not amount to more

than £20 a month in the large majority of cases5. Figure 2.11b shows how respondents perceive

the budget they spend on charging. For most of them, charging is not considered to constitute a

signiﬁcant budget of using an EV.

2.2.1.4 About charging service preferences

The type of services offered on the public charging network in terms of reserved time slot,

preferential charge rate, etc., can have an inﬂuence on how users access the public charging

stations.

Figure 2.12 shows the receptiveness of respondents to three charging offers: 1) priority

charging, i.e., getting priority access to a charging station, 2) reduced charge rate, and 3) a

combination of priority charging and reduced charge rate. The largest number of respondents

5More detailed questions would be needed to understand whether responses indicating a monthly budget higher

than £80 could be classiﬁed as outliers.

051015202530354045AlwaysMost of the timeSometimesRarelyNever2.2. Modeling e-mobility user demand: Greater London case study

16

(a) Criteria to recharge (responses in %).

(b) Criteria to stop a charge (responses in %).

Figure 2.10: Charge management.

(a) Monthly budget for charging (responses in %). (b) Agreement with the statement "the charging bud-

get is signiﬁcant" (responses in %)

Figure 2.11: Charging costs.

selected priority charging as their preferred offer (37%). Between the reduced charging rate

option and the combined option, a larger number of drivers declared to prefer the latter. It is to

be noted that almost 15% of the respondents indicated to neither be interested in getting priority

access nor being offered reduced charging rates.

Figure 2.12: Responsiveness to charging offers (responses in %).

Figure 2.13 focuses on the responsiveness of drivers to a reduction in the tariff of a charge

in exchange to subscribing to a charge deporting scheme, namely 1) deporting the charge in

time, i.e., the driver is asked to wait to charge (Figure 2.17a), and 2) deporting the charge

in space, i.e., the driver is redirected to a charging station that is located further away from

the destination (Figure 2.17a). The tariff’s reduction under which respondents would consider

subscribing to such a scheme is similar for both deporting options: a same proportion of around

30% of the drivers would be responsive to a reduction of either 25% and 50%.

05101520253035404550About to runout of batteryWhen below25%When below50%When below75%Other010203040506070Until it is full.As much as I have time.I do not take notice.Other0102030405060£0 - £20£21 - £40£41 - £60£61 - £80£81 - £100> £1010102030405060708090Strongly agreeSomewhat agreeNeither agree nordisagreeSomewhat disagreeStrongly disagree0510152025303540I prefer cheapercharging ratesI prefer prioritychargingI prefer them equallyNeither offer appeals tome2.2. Modeling e-mobility user demand: Greater London case study

17

(a) Deporting the charge in time (responses in %).

(b) Deporting the charge in space (responses in %).

Figure 2.13: Responsiveness to a reduction of the tariff of a charge.

Figure 2.14 focuses on the willingness of drivers to spend more time on their charge by

either accepting to delay it or being redirected to a station that is located further away from their

destination. The results show that the time acceptance is in the order of 5 to 10 minutes, beyond

which respondents tend to be less responsive to the perspective of spending more time.

Figure 2.14: Willingness to spend more time on the charge (responses in %).

Figure 2.15 shows how often drivers would be willing to accept service offers. While the

largest number of respondents indicated that they would be interested in getting such offers any

time they need to charge (35%), a non-negligible number of them declared not being interested

in getting these offers often (almost 20% only a few times per month and almost 30% only a

few times per year).

Figure 2.15: Responsiveness to the recurrence of an offer (responses in %).

Finally, Figure 2.16 and Figure 2.17 focus on the inﬂuence of the time of the day and the

weather, respectively, on the responsiveness of drivers to the deporting charging schemes.

05101520253035At least 25%At least 50%At least 75%Free chargingIt is not anoption for meI am notinterested05101520253035At least 25%At least 50%At least 75%Free chargingIt is not an optionfor meI am notinterested0510152025303540NoneLess than 5 min5 - 10 min10 - 15 min15 - 30 min> 30 minHow much further would you be willing to walk for chargingHow much would you be willing to delay your charging time0510152025303540Any time I needchargingOnly few times perweekOnly few times permonthOnly few times peryear2.2. Modeling e-mobility user demand: Greater London case study

18

(a) Deporting charging in time (responses in %).

(b) Deporting charging in space (responses in %).

Figure 2.16: Inﬂuence of the time of the day on drivers’ responsiveness to deporting charging

schemes.

(a) Deporting charging in time (responses in %).

(b) Deporting charging in space (responses in %).

Figure 2.17: Inﬂuence of the weather on drivers’ responsiveness to deporting charging schemes.

2.2.1.5 Comments on the applicability of survey results

As of March 2022, there are 768, 329 plug-in vehicles registered in the UK as opposed to

264, 486 in 2019 [12]. In terms of the public charging infrastructure, the number of connec-

tors has increased from 20, 964 in 2019 to 29, 664 [14]. The observations that can as such

be extracted from the results of the survey we carried out need to be placed in their relevant

0102030405060In the morning (5am - 10am)During the day (10am - 4pm)In the evening (4pm - 8pm)At night (8pm - 5am)NeverSometimesOftenAlways0102030405060In the morning (5am - 10am)During the day (10am - 4pm)In the evening (4pm - 8pm)At night (8pm - 5am)NeverSometimesOftenAlways0102030405060708090Clear SkyCloudyRainyWindyI would not considerI would consider0102030405060708090Clear SkyCloudyRainyWindyI would not considerI would consider2.3. Impact of the e-mobility demand on the infrastructure

19

context. In particular, the obtained sample is by its nature biased to the area (Greater London)

where results were collected and the fact that the responses mostly came from early adopters of

EVs. While the results may not be representative of the general situation in 2022, they provide

a user-focused perspective onto a service that has been rapidly developing over the last three

years.

2.2.2 Consultations with electric vehicle drivers

We complemented the insights that were obtained through the survey by running consultations

with EV drivers in Greater London. The objective of the consultations was to discuss the

experience of drivers when using the public charging infrastructure. The participants insisted

on ﬁve main aspects impairing their experience of public charging networks.

They ﬁrst reported that it was highly cumbersome to manage individual subscription to

different charging network providers. In 2019, public charging stations in the Greater London

region were operated by a dozen of providers, each requiring prospective users to subscribe to

their service in order to be able to access the stations they operate. Given that providers do

not have the same network coverage across the Greater London region, drivers are indirectly

incited to subscribe charging services from different providers, each with its own speciﬁcs. In

addition, some participants mentioned that the absence of charging network coverage in their

neighborhood was a critical factor affecting their lack of motives for using the public charging

network. They also indicated that on top of not necessarily having the option to use a close-

by public station, existing stations were often not available or functioning properly for them

to be considered as a reliable primary source of charging. The lack of a sufﬁcient number of

stations offering super-fast charging was also reported as hindering factor. Finally participants

expressed that it was not always easy to ﬁnd / locate stations and that existing applications had

shortcomings when it comes to providing quality information regarding station’s accessibility.

2.3 Impact of the e-mobility demand on the infrastructure

Different components of the e-mobility demand need to be taken into account in order to study

the impact of the demand on the public charging infrastructure. We developed a framework to

guide the estimation of these components based on the Greater London use case. The frame-

work operates at the macroscopic level. It aims at providing high-level insights on whether the

public charging infrastructure is sufﬁcient to satisfy the charging needs of the ﬂeet of EVs in a

pre-determined region.

2.3.1 Estimation of e-mobility demand components

The framework is composed of three estimation modules:

2.3. Impact of the e-mobility demand on the infrastructure

20

1. the average daily energy needs of an EV;

2. the overall daily charging needs of the ﬂeet of EVs;

3. the geographical distribution of the public charging needs.

Estimations are calculated at the granularity of a London borough. Figure 2.18 provides an

overview of the framework and its modules (orange frame rectangles on the ﬁgure). These are

used to determine if the estimated charging needs can be satisﬁed with the current infrastructure.

The output is in the form of a degree of satisfaction, i.e., percentage of EVs that can charge using

the public charging infrastructure.

Figure 2.18: Overview of the e-mobility demand estimation framework.

Estimation of the average daily energy needs of an EV To estimate the value of the

average daily energy needs of an EV, we propose a simple method. We ﬁrst determine the

average number of kilometers an EV drives on an annual basis. We do so by reporting the total

number of vehicles on the road in Greater London in a year to the total number of kilometers

driven in the region in a year. We then determine the typical energy consumption of an EV per

Average annual distance driven (per vehicle)Degree of satisfaction of public charging needAnnual driven distance in Greater LondonEstimatedfactorsOutputInfluencing factorDerived variableInput parameterEV energy consumption (make-based)Daily public charging need across boroughsTemperature, driving behaviour, range anxiety, drive train efficiency, etc.Daily charging need inGreater LondonDaily EV energy consumptionIncome, buying power, attractiveness, markets development, etc.Public charging at home locationsCharging stations in each boroughNumber of vehicles in Greater LondonPublic charging at destination locationsDestination attractiveness (shopping venues, businesshubs, schools, museums, etc.)Distribution of destination attractiveness across boroughsNumber of EVs perLondon boroughsDistribution of EVs across boroughs2.3. Impact of the e-mobility demand on the infrastructure

21

kilometer by taking into account the inﬂuence of a number of variables including the impact

of temperature on battery management, the driving behaviour, range anxiety (i.e., frequency of

a recharge) and drive train efﬁciency. We obtain the average daily energy needs of an EV by

multiplying the average number of kilometers an EV drives on an annual basis by the typical

energy consumption of an EV per kilometer, which normalises at the day level.

Estimation of the overall daily charging needs in Greater London To estimate the

overall charging needs in Greater London on a daily basis, we multiply the charging needs of

an EV by the total number of EVs on the road in the region. The latter is obtained by aggregating

the number of EVs in every borough.

Estimation of the distribution of public charging needs across Greater London’s bor-

oughs To determine the distribution of the needs in terms of public charging across the Greater

London area, we proceed by deﬁning two types of charging needs: 1) charging needs that are

satisﬁed at the home location of the EV, and 2) charging needs that are satisﬁed at the destina-

tion location of the EV, i.e., where it travels when it is driven. In both cases, we estimate the

distribution of the charging needs at the borough level. For home locations, we assume that the

more EVs in a borough, the higher the public charging demand in that borough. The rational

is that as the number of EVs increases, the reliance on public charging stations also increases

(not all drivers can have access to private chargers). We thus report the distribution of EVs

across boroughs to the total number of EVs to estimate the charging needs at home locations.

For destination locations, we identify key points of interest in the city such as supermarkets,

business hubs, health centers, etc. and weight the charging needs in a borough to the number of

points of interest in that borough (i.e., borough’s attractiveness) such as the larger the number of

points of interest, the higher the demand. The distribution of the charging needs in Greater Lon-

don is estimated by combining the estimation of the needs at home locations and at destination

locations.

To estimate whether charging needs can be satisﬁed by the public charging infrastructure,

we simply compare the estimated charging needs in every borough to the charging load that can

be supported by public charging stations.

2.3.2 Discussion

The proposed estimation methods build upon a number of simplifying assumptions. It is ﬁrst

assumed that it is possible to deﬁne a typical EV, and hence calculate a representative EV

energy consumption proﬁle. In practice this depends on the make of the vehicle and a number

of exogenous factors such as the driving style of the user, the topology of the roads, and the

weather conditions. This necessitates to develop not a typical EV but instead a set of typical

2.3. Impact of the e-mobility demand on the infrastructure

22

EV behaviours. In addition, the estimation considers that the overall vehicle’s miles in an area

are equally split between the number of EVs. In practice journey proﬁles are needed to be

representative of differences in how the vehicle is used. Finally, the framework equally weights

the attractiveness of the points of interest in a local area (borough here). In practice this needs

to be adapted based on actual popularity of destinations that can be determined by consulting

drivers. The framework can easily be extended to accommodate updated assumptions, and

hence estimation methods.

Section 3

Added value e-charging services: incentives

and collaboration models

3.1 Accommodating e-charging services through incentives

Policymakers have been deploying different policy measures to promote the acceptance of EVs.

As a result, the adoption of EVs has been exponentially rising since 2010 with decreasing cost

of producing batteries and growing awareness of public grants for ultra-low-emission vehicles

among the contributing factors [15]. An earlier switch by combustion-vehicle drivers (to a less

polluting mode) has the value of preventing emissions cumulatively over time. The ability of

building an adequate and user-friendly e-Mobility infrastructure is a key part of getting people

to switch to more sustainable transportation modes. In that direction, incentives can help with

promoting e-Mobility further.

3.1.1 How can incentives help?

Promoting user behavior that improves overall system effectiveness and convenience [16] re-

quires not only monetary incentives and disincentives, but also identifying which factors drivers

value, taking advantage of these preferences through “push and pull” measures. Both incentives

and disincentives have strengths and weaknesses: disincentives (e.g., taxes, ﬁnes) come with the

associated expense of enforcement, whereas incentives (e.g., rewards, prizes) imply the cost of

rewarding participants per action taken. Thus, whereas incentives become more expensive to

administer as they grow, for disincentives the opposite is usually true.

To investigate the beneﬁts and impacts of such policy scenarios to encourage EV use is

crucial before implementing new schemes in real-world. The results of such an analysis can

on one hand provide insights on the feasibility of these schemes and on the other hand serve to

develop guidance for policymakers on the incentives and disincentives that have the potential

to be cost-effective, enabling informed decision-making and saving resources.

3.1. Accommodating e-charging services through incentives

24

e-Mobility users can be encouraged to do something either by making it cheaper, easier

or more socially rewarding (other signals may exist), and for each user the intensity of each

of these signals required to induce action varies. This means that to determine how sensitive

users are to each of these nudges makes it possible to send the right signal (or combination

thereof) of the right strength on an individual basis or to groups (as deﬁned according to some

external characteristic, e.g., EV ownership or level of energy consumption). Additionally, it is

also possible to inﬂuence behaviour by using the opposite signals, making anti-social behaviour

more costly, more difﬁcult, or more socially unfavourable, as it is entirely possible that the

sensitivity of users to positive and negative nudges is not perfectly symmetrical, but rather, that

they are more susceptible to one or the other.

3.1.2 Incentives and charging schemes

We review three forms of charging schemes that different incentives can support, speciﬁcally

reserved parking for EVs, queuing for charging and charging network operator roaming. An

overview of the schemes are given in Table 3.1.

Table 3.1: Incentives and charging schemes

Scheme

Reserved Parking

Queuing for Charging

Operator Roaming

name

Description

Reserving on-street park-

Queuing physically or vir-

Allowing

inter-charging

ing near charging stations

tually for public charging

network access

to any

for EV only

stations

service subscriber

Mitigation

Anxiety around charging

Anxiety around charging

Anxiety around on-route

aim

space

availability

charging

User incen-

To leave the vehicle near a

To plan a journey by

To get access to a larger

tive

station and start automat-

making

advanced

ar-

number

(ideally all) of

ically charging when pre-

rangements for charging

charging points on a jour-

vious charge terminates.

stations.

ney.

Reserved Parking The idea behind this scheme is to reduce the anxiety associated with the

availability of charging stations by allowing the reservation of parking near charging stations

exclusively for EVs (e.g., [17]). Such exclusively available parking makes it possible for a

driver to leave the car near a station and move it later on for charging, or if and when technically

possible, connect to a charging station currently in use via an extension cord that can then supply

power when the previous user is done charging. This arrangement also allows equipment able

3.1. Accommodating e-charging services through incentives

25

to connect one station to a number of cars for distributed overnight charging.

Queuing for Charging The rational for this charging scheme is to improve the utilisation

of chargers by setting up time-slots for advance booking (e.g., [18]). Not only does this prevent

drivers from making trips to chargers without knowing if they are available, it is also a way for

recording future demand on a short time basis (e.g., minutes), which is useful for managing the

operation of the charging network. Reservations can be made with different levels of economic

commitment (i.e. so called hard or soft reservations). The disadvantages for operators to imple-

ment such an approach is minimal as reservations can come with an expiry time, and a simple

cap on booking cost can prevent users from being priced out.

Another approach is to implement a queuing system, for instance with mobile alerts when

the charging station becomes free. The challenge with queuing is that drivers cannot be expected

to stay by their vehicles while they wait their turn to charge. For them to perceive queuing as

beneﬁcial they might have to know how many people are ahead of them in the queue. Many

factors need to be combined to deﬁne the cost of implementing a queuing approach and whether

this can achieved through software, hardware, and with support from a website or an app. In

addition to preventing congestion and energy expenditure of drivers searching for charging,

managing queues offers the advantages of allowing better predictions of congestion and elec-

tricity grid-loading based on time and place and, of providing a platform for affecting time of

charge to make demand as constant as possible.

The implementation of a queuing approach depends on where the reservations are made

(either online or at the charging station), the ﬂexibility of the commitment (hard or soft reser-

vations) and the strength of the price signal, e.g., hard reservations might have to price out the

possibility of users exploiting the service. The core idea is that by recording charging instances

and requests on a platform, both drivers’ use of infrastructure, and managers’ operation of the

infrastructure can be improved, adapting the network to particularly stressed areas.

Operator Roaming The current state of the public charging network coverage at the

national and international levels is fragmented, with operators of these networks mostly com-

peting at local and regional levels, and several actors -generally energy providers or petrol

stations- offering charging at petrol stations on motorways. This is a limitation for autonomy

of EV drivers outside of their home energy networks. As EV uptake grows, EV drivers wishing

to travel longer distances are likely to select charging operators providing wider coverage,

naturally leading to network consolidation (e.g., through initiatives such as EV Roam in the UK

or evRoaming4EU in the EU). In the current context where users remain atomized, an initial

approach is a platform where users of different charging networks connect to offer each other

3.2. Reversible charging strategies - Vehicle to Grid integration

26

access through their subscriptions (in exchange for credits). Another approach is to enable

national and international collaboration in order to bring about incentives for network operators

of varying scales to coalesce or to enable roaming [19][20], for instance by allowing members

of other networks access to charging for a small surcharge, as done today in the context of

mobile communications. This can simplify charging on the users’ side and hence contribute

to bolstering EV adoption [21][22]. The objective is to implement a system wherein access to

as many charging points as possible can be made as simple as possible both for current and

prospective EV users.

3.2 Reversible charging strategies - Vehicle to Grid integration

In an effort to tackle climate change, the share of intermittent renewable energies in the energy

mix is increasing while the transportation sector is undergoing electriﬁcation. The incorpora-

tion of millions of EVs on the road is however feared to create extra tension on the electricity

network. The increasing share of intermittent renewable electricity sources to replace dispatch-

able conventional power plants already makes constant balancing between supply and demand

of electricity a challenging task, while the lower load factor of renewables and the higher elec-

tricity demand call for the reinforcement of the electricity network [23]. The smart integration

of electric vehicles is therefore crucial.

As ﬂexible electricity storage systems, the batteries of a large EV ﬂeet have the potential

to provide ancillary services to the electricity network and help incorporate more renewable

energy sources. The combination of smart charging and vehicle-to-grid (V2G) schemes can

offer a dynamic and environmental solution to meet the growing demand and reduce the need

for grid reinforcement [23]. The large scale implementation of these mechanisms raise however

signiﬁcant technical and socio-economic challenges, especially in terms of demonstrating that

these approaches work well in real-life scenarios when taking into account grid limitations,

battery degradation, market characteristics and individual behaviours.

3.2.1 Smart charging and V2G integration - some deﬁnitions

Smart charging refers to the ability of consumers or the grid operator to delay the recharging of

electric vehicles away from times of high demand. While most car owners will typically plug

in their cars right after getting home from work, smart charging allows the activity to be spread

out over the whole night rather than concentrate it at the end of the day, thus, effectively shaving

demand peaks [24].

V2G operations refer to an upper-level integration of the network, where V2G-enabled

3.2. Reversible charging strategies - Vehicle to Grid integration

27

electric vehicles can inject electricity into the grid at a period of high demand and/or low gen-

eration. Such scheme can help ﬂattening the demand curve, hence reducing the capital costs

needed to reinforce the network, and aid with frequency regulation by reducing the need for

renewable output curtailment [25]. From the consumer side, as participants in V2G operations

would be paid, the service can incentivise EV ownership and subsequently help further reduce

greenhouse gas emissions in transport.

3.2.2 Technology and infrastructure requirements

V2G operation is based on a bidirectional concept, under which only minor changes to the EV

design is needed to include several smart electronic devices. Two main connections are required

to enable V2G operations. The ﬁrst one is the power connection to deliver the energy, from and

to the vehicle. The second one is control and logic connections to signal the power demand and

the power ﬂow direction [26]. On-board reversible battery charger can satisfy this function.

A prototype of an on-board bidirectional battery charger is presented by Pinto et al.

in

[27]. It uses two power converters that share a DC link: (1) the full-bridge AC-DC bidirectional

converter that interfaces the power grid and (2) a reversible DC-DC converter that interfaces the

batteries. During the V2G mode of operation, the full-bridge AC-DC bidirectional converter

functions as an inverter to convert DC to AC. Synchronization between the converter and the

power grid fundamental voltage is required so that the system can work based on the current

standards. This is achieved by implementing some logic in a digital controller and determining

the reference current that is needed to produce the reference voltage.

In order to make the

energy ﬂows back from batteries to the grid, the voltage needs to be higher than the power

grid voltage in the peak value. Therefore, the DC-DC converter acts as a step-up converter to

raise the voltage magnitude. The work provides a proof-of-concept in simulation but in practice,

adjustment to the design of the power converter are required for the technology to be seamlessly

integrated within an EV and widely accepted to allow a large deployment.

Most current studies on V2G service build upon the assumption of a large global communi-

cations system, which does not exist in today’s grid infrastructure. V2G operations extensively

depend on the nature of the charging infrastructure. In particular, better information privacy

guarantees and scalability can be achieved with a decentralised charging infrastructure but at

the cost of higher management complexity of the grid. In contrast, EVs aggregated on cen-

talised public charging stations can ease operations but to the extent of the convenience and

privacy of individual vehicle owners.

Aggregators are likely to become essential actors in that picture as they would allow the

exchange of both information and electricity. They could ensure as well that the interests of all

3.2. Reversible charging strategies - Vehicle to Grid integration

28

Table 3.2: Objectives and V2G methods (based on [31]).

Objective

Method

Price

Tariffs and operation and consumer costs control [29, 30, 32]

GHG Emissions

Renewable penetration [28]

Energy losses

Distribution network efﬁciency [28]

Load ﬂattening

Valley ﬁlling

Peak shaving [29]

Load shifting [28]

Frequency regulation [29]

Service quality

Voltage regulation

Load factor

Active power

Reactive power

stakeholders are met when optimising charging and providing ancillary services.

3.2.3 Overview of proposed V2G strategies

A key challenge for the implementation of V2G is the operation of the power grid at the dis-

tribution level. Many studies that have been conducted to probe the feasibility of V2G, do so

under speciﬁc assumptions and parameter settings. In addition, efforts reported in the literature

have been investigating various types of objectives that a V2G strategy can follow. For example,

some studies focus on the implications of V2G if implemented country-wide [28] by investigat-

ing the total demand and total generation capacity limitations. Others focus on optimising for

speciﬁc grid distribution networks [29] or go beyond typical optimisation objectives such as the

minimisation of costs and carbon emissions to discuss the effects of consumer behaviour based

on perceptions of V2G technology [30].

Table 3.2 and Table 3.3 provide an overview of the main objectives and methods proposed

in the literature for the implementation of V2G strategies. Today’s most comprehensive models

incorporate grid, battery, market and population considerations to investigate the potential of

these strategies.

3.2.4 Technical and business limitations

In spite of positive evidence supporting the technological feasibility of V2G, there are still

multiple challenges to overcome in order to reach market maturity.

3.2. Reversible charging strategies - Vehicle to Grid integration

29

Table 3.3: Main technological, economic and social factors of V2G per category

Category

Factors

Grid

Battery

Current and voltage limits [29]

Transformer limits

State of Charge (SOC) [28, 29, 32]

Desired SOC [29, 30, 32]

Battery constraints [32]

Battery degradation [32]

Day-ahead prices

Market

Real time prices [29]

Reserve capacity prices [28, 29]

Population

Homogeneous [28]

Heterogeneous

Collection, storage, analysis [30, 32]

Data

Privacy [30]

User interface [32]

First of all, while battery modelling studies suggest that V2G operations could involve

higher battery degradation rates, it is not highly distinct from what is expected with uncon-

trolled charging mechanisms. As such, solutions such as peak shaving, frequency regulation

and net load shaving do have a practical feasibility [33]. For load shifting to be proﬁtable, how-

ever, the cost of degradation or the cost of the batteries themselves need to be reduced [34].

The implementation of algorithmic intelligence within smart grids and of Battery Management

Systems (BMSes) can enable V2G services to extend the life span of batteries [35] and spread

the discharging cycles along the EV population to allow a maximum of 20 discharges per year

[33]. In addition, manufacturers are likely to adjust their production to the suitable lithium iron

phosphate batteries, which have been proven to be the most adequate for V2G [31] [36].

A better understanding of the behaviour of batteries in V2G operations can help design

incentives that encourage owners to participate in V2G and thus resolve potential network con-

gestion. A possible strategy could be based on the level of battery degradation, by which the

money stream would be redistributed as function of the expected marginal generation cost to

redispatch the energy. For instance, using rough estimates, Staudt et al. [28] evaluated that EV

owners would need to be paid at least 4.12 euros per MWh injected into the grid.

3.2. Reversible charging strategies - Vehicle to Grid integration

30

Another challenge of applying V2G in a large scale is data collection and vehicle manage-

ment. Strbac et al. [37] investigate the implementation of a central management, termed as an

“aggregator”, in charge of collecting the vehicle and grid data and balancing the electricity ﬂow

via communication with EV consumers and the national grid. Interfaces between the system

operators necessitate accurate electricity price prediction that can be obtained with learning-

based approaches [38]. This does however require the availability of large volumes of data in

real time. To handle this large amount of data, it is suggested that all EV are connected to a

common cloud [32], which enables both the EV owner to maximise proﬁt from V2G connection

and the aggregator to manage the charging/discharging schedule.

Section 4

Connected and automated mobility: security

and data protection

The Internet of Things (IoT) has enabled the development of the Internet of Vehicles (IoV). A

connected vehicle utilises a variety of sensors to monitor and map the surrounding environment,

to identify speed and distances and to communicate with other vehicles and share information.

These processes accumulate substantial amounts of data. With the aim of engineering safer,

smarter and more reliable vehicles, the data are processed and shared with the manufacturer to

help improve vehicular operation algorithms. Data is also shared with the connected infrastruc-

ture that supports road mobility and parking.

4.1 Impact of new security standards for connected and automated

cars

The digitisation of the infrastructure inside and around transports enables new business models

in the mobility sector and enhances the utility for the end users whilst incentivising the shift

away from fossil fuels. Despite the clear beneﬁts to the users, the transport sector and the nation

as a whole in terms of increased service availability and comfort, reduced cost, job creation and

sustainability, the challenges that need to be tackled to protect this critical digital infrastructure

against cyber-threats can be overlooked. As we build those new services of the future, safety

and security must be considered by design rather than included as an afterthought. This is not

an easy task to achieve given the complexity of the systems involved and the heterogeneity of

the devices that need to be interconnected to enable new valuable services to customers.

4.1.1 Challenges for future vehicle connectivity and data security

Whilst most modern day vehicles support internal networks of electronic control units with con-

trol over vehicular function, the level of connectivity associated with the shift of connected and

automated vehicles to the mainstream is unprecedented [39]. The rise of Electric Vehicle Cloud

4.1. Impact of new security standards for connected and automated cars

32

and Edge Computing (EVCE) provides an attractive opportunity for companies to reduce pres-

sure on central cloud computing power and enables local aggregation of vehicle’s data to ensure

anonymity at the cloud processing level [40]. However, by expanding the computing power to

the edge, to the connected vehicles, it is increasing the system surface area vulnerable to attack.

All of the network participants must be protected against attack, as well as the cloud system, or

large amounts of data could be leaked to one network vehicle being compromised [41].

Greater levels of vehicle’s connection to home smart systems also raise security challenges.

Any smart device on the home network can fall to a malicious attack and consequentially affect

all other devices, including connected vehicles [42]. Malware could then be transmitted to

other networks, such as public charging networks, impacting the conﬁdentiality and integrity of

information exchanged.

A prominent feature of EVCE computing models is the increased vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V)

communications which enables information, such as trafﬁc and road environment conditions, to

be shared. This information is reliant on vehicle spatio-temporal data for processing, deﬁned as

sensitive data. As stated previously, with a greater number of network nodes, the vulnerability to

attack does increase if one node/vehicle is compromised. Protecting this information whilst also

ensuring traceability of interactions to reduce risk of unnoticed malicious manipulation presents

a security trade off problem. Research into the use of blockchain as a remedy is ongoing [40].

Compromise of the V2V system can lead to jamming or denial-of-service attacks where

essential information exchanges are rendered unable to occur, impacting data availability. Ex-

changes range from sensor information and trafﬁc updates to the electronic control units within

the vehicle and ability to report issues to the central cloud server. False data injections into the

V2V system are also a concern as they may mislead drivers about battery levels or temperature

which can be transmitted back to the central system and impact its predictive and decision rec-

ommendation abilities [43]. Deployment of 5G and the introduction of new encryption methods

provide opportunities to ensure better security of communications between the vehicle, sensors,

and the network which are achieved via cellular, satellite and WiFi services [44, 45].

Finally, the increase of connected vehicles in the mainstream could see a rise in phishing

and malicious software downloads. Software and ﬁrmware updates should come from trusted

sources to avoid malicious software being downloaded, infecting the network and resulting in

system data leaks [39]. This is an example of targeting the human factor in the connected and

automated mobility ecosystem, and car’s companies need to be careful to warn customers of

such risks and produce plans to mitigate the impact of one vehicle being affected to the system.

4.1. Impact of new security standards for connected and automated cars

33

4.1.2 Why are standards and regulations needed ?

4.1.2.1 Software vulnerabilities

It is estimated that it takes 100 million lines of code to get a modern vehicle rolling [46]. Com-

mercial software typically has 15 to 50 bugs per 1, 000 lines of code [47]. A rough estimation

using these numbers point to the existence of hundreds of thousands of potential vulnerabili-

ties, some benign others more critical, waiting to be found and exploited by a malicious actor.

Increased connectivity in the transport infrastructure facilitates access to and exploitation of

those vulnerabilities. The digitisation of the transport ecosystem increases the likelihood of

occurrence of a cyber incident that could disrupt major services with potentially tragic conse-

quences in terms of loss of life or environmental damage along with serious economic losses.

Ironically, these are the very outcomes that the digitisation of transport infrastructure is set to

prevent. A report by Upstream [48], a leading automotive cybersecurity ﬁrm, shows that over

the period 2010-2020, 49.3% of attacks that the ﬁrm analysed were due to black hat hackers

versus 45.8% from white hat hackers1. In 2020, 54.6% of incidents were attacks by black-hat

hackers, which hints at a steady increase in the number of attacks from malicious actors. More

concerning is that almost 80% of the attacks analysed between 2010 and 2020 were performed

remotely through WiFi, Bluetooth 3/4/5G, etc. Although less prominent, physical attacks are

also a major concern that requires attention, especially as we move towards car sharing type

of services. The next customer to use a vehicle should be able to assess with certainty that the

vehicle was not compromised in any way by the previous customer.

4.1.2.2 A complex ecosystem

Securing connected vehicles and the transport infrastructure around it is made even more chal-

lenging due to the fragmented and complex supply ecosystem that is relied upon by this in-

dustry. Vulnerabilities in the products delivered by Tier-1/Tier 2 suppliers to OEMs (Original

Equipment Manufacturer) can be exploited to gain control of a vehicle. For example in May

2020 a vulnerability in ARMv7 implementation of GNU C library allowed hackers to perform

remote code execution on a connected vehicle [49]. These types of vulnerabilities can affect

multiple vendors as the same systems are often used by different OEMs in their respective lines

of products. In addition to the vulnerabilities present in the software of the vehicle itself it is

also crucial to pay attention to the infrastructure around the vehicle, be it the ﬂeet management

servers or the increasingly smart trafﬁc management systems that are moving towards higher

integration with the vehicles systems by providing real time information to the vehicles’ deci-

1The term Black hat hackers denotes hackers with malicious intentions whereas White hat hackers are usually

security researchers rewarded for reporting security vulnerabilities to the company issuing a given product.

4.1. Impact of new security standards for connected and automated cars

34

sion making units. A scenario whereby a compromised road sensor is used to disrupt trafﬁc is

not in the realm of science ﬁction. Such disruptions can also be experienced with human drivers

faced with a dysfunctional trafﬁc light. It is easy to extrapolate what would happen if automated

systems were made to rely on fraudulent data. In [50] Ghena et al. analyse a networked traf-

ﬁc system deployed in the US. They successfully identify and exploit vulnerabilities that they

further use to gain control of the trafﬁc infrastructure. In the future of Intelligent Transport Sys-

tems (ITS) this type of vulnerabilities can cause massive disruptions. These examples constitute

evidence that this is a critical national security matter.

4.1.2.3 Privacy concerns

Coupled to the security concerns previously mentioned are the data privacy concerns that come

with any form of digitised platform. Questions remain unanswered regarding the ownership,

custody and exploitation of the data produced by the various devices connected to the transport

network and their interaction with members of the public. Important questions arise from the

availability and use of data related to passengers travel habits. Hahn et al. deﬁne seven types of

privacy of which privacy of behaviour and privacy of location and space are clearly threatened

by advances in ITS [51]. Although data privacy regulations such as the General Data Protection

Regulation (GDPR) framework (see Section 4.2.2) are now becoming widely implemented, it

is still a challenge to understand how these can effectively be applied in a context where public

data is not necessarily in the hands of a centralised entity but rather accessible to the masses.

4.1.3 Steps taken to mitigate cyber risks

Given the safety risk posed by cyber security issues in the transport industry, regulators have

come together to provide speciﬁc legal requirements and standards that will hopefully drive the

entire industry towards the cyber security best practices.

The UNECE World Forum for Harmonisation of Vehicle Regulations (WP.29) [52] has

produced new regulations focusing on cyber security and Over-The-Air (OTA) software up-

dates in the context of road vehicles. This regulation requires OEMs to build certiﬁed Cyber

Security Management Systems (CSMS) and provides guidance as to the implementation of such

a system. For example a CSMS must be risk-based, i.e., it needs to take into account the speciﬁc

risks of the systems built by the OEM. This is to avoid OEMs to adopt a checkbox approach

to security and purchase blanket security solutions from vendors irrespective of their systems

architecture. This CSMS must also be audited by a third party for compliance with the regu-

lation. This regulation is successful if it incentivises OEMs to consider cyber security in the

design phase of their product lifecycle. Additionally, OEMs are required to implement detec-

4.2. Implications of legal frameworks on connected and automated mobility

35

tion and prevention mechanisms similar to Intrusion Detection/Prevention Systems (IDS/IPS)

common in IT infrastructure. These IDS/IPSes need to be speciﬁc to the context of road vehi-

cles (e.g., IDS system developed by Abba-IoT [53]) . Emphasis is also put on the capability to

perform forensics analysis post incidents. This is to inform a better design of security systems

and a continuous progress towards increased security.

In addition to regulations, new standards have been released to help OEMs comply with the

new regulations such as ISO/SAE 21 434 on Cyber security for Road Vehicles. This standard

serves as a reference implementation of the UNECE regulation. It is however encouraged that

OEMs do not view it as a checklist for their security analysis but as a methodology to design

their CSMS based on their own speciﬁc risks.

4.1.4

Indirect impact of the regulation and standards

The formulation of regulations and standards for cyber security in the automotive sector is an

important development because it compels OEMs to consider cyber security from the design

phase of their product and to adopt the best practices to ensure that safe products are delivered

to the customer. Although a limitation of this regulation is that it does not apply directly to the

OEMs suppliers, the regulatory pressure felt by the OEMs can be passed down to the entire

supply chain and incentivise them to adopt higher standards and practices when it comes to

cyber security. Another indirect consequence of the UNECE regulation is in stimulating the

industry to develop capabilities that are key in dealing with cyber vulnerabilities. This includes

the building of innovative solutions, for example for IDS/IPS, that are not only a copy and paste

of IT versions but that takes into consideration the unique aspect of cyber-physical systems. It

also involves training specialists that understand the idiosyncrasies of transport technology, the

risks, environment and interconnection with the IT world. This might prove to be a challenge in

the short term as there is already an important skill shortage of technical cyber security experts

but only by making cyber security a priority can this issue be resolved in the long term.

4.2 Implications of legal frameworks on connected and automated

mobility

A connected vehicle is able to process up to 19 Tb of data per hour [54]. This leads to a tremen-

dous amount of collected information. In Europe, how this data can be handled, stored and

shared is constrained by the GDPR [55], a framework that aims to protect the data of individ-

uals. For instance, Tesla, which has vehicles operating a series of highly complex algorithms

to gather data, have recently experienced allegations concerning how the data are handled [56].

Regulation for Tesla’s vehicles are set under speciﬁc US state laws and do not necessarily com-

4.2. Implications of legal frameworks on connected and automated mobility

36

ply with the European GDPR. Hence, when these vehicles are on European ground, there are

risks of regulatory non-compliance.

4.2.1 What type of data is being collected?

A connected vehicle, as a part of the Internet of Vehicles, is a highly computerised machine;

a vehicle that interconnects with the surrounding environment through a complex, integrated

network [57]. The vehicle is reliant upon interpreting data to be able to connect and commu-

nicate with other vehicles, sensors, charging points, and road infrastructure. The result of this

is that a substantial amount of data are being continuously gathered, ranging from 1.4 Tb up

to 19 Tb per hour [54]. Data are gathered speciﬁcally through camera and radar technology.

Central to these collection processes is the constant access ability to big data. Data from sen-

sors are directed to a controlling unit within the vehicle that processes and handles information

required for maintaining vehicular operations [58]. The data can be shared to other connected

vehicles or sensors through the concept of V2X, acting essentially as the link the vehicle has

to its surrounding environment at any given time [59]. This process is typically done through

an intra-vehicular wireless sensor network [60], with the main purpose of identifying potential

dangerous situations [57], and to improve the autonomous algorithm.

A substantial amount of data are continuously gathered via the multiple vehicular sensors

with autonomous driving features. This data range is highlighted in Table 4.1 and includes how

the data from each source is handled via cellular, WiFi or satellite.

4.2.2 The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) framework

4.2.2.1 A short history of the GDPR

"Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspon-

dence." - European Convention on Human Rights. In Europe, the right to privacy was initially

covered in the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights [61]. The emergence of the Internet

led to the establishment of the European Data Protection Directive in 1995 [62] that primarily

focused on setting minimum data privacy and security standards to be implemented by each

member state. The evolution of technology and the transition to a digital era highlighted the

importance of more stringent laws to protect a vulnerable population from data collecting enti-

ties who, in numerous instances [63], unfairly capitalise on personal data for commercial and/or

political purposes.

In light of this, the European Union (EU) created the General Data Protection Regulation

(GDPR) in 2016, implemented in May 2018, to replace an obsolete Data Protection Directive

[64]. The new regulation provided "A comprehensive approach on personal data protection" ﬁt

4.2. Implications of legal frameworks on connected and automated mobility

37

Table 4.1: Connected vehicle’s data source and handling

for the time; it imposes obligations on all EU operating organisations to legally collect, process,

store, and protect all EU residents’ personal data [55]. The regulation deﬁned personal data

beyond an individual’s name, contact details and location to include IP address, race, sexual

orientation, political opinions, religious beliefs, biometric data, etc [55]; increasing people’s

privacy rights. It is deﬁned as the most rigid privacy, and security law in the world [62].

4.2.2.2 Context of the GDPR

The GDPR is composed of 7 guiding principles including:

lawfulness, fairness and trans-

parency; purpose limitation; data minimisation; accuracy; storage limitation; integrity and con-

ﬁdentiality (security); and accountability [62].

If any of the above mentioned principles are infringed, the organisation receives a ﬁne of

20 million euros or 4% total annual turnover (whichever is the higher amount). In enforcing the

GDPR, companies such as Google and British Airways have been ﬁned 50 million euros for an

insufﬁcient legal basis for data processing and 20 million euros for insufﬁcient organisational

4.2. Implications of legal frameworks on connected and automated mobility

38

and technical measures to ensure information security respectively [65, 66].

4.2.2.3 GDPR, EVs and connected cars

IoT is enabling the transport sector to innovate and increase in complexity by shifting from

a hardware to a software focus. As a consequence, the legal frameworks necessary to ensure

a fair, equitable and inclusive transition to Intelligent Transport Systems [67] are evolving to

include data protection and cyber security [68]. The primary objective of transport regulations is

road safety, which requires "accessibility, exchange and re-use" of speciﬁc trafﬁc and road data

as per the Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/962 [69]. The incorporation of GDPR in national

legislation may present challenges for transport policy innovation, an issue already highlighted

by the legal battles and ﬁnes encountered by novel mobility services such as Uber. Provisions

for the management and protection of Autonomous and Connected Vehicles data (AVs and CVs)

are still at the initial stages across EU countries [68] though national and transnational progress

has been made through the use of regulatory sandboxes ("Living Labs") [70].

Tesla, founded in 2003, is a pioneer in the commercialisation of electric vehicles [71], with

its Model 3 being the highest selling plug-in car in the UK in 2020 [72]. However, data handling

in Tesla vehicles such as the Model 3 has been found to breach Art. 5(1)(b), Art. 13 and Art.

14 of the GDPR due to the lack of speciﬁcation in the purposes of the data processing [56] as

well as transfer of user data to locations outside the EU. The continuous video and ultrasonic

monitoring that enable Sentry Mode [73] and facilitate driving, present signiﬁcant concerns

for data protection and would need to be disabled on EU member state roads to comply with

GDPR.

4.2.3 Data privacy characteristics

Most of the data collected through the sensors of a connected car lie within the GDPR deﬁnition

of personal data [55]. The GDPR obligates vendors to obtain the vehicle owner’s consent before

collecting, processing and storing any data because of its potential sensitivity. Sensitive data,

which is the majority of personal data, is deﬁned as classiﬁed data that must be protected and

remain inaccessible to outside parties unless the owner of the data grants permission [74]. In

the case of Tesla’s cars, for instance, these include ﬁnancial information, racial or ethnic origin,

health-related data, religious beliefs and political opinions, which are directly collected or could

potentially be inferred from the collected data. While easily amendable, it is worth noting that

Tesla’s terms and conditions have been spotlighted as an issue as it does not explicitly state the

reason for data collection [56].

While trying to improve their self-driving options, car manufacturers face an additional

4.2. Implications of legal frameworks on connected and automated mobility

39

challenge as the built-in cameras used to collect data for training their neural networks also

record non-consenting individuals’ data (biometrics and vehicle details). Tesla vehicles for

instance have been regarded as "surveillance machines" in Germany, where they have received

continuous backlash [56].

Table 4.2: Risk of data handling from source

While all personal data can be deﬁned as sensitive, the degree of sensitivity differs as

not all data is created equal, and the legal ramiﬁcations as a direct result of a breach differ

between data types. Therefore, it is imperative for vehicle’s vendors to assess the varying

degree of sensitivity of the data collected to be able to comply with the GDPR’s data protection

obligations. We focus on Conﬁdentiality, Integrity and Availability (CIA) properties of a data

source to deﬁne the level of data sensitivity in the case of connected and automated cars.

• Conﬁdentiality is about protecting data against unauthorised access, disclosure, or theft

and is directly linked to information privacy [75]. Information with low conﬁdentiality

concerns may be considered less threatening if exposed beyond its intended audience,

while one with high conﬁdentiality concerns is considered private and must be protected

against malicious intents [76].

• Integrity assesses protection of data exchange and data storage against improper modiﬁ-

4.2. Implications of legal frameworks on connected and automated mobility

40

cations or destruction [75].

• Availability [75] is about ensuring a timely, continuous and reliable exchange and use of

data.

In Table 4.2 we qualitatively assess the potential impact on the operations, assets, and

reputation of a vendor if there was to be a conﬁdentiality, integrity or availability violation. The

sensitivity of the data is directly related to the potential impact level, with low impact indicating

a low sensitivity. As highlighted in the table, in the context of the GDPR, conﬁdentiality,

integrity, and availability are crucial properties that vendors need to comply with when handling

data.

4.2.4 Discussion

Connected and automated vehicles often have an interactive interface that presents conditions

requiring consent for vehicle operation and safety. The data that the vehicle collects can not be

processed without the consent of the driver. However, obtaining consent via this interface can

be inﬂuenced by software design [77]. A driver might agree to terms and conditions without

understanding the legal implications which follow, or be presented with an unnecessarily long

policy which most drivers will not read in full. Consequently, the driver may not comprehend

what data is collected.

In the case of Tesla, a video surveillance protection system called Sentry Mode is used to

detect movement outside the vehicle. This is incompatible with the current GDPR regulation as

the lightly triggered cameras record passers-by and stores the footage for a while even without

a determined threat. This footage captures sensitive personal data such as people’s faces and

license plate numbers without consent, breaching data privacy. This presents an issue where the

automatic camera recording is necessary for Sentry Mode’s protection system. It is however

heavily conﬂicting with the GDPR and non-negotiable because it is at the cost of the data

subjects that have not given consent.

It is also the responsibility of the company to comply with the information requirements

of Article 12 of the GDPR [55] which include an indication of the purpose for data collected,

those responsible for the handling and processing of the data and the rights of the data sub-

ject/user. Tesla is for instance accused of vaguely and unsatisfactorily addressing these formal-

ities. Through technical and legal measures such as the above-mentioned in the sentry mode

instance and a Data Protection Impact Assessment may provide good solutions for GDPR com-

pliance for vehicle’s manufacturer. Another potential problem is whether users are able to

request for their data not to be used for instance to improve the performance of the company’s

4.3. Concluding remarks

41

algorithms, e.g., using data on drivers’ hand placements to improve data sets and user experi-

ence.

4.3 Concluding remarks

Connected and autonomous vehicles are only the logical next step in the evolution of transport,

it comes with a vision of a future where transports are more sustainable, more efﬁcient, more

comfortable and safer. To realise this vision it has become urgent to overcome the hurdle

of cyber security so that this future does not turn into a dystopia where the entire transport

infrastructure of a country is grounded to a halt or lives are put at risk by malicious actors.

The new standards and regulations developed speciﬁcally around cyber security in transports

are leading the way to a brighter future by changing cyber security from being an afterthought

to becoming part of the design process of a vehicle. Now is the right time to act before the

infrastructure is built to incorporate security by design and develop the tools and competences

necessary to produce and maintain secure systems. It will be important to see in the coming

years how the automotive sector has responded to these new rules and hopefully gone above

and beyond the basic requirements.

Bibliography

[1] J. Obstfeld. Global engineering: Enabling a connected transport future. Cisco Blogs,

2019. https://blogs.cisco.com/sp/connectedcar-thedrivenhour-wp - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[2] Marina Ferrara, Carlo Liberto, Marialisa Nigro, Martina Trojani, and Gaetano Valenti.

Multimodal choice model for e-mobility scenarios. Transportation Research Procedia,

37:409–416, 2019.

[3] Woosuk Yang. A user-choice model for locating congested fast charging stations. Trans-

portation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 110:189–213, 2018.

[4] Milan Straka, Pasquale De Falco, Gabriella Ferruzzi, Daniela Proto, Gijs Van Der Poel,

Shahab Khormali, and Luboš Buzna. Predicting popularity of electric vehicle charging

infrastructure in urban context. IEEE Access, 8:11315–11327, 2020.

[5] Hendrik Birkel, Matthias Kopyto, and Corinna Lutz. Challenges of applying predictive

analytics in transport logistics.

In Proceedings of the 2020 on Computers and People

Research Conference, pages 144–151, 2020.

[6] C. Pluntke. Modelling users in networks with path choice: four studies in telecommuni-

cations and transit. PhD thesis, University College London (UCL), 2014.

[7] Albert YS Lam, Yiu-Wing Leung, and Xiaowen Chu. Electric vehicle charging station

placement: Formulation, complexity, and solutions. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,

5(6):2846–2856, 2014.

[8] Evolve:

Electric vehicle ﬂeet optimisation for

lowering vehicle

emissions.

https://www.imperial.ac.uk/evolve-project/ - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[9] London councils - who runs london.

https://www.londoncouncils.gov.uk/who-runs-

london/essential-guide-london-local-government - Accessed 01-03-2022.

Bibliography

43

[10] Licensed ultra low emission vehicles by local authority: United kingdom,

re-

port: Veh0132, table veh0132a. https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/all-

vehicles-veh01#ultra-low-emissions-vehicles - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[11] Department

for

transport,

vehicle

licensing

statistics:

Annual

2019.

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/vehicle-licensing-statistics-2019 - Accessed

01-03-2022.

[12] Zapmap ev charging stats. https://www.zap-map.com/statistics/ - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[13] F. Oldﬁeld, K. Kumpavat, R. Corbett, A. Price, M. Aunedi, G. Strbac,

C. O’Malley, D. Gardner, D. Pfeiffer, and J.T. Kamphus.

London electric ve-

hicle infrastructure delivery plan: One year on november 2020.

Technical Re-

port supported by The Mayor of London’s Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Task-

force, 2020.

https://tﬂ.gov.uk/ruc-cdn/static/cms/documents/london-electric-vehicle-

infrastructure-delivery-plan-one-year-on-november-2020.pdf - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[14] Zapmap public charging networks.

https://www.zap-map.com/charge-points/public-

charging-point-networks/ - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[15] International Energy Agency. Policies to promote electric vehicle deployment. Global

EV Outlook 2021, 2021. https://www.iea.org/reports/global-ev-outlook-2021/policies-to-

promote-electric-vehicle-deployment - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[16] James Dixon, Peter Bach Andersen, Keith Bell, and Chresten Træholt. On the ease of

being green: An investigation of the inconvenience of electric vehicle charging. Applied

Energy, 258:114090, 2020.

[17] Charilaos Latinopoulos, Aruna Sivakumar, and JW Polak. Response of electric vehicle

drivers to dynamic pricing of parking and charging services: Risky choice in early reser-

vations. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 80:175–189, 2017.

[18] Yue Cao, Ning Wang, Young Jin Kim, and Chang Ge. A reservation based charging man-

agement for on-the-move ev under mobility uncertainty. In 2015 IEEE Online Conference

on Green Communications (OnlineGreenComm), pages 11–16. IEEE, 2015.

[19] Mustafa A Mustafa, Ning Zhang, Georgios Kalogridis, and Zhong Fan. Roaming electric

vehicle charging and billing: An anonymous multi-user protocol. In 2014 IEEE Inter-

national Conference on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), pages 939–945.

IEEE, 2014.

Bibliography

44

[20] Roland Ferwerda, Michel Bayings, Mart Van der Kam, and Rudi Bekkers. Advancing e-

roaming in europe: Towards a single “language” for the european charging infrastructure.

World Electric Vehicle Journal, 9(4):50, 2018.

[21] Kay Noyen, Matthias Baumann, and Florian Michahelles. Electric mobility roaming for

extending range limitations. In ICMB, page 13, 2013.

[22] A. Datta. Quantifying the Incremental Economic and Consumer Value Beneﬁts of E-

Roaming Within the UK’s Future Public EV Charging Ecosystem. MSc Thesis, Imperial

College London, 2021.

[23] IRENA.

Renewable energy integration in power grids technology brief, 2015.

https://www.irena.org/publications/2015/Apr/Renewable-energy-integration-in-power-

grids - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[24] G. Strbac, C. Gan, V. Stanojevi´c, P. Djapic, P. Mancarella, A. Hawkes, D. Pudjianto,

S. Vine, J. Polak, D. Openshaw, S. Burns, P. West, D. Brogden, A. Creighton, and A. Clax-

ton. Beneﬁts of advanced smart metering for demand response based control of distribu-

tion networks, 2010.

[25] F. Oldﬁeld, K. Kumpavat, R. Corbett, A. Price, M. Aunedi, G. Strbac, C. O’Malley,

D. Gardner, D. Pfeiffer, and J.T. Kamphus. The drive towards a low-carbon grid: Un-

locking the value of vehicle-to- grid ﬂeets in great britain, 2021.

[26] Salman Habib, Muhammad Kamran, and Umar Rashid. Impact analysis of vehicle-to-grid

technology and charging strategies of electric vehicles on distribution networks–a review.

Journal of Power Sources, 277:205–214, 2015.

[27] JG Pinto, Vítor Monteiro, Henrique Gonçalves, Bruno Exposto, Delﬁm Pedrosa, Carlos

Couto, and João L Afonso. Bidirectional battery charger with grid-to-vehicle, vehicle-to-

grid and vehicle-to-home technologies. In IECON 2013-39th Annual Conference of the

IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, pages 5934–5939. IEEE, 2013.

[28] Philipp Staudt, Marc Schmidt, Johannes Gärttner, and Christof Weinhardt. Using vehicle-

to-grid concepts to balance redispatch needs: A case study in germany. In Proceedings of

the Ninth International Conference on Future Energy Systems, pages 80–84, 2018.

[29] Shuang Gao, KT Chau, Chunhua Liu, Diyun Wu, and Ching Chuen Chan.

Integrated

energy management of plug-in electric vehicles in power grid with renewables.

IEEE

Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 63(7):3019–3027, 2014.

Bibliography

45

[30] Michael Wolinetz, Jonn Axsen, Jotham Peters, and Curran Crawford. Simulating the value

of electric-vehicle–grid integration using a behaviourally realistic model. Nature Energy,

3(2):132–139, 2018.

[31] Dai Wang, Jonathan Coignard, Teng Zeng, Cong Zhang, and Samveg Saxena. Quantifying

electric vehicle battery degradation from driving vs. vehicle-to-grid services. Journal of

Power Sources, 332:193–203, 2016.

[32] Florent Grée, Vitaliia Laznikova, Bill Kim, Guillermo Garcia, Tom Kigezi, and Bo Gao.

Cloud-based big data platform for vehicle-to-grid (v2g). World Electric Vehicle Journal,

11(2):30, 2020.

[33] Christian F Calvillo, Karolina Czechowski, Lennart Söder, Alvaro Sanchez-Miralles, and

José Villar. Vehicle-to-grid proﬁtability considering ev battery degradation. In 2016 IEEE

PES Asia-Paciﬁc Power and Energy Engineering Conference (APPEEC), pages 310–314.

IEEE, 2016.

[34] Matthieu Dubarry, Arnaud Devie, and Katherine McKenzie. Durability and reliability

of electric vehicle batteries under electric utility grid operations: Bidirectional charging

impact analysis. Journal of Power Sources, 358:39–49, 2017.

[35] Gaizka Saldaña, Jose Ignacio San Martin, Inmaculada Zamora, Francisco Javier Asen-

sio, and Oier Oñederra. Electric vehicle into the grid: Charging methodologies aimed

at providing ancillary services considering battery degradation. Energies, 12(12):2443,

2019.

[36] Alasdair J Crawford, Qian Huang, Michael CW Kintner-Meyer, Ji-Guang Zhang, David M

Reed, Vincent L Sprenkle, Vilayanur V Viswanathan, and Daiwon Choi. Lifecycle com-

parison of selected li-ion battery chemistries under grid and electric vehicle duty cycle

combinations. Journal of Power Sources, 380:185–193, 2018.

[37] Christophe Guille and George Gross. A conceptual framework for the vehicle-to-grid

(v2g) implementation. Energy policy, 37(11):4379–4390, 2009.

[38] Zihan Chang, Yang Zhang, and Wenbo Chen. Electricity price prediction based on hy-

brid model of adam optimized lstm neural network and wavelet transform. Energy,

187:115804, 2019.

[39] H. Chaudhry and T. Bohn. Security concerns of a plug-in vehicle. In 2012 IEEE PES

Innovative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2012.

Bibliography

46

[40] H. Liu, Y. Zhang, and T. Yang. Blockchain-enabled security in electric vehicles cloud and

edge computing. IEEE Network, 32(3):78–83, 2018.

[41] Rodrigo Roman, Javier Lopez, and Masahiro Mambo. Mobile edge computing, fog et al.:

A survey and analysis of security threats and challenges. Future Generation Computer

Systems, 78:680–698, 2018.

[42] et al. Martinez, Jaiber. Smart grid challenges through the lens of the european genereal

data protection regulation.

International Conference on Information Systems Develop-

ment, 2019.

[43] Yosra Fraiji, Lamia Ben Azzouz, Wassim Trojet, and Leila Azouz Saidane. Cyber secu-

rity issues of internet of electric vehicles. In 2018 IEEE Wireless Communications and

Networking Conference (WCNC), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2018.

[44] Ning Lu, Nan Cheng, Ning Zhang, Xuemin Shen, and Jon W Mark. Connected vehicles:

Solutions and challenges. IEEE internet of things journal, 1(4):289–299, 2014.

[45] Roger Piqueras Jover. The current state of affairs in 5g security and the main remaining

security challenges. CoRR, abs/1904.08394, 2019.

[46] R. N. Charette. This car runs on code. https://spectrum.ieee.org/this-car-runs-on-code -

Accessed 01-03-2022.

[47] IA Sandu, A Salceanu, and O Bejenaru. New approach of the customer defects per lines

of code metric in automotive sw development applications. In Journal of Physics: Con-

ference Series, volume 1065, page 052006. IOP Publishing, 2018.

[48] Upstream

security’s

2020

global

automotive

cybersecurity

report.

https://upstream.auto/upstream-security-global-automotive-cybersecurity-report-2020/

-

Accessed 01-03-2022.

[49] Memory

corruption

vulnerability

threatens

smart

vehicles.

https://upstream.auto/research/automotive-cybersecurity/?id=6150

- Accessed

01-

03-2022.

[50] Branden Ghena, William Beyer, Allen Hillaker, Jonathan Pevarnek, and J. Alex Halder-

man. Green lights forever: Analyzing the security of trafﬁc infrastructure. In Proceedings

of the 8th USENIX Conference on Offensive Technologies, WOOT’14, page 7, USA, 2014.

USENIX Association.

Bibliography

47

[51] Dalton Hahn, Arslan Munir, and Vahid Behzadan. Security and privacy issues in intelli-

gent transportation systems: Classiﬁcation and challenges. IEEE Intelligent Transporta-

tion Systems Magazine, 13(1):181–196, 2019.

[52] Unece world

forum for

harmonization

of

vehicle

regulations

(wp.29).

https://unece.org/wp29-introduction - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[53] Abba-iot. https://github.com/abbaiot - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[54] Tuxera.

Autonomous cars will generate more than 300 tb of data per year.

https://www.tuxera.com/blog/autonomous-cars-300-tb-of-data-per-year/ - Accessed 01-

03-2022.

[55] European Parliament and Council of the European Union. On the protection of natural

persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such

data, and repealing directive 95/46/ec (general data protection regulation). Technical re-

port, European Union, 2016.

[56] P. Hense. They might be seen as green, but teslas are like elephants – they never for-

get. https://www.jdsupra.com/legalnews/they-might-be-seen-as-green-but-teslas-81638/ -

Accessed 01-03-2022.

[57] S. Chen, J. Hu, Y. Shi, Y. Peng, J. Fang, R. Zhao, and L. Zhao. Vehicle-to-everything

(v2x) services supported by lte-based systems and 5g. IEEE Communications Standards

Magazine, 2017.

[58] C. Huang, H. Wang, D. Guo, G. Zhang, G. Xu, W. Zhou, Y. Cheng, Y. Peng, K. Xia, and

F. Lin. A dynamic priority strategy for iov data scheduling towards key data. The Journal

of Supercomputing, 77, 2021.

[59] Y. Fraiji, L.B. Azzouz, W. Trojet, and L.A. Saidane. Cyber security issues of internet

of electric vehicles. 2018 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference

(WCNC), 2018.

[60] J-R. Lin, T. Talty, and O.K. Tonguz. On the potential of bluetooth low energy technology

for vehicular applications. IEEE, 53(1):267–275, 2015.

[61] European

convention

on

human

rights.

https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-

market/sites/digital-agenda/ﬁles/Convention_ENG.pdf - Accessed 01-03-2022.

Bibliography

48

[62] GDPR.EU. What is gdpr, the eu’s new data protection law? https://gdpr.eu/what-is-gdpr/

- Accessed 01-03-2022.

[63] Cambridge

analytica

and facebook:

The

scandal

and the

fallout

so far.

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/04/us/politics/cambridge-analytica-scandal-

fallout.html - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[64] European Data Protection Supervisor. The history of general data protection regu-

lation. https://edps.europa.eu/data-protection/data-protection/legislation/history-general-

data-protection-regulation_en - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[65] The cnil’s restricted committee imposes a ﬁnancial penalty of 50 million euros against

google llc. https://www.cnil.fr/en/cnils-restricted-committee-imposes-ﬁnancial-penalty-

50-million-euros-against-google-llc - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[66] British airways: Penalty notice. https://ico.org.uk/action-weve-taken/enforcement/british-

airways/ - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[67] Leeds

University.

Intelligent

transport

systems.

http://www.its.leeds.ac.uk/projects/konsult/private/level2/instruments/instrument024/l2_024a.htm

- Accessed 01-03-2022.

[68] Federico Costantini, Nikolas Thomopoulos, Fabro Steibel, Angela Curl, Giuseppe

Lugano, and Tatiana Kováˇciková. Chapter eight - autonomous vehicles in a gdpr era:

An international comparison. Advances in Transport Policy and Planning, 5:191–213,

2020.

[69] European Commission. Commission delegated regulation (eu) 2015/962 of 18 decem-

ber 2014 supplementing directive 2010/40/eu of the european parliament and of the

council with regard to the provision of eu-wide real-time trafﬁc information services.

http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2015/962/oj - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[70] F. Engels, A. Wentland, and S.M. Pfotenhauer. Testing future societies? developing a

framework for test beds and living labs as instruments of innovation governance. Research

Policy, 48(9):103826, 2019.

[71] Tesla. Tesla’s mission is to accelerate the world’s transition to sustainable energy.

https://www.tesla.com/en_GB/about - Accessed 01-03-2022.

Bibliography

49

[72] C. Lilly. Tesla model 3 dominates latest 2020 ev sales ﬁgures.

https://www.zap-

map.com/tesla-model-3-dominates-latest-2020-ev-sales-ﬁgures/ - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[73] Tesla.

tures.

Support:

Car

safety

and

security

fea-

https://www.tesla.com/en_GB/support/car-safety-security-

features#: :text=Sentry%20Mode%20is%20a%20feature,the%20severity%20of%20the%20threat

- Accessed 01-03-2022.

[74] Steven Bliim.

What

is sensitive data?

sensitive data deﬁnition & types.

https://cipherpoint.com/blog/what-is-sensitive-data/ - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[75] C. Jouvray, G. Pellischek, and M. Tigueracha. Impact of a smart grid to the electric vehicle

ecosystem from a privacy and security perspective. World Electric Vehicle Symposium and

Exhibition (EVS27), pages 1–10, 2013.

[76] University

of

Delaware.

Managing

data

conﬁdentiality.

https://www1.udel.edu/security/data/conﬁdentiality.html - Accessed 01-03-2022.

[77] J.A. Pattinson, H. Chen, and S. Basu. Legal issues in automated vehicles: critically con-

sidering the potential role of consent and interactive digital interfaces. Human Soc Sci

Commun, 7(153), 2020.

