Towards a Hybrid RF/Optical Lunar
Communication System (LunarComm)

Waseem Raza, Ethan Abele, John O’Hara, Senior Member, IEEE, Behnaz Sadr, Peter LoPresti, Member, IEEE,
Ali Imran, Senior Member, IEEE, Wooyeol Choi, Senior Member, IEEE, Ickhyun Song, Serhat Altunc,
Obadiah Kegege, and Sabit Ekin*, Senior Member, IEEE

1

2
2
0
2

r
a

M
9
2

]

Y
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
9
9
8
5
1
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The prospect of mankind returning to the Moon has
garnered a great amount of attention in recent years. Dozens
of lunar missions are planned for the coming decade which
will require the development of a sustainable communication
infrastructure with high data rates and minimal latency. Space
communication systems thus far have relied on Radio Frequency
(RF) links alone, but recent developments in laser communica-
tions have demonstrated that Free Space Optical (FSO) links can
achieve much higher data rates. Upon considering the respective
beneﬁts and drawbacks of RF and FSO links, we make a
case for the integration of these two technologies into a hybrid
RF/FSO lunar communications architecture which leverages
small satellites in a Low Earth Orbit (LEO) constellation. We
include a case study for this technology designed in Analytical
Graphics’ Systems Tool Kit (STK) software. Results are presented
in terms of chain access duration, propagation delay, transmission
loss, Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), and Bit Error Rate (BER).
This architecture shows potential to revolutionize extraterrestrial
communications and pave the way for highly ambitious future
missions in space.

Index Terms—RF, FSO, Hybrid, Lunar Communications, Lu-
narComm, Lunar Networking, LunaNet, Laser, Optical, Space,
Network, Moon, LEO, SmallSat, STK.

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE National Aeronautics and Space Administration

(NASA) has announced the Artemis project which aims
to send the ﬁrst woman and next man to the Moon by 2024
and establish a permanent presence on the Lunar surface [1].
There are many reasons for this renewed interest in lunar
exploration including that the Moon can be the basis for off-
earth mining, and open new avenues for expanding the space
economy. Also, a new level of commercial and international
partnership opportunities are opened which create the sense
of global cooperation and common human endeavors. In
the long-term vision of deep space exploration–particularly
in mankind’s journey to Mars–a permanent facility on the
Moon can be the launching pad and gateway for deep space
communication and commercial activities. A key challenge of
Artemis’ success will be a reliable and sustainable End-to-
End (E2E) communication network [2]. Various technologies
have been proposed for E2E communication links between
ground stations, lunar orbiters (Gateways), and lunar rovers [2]

*Corresponding author: Sabit Ekin.
W. Raza and A. Imran are with the University of Oklahoma; E. Abele,
J. O’Hara, W. Choi, and S. Ekin are with Oklahoma State University; B. Sadr
and P. LoPresti are with University of Tulsa; I. Song is with the Hanyang
University, Seoul, South Korea; S. Altunc and O. Kegege are with NASA
Goddard Space Flight Center.

focusing on architectural design, lunar constellations for far
side explorations using disruption-tolerant protocols [2], and
commercial and international partnership opportunities.

Communication in traditional

lunar networks has over-
whelmingly been based on Radio Frequency (RF) links, which
provide reliable communication but are inherently energy
inefﬁcient–a serious concern for power-limited Small Satel-
lites (SmallSats). Contrary to this, optical communication can
provide better energy efﬁciency and higher data rates, but
susceptibility to unfavorable weather conditions and Pointing
and Tracking (PAT) errors limit its widespread terrestrial use.
However, several studies have shown that Free Space Optical
(FSO) communication provides a viable option for future lu-
nar communication (LunarComm) and space communications
studies [4]. Therefore, a practical approach is to design a future
communication system that is ﬂexible, integrated, and adap-
tive, which can reap the beneﬁts of both paradigms. Hybrid
RF/FSO systems have been widely studied in the paradigm of
terrestrial networks and Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites [5].
NASA’s integrated Radio Optical Communication (iROC) fo-
cused on developing a single terminal based hybrid RF and
optical communication for space communication [6]. However,
to the best of the authors’ knowledge there is currently no
demonstrated SmallSat and space networking strategy for
lunar networks which utilizes both RF and FSO links.

Motivated by this gap, we argue for a hybrid RF/FSO-based
lunar network design which utilizes a SmallSat based LEO
constellation where each satellite is equipped with both RF
and FSO transceivers to communicate with earth stations and
the Lunar Gateway (GW), which also has similar transceivers
onboard. The contribution is summarized in the following.

• We ﬁrst discuss the two-hop general architecture of Lu-
narComm, which includes the constellations of SmallSats
in LEO orbit, Lunar GW, and facilities on Earth and
Lunar Surfaces. Our preliminary hybrid solution includes
hard switching between RF and FSO links where the RF
links have primary role of supporting the low data rates,
while switching to FSO link is performed for higher data
rates. Also, RF links are used to carry the control data
for the initial FSO signal acquisition and tracking.

• Then,

the important features of RF and FSO based
communication systems are discussed with focus on their
strength and weaknesses. The comparative limitations and
beneﬁts of each scheme suggest that a hybrid combination
will provide the best of both approaches, and various
aspects of the hybrid solutions are discussed.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Fig. 1: Schematic diagram of a hybrid lunar communication network.

• Next, the proposed Hybrid RF/FSO system is discussed
subsequently followed by a discussion on the relevance
of proposed work with NASA’s vision.

• We design a case study using the communication module
of the Analytical Graphics, Inc (AGI) Systems Tool Kit
(STK) to demonstrate the beneﬁts of a hybrid solution
in terms of propagation loss, Bit Error Rate (BER)
and Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR). We deploy various
constellations of SmallSats to analyze the coverage in
terms of access duration at earth facility.

II. GENERAL ARCHITECTURE FOR THE LUNARCOMM

The general architecture of the proposed LunarComm Net-
work is shown Fig. 1. It leverages two intermediate relays,
i.e., constellations of satellites on the Earth side and a GW on
the lunar side to assist the transmission from Earth to Lunar
facilities. The links from the SmallSats to Earth and from GW
to moon are termed “proximity links” and between SmallSats
and GW as “trunk links”. The satellites in the constellations
can communicate with each other over the cross links. Both
the trunk and proximity links can be switched between RF
and FSO communication. Hence the respective devices are
equipped with both type of transceivers. For RF and FSO
channel models we resort to the basic models available in
AGI STK, i.e., ITU-R P.168 Section 2.5 for RF and ITU-R
P1814 for FSO communication. Further, the communication
system is designed in the AGI STK Communication module,
which follows the theoretical model to calculate the access and
communication results 1. The orbital height and constellations
of satellites depend on various factors, such as the PAT error,
delay and coverage requirements in trunk and proximity links,
and cost and energy consumption constraints of the satellites.
Satellites in GEO orbit can offer reliable connection and
broad coverage because of their stationary positions to the
earth rotation and relatively less distance from the Lunar
surface or Gateway. This can also bring some relaxation in

1The values of various parameters are obtained from the state-of-the-art
works in Lunar Laser Communication Demonstration, Laser Communications
Relay Demonstration, and Inter-agency Operations Advisory Group (IOAG)
documentation.

it will

PAT requirements. However,
incur increased delay
and energy consumption on earth side proximity link. On
the other hand, the satellite in LEO orbit, because of the
proximity to the Earth, can be a better choice, especially for
energy-constrained SmallSats. The NASA Artemis program
includes the GW as a vital component for sustainable lunar
explorations. Similar to the International Space Station,
it
will be a solar-powered communication hub, autonomously
operating, science laboratory and short term habitation module
for astronauts. The Lunar GW can be utilized as an important
intermediate relay to communicate to the lunar surface, and
because of its deployment in near rectilinear halo orbit, its
line of sight to the Earth would be minimally obstructed.

III. RF AND FSO COMMUNICATION OVERVIEW

A. Radio Frequency Communication

The greatest strengths of RF communication are its ability to
penetrate through most atmospheric conditions and immunity
to precise alignment requirements. Modern RF space commu-
nications such as the onboard NASA’s latest Tracking and Data
Relay Satellite (TDRS) use transceivers operating primarily in
the S, X, and K bands [7] having frequencies from 2 to 27 GHz
and relying on line-of-sight propagation between transmitters
and receivers. The Ka band (26.5 to 40 GHz) has gained much
interest in recent years due to its higher achievable data rates
and greater spectrum availability. The TDRS has demonstrated
data rates up to 800 Mbps while using Ka-band links [7]. Off-
the-shelf hardware designed for the Ka band is also becoming
more readily available as applications proliferate.

Regarding the modulation and coding, most of the current
and planned space missions are designed around simpler
schemes such as Phase Shift Keying (PSK) [9]. Space ap-
plications often beneﬁt from choosing coding schemes and
rates separately for uplink and downlink, and an adaptive
coding rate can be useful for changing atmospheric conditions.
Coding rates of 1/2, 2/3, and 4/5 alongside convolution or
Reed-Solomon coding schemes have performed well in space
applications [1], [9]. Recent advancements in Software De-
ﬁned Radio (SDR) technology present an attractive option for
building space communication systems. SDRs not only allow

for rapid development with ﬂexible modulation and carrier
selections but also permit many post-deployment alterations in
link parameters. In space applications, this capability allows
engineers to adaptively update the link speciﬁcations for the
SDR-based relay satellites in-ﬂight [8]. SDRs are becoming
smaller and lighter, and off-the-shelf units can be purchased for
small satellite applications. Finally, RF technology provides
backwards compatibility. RF’s dominance in past decades
means that many existing and legacy space systems can
only be contacted via RF. Therefore, RF technology must be
included on any system that must communicate with previous
generations of technologies.

The primary weakness of RF technology and the motivation
for moving to FSO is its comparatively low data rates. FSO
has demonstrated potential for orders-of-magnitude greater
data rates. The next generation of space communications will
require high-throughput links to carry data for various public
and commercial missions, and RF alone is not currently up
to that task. RF links also require a signiﬁcant amount of
room onboard spacecraft for each antenna, which can also
be relatively heavy. Antenna technology for SmallSats has
advanced, but with in-ﬂight deployment methods rather than
weight reduction as the primary focus [7]. In the Ka band
speciﬁcally, there also exists a greater concern of atmospheric
effects. The Ka band’s higher achievable data rates come with
a compromise known as rain fading–the attenuation of an RF
signal due to absorption by water droplets in the atmosphere.
This effect is most prevalent in frequencies above 11 GHz,
which causes the limited consideration in existing S- and X-
band links [7].

B. Free Space Optical Communication

Optical communication addresses some of the important
limitations of RF systems because optical antennas can pro-
duce a higher signal gain in a much smaller footprint (often
around 10 – 20 cm) and use lighter-weight components (plas-
tics, glass). FSO-based communication offers much higher
data rates, which are critical to increase the capabilities of
telemetry, science, voice, video, and alerts [9]. Optical com-
munication systems provide greater immunity to interference
from other sources than RF systems, as they would not
interfere with GEO communication (an ITU requirement) nor
any other RF systems such as the high data rate RF links
envisioned by the IOAG.

Nevertheless, FSO systems also beneﬁt from existing tech-
nology and research. Many of the components needed for
advanced, high-speed optical communication exist as com-
mercial off-the-shelf components developed for ﬁber optic
systems. A wealth of components and technology exist to sup-
port communication at 1550-nm wavelengths recommended
for lunar and lunar-to-earth forward and return links in the
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) [9].
Many components have already undergone reductions in size,
weight, and power consumption critical to the operation of
satellites, Lunar GWs, and other deep-space assets through
the development of integrated photonics and opto-electronic
integrated circuits.

3

FSO systems face several challenges beyond the atmo-
spheric and mechanical effects. Link budget analyses estimate
that an optical transmitter power of 10 − 100 W is needed
to effectively detect high data rate signals at earth-to-moon
distances–a difﬁcult goal for power-limited SmallSats. A trade-
off exists between system efﬁciency and data rate, with ef-
ﬁciency seen as more important on deep space assets since
they are so power limited, [9] and high data rate seen as a
higher priority for LEO except in cases such as SmallSats or
CubeSats that are far more power-limited. It is expected that
the underlying technologies and techniques for modulation,
coding, and synchronization will be signiﬁcantly different
between the two signal cases [9]. Some other concerns in FSO
include the effects of the blast ejecta (lunar dust) on optical
surfaces, acquisition and tracking, and interoperability with
existing or planned communication assets.

C. Hybrid RF/FSO Constellation

it

From the discussion in the previous section,

is em-
phasized that the RF and FSO techniques have complimen-
tary features. Both RF and FSO communication technologies
are well studied in the literature. However, FSO technol-
ogy is signiﬁcantly less mature, and is currently relegated
to demonstration projects such as NASA’s CubeSat Laser
Infrared Crosslink (CLICK) or the Laser Communication
Relay Demonstration. A hybrid system can balance the high
throughput of FSO with the reliability/wide coverage of RF
links to maximize performance in challenging design envi-
ronments such as the E2E lunar communication system. In
fact, similar methodology has been used to improve other
systems such as 5G backhaul links [13]. There is also active
work in hybrid RF/FSO communication strategies for ground
to satellite communications [5]. However,
the authors are
aware of no existing effort to combine these technologies to
achieve Earth-to-Lunar communications using Lunar Gateway
and SmallSat constellations. Such a system has several im-
portant advantages compared to the standard methodology of
direct communication with ground stations on earth. Earth’s
atmosphere introduces undesirable effects, particularly in FSO
communications. These include scintillation and diffraction,
among others. Such effects are magniﬁed by distance, even
after an optical signal has left the atmosphere. Intercepting
signals from ground stations in LEO minimizes these effects,
and the signal can be immediately re-transmitted free from
atmospheric distortions. The availability of RF links in this
constellation may serve as a backup in adverse weather condi-
tions and may also be used to handle telemetry and command
data for the constellation satellites while leaving the optical
links free for communication data.

While the beneﬁts of hybrid RF/FSO systems are clear,
the realization of a truly hybrid system is a much more
involved process requiring further research. A simple hybrid
network could be built by designing a system with both
RF and FSO transceivers mounted on the same device with
each system having separate transmitting and receiving chains.
Such a system would require a hard switching and feedback
mechanism between transmitter and receiver to jointly select

the RF or FSO link for communication. By contrast, soft-
switching based hybridization utilizes: (1) channel coding
(mainly Low Density Parity Check and Raptor codes) with
a portion of the codeword split to RF and FSO links, (2)
channel conditions-based puncturing for rate adjustments, and
(3) complex soft decoding at FSO supported data rates [14].
Although soft switching utilizes the common modulation and
encoding modules, its RF antenna and FSO laser are separately
mounted. A more sophisticated approach is to design a hybrid
antenna with adaptable apertures to operate on both the RF
and FSO links as discussed in [15].

D. Relevance to NASA Future Vision

The proposed hybrid RF/FSO architecture would be impor-
tant for NASA’s Artemis mission as well as for future networks
around other planetary bodies such as Mars. For example,
NASA is currently working towards developing the “LunaNet”
architecture that aims to “empower Artemis with commu-
nications and navigation interoperability” [2]. Considering
the high-rate and reliability needs of such a communication
network, the proposed LunarComm architecture shows the
strong alignment with LunaNet.

In addition, the future LunarComm network must have both
high data rate and high reliability despite an unprecedented
series of challenges. The proposed constellation of SmallSats
greatly increases the redundancy, reliability and accessibility
of the network compared to direct Earth-Lunar communication
architectures. SpaceX’s Starlink network has demonstrated
the feasibility of world-wide network coverage using LEO
SmallSats. The architecture proposed here will apply this same
accessibility to Lunar communications. Any university or insti-
tution may directly access the network from any location. This
accessibility also creates improved reliability and scalability.
Critical missions with large budgets may build or contract
multiple optical ground stations locations across the globe to
ensure optical data rates at all times. Less critical or budget-
limited missions may rely on only a single ground station,
while still beneﬁting from the RF backup to maintain basic
command and telemetry readings.

These proposed advantages can be enabled both by advances
in hardware and in network strategies. The SmallSat nodes
must be capable of communication through atmosphere, inter-
satellite crosslink, and LEO-to-Lunar communication. Each
of these requirements creates different challenges. Satellite
crosslink and LEO-to-Lunar links do not suffer the chal-
lenges of atmospheric effects but may require much greater
pointing accuracy given the larger distances. Meeting each
of these challenges simultaneously will require innovative
designs given the limited SWaP requirements of SmallSat
platforms. Intelligent switching strategies must also be em-
ployed to optimize network throughput in varying conditions.
SmallSat nodes may become inaccessible for a variety of
reasons, ranging from poor atmospheric conditions to low
power. The network must manage throughput in a constantly
changing environment.

4

IV. HYBRID RF/FSO END-TO-END LUNAR NETWORK
CASE STUDY

In this section, we design and evaluate the proposed hybrid
RF/FSO based network for E2E communication between the
earth and moon facilities. We consider a single earth station
as the communication source and a single lunar facility as the
target, and utilize the AGI STK Communication module for
implementing the E2E link with both RF and FSO compo-
nents. Initially a single LEO satellite with orbital parameters
given in Table I is deployed, however, its signiﬁcantly larger
invisibility duration from the earth station, as given in Fig. 2a,
suggests that a constellation of satellites should be used in-
stead. Hence, we take the initial LEO orbit as the basic model
of the Walker constellation tool. This keeps the orbits and
number of satellites in each orbit at maximum separation, and
creates different constellations, i.e., 2-by-2, 3-by-3 and 4-by-4,
which collectively act as the relay station. Aiming to achieve
the maximum possible visibility by utilizing the minimum
possible constellations, we start observing the access results
for 1-by-1 and note the improvements until 100% visibility is
realized. On the lunar side, we deploy GW which also acts
as the second relay node for the E2E communication chain
from Earth station to any Lunar facility [2]. Both relays are
equipped with separate sensors for aligning towards each other
and with their respective communication source or destination.
Each sensor is equipped with both RF and FSO transceivers.
The orbital parameters of the GW are given in Table I and
values of different parameters of RF and FSO chains follow
from the standards [9], as given in Table I. The RF and
FSO components are mounted on the physical assets and
these are assumed to be inter-operable and compatible with
each other. We consider that the RF link is always present
in the whole communication system to provide reliable low
data rate communication, however, hard switching from RF
to FSO links on each “hop” of the network is possible to
support the high data rate transmission. The access/visibility
results of the initial single satellite based deployment and
subsequent extension to constellations are discussed in the
following subsection.

TABLE I: Orbital parameters of the LEO Sat and Lunar GW.

Coord
inate
Type

Semi
Major
Axis

Eccen
tricity

Incli
nation

Arg.
of
Perg.

Long.
of
Ascend.
Node

True
Ano
maly

Classical

7400
(1000) km

0

120

0

0

Classical 6142.4 km 0.6

67.7

270

270

90

90

Parameters

Initial Small
Sat Orbit
Lunar
Gateway

TABLE II: Access Statistics for different Constellations.

Mean Max
Constellation Count Min
1026.86 7205.13
800.57
150.63
940.42
1185.90 27272.04
150.63
1361.58 1763.17 58547.84
499.10
86400.00 86400.00 86400.00 86400.00

1 by 1
2 by 2
3 by 3
4 by 4

9
29
43
1

Sum

5

resource management techniques for conﬂict avoidance.

Table II demonstrated the improvement in access within the
ﬁrst hop link (E2L) only as constellation satellites become
more numerous. However, the total chain access is equally
important. Hence, we present the total duration of E2E chain
accesses for different combinations of satellite constellations
in Fig. 2b. This result show a general trend that the total chain
access increases from 6.42% to 48.10% when the constella-
tions are increased from 1-by-1 to 4-by-4. Although, the use
of 4-by-4 constellations has provided full time connectivity
from the constellation to the Earth facility, the chain access
still could not achieve full coverage because of the limitations
from the GW to Lunar link. One possible approach to improve
this connectivity would be to introduce a constellation of
Gateways, having at least one additional Gateway in the other
halo orbit, but we skip this analysis for simplicity. The trend of
the access count shown in Fig. 2c is also similar to the duration
of access for different constellations. It should be noted that
the higher access counts are not always beneﬁcial, since they
represent the disruption and reestablishment of connection.

B. Comparing the Hybrid Solution to Individual Counterparts

For the link budget analysis we design two different chains
in AGI STK Communication for the RF and FSO links as
detailed in Table III. STK is a highly capable modeling
software that is currently used by NASA for contact scheduling
in the Near Space and Direct to Earth (NSN/DTE) networks,
as well as for theoretical modeling of satellite missions. Relays
in each chain work in decode-store-and-forward mode and
have the capability of hard switching between RF and FSO
transmitter/receiver, making the system suitable for hybrid
solutions. AGI STK communication module provides Com-
plex transmitter/receiver models for RF and Laser transmit-
ter/receiver models for FSO communication. The variable
parameter settings for both transmitter and receiver of RF and
FSO components in uplink (UL) chain are given in Table III.
Further, some parameters have ﬁxed values, which are not
shown in this table. For instance, the RF and FSO antenna
efﬁciencies are set to 55% and 70%, respectively, and all
FSO links support communication at 1550 nm (193414 GHz).
Further, the FSO receivers are set to have a noise ﬁgure of
3 dB and noise temperature is set to be 273 K. This table
also depicts the statistical values of BER for both RF and
FSO links and mean propagation distances (and delay) in each
link. For the input settings of RF and FSO transceivers given
in Table III, we depict the mean propagation loss and mean

Fig. 3: Hybrid RF/FSO based Lunar Communication Perfor-
mance Comparison for propagation loss (left) and SNR (right).

(a) E2L access durations for 1 by 1 constellation.

(b) End-to-end access duration
for different constellations.

(c) End-to-end access count for
different constellations.

Fig. 2: Chain access results for LEO Satellite Constellations.

A. Individual and Chain Access Results

Visibility between the deployed assets is an important
parameter in supporting sustainable communication perfor-
mance. However this visibility varies because of the relative
motion of the devices. In Fig. 2a, we present
the access
duration between different pairs of individual objects for a
period of 24 hours. The ﬁgure gives a detailed depiction of
each visibility instance i.e., E2L (accesses 1 through 9): Earth
and a SmallSat in LEO orbit (for the 1-by-1 constellation
case), L2G: LEO to GW, and G2M (accesses 1 through
3): GW to the lunar facility. The total 9 instances of the
access (disruptions in visibility) between Earth and SmallSat,
accumulate a total time of 7205.132 seconds or 8.34% of 24
hours. LEO and GW are placed in such positions that they are
visible to each other for the whole duration of the 24 hours.
The GW to lunar visibility is affected by three disruptions,
with total access time of 61068.353 or 70.68%.

It can be concluded that the access between Earth station
and LEO is the key factor to maintain the E2E visibility from
E2L stations. Hence, in Table II, we focus on this ﬁrst hop
link (E2L) and observe the visibility statistics by increasing the
number of orbits and satellites per orbit. Thus the total visibil-
ity duration between Earth facility and any satellite in 2-by-2
constellations is increased to 27272.037 seconds or 31.56% of
one day’s time. Similarly, for 3-by-3 constellations visibility is
improved to 67.7% and we get the 100% visibility for 4-by-4
LEO constellation. This means that at any given time at least
one of 16 deployed satellites is in view of the Earth facility.
From these results, it is generally observed that the access
duration steadily increases with the scale of LEO satellite
constellations. Hence, for increased reliability and continuous
coverage the use of more satellites and denser constellations
is an intuitive option. However, apart from the increased cost,
there will be increased disruptions and switching/hopping with
satellites, and sophisticated multiple access techniques would
be required to ensure maximum uninterrupted coverage. Also,
it will enhance the inter-satellite interference and require better

TABLE III: LunarComm Case Study: RF and FSO input parameters and performance comparison with transmit power of 1
dBW.

6

Link
Direction

Device
Name

Oper.
Freq
(GHz)

Anten.
Diam
(m)

Beam
width
(deg)

Gain
(dB)

Data
Rate
(Mbps)

Modul min mean max

RF Link Information

FSO Link Information

RF Input Parameters

RF Link BER FSO Input Parameters FSO Link BER

Ae
(m2)

Gain
(dB)

Data
Rate
(Mbps)

0.01 100

1000

0.01 105

-

min mean max

Distance
(Km)

Prop.
Delay
(s)

2.04
E-15

4.84
E-07

7.46
E-08

7725.42 0.019

1

2.32 37.81

15

QPSK

2.38
E-07

1.74
E-05

1.09
E-04

-

0.25

9.26 25.77

0.75

0.91 45.94

1.25

1.36 50.38

-

1

-

BPSK
-BCH-
127-64 1.00
E-10

-

6.51
E-08

1.22
E-07

0.05 112

300

0.05 112

-

9.57
E-12

1.28
E-11

1.57
E-11

364465

1.216

0.5

0.5

4.63 31.79

15

QPSK

4.63 31.79

-

-

1.23
E-09

1.37
E-08

4.55
E-08

0.01 100

1000

0.01 100

-

1.62
E-14

8.63
E-13

8.63
E-13

8729.26 0.025

Up
Link

Earth
to
Moon
Link

Earth
UL Tx
LEO
UL Rx

LEO
UL Tx

GW
UL Rx
GW
UL Tx
Lunar
UL Rx

10

10

34

34

10

10

SNR for RF and FSO links in Fig. 3. The ﬁrst column of
bar plots on y axis (going front to back) describes when all
three hops are FSO links (shown by OP-OP-OP on right side),
while the second column lists all RF links. These ﬁgures show
only one case of hybrid links, where the proximity links are
RF while the trunk link is optical (shown by RF-OP-RF).
Hence, this column selects values from the previous two chains
accordingly. These results can also be further extrapolated to
different combinations of hard-switched hybridized links by
selecting the appropriate bars from the all RF and FSO chains.
Analysis of both Fig. 3 and Table III reveals that the optical
link, in comparison to RF, faces much greater propagation
loss, however the much higher antenna gains compensate to
achieve even greater SNR and BER values. Each row (left to
right) in these plots show the each respective hop, E2L, L2G,
and G2M, of the end-to-end communication chain between
Earth and Lunar Facilities.

A maximum RF data rate of 15 Mbps is achieved with
the typically expected BERs and the antenna diameters given
in the table, transmit powers of 1 dBW, and an operating
frequency of 10 GHz in the Earth and Lunar proximity links.
Comparing this performance for FSO links with same transmit
power, there is signiﬁcant increase in the data rates with much
lower BER values, due to higher operating frequency, and
higher antenna gains, which yield more gains in link budget
the FSO links can clearly support much
analysis. Hence,
higher data rates. Similarly, FSO performance is superior for
the trunk link between SmallSats and GW, even when RF
frequency is increased to 34 GHz and larger antenna diameters
are employed, sufﬁcient to support 1 Mbps over the long
distance. By comparison, for this link, the FSO can support
about 300 Mbps with the acceptable BER values as shown in
table. The superior performance of FSO is achieved assuming
the error free pointing and alignment between the transceivers.
It is also observed that the FSO links depict better BER than
the RF counterparts because of the inherent higher operating
frequencies, narrower antenna aperture, and higher gains in
the FSO systems. Although the losses are higher in FSO case
as depicted in Fig. 3, the SNR remains higher than the RF
counterpart resulting in improved BER values.

These results for different RF and FSO links can be joined
with the access results to extrapolate the maximum data
which can be transmitted for the Earth to Lunar facility.
Speciﬁcally, the maximum data rates for each hop in both RF
and FSO links are given in Table III. Assuming the RF-OP-RF
communication chain with 4-by-4 constellation of SmallSats,
we have observed the chain access of 41564 seconds. The
overall per day data sending capacity with this kind of chain
is calculated as, 41563(1)/8 = 5.195 GB for each proximity
link and 41564(300)/8 = 1558.650 GB for the trunk link.
The results of the average propagation distances and delays
for both proximity and trunk links are also given in the last
two columns of the Table III. These results show that the trunk
link has the highest of delays among all links, whereas the ﬁrst
hop link has the lowest delay.

V. CONCLUSIONS, CHALLENGES, AND FUTURE
RESEARCH DIRECTIONS

A. Architectural and Design Challenges

This study provides an analysis of hybrid RF/Optical links
for Earth-Moon communication, its performance evaluation,
and access time in case of different SmallSat constellations.
Although these results are based on theoretical models, and
mostly cover best case scenarios (i.e., upper limits), they can
provide valuable guidance for designing a lunar communica-
tion architecture. For example, two of the key performance
indicators (KPIs) in a communication system are data rate
and BER. This study shows how these KPIs can be achieved
and how they depend on the signal quality (SNR), modulation
schemes, and hardware design parameters such as antenna
gains, and operating frequencies.

Designing hybrid RF/FSO systems for space communica-
tion is not trivial, and requires tackling many challenges from
a hardware integration point of view to network design and
optimization. Although this work provides a basic visibility
analysis on the various constellation, and link level evaluation
of communication parameters, a holistic system level analysis
is required with large number of earth and lunar facilities,
ﬂexibility of satellite constellation sizes in various orbits and

the option of utilizing the Lunar GW. The choice of critical
design parameters of Physical, MAC (medium access control),
and Network Layers and their impact on the system level
performance to achieve the high data rates and reliability,
continuous coverage and minimum latency is required to be
explored. This analysis with various possibilities of satel-
lite constellations in tandem with PAT errors on individual
RF/FSO and hybrid RF/FSO links is also an important research
direction.

Effective pointing and acquisition techniques are also ob-
vious problems to explore for the establishment of optical
connections between the SmallSats and GW, especially with
larger numbers of satellites. We aim not to completely turn
off the RF link, but utilize it as a low data rate connection for
sharing the feedback control messages. We have assumed a
single Earth facility as the communication source, however, the
network level analysis of multiple access schemes, interference
from different satellites, and impact on the supportable data
rates are yet to be explored for lunar communication systems.
Another possible research direction is to utilize the soft-
switching-based hybrid system where adaptive channel coding
is assumed to support both types of links. In a soft-switching-
based method, channel coding methods can overcome the
disadvantage of hard-switching by coordinating the data trans-
mission in both links using channel coding methods, such as
LDPC and Raptor codes [14]. Further, the impact of different
carrier speciﬁc channel impairments is not fully explored for
the lunar communication system, which could be an important
area to explore, especially for designing an adaptive system
which can take channel conditions as feedback parameters in
deciding to switch between RF or FSO communication. A
simple hybrid network could be built by designing a system
with both RF and FSO transceivers mounted on the same
device. One of the design challenges is to investigate the
sharing of RF and optical back-end components (for base-
band processing), i.e., using one or more shared processing
blocks thereby signiﬁcantly reducing chip space and power
requirements.

B. Interoperability Challenges

Artemis 3 will be a collaboration between NASA, commer-
cial, and international partners to establish a sustainable lunar
exploration. There are research challenges to be explored in
this architecture. For instance, how do we ensure that lunar
surface science support systems, which include lunar terrain
vehicles, habitation/mobility platforms, and in-situ science
instruments,
incorporate this hybrid RF/Optical scheme in
their design and operational dependencies? These are the
primary users of the Lunar communication architecture and
there may be some risks in selecting the communication or
navigation solutions prematurely. Additional questions include
what are the guiding requirements for the transmitter and
receiver options that will be compatible with the Hybrid
RF/Optical lunar Communication Architecture to ensure E2E
compatibility and interoperability between lunar proximity
links, Lunar GW, visiting spacecraft, Lunar Systems and
Earth, and industry/international partner assets? How is the

7

Hybrid RF/Optical Architecture going to handle navigation
and timing?

VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work is supported by the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration under Grant No. 80NSSC20M0214 is-
sued through the Oklahoma NASA EPSCoR.

REFERENCES

[1] P. M. Goorjian “Free-Space Optical Communication for CubeSats
in Low Lunar Orbit: LLO”, Proc. Society of Photo-optical Instru-
mentation Engineers (SPIE-LASE 2020), 1127214 (March 2020);
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2542134

[2] D. J. Israel, K. D. Mauldin, C. J. Roberts, J. W. Mitchell, A. A. Pulkki-
nen, L. V. D. Cooper, M. A. Johnson, S. D. Christe, and C. J. Gramling,
“LunaNet: a Flexible and Extensible Lunar Exploration Communications
and Navigation Infrastructure,” in 2020 IEEE Aerospace Conference,
2020, pp. 1–14.

[3] T. D. Haws, J. S. Zimmerman, and M. E. Fuller, “SLS, the Gateway,
and a Lunar Outpost in the Early 2030s,” in 2019 IEEE Aerospace
Conference, 2019, pp. 1–15.

[4] D. J. Israel, B. L. Edwards and J. W. Staren, “Laser Communications
Relay Demonstration (LCRD) update and the path towards optical relay
operations,” 2017 IEEE Aerospace Conference, 2017, pp. 1-6.

[5] S. Shah, M. Siddharth, N. Vishwakarma, R. Swaminathan and A.
S. Madhukumar, “Adaptive-Combining-Based Hybrid FSO/RF Satellite
Communication With and Without HAPS,” in IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp.
81492-81511, 2021, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3086024.

[6] Integrated Radio Optical Communications (iROC), High-speed bea-
conless optical communications and proven radio-frequency technol-
ogy Available: https://www1.grc.nasa.gov/space/scan/acs/iroc/ accessed
2021-06-15.

[7] J. Downey, M. Evans, J. Downey, R. Reinhart, and D. Mortensen,
Bandwidth-Efﬁcient Communication through 225 MHz Ka-band Relay
Satellite Channel. [Online]. Available: https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/abs/10.
2514/6.2016-5737

[8] E. Grayver, A. Chin, J. Hsu, S. Stanev, D. Kun and A. Parower,
“Software deﬁned radio for small satellites,” 2015 IEEE Aerospace
Conference, 2015, pp. 1-9, doi: 10.1109/AERO.2015.7118901.

[9] B. L. Edwards, R. Daddato, K. Schulz, C. Schmidt, J. Hamkins,
D. Giggenbach, B. Robinson, L. Braatz, and R. Alliss, “An update
on the CCSDS optical communications working group,” in 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Space Optical Systems and Applications
(ICSOS), 2017, pp. 1–9.

[10] B. V. Oaida, W. Wu, B. I. Erkmen, A. Biswas, K. S. Andrews,
M. Kokorowski, and M. Wilkerson, “Optical link design and validation
testing of the Optical Payload for Lasercomm Science (OPALS) system,”
in Free-Space Laser Communication and Atmospheric Propagation,
International Society for Optics and Photonics, vol. 8971, pp. 235 –
249, 2014.

[11] F. Dios, J. A. Rubio, A. Rodr´ıguez, A. Comer´on, Scintillation and beam-
wander analysis in an optical ground station-satellite up-link, in Applied
Optics, vol. 43, no. 19, pp. 3866–3873

[12] K. Cahoy, P. Grenfell, A. Crews, M. Long, P. Serra, A. Nguyen,
R. Fitzgerald, C. Haughwout, R. Diez, A. Aguilar, J. Conklin, C. Payne,
J. Kusters, C. Sackier, M. LaRocca, and L. Yenchesky, “The CubeSat
Laser Infrared CrosslinK Mission (CLICK),” in International Confer-
ence on Space Optics — ICSO 2018, vol. 11180, pp. 358 – 369, 2019.
[13] M. H. Almekhlaﬁ, A. S. Ibrahim, Y. A. Fahmy, H. M. Elsayed, and
M. M. Khairy, “Hybrid Optical/RF backhauling for 5G Networks,” in
2017 IEEE 28th Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor,
and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2017, pp. 1–5.

[14] W. Zhang, S. Hranilovic and C. Shi, “Soft-Switching Hybrid FSO/RF
Links Using Short-Length Raptor Codes: Design and Implementation,”
in IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 27, no. 9,
pp. 1698-1708, December, 2009.

[15] M. M. Abadi, Z. Ghassemlooy, S. Zvanovec, D. Smith, M. R. Bhatnagar
and Y. Wu, “Dual Purpose Antenna for Hybrid Free Space Optics/RF
Communication Systems,” in Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 34,
no. 14, pp. 3432-3439, July, 2016.

Waseem Raza received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees
in Telecommunication Engineering from the Univer-
sity of Engineering and Technology at Taxila, Taxila,
in 2014 and 2016, respectively. He is currently pur-
suing towards his Ph.D. in Electrical and Computer
Engineering from the University of Oklahoma, USA.
His research interests include AI and ML techniques
for 5G and beyond wireless networks.

Ethan Abele received his master’s degree in elec-
trical engineering from Oklahoma State University
in 2016. He is currently pursuing a Ph.D. as part
of the Ultrafast Terahertz Optoelectronic Laboratory
(UTOL) at Oklahoma State University. His research
interests include free space optical (FSO) and tera-
hertz wireless communication technologies.

John O’Hara (M’05 - SM’19) received his BSEE
degree from the University of Michigan in 1998 and
his Ph.D. from Oklahoma State University (OSU)
in 2003. He was a Director of Central Intelligence
Postdoctoral Fellow at Los Alamos National Labora-
tory (LANL) and worked on numerous metamaterial
projects involving dynamic control over chirality,
resonance frequency, polarization, and modulation
of terahertz waves. In 2017 he joined OSU as an
assistant professor in Electrical & Computer En-
gineering. His current research involves terahertz
wireless communications, terahertz sensing and imaging with metamaterials,
IoT, and light-based sensing and communications. He has 3 patents and around
100 publications in journals and conference proceedings.

Behnaz Sadr received her bachelor’s degree in
electrical and electronics engineering from Bilkent
University, Ankara, Turkey. She graduated from Ok-
lahoma State University in 2011 with her master’s
degree in electrical engineering. Since 2018, she has
been working towards a PhD in computer engineer-
ing at the University of Tulsa. Her current area of
interest is free-space optical communication.

Peter LoPresti
received his bachelor’s degree
in electrical engineering from the University of
Delaware in 1988 and his Ph.D. in electrical engi-
neering from Penn State University in 1994. He has
been a member of the electrical engineering faculty
at the University of Tulsa since 1994, performing
research in nonlinear optics, optical sensors, artiﬁcial
vision, free-space optics and optical networking. He
is Director of the Optical Networking Laboratory
and the Integrated Spectral Analysis Instrument at
The University of Tulsa. He has won numerous
awards for teaching and research at the University of Tulsa, and co-edited
the CRC Handbook of Neuroprosthetic Methods.

Ali Imran (Senior Member, IEEE) is a Williams
Presidential Associate Professor in ECE and director
of the AI4Networks Research Center at the Univer-
sity of Oklahoma. His research interests include AI
and its applications in wireless networks and health-
care. His work on these topics has resulted in several
patents and over 100 peer reviewed publications.
He is an Associate Fellow of the Higher Education
Academy, U.K.

8

Wooyeol Choi (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in electronic engineering from Yonsei
University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2001, and the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering
from Seoul National University, Seoul, in 2003 and
2011, respectively. From 2011 to 2018, he was with
the Texas Analog Center of Excellence (TxACE),
The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX,
USA, ﬁrst as a Research Associate and later as
an Assistant Research Professor. Since 2018, he
has been an Assistant Professor with the School of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater,
OK, USA. His research is focused on the design and characterization of
integrated circuits and systems for various applications from RF to terahertz
frequency range.

Ickhyun Song (S’07-M’11) received his B.S. and
M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea, in
2006 and 2008, respectively, and his Ph.D. degree
in electrical and computer engineering from Georgia
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA in 2016. From
2008 to 2012, he was Design Engineer at Samsung
Electronics, Hwasung, Republic of Korea. In 2018,
he joined the faculty at Oklahoma State University,
and was Assistant Professor in the School of Electri-
cal and Computer Engineering. From 2021, he has
been with the Department of Electronic Engineering at Hanyang University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. His research interest includes extreme-environment
electronics, RF/millimeter-wave circuits and systems, memory technologies,
and device physics and modeling.

Serhat Altunc received his PhD in Electrical Engi-
neering from University of New Mexico in 2007.
He is currently working at Goddard Space ﬂight
Center, NASA and he is leading multiple Satel-
lite and Ground Communication Research activities.
Dr. Altunc is a ﬂight and ground communication
technologist with antenna, RF and Communication
systems background. He published over 100 papers
in refereed journals, book chapter, conference pro-
ceedings and presentations.

Obadiah Kegege serves as the Deputy Project
Manager for the Geostationary Carbon Cycle Ob-
servatory (GeoCarb) mission in the Earth Science
Projects Division at NASA Goddard Space Flight
Center. Dr. Kegege previously served in the tech-
nical management for a number of projects: Ka-
band Arraying Development; GOES Remote Ground
Station development in Australia (collaboration with
NOAH and USAF); and Ocean Color Instrument
(OCI), part of the Plankton, Aerosol, Cloud, ocean
10
Ecosystem (PACE) mission. Dr. Kegege had
years of research and technology development supporting communication
and navigation systems for space exploration. He has authored/co-authored
several publications related to space communication systems and network
architectures. Dr. Kegege obtained his BS in Control and Instrumentation
Electronics from the University of Houston, MSEE from the University of
Texas Pan American and a PhD from the University of Arkansas. Dr. Kegege
is a member of IEEE, SPIE, NSBE, Instrumentation, Systems, and Automation
Society (ISA), and National Technical Association (NTA).

Sabit Ekin received his Ph.D. degree in Electri-
cal and Computer Engineering from Texas A&M
in 2012. He is
University, College Station, TX,
currently a Jack H. Graham Endowed Fellow of
Engineering and an Assistant Professor of Electrical
and Computer Engineering at Oklahoma State Uni-
versity. He worked as a Wireless System Engineer
at Qualcomm between 2013 and 2016. His research
interests include the design and analysis of wireless
systems in both, including mmWave and terahertz
communications for 5G and Beyond technologies,
visible light sensing & communications, non-contact health monitoring, and
Internet of Things applications.

