Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Accretion and Outﬂows in Young Stars with CUBES

J.M. Alcal´a · G. Cupani · C. J. Evans · M. Franchini · B. Nisini

2
2
0
2

r
a

M
9
2

]

R
S
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
1
8
5
5
1
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract The science case on studies of accretion and
outﬂows in low-mass (<1.5M(cid:12)) young stellar objects
(YSOs) with the new CUBES instrument is presented.
We show the need for a high-sensitivity, near-ultraviolet
(NUV) spectrograph like CUBES, with a resolving power
at least four times that of X-Shooter and combined
with UVES via a ﬁbrelink for simultaneous observa-
tions. Simulations with the CUBES exposure time cal-
culator and the end-to-end software show that a signif-
icant gain in signal-to-noise can be achieved compared
to current instruments, for both the spectral contin-
uum and emission lines, including for relatively em-
bedded YSOs. Our simulations also show that the low-
resolution mode of CUBES will be able to observe much
fainter YSOs (V ∼22 mag) in the NUV than we can to-
day, allowing us extend studies to YSOs with background-
limited magnitudes. The performance of CUBES in terms

Based on observations made with the VLT under programs
089.C-0143(A) and 097.C-0741(A)

J.M. Alcal´a
INAF-Osservatorio Astronomico di Capodimonte,
Moiariello 16, 80131 Napoli, Italy
E-mail: juan.alcala@inaf.it

via

G. Cupani
INAF-Osservatorio Astronomico di Trieste, Via G.B.
Tiepolo, 11, I-34143 Trieste, Italy
IFPU–Institute for Fundamental Physics of the Universe,
Via Beirut, 2, I-34151 Trieste, Italy

C. J. Evans
UK Astronomy Technology Centre, Royal Observatory,
Blackford Hill, Edinburgh EH9 3HJ, UK

M. Franchini
INAF-Osservatorio Astronomico di Trieste, Via G.B.
Tiepolo, 11, I-34143 Trieste, Italy

B. Nisini
INAF-Osservatorio Astronomico di Roma, Via di Frascati
33, 00078 Monte Porzio Catone, Italy

of sensitivity in the NUV will provide important new
insights into the evolution of circumstellar disks, by
studying the accretion, jets/winds and photo-evaporation
processes, down to the low-mass brown dwarf regime.
CUBES will also open-up new science as it will be able
to observe targets that are several magnitudes fainter
than those reachable with current instruments, facil-
itating studies of YSOs at distances of ∼ kpc scale.
This means a step-change in the ﬁeld of low-mass star
formation, as it will be possible to expand the science
case from relatively local star-forming regions to a large
swathe of distances within the Milky Way.

Keywords Stars: pre-main sequence, low-mass –
Accretion, accretion disks – protoplanetary disks ·
stars: variables: T Tauri · CUBES instrument

1 Introduction

The study of protoplanetary disks is a rapidly grow-
ing research ﬁeld. Protoplanetary disks play a pivotal
role in determining the initial conditions for planet for-
mation, and many of their characteristics are only now
being unveiled by new observational facilities at high
angular and spectral resolution, over a wide range of
wavelengths, from X-ray to radio.

The way in which circumstellar disks evolve and
form protoplanets is strongly inﬂuenced by the pro-
cesses of mass accretion onto the star, ejection of out-
ﬂows and photo-evaporation in winds of the disk mate-
rial ([45], [28]). A proper understanding of the impact of
these phenomena requires comprehensive study of dif-
ferent physical processes throughout the ﬁrst 107 yr of
the star-disk evolution.

Observationally, the study of these processes is con-
ducted via multi-wavelength investigations, in particu-

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

J.M. Alcal´a et al.

lar by studying classical T Tauri stars (CTTS), which
are young (a few 106 yr), very low- to solar-mass stars
that are actively accreting mass from planet-forming
disks. In the current magnetospheric-accretion paradigm
for CTTS, the strong stellar magnetic ﬁelds truncate
the inner disk at a few stellar radii ([27], [49]). Gas
ﬂows from this location onto the star along the stellar
magnetic ﬁeld lines, forming an accretion shock at the
stellar surface. The heated (T∼104K) optically-thick,
postshock gas and optically-thin, pre-shock gas emits
in the Balmer and Paschen continua and in many spec-
tral lines ([45]). At the same time, magnetically driven
winds carry away the angular momentum of the ac-
creting gas, thereby preventing the star from spinning
up. Meanwhile, the accretion shocks produce strong UV
and X-ray emission (e.g. [18]) that irradiates and photo-
evaporates the disk.

Through spectroscopic surveys of young stellar ob-
jects (YSOs) in nearby (d < 500pc) star-forming re-
gions, the mutual relationships between accretion, jets
and disk structure have been addressed (e.g. [2], [36]
[31] [57] [64]), but further aspects remain unexplored,
mainly because of the low sensitivity and, in some cases,
the limited spectral resolution currently available in the
near-ultraviolet (NUV). For instance, YSOs in distant
(∼kpc scale) star-forming regions, where low metallicity
eﬀects may have an important impact on the accretion
process, have been poorly studied.

Development of the new Cassegrain U-Band Eﬃ-
cient Spectrograph (CUBES) for the Very Large Tele-
scope (VLT) [76] may enable important progress in the
investigation of accretion and winds-outﬂows in solar-
type young stars.

In this contribution we present the CUBES science
case on accretion and wind-outﬂows in YSOs. Hence-
forth we use the terms CTTS or YSOs to refer to solar-
type young stellar objects. In Sect. 2 relevant previous
work and the need for a NUV instrument with high
spectral resolution and sensitivity for studies of YSOs
is highlighted. In Sect. 3 the expected performances of
CUBES on typical solar-type YSOs are presented, tak-
ing into account the possibility of a ﬁbrelink to the
Ultraviolet and Visible Echelle Spectrograph (UVES)
on the VLT. For background context, Sect. 4 intro-
duces relevant ongoing YSO projects that will inﬂuence
CUBES operations, and in Sect. 5 we summarise some
of the key topics in the ﬁeld that CUBES will address.
Finally, a summary and conclusions are presented in
Sect. 6.

2 Previous work and the need for sensitivity
and spectral resolution

2.1 Measurements of accretion rates

˙Macc, can be derived from the
The mass accretion rate,
energy released per unit time in the accretion shock (ac-
cretion luminosity Lacc; see [40], [44]) given the stellar
properties, in particular stellar mass M(cid:63) and radius R(cid:63).
Observationally, this requires measurements of excess
ﬂux in the continuum and lines with respect to sim-
ilar non-accreting template stars. Such measurements
are best performed at ultraviolet (UV) wavelengths (λ
< 4000 ˚A) with the Balmer continuum excess emission
and the Balmer jump (see [46], [47], [1], [2], [57], and
references therein).

On the other hand, accretion is a highly variable
process ([15], [48], [22], [73]) which leads to a range of
˙Macc values for a given object when measured at dif-
ferent epochs (see [23], [24], [16]). Variability in YSOs
induces dispersion in ˙Macc hence, in the observed ˙Macc–
M(cid:63) and ˙Macc–Mdisk scaling relationships, but cannot
explain the large scatter of more than 2 dex in log ˙Macc
at a given YSO mass. Such scaling relationships are
predicted by the theory of viscous disk evolution ([55],
[45], [70] and references therein) but the ˙Macc–Mdisk re-
lationship has been conﬁrmed observationally only re-
cently by spectroscopic surveys in strong synergy with
ALMA surveys of disks in star-forming regions ([9], [56],
[67], [62]).

2.1.1 The Balmer continuum

The continuum excess emission in YSOs is most easily
detected as Balmer continuum emission (see [72], [40]
and references therein). Such continuum excess emis-
sion has been used in the past to derive the accretion
luminosity, Lacc, by ﬁtting the YSO spectra with the
sum of the photospheric spectrum of a non-accreting
template and the emission of a slab of hydrogen (see
[46], [69], [57], [1], [2] and references therein). The ac-
cretion luminosity is given by the luminosity emitted
by the slab. Figure 1 shows an example of the proce-
dure in the region of the Balmer jump, applied to the
X-Shooter spectrum of the T Tauri star GQ Lup.

In the case of X-Shooter spectra, the wide wave-
length range (3000-25000˚A) allows the stellar and ac-
cretion parameters to be self-consistently derived by
ﬁnding the best ﬁt among a grid of slab models and
using the continuum UV-excess emission, while con-
straining both the spectral type of the target and the
interstellar extinction towards it. The best ﬁt is found
by minimizing a χ2
like distribution (see Fig. 1 in [58]).

Accretion and Outﬂows in Young Stars with CUBES

3

Fig. 1 Example X-Shooter spectrum of the classical T Tauri
star GQ Lup in the region of the Balmer jump (in red). The
spectrum of a non-accreting YSO template of the same spec-
tral type as GQ Lup is shown in green. The continuum emis-
sion from a hydrogen slab is shown by the black continuous
line. The best ﬁt to the data with the emission predicted by
the slab model is shown in blue. Figure adapted from [2].

The procedure requires a good absolute ﬂux calibra-
tion (better than ∼15%) throughout the widest possible
spectral range.

High sensitivity and spectral resolution in the NUV
is needed for a better deﬁnition of the Balmer jump, and
to improve the ﬁt to the continuum. This is particularly
important in cases of low accretion rates and YSOs
with spectral types earlier than about K3, where the
contrast is low between continuum excess emission and
the photospheric + chromospheric emission ([3] and see
Sect. 5.1.2). A sensitivity greater than e.g. X-Shooter
is needed to detect the NUV excess emission in low-
luminosity and slightly embedded YSOs.

2.1.2 Lacc–Lline relationships: issues with high Balmer
lines

It is well known that Lacc, and therefore ˙Macc, is cor-
related with the line luminosity, Lline, of H i, He i and
Ca ii lines (e.g. [63], [19], [46], [69], [1], [2] and refer-
ences therein). These latter works provide Lacc–Lline
correlations simultaneously and homogeneously derived
from the UV to the near-infrared (NIR), underlying the
importance of these emission features as accretion diag-
nostics. These accretion tracers are key diagnostics with
which to estimate Lacc via the correlations mentioned
above when ﬂux-calibrated spectra below λ∼3700 ˚A are
not available. Examples of these correlations, drawn
from measurements in X-Shooter spectra, are shown in
Fig. 2.

At low Lacc values, detection of the high Balmer
lines is challenging due to limited sensitivity. In fact,
most of the lower-left points in Fig. 2 for the H 15 line
are represented by upper limits on Lline. As concluded
in previous works (e.g. [69], [1], [4]), the average Lacc

Fig. 2 Examples of Lacc–Lline correlations for Balmer lines
as labelled on each panel. Each point represents the Lacc and
Lline measurement from the X-Shooter spectrum of an indi-
vidual YSO. Lacc was determined from the slab modelling
as explained in the text (see also Fig. 1), while Lline is cal-
culated from ﬂux measurements of the lines and adopting a
distance to the individual YSO. Leftward arrows represent
upper limits on Lline. The red lines represent the best linear
ﬁt to the data. Figure adapted from [2].

and ˙Macc derived from several diagnostics, measured
simultaneously, has a signiﬁcantly reduced error and
can also be used to simultaneously check the extinction.
This argues for simultaneous spectroscopy from the UV
to the longest practicable wavelengths, at the highest
possible sensitivity.

Note that diﬃculties at the high Balmer lines may
arise because of line blending, in particular when low
low-resolution is used. Fig. 1 shows that the crowding
of the high Balmer lines leads to blending that eﬀec-
tively shifts the Balmer limit from 3646˚A to the appar-
ent jump at ∼3700˚A. Balmer lines in strongly accreting
YSOs are intrinsically broad (∆V (cid:39) 250 km/s) hence,
the blending issues in such objects cannot be circum-
vented, even at the highest available resolution. A high
resolution, however, may help to both better study the
line proﬁles and disentangle narrow lines superimposed
on the H i proﬁle (see e.g. Fig. 5).

2.1.3 X-Shooter–UVES comparison

In this practical example we use data of the YSO Sz 88 A,
a T Tauri star in the Lupus star-forming region. With
an estimated ˙Macc∼3.2×10−9M(cid:12)/yr ([2], [3]), this star
is an active accretor, hence its spectrum is rich in emis-
sion lines and exhibits strong continuum excess emis-
sion in the UV. The interstellar extinction toward the
object is low (AV=0.25 mag, [3]) and the source is suf-
ﬁciently bright (V=13.2 mag) for high-resolution spec-
troscopy with e.g. UVES.

4

J.M. Alcal´a et al.

A comparison of X-Shooter and UVES data1 for this
object, in the spectral region around the Balmer jump,
is shown in Fig. 3. For comparison purposes, we have
normalised the UVES data to the X-Shooter ﬂux at
3660 ˚A.

decrements. These authors analysed the Balmer decre-
ments up to the H 15 line, using Hβ (=H 4) as the ref-
erence value.

As shown in Fig. 3, lines up to H 25 were detected in
the X-Shooter spectrum of Sz 88 A. Hence, we use these
data here to exemplify the behaviour of the decrements
in the high Balmer lines. Line ﬂuxes were measured on
the same X-Shooter spectrum, following the method-
ologies described in [2]. The ﬂuxes were then corrected
for interstellar extinction (AV=0.25 mag, [2]) adopting
the extinction curve from [33]. The resulting Balmer
decrements are shown in Fig. 4. For the same reasons
as discussed in [8] we also used the Hβ line as the refer-
ence value. At the X-Shooter resolution, the H(cid:15) (=H 7)
line is not resolved from the Ca iiλ3969 ˚A line.

Fig. 3 Portions of the X-Shooter (red) and UVES (blue)
spectra of the YSO Sz88A (large panel). The upper left in-
sert shows the corresponding exposure times, resolutions and
S/N ratios. A zoom of the region around the Balmer jump is
shown in the lower panel. Balmer emission lines up to H 25 are
labelled. The UVES data were normalised to the X-Shooter
ﬂux at 3660 ˚A.

Whereas UVES provides a spectral resolution that
is more than a factor of ten larger than that from X-
Shooter, the S/N ratio is seven times lower, despite
the much longer exposure time, even in an object as
bright as Sz 88 A. Lines up to H 25 can be detected
in the X-Shooter spectrum, but they are not appar-
ent in the UVES data because of the low S/N. For the
same reason, structure is not seen in the line proﬁles
in the UVES data. Note, however, that the X-Shooter
spectrum was acquired more than four years before
the UVES observation. Therefore, the non-detection of
the high Balmer lines with UVES could be a conse-
quence of lower accretion activity in Sz 88 A during the
UVES observations. All this suggests the need for much
higher sensitivity in the NUV than that of UVES when
aiming at detection of emission diagnostics during low-
accretion phases or in very weak accretors.

2.1.4 Physical conditions of the emitting gas

An important diagnostic for deriving the physical con-
ditions (e.g. density and temperature) of the accreting
gas is to use the H i line ratios, in particular by compar-
ing the Balmer decrements with model predictions (e.g.
[51]). Based on the X-Shooter data by [2], [8] presented
a detailed study of the Balmer, Paschen and Brackett

1 Unpublished data from ESO programme 089.C-0143(A),

PI. B. Nisini.

Fig. 4 Balmer decrements as a function of quantum num-
ber for the star Sz 88 A (blue dots), where the Hβ line (n=4)
has been used as the reference value. The line ratio corre-
sponding to H(cid:15) (n=7) is shown as an upper limit because of
problems of blending with the Ca iiλ3969 ˚A line. The green
and red continuous and dashed lines show models from [51]
with densities and temperatures as labelled.

For lines up to about H 15 the Balmer decrements in
Sz 88 A follow the type-4, or L-shape, trend as deﬁned
in [8]. As demonstrated by these authors, this L-shape
decrement is very well described by models ([51]) of
optically thick H i emitting gas with a temperature in
the range 7500–8500 K and densities 11.4< log(NH)<12
(see also the two lower-right panels in Fig. 11 of [8]).
However, the trend of the decrements for lines with
quantum number higher than ∼15 inverts the slope,
possibly indicating optically-thin emission from gas at
lower temperature. This behaviour was also observed
by [68] in the hydrogen spectrum of the brown dwarf
2MASS J05382543−0242412 (or σ-Ori 500) based on X-
Shooter data. The authors concluded that the physical
conditions of the emitting gas inferred from the hydro-
gen spectrum of this brown dwarf are in contrast with
the predictions of the magnetospheric accretion mod-
els, which predict much higher temperatures. This kind

Accretion and Outﬂows in Young Stars with CUBES

5

of analysis can only be performed for bright and highly
accreting objects, where the high-n Balmer lines can
be detected. However, the understanding of discrepan-
cies with models requires accurate measurements of the
Balmer decrement up to high n-number in samples of
objects with diﬀerent accretion activity, which requires
a greater sensitivity than so far available and the high-
est possible spectral resolution.

2.2 Wind/outﬂow tracers

Mass loss through highly collimated jets and slow disk
winds is a key mechanism driving accretion and con-
tributing to disk dissipation. Previous X-Shooter sur-
veys of YSOs ([64], [65]) have studied the rate of occur-
rence of collimated jets, deriving a tight link with the
properties of slow winds, and establishing a relation-
ship between the rate of mass loss in the outﬂow and
the mass accretion rate ([65]).

While the [O i] 6300 ˚A line has provided the histor-
ical foundation for identifying and measuring jets and
slow disk winds, for insights into the physical conditions
of the diﬀerent outﬂow manifestations one needs to ob-
serve several forbidden lines, probing diﬀerent excita-
tion regimes. In this respect, a key line in the NUV spec-
tral range is the [O ii] line at 3726 ˚A, as the [O ii]3726
/ [O i]6300 ﬂux ratio can be directly used to infer the
degree of plasma ionisation. Knowledge of this is fun-
damental to infer the total gas density (once the elec-
tron density is known from other line ratios, such as
the [O i]5577/6300 ratio) and thus to have a correct
measurement of the mass-loss rate, which is a critical
parameter to constrain the diﬀerent models for disk dis-
sipation and thus understand the protoplanetary disk
evolution and planet formation (e.g. [50])

Gas ionization is low in T Tauri outﬂows (e.g. a frac-
tion of 0.1-0.3) so the [O ii] 3726 ˚A line is usually weak
and therefore requires sensitive NUV observations to
detect it in diﬀerent sources. In addition, and as illus-
trated in Fig. 5, a spectral resolution higher than that
provided by X-shooter is also needed to resolve the line
into components at diﬀerent velocities and thus mea-
sure the ionization fraction in each of them. This ex-
ample eﬀectively shows that the [O ii] can be resolved
into two components, possibly of low and high velocity,
that cannot be resolved at the X-Shooter resolution. We
note that the [O ii] is a doublet at 3726.0/3728.8 ˚A and
what we are seeing in Fig. 5 are two velocity compo-
nents of the [O ii]3726.0 ˚A line, separated by 0.7 ˚A i.e.
about 56 km/s which is a typical velocity separation in
T Tauri outﬂows. The other component of the doublet
at 3728.8 ˚A (at 2.8 ˚A from the 3726.0 ˚A line) is barely

visible above the noise in the UVES spectrum, as ex-
pected having a radiative rate a factor of 10 smaller
than the 3726.0 ˚A line.

Notably, the intensity of the forbidden line in Fig. 5
remains approximately the same, whereas the intensity
of permitted lines, such as H 13 and H 14, is clearly
changing. As mentioned before, the latter may be a con-
sequence of variable accretion, as the UVES spectrum
was acquired more than four years after the X-Shooter
observation.

Fig. 5 Portions of the X-Shooter (red) and UVES (blue)
spectra of Sz 88 A in a spectral range around the [O ii] 3726 ˚A
line. The spectra are the same as in Fig. 3. The UVES data
were normalised to the X-Shooter ﬂux at 3660 ˚A.

3 CUBES performance for YSO studies

The current topics in YSO studies and limits of obser-
vations outlined in Sect. 2 argue for a high-sensitivity
spectrograph such as CUBES, with a resolving power at
least four times that of X-Shooter, and possibly linked
to UVES for simultaneous observations with both in-
struments. We now present results from simulations to
quantify the potential performance of CUBES in the
context of YSO studies.

The primary operational mode of CUBES is ex-
pected to have a resolving power R≥20,000 over the
spectral range from 3000 ˚A to 4050 ˚A. Taking advantage
of the high-sensitivity provided by CUBES in the near-
UV, a second operational mode with R≈7,000 over the
same spectral range is foreseen to allow the investiga-
tion of background-limited objects for science cases not
requiring the high-resolution mode. In addition, a ﬁbre-
link to UVES for simultaneous observations at longer
wavelengths is included in the conceptual design [76].

To investigate the instrument performance for the
YSO cases we used the exposure time calculator (ETC)2

2 http://archives.ia2.inaf.it/cubes/#/etc

6

J.M. Alcal´a et al.

and the end-to-end simulator (E2E) software3 devel-
oped for CUBES [35]. To apply these tools to our sci-
ence case, accurately ﬂux-calibrated spectral templates
of YSOs are needed, with good S/N (>90) in the NUV,
and with a resolution similar or higher than that ex-
pected for CUBES. Real spectra, simultaneously satis-
fying such characteristics, are not available, while reli-
able models of spectra reproducing the complete YSOs
phenomenology do not yet exist. Real data that most
closely satisfy these requirements are the X-Shooter
spectra. Despite their lower resolution, the general spec-
tral shape can be used to predict the S/N of the con-
tinuum (and the higher S/N expected for the emission
lines). We therefore used these as our input templates,
in particular those of the YSOs discussed in Sect. 2,
namely GQ Lup and Sz 88 A. A shortcoming of the X-
Shooter data is that the S/N drops signiﬁcantly for λ
< 3250 ˚A hence, for simplicity, we set the ﬂux to zero
below this wavelength.

3.1 High-resolution mode

Brighter objects (V<19 mag): We used the X-Shooter
observation of GQ Lup (Sz 75; SpT=K6, [3]) as our in-
put template, assuming AV=0 mag. We used the CUBES
ETC to estimate the performance for V=10 mag and
19 mag, in adopted conditions of seeing=1 arcsec and
airmass=1.2, with predicted S/N ratios (at λ=3600 ˚A)
of ∼320 and 10, in 5 min and 1 hr, respectively. For an
input template with a weak continuum Balmer emis-
sion, and with an earlier spectral type than GQ Lup
(e.g. MY Lup, SpT=K0, [3]), slightly lower values of
S/N are predicted, with S/N = 300 in 5 min and 9
in 1 hr for V=10 mag and 19 mag, respectively. Adopt-
ing V=18.5 mag (for the MY Lup template) we ﬁnd
S/N=14 in 1 hr; this magnitude is typical of YSOs in
the low-metallicity region Sh2-284 [25].

Adopting a later M6 template (2MASS J16095628−
3859518 or Lup818s in [1]) with V=19 mag and the
same conditions in the ETC yielded S/N≈10 in 1 hr.
This example highlights the interesting prospect of sys-
tematically studying accreting brown dwarfs at rela-
tively high resolution in the UV for the ﬁrst time.

Faint objects (V>19 mag): For objects as faint as V=
20 mag, we use the X-Shooter data of Sz 88 A as the in-
put template, which also has a very good S/N and was
used to exemplify the behaviour of the Balmer decre-
ment in Sect. 2.1.4. This template is shown in the left-
hand panels of Fig. 6 for the cases of AV=0 and 3 mag

3 https://cubes.inaf.it/end-to-end-simulator

of visual extinction. Using the CUBES ETC and adopt-
ing conditions of seeing=0.8 arcsec and airmass=1.2, we
estimate a S/N of 12 and 6 at λ =3600 ˚A for the two
AV values, respectively, in 1.5 hrs of exposure and with
binning ×2 in the spatial direction. The S/N ratio at
3600 ˚A as a function of exposure time is shown in the
right-hand panels of Fig. 6 for the two AV values. We
also used the E2E simulator with the same template
and observing assumptions and recovered an estimated
S/N that was in very good agreement with the ETC.

For comparison with the above results, we obtained
S/N≈5 at ∼3600 ˚A in our X-Shooter spectrum of the
young brown dwarf 2MASS J05382543− 0242412 (σ-
Ori 500 with V=20 mag, AV=0 mag, [68]). This 1.5 hr
exposure was done under similar conditions as those as-
sumed for the ETC predictions above, meaning that in
the faint example (with AV=0) CUBES would provide
data with twice the S/N and about four times better
resolution than X-Shooter. In addition, the quality of
the CUBES data for moderately embedded objects will
be suﬃcient for the studies discussed in Sec. 5.

It is worth mentioning that the S/N ratio per pixel
provided by the ETC does not take into account any op-
timal extraction of the 1-dimensional spectra and there-
fore the predicted S/N value is expected to improve in
case of optimal extraction from the 2-dimensional im-
ages. Also, the S/N of the emission lines will be higher
than for the continuum.

3.2 Low-resolution mode

We make use of the E2E software to simulate the low-
resolution mode of CUBES, adopting the ﬁrst conﬁg-
uration described in Sect. 4.2 of [35], which uses six
slices of 1 arcsec each. With the same input parame-
ters as in the previous subsection (Sz 88 A template,
V=20 mag, seeing = 0.8 arcsec, airmass=1.2, Texp =
1.5 hr, λ =3600 ˚A) we obtained the results shown in
Fig. 7, namely S/N values of 20 and 10 for the AV=0
and 3 mag models, respectively, with a spatial binning
×4 and wavelength binning ×3 (which still yields a sam-
pling well above the Nyquist limit). The noise break-
down histograms are also shown in the right-hand pan-
els of the ﬁgure. Note the limited contribution of the
target on the spectrograph arm ‘0’, which is due to the
zero ﬂux at λ <3250 ˚A in the input template.

This simple exercise shows that a signiﬁcant gain
in S/N, both in continuum and lines, can be achieved
with the CUBES low-res. mode, and suggests that ob-
servations of even fainter YSOs can be attempted if
we are able to trade spectral resolution for sensitivity.
Hence, pushing to lower ﬂux limits, for V=22 mag and

Accretion and Outﬂows in Young Stars with CUBES

7

Fig. 6 Results of the CUBES ETC for the faint case discussed in the text. The template spectra for visual extinctions of AV=0
and 3 mag are shown in the upper and lower left-hand panels, respectively. Note that the unreddened ﬂux of the template
corresponds to the actual magnitude of Sz 88 A (V=13.2 mag), but it is internally normalised to V=20 mag in the ETC. The
ETC results for 1.5hr exposures for the two AV cases are shown in the right-hand panels. The blue curves with dots in the
right-hand panels show the S/N ratio as a function of exposure time for λ =3600 ˚A. The resulting S/N ratios at 3600 ˚A are
labelled in red. All the plots were extracted from the ETC.

AV=0 mag, with Texp =2 hr and adopting the same pa-
rameters as before, the E2E simulator yields the results
shown in Fig. 8. The predicted S/N is ∼5 at λ =3600 ˚A,
but it is >10 for many emission lines, which opens-up
the possibility to extend studies done with X-Shooter
to YSOs with background-limited magnitudes.

We note that the result from the E2E simulator is
the combination of the extracted spectra from all the
instrument slices (see [35]); in our simulations we only
use three slices but most of the object’s ﬂux will go
through the central slice, hence we expect an optimal
extraction of this slice would further improve the ﬁnal
S/N, compared to the estimates shown here.

3.3 Link with UVES

The simultaneous ﬁt of the Balmer continuum and phys-
ical parameters of YSOs is best when the widest possi-
ble spectral window is available, which requires obser-
vations that extend redwards far beyond the CUBES
range (see Sect. 2). A ﬁbrelink to UVES for observations
with both instruments simultaneously would make this
possible. As accretion is a highly variable process, the

simultaneous link is necessary for the ﬁtting procedure
described in Sect. 2.

Introducing a ﬁbrelink entails a reduction in the
UVES throughput, so this is only an eﬃcient option
if the performance of UVES with the ﬁbrelink is suﬃ-
ciently good to deliver the required observations within
the time needed for CUBES observations. The concep-
tual design provides a 40% throughput for the ﬁbre-link
at >5000 ˚A. We estimated the exposure times required
to reach a S/N=10, adopting the unreddened spectral
template shown in Fig. 6 (in the reddened case, the
NUV performance will be the more limiting factor); for
airmass=1.2 and seeing=0.8 arcsec for:

• CUBES ETC: continuum near the [O ii] 3726 ˚A line,
V=19.5 mag, with the high-resolution option and
binning ×2 spatially, gives S/N≈10 in 1 hr.

• UVES ETC: continuum near the [O i] 6300 ˚A line,
V=20.5 mag (scaled to mimic the reduced through-
put of the ﬁbrelink compared to normal UVES oper-
ations), with a 1.0” slit, and the red-arm (580 nm)
setting. The latter combination gives a resolution
R≈40,000 with sampling of >5 pixels. With 2×2
binning we recover a S/N≈5.5 in 1 hr. Binning this
by a further factor of three (oversampling, degrad-

8

J.M. Alcal´a et al.

Fig. 7 Results from the CUBES E2E simulator for the low-resolution mode and the faint case (V=20 mag) discussed in the
text. The left-hand panels show the resulting S/N as a function of wavelength for visual extinctions AV=0 and 3 mag as
indicated. Note the higher S/N of the emission lines with respect to the continuum and the zero S/N for λ <3250 ˚A due to the
cut of ﬂux in the input X-Shooter data. The right-hand panels show the noise breakdown for the two corresponding AV values.
The two histograms in each panel are the photons/pixel of each component as coloured and labelled in the legend, for the two
instrument arms (0 or 1 on the x-axis, the ‘blue’ and ‘red’ arms, respectively). Plots extracted from the E2E simulator.

ing resolution to match CUBES), gives a compara-
ble S/N in a similar exposure time; i.e. the UVES
exposure time ﬁts within the CUBES observation.

Without the ﬁbrelink, a red-arm UVES exposure of
∼1200s gives comparable S/N (ignoring the preset and
separate acquisition time), i.e. each combined (CUBES
+ UVES) observation eﬀectively saves half an hour of
otherwise separate UVES observations in this example.

4 Synergies with other projects

For background context of future programmes in this
ﬁeld, we now brieﬂy introduce some on-going large pro-
grammes on YSOs that will have strong synergies with
CUBES observations.

4.1 ALMA disk surveys

The Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) pro-
vides suﬃcient sensitivity and resolution at sub-mm
wavelengths to detect and measure the mass, Mdisk, of
dusty protoplanetary disks around YSOs with a mass
down to 0.1 M(cid:12) ([9], [10], [67], [14], [20]). Such surveys
have provided the demographics of disks in nearby star-
forming regions. The synergy of these surveys with the
studies of the properties of the central objects, such
˙Macc, have
as stellar mass, M(cid:63), and accretion rate,
provided important constraints on models of viscously
evolving disks by conﬁrming the correlations of Mdisk
with M(cid:63) and ˙Macc (see Sect. 5.1.3), although with sig-
niﬁcant scatter. However, these synergies did not in-
clude statistically signiﬁcant samples of YSOs with M(cid:63)≤
0.1M(cid:12), preventing investigation of whether the scaling
relationships are diﬀerent for low-mass substellar ob-
jects to those for stars. Future sensitive ALMA surveys
of compact and small disks in very low-mass YSOs, will

Accretion and Outﬂows in Young Stars with CUBES

9

Fig. 8 Upper panel: the E2E input spectrum of Sz 88 A with and without taking into account airmass (black dashed and
continuous lines, respectively) for the case of a V=22 mag YSO and AV=0 mag.; the background contribution is shown with
the blue line. Lower panel: the E2E output S/N as a function of wavelength (dashed line) for a 2 hour exposure. Note the zero
S/N for λ <3250 ˚A due to the cut of ﬂux of the input X-Shooter data. Plots extracted from the E2E simulator.

allow investigation of the correlations down to the low-
mass brown dwarf regime.

4.2 ULLYSES & ODYSSEUS

The public Hubble Space Telescope UV Legacy Library
of Young Stars as Essential Standards (ULLYSES) sur-
vey will enable signiﬁcant advances in the study of as-
trophysical disk accretion processes. A total of 500 or-
bits of this Directors Discretionary Time programme
has been dedicated to far-UV spectroscopy with the
Cosmic Origins Spectrograph (at R≈18,000) and low-
resolution NUV/optical spectroscopy with the Space
Telescope Imaging Spectrograph of tens of solar-type
YSOs. The targets cover a range in stellar mass, accre-
tion rate, and age (e.g., [2], [57]).

A large, international team has initiated the Out-
ﬂows and disks around Young Stars: Synergies for the
Exploration of ULLYSES Spectra (ODYSSEUS) project
to bring together the broad expertise required to re-
solve the fundamental problems on accretion and wind
on YSOs through the investigations enabled by ULLY-
SES [29], and to coordinate the ambitious datasets of
simultaneous and contemporaneous observations that
will enhance the impact of the public data (e.g. PENEL-
LOPE [59]). We anticipate strong synergies of future
CUBES observations of YSOs with ODYSSEUS science
products.

4.3 PENELLOPE

The ESO Large Programme (106.20Z8) PENELLOPE
([59], [32]) at the VLT is providing contemporaneous

10

J.M. Alcal´a et al.

high-resolution (UVES, ESPRESSO) and UV-NIR mid–
resolution (X-Shooter) spectra of the ULLYSES tar-
gets to provide their accretion/wind and stellar physical
and kinematical properties. The project involves more
than 50 researchers and, together with ODYSSEUS,
will provide well characterized targets in terms of accre-
tion/wind and stellar properties. These will then serve
as a bright benchmark sample for CUBES programmes.

4.4 GHOsT

The GIARPS High-resolution Observations of T Tauri
stars (GHOsT) ([38], [34], [4]) is a GIARPS@TNG op-
tical/IR high-resolution spectroscopic survey of a ﬂux-
limited, complete sample of T Tauri stars in the Taurus
star-forming region. This ongoing survey will homoge-
neously derive (i.e. avoiding systematics due to non-
simultaneous observations) stellar and accretion/outﬂow
parameters of sources in Taurus, and constrain the prop-
erties of the gas in the inner disk regions. This survey
is in synergy with existing ALMA disk observations in
the region (e.g. [54]), so the programme will directly
link the processes occurring in the star-disk interac-
tion region and the overall disk structure, providing a
unique, rich, and robust observational reference for disk
evolutionary models.

5 Studies of YSOs with CUBES

The high performance of CUBES in terms of spectral
resolving power and sensitivity will mostly broaden our
knowledge on accretion and outﬂows in YSOs, but will
also open-up new science as it will be able to observe
targets that cannot be reached with current facilities. In
this section we describe some of the YSO topics that can
be addressed with CUBES, and with the proposed link
to UVES. Except for line proﬁle analysis (line shapes
and peak position, widths and kinematics), these stud-
ies require a good absolute ﬂux calibration (∼15% or
better, see Sect. 2.1) throughout the widest spectral
range. If this requirement cannot be satisﬁed for simul-
taneous CUBES + UVES observations, contemporane-
ous photometry will be needed, from the NUV to the
reddest possible wavelength.

5.1 Accretion

High throughput observations at R≥20,000 will enable
more detailed study of the accretion process than cur-
rently possible, via precise modelling of the Balmer
jump, and by studying the higher-order Balmer lines.

The high Balmer and Ca ii H (3968 ˚A) & K (3933 ˚A)
lines provide diagnostics of the accretion funnel ﬂows
and heated chromosphere in the post-accretion shock
region (e.g., [5]).

As shown in Sect. 3.2, observations of objects down
to V=22 mag with CUBES will be possible with the
low-res. mode. By scaling the X-Shooter spectrum of
Sz 88 A (V=13.2 mag) to V=22 mag, we derived line
ﬂuxes a factor ∼3×10−4 lower than those discussed in
Sec 2.1.4. Thus, considering the Gaia DR2 distance of
158 pc for Sz 88 A, and assuming AV=0 mag, it would
be possible in principle to observe strong accretors sim-
ilar to Sz 88 A up to a distance of ∼9 kpc with CUBES,
with line ﬂuxes in the range of 7.5×10−16 to 2.2×10−17
erg s−1 cm2, respectively for the Balmer lines from Hα
to H 15, and down to 4.2×10−19 erg s−1 cm2 for H 25.
Of course, the ultimate reach of such observations will
be limited by extinction, particularly given the average
empirical rule of one magnitude of extinction per kpc
(implying AV≈9 mag at 9 kpc) combined with greater
extinction towards the Galactic plane. Nonetheless, our
tests highlight that CUBES will allow us to study YSOs
at ∼kpc scale distances for the ﬁrst time.

As seen in the previous sub-sections the high-resolution

mode oﬀers the possibility of observations of relatively
reddened (AV=3 mag) YSOs with V=20 mag (see Sect. 3.1),
which translates to objects similar to Sz 88 A at a dis-
tance of up to ∼3.5 kpc.

In the case of very low-mass objects (M(cid:63)<0.1M(cid:12)),
such as 2MASS J16095628−3859518 (or Lup818s in [1]
and [3]; SpT=M6; V≈18 mag; logLacc= −4.31; log ˙Macc=
−10.96) in Lupus, the limiting V=22 mag in the low-
resolution mode implies a dilution in ﬂux by a factor
∼2.5×10−2, theoretically meaning a limiting log(Lacc)≈
−6 and log( ˙Macc) (cid:46) −11, with Lacc and ˙Macc in units
of L(cid:12) and M(cid:12) yr−1, respectively.

5.1.1 High Balmer lines and physical conditions of
accreting gas

Our previous studies with X-Shooter ([1], [2], [8]) showed
an important similarity of the physical conditions in the
accreting gas for objects with very diﬀerent ˙Macc, which
was suggested by a number of properties. One was the
comparable behaviour of the Balmer decrements down
to H 15 for diﬀerent objects, while another was the sim-
ilarity of the Lacc–Lline relations which, to zeroth order,
are linear, with slopes varying between 0.99 and 1.18 for
the hydrogen lines, and 0.90 to 1.16 for the He I lines.
This means that, over a range of ﬁve orders of magni-
tude in Lacc, a similar fraction of the accretion energy is
emitted in each line, independently of their excitation
potential and optical depth. This is shown in Fig. 9

Accretion and Outﬂows in Young Stars with CUBES

11

where the fractional line luminosities (Lline/Lacc) for a
few example lines are plotted as a function of Lacc in
log scale. We used the Lacc–Lline relationships by [1] to
produce this plot. The relations are very stable across
the examined stellar parameters, suggesting that the
physical conditions of the accreting gas are very similar
in all objects. Some evidence of a diﬀerent behaviour of
the Balmer decrements at high Balmer lines, possibly
indicating diﬀerent physical conditions of the accreting
gas, were discussed in Sect. 2.1.4.

Fig. 9 Fractional Lline/Lacc line luminosity as a function of
Lacc in log scale for example diagnostic lines as labelled. The
relationships between line luminosity and accretion luminos-
ity by [1] were used to produce the plot.

CUBES observations of relatively bright YSOs (with
V<19 mag) in the high-res. mode will allow us to in-
vestigate the decrements in a more detailed fashion, as
well as extending the Lacc–Lline calibrations to the high-
order Balmer lines, hence further investigate the phys-
ical conditions of the accreting gas at high quantum
numbers. The ODYSSEUS-PENELLOPE and GHOsT
projects (see Sect. 4) will provide bright and very well
characterised targets (in terms of physical and accre-
tion properties) that will be perfect targets for CUBES
observations. The extended Lacc–Lline calibrations will
be critical for estimates of Lacc in much fainter objects,
where ﬁts to the Balmer jump will not be possible be-
cause of the low S/N of the continuum, but where the
emission lines are expected to be well detected.

CUBES alone would be in principle suﬃcient for
these studies, but the simultaneous UVES link would
provide more diagnostics in the red for a more complete
analysis. The resolution of CUBES will also be helpful
for the analysis of the line proﬁles, providing further
information on the physical and kinematical properties
of the accreting gas (e.g. [8]).

5.1.2 Accretion at advanced stages

Transition disks (TDs) are protoplanetary disks that
show evidence of inner holes and gaps, as observed in
millimeter interferometric observations ([6], [71], [7])
and in the dip of the mid-IR spectral energy distribu-
tion (e.g. [60]). The leading explanation for the presence
of inner holes and gaps in the dust distribution of TDs
is photo-evaporation (e.g. [28], [71]).

Low-mass pre-main-sequence stars with transitional
disks accreting at very low rates are likely in the ﬁ-
nal stages of inner disk evolution, and probably have
already formed proto-planets ([66]). Hence, identifying
and investigating such slow accretors may help us to un-
derstand planet formation. However, measurements of
low ˙Macc are challenging. In general, weak accretion is
not easily detectable in the region of the Balmer jump.
Some previous studies attempted ˙Macc measurements
in TDs using other tracers, such as trends between the
lines width and ˙Macc (e.g. [61], [21]). However, such
estimates depend heavily on rather uncertain scaling
relations (see discussion in [1]). Using the Lacc–Lline re-
lationships is in principle possible. However, at very low
accretion levels the chromospheric contribution to the
emission budget may be comparable to Lacc and must
therefore be disentangled.

Another important aspect regarding YSOs in ad-
vanced stages is represented by the i possible degener-
acy of stellar and accretion parameters in objects with
spectral types earlier than about K3. In these relatively
early-type objects the low contrast between the con-
tinuum excess emission and the photospheric + chro-
mospheric emission, may prevent a reliable assessment
of accretion. For example, Fig. 10 shows the case of
the star MY Lup; the solution on the accretion param-
eters based on low-res. spectra alone may be ambiguous,
with up to an order of magnitude diﬀerence in Lacc (see
e.g. [3]). CUBES will allow us to measure low accretion
rates, by more precisely disentangling the contribution
from chromospheric emission, which is diﬃcult to re-
move in general, but practically impossible if S/N is
low in the NUV. The simultaneous link with UVES will
improve the ﬁtting of continuum excess emission.

5.1.3 Low end of

˙Macc in large surveys

A crucial prediction of the YSO viscous accretion the-
ory is the existence of correlations between the disk
mass (Mdisk) the stellar mass (M(cid:63)) and the mass ac-
cretion rate ( ˙Macc) ([45]). Such correlations have been
conﬁrmed only recently for the disk populations of the
1-3 Myr old Lupus and Chamaeleon I star-forming re-
gions (see Sect. 4.1 and [56] and references therein).

12

J.M. Alcal´a et al.

Fig. 10 Lower panel: extinction corrected low-resolution
spectra of MY Lup (in black) and the non-accreting tem-
plate LkCa 19 (in red). The slab model derived in [2] is also
shown (in blue). The cyan spectrum shows the sum of the
non-accreting template plus the slab emission. Upper panel:
as per the lower panel, but now with the slab model multi-
plied by ten. Note the tiny Balmer jump shown in the inset.
Figure adapted from [3].

The observed relations show, however, a much larger
scatter in ˙Macc (>0.9 dex) than viscous evolution would
predict for 1-3 Myr old populations. The viscous disk
˙Macc (<0.4 dex) at
theory predicts a smaller spread of
˙Macc
older ages. We thus need to measure the spread of
at given Mdisk for carefully selected samples of rela-
tively old YSOs, where accretion activity is expected
to be weak. Recent work with X-Shooter showed the
existence of very high accretion rates in the (>5 Myr)
Upper Scorpius association. CUBES will contribute by
measuring the weak Balmer jump and weak excess emis-
sion, as well as disentangling the contribution of the
chromospheric emission.

Another important point which deserves further in-
vestigation is that there is growing evidence of a change
in the slope of the M(cid:63)– ˙Macc relationship for CTTS with
ages of 2-3 Myr at M(cid:63)<0.2 M(cid:12) ([57] and [2], and see
Fig. 11). Such a break could be related to a faster disk
evolution at low-masses (e.g. [74]). To verify this, the
slope of the ˙Macc–M(cid:63) relationship needs to be sampled
at much lower M(cid:63) and ˙Macc values than done so far.
In Fig. 11 the theoretical limits that CUBES may be
able to reach are shown with the instrument logo. Note
that such limits are much lower than the values for σ-
Ori 500 (2MASS J05382543−0242412), the V= 20 mag
young brown dwarf discussed in Sect. 2.1.4.

CUBES not only will complement the surveys of 1-
2 Myr clusters with accurate ˙Macc determinations, but
its sensitivity will allow us to investigate the accre-
tion process in young brown dwarfs, possibly down to
M(cid:63)∼30MJup and ˙Macc (cid:46) 10−11 M(cid:12)/yr. By studying

Fig. 11 Mass accretion rate ( ˙Macc) as a function of stellar
mass (M(cid:63)) for YSOs in the Lupus clouds (black symbols).
Transitional disks are shown with crossed squares. The po-
sition of the young brown dwarf 2MASS J05382543−0242412
(or σ-Ori 500) is shown with the blue dot. Average errors in
log( ˙Macc) and log(M(cid:63)) are shown in the upper left. Dashed
magenta lines represent the ﬁts to the data as in Eqs. (4)
and (5) from [2]. The CUBES logo shows the region of the
diagram that the instrument may be able to reach. Figure
adapted from [3].

the ˙Macc–M(cid:63) relationship at such limits it will be pos-
sible to investigate whether low-mass objects have in-
deed a faster disk evolution than their more massive
counterparts, as proposed by some disk accretion mod-
els ([74]).

Finally, another important issue regards the valid-
ity of the Lacc–Lline relationships at the very low-mass
regime. Recently [11] have produced a theoretical Lacc–
L(Hα) relationship drawn from modelling of a shock
at the surface of a planetary mass object. These au-
thors show that the new theoretical relationship yields
a much higher Lacc for a given L(Hα) than what the
relationships drawn from YSO spectra would predict.
Hence, the validation of the relationships at the lowest
possible mass is of key importance.

The high-sensitivity makes of CUBES a self-standing
instrument for the studies of accretion in very-low mass
YSOs, although the simultaneous link with UVES would
be helpful for the YSO classiﬁcation.

5.1.4 ˙Macc in low metallicity environments

A very important aspect that has received little atten-
tion so far, mainly because of the limited sensitivity of
the existing intermediate/high resolution instruments,
is the spectroscopic study of YSOs in distant (a few
kpc) star-forming regions. At such distances, the low
metallicity may have an important impact on accretion.

Accretion and Outﬂows in Young Stars with CUBES

13

Photometric studies in low-metallicity regions (e.g.
[26], [17] and references therein) suggest that metal-
poor stars accrete at higher rates than solar-metallicity
stars in nearby Galactic star-forming regions. As a con-
sequence, most stars forming in a low-metallicity envi-
ronment should experience disk dispersal at an earlier
stage (in less than about 1 Myr) than those forming
in solar metallicity environments (where disk dispersal
may last up to 5-6 Myr). Thus, metallicity may play a
crucial role on circumstellar disk evolution, hence on
the time scale available for planet formation.

Typical solar-mass YSOs at kpc distances are faint
(V>18 mag, see [25]) so require the signiﬁcant increase
in sensitivity that CUBES will provide compared to
current instruments. CUBES observations will allow us
to investigate the Balmer jump, hence Lacc and ˙Macc
at low Z (<0.2 Z(cid:12)) and answer questions such as: are
the Lacc–L(cid:63) relationships the same at Solar metallicity?
Are the Balmer decrements similar to those at Solar
metallicity? What are the eﬀects of local and external
UV radiation ﬁelds (i.e. external photo-evaporation)?

CUBES will enable studies of accretion at low metal-
licities, as well as the eﬀects of local UV ﬁelds on accre-
tion and winds – weak ﬁelds should not inﬂuence the
disks, whereas strong ﬁelds may modify the ionisation
rate in the disk leading to larger mass-loss rates ([39]).
CUBES can be a self-standing instrument for this
science case, but YSO crowding may represent an issue
for the farthermost SFRs.

5.2 Winds and outﬂows

As mentioned in Sect. 2.3, the outﬂow activity in YSOs
is a phenomenon strictly related to accretion at diﬀerent
mass regimes. The study of such outﬂows enables us
to elucidate the relationship between mass ejection and
accretion, and test the universality of the star formation
mechanism as a function of central YSO mass.

In particular, forbidden lines from the UV to the
NIR spectral domain can be used to measure the physi-
cal properties (density, temperature and ionisation frac-
tion) of the diﬀerent outﬂow manifestations using diag-
nostic tools speciﬁcally designed for the purpose. Anal-
ysis combining lines at diﬀerent wavelengths originating
from various excitation regimes is important, as applied
to CTTS jets observed with X-Shooter ([13], [37]) and
more recently with the GIARPS instrument ([38]) at
much higher resolution. The CUBES + UVES combi-
nation will provide suﬃcient sensitivity and resolution
to apply such diagnostic tools to studies of fainter and
more distant YSOs jets than possible so far.

To this aim, the CUBES spectral range covers sev-
eral key lines for the study of jets/winds in YSOs. We

already mentioned the importance of the [O ii] 3726˚A
line, in combination with the [O i] 6300 ˚A line, to es-
timate the ionization degree of the jets/winds plasma.
Other important lines providing complementary infor-
mation or tracing excitation regimes not probed by op-
tical/IR lines are also present in the CUBES + UVES
range. For example, the [S ii] doublet at 4069/4076 ˚A
is a useful diagnostic of dense winds in protoplane-
tary disks ([12] and references therein). Also, the little-
studied [Ne iii] 3869 ˚A line signals the presence of high-
energy photons, thus probing either high velocity (>
100 km/s) shocks or X-ray heating [52,53]. The two sce-
narios can potentially be discriminated through CUBES
+ UVES velocity-resolved observations.

Finally, the NUV spectral range includes several
bright [Fe ii] and [Fe iii] lines produced from high en-
ergy levels, which are therefore good tracers of the tem-
perature of the ionised gas. The observation of [Fe iii],
combined with [Fe ii], allows the simultaneous determi-
nation of temperature, density and degree of ionisation,
as well as a precise estimate of the Fe abundance in the
gas. The relevant non-LTE models required to predict
the line fuxes already exist (e.g., [36], [37]).

This analysis approach can be applied to a large
sample of sources having diﬀerent stellar and accretion
properties. In addition, the CUBES spectral resolution
will enable us to distinguish the diﬀerent kinematical
wind components and separately study the properties
of the jets and of the slow winds, as well as investigating
whether the relative importance of these two outﬂow
components changes with age, when the contribution
of photo-evaporation is expected to be dominant.

Following determination of the physical parameters,
˙Mout, can be derived from the lu-
the mass ejection rate,
minosity of spectrally-resolved forbidden lines. This will
allow us to measure the ˙Mout/ ˙Macc parameter, which
critically depends on the jet launching mechanism, and
in turn to infer possible variations in the mass loss ef-
ﬁcency due to modiﬁcations of the inner disk magnetic
and physical properties.

While longer-wavelength data are required for this
case, it is not a strong requirement that they are si-
multaneous in time. In this example, the beneﬁt of the
UVES ﬁbrelink is primarily more eﬃcient operations
than separate observations.

6 Summary and conclusions

The CUBES science case on accretion and outﬂows in
YSOs has been presented. The performance of CUBES,
mainly in terms of its increased sensitivity in the NUV
(3000–4050 ˚A), will allow us to broaden investigations

14

J.M. Alcal´a et al.

of the evolution of circumstellar disks, by studying the
accretion, jets/winds and photo-evaporation processes
down to the low-mass, brown dwarf regime and in more
distant YSOs than done so far. In particular CUBES
will enable:

– more precise ﬂux measurements of continuum and
emission lines in the NUV. Contemporaneous pho-
tometric observations in the same spectral range will
be needed in case the CUBES ﬂux calibration will
not be precise at the 15% level or better.

– detection of weak emission lines (and their line mor-
phology), in particular for the Ca ii H&K and high-
H lines, which are diagnostics of the accretion funnel
ﬂows.

– investigation of the physical conditions of the in-
ﬂowing gas via precise Balmer decrement determi-
nations, including the high-order Balmer lines.
– reﬁnement of the Lacc–Lline relationships by includ-
ing Balmer lines with a high quantum number.
– better deﬁnition of the Balmer jump, as well as de-
tection of weak emission lines, allowing for studies of
low-accretion YSOs, including objects in the latest
stages of evolution.

– studies of accretion and outﬂows in very low-mass
browns dwarfs, and to study YSOs at much larger
distances than done so far, enabling investigation of
the eﬀects of metallicity and external UV-radiation
on accretion and winds.

In conclusion, CUBES observations of YSOs will
lead to a step-change in the study of accretion and out-
ﬂows in solar-type young stars hence, on protoplanetary
disk evolution, as the spectrograph will enable investi-
gation of targets that are several magnitudes fainter
than those reachable with current instrumentation.

Acknowledgements We very much thank the two anony-
mous referees for their comments and suggestions. Finan-
cial support from the project PRIN INAF 2019 ”Spectro-
scopically tracing the disk dispersal evolution (STRADE)” is
warmly acknowledged. This research made use of the SIM-
BAD database, operated at the CDS (Strasbourg, France).

References

1. Alcal´a, J. M., Natta, A., Manara, C., et al., X-shooter
spectroscopy of young stellar objects. IV. Accretion in low-
mass stars and substellar objects in Lupus, Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 561, p. 2 (2014)

2. Alcal´a, J. M., Manara, C., Natta, A., et al., X-shooter
spectroscopy of young stellar objects in Lupus. Accretion
properties of class II and transitional objects, Astronomy
& Astrophysics, 600, p. 20 (2017)

3. Alcal´a, J.M., Manara, C.F., France, K. et al., HST spectra
reveal accretion in MY Lupi, Astronomy & Astrophysics,
629, p. 108 (2019)

4. Alcal´a, J.M., Gangi, M., Biazzo et al., GIARPS High-
resolution Observations of T Tauri stars (GHOsT). III. A
pilot study of stellar and accretion properties, Astronomy
& Astrophysics, 652, p. 72 (2021)

5. Alencar, S. H. P., Bouvier, J., Walter, F. M. et al., Accre-
tion dynamics in the classical T Tauri star V2129 Ophiuchi,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 541, p. 116 (2012)

6. Andrews, S. M., Wilner, D. J., Espaillat, C., et al., Re-
solved Images of Large Cavities in Protoplanetary Transi-
tion disks, Astrophysical Journal, 732, p. 42 (2011)

7. Andrews, S. M., Huang, J., P´erez, L. M. et al., The
disk Substructures at High Angular Resolution Project
(DSHARP).
I. Motivation, Sample, Calibration, and
Overview, Astrophysical Journal letters, 869, p. 41 (2018)
8. Antoniucci, S., Nisini, B., Giannini, T. et al., X-shooter
spectroscopy of young stellar objects VI. H i line decre-
ments, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 99, p. 105 (2017)

9. Ansdell, M., Williams, J. P., van der Marel, N. et al.,
ALMA Survey of Lupus Protoplanetary disks. I. Dust and
Gas Masses, Astrophysical Journal, 228, p. 46 (2016)

10. Ansdell, M., Williams, J. P., Trapman, L. et al., ALMA
Survey of Lupus Protoplanetary disks. II. Gas Disk Raii,
Astrophysical Journal, 473, p. 123 (2018)

11. Aoyama, Y., Marleau, G.-D., Ikoma, M., Mordasini, Ch.,
Comparison of Planetary Hα-emission Models: A New Cor-
relation with Accretion Luminosity, Astrophysical Journal,
917, p. 30 (2021)

12. Ballabio, G., Alexander, R. D., Clarke, C. J., For-
bidden line diagnostics of photoevaporative disc winds,
M.N.R.A.S., 496, p. 2932 (2020)

13. Bacciotti, F., Whelan, E. T. Alcal a, J.M. et al. , The
First X-shooter Observations of Jets from Young Stars, As-
trophysical Journal, 737, p. 26 (2011)

14. Barenfeld, S. A., Carpenter, J. M., Ricci, L. et al., ALMA
Observations of Circumstellar Disks in the Upper Scorpius
OB Association, Astrophysical Journal, 827, p. 142 (2016)
15. Basri, G. & Batalha, C., Hamilton Echelle Spectra of
Young Stars. I. Optical Veiling , Astrophysical Journal, 363,
p. 654 (1990)

16. Biazzo, K., Alcal´a, J. M., Covino, et al., The Chamaeleon
II low-mass star-forming region: radial velocities, elemental
abundances, and accretion properties, Astronomy & Astro-
physics, 547, p. 104 (2012)

17. Biazzo, K., Beccari, G., De Marchi, G., Panagia, N., Pho-
tometric Determination of the Mass Accretion Rates of Pre-
main-sequence Stars. VI. The Case of LH 95 in the Large
Magellanic Cloud, Astrophysical Journal, 875, p. 51 (2019)
18. Bonito, R., Orlando, S., Argiroﬃ, C. et al., Magnetohy-
drodynamic Modeling of the Accretion Shocks in Classical
T Tauri Stars: The Role of Local Absorption in the X-Ray
Emission, Astrophysical Journal, 795, L34

19. Calvet, N., Muzerolle, J., Brice˜no, C. et al., The Mass
Accretion Rates of Intermediate-Mass T Tauri Stars, As-
tronomical Journal, 128, p. 129 (2004)

20. Cazzoletti, P., Manara, C. F., Baobab Liu, H. et al.,
ALMA survey of Class II protoplanetary disks in Corona
Australis: a young region with low disk masses, Astronomy
& Astrophysics, 626, p. 11 (2019)

21. Cieza, L. A., Schreiber, M. R., Romero, G. A. et al., The
Nature of Transition Circumstellar disks. I. The Ophiuchus
Molecular Cloud, Astrophysical Journal, 712, p. 925 (2010)
22. Cody, A. M. & Hillenbrand, L. A. , Precision Photometric
Monitoring of Very Low Mass σ-Orionis Cluster Members:
Variability and Rotation at a Few Myr, Astrophys. Journal
Suppl. Series, 191, p. 389 (2010)

23. Costigan, G., Scholz, A., Stelzer, B., et al.,LAMP: the
long-term accretion monitoring programme of T Tauri stars
in Chamaeleon I , M.N.R.A.S., 427, p. 1344 (2012)

Accretion and Outﬂows in Young Stars with CUBES

15

24. Costigan, G., Vink, J. S., Jorick, S., et al. Temperaments
of young stars: rapid mass accretion rate changes in T Tauri
and Herbig Ae stars, M.N.R.A.S., 440, p. 3444 (2014)

25. Cusano, F., Ripepi, V., Alcal´a, J. M., et al., Pre-
main-sequence stars in the star-forming complex Sh 2-284,
M.N.R.A.S., 410, p. 227 (2012)

26. De Marchi, Guido; Panagia, N., Beccari, G., Photometric
Determination of the Mass Accretion Rates of Pre-main-
sequence Stars. V. Recent Star Formation in the 30 Dor
Nebula, Astrophysical Journal, 846, p. 110 (2017)

27. Donati, J. F., Landstreet, J. D., Magnetic Fields of Non-
degenerate Stars, Annual Review of Astronomy & Astro-
physics, 47, p. 333 (2009)
28. Ercolano, B., Pascucci, I.

, The dispersal of planet-
forming disks: theory confronts observations, Royal Society
Open Science, Volume 4, Issue 4, id.170114 (2017)

29. Espaillat, C. C., Herczeg, G.J., et al. , The ODYSSEUS
Survey. I. Motivation and First Results: Accretion, Ejec-
tion, and disk Irradiation of CVSO 109, Astronomical Jour-
nal, 163, p. 114 (2022)

30. Fang, M., Pascucci, I., Edwards, S. et al., A New Look
at T Tauri Star Forbidden Lines: MHD-driven Winds from
the Inner disk, Astrophysical Journal, 868, p. 28 (2018)
31. Frasca, A., Biazzo, K., Alcal´a, J.M. et al., X-shooter spec-
troscopy of young stellar objects in Lupus: Atmospheric pa-
rameters, membership, and activity diagnostics, Astronomy
& Astrophysics, 602, p. 33 (2017)

32. Frasca, A., Boﬃn, H.M.J., Manara, C. et al., PENEL-
LOPE II. CVSO 104: a pre-main sequence close binary
with an optical companion in Ori OB1, Astronomy & As-
trophysics, 656, p. 138 (2021)

33. Fitzpatrick, E. L., Massa, D., Gordon, K. D. et al.,
An Analysis of the Shapes of
Interstellar Extinction
Curves. VII. Milky Way Spectrophotometric Optical-
through-ultraviolet Extinction and Its R-dependence, As-
trophysical Journal, 886, p. 108 (2019)

34. Gangi, M., Nisini, B., Antoniucci, S. et al., GIARPS
High-resolution Observations of T Tauri stars (GHOsT). II.
Connecting atomic and molecular winds in protoplanetary
disks, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 643, p. 32 (2020)

35. Genoni, M., Landoni, M., Cupani, G. et al., The CUBES
Instrument model and simulation tools, ExA, in press as
part of the CUBES Special Issue

36. Giannini, T., Antoniucci, A., Nisini, B., Solving the Ex-
citation and Chemical Abundances in Shocks: The Case of
HH 1, Astrophysical Journal, 814, p. 52 (2015)

37. Giannini, T., Antoniucci, A., Nisini, B. et al., Empirical
Determination of Einstein A-coeﬃcient Ratios of Bright [Fe
II] Lines, Astrophysical Journal, 798, p. 33 (2015a)

38. Giannini, T., Nisini, B., Antoniucci, S. et al., GIARPS
High-resolution Observations of T Tauri stars (GHOsT). I.
Jet line emission, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 631, p. 44
(2019)

39. Guarcello, M. G., Biazzo, K., Drake, J. J., et al., Disper-
sal timescale of protoplanetary disks in the low-metallicity
young cluster Dolidze 25, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 650,
p. 157 (2021)

40. Gullbring, E., Hartmann, L., Brice˜no, C., & Calvet, N.,
disk Accretion Rates for T Tauri Stars, Astrophysical Jour-
nal, 492, p. 323 (1998)

41. Gullbring, E., Calvet, N., Muzerolle, J. et al., The Struc-
ture and Emission of the Accretion Shock in T Tauri
Stars. II. The Ultraviolet-Continuum Emission, Astrophys-
ical Journal, 544, p. 927 (2000)

42. Hartigan, P., Kenyon, S. J., Hartmann, L., et al., Optical
Excess Emission in T Tauri Stars,Astrophysical Journal,
382, p. 617 (1991)

43. Hartigan, P., & Kenyon, S. J., A Spectroscopic Survey
of Subarcsecond Binaries in the Taurus-Auriga Dark Cloud
with the Hubble Space Telescope, Astrophysical Journal,
583, p. 334 (2003)

44. Hartmann, L. in Accretion Processes in Star Formation,

Cambridge University Press (1998)

45. Hartmann, L., Herczeg, G., Calvet, N., Accretion onto
Pre-Main-Sequence Stars, Annual Review of Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 54, p. 135 (2016)

46. Herczeg, G., & Hillenbrand, L. A. , UV Excess Measures
of Accretion onto Young Very Low Mass Stars and Brown
Dwarfs, Astrophysical Journal, 681, p. 594 (2008)

47. Ingleby, L., Calvet, N., Herczeg, G. et al., Accretion Rates
for T Tauri Stars Using Nearly Simultaneous Ultraviolet
and Optical Spectra, Astrophysical Journal, 767, p. 112
(2013)

48. Jayawardhana, R., Coﬀey, J., Scholz, A., Brandeker, A.,
& van Kerkwijk, M. H., Accretion disks around Young
Stars: Lifetimes, disk Locking, and Variability, Astrophysi-
cal Journal, 648, p. 1206 (2006)

49. Johns-Krull, C. M., Chen, W., Valenti, J. A. et al., Mag-
netically Controlled Accretion on the Classical T Tauri
Stars GQ Lupi and TW Hydrae, Astrophysical Journal,
765, p. 11 (2013)

50. Kunitomo, M., Suzuki, T. K., & Inutsuka, Shu-
ichiro, Dispersal of protoplanetary discs by the combina-
tion of magnetically driven and photoevaporative winds,
M.N.R.A.S., 492, p. 3849. (2020)

51. Kwan, J., & Fischer, W., Origins of the H, He I and Ca
II line emission in classical T Tauri stars, M.N.R.A.S., 411,
p. 2383 (2011)

52. Liu, Chun-Fan, Shang, Hsien, Walter, Frederick M., Her-
czeg, Gregory J., Velocity-resolved [Ne III] from X-Ray Ir-
radiated Sz 102 Microjets, Astrophysical Journal, 786, p.
99 (2014)

53. Liu, C.-F., Shang, H., Herczeg, G. J., et al., Revealing
Ionization Conditions of Sz 102 with Spatially Resolved [Ne
III] Microjets, Astrophysical Journal, 909, p. 196 (2021)
54. Long, F., Herczeg, G. J., Harsono, D. et al., Compact
disks in a High-resolution ALMA Survey of Dust Structures
in the Taurus Molecular Cloud, Astrophysical Journal, 882,
p. 49 (2019)

55. Lynden-Bell, D., & Pringle, J. E., The evolution of
viscous disks and the origin of the nebular variables,
M.N.R.A.S., 168, p. 603 (1974)

56. Manara, C. F., Rosotti, G., Testi, L. et al., Evidence for
a correlation between mass accretion rates onto young stars
and the mass of their protoplanetary disks, Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 591, L3 (2016)

57. Manara, C. F., Testi, L., Herczeg, G. J., et al., X-shooter
study of accretion in Chamaeleon I. II. A steeper increase
of accretion with stellar mass for very low-mass stars?, As-
tronomy & Astrophysics, 604, p. 127 (2017)

58. Manara, C. F. , Accretion onto young stars: the key to
disk evolution, Perspective article for the Star Formation
Newsletter 300. p. 6 (2017)

59. Manara, C. F., Frasca, A., Venuti, L. et al., PENEL-
LOPE: The ESO data legacy program to complement the
Hubble UV Legacy Library of Young Stars (ULLYSES).
I. Survey presentation and accretion properties of Orion
OB1 and σ–Orionis,Astronomy & Astrophysics, 650, p.196
(2021)

60. Mer´ın, B., Jørgensen, J. K., Spezzi, L., et al., The Spitzer
c2d Survey of Large, Nearby, Interstellar Clouds. XI. Lupus
Observed with IRAC and MIPS , Astrophys. Journal Suppl.
Series, 177, p. 551 (2008)

16

J.M. Alcal´a et al.

61. Mer´ın, B., Brown, J. M., Oliveira, I., et al., A Spitzer c2d
Legacy Survey to Identify and Characterize disks with Inner
Dust Holes, Astrophysical Journal, 718, p. 1200 (2010)
62. Mulders, G. D., Pascucci, I., Manara, C. F., et al., Con-
straints from Dust Mass and Mass Accretion Rate Measure-
ments on Angular Momentum Transport in Protoplanetary
disks, Astrophysical Journal, 847, p. 31 (2017)

63. Muzerolle, J., Hartmann, L., & Calvet, N., Emission-
Line Diagnostics of T Tauri Magnetospheric Accretion. I.
Line Proﬁle Observations, Astronomical Journal, 116, p.
455 (1998)

64. Nisini, B., Antoniucci, S., Alcal´a, J. M., Connection be-
tween jets, winds and accretion in T Tauri stars. The X-
shooter view, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 609, p. 89 (2018)
65. Nisini, B., Antoniucci, S., Alcal´a, J. M., X-Shooter Sur-
vey of Jets and Winds in T Tauri Stars, ASSP, 55, p. 103
(2019)

66. Owen, J. E., & Clarke, C. J., Two populations of transi-

tion disks?, M.N.R.A.S., 426, L96 (2012)

67. Pascucci, I., Testi, L., Herczeg, G. J., et al., A Steeper
than Linear disk Mass-Stellar Mass Scaling Relation, As-
trophysical Journal, 831, p. 125 (2016)

68. Rigliaco, E., Natta, A., Randich, S., et al., X-shooter ob-
servations of the accreting brown dwarf J053825.4-024241,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 526, p L6 (2011)

69. Rigliaco, E., Natta, A., Testi, L., et al., X-shooter spec-
troscopy of young stellar objects. I. Mass accretion rates of
low-mass T Tauri stars in σ-Orionis, Astronomy & Astro-
physics, 548, p 56 (2012)

70. Rosotti, G. P., Clarke, C. J., Manara, C. F., & Facchini,
S., Constraining protoplanetary disk evolution using accre-
tion rate and disk mass measurements: the usefulness of
the dimensionless accretion parameter, M.N.R.A.S., 468, p.
1631 (2017)

71. van der Marel, N., Williams, J. P., Ansdell, M., et al.,

Title-Paper, Astrophysical Journal, 854, p. 177 (2018)

72. Valenti, J. A., Basri, G., & Johns, C. M., New Insights
into the Nature of Transition disks from a Complete disk
Survey of the Lupus Star-forming Region, Astrophysical
Journal, 106, p. 2024 (1993)

73. Venuti, L., Bouvier, J., Flaccomio, E., et al., Mapping
accretion and its variability in the young open cluster NGC
2264: a study based on u-band photometry, Astronomy &
Astrophysics, 570, p. 82 (2014)

74. Vorobyov, E. I., & Basu, S., The Bimodality of Accretion
in T Tauri Stars and Brown Dwarfs, Astrophysical Journal,
703, p. 922 (2009)

75. White, R., & Hillenbrand, L. A., On the Evolutionary
Status of Class I Stars and Herbig-Haro Energy Sources in
Taurus-Auriga, Astrophysical Journal, 616, p. 998 (2004)
76. Zanutta, A., Atkinson, D., Baldini, V. et al. CUBES
in press as part of the

Phase-A design overview, ExA,
CUBES Special Issue

