Towards Axiomatic Foundations for Conceptual Modeling 

TOWARDS AXIOMATIC FOUNDATIONS FOR 
CONCEPTUAL MODELING: AN EXAMPLE 

arXiv - Preprint 

Peter Fettke, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany, and German Research Center for 
Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Saarbrücken, Germany, email: peter.fettke@dfki.de  

Wolfgang Reisig, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany, email: 

reisig@informatik.hu-berlin.de  

Abstract  

Conceptual modeling is a strongly interdisciplinary field of research. Although numerous proposals for 
axiomatic foundations of the main ideas of the field exist, there is still a lack of understanding main 
concepts  such  as  system,  process,  event,  data,  and  many  more.  Against  the  background  of  the 
tremendously  gaining  importance  of  digital  phenomena,  we  argue  that  axiomatic  foundations  are 
needed for our discipline. Besides the general call, we provide a particular case study using HERAKLIT. 
This  modeling  infrastructure  encompasses  the  architecture,  statics,  and  dynamics  of  computer-
integrated systems. The case study illustrates how axiomatically well-founded conceptual models may 
look  like  in  practice.  We  argue  that  axiomatic  foundations  do  not  only  have  positive  effects  for 
theoretical  research,  but  also  for  empirical  research,  because,  for  instance,  assumed  axioms  can 
explicitly be tested. It is now time to spark the discussion on axiomatic foundations of our field.    

Keywords: systems composition, data modelling, behavior modelling, composition calculus, algebraic 
specification. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Towards Axiomatic Foundations for Conceptual Modeling 

"Formalization is important to economics, because it allows readers and others to identify the precise 
assumptions that underpin any purported conclusion, to verify that the assumptions really do imply 
this conclusion, and to check how deviations from the assumptions might alter the conclusion." 
Paul Milgrom (2017), p. 3f., Nobel Laureate 2020 

1 

The Field and Branches of Conceptual Modeling 

As numerous other terms in computing disciplines, the term "conceptual modeling" is used to denote a 
particular kind of problem, a possible solution to that problem, and the academic field studying that 
problem and its known solutions: 

(a) Conceptual modeling as a problem: Concepts can be understood as intellectual building blocks. They 
are important for thinking, reasoning, and describing as well as for designing, manipulating, or acting 
in  the  world.  Concepts  are  not  only  used  by  humans  but  are  also  needed  for  communication  with 
machines, e.g. for describing the functionality a running program offers as well as for denoting steps, 
procedures, and variables of an algorithm formulated in a particular programing language. Although no 
consensus on the nature of concepts exists, in general, it can be said that conceptual modeling aims at 
providing a shared understanding of a particular domain of interest (cp. Uschold, p. 96). 

(b) Conceptual modeling as a solution: Conceptual modeling is used in many different contexts, e.g. 
database  modeling,  software  development,  business  process  reengineering,  workflow  modeling, 
software  selection,  configuration  of  enterprise  resource  planning  systems,  and  many  more.  Both  in 
academia and industry, numerous approaches to conceptual modeling emerged. Some speak of hundreds 
or  even  thousands  of  different  approaches.  The  International  Standardization  Organization  (ISO), 
Object Management Group (OMG), or other institutions standardized several approaches, e.g. Business 
Process Modeling Notation (BPMN), Unified Modeling Language (UML), or Petri nets. Others are de 
facto standards since market-leading tools are available supporting particular solutions, e.g. Architecture 
for Integrated Information Systems (ARIS) by Software AG and SAP, or Directly-Follow-Graphs used 
by  leading  process  mining  vendors.  In  general,  each  approach  claims  to  provide  a  solution  for  a 
particular problem of conceptual modeling. 

(c) Conceptual modeling as an academic field of inquiry: Having in mind the wide and heterogeneous 
spectrum of different problems and solutions of conceptual modeling, it is not surprising that the field 
is  interdisciplinary  by  nature.  Although  conceptual  modeling  is  viewed  as  a  niche  topic  in  the 
information systems discipline by Wand and Weber (2017) and others, it is undisputable that conceptual 
modeling  has  longstanding  research  traditions  outside  this  discipline,  too  (Härderer  and  Fill  (2021), 
Hirschheim et al. (1995)). Hence, we conclude that conceptual modeling is a field of its own, consisting 
of several research branches rooted in different academic disciplines. Some important branches of the 
field  and  their  major  outlets  for  publishing  results  are:  business  process  management  (International 
Conference  on  Business  Process  Management,  since  2003),  distributed  systems  and  Petri  nets 
(International Conference on Application and Theory of Petri Nets, since 1980), database systems (e.g. 
International  Conference  on  Conceptual  Modeling,  since  1979),  business  informatics  and  enterprise 
modeling  (Enterprise  Modeling  and  Information  Systems  Architectures,  since  2005,  The  Practice  of 
Enterprise Modeling, since 2008), and software engineering (e.g. International Conference on Model 
Driven  Engineering  Languages  and  Systems,  since  1998).  Additionally,  several  areas  of  theoretical 
computer science, e.g. automata theory, and formal languages, are of central importance for the field as 
a whole, too. 

The problems, solutions, and branches of conceptual modeling give a rich picture of different academic 
ideas important for understanding and designing the world we live in. Against the background of recent 
developments, Recker et al. (2021) started the discussion on important assumptions of the field from the 
perspective of the information systems discipline. We argue that this important discussion should be 
extended in at least two directions: Firstly, it is open whether the identified assumptions are generally 
accepted  in  the  whole  field  of  conceptual  modeling  or  are  only  accepted  in  particular  branches  of 
conceptual modeling. Secondly, we like to deepen the ongoing discussion and direct it to important core 
phenomena of conceptual modeling (cp. Alt (2013), Weber (1997)). In particular, we pose the question: 
Are there more basic assumptions about core phenomena conceptual modeling is dealing with? How 
might  the  understanding  of  these  core  phenomena  might  change  in  the  digital  world?  For  example, 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Towards Axiomatic Foundations for Conceptual Modeling 

central terms of our field such as concept, data, process, object, (sub-) system, and many more are not 
uniformly  defined  and  understood.  In  addition,  the  phenomena  related  to  these  terms  are  not  neatly 
separated from one another but are highly interwoven, both in academia and practice, e.g. there is no 
sharp boundary between the "data" and the "process" in a "system". Data, processes, and systems in the 
world are highly interrelated and integrated, even with a higher degree in the age of "digital first". 

In this position paper, we argue that besides bold and far-reaching speculations, also precise and explicit 
foundations  are  needed  for  the  progress  of  our  discipline.  Conceptual  modeling  as  a  scientific  field 
should not only speculate on important ideas but should also  precisely put forward assumptions and 
derive interesting conclusions which can be verified by others. Particularly, for this end, we focus on 
the central idea of the axiomatic method for foundations for conceptual modeling. In doing that, the next 
Section  summarizes  the  main  idea  of  the  axiomatic  method,  Section  3  sketches  an  example  in  our 
domain. The paper closes with some conclusions in Section 4. 

2 

The Axiomatic Method in Empirical Sciences 

The idea of axiomatizing a body of knowledge is anything but new and can be traced back, at least, more 
than 2,000 years to Euclid who gives axiomatic foundations for geometry (Suppes (2002)). Since then, 
tremendous  progress  has  been  achieved,  e.g.  the  flourishing  field  of  geometry  develops  in  different 
branches with many important applications and different foundations, e.g. (non-) Euclidian geometry.  
Besides particular applications in geometry, the idea of axiomatizing develops in different directions 
and is differently understood today. One widely accepted and well-practiced approach can be understood 
as an informal axiomatizing. This approach is attributed as informal because it does not use a formal 
system to formulate the main ideas of a body of knowledge. The framework used is based on intuitive 
set-theory and combines formal with informal ideas (Suppes (1957)). As such, it is always claimed that 
the formulated ideas can be expressed in the formal system of first order predicate logic. However, in 
everyday scientific practice, just informal language is used. 
The idea for this kind of axiomatizing can be traced back to model theory, as developed in logic and 
mathematics.  Particularly,  the  Bourbaki  group  applies  this  idea  to  overcome  the  basic  crisis  in 
mathematics  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  century  (Bourbaki  (1957)).  However,  in  the  meantime,  this 
approach is the standard approach not only used in mathematics, but also in empirical sciences which 
numerous  examples  clearly  and  impressively  demonstrate.  For  instance,  Suppes  (2002)  provides 
examples from physics, philosophy, psychology, computer science, economics, and semiotics. 
The core idea of an informal axiomatizing is to introduce a mathematical structure S consisting of: 
•  Basic sets: The basic sets define the basic objects of the structure S, e.g the symbol M denotes a 

basic set. 

•  Derived  sets:  Several  relations  can  be  defined  on  basic  sorts  or  derived  sets,  e.g.  the  symbol  < 

denotes a binary relation on M. 

•  Functions: Mathematical functions can be defined as operations on sets, e.g. the symbol f denotes a 

function M on itself. 

•  Properties: Certain properties hold for all elements of the structure S ("axioms"), e.g. for all a, b 

element of M holds: a < b or b < a. 

The axiomatic method is already intensively used in conceptual modeling. Most, if not all computer 
science-oriented branches of conceptual modeling apply the axiomatic method. But, in management-
oriented approaches, this idea is already used, too, which is not only demonstrated by the quote of the 
Nobel Laureate Paul Milgrom cited in Section 1. One of the most prominent examples stemming from 
the information systems discipline is the framework introduced by Wand and Weber (1990) which is 
based  on  Bunge's  work.  Although  many  contributions  relying  on  this  framework  do  not  explicitly 
discuss or contribute to the axiomatic foundations of conceptual modeling, it is indisputable that Wand 
and  Weber  (1990)  apply  the  axiomatic  method.  To  sum  up,  up  to  now,  the  axiomatic  method  has  a 
longstanding academic tradition and it is fully justified that it is not only of major importance for science 
in general but also for the field of conceptual modeling in particular.  

3 

 
Towards Axiomatic Foundations for Conceptual Modeling 

3 

Example 

Next, we illuminate the axiomatic method by an example that sketches some core ideas of HERAKLIT. 
HERAKLIT is an infrastructure for conceptual modeling which particularly addresses the requirements 
for modeling computer-integrated systems in the age of "digital first". A HERAKLIT model of the world 
consists of three pillars: 
•  Architecture: Today's information systems are composed of several sub-systems. A module is the 

basic building block for composing complex systems. 

•  Statics: Structures describe symbolic objects as well as objects in the real or imaginary world, e.g. 

customers, receipts, products, invoices, organizations, employees etc. 

•  Dynamics: Changes in the world are described by a flow of events. 
All  three  pillars  are  strongly  integrated  as  is  demonstrated  by  the  following  example  describing  a 
restaurant business with several branches. All branches are structured according to the same scheme and 
behave according to the same patterns; however, they differ in some details. The scheme of all branches, 
an example of a branch, and a run in this branch are modeled. 
A branch is composed of three modules, namely entry, dining area, and a kitchen (Figure 1a). The major 
objects such as clients, tables, orders, etc. are defined by a signature-structure (Figure 1b). A particular 
instantiation for a branch depicts Figure 1c. Figure 1d shows a particular flow of events in the restaurant: 
Alice and Bob enter the restaurant, order a meal, the meal is concurrently prepared and cooked, and 
served to both customers. After having the meal, the customers leave the restaurant. 
Note, that all concepts of HERAKLIT and all concepts of this example are introduced axiomatically. More 
technically, HERAKLIT integrates well-known concepts, namely, the idea of model theory and axiomatic 
specification (statics), Petri nets (dynamics), and composition calculus (architecture). More technical 
details and case studies are described by Fettke and Reisig (2021a, b). 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

Figure 1. 

Axiomatic modeling: an example based on HERAKLIT. 

(d) 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Towards Axiomatic Foundations for Conceptual Modeling 

4 

Conclusions 

This position paper emphasizes the intellectual power of the axiomatic method in general and for the 
field of conceptual modeling in particular. We strongly agree on the positive aspects of formalization 
mentioned in the quote from Nobel Laureate Paul Milgrom (cp. Section 1). Furthermore, we fully share 
the surprise and wonder described by Weber (1997) on using formalization in our field:  
"[W]e [Wand & Weber] have often been criticized for the formal approach we have used to articulate 
our models. I am perplexed by these criticisms because I cannot conceive of a discipline that is serious 
about its foundations if it proscribes use of mathematics to articulate these foundations." (p. 33) 
Looking back the last decades, it is safe to say that many axiomatic foundations introduced by Wand 
and Weber are well-accepted as well as often empirically tested, particularly in the information systems 
branch of conceptual modeling. However, other branches rely on different axiomatic systems. Hence, 
we believe that it is now time to intensify the discussion on the axiomatic foundations of our field.  
Particularly against the background of digitization, this is of major importance. Most, and foremost, it 
is necessary to explicate what is meant by digital phenomena, e.g. digital data, digital computers, and 
digital ecosystems. Since several branches of conceptual modeling already started the discussion on how 
conceptual modeling can embrace digital transformation, now a deeper discussion is needed. 
Besides the major advantages of the axiomatic method, we do not argue for the abandonment of other 
forms of scientific inquiry. The axiomatic method can easily be integrated with other methods such as 
bold speculations and empirical approaches like experiments and case studies. With this in mind, we 
strongly believe in a prosperous future of our field. 

References 

Alt, S. (2017): Work System Theory: Overview of Core Concepts, Extensions, and Challenges for the 

Future. Journal of the Association for Information, 14(2), 72-121. 

Bourbaki., N. (1950): The Architecture of Mathematics. The American Mathematical Monthly, 57(4): 

221-232.  

Fettke, P., Reisig, W. (2021a): Modelling service-oriented systems and cloud services with HERAKLIT. 
Advances  in  Service-Oriented  and  Cloud  Computing.  Communications  in  Computer  and 
Information Science (CCIS), Springer, 77-89. 

Fettke, P.; Reisig, W. (2021b): Handbook of HERAKLIT. HERAKLIT working paper, v1.1, September 10, 

2021, http://www.heraklit.org 

Härer, F., Hans-Georg Fill, H.-G. (2020): Past Trends and Future Prospects in Conceptual Modeling - 
A Bibliometric Analysis. 39th International Conference on Conceptual Modeling 2020: 34-47.  
Hirschheim,  R.,  Klein,  H.  K.,  &  Lyytinen,  K.  (1995).  Information  Systems  Development  and  Data 
Modeling: Conceptual and Philosophical Foundations. Cambridge University Press.  
Milgrom, P. (2017): Discovering Prices - Auction Design in Markets with Complex Constraints. New 

York: Columbia University Press. 

Recker, J., Lukyanenko, R., Jabbari, M., Samuel, B. M., & Castellanos, A. (2021). From Representation 
to  Mediation:  A  New  Agenda  for  Conceptual  Modeling  Research  in  a  Digital  World.  MIS 
Quarterly, 45(1), 269-300. https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2020/16207  

Suppes, P. (2002): Representation and Invariance of Scientific Structures. Chicago: CSLI Publications. 
Suppes. P. (1957): Introduction to Logic. New York et al: Van Nostrund Reinhold. 
Uschold, M., Gruninger, M. (1996): Ontologies: principles, methods and applications. The Knowledge. 

Enginering Review, 11(2), 93-136.  

Wand,  Y.,  Weber,  R.  (2017):  Thirty  Years  Later:  Some  Reflections  on  Ontological  Analysis  in 

Conceptual Modeling. Journal of Database Management, 28(1), 1-17. 

Wand, Y., Weber, R. (1990): An Ontological Model of an Information System. IEEE Transaction on 

Software Engineering, 16(11): 1282-1292. 

Weber, R. (1997): Ontological Foundations of Information Systems. Melbourne: Coopers & Lybrand. 

5 

 
