1

Post-Disaster Communications:

Enabling Technologies, Architectures,

and Open Challenges

Maurilio Matracia, Student Member, IEEE, Nasir Saeed, Senior Member, IEEE,

Mustafa A. Kishk, Member, IEEE, and Mohamed-Slim Alouini, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract

The number of disasters has increased over the past decade where these calamities signiﬁcantly affect

the functionality of communication networks. In the context of 6G, airborne and spaceborne networks

offer hope in disaster recovery to serve the underserved and to be resilient in calamities. Therefore,

our paper reviews the state-of-the-art literature on post-disaster wireless communication networks and

provides insights for the future establishment of such networks. In particular, we ﬁrst give an overview of

the works investigating the general procedures and strategies for facing any large-scale disaster. Then, we

present technological solutions for post-disaster communications, such as the recovery of the terrestrial

infrastructure, installing aerial networks, and using spaceborne networks. Afterwards, we shed light

on the technological aspects of post-disaster networks, primarily the physical and networking issues.

We present the literature on channel modeling, coverage and capacity, radio resource management,

localization, and energy efﬁciency in the physical layer part, and discuss the integrated space-air-ground

architectures, routing, delay-tolerant/software-deﬁned networks, and edge computing in the networking

layer part. This paper also includes interesting simulation results which can provide practical guidelines

about the deployment of ad hoc network architectures in emergency scenarios. Finally, we present several

promising research directions, namely backhauling, cache-enabled and intelligent reﬂective surface-

enabled networks, placement optimization of aerial base stations (ABSs), and the mobility-related

aspects that come into play when deploying aerial networks, such as planning their trajectories and

the consequent handovers (HOs).

Maurilio Matracia and Mohamed-Slim Alouini are with the Computer, Electrical, and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering

(CEMSE) Division at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955, Makkah, Kingdom of

Saudi Arabia (email: maurilio.matracia; slim.alouini@kaust.edu.sa);

Nasir Saeed is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National University of Technology (NUTECH), Islamabad,

Pakistan (email: mr.nasir.saeed@ieee.org).

Mustafa Kishk was with KAUST, CEMSE Division during this work. Currently, he is with the Electronic Engineering

Department at Maynooth University, Co Kildare, Ireland (email: mustafa.kishk@mu.ie).

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

9
1

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

2
v
1
2
6
3
1
.
3
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
Coverage, stochastic geometry, non-terrestrial networks, resilience, backhaul, 6G.

Index Terms

2

TABLE I

MAIN NOMENCLATURE

A2G

AI

CSI

DTN

FSO

HO

IoT

IRS

LEO

LoRa

LTE

Air-to-ground

Artiﬁcial intelligence

Channel state information

Delay-tolerant network

Free space optics

Handover

Internet of things

Intelligent reﬂective surface

Low Earth orbit

Long range

ABS

BER

D2D

FR

HAP

Aerial base station

Bit error rate

Device-to-device

First responder

High-altitude platform

HetNet

Heterogeneous network

IP

LAP

LiFi

LoS

Internet protocol

Low-altitude platform

Light ﬁdelity

Line-of-sight

Long term evolution

MANET Mobile ad hoc network

MDRU Movable and deployable resource unit MEO

Medium Earth orbit

MIMO Multiple-input-multiple-output

Network-in-a-box

NFV

NLoS

Network functions virtualization

Non-LoS

NIB

PDC

PSO

RAN

S2G

SDN

TBS

Post-disaster communication

PPDR

Public protection and disaster relief

Particle swarm optimization

Radio access network

Space-to-ground

Software-deﬁned network

Terrestrial base station

QoS

RF

Quality of service

Radio frequency

SAGIN

Space-air-ground integrated network

SDR

UAV

Software-deﬁned radio

Unmanned aerial vehicle

VANET Vehicular ad hoc network

VHetNet Vertical HetNet

WLAN Wireless local area network

WSN

Wireless sensor network

3

I. INTRODUCTION

While the story of wireless communications tells us the astonishing growth of the achievable

data rates over various mobile generations, the increasing research and business interests on the

idea of ubiquitous connectivity are much younger. Therefore, wireless communication experts

expect that 6G technology will be the ﬁrst to pay special attention to unconnected and under-

connected environments such as low-income, remote, or disaster-struck regions. In this context,

many specialized researchers and entrepreneurs are trying to design and implement alternative

network architectures and strategies speciﬁcally meant to enhance the performances of the current

wireless communication systems, since they are particularly susceptible to calamities (see Fig. 1).

In 2021, almost one hundred million people have suffered from natural hazards. Therefore,

several organizations and companies have provided them with tangible support in such cir-

cumstances. For instance, Alphabet’s Project Loon, in collaboration with AT&T and T-Mobile,

provided connectivity to more than a hundred thousand Puerto Ricans after Hurricane Maria

destroyed the local network infrastructure. Although the balloons deployed by Alphabet enabled

just essential connectivity services, it was an impressive achievement to successfully control

their ﬂight from Nevada by using machine learning algorithms [1]. Furthermore, right after the

earthquake in Haiti on August 14, 2021, International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the

Emergency Telecommunications Cluster (ETC) collaborated in ﬁlling the consequent connectivity

gaps experienced by the suffered region. In particular, they assessed the status of the telecom

services via a mapping platform called Disaster Connectivity Map (DCM). Satellite phones

and Broadband Global Area Network (BGAN) terminals were provided by ITU to Haiti [2].

Finally, it is worth mentioning Elon Musk’s recent efforts in providing a reliable backup Starlink

satellite network to both the Kingdom of Tonga [3] and Ukraine [4], which experienced Internet

disruptions due to a tsunami and a conﬂict with Russia, respectively.

Spatial networks (SNs) including non-terrestrial nodes such as ABSs and/or satellites can

strongly contribute by providing coverage and capacity at relatively low costs and short de-

ployment times. In SNs, the ABSs and satellites operate at very different altitudes; therefore,

designing the physical and networking layer is quite challenging. For instance, different channel

models need to be investigated for characterizing the air-to-ground (A2G), air-to-air, space-

to-air, and space-to-ground (S2G) communication. Moreover, energy-related considerations for

high-altitude platforms (HAPs) and satellites should be considered since they are mostly solar-

4

powered.

Another crucial aspect to consider is that both power plants and transmission lines are usually

susceptible to large scale disasters. In this context, Ref. [5] developed and tested a prototype for

an autonomous anti-disaster solar-powered BS connected to the core network via satellite links.

Other interesting projects on developing post-disaster communication networks are project

Lantern [6], Baculus [7], and portable cell initiative [8]. Project Lantern is a platform based

on the long range (LoRa) protocol and aims to support disaster recovery efforts. It includes

a hardware that is able to autonomously provide WiFi, app-based services (essentially meant

to help ﬁnding supplies), and share useful data to all users through the cloud. Also, machine

learning (ML) is used to make a chatbot assist emergency responders (ERs) by sharing important

information. On the other hand, Baculus creates a WiFi mesh network, where the users are

equipped with a so-called divining rod (i.e., an antenna that guides them towards the closest WiFi

access point). The divining rods are continuously updated via satellites about the conﬁguration

of the mesh network, in order to help more users to connect. Alternatively, the portable cell

initiative project builds portable and temporary systems acting as cell towers, to be deployed in

any unconnected environment. In particular, the so-called micro-cells come in a plug-and-play

fashion and are characterized by a high level of resilience. They can interconnect with each

other in order to create a mesh network which relies on satellite backhaul in order to provide

2G connectivity, even without new SIM cards.

In post-disaster scenarios, connectivity represents a challenging issue and therefore it has

gained importance in research over the last few years. One main reason for this is the difﬁculty

faced when assessing the damages, since a relatively long time is needed to identify the exact

zones that lost connectivity due to the calamity. Moreover, the disaster victims can be trapped in

the rubble, making it hard for emergency responders to locate and rescue them. Several paradigms

can be considered for re-establishing connectivity in post-disaster scenarios. Let us take wildﬁre

detection as an example: apart from conventional solutions such as satellite imaging and remote

camera-based sensing, which are slow and relatively unreliable, the Internet of things (IoT) can be

combined with unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) [9] or even being used in an infrastructure-less

manner. Indeed, IoT-enabled devices can communicate with each other and essentially create a

wireless sensor network (WSN) to inform the users about any signiﬁcant perturbations on their

surrounding environment. To this extent, LoRa technology is often used in order to transfer

data over long distances with low power consumption, at the price of a quite limited capacity.

5

Moreover, novel drone-assisted mesh network architectures, such as the so-called UbiQNet [10],

are capable of combining image processing and deep learning in order to ﬁnd the neighbouring

ﬁrst responders (FR) nodes.

Some other interesting paradigms that have been explored in the literature in order to support

the networking layer are delay-tolerant networks (DTNs) and software-deﬁned networks (SDNs).

The former rely on the Store and Forwarding routing mechanism for making up to the absence

of a direct path between source and destination [11]. SDNs, instead, are meant to decouple

forwarding devices’ data plane from control plane, in order to ease both the management and

the control of the network [12], [13]. These two paradigms can be conveniently combined in

emergency scenarios.

As connectivity is at the heart of humanitarian response in disaster situations, this paper aims

to solicit the up-to-date literature on the key aspects of wireless post-disaster communications

(PDCs), including both terrestrial and non-terrestrial technologies, as well as the consequent

issues involving the physical and the networking layers. Furthermore, the proposed work offers

relevant simulation results: these can be used by network operators and institutions affected by

a calamity in order to estimate the network’s performance depending on the considered setup

circumstances (essentially, the type and number of available nodes as well as the size of the

disaster area).

A. Related Surveys and Reviews

In order to properly describe the signiﬁcance of information and communication (ICT) tech-

nologies in disaster scenarios, many survey papers have been recently published.

Authors in [15] proposed a systematic review on artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) applications

for analyzing and processing big data from social media platforms in emergency scenarios.

Similarly, [16] reviewed social-aware data dissemination approaches and their difference from

traditional data dissemination in disaster situations. In addition, the latest advances regarding the

Fog-Assisted Disaster Evacuation Service (FADE) architecture can be found in Ref. [17].

The work presented in [18] is an overview of non-image-based techniques for accurately

counting people in both indoor and outdoor environments in disaster scenarios. The authors

of [19] presented another exciting survey on the role of large-scale 3D networks such as

hybrid satellite-aerial-terrestrial networks in emergency scenarios, their architectures, trends, and

challenges. General applications of UAVs in disaster management systems have been extensively

6

Fig. 1. Disaster-struck cell tower [14].

reviewed and discussed in [20]. A more speciﬁc review on UAVs’ path planning in smart cities

affected by disasters has been recently proposed in [21], where several network security aspects

are also considered. Ref. [22], instead, surveyed UAV-enabled post-disaster assessment, with

a special focus on the PRISMA project, which targets developing and deploying robots and

autonomous systems that can monitor and intervene in real-time.

A comprehensive review on regulatory and standardization aspects of public safety networks

(PSNs) can be found in [23]. Furthermore, Ref. [24] reviewed emerging paradigms for PSNs,

primarily focusing on how to converge land mobile radio (LMR) and long term evolution (LTE)

technologies. Authors in [25] also compared LMR and LTE in PSNs, with a special focus on the

software environment needed for evaluating the key performance indicators (KPIs). In a recent

survey [26], the authors discussed future designs for PSNs to manage emergency settings, since

in the context of 5G and beyond networks it is required to exploit more advanced technologies

such as autonomous decision-making systems and to combine advanced technologies, such as

network functions virtualization (NFV) and software-deﬁned networking.

Alternatively, [27] surveyed different multihop ad-hoc network paradigms, including mobile

ad hoc networks (MANETs), vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs), and DTNs, and discussed

their importance in the context of disaster response. Reviews on routing and rescue entities’

7

mobility models for MANETs in disaster-struck areas can be found in [28] and [29], respectively.

Authors in [30] studied disaster recovery solutions from the perspective of users and network

solutions such as device-to-device (D2D) and dynamic wireless networks (DWNs), respectively.

Similarly, [31] presented an overview of the current state of the art of communication systems

for mitigating natural disasters, focusing on methods for achieving resilient routing, vulnerability

assessment, and reinforcement of existing networks.

For non-resilient infrastructures, Ref. [32] introduced the network-in-a-box (NIB) concept,

which consists in ﬁtting all the required software and hardware modules in portable devices,

resulting in a dynamic and versatile architecture which can either self- or inter-operate. Authors

in [33] covered the resilience issue as well, showcasing various solutions, including D2D,

UAVs, and IoT. The latter technology is extensively discussed in [34], where IoT-enabled ﬂood

search and rescue (SAR) systems are critically surveyed and a novel IoT-aided integrated ﬂood

management framework based on water-ground-air networks is proposed.

Authors in [35] presented a tutorial-like overview of packet-switched networks by focusing on

their fast data-plane recovery mechanisms, from traditional layer-2 (i.e., data link layer) network

technologies to programmable network paradigms and protocols. Also, [36] presented a state-

of-the-art review, categorizing routing protocols for UAV-assisted VANETs based on design and

functionality. In Ref. [37], wireless technologies for disaster recovery and healthcare applications

were reviewed and compared based on bandwidth, range, and throughput. Contextually, authors

in [38] conducted a systematic review on the most recent technologies for emergency com-

munications. They also introduced a novel architecture, which combines UAV-based wireless

mesh networks and near vertical incidence skywave (NVIS) technologies, in order to enable

communications between moving agents in harsh environments. A summary of the above surveys

and reviews is presented in Table II.

B. Contributions

Based on the relevant surveys discussed above, and to the best of the authors’ knowledge,

there is no single survey that distinctly focuses on the updated communication technologies

and issues in post-disaster situations. Since communication is a prominent part of establishing

post-disaster networks, it is pertinent to analyze the connection between disaster situations and

communication technologies from various aspects, including technical issues, applications, and

8

TABLE II

RELEVANT SURVEYS AND REVIEWS

Year Main focus

2013

Regulations and standards

2016

2017

Resilience, ad-hoc networks’ deployment, routing

LMR-LTE convergence, push-to-talk over LTE

Hybrid satellite-aerial-terrestrial networks

Mobile social networks (MSNs),

D2D, data dissemination

Autonomous systems for post-disaster assessment

MANETs, VANETs, DTN

2018

D2D, DWN

NIB

2019

2020

2021

AI, big data analysis and processing

Wireless technologies for

disaster recovery and healthcare

Indoor and outdoor non-image-based

people counting technologies

LMR, LTE

Routing, MANETs

Autonomous decision-making systems, NFV, SDNs

UAV-assisted VANETs, routing protocols

Wireless technologies for resilient networks

Mobility models, MANETs

Fog computing, disaster evacuation

UAV path planning, network security

IoT-enabled ﬂood SAR systems

Data-plane recovery mechanisms

for packet-switched networks

UAVs for disaster management

2022

Technologies for emergency communications

Paradigms, physical and networking layers, challenges

Ref.

[23]

[31]

[24]

[19]

[16]

[27]

[27]

[30]

[32]

[15]

[37]

[18]

[25]

[28]

[26]

[36]

[33]

[29]

[17]

[21]

[34]

[35]

[20]

[38]

This

paper

challenges. Therefore, this paper offers an overview of the main features of PDCs, with particular

attention to ad-hoc aerial networks. We can thus summarize our contributions as follows:

1) We provide an up-to-date review of PDCs to project the reader in the perspective of the 5G

and beyond generation of wireless communications. In particular, we extensively discuss

9

the most relevant research efforts done over the last decade to design powerful wireless

technologies for PDCs and try to solve recurrent physical and networking layer problems;

2) We present our stochastic-geometry-based simulation results for two realistic post-disaster

network setups, and consequently discuss how to achieve efﬁcient network planning in

such scenarios;

3) Given the numerous aspects deserving further researchers’ attention, we discuss inherent

challenges and present what we believe are the most promising directions for future

research in the area of post-disaster wireless communications. In particular, our interest is

focused on: modulation and coding, backhauling, placement, trajectory and scheduling of

movable nodes, HO management, and content caching.

C. Organization

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec. II discusses the most relevant wireless

technologies for disaster management and recovery. In Sec. III, we review the main physical layer

issues, with a particular focus on the most common channel models as well as the techniques for

improving energy efﬁciency in emergency scenarios. Nonetheless, other literature works referring

to inherent aspects such as coverage, capacity, radio resource management, and localization

are extensively discussed. In addition, the same section offers two realistic use cases about

wireless coverage in disaster environments and exploit a stochastic geometry approach for our

numerical simulations. On the other hand, Sec. IV provides an overview of some recent works on

the networking layer aspects of integrated space-air-ground architectures, routing, delay-tolerant

networking, and software-deﬁned networking. Finally, Sec. VI shows the main future research

challenges, followed by our conclusions in Sec. VII.

The structure of this paper is schematically displayed in Fig. 2.

II. WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES

In post-disaster situations, a timely counteraction is generally required. Therefore, many

wireless technologies have been speciﬁcally designed or even re-adapted for serving victims and

FRs. In this section, we discuss literature works that recently proposed solutions for improving

PDCs, and categorize them depending on the network architecture (namely terrestrial, aerial, or

space enabled networks). A schematic view of a comprehensive network architecture for PDCs

is illustrated in Fig. 3, while Fig 4 compares various cellular paradigms.

10

Fig. 2. Structure of this paper.

A. Recovery of Terrestrial Networks

One main limitation of current network infrastructures is the lack of sufﬁcient redundancy.

Moreover, the most recent occurrences of calamities have often demonstrated that wireless net-

works are very susceptible. Whenever the terrestrial infrastructure gets damaged, it is preferable

to consider repairing it before resorting to other ad-hoc solutions such as ABSs. However, it is

evident that several challenges may arise: tight time constraints, scarce availability of specialized

installers and respective equipment, and harsh environmental conditions are just few examples

of the difﬁculties to be potentially faced.

In this context, the authors of [39] have analyzed the recovery phase of a communication

network, evaluating the advantages of D2D and cellular communication systems operating in

underlay mode. Furthermore, Ref. [40] has investigated the three possible disaster-struck network

Survey OrganizationI.Introduction▪Motivation▪Related surveys and reviews▪ContributionsIII. Physical Layer Issues▪Channel modeling▪Coverage and capacity▪Radio resource management▪Localization▪Energy efficiencyII.Wireless Technologies▪Recovery of terrestrial networks▪Installation of aerial networks▪Using space networksV. Proposed Use Cases▪Small Disasters▪Large DisastersIV. Networking Layer Issues▪Integrated space-air-ground architectures▪Routing▪DTNs▪Edge computingVI. Challenges and Research Directions▪Modulation and coding schemes▪Backhauling▪Optimal placement▪Optimal trajectory ▪Scheduling▪HO management▪Content caching▪IRS-Enabled NetworksVII. Conclusion▪Summary▪Final remarks11

conditions, namely congested, partly functional, or fully isolated, including important consider-

ations on spectrum allocation. Contextually, authors in [41] have promoted RAPID TIMEER, a

system for recording and reporting (via texts, images, and voice) that works independently from

both power and telecommunication infrastructures.

The authors of [42] propose the use of cyber-physical systems, especially in public buses and

drones, to develop a mobile edge infrastructure, where the buses host as BSs, computation units,

and power resources, and are can thus support drones in covering hard-to-reach areas.

Park et al. [43] pushed the NIB concept forward by proposing their vision in the context of 6G,

and the consequent challenges to overcome. The authors also proposed an interesting case study

where NIB’s ﬂexibility is exploited to maximize spectral efﬁciency in maritime communications.

Finally, Sakano et al. [44] suggested deploying so-called movable and deployable resource units

(MDRUs)1, which are essentially vehicle-mounted base stations, as a comprehensive solution

for satisfying the needs of users in disaster recovery situations. Some of the main advantages of

this solution are indeed represented by its agility, prompt installation, and carrier-free usability.

B. Installation of Aerial Networks

Since the recovery of terrestrial networks in disaster-affected regions is usually a long process,

many works focused on quicker solutions such as using aerial networks, with airborne platforms

(drones, balloons, gliders, airships, etc.) working as ﬂying BSs. Depending on the height and

resources of the aerial BS, we can broadly categorize them as low-altitude platforms (LAPs) or

HAPs.

The main challenges associated to aerial networks in disaster scenarios are mostly related

to their deployment and operation. Indeed, advanced technologies are mostly required for:

timely moving and deploying the aerial nodes, controlling their trajectory (especially in case

of swarms of untethered drones, as will be further discussed in Sec. VI-D), ensuring sufﬁcient

ﬂight endurance (which relates to the problem of energy efﬁciency discussed in Sec. III-E).

Depending on the altitude of the aerial node, different types of aerial networks can be used for

various disaster management applications and use cases [45, Chapter 9].

1 Although these units are typically terrestrial base stations, in this paper the acronym ‘TBS’ exclusively refers to any node

of the ﬁxed terrestrial infrastructure, such as a cell tower.

12

1) LAP-Based Solution: Due to their fast implementation, a large number of works discussed

LAPs usage in PDCs. For example, Ref. [46] reviewed disaster management applications and

challenges using UAV networks, especially when combined with WSNs and cellular networks.

Similarly, authors in [47] extensively discussed UAV-aided disaster-resilient networks from a 5G

perspective, including fruitful considerations on the simultaneous occurrence of UAV and D2D

communications and the power control strategies. Furthermore, [48] recently presented the main

topological elements to take into account when deploying ABSs, where various types of UAVs

are compared for typical post-disaster network setups. Authors in [49], instead, introduced a

distributed and scalable message-based system relying on electric vehicles (EVs) and UAVs that

allows to connect shelters by properly partitioning the suffered region (assuming it is sufﬁciently

large). Finally, the main targets of UAV-aided networks, namely ubiquitous coverage, relaying,

and information dissemination, were extensively discussed in [50] together with some design

considerations and performance-enhancing techniques.

A recent trend shows a considerable interest in using optimization tools for aerial networks-

assisted post-disaster communications. For example, authors in [51] used particle swarm opti-

mization (PSO) to adjust UAVs’ antenna altitude and beam angle for post-disaster networks. The

developed framework allows to effectively optimize coverage under the transmit power constraint.

Similarly, authors in [52] proposed another optimization-based work for UAV-aided disaster

communications (i.e., a macro BS supported by UAVs serving hard-to-reach clusters of users),

and validated their framework for ensuring high energy efﬁciency by jointly optimizing UAVs’

deployment and resource allocation. Then, Ref. [53] proposed a uniﬁed framework that considers

UAVs’ trajectory, scheduling, and transceiver design optimization in case of emergency. Similarly,

authors in [54] used a genetic algorithm (GA) to evaluate improvements in terms of throughput

when the ﬂying BSs are optimally placed; in particular, the study showed that the performance of

the network can generally be improved by increasing the number of ABSs and decreasing their

altitude. Also, Ref. [55] recently presented a novel approach to rapidly detect users’ clusters

variations in a post-disaster situation, where data ferry UAVs’ path planning is contextually

optimized to connect the highest number of nodes in a reasonable amount of time. Furthermore,

authors in [56] proposed an integrated aerial-ground network for swift communication recovery

to maximize the time-weighted coverage (i.e., the integration over time of the coverage area

weighted by a time-dependent function) for a given deployment strategy.

The combined use of ABSs and D2D technologies can extend the coverage for PDCs. For

13

instance, authors in [57] proposed a linear programming algorithm for obtaining a suboptimal so-

lution for the problem of maximum rate and coverage of UAV-enabled networks with underlying

D2D communications. However, the latter work neglects the effects of both small-scale fading

and non-line-of-sight (NLoS) transmission. In the same context, [58] introduced two optimal

transceiver designs schemes and a shortest-path-routing algorithm to construct efﬁcient multihop

D2D links in a post-disaster situation.

Besides the aforementioned physical layer issues, various works tackled the network layer

issues in PDCs. For example, [59] discussed the layout of the aerial emergency ad-hoc network

(EANET) for both ad-hoc on demand distance vector (AODV) and zone routing protocol (ZRP),

eventually promoting the latter since it generally leads to a higher packet delivery fraction (i.e.,

the ratio between the number of packets generated at the source and the number of packets

received at the destination). Furthermore, the study in [60] suggested a UAV-DTN based on a

decentralized near-cloud infrastructure with LoRa technology to provide low-power transmission

over long distances. The authors investigated the performances of the network (i.e., long-range

detection/messaging and detection under rubble) in both inside and outside environments, in

order to comprehensively test the proposed technology. Another work [61] recently introduced a

UAV-assisted DTN that takes into account the importance of UAVs’ altitude, since it impacts the

required number of nodes, delay time, and delivery ratio. This work is particularly interesting

because it takes into account also the type of environment (urban, suburban, or rural).

2) HAP-Based solution: HAPs can be either helikites, airships, gliders, or balloons operating

at higher altitudes than LAPs, and their characteristics are intermediate between drones and

satellites. Their main advantage is probably the much longer endurance, which implies they

could even support PDCs without being deployed after the occurrence of a calamity: HAPs can

indeed be aloft for several months, and provide coverage and capacity even in ordinary conditions

of the network, meaning that they are not necessarily an ad hoc solution. On the other hand,

the time they require for proper deployment and relocation (they generally lack a propulsion

system) might be excessive for most of the emergency situations.

Authors in [62] considered helikites to deploy 4G-LTE remote radio head (RRH) and provide

high capacity Internet services in case of emergency. Alternatively, other works use balloons

in disaster-struck areas (recall Google Loon in Puerto Rico) to quickly recover the networks.

For instance, the work presented in [63] proposed a novel network of balloons equipped with

light ﬁdelity (LiFi) transceivers, with a particular focus on the physical design of the platforms.

14

Fig. 3.

Integrated communication systems including the main ad hoc network paradigms, namely VANETs, MANETs, LAPs

(e.g., drones, tethered aerostats), HAPs (e.g., gliders), and low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite systems. The area in orange represents

the disaster-struck zone.

Fig. 4. Qualitative comparison between various types of platforms.

𝟏𝟕−𝟓𝟎𝐤𝐦𝟏𝟔𝟎−𝟏𝟐𝟎𝟎𝐤𝐦𝟏𝟓𝟎−𝟏𝟎𝟎𝟎𝐦𝟓𝟎−𝟏𝟐𝟎𝐦`Working TBSDroneFailed TBSLEO satellitesystemGliderTethered aerostatMDRUMANETMDRUsSatellitesMulti-rotordronesTetheredLAPsHAPsPayload capability and capacityCoverage radiusMobility and relocation flexibility15

Moreover, the authors of [64] propose an interesting wireless balloon monitoring system, where

a high-resolution omnidirectional camera and wireless LAN technologies are exploited to make

bird’s eye views available to ground relay stations. On the other hand, Ref. [65] introduces

a satellite-aided balloon-based wireless relay system which can be deployed in less than four

hours.

Besides ﬂoating balloons, there is a recent trend for using tethered balloons to enable con-

nectivity in disaster situations. Authors in [66] presented a comprehensive overview of the

characteristics of tethered balloons. More recently, Ref. [67] compared various technologies

and promoted the use of WiFi balloon to access social networks in the occurrence of a calamity.

Finally, the work presented in [68] tackled important challenges such as routing and resource

allocation for heterogeneous vertical networks that include not only HAPs, but also satellites

and cell towers. A summary of the papers mentioned in this section can be found in Table III.

C. Using Space Networks

Last but not least, emerging small satellite networks can play a major role in providing

connectivity to the disaster struck regions [76].

Although the main use of satellites in post-disaster scenarios consists in providing backhaul to

the aerial nodes (especially HAPs, as we assumed in Sec, V-2), one interesting research direction

is to design low-latency-LEO satellites that are able to provide also access functionalities to the

users, similarly to ABSs. However, power consumption is still one of the many major issues [77,

Sec. IX-D]. Nonetheless, several works have considered the use of satellites in disaster situations

over the last decade [69]–[75], [78], [79].

For example, Ref. [75] presented three novel architectures, supported by experimental mea-

surements, based on satellite communication (SATCOM) for public protection and disaster relief

(PPDR). The proposed schemes (namely, SATCOM-enabled network with two independent

evolved packet cores, network with synchronized evolved packet cores and multi-user-equipment

router, and hybrid SATCOM-enabled network with the multi-user-equipment router) have dif-

ferent pros and cons, all aiming to minimize the network deployment time while maintaining

the network secure and versatile. In the same context, a combination of Ka-band medium Earth

orbit (MEO) satellites (for backhaul) and LTE (for access) was proposed in [72]. In particular,

their work suggested infrastructure-less and infrastructure-based topologies relying on ad hoc

mobile emergency operations control centers (MEOCs) to provide connectivity to FRs.

SUMMARY OF THE RELEVANT PAPERS ON WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES

TABLE III

Topic

Year Main focus

2016 MDRUs

Recovery of terrestrial networks

2018 Disaster assessment, data inventory, ﬁeld situation recording/reporting

2017 Mobile edge infrastructure, cyber-physical systems

2019

D2D and cellular systems

4G-LTE, D2D, UAVs, MANETs, IoT

2021

6G-NIB, maritime communications

2013 Helikites, 4G-LTE RRH

2014

Balloons, monitoring

EVs, UAVs, area partitioning

2015

DTN, topology, altitude

Balloons, satellites, relaying, deployment time

Coverage, relaying, information dissemination

2016

UAVs, WSNs

Optimal placement, throughput

2017

EANET, AODV, ZRP

Installation of aerial networks

2018

2019

Balloons, LiFi

Tethered balloons

UAVs, resilience, D2D, power control

Implementation of PSO algorithm

Trajectory, scheduling, transceiver design

Transceiver design, routing, D2D

Heterogeneous networks (HetNets), routing, resource allocation

DTN, LoRa

Cluster localization, UAV path planning

2020

Swift communication recovery, time-weighted coverage

Rate, coverage, D2D

WiFi balloons, social network

2021

Deployment, resource allocation

Topological aspects, capacity, types of ﬂeets

LTE-satellite and radio interface

2013

Satellite-gateway links and WINDS

SDR-VSAT systems and coverage

Using space networks

2015

Satellite-LTE integration for disaster recovery

2019

IoT and big data analytics

Weather prediction and evacuation warning systems

2021

Experimental ﬁeld trials on novel satellite-based architectures

16

Ref.

[44]

[42]

[41]

[39]

[40]

[43]

[62]

[64]

[49]

[61]

[65]

[50]

[46]

[54]

[59]

[63]

[66]

[47]

[51]

[53]

[58]

[68]

[60]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[67]

[52]

[48]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

17

Authors in [69] introduced the Chinese initiative called LTE-satellite and comprehensively

discussed its radio interface technology. Then, in [70], the authors presented an experimental work

based on Wideband Internetworking engineering test and Demonstration Satellite (WINDS),

showing several examples of satellite-earth station links. Due to the importance of geospatial data

for IoT-aided disaster management, Ref. [73] discussed the so-called City Geospatial Dashboard

which can be utilized for collecting, sharing, and visualizing geospatial big data.

Other interesting works such as [74] focused on the use of satellites in the context of natural

disasters, speciﬁcally for weather prediction and warnings for easier evacuation. Finally, [71]

discussed multi-mode software-deﬁned radio (SDR) for very small aperture terminal (VSAT)

systems as a possible solution to provide cellular coverage in case of large scale disasters, such

as the great East Japan earthquake occured in early 2011.

D. Important Remarks

Assuming a moderate severity of the calamity, increased network redundancy (whenever

economically feasible) may be the best solution to prevent outages in post-disaster scenarios.

This is because if the infrastructure gets damaged it may be difﬁcult to repair or support it in

a timely manner. Alternatively, there are solutions such as airborne and spaceborne networks;

despite they still present several techno-economic limitations, their deployment has been quite

effective in several cases. Other paradigms such as NIB and MDRU also have the potential to

overcome this issue, at least in case of small disasters.

Nonetheless, it is evident that disasters are often unpredictable and sometimes governments

and network operators are not prepared to face them. Therefore, important efforts are required

to improve at least the general emergency plans and ensure a decent level of network resilience:

while this might not lead to the optimal strategies, it will ensure timely counteractions to any

calamities since all wireless technologies can be helpful in challenging situations.

III. PHYSICAL LAYER ISSUES

In this section, we survey the main topics related to the physical layer of a post-disaster

network. We will mostly focus on the differences between the channel models used for terrestrial,

aerial, and space communications. However, to the best of our knowledge literature works

considering degradation of the environment, for example due to the smoke generated by a wildﬁre

or the debris brought by a tornado, are still missing.

Another important issue that will be covered in this section is related to coverage and capacity

in PDCs. These two performance metrics gain great importance in critical situations, since what

often saves trapped victims’ lives is being able to access emergency information as well as to

share their location to the outer rescuers, which explains why also the problem of localization

18

is included hereby.

A. Channel Modeling

Post-disaster environments can be particularly harsh because of the high degree of scattering

due to the presence of obstacles such as rubble, fallen trees, ash, etc. Therefore, channel modeling

is one of the major aspects of post-disaster communication networks, especially when considering

vertical heterogeneous networks (VHetNets) since the complexity of the network topology is

considerably high. Due to this, the general fading distributions (e.g., Rayleigh, Rician, and

Nakagami-m) are not always applicable in post-disaster scenarios [80]. In this subsection, we

survey the literature about PDCs’ channel modeling for non-terrestrial networks. A summary of

the reviewed papers can be found in Table IV.

1) LAPs: In [81] we can ﬁnd an accurate mathematical model allowing us to estimate the

ABS’ altitude that maximizes the coverage area and a closed-form expression for computing the

line-of-sight (LoS) probability. Then, the authors of [82] provided a statistical propagation model

for predicting the A2G path loss between terrestrial and aerial nodes, given the urbanization level

of the environment and the ABS’ elevation angle. In the latter paper, reﬂections due to objects

and trees where neglected for simplicity, while the one due to buildings was modeled under the

assumption that their surface was made of concrete, which has considerable dielectric parameters

leading to strong reﬂection phenomena; also, the authors assumed knife-edges in order to evaluate

scattering in a deterministic manner, although this implies approximated results.

Furthermore, it should be noted that for urban environments a large percentage of the victims

is usually trapped inside buildings with multiple ﬂoors, which requires to use a tridimensional

model. Therefore, Ref. [83] compared the performances of various path loss models as well as the

impact of indoor and outdoor environments on both uplink and downlink, which in general are

not symmetrical. To model LoS propagation channels usually the Winner II and the free-space

pathloss models are used, whereas for the case NLoS propagation the majority of the works

relies on Winner II and two-ray models. Hence, the authors of [83] investigated the Winner II

19

pathloss model proposed in [84] with an extra blockage component (which refers to the indoor

part of the path), and found it to be the most accurate for urban environments.

Finally, a recent work [80] presented a novel framework to characterize the composite fading

channel and optimize both capacity and energy efﬁciency. In particular, the authors used the

Fisher-Snedecor F distribution to characterize the link between UAVs equipped with intelligent

reﬂective surfaces (IRSs) and trapped users, and proved the effectiveness of their resource

allocation scheme by means of selected simulation results.

2) HAPs: To the best of our knowledge, there are no works exclusively focusing on HAPs’

channel modeling for PDCs. However, several contributions can be extracted from relevant

references with a general validity, as discussed in what follows.

Ref. [85] assumed a Rician fading channel with K factor for analyzing capacity in HAP

networks. The choice of using the Rician fading channel model can be justiﬁed by noting that

HAPs have a wide elevation angle, which allows them to be almost always in LoS conditions with

the typical user within the same cell. Authors in [86] statistically modeled the HAP dual circularly

polarized 2×2 multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO) propagation channel and applied the ray

tracing approach to the digital relief model to solve the problem of lacing measured data.

Furthermore, a theoretical 3D wideband model was introduced in [87] for HAP-MIMO channel.

Note that the tridimensional model was needed because of the considerable altitude of the ﬂying

base station, which was assumed to be equipped with multiple transmit and receive antennas

aligned in different planes. In the latter work, the Chapman-Kolmogorov equations were applied

in order to derive the survival probabilities of scatterers. motivated by the absence of experimental

results in the literature, authors in [88] presented a novel statistical channel model of long-

distance Ka-band signal transmission via HAP and veriﬁed it via numerical simulations. Finally,

authors in [89] derived tractable closed-form statistical channel models for ground-to-HAP free-

space optics (FSO) links which also take into account the effects of atmospheric turbulence and

other relevant aspects of FSO communications.

3) Satellites: For space communications, it is still needed to model the S2G channel because

of the current lack of achievable standards. Indeed, even if some standards were established

by the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS), they are often obstructed

by technological limitations [90]. The communication link could leverage either laser, radio

frequency (RF), or visible light communication (VLC). The critical aspect to take into account

is the energy consumption for each technique, since satellites essentially rely on solar energy.

20

The signal envelope is subjected to three main sources of variation, namely multipath fading,

LoS shadowing, and multiplicative shadow fading. The ﬁrst one, which is usually modeled

by Rayleigh or Rice distributions, is generated by the combination of all the scattered NLoS

components along with a possible LOS ray, leading to rapid small-scale ﬂuctuations. On the other

hand, LoS shadowing arises from a LoS obstruction due to objects (e.g., trees and buildings),

which implies slower ﬂuctuations on a larger scale. Finally, the multiplicative shadow fading

phenomenon is responsible for random variations in the power of LoS multipath components.

Most of the famous models consider land-mobile-satellite communication systems, and can be

categorized as static (e.g., the ones developed by Loo [91], Corazza-Vatalaro [92], Hwang [93],

Patzold [94], Kourogiorgas [95], Abdi [96], and Saunders [97]) or dynamic (e.g., the ones

developed by Fontan [98], Scalise [99], Nikolaidis [100], and Lopez-Salamanca [101]).

Authors in [102] considered a dual-polarized MIMO channel, focusing on the models referred

to as Quasi Deterministic Radio channel Generator (QuaDRiGa) and Loo in order to capture

the ionospheric, tropospheric, and fading effects on a land mobile satellite (LMS) system. In

the same context, authors in [103] introduced an algorithm for modeling dual-polarized MIMO

channel while taking into account LoS shadowing, multipath effect, elevation angle, and other

relevant channel factors. Ref. [104] introduced a reliable channel model for taking into account

dynamic cloudy weather impairments, which impact on the Rician factor and signal propagation.

On the other side, a simpliﬁed fading channel model for describing received signals, multipath

fading, and shadowing effect has been analyzed by the authors of Ref. [105]. In [106], instead,

the so-called channel reservation strategy is promoted as a solution for improving access and HO

performances. Finally, authors in [107] presented an original channel model for 5G and beyond

which, based on atmospheric data, allows to predict channel attenuation at any time.

B. Coverage and Capacity

This subsection discusses two crucial aspects of PDCs, namely coverage and capacity. The

reviewed papers are summarized in Table V.

1) Coverage: In post-disaster scenarios, coverage can be compromised due to the failure

of one or multiple cell towers. Although several non-terrestrial technologies allow for restoring

connectivity, the main challenge is timely putting them in operation. Although these technologies

can quickly cover large areas (thanks to the higher altitude compared to cell towers), their oper-

ation can be complex and last for long periods. Nonetheless, their potential attracted academia

21

SUMMARY OF THE RELEVANT PAPERS ON CHANNEL MODELING

TABLE IV

Topic

Year Main focus

2014

2018

LAPs

Altitude, LoS probability

A2G path loss

Resilience

Path loss

2021

Power allocation

Rician fading channel, capacity

2017

MIMO, ray tracing

HAPs

MIMO, Chapman-Kolmogorov equations

2020

FSO

Ka-band transmission

2014

Rician factor, signal propagation

2016

Fading channel

Satellites

2017 Dual-polarized MIMO, LMS

2019

Channel reservation strategy, HO

2020

Channel attenuation

Ref.

[81]

[82]

[47]

[83]

[80]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[89]

[88]

[104]

[105]

[102],

[103]

[106]

[107]

and industry entities, leading to continuous technological improvements that partially solve the

challenges mentioned above.

D2D communication along with UAVs can be used to provide ubiquitous coverage in post-

disaster situations. Most of the existing works focus on using D2D for communicating in lack

of a functioning infrastructure [53], [108]–[111]. For instance, authors in [108] have proposed

an LTE-based D2D technology and evaluated its performances for a typical disaster scenario.

Authors in [53], instead, have proposed establishing multihop D2D links to extend the coverage

area of UAVs when there is a lack of functioning cell towers. Furthermore, Ref. [109] suggested

a hierarchical D2D architecture with a centralized SDN controller communicating with the cloud

head to minimize energy consumption. Also, authors in [110] considered deploying UAVs to

discover D2D devices in disaster-struck regions. Finally, authors in [111] provided an overview

of the use of ubiquitous mobile devices and applications in the context of 5G for post-disaster

communications. Ref. [39], instead, proposed to combine D2D and cellular technologies to

improve the coverage probability. The work proposed in [56] introduced a performance metric

called time-weighted coverage (since the behavior of the network is dynamic) to promote a novel

22

SUMMARY OF THE RELEVANT PAPERS ON COVERAGE AND CAPACITY

TABLE V

Topic

Year Main focus

Optimal deployment, wireless gateways,

2015

relay nodes

D2D, SDR

D2D, SDN

Coverage

2017 D2D, UAVs

2018 D2D, LTE

D2D, multihop, UAVs

2019

D2D, 5G

UAVs, IoT

2020

Time-weighted coverage, HetNets

2020

Satellites, cost, multiple-coverage

2021 VHetNets

Capacity

Ref.

[112]

[111]

[109]

[110]

[108]

[53]

[39]

[58]

[56]

[78]

[48]

3D networking architecture with both terrestrial and aerial nodes. The concept of coverage has

also been discussed in [58] since UAVs are proposed as an effective solution to make up for

the eventual loss of coverage for IoT applications. Authors in [112] studied via simulations the

optimal deployment of wireless gateways and relay nodes while considering its inﬂuence on

ﬁeld commanders’ positions.

2) Capacity: Whenever there is a failure in the network infrastructure, not only coverage

but also capacity becomes a critical issue.

In fact, cell towers cannot be entirely replaced by

ad hoc nodes since the latter relies on wireless backhaul links and can usually carry a much

smaller number of antennas while suffering delays due to their high altitude. Moreover, current

dedicated PPDR networks are usually based on terrestrial trunked radio (TETRA) and analog

private mobile radio (PMR), which are more suitable for advanced voice services rather than

data-intensive applications [72]. This is because the entire load has to be divided among only

the surviving BSs, leading to outages and low data rates. Also for this topic, very few relevant

research articles have been published recently and are mentioned in what follows. In [48], the

deployment of the best aerial ﬂeet in order to maximize the capacity in the middle of the

disaster-struck area has been investigated. Ref. [78], instead, included design considerations

for a capacity-oriented LEO satellite constellation and implemented a multi-objective genetic

algorithm that optimizes a combination of constellation cost, capacity, and multiple-coverage.

23

C. Radio Resource Management

Radio resource management can be a critical issue in the context of PDCs. For example, in

an aerial network deployment with FSO links, the performance can be signiﬁcantly degraded in

the case of polluted air (especially in the presence of smoke, fog, sand, or dust). A potential

solution to such a problem would be to introduce a complimentary wireless channel less affected

by such conditions as RF transmission, as suggested by the authors of Ref. [113]. Indeed, the

paper highlighted that commercial hybrid FSO/RF systems already combined millimeter wave

(mmWave) and laser-based FSO to serve large areas with at least one gigabit per second (Gbps)

of data transmission. Hence, developing novel spectrum management techniques is crucial to

overcoming the environmental effects in a post-disaster situation.

For instance, [40] discussed spectrum allocation strategies and future technologies for EMSs.

Ref. [114] introduced aerial network access and resource allocation scheme that optimizes

the number of human portable/wearable machine-type devices (HMTDs) that are transmitting

data. In the same context, authors in [115] proposed a radio resource management system

based on orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) using a novel resource allocation

technique for improving aerial networks’ data communications. Moreover, in [116], a novel

5G network architecture based on slicing is introduced for supporting FRs’ communications

by dynamically prioritizing their channels, depending on their need. The authors of Ref. [117],

instead, investigated the use of radio access network (RAN) slicing and introduced management

mechanisms that allow handling the slice reconﬁgurations.

For aerial networks, an autonomous spectrum management scheme based on spectrum sharing

has been introduced and validated via simulation results in [118]. Finally, authors in [119]

proposed a resource allocation scheme for UAV-enabled cellular networks as well as efﬁcient

algorithms for clustering selection and resource allocation.

D. Localization

Humans affected by a disaster must be rescued within the so-called golden 72 hours after

the disaster.

In this context, localization plays a major role in emergency scenarios, especially

when a considerable percentage of the victims are trapped [120]. It is evident that localizing the

victims becomes much more challenging if they are trapped under rubble in case of earthquakes

or covered by the smoke of a ﬁre. To further complicate the situation, disasters generally modify

24

the environment, and thus existing maps might not be helpful anymore. This may require simul-

taneous localization and mapping (SLAM) techniques, which may overload the computational

capability of the systems (e.g., UAVs or other autonomous robots) and considerably increase their

power consumption. In order to perform SLAM tasks, UAVs should be equipped with sensors

such as a global positioning system (GPS) receiver, inertial measurement unit (IMU), ultrasonic

transceiver, light detection and ranging (LIDAR), radio detection and ranging (RADAR), and

various types of cameras (i.e., mono-, stereo-, infrared, and depth cameras). However, some of

these sensors have strong techno-economic limitations, as summarized in Fig. 5.

In general, localization techniques can be categorized as centralized (if the input data are

processed by the BS) or decentralized (if the input data are processed by the sensor nodes) [121].

Due to the susceptibility of cell towers as well as the limited availability of power in disaster

circumstances, our interest is mostly oriented towards decentralized localization techniques which

can be further distinguished as range-based and range-free techniques. Range based techniques

require accurate measures of distances or angles between the devices of the network, and therefore

they require an additional hardware as well as a stronger power supply when compared to range-

free techniques [122], which however are usually less precise. Authors in [123] introduced a

range-free scheme for localization in WSNs, which makes use of fuzzy logic to relate the received

signal strength (RSS) and the distance so that the location can be evaluated in sufﬁciently precise

manner. Following the same lines, the process of localization and the related procedures were

presented in [122] together with the taxonomy of range-free techniques, with a special focus on

the so-called DV-HOP algorithm. Furthermore, Ref. [124] implemented two WSN-based methods

to ensure the localization of vibration damage in tunnels. Finally, authors in [125] focused on

the estimation of both position and transmission orientation of a directional source in 3D WSNs.

In the speciﬁc context of PDCs, Ref. [126] provided an insightful overview of the existing

localization algorithms for post-disaster scenarios using WSNs. Authors in [127] proposed one

possible approach for localizing damages and humans in a disaster-struck region. Furthermore,

Khan et al. [128] devised a localization technique based on RSS measurements, where the relative

ground coordinates of users are computed using Isomap (that is, a nonlinear technique applied

for dimensionality reduction) and then transformed to the actual global coordinate system.

Alternatively, authors in [129] introduced a modeling and simulation method of the radio

channel for rescue purposes, which can be used to develop radio localization systems. In general,

the passive localization schemes that are developed in various works can be applied to post-

25

Fig. 5. Qualitative comparison between the common SLAM sensors for UAVs [22, Sec. 5]. Note that infrared is hereby

abbreviated as IR and RGB-D is a speciﬁc type of depth camera.

TABLE VI

SUMMARY OF THE RELEVANT PAPERS ON LOCALIZATION

Year Main focus

2013 WSNs, algorithms

2014

PSO, path planning strategy

2015

Satellite stereo images

Radio channel, rescue

2016

Fuzzy logic, range-free localization, WSNs

2017 Vibration damage, WSN

2019

Range-free localization, taxonomy

2020

Gauss-Newton algorithm, accuracy, WSNs

Directional source, 3D WSNs

Ref.

[126]

[131]

[127]

[129]

[123]

[124]

[122]

[130]

[125]

disaster situations. For instance, [130] recently discussed localization in a WSN for different

applications. In the same context, authors in [131] implemented their algorithm by using PSO

and promoted the path planning strategy based on a grid scan.

Infrared camera andRADARLIDARGPS, IMU, andultrasonic transceiverMono/stereo-cameraDepth cameraCostWeight and dimensionsComputational cost and power consumption26

E. Energy Efﬁciency

Since the power infrastructure is also susceptible to calamities, emergency circumstances

require energy efﬁcient systems [41], [51], [52], [113], [132]–[141]. The nodes in a post-disaster

network can rely on either renewable energy (especially photovoltaic panels), RF charging,

batteries, or laser power beaming, to name a few. However, these technologies are currently

unable to ensure a continuous and prolonged service. Nonetheless, many works have recently

devised techniques that reduce the overall power consumption of PDCs systems, which can be

summarized as follows.

Ref. [132] proposed a disaster-time system that makes use of a message ferry method to collect

and exchange information while improving DTNs’ energy efﬁciency; in particular, the authors

introduced a method that allows to relay the messages of mobile terminals with low battery

level to the terminals with higher battery level, avoiding the former to fully discharge. Inspired

by biological networks of living organisms, authors in [133] introduced an energy-efﬁcient

disaster response network (DRN), called Bio-DRN, modeled via an integer linear programming

optimization problem. In the same work, the Bio-DRN was developed by means of a sub-optimal

heuristics and tested via simulation considering a real disaster-prone region in Nepal. Another

interesting work in [142], optimized the 3-D placement of a set of aerial access points for

energy-efﬁcient uplink communications2.

Authors in [134] investigated the possibility of mounting solar panels on top of UAVs to

increase their autonomy while taking into account routing, data rate, and transmit power con-

straints. Evidently, the main issue with this solution is represented by the additional payload due

to the panels themselves. On the other hand, authors in [113] promoted a heterogeneous ﬂeet

that includes untethered drones for cellular coverage, tethered drones for high-capacity backhaul-

ing, and untethered powering drones for charging. In [135] a novel beamforming architecture,

based on conditional time split-energy extraction (CT-EE) for enhancing nodes’ autonomy, was

presented and compared to conventional beamforming and other energy extraction methods.

Furthermore, to minimize both message overhead and energy consumption, [136] proposed a

hybrid solution for DTNs where the routing protocol is chosen depending on the mobility patterns

of each node. Works such as [137], instead, focused more on optimizing data trafﬁc throughput.

In particular, the authors described the problem via mixed integer linear programming (MILP)

2The latter work is general and not limited to post-disaster scenarios.

27

and developed a trafﬁc demand-aware off-line energy-efﬁcient scheme for WMNs constituted

by renewable-energy-enabled base stations (REBSs). Moreover, in the context of WSNs for

disaster monitoring, Ref. [138] presented an energy-efﬁcient data retrieval scheme based on

intelligent sleep scheduling. In addition, the authors mathematically proved that the proposed

scheme is capable to extend the longevity of the network, while contributing with trafﬁc reduction

and load balancing. An interesting problem tackled with stochastic geometry is [139]. Here,

the authors used energy harvesting and transfer for the user equipment in D2D clustering

communications for disaster management; the required power would be captured from RF

signal via BS. Similarly Ref. [143] used the optimal cluster head (CH) technique to make

energy transfer more efﬁcient in UAV-assisted D2D PDCs. The proposed results also showed

improvements in terms of network coverage and reliability. The novelty of the work presented

in [140], instead, consists in combining both spectrum and energy efﬁciencies (thus, a new

metric called spectrum-energy efﬁciency was deﬁned) for renewable-energy-enabled gateways

and MDRUs deployed in disaster struck environments. In particular, the authors proposed a

topological scheme based on the top k spectrum-efﬁcient paths and showed how to optimize the

value of k itself. Finally, authors in [141] developed an algorithm for network reconﬁguration

in underwater communication systems that are capable of harvesting energy in case of disasters

occurring in the ocean, such as tsunamis.

F. Important Remarks

The presence of obstacles generated by the calamity (combined with the typical complexity

of ad hoc network architectures) makes channel modeling extremely challenging. Due to this,

accurate estimation of performance metrics such as joint access and backhaul coverage proba-

bility and capacity is not possible yet. This issue, together with the increased trafﬁc demand and

limited bandwidth and energy resources, strongly affects also radio resource management and

energy efﬁciency (which is actually the most important requirement, since most devices are not

designed to operate for a long time without any power infrastructure’s energy supply).

IV. NETWORKING LAYER ISSUES

This section reviews various references on networking aspects including space-air-ground inte-

gration (from its architecture to its inherent complications), routing algorithms, and applications

of DTNs and edge computing in emergency scenarios.

28

SUMMARY OF THE RELEVANT PAPERS ON ENERGY EFFICIENCY

TABLE VII

Year Main focus

2014 MDRU, spectrum efﬁciency

2015

Mobility, DTN protocols

Data trafﬁc throughput

Energy harvesting, D2D

2018

Energy harvesting, underwater IoT

2019

Drones, battery, backhaul

Temporary communication system, DTN

Resilient networks

Optimal placement

2020

Solar powered UAVs

Beamforming, MIMO

2021 Data retrieval

2021

Energy harvesting, UAV, D2D

Ref.

[140]

[136]

[137]

[139]

[141]

[113]

[132]

[133]

[142]

[134]

[135]

[138]

[143]

A. Integrated Space-Air-Ground Architectures

Space-air-ground integrated network (SAGIN) is an emerging paradigm that can be im-

plemented also in post-disaster scenarios as a solution for improving security and extending

coverage [77, Sec. IX-B]. The main idea behind this solution is to conveniently combine the

three said layers: in fact, terrestrial networks have the lowest delays and the highest capacity

(often without energy constraints), while satellites beneﬁt from an extremely wide coverage

area and they are generally resilient to any disaster; aerial platforms, instead, have intermediate

characteristics between terrestrial and space nodes. For this paradigm, the space, air, and ground

segments can either inter-operate or be independent of each other.

If they inter-operate, one

of the main challenges (essentially due to the different trajectories and velocities between the

nodes) consists in effectively harmonizing the ﬂight of the aerial platforms (especially if both

HAPs and LAPs are present) so that the risk of getting them disconnected is minimized: to

achieve this, novel routing protocols taking into account the variety of the interconnections (e.g.,

hybrid RF/free space optics between HAPs and LAPs, and free-space optics among HAPs) need

to be designed [77, Sec. IX-B].

One typical example of SAGIN architecture is the so-called Global Information Grid (GIG),

which is made by four layers (i.e., ground, aerospace, near-space and satellite layers) embed-

29

ding the communication, sensor, and operation networks [144]. Generally speaking, the space

network may include geosynchronous equatorial orbit (GEO), MEO, and LEO satellites, with

the respective terrestrial infrastructures (e.g., ground stations and control centers). Note also that

the terrestrial layer is not limited to cell towers, but may also include MANETs, wireless local

area networks (WLANs), etc.

In Ref. [145], a novel cooperative communication scheme for UAV-aided satellite/terrestrial

integrated mobile communication systems (STICSs) is proposed as a means of interference

mitigation. Indeed, the UAVs act as relay stations and, according to the simulation results

obtained, allow to reduce the average bit error rate (BER) and boost the throughput of the system.

Authors in [146], on the other side, provided a framework for using Internet Protocol (IP) for

disaster management services within a SAGIN. The study simulated two disasters occurring

in Africa and North America, and showcased the additional services offered by the proposed

IP-based method.

B. Routing

Generally speaking, the problem of routing consists of ﬁnding the optimal path that effectively

transfers data among the network nodes. It is evident that post-disaster wireless environments

are incredibly unpredictable, and therefore routing cannot be planned as carefully as in ordinary

circumstances. As far as we are concerned, the main routing challenges brought by the occurrence

of a calamity are due to terrestrial nodes’ malfunction or failure, inaccurate placement of ad-hoc

nodes, unpredictable trafﬁc demand and distribution, energy shortage, and harsh environmental

conditions (which may essentially affect the wireless communication channels and, for example,

reduce the ad-hoc nodes’ coverage radii). Since routing can tremendously impact on the

performances of the network (especially in terms of energy efﬁciency and delay), several works

have recently tackled this topic, as discussed in the rest of this section.

Authors in [147] have improved the multicast routing squirrel search algorithm (SSA) for

providing green communications and has experimentally shown the effectiveness of properly

balancing energy consumption and other quality of service (QoS) parameters. The study proposed

in [148], instead, relied on real-world maps and suggested several methods on access point

placement and routing in order to quickly connect users inside middle-size disasters. Moreover,

authors in [149] proposed a D2D-based framework to cluster users’ devices and optimize the

transmission power for each gateway. One of the most remarkable strategies consists in putting

30

the nodes within the damaged area in LISTEN mode and provide them the clustering instructions

from a functional area, thus saving valuable energy to the devices.

In the context of dual-channel-based MANETs, authors in [150] recently introduced an algo-

rithm for efﬁcient routing, since each node is able to conﬁgure the routing table based on the

exchanged neighbor list. The main application suggested for this work is indoor communications

for ﬁreﬁghters, especially since previous works do not consider the mobility of the nodes properly,

and neglect the presence of potential obstacles in the environment. Another approach based

on routing table has been proposed in [151], where the concept of intercontact routing was

introduced to estimate delivery probabilities and route delays, as well as to ﬁnd reliable routes

and consequently control message replication and forwarding. Furthermore, the authors enhanced

the energy efﬁciency of protocol by means of a differentiated message delivery service.

For UAV networks, instead, Ref. [152] suggested a location-aided delay-tolerant routing

(LADTR) protocol in order to exploit both store-carry-forward (SCF) technique and location-

aided forwarding. Indeed, this work improved the efﬁciency of SCF by introducing ferrying UAVs

into the network, and validated the LADTR protocol by numerically comparing it (in terms of

routing overhead, packet delivery ratio, and average delay) with other common protocols.

Authors in [153] focused on DTNs and introduced additional routing methods (e.g., Node

Selection by the evacuator’s territory, Data Triage by data priority, and Dynamic FEC controls

by the Jolly-Sobor model). In this work, ﬁeld experiments were carried out for validating the

performances of the proposed routing methods. Morover, the authors of Ref. [136] suggested

hybrid DTN protocols for allowing nodes to apply different routing rules depending on their own

mobility patterns. Instead, authors in [154] introduced and analyzed a DTN routing protocol for

information-centric networks (ICNs) in disaster-struck areas, showing its advantages in terms of

delivery probability and overhead ratio. Finally, the D2D-based architecture proposed in [109]

uses a SDN controller which can conveniently enable multi-hop routing path between victims

and FRs.

To deepen this topic, the reader could also refer to [28], which surveyed routing protocols for

MANET-based architectures in disaster area networks (DANs).

C. DTNs

Whenever there is no way to ensure a reliable backhaul link to the core network, connectivity

is compromised. Since this situation is recurrent in emergency scenarios, DTNs can play a crucial

31

TABLE VIII

SUMMARY OF THE RELEVANT PAPERS ON ROUTING

Year Main focus

2013

Intercontact delay

2015

D2D, SDN

Hybrid DTN protocols, mobility

2017

Experiments on routing methods

2018

2019

2020

Routing protocol for UAV networks

DTN routing protocol for ICNs

SSA

D2D transmit power optimization

Access point placement

Dual-channel-based MANETs

Ref.

[151]

[109]

[136]

[153]

[152]

[154]

[147]

[149]

[148]

[150]

role in the context of disaster management. Therefore, many researchers started investigating the

potential applications of DTNs in this area. However, it is evident that DTNs rarely operate in

real time, therefore devising novel and powerful routing algorithms is needed in order to ensure a

sufﬁcient QoS (while meeting the energy and memory constraints of IoT devices) in emergency

situations. Moreover, routing protocols should use context information about trafﬁc to inﬂuence

the relay selection depending on the user trafﬁc needs [155].

In [156], the so-called IBR-DTN architecture (i.e., an implementation of the bundle protocol

RFC5050) has been shown to be effective when sending small size data such as text messages. On

the other side, if the connection is lost during the transmission then the entire ﬁle would need to be

sent again, which makes this architecture very inefﬁcient for sending heavy ﬁles. Ref. [157] has

suggested to use delay-tolerant networking in a location-based mobility prediction scheme that

estimates the mobility pattern of the nodes (e.g., FRs or victims equipped with smart devices) and

enables to select the best forwarder. Another interesting work has been presented in [158], where

the authors promoted an infrastructure-less health data delivery process architecture capable of

automatically identify injured persons. In order to make up for the eventual unavailability of

cloud-based mapping services and data in post-disaster scenarios, authors in [159] have presented

DTN MapEx: a distributed computing system that generates and shares maps over a DTN. To do

this, users need to log the GPS traces of their routes and collect data about the disaster-struck

environment; then, pre-deployed computing nodes process the collected data to generate a map

32

TABLE IX

SUMMARY OF THE RELEVANT PAPERS ON DTNS

Topic Year Main focus

DTNs

Mobility prediction

2015

Mapping

Message delivery ratio

Mobility

Healthcare, identiﬁcation

Demand forecasting

IBR-DTN

Resource allocation

Hybrid SDN-DTN,

2016

2019

2020

message delivery rate, packet loss

Ref.

[157]

[159]

[160]

[155]

[158]

[161]

[156]

[162]

[11]

for the network. Ref. [160] devised a novel DTN-based message relay protocol that incorporates

message delivery into a speciﬁc type of shelter network called autonomous wireless network

construction package with intelligence (ANPI). This solution was tested via simulations, showing

its effectiveness in reducing redundant transmissions and improving the message delivery ratio.

The authors of [161] derived a principal component regression model and proposed an oppor-

tunistic demand sharing scheme for collecting and spreading resource demands to the control

station via a smartphone-enabled DTN. By means of selected case studies, this work also

illustrated to what extent DTNs can be useful for demand forecasting. More recently, the concept

of DTN has been applied also for post-disaster resource allocation, used in a novel opportunistic

knowledge sharing approach for gathering the resource needs in a utility-driven system [162];

simulations results showed that the proposed system is very competitive with the similar ones

proposed in literature, especially in a fully connected scenario. Ref. [155] used realistic trafﬁc and

mobility data in order to evaluate various routing schemes for DTNs, and introduced the option of

combining dedicated DTN routing to additional aerial nodes. Finally, authors in [11] proposed a

four-layer architecture consisting of a combination of SDN and DTN in order to minimize packet

loss. Interestingly, the Mininet-WiFi simulation results suggested that the proposed architecture

can achieve a packet loss as low as 0.46%.

A quick summary of the aforementioned papers is proposed in Table IX.

33

D. Edge Computing

By deﬁnition, edge computing is an autonomous computing model that comprises many

distributed devices communicating with the network for several computing tasks [163]. In other

words, edge computing is a paradigm meant to move computational data, applications, and

services from the cloud servers to the edge network to minimize latency and maximize band-

width [164].

Apart for the evident need of low latency communications we recall that the problem of

bandwidth is also due to the susceptibility of FSO to harsh atmospheric conditions, as already

mentioned in Sec. III-C. Furthermore, UAV-enabled multi-access edge computing could provide

additional resources and effective low-latency services compared to traditional MEC architectures

(since UAVs can be easily moved closer to the sources of data generation). However, designing

efﬁcient ofﬂoading and resource allocation strategies is difﬁcult because of the heterogeneous

protocols and interfaces used in this context [165]. In line with these goals, the National Science

Foundation (NSF) announced the project AirEdge. The main idea is to use a swarm of UAVs

to carry mobile radio access points and edge servers, enabling on-demand edge computing and

networking services for anti-terrorism, disaster rescue, or public safety applications [166].

Ref. [167] devised Echo, an interesting edge-enabled framework for disaster rescue, relying

on computer vision to analyze and ﬁlter crowdsourced pictures to provide only relevant content

to FRs and preserve bandwidth. The authors also designed an adaptive photo detector to im-

prove the precision and recall rate. On the other hand, authors in [168] recently implemented

mobile edge computing (MEC) task management strategies by applying long-range wide-area

networking (LoRaWAN) to UAV-aided architectures. The presented simulation results promoted

this solution since it conveniently enables long-range MEC service. Another interesting work

has been presented in [169], where several PS-LTE enabling services were discussed in the

context of the current 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) standard releases. Moreover,

the authors proposed and evaluated a disaster-resilient edge architecture consisting of: SDN

layer (to enable centralized control), UAV cloudlet layer (to perform either edge computing or

enable emergency communications), and radio access layer. Another interesting paper is [170],

where a novel framework for drone-assisted and blockchain-enabled edge-cloud computing

networks (DBECNs) is presented. The authors devised an architecture (consisting of the terminal,

multifunctional drone, blockchain, edge, and cloud layers) where UAVs act as moving terminals

34

or BSs and proposed various use cases, including disaster relief and crowd monitoring. However,

important challenges related to AI-based algorithms, scalability and QoS, channel modeling,

as well as the integration of SAGINs and edge-computing-enabled networks are faced by the

proposed framework.

Authors in [171] proposed a data backup scheme to combine edge computing and blockchain

technologies for disaster scenarios: while the former processes big data coming from the mi-

crogrid, blockchain provides security to the equipment needed to perform edge computing.

However, the main challenge here is to deal with the trade-off between energy efﬁciency and

security. Moreover, authors in [172] designed and implemented a named-data-networking-based

support system over the edge computing platform KubeEdge. By doing this, this work showed

the effectiveness of the proposed solution in promoting efﬁcient emergency communications

and responders’ mobility. Finally, authors in [173] studied resource allocation to enable latency-

intolerant tasks due to emergencies in oil ﬁelds. In particular, they devised a stochastic model that

captures end-to-end uncertainties within the proposed federated edge environment to estimate

the risk associated with each task and showed a performance improvement of almost 30 percent

compared to state-of-the-art solutions.

E. Important Remarks

Generally speaking, heterogeneity brings strengths and challenges at the same time. Integrating

different communication technologies and protocols in the same system requires innovative

research because each node type is designed to operate in speciﬁc environments and conditions

and may not be compatible with different types [20, Sec. 7]. Also, networking issues might

arise even in the case of simple multi-layered architectures, where any failed gateway node must

be rapidly detected and properly replaced by another node for timely recovery [174, Sec. 4].

Nonetheless, we believe that SAGIN architectures represent the most promising PDCs paradigm

compared to DTNs because they require more ﬂexibility, which might be incompatible with

the tight time constraints characterizing emergencies. Besides, UAV-enabled edge computing

projects such as AirEdge could develop powerful technologies and expand networks’ resources.

Additionally, due to PDC networks’ ad hoc structure, robust routing protocols need to be devised.

Also, we believe that also security plays an important role, especially in the context of human-

made disasters (e.g., terrorism and wars), and therefore should not be overlooked.

35

TABLE X

MAIN SIMULATION PARAMETERS

Description

Number of system realizations

Simulation radius

Value

2×104



rs =

rd +3 [km], for TBSs



hS , for satellites

Type of environment

Urban [81]

TBS density

Path loss exponents

LAP altitude

Transmit powers

Nakagami-m shape parameters

λT = 10 TBSs/km2


αM = 3




αT = 2.9

αL = [2.5, 3], for [Los, NLoS]

αH = [2.2, 3], for [Los, NLoS]

αS = 2

hL = 0.2 km









pT = pM = 10 W

pL = 3 W

pH = 20 W

pS = 1000 W

mT = mM = 1

mL = 2

mH = mS = 3

SINR thresholds

τ =






0.1, for access links

0.2, for backhaul links

Noise power

n = 10−12 W
σ2

V. PROPOSED USE CASES

In this section, we present two use cases referring to the problem of coverage in the event of

a disaster of either small or large scale. The main goal is to identify the optimal ad hoc network

architecture (made of terrestrial, aerial, and space nodes) in order to serve a multitude of users

inside the suffered region. Then, we extract valuable insights based on the proposed simulation

results.

Both the considered setups (each one referring to a speciﬁc use case) assume uniformly
distributed users and TBSs; however, inside the disaster area A0 (assumed circular with radius

36

Fig. 6. Proposed system setup for small disasters: one LAP hovering above the origin O and a given number of MDRUs (nM )

are deployed in order to strengthen the disaster-struck network infrastructure.

rd), the original infrastructure is nonfunctional, while outside it operates appropriately with a

reliable connection to the core network (e.g., by means of optical ﬁber links). All the other

backhaul links (except the one connecting the satellite to the ground station) are not ideal and

thus cannot guarantee reliable communications. The QoS is evaluated based on averaged coverage

probability experienced by the users inside the suffered region. A summary of the main system

parameters is presented in Table X, where h denotes the transceiver altitude and the subscripts

L, H, M , T , and S respectively refer to LAPs, HAPs, MDRUs, TBSs, and LEO satellites.

1) Small Disasters: In this scenario, we assume that rd is relatively small (i.e., from a hundred

meters to ten kilometers, as in most cases), and thus LAPs are generally preferred over HAPs [48].

As depicted in Fig. 6, we propose a simple strategy that consists in deploying one single LAP

above the disaster epicenter as well as a set of MDRUs (uniformly distributed over the disaster

area and ﬁxed in number).

Therefore, the users can associate with any of the three types of BS (outer TBS, LAP, or

MDRU), but only TBSs have a direct connection to the core network. Hence, for each user served

by a LAP or an MDRU at least one additional non-ideal wireless backhaul link is needed, which

𝒜0𝑶[epicenter]ℎL𝑟𝑢Disaster area (𝒜0)Functioning TBSFailed TBSABSTypical userMDRU37

Fig. 7. Simulated coverage probability for the ﬁrst setup. The markers highlight the maximum coverage probability for each

line.

implies a higher risk of outage. Based on the maximum average received power association

rule for each consecutive link and assuming MDRUs to have only access functionalities, the

possible paths are user–TBS, user–LAP, user–LAP–TBS, user–MDRU–TBS, and user–MDRU–

LAP–TBS.

The results displayed in Fig. 7 clearly show that the coverage probability strongly depends on

rd , and in particular, a larger disaster radius generally implies a lower QoS. Indeed, for large

values of rd the system suffers the fact that, given that the distance to the closest TBS often is

larger than the respective coverage radius, one single drone is not sufﬁcient to provide reliable

backhaul for hundreds of MDRUs. Therefore, the backhaul link becomes the bottleneck of the

system.

Moving to more speciﬁc considerations, the simulated curves deﬁne two different cases:

(i) As long as rd does not exceed one kilometer (see the blue and the red lines), MDRUs are

unnecessary since the user can easily associate to either the LAP or the closest TBS;

(ii) For much larger disasters (see the yellow lines), the optimal number of MDRUs (n∗

M ) jumps
to several hundreds, since average distance between the user and either the LAP or the closest

surviving TBS becomes excessive;

38

Fig. 8. Proposed system setup for large disasters: one HAP hovering above the origin O and one satellite around the area of

interest support the disaster-struck terrestrial infrastructure.

(iii) The value of n∗

the presence of a LAP reduces n∗

M always increases as rd increases. Moreover, if rd is sufﬁciently small,
M since a considerable percentage of users directly associates
to the aerial node and does not need further MDRUs; on the other hand, for rd = 10 km the

backhaul link offered by the LAP becomes vital and promotes the deployment of further ad hoc

nodes, which otherwise would mostly backﬁre because of their limitations in reaching the core

network.

2) Large Disasters: The simulation results regarding ﬁrst setup have evidently shown the

limitations of the proposed strategy when rd exceeds a few kilometers. Therefore, we hereby

test a different network architecture that supports the surviving infrastructure by means of a

HAP above the disaster epicenter and a LEO satellite (see Fig. 8). For the HAP-satellite link,

the shadowed Rician fading channel is assumed according to [175].

For this setup, we recall that the satellite backhaul connection to the closest ground station

is assumed ideal. However, the user can exploit the satellite only for backhaul, by associating

𝒜0𝑶[epicenter]ℎ𝐻𝑟𝑢ℎ𝑆Functioning TBSFailed TBSTypical userLEO satelliteHAPDisaster area (𝒜0)39

Fig. 9. Simulated coverage probability for the second setup (n denotes the number of nodes).

to a HAP. Therefore, the set of possible communication paths consists of just three elements:

user–TBS, user–HAP–TBS, and user–HAP–satellite.

We can note that Fig. 9 is consistent with Fig. 7, meaning that, for rd = [1, 10] km, the blue

curve in the former matches with the initial values of the respective dotted lines in the latter.

Moreover, several insights can be extracted:

(i) It is evident that the satellite altitude hS does not have a considerable inﬂuence on the

coverage probability (the yellow and red markers match with the respective solid lines). This

suggests that, for any value of rd , the air-to-space backhaul link is not the bottleneck of the

system;

(ii) Despite its altitude is not relevant, the satellite starts playing a vital role as rd exceeds a

dozen kilometers;

(iii) For rd → 1 km, the proposed scheme cannot provide a strong support to the terrestrial

infrastructure (i.e., the coverage probability falls between 40% and 60%, no matter which of the

proposed strategies is implemented);

(iv) For any value of rd , the highest QoS can be achieved when a satellite is available and the

HAP is deployed at relatively low altitude, despite the lower LoS probability.

VI. CHALLENGES AND RESEARCH DIRECTIONS

Despite the research efforts discussed in the previous sections, there are still many open

problems to address. In particular, this section focuses on modulation and coding schemes, back-

hauling, optimal placement and trajectory/scheduling, and HO issues while suggesting possible

40

future research directions.

A. Modulation and Coding Schemes

Another crucial aspect for studying the physical layer in PDCs regards the modulation and

coding schemes to use. Unfortunately, this area has not been strongly tackled yet3, but nonetheless

insightful considerations have been presented for general applications. In PDCs, reliability should

be a priority in emergency scenarios. Therefore, we believe that modulation and coding schemes

that, given the bandwidth and energy constraints, ensure a low BER should be preferred over

those that try to optimize performance metrics such as rate, latency, and throughput. For example,

let us consider the waveform orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM): schemes

based on quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) would be preferred over the ones based on

phase-shift keying (PSK) because of the larger distances among their adjacent constellation points

(although PSK can be more energy efﬁcient). Moreover, it is worth recalling the importance of

the channel type: for example, compared to the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel,

in a Rayleigh channel, the BER is higher and less dependent on the SNR [176].

In the context of PDCs, the experimental results proposed in [177] showed that siren sounds

can be used in conjunction to complete complementary codes (CCCs) to embed messages that

can be visualized by means of an Android application. In this way, the information dissemination

would be more effective (especially for hearing-impaired people), but nonetheless powerful

error-correcting codes are needed whenever the bit rate exceeds roughly one thousand bits per

second. Authors in. [178] presented a secure and inexpensive gossiping method enabled by

reinforcement learning and game theory to mitigate the communication losses usually occurring

in disaster scenarios. Simulation experiments validated the beneﬁts of this approach, compared

to other schemes from the literature, in terms of overhead, latency, reliability, security, and

energy efﬁciency. Furthermore, [63] presented the derivation of the mean co-channel interference

for one-dimensional and bidimensional LiFi balloon networks (LiBNets) that are distributed

3 Because of this, we include this topic in the list of challenges for PDCs.

41

according to a homogeneous Poisson point process (HPPP). Finally, the work presented in [79]

is a study about the mixed support of time division multiple access (TDMA) and single channel

per carrier (SCPC) transmission to improve the bandwidth utilization in satellite-aided disaster

communications. The authors considered four different scenarios in order to categorize the

formation of bandwidth assignment depending on the network’s characteristics.

B. Backhauling

One crucial functionality of cell towers is providing backhaul connections to mobile users.

Most of the ad-hoc solutions discussed above provide access only, meaning they still have to

rely on TBSs or satellites for backhaul connectivity. However, it is impossible to equip the

small devices (including drones [113]) with satellite transceiver equipment: to this extent, we

believe that, whenever their implementation is feasible, tethered backhaul UAVs [179] generally

represent an excellent solution to the problem. Apart from intelligent allocation of resources such

as bandwidth and energy [180], backhaul links also require the proper deployment of the network

nodes to be reliable and effective. Usually, heterogeneous networks have higher complexity;

meshed networks might be more convenient in emergency scenarios due to their higher level

of redundancy and versatility. However, the inherent challenge in deploying large-scale self-

organizing networks with UAVs is that the topology is subject to continuous modiﬁcations. Thus,

fast computational methods are needed for PDCs management. To this extent, novel solutions

are needed to make up for the potential failure of TBSs by ensuring reliable backhaul links for

any other node of the network.

Motivated by the frequent catastrophes that occurred in the Philippines, Ref. [181] devised a

solution to provide GSM access and backhaul in the aftermath of a disaster. The idea is essentially

to rapidly deploy a mini-cell tower and make it operate in IP protocol (e.g., via TVWS or WiFi

backhaul links) to serve FRs and victims. Then, [182] suggested using worldwide interoperability

for microwave access (WiMAX) technology to serve as backhaul to the WiFi network in disaster

recovery circumstances by integrating it with WLAN access points. In addition, the authors

implemented voice over IP (VoIP) services in order to assess the system’s capabilities.

Authors in [183] recently borrowed tools from stochastic geometry to estimate the effectiveness

of mmWave backhauling for ABS-aided terrestrial networks. In particular, an algorithm was

developed to maximize the throughput based on user association, UAV positioning, and resource

allocation. Furthermore, [184] jointly optimized resource allocation, user association, and UAV

42

positioning while taking into account both access and backhaul links, since the transmission

rate of the system is given by the minimum between access and backhaul transmission rates.

Ref. [113], instead, proposed a novel architecture relying on various types of drones, including

a backhaul drone, as already discussed in Sec. III-E. In particular, the authors considered the

backhaul drone to be connected via tether to an ad hoc truck operating as a satellite ground

station, while a hybrid FSO/RF link connects the former to an untethered drone (speciﬁcally

designed to provide access).

One of the main backhauling problems in post-disaster situations is to maximize the reliability

of backhaul links, which requires perfect aligning between the transmit and receive antennas,

given that mmWave systems are known for their high directivity. In the context of emergency

communications, splitting access and backhaul resources might be convenient since dynamic

algorithms can be used to adapt the network depending on the different phases of disaster

management; also, proper transmit power allocation combined with spatial multiplexing can

mitigate interference from the user side. However, accurate beam steering error models still need

to be investigated and, since UAVs are also used as relays without any queuing capabilities, it

also would be interesting to analyze spatio-temporal models with queuing for the ABSs [183].

C. Optimal Placement

Given the increasing interest in vertical heterogeneous networks and their utility in post-

disaster scenarios, it is essential to consider the optimal placement of ABSs because higher mo-

bility and relocation ﬂexibility characterize aerial nodes differently compared to their terrestrial

counterparts. Moreover, it is evident that in emergency circumstances the problem of placement

should not be constrained by any regulation (for example, on the ABSs’ altitude) as long as it

is meant to mitigate the damages. This, in turn, brings the opportunity to optimize the aerial

nodes’ locations to obtain the best network’s performance either in terms of coverage, capacity,

or energy efﬁciency (or any combination of the three). However, once again, the uncertainties

in the network topology (e.g., regarding the availability of access and backhaul links, the trafﬁc

distribution and intensity, etc.) can lead to very challenging optimization problems.

For instance, [185] devised an analytical model describing how survivors can place (by means

of a step-by-step guide in the form of mobile application) relay nodes such as mobile phones

to communicate over long distances. However, the main challenge is to improve the analytical

model since it can only describe the trend of the channel quality and it is generally impractical

43

to perform measurements in emergency scenarios. Moreover, Ref. [186] borrowed tools from

optimization theory to determine how to place (i.e., where and how many) edge-devices to

conveniently provide reliable connectivity to FRs.

In the context of aerial networks, the choice of optimal placement of the ABS can be based on

the study of several characteristics of the environment (e.g., shape and size of the disaster area,

QoR of the terrestrial network, load distribution, etc.) [48]. Knowing such information makes

it possible to minimize the aggregate interference and maximize the QoS for both the FRs and

the victims involved in the disaster. Successful deployment of ABSs strongly depends on the

assessment of the topology of the environment itself (which may take a relatively long time)

and the estimation of the channel. Hence, novel and efﬁcient methods and algorithms need to

be devised to solve these issues.

For general situations, authors in [187] introduced a setup with multiple TBSs supported by

one single ABS, and optimized both the placement of the latter and the transmit power allocation

of the nodes for both uplink and downlink operations. Similarly, [188] proposed the K-means

and Q-learning assisted 3D ABS Placement and Power allocation algorithm (KQPP) for sum-

capacity maximization. In particular the optimization framework used the K-means and discrete

search algorithms for the ABS’ ground coordinates, the model-free Q-learning reinforcement

learning algorithm for power allocation (for varying ABSs’ altitudes). The convex optimization

framework introduced in Ref. [189] took into account also user scheduling and co-channel

interference, showing promising results when compared to conventional methods.

For emergency circumstances, the study presented in [190] focused on the impact of various

parameters, such as the size of the recovery area, the altitude and the number of nodes per

cluster, and the transmit power for backhaul on ABSs, while authors in [53] discussed the optimal

hovering positions of UAVs-based relaying systems. Moreover, works such as [54] and [113]

have quantitatively shown that how optimal placement of ABSs can contribute in terms of

throughput enhancement. Finally, [191] optimizes the positions of ABSs and the assigned users

to maximize spectral efﬁciency while keeping a sufﬁcient QoS for the users. However, as the

authors remarked, even assuming to solve the problem of positioning the UAVs, other challenges

still need to be overcome, such as achieving sufﬁcient self-organizing network capabilities, and

mitigating the co-channel interference due to the high percentage of LoS aerial links. Moreover,

developing effective trajectory planning and control mechanisms is required in order to deal with

the high mobility demands, as we will discuss in the following subsection.

44

SUMMARY OF THE RELEVANT PAPERS ON OPTIMAL PLACEMENT

TABLE XI

Year Main focus

2015

Long distance communications

2016

Throughput

2018

Stochastic-geometry-based performance analysis

Coordination

2019

Relaying systems

Power allocation

2020

Scheduling, co-channel interference

Edge-devices for FRs

Spectral efﬁciency

2021

Ergodic capacity

2022

Sum capacity

Ref.

[185]

[54]

[190]

[113]

[53]

[187]

[189]

[186]

[191]

[48]

[188]

D. Optimal Trajectory

The research on optimizing ABSs’ trajectory for post-disaster networks is still in its infancy

and needs further investigation. Trajectory planning is critical when deploying ABSs, especially

those characterized by ﬁxed wings because they cannot simply stay aloft in a speciﬁed position.

Therefore, the location of the aerial nodes should be adjusted in real-time, in order to avoid

collisions while following the movements of the load (e.g., users escaping from a building on

ﬁre and moving towards a shelter). One possible direction in this domain consists in developing

powerful distributed algorithms that can identify optimal trajectories for a ﬂeet of UAVs (which

can be needed in case of large disasters or high capacity needs) and a team of FRs or a group

of victims that need to be rescued. Further considerations on UAV trajectory optimization are

available in [47].

Authors in [192] recently studied the inﬂuence of obstacles on the status of road networks

and the speed of rescue vehicles to generate effective safe routes for FRs. In this work, the

authors mentioned several challenges to be overcome in the future, for example: (i) extending

the framework to the case with multiple vehicles and destinations; (ii) developing a routing

algorithm that takes into account not only the risks associated to routes, but also FRs’ time

constraints; (iii) developing a user interface that allows to adapt the routing parameters based

on real situations. Instead, [193] presented swarm-intelligence-based localization and clustering

45

algorithms for trajectory optimization in aerial emergency networks. According to the authors,

the next step would be to investigate bio-inspired AI techniques to improve the performances

of the algorithms. Another interesting work, presented in Ref. [110], aims to optimize the UAV

ﬂying paths, in terms of both coverage area and energy efﬁciency, depending on the type of

disaster (e.g., earthquake, ﬂood, wildﬁre, etc.). In addition, an extensive comparison between the

S-, O-, ZigZag-, and rectangular paths was discussed by the authors.

E. Scheduling

Another challenging aspect of PDCs is transmission scheduling, due to multiple issues. For

example, it would be impossible to perform opportunistic scheduling if the transmitter is not

able to continuously obtain the channel state information (CSI); evidently, this problem would

occur frequently given the current difﬁculties in identifying the proper channel model (see

Sec. III-A) and the actual network topology. Another open challenge consists in determining

priorities depending on the type of user (for instance, the ideal scheduling algorithm should

work so that trapped victims and ﬁrst responders are better served than other types of users).

Works such as [53] jointly optimized UAVs’ trajectory and scheduling to connect ground devices

and surviving BSs in the most effective way. On the other hand, authors in [194] devised a

domain-speciﬁc memetic algorithm to solve broadcast scheduling problem in wireless mesh

networks. The effectiveness and efﬁciency of this algorithm were then validated via simulations.

Finally, [195] introduced a dynamic priority scheduling strategy for UAV-assisted MANETs. In

particular, the Gauss-Markov mobility model captures the nodes’ dynamics while the devised

priority assignment takes into account both the delay experienced by the packet and the effects

of such delay on the next transmissions.

F. HO Management

Another major challenge in PDCs is the HO management between the ABSs, especially in

terms of HO cost (i.e., the fraction of time that, on average, is spent for associating with another

ABS). Note that for the case of aerial networks, this does not depend only on the user’s velocity

but also on the velocity of the aerial nodes since, as extensively discussed in the previous

subsection, they are usually non-stationary. In addition, the emergency situation may easily lead

to an increased HO rate, since the users may be moving as fast as they can to save their lives

46

and the increased trafﬁc demand may require considerable network densiﬁcation. This, in turn,

would imply a decrease in terms of QoS and energy efﬁciency.

Authors in [196] devised an LTE-advanced (LTE-A) user-equipment-controlled and BS-assisted

handover scheme to prolong the network’s autonomy. Ref. [197] investigated the rate performance

of a UAV-aided three-tier downlink network by taking into account the effect of HO rates on

the user rate. In particular, [197] assumed two operating modes, namely conventional (where

all the BSs transmit data and control signals) and control/data split (where only UAVs provide

control signals but any BS can provide the data), showing that the latter generally reduces

the HO cost. To this extent, designing efﬁcient HO schemes for integrated terrestrial-vertical

heterogeneous networks becomes very challenging. For a given situation, the main problem is,

indeed, to understand the optimal density of nodes so that the HO rate remains acceptable.

G. Content Caching

Content caching is an emerging area for data distribution where the content is provided to the

user from the closest servers [198]. In general, the potential beneﬁts provided by edge caching

consist in: (i) caching popular contents to reduce the delay and load experienced by the BSs

(assuming that the edge nodes are placed close enough to the users), and (ii) minimizing trafﬁc

through backhaul links (due to redundant data transmissions avoidance) [199]. On the downside,

if data are gathered from various sources (for example, sensors or social networks), then it is

necessary to bridge any discrepancy or error before sharing. Modern technologies can already

deal with this issue in ordinary occasions, but devising a similar framework for PDCs is much

more challenging [20, Sec. 7]. We recall that a recent review on fog computing can be found

in [17]. In emergency scenarios, we strongly believe that content caching can be an important

tool to timely share vital information such as safe routes, shelters, and speciﬁc safety guidelines.

Authors in [199] proposed an effective and secure caching scheme for ensuring backup in case

of disasters. This scheme was designed to serve mobile users in mobile social networks (MSNs)

with fog computing (i.e., one of the main aspects of edge computing) and secure encryption.

Instead, authors in [200] used edge caching, where a generic multiple UAV-enabled RAN (UAV-

RAN) is utilized for spectral efﬁciency enhancement. In particular, they assumed a stochastic

geometry-based setup and suggested dividing the caching contents into two sets with different

ranges of popularity: the most popular ﬁles would be stored at all ABSs, while the least ones

just at one ABS. The optimization problem consists in ﬁnding the proper popularity threshold

47

to deﬁne the two sets, and the authors derived the expression of the threshold based on Fenchel

duality. One major challenge for using content caching in post-disaster situations is optimizing

content distribution in cloud servers to reduce costs, latency, and resource consumption.

H. IRS-Enabled Networks

Two important challenges in emergency scenarios arise from the rich scattering (see Sec. III-A)

environment as well as the scarcity of surviving infrastructure. IRSs could play an important

role in overcoming these challenges, especially when combining their co-located and separated

operation mode. In fact, although the IRS is usually designed as a whole device, it is possible to

engineer detachable patches that, if necessary, can operate independently or even collaborate (if

they are not too far from each other). In this way, these elements can mitigate the effects of both

scattering and multipath propagation. Nonetheless, the inherent and tight constraints in terms of

memory, computational capability, and energy may prevent from applying this technology [201].

Another interesting application of IRSs derives from their installation on UAVs, as suggested

in [202]. The main related challenges for this technology derive from (i) the need of continuous

reconﬁguration of the IRS in order to perform accurate channel estimation while the UAV is

moving and (ii) the limited payload capability of untethered UAVs.

Several contributions in this topic were proposed by the authors of Ref. [201], where IRS

technology was reviewed, discussed, and evaluated for various challenging environments (i.e.,

post-disaster, industrial, underwater, and underground). Moreover, authors in [203] discussed

IRS-assisted and IRS-equipped UAV PSNs, for which aerial surveillance and SAR applications

were respectively proposed.

For more general applications, the study presented in [204] focused on the use of an IRS-

assisted UAV for serving multiple ground users. The authors jointly optimized the UAV’s

trajectory and velocity, resource allocation strategy, and phase control at the IRS in order to

minimize the overall power consumption4. We also recall [80] in Sec. III-A1 for the problem of

characterizing the link between UAV-mounted IRSs and trapped users. The imperfection of CSI

can be captured by the framework proposed in [205], which focused on robust and secure IRS-

assisted multi-user multiple-input single-output (MISO) downlink communications. The authors

assumed self-sustainable IRSs (capable to simultaneously reﬂect and harvest energy from the

4The latter work is general and not limited to post-disaster scenarios.

48

received signals) and jointly designed beamformers, IRS phase shifts, and energy harvesting

schedule in order to maximize the system sum-rate.

VII. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we reviewed recent works on the development of post-disaster wireless com-

munication networks, which are envisioned as one of the most relevant aspects of 5G and

beyond connectivity. We showed that current research is highly focused on developing novel

algorithms, technologies, and architectures to improve the overall network performances in case

of emergency. Moreover, we discussed the main challenges and limitations these studies faced,

and linked them to future research directions, as well as the need to carry on practical experiments

and ﬁeld tests. Finally, by numerical evaluation of the coverage probability in realistic post-

disaster scenarios, we proved the effectiveness of creating novel ad hoc architectures that properly

combine existing wireless technologies.

Therefore, by discussing relevant literature works, novel case studies, and current technological

challenges, we hope this work provides a valuable bird’s eye view for both academic and

industrial researchers who wants to explore the area of PDCs.

REFERENCES

[1] D. Lumb, “Project Loon delivers internet to 100,000 people in Puerto Rico,” Tech. Rep., 2017. Accessed: Oct. 12,

2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.engadget.com/2017-11-09-project-loon-delivers-internet-100-000-people-puerto-

rico.html.

[2]

International Telecommunications Union, “ITU Disaster Response,” Tech. Rep., Geneva, Switzerland, 2021. Accessed:

Oct. 12, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Emergency-Telecommunications/Pages/Response.aspx.

[3] K. Needham, “Musk’s Starlink connects remote Tonga villages still cut off after tsunami,” Tech. Rep., 2022. Accessed: Mar.

4, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-paciﬁc/musks-starlink-connects-remote-tonga-villages-

still-cut-off-after-tsunami-2022-02-23/.

[4] C. Gohd, “SpaceX Starlink satellite internet terminals arrive in Ukraine,” Tech. Rep., 2022. Accessed: Mar. 5, 2022.

[Online]. Available: https://www.space.com/spacex-starlink-terminals-arrive-ukraine-elon-musk-russia.

[5] H. Yuze, S. Nabeta, and Y. Ito, “Development of autonomous anti-disaster base station by combination of satellite

and wireless networks,” in IEEE 29th International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications

Workshops, Gwangiu, South Korea, 2015, pp. 524–528.

[6] Mozilla, “An Internet That Fits on Your Keychain,” Tech. Rep., 2018. Accessed: Nov. 9, 2021. [Online]. Available:

https://medium.com/read-write-participate/an-internet-that-ﬁts-on-your-keychain-ae582d8bcd48.

[7] ——,

“Internet

in a backpack,” Tech. Rep., 2020. Accessed: Nov. 9, 2021.

[Online video]. Available:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1usHQX82btQ.

49

[8] USC Viterbi

School

of

Engineering,

“Portable Cell

Initiative

-

Project

proposal,”

Tech. Rep.,

2017.

Accessed:

Nov.

9,

2021.

[Online].

Available:

https://github.com/kovesdy/portable-cell-

initiative/blob/master/documentation/Project%20Proposal.pdf.

[9] O. M. Bushnaq, A. Chaaban, and T. Y. Al-Naffouri, “The role of UAV-IoT networks in future wildﬁre detection,” IEEE

Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2021.

[10] S. Ganesh, V. Gopalasamy, and N. B. Sai Shibu, “Architecture for drone assisted emergency ad-hoc network for disaster

rescue operations,” in 2021 International Conference on COMmunication Systems NETworkS (COMSNETS), Bangalore,

India, 2021, pp. 44–49.

[11] M. A. Hoque, M. Razu, T. Islam, and A. Amin, “SDN-DTN combined architecture in post disaster scenario – A new

way to start,” in 6th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication Systems (ICACCS).

IEEE,

Coimbatore, India, 2020, pp. 230–235.

[12] R. Amin, M. Reisslein, and N. Shah, “Hybrid SDN networks: A survey of existing approaches,” IEEE Communications

Surveys Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3259–3306, 2018.

[13] R. B. Lourenço, S. S. Savas, M. Tornatore, and B. Mukherjee, “Robust hierarchical control plane for transport software-

deﬁned networks,” Optical Switching and Networking, vol. 30, pp. 10–22, 2018.

[14] Mihir Zaveri, Emily S. Rueb, “Tornadoes Kill at Least 23 in Alabama, Ofﬁcial Says,” Tech. Rep., 2019. Accessed: Mar.

6, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/03/us/tornado-alabama-georgia-deaths.html.

[15] V. Nunavath and M. Goodwin, “The role of artiﬁcial intelligence in social media big data analytics for disaster management

– Initial results of a systematic literature review,” in 5th International Conference on Information and Communication

Technologies for Disaster Management (ICT-DM).

IEEE, Sendai, Japan, 2018, pp. 1–4.

[16] Y. Zhao and W. Song, “Survey on social-aware data dissemination over mobile wireless networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 5,

pp. 6049–6059, 2017.

[17]

I. F. Kurniawan, A. T. Asyhari, F. He, and Y. Liu, “Mobile computing and communications-driven fog-assisted disaster

evacuation techniques for context-aware guidance support: A survey,” Computer Communications, vol. 179, pp. 195–216,

2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140366421002802

[18] S. T. Kouyoumdjieva, P. Danielis, and G. Karlsson, “Survey of non-image-based approaches for counting people,” IEEE

Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1305–1336, 2019.

[19] Y. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Zhang, and P. Zhang, “Hybrid satellite-aerial-terrestrial networks in emergency scenarios: A survey,”

China Communications, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 1–13, 2017.

[20] A. Khan, S. Gupta, and S. K. Gupta, “Emerging UAV technology for disaster detection, mitigation, response, and

preparedness,” Journal of Field Robotics, 2022.

[21] Z. Qadir, F. Ullah, H. S. Munawar, and F. Al-Turjman, “Addressing disasters in smart cities through UAVs path planning

and 5G communications: A systematic review,” Computer Communications, vol. 168, pp. 114–135, 2021. [Online].

Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140366421000116

[22] C. T. Recchiuto and A. Sgorbissa, “Post-disaster assessment with unmanned aerial vehicles: A survey on practical

implementations and research approaches,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 459–490, 2018.

[23] G. Baldini, S. Karanasios, D. Allen, and F. Vergari, “Survey of wireless communication technologies for public safety,”

IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 619–641, 2013.

[24] A. Kumbhar, F. Koohifar, I. Güvenç, and B. Mueller, “A survey on legacy and emerging technologies for public safety

communications,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 97–124, 2016.

[25] A. Jarwan, A. Sabbah, M. Ibnkahla, and O. Issa, “LTE-based public safety networks: A survey,” IEEE Communications

Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1165–1187, 2019.

50

[26] M. G. Pérez, A. Huertas Celdrán, F. J. García Clemente, and G. Martínez Pérez, “Review and open challenges

of public safety networks to manage emergency settings in 5G,” in 17th International Conference on Electrical

Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and Information Technology (ECTI-CON), Phuket, Thailand,

2020, pp. 555–558.

[27] C. J. Hwang, A. Kush, and A. Kumar, “Multihop ad hoc networks for disaster response scenarios,” in International

Conference on Computational Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI).

IEEE, Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2018, pp.

810–814.

[28] Y. Jahir, M. Atiquzzaman, H. Refai, A. Paranjothi, and P. G. LoPresti, “Routing protocols and architecture

for disaster area network: A survey,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 82, pp. 1–14, 2019.

[Online]. Available:

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1570870518305626

[29] N. A. Mahiddin, F. F. M. Affandi, and Z. Mohamad, “A review on mobility models in disaster area scenario,” International

Journal of Advanced Technology and Engineering Exploration, vol. 8, no. 80, p. 848, 2021.

[30] W. Yu, H. Xu, J. Nguyen, E. Blasch, A. Hematian, and W. Gao, “Survey of public safety communications: User-side and

network-side solutions and future directions,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 70 397–70 425, 2018.

[31] T. Gomes, J. Tapolcai, C. Esposito, D. Hutchison, F. Kuipers, J. Rak, A. De Sousa, A. Iossiﬁdes, R. Travanca, J. André

et al., “A survey of strategies for communication networks to protect against large-scale natural disasters,” in 8th

international workshop on resilient networks design and modeling (RNDM).

IEEE, Halmstad, Sweden, 2016, pp.

11–22.

[32] M. Pozza, A. Rao, H. Flinck, and S. Tarkoma, “Network-in-a-box: A survey about on-demand ﬂexible networks,” IEEE

Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2407–2428, 2018.

[33] K. Ali, H. X. Nguyen, Q.-T. Vien, P. Shah, M. Raza, V. V. Paranthaman, B. Er-Rahmadi, M. Awais, S. ul Islam, and J. J.

Rodrigues, “Review and implementation of resilient public safety networks: 5G, IoT, and emerging technologies,” IEEE

Network, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 18–25, 2021.

[34] M. M. Hasan, M. A. Rahman, A. Sedigh, A. U. Khasanah, A. Tauﬁq Asyhari, H. Tao, and S. A. Bakar,

“Search and rescue operation in ﬂooded areas: A survey on emerging sensor networking-enabled iot-oriented

technologies and applications,” Cognitive Systems Research, vol. 67, pp. 104–123, 2021.

[Online]. Available:

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389041720301145

[35] M. Chiesa, A. Kamisi´nski, J. Rak, G. Rétvári, and S. Schmid, “A survey of fast-recovery mechanisms in packet-switched

networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1253–1301, 2021.

[36] R. A. Nazib and S. Moh, “Routing protocols for unmanned aerial vehicle-aided vehicular ad hoc networks: A survey,”

IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 77 535–77 560, 2020.

[37] F. Pervez, J. Qadir, M. Khalil, T. Yaqoob, U. Ashraf, and S. Younis, “Wireless technologies for emergency response: A

comprehensive review and some guidelines,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 71 814–71 838, 2018.

[38] A. Carreras-Coch, J. Navarro, C. Sans, and A. Zaballos, “Communication technologies in emergency situations,”

Electronics, vol. 11, no. 7, p. 1155, 2022.

[39] G. Deepak, A. Ladas, and C. Politis, “Robust device-to-device 5G cellular communication in the post-disaster scenario,”

in 16th IEEE Annual Consumer Communications Networking Conference (CCNC), 2019, pp. 1–6.

[40] G. Deepak, A. Ladas, Y. A. Sambo, H. Pervaiz, C. Politis, and M. A. Imran, “An overview of post-disaster emergency

communication systems in the future networks,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 132–139, 2019.

[41] Udrekh, Agustan, S. Yulianto, and O. B. Bintoro, “RAPID TIMEER: An alternative solution for post-disaster rapid

assessment,” in IEEE International Conference on Communication, Networks and Satellite (Comnetsat), Medan, Indonesia,

2018, pp. 24–27.

51

[42] M. Narang, W. Liu, J. Gutierrez, and L. Chiaraviglio, “A cyber physical buses-and-drones mobile edge infrastructure

for large scale disaster emergency communications,” in IEEE 37th International Conference on Distributed Computing

Systems Workshops (ICDCSW), 2017, pp. 53–60.

[43] K.-H. Park, M.-S. Alouini, and Y. Chen, “On-demand networking for ubiquitous connectivity and network resilience: A

network-in-a-box solution,” arXiv, 2021. Available online: https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.01726.

[44] T. Sakano, S. Kotabe, T. Komukai, T. Kumagai, Y. Shimizu, A. Takahara, T. Ngo, Z. M. Fadlullah, H. Nishiyama, and

N. Kato, “Bringing movable and deployable networks to disaster areas: Development and ﬁeld test of MDRU,” IEEE

Network, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 86–91, 2016.

[45] O. M. Bushnaq, D. Mishra, E. Natalizio, and I. F. Akyildiz, “Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for disaster management,”

pp. 159–183, 2022.

[46] M. Erdelj and E. Natalizio, “UAV-assisted disaster management: Applications and open issues,” in International

Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC).

IEEE, Kauai, Hawaii, USA, 2016, pp. 1–5.

[47] S. A. R. Naqvi, S. A. Hassan, H. Pervaiz, and Q. Ni, “Drone-aided communication as a key enabler for 5G and resilient

public safety networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 36–42, 2018.

[48] M. Matracia, M. Kishk, and M.-S. Alouini, “On the topological aspects of UAV-assisted post-disaster wireless

communication networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 59–64, 2021.

[49] K. Mase and H. Okada, “Message communication system using unmanned aerial vehicles under large-scale disaster

environments,” in IEEE 26th Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications

(PIMRC), Bologna, Italy, 2015, pp. 2171–2176.

[50] Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, and T. J. Lim, “Wireless communications with unmanned aerial vehicles: Opportunities and challenges,”

IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 36–42, 2016.

[51] B. Li, C. Chen, R. Zhang, H. Jiang, and X. Guo, “The energy-efﬁcient UAV-based BS coverage in air-to-ground

communications,” in IEEE 10th Sensor Array and Multichannel Signal Processing Workshop (SAM), Shefﬁeld, UK,

2018, pp. 578–581.

[52] T. Do-Duy, L. D. Nguyen, T. Q. Duong, S. Khosravirad, and H. Claussen, “Joint optimisation of real-time deployment

and resource allocation for UAV-aided disaster emergency communications,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in

Communications, pp. 3411–3424, 2021.

[53] N. Zhao, W. Lu, M. Sheng, Y. Chen, J. Tang, F. R. Yu, and K. Wong, “UAV-assisted emergency networks in disasters,”

IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 45–51, 2019.

[54] A. Merwaday, A. Tuncer, A. Kumbhar, and I. Guvenc, “Improved throughput coverage in natural disasters: Unmanned

aerial base stations for public-safety communications,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 53–60,

2016.

[55] J. Zobel, B. Becker, R. Kundel, P. Lieser, and R. Steinmetz, “Topology-aware path planning for in-transit coverage of

aerial post-disaster communication assistance systems,” in IEEE 45th LCN Symposium on Emerging Topics in Networking

(LCN Symposium), Sydney, Australia, 2020, pp. 88–98.

[56] X. Xu and Y. Zeng, “Time-weighted coverage of integrated aerial and ground networks for post-disaster communications,”

in IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference Workshops (WCNCW), [Virtual conference], 2020, pp.

1–6.

[57] J. Miao, Q. Liao, and Z. Zhao, “Joint rate and coverage design for UAV-enabled wireless networks with underlaid D2D

communications,” in IEEE 6th International Conference on Computer and Communications (ICCC), Chengdu, China,

2020, pp. 815–819.

52

[58] X. Liu, Z. Li, N. Zhao, W. Meng, G. Gui, Y. Chen, and F. Adachi, “Transceiver design and multihop D2D for UAV IoT

coverage in disasters,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1803–1815, 2019.

[59] J. Grover, A. Jain, and N. S. Chaudhari, “Unmanned aerial vehicles operated emergency ad hoc networks,” in 7th

International Conference on Communication Systems and Network Technologies (CSNT), Nagpur, India, 2017, pp. 92–96.

[60] D. Solpico, M. I. Tan, E. J. Manalansan, F. A. Zagala, J. A. Leceta, D. F. Lanuza, J. Bernal, R. D. Ramos, R. J. Villareal,

X. M. Cruz, J. A. dela Cruz, D. J. Lagazo, J. L. Honrado, G. Abrajano, N. J. Libatique, and G. Tangonan, “Application

of the V-HUB standard using LoRa beacons, mobile cloud, UAVs, and DTN for disaster-resilient communications,” in

2019 IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference (GHTC), Seattle, WA, USA, 2019, pp. 1–8.

[61] A. Mori, H. Okada, K. Kobayashi, M. Katayama, and K. Mase, “Construction of a node-combined wireless network for

large-scale disasters,” in 12th Annual IEEE Consumer Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC), Las Vegas,

NV, USA, 2015, pp. 219–224.

[62] K. Gomez, T. Rasheed, L. Reynaud, and I. Bucaille, “Realistic deployments of LTE-based hybrid aerial-terrestrial networks

for public safety,” in IEEE 18th International Workshop on Computer Aided Modeling and Design of Communication

Links and Networks (CAMAD), Berlin, Germany, 2013, pp. 233–237.

[63] A. Surampudi, S. S. Chapalgaonkar, and P. Arumugam, “Can balloons produce Li-Fi? A disaster management perspective,”

in Global LIFI Congress (GLC), Paris, France, 2018, pp. 1–5.

[64] S. Arimura, Y. Shibata, Y. Ohashi, and N. Uchida, “A new wireless micro-balloon network for disaster use,” in 28th

International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications Workshops, Victoria, BC, Canada, 2014,

pp. 617–622.

[65] J. Nakajima, Y. Ohta, H. Miyajima, M. Tokunaga, Y. Sugita, H. Omote, H. Hayashi, and T. Fujii, “A balloon-based

wireless relay system for disaster response,” in IEEE 82nd Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2015-Fall), Boston,

MA, USA, 2015, pp. 1–6.

[66] S. H. Alsamhi, M. S. Ansari, and N. S. Rajput, “Disaster coverage predication for the emerging tethered balloon

technology: Capability for preparedness, detection, mitigation, and response,” Disaster Medicine and Public Health

Preparedness, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 222–231, 2018.

[67] P. Rengaraju, K. Sethuramalingam, and C.-H. Lung, “Providing internet access for post-disaster communications using

balloon networks,” in Proceedings of the 18th ACM Symposium on Performance Evaluation of Wireless Ad Hoc, Sensor,

& Ubiquitous Networks, 2021, pp. 111–117.

[68] S. Gharbi, N. Zangar, and N. Aitsaadi, “Overview: High altitude platform network for disaster and crises application,” in

International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies for Disaster Management (ICT-DM).

IEEE,

Paris, France, 2019, pp. 1–2.

[69] L. Siyang, Q. Fei, G. Zhen, Z. Yuan, and H. Yizhou, “LTE-satellite: Chinese proposal for satellite component of IMT-

advanced system,” China Communications, vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 47–64, 2013.

[70] T. Takahashi, B. Jeong, M. Okawa, A. Akaishi, T. Asai, N. Katayama, M. Akioka, N. Yoshimura, M. Toyoshima,

R. Miura, and N. Kadowaki, “Disaster satellite communication experiments using WINDS and wireless mesh network,”

in 16th International Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC), Atlantic City, NJ, USA,

2013, pp. 1–4.

[71] N. Suematsu, H. Oguma, S. Eguchi, S. Kameda, M. Sasanuma, and K. Kuroda, “Multi-mode SDR VSAT against big

disasters,” in European Microwave Conference.

IEEE, Nuremberg, Germany, 2013, pp. 842–845.

[72] M. Casoni, C. A. Grazia, M. Klapez, N. Patriciello, A. Amditis, and E. Sdongos, “Integration of satellite and LTE for

disaster recovery,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 47–53, 2015.

[73] K. K. Lwin, Y. Sekimoto, W. Takeuchi, and K. Zettsu, “City geospatial dashboard: IoT and big data analytics for geospatial

53

solutions provider in disaster management,” in International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies

for Disaster Management (ICT-DM).

IEEE, Paris, France, 2019, pp. 1–4.

[74] R. Salvi, K. Shinde, J. Jadhav, S. Ubale, and J. Katkar, “Weather prediction and easy evacuation using satellite

communication,” in International Conference on Wireless Communications Signal Processing and Networking (WiSPNET).

IEEE, Chennai, India, 2019, pp. 66–68.

[75] F. Völk, R. T. Schwarz, M. Lorenz, and A. Knopp, “Emergency 5G communication on-the-move: Concept and ﬁeld trial

of a mobile satellite backhaul for public protection and disaster relief,” International Journal of Satellite Communications

and Networking, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 417–430, 2021.

[76] N. Saeed, H. Almorad, H. Dahrouj, T. Y. Al-Naffouri, J. S. Shamma, and M.-S. Alouini, “Point-to-Point communication in

integrated satellite-aerial 6G networks: State-of-the-art and future challenges,” IEEE Open Journal of the Communications

Society, vol. 2, pp. 1505–1525, 2021.

[77] O. Kodheli, E. Lagunas, N. Maturo, S. K. Sharma, B. Shankar, J. F. M. Montoya, J. C. M. Duncan, D. Spano,

S. Chatzinotas, S. Kisseleff, J. Querol, L. Lei, T. X. Vu, and G. Goussetis, “Satellite communications in the new space

era: A survey and future challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 70–109, 2021.

[78] C.-Q. Dai, T. Yu, and Q. Chen, “Capacity-oriented satellite constellation design in disaster emergency communication

network,” in International Conference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP).

IEEE, Nanjing,

China, 2020, pp. 666–671.

[79] M.-S. Shin, J.-G. Ryu, and D.-G. Oh, “On the mixed support of TDMA and SCPC for satellite disaster communications

network,” in International Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC), Jeju Island,

South Korea, 2017, pp. 1213–1215.

[80] Z. Yao, W. Cheng, W. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “Resource allocation for 5G-UAV-based emergency wireless communica-

tions,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 3395–3410, 2021.

[81] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and S. Lardner, “Optimal LAP altitude for maximum coverage,” IEEE Wireless

Communications Letters, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 569–572, 2014.

[82] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and A. Jamalipour, “Modeling air-to-ground path loss for low altitude platforms in urban

environments,” in IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Austin, TX, USA, 2014, pp. 2898–2904.

[83] A. Ranjan, B. Panigrahi, H. K. Rath, P. Misra, A. Simha, and H. B. Sahu, “A study on pathloss model for UAV based

urban disaster and emergency communication systems,” in Twenty Fourth National Conference on Communications (NCC),

Hyderabad, India, 2018, pp. 1–6.

[84] J. Meinilä, P. Kyösti, T. Jämsä, and L. Hentilä, “WINNER II channel models,” in Radio Technologies and Concepts for

IMT-Advanced, 2009.

[85]

Iskandart, S. Gratsia, and M. E. Ernawan, “LTE uplink cellular capacity analysis in a high altitude platforms (HAPS)

communication,” in 11th International Conference on Telecommunication Systems Services and Applications (TSSA).

IEEE, Lombok, Indonesia, 2017, pp. 1–5.

[86] M. Yang, S. Zhang, X. Shao, Q. Guo, and W. Tang, “Statistical modeling of the high altitude platform dual-polarized

mimo propagation channel,” China Communications, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 43–54, 2017.

[87] Z. Lian, L. Jiang, and C. He, “A 3-D wideband model based on dynamic evolution of scatterers for HAP-MIMO channel,”

IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 684–687, 2017.

[88] J. Zhao, Q. Wang, Y. Li, J. Zhou, and W. Zhou, “Ka-band based channel modeling and analysis in high altitude platform

(HAP) system,” in IEEE 91st Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2020-Spring), Antwerp, Begium, 2020, pp. 1–5.

[89] H. Saﬁ, A. Dargahi, J. Cheng, and M. Safari, “Analytical channel model and link design optimization for ground-to-HAP

free-space optical communications,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 38, no. 18, pp. 5036–5047, 2020.

54

[90] N. Saeed, A. Elzanaty, H. Almorad, H. Dahrouj, T. Y. Al-Naffouri, and M.-S. Alouini, “CubeSat communications: Recent

advances and future challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1839–1862, 2020.

[91] C. Loo, “A statistical model for a land mobile satellite link,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 34, no. 3,

pp. 122–127, 1985.

[92] G. E. Corazza and F. Vatalaro, “A statistical model for land mobile satellite channels and its application to nongeostationary

orbit systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 738–742, 1994.

[93] S.-H. Hwang, K.-J. Kim, J.-Y. Ahn, and K.-C. Whang, “A channel model for nongeostationary orbiting satellite system,”

in 47th Vehicular Technology Conference. Technology in Motion, vol. 1.

IEEE, Phoenix, AZ, USA, 1997, pp. 41–45.

[94] M. Patzold, Y. Li, and F. Laue, “A study of a land mobile satellite channel model with asymmetrical doppler power

spectrum and lognormally distributed line-of-sight component,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 47,

no. 1, pp. 297–310, 1998.

[95] C. Kourogiorgas, M. Kvicera, D. Skraparlis, T. Korinek, V. K. Sakarellos, A. D. Panagopoulos, and P. Pechac, “Modeling

of ﬁrst-order statistics of the MIMO dual polarized channel at 2 GHz for land mobile satellite systems under tree

shadowing,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 5410–5415, 2014.

[96] A. Abdi, W. C. Lau, M.-S. Alouini, and M. Kaveh, “A new simple model for land mobile satellite channels: First- and

second-order statistics,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 519–528, 2003.

[97] S. Saunders and B. Evans, “Physical model of shadowing probability for land mobile satellite propagation,” Electronics

Letters, vol. 32, no. 17, pp. 1548–1549, 1996.

[98] F. P. Fontan, M. Vázquez-Castro, C. E. Cabado, J. P. Garcia, and E. Kubista, “Statistical modeling of the LMS channel,”

IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1549–1567, 2001.

[99] S. Scalise, C. Alasseur, L. Husson, and H. Ernst, “SAT04-2: Accurate and novel modeling of the land mobile satellite

channel using reversible jump Markov chain Monte Carlo technique,” in IEEE Global Communications Conference

(GLOBECOM), San Francisco, CA, USA, 2006, pp. 1–6.

[100] V. Nikolaidis, N. Moraitis, and A. G. Kanatas, “Dual-polarized narrowband MIMO LMS channel measurements in urban

environments,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 763–774, 2016.

[101] J. J. Lopez-Salamanca, L. O. Seman, M. D. Berejuck, and E. A. Bezerra, “Finite-state Markov chains channel model for

CubeSats communication uplink,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 142–154,

2019.

[102] M. Aparna and S. Kirthiga, “Parametric analysis of channel models for land mobile satellite MIMO,” in International

Conference on Wireless Communications, Signal Processing and Networking (WiSPNET).

IEEE, Chennai, India, 2017,

pp. 2466–2470.

[103] X. Wang and C. Qi, “Algorithm for modeling dual-polarized MIMO channel in land mobile satellite communications,”

in 9th International Conference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP).

IEEE, Nanjing, China,

2017, pp. 1–6.

[104] A. M. Al-Saegh, A. Sali, A. Ismail, and J. S. Mandeep, “Analysis and modeling of the cloud impairments of satellite-to-

land mobile channel at Ku and Ka bands,” in 7th Advanced Satellite Multimedia Systems Conference and the 13th Signal

Processing for Space Communications Workshop (ASMS/SPSC).

IEEE, Livorno, Italy, 2014, pp. 436–441.

[105] T. Liu, B. Sun, Z. Li, and Z. Dou, “Analysis of channel characteristics and channel model for satellite communication

system,” in IEEE International Conference on Electronic Information and Communication Technology (ICEICT), Harbin,

China, 2016, pp. 166–169.

[106] Q. Zou and L. Zhu, “Dynamic channel allocation strategy of satellite communication systems based on grey prediction,”

55

in 2019 International Symposium on Networks, Computers and Communications (ISNCC), Istanbul, Turkey, 2019, pp.

1–5.

[107] L. Bai, Q. Xu, S. Wu, S. Ventouras, and G. Goussetis, “A novel atmosphere-informed data-driven predictive channel

modeling for B5G/6G satellite-terrestrial wireless communication systems at Q-band,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular

Technology, vol. 69, no. 12, pp. 14 225–14 237, 2020.

[108] V. Marttin, U. Yuzgec, C. Bayilmis, and K. Kucuk, “D2D communication and energy efﬁciency on LTE for public

safety networks,” in 3rd International Conference on Computer Science and Engineering (UBMK), Sarajevo, Bosnia and

Herzegovina, 2018, pp. 547–551.

[109] M. Usman, A. A. Gebremariam, U. Raza, and F. Granelli, “A software-deﬁned device-to-device communication

architecture for public safety applications in 5G networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 1649–1654, 2015.

[110] E. Christy, R. P. Astuti, B. Syihabuddin, B. Narottama, O. Rhesa, and F. Rachmawati, “Optimum UAV ﬂying path

for Device-to-Device communications in disaster area,” in International Conference on Signals and Systems (ICSigSys).

IEEE, Bali, Indonesia, 2017, pp. 318–322.

[111] P. Rawat, M. Haddad, and E. Altman, “Towards efﬁcient disaster management: 5G and device to device communication,”

in 2nd International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies for Disaster Management (ICT-DM),

Rennes, France, 2015, pp. 79–87.

[112] T. Pfeiffenberger, P. Dorﬁnger, and F. von Tüllenburg, “Communication coverage awareness for self-aligning wireless

communication in disaster operations,” in IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communication

Workshops (PerCom Workshops), St. Louis, MO, USA, 2015, pp. 481–486.

[113] M. Y. Selim and A. E. Kamal, “Post-disaster 4G/5G network rehabilitation using drones: Solving battery and backhaul

issues,” in IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), Abu Dhabi, UAE, 2018, pp. 1–6.

[114] X. Liu and N. Ansari, “Resource allocation in UAV-assisted M2M communications for disaster rescue,” IEEE Wireless

Communications Letters, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 580–583, 2019.

[115] H. Nishiyama, Y. Kawamoto, and D. Takaishi, “On OFDM-based resource allocation in LTE radio management system

for unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs),” in IEEE 86th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall), 2017, pp. 1–5.

[116] K. Carlberg, E. W. Burger, and R. P. Jover, “Dynamic 5G network slicing for ﬁrst responders,” in Principles, Systems

and Applications of IP Telecommunications (IPTComm).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–4.

[117] J. Pérez-Romero, I. Vilá, O. Sallent, B. Blanco, A. Sanchoyerto, R. Solozábal, and F. Liberal, “Supporting mission

critical services through radio access network slicing,” in International Conference on Information and Communication

Technologies for Disaster Management (ICT-DM), 2019, pp. 1–8.

[118] A. Shamsoshoara, F. Afghah, A. Razi, S. Mousavi, J. Ashdown, and K. Turk, “An autonomous spectrum management

scheme for unmanned aerial vehicle networks in disaster relief operations,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 58 064–58 079, 2020.

[119] L. D. Nguyen, K. K. Nguyen, A. Kortun, and T. Q. Duong, “Real-time deployment and resource allocation for distributed

UAV systems in disaster relief,” in IEEE 20th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless

Communications (SPAWC), Cannes, France, 2019, pp. 1–5.

[120] R. A. Khalil, N. Saeed, and M. Almutiry, “UAVs-assisted passive source localization using robust TDOA ranging for

search and rescue,” ICT Express, 2022.

[121] N. Saeed, H. Nam, T. Y. Al-Naffouri, and M.-S. Alouini, “A state-of-the-art survey on multidimensional scaling-based

localization techniques,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3565–3583, 2019.

[122] R. Mehannaoui and K. N. Mouss, “A study with simulation of range free localization techniques in wireless sensors

networks,” in International Conference on Advanced Electrical Engineering (ICAEE).

IEEE, Algiers, Algeria, 2019, pp.

1–4.

56

[123] S. Bhowmik, R. Kar, and C. Giri, “Fuzzy node localization in wireless sensor network,” in International Conference on

Wireless Communications, Signal Processing and Networking (WiSPNET).

IEEE, Chennai, India, 2016, pp. 1112–1116.

[124] A. Zrelli and T. Ezzedine, “Localization of damage using wireless sensor networks for tunnel health monitoring,” in 13th

International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC).

IEEE, Valencia, Spain, 2017, pp.

1161–1165.

[125] P. Zuo, T. Peng, H. Wu, K. You, H. Jing, W. Guo, and W. Wang, “Directional source localization based on RSS-AOA

combined measurements,” China Communications, vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 181–193, 2020.

[126] S. Gu, Y. Yue, C. Maple, C. Wu, and B. Liu, “Challenges in mobile localisation in wireless sensor networks for disaster

scenarios,” in 19th International Conference on Automation and Computing.

IEEE, London, UK, 2013, pp. 1–6.

[127] R. F. Ahmad, A. S. Malik, A. Qayyum, and N. Kamel, “Disaster monitoring in urban and remote areas using satellite

stereo images: A depth estimation approach,” in IEEE 11th International Colloquium on Signal Processing Its Applications

(CSPA), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2015, pp. 150–155.

[128] M. A. Khan, N. Saeed, A. W. Ahmad, and C. Lee, “Location awareness in 5G networks using RSS measurements for

public safety applications,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 21 753–21 762, 2017.

[129] L.-S. Chai, J. He, and X.-C. Wei, “Radio channel modeling and measurement of a localization rescue system,” in 2013

Proceedings of the International Symposium on Antennas Propagation, vol. 02, 2013, pp. 1060–1063.

[130] A. Jahangiri, M. Mohammadi-Amin, and G. Kahe, “A parametric study on Gauss-Newton iterations for wireless sensor

network localization,” in 3rd West Asian Symposium on Optical and Millimeter-wave Wireless Communication (WASOWC).

IEEE, Tehran, Iran, 2020, pp. 1–4.

[131] X. Zhang, T. Wang, and J. Fang, “A node localization approach using particle swarm optimization in wireless sensor

networks,” in International Conference on Identiﬁcation, Information and Knowledge in the Internet of Things.

IEEE,

Beijing, China, 2014, pp. 84–87.

[132] Y. Nakamura, T. Kaneta, and O. Takahashi, “A temporary communication system using DTN for improving power

consumption of mobile terminals,” in International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC).

IEEE, Honolulu, HI, USA, 2019, pp. 235–239.

[133] V. K. Shah, S. Roy, S. Silvestri, and S. K. Das, “Bio-DRN: Robust and energy-efﬁcient bio-inspired disaster response

networks,” in IEEE 16th International Conference on Mobile Ad Hoc and Sensor Systems (MASS), Monterey, CA, USA,

2019, pp. 326–334.

[134] S. Seng, G. Yang, X. Li, H. Ji, and C. Luo, “Energy-efﬁcient communications in solar-powered unmanned aerial systems,”

in IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Taipei, Taiwan, 2020, pp. 1–6.

[135] K. Ashok and T. Sudha, “Uninterrupted connectivity using conditional time split energy extraction with beamforming

system for disaster affected wireless networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 194 912–194 924, 2020.

[136] E. Rosas, F. Garay, N. Hidalgo, and O. Marin, “Mobility-aware DTN protocols for post-disaster scenarios,” in 2nd

International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies for Disaster Management (ICT-DM).

IEEE,

Rennes, France, 2015, pp. 193–199.

[137] M. Li, H. Nishiyama, N. Kato, Y. Owada, and K. Hamaguchi, “On the energy-efﬁcient of throughput-based scheme using

renewable energy for wireless mesh networks in disaster area,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing,

vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 420–431, 2015.

[138] K. Kayiram, P. S. Reddy, A. Sharma, and R. Lalitha, “Energy efﬁcient data retrieval in wireless sensor networks for

disaster monitoring applications,” in International Conference on Sustainable Energy and Future Electric Transportation

(SEFET).

IEEE, Hyderabad, India, 2021, pp. 1–7.

57

[139] K. Ali, H. X. Nguyen, Q.-T. Vien, P. Shah, and Z. Chu, “Disaster management using D2D communication with power

transfer and clustering techniques,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 14 643–14 654, 2018.

[140] T. Ngo, H. Nishiyama, N. Kato, T. Sakano, and A. Takahara, “A spectrum- and energy-efﬁcient scheme for improving

the utilization of MDRU-based disaster resilient networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 63, no. 5,

pp. 2027–2037, 2014.

[141] H. H. Mahmoud, T. Ismail, and S. O. Abdellatif, “Energy efﬁcient topology control algorithm and dynamic management

scheme for underwater IoT applications,” in IEEE Global Conference on Internet of Things (GCIoT), Alexandria, Egypt,

2018, pp. 1–5.

[142] N. Babu, C. B. Papadias, and P. Popovski, “Energy-efﬁcient 3-D deployment of aerial access points in a UAV

communication system,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 2883–2887, 2020.

[143] A. Saif, K. Dimyati, K. A. Noordin, G. Deepak, N. S. M. Shah, Q. Abdullah, and M. Mohamad, “An efﬁcient energy

harvesting and optimal clustering technique for sustainable postdisaster emergency communication systems,” IEEE Access,

vol. 9, pp. 78 188–78 202, 2021.

[144] J. Liu, Y. Shi, Z. M. Fadlullah, and N. Kato, “Space-air-ground integrated network: A survey,” IEEE Communications

Surveys Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2714–2741, 2018.

[145] T. Akiyoshi, E. Okamoto, H. Tsuji, and A. Miura, “Performance improvement of satellite/terrestrial integrated mobile

communication system using unmanned aerial vehicle cooperative communications,” in 2017 International Conference

on Information Networking (ICOIN).

IEEE, Da Nang, Vietnam, 2017, pp. 417–422.

[146] S. J. H. Pirzada, M. Haris, M. N. Hasan, T. Xu, and L. Jianwei, “Detection and communication of disasters with space-

air-ground integrated network,” in IEEE 23rd International Multitopic Conference (INMIC), Bahawalpur, Pakistan, 2020,

pp. 1–6.

[147] R. Chaudhry, S. Tapaswi, and N. Kumar, “A green multicast routing algorithm for smart sensor networks in disaster

management,” IEEE Transactions on Green Communications and Networking, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 215–226, 2019.

[148] J. Xu, K. Ota, and M. Dong, “Fast networking for disaster recovery,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing,

vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 845–854, 2020.

[149] A. Masaracchia, L. D. Nguyen, T. Q. Duong, and M.-N. Nguyen, “An energy-efﬁcient clustering and routing framework

for disaster relief network,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 56 520–56 532, 2019.

[150] N. Kim, W. Na, and S. Cho, “Dual-channel-based mobile ad hoc network routing technique for indoor disaster

environment,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 126 713–126 724, 2020.

[151] M. Y. S. Uddin, H. Ahmadi, T. Abdelzaher, and R. Kravets, “Intercontact routing for energy constrained disaster response

networks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 1986–1998, 2013.

[152] M. Y. Arafat and S. Moh, “Location-aided delay tolerant routing protocol in UAV networks for post-disaster operation,”

IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 59 891–59 906, 2018.

[153] N. Uchida, T. Shingai, T. Shigetome, and Y. Shibata, “Implementations of data triage methods for DTN based disaster

information networks,” in IEEE 8th International Conference on Awareness Science and Technology (iCAST), Taichung,

Taiwan, 2017, pp. 205–209.

[154] M. W. Kang and Y. Won Chung, “Performance analysis of a novel DTN routing protocol for ICN in disaster environments,”

in International Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC), Jeju, South Korea, 2018,

pp. 1276–1278.

[155] S. Krug and J. Seitz, “Challenges of applying DTN routing protocols in realistic disaster scenarios,” in Eighth International

Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN), Vienna, Austria, 2016, pp. 784–789.

58

[156] M. Fauzan, T. W. Purboyo, and C. Setianingsih, “IBR-DTN to solve communication problem on post-disaster rescue

mission,” in International Seminar on Intelligent Technology and Its Applications (ISITIA), Surabaya, Indonesia, 2019,

pp. 24–28.

[157] S. Ganguly, S. Basu, S. Roy, and S. Mitra, “A location based mobility prediction scheme for post disaster communication

network using DTN,” in Applications and Innovations in Mobile Computing (AIMoC), Kolkata, India, 2015, pp. 25–28.

[158] A. Roy, S. Mahanta, M. Tripathy, S. Ghosh, and S. Bal, “Health condition identiﬁcation of affected people in post

disaster area using DTN,” in IEEE 7th Annual Ubiquitous Computing, Electronics Mobile Communication Conference

(UEMCON), New York, NY, USA, 2016, pp. 1–3.

[159] E. M. Trono, Y. Arakawa, M. Tamai, and K. Yasumoto, “DTN MapEx: Disaster area mapping through distributed

computing over a delay tolerant network,” in Eighth International Conference on Mobile Computing and Ubiquitous

Networking (ICMU).

IEEE, Hakodate, Japan, 2015, pp. 179–184.

[160] M. Kawamoto and T. Shigeyasu, “Message relay decision algorithm to improve message delivery ratio in DTN-based

wireless disaster information systems,” in IEEE 29th International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and

Applications, Gwangju, South Korea, 2015, pp. 822–828.

[161] S. Basu, S. Roy, and S. DasBit, “A post-disaster demand forecasting system using principal component regression analysis

and case-based reasoning over smartphone-based DTN,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, vol. 66, no. 2,

pp. 224–239, 2019.

[162] S. Basu, S. Roy, S. Bandyopadhyay, and S. Das Bit, “A utility driven post disaster emergency resource allocation system

using DTN,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 2338–2350, 2020.

[163] L. M. Vaquero and L. Rodero-Merino, “Finding your way in the fog: Towards a comprehensive deﬁnition of fog

computing,” ACM SIGCOMM computer communication Review, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 27–32, 2014.

[164] W. Z. Khan, E. Ahmed, S. Hakak, I. Yaqoob, and A. Ahmed, “Edge computing: A survey,” Future Generation Computer

Systems, vol. 97, pp. 219–235, 2019.

[165] N. Fatima, P. Saxena, and M. Gupta, “Integration of multi access edge computing with unmanned aerial vehicles: Current

techniques, open issues and research directions,” Physical Communication, vol. 52, p. 101641, 2022.

[166] N. S. Foundation, “AirEdge: Robust Airborne Wireless Edge Computing Network using Swarming UAVs,” 2020.

Accessed: Jun. 15, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=2008447&Hi

storicalAwards=false.

[167] F. Liu, Y. Guo, Z. Cai, N. Xiao, and Z. Zhao, “Edge-enabled disaster rescue: A case study of searching for missing

people,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 10, no. 6, dec 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3331146

[168] J. Xu, K. Ota, and M. Dong, “Big data on the ﬂy: UAV-mounted mobile edge computing for disaster management,” IEEE

Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 2620–2630, 2020.

[169] Z. Kaleem, M. Yousaf, A. Qamar, A. Ahmad, T. Q. Duong, W. Choi, and A. Jamalipour, “UAV-empowered disaster-

resilient edge architecture for delay-sensitive communication,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 124–132, 2019.

[170] J. Du, H. Cao, A. Sun, G. Lu, M. H. Anisi, and A. Jindal, “Drone-assisted and blockchain-enabled edge-cloud computing

networks: Architecture design, case study, and future directions,” IEEE Internet of Things Magazine, vol. 4, no. 4, pp.

54–59, 2021.

[171] L. Zhang, Y. Cao, G. Zhang, Y. Huang, and C. Zheng, “A blockchain-based microgrid data disaster backup scheme in

edge computing,” Security and Communication Networks, 2021.

[172] M.-N. Tran and Y. Kim, “Named data networking based disaster response support system over edge computing

infrastructure,” Electronics, vol. 10, no. 3, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/335

59

[173] R. F. Hussain, M. A. Salehi, A. Kovalenko, Y. Feng, and O. Semiari, “Federated edge computing for disaster

management

in remote smart oil ﬁelds,” in 21st International Conference on High Performance Computing and

Communications; 17th International Conference on Smart City; 5th International Conference on Data Science and Systems

(HPCC/SmartCity/DSS).

IEEE, Zhangjiajie, China, 2019, pp. 929–936.

[174] X. Chen, J. Tang, and S. Lao, “Review of unmanned aerial vehicle swarm communication architectures and routing

protocols,” Applied Sciences, vol. 10, no. 10, p. 3661, 2020.

[175] A. Talgat, M. A. Kishk, and M.-S. Alouini, “Stochastic geometry-based analysis of LEO satellite communication systems,”

IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 2458–2462, 2021.

[176] H. Haboobi and M. R. Kadhum, “Impact study and evaluation of higher modulation schemes on physical layer of

upcoming wireless mobile networks,” (IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,

vol. 10, no. 5, 2019.

[177] T. Kojima, T. Tachikawa, A. Oizumi, Y. Yamaguchi, and U. Parampalli, “A disaster prevention broadcasting based on

data hiding scheme using complete complementary codes,” in International Symposium on Information Theory and its

Applications.

IEEE, Melbourne, Australia, 2014, pp. 45–49.

[178] C. Esposito, Z. Zhao, and J. Rak, “Reinforced secure gossiping against dos attacks in post-disaster scenarios,” IEEE

Access, vol. 8, pp. 178 651–178 669, 2020.

[179] M. Kishk, A. Bader, and M.-S. Alouini, “Aerial base station deployment in 6G cellular networks using tethered drones:

The mobility and endurance tradeoff,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 103–111, 2020.

[180] B. Tezergil and E. Onur, “Wireless backhaul in 5G and beyond: Issues, challenges and opportunities,” 2021. [Online]

Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.08234.

[181] J. J. S. Marciano, P. R. Ramirez, P. Martinez, and M. C. Barela, “ROGER: Robust and rapidly deployable GSM base

station and backhaul for emergency response,” in IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference (GHTC), Seattle,

WA, USA, 2016, pp. 128–135.

[182] H. M. T. Al-Hilﬁ, M. T. Mohammed Al Hashimi, and I. Marghescu, “WiMAX and WiFi network integration as

backhaul on emergency communications,” in 14th International Conference on Advanced Trends in Radioelecrtronics,

Telecommunications and Computer Engineering (TCSET).

IEEE, Lviv-Slavske, Ukraine, 2018, pp. 1063–1068.

[183] N. Kouzayha, H. ElSawy, H. Dahrouj, K. Alshaikh, T. Y. Al-Naffouri, and M.-S. Alouini, “Stochastic geometry analysis

of hybrid aerial terrestrial networks with mmWave backhauling,” in IEEE International Conference on Communications

(ICC), Dublin, Ireland, 2020, pp. 1–7.

[184] X. Yuan, H. Tian, and G. Nie, “Joint access and backhaul link optimization in multiple UAV-assisted emergency network,”

in IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC), Chongqing, China, 2020, pp. 735–740.

[185] M. Herlich and S. Yamada, “Motivation for a step-by-step guide to set up wireless disaster recovery networks,” in 2nd

International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies for Disaster Management (ICT-DM).

IEEE,

Rennes, France, 2015, pp. 64–70.

[186] G. Jowkar, M. Fotouhi, and W. Cheng, “Quick edge-device deployment for connecting ﬁrst responders in public

safety networks,” in IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom

Workshops), Austin, TX, USA, 2020, pp. 1–6.

[187] M. A. Ali and A. Jamalipour, “UAV placement and power allocation in uplink and downlink operations of cellular

network,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 4383–4393, 2020.

[188] Z. Kaleem, W. Khalid, A. Muqaibel, A. A. Nasir, C. Yuen, and G. K. Karagiannidis, “Learning-aided UAV 3D placement

and power allocation for sum-capacity enhancement under varying altitudes,” IEEE Communications Letters, 2022.

60

[189]

I. Valiulahi and C. Masouros, “Multi-UAV deployment for throughput maximization in the presence of co-channel

interference,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 3605–3618, 2020.

[190] A. M. Hayajneh, S. A. R. Zaidi, D. C. McLernon, M. Di Renzo, and M. Ghogho, “Performance analysis of UAV enabled

disaster recovery networks: A stochastic geometric framework based on cluster processes,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp.

26 215–26 230, 2018.

[191] H. Hydher, D. N. K. Jayakody, K. T. Hemachandra, and T. Samarasinghe, “Intelligent UAV deployment for a disaster-

resilient wireless network,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 21, 2020.

[192] Z. Wang and S. Zlatanova, “Safe route determination for ﬁrst responders in the presence of moving obstacles,” IEEE

Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1044–1053, 2020.

[193] M. Y. Arafat and S. Moh, “Localization and clustering based on swarm intelligence in UAV networks for emergency

communications,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8958–8976, 2019.

[194] D. Arivudainambi and D. Rekha, “Heuristic approach for broadcast scheduling, problem in wireless mesh networks,”

AEU-International Journal of Electronics and Communications, vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 489–495, 2014.

[195] M. Gao, B. Zhang, and L. Wang, “A dynamic priority packet scheduling scheme for post-disaster UAV-assisted mobile

ad hoc network,” in 2021 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC).

IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.

[196] S. K. Ray, N. I. Sarkar, D. Deka, and S. K. Ray, “LTE-advanced based handover mechanism for natural disaster situations,”

International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), pp. 165–170, Siem Reap, Cambodia, 2015.

[197] R. Arshad, L. Lampe, H. ElSawy, and M. J. Hossain, “Integrating UAVs into existing wireless networks: A stochastic

geometry approach,” in IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), Abu Dhabi, UAE, 2018, pp. 1–6.

[198] C. Bernardini, T. Silverston, and A. Vasilakos, “Caching strategies for information centric networking: Opportunities and

challenges,” 2016. [Online] Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.07630.

[199] Z. Su, Q. Xu, J. Luo, H. Pu, Y. Peng, and R. Lu, “A secure content caching scheme for disaster backup in fog computing

enabled mobile social networks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 4579–4589, 2018.

[200] F. Zhou, N. Wang, G. Luo, L. Fan, and W. Chen, “Edge caching in multi-UAV-enabled radio access networks: 3D

modeling and spectral efﬁciency optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Signal and Information Processing over Networks,

vol. 6, pp. 329–341, 2020.

[201] S. Kisseleff, S. Chatzinotas, and B. Ottersten, “Reconﬁgurable intelligent surfaces in challenging environments:

Underwater, underground, industrial and disaster,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 150 214–150 233, 2021.

[202] S. Alfattani, W. Jaafar, Y. Hmamouche, H. Yanikomeroglu, A. Yongaçoglu, N. D. Ðào, and P. Zhu, “Aerial platforms

with reconﬁgurable smart surfaces for 5G and beyond,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 96–102,

2021.

[203] W. Jaafar, L. Bariah, S. Muhaidat, and H. Yanikomeroglu, “Enhancing UAV-based public safety networks with

reconﬁgurable intelligent surfaces,” in Intelligent Unmanned Air Vehicles Communications for Public Safety Networks.

Springer, 2022, pp. 145–167.

[204] Y. Cai, Z. Wei, S. Hu, D. W. K. Ng, and J. Yuan, “Resource allocation for power-efﬁcient IRS-assisted UAV

communications,” in International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), IEEE, Dublin, Ireland,

2020, pp. 1–7.

[205] S. Hu, Z. Wei, Y. Cai, C. Liu, D. W. K. Ng, and J. Yuan, “Robust and secure sum-rate maximization for multiuser MISO

downlink systems with self-sustainable IRS,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 7032–7049,

2021.

Maurilio Matracia [S’21] is a Doctoral Student at the Communication Theory Lab (CTL), King Abdullah

University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA). He received his M.Sc.

degree in Electrical Engineering from the University of Palermo (UNIPA), Italy, in 2019. His main research

interest regards rural and emergency communications.

61

Nasir Saeed [S’13 M’15 SM’19] received the Ph.D. degree in Electronics and Communication Engineering

from Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2015. He is currently an Associate Professor with the De-

partment of Electrical Engineering, Northern Border University, Arar, KSA. His current research interests

include cognitive radio networks, underwater wireless communications, aerial networks, dimensionality

reduction, and localization.

Mustafa A. Kishk [S’16, M’18] is currently an Assistant Professor at the Electronic Engineering De-

partment, Maynooth University, Ireland. He received his B.Sc. and M.Sc. degree from Cairo University

in 2013 and 2015, respectively, and his Ph.D. degree from Virginia Tech in 2018. His research interests

include stochastic geometry, energy harvesting wireless networks, UAV-enabled communication systems,

and satellite communications.

Mohamed-Slim Alouini [S’94, M’98, SM’03, F’09] was born in Tunis, Tunisia. He received the Ph.D.

degree in Electrical Engineering from the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), Pasadena, USA, in

1998. He served as a faculty member in the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA, and in the Texas

A&M University at Qatar, Doha, Qatar, before joining KAUST as a Professor of Electrical Engineering

in 2009. His current research interests include the modeling, design, and performance analysis of wireless

communication systems.

