1 

A Machine Learning-Based Method for 
Identifying Critical Distance Relays for 
Transient Stability Studies 

Ramin Vakili, Student Member, IEEE, and Mojdeh Khorsand, Member, IEEE 

Abstract—Modeling protective relays is crucial for performing 
accurate stability studies as they play a critical role in defining the 
dynamic  responses  of  power  systems  during  disturbances. 
Nevertheless,  due  to  the  current  limitations  of  stability  software 
and the challenges of keeping track of the changes in the settings 
information  of  thousands  of  protective  relays,  modeling  all  the 
protective  relays  in  bulk  power  systems  is  a  challenging  task. 
Distance relays are among the critical protection schemes, which 
are not properly modeled in current practices of stability studies. 
This paper proposes a machine learning-based method that uses 
the  results  of  early-terminated  stability  studies  to  identify  the 
critical  distance  relays  required  to  be  modeled  in  those  studies. 
The  algorithm  used  is  the  random  forest  (RF)  classifier.  GE 
positive  sequence  load  flow  analysis  (PSLF)  software  is  used  to 
perform stability studies. The model is trained and tested on the 
Western  Electricity  Coordinating  Council  (WECC)  system  data 
representing  the  2018  summer  peak  load  under  different 
operating  conditions  and  topologies  of  the  system.  The  results 
show  the  great  performance  of  the  method  in  identifying  the 
critical distance relays. The results also show that only modeling 
the identified critical distance relays suffices to perform accurate 
stability studies. 

Index  Terms--  Distance  relays,  identifying  critical  protective 
relays,  modeling  protective  relays  in  stability  studies,  power 
system  protection,  random  forest  classifier,  relay  misoperation, 
transient stability study. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

T 

he dynamic responses of the major assets in power systems 
including generators, loads, and control systems along with 
the  responses  of  the  protection  schemes  are  the  two  main 
aspects  that  define  power  system  behavior  during  major 
disturbances [1]. Post-analysis of many of the prior blackouts 
and  major  outages  show  that  unforeseen  relay  misoperations 
played  a  significant  role  in  leading  the  system  toward  these 
catastrophic events [2], [3]. In this regard, protection systems 
are  identified  by  the  North  American  Electric  Reliability 
Corporation  (NERC)  as  critical  reliability  assets  in  power 
systems [4]. Therefore, proper modeling of protection systems 
in transient stability studies is crucial for obtaining a realistic 
assessment of system behavior [5]. 

There are different types of protective relays in bulk power 
systems  that  are  needed  to  be  included  in  transient  stability 

studies  to  achieve  a  realistic  assessment  of  system  behavior. 
Some of these protective relays, such as underfrequency load 
shedding  (UFLS)  and  undervoltage  load  shedding  (UVLS) 
relays,  usually  are  included  in  transient  stability  studies. 
However, despite being one of the most common and critical 
protective relays in power systems, distance relays are usually 
not properly included in stability studies [5]. References [4]-[8] 
show  that  the  results  of  transient  stability  studies  performed 
without modeling distance relays might not capture the actual 
response of the system to a disturbance. This paper also shows 
the importance of modeling distance relays in stability studies 
with further case studies on the WECC system. 

The  most  straightforward  way  to  capture  the  behavior  of 
distance relays in transient stability studies is to model all the 
relays in the system. However, modeling thousands of distance 
relays  that  exist  in  bulk  power  systems,  such  as  the  WECC 
system, is challenging due to two main reasons [6]: 
•  Commercial  stability  software  tools,  such  as  GE  PSLF, 
have limitations on the number of dynamic models that can 
be included in the dynamic files used for stability studies. 
Therefore, modeling thousands of distance relays in a bulk 
power system overwhelms the dynamic file and exceeds the 
current limitation of the software. 

•  In bulk power systems, it is a challenging task to keep the 
updated setting information of thousands of distance relays 
in the dynamic file of the system since protection engineers 
change these settings for various purposes. The reach of the 
operation zones and the time delay for the operation of each 
zone are the two main settings that govern the functionality 
of distance relays. In an outdated dynamic file, the settings 
of one or more distance relays can be different from their 
actual values. It is shown in [6] that outdated relay settings 
might  lead  to  an  incorrect  assessment  of  the  dynamic 
behavior of power systems during major disturbances. 
Due to these challenges, the need for a method to identify 
the critical distance relays for each type of contingency, i.e., the 
distance relays that are likely to operate during the contingency, 
has been identified by the industry [3], [5], and [9]. To address 
this  need,  various  methods  are  proposed  in  the  literature  to 
identify  the  critical  distance  relays  that  are  required  to  be 
included in transient stability studies.  

A link between the power system simulator for engineering 

The  authors  are  with  the  School  of  Electrical,  Computer,  and  Energy  Engineering,  Arizona  State  University,  Tempe,  AZ  85287-5706  USA  (e-mail: 

rvakili@asu.edu; mojdeh.khorsand@asu.edu). 

 
  
 
 
(PSS/E)  and 
the  computer-aided  protection  engineering 
(CAPE) software—a software tool for analyzing the behavior 
of  protective  relays—has  been  developed  in  [10].  The  link 
developed  in  [10]  provides  a  platform  for  simultaneous 
assessment  of  protection  system  behavior  and  dynamic 
response of power systems during disturbances. During severe 
disturbances,  the  initiating  event  might  have  system-wide 
impacts  and  results  in  unstable  power  swings  that  can  cause 
misoperations  of  several  distance  relays  in  the  system  at 
locations far from the initial fault location [9].  However, using 
the approach of [10], only the operations of the distance relays 
in  the  vicinity  of  initial  fault  locations  are  analyzed  and  the 
system-wide effects of disturbances on the distance relays are 
ignored. References [7], [11], and [12] have proposed different 
methods  for  identifying  critical  distance  relays.  The  methods 
proposed in these references are based on the location and size 
of  the  initiating  events.  Therefore,  these  methods  also  fail  to 
identify  the  distance  relays  which  operate  due  to  the  system-
wide effects of the initiating events. 

 As  another  method  of  identifying  critical  distance  relays, 
the  Independent  System  Operator  (ISO)  of  New  England 
monitors the impedance trajectories observed by relays in their 
planning studies. If any of the impedance trajectories traverse 
into  the  zone-3  reach  of  its  related  distance  relay,  which  is 
considered  300%  of  line  impedances  for  all  the  transmission 
lines in this initial study, the actual setting data of the relay is 
collected, and the relay is modeled in the planning studies [13]. 
The  operation  of  distance  relays  affects  the  system  behavior 
assessment for the remainder of the simulation. Therefore, after 
identifying  the  distance  relay  that  operates  first  during  the 
transient  stability  study,  the  results  of  the  study  might  not 
properly  reflect  the  actual  behavior  of  the  system  for  the 
remainder  of  the  simulation.  Hence,  the  rest  of  the  critical 
distance relays identified by this method might be incorrect.  

References  [14]  and  [15]  have  proposed  new  methods  for 
identifying the distance relays that are at the electrical center of 
a system and might misoperate due to unstable power swings 
during  out-of-step  (OOS)  conditions.  A  generic  method  for 
identifying  the  critical  distance  relays  for  all  types  of 
contingencies is proposed in [5], which is based on solving an 
optimization  problem  using  the  prior  generator  grouping 
information  and  network  structure.  However,  the  methods 
proposed in [14], [15], and [5] only focus on the distance relay 
operations that occur due to unstable power swings. Thus, they 
do not consider the operations in the vicinity of the initiating 
event,  which  occur  due  to  the  initial  impacts  of  the  event. 
Moreover, the method in [5] provides a generic list of critical 
distance relays for all types of contingencies. However, the type 
and location of a contingency significantly affect the list of the 
critical  distance  relays  that  are  required  to  be  modeled  for 
performing  an  accurate  transient  stability  study.  Therefore, 
providing  a  specific  list  of  critical  distance  relays  for  each 
contingency is of great importance. 

 Different methods for designing distance relay schemes are 
proposed  in  [16]-[25]  which  enables  these  schemes  to 
distinguish  between  a  power  swing  and  a  fault  condition.  If 
these  schemes  are  properly  modeled  in  transient  stability 

2 

they  might  be  able 

studies, 
to  detect  distance  relay 
misoperations  due  to  unstable  power  swings  and  OOS 
conditions.  Nevertheless,  none  of  these  methods  are  able  to 
identify all the critical distance relays which are required to be 
modeled for performing accurate transient stability studies.  

The  method  proposed  in  [6]  is  an  iterative  algorithm  that 
utilizes  two  methods  of  apparent  impedance  monitoring  and 
minimum  voltage  evaluation  to  identify  the  critical  distance 
relays for any contingency. Although this method can identify 
all the critical distance relays for a contingency, it imposes a 
heavy  computational  burden  as  several  runs  of  transient 
stability studies should be performed in this method. This, in 
turn, leads to excessive simulation time.  

transient  stability  study  of 

A fast machine learning (ML)-based method is proposed in 
this paper that eliminates the drawbacks of the methods in the 
literature.  The  method  trains  an  ML  model  which  promptly 
identifies all the critical distance relays that need to be modeled 
in  the  transient  stability  study  of  a  contingency.  To  train  the 
model,  the  method  utilizes  the  results  of  extensive  offline 
transient  stability  studies  of  different  types  of  contingencies 
under  various  operating  conditions  and  topologies  of  the 
system.  After  being  trained,  the  model  uses  the  results  of  an 
initial  early-terminated 
the 
contingency under study to identify the critical distance relays 
for  that  contingency.  The  number  of  critical  distance  relays 
identified by the method for any contingency is far less than the 
total  number  of  distance  relays  in  the  system.  Therefore,  the 
method eliminates the challenges associated with modeling all 
the  distance  relays  in  the  system.  Moreover,  it  is  indeed  less 
challenging  to  keep  the  updated  setting  information  for  this 
small  subset  of  distance  relays  in  the  dynamic  files  of  bulk 
power  systems.  The  major  contributions  of  the  paper  can  be 
summarized as follows:  
•  Unlike  the  methods  proposed  in  the  literature,  the  ML-
based method developed in this paper is able to identify all 
the critical distance relays that are required to be modeled 
in  the  transient  stability  study  of  a  contingency.  This 
includes the distance relays that operate due to the initial 
impacts of the contingency and the ones that operate due to 
the system-wide impacts of the contingency.  

•  Unlike  the  other  methods  in  the  literature,  the  proposed 
method is very fast. Therefore, it can be used in planning 
studies, where a sheer number of contingencies are studied, 
to promptly identify the critical distance relays that need to 
be  included  in  the  transient  stability  studies  of  the 
contingencies under study. 

•  The  proposed  method  is  trained  considering  different 
operating  conditions  and  topologies  of  the  system  under 
study. Therefore, as the results reveal, the method is robust 
against changes in the topology and the operating condition 
of  the  system  and  can  yield  great  results  even  under  a 
different topology and operating condition of the system.  
The  rest  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section  II 
presents the proposed ML-based method for identifying critical 
distance  relays.  Section  III  describes  the  Random  Forest 
algorithm, the metrics used to evaluate the performance of the 
trained  RF  model,  as  well  as  the  grid  search  and  the  K-fold 

 
3 

IV 

evaluates 

cross-validation  methods.  Section 
the 
performance of the trained model in terms of the metric used. 
Also,  Section  IV  further  assesses  the  performance  of  the 
method in identifying the critical distance relays and capturing 
the  behavior  of  the  system  by  performing  transient  stability 
studies of several contingencies on the WECC system using the 
proposed method. Conclusions are provided in Section V. 

II.  IDENTIFICATION OF CRITICAL DISTANCE RELAYS 

The ML-based method developed in this paper works based 
on  the  latent  correlation  between  the  impedance  trajectories 
observed  by  distance  relays  during  the  early  stages  of  a 
contingency and the behavior of the distance relays for several 
seconds  later.  Figure  1  shows  the  flowchart  of  the  proposed 
method. During the training stage, to create a comprehensive 
dataset  for  training/testing  an  ML  model,  extensive  transient 
stability  studies  are  performed  on  different 
types  of 
contingencies  under  different  operating  conditions  and 
topologies of the system. The contingencies studied include bus 
faults  and  line  faults  followed  by  removing  one  or  more 
transmission lines, as well as generator outage contingencies. 
During  these  studies,  the  real  and  imaginary  parts  of  the 
impedance  trajectories  observed  by  the  distance  relays  at  the 
time of the fault and up to 1 cycle after the fault are captured 
and used as the features of the ML model. The operations of the 
distance  relays  during  each  contingency  are  used  to  label  the 
dataset (1 for operation and 0 for not operation). Note that due 
to the software limitations, only the distance relays on the high 
voltage transmission lines with the voltage level of 345 kV and 
above  are  modeled  in  transient  stability  studies  of  the 
contingencies.  If  available,  the  results  of  the  offline  transient 
stability studies can be combined with the historical records of 
the  impedance  trajectories  observed  by  distance  relays  in  the 
system during prior contingencies along with the record of their 
operations.  Note  that  after  the  model  is  trained  using  the 
comprehensive  dataset,  it  is  used  to  identify  critical  distance 
relays  for  any  contingency.  Hence,  the  process  of  building  a 
comprehensive dataset through conducting extensive transient 
stability studies is only performed once at the training stage. 

The  problem  of  predicting  distance  relay  operations  is  a 
binary  classification  problem  (with  two  classes  of  0  and  1). 
Throughout this paper, the following definitions for class 0 and 
class 1 of the classification problem hold:  
•  Class 0: This class represents the samples of no-operation of 
distance relays, i.e., the samples where a distance relay does 
not operate for the entire simulation time, in the dataset.  
•  Class 1: This class represents the samples of distance relay 

operations in the dataset.  
Different  types  of  ML  algorithms  can  be  used  for 
classification problems. As it can train robust models with high 
accuracy and prediction/training speed, an RF classifier is used 
in  this  paper  to  train  the  ML  model.  To  achieve  the  best 
performance, a two-stage grid search method is used to tune the 
hyperparameters  of  the  RF  model.  During  the  grid  search,  to 
realistically evaluate the performances of the RF models trained 
with different combinations of hyperparameter values, the K-
fold cross-validation method is utilized. The grid search and the  

Fig. 1. The flowchart of the proposed method. 

K-fold cross-validation methods are explained in Section III. C 
and Section III. D, respectively. 

In the application stage, the trained model is used to identify 
the  critical  distance  relays  for  any  contingency  under  study. 
Note that this contingency might be a new contingency that has 
not been studied during building the dataset for training/testing 
the  model;  as  the  results  of  this  paper  confirm,  the  proposed 
approach performs well for such out-of-sample scenarios. First, 
the proposed method performs an initial transient stability study 
of the contingency under study without modeling any distance 
relays.  Since  the  trained  model  only  needs  the  impedance 
trajectories observed by distance relays up to 1 cycle after the 
fault as its input features, the initial transient stability study can 
be  terminated  1  cycle  after  the  fault,  which  can  considerably 
reduce the simulation time. Note that the impedance trajectories 
observed by distance relays can be easily captured at each time 
interval of the transient stability study without any change in 
the  existing  practice  of  performing  these  studies  and  without 
any need to model the distance relays. Next, the method extracts 
the input features of the trained model from the results of the 
initial transient stability study. Then, the trained model predicts 
whether any of the distance relays in the system operate for the 
entire  simulation  time  or  not.  The  distance  relays  that  are 
predicted to operate are identified as the critical distance relays 
for  the  contingency.  Thus,  at  the  next  stage,  their  dynamic 
models are included in the dynamic file of the system. In this 
stage,  the  updated  relay  settings  for  the  identified  critical 
distance relays can be obtained (from the protection groups of 
utilities) and be included in the dynamic models of the distance 
relays  to  achieve  a  more  precise  assessment  of  the  system 
behavior.  Finally,  using  the  stability  software,  the  method 
performs  a  transient  stability  study  with  only  modeling  the 
critical distance relays to capture the response of the system to 
the contingency. Note that unlike the case of modeling all the 
distance relays, the small number of the critical distance relays 
identified  by  the  proposed  method  can  easily  be  included  in 
stability  studies  without  violating  the  current  limitations  of 
stability analysis software tools. 

 
 
III.  THE RANDOM FOREST ALGORITHM, THE METRICS USED, 
THE GRID SEARCH METHOD, AND THE K-FOLD CROSS-
VALIDATION METHOD 

A brief explanation of the Random Forest algorithm along 
with  its  advantages,  which  make  it  suitable  for  predicting 
distance relay operations, are provided in this section. Also, the 
metrics, the grid search method, and the K-fold cross-validation 
method used in this paper are explained.  

A.  Random Forest 

for  classification  and 

The  RF  algorithm  is  a  well-known  and  successful  ML 
regression  problems. 
algorithm 
Composed  of  multiple  single  decision  trees  (DTs),  the  RF 
operates as an ensemble ML algorithm. Each individual DT of 
the RF is trained on a subset of the dataset and uses a subset of 
the features as its input. In classification problems, the output 
of the RF is selected based on the most votes from its individual 
DTs  [26].  Numerous  advantages  of  the  RF  have  made  it  a 
popular ML algorithm to be widely deployed in many problems 
[27].  Some  of  the  most  important  advantages  of  the  RF  that 
make it suitable for the problem of this paper are as follows: 
•  One  of  the  widely  known  problems  of  a  single  DT  is 
overfitting. This causes DT to have a poor performance on 
new datasets. To overcome this problem, the RF algorithm 
trains  multiple  DTs  on  different  parts  of  the  training  set 
using  bootstrap  aggregating  or  bagging  techniques.  This 
eliminates the overfitting problem of a single DT. Hence, 
the RF can have high accuracy on new datasets [28]. 

•  The  performance  of  the  RF  in  handling  unbalanced  and 
non-linear datasets is outstanding [28]. For the application 
of  this  paper,  as  the  dataset  is  unbalanced  and  has  more 
cases of class 0 than class 1, this feature of the RF algorithm 
is of great importance. 

•  The RF has a high training and prediction speed, and it can 
easily handle high dimensional data, as it only uses a subset 
of features to train each DT. Also, as the RF algorithm is 
parallelizable, the process can be divided between multiple 
computers,  which  can  significantly  increase  the  speed  of 
the  algorithm.  The  high  speed  of  the  RF  algorithm  is 
favorable for the problem of this paper since it enables the 
RF to predict the operation of all the distance relays in bulk 
power systems in a short time [27], [28].  

B.  Metrics 

To evaluate the performance of the trained model two metrics 
of Recall and Precision are used in this paper. These metrics are 
introduced in this subsection.  Note that, in the formulations of 
Recall and Precision, TP is the number of true-positive cases, 
i.e.,  the  cases  of  distance  relay  operations  (class  1)  that  the 
trained  model  correctly  predicts  as  operation  cases.  FN  is  the 
number of false-negative cases, i.e., the distance relay operation 
cases that the trained model erroneously predicts as no-operation 
cases (class 0). Finally, FP is the number of false-positive cases, 
i.e.,  the  no-operation  cases  of  distance  relays  that  the  trained 
model erroneously predicts as operation cases. 

Recall  or  true-positive  rate  (TPR)  is  the  fraction  of  all  the 
positive cases, i.e., distance relay operation cases in this paper, 

4 

that the trained model correctly predicts as positive cases. Recall 
can be formulated using (1) [29]. 

𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 = 	

!"

!"#$%

(1) 

In the application of identifying critical distance relays, it is 
of the highest importance that the trained model does not miss 
any distance relay operation. In other words, ideally, the trained 
model should correctly predict all the distance relay operations. 
Hence, FN should be very low, and the Recall value should be 
very  high  (close  to  1)  to  guarantee  that  all  the  distance  relay 
operations are captured by the trained model. Therefore, in this 
paper, maximizing the Recall value is considered the objective 
of the grid search on the hyperparameters of the RF. 

Precision  is  defined  as  the  fraction  of  all  the  positive 
predictions  of  the  trained  model  that  are  correct  predictions. 
Precision can be formulated using (2) [29]. 

𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 	 !"

!"#$"

(2) 

In this paper, a high number of false-positive cases show that 
the  trained  model  is  prone  to  misclassify  many  of  the  no-
operation cases of distance relays as operation cases and identify 
those distance relays as critical. Therefore, many distance relays 
might be included in the dynamic file of the system, which is 
undesirable;  modeling  many  distance  relays  might  cause  the 
same challenges as modeling all the distance relays. However, 
modeling additional distance relays in the final stability analysis 
will  not  impact  the  accuracy  of  the  analysis  as  long  as  the 
number of these relays does not exceed the limitation of transient 
stability  analysis  software  tools  and  the  relay  settings  are 
accurate. Thus, although maximizing the Precision value is not 
considered  the  main  objective, it  is  tried  to  achieve  a  suitable 
value for Precision that does not result in the modeling of a large 
number of distance relays in transient stability studies. 

C.  Grid search method 

The  grid  search,  also  known  as  parameter  sweep,  is  a 
traditional method to optimize the hyperparameters of an ML 
algorithm.  In  grid  search,  an  exhaustive  search  is  performed 
through  a  specified  range  of  the  hyperparameter  space  of  the 
ML algorithm. A performance measure should be considered to 
direct the grid search in optimizing the hyperparameters. In this 
paper,  as  mentioned  earlier,  maximizing  Recall  value  is 
considered the performance measure. The performance metric 
is  measured  by  applying  the  cross-validation  method  at  each 
iteration of the grid search method [30]-[32].   

The grid search method can be easily used to optimize the 
hyperparameters of an ML model. Its biggest disadvantage is 
that when the number of hyperparameters to be tuned increases, 
this method can be computationally heavy and time-consuming. 
However, because the hyperparameters to be tuned are usually 
independent of each other, the processing task of the grid search 
can be divided into several parallel tasks with little or no effort, 
and each task can be performed with a separate computer [33].   

D.   K-fold cross-validation 

The K-fold cross-validation method is used to evaluate the 
performances of the models trained at each iteration of the grid 

 
 
 
search on new and out-of-sample cases. The method divides the 
dataset into K folds and at each iteration, it selects one of the 
folds as the test set and the remaining K-1 folds as the training 
set. Then, a model is trained on the training set and is tested on 
the  test  set.  The  score/error  of  the  model  is  recorded  at  each 
iteration. The iterations stop when all the folds are used as a test 
set. The average of the recorded scores/errors (Recall value in 
this  paper)  in  all  the  iterations  is  the  performance  metric  for 
comparing the performances of the trained models [34]-[35].  

IV.  CASE STUDIES 

The performance of the proposed method is evaluated on the 
actual WECC system data representing the 2018 summer peak 
load case. The system includes 23297 buses, 18347 lines, 4224 
generators,  and  9050  transformers.  The  maximum  generation 
capacity and the load of the system are 281.38 GW and 174.3 
GW, respectively. The PSLF software is used for performing 
transient  stability  studies  to  create  the  dataset  required  for 
training and testing the RF model. Overall, 929 contingencies 
under  different  operating  conditions  and  topologies  of  the 
system  are  studied.  To  be  able  to  observe  the  behavior  of 
distance  relays  in  these  studies,  a  reference  dynamic  file  is 
created for the WECC system that includes two types of widely 
used distance relay models from the PSLF model library [36], 
namely, “Zlin1” and “Zlinw”. 

Zlin1 is a distance relay model in the PSLF model library 
that  includes  three  operation  zones  [36].  Zlin1  needs  to  be 
modeled  on  each  line  with  its  specific  settings.  On  the  other 
hand, Zlinw is a generic distance relay model in the PSLF model 
library with two operation zones [36]. Unlike Zlin1, Zlinw does 
not need to be modeled for every line with its specific settings; 
rather,  it  monitors  all  the  lines  between  its  minimum  and 
maximum voltage settings. Each of these distance relay models 
is used to model the distance relays on a subset of the lines of 
the system depending on the voltage level of the lines. Table I 
shows the voltage level of the lines whose distance relays are 
modeled with the Zlin1 and Zlinw models.  

Table I. The voltage level of the lines modeled with Zlin1 and Zlinw models 

Model 
Zlin1 
Zlinw 

Transmission lines voltage level 
> 345 kV 
100 kV – 345 kV 

Note that since the Zlin1 model needs to be included for each 
line, separately, it is only modeled on the lines with a voltage 
level equal to or higher than 345 kV since these lines are the 
most critical lines of the system. Modeling Zlin1 on every line 
overwhelms  the  dynamic  file  of  the  system  and  exceeds  the 
current limitation of the PSLF software tool. Therefore, for the 
lines with a lower voltage level, the Zlinw model is used, as this 
model does not need to be included on each line, separately. 

The well-known “scikit-learn” library [37] in Python is used 
to train the RF model. To achieve the best performance, a two-
stage grid search method with the objective of maximizing the 
Recall  metric  is  used  to  tune  the  hyperparameters  of  the  RF 
model. Furthermore, the K-fold cross-validation method with 5 
folds is used to assess the performances of the trained models. 
The most important hyperparameters of the RF classifier are 
class weights, the number of trees in the forest, the maximum 

5 

depth  of  the  trees,  the  minimum  sample  split  (MSS),  the 
minimum sample leaf (MSL), the number of features considered 
when looking for the best split, and whether bootstrap samples 
are  used  when  building  trees.  Precise  tuning  of  these 
hyperparameters  is  critical  for  enhancing  the  performance  of 
the  trained  model.  Explaining  the  role  of  each  of  these 
hyperparameters in the performance of the RF model is out of 
the scope of this paper, and more details in this regard can be 
found in the “scikit-learn” library [37]. These hyperparameters 
can take a wide range of values. Hence, at the first stage of the 
grid  search,  an  approximation  of  the  best  value  for  each 
hyperparameter is obtained. Then, at the second stage, the grid 
search method searches around the approximate value obtained 
from  the  first  stage  to  find  the  exact  value  for  each 
hyperparameter that yields the best performance.  

To show the impact of changing each hyperparameter on the 
performances of the trained models, the change in the Recall 
value  for  the  various  number  of  trees  in  the  forest  and  the 
maximum  depth  of  trees  is  provided  in  Fig.  2(a).  Also,  the 
change in the Recall value for the various class weights and the 
number of trees in the forest is provided in Fig. 2(b). Note that, 
in  Fig.  2(b),  the  set  of  the  numbers  on  the  X-axis  (the  class 
weight axis) shows the weight of each class. For example, “0:1, 
1:10” means the weight of 1 for class 0 and the weight of 10 for 
class 1. The other sets of numbers are interpreted, likewise. The 
“balanced” weight on this axis means a weight for a class that 
is  inversely  proportional  to  the  class  frequency  in  the  input 
dataset [37]. For example, if the “balanced” option is used for 
the  class  weight  and  the  number  of  samples  in  the  dataset 
belonging  to  class  1  is  3  times  that  belonging  to  class  0,  the 
weight of class 1 will be 1/3 of the weight of class 0.  

Fig. 2(a) shows that in comparison to the number of trees in 
the forest, the maximum depth of trees has slightly more impact 
on the performance of the trained models. It also shows that the 
trained  model  has  a  better  performance  when  the  maximum 
depth of trees is set to 10. Fig. 2(b) shows that the class weights 
have  the  highest  impact  on  the  performance  of  the  trained 
model, and as the weight of class 1 increases, the Recall value 
increases, as well. Note that, this increase comes at the price of 
deteriorating  the  Precision  value  of  the  trained  model. 
Therefore,  although  the  weight  of  100  for  class  1  gives  the 
highest Recall value in the first stage of the grid search method 
(above 0.99), the performance of the trained model in terms of 
the Precision value is very poor for this weight of class 1 (below 
0.5).  Thus, for the first stage, the weight of 10 is selected for 
class 1, which yields a high Recall value (around 0.979), while 
it keeps the Precision at a reasonable value (above 0.7). 

Table  II  shows 

the  best  values  obtained  for  each 
hyperparameter from the grid search method. Using the values 
provided in Table II for training the RF model yields the best 
results in terms of the Recall value (while maintaining a high 
Precision  value).  The  performance  of  the  trained  model  is 
including  over  900 
evaluated  on 
contingencies,  using  the  K-fold  cross-validation  method.  The 
results reveal that the trained model has Recall and Precision 
values of 0.981 and 0.737, respectively. This high Recall value 
of the trained model can ensure that it can correctly identify all 

the  entire  dataset, 

 
the critical distance relays for a contingency and does not miss 
any  distance  relay  operation,  even  under  different  operating 
points  and  topologies  of  the  system.  Whereas  the  reasonably 
high value of Precision shows that the model does not identify 
many  distance  relays  in  the  system  as  critical.  Using  the 
hyperparameters  obtained  from  the  grid  search,  the  final  RF 
model is trained on the whole dataset and implemented in the 
proposed method to identify the critical distance relays for any 
contingency under study in the application stage. 

(a) 

(b) 
Fig. 2. The change in the Recall value for different values of the maximum 
depth of trees and the number of trees in the forest (a), as well as for the 
different values of class weights and the number of trees in the forest (b).   

Table II. The selected hyperparameters of the RF model 
Hyperparameter 
Class weights 
Number of trees in the forest 
Maximum depth of trees 
MSS 
MSL 

Tuned Value 
1 for class 0 and 20 for class 1 
15 
15 
2 
2 
“auto”—equal to the square root of 
the number of all the features 
“False”—meaning the whole 
dataset is used to build each tree 

The number of features 

Bootstrap 

To further illustrate the performance of the proposed method 
in  identifying  the  critical  distance  relays  and  capturing  the 
precise  response  of  the  system  during  various  contingencies 
three different contingencies are considered for more detailed 
studies.    Different  operating  conditions  and  topologies  of  the 
system are considered in these studies. For each contingency, 
three different cases are analyzed: 
•  Case 1: To show the impact of modeling distance relays on 
the  response  of  the  system,  the  first  case  considered  in 
studying each contingency performs the transient stability 
studies without modeling distance relays. 

•  Case 2: In this case, the reference dynamic file, which was 

6 

used  for  performing  transient  stability  studies  during 
creating the dataset stage, is used for performing transient 
stability  studies  of  each  contingency.  Note  that,  as 
mentioned earlier, this dynamic file includes Zlin1 models 
for the lines with a voltage level equal to or higher than 345 
kV  and  a  Zlinw  model  for  the  lines  with  a  voltage  level 
between 100 kV and 345 kV. This case is referred to as the 
reference case throughout this paper. 

•  Case 3: In this case, the proposed method is used to identify 
the  critical  distance  relays  for  the  contingencies  under 
study.  Then,  the  transient  stability  studies  are  performed 
with only including Zlin1 models for the identified critical 
distance relays. Similar to the second case, the Zlinw model 
is used in the third case to monitor the lines with a voltage 
level  between  100  and  345  kV.  Note  that,  the  proposed 
method can identify all the critical distance relays on the 
lines at any voltage level. However, to be able to compare 
the  results  of  the  method  with  the  second  case  (the 
reference case), the settings of the method are modified to 
only identify the critical distance relays on the lines with 
voltage levels of 345 kV and above. 
In  both  the  second  and  the  third  cases,  zone-1,  -2,  and  -3 
reaches of Zlin1 models are considered to be 80%, 120%, and 
220% of the related line impedances, respectively. Time delays 
of 0, 0.2, and 0.3 seconds are considered for zone-1, -2, and -3 
operations of Zlin1 models, respectively. The same zone-1 and 
-2 reaches and time delays are used for the Zlinw model. Circuit 
breaker delay time is set to 0.05 seconds, which means that it 
takes 0.05 seconds for the circuit breaker to open the line after 
receiving the tripping signal from its distance relay. Note that, 
although  generic  relay  settings  are  considered  for  simplicity, 
the  method  can  be  used  with  precise  relay  settings  obtained 
from  the  protection  groups  of  electric  utility  companies  to 
provide a more realistic assessment of system behavior.  

Note that, these contingencies are only provided to show in 
more  detail  the  performance  of  the  proposed  method  and  the 
response  of  the  system  for  three  simulated  out-of-sample 
contingencies. However, the values of 0.981 and 0.737 reported 
earlier for the Recall and Precision metrics are obtained from 
testing the model on the entire dataset (over 900 contingencies) 
using  the  K-fold  cross-validation  method.  To  protect  the 
proprietary  data,  arbitrary  numbers  are  used  throughout  the 
paper to represent power system assets.  

Contingency  1:  In  this  contingency,  a  bus  fault  occurs  on 
Bus 3 of the system and is cleared after 4 cycles by removing 
the  three  500  kV  transmission  lines  that  comprise  California 
Oregon  Intertie  (COI).  During  the  summer  peak  load,  COI 
transfer a total power of around 4,113 MW from the north to 
south  of  the  WECC  system.  As  these  three  lines  transfer  a 
considerably  high  amount  of  power,  they  are  very  critical  tie 
lines of the WECC system, and their outage is a known critical 
emergency  for  the  WECC  system,  which  has  the  potential  to 
jeopardize  the  system  stability.  Therefore,  this  critical  N-3 
outage  has  been  considered  for  a  more  detailed  analysis.  To 
evaluate  the  performance  of  the  proposed  method  under  new 
and  unseen  pre-fault  operating  conditions,  a  new  pre-fault 
operation condition of the WECC system is considered for this 

 
 
 
 
contingency. In the new operating condition, a uniform increase 
of 2 percent in the large loads (above 100 MW) of the areas that 
import  power  through  the  COI,  which  leads  to  a  55.71  MW 
increase  in  the  net  load  of  these  areas,  is  considered.  This 
increase  in  the  load  is  compensated  by  three  of  the  largest 
generators existing in the areas that send power through COI, 
without violating the limitations of any generation unit in the 
system. The results of transient stability studies performed for 
Case  1  (modeling  no  distance  relay),  Case  2  (the  reference 
case), and Case 3 (the proposed method) of this contingency are 
illustrated in Fig. 3 (a), (b), and (c), respectively. 

 Comparing Fig. 3 (a) and (b) shows that without modeling 
distance relays the dynamic response of the system in terms of 
the  relative  rotor  angles  of  a  set  of  generators  is  completely 
different from that of the reference case. Also, comparing Fig. 
3 (b) and (c) illustrate that the proposed method can capture the 
behavior of the system exactly as the reference case, even for 
severe disturbances such as the disturbance of this contingency 
and a new pre-fault operating condition of the system. For the 
sake  of  clarity,  only  the  rotor  angles  of  a  set  of  selected 
generators are shown. However, the relative rotor angles of all 
the generators show exactly the same response in the reference 
case and the proposed method.  

In this contingency, with the distance relays modeled in the 
system,  the  network  solution  diverges  at  6.321  (s)  and  the 
transient stability study terminates. The severe disturbance of 
COI outage has widespread effects on the system and leads to 
many  distance  relay  operations.  In  the  real-world  system, 
proper remedial actions, such as load shedding and controlled 
islanding, are considered for this contingency. As in this paper, 
we do not have access to the remedial actions employed in the 
WECC system, transient stability studies are performed without 
considering  the  remedial  actions.  However,  if  the  remedial 
actions are included, the proposed method is expected to be able 
to capture the behavior of the system.  

Note that, improving the reliability and resiliency of power 
systems  by  designing  proper  preventive/remedial  actions 
requires  a  detailed  assessment  of  the  responses  of  different 
assets and protection schemes in the system, and only analyzing 
if the system maintains its stability or not during a contingency 
is not sufficient.  Thus, although in this contingency, the system 
becomes unstable in either case of modeling or not modeling 
distance  relays,  to  have  a  precise  assessment  of  the  system 
response, which is crucial for devising proper preventive and 
remedial actions, modeling distance relays is necessary.  

Table  III  shows  the  list  of  the  relays  that  operate  in  the 
reference  case  (Case  2)  and  the  proposed  method  (Case  3). 
Lines 1,2, and 3 are in the area that imports power through COI, 
and line 4 is in the area that exports power through COI (Lines 
1-4  are  in  the  vicinity  of  the  fault  location).  Therefore,  the 
distance relays of these lines operate due to the initial impacts 
of the disturbance. The ability to predict the operations of these 
distance relays shows that the method can correctly capture the 
distance  relay  operations  due  to  the  initial  impacts  of 
disturbances. All other lines listed in Table III are in the areas 
far from the fault location. Lines 8, 10, 15, and 17 are the tie-
lines  that  connect  two  areas  far  from  the  fault  location.  The 

7 

ability to correctly predict the operations of the distance relays 
of  these  lines  and  identify  them  as  critical  shows  that  the 
method can correctly capture the distance relay operations that 
occur due to the system-wide impacts of disturbances. Hence, 
it  is  observed  that  the  method  can  identify  all  the  critical 
distance relays for this severe contingency under the new pre-
fault operating condition of the system. 

Contingency 2: The same N-3 COI outage that is analyzed 
in  Contingency  1  is  also  considered  for  Contingency  2. 
However, to evaluate the performance of the method in the case  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

Fig. 3. The relative rotor angles of a set of generators in Contingency 1: (a) 
Case 1, (b) Case 2, and (c) Case 3. 

Table III. The list of all distance relay operations in Contingency 1. 

The reference case 
Relay 
Lines 1, 2, 3 
Line 4 
Line 5 
Line 6 
Lines 7 
Line 8 
Line 9 
Line 10 
Line 11 
Line 12 
Line 13 
Line 14 
Line 15 
Line 16, 17 

Time (s) 
1.050 
1.888 
2.629 
2.671 
2.683 
2.767 
2.771 
2.950 
2.979 
3.009 
3.025 
3.179 
5.921 
6.321 

The proposed method 

Time (s) 
1.050 
1.888 
2.629 
2.671 
2.683 
2.767 
2.771 
2.950 
2.979 
3.009 
3.025 
3.179 
5.921 
6.321 

Relay 
Lines 1, 2, 3 
Line 4 
Line 5 
Line 6 
Lines 7 
Line 8 
Line 9 
Line 10 
Line 11 
Line 12 
Line 13 
Line 14 
Line 15 
Line 16, 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of  a  different  pre-fault  topology  of  the  system,  the  pre-fault 
topology of the system is modified by taking two critical 500 
kV transmission lines of the system out of service.   

The results of transient stability studies performed for Case1 
(modeling no distance relay), Case 2 (the reference case), and 
Case 3 (the proposed method) of this contingency are illustrated 
in Fig. 4 (a), (b), and (c), respectively.  As shown in Fig. 4 (a), 
without modeling distance relays, the response of the system in 
terms of the rotor angles of a set of generators is different from 
the  reference  case.  Also,  comparing  Fig.  4  (b)  and  (c) 
demonstrates  that  the  system  response  is  similar  in  both  the 
reference case and the proposed method, showing the accuracy 
of the method in capturing the response of the system. Similar 
to Contingency 1, in this contingency, with modeling distance 
relays, the network solution in the stability software diverges at 
6.259 (s) and the transient stability study terminates.  

Table IV provides the list of all distance relay operations in 
the reference case (Case 2) and the proposed method (Case3). 
Similar to Contingency 1, distance relay operations occur both 
on the lines close to the fault location and the lines far from it. 
As seen in Table IV, the method can correctly predict all the 
distance relay operations in this contingency, which shows the 
ability of the method to identify distance relay operations due 
to  the  initial  and  system-wide  impacts  of  this  severe 
contingency under the new pre-fault topology of the system. 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

Fig. 4. The relative rotor angles of a set of generators in Contingency 2: (a) 
Case 1, (b) Case 2, and (c) Case 3. 

8 

Table IV. The list of all distance relay operations in Contingency 2. 

The reference case 
Relay 
Lines 1, 2, 3 
Line 4 
Line 5 
Line 9 
Lines 6, 8 
Line 7 
Line 10 
Line 11 
Line 12 
Line 13 
Line 14 
Line 15 
Line 17 
Line 16 

Time (s) 
1.050 
1.917 
2.692 
2.854 
2.863 
2.884 
3.046 
3.063 
3.092 
3.096 
3.275 
5.925 
6.242 
6.259 

The proposed method 

Time (s) 
1.050 
1.917 
2.692 
2.854 
2.863 
2.884 
3.046 
3.063 
3.092 
3.096 
3.275 
5.925 
6.242 
6.259 

Relay 
Lines 1, 2, 3 
Line 4 
Line 5 
Line 9 
Lines 6, 8 
Line 7 
Line 10 
Line 11 
Line 12 
Line 13 
Line 14 
Line 15 
Line 17 
Line 16 

Contingency 3: To evaluate the performance of the proposed 
method in another type of disturbance, an N-3 generator outage 
contingency  is  considered  here.  The  selected  generators  are 
among the generators with the highest active power generation 
in  the  system.  These  three  generators  produce  a  total  active 
power of around 1,268 MW.  The pre-fault operating condition 
of  Contingency  1  is  considered  in  this  contingency,  as  well. 
This N-3 generator outage has widespread impacts throughout 
the system, causing several distance relay misoperations due to 
unstable  power  swings.  Therefore,  identifying  these  critical 
distance relays by the proposed method further shows its ability 
to identify the distance relay operations due to unstable power 
swings at locations far from the location of the initial event.  

The results of transient stability studies performed for Case 
1 (modeling no distance relay), Case 2 (the reference case), and 
Case 3 (the proposed method) are shown in Fig. 5 (a), (b), and 
(c),  respectively.  Comparing  Fig.  5  (a)  and  (b),  it  is  revealed 
that without modeling distance relays, transient stability studies 
cannot capture the actual response of the system. Also, as seen 
in Fig. 5 (c), the response of the system in the case of using the 
proposed method is similar to that in Case 2 shown in Fig. 5 (b).  
Table V provides the list of distance relay operations in both 
the  reference  case  and  the  proposed  method.  As  seen  in  this 
table, the method can correctly identify all the distance relays 
that operate in the reference case as critical. This further shows 
the  capability  of  the  method  in  predicting  distance  relay 
operation due to the system-wide impacts of a disturbance.  

Analyzing  these  contingencies  shows  that  the  proposed 
method  can  correctly  identify  the  critical  distance  relays  and 
capture  the  precise  response  of  the  system  for  any  type  of 
contingency  even  under  different  operating  conditions  and 
topologies of the system. To further show that to what extent 
the  method  reduces  the  number  of  distance  relay  models 
included  in  transient  stability  studies,  Table  VI  is  provided. 
Table  VI  shows  the  number  of  distance  relays  identified  as 
critical in each contingency. It also shows what percentage of 
the  total  number  of  distance  relays  in  the  reference  case  are 
identified  as  critical  distance  relays  in  each  contingency.  As 
seen in Table VI, the total number of critical distance relays in 
each  contingency  is  less  than  4.01%  of  the  total  number  of 
distance  relays  in  the  reference  case.  Therefore,  the  dynamic 
models of this small number of critical distance relays with their 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
updated  settings  can  easily  be  obtained  and  included  in  the 
dynamic  file  of  the  system  without  violating  the  current 
limitation  of  stability  software  tools.  This  also  significantly 
decreases the maintenance burden of keeping the distance relay 
setting information updated in the dynamic file of the system 
and the computational burden of the computing system. 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

Fig. 5. The relative rotor angles of a set of generators in Contingency 3: (a) 
Case 1, (b) Case 2, and (c) Case 3. 

Table V. The list of all distance relay operations in Contingency 3. 

The reference case 
Relay 
Lines 15 
Line 17 

Time (s) 
3.075 
3.283 

The proposed method 

Time (s) 
3.075 
3.283 

Relay 
Lines 15 
Line 17 

Contingency 

Total number of the identified 
critical distance relays 

Table VI. The total number of the identified critical distance relays. 
Percentage of the total 
number of distance 
relays 
4.01% 
3.05% 
2.10% 

37 
35 
26 

1 
2 
3 

For the contingencies studied in this section, the processing 
time  of  the  three  major  processes  performed  in  the  proposed 
method  to  identify  the  critical  distance  relays  is  provided  in 
Table VII. These three major processes are as follows:  
•  Process 1: Performing the initial early-terminated transient 

stability analysis of the contingency under study. 

•  Process 2: Extracting the required features of the ML model 
from  the  results  of  the  transient  stability  study  and  pre-
processing them to be fed into the trained ML model. 

9 

•  Process 3: Predicting the operation of all the distance relays 

in the system.  
The processing time of performing transient stability studies 
depends on the type of the disturbance being studied as well as 
the operating condition and topology of the system. Therefore, 
as  seen  in  Table  VII,  the  processing  time  for  performing  the 
initial transient stability study is different for each contingency, 
whereas the processing time for extracting the features and the 
prediction  time  of  the  ML  model  are  the  same  for  all  the 
contingencies.  The  total  processing  time  for  any  contingency 
studied  is  less  than  111  seconds.  The  three  contingencies 
studied in this section are among the most severe disturbances 
of the WECC system. Hence, solving transient stability studies 
of these contingencies requires more processing time than other 
contingencies. The fact that the processing time of the method 
for these contingencies is less than 111 seconds guarantees that 
the processing time for any other contingency is also very small. 
This shows that the method can be used in planning studies to 
promptly identify the critical distance relays for a large number 
of the contingencies that are required to be studied. 

Table VII. The processing time of the proposed method. 
Process 2 (s) 
1.2 
1.2 
1.2 

Process 1 (s) 
108.95 
108.70 
22.46 

Process 3 (s) 
0.008 
0.008 
0.008 

Contingency 
1 
2 
3 

Total (s) 
110.16 
109.91 
23.67 

V.  CONCLUSION 

This  paper  proposes  an  ML-based  method  to  identify  the 
critical distance relays required to be modeled for performing 
accurate  transient  stability  studies  of  different  types  of 
contingencies. The method is based on training an ML model 
to  learn  the  latent  pattern  between  the  impedance  trajectories 
observed  by  distance  relays  during  the  early  stages  of  a 
contingency and their operations for several seconds later. The 
RF classifier is used as the machine learning algorithm. After 
being trained using the dataset created from extensive offline 
transient stability studies and the records of historical outages, 
the RF model can predict the operation of distance relays during 
any  contingency  under  study  using  the  results  of  the  early-
terminated  transient  stability  study  of  that  contingency.  The 
WECC system data representing the 2018 summer peak load is 
used  as  the  test  system.  Using  the  K-fold  cross-validation 
method, the performance of the trained model is evaluated on 
the entire dataset, and it is observed that the trained model has 
a  great  performance  in  terms  of  the  Recall  and  Precision 
metrics. To show in more detail how the method can identify 
the critical distance relays for any contingency under study and 
capture  the  system  response,  three  contingencies  are  studied 
under new topologies and operating conditions of the system. 

 The  results  show  that  the  transient  stability  studies 
performed  without  modeling  distance  relays  can  manifest  an 
inaccurate  system  behavior.  Also,  the  results  show  the  great 
performance of the proposed method in identifying the critical 
distance  relays  and  capturing  the  precise  behavior  of  the 
system. It is observed that in comparison to the reference case, 
the proposed method requires modeling a far smaller number of 
distance relays in transient stability studies (less than 4.01% of 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
all  the  distance  relays  in  the  reference  case  for  any  of  the 
contingencies  studied).  Also,  it  is  observed  that  the  total 
processing time for any of the studied contingencies is below 
111 seconds, which illustrates the high speed of the method in 
identifying the critical distance relays in the system.  

The small number of critical distance relays identified by the 
method  can  be  easily  modeled  in  stability  studies  without 
exceeding the limitations of stability software. Also, using this 
method,  only  critical  distance  relays  are  required  to  be 
accurately  tracked  for  changes  in  their  settings,  which 
considerably  reduces  the  maintenance  burden.  Finally,  by 
reducing the number of distance relays modeled in the studies, 
the method significantly reduces the computational burden of 
the  computing  system.  Thus,  more  dynamic  models  can  be 
included in the analysis of various contingencies. 

Similar  strategies  can  be  applied  to  identify  other  critical 
protective relays, such as generator protective relays, that play 
significant  roles  in  defining  the  system  response  during  a 
contingency  and  are  required  to  be  modeled  in  the  transient 
stability  study.  Hence,  developing  similar  methods  for 
identifying  the  critical  protective  relays  other  than  distance 
relays can be a proper continuation of this research.  

REFERENCES 

[1]  L. G. Perez, A. J. Flechsig, and V. Venkatasubramanian, “Modeling the 
protective  system  for  power  system  dynamic  analysis,”  IEEE  Trans. 
Power Syst., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1963–1973, Nov. 1994. 

[2]  D. C. Elizondo, J. D. L. Ree, A. G. Phadke, and S. Horowitz, “Hidden 
impact  on  wide-area 
failures 
disturbances,”  in  IEEE  Power  Eng.  Soc.  Winter  Meeting,  pp.  710–714, 
Columbus, OH, USA, 2001. 

in  protection  systems  and 

their 

[3]   Final  report  on  the  August  14,  2003  blackout  in  the  United  States  and 
Canada:  Causes  and  Recommendations,  U.S.–Canada  Power  System 
Outage Task Force, 2004. 

[4]  N. Samaan et al., “Modeling of protection in dynamic simulation using 
generic  relay  models  and  settings,”  in  IEEE  Power  and  Energy  Soc. 
General Meeting (PESGM), pp. 1-5, Boston, MA, USA, 2016. 

[5]  M.  Abdi-Khorsand  and  V.  Vittal,  “Identification  of  critical  protection 
functions  for  transient  stability  studies,”  IEEE  Trans.  Power  Syst.,  vol. 
33, no. 3, pp. 2940-2948, May 2018. 

[6]  R. Vakili, M. Khorsand, V. Vittal, B. Robertson, and P. Augustin, “An 
algorithmic approach for identifying critical distance relays for transient 
stability  studies,”  IEEE  Open  Access  Journal  of  Power  and  Energy 
(OAJPE), vol. 8, pp. 107-117, March 2021.  

[7]  D.  P.  Nedic,  “Simulation  of 

large  system  disturbances,”  Ph.D. 
dissertation,  Dept.  Electr.  Eng.  Electron.,  Univ.  Manchester  Inst.  Sci. 
Technol., Manchester, U.K., 2003. 

[8]  P. Chatterjee, M. Khorsand, and K. W. Hedman, “Enhanced assessment 
of  power  system  behavior  during  multiple  contingencies,”  in  North 
American Power Symp. (NAPS), pp. 1-6, Fargo, ND, 2018. 

[9]  P. Pourbeik, P. S. Kundur, and C.W. Taylor, “The anatomy of a power 
grid blackout,” IEEE Power Energy Mag., vol. 5, no. 4, Sep. 2006. 
[10]  V. Vittal, S.Lotfifard, A. Bose, M. Khorsand, and I. Kiaei, “Evaluation of 
protective  relay  dynamic  response  via  a  co-simulation  platform,”  Final 
PSERC Project Report, Sept. 2017.  

[11]  S.  Tamronglak,  “Analysis  of  power  system  disturbances  due  to  relay 
hidden  failures,”  Ph.D.  Diss.,  Dept.  Electr.  Eng.,  Virginia  Tech, 
Blacksburg, VA, USA, 1994. 

[12]  D. S. Kirschen and D. P. Nedic, “Consideration of hidden failures in 

security analysis,” 14th Power Syst. Comput. Conf., pp. 24–28, Seville, 
Spain, 2002. 

[13]  “ISO  New  England  operating  procedure  No.  24  -  protection  outages, 
settings  and  coordination”,  ISO  New  England,  Feb.  2019,  URL: 
https://www.iso-ne.com/static-
assets/documents/2019/02/op24_rto_final.pdf. 

10 

[14]  S. A. Lavand and S. A. Soman, “Predictive analytic to supervise zone 1 
of distance relay using synchrophasors,” IEEE Trans. on Power Del., vol. 
31, no. 4, pp. 1844-1854, Aug. 2016. 

[15]  M. Abdi-Khorsand and V. Vittal, “Modeling protection systems in time-
domain  simulations:  a  new  method  to  detect  mis-operating  relays  for 
unstable  power  swings,”  IEEE  Trans.  Power  Syst.,  vol.  32,  no.  4,  pp. 
2790-2798, July 2017. 

[16]  N. Fischer, G. Benmouyal, D. Hou, D. Tziouvaras, J. Byrne-Finley, and 
B. Smyth, “Tutorial on power swing blocking and out-of-step tripping,” 
39th Annu. Western Protective Relay Conf., Spokane, WA, USA, 2012. 

[17]  J. Holbach, “New out of step blocking algorithm for detecting fast power 
swing frequencies,” Power Syst. Conf.: Adv. Metering, Protect., Control, 
Commun., Distributed Resources, pp. 182–199, Clemson, SC, 2006. 
[18]  C. W. Taylor, J. M. Haner, L. A. Hill, W. A. Mittelstadt, and R. L. Cresap, 
“A  new  out-of-step  relay  with  rate  of  change  of  apparent  resistance 
augmentation,” IEEE Trans. Power App. Syst., vol. PAS-102, no. 3, pp. 
631–639, Mar. 1983. 

[19]  G.  Benmouyal,  D.  Hou,  and  D.  Tziouvaras,  “Zero-setting  power-swing 
Available: 

blocking 
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/c0b2/f9bf5f6d93ffd623084d47b45dadd
021f2ab.pdf 

protection,” 

[Online]. 

2004. 

SEL, 

[20]  K. H. So, J. Y. Heo, C. H. Kim, R. K. Aggarwal, and K. B. Song, “Out 
of-step  detection  algorithm  using  frequency  deviation  of  voltage,”  IET 
Gener., Transm., Distrib., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 119–126, Jan. 2007. 

[21]  R. Jafari, N. Moaddabi, M. Eskandari-Nasab, G. B. Gharehpetian, and M. 
S.  Naderi,  “A  novel  power  swing  detection  scheme  independent  of  the 
rate  of  change  of  power  system  parameters,”  IEEE  Trans.  Power  Del., 
vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 1192–1202, Jun. 2014. 

[22]  Q. Verzosa, “Realistic testing of power swing blocking and out-of-step 
tripping functions,” IEEE Protection Relay Conf., pp. 420–449, College 
Station, TX, 2013. 

[23]  A.  Guzm´an,  V.  Mynam,  and  G.  Zweigle,  “Backup  transmission  line 
protection  for  ground  faults  and  power  swing  detection  using 
synchrophasors,” 34th Annu. Western Protective Relay Conf., Spokane, 
WA, USA, 2007. 

[24]  B. Shrestha, R. Gokaraju, and M. Sachdev, “Out-of-step protection using 
state-plane trajectories analysis,” IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 28, no. 2, 
pp. 1083–1093, Apr. 2013. 

[25]  A. F. Abidin, A. Mohamed, H. Shareef, “Intelligent detection of unstable 
power swing for correct distance relay operation using S-transform and 
neural  networks,”  Expert  Systems  with  Applications,  vol.  38,  Issue.  12, 
pp. 14969-14975, Nov. 2011. 

[26]  T. Yiu, “Understanding random forest: how the algorithm works and why 
it  is  so  effective,”  toward  data  science,  Jun.  12,  2019,  Available: 
https://towardsdatascience.com/understanding-random-forest-
58381e0602d2. 

[27]  G.  Biau,  E.  Scornet,  “A  random  forest  guided  tour”,  Springer,  vol.  25, 

Issue. 2, pp. 197-227, Jun. 2016. 

[28]  R.  Vakili,  M.  Khorsand,  “Machine-learning-based  advanced  dynamic 
security assessment: prediction of loss of synchronism in generators,” in 
52nd North American Power Symp. (NAPS), Tempe, AZ, 2020. 

[29]  D.    Olsun  and  D.  Delen.  Advanced  data  mining  techniques.  Springer, 

p.138, 2008. 

[30]  “Hyperparameter  optimization,”  Wikipedia,  May.  9,  2021,  URL: 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperparameter_optimization.  

[31]  “A  practical  guide  to  support  vector  classification,”  Technical  Report, 
URL: 
University, 

National 
https://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/papers/guide/guide.pdf. 

Taiwan 

2016. 

May. 

[32]  D.  Chicco,  “Ten  quick  tips  for  machine  learning  in  computational 

biology”, BioData Mining. 10 (35): 35, Dec. 2017.  

[33]  J.  Bergstra,  Y.  Bengio,  “Random  search 

for  hyper-parameter 
optimization,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 13, pp. 281-
305, Feb. 2012.  

[34]  T.  Fushiki,  “Estimation  of  prediction  error  by  using  k-fold  cross-

validation,” Stats. and Comp., vol. 21, pp. 137-146, Oct. 2009. 

[35]  M.  Sanjay,  “Why  and  how  to  cross  validate  a  model?,”  towards  data 
science, Nov. 12,  2018, URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/why-and-
how-to-cross-validate-a-model-d6424b45261f. 

[36]  PSLF User’s Manual, PSLF Version 18.1-01, General Electric. 
[37]  Random forest classifier, scikit learn, scikit learn developers, Available: 

https://scikit-
learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestClas
sifier.html. 

 
 
