2
2
0
2

r
p
A
7
1

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
6
0
8
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Geo-Enabled Business Process Modeling

Behshid Behkamal1, Asef Pourmasoumi1, Mehdi Akbarian Rastaghi1, Mohsen
Kahani1, Hamid Reza Motahari-Nezhad2, Mohammad Allahbakhsh3,1, and
Issa Najaﬁ4

1 WTLab, Computer Engineering Department, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad,
Mashhad, Iran
{behkamal,asef.pms,kahani,allahbakhsh}@um.ac.ir
mehdi.akbarian@mail.um.ac.ir
2 Ernst & Young AI Lab, Palo Alto, USA
hamid.motahari@ey.com
3 University of Zabol, Zabol, Iran
allahbakhsh@uoz.ac.ir
4 National Post Company of Iran, Tehran, Iran
issa.najafi@post.ir

Abstract. Recent advancements in location-aware analytics have cre-
ated novel opportunities in diﬀerent domains. In the area of process
mining, enriching process models with geolocation helps to gain a bet-
ter understanding of how the process activities are executed in prac-
tice. In this paper, we introduce our idea of geo-enabled process mod-
eling and report on our industrial experience. To this end, we present
a real-world case study to describe the importance of considering the
location in process mining. Then we discuss the shortcomings of cur-
rently available process mining tools and propose our novel approach for
modeling geo-enabled processes focusing on 1) increasing process inter-
pretability through geo-visualization, 2) incorporating location-related
metadata into process analysis, and 3) using location-based measures for
the assessment of process performance. Finally, we conclude the paper
by future research directions.

Keywords: Location · Process Mining · Geo-Enabled Process Model.

1

Introduction

Process mining is an emerging research area, which helps business analysts and
managers gain more insight into their organization’s processes. Business pro-
cess mining research has focused on both intra-organizational as well as cross-
organizational processes
[1]. There are two main types of cross-organizations
process mining. In the ﬁrst, diﬀerent organizations work with each other on the
same instance of a process to complete it, so they act like puzzle pieces; e.g.,
the process of ’obtaining a building permit’. The latter group includes the pro-
cesses in which several organizations use a common infrastructure and execute
the same process model with some minor customizations; e.g., the process of

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

B. Behkamal et al.

’parcel pickup and delivery’. In both groups, the activities of a business process
may be performed in diﬀerent geographic locations. Thus, the location where
the process activities are performed can provide helpful information for analyz-
ing process performance. There are a very limited number of research initia-
tives that investigate geospatial information for process analysis. The concept of
location-dependent task was ﬁrstly introduced by Zhu et al. [2]. They presented
ﬁve location-dependent process model patterns to show how location impacts
business process modeling. Zhu et al. also proposed a Petri net modeling mech-
anism, which incorporates location aspects and ways to constrain the execution
of activities [3,2]. In another work of the same authors [4], they investigated
how location impacts the primary logical relationships in a process control-ﬂow.
Also, [5] introduced a process mining technique to understand similar movement
patterns in an indoor environment.

Our paper reports on our industrial experience in working with business pro-
cess mining technology while explicitly considering geospatial information. We
demonstrate that when business process event logs are enriched with geospatial
information of process activities, other peripheral information, which are only
obtainable through geolocation can be accessed for performing more advanced
business process mining tasks. In the rest of the paper, we ﬁrst present a mo-
tivating scenario in Section 2. Then, we discuss the shortcomings of available
process mining tools and propose our solution in Section 3. Our developed tool
suite is presented in Section 4. Finally, we conclude the paper and present future
research directions in Section 5.

2 Motivation

The work reported in this paper is a result of our industrial investigation of
business process mining techniques in collaboration with National Post Company
of Iran (NPCI). We present a running example based on data provided by our
project partner. One of the most recent challenges in NPCI is to identify the best
route for parcel delivery across the country so that they can improve their current
distribution process. As such, the process that has been reported throughout this
paper is a business process named ‘parcel pickup and delivery’. There are four
types of activities in this process, each of which is performed at one of the
post oﬃces placed in diﬀerent geographic locations across the country. These
activities are: 1) parcel pickup, 2) parcel check-in, when the parcel arrives at a
middle station, 3) parcel check-out, when the parcel exits from a middle station,
and 4) parcel delivery. All activities are stored in the event logs of the web-based
system as presented in Table 1.

In this log ﬁle, the Case id refers to Parcel# which is a unique number used
for tracking, and contains a sequence of activities that are performed to transfer
a parcel from source to destination. Besides Case id and Event id which are
mandatory components of a process instance, there are supplementary informa-
tion recorded for each case, including Timestamp, Resource, City, andLocation.
Notably, the location of each activity was not recorded in the original log ﬁle,

Geo-Enabled Business Process Modeling

3

Table 1. A sample of an event log of our experiment

Case id

Event id Properties

1986638

245
246
247
248
249
250
251

Timestamp
25-05-2017: 11.50
25-05-2017:14.01
26-05-2017: 08.12
26-05-2017: 15.20
27-05-2017: 09.27
27-05-2017: 10.02
27-05-2017: 14.38

Resource
Activity
Parcel pickup
P.O. 123
Parcel check-out P.O. 123
Parcel check in P.O. 240
Parcel check-out P.O. 240
Parcel check in P.O. 285
Parcel check-out P.O. 285
Parcel Delivery Postman 12

Location

City
Mashhad 37.75888900,45.97833300
Mashhad 37.75888900,45.97833300
37.55527800,45.07250000
Tehran
37.55527800,45.07250000
Tehran
35.84001880,50.93909060
Shiraz
35.84001880,50.93909060
Shiraz
35.12001440,49.93909060
Shiraz

but we have extracted it from Google Maps using the name of the city. In this
experiment, we used a small portion of the event log containing 1,137,643 cases.
We ﬁrst draw a process model using BPMN notation, in which the Case id is
Parcel# and the activities are parcel pickup, parcel check-in, parcel check-out and
parcel delivery, as shown in Figure 1. In this process model, the activity column
was selected as activity. This provides a view on the ﬂow of the diﬀerent process
steps; however, it cannot present how diﬀerent process instances are executed.

Fig. 1. The process model using activity column as ’activity’

Given such a dataset, we can look at the process in a diﬀerent way by set-
ting another column as activity. In this experiment, we consider city as activity
and automatically discover the process map using two well-known process min-
ing tools, Disco [6] and ProM [7]. Figure 2 shows a ﬁltered path of the process
map demonstrating only those events which have parcels sent from ‘Mashhad’ to
‘Shiraz’. Although these process models provide valuable insight to analysts and
process owners, however, they cannot help with providing a geospatial perspec-
tive on the process and answering any geo-related question about the process,
such as how can the process of ‘parcel pickup and delivery’ be visually rendered
on the map? or what are the paths with the highest degree of parcel traﬃc
across the country? In the next section, we investigate the problems of currently
available process mining techniques and introduce our solution for geo-enabled
process modeling.

3 Proposed Approach for Geo-Enabled Process Modeling

Based on our practical experience in the analysis of cross-organizational busi-
ness processes [8], we have realized that currently available techniques do not
allow including the geospatial information about process execution into the pro-
cess models, e.g., the location in which the activities are executed. Here, we

4

B. Behkamal et al.

(a) ProM tool

(b) Disco tool

Fig. 2. The process map discovered by ProM and Disco tool using city as ’activity’

are going to brieﬂy present the problems we have practically encountered, and
introduce our proposed approach for the geo-enabled visualization of the process.

Challenge 1. Complex process models cannot be rendered in an un-
derstandable manner. A business process can be the visualized by many well-
known standards (e.g., Petri Nets [9], Business Process Model and Notation [10],
Workﬂow Nets [11]) most of which render process models based on control ﬂow
in event logs. There are some methods for designing process models in a way that
increases their understandability. For instance, in [12], the authors investigate
the eﬀect of layout features of process models on model understandability.
Challenge 2. There are valuable location-related metadata that are
not considered in process analysis. Geospatial information provides access
to additional peripheral metadata such as weather and location hierarchy, which
are not accessible if geospatial information is not stored in event logs. For ex-
ample, if we have some information related to the routes such as ground paths,
airlines, and railways, or even more detailed information like maximum speed
and the number of lanes in a highway, we can eﬀectively mine and analyze a
business process log by taking this additional information into account.
Challenge 3. Location-based metrics are not currently applied for per-
formance assessment of business processes. Typically, three dimensions of
performance are identiﬁed: time, cost and quality. Time-related information is
used to detect deviations and to improve the processes. Also, cost is taken into

324543111111213111143217242231111678678Mashhad685Tehran462Shiraz681Tabriz2Ardebil1Khoramabad2Bandarabbass5Esfahan4Rasht5Geo-Enabled Business Process Modeling

5

consideration for performing process analysis [13]. However, addition of geospa-
tial information to event logs makes it possible to consider new metrics for the
assessment and enhancement of business processes. For example, in Figure 2, if
there are two routes between ’Mashhad’ and ’Shiraz’ with diﬀerent path lengths,
current tools cannot explain why it takes more time to deliver the parcel via the
longer path from ’Mashhad’ and ’Shiraz’. In other words, it is not possible to use
the geospatial information as a metric to assess business process performance.

To address these problems, we propose a novel modeling approach for geo-
enabled processes. We deﬁne a geo-enabled process model consisting of four per-
spectives: 1) process perspective focusing on the control ﬂow of geo-located activ-
ities, 2) organizational perspective, which depicts the organizational structure to
represent geo-visiulized inter-organizational activities, 3) case perspective, show-
ing the characteristics, including geospatial features, of a process instance, and
4) event perspective, which represents the timing, the order, and the location
of the events. In other words, for geo-enabled processes, we add the geospatial
perspective of business processes focusing on the geographic location of process
activities. In a geo-enabled process model, the nodes of the model represent
real-world geographic locations and the transitions between nodes represent the
activities taken place between diﬀerent nodes. Given diﬀerent scales of locations
(from coarse to ﬁne-grained), the process model may be deﬁned hierarchically,
with regard to the location, and include hierarchical locations in multiple scales.
We may overlay the geo-enabled process model with additional layers on the
map to represent location-related data from external data sources to allow for
better analysis of the process. We have implemented these abstractions and il-
lustrate the use of such additional layers in the next section. Figure 3 illustrates
one realization of a geo-enabled business process model on a map.

Fig. 3. The geo-enabled business process model

ShirazMashhadArdebil684435244316843Bandar Abbas2Rasht247111123218111141113EsfahanKhoram AbadTehranTabriz6

B. Behkamal et al.

4 Geo-enabled Process Modeling in Practice

To bridge the gap between the process execution in the real world and the process
model discovered from event, we have developed a tool suite, called MEEM, using
the ‘Open Street Map API’ platform with an open-content license. MEEM stands
for ‘Meeting of Events and Evidence on the Map’, which integrates two diﬀerent
aspects of data, i.e., ‘Events’ and ‘Evidence’. On the ‘Events’ perspective, the in-
formation related to the process activities is extracted from the geo-tagged event
log presented in Table 1. Two layers are implemented in the ‘Events’ perspective
to show the overview of parcel delivery across the country in both static and dy-
namic fashions. We have also, implemented the ’Evidence’ perspective in which
valuable location-related data available in external data sources are collected
and visualized in diﬀerent layers, such as main roads, airlines and railways. The
online demonstration of the tool, repositories, and other dissemination materials
are publicly available at https://github.com/makbn/meem. Here, we present the
advantages of geo-enabled process modeling and address the challenges men-
tioned in the previous section.
S1. Increasing process interpretability. One of the challenges of current
process mining tools is to understandably draw the workﬂow of a process. Given
geospatial information, we are able to address this issue and demonstrate how a
process model would be more understandable through geovisualization. To this
end, we ﬁrst draw the workﬂow of the parcel delivery process without considering
geo-tags using Disco [6]. Then, we depict the same process model on the map and
explain its main advantages compared to the former. To visualize the workﬂow of
the process, we selected two Iranian provinces, namely ‘Gilan’ and ‘Golestan’, as
the source and destination, respectively. Then, we ﬁltered for only those events
which have parcels sent from ‘Gilan’ to ‘Golestan’ using ‘Endpoints Filter’ option
of Disco shown in Figure 4(a). We then depict the process graph discovered from
geo-tagged event logs using our tool which is shown in Figure 4(b). It is clear
that when the process graph is visualized on a map, it is more understandable as
the activities (nodes of the graph) are placed on real-world geographic locations.
S2. Incorporating location-related properties into process models. We
believe that process mining will beneﬁt from location hierarchy. For example, we
are able to ﬁlter the events at diﬀerent levels of post oﬃces, cities, and countries.
So, we have used location hierarchy as metadata to address the second challenge.
S3. Using location-based measures for the assessment of process per-
formance. Considering geospatial information will enable process analysts to
improve the eﬃciency of process execution. For example, the distance between
the locations of two consecutive activities can be used as a measure for the
assessment of process performance along with the execution time. As shown in
Figure 4(a)., there are three routes for parcel delivery from ‘Gilan’ to ‘Golestan’,
which are drawn in diﬀerent colors. Based on the thickness of the arrows (that
shows the number of parcels which have traveled through that path) we can
see that most of the parcels are transferred via Path 1. However, by this rep-
resentation of the process graph, we cannot detect which path is optimal since
the distances between nodes are not presented in this model. When the process

Geo-Enabled Business Process Modeling

7

(a) The discovered process map from event log using Disco.

(b) The discovered process map from geo-tagged event log using our
tool.

Fig. 4. The ﬁltered paths from ‘Gilan’ to ‘Golestan’

graph is drawn using geo-tagged data, it is possible to place the activities on
the exact location they are executed. As such, not only the execution time of
a process instance is considered for the assessment of process performance, but
also the distance between activity locations can be applied as a complementary
metric to better analyze the process execution. Thus, we can simply infer that
among all three existing paths from ‘Gilan’ to ‘Golestan’, Path 1, which is drawn
in blue, is the optimal path in terms of distance between source and destination.

5 Conclusion and Future Research Directions

The goal of this paper is to contribute to process mining by introducing ‘geo-
enabled process modeling’. We have ﬁrst motivated our work by presenting a
real world scenario and enumerating some challenges faced by available tools.
Then, we have presented our developed tool and demonstrated how process
mining can beneﬁt from adding the geospatial dimension in practice. There are
two promising research directions: 1) visualizing the formal process model on

Path 2Path 1Path 3GilanZanjanTehranGolestanMazandaran8

B. Behkamal et al.

the map. Here, we have just conﬁned to drawing a simple representation of
the process graph on the map. To geovisualize the formal process model, the
existing plug-ins such as Alpha Miner and the Inductive Visual Miner will be
used to create new plugins; 2) Proposing a novel location-based metric. Most of
the process mining techniques calculate performance based on execution time.
Adding the new location dimensions to event logs, we can better analyze the
performance of business processes using a distance-based metric.

References

1. Wil Van Der Aalst, Arya Adriansyah, Ana Karla Alves De Medeiros, Franco
Arcieri, Thomas Baier, Tobias Blickle, Jagadeesh Chandra Bose, Peter Van
Den Brand, Ronald Brandtjen, et al. Process mining manifesto. In International
Conference on Business Process Management, pages 169–194. Springer, 2011.
2. Xinwei Zhu, Jan Recker, Guobin Zhu, and Fl´avia Maria Santoro. Exploring
location-dependency in process modeling. Business Process Management Journal,
2014.

3. Xinwei Zhu, Guobin Zhu, Seppe KLM vanden Broucke, Jan Vanthienen, and Bart
Baesens. Towards location-aware process modeling and execution. In International
Conference on Business Process Management, pages 186–197. Springer, 2014.
4. Xinwei Zhu, Seppe Vanden Broucke, Guobin Zhu, Jan Vanthienen, and Bart Bae-
sens. Enabling ﬂexible location-aware business process modeling and execution.
Decision Support Systems, 83:1–9, 2016.

5. Peter Blank, Michael Maurer, Melanie Siebenhofer, Andreas Rogge-Solti, and Ste-
fan Schonig. Location-aware path alignment in process mining.
In 2016 IEEE
20th International Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Workshop (EDOCW),
pages 1–8. IEEE, 2016.

6. Christian W G¨unther and Anne Rozinat. Disco: Discover your processes. BPM

(Demos), 940:40–44, 2012.

7. Boudewijn F Van Dongen, Ana Karla A de Medeiros, HMW Verbeek, AJMM
Weijters, and Wil MP van Der Aalst. The prom framework: A new era in process
mining tool support. In International conference on application and theory of petri
nets, pages 444–454. Springer, 2005.

8. Asef Pourmasoumi, Mohsen Kahani, and Ebrahim Bagheri. The evolutionary com-
position of desirable execution traces from event logs. Future Generation Computer
Systems, 98:78–103, 2019.

9. Wolfgang Reisig. Petri nets: an introduction, volume 4. Springer Science & Business

Media, 2012.

10. Remco Dijkman, Jorg Hofstetter, and Jana Koehler. Business Process Model and

Notation. Springer, 2011.

11. Wil MP Van der Aalst. Veriﬁcation of workﬂow nets. In International Conference

on Application and Theory of Petri Nets, pages 407–426. Springer, 1997.

12. Vered Bernstein and Pnina Soﬀer. Identifying and quantifying visual layout fea-
tures of business process models. In Enterprise, Business-Process and Information
Systems Modeling, pages 200–213. Springer, 2015.

13. Bart FA Hompes, Abderrahmane Maaradji, Marcello La Rosa, Marlon Dumas,
Joos CAM Buijs, and Wil MP van der Aalst. Discovering causal factors explaining
business process performance variation. In International Conference on Advanced
Information Systems Engineering, pages 177–192. Springer, 2017.

