2
2
0
2

y
a
M
2
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
6
7
6
3
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

cyberaCTIve: a STIX-based Tool for Cyber Threat
Intelligence in Complex Models

Ricardo M. Czekster∗, Roberto Metere†‡, Charles Morisset†
∗School of Informatics and Digital Engineering, Aston University, Birmingham, United Kingdom
r.meloczekster@aston.ac.uk
†School of Computing, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom
{roberto.metere, charles.morisset}@ncl.ac.uk
‡The Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom

Abstract—Cyber threat intelligence (CTI) is practical real-
world information that is collected with the purpose of assessing
threats in cyber-physical systems (CPS). A practical notation for
sharing CTI is STIX. STIX offers facilities to create, visualise
and share models; however, even a moderately simple project can
be represented in STIX as a quite complex graph, suggesting to
spread CTI across multiple simpler sub-projects. Our tool aims
to enhance the STIX-based modelling task in contexts when such
simpliﬁcations are infeasible. Examples can be the microgrid and,
more in general, the smart grid.

Index Terms—Cyber Threat Intelligence, Situational Aware-
ness, Structured Cyber-attack Representations, Cyber-security,
Cyber-Physical Systems

I. INTRODUCTION

Criminal activity has increased as workers shifted towards
virtual alternatives to perform their tasks [1], [2]. These
malicious actors exploit vulnerabilities that stretch resources
to the limit for ﬁnancial gains, impair trust, recognition, or
data theft, among other reasons.

In many cases, performing remote tasks is the only alter-
native, and remote control features translate to a growth of
interconnected cyber-physical systems (CPS). One example of
a CPS is the smart grid where power managers implement
dynamic load responses for different energy proﬁles to meet
supply-demand [3].

What makes hard to deter cyber-criminals and deviant
behaviour is the overwhelming time needed to understand
malicious occurrences, complex timelines, trusting issues re-
lated to sources, to then act on protecting the infrastructure.
Generally, such information is collected under the term cyber
threat intelligence (CTI) [4]1. As a system gets eventually
compromised and then quickly reported, other organisations
can be made aware and can prepare themselves to respond
to similar potential threats. This exchange of CTI highlights
the importance of effectively describe, report, and share it by
using standardised and structured formats comprehensible by
analysts across diverse disciplines.

This work extends on the standard format used by cyber-
security analysts called STIXTM (Structured Threat Informa-
tion eXpression) [5]. STIX allows to model, visualise and

1Also termed information security threat intelligence, or ISTI; however, we

shall use CTI throughout this work.

share CTI models that collect valuable insights and contextual
intelligence to establish richer and wider cyber-attack narra-
tives to understand ongoing incursions. These data are valuable
tools helping security ofﬁcers take prompt actions to thwart
cyber-attacks or protect systems against further advances.
However, the main difﬁculty of STIX, despite having a very
thorough documentation, is due to its inherent complexity
when creating or updating models given the sheer amount of
parameters one must consider.

In this paper we are interested in helping cyber-security
ofﬁcers to address incorporating CTI related data into smart
buildings. Our contribution offers a partial solution that takes
into account all the problems outlined above. In particular, we
propose a tool for modelling structured cyber-attacks called cy-
beraCTIve (Cyber-Attack CTI Virtual Environment). Our aim
is to ease modelling and structuring cyber-attack progression
as new pieces of evidence emerge through different sources,
as well as to simplify sharing and analysing CTI.

Furthermore, we implemented a log of all events that ana-
lysts created and order them by the timestamp. This extension
allows for a timeline analysis, where analysis could inspect
the chain of events and then try to reason on ongoing cyber-
attacks. This can help ﬁnding patterns that can apply to corre-
sponding real-world data audits and speed up forensic analysis.
For example,
they may quickly review other models and
add more contextual data, clarify their position, or deciding
to employ mitigating pro-active measures to thwart attacks.
Overall, we simplify STIX-based modelling effort and ensure
high cyber-attack expressiveness to help thwart attacks and
disseminate relevant contexts for peers to react faster.

II. CYBER THREAT INTELLIGENCE

Data, information, knowledge, intelligence and wisdom are
interrelated concepts that play a relevant role for an effective
system analysis [6]. The terminology Threat Intelligence it-
self originates from military literature that was later broadly
adopted by other stakeholders. Industrial partners, more specif-
ically the Gartner group, acknowledges the following as-
sertion: “Threat
intelligence is evidence-based knowledge,
including context, mechanisms, indicators, implications and
actionable advice, about an existing or emerging menace or

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
hazard to assets that can be used to inform decisions regarding
the subject’s response to that menace or hazard.”2.

Recent advances introduced the term cyber threat intelli-
gence (CTI) [4], [7] to encompass information technologies.
CTI is thus a way of anticipating attacks or malicious in-
cursions in networks deemed crucial for maintaining business
operations. It helps stakeholders to devise measures to compli-
cate, prevent, or thwart adversarial actions in networks where
managers require control and security. Major individuals inter-
ested in employing CTI are network administrators, security
ofﬁcers, managers and decision makers, incident responders,
and infrastructure operators.

CTI holds value to enterprises wishing to enlarge the
analysis scope when considering cyber-attacks. We mention
the SANS Institute3 report tackling how it is employed by
organisations [8]. They noticed an increase in interest over
the years, however, stakeholders comment on the need of
expanding use cases to enhance how to understand the CTI
beneﬁt and security posture gains. The report also discusses on
the need for improve report automation and ways of enlarging
adopting by government-sponsored groups, private sector, and
industry-focused groups, to name a few of their ﬁndings.

Examples of data sources used in intelligence gathering [8]
stretches technical, human, and internal domains, and it could
be both structured and unstructured [4], [9]. Quality of CTI-
based feeds is a topic of wide interest [10], [11] in attempts
to determine best data sources with high-quality curated
cyber-security withholding crucial elements to make decisions.
Tundis et al. (2019) [12], for instance, investigated automated
assessment of sources and computed a relevance score index
to reduce the time needed to verify gathered intelligence.

Security ofﬁcers and CI managers should assess and eval-
uate data available in open or public CTI feeds, data from
security vendors, industry reports on vulnerabilities (zero day,
etc.), open source intelligence (OSINT) reports4, security data
extracted from IDS or ﬁrewall, data from the security, infor-
mation, and event management (SIEM) platform, incident re-
sponse systems, and network trafﬁc and ﬂow logs, to mention
a few. Ramsdale et al. (2020) [13] conducted a comparative
analysis of threat intelligence sources, highlighting structured
standards such as STIX [5], Trusted Automated Exchange of
Indicator Information (TAXIITM) [14], and Cyber Observable
eXpression (CybOXTM) [15], [16].

CTI, however, could lack on timeliness, i.e., by the time
crucial information is processed and disseminated over peers,
it could be already outdated. On the one hand, the use of CTI
feeds and sharing features undoubtedly helps deter malicious
activities. On the other hand, advertising exploited vulnera-
bilities could be an incentive for triggering cyber-attacks as
malicious actors will be aware of impending threats. If security

2https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/2487216/definition-threat-intellige

nce.

3SANS is a US institute and the acronym stands for SysAdmin, Audit,

Network, and Security.

4By ‘Open’, in this community, it refers to publicly available data on

security.

teams are not responsive in due course, their omissions could
lead to irreversible damages, data exﬁltration, ransomware,
or ﬁnancial loss. Another drawback of CTI concerns lack of
reporting, or under-reporting malicious activities. The cause
varies from case to case but is usually related to companies
being afraid of losing user trust on their systems, negative
publicity, competitive disadvantage, lawsuits, or liabilities due
to lack of preparedness.

One could employ CTI against advanced persistent
threats [17], [18] and threat actors attempting long term
cyber-physical malicious incursions. To that effect, authors
have combined risk assessment with threat modelling to
better understand these kinds of cyber-attacks [19]. Cyber-
security managers could devise strategies on how to conduct
effective data poisoning attacks over long periods of time
to skew algorithms and impair ﬂexible control. In terms of
modelling and representing CTI related data, Takahashi et
al. (2012) [20] has conducted research on structured cyber-
security reporting in incident object description exchange
format (IODEF). Industrial counterparts have also taken an
interest in CTI, for instance, the Mandiant organisation has
published a white paper with regards to open indicators of
compromise (OpenIOC) [21] whereas the real-time inter-
network defence (RID) [22], a request for comments (RFC)
number 65455, outlined a proactive method to help sharing
incident data sanctioned by the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF).

Wagner et al. (2019) [23] discussed CTI sharing in a
survey, explaining basic concepts and future research direc-
tions. Rudman and Irwin (2016) [24] devised a tool that used
samples from the peer-to-peer (P2P) malware Dridex6 for
generating IoC in an automated fashion. Mavroeidis and Bro-
mander (2017) [25] discussed ontologies, sharing standards,
and taxonomies for tackling CTI. The work compares different
methodologies and existing model’s expressiveness for use by
security ofﬁcers.

One cannot neglect the importance and impact of incorpo-
rating machine learning (ML) or artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
algorithms and techniques into cyber-security applications.
Modern AI employs techniques combined with advanced
statistics to help in situations where one requires automated
decisions. AI excels in speed in accuracy in contrast to time-
consuming manual processing. Analysts use it in applications
occurring in well bounded problems where the solution and
the method to extract insight is within the data. For problems
requiring additional context AI suffers to ﬁnd good solutions,
at
in current research prognostics. Merging AI with
cyber-security aims to automate decisions for inferring ‘under
attack’ statuses or conﬁrming malicious activities.

least

Kaloudi and Li (2020) [26] discussed how AI and ML
may help cyber-attackers devise and exploit vulnerabilities in
systems, proposing a framework to tackle this new malicious
incursion opportunity. The idea and scope of the work is to

5https://www.hjp.at/doc/rfc/rfc6545.html.
6United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT). (2015,

October) Alert (TA15-286A) Dridex P2P Malware.

2

survey the literature for highly sophisticated attacks and novel
threats to enhance preparedness. Truong et al. (2020) [27]
commented on the uses and limitations of AI/ML in cyber-
security, highlighting prospects and challenges whereas Iqbal
and Anwar (2020) [28] proposed a system for providing
automated CTI elements to stakeholders.

III. RELATED WORK

There are signiﬁcant initiatives to deal with these malicious
incursions. MITRE, a US based organisation, has developed
the adversarial tactics, techniques, and common knowledge
(ATT&CK®) framework [29] and deﬁned ‘matrices’ (namely
enterprise and mobile domains) to help stakeholders under-
stand the tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP) deployed
by attackers. MITRE has also introduced a similar initiative for
applying ATT&CK to industrial control systems (ICS) called
ATT&CK for ICS [30], due to observed particularities in these
systems. The ATT&CK framework superseded the common
attack pattern enumeration and classiﬁcation (CAPEC) [31],
and we witness academic and industrial partners engaging with
reporting efforts to mitigate cyber-attacks.

Administrators may use ATT&CK to search for evidences
(in their own networks) of malicious incursions that happened
elsewhere, as well as the related TTPs behind attacks. The
tactics explain ‘why?’ they needed to do the attack whereas
the ‘how?’ details the steps undertaken to reach that objective.
Procedures glue everything together giving context
to the
attack so the analyst may understand the motivations behind
the actions and the ways they could establish footholds and
persistence.

The richness and descriptive nature of the malicious encoun-
ters help analysts investigate most signiﬁcant details that could
help preventing next cyber-attacks. Unfortunately, a massive
number of incursions remains not reported or under-reported.
Reasons vary, and are mainly due to ﬁnancial consequences
of disclosing these data as well as liability or shame in
recognising that the company was victim of an attack.

The framework is a valuable resource to help security ofﬁ-
cers to counteract cyber-attacks with threat-informed defences.
ATT&CK differs from classic Cyber Kill Chain® (CKC) [32]
pioneered by Lockheed Martin [33] in the sense that it iden-
tiﬁes and maps adversarial actions that could happen without
any order. Kwon et al. (2020) [34] has created a method
for translating ATT&CK matrix threats directly into NIST’s
cybersecurity framework. This clearly shows the need to cross-
reference models altogether helping cyber-security experts in
their tasks.

The community effort

to establish public databases of
software vulnerability relates information to the Common
Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) [35], used along with
the US National Vulnerability Database (NVD)7. The NVD
uses CVSS to track, score, document, and describe details
about discovered vulnerabilities reported by industrial partners
and individuals. Computing a scoring system that is vouched

7National Vulnerability Database. https://nvd.nist.gov/.

by the cyber-security expert community is invaluable for
practitioners, since the numeric index provides a notion on
severity and the vulnerability’s impact on the infrastructure.
We mention also that the MITRE Corporation, in cooperation
with the NIST and the NVD, maintains the Common Vulner-
abilities and Exposures (CVE) database8. We have compiled
a non-comprehensive list of databases and repositories worth
of note in Appendix A.

In a quantitative venue applied to cyber-security throughout
the years, research has tackled metrics indices for modelling
in this com-
incidents in CI [36], [37]. There is interest
munity concerning the list of key quantitative metrics and
indicators of attacks being perpetrated by malicious actors so
security ofﬁcers may improve analysis. For example, Ramos
et al. (2017) [37] has surveyed research on metrics whereas
Abraham and Nair (2014) [38] have addressed the use of
quantitative security measures to aid security engineers. They
characterised four security classes of metrics: i) Core, e.g.,
CVSS, total vulnerability measure (TVM), or Langweg metric
(LM); ii) Probability based; iii) Structural, such as shortest
path, Number of paths, or mean of path lengths; or iv) Time
based, for instance, mean time to recovery (MTTR), mean time
to ﬁrst failure (MTFF), or mean time to breach (MTTB). In
close relation to cyber-security metrics, one could combine
with indicators of compromise (IoC) [4], for example, IP
address lifetime, or malware signatures.

IV. CYBERACTIVE: A TOOL FOR ASSISTING CTI

We propose here a tool to extend STIX-based modelling
in a single analysis environment called cyberaCTIve, a short
name for cyber-attack CTI virtual environment. It aims to
help cyber-security ofﬁcers in large cyber-physical systems to
model, understand, and share CTI-related models among peers
to quickly thwart cyber-attacks before they propagate and harm
other parts of networks.

A straightforward front-end to STIX databases is not a
i.e., we are aware of STIX 2.1 Drag and
novel concept,
Drop Modeler9 where authors have used JavaScript to create
models using the standard. One of its usability issues is that it
does not directly handle projects, in the sense that saving and
loading projects must be done manually and any accidental
refresh of the page would irrecoverably erase all the current
project. What differentiates our tool is the ability of offering
a management interface of models/objects and enable users to
form analysis groups as they may interact only with models
pertaining the same proﬁle. On top of these differences, our
tool uses auxiliary JSON ﬁles to cope with the current and also
future STIX versions and customised features such as showing
timelines of selected events.

As cyber-attacks progress in the infrastructure over time,
security analysts must start producing valuable insights based
on their observations about simple anomalies or odd user
behaviours. One could document these abnormalities using

8Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures. https://cve.mitre.org/.
9https://github.com/STIX-Modeler/UI. The tool uses auxiliary libraries

such as React, MobX, and Webpack.

3

spreadsheets, internal memos, or using speciﬁc applications,
however, there is a need to employ structured modelling of
cyber-security events happening in networks. In this regard,
STIX is a standard and modelling language deﬁning mod-
elling primitives that map most likely TTPs that could occur.
Examples of the entities present in the framework are STIX
Domain Objects (SDO), STIX Relationship Objects (SRO),
and STIX Cyber-observable Objects (SCO). These elements
present modellers with a small set of essential parameters
for unambiguously depicting any malicious incursion. It is
an invaluable tool for helping analysts understand and reason
about abnormalities that could potentially be classiﬁed as
active attacks.

STIX uses SCOs for characterising host-based and network-
based information. They are used by various SDOs to provide
supporting context. The ‘Observed data’ SDO, for example,
indicates that the raw data was observed at a particular time.
A STIX model can be visualised as a graph whose nodes are
SDOs and SCOs and whose edges linking nodes are SROs.
These STIX entities are essential to model TTPs, however,
one must understand many model-related intricacies before
even starting modelling them within the framework. Users
must cope with a large parameter space required by the
entities to create usable and actionable high-level models.
cyberaCTIve helps users create STIX models and add objects
in a simple manner. The system is web-based and allows
(personal) projects to be easily stored and retrieved for analysis
at any time.

A key feature we have implemented in the tool is the idea
of a timeline that complements previous insights with new
information and situations that are unfolding. We notice that
the main difﬁculty when modelling cyber-attacks is due to low
understanding and differentiating stressful situations that are
overwhelming resources from active malicious activities. And
that is even harder if APT are to consider in a comprehensive
cyber-security assessment. So, here we propose a simpliﬁca-
tion on the way of modelling cyber-attacks, reasoning, and
abstracting circumstances to enrich analysis and evaluation.

A. Modelling cyber-security incidents with STIX

We chose to use and represent attacks with the structured
notation offered by STIX’s documentation [39]. The language
and format speciﬁcation deﬁnes 18 SDOs, two SROs, and 36
SCOs (among types and sub-types). The SDOs are: 1) Attack
Pattern; 2) Campaign; 3) Course of action; 4) Grouping; 5)
Identity; 6) Indicator; 7) Infrastructure; 8) Intrusion set; 9)
Location; 10) Malware; 11) Malware analysis; 12) Note; 13)
Observed data; 14) Opinion; 15) Report; 16) Threat actor; 17)
Tool; and 18) Vulnerability. The SROs are 1) Relationship;
and 2) Sighting, whereas SCOs are for example, files,
network-traffic, and directory types, to mention a
few. The latter represent any piece of data that is important to
convey context to cyber-attacks.

At ﬁrst glance, it seems rather simple to convey even sophis-
ticated cyber-attacks using STIX. However, there are literature
discussing problems even for experienced STIX modellers

when representing simple attacks. This is the main drive to our
research and proposition here, as we aim to simplify the overall
process of effectively modelling with STIX, while maintaining
its core functionality.

Looking closely at STIX’s SDOs and their purposes, one
could think about simpliﬁcations by grouping its related coun-
terparts. Figure 1 shows the STIX SDOs grouped by afﬁnity
and sharing of concepts.

Fig. 1: Grouping STIX SDOs by characteristic. Based on
STIX’s Documentation10.

Some SDOs are similar and can be grouped together into
categories. ‘Attack pattern’, ‘Malware’, and ‘Tool’ can all
be considered types of TTPs: they describe behaviours and
resources that attackers use to carry out their attacks. Similarly,
‘Campaign’, ‘Intrusion set’, and ‘Threat Actor’ all describe
information about why adversaries carry out attacks and how
they organise themselves.

The logical grouping of similar tasks eases modelling and
help users focusing on the study’s objective. We mention that
analysts should devise STIX models as quickly as cyber-
attacks unfold giving a chance for administrators to enact
mitigation mechanisms as soon as possible. We have integrated
cyberaCTIve with the ofﬁcial STIX documentation where,
for any element, it provides links to objects and the main
description directly on the tool.

B. System design and speciﬁcation

Our tool aims to simplify STIX modelling for easier sharing
and understanding of both simple and sophisticated malicious
incursions in critical infrastructure. The approach we describe
here provides a useful narrative to events as they unfold in the

10https://oasis-open.github.io/cti-documentation/stix/intro

4

TTPs, grouped attack actionsPhysical asset informationOrganisations and actorsSpecificMalware relatedExpert comments, annotations, mitigation actionsData related observationsContextSoftwarepower and telecommunication networks. The idea is to capture
pieces of evidence of malicious incursions, traces, anomalous
trafﬁc, or user behaviours and combine with other CTI sources
to pro-actively protect the infrastructure against wrongdoings.
We aim at providing clear and direct contextual data of any
worth to report inconsistencies happening on any CPS.

Figure 2 depicts the Use Case Diagram with two types of
proﬁles (‘User’ and ‘Administrator’) and the functionalities
they may access after successfully logging in the platform.

The ‘Preview JSON’ function will iterate over the objects
of a model and generate excerpts consisting of parameters
following the STIX speciﬁcation. The list of objects will form
a ‘bundle’ that represents the STIX model itself. The language
recommends producing a JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)11
ﬁle containing the model, where the user may aggregate all
objects into one deﬁnition using the modiﬁer ‘bundle’ (that
also has parameters to ﬁll in, such as ‘id’, for instance). There
is also the possibility of downloading the JSON ﬁle for any
model.

Our tables store the models and objects created by users,
that may be normal or administrators. We are keeping track
of when models and objects were created and also modiﬁed
as well as allowing users to retract (we refrained the word
‘revoke’ because STIX already uses it) objects in models.
Users belong to a proﬁle, and they can see and edit objects
created by other users belonging to the same proﬁle.

C. User interface and extended list of features

We implemented a standard web-based system with so
called responsive browser window elements, i.e., ﬂexible hy-
pertext elements that adapts the interface it to ﬁt in different
screens (tablets, PC desktops, and even cell phones) and
browsers (Opera, IE, Safari, Firefox, or Edge). For this we
have used the framework provided by W3-CSS (from the
World-Wide Web consortium, using cascading style sheets)12.
The advantage of using W3-CSS over other similar alternatives
is due to its simplicity and lack of jQuery/JavaScript elements
that were not required by our application.

In the testing environment, we installed a WAMP (Web-
Apache-MySQL-PHP) server with standard conﬁguration. The
application in the production server follows the same conﬁg-
uration as the local environment.

We equipped cyberaCTIve with the following features:
1) Simple to use and interact web-based graphical user

interface (GUI);

2) Creation of bespoke STIX models with DBMS persis-
tence, where users (from different proﬁles) may interact
with their deﬁnitions;

3) Explore the vast parameter space of the STIX speciﬁca-
tion, identifying types, lists, and likely SDO/SRO/SCO
objects to attach to models.

• Assist users when validating models on re-
quired/optional parameters, where the system shows

11JSON is an open interchange format, offering a structured and prone for
validation data structure that is simple to read by both humans and machines.

12https://www.w3schools.com/w3css/default.asp.

types (data structures,
lists, strings,
vocabularies), adhering to STIX rules.

integers, or

4) Users belonging to the same proﬁle share objects and
may edit them as needed that resembles a team analysing
a cyber-attack. We have deﬁned ﬁve basic proﬁles: 1)
Cyber-security managers; 2) Network administrators; 3)
Management; 4) Analysts; and 5) External users.

5) It allows users to ‘retract’ objects and hidden them
from analysis. This is useful for situations where new
evidence emerged and the object in that case becomes
invalid or retains outdated information.

6) Validate STIX models (generated in JSON format),
where our tool checks required parameters and whether
users have chosen valid values as input. Models passing
this validation could be used to share CTI across other
domains or feeds13.

7) Timeline analysis where events are ordered by times-
tamps parameters, allowing cyber-security ofﬁcers to
consider advanced incursions.

• One could use this feature to quickly update models
and differentiate attacks from localised ﬂuctuations
in trafﬁc, load, or user activity that could occa-
sionally happen (or any SCO or signiﬁcant event
occurring in the network). Our tool empowers the
user to modify models and objects depending on
changes in circumstances.

8) Enable users to ‘rethink’ attacks, updating models’ ob-
servations, relationships, observable objects, comments,
previous analysis.

9) The system allows STIX model generation (after vali-
dation for consistency, e.g., required over optional pa-
rameters).

10) Basic forensic analysis over past events in models and

objects.

cyberaCTIve is implemented as a multi-user web appli-
cation. As standard practice, users need to register and log
in to the web application to access models. Models are
accessed through identiﬁers; however, the system would not
let an advanced (or malicious) users that guesses identiﬁers
to retrieve a model owned by other users. We protect the
database from SQL injections through prepared statements
across all queries. We implement encrypted communications
employing HTTP over secure socket layer and, for consistency
among peers, we are saving all timestamps in the system with
Greenwich Mean Time (GMT).

Besides those features, the tool also provides curated con-
tent, with expert domain annotations to establish trustful
networks of accredited sources. It could track cyber-attacks
from mere (albeit malicious) observations and sightings until
actual manifestation of threats and vulnerability exploitation.
Security ofﬁcers could use it whilst auditing or performing
forensic analysis of cyber-attacks, showing ‘trails of evidence’
that are reviewed throughout a duration, so they understand

13We perform an internal validation to check missing parameters, not for

checking whether the model is well-formed.

5

Fig. 2: Use Case Diagram for cyberaCTIve showing major functionalities for its existing proﬁles.

the timeline. They could quickly differentiate possible cyber-
attacks from normal ﬂuctuations on demand or trafﬁc that
occasionally happen in coupled power/telecommunication net-
works.

Since the tool is directed at end-users sitting on top of
the infrastructure, they could use it to better explain cyber-
attacks to high-level stakeholders (business managers, and so
on) so they could enact changes to prevent further incur-
sions of happening. Another clear advantage is the use of
structured cyber-attack format to ease sharing across similar
infrastructure, employing standardised mechanisms used in
industry/academy such as STIX (TTP and CKC). Finally, users
may link STIX elements to map previous malicious actions
and describe other (more sophisticated) cyber-attacks. The tool
shows cyber-attack progression as it unfolds into networks,
matching observations.

D. Showcasing the environment

cyberaCTIve employs two manually generated JSON ﬁles
compiled from the STIX speciﬁcation: i) a ﬁle with basic
deﬁnitions (STIX2.1.json); and ii) another one for vo-
cabularies (STIX2.1-vocabularies.json). Those ﬁles
are public and accessible through the tool. Figure 3 shows
the process for using these two ﬁles to generate input forms
containing STIX models and objects. It covers user’s log in
whilst operating the system, and then logging out (or forcibly
disconnected from its session after a 10-minute timeout),
among the rest of the available features.

The ﬁgure shows the possible features that users may choose
after a successful login. We implemented the tool with a
clean, user friendly, and simple interface where cyber-security
ofﬁcers may select new actions or observations or modify

previous actions14. As mentioned earlier, the cyberaCTIve tool
uses a responsive web-based interface for representing cyber-
attacks. Upon entering the tool, we show a brief explanation
of what it does and links to its functionalities, such as ‘My
dashboard’ that lists all previously created models for that
proﬁle. Users may interact with these elements as they wish
as well as inserting and modifying new objects.

We show in Figure 4 the dashboard for a user, where his/her
proﬁle (‘Cyber-security managers’) has two models. It
is
possible, for each model, to ’View/Add objects’, and for each
object, users may ‘Edit’ or ‘Retract’ (making it temporarily
unavailable for using in models – this could be changed as
desired on a link ‘Restore’). Note that we are ordering models
and objects by date of modiﬁcation (descending). The platform
will automatically paginate the list of models and objects as
needed (each page may withhold 10 instances – these values
could be customised).

Figure 5 shows the process for editing a model. The envi-
ronment shows the model’s name (where they could modify it)
and the list of previously assigned objects (for the case of the
ﬁgure, the user has created 11 objects onto this model). If the
user clicks on any STIX thumbnail the system automatically
retrieves the parameters for this object and let the user change
it. Users may preview the current JSON model description by
clicking on the button ‘Preview JSON deﬁnitions’.

On the ‘Edit model’ page, users may also add new STIX
elements (SDOs, SROS, and SCOs). The tool will list the
thumbnail, the type, the description (that was fetched from
the speciﬁcation). When the user clicks on ‘Add to my model’,

14Source code and instructions are publicly available at https://github.com

/czekster/cyberactive.

6

UserAdminList, create, andmanage STIXmodelsInteract withSTIX modelsList objectsDesign viewCreate, edit,retract objectsPreview/saveJSON<<include>><<include>><<include>><<include>>Managemodels,objectsManageusers,profilesAlter properties<<include>>Analysetimeline<<include>>Share CTI,validate model<<include>>Fig. 3: Overall process and available features for managing models and objects in cyberaCTIve.

on the ‘Submit’ button and the system will go back to the
model, where they can preview the JSON accordingly. The
system does not support removing objects from models, only
retracting (which can be done in the ‘Dashboard’).

Figure 7 shows the ‘Timeline’ feature, where the system
shows events from all models (from the same user proﬁle),
ordered by modified_time property (present in all SDO –
if not present, we show the list of objects without it, in the
end). This feature shows the reasoning and updates behind
the process of modelling, showing all the objects users have
created and ordering them according to the modiﬁcation date,
by any reason or changes in circumstances.

The system will employ a different colour for each model
and will list all objects that users created or modiﬁed in a
temporal perspective. This is crucial to understand how cyber-
attack unfolded, helping to address mitigations.

Finally, we show in Figure 8 the ‘Share intelligence’ feature.
At the current version of cyberaCTIve, it will only verify
missing required parameters and point them out to users.

This concludes the major screens and feature description for
cyberaCTIve. As stated, it acts as a visual front-end for STIX,
where modellers may inspect parameters and assign objects to
models for later analysis.

E. Discussion

The cyberaCTIve tool aims to enrich CTI-related analysis
using more simple, precise, unambiguous, and shareable struc-
tured cyber-attack modelling using STIX, a format that is sanc-
tioned by industry and academia. Cyber-security stakeholders
sitting on top of large attack surfaces may proﬁt from CTI
to pro-actively set forth measures to thwart malicious actions
as they unfold. Helping users tackle high-level modelling
may promote quicker responses and build trustful networks

Fig. 4: Dashboard feature showing the models and objects
created by modellers under the same user proﬁle.

the system will retrieve all properties and let them modify as
needed.

Users may edit individual STIX objects that are assigned to
a speciﬁc model. Figure 6 shows an excerpt of the parameters
for a SDO ‘Threat actor’ that he/she has previously added. The
system shows ‘Common properties’ and ‘Speciﬁc properties’,
where the buttons toggle Hiding/Viewing screens (to ease
navigation). The system will read the parameters that it has
stored on the DBMS and users may change any detail required
by simply changing the value on the input ﬁelds.

After completing the necessary changes, users may click

7

Share CTISTIX 2.1SpecificationSource: STIX spec.JSON file:STIX2.1.jsonJSON file:STIX2.1-vocabularies.jsonManually generated and validated by third-party toolsCyber-ActiVEToolDashboardNew modelSelect modelAdd/EditSTIX objectsShare CTIAnalysetimelineLog outLog inValid credentialsChooseSDO/SRO/SCOList models for profileValidate JSONSelect modelSubmit modelOrder events by timestamp(all user profile models)Check required params.ActionsChoicesFilesSpecificationKey:StartPreview JSONDesign ViewSessionexpired?YesNo(a) For editing the model, users may change its ‘Name’ or edit one
object that was previously added. The ﬁgure was edited and shows
only a few objects belonging to this model. On the tool, it lists all the
objects.

Fig. 6: After a user clicks on a STIX thumbnail, the system
shows the list of parameters for this object.

Fig. 7: cyberaCTIve and the ‘Timeline’ feature, showing all
modiﬁcations ordered by modified_time DBMS column
(if any). The system assigns different colours for all models
belonging to the user proﬁle.

of professionals interested in deterring cyber-criminals in both
virtual and physical spaces.

Present work compiled previous research on modelling
to enrich cyber-
CTI using STIX and developed a tool
attack reasoning, guide precise responses, and enhance overall
preparedness. Our tool is based on the standard proposed
by STIX and allows users to reﬁne their understanding on

(b) Users may also add a new STIX object to this model by choosing
one alternative from the list and clicking on ‘Add to my model’.

Fig. 5: Edit STIX model and add objects, where in (a) the
system shows the current objects that exist for this model and
in (b) it shows the possibility of adding new objects.

8

V. CONCLUSIONS

Cyber-security ofﬁcers working on preventing cyber-attacks
in large cyber-physical systems (e.g., a smart building) must
provide means to enact effective threat hunting, digital foren-
sics, and CTI. These measures enormously help managers,
analysts, cyber-security ofﬁcers, and network administrators
engage with anomalous behaviours to thwart cyber-attacks.
The integration with ‘smart’ features in sensing or tracking
embedded into physical counterparts in the infrastructure will
require advanced analysis mechanisms to cope with unusual
surges in demand or abnormal happenstances. In our opinion,
CTI plays a crucial role, acting as a useful mechanism to ap-
pend to other protective mechanisms in place since it provides
the context for determining cyber-attacks. Analysts use threat
data feeds from multiple sources to help them understand
and respond to malicious incursions. CTI is still in its early
stages as more mature tools and techniques are developed
and adopted by organisations. It must be used in conjunction
with other techniques such as attack modelling techniques
(AMT) [40] such as attack trees or fault tree analysis, co-
simulation [41], focus on APT or LCA, threat modelling, or
advanced statistical analysis (ML/AI), to mention a few.

Government is devising incentives for old and new build-
ings to increase its ‘smartness’ through sensing and remote
management features to improve the control over a myriad of
distributed assets. Building managers should consider ways of
how to adapt to so called net Zero Energy Building (nZEB)
perspectives and enact ways to reduce carbon emissions to
meet greener commitments outlined by legislation. They will
push for change in the private and public sector by for instance
promoting incentives for customers to purchase equipment
and operate as active prosumers in the grid. So, broader
prosumer engagement, dynamic energy pricing and market
considerations, utilities, smart settings, and remote-control
capabilities will demand thorough cyber-security concerns
across the infrastructure. In this sense, nZEB will become an
overspread reality given its advantages. Beyond helping the
climate and ease the strain on power grid on critical hours of
the day, “behind-the-meter” generation and intelligent storage
and release mechanisms will promote energy sharing in the
grid network, compensating customers accordingly.

In the ever-changing threat landscape and the ubiquitous use
of cloud-based architectures in the smart city, and almost any
CPS with IoT, a few measures should be taken into account
such as:

• Sharing issues: organisations have reasons for not shar-
ing CTI: privacy, conﬁdentiality, data related issues and
protection. There are clear advantages on sharing, how-
ever, industry and academia must discuss advantages and
propose new ways of promoting it, through incentives
or showing that protective measures do enhance overall
cyber-security.

• Update obsolescence: as the cyber-attack unfolds and
gets reported, new venues are explored by adversaries,
so older reporting may become outdated.

(a) User selects a model for validation.

(b) After selecting the model, the system will check all the
objects for required parameters showing a report.

Fig. 8: The ‘Share CTI’ allows users to inspect models (and
objects) before sharing with other analysts, domain experts,
and researchers. After selecting a model (a),
the system
validates the model’s object by checking the parameters (b).

detected abnormalities that could potentially lead towards
sophisticated attacks. The features offered by the tool works
in both producing STIX models for sharing but also to
consume and modify previous ones. We were motivated to
implement such characteristics because simple observations,
albeit insigniﬁcant, could be a small part of a larger attempt
to commit criminal offences.

After analysts input their IoCs and STIX models into our
platform, the curated data could help cyber-security ofﬁcers
preparing (before) and mitigating (after) these malicious incur-
sions in a timely fashion. Our proposition may be highly valu-
able to identify malicious insiders acting abnormally within the
infrastructure.

9

• Timeliness: offer updated IoC given emergence of new

threats and highly sophisticated cyber-attacks.

• Structured formats: there is a need for standardised ways
of communicating threats, vulnerabilities, and attacks,
also on simpliﬁed reporting when depicting and learning
about malicious incursions.

• Trustfulness: peers exchanging newest attacks in stan-

dardised fashion.

• Model management: cyber-security ofﬁcers already have
a lot of work deterring cyber-attackers, and modelling
should not hinder their activities or impact their pro-
ductivity. Instead, it should help them and guide better
analysis and quick responses.

• Cognitive load: the magnitude and breadth of data avail-
able for analysts could act as the cause for impairing
better judgements, given the number of new variables to
consider. CTI should offer a minimum set of data points
so stakeholders are not overwhelmed by it.

• Scalability: concerns on emergence of new devices in the

infrastructure and reporting.

A. Future work and outlook

Modelling efforts cannot hinder the reasoning or the ability
of addressing cyber-attacks quickly, just to strictly follow the
standard. Analysts should be able to describe odd circum-
stances with as little information as they have at that moment,
and only care about modelling details and its constraints after-
wards. In early indications of potential malicious incursions,
very little is known about the attacks. As they unfold and
systems gather and compile more evidence, analysts may
append and curate preexisting models with this data combined
with exterior data sources for full contexts.

We implemented here a front-end editor for STIX mod-
elling, where users may interact with the parameters required
by the set of SCO, SRO, or SCO. The idea is to enrich
analysis and allow users to perceive the expected requirements
for devising more shareable models to broader audiences.
Timeliness plays a factor in cyber-attacks because one should
be able to share possible exposure and vulnerabilities with
your trusted peers as soon as possible.

We envision adding more features in future versions of the
tool such as integrating cyberaCTIve with ATT&CK frame-
work’s TTPs and Matrices (provide a static instance of some
STIX elements inspired by it, such as existing Threat Actors or
mitigations). We could also accommodate features for analysts
such as time-based analysis and to devise ways of tracking
the ‘life-time’ of families of cyber-attacks (those focusing
on speciﬁc assets) and also improving the ‘Model visualizer’
feature. For instance, we could allow the selection of groups
of assets (e.g., all RER, or all IS) and then creating empty
objects that will be ﬁlled out in another moment. Because we
expect analysts to deploy our tool in their workspaces, we will
need to review our features proposition with input from power-
based domain experts. In this evaluation they may specify
new streams to look at that are considered essential when in-
specting cyber-attacks. Also, we shall conduct usability testing

subjecting users to the tool and inspecting learning curves,
whether expectations were met, and incorporating suggestions
to improve the tool.

As new implementation, we will consider:

i) Increase
basic security by logging actions and movements of users,
versioning models and objects, showing users older versions
visually (e.g., font colour fading); ii) Improve the ‘timeline’
feature and implement the ‘sharing’ CTI feature using actual
TAXII servers; iii) Offer to ‘redact’ models and objects before
sharing, avoiding unintended disclosure of sensitive data; iv)
Implement remaining STIX parameters not tackled by the
current tool version, e.g., cyber-kill-chain, marking
definitions, and dictionary; v) Force users to provide
well-formed input for speciﬁc types in accordance with the
STIX speciﬁcation when creating URLs, e-mail addresses,
informing (existing/valid) cities or countries; vi) Reuse objects
from other previously created models; vii) Allow analysts to
operate in different capacities (consulting, analyst, or admin-
istrator), across organisations, where they could share infras-
tructure details and locations; and viii) Ability of exporting
and importing models to and from the tool.

There are advantages for implementing systems and em-
ploying JSON ﬁles to map all objects, types, and vocabularies
within the same solution. Now, any changes in the STIX
speciﬁcation will translate to changes in the JSON ﬁles and
the system will retain its basic functionality. Our proposed
tool offers interesting features for cyber-security analysis when
modelling any malicious incursions in networks. It makes
easier to understand required/optional parameters to enrich
models and analysis, besides the ability of sharing models. Our
tool has the potential of easing analysis and capture relevant
cyber-security incident data combined with other CTI data
sources when documenting and analysing most likely attacks
in CI.

Looking at applications, smart buildings pose special con-
cerns to stakeholders addressing cyber-security in power,
telecommunications, and building management, to mention a
few. However, older building managers and customers will
observe the gains of changing towards smart propositions. The
retroﬁtting task of converting buildings into smart buildings
counterparts will present new challenges for protecting and
securing customers participating the network.
Acknowledgements. This research was funded by the Indus-
trial Strategy Challenge Fund and EPSRC, EP/V012053/1,
Active Building Centre Research Programme (ABC RP).

REFERENCES

[1] D. Buil-Gil, F. Mir´o-Llinares, A. Moneva, S. Kemp, and N. D´ıaz-
Casta˜no, “Cybercrime and shifts in opportunities during covid-19: a
preliminary analysis in the uk,” European Societies, vol. 23, no. sup1,
pp. S47–S59, 2021.

[2] H. S. Lallie, L. A. Shepherd, J. R. Nurse, A. Erola, G. Epiphaniou,
C. Maple, and X. Bellekens, “Cyber security in the age of covid-19:
A timeline and analysis of cyber-crime and cyber-attacks during the
pandemic,” Computers & Security, vol. 105, p. 102248, 2021.

[3] I. Alotaibi, M. A. Abido, M. Khalid, and A. V. Savkin, “A comprehen-
sive review of recent advances in smart grids: A sustainable future with
renewable energy resources,” Energies, vol. 13, no. 23, p. 6269, 2020.

10

[4] W. Tounsi, “What is cyber threat intelligence and how is it evolving?,”
Cyber-Vigilance and Digital Trust: Cyber Security in the Era of Cloud
Computing and IoT, pp. 1–49, 2019.

[5] S. Barnum, “Standardizing cyber threat intelligence information with the
Structured Threat Information eXpression (STIX),” Mitre Corporation,
vol. 11, pp. 1–22, 2012.

[6] R. L. Ackoff, “From data to wisdom,” Journal of applied systems

analysis, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 3–9, 1989.

[7] W. Tounsi and H. Rais, “A survey on technical threat intelligence in
the age of sophisticated cyber attacks,” Computers & security, vol. 72,
pp. 212–233, 2018.

[8] R. Brown and R. M. Lee, “The evolution of Cyber Threat Intelligence
(CTI): 2019 SANS CTI survey,” SANS Institute. Available online:
https://www. sans. org/white-papers/38790/(accessed on 12 July 2021),
2019.

[9] Z. Pokorny, “The threat intelligence handbook: Moving toward a security
intelligence program,” CyberEdge Group: Annapolis, MD, USA, 2019.
[10] T. Schaberreiter, V. Kupfersberger, K. Rantos, A. Spyros, A. Papaniko-
laou, C. Ilioudis, and G. Quirchmayr, “A quantitative evaluation of trust
in the quality of cyber threat intelligence sources,” in Proceedings of the
14th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security,
pp. 1–10, 2019.

[11] H. Grifﬁoen, T. Booij, and C. Doerr, “Quality evaluation of cyber threat
intelligence feeds,” in International Conference on Applied Cryptogra-
phy and Network Security, pp. 277–296, Springer, 2020.

[12] A. Tundis, S. Ruppert, and M. M¨uhlh¨auser, “On the automated assess-
ment of open-source cyber threat intelligence sources,” in International
Conference on Computational Science, pp. 453–467, Springer, 2020.

[13] A. Ramsdale, S. Shiaeles, and N. Kolokotronis, “A comparative analysis
of cyber-threat intelligence sources, formats and languages,” Electronics,
vol. 9, no. 5, p. 824, 2020.

[14] J. Connolly, M. Davidson, and C. Schmidt, “The Trusted Automated
eXchange of Indicator Information (TAXII),” The MITRE Corporation,
pp. 1–20, 2014.

[15] S. Barnum, R. Martin, B. Worrell, and I. Kirillov, “The cybox language

speciﬁcation,” The MITRE Corporation, 2012.

[16] E. Casey, G. Back, and S. Barnum, “Leveraging cyboxTM to standardize
representation and exchange of digital forensic information,” Digital
Investigation, vol. 12, pp. S102–S110, 2015.

[17] A. K. Sood and R. J. Enbody, “Targeted cyberattacks: a superset of
advanced persistent threats,” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 11, no. 1,
pp. 54–61, 2012.

[18] A. Alshamrani, S. Myneni, A. Chowdhary, and D. Huang, “A survey
on advanced persistent threats: Techniques, solutions, challenges, and
research opportunities,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1851–1877, 2019.

[19] M. Tatam, B. Shanmugam, S. Azam, and K. Kannoorpatti, “A review
of threat modelling approaches for apt-style attacks,” Heliyon, vol. 7,
no. 1, p. e05969, 2021.

[20] T. Takahashi, K. Landﬁeld, T. Millar, and Y. Kadobayashi, “IODEF –
extension to support structured cybersecurity information,” IETF Internet
Draft, 2012.

[21] O. Mandiant, “An open framework for sharing threat

intelligence,”

Alexandria, Virginia (www. openioc. org), 2014.

[22] K. Moriarty, “Real-time inter-network defense (rid),” tech. rep., RFC

6545, April, 2012.

[23] T. D. Wagner, K. Mahbub, E. Palomar, and A. E. Abdallah, “Cyber
threat intelligence sharing: Survey and research directions,” Computers
& Security, vol. 87, p. 101589, 2019.

[24] L. Rudman and B. Irwin, “Dridex: Analysis of the trafﬁc and automatic
generation of iocs,” in 2016 Information Security for South Africa
(ISSA), pp. 77–84, IEEE, 2016.

[25] V. Mavroeidis and S. Bromander, “Cyber threat intelligence model:
an evaluation of taxonomies, sharing standards, and ontologies within
cyber threat intelligence,” in 2017 European Intelligence and Security
Informatics Conference (EISIC), pp. 91–98, IEEE, 2017.

[26] N. Kaloudi and J. Li, “The AI-Based Cyber Threat Landscape: A
Survey,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 1–34,
2020.

[27] T. C. Truong, I. Zelinka, J. Plucar, M. ˇCand´ık, and V. ˇSulc, “Artiﬁcial
intelligence and cybersecurity: Past, presence, and future,” in Artiﬁcial
intelligence and evolutionary computations in engineering systems,
pp. 351–363, Springer, 2020.

[28] Z. Iqbal and Z. Anwar, “Scerm —- a novel framework for automated
management of cyber threat response activities,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 108, pp. 687–708, 2020.

[29] B. E. Strom, A. Applebaum, D. P. Miller, K. C. Nickels, A. G.
Pennington, and C. B. Thomas, “MITRE ATT&CK®: Design and
philosophy,” MITRE Technical Report, 2018.

[30] O. Alexander, M. Belisle, and J. Steele, “MITRE ATT&CK for Industrial
Control Systems: Design and philosophy,” The MITRE Corporation:
Bedford, MA, USA, 2020.

[31] A. Roberts, “Cyber threat intelligence: The no-nonsense guide for cisos

and security managers,” 2021.

[32] E. M. Hutchins, M. J. Cloppert, R. M. Amin, et al., “Intelligence-driven
computer network defense informed by analysis of adversary campaigns
and intrusion kill chains,” Leading Issues in Information Warfare &
Security Research, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 80, 2011.

[33] Lockheed Martin Corporation, “Seven Ways to Apply the Cyber Kill

Chain with a Threat Intelligence Platform,” 2015.

[34] R. Kwon, T. Ashley, J. Castleberry, P. Mckenzie, and S. N. G. Gourisetti,
“Cyber Threat Dictionary Using MITRE ATT&CK Matrix and NIST
Cybersecurity Framework Mapping,” in 2020 Resilience Week (RWS),
pp. 106–112, IEEE, 2020.

[35] P. Mell, K. Scarfone, and S. Romanosky, “Common vulnerability scoring
system,” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 85–89, 2006.
[36] M. Pendleton, R. Garcia-Lebron, J.-H. Cho, and S. Xu, “A survey on
systems security metrics,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 49,
no. 4, pp. 1–35, 2016.

[37] A. Ramos, M. Lazar, R. Holanda Filho, and J. J. Rodrigues, “Model-
based quantitative network security metrics: A survey,” IEEE Commu-
nications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2704–2734, 2017.
[38] S. Abraham and S. Nair, “Cyber security analytics: a stochastic model
for security quantiﬁcation using absorbing markov chains,” Journal of
Communications, vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 899–907, 2014.

[39] B. Jordan, R. Piazza, and T. Darley, “Stix version 2.1,” OASIS Stan-
dard, Available on https://docs.oasis-open.org/cti/stix/v2.1/os/stix-v2.1-
os.html, Accessed: 27/Oct/2021., 2021.

[40] H. S. Lallie, K. Debattista, and J. Bal, “A review of attack graph and
attack tree visual syntax in cyber security,” Computer Science Review,
vol. 35, p. 100219, 2020.

[41] R. M. Czekster, C. Morisset, J. A. Clark, S. Soudjani, C. Patsios, and
P. Davison, “Systematic review of features for co-simulating security
incidents in Cyber-Physical Systems,” Security and Privacy, vol. 4, no. 3,
p. e150, 2021.

APPENDIX

Table I shows a list of vulnerability repositories fed by

security ofﬁcers, organisations, experts, and academia.

TABLE I: Vulnerability repositories, TTP, & scoring systems.

Repository
NVD
CVE
CWE
–

Description
National Vulnerability Database (NIST/US)
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures
Common Weakness Enumeration
Metasploit Framework
ATT&CK MITRE’s ATT&CKTM Framework
attackics
exploit-db
rapid7
CPE
–
ZDI

MITRE’s ATT&CKTM Framework for ICS
Exploit Database
rapid7 Vulnerability and Exploit Database
Common Platform Enumeration
CERT/CC vulnerability notes
TrendMicro’s Zero Day Initiative

Link

https://nvd.nist.gov/
https://cve.mitre.org/
https://cwe.mitre.org/
https://www.metasploit.com
https://attack.mitre.org/
Link15
https://www.exploit-db.com/
https://www.rapid7.com/db/
http://cpe.mitre.org/
https://kb.cert.org/vuls/
Link16

Scoring system

CVSS

Common Vulnerabilities Scoring system

https://www.ﬁrst.org/cvss/

15Link: https://collaborate.mitre.org/attackics/index.php
16Link: https://www.zerodayinitiative.com/advisories/published/

11

