2
2
0
2

r
p
A
5
1

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
0
9
4
7
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Detection limit of next-generation of multi-element
germanium detectors in the context of
Environmental science

F.J. Iguaz, T. Saleem, E. Fonda, G. Landrot, L. Manzanillas and
F. Orsini
Synchrotron SOLEIL, L’Orme des Merisiers, BP48 Sain-Aubin, 91192 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

E-mail: francisco-jose.iguaz-gutierrez@synchrotron-soleil.fr

Abstract. One of the main challenges in Environmental sciences is the identiﬁcation and
chemical evolution of polluting traces (e.g, cadmium or antimony) in soil, which requires long
In this context, the
acquistion times for accurate measurements at synchrotron facilities.
potential of a new generation multi-element germanium detectors to identify traces at 0.1-
1 ppm in a reasonable time has been studied using Allpix Squared framework [1]. This code has
been customized to include the three dimensional electric and weighting ﬁeld maps generated
by COMSOL Multiphysics software, and several features to model the sample environment at
SOLEIL synchrotron and the signal response of a germanium detector equipped with a Digital
Pulse Processor (DPP). The full simulation chain has been validated by experimental data from
SAMBA beamline of SOLEIL synchrotron. This work presents a ﬁrst estimation of the detection
limit to cadmium traces in a soil sample for a future multi-element germanium detector, using
this simulation chain.

1. Introduction
The concentration of polluting trace metals in soil may be increased to toxic levels for
environmental and human health due to industrial waste, sewage and fertilizers. However, their
concentration may be still too low for an accurate chemical identiﬁcation by actual synchrotron
techniques [2]. These techniques are limited by the sensitivity of energy dispersive detectors
to hard X-rays (energies above 20 keV), like current commercial multi-element germanium
detectors [3, 4], where the maximum input count rate, the signal-to-background ratio and the
energy resolution are the key performance features. In this context, a new generation of multi-
element germanium detectors are developed at diﬀerent places to overcome actual limitations [5].
In combination with the higher brillance expected for coming upgrade of synchrotron light
sources, an improvement of the detection limit is expected.

The actual sensibility of commercial multi-element germanium detectors to polluting traces
is illustrated in ﬁgure 1, where XANES and the ﬁrst part of EXAFS spectrum of a EnviroMat
standard soil containing 5.5 ppm of antimony was measured with a 36 element germanium
detector connected to a XIA-DXP-xMAP DPP [6] at the SAMBA beamline [7] of SOLEIL
synchrotron. The signal-to-noise of the 201 spectra average (red line, integration time of 5 hours)
is better than one spectrum (blue line, integration time of 95 sec), indicating that spectra are

 
 
 
 
 
 
dominated by photon counting statistics and that an improvement of the detector throughput of
a factor 10-100 without compromising the energy resolution could improve the detection limit.
In this measurement, the detector was used without any additional ﬁltering or slitting,
perpendicular with respect to beam axis. The sample, in the form of a pellet of compacted
powder (85 mg, 6 mm diameter, 1.25 mm thickness), was placed at an angle of 45 degrees between
the beam and the detector. The detector-to-sample distance was of 100 mm, corresponding to
an input count rate of 42 kcps and a dead time of 20% for all elements. The detector could
have been approached more, but the detector would have suﬀered of an excessive dead-time
and energy resolution degradation. The beam was focused in a small area at the sample spot
(200 µm width in horizontal and vertical axis), with a photon ﬂux of 5.2×1010 ph/sec, measured
by the ionization chamber situated just before the sample. The energy of the beam was varied
between 30250 and 31200 eV (energy steps of 1 eV, exposure time of 0.1 sec).

Figure 1. XANES and the ﬁrst part of EXAFS spectra (1 spectrum in blue, average of 201
spectra in red) of a EnviroMat standard soil.

This work presents a ﬁrst estimation of the detection limit to cadmium, one example of
polluting traces in soil, for future multi-element germanium detectors based on simulation tools.
Simulation tools are presented in section 2, followed by the description of the simulation study
in section 3.1 and the results in section 3.2. The conclusions and an outlook of future simulation
studies in section 4 complete this manuscript.

2. Simulation of the performance of a multi-element germanium detector
A ﬁrst complete and fully operational simulation chain based on Allpix Squared framework [1]
has been built, customized to multi-element germanium detectors, and combined with three-
dimensional simulations of the electric ﬁeld and the weighting potential, based on COMSOL
Multiphysics® [8]. A scheme of the diﬀerent simulation steps and corresponding module in
Allpix Squared framework are shown in ﬁgure 2. More details can be found in [9].
A concise description of the diﬀerent simulation steps is made for completeness:

(i) Detector and sample geometry: The geometry of a commercial germanium detector
and the sample environment of SAMBA beamline is built.
In ﬁgure 2 (bottom-left), a
visualization of this geometry is shown, where the X-ray beam, the sample and the detector
(composed of a beryllium window, a titanium collimator and a germanium sensor) are
highlighted.

Figure 2. Scheme of the full simulation chain of multi-element germanium detectors.

(ii) Energy deposition: The interaction of X-rays with the detector geometry is simulated
by Geant4 library [10] and energy deposits in the sensor are translated into charge carriers.
(iii) COMSOL Multiphysics® simulations: Three-dimensional maps of the electric ﬁeld
and weighting potential
in a germanium sensor model are simulated using COMSOL
Multiphysics®. The sensor model includes the dimensions of all contacts and doping
proﬁles. An example is shown in ﬁgure 2 (bottom-center). These maps are imported to
Allpix squared by two speciﬁc modules.

(iv) Charge carrier drift in sensor: Charge carriers drift along the electric ﬁeld lines from

the germanium sensor frontside to the segmented backside.

(v) Signal

induction in pixels: Charge carriers movement induce signals in detector

elements, using the Shockley-Ramo’s Theorem and the weighting potential.

(vi) Digitization:

Induced signals on pixels are transformed into digital signals, using a

detector noise model.

(vii) DPP spectrum: Digitized signals are collected into a full energy spectrum for each pixel,

as shown in ﬁgure 2 (bottom-right), by modeling in oﬄine analysis a DPP [11].

3. Detection limit to cadmium traces in soil of a XAFS experiment
3.1. Methodology
The detection limit of a future multi-element germanium detector to cadmium traces in soil has
been studied with simulation tools considering a soil sample measured at SAMBA beamline [9].
The germanium detector modeled in this work has an active area of 900 mm2 and is divided in
smaller elements than actual ones (225 elements of 4 mm2 size, instead of 36 elements of 25 mm2
size) to increase the maximum input count rate. The detector is equipped of a DPP capable to
remove charge sharing events, instead of using a collimator. For comparison purposes, detectors
with actual element size or a recent DPP with no charge sharing rejection feature have been
also studied.

Charge sharing events are events where X-ray energy is shared between several elements,
involving an intensity reduction of the main ﬂuoresence line, an increase of the background
level and ﬁnally, a degradation of the energy resolution. The two ﬁrst eﬀects are illustrated in
ﬁgure 3. The main source of charge sharing events are split events, where charge carries created
by X-rays at the frontside spread over multiple elements when drifting to detector backside.
These events are removed in current commercial detectors using a collimator in front of the
germanium sensor, at a cost of a signiﬁcant reduction of the active area. Xspress4 DPP [12]
will include a ﬁrmware option to reject charge sharing events, which is not available in recent
commercial DPPs, like XIA-FalconX [13] or Xspress3M/X [14, 15].

Figure 3. Simulated element energy spectrum for a multi-element germanium detector situated
at 60 mm of a soil sample rich in cadmium (9150 ppm) or of a soil with no cadmium trace. The
detector is equipped with a recent DPP or Xspress4, and the exposure time is of 60 sec. The
beam energy is 28 keV and the beam ﬂux is 3.47 1010 ph/sec. The shaded grey area deﬁnes the
region of interest of the Kα-line of cadmium.

The detection limit to cadmium at 90% C.L. can be expressed as

DL(ppm) =

(cid:114)

NP ixels × ICRP ixel ×

3 × C(ppm)
(cid:16)

1 − DT (%)
100.0

(cid:17)

× P/B × P/T × Texp

(1)

where C is the cadmium concentration in ppm (9150 ppm), NP ixels is the number of sensor
elements (36 or 225), ICRP ixel is the pixel input count rate in counts per second (cps), DT is
the DPP dead time in %, P/B is the Signal-to-Background ratio, P/T is the Signal-to-Total
spectrum ratio and Texp is the exposure time in seconds (60 sec). Signal (cadmium trace of
9150 ppm in soil) and background (no cadmium trace) intensities are calculated in the region
of interest (RoI) of the Kα-line of cadmium (22.6-23.6 keV), while the total spectrum intensity
is the integral of the full energy spectrum. In the case of signal, the background intensity is
subtracted from the calculated integral.

In this ﬁrst study, no three-dimensional electrostatic maps of germanium sensor have been
used in the simulation. Instead, we have supposed a linear approximation for the electric ﬁeld
and a perfect signal induction, which may underestimate the real values for P/B and P/T ratios.
In our simulation, the detector-to-sample distance has been varied between 20 to 300 mm and
the beam ﬂux intensity between 109 and 1013 ph/sec.

3.2. Simulation results
The detector-to-sample distance has been ﬁrstly optimized studying the dependence of P/B and
P/T ratios on the distance, as shown for the ﬁrst case in ﬁgure 4 (left). P/B ratio is lower for
detector positions very close or very far from sample, reaching an optimum at distance between
60 to 100 mm. In fact, as background intensity is mainly deﬁned by elastic beam X-rays, this
background is particularly intense if the detector is very close to the sample. Meanwhile, if the
detector is very far from the sample, the loss of ﬂuorescence signal is more important than the
reduction of the elastic background. The best value for P/B ratio is estimated for a detector with

small pixels and equipped with Xspress4 DPP, because the electronics will eﬀectively remove
charge sharing events making comparable to actual commercial detector.

Figure 4. Dependence of the peak-to-background (P/B) ratio on the detector-to-sample
distance (left) and dependence of the beam ﬂux intensity on the DPP dead time (right), for
a future multi-element germanium detector with an element size of 4 or 25 mm2, and equipped
with a recent DPP or Xspress4 DPP. The estimation for an actual commercial detector (element
size of 25 mm2, equipped with a titanium collimator) is also included.

Then, the detector-to-sample distance has been ﬁxed to 60 mm and the dependence of the
beam ﬂux intensity on the DPP dead-time has been studied, as shown in ﬁgure 4 (right).
SAMBA beamline intensity is marked with a dashed line. For a dead time of 20%, a future
germanium detector could operate at beam ﬂux a factor 2 higher than actual detector for an
element size of 25 mm2, and a factor 15 for a size of 4 mm2.

Figure 5. Dependence of the detection limit to cadmium on the DPP dead time, for a future
multi-element germanium detector with an element size of 4 or 25 mm2, and equipped with
a recent DPP or Xspress4 DPP. The limit for an actual commercial detector (element size of
25 mm2, equipped with a titanium collimator) is also included.

Finally, the dependence of the detection limit on the DPP dead-time is shown in ﬁgure 5 for
the four detector conﬁgurations. A detection limit of 0.5 ppm to cadmium is estimated for an

element size of 4 mm2 and 1.25 ppm for a size of 25 mm2, if Xspress4 DPP is used. For the
small element, this is a factor 4 improvement compared to commercial detector limit (2.0 ppm),
which translates in a reduction of a factor 16 in exposure time.

4. Conclusions and outlook
A future multi-element germanium detector with very small elements and equipped with a
Xspress4 Digital Pulse Processor could increase the sensitivity to the detection of polluting traces
in soil. This estimation is based in a customized version of Allpix Squared framework combined
with COMSOL Multiphysics software, a complete and powerful tool that could drive current
developments of multi-element germanium detectors. Future work to simulate the detailed
three-dimensional electrostatics maps of a germanium sensor in COMSOL Multiphysics and
SolidStateDetectors [16] is under progress. Alternative pixel conﬁgurations, like hexagonal ones,
are also under study to be integrated in a future release of Allpix Squared code [17].

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank SOLEIL computing service (ISI), in particular to Ph. Martinez,
for technical support in the use of SUMO and TGCC (COBALT and TOPAZE) IT clusters.

References
[1] S. Spannagel et al., Allpix2: A Modular Simulation Framework for Silicon Detectors, Nucl. Instrum. Meth.

A 901 (2018) 164–172, [1806.05813].

[2] M. R. Beccia, P. L. Solari, M. Monfort, C. Moulin and C. Den Auwer, Focus on speciation assessment in
marine radiochemistry using x-ray absorption spectroscopy, New J. Chem. 42 (2018) 7582–7591.
[3] P. Sangsingkeow et al., Advances in germanium detector technology, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 505 (2003)

183 – 186.

[4] M. Amman, Optimization of Amorphous Germanium Electrical Contacts and Surface Coatings on High

Purity Germanium Radiation Detectors, 1809.03046.

[5] N. Tartoni, S. Chatterji, R. Crook, T. Krings, L. Bombelli and A. Alborini, Hexagonal pad multichannel ge
x-ray spectroscopy detector demonstrator: Comprehensive characterization, IEEE Transactions on
Nuclear Science 67 (2020) 1952–1961.

[6] XIA, “xmap, 4 channel pxi digital pulse processor with mapping featues.” xia.com/dxp-xmap.html,

Accessed: 2022-04-08.

[7] E. Fonda et al., The samba quick-exafs monochromator: Xas with edge jumping, Journal of Synchrotron

Radiation 19 (2012) 417–424.

[8] COMSOL Multiphysics®, v. 5.6., COMSOL AB, Stockholm, Sweden, .
[9] T. Saleem, F. J. Iguaz and F. Orsini, Allpix squared simulations of multi-element germanium detectors for

synchrotron applications, JINST 17 (2022) P02013, [2106.11708].

[10] GEANT4 collaboration, S. Agostinelli et al., Geant4: A simulation toolkit, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A A506

(2003) 250–303.

[11] M. Bordessoule, E. Fonda, N. Guignot, J. P. Itie, C. Menneglier and F. Orsini, Performance of spectroscopy

detectors and associated electronics measured at soleil synchrotron, AIP Conference Proceedings 2054
(2019) 060070.

[12] G. Dennis et al., First results using the new dls xspress4 digital pulse processor with monolithic segmented

hpge detectors on xas beamlines, AIP Conference Proceedings 2054 (2019) 060065.

[13] XIA, “Falconx8, ultra-high rate digital pulse processor using sitoro patented signal processing technology.”

xia.com/falconx.html, Accessed: 2022-04-08.

[14] QuantumDetectors, “Xspress 3x/m.” quantumdetectors.com/n/products/xspress-3x/, Accessed:

2022-04-08.

[15] R. Farrow, G. Derbyshire, B. Dobson, A. Dent, D. Bogg, J. Headspith et al., Xspress — x-ray signal

processing electronics for solid state detectors, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 97 (1995) 567–571.

[16] I. Abt, F. Fischer, F. Hagemann, L. Hauertmann, O. Schulz, M. Schuster et al., Simulation of

semiconductor detectors in 3d with SolidStateDetectors.jl, Journal of Instrumentation 16 P08007.

[17] S. Spannagel and P. Sch¨utze, Allpix2- silicon detector monte carlo simulations for particle physics and

beyond, in 12th International Conference on Position Sensitive Detectors, 12, 2021. 2112.08642.

