Measuring Cognitive Load of Software Developers Based on Nasal 
Skin Temperature 

Keitaro NAKASAI†, Shin KOMEDA††, Masateru TSUNODA††, and Masayuki KASHIMA††† 

SUMMARY It has recently become increasingly important to measure the 
cognitive  load  of  developers.  This  is  because  continuing  with  a 
development  under  a  high  cognitive  load  may  cause  human  errors. 
Therefore,  to  automatically  measure  the  cognitive  load,  existing  studies 
have  used  biometric  measures  such  as  brain  waves  and  the  heart  rate. 
However,  developers  are  often  required  to  equip  certain  devices  when 
measuring them, and can therefore be physically burdened. In this study, 
we evaluated the feasibility of non-invasive biometric measures based on 
the nasal skin temperature. The nasal skin temperature has been widely used 
in  other  fields  to  measure  mental  status.  In  the  present  experiment,  the 
subjects created small Java programs, and we estimated their cognitive load 
using the proposed biometric measures based on the nasal skin temperature. 
As  a  result,  the  proposed  biometric  measures  were  shown  to  be  more 
effective than non-biometric  measures. Hence, biometric  measures based 
on nasal skin temperature are promising for estimating the cognitive load 
of developers.   

Key  words:  Nasal  temperature,  mental  workload,  NASA-TLX,  affective 
engineering 

1. Introduction 

Using  biometric  measures,  some  studies  have  recently 
attempted  to  measure  the  cognitive  load  of  developers 
during  software  development  [4].  Biometric  measures  are 
derived  by  measuring  the  physiological  states  of  the 
developers, such as their brain waves. Cognitive load refers 
to the extent of mental burden of a person engaged in a task. 
When the cognitive load of a task is high, it suggests that the 
person is coping with mentally difficult tasks. For instance, 
when work requires significant calculations within  a short 
period, the cognitive load becomes high. 

A continual high cognitive load may cause human errors 
[8].  If  we  can  identify  such  a  high  cognitive  load  of 
developers, we  can  decrease the  risk of  errors by warning 
developers of such a load. In addition, we can measure the 
skill  of  a  developer  based  on  the  cognitive  load  [5].  For 
instance,  when  developers  solve  the  same  programming 
problem, the cognitive load of some developers is lower than 
that of the others. In this case, the programming skills of the 
former are regarded as relatively higher. 

It is not easy for other people to recognize the cognitive 

† The author is with NIT, Kagoshima College, Kirishima-shi, 

899-5193 Japan. 

  †† The authors are with Kindai University, Higashiosaka-shi, 

577-8502 Japan. 

  ††† The author is with Kagoshima University, Kagoshima-shi, 

890-8580 Japan. 

load  of  a  developer  based  on  appearance.  If  biometric 
measures  can  be  used  to  measure  the  cognitive  load  of  a 
developer, 
they  can  be  measured  automatically  and 
objectively. As a result, we can utilize the cognitive load to 
achieve the goals described above. Biometric measures such 
as  brain  waves,  heart  rate,  and  fMRI  have  been  used  to 
measure the cognitive load of software developers [4]. 

However, to conduct such measurements, developers are 
often required to equip certain devices, and therefore may 
experience a certain amount of physical burden. For instance, 
to measure brain waves, a conductive gel is placed on the 
electrodes,  and  the  subjects  should  wash  their  hair  after  a 
measurement. 

The goal of our study was to evaluate the feasibility of 
new biometric measures that can estimate a cognitive load 
without  placing  a  physical  burden  on  the  developers.  We 
propose the use of noninvasive biometric measures based on 
nasal  skin  temperature.  The  nasal  skin  temperature  of  an 
individual  can  be  measured  using  thermography.  When 
thermography is used, developers are not required to install 
any device. The nasal skin temperature has been widely used 
in other fields to measure mental status [1][3][6][10][15]. 

2. Related Work 

(EEGs), 

electroencephalograms 

Gonçales et al. [4] surveyed the cognitive load of different 
software  developers.  As  sensors  for  measuring  cognitive 
load, 
eye-trackers, 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), functional 
near-infrared  spectroscopy  (fNIRS),  electromyography 
(EMG), and multimodal sensors have been used. EEGs are 
used  to  measure  brain  waves.  Based  on  blood  flow  in  the 
brain,  fMRI  shows  which  parts  of  the  brain  are  activated. 
Similarly, fNIRS uses near-infrared light to clarify the active 
parts  of  the  brain.  In  addition,  EMG  is  used  to  clarify  the 
activities  of  the  muscles.  Developers  should  equip  certain 
devices to conduct such measurements, which are therefore 
regarded as invasive biometric measures. 

Some eye-tracker devices are noninvasive [11]. Note that 
our purpose is to show the feasibility of a new noninvasive 
approach, but not to replace the nasal skin temperature with 
the eye gaze. Both are non-invasive approaches, and we can 
therefore  combine  them  to  measure  a  cognitive  load. An 
evaluation of the effect of such combination is a topic for 
future research. 

Multimodal  sensors  combine  different  sensors 

to 

 
 
 
  
 
 
measure a cognitive load. For instance, skin temperature and 
heart  rate  variability  are  used  in  combination,  and  some 
devices are required to measure such metrics. For example, 
to measure the skin temperature, Schaule at al. [13] used a 
bracelet-like device,  and similar  studies have not used  the 
nasal skin temperature or noninvasive biometric measures. 

2.  After the task, the cognitive load is measured using a 

self-assessment questionnaire [1].   

3.  A prediction model is then built, treating the cognitive 
load  measured  in  step  2  and  the  biometric  measures 
collected  in  step  1  as  dependent  and  independent 
variables, respectively. 

3. Nasal Skin Temperature 

When  the  sympathetic  nervous  system  is  active  (i.e.,  the 
mental  status  of  a  person  is  active),  blood  flow  and  skin 
temperature  decrease.  There  are  peripheral  blood  vessels 
just  under  the  nose,  and  the  nasal  skin  temperature  is 
significantly affected by blood flow. Hence, using the nasal 
skin temperature, we can indirectly observe the activity of 
the sympathetic nervous system [1][10]. Specifically, when 
the  nasal  skin  temperature  is  low,  the  mental  status  of  a 
person is active. 

The nasal skin temperature has been widely used in other 
fields  to  measure  a  mental  status  [1][3][6][10][15].  The 
advantage  of  nasal  skin  temperature  is  its  non-invasive 
biometric measurement [1][10]. Previous studies have used 
this approach to measure the cognitive load. To continuously 
increase their mental workload, Mizuno et al. [6] proposed 
assigning a 3-min mental arithmetic task to their subjects six 
times. As the results indicate, the nasal skin temperature can 
appropriately measure the cognitive load. Likewise, Study 
[1]  measured  the  cognitive  load  using  the  nasal  skin 
temperature while reading texts of various complexities. 

The  nasal  skin  temperature  has  also  been  used  to 
measure the arousal level. For example, Nozawa et al. [10] 
used  nasal  skin  temperature  to  measure  the  arousal  level. 
Similarly,  Diaz-Piedra  et  al.  [3]  used  the  nasal  skin 
temperature  to  measure  the  arousal  level  during  a  2-h 
simulated  driving  experiment.  Moreover,  nasal  skin 
temperature is used to estimate the stress in children [15]. 

Based  on  past  studies  in  other  fields,  the  nasal  skin 
temperature  is  expected  to  be  useful  in  measuring  the 
cognitive  load  during  a  software  development.  Unlike  the 
mental  arithmetic  applied  in  [6],  programming  consists  of 
the following phases: 

 

 

 

Planning the structure of the source code. 
Inputting the source code based on the plan. 
Removing defects included in the code. 

The extent of the cognitive load in each phase might be 
different; hence, it is unclear how nasal skin temperature is 
load  during 
effective 
programming. 

the  cognitive 

in  measuring 

4. Metrics for Estimation of Cognitive Load 

An  estimation  model  of  cognitive  load  is  typically  built 
based on the following procedure: 

1.  A  subject  engages  in  certain  tasks,  during  which  the 

biometric measurements of the subject are collected. 

load 

[1][17].  NASA-TLX 

The  task  load  index  (NASA-TLX)  is  often  used  to 
measure  cognitive 
is  a 
questionnaire  that  measures  the  mental  demand,  physical 
demand,  temporal  demand,  own  performance,  effort,  and 
frustration.  To  measure  the  cognitive  load  of  software 
developers, 83% of studies have posed programming tasks 
for  developers  [4].  Specifically,  the  use  of  change  tasks, 
comprehension tasks, and a combination of both tasks have 
been posed. 
Because 

is  not 
significantly affected by blood flow [10], and the difference 
between the forehead and nasal skin temperatures signifies 
the status of the sympathetic nervous system, we calculated 
such difference to allow using the nasal skin temperature as 
a biometric measure, as shown in Figure 1. This difference, 
which we refer to in the following as the NST, has frequently 
been applied in previous studies, including [1][3][10]. Using 
the NST, we defined the following biometric measures:   

forehead  skin 

temperature 

the 

  WNST: NST during a task minus NST while at rest 
  WMAX: Maximum value of WNST 
  WAVE: Average value of WNST 
  WSUM: Sum of WNST 

In our experiment, the NST differed among the subjects. 
That is, the NST of some of the subjects was high, whereas 
that of the others was low. To normalize the differences, we 
defined  the  WNST.  As  described  in  Section  3,  the 
programming consists of different phases, and the cognitive 
load may differ among phases. Hence, we assumed that the 
WNST varies during a task, and WMAX is defined to focus 
on  the  maximum  load  on  the  task.  WAVE  is  defined  to 
consider the average cognitive load during a task. WSUM 
considers the total cognitive load during the task. 

Fig. 1 Example metrics defined in this study 

Task time (min.)
Forehead temperature
Nasal temperature
NST during a task
WNST

WMAX
NST during rest = 1.5

6

4

2

8
32.2 32.1 32.3 32.1
34.9 34.7 34.8 34.7
2.6
1.1

2.5
1.0

2.6
1.1

2.7
1.2

WSUM = 4.4

WAVE = 1.1

Fig. 2 Example metrics defined in this study 

 
 
Table 1 Adjusted R2 of each model   

Candidates of 
Independent variables 

Time 
Time, WMAX, 
WAVE, and WSUM 

Dependent variables 
Mental 
demand 
0.20 

Own 
performance 
-0.06 

Effort 

0.30 

0.27 

0.64 

0.56 

Frustration 
level 

0.01 

0.43 

Table 2 Standardized partial regression coefficients of each model 

Similar to previous studies [7], to evaluate the proposed 
metrics, we compared them with a non-biometric measure. 
As a non-biometric measure, we used the task time to solve 
the problems. Similar to our study, previous studies such as 
those  in  [7]  and  [9]  mainly  focused  on  evaluating  the 
feasibility of biometric measures and did not compare them 
with other biometric measures.   

Independent 
variable 

WMAX 
WAVG 
WSUM 
Time 

Own 
performance 
- 

Dependent variables 
Mental 
demand 
0.46 
- 
- 
-0.80 

-1.10 
1.22 
-0.67 

Effort 

- 
0.31 
0.63 
-1.25 

Frustration 
level 

0.68 
-1.32 
- 
- 

Figure  2  shows  an  example  of  these  metrics.  For 
example,  the  forehead  and  nasal  skin  temperatures  were 
recorded  every  2  min,  and  the  metrics  were  calculated  at 
each point in time. In the example, we assumed that the NST 
at rest was 1.5. 

5. Experiment 

In  the  experiment,  the  subjects  engaged  in  the  following 
three programming tasks: 

 

 

 

Preliminary:  (printing  “hello  world”)  to  learn  the 
experiment environment. 
Easy: (printing a multiplication table using a for loop).   
Difficult: (counting the digits of the given numbers). 

We selected the tasks from Aizu Online Judge [2]. The 
order of easy and difficult tasks was randomly changed for 
each subject. The subjects rested for 3 min before each task 
to  drop  the  NST. The  rest  time  was  the  same  as  that  in  a 
previous study [6]. 

The participants edited the programs on a web browser. 
The accuracy of the program was tested using JUnit. When 
they clicked the execute button, the execution result of the 
program and the output of JUnit were shown in the browser. 
We recorded each task time (i.e., from the time required to 
show the specifications of the program to the time needed to 
pass the Junit test). 

After  each  task,  the  subjects  answered  a  questionnaire 
that  simplified  NASA-TLX  [14]  to  measure  the  cognitive 
load  (see  Section  4).  NASA-TLX  measures  not  only  the 
mental  load  but  also  the  physical  load,  as  described  in 
Section 4. Hence, past studies such as that described in [17] 
used some of the metrics. Similarly, we used mental demand, 
own performance, effort, and frustration level. 

Seven  undergraduate  (fourth  year)  and  master  course 
students  majoring  in  computer  science  were  used  as  the 
subjects.  We  used  a  FLIR  T530  for  thermography.  The 
distance  between  the  thermograph  and  the  subjects  was 
approximately  1  m,  and  the  emissivity  was  set  to  0.98. 
Because we assume that the programming phases described 
in Section 3 are not frequently switched to other phases, and 
the  NST  gradually  changes,  we  calculated  the  metrics 
described in Section 4 every 2 min. 

5. Results 

The average task time was 6.9 min for an easy task, and was 
13.1 min for a difficult task. The average WNST was 0.70, 
and the maximum and minimum values were 1.3 and 0.26 
respectively. 

We  created  two  types  of  linear  regression  model  to 
evaluate the explanatory power of the proposed metrics. We 
set  WMAX,  WAVE,  WSUM,  and  the  task  time  as  the 
explanatory  variables  of  the  multivariate  linear  regression 
models. In the existing approach, we set only the task time 
as an explanatory variable. We applied a log transformation 
to the task time. Mental demand, own performance, effort, 
and frustration level measured by the NASA-TLX were set 
as the dependent variables of each model. 

There were 14 data points because each subject engaged 
in  two  tasks.  We  applied  a  stepwise  variable  selection 
method  to  remove  superfluous  variables.  To  consider 
multicollinearity, when the tolerance was smaller than 1.0, 
the variable was not added to the model during selection. 

Table 1 shows the adjusted R2 values for each model. The 
explanatory power of the model increased according to the 
number of independent variables. The adjusted R2 was used 
to evaluate the explanatory power, avoiding the influence of 
the number. When the value was greater than 0.5, the model 
explained the dependent variables well. 

All  adjusted  R2  values  of  the  models  based  on  the 
proposed  metrics  were  higher  than  those  of  the  non-
biometric measure (benchmark). In addition, the R2 values 
were  larger  than  0.5  when  the  independent  variables  were 
own  performance  and  effort.  Therefore,  the  proposed 
metrics are more effective than the benchmark, and can be 
used to estimate the own performance and effort. 

Table  2  shows  the  standardized  partial  regression 
coefficients  of  each  model.  In  the  table,  “-”  in  the  cells 
indicate  that  the  variable  was  not  included  in  the  model. 
When the values of each dependent variable are small, the 
cognitive load is regarded to be high. The partial coefficient 
of time was negative, indicating that when time is long, the 
values  of  the  independent  variables  are  low  (i.e.,  the 
cognitive load is high), which is a reasonable result. 

The  partial  coefficients  of  WMAX  and  WSUM  are 
positive. This means that when the NST is high, the values 
of the independent variables are high and the cognitive load 
is low. This is also reasonable because when the NST is high, 
the  mental  status  of  the  subjects  is  not  extremely  active. 
WSUM  is  considered  the  most  effective  because  the 
adjusted R2 of models that include WSUM is larger than 0.5. 

 
 
 
In  addition,  the  correlation  coefficients  are  not  small. 
However, the signs of the partial coefficients of the WAVG 
are inconsistent among the models. Further experiments are 
needed  to  clarify  the  role  of  WAVG  in  estimating  the 
cognitive load. 

6. Threats to Validity 

The  participants  in  the  experiment  were  not  professional 
software  developers.  Previous  studies  have  shown  that 
students  instead  of  professionals  can  be  used  in  such 
experiments [12]. Therefore, we believe that the results of 
our  study  would  not  have  been  extremely  different  had 
in  our  experiment.  The 
professionals  participated 
recruitment  of  professional  developers  will  be  an  area  of 
future study, however. 

The number of subjects was also small. However, it is 
not easy to increase the number of subjects in this type of 
study. For example, 10 subjects were included in the studies 
described in [6], [7], and [9]. However, we acknowledge that 
the number of subjects should be increased to enhance the 
reliability of the results. 

In  addition,  in  our  experiment,  we  used  only  a  small 
number  of  specifications  owing  to  time  limitations  [16]. 
However,  it  is  difficult  to  use  realistic  programs  in  such 
experiments. For instance, one study [9] used codes whose 
lines  ranged  from  17  to  32.  However,  the  size  must  be 
considered when interpreting the results. 

7. Conclusion 

We  evaluated  the  feasibility  of  non-invasive  biometric 
measures, WMAX, WAVG, and WSUM, which are based on 
the  nasal  skin  temperature.  Such  temperature  has  been 
widely used in other fields for mental status measurements. 
In the feasibility evaluation, we conducted an experiment in 
which  the  subjects  engaged  in  three  programming  tasks. 
After  the  task,  the  cognitive  load  was  measured  using  the 
NASA-TLX questionnaire. 

We estimated the cognitive load based on the proposed 
metrics using a multivariate linear regression. In addition, as 
a benchmark, we estimated the performance based on a non-
biometric  measure  (i.e.,  task  time).  As  a  result,  the 
explanatory power of the proposed metrics was larger than 
that  of  the  non-biometric  measure,  and  own  performance 
and  effort  as  measured  by  NASA-TLX  were  sufficiently 
explained through the proposed model. 

One of our future studies will be to increase the number 
of  subjects  to  enhance  the  reliability  of  the  results.  In 
addition, we will evaluate the effect of the combination of 
our metrics with other noninvasive biometric measures (e.g., 
metrics based on eye gaze) for estimating the cognitive load 
of the developers. 

Acknowledgments 

This research was partially  supported  by  JSPS (Grants-in-
Aid for Scientific Research (C) (No. 21K11840)). 

References 

[1]   Y. Abdelrahman, E. Velloso, T. Dingler, A. Schmidt, and F. Vetere, 
“Cognitive  Heat:  Exploring  the  Usage  of  Thermal  Imaging  to 
Unobtrusively Estimate Cognitive Load,” In Proc. of Interactive, 
Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, vol.1, no.3, article 
33, 2017. 

[2]   University of Aizu Competitive Programming Club, Aizu Online 

Judge, https://judge.u-aizu.ac.jp/onlinejudge/ 

[3]   C. Diaz-Piedra, E. Gomez-Milan, L. Stasi, “Nasal skin temperature 
reveals  changes  in  arousal  levels  due  to  time  on  task:  An 
experimental 
study,”  Applied 
Ergonomics, vol.81, article 102870, 2019. 

imaging 

infrared 

thermal 

[4]   L. Gonçales, K. Farias, B. da Silva, “Measuring the cognitive load 
of software developers: An extended Systematic Mapping Study,” 
Information and Software Technology, vol.136, 2021. 
S.  Lee,  D.  Hooshyar,  H.  Ji,  K.  Nam,  and  H.  Lim,  “Mining 
biometric data to predict programmer expertise and task difficulty,” 
Cluster Computing, vol.21, pp.1097-1107, 2018. 

[5]  

[6]   T.  Mizuno,  S.  Nomura,  A.  Nozawa,  H.  Asano,  and  H.  Ide, 
“Evaluation  of  the  Effect  of  Intermittent  Mental  Work-Load  by 
Nasal Skin Temperature,” IEICE Transactions on Information and 
Systems, vol.J93-D, no.4, pp.535-543, 2010. 
S. Müller and T. Fritz, “Using (bio)metrics to predict code quality 
online,” 
International  Conference  on  Software 
Engineering (ICSE), pp.452-463, 2016. 
F.  Nachreiner,  “International  Standards  on  Mental  Work-Load,” 
Industrial Health, vol.37, no.2, pp.125-133, 1999. 

In  Proc. 

[8]  

[7]  

[9]   T. Nakagawa, Y. Kamei, H. Uwano, A. Monden, K. Matsumoto, 
and  D.  German,  “Quantifying  programmers’  mental  workload 
during  program  comprehension  based  on  cerebral  blood  flow 
measurement:  a  controlled  experiment,”  In  Companion  Proc.  of 
International  Conference  on  Software  Engineering  (ICSE), 
pp.448-451, 2014. 

[10]  A. Nozawa, M. Tacano, “Correlation analysis on alpha attenuation 
and  nasal  skin  temperature,”  Journal  of  Statistical  Mechanics: 
Theory and Experiment, vol. 009, no.1, p.01007, 2009. 

[11]  U. Obaidellah, M. Haek, and P. Cheng, “A Survey on the Usage of 
Eye-Tracking  in  Computer  Programming,”  ACM  Computing 
Surveys, vol.51, no.1, article 5, 2018. 
I. Salman, A. Misirli, and N. Juristo, “Are students representatives 
of professionals in software engineering experiments?” In Proc. of 
International  Conference  on  Software  Engineering  (ICSE), 
pp.666-676, 2015. 

[12] 

[13]  F. Schaule, J. Johanssen, B. Bruegge, and V. Loftness, “Employing 
Consumer Wearables to Detect Office Workers’ Cognitive Load for 
Interruption  Management,”  In  Proc.  of  Interactive,  Mobile, 
Wearable  and  Ubiquitous  Technologies,  vol.2,  no.1,  article  32, 
2018. 

[14]  K. Shinohara, H. Naito, Y. Matsui, and M. Hikono, “The effects of 
“finger pointing and calling” on cognitive control processes in the 
task-switching  paradigm,”  International  Journal  of  Industrial 
Ergonomics, vol.43, no.2, pp.129-136, 2013. 

[15]  M.  Suzuki,  and  T.  Ohtsuki,  “Estimation  of  stress  condition  of 
children  by  nasal  skin  temperature,”  Intelligent  Computing, 
vol.857, pp.1351-1358, 2019. 

[16]  P. Uesbeck, A. Stefik, S. Hanenberg, J. Pedersen, and P. Daleiden, 
“An  empirical  study  on  the  impact  of  C++  lambdas  and 
programmer experience,” In Proc. of International Conference on 
Software Engineering (ICSE), pp.760-771. 

[17]  F.  Zhang,  S.  Haddad,  B.  Nakisa,  M.  Rastgoo,  C.  Candido,  D. 
Tjondronegoro,  and  R.  Dear,  “The  effects  of  higher  temperature 
setpoints  during  summer  on  office  workers'  cognitive  load  and 
thermal comfort,” Building and Environment, vol.123, pp.176-188, 
2017. 

