2
2
0
2

r
p
A
5

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
3
6
9
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

FACTORS HINDERING THE ADOPTION OF DEVOPS IN THE
SAUDI SOFTWARE INDUSTRY

Mamdouh Alenezi
College of Computer and Information Sciences
Prince Sultan University
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
malenezi@psu.edu.sa

ABSTRACT

DevOps has gained high importance in the global software industry due to the ease of software
development, testing and deployment it provides. However, the Saudi software industry has not
been able to adopt DevOps at a great pace due to various factors. This study, thus, aimed to
examine different factors that hindered the adoption of DevOps in the Saudi software industry. Also,
recommendations are provided at the end for Saudi Arabia to enhance the adoption of DevOps in
its software industry. To accomplish the aims, this study used a literature review and interviews to
gather data and examine it to produce the ﬁndings. The ﬁndings of the study highlight lack of support
from organizational management and lack of laws as the major factors for the adoption of DevOps in
the Saudi software industry.

Keywords Software Engineering · DevOps · Adoption

1

Introduction

The primary aim of the study is to evaluate the factors that hinder the adoption of DevOps in the Saudi software industry
[1]. The gap has been noticed by the software engineers that there is a lack of collaboration between operations and
development teams in Saudi Arabia’s software industry. The idea of collaboration has been considered an important
aspect, and this creates cooperation between the two teams. The new process models called DevOps have been
considered to discuss collaboration [1]. Presently, IT organizations are not adopting DevOps as the added value or
competitive gain, and thus, the companies are surviving a lot if they do not adopt it. The idea of the new process model
aims to attain a fast and high-quality release of the software. DevOps is among the new software processes that help in
the extension of the agility practices within the collaborative culture to empower the process of software delivery and
development [2].

The background reveals that the approach of DevOps is much concerned with improving the collaboration between the
operation teams and development, which illustrates a new shift in the understanding of the way to build up the software
system [3]. It has also been denoted that the operational and development team have different goals in any project
and the goal of the developer is to release the new aspect of the software. Thus, the goal of the operator is to keep the
software stable and available. It is important to maintain the goals, and the coordination between the operational and
development teams is considered vital in the project. The idea of DevOps helps to change the workﬂow of the traditional
software development to streamline and accelerate the software delivery, which means to change the organizational
culture in the delivery of software, not only the ﬂow of process [4].

The idea to adopt DevOps might spur the company to introduce new process changes, technological changes and
personnel changes. The idea of software delivery has been treated as a continuous evolving procedure to obtain the
expectations of users. DevOps makes it possible by bringing the operational and development teams together to facilitate
the continuous integration, delivery and automation in the process that would result in reducing the time to market and
would also result in enhancing the experience of customers and making the work quality-oriented [5]. The research
also depicts that there are more than 50% of the companies across the industries, including manufacturing, banks and

 
 
 
 
 
 
DevOps Adoption

healthcare, are already involved in DevOps and have made it their digital strategy. The software DevOps has been
prominent in academic and practical ﬁelds, but still, there is a lack of literature and academic publications regarding the
empirical investigation of DevOps [6].

The main motivation to evaluate the factors hindering the adoption of DevOps is to explore why organizations are still
not able to adopt DevOps. The implementation of DevOps could increase the competitive advantage of the companies
but go through the factors including lack of strategic direction, lack of knowledge, resistance to change, and silo
mentality could help to understand why there is a lack of adoption of DevOps even in the large organizations. For
this, the study focuses on this research question: "What are the factors hindering the adoption of DevOps in the Saudi
Software Industry?"

In general, the following is needed to address most of the challenges of adopting DevOps. Software engineers need to
know how to design and restructure their systems to integrate continuous delivery. Managers should focus on knowing
DevOps and how it can be introduced and assessed as added value to the organization. Both managers and engineers
should discuss and collaborate in choosing right level of automation toolset [7]. There are few Saudi IT companies that
have adopted DevOps, but still, there are many who are facing hindrances to adopting it [8]. Thus, the purpose of this
study is to study the factors that are creating hindrances for Saudi IT companies in the adoption of DevOps.

1.1 Google Trend (Saudi Arabia (DevOps))

The google trend depicts the growth of DevOps in Saudi Software Industry from 2021 to 2022. The graph shows
tremendous growth from 2021 to 2022, but there are ﬂuctuations that have been making the graph unstable due to the
hindrances that are making the companies difﬁcult to adopt DevOps, especially in Eastern and Makkah Province.

Figure 1: Google Trends [9]

1.2 LinkedIn Insights (Saudi Arabia (DevOps)

The LinkedIn insight shows that the companies in Saudi Arabia have been exploring DevOps engineers to implement it
efﬁciently in their organization.

2 Literature Review

2.1 DevOps History

Prior to the development of DevOps (Development and Operations) by Patrick Debois and Andrew Clay in 2008, the
Agile methodology and waterfall model were used for the development of software [11]. The former deals with a
linear approach of process execution with no option for testing errors in between the levels of processes, while the

2

DevOps Adoption

Figure 2: LinkedIn Insights [10]

latter basis itself on rapid releases in new technologies, the collaboration of emerging processes and the introduction of
improved customer feedback with linear process execution [12]. It releases the ﬁnal product after the development
of its constituent processes through the collaboration of stakeholders with room for continuous development in case
of negative customer feedback. Agile did not focus on continuous development and integration of software with no
room for monitoring of products (software) and customer feedback, and neither did it intend to work for the cultural
aspect of organizations. With the introduction of DevOps and its development tools, agile techniques get integration
with the elimination of their drawbacks and introduce a diversiﬁed culture in operations and development of software
by integrating the efforts of all the team members ranging from developers in the deployment of the software, engineers
in the testing of the software and administrators in documenting the products [5].

2.2 DevOps Building Blocks

DevOps integrate the cultural philosophies of an organization by merging all the departments in a single stream with the
introduction of advanced practices based on some building blocks. It integrates the codes of different developers and
stores them in a single repository for fellow developers to change and review in case of error [13]. DevOps focuses
on the correct metric and sets of measurements for the processes in the development and operations in the creation
of software with continuous deliveries of tests and workings alongside customer feedback. Its iterative approach,
tested from regular feedback in between the execution of processes, allow the formation of value-added products
while eliminating practices that compromise quality and those rejected by the customers [1]. This eliminates the gap
between the developers and operation engineers through robust delivery and integration of service and the discard of
time-consuming development processes. There are some processes in the system employed for the development of
the software that needs regular check and balance, so in order to investigate the performance hindrance components,
DevOps deploy a monitoring system in parallel with the development of the software to ensure optimized system
performance [14]. It also allows robust cycle-wise deployment and multiple scaling of the resources of the product that
reduces time and cost by allowing regular change and updates in the system.

2.3 DevOps Principles and Practices

DevOps uses short feedback customer-related action loops that allow a continuous meeting of the standards proclaimed
by the customers [15]. DevOps allows better communication and understanding between the employees in order to
increase the productivity of the system as a whole. The workers are cross-skilled that can both develop and execute the
tested codes. The workers understand the expertise, needs and functions of each and every other employee [6]. It works
in a culturally uniﬁed system where each and every member of all the departments know the actual processes going on
during the development and operations of the products with a vertically integrated environment of full accountability for
the performance and productivity of the system [16, 17]. The developers, coders, engineers and administrators specialize
in their respective skill sets and attributes and contribute towards a balanced environment with expertise in all domains.
DevOps always allow room for continuous development in technologies, customer demands and organizational culture
that work for cost optimization, time reduction and improved service of products. It also advocates the automation of
industrial processes and information technologies [18].

Nowadays, users and customers assume that modern software applications should accommodate their frequently
changing requirements and needs [19]. To cope with these frequent changes, it is crucial for software companies to
make frequents releases and deployments. TO achieve that, your environment has to be disciplined and transparent;
otherwise, it may lead to major issues and failures including customer dissatisfaction. DevOps tries to close this gap and
its guiding principles can be summed up as follows: culture, measurement, collaboration, and automation [7]. Gupta et
al. [19] pinpointed four main factors that affect DevOps implementation namely, source control, automation, cohesive
teams and continuous delivery.

3

DevOps Adoption

With regards to DevOps cultural movement, there are usually four deﬁning characteristics: open communication,
incentive and responsibility alignment, respect, and trust. However, these cultural aspects cannot be the deﬁning
characteristics of DevOps but rather enablers to support software engineering process capabilities [20].

2.4 DevOps Practices Usage

DevOps works for the development of high-end objectives, unlike traditional methods that cater to small-scale projects.
DevOps involves continuous development in the automation and operations of the formation of software with the use
of automation tools that allow bug detection and elimination from the codes [21]. It works in a loop system where
developers build code that is compiled by the team for testing by the operations team, which checks for the credibility
of the code. It continuously plans and tests codes before dispatching them to production. The components of codes
ready for production are rapidly identiﬁed and then sent for tracking of the usable parts of the codes under continuous
integration with constant feedback between development and testing [22]. These tested codes are continuously being
delivered to production. In case a new part of code needs to be incorporated in between the codes, DevOps uses a
continuous deployment tool across different departments before providing codes for continuous monitoring that checks
the code and system sending it. Further, the continuous monitoring system detects the problems in the processes while
the codes are being dispatched for production. Thus, inaccuracies are removed, and efﬁciency and productivity are
enhanced. The software is then released with an infrastructure code that allows conﬁgurations and changes during
operations. These codes allow the automatic conﬁguration of the software with respect to the environment in which the
software is to be operated [22].

DevOps is primarily used to enhance integration processes and allow fast solutions to problems resulting during
production. With the advanced practices and unique principles of DevOps in the development and operation of software,
widespread areas imply its applications [23]. DevOps shows signiﬁcant results in ﬁnancial trading companies where
it automates the testing, building and development of the production processes with 45 second deployment time. It
signiﬁcantly reduces the time consumption of the processes with good customer feedback. Car production uses precise
metrics and measurements of the scale of products. DevOps allows remedies for error correction and provides increased
precision in error selection through its testing, monitoring and integration practices [1]. Similarly, it shows a great
importance in bug reduction while dealing with codes due to its robust code deployment in between operations. In
networking industries, DevOps allows rapid installations of security patches for the protection of ﬁrewalls by the rapid
introduction of solutions for bugs and viruses [24].

3 Research Methodology

This paper uses two main techniques to examine the factors hindering the adoption of DevOps in the Saudi software
industry. A literature review is conducted in this study to examine the technological, organizational, and environmental
aspects that hinder the adoption of DevOps in the Saudi software industry. Semi-structured interviews were chosen
as the main data collection method to get more insights about the current status of the Saudi software industry. The
ﬁndings are presented in the following section.

Interviews have been selected to gather rich information about different experiences and perceptions of a small number
of respondents [25, 26]. In qualitative research, interviews are considered the most effective data collection method
[26]. Different questions were devised to collect the respondents’ opinions about DevOps adoptions. The questions are
Open-ended questions to give the freedom to the respondents to express themselves.

DevOps practitioners from the operational and development teams of various Saudi software companies that implement
the DevOps practices as a prerequisite are chosen as the participants of this research. These practitioners may function
as different roles during different phases of development as a part of their work.

The following guidelines have been followed while conducting the interviews [27]:

• Clear interview purpose and how the data will be used.
• Introductory questions about background and role.
• Avoid personal/sensitive matters.
• Summarize the conclusions at the end of the interview.
• Record the interviews to transcribe them into text.
• Pre-schedule these interviews.

The following table 1 shows the interview questions used in this study. We tried to use a small set of questions in very
clear English language to clarify and ease the process of collecting the data.

4

DevOps Adoption

Table 1: Questions asked during the interviews

Interview Question

#
1 Could you please state your background - your name, role, and work experience?
2 What does DevOps mean to you and your organization?
3 What are the challenges of adopting DevOps practices?
4 How do you go about solving those challenges?
5 Which of those challenges are you able to successfully solve?
6 What kind of support is needed to solve these challenges?
7 Any other comments you would like to add?

4 Results and Discussion

This section discusses the impact of social, organizational, technological and environmental factors on the implemen-
tation of DevOps in an organization. Also, the ﬁndings are discussed based on their impact on the Saudi software
industry.

4.1

Interviews Details

This section discusses the results of the interviews. A total of 12 participants working in different companies were
selected.Table 2 gives a description of these participants.

Table 2: Description of semi-structured interviewees

Role
#
DevOps Engineer
1
DevOps Architect
2
DevOps Engineer
3
Platform Engineer
4
DevOps Engineer
5
CI/CD Engineer
6
Software Engineer
7
Platform Engineer
8
9
Software Engineer
10 DevOps Engineer
11 DevOps Architect
12 DevOps Engineer

Experience Company Size
200 employees
1-3 years
300 employees
3-5 years
160 employees
3-5 years
500 employees
1-3 years
400 employees
3-5 years
120 employees
3-5 years
400 employees
1-3 years
280 employees
3-5 years
320 employees
3-5 years
640 employees
1-3 years
480 employees
3-5 years
240 employees
1-3 years

4.2 Technological aspect

The technological strength of an organization deﬁnes the potential for introducing new technologies in an attempt to
integrate them with the already established technologies of an organization. Large organizations, in contrast to smaller
organizations, possess readily available technologies that account for the adaptation of DevOps in the software industry.
The implementation of DevOps can signiﬁcantly reduce costs for businesses in Saudi Arabia and has a signiﬁcant
impact on implementing DevOps in the software industry [21]. Technological use of tools and processes accounts for a
positive impact on DevOps adaptation. With the implementation of new technologies and the perceived beneﬁts it reaps
for the organization in terms of development and operations, businesses in Saudi Arabia signiﬁcantly invest in adopting
DevOps technologies due to highly anticipated positive outcomes. The integration of new operational services and
technologies with the previous ones positively impacts the implementation of DevOps in Saudi Arabia [22].

Security complications and concerns regarding its credibility promote threats to Saudi Arabia’s software companies.
Therefore, a strong and ﬂawless security protocol with ample assurance from the security departments provides great
motivation for ofﬁcials from software companies in Saudi Arabia to invest in the introduction of DevOps. New
technologies require severe testing, experimentation, and trials of the new processes and operations before putting them
into real-life action. However, this factor has negligible importance for the adaptation of DevOps operations in Saudi
Arabia’s software companies [28].

5

DevOps Adoption

4.3 Organizational aspect

Several organizational factors, like interest and support from top management levels of the organization, the scale and
size of the company, knowledge of the processes and technologies implemented, and the eagerness of the management
in the implementation of new processes, contribute towards the adaptation of DevOps in the software industry of Saudi
Arabia [23]. Top ofﬁcials and management in Saudi Arabia do not believe in the credibility and beneﬁts of adopting
DevOps technologies. The implementation of new technologies and advanced processes requires a large domain of
operations and a considerably large size of the organization where the practices can be amply tested, experimented with
and developed prior to their execution [12]. Saudi Arabia intends to adopt DevOps in large software organizations, and
it already shows a greater induction of DevOps in big Saudi software industries than in smaller industries. It should
not be neglected that the adaptation of new technologies is facile in smaller organizations, but when assessing the
complexity of DevOps technologies, large organizations are preferred [24].

4.4 Environmental aspect

Saudi Arabia experiences tough competition from software organizations, elevated pressures through government
policies and laws, and a lack of trusted vendors of software products [29]. The technological advancements on national
levels in Saudi Arabia are underdeveloped, with no local data centers and software houses. The competition between
the software companies signiﬁcantly deﬁnes the promotion and adaption of DevOps in Saudi Arabia, as Saudi Arabia
already has few advancements in software industries, and the already established software companies provide tough
competition in the development of operations to a considerable extent. In the previous research, the role of governmental
legislation proved to be a hindrance in the development of the principles of DevOps in Saudi Arabia’s industries [30].
In order to run software companies effectively with greater productivity, companies need to develop good relations
with vendors. Saudi Arabia has a lack of vendor trust owing to a lack of data centers and developed technologies. A
good vendor reputation accounts for the adaptation of DevOps principles in software companies. Saudi Arabia lacks a
developed infrastructure of technologies with lower connection speeds owing to strict governmental policies and data
transfer complications. This discourages software company owners from adapting to DevOps in their organizations as
DevOps requires relatively high connection speeds with advanced technologies in the operations and development of
software. However, research does not promote this fact as a hindrance to the development of DevOps in Saudi Arabia’s
software industry [31]. The effective development of DevOps in the software industry requires highly established
data centers for the ﬂow of data and information between different departments of the software industry and also with
foreign data centers and companies. Saudi Arabia imposes strict policies regarding the transfer of data in and out of
companies from their country. This considerably hinders the introduction of new technologies and DevOps principles.
It is seen that local data centers provide a boost for new technologies and methodologies like DevOps [3].

DevOps is based on a strong, interlinked cultural environment in the software industry. It focuses on establishing a rich
diversity of employees. Saudi Arabia imposes and exercises strict social values and culture. Assessing this factor, Saudi
Arabia provides a hindrance to the adaptation of DevOps in the operations and processes of software companies. The
growth of these companies is affected as a less diverse work environment culture contributes to a lack of communication
between different departments within a company [32].

5 Recommendations

Some of the recommendations for promoting the adaptation of DevOps in the Saudi software industry are as follows:

In a software company, there is signiﬁcant automation in the processes of the DevOps method, ranging from development
to testing and successful implementation of codes in the software industry [30]. Still, there is room for introducing more
automation tools for testing new frameworks for the assessment of the correct framework for every speciﬁc industry in
terms of their types and domains of operations [31]. Countries like Saudi Arabia sincerely need to introduce new laws
and regulations regarding the introduction of new technologies like DevOps. They need to allow for the diversiﬁcation
of cultures in their software companies along with revised legislation to develop local software houses and data centers
for an efﬁcient ﬂow of data. The development of DevOps needs proper documentation of its processes and technologies
for industrialists, company owners, and employees in order to promote their interest in the development of emerging
technologies and to improve communication levels among cross-department employees [3].

In addition to this, the problems faced by Saudi Arabia regarding the implementation of DevOps also require a
collaborative environment with enthusiasm from the upper management. There is less research that talks about the role
of leadership types [18]. Therefore, this domain needs research to develop leadership types in accordance with the scope,
size, and type of industries. Also, most of the researchers provide analysis of a speciﬁc target department of an industry.
The domain of analysis needs to be enlarged, incorporating different departments and levels of hierarchy. Researchers

6

DevOps Adoption

also need to provide multiple solutions for each problem so that industrial practitioners adopt different strategies and
methods for optimizing their business processes. Training sessions for developers, engineers, staff, and managers
provide an effective understanding of the proper implementation of DevOps in software industry processes [22]. There
is no proper management of data in many industries that require proper protection and security of information [33].

6 Conclusion

Continuous and productive development in the software industry needs innovation and the introduction of new, improved
technologies. DevOps is the latest emerging technological method that reaps great results for the optimization of
industrial processes. This paper highlights all the challenges modern industries face while coping with increased
modernization in software industries. This research paper provides a comprehensive analysis of the factors that promote
and degrade the adaptation of emerging technologies and methods of industrial optimization and automation like DevOps
and highlights the key factors that speciﬁcally hinder the adaptation of DevOps in the software industries of Saudi
Arabia. This paper incorporates literature review and interviews. It explains the technological, social, organizational,
and environmental factors that affect the implementation and adaptation of DevOps principles in Saudi Arabia. The
paper covers extensive analysis of DevOps operations, including their processes, tools, and associated technologies.
It especially highlights the key areas and domains for the Saudi Arabian software industry where improvement is
anticipated in the future regarding the introduction of new industrial technologies and processes. It also highlights and
recommends the key areas that require further research to come up with new processes and experiments.

References

[1] Mohammad Zarour, Norah Alhammad, Mamdouh Alenezi, and Khalid Alsarayrah. Devops process model
adoption in saudi arabia: An empirical study. Jordanian Journal of Computers and Information Technology
(JJCIT), 6(03), 2020.

[2] Krikor Maroukian, Stephen R Gulliver, et al. Leading devops practice and principle adoption. In CS & IT

Conference Proceedings, volume 10. CS & IT Conference Proceedings, 2020.

[3] Krikor Maroukian and Stephen Gulliver. Exploring the link between leadership and devops practice and principle

adoption. Advanced Computing: An International Journal, 11(4), 2020.

[4] Saima Raﬁ, Wu Yu, and Muhammad Azeem Akbar. Towards a hypothetical framework to secure devops adoption:
Grounded theory approach. In Proceedings of the Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering, pages
457–462. 2020.

[5] Morgan Rowse and Jason Cohen. A survey of devops in the south african software context. In Proceedings of the

54th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, page 6785, 2021.

[6] Muhammad Azeem Akbar, Sajjad Mahmood, Muhammad Shaﬁq, Ahmed Alsanad, Abeer Abdul-Aziz Alsanad,
and Abdu Gumaei. Identiﬁcation and prioritization of devops success factors using fuzzy-ahp approach. Soft
computing, pages 1–25, 2020.

[7] Mike Krey, Ahmad Kabbout, Lavdrim Osmani, and Armend Saliji. Devops adoption: challenges & barriers. In
55th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), virtual, 3-7 January 2022, pages 7297–7309.
University of Hawaii at Manoa, 2022.

[8] Sarah Al-Zahrani and Bahjat Fakieh. How devops practices support digital transformation. Int. J. Adv. Trends

Comput. Sci. Eng, 9(3):2780–2788, 2020.

[9] Google trends. DevOps. Accessed April 01, 2022 [Online].
[10] Linkedin insights. LinkedIn. Accessed April 01, 2022 [Online].

[11] Pulasthi Perera, Madhushi Bandara, and Indika Perera. Evaluating the impact of devops practice in sri lankan
software development organizations. In 2016 Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in ICT for Emerging
Regions (ICTer), pages 281–287. IEEE, 2016.

[12] Mohammad Zarour, Norah Alhammad, Mamdouh Alenezi, and Khalid Alsarayrah. A research on devops maturity

models. Int. J. Recent Technol. Eng, 8(3):4854–4862, 2019.

[13] Paul Laihonen. Adoption of devops practices in the ﬁnnish software industry: an empirical study. Master’s thesis,

School of Electrical Engineering, Aalto University, 2018.

[14] Floris Erich, Chintan Amrit, and Maya Daneva. Report: Devops literature review. University of Twente, Tech. Rep,

2014.

7

DevOps Adoption

[15] G Bou Ghantous and Asif Gill. Devops: Concepts, practices, tools, beneﬁts and challenges. PACIS2017, 2017.
[16] Krikor Maroukian. Towards practice and principle adoption through continuous devops leadership. J. Softw.,

16(1):1–13, 2021.

[17] Christof Ebert, Gorka Gallardo, Josune Hernantes, and Nicolas Serrano. Devops. Ieee Software, 33(3):94–100,

2016.

[18] Floris MA Erich, Chintan Amrit, and Maya Daneva. A qualitative study of devops usage in practice. Journal of

Software: Evolution and Process, 29(6):e1885, 2017.

[19] Viral Gupta, Parmod Kumar Kapur, and Deepak Kumar. Modeling and measuring attributes inﬂuencing devops
Information and software technology,

implementation in an enterprise using structural equation modeling.
92:75–91, 2017.

[20] Mali Senapathi, Jim Buchan, and Hady Osman. Devops capabilities, practices, and challenges: Insights from
a case study. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software
Engineering 2018, pages 57–67, 2018.

[21] Fahad Abdullah Alghamdi. An Enhanced Conceptual Model of Factors Affecting the Adoption of Cloud Computing

in SMEs: A Case Study of Saudi Arabia. PhD thesis, University of Canberra, 2019.

[22] Mirna Muñoz and Mario Negrete Rodríguez. A guidance to implement or reinforce a devops approach in

organizations: A case study. Journal of Software: Evolution and Process, page e2342, 2021.

[23] Themba Masombuka and Ernest Mnkandla. A devops collaboration culture acceptance model. In Proceedings of
the Annual Conference of the South African Institute of Computer Scientists and Information Technologists, pages
279–285, 2018.

[24] Ahmed Osama Mansour and M Rizwan Jameel Qureshi. Proposal to cope change resistance using devops. 2020.
[25] Carolyn Boyce and Palena Neale. Conducting in-depth interviews: A guide for designing and conducting in-depth

interviews for evaluation input. 2006.

[26] Virginia Tech. Research methods guide: Interview research, 2018.
[27] Per Runeson and Martin Höst. Guidelines for conducting and reporting case study research in software engineering.

Empirical software engineering, 14(2):131–164, 2009.

[28] Saima Raﬁ, Wu Yu, Muhammad Azeem Akbar, Sajjad Mahmood, Ahmed Alsanad, and Abdu Gumaei. Readiness
model for devops implementation in software organizations. Journal of Software: Evolution and Process,
33(4):e2323, 2021.

[29] Saima Raﬁ, Wu Yu, and Muhammad Azeem Akbar. Rmdevops: a road map for improvement in devops activities
in context of software organizations. In Proceedings of the Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering,
pages 413–418. 2020.

[30] Erik Hochbergs and Laroy Nilsson Sjödahl. Software conﬁguration management in a devops context. LU-CS-EX,

2020.

[31] Sikender Mohsienuddin Mohammad. Improve software quality through practicing devops automation. Interna-

tional Journal of Creative Research Thoughts (IJCRT), pages 2320–2882, 2018.

[32] Mamdouh Alenezi, Mohammad Zarour, and SULTAN AL SULIS. Devops development process awarness and

adoption-the case of saudi arabia. Journal on Software Engineering, 14(1), 2019.

[33] Martin Gilje Jaatun, Daniela S Cruzes, and Jesus Luna. Devops for better software security in the cloud invited
paper. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, pages 1–6,
2017.

8

