Towards Understanding the Skill Gap in Cybersecurity

Francois Goupil∗
Pavel Laskov∗
francois.goupil@uni.li
pavel.laskov@uni.li
University of Liechtenstein
Vaduz, Liechtenstein

Irdin Pekaric†
Michael Felderer†
irdin.pekaric@uibk.ac.at
michael.felderer@uibk.ac.at
University of Innsbruck
Innsbruck, Austria

Alexander Dürr‡
Frederic Thiesse‡
alexander.duerr@uni-wuerzburg.de
frederic.thiesse@uni-wuerzburg.de
University of Würzburg
Würzburg, Germany

2
2
0
2

r
p
A
8
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
9
7
3
1
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Given the ongoing "arms race" in cybersecurity, the shortage of
skilled professionals in this field is one of the strongest in computer
science. The currently unmet staffing demand in cybersecurity
is estimated at over 3 million jobs worldwide. Furthermore, the
qualifications of the existing workforce are largely believed to be
insufficient. We attempt to gain deeper insights into the nature
of the current skill gap in cybersecurity. To this end, we correlate
data from job ads and academic curricula using two kinds of skill
characterizations: manual definitions from established skill frame-
works as well as "skill topics" automatically derived by text mining
tools. Our analysis shows a strong agreement between these two
analysis techniques and reveals a substantial undersupply in sev-
eral crucial skill categories, e.g., software and application security,
security management, requirements engineering, compliance and
certification. Based on the results of our analysis, we provide rec-
ommendations for future curricula development in cybersecurity
so as to decrease the identified skill gaps.

KEYWORDS
skill gap, curricula development, skill taxonomy, text mining

ACM Reference Format:
Francois Goupil, Pavel Laskov, Irdin Pekaric, Michael Felderer, Alexander
Dürr, and Frederic Thiesse. 2022. Towards Understanding the Skill Gap in
Cybersecurity. In Proceedings of 27th Annual Conference on Innovation and
Technology in Computer Science Education (ITiCSE) (ACM ITiCSE ’22). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 7 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456

1 INTRODUCTION
Cybersecurity is not only a “gold mine” for criminals but also one
of the most lucrative fields for job seekers—if they qualify.

“Nowhere is the workforce-skills gap more pronounced than in
cybersecurity", concluded the World Economic Forum in 2017 and
projected 3.5 million unfilled jobs in cybersecurity by 2021 [2]. This

∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†Both authors contributed equally to this research.
‡Both authors contributed equally to this research.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ACM ITiCSE ’22, July 11–13, 2022, Dublin, Ireland
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456

forecast turned out to be quite accurate, as the 2020 (ISC)2 Cyber-
security Workforce Report revealed a current gap of 3.1 million
jobs [3]. Furthermore, the recent State of Cybersecurity Report of
the Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA)
[18] claims that over 60% of cybersecurity teams in the USA are
understaffed and 50% of cybersecurity job applicants are not well
qualified.

These facts expose two facets of the cybersecurity skill gap: (a)
the sheer number of unfilled positions and (b) the discrepancy be-
tween the skills needed in the industry and the job seekers’ qualifi-
cations. The latter is of particular importance for computer science
education which shapes the future workforce. In this paper, we
attempt to obtain a deeper understanding of the qualifications dis-
crepancy in cybersecurity and propose techniques for a routine
execution of such analyses.

A traditional approach for the characterization of skills involves
manual development of a “skill framework” reflecting knowledge,
roles, position level, etc. Examples of skill frameworks related to
cybersecurity are the ACM Computing Classification System (CCS,
"Security and Privacy" category) [1], the Cybersecurity Body of
Knowledge (CyBOK) [4] and the EU Cybersecurity Taxonomy [20].
A skill framework provides comprehensive coverage of various
educational aspects. Its development, however, requires substantial
manual work and cannot be easily updated through time.

In the recent decade, various text mining tools have been pro-
posed for automatic skill characterization in different industries, e.g.,
[6, 11, 13], as well as for exploring academic curricula [14]. Text
mining enables construction of topic models from the underlying
data. Such models represent topics as sets of keywords (which can
be manually annotated) and assess the importance of each topic
in the overall data corpus. When text mining tools are applied to
the job ad or curricula data, the resulting topics are likely to char-
acterize the skills referred to by the respective documents. Such
characterizations can then be used for the analysis of skill gaps.
While topic models cannot capture semantic relationships between
various qualification-related aspects as skill frameworks do, their
obvious advantage is the low amount of manual work and hence,
the possibility for a periodic re-assessment.

In this contribution, we demonstrate that both manual and auto-
matic analysis provide a consistent characterization of skill gaps
in cybersecurity. Our investigation is based on the job ad and the
academic curricula data collected in the German-speaking coun-
tries of Europe (Germany, Switzerland, Austria and Liechtenstein).
The main instrument of our analysis is the alignment of docu-
ment frequencies of various skill categories, i.e., the percentage of
documents in the corpus containing a certain skill category. Skill

 
 
 
 
 
 
ACM ITiCSE ’22, July 11–13, 2022, Dublin, Ireland

Francois Goupil, Pavel Laskov, Irdin Pekaric, Michael Felderer, Alexander Dürr, and Frederic Thiesse

categories with substantially different document frequencies in job
ads and curricula represent a mismatch between an industrial de-
mand and the academic supply. Such analysis enables us to identify
skills of high demand in the industry but low supply in academic
programs and vice versa. In the following, we refer to the shortage
of certain skills in industry as a “positive” and the oversupply of
skill by academia as a “negative” skill gap.

The main difference between the manual and the automatic vari-
ants of our analysis lies in the construction of skill topics. Our
manual analysis uses fuzzy matching to compute document fre-
quencies for skill categories defined in existing skill frameworks.
In our automatic analysis, the skill categories are extracted from
the respective data as topics using text mining and are manually
annotated as short skill descriptions. The document frequencies of
topics for the automatic analysis are obtained as a by-product of
the text mining step.

The results obtained via our analysis offer interesting insights
into the skill gaps in cybersecurity. We compare the skill categories
for three experimental setups: automatic, manual using the ACM
CCS, and manual using the EU Cybersecurity Taxonomy. Both pos-
itive and negative skill gaps can be reported based on our data
corpus. The most significant positive skill gaps exist in software
and application security and security management. On the other
hand, certain classical topics of cybersecurity such as cryptography
and cryptanalysis are not in high demand in industry any more,
which raises a question whether they should still be considered
as an important cornerstone of cybersecurity education. Finally,
increasing industrial demand for various emerging cybersecurity
skills such as cloud services, cyber threat intelligence and security
compliance, as well as for certain important branches such as au-
tomotive systems and online banking has been pinpointed by the
automatic analysis. The demand for such skill, albeit not too high
in absolute terms, is so far hardly met by the academic programs.
This paper is organized as follows. A brief account of related
work is presented in Section 2 as a motivation for our study. The
data collection and processing methods are presented in Section 3.
The skill gaps identified as a result of our study are presented in
Section 4. Implications of the identified skill gaps for computer secu-
rity education are discussed in Section 5, followed by the summary
and conclusions in Section 7.

2 RELATED WORK
Computer science and information systems have always suffered
from the lack of a qualified workforce. It is therefore not surprising
that various prior works attempted to characterize the required
skills and to analyze a discrepancy between industry expectations
and educational outcomes. Early approaches to this problem, e.g.,
[22], conducted surveys among managers and university professors
aimed at devising a qualitative description of the IT skill portfolio
in industry and academia.

A broad class of literature related to skill gap analysis addresses
the task of building characterizations of essential skills in a certain
field of computer science. For example, [7] developed a catalog
of 95 technical and non-technical skills believed to be essential
for information systems professionals (in 2007) and surveyed HR
managers to explicitly assess the skill gap in each category. Further

examples of manual construction of skill definitions are the ACM
CCS [1], CyBOK [4] and the EU Cybersecurity Taxonomy [20].

The rapid development of text mining and NLP techniques of-
fers a powerful tool for automatic skill characterization. One of
the earliest works of this kind matched a pre-defined set of related
keywords against 244,460 unique job advertisements and used clus-
tering to group most frequent skills into job profiles [6]. Text mining
approaches have also been used to compare skill sets in different
branches of the IT industry [11], mapping skills to different profes-
sional roles [13], design and analysis of curricula [14], as well as for
longitudinal studies of industrial skill demands [16], to name only a
few exemplary works. An example of a hybrid approach combining
surveys with job ad and curricula analysis based on a manual skill
taxonomy can be found in recent work on skill requirements in
digital forensics [17].

In comparison with prior work our approach exhibits the follow-

ing distinctive features:

• We present a quantitative assessment of the skill gaps as the
discrepancy in document frequencies between similar skills
in job ads and curricula.

• We verify that manual and automatic skill extraction delivers
coherent results, the latter being capable of detecting novel
skill demands.

• We demonstrate that a multilingual nature of job ad and
curricula data can be effectively handled by modern text
mining tools.

• Using this novel methodology, we analyze the skill gap in
the field of cybersecurity and make recommendations for
the future curricula development.

3 METHODS
In this section, we provide a detailed account of data collection
and analysis methods. Specifically, we present the methods for the
collection of the job ad and curriculum data as well as the techniques
for manual and automatic extraction of skill categories.

3.1 Collection of Job Advertisement Data
The job-ad data is the main source of information about the skills
expected by the cybersecurity industry. To build such a data corpus,
we developed web crawlers for the scraping of job ads at Indeed,
Stepstone, and Monster—three job portals extensively used in the
German-speaking countries. Note that the data-driven skill gap anal-
ysis inevitably leads to a multilingual environment. Especially for
the cybersecurity workforce, which is highly international, under-
standing of applicants’ skills regardless of the potential employer’s
locations as well as of the language of her education is highly desir-
able. Hence, the design of our study provides a perfect setup for the
investigation of multilingual aspects in skill analysis. By presenting
the results obtained from the mixture of English and German data
we ensure the transferability of our analysis procedure to other
countries.

Our web crawlers were built using the scrapy library and entail

the following main steps:

(1) Querying the aforementioned three job portals for keywords
“cyber-security” and “it-sicherheit” (cyber-security in Ger-
man) and collecting the resulting URLs.

Towards Understanding the Skill Gap in Cybersecurity

ACM ITiCSE ’22, July 11–13, 2022, Dublin, Ireland

(2) Crawling each URL after a three-second timeout and retriev-
ing the job id, title, location, company, description as well as
country.

(3) Storing this data in a PostGreSQL database.

In order to obtain a representative dataset, we ran the scrapers
every second Sunday for 3 months starting from 5 am until 1 pm.
Subsequently, we performed various data cleaning and filtering
tasks to improve our dataset quality. We first removed duplicates
within each single job portal (arising when the same job ad is en-
countered during a different time interval) using the respective job
IDs. Then, using the hash of the job description, we also removed
duplicates originating from different job portals, as it is not uncom-
mon for companies to publish the same job ad on different portals.
We found that looking for the cybersecurity keywords was not
enough to guarantee that a job ad is indeed related to cybersecurity.
Therefore, we filtered the data using a more restrictive matching
rule: the keyword “security” (German: “Sicherheit”) should either
occur in the job title or at least three times in the job description.
Our data collection procedure yielded 933 job ads in English and
1,530 job ads in German. As it can be seen in Table 1, this dataset
exhibits a good coverage of the respective regions and languages
despite its relatively small size.

Country (language) S (ger) S (en) A (ger) A (en) G (ger) G (en)
Number of job ads 214
Table 1: Distribution of job ads per country and language:
Switzerland (S), Austria (A), Germany (G)

1028

226

158

503

272

3.2 Collection of Curricula Data
The second dataset needed for our approach contains the cyber-
security curricula in higher education institutions in the German-
speaking countries. It covers all explicitly stated cybersecurity study
programs at selected public universities and universities of applied
sciences. To keep the dataset balanced across the three countries, a
representative subset of German universities was chosen, whereas
in Austria and Switzerland all universities were considered. Data
acquisition comprised the following steps: (1) investigation of the
relevant sources, (2) gathering of the raw data, and (3) extraction
of curricula descriptions.

In the initial stage, it was necessary to investigate the building
blocks of curricula in each country. These included the course
information covering name, description, university, and level. The
level shows if the course is included in bachelor or master studies.
The search for relevant curricula was done manually by checking
official lists and databases of universities and their study programs.
For example, in order to obtain the cybersecurity curricula for
Austrian universities, the official database of studienwahl.at was
used. This is the recommended database for prospective students
in Austria maintained by the Austrian ministry of science and
education [5]. The curricula for the Swiss and German universities
were collected by checking each university’s website and gathering
the necessary information.

The relevant cybersecurity course information was identified in
curricula of 13 Swiss, 12 Austrian, and 11 German universities. They
were available in German or English. The data corpus comprises

842 different courses. The distribution of courses per country and
language is shown in Table 2.

Country (language) S (ger) S (en) A (ger) A (en) G (ger) G (en)
Number of courses 0

392

200

138

28

84

Table 2: Distribution of curricula per country and language

3.3 Manual Extraction of Skill Categories
Manual skill analysis relies on existing cyber-security taxonomies.
We refer to a taxonomy as a hierarchical list of keyword sets describ-
ing specific cybersecurity skill categories. In this work, we chose
the ACM CCS [1] and the EU Cybersecurity Taxonomy [20] be-
cause they were suitable for our approach described in Section 3.3.3.
These taxonomies are concise and have a clear hierarchy with 2
layers of skill categories.

3.3.1 ACM CCS. The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM)
proposed a Computing Classification System (CCS) [1] that includes
the "Security and Privacy" category as a top area. The latest version
of ACM CCS was updated in the year 2012. Its purpose is to classify
publications submitted to ACM events. Table 3 shows an example
of L1 and L2 layers in ACM CCS.

L1
Cryptography

L2
Key management
Public key cryptography
Digital signatures
Symmetric cryptography
Block and stream ciphers
Hash functions and message authentication codes
Cryptanalysis and other attacks
Information-theoretic techniques
Mathematical foundations of cryptography
Table 3: Exemplary L1 and L2 categories of ACM CCS

3.3.2 EU Cybersecurity Taxonomy. The main objective of the EU
Cybersecurity Taxonomy (CST) developed by the EU Joint Research
Center is to align cybersecurity terminologies, definitions, and
domains used across different EU countries into a coherent and
comprehensive taxonomy [20]. This taxonomy contains three "di-
mensions": research domains, sectors and technologies, and use
cases. Subcategories of research domains are most closely related
to skills; therefore this dimension is selected as the base taxonomy
for our analysis.

Fuzzy Keyword Matching. The main task of our manual anal-
3.3.3
ysis is to search for specific skill categories from the respective tax-
onomies in job ads and curricula descriptions. Each skill category is
represented by a set of keywords, e.g., {"block", "and", "stream", "ci-
phers"}. Since the taxonomies are developed in English, documents
in a different language were automatically translated into English
using the DeepL API. The search was performed using a Python
library fuzzywuzzy [15], which provides various algorithms for
fuzzy string matching. Specifically, a token set matching approach
is used in this work which is suitable for comparing strings that
are vastly different in size. This method yields a similarity score in
the range 0-100, where 100 corresponds to the exact match.

ACM ITiCSE ’22, July 11–13, 2022, Dublin, Ireland

Francois Goupil, Pavel Laskov, Irdin Pekaric, Michael Felderer, Alexander Dürr, and Frederic Thiesse

Finally, for each skill category, we compute the percentage of
documents in the corpus for which the similarity score with this
category’s keyword set exceeds 90%. The matching process is car-
ried out for all skill categories in L2. The respective values for skill
categories in L1 are aggregated over their subcategories.

3.4 Automatic Extraction of Skill Categories
The goal of automatic extraction of skill categories is to identify
sets of keywords that are characteristic of certain skills. This task
is closely related to topic modeling in text analysis in which such
sets of keywords are interpreted as topics addressed in a document.
The latter problem belongs to the class of unsupervised machine
learning and has been extensively addressed in the literature (cf.
[8] for a detailed review of related methods).

The best-known approach for topic modeling is the Latent Dirich-
let Allocation (LDA) [10] in which each document is assumed to
have a variety of topics represented by various keyword sets. De-
spite the success of LDA models for topic extraction from large
datasets, they are language-specific and limited to a fixed vocab-
ulary. Recent work in deep learning, especially the pre-trained
Transformer models such as BERT [12], bring new opportunities
for topic modeling. Pre-trained neural topic models replace key-
word sets with learned contextual embeddings. Transformer models
can, furthermore, handle different languages via an unsupervised
mapping between languages during pre-training.

To discover the topics in different corpora and languages, we
use the contextual topic modeling approach of Bianchi et al. [9],
particularly suitable for cross-lingual settings. The main idea of
this approach is to first create a topic model for a reference data
corpus, and then to use zero-shot learning to infer similarly re-
lated topics in other corpora, potentially in different languages.
In addition, we leverage a pre-trained NLP model for a different
task, next sentence prediction, in order to create word embed-
dings in different languages and use them, instead of bag-of-words
in a specific language, as input for topic modeling. We use the
model distilbert-base-multilingual-cased [21], trained on
documents in 104 languages, including German and English, col-
lected from Wikipedia. This model can be adapted to topic modeling
via a standard transfer learning technique known as "fine-tuning".
A crucial task of topic modeling that require special attention is
determining the optimal number of topics. We repeatedly run the
topic modeling step on our reference corpus, English job ads, for a
various number of topics ranging from 5 to 50. The quality of topics
is assessed using the Normalized Pointwise Mutual Information
(NPMI) score which is closely correlated with human judgments of
topic quality [19]. According to this empirical evaluation, the most
plausible number of topics in our English job ad corpus is 20, which
is feasible as the number of key skills in cybersecurity. The resulting
topics require interpretation since they comprise several dozen of
keywords. The final topic annotation was carried out manually by
three experts who assigned short descriptions based on the 30 most
likely words reported for each topic.

4 IDENTIFIED SKILL GAPS
In this section, we analyze the results of skill category extraction
and identify skill gaps. As explained in Sections 3.3 and 3.4, both

Figure 1: L1 skill gap analysis (ACM CCS)

Figure 2: L1 skill gap analysis (EU CST)

analysis methods return the document frequency of skill categories.
If a substantial difference in the document frequency is observed
for some skill category this is reported as a skill gap.

4.1 Manual Analysis Results
We first present the manual skill gap analysis results at the L1 level
for the two taxonomies, shown in Figures 1 and 2, respectively.
These figures display the percentage of documents “supporting”
the respective skill categories in job ads and academic curricula.

Clear skill gaps can be observed for several L1 skill categories.
Substantial discrepancies in “support” exist for the skill categories
"Systems Security", "Software and Application Security", "Formal
Methods and Theory of Security" and "Security Hardware" in the
ACM CCS and for the skill categories "Software and Hardware
Security Engineering", "Security Management and Governance",
"Network and Distributed Systems", "Incident Handling and Digital
Forensics", "Assurance, Audit and Certification" of JRC taxonomy.
A deeper understanding of identified skill gaps can be obtained
by analyzing results at L2. The results cannot be presented here for
all L2 categories1, yet some examples of such analysis presented
below are very instructive.

Figure 3 shows a more detailed L2 skill gap analysis for the L1
category “Software and Application Security” in ACM CCS for
which a large skill gap is observed in Figure 1. Here we can see that
the largest skill gaps exist for the subcategories “Web Application
Security” and “Software Security Engineering”. Such topics are in
high demand in today’s IT industry, whereas academic offerings
seem to insufficiently address these skills.

1Comprehensive results can be found at https://tinyurl.com/midsise.

Towards Understanding the Skill Gap in Cybersecurity

ACM ITiCSE ’22, July 11–13, 2022, Dublin, Ireland

Figure 3: Software and application security (ACM CCS)

Figure 6: L2 analysis for “Cryptography and Cryptanalysis”
(EU CST)

Figure 4: Security management and governance (EU CST)

Figure 5: L2 analysis for “Cryptography” (ACM CCS)

Another example illustrates the skill gap in the L1 category “Secu-
rity Management and Governance” of the EU CST, shown in Figure
4. One can see four prominent skill gaps related to information
security management, risk assessment, compliance and standards.
All these skills are under-represented in the academic curricula.

In general, one cannot expect a full coherence between the results
based on the two taxonomies due to their differences in the specific
composition of L1 and L2 categories. Even seemingly contradictory
results may be observed which, however, make sense after a closer
investigation. For example, at L1, no skill gap is observed in the
category “Cryptography” in ACM CCS but a negative skill gap is
observed in EU CST. The L2 analysis shown in Figures 5 and 6
reveals, however, that a negative skill gap does exist in almost all
L2 categories in both taxonomies but is compensated for the ACM
CCS by the skill gap in the category “Key Management” which is
much more general an hence more prominent among job ads.

Figure 7: Automatic skill gap analysis.

4.2 Automatic Analysis
The results of the automatic skill gap analysis are presented in
Figure 7. It shows document frequencies for 20 skill categories iden-
tified as topics by the text mining technique presented in Section 4.2.
For each topic, document frequencies are presented for job ads and
curricula, in English and in German.

The obtained results offer some intriguing insights about the
nature of skill gaps as well as the analysis technique itself. The
first interesting observation is that the identified topics not only
represent the skills but also other information typical for job ads,
e.g., employment information, administration, job requirements,
and HR-related information. Another interesting fact is that some
topics represent IT branches rather than skills, e.g., automotive em-
bedded systems and online banking. This effect is quite natural and
indicative of specific branches where the demand for cybersecurity
skills is particularly strong.

The specific skill gaps identified by our analysis are very plau-
sible. The strongest discrepancy between job ads and curricula in
Figure 7 can be observed for security compliance, followed by cloud
services, automotive embedded systems, online banking, and threat
intelligence. Some other observed discrepancies, e.g., in security
customer support, security consulting, and the “inverse” skill gap

ACM ITiCSE ’22, July 11–13, 2022, Dublin, Ireland

Francois Goupil, Pavel Laskov, Irdin Pekaric, Michael Felderer, Alexander Dürr, and Frederic Thiesse

in scientific research are also quite obvious. It noteworthy that the
skill gaps identified by the automatic analysis are largely consistent
with the manual analysis, except that cloud security was only dis-
covered by the automatic analysis. To our surprise, cloud security
is mentioned neither in the ACM CCS nor in the EU Cybersecurity
Taxonomy, which corroborates our observation that skill gaps must
be periodically re-assessed.

5 DISCUSSION
Both automatic and manual extraction of skill categories can accu-
rately infer skills required in industry and produced by the academia.
Despite the relatively small size of our data corpora as well as its
regional focus on German-speaking countries, the identified skill
gaps are plausible and enable concrete curricula development rec-
ommendations, as elucidated in the following section.

The multilingual nature of job ads and curricula descriptions can
be addressed in two different ways. For the manual analysis built on
existing taxonomies, automatic translation must be used in order
to convert the data into the target language of the taxonomy. This
feature is indispensable for smaller regional markets with no skill
taxonomies available beforehand. Automatic analysis building on
multilingual NLP techniques, in contrast, exhibits a strong potential
both for regional markets and in the global international context.
The developed methodology is clearly applicable to other disci-
plines in computer science beyond cybersecurity. The broad avail-
ability of job ad and curricula data makes the adaptation of out
methods to other disciplines rather straightforward. Our methods
are also suitable for a periodic re-assessment of existing skill gaps,
especially as a way to measure the impact of educations develop-
ment. Our tools are available as an open source code. 2

6 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CURRICULA

DESIGN

In order to support the design of future curricula in cybersecurity
that are capable of meeting industrial needs, we have distilled all
our results into a new graph representation shown in Figure 8. Its
horizontal axis represents the industrial demand (measured as the
percentage job ads), and its vertical axis represents the strength of
a skill gap (measured as the difference in the percentages of job
ads and curricula “supporting” the respective skill category). Skill
categories that are close to the upper diagonal line exhibit strong
skill gaps; they are further prioritized (from left to right) by the
absolute strength of industrial demand. The negative skill gaps,
indicative of the oversupply of academic programs, can be seen as
entries in the negative part of the graph in Figure 8. The results
of three different analysis techniques presented in the previous
sections are shown in different colors.

The following specific recommendations can be articulated de-
rived from Figure 8. More courses covering security management
and governance as well as software and application security should
be added to academic curricula. The discrepancy between the indus-
trial demand and the academic supply is very strong in these two
areas. Also formal methods and theory of security (which covers se-
curity requirements engineering) as well as software and hardware

2https://tinyurl.com/EMIDSISE

Figure 8: Summary and prioritization of identified skill
gaps

security engineering have a high industrial demand and a substan-
tial skill gap, and hence should be better addressed in the future
curricula. In contrast, scientific research as well as cryptography
and cryptanalysis seem to be over-represented in curricula, and
there is, in general, a low industrial demand on skills in these areas.
The recommendations derived from Figure 8 are in line with the
results from both the manual and the automatic analysis discussed
before. Some emerging skill categories such as security compliance,
cloud services, cyber threat intelligence and automotive embed-
ded systems, in which moderate skill gaps were identified by our
automatic analysis, should also be considered as potential “skill
bottlenecks” in the near future.

7 CONCLUSIONS
The methods presented in this paper as well as the results of the
skill gap analysis obtained with the help of these methods con-
stitute an important step towards the understanding of skill gaps
in specific branches of the IT industry. Perhaps the most impor-
tant lesson we learned from this study is that skill gaps are highly
dynamic. Despite a substantial effort invested worldwide into the
systematization of cybersecurity knowledge, the skill landscape
in the IT industry closely follows fast-evolving technology trends.
Fixed skill taxonomies seem to be insufficient for capturing such de-
velopment and hence, the automatic analysis techniques presented
in our paper are certainly a promising instrument, especially for a
periodic re-assessment of the skill landscape.

Our findings certainly support the claim that cybersecurity prob-
lems cannot be solved by technical solutions alone. Hence, the
technical part of cybersecurity education should be complemented
by stronger offerings on the managerial side where a strong skill
gap can be observed in our current results. Numerous gaps also ex-
ist in the technical disciplines related to cybersecurity, especially in
cloud security, threat intelligence, incident response, and forensics.

Towards Understanding the Skill Gap in Cybersecurity

ACM ITiCSE ’22, July 11–13, 2022, Dublin, Ireland

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The funding for this work was provided by the EU Erasmus+ Pro-
gramme under the Grant Agreement Number 2018-1-LI01-KA203-
000114 (project MIDSISE). The authors are grateful to Ulrike Meyer
(RWTH Aachen) and Fabio Di Franco (ENISA) for valuable feedback
on the project results.

REFERENCES
[1] [n.d.]. Computing Classification System. https://dl.acm.org/ccs
[2] 2017.

the future of cybersecurity will

is what

This

look like.

https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/08/the-us-is-upping-its-game-
against-cyber-attacks-but-the-security-industry-faces-a-huge-challenge
[3] 2020. (ISC)2 Cybersecurity Workforce Study. https://www.isc2.org/Research/

Workforce-Study

[4] 2021. The Cybersecurity Body of Knowledge. https://www.cybok.org/media/

downloads/CyBOK_v1.1.0.pdf Version 1.1.

[5] 2021. Imprint - Studienwahl.at - Study in Austria. https://www.studienwahl.at/

Content.Node/-SWAT--Impressum.en.php

[6] Andrew Aken, Chuck Litecky, Altaf Ahmad, and Jim Nelson. 2009. Mining for

computing jobs. IEEE software 27, 1 (2009), 78–85.

[7] Andrew Aken and Michael D Michalisin. 2007. The impact of the skills gap on
the recruitment of MIS graduates. In Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIGMIS CPR
conference on Computer personnel research: The global information technology
workforce. 105–111.

[8] Rubayyi Alghamdi and Khalid Alfalqi. 2015. A survey of topic modeling in text

mining. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl.(IJACSA) 6, 1 (2015).

[9] Federico Bianchi, Silvia Terragni, Dirk Hovy, Debora Nozza, and Elisabetta Fersini.
2021. Cross-lingual Contextualized Topic Models with Zero-shot Learning. In
Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Main Volume. 1676–1683.

[10] David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation.

The Journal of machine Learning research 3 (2003), 993–1022.

[11] Stefan Debortoli, Oliver Müller, and Jan vom Brocke. 2014. Comparing business
intelligence and big data skills. Business & Information Systems Engineering 6, 5
(2014), 289–300.

[12] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).

[13] Patrick Föll, Matthias Hauser, and Thiesse. 2018. Identifying the skills expected
of IS graduates by industry: A text mining approach. Proceedings of the 39th
international conference on information systems (ICIS).

[14] Patrick Föll and Frédéric Thiesse. 2021. Exploring Information Systems Curricula.

Business & Information Systems Engineering (2021), 1–22.

[15] Jose Gonzalez. 2021. FuzzyWuzzy. https://github.com/seatgeek/fuzzywuzzy.
[16] Joshua Peter Handali, Johannes Schneider, Denis Dennehy, Benedikt Hoffmeis-
ter, Kieran Conboy, and Jörg Becker. 2020. Industry demand for analytics: A
longitudinal study. (2020).

[17] Radek Hranický, Frank Breitinger, Ondrej Rysavý, John Sheppard, Florin
Schaedler, Holger Morgenstern, and Simon Malik. 2021. What do incident re-
sponse practitioners need to know? A skillmap for the years ahead. In Proceedings
of the Twenty First Annual DFRWS Conference. to appear.

[18] ISACA. 2021. State of Cybersecurity 2021, Part 1: Global Update on Workforce
Efforts, Resources and Budgets. https://www.isaca.org/go/state-of-cybersecurity-
2021.

[19] Jey Han Lau, David Newman, and Timothy Baldwin. 2014. Machine reading
tea leaves: Automatically evaluating topic coherence and topic model quality. In
Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics. 530–539.

[20] Igor Nai Fovino, Ricardo Neisse, José Hernández-Ramos, Nineta Polemi, Gian-
Luigi Ruzzante, Malgorzata Figwer, and Alessandro Lazari. 2019. A Proposal for
a European Cybersecurity Taxonomy. https://doi.org/10.2760/106002

[21] Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. 2019. Dis-
tilBERT, a distilled version of BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.01108 (2019).

[22] Eileen M Trauth, Douglas W Farwell, and Denis Lee. 1993. The IS expectation
gap: Industry expectations versus academic preparation. Mis Quarterly (1993),
293–307.

