When is Good Good Enough? Context Factors for Good 
Remote Work of Agile Software Development Teams – 
The Otto Case 
 L. Rometsch1, R. Wegner1, F. Brusch1, M. Neumann1, L. Linke2 
1 Hochschule Hannover, Faculty IV, Department of Business Informatics, Hannover, Germany 
e-mail: {lisa.rometsch, richard.wegner, florian.brusch}@stud.hs-hannover.de, 
michael.neumann@hs-hannover.de 
2Otto GmbH & Co KG., E-Commerce Solutions & Technology, Hamburg, Germany 
e-mail: lukas.linke@otto.de 

Abstract—The  Covid-19  pandemic  led  to  several  challenges  in  everybody  working  life.  Many  companies 
worldwide  enabled  comprehensive  remote  work  settings  for  their  employees.  Agile  Software  Development 
Teams are affected by the switch to remote work as agile methods setting communication and collaboration in 
focus.  The  well-being  and  motivation  of  software  engineers  and  developers,  which  impacting  their 
performance, are influenced by specific context factors. This paper aims to analyze identify specific context 
factors for a good remote work setting. We designed a single case study at a German ecommerce company and 
conducted an experiment using a gamification approach including eight semi-structured interviews. Our results 
show, that the agile software development team members to their health. Furthermore, most the team members 
value the gamification approach to put more focus on physical activities and the health well-being. We discuss 
several practical implications and provide recommendations for other teams and companies.  

1. INTRODUCTION 

iterative, 

Agile  methods  are  well-known  approaches 
in  the  area  of  software  development.  The 
popularity  of 
incremental,  and 
lightweight approaches such as Scrum or XP has 
increased  steadily  over  the  past  20  years  [1]. 
Agile methods are setting social aspects in focus 
[2].  Especially 
and 
collaboration  among  the  members  of  agile 
software  development  teams  and  further,  the 
involvement and integration of stakeholders like 
customers or clients are of high importance for 
the success of agile methods [3].  

communication 

the 

The  Covid  19  pandemic  has  led  to  various 
change  processes  worldwide  over  the  past  two 
years.  Many  countries  and  companies  have 
defined and implemented extensive containment 
measures to reduce the spread of the virus. One 
of these measures is the switch to remote work. 
For  instance,  the  German  government  has 
required  companies  to  allow  home-based  work 

1 

is  known 

and  let  employees  work  from  home  when 
possible.  
It 

the  quality  of 
that 
communication  and  collaboration  can  be 
negatively  affected  in  distributed  teams  [4]. 
Agile  software  development  teams  have  thus 
been affected by the shift to remote activity, as 
their  daily  collaboration  has  changed  (e.g.,  [5], 
[6]). Various studies show effects on the social 
aspects  of  collaboration  or  even  difficulties  in 
onboarding and socializing new team  members 
(e.g., [7-10]). Likewise, effects on specific agile 
practices that have a strong collaborative focus, 
such  as  pair  programming,  are  described  [11]. 
Various  authors  explain  in  studies  that  agile 
software development teams have reacted to the 
new  circumstances  and  adapted  their  agile 
approach [7-12]. The effects on the performance 
of  agile  software  development 
teams  are 
described in several studies as both positive [7-
10] and negative [6,13].  

We know that well-being and motivation are 
highly important for the performance of software 
engineers  and  developers  [14].  Good  work  for 

 
 
 
Rometsch et al. 

can  be 

employees 
evaluated  differently 
concerning  the  work  situation,  but  depends  on 
the design of certain context factors [15]. Thus, 
it  is  important  to  understand  which  context 
factors affect good work.  One may assume that 
the work organization of remote and onsite work 
come  with  different  context  factors  concerning 
the evaluation of good work. 

This  paper  aims  to  analyze  the  context 
factors that enable good work in a remote work 
setting.  In  particular,  we  investigate  which 
context factors influences the way of working to 
enable  quality  and  a  better  performance  of  the 
agile software development team. We designed a 
single  case  study  at  Otto.  Otto  is  a  German 
trading  and  services company  headquartered  in 
Hamburg,  which  operates  worldwide  with 
around  52,000 employees  in  the  business  areas 
of e-commerce, retail, finance and logistics.  

 The two aims of our study are to define what 
constitutes good work and to identify the context 
factors  for  good  work  for  a  remote  operating 
agile software development team at Otto. Thus, 
we defined the following research question: 

RQ: Which context factors are relevant for 
good work at Otto for a specific agile software 
development  team  working  in  a  remote  work 
setting and can be designed accordingly? 

The paper  at  hand  is structured  as  follows: 
We provide the theoretical background including 
the fundamentals of good work and gamification 
in  the  second  Section.  In  the  third  Section,  we 
present  our  research  design.  We  present  the 
results of our study in Section 4. Before the paper 
closes  with  a  conclusion  and  the  limitations  in 
Section  6,  we  discuss  practical  implications  in 
Section 5. 

2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 

2.1. Fundamentals of Good Work 

The discussion of what good work exactly is 
and which factors affect the quality of work goes 
back to the 1970s [16]. The term good work is 
described 
different 
defined 
perspectives  [17].  These  perspectives  cover 
specific  organizational  types.  For  instance,  the 
type  of  work  (e.g.,  production  or  knowledge 

from 

and 

2 

work)  should  be  considered.  Also,  the  context 
factors, which influence good work relate to the 
professional  area,  e.g.,  software  development 
[18]. 

In  its  2020  annual  report,  the  index  of  the 
German  Trade  Union  Confederation  (DGB) 
primarily  refers  to  the  common  variants  of 
mobile work or remote work. This focus is the 
result  of  the  Covid-19  pandemic.  In  addition, 
possible  context  factors  for  good  work  are 
already mentioned in the report, some of which 
are  adopted  in  this  version  for  the  survey  or 
clustering.  In  summary,  material  security, 
recognition, 
opportunities, 
development 
sufficient  work 
low-stress 
activities  make  up  good  work  [19].  The 
definition  of  the  industrial  union  IG  Metall 
overlaps in this respect, but supplements it with 
preventive 
participation-oriented 
occupational  health  and  safety  as  well  as  the 
sustainable  handling  of  human  performance 
[20].  This  makes  it  clear  that  in  addition  to 
factors  that  can  be  shaped  in  the  short  term, 
sustainable aspects also play a role. 

resources  and 

and 

Finally,  in  connection  with  good  work,  the 
well-known methods of quality management are 
used. It is assumed here that quality development 
in an organization is successful if ethically based 
quality  goals  are  set  and  the  development  of 
social skills is promoted. 

In summary, it can be stated that good work 
can be understood as the framework conditions 
of a job that have a significant influence on the 
quality or quantity of the work results as well as 
on the quality of life of the individual. 

2.2. Gamification 

When  playful  elements  with  an  aesthetic 
design  are  used  in  a  non-game  context,  this  is 
referred  to  as  gamification  [18].  Gamification 
typically contains a motivating mechanism that 
are used by users on a digital platform [21]. The 
trend  towards  gamification  stems  from  the 
success of video games that have been reported 
in  recent  years.  As  a  result  of  the  digital 
transformation, gamification is increasingly used 
not only for private use, but also in commercial 
operations  and  other  non-gaming  contexts.  In 
particular, gamification gained a lot of interest in 

the past years in the area of software engineering 
[22]. Gamification approaches are used to create 
incentives for employees to take certain actions. 
Entire workflows and processes can be adjusted 
accordingly.  Gamification  measures  have  a 
positive effect on motivation and strengthen the 
sense of togetherness within the team [18]. 

3. RESEARCH DESIGN 

We  performed  a  single  case  study  at  Otto 
with one embedded unit of analysis, which is the 
agile  software  development  team  under  study. 
The study was designed and prepared based on 
the guidelines from Runeson and Hoest [24] and 
Yin  [26].  We  chose  this  approach  because  the 
topic of the study is timely and has not yet been 
sufficiently  researched  in  this  context.  The 
selected  research  design  allows  to  collect  data 
based on flexible reactions of the agile software 
development team members during the research 
process [25]. 

We used three different research methods. In 
the first step, we performed a literature review to 
identify the context for good work. Based on our 
analysis, we created six cluster, which we used 
for  the  categorization  of  the  identified  factors 
from  the  literature.  In  the  next  step,  we 
conducted  a  multipoint  query  with  the  agile 
software development team to identify the most 
relevant cluster of context factors. We used the 
results  of  the  multipoint  query  to  perform  the 
third  and  final  method.  We  performed  an 
experiment  with  a  gamification  approach  and 
collected the data in semi-structured interviews. 
We  describe the  specific research  methods, the 
data  collection  and  analysis  in  the  following 
subsections. 

3.1. Clustering the context factors 

As  described  above,  we  performed  a 
multipoint query using the tool Miro in order to 

importance  from 

get an understanding which of the clusters is of 
the  agile  software 
high 
development teams’ perspective. An overview of 
the  cluster  is  available  in  Appendix  A.1.  The 
team  voted  for  the  health  cluster.  The  health 
cluster consists of the following context factors: 
Mental  stress,  physical  strain,  leisure  time  and 
promotion  of  personal  skills.  As  a  result,  we 
developed  an  experiment  using  a  gamification 
approach  for  health-promoting  measures  in  the 
context of remote work.  

3.2. Experiment 

In order to investigate the context factors for 
the  health  cluster,  we  decided  to  prepare  and 
perform  an  experiment  using  a  gamification 
approach  with  the  agile  software  development 
team.  To  conduct  the  experiment  remotely,  we 
developed a gamification board with the virtual 
collaboration tool Miro.  

At the end of an experiment week, the final 
weekly  winner  is  determined  and  awarded  a 
certificate  in  the  daily  meeting  of  the  agile 
software  development  team.  The  activities  are 
entered manually and independently by the agile 
software development team members, while the 
agile coach and lead of the team are responsible 
for  the  evaluation.  To  remind  them  to  use  the 
board and to exercise regularly, circular emails 
are sent to everyone involved twice a day with a 
short  motivational  text  and  a  link  to  an 
approximately 5-minute exercise unit.  

In addition, a mood barometer developed for 
the experiment is used daily in Miro in the team. 
The  goal  is  to  provide an opportunity  for team 
reflection  and  to  give  the  team  leader  an 
overview of potential dissatisfaction and stress in 
the team's working environment. 

The  experiment  was  conducted  during  two 

weeks in May 2021.

3 

 
Rometsch et al. 

3.4. Data Analysis 

As  a  method  for  analyzing  the  interview 
data,  qualitative  content  analysis  according  to 
Mayring [25] is used in this work. The summary 
content  analysis  is  chosen  inductively  as  the 
procedure  since  it  is  about  exploring  a  new 
phenomenon and the categories are not explicitly 
defined  in  advance  [27].  In  the  course  of  the 
are 
individual 
summary, 
summarized  and  the  material  is  reduced  to  the 
research  topic  [25]  with  the  aim  of  identifying 
commonalities  in  the  interview  statements  and 
consequently of a high gain in knowledge for the 
derived  recommendations  for  action  achieve. 
The  interview  data  were  analyzed  by  the 
researcher 
that  did  not  conduct  the 
interview itself in order to reduce the risk of bias. 

interviews 

team 

the 

Fig. 2. Part of the gamification board 

We  selected  this  approach  because  no 
comparable experiments have been conducted in 
the context of our study. As shown in Figure 2, 
various game elements such as a level bar, ranks, 
skills  and  a  motivation  barometer  are  added  to 
the tracking table. The boards of the individual 
subjects are in a common view, which means that 
the progress of the subjects is visible to everyone 
at  all  times.  The  leaderboard  is  updated  on  a 
daily basis to allow for constant comparison. 

3.3. Data Collection 

A  semi-structured  interview  guideline  with 
open questions was developed for the interviews, 
which  enables  a  flexible  reaction  to  the  test 
persons'  statements  during  the  interviews.  The 
interview guideline is available in Appendix A.2. 
To conduct the interviews, we performed video 
calls  using  Microsoft  Teams.  The  interviews 
were performed in teams of two researchers. One 
researcher  was  responsible  for  conducting  the 
interview  and  the  other  for  documenting  the 
answers.  The  interviewees  are  the  members  of 
the  agile  software  development  teams  who 
voluntarily took part in the experiment. In total, 
we conducted eight interviews over a period of 
two weeks in May 2021. 

4 

4. RESULTS 

spirit, 

implementation, 

In  this  Section,  the  results  of  the  focus 
groups are presented and analyzed based on the 
six categories of motivation, social conversion, 
competitive 
self-
organization,  and  well-being.  The  categories 
were  identified  in  the  course  of  structuring  the 
interview  statements  and  described 
the 
following  section.  The  descriptions  of  the 
dimensions  are  based  on  the  statements  of  the 
subjects in the interviews conducted. 

in 

4.1. Motivation 

During the remote work, the subjects did less 
sports  overall  than  usual,  although  there  was 
certainly the possibility to do so. This is due to 
the lack of motivation for physical activities that 
have arisen as a result of the pandemic. Despite 
existing  health 
self-organized 
integration  of  exercise  into  everyday  life  is 
becoming increasingly difficult. 

awareness, 

4.2. Social conversion  

Social  exchange  suffers  in  a  remote  work 
to  communicate 
setting.  The  willingness 
virtually is low because time is already spent at 
the  work-station  during  work.  Accordingly, 
face-to-face 
lacking. 
communication 
However, there are also positive facets, such as 

is 

 
the use of new communication and collaboration 
tools, which results in easier communication. 

4.3. Competitive spirit 

In  particular, 

As presented in Section 2.2, the competition 
in  an  open  gamification  context  represents  a 
motivator,  which  may  lead  to  an  increased 
individual  sports 
the 
level. 
successes  of  the  other  team  members  and  the 
conscious  examination  of  the  topic  increase 
motivation.  On  the  other  hand,  a  challenging 
approach is not a motivation for every employee. 
The  sporting  intentions  and  the  comparison  by 
the gamification board had a negative effect on 
individual  team  members,  since  the  sport  is 
perceived as an additional task.  

4.4. Implementation of a gamification approach 

as 

intuitive 

The subjects rated the basic structure of the 
experiment 
and 
positive, 
understandable.  Only  the  distribution  of  the 
points and XP points is not comprehensible for 
all team members. In addition, the time factor is 
of  importance,  since  the  majority  of  the  team 
members stated that they did not find any time 
for  breaks  and  tracking  to  perform  physical 
activities  during 
time.  The 
elements  of  gamification  of  the  experiment  are 
perceived as positive and the possibility of being 
able to climb levels increases motivation.  

their  working 

Some  of  the  daily  mails  are  perceived  as 
spam  by  the  team  members,  since  the times  of 
the  reminders  do  not  coincide  with  the  break 
times  due  to  the  individual  work  structure.  In 
addition,  the  e-mails  are  often  deleted  or 
automatically moved to folders in order to keep 
an  overview  of their tasks  in the daily  e-mails. 
However, the idea of remembering, in general, is 
rated  as  positive  and  gives  an  impetus to think 
more about physical activities, breaks and airing.  
is  predominantly 
perceived  as  positive.  The  evaluation  showed 
that the team members were more motivated at 
the  beginning  of  the  week  and  in  the  morning 
than at the end of the week and in the afternoon. 
The  team  members  consider  it  important  to 
observe the mood in the team in order to be able 
to  actively  respond  to  the  mood  of  their 

The  mood  barometer 

5 

and 

colleagues 
considerate 
cooperation.  However,  the  lack  of  anonymity 
created a barrier to sharing negative moods. 

promote 

to 

4.5. Individual self-organization 

It is not easy for team members with children 
to  reconcile  work  and  childcare,  as  there  is  a 
constant  change  of  context  between  work  and 
private  life.  In  addition,  work  processes  in 
remote  work  have  to  be  reorganized.  Although 
there  is  more  time  due  to  the  elimination  of 
commuting, it cannot be used effectively. 

4.6. Well-being  

Physical activities can help reduce stress and 
improve  alertness.  However,  several 
team 
members point to the aspect that sport in front of 
colleagues  causes  discomfort.  Accordingly, 
health  promotion  by  the  employer  could  also 
have negative effects. 

5. PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS 

increased 

In  the  long  term,  the  integration  of  the 
physical activity of the employees into everyday 
working  life  should  become  an  integral  part  of 
the remote work culture. In order to establish this 
effectively, 
the 
importance  of  breaks  and  rest  time  slots  is 
necessary.  In  addition,  regular  reminders  to 
employees  to  keep  working  hours  free  are 
necessary.  Similarly,  adjusting  the  scheduling 
culture, in the form of fixed buffer times between 
appointments,  can  support  to  relaxing 
the 
workday. 

awareness  of 

To ensure a healthy level of physical activity 
for  employees  during  working  hours,  we 
recommend  establishing  short  breaks 
for 
physical  activity  as  part  of  working  hours.  For 
this, employees should be given an appropriate 
time  frame  within  their  working  hours  as  a 
tolerated break for physical activities, since the 
regular  break  times  are  too  short,  especially  in 
the remote work context, to take adequate breaks 
and  physical  activities.  It's  possible  that  this 
could result in long-term benefits for businesses 
in the form of fewer cases of illness. 

In order to promote social interaction among 
to  arrange 
is  recommended 

employees, 

it 

 
Rometsch et al. 

the 

team 

appointments  within 
for  which 
employees  can  voluntarily  sign  up  on  a  list  to 
participate in a joint virtual coffee break. These 
appointments  can  take  place  on  a  weekly  or 
monthly  basis  or  run  parallel  to  iteration 
rhythms. Another option is a regular face-to-face 
meeting for team actions, such as joint walks. 

In 

tables. 

this  context, 

To increase the added value of gamification, 
it  is  recommended  to  increase  the  level  of 
automation  to  minimize  the  personal  effort 
required to automatically track and update scores 
and 
is  also 
recommended to use a different tool, as Miro is 
often  seen  as  a  work  tool  and  cannot  meet  the 
requirements  of  employees  due  to  its  lack  of 
anonymity and privacy. Particularly concerning 
mutual motivation in a team context, a solution 
should  be  chosen  that  makes  it  possible  to 
motivate each other in real time without having 
to forgo anonymity. 

it 

than 

channels 

Reminders  for  physical  activity  and  airing 
should also be subscribable on a voluntary basis, 
with the possibility to choose the reminder times 
independently.  In  addition,  the  use  of  other 
is 
communication 
recommended,  as  these  may  be  overseen  or 
ignored. One way to increase the exchange about 
physical and mental well-being in the team is to 
establish an anonymous mood barometer as part 
of agile practices such as retrospectives or daily 
stand-ups. It is also conceivable to develop new 
agile  practices  for  this  purpose  that  bring  this 
facet to the fore. 

e-mail 

6. THREATS TO VALIDITY 

Although  we  designed  our  study  based  on  the 
Runeson and Hoest guidelines, there are several 
limitations to consider. 

Construct validity: A risk for construct validity 
is  not  including  relevant  and  related  literature 
when designing a case study. To counteract this 
risk, we searched various databases for relevant 
literature, deliberately including gray literature. 
This  is  a  well-known  approach  for  novel, 
hitherto 
[28].  We 
conducted  all  data  (interviews  and  parts  of  the 
experiments)  during  the  working  hours  of  the 

little-researched 

topics 

6 

team  members  in  order  to  minimize  potential 
risks  of  bias  such  as  fatigue.  Furthermore,  we 
made  sure  that  we  only  use  tools  for  data 
collection  (MS  Teams  and  Miro)  that  were 
already known to the team members. 

threats,  we 

Internal  validity:  In  order  to  avoid  the  risk  of 
internal  validity 
took  several 
measures.  First,  we  designed  the  interview 
guideline  as  semi-structured  including  non-
leading questions. This approach allows as to go 
in-depth whenever an interviewee point to new 
or unexpected directions. The interviewees and 
the  researchers  did  not  know  each  other 
personally. However, we were not able to record 
and  transcript  the  interview  data  due  to  data 
security  issues.  This  limitation  is  covered  by 
in  pairs.  We 
interviews 
performing 
conducted  all  interviewers  with  at  least  two 
researchers.  One  performing  the  interview  and 
the other observing and protocolling it.  

the 

External validity: The external validity could be 
optimized  by  adding  more  agile  software 
development teams to our study. It is also worth 
to  mention,  that  it  would  be  interesting  to  add 
other  cases  from  different  business  areas, 
companies or countries to this study. It could be 
interesting for a thorough analysis as the remote 
work setting affects many companies, teams and 
people around the globe.  

7. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

The aim of our study was to examine which 
context factors are particularly relevant for good 
work  at  Otto  in  an  agile  software  development 
team  in  current  remote  work  setting  and  how 
these can be designed accordingly. The results of 
our  study  show  that  team  members  attach  the 
greatest  importance  to  the  area  of  health.  Our 
results show that external incentives such as the 
use  of  gamification  elements  motivate  the 
majority of the team members to improve their 
physical activities and awareness of health well-
being.  After  conducting  the  interviews,  the 
research  question  can  be  answered  as  follows: 
For  the  employees  of  a  software  development 
team at Otto, the area of health is of the greatest 
importance.  This  area  can  be  designed 

accordingly through gamification and leads to at 
least  short-term  positive  effects.  It  should  be 
mentioned here that gamification has not led to 
an  increase  in  movement  for  some  employees. 
Our work serves as a basis for further research. 
It  would  be  interesting  how  agile  software 
development  teams  from  other  contexts  (e.g. 
industries, companies and countries) react to our 
gamification  experiment  and  which  context 
factors  for  good  work  they  focus  on.  Since  the 
comprehensive introduction of remote work also 
affects other business areas, we also recommend 
considering  other  (software)  process  models  or 
roles in future research in this area. 

APPENDIX 

A.1: The overview of the cluster is available at 
the following link: 
https://sync.academiccloud.de/index.php/s/XJ5h
jRK1Gfjf2LG 

A.2: The interview guideline is available at the 
the following link: 
https://sync.academiccloud.de/index.php/s/G7A
FDIjf3QGf3JF 

REFERENCES 

1.  VersionOne and Collabnet: “15th annual state of agile 

survey report,” 2021 

2.  P. Abrahamsson, O. Salo, J. Ronkainen, and J. Warsta: 
“Agile  software  development  methods:  Review  and 
analysis,” vol. 478, pp. 7–94, 2002.  

3.  T. Chow, D.-B. Cao, A survey study of critical success 
factors in agile software projects, Journal of Systems 
and Software, 81, pp. 961–971, 2008. 

4.  S. Jalali, C. Wohlin: Global software engineering and 
agile  practices:  a  systematic  review,  Journal  of 
Software:  Evolution  and  Process,  24,  pp.  643–659, 
2012. 

5.  M. Neumann and Y. Bogdanov: The impact of Covid 
19  on  agile  software  development:  A  systematic 
literature  review,  In:  Proceedings  of  the  55th  Hawii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 2022. 

6.  P.  Ralph,  S.  Baltes,  G.  Adisaputri,  R.  Torkar, 
V.  Kovalenko,  M.  Kalinowski,  N.  Novielli,  S.  Yoo, 
X.  Devroey,  X.  Tan,  M.  Zhou,  B.  Turhan,  R.  Hoda, 
H. Hata, G. Robles, A. Milani Fard, and R. Alkadhi: 
Pandemic  programming:  How  covid-19  affects 
software  developers  and  how  their  organizations  can 
help, Empirical Software Engineering, pp. 1–35, 2020. 
7.  K. Marek, E. Winska, and W. Dabrowski: The State of 
Agile  Software  Development  Teams  During  the 
of 
Covid-19 

Proceedings 

Pandemic. 

In 

7 

the  5th  International  Conference  on  Lean  and  Agile 
Software  Development.  Lecture  Notes  in  Business 
Information  Processing,  Vol. 
408.  Springer, 
pp. 24–39, 2021. 

Development: 

8.  M. Neumann, Y. Bogdanov, M. Lier, and L. Baumann: 
The Sars-Cov-2 Pandemic and Agile Methodologies in 
Multiple 
Software 
Case  Study  in  Germany.  In  Proceedings  of  the  5th 
International Conference on Lean and Agile Software 
Development. 
Business 
Lecture  Notes 
Information  Processing,  Vol.  408.  Springer,  pp.  40–
58, 2021. 

in 

A 

system 

development 

9.  M. O Connor, K. Conboy, and D. Dennehy: COVID-
19  affected  remote  workers:  a  temporal  analysis  of 
information 
during 
the pandemic. Journal of Decision Systems, 2021. 
10.  R. Da Camara, M. Marinho, Suzana Sampaio, and S. 
Cadete:  How  do  Agile  Software  Startups  deal  with 
uncertainties  by  Covid-19  pandemic?  International 
Journal of Software Engineering & Applications, 11, 
4, pp. 15–34, 2020. 

11.  D.  Smite,  M.  Mikalsen,  N.  Moe,  S.  V.,  and  K.  E., 
“From  collaboration  to  solitude  and  back:  Remote 
pair  programming  during  covid-19,”  In:  Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Agile Processes in 
Software  Engineering  and  Extreme  Programming. 
(XP), pp. 3–18, Springer, 2021. 

12.  M.  Schmidtner,  C.  Doering,  and  H.Timinger:  Agile 
IEEE 

Working  during  COVID-19  Pandemic, 
Engineering Management Review, 2021. 

13.  S. A. Butt, S. Misra, M. W. Anjum, and S. A. Hassan: 
Agile Project Development Issues During COVID-19., 
in Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on 
Lean  and  Agile  Software  Development,  Vol.  408. 
Springer, pp. 59–70, 2021. 

14.  D. Russo, P. Hanel, S. Altnickel, and N. van Berkel: 
Predictors  of  Well-being  and  Productivity  among 
Software  Professionals  during 
the  COVID-19 
Pandemic: A Longitudinal Study. Empirical Software 
Engineering 26, 62, 2021.  

15.  Tuomi K, Huuhtanen P, Nykyri E, et al. Promotion of 
work ability, the quality of work and retirement. Occup 
Med (Lond), pp.18-24, 2001. 

16.  E.F. Schumacher: Good Work, New York: Harper and 

Row, 1979. 

17.  S.  H.  Hattrup,  M.  Edwards,  K.  H.  Funk:  Workers’ 
Definitions of the Characteristics That Comprise Good 
Work:  A Qualitative  Analysis, 
In  Management 
Revuew, pp. 346-371, 2020. 

18.  A. N. Meyer, G. C. Murphy, T. Zimmermann and T. 
Fritz,  "Enabling  Good  Work  Habits  in  Software 
Developers through Reflective Goal-Setting," in IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 47, no. 9, 
pp. 1872-1885, 2021 

19.  IG  Metall  (2007).  Handbuch  »Gute  Arbeit«  - 
Handlungshilfen  und  Materialien  für  die  betriebliche 
Praxis. 

20.  Institut  DGB-Index  Gute  Arbeit  Berlin  (2020). 
Jahresbericht 
der 
Beschäftigtenbefragung zum DGB-Index Gute Arbeit 
https://index-gute-
2020. 

Ergebnisse 

URL: 

2020 

- 

 
Rometsch et al. 

arbeit.dgb.de/++co++b8f3f396-0c7f-11eb-91bf-
001a4a160127 

21.  A.  Matallaoui,  N.  Hanner  and  R.  Zarnekow: 
to  Gamification:  Foundation  and 
Gamification; 
In 

Introduction 
Underlying 
Theories. 
Springer: Cham, Switzerland, pp. 3–18, 2017. 

22.  M.  Sailer,  J.  Hense,  H.  Mandl  and  M.  Klevers: 
Psychological  perspectives  on  motivation  through 
gamification.  Interaction  Design  and  Architecture(s) 
Journal, 19, pp. 28–37, 2013. 

23.  O.  Pedreira,  F.  Garcia,  N.  Brisaboa,  and  M. Piattini: 
Gamification  in  software  engineering–A  systematic 
mapping.  Information  and  Software  Technology,  57, 
pp. 157–168, 2015. 

24.  Per  Runeson  and  Martin  Höst:  Guidelines  for 
conducting  and  reporting  case  study  research  in 
Software 
engineering. 
software 
Engineering 14, 2, pp. 131–164, 2009. 

Empirical 

25.  P.  Mayring:  Qualitative  content  analysis.  In  Forum: 
Qualitative  Social  Research,  Online  Journal,  1(2), 
2000. 
https://www.qualitative-
research.net/index.php/fqs/article/download/1089/238
6/ 

URL: 

26.  R. K. Yin: Case study research: Design and methods 
(4.  ed.  ed.).  Applied  social  research  methods  series, 
Vol. 5. Sage, Los Angeles, 2009. 

27.  S. Wilkinson: Focus group research. In D. Silverman 
(Ed.),  Qualitative  research.  Theory,  Method  and 
Practice. 
(2  ed.).  Thousand  Oaks,  CA.:  Sage 
Publications, 2004. 

28.  F.  Kamei,  G.  Pinto,  I.  Wiese,  M.  Ribeiro,  and  S. 
Soares: What Evidence We Would Miss If We Do Not 
Use Grey Literature? Proceedings of the 15th ACM / 
IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software 
Engineering  and  Measurement  (ESEM).  Association 
for  Computing  Machinery,  New  York,  NY,  USA, 
Article 24, 1–11. 2021. 

8 

 
