2
2
0
2

r
p
A
1
1

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
8
1
5
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Towards Understanding Analytics in Software Startups
Usman Rafiq
Faculty of Computer Science, Free University of Bozen-Bolzano,
Bolzano, Italy
urafiq@unibz.it

ABSTRACT
Analytics plays a crucial role in the data-informed decision-making
processes of modern businesses. Unlike established software com-
panies, software startups are not seen utilizing the potential of
analytics even though a startup process should be primarily data-
driven. There has been little understanding in the literature about
analytics for software startups. This study set out to address the
knowledge gap by exploring how analytics is understood in the
context of software startups. To this end, we collected the qual-
itative data of three analytics platforms that are mostly used by
startups from multiple sources. We covered platform documenta-
tion as well as experience reports of the software startups using
these platforms. The data was analyzed using content analysis tech-
niques. Four high-level concepts were identified that encapsulate
the real understanding of software startups on analytics, including
instrumentation of analytics, experimentation, diagnostic analysis,
and getting insights. The first concept describes how startups set up
analytics and the latter three illustrate the usage scenarios of ana-
lytics. This study is the first step toward understanding analytics in
the software startup context. The identified concepts can guide fur-
ther investigation of analytics in this context. It also provides some
insights for software startups to set up analytics for data-informed
decisions. Given the limitation of the data used in the study, the
immediate next step is to ground as well as validate the acquired
understanding using the primary data, by directly interacting with
software startups

CCS CONCEPTS
• software and its engineering → Software creation and man-
agement.

KEYWORDS
analytics, metrics, abstraction, software startups

ACM Reference Format:
Usman Rafiq. 2022. Towards Understanding Analytics in Software Startups.
In 5th International Workshop on Software-intensive Business: Towards Sus-
tainable Software Business (IWSiB’22 ), May 18, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 8 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3524614.3528632

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
IWSiB’22 , May 18, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9302-7/22/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3524614.3528632

1 INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in utilizing
analytics to produce value in the software businesses [8, 14]. Often-
times, the power of analytics is used to analyze significant informa-
tion about software projects [8]. This vast amount of information
leads to actions and decisions, transforming ways to revisit business
methods and practices [16]. Particularly, software businesses avail
this information to understand and make decisions while the project
evolves [8]. The use of analytics to facilitate the decision-making
process has begun to proliferate since its inception [14]. Mainly,
established software businesses and companies are harnessing the
full potential of analytics, possibly because of the access to a large
amount of information and abundant resources.

Startup companies are distinguished by their focus on inno-
vation, under extreme uncertainty [3, 18]. These companies con-
stantly look for a sustainable and scalable business model with
speed and focus. Software startups are types of startups, aiming
to build software-intensive products or services [19]. Similar to
general startup companies, while aiming at innovation, software
startups also need to move and act fast. Nevertheless, they are
confronted with a few other challenges, related to the software
engineering field. Software startups use lean startup methodol-
ogy to validate the product-market fit [4] and agile development
methodologies to develop the product [15]. This product and busi-
ness development cycle certainly brings a change in direction. It is
referred to as pivoting in software startups [18] and brings a change
in the product as well as the business model. We, therefore, may
obtain a pertinent illustration that startups adjust themselves based
on the information they gain. The decisions regarding directions
could be diverse, like for example, changing the target customer
segments, adding or removing product features, improving user
experience, modifying customer acquisition strategies, and so forth.
This is where software startups could utilize analytics, to better
understand and evaluate their actions.

The research regarding software startups, to date, has primarily
tended to focus on software development methodologies [19]. There
is still uncertainty, however, how software startups understand and
apply analytics throughout the product as well as the business de-
velopment. The role of analytics in startups is unknown despite the
widespread use of analytics in other businesses [2, 17]. Therefore,
the current study seeks to address this gap. It will eventually help
to understand how startups can use the power of analytics to make
data-informed decisions and illuminate their ways towards success.
The following Research Question (RQ) is guiding our research: RQ:
How is analytics understood in the software startup context?

The RQ turns our study exploratory. We utilized secondary data,
in the form of text documents, from analytics platforms for star-
tups, to answer the RQ. This study contributes to several important
areas. It is the first step towards the understanding of analytics by

 
 
 
 
 
 
IWSiB’22 , May 18, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Usman Rafiq

software startups and eventually explains how do they leverage
their decision-making using analytics. Moreover, the findings iden-
tify important areas of product and business development where
analytics can be applied.

2 RELATED WORK
There are relatively few studies on analytics in the software startup
context. In recent work, Rafiq et. al [17] studied how software
startups deal with the information to make decisions from an ana-
lytics perspective. They reported ten types of recurrent analytics
mistakes that might derail software startups. The information deal-
ing mistakes are further grouped into four categories: information
collection, information analysis, information communication, and
information usage.

In another related study, while investigating the role of data
analytics in startup companies, Berg et al. [2] presented challenges
and barriers faced by startups. The study claims that startups are
aware of the benefits of applying analytics, however, they are also
facing challenges in implementing it. The reported challenges are
scarcity of resources, lack of training/skills, time management is-
sues, privacy issues in dealing with the data, and lack of access to
the data. It is further argued that the amount of data that startups
collect, in the early stages, is insufficient to apply analytics. We
find that this study analyzed hardware startups only and big data
analytics was brought into the question. This is done possibly be-
cause the term big data is considered as one of the key aspects of
business analytics, however, it differs from traditional data in terms
of velocity, volume, and variety [6].

On the other hand, we find some writers reporting on metrics
and measurements in startups. One such example is the multiple
case study of Kamulegeya et al. [11], where authors report 28 met-
rics that startups are utilizing or wish to utilize. The study [11]
classifies metrics list according to the measurement practices in
established software companies and present five categories: busi-
ness metrics, product metrics, organizational performance metrics,
project metrics, and design metrics.

Later, Kemell et al. [12], in their multi-vocal literature review,
report more than 100 metrics that startups can use. However, we
observed that most of these metrics are appropriate for the late
stages in the life cycle of startups. Moreover, the study does not
reflect on the information needed and the process to collect/track
these metrics.

Taken together, the studies presented, thus far, provide evidence
that there is a lack of understanding on how startups understand
the term analytics and apply analytics in the startup context. The
current study seeks to address this gap.

3 RESEARCH METHOD
Our research is exploratory in nature as the knowledge on the
understanding of software startups regarding analytics is limited.
Therefore, to develop an initial understanding of what software
startups think about analytics, we decided to utilize secondary data
i.e. text data from analytics platforms. Nowadays, the widespread
usage of secondary data in research makes it a feasible approach
to meet limited-time and resources [10]. Vartanian [20] describes
that secondary data is the data collected by someone other than the

Figure 1: Data Collection and Analysis Procedure

researcher with some other objective. Likewise, to analyze the data
set, we used content analysis, a qualitative research method [9]. A
major advantage of using content analysis is that it is considered
an appropriate method in the absence of existing theory or when
the knowledge on the phenomenon is limited. In particular, we
employed a conventional content analysis approach to build an
understanding of analytics in the startup context. Fig. 1 depicts the
complete process of data collection and analysis. The following
subsections describe how we collected, filtered, and analyzed the
data.

3.1 Data Collection
Based on the research question, we planned to study analytics
platforms that are particularly intended for software startups. As a
preliminary step on getting information for platforms that startups
are using., we consulted forums on Hacker News 1. Hacker News
is the most trusted, reliable, and prevalent source of news for the
entrepreneurship and computer science community. It facilitates
finding the latest information on startups which is hard to find
elsewhere.

We applied search terms like "analytics", "metrics" and "startups"
to drive the search on the forum. These terms are originated from

1https://news.ycombinator.com/

Towards Understanding Analytics in Software Startups

IWSiB’22 , May 18, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

the research question of this research. Consequently, the manual
analysis of the resulting discussions on forums revealed several ana-
lytics platforms. These platforms were brought up into a discussion
of the startup community, illustrating its features, usage scenarios,
and a short comparison. These platforms were ranged from open
source to proprietary solutions and covered the following:
• Simple Analytics (https://simpleanalytics.com/)
• Mixpanel (https://mixpanel.com/)
• Google Analytics (https://analytics.google.com/)
• Matomo(https://matomo.org/)
• Fathom (https://usefathom.com/)
• Plausible (https://plausible.io)
• Open Web Analytics (https://www.openwebanalytics.com/)
• Kissmetrics (https://www.kissmetrics.io/)
• Amplitude (https://amplitude.com/)
• Umami (https://umami.is/)
• Goatcounter (https://www.goatcounter.com/)
• Snowplow (https://snowplowanalytics.com/)

Thereafter, we visited individual platform websites, manually ex-
tracted the information, and stored it in text files. The informa-
tion stemmed from several sources, like for example, associated
documentation, configuration information, developer information
in case of an open-source tool, user interface, testimonials of cus-
tomers, and blog posts. We also found blogs of some of the platforms
where the vendors expressed their opinions about analytics and
shared their experiences in instrumenting analytics at other startup
companies. We read each of the available documentation and as-
sessed whether the data can be utilized to address the research
question. It is noteworthy to state that we utilized every possible
way to extract the fragmented documentation associated with these
platforms with an intent not to miss some useful information. To
achieve this, we searched platform-specific documentation on the
platform website, Hacker News forum and Github 2, a repository
hosting service of open source applications. In this regard, we used
the platform’s hosting documentation on Github, known as a wiki
to extract some more information.

To obtain another triangulation in the data collection and sam-
pling phase, we explored the website of G2 3. G2 is a legit source
to check the reviews of business software by real users. We found
some of the platforms available on G2, however, few platforms were
not listed on it. This has helped us in screening analytics platforms
for the final data set. Lastly, we decided to utilize the information
from the following three platforms for our data set:

(1) Amplitude (https://amplitude.com/)
(2) Mixpanel (https://mixpanel.com/)
(3) Plausible (https://plausible.io)

We considered the following inclusion/exclusion criteria while
screening the platform information for our final data set: (1) Plat-
form is mature i.e. used by a huge startup community. We subjec-
tively assessed these criteria from Hacker News forum and objec-
tively from stargazer on Github website (2) Platform is available on
G2 website, (3) Platform is having extensive documentation, from
multiple sources like, for instance, website, blog posts and informa-
tion from forums. (4) Platform’s vendor is/was a software startup.

We checked startup information from Crunchbase 4. (5) Platform’s
documentation contained data wherein at least one or multiple
stories were shared. These stories communicate experiences of
software startups while implementing analytics. We assessed this
information from the collected documentation of the platform and
later on checked individual startups on Crunchbase. In total, the
data contained 9 startup stories focusing on analytics, with varying
text lengths.

3.2 Data Analysis
We used the qualitative analysis method, named, content analysis
to analyze the data. The use of content analysis in the software
engineering context is not new to software engineering research.
Recent studies, such as [7] and [13], advocate a rigorous process
for its use in software engineering.

Content analysis can be applied to the text data other than in-
terview data and coding categories are directly derived from the
data [9]. This is what makes it different from thematic analysis.
Therefore, in the content analysis research method, text data can be
obtained from interviews, focus groups, narrative responses, survey
questions, books, articles, or even manuals [9]. In particular, we
applied conventional content analysis inductively. This approach
is recommended when there is a lack of research knowledge on
the topic [9]. While performing analysis, we read the whole text
repeatedly to get a complete sense of the data. We then started
coding phrases wherein the term analytics was indicated or the
impression of analytics was arising. We highlighted the text that
appeared to contain the relevant terms and described the concepts.
Subsequently, we utilized the author’s words to code this segment
of the text. Alongside, we ignored the summative indication of
analytics in the text whereby the text was mainly referring to the
names of analytics platforms. Meanwhile, we avoided creating new
codes as the analysis process continued. It further depicts that we
only added new codes when we assessed that the existing codes
are not fit to label the new text under consideration.

Likewise, soon after finishing the development of codes, we then
moved the focus of our analysis to the coded data and examined
each code. We eventually examined the text within the particular
code and then merged, renamed, and eliminated codes while the
analysis process iterated. Based on the similarity in the codes and
the relationship between the codes, we created the clusters, even-
tually organizing clusters into a hierarchical structure. As a result,
we obtained 16 themes that were further clustered into 4 high-level
themes/top-level categories.

We used NVIVO 5, a qualitative data analysis tool, to support

the conventional content analysis.

4 FINDINGS
In this section, we present our research results. We identified 14
themes, in our data set, that directly express or found more rele-
vant to the analytics process inside software startups. We catego-
rized these themes into 4 high-level themes. The high-level themes
include instrumenting, experimentation, diagnostic analysis, and

2https://github.com/
3https://www.g2.com/

4https://www.crunchbase.com/discover/organization.companies
5https://www.qsrinternational.com/nvivo-qualitative-data-analysis-software/home/

IWSiB’22 , May 18, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Usman Rafiq

getting insights. The clustering of themes and labeling into high-
level is purely inductive and thus based on two factors. The first
one focuses on how to set up analytics in startups and we name
it instrumenting analytics. What we mean by instrumentation of
analytics is the intuition and directions to set up analytics in star-
tups. On the flip side, three themes coexist together and focus what
are the possible scenarios of applying analytics in startups. Here,
we include experimentation, diagnostic analysis and finally getting
insights. These themes, when taken together, illustrate how the
term analytics is understood by software startups. Fig. 2 shows how
software startups handle analytics.

4.1 Instrumenting Analytics:
4.1.1 Defining Goals: We figured out that all of the startups, em-
ploying analytics, have the sense of defining one or multiple goals
to achieve, through analytics. Often analytics platform vendors also
found promoting culture to establish the goals to meet the business
objectives. As an example, in the report of Amplitude platform (1),
the concept is explained like this: “ Too often, companies develop
feature after feature without thinking about how those features meet
overall business objectives.“. Therefore, these goals might be tied
directly to the success of the startup. This further illustrates the
thinking of measuring what matters the most and avoiding get-
ting indulged in the noise. It is evident from one of the following
excerpts, of Amplitude Platform (1): “Measuring anything and ev-
erything leads to unmanageable data. It shifts the burden to your
team to try and make sense of the results.“. In another instance, the
company advised in a similar context:“keep your end goals in mind“.
Going in the same vein, one of the startups, wanted their clients
to hit on the platform. The goal was to increase customer retention.
The possible ways they found against the goal were to reduce
churn rate and increase customer conversion. Churn rate is the
rate at which customers discontinue using a service or product and
conversion means how new customers take a desired action [5]. In
the data of Mixpanel Platform (2), a startup described the situation
in the following words:“For each market, they have targets they want
partners to hit, so they know they are reducing churn and increasing
conversion“. A similar conclusion is echoed in another report of
Plausible Analytics Platform (3), where the company expressed its
thoughts about setting goals: “Most web analytics allow site owners
to set goals and events to track those visitor actions that matter the
most to them.“. It is worthwhile to report that these established
goals generate several metrics to monitor. The startup reflected
this opinion in the following excerpt: “goals and events can be tied
directly to the monetary success of an enterprise which makes them
essential metrics to follow to understand the state of the business“.

4.1.2 Asking Questions: The data analysis, on the whole, suggests
that asking questions is a good way to establish the key focus of
analytics, revealing what one wants to achieve through it. And, cer-
tainly, this has a connection with setting goals while instrumenting
analytics in the startup. In the report of Mixpanel Platform (2), one
startup emphasized it in the following way: “We need to be asking
these questions“. The same report embarked again: “We want people
to engage with data, ask questions, and find the answers in data to
make the right decisions“. Likewise, Amplitude Platform (1) data,
reported a similar conclusion in the following excerpt: “Businesses

often have a multitude of questions about their customers and how
their product is performing“.

Based on the data set, we encountered the following set of ques-
tions that can be asked while instrumenting analytics:What exactly
works and what does not?, What do we want to be measuring?,
What’s the useful metric?, Is there an event we should be publish-
ing?, Which features are popular?, Which users retain best?, which
types of users stick around, and for how long Who are my most
valuable customers?, What actions do those valuable customers
take?, Who are the customers who churn?, How many power users
you have, What actions do churn users take?, What are the charac-
teristics of highly engaged users?, What are my users’ pain points?,
What’s happening on your site live in that moment, What are peo-
ple doing when they visit the website? and What’s happening and
how things are going?

4.1.3 Metrics As a Culture: We found several interesting examples
in the data where one startup repeatedly emphasized embedding
metrics in the overall culture of the product development process.
It means that no product feature should be left without publishing
different metrics. It is aimed at serving the purpose of measuring
and working towards large business goals. The same startup, said
on one occasion, in the report of Mixpanel Platform (2): “Publishing
the right business metrics must be integrated into your development
process“. The speaker, continued: “Baking this into the culture and
the expectation is probably the most important and most impactful
thing that you can do“. He further advised startups: “build it into the
culture and build it into the development process so that it becomes
a given“. While establishing this culture, it is necessary that all
product platforms i.e. web and mobile, should be aligned and the
same vocabulary should be put in place across the development
life cycle. This alludes to the following notion: “Ensure that all your
stakeholders–both in web and mobile–are aligned on how to name
those events and properties. “. A similar conclusion is highlighted
in the report of Amplitude Platform (1), where the company said:
“They align on target product outcomes, define an event taxonomy to
measure those outcomes, and instrument tracking code“.

4.1.4 Tracking Goals: We observed that another theme in the data
is usually concerned with tracking the goals. This theme is con-
cerned with tracking established goals. For example, a startup set
up a goal and wanted partners to grow. In contrast to this goal,
the startup asked many questions and then tracked metrics. This is
shown in the following excerpt of a startup, in Mixpanel Platform
(2) report: “... track how well their restaurant partners are doing on
the platform“. “and being able to look at these metrics is what’s going
to enable us to do that“, the startup reported. Another startup, in
the same report, had a similar goal and wanted to know the most
performing customer acquisition channels and increase customer
conversion. The startup reflects its tracking of this goal in the fol-
lowing words: “...been able to measure and optimize high-performing
acquisition channels, and also improve purchase funnels, making it
easy for consumers to convert into loyal policyholders“. A similar
indication about tracking goals about customer conversion is found
in the report of Plausible Analytics Platform (3), where the startup
indicated to track several metrics against goals: “Track events and
goals to identify the number of unique converted visitors, the total

Towards Understanding Analytics in Software Startups

IWSiB’22 , May 18, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Figure 2: How Software Startups Understand Analytics

number of conversions, the conversion rate, and the referral sites that
send the traffic that converts the best.“.

Finally, make certain that everyone is bought in on maintaining best
practices“.

4.1.5 Unifying Analytics: Unifying Analytics is one of the chal-
lenges that startups must tackle while instrumenting analytics.
Based on the findings, we highlight two types of unification, a
startup can achieve. The first type incorporates unifying analyt-
ics on all of the fragmented products of the startup. Oftentimes, a
startup offers multiple platforms, such as a combination of web and
mobile app. This is echoed by one of the startups, in the report of
Mixpanel Platform (2): “the company needed to unify its fragmented
analytics ecosystem“.

On the flip side, the other aspect of unification discussed in the
data is the shared understanding and goal alignment among differ-
ent startup teams, like, for instance, between the engineering team
and product team. The shared understanding and alignment might
include target product outcomes, taxonomy to measure outcomes,
and instrumenting coding accordingly. The report of Amplitude
Platform (1) shows: “Implementing great product analytics requires
product and engineering teams to work together. They align on tar-
get product outcomes, define an event taxonomy to measure those
outcomes, and instrument tracking code“. This enables the engineer-
ing team to track only what is required by the product team. The
company, Mixpanel Platform (2), agrees with such alignment in
the following words: “Ensure that all your stakeholders–both in web
and mobile–are aligned on how to name those events and properties.

4.2 Experimentation
4.2.1 Testing Hypotheses: A recurrent theme in the data was the
utilization of analytics in testing hypotheses. Startups need to
quickly test several hypotheses. Various startup development ap-
proaches like, for example, lean startup and customer development
methodology are amplifying the use of Hypotheses, particularly at
early stages [4, 18]. We found startups using analytics to test the
hypotheses. Simultaneously, analytics platforms are providing sup-
porting features to achieve this goal. For example, the Amplitude
Platform (1) report indicated such features. Identifying the Winning
features, customer acquisition campaigns, referral sources, and hy-
potheses regarding customer behavior are prominent in the data.
At one instance, the report of Amplitude Platform (1), indicated:“Its
growth engine generates hypotheses data by observing customer be-
havior while also amplifying winning features and campaign ideas“.
We encountered many instances in the data where this feature
was highlighted. It shows that the concerns regarding hypotheses
testing through analytics are widespread among startups. This is
evident from the following excerpt of a startup in the report of Mix-
panel Platform (2): “We wanted to test this hypothesis, so we quickly
threw events“. The startup continued alluding about the outcome
of this testing: “ we were able to test and disprove our hypothesis of

IWSiB’22 , May 18, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Usman Rafiq

it being related to payday”“. The testing of the hypotheses saved
the startup from investing more effort and time. The startup com-
mented:“This finding was helpful... because it showed them that, since
restaurants were already using the feature, perhaps they didn’t need
to invest more in it“.

4.2.2 Conducting A/B Testing: In the data, at various places, star-
tups expressed the use of analytics in conducting A/B testing. They
illustrated the benefits, this testing has brought to them and saved
them in several ways. We found two examples where startups mea-
sured and followed the results of A/B testing through the use of
analytics. Mainly, A/B tests were conducted to test the focus of the
product’s features. At the same time, one startup instrumented the
process of analytics in their environment because they needed to
clarify and learn from A/B tests. The startup reports this finding in
the report of Mixpanel Platform (2) using the following words: “The
company required a tool that could quickly clarify and streamline the
learnings from A/B testing“. The same startup continued expressing
its interests in A/B testing measurements through analytics and
said that this helped them to improve account creation using A/B
testing. It is expressed in the following excerpt:“monitor an A/B
test to see if it could increase another important metric: New Signer
Accounts“.

While, on the other hand, in the Amplitude Platform (1) report,
a startup argued that analytics helps in A/B testing regardless of
the exclamation points the test generates. The startup commented:
“Analytics are for more complex than A/B testing whether two ex-
clamation points or three generate more opens“. The startup further
commented: “Analytics helped ... his team shift their entire messaging
strategy toward what their users valued“.

Finding Product-Market Fit: A common view expressed in
4.2.3
all the reports is the use of analytics to truly understand the target
customers and move towards the development of the right product
for them. This means that startups can assess analytically whether
their business model is flawed or has the potential to grow fast. In
several instances, in the data of Amplitude Platform (1), we encoun-
tered the company standing out in explaining the similar benefits.
For instance, at one place, the company reported:“analytics is the
epicenter of how digital-first companies figure out customer needs
and measure the impact of their products“. It continued expressing
significant use of analytics in the product-market fit for startups:
“ To improve your odds of finding product-market fit, you need an
analytics platform that can go past reporting vanity metrics and basic
conversion funnels to understanding the experience customers are
having in your product“. In the same way, another company, Plau-
sible Analytics (3) also reported building an understanding of the
product benefits. The company alluded to the view in the following
words: “Understanding the interest around your product’s benefits..“.

4.2.4 Growing Customer Base: We find in our analysis that, a grow-
ing customer base is regarded as the experiment-driven process,
whereby different options are built and tested. We report an in-
teresting event when a startup aimed to remove pop-ups from its
application to increase the customer activation rates. After three
months of onboarding, they accidentally removed the pop-ups even
when they were not ready to embrace this change. The accident
went unnoticed for two weeks by the startup and suddenly they

realized a massive increase in the customer activation rates. A deep
dig down through the analytics platform revealed pop-up removal
as the main reason for this. In the report of Amplitude Platform
(1), the startup explained this event in the following words: “We
talk about growth and retention as “experiment-driven” processes so
much that we sometimes lose sight of the fact that many discover-
ies occur by chance“. The startup regarded customer growth as an
experiment-driven process, as they also planned to test it in the
same way. Now, in a retrospect, they sense that although it was an
accident, however, without the analytics the root cause cannot be
exactly known. The startup explains this in the following excerpt:
“They can only happen, however, if you’ve been tracking the data you
need to work back to the root cause later“. They continued sharing
their pleasant accident:“Without data to look back on, this whole
affair would have been regarded as a massive error “.

4.3 Diagnostic Analysis
4.3.1 Uncovering Cause: The data analysis revealed that software
startups are utilizing analytics to diagnose a strange or unexpected
cause of a phenomenon. The strange situations may include sudden
spikes in application traffic at particular times or a sudden decrease
in customer conversion rate. Customer conversion rate is the per-
centage of users who take the desired action on the product[5]. We
found 3 instances in the reports of two analytics platforms, where
software startups reported their experience in finding the cause
of a strange phenomenon just because they were already into the
analytics. For instance, we found that one of the startup customers
of Amplitude Platform (1) , noticed an unusual yet recurring trend
of a spike in traffic. They were new to applying analytics but they
managed to sort out the reason eventually. And they assessed that
it is the start of the weekend and the traffic is spiking every Monday
or on Tuesday. The startup figured out, with the help of analytics,
that their partners were looking at their feedback, sales of last week,
changes to opening hours or menus, at the beginning of every week.
The startup explained the diagnosis:“The company continued to col-
lect a month’s worth of data and realized that DAU was spiking every
Monday—or, in the case of a long weekend—Tuesday. It’s the start of
the work week and of course our partners are logging in“. Here, DAU
is the abbreviation for daily active users.

A similar situation is reported by another startup at Mixpanel
platform (2). The startup experienced a sudden drop in the conver-
sion rate and later it was found that a minor change on the home
page has caused this drop. The startup also utilized analytics in
finding the cause. According to the Mixpanel (2), “If you weren’t pay-
ing close attention to your analytics, you would just wind up sitting
around and wondering why your conversion rate had dropped“.

4.4 Getting Insights:
4.4.1 Assessing Efforts: In this theme, startups obtained insights
on the efforts that they put in terms of introducing new product
features, making changes in the product layout, and hiring variant
customer acquisition as well as marketing channels. They want
to observe which of their efforts are more result-oriented so that
they can shift all their focus to the identified direction. This new
direction leads the future strategy of the startup and brings better

Towards Understanding Analytics in Software Startups

IWSiB’22 , May 18, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

understanding the customer needs. As, one startup, Plausible An-
alytics (3) indicated:“You may be putting a lot of time, effort, and
resources into different marketing campaigns and by looking at refer-
ral sources of your website traffic you can better understand which of
those campaigns are more worth than others“. The startup continued
arguing that one needs to redesign its future strategy if the existing
efforts are misleading. “If you’re spending a lot of time and effort on
a community but that effort doesn’t result in any benefits to your site
or business, then you need to reconsider things“, the startup remarked
on the situation. While talking about the future strategy, the startup
asserted to analyze efforts to optimize the future. It is reported in
the following phrase: “an addition layer and more depth to analyze
your efforts which can then help you optimize your strategy for the
future“.

A similar experience is shared in the report of Amplitude Plat-
form (1), where the company highlighted the need for analytics to
deeply understand the customer needs and assess the outcomes
of development efforts. The statement reflects this finding: “The
one thing we found missing was a powerful product platform to truly
understand what users wanted and the impact our development efforts
were having on their user experience“.

4.4.2 Measuring Progress: Savvy startups are often concerned with
measuring their progress. However, measuring the progress without
any yardstick is barely possible. This is what we pointed out while
analyzing the data. We found that startups are using analytics to
measure their progress using insights from different perspectives.
The startup, Plausible Analytics (3), told in their report: “we use web
analytics to measure our startup’s progress and make better decisions“.
Generalizing this need, the startup claimed: “majority of website and
business owners want to see some level of stats that tells them what’s
going on “. The company further highlighted the key advantages of
using analytics in measuring progress, in following excerpt: “some
of the main areas where web analytics can help website owners get a
better idea of what’s happening and how things are going “.

4.4.3 Making Decisions: The data analysis depicts that, startup
decisions are based on the insights that the analytics generates for
them. These insights oftentimes arise by measuring the progress of
startup, by assessing the startup efforts in making things done, or
during the experimentation, however, these are considered holis-
tically while making decisions. For instance, Plausible Analytics
(3) claimed that they used analytics in making decisions. These
decisions further lay down the foundation of future strategy. It is
apparent from the following excerpt: “... more depth to analyze your
efforts which can then help you optimize your strategy for the future
“. In the same way, a startup, in the report of Mixpanel Platform
(2), shared that they decided not to put more effort into design-
ing features when they observed that their partners are already
engaged with the product. The startup commented: “This finding
was helpful ... because it showed them that, since restaurants were
already using the feature, perhaps they didn’t need to invest more
in it.“. The company Amplitude Platform (1) sheds more light on
making decisions employing analytics in these words: “Your product
analytics can provide you with the exact data needed to drive your
decision-making and continue to make improvements that delight
your customers. “.

4.4.4 Understanding User Behaviour and Engagement: One possi-
ble use of analytics, our data analysis showed, is understanding
user behavior and interaction with the product. It is used to clear
the assumptions regarding the customer’s behavior. At the same
time, it brings to the surface, trending content, winning product
features, and highlights the customer journey from one platform to
another. Several analytics goals can be achieved through this, like,
for example, improving retention by monitoring and understanding
user behavior. The report of Amplitude Platform (1), highlights
this finding in the following words: “Identifying which customers
are most engaged and using this information to improve retention “.
The company continued expressing similar and concrete benefits at
another place in the following excerpt: “analytics helps you create
that digital experience without any guesswork. It provides you with
concrete information to optimize conversions, grow retention, and
maximize revenue. “.

Another interesting finding, we noticed, is finding reasons of
a user behaviour. “Good product teams don’t just ask, what are my
users doing? They ask, why? This requires context“, the report of
Amplitude Platform (1), revealed.

5 DISCUSSION
Our study results confirm that analytics in the startup context
reflects a somewhat different meaning in contrast to what is de-
scribed in the software engineering literature. Therefore, when we
talk about startups, analytics is not based on the big data as it is
indicated in [2, 14], nor it is characterized by what is given in terms
of software analytics [8]. However, we find that while there exist
many types of analytics in the literature, e.g. big data analytics, web
analytics, software analytics, and social media analytics, startup
analytics is closer to the characteristics of web analytics. Along-
side, we need further investigation to ground the understanding of
analytics in the startup context.

The study [17] also reported a few other analytics-related mis-
takes, e.g. “avoiding to collect further information“, “poor team com-
munication“ and “mishandling information“. Our data shows that
the first two mistakes can be mitigated by instrumenting analyt-
ics in startups. For instance, unifying analytics will reduce poor
communication in the startup team. Similarly, for the last one, the
findings suggest looking at information from multiple perspectives
and also waiting for trends to appear in the information.

Surprisingly, one of our findings emphasizes developing a cul-
ture of metrics and embedding it into the development of product
features. This invites the concept of measuring everything, espe-
cially in product development. A possible explanation for this result
might be that startups could need to produce hindsight. Therefore,
in a retrospect, they might need to do this. However, we find no
clue on this finding from literature, and our study also remains
unable to explain it to a further extent.

In contrast to the earlier findings of [2], however, we confirm
that software startups are using analytics. This difference may
be explained by our chosen sample. We studied purely software
startups while Berg et al. [2] studied startups with a hardware part
as well. Another important difference, we would like to illustrate
is that our study focused on the understanding of startups about
analytics. We find that, when taken together, this understanding is

IWSiB’22 , May 18, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Usman Rafiq

startups with the primary data. Moreover, the current findings have
left many questions in need of further investigation. For example,
further work is required to map the relationship of analytics with
the term metrics. As both these terms are used interchangeably.
Lastly, the relationship between stages of startup across the life-
cycle and use of analytics might be worth investigating.

REFERENCES
[1] Florian Auer, Chhong Shing Lee, and Michael Felderer. 2020. Continuous experi-
ment definition characteristics. In 2020 46th Euromicro Conference on Software
Engineering and Advanced Applications (SEAA). IEEE, 186–190.

[2] Vebjørn Berg, Jørgen Birkeland, Ilias O Pappas, and Letizia Jaccheri. 2018. The
Role of Data Analytics in Startup Companies: Exploring Challenges and Barriers.
In Conference on e-Business, e-Services and e-Society. Springer, 205–216.

[3] Steve Blank. 2020. The four steps to the epiphany: successful strategies for products

that win. John Wiley & Sons.

[4] Jan Bosch, Helena Holmström Olsson, Jens Björk, and Jens Ljungblad. 2013. The
early stage software startup development model: a framework for operational-
izing lean principles in software startups. In International Conference on Lean
Enterprise Software and Systems. Springer, 1–15.

[5] Alistair Croll and Benjamin Yoskovitz. 2013. Lean analytics: Use data to build a

better startup faster. " O’Reilly Media, Inc.".

[6] Charles K Davis. 2014. Beyond data and analysis. Commun. ACM 57, 6 (2014),

39–41.

[7] Joanna F DeFranco and Phillip A Laplante. 2017. A content analysis process for
qualitative software engineering research. Innovations in Systems and Software
Engineering 13, 2 (2017), 129–141.

[8] Latifa Guerrouj, Olga Baysal, David Lo, and Foutse Khomh. 2016. Software
analytics: challenges and opportunities. In 2016 IEEE/ACM 38th International
Conference on Software Engineering Companion (ICSE-C). IEEE, 902–903.
[9] Hsiu-Fang Hsieh and Sarah E Shannon. 2005. Three approaches to qualitative

content analysis. Qualitative health research 15, 9 (2005), 1277–1288.

[10] Melissa P Johnston. 2017. Secondary data analysis: A method of which the time
has come. Qualitative and quantitative methods in libraries 3, 3 (2017), 619–626.
[11] Grace Kamulegeya, Raymond Mugwanya, and Regina Hebig. 2018. Measurements
in the early stage software start-ups: a multiple case study in a nascent ecosystem.
Foundations of Computing and Decision Sciences 43, 4 (2018), 251–280.

[12] Kai-Kristian Kemell, Xiaofeng Wang, Anh Nguyen-Duc, Jason Grendus, Tuure
Tuunanen, and Pekka Abrahamsson. 2019. 100+ Metrics for Software Startups-A
Multi-Vocal Literature Review. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.04819 (2019).

[13] Zijad Kurtanović and Walid Maalej. 2018. On user rationale in software engi-

neering. Requirements Engineering 23, 3 (2018), 357–379.

[14] Patrick Mikalef, Ilias O Pappas, John Krogstie, and Michail Giannakos. 2018. Big
data analytics capabilities: a systematic literature review and research agenda.
Information Systems and e-Business Management 16, 3 (2018), 547–578.

[15] Jevgenija Pantiuchina, Marco Mondini, Dron Khanna, Xiaofeng Wang, and Pekka
Abrahamsson. 2017. Are software startups applying agile practices? The state of
the practice from a large survey. In International Conference on Agile Software
Development. Springer, Cham, 167–183.

[16] Ilias O Pappas, Patrick Mikalef, Michail N Giannakos, John Krogstie, and George
Lekakos. 2018. Big data and business analytics ecosystems: paving the way
towards digital transformation and sustainable societies. Information Systems
and e-Business Management 16, 3 (2018), 479–491.

[17] Usman Rafiq, Jorge Melegati, Dron Khanna, Eduardo Guerra, and Xiaofeng Wang.
In Evaluation and

2021. Analytics Mistakes that Derail Software Startups.
Assessment in Software Engineering. 60–69.

[18] Eric Ries. 2011. The lean startup: How today’s entrepreneurs use continuous inno-

vation to create radically successful businesses. Currency.

[19] Michael Unterkalmsteiner, Pekka Abrahamsson, Xiaofeng Wang, Anh Nguyen-
Duc, Syed Shah, Sohaib Shahid Bajwa, Guido H Baltes, Kieran Conboy, Eoin
Cullina, Denis Dennehy, et al. 2016. Software startups–a research agenda. e-
Informatica Software Engineering Journal 10, 1 (2016).

[20] Thomas P Vartanian. 2010. Secondary data analysis. Oxford University Press.

pretty different from what general software engineering literature
states about analytics. The literature [8, 14, 16], presents analytics
in terms of big data analytics, software analytics, or simply data
analytics. It is interesting to reveal that our findings provide a
diverse understanding of analytics from a startup’s perspective.
However, it would be interesting to relate our findings with general
software engineering literature. This would remain an important
issue for future avenues.

Lastly, the findings strongly show a connection of analytics with
metrics. For example, goals and questions during analytics instru-
mentation generate metrics. However, our findings are not self-
explanatory in explaining this connection and further assessment
of the relationship between analytics and metrics.

5.1 Threats to Validity
One of the threats to validity, particularly, internal validity, is the
use of secondary data. This type of data provides a lack of control
on data volume and quality. To mitigate this threat, to a certain
extent, we triangulated data using multiple sources and by applying
inclusion/exclusion criteria. This type of data has already been used
by other studies, like for example, by [1].

Regarding threats to external validity, one of the threats lies
in our data collection strategy. We selected 3 platforms out of 12
for further investigation by applying several inclusion/exclusion
criteria. Later, we collected analytics platform documentation from
every possible source e.g. platform website, blogs, and forums. The
data, from the three platforms, was different in length and scope.
Besides that, we might have missed collecting some associated
data. However, the data set was containing startups from differ-
ent geographical regions, market segments, and different product
platforms. It enhanced the ability to generalize the results of this
ongoing research effort.

Regarding the reliability of this study, one possible threat is
concerned with the researcher’s bias in the coding process. The
coding process was done by one researcher solely, however, the
early codes and themes were discussed with the other researcher
before reporting.

Lastly, we take the privilege to admit that the reported under-
standing of analytics, in the startup context, still needs further
investigation, possibly with the primary data. It further means that
we need to continue grounding and validating our understanding
of analytics in the startup context based on the primary data.

6 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Startups are confronted with several challenges while raising the
odds of success. Uncertainty, scarcity of resources, engineering
challenges, speed, and right focus are among few to mention. On
their way, startups have to take plenty of decisions and adjust
directions accordingly. This is where analytics can serve them with
the right information. This is the first study that attempts to explain
how analytics is understood in the startup context. In this ongoing
research, we report an initial understanding of analytics in the
startups covering its instrumentation and the context, in which it
can be utilized.

Several questions still need to be answered in the future. One
significant direction is to validate this understanding of analytics in

