2
2
0
2

r
p
A
0
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
3
7
9
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Poster: ARLIF-IDS — Attention augmented
Real-Time Isolation Forest Intrusion Detection
System

Aman Priyanshu
Dept. of Information &
Communication Technology
Manipal Institute of Technology
Manipal, India
aman.priyanshu@learner.manipal.edu

Sarthak Shastri
Dept. of Information &
Communication Technology
Manipal Institute of Technology
Manipal, India
sarthak.shastri@learner.manipal.edu

Sai Sravan Medicherla
Dept. of Information &
Communication Technology
Manipal Institute of Technology
Manipal, India
sai.medicherla@learner.manipal.edu

Abstract—Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack is a
malicious attempt to disrupt the normal trafﬁc of a targeted
server, service or network by overwhelming the target or its sur-
rounding infrastructure with a ﬂood of Internet trafﬁc. Emerging
technologies such as the Internet of Things and Software Deﬁned
Networking leverage lightweight strategies for the early detection
of DDoS attacks. Previous literature demonstrates the utility of
lower number of signiﬁcant features for intrusion detection [1],
[2], [4]. Thus, it is essential to have a fast and effective security
identiﬁcation model based on low number of features.

In this work, a novel Attention-based Isolation Forest Intrusion
Detection System is proposed. The model considerably reduces
training time and memory consumption of the generated model.
For performance assessment, the model
is assessed over two
benchmark datasets, the NSL-KDD dataset & the KDDCUP’99
dataset. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
attention augmented model achieves a signiﬁcant reduction in
execution time, by 91.78%, and an average detection F1-Score
of 0.93 on the NSL-KDD and KDDCUP’99 dataset. The results
of performance evaluation show that the proposed methodology
has low complexity and requires less processing time and com-
putational resources, outperforming other current IDS based on
machine learning algorithms.

Index Terms—Attention, Isolation Forest, Intrusion Detection

System, Memory Optimization, Edge Deployment

I. INTRODUCTION

The rapid advances in the communication technology have
resulted in transmission services handling huge network size
and the corresponding data. As a result, malicious entities have
ample opportunity to attack and deny service to target systems
(DDoS). Despite existing traditional solutions, Distributed
Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks continue to be a prominent
cybercrime. Many attacks occur each day and pose security
the existence of
challenges for client-networks. Therefore,
accurate intrusion detection systems becomes indispensable.
An intrusion detection system (IDS) is a tool that prevents the
network from possible intrusions by inspecting the network
trafﬁc, to ensure its conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability.
Despite enormous efforts by the researchers, IDS still faces
challenges in improving detection performance while reducing
detection-time and increasing memory optimization.

II. RELATED WORK

Existing surveys on anomaly detection techniques, only
marginally consider the utility of neural-network-based ap-
proaches, due to their intensive memory consumption and
high detection-time. Current research developments regarding
deep neural networks and LSTM architectures for anomaly
detection are oftentimes not scalable due to these issues.
However, IDS which employ machine learning methodology,
such as classiﬁcation-based, clustering-based and information-
theoretic approaches. Thus, techniques based on the isolation
forest (IF), random forest (RF), distance-based inference,
entropy-based inference constitute a major part of the investi-
gations [4]. Theoretical studies have also been conducted on
LSTM and CNNs. An analysis is conducted over these deep
neural network methods.

III. METHODOLOGY

Our proposed methodology, which we call ARLIF - Atten-
tion augmented Real-Time Isolation Forest Intrusion Detection
System, draws inspiration from the transformer models [5].
However, unlike traditional attention-based model, we employ
learning on only the attention layer, whereas time-series datum
is computed using proba values predicted by Isolation Trees.
The methodology allows online learning, and real-time detec-
tion systems may employ it for high-performance detection.

The architecture of this model relies solely on attention
mechanisms to carry out the seasonality learning, allowing the
modulation and focus of predictions to be placed on speciﬁc
isolation trees, based on previous responses (context).

A. Attention Mechanism

In order to utilize the attention mechanism in the network in-
trusion detection domain and take advantage of its properties,
we employ its contextualizing attentive properties during forest
response averaging. Taking each trees predicted probability as
its vector at V i
k for treei at time = k. Thereby, allowing the
attention mechanism to create updated vector embeddings for

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Proposed methodology - Attention augmented Real-Time Isolation Forest Intrusion Detection System

every tree, based on responses from others as well as, their
time-series.

To formulate the algorithm presented in Fig 1, we limit
to be pre-
previous time-series predictions of each tree,
vious k-responses. Therefore once a forest of
isolation
trees are trained,
the online learning will only be exe-
cuted through the attention mechanism, which would have:
number of trainable parameters = 3 ∗ k ∗ (k + 1), which
would be based on query, key, &value layers. The model
therefore, offers a memory optimal, time efﬁcient approach
towards intrusion detection.

IV. RESULTS

TABLE I
MODEL PERFORMANCE INFERENCE ON DATASETS

Model Name
CNN
LSTM
ARLIF-IDS
Isolation Forest
Random Forest
Entropy-based IDS
Distance-based IDS

F1-Score Memory Acquired

0.95
0.96
0.93
0.87
0.88
0.83
0.84

105kB
238kB
11kB
6kB
44kB
3kB
4kB

Detection-Time
4.6s
7.3s
0.6s
0.4s
0.9s
0.2s
0.2s

We carry out a set of experimental evaluations in order to
provide a deep analysis of the performance of the proposed
model. Then, we compare the overall results against baseline
models. The models are tested on KDDCUP’99 dataset and
the NSL-KDD dataset as benchmark.

We present these results in Table I. As demonstrated the
proposed methodology is able to give high preliminary results
for the memory-time-performance tradeoff. The table presents
neural network and tree based methods as the highest per-
forming algorithms, where as, entropy-based and distribution-

based methods provide low memory and execution-time utility.
ARLIF-IDS gives a satisfactory trade-off giving performance
even higher than LSTM networks.

V. CONCLUSION
This poster presents an intrusion detection model with at-
tention mechanism for isolation forest augmentation. We take
into account the sparse correlation majority trafﬁc-features
have with anomaly detection, and develop a strategy to
utilize models with low-feature space input further cutting
down on computational costs [4]. The proposed model was
demonstrated to achieve satisfactory performance of 0.93 F1-
Score for the KDDCUP’99 dataset and NSL-KDD dataset.
We also show that it lowers average detection-time of 91.78%
with respect to LSTM anomaly detection model and 95.37%
lower memory utilization with respect to the same. For future
work, we hope to utilize other probabilistic methods instead
of isolation trees.

REFERENCES

[1] Q. R. S. Fitni and K. Ramli, ”Implementation of Ensemble Learning
and Feature Selection for Performance Improvements in Anomaly-Based
Intrusion Detection Systems,” 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Industry 4.0, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, and Communications Technology
(IAICT), 2020, pp. 118-124, doi: 10.1109/IAICT50021.2020.9172014.
[2] A. A. Aburomman and M. Bin Ibne Reaz, ”Ensemble of binary SVM
classiﬁers based on PCA and LDA feature extraction for intrusion detec-
tion,” 2016 IEEE Advanced Information Management, Communicates,
Electronic and Automation Control Conference (IMCEC), 2016, pp.
636-640, doi: 10.1109/IMCEC.2016.7867287.

[3] C. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Yan and J. Wang, ”An Intrusion Detection Model
With Hierarchical Attention Mechanism,” in IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
67542-67554, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2983568.

[4] Josy Elsa Varghese, Balachandra Muniyal, & Aman Priyanshu (2022).
Finding an elite feature for (D)DoS fast detection—Mixed methods
research. Computers & Electrical Engineering, 98, 107705.

[5] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion
Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, & Illia Polosukhin (2017).
Attention Is All You Need. CoRR, abs/1706.03762.

