2
2
0
2

r
p
A
9

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
2
4
4
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Revisiting the Effect of Branch Handling Strategies
on Change Recommendation

Keisuke Isemoto
k_isemoto@se.c.titech.ac.jp
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan

Takashi Kobayashi
tkobaya@c.titech.ac.jp
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan

Shinpei Hayashi
hayashi@c.titech.ac.jp
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan

ABSTRACT
Although literature has noted the effects of branch handling strate-
gies on change recommendation based on evolutionary coupling,
they have been tested in a limited experimental setting. Additionally,
the branches characteristics that lead to these effects have not been
investigated. In this study, we revisited the investigation conducted
by Kovalenko et al. on the effect to change recommendation using
two different branch handling strategies: including changesets from
commits on a branch and excluding them. In addition to the setting
by Kovalenko et al., we introduced another setting to compare: ex-
tracting a changeset for a branch from a merge commit at once. We
compared the change recommendation results and the similarity of
the extracted co-changes to those in the future obtained using two
strategies through 30 open-source software systems. The results
show that handling commits on a branch separately is often more
appropriate in change recommendation, although the comparison
in an additional setting resulted in a balanced performance among
the branch handling strategies. Additionally, we found that the
merge commit size and the branch length positively influence the
change recommendation results.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Software and its engineering → Software version control;
Software evolution;

KEYWORDS
Change recommendation, evolutionary coupling, version control,
Git

1 INTRODUCTION
As software systems evolve, the amount of codes and the depen-
dencies between the codes increase, thus making the systems more
complex. As their complexity increases, it is difficult for developers
to understand the extent and effect of their changes. Therefore,
necessary changes can leak out, causing bugs in the source code.

Dependencies among source files can be identified based on in-
formation about the evolutionary processes of the source files. By
using information such as commits recorded in version control
systems, we can estimate dependencies that cannot be obtained
through static or dynamic analysis, independent of the used pro-
gramming language.

One approach is change recommendation based on evolutionary
coupling [14, 20]. The co-change information can be obtained from
the revision history of the source files that have been changed in
the same revision. By applying association rule mining to the co-
change information, the dependencies among source files can be

1

extracted as association rules such as “when a file 𝑓1 is changed,
another file 𝑓2 should also be changed.”

Researchers have noted that there are various factors that affect
the results of change recommendations based on co-change infor-
mation [11, 12]. Kovalenko et al. reported the influence of branches
in history [8]. They compared two history extraction approaches
with different branch handling strategies, and reported that ob-
taining co-change information from commits on a branch slightly
improved the recommendation performance compared to omitting
to obtain it from history.

However, unlike the result obtained by Kovalenko et al. [8],
another possible approach when extracting co-change information
from history is to obtain such co-change information collectively
from a merge commit without traversing commits on a branch. A
similar study conducted by Miura et al. [9] concluded that changes
should be summarized by work item in co-change analysis, and it
is unclear how the changes on a branch should be handled when
applying a co-change analysis. Miura et al. investigated the co-
change information extracted from the version history of open-
source software systems, and found that the changes in commits
identified as following the same work, i.e., those related to the
same issue, should be grouped together to avoid missing co-change
information [9]. Branches in version control systems are primarily
used for achieving specific tasks, such as bug fixes and feature
additions [21], and changes on a branch are comparable to the same
work. Based on this observation, an approach skipping commits on
a branch but obtaining their co-change information from a merge
commit is possible, and the appropriate treatment of branches when
extracting changes during change recommendation is unclear.

Additionally, because branches are an essential element of soft-
ware development, it is important to investigate the influence of
branches in applying repository mining methods to actual repos-
itories. Currently, Git is widely used as a representative version
control system. In projects that use Git, change management using
branches is widely practiced [3]. The branches in Git are easy to cre-
ate, can be used for tasks such as fixing bugs or adding features [21],
and can be used to manage each release. Branch usage also affects
the granularity of commits and change recommendations; hence,
branches need to be handled appropriately depending on the char-
acteristics of the target repository. Additionally, investigating the
types of branches that have affected the change recommendation
should be helpful in implementing repository mining methods in
actual development.

In this study, we set the following research questions (RQs) to
identify the appropriate method for handling branches in change
recommendations.

 
 
 
 
 
 
• RQ1: Does the experimental setting of the study on branch
handling strategies influence the change recommendation
performance?

• RQ2: Which branches characteristics affect the performance

of change recommendations?
– RQ2.1: What is the relationship between the branch char-

acteristics and change recommendation results?

– RQ2.2: What is the relationship between the branch char-
acteristics and the co-changes extracted from commits in
a branch and those from a merge commit?

To answer RQ1, we compare the change recommendation results
with the two branch handling strategies proposed by Kovalenko
et al. [8] to investigate the effect of the experimental setting that
might lead to the results. We used more repositories than Kovalenko
et al. as well as two implementations. The first implementation
reproduced Kovalenko et al.’s study, and the other implementa-
tion changed the handling of merge commits. We compared the
results with different branch handling strategies, and analyzed
them through validation based on more evaluation metrics than
Kovalenko et al.

In RQ2, we investigate the branches characteristics that affect
the change recommendations. However, because differences exist
among the branches, defining a uniform treatment for the branches
might not be possible. Therefore, we investigate how each branch
characteristic affects the change recommendation, such as the
length of branches and the size of the merge commits. In RQ2.1, we
analyze the differences in the recommendation results of different
branch handling strategies for each branch characteristic. Because
the analysis in answering RQ2.1 can be affected by the configura-
tion of the change recommendation method used, in RQ2.2 we also
analyze the difference in co-change information directly between
the commits on a branch and those in a merge commit for each
branch characteristic.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We first briefly ex-
plain the change recommendation approach based on evolutionary
coupling in the next section. In Section 3, we explain the study by
Kovalenko et al. and introduce RQs. We respond to the introduced
RQs in Section 4. Discussion and implications, and threats to valid-
ity are described in Sections 5 and 6, respecctively. Sections 7 and 8
are for related work and concluding remarks.

2 CHANGE RECOMMENDATION BASED ON

EVOLUTIONARY COUPLING

Change recommendation approaches based on evolutionary cou-
pling [8, 14, 20] take a set of files as an input query, and output a
ranked list of files as recommendations to be fixed in addition to
the input set of files. In this study, we use the “other files” algo-
rithm, which is a change recommendation algorithm implemented
by Kovalenko et al. [7]. In the following, we briefly explain this as
a typical method of co-change-based change recommendation.

This change recommendation algorithm comprises the following

three steps:

(1) Collection of commits to be used.
(2) Application of the Apriori algorithm [1] to the changesets
extracted from the collected commits to generate association
rules.

2

Keisuke Isemoto, Takashi Kobayashi, and Shinpei Hayashi

(3) Construction of a recommendation list of files using the ob-

tained association rules.

The first step is to collect commits from the target change repos-
itory using the given branch handling strategy. Each commit is
regarded as a changeset, i.e., a set of files that were modified at the
commit. Initially, commits that meet the following inclusion criteria
are collected by following the given branch handling strategy.

• Only commits that contain at least one file in the query are

included.

• Assuming that changed files in large commits may not have
meaningful relationships [11], commits with more than 10
changed files are excluded.

Finally, at most, 100 latest files are passed onto the next step.

The second step is to generate association rules. The set of changed
files in each collected commit forms a transaction; i.e., each pair of
files in the changeset is changed together. The transaction database
𝑇 , which is a set of transactions obtained from the commits, is the
input for the Apriori algorithm for generating association rules as
the recommendation results. Each association rule follows the form
of “condition part → conclusion part” (𝑥 → 𝑦), where each part is a
set of files. The quality of an association rule is measured by the
support and confidence metrics:

support (𝑥) = |{ 𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 | 𝑥 ⊆ 𝑡 }|/|𝑇 |,

support (𝑥 → 𝑦) = support (𝑥 ∪ 𝑦),

confidence(𝑥 → 𝑦) = support (𝑥 → 𝑦)/support (𝑥).

In the Apriori algorithm, two parameters, the minimum support (min-
sup) and confidence (minconf ), are employed to generate the asso-
ciation rules that meet the conditions from the given transaction
database. We used the same parameters as those in Kovalenko et
al.: (minsup, minconf ) = (0.1, 0.1). The generated association rules
having more than one file at the conclusion part are filtered out.
Finally, at most, 10 association rules having top support values are
passed onto the next step.

The third step is to produce a recommendation list by applying
the given query to the obtained association rules. If all the files
in the condition part of an association rule are included in the
query, the file at the conclusion part of the rule is adopted as a
recommendation result. The results in the recommendation list are
ranked in the order of support of the adopted rules.

In this change recommendation approach, the number of recom-
mendations is kept low, because the association rules to be used
are narrowed down before making the recommendation. Because
the recommendation is made from at most 10 association rules, the
resulting recommended files are also at most 10.

3 BRANCH HANDLING STRATEGIES
Kovalenko et al. [8] studied the effect of handling branches when
applying repository mining tasks to a Git repository. They investi-
gated three repository mining applications: recommending review-
ers [2], bug prediction [4], and change recommendation [20]. They
compared the results after applying two branch handling strategies,
First-Parent and Full, to three repository mining methods, including
change recommendation, to evaluate the importance of each branch
handling strategy. Figure 1 shows each branch handling strategy.
The commits with a parallelogram are the targets to be extracted in

Revisiting the Effect of Branch Handling Strategies on Change Recommendation

Figure 1: Branch handling strategies.

the branch handling strategy used. The First-Parent strategy selects
commits by tracing the first parent when a merge commit occurs
and omits the changes obtained from non-main branches, whereas
the Full strategy selects commits that are reachable by tracing all
parent commits. The Full strategy excludes the merging change in
merge commits, as they are a union of all changes on the associated
branch. The First-Parent strategy defined by Kovalenko et al. also
excludes the merging change in merge commits to compare the
effect of using the changes in branches. For clarity, we named this
strategy as First-Parentno_merge. Kovalenko et al. compared these
two branch handling strategies, and demonstrated that the Full
strategy exhibited a slightly better recommendation performance.
Nevertheless, there is another possible approach for handling
changes in a branch: extracting all the changes from a merge commit
to obtain co-change information of a branch collectively. We name
this strategy First-Parentmerge. In the Full strategy, each commit on
a branch is treated individually. In the First-Parentmerge strategy,
the changes on the branch are combined into a merge commit, and
a single changeset from the merge commit is used. In contrast to
the First-Parentmerge strategy, the First-Parentno_merge strategy ex-
cludes merge commits with some exceptions; only the cases where
the merge commits contained additional changes are included. The
difference of handling merge commits might affect the change rec-
ommendation performance, wherein the performance of the Full
strategy tended to be higher.

Therefore, in RQ1, we compare the performance of the change
recommendation results between Full and First-Parentno_merge and
between Full and First-Parentmerge. Through experiments with the
two combinations, we confirmed the influence of missing changes
on the branches as Kovalenko et al. studied. By experimenting with
Full and First-Parentno_merge, we can experiment with almost the
same conditions as Kovalenko et al., leading to a fairer comparison.
Additionally, RQ2 considers the missing changes in the branches of
the First-Parent strategy to be unsuitable for comparing the branch
handling; hence, we target the recommendation results between
the Full and First-Parentmerge strategies.

4 EMPIRICAL STUDIES
4.1 Dataset Preparation
In this study, we used the repository sets of the Apache Software
Foundation (ASF) and Eclipse ecosystems used by Kovalenko et
al. [8] (Apache𝐾 and Eclipse𝐾 , respectively) and that of the ASF

3

Table 1: Target repository sets

Repository sets
Apache𝐾
Eclipse𝐾
Apache𝑀

# repositories Avg. # commits
3,955.6
15,582.9
2,829.6

10
8
12

ecosystem used by Miura et al. [9] (Apache𝑀 ), comprising 30 repos-
itories in total. Table 1 presents the statistics of the used repository
sets. Note that two repositories from the Eclipse ecosystem, which
failed to clone, and two repositories from ASF, which were unaf-
fected by the branch handling strategy selection, were excluded.

4.2 RQ1: Does the experimental setting of the
study on branch handling strategies
influence the change recommendation
performance?

4.2.1 Motivation. Kovalenko et al. [8] compared the change rec-
ommendation results using two branch handling strategies, and
they reported that the Full strategy slightly outperformed the
First-Parentno_merge strategy. In contrast, according to Miura et
al. [9], the co-change information should be handled at the task (work
item) level in the evolutionary coupling analysis because the revi-
sion (commit) level analysis fails to extract the co-change informa-
tion over revisions within the task. If we assume that the changes
made on a single branch are all related to a single task, there may
lead to another strategy to extract all the changes in a branch from
a merge commit at once: First-Parentmerge. Miura et al. [9] found
that missing co-changes could be prevented by employing the task
level change treatment, while Kovalenko et al. found that the Full
strategy, which treats commits on a branch separately, produced
both a higher recommendation success rate and higher number of
recommendations. Because the branches are mainly used as imple-
menting features, i.e., as feature branches [21], if we consider that
the changes on a branch are related to a task, summarizing them
at the task level is similar to merging the changes on a branch. Al-
though the study by Kovalenko et al. compared the performance of
the Full and First-Parentno_merge strategies, a different comparison
with First-Parentmerge can lead to understanding branch handling
strategies more on their change recommendation performance. The
First-Parentno_merge strategy skips many changes on the branches,
which may have resulted in the slightly higher performance of the
Full strategy. If the performance of the Full strategy was higher
because of the co-change information being excluded, it does not
necessarily mean that the performance of the Full strategy is better
than that of the First-Parentmerge strategy in general. Therefore, we
experimented with an implementation that follows Kovalenko et
al. [8], denoted as the First-Parentno_merge strategy. We also used
another implementation to process all the changes in the collected
merge commits, denoted as the First-Parentmerge strategy.

Additionally, Kovalenko et al. used the success rate and number
of recommendations for the evaluation metrics, which might be
room for improvement. For example, the success rate and number
of recommendations can be kept high even if the number of wrong

(a) Full(c) First-Parentno_merge(w/o merging changes)(b) First-Parentmerge(w/ merging changes)Keisuke Isemoto, Takashi Kobayashi, and Shinpei Hayashi

Figure 2: Comparison of two change recommendation results obtained using different branch handling strategies.

recommendations increases, while increasing the number of recom-
mendations. We used the mean average precision (MAP) [11–14]
and the number of wins and losses [13], which are also used in other
change recommendation studies, to compare the performance of the
branch handling strategies. The detailed definitions of evaluation
metrics will be explained later.

In addition, we compare the results for the repository sets used
by Kovalenko et al. and those used by Miura et al., to investigate
the influence of repository selection in the experiments.

Study Design. We compare the recommendation results be-
4.2.2
tween the Full and First-Parentno_merge strategies (Impno_merge) and
those between the Full and First-Parentmerge strategies (Impmerge).
An overview of the conducted experiment is shown in Figure 2.
For each repository and each commit to be experimented upon,
we created a test set by selecting one file in the changeset as the
oracle and using the remaining files as the query. With the prepared
test set, a change recommendation was performed for each branch
handling strategy. Finally, the results based on the branch handling
strategies are compared and summarized.

We selected the commits to be used that satisfy the following
conditions, which are the same as those used by Kovalenko et al.

• At most, 10 files are changed in the commit.
• Different branch handling strategies produce different change-

sets to ensure that the comparison is meaningful [8].

• At least five changesets are collected in either of the branch
handling strategies to be able to produce meaningful rules [8].
• At least one association rule is generated in either of the

branch handling strategies [8].

Note that Impno_merge and Impmerge have the following three
minor differences in their processing, in addition to the branch
handling strategy used.

• Different restrictions on commit extraction. The com-
mit extraction process is eligible for generating association
rules. In Impno_merge, up to 100 commits, containing query

changes as well as at most 10 changed files in descending
order of the authored date (newer to older), are targeted.
In Impmerge, for each change targeted in the query, it ex-
tracts at most 100 commits using the git-log command
with respect to the structure of the commit graph, and com-
mits comprising more than 10 changed files are filtered out.
Impno_merge fetches commits until it reaches 100, or there
are no additional commits with changes matching the query;
meanwhile, Impmerge fetches up to 100 commits from the
sliced history of each file in the query, and extracts commits
comprising at most 10 file changes. We made this change for
efficiency in Impmerge, as we needed to process large-scale
test sets.

• Different target repository sets. The implementation of
Kovalenko et al. excludes repositories containing more than
10,000 commits. In Impno_merge, we also limited the reposi-
tories that the original implementation of Kovalenko et al.
could process, because we wanted to compare the results of
our Impno_merge and Kovalenko et al.’s implementation to
identify the differences.

• Different adjustment for the number of association
rules. The implementation of Kovalenko et al. (Impno_merge)
included adjusting the number of commits to be used to gen-
erate the association rules and the number of association
rules to be extracted to ensure that the results of both branch
handling strategies produce the same number of recommen-
dations for fairness. This is an unnecessary process in the
actual change recommendation process. To align with the
actual change recommendation process, Impmerge did not fol-
low such an adjustment. In contrast, Impno_merge continued
to perform the same adjustment because this study focused
more on replicating the experiments of Kovalenko et al.

The obtained recommendation results are thus compared with

several evaluation metrics.

4

RepositoryRecommendationlistChangesetsACADACDBAssociationrulesCollectedcommitsTest setCompareQuery:Oracle:First-ParentFullABCABCRevisiting the Effect of Branch Handling Strategies on Change Recommendation

Table 2: Summary of differences between two studies

• Success rate [8] classifies the recommendation results into
success, failure, and no prediction, and summarizes their ra-
tios for each branch handling strategy. Note that we have
changed the classification criteria differently than Kovalenko
et al. They regarded a recommendation as a failure only when
the files included in the query were recommended, whereas
we regarded such cases as no prediction. In addition to the
success rate, the failure rate and no prediction rate were com-
puted.

• MAP [13] is used in two ways. MAPall strictly treats the
average precision (AP) of the no-recommendation result as
0, as it assumes that the recommender should always pro-
duce at least one recommendation file. In contrast, MAPapp
excludes such no-recommendation results, as it allows the
recommendation system to skip its recommendation results.
• Number of wins/losses [13] is calculated by determining
the win or loss for each test set. A strategy wins if it produces
a higher AP than the other strategy, or if it does not make a
false recommendation when the APs of both strategies are 0.

Table 2 summarizes the differences between the study conducted

by Kovalenko et al. and the results from answering RQ1.
4.2.3 Results.

Effect of repository selection. We investigated the effect of
target repository selection on the performance of the change rec-
ommendation. The results for each repository set are shown in
Table 3 using the same format as the table in Kovalenko et al. ’s
study, whose columns indicate the implementation used, strategy
used, number of test sets to be used (event count), average numbers
of recommendations and rules, and evaluation metric values. In
Impno_merge, both the number of recommendations and success
rate were higher than those when using the Full strategy, except for
the number of recommendations in Eclipse𝐾 . The results indicate
that using different repository sets (Apache𝑀 ), rather than the ones
used by Kovalenko et al. (Apache𝐾 and Eclipse𝐾 ), did not change
the trend of the success rate. Hence, we conclude that the difference
between the two studies was not due to the repository selection.

Effect of evaluation metrics. To investigate the influence of
the evaluation metrics to be used, the results of the success rate,

5

MAPall, MAPapp, and the number of wins and losses for all reposito-
ries are computed, as shown in Table 4. The rightmost two columns
show the number of wins and draws for each branch handling
strategy. For Impno_merge, Full performed better in most evaluation
metrics; however, First-Parent had more number of wins. First-
Parent had a higher number of wins for Impno_merge because the
number of false recommendations increased along with the num-
ber of recommendations in Full. We suspect that this is due to the
missing changes on the branch in the First-Parent strategy, which
reduced the variation of recommendations and number of recom-
mendations.

Table 5 summarizes the number of repositories that performed
better than the opponent strategy in terms of the success rate,
MAPall, and the number of wins/losses. To count the winners in
terms of the success rate, we considered it a draw if the rate was
equal to that of the other strategy. To count the winners in terms
of MAPapp, we used the Wilcoxon signed-rank test for the distri-
bution of AP values. The winner was decided when we confirmed
statistical significance at the 5% significance level. If we could not
conclude statistical significance, we considered such cases as draws.
Consequently, for the success rate and MAPall, the performance of
the Full strategy tended to be higher in Impno_merge. The Full strat-
egy produced more winning repositories in terms of the number of
wins.

The Impno_merge results also indicate that the Full strategy pro-
duced more false recommendations. However, the performance of
the Full strategy tended to be higher, and we concluded that the
effect of the evaluation metrics was small.

Effect of not using changes in branches. The results of Impno_merge

and Impmerge in the tables above were compared to determine
the effect of skipping information on the branches. In all results,
the branch handling strategy that resulted in higher performance
tended to vary. In the results of Table 3, the branch handling strate-
gies that exhibited higher performance differed depending on the
repository set used. The First-Parent strategy produced a higher
recommendation count and success rate for Apache𝐾 , whereas the
Full strategy produced a higher recommendation count and success
rate for Eclipse𝐾 . For Apache𝑀 , the number of recommendations
was higher when using the First-Parent strategy, and the success
rate was higher when using the Full strategy. The magnitude of the
difference was smaller than that for Impno_merge. In Table 4, the dif-
ference between the branch handling strategies became smaller in
MAPall, and the draw rate in terms of the number of wins increased
from 84.7% (36,708/43,329) to 89.9% (130,809/145,529). Moreover,
Table 5 shows that Impmerge demonstrated better equilibrium than
Impno_merge in terms of the number of repositories that the Full
and First-Parent strategies produced higher performance.

In summary, the results of Kovalenko et al. [8], which showed
that the change recommendation performed slightly better when
commits on a branch were handled, were possibly caused by missing
change information on branches.

The change recommendation performance could be affected
by the experimental setting in handling merging changes. Re-
gardless of the variations of the target repository sets and the

Experimental settingby Kovalenko et al.Replication settingof Kovalenko et al.in this paper(Impno_merge)Experimental settingusing merging changes(Impmerge)Branchhandling strategiesFullvs.First-Parentsno_mergeFullvs.First-Parentsno_mergeFullvs.First-Parentsmerge# targetrepositories202430EvaluationmetricsSuccess rate,# recommendationsSuccess rate,# recommendations,MAP,# wins in APSuccess rate,# recommendations,MAP,# wins in APEffect ofmetricsEffect ofimplementationEffect ofrepositoriesKeisuke Isemoto, Takashi Kobayashi, and Shinpei Hayashi

Table 3: Success, failure, and no prediction rates per repository sets

Implementation Repositories

Strategy

Apache𝐾

Impno_merge

Eclipse𝐾

Apache𝑀

Apache𝐾

Impmerge

Eclipse𝐾

Apache𝑀

Full
First-Parentno_merge
Full
First-Parentno_merge
Full
First-Parentno_merge
Full
First-Parentmerge
Full
First-Parentmerge
Full
First-Parentmerge

Events Recommendations
(average)
count
1.005
25,588
0.954
25,558
0.775
4,405
0.788
4,405
0.726
7,063
0.661
7,063
0.787
33,728
0.823
33,728
0.740
5,994
0.739
5,994
0.739
105,807
0.745
105,807

Rules
(average)
7.763
7.763
6.862
6.862
6.491
6.491
6.808
7.172
6.517
6.792
5.391
5.516

Success
rate
0.179
0.167
0.156
0.148
0.104
0.099
0.143
0.147
0.150
0.148
0.165
0.163

Failure No prediction
rate
0.383
0.405
0.472
0.470
0.501
0.542
0.507
0.488
0.499
0.503
0.515
0.512

rate
0.438
0.428
0.372
0.383
0.395
0.359
0.350
0.365
0.350
0.349
0.319
0.325

Table 4: Study results

Implementation

Impno_merge

Impmerge

Strategy
Full
First-Parentno_merge
Full
First-Parentmerge

Success rate MAPall MAPapp
0.247
0.241
0.294
0.289

0.144
0.135
0.143
0.143

0.162
0.152
0.160
0.159

# wins
3,214
3,407
7,848
6,872

# draws

36,708

130,809

Table 5: Number of repositories of higher performance

Implementation Metric

Impno_merge

Impmerge

Success rate
MAPall
# wins
Success rate
MAPall
# wins

# Full
wins
15
8
13
15
5
16

# draws

7
16
2
3
20
1

# First-Parent
wins
2
0
9
12
5
13

evaluation metrics, the Full strategy tended to demonstrate bet-
ter performance than First-Parent strategy in Impno_merge; such
variations did not affect the conclusion of Kovalenko et al. How-
ever, this tendency was balanced when using Impmerge, which
includes merging changes when using the First-Parent strategy.

4.3 RQ2: Which branches characteristics affect

the performance of change
recommendations?

4.3.1 Motivation. Branches can be used in multiple ways, and
different repositories use them differently. Although most branches
are used to implement features or fix bugs [21], they are also used to
manage releases. For example, several repositories of interest in this
study, such as apache/accumulo or apache/cassandra, prepare
branches for each version, and developers work on them in parallel.
Even if a branch is used to implement a feature, the frequency of

6

creating a branch and/or granularity of commits and features might
differ depending on the commit policy of the project.

Depending on the characteristics of each branch, there may
be different ways of handling the branch that is appropriate for
extracting changes in the change recommendations. For example,
if changes are frequently split into smaller fragments and commits
are kept fine-grained on a branch in a project, it might be better
to treat them as a single merge commit, rather than as multiple
smaller commits. In contrast, in the case of making multiple large
changes on a branch and merging them, it might be better to treat
each commit on the branch separately to collect changesets for the
change recommendation and avoid unnecessary coupling.

Therefore, in answering RQ2, we examine the influence of the
following two characteristics of a merged branch on the change
recommendation performance.

• Branch length is the number of commits in the path of a
branch. It counts the commits between the merge commit
and the merge base, i.e., the common parent of the merged
branch and the parent branch. An illustrative example is
shown in Figure 3, which shows the computation of the
length of the branch merged at commit 𝐻 . First, the merge
base of this branch, 𝐶, was computed as the common parent
of the head commit of the sinking branch of merge 𝐸 and
source branch of the merge 𝐺. The commits on the target
branch until the merge base is read, i.e., 𝐺, 𝐹 , and 𝐷, are
retrieved. When finding another merge commit during this
retrieval, we apply this process recursively. Because commit
𝐹 is a merge commit on the acquired branch, we compute the
commits on the branch to be merged at 𝐹 up to merge base 𝐴.
Commit 𝐵 is newly retrieved. Finally, all meaningful commits

Revisiting the Effect of Branch Handling Strategies on Change Recommendation

Figure 3: Computation of branch length.

to be merged at commit 𝐻 , excluding merge commits, are 𝐺,
𝐷, and 𝐵, and its branch length is computed as 3.

• Merge commit size indicates the size of the changeset of
a merge commit, i.e., the number of files that have been
changed by the merge commit.

We divided this RQ into the following two sub questions:

• RQ2.1: What is the relationship between the branch charac-

teristics and change recommendation results?

• RQ2.2: What is the relationship between the branch char-
acteristics and the co-changes extracted from commits in a
branch and those from a merge commit?

In RQ2.1, we examine, for each branch characteristic, the trend in
change recommendation results for each characteristic of the par-
tial change history used to generate association rules caused by a
branch. In contrast, RQ2.2 examines the accuracy of the co-change
information of commits on the branch, and the merge commits indi-
cate future changes for each branch characteristic. The analysis for
RQ2.1 focuses on the branch that caused the difference in commits
used for change recommendation, whereas the analysis for RQ2.2
directly compares the co-change information of commits on the
branch and merge commits. Therefore, the analysis for RQ2.2 was
unaffected by the implementation of the change recommendation
method.

Study Design of RQ2.1. We investigated the recommendation
4.3.2
results for each branch characteristic used in association rule gener-
ation in the change recommendation. The commits used to generate
the association rules were replaced by switching the branch han-
dling strategy used. From the replaced commits, we could identify
the merge commit that caused the replacement and the commits on
the branch that were additionally captured by the replacement. We
also analyzed the trend of the recommendation results for those
characteristics. Because there may be more than one merge commit
that caused the replacement, we compared two typical cases to
determine if a similar tendency could be obtained: 1) the results of
a single commit and 2) those of six or more commits. Boundary six
was used for the third quartile of the number of merge commits
that caused the swap of commits in each test set to be analyzed.

To compare the recommendation results obtained from Full and
First-Parentmerge strategies, we used the number of wins/losses [13].
Using the values of the branch characteristics involved, we divided
the recommendation results such that the number of samples was
as even as possible, and confirmed the branch handling strategy
that tends to win. In the case of six or more merge commits, we
split the results by the median value to mitigate the effect of outlier
instances related to several merge commits.

Note that we limited the number of commits to be investigated to
highlight the changes in the commits used between branch handling
strategies. Specifically, we targeted commits obtained by limiting
the median (53) number of retrieved commits to generate associa-
tion rules via the First-Parent strategy, resulting in 71,832 commits.
4.3.3 Results of RQ2.1.

Branch length. The ratio of the winning branch handling strat-
egy to the branch length and the size of the merge commit is shown
in Figure 4. Note that tie cases are excluded in this figure. In the case
of a single merge commit, the effect on the recommendation result
increases with the branch length, from 10 to 24. When the branches
become longer than 881, the influence increases. The difference in
the win rate between the branch handling strategies, which was
less than 2% up to a branch length of 881, becomes 8% higher for
the Full strategy. If six or more merge commits are handled, the
win rate increases until the branch length reaches 5.

Therefore, we conclude that, when the branch is longer, the
influence of selecting the branch handling strategy is greater. If
there are extremely long branches involved, they might be better
treated separately in the commits on the branch, i.e., using the Full
strategy.

Merge commit size. In the case of a single merge commit, as
shown in Figure 4, until the size of the merge commit exceeds 10,
there is no winner in approximately 97% of the cases, and the effect
of changing the branch handling strategy is small. However, when
the size exceeds 10, the win rate increases rapidly from 3% to 10%.
We believe that this is because the change recommendation method
used in this experiment generates an association rule that excludes
commits with more than 11 changes. In the case of six or more
merge commits, the rates of winning and losing, rather than draws,
tended to increase for winning commits.

As the size of the merge commits increases, the effect of the
branch increases. Additionally, in the case of a single branch, we
observe a sudden increase in the win rate when the size of the
merge commit exceeds 10. This is considered to be an effect of the
change recommendation method mentioned above.

Study Design of RQ2.2. In answering RQ2.2, we compared
4.3.4
the co-changed files extracted from a merge commit as a single
changeset and those extracted from multiple changesets from the
commits on the related branch. In the analysis, for every single
file that is modified by a merge commit or a commit on a branch
that is fixed, its co-changed files (𝐹changed ) are compared. The files
that are co-changed with the target file in the reachable future 100
commits from the merge commit are regarded as the oracle (𝐹oracle).
By comparing the two file sets, Precision is calculated as

Precision =

|𝐹changed ∩ 𝐹oracle |
|𝐹changed |

.

7

1.Retrieve commits on the branchuntil reaching C:the merge baseof the commits Eand G.2.Retrieve commits on the branch until reaching A:the merge base of the commits Eand B.Bis the head of the branch to be merged to F.Merge baseCommits on thefocused branchHCEADGBFMerge baseCommits on thefocused branchHCEADGBFKeisuke Isemoto, Takashi Kobayashi, and Shinpei Hayashi

Figure 4: Winning rate of branch handling strategies against branch characteristics.

To mitigate the effect of the merge commits containing several
files, which should be larger than that of smaller merge commits,
we obtained the average for each commit, and determined the
distribution and trend for each characteristic of the branch.

We targeted all merge commits on the default branch, i.e., the
merge commits that can be reached from the repository’s HEAD
by following the first parent commit, which can be reachable using
both the First-Parent and Full strategies. We excluded merge com-
mits where the associated branch length is 1, and the change in the
changed files in the branch is the same as that in the merge commit,
because the difference in the co-change extraction strategies does
not affect such merge commits.
4.3.5 Results of RQ2.2.

Branch length. The distribution of the average values per com-
mit of Precision for the branch features is shown in Figure 5(a).
Except for branch lengths of 1, the distribution exhibits higher
precision when using branches than when using merge commits,
and the difference between them increases as the branch length
increases. In cases with a branch length of 1 or less, the Precision
was higher when using merge commits because using branches can
only outperform if additional changes, or deletion of unnecessary
changes, have been made during the merge.

In summary, except for branch lengths 1 or less, the precision
values were higher when the changesets were extracted individually

with the commits on a branch. When the branch is longer, the
difference is larger.

Merge commit size. As shown in Figure 5(b), when the size
of the merge commits is small, the median and third quartiles are
higher when using merge commits. However, as the size increases,
the distribution of precision increases when branches are used. The
median and third quartiles are higher when using merge commits,
while the merge commit is small. As the merge commit becomes
larger, the median becomes higher when using branches. As merge
commits become larger, the extracted co-changes are summarized
in a merge increase, and the ratio of not useful changes that will
not happen in the future increases.

Summary. In both analyses of RQ2.1 and RQ2.2, when the
4.3.6
branch is longer or the merge commit is larger, the evaluation result
is better for treating them separately in commits on a branch. In the
case of longer branches and larger changes, there might be multiple
changes belonging to different intentional tasks, and merging them
together in a single changeset of a merge commit tends to have a
negative effect. In the case of shorter branches and smaller changes,
a single changeset extracted from a merge commit tends to be
better for the source of co-changes. However, these differences
were hardly reflected in the recommendation results. We examined
the recommendation results where the maximum length of the
involved branches was at most 1, and 98% of their cases resulted
in a tie, although the First-Parent strategy demonstrated a higher

8

(c) Branch length (median)(d) Merge commit size (median)(a) Branch length(b) Merge commit sizeWin rate (more than 5)Win rate (1)Full    First-ParentRevisiting the Effect of Branch Handling Strategies on Change Recommendation

Figure 5: Distribution of Precision over branch characteristics.

performance in general. The need for the branch handling strategy
to be changed is minute in repositories where branches are used
infrequently, and where they are short, because the influence of only
a single short branch is negligible for selecting a branch handling
strategy.

A sudden increase in the influence of the branch handling strate-
gies occurred when the number of merges exceeded 10 in the rec-
ommendation results. This is because the change recommendation
method to be used limited the source commits in generating as-
sociation rules with at most 10 changes. When analyzing the co-
changes (RQ2.2), there was no significant differences when the size
of the merge commits was approximately 10. The influence of the
branch handling strategies increased because the co-change of the
merge commits was not handled anymore.

When longer branches and larger merge commits are involved,
the effect of the branch handling strategies becomes more signif-
icant, and the performance improves when the co-changes are
extracted individually from the commits on a branch. In contrast,
when shorter branches and smaller merge commits are involved,
the performance improves when the co-changes are extracted
from a merge commit at once. However, the observed differ-
ence was small; the effect was also small. The size parameter
of excluding commits in the change recommendation method
affected the difference in the recommendation results.

5 DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS
5.1 Discussion
The results of RQ2 showed that, as the branches become longer
and the merge commits become larger, handling co-changes with
commits on the branch exhibit better performance. However, if
we refer to Figure 4, it is evident that the rate at which the Full
strategy wins does not increase unilaterally; however, the rate at
which the First-Parent strategy wins also increases. Therefore, we
sampled and investigated a small number (40) of merge commits
to determine the co-changes added. Regarding the sampling, we
sampled merge commits where the number of co-changes added

9

by the merge is seven or more, to exclude a small number of co-
changes that were highly affected by a single co-change and cases
where the maximum number of co-changes that a change to three
files can have was six or less. A typical case is the co-change with
CHANGE.txt in apache/cassandra, which records the updates. In
this repository, 19 out of 20 merge commits corresponded to this.
The other repositories also contained three co-changes with config-
uration files. Additionally, co-changes from newly added changes in
the merge commit occurred in 6 of the 40 cases. For merge commits
with additional changes, the probability of future co-changes of the
merge was higher than that of co-changes on the branch, which is
the opposite of the result for the merge commits without additional
changes. If there are additional changes in a merge commit, it might
be better to handle a single changeset extracted from the merge
commit.

5.2 Implications
In change recommendation, it is suggested that handling commits
on a branch separately is better, instead of merging them in a merge
commit. When the branch is longer, it tends to be better at handling
commits individually on the branch. When the branch is shorter,
such as those with a length of 1, it is better at handling commits as
a merge commit; however, the effect of this treatment is extremely
small. Additionally, because long branches contain changes to many
different files, there are many opportunities for a single branch
to affect the change recommendation. Therefore, when deciding
whether to handle long branches uniformly as multiple commits
on a branch or as a single merge commit, the disadvantage of
generating co-changes that will not be made in the future leads
to a higher risk than the other strategy, which may lack some
co-changes.

However, when using a file as a query that has been modified
significantly, when branches are rarely used, or when only shorter
branches are used in the target repository, the importance of select-
ing the branch handling strategies decreases.

(a) Branch length(b) Merge commit sizePrecisonBranch        Merge6 THREATS TO VALIDITY
Internal validity. We studied the change recommendation method
based on the “other files” algorithm and the implementation by
Kovalenko et al. [7]. Because the method was designed to limit
its recommendations, the effect of selecting the branch handling
strategies might be smaller in observation than in reality.

The analysis conducted in this study assumes that changes on
a branch are related to a single task in most cases, which is the
most typical usage of a branch. However, this is not always true;
the changes in a branch may be related to multiple tasks. In fact, in
the repository of apache/cassandra in Apache𝐾 , commits related
to multiple tasks, where multiple issues are linked, were merged
at once. Therefore, we believe that the results of this study do not
negate the results of Miura et al. [9].

External validity. In our study, only the repositories of Apache𝐾
and Eclipse𝐾 used by Kovalenko et al. [8] and those of Apache𝑀
used by Miura et al. [9], were targeted. The selection of repositories
may still be biased; it may have been influenced by their develop-
ment styles. For example, in apache/cassandra, where merging
was heavily used, the changes corresponding to an issue were com-
bined into a single commit without recording the details of the
fine-grained development history. In such repositories, where the
fine-grained development process is performed on branches, using
commits on a branch separately, as the source of changesets to be
used for the change recommendation, might produce better results.

7 RELATED WORK
Several change recommendation methods that utilize change cou-
pling have been proposed. These include ROSE by Zimmermann et
al. [20], an FP-Tree-based approach by Ying et al. [19], CO-CHANGE
by Kagdi et al. [6], and TARMAQ by Rolfsnes et al. [14]. In these
methods, changesets obtained from the commits in a repository are
used to generate the recommendation rules. The branch handling
strategies studied herein affect the accuracy of these methods.

Moonen et al. studied the various factors that affect the change
recommendations. They investigated the effect of measures, such
as confidence and support, which are used to rank association rules.
They also studied the effect of limiting the number of file changes
in a commit used to create association rules [11], that of the history
length used, and that of using the most recent history [12]. Pugh et
al. [13] improved the accuracy of change recommendations based
on these results to produce shorter partial histories for generating
recommendation rules.

Moreover, Rolfsnes et al. proposed several approaches to improve
the accuracy of change recommendation methods, including the
aggregation of multiple recommendation rules [15], filtration of rec-
ommendations via machine learning [16], and use of method-level
finer-grained co-change information [17]. Mondal et al. proposed a
combinational approach for analyzing the relationship of program
identifiers [10].

Zou et al. [21] conducted a study on branch usage in 2,923 repos-
itories, published on GitHub. Further, Shihab et al. [18] investigated
the influence of branches on software quality for repositories in
Microsoft. Bird et al. [3] reduced development delays by identifying
high-cost branches that require conflict resolution for merging or
a long time for validating and deleting branches with high cost,

10

Keisuke Isemoto, Takashi Kobayashi, and Shinpei Hayashi

but small contributions. In contrast to their studies, in this study,
we analyzed the effect of each branch characteristic on the change
recommendations.

8 CONCLUSION
In this study, we analyzed the effect of branches on change recom-
mendation results. In contrast to the study by Kovalenko et al. [8]
with a slightly higher performance for the Full branch handling
strategy than the First-Parentno_merge strategy, the comparison with
the First-Parentmerge strategy resulted in a balanced performance
among the branch handling strategies.

Additionally, the analyses of branch influence on the change
recommendation demonstrated that it is better to treat commits on
branches separately in the change recommendation. Meanwhile,
handling all commits on a branch as a single changeset at once
in the related merge commit prevented the leakage of co-changes.
Performing this treatment on a large branch caused a negative effect
of noise from unnecessary co-changes that will not be changed in
the future. We conclude that it is less risky to handle co-changes in
the commits on a branch.

Our future work will involve improving the generality of our
analysis by experimenting on a wider range of repositories with
modern change recommendation methods, such as TARMAQ [14].

The supplemental materials are publicly available [5].

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partly supported by JSPS Grants-in-Aid for Scientific
Research JP18K11238, JP21K18302, JP21KK0179, and JP21H04877.

REFERENCES
[1] Rakesh Agrawal and Ramakrishnan Srikant. 1994. Fast Algorithms for Mining
Association Rules in Large Databases. In Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB 1994). 487–499.

[2] Vipin Balachandran. 2013. Reducing human effort and improving quality in peer
code reviews using automatic static analysis and reviewer recommendation. In
Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE
2013). 931–940.

[3] Christian Bird and Thomas Zimmermann. 2012. Assessing the value of branches
with what-if analysis. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE 2012). 1–11.

[4] Ahmed E. Hassan. 2009. Predicting faults using the complexity of code changes.
In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE
2009). 78–88.

[5] Keisuke Isemoto, Takashi Kobayashi, and Shinpei Hayashi. 2022. Appendix of
“Revisiting the effect of branch handling strategies on change recommendation”.
Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6402130

[6] Huzefa Kagdi, Shehnaaz Yusuf, and Jonathan Maletic. 2006. Mining sequences
of changed-files from version histories. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
Workshop on Mining Software Repositories (MSR 2006). 47–53.

[7] Vladimir Kovalenko. 2018. Mining file histories: Should we consider branches?—

Online appendix. https://github.com/vovak/branches.

[8] Vladimir Kovalenko, Fabio Palomba, and Alberto Bacchelli. 2018. Mining file
histories: Should we consider branches?. In Proceedings of the 33rd IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE 2018). 202–213.
[9] Keisuke Miura, Shane McIntosh, Yasutaka Kamei, Ahmed E. Hassan, and Naoyasu
Ubayashi. 2016. The impact of task granularity on co-evolution analyses. In
Proceedings of the 9th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software
Engineering and Measurement (ESEM 2016). 1–10.

[10] Manishankar Mondal, Chanchal K. Roy, and Kevin A. Schneider. 2014. Improving
the detection accuracy of evolutionary coupling by measuring change corre-
spondence. In Proceedings of the Software Evolution Week - IEEE Conference on
Software Maintenance, Reengineering, and Reverse Engineering (CSMR-WCRE 2014).
358–362.

[11] Leon Moonen, Stefano Di Alesio, David Binkley, and Thomas Rolfsnes. 2016.
Practical guidelines for change recommendation using association rule mining. In

Revisiting the Effect of Branch Handling Strategies on Change Recommendation

Proceedings of the 31st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE 2016). 732–743.

[12] Leon Moonen, Thomas Rolfsnes, Dave Binkley, and Stefano Di Alesio. 2018. What
are the effects of history length and age on mining software change impact?
Empirical Software Engineering 23, 4 (2018), 2362–2397.

[13] Sydney Pugh, David Binkley, and Leon Moonen. 2018. The case for adaptive
change recommendation. In Proceedings of the 18th IEEE International Working
Conference on Source Code Analysis and Manipulation (SCAM 2018). 129–138.
[14] Thomas Rolfsnes, Stefano Di Alesio, Razieh Behjati, Leon Moonen, and Dave W.
Binkley. 2016. Generalizing the analysis of evolutionary coupling for software
change impact analysis. In Proceedings of the 23rd IEEE International Conference
on Software Analysis, Evolution, and Reengineering (SANER 2016). 201–212.
[15] Thomas Rolfsnes, Leon Moonen, Stefano Di Alesio, Razieh Behjati, and Dave
Binkley. 2016. Improving change recommendation using aggregated association
rules. In Proceedings of the 13th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Mining
Software Repositories (MSR 2016). 73–84.

[16] Thomas Rolfsnes, Leon Moonen, and David Binkley. 2017. Predicting relevance
of change recommendations. In Proceedings of the 32nd IEEE/ACM International

Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE 2017). 694–705.

[17] Thomas Rolfsnes, Leon Moonen, Stefano Di Alesio, Razieh Behjati, and Dave
Binkley. 2018. Aggregating association rules to improve change recommendation.
Empirical Software Engineering 23, 2 (2018), 987–1035.

[18] Emad Shihab and Thomas Zimmermann. 2012. The effect of branching strategies
on software quality. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM/IEEE International Symposium
on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM 2012). 301–310.
[19] Annie T.T. Ying, Gail C. Murphy, Raymond Ng, and Mark C. Chu-Carroll. 2004.
Predicting source code changes by mining change history. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering 30, 9 (2004), 574–586.

[20] Thomas Zimmermann, Peter Weisgerber, Stephan Diehl, and Andreas Zeller.
2005. Mining version histories to guide software changes. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering 31, 6 (2005), 429–445.

[21] Weiqin Zou, Weiqiang Zhang, Xin Xia, Reid Holmes, and Zhenyu Chen. 2019.
Branch Use in Practice: A Large-Scale Empirical Study of 2,923 Projects on
GitHub. In Proceedings of the 19th IEEE International Conference on Software
Quality, Reliability and Security (QRS 2019). 306–317.

11

