2
2
0
2

r
p
A
4
2

]

Y
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
0
3
2
1
1
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Experimental Platform for Boundary Control of Mechanical
Frenkel-Kontorova Model

Loi Do, Kriˇstof Puˇcejdl, and Zdenˇek Hur´ak*†

Abstract

Gordon equation, multi-pendulum mechatronic plat-
form, boundary control

In this paper, we present a laboratory mechatronic
platform for experimental veriﬁcation and demonstra-
tion of various dynamical and control system phenom-
ena exhibited by the Frenkel-Kontorova (FK) model –
a spatially discretized version of the sine-Gordon equa-
tion. The platform consists of an array of torsionally
coupled pendulums pivoting around a single shaft that
can be controlled through the motors at boundaries
while all angles are read electronically. We ﬁrst intro-
duce and describe the platform, providing details of its
mechatronic design and software architecture. All the
ﬁles are freely shared with the research community un-
der an open-source license through a public repository.
The motivation for this sharing is to help reproducibil-
ity or research – the platform can be useful for others as
a testbed for control algorithms for this class of dynam-
ical systems, for instance, distributed control or control
of ﬂexible structures. In the second part of the paper, we
then showcase the platform using two control problem
formulations tailored to the FK model – we discuss the
practical motivation for studying these problems, pro-
pose (some) methods for solving them and demonstrate
the functionality using experiments. In particular, the
ﬁrst control formulation deals with non-collocated con-
trol/regulation of a single pendulum through one bound-
ary of the array in the presence of a disturbance sent
from the other boundary; the second control problem
consists in synchronizing pendulums’ angular speeds.
Some other motivated problems can certainly be for-
mulated, solved, and demonstrated using the proposed
platform.

Index terms— Frenkel-Kontorova model, sine-

*This work was supported by the Grant Agency of the Czech Tech-
nical University in Prague, grant No. SGS22/166/OHK3/3T/13 and
by the Czech Science Foundation (GACR) under contract No. 21-
07321S.

†Loi Do, Kriˇstof Puˇcejdl,

and Zdenˇek Hur´ak are with
of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical Uni-
{doloi, kristof.pucejdl,
in

Prague

Faculty
versity
hurak}@fel.cvut.cz

Supplementary Materials

All supplementary materials, such as assembly in-
structions, source codes, and bills of materials, are
available at github.com/aa4cc/The-Frenkel-Kontorova-
laboratory-model. The repository also includes addi-
tional multimedia ﬁles, for instance, videos from exper-
iments.

1. Introduction

The Frenkel-Kontorova (FK) model, ﬁrst presented
in [1] within a study of crystal dislocation, describes
a motion of a one-dimensional chain of harmonically
coupled identical particles in a spatially periodic po-
tential ﬁeld. Subsequently, the model was found to
describe many other physical systems, for instance,
Josephson junction arrays, mechanical properties of
an open-state of the DNA, and systems in solid-state
physics; see [2] for further details. The reason behind
the FK model’s universality is arguably the fact that it
represents a discretized version of the celebrated sine-
Gordon (sG) equation.

In this paper, we present a mechatronic platform re-
alizing the FK model as an array of torsionally coupled
pendulums pivoting around a single shaft and show two
novel boundary-control formulations deﬁned on the FK
model. The idea of the mechanical platform realizing
the FK model is not new. However, as we document in
the next section, our platform differs from other works
in several aspects. The platform can be useful for ed-
ucational demonstrations or as a testbed for research
in many areas of automatic control, such as distributed
control of coupled oscillators, control of underactuated
systems, or control of lump-modeled ﬂexible structures.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Related Work

Many works studied the FK model as an array of
pendulums, primary in a connection to the sG equation.
In [3], the author presented and highlighted a pedagog-
ical beneﬁt of how the mechanical FK model can be
used to demonstrate the non-linear wave phenomena of
the sG equation. The model was constructed as a series
of spring-connected nails soldered into a brass base and
supported horizontally on a taut wire attached at both
ends to a frame.

Later, an improved construction of the FK model
was presented in [4] and [5]. The authors studied a par-
ticular solution of the sG equation, so-called Intrinsic
Localized Modes (ILMs), also referred to as discrete
breathers. Unlike [3], the array’s frame was addition-
ally subjected to a harmonic driving in a horizontal di-
rection. By applying suitable open-loop control of the
driving’s amplitude and frequency, the array forms a
stable, localized, or even moving ILM. A similar me-
chanical setup was developed in [6], where two disc-
type pendulums with an elastic cord as a spring were
used to conﬁrm the theoretical analysis of ILM’s be-
havior under imperfections in mechanical parameters.

In a series of papers [7], [8], the authors presented
another mechatronic multi-pendulum setup based on
the FK model. Compared to [4, 5], this setup was di-
rectly designed as a testbed for feedback control tasks.
The chain can be controlled by motors attached at the
boundaries, and, as the theoretical works by the same
authors deal with distributed control, each pendulum
can be individually controlled by an electromagnetic
actuator. An optical encoder in each module provides
measurements of the pendulum’s angle.

The laboratory model, which we present in this pa-
per, is mechanically comparable to [7, 8]. Similarly,
every pendulum in the chain has its angle measured by
an encoder, and the model can be controlled by motors
attached to its boundaries. In contrast, the pendulums
in our platform are all attached to a single base, so the
model is compact and easily scalable. Additionally, as
the platform is open-source, it is relatively simple to re-
produce and can also be modiﬁed to particular needs of
the scientiﬁc community.

3. Experimental Platform Description

The photo of our platform is in Fig. 1. The platform
consists of 20 connected pendulum modules mounted
on an aluminum proﬁle, two motors attached at the
boundaries, and electronics for control and data acqui-
sition. Each module, schematically visualized in Fig. 2,
comprises a frame with a pendulum, rotary encoder, and

Figure 1: A photo of the platform with 20 pendulum
modules and two motors attached at the boundaries

Figure 2: 3D visualization of the module’s mechanical
design

a torsional spring. The mechanical parts of the mod-
ule are designed as a combination of 3D-printed and
off-the-shelf components. Therefore, the module is ad-
justable and can be easily reproduced. The total length
of the platform with 20 modules is about 1 m. The ap-
proximate price of one module is C60.

The pendulum’s angle is measured using a capac-
itive encoder AMT132S-V by CUI Devices with a res-
olution of 4096 pulses per one revolution. To process
the measurements, we used FPGA development board
DE0-nano by Terasic with a custom-made shield (add-
on), allowing read-out with a frequency up to 500 Hz.
The motors actuating the chain are NEMA17 1.8° step-
per motors controlled by Pololu Tic T249 drivers. The
data acquisition board and motor controllers are then
connected to the PC that runs the control algorithms.
Fig. 3 displays the HW architecture.

Remark 1 Stepper motors are able to directly and ac-
curately set their desired position or speed. Thus,
we can view the stepper motors attached through the
springs to the boundary pendulums as ideally controlled
virtual pendulums. However, different motors (e.g.,
BLDC motors) need to be used if one wants to control
the exerted torque on boundary pendulums instead.

Remark 3 The standard FK model proposed in [1] dif-
fers from the presented model (1) in two aspects. First,
the standard model is deﬁned without dissipation terms,
and second, with N → ∞ and, thus, no boundaries.

4.1. External Inputs

The laboratory platform can be actuated by two
motors attached through springs to the boundary pen-
dulums, schematically depicted in Fig. 3. To specify
the torques Mi in (1), we denote the angles of motors at-
tached to the ﬁrst and the last pendulum in the chain as
ϕM1, and ϕM2, respectively. The external input torques
can be written as

Mi =




k(ϕM1 − ϕ1) + b( ˙ϕM1 − ˙ϕ1)
k(ϕM2 − ϕN) + b( ˙ϕM2 − ˙ϕN)

0

for i = 1 ,
for i = N ,
otherwise .

(2)

Figure 3: The hardware architecture of our platform

Figure 4: The mechanical analogy of the FK model as a
chain of particles that slides over a potential landscape

4. Mathematical Model

4.2. Equations in a Matrix Form

We denote the i-th pendulum angle as ϕi. The to-
tal torque acting on each pendulum can be decomposed
into several terms. For an uncoupled pendulum, the
torques come from gravity and friction in the bearing.
We model the friction as a simple linear dependence on
a pendulum’s absolute angular speed ˙ϕ with a coefﬁ-
cient γ.

The nearest-neighbor coupling via real springs
adds two additional torques. The ﬁrst torque comes
from potential energy accumulated in the spring, and
the second torque results from energy dissipation in a
real spring. We model the dissipation again as friction
linearly dependent on relative speeds of adjacent pen-
dulums with a coefﬁcient b. The equation describing a
motion of i-th pendulum, i = 1, . . . , N, is

J ¨ϕi + mgl sin(ϕi) + γ ˙ϕi −

k
2

∂
∂ ϕi

N−1
∑
i=1

(ϕi+1 − ϕi)2

(1)

−

b
2

∂
∂ ˙ϕi

N−1
∑
i=1

( ˙ϕi+1 − ˙ϕi)2 = Mi ,

where g is the gravity constant, k is spring constant, and
J, m, and l are the moment of inertia, mass, and length
of the pendulum, respectively. The terms Mi represent
external torques to be speciﬁed.

Remark 2 Another mechanical analogy of
the FK
model is depicted in Fig. 4, where the translational co-
ordinate x replaces the angular coordinate ϕ. This me-
chanical analogy was originally presented in [1].

To write the model (1) in a state-space form, we use
the formalism of multiagent systems. The topological
structure of the interactions between the pendulums can
be described by an undirected path graph with a graph
Laplacian L = (li j) ∈ RN×N:

L =

0
2 −1
2














1 −1
−1
0 −1
...
0
0
0

· · ·
· · ·
· · ·

· · ·
· · ·
· · ·

. . .














0
0
0
...
0
2 −1
1

2 −1
−1
0 −1

.

(3)

Furthermore, by deﬁning the state of the i-th pendulum
as xi = [ϕi, ˙ϕi]T = [xi,1, xi,2]T, the state-space equations
describing the dynamics can be written as

˙xi = f (xi) −

(cid:32)

B

K

1
J

N
∑
j=1

(cid:33)

li jx j − Mi

,

(4)

where f (xi) is the uncoupled dynamics of a single pen-
dulum

f (xi) =

(cid:34)

−

mgl
J

xi,2

sin(xi,1) −

(cid:35)

,

γ
J

xi,2

(5)

EncodersPCFPGAmeasurementacquisitionMotorMotorMotorDriverMotorDrivermkxTable 1: Mechanical parameters of the platform

Description
Rod length
Nominal spring constant
Pendulum’s weight
Moment of inertia
Identif. spring constant
Relative dissipation coef.
Absolute dissipation coef.

Symbol
l
¯k
m
J
k
b
γ

Value
0.15 m
0.054 N m−1
17 g
3.82 × 10−4 kgm2
0.065 N m−1
1.70 × 10−3 N m s rad−1
3.75 × 10−4 N m s rad−1

and B = [0, 1]T, K = [k, b], which render the torque cou-
pling through springs with dissipation. Additionally, let

N]T ,

1 , . . . , xT

x = [xT
u = [ϕM1, ˙ϕM1, ϕM2, ˙ϕM2]T ,
F(x) = [ f (x1)T, . . . , f (xN)T]T ,
dM1 = [1, 0, . . . , 0]T ∈ RN ,
dM2 = [0, . . . , 0, 1]T ∈ RN ,
D = diag(dM1 + dM2) .

The ﬁnal compact matrix form of the system with inputs
is

˙x =F(x) −

(cid:19)

(L + D) ⊗ BK

x

(cid:18) 1
J

(cid:18) 1
J

+

(cid:19)

[dM1 , dM2] ⊗ BK

u ,

(7)

where ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product.

4.3. Parameter Identiﬁcation and Model Veriﬁ-

cation

To verify the validity of the presented mathemati-
cal model, we ﬁrst identify the unknown parameters. As
known parameters, we choose the mass m and length l,
from which we also computed the moment of inertia
J = ml2, assuming negligible mass of the rod. The nu-
merical values are listed in the ﬁrst part of Tab. 1. The
parameters we need to identify are the spring constant k
and the two damping coefﬁcients, γ and b. Although the
nominal spring constant ¯k is known from the datasheet,
the value is valid only when the spring is rotated along
its wind direction. Since the spring can rotate in both
directions in our case, we choose k to be unknown.

The identiﬁcation was deﬁned as a gray box model,
and the unknown parameters were found using System
Identiﬁcation Toolbox for Matlab, minimizing the least
square error of all pendulum’s angles in the chain. To
collect input data for the identiﬁcation, we used a chain

Figure 5: Simulation output with identiﬁed parameters
compared with measurements from the real platform.
Identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation were done with N = 5 and
N = 20 pendulums, respectively.

(6)

of N = 5 pendulums with only one motor’s torque M1
active (MN = 0) and set the motor’s trajectory to

ϕM1(t) = a sin(ωt) ,

(8)

where a and ω are the signal’s amplitude and the an-
gular frequency, respectively. Several values of a and
ω were used to collect many identiﬁcation trajectories.
For evaluation, we used the signal (8) with a = 2 rad
and ω = 10 rad s−1. See the top part of Fig. 5 com-
paring measured pendulums’ angles and outputs from
simulating the model (7) with identiﬁed parameters.
In the identiﬁcation experiment, the normalized root-
mean-square error (NRMSE) averaged over all pendu-
lums in the chain was eidn = 0.12.

For the veriﬁcation, we compare the real system
and the output from the simulation with N = 20 pen-
dulums actuated with the same input (8), see the bot-
tom part of Fig. 5. The NRMSE averaged over all pen-
dulums in the veriﬁcation experiment was evrf = 0.28.
One can see that the error ever grows with an increasing
number of pendulums in the chain. However, the main
behavior of the system is well captured by the model.

5. Examples of Boundary Control Formu-

lations

As described in previous sections, the system is
boundary-controlled. Thus, for N > 2, the system is un-
deractuated, which imposes challenging control prob-
lems. This section proposes two such control formula-
tions and describes control algorithms for solving them.

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: Snapshots from the experiments: (a) Non-
collocated control of oscillations, (b) Open-loop, low-
oscillatory rotation of the pendulums

We ﬁrst designed and tuned the algorithms on the math-
ematical model, and then the solutions were veriﬁed on
the real platform. The snapshots from the two experi-
ments are in Fig. 6.

5.1. Non-collocated Control of Oscillation

As the ﬁrst task, we propose feedback control of a
single pendulum’s oscillations. Consider a pendulum in
the chain with an index i(cid:63) > 1 that we select to be stabi-
lized to ϕ (cid:63) = 0 while the torque M1(t) is controlled and
MN(t) acts as an unknown disturbance. We can formu-
late the goal to satisfy a condition

|ϕi(cid:63)(t) − ϕ (cid:63)| ≤ ε ,

lim
t→∞

(9)

where ε ≥ 0 is some small constant. The challenge
is that the input M1(t) is non-collocated to the i(cid:63)-th
pendulum, with the coupling represented by the inter-
pendulums, which is non-linear.

To solve problem (9), we view the action of the dis-
turbance MN(t) as launching a traveling wave into the
system. The idea is to launch, using M1(t), a travel-
ing wave that reaches the i(cid:63)-th pendulum with the same
amplitude as the disturbance wave but with the opposite
phase. The amplitudes of the two waves cancel out at
position index i(cid:63), so |ϕi(cid:63)(t)| → 0. This concept of wave-
based control of oscillations in lump-modeled ﬂexible
structures was used in many works; for instance, see [9]
and references therein.

5.1.1. Naive Solution. With available measurements
from all pendulums and if i(cid:63) ≤ ( N
2 +∆), where ∆ is some
small constant integer (see Remark 4), the solution is
straightforward. The control law for the controlled mo-
tor to launch a wave that cancels the disturbance at in-
dex i(cid:63) is

ϕM1(t) = −ϕ2i(cid:63)(t) .
The validity of control law (10) to satisfy goal (9) can
be derived from the system’s symmetry, which is evi-

(10)

Figure 7: Wave-based compensation of the feedback de-
lay td.

dent from the Laplacian (3) of the system. Thus, by ap-
plying (10), the net torque acting on the i(cid:63)-th pendulum
is zero after transient effects.

5.1.2. Wave-based Delay Compensation. However,
on a real platform, the solution (10) is not directly ap-
plicable. The main reason is the inevitable time delay
td in the feedback loop caused by the hardware imple-
mentation. So instead of the measurement ϕ2i(cid:63)(t) being
available at the time t, only ϕ2i(cid:63)(t −td) is available. Us-
ing the delayed measurement in (10) would naturally
cause phase mismatch of the waves reaching the i(cid:63)-th
pendulum. Thus, the goal (9) would not be guaranteed.
There are many ways how one could compensate for the
delay, for instance, using the Smith predictor or possi-
bly the Kalman Filter to estimate ϕ2i(cid:63)(t) from delayed
measurements. The system is, however, non-linear.

Here, we propose yet another way to compensate
for the delay using the wave character of the system.
The solution is schematically depicted in Fig. 7. Con-
sider a particular wave front traveling through the sys-
tem in the direction of decreasing position index, and let
deﬁne t(i, j) to be the time needed for a wave front to
travel from i-th to j-th pendulum. As the wave travels
through the system, it follows from the wave property
of the system that each pendulum delays the wave front
by t(i + 1, i) and decreases the wave front’s amplitude
by some coefﬁcient λ . Therefore, to compensate for
the phase mismatch caused by the delay td, we can use,
instead of ϕ2i(cid:63) (t), a measurement ϕ(2i(cid:63)+∆)(t − td − ˜t),
where ∆ = 1, 2, . . . and ˜t ≥ 0 are selected to satisfy

t(2i(cid:63) + ∆, 2i(cid:63)) − ˜t = td ,

(11)

and ˜t < t(i + 1, i). The control law compensating the
time delay is

ϕM1(t) = −λ ϕ(2i(cid:63)+∆)(t − td − ˜t) ,

(12)

where λ ≥ 0 is a parameter to compensate for a gain
mismatch of the wave fronts. We describe the method
to obtain the parameter λ below.

5.1.3. Adaptive Gain Compensation. To ﬁnd the gain
λ , we employ the Extremum Seeking Control (ESC);

ϕ(2i(cid:63)+∆)(t)ϕ2i(cid:63)(t)ϕ(2i(cid:63)+∆)(t−td−˜t)ϕ2i(cid:63)(t)iitt−td−˜tϕ2i(cid:63)(t−td)WavefrontFigure 8: Block diagram of wave-based non-collocated
control of oscillations with an extremum seeking con-
troller adaptively changing the control gain

Figure 9: Response of the system to the distur-
bance (14). Highlighted is the disturbance signal and
the angle of the pendulum which we wish to stabilize.

Table 2: Non-collocated control: experiment parame-
ters

Description
Control and sampling period
Disturbance: amplitude
Disturbance: angular frequency
ESC: Size of the time window
ESC: Gain
ESC: Sine frequency
ESC: Sine amplitude
ESC: HPF cut-off frequency

Symbol
Ts
aM2
ωM2
W
KE
ωE
aE
fHPF

Value
0.03 s
3 rad
9.24 rad s−1
20
8
0.5 Hz
0.01
0.1 Hz

see [10] for details. The ESC allows to ﬁnd the opti-
mal value of λ based on online minimization of a given
performance index I. Since the goal is to stabilize the
pendulum at ϕ (cid:63) = 0, we chose the performance index
to be minimized as a running average of the selected
pendulum’s angle ϕi(cid:63) in an absolute value, that is

periodic triangle wave signal

ϕM2(t) = −

2aM2
π

arcsin (sin (ωM2t)) .

(14)

The system’s response to the disturbance is shown in
Fig. 9. Numerical values of the parameters related to
the experiment are in Tab. 2. The parameters of the ESC
were selected to achieve the best performance.

We divide the experiment into three time intervals
to showcase the designed control; see Fig. 10. In the
ﬁrst interval starting at t = 0 s, only the disturbance MN
is activated while the control loop is not. The maximum
amplitude of the selected pendulum is ϕ6,max ≈ 18°.
At t = 14 s, the solution (12) with λ = 1 is activated,
resulting in a decrease of the oscillation amplitude to
ϕ6,max ≈ 5°. Lastly, in the third interval, the adaptive
loop with ESC is turned on, and after ≈ 10 s, it addition-
ally decreases the maximal amplitude to ϕ6,max ≈ 2°.
The remaining oscillations are mainly due to the per-
sisting ESC, changing the gain λ .

5.2. Open-loop, Low-oscillatory Rotation of the

I(t) =

1
W

W −1
∑
j=0

|ϕi(cid:63)(t − jTs)| ,

(13)

Pendulums

where W is the time window size over which the run-
ning average is computed. The block diagram of the
ESC implementation is depicted in Fig. 8.

Remark 4 The formulated solution to the problem (9)
works only when the index of the selected pendulum is
i(cid:63) ≤ ( N
2 + ∆), the measure-
ment ϕ(2i(cid:63)+∆) is not available to implement (12). A dif-
ferent solution needs to be designed for such cases.

2 + ∆). Naturally, for i(cid:63) > ( N

5.1.4. Experiment. To experimentally verify and
demonstrate the designed control, we used N = 20
pendulums and selected the pendulum i(cid:63) = 6 to be
stabilized. We set the disturbance’s trajectory as a

The second control problem we demonstrate is the
following. Consider the system (1) controlled only by
one motor M1(t). Given a reference speed ωref (cid:54)= 0, the
goal is to rotate all pendulums in the chain with an av-
erage speed equal to ωref while minimizing the oscilla-
tions within the chain. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne the goal
as to ﬁnd the reference trajectory x0(t) for which

(cid:90) Tf

|xi,2(t) − x j,2(t)|dt ,

min ∑
i> j
¯xi,2(t) = ωref , i = 1, 2, . . . , N ,

0

lim
t→∞

(15a)

(15b)

where ¯(.) denotes the mean value and Tf is the ﬁnal time.
As we argued in [11], the formulated problem (15)

System(FKmodel)PerformanceevaluationλˆλϕiWave-basedcontroller(cid:82)aEsin(ωEt)KE−ϕ(2i(cid:63)+∆)IHigh-passﬁlter(HPF)ϕM1ESCTo satisfy the second condition, we consider the
˜x0(t) to be a solution to (5) with γ = 0 and such ini-
tial conditions that the pendulum has enough energy to
swing through the inverse position. This results in a
continuous rotation with ¯xi,2 > 0 while the pendulums
are able to move close to synchrony as the absolute dis-
sipation in the real system acts only as a perturbation to
the complete synchrony. The proposed solution to the
goal (15b) is open-loop; the motor tracks the given ﬁxed
trajectory ˜x0.

5.2.2. Experiment. We used N = 5 pendulums for the
experiments as the coupling strength between the pen-
dulums was not strong enough to keep more pendulums
near synchrony. We set the average reference speed to
ωref = 8.2 rad s−1. To obtain the near-synchronized tra-
jectory with a given speed, we set the initial conditions
in (5) to x0(0) = [π, 3]T and γ = 0. The results from
the experiment are in the top part of Fig. 11. Although
the near-synchronized motion is being disrupted, the
pendulums are able to re-synchronize and maintain the
near-synchronized state for several periods. The per-
turbations are mainly caused by accumulated mismatch
between the real dynamics with γ > 0 and the reference
trajectory.

To show the signiﬁcance of the synchronized mo-
tion, we also run an experiment with a constant speed
reference trajectory x0(t) = [ωreft, ωref]T; see bottom
part of Fig. 11. We can see that as the pendulums are not
synchronized, the oscillations are more signiﬁcant, re-
sulting in higher difference in pendulums’ speeds. The
criterion (15a) evaluated for the near-synchronized and
the constant speed trajectories in the interval t ∈ (0, 15)
is for the former lower by 56 %.

6. Conclusion

In this paper, we described our new laboratory
mechatronic platform for experiments with a boundary
control of an array/chain of some twenty coupled pen-
dulums pivoting around a single shaft – the mechanical
realization of the Frenkel-Kontorova (FK) model. We
also provided a mathematical model suitable for sim-
ulation experiments. Finally, we formulated two con-
trol problems, proposed methods for their solution, and
demonstrated these experimentally using the platform.
We offered the design ﬁles and source codes to the re-
search community for free through a public repository.
Our future work will address some admitted shortcom-
ings of the solutions in this paper.

Figure 10: Experimental veriﬁcation of the proposed
non-collocated, wave-based control of single pendu-
lum’s oscillation

might be relevant for the control of nanoscale friction.

5.2.1. Synchronization-based Solution. We can ad-
dress the goal (15a) as to reach synchronization in the
pendulums’ speeds. Consider trajectory x0(t) to be a
solution to the drift dynamics of a single pendulum (5).
We deﬁne the synchronization error δi = xi − x0, which
gives the error dynamics

˙δi = ˙xi − ˙x0 = f (xi) − f (x0) −

(cid:32)

B

K

1
J

N
∑
j=1

(cid:33)

li jx j + Mi

,

with M1(t) = K(x1 −x0). By deﬁning δ = [δT
we can rewrite (16) into a matrix form

1 , . . . , δT

(16)
N ]T,

˙δ = F (δ , x0) = F(x) − F(x0) − ((L + D) ⊗ (BK)) δ ,
(17)
Linearizing the system (17) around the origin yields the
Jacobian matrix

∂ F (δ , x0)
∂ δ

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)δ =0
x0=0

= IN ⊗

(cid:21)

(cid:20) 0
1
−1 −γ

− (L + D) ⊗ BK ,

(18)
where IN is an identity matrix of size N. By examining
the eigenvalues of the matrix (18), it can be shown that
the origin of the system (17) is locally asymptotically
stable; see [11] for a more detailed analysis. Thus, we
have shown, that pendulums completely synchronize by
choosing x0(t) as a solution to (5). However, the solu-
tion of (5) with γ > 0 corresponds to a trajectory of a
single, damped pendulum. Such trajectory asymptoti-
cally decays to the origin with xi,2 → 0, so the second
goal (15b) could not be satisﬁed.

Lump-Modeled Flexible Robots,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 342–352, Apr. 2007.
[10] K. B. Ariyur and M. Krstic, Real-Time Optimization
by Extremum-Seeking Control, 1st ed. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley-Interscience, Oct. 2003.

[11] L. Do and Z. Hur´ak, “Synchronization in the Frenkel-
Kontorova Model with Application to Control of
Nanoscale Friction,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 54,
no. 14, pp. 406–411, Jan. 2021.

Experiments:

Figure 11:
comparison of near-
synchronization reference trajectory and constant speed
trajectory. The near-synchronized trajectory allows to
considerably reduce the oscillations within the chain.

References

[1] J. Frenkel and T. Kontorova, “On the theory of plastic
deformation and twinning. II.” 1938, pages: 1340-1348
Volume: 8.

[2] J. Cuevas-Maraver, P. G. Kevrekidis, and F. Williams,
The sine-Gordon Model and its Applications, ser. Non-
linear Systems and Complexity. Cham: Springer Inter-
national Publishing, 2014, vol. 10.

[3] A. C. Scott, “A Nonlinear Klein-Gordon Equation,”
American Journal of Physics, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 52–61,
Jan. 1969, publisher: American Association of Physics
Teachers.

[4] R. B. Thakur, L. Q. English, and A. J. Sievers, “Driven
intrinsic localized modes in a coupled pendulum array,”
Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, vol. 41, no. 1, p.
015503, Dec. 2007, publisher: IOP Publishing.

[5] J. Cuevas-Maraver, L. English, P. Kevrekidis, and
M. Anderson, “Discrete Breathers in a Forced-Damped
Array of Coupled Pendula: Modeling, Computation,
and Experiment,” Physical review letters, vol. 102, p.
224101, Jul. 2009.

[6] T. Ikeda, Y. Harata, and K. Nishimura, “Intrinsic Lo-
calized Modes of Harmonic Oscillations in Pendulum
Arrays Subjected to Horizontal Excitation,” Journal of
Computational and Nonlinear Dynamics, vol. 10, no. 2,
2015.

[7] A. L. Fradkov and B. Andrievsky, “Control of wave mo-
tion in the chain of pendulums,” IFAC Proceedings Vol-
umes, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 3136–3141, Jan. 2008.

[8] A. L. Fradkov, B. Andrievsky, and K. B. Boykov,
“Multipendulum mechatronic setup: Design and experi-
ments,” Mechatronics, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 76–82, 2012.

[9] W. J. O’Connor, “Wave-Based Analysis and Control of

