2
2
0
2

r
p
A
4

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
9
0
8
1
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

RF Electronics

Josef Frisch (SLAC), Paul O’Connor (BNL)

ABSTRACT

For many decades High Energy Physics (HEP) instrumentation has been concen-
trated on detectors of ionizing radiation – where the energy of incident particles
or photons is suﬃcient to create mobile charge in gas, liquid, or solid material,
which can be processed by front end electronics (FEE) to provide information
about the position, energy, and timing of the incoming radiation. However,
recently-proposed HEP experiments need to sense or control EM radiation in the
radiofrequency (RF) range, where ionization detectors are unavailable. These
experiments can take advantage of emerging microelectronics developments fos-
tered by the explosive growth of wireless data communications in the commercial
sector.

Moore’s Law advances in semiconductor technology have brought about the
recent development of advanced microelectronic components with groundbreak-
ing levels of analog-digital integration and processing speed. In particular, RF
”System-on-Chip” (RFSoC) platforms oﬀer multiple data converter interfaces
to the analog world (ADCs and DACs) having bandwidths approaching 10 GHz
and abundant digital signal processing resources on the same silicon die. Such
devices eliminate the complex PC board interfaces that have long been used to
couple discrete ADCs and DACs to FPGA processors, thus radically reducing
power consumption, impedance mismatch, and footprint area, while allowing
analog preconditioning circuits to be eliminated in favor of digital signal pro-
cessing. Costed for wide deployment, these devices are helping to accelerate the
trend towards “software deﬁned radio” in several high-volume commercial mar-
kets. In this whitepaper we highlight some HEP applications where leading-edge
RF microelectronics can be a key enabler.

Submitted to the Proceedings of the US Community Study
on the Future of Particle Physics (Snowmass 2021)

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
1

Introduction

In recent years the High Energy Physics community’s experimental portfolio has begun
to require instrumentation to probe the classical properties of the electromagnetic ﬁeld –
the spatial and temporal behavior of amplitude, phase, frequency, and polarization – with
unprecedented signal-to-noise. These experiments are now able to take advantage of de-
velopments in semiconductor microelectronics brought about by the growth of commercial
wireless applications, particularly telecommunications, radar, and wireless powering. Mod-
ern microelectronic platforms have now reached the stage where most signal processing
functions conventionally realized with analog circuits can be subsumed into the digital fab-
ric of Field Programmable Gate Arrays which incorporate RF-rate data converters with
large DSP ”slices”, memories, I/O structures, and processor cores. For many systems this
leads to orders-of-magnitude improvement in signal processing throughput per unit of power
consumption. In the following sections we will describe some of the HEP activities making
use of the new digital RF technologies and projections for their use in future large-scale pro-
grams. In many cases, citations to the relevant proposals in other Snowmass whitepapers
are provided.

Prior to 2018, two bottlenecks stood
in the way of
fully-digital processing of
high bandwidth, high dynamic range sig-
nals. First, ADC performance (as measured
on the speed/resolution plane, see Figure)
was barely adequate to acquire multi-GHz
signals at Nyquist rate, having only a few
bits of resolution (Figure 1). Therefore, het-
erodyne techniques involving costly, sensi-
tive analog preconditioning circuitry (mix-
ers, local oscillators, quadrature couplers,
etc.) were used to translate down to inter-
mediate frequencies for lower-rate digitization. Second, the interface that transfers digitized
data between the high-speed ADC and ﬁrst-stage digital processor became complex and
power-consuming, and required expert circuit layout techniques to avoid timing errors. The
cost and design eﬀort to realize high-bandwidth, high-resolution digital processors relegated
them to specialty markets.

Figure 1: Analog-to-digital converter resolu-
tion (eﬀective bits) vs. sampling rate c. 2016

An emerging family of microelectronic
platforms dedicated to acquiring and pro-
cessing analog RF signals in the digital do-
main has been released by Xilinx starting
in 2018. Referred to as Zynq UltraScale+
RFSoC (hereafter RFSoC) they incorpo-
rate high-rate analog-to-digital converters
(ADCs) along with a rich fabric of fast
programmable logic and memory, powerful

Figure 2: (a) block diagram and (b) form fac-
tor for an RFSoC module oﬀered by Pentek

2

quad-core ARM processors for application
processing, and abundant high-speed connectivity interfaces. The ADCs have a combined
sample-rate/dynamic range/power consumption ﬁgure of merit exceeding that of the most
advanced discrete devices, and by providing a built-in, on-chip interface between digitizers
and signal processing logic, design ﬁrmware development cycles can be shortened by an
order of magnitude. Several vendors now oﬀer the RFSoC chips on compact form factor
modules with turnkey base ﬁrmware and a variety of custom IP for typical applications.
Target markets include new high-bandwidth wireless networking and telecommunication,
radar, satellite communication, and aerospace/defense applications. Xilinx has introduced
three generations of RFSoC between 2018-2020, each time increasing the maximum ADC
sampling rate by 25%, and further improvements are expected as new sub-10nm CMOS
process nodes become available.

Interestingly, the same technical requirements demanded by commercial product devel-

opers overlap signiﬁcantly with research areas of interest to the community:

• multiple, phase-coherent sampling channels;

• analog bandwidth >5GHz with sampling rate >2Gsa/s and resolution >10 eﬀective

bits;

• low noise, distortion, and crosstalk;

• moderate power consumption and compact form factor;

• conﬁgurable, ﬁeld-programmable functionality;

• scalable to large systems.

The beneﬁts of integrated RF platforms
are beginning to be realized in the exper-
imental physics community. Recent ac-
tivities include accelerator applications [1],
radio astronomy [2], atmospheric sensing
[3], multiplexed readout of superconduct-
ing bolometers [4] and scintillators [5], radio
neutrino detection [6], and manipulation of
qubit structures for Quantum Information
Science [7].

Figure 3:
ments map onto experimental needs.

commercial application require-

2 Microwave multiplexing for CMB

Cryogenic bolometers are widely used for Cosmic Microwave Backgrond (CMB) intensity
and polarization mapping. Detectors have noise levels below the CMB shot noise so recent
developments have focused on increasing the number of detector elements in a telescope
system. The Simons Observatory is in production of a readout with 70,000 detectors, and
future projects will use hundreds of thousands of detectors

3

2.1 Cryogenic Bolometer Technology

Detectors for CMB are commonly operated at 100mK temperatures in order to have de-
tection noise that is small compared to the CMB shot noise and sky noise. The most
commonly used type of detector for CMB instruments is the Transition Edge Sensor (TES).
These are fabricated as thin ﬁlms composed alloys with a superconducting transition tem-
perature slightly above the cryogenic bath temperature. When voltage biased, a natural
electro-thermal feedback maintains the detector at its transition temperature, and the de-
vice current is dirctly realted to external power applied to the detector.

The TES output current requires some architecture of SQUID ampliﬁcation before it
can be further ampliﬁed by conventional semiconductor ampliﬁers. In existing telescope
systems this ampliﬁcation is combined with multiplexing. Three types of systems are in
common use:

• Time division Multiplexing (TDM): This is the most commonly used scheme for CMB.
In this scheme a row / column address mechanism is used to reduce the number of
readout wires. This provides O(100) multiplexing ratios

• MHz Frequency Division Multiplexing (FDM): This scheme incorporates the TES
sensors in MHz frequency resonant circuits, with each resonator tuned to a diﬀerent
frequency. This provides O(100) multiplexing ratios

• Microwave Multiplexing (uMUX0: This scheme couples the SQUID current to SQUID
loaded microwave resonators, typically operating in the 4-8GHz frequency range, with
each resonator tuned to a diﬀerent frequency. The SQUIDs act as a type of parametric
ampliﬁer allowing the low power TES current to modulate a higher power RF signal.
This provides O(1000) multiplexing ratios. The high multiplexing ratios and excellent
noise performance of these systems is attractive, but they require complex RF based
warm readout systems.

Kinetic Induction Detectors (KIDs) make use of the temperature dependence of the
inductance of superconducting circuits operated near their transition temperatures. When
fabricated into resonant circuits, this provides a temperature tuned resonant circuit that can
be used to frequency multiplex many detectors. KID detectors have not yet matched the
noise performance of TES detectors, however the technology is improving and the potential
multiplexing factors of O(10,000) make them attractive for future CMB systems. The
operating frequencies range from a few X 100MHz to several GHz. The readout systems
for KIDs are very similar to microwave multiplexing readouts.

4

Figure 4: Warm readout system for microwave multiplexed TES detectors

2.2 Warm readout System

uMUX systems and KID systems use nearly identical microwave readout systems. These
systems much generate RF tones to interrogate the cold resonators in order to measure
the resonator frequency, and then tune those tones to track the frequency changes of those
resonators. This comprises a digital radio system operating with O(1000) tones for uMUX
and potentially O(10,000) tones for KID detectors. The ”warm” readout can be considered
to comprise all of the ”conventional” RF devices from the 4K ampliﬁers to the digital
feedback system. The warm readout system has a number of technical challenges:

• Bandwidth: The readout system typically requires 4GHz of analog bandwidth. This
exceeds the anti-aliased bandwidth of high resolution ADCs / DACs as of 2022. Note
that while in principal an ADC has a Nyquist bandwidth of 1/2 of the clock speed, in
practice antialias ﬁlters have ﬁnite slopes, and a ration of 3:1 to 5:1 of digitizing rate
/ analog bandwidth is typically required. This necessitates the use of multiple ADCs

5

and DACs to covere the 4GHz bandwidth. These can be combined using frequency
multiplexing ﬁlters, or in an I/Q conﬁguration.

• Signal Processing: The total digital bandwidth is large, as an example the SLAC
SMuRF uMUX system uses 8X 2.5Gs/s digitizers to obtain 4GHz of bandwith, re-
sulting in a 400 Gbit raw data rate. Processing throughput is near the limit of modern
FGPAs using eﬃcient code and algorithms.

• Dynamic range: Any RF system will have some nonlinear response. This results in the
production of inter-modulation signals. 2nd order signals have frequencies of f1+f2
and f2-f2. In some designs (such as SLAC SMuRF these tones are outsdie of the signal
band, however that required the use of a larger total digitizing throughput. The 3rd
order terms of the form F1+F2-F3 will be in band and the number of those tones
scales as N3 With O[103]tones this results in O[109] intermodulation tones. The large
number of intermodulation tones behave like noise ﬂoor.

• Tone tracking: For both uMUX and KID detectors, the frequency modulation from
signals (and ﬂux ramp for uMUX) is not small compared to the resonator line width.
Having the drive tones track the resonator frequency shifts provides improved linearity
with respect to signal inputs and reduces the signal levels in the RF chain, improving
the RF dynamic range. Tone tracking requires additional ﬁrmware complexity and
additional FPGA processing power

The present generation of uMUX readout systems are capable of reading approximately
2000 detectors in a 4GHz bandwidth, and require approximately 1U of rack space and 250W
of power. The next generation of readout based on RFSoC parts is expected to reduce the
size and power consumption by a factor of 2X-4X.

Note that in addition to the RF systems uMUX readouts require a signiﬁcant amount
of high precision, low frequency systems for TES bias and other functions. The underlying
industrial technology is not developing as quickly as is the RF / signal processing and is
expected to represent a larger fraction of the total system size and complexity in the future.
KID detectors have a substantial advantage here in not requiring the large low frequency
bias system.

3

Instrumentation for 21cm cosmology

The 21 cm hyperﬁne transition of neutral atomic hydrogen (HI) occurs when the electron
and proton spins change from aligned to anti-aligned. Observation of the radiofrequency
emission from the cosmos began in 1951 [8] using instruments made possible by the devel-
opment of radar during World War II. It was soon used to map the structure and rotation
curve of our galaxy and later, neighboring galaxies – which has provided the strongest
evidence for the existence of dark matter.

There are many instrumentation challenges to extending 21cm observations to cosmo-
logical distances, but the potential to improve our understanding of fundamental processes

6

underlying cosmic acceleration (dark energy and inﬂation) is great. Since the 21 cm transi-
tion is sharp and isolated, we can use it to determine precise source redshifts. This opens the
possibility to probe regions of the Universe that are inaccessible to optical surveys. How-
ever, the amplitude of the 21 cm signal is very weak and is masked by strong foregrounds
from galactic synchrotron and point source emission, as well as anthropogenic RFI, in the
same frequency bands.

Two lines of R&D have emerged over the
past decade and progress is being made in
overcoming the main issues. The ﬁrst, tar-
geting large-scale structure in the modern
universe at 0.1 ≤ z ≤ 6, employs intensity
mapping to detect the aggregate emission
from many hundreds of unresolved galax-
ies using telescopes whose angular and fre-
quency resolution are coarse, but suﬃcient
to map structures of relevance for cosmol-
ogy. There has been an initial detection
in cross-correlation with optical galaxy sur-
veys at low redshift using the 100-m dish
of the Green Bank Telescope [9] in 2013.
Follow-on experiments such as CHIME [10] using large interferometers are underway with
greater sensitivity. The second approach seeks to characterize the global (monopole) signal
from neutral hydrogen during the cosmic Dark Ages (10 ≤ z ≤ 500), an epoch in cosmic
history that is otherwise unobservable as stars and galaxies had not yet formed. During
this time cosmological processes are unaﬀected by astrophysical interactions and provides
a pristine laboratory which has shown tantalizing signs of BSM physics [11].

Figure 5: Harold Ewen inspects the horn of the in-
strument he used to detect the Galactic 21˙cm radia-
tion. Credit: NRAO/AUI/NSF

3.1 HI Intensity Mapping

By virtue of its inherently large ﬁeld of view and high survey speed, intensity mapping in-
terferometers will likely surpass optical surveys in terms of volume of the cosmos surveyed.
Achieving this potential will require a new generation of powerful, scalable on-antenna
receivers and digitizers based on modern RF microelectronic platforms; their individual-
element data streams will be phase-synchronized and transported to a massive digital corre-
lator with processing throughput equalling or exceeding that of present-day supercomputers
(see Fig. 7).

High channel-count, fast RF digitization as planned for large 21 cm interferometers is
also used extensively in accelerator control and beam diagnostics. Large accelerators such as
LCLS-II can include over a thousand channels of RF front ends and high-performance dig-
itizers connected to a distributed data network. Although optimization of dynamic range,
bandwidth, and noise characteristics diﬀer from those needed for the 21 cm experiment,
many commonalities between the designs remain. For performing early digitization at ev-
ery antenna or antenna group, the RF system-on-chip (RFSoC) family which integrates

7

GHz-rate data converters with powerful digital logic, DSP, and memory [2] is ideally suited.
Current generation RFSoC parts have up to eight, 6 Gigasample/sec converters with 12-bit
nominal resolution (11.4 ENOB). This allows a tradeoﬀ: high bandwidth direct digitization
provides the ability to oversample and design high performance digital band selection ﬁlters
and high order frequency channelizers, relaxing constraints on the analog preﬁltering and
conditioning. The onboard programmable logic will also permit ﬁeld-programmable algo-
rithms to perform calibration and RFI ﬂagging and mitigation. These are well understood
problems in radio astronomy, though the eﬀects of residual RFI at the small level of the
21˙cm signal is only starting to be addressed [12].

Current generation 21 cm instruments produce ≥100TB of data per day without any
compression, natively generating an amount of data ∝ N 2 where N is the number of ele-
ments (currently N ∼ 103). Compression by a factor of ∼ N is achievable by exploiting
redundancy within the interferometer, but requires the use of real-time, in-situ calibration
and places strong constraints on the uniformity of the optics beteen elements. Estimates of
data rates, correlator processing speeds, and compute power for a proposed large ultraw-
ideband IM experiment (PUMA [13]) are given in Ref. [14]. The scale of the problem can
be seen by comparison with present large data acquisition systems: the rates estimated for
PUMA exceed those at the LHC, LCLS-II, and SKA1 by factors of over 100 up to several
1000. One approach being studied to constrain the enormous power dissipation is a dedi-
cated ASIC having suﬃcient numbers of complex multiply-accumulate units (CMACs) to
allow all correlations of up to 64 signals to be computed in parallel at an energy cost of as
low as 1.8 pJ per CMAC operation [15].

Figure 6: HI intensity mapping (IM) makes a tomographic reconstruction of large-scale structure by
capturing the aggregate emission of many unresolved galaxies. Left: Distribution of galaxies in 2D (radial
coordinate is distance) from an optical galaxy spectrographic survey. Middle: Illustrating the resolution in
angle and frequency relevant to cosmology. Right: Map-making results in a density map at each redshift.

3.2 Measuring the monopole signal at high redshift

The redshift range 10 ≤ z ≤ 500 is a largely unexplored window on the infant Universe.
During the so-called Dark Ages the Universe was dominated by neutral atomic hydrogen
and the population of the upper and lower states of the 21 cm system dictates whether

8

Figure 7: Illustration of anticipated data ﬂow in a large interferometric array. Conversion of waveform
data to frequency space, e.g. channelization, is accomplished close to each receiver; coincident data for
each frequency bin are collected from all stations through a cross-bar switch (also called a “corner-turn”
operation); correlations are constructed for each frequency bin, which can then be time-averaged and stored,
followed by physics analysis.

the signal is seen in emission or absorption against the CMB backlight. Observing the
global (sky-averaged) 21 cm signal provides a measure of the interplay between the HI spin
temperature and cooling due to cosmic expansion. The absence of astrophysical eﬀects in
the early Universe makes robust theoretical predictions possible, and any departure from
standard cosmological models is an indicator of new physics.

At frequencies below ∼ 10 MHz the absorption, emission, and distortion of the Earth’s
ionosphere prevent ground-based measurements except at the most favorable sites during
ideal conditions. In Earth orbit, above the ionosphere, extensive terrestrial RFI (from man-
made or meteorological sources) similarly prohibits meaningful observations in the HF (3
- 30 MHz) and UHF (30 - 300MHz) bands. For decades it has been recognized that the
lunar farside, where neither terrestrial RFI nor ionospheric eﬀects are present, presents an
ideal site for low frequency radio astronomy [16], [17]. The potential of the 21 cm probe has
been recognized by the NASEM Decadal Survey of Astronomy and Astrophysics, whose
Panel on Cosmology identiﬁed the Dark Ages as its sole discovery area. A number of
Snowmass Cosmic Frontier whitepapers ( [18], [19], [20], [21]) develop the science case for
a 21 cm Dark Ages experiment on the Moon. An alternative, equally viable approach is to
observe from a satellite or satellite formation in a lunar orbit selected to provide periodic
blocking of terrestrial RFI, wider and higher-cadence sky coverage, and interferometric
imaging ( [22], [23]).

RF electronics with the best possible balance of processing power for a highly con-
strained mass and power budget will be the key enabling technology for a lunar Dark Ages
experiment, along with optimized antennas. In the short term only modest missions with

9

FTDish array N x NChannelizeSwitchCorrelate + averageonlineofflineArtifact removalComponent selectionmapmakingshared instrument payloads will be possible for cost reasons. The frequency range is low
compared to modern-Universe IM experiments and digitizers in the ∼ 100 Msamples/sec
are appropriate. The analog signal chain requires careful attention to the interface between
the antenna and preampliﬁer to achieve a noise level low enough to be sensitive to the Dark
Ages signal in the presence of foregrounds nearly 105 times larger. The only possibility for
a small pathﬁnder mission to detect the signal is by integrating over many lunar cycles, and
by appropriate foreground modeling along with accurate antenna beam characterization to
allow deconvolution. The receiver analog signal chain must have high dynamic range to
handle the sky signal as well as any unmitigated EMI from the rest of the spacecraft.

The harsh lunar environment presents signiﬁcant challenges for the instrument pack-
age: radiation dose is about 2.5× what is encountered in low Earth orbit, and the surface
temperature ranges from ∼ 100K to ∼ 400K between over the 28-day lunar cycle. Unless
radioisotope thermal generators are used, the instrument electronics will need to operate
on battery power for the duration of the lunar night (14 Earth days). With mass budgets
in the 100kg range, battery capacity will likely limit the nighttime power budget to around
10W. During the lunar day the battery will be recharged by solar photovoltaics. Besides
the diﬃculty of lunar surface survival, a telescope on the farside is necessarily permanently
out of direct contact with Earth ground stations. Therefore, radio communication with a
relay satellite will be required and with low-power transceivers it will be necessary to use
powerful encoding and compression to transport the acquired data.

As in the IM case, calibration methods will need to be developed to allow separation of
galactic foregrounds from the cosmological 21 cm signal. There are no natural calibrators
available (with the possible exception of the outer radioplanets), and one proposal is to
insert a broadband transmitter into a lunar orbit where it can be viewed by the receiver on
the surface. By using coded modulation on the calibrator, it can be possible to detect the
signal at amplitudes low enough to not interfere with normal observing. Various schemes
for developing the RF circuitry for an orbiting calibrator are being studied.

4 Radio Detection of UHE neutrinos, cosmic rays, and pho-

tons

The highest energy neutrinos probe extreme astrophysical environments inaccessible via
other messengers [24]. When a high-energy neutrino interacts, a fraction of its energy is
transferred through deep-inelastic scattering with nucleons, which causes a hadronic shower
to develop. Radio detection of neutrinos is possible through the Askaryan eﬀect (Fig. 8),
where particle showers in dense media (in this case polar ice) cause nanosecond-scale radio
pulses in the frequency range between 30 MHz and 1 GHz. Consequently, fast, broad-band
and low-noise receivers and systems are needed to eﬃciently detect the rare signals. Dozens
to hundreds of such receivers in an interferometric phased array distributed over a few
square km are being proposed, requiring cost- and power-eﬃcient modules having exquisite
(sub-nanosecond) timing precision to accurately reconstruct event topologies. Experiments
such as ARA [25], ANITA [26], and ARIANNA [26] have begun studying the diﬀuse ﬂux

10

of astrophysical neutrinos and candidate sources of extra-galactic neutrinos. Proposed new
in-ice facilities such as RNO-G [24] and IceCube-Gen2 [27] will monitor volumes of up to
several 100 km3 of polar ice with the goal of detecting the ﬁrst EeV neutrinos. These
experiments call for large arrays of radio receivers with sensitivity over a wide range of
frequency to enable reconstruction of event energy and topology. Leveraging the R&D
directed at commercial markets will be critical to cost-eﬃcient construction of large facilities
for UHE particle astrophysics in the coming decade.

In addition to neutrinos, the perfor-
mance of large-scale air-shower arrays can
be enhanced by augmentation with a ra-
dio sub-detector, as the radio emission in
air showers is sensitive to the electromag-
netic component. A hybrid detector of this
type has been shown [28] to improve sensi-
tivity to highly-inclined extensive air show-
ers such as those resulting from PeV gamma
rays originating from the Galactic Center.

Figure 8: Radio neutrino detection (credit:
events.icecube.wisc.edu)

5 Other applications

5.1 Axion dark matter searches

Laboratory experiments to search for ”wavelike” dark matter seek to detect the conversion
of axions to photons in a high-Q resonant cavity in the presence of a magnetic ﬁeld.
If
this conversion can occur, then its rate will be enhanced when the cavity’s resonant fre-
quency matches that of the produced photon, which corresponds to the mass-energy of
the axion. Thus far searches have not resulted in detection, but future experiments will
extend the frequency range and sensitivity to cover a wider search range. Cavity resonant
frequencies cover a wide range in the microwave spectrum and require extensive processing
before and after digitization to extract the weak signals from axion conversion. Modern
RF microelectronic technology will play a key role in carrying out the next generation of
experiments.

5.2 Control and manipulation of superconducting qubit systems

Superconducting qubit systems oﬀer a promising way to work with information encoded
in uniquely quantum properties (entanglement and coherence). Such systems behave like
macroscopic ”artiﬁcial atoms” whose energy band structure corresponds to transition fre-
quencies in the microwave range. Typically, warm electronic modules generate and detect
the necessary analog signals that operate on the qubit system to create, sequence, and probe
system states. The generation and transmission of control signals is challenging because

11

small errors in control signals will aﬀect the results of operations, and the errors associated
with each gate operation accumulate as the system runs. As an example of how modern
RF technologies developed for wireless telecom has already been put to use for quantum
information processing, see Reference [7].

References

[1] J. Dusatko et al., Evaluation of the xilinx rfsoc for accelerator applications, in North
American Particle Accelerator Conference (NAPAC’19), Lansing, MI, USA, 01-06
September 2019, pp. 483–486, JACOW Publishing, Geneva, Switzerland, 2019.

[2] C. Liu, M.E. Jones and A.C. Taylor, Characterizing the performance of high-speed
data converters for rfsoc-based radio astronomy receivers, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society 501 (2021) 5096.

[3] D. Conway, Element-level digital array for multifunction phased-array radar, in 99th

American Meteorological Society Annual Meeting, AMS, 2019.

[4] A. Sinclair, R. Stephenson, J. Hoh, S. Gordon and P. Mauskopf, On the development
of a reconﬁgurable readout for superconducting arrays, in Millimeter, Submillimeter,
and Far-Infrared Detectors and Instrumentation for Astronomy X, vol. 11453,
pp. 243–251, SPIE, 2020.

[5] M. Mishra and J. Mattingly, Recovery of coincident frequency domain multiplexed

detector pulses using sequential deconvolution, Journal of Instrumentation 16 (2021)
P03011.

[6] T. Huege and D. Besson, Radio-wave detection of ultra-high-energy neutrinos and

cosmic rays, Progress of Theoretical and Experimental Physics 2017 (2017) 12A106.

[7] R. Borgani, M. Tholen and D. Haviland, Adapting 5g-telecom hardware for the

control of quantum computers, Bulletin of the American Physical Society 66 (2021) .

[8] H.I. Ewen and E.M. Purcell, Observation of a line in the galactic radio spectrum:
Radiation from galactic hydrogen at 1,420 mc./sec., Nature 168 (1951) 356.

[9] K. Masui, E. Switzer, N. Banavar, K. Bandura, C. Blake, L.-M. Calin et al.,

Measurement of 21 cm brightness ﬂuctuations at z 0.8 in cross-correlation, The
Astrophysical Journal Letters 763 (2013) L20.

[10] L. Newburgh, C. Collaboration et al., Measuring dark energy with chime, in APS

April Meeting Abstracts, vol. 2015, pp. H14–005, 2015.

[11] G. Bower, S. Chatterjee, J. Cordes, P. Demorest, J.S. Deneva, J. Dexter et al.,

Fundamental Physics with Galactic Center Pulsars, in BAAS, vol. 51, p. 438, May,
2019.

12

[12] S.E. Harper and C. Dickinson, Potential impact of global navigation satellite services

on total power h i intensity mapping surveys, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society 479 (2018) 2024.

[13] K. Bandura, E. Castorina, L. Connor, S. Foreman, D. Green, D. Karagiannis et al.,
Packed ultra-wideband mapping array (puma): A radio telescope for cosmology and
transients, arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.12559 (2019) .

[14] E. Castorina, S. Foreman, D. Karagiannis, A. Liu, K.W. Masui, P.D. Meerburg et al.,
Packed ultra-wideband mapping array (puma): Astro2020 rﬁ response, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.05072 (2020) .

[15] L.R. D’Addario and D. Wang, A low-power correlator asic for arrays with many

antennas, in 2016 United States National Committee of URSI National Radio Science
Meeting (USNC-URSI NRSM), pp. 1–2, IEEE, 2016.

[16] R. Basler, G. Johnson and R. Vondrak, Evaluation of a large radio-telescope array on

the lunar farside, in Lunar Science Inst., Abstracts of Papers Presented at a Special
Session of the Seventh Annual Lunar Science Conference on Utilization of Lunar
Materials and Expertise for Large Scale Operations in Space, 1976.

[17] S. Johnson, Siting and constructing telescopes and interferometers on the moon, in

Stockholm International Astronautical Federation Congress, 1985.

[18] A. Liu, J. Aguirre, Y. Ali-Haimoud, M. Alvarez, A. Beardsley, G. Becker et al.,

Cosmology with the Highly Redshifted 21cm Line, arXiv e-prints (2019)
arXiv:1903.06240 [1903.06240].

[19] A. Liu, L. Newburgh, B. Saliwanchik and A. Slosar, Snowmass2021 cosmic frontier

white paper: 21cm radiation as a probe of physics across cosmic ages, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.07864 (2022) .

[20] S. Chakrabarti, A. Drlica-Wagner, T.S. Li, N. Sehgal, J.D. Simon, S. Birrer et al.,
Snowmass2021 cosmic frontier white paper: Observational facilities to study dark
matter, arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.06200 (2022) .

[21] K.K. Boddy, M. Lisanti, S.D. McDermott, N.L. Rodd, C. Weniger, Y. Ali-Ha¨ımoud

et al., Astrophysical and cosmological probes of dark matter, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.06380 (2022) .

[22] Y. Shi, F. Deng, Y. Xu, F. Wu, Q. Yan and X. Chen, Lunar orbit measurement of
cosmic dawn 21 cm global spectrum, arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.01124 (2022) .

[23] Y. Shi, Y. Xu, L. Deng, F. Wu, L. Wu, Q. Huang et al., Imaging sensitivity of a

linear interferometer array on lunar orbit, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society 510 (2022) 3046.

[24] J. Aguilar, P. Allison, J. Beatty, H. Bernhoﬀ, D. Besson, N. Bingefors et al., Design
and sensitivity of the radio neutrino observatory in greenland (rno-g), Journal of
Instrumentation 16 (2021) P03025.

13

[25] M.F.H. Seikh and D. Besson, Towards the calibration of askaryan radio array (ara)

station 1, Bulletin of the American Physical Society (2022) .

[26] P. Gorham, P. Allison, O. Banerjee, L. Batten, J. Beatty, K. Belov et al., Constraints

on the ultrahigh-energy cosmic neutrino ﬂux from the fourth ﬂight of anita, Physical
Review D 99 (2019) 122001.

[27] E. Blaufuss, The icecube-gen2 high energy array, in The 34th International Cosmic

Ray Conference, vol. 236, p. 1146, SISSA Medialab, 2016.

[28] M. Renschler, A. Balagopal, A. Haungs, T. Huber, T. Huege, T. Karg et al., Detector

developments for a hybrid particle and radio array for cosmic-ray air-shower
detection, Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1181 (2019) 012075.

14

