2
2
0
2

r
p
A
7
2

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
8
5
3
1
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Prescriptive and Descriptive Approaches to Machine-Learning
Transparency

David Adkins
davidadkins@fb.com
Meta AI
USA

Narine Kokhlikyan
narine@fb.com
Meta AI
USA

Chavez Procope
cprocope@fb.com
Meta AI
USA

Adeel Cheema
acheema@fb.com
Meta AI
USA
Pushkar Mishra∗
pushkarmishra@fb.com
Meta AI
UK

Erin Wang
yulinw@fb.com
Meta AI
USA

Bilal Alsallakh∗
bilalsal@fb.com
Meta AI
USA

Emily McReynolds
emcr@fb.com
Meta AI
USA
Jeremy Sawruk∗
jsawruk@fb.com
Meta AI
USA

Polina Zvyagina
polinaz@fb.com
Meta AI
USA

ABSTRACT
Specialized documentation techniques have been developed to com-
municate key facts about machine-learning (ML) systems and the
datasets and models they rely on. Techniques such as Datasheets,
FactSheets, and Model Cards have taken a mainly descriptive ap-
proach, providing various details about the system components.
While the above information is essential for product developers
and external experts to assess whether the ML system meets their
requirements, other stakeholders might find it less actionable. In
particular, ML engineers need guidance on how to mitigate potential
shortcomings in order to fix bugs or improve the system’s perfor-
mance. We survey approaches that aim to provide such guidance
in a prescriptive way. We further propose a preliminary approach,
called Method Cards, which aims to increase the transparency and
reproducibility of ML systems by providing prescriptive documenta-
tion of commonly-used ML methods and techniques. We showcase
our proposal with an example in small object detection, and demon-
strate how Method Cards can communicate key considerations for
model developers. We further highlight avenues for improving the
user experience of ML engineers based on Method Cards.

∗Equal contribution (authors’ list in alphabetical order).

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, Apr 30– May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3519724

CCS CONCEPTS
• Software and its engineering → Documentation; • Comput-
ing methodologies → Machine learning.

KEYWORDS
Method Cards, Developer Experience, Transparency

ACM Reference Format:
David Adkins, Bilal Alsallakh, Adeel Cheema, Narine Kokhlikyan, Emily
McReynolds, Pushkar Mishra∗, Chavez Procope, Jeremy Sawruk∗, Erin
Wang, and Polina Zvyagina. 2022. Prescriptive and Descriptive Approaches
to Machine-Learning Transparency. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI 2022
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491101.3519724

1 INTRODUCTION
With the rapid adoption of machine learning (ML) in practical
applications, ML-specific documentation has become crucial to their
transparency and to the user experience of different stakeholders of
ML. In contrast to traditional software systems, the documentation
of ML-based systems is an emerging area that poses new challenges
and requirements. A variety of initiatives have been undertaken
over the past few years to address these challenges. These initiatives
aim to provide systematic ways to document ML-based systems.

The above-mentioned initiatives has focused on describing vari-
ous components of ML-based systems. For example, Datasheets for
Datasets [13] focus on providing key details about the datasets used
to develop ML models. Similarly, Model Cards [29] aim to commu-
nicate key facts about individual models such as their intended use,
training and evaluation data, and relevant metrics. In addition, Fact-
Sheets [6] aim to act as declarations of conformity for AI services
by providing relevant details to the consumers of these services.
While the above solutions advance the transparency of ML-based

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, Apr 30– May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA

Adkins et al.

systems, their descriptive nature might limit their utility for certain
stakeholders. For example, ML engineers need specific information
on how to retrain the system and how to mitigate certain problems,
yet such knowledge is often sparsely documented.

We review and propose prescriptive solutions that aim to pro-
vide greater transparency into ML-based systems and to improve
the experience of their developers. Our proposal caters mainly to
expert stakeholders such as model developers and external model
reviewers. Our contributions encompass:

• Motivating the need for a prescriptive approach to ML trans-
parency, and surveying existing initiatives and forms of this
approach (Section 3).

• Proposing Method Cards as a preliminary means to foster
ML transparency and reproducibility, and improve the user
experience of ML engineers (Section 4).

In section 5 we compare our proposals with previous work, and
outline potential directions for future work.

2 BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
Providing transparency into ML systems involves distinct chal-
lenges. Here we provide an overview of three complementary ap-
proaches that contribute to ML transparency along with a motivat-
ing example for prescriptive ones.

2.1 Transparency Through Documentation
The ABOUT ML initiative [39] advocates documentation as a prac-
tical intervention to provide clarity into decision making in ML
systems for stakeholders. The authors explain the value of both
external and internal documentation such as establishing trust and
demonstrating fairness [21]. Furthermore, the authors argue that
documentation is both an artifact and a process, showing how devel-
oping the documentation fosters ML developers to think critically
about every step in the ML lifecycle. Accordingly, the initiative
is led by the Partnership on AI consortium which continues to
develop this process.

Documenting software systems is a long-standing goal of soft-
ware engineering. Some of the emerging documentation initiatives
for ML-based systems have adapted existing methods while oth-
ers necessarily take a novel approach. Datasheets [13], and to an
extent Model Cards [29], grew from experiences with hardware
specification documentation. Dataset Nutrition Labels [9, 20] and
FactSheets [6] are further prominent examples of these initiatives.
Hind et al [19] report on the experience of AI teams in using Fact-
Sheets, and provide recommendations for easing the collection and
flexible presentation of AI facts to promote transparency.

2.2 Transparency Through Reproducibility
The ability of stakeholders to reproduce an ML system significantly
increases its transparency [15]. In addition to testing the system
on their own data points, reproducibility enables stakeholders to
retrain the ML models independently. Besides ensuring trust in the
system and its components, the ability to retrain the ML models is
crucial to analyze and debug these models.

Reproducibility in ML cannot be simply solved by making the
source code available. The nature of ML algorithms and how they
are trained make it challenging to warrant reproducibility of the

results [40]. Bell and Kampman [8] proposed ideas to foster this
reproducibility, inspired by the recent reformation in psychology.
Examples for these are Multiverse analysis [42], preregistration [30],
and encouraging the publication of negative results. Likewise, sev-
eral proposals have been made to quantify and accordingly improve
reproducibility [34, 37].

2.3 Transparency Through Interpretability
Lipton [23] analyzes in detail the notion of transparency in inter-
pretability. The author argues how transparency in this context is
the opposite of “black-boxness” as it helps understanding the mech-
anism by which the model works. Such understanding can be at
the level of the entire model, at the level of individual components
such as parameters, and at the level of the training algorithm.

Weller [46] identifies different use cases of transparency, and
distinguishes between two types of interpretability solutions to
support them: global (how an overall system works) and local (ex-
plaining a particular prediction). The author surveys available tech-
niques for both types and argues how the transparency enabled by
them can be provide insights into important model characteristics
such as robustness and fairness.

2.4 Illustrative Example
Consider a team of ML engineers tasked with developing an image
object detector for a specific application. The team has a variety of
choices to make such as the model type to use (e.g. convolutional
networks vs. Vision Transformers), the training paradigm (e.g. su-
pervised vs. self-supervised learning, etc.), the architecture type
(e.g. ResNet vs. VGGNet), the optimizer to use, and the input pre-
processing operations to mention a few. To speed up the ideation
process and to obtain a benchmarking baseline, the team starts
by finetuning a Single-Shot Detector (SSD) with a ResNet-50 as a
backbone convolutional network pre-trained on ImageNet. This
transfer-learning paradigm is very popular, especially when the
training data is limited. They resize their images to 640𝑥480 to
maintain the aspect ratio, and train their model following the same
training script used to train the backbone model. However, there
are a variety of nuances that impact the performance and reliability
of their model. A few examples of these issues are:

• The resizing operation in popular deep-learning frameworks

has a subtle aliasing flaw [32].

• The input size used was shown to induce parity issues in
ResNet models [2], leading to skewness in the learned filters.
• The default 0-padding used in ResNet was shown to impact

small object detection [3], leading to blind spots.

• Transfer learning from a supervised model trained on Ima-
geNet can lead to conflicts between the ImageNet categories
and the objects of the target domain [50].

Fortunately, it is possible to mitigate the above issues by making
careful architectural, training, and preprocessing choices. However,
these issues might not be widely known among practitioners and
are often left unaddressed. Our goal is to provide ML engineers with
actionable guidance on available ML methods and how to use them
effectively in the systems they intend to develop. In contrast to the
descriptive documentation techniques mentioned in Section 2.1,
our guidance follows a prescriptive approach. As a rough metaphor,

Prescriptive and Descriptive Approaches to Machine-Learning Transparency

CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, Apr 30– May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA

Model Cards and FactSheets are analogous to user manuals that
are shipped with software programs and automobiles. While we
aim to create prescriptive solutions that are analogous to computer
programming recipes [35] and car repair manuals.

3 A PRESCRIPTIVE APPROACH TO ML

TRANSPARENCY

Software engineering has a long history of employing prescriptive
models [25] for various purposes such as effective diffusion [38],
safety certification [16], and error analysis [26]. A key distinction
between descriptive and prescriptive models is that the former
describe an existing system, while the latter specify how a new
system should be created [25].

Descriptive approaches such as documenting general informa-
tion of an existing system can sometimes be viewed by ML prac-
titioners as time-consuming, lacking clear incentives, and/or as
having intelligibility concerns [27]. Prescriptive approaches, on the
other hand, provide explicit instructions on how to develop and
deploy a solution or how to handle unexpected situations. This is
useful in a variety of engineering disciplines both for modeling
solutions [12, 18] and for guiding troubleshooting efforts [11, 47].
Specific methods have been devised to support the documentation
process of prescriptive software models [10].

The Machine Learning community has recently started employ-
ing prescriptive approaches to developing ML systems. The pre-
scriptive nature of such approaches directly contribute to the trans-
parency of the ML system, especially from the perspective of ML
engineers and external reviewers. The following initiatives by the
ML community involve prescriptive aspects and are targeted either
at ML engineers or at ML researchers.

Guidelines and Design Patterns. A number of design patterns
have recently emerged in the ML community, both among practi-
tioners [5, 22, 28, 31, 41], and among researchers [43, 48]. These pat-
terns tackle various aspects of model development and deployment,
data and problem representation, training, serving and operation,
reproducibility, quality-control and responsible AI usage. These
patterns as well as complementary anti-patterns [44] capture best
practices and are very helpful to replicate successful solutions in
new applications.

Recipes. As one of the leading deep-learning frameworks, Py-
Torch [33] maintains a list of recipes 1, defined as “bite-sized, action-
able examples of how to use specific PyTorch features”. In contrast
to the standard documentation 2, these recipes focus on executable
solutions and demonstrate best practices established by the frame-
work developers and its community.

PWC Methods. The Papers With Code (PWC) community project
has recently started maintaining a catalog of ML methods proposed
in the research community for various ML tasks 3. The catalog
features a categorization of the method by task or data modality as
well as an informative community-generated description of each
method, along with statistics about its usage (Figure 1). Unlike
Model Cards and FactSheets, these descriptions are independent of

1Official PyTorch Recipes: https://pytorch.org/tutorials/recipes/recipes_index.html
2PyTorch Documentation https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/index.html
3https://paperswithcode.com/methods

any specific models or systems, focusing instead on the underlying
ML methods available in the literature, with ML researchers as the
main audience.

Reproducibility Checklists. Over the past few years, the ML
research community has developed a reproducibility checklist, with
the goal of ensuring that research articles and results are easy to re-
produce [34]. The checklist includes specific instructions regarding
the models and algorithms presented, the datasets used, and the
code shared, in addition to expectations regarding any theoretical
claim or experimental results.

ML Cheat Sheets. A variety of cheat sheets have been developed
to provide an overview of ML algorithms. These sheets typically
provide a flow chart on how to choose an algorithm for a specific
problem, as in the ones developed by Microsoft Azure 4 or by
SAS 5. Similarity, ML Flashcards serve as a quick reference of ML
concepts 6. Additionally, several practitioners have compiled best
practices for training ML models [4, 17].

Interactive Hyperparameter Visualizations. A variety of in-
teractive widgets aim to help ML engineers in making informed
choices of their model’s hyperparameters by visualizing how these
choices impact the model. Examples include basic convolution arith-
metic 7, choosing t-SNE parameters [45], and understanding the
impact of padding choices [49].

4 METHOD CARDS
We propose Method Cards to guide ML engineers throughout the
process of model development. Analogous to Model Cards, these
cards aim to communicate key information about ML methods. The
information comprises both prescriptive and descriptive elements,
putting the main focus on ensuring that ML engineers are able to
use these methods properly. The cards aim to support developers at
multiple stages of the model-development process such as training,
testing, and debugging. For this purpose, we propose a structure
for the cards, outlined in Figure 2.

For each prompt in Method Cards, the method creators are ex-
pected to provide sufficient instructions and documentation to
guide ML engineers. These instructions should help the engineers
in choosing suited preprocessing steps, model components, and hy-
perparameters for their task. Furthermore, the instructions should
make these engineers aware of how their choices potentially im-
pact the model’s behavior, how to evaluate this impact, and how
to handle prediction errors accordingly. Finally, the instructions
should explicitly inform the engineers on responsible usage of the
method by addressing potential fairness and privacy concerns.

The instructions and documentation needed for the prompts in
Method Cards can be enriched with the prescriptive approaches
outlined in Section 3. IBM’s FactSheets provide several examples
that demonstrate how to format and deliver such rich information
at multiple levels of detail in a usable way.

4https://blogs.sas.com/content/subconsciousmusings/2020/12/09/machine-learning-
algorithm-use/
5https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/machine-learning/algorithm-cheat-sheet
6https://machinelearningflashcards.com/
7Convolution Visualizer by Edward Yang: https://ezyang.github.io/convolution-
visualizer/

CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, Apr 30– May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA

Adkins et al.

Figure 1: Documenting ML methods in Papers With Code. For each method, the documentation includes brief textual and
graphical descriptions, a list of papers that introduce or use the method, and a list of ML tasks the method is suited for.

4.1 Granularity of ML Methods
The sections and prompts we propose in Figure 2 focus on ML
methods that are sufficient to produce a proper ML model with
defined input, output, and task. Examples for these are object de-
tection methods such as Single-shot Detectors [24] and language
modelling methods such as Generative Pre-trained Transformers
(GPT) [36]. It is possible to create Model Cards for the models
created using these methods.

We refer to ML methods that focus on specific parts of a model
as ML components, following the PWC terminology. Examples
of these are pooling, regularization, and normalization operations.
These components correspond to specific prompts in our proposed
Method Cards, specifically, the ones in “Data Preparation” and
“Modelling and Training”. The ML community is constantly study-
ing these components, identifying their strengths and weaknesses
in different ML applications. PWC provides a good overview of
these studies, which can help the creators of Method Cards provide
actionable recommendations about these components.

Likewise, ML systems often encompass multiple ML models, as
well as non-ML components such as data acquisition and human-in-
the-loop interfaces. Examples of these are fraud detection systems
that rely on ML models to identify abnormal behavior and on human
reviewers to take appropriate action when an automated decision
could not be determined reliably. Providing transparency into such
systems and services require artifacts similar to FactSheets.

4.2 Maintaining Method Cards
Within corporations, ML teams can benefit from maintaining method
cards for their common use cases. These cards can be curated collec-
tively and updated regularly as the team experiments with various
components and parameterizations, and as they gain insights about

their method’s weaknesses and edge cases. Such documentation is
important for onboarding new ML engineers and to enable them
to maintain the ML models and to retrain them when needed. As
such, Method Cards offer a systematic way to communicate best
ML practices identified by the team.

Since ML methods share a variety of components and can have
similar goals, their cards can naturally overlap. It is often possible
to categorize these methods into a hierarchy, and to document
shared information into cards that correspond to high levels in the
hierarchy. For example, methods based on convolutional neural
networks can inherit generic considerations related to these models
such as choosing a suited input size (Section 2.4). Likewise, object
detection methods can inherent common considerations such as
evaluation metrics and data preparation. The hierarchy used to
categorize PWC Methods could serve as a useful reference.

4.3 An Example of Method Cards
In the appendix we provide an example method card, created for
traffic light detection using an SSD. The card exemplifies how a team
of ML engineers can collectively document the nuances mentioned
in Section 2.4, both based on published literature and on their
own observations and experiences. Notice how the information
presented is independent of a specific model. For example, the
challenges of using SSDs for small object detection are inherent to
the method. Likewise, many challenges arise from the nature of the
problem, such as the similarity of red traffic lights with tail lights.
In the example, we used concise descriptions and instructions
to avoid turning the curation and consumption of Method Cards
into a burden. Nevertheless, the curators can elaborate on certain
prompts by providing links to executable notebooks, articles, and
further materials needed to clarify the prompts.

Prescriptive and Descriptive Approaches to Machine-Learning Transparency

CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, Apr 30– May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA

Method Card Template

Basic Method Information

• Parameter initialization / self pre-training / transfer from

• Name, version, and application domain(s).
• Method purpose and appropriate uses.
• Method definition, published literature, reference imple-

mentation.

• Example input and output.

Safety and Troubleshooting

• Inappropriate uses and common usage pitfalls.
• Known weaknesses, biases, and privacy leakage.
• How to detect biases in the model internals.
• Common failure modes, potential root causes, and pos-
sible mitigations via hyperparameter tuning or training
data expansion.

Data Preparation

• Input and output format, shape, and data type.
• Data transformation and normalization.
• Recommended sampling and balancing.
• Recommended batching scheme and batch size.
• Required data augmentation and shuffling.
• Validation and train-test splitting schemes.

Modelling and Optimization

a trained baseline (specify datasets).

• Regularization scheme, capacity selection.
• If applicable, learning rate and schedulers.
• Weight quantization, recommended bit depth.
• Possibilities to compile the model graph.
• Parallelization at training and inference time.
• Recommended model compression techniques.

Method Benchmarking

• Performance metric(s) and applicable threshold(s).
• Threshold selection.
• Fairness evaluation and subgroup comparison.
• Overfitting detection.
• Training and inference time efficiency.
• Available benchmarks.

Interpretability and Explainability

• Applicable feature attribution methods, and how they can

help explain model predictions.

• How to identify influential training instances behind a

specific model prediction.

• How to identify internal concepts and features learned

using the method.

Robustness

• Architecture family and components used.
• A list of hyperparameters, along with applicable values

and their known impact.

• Training objective(s), loss(es), and optimizer(s).

• Known vulnerabilities to adversarial attacks, and recom-

mended mitigation.

• Out-of-distribution behavior.
• Detecting and mitigating data and model drifts.

Figure 2: Suggested sections in Method Cards, along with the prompts they capture. Providing instructions for each prompt
offers guidance to ML engineers and helps external reviewers evaluate the maturity of the model development processes.

.

5 DISCUSSION

Possible Applications. Besides serving as a tool for prescriptive
documentation, Method Cards, can further support building inter-
active tools to improve ML development processes. For example, a
formal specification of certain prompts can be used to allow gener-
ating ML code templates. These templates serve as a useful starting
points that ML developers can adapt, and help reducing potential
coding errors as demonstrated in ClassyVision templates [1].

Our effort to explore prescriptive solutions started in response
to preliminary interviews we conducted with ML engineers who
work on various ML problems in practical applications. Of their
frequent pain points are the ability to make informed choices when
designing and training new models, as well as finding solutions to
improve the accuracy of existing models. As such, Method Cards
aim to fill one of the gaps identified by the Model Cards authors:

It seems unlikely, at least in the near term, that model
cards could be standardized or formalized to a degree
needed to prevent misleading representations of model
results (whether intended or unintended). It is therefore
important to consider model cards as one transparency

tool among many, which could include, for example,
- [29, p. 9].
algorithmic auditing by third-parties [...]”

While Model Cards and FactSheets put main focus on documenting
existing models, Method Cards focus more on the underlying me-
thodical and algorithmic choices that need to be considered when
creating and training these models. As a rough analogy, if Model
Cards and FactSheets provide nutrition information about cooked
meals, Method Cards provide the recipes.

Comparison with PWC Methods. PWC Methods have mainly fo-
cused on offering a catalog of methods extracted from ML literature,
designed to be usable mainly for researchers. On the other hand,
Method Cards have ML engineers and algorithmic reviewers as
target users, focusing on transparent, reproducible, and responsi-
ble usage of these methods. Ultimately, interested stakeholders in
the ML community can augment PWC Methods with the prescrip-
tive information we proposed in our template to help meet these
requirements.

CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, Apr 30– May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA

Adkins et al.

The Usability of Method Cards. A major challenge in offering
documentation-based transparency is the effort needed by ML en-
gineers to develop the needed artifacts [27], compared with the
perceived benefits. Finding the appropriate level of detail is a key
to alleviate the burden and maximize the value, as the authors of
FactSheets reported [19]. Accordingly, we consider the template
suggested in Figure 2 to be an reference example, and encourage
ML engineers to refine the prompts to fit their needs. Furthermore,
interactive interfaces can help presenting the information at multi-
ple levels of detail. For example, detailed answers can help onboard
new team members, while summarized bullet lists are more suited
for external reviewers.

6 CONCLUSION
We presented an overview of prescriptive approaches in ML doc-
umentation and their ability to facilitate transparency into ML
algorithms. We further presented Method Cards that leverage de-
scriptive and prescriptive elements to directly address the chal-
lenges surrounding algorithmic transparency. Unlike Model Cards,
these cards do not describe specific ML models, focusing instead on
providing guidance on how to properly use ML methods to define
and train these models. This helps increase reproducibility of ML
and enables external reviewers to determine the appropriateness of
the methods used in ML-based solutions. Furthermore, this enables
ML engineers to develop best practices to mitigate potential short-
comings and to improve the system’s performance. We presented
an example of Method Cards along with potential applications in
generating templates and powering static analyzers of ML code.

REFERENCES
[1] A. Adcock, V. Reis, M. Singh, Z. Yan, L. van der Maaten, K. Zhang, S. Motwani, J.
Guerin, N. Goyal, I. Misra, L. Gustafson, C. Changhan, and P. Goyal. 2019. Classy
Vision. https://github.com/facebookresearch/ClassyVision.

[2] B. Alsallakh, N. Kokhlikyan, V. Miglani, S. Muttepawar, E. Wang, S. Zhang, D. Ad-
kins, and O. Reblitz-Richardson. 2021. Debugging the Internals of Convolutional
Networks. In eXplainable AI approaches for debugging and diagnosis - NeurIPS
Workshop.

[3] B. Alsallakh, N. Kokhlikyan, V. Miglani, J. Yuan, and O. Reblitz-Richardson. 2021.
Mind the Pad – CNNs Can Develop Blind Spots. In Intl. Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR).

[4] Long Ang. 2018. A bunch of tips and tricks for training deep neural networks.
(2018). https://towardsdatascience.com/a-bunch-of-tips-and-tricks-for-training-
deep-neural-networks-3ca24c31ddc8

[5] Apple. 2019. Human interface guidelines for machine learning. (2019). https:
//developer.apple.com/design/human-interface-guidelines/machine-learning/

[6] Matthew Arnold, Rachel KE Bellamy, Michael Hind, Stephanie Houde, Sameep
Mehta, Aleksandra Mojsilović, Ravi Nair, K Natesan Ramamurthy, Alexandra
Olteanu, David Piorkowski, et al. 2019. FactSheets: Increasing trust in AI services
through supplier’s declarations of conformity.
IBM Journal of Research and
Development 63, 4/5 (2019), 6–1.

[7] Karsten Behrendt, Libor Novak, and Rami Botros. 2017. A deep learning approach
to traffic lights: Detection, tracking, and classification. In 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 1370–1377.

[8] Samuel J Bell and Onno P Kampman. 2021. Perspectives on Machine Learn-
ing from Psychology’s Reproducibility Crisis. ICLR Workshop on Science and
Engineering of Deep Learning arXiv:2104.08878 (2021).

[9] Kasia S Chmielinski, Sarah Newman, Matt Taylor, Josh Joseph, Kemi Thomas,
Jessica Yurkofsky, and Yue Chelsea Qiu. 2020. The dataset nutrition label (2nd
Gen): Leveraging context to mitigate harms in artificial intelligence. In NeurIPS
Workshop on Dataset Curation and Security.

[10] Paul Clements, David Garlan, Reed Little, Robert Nord, and Judith Stafford. 2003.
Documenting software architectures: views and beyond. In 25th International
Conference on Software Engineering, 2003. Proceedings. IEEE, 740–741.

[11] Ulf Eliasson, Rogardt Heldal, Patrizio Pelliccione, and Jonn Lantz. 2015. Archi-
tecting in the automotive domain: Descriptive vs prescriptive architecture. In
2015 12th Working IEEE/IFIP Conference on Software Architecture. IEEE, 115–118.

[12] Susan Finger and John R Dixon. 1989. A review of research in mechanical
engineering design. Part I: Descriptive, prescriptive, and computer-based models
of design processes. Research in engineering design 1, 1 (1989), 51–67.

[13] T. Gebru, J. Morgenstern, B. Vecchione, J. Wortman Vaughan, H. Wallach,
Hal Daumé III, and K. Crawford. 2021. Datasheets for Datasets. Commun.
ACM 64, 12 (nov 2021), 86–92. https://doi.org/10.1145/3458723

[14] Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A.
Wichmann, and Wieland Brendel. 2019.
ImageNet-trained CNNs are biased
towards texture; increasing shape bias improves accuracy and robustness.. In
International Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/
forum?id=Bygh9j09KX

[15] Benjamin Haibe-Kains, George Alexandru Adam, Ahmed Hosny, Farnoosh Kho-
dakarami, Levi Waldron, Bo Wang, Chris McIntosh, Anna Goldenberg, Anshul
Kundaje, Casey S Greene, et al. 2020. Transparency and reproducibility in artificial
intelligence. Nature 586, 7829 (2020), E14–E16.

[16] Richard Hawkins, Ibrahim Habli, Tim Kelly, and John McDermid. 2013. Assurance
cases and prescriptive software safety certification: A comparative study. Safety
science 59 (2013), 55–71.

[17] T. He, Z. Zhang, H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Xie, and M. Li. 2019. Bag of tricks for
image classification with convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 558–567.
[18] Rogardt Heldal, Patrizio Pelliccione, Ulf Eliasson, Jonn Lantz, Jesper Derehag, and
Jon Whittle. 2016. Descriptive vs prescriptive models in industry. In Proceedings
of the acm/ieee 19th international conference on model driven engineering languages
and systems. 216–226.

[19] Michael Hind, Stephanie Houde, Jacquelyn Martino, Aleksandra Mojsilovic, David
Piorkowski, John Richards, and Kush R Varshney. 2020. Experiences with im-
proving the transparency of AI models and services. In Extended Abstracts of the
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–8.

[20] Sarah Holland, Ahmed Hosny, Sarah Newman, Joshua Joseph, and Kasia Chmielin-
ski. 2018. The dataset nutrition label: A framework to drive higher data quality
standards. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.03677 (2018).

[21] Kenneth Holstein, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hal Daumé III, Miro Dudik, and
Hanna Wallach. 2019. Improving fairness in machine learning systems: What do
industry practitioners need?. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human
factors in computing systems. 1–16.

[22] Valliappa Lakshmanan, Sara Robinson, and Michael Munn. 2020. Machine learning

design patterns. O’Reilly Media.

[23] Zachary C Lipton. 2018. The Mythos of Model Interpretability: In machine
learning, the concept of interpretability is both important and slippery. Queue
16, 3 (2018), 31–57.

[24] Wei Liu, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Christian Szegedy, Scott Reed,
Cheng-Yang Fu, and Alexander C Berg. 2016. SSD: Single shot multibox detector.
In European Conference on Computer Vision. 21–37.

[25] Jochen Ludewig. 2003. Models in software engineering–an introduction. Software

and Systems Modeling 2, 1 (2003), 5–14.

[26] Wong Hoo Meng and Sagaya Sabestinal Amalathas. 2019. A new approach
towards developing a prescriptive analytical logic model for software applica-
tion error analysis. In Proceedings of the Computational Methods in Systems and
Software. Springer, 256–274.

[27] Milagros Miceli, Tianling Yang, Laurens Naudts, Martin Schuessler, Diana Ser-
banescu, and Alex Hanna. 2021. Documenting Computer Vision Datasets: An
Invitation to Reflexive Data Practices. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference
on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. 161–172.

[28] Microsoft. 2021. The HAX Toolkit.

(2021). https://www.microsoft.com/en-

us/haxtoolkit/

[29] Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman,
Ben Hutchinson, Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. 2019.
Model cards for model reporting. In Proceedings of the conference on fairness,
accountability, and transparency. 220–229.

[30] Brian A Nosek, Jeffrey R Spies, and Matt Motyl. 2012. Scientific utopia: II. Restruc-
turing incentives and practices to promote truth over publishability. Perspectives
on Psychological Science 7, 6 (2012), 615–631.

[31] Google PAIR. 2019. People + AI Guidebook. (2019). https://pair.withgoogle.com/

guidebook

[32] Gaurav Parmar, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan Zhu. 2021. On Buggy Resiz-
arXiv preprint

ing Libraries and Surprising Subtleties in FID Calculation.
arXiv:2104.11222 (2021).

[33] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory
Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, et al. 2019. PyTorch:
An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). 8024–8035.

[34] Joelle Pineau, Philippe Vincent-Lamarre, Koustuv Sinha, Vincent Larivière, Alina
Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché Buc, Emily Fox, and Hugo Larochelle. 2021. Im-
proving reproducibility in machine learning research: a report from the NeurIPS
2019 reproducibility program. Journal of Machine Learning Research 22 (2021).

[35] William H Press, Brian P Flannery, Saul A Teukolsky, William T Vetterling, et al.

1989. Numerical recipes.

Prescriptive and Descriptive Approaches to Machine-Learning Transparency

CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, Apr 30– May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA

[36] Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya
Sutskever. 2019. Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. (2019).
[37] Edward Raff. 2019. A step toward quantifying independently reproducible ma-
chine learning research. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32
(2019), 5485–5495.

[38] Sridhar A. Raghavan and Donald R. Chand. 1989. Diffusing software-engineering

methods. IEEE software 6, 4 (1989), 81–90.

[39] I. D. Raji and J. Yang. 2019. ABOUT ML: Annotation and benchmarking on
understanding and transparency of machine learning lifecycles. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.06166 (2019).

[40] David Sculley, Gary Holt, Daniel Golovin, Eugene Davydov, Todd Phillips, Diet-
mar Ebner, Vinay Chaudhary, Michael Young, Jean-Francois Crespo, and Dan
Dennison. 2015. Hidden technical debt in machine learning systems. Advances
in neural information processing systems 28 (2015), 2503–2511.

[41] Y. Shibui. 2020. Machine learning system design patterns. (2020). https://github.

com/mercari/ml-system-design-pattern

[42] Sara Steegen, Francis Tuerlinckx, Andrew Gelman, and Wolf Vanpaemel. 2016. In-
creasing transparency through a multiverse analysis. Perspectives on Psychological
Science 11, 5 (2016), 702–712.

[43] Hironori Washizaki, Foutse Khomh, Yann-Gaël Guéhéneuc, Hironori Takeuchi,
Naotake Natori, Takuo Doi, and Satoshi Okuda. 2022. Software Engineering
Design Patterns for Machine Learning Applications. IEEE Computer 55, 3 (2022),
1–9.

[44] Hironori Washizaki, Hiromu Uchida, Foutse Khomh, and Yann-Gaël Guéhéneuc.
2019. Studying software engineering patterns for designing machine learning
systems. In 2019 10th International Workshop on Empirical Software Engineering
in Practice (IWESEP). IEEE, 49–495.

[45] Martin Wattenberg, Fernanda Viégas, and Ian Johnson. 2016. How to use t-SNE

effectively. Distill 1, 10 (2016), e2.

[46] Adrian Weller. 2019. Transparency: motivations and challenges. In Explainable
AI: Interpreting, Explaining and Visualizing Deep Learning. Springer, 23–40.
[47] Hoo Meng Wong, Sagaya Sabestinal Amalathas, and Tatana Zitkova. 2019. A
prescriptive logic model for software application root cause analysis. European
Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 3, 5 (2019).

[48] Haruki Yokoyama. 2019. Machine learning system architectural pattern for
improving operational stability. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Software
Architecture Companion (ICSA-C). IEEE, 267–274.

[49] J. Yuan, B. Alsallakh, N. Kokhlikyan, V. Miglani, and O. Reblitz-Richardson. 2021.
Convolution Can Incur Foveation Effects. In Beyond static papers: Rethinking how
we share scientific understanding in ML-ICLR 2021 workshop.

[50] Barret Zoph, Golnaz Ghiasi, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yin Cui, Hanxiao Liu, Ekin D Cubuk,
and Quoc V Le. 2020. Rethinking pre-training and self-training. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.06882 (2020).

CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, Apr 30– May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA

Adkins et al.

Method Card - Traffic Light Detection

Basic Method Information

Name, version, and application domain(s): Traffic light de-
tection based on SSD, V1, for street scene analysis.

Method purpose and appropriate uses: Detect rectangular
traffic-light instances in a street scene, represented by a monoc-
ular camera image. The detector can be used in offline analysis,
e.g., to support street scene retrieval based on traffic criteria and
in similar traffic analysis tasks.

Method definition: Traffic light detection based on the SSD
object detection architecture. Published in [7], reference imple-
mentation in https://github.com/bosch-ros-pkg/bstld.

Example input and output: The Output is a list of bounding
boxes representing the detected objects, along with detection
score and detected traffic light color.

Safety and Troubleshooting

Inappropriate use and common usage pitfalls:

• Red traffic lights likely undetected if in proximity of vehi-
cles (will likely be deemed as tail lights). Consider generat-
ing training samples with such scenarios, or first applying
a car detector and masking detected cars.

• Green traffic lights with vegetation background. Consider
using a backbone that has higher shape bias and lower
texture bias [14].

• Traffic lights with street ads in the background. Consider

augmentation with generating data.

Data Preparation

Input and output format, shape, and data type:

• The input is a 1280×840 RGB image, with integer intensity
values in the range [0, 225]. Do not resize the image as
this can compromise the aspect ratio of the traffic lights.
• The output is a ranked list of detected traffic lights.
Each item in the list contains the bounding box
((𝑥1, 𝑦1), (𝑥2, 𝑦2)) in a relative coordinate system [0, 1] ×
[0, 1], and the production confidence normalized to [0, 1].

Data transformation and normalization: The input image
is first normalized to the range [0, 1].

Recommended sampling and balancing:

• The frames in available datasets are captured at a constant
interval. Hence, scenes at red traffic lights tend to be al-
most identical and over-represented. Consider similarity-
based sampling.

• Yellow traffic lights are limited in available datasets and
often have a larger size as they tend to be captured close
to intersections. Data augmentation should focus on in-
creasing their frequency.

• Must NOT be used in autonomous driving, it is not de-

Recommended batching scheme and batch size.

signed to handle all traffic scenarios.

• Should not be used with night-time scenes.

Known weaknesses and biases:

• Can only handle rectangular bounding boxes during train-

ing and inference.

• Biased against red traffic lights as they are very similar

to vehicle tail lights.

How to detect biases in the model internals:

• Feed a zero input and look for activation artifacts
• Average the feature maps over random inputs.
• Is the average kernel per conv. layer symmetric?

Common failure modes, root causes, and mitigation:

• Use a batch size of 4 or higher if the GPU allows.
• Ensure that batches contain diverse scenes instead of con-

secutive frames.

• Use InstanceNormalization for a batch size of 1 or 2

and BatchNorm with batch size of 4.

Required data augmentation and shuffling.

• Make sure to enable horizontal image flipping.
• Shuffle individual frames instead of batches.

Validation and train-test splitting schemes: Ensure suffi-
cient diversity of the different splits, especially given the se-
quential nature of the collected scenes. Ensure that yellow traffic
lights are sufficiently present in the validation set as they are
likely a minority.

Prescriptive and Descriptive Approaches to Machine-Learning Transparency

CHI ’22 Extended Abstracts, Apr 30– May 05, 2022, New Orleans, LA

Method Card - Traffic Light Detection (continued)

Modelling and Optimization

Method Benchmarking

Architecture family and components:

Performance metric(s) and applicable threshold(s):

• The SSD multi-box architecture [24] with a box predictor

• Use Average Precision (AP) to compare models overall,

for each traffic light color.

• The backbone CNN can be a ResNet, a MobileNet, Effi-
cientNet or another architecture depending on available
computing capacity.

• Avoid backbones that use dilation.
• Use maxpooling instead of strided convolution.

Hyperparameters, applicable values, known impact:

• Use mirror padding to reduce artifacts. 0-padding can

create blind spots with small objects.

• Resize each input dimension to a 𝑎 · 2𝑑 + 1 where 𝑑 is
the number of pooling layers an 𝑎 is a scalar. This avoids
asymmetric filters.

Training objective(s), and optimizer(s): Use

• weighted sigmoid as classification loss and weighted

smooth L1 for localization loss.

• Hard negative miner and NMS to reduce FPs.
• RMSProp optimizer with MobileNet and SGD

with

Momentum for ResNet backbone.

Parameter initialization: Use Xavier’s method if training
from scratch. If finetuning, use a checkpoint trained with self-
supervision.

Regularization scheme, capacity selection: We do NOT rec-
ommend using dropout in the box-predictor of the SSD. We
recommend an L2 regularizer with a factor of 0.00004.

Weight quantization, recommended bit depth: Given the
small size of the target objects, we recommend 32-bit FP values
to encode the weights without quantization.

Parallelization at training and inference time: We recom-
mend identical GPUs to parallelize the training, and ensuring
the batches are distributed randomly across them.

Recommended model compression techniques: Given the
small size of the target objects, compression can potentially
wash out fundamental features.

per light category, and per object size.

• Use the IoU overlap threshold to determine if a detected

object covers the ground truth instance.

• A score threshold defines the operating point.

Threshold selection: Calibrate the IoU and score thresholds
based on the intended use. If using lower thresholds for higher
recall, consider human reviewers to double check.

Overfitting detection: Standard analysis on training and test
set performance.

Training and inference time efficiency: SSDs are generally
fast both at training and at inference. A MobileNet backbone
converges within hours on BSTLD, and can perform detection
in 38𝑚𝑠 on a single-core machine.

Available benchmarks: Results on BSTLD: https://github.com/
bosch-ros-pkg/bstld#results

Interpretability and Explainability

Applicable feature attribution methods: GradCAM, LIME (ap-
plied to super-pixels), and window occlusion help determine
scene features involved in the detection.

How to identify influential training instances: Use algo-
rithms based on comparing embeddings, such as TracIn, to
identify proponents and opponents.

How to identify internal concepts and features learned:
Use TCAV when example scenes for street concepts are available.
Use NetDissect when scenes with segmentation masks are
available.

Robustness

Out-of-distribution behavior: The method is likely to depend
on regional street features, and hence to underperform on scenes
from cities outside of the training set. Also, distorted or signif-
icantly different tones of green, yellow, or red will likely be
undetected.

Detecting and mitigating data and model drifts: Traffic
lights are constantly being updated, and hence the training data
need to be regularly updated. Novel objects might resemble traf-
fic lights, incurring new false positives.

