2
2
0
2

r
p
A
8

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
1
3
4
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Towards Understanding Barriers and Mitigation Strategies of
Software Engineers with Non-traditional Educational and
Occupational Backgrounds∗

Tavian Barnes†
Ken Jen Lee†
Cristina Tavares†
tbarnes@uwaterloo.ca
kenjen.lee@uwaterloo.ca
cristina.tavares@uwaterloo.ca
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada

Gema Rodríguez-Pérez
gema.rodriguezperez@ubc.ca
University of British Columbia
Kelowna, British Columbia, Canada

Meiyappan Nagappan
mei.nagappan@uwaterloo.ca
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada

ABSTRACT
The traditional path to a software engineering career involves a
post-secondary diploma in Software Engineering, Computer Sci-
ence, or a related field. However, many software engineers take a
non-traditional path to their career, starting from other industries
or fields of study. This paper proposes a study on barriers faced
by software engineers with non-traditional educational and occu-
pational backgrounds, and possible mitigation strategies for those
barriers. We propose a two-stage methodology, consisting of an
exploratory study, followed by a validation study. The exploratory
study will involve a grounded-theory-based qualitative analysis of
relevant Reddit data to yield a framework around the barriers and
possible mitigation strategies. These findings will then be validated
using a survey in the validation study. Making software engineer-
ing more accessible to those with non-traditional backgrounds will
not only bring about the benefits of functional diversity, but also
serves as a method of filling in the labour shortages of the software
engineering industry.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Social and professional topics → Computing profession.

KEYWORDS
non-traditional backgrounds, barriers, mitigation strategies, career
switch, software engineering career

1 INTRODUCTION
The software engineering (SE) industry has seen significant annual
growth in North America over the last decade [7, 27]. Even though
the number of Computer Science (CS) and SE degrees has been
increasing as well [14, 15], there is still a shortage of software engi-
neers [18, 26]. This surplus in labour demand brought to attention
paths into a SE career that are alternatives to the traditional path,
i.e., via a university degree in CS or SE related areas [56]. However,

∗This study was accepted at the MSR 2022 Registered Reports Track as a Continuity
Acceptance (CA).
†Equal contributors by alphabetical order

MSR’22, May 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2022. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

there is little understanding on how viable and effective it is for
someone with a non-traditional educational and/or occupational
background to switch into a SE career. For the purposes of this
work, a software engineer has a traditional background if they com-
pleted a post-secondary program in SE, CS, or a closely related field,
then begin their career as a software engineer. A non-traditional
background then applies to software engineers who did not follow
this traditional career path, including anyone who switched into
SE from another career, who first studied another field before SE,
or who taught themselves SE.

As such, this work aims to contribute a first step towards under-
standing the barriers faced by those with a non-traditional occupa-
tional and/or educational background trying to switch into a SE career,
and explore possible mitigation strategies for these barriers. Having
an understanding of the barriers and mitigation strategies serve an
essential step in making SE careers more accessible to those with a
non-traditional background. This could not only have implications
for filling in the current labour shortage, but also contribute to
having a more diverse SE community. While not a form of social
diversity per se, academic background diversity is a form of func-
tional diversity [23]. While not much research has been done on
educational background diversity in CS/SE, prior works in other
areas found various benefits. For instance, educational diversity
can aid in avoiding the “groupthink” mindset [29]. Lorenzo and
Reeves also found educational background diversity having a statis-
tically significant correlation with how innovative enterprises are
across eight countries (US, France, Germany, China, Brazil, India,
Switzerland, and Austria) [37].

2 RESEARCH QUESTIONS
This paper aims to investigate the following research questions:

RQ1 What are the perceived barriers faced by those with a non-
traditional educational and occupational background who are
either software engineers, or trying to switch into a SE career?
Motivation: Understanding what these barriers are could
provide valuable insights into how the SE industry is limited
in its accessibility to those with diverse educational and
occupational backgrounds currently.

RQ2 What are mitigation strategies that could lower observed bar-

riers to succeed?

 
 
 
 
 
 
MSR’22, May 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Barnes, Lee and Tavares, et al.

Motivation: Barriers are only half the story; a comprehen-
sive understanding also includes exploring the mitigation
strategies currently employed by those facing these barri-
ers. Insights into RQ2 could have implications on how well
each barrier is mitigated, how current mitigation strategies
can be facilitated by various parties, and the possibilities of
empowering those with a non-traditional background with
new mitigation strategies that are not currently employed.

3 RELEVANT WORK
3.1 Understanding Diversity in CS/SE
Harrison and Klein [23] define diversity as the “distribution of
differences among the members of a unit concerning a common
attribute.” Much existing diversity research in SE focuses on social
attributes like gender, age, and ethnicity, especially as these are
protected classes under United States anti-discrimination law [13].
Studies have shown that software engineers face challenges and
barriers to developing activities in this field resulting from perceived
diversity related to these attributes [46]. Age-related barriers are
particularly relevant to software engineers with non-traditional
academic backgrounds, who tend to be older at the same career
stage as their peers [16]. The perception that younger software
engineers are better is pervasive throughout the industry and even
popular media [4]. This discriminatory discourse tend to create
challenges to older software engineers to participate in open-source
software (OSS) projects [5, 42].

3.2 Diversity in Educational and Occupational

Backgrounds

Educational background diversity refers to the different sets of
knowledge, skills, and abilities that team members acquired in the
function of their educational backgrounds. Thus, a team composed
of people with diverse educational backgrounds can understand a
problem based on various combinations of information, insights,
and perspectives [38]. Studies have shown that diverse educational
backgrounds may affect work outcomes and team behaviour in sev-
eral aspects, such as team creativity, team performance, and innova-
tion [21, 30, 40, 43]. However, high educational background levels
can lead to an excessive conflict of ideas that is time-consuming due
to the need for reconciling knowledge, experiences, and different
views [38]. According to Kearney and Gebert, the formation of a
team with diverse functional and educational profiles is a way to
promote the integration of crossed ideas and to present to the team
new perspectives and insights to solve a problem or execute a task
[32]. Results of a study conducted by Guo et al. have demonstrated
that educational diversity may negatively affect team creativity,
especially when tasks are repetitive, defined, and predictable, and
personnel team variability is higher [10, 21]. Cases of research have
also shown that educational diversity influences, at different levels,
team performance in the banking and financial sectors [45].

Functional background diversity refers to differences in the pro-
fessional background among team members [6, 10, 44]. Research
has indicated that functional diversity is associated not only with
the promotion of creativity, innovation, performance, and problem-
solving ability but allowing a high capacity for incorporating new

knowledge from a diverse domain [49, 50]. Although diverse func-
tional backgrounds offer teams various benefits, different views
and perspectives might cause disagreements among team members,
negatively impacting teams [50]. Also, functional background di-
versity may be negatively impacted by rising costs associated with
the time-consuming consensus process when integrating ideas [49].

3.3 Career Switching
While there does not exist much prior research on career transitions
related to the software industry, research by Castro et al. on career
transitions by junior academics into Data Science is of particularly
relevance [9]. These junior academics faced career barriers within
academics, including career uncertainty and the lack of meaning
and impact. These barriers, when paired with a failure to meet career
expectations, motivated a career switch. The transitioning process
is facilitated by what Castro et al. referred to as career catalysts (e.g.,
“adapting one’s mindset to new industries and roles”). They also
captured what junior academics did as part of the transition, which
include activities like self-learning. Lastly, they explored how a
successful transition into Data Science allowed for an experience
of career sustainability [9].

In contrast, this work looks to contribute a more high-level un-
derstanding of the barriers faced by, and mitigation strategies used
by, those with any non-traditional occupational and/or educational
background (i.e., not just junior academics) transitioning into any
role related to SE (i.e., not just Data Science).

4 METHODOLOGY

Figure 1: A high-level overview of the methodology of this
work, which contains an exploratory study, followed by a
validation study.

To answer our research questions, we will perform an exploratory
study where we qualitatively analyze Reddit posts by our target
population, i.e., those who are considering a SE career, as well as
those who have already started theirs, with non-traditional edu-
cational or occupational backgrounds. This analysis will be based
on Hoda’s Socio-Technical Grounded Theory (STGT) [25], and
will aim to uncover barriers and possible mitigation strategies. To
validate the barriers and mitigation strategies gathered from the
qualitative analysis, a survey will be designed and administered to
our target population in a validation study. A high-level overview
of our methodology is presented in Fig. 1. Below, we discuss the
exploratory study and validation study in detail.

Towards Understanding Barriers and Mitigation Strategies of Software Engineers with Non-traditional Educational and Occupational Backgrounds

MSR’22, May 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

4.1 Exploratory Study
This study uses a qualitative analysis process that is inspired by
the STGT, which consists of two stages, the Basic Stage and the
Advanced Stage (Fig. 1). STGT, proposed by Hoda, is “an iterative
and incremental research method for conducting socio-technical
research using traditional and modern research techniques to gen-
erate novel, useful, parsimonious, and modifiable theories” [25].
This aligns very well with our study for two reasons. First is the
socio-technical nature of our topic, i.e., the barriers faced by those
who want to transfer into a SE career have both social and tech-
nical aspects. Moreover, STGT is designed with a wide variety of
research methodologies in mind, unlike many existing versions
of Grounded Theory (GT), which are “predominantly applied as a
qualitative method through traditional data collection techniques
such as interviews and observation” [25]. One aspect of this is
STGT’s allowance for context-specific ontological stands, including
non-physical realities like Reddit, a virtual world.

However, it is worth noting that several aspects of this study’s
procedures deviate from STGT. First, while STGT takes inspiration
from Glaserian, Strauss-Corbinian, and Constructivist versions of
GT, [25] does not specify i) if research questions should be defined
prior to starting the data collection and analysis phase, and ii) how, if
at all, can Inter-Coder Reliability (ICR) statistics be used to verify the
reliability of multiple coders’ analysis. This work defined research
questions prior to the analysis, closer to Strauss-Corbinian GT, in
which “a question should be pre-set as it sets the boundaries around
the study area” [12]. Moreover, the questions are structured in terms
of barriers and mitigation strategies, which is a structure commonly
used in existing SE research on various aspects of diversity (e.g.,
[4, 8, 19, 31, 48]). This was done to strike “a balance between being
sufficiently informed versus overly influenced by existing works”,
a Constructivist GT approach [25]. Regarding ICR statistics, we
describe below the procedure we plan to use for incorporating
Krippendorff’s Alpha [33] to ensure reliability. Another aspect
deviating from the grounded theory approach is that this work has
pre-determined data sources (i.e., Reddit), instead of allowing for
the possibility of theoretically sampling from other unplanned data
sources [25]. This decision to determine a fixed data source is made
as a balance between manpower and budgetary constraints, and
our belief that Reddit serves as a rich data source sufficient for a
first step towards answering the research questions.

Ethics Considerations. Since this study involves the analysis
of a publicly available archive of Reddit posts hosted by pushshift.io,
careful ethics considerations are needed. On this, Gold and Krinke
demonstrates the use of Menlo ethics principles within MSR re-
search contexts in [20]. Since obtaining informed consent from
Reddit users whose content is analysed in this work is logistically
impossible, we will not present any direct quotations from the data.
We will anonymize the data by removing usernames and make it
privately available for any future researchers interested in replicat-
ing or building off of this work. This aligns with Hoda’s suggestion
to “obscure identifiable information” when using public data [25].
We describe the details of the procedure we plan to execute

below.

Figure 2: An overview of the Basic Stage. Steps that have
been completed are shaded grey.

4.1.1 Basic Stage. This stage involves a lean literature review, basic
data collection and basic data analysis (Fig. 2).

Lean Literature Review. The purpose of performing a lean
literature review is to “identify gaps and motivate the need for a

MSR’22, May 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Barnes, Lee and Tavares, et al.

study” [25]. Findings from our lean literature review have been pre-
sented in Section 3 above, and revealed that there exists no study or
framework that explores our research questions. This motivates our
study, especially given the significance of our research questions,
as explained in Section 1. To borrow Hoda’s words, the topics ex-
plored in this paper are “relatively nascent, with no or few existing
theories” [25].

Basic Data Collection. We describe our basic data collection

process from Reddit below.

We chose to use Reddit as our data source because it is i) widely
used and is one of the top 20 most popular websites in the world
[3], and ii) has subreddits, which are forums on Reddit for discus-
sions on specific topics, with posts that are relevant to our research
questions. Reddit has seen increasing use by researchers to explore
questions related to the social sciences [3] and SE (e.g., [28]). Our
dataset was collected from Reddit posts made in the three-year pe-
riod from 2017 to 2019, using a publicly available archive of Reddit
posts hosted by pushshift.io. We wanted to focus on data prior to
2020 to avoid any confounding variables introduced by the global
pandemic. On the other hand, to select an appropriate start year,
due to the lack of a clear way of studying the trend of the SE world,
we instead observed trends in the use of programming languages
as reported by Stack Overflow’s annual survey. Particularly, 2017
was when the use of Python increased significantly from 25.9%
in 2016 [52] to 32% in 2017 [53] among all survey responses. As
such, we chose 2017 as the start year. We restricted the data to a set
of seven subreddits, denoted by “/r/", where posts relevant to our
study would be on-topic: /r/{learnprogramming, AskProgramming,
cscareerquestions, SoftwareEngineering, cscareerquestionsEU, Expe-
riencedDevs, and codingbootcamp}. These subreddits were selected
since they were the most relevant ones out of the 1000 subred-
dits with the most subscribers [1]. The resulting dataset contains
312,022 posts in total.

To find potentially relevant posts within this dataset, we built a
simple keyword search engine. The search engine is written in 195
lines of Rust and performs a full-text keyword search over the titles
and post bodies of every Reddit post in the dataset. The search is
case-insensitive and respects word boundaries, but does not per-
form any more advanced query processing such as stemming. We
compensated for this by explicitly including relevant pluralization
and conjugations of our keywords. The source code of the search
engine is available at https://github.com/tavianator/pheddit.

Using this search engine, we iteratively refined a set of search
queries that gave a large quantity of relevant documents. Starting
from an initial set of queries, we worked through the resulting
posts to determine whether we deemed them relevant, referring
to and revising our inclusion and exclusion criteria as necessary,
and whether they contained keywords that might be useful for
future search queries. We describe this process in more details in
the following paragraphs.

A Reddit post is included for qualitative analysis (i.e., consid-
ered relevant) if it meets the inclusion and exclusion criteria. To
generate these criteria, we first individually gathered a total set
of 52 posts using an initial set of keywords that we thought were
relevant to our research questions. These keywords included career,
career change, self-taught, switch software engineering, back to school,
and community college. The posts were also chosen to aid in the

process of designing the inclusion and exclusion criteria, i.e., we
had posts that were obviously relevant or irrelevant, and posts that
were ambiguous. Then, as a group, we generated the inclusion and
exclusion criteria by discussing the relevance of each post (Fig. ??).

Figure 3: An overview of the inclusion and exclusion crite-
ria.

In general, our motivation is to cast a reasonably wide net when
gathering the various barriers and mitigation strategies; i.e., we
do not want to have a narrow scope that artificially excludes the
messiness and complexity of the phenomenon studied. As such,
other trickier cases (e.g., someone who started their university
education in CS and switched to an irrelevant area halfway through)
will be accessed on a case-by-case basis based on their contribution
towards our process of answering the research questions.

Based on the initial set of posts, we performed a keyword expan-
sion exercise as a group to generate a final set of keywords that
reflects relevant concepts to our research questions.

The final set of keywords contains 12 words, including degree,
career, programming, school, learn, switch, change, college, university,
advice, bootcamp, self-taught. These keywords are used to search
the title and body content (i.e., excluding the comments and replies)
of all posts in our data pool, resulting in 133,829 possibly relevant
posts.

Basic Data Analysis. This step involves an iterative process
that includes basic data analysis, basic memoing and theoretical
sampling [25].

Basic data analysis will involve two steps, namely open coding
and constant comparison. In this study, we will be using NVivo
12, a data analysis software commonly used in qualitative contexts
(e.g., [39, 54]), to aid with various steps in our qualitative analyses,
including open coding and memoing. During open coding, coders

Towards Understanding Barriers and Mitigation Strategies of Software Engineers with Non-traditional Educational and Occupational Backgrounds

MSR’22, May 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

(i.e., the first three authors) will treat each comment or original
post as a single unit of coding, a common practice for Reddit-based
qualitative coding (e.g., [55]). The exact methods of coding used
could include descriptive coding (nouns summarizing the topic
of a datum), in vivo coding (codes based on the actual language
used in the data), process coding (using “-ing” words exclusively
to represent actions suggested by a datum, including observable
human actions, mental processes and conceptual ideas) and versus
coding (codes with a “A vs B” format) [47]. In terms of types of
codes, we expect to have codes on not just barriers and mitigation
strategies, but also observed demographic factors of commenters
in relevant Reddit posts. E.g., if someone says they are trying a
career switch at 40, we will code the age as 40. Importantly, a
post will only be coded if it is judged as relevant based on the
inclusion and exclusion criteria. To ensure an acceptable level of
reliability between the three coders, intercoder-reliability (ICR) will
be measured at the initial stage of coding, as shown in Fig. 2.

We plan to use percentage agreement on which posts are con-
sidered relevant (i.e., relevant/irrelevant). For relevant posts that
are coded, we plan to use Krippendorff’s Alpha [33] given its flexi-
bility in regard to the number of coders, sample size etc. [24], its
suitability for our study’s design [17] and its use in existing works
that qualitatively analyzed mined Reddit data [34, 51]. Multiple
iterations of independent coding, comparisons across coders and
refinement of the coding process may be performed if necessary to
achieve satisfactory ICR (see [34] for example), which, in our case,
would be an Alpha of 0.8 or larger [36].

Next, constant comparison, which is “the process of constantly
comparing derived codes within the same source and across sources
to identify key patterns in the data” [25], will also be performed by
the researchers during the analysis to iteratively produce concepts,
sub-categories (if suitable) and categories in increasing abstraction
levels. We will perform multiple rounds of individual- (for deeper
reflections on the data) and group-based (for synthesizing every-
one’s reflections) constant comparison in our study, which will be
interleaved with other parts of the basic data analysis stage.

Basic memoing is a process where researchers document their
thoughts, ideas and reflections on emerging concepts and their con-
nections during qualitative analysis [25]. It will be used by the first
three authors who will be participating in the qualitative analysis
process. Memos will be referenced when codes are compared and
grouped into categories and concepts.

Theoretical sampling is an ongoing sampling process that in-
volves the intentional selection of data sources based on the data’s
specific characteristics [25]. For this study, the pool of possibly
relevant posts will be randomly divided among us (the first three
authors) for individual sampling and coding after all initial disagree-
ments have been discussed and resolved, as described above. Rele-
vant Reddit posts will be theoretically sampled such that they con-
tribute meaningfully towards the qualitative analysis. This means
choosing relevant posts from the pool of possibly relevant posts
that offer new information instead of those that provide primarily
repeated information that have been analyzed from previous posts.
We will move on from the Basic Stage to the Advanced Stage
upon the emergence of a few strong categories, as recommended
by Hoda [25]. We describe the details of the Advanced Stage next.

Figure 4: An overview of the Advanced Stage.

4.1.2 Advanced Stage. The Advanced Stage involves targeted lit-
erature review, theoretical saturation, and theory development
(Fig. 4).

Targeted Literature Review. This refers to “an in-depth re-
view of literature targeting relevance to the emerging/emergent
categories and hypotheses” [25]. Depending on the findings from
the analysis of the Basic Stage, we will periodically perform tar-
geted literature review in order to understand where our findings
situate among relevant works.

Theoretical Saturation. This refers to when new data collected
no longer generate or contribute significantly to the existing find-
ings (e.g., concepts, categories) [25]. Practically, we will define our
analysis as having reached theoretical saturation if during inde-
pendent coding, each of the three first authors come to a point of
analyzing three theoretically sampled Reddit posts that no longer
contribute significantly to existing findings. Moreover, a following
validation study will be used as a form of triangulation to facilitate
an understanding of the findings’ trustworthiness [2].

Theory Development. STGT provides researchers with a choice
of two theory development approaches, Emergent Mode or Struc-
tured Mode [25]. The Emergent mode is preferable when the basic
stage reveals categories with emerging relationships, but without a
clear theoretical structure. It involves targeted data collection and
analysis (where focus is paid almost exclusively to the most signif-
icant categories), and theoretical structuring (where researchers
could explore how the emerging theory fits with theory genres
and templates) [25]. The Structured mode is recommended for use
when the Basic Stage yields categories with a relatively clear theo-
retical structure. It involves structured data collection and analysis
(where relationships between key categories are strengthened), and
theoretical integration (where categories are full integrated into
the overall structure of the framework). What we use will depend
on our findings from the Basic Stage. Regardless, the final outcome
will be a framework that serves to answer our research questions.

4.2 Validation Study
The validation study will involve the design and administration of
a survey that aims to validate findings on barriers and mitigation
strategies from the exploratory study (Fig. 5).

Targeted Audience. Participants will only be eligible to com-
plete the survey if they are 18 and older, and have extensive expe-
rience (a post-secondary degree or diploma or 3+ years of work
experience) in a field other than SE, and who

MSR’22, May 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Barnes, Lee and Tavares, et al.

Data Analysis and Presentation. We will be analyzing to what
extent are findings from the exploratory study validated, which will
be done mainly through descriptive statistics of close-ended ques-
tions, and qualitative analysis of open-ended questions. Wherever
appropriate, findings from our analysis of survey responses will
also be used to improve the framework from the exploratory study.
We will also present descriptive statistics about the demographics
of the survey participants. No statistical tests will be used because
this validation study does not involve any experimental or control
conditions but only serves to better understand how widespread
barriers and mitigation strategies from the exploratory study are.
Ethics Considerations. An approval from our institution’s
ethics committee will be obtained before the pilot and actual de-
ployment of the survey.

5 THREATS TO VALIDITY
The first threat to validity is the subjectivity involved in the Reddit
query building process. For instance, there might be important
keywords that are missing from our Reddit search query, especially
since it is not possible to objectively measure the completeness and
quality of the keywords. To address this, we snowballed the group
of keywords by starting with a set of keywords that we thought
were relevant to our research questions and expanded it as we
became more familiar with the dataset. Moreover, the survey in
the validation study contributes towards a more comprehensive
understanding by validating any findings and contributing new
findings that might have been missing from the exploratory study.
Another threat to our work’s external validity is in terms of its
geographic generalizability. We expect most of the users whose
comments are posts in our dataset to be from the United States (US),
since the US accounted for 48.93% of all traffic to Reddit in the six
months leading up to June 2021 [11]. We also expect participants
for our validation study to be mostly located in the North America.
As such, we do not claim to have findings that are generalizable
across all continents, but to mostly be valid in the context of North
America. Besides, findings from this work only serve as a first step
exploration of the research questions, since they predominantly
reflect barriers and mitigation strategies reported in the selected
subreddits. While Reddit is a rich source of data, future works by
larger research teams with more budget can better apply grounded
theory’s theoretical sampling by preparing to branch into other
unexpected data sources to explore other possible aspects of the
research questions [25].

6 POTENTIAL IMPLICATIONS
We hope that findings from this work can not only lead to a better
understanding of the i) barriers and ii) mitigation strategies faced
by those with non-traditional educational or occupational back-
ground in a career related to SE, but also iii) serve as a basis off of
which discussions and research of possible solutions could be held.
Particularly relevant to EMSE is this work’s implications for future
work on possible SE processes and tools that can be designed based
on the mitigation strategies observed.

Figure 5: An overview of the Validation Study.

• currently work as a software engineer, OR
• are currently studying SE, OR
• previously worked in or studied SE, AFTER their experience

in another field

Survey Design. The survey will ask participants about their de-
mographics, educational background and occupational background.
However, the core part of the survey will be about validating find-
ings from the exploratory study, which include barriers and mitiga-
tion strategies. Regarding this, participants will be asked to:

• Rate how relevant each barrier from the exploratory study
is in their experience using Likert scales (1 =Not relevant at
all and 5 =Extremely relevant)

• List any other barriers they faced and mitigated strategies

relevant to them

• List mitigation strategies they used for each barrier from the

exploratory study

• Rate how effective each mitigation strategy from the ex-
ploratory study is using Likert scales (1 =Not effective at all
and 5 =Extremely effective)

We plan to ask participants to list possible mitigation strategy on
their own before asking them to rate mitigation strategies found
from the exploratory study to understand their perspective better
without biasing them with the strategies found in the exploratory
study.

Pilot study. Following STGT’s recommendation for a prepa-
ration and piloting phase, we will conduct a pilot study by run-
ning three participants through the survey using a think-out-loud
methodology (see [22, 35, 41] for similar survey pilot methodolo-
gies), and at least two researchers will be present for each partici-
pant when they fill in the survey. Feedback from these participants
will be used to improve the survey wording and structure.

Data collection. We will make the improved survey available to
participants and collect responses from around 50 participants, as
estimated from our budget for this work. We plan to recruit partici-
pants by advertising on relevant subreddits (e.g., /r/{learnprogramming,
cscareerquestionsEU }) and through snowball sampling via personal
connections. Each participant will receive a remuneration of CAD$
10 for completing the survey.

Towards Understanding Barriers and Mitigation Strategies of Software Engineers with Non-traditional Educational and Occupational Backgrounds

MSR’22, May 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

7 SUMMARY
This work aims to analyze barriers and mitigation strategies of soft-
ware engineers with non-traditional educational and occupational
backgrounds, an important aspect of SE that remains unexplored
currently. The analysis is carried out in two steps. The first, an
exploratory study, will involve the analysis of relevant Reddit data
using a grounded-theory-based approach towards emerging themes
and patterns around barriers and mitigation strategies. The sec-
ond step is a validation study that will validate findings from the
exploratory study via a survey that will be filled out by software
engineers with non-traditional educational and occupational back-
grounds.

REFERENCES
[1] [n.d.]. Subreddit Stats. https://subredditstats.com/list/most-subscribers
[2] Khaldoun M. Aldiabat and Carole-Lynne Le Navenec. 2018. Data Saturation: The
Mysterious Step in Grounded Theory Methodology. The Qualitative Report 23, 1
(01 2018), 245–261.

[3] Ashley Amaya, Ruben Bach, Florian Keusch, and Frauke Kreuter. 2021. New data
sources in social science research: things to know before working with reddit
data. Social science computer review 39, 5 (2021), 943–960.

[4] Sebastian Baltes, George Park, and Alexander Serebrenik. 2020. Is 40 the New 60?
How Popular Media Portrays the Employability of Older Software Developers.
IEEE Software 37, 6 (2020), 26–31. https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2020.3014178
[5] Sebastian Baltes, George Park, and Alexander Serebrenik. 2020. Is 40 the new
60? How popular media portrays the employability of older software developers.
IEEE Software 37, 6 (2020), 26–31.

[6] J. S Bunderson and K. M Sutcliffe. 2002. Comparing Alternative Conceptualiza-
tions of Functional Diversity in Management Teams: Process and Performance
Effects. Academy of Management journal 45, 5 (2002), 875–893.

[7] Statistics Canada. [n.d.]. Strong growth in operating revenue, software develop-
ment and computer service industries, 2019. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/
daily-quotidien/210304/dq210304d-eng.htm

[8] Edna Dias Canedo, Fabiana Mendes, Anderson Cerqueira, Marcio Okimoto, Gus-
tavo Pinto, and Rodrigo Bonifacio. 2021. Breaking one barrier at a time: how
women developers cope in a men-dominated industry. In Brazilian Symposium
on Software Engineering. 378–387.

[9] Mayra Ruiz Castro, Beatrice Van der Heijden, and Emma L. Henderson. 2020. Cat-
alysts in career transitions: Academic researchers transitioning into sustainable
careers in data science. Journal of Vocational Behavior 122 (Oct. 2020), 103479.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvb.2020.103479

[10] J. Chen, Wei Yang Lim, B. Tan, and Hong Ling. 2018. The Role of Functional
Diversity, Collective Team Identification, and Task Cohesion in Influencing Inno-
vation Speed: Evidence From Software Development Teams. J. Glob. Inf. Manag.
26 (2018), 163–192.

[11] J. Clement. [n.d.]. Distribution of Reddit.com traffic 2021, by country. https:
//www.statista.com/statistics/325144/reddit-global-active-user-distribution/
[12] Gerry Coleman and Rory O’Connor. 2007. Using grounded theory to understand
software process improvement: A study of Irish software product companies.
Information and Software Technology 49, 6 (June 2007), 654–667. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.infsof.2007.02.011

[13] U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. [n.d.].

Prohibited Em-
ployment Policies/Practices. https://www.eeoc.gov/prohibited-employment-
policiespractices

[14] DataUSA. [n.d.]. Computer Science Profile.

https://datausa.io/profile/cip/

computer-science-110701

[15] DataUSA. [n.d.]. Computer Software Engineering Profile. https://datausa.io/

profile/cip/computer-software-engineering

[16] Liz Eggleston. 2021. 2020 Coding Bootcamp Alumni Outcomes & Demographics
Report. https://www.coursereport.com/reports/2020-coding-bootcamp-alumni-
outcomes-demographics-report-during-covid-19

[17] Guangchao Charles Feng. 2013. Intercoder reliability indices: disuse, misuse, and
abuse. Quality & Quantity 48, 3 (Nov. 2013), 1803–1815. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11135-013-9956-8

[18] Forbes. [n.d.]. Is There A Developer Shortage? Yes, But The Problem Is More
Complicated Than It Looks. https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/
2021/06/08/is-there-a-developer-shortage-yes-but-the-problem-is-more-
complicated-than-it-looks/?sh=6376767d3b8e

[19] Denae Ford, Justin Smith, Philip J Guo, and Chris Parnin. 2016. Paradise un-
plugged: Identifying barriers for female participation on stack overflow. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations
of Software Engineering. 846–857.

[20] Nicolas E. Gold and Jens Krinke. 2021. Ethics in the mining of software reposito-
ries. Empirical Software Engineering 27, 1 (Nov. 2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10664-021-10057-7

[21] Weixiao Guo, Chenjing Gan, and Duanxu Wang. 2021. When Does Educational
Level Diversity Foster Team Creativity? Exploring the Moderating Roles of Task
and Personnel Variability. Frontiers in psychology 12 (2021), 585849–585849.
[22] Monika Gupta, Ashish Sureka, Srinivas Padmanabhuni, and Allahbaksh Mo-
hammedali Asadullah. 2015. Identifying software process management chal-
lenges: Survey of practitioners in a large global it company. In 2015 IEEE/ACM
12th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories. IEEE, 346–356.
[23] D. Harrison and K. Klein. 2007. What’s the difference? Diversity constructs as
separation, variety, or disparity in organizations. Academy of Management Review
32 (2007), 1199–1228.

[24] Andrew F Hayes and Klaus Krippendorff. 2007. Answering the call for a standard
reliability measure for coding data. Communication methods and measures 1, 1
(2007), 77–89.

[25] Rashina Hoda. 2021. Socio-Technical Grounded Theory for Software Engineering.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering (2021), 1–1. https://doi.org/10.1109/
tse.2021.3106280

[26] Sonja Hyrynsalmi and Sami Hyrynsalmi. 2019. What motivates adult age women
to make a career change to the software industry?. In 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Engineering, Technology and Innovation (ICE/ITMC). IEEE, 1–8.

[27] IBISWorld. [n.d.]. Software Publishing Industry in the US - Market Research
https://www.ibisworld.com/united-states/market-research-reports/

Report.
software-publishing-industry/

[28] Tahira Iqbal, Moniba Khan, Kuldar Taveter, and Norbert Seyff. 2021. Mining
Reddit as a New Source for Software Requirements. In 2021 IEEE 29th International
Requirements Engineering Conference (RE). IEEE, 128–138.

[29] Irving L Janis. 1972. Victims of Groupthink: A psychological study of foreign-
policy decisions and fiascoes. The ANNALS of the American Academy of
https://doi.org/10.1177/
Political and Social Science 407, 1 (1972), 179–180.
000271627340700115

[30] Karen A Jehn, Gregory B Northcraft, and Margaret A Neale. 1999. Why Differ-
ences Make a Difference: A Field Study of Diversity, Conflict, and Performance
in Workgroups. Administrative science quarterly 44, 4 (1999), 741–763.

[31] Pawanpreet Kaur and Sumit Sharma. 2014. Agile software development in global
software engineering. International Journal of Computer Applications 97, 4 (2014).
[32] Eric Kearney and Diether Gebert. 2009. Managing Diversity and Enhancing
Team Outcomes: The Promise of Transformational Leadership. Journal of applied
psychology 94, 1 (2009), 77–89.

[33] Klaus Krippendorff. 2011. Computing Krippendorff’s alpha-reliability. https:

//repository.upenn.edu/asc_papers/43

[34] Priya Kumar, Anatoliy Gruzd, Caroline Haythornthwaite, Sarah Gilbert, Marc
Esteve del Valle, and Drew Paulin. 2018. Learning in the wild: Coding Reddit for
learning and practice. In Proceedings of the 51st Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences.

[35] Thomas D LaToza, Gina Venolia, and Robert DeLine. 2006. Maintaining mental
models: a study of developer work habits. In Proceedings of the 28th international
conference on Software engineering. 492–501.

[36] Matthew Lombard, Jennifer Snyder-Duch, and Cheryl Campanella Bracken. 2002.
Content Analysis in Mass Communication: Assessment and Reporting of Inter-
coder Reliability. Human Communication Research 28, 4 (Oct. 2002), 587–604.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2958.2002.tb00826.x

[37] Rocio Lorenzo and Martin Reeves. 2018. How and where diversity drives financial

performance. Harvard Business Review 30 (2018), 1–5.

[38] Kun Luan, Chu-Ding Ling, and Xiao-Yun Xie. 2016. The nonlinear effects of
educational diversity on team creativity. Asia Pacific journal of human resources
54, 4 (2016), 465–480.

[39] Zainab Masood, Rashina Hoda, and Kelly Blincoe. 2020. How agile teams make
self-assignment work: a grounded theory study. Empirical Software Engineering
25, 6 (Sept. 2020), 4962–5005. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-020-09876-x
[40] A. Mohammadi, A. Broström, and C. Franzoni. 2017. Workforce Composition
and Innovation: How Diversity in Employees’ Ethnic and Educational Back-
grounds Facilitates Firm-Level Innovativeness: WORKFORCE COMPOSITION
AND INNOVATION. The Journal of product innovation management 34, 4 (2017),
406–426.

[41] Saikat Mondal and Banani Roy. 2022. Reproducibility Challenges and Their
Impacts on Technical Q&A Websites: The Practitioners’ Perspectives. In 15th
Innovations in Software Engineering Conference (Gandhinagar, India) (ISEC 2022).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 11, 11 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3511430.3511439

[42] Patrick Morrison, Rahul Pandita, Emerson Murphy-Hill, and Anne McLaugh-
lin. 2016. Veteran developers’ contributions and motivations: An open source
perspective. In 2016 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric
Computing (VL/HCC). IEEE, 171–179.

[43] Katherine W Phillips, Elizabeth A Mannix, Margaret A Neale, and Deborah
H. Gruenfeld. 2004. Diverse groups and information sharing: The effects of
congruent ties. Journal of experimental social psychology 40, 4 (2004), 497–510.

MSR’22, May 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Barnes, Lee and Tavares, et al.

[44] Andreas W Richter, Giles Hirst, Daan van Knippenberg, and Markus Baer. 2012.
Creative Self-Efficacy and Individual Creativity in Team Contexts: Cross-Level
Interactions With Team Informational Resources. Journal of Applied Psychology
97, 6 (2012), 1282–1290. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029359

[45] Muhammad Rizwan, Mula Nazar Khan, Babar Nadeem, and Q Abbas. 2016. The
impact of workforce diversity towards employee performance: Evidence from
banking sector of Pakistan. American Journal of Marketing Research 2, 2 (2016),
53–60.

[46] Gema Rodríguez-Pérez, Reza Nadri, and Meiyappan Nagappan. 2021. Perceived
diversity in software engineering: a systematic literature review. Empirical
software engineering : an international journal 26, 5 (2021), 102–102.

[47] Johnny Saldaña. 2014. Coding and analysis strategies. In The Oxford handbook of

qualitative research.

[48] Sumit Sharma, Pawanpreet Kaur, and Upinder Kaur. 2015. Communication under-
standability enhancement in GSD. In 2015 International Conference on Futuristic
Trends on Computational Analysis and Knowledge Management (ABLAZE). IEEE,
28–33.

[49] Starlene M Simons and Kimberly N Rowland. 2011. Diversity and its impact on
organizational performance: The influence of diversity constructions on expecta-
tions and outcomes. Journal of technology management & innovation 6, 3 (2011),
171–183. http://dx.doi.org/10.4067/S0718-27242011000300013

[50] Anit Somech. 2006. The Effects of Leadership Style and Team Process on Per-
formance and Innovation in Functionally Heterogeneous Teams. Journal of
management 32, 1 (2006), 132–157.

[51] L Sparrow, Madeleine Antonellos, Martin Gibbs, and Michael Arnold. 2020. From
‘Silly’to ‘Scumbag’: Reddit Discussion of a Case of Groping in a Virtual Reality
Game. In Proceedings of the 2020 DiGRA International Conference: Play Everywhere,
The Digital Games Research Association.

[52] StackOverflow. [n.d.]. Stack Overflow Developer Survey Results 2016. https:

//insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2016#technology

[53] Stackoverflow. [n.d.]. Stack Overflow Developer Survey Results 2017. https:

//insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2017#technology

[54] Anastasiia Tkalich, Nils Brede Moe, and Rasmus Ulfsnes. 2021. Making Internal
Software Startups Work: How to Innovate Like a Venture Builder?. In International
Conference on Software Business. Springer, 152–167.

[55] Marc Esteve Del Valle and Rik Smit. 2021. Moonwalking together: Tracing Red-
ditors’ digital memory work on Michael Jackson. Convergence: The International
Journal of Research into New Media Technologies 27, 6 (March 2021), 1811–1832.
https://doi.org/10.1177/13548565211003878

[56] Graham Wilson. 2017. Building a new mythology: The coding boot-camp phe-

nomenon. ACM Inroads 8, 4 (2017), 66–71.

