Upgrade of ASACUSA’s Antihydrogen Detector

V. Kraxbergera,∗, C. Amslera, H. Breukerb, S. Chesnevskayaa, G. Costantinic,d, R. Ferragute,f, M. Giammarchif, A. Gligorovaa, G.
Gostac,d, H. Higakig, E. D. Huntera, C. Killiana, V. Kletzla,1, N. Kurodah, A. Lanza,i, M. Lealic,d, V. M¨ackela, G.Maerof,j, C.
Malbrunotk, V. Mascagnac,d, Y. Matsudah, S. Miglioratic,d, D. J. Murtagha, Y. Nagatal, A. Nandaa,i, L. Nowakk,i, E. Pasinof,j, M.
Rom´ef,j, M. C. Simona, M. Tajimam, V. Tosoe,f, S. Ulmerb, L. Venturellic,d, A. Weisera,i, E. Widmanna, T. Wolzk, Y. Yamazakib, J.
Zmeskala

aStefan-Meyer-Institute for Subatomic Physics, Austrian Academy of Science, Vienna, Austria
bUlmer Fundamental Symmetries Laboratory, RIKEN, Saitama, Japan
cDipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione, Universit`a degli Studi di Brescia, Brescia, Italy
dINFN sez. Pavia, Pavia, Italy
ePolitecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
fINFN sez. Milano, Milan, Italy
gGraduate School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan
hInstitute of Physics, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
iUniversity of Vienna, Vienna Doctoral School in Physics, Vienna, Austria
jDipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a degli Studi di Milano
kExperimental Physics Department, CERN, Geneva, Switzerland
lDepartment of Physics, Tokyo University of Science, Tokyo, Japan
mRIKEN Nishina Center for Accelerator-Based Science, Saitama, Japan

Abstract

The goal of the ASACUSA (Atomic Spectroscopy And Collisions Using Slow Antiprotons) CUSP experiment at CERN’s An-
tiproton Decelerator is to measure the ground state hyperﬁne splitting of antihydrogen in order to test whether CPT invariance is
broken.

The ASACUSA hodoscope is a detector consisting of two layers of 32 plastic scintillator bars individually read out by two
serially connected silicon photo multipliers (SiPMs) on each end. Two additional layers for position resolution along the beam axis
were scintillator ﬁbres, which will now be replaced by scintillating tiles placed onto the existing bars and also read out by SiPMs. If
the antiproton of antihydrogen annihilates in the center of the hodoscope, particles (mostly pions) are produced and travel through
the various layers of the detector and produce signals.

The hodoscope was successfully used during the last data taking period at CERN. The necessary time resolution to discriminate
between particles travelling through the detector from outside and particles produced in the center of the detector was achieved by
the use of waveform digitisers and software constant fraction discrimination. The disadvantage of this readout scheme was the slow
readout speed, which was improved by two orders of magnitude. This was done by omitting the digitisers and replacing them with
TDCs reading out the digital time-over-threshold (ToT) signal using leading edge discrimination.

Keywords: Antihydrogen, Antimatter, Data Acquisitoin, Silicon Photomultiplier

1. Introduction

The CPT symmetry (charge conjugation, parity transforma-
tion and time reversal) is a fundamental part of the Standard
If it is valid then matter and an-
Model of particle physics.
timatter must have equal or sign-opposite intrinsic properties.
The matter-antimatter asymmetry observed in our universe can
not be explained by the already found CP violations [1]. The
ASACUSA experiment plans to create an antihydrogen beam
to measure the hyperﬁne splitting of ground-state H using Rabi
spectroscopy [2, 3]. The hodoscope is used to analyse the num-

ber of arriving antihydrogen atoms by detecting their annihila-
tion products [4].
In the previous ASACUSA CUSP beam times the rate of anti-
hydrogen reaching the detector was only a few Hz, but for the
upcoming beam times it is expected that the antihydrogen pro-
duction will be more eﬃcient and a faster readout is needed.
The maximum readout rate with the previous setup was at ≈ 50
Hz, the goal was to reach 1 kHz. For that the previously used
data acquisition (DAQ) system [5, 6] had to be modiﬁed.

2. The Hodoscope Detector

∗Corresponding author at Stefan-Meyer-Institute for Subatomic Physics of

the Austrian Academy of Science, Kegelgasse 27, 1030 Vienna, Austria

Email address: viktoria.kraxberger@oeaw.ac.at (V. Kraxberger)
1Present address: Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen, Switzerland

The hodoscope (Fig. 1) is a two-layered octagonal barrel-
type detector consisting of 32 EJ 200 scintillator bars per layer.
The outer bars have a dimension of 450×35×5 mm3, the inners

Preprint submitted to Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research, Section A

April 26, 2022

2
2
0
2

r
p
A
5
2

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
2
7
5
1
1
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
are 300 × 20 × 5 mm3. Light guides in the shape of trapezoidal
prisms are attached on both ends of the bars with a length of
40 mm (inner layer) and 75 mm (outer layer). They reduce the
cross section of the bars down to 8 × 5 mm2 matching the active
area of the used silicon photomultipliers. Until recently the po-
sition resolution in beam direction was provided by scintillating
ﬁbres (100 in the outer, 64 in the inner layer) which are now be-
ing replaced by 240 EJ 200 scintillator tiles (15 per octagon side
and layer). On the outer layer the 129 × 30 × 5 mm3 tiles will
be placed perpendicularly onto each section of four bars. The
same is true for the inner layer, where the tiles have a size of
84 × 20 × 5 mm3. The bars are readout using two 3 × 3 KETEK
PM3350-TS SiPMs on each end, for the ﬁbres one 3×3 KETEK
PM3350-EB was used. The new tile-readout is done with two
serially connected Broadcom AFBR-S4N33C013 3 × 3 SiPMs
on one side.

A trigger for the DAQ is produced using two CAEN V2495
FPGA logic modules replacing the before used combination of
several NIM logic units and one VME CAEN V2495 FPGA.
This trigger is produced for events where there is a signal on
both ends of one scintillator bar (to exclude triggering on noise
of a single SiPM) for at least one inner and one outer bar. It is
then distributed to each TDC and the SIS3104.

4. Time and Position Resolution

In the new setup only digital time-over-threshold signals are
used which are produced by leading edge discrimination. This
introduces a jitter depending on the rise time of the signals. Due
to the diﬀerence in rise times, the ToT signal is not produced at
a certain fraction of the amplitude, but at a ﬁxed threshold. If
the signals are produced with SiPMs operated in saturation, the
amplitude of all signals is maximal (≈ 800 mV) and the rise
time is minimized. When taking the leading edge (LE) times
at a speciﬁc threshold voltage, the signals are therefore more
constant as the rise time does not vary as much.

4.1. Resolution with a Test Setup

In the test setup, see Fig. 2, a pico-second laser pulse was
used to produce signals in the scintillator bar, read out at each
end with an FPGA and TDCs similar to the hodoscope setup.
The measurement was done with the laser irradiating various
points along the scintillator bar. The time diﬀerences of the
leading edges of the signals on both ends were ﬁtted with a
Gaussian distribution.

Figure 1: Front view of the hodoscope with an outer and inner layer of 32 scin-
tillator bars and 120 scintillator tiles each. The distance between two opposite
outer bars is 350 mm.

3. Data Acquisition Hardware and Software Upgrades

The DAQ is done using CAEN V1190A/B TDCs and CAEN
V2495 FPGA units together with the MIDAS [7] software. A
VME controller (Struck SIS3104) connects them to a PC via
optical link ﬁbre. Both hardware and software were upgraded
and reprogrammed to allow a higher readout rate. The MIDAS
frontend was adapted to use a polled trigger, already allowing
readout at a rate of 300 Hz and the TDC readout was changed
to block transfer mode, such that now it is possible to record
events at rates of over 1 kHz. Compared with the previous data
acquisition, this represents an improvement by two orders of
magnitude.

2

Figure 2: A sketch of the setup with a pulsed laser positioned in front of the
scintillator bar. The laser beam ﬁrst goes through an absorptive ﬁlter to lower
the intensity and then through a top-hat diﬀuser so the beam has a diameter of
≈ 5 mm.

In Fig. 3 these time diﬀerences with the standard deviation of
the Gaussian ﬁt as y-errorbars are plotted against the positions
of the laser along the bar. There is a linear dependence between
time diﬀerences and positions, where the slope k is indicated
in the graph. Using this linear function the position resolution
could also be determined as ≈ 1 cm standard deviation. Com-
pared to the resolution with the previous setup this would be an
improvement by a factor of 3 [4].

4.2. Hodoscope Resolution

To test these results with the whole hodoscope setup using
cosmic rays, coincidences with a pair of ﬁbres (one inner, one
outer) were used to consider only signals travelling through the
detector perpendicular to the beam axis. Thus, the position of

SiPMB2SiPMB1absorptive filtertop-hat diffuserLASER100 Hz5. Conclusion

We have performed changes in the DAQ hardware and soft-
ware to achieve a possible readout rate of over 1 kHz in
ASACUSA’s antihydrogen detector. The hardware now only
consists of VME modules and the signals are recorded as time-
over-thresholds via leading edge discrimination. From a test
setup we could conclude that a very good time resolution is
possible, but this has not been achieved yet with the hodoscope.
The currently performed upgrade to the use of scintillator tiles
is promising for future measurements.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by Austrian Science Fund (FWF) P
32468, W1252-N27, and P 34438; the JSPS KAKENHI Foster-
ing Joint International Research B 19KK0075; the Grant-in-Aid
for Scientiﬁc Research B 20H01930; Special Research Projects
for Basic Science of RIKEN; Universit`a di Brescia and Istituto
Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare; and the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie
Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 721559.

References

[1] P. Zyla, et al., Review of Particle Physics, PTEP 2020 (8) (2020) 083C01.

doi:10.1093/ptep/ptaa104.

[2] E. Widmann, C. Amsler, S. Arguedas Cuendis, H. Breuker, M. Dier-
maier, P. Dupr´e, C. Evans, M. Fleck, A. Gligorova, H. Higaki, Y. Kanai,
B. Kolbinger, N. Kuroda, M. Leali, A. M. M. Leite, V. M¨ackel, C. Mal-
brunot, V. Mascagna, O. Massiczek, Y. Matsuda, D. J. Murtagh, Y. Na-
gata, A. Nanda, D. Phan, C. Sauerzopf, M. C. Simon, M. Tajima,
H. Spitzer, M. Strube, S. Ulmer, L. Venturelli, M. Wiesinger, Y. Ya-
mazaki, J. Zmeskal, Hyperﬁne spectroscopy of hydrogen and antihydrogen
in ASACUSA, Hyperﬁne Interactions 240 (1) (2019) 5. doi:10.1007/
s10751-018-1536-9.

[3] C. Malbrunot, C. Amsler, S. A. Cuendis, H. Breuker, P. Dupre, M. Fleck,
H. Higaki, Y. Kanai, B. Kolbinger, N. Kuroda, M. Leali, V. M¨ackel,
V. Mascagna, O. Massiczek, Y. Matsuda, Y. Nagata, M. C. Simon,
H. Spitzer, M. Tajima, S. Ulmer, L. Venturelli, E. Widmann, M. Wiesinger,
Y. Yamazaki, J. Zmeskal, The ASACUSA antihydrogen and hydrogen pro-
gram: Results and prospects, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Soci-
ety A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 376 (2116) (mar
2018). doi:10.1098/RSTA.2017.0273.

[4] B. Kolbinger, C. Amsler, S. A. Cuendis, H. Breuker, A. Capon, G. Costan-
tini, P. Dupr´e, M. Fleck, A. Gligorova, H. Higaki, Y. Kanai, V. Kletzl,
N. Kuroda, A. Lanz, M. Leali, V. M¨ackel, C. Malbrunot, V. Mascagna,
O. Massiczek, Y. Matsuda, D. J. Murtagh, Y. Nagata, A. Nanda, L. Nowak,
B. Radics, C. Sauerzopf, M. C. Simon, M. Tajima, H. A. Torii, U. Ug-
gerhøj, S. Ulmer, L. Venturelli, A. Weiser, M. Wiesinger, E. Widmann,
T. Wolz, Y. Yamazaki, J. Zmeskal, Measurement of the principal quantum
number distribution in a beam of antihydrogen atoms, European Physi-
cal Journal D 75 (3) (2021). arXiv:2008.04246, doi:10.1140/epjd/
s10053-021-00101-y.

[5] C. Sauerzopf, The ASACUSA Antihydrogen Detector: Development and

Data Analysis, Phd thesis, Technical University of Vienna (2016).

[6] M. Fleck, The Development and Implementation of a Fibre Detector and
Advanced Data Acquisition for the ASACUSA Antihydrogen Detector,
Master thesis, Technical University of Vienna (2018).

[7] PSI, TRIUMF, MIDAS Wiki.

URL https://midas.triumf.ca/MidasWiki/index.php?title=
Main_Page&oldid=2982

Figure 3: The means of the time diﬀerences between the two ends of the bar
plotted against the position of the laser along the bar, where 0 cm is the middle.
The y-errorbars show the standard deviations. The orange line shows a linear
ﬁt, where the resulting slope is k = (0.124 ± 0.005) ns/cm.

the hit along the bars should have been known, but the results
were very poor and no position resolution could be achieved.
Nevertheless there were already plans to replace the ﬁbres with
scintillator tiles to improve the tracking eﬃciency. Onto each
section of 4 scintillator bars, 15 tiles will be placed perpendic-
ularly.
Looking at the time diﬀerences between downstream (DS) and
upstream (US) leading edge times in coincidence with one the
15 tiles, a linear dependance can be seen, Fig. 4. The mean of
the measured standard deviations on this bar is (cid:104)σ(cid:105) = (1.4±0.1)
ns. This can still be improved by increasing the ampliﬁcation
of the SiPM signals and therefore minimising the time walk of
the leading edges.

Figure 4: The means of the time diﬀerences between the two ends of the bar
plotted against the position of the tile along the bar. The y-errorbars show the
standard deviations. The orange line shows a linear ﬁt, where the resulting
slope is k = (0.18 ± 0.03) ns/cm.

3

−20−1001020Position on bar in cm−10123Time between B1 and B2 in nsk = (0.124 ± 0.005) ns/cmTestbar−20−1001020Position on bar in cm−20246Time between DS and US in nsk = (0.18 ± 0.03) ns/cmHodoscope Outer Bar 9