Aerial Computing: A New Computing Paradigm,
Applications, and Challenges

Quoc-Viet Pham, Member, IEEE, Rukhsana Ruby, Member, IEEE, Fang Fang, Member, IEEE,
Dinh C. Nguyen, Member, IEEE, Zhaohui Yang, Member, IEEE, Mai Le,
Zhiguo Ding, Fellow, IEEE and Won-Joo Hwang, Senior Member, IEEE

1

2
2
0
2

r
p
A
5

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
0
0
2
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—In existing computing systems, such as edge com-
puting and cloud computing, several emerging applications and
practical scenarios are mostly unavailable or only partially im-
plemented. To overcome the limitations that restrict such applica-
tions, the development of a comprehensive computing paradigm
has garnered attention in both academia and industry. However,
a gap exists in the literature owing to the scarce research, and
a comprehensive computing paradigm is yet to be systematically
designed and reviewed. This study introduces a novel concept,
called aerial computing, via the amalgamation of aerial radio
access networks and edge computing, which attempts to bridge
the gap. Speciﬁcally, ﬁrst, we propose a novel comprehensive com-
puting architecture that is composed of low-altitude computing,
high-altitude computing, and satellite computing platforms, along
with conventional computing systems. We determine that aerial
computing offers several desirable attributes: global computing
service, better mobility, higher scalability and availability, and si-
multaneity. Second, we comprehensively discuss key technologies
that facilitate aerial computing, including energy reﬁlling, edge
computing, network softwarization, frequency spectrum, multi-
access techniques, artiﬁcial intelligence, and big data. In addition,
we discuss vertical domain applications (e.g., smart cities, smart
vehicles, smart factories, and smart grids) supported by aerial
computing. Finally, we highlight several challenges that need to
be addressed and their possible solutions.

Index Terms—6G, Aerial Access Networks, Aerial Computing,
Edge Computing, Enabling Technologies, Vertical Applications.

I. INTRODUCTION
Research communities have started to deﬁne roadmaps for
sixth-generation (6G) networks [1]. As various Internet-of-
Things (IoT) applications are set to emerge in 6G, additional
data need to be collected and transmitted. However, IoT de-
vices are constrained by factors, such as batteries, transmission

Quoc-Viet Pham is with the Korean Southeast Center for the 4th Industrial
Revolution Leader Education, Pusan National University, Busan 46241, Korea.
Rukhsana Ruby is with College of Computer Science and Software Engi-

neering, Shenzhen University, China.

Fang Fang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
and the Department of Computer Science, Western University, London, ON
N6A 3K7, Canada.

Dinh C. Nguyen is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering,

Purdue University, USA.

Zhaohui Yang is with the Centre for Telecommunications Research, De-

partment of Engineering, King’s College London, WC2R 2LS, UK.

Mai Le is with the Department of Information Convergence Engineering,

Pusan National University, Busan 46241, Korea.

Zhiguo Ding is with the School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering,

The University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK.

Won-Joo Hwang is with the Department of Biomedical Convergence

Engineering, Pusan National University, Yangsan 50612, Korea.

E-mails:

vietpq@pusan.ac.kr,

fang.fang@uwo.ca,
yang.zhaohui@kcl.ac.uk, maile2108@gmail.com,

ruby@szu.edu.cn,

nguye772@purdue.edu,
zhiguo.ding@manchester.ac.uk, wjhwang@pusan.ac.kr.

power, and processing capacity. To facilitate data transmission
from IoT devices worldwide, several studies have investigated
aerial access networks (AANs), which can offer line-of-sight
(LoS) communication links, favorable channels, and improved
coverage. An AAN generally consists of three primary compo-
nents: low-altitude platforms (LAPs), high-altitude platforms
(HAPs), and low-Earth-orbit (LEO) satellites [2]. These plat-
forms fully complement the conventional terrestrial access net-
work to create a future access network in 6G that can provide
wireless services with global coverage and diverse quality of
service (QoS). Moreover, to better support emerging compute-
intensive applications, such as fully autonomous vehicles,
ﬂying taxis, holographic communications, and virtual reality
(VR), edge computing (e.g., fog computing and multi-access
edge computing (MEC)) is a promising concept owing to the
availability of powerful computing and storage resources at the
edge of the network [3]. The amalgamation of AANs and edge
computing introduces a novel concept referred to as aerial
computing. Aerial computing is expected to provide advanced
services, such as communication, computing, caching, sensing,
navigation, and control, at a global scale.

Aerial computing is considered a promising paradigm that
enables local data analysis and real-time service provisioning
in the air. Facilitated by advantages, such as high mobility,
fast deployment, global availability, scalability, and ﬂexibil-
ity, aerial computing complements conventional computing
paradigms (e.g., cloud computing, fog computing, and MEC)
and is thus considered a pillar of the comprehensive computing
infrastructure in future 6G networks [4]. For example, in [5],
IoT data over small areas could be collected and processed
cooperatively by a set of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) at
low altitudes, whereas IoT data over large-scale areas could
be executed by HAPs at high altitudes. In [6], UAVs were
leveraged as intermediate points between vehicles and the
network edge to enable data collection and task preprocessing
and thus facilitate data transfer in smart vertical domain
environments. Meanwhile, in the race toward global Internet
connectivity among tech giants, such as SpaceX, Google,
Amazon, and Facebook, several LEO satellite systems have
been deployed to provide Internet services to users, particu-
larly in rural and hard-to-reach areas, with a performance that
is comparable to that of the current terrestrial mobile network
[7]. However, these systems have not yet been integrated into
current computing systems as key components.

The above observations emphasize the importance of a
comprehensive computing architecture for future 6G systems.

 
 
 
 
 
 
As a native constituent, aerial computing is composed of
low-altitude and high-altitude computing platforms as well as
satellite computing platforms. It can carry its full complement
of conventional terrestrial computing paradigms. Conceptually,
aerial computing can facilitate various smart industrial appli-
cations, such as smart cities, smart vehicles, smart factories,
and smart grids. Moreover, it is expected to provide a reference
6G computing architecture for future studies.

A. Visions Toward a Comprehensive Computing Infrastructure

In recent years, several surveys on edge computing and
mobile networks have been conducted. For example, enabling
MEC technologies, including virtual machines (VMs), net-
work function virtualization (NFV), software-deﬁned network-
ing (SDN), and network slicing were reviewed in [8]. The use
of MEC for IoT applications, such as critical and massive IoT,
wearable IoT, smart energy, and IoT automotive, was discussed
in [9]. Computation ofﬂoading, resource management, and
optimal placement problems in edge computing systems were
discussed in [10]–[12]. The amalgamation of MEC and AI,
referred to as edge intelligence and intelligent edge, has been
reviewed in several studies [13], [14]. Further, certain reviews
focused on the integration of edge computing with emerging
technologies, such as blockchain [15] and ﬁfth-generation (5G)
and beyond networks [16]. More recently, privacy/security
issues and solutions of MEC services were reviewed [17].

MEC is a key enabler of many wireless services offering
better QoS. Moreover, MEC has the potential to be closely
integrated with emerging technologies and systems [15], [16].
In addition, these studies elaborate on the various challenges of
MEC that need to be examined in beyond-5G networks, such
as resource optimization, security and privacy, and real-time
implementation. With the expected extraordinary populariza-
tion of the next-generation Internet and the emergence of killer
applications, such as VR, space tourism, fully autonomous
vehicles, holographic communications, and deep-sea sight, the
current MEC infrastructure needs to be further expanded both
vertically and horizontally to complement existing edge com-
puting systems. However, the aforementioned reviews [8]–[17]
primarily focus on 5G network scenarios, technologies, and
applications, but the new requirements for a comprehensive
6G computing infrastructure have not been reviewed yet.

Future 6G systems have been envisioned in recent studies.
For example, the authors of [18] discussed their vision for
use cases, enabling technologies, and overcoming the chal-
lenges of 6G networks. In [19], a set of key performance
indicators (KPIs) were deﬁned for 6G, such as peak data rate
>100 Gbps, trafﬁc density >100 Tb/s/km2, network density
>10 million connections per km2, mobility >1000 km/h,
centimeter-level positioning accuracy, reliability >99.999%,
receiver sensitivity <-130 dBm, 3-times spectral efﬁciency,
and 10-times energy efﬁciency. Six technical
trends were
discussed in [19], namely, coverage expansion, new resources
and bandwidth spectrum, new modulation techniques, enhanc-
ing the system capacity, adding computing and intelligence
capabilities, and three-dimensional (3D) network architecture.
Regarding 3D networks, several studies have reviewed UAV

2

communications [20], HAP networks [21], airborne communi-
cations [22], satellite communications [23], terrestrial-satellite
integrated networks [24], and future aerial networks [25].
Recently, the primary aspects of aerial radio access networks,
such as architectures, network design, enabling technologies,
and applications, were reviewed in [26]. Owing to excellent
features and numerous applications, many researchers believe
that AI techniques are a key component of many 6G systems.
For example, machine learning (ML) is considered a double-
edged sword for privacy in 6G [27]. Moreover, AI is an integral
part of future networks, such as sensing AI at receivers, on-
device AI, access AI (i.e., transmission at PHY, MAC, and
network layers), and data-provenance AI [28].

The above surveys mainly concentrate on the KPIs, enabling
technologies, potential applications, and major challenges of
6G. The existing reviews emphasize the importance of a
comprehensive computing infrastructure for the foundation of
6G in the next 10 years. However, despite promising studies
and an urgent need for a comprehensive computing infrastruc-
ture, a large gap exists in the existing studies because aerial
computing has not been systematically reviewed. This paper
attempts to bridge this gap by introducing a new computing
architecture that can be employed in future network systems.
This paper also presents a comprehensive review of aerial
computing. Table I summarizes the existing surveys on edge
computing and aerial communications. It also highlights the
contributions of the present study.

B. Contributions and Research Methodologies

As discussed above, aerial computing is a promising concept
for providing computing resources and wireless services on
a global scale. This paper attempts to bridge the gap in the
existing literature by presenting an in-depth review of aerial
computing with a vision toward a comprehensive computing
infrastructure in future 6G networks. The review covers the
following aspects.

Fundamentals and Designs (Section II): First, to enrich
the full understanding of the concept of aerial computing,
we present the system architecture, which is illustrated in
Fig. 1. This comprehensive computing architecture is expected
to be the key enabler of many computationally intensive
applications that will be available in 6G systems. Following
the analysis of the proposed architecture, we elaborate upon
the important features of aerial computing, including ubiquity,
mobility, availability, simultaneity, and scalability, and further
differentiate between aerial computing from other computing
paradigms. Further, we present important design problems for
an aerial computing system, including computation, commu-
nication, energy consumption, and latency models.

Enabling Technologies (Section III): To realize aerial com-
puting in 6G systems, we discuss a set of key enabling
technologies, which include network softwarization, energy
reﬁlling, frequency spectrum, multi-access techniques, and AI
and big data. In particular, energy reﬁlling is crucial for main-
taining the sustainable operations of aerial components. With
regard to the operational management of aerial computing
systems, we review state-of-the-art studies on softwarization

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF EXISTING SURVEYS ON EDGE COMPUTING AND FUTURE WIRELESS NETWORKS.

3

Reference

Main theme

6G/AI MEC

AAN

Key Contributions

[8]

[9]

[10]–[12]

[13], [14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]–[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

This paper

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

Enabling technologies of MEC systems, such as VM, contain-
ers, NFV, SDN, and network slicing, are reviewed.
MEC applications for IoT service realization in 5G networks.

Reviews of seminal MEC architectures, computation ofﬂoading
issues, resource management, and optimal placement problems.
Interactions between AI techniques and MEC systems; that is,
intelligent edge and edge intelligence.

Integration of blockchain and MEC systems.

Integration of MEC with 5G technologies, such as cloud radio
access networks, massive multi-input multi-output (MIMO),
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) communications, and AI.
Comprehensive survey on privacy/security issues and solutions
in MEC systems.
A speculative study on promising applications and major tech-
nologies in future 6G networks.
A vision of KPIs, technologies, technical trends, and challenges
of 6G networks.
3D networking, such as UAV communications [20], HAP
systems [21], airborne communications [22], satellite commu-
nications [23], terrestrial-satellite integrated networks [24], and
wireless communications for future AANs [25].
Technical aspects of AANs in the 6G context and key enablers.

A comprehensive survey of the alliance between ML and 6G
privacy.
Four important domains of AI in 6G are reviewed, namely,
sensing AI, on-device AI, access AI, and data-provenance AI.
A comprehensive survey of aerial computing. In particular,

• We introduce a novel architecture of aerial computing,
which complements the existing computing infrastruc-
tures. Important features of aerial computing, such as mo-
bility, availability, scalability, ﬂexibility, and simultaneity,
have also been analyzed in detail.

• We provide in-depth discussions of key enablers of aerial
computing and the use of aerial computing in important
vertical applications, including smart cities, smart vehi-
cles, smart factories, and smart grids.

• Key challenges of aerial computing are presented along
with potential solutions and future research directives.

Limitations

This paper does not focus on aerial comput-
ing and its role.
The role and applications of aerial comput-
ing have not been presented.
The role and applications of aerial comput-
ing are not discussed.
The role of aerial computing in enabling a
comprehensive computing infrastructure in
6G is not considered.
Only the integration of blockchain into edge
computing systems is presented.
Only the integration of MEC with 5G tech-
nologies is reviewed, while the role and ap-
plications of aerial computing are ignored.
The paper reviews only the security and
privacy aspects of MEC systems.
Only the vision of future 6G networks is
discussed.
Only a brief discussion of future 6G net-
works is presented.
These papers primarily focus on the com-
munication aspects of AAN, while the com-
puting aspects and the role of aerial comput-
ing are ignored.
The computing aspects and applications of
aerial computing are not presented.
The paper focuses only on privacy aspects
and its alliance with ML.
The paper focuses on the role and applica-
tions of AI in future networks.

techniques, including VM, network slicing, NFV, and SDN.
These softwarization techniques are important for facilitating
ﬂexible and programmable operations and the deployment
acceleration of aerial computing systems. In addition, we
discuss frequency spectrum and multi-access techniques (e.g.,
massive MIMO, intelligent reﬂecting surface (IRS), and non-
orthogonal multiple access (NOMA)), used in aerial comput-
ing systems. Finally, AI and big data analytics are considered
important technologies for exploiting massive data generated
from aerial computing, thus improving system performance.

Vertical Domain Applications (Section IV): The integration
of wireless technologies into industrial automation systems has
shown great potential in creating more efﬁcient and productive
vertical domain applications (i.e., smart cities, smart vehicles,
smart factories, and smart grids). Further, we present an
extensive review of state-of-the-art studies on these vertical
domain applications in the context of 6G aerial computing. In

this regard, we discuss the manner in which aerial computing
can support vertical domain applications.

Research Challenges and Potential Directions (Section V):
To further drive research into aerial computing in the future,
we discuss the major challenges, possible solutions, and
potential directives. Aerial computing systems face critical
challenges, such as energy efﬁciency, efﬁcient resource man-
agement, and network stability. Further, large-scale network
optimization is another critical issue for embedding distributed
and learning approaches such that aerial computing systems
can efﬁciently operate on a large scale. Finally, security,
privacy, and trust are important aspects of aerial computing
but have not been adequately addressed by existing studies.

II. FUNDAMENTALS AND DESIGN

In this section, we present

the system architecture and

fundamental features of aerial computing.

4

Fig. 1. A novel comprehensive 6G computing architecture.

A. System Architecture

As shown in Fig. 1, we propose a novel aerial computing-
based 6G architecture wherein the aerial components are
positioned in a hierarchical manner. In addition to conventional
computing infrastructure, the proposed aerial computing archi-
tecture consists of four main entities: IoT devices, low-altitude
computing (LAC) platforms, high-altitude computing (HAC)
platforms, and satellite computing platforms, along with ver-
tical domain applications and key enabling technologies.

IoT: This layer refers to any IoT device that generates data
and comprises compute-intensive applications that need to be
executed by aerial computing systems. For example, wearable
devices, such as smart watches, eyeglasses, ﬁtness trackers,
and body-mounted sensors are responsible for monitoring and
collecting the health information (e.g., heart rate, physical
activity, and blood pressure). These devices may ofﬂoad col-
lected data to an edge node for further processing because
they are typically resource-constrained and have a relatively
small size. Aerial components (e.g., UAVs and drones) can be
a part of this IoT layer when they are dispatched to collect
data from ground sensors. To maximize the ﬂight time and

data collection efﬁciency, the UAV ofﬂoads the collected data
to a terrestrial MEC server and/or other more powerful UAVs.
Terrestrial Computing: This layer comprises conventional
terrestrial computing paradigms, such as fog computing, MEC,
and cloudlet. Typically, computing nodes are deployed at
preset locations. According to [16], the potential deployment
locations of an MEC server include routers, IoT gateways,
macro base stations (BSs), small cell BSs, optical network
units, radio network controller sites, and wireless ﬁdelity
(WiFi) access points, whereas the common locations of a fog
node are gateways, intermediate nodes (between the cloud and
end devices), and network elements (e.g., routers and switches)
[29]. The collaborative and hierarchical MEC framework uti-
lizes the advantage of many applications and services, as edge
devices with different capabilities can collaboratively perform
data processing and task execution [30].

Low-Altitude Computing: The LAC platform is positioned
in the lowest tier of aerial computing systems with an altitude
of 0–10 km above the Earth’s surface. This platform offers
several advantages, such as cost-effectiveness, rapid deploy-
ment, and LoS communication links. Hence, LAC systems are
highly effective for emergency scenarios, military surveillance,

Marine communicationsUndergroundTerrestrial computingHAC platformSatellite computingSmart citySmart factorySmart gridSmart vehicleVertical domain applicationsIoT DevicesIoT DevicesIoT DevicesLAC platformKey-enabling technologiesAI and Big DataMulti-access techniquesFrequency spectrumNetwork softwarizationEnergy harvestingtemporary events, and IoT data collection and processing
[31]. The authors of [32] demonstrated that the UAV can
be leveraged for data collection, aerial relaying, and aerial
computing of the tasks ofﬂoaded from ground IoT devices.
The primary components of the LAC platform are drones and
UAVs equipped with computing capabilities, which typically
have limited battery capacities, low computing resources, and
low endurance. Consequently, several solutions have been pro-
posed to address these challenges, such as wireless- and solar-
powered UAV-MEC and task ofﬂoading to more powerful
terrestrial and HAC-MEC servers [33]. There exist two types
of LAC servers: ﬁxed-wing and rotary-wing. The former does
not hold up in the air and needs to move forward continuously,
whereas the latter can take off and land vertically.

High-Altitude Computing: The HAC platform comprises
both manned and unmanned aerial components (e.g., airplanes,
airships, and balloons) that operate at an altitude ranging from
17 to 50 km. The advantages of HAC systems over other
platforms include large-area coverage with the cell size of up
to 10 km, adaptability to trafﬁc demands, rapid deployment
compared to terrestrial computing and satellite computing,
high endurance compared to LAC platforms, and green op-
eration capability with solar power [34]. At the World Radio
Conference (WRC)-19, several frequency bands were allocated
to HAC systems by the ITU Radio communication Sector,
including the 31–31.3 and 38–39.5 GHz bands for worldwide
use, 47.2–47.5 and 47.9–48.2 GHz for administration use,
and 21.4–22 and 24.25–27.5 GHz for ﬁxed services in ITU
Regions 2 [35]. In recent years, several industrial projects have
been observed in LAC platforms for wireless and computing
services, such as ﬂying cells on wings [36], Google Skybender
[37], and ApusDuo [38]. Owing to the quasi-stationary feature,
HAC platforms can form a collaborative HAC-MEC server
with more powerful capabilities and higher time endurance,
aiding in the execution of the computation tasks that are
ofﬂoaded from LAC and/or satellite systems.

Satellite Computing: This layer is composed of LEO
satellites with computing capabilities. LEO satellites typically
operate at an altitude of approximately 80–2000 km above
the Earth’s surface. For example, SpaceX launched 60 LEO
satellites at altitudes not greater than 580 km in May 2019.
These satellites can provide Internet services globally with a
data rate ranging from 50 to 150 Mbps and a latency ranging
from 20 to 40 ms (www.starlink.com/). Amazon also initiated
a satellite project called Kuiper, which plans to launch a
constellation of 3200 satellites at an altitude of approximately
610 km [39]. These LEO satellites are expected to provide
various wireless and computing services, particularly when
other computing platforms are temporarily unavailable and/or
satellite computing is the only option. Unlike in LAC and
HAC platforms, users are not usually connected with satellite
computing systems because of the excessive hardware cost
incurred when MEC servers are embedded in LEO satellites.
Instead, LEO satellites can act as relays to receive and transmit
computation tasks/results between users and MEC servers.
However, computing directly at the satellite edge server is
beneﬁcial for applications with sparse users; that is, users are
located at different geographical locations [24], [40].

5

Industrial Applications: Aerial computing supports and
enables (new) industrial applications owing to its distinctive
features, such as high mobility, always-available computing,
and scalability (discussed in Section II-B). For example, aerial
computing systems can support large-scale vehicle systems
and/or advanced trafﬁc signal infrastructures to improve the
experience of in-car infotainment applications and reduce
trafﬁc congestion by deploying massive MEC on roadside
units, power systems, buildings, and highway infrastructure.
In Section IV, we comprehensively discuss the use of aerial
computing for four primary industrial applications: smart
cities, smart vehicles, smart factories, and smart grids.

Enabling Technologies: The realization of aerial computing
is facilitated by several key enabling technologies, including
network softwarization, energy reﬁlling, frequency spectrum,
multi-access techniques, and AI and big data. A thorough
discussion of these technologies in the context of aerial
computing is presented in Section III.

B. Desirable Features

Aerial computing retains the base features of the concept
of edge computing, including on-premises, proximity, lower
infor-
location awareness, and network contextual
latency,
mation. In addition, it has certain fundamental features that
differentiate it from other computing paradigms (e.g., fog
computing and cloudlet), which are discussed as follows.

• Mobility: Aerial platforms can be deployed quickly to
support on-demand computing applications. While LAC
platforms can enable the rapid roll-out of computing
services, the deployment of a terrestrial computing system
is time-consuming owing to planning procedures and
civil works involved. From the perspective of the user,
the overlaying architecture of LAC, HAC, and satellite
computing helps aerial computing systems ﬂexibly satisfy
different computation tasks from end IoT devices.

• Availability: Aerial computing systems are usually avail-
able as they are not much affected by natural disas-
ters, unlike terrestrial computing, and can be easily and
quickly deployed for particular computation tasks. The
availability of aerial computing also relies on its hierar-
chical architecture with different computing platforms at
different altitudes and coverage distances.

• Scalability: Aerial computing systems can provide on-
demand computing services as well as applications with
geographically distributed users. As the aerial compo-
nents can collaboratively form computing clusters, mas-
sive IoT devices can be served, thereby improving user
satisfaction and guaranteeing service continuity.

• Flexibility: Unlike terrestrial computing, wherein MEC
and fog nodes are typically deployed at pre-speciﬁed
locations, aerial computing entities can be changed easily
to ﬂexibly suit different situations. Further, enhanced
computing services may be provided via additional aerial
computing platforms, such as LAC and HAC.

• Simultaneity: Different aerial computing platforms can
provide computing services to geographical users simul-
taneously. Thus, users in different countries can request

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF AERIAL COMPUTING WITH OTHER EDGE COMPUTING PARADIGMS.

Cloudlet
Satyanarayanan, 2009 [41]

Fog Computing
Cisco, 2012

MEC
ETSI, 2014

Aerial Computing
This work, 2021

6

Moving cloud computing capabilities to the network edge

Deployment

Application
Examples

Business premises (e.g., shop-
ping malls, companies, and
personal computers)
Locally resource-intensive and
interactive applications

Strategic locations both indoors
and outdoors (e.g., IoT gate-
ways, routers, and switches)
Smart vertical domain appli-
cations (e.g., smart cities and
smart health) and video surveil-
lance
Autonomous operation or inter-
mittent Internet connectivity
Less global

Autonomous operation (e.g.,
WiFi)
Local

Autonomous operation or mo-
bile Internet
Less global

Autonomous operation or mo-
bile Internet
Global

Various locations within radio
access networks (RANs) (e.g.,
radio towers and gateways)
Content caching, autonomous
reality
augmented
vehicle,
(AR), data analytics

Making computing capabilities
available at all times, at both
the network edge and air
Locations in the air and within
RANs
towers,
UAVs, and LEO satellites)
On-demand applications and
applications with sparse user
distribution

radio

(e.g.,

Low
Low

Low
Relatively low

Low
Low

Localized

Distributed/hierarchical

Localized/hierarchical

Dependent on deployment scenarios [29], [42]

Dependent on deployment scenarios [29], [42]

High

High

Low [43]

Low [43]

High [43]

High [44]

High

High [44]
High [44]

High

High [17]

High

Medium
Various, from low to long

Localized/hierarchical/on-
demand
High

High

Low

Very high
Very high
Very high

High

OpenFog Consortium

ETSI, 3GPP, ITU-T

-

VM, NFV, network slicing, and other virtualization technologies

Standalone only

Cloud-connected support

Both cloud-connected and stan-
dalone operation

Both cloud-connected and stan-
dalone operation

Introduced
by
Purpose

Internet
Connectivity
Service
Coverage
Latency
User
Proximity
Architecture

Storage
Capacity
Computational
Power
Power
Consumption
Availability
Scalability
Mobility
Security
Context
awareness
Local
Awareness
Standard
Organizations
Virtualization
support
Operation
Mode

Low
Low [44]
Medium
Medium

NIST

VM

computing services to LEO satellite computing services
concurrently. Therefore, aerial computing is regarded as
a full complement of terrestrial computing infrastructure,
which is usually used for localized computing services.
After analyzing these features, we draw a comparison be-
tween aerial computing and other edge computing paradigms,
as presented in Table II. Based on the above explanations,
aerial computing can support other computing concepts, such
as in-network computing and cloud-native computing. How-
ever, resource and operation constraints of aerial computing
limit its capability to enable high-performance services in in-
network computing and scalable applications in cloud-native
computing. Therefore, the integration of aerial computing with
edge computing, in-network computing, and AI techniques is
necessary to provide advanced services and applications in the
future. For example, network elements in aerial computing, as
edge devices, can partially perform computation tasks before
pushing them into the network elements (e.g., switches and

routers) for further processing. The integration shows great
potential to respond to heterogeneous network scenarios and
application requirements in 6G, but several challenges and
limitations should be addressed [45].

C. Network Design

This part explains the important models for designing and

optimizing an aerial computing system.

1) Computation Model: The ﬁrst component of aerial
computing involves computing models with the following
fundamental aspects:

• computation ofﬂoading decision,
• deployment locations of edge servers,
• collaborative and hierarchical computation.
Computation ofﬂoading decision: A computation task I
can be modeled by a tuple I = (C, D, T ), where C is the
computation workload (CPU cycles per bit), D is the task

7

LAPs, which are mainly responsible for data collection from
ground IoT users [33], [46].

2) Communication Model: The communication model
plays an important role in aerial computing systems for
guaranteeing efﬁcient communications among computing plat-
forms (e.g., between IoT devices and LAC servers). Several
communication models have been proposed for this purpose.
In the literature, orthogonal multiple access (OMA), NOMA,
and MIMO have been typically adopted for the achievable
rate formula. When OMA (e.g., time division multiple access
(TDMA), frequency division multiple access (FDMA), and
orthogonal frequency-division multiple access (OFDMA)) are
widely used for ease interference management. In addition,
there are studies on hybrid OMA-NOMA computing systems
[47]. They demonstrated that hybrid NOMA systems are
highly advantageous compared to conventional OMA systems.
Thus, the use of such hybrid OMA-NOMA approaches in
aerial computing systems is a promising approach.

3) Energy Consumption Model: Energy efﬁciency is an
important design requirement for aerial computing systems.
Energy is consumed in several aspects, including local compu-
tation, communication, remote computing, and operation. The
other part is the energy consumed by the aerial components
(i.e., aerial users and servers), which is important for designing
sustainable operations of aerial computing systems, particu-
larly LAC platforms with limited onboard batteries. However,
various factors, such as ﬂying modes, ﬂying speed, payload,
and external conditions (e.g., weather and wind speed) can
affect the energy model of aerial components. In an effort
to incorporate this, the authors of [48] modeled the power
consumption of multirotor helicopters in hover and vertical
moving modes. The power consumed by the UAV to remain
aﬂoat in the horizontal moving mode is modeled in [49]. These
models have been studied to improve the energy and power
efﬁciency of aerial computing [50]. Moreover, the possibility
of aerial computing in terms of energy and power consumption
can be realized by integrating aerial computing with emerging
technologies in 6G, as discussed in Section III.

4) Latency Model: A beneﬁt of aerial computing is the
incorporation of LEO satellite computing platforms, which
provide a global coverage but have lower latency compared
to geostationary Earth orbit (GEO) and medium Earth orbit
(MEO) platforms. As reported in [51],
the OneWeb LEO
satellite system can provide Internet services for 1 billion
users with an average latency of 30 ms. The Starlink system
promises a latency between 25 and 35 ms, while the Telesat
system aims to achieve latency from 30 to 50 ms, and the
average latency of the SpaceX system is less than 20 ms.
Moreover, positioned in the lowest tier of the comprehensive
aerial computing architecture, LAC platforms are expected to
provide much lower latency and thus are suitable for latency-
critical services. Further, in the middle tier, HAC platforms
aim to balance latency and computing service availability.
Therefore, aerial computing can provide computing services
with different latency requirements while offering desirable
features, such as mobility, availability, scalability, ﬂexibility,
and simultaneity.

Other latency sources in aerial computing include com-

Fig. 2. Collaborative computation between LAC and HAC platforms.

size (bits), and T is the completion time deadline (seconds).
Fundamentally, an ofﬂoading decision results in either local
computing at the devices, full execution at the edge server, or
partial ofﬂoading at both. In the case of partial ofﬂoading, the
task size D is divided into smaller parts for local execution and
remote execution at the edge servers and/or nearby devices.

Deployment location: Computation in aerial computing may
have the following deployment location possibilities: 1) local
devices, 2) terrestrial edge servers, 3) LAC servers, 4) HAC
servers, 5) LEO satellites, and 6) centralized clouds. Each
deployment location of the edge servers has both advantages
and disadvantages. For example, the ﬁrst scheme (i.e., local
computing at the end devices) does not incur any transmission
latency, but poor computing resources render it unsuitable
for many emerging applications and new services, such as
extended reality (XR) and smart cities. Further, computation
and content caching at the satellite computing platforms (e.g.,
LEO satellites) is highly beneﬁcial to applications with users
in remote areas (e.g., mountains and islands) but might result
in a higher latency and hardware cost compared to those of
terrestrial computing and LAC/HAC platforms [24], [40].

Collaborative and hierarchical computation: However, re-
liance on only an aerial computing node/platform (i.e., LAC
or HAC only) to perform emerging compute-intensive applica-
tions is highly impractical. This is due to the onboard energy
limitations of LAC platforms, intermittent harvested energy
of HAC platforms, and hardware cost of satellite computing
platforms for big data applications. The synergy between LAC
and HAC platforms in aerial computing systems is discussed
in [33]; herein, it is illustrated in Fig. 2. In such a scenario, the
more powerful HAC platform and ﬁxed-wing LAPs can assist
the long-term operation and computation tasks of rotary-wing

Layer 0: Ground IoT usersLayer 1: LAC platformLayer 2: HAC platformUAV                                     IoT devices: sensory dataLAC platform: data collection from IoT devicesHAC platform: processes the computation tasks received from the LAC platformLAC platform: offloads the tasks to the HAC platform for remote executionputation, queuing, and fronthaul and backhaul transmission.
Latency also occurs when the server executes the computation
task remotely and broadcasts the processed results to the
users in the downlink. Consequently, aiming to minimize
the maximum latency among users, [52] investigated a joint
problem of two-dimensional LAC placement, fronthaul and
backhaul bandwidth allocation, computing resource allocation,
and caching decision. Further, in [53], the joint optimization
of task allocation, scheduling, power control, and LAC server
trajectory was studied to minimize the total energy consump-
tion. To manage the latency requirement, the LAC server must
execute a minimum number of bits ofﬂoaded from each user.

D. Summary

This section presents the system architecture of aerial
computing, fundamental features, and key design aspects.
Complementing conventional terrestrial computing systems,
the proposed aerial computing framework provides computing
services to massive IoT users worldwide. Compared to other
edge computing paradigms, aerial computing offers several
desirable features, such as mobility, availability, scalability,
ﬂexibility, and simultaneity. Moreover, four key design aspects
of aerial computing have been reviewed, namely, computation,
communication, energy consumption, and latency. Because
many emerging applications will be available in the near
future, more thorough investigations are required to explore
the potential advantages of aerial computing.

III. ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES

Enabling technologies of aerial computing are presented in
this section. These technologies include network softwariza-
tion, energy reﬁlling, edge computing, frequency spectrum,
multi-access techniques, AI, and big data. To enrich the
understanding of the integration of aerial computing with
enabling technologies, we illustrate the manner in which
enabling technologies support aerial computing in Fig. 3.

A. Network Softwarization

Virtualization has enabled network operators to design,
implement, and manage systems and network services with
improved efﬁciency. NFV and SDN are two promising tech-
nologies that facilitate virtualization. NFV decouples net-
work functions from proprietary hardware (e.g., ﬁrewalls and
routers), thereby providing equivalent network functionality
with general-purpose servers. SDN separates the control plane
from the forwarding plane, thereby enabling network operators
to conﬁgure and manage network functions in a centralized
manner through the software. Other commonly used virtu-
alization technologies include network slicing and VM. We
brieﬂy introduce the fundamentals of these technologies and
thereafter discuss their application in aerial computing.

1) Network Function Virtualization: The concept of NFV
was ﬁrst proposed in 2012, with an aim to reduce the capital
and operating expenses of telecom networks, as well as to
facilitate the deployment of new services. Its primary idea is
to decompose the network functions from physical network

8

equipment via virtualized network functions (VNFs). A typical
NFV architecture consists of three main elements: infrastruc-
ture, management, and orchestration. The NFV infrastructure
represents computing, storage, and network hardware as well
as software (abstractions of physical resources) resources
constituting the environment where VNFs are deployed. In
addition, a VNF is an implementation of a network function,
for example, a ﬁrewall, deployed on virtual resources such
as VMs. Furthermore, NFV-Management and Orchestration
(MANO) is the management and orchestration framework
needed to provide the VNFs.

NFV provides many opportunities for network service pro-
visioning, e.g., independent deployment and maintenance of
software and hardware, ﬂexible and agile service deployment,
and dynamic resource allocation. Therefore, NFV can beneﬁt
aerial computing. For instance, NFV can allocate additional re-
sources from another LAC/HAC/satellite computing platform
to alleviate computing congestion in one platform.

2) Software-Deﬁned Networking: SDN is an emerging net-
work architecture that intelligently controls the network by
decoupling the control plane and efﬁciently managing the
network via programming operations [54]. Driven by its key
features, including separated control plane and data plane,
centralized controller, open interfaces, and programmable op-
erations, an SDN can intelligently operate the network at a
low operating cost. Thus, it can support intelligent applications
through simpliﬁed hardware, software, and management [8].
Despite these advantages, SDN has several key challenges in
the 6G network: 1) efﬁcient and intelligent maintenance of
the dynamic network topology [55], 2) intelligent network
management and orchestration via AI/ML, and 3) trafﬁc
engineering with heterogeneous QoS requirements [56].

In aerial computing, wireless networks support heteroge-
neous IoT devices/users, LAC/HAC platforms, 6G technolo-
gies, and conﬁguration interfaces. SDN can provide logically
centralized control by abstracting the underlying network
infrastructure. For instance, SDN controllers can handle aerial-
computing-related VNFs and VMs as another type of resource
that can be dynamically managed. Therefore, SDN can provide
an efﬁcient solution for managing aerial computing systems
and services.

3) Network Slicing: Network slicing is a virtualization
technology that allows multiple logical networks (slices) to run
on a uniﬁed physical network infrastructure [57]. Each logical
network is independently conﬁgured to satisfy the required
network characteristics, such as bandwidth, delay, and capac-
ity, to provide diverse services of expected scenarios. Each
logical network also contains computing and storage resources
that are capable of realizing speciﬁc network functions via
NFV or service function chains. In contrast, VM can provide
ﬁne-grained control
to instantiate and terminate tasks and
processes at any time without affecting the hardware on aerial
platforms. Each VM shares computing, storage, memory, and
network resources from aerial computing systems, while its
operation is entirely isolated from that of the host and guest
VMs. Further, AI/ML can be employed to intelligently allocate
virtual resources of VMs in aerial computing.

In aerial computing, network slicing can be utilized to

9

Fig. 3.

Integration of aerial computing with enabling technologies.

slice the entire network into individual networks considering
computing services and IoT services, which can be optimized
by speciﬁc requirements and services. However, an AI-enabled
intelligent management and orchestration framework should be
designed to efﬁciently support network slicing in 6G networks.

B. Energy Reﬁlling

1) Energy Harvesting: Energy harvesting is a novel ap-
proach to utilize renewable energy sources. For example, solar
energy can be converted into electric energy by deploying
photovoltaic (PV) cells on UAVs, and the electric energy
can be stored in rechargeable batteries [58]. However, natural
energy sources are highly dependent on climate variability. For
instance, solar power harvesting can be severely affected by
weather conditions.

Some non-electromagnetic ﬁeld-based charging technolo-
gies have been used, including gust soaring, PV arrays, laser
beaming, and battery dumping [59]. Dynamic soaring involves
harvesting energy from wind and airﬂow by adjusting the
trajectory of UAVs to prolong their ﬂying duration [60]. For
PV arrays, solar irradiation energy is harvested by PV cells to
power a drone or recharge its battery, which is used for the
operation during the night. This technology can be applied
to ﬁxed-wing drones because a certain amount of space is
needed for PV panels. In laser-beaming technology, a laser
fed by an external source of energy produces a concentrated
and streamlined beam of light with a certain frequency to the
speciﬁc PV cells on a drone. The PV cell can then convert the
laser beam into energy to recharge the battery of the drone.

2) Wireless Power Transfer: Another popular application of
energy harvesting is that energy is usually harvested from am-
bient radio frequency electromagnetic signals. In simultaneous
wireless and information power transfer (SWIPT), energy can
be harvested, usually partially, from the transmitted signals via
power switching or time switching techniques. A strong user
with a high channel gain can forward data to a weak user with
a low channel gain by using the harvested energy from the
transmitted signals. Wireless power communication networks
(WPCNs) are used to harvest energy from radio transmission,
wherein sequential energy is transferred wirelessly to the
intended users, which supports dedicated wireless charging
[61]. Aerial components at different computing platforms (e.g.,
UAVs at the LAC platform and balloons at the HAC platform)
have been proposed to be integrated with WPCN. This ﬂexible
implementation allows aerial components to be charged or
to charge a set of ground users, thus providing sustainable
solutions for aerial computing systems [62], [63]. Besides,
aerial components can be equipped with solar-powered cells
and large energy storage to store energy harvested from solar
powers in the environment.

Wireless power transfer (WPT) has been proven to provide
power for UAVs wirelessly without landing for energy re-
fueling [64]. Moreover, the coordination of LAC servers at
the LAC platform and edge servers on different platforms
(i.e., LAC, HAC, and satellite) is a promising approach
to better provide computing services over large-scale areas
[63]. Since WPT from the air is quite limited due to the
severe path loss, many factors (e.g., antenna size) need to be
considered for practical implementation. To further support

InternetFrequencyPowerNFV InfrastructureEnergy harvestingIRSNOMAAI and Big dataVertical Domain ApplicationsAI/MLMassive MIMONOMANOMANOMATHz /Sub 6GHzAI AI/MLAI/MLTHz /Sub 6GHzlow-power IoT/mobile devices, emerging technologies, such
as backscatter communications and IRS, can be deployed. For
example, [65] considered IoT devices as backscatter-assisted
users, which harvest energy from the ground gateway to
perform computation ofﬂoading. Similarly, aerial components
can assist
low-power users in performing necessary data
transmissions and computation tasks.

C. Frequency Spectrum

1) Sub-6 GHz and mmWave: To meet the extremely high
data rate requirements of 5G systems, high-frequency spec-
trum bands are exploited. In particular, millimeter waves
(mmWave) can provide gigabit-per-second data rates owing
to the radio frequency spectrum in the range of 30–300 GHz,
whereas the sub-6 GHz range can provide large coverage with
high cost efﬁciency with a spectrum band below 6 GHz [66].
Driven by the increase in IoT devices, such as XR services en-
compassing AR, mixed reality, and VR, some studies proposed
the integration of mmWave and Sub-6 GHz to balance the
high data rate and large coverage in next-generation wireless
communication systems. Speciﬁcally, mmWave can be used in
tiny cells for mobile and ﬁxed access, whereas sub-6 GHz can
be used in small cells. For example, the use of the mmWave
band in aerial computing was considered in [67], wherein a
hierarchical architecture of a satellite computing server, two
terrestrial MEC servers, and a set of vehicles was considered.
in the frequency range
of 0.1–10 THz, has been explored in the next-generation
wireless communication systems to achieve the terabits per
second data rate with low latency. Potential use cases for
THz communications include close proximity communication,
extremely high data rates for indoor communications, and
wireless backhauling and fronthauling technologies. Thus,
THz can be utilized in LoS and high data transmission among
aerial components in aerial computing systems [68].

2) THz: Terahertz (THz) band,

3) Other High-Frequency Bands: At WRC-12, the ITU
identiﬁed the C-band for the use of control and non-payload
communication. The C-band refers to a frequency range of
4–8 GHz and is used primarily for satellite communications.
Moreover, the K-band in the frequency range of 14–27 GHz
is typically used for short-range communications owing to
the high atmospheric attenuation. The K-band can be used
in satellite communications, astronomical observations, and
radar. Radars in this frequency range provide a short range
and high throughput.

D. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Big Data Analytics

AI technology aims to train machines to perform human
tasks. It has been applied to various areas, such as image
recognition, robotic vehicles, machine translation, and game
AI. Further, ML, which is a promising subset of the AI
intelligence
technique to learn from the data and impart
to existing systems, has been employed to render wireless
communication and networks highly efﬁcient and adaptable.
Intelligent wireless network can provide efﬁcient support for
aerial computing. The advantage of applying ML in wireless
network operation is that it enables the network to monitor,

10

learn, and predict various communication-related parameters,
such as wireless channels, trafﬁc patterns, user context, and
device locations. In general, ML algorithms include supervised
learning, unsupervised learning, reinforcement learning (RL),
deep learning (DL), deep reinforcement learning (DRL), and
federated learning (FL) [69].

1) Supervised Learning/Unsupervised Learning: In super-
vised learning algorithms, both the input and desired outputs of
the used datasets are available. However, supervised learning
algorithms can only be employed in scenarios with sufﬁcient
labeled data, for example, classiﬁcation. In contrast, in unsu-
pervised learning, the dataset used for training does not include
labeled output or target values. The purpose of unsupervised
learning is to extract key features of the data for better
prediction. Further, unsupervised learning algorithms can be
applied to scenarios, such as clustering based on the available
data. In aerial computing, supervised learning/unsupervised
learning can be used for user clustering/grouping to provide
better service.

2) Deep Learning: DL algorithms have been developed
to deal with complex input–output mappings. DL consists
of multiple layers for feature extraction and transformation.
DL can be used for in-depth analysis in a complex scenario
with massive data and to realize different control schemes for
different protocol layers. For example, in [70], DL was used
to classify cloud images captured by satellite clouds in aerial
computing systems.

3) Reinforcement Learning: The main idea of RL is to train
the agent to generate actions according to the current environ-
ment. In RL, the problems are solved by employing a sequence
of actions that use the trial-and-error rule. RL algorithms
have been extensively used in wireless network optimization
to obtain the optimal policy, for example, user grouping
decisions or actions. DRL is a DL framework developed
based on RL; it relies on updated samples in practice instead
of the ideal transition probability in theory. DRL involves
learning from the feedback that evaluates the actions taken
rather than learning from the correct actions. DRL algorithms
have been applied to wireless networks for multiple aspects,
including mobile networking, resource allocation, schedular
design, and routing [71]. Furthermore, it can promptly make
a decision under dynamically changing network conditions,
such as channel state information [72].

4) Federated Learning: FL is an AI approach that enables
users to collaboratively learn a shared model with data main-
tained on their own devices [73]. In contrast to a standard
ML algorithm that requires a centralized training dataset in the
data center, FL allows devices to train a learning model locally
and transmit the training parameters instead. Thus, it addresses
concerns, such as user privacy and limited data transmission
resources (e.g., bandwidth) [62], [73]. A potential application
of aerial computing for FL-enabled wireless networks is aerial
is, a computing server (e.g., LAC,
aggregation [74];
HAC, and satellite computing) in aerial computing acts as the
aerial server and performs model aggregation in the air, as
shown in Fig. 4(a)]. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 4(b), aerial
computing can extend the learning coverage of terrestrial FL-
enabled networks, particularly when certain obstacles prevent

that

11

Fig. 4. Applications of aerial computing for FL-enabled wireless systems [2].

model updating and broadcasting between FL users and the
aggregation server. Further, aerial components (e.g., LAC,
HAC, and satellites) can be FL users, which train local AI
models and share updates with the central cloud [75].

5) Big Data: The features of big data have been commonly
described by ﬁve “V”s: volume, variety, velocity, veracity, and
value. Certain attempts have been undertaken to apply big
data analytics to wireless communications [76]. The increas-
ing complexity of networks and complicated wireless trafﬁc
patterns make big data analytics appealing. ML algorithms
coupled with edge computing can be used to process big data
in 6G [77]. MEC has become the primary computing method
for big data analysis in heterogeneous 6G.

AI and big data, combined with other enabling technologies
mentioned in this section, have been widely introduced to
aerial computing in 6G owing to the advantages of intelligent
management and automatic self-improvement. In particular,
AI/ML can be used in intelligent UAV/drone trajectory design,
virtual resource management, data processing, task computa-
tion, and channel estimation. In addition, AI and big data can
be used in NFV and SDN-based networks to achieve intelligent
network management and optimization [78]. RL approaches
have also been conducted to improve resource utilization and
service provision [79]. Further, advantages of the other ML
techniques, such as meta learning and transfer learning, can be
exploited. For example, the beneﬁts of transfer learning with
knowledge preprocessing in LAC systems have been demon-
strated in [80]. However, major challenges should be answered
to further improve the effectiveness of transfer learning in
heterogeneous aerial computing systems. More speciﬁcally, we
need to determine the source agent and transferred knowledge,
and optimize scheduling and resources.

Certain challenges need to be addressed to realize aerial
computing in 6G, including data security/privacy, learning efﬁ-
ciency, communication cost, and the tradeoff between learning
accuracy and convergence. AI/ML is recognized as the most
promising solution for providing intelligent wireless commu-

nications and signal processing computation task control for
increasingly complex and heterogeneous networks.

E. Other Wireless Techniques

1) Non-orthogonal Multiple Access: NOMA is considered
a promising technology in 5G and beyond owing to its high
spectrum efﬁciency and massive connectivity. It is broadly
classiﬁed into two categories: power-domain NOMA and
code-domain NOMA. Power-domain NOMA uses the power
domain for multiple access, whereas code-domain NOMA
exploits sparse code for multiple access. NOMA can support
more users than the number of available subcarriers, thereby
improving wireless communication performance with multiple
features,
low latency, high
spectral efﬁciency, and high energy efﬁciency.

including massive connectivity,

• First, as NOMA enables multiple users to be multiplexed
on the same channel simultaneously, it is suitable for a
scenario with a large number of connections (e.g., IoT
applications). Therefore, NOMA can be applied in aerial
computing to support multiple devices/users to ofﬂoad
their tasks to aerial servers, as shown in Fig. 3.

• Second, compared with OMA where users must wait until
a resource block is available to transmit or receive data,
NOMA can provide grant-free transmission with ﬂexible
scheduling. Therefore, the ofﬂoading/downloading delay
of the devices/users in aerial computing can be signiﬁ-
cantly reduced.

• Third, NOMA can achieve higher spectral efﬁciency and
user fairness than OMA [86]. Further, NOMA users
can utilize the entire frequency bands for transmission,
whereas OMA users can only use a fraction of the entire
spectrum for communication. In aerial computing, high
spectrum efﬁciency can also be achieved in the communi-
cations between LAC/HAC platforms when using a high-
frequency spectrum [67].

2) Massive MIMO: The concept of massive MIMO has
spec-

been proposed to drastically increase data rates,

FL UsersLocal trainingModel aggregation in the airLAC platformLocal dataAerial serverLocal dataMEC ServerSatellite computing platformObstaclesTerrestrial BSAerial relayGround stationLocal dataHAPa) FL model aggregation in the airb) FL model relaying in the air12

Category

Network
Softwarization
[54]–[56],
[81]–[83]

Energy Reﬁlling
[58], [59], [61],
[63], [84], [85]

Frequency
Spectrum [66],
[68]

Enabler
NFV
VM
Network slicing
SDN
Energy harvest-
ing
WPT
and WPCNs)
Sub-6 GHz
THz
C-Band K-Band

(SWIPT

Multiple Access
Techniques
[86]–[90]

NOMA

Massive MIMO

AI/Big Data
Analytics [69],
[71]–[73],
[76]–[79]

IRS

ML
DL
RL

FL

Big data
analytics

TABLE III
SUMMARY OF ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES OF AERIAL COMPUTING.

Advantages
High ﬂexibility and low operational cost
Sufﬁcient computing resources
Flexibility, resource efﬁciency and Security
High ﬂexibility and low operational cost
Ambient natural energy source

Key Challenges
Service heterogeneity
Intelligent management of virtual resources
Intelligent management and orchestration framework design
SDN controller placement
Highly dependent on weather conditions

Harvest energy from radio transmission

High bandwidth and high data rate
High bandwidth and high data rate
Satellite communications and high through-
put
High spectral efﬁciency and massive con-
nectivity
High statistical multiplexing gain and high
spectral efﬁciency
High channel gain and low implementation
costs
Automatic features, predictions
Automatic features, predictions
Generate optimal decisions in a dynamic en-
vironment and require the Markovian model
and high computation
Protects user data privacy

Prediction of user preference distribution

Trade-off between harvested energy and consumed power and
joint resource allocation
Severe attenuation and blockage and low range
Severe attenuation and blockage and low range
Atmospheric attenuation

Decoding complexity for multiple users

High implementation cost, intelligent environment adaption
and channel prediction
Intelligent optimization of IRS

Computational complexity
Computational complexity
High dimensionality of the states and action spaces

Communication cost and tradeoff between learning accuracy
and convergence
Feature extraction and data modeling

tral/energy efﬁciency, and coverage of wireless networks by
aggressive spatial multiplexing. In massive MIMO, a BS
equipped with a few hundred antenna arrays serves tens of
users simultaneously. It is considered a promising technology
in 6G owing to the following advantages [87].

wireless environment, and 3) limitation in channel prediction.
Equipped with full-dimensional large arrays, ground BSs can
apply adaptive ﬁne-grained 3D beamforming to mitigate the
strong interference between high-altitude UAVs and low-
altitude terrestrial users.

• Multiplexing gain: Aggressive spatial multiplexing can
increase the data rate dramatically in the spatial domain.
Further, the ofﬂoading delay of the computation task is
signiﬁcantly reduced for remote aerial computing.

• Energy/spectral efﬁciency: The energy efﬁciency can be
improved via massive MIMO as it is inversely propor-
tional to the number of antennas at the BS.

• Increased robustness: Due to a large number of antennas,
the propagation channel provides additional diversity
gains, which also increases the link reliability. Thus,
MIMO can provide reliable links in aerial computing,
where the uncorrelated noise and intra-cell interference
can vanish with an increasing number of antennas.

Various multiple access technologies, such as OMA and
NOMA, can be combined with massive MIMO to further
improve the communication performance [91]. In massive
MIMO-OMA systems, the maximum ratio combing and zero-
forcing can be utilized to achieve a high spectral efﬁciency in
underloaded systems. However, some studies proposed mas-
sive MIMO-NOMA to support a large number of users; that is,
the overloaded system, and to meet the massive connectivity
requirement of 6G [89]. However, there exist challenges for the
realization of massive MIMO, which are the 1) deployment of
extremely large antenna arrays, 2) adaptation to the intelligent

3) Intelligent Reﬂecting Surface: IRS has been proposed as
a promising technology in 6G to alter the wireless channel by
intelligently adjusting the amplitude and/or phase shift of each
element of the IRS [90]. Extensive deployment of IRSs in the
wireless network and smart coordination of the reﬂections can
result in the ﬂexible reconﬁguration of the wireless channels
between transmitters and receivers to expand the commu-
nication coverage and improve the wireless communication
capacity and reliability. IRS has various advantages.

• Low cost: The reﬂecting elements of IRS are low-cost
printed dipoles, which only passively reﬂect the signal
without transmitting the signal.

• Full-duplex mode: Different from the traditional relay
system with half-duplex relay, IRS can work in a full-
duplex mode.

• Auxiliary device: IRS has great ﬂexibility and compati-
bility to be integrated into the existing wireless networks
such as WiFi or cellular.

Thus, IRS can be massively deployed in wireless networks
and combined with other promising technologies, such as
NOMA [92], massive MIMO, and UAVs. However, IRS is
still in its nascent stages, and certain potential challenges
need to be addressed: 1) The deployment of IRS, especially
for air computing, the location IRS can signiﬁcantly affect

the channel condition for data transmission; 2) The reﬂection
of IRS is sensitive to the angle of arrival, which affects the
channel model of the IRS in practice [90].

IRS can be applied in various scenarios to improve the
communication performance [68]. The most important task
for aerial computing is to prolong the battery life of UAVs,
LAC servers, and IoT devices. Energy harvesting or WPT
techniques can be implemented using IRS to overcome the
high-power loss over long distances. For example, a highly
efﬁcient energy charging zone can be created by deploying
IRSs in the proximity of devices or UAVs. In addition, if
IRSs are deployed on UAVs, the UAVs can ﬂexibly establish
strong LoS links with the ground nodes to improve the
communication quality for aerial computation task ofﬂoading
and downloading.

F. Summary and Discussion

In this section, we have presented a set of enabling tech-
nologies of aerial computing. Table III presents a summary of
the enabling technologies and their advantages and challenges.
These technologies can be ﬂexibly implemented in future
6G networks to efﬁciently provide fast computing services,
better mobility, and higher scalability and availability. Further,
these technologies can facilitate the process of addressing
challenges, such as intelligent communication and computa-
tion resource allocation design, joint optimization of UAV
trajectory and placement design, user association and grouping
design, and secure computing and communications. However,
certain challenges need to be addressed, as highlighted below.
• Intelligent Control: The cooperation of enabling tech-
nologies should allow for intelligence in aerial comput-
ing. The joint intelligent optimization of computing re-
sources (LAC, HAC, and satellite computing platforms),
communication link design with different multi-access
techniques, and network control/scheduling can be inves-
tigated in future studies.

• Secure Control: For aerial computing, the user data need
to be transmitted and shared with the aerial server, which
leads to security concerns and data transmission over-
head. Therefore, FL and blockchain can be exploited to
protect data privacy and improve security by transmitting
the training parameter to the server for global aggregation
[93], [94].

• Aerial Intelligence: AC, HAC, and satellite computing
platforms can enable aerial
intelligence by collecting
surrounding data and then executing onboard intelligent
algorithms. The aims of intelligent algorithms include
autonomous collision avoidance, adaptive ﬂight gesture
adjustment, and trajectory optimization for data collec-
tion. Therefore, the design of intelligent algorithms can
efﬁciently support aerial computing in terms of energy
savings, large coverage, delay minimization, etc.

IV. VERTICAL DOMAIN APPLICATIONS

Aerial computing is expected to serve different vertical do-
main applications that require service provision from different
perspectives. In this section, we explore the impact of aerial

13

computing on relevant domains: smart cities, smart vehicles,
manufacturing, and smart grids.

A. Smart City

The IoT involves all devices that are connected to the
Internet on Earth. Due to the potential of these devices in
improving the quality of human lives, they are sensitive to
latency, storage, bandwidth, and security. With the increasing
popularity of the IoT, cities are becoming smarter, and the
concept of smart cities is gaining traction and a new dimen-
sion. Aerial computing can aid in better understanding the
potential of the IoT in developing new strategies for smart
cities, thus reducing costs and improving safety. Furthermore,
new endeavors, such as 5Gcity [95] and SynchroniCity [96],
can help realize the idea of a future city. According to [95],
there are four possible major themes in smart cities, which
are data communication and processing, MEC support, urban
planning and management, and surveillance and security. In
Fig. 5, we provide an example of a smart city through the use
of aerial computing technologies.

1) Data Communication and Processing: With embedded
multiple sensors, LACs, HACs, and satellite computing plat-
forms have great potential for sensing data in IoT environ-
ments and providing social services to smart cities. In [97],
the authors proposed a joint scheme of 3D placement, com-
putation, and communication resource allocation for multiple
HACs in an uplink IoT network, where the task distribution
among HACs and communication resources were considered.
The solution scheme was developed based on the K-means
method, a Hungarian-based algorithm, and an iterative method.
The simulation results illustrate that the total transmission
power of the IoT nodes is signiﬁcantly minimized through
the proposed algorithm. In [98], a technique referred to as
AirComp was developed to receive data from multiple sen-
sors simultaneously by utilizing the superposition property of
multi-access channels, as shown in Fig. 5. A near-optimal
equalizer was derived using differential geometry to facilitate
multimodal sensing technology in the proposed technique.
Finally, an efﬁcient channel feedback mechanism was designed
to facilitate the acquisition of the entire channel information
from many sensors simultaneously. In [99], a novel and
efﬁcient control algorithm for LACs was proposed to manage
sensing and their movement using DRL techniques. The pro-
posed method extracts features using the convolutional neural
network (CNN) and infers decisions following the multi-agent
deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) method. However,
swarms of LACs and HACs may face difﬁculties owing
to their limited storage and computation capacities during
crowd sensing. To resolve this issue, in [100], edge/cloud
computing technologies were introduced to the swarm for
enhancing their QoS. Based on a case study of latency-
critical applications, their simulation results illustrated that
the proposed approach could effectively improve the QoS of
the swarm servicing entity. Furthermore, to enhance the poor
coverage of information-centric IoT networks, the authors of
[101] optimized the coverage of such a network via LACs and
HACs at a low cost. The proposed scheme was designed based

14

a fairness-aware task distribution and trajectory optimization
scheme in LAC systems, in which a ﬁxed-wing LAC played
the role of a ﬂying computing server for mobile terminals.
Under fairness consideration, the authors aimed to minimize
the maximum energy consumption of all mobile terminals.
The non-convex problem was converted into a convex one,
and an iterative algorithm was proposed to solve the problem.
Further, under the assumption that the communication between
the LAC and mobile terminals followed the NOMA technol-
ogy, the authors in [106] proposed an iterative algorithm to
minimize the maximum energy consumption of all mobile
terminals by controlling the trajectory, task data, and com-
puting resources in an adaptive manner. The simulation results
illustrated that the proposed algorithm could effectively reduce
the highest energy consumption among mobile terminals while
considering the fairness issue. The work in [107] introduced
a highly diversiﬁed urban scenario, which was served by
multiple LAC servers. Two non-convex programming prob-
lems were sequentially formulated to optimize the delay and
energy performance of uplink and downlink communication
scenarios for AR applications, which were solved by convex
approximation techniques. Through experiments, the authors
veriﬁed that the proposed network model could serve cellular
users in a satisfactory manner.

3) Urban Planning and Management: Extracting building
anatomy through remote sensing technologies is crucial for
urban planning and management. Considering diverse scales
the authors of [108]
and appearances, assisted by HACs,
proposed an automatic method to extract building instances.
The proposed HAC unit consisted of an improved hybrid
task cascade method, which had three components for three
different consecutive tasks: high-resolution representation, def-
inition of guided anchor, and formation of focal loss. Com-
prehensive experiments on a real dataset revealed that the
proposed method was shown to perform better compared to the
conventional R-CNN method in terms of extracting building
instances. As of the LAC server, in [109], a target tracking
algorithm to locate LAC-captured targets, such as pedestrians
and vehicles, was proposed using the sparse representation
theory. Upon implementation with real data, the results prove
that the proposed tracker can achieve better performance com-
pared with existing tracking algorithms. Further, to monitor
urban environments, the authors of [110] proposed the use of
heterogeneous aerial computing (e.g., LACs, HACs, and satel-
lite computing) and investigated a collaborative methodology
to share the workload. A simple illustration picture of this
collaboration feature is provided in Fig. 5. For a particular
set of degrees of freedom (e.g., a number of tasks and
vehicles), an efﬁcient algorithm was proposed to maximize the
overall weight of completed tasks. Through simulations, the
authors determined that the proposed algorithm signiﬁcantly
outperformed the other heuristic algorithms.

With the growing trend of industrialization, air pollution
has reached a signiﬁcant level in urban areas. Consequently,
monitoring air pollution has become a matter of great concern
in recent years. To this end, the authors of [111] presented
an efﬁcient and cost-effective air quality monitoring system
using LACs and HACs. The three major aspects of the system

Fig. 5.

Illustration of a smart city using aerial computing.

on an improved rolling horizon strategy (IRHS). Through
comprehensive experiments compared to previous studies, the
authors demonstrated that the proposed scheme can improve
the coverage ratio (by 21.42%) and reduce the cost ratio (by
13.335% to 34.32%).

Aiming to track a moving target using synthetic aperture
radar (SAR) based on compressive sensing technology, the
authors of [102] considered applying the multi-channel pro-
cessing technique to the SAR computation unit. Because of the
joint consideration of the magnitude and phase, the proposed
weight-adjusted sparse algorithm in the computing unit could
improve the performance of clutter suppression. In another
work [103], the same authors determined a different method to
track moving targets with the assistance of compensated target
motion in the SAR computing unit. The motion compensation
procedure in the SAR computing unit consisted of two steps:
the SPECAN processing was ﬁrst applied to the frequency
and azimuth domain, and then the correction of the residual
component was incorporated into the sparse imaging outcome.
Further, the authors also overcame the challenges associated
with the motion of the target and the imaging of multiple mov-
ing targets using a novel parametric sparse imaging approach
and an orthogonal matching pursuit method, respectively.

2) MEC Support: In [104], a novel online HAC-assisted
edge server management scheme was proposed to provide
ﬂexible edge computing services. Several hot-spot areas were
extrapolated by geographically merging the tasks, and the
corresponding HACs were dispatched to the appropriate lo-
cations for the necessary service. A simple illustration of this
use case is provided in Fig. 5. Through extensive simulation
with real-world data, the authors showed that the proposed
mobile server dispatching scheme could serve more users with
a high utilization of resources. The authors of [105] proposed

Multimodal-Sensing AirCompRoad Network ExtractionCollaborative Service using BlockchainUrban Tree Inventory MonitoringAir Quality MonitoringMEC ServicesVideo SurveillanceMEC serverTerrestrial BSproposed in [111] were data processing, deployment, and
power control. The system was deployed at Peking University
and Xidian University, and about 100,000 samples have been
collected since February 2018. A partial illustration of this
system is provided in Fig. 5. Using a 360-degree panoramic
camera in HACs, the authors of [112] designed a novel air
quality indicator (AQI) monitoring system, AQ360, to detect
the air quality level (shown in Fig. 5). Upon solving the
recognition problem of images, they optimized the placement
of the corresponding LAC to achieve the optimal outcome.
Through the implementation of the system under realistic
scenarios, they showed that the system can perform better
compared to existing studies in terms of AQI recognition error
and energy consumption. Further, using microwave downlink
sensor networks, the authors of [113] studied a rainfall moni-
toring system via a satellite computing platform. The proposed
method was implemented in the satellite computing unit, and it
was compared with the Ligurian regional tipping-bucket rain
gauge (TBRG) network at a city in Italy. The performance
of these two types of monitoring systems was found to be
similar, based on the rain events that occurred over the time
period between January 2017 and December 2018.

Fine-grained driving lines are crucial components of high-
deﬁnition maps for the smooth operation of autonomous
vehicles. To this end, the authors of [114] presented a semi-
automated driving line generation method utilizing a mobile
laser scanning computing system, as shown in Fig. 5. Through
simulations on real datasets, the authors demonstrated that
the proposed method achieved an average recall, precision,
and F1-score of 90.79%, 92.94%, and 91.85%, respectively.
Further, using the same mobile laser point clouds, the authors
of [115] proposed an image-translation-based method to ob-
tain the 3D vectors of typical road markings, as shown in
Fig. 5). Another method for extracting road networks using a
satellite computing platform was proposed in [116], wherein
a novel aperiodic directional structure measurement (ADSM)
technique was adopted. In contrast, to facilitate city planning
via swarms of fully automated LACs, the authors of [117] pro-
posed a holistic distributed framework equipped with various
effective and efﬁcient skills, which could be adjusted based
on the requirements of the LACs and environments. Through
experiments, the authors demonstrated that a swarm of LACs
equipped with the proposed framework could effectively sat-
isfy the requirements of diverse applications. The authors of
[118] presented an efﬁcient framework for extrapolating urban
tree inventories by using 3D point clouds acquired by a HAC-
borne laser scanning system (shown in Fig. 5). The high-level
processing steps of the proposed HAC framework are individ-
ual tree cluster extraction, geometric parameter estimation, and
tree species classiﬁcation. Through experiments, the authors
demonstrated that the detection accuracy of the roadside tree
was over 93% with an average error of approximately 5%,
and the overall classiﬁcation accuracy was approximately
78%. Another application of the point clouds collected by
the computing system is the modeling of an underground
parking lot [119]. The method utilized in the HAC consists of
two parts: a joint localization and mapping algorithm based
on sparse point clouds and a semantic modeling algorithm.

15

The results from comprehensive experiments indicated that the
proposed algorithm achieves centimeter-level accuracy with a
precision of 84.8%.

4) Surveillance and Security: The concept of a smart city is
vulnerable to security and privacy issues since the collection,
dissemination, management, and processing of data in aerial
computing platforms can be interrupted by malicious users.
Thus, evidenced by certain existing reports, we discuss the
way in which aerial computing platforms (e.g., LACs, HACs,
and satellites) could be the means of resolving security and
privacy issues in smart cities.

With the assistance of 3D simulation and a set of robot
operating system-equipped LACs, the authors of [120] demon-
strated an autonomous navigation system to control the phys-
ical security of smart buildings. The results from the ex-
periments indicated that the proposed approach achieves an
acceptable level of accuracy in terms of mapping the indoor
environment of smart buildings. In [121], a novel framework
was proposed to monitor suspicious links by utilizing the
characteristics of LACs. Particularly, the system consists of
a suspicious transmission link and an LAC unit for mon-
itoring. Further, in the LAC system, the wireless resource
allocation problems, including trajectory planning and energy
minimization, can be solved using the popular successive
convex approximation method.

Video surveillance applications are associated with several
challenges in smart cities, such as scalability, integrity, and
latency. In [122], a series of optimal scheduling and control
algorithms were designed to address these challenges. A
network with full coverage was established via an LAC cluster,
and the scheduling problem was solved using the bi-objective
fragile bin packing technique. Thereafter, extensive simula-
tions with realistic parameter settings were conducted, and the
effectiveness of the proposed scheme was veriﬁed in terms of
many systems and video-speciﬁc performance metrics. The
authors of [123] introduced a surveillance model for a multi-
domain IoT environment using heterogeneous smart HACs and
LACs (shown in Fig. 5). A heuristic method was used to
minimize the maximum movement of LACs while avoiding
collisions among them. Extensive simulations were conducted
considering heterogeneous scenarios with multiple HACs and
LACs to verify the merits of the proposed method.

In addition to limited storage and computation power,
security and privacy are two of the alarming concerns for data
dissemination schemes in aerial environments. To this end, the
authors of [124] presented a low-cost computationally efﬁcient
short proxy signature (CB-PS) scheme for the LAC server,
which was oblivious to secret key information in conventional
ID-based schemes. To further enhance the security of such
tasks, the authors of [125], presented a novel blockchain-based
strategy to facilitate multi-party authentication among multiple
LACs and HACs. Speciﬁcally, this strategy is useful for P2P
and group communications among LACs and HACs while
ensuring the efﬁciency of data dissemination. Through com-
prehensive experiments and simulations, the authors veriﬁed
the merit of the proposed technique in terms of authentication
among multiple LACs and HACs. Subsequently, to satisfy the
connectivity, data, and service demands of an exponentially

16

detection algorithm (shown in Fig. 6). Implemented at the
HAC server, the detection method considers sparsity in data
as well as multiple features. Further, through experiments, the
authors veriﬁed the utility of the proposed algorithm in terms
of detecting a large number of vehicles in metropolitan cities.
2) Safety and Security: Based on the data collected by
the LAC server, the authors of [132] proposed the Siamese
Interaction Long Short-Term Memory (SILSTM) network to
identify the behavior of collision-prone vehicles. Upon learn-
ing the interaction scenarios of a vehicle with its neighbors,
the SILSTM network can predict accident-prone interactions
in advance. Subsequently, through extensive experiments with
a real dataset, the authors veriﬁed the merit of the proposed
approach in terms of detecting collision-prone trajectories at
four different intersections. A collision-prone scenario and its
resolution are illustrated in the intersection of Fig. 6. Trafﬁc
surveillance is one of the core components of next-generation
ITS. LACs or HACs can act as relays to facilitate quick data
delivery between vehicles and edge nodes, which is associated
with a high risk of information leakage. To this end, for the
LAC server, the authors of [133] proposed an optimization
model based on a probabilistic data structure (PDS)-based
strategy with a triple Bloom ﬁlter that can detect cyber threats
of smart vehicles in advance.

3) MEC Support: During unexpected events, e.g., adverse
weather conditions and extreme trafﬁc congestion, LAC/HACs
can act as ﬂying RSUs. Such a scenario was described in
[134], providing the required infrastructure for diverse traf-
ﬁc applications for the improvement of the QoS (shown in
Fig. 6). Through simulation, the authors demonstrated that the
proposed method could achieve satisfactory performance in
terms of network coverage and latency. In the context of social
Internet of Vehicles (SIoV) to strengthen social relationship
among vehicles, an LAC platform for SIoV, consisting of a
three-layer integrated architecture, was adopted in [135]. The
aim of the architecture was to jointly optimize the transmission
power of vehicles and the LAC trajectory under realistic con-
straints. Through simulations compared with existing schemes,
the authors demonstrated that the proposed architecture in the
LAC platform could effectively maintain social relationships
among vehicles.

4) Infotainment: To disseminate information (e.g., news
and entertainment), [136] proposed a new LAC-based wire-
less access infrastructure using the RaptorQ-protected content
diffusion technique. A simple illustration of this function
is shown at the right-hand side of Fig. 6. Through exper-
iments using real vehicles and LAC platforms, the authors
demonstrated that the RaptorQ-based content dissemination
mechanism in LAC platforms was highly efﬁcient and cost-
effective in terms of transmitting information to multiple
moving receivers simultaneously. For the same purpose, in
[137], a 3D LAC-based simulation model was constructed
using the OMNET++ simulator with the objective of passing
information from the LACs to cars. Various path loss and
elevation models were considered to render the simulation
more realistic.

Disseminating data efﬁciently is one of the core tasks in
V2X networks. To this end, the authors of [138] proposed

Fig. 6.

Illustration of smart vehicles using aerial computing.

growing number of IoT devices in smart cities, the authors
of [126] envisioned a 5G network environment supported by
blockchain-enabled LACs and HACs. The objective of this
network was to provide Internet connectivity to IoT devices
via blockchain-enabled multiple LACs and HACs and to
facilitate decentralized service delivery and routing facilities
in a reliable and secure manner.

B. Smart Vehicle

Over the last 30 years, intelligent transportation systems
(ITS) have been investigated to improve the safety and efﬁ-
ciency of the transportation industry. Along this line, IEEE
developed a protocol called IEEE 802.11p [127]. However,
this standard is not sufﬁciently competent to meet the real-
time requirements of the emerging vehicular industry. Conse-
quently, existing studies have emphasized the merits of aerial
computing for efﬁcient ITS [128], [129] to achieve reliable
and low-latency, smart, and seamless vehicle-to-everything
communication. Along with beneﬁts, several research chal-
lenges still exist in aerial vehicular computing, which can be
overcome by leveraging emerging technologies, such as IRS
and AI. For example, [128] showed that AI-enabled LAPs
help improve the service performance of vehicular networks
compared with ones without AI and LAP deployment.

Furthermore, in recent years, the 5G Automotive Asso-
ciation (5GAA) deﬁned a new concept, namely cooperative
intelligent
transportation systems (C-ITS), which considers
aerial computing as an enabling technology for V2X com-
munications [130]. According to this standard, we highlight
a few main use cases in the context of C-ITS, such as
trafﬁc management, safety and security, MEC provision, and
infotainment. Fig. 6 illustrates a few applications served by
aerial computing platforms in smart vehicles.

1) Trafﬁc Management: With the growing number of vehi-
cles in recent years, vehicle detection has become a vital part
of the ITS, which assists in resolving various information and
management issues, such as trafﬁc and vehicle ﬂow statistics
and road network management. By acquiring high-resolution
images using HACs, the authors of [131] designed a vehicle

Vehicle Flow StatisticsCollision-prone Vehicle DetectionMEC ServicesInfotainmentMEC serverTerrestrial BS17

becoming increasingly automated with the development of
robots and smart tractors. However, to guide these machines
in an automated manner, the accurate detection of crop rows
is crucial. In [142], based on images acquired by LACs,
the authors proposed a learning CRowNet model to detect
crop rows (shown in Fig. 7). The corresponding LAC server
was equipped with a model formed using SegNet (S-SegNet)
and a CNN-based Hough transform (HoughCNet) technique.
Through extensive numerical simulations compared with tra-
ditional methods, the authors demonstrated that the CRowNet
model achieved 93.58% accuracy.

D. Smart Grid

Smart grids have been widely used in recent years. A large
number of new power lines have been under real operation,
resulting in a signiﬁcant growth of transmission line mileage
and power equipment. However, the monitoring, detection,
and maintenance of power transmission systems are essential
to ensure uninterrupted operations. Having noticed the risk
of failure in conventional manual monitoring methods, many
researchers have been working on the automation of power
line inspection, monitoring, and management using the latest
technologies [143], [144], such as aerial computing, image
processing, AI, and DL. Most of the existing studies emphasize
two crucial aspects of smart grid automation: 1) monitoring
and inspection and 2) control and management. We focus on
the computational aspect of aerial technologies in performing
these tasks. In Fig. 8, we brieﬂy illustrate a few use cases of
the smart grid domain using aerial computing.

1) Monitoring and Inspection: Insulators are prevalent in
high-voltage transmission lines and play a key role in electrical
insulation and conductor conjunction. Insulator faults (e.g.,
glass insulators self-blast) pose a grave threat to power systems
as they can cause cascade failure. Considering the difﬁculty
of manual inspection, [145] proposed a new DL framework to
detect the location of broken insulators by capturing images
using HACs (shown in Fig. 8). Speciﬁcally, the proposed DL
model in the HAC server works in the low-SNR regime with
the assistance of two modules: R-CNN to detect objects and
U-net to classify pixels. Using a real dataset, via experiments
compared with the other methods, the authors showed that
the proposed approach achieves real-time accuracy. After
capturing images of transmission lines using HACs, [146]
also proposed an improved insulator defect detection method
based on an improved ResNeSt and region proposal network.
Through suitable experiments on a real dataset, the authors
showed that the proposed method deployed in the HAC server
can achieve 98.38% accuracy in detecting insulator defects.
Further, aerial computing is a feasible solution to inspect
power transmission lines. Consequently, while solving the
battery limitation problem of aerial computing platforms (e.g.,
HACs and LACs), a new idea was proposed in [147], suggest-
ing the use of a smart hangar as an assistant to achieve full
power automation, a path planning model for the LAC server
was developed. Through simulations, the authors demonstrated
that the proposed scheme in the LAC server is effective in
solving existing inspection problems.

Fig. 7.

Illustration of smart factories using aerial computing.

a novel LAC-based scheduling protocol that consists of a
proactive caching policy and a ﬁle-sharing strategy. Subse-
quently, through simulations, the authors demonstrated that the
proposed scheduling strategy could enhance the performance
of the system in terms of throughput and latency. Further,
to enhance the security of V2X communications, in [139], a
few physical layer security (PLS) strategies were proposed for
LACs and HACs. Comprehensive simulations were conducted,
the outcome of which revealed that the proposed strategies
in LACs and HACs could effectively handle many emerging
security threats in V2X communications.

C. Smart Factory

Among the many enabling technologies, 6G,

industrial
IoT (IIoT) and aerial computing have been integrated with
cognitive skills and innovation to aid industries in increas-
ing production and delivering customized products more
quickly [140]. Such enabling technologies constitute Industry
5.0, an advanced production model focusing on the interac-
tion between machines and humans. This collaborative work
facilitates human capabilities, realizing higher productivity
and exceptionally easy automation for individuals and small
businesses. Such a feat was not possible a few years back.
Here, we provide a few examples of manufacturing models
with the assistance of LACs and HACs, the corresponding
schematic of which is illustrated in Fig. 7.

With the increasing trend of automation, IIoT has become
prevalent in smart factories for data communication and pro-
duction management. Wireless sensor networks (WSNs), the
most important components of the IIoT, are used for numerous
tasks in indoor industrial environments, such as irrigation and
the inspection of machines. However, these networks have a
low computational capability. Therefore, in [141], a WSN-
based safe navigation algorithm was proposed for micro aerial
robots (i.e., LACs) in the IIoT. A WSN with a 3D ranger
was used as a computational tool for micro ﬂying robots
to detect obstacles in an indoor industrial environment, as
shown in Fig. 7. Through extensive simulations with multiple
micro ﬂying robots,
the authors veriﬁed the merit of the
proposed algorithm in terms of obstacle-aware monitoring
in dynamic factory environments. Meanwhile, agriculture is

Crop Row DetectionCollaborative Factory Monitoring18

satellite, and a hybrid solar forecasting method was proposed
to run the smart grid in a cost-effective manner. For the core
computing unit, desirable features and cloud cover factors
were extracted from the images using certain intermediate
mathematical formulae and a modiﬁed CNN, respectively.
Coupled with meteorological
information and cloud cover
factors, a ﬁnal forecasting model was developed.

E. Summary and Discussion

In this section, important vertical domain applications sup-
ported by aerial computing,
including smart cities, smart
vehicles, smart factories, and smart grids, have been discussed.
A summary of the applications is presented in Table IV.

Data communication, processing, and management of
ground sensors and IoT nodes are crucial tasks to facilitate
applications in smart cities. Aerial computing platforms (e.g.,
LACs, HACs, and satellites) are effective in performing these
tasks owing to their ﬂexible deployment and LoS communica-
tion features in air-to-air or air-to-ground links. However, even
with the use of aerial computing, several research challenges
require to be solved to obtain optimal performance, such as 3D
deployment, joint computation and communication resource
management, coverage, and trajectory design. Several existing
studies have addressed these challenges by adopting cutting-
edge techniques, such as convex optimization, graph theory,
and AI/ML tools. Because of security breaches, smart city
applications are associated with several challenges, such as
designing low-cost and efﬁcient signature and authentication
protocols. Few studies have adopted the CB-PS scheme and
blockchain to solve these problems to a certain extent. Further,
aerial computing is a promising solution for realizing MEC
with other communication technologies, which is associated
with several challenges as well, such as task data allocation,
computation and communication resource management, and
aerial device deployment issues. City planning and manage-
ment are also crucial aspects of smart cities. Certain useful
tasks in the context of this use case are target tracking to facili-
tate city design, air pollution monitoring, and city map designs.
In addition to providing certain functional requirements, aerial
computing may aid in achieving surveillance and security
in smart cities. The effective utilization of aerial computing
is associated with certain challenges, such as the HAC/LAC
navigation strategy, deployment, and resource management.

In the domain of smart vehicles, aerial computing platforms
can be effectively utilized for various purposes, such as
trafﬁc management, safety and security, ﬂying RSUs, and
infotainment. Despite serving all
these use cases, several
research challenges need to be solved, such as computation
and communication resource management, trajectory design of
aerial computing platforms, data analysis, and routing strategy.
Several existing studies have addressed these issues via AI/ML
techniques, probabilistic approaches, and optimization tools.
Finally, monitoring, inspection, and management are the
primary applications of aerial computing platforms in smart
manufacturing and smart grid domains. However, certain tech-
nical problems must be solved to obtain optimal outcome
from aerial computing platforms in these domains, such as

Fig. 8.

Illustration of smart grid using aerial computing.

With the growing popularity of wind power, more turbines
are being deployed in remote areas. [148] considered the
deployment of HACs and LACs for inspecting turbines (shown
in Fig. 8). Using the forecasted wind conditions obtained
by the HAC-borne edge intelligence, two algorithms were
developed to minimize the ﬂight time of the HAC and to
optimize power generation by the turbine. Through simulation
using a real dataset, it was shown that the proposed method
can generate 44% more power and reduce the ﬂight time by
25% compared to an existing scheme. With the growth of
rooftop solar PV arrays in power generation, [149] designed a
new system called SolarFinder, which can be implemented in
a satellite computing platform to detect distributed solar PV
arrays over an area in a cost-effective and autonomous manner,
as shown in Fig. 8. The intelligence of SolarFinder is built on
the support vector machine (SVM) model and a deep CNN
approach jointly. Over 269,632 images captured by satellite,
the performance of SolarFinder was evaluated, and the results
showed that the pre-trained SolarFinder achieved a Matthews
correlation coefﬁcient (MCC) of 0.17.

2) Control and Management: According to the require-
ments of a smart grid network, controlling non-technical losses
(e.g., electrical theft) is one of the most alarming concerns
in developing countries. In [150], the authors discussed a
possible communication network and a framework using LAC
platforms to control non-technical losses (i.e., tampering of
electrical devices) in energy distribution systems. An example
of this use case is shown in Fig. 8. For the effective man-
agement of power distribution networks, which consist of nu-
merous sparsely distributed grids, LEO satellites were utilized
as the key components of the communication infrastructure
to manage active networks [151]. Such a scenario is shown
at the left corner of Fig. 8. The effectiveness of the proposed
LEO satellite-equipped framework in terms of managing future
power supply networks was established through extensive ex-
periments. In [152], the feasibility of satellite communication
for connecting a smart grid with remotely located actuators
was also studied. In addition to the routing and channel
access mechanism, the possible optimization of computation
resources was studied. In [153], images were captured using a

Electrical Theft DectectionInsulator Defect DetectionWind Turbine ManagementConnect Between Two Power Distribution NetworksSolar Forcasting MethodTABLE IV
SUMMARY OF VERTICAL DOMAIN APPLICATIONS.

References
– [97]–[103]
– [104]–[107]
– [108]–[119]
– [120]–[126]

– [131]
– [132], [133]
– [134], [135]
– [136]–[138]

s
e
i
t
i

C

t
r
a
m
S

s
e
l
c
i
h
e
V

t
r
a
m
S

s – [141]
– [142]

e
i
r
o
t
c
a
F

– [145]–[149]
– [150]–[153]

s
d
i
r
G

t
r
a
m
S

Use Cases
– Data collection, high-mobility mul-
timodal sensing, control and manage-
ment of sensing, enhancement of QoS
in crowd sensing, improvement of in-
formation coverage, and tracking mov-
ing targets.
– Serving IoT devices with efﬁ-
cient resource utilization, task data al-
location, and trajectory optimization
with/without NOMA, and serving as
cache-enabled edge computing nodes.
– Automatic extraction of building
instances,
tracking, monitor-
ing urban environments, air quality
monitoring, rainfall monitoring, semi-
automated driving line automation,
building road networks, city planning,
extraction of urban tree inventory, and
modeling an urban parking lot.
– Physical security of smart buildings,
monitoring suspicious links, mitigat-
ing challenges of video surveillance
applications, constructing surveillance
models for multi-domain IoT, ensur-
ing security in data dissemination, and
trustworthy authentication.

target

– Vehicle detection for trafﬁc manage-
ment and road network planning.
– Trafﬁc collision detection and cyber
threat detection.
– Flying roadside units, and social
relationships among vehicles.
– Disseminating news and entertain-
ment information among vehicles and
sharing ﬁles in V2X.

– Monitoring industrial environments.
– Detecting crop rows in agriculture.

– Detecting insulator defects in trans-
mission lines, inspecting power trans-
mission lines,
inspecting wind tur-
bines, and detecting distributed solar
PV arrays.
– Controlling non-technical losses in
energy distribution systems, manag-
ing active power distribution networks,
connecting two power distribution net-
works, and forecasting solar energy for
the smooth operation of smart grids.

IRHS,

algorithms,

Analytical Tools
– K-means method, Hungarian
algorithm, differential geometry,
CNN and DDPG, edge/cloud
computing,
sparse
algorithms based on compressive
sensing technology, and a novel
parametric
imaging
sparse
approach.
– Geographic merging of tasks,
and
optimization
convex approximation.
– Sparse representation theory,
collaborative workload sharing
algorithm, system development,
placement optimization, satellite
downlink
sensor
microwave
distance
networks,
inverse
weighted method,
novel
ADSM technique, decentralized
agent-based control architecture,
classiﬁcation-based method, and
SLAM algorithm.
–
optimal
optimization,
scheme, and blockchain.

an
scheduling algorithm,
low-cost CB-PS

Jamming

signal,

a

– ML technique.
– SILSTM network and a PDS-
based scheduling technique.
– Algorithm and optimization
tools.
– RaptorQ-based content dissem-
ination mechanisms and opti-
mized scheduling policies.

– A navigation algorithm.
– A model formed with SegNet
(S-SegNet) and HoughCNet.

– DL and customized neural net-
works, optimization tools, and
integration of an SVM model
with deep CNNs.
– Design of a suitable com-
munication network; integration
of LEO satellites, optimiza-
tion tools, and CNN-based ap-
proaches.

19

Relevant Lessons
– Minimize the total
transmission power
of IoT nodes, outperforms three existing
schemes, improves QoS, improves the cover-
age ratio of information by 21.42%, and can
track moving targets accurately.
– Provide energy-efﬁcient AR services to
mobile users under tight delay constraints.
– Enhance performance compared with the
mainstream Mask R-CNN method; achieve
good precision compared with state-of-the-
art works; maximize the total weight of
completed tasks; achieve a lower AQI recog-
nition error; has close agreement with other
existing methods; achieve an average recall,
precision, and F1-score of 90.79%, 92.94%,
and 91.85%, respectively; achieve an overall
accuracy of 78%; and achieve centimeter-
level accuracy with a precision of 84.8%.
– Achieve an acceptable accuracy for indoor
environments, effectively monitor a suspi-
cious link, make video surveillance applica-
tions work efﬁciently, enhance the security
of the LAC server, perform authentication
tasks effectively, and proves that blockchain
is effective in collaborative security among
multiple LACs and HACs.

– Achieve satisfactory performance in vehi-
cle detection.
– Can detect collision-prone interaction tra-
jectories and cyber threats effectively.
– Can achieve full network coverage under
different scenarios and optimize the transmit
power in vehicles and LAC trajectory.
– Can deliver infotainment service effec-
tively.

– Can navigate accurately while detecting
obstacles.
– Can detect crop row with the accuracy of
93.58%.
– Achieve 93.58% accuracy, achieve 44%
improvement in power generation and 25%
reduction in ﬂight time, achieve an MCC of
0.17, which is 3 times better than a pre-
trained CNN-based approach, proves that a
smart hanger can effectively solve the limited
battery capacity problem of LACs/HACs.
– Can detect tampering of electrical devices,
show that LEO satellites are effective in man-
aging remote power generation sites, and can
forecast solar energy for smooth operation.

obstacle-aware monitoring a factory environment [141] and
crop row detection (using ML tools) in agriculture ﬁeld
[142]. Furthermore, a few more problems in smart grids
using aerial computing, such as the detection of insulator
defects, management of solar PV array, and inspection of
power line and wind turbine, need to be resolved. In terms of
control and management, the main problems are electrical theft
detection, active and power distribution network management,
and forecasting solar energy for the smooth and continued
operation of smart grids, which can be addressed by equipping
special hardware and software in aerial computing platforms,

AI/ML, and optimization tools.

V. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

In this section, we identify interesting research challenges
and highlight possible future directions for aerial computing.

A. Energy Efﬁciency

In aerial computing, achieving sustainable energy manage-
ment at LAC and HAC platforms and energy-efﬁcient satellite
computing is a major concern. Data communications and
service delivery in satellite environments and space travel with

airplanes, require large energy resources to ensure network
operations. In addition, the power consumption of aerial com-
ponents may vary depending on the operation mode. For exam-
ple, average power consumption of the UAV is 8.2412 W in the
idle mode and 245.2815 W in the horizontal movement mode,
and average power consumption is 8.2618 W and 8.2637 W
when the UAV performs communication transmissions with
WiFi and GPS, respectively [154]. Thus, we need to focus
on energy-efﬁcient designs to realize sustainable and green
aerial computing. For example, the authors of [155] suggested
a space-air-ground architecture with a focus on maximizing
the system energy efﬁciency enabled by the joint optimization
of uplink transmission power control, sub-channel selection,
and deployment of aerial relays. This can be achieved by
dividing the original problem into two sub-problems, optimal
subchannel selection and power control policy, which are ob-
tained by available aerial relay deployment. Moreover, energy
reﬁlling techniques to exploit renewable energy resources can
be useful for building sustainable aerial computing systems.
Aerial devices and satellites can harvest power from ambient
environments, such as wind, solar, vibration, and thermal
power, at the LAC platform to support their operations, e.g.,
data communications over aerial links.

B. Resource Management

Aerial computing accommodates data collection and com-
putation tasks to serve end IoT devices via different computing
platforms (e.g., LAC and HAC) and supports edge services
in future 6G networks. Compared to terrestrial computing
infrastructures, such as cloud data centers and cloudlet, com-
puting platforms in aerial computing possess limited storage
resources and battery capabilities, which would hinder the de-
ployment of aerial computing services, such as airplane-based
civil monitoring for terrestrial IoT environments [156]. Thus,
resource management strategies are urgently required to satisfy
seamless service delivery in space. Moreover, in the future 6G
era, intelligent aerial computing is expected to be a dominant
research area, where AI functions can be integrated into aerial
devices at the LAC platform to enable self-controlled and
autonomous aerial systems. In this context, training DL models
on these aerial devices with massive datasets may be infeasible
because of the high demands of computation and memory
resources, particularly when training with large-scale audio
and image data [157]. Therefore, optimizing on-device AI/DL
models is of paramount importance for solving the computa-
tional burden posed on aerial devices in the air. Consequently,
several solutions have been proposed to facilitate resource
management in aerial computing. For example, the authors of
[158] considered a resource management solution for aerial
computing systems wherein a joint optimization of task of-
ﬂoading, resource allocation mechanism, and the trajectory of
aerial devices in the air was derived with respect to terrestrial
users’ latency requirements. Thus, the energy of the aerial
devices was minimized, while a longer ﬂight duration was
achieved. Moreover, it is also necessary to develop on-device
learning solutions to support self-learning aerial computing
systems. For example, improved network architecture, training

20

optimization, and hardware design were used to accelerate on-
device data training [159]. A streamlined slimming framework
was developed and combined with a consecutive tensor layer
to improve the training rates. Simulation results show that the
proposed method can enhance the training rate by up to 30%
compared to traditional approaches without compromising
learning accuracy. Thus, this approach provides opportunities
for designing intelligent ﬂying devices in aerial computing.

C. Network Stability

The topology of aerial computing ﬂuctuates with the number
of nodes, battery levels, and varying communication condi-
tions. The trajectories and speeds of aerial components and
ﬂying devices also vary owing to the terrestrial application
requirements and environmental dynamics, e.g., different al-
titudes of buildings in smart cities in the LAC platform and
different orbital altitudes of multiple LEO satellites. Further,
the operational complexity and unpredictability of aerial com-
ponents in space can make the involved aerial computing
system unstable. In fact, aerial nodes can join and leave
unpredictably, or their ﬂight can be stationary, slow, or fast.
Thus, achieving network sustainability in aerial systems is
critical. As a promising method, an optimal tracking policy
was constructed in [160] for each aerial device in an aerial-
based network to mitigate the varying network topology issues
in aerial computing operations, e.g., ﬂying trajectories of
UAVs. The key focus was on achieving an adaptive surround-
ing network conﬁguration for varying channel quality and
communication bandwidth resources. Subsequently, a particle
swarm optimization algorithm was developed to optimally
schedule the energy allocation among a set of aerial nodes,
while the prediction error of the surrounding node locations
was minimized. Another study in [161] built an observer,
which could monitor surrounding unmanned aerial nodes in
an aerial environment using Kalman ﬁltering with respect to
the maximum number of parallel targets, measurement time,
measurement success rate, and measurement noise. Thus, the
optimal measurement policy was obtained for network topol-
ogy monitoring, aiming to achieve an accurate prediction of
trajectory topology in autonomous aerial computing systems.
Moreover, blockchain can help build scalable aerial comput-
ing networks thanks to its decentralized feature for enabling
large-scale interconnection among servers and devices, e.g.,
unmanned aerial components in the HAC platform [162]. Each
aerial device works as a blockchain node to build decentralized
data services, such as data sharing, data communications, and
data storage, without the need for a central server for better
networking scalability.

D. Large-Scale Network Optimization

In aerial computing, aerial devices operate on a large scale,
and cooperative optimization is needed to utilize the advan-
tages from multiple and distributed network datasets, such as
diverse channel features and environment properties, while
improving the network quality. For example, performing an
optimal trajectory control policy for all manned and unmanned
aerial components is a challenge on the HAC platform if only

the characteristics of an aerial device are obtained [163]. More
importantly, the datasets of future intelligent aerial networks
are distributed over large-scale networks rather than being cen-
trally located. Therefore, there is an urgent need for distributed
and large-scale optimization approaches to enable scalable
and intelligent aerial computing applications. A large-scale
trajectory optimization solution was proposed in [164] for the
Internet of aerial devices, for example, UAVs and balloons,
through the use of a multi-agent DRL algorithm. This enables
aerial devices to collaboratively develop a distributed sense-
and-send protocol in an aerial computing setting, facilitating
large-scale sensing and data task transfer in cellular networks.

E. Security, Privacy, and Trust

Although 6G-based aerial computing can offer global cov-
erage and diverse QoS provision to industrial applications,
critical issues related to security, privacy, and trust must be
solved. Adversaries may attack aerial communication chan-
nels and deploy data breaches in the ﬂying BSs on the
HAC platform, as the management of lower altitude-based
servers is limited owing to the physical distance [165]. AI
techniques are extensively used to enable intelligent aerial
computing, but they often require centralized data collection
for training, which raises potential privacy issues owing to
the exposure of sensitive information in the air. Moreover, the
deployment of satellite-terrestrial communications in space can
face critical challenges caused by untrusted environments, as
third parties and attackers can compromise the data exchange
among aerial devices, BSs, and terrestrial IoT users. There-
fore, blockchain is a promising solution [166] for building
trust and establishing secure decentralized satellite-ground
communications for aerial computing systems. Blockchain,
with its traceability and trustworthiness, can provide enhanced
security for aerial computing systems [167]. The data from
aerial communications, such as device location and channel
information, can be stored in the data ledger where blocks
are built based on immutable transactions. This makes the
information in the blockchains resistant to data modiﬁcations
or threats. The elimination of centralized authority of the
blockchain also helps mitigate single-point failures in involved
aerial networks. In addition, smart contracts can be used as
self-executing software running on blockchain for providing
automatic authentication and veriﬁcation to ensure reliable
aerial communications [166]. This technique attains further
relevance in the 6G era because aerial computing systems tend
to be decentralized and deployed on a large scale, which can
be realized using the decentralization feature of blockchain. To
preserve data privacy in aerial computing, perturbation tech-
niques, such as differential privacy and dummy operations, are
particularly helpful in protecting data leakage against external
threats during data exchange. For example, differential privacy
was adopted in [168] to realize privacy-enhanced intelligent
aerial communications by introducing artiﬁcial noise into the
trained gradients at aerial devices. This solution helps hide
sensitive information while guaranteeing convergence, such
that adversaries cannot retrieve useful data samples.

21

VI. CONCLUSION

Edge computing has become an indispensable component of
the present network infrastructure, but it also has various lim-
itations owing to the emergence of new services and applica-
tions and the expansion of the network. We highlighted the fact
that the current computing infrastructure does not meet new
demands and requirements. In this regard, the concept of aerial
computing was introduced and comprehensively reviewed in
this study. First, we presented an overview of aerial computing,
starting from the system architecture to the reference model
and fundamental features, and compared it with conventional
computing paradigms, such as cloudlet, fog computing, and
MEC. Next, we presented a set of key enabling technologies
and discussed the use of aerial computing in vertical domain
applications. Finally, we discussed the research challenges and
promising future directions pertaining to aerial computing. As
the development of aerial computing is still in a preliminary
stage and there are many unexplored issues, we believe that
this paper has revealed certain important lessons and key ideas
that will drive further research and unlock the full potential of
a comprehensive 6G computing infrastructure in the future.

REFERENCES

[1] H. Tataria, M. Shaﬁ, A. F. Molisch, M. Dohler, H. Sj¨oland, and
F. Tufvesson, “6G wireless systems: Vision, requirements, challenges,
insights, and opportunities,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 109, no. 7,
pp. 1166–1199, Jul. 2021.

[2] Q.-V. Pham, M. Zeng, T. Huynh-The, Z. Han, and W.-J. Hwang, “Aerial
access networks for federated learning: Applications and challenges,”
IEEE Network, 2022, in press.

[3] F. Jiang, K. Wang, L. Dong, C. Pan, W. Xu, and K. Yang, “AI
driven heterogeneous MEC system with UAV assistance for dynamic
environment: Challenges and solutions,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 1,
pp. 400–408, Jan./Feb. 2021.

[4] M. Ke, Z. Gao, Y. Huang, G. Ding, D. W. K. Ng, Q. Wu, and J. Zhang,
“An edge computing paradigm for massive IoT connectivity over high-
altitude platform networks,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 28,
no. 5, pp. 102–109, Nov. 2021.

[5] Z. Yu, Y. Gong, S. Gong, and Y. Guo, “Joint task ofﬂoading and
resource allocation in UAV-enabled mobile edge computing,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 3147–3159, Jan. 2020.

[6] S. Garg, A. Singh, S. Batra, N. Kumar, and L. T. Yang, “UAV-
empowered edge computing environment for cyber-threat detection in
smart vehicles,” IEEE Network, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 42–51, May/Jun.
2018.

Borrett,
the

future
[7] A.
of
[On-
line]. Available: https://techmonitor.ai/internet-of-things/connectivity/
satellite-broadband-future-1trn-space-economy

is
economy,” Mar.

“Satellite
space

the
2021.

broadband

$1trn

[8] T. Taleb, K. Samdanis, B. Mada, H. Flinck, S. Dutta, and D. Sabella,
“On multi-access edge computing: A survey of the emerging 5G
network edge cloud architecture and orchestration,” IEEE Communica-
tions Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1657–1681, Thirdquarter
2017.

[9] P. Porambage, J. Okwuibe, M. Liyanage, M. Ylianttila, and T. Taleb,
“Survey on multi-access edge computing for internet of things realiza-
tion,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 4, pp.
2961–2991, Fourthquarter 2018.

[10] P. Mach and Z. Becvar, “Mobile edge computing: A survey on archi-
tecture and computation ofﬂoading,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1628–1656, Thirdquarter 2017.

[11] Y. Mao, C. You, J. Zhang, K. Huang, and K. B. Letaief, “A survey
on mobile edge computing: The communication perspective,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2322–2358,
Fourthquarter 2017.

[12] B. Sonkoly, J. Czentye, M. Szalay, B. N´emeth, and L. Toka, “Survey
on placement methods in the edge and beyond,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 2590–2629, Fourthquarter 2021.

[13] X. Wang, Y. Han, V. C. Leung, D. Niyato, X. Yan, and X. Chen,
“Convergence of edge computing and deep learning: A comprehensive
survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2, pp.
869–904, Secondquarter 2020.

[14] D. Xu, T. Li, Y. Li, X. Su, S. Tarkoma, T. Jiang, J. Crowcroft, and
P. Hui, “Edge intelligence: Empowering intelligence to the edge of
network,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 109, no. 11, pp. 1778–1837,
Nov. 2021.

[15] R. Yang, F. R. Yu, P. Si, Z. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Integrated blockchain
and edge computing systems: A survey, some research issues and
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 1508–1532, Thirdquarter 2019.

[16] Q.-V. Pham, F. Fang, V. N. Ha, M. J. Piran, M. Le, L. B. Le, W.-J.
Hwang, and Z. Ding, “A survey of multi-access edge computing in
5G and beyond: Fundamentals, technology integration, and state-of-
the-art,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 116 974–117 017, Jun. 2020.
[17] P. S. Ranaweera, A. D. Jurcut, and M. Liyanage, “Survey on multi-
access edge computing security and privacy,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials Computing, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1078–1124, Sec-
ondquarter 2021.

[18] F. Tariq, M. R. Khandaker, K.-K. Wong, M. A. Imran, M. Bennis, and
M. Debbah, “A speculative study on 6G,” IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 118–125, Aug. 2020.

[19] S. Chen, Y.-C. Liang, S. Sun, S. Kang, W. Cheng, and M. Peng,
“Vision, requirements, and technology trend of 6G: How to tackle the
challenges of system coverage, capacity, user data-rate and movement
speed,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 218–228,
Apr. 2020.

[20] A. Fotouhi, H. Qiang, M. Ding, M. Hassan, L. G. Giordano, A. Garcia-
Rodriguez, and J. Yuan, “Survey on UAV cellular communications:
Practical aspects, standardization advancements, regulation, and secu-
rity challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21,
no. 4, pp. 3417–3442, Fourthquarter 2019.

[21] G. Karabulut Kurt, M. G. Khoshkholgh, S. Alfattani, A. Ibrahim,
T. S. J. Darwish, M. S. Alam, H. Yanikomeroglu, and A. Yongacoglu,
“A vision and framework for the high altitude platform station (HAPS)
networks of the future,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 729–779, Secondquarter 2021.

[22] X. Cao, P. Yang, M. Alzenad, X. Xi, D. Wu, and H. Yanikomeroglu,
“Airborne communication networks: A survey,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 1907–1926, Sep.
2018.

[23] O. Kodheli et al., “Satellite communications in the new space era:
A survey and future challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 70–109, Firstquarter 2021.

[24] R. Xie, Q. Tang, Q. Wang, X. Liu, F. R. Yu, and T. Huang, “Satellite-
terrestrial
integrated edge computing networks: Architecture, chal-
lenges, and open issues,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 224–231,
May/Jun. 2020.

[25] A. Baltaci, E. Dinc, M. Ozger, A. Alabbasi, C. Cavdar, and D. Schupke,
“A survey of wireless networks for future aerial communications
(FACOM),” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 4,
pp. 2833–2884, Fourthquarter 2021.

[26] N.-N. Dao, Q.-V. Pham, N. H. Tu, T. T. Thanh, V. N. Q. Bao,
D. S. Lakew, and S. Cho, “Survey on aerial radio access networks:
Toward a comprehensive 6G access infrastructure,” IEEE Communica-
tions Surveys & Tutorials Computing, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1193–1225,
Secondquarter 2021.

[27] Y. Sun, J. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Cao, and N. Kato, “When machine learning
meets privacy in 6G: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 2694–2724, Fourthquarter 2020.

[28] D. C. Nguyen, P. Cheng, M. Ding, D. Lopez-Perez, P. N. Pathirana,
J. Li, A. Seneviratne, Y. Li, and H. V. Poor, “Enabling AI in future
wireless networks: A data life cycle perspective,” IEEE Communica-
tions Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 553–595, Firstquarter
2021.

[29] M. Mukherjee, L. Shu, and D. Wang, “Survey of fog computing:
Fundamental, network applications, and research challenges,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1826–1857,
Thirdquarter 2018.

[30] B. Wu, K. Xu, Q. Li, S. Ren, Z. Liu, and Z. Zhang, “Toward
blockchain-powered trusted collaborative services for edge-centric net-
works,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 30–36, Mar./Apr. 2020.
[31] D.-H. Tran, V.-D. Nguyen, S. Chatzinotas, T. X. Vu, and B. Ottersten,
“UAV relay-assisted emergency communications in IoT networks:

22

Resource allocation and trajectory optimization,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1621–1637, Mar. 2022.
[32] X. Hu, K.-K. Wong, and Y. Zhang, “Wireless-powered edge computing
with cooperative UAV: Task, time scheduling and trajectory design,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 19, no. 12, pp.
8083–8098, Dec. 2020.

[33] J. Liu, L. Li, F. Yang, X. Liu, X. Li, X. Tang, and Z. Han, “Minimiza-
tion of ofﬂoading delay for two-tier UAV with mobile edge computing,”
in 15th International Wireless Communications & Mobile Computing
Conference (IWCMC), Tangier, Morocco, 2019.

[34] T. Tozer and D. Grace, “High-altitude platforms for wireless communi-
cations,” Electronics & Communication Engineering Journal, vol. 13,
no. 3, pp. 127–137, Jun. 2001.
high-altitude

[Online].
https://www.itu.int/en/mediacentre/backgrounders/Pages/

[35] “HAPS

systems.”

platform

–

Available:
High-altitude-platform-systems.aspx

[36] A. Pregler, “When COWs ﬂy: AT&T sending LTE signals from drones.”
[Online]. Available: https://about.att.com/innovationblog/cows ﬂy

tests

drone

Skybender:

Google’s
revealed.”

5G
[37] “Project
Avail-
Internet
able:
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/29/
project-skybender-google-drone-tests-internet-spaceport-virgin-galactic
un-
joins HAPS
manned platforms.” [Online]. Available: https://www.gpsworld.com/
uavos-joins-haps-for-high-altitude-unmanned-platforms/

secretive
[Online].

[38] T. Cozzens,

high-altitude

“UAVOS

for

[39] E. Howell, “The FCC has approved Amazon’s plan for

its
kuiper satellite constellation.” [Online]. Available: www.space.com/
amazon-kuiper-satellite-constellation-fcc-approval.html

[40] Z. Zhang, W. Zhang, and F.-H. Tseng, “Satellite mobile edge comput-
ing: Improving QoS of high-speed satellite-terrestrial networks using
edge computing techniques,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 70–76,
Jan./Feb. 2019.

[41] M. Satyanarayanan, P. Bahl, R. Caceres, and N. Davies, “The case for
VM-based cloudlets in mobile computing,” IEEE pervasive Computing,
vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 14–23, Oct.-Dec. 2009.

[42] Q.-V. Pham, T. Huynh-The, M. Alazab, J. Zhao, and W.-J. Hwang,
“Sum-rate maximization for UAV-assisted visible light communications
using NOMA: Swarm intelligence meets machine learning,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 10 375–10 387, Oct.
2020.

[43] A. Yousefpour, C. Fung, T. Nguyen, K. Kadiyala, F. Jalali, A. Ni-
akanlahiji, J. Kong, and J. P. Jue, “All one needs to know about fog
computing and related edge computing paradigms: A complete survey,”
Journal of Systems Architecture, vol. 98, pp. 289–330, Sep. 2019.
[44] R. Roman, J. Lopez, and M. Mambo, “Mobile edge computing, fog et
al.: A survey and analysis of security threats and challenges,” Future
Generation Computer Systems, vol. 78, pp. 680–698, Jan. 2018.
[45] D. Zeng, N. Ansari, M.-J. Montpetit, E. M. Schooler, and D. Tarchi,
“Guest editorial: In-network computing: Emerging trends for the edge-
cloud continuum,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 12–13, Sep./Oct.
2021.

[46] Z. Xie, J. Liu, M. Sheng, N. Zhao, and J. Li, “Exploiting aerial
computing for air-to-ground coverage enhancement,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 50–58, Oct. 2021.

[47] L. Liu, B. Sun, Y. Wu, and D. H. Tsang, “Latency optimization for
computation ofﬂoading with hybrid NOMA-OMA transmission,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6677–6691, Apr. 2021.

deployment.

[48] K. Dorling, J. Heinrichs, G. G. Messier, and S. Magierowski, “Vehicle
routing problems for drone delivery,” IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 70–85, Jan. 2017.
[49] R. Austin, Unmanned aircraft systems: UAVs design, development and
John Wiley & Sons, 2011, vol. 54.
[50] B. Zhu, E. Bedeer, H. H. Nguyen, R. Barton, and J. Henry, “UAV
trajectory planning in wireless sensor networks for energy consumption
minimization by deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 9, pp. 9540–9554, Aug. 2021.
[51] Y. Su, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Yuan, H. Cao, and J. Shi, “Broadband LEO
satellite communications: Architectures and key technologies,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 55–61, Apr. 2019.
[52] Y. Zhou, C. Pan, P. L. Yeoh, K. Wang, M. Elkashlan, B. Vucetic,
and Y. Li, “Communication-and-computing latency minimization for
UAV-enabled virtual reality delivery systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications, vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 1723–1735, Nov. 2021.

[53] T. Zhang, Y. Xu, J. Loo, D. Yang, and L. Xiao, “Joint computation
and communication design for UAV-assisted mobile edge computing
in IoT,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 8,
pp. 5505–5516, Oct. 2019.

[54] D. Wu, X. Huang, X. Xie, X. Nie, L. Bao, and Z. Qin, “LEDGE:
Leveraging edge computing for resilient access management of mobile
IoT,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 20, no. 3, pp.
1110–1125, Mar. 2021.

[55] S. Khan, A. Gani, A. W. Abdul Wahab, M. Guizani, and M. K.
Khan, “Topology discovery in software deﬁned networks: Threats,
taxonomy, and state-of-the-art,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 303–324, Firstquarter 2017.

[56] S. Tomovic and I. Radusinovic, “Toward a scalable, robust, and QoS-
aware virtual-link provisioning in SDN-based ISP networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Network and Service Management, vol. 16, no. 3, pp.
1032–1045, Jul. 2019.

[57] L. Nkenyereye, J. Y. Hwang, Q.-V. Pham, and J. S. Song, “Virtual
IoT service slice functions for multi-access edge computing platform,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 14, pp. 11 233–11 248, Jul.
2021.

[58] J. Huang, Y. Zhou, Z. Ning, and H. Gharavi, “Wireless power transfer
and energy harvesting: Current status and future prospects,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 163–169, Aug. 2019.

[59] M. Lu, M. Bagheri, A. P. James, and T. Phung, “Wireless charging
techniques for UAVs: A review, reconceptualization, and extension,”
IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 29 865–29 884, May 2018.

[60] P. K. Chittoor, B. Chokkalingam, and L. Mihet-Popa, “A review on
UAV wireless charging: Fundamentals, applications, charging tech-
niques and standards,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 69 235–69 266, 2021.
[61] M. Vaezi, G. A. Aruma Baduge, Y. Liu, A. Arafa, F. Fang, and
Z. Ding, “Interplay between NOMA and other emerging technologies:
A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and
Networking, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 900–919, Aug. 2019.

[62] Q.-V. Pham, M. Zeng, R. Ruby, T. Huynh-The, and W.-J. Hwang, “UAV
communications for sustainable federated learning,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 3944–3948, Apr. 2021.

[63] L. Xie, X. Cao, J. Xu, and R. Zhang, “UAV-enabled wireless power
transfer: A tutorial overview,” IEEE Transactions on Green Communi-
cations and Networking, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 2042–2064, Dec. 2021.
[64] Y. Yixin, S. Wan, and X. Zhang, “Design of UAV wireless power
transmission system based on coupling coil structure optimization,” J.
Wireless Com. Network, vol. 2020, no. 1, pp. 1–13, Mar. 2020.
[65] P. X. Nguyen, D.-H. Tran, O. Onireti, P. T. Tin, S. Q. Nguyen,
S. Chatzinotas, and H. V. Poor, “Backscatter-assisted data ofﬂoading
in OFDMA-based wireless-powered mobile edge computing for IoT
networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 9233–
9243, Jun. 2021.

[66] C. de Alwis, A. Kalla, Q.-V. Pham, P. Kumar, K. Dev, W.-J. Hwang,
and M. Liyanage, “Survey on 6G frontiers: Trends, applications,
requirements, technologies and future research,” IEEE Open Journal
of the Communications Society, vol. 2, pp. 836–886, Apr. 2021.
[67] J. Jiao, Y. He, S. Wu, and Q. Zhang, “Intelligent hybrid non-orthogonal
multiple access relaying for vehicular networks in 6G,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 19, pp. 14 773–14 786, Oct. 2021.
[68] Z. Chen, X. Ma, C. Han, and Q. Wen, “Towards intelligent reﬂecting
surface empowered 6G Terahertz communications: A survey,” China
Communications, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 93–119, May 2021.

[69] N. C. Luong, D. T. Hoang, S. Gong, D. Niyato, P. Wang, Y.-C.
Liang, and D. I. Kim, “Applications of deep reinforcement learning
in communications and networking: A survey,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3133–3174, Fourthquarter 2019.
[70] C. Bai, M. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Zheng, and S. Chen, “LSCIDMR: Large-
scale satellite cloud image database for meteorological research,” IEEE
Transactions on Cybernetics, 2021, in press.

[71] C. She, C. Sun, Z. Gu, Y. Li, C. Yang, H. V. Poor, and B. Vucetic,
“A tutorial on ultrareliable and low-latency communications in 6G:
Integrating domain knowledge into deep learning,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 109, no. 3, pp. 204–246, Mar. 2021.

[72] L. Qian, Y. Wu, F. Jiang, N. Yu, W. Lu, and B. Lin, “NOMA assisted
multi-task multi-access mobile edge computing via deep reinforcement
learning for industrial internet of things,” IEEE Transactions on Indus-
trial Informatics, vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5688–5698, Aug. 2021.

[73] M. Chen, Z. Yang, W. Saad, C. Yin, H. V. Poor, and S. Cui, “A joint
learning and communications framework for federated learning over
wireless networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 269–283, Jan. 2021.

[74] Q.-V. Pham, M. Le, T. Huynh-The, Z. Han, and W.-J. Hwang, “Energy-
efﬁcient federated learning over UAV-enabled wireless powered com-
munications,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2022, in
press.

23

[75] Z. M. Fadlullah and N. Kato, “On smart IoT remote sensing over
integrated terrestrial-aerial-space networks: An asynchronous federated
learning approach,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 129–135,
Sep./Oct. 2021.

[76] A. Imran, A. Zoha, and A. Abu-Dayya, “Challenges in 5G: how to
empower SON with big data for enabling 5G,” IEEE Network, vol. 28,
no. 6, pp. 27–33, Nov./Dec. 2014.

[77] Y. Liu, S. Bi, Z. Shi, and L. Hanzo, “When machine learning meets
big data: A wireless communication perspective,” IEEE Vehicular
Technology Magazine, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 63–72, Mar. 2020.

[78] A. Guo, C. Yuan, G. He, and L. Xu, “Research on SDN/NFV network
trafﬁc management and optimization based on big data and artiﬁcial
intelligence,” in 18th International Symposium on Communications and
Information Technologies (ISCIT), Bangkok, Thailand, Dec. 2018.
[79] S. I. Kim and H. S. Kim, “A research on dynamic service function
chaining based on reinforcement learning using resource usage,” in
Ninth International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks
(ICUFN), Milan, Italy, 2017.

[80] K. Zhang, D. Si, W. Wang, J. Cao, and Y. Zhang, “Transfer learning
for distributed intelligence in aerial edge networks,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 74–81, Oct. 2021.

[81] S. Sezer, S. Scott-Hayward, P. K. Chouhan, B. Fraser, D. Lake,
J. Finnegan, N. Viljoen, M. Miller, and N. Rao, “Are we ready for
SDN? implementation challenges for software-deﬁned networks,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 36–43, Jul. 2013.
[82] I. Afolabi, T. Taleb, K. Samdanis, A. Ksentini, and H. Flinck, “Network
slicing and softwarization: A survey on principles, enabling tech-
nologies, and solutions,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2429–2453, Thirdquarter 2018.

[83] C. Benzaid and T. Taleb, “AI-driven zero touch network and service
management in 5G and beyond: Challenges and research directions,”
IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 186–194, Mar./Apr. 2020.

[84] P. L. Richardson, “Upwind dynamic soaring of albatrosses and UAVs,”

Progress in Oceanography, vol. 130, pp. 146–156, Jan. 2015.

[85] L. Xie, J. Xu, and R. Zhang, “Throughput maximization for UAV-
enabled wireless powered communication networks,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1690–1703, Apr. 2019.

[86] Z. Ding, Y. Liu, J. Choi, Q. Sun, M. Elkashlan, I. Chih-Lin, and H. V.
Poor, “Application of non-orthogonal multiple access in LTE and 5G
networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 185–
191, Feb. 2017.

[87] O. Elijah, C. Y. Leow, T. A. Rahman, S. Nunoo, and S. Z. Iliya, “A
comprehensive survey of pilot contamination in massive MIMO—5G
system,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2,
pp. 905–923, Secondquarter 2016.

[88] E. Bj¨ornson, E. G. Larsson, and T. L. Marzetta, “Massive MIMO: ten
myths and one critical question,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 114–123, Feb. 2016.

[89] K. Senel, H. V. Cheng, E. Bj¨ornson, and E. G. Larsson, “What role
can NOMA play in massive MIMO?” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
in Signal Processing, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 597–611, Jun. 2019.

[90] J. C. B. Garcia, A. Sibille, and M. Kamoun, “Reconﬁgurable intelligent
surfaces: Bridging the gap between scattering and reﬂection,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 38, no. 11, pp.
2538–2547, Nov. 2020.

[91] M. Zeng, W. Hao, O. A. Dobre, Z. Ding, and H. V. Poor, “Massive
MIMO-assisted mobile edge computing: Exciting possibilities for com-
putation ofﬂoading,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 15,
no. 2, pp. 31–38, Jun. 2020.

[92] F. Fang, Y. Xu, Q.-V. Pham, and Z. Ding, “Energy-efﬁcient design of
IRS-NOMA networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 69, no. 11, pp. 14 088–14 092, Nov. 2020.

[93] W. Y. B. Lim, N. C. Luong, D. T. Hoang, Y. Jiao, Y.-C. Liang, Q. Yang,
D. Niyato, and C. Miao, “Federated learning in mobile edge networks:
A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2031–2063, Thirdquarter 2020.

[94] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, Q.-V. Pham, P. N. Pathirana, L. B. Le,
A. Seneviratne, J. Li, D. Niyato, and H. V. Poor, “Federated learning
meets blockchain in edge computing: Opportunities and challenges,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 16, pp. 12 806–12 825,
Aug. 2021.

[95] C. Colman-Meixner et al., “Deploying a novel 5G-enabled architecture
on city infrastructure for ultra-high deﬁnition and immersive media
production and broadcasting,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting,
vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 392–403, Jun. 2019.

[96] F. Cirillo, D. G´omez, L. Diez, I. Elicegui Maestro, T. B. J. Gilbert,
and R. Akhavan, “Smart city IoT services creation through large-scale
collaboration,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 5267–
5275, Jun. 2020.

[97] Y. Liu, K. Liu, J. Han, L. Zhu, Z. Xiao, and X. G. Xia, “Resource
allocation and 3-D placement for UAV-enabled energy-efﬁcient IoT
communications,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 3, pp.
1322–1333, Feb. 2021.

[98] G. Zhu and K. Huang, “MIMO over-the-air computation for high-
mobility multimodal sensing,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6,
no. 4, pp. 6089–6103, Aug. 2019.

[99] C. H. Liu, Z. Chen, and Y. Zhan, “Energy-efﬁcient distributed mobile
crowd sensing: A deep learning approach,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1262–1276, Jun. 2019.
[100] W. Chen, B. Liu, H. Huang, S. Guo, and Z. Zheng, “When UAV swarm
meets edge-cloud computing: The QoS perspective,” IEEE Network,
vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 36–43, Mar./Apr. 2019.

[101] T. Li, K. Ota, T. Wang, X. Li, Z. Cai, and A. Liu, “Optimizing the
coverage via the UAVs with lower costs for information-centric Internet
of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 15 292–15 309, Jan. 2019.
[102] G. Xu, Y. Liu, and M. Xing, “Multi-channel synthetic aperture radar
imaging of ground moving targets using compressive sensing,” IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 66 134–66 142, Jul. 2018.

[103] G. Xu, Y. Liu, J. Sheng, G. Jing, X. Lin, and J. Chen, “Parametric
sparse SAR imaging of ground moving targets integrated with motion
compensation,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 73 457–73 464, Dec. 2018.

[104] J. Wang, K. Liu, and J. Pan, “Online UAV-mounted edge server
dispatching for mobile-to-mobile edge computing,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1375–1386, Feb. 2020.

[105] X. Diao, J. Zheng, Y. Cai, Y. Wu, and A. Anpalagan, “Fair data
allocation and trajectory optimization for UAV-assisted mobile edge
computing,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 2357–
2361, Dec. 2019.

[106] X. Diao, J. Zheng, Y. Wu, Y. Cai, and A. Anpalagan, “Joint trajectory
design, task data, and computing resource allocations for NOMA-based
and UAV-assisted mobile edge computing,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp.
117 448–117 459, 2019.

[107] Z. Tan, H. Qu, J. Zhao, S. Zhou, and W. Wang, “UAV-aided edge/fog
computing in smart IoT community for social augmented reality,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 4872–4884, Jun. 2020.

[108] X. Liu, Y. Chen, M. Wei, C. Wang, W. N. Gonc¸alves, J. M. Junior, and
J. Li, “Building instance extraction method based on improved hybrid
task cascade,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters, vol. 19,
pp. 1–5, Mar. 2022.

[109] M. Wan, G. Gu, W. Qian, K. Ren, X. Maldague, and Q. Chen,
“Unmanned aerial vehicle video-based target tracking algorithm using
sparse representation,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 6,
pp. 9689–9706, Dec. 2019.

[110] P. Li, X. Wu, W. Shen, W. Tong, and S. Guo, “Collaboration of
heterogeneous unmanned vehicles for smart cities,” IEEE Network,
vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 133–137, Jul./Aug. 2019.

[111] Z. Hu, Z. Bai, Y. Yang, Z. Zheng, K. Bian, and L. Song, “UAV aided
aerial-ground IoT for air quality sensing in smart city: Architecture,
technologies, and implementation,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 2, pp.
14–22, Mar./Apr. 2019.

[112] J. Gao, Z. Hu, K. Bian, X. Mao, and L. Song, “AQ360: UAV-aided
air quality monitoring by 360-degree aerial panoramic images in urban
areas,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 428–442,
Jan. 2021.

[113] M. Colli, F. Cassola, F. Martina, E. Trovatore, A. Delucchi, S. Maggi-
olo, and D. D. Caviglia, “Rainfall ﬁelds monitoring based on satellite
microwave down-links and traditional techniques in the city of genoa,”
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 58, no. 9,
pp. 6266–6280, Sep. 2020.

[114] L. Ma, Y. Li, J. Li, Z. Zhong, and M. A. Chapman, “Generation
of horizontally curved driving lines in HD maps using mobile laser
scanning point clouds,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied
Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 1572–
1586, May 2019.

[115] L. Liu, H. Ma, S. Chen, X. Tang, J. Xie, G. Huang, and F. Mo,
“Image-translation-based road marking extraction from mobile laser
point clouds,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 64 297–64 309, Apr. 2020.

[116] Y. Zang, C. Wang, L. Cao, Y. Yu, and J. Li, “Road network extraction
via aperiodic directional structure measurement,” IEEE Transactions
on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 3322–3335,
Jun. 2016.

24

[117] K. Kuru, “Planning the future of smart cities with swarms of fully
autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles using a novel framework,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 6571–6595, Jan. 2021.

[118] Y. Chen, S. Wang, J. Li, L. Ma, R. Wu, Z. Luo, and C. Wang, “Rapid
urban roadside tree inventory using a mobile laser scanning system,”
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and
Remote Sensing, vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 3690–3700, Sep. 2019.

[119] Z. Gong, J. Li, Z. Luo, C. Wen, C. Wang, and J. Zelek, “Mapping
and semantic modeling of underground parking lots using a backpack
LiDAR system,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Sys-
tems, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 734–746, Feb. 2021.

[120] E. Ertugrul, U. Kocaman, and O. K. Sahingoz, “Autonomous aerial
navigation and mapping for security of smart buildings,” in 6th Inter-
national Istanbul Smart Grids and Cities Congress and Fair (ICSG),
Istanbul, Turkey, 2018.

[121] S. Hu, Q. Wu, and X. Wang, “Energy management and trajectory
optimization for UAV-enabled legitimate monitoring systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 142–
155, Jan. 2021.

[122] Y. Jin, Z. Qian, and W. Yang, “UAV cluster-based video surveillance
system optimization in heterogeneous communication of smart cities,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 55 654–55 664, Mar. 2020.

[123] H. Kim and J. Ben-Othman, “A collision-free surveillance system using
smart UAVs in multi domain IoT,” IEEE Communications Letters,
vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 2587–2590, Dec. 2018.

[124] G. K. Verma, B. B. Singh, N. Kumar, and D. He, “CB-PS: An
efﬁcient short-certiﬁcate-based proxy signature scheme for UAVs,”
IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 621–632, Mar. 2020.
[125] K. Gai, Y. Wu, L. Zhu, K.-K. R. Choo, and B. Xiao, “Blockchain-
enabled trustworthy group communications in UAV networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 22, no. 7, pp.
4118–4130, Jul. 2021.

[126] M. Aloqaily, O. Bouachir, A. Boukerche, and I. A. Ridhawi, “Design
guidelines for blockchain-assisted 5G-UAV networks,” IEEE Network,
vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 64–71, Jan./Feb. 2021.

[127] S. A. A. Shah, E. Ahmed, M. Imran, and S. Zeadally, “5G for vehicular
communications,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 1, pp.
111–117, Jan. 2018.

[128] J. Hu, C. Chen, L. Cai, M. R. Khosravi, Q. Pei, and S. Wan, “UAV-
assisted vehicular edge computing for the 6G internet of vehicles: archi-
tecture, intelligence, and challenges,” IEEE Communications Standards
Magazine, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 12–18, Jun. 2021.

[129] Y. Cao, S. Xu, J. Liu, and N. Kato, “Toward smart and secure V2X
communication in 5G and beyond: A UAV-enabled aerial intelligent
reﬂecting surface solution,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine,
vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 66–73, Mar. 2022.

[130] A. Sharma, P. Vanjani, N. Paliwal, C. M. W. Basnayaka, D. N. K.
Jayakody, H.-C. Wang, and P. Muthuchidambaranathane, “Communi-
cation and networking technologies for UAVs: A survey,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 168, p. 102739, Oct. 2020.
[131] Z. Chen, C. Wang, H. Luo, H. Wang, Y. Chen, C. Wen, Y. Yu, L. Cao,
and J. Li, “Vehicle detection in high-resolution aerial images based on
fast sparse representation classiﬁcation and multiorder feature,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 17, no. 8, pp.
2296–2309, Aug. 2016.

[132] D. Roy, T. Ishizaka, C. K. Mohan, and A. Fukuda, “Detection of
collision-prone vehicle behavior at intersections using siamese interac-
tion LSTM,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
2020, in press.

[133] S. Garg, A. Singh, S. Batra, N. Kumar, and L. T. Yang, “UAV-
empowered edge computing environment for cyber-threat detection in
smart vehicles,” IEEE Network, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 42–51, May/Jun.
2018.

[134] H. El-Sayed, M. Chaqfa, S. Zeadally, and D. Puthal, “A trafﬁc-aware
approach for enabling unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in smart city
scenarios,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 86 297–86 305, Jun. 2019.
[135] L. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Q. Wu, H. Zhao, H. Xu, and X. Wu, “Energy-aware
dynamic resource allocation in UAV assisted mobile edge computing
over social internet of vehicles,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 56 700–
56 715, Oct. 2018.

[136] S. Ortiz, C. T. Calafate, J. Cano, P. Manzoni, and C. K. Toh, “A UAV-
based content delivery architecture for rural areas and future smart
cities,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 29–36, Jan./Feb.
2019.

[137] S. A. Hadiwardoyo, C. T. Calafate, J. Cano, Y. Ji, E. Hern´andez-
Orallo, and P. Manzoni, “3D simulation modeling of UAV-to-car
communications,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 8808–8823, Dec. 2019.

25

[138] R. Lu, R. Zhang, X. Cheng, and L. Yang, “UAV-assisted data dissem-
ination with proactive caching and ﬁle sharing in V2X networks,” in
IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Waikoloa,
HI, USA, 2019.

[139] B. Shang, L. Liu, J. Ma, and P. Fan, “Unmanned aerial vehicle meets
vehicle-to-everything in secure communications,” IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 98–103, Oct. 2019.

[140] J. M¨uller, “Enabling technologies for

Industry 5.0,” Directorate-
General for Research and Innovation (European Commission), Sep.
2020.

[141] H. Li and A. V. Savkin, “Wireless sensor network based navigation
internet of things,” IEEE
of micro ﬂying robots in the industrial
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 3524–3533,
Aug. 2018.

[142] M. D. Bah, A. Haﬁane, and R. Canals, “CRowNet: Deep network for
crop row detection in UAV images,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 5189–
5200, Dec. 2020.

[143] L. Yang, J. Fan, Y. Liu, E. Li, J. Peng, and Z. Liang, “A review on
state-of-the-art power line inspection techniques,” IEEE Transactions
on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 69, no. 12, pp. 9350–9365,
Dec. 2020.

[144] A. Meloni and L. Atzori, “The role of satellite communications in the
smart grid,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 50–56,
Apr. 2017.

[145] Z. Ling, D. Zhang, R. C. Qiu, Z. Jin, Y. Zhang, X. He, and H. Liu,
“An accurate and real-time method of self-blast glass insulator location
based on faster R-CNN and U-net with aerial images,” CSEE Journal
of Power and Energy Systems, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 474–482, Dec. 2019.
[146] X. Tao, D. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Liu, H. Zhang, and D. Xu, “Detection
of power line insulator defects using aerial
images analyzed with
convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 1486–1498, Apr. 2020.
[147] Z. Liu, X. Wang, and Y. Liu, “Application of unmanned aerial vehicle
hangar in transmission tower inspection considering the risk probabil-
ities of steel towers,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 159 048–159 057, Oct.
2019.

[148] H.-M. Chung, S. Maharjan, Y. Zhang, F. Eliassen, and T. Yuan, “Edge
intelligence empowered UAVs for automated wind farm monitoring
in smart grids,” in IEEE Global Communications Conference, Taipei,
Taiwan, 2020.

[149] Q. Li, Y. Feng, Y. Leng, and D. Chen, “SolarFinder: Automatic
detection of solar photovoltaic arrays,” in ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN),
Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2020.

[150] P. Rengaraju, S. R. Pandian, and C. Lung, “Communication networks
and non-technical energy loss control system for smart grid networks,”
in IEEE Innovative Smart Grid Technologies - Asia (ISGT ASIA), Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia, 2014.

[151] Q. Yang, D. I. Laurenson, and J. A. Barria, “On the use of LEO satellite
constellation for active network management in power distribution
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1371–
1381, Sep. 2012.

[152] M. De Sanctis, E. Cianca, G. Araniti, I. Bisio, and R. Prasad, “Satellite
communications supporting internet of remote things,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 113–123, Feb. 2016.

[153] Z. Si, Y. Yu, M. Yang, and P. Li, “Hybrid solar forecasting method using
satellite visible images and modiﬁed convolutional neural networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 5–16,
Jan./Feb. 2021.

[154] H. V. Abeywickrama, B. A. Jayawickrama, Y. He, and E. Dutkiewicz,
“Empirical power consumption model for UAVs,” in IEEE 88th Vehic-
ular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall), Chicago, IL, USA, Apr 2018.
[155] Z. Li, Y. Wang, M. Liu, R. Sun, Y. Chen, J. Yuan, and J. Li, “Energy
efﬁcient resource allocation for UAV-assisted space-air-ground internet
of remote things networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 145 348–145 362,
Oct. 2019.

[156] R. Verdone and S. Mignardi, “Joint aerial-terrestrial resource manage-
ment in UAV-aided mobile radio networks,” IEEE Network, vol. 32,
no. 5, pp. 70–75, Sep./Oct. 2018.

[157] U. Challita, A. Ferdowsi, M. Chen, and W. Saad, “Machine learning for
wireless connectivity and security of cellular-connected UAVs,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 28–35, Feb. 2019.
[158] Y. K. Tun, Y. M. Park, N. H. Tran, W. Saad, S. R. Pandey, and C. S.
Hong, “Energy-efﬁcient resource management in UAV-assisted mobile
edge computing,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 25, no. 1, pp.
249–253, Jan. 2021.

[159] Q. Zhou, Z. Qu, S. Guo, B. Luo, J. Guo, Z. Xu, and R. Akerkar, “On-
device learning systems for edge intelligence: A software and hardware
synergy perspective,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 15,
pp. 11 916–11 934, Aug. 2021.

[160] A. Razi, F. Afghah, and J. Chakareski, “Optimal measurement policy
for predicting UAV network topology,” in 51st Asilomar Conference
on Signals, Systems, and Computers, Paciﬁc Grove, CA, USA, 2017.
[161] A. Razi, “Optimal measurement policy for linear measurement systems
with applications to UAV network topology prediction,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 1970–1981, Feb.
2020.

[162] E. Ghribi, T. T. Khoei, H. T. Gorji, P. Ranganathan, and N. Kaabouch,
“A secure blockchain-based communication approach for UAV net-
works,” in IEEE International Conference on Electro Information
Technology (EIT), Chicago, IL, USA, 2020.

[163] H. Qiu and H. Duan, “A multi-objective pigeon-inspired optimization
approach to UAV distributed ﬂocking among obstacles,” Information
Sciences, vol. 509, pp. 515–529, Jan. 2020.

[164] J. Hu, H. Zhang, L. Song, R. Schober, and H. V. Poor, “Cooperative
internet of UAVs: Distributed trajectory design by multi-agent deep re-
inforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 68,
no. 11, pp. 6807–6821, Nov. 2020.

[165] W. Li, Z. Su, R. Li, K. Zhang, and Y. Wang, “Blockchain-based data
security for artiﬁcial intelligence applications in 6G networks,” IEEE
Network, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 31–37, Nov./Dec. 2020.

[166] W. Sun, L. Wang, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Collaborative blockchain
for space-air-ground integrated networks,” IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 82–89, Dec. 2020.

[167] K. Lei, Q. Zhang, J. Lou, B. Bai, and K. Xu, “Securing ICN-based UAV
ad hoc networks with blockchain,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 26–32, Jun. 2019.

[168] Y. Wang, Z. Su, N. Zhang, and A. Benslimane, “Learning in the
air: Secure federated learning for UAV-assisted crowdsensing,” IEEE
Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, vol. 8, no. 2, pp.
1055–1069, Apr.-Jun. 2021.

