Software Engineers’ Response to Public Crisis: Lessons Learnt
from Spontaneously Building an Informative COVID-19
Dashboard
Chao Wu
benyunlongwu@gmail.com
Faculty of Information Technology,
Monash University
Australia

Chunyang Chen∗
chunyang.chen@monash.edu
Faculty of Information Technology,
Monash University
Australia

Han Wang
han.wang@monash.edu
Faculty of Information Technology,
Monash University
Australia

2
2
0
2

r
p
A
9
1

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
7
6
8
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Burak Turhan
burak.turhan@oulu.fi
Faculty of Info. Tech. and Electrical
Eng., University of Oulu
Finland

Shiping Chen
shiping.chen@data61.csiro.au
Data61 CSIRO
Australia

Jon Whittle
jon.whittle@data61.csiro.au
Data61 CSIRO
Australia

ABSTRACT
The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak quickly spread
around the world, resulting in over 240 million infections and 4
million deaths by Oct 2021. While the virus is spreading from per-
son to person silently, fear has also been spreading around the
globe. The COVID-19 information from the Australian Govern-
ment is convincing but not timely or detailed, and there is much
information on social networks with both facts and rumors. As soft-
ware engineers, we have spontaneously and rapidly constructed a
COVID-19 information dashboard aggregating reliable information
semi-automatically checked from different sources for providing
one-stop information sharing site about the latest status in Australia.
Inspired by the John Hopkins University COVID-19 Map, our dash-
board contains the case statistics, case distribution, government
policy, latest news, with interactive visualization. In this paper, we
present a participant’s in-person observations in which the authors
acted as founders of https://covid-19-au.com/ serving more than
830K users with 14M page views since March 2020. According to
our first-hand experience, we summarize 9 lessons for developers,
researchers and instructors. These lessons may inspire the devel-
opment, research and teaching in software engineer aspects for
coping with similar public crises in the future.

KEYWORDS
COVID-19, information dashboard, design lessons, education

ACM Reference Format:
Han Wang, Chao Wu, Chunyang Chen, Burak Turhan, Shiping Chen,
and Jon Whittle. 2022. Software Engineers’ Response to Public Crisis: Lessons

∗Corresponding authors

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICSE-SEIS’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9227-3/22/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3510458.3513010

Learnt from Spontaneously Building an Informative COVID-19 Dashboard.
In Software Engineering in Society (ICSE-SEIS’22), May 21–29, 2022, Pitts-
burgh, PA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3510458.3513010

LAY ABSTRACT
The 2019 Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) outbreak has spread
rapidly around the world. By October 2021, it has caused more
than 240 million infections and 4 million deaths. Although the
world is acting against the virus, some information on the Internet
has not been updated in time, and there are also many rumors on
social media. Therefore, software engineers have developed COVID-
19 information dashboards such as the Johns Hopkins University
COVID-19 Map and the World Health Organization COVID-19
website to provide the public with one-stop reliable COVID-19
related information. The author has also developed a COVID-19
dashboard https://covid-19-au.com/ that provides case statistics,
case distribution, government policies, latest news, and interactive
visualization during the pandemic in Australia. It has been popular
since March 2020 and has provided 14 million page views to more
than 830,000 users. In this paper, the authors discussed how they
built the COVID-19 dashboard website and how they formed and
managed a team of volunteers to help and maintain the project.
More importantly, the authors summarized 9 lessons for developers,
researchers and instructors based on experience. These courses may
inspire them in development, research and teaching to deal with
similar public crises in the future, and ultimately bring accurate
information to public users more effectively.

1 INTRODUCTION
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) [85] is an infectious disease
caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-
CoV-2). Since its first identification in December 2019, COVID-19
has spread globally, resulting in an ongoing pandemic. By the time
we write this paper, there have been over 240 million confirmed
cases and caused over 4 million lives lost in more than 192 countries
and territories by Oct 2021. To avoid the transmission of the virus,
over 90 governments have taken actions such as lockdowns, border

 
 
 
 
 
 
ICSE-SEIS’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Han Wang, Chao Wu, Chunyang Chen, Burak Turhan, Shiping Chen, and Jon Whittle

closures, working from home arrangements, enforcing social dis-
tancing, which influenced over half of the world’s population [66].
The pandemic has a severe influence on society, which has also
caused global economic disruptions, education interruptions, and
discrimination.

Under this unprecedented situation, it is usual for people to feel
the urge to constantly check for the latest updates and information
via government websites, news outlets, and social media. Consider-
ing that COVID-19 transmission, it is important to inform people
frequently and accurately with the latest status of COVID-19, par-
ticularly in their locality. Furthermore, the information can help
the public take proper actions, and also guide governments’ policy
making for maintaining the community health. Therefore, there’s
a need for a timely and trustworthy platform to provide stats and
information on the COVID-19 virus to the public.

In Australia, the federal and state governments’ public media re-
leases every day since the beginning of the outbreak, including data
of new case numbers and information on symptoms and prevention
from the COVID-19 virus. However, there are some limitations
with the government updates: First, Australian states report their
status separately without national criteria, making the data types
inconsistent for each other. There are also some conflicts between
the state government data and federal government data from time
to time. Second, suitable interactive data visualization is needed
to display the information, rather than the current static, plain
text. Third, updates are not frequent enough, i.e., once a day and at
different times in each state, and many details are missing.

As an alternative, social media updates COVID-19 related infor-
mation more frequently with fine-grained detail, but these channels
also include numerous rumours and misinformation and can some-
times spread even faster than the truth [15, 73]. Also, it’s hard to
see a historical trend due to its high frequent update and limited
content size.

To bridge the gap and respond to this crisis, we developed a
COVID-19 information dashboard1 aggregating the information
from different sources with intuitive data visualizations and fre-
quent updates for providing people with the latest and the most
accurate information. Our dashboard includes the latest COVID-19
status in each state (e.g., numbers of new cases, recovery, deaths,
and trend), flight search, infection map, symptoms and prevention
information, and latest news and tweets (as seen in Fig 1) to ad-
dress people’s information needs. To make the information more
understandable, we apply different interactive data visualization
techniques for different kinds of data with tables, line/bar charts,
and also the advanced interactive map.

There are some similar dashboards around the world (such as
COVID-19 global map from JHU [76], 1Point3Acres COVID-19
tracking resource for North America [1], DX Doctor’s COVID-19
real-time report in China [19]), but our dashboard is the first one
specifically targeting people in Australia with over 837K individual
users and 14M page views. Through spontaneously and rapidly
building this dashboard, we have accumulated much first-hand
experience, including the requirement elicitation, user activity anal-
ysis, collaboratively coding and testing, and continuously releasing.

1https://covid-19-au.com

Based on the challenges and the experience, we summarise 9
lessons that would be helpful for the developers, researchers, and
instructors respectively. First, we discuss the usage of sensitive
data, professional wording, calming user feelings, and task allo-
cation as lessons for developers when developing the COVID-19
dashboard. Second, for the academic researchers, we talk about the
lessons related to how they can elicit people’s information needs,
analyse users’ interactions on different devices, and understand
users’ interests in map visualizations by analysing the usage data
and user feedback we collected. Third, we discuss how students can
benefit from this project and how the instructors need to support
the students from the perspective of software engineer instructors.
The lessons aim to help software engineers better understand how
to deal with the pandemic as different roles. In particular, they may
guide software developers in developing similar applications for
future crisis events, benefit researchers in conducting studies in this
area, and inspire instructors in practical teaching about software
engineering.

The COVID-19 dashboard is a great example of the importance
of deeply thinking through what we call human values in software
design. Human values - such as inclusion, diversity, social respon-
sibility - are things that we as a society value, but they have often
been paid little attention in software engineering [60]. In the case of
a dashboard presenting important data on an emerging pandemic,
it is critical that the design of the system thinks through possible
negative consequences - for example, presenting the information
in one way versus another may influence citizens’ behaviours.
The contribution of this work is summarized as follows:

• This is a timely social-good project for developing a COVID-
19 information dashboard within a limited time for solving
information needs of the society during this global pandemic.
• We document the first-hand development experience of an
information dashboard for COVID-19 with great social im-
pact on millions of people in Australia.

• During the dashboard development, we distill important
lessons for developers, researchers, and instructors based on
our own experience, and these lessons may guide them in
the software engineer area and deliver value to the public.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides
the background of the efforts the developers have made to fight
against the pandemic, and some dashboards that have been released
for the COVID-19. We introduce the dashboard characteristics, the
huge impact it has made to the public, and the overall steps of how
the authors developed it in section 3. In section 4, we summarize a
total of 9 lessons learned during the development of the COVID-
19 dashboard. We conclude our work in section 5 and discuss the
improvements that could be made to the dashboard.

2 BACKGROUND
Software systems increasingly impact our society. This is espe-
cially true for AI systems, which can replace humans as decision
makers, but it is also true for more mundane software systems. Es-
sentially, any software system has the potential for impact (positive
or negative) on society and there is an increasing recognition that
developers need to understand these impacts as part of the software
design process [79]. During the COVID-19 pandemic, developers

Software Engineers’ Response to Public Crisis: Lessons Learnt from Spontaneously Building an Informative COVID-19 Dashboard

ICSE-SEIS’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Figure 1: Different functionalities of our dashboard

are mobilising around the coronavirus outbreak to find solutions
to deal with the crisis using different software technologies.

2.1 Developers’ Efforts in Fighting the Virus
The Information Technology community is one of the important
forces in fighting with COVID-19. Various innovations and solu-
tions ranging from contact tracing applications to data platforms
were developed in response to different aspects of the pandemic.
Researchers have also reviewed the proposed applications and tax-
onomies [10, 43, 78]. Based on our experience and the existing
research, we categorised such applications into 5 types:

Symptom Tracking applications that analyse symptom data
from suspected and confirmed patients. Governments of countries
such as Australia [20], Singapore [34], and the US [13] have rolled
out their Self Checkers applications to direct individuals to appropri-
ate resources. Some governments of countries such as Iceland [39]
and the UK [13] use mobile technologies to collect data on patient-
reported symptoms and triangulate to reveal information like how
the virus is spreading and people who might have a risk that was
exposed to the virus.

Crowd Detection applications that reduce the risk of virus
transmission by monitoring the crowd in public areas. The Califor-
nian government worked with mobile app company Foursquare to
track if public areas such as beaches and parks, were getting too
crowded. In Denver, the Tri-County Health Department utilised
data from ad-tech startup to monitor counties where the population
on average strays more than 330 feet from home [67]. In the UK,
the University of Newcastle uses data generated from smart city
technology such as pedestrian flow, car park occupancy, and traffic
to measure social distancing during the lock-down [42].

Contact Tracing applications identify and alert individuals
who are close contacts of the confirmed patients. After Singa-
pore launched the first COVID-19 contact tracing app “Trace To-
gether" [35] in March 2020, over 47 countries [56] and territories
have developed their own Contact Tracing app. Concerns and de-
bates have arisen around the effectiveness of the software [9], pri-
vacy issues [38], and project management failures [11]. To tackle
such problems, Apple and Google co-developed a joint API for
contact tracing applications [2].

Quarantine Daily Life applications that help users cope with
their life during the pandemic. Taiwan government uses a system
called eMask to imposes quotas on masks [18] to prevent hoarding.

To help the self-employed people, financial technology profession-
als have created Covid Credit [30], a cloud-based tool developed
with open banking technology to help people prove their income
losses to the government. Microsoft’s videoconferencing tool Teams
uses artificial intelligence to cut out of the users’ live photos and
place them into a fixed position within a setting to create a more
connected feel for the attendees [69]. Some developers even cre-
ated applications that mimic office sounds [70] for users who miss
working onsite.

Information Aggregation and Sharing applications aggre-
gate and share COVID-19 data in real-time. Many applications col-
lect and share COVID-19 datasets, such as COVID-19 Data Hub [37],
DOMO tracker [21], Our World In Data [41] and Tableau COVID-19
global data [72]. The datasets were further visualised, analysed, and
broadcasted. During December 2019, an AI company had sent the
warnings of the outbreak by souring news reports and airline tick-
eting data [51]. In Europe, free live map of border crossing times
for trucks was created to help Europe’s supply chains to evaluate
expected delays [68] based on traffic data. Some visualization ap-
plications [16, 32] including our dashboard focus on presenting
COVID case information to help to provide a foundation for public
policy decisions [25].

2.2 Information Dashboard about COVID-19
A dashboard is a visual display of the most important information
needed to achieve one or more objectives. Information was con-
solidated and arranged on a single screen to be monitored at a
glance [29]. There is a long history of using dashboards in response
to disasters such as pandemics [77], Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in
the US [71] and storms in Brazil [45]. Nowadays, dashboards are
widely used to effectively communicate disaster information [33]
such as earthquakes [23], hurricane [24], and bushfires [36] to the
public.

Since the COVID-19 outbreak, the information dashboard has
also been adopted for displaying the COVID-19 related informa-
tion. For example, Johns Hopkins University developed a global
COVID-19 dashboard [22] to display the reported cases on a daily
time scale around the world. A number of similar dashboards are
also developed by different entities and countries globally [1, 7, 19,
27, 49, 65, 80, 83]. Other than the case number, dashboards were
found to be used to display a variety of COVID data, including a
clinical trial [74], preventive measures [82], social media sentiment

(a) Home Page(b) Info Page(c) News PageICSE-SEIS’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Han Wang, Chao Wu, Chunyang Chen, Burak Turhan, Shiping Chen, and Jon Whittle

level [59], county vulnerability index [50], and projection [31, 52].
Academic research in various disciplines has been generated based
on these publicly available data dashboards [3, 5, 46, 47, 57, 58].

However, along with the rapid emergence of various dashboards,
some concerns have been raised. One research proposed the idea of
"dashboard pandemic", stating that the dashboards are a "biopolitical
technology of anxiety" and prompts national states of emergency,
which lacks nuanced spatial, temporal, social, and epidemiological
information. Thus not adequately addressing the uneven and unjust
geographies of the present [26]. An article addressed geopolitical
considerations in maintaining, calling developers accountable to
readers [53]. Efforts to address these issues have been made. For
example, the US county-level dataset [44] covers 300 variables from
demographics to climate to make the dashboards more representa-
tive.

The authors developed an information dashboard2 for displaying
the latest status of COVID-19 in Australia in early March 2020.
Besides the basic data statistics about COVID-19, we also add some
additional features such as a rich information map, flight searching
with confirmed cases, manually filtered latest news and tweets, etc.
As the founders of this project, we share our first-hand experience
and lessons which may inspire further research on developing
similar information dashboard for other emergency disasters, and
new ways of education during the pandemic.

3 AU COVID-19 DASHBOARD

DEVELOPMENT

In this section, we introduce the project characteristics, impact, and
overall development process in steps.

3.1 Project Characteristic
The first COVID-19 confirmed case in Australia was identified on
January 25, 2020, and the increase was relatively slow in the next
month. Since the beginning of March 2020, the number of new
COVID-19 cases were increasing significantly in Australia. To keep
people informed and calm, we started to develop an information
dashboard to report the latest COVID-19 status in Australia on
March 14, 2020, with a small team of the first three authors (one
product manager and two developers). We officially released our
dashboard on March 16 with basic functionalities and open-sourced
our project on GitHub3. It has become one of the first COVID-
19 informative dashboards in Australia. With the promotion and
recruitment, our team increased from 3 members to 38 active mem-
bers4 and over 200 volunteers from 12 different nations, most of
whom are undergraduate/postgraduate students in Australia. Ac-
cording to participants’ expertise, we separated them into different
groups, including web development, data/information/news collec-
tion, and communication. Note that this project is nonprofit, and
all participants volunteer to contribute to it.

After the development, based on the existing dashboards from
other countries and analysing user feedback with feature require-
ments and behaviors, we kept adding features to the dashboard.
The information dashboard contains functionalities as below:

2https://covid-19-au.com
3https://github.com/covid-19-au/covid-19-au.github.io
4https://covid-19-au.com/about-us

Figure 2: The visiting traffic of our dashboard

• The latest number of new/total cases, death, recovery, testing

in each state and territory.

• Data visualisation of historical data trend.
• A map of case distribution in each city or suburb.
• Flight details search with confirmed cases.
• Basic information about COVID-19 including symptoms,
prevention, and a list of hospitals doing coronavirus testing.
• Latest news from online newsgroup and tweets from the

Department of Health in State Government.

3.2 Impact
Our project is a social-good open-source project to keep people
informed and calm during the pandemic. Since the launch of this
site, it has drawn a wide range of attention across Australia. From
March 17, 2020 to July 16, 2021, there have been 837,958 individ-
ual users with 14,465,574 page views, as seen in Fig 2. There are
4,337,250 sessions, and users spend over 2.6 minutes on average in
each session. Among all the visitors, 21.7% of the users are returning
users, whereas the rest of them are new visitors. Most of the users
(78.3%) use mobile devices to access the dashboard, whereas 19.1%
of them use Desktop. Only 2.6% of the users use a tablet to visit the
website. Although most users are from Australia(over 90%), there
are still some of them from other 184 different countries and areas
around the world. From different channels (e.g., social media, email,
online survey), we received much feedback from users aged from
10 to 80, around 81% of the users feel excellent or very good about
our website. The feedback includes appreciation letters, bug/error
reports, and feature requests. For example, we received an appreci-
ation letter from a Canadian user who has an immunosuppressed
daughter lives in Australia:

“The information that your site has provided brings my family
reassurance that my daughter is in safe hands; and for that we are
truly grateful. ”

Furthermore, there is also feedback that expressed their appreci-

ation while requesting more features like:

“Thanks for all of your hard work to keep people informed about
the spread of covid-19. Seeing the data each day really helps put
everything in perspective and is an effective way to reduce the fear
and panic that are being spread. The only addition I could think of

Software Engineers’ Response to Public Crisis: Lessons Learnt from Spontaneously Building an Informative COVID-19 Dashboard

ICSE-SEIS’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Figure 3: The development life cycle

would be to include a new version of the “Cases, Deaths and Recoveries"
graph but allow it to be broken down by each state.”

Seeing such feedback really motivated the team to keep deliv-
ering features to the product and having a positive impact on the
users.

3.3 An Overview of Development Process
In this section, we demonstrate the development process of the
dashboard. Fig 3 shows the development cycle of how we build and
maintain the dashboard. Our development cycle starts with team
building. As most of our team members are volunteer students, they
would need to focus on their class works first and then help with the
development. So we have to constantly find new members to take
place for some old volunteers who need to deal with their assign-
ments first. Then, we adopt the Agile programming cycle in order to
deliver value and response to the requirements frequently [6]. The
development team meets virtually online to discuss which feature
to develop in the next sprint, and we only pick the tasks that are
actually needed. Moreover, inside each sprint, the developers report
their daily scrum online, pick tasks from Kanban, and do extensive
code reviews and tests. We discuss the details of each step in the
following part.

(Step-1) Team Building To develop this dashboard, we con-
structed a team initialised with the first three authors of this paper
as founders of this project and gradually expanded to over 200
volunteers from 12 different countries (e.g., Australia, China, Viet-
nam, et cetera.) with different expertise (e.g., IT, business, health).
Most of them are enrolled students who did not know each other
before this project, and all of them are working as volunteers. We
split the team into three groups: the data team (data collection
and update), the development team (build and test the dashboard),
and the communication team (manage the social media account
and communicate with end-users). Each team collaborates closely
with each other and keeps producing value during the development
process.

(Step-2) Requirement Elicitation Different from conventional
software development, we did not have a complete list of require-
ments before the project development and did not have enough time
for user requirement analysis before we started the development
due to the rapid change of the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, we
designed the initial version of the website with basic functions by
the inspiration from other dashboards developed in the counties
with earlier cases (e.g., China, Singapore) and our development ex-
perience. After building and releasing the Minimum Viable Product
(MVP) version of the website, the communication team keeps col-
lecting feature requests from public users’ comments and feedback.
They then summarised the requirements and discussed with the
development team to make implement plans. The plans include the

new feature development and the improvements on the existing
ones.

(Step-3) Data Collection Data collection is a really important
step to the information dashboard. The data needs to be accurate
and trustworthy. The data collection team collects the data from
different resources (e.g., Government websites, online newsgroups,
social media) using a semi-automatic way to make sure the infor-
mation users gained from our dashboard is correct and trustworthy.
The automatic crawler extracts the data from the Internet, and
volunteers double-check the results, including resolving the contra-
dictory information, identifying the reliable resources, and make
sure the numbers are correct. In terms of data trustworthiness, we
only use the data from country and state government official re-
lease and their official accounts on social media. And for the online
newsgroups, we use the news from mainstream national online
newsgroups and big newsgroups in the states of Australia. We have
our data sources listed here5.

(Step-4) Data Visualization We understand that data visual-
isation is not just about display raw data directly to the public.
With different types of data we collected in the previous step, we
add different types of data visualisations. For example, we use the
heatmap to show the case density in the suburbs and states, the
line chart to show the historical COVID-19 trend in Australia and
the other countries. We also use other charts like pie charts, bar
charts, and stacked charts to display data, i.e., the age and gender
distribution for each state in Australia.

(Step-5) Web Development We develop the website with Re-
act JavaScript, code is stored at Github for code management, and
the website is hosted on AWS. The development team adopts the
Agile programming model. The team members pick tasks from Kan-
ban and chat virtually through Slack channels or Zoom meetings
regularly. They also chat with the data team and communications
team to understand the requirement.

(Step-6) Testing & Release After the implementation of each
new feature, we manually test our web applications on different
devices to make sure the features work on all popular operating
systems and different screen sizes. We also ask a small portion of
our users to test the features and send feedback to us. After passing
the tests, we release the new features immediately to meet the
public needs on time.

4 LESSONS LEARNED IN DASHBOARD

DEVELOPMENT

During the rapid developments, we have made some mistakes as
well as conducting some experiments with our users. We also col-
lect and analyse the user activities to learn how they are using the
COVID-19 dashboard to continuously improve the website. With
our first-hand experience and theories in software development, we
summarise some lessons that are highly related to the pandemic it-
self. Furthermore, based on our work duties(developers, researchers
and instructors), we categorise the lessons into these three aspects,
which should be helpful with people who work in the same areas
respectively.

5https://bit.ly/2IEdFNj

ICSE-SEIS’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Han Wang, Chao Wu, Chunyang Chen, Burak Turhan, Shiping Chen, and Jon Whittle

Fig 4. We use the shades of red to represents confirmed cases in a
certain area to avoid the ambiguous and misunderstanding.

Lesson 2: Use domain-specific terms for a clear descrip-
tion In the development of such domain-specific app, it is cru-
cial to choose professional terms rather than some random words
which may cause ambiguity, confusion, and resulting in losing
trust in the product. In our development experience of the COVID-
19 dashboard, we once used the term “Existing Case” to describe
the confirmed cases that have not recovered yet. Though all of
the developers in our team can understand this well, we received
much feedback asking what does the Existing Case refers to as they
thought the Existing Case is identical to Confirmed Case, some even
suspect that we were using fraud data. We then realized that for
this kind of cases, there is a more professional term as Active Case
for it. We quickly change the wording of it and add an explanation
under the column to explain to the users who are still not clear
about it. Furthermore, adopting correct medical terms which is
both accurate and easy to understand is difficult, so we also further
checked all the other words that we were using, compared them
with the ones on the government Department of Health website,
and consult our team members with medical backgrounds to make
sure we are using the right form.

Lesson 3: keep users calm during the pandemic The COVID-
19 virus not only has a physical impact on the patients but also
brings heavy mental pressure, especially to people in lockdown or
quarantine. There has been an increased number of reports of de-
pression, anxiety, and distress across a number of medical staff and
the public [51]. The social distancing, the isolated policies, and the
fear of health and financial situations have negatively influenced
people on their mental health. When developing the COVID-19
dashboard, we learned that the increasing number of death and
confirmed numbers could cause people to feel anxious and worried.
In order to avoid this, developers shall also consider keeping users
calm when developing such dashboards.

Since knowing the facts about COVID-19 can help reduce stress [14],

in the COVID-19 dashboard, we develop the information page (seen
in Fig 1) that contains an instructional video of what the virus is,
general information, and frequently asked questions about the
COVID-19, and Australian state regulations. Furthermore, we also
add a daily distractions section to the page, which includes videos,
images, and news that are either fun and relaxing or motivated
people during the time.

Lesson 4: Develop different features for different phases
of the pandemic We develop the features that are only needed
now [17]. Since the pandemic starts with no signs and it spreads
around so quickly, there is no enough time for developers to develop
all the features. Also, as our communication team keeps receiving
feature requests from end-users, it is important to choose which
features to develop under the current circumstances. In our practice,
we chose the features that are needed the most based on different
phases of the pandemic which keeps the continuous development,
improves the efficiency of development, and increases developers’
motivation [17].

As can be seen in Fig 5, we firstly developed a Minimum Viable
Product(MVP) [64], based on the inspiration from other dashboards
developed in other countries (e.g., JHU, DXY, etc). Then, we noticed
that the Australian government started to release policies such as

Figure 4: The update of case map

4.1 Lessons for Developers
The software developers’ productivity and wellbeing have declined
due to the pandemic [63]. To help them with their development in
future crises, we summarised four lessons for the developers based
on the mistakes we have made and the experience we gained in the
development process. The lessons are related to data collection and
visualisation, entity naming, and prioritise development tasks.

Lesson 1: Be careful about sensitive data Due to the sensi-
tivity of the COVID-19 data, any errors in the data may incur social
panic and spread fast among people [28, 84]. At the beginning stage
of our dashboard, we have not built up a mechanism to efficiently
update data in the dashboard. One day we accidentally put the
death number wrongly by adding an extra zero after the number.
Though we were aware of the error soon after the release, we cor-
rected the number and deployed the updated version as soon as
possible, we still received a number of complaints (over 20) about
the wrong number which resulting in users’ confusion, panic, and
disappointment of our data in the dashboard, which brought a
negative influence to the dashboard.

To ensure the data accuracy, we then decided to adopt a human-
centered semi-automatic mechanism to collect and verify sensitive
data such as statistics and news, which kept both the data accuracy
and maintenance update efficiency. In our approach, we first built
the crawlers to fetch the latest stats from different trustworthy
data sources. Then, we involved human into the loop (HITL)[81]
mechanism for having members from the data team to check the
data accuracy and also resolving potential data conflicts. Finally,
we published the data to the website for the public to view. Besides,
we also simplified the deployment process to adapt quickly update
so that if any unexpected errors happen, we can respond to them
quickly. In such a way, we reduce the chances that errors might
happen during the data collection process.

Another example is when developing the cases map, we firstly
use map markers to annotate COVID-19 virus stats in each city.
As seen in (a) Fig 4, the red cross icons represent the geographic
location of a COVID-19 clinic, and the grey markers represent
the number of confirmed cases in that suburb. However, then we
received feedback from users saying one of the markers was pointed
right on his farm, which he was not happy with: “You have a case
marked on our farm...”. Furthermore, we also received feedback like
the pointer was pointed in a national park which confused them if
there was a virus case in the park. So we changed it to the (b) of

Software Engineers’ Response to Public Crisis: Lessons Learnt from Spontaneously Building an Informative COVID-19 Dashboard

ICSE-SEIS’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Figure 5: Temporal changes of our site

some necessary information about the virus and the regulations to
the public. Moreover, some online newsgroups also had detailed
news behind those numbers. So we added the news and informa-
tion features right after the MVP. As the COVID-19 pandemic was
getting worse, we noticed that more than 60% for the cases are re-
lated to overseas traveling[55] so we updated the related flights and
cruise ship information to the dashboard. As mentioned above, we
also added the daily distraction part to keep people relax and calm
during the pandemic. Finally, as the increasing curve was flattened,
we noticed that the pandemic in other countries was still severe,
so we added the global comparison to compare the pandemic in
Australia with the rest of the countries to give the users a global
view of the COVID-19 pandemic.

In such a way, we managed to add new features in each new
development iterations and keep delivering what is needed by the
users at specific periods of the pandemic.

Summary of lessons for developers: Software develop-
ers play an important role in fighting COVID-19. When
rapidly developing an information dashboard for future
crises, they should be careful about the sensitive data to
avoid society panic, use domain-specific terms to avoid
confusion, keep an eye on the mental health of users as
well as delivering features based on different phases of the
crisis.

4.2 Lessons for Academic Researchers
Apart from the development lessons shared with developers, we also
collect much information about users’ interactions and feedback to
our information dashboard. In this section, we explore the data we
collected to distill lessons that may benefit other researchers’ study
and improve the development.

Lesson 5: Understand people’s information needs about
COVID-19 During the development of the dashboard, we have
collected user feedback and their overall usage activities through
Google Analysis. By analyzing this kind of data, our platform can
help other researchers and Governments better understand people’s
COVID-19 information needs to which they can work to cater to.
Based on the data we collected from Google Analytics6 which
helps collect end-user behaviour of the website, we learned that
except the home page, state pages like Victoria (512,413 times), New
South Wales (164,192 times) and Queensland (80,125 times) are the
most visited pages, which are also the top three states that have
the highest confirmed case number of COVID-19 in Australia. Note
that the pandemic in Victoria is especially severe compared with
the rest two, which also makes its page view significantly higher

6https://analytics.google.com/

Component (actions)
Case Map (click, zoom, span, etc)
Case by State (choose state)
Navigation (click)
Global Comparison (select countries)
News (direct to original news)
Flight Search (search)

Portion
71.7%
10.5%
8.2%
7%
1.5%
1%

Table 1: Users activities data collected from Google Analyt-
ics

Figure 6: Results from the feedback

compared with the others. We also collect how users interact with
page components. Table 1 shows the interaction frequency with
components. We can see that the most popular component in our
dashboard is the Case Map, as COVID-19 is spread by human and
people are most concerned with the spatial data.

For data from the user feedback, it is easier to figure out their in-
formation needs compares with the analytic tools, i.e. which part of
the website do they like the most, what are the features they require.
By September 2020, we have received a total of 315 feedback from
users. As mentioned above, over 81% of the participants feel excel-
lent or very good about the website we build. Some other details
as can be seen in Fig 6, of all the features in the dashboard, users
prefer the real-time stats of the detailed state data the most. Most of
the users come to express their appreciation to the dashboard and
leave their feature requests or bug reports of the dashboard. We
further cross-compare the data with their age and gender and find
out some facts, i.e. For users older than 40, they tend to raise bugs
and data errors (37% of users older than 40) whereas the younger
ones are more likely to ask for new features (44% of people younger
than 40) such as adding the test number and the ICU number to
the state table, introducing the log scale to the line charts, adding
detailed age/gender distribution, etc.

The data analysis from Google Analytics and users’ feedback
helps us to make a better adjustment to the dashboard in order
to improve their user experience. For example, we noticed that
a number of our users are using the Case Map to check the data

MVPNews andinformationFlights andCruise ShipStateComparisonDailyDistractionGlobalComparisonPandemic starts Pandemic spreads (More and morepeople got infected)Increasing curve isﬂattenedICSE-SEIS’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Han Wang, Chao Wu, Chunyang Chen, Burak Turhan, Shiping Chen, and Jon Whittle

Figure 8: Session activities breakdown

State
Victoria
New South Wales
Queensland
Western Australia
Southern Australia
Northern Territory
Tasmania
Australian Capital Territory

Clicks
4,849
2,625
1,395
823
500
361
191
27

Case Number
20,269
4,273
1,161
692
473
33
230
113

Table 2: Clicks on state and territory tiles

Navigation took up the majority of all the activities. As indicated
in Fig 8, mobile users and desktop users spent 95.59% and 86.99% of
their activities respectively on zooming and panning. After users
locate an area, they can click on it to see the detail. Mobile sessions
had a 0.51 average click volume, which means that only 50% of
them click on any of the tiles. In comparison, desktop sessions had
2 average clicks. Most users were not enthusiastic about finding the
tile detail, including history numbers and trends. 85.91% of all the
map sessions had not clicked any tile on the map. However, when
calculating the sessions with at least one click recorded, we found
that those sessions had 4.2 clicks on average. This indicates that
those who want to explore the details tend to select multiple places
inside one session.

Lesson 7: Understand users’ interests in the map
Apart from the interactions, researchers can further tell users’
interest areas on the map by mining different interaction records.
The results may help the Government make the policies accordingly,
understand one area’s mental stress, etc.

From the data we collected from the case map, we find that the
hot area in the map is proportional to the number of active cases
in the areas. Refer to Table 2, of all the 8 Australian states showing
on the map the most clicked one is Victoria, which is the state
that also has 74% of all the cases in Australia by October 2020. The
Local Government Area (LGA) level data shows the same pattern.
The most clicked tile is Wyndham Victoria, which has the most
COVID-19 cases among all the other LGA areas. Out of the 14,168
sessions that recorded a click, 71.2% of them clicked on a tile that
is 50km away from their IP locations, which indicates apart from
where they are based, the users are also interested in the situation
outside the place they live in or work at. This reveals that users
show more interest in the hot spot area with more case numbers
regardless they are the residents or not.

Another factor leading to the hot area is not related to the COVID-
19 case number, but the size of that area. The Northern Territory
State is of the least cases and least population among all the other
states in Australia, but it attracted more clicks than Tasmania and
Australian Capital Territory because it is the third-largest state in
Australia in size. It is 15.6 times larger than Tasmania and 602 times

Figure 7: The interactive data map

with their mobile devices (over 80% of users are mobile users), and
we have also received some feedback expressed that it’s hard to
interact with the map on small screens. So, we added a full-screen
option to the map for users to be able to better navigate on the
map (as can be seen in Fig 4 as well). We also prioritised the feature
requests based on the number of them accordingly.

Lesson 6: Understand users’ different interactions on mo-
bile and desktop devices The interactive COVID-19 case map,
as illustrated in Fig 7, has been considered to be one of the most
critical parts of our dashboard according to our user feedback (as
Case map in Table 1). Epidemics of emerging infectious diseases
such as COVID-19 are often observed as several clusters of disease
at widespread locations [75], and its transmission is more likely to
occur between individuals that are in close proximity [61]. There-
fore, spatial data such as confirmed case numbers in different areas
are quickly disclosed and broadcast to the public.

When people perceive such data, they naturally interact with it
as it is easy to understand. This is one of the reasons for the case
map component is popular. However, due to the complexity of the
spatial data and the characteristic of this pandemic, we hope to
provide more insights to researchers on how users interact with
the map especially in mobile platforms, which can help with their
system design in future crises.

Users can interact with the map by actions including zooming,
panning, and clicking. We analyzed 779,018 records of our dash-
board’s map interaction logs from August 10 to September 9, 2020.
These logs were further aggregated into 61,322 sessions. Among
these sessions, we found that more of them were generated by
mobile users than desktop users. 43,503 sessions were carried out
by mobile devices, which took 70.94% of all the sessions. Moreover,
there was a clear difference between the interaction patterns of the
two user groups. Mobile users spent less time interacting with the
map. A mobile session’s average duration was 41.57 seconds, while
it was 94.61 seconds for a desktop user. Correspondingly, mobile
users generated fewer activities. Their average number of activities
per session was 11.57 times, which was 25% less than desktop users.
The reason might be that it was hard for mobile users to carry out
complicated gesture actions on the small screen than desktop users
with a mouse or touchpad.

Software Engineers’ Response to Public Crisis: Lessons Learnt from Spontaneously Building an Informative COVID-19 Dashboard

ICSE-SEIS’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Figure 9: Clicks on Wyndham and Yarra Ranges aggregated
(other clicks were hidden for clarity)

larger than the Australian Capital Territory. A similar situation
happens in clicks on LGA level data too. Take the second most
clicked LGA area, Yarra Ranges Victoria as an example. Compare
to the Wyndham (the most clicked LGA with the highest confirmed
number), Yarra Ranges has 90% confirmed cases less than Wyndham,
but is more than 4 times larger than it. Fig 9 shows the clicks on
Wyndham and Yarra Ranges, the red layers represent the confirmed
case numbers, whereas the green represents the click numbers. The
darker the color is, the higher numbers it has. So the larger area
gets a higher chance to be clicked.

The website also offers several data layer options for users to
choose from (top left corner of Fig 7), i.e., active case, total case, total
deaths, etc. However, only a few users appeared to have selected
them. Excepting the default layer “active cases" which was designed
to be displayed for every session, the 4 most displayed layers (total
cases, new cases, recovered number and death number) took 11% of
all sessions. A similar pattern was found in the history data periods
filter and history data slider as well. Most sessions were not related
to either of those functions.

Summary of lessons for researchers: By analyzing
users’ interactions and feedback to our information dash-
board, we find that users always want to see more types of
data and visualizations, they are interested in interact with
case map the most, desktop users interact more compare
with mobile device users, and they tend to focus on the
area with high confirmed case numbers, etc. The conclu-
sion may help other researchers understand people during
the pandemic and decision-makers in the government to
design their policies.

4.3 Lessons for Software Engineering

Instructors

Our dashboard is an open-source project initiated by Software
Engineer (SE) instructors and run by volunteers, mainly university
students. This section summarized the participants’ experiences
and listed several suggestions that may help SE instructors teach
software engineering principles and concepts during the pandemic
through project-based learning.

Lesson 8: Students benefit from software engineering project-

based learning in the pandemic Although researches show that
university students experienced heterogeneous disruptions during

Figure 10: Slack message volume by channels

the pandemic [4, 12, 48], our volunteers unanimously expressed
that participating in the project is a beneficial experience.

One of the benefits is that participating in such projects prepares
them for their future career. Many participants revealed the gap
between the industry requirement and skill they acquired from
tertiary education [62]. By participating in the project, they get
a chance to apply their SE principles and knowledge to a real-
world project. Our project is authentic, larger in scale, and more
agile in pace compared to the capstone projects they were assigned
from regular university courses. The site’s development can be
traced through its GitHub repository7. There were 29 contributors
submitted 604 pull requests with 2921 commits in 206 days, which
is approximately 14 commits per day. The two peaks of the commit
volumes are aligned with the two waves of outbreaks in Victoria
Australia, where the majority of the developers based. The commits
were mainly submitted during the night, 62% of the commits were
submitted between 20:00 and 00:00 (GMT+11), as most of the major
updates are deployed at night. The manual website updates last
from morning to night, volunteers work in pair on shifts to submit
and review data. The communication team runs multiple social
media accounts, posts live data and write blogs to keep the public
informed.

Being able to work with a big community closely is another
benefit. It helps the students cope with the social distancing and
lockdown, by providing a sense of belonging and equipping them
with useful soft skills, especially the communication and cooper-
ation skills in the large development team. In the project, over
200 members communicate closely to plan, implement, test, and
maintain the dashboard to keep it abreast of the pandemic via slack
across 13 different channels as per Fig 10. The discussions are mainly
work-related. We applied the Latent Dirichlet Allocation(LDA) [8]
algorithm to all the chatting records and discovered the most fre-
quently discussed topics are the data collection (includes news and
case numbers), web page design, page testing, and requirements
discussions.

Therefore, instructors can use such a project-based learning ap-
proach to teach software engineering students under the epidemic
allows students to collaborate within a large development group,
and better understand the software development life cycle.

Lesson 9: Support students through the project process in

the pandemic

7https://github.com/covid-19-au/covid-19-au.github.io

ICSE-SEIS’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Han Wang, Chao Wu, Chunyang Chen, Burak Turhan, Shiping Chen, and Jon Whittle

attitude to motivate the group. Such efforts provide a friendly and
encouraging atmosphere, which reduces the stress for students.
Furthermore, we observed that the instructor is the most responsive
to all the members’ questions and achievements. This prevents the
question owner’s anxiety from building up while making people
feel appreciated.

Summary of lessons for software engineering in-
structors The COVID-19 pandemic is changing the land-
scape of higher education, and instructors will have to
adopt new ways to help students solve their challenges and
create programs that are better suited for remote learning.
Our experience has shown that organizing an open-source
social-good software projects like ours is an good way
for instructors to help students mitigate disruptive effects
during the COVID-19 pandemic. By creating a positive
environment and providing prompt support and feedback,
instructors can help students gain experience and improve
their skills, thus enhancing their motivation during devel-
opment.

5 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this project, we essentially followed an iterative process of un-
derstanding the users’ values as the project emerged. We share our
experiences on the development of COVID-19 Information Dash-
board. Most importantly, we summarize 9 lessons for developers,
researchers, and software engineer instructors, which may help
them with their works and further benefit the society. Many of the
lesson descriptions in this paper are about taking into account a par-
ticular human value during design. For example, lesson 3 concerns
being sensitive to adverse physiological reactions in users because
of the way data is presented. In an ideal world, the relevant values
for an application would be uncovered upfront during requirements
engineering. However, this is difficult in practice and a more itera-
tive approach is required, as followed in this paper.Research shows
that software engineers do not naturally think about human values
during development [40] and so the work here presents a case study
from which useful insights may be drawn on how to properly un-
derstand and design for human values as the three roles a software
engineer can be.

In the future, we are going to further explore the project in two
directions. On the one hand, we will further improve our site fol-
lowing the requirements from the public users and sharing more
valuable data and experience with developers, researchers, and in-
structors. On the other hand, we will try to abstract our existing
project into a general template that can be adapted to other emer-
gency disasters like bush fire, flood, etc. We plan to release that
template into an open-source platform for the community.

REFERENCES
[1] 1point3acres. 2020. 1point3acres Global COVID-19 Tracker and Interactive

Charts. https://coronavirus.1point3acres.com/en. Accessed: 2020-5-19.

[2] Apple. 2020. Privacy-Preserving Contact Tracing. https://covid19.apple.com/

contacttracing. Accessed: 2020-5-17.

[3] Rahul K Arora, Abel Joseph, Jordan Van Wyk, Simona Rocco, Austin Atmaja,
Ewan May, Tingting Yan, Niklas Bobrovitz, Jonathan Chevrier, Matthew P Cheng,

Figure 11: New recruitment overtime

The COVID-19 pandemic has created many unprecedented chal-
lenges for students, and they need support from the instructors to
better continue their study. Based on our experience during this
open-source project, which is dominated by university students,
we believe that instructors can provide assistance in the following
areas.

Online open source project provides an immersive learning op-
portunity for the students, which is an effective pedagogy to teach
Software Engineer principles and concepts. In our project, the in-
structor plays a role as the project manager. After completing the
initial organization and helping the groups break the ice, the instruc-
tor guided the three student teams to independently arrange their
rosters, schedule regular meetings, manage tasks and approach
users. As a result, all the teams accomplished their works success-
fully and kept bringing values to the dashboard website. In a survey
we conducted with another research group, students stated that
both their technical and non-technical skills grew after participat-
ing in this project. The most significant growth from these two
categories are front-end development (34%) and working online
skills (31%). A number of the participants also mentions other skills
like UI/UX (32%), promotion (30%), and time management(24%).

Instructors’ promotion can also help with the team building.
Based our slack member analysis (Fig 11), we find that every time
the volunteer team is enlarged in size is because of the instructors’
help includes posts on the university website, Information Tech-
nology deportment newsletter, and class promotion. Many of the
students revealed that they would not know they could participate
into the project without such promotions, and they are grateful for
this.

The sense of contributing to a great cause is the students’ largest
motivation, according to the student volunteers. Some explained
that the project relieved them from powerless for not being able to
do much during the pandemic apart from passively quarantined at
home. However, the rapidly developing pandemic keeps causing
pressure to the participants who are closely following it, which
requires awareness from the instructors. We applied sentiment
analysis to the Slack messages to see the atmosphere in our project
and our instructor’s strategy to keep members motivated while not
overwhelming. An AFINN word list [54] test shows the instructor
has a 28% higher sentiment level than the ordinary members. Of
all the Emojis in all the chatting history, the instructor alone sent
16% of them. This shows the instructor’s attempt to use a positive

Software Engineers’ Response to Public Crisis: Lessons Learnt from Spontaneously Building an Informative COVID-19 Dashboard

ICSE-SEIS’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

et al. 2020. SeroTracker: a global SARS-CoV-2 seroprevalence dashboard. The
Lancet. Infectious Diseases (2020).

[4] Esteban M Aucejo, Jacob French, Maria Paola Ugalde Araya, and Basit Zafar. 2020.
The impact of COVID-19 on student experiences and expectations: Evidence
from a survey. Journal of Public Economics (2020), 104271.

[5] Stefano Barone, Alexander Chakhunashvili, and Albert Comelli. 2020. Building a
statistical surveillance dashboard for COVID-19 infection worldwide. Quality
Engineering (2020), 1–10.

[6] Kent Beck, Mike Beedle, Arie Van Bennekum, Alistair Cockburn, Ward Cunning-
ham, Martin Fowler, James Grenning, Jim Highsmith, Andrew Hunt, Ron Jeffries,
et al. 2001. Manifesto for agile software development. (2001).

[7] Isha Berry, Jean-Paul R Soucy, Ashleigh Tuite, and David Fisman. 2020. Open
access epidemiologic data and an interactive dashboard to monitor the COVID-19
outbreak in Canada. CMAJ 192, 15 (2020), E420–E420.

[8] David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. 2003. Latent dirichlet allocation.

Journal of machine Learning research 3, Jan (2003), 993–1022.

[9] Ariel Bogle. 2020. COVIDSafe has been downloaded by millions, but yet to
identify contacts. https://www.abc.net.au/news/science/2020-06-11/coronavirus-
contact-tracing-app-covid-safe-no-close-contacts/12343138. Accessed: 2020-5-
17.

[10] Jobie Budd, Benjamin S Miller, Erin M Manning, Vasileios Lampos, Mengdie
Zhuang, Michael Edelstein, Geraint Rees, Vincent C Emery, Molly M Stevens,
Neil Keegan, et al. 2020. Digital technologies in the public-health response to
COVID-19. Nature medicine 26, 8 (2020), 1183–1192.

[11] Matt Burgess. 2020. Why the NHS Covid-19 contact tracing app failed. https://
www.wired.co.uk/article/nhs-tracing-app-scrapped-apple-google-uk. Accessed:
2020-5-17.

[12] Wenjun Cao, Ziwei Fang, Guoqiang Hou, Mei Han, Xinrong Xu, Jiaxin Dong, and
Jianzhong Zheng. 2020. The psychological impact of the COVID-19 epidemic on
college students in China. Psychiatry research (2020), 112934.

[13] CDC. 2020. Coronavirus Self-Checker. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-

ncov/symptoms-testing/coronavirus-self-checker.html. Accessed: 2020-5-17.

[14] CDC. 2020. Pandemics can be stressful. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-
ncov/daily-life-coping/managing-stress-anxiety.html. Accessed: 2020-8-13.
[15] Matteo Cinelli, Walter Quattrociocchi, Alessandro Galeazzi, Carlo Michele Valen-
sise, Emanuele Brugnoli, Ana Lucia Schmidt, Paola Zola, Fabiana Zollo, and
Antonio Scala. 2020. The COVID-19 social media infodemic. Scientific Reports 10,
1 (2020), 16598. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-73510-5

[16] Harvard Colllege. 2020. MAPS ABOUT 2019-NCOV ON ARCGIS ONLINE. https:
//gis.harvard.edu/news/maps-about-2019-ncov-arcgis-online. Accessed: 2020-5-
19.

[17] Anuradha Dande, Veli-Pekka Eloranta, H Hadaytullah, Antti-Jussi Kovalainen,
Timo Lehtonen, Marko Leppänen, Taru Salmimaa, Mahbubul Syeed, Matti Vuori,
Claude Rubattel, et al. 2014. Software startup patterns-an empirical study. (2014).
[18] Hubert Davis. 2020. Countries Need a Mask Inventory System Like Taiwan
eMask App. https://screenrant.com/coronavirus-mask-app-taiwan/. Accessed:
2020-5-17.

[19] DingXiangYuan. 2020. COIVD-19 Global Pandemic Real-time Report. https:

//ncov.dxy.cn/ncovh5/view/en_pneumonia. Accessed: 2020-5-17.

[20] Health Direct. 2020. Coronavirus (COVID-19) Symptom Checker. https://www.
healthdirect.gov.au/symptom-checker/tool/basic-details. Accessed: 2020-8-15.
[21] Domo. 2020. Daily Pulse. https://www.domo.com/covid19/daily-pulse/. Accessed:

2020-8-13.

[22] Ensheng Dong, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner. 2020. An interactive web-based
dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time. The Lancet infectious diseases (2020).
[23] Esri. 2020. Earthquake Watch. https://esri.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/

index.html#/c8af9c5411814584b460cc87cb7c3780. Accessed: 2021-9-20.

[24] Esri. 2020. Hurricanes. http://coolmaps.esri.com/Dashboards/Hurricanes/. Ac-

cessed: 2021-9-20.

[25] Esriau. 2020. Australian COVID-19 Hub. https://covid19-esriau.hub.arcgis.com.

Accessed: 2020-5-16.

[26] Jonathan Everts. 2020. The dashboard pandemic. Dialogues in Human Geography

10, 2 (2020), 260–264.

[27] Carlos Fernandez-Lozano and Francisco Cedron. 2020. Shiny Dashboard for Mon-
itoring the COVID-19 Pandemic in Spain. In Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing
Institute Proceedings, Vol. 54. 23.

[28] Will Feuer. 2020. Global coronavirus cases approach two million, doubling in
under two weeks. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/04/13/global-coronavirus-cases-
top-two-million-doubling-in-under-two-weeks.html. Accessed: 2020-12-19.
[29] Stephen Few and Perceptual Edge. 2007. Dashboard confusion revisited. Percep-

tual Edge (2007), 1–6.

[30] UK Fintech. 2020. Covid Credit. https://covidcredit.uk. Accessed: 2020-5-14.
[31] Hector Florez and Sweta Singh. 2020. Online dashboard and data analysis ap-
proach for assessing COVID-19 case and death data. F1000Research 9, 570 (2020),
570.

[32] HongKong Government. 2020. Latest Situation of Coronavirus Disease (COVID-
19) in Hong Kong. https://chp-dashboard.geodata.gov.hk/covid-19/en.html. Ac-
cessed: 2020-5-19.

[33] Queensland Government. 2020. Fraser Coast Disaster Dashboard. http://disaster.

frasercoast.qld.gov.au. Accessed: 2021-9-20.

[34] Singapore Government. 2020. Singapore COVID-19 Symptom Checker. https:

//sgcovidcheck.gov.sg. Accessed: 2020-5-17.

[35] Singapore Government. 2020. TraceTogether, safer together. https://www.

tracetogether.gov.sg. Accessed: 2020-5-17.

[36] Victorian Government. 2020. VIC Emergency. http://emergency.vic.gov.au/

respond/. Accessed: 2021-9-20.

[37] Emanuele Guidotti and David Ardia. 2020. COVID-19 data hub. Journal of Open

Source Software 5, 51 (2020), 2376.

[38] Laura Hautala. 2020. COVID-19 contact tracing apps create privacy pitfalls
around the world. https://www.cnet.com/news/covid-contact-tracing-apps-
bring-privacy-pitfalls-around-the-world/. Accessed: 2020-5-17.

[39] Kim Hjelmgaard. 2020. Iceland has tested more of its population for coronavirus
than anywhere else. https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2020/04/10/
coronavirus-covid-19-small-nations-iceland-big-data/2959797001/. Accessed:
2020-5-17.

[40] Waqar Hussain, Harsha Perera, Jon Whittle, Arif Nurwidyantoro, Rashina Hoda,
Rifat Ara Shams, and Gillian Oliver. 2020. Human Values in Software Engineering:
Contrasting Case Studies of Practice. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
(2020).

[41] Our World in Data. 2020. Our world in data. https://ourworldindata.org/

coronavirus. Accessed: 2020-8-13.

[42] Phil James and Ronnie Das. 2020. How to use smart city technology to measure so-
cial distancing. https://www.ncl.ac.uk/who-we-are/coronavirus/research/smart-
cities/. Accessed: 2021-3-13.

[43] Mohd Javaid, Abid Haleem, Raju Vaishya, Shashi Bahl, Rajiv Suman, and Abhishek
Vaish. 2020. Industry 4.0 technologies and their applications in fighting COVID-19
pandemic. Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews (2020).
[44] Benjamin D Killeen, Jie Ying Wu, Kinjal Shah, Anna Zapaishchykova, Philipp
Nikutta, Aniruddha Tamhane, Shreya Chakraborty, Jinchi Wei, Tiger Gao,
Mareike Thies, et al. 2020. A County-level Dataset for Informing the United
States’ Response to COVID-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00756 (2020).

[45] Rob Kitchin, Tracey P Lauriault, and Gavin McArdle. 2015. Knowing and govern-
ing cities through urban indicators, city benchmarking and real-time dashboards.
Regional Studies, Regional Science 2, 1 (2015), 6–28.

[46] Benjamin Koh, Mojtaba Shahin, Annette Ong, Soo Yeap, Priyanka Saxena, Man-
vendra Singh, and Chunyang Chen. 2021. Pandemic Software Development: The
Student Experiences from Developing a COVID-19 Information Dashboard.
[47] Xinyan Li, Han Wang, Chunyang Chen, and John Grundy. 2021. An Empiri-
cal Study on How Well Do COVID-19 Information Dashboards Service User
Information Needs. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing (2021).

[48] Sara Marelli, Alessandra Castelnuovo, Antonella Somma, Vincenza Castronovo,
Samantha Mombelli, Daniela Bottoni, Caterina Leitner, Andrea Fossati, and Luigi
Ferini-Strambi. 2020. Impact of COVID-19 lockdown on sleep quality in university
students and administration staff. Journal of Neurology (2020), 1–8.

[49] Vukosi Marivate and Herkulaas MvE Combrink. 2020. Use of Available Data To
Inform The COVID-19 Outbreak in South Africa: A Case Study. Data Science
Journal 19, 1 (2020).

[50] Skylar W Marvel, John S House, Matthew Wheeler, Kuncheng Song, Yi-Hui
Zhou, Fred A Wright, Weihsueh A Chiu, Ivan Rusyn, Alison Motsinger-Reif,
and David M Reif. 2021. The COVID-19 Pandemic Vulnerability Index (PVI)
Dashboard: Monitoring county-level vulnerability using visualization, statistical
modeling, and machine learning. Environmental Health Perspectives 129, 1 (2021),
017701.

[51] Becky McCall. 2020. COVID-19 and artificial intelligence: protecting health-care
workers and curbing the spread. The Lancet Digital Health 2, 4 (2020), e166–e167.
[52] Wojciech Młocek and Robert Lew. 2020. Forecasting trajectories of an emerg-
ing epidemic with mathematical modeling in an online dashboard: The case of
COVID-19. medRxiv (2020).

[53] Rania Muhareb and Rita Giacaman. 2020. Tracking COVID-19 responsibly. The

Lancet (2020).

[54] Finn Årup Nielsen. 2011. A new ANEW: Evaluation of a word list for sentiment

analysis in microblogs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1103.2903 (2011).

[55] Australian Government Department of Health. 2020. Australian COVID-19 cases
by source of infection. https://www.health.gov.au/resources/australian-covid-
19-cases-by-source-of-infection. Accessed: 2020-5-16.

[56] Patrick O’Neill, Tate Ryan-Mosley, and Bobbie Johnson. 2020. A flood
of coronavirus apps are tracking us. Now it’s time to keep track of
them. https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/05/07/1000961/launching-mittr-
covid-tracing-tracker/. Accessed: 2020-5-17.

[57] Carlos Irwin A Oronce, Christopher A Scannell, Ichiro Kawachi, and Yusuke
Tsugawa. 2020. Association between state-level income inequality and COVID-19
cases and mortality in the USA. Journal of General Internal Medicine 35, 9 (2020),
2791–2793.

[58] Nicola Parolini, Giovanni Ardenghi, Luca Dede, and Alfio Quarteroni. 2020. A
Mathematical Dashboard for the Analysis of Italian COVID-19 Epidemic Data.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.11109 (2020).

ICSE-SEIS’22, May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Han Wang, Chao Wu, Chunyang Chen, Burak Turhan, Shiping Chen, and Jon Whittle

[59] Max Pellert, Jana Lasser, Hannah Metzler, and David Garcia. 2020. Dash-
board of sentiment in Austrian social media during COVID-19. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.11158 (2020).

[60] Harsha Perera, Waqar Hussain, Jon Whittle, Arif Nurwidyantoro, Davoud
Mougouei, Rifat Ara Shams, and Gillian Oliver. 2020. A study on the preva-
lence of human values in software engineering publications, 2015-2018. In 2020
IEEE/ACM 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE,
409–420.

[61] Dirk Pfeiffer, Timothy P Robinson, Mark Stevenson, Kim B Stevens, David J
Rogers, Archie CA Clements, et al. 2008. Spatial analysis in epidemiology. Vol. 142.
Oxford University Press Oxford.

[62] Alex Radermacher, Gursimran Walia, and Dean Knudson. 2014. Investigating the
skill gap between graduating students and industry expectations. In Companion
Proceedings of the 36th international conference on software engineering. 291–300.
[63] Paul Ralph, Sebastian Baltes, Gianisa Adisaputri, Richard Torkar, Vladimir Ko-
valenko, Marcos Kalinowski, Nicole Novielli, Shin Yoo, Xavier Devroey, Xin Tan,
Minghui Zhou, Burak Turhan, Rashina Hoda, Hideaki Hata, Gregorio Robles,
Amin Milani Fard, and Rana Alkadhi. 2020. Pandemic programming. Empirical
Software Engineering (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-020-09875-y
[64] Eric Ries. 2009. Minimum viable product: a guide. Startup lessons learned (2009).
[65] Tobias Röddiger, Michael Beigl, Dominik Dörner, and Matthias Budde. 2020.
Responsible, Automated Data Gathering for Timely Citizen Dashboard Provision
During a Global Pandemic (COVID-19). Digital Government: Research and Practice
2, 1 (2020), 1–9.

[66] Alasdair Sandford. 2020. Coronavirus: Half of humanity now on lockdown as 90
countries call for confinement. https://bit.ly/3783LO1. Accessed: 2020-8-13.
[67] Sam Schechner, Kirsten Grind, and Patience Haggin. 2020. Tech Firms Are Spying
on You. In a Pandemic, Governments Say That’s OK. https://on.wsj.com/379LnnS.
Accessed: 2020-8-13.

[68] Sixfold. 2020. truck boarder crossing times. https://covid-19.sixfold.com. Ac-

cessed: 2020-8-13.

[69] Jared Spataro. 2020. Reimagining virtual collaboration for the future of work
and learning. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365/blog/2020/07/08/
reimagining-virtual-collaboration-future-work-learning/. Accessed: 2022-1-17.
[70] Familjen STHLM. 2020. The Sound of Colleagues. https://soundofcolleagues.com.

Accessed: 2020-5-17.

[71] Gregory Stone, Arina Lekht, Nancy Burris, and Clayton Williams. 2007. Data
collection and communications in the public health response to a disaster: Rapid
population estimate surveys and the daily dashboard in post-Katrina New Orleans.
Journal of Public Health Management and Practice 13, 5 (2007), 453–460.
[72] Tableau. 2020. Get the latest, trusted COVID-19 global data. https://www.tableau.

com/covid-19-coronavirus-data-resources. Accessed: 2020-8-13.

[73] Samia Tasnim, Md Hossain, and Hoimonty Mazumder. 2020. Impact of rumors
or misinformation on coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in social media. Journal
of Preventive Medicine and Public Health 53 (04 2020). https://doi.org/10.3961/
jpmph.20.094

[74] Kristian Thorlund, Louis Dron, Jay Park, Grace Hsu, Jamie I Forrest, and Edward J
Mills. 2020. A real-time dashboard of clinical trials for COVID-19. The Lancet
Digital Health 2, 6 (2020), e286–e287.

[75] Michael Thrusfield, L Mansley, P Dunlop, J Taylor, A Pawson, and L Stringer.
2005. The foot-and-mouth disease epidemic in Dumfries and Galloway, 2001. 1:
Characteristics and control. Veterinary Record 156, 8 (2005), 229–252.

[76] Johns Hopkins University. 2020. COVID-19 Dashboard by the Center for Systems
Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University (JHU). https:
//coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html. Accessed: 2020-5-17.

[77] DA Wells, B Lawless, J Trpkovski, A Hill, J Kwong Leung, and TE Stewart. 2009.
Post SARS–Critical Care Performance Measurement and Management in Ontario,
Canada.
In B44. ORGANIZATION AND GUIDELINES IN THE ICU. American
Thoracic Society, A3114.

[78] Sera Whitelaw, Mamas A Mamas, Eric Topol, and Harriette GC Van Spall. 2020.
Applications of digital technology in COVID-19 pandemic planning and response.
The Lancet Digital Health (2020).

[79] Jon Whittle, Maria Angela Ferrario, William Simm, and Waqar Hussain. 2019. A

case for human values in software engineering. IEEE Software (2019).

[80] WHO. 2020. WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard. https://covid19.

who.int/. Accessed: 2020-5-14.

[81] Wikipedia. 2020. Human in the loop. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human-in-

the-loop. Accessed: 2020-5-16.

[82] Patient Mijiriro Wimba, Jacques-Aimé Bazeboso, Philippe Bianga Katchunga,
Léon Tshilolo, Benjamin Longo-Mbenza, Muriel Rabilloud, Philippe Vanhems,
Jean Iwaz, Jean-François Étard, and René Écochard. 2020. A dashboard for moni-
toring preventive measures in response to COVID-19 outbreak in the Democratic
Republic of Congo. Tropical medicine and health 48, 1 (2020), 1–8.

[83] Benjamin D Wissel, PJ Van Camp, Michal Kouril, Chad Weis, Tracy A Glauser,
Peter S White, Isaac S Kohane, and Judith W Dexheimer. 2020. An interactive
online dashboard for tracking covid-19 in us counties, cities, and states in real
time. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association (2020).

[84] Zhang Zhihao. 2020.

rected after miscalculation.
WS5e952f11a3105d50a3d16143.html. Accessed: 2020-12-19.

Johns Hopkins tally of COVID-19 cases cor-
http://global.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202004/14/

[85] Peng Zhou, Xing-Lou Yang, Xian-Guang Wang, Ben Hu, Lei Zhang, Wei Zhang,
Hao-Rui Si, Yan Zhu, Bei Li, Chao-Lin Huang, et al. 2020. A pneumonia outbreak
associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. nature 579, 7798 (2020),
270–273.

