Problem reports and team maturity in agile
automotive software development

Lucas Gren
Volvo Cars and Chalmers | University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweden
Blekinge Institute of Technology
Karlskrona, Sweden
lucas.gren@lucasgren.com

Martin Shepperd
Chalmers | University of Gothenburg
Gothenburg, Sweden
Brunel University
London, UK
martin.shepperd@brunel.ac.uk

2
2
0
2

r
p
A
4

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
8
2
1
0
.
4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Background: Volvo Cars is pioneering an agile transformation
on a large scale in the automotive industry. Social psycho-
logical aspects of automotive software development are an
under-researched area in general. Few studies on team ma-
turity or group dynamics can be found specifically in the
automotive software engineering domain.

Objective: This study is intended as an initial step to fill
that gap by investigating the connection between issues and
problem reports and team maturity.

Method: We conducted a quantitative study with 84 par-
ticipants from 14 teams and qualitatively validated the result
with the Release Train Engineer having an overview of all
the participating teams.

Results: We find that the more mature a team is, the faster
they seem to resolve issues as provided through external
feedback, at least in the two initial team maturity stages.

Conclusion: This study suggests that working on team
dynamics might increase productivity in modern automotive
software development departments, but this needs further
investigation.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Software and its engineering → Agile software development;
Programming teams.

KEYWORDS
automotive software development, teams, team maturity,
problem reports

ACM Reference Format:
Lucas Gren and Martin Shepperd. 2022. Problem reports and
team maturity in agile automotive software development. In 15th
International Conference on Cooperative and Human Aspects of
Software Engineering (CHASE’22 ), May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 5 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3528579.3529173

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage
and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CHASE’22 , May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9342-3/22/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3528579.3529173

INTRODUCTION

1
An agile approach to projects has become extremely popular
both within [2], and outside software development [17]. In
contrast to traditional plan-driven development (a waterfall
process), this paradigm has been given the name agile, which
literally means to be able to move quickly, easily and be
flexible [23]. Feasible solutions to customer needs should
be developed in close customer collaboration, rather than
being subject to the uncertainties of large up-front design
and planning [19]. With the explosion of software in the car,
this complexity has forced automotive companies to, not just
focus on customer value, but to also to rely on teams, and
teams of teams, to develop modern cars with around 150
Million lines of code. This implies that the social aspect of
group dynamics need to be understood in order to scale the
development projects. The car projects also differ in that
the agile approaches are used across both software, hybrid,
and pure hardware teams. This study, though, focuses on the
software teams in this quite different context since the ≈ 800
teams essentially build one single product together.

Research on automotive software engineering has mainly
focused on testing and building software models [9]. We have
not been able to find many studies on organizational psychol-
ogy in general except studies on “human factors” associated
with individuals (e.g., Maro et al. [14]). We have not been able
to find any studies on social psychology in general, or team
maturity in particular, in automotive software development.
Some studies have been conducted on self-organization
in general agile software development (i.e., not automotive)
teams in a broader software engineering context, also referred
to as team autonomy. Moe et al. [16] concluded that one of the
barriers to agile team autonomy was a lack of system support
for teams and reduced external autonomy. More recently,
Hodgson and Briand [11] investigated how teams adopt agile
practices over time. They conclude that some teams do a
“big bang” while other implement agile practices one-by-one.
They saw a trend that team members without much previous
agile knowledge prefer the latter while experienced agile
practitioners prefer the former. Volvo Cars has gone through
an agile transformation in the last five years and there is a
strong push towards providing teams with the mandate to
lead themselves to a larger extent, i.e., a “big bang” on a
very large scale impacting close to 800 teams.

Hoda et al. [10] showed that senior management have a
key role in enabling team agility. That there is a challenge in

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHASE’22 , May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Lucas Gren and Martin Shepperd

fitting the agile approach into traditional management in a
software engineering context was also shown by Hodgson and
Briand [11]. In more general leadership research, there are
traits that a good leader must have, but on top of that, good
leaders in all fields adapt their leadership style dynamically
to the situation [12]. Leadership could also be seen as a
function of group action [20] and not a role, which makes
it possible to share or change over time. This means that
there is no best leadership style since many different styles
are needed depending on the context, the group, and the
people involved. In the agile space, e.g., servant leadership is
advocated as the foundation for leading, but the definition
of what that is remains vague [18]. Leadership is a difficult
construct to research since it happens in complex systems
and is influenced by a vast number of factors.

Gren et al. [8] found initial indications confirming that
the definition of agile teams overlaps with what is meant by
a mature group in social psychology [22]. Agile teams are
dependent on also being mature in terms of collaborative
behaviur plus having navigated through the initial stages
of group development. Mature teams are also known to col-
laborate better with other teams [21], which is of interest
when scaling the agile ways of working at Volvo Cars. We
define team maturity in this study as the degree to which a
team has navigated through the group development stages
according to Wheelan [21]. In Wheelan’s Integrated Model
of Group Development (or IMGD), small groups (or teams)
start in the Dependency and Inclusion stage where team
members are tentative and polite in their communication and
need to build an initial level of psychological safety. Team
members do not have a common mental model of the group
goal nor do they know the real competencies of the other
team members. When higher levels of psychological safety
start to emerge, the team transitions into the second phase,
Counter-Dependency and Fight. This is a conflict stage but
is absolutely necessary to determine who can contribute to
what and create a shared mental model of the team’s purpose.
After the second stage, the team can organize work better and
set productive group norms. With higher levels of trust and
a continuous improvements of work organization, the team
can reach stage four, which is the Work and Productivity
stage [21].

Leadership, self-organization, and agility can thus be map-
ped onto the team development stages [8]. As the develop-
ment cycle moves along from a psychological perspective, all
members of the team (including the managers or leaders)
must change their behavior [21]. Team maturity, as measured
by the Group Development Questionnaire (GDQ), has been
shown to be correlated to measurements of productivity also
in software engineering [1]. In this study, we used a recently
developed short version of the GDQ comprising 13 items
instead of 60 [5], which makes it practically more useful
considering the time availability of teams.

If the results on the connection between team maturity
and team productivity from social psychology [21] apply to
automotive software development, aspects of productivity
should also be connected to measurements of team maturity

in that context. One quite objective proxy for productivity
for these Volvo Cars teams was their issue management, i.e.,
how long the teams take to fix issues reported back from
their deliveries. This metric is external to the team, which
makes it in many ways more appropriate than e.g., flow of
backlog items or self-assessed productivity.

2 METHOD
We distributed the short version of the GDQ, (the GDQS
[5]) to 14 teams engaged in software-only development at
Volvo Cars. The teams also logged the number of issues they
have with the delivered software in the same month. Issues
could be for example bugs or other types of change requests.
The number of issues can accumulate since many of them
remain unaddressed so it may not a good measurement of
the current team performance. We, therefore, instead looked
at the average age of issues in the same month as the teams
filled out the GDQS. The average is sensitive to outliers but
Volvo Cars chose that metric as a KPI since all issues need
to be resolved. 82 team members answered the GDQS from
all the 14 teams. Since this is an average of responses per
team and the teams are usually from 3 to 12 individuals, we
estimate this response rate to be around 80%.

We describe the data and its patterns or lack thereof and
avoid using 𝑝 values for null hypothesis significance testing
in accordance with McShane et al. [15]. We instead use an
approach based on Bayesian Data Analysis (BDA), i.e., we
will plot the re-sampled (using Markov-Chain Monte Carlo)
distribution of all our parameters and be explicit about our
assumptions (see supplementary material). For a description
and tutorial applied to software engineering see Furia et al.
[3].

Note all the shared data in this paper, plots and supple-
mentary material were transformed using arbitrary linear
transformations. This was done so as to not reveal the ab-
solute values of issues and team maturity, since that was
deemed as sensitive information by the company. The aver-
age ages of issues where downloaded from the Volvo Cars
instance of Jira and the team maturity data was collected
through the company’s own survey tool.

In the second step, we interviewed the Release Train En-
gineer (RTE), which is a role that has an overview of this
whole set of teams. The interviewee was asked to describe
the situation around the data collection and also critically
assess the connection between team maturity and the teams’
capacity to resolve reported issues.

Based on previous studies of team maturity and aspects
of productivity (see Section 1), we hypothesize that the first
two stages (Stage 1 and 2) should be positively connected to
the average age of issues, i.e., the more collaborative aspects
to solve in these stages, the longer it would take to solve
reported issues. We would also hypothesize that the latter
stages (Stage 3 and 4) would have the opposite relationship
to reported issues, since higher values on these two scales
imply more maturity (e.g., higher levels of trust etc.).

Problem reports and team maturity in agile
automotive software development

CHASE’22 , May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

(a) Stage 1

(b) Stage 2

Figure 1: Scatter plots with each with one of the developmen-
tal stages of team maturity as independent variable (the x
axis) and the average age of issues as dependent variable (the
y axis).

3 RESULTS
3.1 Quantitative results
The result shown in Fig. 1 indicates that the direction of the
lines are in the hypothesized direction. However, Fig. 2 shows
that only the distributions of stages 1 and 2 are distinct from
zero with close to a 95% credible interval.

As mentioned, we do not want to use classical NHST
inference, which means that we see this quantitative result
as indicative, but further studies are needed. We would like
to, instead, highlight the importance of the qualitative data
below.

In summary, when the teams are newly formed (or less
mature) or in the conflict stage of creating shared mental
models of the team goals and figuring out who can really
contribute with what in order to fulfill these goals, the average
age of issues is higher for those teams.

(c) Stage 3

(d) Stage 4

Figure 2: Re-sample distributions of four separate models,
each with one of the developmental stages of team maturity
as independent variable and the average age of issues as de-
pendent variable.

3.2 Qualitative validation
Below is a summary of what the RTE commented upon in
the interview.

During the time of the data collection, the teams were
focusing on removing issues that were never to be dealt with.
The team developed their software in-house and wanted to
remove issues they had inherited from suppliers. The teams
were working on two different platforms, one old and one
new. Different teams were working on the different platforms.
The teams working on the old platforms were described as
having lower motivation for their work compared to the
teams working on the new platform. The teams that worked
on the old platform would have preferred to work on the new
platform instead. The teams working on the new platform
used to even be located at a different municipality.

The performance and collaboration of the teams were
described as very different. Regarding their reported issues,
some teams could solve those internally while other teams

−50005001000140160180200Stage 1Average age of issuesLowestNY050010001500125150175200225Stage 2Average age of issuesLowestNY050010001500200240280Stage 3Average age of issuesLowestNY050010001500220240260280300Stage 4Average age of issuesLowestNYb_stage1trans−0.020.000.020.040.06b_stage2trans−0.010.000.010.020.03b_stage3trans−0.04−0.020.000.02b_stage4trans−0.050−0.0250.0000.0250.050CHASE’22 , May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Lucas Gren and Martin Shepperd

were highly dependent on suppliers. For some teams, solving
issues was a complex task with many steps.

The teams working on the old platform had closed a high
number of issues, other teams received reports of defects that
were incorrectly perceived as being errors.

The teams working on the old platform were assessed as
having lower team maturity compared to the ones working
on the new platform. They closed a lot of issues that they
realized would never be dealt with. Fixing issues from problem
reports was a part of all the teams’ daily work.

As a form of validation, the team with the highest values
on the y axis in Fig. 1, was the team the interviewee identified
as the least mature team (denoted as a triangle).

4 DISCUSSION
The results of this study suggest that the automotive software
development having transformed into agile ways of working,
might be dependent on team maturity in order to deliver value
in the shape of fixing issues in their delivery. Since the team
as a unit of analysis lies at the heart of an agile organization,
research on automotive agile software development should
also use theories and models from social psychology in order
to understand the mechanisms at play.

On the necessary journey towards being more responsive
to change, Volvo Cars has been on an agile transformation
for the last five years. Some parts of the company has gotten
farther than others at the time of this research, but the vehicle
software and electronics department were the forerunner in
the transformation.

Now that the automotive industry has software as a key
to gaining a competitive advantage, research on software
engineering adapted to the automotive industry is needed
and conducted to understand this somewhat specific context.
The psychological aspects of automotive software engineering
has, though, not been much in focus and this study is a tiny
step in beginning to fill that gap. Research so far has focused
on testing and building software models [9] and the human
factors investigated have been associated with individual
psychology (e.g., Maro et al. [14]). Since the aspects of agile
team autonomy now also surfaces in the automotive software
development, we need to investigate this context further also
with regards to self-organization. Moe et al. [16] concluded,
among other things, that one of the barriers of agile team
autonomy was a lack of system for team support. This is
an aspect identified in the agile transformation at Volvo
Cars as well and the participating teams (and many others)
were trained for at least three hours in Wheelan’s Integrated
Model of Group Development. They were also given access
to a toolbox connected to the different stages after having
filled out the GDQS, which hopefully helped them maturing
further as a team, but this remains to be investigated.

4.1 Practical implications
We have assumed that the team maturity would be connected
to aspects of productivity in the automotive software devel-
opment at Volvo Cars, but this current study is the first one

showing data on this actually being the case. If the results
of this study would hold for automotive software engineering
in general, it has a multitude of implications for developing
such software. Many of the challenges go hand-in-hand with
the agile transformation, but also provides way of getting
teams to mature faster. One of these implications is to focus
even more on training leaders and managers (in addition
to training teams, of course) in adapting their leadership
style dynamically to the team maturity level [12]. A team
will not self-organize on day one because the team members
are unlikely to have met before. Also there are the lead-
ership challenges of designing teams well and assuring the
emergence of good work principles and norms [6], instead of
micromanaging technical details. Agile leadership has been
described as “servant leadership,” which remains vague [18].
But a key aspect of thinking about servant leadership is that
it challenges many managers’ mental model of leadership
being based on hierarchical power, however, agile leadership
need to be a servant in a way that serves the teams with
what they actually need right now. That could also be to
confront behavior that does not build psychological safety,
as an example [7].

This current study is in line with the result by Al-Sabbagh
and Gren [1] that team maturity as measured by the GDQ is
connected to productivity aspect of software development, but
extends it into the automotive software development domain.
A very practical implication for the automotive industry is
to measure team maturity in a short validated survey, such
as the GDQS [5], train both managers, agile leaders, and
team members in team development, by for example using
the Integrated Model of Group Development [22] in order to
increase the speed of fixing issues in the teams’ deliveries. We
infer this causality by logic and the qualitative data, since
it does not make sense to hypothesize that fixing issues fast
would lead to the team maturing, however, the mediating
role of team maturity between team building interventions
and the speed of fixing issues, of course needs much more
research.

4.2 Threats to validity
We use relevant parts of the checklist created by Gren [4] for
behavioral software engineering research.

Reliability. Both the internal consistency and stability have
been checked multiple times in the development of the GDQ
[22] and GDQS [5]. The lack of a formal definition of what
becomes an issue in the problem reports at Volvo Cars is a
threat to the reliability of us actually measuring the average
age of issues the teams have. Further studies should explicitly
ask for such a definition, or help define it, if it does not exist.
We do not know how extreme values might have affected this
average that Volvo Cars chose to use as a KPI. Perhaps the
median age of issues might have been more reliable.

Construct validity. The constructs under investigation were
the four team development scales and the average age of
issues. The GDQS is a well-validated scale for measuring

Problem reports and team maturity in agile
automotive software development

CHASE’22 , May 21–29, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

team maturity and we only selected teams in a part of Volvo
Cars that we know reported and maintained their problem
reports continuously. The validity of the used constructs are,
therefore, assessed as high.

Internal validity. We tried to argue for a theoretical reason
for causality between team maturity and average age of
issues, but we did not measure any other confounding factors.
Potential confounds could be type of work, team composition,
conformance to processes, individual competencies, etc., and
in a social complex adaptive system there could be many
more.

External validity. The small sample of 14 teams and a
collection of data from only one part of Volvo Cars are
other large threats to this study. We do not know if these
teams and the way they work is representative to any teams
outside this context. A random sample was not possible in
this case since it was hard to find a set of teams that were
in a position to continuously report on, and receive feedback
from their deliveries. This is an ongoing transformation at
Volvo Cars, i.e., to become more data-driven. However, it
does seem plausible that they could be applicable to other
similar safety-critical software development environments.

5 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We conclude that the average ages of issues in automotive
software development teams were associated with teams hav-
ing higher values on the first two stages of team development.
This could mean that mature teams fix issues faster. How-
ever, this is just an initial study with a small sample and
future studied should sample randomly and also use other
productivity measurements. Another part of the automotive
software development that could be studied in the future is
extending the work of Lenberg et al. [13] and further look at
how teams deal with safety-critical systems.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
1
The Supplementary Material is available on Zenodo
. It
includes an anonymized raw data CSV file and all the R
scripts used.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Both authors would like to thank the Swedish Research
Council funding this work under the auspices of the 2022
Tage Erlander research professorship. Both authors thank
Volvo for the provision of the data that made this work
possible. This project is an associated project under the
Software Center, Gothenburg, Sweden.

REFERENCES
[1] K. Al-Sabbagh and L. Gren. 2018. The connections between group
maturity, software development velocity, and planning effective-
ness. Journal of Software: Evolution and Process 30, 1 (2018),
e1896.

[2] T. Dingsøyr, S. Nerur, V. Balijepally, and N. Moe. 2012. A
decade of agile methodologies: Towards explaining agile software

1https://www.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6400809

development. The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012),
1213—–1221.

[3] C. Furia, R. Feldt, and R. Torkar. 2019. Bayesian data analysis
in empirical software engineering research. IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering 47, 9 (2019), 1786–1810.

[4] L. Gren. 2018. Standards of validity and the validity of standards
in behavioral software engineering research: The perspective of
psychological test theory. In International Symposium on Em-
pirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM). 1–4.
[5] L. Gren, C. Jacobsson, N. Rydbo, and P. Lenberg. 2020. The
Group Development Questionnaire Short (GDQS) Scales: Tiny-
Yet-Effective Measures of Team/Small Group Development. (Feb
2020). DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/u3p8c

[6] L. Gren and M. Lindman. 2020. What an Agile Leader Does: The
Group Dynamics Perspective. In International Conference on
Agile Software Development (XP). Springer, 178–194.

[7] L. Gren and P. Ralph. 2022. What Makes Effective Leadership in
Agile Software Development Teams?. In The 44th International
Conference on Software Engineering. ACM, New York.

[8] L Gren, R Torkar, and R Feldt. 2017. Group development and
group maturity when building agile teams: A qualitative and
quantitative investigation at eight large companies. The Journal
of Systems and Software 124 (2017), 104—–119.

[9] A. Haghighatkhah, A. Banijamali, O-P. Pakanen, M. Oivo, and
P. Kuvaja. 2017. Automotive software engineering: A systematic
mapping study. Journal of Systems & Software 128 (2017),
25–55.

[10] R. Hoda, J. Noble, and S. Marshall. 2011. Supporting self-
organizing agile teams. In International Conference on Agile
Software Development. Springer, 73–87.

[11] D. Hodgson and L. Briand. 2013. Controlling the uncontrol-
lable:‘Agile’teams and illusions of autonomy in creative work.
Work, employment and society 27, 2 (2013), 308–325.

[12] S. Kozlowski, D. Watola, J. Jensen, B. Kim, and I. Botero. 2009.
Developing adaptive teams: A theory of dynamic team leader-
ship. In Team effectiveness in complex organizations: Cross-
disciplinary perspectives and approaches, E. Salas, G. Goodwin,
and S. Burke (Eds.). Routledge, New York, 113–155.

[13] P. Lenberg, R. Feldt, L. Wallgren Tengberg, and L. Gren. 2020. Be-
havioral Aspects of Safety-Critical Software Development. In Co-
operative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering (CHASE).
IEEE.

[14] S. Maro, M. Staron, and J. Steghöfer. 2017. Challenges of estab-
lishing traceability in the automotive domain. In International
Conference on Software Quality. Springer, 153–172.

[15] B. McShane, D. Gal, A. Gelman, C. Robert, and J. Tackett. 2019.
Abandon statistical significance. The American Statistician 73,
sup1 (2019), 235–245.

[16] N. Moe, T. Dingsøyr, and T. Dybå. 2008. Understanding self-
organizing teams in agile software development. In 19th Australian
Conference on Software Engineering (ASWEC’08). 76–85.
[17] J. Pajares, D. Poza, F. Villafañez, and A. López-Paredes. 2017.
Project Management Methodologies in the Fourth Technological
Revolution. In Advances in Management Engineering, H. Cesáreo
(Ed.). Springer, 121–144.

[18] D. Parris and J. Peachey. 2013. A systematic literature review of
servant leadership theory in organizational contexts. Journal of
Business Ethics 113, 3 (2013), 377–393.

[19] K. Petersen. 2011. Is lean agile and agile lean? A comparison
between two software development paradigms. In Modern soft-
ware engineering concepts and practices: Advanced approaches,
A. Dogru and V. Bicer (Eds.). IGI Global, 19–46.

[20] M. Von Cranach. 1986. Leadership as a function of group ac-
tion. In Changing conceptions of leadership, C. Graumann and
S. Moscovici (Eds.). Springer, New York, 115–134.

[21] S Wheelan. 2005. Group processes: A developmental perspective

(2 ed.). Allyn and Bacon, Boston.

[22] S. Wheelan and J. Hochberger. 1996. Validation studies of the
group development questionnaire. Small Group Research 27, 1
(1996), 143–170.

[23] L. Williams. 2012. What agile teams think of agile principles.

CACM 55, 4 (2012), 71–76.

