2
2
0
2

r
p
A
7
1

]
i
c
s
-
l
r
t

m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[

1
v
2
7
0
4
1
.

4
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

PCrystalX - Web Application

Pablo L. Bernardo
State University of Northern Rio de Janeiro – UENF

pablolb@uenf.br

https://pcrystalx.uenf.br/

May 2, 2022

Abstract

PCrystalX - Web is a web application developed to be easy and fast to use. The purpose of the software is that researchers from any area are

able to use two methods to analyze an X-ray diffraction pattern more straightforwardly. With the full width at half maximum (FWHM)

as a function of 2θ for each peak, it is possible to estimate the crystallite size by the Scherrer equation and apply the Williamson-Hall

methods. PCrystalX - Web is a simpliﬁed version of the PCrystalX Software [1] program, which is still under development.

from different areas can use it easily, and in some cases,

without the need to carry out a structural reﬁnement to

obtain an interesting result from the X-ray data analysis.

With PCristalX - Web it is possible, without the need for

structural reﬁnement, to estimate the crystallite size by the

Scherrer equation and the crystallite size and strain by the

Williamson-Hall plot. Furthermore, it is possible to use

the parameters U, V and W, of the Caglioti equation, to

apply the instrumental correction in the analysis (when a

standard sample is measured).

Figure 1 shows the ﬁrst version of PCrystalX - Web

application. Currently, it is possible to import data in txt

and csv format or just type the values of 2θ and FWHM

into the table. The program was written using Python

3.9 and Dash framework [7]. The program is hosted

on a server at the State University of Northern Rio de

Janeiro – UENF, Brazil (https://pcrystalx.uenf.br/) and is

distributed online under the conditions of the GPL Open

Source License (Version 3).

1.

Introduction

X-ray diffraction is one of the oldest methods used

by researchers for the structural characterization of

various crystalline materials. However, the analysis

of a diffractogram is not trivial. Although there are

several programs for the reﬁnement of data obtained

by X-ray diffraction to describe the crystal structure of

any compound, some programs require a high degree

of crystallographic knowledge, complex interfaces to use,

and some with expensive licenses. Most of these programs

focus on the Le Bail and/or Rietveld reﬁnement methods,

where it is possible to reﬁne the lattice parameters,

constants U, V and W of the Caglioti equation to deﬁne

FWHM as a function of the angle θ, atomic positions,

among many other parameters.

Some examples are:

FullProf Suite [2], Profex [3], GSAS [4], TOPAS [5],

HighScore Plus [6], and others.

PCrystalX - Web aims to be a program that will help

researchers both in the analysis of raw data and in the

analysis of data obtained through structural reﬁnement.

The main idea is to offer a program so that researchers

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
PCrystalX - Web • Mar 2022 • Version 1

Figure 1: PCrystalX - Web page: https://pcrystalx.uenf.br/

2. General

PCrystalX

- Web

functionality

2.1. Caglioti equation

The observed diffraction peak proﬁle is a convolution

of the instrumental proﬁle and the specimen proﬁle.
Once the user has the 2θ and FWHM (βi) for each
peak from standard specimen data (for example, LaB6),
it is possible to obtain U, V and W parameters from

the Caglioti equation [8] for Gaussian and Pseudo-Voigt

proﬁles (possible with PCrystalX Software, Figure 2).

When these parameters are obtained, we can use them

to perform the instrumental correction using the Caglioti

equations:

Gaussian or Pseudo-Voigt:

i = U.tan2θ + V.tanθ + W
β2

(1)

Figure 2: Parameters U, V and W obtained from the Caglioti equation

in PCrystalX Software [1]

Where βs, βo and βi are the integral-breadth of a
specimen, observed and instrumental proﬁles. Initially,

the values of U, V and W are assumed to be zero. The
program will assume that βi = 0 and βs = βo. If the user
has the values of U, V and W, these can be used to perform

the calculation. If any value is incompatible, a warning

window will appear on the page as "U V W values not

supported.”

2.2. Scherrer equation

In X-ray powder diffraction, a family of planes produces a

peak only at a speciﬁc angle 2θ. Scherrer equation [9, 10]

can be used to estimate the crystallite size for each peak
(Lhkl). The crystallite size calculated from the Scherrer
equation is given by:

L =

Ks.λ
βs.cosθ

(3)

PCrystalX - Web uses the integral-breadth (β) method to

perform the instrumental correction. For each diffraction

peak, the integral-breadth for Gaussian or Pseudo-Voigt

proﬁles is given by:

Where Ks is a constant that depends on the shape of
the crystallite, λ is the wavelength, βs is the corrected
line broadening at FWHM and θ is the scattering angle in

radians. With 2θ and FWHM data, PCrystalX - Web can

s = β2
β2

o − β2
i

estimate the crystallite size for each peak and then obtain
the average crystallite size (Lm).

(2)

2

PCrystalX - Web • Mar 2022 • Version 1

The user can choose the wavelength and crystallite

shape value, and it is possible to consider the parameters

U, V and W to apply peak correction. A histogram plot

will be generated with crystallite size values for each
peak and the value of Lm (Figure 3). If the value of the
wavelength, crystallite shape, or bins is none, a warning

window will appear on the page.

and

then,

βL =

Ks.λ
Lcosθ

βe = 4e.tanθ

(4)

(5)

βTot.cosθ =

Ks.λ
L

+ 4e.sinθ

(6)

Where e is the strain induced in powders. With 2θ

and FWHM data for each peak, the user can choose

the wavelength, crystallite shape value, and is possible

to consider the parameters U, V and W to apply peak

correction to estimate the crystallite size and strain. If the

value of the wavelength, crystallite shape, or bins is none,

a warning window will appear on the page.

Thereby, a βs.cosθ vs 4.sinθ plot will be generated and
a linear ﬁt will be performed automatically on the data.

With this, we can obtain the average value of the crystallite

Figure 3: Histogram of crystallite size by Scherrer equation

The user can change the histogram bins values and

size and the lattice strain value. The user can download

download the ﬁgure plot in png format. Furthermore, it is

possible to export a result table containing the 2θ, FWHM,
Lhkl and δLhkl data in txt format.

the ﬁgure plot in png format (Figure 4) and export a result
table containing the 4.sinθ, βs.cosθ, δβs.cosθ and Fit data
in txt format.

2.3. Williamson-Hall method

In X-ray diffraction, a perfect crystalline sample produces

sharp peaks. The absence of perfect crystallinity leads to

a broadening of the diffraction peaks and we can consider

two contributions to this broadening: crystallite size and

lattice strain. Scherrer equation does not consider the

lattice strain. However, G.K.Williamson and his student,

W.H.Hall in 1953 [11] explained how crystallite size and

strain can broaden the powder diffraction peak.

They assumed that the total broadening is due to the

size broadening βL and the strain broadening βe. So,
βTot = βL + βe, and the Williamson-Hall equation is given
by:

Figure 4: Williamson - Hall analysis: determination of crystallite size

and strain

3

PCrystalX - Web • Mar 2022 • Version 1

3. Conclusions

PCrystalX - Web is a web application developed to

help researchers from different areas in the analysis

of data obtained by X-ray diffraction, in particular, in

the estimation of crystallite size and strain. This web

and crystallographic objects written in c++. Journal of

Applied Crystallography, 51(1):210–218, 2018.

[6] Thomas Degen, Mustapha Sadki, Egbert Bron, Uwe

König, and Gwilherm Nénert. The highscore suite.

Powder diffraction, 29(S2):S13–S18, 2014.

application stands out as it is not necessary to download

[7] Dash

Python.

Dash

python,

2021.

or install any program on a computer. The user just needs

https://dash.plotly.com/introduction.

[8] G Caglioti, A t Paoletti, and FP Ricci. Choice of

collimators for a crystal spectrometer for neutron

diffraction. 3(4):223–228, 1958.

[9] P Scherrer. Göttinger nachrichten math.

Phys,

2:98–100, 1918.

[10] AL Patterson. The scherrer formula for x-ray particle

size determination. Physical review, 56(10):978, 1939.

[11] GK Williamson and WH Hall. X-ray line broadening

from ﬁled aluminium and wolfram. Acta metallurgica,

1(1):22–31, 1953.

to access the internet through the computer, tablet, or

smartphone to perform the calculations using the Scherrer

equation and the Williamson-Hall method. In the future,

new applications may be added.

4. Acknowledgements

We would like to thank all users who are helping to

improve the PCrystalX-Web application by providing their

suggestions. Also, a special thanks to Nikola Bernardo,

Cintia Baltar, André Pecini, Wellington Wallace and André

Rangel.

References

[1] Pablo L. Bernardo.

Pcrystalx:

a software

to analyze

x-ray diffraction patterns.,

2022.

https://www.pcrystalx.com.

[2] Juan Rodríguez-Carvajal.

Fullprof. CEA/Saclay,

France, 2001.

[3] Nicola Doebelin and Reinhard Kleeberg. Profex: a

graphical user interface for the rietveld reﬁnement

program bgmn.

Journal of applied crystallography,

48(5):1573–1580, 2015.

[4] Brian H Toby. Expgui, a graphical user interface for

gsas. Journal of applied crystallography, 34(2):210–213,

2001.

[5] Alan A Coelho. Topas and topas-academic: an

optimization program integrating computer algebra

4

