IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

Internet of Things Device Capabilities, 
Architectures, Protocols, and Smart 
Applications in Healthcare Domain: A Review 

Md. Milon Islam, Sheikh Nooruddin, Fakhri Karray, Fellow, IEEE, and Ghulam Muhammad, Senior Member, IEEE 

in 

 Architectures 

Abstract—Nowadays,  the  Internet  has  spread  to  practically 
every  country  around  the  world  and  is  having  unprecedented 
effects on people’s lives. The Internet of Things (IoT) is getting 
more  popular  and  has  a  high  level  of  interest  in  both 
practitioners  and  academicians 
the  age  of  wireless 
communication  due  to  its  diverse  applications.  The  IoT  is  a 
technology  that  enables  everyday  things  to  become  savvier, 
everyday  computation  towards  becoming 
intellectual,  and 
everyday  communication  to  become  a  little  more  insightful.  In 
this  paper,  the  most  common  and  popular 
IoT  device 
capabilities,  architectures,  and  protocols  are  demonstrated  in 
brief  to  provide  a  clear  overview  of  the  IoT  technology  to  the 
researchers  in  this  area.  The  common  IoT  device  capabilities 
including  hardware  (Raspberry  Pi,  Arduino,  and  ESP8266)  and 
software  (operating  systems,  and  built-in  tools)  platforms  are 
described  in  detail.  The  widely  used  architectures  that  have 
been recently evolved and used are the three-layer architecture, 
SOA-based  architecture, and  middleware-based  architecture.  The  popular  protocols  for  IoT  are  demonstrated which 
include CoAP, MQTT, XMPP, AMQP, DDS, LoWPAN, BLE, and Zigbee that are frequently utilized to develop smart IoT 
applications. Additionally, this research provides an in-depth overview of the potential healthcare applications based 
on IoT technologies in the context of addressing various healthcare concerns. Finally, this paper summarizes state-of-
the-art  knowledge,  highlights  open  issues  and  shortcomings,  and  provides  recommendations  for  further  studies 
which would be quite beneficial to anyone with a desire to work in this field and make breakthroughs to get expertise 
in this area. 

Device Capabilities 

        Protocols 

         Healthcare 

Index  Terms—  Internet  of  Things,  Device  Capabilities,  IoT  Architecture,  Communication  Protocol,  Healthcare 

Applications.  

I.   Introduction 

T 

HE  IoT  concept  represents  a  set  of  Internet-connected 
devices  that  are  empowered  with  computing  capability, 
are  easily  recognizable,  and  can  share  data  over  the  Internet 
without the need for physical contact. The IoT revolution has 
resulted  in  unprecedented  levels  of  interconnection  among 
devices, allowing for the development of smart environments. 
The  smart  connectivity  with  the  existing  network,  as  well  as 

Md.  Milon  Islam,  and  Sheikh  Nooruddin  are  with  the  Centre  for 
Pattern  Analysis  and  Machine  Intelligence,  Department  of  Electrical 
and  Computer  Engineering,  University  of  Waterloo,  ON,  N2L  3G1, 
and 
Canada 
sheikh.nooruddin@uwaterloo.ca).  

milonislam@uwaterloo.ca*, 

(e-mail: 

Fakhri  Karray  is  with  the  Centre  for  Pattern  Analysis  and  Machine 
Intelligence,  Department  of  Electrical  and  Computer  Engineering, 
University  of  Waterloo,  ON,  N2L  3G1,  Canada  and  Mohamed  bin 
Zayed  University  of  Artificial  Intelligence,  Abu  Dhabi,  United  Arab 
Emirates (e-mail: karray@uwaterloo.ca). 

is  with 

Ghulam  Muhammad 

the  Department  of  Computer 
Engineering,  College  of  Computer  and  Information  Sciences,  King 
Saud  University,  Riyadh  11543,  Saudi  Arabia  and  Center  of  Smart 
Robotics  Research,  King  Saud  University,  Riyadh,  Saudi  Arabia  (e-
mail: ghulam@ksu.edu.sa). 

networks, 

range  of 

distributed 

context-aware  information  processing  employing  network 
resources,  are  essential  components  of  IoT  [1],  [2].  The  IoT 
allows physical things to see, hear, think, and execute a variety 
of tasks by allowing them to “speak” to one another, exchange 
information data, and make choices. The concept of IoT turns 
these devices from being conventional to smart by leveraging 
its  wide 
including  embedded 
technologies 
applications,  Internet  protocol  and  applications,  wireless 
sensor 
communications, 
technologies [3], [4]. An important advancement of the current 
Internet into a network of interconnected objects is that it not 
only  comes  into  contact  with  the  physical  surroundings  via 
actuation,  controlling,  and  monitoring,  nor  merely  extracts 
information from the surroundings, but it also uses traditional 
network  requirements  to  enhance  data  transfer,  predictive 
analysis,  and  communication [4],  [5].  The  IoT  covers  a  huge 
number  of  applications  including  healthcare,  automotive, 
utilities,  smart  cities,  wearables,  smart  homes,  and  smart 
farming [6], [7]. Numerous research projects, enterprises, and 
businesses are currently engaged in the creation of various IoT 
features  to  accommodate  the  growing  evolving  needs  that 

and 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
emerge with such rapid development. 

A  healthcare  platform  is  described  as  a  combination  of 
hardware and software components that work together to give 
a wide range of healthcare services and applications to people 
including  healthcare  professionals  and  patients,  to  promote 
health  in  an  efficient  and  widespread  manner  [8],  [9]. 
frameworks 
there  are  numerous  healthcare 
Nowadays, 
available  that  integrate  various  technologies  to  monitor 
multiple  human  bio-physical  symptoms  and  environmental 
data  utilizing  various  wireless  communications  techniques 
including  ZigBee,  5G,  Bluetooth,  and  Wi-Fi  [10],  [11].  IoT 
technology supports healthcare systems by allowing people to 
remain  at  smart  homes  and  be  monitored  in  real-time  rather 
than  being  admitted  to  hospitals  or  clinics  that  reduces  the 
emergency  costs  [12],  [13].  There  are  several  advantages  of 
IoT  technologies  to  design  smart  healthcare  systems  such  as 
ease  of  access,  ensuring  patient  comfort  and  safety,  and 
reducing patient’s burden in hospitals. In general, IoT enables 
networks of smart devices, cloud applications, and solutions to 
make  data  transfer  and  storage  easier.  The  most  promising 
applications  of  IoT  in  the  area  of  healthcare  include  remote 
monitoring,  smart  medical  device,  smart  homes,  as  well  as 
wearable  devices.  In  recent  years,  several  academic  and 
industry  researches  on  IoT  interoperability  including  the 
healthcare  domain  have  been  done,  with  an  emphasis  on  the 
standardization  of  communication  protocols 
to  offer 
interoperability  of  diverse  devices,  networks,  and  data 
structures  [14],  [15].  To  ensure  QoS  in  healthcare  systems, 
IoT  should  incorporate  some  aspects  such  as  standardization 
of  reliable  communication  protocols,  enhanced  mobile  and 
wearable  devices,  and 
low-power 
embedded  processors  [16],  [17].  The  IoT  communication 
architecture  could  be  the  primary  enabling  mechanism  for 
decentralized  pervasive  healthcare  applications,  considering 
the  prevailing  availability  of  distant  wireless  healthcare 
platforms and the rising topic of electronic patientcare datasets 
[18], [19]. 

low-cost  as  well  as 

This  paper  is  aimed  at highlighting  the  fundamental  issues 
of  IoT  device  capabilities,  architectures,  protocols,  and 
healthcare applications in detail. The  IoT device  incorporates 
all  the  necessary  components  for  hardware  and  software 
platforms. The  hardware platform describes the most popular 
portable  processing  devices  such  as  Raspberry  Pi,  Arduino, 
and ESP8266 highlighting some significant features including 
power  requirement,  memory  capacity,  and  processing  power. 
The  software  platform  is  described  focusing  the  operating 
systems for small embedded devices and built-in software for 
IoT-related  tasks.  The  operating  systems  named  Contiki, 
Mbed,  RIOT,  Embedded  Linux,  and  Windows  10  IoT  are 
described  here  with  their  distinguished  features.  The  popular 
and  widely  used  built-in  tools  for  IoT  smart  applications 
include  DeviceHive,  Kaa,  ThingsBoard,  AWS  IoT,  and 
Google Cloud IoT. The IoT architectures such as three-layer, 
SoA-based,  and  middleware-based  architectures  are  depicted 
to  provide  cutting-edge  insights.  The  three-layer  architecture 
contains  the  layers  of  perception,  network,  and  application. 
Additionally,  the  SoA-based  architecture  comprises  of  a 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

the 

layers  of 

individuals  using 

layer  along  with  the 

service 
three-layer 
architecture.  The  middleware  and  business  layers  are  the 
additional layer in the middleware-based architecture over the 
three-layer architecture. The IoT communication protocols are 
also  demonstrated  here 
to  provide  an  overview  of 
communication interfaces. The popular eight protocols that are 
described  in  this  paper  are  CoAP,  MQTT,  XMPP,  AMQP, 
DDS,  LoWPAN,  BLE,  and  Zigbee.  The  most  promising 
for  monitoring,  diagnosis,  and 
healthcare  applications 
treatment 
technologies  are 
for 
demonstrated.  The  major  applications  include  bio-physical 
parameter  monitoring,  chronic  disease  detection,  medication 
management, telehealth, as well as home and elderly care. The 
current  challenges  for  IoT  technologies  and  potential  future 
trends are explored to find out the research gaps and potential 
solutions to develop smart applications. The key contributions 
of the paper are highlighted as follows. 
(i)  Providing  a  comprehensive  discussion  on  IoT  device 
capabilities  highlighting  the  area  of  hardware  and 
software  systems  including  the  processing  capabilities, 
operating systems, and built-in tools. 

IoT 

(ii) Addressing  core  technologies  for  IoT  architectures  that 
in  diverse  application 

are 
domains of IoT and a detailed discussion on it. 

the  fundamental 

issues 

(iii) Analyzing typical IoT communication protocols that deal 
with data transmission concerns via networks, as well as 
providing an overview of each. 

(iv) Exploring  the  in-depth  analysis  of  the  most  recent  and 
promising 
applications 
incorporating  different  architectures  and  protocols  for 
monitoring,  diagnosis,  and  treatment  of  the  patients  in 
hospitals as well as smart home environments. 

healthcare 

IoT-based 

(v)  Presenting  a  study  of  the  major  open 

issues  for 
application approaches in the IoT context, as well as the 
future trends to provide the scope of further research for 
smart applications. 

The remaining parts of the paper read as follows. The paper 
collection and selection criteria are demonstrated in section II. 
Section  III  provides  the  concept  of  IoT  device  capabilities 
with  proper  illustration  of  hardware  and  software  platforms. 
The architectures that are available in recent times to develop 
smart  systems  are  described  in  section  IV.  Section  V 
demonstrates  the  IoT  protocols  that  are  generally  used  to 
transfer data  over the Internet. The  healthcare  applications of 
IoT technology are briefly described in section VI. Section VII 
demonstrated the open discussions of the IoT technology with 
the  current  challenges  as  well  as  the  potential  future  works. 
Section VIII concludes the paper. 

II.  PAPER COLLECTION AND SELECTION 

This research was limited to peer-reviewed research works 
published  in  reputed  international  venues  mostly  within  the 
years from 2017 to 2022 and written in English. Some notable 
sources used for this research are Google Scholar, EMBASE, 
PubMed,  and  NCBI.  The  most  used  search  keywords  were 
“IoT  Overview”,  “IoT  Security  Issues”,  “IoT  architectures”, 
“IoT in Healthcare”, “IoT Operating Systems”, “Challenges in 
IoT”, “Industrial IoT”, and “Smart Applications using IoT”.  

2 

 
 
 
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

Literature Search 
(Google Scholar = 739, EMBASE = 157, 
NCBI = 193, PubMed = 55) 

Number of duplicate records = 743 

Number of records after duplicate removal = 401 

Number of records removed after abstract review = 165 

Full text articles considered for review = 236 

Number of records removed after during full paper review = 
187 

Studies included in detailed final review = 49 

Fig. 1. Flow diagram showing article selection for final review. The final selection is done based on the duplicate records, abstract review, and full 
paper review. 

We  also  manually  searched  various  web  search  engines  such 
as Google, DuckDuckGo, and Bing and books, articles, online 
magazines,  online  reports  from  reputable  sources  to  provide 
various  statistics.  The  abstracts,  titles,  keywords,  and  overall 
structures of the papers were analyzed to eliminate duplicates. 
We also eliminated publications that were beyond the scope of  
this  work.  Fig.  1  shows  the  article  selection  process  of  the 
detailed review paper from the initial search stage. Only a very 
small  number  of  papers  were  selected  for  review  from  the 
initial high number of search results. The rejected papers were 
removed based on duplication, and out of focus of this work.  

III.  IOT DEVICE CAPABILITIES 

In  general,  an  IoT  framework  comprises  of  devices  that 
perform sensing, actuation, control, and surveillance tasks. IoT 
devices  are  able  to  transmit  data  to  other  devices  and 
applications  over  the  Internet,  or  they  can  retrieve  data  from 
other  connected  devices  and  process  it  locally  or  on  a  cloud 
server  after  sending  it  to  centralized  servers.  The  tasks  are 
completed  on  the  local  server  or  within  the  IoT  architecture 
depending  on  some  temporal  and  spatial  restrictions  such  as 
memory,  communication  delays,  deadlines,  computational 
power,  and  speed  of  operation.  An  IoT  device  may  have 
multiple  interfaces  for  communicating  with  other  devices,  in 
both wired and wireless mode. The common interfaces that are 
equipped  with  most  of  the  IoT  devices  are  I/O  interfaces  for 
sensors,  Internet  connectivity  interfaces,  memory  and  storage 
interfaces, and audio/video interfaces. There are various types 
of  IoT  objects  such  as  wearable  sensors,  accelerometers, 
cameras,  smart  watches,  smart  locks,  Global  Positioning 

System  (GPS),  and  LED  lights  that  are  available  for  smart 
applications. Mostly all IoT devices produce large amounts of 
data in various forms, which while analyzed by data analytics 
engines,  carries  important  information  that  can  be  used  to 
guide  local  or  remote  activities.  The  IoT  device  capabilities 
highlighting hardware and software platform is shown in Fig. 
2.  In  the  following  section,  the  device  capabilities  including 
hardware and software platforms are demonstrated in brief. 

A.  Hardware 

The  hardware  components  for  the  Internet  of  Things  have 
arrived in a variety of shapes and sizes, depending on the tasks 
at  hand.  For  instance,  the  core  CPUs  are  used  to  operate  the 
phones,  the  sensors  are  utilized  to  perceive  data  from  the 
physical environment, and the data are processed and analyzed 
on the edge devices. In the case of wired mode, the hardware 
aspects are the essential components of the IoT platform, and 
the  capabilities  of 
in 
significance  as  IoT  has  progressed.  The  main  hardware  kits 
that are widely used to develop IoT applications are described 
here  focusing  on  some  properties  such  as  processing  power, 
memory capacity, and power requirement. 

these  devices  have  only  grown 

(i) Raspberry Pi 

Raspberry  Pi  is  a  series  of  single-board  computers  that 
compress  a  lot of processing power  into  a  tiny  box  and  offer 
desktop-like functionality [20]. The components of Raspberry 
Pi vary based on its version. In Raspberry Pi B+ model, there 
are four USB ports, two ports for the camera, an Ethernet port, 
an audio jack port, and a HDMI port. To implement real case 
studies, there are 17 General Purpose Input Output (GPIO)  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

IoT Device Capabilities 

Hardware Systems 

Software Systems 

Raspberry Pi 

Operating Systems 

Built-in Tools 

Arduino 

ESP8266 

Contiki 

Mbed 

RIOT 

DeviceHive 

Kaa 

ThingsBoard 

Embedded Linux 

AWS IoT 

Windows 10 IoT 

Google Cloud IoT 

Fig.  2.  IoT  device  capabilities  considering  hardware  and  software  platforms.  The  hardware  platform  includes  several  types  of  tiny  processing 
devices such as Raspberry Pi, Arduino, and ESP8266. The software module comprises several operating systems and built-in tools. 

pins  that  are  available  to  connect  with  any  electronic 
components such as LEDs, sensors, switches, and motors. The 
minimum  required  logic  level  for  the  Raspberry  Pi  is  almost 
3.3V. In general, it is run over the Raspbian operating system. 
Additionally,  it  is  also  compatible  with  other  operating 
systems  such  as  Lakka,  RaspBSD,  and  RetroPie  [21].  The 
programming languages that are supported in Raspberry Pi are 
Python, Java, C++, and C. The combination of GPIO pins with 
the Linux operating system gives this device a lot of flexibility 
and  gives  users  a  lot  of  choices.  The  CPU  speed  of  the 
standard Raspberry Pi model is 700 MHz to 1.4 GHz, memory 
capacity is 256 MB to 4 GB, and the power requirement is 2.5 
Amp.  These  measures  are  varied  based  on  the  version  of  the 
Raspberry  Pi  model.  The  Raspberry  Pi  is  well-suited  for  a 
wide range of applications due to its high connectivity, ease of 
use, portability, low power consumption, high flexibility, and 
high transferability [22]. However, there is no power button to 
keep it in sleep mode while it becomes idle, no built-in ADC, 
and replicability is quite hard for this device. 

(ii)  Arduino 

Arduino  is  a  popular  and  frequently  used  open-source 
electronics framework based on simple hardware and software 
that  can  be  utilized  to  develop  electronic  projects.  It  offers  a 
from  straightforward  8-bit 
wide  variety  of  products, 
microcontroller  boards 
IoT 
components, and 3-D printing  [23]. The set of instructions to 
complete  any  tasks  are  executed  through  microcontrollers. 

to  wearable 

technologies, 

There  are  several  versions  of  Arduino  such  as  UNO,  micro, 
pro,  mega,  and  nano  available  in  the  market  for  electronic 
system  development  where  the  use  of  the  Arduino  model 
varies  based  on  the  nature  of  the  applications.  It  is  easily 
compatible with MAC, windows as well as Linux platforms. A 
type  B  USB  cable  is  utilized  to  do  programming  in  the 
Arduino board with the support of an IDE [24]. The supported 
language for Arduino is C++ where  the  fundamental issue of 
peripherals  such  as  sensors  and  actuators  are  controlled 
through the use of header files. Arduino Uno has analog pins, 
digital  pins,  a  USB  connection,  a  reset  button,  a  crystal 
oscillator,  and  a  power  jack.  Arduino  is  highly  suited  to 
perceive  data  from  physical  environments  i.e.,  analog  data 
[25]. 

for  embedded  development 

(iii) ESP8266 
   ESP8266  is  a  mini-sized,  Wi-Fi  enabled  device  with  full 
is 
TCP/IP  stack  and  microcontroller  capability  which 
frequently  used 
IoT 
environments  [26].  This  device  can  host  an  application  that 
offloads  all  Wi-Fi  network  services  to  another  underlying 
hardware. The Wi-Fi module of ESP8266 is pre-programmed 
with  an  ESP-AT  command  set  firmware  that  enables  any 
Arduino device to get a Wi-Fi connection. It runs at 80 MHz 
and  uses  a  32-bit  RISC  CPU  (reduced  instruction  set 
computer)  based  on  the  Tensilica  Xtensa  L106.  The  boot 
ROM, instruction RAM, and  data  RAM size  of ESP8266 are 
64 KB, 64 KB, and 96 KB respectively. 

in 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

TABLE I 
IOT HARDWARE COMPONENTS WITH SOME PROPERTIES 

Property 

Raspberry Pi 

Arduino 

Programming 
Wi-Fi 
Code Distribution 
Storage  
I/O 
CPU speed 
CPU 

Memory Capacity (RAM) 
Power Requirement 
Cost 

Python/Java/C++ 
USB dongle 
In-Situ 
SD-card 
17 GPIO 
700 MHz to 1.4 GHz 
ARM  Cortex-A7,  ARM  Cortex 
A-53, ARM Cortex-A72 
256 MB-4 GB 
5V, 2.5 Amp  
Expensive ($35) 

C++ 
Shield or ESP8266 
USB/SPI/Serial 
Built-in 
Arduino UNO: 13 GPIO/6 ADC 
16 MHz 
Atmel  AVR,  ARM Cortex-M0+,  ARM 
Cortex-M3, Intel Quark 
16 KB-64 MB 
5V, 250 mA  
Moderate ($3-$30) 

ESP8266 

C++/Lua 
Built-in 
Serial/OTA 
Built-in 
10 GPIO/1 ADC 
80 MHz 
Tensilica  L106  32-bit 
RISC processor 
128 KB-4 MB 
3.3V, 70.5 mA  
Low cost ($3) 

The  Serial  Peripheral  Interface  (SPI)  accesses  the  external 
flash  memory.  ESP8266  is  quite  fit  for  the  low-cost  systems 
[27] that do not require a high amount of CPU support, huge 
storage,  some  special  features  such  as  camera,  USB,  and 
HDMI ports. 

Table I shows the different properties including CPU speed, 
memory capacity, power requirement, supported programming 
languages,  and  storage  of  the  above-mentioned  hardware 
components. 

B.  Software 

In  general,  IoT  software  outlines  the  key  aspects  of 
communication  networks  and  action  via  numerous  channels, 
integrated  devices,  partner  systems,  and  development  tools. 
IoT  software  is  the  underlying  platform  that  allows  a 
connected  device  to  capture  and  communicate  data  in  real-
time where the data are generally processed by computers and 
relevant  applications.  The  connected  devices  can  operate 
effectively owing to the intelligence that IoT software ensures. 
Smart  devices  are  limited  to  their  computing  power  and  in 
such  scenarios, 
through  cloud 
computing technology where the IoT software is located. The 
operating systems along with built-in tools which are the parts 
of IoT software are described here. 

is  ensured 

intelligence 

(i) Operating Systems 

An  IoT  Operating  System  (OS)  is  a  part  of  software 
platforms  that  ensures  how  IoT  smart  devices  interact  with 
users and handle all software and hardware resources. IoT OSs 
are  integrated  operating  systems  that  are  intended  to  work  in 
small  IoT  devices  with  limited  memory  and  low  processing 
capacity.  IoT  devices  can  interact  with  cloud  platforms  and 
other  intelligent  devices  over  a  global  network  thanks  to 
embedded  operating  systems.  The  operating  systems  for  a 
particular  application  are  chosen  based  on  some performance 
measures 
reliability, 
simplicity,  and  consistency.  The  popular  IoT  operating 
systems are demonstrated here to provide a short overview of 
embedded operating systems. 

flexibility,  compatibility, 

including 

1)  Contiki 

Contiki  is  a  freely  available  operating  system  that  is  well-
known  for  its  way  of  interacting  with  extremely  small,  low-
power,  and  cost-effective  embedded  systems  to  the  Internet 
[28]. The programming language that is used in Contiki is C.  

It  supports  multithreading  via  protothread,  and  the  processes 
are  managed  through  cooperative  or  preemptive  scheduling. 
Generally,  multiple  stacks  are  supported  in  Contiki  including 
some features such as 6LoWPAN, CoAP, and IPv6 [29]. This 
operating  system  is  appropriate  for  developing  complex 
wireless systems due to its high memory efficiency. 

2)  Mbed 

Mbed operating system is a publicly available, open-source 
OS  that  is  quite  popular  for  its  integration  with  ARM 
processors and has a wide range of connectivity features such 
as  Wi-Fi,  Ethernet,  6LoWPAN,  Cellular,  and  Bluetooth  [30]. 
It  is  particularly  tailored  for  32-bit  ARM  processors.  This 
operating  system  has  a  multilayer  security  system  that 
provides  users  with  a  high  level  of  reliability.  Mbed  OS  is 
well-suited  to  IoT  applications  on  ARM  cortex  M-based 
devices, as it preserves code clean and portable features  [31]. 
It is a popular IoT OS due to its low system requirements and 
compatibility with a variety of development kits. 

3)  RIOT 

RIOT is another widely used and popular operating system 
specifically  designed  for  embedded  devices  [32].  This  OS 
targets wireless sensor networks as it is developed based on a 
microkernel  architecture  named  FireKernel.  It  ensures  the 
usage  of  multithreading  and  SSL/TSL  libraries,  as  well  as 
provides  the  facilities  of  the  use  of  8,  16,  and  32-bit 
processors.  The  supported  language  for  RIOT  is  C  and  C++. 
RIOT  can  run  as  a  Linux  or  macOS  process  as  there  is  a 
dedicated port for this OS. RIOT enables modular design and 
provides  access  to  separate  hardware  abstraction  for  minimal 
memory and energy consumption [33]. 

4)  Embedded Linux 

Embedded Linux is a  significantly modified version of the 
Linux kernel, designed specifically for embedded devices. The 
compact size and low power consumption of this OS make it 
well-suited  for  fulfilling  all  the  requirements  of  IoT  devices 
such as tablets, navigational devices, and wireless routers [34]. 
It requires a small amount of storage like 100 KB of memory 
that makes it quick and dynamic. In the IoT OS world, this OS 
also  offers  an  unparallel  level  of  customization.  Embedded 
Linux OS is easily compatible with any single-board computer 
such  as  Raspberry  Pi  (Raspbian,  Ubuntu  Core,  OSMC,  and 
Gentoo. Linux distros are popular options for IoT applications  

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

TABLE II 
A SHORT LOOK AT THE IOT OPERATING SYSTEMS 

Operating 
Systems 

Features 

Provider 

License 

Processor 

Use Cases 

Contiki 

Open-source, free 

ThingSquare 

3-clause BSD 

Mbed 

RIOT 

ARM-based, 
grade security 
Open-source, 
multithreading 

high-

ARM 

Apache 2.0   

full 

FU Berlin  

LGPLv2.1 

Embedded 
Linux 

Linux kernel, free 

Multiple 
providers 

GPL, 
GPLv2 

and 

Windows  10 
IoT 

Proprietary,  high-grade 
security 

Microsoft 
Corporation 

Commercial 

ARM  Cortex-M,  MSP430, 
AVR, and x86. 
ARM Cortex-M 

memory-

Networked 
constrained systems 
For portable code 

ARM  Cortex-M,  MSP430, 
ARM7,  AVR,  x86,  and 
Cortex-M23.  
ARM Cortex-A8, 
ARM Cortex A-53, and Intel 
Core i3, i5, i7.  
ARM 
Snapdragon 400, 
ARM Cortex-A53 

Cortex-A7, 

Can  be  run  as  a  MacOS 
process 

Versatile-can  be  used  for 
various use cases 

Ideal 
for 
industrial use cases 

heavy-duty 

to  some  performance  factors  such  as  flexibility, 
and 
layers, 

architectural 

support, 

cloud 

due 
consistency, 
visualization [35].   

5) Windows 10 IoT 

Windows  10  IoT  is  a  product  of  Microsoft  Windows  10 
operating  system,  but  it  is  dedicatedly  designed  for  IoT 
devices  [36].  Windows  IoT  is  divided  into  two  parts: 
Windows  10  IoT  core,  which  is  considered  to  interact  with 
tiny  embedded  devices,  and  Windows  10  IoT  Enterprise, 
which  is  developed  for  industrial  use.  Windows  10  IoT 
includes a user-friendly interface, more user control than some 
other  OSs,  and  is  universally  recognized  as  a  capable  IoT 
operating system among IoT experts. Windows OS is  a quite 
better  choice  over  free  or  open-source  ones  whenever 
reliability and security become critical issues [37]. 

Table  II  provides  an  overview  of  the  discussed  IoT 
operating  systems  including  some  dominant  features  such  as 
accessibility, provider, license, processor, and use cases. 

(ii)  Built-in-Tools 

Generally, IoT software has two main attributes such as (i) 
Connectivity  with  wired  or  wireless  devices  via  Bluetooth, 
ZigBee,  Ethernet,  5G/6G,  or  satellite  communications.  (ii) 
Automated communication between the hardware, devices, or 
machinery without human involvement to initiate an operation 
or carry out actions. The available built-in tools are developed 
based on these two characteristics to carry out automated data 
analysis  and  transfer,  as  well  as  autonomous  response.  The 
most  popular  IoT  built-in  tools  are  described  here  to  provide 
in-depth knowledge to the researchers.    

1) DeviceHive 

layer,  control 

DeviceHive  is  a  publicly  accessible  platform  that  offers 
communication and management tools for connected devices. 
There  are  several  things  included  in  DeviceHive  such  as 
software,  multi-platform 
communication 
modules and users to launch smart home development, remote 
control and monitoring tool, and telemetry [38]. DeviceHive is 
compatible  with  Python, Node.js,  and Java client  modules.  It 
uses  the  REST,  WebSocket, and  MQTT  protocols  to  connect 
with other devices. This platform is a modular, hardware, and 
cloud independent micro service-oriented solution with access 
control APIs in several protocols that enable users to monitor, 
control, and analyze the behavior of their devices. 

2) Kaa 
Kaa 

for  enabling 

is  developed 

smart  devices 

to 
communicate  with  each  other  across  a  big  cloud.  Kaa  is  an 
open-source development tool, and it is hardware-oriented i.e.,  
it  is  well-suited  for  any  hardware  components  such  as 
sensors,  gateways,  and  devices.  Kaa’s  multi-purpose 
middleware  enables  users 
solutions, 
application  support,  and  a  variety  of  intelligent  devices  [39]. 
The  set-up  of  Kaa  tool  is  quite  easy  and  it  provides  a  large 
number  of  features  that  can  be  integrated  into  the  platform 
easily. Kaa is a scalable IoT platform that uses a microservice 
design to provide obvious layers of abstraction, flexibility, and 
scalability [40]. 

to  develop 

IoT 

3) ThingsBoard 

ThingsBoard  is  a  free  server-side  built-in  tool  for  data 
collection,  processing,  monitoring,  and  device  management 
[41].  It  is  deployable  in  any  smart  application  including 
personal  and  commercial  purposes.  ThingsBoard  supports 
several protocols such as CoAP, MQTT, and HTTP. The IoT 
devices are easily connected to the platform via ThingsBoard 
gateway. Although the back-end of ThingsBoard is written in 
Java,  it  supports  several  micro  services  based  on  Node.js. 
Some  of  the  major  reliant  features  of  ThingsBoard  are 
scalable,  fault-tolerant,  robust  and  efficient,  adaptable,  and 
resilient  [42].  In  practical  scenarios,  it  is  well-suited  for 
predictive  analytics  tasks  such  as  smart  farming,  smart 
metering, and smart energy. 

4) AWS IoT 

The Amazon Web Services (AWS) IoT tool is a reliable and 
secure  development  platform  for  industrial,  business,  and 
retail  solutions.  This  platform  can  be  used  to  analyze  and 
manage  data  from  Internet-connected  devices  and  sensors  in 
residences,  businesses,  healthcare,  automobiles,  and  other 
locations [43]. It supports HTTP, LoRaWAN, the lightweight 
communication protocol, and MQTT to publish and subscribe 
to  messages.  This  tool  incorporates  layers  of  security  like 
encryption,  secure  access,  constant  monitoring,  and  audits. 
AWS  IoT  is  able  to handle  smart  objects  and  trillions  of 
signals,  and  it  can  securely  and  efficiently  interpret  and 
transmit  those  signals  to  AWS  endpoints  and  other  devices 
[44]. 

6 

 
 
 
 
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

IoT Architectures 

Three-Layer Architectures 

SOA-based Architectures 

Middleware-based Architectures 

Application Layer 

Application Layer 

Business Layer 

Network Layer 

Perception Layer 

Service Layer 

Network Layer 

Perception Layer 

Application Layer 

Middleware Layer 

Network Layer 

Perception Layer 

Fig. 3. Most common and frequently used IoT architectures that incorporate the three-layer architecture, SOA-based architecture, and middleware-based 
architecture. 
5) Google Cloud IoT 

and 

incorporated  with 

Google  Cloud  provides  scalable  services  that  are  quite 
managed 
IoT  devices.  The 
functionalities of this tool include connecting, preserving, and 
investigating  data  at  the  edge  and  in  the  cloud.  The  common 
aspects of Google Cloud IoT are data warehousing and quick 
querying,  streaming  and  batch  analysis,  device  connectivity 
and  management,  as  well  as  Artificial  Intelligence  (AI)  and 
Machine Learning (ML) models [45]. This platform is capable 
of  predicting  equipment  maintenance  and  optimizing 
operations,  as  well  as  monitoring  resources  in  real-time. 
Google  Cloud  IoT  covers  a  wide  range  of  applications 
including  predictive  analytics,  logistics  and  supply  chain 
management,  smart  cities  and  infrastructures,  as  well  as  real-
time asset surveillance [46]. 

IV.  IOT ARCHITECTURES 

The  Internet  of  Things  should  be  competent  at  networking 
billions or trillions of diverse things over the Internet, therefore, a 
flexible architectural pattern is crucial. Some of the major factors 
like reliability, scalability, privacy and security, quality of service 
(QoS),  and  data  storage  should  be  considered  at  the  time  of 
developing  the  architecture  of  an  IoT  network  [47],  [48].  To 
fulfill  the  demand  of  the  defined  key  features,  several  research 
groups  have  proposed  several  IoT  architectures.  The  ever-
growing  number  of  potential  architectures  has  been  unable  to 
settle  on  a  standard  model  [49].  There  is  no  specific  base 
architectural  pattern  till  now  despite  numerous  standardization 
initiatives. This is because of its wide area of applications having 

different  design  patterns  and  variables/factors  to  measure  the 
performance  of  the  existing  systems.  Fig.  3  depicts  the  most 
common and widely used IoT architectures, which are explained 
as follows. 

A. Three-Layer Architectures 

The  most  fundamental  architecture  is  the  three-layer 
architecture which was developed in the beginning periods of 
research in the IoT area [50], [51]. This architecture is divided 
into three base architectures such as perception layer, network 
layer, and application layer which are demonstrated below. 

1) Perception Layer 

In  the  IoT  ecosystem,  the  perception  layer  is  sometimes 
referred to as the sensor layer, and it is deployed in the bottom 
layer.  The  perception  layer  interferes  with  the  environments 
via  smart  devices  like  sensors,  actuators,  cameras,  and  GPS 
terminals  to  collect  and  process  data.  This  layer’s  primary 
functions  include  connecting  devices  to  the  IoT  framework, 
measuring,  and  processing  real-time  physical  parameters 
(data)  from  connected  things  via  intelligent  devices,  and 
transmitting  data  to  the  higher  layer  via  its  interfaces  [52], 
[53].  In  the  perception  layer,  heterogeneous  devices  are 
configured  using  standardized  plug-and-play  techniques  [54]. 
The  major  success  of  IoT,  known  as  big  data,  begins  in  this 
layer. 

2) Network Layer 

The  network  layer,  also  known  as  the  transmission  layer 
and incorporated in the middle layer of the IoT framework, is 
referred to as the core of the IoT ecosystem [55]. The network  

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

Zigbee 

BLE 

LoWPAN 

CoAP 

IoT 
Protocols 

DDS 

MQTT 

XMPP 

AMQP 

Fig. 4. Most common emerging IoT communication protocols that are extensively used to develop smart IoT applications. 

layer 

layer  serves  as  a  link  between  the  perception  layer  and  the 
application  layer,  allowing  data  to  be  transferred  to  IoT 
servers,  applications,  and  devices  through  interconnected 
networks.  The  network 
consists  of  different 
communication  standards  like  Wi-Fi,  Bluetooth,  and  ZigBee 
[56]  and  IoT  objects  like  gateway,  hub,  and  switching  [57]. 
The  use  of  wireless  protocols  is  very  important  in  this  layer 
because  wireless  devices  can  be  deployed 
in  critical 
environments  with  less  material  and  human  effort  [58].  This 
transmits/receives  data 
layer  generally 
to/from  various 
applications  via 
interfaces/gateways  using  a  variety  of 
communication standards and protocols. 

3) Application Layer 

The  application  layer  is  located  at  the  top  layer  of  the  IoT 
network,  and  it  serves  as  the  interface  between  users  and 
applications.  This  layer  is  in  charge  of  retrieving  data  sent 
from  the  network  layer  and  utilizing  the  collected  data  for 
specific  operations  [59].  As  a  task  of  the  application  layer,  it 
provides  the  storage  facility  that  can  be  utilized  to  store  a 
backup  of  the  acquired  data  into  database.  Additionally,  this 
layer  predicts  the  future  condition  of  physical  things  by 
analyzing  the  nature  of  the  received  information.  From  an 
application 
the 
this 
functionalities  of  the  IoT  framework  to  develop  real-time 
applications including the healthcare system [60], smart cities 
[61], smart transportation [62], and smart agriculture [63].  

incorporates 

perspective, 

layer 

B. Service-Oriented Architectures 

Generally,  Service-Oriented  Architecture  (SOA) 

is  a 
component  model-based  framework  that  connects  various 
functional  blocks  of  applications  via  interfaces  as  well  as 
standard  protocols  [64].  SOA  provides  viability  by  allowing 
software  and  hardware  components 
to  be  reused  and 
coordinating the intended services. A new layer named service 

layer is added between the network layer and application layer 
that  ensures  services  are  sufficient  to  assist  the  application 
layer  extending  the  three-layer  architecture  in  the  SOA 
framework [65], [66]. As a result, the SOA architecture differs 
from  the  conventional  three-layer  framework  by  including 
service  layer  functionalities.  The  service  layer  consists  of 
several  components  such  as  service  management,  service 
discovery,  service  composition,  and  service  interfaces  [67]. 
The  service  management  maintains  and  measures  the  trust 
processes in order to fulfill the service’s requests. The service 
discovery  unit  finds  the  service’s  requests.  The  purpose  of 
service  composition  is  to  communicate  with  the  associated 
the  requests 
things  and 
efficiently.  Additionally,  all  the  services  are  interfaced  with 
one  another  through  service  interface  unit.  The  application 
layer, in general, complies with the user’s request for services. 

incorporate  services 

to  obtain 

C. Middleware-based Architectures 

The  middleware-based  architecture  is  also  popular  and 
widely used in the IoT ecosystem nowadays; it is also known 
as  a  five-layer  architecture.  To  ensure  some  of 
the 
performance  factors  like  reliability,  scalability,  and  QoS  in 
today’s  applications,  the  middleware-based  architecture  plays 
a  vital  role  by  creating  applications  efficiently  and  providing 
links  among  the  applications,  users,  and  data  [68].  The  five-
layer  architecture  has  been  introduced  due  to  the  recent 
developments  of  IoT  and  its  huge  applications  in  business 
models.  As  shown  in  Figure  3,  the  five  layers  include  the 
middleware  layer  in  between  the  network  and  application 
layer as well as the business layer at the top of the layer of the 
layer 
three-layer 
aggregates,  and  filters  data  retrieved  from  the  hardware, 
conducts  data  exploration,  and  offers  access  control  to  the 
objects for a variety of applications [70]. This layer has grown 
in importance in recent years since it allows for the growth of 

[69].  The  middleware 

architecture 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
streamlined  novel  services  and  the  incorporation  of  existing 
methods  into  new  designs.  The  other  layer  of  middleware-
based  architecture  named  the  business  layer  organizes  the 
entire  services  and  activities  of  the  IoT  infrastructure.  This 
layer  takes  data  from  the  application  layer  and  creates  a 
business model, graphs, and other representations based on it 
[71].  This  layer  is  in  charge of  designing,  implementing,  and 
monitoring all IoT components. In addition, the output of the 
previous  four  layers  is  compared  with  the  desired  output  in 
this layer to enable the services and user’s privacy [72].  

V.  IOT PROTOCOLS  

Various  standards  have  been  introduced  to  assess  the 
services  and  relevance  that  are  utilized  for  IoT  solutions  to 
link  several  things  to  the  Internet  in  IoT  common  standards 
[73], [74]. Although multiple protocols have been developed, 
they  are  not  all  required  for  a  single  IoT  application  at  the 
same  time.  The  IoT  protocols  for  a  given  application  are 
chosen  considering  the  nature  of  the  application.  The  most 
common IoT protocols (depicted in Fig. 4), which are utilized 
in a variety of applications, are listed below. 

A. Constrained Application Protocol 

(HTTP) 

The  Internet  Engineer  Task  Force  (IETF),  Constrained 
RESTful  Environments  (CoRE)  research  team  developed  the 
is  a 
Constrained  Application  Protocol  (CoAP),  which 
Hypertext  Transfer  Protocol 
and 
functional 
lightweight  application  layer  protocol  [75].  As  most  IoT 
devices  have  limited  power  and  storage,  the  CoAP  protocol 
extends  the  functionalities  of  HTTP  (which  has  a  relatively 
high  complexity)  by  fulfilling  the  needs  of  IoT  devices  [76]. 
This  protocol  shows  how  to  build  a  web  transfer  protocol 
called  REpresentational  State  Transfer  (REST)  on  the  upper 
level  of  HTTP.  The  CoAP  uses  the  User  Datagram  Protocol 
(UDP) because it is simple in nature and has a small message 
size  and  layout,  which  helps  to  decrease  the  needs  of 
bandwidth,  utilize  resources,  and  decrease  the  overhead  of 
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) handshaking before data 
transfer  [77].  This  protocol  has  two  sub-layers  such  as  the 
messaging  sub-layer  and  the  request/response  sub-layer.  The 
first  sub-layer  (messaging)  determines  the  replications  and 
ensures  efficient  data  transmission  over  the  UDP  through 
exponential  backoff  as  UDP  is  constrained  to  error  recovery 
technique.  On  the  contrary,  the  REST  communications  are 
handled  by  the  request/response  sub-layer.  There  are  four 
kinds  of  messages  in  CoAP  such  as  confirmable,  non-
confirmable,  reset,  and  acknowledgment.  The  CoAP  enables 
efficient delivery, congestion control, and flow control for IoT 
applications 
in  resource-constrained  and  unsynchronized 
objects  [78].  The  CoAP  has  several  drawbacks,  including 
increased  communication  delay,  packet  delivery  instability, 
and the inability to transfer complicated data [79]. 

B. Message Queue Telemetry Transport 

Message  Queue  Telemetry  Transport  (MQTT) 

is  a 
messaging transport protocol that performs data aggregation of 
the environmental data and sends it to a web server [80]. This 
protocol is based on the TCP subscribe and publish messaging 
model  and  is  intended  for  lightweight  Machine-to-Machine 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

(M2M),  server-to-server,  and  machine-to-server  interactions 
[81]. Here, the clients are acted as publishers/subscribers and 
the server is as a broker where the clients are connected to the 
server  through  TCP.  Generally,  the  subscriber  registers  for  a 
particular  task  in  a  device,  and  the  data  are  generated  and 
transferred  to  subscribers  by  the  publishers  through  brokers 
[82].  MQTT  is  appropriate  for  utilization  in  things  with 
limited  resources,  like  those  with  low  power  and  computing 
capabilities  and  are  connected  to  low  bandwidth  or  unstable 
networks.  However,  the  MQTT  protocol  is  not  suited  for 
usage  with  all  forms  of  IoT  applications  because  it  operates 
over  TCP,  and  the  overhead  is  raised  because  it  uses  topic 
names as texts [83]. 

C. Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol 

Extensible  messaging  and  presence  protocol  (XMPP)  is  a 
protocol that ensures low bandwidth communication and short 
message  transfer,  making  it  ideal  for  video  conferencing, 
publish-subscribe  systems,  telepresence,  multi-party  chatting, 
and  talking  in  IoT  [84].  For  instant  messaging  applications, 
XMPP  is  appropriate  for  authentication,  security  measure, 
access  control,  hop-by-hop  and  end-to-end  encryption,  and 
interoperability  with  various  protocols.  This  protocol  serves 
three  functions:  client,  server,  and  gateway,  and  it  facilitates 
two-way communications between any two of these roles [85]. 
In this scenario, the client connects to the server through TCP 
protocol and transfers data using the XML streaming standard; 
the  server  is  in  charge  for  the  connection  management  and 
routing  of  the  message,  and  the  gateway  ensures  reliable 
connectivity  among distributed  systems.  This  protocol  allows 
communication among a variety of applications as it is flexible 
and  simple 
in  nature.  However,  XMPP  requires  high 
computing  capabilities  devices,  consumes  bandwidth  of  the 
network,  transfers  simple  types  of  data,  and  is  unable  to 
provide QoS [86]. 

D. Advanced Message Queuing Protocol 

is  utilized  at 

Advanced  Message  Queuing  Protocol  (AMQP)  is  an  open 
platform  messaging  standard  which 
the 
application level to provide message services such as privacy, 
queuing, durability, and routing  [87]. AMQP ensures reliable 
and  consistent  information  exchange  by  using  message 
passing  primitives  such  as  one-to-one,  one-to-many,  and 
exactly-once delivery. This protocol necessarily needs a stable 
transport  protocol  architecture and  middleware  serves  as  a 
gateway  between  applications  and  available 
resources, 
connecting  institutions  and  mechanisms  throughout  time  and 
space.  The  message  queue  and  the  exchange  queue  are  two 
main  steps  in  the  AMQP  data  transmission  process.  In  a 
message  queue  paradigm,  messages  are  kept  until  they  are 
delivered to the recipient. The messages are transmitted in an 
appropriate  sequence  in  another  scenario  (exchange  queue 
model)  [88].  AMQP  also  enables  the  publish/subscribe 
communication  architecture  in  addition  to  point-to-point  data 
transfer. There are two kinds of messages found in AMQP like 
bare messages provided by the sender and annotated messages 
available  at 
requires 
comparatively  higher  bandwidth,  and  it  does  not  guarantee 
resource discovery [89]. 

recipient.  However,  AMQP 

the 

9 

 
 
 
 
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

TABLE III 
IOT COMMUNICATION PROTOCOLS WITH SOME FUNDAMENTAL FEATURES 

Protocol 
Name 

Network 
Standard 

Latest Version 
(Year) 

Transport 
Protocol 

Messaging Model 

Architecture 

CoAP 

MQTT 

XMPP 

AMQP 

IETF, Eclipse Foundation  RFC 8323 (2018) 

OASIS, 
Foundations 

Eclipse 

MQTT  version  5.0 
(2018) 

(RFC 3920-RFC 3923) 
RFC 4622, RFC 4854, 
RFC 4979, RFC 6122 
OASIS, ISO/IEC 

XMPP v 1.0.1, 
XEP-0128 (2019) 

UDP 

TCP 

TCP 

Request/response 

Publish/subscribe 
and request/response 

Publish/subscribe 
and request/response 

Tree 

Tree 

Client-server 

Security 

AMQP v 2.5.0 (2019) 

TCP 

Publish/subscribe 

P2P 

Both 

Security 
and 
QoS 

Both 

Both 

Application 
Levels 

Utility field 

IoT messaging 

Remote 
management 

Enterprise 
integration 

DDS 

OMG 

DDS v.1.4 (2015) 

TCP/UDP 

Publish/subscribe 
and request/response 

Bus 

QoS 

Military 

LoWPAN 

IEEE 802.15.4 

BLE 

802.15.1 

Zigbee 

IEEE 
802.15.4 

6Lo-BLEMesh 
(2019) 

6Lo-BLEMesh 
(2019), 
MRT-BLE (2018) 
Zigbee 3.0 
(2018) 

TCP 

Publish/subscribe 

Star, mesh 

Security 

Structural 
monitoring 

TCP/UDP 

Publish/subscribe 
and request/response 

Star 

Security  Wearable 

devices 

UDP 

Publish/subscribe 
and request/response 

Star,  mesh, 
hybrid 

Security 

Consumer 
electronics 

E. Data Distribution Service 

Data  Distribution  Service  (DDS)  is  a  data  distribution 
service protocol based on publish/subscribe model that allows 
highly  dependable  M2M,  real-time,  flexible,  and  accessible 
connections  [90].  DDS  retrieves  the  edge  outliers  and  gives 
notifications  as  well  as  pushes  them  to  the  data  analytics 
engine.  The  distributed  relational  information  model,  which 
uses  a  distributed  server  to  keep  the  application’s  specific 
data,  is  generated/consumed  by  the  publishers/subscribers. 
The powerful QoS architecture of DDS is worked based on a 
series  of  two  principles  that  provide  end-to-end  QoS  control 
[91].  DDS  allows  asynchronous  data  transfer  via  a  data  bus 
through  Peer-to-Peer  (P2P)  and  distribution  communication, 
making it a good fit for IoT applications [92]. As this protocol 
supports  multicasting  and  broker-less  model,  it  is  possible  to 
obtain  high  reliability  and  QoS  through  the  use  of  this 
protocol.   

F. Low-Power Wireless Personal Area Networks 

Low-Power  Wireless  Personal  Area  Networks  (LoWPAN) 
are  made  up  of  a  variety  of  cost-effective  devices  that  are 
linked  via  wireless  communication.  This  protocol  has  a  huge 
number  of  applications  in  IoT  architectures  due  to  its  small 
packet sizes, low computing power, low data throughput, and 
low  latency  [93].  Additionally,  the  6LoWPAN  protocol  was 
introduced  by  incorporating  the  most  recent  release  of  the 
Internet  protocol  (IPv6)  and  LoWPAN.  6LoWPAN  makes  it 
easier to maintain the administration process by allowing each 
constrained  object  to  be  accessed  independently  within  the 
network.  Additionally,  it  is  in  charge  of  segmenting  and 
reorganizing  IPv6 
traffic,  guaranteeing  unitary  routing, 
reducing  protocol  stack  headers,  and  providing  compliance 
with  the  higher  levels  [94].  This  protocol  eliminates  overall 
packet  overhead  as  it  does  not  include  the  extra  header 
information  during  routing.  Besides,  6LoWPAN  contains  a 
mesh address header to enable packet routing in a mesh  

architecture, but it is unable to provide detailed information of 
routing  to  the  link  layer.  6LoWPAN  has  various  advantages, 
including  ad-hoc  self-organization,  robust  connectivity  and 
standard compatibility, and low power consumption.  

G.  Bluetooth Low Energy 

radio  with 

Bluetooth  Low  Energy  (BLE),  an  extended  version  of 
Bluetooth  offers  a  small 
reduced  power 
consumption to operate for a longer period for controlling and 
monitoring  applications  [95].  The  protocol  stack  that  is 
utilized  in  BLE  is  almost  identical  to  the  standard  of 
conventional  Bluetooth  technology,  but  it  has  a  larger 
coverage;  approximately  100  meters  with  low  latency  [96]. 
The devices that employ the BLE standard are categorized into 
two groups: master and slave. The master devices are the ones 
that  play  the  most  important  roles  and  link  to  slaves. 
Additionally,  the  slaves  can  access  and  subscribe  several 
master devices. BLE enables devices to investigate as masters 
or slaves channels in star topology [97]. This technology turns 
off the radio while idle time and only turns it on to broadcast 
or  receive  minimal  data  packets,  resulting  in  minimal  energy 
consumption.  There  is  a  gateway  required  (another  BLE 
device  with  network  connectivity)  for  BLE  devices  while 
transferring data over the Internet.  

H. Zigbee 

Zigbee  is  a  communication  standard  that  ensures  reliable, 
low  power,  and  cost-effective  data  transfer,  but  it  covers  a 
small  range  of  communication  [98].  Zigbee  supports  star, 
cluster-tree,  and  P2P  network  topologies.  A  controller,  in 
general,  is  in  charge of  the  structure  and  can  be  found  at  the 
middle  of  a  star  network,  at  the  root  of  a  tree  or  cluster 
architecture,  or  anywhere  else  in  a  P2P topology  [99].  There 
are two stacks in Zigbee standard such as ZigBee and ZigBee 
Pro;  these  stacks  allow  mesh  network  architectures  and  to 
operate with a variety of applications, allowing for low storage 
and processing power implementations. ZigBee Pro adds new 
functionalities like a symmetric key in order to ensure  

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

Fig.  5.  A  general  pipeline  of  IoT-based  smart  healthcare  systems.  The  sensors  (heart  rate,  temperature,  blood  pressure,  SpO2,  glucose,  and 
smartphone) collect the data from the real-time healthcare environment. Some of the data are processed in edge/fog server and the major data 
analysis occurs in cloud server where the data analytics engines predict the patient status. The emergencies, families, and physicians receive the 
patient's condition and take further required actions. 

relaying 

for  enhanced 
security,  effective  many-to-one 
performance  and  probabilistic  address  allocation 
for 
flexibility. This protocol offers stringent security and listening  
mechanisms,  making  it  quite  appropriate  compared  to  other 
wireless communication standards [100]. The Zigbee protocol 
has  a  wide  range  of  control  and  monitoring  applications, 
including smart healthcare, smart homes, industry automation, 
lighting, and commercial control. 

Table  III  describes  the  IoT  communication  protocols  with 
some  basic  features  such  as  network  standard,  latest  version, 
used  transport  protocol,  used  messaging  model,  utilized 
architecture,  the  security  and  QoS  measures,  as  well  as 
potential application levels for the protocols that are necessary 
to compare each of the protocols.  

VI.  SMART HEALTHCARE APPLICATIONS 

Considering the state of the world today and the disperse of 
outbreaks  and  communicable  diseases  including  COVID-19, 
as  well  as  other  things  relevant  to  this  global  epidemic  like 
massive cost, long distance, and the need for isolation during 
this  crucial  timeframe,  heading  to  healthcare  institutions  is 
challenging,  even  sometimes  become  impossible  particularly 
for  the  disabled  and  elderly,  who  experience  severe  from  at 
least  one  chronic  illness  [101],  [102].  As  a  result,  efficient, 
substantial,  and  computer-aided  technology  is  very  important 
to address the necessities for long-term care and remote health 
care monitoring to ensure patients with an adequate quality of 
life while also reducing the economic strain  [103], [104]. IoT 
has become a revolution for healthcare applications, allowing 
for  the  development  of  predictive  and  smart  systems  by 
linking various IoT devices to perceive real-time bio-physical 
information from patients including heart rate, blood pressure, 
glucose  level,  body  temperature,  and  oxygen  saturation  level 
[105], [106]. The most significant contributions of IoT in the 
healthcare  industry  are  remote  patient  monitoring,  disease 

management,  preventative  care,  and  assisted  living  [107], 
[108].  Additionally,  the  application  environment  of  IoT  for 
smart  healthcare 
includes  hospital  management,  home 
healthcare, and e-healthcare/mobile healthcare [109], [110]. A 
general  pipeline  of  IoT-based  smart  healthcare  systems  with 
in  Fig.  5.  Various 
is  shown 
the  basic  components 
sensors/medical  devices  are  utilized  to  collect  data  from  the 
patient end through the help of healthcare professionals or the 
patients. The data collection step for healthcare is done in the 
perception  layer  and  the  retrieved  data  are  sent  through  the 
layer  using  Wi-Fi  or  LoRa  communication 
network 
technologies.  Some  portions  of 
the  collected  data  are 
processed in the edge/fog server to decrease the burden of the 
cloud server. The main data analytics including preprocessing, 
feature  selection,  and  classification  are  done 
through 
predictive  analytics  engines  with 
the  use  of  artificial 
intelligence  techniques;  resided  in  the  cloud  server.  All  the 
processes  for 
the 
middleware  layer.  The  outcomes  of  the  analytics  engines  are 
sent  as  notifications  through  call/short  messages  to  the 
emergencies,  physicians  and  families,  as  well  as  interactive 
user  interfaces.  The  application  layer  and  business  layer 
performed the information consuming step. Although IoT has 
diverse  applications  in  the  healthcare  domain,  some  of  the 
most  recent  and  promising  works  are  described  here.  The 
major applications that IoT includes in healthcare domain are 
depicted Fig. 6. 

the  data  analysis  are  performed 

in 

A. Biophysical Parameter Monitoring 

The monitoring of biophysical parameters is mainly used to 
observe  the  changes  or  absence  of  changes  in  the  health 
findings  of  a  patient.  The  goal  of  health  monitoring  is  to 
provide  early  notification  of  threatening  deterioration  by 
achieving an optimal compromise that included many medical, 
engineering,  and  financial  design  factors.  IoT  plays  a 
significant role to monitor patients remotely and condensing  

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

Healthcare Applications 

Biophysical 
Parameter 
Monitoring 

Chronic 
Disease 
Detection 

Medication 
Management 

Telehealth 

Home and 
Elderly Care 

ECG Monitoring 

Human Activity Recognition 

Blood Pressure Monitoring 

Fall Detection 

Body Temperature Monitoring 

Sleep Disorder Monitoring 

Glucose Level Monitoring 

Cardiac Monitoring 

Oxygen Saturation Monitoring 

Agitation Monitoring 

Fig.  6.  Major  healthcare  applications  focusing  on  IoT  concepts  in  the  area  of  biophysical  parameter  monitoring,  chronic  disease  detection, 
medication management, telehealth, as well as home and elderly care.  

the burden of patients in the hospital as well as decreasing the 
number  of  cases.  The  major  bio-physical  symptoms  of  a 
particular  patient  involve  Electrocardiogram  (ECG),  blood 
pressure,  temperature,  glucose  level,  and  oxygen  saturation 
(SpO2).  The  frameworks  that  are  developed  to  monitor  the 
above-mentioned  parameters  of  the  patients  in  the  IoT 
environment are described below.  

(i) ECG Monitoring 

(physicians/families) 

Wu  et  al.  [113]  introduced  a  tiny-sized  and  low-powered 
ECG  monitoring  framework  that  was  incorporated  into  a  t-
shirt. To collect the ECG signal, the system used biopotential 
chips.  The  retrieved  data  from  the  patients  are  transferred  to 
end-users 
using  Bluetooth.  A 
smartphone  application  has  been  developed  in  this  system  to 
visualize the collected data. The minimum power required for 
the developed system to operate is 5.2 mW. The system is no 
longer in real-time mode; it is possible to monitor the ECG in 
real-time by utilizing big data analytics to accommodate larger 
data  capacity.  Shaown  et  al.  [114]  developed  an  ECG 
monitoring  system  in  IoT  for  ensuring  smart  health.  The 
developed  system  used  Raspberry  Pi,  Arduino,  ECG  sensor 
(AD8232),  and  bio  pad  as  hardware  components.  The 
collected data  are sent to cloud server for processing through 
Wi-Fi  network.  The  emergency  cases  of  the  individuals  are 
automatically sent to doctors to take fast initiatives as a form 
of  an  email.  The  overall  accuracy  found  from  the  developed 
system is approximately 80%. In another study, Djelouat et al. 
[115]  presented  a  wearable  ECG  monitoring  platform  that 
resolved  the  problems  related  to  power  consumption.  The 
device  featured  a  novel  design  called  compressive  sensing, 

scheme 

which  can  reduce  power  consumption  and  improve  ECG 
monitoring  efficiency.  It  is  shown  from  the  experimental 
results that the multicore processors are quite appropriate for a 
solution  while  maintaining  processing 
gateway-centric 
capacity  and  power  efficiency.  Sahu  et  al.  [116]  proposed  a 
cloud-based 
for 
remote  ECG  monitoring 
cardiovascular  patients.  The  ECG  data  are  transmitted  to  the 
AWS  through  a  mobile  gateway  service.  BLE  is  used  as  a 
communication  medium  between  the  users  and  end  devices. 
For data visualization, fast response, and long-live connection, 
AWS  used  HTTP  and  MQTT  protocols  in  this  system. 
Further,  Basu  et  al.  [117]  introduced  a  platform  for  remote 
patients to monitor their cardiac conditions using the concept 
of  IoT 
technology.  The  system  used  an  ECG  sensor 
(AD8232); interfaced with a notch filter (removes the power-
line  frequencies),  and  Arduino  to  process  the  data  initially. 
The  final processing  is  done using  MATLAB  tool  to remove 
baseline  wander and the processed data  are  transferred to the 
cloud  as  a  decision  via  Wi-Fi  that  can  be  accessed  by  the 
registered users. 

(ii) Blood Pressure Monitoring 

The measurement of blood pressure (BP) is one of the most 
important  aspects  of  diagnosing  any  disorders  in  the  human 
body. In general, trained professionals measure blood pressure 
while  recording  the  data  of  humans.  Nowadays,  IoT  and 
several sensing modalities are used to measure blood pressure 
automatically  and  efficiently.  Numerous  works  [118],  [119] 
have been conducted to make the blood pressure measurement 
process automated in recent years.  

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The  authors  of  [120]  developed  a  wearable  device  to 
measure  systolic  and  diastolic  pressure  accurately.    The 
developed system used light-based sensors to collect data and 
the recorded data are stored in the cloud server to make further 
analysis. The system was tested with targeted users (more than 
70  individuals)  and  the  performance  was  validated.  Singh  et 
al. [121] demonstrated a blood pressure monitoring framework 
using the concept of IoT, Arduino, and blood pressure sensors. 
Communication  technologies  including  Bluetooth  and  Wi-Fi 
are  utilized  to  transmit  data  from  the  patients  to  the  cloud 
database.  The  developed  system  is  flexible,  cost-effective, 
compact, and provides the facilities to monitor blood pressure 
from  the  home  environment.  In  another  study,  Hashim  et  al. 
[122]  introduced  a  wearable  system  for  blood  pressure 
monitoring  in  IoT  environment.  A  blood  pressure  sensor  is 
connected with Raspberry Pi to collect data from the patients. 
The system is tested with various positions of the patients such 
as sitting, standing, and lying where the BP value of the sitting 
position  is  more  correct.  The  readings  of  the  BP  sensor  are 
sent  to  registered  Telegram  as  well  as  Gmail  application  for 
patient monitoring. In  [123], the authors presented the use of 
machine  learning  techniques  to  classify  blood  pressure  in 
wireless  sensor  networks  environment  that  can  provide  BP 
status  and  the  abnormalities  in  real-time.  In  this  prototype,  a 
for  data 
pressure  sensor 
collection, a microcontroller (ATmega328) is utilized for data 
processing, and the data transfer is done through a transceiver 
(NRF24L01).  Among  the  used  machine  learning  techniques, 
the  decision  tree  algorithm  achieved  the  highest  accuracy 
(97.9%)  for  BP  status  detection.  Finally,  all  the  data  of  BP 
status are visualized in IBM Watson Cloud. Furthermore, Adi 
and  Kitagawa  [124]  developed  an  IoT  platform  for  blood 
pressure  monitoring  using  a  tiny  embedded  device.  The  used 
components  in  this  prototype  are  the  pressure  sensor,  Zigbee 
Radio  Frequency  (RF)  module,  and  Raspberry  Pi  3.  The 
purpose of the Zigbee module is to send BP data to a database, 
which  is  then  transferred  to  an  IoT  network  via  Zigbee  end-
device  connection  to  the  Zigbee  coordinator.  However,  the 
developed  system  is  still  working  in  localhost;  not  in  real-
time. 

(MPS20N0040D-D) 

is  used 

(iii) Body Temperature Monitoring 

is  a 

individuals 

The  body 

temperature  of 

leading 
determinant  of  homeostasis  maintenance  and  is  used  in  a 
variety  of  diagnostic  procedures. 
In  many  disorders, 
maintaining  records  of  temperature  changes  might  help 
doctors  to draw  assumptions  about  a  patient’s  health.  The 
traditional  way  of  temperature  measurement  is  the  use  of 
thermometer that takes the records from the different positions 
of the patient’s body such as ear, mouth, or rectum. However, 
the  traditional  techniques  for  body  temperature  measurement 
are  low  comfortable,  less  flexible,  and  accurate.  In  recent 
days,  several  frameworks  [106],  [125]  have  been  developed 
thanks  to  IoT  technology  for  human  body  temperature 
measurement.  

Ota  et  al.  [126]  developed  a  wearable  prototype  for  body 
temperature measurement that is printed using 3D printer and 
is applicable to wear on the ear. The developed device records 
data from the tympanic membrane utilizing an infrared sensor. 
In this system, a wireless sensor network and data processing 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

unit  are  utilized  where  the  prototype  is  integrated.  The 
environmental  conditions  and  other  physical  activities  could 
not  interfere  with  the  readings  of  the  body  temperature. 
Zakaria  et  al.  [127]  proposed  a  lightweight  device  for  real-
time  temperature  measurement  targeting  infant  patients.  The 
major  components  of  this  system  include  a  wearable  sensor 
(LM-35),  microcontroller  (Arduino),  ESP8266,  and  power 
module.  The  collected  body  temperature  is  visualized  in  the 
cloud server through ThingSpeak and Blynk application. The 
developed system can provide alert messages to the mediators 
to  take  immediate  actions  while  there  is  a  high  change  of 
temperature.  In  another  work,  Rahimoon  et  al.  [128] 
introduced  a  contactless  body  temperature  measurement 
system  to  monitor  the  patients  remotely.  Two  temperature 
sensors named LM-35 and MLX-90614, Arduino, ESP Wi-Fi 
shield  are  used  in  this  prototype.  The  collected  data  are 
transferred to the cloud server for remote access utilizing Wi-
Fi  connection.  However,  the  developed  prototype  is  quite 
accurate,  real-time,  as  well  as  reliable.  Boonsong  et  al.  [129] 
demonstrated  a  contactless  body  temperature  monitoring 
platform in IoT environment. The infrared temperature sensor 
MLX90614  DCI  is  used  here  to  perceive  the  data  from  the 
environment and sent it to the host computer as well as cloud 
server using 2.4 GHz microwave frequency. The experimental 
findings  revealed  that  the  developed  framework  obtained  a 
reliability calibration of 74.7%. Further, Fang et al. [130] used 
a  wearable  smart  bracelet  to  monitor  the  temperature  for 
contact  tracing  application  during  the  time  of  the  pandemic. 
The  bracelet  used  RF  technology  for  data  collection  and  the 
retrieved  data  are  sent  to  cloud  database  via  wireless 
technology.  However,  the  system  is  cost-effective,  easy  to 
operate, and provides better data privacy.  

(iv)  Glucose Level Monitoring 

Glucose  level  monitoring  is  one  of  the  most  significant 
aspects  of  managing  type  1  or  type  2  diabetes.  Diabetes  is  a 
chronic  disease  wherein  the  glucose  levels  in  the  body  keep 
going  up  for  an  extended  time.  Fingerpicking  is  the  most 
common method for detecting diabetes, which is validated by 
blood glucose levels. The development of numerous wearable 
devices  [131],  [132]  for  blood  glucose  monitoring  using 
modern  IoT  technologies  ensures  some  features  such  as 
comfort, safety, noninvasiveness, and convenience. 

Alarcón-Paredes  et  al.  [133]  developed  a  prototype  in  the 
shape of a glove that can measure a patient’s glucose level and 
is  equipped  with  a  Raspberry  Pi  camera  and  visible  laser 
beam.  The  developed  framework  used  a  set  of  images 
collected  from  the  patients’  fingertips  to  detect  their  diabetic 
status.  For  data  analysis,  an  artificial  neural  network  is  used, 
and the obtained mean absolute error and Clarke grid error of 
this  system  are  10.37%  and  90.32%  respectively.  However, 
the  developed  prototype  is  a little  bit  bulky  to use.  Gia  et al. 
[134]  introduced  an  architecture  for  real-time  blood  glucose 
level  monitoring  in  IoT  environment.  The  proposed  scheme 
was designed as an energy-efficient sensor module using nRF 
communication  protocol  and  developed  an  energy  harvesting 
unit to extend the battery life of the sensor device. There is a 
push-button  service  in  the  developed  prototype  that  notifies 
the  mediators  in  the  case  of  abnormal  behaviors  of  glucose 
like  too  high  or  too  low.  In  another  research,  Rahmat  et  al. 

13 

 
 
 
[135]  proposed  a  prototype  named  GluQo  to  monitor  the 
glucose  level  efficiently.  The  data  from  the  fingertip  are 
collected using near-infrared LED to determine blood glucose 
optically and the intensity of the retrieved light calculated the 
concentration  of  the  glucose  of  the  blood.  The  glucose  level 
was sent to the mobile application through Wi-Fi signal from 
the microcontroller. It is found from the experimental findings 
that the percentage error of the developed prototype is 7.20%. 
Valenzuela  et  al.  [136]  used  a  double  moving  average 
technique enabled by an IoT network to offer a framework for 
blood  glucose  monitoring  to  minimize  potential  problems  in 
elderly adults. The data for the developed system are collected 
using  a  glucometer  and  this  sensor  is  connected  with 
NodeMCU to make IoT environments. The system can notify 
doctors and families about a potential critical state in patients 
at  an  early  stage.  Further,  the  authors  of    [137]  used  near-
infrared  sensors  to  demonstrate  a  portable  non-invasive 
glucose  monitoring  system.  The  data  for  the  experiments  are 
collected  from  the  fingertip  of  the  patients  and  the  analyzed 
data  are  displayed  on  the  Android  application.  The  obtained 
percentage  difference  of  the  reliability  test  of  the  developed 
prototype is less than 25% and the approximate cost is $15. 

(v) Oxygen Saturation Monitoring 

The measurement of oxygen saturation is a crucial thing in 
the  management  and  interpretation  of  the  healthcare  system. 
Pulse oximetry is the process of measuring oxygen saturation 
in a non-invasive way and it is used as a significant factor in 
the  patient  care  system.  The  non-invasive  techniques  for 
oxygen  saturation  monitoring  solve  the  problems  associated 
with  traditional  approaches  and  ensure  real-time  monitoring. 
The  integration  of  IoT-based  technologies  [138],  [139]  with 
pulse oximetry has shown significant potential in the medical 
field. 

Son et al. [140] proposed a SpO2 monitoring wearable tool 
that  uses  IoT  technology  to  give  real-time  monitoring  and 
prediction of patient health state. The data from the sensor are 
transferred to cloud database through Internet and this data can 
be  accessed  via  a  web  server  for  the  registered  users.  The 
experimental  findings  found  that  the  highest  deviation  of 
SpO2 measurement for this device is approximately 4.4%. It is 
evident that the prototype is complete, cost-effective, and low-
power  consumption.  The  authors  of  [141]  demonstrated  a 
wearable  prototype  for  blood  oxygen  saturation  monitoring 
from Photoplethysmography (PPG) signal using the concept of 
Bluetooth  low  energy.  Here,  the  system  introduced  a  novel 
adaptive  cancellation  algorithm  using  adaptive  filtering  to 
remove  motion-induced  nosiness.  The  proposed  architecture 
captured  the  blood  oxygen  signals  as  soon  as  it  received  the 
instruction and sent the data to the mobile phone gateway via 
Wi-Fi,  where  it  displayed  the  mathematical  waveform.  In 
another research, Zhang et al. [142] proposed a new wearable 
tool  for blood  oxygen  saturation  monitoring  that  sensed  two-
channel  PPG  signals,  and  sent  the  signals  to  the  smartphone 
wirelessly.  The  dataset  for  this  work  is  retrieved  from  the 
users  (eleven  individuals)  to  measure  the  performance  of  the 
proposed  framework.  It  is  evident  from  the  experiments  that 
the  root  mean  square  error  for  SpO2  estimation  is  1.8%. 
However,  the  performance  of  the  proposed  framework  is 
calculated using the data from healthy patients. Adiputra et al. 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

[143]  presented  a  small,  wearable,  and  cost-effective  SpO2 
device  in  IoT  environment  for  blood  oxygen  monitoring.  To 
create IoT environment, the developed prototype is connected 
with  NodeMCU  which  functions  as  a  data  processor  and 
Internet network gateway. A dedicated website is developed to 
ensure online and real-time  data  accessibility from the cloud. 
The error rate for SpO2 monitoring is quite low (1.5% only). 
Furthermore,  Utomo  et  al.  [144]  demonstrated  a  scheme  for 
SpO2  monitoring  using  oximeter  sensor  data  through  the 
concept  of  IoT  technology.  The  data  are  collected  from  the 
finger of the patients in different body positions like standing, 
sitting,  and  lying.  The  sensor  is  connected  with  ESP8266 
microcontroller, and the collected data  are transferred via the 
built-in  Wi-Fi  module  to  the  cloud  server  where  the  data 
visualization  is  done  using  ThinkSpeak  application.  The 
experimental findings revealed that the uncertainly measure of 
the SpO2 is 0.04. 

B. Chronic Disease Detection 

Chronic  disease 

is  a  patient  health 

issue  whose 
consequences  are  continuous  or  otherwise  lengthy,  or  an 
illness  that  develops  over  time.  Many  individuals  around  the 
world  suffer  from  chronic  illnesses  including  heart  disease, 
diabetes,  asthma,  and  cancer.  In  most  cases,  these  illnesses 
lead  to  mental  health  problems,  which  is  one  of  the  most 
common  adverse  events  of  chronic  disease.  The  recent 
revolution  of  IoT  contributes  a  lot  to  develop  healthcare 
frameworks  [145], [146] for the people infected with chronic 
disease.  

Shihab  et  al.  [147]  developed  a  system  for  heart  disease 
detection using the concept of recurrent neural network (RNN) 
in IoT environment. In this system, an ECG sensor, Arduino, 
and  biomedical  patch  are  used  for  data  collection  and  to 
perform  the  experimental  study.  The  parameters  from  ECG 
recordings  are  retrieved  and  fed  into  RNNs  with  recurrent 
layers as input. The major advantage of this developed system 
is that it is quite beneficial for doctors to be able to prescribe 
medication  to  patients  without  having  to  be  physically  there. 
The authors of [148] proposed a IoT-based novel heart disease 
diagnosis  system  using  machine  learning  techniques.  In  the 
preprocessing  step,  the  noises  from  the  raw  ECG  signals  are 
removed  efficiently  ensuring  more  accurate  diagnosis.  As 
hardware components for ensuring IoT platform, the system is 
comprised  of  Arduino,  ECG  sensor,  pulse  sensor,  and 
temperature  sensor.  The  decision  tree  algorithm  obtained 
comparatively better performances for heart disease diagnosis 
using the benchmark dataset. Hebbale et al. [149] presented a 
non-invasive  self-care  framework  that  monitors  the  blood 
sugar  of  diabetes  patients  using  machine  learning  techniques 
and IoT. In this system, predictive analytics engines reside on 
the  cloud,  and  they  are  used  for  data  analysis  for  diabetes 
detection. A smartphone application facilitated the physicians 
as well as patients to monitor the blood sugar and related risk 
easily.  The  decisions  from  the  machine  learning  approaches 
are  forwarded  to  the  doctors  for  further  analysis  and  the 
necessary  recommendations  from  the  doctors  are  sent  to  the 
parents  through  the  developed  mobile  application.  Support 
vector machine obtained the highest accuracy of 82.41% from 
the  experiment.  The  authors of  [150]  described  an  IoT-based 
learning 
diabetes  prediction 

scheme  using  machine 

14 

 
 
 
approaches.  The  data  for  this  system  are  collected  using  IoT 
diabetes senor. The dataset for the experiment  is divided into 
training  and  testing  set  in  the  percentage  of  75%  (11,250 
records) and 25% (3,750 records) respectively. It is found that 
the achieved accuracy and error rate of the developed system 
are 94.23% and 5.77% respectively.  

Shah  et  al.  [151]  proposed  a  health  parameter  monitoring 
scheme for asthma patients using the concept of IoT and cloud 
technology.  The  system  utilized  a  smart  sensor  to  record  the 
respiratory  rate  of  the  patients.  A  watermarking  technique 
ensures  data  security  and  authenticity  whenever  transferred 
from patients’ side to cloud as well as cloud to physicians. A 
dedicated  cloud  server  is  used  here  to  keep  the  record  of the 
patients and it provides access to mediators for diagnostic and 
monitoring  purposes.  The  author  of  [152]  demonstrated  an 
architecture to predict asthma using decision tree algorithm in 
IoT  environment.  The  major  components  of  the  developed 
system are Arduino, ESP8266, GP2Y1010AU0F Optical Dust 
sensor,  LM-35  sensor,  and  ‘NO’  Gas  sensor.  The  prototype 
can notify patients when they need to take pain relievers. It is 
observed from the experiments that the decision tree algorithm 
achieved  an  accuracy  of  97.7%  for  asthma  prediction. 
However,  the  developed prototype  is  not  fully  integrated  and 
bulky.  Rehman  et  al.  [153]  developed  an  IoT  cancer 
monitoring  framework  based  on  multi-layered  architecture 
that can diagnose and monitor cancer patients remotely. Here, 
three-layered  architectures  are  utilized  which  are  the  patient 
layer,  connectivity  layer,  and  medical  layer.  The  prototype  is 
in  the  shape  of  a  wristband  and  can  monitor  the  basic  health 
issues  of  cancer  patients.  The  major  advantage  of  this 
architecture  includes  it  gives  continuous  monitoring  of  the 
patients  that  is  helpful  for  the  physicians  to  generate  a 
complete  history  of  the  patients  which  in  turn  would  be 
helpful for  treatment  in  the  later  stages.  In  [154],  the  authors 
demonstrated various types of architectures and frameworks to 
develop  IoT-based  healthcare  platforms  targeting  cancer 
patients.  For  communication  purposes,  a  wireless  sensor 
network is developed that can accommodate a high number of 
sensors and the data analysis is done on the cloud server. The 
security  measures  and  operational  challenges  regarding  the 
IoT  healthcare  system  for  cancer  patients  are  also  described 
here. 

C. Medication Management 

Smart medication is one of the most significant concerns in 
the  IoT-based  smart  healthcare  application.  It  is  very  critical 
as  it  is  intrinsically  related  to  human  health,  and  missing  a 
dose  of  medication  can  have  serious  effects.  Medication 
nonadherence  is  particularly  common  in  older  individuals  as 
they  age  and  eventually  increases  the  chance  of  diseases 
including  dementia,  and  cognitive  decline.  Hence,  it  is  badly 
needed for them to use assistive technologies to keep the track 
of medication timing and dose. In recent times, several studies 
[155], [156] have been performed emphasizing on employing 
IoT technology to track patients’ medication adherence. 

Bharadwaj et al. [157] developed an IoT device in the shape 
of  a  medical  box  to  remind  the  patients  in  the  time  of 
medication. In this prototype, there are three trays to keep the 
medicine  for  three  different  periods  such  as  morning,  noon, 
and  evening.  The  data  are  stored  on  the  cloud  server  and 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

to 

take 

for  data  analysis  and  aided 

smartphone  application  retrieved  the  data  from  the  cloud  and 
used  it  to  remind  the  patients  for  medication.  Srinivaset  al. 
[158] introduced a home-based medicine box named iMedBox 
to manage medicine for patients in IoT environment. The used 
sensors  in  this  prototype  notified  the  patients  via  a  wireless 
connection  and  an  Android  application 
their 
medications  on  time  and  to  keep  in  closer  contact  with  their 
doctors.  In  another  research,  Latif  et  al.  [159]  presented  a 
wearable IoT device called I-CARES to diagnose health issues 
and  medication  for  elder  patients.  The  system  described  an 
algorithm 
the  medical 
professionals  to  make  decisions  for  early-stage  treatment  of 
predicted  diseases  or  illnesses.  Additionally,  the  developed 
prototype  can  predict  emergencies  and  call  emergency 
personnel  when  necessary.  Tsai  et  al.  [160]  demonstrated  an 
intelligent  pillbox  for  the  older  individual  and  nursing  home 
needs using the concept of electronic technology and network 
functionality.  Using  embedded  sensors,  the  developed  device 
detects  the  signal  when  patients  take  their  medications  and 
displays the schedules and deadlines as text, pattern, or voice 
on  the  LCD  screen.  The  hardware  unit  is  made  up  of 
webduino  for  data  transmission  and  can  interact  with  a  web 
server via the IoT architecture. The sensed data are transferred 
to  the  Arduino  module,  which  is  then  sent  to  the  developed 
pillbox,  allowing  the  elderly  to  maintain  their  medications. 
The  authors  of  [161]  designed  a  smart  medication  box  for 
ensuring  medication  monitoring 
in  IoT  platform.  The 
prototype  includes  six  distinct  parts  to  keep  track  of  six 
different  pills,  and  it  can  send  timely  remainders  to  the 
caregivers/patients 
the  smartphone.  A  simple 
authentication  process  is  developed  to  avoid  overdosage  and 
improper  intake  of  medicines.  In  addition,  the  system  is  able 
to  provide  monitoring  facilities  of  temperature  and  heartbeat 
through the  use of biosensors. Vardhini et al.  [162] proposed 
an  assistive  system  to  help  elderly  people  with  memory 
impairment  for  keeping  track  of  their  medication  schedules 
and  inform  them  to  consider  taking  their  medicines  at  the 
appropriate  times.  The  main  hardware  components  for  the 
prototype  include  NodeMCU,  LDR  sensor,  motor,  switch, 
power  supply  (battery),  LCD  monitor,  and  buzzer.  The 
developed system is low-cost (approximately $15), and easy to 
use.  However,  the  system  has  not  tested  in  any  hospital 
environments. 

through 

D. Telehealth 

to 

Telehealth is the use of technologies such as digital devices, 
smartphone  apps,  and  webpages  to  instruct,  detect,  and  even 
prescribe  remedy 
individuals  suffering  from  health 
problems.  It  primarily  allows  individuals  of  all  ages  to  be 
monitored  remotely.  The  telehealth  system  monitors  the 
significant clinical data and takes oversight of the individual’s 
well-being.  Numerous  frameworks  [163],  [164]  have  been 
done  to  ensure  telehealth  services  using  IoT  technology  in 
recent times. 

Rokonuzzaman et al. [165] developed a telehealth platform 
based on the IoT concept to create warnings automatically for 
providing individuals with desirable healthcare under constant 
health  contexts.  A  smartphone  application  called  ‘village 
doctor app (VDA)’ is deployed for real-time monitoring. This 
scheme  provides  the  monitoring  facilities  of  heart  rate  and 

15 

 
 
 
in 

to 

the 

reality 

the  data  from 

the  cloud  server 

approach  has  been  proven 

temperature.  The  hardware  components  of  the  developed 
prototype  are  heart  rate  sensor,  temperature  sensor,  Arduino, 
NodeMCU,  battery,  and  LCD  display.  The  physicians  can 
access 
through  VDA 
application.  Ganesh  et  al.  [166]  introduced  a  framework 
named  ‘AutoImpilo’ 
telemedicine  and 
improve 
telehealth  services  in  IoT  networks.  The  designed  approach 
ensured  that  all  online  medical  checks  were  conducted  in 
collaboration  with  consulting  the  doctors  or  specialists.  This 
system is quite beneficial for individuals who are unable to go 
outside  due  to  ages  or  quarantine  issues.  The  system  used  a 
smart card in the authentication step to ensure privacy, but it is 
not linked to the cloud. In another work, Tsiouris et al.  [167] 
integrated  many  online 
technologies  and  compatible 
components  into  a  unified  framework  for  digital  coaching, 
encouragement,  and  empowerment  of  elderly  with  balance 
problems.  This 
a 
telerehabilitation  system  for  individuals  with  balance  issues 
that  uses  augmented 
to  provide  a  surrogate 
physiotherapist as a superimposed hologram, along with easy-
to-use  wearable  sensors.  Hewa  et  al.  [168]  employed  many 
decentralized  applications 
to 
to 
patients’  wallets  effectively  and  reliably  as  an  incentive  for 
providing  their  health  information  utilizing  edge  computing 
and blockchain technology. To provide scalability with a large 
number  of  connected  biomedical  sensors  to  the  cloud,  the 
system  included  memory  offloading  functionality  into  the 
blockchain.  The  proposed  platform  is  tested  in  a  near  real-
world  setting  employing  the  Hyperledger  Fabric  blockchain 
infrastructure  and  Raspberry  Pi  modules  to  imitate  smart 
sensor  activities.  Further,  Hamil  et  al.  [169]  described  a 
telehealth  platform  for  bio-signal  diagnosis  and  classification 
using e-health sensors data considering IoT environment. The 
Arduino  and  Raspberry  Pi  with  sensors  are  used  for  data 
acquisition  and  processing.  The  used  sensors  are  here  ECG 
sensors,  body  temperature  sensor,  SpO2,  position  sensor, 
airflow  sensor,  and  galvanic  skin  sensor.  Various  machine 
learning algorithms are tested with PhysioNet databases where 
the  best  accuracy  of  99.56%  is  found  from  convolutional 
neural  network-support  vector  machine  for  atrial  fibrillation 
classification. 

transmit  cryptocurrency 

E. Home and Elderly Care 

Elders  can  continue  living  at  home  freely  with  the 
assistance of smart home care services, as IoT devices provide 
them with the security of being observed and the capability to 
instantly  call  for  help  in  the  case  of  an  emergency.  Modern 
IoT  technologies,  as  well  as  relevant  wearables  devices,  are 
frequently utilized in ambient assisted living environments to 
monitor  older  patients  who  are  unable  to  move  rapidly  and 
need longer time to reach clinics for routine or urgent medical 
facilities [170], [171].  

Abdelgawad  et  al.  [172]  proposed  a  system  for  health 
monitoring  of  older  people  in  an  ambient  assisted  living 
environment where the data are retrieved from several sensors 
and transferred it to the cloud server for further investigation. 
The prototype incorporates six different sensors, Raspberry Pi, 
Wi-Fi  module,  cloud  server,  sensor  interface  circuits,  and  an 
indoor  positioning  module  enabled  by  Bluetooth  low  energy. 
A feedback signal is sent to the users based on the behavior of 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

the data so that they could take necessary actions in the case of 
emergencies.  The  authors  of  [173]  developed  a  wearable 
framework for health data  monitoring (stress, blood pressure, 
and  position  of  the  users)  for  the  elderly  in  smart  home 
environments.  The  stress  of  the  elders  is  detected  using 
electrodermal  activity,  PPG,  and  skin  temperature  sensors. 
The  blood  pressure  is  estimated  utilizing  the  data  from  the 
PPG sensor. The location of the individuals is detected using a 
voice-assisted  indoor  location  module.  The  highest  accuracy 
of  94%  is  obtained  from  the  combination  of  multiple  signals 
for  stress  detection.  Finally,  a  prototype  is  developed  to  test 
the location detection system in a smart home environment. In 
another  work,  Debauchea  et  al.  [174]  demonstrated  a  novel 
architecture  for  elderly  psychological  signals  monitoring 
utilizing  the  concept  of  IoT  and  fog  computing.  The 
framework  includes  a  wireless  sensor  network  consisting  of 
various  psychological  and  environmental  signals,  a  local 
gateway for local and fast storage, and Lamda cloud server for 
data processing as well as storage. The main advantage of this 
architecture is that it can provide local gateway monitoring of 
new  and  current  patient  data.  The  latency  and  CPU  usage  of 
the fog architecture is 7 ms and 7.86% respectively. In  [175], 
the authors presented a novel and scalable platform for smart 
home  and  elderly  care  based  on  IoT  concept.  The  system 
employed various sensors data such as heartbeat, pressure, and 
gas  sensor  for  patients  as  well  as  smart  home  monitoring 
through  the  use  of  Raspberry  Pi  and  cloud  server.  The 
medications  are  suggested  by  the registered  doctors  based on 
the  health  conditions  of  the  patients  which  are  delivered 
through wireless sensor networks in the form of texts or email. 
The  experimental 
the  mobility 
absorption  of  the  designed  network  is  approximately  90%. 
However,  a  few  numbers  of  signals  are  considered  here  for 
health  and  home  monitoring.  Furthermore,  Srinivasan  et  al. 
[176] used the concept of IoT and machine learning to develop 
an  elder  care  system.  The  prototype  of  this  framework 
contains  sensors  connected  to  an  ESP32  and  a  home  module 
with  an  IoT  camera  attached  to  a  Raspberry  Pi.  The 
biophysical  parameters  are  retrieved  through  sensors  and 
processed  in  the  AWS  cloud  utilizing  machine  learning 
approaches.  The  warnings  are  directed 
to  caregivers 
automatically  in  the  case  of  abnormalities.  The  locations  are 
tracked  through  a  GPS  module  that  are  transferred  to  the 
mediators to let them the location of the individual patient. All 
the  data  for  the  experiments  are  visualized  through  the 
developed smartphone application. 

revealed 

findings 

that 

VII.  OPEN CHALLENGES AND FUTURE TRENDS 

Internet  of  Things  and  the  technology  and  research  state 
related  to  it  are  in  their  nascent  state  compared  to  other 
networking  research  topics.  The  state-of-the-art  connection 
models and architectures are recently being developed. IoT in 
general  and  IoT  in  healthcare  in  specific  still  face  many 
challenges.  Understanding  and  exploring  these  challenges 
such as the security and privacy risks, lack of standardization, 
big  data  management,  and  costs  are  imperative  to  realize  the 
full  potential  of  Internet  of  Things  in  industrial,  healthcare, 
and  personal  use  cases  among  other  promising  domains. The 
major challenges and the potentials future directions for IoT  

16 

 
 
 
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

Discussions on IoT 

Challenges 

Security and Privacy 

transmitted 

IoT 
Data 
networks is confidential and 
sensitive in nature. 

in 

Standardization and Interoperability 

Heterogenous  devices  need 
to  interact  with  one  another 
to perform tasks. 

Data Variability and Scalability 

Massive  amounts  of  data 
can  be  transferred  through 
IoT networks. 

Power and Cost Efficiency 

Millions  of  devices  connect 
to  IoT  networks,  they  need 
to be power, cost efficient. 

Reliability and Availability 

in 
provide 

Devices 
must 
functionalities 
network downtime. 

IoT  network 
basic 
during 

Identity and Mobility 

in 

Devices 
IoT  network 
might  be  mobile,  devices 
also 
individual 
identity.  

require 

Future Works 

RSA, and DSS algorithms in 
endpoints. 

Anomaly  detection  using 
AI. 
Biometric authentication. 

Blockchain 
authentication. 

based 

Standard 
Description Language. 

Service 

Open-access  network  and 
communication protocols. 

Lossless 
data over the network. 

compression  of 

Big data warehousing. 

Big  data  processing  using 
Apache  Hadoop,  Apache 
ZooKeeper, and Apache Kafka. 

Multi-purpose devices. 

Battery 
powered devices. 

operated 

solar-

Fault tolerant networks. 

Error detection and recovery 
in commodity networks. 

TinyML  for  reliable  and 
available devices.  

Standardize 
networks and devices. 

IPv6 

for  all 

Reinforcement  Learning  for 
developing  more  efficient 
network protocols.  

Vehicular  Ad-hoc  Networks 
can  be  extended  for  highly 
mobile nodes. 

Fig.  7.  Challenges  and  future  research  directions  of  IoT.  The  major  challenges  encompass security,  reliability, scalability,  availability, and  cost-
efficiency.  The  potential  future  directions  include  the  area  of  blockchain,  TinyML,  reinforcement  learning,  and  big  data  processing.

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
research  are  illustrated  in  Fig.  7  in  brief.  The  open  issues,  as 
well as future research trends related to IoT, are discussed as 
follows. 

A. Security and Privacy in IoT 

Security is a huge concern in any networked system. IoT is 
a  collection  of  devices  connected  via  a  single  network  or 
multiple  networks.  Thus,  the  security  issues  concerning 
networked  systems  are  also  relevant  to  IoT  systems  [177]–
[179]. Devices in IoT are also heterogeneous in nature–which 
adds  to  the  complexity  in  maintaining  the  security  of  the 
transmitted data. To provide complete security, all of the types 
of  devices  connected  to  IoT  networks,  would  need  to  be 
completely  secure–which  is  a  near  impossible  task.  Security 
can  be  breached  on  both  hardware  and  software  levels. 
Modern  smartphones  often  have  exotic  zero-click  exploits, 
meaning the devices can be hacked without any action by the 
user  of  the  device.  Modern  operating  systems  –  be  it  for 
desktop or smartphones often have zero-day exploits, meaning 
the  devices  running  these  updated  operating  systems  can  be 
exploited  by  hackers  even  on  the  first  day  of  the  update. 
Exploited devices can act as Byzantine nodes in IoT networks, 
making  the  entire  network  vulnerable  and  stealing  data  from 
other devices. Especially in healthcare systems, the underlying 
is  extremely  sensitive  and  confidential  in  nature. 
data 
Healthcare  data  not  only  contain  health-related  information 
but  also  contains  identifying  information  of  the  patients 
including  social  security  numbers,  social  insurance  number, 
and  insurance  information.  Any  leak  or  compromise  in  such 
networks  might  result  in  catastrophic  ramifications  for  the 
patient  such  as  identity  theft,  and  customized  scamming. 
Improving  the  security  and  privacy  of  data  in  healthcare 
systems is a research challenge. 

In  the  future,  cryptosecurity  algorithms  such  as  the  RSA 
encryption  algorithm,  Digital  Signature  Standard  (DSS),  and 
ElGamal  can  be  utilized  in  all  endpoints  in  IoT  networks  to 
provide  security.  Secure  hash  algorithms  can  be  utilized  to 
ensure data integrity. Blockchain technology can be leveraged 
to  reduce  man-in-the-middle  and  network  eavesdropping 
attacks  [180],  [181].  Non-Fungible  Token  (NFT)  technology 
can save patients from counterfeit products or services. NFTs 
can also help patients to decentralize their sensitive data and to 
share  healthcare  data  while  keeping 
identities 
anonymous.  Biometric  authentication  techniques  such  as 
fingerprints,  voice  recognition,  face  recognition,  and  iris 
recognition  as  well  as  software-based  authentication  such  as 
two-factor  authentication,  access  cards,  and  seed  phrases 
should  also  be  standardized  in  the  future  for  systems 
connected 
intelligence-based 
approaches  for  anomaly  detection  in  networks  should  be 
explored in the future for improving security. Due to advances 
in  TinyML  [182],  it  might  be  possible  to  run  anomaly 
detection models in the future in resource-constrained devices 
[183].  These  would  greatly  improve  the  security  and  privacy 
of the users and the transmitted data. 

in  IoT  networks.  Artificial 

their 

B. Standardization in IoT 

Heterogenous  types  of  devices  are  interconnected  via 
complicated  networks  in  an  IoT  environment.  Each  of  these 
devices  might  use  distinct  architectures  or  protocols  for 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

generating or transmitting data. The devices are also different 
from software and hardware perspectives. The management of 
such  devices  including  the  collaboration  of  the  devices  in  a 
software  or  hardware  level,  proper  addressing,  marshalling, 
de-marshalling,  optimization  at  a  protocol  or  architectural 
level,  and 
is  a  huge  research  challenge. 
Measures  should  be  taken  to  draft  and  standardize  IoT 
architecture and network protocols in the future [184].  

identification 

C. Data Variability in IoT 

Data  in  Internet  of  Things  can  vary  in  type,  size,  and 
formation.  Due  to  the  sheer  number  of  connected  devices  in 
IoT  networks,  storing  the  data  in  solutions  such  as  in 
conventional RAID systems or conventional databases is very 
inefficient. Huge volumes of data are generated in a very short 
period in IoT networks. Conventional database systems are not 
capable of storing or efficiently retrieving them.  Management 
of  the  huge  volume  of  data  such  as  handling  spatial  or 
temporal  information,  handling  differing  data  sizes,  and 
handling  different  types  are  massive  research  challenges. 
Devices in healthcare systems transmit data in various formats 
such as 2D image formats, 3D imaging formats, and numerical 
sensor readings in time-series format. 

Big  data  warehousing  and  processing  frameworks  such  as 
Apache  Hadoop,  Apache  ZooKeeper,  and  Apache  Kafka  can 
be utilized to efficiently deal with the huge volume of data in 
the  future  [185]–[188].  Some  of  these  frameworks  also 
provide  error  detection  and  error  recovery  of  the  stored  data, 
which  will  help  in  persisting  historical  data.  Some  of  these 
frameworks are also capable of dealing with multiple types of 
data at the same time. These frameworks are also highly cost 
and space-efficient. Lossless compression models can also be 
researched  to  transmit  huge  volumes  of  data  over  IoT 
networks [189]. 

D. Identity in IoT Networks 

IoT  networks  generally  consist  of  a  huge  number  of 
devices. Every device needs a unique identity in the network. 
The most used core protocol in standard-based interconnecting 
networks is IPv4. The IPv4 protocol uses 32 bits to represent 
unique  addresses  which  provide  a  maximum  of  232  address 
spaces. IPv4 addresses are represented in 4 numbers separated 
by 4 dots. Due to the huge number of devices connected to IoT 
networks, it is possible to run out of address space. Healthcare 
systems  have  multiple  monitoring  systems  per  person.  For  a 
sufficiently  large  elderly  population  in  a  single  network,  the 
address space for all devices might be insufficient. While a lot 
of  devices  support 
IPv6  nowadays,  developing  more 
lightweight  and  robust  solutions  for  addressing  the  identified 
problem is a research challenge. 

In the future, IPv6 protocol can be standardized for all IoT 
networks [190], [191]. IPv6 addresses are represented as eight 
groups  of  numbers.  Each  group  contains  four  hexadecimal 
digits. The address space of IPv6 is 2128 which is suitable for 
addressing the huge number of devices in IoT networks. IPv6 
also  supports  shorthand  representation  and  compression  of 
network  addresses,  which  reduces  total  used  bandwidth  over 
the network.  

18 

 
 
 
E. Lack of Service Description Language 

A service description language is a special form of Interface 
Description  Language  that  is  used  for  describing  a  particular 
service.  Interface  description  languages  enable  programs  to 
interact  with  one  another  regardless  of  origin  or  language. 
Similarly,  service  description  language  enables  services  from 
varying  devices  and  software/hardware  combinations  to 
interact  with  one  another.  Due  to  lack  of  standardization, 
devices  in  IoT  networks  use  vastly  different  protocols, 
architectures,  and data  types. The underlying service  routines 
dealing  with  these  differences  are  also  vastly  different  from 
one  another.  A  unified  service  description  language  would 
greatly  benefit 
seamless 
collaboration  and  interoperability  among  devices.  Creating  a 
unified  service  description  language  is  a  massive  research 
challenge. In the future, service description languages such as 
XML,  and  UML.  can  be  extended  to  create  a  standardized 
service  description  language  for  IoT  networks.  Research 
should  also  be  focused  on  developing  specialized  service 
description language for IoT networks [192], [193].  

IoT  networks  by  enabling 

F. Design of Service-Oriented Architecture 

Service-Oriented  architecture 

is  a  style  of  software 
architecture where components of an application interact with 
other  components  of  that  application  or  other  application  via 
services  through  utilizing  a  communication  protocol  over  a 
network.  The  connection  is  independent  of  vendor  or  other 
limiting  hardware  or  software  technologies.  The  design  of 
service-oriented  architecture  for  IoT  systems  is  a  huge 
challenge.  On  one  hand,  service-oriented  architecture 
simplifies 
types  of 
the  management  of  heterogeneous 
connected  devices.  On  the  other  hand,  service-oriented 
architecture  introduces  additional  overhead  to  devices.  Most 
IoT  devices  are  resource-constrained.  Adding  overhead  to 
these  resource-constrained  devices  slows  down  the  entire 
network  making  data  processing,  collection,  and  transferring 
more  difficult.  Thus,  researching  lightweight  service-oriented 
architecture  with  minimum  overhead  that  facilitates  big  data 
warehousing  and  processing  is  a  huge  research  challenge 
[194]–[196].  In  the  future,  novel  architectures  for  IoT 
networks  should  be  developed  to  be  modular  and  service-
oriented in nature. 

G.  Hardware Customization 

IoT  networks  currently  degenerate  into  traditional  ICT 
oriented  networks.  Similarly, 
the  hardware  of  various 
intelligent devices is not customized to specific protocols. IoT 
devices  generate  huge  amounts  of  data  within  short  amounts 
of  time.  Higher  bandwidth  networks  are  necessary  alongside 
big  data  measures  to  store  and  process  the  data  in  real-time. 
Developing  novel  methods  to  transport  the  huge  amounts  of 
data in commodity networks is a huge research challenge, as it 
is  impossible  to  deploy  high  bandwidth  high-frequency 
networks all around us. Similarly, optimizing the hardware of 
general  intelligent  things  to  efficiently  use  certain  universal 
IoT protocols is a research challenge.  

In  healthcare  systems,  various  sensors  are  used  to  monitor 
patients.  Developing  novel  hardware  design  solutions  to 
contain various sensors in small housing would enable a single 
device  to  monitor  various  aspects  of  a  patient.  In  the  future, 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

various  bio-inspired  optimization  techniques  such  as  swarm 
optimization,  and  genetic  algorithms  should  be  utilized  to 
automatically  develop  optimized  hardware  design  for  various 
use cases. 

H. Mobility of IoT Devices 

to  other  networks.  In 

In  an  interconnected  world  from  a  network  perspective, 
intelligent  devices  are  expected  to  disconnect  from  one 
network  and  connect 
traditional 
networks, mobility is a huge issue. For mobile nodes, routing 
tables  have  to  be  re-calculated  each  time  nodes  move  out  of 
range  from  one  another  and  come  into  the  range  of  other 
nodes.  This  calculation  puts  a  huge  overhead  on  the  entire 
network when numerous nodes with high mobility are present 
[197].  Modeling  and  handling  highly  mobile  nodes  in  IoT 
networks are a huge research challenge. In healthcare systems, 
some  monitoring  devices  might  be  mobile  in  nature,  while 
others might be stationary. For example, wearable monitoring 
devices might be highly mobile, while surveillance monitoring 
devices  would  be  stationary.  Patients  would  wear  and  bring 
the  highly  mobile  monitoring  devices  to  their  activities  of 
daily life. Thus, optimizing the various aspects of these mobile 
devices,  such  as  route  discovery,  routing  table  generation, 
efficient  data  transfer,  and  reducing  data  costs  is  a  research 
challenge. 

In  the  future,  artificial  intelligence-based  approaches  such 
as  reinforcement  learning-based  techniques  can  be  used  to 
develop  networks  facilitating  highly  mobile  devices  [198], 
[199]. Vehicular Ad-hoc Network (VANET) architectures can 
be  extended  in  the  future  to  IoT  networks  involving  highly 
mobile nodes [200].  

I.  Reliability in IoT Networks 

in 

Reliability 

is  a  huge 

in  commodity  networks. 
issue 
Regardless  of  network  and  type  of  protocol,  network  packets 
get lost with the data. While some data warehousing solutions 
provide  checkpointing  and  state  management  for  error 
detection  and  recovery,  it  is  not  the  norm  and  requires 
extensive  installation  and  support.  Developing  lightweight 
reliable networks with error detection and error recovery is a 
huge  challenge.  Devices  connected 
IoT  networks 
themselves  need 
to  be  reliable  [201]–[203].  Erroneous 
reporting  might  result  in  faulty  directions  from  central 
controller  servers.  Healthcare  systems  in  general  require 
reliable  and  fast  networks.  Any  drop  in  data,  as  well  as 
monitoring results, might be irreversibly harmful for the users. 
in  stroke,  diabetes,  Alzheimer’s,  or  fall 
For  example, 
monitoring  systems,  it  is  imperative  to  monitor  the  patients 
without  interruptions,  and  any  kind  of delays  in  transmission 
or  monitoring  might  prove  fatal  for  the  patients.  Developing 
specialty  fault  tolerant  and  state-recovery-capable  networks 
for  healthcare  systems  is  a  challenge.  Similarly,  unreliable 
devices in healthcare IoT networks can result in the loss of life 
of patients in extreme cases.  

In  the  future, network  traffic forecasting  models  should  be 
developed  to  predict  traffic  load  and  allocate  network 
resources  accordingly.  Various  checkpointing  algorithms  can 
be  used  for  error  detection  and  correction  in  networks. 
Network  designs  should  also  be  fault  tolerant.  Advances  in 
TinyML enable us to deploy and run machine learning models  

19 

 
 
 
TABLE IV 
SUMMARY OF CHALLENGES IN LARGE-SCALE DEPLOYMENT OF IOT NETWORKS AND FUTURE RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

Type 

Concerns 

Security and Privacy ▪  Healthcare  data  is  highly  sensitive  and 
contains  personal  identifying  information 
such  as  social  security  information,  and 
insurance information. 

Recommendations 
▪  More secure overlay networks such as The Onion Router (TOR) network 

might be used to transfer confidential data. 

▪  Technologies such as blockchain, and NFT tickets can be used to provide 

authentic and customized service. 

▪  Existing security solutions such as RSA, seed phrases, and DSS might be 

employed in all connection endpoints. 

▪  Authentication  and  identity  verification  methods  such  as  password, 
fingerprint  scanning,  signature,  voice  pattern,  and  smart  card  can  be 
employed in application protocols. 

▪  Artificial intelligence-based approaches can be used to detect anomalies in 

IoT networks. 

▪  Developing a standardized service description language would benefit the 

standardization and interoperability of IoT devices. 

▪  Open-source 

implementations  of  vendor-locked  applications  and 

networking protocols would enable interoperability. 

▪  Standardizing  application  and  networking  protocols  would  simplify 

interoperation among devices in IoT networks. 

Standardization  and 
Interoperability 

Data  Variability  and 
Scalability 

▪  Different  devices  in  IoT  networks  use 
application  protocols,  data 
differing 
representation 
network 
protocols,  marshalling,  de-marshalling, 
and identification. 

methods, 

▪  No standard service description language. 
▪  Limited interoperability among devices. 
▪  Data transmitted in  IoT networks vary  by 
representation  over 

type,  and 

size, 
network. 

▪  Utilizing  big  data  warehousing  techniques  and  open-access  application 
frameworks such as Apache Hadoop, and Apache zookeeper will allow the 
storing and processing of huge amounts of data. 

▪  Modularity  can  be  prioritized  to  make  devices  in  IoT  networks  more 

▪  Massive  amounts  of  data  can  be 
transmitted over an IoT network in a very 
short amount of time. 

scalable. 

▪  Lightweight service-oriented architecture of devices would enable scalable 

▪  General applications and networks are not 

big data warehousing and processing. 

scalable in nature. 

▪  Utilizing available SaaS, PaaS, and DaaS platforms such as AWS, Google 
App engine would increase the scalability of IoT-orientated solutions. 
▪  Lossless  compression  algorithms  might  be  utilized  to  transmit  huge 

volumes of data over standard IoT networks. 

▪  Increasing  number  of  intelligent  devices 
connected  in  IoT  networks  has  harmful 
effects on nature. 

▪  Devices are not as power-efficient as they 

could be. 

▪  Setting  up  and  maintaining  all-day 
monitoring  via  multiple  devices  is  not 
cost-efficient. 

and 

▪  Devices  used  in  monitoring  purposes  in 
both  industrial  and  healthcare  use  cases 
need to be available all the time regardless 
of  network  or  other  failures  for  avoiding 
dangerous or life-threatening situations. 
▪  Intelligent  devices  used  for  monitoring 
and  surveillance  purposes  need  to  be 
reliable at all times. Unreliable monitoring 
can  result  in  erroneous  diagnoses  which 
might even lead to death of patients. 

▪  IoT 

networks 

to  maximize 
need 
availability  and  reliability.  Downtime  of 
networks  might  lead  to  loss  of  valuable 
data. 

▪  Solar-powered  hardware  solutions  would  increase  the  sustainability  and 

eco-friendliness of the huge number of devices used in IoT networks. 

▪  Creating  multi-purpose  generalized  devices  would  reduce  the  number  of 
separate  devices  necessary  to  monitor  or  surveil patients  or  environment. 
This reduction in number would also reduce the overall cost. 

▪  Specialized  hardware  for  task-specific  purposes  might  reduce  overall 

power consumption. 

▪  Optimized  software  would  also  reduce 

the  amount  of  necessary 

processing, which might optimize power consumption. 

▪  Fault-tolerant development principles should be followed while developing 

specialized IoT networks. 

▪  Error detection and recovery techniques in networking such as distributed 
checkpointing,  and  coordinated  checkpointing  can  be  implemented  to 
increase network reliability. 

▪  Network traffic analysis and traffic forecasting might be used to anticipate 
network  load,  which  will  help  in  allocating  appropriate  resources  to 
increase network availability. 

▪  Simplified  versions  of  applications  must  be  available  in  devices  to 

facilitate basic services even during network failure or downtime. 

▪  TinyML  deployment  techniques  can  be  leveraged  to  ensure  minimal 

functionality during network downtime. 

▪  Sensing  modules  in  devices  must  be  within  standardized  error  tolerance 
limits and must undergo scheduled testing to guarantee utmost reliability. 
▪  Using  state-of-the-art  battery  technologies  might  improve  the  reliability 

and availability of devices. 

and 

▪  IPv4  network  protocol  might  not  be 
sufficient  to  address  millions  of  devices 
connected in IoT networks. 

▪  Networks  and  routing  protocols  are  not 
efficient  in  dealing  with  numerous  highly 
mobile devices in IoT networks. 

▪  IPv6 can be adopted as the standard Internet protocol for IoT networks. 
▪  Artificial 

learning 
techniques  can  be  utilized  to  develop  and  test  new  routing  protocols 
capable of efficiently dealing with highly mobile nodes. 

intelligence  approaches  such  as 

reinforcement 

▪  Vehicular  Ad-hoc  Networks  already  provide  networking  solutions  for 
mobile  and  stationary  nodes  in  networks.  Relevant  components  from 
VANETs can be evolved for use in IoT networks. 

Power 
Efficiency 

and  Cost 

Reliability 
Availability 

Identity 
Mobility 

in  resource-constrained  environments.  In  the  future,  devices 
connected  in  IoT  networks  should  use  TinyML  to  run  basic 
models to provide basic service functionalities during network 
downtime or other failures. This would increase the reliability 
factor of the devices. To reduce the downtime of the devices, 
advanced battery solutions should be used in the future.  

J. Scalability in IoT Networks 

IoT  networks  might  have  millions  or  billions  of 
interconnected  nodes.  General  networks  and  services  are  not 
scalable in nature. Scalability is a huge challenge for such IoT 
networks  [204],  [205].  In  healthcare  systems,  each  patient 
might have multiple types of monitoring going on at the same 
time.  For  example,  elderly  patients  might  be  monitored  for 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
heart  diseases,  glucose 
levels,  diabetes,  Parkinson’s, 
Alzheimer’s,  and  falls  at  the  same  time.  For  a  sufficiently 
large  elderly  population,  the  number  of  these  systems  would 
reach  millions,  requiring  specialty  scalable  services  and 
applications. 

In the future, the potential of using existing Database-as-a-
Service  (DaaS),  Platform-as-a-Service  (PaaS),  and  Software-
as-a-Service (SaaS) to increase  the scalability of IoT services 
and  networks  should  be  explored.  The  research  focus  should 
be  on  developing  modular  IoT  solutions  that  can  scale  on 
need. 

K. Availability in IoT Networks 

IoT  has  applications  in  industrial  and  healthcare  domains 
among other potential application areas. Industrial devices are 
placed  for  continuous  monitoring  of  various  parameters  such 
as  temperature,  humidity  levels,  and  pressure.  Even  during 
network  failures,  the  devices  should  be  able  to  provide  basic 
monitoring services to avoid catastrophic failures in industrial 
cases.  In the  healthcare space, monitoring devices need to be 
available  at  all  times  similar  to  industrial  use  cases.  Lack  of 
availability might result in serious bodily harm or even death. 
Devices  in  IoT  networks  must  provide  basic  monitoring  and 
action  services  even  when  they  are  disconnected  from 
networks  or  when  network  failures  happen.  The  availability 
should be implemented in both hardware and software levels.  
Similar  to  the  reliability,  research  should  be  focused  on 
deploying  basic  models  into  devices  using  TinyML,  which 
would increase overall availability. Novel error detection and 
error  correction in fault tolerant networks should be explored 
to increase the availability of the network. 

L. Interoperability in IoT Networks 

Interoperable  applications  and  services  can  communicate 
and transmit data among themselves regardless of hardware or 
software differences. However, interoperability is very hard to 
achieve.  New  protocols  or  architectures  that  are  constantly 
being  developed  do  not  always  support  all  legacy  protocols 
and  architectures,  making  data  transmission  and  interaction 
between  devices  very  complex  and  problematic.  Similarly, 
operating systems and various applications also have different 
implementations, making data sharing very difficult. Vendors 
often-time  have  patented  and  exclusive  implementations  that 
make their devices only compatible with other devices of the 
same  vendor.  Thus,  interoperability  is  a  huge  research 
challenge  for  IoT  [206],  [207].  Interoperability  is  very 
important in healthcare systems as various medical equipment 
have  differing  hardware,  protocol  implementations,  and  data 
representation. For a smooth deployment and operation of IoT 
networks  in  the  healthcare  sector,  the  various  devices  and 
services need to be interoperable. 

In  the  future,  the  research  focus  should  be  on  developing 
open-access  network  architecture  and  protocols  to  facilitate 
interoperability among devices. Open-access implementations 
of  specialty  architecture  and  protocols  would  also  facilitate 
this issue. 

M. Power and Cost Efficiency in IoT Networks 

IoT  networks  have  millions  of  nodes.  Power  and  cost  are 
huge concerns for such a huge number of devices. The entire 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

world is also experiencing various global natural catastrophes 
due  to  global  warming  and  climate  change  caused  by 
extracting  and  depending  on  fossil  fuels,  trashing  the  oceans 
with electronic waste, and chemical waste. With an increased 
understanding of the causes behind the sudden climate change 
and  global  warming,  researchers  are  increasingly  moving 
and  bio-degradable 
eco-friendly, 
towards 
solutions.  Making  IoT  devices  more  eco-friendly,  cost-
efficient,  and power-efficient is  a  massive  research  challenge 
[208].  Similarly,  converting  medical  intelligent  monitoring 
devices  in  healthcare  IoT  networks  into  more  multi-purpose, 
power and cost-efficient, long-lasting, eco-friendly versions is 
a research challenge.  

sustainable, 

In the future, research should be focused on simplifying and 
combining  multiple  sensing  modalities  in  single  devices  to 
reduce  the  number  of  total  sensors  necessary  to  monitor  and 
surveil  users.  The  focus  should  also  be  on  developing  more 
area-surveillance  solutions.  Area-surveillance  technologies 
would reduce the number of devices per individual. Reducing 
the  total  number  of  devices  needed  per  user  would  also 
drastically  reduce  the  cost  to  effectively  deploy  an  IoT 
solution.  In  the  future,  research  should  be  focused  on 
transforming commodity devices into solar-powered versions. 
Research  on  hardware  and  software  optimization  would  also 
increase  the  power  the  efficiency  of  devices.  Making  the 
devices  solar-powered  would  reduce  the  overall  pressure  on 
fossil fuel, which has beneficial effects on nature.  

The summary of challenges in large-scale deployment of 
IoT networks and future research recommendations are shown 
in Table IV to provide a broad idea to the readers in a short 
look. 

VIII.  CONCLUSION 

the  cutting-edge 

The  Internet  has  significantly  shaped  the  way  people  live, 
allowing  individuals  to  interact  with  one  another  on  a  virtual 
level  in  a  variety  of  situations  ranging  from  professional  to 
social.  The  Internet  of  Things  could  contribute  meaningfully 
to  this  system  by  enabling  communication  among  connected 
devices,  which  tends  to  result  in  the  dream  of  “anymedia, 
anytime,  anything,  anywhere”  connectivity.  This  paper 
focuses  on 
IoT  device  capabilities, 
architectures,  and  protocols  that  describe  the  IoT  conceptual 
framework.  The  IoT  device  capabilities  for  hardware  and 
software  tools  are  thoroughly  demonstrated  in  this  paper. 
There have been discussions about possible IoT architectures, 
such  as  the  conventional  three-layer  architecture,  the  SoA 
based  architecture,  and  the  middleware-based  architecture. 
Additionally,  the  IoT  communications  protocols  with  their 
distinguished  features  are  incorporated  briefly  in  this  paper. 
We  have  highlighted  various  IoT  applications  for  smart 
healthcare  that  have  been  developed  in  the  recent  decades  to 
ensure  some  facilities  for  medical  practitioners  such  as 
monitoring  and  identifying  a  variety  of  health  problems, 
measuring  various  health  factors,  and  offering  diagnosis  and 
treatment  at  remote  locations.  Lastly,  the  current  challenges 
and  gaps  related  to  the  development  of  IoT-based  healthcare 
applications,  along  with  future  improvement  and  research 
focus in the coming years have been explored here. Hopefully, 
this  paper  will  provide  a  stable  platform  for  scholars  and 

21 

 
 
 
scientists  willing  to  engage  in  learning  more  about  IoT 
technologies  in  the  context  to  fully  grasp  the  general 
architecture  and roles  of  the multiple  elements  and  processes 
that comprise the concept of Internet of Things. 

APPENDIX 

TABLE A 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 

Abbreviation 

Definition 

ADC 
AI 
AMQP 

AWS 
BLE 
BP 
CoAP 
CoRE 

CPU 
DaaS 
DDS 
DSS 
ECG 
GPIO 
GPS 
HTTP 
IETF 
I/O 
IPv6 
ISO/IEC 

IoT 
LoWPAN 

ML 
M2M 
MQTT 

NFT 

Queuing 

RESTful 

Analog to Digital Converter 
Artificial Intelligence 
Advanced  Message 
Protocol 
Amazon Web Services 
Bluetooth Low Energy 
Blood Pressure 
Constrained Application Protocol 
Constrained 
Environments 
Central Processing Unit 
Database-as-a-service 
Data Distribution Service 
Digital Signature Standard 
Electrocardiogram 
General Purpose Input Output 
Global Positioning System 
Hypertext Transfer Protocol 
Internet Engineer Task Force 
Input/Output 
Internet Protocol Version 6 
International  Organization 
Standardization/International 
Electrotechnical Commission 
Internet of Things 
Low-Power Wireless Personal Area 
Networks 
Machine Learning 
Machine to Machine 
Message 
Queue 
Transport 
Non-Fungible Token 

Telemetry 

for 

REFERENCES 

Terminology 
General 
General 
Technical 

General 
Technical 
Medical 
Technical 
Technical 

General 
Technical 
Technical 
Technical 
Medical 
Technical 
General 
Technical 
General 
General 
Technical 
General 

Technical 
Technical 

General 
Technical 
Technical 

Technical 

[1]  Y. Song, F. R. Yu, L. Zhou, X. Yang, and Z. He, “Applications of the 
Internet of Things (IoT) in Smart Logistics: A Comprehensive Survey,” 
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 4250–4274, Mar. 2021. 
[2]  D.  C.  Nguyen et  al.,  "6G  Internet  of  Things:  A  Comprehensive 
Survey,"  IEEE  Internet  Things  J.,  vol.  9,  no.  1,  pp.  359-383,  1  Jan.1, 
2022. 
F. Guo, F. R. Yu, H. Zhang, X. Li, H. Ji and V. C. M. Leung, "Enabling 
Massive  IoT  Toward  6G:  A  Comprehensive  Survey,"  IEEE  Internet 
Things J., vol. 8, no. 15, pp. 11891-11915, 1 Aug.1, 2021. 
L.  Chettri  and  R.  Bera,  “A  Comprehensive  Survey  on  Internet  of 
Things (IoT) Toward 5G Wireless Systems,”  IEEE Internet Things J., 
vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 16–32, Jan. 2020. 

[4] 

[3] 

[6] 

[5]  M. Nasr, M. M. Islam, S. Shehata, F. Karray, and Y. Quintana, “Smart 
Healthcare in the Age of AI: Recent Advances, Challenges, and Future 
Prospects,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 145248–145270, 2021. 
F.  John  Dian,  R.  Vahidnia,  and  A.  Rahmati,  “Wearables  and  the 
Internet of  Things  (IoT),  Applications,  Opportunities, and  Challenges: 
A Survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 69200–69211, 2020. 
P.  Asghari,  A.  M.  Rahmani,  and  H.  H.  S.  Javadi,  “Internet  of  Things 
applications:  A  systematic  review,”  Comput.  Networks,  vol.  148,  pp. 
241–261, Jan. 2019. 

[7] 

[8]  G.  Marques,  R.  Pitarma,  N.  M.  Garcia,  and  N.  Pombo,  “Internet  of 
Things  Architectures,  Technologies,  Applications,  Challenges,  and 
Future  Directions  for  Enhanced  Living  Environments  and  Healthcare 
Systems: A Review,” Electronics, vol. 8, no. 10, p. 1081, Sep. 2019. 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

[9] 

F.  Alshehri  and  G.  Muhammad,  "A  Comprehensive  Survey  of  the 
Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  and  AI-Based  Smart  Healthcare,"  IEEE 
Access, vol. 9, pp. 3660-3678, 2021. 

[10]  S.  Ketu  and  P.  K.  Mishra,  “Internet  of  Healthcare  Things:  A 
contemporary survey,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications. 
2021. 

[11]  M.  M.  Dhanvijay  and  S.  C.  Patil,  “Internet  of  Things:  A  survey  of 
enabling  technologies  in  healthcare  and  its  applications,”  Comput. 
Networks, vol. 153, pp. 113–131, Apr. 2019. 

[12]  R. Maskeliūnas, R. Damaševičius, and S. Segal, “A Review of Internet 
of  Things  Technologies  for  Ambient  Assisted  Living  Environments,” 
Futur. Internet, vol. 11, no. 12, p. 259, Dec. 2019. 
J.  Cahill,  R.  Portales,  S.  McLoughin,  N.  Nagan,  B.  Henrichs,  and  S. 
Wetherall,  “IoT/Sensor-Based  Infrastructures  Promoting  a  Sense  of 
Home,  Independent  Living,  Comfort  and  Wellness,”  Sensors,  vol.  19, 
no. 3, p. 485, Jan. 2019. 

[13] 

[14]  Y.  Yang,  H.  Wang,  R.  Jiang,  X.  Guo,  J.  Cheng  and  Y.  Chen,  "A 
Review  of  IoT-enabled  Mobile  Healthcare:  Technologies,  Challenges, 
and 
doi: 
10.1109/JIOT.2022.3144400. 

Trends," 

Internet 

Things 

Future 

IEEE 

J., 

[15]  H.  Abdelghaffar  and  M.  Abousteit,  “Internet  of  Things  (IoT) 
Interoperability Success Criteria,” Int. J. Enterp. Inf. Syst., vol. 17, no. 
1, pp. 85–105, Jan. 2021. 

[16]  Z.  N.  Aghdam,  A.  M.  Rahmani,  and  M.  Hosseinzadeh,  “The  Role  of 
the  Internet of  Things in  Healthcare:  Future  Trends  and Challenges.,” 
Comput. Methods Programs Biomed., vol. 199, p. 105903, Feb. 2021. 

[17]  M. N. Bhuiyan, M. M. Rahman, M. M. Billah, and D. Saha, “Internet 
of Things (IoT): A Review of Its Enabling Technologies in Healthcare 
Applications, 
and  Market 
Protocols, 
Opportunities,”  IEEE  Internet  Things  J.,  vol.  8,  no.  13,  pp.  10474–
10498, Jul. 2021. 

Standards 

Security, 

[18]  M.  Rath  and  B.  Pattanayak,  “Technological  improvement  in  modern 
health care applications using Internet of Things (IoT) and proposal of 
novel health care approach,” Int. J. Hum. Rights Healthc., vol. 12, no. 
2, pp. 148–162, May 2019. 

[20] 

[19]  B. Pradhan, S. Bhattacharyya, and K. Pal, “IoT-Based Applications in 
Healthcare Devices,” J. Healthc. Eng., vol. 2021, pp. 1–18, Mar. 2021. 
J.  W.  Jolles,  “Broad‐scale  applications  of  the  Raspberry  Pi:  A  review 
and  guide  for  biologists,”  Methods  Ecol.  Evol.,  vol.  12,  no.  9,  pp. 
1562–1579, Sep. 2021. 

[21]  A. Polianytsia, O. Starkova, and K. Herasymenko, “Survey of hardware 
IoT  platforms,”  in  2016  Third  International  Scientific-Practical 
Conference  Problems  of  Infocommunications  Science  and  Technology 
(PIC S&T), 2016, pp. 152–153. 

[22]  V.  Vujovic  and  M.  Maksimovic,  “Raspberry  Pi  as  a  Wireless  Sensor 
node:  Performances  and  constraints,”  in  2014  37th  International 
Information  and  Communication  Technology, 
Convention  on 
Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO), 2014, pp. 1013–1018. 
[23]  H.  K.  Kondaveeti,  N.  K.  Kumaravelu,  S.  D.  Vanambathina,  S.  E. 
Mathe,  and  S.  Vappangi,  “A  systematic 
literature  review  on 
prototyping  with  Arduino:  Applications,  challenges,  advantages,  and 
limitations,” Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 40, p. 100364, May 2021. 

[24]  D. K. Halim, T. C. Ming, N. M. Song, and D. Hartono, “Arduino-based 
IDE  for  Embedded  Multi-processor  System-on-Chip,”  in  2019  5th 
International Conference on New Media Studies (CONMEDIA), 2019, 
pp. 135–138. 

[26] 

[25]  S.-M.  Kim,  Y.  Choi,  and  J.  Suh,  “Applications  of  the  Open-Source 
Hardware Arduino Platform in the Mining Industry: A Review,” Appl. 
Sci., vol. 10, no. 14, p. 5018, Jul. 2020. 
J.  Mesquita,  D.  Guimaraes,  C.  Pereira,  F.  Santos,  and  L.  Almeida, 
“Assessing  the  ESP8266  WiFi  module  for  the  Internet  of  Things,”  in 
2018  IEEE  23rd  International  Conference  on  Emerging  Technologies 
and Factory Automation (ETFA), 2018, pp. 784–791. 
I.  Gunawan,  A.  Sudianto,  and  M.  Sadali,  “Measuring  Body 
Temperature  Based  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  Using  Esp8266  and 
Firebase,” SISFOTENIKA, vol. 11, no. 1, p. 91, Jan. 2021. 

[27] 

[28]  T.  Z.  Asici,  B.  Karaduman,  R.  Eslampanah,  M.  Challenger,  J.  Denil, 
and H. Vangheluwe, “Applying Model Driven Engineering Techniques 
the  Development  of  Contiki-Based  IoT  Systems,”  in  2019 
to 
IEEE/ACM  1st  International  Workshop  on  Software  Engineering 
Research & Practices for the Internet of Things (SERP4IoT), 2019, pp. 
25–32. 

[29]  Y.  Bin  Zikria, M.  K.  Afzal,  F.  Ishmanov,  S.  W.  Kim, and  H.  Yu, “A 
survey on routing protocols supported by the Contiki Internet of things 
operating system,” Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 82, pp. 200–219, 

22 

 
 
 
 
May 2018. 

[30]  C. Sabri, L. Kriaa, and S. L. Azzouz, “Comparison of IoT Constrained 
Devices  Operating  Systems:  A  Survey,”  in  2017  IEEE/ACS  14th 
International  Conference  on  Computer  Systems  and  Applications 
(AICCSA), 2017, pp. 369–375. 

[31]  F.  Jaskani,  S.  Manzoor,  M.  Amin,  M.  Asif,  and  M.  Irfan,  “An 
Investigation  on  Several  Operating  Systems  for  Internet  of  Things,” 
EAI  Endorsed  Trans.  Creat.  Technol.,  vol.  6,  no.  18,  p.  160386,  Jan. 
2019. 

[32]  E. Baccelli et al., “RIOT: An Open Source Operating System for Low-
End Embedded Devices in the IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 
6, pp. 4428–4440, Dec. 2018. 

[33]  B.  Karaduman,  M.  Challenger,  R.  Eslampanah,  J.  Denil,  and  H. 
Vangheluwe,  “Platform-specific  Modeling  for  RIOT  based  IoT 
Systems,”  in  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE/ACM  42nd  International 
Conference on Software Engineering Workshops, 2020, pp. 639–646. 

[34]  C. Hannon, J. Yan, Y.-A. Liu, and D. Jin, “A Distributed Virtual Time 
System on Embedded Linux  for  Evaluating Cyber-Physical  Systems,” 
in Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSIM Conference on Principles of 
Advanced Discrete Simulation, 2019, pp. 37–48. 

[35]  H.  Ben  Mansour,  L.  Chaarabi,  and  K.  Jelassi,  “Embedded  Linux 
Hardware/Software  Architecture 
for  Electrical  Measurement 
Acquisition,”  in  Smart  Innovation,  Systems  and  Technologies,  2020, 
pp. 167–176. 

[36]  C. Bell, Windows 10 for the Internet of Things. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 

2021. 

[37]  Z.  Syahputa,  M.  Zarlis,  and  B.  B.  Nasution,  “Testing  Real-Time 
Applications on Windows 10 IOT Using the Nyquist Theory,” J. Phys. 
Conf. Ser., vol. 1255, p. 012066, Aug. 2019. 

[38]  M.  Lyaskov,  G.  Spasov, and  G.  Petrova,  “A practical  implementation 
of  smart  home  energy  data  storage  and  control  application  based  on 
cloud  services,”  in  2017  XXVI  International  Scientific  Conference 
Electronics (ET), 2017, pp. 1–4. 

[39]  M.  U.  H.  Al  Rasyid,  M.  H.  Mubarrok,  and  J.  A.  Nur  Hasim, 
“Implementation  of  environmental  monitoring  based  on  KAA  IoT 
platform,” Bull. Electr. Eng. Informatics, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 2578–2587, 
Dec. 2020. 

[40]  A.  Kumar  and  A.  Kumar,  “6  IoT-based  platform  for  smart  farming  – 
Kaa,”  in  Internet of  Things  and  Machine  Learning  in  Agriculture,  De 
Gruyter, 2021, pp. 109–130. 

[41]  L.  O.  Aghenta  and  M.  Tariq  Iqbal,  “Design  and  implementation  of  a 
low-cost,  open  source  IoT-based  SCADA  system  using  ESP32  with 
OLED,  ThingsBoard  and  MQTT  protocol,”  AIMS  Electron.  Electr. 
Eng., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 57–86, 2020. 

[42]  M. Henschke, X. Wei, and X. Zhang, “Data Visualization for Wireless 
Sensor  Networks  Using  ThingsBoard,”  in  2020  29th  Wireless  and 
Optical Communications Conference (WOCC), 2020, pp. 1–6. 

[43]  W.  Tärneberg,  V.  Chandrasekaran,  and  M.  Humphrey,  “Experiences 
creating  a  framework  for  smart  traffic  control  using  AWS  IOT,”  in 
Proceedings of the  9th  International Conference on  Utility and  Cloud 
Computing, 2016, pp. 63–69. 

[44]  L.  Calderoni,  “Preserving  context  security  in  AWS  IoT  Core,”  in 
Proceedings  of  the  14th  International  Conference  on  Availability, 
Reliability and Security, 2019, pp. 1–5. 

[45]  P. Pierleoni, R. Concetti, A. Belli, and L. Palma, “Amazon, Google and 
Microsoft  Solutions  for  IoT:  Architectures  and  a  Performance 
Comparison,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 5455–5470, 2020. 

[46]  B. Grados and H. Bedon, “Software Components of an IoT Monitoring 
Platform  in  Google  Cloud  Platform:  A  Descriptive  Research  and  an 
Architectural  Proposal,” 
in  Computer  and 
Information Science, 2020, pp. 153–167. 

in  Communications 

[47]  N.  Mishra  and  S.  Pandya,  “Internet  of  Things  Applications,  Security 
Challenges,  Attacks,  Intrusion  Detection,  and  Future  Visions:  A 
Systematic Review,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 59353–59377, 2021. 
[48]  A. Alreshidi and A. Ahmad, “Architecting Software for the Internet of 
Thing Based Systems,” Futur. Internet, vol. 11, no. 7, p. 153, Jul. 2019. 
[49]  F.  Alshohoumi,  M.  Sarrab,  A.  AlHamadani,  and  D.  Al-Abri, 
“Systematic Review of Existing IoT Architectures Security and Privacy 
Issues  and  Concerns,”  Int.  J.  Adv.  Comput.  Sci.  Appl.,  vol.  10,  no.  7, 
2019. 

[50]  W.  Kassab  and  K.  A.  Darabkh,  “A–Z  survey  of  Internet  of  Things: 
Architectures,  protocols,  applications, 
future 
directions and recommendations,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 163, p. 
102663, Aug. 2020. 
I.  Zhou  et  al.,  “Internet  of  Things  2.0:  Concepts,  Applications,  and 

recent  advances, 

[51] 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

Future Directions,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 70961–71012, 2021. 
[52]  K. Liu, Y. Bi, and D. Liu, “Internet of Things based acquisition system 
of industrial intelligent bar code  for smart  city applications,”  Comput. 
Commun., vol. 150, pp. 325–333, Jan. 2020. 

[53]  R.  Liu,  J.  Shen,  F.  Jiao,  and  M.  Ding,  “Deployment  Optimization  of 
Perception  Layer  Nodes  in  the  Internet  of  Things  Based  on  NB-IoT 
Technology,” in Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences, 
Social-Informatics  and  Telecommunications  Engineering,  LNICST, 
2021, pp. 202–210. 

[54]  P. P. Ray, “A survey on Internet of Things architectures,” J. King Saud 
Univ. - Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 291–319, Jul. 2018. 
[55]  P. Upadhyay and P. D. Upadhyay, “Internet of things - A Survey,” Int. 

[56] 

J. Sci. Res. Comput. Sci. Eng. Inf. Technol., pp. 417–438, May 2021. 
J.  Dizdarevic,  F.  Carpio,  A.  Jukan,  and  X.  Masip-Bruin,  “Survey  of 
Internet-of-Things  and  Related 
Communication  Protocols 
Challenges  of  Fog  and  Cloud  Computing  Integration,”  ACM  Comput. 
Surv., Apr. 2018. 

for 

[57]  L. M. Abdulrahman  et al., “A State of Art for Smart Gateways Issues 

and Modification,” Asian J. Res. Comput. Sci., pp. 1–13, Apr. 2021. 

[58]  A. Kumar, M. Zhao, K.-J. Wong, Y. L. Guan, and P. H. J. Chong, “A 
Comprehensive  Study  of  IoT  and  WSN  MAC  Protocols:  Research 
Issues, Challenges and Opportunities,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 76228–
76262, 2018. 
J.  Zhang,  Y.  Ye,  C.  Hu,  and  B.  Li,  “Architecture  design  and  demand 
analysis on application layer  of  standard  system  for  ubiquitous  power 
Internet of Things,” Glob. Energy Interconnect., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 304–
314, Jun. 2021. 

[59] 

[60]  X.  Li,  Y.  Lu,  X.  Fu,  and  Y.  Qi,  “Building  the  Internet  of  Things 
platform for smart maternal healthcare services with wearable devices 
and cloud computing,” Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 118, pp. 282–
296, May 2021. 

[61]  Y.  Qian,  D.  Wu,  W. Bao,  and  P.  Lorenz,  “The  Internet  of  Things  for 
Smart Cities: Technologies and Applications,” IEEE Netw., vol. 33, no. 
2, pp. 4–5, Mar. 2019. 

[62]  F.  Zantalis,  G. Koulouras,  S. Karabetsos,  and  D. Kandris, “A  Review 
of Machine Learning and IoT in Smart Transportation,” Futur. Internet, 
vol. 11, no. 4, p. 94, Apr. 2019. 

[63]  M.  Ayaz,  M.  Ammad-Uddin,  Z.  Sharif,  A.  Mansour,  and  E.-H.  M. 
Aggoune, “Internet-of-Things  (IoT)-Based  Smart  Agriculture:  Toward 
Making  the  Fields  Talk,”  IEEE  Access,  vol.  7,  pp.  129551–129583, 
2019. 

[64]  S. Li, L. Da Xu, and S. Zhao, “5G Internet of Things: A survey,” J. Ind. 

Inf. Integr., vol. 10, pp. 1–9, Jun. 2018. 

[65]  M.  Lombardi,  F.  Pascale,  and  D.  Santaniello,  “Internet  of  Things:  A 
General Overview between Architectures, Protocols and Applications,” 
Information, vol. 12, no. 2, p. 87, Feb. 2021. 

[66]  S. Misra, C. Roy, and A. Mukherjee, “Overview of Internet of Things,” 
in Introduction to Industrial Internet of Things and Industry 4.0, CRC 
Press, 2021, pp. 3–24. 

[67]  F.  Meneghello,  M.  Calore,  D.  Zucchetto,  M.  Polese  and  A.  Zanella, 
"IoT: 
Internet  of  Threats?  A  Survey  of  Practical  Security 
Vulnerabilities  in  Real  IoT  Devices,"  IEEE  Internet  Things  J.,  vol.  6, 
no. 5, pp. 8182-8201, Oct. 2019. 
J.-H.  Park,  “An  Intelligent  Service  Middleware  Based  on  Sensors  in 
IoT Environments,” Int. J. Softw. Eng. Knowl. Eng., vol. 30, no. 04, pp. 
523–536, Apr. 2020. 

[68] 

[69]  B.  B.  Gupta  and  M.  Quamara,  “An  overview  of  Internet  of  Things 
(IoT):  Architectural  aspects,  challenges,  and  protocols,”  Concurr. 
Comput. Pract. Exp., vol. 32, no. 21, Nov. 2020. 
J. Zhang, M. Ma, P. Wang, and X. Sun, “Middleware for the Internet of 
Things:  A  survey  on  requirements,  enabling 
technologies,  and 
solutions,” J. Syst. Archit., vol. 117, p. 102098, Aug. 2021. 

[70] 

[71]  M.  Palmaccio,  G.  Dicuonzo,  and  Z.  S.  Belyaeva,  “The  internet  of 
things and corporate business models: A systematic literature review,” 
J. Bus. Res., vol. 131, pp. 610–618, Jul. 2021. 

[72]  A. Bujari, M. Furini, F. Mandreoli, R. Martoglia, M. Montangero, and 
D.  Ronzani,  “Standards,  Security  and  Business  Models:  Key 
Challenges for the IoT Scenario,” Mob. Networks Appl., vol. 23, no. 1, 
pp. 147–154, Feb. 2018. 
J.  Silva,  J.  Rodrigues,  J.  Al-Muhtadi,  R.  Rabêlo,  and  V.  Furtado, 
“Management  Platforms  and  Protocols  for  Internet  of  Things:  A 
Survey,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 3, p. 676, Feb. 2019. 

[73] 

[74]  G.  A.  Papakostas  and  V.  Kanakaris,  “Internet  of  things  protocols  -  a 

survey,” Int. J. Humanit. Technol., vol. 1, no. 2, p. 101, 2020. 

[75]  M. A. Tariq, M. Khan, M. T. Raza Khan, and D. Kim, “Enhancements 

23 

 
 
 
and Challenges in CoAP—A Survey,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 21, p. 6391, 
Nov. 2020. 

[76]  N.  Nikolov,  “Research  of  MQTT,  CoAP,  HTTP  and  XMPP  IoT 
Communication  protocols  for  Embedded  Systems,”  in  2020  XXIX 
International Scientific Conference Electronics (ET), 2020, pp. 1–4. 

[77]  G.  A.  Akpakwu,  G.  P.  Hancke,  and  A.  M.  Abu‐Mahfouz,  “CACC: 
lightweight 
traffic,”  Trans.  Emerg. 

Context‐aware 
CoAP/UDP‐based 
Telecommun. Technol., vol. 31, no. 2, Feb. 2020. 

Internet  of  Things 

congestion 

approach 

control 

for 

[78]  S.  Bansal  and  D.  Kumar,  “Distance‐based  congestion  control 
mechanism for CoAP in IoT,” IET Commun., vol. 14, no. 19, pp. 3512–
3520, Dec. 2020. 

[79]  S.-P. Hsu, Y.-M. Chang, S.-R. Yang, and P.-H. Hsieh, “The Design and 
Implementation  of  a  Lightweight  CoAP-based  IoT  Framework  with 
Smart  Contract  Security  Guarantee,”  in  2020  12th  International 
Symposium  on  Communication  Systems,  Networks  and  Digital  Signal 
Processing (CSNDSP), 2020, pp. 1–6. 

[80]  S.  Quincozes,  T.  Emilio,  and  J.  Kazienko,  “MQTT  Protocol: 
Fundamentals,  Tools  and  Future  Directions,”  IEEE  Lat.  Am.  Trans., 
vol. 17, no. 09, pp. 1439–1448, Sep. 2019. 

[81]  B.  Mishra  and  A.  Kertesz,  “The  Use  of  MQTT  in  M2M  and  IoT 

Systems: A Survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 201071–201086, 2020. 

[82]  V.  M.  and  S.  Sankaranarayanan,  “Publish/subscribe  based  multi-tier 
edge computational model in Internet of Things for latency reduction,” 
J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 127, pp. 18–27, May 2019. 

[83]  D.  Dinculeană  and  X.  Cheng,  “Vulnerabilities  and  Limitations  of 
MQTT Protocol Used between IoT Devices,”  Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 5, 
p. 848, Feb. 2019. 

[84]  E. Al-Masri et al., “Investigating Messaging Protocols for the Internet 
of Things (IoT),” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 94880–94911, 2020. 
[85]  M.  Faiqurahman,  M.  M.  Madani,  and  D.  R.  Akbi,  “Performance  of 
XMPP-Based  Gateway  for  IoT  Device  Communication  Services,”  J. 
Teknol. dan Sist. Komput., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 127–133, Oct. 2019. 
[86]  C.-S. Cho, W.-G. Chen, C.-K. C. Liao, J.-L. Liao, F.-F. Chen, and T.-
C. Shen, “Building on the Distributed Energy Resources IoT based IEC 
61850  XMPP  for  TPC,”  in  2019  IEEE  International  Conference  on 
Industrial Cyber Physical Systems (ICPS), 2019, pp. 61–66. 

[87]  C. A. Garcia, J. E. Naranjo, and M. V. Garcia, “Analysis of AMQP for 
Industrial  Internet  of  Things  Based  on  Low-Cost  Automation,”  in 
Smart Innovation, Systems and Technologies, 2021, pp. 235–244. 
[88]  P.  Bhimani  and  G.  Panchal,  “Message  Delivery  Guarantee  and  Status 
Update of Clients Based on IoT-AMQP,” in Lecture Notes in Networks 
and Systems, 2018, pp. 15–22. 

[89]  G.  P.  Naik  and  A.  U.  Bapat,  “A  Brief  Comparative  Analysis  on 
Application  Layer  Protocols  of  Internet  of  Things:  MQTT,  CoAP, 
AMQP  and  HTTP,”  Int.  J.  Comput. Sci.  Mob. Comput.,  vol. 9, no. 9, 
pp. 135–141, Sep. 2020. 

[90]  F. Karatas and I. Korpeoglu, “Fog-Based Data Distribution Service (F-
DAD)  for  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  applications,”  Futur.  Gener. 
Comput. Syst., vol. 93, pp. 156–169, Apr. 2019. 

[91]  T. Alam, B. Rababah, A. Ali, and S. Qamar, “Distributed Intelligence 
at the Edge on IoT Networks,” Ann. Emerg. Technol. Comput., vol. 4, 
no. 5, pp. 1–18, Dec. 2020. 

[92]  R. S. Auliva, R.-K. Sheu, D. Liang, and W.-J. Wang, “IIoT Testbed: A 
DDS-Based  Emulation  Tool  for  Industrial  IoT  Applications,”  in  2018 
International Conference on System Science and Engineering (ICSSE), 
2018, pp. 1–4. 

[93]  C.  Gündoğan,  P.  Kietzmann,  T.  C.  Schmidt,  and  M.  Wählisch, 
“Designing a LoWPAN convergence layer for the Information Centric 
Internet  of  Things,”  Comput.  Commun.,  vol.  164,  pp.  114–123,  Dec. 
2020. 

[94]  M. K. Shah and L. K. Sharma, “Study on 6LoWPAN Routing Protocols 
with  SD  aspects  in  IoT,”  in  2018  2nd  International  Conference  on  I-
SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC)I-SMAC 
(IoT  in  Social,  Mobile,  Analytics  and  Cloud)  (I-SMAC),  2018  2nd 
International Conference on, 2018, pp. 60–65. 

[95]  S.  Zeadally,  F.  Siddiqui,  and  Z.  Baig,  “25  Years  of  Bluetooth 
Technology,” Futur. Internet, vol. 11, no. 9, p. 194, Sep. 2019. 
[96]  E.  Garcia-Espinosa,  O.  Longoria-Gandara,  I.  Pegueros-Lepe,  and  A. 
Veloz-Guerrero,  “Power  Consumption  Analysis  of  Bluetooth  Low 
Energy  Commercial  Products  and  Their  Implications  for  IoT 
Applications,” Electronics, vol. 7, no. 12, p. 386, Dec. 2018. 

[97]  K.  E.  Jeon,  J.  She,  P.  Soonsawad,  and  P.  C.  Ng,  “BLE  Beacons  for 
Internet  of  Things  Applications:  Survey,  Challenges, 
and 
Opportunities,”  IEEE  Internet  Things  J.,  vol.  5,  no.  2,  pp.  811–828, 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

Apr. 2018. 

[98]  Y.  R.  Hamdy  and  A.  I.  Alghannam, “Evaluation  of  ZigBee  Topology 
Effect  on  Throughput  and  End  to  End  Delay  Due  to  Different 
Transmission  Bands  for  IoT  Applications,”  J.  Commun.  Softw.  Syst., 
vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 254–259, Sep. 2020. 

[99]  H. Zemrane, Y. Baddi, and A. Hasbi, “Internet of Things Industry 4.0 
Ecosystem  Based  on  Zigbee  Protocol,”  in  Advances  in  Intelligent 
Systems and Computing, 2021, pp. 249–260. 

[100]  M.  Gupta  and  S.  Singh,  “A  Survey  on  the  ZigBee  Protocol,  It’s 
Security  in  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  and  Comparison  of  ZigBee  with 
Bluetooth and Wi-Fi,” 2021, pp. 473–482. 

[101]  M.  Haghi  Kashani,  M.  Madanipour,  M.  Nikravan,  P.  Asghari,  and  E. 
Mahdipour,  “A  systematic  review  of  IoT  in  healthcare:  Applications, 
techniques, and  trends,”  J. Netw.  Comput.  Appl.,  vol.  192, p. 103164, 
Oct. 2021. 

[102]  G.  Muhammad,  F.  Alshehri,  F. Karray,  A.  E.  Saddik,  M.  Alsulaiman, 
and  T.  H.  Falk,  ‘‘A  comprehensive  survey  on  multimodal  medical 
signals  fusion  for  smart healthcare  systems,’’  Inf.  Fusion,  vol. 76, pp. 
355–375, Dec. 2021. 

[103]  S.  Selvaraj  and  S.  Sundaravaradhan, “Challenges  and  opportunities  in 
IoT healthcare systems: a systematic review,” SN Appl. Sci., vol. 2, no. 
1, p. 139, Jan. 2020. 

[104]  Y.  A.  Qadri,  A.  Nauman,  Y.  Bin  Zikria,  A.  V.  Vasilakos,  and  S.  W. 
Kim,  “The  Future  of  Healthcare  Internet  of  Things:  A  Survey  of 
Emerging Technologies,”  IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 
2, pp. 1121–1167, 2020. 

[105]  V.  S.  Naresh,  S.  S.  Pericherla,  P.  Sita  Rama  Murty,  and  S.  Reddi, 
“Internet  of  Things 
in  Healthcare:  Architecture,  Applications, 
Challenges, and Solutions,” Comput. Syst. Sci. Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 
411–421, 2020. 

[106]  A.  Rahaman,  M.  Islam,  M.  Islam,  M.  Sadi,  and  S.  Nooruddin, 
“Developing IoT Based Smart Health Monitoring Systems: A Review,” 
Rev. d’Intelligence Artif., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 435–440, Dec. 2019. 
[107]  G. Marques, J. Saini, I. M. Pires, N. Miranda, and R. Pitarma, “Internet 
of Things for Enhanced Living Environments, Health and Well-Being: 
Technologies,  Architectures  and  Systems,”  in  Advances  in  Intelligent 
Systems and Computing, 2020, pp. 616–631. 

[108]  N. Y. Philip, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, H. Wang, S. J. Fong, and J. Chen, 
“Internet  of  Things  for  In-Home  Health  Monitoring  Systems:  Current 
Advances,  Challenges  and  Future  Directions,”  IEEE  J.  Sel.  Areas 
Commun., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 300–310, Feb. 2021. 

[109]  H.  Ahmadi,  G.  Arji,  L.  Shahmoradi,  R.  Safdari,  M.  Nilashi,  and  M. 
Alizadeh,  “The  application  of  internet  of  things  in  healthcare:  a 
systematic literature review and classification,” Universal Access in the 
Information Society. 2019. 

[110]  M.  M.  Islam,  A.  Rahaman,  and  M.  R.  Islam,  “Development  of  Smart 
Healthcare Monitoring System in IoT Environment,” SN Comput. Sci., 
vol. 1, no. 3, p. 185, May 2020. 

[111]  M.  A.  Serhani,  H.  T.  El  Kassabi,  H.  Ismail,  and  A.  Nujum  Navaz, 
“ECG Monitoring Systems: Review, Architecture, Processes, and Key 
Challenges,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 6, p. 1796, Mar. 2020. 

[112]  P. K. Vishwakarma and R. Singh, “A – Review on IoT-Assisted ECG 
Monitoring Framework for Health Care Applications,” in 2021 Fourth 
International  Conference  on  Computational 
Intelligence  and 
Communication Technologies (CCICT), 2021, pp. 203–207. 

[113]  T. Wu, J.-M. Redouté, and M. Yuce, “A Wearable, Low-Power, Real-
IoT  Healthcare 

Time  ECG  Monitor 
Applications,” in Internet of Things, 2019, pp. 165–173. 

for  Smart  T-shirt  and 

[114]  T.  Shaown,  I.  Hasan,  M.  M.  R.  Mim,  and  M.  S.  Hossain,  “IoT-based 
Portable  ECG  Monitoring  System  for  Smart  Healthcare,”  in  2019  1st 
International  Conference  on  Advances  in  Science,  Engineering  and 
Robotics Technology (ICASERT), 2019, pp. 1–5. 

[115]  H.  Djelouat  et  al.,  “Real-time  ECG  monitoring  using  compressive 
sensing  on  a  heterogeneous  multicore  edge-device,”  Microprocess. 
Microsyst., vol. 72, p. 102839, Feb. 2020. 

[116]  M. L. Sahu, M. Atulkar, M. K. Ahirwal, and A. Ahamad, “IoT-enabled 
cloud-based  real-time  remote  ECG  monitoring  system,”  J.  Med.  Eng. 
Technol., vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 473–485, Aug. 2021. 

[117]  S.  Basu,  A.  Sengupta,  A.  Das,  M.  Ghosh,  and  S.  Barman  (Mandal), 
“IoT-Based  Real-Time  Remote  ECG  Monitoring  System,”  in  Lecture 
Notes in Networks and Systems, 2021, pp. 23–28. 

[118]  F.  Lamonaca  et  al.,  “An  Overview  on  Internet  of  Medical  Things  in 
Blood  Pressure  Monitoring,”  in  2019  IEEE  International  Symposium 
on Medical Measurements and Applications (MeMeA), 2019, pp. 1–6. 

[119]  L. R. Krakoff, “Home Blood Pressure Monitoring,” Hypertension, vol. 

24 

 
 
 
63, no. 4, pp. 670–671, Apr. 2014. 

2017, pp. 144–149. 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

[120]  Q.  Xin  and  J.  Wu,  “A  novel  wearable  device  for  continuous,  non-
invasion blood pressure  measurement,”  Comput.  Biol.  Chem., vol. 69, 
pp. 134–137, Aug. 2017. 

[121]  B.  Singh,  S.  Urooj,  S.  Mishra,  and  S.  Haldar,  “Blood  Pressure 
Monitoring  System  using  Wireless  technologies,”  Procedia  Comput. 
Sci., vol. 152, pp. 267–273, 2019. 

[122]  N. Hashim, N. Norddin, F. Idris, S. N. I. Mohd Yusoff, and M. Zahari, 
“IoT  blood  pressure  monitoring  system,”  Indones.  J.  Electr.  Eng. 
Comput. Sci., vol. 19, no. 3, p. 1384, Sep. 2020. 

[123]  A.  EL  ATTAOUI,  S.  Largo,  A.  Jilbab,  and  A.  Bourouhou,  “Wireless 
medical  sensor  network  for  blood  pressure  monitoring  based  on 
machine  learning  for  real-time  data  classification,”  J.  Ambient  Intell. 
Humaniz. Comput., vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 8777–8792, Sep. 2021. 

[124]  P.  D.  P.  Adi  and  A.  Kitagawa,  “ZigBee  Radio  Frequency  (RF) 
Performance  on  Raspberry  Pi  3  for  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  based 
Blood  Pressure  Sensors  Monitoring,”  Int.  J.  Adv.  Comput.  Sci.  Appl., 
vol. 10, no. 5, 2019. 

[125]  T. Mohanraj, B. Arunkumar, S. ShahulHammed, and R. Santhosh, “A 
Review on Internet of Things (IoT) Based Pulse Rate, Blood Pressure, 
Body  Temperature Monitoring  System,” in  2020 Fourth  International 
Conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-
SMAC), 2020, pp. 78–79. 

[126]  H.  Ota  et  al.,  “3D  Printed  ‘Earable’  Smart  Devices  for  Real-Time 
Detection of Core Body Temperature,” ACS Sensors, vol. 2, no. 7, pp. 
990–997, Jul. 2017. 

[127]  N.  A.  Zakaria,  F.  N.  B.  Mohd  Saleh,  and  M.  A.  A.  Razak,  “IoT 
(Internet  of  Things)  Based  Infant  Body  Temperature  Monitoring,”  in 
2018 2nd International Conference on BioSignal Analysis, Processing 
and Systems (ICBAPS), 2018, pp. 148–153. 

[128]  A. A. Rahimoon, M. N. Abdullah, and I. Taib, “Design of a contactless 
body  temperature  measurement  system  using  Arduino,”  Indones.  J. 
Electr. Eng. Comput. Sci., vol. 19, no. 3, p. 1251, Sep. 2020. 

[129]  W.  Boonsong,  N.  Senajit,  and  P.  Prasongchan,  “Contactless  Body 
Temperature  Monitoring  of  In-Patient  Department  (IPD)  Using  2.4 
GHz Microwave Frequency via the Internet of Things (IoT) Network,” 
Wirel. Pers. Commun., Nov. 2021. 

[130]  B. Fang, F. Sun, Z. Quan, H. Liu, and J. Shan, “Smart Bracelet System 
for  Temperature  Monitoring  and  Movement  Tracking  Analysis,”  J. 
Healthc. Eng., vol. 2021, pp. 1–11, Jul. 2021. 

[131]  T.  M.  Fernández-Caramés,  I.  Froiz-Míguez,  O.  Blanco-Novoa,  and  P. 
Fraga-Lamas, “Enabling the Internet of Mobile Crowdsourcing Health 
Things:  A  Mobile  Fog  Computing,  Blockchain  and  IoT  Based 
Continuous  Glucose  Monitoring  System  for  Diabetes  Mellitus 
Research and Care,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 15, p. 3319, Jul. 2019. 
[132]  K. Dziergowska, M. B. Łabowska, M. Gąsior-Głogowska, B. Kmiecik, 
and  J.  Detyna,  “Modern  noninvasive  methods  for  monitoring  glucose 
levels in patients: a review,” Bio-Algorithms and Med-Systems, vol. 15, 
no. 4, Dec. 2019. 

[133]  A.  Alarcón-Paredes,  V.  Francisco-García,  I.  P.  Guzmán-Guzmán,  J. 
Cantillo-Negrete,  R.  E.  Cuevas-Valencia,  and  G.  A.  Alonso-Silverio, 
“An IoT-Based Non-Invasive Glucose Level Monitoring System Using 
Raspberry Pi,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 15, p. 3046, Jul. 2019. 

[134]  T. N. Gia et al., “IoT-based continuous glucose monitoring system: A 
feasibility study,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 109, pp. 327–334, 2017. 
[135]  C.  F.  Aizat  Rahmat,  M.  A.  Su,  E.  L.M.  Mohd  Addi,  M.  Yeong, 
“GluQo:  IoT-Based  Non-invasive  Blood  Glucose  Monitoring,”  J. 
Telecommun. Electron. Comput. Eng., vol. 9, no. 3–9, pp. 71–75, 2017. 
[136]  F.  Valenzuela,  A.  García,  E.  Ruiz.,  M.  Vázquez,  J.  Cortez,  and  A. 
Espinoza,  “An  IoT-Based  Glucose  Monitoring  Algorithm  to  Prevent 
Diabetes Complications,” Appl. Sci., vol. 10, no. 3, p. 921, Jan. 2020. 

[137]  R.  Bin  Anis,  Siti  Nur  Shahidah  binti  Alias,  “A  Portable  Non-Invasive 
Blood  Glucose  Monitoring  Device  with  IoT,”  Evol.  Electr.  Electron. 
Eng., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 36–44, 2021. 

[138]  W.  Zhong,  Z.  Ji,  and  C.  Sun,  “A  Review  of  Monitoring  Methods  for 
Cerebral Blood Oxygen Saturation,” Healthcare, vol. 9, no. 9, p. 1104, 
Aug. 2021. 

[139]  S. Basu, S. Saha, S. Pandit, and S. Barman, “Smart Health Monitoring 
System  for  Temperature,  Blood  Oxygen  Saturation,  and  Heart  Rate 
Sensing  with  Embedded  Processing  and  Transmission  Using  IoT 
Platform,”  in  Advances  in  Intelligent  Systems  and  Computing,  2020, 
pp. 81–91. 

[140]  L.  Phuoc  Son,  N.  Thi  Anh  Thu,  and  N.  Trung  Kien,  “Design  an  IoT 
wrist-device 
International 
Conference  on  Advanced  Technologies  for  Communications  (ATC), 

for  SpO2  measurement,” 

in  2017 

[141]  Q. Chen and L. Tang, “A wearable blood oxygen saturation monitoring 
system based on bluetooth low energy technology,” Comput. Commun., 
vol. 160, pp. 101–110, Jul. 2020. 

[142]  Q.  Zhang,  D.  Arney,  J.  M.  Goldman,  E.  M.  Isselbacher,  and  A.  A. 
Armoundas,  “Design  Implementation  and  Evaluation  of  a  Mobile 
Continuous  Blood  Oxygen  Saturation  Monitoring  System,”  Sensors, 
vol. 20, no. 22, p. 6581, Nov. 2020. 

[143]  R. R.  Adiputra,  S.  Hadiyoso, and  Y.  S.  Hariyani, “Internet of  Things: 
Low  Cost and  Wearable  SpO2  Device  for  Health Monitoring,”  Int. J. 
Electr. Comput. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, p. 939, Apr. 2018. 

[144]  B.  Utomo,  Triwiyanto,  S.  Luthfiyah,  U.  Mudjiono,  and  T.  Hamzah, 
“The  Real-Time  Vital  Sign  Monitor  for  Heart  Rate  and  SPO  2 
Parameter  Using  Internet of  Things Technology,”  J.  Phys.  Conf. Ser., 
vol. 1373, no. 1, p. 012028, Nov. 2019. 

[145]  A. A. Qaffas, R. Hoque, and N. Almazmomi, “The Internet of Things 
and  Big  Data  Analytics  for  Chronic  Disease  Monitoring  in  Saudi 
Arabia,” Telemed. e-Health, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 74–81, Jan. 2021. 
[146]  T.  Amira,  I.  Dan,  B.  Az-eddine,  H.  H.  Ngo,  G.  Said,  and  W.-W. 
Katarzyna,  “Monitoring  chronic  disease  at  home  using  connected 
devices,”  in  2018  13th  Annual  Conference  on  System  of  Systems 
Engineering (SoSE), 2018, pp. 400–407. 

[147]  A.  N.  Shihab,  M.  J.  Mokarrama,  R.  Karim,  S.  Khatun,  and  M.  S. 
Arefin, “An IoT-Based Heart Disease Detection System Using RNN,” 
in Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, 2021, pp. 535–545. 
[148]  M.  K.  Gawali  and  C.  Rambabu,  “IoT  Model  for  Heart  Disease 
Detection  Using  Machine  Learning  (ML)  Techniques,”  in  Techno-
Societal 2020, 2021. 

[149]  A. Hebbale, G. Vinay, B. V. Krishna, and J. Shah, “IoT and Machine 
Learning  based  Self  Care  System  for  Diabetes  Monitoring  and 
Prediction,”  in  2021  2nd  Global  Conference  for  Advancement  in 
Technology (GCAT), 2021, pp. 1–7. 

[150]  P. R. Anisha and C. K. K. Reddy, “Early Detection of Diabetes Using 
Machine  Learning  Algorithms  and  Internet  of  Things:  ADPA,”  in 
Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems, 2021, pp. 79–85. 

[151]  S. T. U. Shah, F. Badshah, F. Dad, N. Amin, and M. A. Jan, “Cloud-
Assisted IoT-Based Smart Respiratory Monitoring System for Asthma 
Patients,” 
in  Communication  and 
Computing, 2019, pp. 77–86. 

in  EAI/Springer  Innovations 

[152]  A.  K.  Prasad,  “SMART  Asthma  Alert  Using  IoT  and  Predicting 
Threshold Values Using Decision Tree Classifier,” in Lecture Notes in 
Networks and Systems, 2021, pp. 141–150. 

[153]  O. Rehman, Z. Farrukh, A. Al-Busaidi, K. Cha, S. Park, and I. Rahman, 
“IoT  Powered  Cancer  Observation  System.,”  in  The  9th  International 
Conference on Smart Media and Applications, 2020, pp. 313–318. 
[154]  A.  Onasanya  and  M.  Elshakankiri,  “Smart  integrated  IoT  healthcare 
system  for  cancer  care,”  Wirel.  Networks,  vol.  27,  no.  6,  pp.  4297–
4312, Aug. 2021. 

[155]  J. Huang, X. Wu, W. Huang, X. Wu, and S. Wang, “Internet of things 
in health management systems: A review,”  Int. J. Commun. Syst., vol. 
34, no. 4, Mar. 2021. 

[156]  K. H. So, C. W. Ting, C. P. Lee, T. T.-N. Lam, S. C. Chiang, and Y. T. 
Cheung,  “Medication  Management  Service  for  Old  Age  Homes  in 
Hong  Kong  Using  Information  Technology,  Automation  Technology, 
and the Internet of Things: Pre-Post Interventional Study,” JMIR Med. 
Informatics, vol. 9, no. 2, p. e24280, Feb. 2021. 

[157]  S. A. Bharadwaj, D. Yarravarapu, S. C. K. Reddy, T. Prudhvi, K. S. P. 
Sandeep, and O. S. D. Reddy, “Enhancing healthcare using m-Care box 
(Monitoring  non-compliance  of  medication),”  in  2017  International 
Conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-
SMAC), 2017, pp. 352–356. 

[158]  M.  Srinivas,  P.  Durgaprasadarao,  and  V.  N.  P.  Raj,  “Intelligent 
medicine  box  for  medication  management  using  IoT,”  in  2018  2nd 
International  Conference  on  Inventive  Systems  and  Control  (ICISC), 
2018, pp. 32–34. 

[159]  G.  Latif,  A.  Shankar,  J.  M.  Alghazo,  V.  Kalyanasundaram,  C.  S. 
Boopathi, and M. Arfan Jaffar, “I-CARES: advancing health diagnosis 
and  medication  through  IoT,”  Wirel.  Networks,  vol.  26,  no.  4,  pp. 
2375–2389, May 2020. 

[160]  H.-L.  Tsai,  C.  H.  Tseng,  L.-C.  Wang,  and  F.-S.  Juang,  “Bidirectional 
smart  pill  box  monitored  through  internet  and  receiving  reminding 
message  from  remote  relatives,” 
in  2017  IEEE  International 
Conference on Consumer Electronics  - Taiwan (ICCE-TW), 2017, pp. 
393–394. 

[161]  B.  Ayshwarya  and  R.  Velmurugan,  “Intelligent  and  Safe  Medication 

25 

 
 
 
Box  In  Health  IoT  Platform  for  Medication  Monitoring  System  with 
Timely  Remainders,”  in  2021  7th  International  Conference  on 
Advanced  Computing  and  Communication  Systems  (ICACCS),  2021, 
pp. 1828–1831. 

[182]  R. Sanchez-Iborra and A. F. Skarmeta, “TinyML-Enabled Frugal Smart 
Objects: Challenges and Opportunities,” IEEE Circuits Syst. Mag., vol. 
20, no. 3, 2020. 

[183]  D.  L.  Dutta  and  S.  Bharali,  “TinyML  Meets  IoT:  A  Comprehensive 

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

[162]  P. A. Harsha Vardhini, M. S. Harsha, P. N. Sai, and P. Srikanth, “IoT 
based  Smart  Medicine  Assistive  System  for  Memory  Impairment 
Patient,”  in  2020  12th  International  Conference  on  Computational 
Intelligence and Communication Networks (CICN), 2020, pp. 182–186. 
[163]  S. M. A. Ullah, M. M. Islam, S. Mahmud, S. Nooruddin, S. M. T. U. 
Raju,  and  M.  R.  Haque,  “Scalable  Telehealth  Services  to  Combat 
Novel  Coronavirus  (COVID-19)  Pandemic,”  SN  Comput.  Sci.,  vol.  2, 
no. 1, p. 18, Feb. 2021. 

[164]  C.  M.  Graham  and  N.  Jones,  “Impact  of  IoT  on  geriatric  telehealth,” 
Work. with Older People, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 231–243, Aug. 2020. 
[165]  Md. Rokonuzzaman, M. I. Hossain, T. Islam, P. P. Sarkar, M. R. Islam, 
and  N.  Amin,  “Design  and  Implementation  of  Telehealth  Device: 
Linking  IoT  Sensors  to  Cloud  Networks,”  in  2020  IEEE-EMBS 
Conference on Biomedical Engineering and Sciences (IECBES), 2021, 
pp. 281–285. 

[166]  D. Ganesh, G. Seshadri, S. Sokkanarayanan, P. Bose, S. Rajan, and M. 
Sathiyanarayanan,  “AutoImpilo:  Smart  Automated  Health  Machine 
using IoT to Improve Telemedicine and Telehealth,” in Proceedings of 
the  International  Conference  on  Smart  Technologies  in  Computing, 
Electrical and Electronics, ICSTCEE 2020, 2020. 

[167]  K.  M.  Tsiouris  et  al.,  “Designing  interoperable  telehealth  platforms: 
bridging IoT devices with cloud infrastructures,” Enterp. Inf. Syst., vol. 
14, no. 8, pp. 1194–1218, Sep. 2020. 

[168]  T.  Hewa,  A. Braeken,  M.  Ylianttila, and  M.  Liyanage,  “Multi-Access 
Edge  Computing  and  Blockchain-based  Secure  Telehealth  System 
Connected  with  5G  and  IoT,”  in  GLOBECOM  2020  -  2020  IEEE 
Global Communications Conference, 2020, pp. 1–6. 

[169]  H.  Hamil  et  al.,  “Design  of  a  secured  telehealth  system  based  on 
multiple biosignals diagnosis and classification for application,” Expert 
Syst., Jul. 2021. 

[170]  D. Pal, S. Funilkul, N. Charoenkitkarn, and P. Kanthamanon, “Internet-
of-Things  and  Smart  Homes  for  Elderly  Healthcare:  An  End  User 
Perspective,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 10483–10496, 2018. 

[171]  J.  P.  Lousado  and  S.  Antunes,  “Monitoring  and  Support  for  Elderly 
People  Using  LoRa  Communication  Technologies:  IoT  Concepts  and 
Applications,” Futur. Internet, vol. 12, no. 11, p. 206, Nov. 2020. 
[172]  A.  Abdelgawad,  K.  Yelamarthi,  and  A.  Khattab,  “IoT-Based  Health 
Monitoring  System  for  Active  and  Assisted  Living,” in  Lecture  Notes 
of 
for  Computer  Sciences,  Social-Informatics  and 
Telecommunications Engineering, LNICST, 2017, pp. 11–20. 

the  Institute 

[173]  R. K. Nath and H. Thapliyal, “Wearable Health Monitoring System for 
Older Adults in a Smart Home Environment,” in 2021 IEEE Computer 
Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI), 2021, pp. 390–395. 
[174]  O.  Debauche,  S.  Mahmoudi,  P.  Manneback,  and  A.  Assila,  “Fog  IoT 
for Health: A new Architecture for Patients and Elderly Monitoring.,” 
Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 160, pp. 289–297, 2019. 

[175]  J.  Boobalan  and  M.  Malleswaran,  “A  Novel  and  Customizable 
Framework  for  IoT  Based  Smart  Home  Nursing  for  Elderly Care,” in 
Lecture  Notes  on  Data  Engineering  and  Communications 
Technologies, 2020, pp. 27–38. 

[176]  A.  Srinivasan  et  al.,  “Elder  Care  System  using  IoT  and  Machine 
Learning in AWS Cloud,” in 2020 IEEE 17th International Conference 
on Smart Communities: Improving Quality of Life Using ICT, IoT  and 
AI (HONET), 2020, pp. 92–98. 

[177]  M.  Frustaci,  P.  Pace,  G.  Aloi,  and  G.  Fortino,  “Evaluating  critical 
security issues of the IoT world: Present and future challenges,”  IEEE 
Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 4, 2018. 

[178]  M. Masud et al., "A Lightweight and Robust Secure Key Establishment 
Protocol  for  Internet  of Medical Things in COVID-19  Patients  Care," 
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 21, pp. 15694-15703, Nov.1, 2021. 
[179]  M. Masud, G. S. Gaba, K. Choudhary, M. S. Hossain, M. F.  Alhamid 
and  G.  Muhammad,  "Lightweight  and  Anonymity-Preserving  User 
Authentication  Scheme  for  IoT-Based  Healthcare,"  IEEE  Internet 
Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2649-2656, Feb.15, 2022. 

[180]  B. K. Mohanta, D. Jena, S. Ramasubbareddy, M. Daneshmand, and A. 
H.  Gandomi,  “Addressing  Security  and  Privacy  Issues  of  IoT  Using 
Blockchain Technology,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 2, 2021. 

[181]  Y. Zhao, X. Yang, Y. Yu, B. Qin, X. Du and M. Guizani, "Blockchain-
Based Auditable Privacy-Preserving Data Classification for Internet of 
Things,"  IEEE  Internet  Things  J.,  vol.  9,  no.  4,  pp.  2468-2484,  15 
Feb.15, 2022. 

Survey,” Internet of Things, vol. 16, 2021. 

[184]  V.  Gazis,  “A  Survey  of  Standards  for  Machine-to-Machine  and  the 
Internet of Things,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 
19, no. 1. 2017. 

[185]  S. Wan, J. Lu, P. Fan, and K. B. Letaief, “Toward Big Data Processing 
in  IoT:  Path  Planning  and  Resource  Management  of  UAV  Base 
Stations in Mobile-Edge Computing System,” IEEE Internet Things J., 
vol. 7, no. 7, 2020. 

[186]  M.  Syafrudin,  G.  Alfian,  N.  L.  Fitriyani,  and  J.  Rhee,  “Performance 
analysis of IoT-based sensor, big data processing, and machine learning 
model  for  real-time  monitoring  system  in  automotive  manufacturing,” 
Sensors (Switzerland), vol. 18, no. 9, 2018. 

[187]  D.  D.  Sánchez-Gallegos  et  al.,  “From  the  edge  to  the  cloud:  A 
continuous  delivery  and  preparation  model  for  processing  big  IoT 
data,” Simul. Model. Pract. Theory, vol. 105, 2020. 

[188]  Y. N. Malek et al., “On the use of IoT and Big Data Technologies for 
Real-time  Monitoring  and  Data  Processing,”  in  Procedia  Computer 
Science, 2017, vol. 113. 

[189]  G. Signoretti, M. Silva, P. Andrade, I. Silva, E. Sisinni, and P. Ferrari, 
“An evolving tinyml compression algorithm for iot environments based 
on data eccentricity,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 12, 2021. 

[190]  K.  Nolan  and  M.  Kelly,  “IPv6  convergence  for  IoT  cyber-physical 

systems,” Inf., vol. 9, no. 4, 2018. 

[191]  T.  Savolainen,  J.  Soininen,  and  B.  Silverajan,  “IPv6  addressing 

strategies for IoT,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 13, no. 10, 2013. 

[192]  A.  E.  Khaled,  A.  Helal,  W.  Lindquist,  and C.  Lee,  “IoT-DDL-Device 

Description Language for the ‘T’ in IoT,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, 2018. 

[193]  M.  Zúñiga-Prieto,  D.  Rodríguez,  J.  Rodríguez,  L.  Solano,  E.  Insfran, 
and  S.  Abrahao,  “IOT-ADL:  An  ADL  for  describing  cloud  IoT 
applications,” J. Comput., vol. 29, no. 6, 2018. 

[194]  A. S. Pillai, G. S. Chandraprasad, A. S. Khwaja, and A. Anpalagan, “A 
service  oriented  IoT  architecture  for  disaster  preparedness  and 
forecasting system,” Internet of Things (Netherlands), vol. 14, 2021. 

[195]  S. Maurya and K. Mukherjee, “An energy efficient architecture of IoT 
based on service oriented architecture (SOA),”  Inform., vol. 43, no. 1, 
2019. 

[196]  L. Li, S. Li, and S. Zhao, “QoS-Aware scheduling of services-oriented 

internet of things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informatics, vol. 10, no. 2, 2014. 

[197]  K.  Panagidi,  C.  Anagnostopoulos,  A.  Chalvatzaras,  and  S. 
Hadjiefthymiades,  “To  transmit  or  not  to  transmit:  Controlling 
communications  in  the  mobile  iot  domain,”  ACM  Trans.  Internet 
Technol., vol. 20, no. 3, 2020. 

[198]  X. Xiong, K. Zheng, L. Lei, and L. Hou, “Resource allocation based on 
deep  reinforcement  learning  in  IoT  edge  computing,”  IEEE  J.  Sel. 
Areas Commun., vol. 38, no. 6, 2020. 

[199]  X.  Wei,  J.  Zhao,  L.  Zhou,  and  Y.  Qian,  “Broad  Reinforcement 
Learning for Supporting Fast Autonomous IoT,”  IEEE Internet Things 
J., vol. 7, no. 8, 2020. 

[200]  S. M. Hatim, S. J. Elias, N. Awang, and M. Y. Darus, “VANETs and 
Internet  of  Things  (IoT):  A  discussion,”  Indones.  J.  Electr.  Eng. 
Comput. Sci., vol. 12, no. 1, 2018. 

[201]  Y.  Mo,  L.  Xing,  W.  Guo,  S. Cai,  Z.  Zhang,  and  J.  Jiang, “Reliability 
Analysis  of  IoT  Networks  with  Community  Structures,”  IEEE  Trans. 
Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 1, 2020. 

[202]  K. Azghiou, M. El Mouhib, M. A. Koulali, and A. Benali, “An end-to-
things,”  Sensors 

internet  of 

the 

end  reliability  framework  of 
(Switzerland), vol. 20, no. 9, 2020. 

[203]  L.  Xing,  “Reliability  in  Internet  of  Things:  Current  Status  and  Future 

Perspectives,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, 2020. 

[204]  O. Novo, “Blockchain Meets IoT: An Architecture for Scalable Access 
Management in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 2, 2018. 
[205]  A.  Javed,  A.  Malhi,  T.  Kinnunen,  and  K.  Framling,  “Scalable  IoT 
Platform  for  Heterogeneous  Devices  in  Smart  Environments,”  IEEE 
Access, vol. 8, 2020. 

[206]  M.  Noura,  M.  Atiquzzaman,  and  M.  Gaedke,  “Interoperability  in 
Internet of Things: Taxonomies and Open Challenges,” Mob. Networks 
Appl., vol. 24, no. 3, 2019. 

[207]  T. R.  Gadekallu  et  al.,  "Blockchain  for Edge of Things:  Applications, 
Opportunities, and Challenges," IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 2, 
pp. 964-988, 15 Jan.15, 2022. 

[208]  Y.  Liu,  M.  Peng,  G.  Shou,  Y.  Chen  and  S.  Chen,  "Toward  Edge 

26 

 
 
 
IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH X, XXXX 

Engineering, a Fellow of the Engineering Institute of Canada and 
a Fellow of the IEEE. 

(Senior 
Ghulam  Muhammad 
Member, IEEE) is a professor in the 
Department 
Computer 
of 
Engineering,  College  of  Computer 
and  Information  Sciences  at  King 
Saud  University 
(KSU),  Riyadh, 
Saudi  Arabia.  Prof.  Ghulam 
in 
received  his  Ph.D.  degree 
Information 
and 
Electronic 
Engineering 
Toyohashi 
from 
University  and  Technology,  Japan 
in 2006, M.S. degree from the same 
university  in  2003.  He  received  his 
B.S.  degree  in  Computer  Science 
and Engineering  

from  Bangladesh  University  of  Engineering  and  Technology  in 
1997. He was a recipient of the Japan Society for Promotion and 
Science  (JSPS)  fellowship  from  the  Ministry  of  Education, 
Culture,  Sports,  Science  and  Technology,  Japan.  His  research 
interests  include  signal  processing,  machine  learning,  IoTs, 
medical  signal  and  image  analysis,  AI,  and  biometrics.  Prof. 
Ghulam  has  authored  and  co-authored  more 
than  300 
publications including IEEE / ACM / Springer / Elsevier journals, 
and  flagship  conference  papers.  He  owns  two  U.S.  patents.  He 
received 
faculty  award  of  Computer  Engineering 
department  at  KSU  during  2014-2015.  He  has  supervised  more 
than 15 Ph.D. and Master Theses. 

the  best 

Intelligence:  Multiaccess  Edge  Computing  for  5G  and  Internet  of 
Things,"  IEEE  Internet  Things  J.,  vol.  7,  no.  8,  pp.  6722-6747,  Aug. 
2020. 

is  currently 
Md.  Milon 
Islam 
pursuing  his  PhD  at  the  Centre  for 
Pattern  Analysis  and  Machine 
Intelligence  in  the  Department  of 
Computer 
and 
Electrical 
Engineering  at  the  University  of 
Waterloo,  Canada.  He  received  his 
B.Sc. 
in 
Computer Science  and Engineering 
(CSE) from the Khulna University of 
Engineering  &  Technology,  Khulna, 
Bangladesh, 
in  2016  and  2019 
respectively, where he is currently 

and  M.Sc. 

degree 

working as an Assistant Professor (on leave) in CSE. In 2017, he 
joined  the  Department  of  Computer  Science  and  Engineering, 
Khulna  University  of  Engineering  &  Technology,  as  a  Lecturer. 
He  has  published  several  numbers  of  research  papers  in  peer 
reviewed  journals,  book  chapters  and  conferences.  In  addition, 
he  is  reviewer  of  several  reputed  journals  and  conferences.  His 
research  interests  include  machine  learning  and  its  application, 
deep  learning,  intelligent  systems  design,  health  informatics, 
Internet  of  Things  (IoT),  and  to  solve  real  life  problems  with  the 
concept of computer science. 

is  currently 
Sheikh  Nooruddin 
pursuing  his  Master  of  Applied 
Science (MASc) degree in Electrical 
and  Computer  Engineering  (ECE) 
with  a  specialization 
in  Pattern 
Analysis  and  Machine  Intelligence 
(PAMI)  at 
the  University  of 
Waterloo,  Ontario,  Canada.  He 
received his B.Sc. Eng. in Computer 
Science  and  Engineering  degree 
from 
of 
Engineering 
Technology, 
Bangladesh in 2020. 

University 

Khulna 

& 

interests 

research 

His 
include  computer  vision,  artificial 
intelligence,  human  activity  recognition,  Internet  of  things,  and 
medical  signal  processing.  He  has  authored  and  co-authored 
multiple  journals  and  conference  articles  published  by  reputed 
peer-reviewed  international  publishers  including  IEEE,  Elsevier, 
and Springer.   

Fakhri  Karray  is  a  Professor  and 
Provost of the Mohamed Bin Zayed 
University of AI in the UAE. He has 
served  as  the  University  Research 
Chair  Professor  in  Electrical  and 
Computer  Engineering  and 
the 
founding  co-director  of  the  Institute 
of  Artificial 
the 
University of Waterloo. He holds the 
Loblaw’s Research Chair in Artificial 
Intelligence.  Dr.  Karray’s  research 
work  spans  the  areas  of  intelligent 
systems and operational artificial  

Intelligence  at 

intelligence  as  applied  to  smart  devices  and  man  machine 
interaction  systems 
through  speech,  gesture,  and  natural 
language.  He  has  authored  extensively  in  these  areas  and  has 
disseminated  his  work  in  journals,  conference  proceedings,  and 
textbooks.  He  is  the  co-author  of  two  dozen  US  patents,  has 
chaired/co-chaired  several  international  conferences  in  his  area 
of  expertise  and  has  served  as  keynote/plenary  speaker  on 
numerous  occasions.  He  has  served  as 
the  associate 
editor/guest  editor  for  a  variety  of  leading  journals  in  the  field, 
including  the  IEEE  Transactions  on  Cybernetics,  the  IEEE 
Transactions  on  Neural  Networks  and  Learning  Systems,  the 
IEEE  Transactions  on  Mechatronics,  the  IEEE  Computational 
Intelligence  Magazine.  He  has  served  as  the  University  of 
Waterloo’s  Academic  Advisor 
for  Amazon’s  Alexa  Fund 
Fellowship Program and is a Fellow of the Canadian Academy of 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
