2
2
0
2

y
a
M
6
1

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
4
8
7
0
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Beneﬁts and Drawbacks of a Graduate Course: An
Experience Teaching Systematic Literature Review

Anderson Y. Iwazaki
Vinicius dos Santos
University of S˜ao Paulo (ICMC/USP)
S˜ao Carlos, Brazil
iwazaki.anderson@usp.br, vinicius.dos.santos@usp.br

Katia R. Felizardo
´Erica F. de Souza
Federal University of Technology - Paran´a (UTFPR)
Corn´elio Proc´opio, Brazil
katiascannavino@utfpr.edu.br, ericasouza@utfpr.edu.br

Natasha M. C. Valentim
Federal University of Paran´a
Curitiba, Brazil
natasha@inf.ufpr.br

Elisa Y. Nakagawa
University of S˜ao Paulo
S˜ao Carlos, Brazil
elisa@icmc.usp.br

Abstract—Graduate subjects (or courses) are commonly of-
fered in graduate courses and can provide specialized knowledge
of different topics that are important for the formation of Ph.D.
and Master’s students. At the same time, Systematic Literature
Review (SLR) has been increasingly adopted in the computing
area as a research method to synthesize the state of the art
of a given research topic, identify research groups working on
that topic, understand the existing limitations and research gaps,
and also identify new research directions. However, it is still not
well understood the real beneﬁts and drawbacks of offering a
subject that addresses SLR for graduate students. Moreover, it
is not known the difﬁculties faced by professors (i.e., educators)
to teach this subject. The main goal of this work is to present
an experience report of teaching SLR, in particular, the beneﬁts
and drawbacks of this subject for computer science graduate
students. In addition, this work also presents the essential topics
of SLR that we recommend to be taught and a better way to
teach them, aiming at supporting graduate courses to offer it.
For this, we surveyed computer science graduate students who
attended the SLR subject that was taught for almost ten years in
our institutions. In particular, we collected the lessons learned,
ﬁndings, and insights; following, we summarized the beneﬁts
and drawbacks for students, the difﬁculties for professors, and
also those essential
topics to be taught. As a main result,
the SLR subject can be considered a valuable opportunity for
graduate students that could use this subject to conduct the
required deep literature review of their research topic and have
a better comprehension of their research area. Besides and more
importantly, this subject can improve important research skills
of students, including the ability to recognize research problems,
analyze and synthesize data, think critically, and write papers.
Therefore, we believe that graduate courses should analyze the
possibility of offering the SLR subject.

Index Terms—Graduate Course, Computer Science, Systematic

Literature Review, SLR

I. INTRODUCTION

Over the last decade, most research has emphasized the
advantages of secondary studies (i.e., Systematic Literature
Reviews (SLR) or Systematic Mapping (SM)) compared with
traditional reviews [1]–[4]. In particular, an SLR is a type of
literature review that systematically collects studies, critically

appraises them, and synthesizes ﬁndings on a speciﬁc research
topic [1]. SLR is also widely known as a valuable means to
gather research gaps and topics for further investigation [1],
[5]–[8].

In parallel, no matter the graduate courses, students need
to conduct a deep literature review during their Ph.D. or
even Master’s projects [9], [10]. In this scenario, we observe
many computer science graduate students have conducted SLR
replacing traditional reviews. For instance, around 50% of SLR
conducted in the Software Engineering (SE) area (of a total of
436 SLR published in SE, within the period from January 2004
to May 2016 [11] have a Ph.D. student involved). Hence, these
and other students have beneﬁted from SLR, which enables the
identiﬁcation of the state of the art of their research interest,
the existing research gaps, and a better positioning of their
project in relation to the others.

At the same time, most computer science graduate courses
in Brazil and other countries have not offered the SLR subject;
exceptions are few universities, such as XXX1, YYY2. Hence,
the real beneﬁts and drawbacks of this subject for students
are not still entirely understood. It is not also clear how this
subject could be structured regarding the taught topics and,
more importantly, how to better balance theory and practice.
In this scenario, the main issue that motivated the conduction
of this work is that many graduate students that could take
advantage of this subject may not be beneﬁting from it.

Regarding the related work, [12] observed the SLR subject
could develop research skills in Master’s students, including
the ability to handle literature and formulate research ques-
tions. [13] pointed out that graduate students should perform
SLR to improve their ability to search, select, understand,
and critically appraise studies, as well as integrate data and
more precisely identify research gaps and improve their aca-
demic writing skills. [14] analyzed how the engineering area

1To be replaced after blind review.
2To be replaced after blind review.

 
 
 
 
 
 
has conducted SLR and proposed improvements in the SLR
process focusing on engineering graduate courses. In the same
direction, [15] showed the way to adapt the SLR process to
be taught in the engineering area. Despite these related works
have brought important contributions, as far as we know, there
is still a lack of studies investigating the real beneﬁts and
drawbacks of SLR subject to graduate students. There are also
no recommendations on SLR topics that could be taught and
the ways to better teach them.

In this scenario, the main goal of this work is to report
an experience teaching SLR, focusing mainly on the beneﬁts
and drawbacks of the SLR subject for computer science
graduate students. To do that, we performed a long-term
study by analyzing the SLR subject offered in the computer
science graduate course at XXX3. This one-semester subject
that combines theory and practice was offered nine times
(once a year), and a total of 153 students attended it. More
importantly, SLR was offered as a principal topic, i.e., the
subject only focused on SLR and its process. Considering
that the design of graduate subjects is sometimes challenging
for graduate courses with respect to topics to be included
and abilities/knowledge to be improved in students, this work
also delineates the essential topics of SLR and experimented
means to teach them. Finally, this work intends to show the
undeniable value of SLR and also motivate graduate courses
to offer it.

The remainder of this work is structured as follows. Section
II presents the research method used in this work. Section III
discusses the survey results. Section IV presents the main
results of this work, i.e., the beneﬁts and drawbacks of SLR
subject to graduate students and the SLR topics and means to
teach them. Lastly, Section V provides the ﬁnal remarks.

II. RESEARCH METHOD

Figure 1 summarizes the research method used in this long-
term study. It is worth saying three of the authors of this
paper are professors (i.e., educators) who have taught the SLR
subject in their institutions and have conducted SLR and SM
for more than 15 years together with their Ph.D. and Master’s
students, such as ()4 These professors have also worked as
researchers on SLR and published their contributions, such as
in ()()5.

Hence, after these professors taught the SLR subject for
almost 10 years, we surveyed students who attended this
subject. Following, considering the survey results (presented
in Section III) together with our experience, knowledge, and
insights collected during the years, we delineated the beneﬁts
and drawbacks of this subject for students and also difﬁculties
to professors who teach it (presented in Section IV-A). We
also delineate the set of topics relevant to be taught as well
as better ways to teach them (described in Section IV-B).

In particular, regarding the survey, its planning and conduc-

tion were organized in ﬁve steps according to [16]:

3To be replaced after blind review.
4To be replaced after blind review.
5To be replaced after blind review.

Fig. 1. Overall of the research method applied in this work

• Steps 1: Survey deﬁnition: We established four goals
(G) to gather the students’ opinions: G1: Identiﬁcation
of who should attend the SLR subject; G2: Identiﬁcation
of the contents that should be taught in the SLR subject;
G3: Identiﬁcation of the skills developed in students
who attended the SLR subject; and G4: Identiﬁcation of
difﬁculties of who attended the SLR subject.

• Step 2: Survey instrument development6: The question-
naire had four sections: (i) Consent (one question); (ii)
Student’s proﬁle (10 questions); (iii) SLR subject (three
questions, each one for achieving G1 to G3); and (iv)
Students’ impressions (three questions for G4). Questions
associated with G1 to G3 were rated using the Likert scale
(Strong agree = 5, Agree = 4, Undecided = 3, Disagree =
2, and Strong Disagree = 1), while those associated with
G4 were open questions.

• Step 3: Evaluation of the survey instrument: We
conducted a pre-test with a smaller sample (a postdoctoral
researcher who had already attended the SLR subject)
to identify improvements in the questionnaire. We also
analyzed the reliability of the survey considering Cron-
bach’s alpha test [17], which veriﬁed that the Likert scale
was reliable. The reliability of our survey is 94% (or
Excellent).

• Step 4: Data collection: We invited 153 students who
attended the SLR subject between 2011 to 2019. They
were from various computing areas, including software
engineering, artiﬁcial intelligence, computing network,
human-computer interaction, reconﬁgurable computing,
and education. A total of 32 participants (16 Ph.D.
students and 16 Master’s students) answered our ques-
tionnaire and data was collected through an online form.
• Step 5: Results: We used two statistical methods (mode
and medium) to interpret results associated with G1
to G3. For the open questions (G4), to systematically
analyze the information collected from participants, we
used Grounded Theory [18], [19], which encompasses
two techniques [19]: (i) open coding that identiﬁes codes
that are separated into discrete parts for analysis; and
(ii) axial coding that handles connections between codes

6Complete instrument of this survey is available in https://drive.google.com/

ﬁle/d/10lipRCOnUBtuSBNmdjs2-h aSHTvsT1k/view?usp=sharing

and groups them according to their similarities (in our
case, the impressions and/or difﬁculties of students when
attending the SLR subject). The next section presents the
survey results.

III. SURVEY RESULTS

Figure 2 summarizes G1 and shows who should attend the
SLR subject according to participants7. Most of them agreed
or strongly agreed with ﬁve (of six items), as the mode and
medium show. As expected, participants claimed that those
who need to understand better the SLR process should attend
it. At the same time, students that need to develop research
skills (which are actually fundamental for graduate students)
should attend it, similarly to those that need to develop the
ability to systematically search for evidence/studies in the
literature and understand and get knowledge from scientiﬁc
studies. Otherwise, SLR subject seems not relevant to those
that need to develop teamwork skill and networking. We
in a
argue this occurs because each student has interest
speciﬁc research topic and, hence, they focus on his/her own
SLR; however, students should be closely accompanied by
specialists in their research topic (e.g., their supervisors) who
should be able to mainly revise conﬁdently the SLR protocol.
To achieve G2, we questioned participants about the rel-
evance of the topics taught in the subject. Figure 3 shows
that almost all participants agreed or strongly agreed that all
topics are relevant, as also pointed out by mode and medium.
There is an inclination that the preparation of the SLR protocol
and analysis/synthesis of results are more relevant. Meanwhile,
the discussion about the difference between SM and SLR
as well as challenges to the SLR conduction seem to some
extent less relevant compared with the others. We observe all
topics considered relevant (i.e., topics 1 to 6) are essential to
conducting SLR as a whole, i.e., (i) a good understanding of
theoretical and practical aspects; (ii) preparation of a good
SLR protocol (which guides the review and documents its
execution); (iii) conduction of the SLR following the protocol
(i.e., systematic search for studies and application of selection
criteria); (iv) synthesis of results; and (v) identiﬁcation of
threats to validity.

Concerning G3, Figure 4 shows most students agreed or
strongly agreed that SLR subject made it possible to develop
various skills. As expected, two skills or knowledge directly
associated with the subject’s contents highlighted, i.e., the
the SLR process and the SLR protocol
knowledge about
elaboration. It is also expressive that knowledge and practical
skills essential for graduate students are highlighted. Another
relevant skill is the ability to accurately use the tools and
databases (i.e., database search engines) to ﬁnd evidence
of a given research topic. Other three skills for graduate
students can be also developed, i.e., the ability to recognize
research problems (of studies being analyzed or even of their
graduate projects), the enhancement of thinking critically (on

the studies analyzed or even on their studies), and also the
ability to interpret data. Another skill considered essential
for good researchers is the ability to plan, write, and publish
scientiﬁc papers. We claim this skill is developed because this
subject requires the reading of various studies and also tightly
motivates students to publish their SLR in a scientiﬁc event or
journal. Actually, most respondents (16 of 32) published their
SLR in scientiﬁc events or specialized journals8, while almost
all of them (26 of 32) used the SLR in their dissertations/thesis.
Otherwise, as previously pointed out,
this subject seems
not to promote teamwork skills and networking. Moreover,
when asked if participants would recommend the subject to
their colleagues, they claimed the attendance leveraged their
research activities by mainly making it possible to better
understand their research area (through the accurate discovery
of associated studies), besides the opportunity to publish a
paper.

The three open questions gathered the students’ impres-
sions and/or difﬁculties and achieved G4. After analyzing the
answers using coding9, three issues highlighted: (i) lack of
deeper knowledge of their research area; (ii) inherent difﬁculty
of the SLR; and (iii) time constraints. Participants pointed
out the lack of deeper knowledge of their research area as
the main difﬁculty when attending the subject. Most of them
were starting in a new research topic and did not have the
conﬁdence to, for instance, deﬁne the main goal of the SLR
or the right research questions. We observe that almost always
students proceed with various changes and adjustments in the
SLR protocol, including in the SLR scope, search strategies,
and even synthesis of results. This result is in line with a
study published in ()10, which showed that the protocol must
be iteratively deﬁned through many reﬁnements during the
planning phase. These reﬁnements are expected to achieve
good SLR, while they can occur independently of the level
of experience of the researchers with SLR.

The lack of knowledge of students on their research area
directly leads to the difﬁculty in all tasks required to the
SLR conduction. Hence, the search for relevant studies was
pointed out as challenging due to the need for a suitable search
string (composed of keywords, synonymous, and appropriate
combination among them). In most cases, students are required
to read various studies to identify suitable keywords and their
synonyms. The correct use of such string in digital databases
is another challenge. In general, these databases are not well-
suited to support automated searches; hence, a given search
string needs to be accurately adapted to each database, which
also continuously updates its search engine (e.g., ACM DL has
updated its engine each around two years). Besides, students
have sometimes difﬁculty determining whether a given study
is relevant or not only considering the selection criteria.
Elaboration of the data extraction form was also mentioned

8Available

on

https://drive.google.com/ﬁle/d/

1O5RYzZ5v7FWDbyuFm2lVogbaZbN5ZP5m/view

9Raw data and data analysis are available on https://drive.google.com/ﬁle/

7The raw data is available on https://drive.google.com/ﬁle/d/1 6WYik223
MIOQ-RPSh5X0bVRf5sI-n/view?usp=sharing

d/1ivZ6GxkAHus5FozMdBA8EDtvX0ogWQte/view

10To be replaced after blind review.

Fig. 2. Who should attend the SLR subject

Fig. 3. Topics taught in the SLR subject

Fig. 4. Skills developed in students who attended the SLR subject

as another difﬁculty due to the doubt about what to extract
from the studies.

Participants also revealed time constraint was another dif-
ﬁculty. Performing an SLR demands considerable time and
effort,
together with the need to balance effort and time
with other activities. Most students start their SLR during the
subject, but data extraction and results synthesis are further
completed, intending to use the SLR to replace the literature
review required for their Master’s or Ph.D. projects.

This survey supported us to the elaboration of the main

contributions of this paper, presented in the next section.

IV. RESULTS

The survey results associated with G1 to G4 together with
our experience teaching the SLR subject for years made us
possible to ﬁnd: (i) ﬁve beneﬁts of this subject for graduate
students; (ii) three drawbacks of this subject for these students;
(iii) two main difﬁculties for professors who teach SLR; and
(iv) the main topics that could be taught in the SLR subject
and the way to better teach them.

The next subsection details the beneﬁts, drawbacks, and dif-
ﬁculties, as summarized in Figure 5, while the other subsection
discusses the main topics of SLR.

Fig. 5. Beneﬁts, Drawbacks, and Difﬁculties of SLR Subject

A. Beneﬁts, Drawbacks, and Difﬁculties

As with any other graduate subject, the SLR subject can
beneﬁts students. We identiﬁed a set of ﬁve beneﬁts that
together could contribute to leverage students to become more
prepared researchers in their ﬁeld.

Considering that graduate students, and undoubtedly all
Ph.D. students, should conduct a deep literature review
as part of their projects, the SLR subject can provide an
opportunity for them to perform that task through a non-
biased, transparent, and well-deﬁned process. Grounded on
a systematic research method [1], a detailed state of the art
of the research topic can be gathered, including the identi-

ﬁcation and combination of commonalities and differences
among evidence from various studies, identiﬁcation of existing
research gaps and challenges, and production of reliable and
accurate conclusions about a given topic. In this perspective,
we recommend students conduct SLR to perform the required
deep literature review. However, it is worth highlighting the
gains aforementioned can be achieved only if SLR are cor-
rectly planned and conducted, following well-experimented
guidelines and processes as well as assuring that all tasks
are properly performed and auditable. From our experience
teaching SLR, we observe there are many decisions that
students need to take along with the entire SLR process,
and wrong decisions usually lead to many mistakes and, as
a consequence, erroneous answers to the research questions.
Examples of decisions, just to mention a few, are regarding the:
(i) search string (i.e., which keywords, their synonymous, and
composition among them should be adopted); (ii) databases
(i.e., depending on the research topics, speciﬁc databases are
required, in particular, when such topics are positioned in a
multidisciplinary area, like computing and social science); (iii)
use of databases’ search engine (i.e., the wrong conﬁguration
of the search string for each database’s search engine is a
recurrent error and, as a consequence, a greater number of not-
related studies could be returned or important studies could
be missed); and (iv) selection criteria (i.e., which the better
inclusion and exclusion criteria are, from diverse selection
criteria that could be adopted, aiming at correctness and
the same time, by
productivity of the selection task). At
usually addressing emerging research topics, almost all SLR
conducted during the SLR subject have been unique so that
decisions taken in existing SLR even those in closer topics
cannot be exactly reused. In this scenario, the SLR subject
has supported students to take righter decisions.

Students are also sometimes required to update the literature
review to include it in the ﬁnal version of their theses. In this
case, when the review was previously conducted via an SLR,
it can be more easily updated. To do that, SLR must have
been well-documented, registering not only those elements
usually recommended to be documented such as the SLR
protocol [11] but also we particularly recommend documenting
those non-trivial elements, such as keywords or databases not
used, studies excluded, and all decisions taken during the SLR
conduction together with existing alternatives, the selected
alternative, and rationales, e.g., all publications databases that
were not used and reasons for that.

With their projects ahead still starting, students who have
attended the SLR subject do not completely understand yet
their projects regarding the exact research problem to be
addressed, goals, research method to be followed, and ex-
pected contributions. The SLR conduction can support them to
identify the state of the art of the associated research, existing
gaps, and challenges of their research topic. Hence, another
beneﬁt is that the SLR subject makes it possible for students
to start to better understand and position their Ph.D. or
Master’s projects within the research area. At
the same
time, we have observed the students have recurrently used the

SLR results to make decisions about their project, including
regarding the scope, goals, and expected contributions. Hence,
we believe the SLR subject and the conduction of an SLR
are valuable means to drive research, enabling the opening
of novel research topics. It is worth highlighting that students
can then conduct evidence-based research, i.e., decisions taken
are based on evidence from several studies found in the SLR.
More importantly, having a broader and deeper knowledge of
the research area, students can use the SLR to somehow assure
the originality of their theses.
The self-conﬁdence of

the students on the research
topic is another important beneﬁt. As SLR requires that
students systematically and rigorously explore studies in a
topic, they become more familiarized with that topic and can
gain conﬁdence that they know possibly all related studies.
SLR subject could then contribute to reducing the lack of
conﬁdence and uncertainty commonly faced by students who
are sometimes novices in the area. Moreover, during the SLR
conduction, important information about the research topic
can be also collected, such as the research tendency (e.g.,
increase or decrease in the number of studies over the years),
main researchers, research groups, and industry involvement
working on that topic, leading countries or regions, maturity of
the research topic, and research trends (e.g., if the topic and its
subtopics are promising). All this knowledge is fundamental
for somehow pushing students to become better researchers in
their area.

The fourth beneﬁt is the development of research skills
by students. In turn,
there exist different sets of research
skills desired to be developed in graduate students [20]–[23].
By analyzing these studies, we found the SLR subject could
support the development of ﬁve important skills:

• Increase of knowledge on the research topic: Besides
learning a rigorous and effective means to the literature
surveys and its associated processes (which are taught in
the SLR subject), this subject is an important opportunity
for students to increase the knowledge concerning the
background and foundations of their research topic by
looking into the background section presented in almost
all studies. Moreover, students can learn about different
scientiﬁc methods and assessment methods (presented in
the studies), while they can develop practical skills, e.g.,
dealing better with publications databases;

• Recognition of research problems: SLR subject requires
that students look into the existing research problems as
well as the research gaps, difﬁculties, and even contra-
dictions being addressed by studies. Hence, students can
develop the ability to recognize them and also the ability
to elaborate the research problems for their projects and
papers;
• Critical

thinking: The SLR subject faces students to
understand different solutions and alternatives, as well
as positive and negative points from a variety of studies,
pushing these students to engage in reﬂective and inde-
pendent thinking and understand the logical connections
among different ideas and, as a consequence, enhance the

critical thinking;

• Analysis and synthesis of data: SLR subject requires
that students summarize data from various studies, deﬁne
how to organize it, identify relevant data, and synthesize
results. All
these tasks require the ability to analyze
and synthesize data, leading to the development of such
important skills; and

• Writing and publishing: SLR subject demands the full
reading of various types of scientiﬁc literature, such as
theoretical and empirical original research, case report,
case study, researchers’ opinion (or position paper), sur-
veys/reviews, including secondary studies. Students can
then accumulate knowledge of this diversity that is surely
positive to organize their future publications. At the same
time, students can gain experience in writing papers when
they report the results of their SLR as a paper.

The aforementioned skills are undoubtedly relevant for
students, as also discussed in [15], mainly those unmeasur-
able abilities, such as research problem recognition, critical
thinking, and paper planning, writing, and publishing. Finally,
aligned to the latter (writing and publishing), the ﬁfth beneﬁt
is the possibility of students to publish a paper reporting the
SLR conduction and results. We observe that, when attend-
ing the SLR subject, most students are starting their Ph.D.
or Master’s projects, which have not still produced results
suitable for publication. Hence, by attending this subject, the
publication of a paper containing results of their SLR is
interesting. As previously found in our survey, around half
part of students published the SLR started during the SLR
subject in journals and scientiﬁc events. At the same time,
good SLR are important contributions for any research area
[14], possibly attracting a number of citations.

Regarding the drawbacks of the SLR subject for students,
we identiﬁed three drawbacks and also directions that could
mitigate them. The ﬁrst drawback is related to the lack of
knowledge of students concerning their research area.
Students in their ﬁrst or second semester of graduate courses
have usually attended the SLR subject at XYZ11. At that
moment, most of them have not still deﬁned the exact topic
of their project and sometimes have little knowledge of the
topic that will be possibly researched. However, conducting
high-quality SLR requires a deeper knowledge of the research
topic [24]. To mitigate this lack, we recommend students
have the support of more experienced researchers such as
their supervisors to assure the quality of the SLR. If this
support
is not provided, we have observed students have
difﬁculty proceeding with the steps of the SLR process, e.g.,
the deﬁnition of search strings and elaboration of adequate
answers for research questions.

The second drawback refers to the difﬁculty of the SLR
protocol elaboration. The SLR conduction and, in particular,
the elaboration of the SLR protocol, are not trivial tasks.
involves various elements that need to be
Such protocol
well-deﬁned (e.g., research questions, search string, search

11To be replaced after blind review.

strategies, studies selection process, data extraction form, etc.).
To mitigate this difﬁculty, we recommend building the SLR
protocol iteratively, i.e., students perform iterative pre-tests of
the protocol to observe its correctness, conciseness, coherence,
and completeness and iteratively reﬁne it. Considering our
experience from the SLR subject, when such protocol is well-
deﬁned by students, they can to some extent more easily
perform the next steps of the SLR process.

it

Another drawback is the time constraints of students.
Graduation students have various time- and effort-consuming
demands, such as other subjects, a part-time job (in some
cases), responsibilities as teaching assistants, and other gradu-
ate program requirements that must be completed timely and
satisfactorily. In the meantime, the SLR conduction actually
consumes considerable time and effort; for instance,
is
common for SLR to have more than 2,000 candidate studies to
be veriﬁed. A big challenge is then to conciliate all academic
and non-academic tasks together with the conduction of an
SLR. To mitigate this issue, we recommend students focus
speciﬁcally on the preparation and validation of the SLR
protocol during the subject, which usually provides important
support for those tasks. Following this, they can start the SLR
conduction itself and ﬁnish it after the subject. We have also
observed that the amount of time and effort required for SLR
depends directly on the students’ skills (e.g., ability of critical
thinking and data synthesis) as well as their knowledge of the
area. We also have observed that the protocol elaboration can
particularly help students to gain such skills and knowledge;
hence, the dedication to such protocol becomes even more
important.

Concerning the difﬁculties that professors have faced when
teaching SLR, two are relevant to be discussed. The ﬁrst one is
the hard-working nature of this subject. During the subject,
each student usually conducts his/her SLR to comply with
the literature review necessary for his/her graduate project
proposal. In turn, each SLR is sometimes unique in the sense
there are no others to be used as a closer reference. In
this scenario, professors need to provide meaningful support
for each student aiming to make the subject effective. But
supporting concomitantly diverse SLR is a very complicated
task. It is also hard due to the different rhythm of each SLR
with, for instance, different numbers of studies to be managed,
data to be extracted, and distinct methods to synthesize results.
To minimize this difﬁculty, a closer involvement of supervisors
or other experts in the research topic is necessary, but in many
cases, they do not have enough knowledge of particularities
of the SLR conduction. At the same time, it is debatable if
all students could conduct an SLR of the same research topic,
while the professor could have a level of control regarding,
e.g., the search string, databases, and selection criteria to be
used. We believe such “toy example” could be useful only for
illustration and exercise, but not for an effective step towards
the deep literature review that students need.

Another difﬁculty is the lack of didactic materials. It
is known that there are many scientiﬁc materials of SLR
(e.g., articles, technical reports, and books) sometimes address-

ing theoretical issues. However, good didactic materials (in
particular, books) are missing besides materials that address
practical issues that we believe are core to assure the successful
conduction of SLR. Some examples of practical issues are,
to mention a few, the conﬁguration of the search string to
different databases’ search engines, management of sometimes
a large number of studies, and correct use of supporting
tools. In this scenario, professors have difﬁculty connecting
SLR theory and practice and provide suitable materials to be
followed for the students.

We summarize that as with other subjects, there are difﬁcul-
ties for those who teach the SLR subject and also difﬁculties
for students. However, this subject provides important beneﬁts,
in particular, those that can directly contribute to the Ph.D.
and Master’s theses. Hence, the next section presents some
directions of the way that the SLR subject could be taught.

B. Topics of SLR Subject

After many adjustments done over the years regarding the
topics taught in the SLR subject, we were able to deﬁne a
set of eight main topics that we believe are comprehensive
enough and relevant to be taught, as detailed below:

1) Theoretical foundation: This topic presents an overview
of various types of literature review, including traditional
literature review (a comparison between traditional liter-
ature review and SLR is provided in [7], [25]), rapid re-
view [26], multi-vocal literature review [27], [28], grey-
literature review [29], tertiary study [30] and mainly
SLR and SM. Comparison among them, highlighting
their purposes, differences, and commonalities, as well
as advantages and limitations, are discussed;

2) SLR process: This topic presents the theoretical aspects
of SLR, an overview of the SLR 3-phase process (plan-
ning, conduction, and synthesis), and existing guidelines
to conduct SLR. More importantly, this topic also en-
compasses discussions on the iterative nature of the SLR
process that provides beneﬁts and difﬁculties to students
who are sometimes conducting their ﬁrst SLR;

3) SLR planning: This topic addresses the core artifact of
SLR, i.e., the SLR protocol. All items of the protocol,
including the goal of the SLR, research questions, search
string (and the ways to deﬁne and calibrate it), search
strategy, primary study selection criteria, data extraction
methods, and result synthesis methods, are discussed
together with the most common approaches to deﬁne
them;

in the publication databases,

4) SLR conduction: It is presented the means to search
studies
the relevant
databases for speciﬁc areas, and the particularities of
each database. This topic also addresses existing strate-
gies to increase the coverage and completeness of
the search for studies, such as experts’ opinions and
snowballing technique [31]–[34]. Moreover, assuring the
coverage and completeness of the searches for studies
is another issue presented and widely discussed with
students;

5) SLR analysis and synthesis: This topic presents meth-
ods for the data analysis supported by tables or other
visual/graphical representations (e.g., graphs, graphics,
charts,
infographics, word clouds, and geographical
maps). Besides that, more importantly, methods for syn-
thesis of SLR results, such as descriptive and quantita-
tive synthesis (obtained through a statistical calculation),
are also widely discussed with students;

6) Threats to validity: As with any other research method,
diverse threats to the validity occur in SLR [35]. Hence,
the main threats to validity, including construct validity,
internal validity, and conclusion validity, and also how
they could be mitigated, are presented and discussed;
7) SLR update: In the case of SLR conducted during
the SLR subject by graduate students, such SLR are
sometimes required to be updated to adhere to the ﬁnal
theses. Hence, this topic discusses the ways and impor-
tant requirements, mainly regarding the documentation
of SLR, so that SLR are more easily updated [11]; and
8) Supporting tools: Aiming at increasing the productivity
and reliability of SLR results, the use of supporting tools
is highly recommended. There are tools that can support
almost all SLR process such as Parsifal12, while bibliog-
raphy management tools or reference managers are also
useful, e.g., EndNote13, JabRef14, and Mendeley15.

It is worth highlighting Topics 1 to 5 should be taught
in that order, while the others could be provided along with
the semester. For each topic, we also suggest possible ways
to teach it, as summarized in Table I (second column). The
ﬁrst two topics are mainly presented in expository classes,
while the remaining are distributed in expository and hands-
on classes aiming at achieving the synergy between theory
and practice. Moreover, this subject must pay special attention
to the learning method adopted to increase the students’
engagement and learning. For instance, ﬂipped classroom [36],
[37] is interesting for this subject since it could leverage the
motivation and engagement of students. Another approach is
Case-Based Learning (CBL), which uses realistic narratives
(cases) for educational purposes [38], [39] and has been
already successfully applied in other subjects by promoting
the students’ learning and their critical thinking [39].

In terms of duration and number of classes, we believe SLR
can be adequately addressed in a one-semester subject with
around 2-hour class and 6-hour out-of-class per week, whose
distribution is presented in Table I. Considering a 16-week
semester, we believe such distribution of the topics in those
classes can work well. In particular, the SLR subject should
focus mainly on the SLR planning and conduction consuming
approximately 50% of the classes. As stated before, a deeper
discussion on the SLR planning during the classes should
be performed, considering the time constraints of students.

12https://www.parsif.al
13http://endnote.com
14http://www.jabref.org
15https://www.mendeley.com

Regarding the bibliography, there are relevant papers published
in main journals and conferences on Empirical Software
Engineering that could be adopted in this subject. For each
topic, we selected a set of materials that has worked well in
our classes, as listed in Table I.

As stated before, each SLR developed during the SLR
subject has been sometimes unique and has presented its
speciﬁcity, including its scope, research topic covered, re-
search questions, and publication databases. Although there
exists such speciﬁcity, some commonality with SLR previously
conducted also exists and can be reused. For instance, part
of a search string or the same databases used in closer SLR
can be used. Hence, good examples of SLR published in
important vehicles can serve as references. Good vehicles to
ﬁnd these SLR in the software engineering area are the Journal
of Systems and Software16, Information and Software Tech-
nology17, and conferences like International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE)18, International Symposium on
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM)19,
and International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment
in Software Engineering (EASE)20.

V. FINAL REMARKS

Graduate subjects can contribute to engaging students in
their formation and paves the way to further become them
good researchers. This paper presented an experience report
on teaching SLR in a subject for computer science graduate
students. While diverse beneﬁts and drawbacks for students
were observed together with the associated causes, this expe-
rience report intends to motivate the discussion about the trade-
off to offer this subject. From our point of view, attendance
to the SLR subject seems to be a valuable opportunity for
students, mainly regarding a means to evolve their Ph.D. or
Master’s project. This subject seems to have an important
role to develop required research skills in graduate students,
including the ability to recognize research problems, analyze
and synthesize data, think critically, and write papers. At the
same time, professors responsible for this subject have some
difﬁculties teaching it due to the inherent nature of this subject
as well as the lack of didactic materials due to SLR is a novel
topic to be addressed in graduate courses.

During the conduction of this work, we found and mitigated
the threats to the validity. In particular, regarding the survey,
a threat to the construct validity was a given question could
inﬂuence the answers to the others. To mitigate it, we were
concerned with elaborating the questions and ordered them
to avoid any inﬂuence. We also elaborated on all questions
considering our long-term experience teaching SLR. Following
this, we performed a pre-test with a postdoctoral researcher
who was also an expert in SLR. In addition, we encouraged
respondents to share their impressions through open questions.

16https://www.journals.elsevier.com/journal-of-systems-and-software
17https://www.journals.elsevier.com/information-and-software-technology
18http://www.icse-conferences.org
19http://www.esem-conferences.org
20https://conf.researchr.org/home/ease-2022

Concerning the conclusion validity, the representativeness and
the number of respondents could be a threat; hence, we cannot
generalize the results, including the beneﬁts, and drawbacks
reported in this work, for other graduate courses and students.
Different students’ backgrounds, the moment when students
attend it, and speciﬁc issues of the courses can lead to different
results compared with ours. Moreover, the difﬁculties faced by
professors who teach this subject cannot be also generalized.
Their background and experience with SLR can mitigate or
accentuate these or other difﬁculties. However, we believe that
results (i.e., beneﬁts, drawbacks, difﬁculties, and SLR topics)
can be considered relevant because the long-term experience
teaching this SLR subject was considered together with the
opinion of students that attended the subject along with the
years.

We have also observed that SLR has attracted the attention
of students from diverse areas, like artiﬁcial intelligence, com-
puting network, and education, besides software engineering
that previously introduced SLR in computing. Such areas have
also started the publication of SLR and SMS. In this scenario,
the SLR subject should deal with speciﬁcities of these areas
such as the publication databases relevant to be adopted, since
they should consider others than those suggested for software
engineering.

For future work,

this experience could be replicated in
other graduate courses, different regions, and diverse students’
proﬁles. Finally, this work intends to motivate graduate courses
not only in software engineering but also in other areas to
teach SLR and use it as an added-value means to leverage
the students’ formation and, as a consequence, the quality of
graduate courses.

REFERENCES

[1] B. Kitchenham, D. Budgen, and P. Brereton, Evidence-based software

engineering and systematic reviews. CRC Press, 2015, vol. 4.

[2] M. Kuhrmann, “Teaching empirical software engineering using ex-
pert teams,” in 2017 Software Engineering Education in Universities
(SEUH), 2017, pp. 20–31.

[3] M. Lavall´ee, P. Robillard, and R. Mirsalari, “Performing systematic lit-
erature reviews with novices: An iterative approach,” IEEE Transactions
on Education, vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 175–181, 2013.

[4] M. Riaz, M. Sulayman, N. Salleh, and E. Mendes, “Experiences conduct-
ing systematic reviews from novices’ perspective,” in 14th International
Conference on Evaluation and Assessment
in Software Engineering
(EASE), 2010, pp. 1–10.

[5] T. Dyba, B. A. Kitchenham, and M. Jorgensen, “Evidence-based soft-
ware engineering for practitioners,” IEEE Software, vol. 22, no. 1, pp.
58–65, 2005.

[6] B. Kitchenham, D. Budgen, and P. Brereton, “Using mapping studies
as the basis for further research–a participant-observer case study,”
Information and Software Technology, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 638–651, 2011.
[7] H. Zhang and M. Babar, “An empirical investigation of systematic
reviews in software engineering,” in 5th International Symposium on
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM), 2011, pp.
87–96.

[8] M. Niazi, “Do systematic literature reviews outperform informal litera-
ture reviews in the software engineering domain? An initial case study,”
Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 845–
855, 2015.

[9] P.-M. Daigneault, S. Jacob, and M. Ouimet, “Using systematic review
methods within a Ph.D. dissertation in political science: Challenges and
lessons learned from practice,” International Journal of Social Research
Methodology, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 267–283, 2014.

TABLE I
ESSENTIAL TOPICS TO BE TAUGHT IN THE SLR SUBJECT

#

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Topic

Learning Means

Theoretical
dation

foun-

Expository class complemented with ex-
amples from the literature

SLR process

SLR planning

SLR conduction

SLR analysis and
synthesis
Threats to validity

Expository class complemented with ex-
amples from the literature
Hands-on classes complemented with
expository classes
Hands-on classes complemented with
expository classes
Hands-on classes complemented with
expository classes
Expository class

SLR update

Supporting tools

Expository class complemented with ex-
amples from the literature
Hands-on classes

Number
of Classes
1 (of 16)

1 (of 16)

Main Materials

SLR [1], SM [6], [40], traditional literature review [7], [25], grey-
literature review [29], rapid review [26], multi-vocal literature review
[27], [28], and tertiary study [30]
Procedures and guidelines to perform SLR [1]

5 (of 16)

SLR planning [1]

3 (of 16)

SLR conduction [1], snowballing [31]–[34]

2 (of 16)

SLR analysis and synthesis [1]

1 (of 16)

2 (of 16)

1 (of 16)

Identiﬁcation, classiﬁcation, and mitigation of threats to validity in
SLR [35]
When and how to update SLR [11]

Practical issues (e.g., conﬁguration of the search string for databases’
search engine) and hands-on class using tools such as Parsifal.

[10] L. Puljak and D. Sapunar, “Acceptance of a systematic review as a
thesis: survey of biomedical doctoral programs in Europe,” Systematic
Reviews, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2017.

[11] E. Mendes, C. Wohlin, K. Felizardo, and M. Kalinowski, “When to
update systematic literature reviews in software engineering,” Journal
of Systems and Software, vol. 167, p. 110607, 2020.

[12] B. Oates and G. Capper, “Using systematic reviews and evidence-
based software engineering with masters students,” in 9th International
Conference on Evaluation and Assessment
in Software Engineering
(EASE), 2009, pp. 1–8.

[13] B. Pejcinovic, “Development and uses of iterative systematic literature
reviews in electrical engineering education,” Electrical and Computer
Engineering Faculty Publications and Presentations, vol. 327, no. 1,
pp. 1–10, 2015.

[14] M. Borrego, M. Foster, and J. Froyd, “What is the state of the art of
systematic review in engineering education?” Journal of Engineering
Education, vol. 104, no. 2, pp. 212–242, 2015.

[15] J. Froyd, M. Foster, J. Martin, M. Borrego, H. Choe, and X. Chen,
“Special session: Introduction to systematic reviews in engineering
education research,” in IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE),
2015, pp. 1–3.

[16] B. Kitchenham and S. Pﬂeeger, “Personal opinion surveys,” in Guide to
advanced empirical software engineering. Springer, 2008, pp. 63–92.
[17] L. Cronbach, “Coefﬁcient alpha and the internal structure of tests,”

Psychometrika, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 297–334, 1951.

[18] C. Seaman, “Qualitative methods,” in Guide to Advanced Empirical

Software Engineering. Springer, 2008, pp. 35–62.

[19] A. Strauss and J. Corbin, Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques
SAGE

and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory, 2nd ed.
Publications, 1998.

[20] J. Hermanowicz, “Faculty perceptions of their graduate education,”

Higher Education, vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 291–305, 2016.

[21] E. Tarasova, O. Khatsrinova, G. Fakhretdinova, and A. Kaybiyaynen,
“Project-based learning activities for engineering college students,”
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, vol. 1329, pp. 253–
260, 2021.

[22] P. Bravo and M. de la Rosa, “Research competences in university
training [las competencias investigadoras en la formaci´on universitaria],”
Universidad y Sociedad, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 17–25, 2021.

[23] S. Alhumoud, A. Alowisheq, and N. Altwairesh, “Teaching research
methods for computer science students using virtual learning: A case
study,” in 12th International Conference on Computer Supported Edu-
cation (CSEDU’20), vol. 1, 2020, pp. 518–522.

[24] T. V. Ribeiro, J. Massollar, and G. H. Travassos, “Challenges and pitfalls
on surveying evidence in the software engineering technical literature:
an exploratory study with novices,” Empirical Software Engineering,
vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1594–1663, 2018.

[25] H. Zhang and M. Babar, “Systematic reviews in software engineer-

ing: An empirical investigation,” Information and Software Technology,
vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1341–1354, 2013.

[26] S. Khangura, K. Konnyu, R. Cushman, J. Grimshaw, and D. Moher, “Ev-
idence summaries: the evolution of a rapid review approach,” Systematic
Reviews, vol. 1, no. 10, pp. 1–9, 2012.

[27] V. Garousi, M. Felderer, and M. M¨antyl¨a, “The need for multivocal
literature reviews in software engineering: complementing systematic
literature reviews with grey literature,” in 20th International Conference
on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE), 2016,
pp. 1–6.

[28] V. Garousi, M. Felderer, and M. M¨antyl¨a, “Guidelines for including
grey literature and conducting multivocal literature reviews in software
engineering,” Information and Software Technology, vol. 106, no. 1, pp.
101–121, 2019.

[29] ——, “Beneﬁting from the grey literature in software engineering
research,” in Contemporary Empirical Methods in Software Engineering,
M. Felderer and G. Travassos, Eds. Springer, 2020, pp. 389–418.
[30] S. Imtiaz, M. Bano, N. Ikram, and M. Niazi, “A tertiary study:
Experiences of conducting systematic literature reviews in software
engineering,” in EASE, 2013, p. 177–182.

[31] D. Badampudi, C. Wohlin, and K. Petersen, “Experiences from using
snowballing and database searches in systematic literature studies,”
in
in 19th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment
Software Engineering (EASE), 2015, pp. 1–17.

[32] S. Jalali and C. Wohlin, “Systematic literature studies: database searches
vs. backward snowballing,” in 6th International Symposium on Empiri-
cal Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM), 2012, pp. 29–38.
[33] C. Wohlin, “Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies
and a replication in software engineering,” in 18th International Con-
ference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE),
2014, p. 38.

[34] ——, “Second-generation systematic literature studies using snow-
balling,” in 20th International Conference on Evaluation and Assess-
ment in Software Engineering (EASE’16), 2016, pp. 1–15.

[35] A. Ampatzoglou, S. Bibi, P. Avgeriou, M. Verbeek, and A. Chatzi-
georgiou, “Identifying, categorizing and mitigating threats to validity
in software engineering secondary studies,” Information and Software
Technology, vol. 106, pp. 201–230, 2019.

[36] A. Al-Zahrani, “From passive to active: The impact of the ﬂipped class-
room through social learning platforms on higher education students’
creative thinking,” British Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 46,
no. 6, pp. 1133–1148, 2015.

[37] M. Urfa and G. Durak, “Implementation of the ﬂipped classroom model
in the scientiﬁc ethics course.” Journal of Education and e-Learning
Research, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 108–117, 2017.

[38] C. Herreid, “Case studies in science - a novel method of science
education,” Journal of College Science Teaching, vol. 23, no. 4, pp.
221–229, 1994.

[39] A. Yadav, M. Lundeberg, M. DeSchryver, K. Dirkin, N. Schiller,
K. Maier, and C. Herreid, “Teaching science with case studies: A
national survey of faculty perceptions of the beneﬁts and challenges
of using cases,” Journal of College Science Teaching, vol. 37, no. 1, pp.
34–38, 2007.

[40] K. Petersen, S. Vakkalanka, and L. Kuzniarz, “Guidelines for conduct-
ing systematic mapping studies in software engineering: An update,”
Information and Software Technology, vol. 64, pp. 1–18, 2015.

