Study on the ERP Implementation Methodologies on SAP, Oracle NetSuite, and 
Microsoft Dynamics 365: A Review 

Madabattula Archana  

           Prof  Dr  VijayaKumar Varadarajan, 

Sai S ravan Mediche rla  

Globa l Doctor of Busine ss &  

Swiss Schoo l of Bu sine ss and   

Dept. of Information &  

 Administ ration  

Management, Switzerland  

Communication Tech nology 

Swiss Schoo l of Bu sine ss and  

vijayakumar@ssbm.ch 

Manip al In stitute of Techno log y  

 Management, Switzerland  

madabattula@ssbm.ch  

Manip al, India  

sai.mediche rla@learner.man ipa l.edu  

ABSTRACT 
There are Top three vendors in the ERP market E.g., 
SAP, Oracle Net Suite and Microsoft dynamics 365 
leading the Global ERP market. [1] While analyzing the 
ERP selection and implementation trends, it is critical 
that any organization looking to implement an ERP 
system assesses the vendors through the lens of its own 
organization’s specific requirements. When choosing   
the right ERP, few things must be taken into 
consideration like the Time Budget and resources. The 
research paper analyses each phase and compares the 
methodologies of SAP, Oracle Net Suite and Microsoft 
Dynamics 365 and suggests the best methodologies to 
be practiced for any ERP projects. Like a poorly 
planned trip, if you don’t have effective methodology, 
you can expect a negative impact on your 
implementation, solution quality, and business 
satisfaction. Wrong choice of methodology may lead to 
poor decision-making, best practices may not be 
followed, and teams may be disjointed in the 
implementation, which can cause delays. Choosing the 

right ERP methodology is the key.  Methodology is the 
lifeline for successful project implementation. 

INTRODUCTION 

in Enterprise  Resource  Planning.                    

to 

Invest 

With the growing and expansion of the business in the 
global  market,  business  need  a  faster  application  to 
monitor  and  to  enhance  their  decision-making  process 
and 
What  is  ERP  [3]:  ERP  means  Enterprise  Resource 
Planning.  As  the  name  itself  suggest  it’s  planning  the 
Enterprise  Resources.  Enterprise’s  means  Company  or 
an  Organization,  and  it  has  many  departments  like 
Accounting  and  Finance,  Sales  and  Marketing,  Human 

METHODOLOGY IS THE LIFELINE 

FOR A PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION. 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
      
      
 
Resources  and  Manufacturing  department  etc.  As 
company  expand  globally  and  business  is  open  for 
International  customers  then  it  would  be  difficult  for 
companies to manage the business and this is when ERP 
application  makes  is  way  to  a  automate  business 
processes  and  provide  internal  control  for  all  internal 
stakeholders  and  departments  ,  where  the  central 
database that collects all the business data will help the 
Management to make the right decision .The right ERP 
application for the business will help the client to grow 
faster, cost effectiveness  and high productivity.  

 ERP  application  can  help organizations bring together 
different  activities  under  a  single  platform,  An  ERP 
system binds together all these processes with a unified 
interface. This makes it easy for users to access data with 
a centralized dashboard and features like access control 
and increased data security.  

Why  methodology  is  important?  50%  of  the  ERP 
implementations  fail  due  to  choice  of  the  ERP 
Methodologies.[2] 

Define Methodology -  

It describes the use of a collection of methods to achieve 
predictable  outcomes.  The  global  Enterprise  Resource 
Planning market is valued $45.91 billion in 2022 and is 
projected  to  reach  $59.97  billion  by  2027  according  to 
https://www.statista.com. 

The Word’s Top Leading ERP’s are SAP having 
market  share  of  19.3%,  global  Oracle  NetSuite  with 
11.2%, Microsoft Dynamics 365 market share is around 
6.2%. According to https://www.statista.com 

to 

seek 

begun 

effective  ways 

The term “project management methodology” was first 
defined  in  1960s,  when  various  business  organizations 
have 
that 
could  simplify  the  realization  of  benefits  out  of 
businesses in a structured and unique entity (which was 
later  called  “Project”).    Methodology  is  the  core  of 
project execution that allows the team to take the right 
path towards implementation. A methodology is a  

prescriptive  definition  of  series  of  activities  to  be 
undertaken for a given project. 

METHODOLOGIES  FOR 
ERP IMPLEMENTATION 

According to [1] SAP is a software  business provider 
that  offers  software  applications  and  services  that 
helped organizations in more than 25 industries to run 
approach. 
a 
their 

businesses 

successful 

in 

RESEARCH OUTLINE  
My research paper outlines on the methodologies used to implement the ERP application and the focus is more on 
the process, the base of each of the methodologies used by SAP, Oracle NetSuite, Microsoft Dynamics 365 

SAP: 

    SAP  software  applications  and  services  are  used 
in  120 
among  more 

than  47,800  customers 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
different  countries  and  SAP  Company  is  listed  on 
several stock exchanges. 

SAP has methodologies to implement in the application 
for their business.  

SAP Methodologies:  

Phase 1 Project Preparation – We make the necessary 
preparation before we met the client  

•  We  obtain  the  support  from  the  senior-level 

management/stakeholder support. 
Identifying clear project objectives 

• 
•  Architect an efficient decision-making process 
•  Creating  an  environment  suitable  for  change 

and re-engineering 

•  Building a qualified and capable project team. 

Phase 2 Business Blueprint - We meet the Client in 
this Stage.[5] 
This  is  the  external  meeting  and  the  this  is  the  first 
meeting with the client.  
This  phase  is  to  help  extract  pertinent  information 
about  company  that  is  necessary  for  implementation. 
Here, we will gather all the information about the how 
the business runs. These blueprints are in the form of 
questionnaires 
for 
that  are  designed 
information  that  uncovers  how  your  company  does 
business.  As  such,  they  also  serve  to  document  the 
implementation. 

to  probe 

•  Each  business  blueprint  document  essentially 
outlines  your  future  business  processes  and 
business requirements. The kinds of questions 
asked  are  germane  to  the  particular  business 
function. 

•  The questions are retrieved from the AS – IS 
document,  which  are  unambiguous,  which 
needed more details etc. 

Phase 3 Realization – In the Realization phase,  
With  the  completion  of  the  business  in  phase  2, 
“functional” experts are now ready to begin configuring 
SAP. The Realization phase is broken in to two parts. 

      Your  SAP  consulting  team  helps  you  configure  your 
baseline  system,  called  the  baseline  configuration. 
Your  implementation  project  team  fine-tunes  that 
system  to  meet  all  your  business  and  process 
requirements 
fine-tuning 
configuration. 

part 

the 

of 

as 

The initial configuration completed during the base 
line configuration is based on the information that you 
provided in your blueprint document. The remaining 
approximately 20% of your configuration that was not 
tackled during the baseline configuration is completed 
during the fine-tuning configuration. 

Fine tuning usually deals with the exceptions that are 

Phase 1 Project Preparation 

Phase 2 Business Blueprint AS IS – TO BE 

Phase 3 Realization 

Phase 4 Final Preparation 

Phase 5 Go-Live and support 

not covered in baseline configuration. This final bit of 
tweaking represents the work necessary to fit your 
special needs. 

Configuration Testing- 
                     With the help of your SAP consulting 
team, you segregate your business processes into 
cycles of related business flows. The cycles serve as 
independent units that enable you to test specific parts 
of the business process. You can also work through 
configuring the SAP implementation guide (IMG). A 
tool used to assist you in configuring your SAP system 
in a step by step manner. 

Knowledge Transfer- 
                             As the configuration phase ends, it 
becomes necessary for the Project team to be self-
sufficient in their knowledge of the configuration of your 
SAP system. 

Knowledge transfer to the configuration team tasked 
with system maintenance (that is, maintenance of the 
business processes after Go-live) needs to be completed 
at this time. In addition, the end users tasked with using 
the system for day-to-day business purposes must be 
trained. 

 Phase 4 Final Preparation 

•  As phase 3 merges into phase 4, you should 
find yourselves not only in the midst of SAP 
training, but also in the midst of rigorous 
functional and stress testing. 

•  Phase 4 also concentrates on the fine tuning 
of your configuration before Go-live and 

 
 
 
 
 
more importantly, the migration of data from 
your old system or systems to SAP. 

•  Workload testing (including peak volume, daily 
load, and other forms of stress testing), and 
integration or functional testing are conducted 
to ensure the accuracy of your data and 
the stability of your SAP system. Because you 
should have begun testing back in phase 2, you 
do not have too far to go until Go-live. 

Now is an important time to perform preventative 
maintenance checks to ensure optimal performance at 
your SAP system. At the conclusion of phase 4, take time 
to plan and document a Go-live strategy. Preparation for 
Go-live means preparing for your end-user’s questions as 
they start actively working on the new SAP system. 

Phase 5 Go-Live and support – 

Go-Live activity will be smooth and breeze if all the 
previous phases have been executed under a strict 
monitoring process. If all the previous phases are not 
dealt with the way they were supposed to be then it is 
altogether a different ball game. 

Introducing a new system or tool or service to entire 
different individuals, in this case, preparation is the 
key. Within this preparation, one has to make sure that 
they have answered all the What If scenarios within 
the business processes and how is the tool or system is 
capable of answering or supporting in those situations. 

Further,  processing  maintenance  contracts  and 
documenting the overall Go-live process is vital in this 
phase. 

. 
ORACLE NETSUITE 
METHODOLOGIES: 

 In the Methodologies for the first phase practiced at 
Oracle Net Suite is ENGAGE. 

Stage 1: Engage 

Stage 2: Drive 

Stage 3: Enable 

Stage 4: Convert 

Oracle NetSuite Stage 1: Engage 

 The Objective of this Session is Engage with the 
customer                                  
Set expectations and framework for a successful 
Implementation. The milestone     Successfully set 
expectations and framework Trust is formed between 
Customer and Implementation Team which is focused 
more on the Customer Engagement. The Activities are: 

•  Staff Project 
•  Engage Account Manager 
•  Customer attend LCS Company Pass: Getting 

Started Webinar 
•  Reverse Sales to PS KT 
•  Conduct Kick-Off Meeting 
•  Complete Getting Started Session 
• 
Install Suite Success Bundles 
•  Finalize Project Plan 
•  Hold User Adoption Discussion 
•  Develop Data Migration Strategy 
•  Begin Data Migration 
•  Confirm project team has begun Industry 

Fundamentals 

•  Conduct Education and Adoption Strategy 

Meeting 

•  Conduct Personalization Sessions 
•  Build Awareness 
•  Complete Engage Checkpoint 
•  Develop Functional Design Document (if 

appropriate) 

In the Oracle Net Suite, Reverse Sales to CS KT 
(Customer Success) (Knowledge Transfer) session. – in 
this session the Delivery team meets the Sales team. This 
is an Internal meeting. In this meeting the Delivery Team 
review the License owned, customer website, Sales 
artifacts etc. The Objective of this meeting is to know 
about the client personality, why they choose Net Suite 
and to know about the pain points of their business.  

Then Kick – off meeting is conducted which is the first 
one to one meeting with the client where we confirm the 
customers goals and initiatives. we review the scope of 
the project. The Kickoff meeting is the official start of 
project delivery and marked as Day 1 of the project. 
Establish the project methodology and governance 
followed by Bundle installation session and immediately 
Getting started session starts, Allow the customer to log 
into their NetSuite account for the first time. • Grant 
access to the NetSuite CS team. • Highlight key NetSuite 
features. • Introduce the Data Migration templates. • 
Emphasize that all customer data is stored in the File 
Cabinet. • Introduce Support, SuiteAnswers, and Suite 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ideas. Through the Engage Phase, Trust is formed 
between the Delivery team and the Customer. 

Oracle NetSuite Stage 2: Drive 

                            In the Methodologies for the second 
phase practiced at Oracle Net Suite is DRIVE, The 
Objective of this session is to Lead customer through 
configuration requirements and initial walkthrough of 
NetSuite. The milestone Customer understands 
configuration requirements and basics of NetSuite 

 Lead customer through configuration requirements and 
initial walkthrough of NetSuite 

•  Complete Configurations 
•  Develop Scripts (if appropriate) 
•  Continue Data Migration 
•  Conduct Process Walkthrough(s) 
•  Develop Training Approach and Materials 
•  Conduct Learning Action Planning Meeting 
•  Develop User Acceptance Plan 
•  Confirm project team has begun Administrator 

Fundamentals 
•  Drive Understanding 
•  Complete Drive Checkpoint 

During the Personalization session, this is business 
requirement gathering session where the Delivery team 
gathers all the business requirement from the Process 
owners to configure the business based on their 
requirements in the Oracle Net Suite. The Delivery team 
will lead the session and they will ask questions that have 
the dispute in the blueprint, they will ask questions that 
were not clear to them in the blueprint. They will ask 
questions to the customer that were unambiguous to 
them in the blueprint. Once the requirement is gathered 
the Delivery team will configure the business based on 
the customer requirement and will demonstrate the 
business in the NetSuite in the Process walkthrough 
Session. This Process Walkthrough session will make the 
client understand how his business is going to be in 
NetSuite environment. After successful completion of 
the Process Walkthrough we guide the client for UAT. 

  Oracle NetSuite Stage 3: Enable 

                                In the Methodologies for the third 
phase practiced at Oracle Net Suite is ENABLE, prepare 
customer for Go-Live, Train end users, Support 
customer UAT. The milestone is Completing the UAT 
and the End user Training. The Activities are: 

Continue Data Migration 
Conduct Final Process Walkthrough 
Conduct Education Services KT  

Provide User Acceptance Testing (UAT) Guidance 
Basic Usability Training for UAT 
Conduct Pre-UAT Training (optional) 
Conduct UAT 
User Training  
Provide Support Video 
Empower End Users 
Complete Enable Checkpoint 

In the Enable Stage, The Process Walkthrough 2 is 
conducted. This session is between the customer and the 
Delivery team and in this session the Customer will lead  
the session, which meant that the customer would show 
the Process of their business to the Delivery team. The 
objective of this session is to make sure that the 
customer familiar’s themselves with the Net Suite 
application and also to make sure that they have 
understood the NetSuite application. 

Oracle NetSuite Stage 4: Convert 

                                 In the Methodologies for the last 
and fourth phase practiced at Oracle Net Suite is 
Convert, the objective of this Convert stage is to 
Confirm business readiness and instill confidence and 
transfer system ownership to Customer. The Activities 
are: 
Complete Data Migration 
Confirm any Additional Implementation Readiness 
Training 
Complete Cutover Checklist 
Conduct Cutover 
Provide Post Go-Live Support 
Enter Info in “As Built” 
Customer Transition Meeting 
Harness Ownership  
Post Go-Live Follow Up Training Sessions 
Complete Convert Checkpoint 
Transition to NS Support and/or ACS 

MICROSOFT 
365 METHODOLOGIES                       

DYNAMICS 

Success  by  Design  maps 
the  Dynamic  365 
implementation lifecycle into four methodology phases:  

Stage 1: Initiate 

Stage 2: Implement 

Stage 3: Prepare 

Stage 4: Operate 

In this section and the following sections, we outline  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Success by Design phases, their relationship 
to Success by Design reviews, and the desired outputs  
and outcomes.[6] 
Core implementation team: This is the team doing the 
actual execution of the project. For any Dynamics 365 
implementation project, core implementation teams 
should include project manager(s), business subject 
matter experts, solution architects, functional and 
technical consultants, developers, testers, change 
management advisors, and user champions.   

Microsoft Dynamics 365 Get ready to start 
Stage 1: Initiate  

In the Initiate phase, 
•  Kick off  
•  Requirement analysis 
•  Fit gap analysis 
•  Customer kick off 
•  The project team will be gathering and 
validating business requirements 
finalizing the high-level solution approach, 
making inroads to define all in-scope 
workstreams, and updating the project plan to 
reflect these updates. 

• 

•  When the project team has produced the 
high-level solution design and the related 
project workstreams are more or less defined, 
Success by Design begins with the Solution 
Blueprint Review. 

•  Microsoft Dynamics 365 Design and Build 

Phase         
     Stage 2: Implement  

In the Implement phase, we perform the following: 

•  Code 
•  Configuration 
•  Data modeling 
•  Solution Performance 
• 
• 

• 

• 

Integration 
the project team is focused on building the 
solution per the agreed-upon solution design 
and scope. 
Implementation Reviews are introduced in 
this phase, having been informed by the 
findings and recommendations of the 
Solution Blueprint Review.  
Implementation Reviews are used to more 
deeply address questions related to the 
specific aspects of the solution design (data 
model, security, integration) and 
implementation practices (ALM, testing 

strategy). Implementation Reviews are meant 
to fully address the risks identified during or 
after the Solution Blueprint Review but before 
the solution build is too far along.  

Microsoft Dynamics 365 Deploy Stage 3: Prepare   

In the Prepare phase,  

•  UAT  
•  Mock go live 
•  Cutover 
•  Testing and Acceptance 
•  Go live planning  
•  User readiness 
•  Cutover planning 
The solution has been built and tested and the 
project team is preparing for the final round of 
user acceptance testing (UAT) and training.  
•  Additionally, all necessary customer approvals 
have been granted, information security 
reviews completed, the cutover plan defined 
(including go/no-go criteria), mock go-lives 
scheduled, the support model ready, and the 
deployment runbook completed with tasks, 
owners, durations, and dependencies defined.  

•  At this point, the project team uses the 

Success by Design Go-live Readiness Review 
to identify any remaining gaps or issues.  

The Prepare Stage of the Microsoft Dynamics 
365, Implementation Reviews are meant to fully 
address the risks identified during or after the 
Solution Blueprint Review. This phase practiced 
by Microsoft Dynamics 365 analyses the potential 
risks. This is one of the best phases in the Success 
by Design phases. 

Microsoft Dynamics 365 Live Phase Stage 4: 
Operate   

In the Operate phase,  

the customer solution is live. 

• 
•  Service the solution  
•  Support 
•  Bug tracking 
•  Solution health 
•  Usage 
•  Maintenance 
•  Post Go-Live readiness review 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONCLUSION Success by Design equips project 
teams with a model for technical and project 
governance that invites questions and reflection, which 
leads to critical understanding of risks that might 
otherwise go unnoticed until too late in the project. 
Considering the pace of cloud solutions and the 
investment that organizations make in Dynamics 365 
software and implementation costs, even the most 
experienced customers and partners with the best 
methodologies will benefit by incorporating Success 
by Design into their projects. 
To achieve that, business applications must do more 
than just separately run your back office, marketing, 
supply chain, or even field operations. They must give 
you the agility to remove every barrier in your way. 
When this happens, business applications become 
more than just operational solutions. They become 
resilient solutions that enable the digital feedback loop 
and adapt to customer demands, delivering stronger, 
more engaging experiences around the products you 
make and services you provide. In Microsoft 
Dynamics 365, the Success by Design phases and their 
relationship to Success by Design reviews the desired 
outputs and outcomes with a user-friendly approach.  

Comparison between the ERP Implementation 
Methodologies of SAP, Oracle NetSuite and 
Microsoft Dynamics 365- My research conclusion: 

According to me, Knowledge Transfer should start 
from the Sales Team. 
When compared to all the other Methodologies used 
by SAP and Microsoft Dynamics 365, Reverse to 
Customer Success Knowledge Transfer, is the best 
practice used by Oracle NetSuite because here the 
Delivery team is well-prepared prior meeting the 
client. Since the Sales team is also involved its gives 
them a higher overview of the customer expectations.  
In the other Methodologies like SAP and Microsoft 
Dynamics 365, the Sales team is not involved.  

                          This Methodology followed by only 
Oracle NetSuite, give a lot of importance to the 
Customer Engagement. This session is pre preparation 
before meeting the client in person. Since the Sales 
team is also involved its gives them a higher overview 
of the customer expectations. By preparing the 
Delivery Team for the next meeting with the client it 

sets the preparedness and strong effectiveness to 
know the customer better , their personalities and the 
pain points in the business and why they choose this 
ERP , and set expectations and framework for a 
successful implementation. This is the foundation for 
any ERP methodology. 

All the ERP Vendors, follow the Project gathering 
phase as the initial  but When compared to all the 
other Methodologies used by SAP and Microsoft 
Dynamics and Oracle NetSuite ,one of the best 
practice used  here is the Revere Sales to PS KT 
session. 

In the Enable Stage of Oracle Net Suite, The Process 
Walkthrough 2 is conducted. This session is between 
the customer and the Delivery team and in this session 
the Customer will lead and where the customer will 
showcase the business process in Net  

Suite to the delivery team. This is one of the best 
practices as it will let us know how well the client has 
understood the application and how user friendly the 
client is with the Suite.  This is such an amazing 
session which is only followed by the Oracle NetSuite 
methodologies which is not followed by other ERP’s 
like Microsoft Dynamics 365 and SAP. One of the 
critical success factors for a project is also training. 
Through the process walkthrough 2 and Reverse to 
Sales Knowledge Transfer, many failed 
implementations can be reduced.  

                       I suggest that any ERP Methodology 
should have Reverse to Sales KT and Process 
Walkthrough 2. For Oracle NetSuite, Customer 
Engagement lead to Customer Success.  For Microsoft 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dynamics 365, every business is of creating great 
customer experiences. In Oracle NetSuite, Following 
the best practices suggested by the Suite Success for 
the customer’s business combined with Customer 
Engagement brings Customer success.[7] 

In SAP, Process and Sustainability is the Economics to 
bring the process and application technology 
integration of all the departments like   Sales and 
Marketing, Finance, Production planning and so on. 

All the three ERP Vendors are pioneer in their own 
way and the methodology used determines the success 
of the project implementation. 

REFERENCES: 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

Hesham Mohamed El-Sherif Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) Evaluation - 
November 2014 

Yücel YılmazGurkan Ozcan-Implementing ERP-systems with accelerated ERP 
more efficient and quickly – a best practice-July 2011 

Rohit Kenge - A Research Study on the ERP System Implementation and Current 
Trends in ERP - October 2020 

Wouroud I Elfarmawi - Challenges Affecting the Implementation of Enterprise 
Resource Planning (ERP) - December 2020 

Yucel, Gurkan- Implementing ERP systems with Accelerated ERP more efficient 
and quickly- a best practice 

Jt Gorrell - Factors Affecting Microsoft Dynamics ERP Implementation Success - 
September 2020 

 Wissam EL Hajj,Ali serhan- Study on the Factors that Determine the Success of 
ERP Implementation- May 2019 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
