Finite element simulation for validation of multi-dipole line cusp magnetic 
field configuration for MPD  

A. D. Patel1*, A. Amardas1, N. Ramasubramanian1,2 

1Institute for Plasma Research, Bhat, Gandhinagar, Gujarat-382428, India 

2Homi Bhabha National Institute, Training School Complex, Anushaktinagar, Mumbai 400094, India 

*E-mail: amitphy9898@gmail.com 

Abstract: 

A Multi-dipole line cusp configured Plasma Device (MPD) having six electromagnets with embedded 
Vacoflux-50 as a core material has been operated with a capability to experimentally control the field-
free region, the radial profile of magnetic  field, and pole magnetic field by changing magnet current. 
For the validation of multi-dipole line cusp magnetic field (MMF) configuration in a 3-D geometry, a 
finite  element  simulation  has  been  performed  using  COMSOL  software.  This  paper  presents  3-D 
magnetic field simulation results of multi-pole line cusp magnetic field configuration performed over 
the  1.2m  length  and  40cm  diameter  chamber  in  the  vacuum  condition.  The  simulation  results  show 
good  agreement  with  the  experimentally  measured  magnetic  field  profile.  The  performed  magnetic 
field simulation results clearly capture that this configuration has full control over a null region (nearly 
field-free  region)  as  well  is  capable  to  change  the  magnetic  field  values  and  radial  variation  of  the 
magnetic field. Moreover, the magnetic field profiles over the end cross section of the device have been 
discussed. 

I. 

Introduction: 

Plasma  confined  by  multi-dipole  cusp  configurations  has  found  fundamental  applications  in  the  evolution  of 
negative/positive ion sources [1-4], material sciences, plasma-etching reactors [5], fundamental plasma physics, 
etc.  The  potentiality  to  confine  a  large  volume  of  high-density  uniform  plasma  is  the  main  crucial  feature  of 
such  configurations  [6].  Although  the  studies  of  plasma  confinement  by  multi-dipole  cusp  configuration 
emerged  from  nuclear  fusion  research, it  is  no  more  considered  for  fusion  research  since  other  substantial 
options are available. The negative/positive ion source with a multi-pole cusp configuration has demonstrated its 
capability  for high current and stable ion beams  which is  essential  for the  new  generation of accelerators [7]. 
Moreover, these types of multi-dipole cusp geometries are being applicable for basic plasma-physics studies (i.e. 
plasma waves and instability, plasma-particle interaction) in laboratory plasma devices due to their capability to 
confine large-volume uniform and quiescent plasmas [6].  Thus for the validation and future plasma modeling 
using COMSOL multi-physics, the 3-D finite element magnetic field simulation has been performed [8]. 

In this article, a simulation of multi-pole line cusp magnetic field configuration using COMSOL software tool 
for MPD having axial length l200 cm and 40 cm diameter [9, 10] has been discussed. The results obtained by 
performing simulation are compared with experimentally measured magnetic field values. The control over the 
null region, the control over radial variation of magnetic field values, and control over the pole magnetic field 
have been discussed. Moreover, in MPD authors have been trying to produce contact ionization Cesium plasma 
using coaxial tungsten hot plate-based cathode source [11]. This source has been placed at the end edge of the 
chamber. The tungsten filaments have been used to heat the tungsten plate. The ambient magnetic field cause  J 
X  B  forces  and  scatter  the  electron-emitting  tungsten  filaments  [12]  and  thus  nearly  field-free  region  of  the 
multi-pole cusp magnetic field configuration plays a crucial role in placing the source. Thus the counter (r, θ) 
plane  of  magnetic  field  configuration  at  the  end  edge  of  the  device  is  crucial  and  has  been  discussed.  This 
counter (r, θ) plane of the multi-pole cusp magnetic field configuration also helps to choose the location of the 
hot  tungsten  plate-based  Cesium  plasma  inside  the  null  region  cusp  magnetic  field  configuration  so  that 
maximum axial plasma length can be achieved. The construction of the MPD device is described in section II, 
while  section  III  contains  the  COMSOL  simulation  model  and  simulation  results  compared  with  the 
experimental values and the conclusion of the performed simulation results will be discussed in Section IV. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II.  Multi-pole cusp magnetic field device (MPD) 

The schematic diagram of the complete setup of the MPD device is shown in figure 1 (a), figure 1 (b) represents 
the  CATIA image, and  figure (c) represents the  real image. The device consists of a vacuum  chamber  with a 
pumping  system,  magnet  system,  a  tungsten  filament-based  source  for  the  plasma  ignition,  and  basic  plasma 
diagnostics. The main chamber of the MPD is made up of non-magnetic stainless steel-304. The diameter of this 
chamber is 40 cm and the axial length is 1500 cm.  This chamber is attached with a Turbo-Molecular Pump (430 
liters/sec) backed up by a rotary pump on the end side and is sufficient to produce a base pressure of 10-6 mBar. 
The six electromagnets are arranged in the multi-dipole cusp configuration along the circumference of a 40.5 cm 
diameter  cylindrical  chamber.  Each  electromagnet  is  wound  with  double  pan-cake  windings  using  hollow 
copper  pipes,  the  cross-section  of  which  is  shown  in  figure  2  and  figure  3  shows  the  real  image  of  the 
electromagnet.  More  about  electromagnets  have  been  discussed  in  our  earlier  published  article  ref.  8  and 
9.   Rectangular  Vacoflux-50  core  material  is  embedded  in  each  of  the  magnets  as  shown  in  figure  3.  The 
Vacoflux-50 core is a ferromagnetic material made up of iron and cobalt in a ratio of 50:50. The Vacoflux-50 
core  material  has  relative  permeability  is  >  4000,  the  saturation  flux  density  is  >  2  Tela,  and  the  Curie 
temperature is 700 degree Celsius. These six electromagnets are powered by a set of power supplies connected 
in parallel. 

(a) 

Fig. 1: (a) Schematic diagram of experimental setup of MPD (b) CATIA image of MPD (c) Image of MPD with versatile 
electro-magnets. 

 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
Fig. 2:  Cross-sectional of the electromagnet showing copper pipes and core material vacoflux-50. 

Fig. 3:  Image of versatile electro magnet coil for multi-pole cusp magnetic field configuration. 

III. 

3-D COMSOL magnetic field simulation and comparison with experimental results 

A  3-D  finite  element  magnetic  field  simulation  for  VMMF  is  performed  using  COMSOL  software.  Figure  4 
shows the 3-D model created in COMSOL of the MPD device generated in COMSOL and figure 5 shows the 
Controlled fine mesh of the multi-pole cusp magnetic field configuration. Figure 6 represents the contour plot of 
the magnetic field lines at the mid (r, θ) plane when 150A magnet current (Imag) is pass through in magnets in 
vacuum  condition.  Similar  simulations  were  also  performed  for  50A  and  100A  magnet  current  is  passing 
through in magnets. The simulated magnetic field values along the cusp are compared with experimental results 
for these three currents. Figure 7 represents the radial variation of the magnetic field along the cusp region and 
is compared with experimental values at 50A, 100A, and 150A measured at the mid (r, θ) plane of the device. 
The field inside the vacuum chamber is measured using a tri-axis gauss probe and a suitable gauss meter. The 
magnetic field measurements with changing magnet current were performed at several radial locations as well as 
on  the  different  cross-sectional  planes  of  the  device.  Figure  6  shows  the  2-D  (r,  θ)  plane  contour  plot  of  the 
magnetic  field simulated using COMSOL. The radial variation of the  measured  magnetic field (BM) along  the 
cusp  region  (θ  =0o)  is  shown  in  figure  4(a)  for  three  different  currents  (Imag=  50A  and  100A,  150A)  in  the 
magnets. The figure also shows the simulated magnetic field (BS) is in good agreement with measured values. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Fig. 4: A multi-dipole cusp magnetic field configuration model developed in COMSOL 

Fig. 5: Controlled fine mesh of the multi-pole cusp magnetic field configuration. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  6:  Contour  plot  of  the  magnetic  field  lines  in  the  mid  (r,  θ)  plane,  150A  magnet  current,  and  inside  the  chamber  of 
multi-pole cusp magnetic field configuration from COMSOL simulation 

Fig. 7: Radial variation of magnetic field along cusp region and compared with experimental values at 50A, 100A, and 150A 
measured at mid (r, θ) plane of the device. 

A 3-D finite element magnetic field simulation using COMSOL software has been also performed for 
the end edge (r, θ) plane of the device. Figure 8 represents a contour plot of the vacuum field lines in the edge 
(r,  θ)  plane  of  the  device  at  150A  magnet  current  of  multi-pole  cusp  magnetic  field  configuration  from 
COMSOL simulation. From the figure, it is clearly evident that the end edge (r, θ) plane follows the mid (r, θ) 
plane except for magnetic field values. Figure 9 represents the radial  variation of the magnetic field along the 
cusp region at 50A, 100A, and 150A measured at the edge (r, θ) plane of the device in vacuum conditions. The 
variation of magnetic field values along the radial direction follows the trend of mid variation of magnetic field 
values along the radial direction of (r, θ) plane. The precise location of the end edges counter (r, θ) plane was 
obtained from the simulation has been used to choose the location of the hot tungsten plate-based cesium plasma 
source [11] inside the null region of cusp magnetic field configuration. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  8:  Contour  plot of  the  magnetic  field  lines  in  the  edge  (r,  θ)  plane, 150A  magnet  current,  and  inside  the  chamber  of 
multi-pole cusp magnetic field configuration from COMSOL simulation 

Fig. 9: Radial variation of magnetic field along cusp region at 50A, 100A, and 150A measured at edge (r, θ) plane of the 
device.  

IV. 

Conclusion 

A Multi-dipole line cusp configured Plasma Device having six electromagnets with embedded Vacoflux-50 core 
material has been operated with a function to control the field free region, radial profile of magnetic field values, 
and pole  magnetic  field by changing  magnet current experimentally. A  simulation of a  multi-dipole line cusp 
magnetic  field  (over  a  nearly  1.2  m  axial  length  and  40  cm  diameter  of  the  chamber)  in  a  vacuum  is 
demonstrated  using  the  COMSOL  simulation  tool.  The  simulation  results  show  good  agreement  with 
experimentally measured magnetic field values. The performed magnetic field simulation results clearly capture 
that this configuration has full control over a null region (nearly field-free region) as well is capable to change 
the  magnetic  field  values  and  radial  variation  of  the  magnetic  field.  Moreover,  finite  element  magnetic  field 
simulation  using  COMSOL  software  was  also  performed  for  observing  the  end  edge  (r,  θ)  plane  of  this 
configuration.  The  results  show  edge  (r,  θ)  plane  follows  the  mid  (r,  θ)  plane  trend  except  values  and  radial 
variation of magnetic field values also follows the trend except values.  

Acknowledgment: 

All  the  simulations  have  been  performed  using  Antya,  a  linux  cluster  at  Institute  for  Plasma  Research, 
Gandhinagar, India.  

References: 

1.  R. J. Taylor, K. R. MacKenzie, and Ikezi, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 43, 1675 (1972) 
2.  M.G. Haines, Nucl. Fusion 17, 811 (1977) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  I. Spalding, in Advances in plasma physics, edited by A. Simon and W. B. Thomson 
4.  See for example K. N. Leung, R. D. Collier, L. B. Marshall, T. N. Gallaher, W.H. Ingham, 

R.E. Kribel, and G.R. Taylor, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 49,321 (1978) 

5.  T.E. Wicker and T.D. Mantei, J. Appl. Phys. 57, 1638 (1985) 
6.  R. Limpaecher and K. R. MacKenzie, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 44, 726(1973) 
7.  A. kumar, V.K. Senecha and R. M. Vadjikar, AIP Conference Proceedings 137, 1097 (2009) 
8.  https://www.comsol.com 
9.  A.  D.  Patel,  M.  Sharma,  N.  Ramasubramanian,  R.  Ganesh,  and  P.  K.  Chattopadhyay,  Rev. 

Sci. Instrum., 44, 726 (2018).   

10.  A. D. Patel, M. Sharma, N. Ramasubramanian, J. Ghosh, P. K. Chattopadhyay,  Phys. Scr. 95, 

035602 (2020). 

11.  A.  D.  Patel,  Zubin  Shaikh,  M.  Sharma,  Santosh  P.  Pandya,  and  N.  Ramasubramanian,  IPR 

/Lib./T.R.676 /2022. 

12.  F. F. Chen, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 40, 1049 (1969). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
