Towards Supporting Intelligence in 5G/6G Core
Networks: NWDAF Implementation and Initial
Analysis

Ali Chouman, Dimitrios Michael Manias, and Abdallah Shami
ECE Department, Western University, London ON, Canada
{achouman, dmanias3, Abdallah.Shami}@uwo.ca

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
0
3

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
2
1
5
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Wireless networks, in the ﬁfth-generation and be-
yond, must support diverse network applications which will
support the numerous and demanding connections of today’s and
tomorrow’s devices. Requirements such as high data rates, low
latencies, and reliability are crucial considerations and artiﬁcial
intelligence is incorporated to achieve these requirements for
intelligent
a large number of connected devices. Speciﬁcally,
methods and frameworks for advanced analysis are employed
by the 5G Core Network Data Analytics Function (NWDAF)
to detect patterns and ascribe detailed action information to
accommodate end users and improve network performance.
To this end, the work presented in this paper incorporates a
functional NWDAF into a 5G network developed using open
source software. Furthermore, an analysis of the network data
collected by the NWDAF and the valuable insights which can
be drawn from it have been presented with detailed Network
Function interactions. An example application of such insights
used for intelligent network management is outlined. Finally, the
expected limitations of 5G networks are discussed as motivation
for the development of 6G networks.

Index Terms—5G, 6G, Core Networks, NWDAF, Intelligent

Networks

I. INTRODUCTION

The telecommunications industry has sparked a dramatic
transition to novel and improved high-speed wireless commu-
nications architectures in industry and society. The design and
operation of 5G and Beyond (5G+) networks is a tightly woven
cooperation of developments in both the 5G Core and 5G radio
networks that has led the charge for fast-paced development
in the communications industry. The 5G+ concept has become
a critical tool in the introduction and development of Industry
4.0, a paradigm shift of modern wireless communications
systems to true, digital economies [1].

The 5G architecture is comprised of the 5G Core (5GC)
network, the new Radio Access Network (RAN), and its newly
supported New Radio (NR). The Third Generation Partnership
Project (3GPP) outlined the design of the 5G Core to implicitly
and explicitly support new architectural features, such as a
service-based architecture (SBA), consistent user experience,
improved Quality-of-Service (QoS), enhanced machine-to-
machine communication services, adaption to cloud-native
technologies, and edge computing access. 5G deﬁnes three
service grades, where each strata deﬁnes its own special
requirements to adhere to customers’ business models: Ultra-

Reliable Low Latency Communications (URLLC), Massive
Machine-Type Communications (mMTC), and Enhanced Mo-
bile Broadband (eMBB) [2].

The use of AI in 5G+ networks is one of the deﬁning
characteristics of this paradigm-shifting technology. According
to reported statistics, by 2025, it is projected that the telecom
industry will invest USD 36.7B in AI through software and
hardware investments as well as AI services [3]. The oper-
ational beneﬁts of AI in 5G+ networks consider the added
value the AI system provides in terms of the management and
orchestration of networks [4][5]. One of the main beneﬁts of
AI is the ability to take proactive and predictive measures
to ensure the optimization of network performance. Some
methods of network performance optimization include the
reduction of power consumption through enhanced algorithmic
performance, the maximization of throughput through optimal
trafﬁc routing and infrastructure placement, as well as the
ability to support an increasingly dense number of users [6][7].
The envisioned AI-enabled network will consist of intelli-
gent agents being fed data related to the network, including
network measurements and statistics, resource utilization, and
trafﬁc patterns and conducting inferencing to provide network
automation through Management and Orchestration (MANO)
tasks such as resource optimization and system reconﬁguration
[3][8]. However, one of the main challenges plaguing AI
implementations across all ﬁelds relates to the availability of
high-quality data. In order to effectively collect the required
data to build and train AI agents, data collection interfaces
need to be deployed throughout the network and constantly
be monitored [9]. To this end, the Network Data Analytics
Function (NWDAF) has been proposed by 3GPP as a solution
to this problem to be directly implemented in the 5G+ core
network as a key network function.

The work described in this paper addresses the practical
development of the NWDAF and considers its integration
into an operational 5G core implemented using open-source
software, including Open5GS [10] and UERANSIM [11]. The
main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
• Initial analysis into the type of core network function data

that can be collected by the NWDAF.

• Presentation of insights which can be drawn using the

collected core network data.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Accepted: IWCMC 2022

• Discussion as to how the NWDAF can be used to
inﬂuence MANO activities such as core network function
placement.

• An outlook into the state of future networks, the expected
limitations of 5G, and the motivation sparking the initial
discussion of 6G networks.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II considers background information related to the 5G Core
and the NWDAF. Section III presents a use case highlighting
key insights obtained from the analysis of NWDAF-collected
5G core network data and its application to the MANO of 5G+
networks. Section IV discusses the vision and requirements
of 6G networks, as well as the expected limitations of 5G
networks motivating their initial conceptualization and devel-
opment. Finally, Section V concludes the paper and discusses
opportunities for future work.

II. BACKGROUND

a database containing network/user policies and associated
data. Finally, the Authentication Server Function provides au-
thentication services for a speciﬁc device, utilizing credentials
from the UDM [12].

As an underlying function solely responsible for data ana-
lytics and network learning, the NWDAF represents operator-
managed network analytics as a logical function [2]. The
NWDAF provides slice-speciﬁc network data analytics to any
given NF. As well, the NWDAF provides network analytics
information to NFs on a network slice instance level. The
function also notiﬁes NFs with slice-speciﬁc network status
analytic information for any that are subscribed to it. NFs may
also collect network status analytic information directly from
the NWDAF. In the 5G Core, both the Policy Control Function
(PCF) and the Network Slice Selection Function (NSSF) are
consumers of network analytics. The PCF may use that data
in its policy decisions, and the NSSF may use the load-level
information provided by the NWDAF for slice selection.

A. 5G Core

B. NWDAF

The 5G Core is composed of various Network Functions
(NFs) with their individually associated microservices and
responsibilities. The 3GPP intended for the 5G Core to
bring about a mindset shift from evolving architectures into
standalone, access-independent structures. For example, the
5G Core, by design principle, does not provide backwards
compatibility for any previous generations of RANs (e.g.,
the 5GC consists of a new set of
GSM, LTE). Instead,
interfaces that are intended for core network-radio network
interactions. In terms of the 5G RAN speciﬁcations, the 3GPP
deﬁned two architectural variants which combine the LTE and
the 5G NR: the non stand-alone architecture (NSA) and the
stand-alone architecture (SA). The key difference is that the
NSA aims to maximize the reusability of 4G architectures by
relying on LTE radio access for signaling between UE devices
and the network. Speciﬁcally, it consolidates an enhanced EPC
network to support 5G in the more recent deployments [1].

At

the core of 5GC, NFs provide the functionality for
establishing sessions and forwarding data to and from mobile
User Equipment (UE) devices. Some key NFs and their
operations are detailed to provide a brief summary of the
5G Core functionalities. The Access and Mobility Manage-
ment Function (AMF) interacts with the UE devices and
the RAN, and is involved in most 5G signalling calls. As
well, the AMF supports activation for devices in idle mode.
The Session Management Function (SMF) manages end user
device sessions, including their establishment, modiﬁcation,
release, and IP address allocation. The SMF also interacts with
other NFs to select and control different User Plane Function
(UPF) instances over the network. This control allows it
to conﬁgure trafﬁc steering and enforcement
in UPFs for
individual sessions. The UPF processes and forwards user data
and is controlled by the SMF. In addition, the UPF connects to
external IP networks to act as anchor points, hiding mobility.
The Uniﬁed Data Management Function (UDM) accesses user
subscription data stored in the Uniﬁed Data Repository (UDR),

The NWDAF architecture is designed to aid policy and
decision-making for NFs in the control plane and supports
some important services for a given NF service consumer.
Industrial NWDAF solutions typically have an N23 interface
and an N34 interface as reference points to the PCF and the
NSSF, respectively. As well, 5G edge computing use cases
allow the NWDAF to aid the SMF in routing decisions. As
the central point of network analytics, the NWDAF enables
operators to capture non-SBI data in addition to SBI data as
standalone 5G deployments become more prevalent [13].

As of December 2021, the NWDAF provides ﬁve different
NF services: AnalyticsSubscription, AnalyticsInfo, DataMan-
agement, MLModelProvision, and MLModelInfo. The Analyt-
icsSubscription service notiﬁes the NF consumer instance of
all analytics subscribed to the speciﬁc NWDAF service. The
AnalyticsInfo service enables the NF consumer to request and
retrieve network data analytics from the NWDAF. As well,
it enables the NWDAF to request analytics context transfers
from another NWDAF if necessary. The DataManagement
service allows an NF consumer to subscribe to receive data
if the data is
or historical analytics (interpreted as data);
already deﬁned in the NWDAF, the subscription is updated.
The MLModelProvision service enables an NF consumer to
receive notiﬁcations when an ML model, matching subscrip-
tion parameters, becomes available. Finally, the MLModelInfo
service enables an NF consumer to request and retrieve ML
model information from the NWDAF [14].

Industrial NWDAF implementations provide closed-loop
automation for third-party NFs and solutions inside the 5G
Core. In particular, these NWDAFs are intended for continuous
monitoring of every NF, network slice, and UE device and use
a variety of KPIs to measure network performance. The real-
time KPIs can be used to automate network issue resolution,
while predictive analytics can be used to predict those network
issues in the future. Predictive analytics may also provide
anomaly detection to be used for automating mitigation [13].

2

III. CASE STUDY: NWDAF IMPLEMENTATION AND
ANALYSIS

The following case study will explore the various insights
and conclusions drawn from network-generated data from a
5G Core Network. The analysis conducted in this case study
is an example of how the NWDAF can leverage data to provide
meaningful insights to enhance the MANO of core network
functions. Speciﬁcally, this case study will analyze control
packets generated during the instantiation of the network core.
Through these control packets, various statistics such as the
size and number of packets per protocol will be displayed.
Additionally, an in-depth exploration of the Binding Support
Function (BSF) and its interaction with the Network Reposi-
tory Function (NRF) will be discussed. Using both analyses, a
recommendation can be made regarding the placement of the
BSF in relation to the NRF.

The collected data for this case study was generated through
Open5GS, an open-source project providing network func-
tionalities for building private 5G networks [10]. The 5G
standalone implementation was used for the system model
leveraging both the Service-Based Architecture (SBA) and
following the Control and User Plane Separation (CUPS)
scheme, as described by 5G network standardization efforts led
by the 3GPP [14]. UERANSIM, an open-source state-of-the-
art 5G UE and RAN implementation, was used to complete
full operation of the 5G Core with connected devices [11].
Figure 1 outlines the various core network functions which
were operational during the data collection phase. Addition-
ally, this ﬁgure illustrates how the proposed NWDAF ﬁts in
the 5G Core with its associated interfaces (depicted in green).
In this ﬁgure, the reference point architecture, presented by
solid lines, illustrates the point-to-point interaction between
core network functions, whereas the SBA is illustrated by the
dashed lines. Through the SBA, the NWDAF is able to collect
data and statistics about all other authorized core network
functions without having an explicit point-to-point reference
deﬁned. The data collection phase ran for 138 minutes and,
as previously mentioned, exclusively considered the control
signalling between the various network functions in the control
plane, not including any GPRS Tunneling Protocol (GTP)
trafﬁc from the UE and the RAN. The data for this case study
is publically available [15].

The ﬁrst result presented in Fig. 2 considers the total number
of packets associated with each observed protocol throughout
the duration of the data collection phase. As seen through
this ﬁgure,
the overwhelming majority of packets utilize
the TCP protocol, something which is expected considering
the NFs communicate with each other through REST APIs
leveraging the HTTP/2 protocol. RESTful SBA procedures can
be categorized into Service Registration, Service Discovery,
and Session Establishment. It should be noted that the three
NGAP protocols have been introduced in 5G and are used
in communications between the gNB and the Access and
Mobility Function.

In addition to the NGAP protocols, which are prevalent

3

Accepted: IWCMC 2022

in UE registration and de-registration, the Packet Forwarding
Control Protocol (PFCP) is paramount to formalizing the inter-
actions between 5G Core NFs, speciﬁcally between the SMF
and the UPF through the N4 interface. Albeit infrequent in the
generated network trafﬁc when compared to other protocols,
PFCP is used in signalling procedures in the Control Plane
for network attachment and in the User Plane for IPv4/IPv6
packet forwarding with the wireless RAN and the PDU [16].
The next stage in this analysis considers the average size of
each protocol’s packets along with statistics such as the stan-
dard deviation and maximum packet size as presented in Fig.
3. Through this ﬁgure, it can be seen that the largest packet
sizes are attributed to the SSL protocols. However, given the
volume of SSL packets presented in the previous results, these
packets are infrequent. Considering both presented results, it is
evident that the focus of this analysis should be on TCP packet
signalling as they have the greatest volume and signiﬁcant size
compared to the other protocols.

The following results pertain to the interaction between the
BSF and the NRF. This interaction was selected to further
explore the trends in TCP control packets and provide a mean-
ingful recommendation based on the volume and frequency
of data exchanged between these NFs. Figure 4 considers all
TCP control packets exchanged between these two functions
and compares the size of the packet to the time at which it
was sent, effectively providing bi-direction link throughput for
this interface. This ﬁgure shows a clear spike in packet size
near the beginning, followed by a constant packet size for the
remainder of the data collection stage. The zoomed-in portion
of the graph shows that the packets are transmitted periodically
with minor variations due to signalling processes.

To further explore these results and translate them to observ-
able 5G NF events, a more intuitive analysis is done regarding
the one-way communication of the BSF with the NRF as seen
in Fig. 5. In this ﬁgure, the TCP packets with the BSF as the
source and the NRF as the destination are displayed, and text
annotations have been used to highlight key NF events. As
seen in this ﬁgure, the initial spike in packet size is attributed
to the BSF registering with the NRF. In HTTP/2-based com-
munications, this interaction corresponds to a request/response
fetch in the SBI, as opposed to a subscribe/notify callback
(e.g., the SMF subscribing to the NRF for notiﬁcations when
other NFs go down). During this registration process, the BSF
is required to send all its functional information to the NRF,
resulting in the increased packet size. The second major NF
event is the BSF heartbeat which occurs every 10 seconds
and makes the NRF aware of any changes in its status (i.e.,
registration, load). As illustrated in the zoomed-in portion of
the graph, two packet size values emerge; the greater packet
size is associated with the PATCH request used to perform
the heartbeat, whereas the lesser packet size is associated with
the acknowledgement of received information from the NRF
in response. It is important to note that the PATCH request,
partially updates the network resource, compared to a PUT
request, which completely replaces the resource addressed by
the URI with the JSON-formatted payload of the request.

Accepted: IWCMC 2022

Fig. 1: 5G Core Service Based Architecture

Fig. 2: Number of Packets per Protocol

Fig. 3: Packet Length Statistics per Protocol

Equivalently, Fig. 6 presents the one-way communication of
the NRF with the BRF. As labelled through the annotation, the
ﬁrst major spike corresponds to the response sent when the NF
has been registered (NF REGISTERED) and the proﬁle has
been created. As expected, when compared with the initial
request seen in Fig. 5, the response is signiﬁcantly smaller.
Furthermore, when looking at the zoomed-in portion of the
graph outlining the response to the BSF heartbeat, there are
once again two distinct packet sizes that emerge. The smaller
of the two sizes corresponds to a simple acknowledgement,
whereas the larger size corresponds to the response of the

heartbeat. As outlined in the NRF schema, if no signiﬁcant
change has been made to the status of the function,
the
response to the heartbeat is a packet with an empty body;
however, if there were to be a signiﬁcant change to the function
status, such as the signal value NF DEREGISTERED, this
response’s body would contain the latest updated information.
Given the results presented in this case study, the NWDAF
could be tasked with recommending a placement decision for
another instance of the BSF function. An industrial NWDAF
solution utilizes similar policy decision-making in the context
of the PCF and the NSSF [13]. The PCF should take input

4

NSSFAMFAUSFUDMSMFPCFUPFUDRNRFBSFN7N4N11N13N12N22N15N8N10N35N36NWDAFN23N34HTTP2HTTP2/JSONHTTP2/JSON/NAS-5GSHTTP2/JSON/NAS-5GS/NGAPHTTP2/JSON/NGAPICMPMDNSNGAPNGAP/NAS-5GSNGAP/NAS-5GS/NAS-5GSPFCPSCTPSSLv2TCPUDPProtocol100101102103104Number of PacketsNumber of Packets per ProtocolHTTP2HTTP2/JSONHTTP2/JSON/NAS-5GSHTTP2/JSON/NAS-5GS/NGAPHTTP2/JSON/NGAPICMPMDNSNGAPNGAP/NAS-5GSNGAP/NAS-5GS/NAS-5GSPFCPSCTPSSLv2TCPUDPProtocol102103104Packet Length [bytes]Packet Length Statistics per ProtocolMaximumAverageAccepted: IWCMC 2022

from the NWDAF to allocate resources and steer trafﬁc poli-
cies for dynamic network slices, and the NSSF should gather
load-level information from the NWDAF for the purpose of
slice selection. As illustrated, the initial registration process
with the NRF results in the packet size spike, whereas the
remainder of its interaction with the NRF is a set of periodic
heartbeats of much smaller packet size. For this reason, the co-
location of these network functions is likely not required as
the amount of control information exchanged between them is
limited. Future work with the BSF will explore its interaction
with the PCF as it is responsible for communicating with the
PCF to partially update binding information for PDU sessions
which are set to binding level endpoint NF SET.

IV. FUTURE OUTLOOK

Efﬁcient operation is at

the forefront of future 5G de-
ployment and maintenance considerations, and mobility is
a key metric/KPI that the NWDAF must follow and learn
about within the network. Control plane NFs can predict this
mobility, provided that the analytics operations are efﬁcient
and intelligent (i.e., leads to making proactive decisions). Data
required for mobility prediction can be streamed by the AMF
to the NWDAF via the data collection API and can identify
aperiodicity in mobility patterns. On the user plane side, a
UPF area prediction service can be implemented based on UE
location, capacity/availability, and distance [17].

While 5G is currently being developed and NSPs are
beginning initial deployment, and integration, discussion of
6G networks is already on the horizon. The main motivation
behind this discussion is the rapidly increasing number of
connected devices, a trend that is expected to continue for the
foreseeable future as I/IoT frameworks continue to develop
and expand. To this end, there is a concern that 5G networks
will not be able to meet the demands of future use cases, which
are projected to require transfer rates in the order of Tb/s,
latency on the order of microseconds, as well as increased
connection density due to a multitude of deployed sensors.
Additionally, future use cases ranging from Augmented/Virtual
Reality (A/VR) and Robotics to Holograms and Teleoperation
are expected to disrupt existing networks and test their extra-
neous, boundary use cases [18].

To address the expected limitations and shortcomings of 5G
networks, research has begun into methods of expanding the
capacity and capability of future networks to ensure that future
demands can be met. Some proposed lines of research include
the exploration of new frequency bands (THz) as well as
distributed and federated intelligence throughout the network.
As user behaviour and habits change and evolve, networking
practices must also follow suit. 6G presents a revolutionary
opportunity to scale up the presence of intelligence in networks
and ultimately enable a plethora of future use cases and
applications; however, this is not a trivial task.

As 6G networks take shape, AI will be deeply integrated
into the network, more than just through a core network func-
tion. As intelligence gets distributed through the system, so do
the privacy and security risks associated with it. These risks

Fig. 4: Bytes per Second Exchanged between BSF and NRF

Fig. 5: Length of Packets Sent from BSF to NRF

Fig. 6: Length of Packets Sent from BSF to NRF

5

02000400060008000Time [s]05001000150020002500BytesThroughput BSF-NRF Interaction2000220045050055019:1019:26:4019:43:2020:0020:16:4020:33:2020:5021:06:4021:23:20Time200400600800Packet Length [bytes]BSF Registration with NRFPacket Length BSF  NRF20:2520:26:4020:28:2020:30Time6080100120140160BSF Heartbeat to NRF19:1019:26:4019:43:2020:0020:16:4020:33:2020:5021:06:4021:23:20Time75100125150175200225Packet Length [bytes]Profile Created - NF Registration ResponsePacket Length NRF  BSF20:18:2020:2020:21:4020:23:2020:25Time708090100NRF Heartbeat Responsecan range from data poisoning at edge nodes to system-wide
model drift, each with its own intricacies and nuances which
must be addressed. Additionally, with more data distributed at
the edge, data privacy is paramount to ensuring public safety
considering critical services such as emergency, ﬁnance, and
transportation will be in jeopardy of being compromised. As
such, it will become increasingly important to consider model
maintenance as an integral part of the ML/AI life cycle to
ensure future networks’ safe and secure performance.

6G networks must fully realize the revolutionizing Industry
is the
4.0 that started with 5G networks. In particular, it
digital transformation of physical manufacturing systems and
IoT services. IoT-based diagnostics will enhance maintenance
and operation of machine communications, prioritizing cost-
effectiveness and ﬂexibility. In Industry 4.0, automation re-
quires reliable and synchronous communication systems that
6G is situated to address through the aforementioned disruptive
technologies [19].

The various use cases of the NWDAF will aid in addressing
the AI-related challenges in 6G networks. With the advent of
low-power requirements for IoT devices, AI model training
could consider new speciﬁcations recommended by NWDAF
data, based on federated learning (e.g.,
learning at edge
devices). As well, AI use cases guided by the NWDAF data
analytics must address the lack of bounding performance in
6G networks. In contrast to the previous challenge, system
design must consider worst-case scenario network events while
providing a minimum acceptable QoS/performance guarantee;
however, due to non-linear characteristics of such related
problems, it may be infeasible for AI approaches regardless
of their effectiveness in real-time inferences [20].

V. CONCLUSION

The adoption and integration of intelligence in 5G networks
has the potential to revolutionize our current networking prac-
tices. Perhaps the greatest potential lies in the Network Data
and Analytics Function (NWDAF) proposed by 3GPP. This
function will collect a plethora of information and statistics
on the operation of the network ranging from high-level data
such as slice level information to very speciﬁc data related
to a single NF. This will ultimately enable a holistic view
of the network and will enable enhanced Management and
Orchestration (MANO) capabilities. Throughout this paper,
we have presented a case study that outlined an analysis
of NWDAF-collected core network function data from an
Open5GS and UERANSIM implementation. An initial analy-
sis into this data and the potential insights that can be drawn
from it were illustrated. In this case study, 5G core function
control messages were considered; speciﬁcally, the interaction
between the Network Repository Function (NRF) and the
Binding Support Function (BSF) was examined.

Future work in this area will consider the impact of the
NWDAF on 5G networks and continue to explore data gen-
erated from 5G core network functions. As mentioned in the
results section, a study on the interaction between the BSF
and the Policy and Control Function (PCF) will be a focus.

Accepted: IWCMC 2022

Finally, the development of advanced analytics models will
be considered using the generated data for use cases such as
proactive network management and forecasting.

REFERENCES

[1] Stefan Rommer, Peter Hedman, Magnus Olsson, Lars Frid, Shabnam
Sultana, and Catherine Mulligan. 5G Core Networks: Powering Digi-
talization. Academic Press, 2019.

[2]

5G; 5G System; Network Data Analytics Services; Stage 3
(3GPP TS 29.520 version 15.0.0 Release 15)etsi
ts 129 520
v15.0.0. https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi ts/129500 129599/129520/15.
00.00 60/ts 129520v150000p.pdf.

[3] Huisik Hong, Leifeng Ruan, and Tong Zhang. “ai in the 5g network:
Six questions you weren’t supposed to ask”. White Paper, 2021.
[Online]. Available:https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/
en/documents/white-papers/ai-in-the-5g-network-white-paper.pdf
(ac-
cessed Jan. 9, 2022).

[4] Dimitrios Michael Manias and Abdallah Shami. The need for advanced
IEEE Network,

intelligence in nfv management and orchestration.
35(1):365–371, 2021.

[5] Dimitrios Michael Manias, Manar Jammal, Hassan Hawilo, Abdallah
Shami, Parisa Heidari, Adel Larabi, and Richard Brunner. Machine
learning for performance-aware virtual network function placement. In
2019 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), pages
1–6, 2019.

AI.
wireless

[6] DeepSig
5g
how-artiﬁcial-intelligence-improves-5g-wireless-capabilities
Jan. 9, 2022).

intelligence
improves
https://www.deepsig.ai/
(accessed

capabilities”.

artiﬁcial

“how

[7] Hassan Hawilo, Abdallah Shami, Maysam Mirahmadi, and Rasool Asal.
Nfv: state of the art, challenges, and implementation in next generation
mobile networks (vepc). IEEE Network, 28(6):18–26, 2014.

[8] Hassan Hawilo, Manar Jammal, and Abdallah Shami. Network function
virtualization-aware orchestrator for service function chaining placement
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
in the cloud.
37(3):643–655, 2019.

[9] 5G PPP Technology Board.

“ai and ml – enablers for beyond 5g
networks version 1.0”. https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/
AI-MLforNetworks-v1-0.pdf (accessed Jan. 9, 2022).

[10] Open5GS. “open5gs: Open source project of 5gc and epc (release-16)”.

https://open5gs.org/ (accessed Feb. 25, 2022).

[11] Aligungr. Aligungr/ueransim: Open source 5g ue and ran (gnodeb)

implementation.

[12] Gabrial Brown. Service-based architecture for 5g core networks. Huawei

White Paper, 1, 2017.

[13] Radcom. Network data analytics function (nwdaf), Oct 2021.
[14]

3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Speciﬁcation Group
Services and System Aspects; Release 16 Description; Summary of Rel-
16 Work Items (Release 16) 3gpp tr 21.916 v16.1.0. January 2022. [On-
line]. Available: https://portal.3gpp.org/desktopmodules/Speciﬁcations/
SpeciﬁcationDetails.aspx?speciﬁcationId=3493.

[15] https://github.com/Western-OC2-Lab/5G-Core-Networks-Datasets.
[16] Ramy Mohamed, Soﬁane Zemouri, and Christos Verikoukis. Perfor-
mance evaluation and comparison between sa and nsa 5g networks
In 2021 IEEE International Mediterranean
in indoor environment.
Conference on Communications and Networking (MeditCom), pages
112–116. IEEE, 2021.

[17] Jaeseong Jeong, Dinand Roeland, Jesper Derehag, ˚Ake Ai Johansson,
Venkatesh Umaashankar, Gordon Sun, and G¨oran Eriksson. Mobility
IEEE Communications Standards
prediction for 5g core networks.
Magazine, 5(1):56–61, 2021.

[18] Marco Giordani, Michele Polese, Marco Mezzavilla, Sundeep Rangan,
and Michele Zorzi. Toward 6g networks: Use cases and technologies.
IEEE Communications Magazine, 58(3):55–61, 2020.

[19] Zhengquan Zhang, Yue Xiao, Zheng Ma, Ming Xiao, Zhiguo Ding,
Xianfu Lei, George K Karagiannidis, and Pingzhi Fan. 6g wireless
networks: Vision, requirements, architecture, and key technologies.
IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, 14(3):28–41, 2019.

[20] Rubayet Shaﬁn, Lingjia Liu, Vikram Chandrasekhar, Hao Chen, Jeffrey
intelligence-enabled
Reed, and Jianzhong Charlie Zhang. Artiﬁcial
cellular networks: A critical path to beyond-5g and 6g. IEEE Wireless
Communications, 27(2):212–217, 2020.

6

