2
2
0
2

y
a
M
2
1

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
2
8
5
0
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Emotion–Centric Requirements Change
Handling in Software Engineering

Kashumi Madampe, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Rashina Hoda, Member, IEEE,
and John Grundy, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Background: Requirements Changes (RCs) – the additions/modiﬁcations/deletions of functional/non-functional
requirements in software products – are challenging for software practitioners to handle. Handling some changes may signiﬁcantly
impact the emotions of the practitioners. Objective: We wanted to know the key challenges that make RC handling difﬁcult, how these
impact the emotions of software practitioners, what inﬂuences their RC handling, and how RC handling can be made less emotionally
challenging. Method: We followed a mixed-methods approach. We conducted two survey studies, with 40 participants and 201
participants respectively. The presentation of key quantitative data was followed by descriptive statistical analysis, and the qualitative
data was analysed using Strauss–Corbinian Grounded Theory, and Socio–Technical Grounded Theory analysis techniques. Findings:
We found (1) several key factors that make RC handling an emotional challenge, (2) varying emotions that practitioners feel when it is
challenging to handle RCs, (3) how stakeholders, including practitioners themselves, peers, managers and customers, inﬂuence the
RC handling and how practitioners feel due to the stakeholder inﬂuence, and (4) practices that can be used to better handle RCs.
Conclusion: Some challenges are technical and some are social which also belong to aspects of agile practice, emotional intelligence,
and cognitive intelligence. Therefore, to better handle RCs with positive emotions in socio–technical environments, agility, emotional
intelligence, and cognitive intelligence need to cooperate with each other.

Index Terms—emotions, emotional intelligence, affects, requirements, changes, human factors, mixed-methods, software engineering,
software teams, socio-technical grounded theory, agile, job-related affective well-being scale, well-being, workplace awareness

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

E MOTIONS are a fundamental part of being human.

Scherer deﬁnes emotions as “a sequence of interrelated,
synchronised changes in the states of all the ﬁve organismic
subsystems (information processing, support, executive, action,
and monitoring) in response to the evaluation of an external or
internal stimulus event as relevant to central concerns of the
organism” [1]. While emotions play a vital role for human
beings, in general requirements changes (RCs) play an im-
portant role in software development teams.

RCs

can be

additions/modiﬁcations/deletions of
functional/non-functional requirements of any software [2].
As RCs are unavoidable and impact the scope, cost, and
time of the software development project, RCs can often be
challenging for software practitioners to handle. RCs also
act as stimuli in triggering the emotions of software prac-
titioners who handle them. Existing research recognises the
association between emotions and behavior [3], cognition
[3], productivity [3], [4], [5], [6], and decision-making [7].

Over the past decade, many studies have been con-
ducted to explore the impact of emotions of software prac-
titioners in general, and emotions and their impact on pro-
ductivity [6], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. Furthermore, in light of
the recent global pandemic, there has been renewed interest
in studying emotions in software engineering (SE) contexts

• K. Madampe, R. Hoda, and J. Grundy are with the HumaniSE Lab
at Department of Software Systems and Cybersecurity, Faculty of
Information Technology, Monash University, Wellington Road, Clayton,
VIC 3800, Australia.

[13]. However, less attention has been given to investigating
the emotions of practitioners while handling requirements
or RCs [14], [15].

We conducted two studies on RCs and emotional
responses to RCs as worldwide survey studies1, one
focusing solely on RCs (survey Alpha: 40 participants) and
the other on emotional responses to RCs (survey Beta: 201
participants). Through the analysis of survey Alpha data
using descriptive statistical analysis and Strauss-Corbinian
Grounded Theory analysis techniques [16], we found
several key factors that make RC handling challenging. In
survey Beta, using Job related Affective Well-being Scale
(JAWS) [17], and Socio–Technical Grounded Theory for data
analysis (STGT4DA) [18], we explored how practitioners
feel when they ﬁnd it challenging to handle RCs. We
also investigated how stakeholders inﬂuence the overall
handling of a RC throughout its life cycle. By synthesising
ﬁndings from both survey Alpha and Beta we found
the most common RC handling techniques practitioners
use upon receiving RCs to prior development, i.e., pre–
development RC handling techniques. These ﬁndings
ultimately led to derive a set of recommended practices that
can be utilised throughout the RC handling life cycle.

The key contributions of this paper are:

• Key factors that make RC handling a challenge;
• How practitioners feel due to RC challenges

E-mail: kashumi.madampe@monash.edu

1. Approved by Monash Human Research Ethics Committee. Ap-

Manuscript received May 11, 2022; revised Month Date, 2021.

proval Number: 23578

 
 
 
 
 
 
• How stakeholders inﬂuence practitioners’ emotions

when handling RCs;

• A number of recommendations for practitioners for

a better RC handling experience; and

• A number of
searchers.

future research directions for re-

2 MOTIVATION, RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND DEF-
INITIONS

2.1 Motivation

2.1.1 Motivation from Experience

Imagine Kash, a software developer, who unexpectedly
receives an RC to work on. The RCs high complexity, high
cascading impact, large size, imprecise/ unclear deﬁnition,
high priority, high required effort, and difﬁcult/ irregular
access to the customer made it challenging for Kash to handle
the RC. On top of this, cross–functionality was forced within
her team. All these factors make Kash feel high anxiety and
low pleasurable emotions. She thinks that if she had some
pre–development techniques to use early and some best
practices, these could make handling the RC easier. This
could also arouse higher pleasurable emotions in her RC
handling work. We wanted to help software practitioners
like Kash by better understanding their emotional responses
to RCs, and then providing such guidance when they go
about handling RCs.

2.1.2 Motivation from Related Work

RC Handling in Agile Contexts. Given that agile being
widely used in software development, secondary studies
on agile requirements engineering, practices, and challenges
highlight that studies on functional and non-functional
requirements, process support and management, process
quality and improvement, requirement negotiation, and
acceptance tests have been studied extensively [19]. Also,
studies on beneﬁts of agile RE over traditional RE as a re-
search area is saturated [20], studies on user and stakeholder
involvement are in a high volume [21], and requirement
prioritisation and testing before coding have been studied
widely [22]. However, studies on changes in requirements
[19], and change management lacks attention in research
[20], [21], [22].

Emotions in Software Engineering. According to Muller
and Fritz, the reasons for increase in emotions/progress
during software development are, localising relevant code,
better understanding of parts of the code, clear next steps,
writing code, and having new ideas. And, the reasons for
decreases in emotions/progress are, difﬁculty in under-
standing how parts of the code/API work, difﬁculty in
localising relevant code, not being sure about next steps,
realising that hypothesis on how code works is wrong,
and missing/insufﬁcient documentation [7]. Furthermore, a
negative link exists between hurry and number of commits,
a negative relationship exists between social interaction and
hindered work well-being [23], and emotions of a technical
question impacts the probability of obtaining satisfying an-
swers [24]. Security related discussions on GitHub contain
more negative emotions than other discussions [25]. Also,
frustration is felt most often during software development

2

[9]. This lowers productivity, while anger increases produc-
tivity, enthusiasm increases productivity, and emotions tran-
sit from frustration → anger → contentment → enthusiasm
[9]. Anxiety and nervousness are felt when presenting and
satisfaction and enjoyment are felt when coding [26]. How-
ever, emotional awareness increases developer’s progress by
mitigating negative emotions [27]. In summary, research has
been done on exploring emotions in SE in general during/
post development [28], [29], [30], [5], [27], [31], [32], [33],
[25], [12], [24], [34], including how emotions impact pro-
ductivity [9], [10], [8], progress [35], [7], and how practices
impact the emotions [26], relationship between emotions
and problem solving [11], and relationship between affective
states and software metrics [23]. However, research on emo-
tions during requirements engineering activities, including
while handling RCs is extremely limited [36], [14], [15].

2.2 Research Questions

The key research questions that we wanted to answer in this
study are:

RQ1. What are the factors that make RC handling a chal-
lenge? We were interested in understanding “what”
makes the RC handling a challenge. We conducted
survey Alpha to answer this research question.
RQ2. How do practitioners feel when it is challenging
to handle RCs? We wanted to know how practi-
tioners feel various emotions when they handle RCs.
The open–ended questions in Survey Beta resulted
in details about how practitioners feel when it is
challenging for them to handle their RCs.

RQ3. How do stakeholders inﬂuence the handling of RCs
emotionally and how do software practitioners feel
about this inﬂuence? The open–ended questions in
survey Beta illuminated how stakeholders inﬂuence
the overall handling of RCs, and how practitioners
feel about their inﬂuence on handling of RCs. As we
identiﬁed a range of key stakeholders – practitioner,
peers in the team, manager, and customers – we
further breakdown this research question to sub–
research questions:

RQ3.1. How do practitioners themselves inﬂuence the han-

dling of RCs?

RQ3.2. How do peers in the team inﬂuence the handling of

RCs?

RQ3.3. How do team managers inﬂuence the handling of

RCs?

RQ3.4. How do customers inﬂuence the handling of RCs?

RQ4. How do practitioners approach handling RCs while
managing emotions? We asked about the techniques
practitioners use to handle RCs and make their
RC handling more emotionally easier. This emerged
from the answers given to the open–ended questions
in both surveys.

2.3 Deﬁnitions

We use the terms presented in Table 1 throughout the paper.
The cited deﬁnitions are directly from the sources and not
paraphrased.

TABLE 1
Deﬁnitions of Key Terms Used

Term

Agility

Cognitive intelligence

Emotion

Emotional intelligence

Emotion regulation

Deﬁnition

Carrying out agile practices such as collaboration,
self–organisation, and cross–functionality

Ones abilities to learn, remember, reason, solve
problems, and make sound judgments, particularly
as contrasted with emotional intelligence [37]

A sequence of interrelated, synchronised changes
in the states of all the ﬁve organismic subsystems
(information processing, support, executive, action,
and monitoring) in response to the evaluation of an
external or internal stimulus event as relevant to
central concerns of the organism [1]

Type of intelligence that involves the ability to
process emotional information and use it in
reasoning and other cognitive activities [37]

Any process that decreases, maintains, or
increases emotional intensity over time, thereby
modifying the spontaneous ﬂow of emotions
[38], [39], [40]

Emotion response

An emotional reaction, such as happiness, fear,
or sadness, to give a stimulus [37]

Empathy

Understanding a person from his or her frame of
reference rather than ones own, or vicariously
experiencing that persons feelings, perceptions,
and thoughts [37]

Requirements Change

Additions/modiﬁcations/deletions of functional/
non-functional requirements in a software project [2]

3 STUDY DESIGN
We conducted two studies (survey Alpha and Beta) to
gain an in–depth understanding of how RCs arise during
software development (Alpha) and how practitioners emo-
tionally respond to these RCs (Beta). Replication packages
including the questionnaires and data for both survey Alpha
and survey Beta are available online2. Fig 1 outlines the
conduct of the studies, further explained in detail below
and in the upcoming sub–sections.

Survey Alpha. First, we developed the survey question-
naire (Section 3.2), then conducted a pilot study to receive
feedback and better reﬁne the survey questions. Then we
collected data on RCs (Section 3.4). The collected data fol-
lowed a descriptive statistical analysis (quantitative data)
and Strauss–Corbinian Grounded Theory analysis (quali-
tative data) (Section 3.5). The ﬁndings from this analysis
answered RQ1.

Survey Beta. Survey Beta started with selecting an emo-
tion scale appropriate for our study (Section 3.3). Then,
similar to survey Alpha, we developed the survey (Section
3.3), and conducted the pilot study to reﬁne the survey
questionnaire. After this step, we collected data on emotional
responses to RCs (Section 3.4). We then used descriptive
statistical analysis (quantitative data), and Socio–Technical
Grounded Theory analysis and Job related Affective Well–
being Scale (qualitative data) to analyse the data. This
analysis resulted in answering RQ2 and RQ3.

3.1 Survey Questionnaire Development

We developed both questionnaires of survey Alpha and
Beta by following Kitchenham et al.’s [41], [42], and Punter

3

et al.’s [43] guidelines. Both questionnaires had questions
on demographic information, project information, and team
information of the participants. The rest of the questions of
survey Alpha focused on RCs and the survey Beta focused
on emotional responses to RCs. We used Qualtrics3 as the
survey platform in both cases.

3.2 Survey Alpha

The complete survey questionnaire of survey Alpha is
available in the replication package. In Fig. 2 we present
the question that we used to answer RQ1 and RQ4. The
participants were allowed to choose their choices from the
closed–ended question, and also they had the opportunity
to give their opinions through the open–ended question.

To develop the choices for the closed–ended question, we
consulted literature, our previous interview–based study,
and our own collective industry experience. We considered
complexity, cascading impact, size of RC, effort required, deﬁni-
tion, priority, and access to customer as the factors that make
RC handling challenging. According to Boehm [44], com-
plexity is one of the important drivers in software cost. We
combined requirements dependability and change conﬂicts
with existing requirements, which are considered as chal-
lenges in RC management in general [45] as cascading impact.
Furthermore, we derived access to customer from a previ-
ous interview–based study we conducted and also adapted
from Hoda et al.’s work [46] and Anwer et al.’s work
[45] along with prioritisation as prioritisation is a challenge
in RC management in general. Other metrics: size of RC,
effort required, and deﬁnition were hypothesised based on
experience. Complexity, cascading impact, effort required,
and priority followed the dimensions “low, medium, high”.
We used “small, medium”, and “large” as the dimen-
sions for size of RC. The dimensions “imprecise or unclear,
doesn’t matter”, and “precise and clear” were used for the
factor deﬁnition. Difﬁcult or irregular, doesn’t matter, and
easy and regular were used for the factor access to customer.

3.3 Survey Beta

In order to describe and capture emotional responses to
RCs, we needed a set of emotions and scale to capture
them. We evaluated 20 well-established emotion scales from
psychology – the 15 as described in [47], as well as PANAS
[48], SPANE [49], JES [50], DEQ [51], and JAWS [17]. We
compared their categorisation of emotions and their ap-
plicability for use to describe practitioners’ emotional re-
sponses to RCs. Through our analysis, we found 3 scales –
Discrete Emotions Questionnaire (DEQ), Job Emotion Scale
(JES), and Job-related Affective Well-being Scale (JAWS) –
to be appropriate scales for use in our study. We found
these scales as appropriate for study as the majority of the
emotions given in these scales are commonly felt in software
engineering contexts given our own industrial experience,
whereas other scales consist of less common emotions felt
in software engineering contexts. From our own industrial
experience, we decided not to use DEQ as we came across
certain emotions that were irrelevant for software develop-
ment teams (e.g.: “terror” and “craving”). In our previous

2. https://github.com/users/kashumi-m/projects/1

3. https://www.qualtrics.com/

4

TABLE 2
Job-related Affective Well-being Scale Sub-Scales

Sub Scale

Emotion

High2
High1
Low1
Low2

Energetic, Excited, Ecstatic, Enthusiastic, Inspired
At-ease, Calm, Content, Satisﬁed, Relaxed
Angry, Anxious, Disgusted, Frightened, Furious
Bored, Depressed, Discouraged, Gloomy, Fatigued

and Low pleasurable-Low Arousal (Low2). We abbreviated
the sub-scales as above by making the abbreviation central
to the pleasure. i.e., for example, when both pleasure and
arousal are high, we abbreviated it as high2; otherwise high1.
The emotions under each sub-scale are given in Table 2. The
scale allows the participants to select one of the following
ﬁve choices choice per emotion: never, rarely, sometimes, quite
often, and extremely often.

After we selected the emotion scale to use, we developed
the questionnaire for survey Beta, available in the replica-
tion package. The open–ended questions that were used
to answer RQ2 followed this approach. First, we allowed
participants to indicate how they feel when handling RCs
through a closed–ended question (complete JAWS scale).
Then, upon the selection of their emotions in that question,
they were prompted with open–ended questions represent-
ing the sub–scales of the emotions in JAWS. This is illus-
trated in Fig. 3.

3.4 Data Collection

The data collection steps we followed during the two survey
studies are summarised in Table 3. First we conducted
pilot studies (as a part of the study design), then reﬁned
the questionnaire based on the feedback we received from
pilot study participants, and ﬁnally recruited participants
through various techniques. The key difference between
the data collection techniques used in the surveys was the
sampling methods used (DC 3.1. and DC 3.2.). In survey
Alpha (40 participants), we used convenience sampling due
to convenient access to participants, time and budget con-
straints. In survey Beta (201 participants), we used random

Fig. 1. Our Approach

Fig. 2. Survey Alpha: Question on RC Challenging Factors

work [14], we used JES which consists of 16 emotions.
However, we wanted to gain a more comprehensive under-
standing of emotional responses to RCs. Therefore, ﬁnally
we decided to use JAWS which has been used widely to
assess emotional reactions of people to their jobs. As our
survey Beta questionnaire asked the participants to respond
to the questions by thinking of the current or most recent
project they worked on, we found JAWS likely to be the
most appropriate emotion scale for our study.

JAWS has two forms:

JAWS claim as the form that

long form (30 emotions) and
short form (20 emotions). We utilised the short form which
is most
the authors of
commonly used [52]. The 20 emotions in JAWS are cate-
gorised into 4 sub-scales along the dimensions: pleasure
and arousal (intensity). The sub-scales are namely, High
pleasurable-High arousal (High2), High pleasurable-Low
Arousal (High1), Low pleasurable-High Arousal (Low1),

Survey	Alpha:	Requirements	ChangesSurvey	Beta:	Emotional	Responses	to	Requirements	ChangesQuantitative	AnalysisDescriptive	Statistics	Analysis	(RQ1)Qualitative	AnalysisStrauss-CorbinianGrounded	Theory	(RQ1,	RQ4)Socio-Technical	Grounded	Theory	(RQ2,	RQ3,	RQ4)Job	Related	Affective	Well-being	Scale	Analysis	(RQ2)Findings1.Factorsthatmakerequirementschangehandlingachallenge(SurveyAlpha)2.Practitioners’emotionswhenitischallengingtohandlerequirementschanges(SurveyBeta)3.Stakeholderinfluenceonoverallhandlingoftherequirementschanges(SurveyBeta)4.Mostcommonpre-developmentRChandlingtechniques(SurveyAlphaandBeta)Survey	Questionnaire	DevelopmentPilot	RunPilot	RunSurvey	Questionnaire	DevelopmentEmotion	Scale	SelectionJob	Affective	Well-being	ScaleUpdate:	1	iterationUpdate:	1	iterationData	CollectionData	AnalysisStudy	Design5

introduced yet. Therefore, STGT4DA was not used in survey
Alpha.

In survey Beta, we followed a combined qualitative ap-
proach of JAWS analysis and open coding and constant com-
parison techniques as in STGT4DA [18] (using MAXQDA4
majorly and Microsoft Excel as needed). We used STGT4DA
due to its suitability to apply in socio–technical studies, its
similarity to Strauss–Corbinian GT data analysis techniques
where we had previous experience in, and our interest in
applying it. Since the open coding and constant compari-
son techniques are the same in Strauss–Corbinian GT and
STGT4DA, here we only explain the combined qualitative
data analysis approach we took in Survey Beta. Below, we
further explain the analysis through examples.

DA2.1. JAWS analysis: As the open–ended questions were
developed to allow participants to report their experiences
in feeling the speciﬁc emotions as given in the question
(emotion sub–scale of JAWS), the participants used the
exact terms of emotions as in JAWS. In cases where the
participants did not mention the emotion, we considered
that they felt the emotions in that particular sub–scale in
general. For example, we extracted the emotion “anxious”
from raw data ““Anxious when I feel the new technology is
difﬁcult to learn”.

DA2.2. STGT analysis: STGT served our analysis in two
key ways. (1) It helped us in identifying the evidence in
survey Beta data for emotions for RC handling challenging
factors found in survey Alpha. As given in Table 8, we
found evidence for each RC challenging factor along their
dimensions using STGT4DA. For example, when participant
βP94 answered the question on when he felt high2 emotions
as “when the implementation turns out to be less complex than
initially speciﬁed”, we were able to know that when complex-
ity (challenging factor) is low (dimension), βP94 felt high2
emotions in general. However, we found these organically,
i.e., we did not force the ﬁndings to emerge but later on
aided in identifying evidence for RC challenging factors in
survey Beta. (2) emergence of pre–development techniques
and stakeholder factors in survey Beta.

We ﬁrst open coded the qualitative data (interpreted
the data in small, meaningful chunks of words). We then
compared these codes using constant comparison and pro-
duced concepts where similar codes were grouped together.
Constant comparison was applied again on concepts to
produce sub–categories. After sub–category creation, we
repeated the same to produce categories. For example, raw
data “Anxious when I feel the new technology is difﬁcult to learn”
yielded in the code “difﬁculty in learning [new technology]”
which we compared with similar codes to produce the
concept “difﬁculty in learning/ acquiring new knowledge,
followed by the sub-category “practitioner–related factors”
and the category “stakeholder factors”.

DA3. Data synthesis: Memoing can take different forms
(verbal, textual, visual). Here we used visual memos as it
was easy to uncover the connections between the ﬁndings
of the two studies. We observed the ﬁndings from a socio–
technical perspective, and that allowed us to identify the
connection between the ﬁndings. We found the challenging
factors of effort, cross-functionality within the team, and

4. https://www.maxqda.com/

Fig. 3. Survey Beta: Prompting Open–ended Questions based on the
Emotions Selected in the Closed–ended Question

sampling ﬁrst to get a sample to represent the survey devel-
opment population (as in [53] 18.9 M in 2019; sample size
required=385 participants) and then purposive sampling to
have fair geographical distribution and gender distribution.
However, in survey Beta, we did not collect data from 385
participants as the data we collected met our requirement on
saturation of quantitative data collected, i.e., when we iden-
tiﬁed the most common emotions felt during RC handling
(results are given in [15]), where no more data collection was
necessary. We did not collect any identiﬁable information
such as personal information from the participants, except
from the participants who provided their details voluntarily
for the participation in future studies.

3.5 Data Analysis

The data analysis steps we followed are given in Table 4.
Survey Alpha and Beta followed different approaches in
data analysis.

Quantitative Analysis (DA1): Quantitative analysis where
descriptive statistical analysis was done for quantitative
data collected via both surveys. However, we only report
the quantitative analysis of survey Alpha ﬁndings (using
Microsoft Excel) here, as survey Beta quantitative analysis
ﬁndings (using Python) are out of the scope of this paper,
and are presented in [15].
Qualitative Analysis

(DA2): Qualitative analysis ap-
proaches in the 2 surveys are different from each other –
survey Alpha focused only on RCs, and survey Beta focused
on both emotions and RCs. Survey Alpha only followed
the open coding and constant comparison techniques of
Strauss–Corbinian Grounded Theory (GT) [16] (using Mi-
crosoft Excel). We used Strauss–Corbinian GT due to its struc-
tured approach of data analysis and our previous experience
in using it. By the time of the ﬁrst study, STGT4DA was not

TABLE 3
Data Collection

6

Survey Alpha

Alpha Participants

Survey Beta

Beta Participants

Steps

Conduct pilot study

DC1.

DC2.

Qualiﬁcation criteria: Experience in
software development industry

¥

Reﬁne the survey questionnaire based
on feedback received from
pilot study participants

• Changed the survey title to stay
in layman terms
• Changed the estimated completion
time

DC3.

Recruit participants

DC3.1.

DC3.2.

Post the survey link on professional
software development groups
and in our proﬁles on social media
such as LinkedIn, Twitter, and Facebook

Sending the survey link to our known
contacts in the software
development industry

¥

¥

DC3.3. Using other recruitment techniques

Agile Alliance posting the survey
link on their
LinkedIn, Twitter, and Facebook
channels

4 participants
(2 Research Fellows;
2 PhD students)

¥

2 participants
(2 PhD students)

Changed the estimated
completion time






¥

¥






42 participants
(Random sampling:
37 participants; purposive
sampling: 5 participants)

40 participants
(Convenience sampling)

Recruiting participants
through Amazon
Mechanical Turk

Qualiﬁcation criteria:
• Employment Industry -
Software and
IT Services
• Job Function - Information
Technology

159 participants
(Purposive sampling)

Collected data relavant to this paper

Quantitatve and Qualitative data

Qualitative data

TABLE 4
Data Analysis

Step

Survey Alpha

Survey Beta

DA1. Quantitative analysis

Descriptive statistical analysis:
Validation of pre-deﬁned RC challenging factors

N/A to this paper

DA2. Qualitative analysis

RQ answered: RQ1

Strauss–Corbinian GT data analysis techniques –
open coding and constant comparison: Further RC
challenging factors, most common pre–development
RC handling techniques

RQ answered: RQ1, RQ4

DA2.1. JAWS: Emotion extraction from raw data

DA2.2. STGT4DA – open coding and constant
comparison: stakeholder factors of
emotional responses to RCs, emotional responses
to RC challenging factors,
most common pre–development
RC handling technniques

RQ answered: RQ2, RQ3, RQ4

DA3.

Data synthesis of ﬁndings from
survey Alpha and survey Beta

STGT4DA – memoing through visual memos (diagrams): Conceptual model

The relationship between the ﬁndings

access to the customer related to the stakeholders. The
conceptual model representing the relationships between
the ﬁndings from survey Alpha and survey Beta is given
in Fig. 5.

4 PARTICIPANT AND PROJECT CONTEXT

4.1 Demographic Data of Participants

year; max(total experience)=30 years), and a mean total
agile experience of 4.4 years (min(total agile experience)=1
year; max(total experience)=20 years). Survey Beta partici-
pants had a mean total experience of 7.8 years (min(total
experience)=1 year; max(total experience)=35 years), and a
mean total agile experience of 5.12 years (min(total agile
experience)=0 years; max(total experience)=20 years).

A summary of demographic data of participants for both
surveys is given in Table 5. The majority of survey Al-
pha participants represented Asia (N=26; 65%) whereas
the majority of survey Beta participants represented North
America (N=96; 47.78%). The most commonly played role
of both surveys’ participants was developer (Alpha (N=18;
45%); Beta (N=75; 37.31%)). Survey Alpha participants had a
mean total experience of 8.74 years (min(total experience)=1

4.2 Project and Team Information of Participants

A summary of project and team information for both sur-
veys is given in Appendix A. The projects that both survey
participants chose to answer the questionnaires were new
developments (Alpha (N=26; 65%), Beta (N=115; 57.21%)).
All participants of survey Alpha used agile methods in their
projects (N=40; 100%) as we only targeted agile practitioners

TABLE 5
Demographic Information of Survey Participants (Dev: Developer;
AC/SM: Agile Coach/Scrum Master; BA: Business Analyst; PO:
Product Owner; XT: Total Software Development Experience; XTA:
Total Agile Experience)

Survey Alpha (Other: ≤ 2 participants)

Location

# of Participants

Role

# of Participants

7

Dev
Tester
AC/SM
BA

PO

Other

15
8
5
3

3

6

Asia
Australasia
North America
Europe

26

9
3
2

Gender

Male
Female

XT

Minimum
Maximum
Mean

# of Participants

23
17

# of Years

XTA

# of Years

1
30
8.74

Minimum
Maximum
Mean

1
20
4.4

Survey Beta (Other: ≤ 5 participants)

Location

# of Participants

Role

# of Participants

96

North America
Asia
Europe
Australasia
South America
Africa

40

24
22
17

2

Dev
Manager
BA
Dev, Tester
Tester
Dev, Manager

Gender

# of Participants

AC/SM

Male
Female
Gender diverse

1

115 AC/SM, Dev
Other

85

75

21
19
14
10
9

8

7

38

XT

Minimum
Maximum
Mean

# of Years

XTA

# of Years

1
35
7.84

Minimum
Maximum
Mean

0
20
5.12

in survey Alpha, and the majority of survey Beta partici-
pants used agile methods in their projects as well (N=176;
87.56%). Therefore, overall, 89.32% (N=216) participants
from both the surveys used agile in their projects which is
in line with reported agile use in the industry [54], where
RCs are common.

5 FINDINGS

5.1 Factors that make RC handling a challenge (An-
swer to RQ1)

Quantitative analysis of survey responses are shown in Fig.
4. Taking the top most responded results by the participants
into consideration, an RC is seen as challenging when its

•

•

•

complexity is high and/or;
cascading impact is high and/or;
size is large and/or;
effort required is high and/or;

•
• deﬁnition is imprecise or unclear and/or;
• priority is high and/or;
•

access to customer is difﬁcult or irregular.

Apart from complexity, cascading impact, size, effort
required, deﬁnition, priority, and access to customer, our
analysis of open–ended responses resulted in identifying

Fig. 4. Factors Making Requirements Changes Challenging to Handle:
Results from Survey Alpha Quantitative Data

that forced cross-functionality make the RC handling chal-
lenging. For example, when business analysts try to force
the completion of development; there is insufﬁcient impact
analysis of the RC by developers; and developers are disen-
gaged from thinking deeply about the RC.

“..disengaged from thinking & expecting others to
do the thinking & exploring of expected business value
(I just want to write code, man!)” – αP25
Based on the above quantitative and qualitative data

analysis, we deﬁne a challenging RC as per below:

The deﬁnition of a challenging RC. An RC whose
complexity is high, cascading impact is high, size
is large, effort required to action is high, deﬁni-
tion is imprecise or unclear, priority is high, ac-
cess to customers is difﬁcult or irregular, and cross–
functionality is forced is called a challenging RC.

5.2 How do Practitioners Feel when it is Challenging to
Handle RCs (Answer to RQ2)

The key challenge factors, the key emotions felt, some
representative examples, and roles of the participants who
reported the challenges and emotions are given in Appendix
B and described below.

Complexity. As stated by several participants, when
the RC is not complicated to work on, they tend to feel
both high2 (e.g.: excited, energetic) and high1 (e.g.: content,
calm, relaxed) emotions. Even when the RC complexity that
was originally speciﬁed changes to a less complicated one,
they tend to feel high pleasurable emotions. For example,
as βP194 mentioned, they felt high2 emotions when the
implementation turned out to be less complex than it was
initially speciﬁed. In contrast, when an RC is complicated
to work on, they tend to feel more low1 emotions (e.g.:
anxiety), as mentioned by a few participants. For example,
β82 mentioned, additions and/or modiﬁcations that were
highly complex made them feel low1 emotions.

Complexity: Low (4%)  Medium (22%)  High (74%)Cascading Impact: Low (4%)  Medium (34%)  High (62%)Size: Small (13%)  Medium (30%)  Large (57%)Effort Required: Low (4%)  Medium (32%)  High (64%)Definition: Imprecise/ Unclear (71%)  Doesn't matter (22%)  Precise/ Clear (7%)Priority: Low (7%)  Medium (20%)  High (73%)Access to Customer: Difficult/ Irregular (65%)  Doesn't Matter (21%)  Easy/ Regular (14%)Cascading Impact. When the impact of the RC on the
other requirements, including the ones that have already
been developed, is low, the practitioners tend to feel high1
emotions (e.g.: content). However, when the cascading im-
pact is high – such as when several changes have to be done
together to realise the RC, such as design-level changes in
the database, application, and program structure – practi-
tioners tend to feel both low1 (e.g.: angry) and low2 (e.g.:
discouraged, fatigued) emotions.

Size of the RC. When the size of the RC is large, the prac-
titioners tend to feel low2 emotions in general. For example,
as βP10 mentioned, when RC additions such as new features
are large, it makes them rewrite on a large scale, and also
goes beyond the initial scope. This indicates that the size of
the RC, impacts effort (rewriting incurs effort) and increases
the scope – i.e., scope creep. Not only the project scope, but
also the scope of work of the individual is impacted. For
example, when the RCs are within scope, practitioners tend
to feel high2 emotions (e.g.: enthusiastic). Even though we
found evidence of emotional responses felt towards large-
sized RCs, we could not ﬁnd how practitioners feel when
their RCs are small.

Deﬁnition. Precise and clear deﬁnition of an RC matters.
When the RC is well-deﬁned, practitioners tend to feel high1
emotions in general. For example, βP175 mentioned that, all
required details for working on the RC were well speciﬁed
and that made them know what exactly they were supposed
to do and that did not require them to do a second pass on
the code for checking the consistency with the rest of the UI
work. On the other hand, when RCs are not well-deﬁned,
practitioners tend to feel low2 emotions. Practitioners also
struggle to look for information needed to work on the RC,
which is connected to the challenge “access to customer”.

Access to Customer. When practitioners have regular
conversations about an RC and engage with their team
throughout the process, they tend to feel high1 emotions
(e.g.: calm). However, some practitioners stated that when
the customer is busy and there are delays in replying about
the RC, does not read the emails fully, or even not taking the
meetings seriously, they feel low2 emotions (e.g.: fatigued,
gloomy). This is related to the relationship management of
the customer that we explain in the next section.

We did not ﬁnd speciﬁc reported emotional responses

for RC priority and cross–functionality aspects.

8

Variations of emotions across dimensions of RC
challenging factors. When an RC is complicated,
practitioners feel low1 emotions. When an RC is less
complicated, practitioners feel both high2 and high1
emotions. When the cascading impact of the RC is
high, practitioners tend to feel both low2 and low1
emotions. When the cascading impact is low, the
emotions felt by the practitioners tend to be high1.
Low2 emotions tend to be felt when an RC is large.
When the deﬁnition of the RC is precise/ clear, high1
emotions are felt. However, low2 emotions are felt
when the RC is deﬁned imprecisely or unclearly.
When the access to the customer is easy/ regular,
calmness is often felt by the practitioners. When it is
difﬁcult/ irregular to access the customer, emotions
such as fatigue and gloom are felt. Further, when
the effort required to work on the RC is high, low2
emotions tend to be felt by practitioners.

5.3 How Stakeholders Inﬂuence the Overall Handling
of the RCs (Answer to RQ3)

We found several stakeholder factors that are perceived
by the practitioners as factors that inﬂuence the overall
RC handling and resulting in their emotional responses.
The key stakeholders found are the “practitioner”, “team”,
“manager”, and “customer”. The inﬂuence of each of these
stakeholders is described in each of the sub–sections below.
We describe the key factors, the felt emotions, some repre-
sentative examples, and the roles of the participants who
reported them. We summarise the factors that lead to high
and low pleasurable emotions of the practitioners, that we
term “high pleasurable and low pleasurable factors”. Some
factors take both high and low pleasurable dimensions
– for example, learning/ knowledge acquisition arouses
high pleasurable emotions when that is preferred by the
practitioners. However, when it is difﬁcult to learn/ acquire
the knowledge, low pleasurable emotions may be aroused.
For such cases, we present the factors as single description
points.

The factors not only result in arousing the emotions
of the practitioners but may also have work–related con-
sequences. We have indicated these work–related conse-
quences by PC<ID> for the practitioner, TC<ID> for the
team, MC<ID> for the manager, and CC<ID> for the
customer.

5.3.1 How Practitioners Themselves Inﬂuence the Han-
dling of RCs (Answer to RQ3.1.)

From the above ﬁndings, the variations of emotions
found across dimensions of RC challenging factors are sum-
marised below.

Below, we describe the practitioner–related factors. Repre-
sentative examples for these factors are given in Appendix
C.

High pleasurable practitioner–related factors:
Preference in learning/ knowledge acquisition (hA)
High empowerment/autonomy/ responsibility (hB)
Ideating (hC)

Low pleasurable practitioner–related factors:
Difﬁculty in learning/ knowledge acquisition (hA)
Less autonomy (hB)
Making mistakes (hD)

hA. Learning/ knowledge acquisition of the practi-
tioner. Some practitioners prefer acquiring new knowledge
and gaining a learning experience through handling an RC.
They see knowledge acquisition and learning as an an-
tecedent that makes them feel high2 emotions (e.g.: excited,
inspired), which also improves their skills (PC1), allows them
to feel “smarter” (PC2), and let the practitioners meet peers
requests if they ask for any (PC3). However, learning and
knowledge acquisition is not easy for everyone. There are
cases where practitioners ﬁnd it difﬁcult to learn– for exam-
ple, learning a new technology, a tool or a new methodology.
In such cases, the practitioners may experience low1 (e.g.:
anxious) and low2 (e.g.: gloomy, fatigued, discouraged, over
depressed) emotions.

hB. Empowerment/ Autonomy/ Responsibility of the
practitioner. The practitioners feeling empowered, having
autonomy, and feeling responsible while working on RCs
inspired) and high1 (e.g.:
result in high2 (e.g.: energetic,
satisﬁed, relaxed) emotions within them as they reported.
According to self–determination theory, autonomy is one
of the psychological needs of human beings. When they
are being controlled, their autonomy is restricted, hence the
psychological need is violated. Several participants reported
that they are required to work overtime because of the RCs.
This forced effort often leads to low1 emtions and low2
(e.g.: bored, depressed) emotions, especially in depression, as
perceived by the practitioners. Not only low pleasurable
emotions, but also working overtime leads to losing sleep
(PC4) and time for relaxation (PC5), which are basic physi-
ological needs as in Maslows hierarchy of human needs.

hC. Practitioner ideating. Practitioners coming up with
ideas to work on the RC, often generate high2 emotions
in general in them as they reported. Even the ideas that
practitioners get at times when they use ideating as an
exercise for their brains, become useful when they face a
similar occasion in real, in this case a similar RC.

hD. Practitioner making mistakes. Practitioners them-
selves making minor mistakes and ﬁnding that their mis-
takes could have been avoided through easy ﬁxes, make
them feel both low1 in general and low2 (e.g.: over depressed)
emotions.

5.3.2 How Peers in the Team Inﬂuence the Handling of RCs
(Answer to RQ3.2)

9

the

required expertise/ competency/

High pleasurable team–related factors:
Having
relevant experience within the team (ﬂA)
High efﬁciency/ productivity of the team (ﬂB)
Better relationship management within the team
through collaboration and engagement (ﬂC)

Low pleasurable team–related factors:
Low efﬁciency/ low productivity of the team (ﬂB)
Team members making mistakes (ﬂD)

ﬂA. Having the required expertise/ competency/ rel-
evant experience within the team. Having team members
who are experts, competent, and having relevant experience
in the team tend to arise high2 (e.g.: inspired) and high1
(e.g.: relaxed, satisﬁed, calm, at ease) emotions in practitioners
when they are handling RCs. For example, our participants
mentioned that peers with the necessary knowledge, make
them inspired and peers having experience working with
similar RCs allow the practitioners to stay calm, relaxed,
satisﬁed, at ease when working with RCs.

ﬂB. Efﬁciency/ Productivity of the team. The effect
of efﬁciency and productivity of peers is two–fold. Being
efﬁcient and productive tends to lead to high pleasurable
emotions, and being inefﬁcient and unproductive tends to
lead to low pleasurable emotions of practitioners when they
are working on RCs. When the team has members who
are efﬁcient and productive, this results in both high2 (e.g.:
inspired, excited, energetic) and high1 (e.g.: relaxed, satisﬁed,
calm, at ease) emotions of practitioners, as a better outcome is
anticipated. At the same time, when the team is efﬁcient and
productive, the absence of a manager does not make much
difference, as mentioned by βP193 who is both a developer
and a manager.

On the contrary, team members whose rate of working
is slow, and who believe in traditional ways of executing
tasks, tend to result in low efﬁciency and low productivity,
and low1 (e.g.: angry, anxious) emotions in practitioners,
as perceived by them. Also, when team members do not
work as expected by practitioners, that also may lead to
low1 emotions. βP156 claimed that they noticed that slow
working rates are sometimes apparent in practitioners who
are older in age, and also such practitioners may show a
resistance to adapt to current practices at work. In relation
to this, some participants stated that they feel high plea-
surable emotions when working with young peers. These
potentially controversial statements related to team member
age differences requires further research in the future, and
we elaborate this in Section 7.3.

“I feel angry, anxious anytime I work with old folks
who always have a slow work rate and always believes in
their traditional way of performing duties I am always
furious and always hope I get younger teammates” –
βP156

“Also because of this two young individual added to
our team, I feel calm, mainly because I know all work
will be done perfectly” – βP156

Below, we describe the peer–related factors. Representative
examples for these factors are given in Appendix D.

“I have young and vibrant team members who
always ﬁnd new ways to sort things out whenever we

deal with software and I am always energetic and excited
to work with this particular set of people” – βP60
ﬂC. Relationship management within the team. Good
working relationships, where collaborative working and
team engagement play major roles, are essential to effec-
tively handling RCs. When team members work effectively,
being accountable for what they do, and ask for and receive
help from others in the team, this tends to make individual
practitioners feel both high2 (e.g.: inspired, energetic) and
high1 (e.g.: relaxed, satisﬁed, calm) emotions. Having support-
ive peers also result in the efﬁciency and productivity of the
team (TC1). Better collaboration and team engagement also
enable ﬁnding solutions easily (TC2), can set a practitioners’
mood to a “jolly” level (TC3), lessens the probability of
feeling frustrated and pressurised (TC4), achieve the goal/
objective on time (TC5), and stay within the budget (TC6).

When a team works well, and management communi-
cates well with the team, and most importantly when the
team works collaboratively and engages well by conducting
meetings to work on the RCs, the high2 (e.g.:
inspired,
energetic) and high1 (e.g.: relaxed, satisﬁed, calm) emotions
of practitioners arise as reported by our participants. For
example, βP3 stated that them having a meeting to discuss
the RC properly, and to break down the RC into tasks,
prioritise them, estimate effort, and allocate the tasks within
their working hours led to high pleasurable emotions in
him.

ﬂD. Team members making mistakes. When peers
make mistakes, but not the practitioners themselves, they
may feel low1 (e.g.: angry, disgusted) emotions in general,
and speciﬁcally anger and even disgust. They also believe
that not only themselves, but also others in the team feel the
same ways when their peers make mistakes.

5.3.3 How Managers Inﬂuence the Handling of RCs (An-
swer to RQ3.3.)
Below, we describe the manager–related factors. Represen-
tative examples for these factors are given in Appendix E.

High pleasurable manager–related factors:
A manager having empathy (social awareness) (–A)
A manager building better relationships through
(relationship
communication
management) (–B)

and coordination

Low pleasurable manager–related factor:
A manager lacking empathy (social awareness) (–A)

–A. Social awareness of the manager. Both positive
and negative aspects of social awareness of the manager
– having empathy or lacking it – are perceived as factors
that lead to the high and low pleasurable emotions of
the practitioners. For example, when a manager does not
pressurise their team, but motivates the team (MC1) by
being empathetic and allowing the team to handle their
RCs as best suits them, practitioners tend to experience an
arising of high2 emotions (e.g.: energetic), and high1 (e.g.:
calm) emotions of the practitioners. On the other hand, when
a manager lacks empathy e.g. when they are unable to cope
with human errors of the team – even minor mistakes –
and when the manager does not seem to feel how the team

10

feels or understand the teams emotional investments in their
RCs, practitioners perceive that it leads to having both low2
in general and low1 (e.g.: angry) emotions in them.

–B. Relationship management of the manager. Man-
agers prompt and honest communication, better coordina-
tion, and having conversations with the team tend to make
the practitioners feel both high2 (e.g.: inspired) and high1
(e.g.: satisﬁed, relaxed) emotions that allows them to better
handle the RCs.

5.3.4 How Customers Inﬂuence the Handling of RCs (An-
swer to RQ3.4.)

Below, we describe the customer–related factors. Represen-
tative examples for these factors are given in Appendix F.

High pleasurable customer–related factors:
Customers manifested high pleasurable emotions
(self–regulation) ({A)
Customers positive engagement with the team
(relationship management) ({B)

Low pleasurable customer–related factors:
Customers manifested low pleasurable emotions
(self–regulation) ({A)
Customers scepticism of what he/she/they need
({C)

{A. Self–regulation of the customer. A customer man-
ifesting their emotions has an impact on the emotions of the
practitioners. For example, when the customer is satisﬁed or
excited with practitioners work – that is when the customer
manifests both high2 (e.g.: excited) and high1 (e.g.: satisﬁed)
emotions – the practitioners tend also to feel both high2 (e.g.:
energetic, inspired) and high1 (e.g.: calm, satisﬁed) emotions as
well. Likewise, if the customer appears to be unsatisﬁed or
unimpressed with the delivered work – that is, when the
manifested emotions of the customer are low pleasurable
emotions (e.g.: unsatisﬁed, unimpressed) – then the practition-
ers tend to feel angry and low2 (e.g.: depressed) emotions. As
a further consequence of this, the team may have to redo
some RC work (CC2) as well.

{B. Relationship management of the customer. Cus-
tomers positive engagement with the project and the team
when they are handling RCs leads to high2 and high1 (e.g.:
calm, satisﬁed) emotions of the practitioners. For instance,
having a better understanding of the RC and customer
working together with the team, and giving input to the
team leads to high pleasurable emotions of the practition-
ers. Customers positive engagement not only leads to high
pleasure emotions of the team but also allows deﬁning the
RC, thereby resulting in a better outcome.

{C. Customer’s scepticism of what they need. If practi-
tioners perceive that their customer is not clear about what
they need and request RCs repeatedly, then practitioners
perceive that as an antecedent that makes them feel both
low1 (e.g.: anxious) and low2 (e.g.: bored, depressed, discour-
aged) emotions. This also possibly leads to the team redoing
their RC work (CC2) and the team not fully addressing the
RC, expecting that it will change again (CC3). Furthermore,
Hoda et al. [46] mentions that customer’s scepticism leads
to inadequate collaboration during software development.

6 HOW DO PRACTITIONERS APPROACH HANDLING
RCS WHILE MANAGING EMOTIONS? (ANSWER TO
RQ4)
Some common RC handling techniques were reported by
practitioners – ranging from processes including high-level
practices to low-level coding techniques – that they use and
that make their RC handling more emotionally easier. We
list them below for the beneﬁt of other practitioners.

Re-estimate and change the sprint plan (from Survey Alpha).
Some practitioners reported the need to periodically revisit
RC change handling priorities and ordering, to help them
manage negative reactions. This includes analysing the im-
pact of the RC → estimating the effort of the RC → adding
RC to the iteration backlog → removing existing user stories
according to the priority and size from the iteration backlog.
RC Prioritisation (from Survey Alpha). As mentioned
by several participants, prioritisation can be done based on
the changes in the market, based on team leaning, and the
business need of the customer, or combinations. However,
if the customer is unclear or sceptical about what they need,
then it is the responsibility of the manager and the team to
move forward with a discussion which resolves different RC
priorities.

Discuss with the project manager whether the RC is
reasonable to implement (from Survey Beta). Practitioners
suggest → identify the scope affected → discuss with the
relevant product owner → quick POC implementation →
plan → design → assign work. This indicates the utilisation
of continuous relationship management before making any
decision on the implementation/ acceptance of the RC to
help manage practitioner emotions.

First come, ﬁrst served (from Survey Alpha and Beta).
In some cases, participants implement RCs as they receive
them. We identiﬁed this phenomenon in one of our previous
studies as well [55]. This technique does not follow any
prioritisation or any other best practices, but simply imple-
menting them as received. Sometimes this strategy works
well for managing emotional impact of RCs e.g.

“This is my regular demeanor while working. I try

to deal with things as they come” – βP52
Find your own ways to handle the RC and use them in
similar situations (from Survey Beta). Sometimes the so–
called standard ways of handling RCs may not be applicable
to every situation. In such instances, practitioners and their
teams need to ﬁnd ways that suit their own situation, team
members and customers and apply them. For example, βP56
mentioned that having these in hand could be useful in
applying at similar situations:

“I feel and have felt this way whenever we found a
better way of doing things. One method might work or
it might not but then suddenly, we ﬁnd a way to push
requests faster, anything like that and it gets me really
excited and hopeful for the project. I feel like there’s other
places I could apply these things to” – βP56
Write pseudocode to generate solutions (from Survey
Beta). Before implementing an RC, working through design
changes and pseudocode was suggested as an effective
technique by some participants, allowing them to gauge
impact on emotions up front before fully implementing an
RC.

11

Early implementation of a ﬂexible structure to manage
the logic ﬂow (from Survey Beta). This technique is useful
for handling cascading impacts of an RC. Participant βP122
mentioned that the ﬂexible structure they had where they
used dependency injection help them to more easily imple-
ment many RCs:

“In one of my previous projects, my leader and
project manager wanted to adjust a piece of the pre-
deﬁned logic ﬂow, because I had already implemented a
ﬂexible structure to manage that logic ﬂow, I just need
to change the order of parameters and then everything
work to ﬁt the new requirement. Emotion: at ease.
Process: Scrum. Techniques used to handle changes:
program to interfaces, dependency injection” – βP122
The above results demonstrate that some RC handling
ways are highly organised where a step-by-step process is
followed, and some are not. However, common techniques
of RC handling include, but are not limited to, impact
analysis, prioritisation, effort estimation, and POC imple-
mentation or writing pseudocode before implementation.

7 DISCUSSION
7.1 Relationship between Challenges, Stakeholders,
and Emotions

Challenge factors and stakeholder factors. Some of the
challenging factors of RC handling reported and their
impact on practitioner emotions – complexity, cascading
impact, size, deﬁnition, and priority – are more technical
aspects of handling RCs.Effort, cross–functionality, access
to the customer, manager impact, and relationship manage-
ment of the customer are socio-technical aspects of handling
RCs. Fig. 5 summarises the key relationships between these
factors that we have identiﬁed. The challenging factors are
given in blue text and stakeholder factors are given in black
text.

Challenging factors, stakeholders, and emotions. From
our ﬁndings, it is evident that RC handling challenging fac-
tors and stakeholders factors both contribute to the trigger-
ing of emotions in practitioners. Previously [15] we found
that RCs and the stakeholders act as the stimuli of triggering
emotions particularly at distinct events in the project and RC
handling life cycles.

Agility, emotional intelligence, and cognitive intelli-
gence. Further analysis of our ﬁndings resulted in cate-
gorising socio-technical factors into agility, emotional in-
telligence, and cognitive intelligence of practitioners and
stakeholders. The majority of the factors under practitioner
and peers belong to cognitive intelligence areas, whereas
the majority of factors under customer and manager belong
to relationship management which comes under emotional
intelligence. In addition, cross–functionality, which is often
a characteristic of agile teams, applies to practitioners, their
peers, and manager. These categorisations are indicated next
to the factors in Fig. 5.

7.2 Implications for Practitioners

RC challenge assessment as a pre-development RC han-
dling technique. Practitioners told us that there is a need
to assess the challenging nature of RCs earlier – i.e., at the

receiving stage. They said that this would help practitioners
to better understand how challenging the RC is to handle
and ease the emotional impact during the RC handling
process. The key challenging factors of RCs summarised in
Section 5.1 and their respective dimensions can be used to
assess how challenging RCs are (as challenge assessment
metrics) before developing the RC.

The interplay between agility, emotional intelligence,
and cognitive intelligence. From the relationship we iden-
tiﬁed between the challenging factors, stakeholders, and
emotions (Fig. 5), it is evident that for practitioners to better
handle RCs while maintaining high pleasurable emotions
in them (regulating low pleasurable emotions by navigating
low pleasurable emotions towards high pleasurable emo-
tions), the three aspects – agility, emotional intelligence, and
cognitive intelligence should be present at a sufﬁcient level
throughout the RC handling life cycle.

Emotional Awareness throughout RC Handling. Our
ﬁndings indicate that practitioners feel various emotions
while handling RCs, and as a ﬁnal note we would like to
emphasise the importance of emotions at work. Therefore,
we request organisations, managers, and practitioners to,
make being aware of the emotional well–being a consis-
tent and continuous practice. Do not wait till something
happens. Tools such as Emotimonitor [56] can be used to
monitor emotions at task level.

“Sometimes I feel depressed in bad working members.
Many employers take an ad hoc approach to handling
depression among employees. Many managers become
aware of mental health issues only when they investigate
why a team member is performing poorly.” – βP107
Recommendations. Based on the above implications, in
Table 6 we provide best practices for practitioners, man-
agers, and customers to consider following when handling
RCs.

7.3 Implications for Researchers

Rational Emotive Therapy: Antecedents, beliefs, and emo-
tional consequences. We have presented the factors that

12

our study participants reported to heavily inﬂuence RC
handling and in triggering emotions of the practitioners.
These ﬁndings were derived from the opinions of the practi-
tioners – which are what they believe but which may not be
true. According to the ABC model of emotions, antecedents
(factors) (A) lead to beliefs (B) that eventually result in
consequences (including emotions) (C). This can take two
forms: (1) antecedent → rational belief → rational emotions,
or (2) antecedent → irrational belief → irrational emotions.
Applying these two forms to our ﬁndings around low
pleasurable emotions, it can be said that the low pleasurable
emotions may not be always due to rational beliefs the prac-
titioners have. For example, practitioners making mistakes
generating low pleasurable emotions, can be thought of as
an irrational belief; where mistakes could be considered as
an opportunity to learn, thus resulting in high pleasurable
emotions. Questioning the rationality around the beliefs. For
instance, questioning the rationality around the beliefs that
result in low pleasurable emotions, could help in identifying
(1) the irrational beliefs and (2) navigating the irrational
belief to replace them with new beliefs that result in high
pleasurable emotions. We encourage researchers to inves-
tigate this further to devise potential strategies that could
replace the irrational beliefs of practitioners – i.e., how to
regulate low pleasurable emotions (one of key aspects in
emotional intelligence), so that preferred high pleasurable
emotions are produced in them when handling RCs.

Antecedent–focused emotion regulation. While ratio-
nal emotive therapy focuses on regulating the emotions
by changing the beliefs, the emotions can be regulated
using antecedent–focused emotion regulation (as opposed
to response–focused emotion regulation). That is changing
the antecedents that trigger the emotions. In simple terms,
we are changing the situations early, so that emotions are
regulated. For example, when the size of the RC is large
(antecedent) and causes low pleasurable emotions, the RC
can be broken down into manageable sizes (regulation) so
that feeling low pleasurable emotions are regulated. The
best practices we have given in Section 7.2 are based on

Fig. 5. Relationship between the Challenging Factors, Stakeholders, and Emotions (Cog: Cognitive Intelligence; EI: Emotional Intelligence | Blue
Text: Challenging Factors; Black Text: Stakeholder Factors)

Software	PractitionerEmotions1.Effort	[Cog]2.Learning/	knowledge	acquisition	[Cog]3.Ideating	[Cog]4.Mistakes	[Cog]5.Empowerment/	autonomy/	responsibility	[Agility]1.Complexity2.Cascading	impact3.Size4.Definition5.PriorityRequirements	ChangeCustomer1.Self-regulation	[EI]2.Relationship	management	[EI]	[Agility]3.Business	need	[Agility]Manager1.Social	awareness	[EI]2.Relationship	management	[EI]	[Agility]Peers1.Expertise/	competency/	relevant	experience	[Cog]2.Efficiency/	productivity	[Cog]3.Mistakes	[Cog]4.Relationship	management	[EI]	[Agility]Technical	Sub-systemSocial	Sub-systemTeamCross-functionality	[Agility]makeitchallengingto	handle	and	variateinfluenceinfluenceinfluenceTechnicallyintensiveSocially	intensiveFor

Recommendation

How

TABLE 6
Recommendations

13

Team including managers and
practitioners

Improve agility

Practitioner

Manager

Customer

Improve emotional intelligence
(self awareness)

Pre-development
RC handling techniques

Improve emotional intelligence
(self regulation)

Improve emotional
intelligence
(relationship management)

Improve agility

Improve cognitive intelligence

Improve emotional intelligence
(social awareness)

Improve emotional intelligence
(relationship management)

Improve emotional intelligence
(relationship management)

Improve emotional intelligence
(social awareness and
relationship management)

Maintain a natural cross-functionality – do not over do it by forcing

Have proper acceptance criteria for RC acceptance that suits you, and then follow them
to decide the acceptance of the RC. This may include questioning the rationality of the
RC, conducting impact analysis, estimating the effort required

Prioritise the RC by discussing with the customer, manager, and the team

Use emotion monitoring and tracking tools through out RC handling

Assess how challenging the RC is

Always discuss with the customer, manager, and the team early to clarify the necessary
information, better deﬁne the RC before implementing

Write the pseudocode and manually observe if the required output can be generated

Implement a POC where necessary and if that suits your situation

Regulate low pleasurable emotions when human errors happen.
For example, consider mistakes as an opportunity to learn

Collaboratively work with other team members

Be supportive to each other

Feel empowered/ autonomous/ responsible

Minimise forcing the effort – working overtime, as much as possible

Be due diligent:
Ideate
Learn/ acquire new knowledge

Feel the team and motivate them accordingly

Promptly and honestly communicate with the team

Have proper coordination and conversations with the team

Positively engage with the team

Appreciate the team by showing high pleasurable emotions when you are satisﬁed with
the work they delivered

Know the business need

If you are unsure about the RCs you request, talk with the team

antecedent–focused emotion regulation. Further research on
how to regulate emotions by managing the antecedents is
encouraged.

Emotions are not the only consequence of stakeholder
factors. In Section 5.3, for some stakeholder factors, we iden-
tiﬁed other consequences than just emotions, though we
have not found additional consequences for all the factors.
We hypothesise that there could be other consequences for
all factors and even additional consequences for the factors
for which we found other consequences. We encourage
researchers to investigate this in the future.

Age, behavior, team climate, and emotional conse-
quences. Some of our ﬁndings indicate that participants
perceived the age of the peers in the team impact the RC
handling and result in the emotions of the practitioners. For
example, βP156 said that old peers stick to traditional ways
of working, resulting in low efﬁciency, thus making him feel
low pleasurable emotions. On the other hand, some other
practitioners mentioned that working with young peers
bring high pleasurable emotions in them, and they ﬁnd new

ways to handle the work and do the work perfectly.

A member of a team could have a variety of experiences
and expertise related to work that is not only limited to
RCs, but also to the other tasks carried out by the team.
Therefore, it is discriminatory to form a team based on age,
or consider that older peers are not suitable to have within
the team but young peers are. If a particular individual is
not ﬂexible enough to change their ways of working or to
gain new knowledge to adhere to the working mechanism in
the team, it is the responsibility of the manager to help them
to take the right measures. While Baltes et al. summarised
most common employment strategies for older developers
in their article [57], we have presented how behavior change
models can be used in agile contexts to change the behavior
of certain agile roles in a theory–based previous study of us
[58]. However, we have not studied the practicality of the
suggestions we have made. Therefore, we recommend the
future researchers study this in the future, as we consider
this as a crucial area to address for the betterment of the
software teams.

Low pleasurable stakeholder factors as challenges.
Even though the survey Beta participants stated how differ-
ent stakeholders inﬂuence the RC handling and their emo-
tions, it can be hypothesised that the factors that aroused
low pleasurable emotions in them could be challenges to
them. However, since they did not explicitly mention that
they were challenges, we did not conclude them as chal-
lenges. This could be validated in the future to expand the
challenge assessment metrics that we have given in this
paper.

8 THREATS TO VALIDITY

External Validity. The majority of the participants in survey
Alpha represented Asia, while the majority of the par-
ticipants in survey Beta represented North America. The
emotions felt for the challenges (answer to RQ2) reported
by survey Alpha participants, were reported by the survey
Beta participants. This has 2 aspects. (1) survey Alpha par-
ticipants may have felt different to the challenges that they
experienced, (2) survey Beta participants may have faced
additional/less challenges than the ones that we identiﬁed
in survey Alpha. However, as it was not possible to visit
survey Alpha participants back query about the emotions
felt, the ﬁrst point mentioned above remains as a threat
to the validity of the ﬁndings of RQ2. As mentioned in
Section 7.3, the low pleasurable stakeholder factors could
be considered as additional challenges faced by survey
Beta practitioners. However, since this was not conﬁrmed
through our study, we did not derive any conclusions.
Both surveys were conducted during the Covid-19 global
pandemic, where the emotional wellbeing of every global
citizen was impacted. The ﬁndings around the emotions we
have presented in this paper may have been different during
a time without a pandemic. If the global situation changes in
the future, future researchers may consider replicating this
study again to compare and contrast to validate the ﬁndings
we have given in this paper.

Construct Validity. In both surveys, we provided the
deﬁnition of RC so that all participants share the same
understanding. However, the deﬁnitions of the challenging
factors in survey Alpha and the deﬁnitions for emotions in
survey Beta were not given. We assumed that the partici-
pants share a common understanding of the terminology.
However, this might not have been the case for every par-
ticipant. Therefore, in future studies, we suggest researchers
to include deﬁnitions as much as possible in the surveys.

Reliability. All data were analysed by the ﬁrst author.
In order to mitigate the subjectivity of the analysis, the
team had weekly meetings and discussed the ﬁndings. After
iteratively going through the analysis, a ﬁnal meeting was
held between the ﬁrst and the second author to ﬁnalise the
ﬁndings. Hence, the researcher bias was mitigated.

9 CONCLUSIONS

Through ﬁndings from two survey studies, this paper
presents the key challenging factors that make RC han-
dling a challenge and how practitioners feel when RCs are
challenging to handle, how practitioners themselves, their
peers in the team, their managers, and customers inﬂuence

14

the overall RC handling. Some challenges are technical and
some are social which also belong to aspects of agile, emo-
tional intelligence, and cognitive intelligence. Therefore, to
better handle RCs with positive emotions in socio–technical
environments, agility, emotional intelligence, and cognitive
intelligence need to cooperate with each other.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is supported by a Monash Faculty of IT schol-
arship. Grundy is supported by ARC Laureate Fellowship
FL190100035. Also, our sincere gratitude goes to Dr William
Bingley for providing invaluable feedback for this work, and
all the participants who took part in this study.

REFERENCES

[1] K. R. Scherer, “Toward a dynamic theory of emotion,” Geneva

Studies in Emotion, 1987.

[2] K. Madampe, R. Hoda, and J. Grundy, “A Faceted Taxonomy of
Requirements Changes in Agile Contexts,” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, 2021.

[3] R. Colomo-Palacios, A. Hern´andez-L ´opez, . Garc´ıa-Crespo, and
P. Soto-Acosta, “A study of emotions in requirements engineer-
ing,” in Communications in Computer and Information Science, 2010.
[4] D. Graziotin, X. Wang, and P. Abrahamsson, “Do feelings matter?
On the correlation of affects and the self-assessed productivity in
software engineering,” Journal of Software: Evolution and Process,
2015.

[5] A. Kolakowska, A. Landowska, M. Szwoch, W. Szwoch, and
M. R. Wrobel, “Emotion recognition and its application in software
engineering,” in 2013 6th International Conference on Human System
Interactions, HSI 2013, 2013.

[6] D. Girardi, F. Lanubile, N. Novielli, and A. Serebrenik, “Emotions
and Perceived Productivity of Software Developers at the Work-
place,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, pp. 1–1, 6 2021.
S. C. M ¨uller and T. Fritz, “Stuck and frustrated or in ﬂow and
happy: Sensing developers’ emotions and progress,” in Proceedings
- International Conference on Software Engineering, 2015.

[7]

[8] M. R. Wrobel, “Towards the participant observation of emotions in
software development teams,” in Proceedings of the 2016 Federated
Conference on Computer Science and Information Systems, FedCSIS
2016, 2016.

[9] M. R. Wrobel, “Emotions in the software development process,” in
2013 6th International Conference on Human System Interactions, HSI
2013, 2013.

[10] B. Crawford, R. Soto, C. L. de la Barra, K. Crawford, and E. Olgu´ın,
“The Inﬂuence of Emotions on Productivity in Software Engineer-
ing,” in Communications in Computer and Information Science, 2014.
[11] D. Graziotin, X. Wang, and P. Abrahamsson, “Happy software
developers solve problems better: Psychological measurements in
empirical software engineering,” PeerJ, 2014.

[12] D. Graziotin, X. Wang, and P. Abrahamsson, “Software developers,

moods, emotions, and performance,” IEEE Software, 2014.

[13] P. Ralph, S. Baltes, G. Adisaputri, R. Torkar, V. Kovalenko,
M. Kalinowski, N. Novielli, S. Yoo, X. Devroey, X. Tan, M. Zhou,
B. Turhan, R. Hoda, H. Hata, G. Robles, A. Milani Fard, and
R. Alkadhi, “Pandemic programming,” Empirical Software Engi-
neering, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 4927–4961, 2020.

[14] K. Madampe, R. Hoda, and P. Singh, “Towards Understanding
Emotional Response to Requirements Changes in Agile Teams,”
in IEEE/ACM 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering
New Ideas and Emerging Results (ICSE-NIER20), (Seoul, Republic of
Korea), p. 4, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2020.

[15] K. Madampe, R. Hoda, and J. Grundy, “The Emotional Roller
Coaster of Responding to Requirements Changes in Software
Engineering,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, p. 1, 2022.
[16] A. Strauss and J. Corbin, Basics of qualitative research techniques.

1998.

[17] P. T. Van Katwyk, S. Fox, P. E. Spector, and E. K. Kelloway, “Using
the Job-Related Affective Well-Being Scale (JAWS) to investigate
affective responses to work stressors.,” Journal of occupational health
psychology, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 219–230, 2000.

[18] R. Hoda, “Socio-Technical Grounded Theory for Software Engi-
neering,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, pp. 1–1, 8 2021.
[19] K. Curcio, T. Navarro, A. Malucelli, and S. Reinehr, “Requirements
engineering: A systematic mapping study in agile software devel-
opment,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 139, pp. 32–50, 5
2018.

[20] V. T. Heikkila, D. Damian, C. Lassenius, and M. Paasivaara, “A
Mapping Study on Requirements Engineering in Agile Software
Development,” in 41st Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering
and Advanced Applications (SEAA 2015), pp. 199–207, Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 10 2015.

[21] E. M. Sch ¨on, J. Thomaschewski, and M. J. Escalona, “Agile Re-
quirements Engineering: A systematic literature review,” Computer
Standards and Interfaces, vol. 49, pp. 79–91, 1 2017.

[22] I. Inayat, S. S. Salim, S. Marczak, M. Daneva, and S. Shamshirband,
“A systematic literature review on agile requirements engineering
practices and challenges,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 51,
pp. 915–929, 10 2015.

[23] M. Kuutila, M. V. M¨antyl¨a, M. Claes, M. Elovainio, and B. Adams,
“Using experience sampling to link software repositories with
emotions and work well-being,” in International Symposium on
Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement, 2018.

[24] N. Novielli, F. Calefato, and F. Lanubile, “Towards discovering the
role of emotions in stack overﬂow,” in 6th International Workshop
on Social Software Engineering, SSE 2014 - Proceedings, 2014.

[25] D. Pletea, B. Vasilescu, and A. Serebrenik, “Security and emotion:
Sentiment analysis of security discussions on GitHub,” in 11th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, MSR 2014 -
Proceedings, 2014.

[26] R. Colomo-Palacios, T. Samuelsen, and C. Casado-Lumbreras,
“Emotions in software practice: Presentation vs. coding,” in Pro-
ceedings - 2019 IEEE/ACM 4th International Workshop on Emotion
Awareness in Software Engineering, SEmotion 2019, pp. 23–28, Insti-
tute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 5 2019.

[27] A. Fountaine and B. Sharif, “Emotional awareness in software
development: Theory and measurement,” in Proceedings - 2017
IEEE/ACM 2nd International Workshop on Emotion Awareness in Soft-
ware Engineering, SEmotion 2017, pp. 28–31, Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers Inc., 6 2017.

[28] A. Murgia, M. Ortu, P. Tourani, B. Adams, and S. Demeyer, “An
exploratory qualitative and quantitative analysis of emotions in
issue report comments of open source systems,” Empirical Software
Engineering, 2018.

[29] G. Yang, S. Baek, J. W. Lee, and B. Lee, “Analyzing emotion
words to predict severity of software bugs: A case study of open
source projects,” in Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Applied
Computing, vol. Part F128005, 2017.

[30] A. Murgia, P. Tourani, B. Adams, and M. Ortu, “Do developers
feel emotions? An exploratory analysis of emotions in software
artifacts,” in 11th Working Conference on Mining Software Reposito-
ries, MSR 2014 - Proceedings, 2014.

[31] N. Novielli, F. Calefato, and F. Lanubile, “A gold standard for emo-
tion annotation in stack overﬂow,” in Proceedings - International
Conference on Software Engineering, 2018.

[32] K. Neupane, K. Cheung, and Y. Wang, “EmoD: An End-to-End
Approach for Investigating Emotion Dynamics in Software De-
velopment,” in Proceedings - 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Software Maintenance and Evolution, ICSME 2019, pp. 252–256,
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 9 2019.
[33] K. Werder and S. Brinkkemper, “MEME: Toward a method for
emotions extraction from github,” in Proceedings - International
Conference on Software Engineering, 2018.

[34] E. Guzman and B. Bruegge, “Towards emotional awareness in
software development teams,” in 2013 9th Joint Meeting of the
European Software Engineering Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, ESEC/FSE
2013 - Proceedings, 2013.

[35] D. Girardi, F. Lanubile, N. Novielli, and D. Fucci, “Sensing De-
velopers Emotions: The Design of a Replicated Experiment,” in
IEEE/ACM 3rd International Workshop on Emotion Awareness in
Software Engineering (SEmotion), 2018.

[36] R. Colomo-Palacios, C. Casado-Lumbreras, P. Soto-Acosta, and
. Garc´ıa-Crespo, “Using the affect grid to measure emotions in
software requirements engineering,” Journal of Universal Computer
Science, vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 1281–1298, 2011.

[37] G. R. VandenBos, APA Dictionary of Psychology. American Psycho-

logical Association, 2007.

15

[38] P. Koval, E. A. Butler, T. Hollenstein, D. Lanteigne, and P. Kuppens,
“Emotion regulation and the temporal dynamics of emotions:
Effects of cognitive reappraisal and expressive suppression on
emotional inertia,” Cognition and Emotion, vol. 29, pp. 831–851, 7
2015.

[39] J. J. Gross and R. Thompson, “Emotion regulation: Conceptual
foundations. In J.J. Gross (Ed.), Handbook of emotion regulation.
New York: Guilford Press.,” in Handbook of Emotion Regulation,
vol. 3, 2007.

[40] S. Koole, “The psychology of emotion regulation: An integrative

review,” 2009.

[41] B. A. Kitchenham and S. L. Pﬂeeger, “Personal opinion surveys,”
in Guide to Advanced Empirical Software Engineering, pp. 63–92,
Springer London, 2008.

[42] B. A. Kitchenham, S. L. Pﬂeeger, L. M. Pickard, P. W. Jones, D. C.
Hoaglin, K. El Emam, and J. Rosenberg, “Preliminary guidelines
for empirical research in software engineering,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 721–734, 2002.

[43] T. Punter, M. Ciolkowski, B. Freimut, and I. John, “Conducting
on-line surveys in software engineering,” in Proceedings - 2003
International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering, ISESE
2003, pp. 80–88, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
Inc., 2003.

[44] B. W. Boehm, “Software Engineering Economics,” in Pioneers and
Their Contributions to Software Engineering: sd&m Conference on Soft-
ware Pioneers, Bonn, June 28/29, 2001, Original Historic Contributions
(M. Broy and E. Denert, eds.), pp. 99–150, Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2001.

[45] S. Anwer, L. Wen, and Z. Wang, “A systematic approach for iden-
tifying requirement change management challenges: Preliminary
results,” in EASE ’19: Proceedings of the Evaluation and Assessment
on Software Engineering, (New York, NY, USA), pp. 230–235, Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, 4 2019.

[46] R. Hoda, J. Noble, and S. Marshall, “The impact of inadequate cus-
tomer collaboration on self-organizing Agile teams,” in Information
and Software Technology, vol. 53, pp. 521–534, Elsevier, 5 2011.
[47] M. K. Curumsing, Emotion-oriented requirements engineering. PhD

thesis, 2017.

[48] D. Watson, L. A. Clark, and A. Tellegen, “Development and
validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The
PANAS scales.,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 54,
no. 6, 1988.

[49] E. Diener, D. Wirtz, W. Tov, C. Kim-Prieto, D. w. Choi, S. Oishi,
and R. Biswas-Diener, “New well-being measures: Short scales
to assess ﬂourishing and positive and negative feelings,” Social
Indicators Research, vol. 97, no. 2, 2010.

[50] C. D. Fisher, “Emotions at work: What do people feel and how
should we measure it? Part of the Human Resources Management
Commons,” tech. rep., 1997.

[51] University of York. NHS Centre for Reviews & Dissemination,
Systematic Reviews: CRD’s guidance for undertaking reviews in health
care. CRD, University of York, 2009.

[52] “Job-related Affective Well-being Scale JAWS - Paul Spector.”
[53] SlashData Ltd., “The Global Developer Population Report 2019,”

tech. rep., 2019.

[54] “14th State of Agile Report — State of Agile,” tech. rep.,

https://stateofagile.com/, 2020.

[55] K. Madampe, R. Hoda, J. Grundy, and P. Singh, “Towards Under-
standing Technical Responses to Requirements Changes in Agile
Teams,” in IEEE/ACM 42nd International Conference on Software
Engineering Workshops (ICSEW20), (Seoul, Republic of Korea), p. 4,
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2020.

[56] M.-A. A. El-Migid, D. Cai, T. Niven, J. Vo, K. Madampe, J. Grundy,
and R. Hoda, “Emotimonitor: A Trello power-up to capture and
monitor emotions of Agile teams,” Journal of Systems and Software,
vol. 186, p. 111206, 4 2022.

[57] S. Baltes, G. Park, and A. Serebrenik, “Is 40 the New 60? How
Popular Media Portrays the Employability of Older Software
Developers,” IEEE Software, vol. 37, no. 6, 2020.

[58] K. Madampe, R. Hoda, and J. Grundy, “Towards Better Under-
standing of Agile Teams through Behavior Change Models,” in
he 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering - Human-Centric Software Engineering and Cyber Security
Workshop, (Melbourne), 2020.

APPENDIX A
PROJECT INFORMATION

16

TABLE 7
Information of Current/Most Recent Project of the Survey Alpha and Beta Participants (Other: ≤ 5 participants)

Survey Alpha

Project Domain

IT
Other

# of Participants

Project Category

# of Participants Agile Method Used

# of Participants

23
17

New Development
Software as a Service
Other

22
9
9

Scrum
Other

28

12

Team Size

# of People

Iteration Length

# of Weeks

Minimum
Maximum
Mean
Standard Deviation

3
80
14.36
15.54

Minimum
Maximum
Mean
Standard Deviation

2
10
3.28
2.25

Practices Followed (Order of the Bars in Each Graph Below: Never → Sometimes → About half the time → Most of the Time → Always)

Collective Estimation
Customer Demos
Daily Standup/Team Meeting
Deﬁnition of Done
Iteration Planning

Product Backlog
Short iterations/Sprints
Release Planning
Retrospectives
Review Meetings

Scrum/Kanban Board
Self–assignment
Sprint Backlog
User Stories
Pair Programming

Survey Beta

Project Domain

IT
Finance & Banking
Manufacturing
Transport
Telecom
Other

# of Participants

Project Category

# of Participants Development Method Used

# of Participants

122

New development
Software as a Service
Maintenance
Migration

115

47

22
17

30

10
10
7
16

Scrum
Dynamic System Development
Feature Driven Development
Waterfall
Kanban
Crystal

None

Other

57
44

25
17
14
11

8

11

Team Size

# of People

Iteration Length

# of Weeks

Minimum
Maximum
Mean
Standard Deviation

1
100
18.61
18.8

Minimum
Maximum
Mean
Standard Deviation

1
10
5.67
2.11

Practices Followed (Order of the Bars in Each Graph Below: Never → Sometimes → About half the time → Most of the time → Always)

Collective Estimation
Customer Demos
Daily Standup/team meeting
Deﬁnition of Done
Iteration Planning
Pair Programming

Product Backlog
Short Iterations/Sprints
Release Planning
Retrospectives
Review Meetings

Scrum/Kanban Board
Self-assignment
Sprint Backlog
User Stories
Use Cases

APPENDIX B
CHALLENGES AND EMOTIONS FELT – EXAMPLES

17

TABLE 8
Challenges and Emotions Felt (Dev: Developer; BA: Business Analyst; AC/SM: Agile Coach/ Scrum Master; Mgr: Manager; Sys. Admin: System
Administrator)

Challenge

Dimension

Emotions

Examples

Roles (<Participants>)

Complexity

High

Low

Cascading impact

High

Low1 in gen.
Anxious

High2 in gen.
Excited
Energetic

High1 in gen.
Content
Calm
Relaxed

Low1 in gen.
Angry

Discouraged
Fatigued

“Client requested a new functionality that would need to make a
lot of changes in the project that was developed with a high level
of complexity” – βP82

“When we had to deal with additions and/or modiﬁcations that
were highly complex and/or unexpected, I tended to feel anxious”
– βP188

Dev (βP82, βP128, βP188)

“When the implementation turns out to be less complex than initially
speciﬁed” – βP94

“When the owner asked us change the third party service provider
which they insisted early on the project I felt energetic because we
could do it better and easier” – βP113

Dev (βP82, βP94, βP110, βP113, βP125,
βP128, βP188)
BA (βP170, βP183)
Tester (βP54)
AC/SM, Dev (βP76)
Dev, Mgr (βP116)
Dev, Sys. Admin (βP177)

“Nightmarish changes that totally change the database design,
application design, program structure or involve a complete overhaul
of the application due to a basic assumption or understanding based
on which the application was developed being charged at the last
minute are extremely scary, time consuming, risky and difﬁcult to
implement without from scratch. These are changes that involve a
change in database structure, constraints and relationship between
ﬁles, program logic, etc. Usually, this will require a re-estimation,
and change in deadlines. Sometimes this even requires starting from
scratch to avoid design issues” – βP128

“When requirements were signiﬁcantly changed in the middle of
the project, typically needing signiﬁcant modiﬁcation of work we’d
already done, I tended to feel discouraged
and fatigued” – βP188

Dev (βP128, βP138, βP151, βP188)

Low

Large

Size

High1 in gen.
Content

“Some examples are the wordings on screens, minor layout changes,
additional variations, or changes that can be implemented without
major changes to the existing application
design or program ﬂow.” – βP128

Dev (βP128, βP130)
BA, Dev, Tester (βP92)

Low2 in gen.

“Large new features being added, that necessitate large rewrites
as they were well beyond the initial scope” – βP10

Dev (βP10)

Deﬁnition

Precise/ clear

High1 in gen.

“well–deﬁned feature deﬁnitions” – βP174

“When we ﬁnally got UI mockups, I was pleased that I knew exactly
what I was supposed to be building, instead of having to design the
UX as I went along. I was also happy all the details (fonts, spacing,
etc.) were exactly speciﬁed, so I could code it right the ﬁrst time
instead of having to do a second pass for consistency with the rest
of the UI” – βP175

Dev (βP175)
Dev, Mgr (βP174)

Imprecise/ unclear

Low2 in gen.

“I just hate projects where I need to run after information cause
nobody knows anything, it tends to put me in a negative mood”
– βP104

Dev (βP104)

Access to customer

Easy/ regular

Calm

Difﬁcult/ irregular

Fatigued
Gloomy

Effort required

High

Low2 in gen.

“Requirements for permitting issuance manual refunds changed
to require a not more fraud detection code. I was calm when we had
this change, because we have regular conversations with the
stakeholder who the project was for. With the regular collaboration,
I knew that she would understand delay at not be angry at us for
this” – βP184

“satisﬁed. Customer input happens throughout the development
process” – βP187

“well we used Dynamic systems development method in our
project as the client needed an updation on their application as
the are shifting to an newer location we used Rapid Application
Development using DSDM. Overall it was an fatigued experience
cause project seems to be moving a bit gloomy as client was
always busy so reply was much delayed.” – βP165

“Late in the dev phase of a new work project, my client changed
their requirements; speciﬁcally they wanted to change how their
data is loaded into the application, changing it from an XLS ﬁle
to a database table.. I had to rebuild the ﬁle loader completely.
It made me feel angry because I felt they do not understand my
position, did not take our meetings seriously or read my
emails clearly to prevent this from happening” – βP150

“The client asked for an unexpected change when we had ﬁnished
loading more than 25gbs of data and also all the databases were
already connected. We had to make a change, call the engineers
and rewrite more than 256 lines of code and upload everything
back to the two servers. The change was basically that the he
wanted the app to be hybrid. It was an app for mobile payments.
The client wanted the app to work with all devices, when at the
beginning he had asked for it only for android. The conversion was
not difﬁcult, the problem was to delete all ﬁles from the server and
upload everything again. It was a headache” – βP72

“These emotions were experienced when requirements are changed
that will increase the amount of effort required signiﬁcantly” – βP123

Dev, Mgr (βP187)
Dev, Tester (βP184)
AC/SM, Dev, Tester (βP83)

Dev (βP125, βP165)
Dev, Tester (βP150)

Dev (βP123)
AC/SM, Dev (βP72)

APPENDIX C
PRACTITIONER–RELATED FACTORS – EXAMPLES

18

TABLE 9
Practitioner–related factors (IC1–IC4: Further Consequences; in gen.: in general; Dev: Developer; Mgr: Manager; AC/SM: Agile Coach/Scrum
Master; BA: Business Analyst; PO: Product Owner)

hFactor

Emotions

Examples

[+A] Preference in learning/
knowledge acquisition [IC2, IC3, IC4]

High2 in gen.
Excited
Inspired

[+B] High empowerment/ auntonomy/
responsibility [IC1]

Energetic
Inspired

High1 in gen.
Satisﬁed
Relaxed

[+C] Practitioner ideating

High2 in gen.

[-A] Difﬁculty in learning/ knowledge
acquisition

[-B] Less autonomy due to forced effort
on working overtime [IC5, IC6]

Anxious

Gloomy
Fatigued
Discouraged
Depressed [over]

Low1 in gen.

Low2 in gen.
Bored
Depressed

[-D] Making mistakes

Low1 in gen.
Depressed [over]

“Because I was assigned with the changes related to the component I was
responsible, and it was interesting because I had to learn new concepts”
– βP25

“I was working on project with dd payment method and they included the
concept of virtual payment so I had to do the webservice and linking the
payment bank account with our own webservice to capture the data which
was fun and excitement for me do it. It was new and I learned a lot out of
it which is great” – βP126

“The combination of autonomy, pay, ﬂexibility, and job satisfaction leads
to software engineers being quite happy compared to people in other
professions” – βP195

“I was placed as a head tech on a major project to save our company
thousands of dollars. Knowing that I could potentially save our company
over 1 million dollars with time saving and energy saving techniques
made me quite excited. I was really energetic and felt inspired to get the
best information I could to make sure our company could do the same
amount of work but use less energy” – βP196

“I felt these emotions with the ideas that came to my mind, about the
new project I am developing” – βP81

“When an addition to the functionality the costumer wants is something
you thought about before as some kind of exercise” – βP94

“Anxious when i feel that the new technology is difﬁcult to learn”
– βP103

“During the initial learning of clients modiﬁcation i felt very anxious
during the learning procedure of [project management tool] +
Agile on the implementation” – βP67

“overwork , get stuck due to dependency on other developments,
only solve bugs, not see progress in the project ... redo the same
story many times” – βP106

“Depression on the job is often misinterpreted as a bad attitude or
poor work ethic I feel sometimes depressed because of over time
work and excess of project on my head, due date is to near to me,
so that I lost my sleep and my relax time. so i felt to much depressed”
– βP147

“whenever i missed just liltle mistake like forget to add a semicolon
lol” – βP133

“some time over depression to run the program and ﬁnding the new
code for gaining our knowledge and developing the advanced
technology and identify the mistake easy replaced” – βP65

Roles (<Participants>)

Dev (βP106, βP199)
Dev, Tester (βP25,
βP88, βP134)
BA (βP189)
BA, Dev (βP126)
BA, Dev, Mgr (βP143)
AC/SM, Dev (βP103)

BA (βP195)
Mgr (βP107)
AC/SM, Tester
(βP196)

Dev (βP94)
PO (βP81)
AC/SM, Mgr, Tester
(βP133)

Mgr (βP66)
AC/SM (βP67)
AC/SM, Dev
(βP103)
Tester, Product
Specialist (βP135)

Dev (βP56, βP86,
βP89, βP106)
Dev, Tester
(βP192)
BA (βP132,
βP147)
BA, Dev (βP126)
AC/SM (βP129)

Dev (βP131)
Tester (βP65)
BA, PO, Tester
(βP141)
Mgr, PO, Tester
(βP155)

APPENDIX D
PEER–RELATED FACTORS – EXAMPLES

19

TABLE 10
Peer–related factors (PC1–PC5: Additional Consequence of the Antecedent; in gen.: in general; Dev: Developer; Mgr: Manager; AC/SM: Agile
Coach/Scrum Master; BA: Business Analyst; PO: Product Owner)

ﬂFactor

Emotions

Examples

Roles (<Participants>)

[+A] Having the required expertise/ competency/
relevant experience of the peers

[+B] High efﬁciency/ productivity of peers

[+C] Better relationship management within the
team through collaboration and engagement [PC1–PC5]

[-B] Low efﬁciency/ low productivity of the team

[-D] Team members making mistakes

Inspired

High1 in gen.
Relaxed
Satisﬁed
Calm
At ease

High2 in gen.
Inspired
Excited
Energetic

Relaxed
Satisﬁed
Calm
At ease

High2 in gen.
Inspired
Energetic

High1 in gen.
Relaxed
Satisﬁed
Calm

Low1 in gen.
Angry
Anxious

Low1 in gen.
Angry
Disgusted

“I feel inspired in my project work team members. It help of my
team members and my project team member is very
knowledgeable persons” – βP107

“.. I belonged to an experienced team. Updating and changing
requirements - just as with any project - is something we had
done several times before this particular project. We (mostly)
knew what to expect and how to handle any unscheduled
issues or errors. We had every reason to stay calm and implement
changes in the same way we had done multiple times before”
– βP101

“its combination of doing work that is doing work efﬁcient the
output come also very well once we do energetic work we get
excited result that result give enthusiastic state these all are come
we inspired some thing on our work that inspire we ﬁnd” – βP176

“At sometime, I feel more at-ease whenever there is a change in
requirements from our client side because of my team members
as they are more efﬁcient in their work and sometimes they don’t
need any presence of mine in that time which makes me feel
at-ease” – βP109

“When the team is functioning well, management is
communicating, and the revision process is ﬂowing smoothly, I
feel relaxed and satisﬁed that we’re going to meet objectives
on time and on budget” – βP198

“As we have the MVVM framework, the change of UI is
concentrated on a small number of source code ﬁles. The
changes are still within the scope of my work. Furthermore,
the requirement changes follow standard SOP and Scrum
process. We had a meeting to break down the requirements
into tasks, prioritise user stories and commit tasks within our
working hours. The changes also went through a proper
discussion between all team members, managers and
software architect to estimate the effort and the impact of
the changes on production systems” – βP3

“slow co-workers” – βP133

“I feel angry anxious anytime I work with old folks who
always have a slow work rate and always believes in their
traditional way of performing duties I am always furious and
always hope I get younger teammates” – βP156

“when something developed not working because of someone
else did a mistake” – βP53

Sometimes teammate make mistakes on very important projects.
These tβPes of emotions are faced [by] all guys” – βP186

Dev (βP61)
Tester (βP54)
Mgr (βP101, βP107)
Dev, Mgr (βP174)

Dev (βP176, βP156)
Mgr (βP186, βP167, βP107)
Dev, Mgr (βP193)

Dev (βP3, βP96, βP118, βP160,
βP198)
BA (βP117)
Mgr (βP37, βP68, βP107)
Dev, Mgr (βP38, βP41)
Dev, Mgr, Tester (βP100)

Dev (βP110, βP156)
AC/SM, Mgr, Tester (βP133)

Dev (βP53)
Mgr (βP186)
AC/SM (βP197)

APPENDIX E
MANAGER–RELATED FACTORS – EXAMPLES

20

TABLE 11
Manager–related factors (in gen.: in general; Dev: Developer; Mgr: Manager; AC/SM: Agile Coach/Scrum Master; BA: Business Analyst; PO:
Product Owner)

–Factor

Emotions

Examples

Roles (<Participants>)

[+A] Manager having empathy (social awareness)

Energetic

High1 in gen.
Calm

[+B] Manager building better relationships through
communication and coordination (relationship
management)

Inspired

Satisﬁed
Relaxed

“Because I was never given a pressure on completion due date and I
was never given a negative reviews on the ongoing project day by
day” – βP132

“one spotify project our team member is mistake, we ﬁnd the mistake
last time , so immediate work day night we ﬁnish the project. and very
calm, because our new team leader says every project [is] a lesson”
– βP45

“My manger makes me feel inspired whenever he speaks with me”
– βP61

“great project managers are great communicators with high emotional
intelligence. prompt and honest communication immediately gives a
project manager satisﬁed and relaxed” – βP153

“my ex team leader was suddenly angry for every minor mistake”
– βP45

BA (βP132)
BA, Dev (βP200)
Mgr (βP45)

Dev (βP61)
BA, Dev, Mgr (βP143)
AC/SM (βP153)

[-A] Manager lacking empathy (social awareness)

Low1 in gen.
Angry

Low2 in gen.

“I worked more and more time each day to try to succesfully make
the job, and new issues appeared every day that needed more and
more time. We were all at same feelings but team leader didn’t hear
his team feeling. He requested us to perform this project on at
’just in time’. I lost energy and I worked whithout any positive
feedback. I lost my ﬂow” – βP173

Dev (βP173)
BA (βP147)
Mgr (βP45)

APPENDIX F
CUSTOMER–RELATED FACTORS – EXAMPLES

21

TABLE 12
Customer–related Factors (CC1–CC3: Additional Consequence of the Antecedent; in gen.: in general; Dev: Developer; Mgr: Manager; AC/SM:
Agile Coach/Scrum Master; BA: Business Analyst; PO: Product Owner)

{Factor

Emotions

Examples

Roles (<Participants>)

[+A] Customers’ manifested high pleasurable
emotions [satisﬁed/ excited] [CC1]

[+B] Customers’ positive engagement with
the team

[-A] Customers’ manifested low pleasurable
emotions [unsatisﬁed/ unimpressed] [CC2]

[-C] Customer being sceptical [CC2, CC3]

High2 in gen.
Energetic
Inspired

High1 in gen.
Calm
Satisﬁed

High2 in gen.

Calm
Satisﬁed

Angry

Low2 in gen.
Depressed

Low1 in gen.
Anxious

Low2 in gen.
Bored
Depressed
Discouraged

“I normally have these emotions when my clients love my work”
– βP116

“During the software development, there was demo for it. At the
time we wanted to show the project demo differently with Visme
and Covo tool. Everyone appreciated that it was so special.
We felt so much energy, inspiration at the time” – βP158

“When the client understood a necessary change and we were able
to work together to deﬁne the requirement change. It would lead
to a better outcome” – βP12

“Customer input happens throughout the development process”
– βP187

“These emotions come when you see the client is not satisﬁed
with the work you’ve presented to him /her” – P116

“Suppose our project [did] not impress client, then we feel very
bad and depressed” – P186

“If client is not clear about what he wants and ask for same
functional or non-fuctional changes again and again that makes
me discouraged and bored” – βP109

“Multiple changes on the same functionnality/aspect, clearly
showing the client does not know what [client] wants. You do this
change fully expecting that the developpement won’t ’stick’ and
you’ll have to change this again soon” – βP77

Dev (βP98, βP110)
Dev, Mgr (βP116)
AC/SM, Dev (βP158)

BA, Dev, Mgr,
PO, Tester (βP12)
AC/SM, Dev (βP158)
Dev, Mgr (βP187)

Dev, Mgr (βP116)
BA, Dev (βP126)
Mgr (βP186)

Dev (βP77)
BA (βP90, βP109)
Tester (βP180)
Dev (βP199)

