2
2
0
2

n
u
J

6
1

]
P
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

2
v
7
7
5
2
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

A Real-World Radio Frequency Signal Dataset
Based on LTE System and Variable Channels

Shupeng Zhang†, Yibin Zhang†, Xixi Zhang†, Jinlong Sun†, Yun Lin(cid:63), Haris Gacanin‡,
Fumiyuki Adachi††, and Guan Gui†

†College of Telecommunications and Information Engineering, NJUPT, Nanjing, China
(cid:63)College of Information and Communication Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China
‡Institute for Communication Technologies and Embedded Systems, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
††International Research Institute of Disaster Science (IRIDeS), Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan
∗E-mails: harisg@ice.rwth-aachen.de, fumiyuki.adachi.b4@tohoku.ac.jp, guiguan@njupt.edu.cn

Abstract—Radio Frequency Fingerprint (RFF) identiﬁcation
on account of deep learning has the potential to enhance the
security performance of wireless networks. Recently, several RFF
datasets were proposed to satisfy requirements of large-scale
datasets. However, most of these datasets are collected from
2.4G WiFi devices and through similar channel environments.
Meanwhile, they only provided receiving data collected by the
speciﬁc equipment. This paper utilizes software radio peripheral
as a dataset generating platform. Therefore,
the user can
customize the parameters of the dataset, such as frequency
band, modulation mode, antenna gain, and so on. In addition,
the proposed dataset is generated through various and complex
channel environments, which aims to better characterize the
radio frequency signals in the real world. We collect the dataset
at transmitters and receivers to simulate a real-world RFF
dataset based on the long-term evolution (LTE). Furthermore,
we verify the dataset and conﬁrm its reliability. The dataset
and reproducible code of this paper can be downloaded from
GitHub1.

Index Terms—RFF dataset, software radio peripheral, real-

world, deep learning, devices identiﬁcation.

I. INTRODUCTION

Recently, as wireless communication keeps advancing,
the application of Internet of Things (IoT) has become an
indispensable part of daily life. Meanwhile, cyber attack like
impersonation attack happens more often. The hacker is able
to duplicate the identity information to spoof devices [1]–[4].
Therefore, the security of wireless communication becomes
a vital issue [5]. Radio Frequency Fingerprinting (RFF) is
regarded as a technology to identify wireless devices and to
strengthen the security of wireless communication [6]. The
RFF is the feature caused by the hardware imperfections of
analog circuitry. These hardware imperfections are generated
during the production process. Therefore, RFF is unique and
applicable to devices identiﬁcation [7]–[9].

Recognizing the most relevant functions from a mixture
containing large numbers of signal radios is a challenge [10]–
[13]. It
therefore it needs domain
knowledge and advanced testing facility. On the contrary,

is protocol dependent,

1GitHub link: https://github.com/njuptzsp/XSRPdataset

the RF signal samples are sufﬁcient

methods based on neural network are gaining appeal because
they can automatically identify features with considering
protocol: only raw in-phase (I) and quadrature (Q) components
of
recognition,
which greatly facilitates application of RFF identiﬁcation.
Hence, many researchers work to apply deep learning
to RFF identiﬁcation [14]–[20]. The main stages in the
RFF identiﬁcation are shown in Fig. 1. Signiﬁcantly,
this
technology requires high-quality datasets. Recently, several
datasets were proposed. They are shown as follows.

for

• ORACLE: The ORACLE dataset

recorded raw IQ
symbols collected from transmissions of 16 USRP X310
transmitter signals and demodulated IQ samples collected
after equalizing transmissions of 16 IQ imbalance
conﬁgurations [21].

• The dataset recorded bluetooth signals from 27 various
phones and changed sampling rate in each collection. The
data acquisition system for creating dataset was described
in detail. Then, the reliability of two methods based on
transient bluetooth signals were tested by the dataset [22].
• ADS-B: A large scale radio dataset is created, which is
dependent on a peculiar aviation system, i.e., Automatic
Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B). This dataset
captured ADS-B signals outdoors and labelled them.
Then, they cleaned and sorted the data and created a high-
quality dataset ﬁnally [23].

However, the above datasets are signals collected from 2.4G
wireless devices such as smartphones and laptops. The signal
frequency band is single and not universal. Also, some of them
are collected under similar ideal wireless channels. Except
these, datasets described above only recorded signals data at
the receiver-side. Therefore, we use a wireless communication
system based on LTE [24], [25] and generate 800 MHz signals.
We transmit signals through different real wireless channels
collecting both the transmission and reception data in a 800
MHz LTE signal frequency band where the one can simulate
a more realistic communication environment. Although, the
channel environment does not affect RFF, it inﬂuences the
received signal and RFF feature extraction [26]. Our main

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

5) Resource mapping: This is to map the digital signal of
01 to the speciﬁc time and frequency of electromagnetic wave.
Inverse Fast Fourier Transform (IFFT) is to

6) IFFT:

transfer frequency domain data to time domain.

7) Add CP: Add CP is to eliminate Inter-Carrier Inter-
ference (ICI) and Inter-Symbol Interference (ISI) and it will
be described later. Finally, we perform DA conversion and
transmit the analog signal. The RF signal after up conversion
is shown as:

X(t) = s(t)e−j2πf T x

c

t,

(1)

where s(t) represents the baseband signal; f T x
frequency of the transmitter.

c

is the carrier

After processing in the XSRP as the transmitter, the radio
signals carry RFF. The rest of the processing procedures
at receiver-side will not be introduced because they are all
restoration in the previous stage. Considering that wireless
is R(t) =
channels affect reception,
αcX(t), where αc is the wireless channel fading gain. The
baseband signal after down conversion is represented as:

the received signal

Y (t) = R(t)ej2πf Rx

c

t+φ

= αcs(t)ej2π∆f t+φ,

(2)

c

where f Rx
is the carrier frequency of receiver, φ is the receiver
phase error, ∆f = f Rx
is the frequency offset between
transmitter and receiver. The phase rotation factor ej2π∆f t+φ
in (2) changes with time t.

c − f T x

c

Main system parameters are shown as Tab. I. In this
procedure, the data collection and processing are all completed
by computers. We can choose any part of the system’s data
to store freely. For the purpose of RFF identiﬁcation and
follow-up extended experiment, we choose some parts of the
system’s data to store in the computer. All above mentioned
communication modules are all shown in Fig. 2.

B. LTE Frame Structure

In this part, we describe LTE frame structure. From Fig. 3,
we can see that one 10 ms wireless frame contains ten 1
ms subframes. Each subframe consists of two 0.5 ms time
slots. Each time slot consists of 7 OFDM symbols. Useful data
accounts for 6 symbols. Pilot data occupies symbol position
3. The CP is to copy the part within the last certain length of
the OFDM signal and put it in the head of the OFDM signal.
The OFDM signal that becomes longer after adding the CP
is used as a new OFDM signal. In this way, ICI and ISI can
be completely eliminated if the CP length is longer than the
largest propagation time delay [29], [30].

TABLE I
SYSTEM PARAMETERS AND DEFAULT VALUES.

System parameter
Modulation type
Channel coding type
SNR
Transmission frequency
Reception frequency

Default setting
16QAM
1/2 convolutional code
20 dB
800 MHz
800 MHz

Fig. 1. Devices identiﬁcation using RFF.

contributions of the letter are shown below.

• To meet

the requirements of large-scale dataset, we
use a wireless communication system based on LTE
and generate a dataset by using 10 different XSRP as
transmitters and storing transmission and reception data.
• To solve the problem of single frequency band and lack of
complex channel environment, we set emission frequency
as 800 MHz and generate two channel environments
including Line of Sight (LOS) channel and Non Line of
Sight (NLOS) channel [27], [28].

• We validate the dataset by using simple CNN. Judging
from the classiﬁcation accuracy, the dataset is reliable
and can be used in deep learning-based RFF identiﬁcation
techniques.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

A. Wireless Communication System Based on LTE

In this part, we introduce the wireless communication
system based on LTE. LTE provides better coverage, improved
system capacity, and signals with high peak value in a highly
efﬁcient manner. The signal source data is generated on the
computer and carried out a series of processing based on LTE.
Then, the signal data are sent to the XSRP as transmitter
and transmitted through wifeless channel to another XSRP as
receiver. As shown in Fig. 2, the detailed stages of wireless
communication system based on LTE are as follows:

1) Generate source: We use 10 different XSRP as
transmitters to meet the need of large-scale dataset. This means
we need enough radio source data to process and transmit.
If we transmit same signal data every time, the dataset is
unreasonable. We should ensure that most of radio signal
source is different. Therefore, we use Matlab to PCM encode
an 18 minute MP3 ﬁle and then generate ﬁve thousands rows
of source data. We select 400 rows randomly as radio source
data in every transmission.

2) Channel code: To enhance data transmission efﬁciency
and decrease bit error rate, the channel coding type is 1/2
convolutional code. That is, two bits are output for each input
bit. We represent the data after channel coding as x(t).

3) Modulation mapping: The modulation type is 16
Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (QAM). We map the data
to the constellation according to the 16QAM mapping table.
Modulation mapping is to improve signal anti-interference
ability and facilitate wireless communication.

4) Generate pilot: We generate 2 pilots for the channel

estimation at the receiver-side.

3

Fig. 2. Wireless communication system based on LTE.

Fig. 3. LTE frame structure.

III. DATASET GENERATION APPROACH

A. Channel Environment

We select our laboratory as the place to transmit and
receive signals. Due to many people, personal computers,
work station and closed room, our laboratory has complex
electromagnetic environment. On this basis, we design two
kinds of channel environments including: NLOS and LOS
channel environments. They are shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6.
In the situation of NLOS, wireless signals are received in
many ways containing reﬂection, scattering and diffraction,
and multipath effect will bring many troubles like time delay
synchronization, link instability and so on. In NLOS channel
environment, the distance between transmitter and receiver is
far and there will be people walking around sometimes in
our laboratory, hence the channel conditions are changing.
This can help us simulate more channel conditions and
SNR regimes. Under the condition of LOS,
the wireless
signal propagates in a straight line between the transmitter
and the receiver without shielding. This is an ideal channel
environment and the distance between the transmitter and the
receiver is close.

B. Hardware Setup

The hardware conﬁguration of wireless communication

system is represented below:

and it can make an ordinary computer work like high
broadband software radio equipment. In essence, it acts
as the digital baseband and intermediate frequency part
of the communication system.

2) Signal processing equipment: As is shown in Fig. 4,
there is a computer at each transmitter-side and receiver-
side which is used for signal processing and storage.
3) Computer conﬁguration: CPU is Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-
10700 @ 2.90 GHz, Random Access Memory is 16 GB,
and Solid State Disk is 1 TB.

The dataset consists of two parts including: transmitter-side
data and receiver-side data. We store source data, modulation
data, IFFT data and transmission data at
transmitter-side.
At receiver-side data, we store the data corresponding to
the transmitter. We use ﬁve transmitters for every channel
environment. Each transmission and reception last about 4
hours and collect 400 samples. The length of each sample is
28796. After storing ten times of transmission and reception
using 10 different XSRP, we combine the stored data into
dataset.

IV. DATASET ANALYSIS AND VERIFICATION
In section III, we introduced how to generate dataset.
This section, we mainly analyze the dataset including the
effect of different channel environments to the radio reception.
Meanwhile, the reliability of the dataset is veriﬁed.

1) Signal receiving equipment: We use XSRP as transmitter
and receiver. XSRP is a software deﬁned radio platform.
to the computer with network cable
We connect

it

As is shown in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8,

these two pictures
are reviver constellation of 16QAM signals through different
the two
channel environments. From the comparison of

4

will eventually learn the ﬁngerprint mixed with channel
distortion, rather than pure inherent ﬁngerprint. Therefore, we
have collected the dataset which contains different kinds of
channel environments and using this dataset to train the neural
network can increase the robustness of the network.

We also use a simple CNN to verify the reliability of
dataset. CNN has the advantage of translation invariance: the
converted weights detect the patterns at any position of each
layer, and the signal is transmitted to the higher layer through
the maximum pool layer. This feature enables the network
to detect the patterns well. The dataset is divided into three
portions, i.e., the training set, the validation set, and the test set.
They account for 60%, 20%, and 20% of the whole dataset
respectively. The dataset has 4000 samples in total. Hence,
there are 2400 samples in the training set, 800 samples in
the validation set and 800 samples in the test set. To reduce
training time and enhance performance, the epoch is set as 200
and batch size is set as 16. Also, an early stop mechanism was
established to save time. The performance of the CNN model
is shown as Fig. 9. The classiﬁcation accuracy is not very
good but some species are classiﬁed very precisely. Hence,
the dataset is reliable and more ways to improve classiﬁcation
accuracy of the dataset are worth exploring.

(a) transmitted constellation

(b) received constellation

Fig. 7. Constellations of a transmitter and a receiver under NLOS channel
environment.

(a) transmitted constellation

(b) received constellation

Fig. 8. Constellations of a transmitter and a receiver under LOS channel
environment.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, a real-world RFF dataset considering LTE
and variable channels is proposed. We also present the main
part about how to generate the dataset including system model
and hardware setup. The test result using the dataset is also
presented. As shown in the result, although the current results

Fig. 4. Hardware setup.

Fig. 5. NLOS channel environment constructed in laboratory.

is difﬁcult

to get shape of

pictures, NLOS channel environment lead to poor reception
the original
effect and it
constellation. Instead, transmitter and receiver constellation
are similar in the situation of LOS channel environment.
Therefore, the LOS channels often lead to ideal reception in
our experiment. From the RFF introduced above, no matter
poor or ideal reception effect, it will not affect the reliability
of dataset and features extraction. Because RFF represents
the physical feature due to hardware imperfections, it will
not be changed by the reception effect. However, wireless
channel is the main factor leading to the decline of accuracy in
RFF identiﬁcation based on deep learning. If a training set is
collected in a speciﬁc channel environment, the neural network

Fig. 6. LOS channel environment constructed in laboratory.

5

[10] Y. Wang, G. Gui, H. Gacanin, T. Ohtsuki, O. A. Dobre, and H. V. Poor,
“An efﬁcient speciﬁc emitter identiﬁcation method based on complex-
valued neural networks and network compression,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2305–2317, Aug.
2021.

[11] P. Wang, Y. Cheng, B. Dong, and G. Gui, “Binary neural networks
for wireless interference identiﬁcation,” IEEE Wireless Commuications
Letters, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 23–27, Jan. 2022.

[12] Z. Qin, H. Ye, G. Y. Li, B.-H. F. Juang, “Deep learning in physical
layer communications,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 2,
pp. 93–99, Feb. 2019.

[13] X. X. Zhang, H. T. Zhao, et al., “NAS-AMR: neural architec-
ture search based automatic modulation recognition method for
integrating sensing and communication system,” IEEE Transactions
on Cognitive Communications and Networking, early access, doi:
10.1109/TCCN.2022.3169740.

[14] L. Zong, C. Xu, and H. Yuan, “A RF ﬁngerprint recognition method
based on deeply convolutional neural network,” in 2020 IEEE 5th
Information Technology and Mechatronics Engineering Conference
(ITOEC), Chongqing, China, 2020, pp. 1778–1781.

[15] D. Liu, M. Wang, and H. Wang, “RF ﬁngerprint recognition based
on spectrum waterfall diagram,” in 2021 18th International Computer
Conference on Wavelet Active Media Technology and Information
Processing (ICCWAMTIP), Chengdu, China, 2021, pp. 613–616.
[16] Y. Peng, P. Liu, Y. Wang, G. Gui, B. Adebisi, and H. Gacanin,
“Radio frequency ﬁngerprint identiﬁcation based on slice integration
cooperation and heat constellation trace ﬁgure,” IEEE Wireless
Commuications Letters, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 543–547, Mar. 2022.
[17] Y. Yang, A. Hu, Y. Xing, J. Yu, Z. Zhang, “A data-independent radio
frequency ﬁngerprint extraction scheme,” IEEE Wireless Commuications
Letters, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2524–2527, Nov. 2021.

[18] Z. Yang, A. Hu, W. Xu, J. Yu, annd Y. Yang, “An artiﬁcial radio
frequency ﬁngerprint embedding scheme for device identiﬁcation,” IEEE
Commuications Letters, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 974–978, May 2021.
[19] J. Yu, A. Hu, G. Li, and L. Peng, “A robust RF ﬁngerprinting approach
using multisampling convolutional neural network,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 6786–6799, 2019.

[20] K. Sankhe, M. Belgiovine, et al., “No radio left behind:

radio
ﬁngerprinting through deep learning of physical-layer hardware
impairments,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and
Networking, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 165–178, 2019.

[21] K. Sankhe, M. Belgiovine, et al., “ORACLE: optimized radio classiﬁca-
tion through convolutional neuraL networks,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2019
IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, Paris, France, 2019,
pp. 370–378.

[22] E. Uzundurukan, Y. Dalveren, and A. Kara, “A database for radio
frequency fringerprinting of bluetooth Devices,” Data, vol. 5, no. 2,
Jun. 2020.

[23] Y. Tu, Y. Lin, H. Zha, J. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Large-scale real-
world radio signal recognition with deep learning,” Chinese Journal of
Aeronautics, early access, doi: 10.1016/j.cja.2021.08.016.

[24] M. Labib, V. Marojevic, and J. H. Reed, “Analyzing and enhancing
the resilience of LTE/LTE-A systems to RF spooﬁng,” in 2015 IEEE
Conference on Standards for Communications and Networking (CSCN),
Tokyo, Japan, 2015, pp. 315–320.

[25] P. Yin, L. Peng, J. Zhang, M. Liu, H. Fu, and A. Hu, “LTE device
identiﬁcation based on RF ﬁngerprint with multi-channel convolutional
neural network,” in 2021 IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), Madrid, Spain, 2021, pp. 1–6.

[26] N. Soltani, K. Sankhe, J. Dy, S. Ioannidis, and K. Chowdhury, “More is
better: data augmentation for channel-resilient RF ﬁngerprinting,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 66–72, Oct. 2020.
[27] F. Wang, Z. Xu, R. Zhi, J. Chen, and P. Zhang, “LOS/NLOS channel
identiﬁcation technology based on CNN,” in 2019 6th NAFOSTED
Conference on Information and Computer Science (NICS), Hanoi,
Vietnam, 2019, pp. 200–203.

[28] K. Aono, M. Sawahashi, and N. Kamiya, “Performance of single-
carrier LOS-MIMO using FDE in 3GPP TDL channel models,” in 2020
International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation (ISAP), Osaka,
Japan, 2021, pp. 819–820.

[29] H. Nourollahi and S. G. Maghrebi, “Evaluation of cyclic preﬁx length
in OFDM system based for Rayleigh fading channels under different
modulation schemes,” in 2017 IEEE Symposium on Computers and
Communications (ISCC), Heraklion, Greece, 2017, pp. 164–169.
[30] T. Nagashima, T. Murakawa, et al., “Cyclic preﬁx insertion for
all-optical fractional OFDM,” in 2015 International Conference on
Photonics in Switching (PS), Florence, Italy, 2015, pp. 79–81.

Fig. 9. Classiﬁcation results with CNN.

are not ideal, our dataset is conﬁrmed that it can be used to
deep learning. Finally, the dataset and matlab code is uploaded
to Github. We expect that it is able to encourage more and
more investigators to devote to the domains and propose more
excellent methods to enhance the identiﬁcation performance.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work was supported by the National Key Research
and Development Program of China under Grant No.
2021ZD0113003, National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant Number 61901228, China Postdoctoral Sci-
ence Foundation Project under Grant Number 2021M702466.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Zhao, J. Yin, et al., “An efﬁcient intrusion detection method based
on dynamic autoencoder,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol.
10, no. 8, pp. 1707–1711, Aug. 2021.

[2] S. I. Popoola, B. Adebisi, M. Hammoudeh, G. Gui, and H. Gacanin,
“Hybrid deep learning for botnet attack detection in the internet of things
networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 4944–
4956, Jun. 2021.

[3] Y. Liu, Z. Su, and Y. Wang, “Energy-efﬁcient and physical-layer secure
computation ofﬂoading in blockchain-empowered internet of things,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2022.3159248.
[4] D. Antonioli, N. O. Tippenhauer, and K. Rasmussen, “BIAS: bluetooth
impersonation attacks,” in 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (SP), San Francisco, CA, USA, 2020, pp. 549–562.

[5] L. Jin, X. Hu, Y. Lou, Z. Zhong, X. Sun, H. Wang, and J. Wu,
“Introduction to wireless endogenous security and safety: problems,
attributes, structures and functions,” China Communications, vol. 18,
no. 9, pp. 88–99, Sept. 2021.

[6] S. Deng, Z. Huang, and X. Wang, “A novel

speciﬁc emitter
identiﬁcation method based on radio frequency ﬁngerprints,” in 2017
2nd IEEE International Conference on Computational Intelligence and
Applications (ICCIA), Beijing, China, 2017, pp. 368–371.

[7] Y. Yang and T. Yan, “Radio frequency ﬁngerprint recognition method
based on generative adversarial net,” in 2021 13th International
Conference on Communication Software and Networks
(ICCSN),
Chongqing, China, 2021, pp. 361–364.

[8] D. Nouichi, M. Abdelsalam, Q. Nasir, and S. Abbas, “IoT devices
security using RF ﬁngerprinting,” in 2019 Advances in Science and
Engineering Technology International Conferences (ASET), Dubai,
United Arab Emirates, 2019, pp. 1–7.

[9] N. Soltanieh, Y. Norouzi, Y. Yang, and N. C. Karmakar, “A review
of radio frequency ﬁngerprinting techniques,”” IEEE Journal of Radio
Frequency Identiﬁcation, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 222–233, Sept. 2020.

