Demo: A Transparent Antenna System for
In-Building Networks

Sang-Hyun Park, Soo-Min Kim, Seonghoon Kim∗, HongIl Yoo∗, Byoungnam Kim∗, and Chan-Byoung Chae
School of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University, Korea
∗Sensor View, Korea
Email:{williampark, sm.kim, cbchae}@yonsei.ac.kr, {seonghoon.kim, hi.yoo, klaus.kim}@sensor-view.com

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
9
1

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
0
4
0
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—For in-building networks, the potential of trans-
parent antennas, which are used as windows of a building, is
presented in this paper. In this scenario, a transparent window
antenna communicates with outdoor devices or base stations,
and the indoor repeaters act as relay stations of the transparent
window antenna for indoor devices. At indoor, back lobe waves
of the transparent window antenna are deﬁned as interference to
in-building networks. Hence, we analyze different SIR and SINR
results according to the location of an indoor repeater through
3D ray tracing system-level simulation. Furthermore, a link-level
simulation through a full-duplex software-deﬁned radio platform
with the fabricated transparent antenna is presented to examine
the feasibility of the transparent antenna.
Index Terms—Transparent antenna,
building networks, software-deﬁned radio.

invisible antenna,

in-

I. INTRODUCTION

Fig. 1. An example of transparent antenna system for in-building networks.

Due to the increasing number of Internet of Things (IoT)
devices and the emerging vehicle-to-everything (V2X) trend,
faster and more reliable networks are required in urban
environments. Installing additional access points and signal
repeaters embedded into the existing infrastructure by inserting
transparent antennas into windows would be an alternative
solution to support the requirements [1]. Fortunately, trans-
parent antennas have been developed enough to be used as
windows instead of glass via either meshed conductors or
transparent conductive oxides (TCOs) for two decades [2]. Lo-
cating transparent antennas on exterior windows of buildings
has beneﬁts: Aesthetic-friendly building, numerous antennas
located at various heights, a window antenna serving as a road-
side unit (RSU) for multi-objective, and in-building networks
aided transparent window antennas.

In Fig. 1, in the case of in-building networks, the indoor re-
peaters, which relay the signals to/from the transparent antenna
which acts as windows, exist and communicate with indoor
devices and users. These repeaters for in-building networks
can achieve a higher maximum sum rate to resolve the low
indoor signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) caused by blockages, doors,
and walls. Besides,
indoor devices and users attain lower
uplink power consumption than directly transmitting to the
base station outside the building. Although these advantages
exist, the transparent antenna’s back lobe waves affect in-
building networks as interference. Hence, it is necessary to
analyze different signal-to-interference ratio (SIR) and signal-
to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) results depending on

the location of an indoor repeater through 3D ray tracing
system-level simulation.

II. SYSTEM-LEVEL SIMULATION

We evaluate SIR and SINR of in-building networks with
a system-level simulator using Wireless System Engineering
(WiSE)–a 3D ray tracing tool developed by Bell Labs [3]. We
model a 3.5 x 3 x 3 m building with a 1.75 x 1.5 m transparent
antenna as a window (see Fig. 2(a)). The walls of the building,
including a roof, consist of concrete. We consider one donor
(transparent window antenna) and one repeater in each case.
Each case is divided in terms of the different locations of a
repeater. The donor’s beam always points to the outside of
the window. Each indoor repeater’s beam points to the center
coordinates of the room.

Fig. 2(b) presents 2D indoor SIR evaluated at 1.5 m height,
the middle height of the entire height,
in dB scale. The
repeater and the widow’s locations are expressed in blue and
white squares, respectively. Fig. 2(c) shows the CDF of SINR
and SNR graphs based on Fig. 2(b) results in each case.
According to results, in case 1, because the locations of the
repeater and donor are not a line-of-sight (LoS), in-building
networks can support a better maximum sum rate than that
from case 2. Hence, when utilizing a window donor for in-
building networks, the back lobe wave of the donor that acts
as interference and the location of the indoor repeater should
be considered necessarily.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.

(a) In-building networks modeling for 3D ray tracing (b) Indoor SIR (c) Indoor SINR and SNR graphs.

III. DEMONSTRATION AND CONCLUDING REMARKS

As Fig. 3 (a) shows, we manufactured a transparent antenna
as window donors. Our fabricated sub-6 GHz transparent
antenna has high-quality transparency that makes aesthetic-
friendly buildings and small back lobe waves that feebly affect
the desired signal. To verify and characterize the link-level
performance of our proposed antenna with several scenarios,
we conducted the measurement campaign as shown in Fig. 3
(b). We tested the scenarios through the FPGA modules, which
conclude a PXIe chassis (PXIe-1082), an FPGA controller
module (PXIe-8880), RF modules (NI 5791, dual-polarized
antenna), and FPGA modules (PXIe-7975). An extended draft
will describe more detailed parameters like the antenna’s
transparency, beam pattern, and hardware speciﬁcations.

This paper proposed an in-building networks-aided trans-
parent antenna system. Due to interference from a transparent
window antenna, we analyzed indoor SIR and SINR. As a
result, the indoor SINR performance varies critically depend-
ing on the location of the indoor repeater. Hence, in order
to realize the system, the donor’s interference and the indoor
repeater’s location must be considered. Furthermore, a link-
level simulation through a full-duplex software-deﬁned radio
platform with the fabricated transparent antenna was presented
to examine the feasibility of a transparent antenna.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3. (a) Proposed transparent antenna (b) real-time measurement campaigns

This work was supported by Institute of Information &
communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP)
grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. 2021-
0-00486)(No. 2021-0-02208).

REFERENCES
[1] R. B. Green et al., “Optically transparent antennas and ﬁlters:
A smart city concept to alleviate infrastructure and network ca-

pacity challenges,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine,
vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 37–47, Jun. 2019.

[2] Q. L. Li et al., “Optically transparent dual-band MIMO antenna
using micro-metal mesh conductive ﬁlm for WLAN system,”
IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 16, pp.
920–923, 2017.

[3] S.-H. Park et al., “Beam squint in ultra-wideband mmWave
systems: RF lens array vs. phase-shifter-based array,” to appear
in IEEE Wireless Communications.

3M3.5MCase 1Case 2ConcreteWindow donorRepeaterBeam direction3M1.75M1.5M(a)(c)SIR[dB] at Case 1SIR[dB] at Case 2(b)WindowWindowRepeaterRepeater