Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. zodipy
August 31, 2022

©ESO 2022

2
2
0
2

g
u
A
0
3

]
P
E
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

2
v
2
6
9
2
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cosmoglobe: Simulating zodiacal emission with ZodiPy (cid:63)

M. San, D. Herman, G. B. Erikstad, M. Galloway, and D. Watts

Institute of Theoretical Astrophysics, University of Oslo, Blindern, Oslo, Norway

August 31, 2022

ABSTRACT

We present ZodiPy, a modern and easy-to-use Python package for modeling the zodiacal emission seen by an arbitrary Solar System
observer, which can be used for the removal of both thermal emission and scattered sunlight from interplanetary dust in astrophysical
data. The code implements the COBE Diﬀuse Infrared Background Experiment (DIRBE) interplanetary dust model and the Planck
extension, which allows for zodiacal emission predictions at infrared wavelengths in the 1.25–240 µm range and at microwave fre-
quencies in the 30–857 GHz range. The predicted zodiacal emission may be extrapolated to frequencies and wavelengths not covered
by the built-in models to produce forecasts for future experiments. ZodiPy attempts to enable the development of new interplanetary
dust models by providing the community with an easy-to-use interface for testing both current and future models. We demonstrate
how the software can be used by creating simulated zodiacal emission timestreams for the DIRBE experiment and show that these
agree with corresponding timestreams produced with the DIRBE Zodiacal Light Prediction Software. We also make binned maps of
the zodiacal emission as predicted to be observed by DIRBE and compare them with the DIRBE calibrated individual observations
(CIO).

Key words. Zodiacal dust, Interplanetary medium, Cosmology: cosmic background radiation

1. Introduction

Zodiacal emission (ZE, sometimes called zodiacal light emis-
sion or interplanetary dust emission) is a source of radiation ob-
servable from the optical to the submillimeter regimes (Leinert
et al. 1998 and references therein). Observations of ZE date back
millennia and still hold prominence for a host of modern exper-
iments. ZE is caused by scattering and re-emission at infrared
wavelengths of sunlight absorbed by interplanetary dust (IPD)
within the Solar System. The diﬀuse ZE is a major contributor
to the total sky brightness at infrared wavelengths between 1–
100 µm, and it dominates the mid-infrared (∼ 10–60 µm) with a
spectral peak at around 10–20 µm.

Zodiacal emission has been a driving force in the explo-
ration of the interplanetary medium since the seventeenth cen-
tury (Cassini 1685), and it was found to be well characteri-
zable in the infrared by the Diﬀuse Infrared Background Ex-
periment (DIRBE) instrument onboard the Cosmic Background
Explorer (COBE) (Mather et al. 1994; Hauser et al. 1998).
With the purpose of removing ZE from their data, the DIRBE
team constructed a geometric model depicting the interplanetary
medium and its distinguishable components. These components
were then set up with modiﬁed blackbody spectra and evaluated
through line-of-sight integration to make predictions of the ob-
served ZE. This model, described in Kelsall et al. (1998) (here-
after K98), has proven to be eﬀective for describing the ZE in
the infrared and submillimeter regimes. The DIRBE model was
recently used by the Planck Collaboration (Planck Collaboration
et al. 2014, 2016, 2020) in their analysis of the High Frequency
Instrument (HFI) data, where it was adapted to be valid at sub-
terahertz frequencies. The Planck update to the DIRBE model is

(cid:63) This work is part of the Cosmoglobe eﬀort, and the code is
published under an open-source license at https://github.com/
Cosmoglobe/zodipy.

the state-of-the-art method for removing ZE from data in cosmic
microwave background (CMB) cosmology.

In CMB studies, the ZE is a local foreground whose struc-
ture is highly dependent on the position of the observer within
the Solar System. A consequence of this is that every experiment
observes a unique ZE signal due to diﬀerences in the scanning
strategy and telescope position. As such, it is impossible to de-
scribe the ZE foreground through a single template, as would be
possible for most Galactic foregrounds, and instead ZE must be
dynamically modeled on a per-experiment basis.

While new data will reﬁne our understanding of the inter-
planetary medium, it is necessary for future models to be con-
sistent with both new and archival data. It is precisely this need
that motivates the Cosmoglobe project,1 which aims to create
a framework that will allow for the reﬁnement of astrophysi-
cal models jointly with the raw data from complementary ex-
periments. This form of joint analysis is already being explored
within the framework of WMAP (Watts et al. 2022) and Lite-
BIRD (Aurlien et al. 2022), in combination with Planck Low
Frequency Instrument data (BeyondPlanck 2022). ZE is an es-
pecially promising direction for joint analysis, in part because
HFI made observations of ZE at complementary wavelengths
to DIRBE. While the DIRBE model was modiﬁed during the
HFI analysis, no attempt was made to improve upon the ge-
ometrical representation of the model components using the
larger eﬀective dataset. Our understanding of the interplanetary
medium has improved since the development of the DIRBE IPD
model (see, for example, Reach et al. 1997; Reach 2010a,b). The
AKARI satellite, which observed in the infrared at wavelengths
between 6–180 µm, detected small-scale structures in the ZE
which were not well-characterized by the DIRBE model (Oot-
subo et al. 2016). While the DIRBE model has been successful

1 Learn more about Cosmoglobe at
https://www.cosmoglobe.uio.no/

Article number, page 1 of 10

 
 
 
 
 
 
A&A proofs: manuscript no. zodipy

in describing the large-scale diﬀuse ZE, modern high-resolution
high-frequency and infrared experiments will require IPD mod-
els that can more eﬀectively resolve the small-scale structures
in the ZE. As such, an update of the community state-of-art ZE
model is long overdue. In this Cosmoglobe framework, such a
model reﬁnement is a natural byproduct of a joint analysis of
DIRBE, HFI, and other data. To improve upon this model, it
is essential to have the model agree with the data at all wave-
lengths. The modeling of ZE is in the process of being imple-
mented in the Commander framework, which will ultimately be
used for the joint processing of HFI and DIRBE data. However,
a stand-alone code is useful for agile model building and data
analysis. As such, ZodiPy will function as the ﬁrst step toward
this goal in the Cosmoglobe framework, in addition to making
ZE corrections on arbitrary data more accessible to the commu-
nity.

In this paper we present ZodiPy, a modern Python imple-
mentation of the DIRBE model in a user-friendly fashion which
allows for forecasting of ZE by arbitrary Solar System observers
at wavelengths of 1.25–240 µm and frequencies of 30–857 GHz.
ZodiPy supports custom user-deﬁned model implementations,
and it allows for extrapolations of models to wavelengths or fre-
quencies outside of the valid ranges deﬁned by the models. In
addition to forecasting ZE for current and future experiments,
ZodiPy will act as a stand-alone code for testing and comparing
improved models of ZE with the Cosmoglobe framework.

In Sect. 2 we introduce the DIRBE IPD model and show ge-
ometric illustrations of its IPD components. In Sect. 3 we intro-
duce the emission mechanisms of IPD and describe the imple-
mentation of the model evaluation in ZodiPy. Additionally, we
present instantaneous maps of the ZE, both the total emission
and the component-wise emission. In Sect. 4 we illustrate a few
use-cases of ZodiPy by applying the software to make predic-
tions about the ZE foreground as observed by DIRBE.

2. Interplanetary dust model

ZodiPy implements the DIRBE IPD model as described in Kel-
sall et al. (1998). The model is twofold. The ﬁrst part is a three-
dimensional parametric description of the distribution of IPD in
the Solar System, consisting of six individual components: the
diﬀuse cloud, three dust bands, the circumsolar ring, and the
Earth-trailing feature. A detailed description of each component
is presented in Sec. 2.2. The second part of the model describes
the emission mechanisms of IPD. In total, there are over 80 free
parameters in the DIRBE model. In the following sections, we
introduce the parameterized number density functions of the IPD
components.

2.1. Coordinates and geometry

All IPD components, except the Earth-trailing feature, are dis-
tributed symmetrically around the Sun with respect to the eclip-
tic plane. The natural coordinate system for describing the three-
dimensional density distribution of an IPD component, c, is
Cartesian heliocentric ecliptic coordinates (x, y, z). However, the
spatial origin of the components is not necessarily aligned per-
fectly with that of the Sun. Therefore a coordinate oﬀset is in-
troduced for each component (x0,c, y0,c, z0,c). We deﬁne these
component-centric coordinates as follows:
xc = x − x0,c
yc = y − y0,c
zc = z − z0,c.

(1)

Article number, page 2 of 10

In addition to this oﬀset, each component is allowed to have
some inclination i and ascending node Ω, with respect to the
ecliptic. The symmetry of a component with respect to its mid-
plane allows us to completely describe its density with the two
coordinates
(cid:113)

x2
c

+ y2
c

Rc =
Zc = xc sin Ωc sin ic − yc cos Ωc sin ic + zc cos ic,

+ z2
c

(2)

(3)

where Rc is the radial distance from the center of the component,
and Zc is the height above its mid-plane. The ratio between these
two coordinates, ζc ≡ |Zc/Rc|, is a helpful auxiliary quantity for
describing the fan-like distribution that the diﬀuse cloud and the
dust bands exhibit. We note that all distances in the DIRBE IPD
model are given in units of AU and implicitly divided by 1 AU.

2.2. Interplanetary dust components

Below we introduce the DIRBE IPD components. We refer the
reader to K98 (and references therein) for an in-depth review
of the observational and physical motivations behind the model
components.

2.2.1. The diffuse cloud
The primary component in the model is the diﬀuse cloud. As the
name suggests, this is a cloud-like component that encapsulates
the inner Solar System and accounts for the majority of total IPD
density in the model. The number density of the diﬀuse cloud,
nC, is modeled in a separable form with a radial and vertical
component,

nC(RC, ZC) = n0,CR−α

C f (ζC).

(4)

The radial term, R−α
C is a power law with α as a free parame-
ter. The vertical term, f (ζC), represents a widened modiﬁed fan
model,

f (ζ) = exp[−βgγ],

where
(cid:40)

g =

ζ2/2µ
ζ − µ/2

for ζ < µ
for ζ ≥ µ,

(5)

(6)

and β, γ, and µ are free parameters describing the vertical shape
and widening of the diﬀuse cloud. The density distribution of the
diﬀuse cloud, as detailed by the DIRBE model, is illustrated in
the top panel of Fig. 1, where we show two cross sections of the
tabulated cloud density in the xz and xy planes, respectively.

2.2.2. Dust bands

The model includes three dust band pairs. These are bands of
IPD concentrations appearing at distinct ecliptic latitudes asso-
ciated with asteroid families (Sykes 1990). The density of a dust
band, B j, where j ∈ {1, 2, 3}, is modeled in the following form:

nB j(RB j, ZB j) =





exp

3n0,B j
RB j


1 − exp


×





−


−





ζB j
δζB j



RB j
δRB j

20








,



6


pB j



1 +









ζB j
δζB j





v−1
B j



(7)

M. San et al.: Cosmoglobe: Simulating zodiacal emission with ZodiPy

Fig. 1. Interplanetary dust density distribution of the diﬀuse cloud, the circumsolar ring, and the Earth-trailing feature. (Left column:) Cross section
showing the xz plane (y = 0). The gray-dashed line represents the ecliptic plane. (Right column:) Cross section showing the xy plane (z = 0). The
gray-dashed circle represents the orbit of Earth. (Top row:) The density of the diﬀuse cloud. (Middle row:) The density of the circumsolar ring.
(Bottom row:) The density of the Earth-trailing feature. The blue dot represents Earth.

Article number, page 3 of 10

−4−2024x[AU]−4−2024z[AU]−4−2024x[AU]−4−2024y[AU]10−810−710−6AU−1−101x[AU]−0.4−0.20.00.20.4z[AU]−101x[AU]−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.5y[AU]0.000.250.500.751.001.251.501.75AU−1×10−8−101x[AU]−0.4−0.20.00.20.4z[AU]−101x[AU]−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.5y[AU]0.000.250.500.751.001.251.501.75AU−1×10−8A&A proofs: manuscript no. zodipy

Fig. 2. Interplanetary dust density distribution of the three dust bands. (Left column:) Cross section showing the xz plane (y = 0). The gray-dashed
line represents the ecliptic plane. (Right column:) Cross section showing the xy plane (z = 0). The gray-dashed circle represents the orbit of Earth.
(Top row:) The density of dust band 1. (Middle row:) The density of dust band 2. (Bottom row:) The density of dust band 3.

Article number, page 4 of 10

−2.0−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.52.0z[AU]−4−2024y[AU]01234AU−1×10−9−2.0−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.52.0z[AU]−4−2024y[AU]0123456AU−1×10−9−4−2024−2.0−1.5−1.0−0.50.00.51.01.52.0z[AU]−4−2024−4−2024y[AU]0.000.250.500.751.001.251.501.752.00AU−1×10−9x[AU]M. San et al.: Cosmoglobe: Simulating zodiacal emission with ZodiPy

where n0,B j is the density of the band at 3 AU, δRB j
is a free pa-
rameter representing the inner radial cutoﬀ, and δζB j
, vB j, and
pB j are free shape parameters. We note that there is a factor
of vB j diﬀerence between this formulation and Eq. (8) in K98.
This factor is mentioned in Sect. 4.1.2 in Planck Collaboration
et al. (2014) and comes from a diﬀerence between the text and
the implementation in the COBE DIRBE Zodiacal Light Pre-
diction Software.2 We follow the convention in the code imple-
mentation. The three band pairs, which appear at ecliptic lati-
tudes around ±1.4◦, ±10◦, and ±15◦, respectively, are illustrated
in Fig. 2, where we show two cross sections of the tabulated band
densities in the xz and xy planes, respectively.

2.2.3. Circumsolar ring and Earth-trailing feature

As the orbit of IPD grains decays, they may end up getting
trapped in gravitational resonant orbits with planets, resulting in
circumsolar rings. The DIRBE model includes one such circum-
solar ring, nR, for Earth’s orbit,

(8)

nR(RR, ZR) = nR,0 exp


−



(cid:0)RR − R0,R
σ2

(cid:1)2

−



 ,

|ZR|
σR,z

R,r
where nR is the density of the ring at 1 AU, R0,R is the radius
of the peak density, and σR,r and σR,z are the radial and vertical
dispersions, respectively.

Dermott et al. (1994) showed through dynamical simulations
of the circumsolar ring that we should expect enhancements in
the dust concentration of the ring in the regions trailing and lead-
ing Earth. The DIRBE team was able to ﬁt such a density feature,
nF, to the region trailing Earth,

nF(RF, ZF, θF) = nF,0 exp


−



(cid:1)2

(cid:0)RF − RF,0
σ2
F,r

−

|ZF|
σF,z

−

(cid:1)2

(cid:0)θF − θF,0
σ2
F,θ



 ,

(9)

where θF is the ecliptic longitude of Earth seen from the feature-
centric frame. The Earth-trailing feature is the only component
in the model not symmetrical in its mid-plane, which will require
us knowing the heliocentric longitude of Earth at all observation
times to determine the position of the Earth-trailing feature. We
note that there is a factor 1/2 diﬀerence in the ﬁrst term in the ex-
ponential of Eq. (8), and the ﬁrst and last term in the exponential
of Eq. (9) and Eq. (9) in K98, which is again due to a diﬀerence
between the text and the code implementation. The density dis-
tributions of the circumsolar ring and the Earth-trailing feature
are illustrated in the middle and bottom panels of Fig. 1, where
we show two cross sections of the tabulated densities in the xz
and xy planes, respectively.

3. Zodiacal emission

Fig. 3. Illustration showing that the integrated IPD along a line of sight
toward a point on the celestial sphere as seen from Earth (blue circles)
changes as Earth orbits the Sun (yellow circle).

3.1. Time-varying emission

The motion of an observer through the IPD distribution intro-
duces a time dependence in the observed ZE. To an observer
orbiting the Sun with Earth, the IPD distribution moves along
the ecliptic by approximately one degree a day (with respect to
the Galactic coordinate frame). As the observer travels within
this distribution, any line of sight toward the same point on the
distant celestial sphere contains varying amounts of IPD. This
eﬀect is illustrated in Fig. 3.

The characteristic time variation in ZE makes it easy to rec-
ognize in data, even at wavelengths and frequencies where the
observed emission is very weak. We can extract the ZE signal by
splitting the data temporally (with similar sky coverage) and sub-
tracting one from the other, which removes any time-invariant
Galactic emission. On the other hand, a downside of this time
variation is that the emission becomes a function of the scanning
strategy of experiments, making it impossible to construct a uni-
versal foreground template of the ZE, as is commonly done for
Galactic foregrounds. Instead, the ZE observed by an experiment
must be dynamically modeled on a per-experiment basis.

3.2. Emission mechanisms

When heated by their surroundings, dust grains emit thermal ra-
diation. In the case of IPD grains, the heat source is radiation
from the Sun. If we assume that each dust grain behaves simi-
lar to a blackbody, then the emission from a single dust grain at
some delta wavelength, λ, is given by the Planck function Bλ(T ),

Now that we have a model for the spatial distribution of IPD
in the Solar System, the next step is to connect the densities of
each IPD component to the foreground emission seen by a So-
lar System observer. In the following sections, we illustrate the
characteristic time variation of the ZE and give an overview of
the emission mechanisms of IPD as described in K98. We also
show how we apply the full DIRBE model to evaluate the ZE in
ZodiPy.

2 The COBE DIRBE Zodiacal Light Prediction Software is a code
written in IDL which computes the ZE predicted to be observed
by DIRBE. The source code is available on LAMBDA: https://
lambda.gsfc.nasa.gov/product/cobe/dirbe_zodi_sw.html.

IThermal
λ

= Bλ(T ).

(10)

The temperature of the dust grain, T , is assumed to be a function
of the radial distance from the Sun,
T (R) = T0R−δ,

(11)

where T0 is the temperature of the dust grain at 1 AU, R is the
distance from the Sun, and δ is the power-law exponent describ-
ing how the temperature falls with distance from the Sun.

Dust grains come in varying shapes and compositions and
they are not true blackbodies. We, therefore, model the IPD
grains as modiﬁed blackbodies instead, where we scale the

Article number, page 5 of 10

A&A proofs: manuscript no. zodipy

Planck function, Bλ(T ), by an emissivity, Eλ, which measures
the deviation of the IPD grain from the Planck function at some
wavelength. Additionally, we assume that all the dust in a spe-
ciﬁc IPD component is of the same composition, but we allow
the composition to vary from component to component, such that
the emissivity becomes Ec,λ. The thermal emission then becomes

IThermal
c,λ

= Ec,λBλ(T (R)).

(12)

In addition to generating thermal radiation, IPD grains also
scatter sunlight at infrared wavelengths. The scattering term, as
deﬁned in K98, is
IScattering
= Ac,λF(cid:12)
c,λ

λ (R)Φλ(Θ).

(13)

Here Ac,λ is the albedo, which represents the fraction of photons
that get reﬂected by the surface of the grain and is a function
of the grain composition, and F(cid:12)
λ is the solar spectral irradiance,
representing the ﬂux received at some wavelength by the surface
of the dust grains at some distance from the Sun. The spectral
solar irradiance is given by

,

(14)

F(cid:12)
λ (R) =

F(cid:12)
λ,0
R2
where F(cid:12)
λ,0 is the reference spectra of the solar irradiance at
1 AU, and R is the radial distance from the Sun. The solar ir-
radiance reference spectra used in the DIRBE model is tabulated
in the COBE DIRBE Zodiacal Light Prediction Software.

Finally, Φλ(Θ) is the phase function and represents the distri-
bution of scattered light intensity. The phase function as deﬁned
in K98 is
Φλ(Θ) = N

C0,λ + C1,λΘ + eC2,λΘ(cid:105)
(cid:104)

(15)

,

where Ck,λ are free parameters. The phase function can be inter-
preted as a probability density, representing the probability of a
photon getting scattered as a function of the scattering angle Θ,
and it must therefore be normalized. The DIRBE normalization
factor N has the following analytic solution:



2π

N =



2C0,λ + πC1,λ + eπC2,λ + 1
+ 1

C2
2,λ



−1




.

(16)

At scattering wavelengths, that is to say wavelengths where
Ac,λ (cid:44) 0, we assume some fraction of the total radiated heat
to be scattered away from the observer, such that the thermal
contribution becomes
IThermal
c,λ

(cid:1) Ec,λBλ(T (R)).

= (cid:0)1 − Ac,λ

(17)

Combining Eqs. (13) and (17) gives us the total emission in in-
tensity from a single grain of IPD,

ITotal
c,λ

= IScattering
c,λ
= Ac,λF(cid:12)

+ IThermal
c,λ

λ (R)Φλ(Θ) + (cid:0)1 − Ac,λ

(cid:1) Ec,λBλ(T (R)).

(18)

(19)

3.3. Evaluating the zodiacal emission

Now that we have expressions for both the number densities of
the IPD components and the emission mechanisms, we can turn
to the full model evaluation in ZodiPy. For an experiment ob-
serving some point p on the sky at time t, the total contribution
to the sky intensity from ZE is

Ip,t =

(cid:90)

(cid:88)

c

(cid:104)

nc

Ac,λF(cid:12)
λ

Φλ + (cid:0)1 − Ac,λ

(cid:1) Ec,λBλ

(cid:105)

ds,

(20)

Article number, page 6 of 10

where we integrate along a line-of-sight ds from the observer
toward p. Equation (20) represents the brightness integral as de-
scribed in Eq. (1) in K98, but without the color-correction fac-
tor, and it is further reduced to Eq. (8) in Planck Collaboration
et al. (2014) at wavelengths where Ac,λ = 0. We note that in the
DIRBE analysis, the endpoints of all considered line of sights
were ﬁxed to a radial distance of 5.2 AU from the Sun, cor-
responding to the orbital distance of Jupiter. We would prefer
to relax this assumption, but it is likely that the DIRBE IPD
model parameters are aﬀected by this cutoﬀ. As such, ZodiPy
follows this convention by default, but the user may specify an
alternative cutoﬀ distance. The line-of-sight integration is per-
formed using Gaussian-Legendre quadrature, with a default of
100 points, but the user may change this number depending on
the desired accuracy.

The pointing in Eq. (20) may be given as a single sky co-
ordinate or a sequence of sky coordinates, either in the form of
angles on the sky (θ, φ) or as integers referring to the indices of
pixels on a HEALPix3 pixelization grid with the resolution given
by Nside (Górski et al. 2005). The pointing information is inter-
nally converted to ecliptic unit vectors on the sphere using the
healpy software (Zonca et al. 2019) and further used (along-
side the observer position and the radial cutoﬀ) to construct the
evaluated line of sights. The observer position is assumed to be
constant over the duration of the user-provided input pointing
sequence, which means that the pointing must be appropriately
chunked depending on the position and velocity of the observer.
For instance, observers orbiting the Sun alongside Earth should
provide pointing sequences of periods corresponding to a day of
observation at most, so as to account for the time variations in
the ZE. The predicted ZE corresponding to a pointing sequence
may be outputted as either a timestream or as a binned HEALPix
map, both in units of MJy sr−1. For code examples of how to use
ZodiPy, we redirect the reader to the documentation4.

3.4. Instantaneous emission maps

In this section, we explore the structure of the ZE as seen on
a particular day with the DIRBE model. We make maps of the
full-sky ZE in both ecliptic and Galactic coordinates and full-
sky maps in ecliptic coordinates of each IPD component, respec-
tively. These maps illustrate how the parametric DIRBE model
relates to the observed ZE and functions as a validation of the
model implementation. Figure 4 shows the instantaneous emis-
sion at 25 µm seen by an observer on Earth at two diﬀerent times
(January 1, 2020, in the top panel and June 1, 2020, in the bot-
tom panel). These are maps that represent the ZE as seen by an
observer able to simultaneously view the full sky at one instant
in time.

The emission can also be viewed component-wise, as illus-
trated in Fig. 5, which shows the emission from Fig. 4 split into
the respective model components in ecliptic coordinates. The
structure observed in these maps can be better understood by in-
specting them alongside the density distributions seen in Figs. 1
and 2. The diﬀuse cloud is the brightest IPD component at this
wavelength, and as such, it looks very similar to the total ZE
emission. We see that dust bands 1 and 3 appear wider on the
side of the map facing away from the Sun. This widening is due

3 HEALPix is an acronym for Hierarchical Equal Area isoLatitude
Pixelation of a sphere. For more information on HEALPix, see
http://healpix.sf.net.
4 The documentation along with example code can be found at
https://zodipy.readthedocs.io.

M. San et al.: Cosmoglobe: Simulating zodiacal emission with ZodiPy

Fig. 4. Instantaneous maps of the predicted ZE at 25µm as seen by an observer on Earth on January 1, 2020 (top panel) and June 1, 2020 (bottom
panel), in ecliptic (left column) and Galactic (right column) coordinates. The location of the Sun is marked as an orange circle on all four maps.

to more high-latitude line of sights looking through the bright
parts of the bands in this direction. The subtle monopole present
in the map of dust band 2 results from the observer being encap-
sulated by dust, which we can see from the density distribution
in the middle panel of Fig. 2. The asymmetry of the emission
with respect to the ecliptic is due to the inclination of the bands.

The circumsolar ring and the Earth-trailing feature exhibit
perhaps the most distinct structures in the maps. The bright stripe
in the ecliptic wrapping behind the Sun in the map of the circum-
solar ring (bottom left of Fig. 4) can be understood as the ob-
server looking past the Sun and through the opposite side of the
circumsolar ring. The two bright regions symmetrically around
the Sun in the ecliptic represent the observer looking tangential
to Earth’s orbit along the longest sections of the ring. We can
understand the partial sky brightening in the circumsolar ring
emission by noting that the observer is located at the inner edge
of the ring (see the gray circle in the middle-right panel of Fig.
1). This means that all directions pointing away from the Sun
look through some portion of the circumsolar ring. A similar
signature is observed in the Earth-trailing feature map (bottom-
right of Fig. 4; however, in this case, only one such bright re-
gion appears on the side pointing toward the feature. Since the
Earth-trailing feature is much wider than the circumsolar ring
in the xz plane, the observer is again encapsulated by the dust
in this component which results in another monopole. Satellite
missions that observe from the second Sun-Earth Lagrange point
(L2, R ≈ 1.01 AU) should expect a slightly higher contribution
from the circumsolar ring and Earth-trailing feature due to the
observer being located closer to the denser regions of these com-
ponents.

4. Comparison with DIRBE

In the following section, we illustrate a few use-cases of ZodiPy
and validate the code implementation by applying the software
to produce simulated timestreams using the pointing of DIRBE
calibrated individual observations (CIO).5 We show that ZodiPy
can accurately reproduce the ZE simulations created with the
COBE-DIRBE Zodiacal Light Prediction Software used by the
DIRBE team in their analysis of the experiment. Additionally,
we use ZodiPy to produce binned simulated maps of the ZE at
25 µm as seen by DIRBE (using the CIO pointing) and compare
these to binned maps of the DIRBE CIO.

4.1. Timestreams

The user input required to produce a timestream with the DIRBE
Zodiacal Light Prediction Software is 1) a wavelength corre-
sponding to one of the ten central band wavelengths of DIRBE;
2) the day of observation represented as an integer counting the
number of days since January 1, 1990; 3) angular pointing infor-
mation; and 4) an optional ﬂag for whether or not to color-correct
the output. In comparison, ZodiPy expects the following input
arguments: 1) any wavelength or frequency; 2) the name of the
observer (deﬁned below) or explicit observer position in units
of AU; 3) the time of observation; and 4) pointing information
in the form of angles or HEALPix pixel indices. Since ZodiPy
can produce timestreams for the arbitrary observer, the observer
position is required explicitly. This argument is provided either
by specifying the name of the observer, for which ZodiPy com-

5 The DIRBE CIO is a user-friendly version of the raw time-
ordered data observed by DIRBE. They are publicly available
on LAMBDA: https://lambda.gsfc.nasa.gov/product/cobe/
c_calib_i_o.html.

Article number, page 7 of 10

Ecliptic2020/01/01Galactic2020/01/01Ecliptic2020/06/0114200MJy/srGalactic2020/06/0114200MJy/srA&A proofs: manuscript no. zodipy

Fig. 5. Instantaneous emission maps (January 1, 2020) for each IPD component in the DIRBE model. The Sun’s location is marked with an orange
circle. (Top left:) The diﬀuse cloud. We note that the intensity is logarithmic due to the highly exponential nature of the zodiacal cloud density near
the Sun. (Top right:) Dust band 1. (Middle left:) Dust band 2. (Middle right:) Dust band 3. (Bottom left:) The circumsolar ring. (Bottom right:)
The Earth-trailing feature.

putes all required Solar System positions (given the time of ob-
servation) using the Astropy Solar System Ephemerides (As-
tropy Collaboration et al. 2013, 2018) or by explicitly passing
in the heliocentric Cartesian coordinates of the observer in units
of AU. In order to compare the two codes, we need to consider
the location of DIRBE explicitly. The COBE satellite carrying
the DIRBE instrument made observations from a near-Earth po-
lar orbit at a distance of about 900 km above the surface. The
variation in DIRBE’s position from its orbit is insigniﬁcant com-
pared to the scale at which the IPD is distributed. As such, we
approximate DIRBE’s location to be the center of Earth.

The comparison of both codes is shown in Fig. 6 where
we have generated timestreams over a small subsequence of
the pointing from DIRBE’s ﬁrst day of observations. The
timestreams are simulated at 25 µm, which corresponds to the
central wavelength of DIRBE’s band 6, which is the band that
observed the most ZE. The top panel shows the ZE timestream
as predicted by ZodiPy, and the bottom panel shows the diﬀer-
ence in percentage between the ZodiPy and DIRBE software
predictions. We ﬁnd the diﬀerence between the two codes to be
less than 0.2%. A similar comparison was also conducted for
the other DIRBE bands, with results consistent with those pre-

Article number, page 8 of 10

sented here. We believe that the minor diﬀerence in the predic-
tions made by the two codes may be attributed to one of or a
combination of the following: 1) a diﬀerence in how the input
pointing is mapped to unit vectors on the sphere; 2) numerical
integration performance for evaluation of the line of sights; 3) a
diﬀerence in the computed Solar System position; and 4) imple-
mentation of the Planck function.

4.2. Binned emission maps

Figure 7 shows two instances of ZE corrections applied to the
binned DIRBE CIO, which are comparable with Figs. 2c and 7
in K98. In the left column, we see the corrections applied to the
ﬁrst week of observations, and in the right column, we see the
corrections applied to the full mission.

The top, middle, and bottom panels show the binned CIO,
the corresponding ZodiPy predictions, and the CIO minus the
ZodiPy predictions, respectively. We note the stripes and dis-
continuities in the full-survey maps. These are artifacts of the
binning process and not features of the infrared sky. More specif-
ically, these stripes correspond to diﬀerences in the path through
the IPD distribution, as discussed in Sect. 3.1, where adjacent

Cloud14200MJy/srBand100.96MJy/srBand202.04MJy/srBand300.5MJy/srRing00.59MJy/srFeature01.27MJy/srM. San et al.: Cosmoglobe: Simulating zodiacal emission with ZodiPy

Planck models, for arbitrary Solar System observers at both in-
frared wavelengths and subterahertz frequencies. The software is
open-source and available on the Python Packaging Index. The
code is designed to allow for new IPD model additions and up-
dates with new developments to state-of-the-art models. Finally,
as a validation of the code implementation, we have demon-
strated that the software can accurately reproduce the Zodiacal
corrections applied in the oﬃcial analysis of the DIRBE data.

Currently, ZodiPy only models ZE in intensity. Polarization
from thermal emission from ZE has never been detected, and it
is expected to be less than 1 % (Weinberg & Hahn 1980; Onaka
2000; Ganga et al. 2021). The scattered sunlight is known to be
polarized as a function of the scanning strategy with the scat-
tering angle and elongation, as shown in Berriman et al. (1994)
and Takimoto et al. (2022), for example. Allowing the user to
predict the polarized emission at wavelengths where the ZE is
dominated by scattered sunlight (1–5 µm) would help with fore-
casting for future polarized experiments. For a more complete
discussion of the intrinsic polarized emission of ZE, readers can
refer to Ganga et al. (2021) and references therein.

ZodiPy is an integral part of the Cosmoglobe framework. Part
of Cosmoglobe’s goal is to perform end-to-end analysis using all
microwave and infrared datasets to constrain the properties of
the sky and the large-scale properties of the Universe. This code
will be an invaluable tool for characterizing the ZE in archival
datasets, such as COBE/DIRBE and Planck/HFI, as well as fu-
ture data from JWST, SPHEREx, and LiteBIRD. A joint analysis
will not only help to better decontaminate data with ZE emission,
but the joint analysis approach taken by Cosmoglobe will neces-
sarily improve the IPD model from K98. In combination with
the full Gibbs sampling framework with Commander3, ZodiPy
will be used to develop new models and visualize the individual
components in an intuitive manner, all while providing the as-
tronomical community at large with a simple interface to predict
ZE in their own data.

Acknowledgements. We thank Profs. Hans Kristian Eriksen, Ken Ganga, and In-
gunn Wehus for useful comments. We also thank the referee for their useful
comments that improved this work. The current work has received funding from
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme un-
der grant agreement numbers 819478 (ERC; Cosmoglobe) and 772253 (ERC;
bits2cosmology). Some of the results in this paper have been derived us-
ing the HEALPix (Górski et al. 2005) package. We acknowledge the use of
the Legacy Archive for Microwave Background Data Analysis (LAMBDA),
part of the High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Center (HEASARC).
HEASARC/LAMBDA is a service of the Astrophysics Science Division at the
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.

References

Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sip˝ocz, B. M., et al. 2018, AJ, 156,

123

Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, 558,

A33

Aurlien et al. 2022, A&A, in preparation [arXiv:20xx.xxxxx]
Berriman, G. B., Boggess, N. W., Hauser, M. G., et al. 1994, ApJ, 431, L63
BeyondPlanck. 2022, A&A, in preparation [arXiv:2011.05609]
Cassini, G. D. 1685, Découverte de la lumière celeste qui paroist dans le zodi-

aque

Dermott, S. F., Jayaraman, S., Xu, Y. L., Gustafson, B. Å. S., & Liou, J. C. 1994,

Nature, 369, 719

Ganga, K., Maris, M., Remazeilles, M., & LiteBIRD Collaboration. 2021, The

Open Journal of Astrophysics, 4, 16

Górski, K. M., Hivon, E., Banday, A. J., et al. 2005, ApJ, 622, 759
Hauser, M. G., Arendt, R. G., Kelsall, T., et al. 1998, ApJ, 508, 25
Kelsall, T., Weiland, J. L., Franz, B. A., et al. 1998, ApJ, 508, 44
Leinert, C., Bowyer, S., Haikala, L. K., et al. 1998, A&AS, 127, 1
Mather, J. C., Cheng, E. S., Cottingham, D. A., et al. 1994, ApJ, 420, 439
Onaka, T. 2000, ApJ, 533, 298

Article number, page 9 of 10

Fig. 6. Zodiacal emission timestreams. (Top:) Timestream simulated
with ZodiPy of the ZE as predicted to have been observed by DIRBEs
band 6 detector A on December 11, 1989 between ∼13:30 and ∼14:30
UTC. (Bottom:) Error in percentage between the ZodiPy timestream
in the top panel and a corresponding timestream produced using the
DIRBE Zodiacal Light Prediction Software.

positions along the scanning pattern on the sky have been ob-
served over extended time intervals.

We note that the simulations in this comparison were pro-
duced using a modiﬁed version of the code that included the
color-correction factor in Eq. (1) in K98. This was done to
make the simulated data more comparable to the CIO, which are
color-corrected. The presented residual maps exhibit some weak
digitization-like structures. We believe that this pattern is due to
errors related to the conversion of the DIRBE pixel indices (na-
tively given in the COBE quadrilateralized spherical cube for-
mat) to longitude and latitude rather than an inherent property of
the CIO or the simulated emission.

5. Conclusions

We have presented software for modeling the thermal emission
and scattered sunlight by IPD, as deﬁned by the DIRBE and

20406080100120140I[MJy/sr]13:4013:5514:0914:241989-12-11hh:mm[UTC]−0.04−0.020.000.020.040.060.080.100.12∆I/I[%]A&A proofs: manuscript no. zodipy

Fig. 7. (Top:) Binned week maps of the DIRBE CIO. (Middle:) Binned week maps from the ZodiPy simulations. (Bottom:) DIRBE minus ZodiPy
binned week map residuals. The columns correspond to week 1 (left) and the full-survey (right), respectively.

Ootsubo, T., Doi, Y., Takita, S., et al. 2016, PASJ, 68, 35
Planck Collaboration, Adam, R., Ade, P. A. R., et al. 2016, A&A, 594, A8
Planck Collaboration, Ade, P. A. R., Aghanim, N., et al. 2014, A&A, 571, A14
Planck Collaboration, Aghanim, N., Akrami, Y., et al. 2020, A&A, 641, A3
Reach, W. T. 2010a, Icarus, 209, 848
Reach, W. T. 2010b, in 41st Annual Lunar and Planetary Science Conference,

Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, 1499

Reach, W. T., Franz, B. A., & Weiland, J. L. 1997, Icarus, 127, 461
Sykes, M. V. 1990, Icarus, 85, 267
Takimoto, K., Arai, T., Matsuura, S., et al. 2022, ApJ, 926, 6
Watts et al. 2022, A&A, submitted [arXiv:2202.11979]
Weinberg, J. L. & Hahn, R. C. 1980, in Solid Particles in the Solar System, ed.

I. Halliday & B. A. McIntosh, Vol. 90, 19–22

Zonca, A., Singer, L., Lenz, D., et al. 2019, Journal of Open Source Software, 4,

1298

Article number, page 10 of 10

DIRBE080MJy/srDIRBE080MJy/srZodipy080MJy/srZodipy080MJy/srResidual55MJy/srResidual55MJy/sr