Signal Restoration and Channel Estimation
for Channel Sounding with SDRs

Julian Ahrens∗, Lia Ahrens∗, Michael Zentarra∗ and Hans D. Schotten∗,†
∗Intelligent Networks
German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Kaiserslautern, Germany

†Institute for Wireless Communication and Navigation
Technische Universit¨at Kaiserslautern
Kaiserslautern, Germany

@dfki.de
julian.ahrens,lia.ahrens,michael.zentarra,schotten
}
{

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
3
2

]
P
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
4
1
4
1
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—In this paper, the task of channel sounding using
software deﬁned radios (SDRs) is considered. In contrast to
classical channel sounding equipment, SDRs are general purpose
devices and require additional steps to be implemented when
employed for this task. On top of this, SDRs may exhibit quirks
causing signal artefacts that obstruct the effective collection of
channel estimation data. Based on these considerations, in this
work, a practical algorithm is devised to compensate for the
drawbacks of using SDRs for channel sounding encountered
in a concrete setup. The proposed approach utilises concepts
from time series and Fourier analysis and comprises a signal
restoration routine for mitigating artefacts within the recorded
signals and an encompassing channel sounding process. The
efﬁcacy of the algorithm is evaluated on real measurements
generated within the given setup. The empirical results show
that the proposed method is able to counteract the shortcomings
of the equipment and deliver reasonable channel estimates.

Index Terms—channel sounding, software deﬁned radio (SDR),

signal restoration, channel estimation

I. INTRODUCTION

In modern mobile communications systems, robust esti-
mates of the core characteristics of all relevant communica-
tions channels are essential to achieving the targeted perfor-
mance and reliability. To this end, extensive measurement cam-
paigns have been undertaken [1] to acquire data for appropriate
channel modelling on the one hand and ﬁtting parameters of
existing standard channel models on the other hand. The in-
sights gathered during these investigations provided the foun-
dation for the standardisation of the key parameters currently
employed in mobile communications systems. However, since
these systems need to operate consistently across a variety of
deployment environments, the parameters are often chosen in a
very conservative manner, which decreases spectral efﬁciency
of the system as a whole and generally leads to suboptimal
performance. With the emergence of specialised use cases
and deployment scenarios in environments that are difﬁcult to
characterise in a generic manner (e.g. pico- and femtocells in
industrial environments), deployment-speciﬁc tuning of system
parameters provides a promising method for optimising system
efﬁciency and performance.

Traditionally, the hardware employed to acquire the needed
channel measurements is expensive and bulky to deploy [2],

This work has been supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and
Research of the Federal Republic of Germany as part of the FunKI project
with grant number 16KIS1182.

which makes analysis and tuning for speciﬁc deployments
costly and cumbersome. In contrast, software deﬁned radios
(SDRs) provide a more accessible and ﬂexible alternative
for channel sounding. Furthermore,
the required hardware
is highly programmable and may be repurposed for other
communication-related tasks once all required channel char-
acterisations have been performed. One disadvantage of using
SDRs instead of traditional channel sounding equipment,
however, is that their speciﬁcations are usually not as high [3]
and there is more uncertainty about the nature of possible
inaccuracies or disturbances. This may show up in the form
of artefacts in the recorded signal, which in turn may lead to
misestimation of channel properties.

In this work, a channel sounding setup based on two SDRs
is considered. Therein, the transmitting unit is of particularly
high mobility, as it can be driven from a single laptop computer
on battery power. As expected and mentioned above,
the
setup produces artefacts in the recorded signals which may
contaminate the channel estimates. The main contribution
of this work is a practical signal restoration algorithm that
greatly reduces these measurement artefacts on the one hand
and an encompassing channel sounding process that produces
reasonable channel estimates on the other hand.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: The
hardware setup and the parameters governing the test trans-
missions are introduced in Section II. Section III provides
an analysis of different types of artefacts encountered during
these transmissions and the subsequent channel estimation. In
Section IV, the proposed procedures for signal restoration and
channel estimation are presented. The effects of the proposed
algorithms are evaluated in Section V. Section VI concludes
the paper.

II. MEASUREMENT SETUP

For the generation and measurement of the required sig-
nals, two different SDRs from the Ettus Research Universal
Software Radio Peripheral (USRP) series are employed. The
USRPs are connected to their respective host PCs, which run
GNU Radio for ﬂexible signal generation and processing.

On the transmitter side, a USRP B210 is deployed. A USB
connection provides power and the data to be transmitted
from its host PC. The B210 has a maximum sampling rate
of 61.44 MS/s [3]. The host PC generates the respective

 
 
 
 
 
 
discrete-time signals digitally and sends them to the B210
for digital-to-analog conversion, ﬁltering, power ampliﬁcation,
and IQ modulation [4].

A USRP N310 operates as the receiver. The N310 ﬁlters,
ampliﬁes, IQ demodulates, and analog-to-digital converts the
received signal. The digital signal is then sent from the N310
to the host PC via Gigabit Ethernet, where the complex signal
is saved to a ﬁle for further processing. The N310 provides
sampling rates up to 153.6 MS/s [5]. However, the limiting
factor of the setup is the Gigabit Ethernet connection. There-
fore, the sampling rate for both the signal generation on the
transmitter side and the signal reception on the receiver side is
set to 25.6 MS/s. The carrier frequency for all measurements
is 2.48 GHz.

For the purpose of evaluation, two types of transmissions
are performed: cable-bound and wireless. For the cable-bound
transmissions, the B210 output is connected via a coaxial
cable and a 30 dB attenuator to the input of the N310, which
records the signal. For the wireless transmissions, both the
transmitter and receiver are equipped with a VERT2450 omni-
directional 2 dBi dual band antenna for operating frequencies
2.4-2.5 GHz and 4.9-5.9 GHz. Here, two different conﬁgura-
tions are implemented: a short-range line-of-sight conﬁgura-
tion for calibration measurements and a longer-range non-line-
of-sight conﬁguration to capture the effects of a real-world
channel. The line-of-sight transmissions take place in a single
room where the transmitter and receiver are spaced approx-
imately 2.5 m apart. For the non-line-of-sight transmissions,
the N310 is placed outside a window in the second ﬂoor of a
residential building. The B210 is then moved across a parking
lot and down into a street so that the line of sight is blocked
by multi-level buildings. The distance between the transmitter
and receiver in this scenario is approximately 100 m.

In all experiments, the transmitter repeats the test signal
indeﬁnitely. The receiver captures a pre-determined number
of samples such that multiple periods of the transmitted signal
are always included in the recording.

III. ANALYSIS OF ARTEFACTS

For visualisation of possible measurement artefacts encoun-
tered during signal transmissions with the setup introduced in
Section II, the actual measurements recorded at the receiver
while repeatedly transmitting a rectangular-shaped test signal
through the line-of-sight wireless channel is depicted in Fig. 1.
Here and in all subsequent plots of complex-valued signals,
the amplitude of the signal is plotted both above and below
the horizontal axis as in an envelope plot and the phase of the
signal is represented by the colours, where green, yellow, red,
and blue represent positive real, positive imaginary, negative
real, and negative imaginary values, respectively. The corre-
sponding colourmap is provided on the right side of Fig. 1. As
to be expected, common effects such as zero offsets potentially
caused by offset voltages in the transmitter ampliﬁer circuitry,
carrier frequency and phase offsets, and additive white noise
can be observed. Two types of artefacts appear to be speciﬁc
to the present setup:

Fig. 1. Signal recorded by receiver given rectangular-shaped test signal

• Random-valued block-shaped bursts of similar durations
located almost
showing up on a seasonal basis (i.e.
equidistantly in time) in the modulated signal (i.e. prior
to compensation for carrier frequency offset), which
suggests possible measurement artefacts on the receiver
side

• Sporadic pulse-shaped interference, indicating the pres-
ence of signals transmitted from other devices that are
sharing the considered channel

These measurement artefacts may have negative impact on
channel estimation, and therefore need to be estimated and
compensated for properly.

Fig. 2. Raw estimate of channel impulse response

On top of the rather setting-speciﬁc measurement artefacts,
another type of artefact emanating from the limitations in
bandwidth and transmission time is observed while performing
channel estimation in the time domain based on Fourier
analysis. This is depicted in Fig. 2, where an estimated
channel impulse response obtained by performing the inverse
Fourier transform on an estimated channel transfer function
of the non-line-of-sight channel introduced in Section II is
displayed. Note in particular the unusual ringing tail prior
to the ﬁrst major impulse (at relative delay time 0), which
has no meaningful physical interpretation. To counteract this,
additional post-processing is required.

IV. SIGNAL RESTORATION AND CHANNEL ESTIMATION

In this section, a signal processing routine devised for
tackling the issues addressed in Section III is presented. As
previously mentioned, the method consists of two parts:

• A signal restoration algorithm that aims to compensate

for measurement artefacts

• A channel estimation algorithm including the design of an
appropriate test signal and post-processing steps that aim
to mitigate artefacts within the estimated channel impulse
response

While the ﬁrst part
is partially speciﬁc to the hardware
employed in the setup introduced in Section II, the second

part addresses more general limitations of inferring the channel
impulse response from the channel state at a limited number
of frequencies.

A. Signal restoration algorithm

Henceforth, let xtest =

The basic idea of the restoration algorithm is to estimate and
remove different offsets and artefacts step by step within an
iterative procedure, initialising all intermediate steps in the ﬁrst
run with roughly estimated values and reﬁning the ongoing
input to each estimation with increasing number of iterations.
xtest[t]
xrec[t]
t
{
}
{
denote the one-dimensional C-valued signals sent from the
transmitter (single-period) and measured at the receiver (multi-
period), respectively. For simplicity of notation, a variable
sequence, xref =
t, is used throughout the algorithm,
which represents the reference signal taken as input to the
ongoing estimation and will be speciﬁed in the description of
each intermediate step below. The iterative procedure consists
of the following steps conducted in succession and is illus-
trated in the block diagram in Fig. 3.

T −1
t=0 and xrec =
}

xref [t]
}
{

Fig. 3. Block diagram of signal restoration algorithm

1) Pre-synchronisation: In general, signal synchronisation
relies on detecting local peak values in the cross-correlation
of the received signal xrec against the reference signal xref . In
the ﬁrst iteration, xref is set to be the single-period test signal
from the transmitter, xtest. In the presence of carrier frequency
offset, segments in xrec originating from the same part of xref
exhibit similar values in amplitude but vary signiﬁcantly in
phase. Therefore, only the amplitude of both xrec and xref
is used to compute the cross-correlation. Taking the temporal
location of each detected peak in the cross-correlation as the
beginning of a period, the synchronised reference signal for
the upcoming restoration steps is obtained by piecing together
copies of the single-period reference signal, xref , each padded
with zeros on the right (if necessary) until the next period.
2) Estimation of phase and carrier frequency offsets:
Let now xref be the synchronised reference signal generated
according to IV-A1. The phase and carrier frequency offsets
are estimated by looking for the maximum of the average
correlation of the instantaneous phase shift of the received

|

xref [t]

signal xrec[t] relative to xref [t] weighted by the instantaneous
2, against any possible instantaneous phase shift
power,
|
in the form of exp(2πif t + iϕ). More precisely, ﬁnd ˆϕ and ˆf
such that1
( ˆϕ, ˆf ) = arg max

exp(2πif t + iϕ).

(xrec[t] xref [t])

(cid:88)

Re

ϕ,f

t

·

(1)
Note that the expression on the right hand-side of (1) is equal
to the real part of the discrete Fourier transform (FFT) of
ϕ. Therefore, ˆf
xrec xref evaluated at f phase shifted by
and ˆϕ are determined by
ˆf = arg max

, ˆϕ = arg FFT(xrec xref )[ ˆf ].

−

FFT(xrec xref )[f ]
|
|

f

In order to make the estimation more precise, the resolution of
the FFT is increased by padding the time-domain signal with
zeros of 15-times the original sequence length.

3) Post-synchronisation: After the estimation of phase and
carrier frequency offsets, a reﬁned synchronised reference
is generated with the same principle as in IV-A1,
signal
where the peak detection is performed on the real part of
the cross-correlation between the actual values (instead of
xrec[t]
only amplitude) of the demodulated received signal,
·
exp(
t, against the single-period reference signal
−
used in IV-A1.

i ˆϕ)
}

2πi ˆf t

−

{

4) Estimation of gain and zero offset: Let xclean denote a
cleaned version of the received signal without measurement
artefacts and let xref be the synchronised reference signal
generated according to IV-A3. Following the common ﬁrst-
order estimation, xclean demodulated according to the results
from IV-A2 is assumed to be of the form

2πi ˆf t

·

−

−

exp(

xclean[t]

i ˆϕ) = again xref [t]+bzero +n[t]

f.a. t
(2)
where again refers to the average value of the channel transfer
function, bzero models the constant offset in the transmitter,
t is assumed to be additive Gaussian white noise
and
}
taking values in C. In the ﬁrst iteration, xclean is roughly
approximated by the original measurements xrec. For the
linear regression model (2), the parameters again and bzero
are determined by means of the least-squares estimate

n[t]
{

arg min
a,b

(cid:88)

|

t

xclean

exp(

·

2πi ˆf t

−

i ˆϕ)

−

−

(a xref [t] + b)

2.
|

5) Estimation of block-shaped bursts: Let xart =

xart[t]
t
}
denote the time series of artefacts including possible noise
within the received signal. The ﬁrst-order estimation model
(2) leads to

{

xart[
·

]
] = xrec[
·

−

(againxref [

]+bzero)
·

·

exp(2πi ˆf
·

[
·

]+i ˆϕ). (3)

As stated in Section III, xart mainly consists of block-shaped
bursts occurring randomly on a seasonal basis (i.e. almost
equidistantly in time). The temporal locations of those blocks
are ﬁrst detected by means of local peak detection in the

1Here and in the sequel, i refers to the imaginary unit and x refers to the

complex conjugate of x ∈ C.

xrefxtest(singleperiod)→Pre-synchronisationEstimationofphaseandcarrierfrequencyoffsetsPost-synchronisationEstimationofgainandzerooffsetEstimationofblock-shapedartefactsOutlierdetectionEstimationoflinearlydistortedtransmittedsignalestimatedlinearlydistortedtransmittedsignal(singleperiod)→xrefsynchronisedreferencesignal(multi-period)→xref(ˆϕ,ˆf)reﬁnedsynchronisedreferencesignal(multi-period)→xref(again,bzero)xblock=⇒(xrec−xblock)→indicesofperiodsincl.sporadicinterference→I0xcleanseasonal difference of a low-pass ﬁltered version of xart,
where the season duration and width of the ﬁlter kernel are
initialised with a rough estimation of the block length based on
visual inspection and reﬁned with increasing number of itera-
tions. The ﬁrst detected locations of blocks are then processed
through a selection algorithm that removes excessive points
or adds extra points in between so as to make potential block
boundaries more evenly distributed over time in accordance
with the observations in Section III. Let xblocks =
xblocks[t]
t
}
{
denote the time series of estimated block-shaped artefacts.
Since most of the visible blocks exhibit linear dependency
on time, the value of xblocks is determined through piece-wise
linear regression.

6) Outlier detection and estimation of linear effect: In con-
trast to the seasonal block-shaped bursts, which are inevitable
during the estimation of the linearly distorted signal and
therefore need to be estimated and removed from the received
signal, the other type of measurement artefacts addressed in
Section III, namely the sporadic pulse-shaped interference, can
be disposed of through outlier detection. That is, the linearly
distorted transmitted signal directly resulting from the channel
impact is estimated through

1[0,T [[

] mean
·

ι∈I\I0{

(xrec[ι +

exp(

−

·

]
−
·
2πi ˆf

xblocks[ι +

[ι +

]
·

−

·

])

·
i ˆϕι)

bzero

(4)

} −

where I refers to the index set of period beginnings in the
synchronised reference signal generated according to IV-A3,
I0 refers to the collection of period indices associated with
the detected outliers, and ˆϕι = ˆϕ + ∆ϕι with ∆ϕι referring
to the ﬁnal phase correction towards xtest for period ι. For
the outlier detection, the energy of each summand in (4) for
all ι
I is used for reference and periods with reference
value higher than 3/2 the median of the empirical distribution
function are discarded.

∈

Iterative procedure: After the ﬁrst run, steps IV-A1 through
IV-A6 are carried out iteratively, with xref used in step IV-A1
updated to the latest output of step IV-A6 and xclean used in
step IV-A4 updated to xrec
xblocks with the latest estimation
−
of xblocks from step IV-A5.

B. Channel estimation

The channel estimation is performed by repeatedly transmit-
ting a pre-deﬁned test signal through the channel, recording the
received signal, applying the signal restoration algorithm from
Section IV-A to the received signal, estimating the channel
transfer function from the restored signal by means of the
discrete Fourier transform, and inferring the channel impulse
response from the estimated transfer function through a post-
processing algorithm based on Fourier analysis.

1) Test signal and frequency domain channel estimation:
The waveform used in the test signal for channel estimation
is based on a Zadoff-Chu sequence of prime length, cf. [6].
In general, Zadoff-Chu sequences of prime length are a class
of signals particularly well-suited for channel estimation due
to their zero-autocorrelation property, which makes them ideal

for synchronisation, and their uniformity of amplitude in both
the time and frequency domains, which results in minimal
crest factor. In particular, their FFTs are always bounded away
T −1
from zero. In this setting, the test signal xtest =
xtest[t]
t=0
}
{
used for channel estimation consists of 4 repetitions of an
arbitrary Zadoff-Chu sequence of prime length NZC, denoted
by xZC =

, i.e.,

NZC−1
xZC[t]
t=0
}
{
(cid:40)
xZC[t mod NZC]
0

xtest[t] =

if t < 4 NZC,
if 4 NZC

t < T .

≤

In order to prevent the channel estimation from being affected
by potential boundary effects caused by the fading channel, the
sequence length NZC is chosen such that the actual temporal
length of xZC is at least twice the expected maximum delay
time of the channel impulse response, so that only the ﬁrst and
last half-repetitions within xtest may be corrupted by boundary
effects and the remaining part in the received signal is cyclic.
On the receiver side, the recorded signal is processed through
the signal restoration procedure presented in Section IV-A.
From the ﬁnal output of the algorithm, the potentially cor-
rupted parts originating from the ﬁrst and last half-repetitions
of xZC are removed, and the remaining 3 repetitions are
averaged, resulting in a signal xest =
. Both
xZC and xest can now be regarded as sampled versions of
band-limited periodic signals with the same period length,
which allows the use of the discrete Fourier transform (FFT)
to compute their frequency domain representations. This leads
to an estimate of the channel transfer function sampled at a
ﬁnite number of points within the band centered at the carrier
frequency, which is denoted by ˆH =

xest[t]
}
{

NZC−1
t=0

, with

ˆH[f ]
{

NZC−1
f =0
}

ˆH[f ] =

FFT(xest)[f ]
FFT(xZC)[f ]

for f = 0, . . . , NZC

1

−

(5)

where the ﬁrst and second halves of the frequency indices
correspond to the actual frequencies from the intervals that
are half the sampling rate in width and located to the right
and left of the carrier frequency, respectively. Note that, due
to the dilation property of the FFT, the resolution of ˆH is
proportional to NZC and thus tunable in general.
2) Time domain channel estimation: Let H : R

C and
h : R
C denote the actual channel transfer function and
the channel impulse response, respectively, which are by their
nature both continuous and aperiodic, and let
denote the
continuous Fourier transform. It holds that

−→

−→

F

h =

−1H,

(6)

F
which provides a theoretical basis for inferring the chan-
nel impulse response from the channel state information in
the frequency domain. In a practical discrete-time setting,
however, estimating h by simply replacing H in (6) by the
discrete estimate ˆH according to (5) and performing the
−1
inverse discrete Fourier transform (IFFT) instead of
would lead to artefacts which render the estimation result
difﬁcult to interpret as illustrated in Fig. 2. In general, due to
the dilation property of the Fourier transform, when operating

F

in a discrete (periodic) setting and switching between the
time and frequency domains, the sequence length in the one
domain is proportional to the resolution in the other. Therefore,
problems while inferring the continuous aperiodic function h
from the discrete ﬁnite sequence ˆH =
instead
of the continuous aperiodic function H are two-fold:

ˆH[f ]
}
{

NZC−1
f =0

through the cable-based setup given in Section II for evaluating
restoration steps IV-A4 and IV-A5.

• Sampling in the frequency domain results in a peri-
odic time domain, which may cause aliasing in general.
However, the period length, i.e., the maximum possible
delay time that can be captured by the estimated channel
impulse response, is equal to the reciprocal of the sample
spacing within ˆH, which is exactly the temporal length
of the sequence xZC ( = NZC/(sampling rate of xZC)).
Thus, the choice of NZC speciﬁed in IV-B1 excludes
the presence of aliasing in the estimated channel impulse
response.

• Information loss in the frequency domain caused by
band restriction results in sacriﬁcing the resolution in
the time domain. On the one hand, this effect can be
compensated for by extending ˆH through zero-padding.
On the other hand, zero-padding in the frequency domain
is equivalent to multiplication by a rectangular window
and thus corresponds to convolution with a sinc kernel in
the time domain; for ˆH not vanishing at the boundaries,
this may introduce extra sinc-shaped tails around each
impulse within the estimated channel impulse response.2
Therefore, in the present approach, ˆH is ﬁrst multiplied
by a Dolph-Chebyshev window [7] (centred around the
carrier frequency), w, with attenuation set to 60 dB3, and
then extended to 16-times the original length through
zero-padding (pad15
0 ).

Overall, the channel impulse response is estimated through

(cid:18)

IFFT

pad15
0

(cid:18) FFT(xest)
FFT(xZC) ·

(cid:19)(cid:19)

w

.

V. RESULTS
In this section, partial and overall effects of the signal
restoration algorithm and channel estimation procedure pro-
posed in Section IV are evaluated on real measurements
acquired using the setup from Section II. For each evaluation,
the signal restoration algorithm is run for 10 iterations.

A. Evaluation of signal restoration

Since the core component of the measurement artefacts
consists in block-shaped bursts speciﬁc to the receiving equip-
ment, a simple rectangular-shaped test signal is transmitted

2Note that, even without zero-padding, restricting the support

in the
frequency domain to a ﬁnite band causes discontinuity in the corresponding
periodic signal used in the IFFT, as long as the values at the left and right
boundary of the band differ from one another. This, in general, results in
possible sinc-shaped ringing in the time domain.

3Note that, as a side effect of windowing the frequency domain rep-
resentation, the time domain is low pass ﬁltered, which results in some
loss of sharpness in the estimated channel impulse response. Choosing the
Dolph-Chebyshev window ensures maximal possible sharpness for a given
attenuation of tails. The attenuation is set to 60 dB, as, at this level, the
residual tails are already below the measured noise ﬂoor.

Fig. 4. Effect of signal restoration

In Fig. 4, following plots are generated for comparison:

• Test signal from the transmitter, xtest
• Original measurements recorded at the receiver, xrec
• Estimated linearly distorted transmitted signal without

employing restoration step IV-A5

• Estimated artefacts output from step IV-A5, xblocks, with

vs. without step IV-A4

• Estimated linearly distorted transmitted signal, employing
restoration step IV-A5, with vs. without step IV-A4

Here, among the subplots in the last two rows, the ones on
the left are generated exactly as proposed in the restoration
algorithm, whereas the ones on the right are generated by
setting xart used in IV-A5 to xrec instead of the expression
on the right-hand side of (3). When examining the plots
on the left, the similarity of xblocks to the artefacts visible
within xrec indicates that most of the block-shaped bursts
are accurately estimated and removed from the original mea-
surements through the signal restoration algorithm. This is
further illustrated in the estimated linearly distorted transmit-
ted signal depicted at the bottom left corner, considering the
well-preserved step-shape and the rapid decay as opposed to
the particularly slow decay of the raw estimate depicted in
the third row. In addition, when examining the plots on the
right, the inaccurate estimate of the measurement artefacts
and the signiﬁcantly distorted step-shape in the corresponding
estimated linearly distorted transmitted signal highlight the
necessity of the ﬁrst-order estimation in step IV-A4 within
the algorithm.

B. Impact on channel estimation

For evaluating the effects of both the signal restoration
algorithm and the post-processing steps, the test signal with
the repeating Zadoff-Chu sequence speciﬁed in IV-B1 is
transmitted through the non-line-of-sight channel conﬁgured
according to Section II.

tion method with other comparable measurements acquired
at the same physical location, which indicates an estimation
error caused by measurement artefacts that would have been
resolved through the missing restoration steps IV-A4 through
IV-A6. Despite the lack of ground truth knowledge in the
employed setup, the comparison in the above three aspects
suggests that the proposed signal restoration algorithm for
mitigating the setting-speciﬁc measurement artefacts indeed
aids in improving the quality of channel estimation.

C. Convergence of iterative procedure

For evaluating the convergence behaviour of the proposed
iterative signal restoration routine, the energy of the difference
between the outputs of step IV-A6 from consecutive iterations
is calculated for the Zadoff-Chu test signal as introduced
in IV-B1 and presented in TABLE I. It turns out that the
estimated linearly distorted transmitted signal converges from
the 3rd iteration, which conﬁrms the stability of the proposed
algorithm.

TABLE I
CONVERGENCE OF ITERATIVE SIGNAL RESTORATION ROUTINE

Iteration
1
2
3
4
5

Energy difference
0.0040479
0.00055984
2.8392 · 10−7
3.9208 · 10−7
3.3383 · 10−7

Iteration
6
7
8
9
10

Energy difference
2.5285 · 10−7
2.4055 · 10−7
2.2315 · 10−7
2.6561 · 10−7
2.4544 · 10−7

VI. CONCLUSION
In this work, a channel estimation procedure including sig-
nal restoration and post-processing is designed for a concrete
channel sounding setup based on SDRs. Experimental results
conﬁrm that the proposed algorithm is able to compensate
for the shortcomings of the hardware and improve the quality
of the subsequent channel estimation, which in particular
suggests the potential of the considered setup being a cost-
effective yet reasonable alternative to classical channel sound-
ing equipment. In future research, the method is planned to be
employed in an SDR-based channel measurement campaign.

REFERENCES

[1] C.-X. Wang, J. Bian, J. Sun, W. Zhang, and M. Zhang, “A survey of
5G channel measurements and models,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3142–3168, 2018.

[2] P. Ky¨osti, J. Meinil¨a, L. Hentila, X. Zhao, T. J¨ams¨a, C. Schneider,
M. Narandzic, M. Milojevi´c, A. Hong, J. Ylitalo, V.-M. Holappa,
M. Alatossava, R. Bultitude, Y. Jong, and T. Rautiainen, “WINNER II
channel models,” Eur. Commission, Brussels, Belgium, Tech. Rep. IST-
4-027756 WINNER II D1.1.2 V1.2, Feb. 2008.

[3] USRP B200/B210 Bus Series, Ettus Research. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.ettus.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/b200-b210 spec sheet.pdf
[Online]. Available:

[4] USRP B200/B210 Schematics, Ettus Research.
https://ﬁles.ettus.com/schematics/b200/b210.pdf

[5] USRP N310, Ettus Research. [Online]. Available: https://www.ettus.com/

wp-content/uploads/2019/01/USRP N310 Datasheet v3.pdf

[6] D. C. Chu, “Polyphase codes with good periodic correlation properties
(corresp.),” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 18, no. 4, pp.
531–532, 1972.

[7] C. L. Dolph, “A current distribution for broadside arrays which optimizes
the relationship between beam width and side-lobe level,” Proceedings of
the IRE, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 335–348, 1946.

Fig. 5. Effect of proposed algorithm on channel estimation

Fig. 5 provides a visualisation of the channel estimation
in both the time and frequency domains performed in the
following order:

1) Only conducting steps IV-A1 through IV-A3 for basic
synchronisation and skipping the windowing step in the
frequency domain from IV-B2

2) Conducting all restoration steps IV-A1 through IV-A6
but skipping the windowing step in the frequency do-
main from IV-B2

3) Only conducting steps IV-A1 through IV-A3 for basic
synchronisation but without resolution of measurement
artefacts, while keeping all post-processing steps in IV-B

4) Keeping all steps as proposed in IV-A and IV-B

Starting with the baseline approach, the result of channel esti-
mation without restoration or post-processing steps illustrated
in the ﬁrst row exhibits signiﬁcant disturbance prior to the ﬁrst
dominant impulse (at relative delay time 0) along with a high
noise ﬂoor in the time domain and visible irregularities in the
frequency domain. In the absence of the windowing step in
the frequency domain, the inferred channel impulse response
displayed in the second row contains the same unnatural
pre-ringing as the one showing up in Fig. 2 as discussed
in Section III, which obscures the shape and extent of the
actual power delay proﬁle. In contrast,
this pre-ringing is
signiﬁcantly mitigated in the time domain of the third and
fourth rows, which demonstrates the efﬁcacy of the frequency-
domain windowing procedure proposed in IV-B2. Among
the remaining estimates in the last two rows, three major
differences are worth noting: First, in the frequency domain,
the channel transfer function inferred from the fully restored
signal appears smoother, particularly in the higher frequency
region (towards boundaries of plot). Similarly, in the time
domain, the full restoration algorithm also contributes to a
lower noise ﬂoor in the estimated channel impulse response.
Moreover, while a pre-echo is only visible in the time-domain
representation of the example displayed in the third row (red
to yellow section prior to relative delay time 0), this effect
cannot be reproduced when evaluating the underlying estima-

