Exploring Apache Incubator Project Trajectories with APEX
Likang Yin*
lkyin@ucdavis.edu
University of California, Davis
Davis, California, USA

Anirudh Ramchandran*
aniramch@ucdavis.edu
University of California, Davis
Davis, California, USA

Vladimir Filkov
vfilkov@ucdavis.edu
University of California, Davis
Davis, California, USA

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
3
2

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
9
9
0
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Open Source Software (OSS) is a major component of our digital
infrastructure, yet more than 80% of such projects fail. Seeking less
uncertainty, many OSS projects join established software communi-
ties, e.g., the Apache Software Foundation (ASF), with established
rules and community support to guide projects toward sustainabil-
ity. In their nascent stage, ASF projects are incubated in the ASF
incubator (ASFI), which provides systematic mentorship toward
long-term sustainability. Projects in ASFI eventually conclude their
incubation by either graduating, if successful, or retiring, if not.

Time-stamped traces of developer activities are publicly avail-
able from ASF, and can be used for monitoring project trajectories
toward sustainability. Here we present a web app dashboard tool,
APEX, that allows internal and external stakeholders to monitor
and explore ASFI project sustainability trajectories, including social
and technical networks.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Software and its engineering → Open source model.

KEYWORDS
OSS Sustainability; Apache Incubator; Tool

ACM Reference Format:
Anirudh Ramchandran*, Likang Yin*, and Vladimir Filkov. 2022. Exploring
Apache Incubator Project Trajectories with APEX. In 19th International
Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR ’22), May 23–24, 2022,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 5 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3524842.3528506

1 INTRODUCTION
In spite of the large amounts of resource put in them, many OSS
projects end up on trajectories that are ultimately not sustainable. In
recent work we showed that OSS project sustainability can be effec-
tively predicted early on in project development from longitudinal
project and process metrics supplemented by socio-technical net-
work metrics (developer communications and code contributions),
specific to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) [3]. ASF, as one
of the most popular OSS communities, provides specific guidelines
and establishes regulations to help OSS projects eventually become
self-sustainable. Nascent projects with ASF aspirations are housed

*The authors contributed equally to this work.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
MSR ’22, May 23–24, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9303-4/22/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3524842.3528506

in the Apache Software Foundation Incubator (ASFI) for a period
of time, after which they are graduated into ASF if they are found
to be sustainable, otherwise they get retired.

Promisingly, our work [3] implied that monitoring and reflecting
on their sustainability forecast can enable projects to act proactively,
and potentially correct downturns in the forecasts. To enable such
monitoring in practice, here we present a dashboard tool, APEX,
intended for nascent projects in the Apache Software Foundation
Incubator to monitor their sustainability trajectories over time, thus
allowing for timely course corrections and for potentially improv-
ing the likelihood of project graduation into ASF. Our motivation
goes beyond ASFI as many nascent OSS projects fall outside the
ASF domain, and its well developed community support structure.
Self-monitoring and self-correction may be even more pertinent
to those. While intended for ASF projects specifically, APEX is
designed in a generic way and thus can easily accommodate data
from repositories other than ASF.
Related Work ASF provides a monitoring tool, Clutch1, to help OSS
developers self-reflect and take actions when their projects are ex-
periencing issues. The Clutch tool uses colors to signal the status
of project metrics, e.g., missing documentation, lack of new com-
mitters, etc. Although it works well for its intended use, Clutch’s
analysis is of limited use as a real-time monitoring tool since (1) it
is not project-specific, i.e., all projects follow the same standards
for all features regardless of their project size or context; (2) it does
not consider historical records; and (3) it does not make action-
able suggestions. Our APEX tool complements the existing Clutch
tool by providing additional analytics power for understanding the
longitudinal socio-technical aspects of projects. It also can yield
potential actionable insights.

There are other projects that focus on analytics for OSS sustain-
ability outside of ASF domain. E.g., the Augur and GrimoireLab
within the CHAOSS (Community Health Analytics Open Source
Software) project2, provide a toolbox for project sustainability self-
monitoring. However, unlike APEX, they don’t provide a synthesis
of metrics into a longitudinal sustainability forecasts, or allow deep
dives into email and commits.

Next, we first introduce APEX, and then describe use cases that
demonstrate its utility in a) monitoring for ASF project downturn
events, b) identifying longer term engagements between developers,
and c) within-ASF project comparisons. The APEX app is available
at https://ossustain.github.io/APEX/. Code and data are available
at https://github.com/ossustain/APEX/.

 
 
 
 
 
 
MSR ’22, May 23–24, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Anirudh Ramchandran*, Likang Yin*, and Vladimir Filkov

given month and on the right are all the file types committed to in
that month (e.g., .java, .html, etc., based on their file extensions).
The edges connect the developers to the file types they committed
to in that month. We aggregate the network edges in a monthly
manner, i.e., the longitudinal networks of each project consist of
monthly network snapshots.

Implementation Technology The APEX tool design and pipeline
is illustrated in Figure 1. To implement the front-end of APEX
we use the D3 JavaScript library (https://d3js.org/). D3 uses visual
layouts and an associated tool-set to improve front-end efficiency.
D3 also provides developers with design flexibility through stan-
dardized data manipulation operations. Additionally, one of D3’s
foci is transitions and animation. This allows our dashboard to
quickly adapt to changing inputs, e.g., a change of the current
month. To provide interactivity of our tool, we use the SVG render-
ing technology, which is based on Document Object Model (DOM)
operations and supports precise user interaction. We also make
use of jQuery extensively. jQuery is a JavaScript library that helps
simplify and standardize interactions between JavaScript code and
HTML elements. We use jQuery to design event listeners: processes
in JavaScript that wait for an event to occur. This has allowed us to
create a seamless dynamic experience throughout the dashboard,
where a change in one section adjusts all related sections and visu-
als accordingly. We have also made use of a lightweight range slider
with multi-touch support called noUIslider, and it has an in-built
event listener function allowing integration with the rest of the
elements in the dashboard. Frequent DOM operations are costly,
negatively impacting the user experience by screen flashing and
stuttering during the interactions. We relax this cost by keeping
each project and month stored in separate json files.

Sustainability Forecasting APEX features the AI based sustain-
ability forecasting model by Yin et al. [3]. They implemented a
3-layer LSTM model: a 64 neurons LSTM layer with a 0.3 rate drop-
out layer, and then followed by a dense layer with the softmax
function to yield the predicted likelihood of project graduation. In
the experimental setup, the graduated projects are encoded as 1;
retired projects as 0. During training, the monthly socio-technical
networks variables (e.g., number of nodes/edges, clustering coeffi-
cient, and mean degree in the networks) of each project were fed
into the model. This LSTM neural network based model gives a
sustainability forecast in each month of the project development.
More experimental details can be found in the paper [3].

3 DASHBOARD ELEMENTS
Dashboard Panes. There are four main sections to the dashboard,
see Figure 2: (1) top pane (panes A,B), (2) left pane (panes C,D), (3)
middle pane (panes E and G) (4) right pane (panes F and H).

The top pane has two parts to it. The left side (A) allows the user
to select a project of interest in the drop-down menu and a specific
month through the month slider. Based on these inputs, the other
panes change dynamically to display the respective information
for the selected project and month. In addition, this section also
allows the user to toggle a checkbox to switch to a range slider
to display a range of months, e.g., 1-5 months, instead of a single
month. To the right (B) is the sustainability forecast visual, which

Figure 1: The APEX pipeline

2 DATA AND IMPLEMENTATION
Data Source The APEX pipeline depends on four types of data:
basic project information, periodic project reports, email communi-
cations, and code commits. We use our previously published dataset
from ASFI [4] to obtain the emails and commits. The dataset com-
prised 211 graduated and 62 retired incubator projects (in total
of 273), with 1,201,746 emails, and 3,654,196 commits, with each
project spending on average 22.32 months in incubation.

We scraped project information (name, mentors, dates, status)
from the project’s ASF Incubator homepage3, using Python’s Beau-
tifulSoup Package. The Apache mailing list archive,contains full
historical information for all projects including project participants,
mentors who assisted with the projects, project reports, all emails,
and all commits. To obtain developer emails we frequently had to
backfill partial email addresses by writing scripts to search for the
partial email throughout the email text. We used the same approach
to identify unique committers that may have used aliases.

Social and Technical Networks From the ASF incubator data we
derive two kinds of longitudinal networks for each project, for each
month: a social and a technical. The social networks have directed
edges between developer, derived from the email archives, using
the method by Bird et al. [1]. We present the social networks in a
bipartite graph layout, using Sankey diagram [2]. There are two
sets of nodes: on the left are all senders of messages in a given
month. On the right are those who either received a direct message,
or, in the case of a broadcast message, those who have responded
to that message. The edges are directed from the sender to the
receiver node, except for the broadcast messages where the edges
are directed from a node that has sent an email to a node that has
replied to that email [1].

The technical network is also a bipartite graph with two sets of
nodes: on the left are the developers that have made commits in a

1Clutch Analysis: http://incubator.apache.org/clutch/
2CHAOSS community https://chaoss.community/
3ASF incubator: http://incubator.apache.org/projects/

Exploring Apache Incubator Project Trajectories with APEX

MSR ’22, May 23–24, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Figure 2: Layout of the APEX Dashboard

depicts the sustainability forecast for the project, ranging from 0
(not sustainable) to 1 (sustainable), for any given month.

Below those, the left pane consists of two distinct sub-sections:
the project info pane (C) and the project report pane (D). The
former shows the project name, a link to the official website, and
the project’s status (i.e., graduated or retired). The ASF sponsor’s
name (if anyone in particular, otherwise ‘incubator’) is displayed
below that. At the bottom is a short introduction to the selected
project. Below that, in the project’s report pane (D), we present the
report submitted by the project to the ASFI, for the given month.
The middle pane consists of the social network visual on top (E)
and its related metrics below it (G). The social bipartite graph is
presented as a Sankey diagram [2], the height of a node illustrating
the % (relative to the total) of emails sent (left) or received/replied-
to (right) by that developer in a given month. The sizes of the
flows sre proportional to the number of emails exchanged between
the developers. Hovering over a developer’s name emphasizes all
developers that have received a directed email, or responded to a
broadcast, from that developer.

In the right pane, on top is the technical network of developers
who have committed to files (F), and their metrics are below (H).
For the visual, we also use a bipartite Sankey diagram. On the
left is a list of developers, while the file type (i.e., extension) of
the files committed to is on the right. The percentage of one’s
efforts relative to others’ is shown on the left, with the sizes of the
flows proportional to that. Hovering over a developer’s name, or,
respectively, a file type, emphasizes additional information: all file
types a developer has touched, or all developers that have touched
that file type along with their % contribution, respectively.

Additionally, by hovering over and clicking on a developer’s
name in the social, respectively the technical networks, we get a
button with their name under the network, which when clicked
opens a window with a list of all their emails, respectively com-
mits, in that month. They appear in a pop-up window next to the
dashboard.

Figure 3: Using the sustainability forecast to understand
and explore downturns (red) and upturns (green) of project
DataFu.

4 USE CASE EXAMPLES
APEX conveniently shows in one place the project info, monthly
aggregated code commits, email communications, and two unique
features of ASF, the periodic report info and the graduation status.
Such rich and fine-grained information can enable researchers and
practitioners to study the trajectory of a given project by showing
changes over time, including identifiable patterns and up/down
trends, in the socio-technical networks and the sustainabiity fore-
casts.
Use Case I: Studying Sustainability Turning Points Patterns and
trends in the longitudinal socio-technical networks can be stud-
ied to identify causes for downturns in the sustainability forecast,
allowing APEX users to be proactive with changing project trajec-
tories. For example, as shown in Figure 3, for the selected project
DataFu, by simply eyeballing we can identify that there is a big
downturn around month 12. Some possible reasons for this could
be that (1) The project just launched a big release; or (2) Some core
developers left the projects. Going through the email discussions
in months adjacent to the downturns may offer reasons for the
changes, which in this case is likely the latter.

Thus, the monthly social-technical networks combined with
the real-time sustainability forecast can allow practitioners and
researchers to monitor for downturn events and react proactively.

MSR ’22, May 23–24, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Anirudh Ramchandran*, Likang Yin*, and Vladimir Filkov

Figure 4: Aggregating project Clerezza’s social networks
over a range of months (7-26) shows longer-term engage-
ments

Use Case II: Studying Different Length Engagements APEX
allows aggregating the networks over a range of months. This al-
lows the study and comparison of different length engagements,
both social and technical in nature. This can be done by enabling
the range slider, which allows multiple months to be selected at
once, yielding a time range for the nodes and edges in the networks.
Once the range is specified, the metrics and the visuals are adjusted
to display multiple consecutive months of interactions.

An example of a social network over a longer range is shown in
Figure 4. There we see thicker and thinner edges; the former indicate
communications that recur over multiple months, attesting to a
longer term engagement between those developers, i.e., recurring
communication. By comparing the short-term and long-term social-
technical networks, we can identify recurring patterns over longer
periods of time during the project incubation.

Use Case III: Cross-Project Comparison APEX also allows
users to compare and contrast two projects by opening up paral-
lel windows of our dashboard. Thereby, researchers can explore
multiple projects simultaneously to generate hypotheses about re-
lationships between their socio-technical structure and graduation
status. E.g., Figure 5 shows the technical networks of two projects,
one graduated and the other retired. An immediate pattern that
emerges is that more developers are committing code changes in
the graduated project than in the retired one. Researchers can fol-
lowup on this hypothesis by looking into the driving factors behind
it, using, e.g., productivity studies, or topics of discussions.

5 USING APEX BEYOND ASF
We have designed APEX to serve ASFI projects that are early in
their incubation to monitor and reflect on their progress in a more
agile way than previously possible. But APEX is in principle not
limited to ASFI data. It takes as input JSON files and visualizes them
in different ways. To aid projects outside of ASF that want to benefit
from it, we have made our full code and data publicly available. We
provide a README file, https://github.com/anirudhsuresh/APEX/
blob/main/README.md, that details the JSON formats of the re-
quired input data. The README file links to scripts with which

Figure 5: Parallel windows can contrast technical networks
between project AWF (retired, top) and project Airflow (grad-
uated, bottom)

comma separated values (CSV) files, common outcome of repos-
itory mining, can be converted to the required JSON format for
all the required APEX components: email networks, email metrics,
technical networks, commit metrics, project info, project reports,
and sustainability forecasts. The last one will have to be calculated
from the others, using the code provided in our previous study [3].

6 LIMITATIONS AND CONCLUSION
Limitations Our dataset is large and diverse (within ASF) but limited
to ASFI projects, so generalizing beyond ASF is risky. However, we
provide a README file with instructions to aid non-ASF projects in
using APEX. Selecting a range of months can result in very dense
networks that are hard to read or interpret. This function is most
useful when limited to a few consecutive months.

Conclusion Research into OSS project sustainability can present
actionable insights for project maintenance. In this work, we pre-
sented a dashboard tool for exploring a longitudinal data-set of tech-
nical contributions and developer communication in ASF incubator
projects, with extrinsic, graduation success labels and forecasts.
The tool can be used for real-time monitoring and study of ASFI
projects. It can also help generate hypothesis about OSS project
sustainability. Future work will be aimed at adding additional data
sets. We have engaged the CHAOSS project and are devising ways
to standardize APEX and integrate it into CHAOSS.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. 2020751.

Exploring Apache Incubator Project Trajectories with APEX

MSR ’22, May 23–24, 2022, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

REFERENCES
[1] Bird, C., Gourley, A., Devanbu, P., Gertz, M., and Swaminathan, A. Mining
email social networks. In Proceedings of the 2006 international workshop on Mining
software repositories (2006), pp. 137–143.

[2] Riehmann, P., Hanfler, M., and Froehlich, B. Interactive sankey diagrams. In
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, 2005. INFOVIS 2005. (2005), IEEE,
pp. 233–240.

[3] Yin, L., Chen, Z., Xuan, Q., and Filkov, V. Sustainability forecasting for apache
incubator projects. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European
Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering (2021), ESEC/FSE 2021, ACM, p. 1056–1067.

[4] Yin, L., Zhang, Z., Xuan, Q., and Filkov, V. Apache software foundation incubator
project sustainability dataset. In 2021 IEEE/ACM 18th International Conference on
Mining Software Repositories (MSR) (2021), IEEE, pp. 595–599.

