2
2
0
2

y
a
M
5

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
5
9
2
0
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

The Evolving Landscape of Software Performance Engineering

Gunnar Kudrjavets
University of Groningen
Groningen, Netherlands
g.kudrjavets@rug.nl

Jeff Thomas
Meta Platforms, Inc.
Menlo Park, CA, USA
jeffdthomas@fb.com

Nachiappan Nagappan
Meta Platforms, Inc.
Menlo Park, CA, USA
nnachi@fb.com

ABSTRACT
Satisfactory software performance is essential for the adoption and
the success of a product. In organizations that follow traditional
software development models (e.g., waterfall), Software Perfor-
mance Engineering (SPE) involves time-consuming experimental
modeling and performance testing outside the actual production
environment. Such existing SPE methods, however, are not opti-
mized for environments utilizing Continuous Integration (CI) and
Continuous Delivery (CD) that result in high frequency and high
volume of code changes. We present a summary of lessons learned
and propose improvements to the SPE process in the context of
CI/CD. Our findings are based on SPE work on products A and
B conducted over 5 years at an online services company X. We
find that (a) SPE has mainly become a post hoc activity based on
data from the production environment, (b) successful application
of SPE techniques require frequent re-evaluation of priorities, and
(c) engineers working on SPE require a broader skill set than one
traditionally possessed by engineers working on performance.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Software and its engineering → Software post-development is-
sues; Software performance; Programming teams.

KEYWORDS
Performance analysis, software performance engineering, SPE

ACM Reference Format:
Gunnar Kudrjavets, Jeff Thomas, and Nachiappan Nagappan. 2022. The
Evolving Landscape of Software Performance Engineering. In Proceedings
of Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE’22). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 INTRODUCTION
Software systems often not meeting performance requirements
is a known problem in the industry [6]. The accepted definition
of SPE is “a proactive approach that uses quantitative techniques
to predict the performance of software early in design to identify
viable options and eliminate unsatisfactory ones before implemen-
tation begins” [10]. In this paper, we enumerate the lessons learned
from our experience while working on tasks related to SPE at the

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
EASE’22, June 13–15, 2022, Göteborg, Sweden
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

company X. Most of our experience comes from being responsible
for the SPE of two products (A and B) for 5 years.

Context. Company X is a large online services company. Software
developed by X includes closed-source mobile applications, open-
source software (such as a memory allocator and a key-value store)
and significant contributions to the Linux kernel. Product A is an
open-source software database storage engine. Classic database
metrics such as queries per second and transactions per second are
the most relevant performance metrics for product A. Product B is
a collection of mobile applications used on various devices running
either Android or iOS. Several metrics quantify the performance of
mobile applications [4]. The metrics for B include application start
time [11], memory usage [5], and responsiveness [13].

Past approaches to SPE. In organizations that use a classical wa-
terfall model, the performance work follows a specific model. Engi-
neers design experiments to measure the performance of a compo-
nent. The experiment measures a component’s performance either
in isolation or in conjunction with the rest of the system. Based
on the results from these experiments, engineers optimize either
design or code until performance metrics meet specific criteria. A
feature that meets the performance criteria is either integrated into
the main development branch or released to a subset of users. The
product teams make design and code changes based on the data
provided by the performance team. The rationale for this approach
is the assumption that software is modified infrequently once re-
leased, and patching is an involved process (e.g., updating Microsoft
Windows).

2 INDUSTRY CHALLENGES
Disruption by CI/CD. Environments that use CI/CD present differ-
ent constraints for performance engineering than those utilizing
the traditional development models. With the advent of “trunk
based development” [12, p. 339], code is no longer developed in
hierarchical child branches. Hundreds to thousands of engineers
can commit code to the main branch every day. Each commit can
potentially cause or fix a performance regression. Though we cannot
publish a specific number about the ratio of software engineers
contributing to the product and performance engineers at X, we
can say that the number of product engineers greatly exceeds the
number of performance engineers. Functionality in products is typ-
ically enabled or disabled by using feature flags (feature toggles) [3]
depending on variables such as deployment goals, target audience,
or state of the feature (e.g., GateKeeper [8]). Given 𝑁 feature flags,
there is a possibility of 2𝑁 combinations of features being active
simultaneously. Testing all these combinations before the release is
not practical (or even possible, given that 𝑁 may be in hundreds).
Limitations of dogfooding. Microsoft popularized the concept
of “dogfooding” in the software industry [2]. Dogfooding is the
practice of engineers using and testing the software they develop

 
 
 
 
 
 
EASE’22, June 13–15, 2022, Göteborg, Sweden

1, 2, and 3

prior to the release to users. While this technique has been, in
our experience, a valuable tool, we observe that engineers form a
biased test sample to detect performance regressions. Engineers
(a) tend to have better hardware than an average user, (b) have
different usage patterns, and (c) use the software using outlier
configurations settings (e.g., specific feature flags, internal tracing
mode, debug builds). Dogfooding enables the early identification of
obvious performance issues but does not serve as a good predictor
for how an average user will behave.

Increased required skill set. Modern software systems are com-
plicated and have many dependencies. Detecting, debugging, and
fixing performance-related issues in a product requires an ever-
expanding skill set and mastery of different tools [1]. In our expe-
rience, a wide array of knowledge spanning from the internals of
operating systems development, code generation by compilers, in-
ternals of a particular programming language to product code itself
is required. We observe that debugging and profiling kernel mode
and user mode code is necessary to solve complex performance
issues. Assuming that each product team has engineers with that
skill set is unrealistic. Therefore, more requirements are placed on
engineers working on SPE.

3 METHOD
Given the relatively small number of engineers working on SPE for
products A and B, we elect not to perform formal personal opinion
surveys. However, we conducted annual “performance summits”
(informal focus groups with a mediator) with engineers involved in
various SPE-related tasks. These events, follow-up discussions be-
tween engineers, and internal technical white-papers documenting
practical SPE challenges serve as a basis of this paper.

4 FINDINGS AND RESULTS
An existing study summarizing 9 years of SPE experience at Fidelity
states that their SPE team was forced to evolve “into a rag tag team
of system integrators” who were, amongst other things, “capable of
profiling, instrumenting and changing application code” [9]. Our
experiences with SPE are similar to the following findings:

(1) A large part of SPE is conducted based on data collected
from the production environment (e.g., various counters,
logs, snapshots). Simulating the production environment
in-house is a challenging research problem. For example, to
correctly evaluate mobile software performance and limit
the presence of confounding variables, a Faraday cage may
be necessary.

(2) A software performance engineer in a CI/CD environment
works in a constantly evolving environment given the large
volume of code changes due to commits in application code
base and related dependencies.

(3) Skill set required to be a successful software performance en-
gineer has changed. Software performance engineers design
experiments, measure their results and present the data to
the product teams. They are also generalists who can work
with a variety of teams and have the ability to debug and
profile code at any abstraction level.

(4) In our experience, it is valuable to have a small number of
dedicated performance engineers working alongside a larger
team of product engineers.

(5) Classic performance metrics include battery (power con-
sumption), CPU, I/O, and memory [1]. Products may demand
a different focus and can value one metric over another. For
example, a long-running process executing on a server in a
data center is not concerned as much about the initial process
start time as an application executing on a mobile device.

5 CONCLUSION
The role of engineers working in the field of SPE for software used
daily by millions of people has changed. The focus has shifted from
traditional, primarily theoretical scientific methods (e.g., experi-
mental design, modeling, projections) to a more practical hands-on
approach (e.g., debugging, profiling, fixing performance regres-
sions).

Modern software development (e.g., CI/CD) uses “release early,
release often” type of methodology originating from the early years
of the open-source software movement [7]. The nature of SPE
has adapted to accommodate that approach. Contemporary SPE
involves working closely with production data and debugging and
profiling user and kernel model applications.

REFERENCES
[1] Brendan Gregg. 2020. Systems Performance: Enterprise and the Cloud (2nd ed.).

Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, USA.

[2] Warren Harrison. 2006. Eating Your Own Dog Food. IEEE Software 23, 3 (2006),

5–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/ms.2006.72

[3] Pete Hodgson. 2017. Feature Toggles (aka Feature Flags). Thoughtworks. Retrieved
February 16, 2022 from https://martinfowler.com/articles/feature-toggles.html
[4] Max Hort, Maria Kechagia, Federica Sarro, and Mark Harman. 2021. A Survey
IEEE Transactions on

of Performance Optimization for Mobile Applications.
Software Engineering (2021), 1–1. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2021.3071193
[5] Jaehwan Lee and Sangoh Park. 2021. Mobile Memory Management System Based
on User’s Application Usage Patterns. Computers, Materials & Continua 68, 3
(2021), 4031–4050. https://doi.org/10.32604/cmc.2021.017872

[6] Daniel A. Menascé. 2002. Software, Performance, or Engineering?. In Proceedings
of the 3rd International Workshop on Software and Performance (Rome, Italy)
(WOSP ’02). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 239–242.
https://doi.org/10.1145/584369.584407

[7] Eric S. Raymond. 1999. The Cathedral & the Bazaar: Musings on Linux And Open
Source by an Accidental Revolutionary (1st ed.). O’Reilly, Sebastopol, CA, USA.
[8] Chuck Rossi. 2017. Rapid Release at Massive Scale. Meta Platforms, Inc. Retrieved
February 26, 2022 from https://engineering.fb.com/2017/08/31/web/rapid-release-
at-massive-scale/

[9] Jayshankar Sankarasetty, Kevin Mobley, Libby Foster, Tad Hammer, and Terri
Calderone. 2007. Software Performance in the Real World: Personal Lessons
From the Performance Trauma Team. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Workshop on Software and Performance (Buenes Aires, Argentina) (WOSP ’07).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 201–208. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1216993.1217027

[10] Connie U. Smith. 2015. Software Performance Engineering Then and Now: A
Position Paper. In Proceedings of the 2015 Workshop on Challenges in Performance
Methods for Software Development (Austin, Texas, USA) (WOSP ’15). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2693561.2693567

[11] Natansh Verma. 2015. Optimizing Facebook for iOS Start Time. Meta Platforms,
Inc. Retrieved January 25, 2022 from https://engineering.fb.com/2015/11/20/ios/
optimizing-facebook-for-ios-start-time/

[12] Titus Winters, Tom Manshreck, and Hyrum Wright. 2020. Software Engineering
at Google: Lessons Learned from Programming Over Time (1st ed.). O’Reilly,
Sebastopol, CA, USA.

[13] Shengqian Yang, Dacong Yan, and Atanas Rountev. 2013. Testing for Poor
Responsiveness in Android Applications. In 2013 1st International Workshop on
the Engineering of Mobile-Enabled Systems (MOBS). IEEE, San Francisco, CA, USA,
1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/MOBS.2013.6614215

