1

Rate-Splitting Multiple Access and its Interplay
with Intelligent Reﬂecting Surfaces

Arthur S. de Sena, Student Member, IEEE, Pedro H. J. Nardelli, Senior Member, IEEE,
Daniel B. da Costa, Senior Member, IEEE, Petar Popovski, Fellow, IEEE, and
Constantinos B. Papadias, Fellow, IEEE

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
4
2

]
P
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
7
0
2
2
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Rate-splitting multiple access (RSMA) has
recently appeared as a powerful technique for improving
the downlink performance of multiple-input multiple-
output (MIMO) systems. By ﬂexibly managing interfer-
ence, RSMA can deliver high spectral and energy efﬁ-
ciency, as well as robustness to imperfect channel state
information (CSI). In another development, an intelligent
reﬂecting surface (IRS) has emerged as a method to control
the wireless environment through software-conﬁgurable,
near-passive, sub-wavelength reﬂecting elements. This ar-
ticle presents the potential of synergy between IRS and
RSMA. Three important improvements achievable by IRS-
RSMA schemes are identiﬁed, supported by insightful
numerical examples, and mapped to beyond-5G use cases,
along with future research directions.

I. INTRODUCTION
A multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) sys-
tem can implement spatial division multiple access
(SDMA) to communicate with multiple spatially
separated users simultaneously and at
the same
frequency. This can improve system rate, scala-
bility, reliability and latency, making MIMO an
indispensable technology for ﬁfth-generation (5G)
communication systems. Nevertheless, by relying
solely on SDMA, severe inter-user interference can
be experienced when users have overlapping spatial
directions or are located close to one another in
overload scenarios. To tackle this issue, strategies
exploiting different domains have been combined
in MIMO systems, from conventional orthogonal
multiple access (OMA) techniques, such as time-
division multiple access (TDMA) and orthogo-
nal frequency-division multiple access (OFDMA),
to non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) tech-
niques, such as power-domain and code-domain
NOMA. Under ideal conditions, all these techniques
efﬁciently mitigate inter-user interference. However,
they are underpinned by an assumption of perfect
channel state information (CSI), which is difﬁcult to
achieve in real-world deployments. In practice, CSI

Rate-Splitting Multiple Access

inaccuracies can diminish the data rates of MIMO,
MIMO-OMA, and MIMO-NOMA schemes [1], [2].
(RSMA) ad-
dresses the drawbacks of OMA and NOMA under
imperfect CSI [1]. Unlike SDMA and OMA tech-
niques, which treat residual multi-user interference
as noise, or NOMA, which by relying on succes-
sive interference cancellation (SIC), fully decodes
the interference, the innovative RSMA technique
combines the two approaches and ﬂexibly treats one
fraction of the interference as noise and addresses
the other fraction through SIC. The RSMA tech-
nique unlocks a ﬂexible interference management
framework that can deliver high spectral and en-
ergy efﬁciencies, optimality in terms of degrees of
freedom (DoF), and robustness to imperfect CSI [2].
Even though RSMA has numerous beneﬁts, es-
tablishing reliable communication links through
fast-varying wireless channels continues to be a
challenge. As an attempt to overcome channel is-
sues, a promising technology called an intelligent
reﬂecting surface (IRS) has been proposed [3].
An IRS can be seen as a cluster of controllable
scatterers, where each scatterer,
i.e., a reﬂecting
element, can be conﬁgured independently to gen-
erate distinct amplitude and phase responses. Col-
lectively, the reﬂecting elements of an IRS are able
to manipulate and reﬂect impinging electromagnetic
waves with an optimized radiation pattern, creating
a large number of possibilities for tuning the prop-
agation medium. Conventionally, these reﬂections
are performed without active ampliﬁcation. As a
result, an IRS does not require ampliﬁers or other
components of conventional radio-frequency (RF)
to enable
chains, which give IRSs the potential
ubiquitous connectivity in beyond-5G at low en-
ergy costs. Furthermore, several other advantages
have been reported, including advanced control of
users’ channel gains, extended coverage range and
improved fairness [4]. Due to these features, several

 
 
 
 
 
 
works investigating the application of IRS to diverse
systems have appeared recently, of which some have
focused on the IRS-RSMA topic [5].

Nevertheless, few technical contributions have
been presented and the full possibilities of the
combination of IRS and RSMA remain to be inves-
tigated. This major literature lacuna motivates the
work reported in this paper. Speciﬁcally, we perform
an in-depth investigation of the possible beneﬁts
that combined RSMA and IRS can provide. On the
one hand, we show that IRSs can enable a more
ﬂexible precoding design and make RSMA resilient
to imperfect SIC. On the other hand, we show that
RSMA can contribute to robust IRS optimizations
even under imperfect CSI. We demonstrate through
simulations that these features unleash performance
gains unreachable with other multiple access (MA)
techniques. We also present future use case scenar-
ios enabled by IRS-RSMA in beyond-5G networks.
The paper concludes by considering existing chal-
lenges and promising research directions.

II. AN OVERVIEW ON RSMA AND IRS
TECHNOLOGY

A. Introduction to the RSMA Technique

The work in [6] can be seen as one of the ﬁrst
studies to demonstrate that superior rate regions are
achievable through rate-splitting (RS) strategies in
broadcast channels of single-antenna systems. The
goal of achieving new rate regions motivated sub-
sequent works investigating further RS approaches.
For instance, the RS strategies presented in [7] and
[8] indicated that if users are being served through
interfering channels, it can be beneﬁcial to convey
part of the information in a shared common stream
and decode part of the inter-user interference. This
feature was recently found useful for improving the
performance of modern MIMO systems.

Practical MIMO-OMA systems conventionally
rely on linear precoding, such as zero-forcing (ZF)
precoding, to mitigate inter-user interference. The
adoption of these precoding techniques is mainly
motivated by their low computational complexity
and their optimality in terms of DoF under perfect
CSI. In practice, however, the CSI estimate is in-
evitably imperfect, which makes linear precoding
unable to cancel the interference completely and
ultimately results in residual noise at the receivers.
Such an issue can reduce the system’s DoF and

2

limit the achievable data rates. As an attempt to
alleviate this limitation, researchers have recently
exploited the RS concepts proposed in [6]–[8] to
develop a new robust MA technique for MIMO
systems, called RSMA. The technique can be seen
as an implementation of the “divide-and-conquer”
concept where part of the inter-user interference is
addressed at the base station (BS), e.g., through
ZF precoding, and part by the users, through SIC.
Consequently, it becomes possible to manage how
much interference (not canceled by precoding due
to imperfect CSI) is treated as noise and how much
is decoded. This ﬂexibility makes the technique
powerful even in scenarios with inaccurate CSI.

In its simplest form, RSMA splits the data mes-
sages of different users into two parts. One part of
each message is encoded into a common symbol and
the remaining part into private symbols. The com-
mon symbol is multiplied by a common precoder
(intended for all users), and the private symbols are
multiplied by private precoders (each one designed
for a particular user). The obtained streams are
superimposed in the power domain and then trans-
mitted towards the users. At the receivers’ side, all
users ﬁrst decode the common stream, while treating
the private streams as noise, and perform SIC to sub-
tract the retrieved messages from the superimposed
stream. After SIC, the data in the private streams is
ﬁnally decoded, ideally, interference-free. Note that
unlike NOMA, in which the number of SIC layers
increases with the increase of users, RSMA requires
that all users (independently of the number) execute
SIC only once. Due to this feature, the technique
is commonly called single-layer RSMA. Recent
results have demonstrated that single-layer RSMA
can outperform all conventional OMA, NOMA, and
SDMA counterparts [2]. Advanced techniques with
multiple common streams and multiple layers of
SIC have been also proposed (called generalized
RSMA [1], for instance). However, more compli-
cated schemes are beyond the scope of this paper.

B. Basics of the IRS Technology

An IRS consists of a thin two-dimensional struc-
ture that comprises multiple reﬂecting elements with
adjustable electromagnetic properties. The reﬂecting
elements, made of passive conductive materials, are
tuned by a low-power control layer, which can be
implemented through diverse technologies. Existing

designs propose the use of PIN diodes, varactors,
graphene, and liquid crystal-based solutions [3].
Moreover, the reﬂecting elements usually have di-
mensions much smaller than the carrier wavelength
[9]. Comprising such tiny components enables IRSs
to steer signals ideally in any direction and achieve
various goals, such as to maximize signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR), assist interference cancellation, or op-
erate in absorption mode for security purposes.

The fast-fading channels of an IRS-assisted sys-
tem can be represented by the addition of a ma-
trix modeling the direct link between the BS and
users and a channel matrix corresponding to the
reﬂected link via the IRS, which, in turn, is usually
represented by the dyadic channel model [10]. The
dyadic model is a multiplicative channel representa-
tion containing three matrices: a matrix for the link
between the BS and IRS, a matrix for the link be-
tween the IRS and users, and a diagonal matrix with
complex-valued elements that model the induced
reﬂections, with amplitudes and phases limited to
[0, 1] and [0, 2𝜋], respectively. This model is used
in the simulation examples given in this article.

III. IRS-RSMA: POTENTIAL IMPROVEMENTS

In this section, we discuss three potential per-
formance improvements that the combined use of
IRSs and RSMA offers. Each improvement is sup-
ported by representative simulation examples, where
we compare the downlink performance of MIMO
systems in combination with different MA solu-
tions, including TDMA, NOMA, and RSMA. In
all implemented systems, we consider a narrow-
band block-fading channel model, where the chan-
nel coefﬁcients remain constant during a time slot
but change independently over different time slots,
time dispersion and fading correlation
such that
are not modeled. For illustration purposes, in the
RSMA schemes, random precoders are employed
for broadcasting the common messages, and ZF
precoding is used for transmitting the private ones.
In the baseline schemes, matched ﬁlter (MF) pre-
coding is adopted in the NOMA systems and ZF
precoding in the TDMA counterpart. We consider a
scenario with two single-antenna users, where user
1 is located at 50 m and user 2 at 30 m from
a BS equipped with 4 antennas, as shown in Fig.
1. Each user is assisted by one IRS containing 50
reﬂecting elements, with each IRS located 10 m

3

Fig. 1. IRS-RSMA setup. Single-antenna users are assisted by IRSs.

apart from its connected user. For simplicity, the
distances from the IRSs to the BS are the same
as those from the connected users to the BS, and
the path-loss exponent is set to 2.5 in all links.
Moreover, the precoders are normalized to unity and
ﬁxed power allocation policies are employed in all
systems. The power coefﬁcients for users 1 and 2 in
the NOMA schemes are conﬁgured as 𝛼1 = 7/8 and
𝛼2 = 1/8, whereas in TDMA all available power is
allocated in each time-slot to the scheduled user,
i.e., 𝛼1 = 𝛼2 = 1. In turn, in the RSMA systems,
the power coefﬁcients for the private messages are
set as 𝛼1 = 𝛼2 = (1 − 𝛼𝑐)/2, where 𝛼𝑐 represents
the coefﬁcient for the common message. It is note-
worthy that, even though we consider a narrow-
band channel model in the simulations, the gains
presented in this section should also be applicable to
other system setups. We recognize, though, that new
insights could be achieved with different models,
such as frequency-selective channels. However, this
possibility is left for future work where an in-depth
investigation can be carried out.

A. Enhanced Rate of the Common Message

The concept introduced by RSMA of conveying
part of the information through a common stream
brings a novel DoF for conﬁguring IRSs, which
makes this synergy unique and distinct from what is
achievable with classic MA solutions. Speciﬁcally,
IRSs can assist the design of efﬁcient precoders for
broadcasting common messages, which is known
to be a challenge in RSMA. Several approaches
have been proposed for addressing this issue in
conventional RSMA systems [1]. However, most

CommonstreamPrivatestreamPrivatestreamCommonstreamPrPrPiviviatataestrtrtereramamaPrPrPiviviatataestreamama10 m10 m50mBase stationequipped withmultiple antennasUser 1User 230mDownlink transmissionsvia RSMAEach single-antennauser is assistedby one IRSsCommon streamshould arriveat both usersPrivate streamsshould arrive onlyat intended users(3)(4)(2)(1)IRS 2IRS 1B. Robustness to Imperfect SIC

4

One key feature shared by NOMA and RSMA
is that both techniques rely on SIC to decode part
of the transmitted messages. In ideal conditions,
is possible to decode the messages perfectly
it
through SIC without any errors. In practice, how-
ever, as a result of hardware imperfections and
other impairments, even if the CSI can be perfectly
estimated, decoding errors may still occur during
the SIC process. It has been demonstrated in the
literature [11] that imperfect SIC can severely harm
the performance of NOMA systems and make them
less spectrally efﬁcient
than conventional OMA
schemes. An in-depth investigation of the impacts
of imperfect SIC on RSMA schemes is still missing
that
in the literature. Nevertheless,
despite the beneﬁts of RSMA, its performance can
deteriorate as a result of SIC errors. The deployment
of IRSs could be highly beneﬁcial to alleviate this
issue in RSMA. Speciﬁcally, by assisting the RSMA
scheme with IRSs and properly splitting the data
symbols between common and private messages,
high performance can be achieved even under the
constraint of imperfect SIC.

is evident

it

The robustness of IRS-RSMA to residual SIC
errors is illustrated in Fig. 3, where the IRSs are
optimized to boost the users’ channel gains and
mitigate interference through a constrained least-
squares approach. As in [11, Sec. III], a deter-
ministic error factor is used to model the residual
interference left by imperfect SIC. It can be seen
that both the NOMA and the IRS-NOMA system
are strongly impacted by residual SIC errors, with
sum-rates limited to only 6.9 bpcu in the high-
SNR regime, which is inferior to that achieved by
the TDMA counterpart after 20 dB. In contrast,
despite the presence of SIC errors, the sum-rates
of the RSMA schemes can outperform the TDMA
counterpart in the entire considered SNR range. For
SNR values below 10 dB the RSMA system can,
however, still be outperformed by its NOMA and
IRS-TDMA counterparts. On the other hand, the
IRS-RSMA system can overcome this issue and
boost the sum-rate in almost all the SNR range. For
instance, when the SNR is 25 dB and the power
allocated to the common message is 𝛼𝑐 = 0.5,
the IRS-RSMA scheme can achieve a sum-rate of
14 bpcu, which is superior to that achieved by the
RSMA counterpart for all values of 𝛼𝑐, and more

Fig. 2. Ergodic rates vs. SNR for the common message in RSMA
schemes (𝛼𝑐 = 0.9, 𝛼1 = 𝛼2 = 0.05).

strategies usually favor some users more than oth-
ers or result
in complex optimization problems.
Moreover, constructing a single precoder capable
of meeting the rate requirement for the common
message for all users may be an infeasible task.
On the other hand, by assisting common stream
transmissions with IRSs, it could be possible to
deliver strong signal beams to users even when
employing simple precoders at the BS.

The above gain is illustrated in Fig. 2, where
the ergodic rates for the common message achieved
with RSMA and IRS-RSMA are presented. The
IRS of each user is optimized to match (to add
constructively) the channel gains of the common
stream achieved in the reﬂected link with the gains
observed in the direct link. As can be seen, due to
the interference generated by the private streams, the
data rates of the common message become limited
in the high-SNR regime in both RSMA and IRS-
RSMA schemes. Note, however, that only the two
users served via conventional RSMA are not able
to meet the minimum rate required to decode the
common message. In contrast, when the IRSs are
optimized to boost the common message, the users
in the IRS-RSMA system become able to achieve
a rate higher than the requirement of 4 bpcu after
5 dB, reaching almost 7 bpcu at 30 dB. This higher
rate represents an impressive improvement of more
than 3 bpcu when compared with the rate observed
in the RSMA counterpart for the same SNR value.

-10-5051015202530SNR [dB]01234567Ergodic rate [BPCU]RSMA - User 1RSMA - User 2IRS-RSMA - User 1IRS-RSMA - User 2Data rate required to decodethe common message5

Fig. 3. Impact of imperfect SIC on the ergodic sum-rates of various
MA systems (SIC error factor = 0.01).

Fig. 4. Ergodic sum-rate curves for various MA systems under im-
perfect CSI (channel error variance = 0.5, 𝛼𝑐 = 0.9, 𝛼1 = 𝛼2 = 0.05).

than 6 bpcu higher than the sum-rate achieved by
the TDMA and NOMA-based schemes.

C. Robustness to Imperfect CSI

As IRSs comprise only nearly passive compo-
nents, accurately estimating the channels of the
cascade-reﬂected link, i.e., the channels between the
BS and the IRS, and the IRS and users, has been
one of the main challenges of IRS-assisted systems,
and different strategies have been proposed. Most
common approaches try to estimate the full con-
catenated channel entirely at the BS through uplink
training techniques, and some other approaches try
to simplify the estimation process by installing
scattered active sensors in the IRS [9]. Nevertheless,
independently of the IRS hardware or estimation
strategy, perfectly obtaining the global CSI remains
a complicated task. Consequently, in practice, the
optimization of the IRSs is usually performed based
on imperfect CSI, which might result in sub-optimal
performance. Fortunately, unlike other conventional
MA techniques, RSMA has the advantage of being
robust in scenarios with inaccurate channel estima-
tion. Therefore, RSMA is a good ﬁt for realistic
IRS-assisted systems with imperfect CSI.

Fig. 4 plots the ergodic sum-rates of various
IRS-assisted systems under perfect and imperfect
CSI. In this ﬁgure, the reﬂecting elements of the
IRSs are also optimized to boost the users’ channel
gains and mitigate interference. Note that because
the inter-user
ZF precoding is unable to cancel
interference completely when the CSI is imperfect,

the IRS-TDMA is the most impacted scheme, with
its sum-rate saturating slightly above 5 bpcu at
high SNR, which is almost 10 bpcu lower than
the IRS-TDMA scheme can reach at 40 dB under
perfect CSI. On the other hand, the IRS-RSMA
system can achieve high sum-rate levels with perfect
and imperfect CSI, outperforming all the baseline
schemes. For instance, when the SNR is 30 dB, the
IRS-RSMA scheme with perfect CSI can obtain a
sum-rate of 21.7 bpcu, while under imperfect CSI
it can still achieve an impressive 20.2 bpcu, which
is approximately 6 bpcu higher than that achieved
by the IRS-NOMA counterpart with imperfect CSI,
and 15 bpcu higher than that of the IRS-TDMA
counterpart with imperfect CSI. These results con-
ﬁrm that by combining RSMA and IRS technology,
it becomes possible to deploy robust communication
systems even when the channel estimation is poor.

IV. POTENTIAL USE CASES IN BEYOND-5G

In this section, we present use case scenarios that
can be enabled with the aid of IRS-RSMA schemes.

A. CSI-Robust UAV Networks

Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) will play an
important role in beyond-5G [12]. UAVs have been
envisioned as executing diverse tasks, ranging from
goods deliveries, surveillance and military applica-
tions, to working as BSs, where UAVs can provide
ﬂexible and dynamic coverage. For instance, with
the help of UAVs, it will be possible to temporarily

0510152025303540SNR [dB]24681012141618Ergodic sum-rate [BPCU]TDMANOMAIRS-NOMARSMA - c = 0.9RSMA - c = 0.5RSMA - c = 0.1IRS-RSMA - c = 0.9IRS-RSMA - c = 0.5IRS-RSMA - c = 0.1IRS-TDMA0510152025303540SNR [dB]510152025Ergodic sum-rate [BPCU]IRS-TDMA - Perfect CSIIRS-TDMA - Imperfect CSIIRS-NOMA - Perfect CSIIRS-NOMA - Imperfect CSIIRS-RSMA - Perfect CSIIRS-RSMA - Imperfect CSI6

Fig. 5. Potential use case scenarios enabled by IRS-RSMA in future wireless networks beyond 5G.

support high-performance connectivity in hyper-
crowded environments, such as in stadiums and at
festivals, or extend signal coverage to remote rural
areas and during natural disasters. The deployment
of swarms of UAVs is another promising application
for future communication systems. In a swarm,
by sensing the environment, a large number of
UAVs can intercommunicate, reorganize and adapt
autonomously in the air, allowing them to execute
even the most complex tasks.

Nevertheless, there are unsolved issues that need
to be tackled before UAV networks become ev-
eryday reality. IRS-RSMA schemes can efﬁciently
address some of these challenges. In particular,
channel
interference and the overhead generated
by multiple UAVs and their fast 3D motion make
channel estimation a complicated process, which
can potentially result in imperfect CSI. As noted
earlier,
in addition to being effective at manag-
ing interference, IRS-RSMA schemes are robust
to imperfect CSI, which makes them very suitable
for employment in UAV networks. For instance,
RSMA could enable multiple UAVs to communicate
efﬁciently with multiple ground users, whereas IRSs
pointed to the sky could guarantee a strong com-
munication link between users and UAVs. One can
also envision a CSI-robust swarm of UAVs equipped
with IRSs, with some UAVs active and others

passive, interacting with each other via RSMA. As
illustrated in Fig. 5a, in both examples, the UAVs
would be able to deliver high data rates seamlessly
with low impact from a possibly degraded CSI.

B. Enhanced High-Frequency Communication

5G has expanded its operating bandwidth by
adopting higher frequency bands above 6 GHz,
known as the millimeter-wave (mmWave) spectrum.
While 5G is expected to operate at frequencies not
higher than 100 GHz, 6G and beyond generations
are foreseen to go further and operate from the
upper band of the mmWave spectrum (100 GHz to
300 GHz), up to the terahertz (THz) spectrum (up
to 3 THz) [13]. However, due to the high signal
attenuation and absorption, operating at such high
frequencies becomes very challenging. The cover-
age range of mmWave and THz communication
can be improved by deploying a large number of
transmit antennas (hundreds or thousands). Never-
theless, the large number of RF chains required in
these large-scale arrays may lead to complicated
precoding design and excessive feedback overhead.
On the other hand, by deploying IRSs to induce
sharp beams directed towards the users, it becomes
possible to mitigate signal attenuation and extend
signal coverage. In turn, by leveraging the RSMA
technique, due to its robustness to imperfect CSI,

(c)(b)(a)REC4KLEO satelliteHigh-altitude UAVemploying IRSsenables seamlesscoverage to alpinistsClimb can bestreamed in ultrahigh definitionin real-timeEmergency servicescan be contacted wheneveran accident occurs16KRSMA THz transmitter withreduced hardware complexity3D hologramsoperating at THzfrequenciesIRSs assist THzcommunicationIRSs assist UAV servingusers through RSMAActive UAVPassive UAVequiped with IRSSwarm of UAVs enablespervasive coveragein crowded scenariosthe required CSI feedback overhead can be re-
duced without signiﬁcantly deteriorating the system
performance. These capabilities suggest that IRS-
RSMA schemes can help to reduce the required
number of active antennas and RF chains at the BS
and still deliver a good communication performance
with the beneﬁts of reducing the BS hardware
complexity. Moreover, since IRSs comprise only
low-power components, the energy required for op-
timizing the reﬂecting elements should be less than
the energy savings achieved with a fewer number
of power-hungry RF chains at the BS. Therefore,
as another beneﬁt, IRS-RSMA could also reduce
the overall energy consumption of mmWave and
THz systems. As illustrated in Fig. 5b, a BS of an
indoor THz IRS-RSMA system could support real-
time 3D holographic meetings in multiple rooms of
a commercial building and, at the same time, stream
16K resolution video to users’ laptops and advanced
smartphones.

C. Seamless Satellite Communication

Enabling seamless connectivity across the entire
Earth’s surface, from high altitude mountain ranges
to the middle of the oceans, by relying on terrestrial
and UAV networks alone may be unrealizable or too
costly. On the other hand, low earth orbit (LEO)
satellite networks can cover vast geographical areas
and potentially deliver high data rates to the most
remote and inhospitable regions of the globe [14],
[15]. Yet, LEO networks come with some draw-
backs. Speciﬁcally, due to the atmospheric gases,
rain, and cloud coverage, the signals transmitted and
received by satellites can suffer strong attenuation.
Moreover, due to long-distance signal travel, the
CSI available in satellites can become outdated.

IRS-RSMA strategies are also suited to cope with
these satellite-related communication issues. First,
by employing the RSMA technique, LEO satellites
become able to deliver high data rates to multiple
users even when the CSI is outdated. Second, by de-
ploying IRSs to boost the signal transmissions, it is
possible to mitigate the effects of atmospheric phe-
nomena. For example, high-altitude UAVs equipped
with IRSs could be deployed near cloud cover to
assist a LEO network to serve multiple alpinists via
RSMA in remote mountainous regions. This IRS-
assisted RSMA-LEO network would ensure high
data rates and reduce the probability of alpinists

7

ﬁnding themselves out of coverage. Such capabil-
ities would enable alpinists to stream their climb
in real-time even under adverse weather conditions.
These features could also save lives following acci-
dents. Fig. 5c illustrates this extreme scenario.

V. CHALLENGES, FUTURE DIRECTIONS AND
CONCLUDING REMARKS

We have demonstrated that the use of IRSs and
RSMA can bring mutual beneﬁts, in that IRSs can
help to address issues related to precoding design
and imperfect SIC in RSMA, and, reciprocally,
RSMA can bring robustness to the imperfect CSI
that is unavoidable in IRS-assisted communications.
However, both RSMA and the IRS technology are
still in their infancy, and there are still several open
problems that need to be solved before practical de-
ployment can happen. Speciﬁcally, more extensive
studies need to be carried out to determine the best
optimization strategies, the most appropriate IRS
architecture, and associated tradeoffs. Frequency-
selective fading in IRS-RSMA still needs to be
better investigated. Furthermore, due to the more
complex encoding,
IRS-RSMA schemes require
new signaling strategies to coordinate users, IRSs
and the BS, and extensive tests need to be performed
in real-world test-beds to conﬁrm the claimed gains.
The combination of IRS and RSMA is a research
area with exciting possibilities for future work. IRS-
RSMA contributions investigating the application
of different modulation techniques, aerial networks,
and THz communications, spanning from perfor-
mance analysis and resource allocation to channel
estimation strategies, are interesting and exciting
future directions. All in all, the full potential of the
interplay of IRSs and RSMA is yet to be realized.

REFERENCES

[1] Y. Mao, B. Clerckx, and V.O. Li, “Rate-splitting multiple access
for downlink communication systems: bridging, generalizing,
and outperforming SDMA and NOMA,” EURASIP J. Wireless
Commun. Network, May 2018.

[2] B. Clerckx, Y. Mao, R. Schober, E. Jorswieck, D. J. Love,
J. Yuan, L. Hanzo, G. Y. Li, E. G. Larsson, and G. Caire,
“Is NOMA efﬁcient in multi-antenna networks? A critical look
at next generation multiple access techniques,” IEEE Open J.
Commun. Soc., vol. 2, 2021, pp. 1310-1343.

[3] M. Di Renzo et al., “Smart radio environments empowered
by reconﬁgurable intelligent surfaces: How it works, state of
research, and the road ahead,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol.
38, no. 11, Nov. 2020, pp. 2450-2525.

Petar Popovski [F] (petarp@es.aau.dk) is with Aalborg University,
Denmark.

8

Constantinos B. Papadias [F] (cpapadias@acg.edu) is with the
American College of Greece, Greece.

[4] A. S. de Sena, D. Carrillo, F. Fang, P. H. J. Nardelli, D. B. da
Costa, U. S. Dias, Z. Ding, C. B. Papadias, and W. Saad, “What
role do intelligent reﬂecting surfaces play in multi-antenna non-
orthogonal multiple access?,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 27,
no. 5, Oct. 2020, pp. 24-31.

[5] A. Bansal, K. Singh, and C. -P. Li, “Analysis of hierarchical
rate splitting for intelligent reﬂecting surfaces-aided downlink
multiuser MISO communications,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc.,
vol. 2, 2021, pp. 785-798.

[6] T. Cover, “Broadcast channels,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol.

18, no. 1, Jan. 1972, pp. 2-14.

[7] A. Carleial, “Interference channels,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory,

vol. 24, no. 1, Jan. 1978, pp. 60-70.

[8] T. Han and K. Kobayashi, “A new achievable rate region for the
interference channel,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 27, no. 1,
Jan. 1981, pp. 49-60.

[9] M. Dajer, Z. Ma, L. Piazzi, N. Prasad, X.-F. Qi, B. Sheen, J.
Yang, and G. Yue, “Reconﬁgurable intelligent surface: Design
the channel – A new opportunity for future wireless networks,”
Digital Commun. Networks, 2021.

[10] Y. Liang, R. Long, Q. Zhang, J. Chen, H. V. Cheng, and H. Guo,
“Large intelligent surface/antennas (LISA): Making reﬂective
radios smart,” J. Commun. Inf. Networks, vol. 4, no. 2, June
2019, pp. 40-50.

[11] A. S. de Sena, F. R. M. Lima, D. B. da Costa, Z. Ding, P. H.
J. Nardelli, U. S. Dias, and C. B. Papadias, “Massive MIMO-
NOMA networks with imperfect SIC: Design and fairness en-
hancement,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 9, Jun.
2020, pp. 6100-6115.

[12] W. Jaafar, S. Naser, S. Muhaidat, P. C. Sofotasios, and H.
Yanikomeroglu, “Multiple access in aerial networks: From or-
thogonal and non-orthogonal to rate-splitting,” IEEE Open J. Veh.
Technol., vol. 1, 2020, pp. 372-392.

[13] K. Rikkinen, P. Kyosti, M. E. Leinonen, M. Berg, and A.
Parssinen, “THz radio communication: Link budget analysis
toward 6G,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 58, no. 11, Nov. 2020,
pp. 22-27.

[14] L. You, K. -X. Li, J. Wang, X. Gao, X. -G. Xia, and B.
Ottersten, “Massive MIMO transmission for LEO satellite com-
munications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 38, no. 8, Aug.
2020, pp. 1851-1865.

[15] B. Matthiesen, E. Bj¨ornson, E. De Carvalho, and P. Popovski,
“Intelligent reﬂecting surface operation under predictable re-
ceiver mobility: A continuous time propagation model,” IEEE
Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 2, Feb. 2021, pp. 216-220.

BIOGRAPHIES

Arthur
Sena
Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology, Finland.

(arthur.sena@lut.ﬁ)

Sousa

[M]

de

Pedro H. J. Nardelli
Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology, Finland.

(pedro.nardelli@lut.ﬁ)

[SM]

is with

is with

Daniel Benevides da Costa [SM] (danielbcosta@ieee.org) is with
the Technology Innovation Institute (TII), Abu Dhabi, United Arab
Emirates.

