Deformation of the myocardium during CPR 

Authors: Jafar Moradicheghamahi1, Gerard Fortuny1, Josep M. López1, Joan Herrero2, Dolors 
Puigjaner1 

1 Departament d’Enginyeria Informàtica i Matemàtiques, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Spain 
2 Departament d’Enginyeria Química, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Spain 

Abstract 

Cardiopulmonary  resuscitation  (CPR)  is  an  emergency  procedure  performed  on  patients  during 
cardiac  and  respiratory  arrest.  This  procedure  externally  activates  the  cardiac  and  respiratory 
systems via the delivery of chest compression and artificial ventilation. As the main purpose of CPR 
is to recirculate the blood flow, prediction of the myocardium behavior has great importance. This 
prediction allows us to have a better understanding of the needed force to recirculate blood without 
hurting  the  heart.  Finite  element  method  offer  the  possibility  of  noninvasive  quantification  of 
myocardial deformation. This method is attractive to use for the assessment of myocardial function. 

To investigate the behavior of the heart wall, a 3D model of thoracic organs has been prepared using 
medical images. In this study, to simulate the behavior of different organs, Code-Aster open software 
is used. For every organ, the material properties are defined. The most important parameters in the 
study  are  displacement,  normal  stress,  and  Von-Mises  stress  in  the  myocardium.  Using  these 
parameters, displacement and stress distribution have been predicted. 

Effects of the applied force on the chest during CPR and deformation of the myocardium have been 
predicted by the finite element model. A linear deformation is observable for each organ during force 
application.  Besides,  the  final  location  of  the  heart  and  ribs  and  also  involved  parameters  in 
predicting myocardium deformation are extracted from the model simulations. 

This finite element model enables us to have a good vision of the deformation of the myocardium 
during CPR. Using this method, it is possible to predict the deformation of every part of the heart, 
especially right and left ventricles. 

Keywords: Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation, Finite Element Method, Myocardium Deformation 

Introduction 

An adult heart beats approximately 100,000 times every day, 30 million times every year, and about 
2.5 billion times in a lifetime. [1]. Iin spite of having a small size, it circulates 7 m3 of blood daily, 2500 
m3 every year, and 200000 in an average lifetime[2]. Annually, about 275,000 Europeans experience 
cardiac arrest and receive cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), and only 29,000 discharged from 
the  hospital  [3].  For  this  reason,  cardiac  arrest  is  mentioned  as  the  main  cause  of  death.  [4]. 
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation, an immediate procedure for patients with cardiac arrest, has a high 

 
 
 
 
potential for  recirculation of  heart  and  air  in  the  lungs  by  compression of  the  chest and  artificial 
ventilation of the lungs [5]. In recent decades, CPR has become a significant emergency procedure to 
save  the  lives  of  patients  with  cardiac  arrest  [6].  Blood  flow  during  CPR  is  correlated  with  the 
compression depth [7]. The main purpose of CPR is to supply oxygenated blood to the myocardium 
and other organs, to fully restore the function of heart and brain. However, the basic physiological 
principles for the CPR life-saving process are just partially understood and often argumentative. [4]. 

The cost of numerical simulation is not high, it can test the system in different conditions, and it is 
able to predict parameters that are difficult to measure in the laboratory [8]. Numerical modeling of 
the myocardium is an acceptable tool in  understanding the mechanisms of healthy and abnormal 
behavior of the heart and considering the mechanical activity of tissue is an important feature of this 
modeling [9-11]. 

The myocardium is the thick muscular layer of the heart. it comprises muscle fibers, extracellular 
matrix, blood vessels, blood, and interstitial fluid [12]. In most models used for the left ventricular 
wall (LV) or other parts of the heart, the epicardium (outer layer) and endocardium (inner layer), 
which are much thinner than the myocardium, are neglected [13].  

Acceptable  computational  models  for  left  ventricular  behavior  can  be  developed  using  some 
simplifications in myocardial deformation. In such models, the myocardium is almost represented by 
a shape that can be defined by several parameters. In most cases, the shapes are symmetrical about 
the left ventricular axis. Examples of this class of models include cylindrical models [14], spherical 
models [15], and prolate spheroidal models [16]. With advances in technology, models based on the 
anatomy of the heart, the mechanism, and interactions of the cardiac system with geometric details 
are widely used and predict more realistic results. [17-19]. Usually, in these models, finite element 
method is applied, which by using a great number of freedom degrees, predict heart deformation and 
other desired variables. [20]. 

To enhance CPR safety, and have a reduction in occurrences of the relevant injuries, a wider vision of 
the  consequences  of  physiological  parameters  related  to  performing  CPR  must  be  provided. 
Therefore, precise and efficient tools for simulating and evaluating CPR results are needed to make 
the possibility to develop clinical guidelines and technological inventions. For this, there is a need for 
models which enable us to have a better understanding of the injury risks [21]. Despite the great wide 
range of studies on normal heart function and also deformation of the chest during CPR, do date there 
is no study concentrating on deformation of the myocardium during CPR. 

A comprehensive FEM model for chest and other organs provides an appropriate opportunity for the 
prediction of heart deformation during CPR. For this purpose, in the present study, a 3D dictionary 
type model from a 3D whole-body model was extracted to investigate the deformation of the heart 
and stress distribution during CPR. This model includes ribs, intercostal muscles, costal cartilages, 
sternum and heart. 

Problem statement 

The 3D model used in the simulation has been shown in Figure 1 (a) which includes different organs 
such as ribs and heart. In Figure 1 (b) detailed view of the heart has been presented. This model of 
the heart includes right and left atriums, right and left ventricles, and myocardium. In this study, all 

 
of the surrounding muscles and tissues were simulated as a “soft” part. Also, the heart was modeled 
in two parts; myocardium and blood. However, the effect of valves was neglected. 

Figure 1: Details of the simulated geometry for CPR 

The  finite  element  method  was  employed  to  provide  a  numerical  solution  for  the  governing 
equations. As illustrated in Figure 2, a grid consisting of 499943 nodes and 2937270 elements was 
used for the analysis. 75260 elements are 2D triangular and 2862010 elements are 3D tetrahedral.  

Figure 2: Schematic of the prepared grid for the whole model  

 
 
 
 
In this study, linear elastic models were applied for all materials. Due to its accuracy in predicting 
small  deformations  [22],  the  linear  model  was  preferred  to  non-linear  models  which  requires  a 
higher computational cost.  

As material properties depend on many factors such as age and gender, they are different in various 
publications.  Based  on  what  has  been  said  in  [23]  Young  module  was  1e6  Pa  for  the  heart  and 
Poisson's ratio  was 0.3 in the present study. Other organs’ properties have been shown in Table 1. It 
should be noted that the Young module value is not the same for different cartilages. The location of 
cartilages have been shown in Figure 1. 

Table 1: Material properties of different parts  

Organ 

Myocardium 

Bones 

Soft tissue 

Cartilage 1L, 1R 

Cartilage 2L, 2R, 3L, 3R 

Cartilage 4L, 4R, 5L, 5R 

Cartilage, 6L,6R, 7L, 7R, 8L, 
8R 

Young module 
(Pa) 

Poisson ratio 

Density (kg/m3) 

Reference 

1e6 

2e9 

9e4 

9e6 

8e7 

7e7 

4e7 

0.3 

0.2 

0.2 

0.3 

0.3 

0.3 

0.3 

2000 

1000 

1000 

1100 

1100 

1100 

1100 

[23] 

[24] 

[25] 

[26] 

[26] 

[26] 

[26] 

In the present model, the applied force has been defined on the sternum and in the perpendicular 
direction to the chest. For this purpose, as is illustrated in Figure 3 (a) with blue color, an area was 
modeled to apply the force. The value of the force was 1e6 N on the applied area of 498.68 mm2. To 
simulate CPR, some fixed areas are required. In order to this, an areas in the back of the chest were 
fixed. Also in this model, we fixed a part of the myocardium (blue area in Figure 3 (b)). 

 
 
Figure 3; (a): the area of the applied force (b): The fixed area of the myocardium 

The simulation was performed for 0.5 s and the defined time step was 0.05 s. In The following, results 
for four times during CPR have been discussed. 

Results  

In this study, using a model which includes ribs, intercostal muscles, costal cartilages, sternum, heart, 
and surrounding muscles, the CPR procedure was simulated numerically. As there are several organs 
in  the  model,  and  as  the  main  goal  of  CPR  is  recirculating blood  in  the  heart,  we  focused  on  the 
deformation of the myocardium in this study. To this purpose, three parameters were investigated; 
Displacement, normal stress, and von Mises stress. Results have been presented for four different 
times including 0.4, 0.45, and 0.5 s.  

With the intention of more accurate investigation, in addition to contours shown on the myocardium, 
some  contours  related  to  a  cross-section  of  the  myocardium  (as  shown  in  Figure  4)  have  been 
prepared. This cross-section was chosen to show right and left ventricles. 

 
 
Figure 4: Details of the cross-section 

As the right ventricle is the closest part of the heart to the sternum (where the force is applied), has 
the most deformation compared to other parts of the heart (2.3e -4 m as shown in Figure 5 and Figure 
6). In addition to the deformation of the right ventricle, the right atrium deformed considerably. The 
right parts of the heart must transmit blood to the lungs through pulmonary arteries to oxygenate it. 
Due to this fact, deformation of the right atrium and right ventricle has high importance. Also, based 
on the observation in Figure 6 there is a slight deformation in the interventricular septum which can 
help to flow the blood from the left ventricle to the aorta.  

Figure 5: Displacement contours for different times 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Displacement contours in cross-section for different times 

As evident in Figure 5 and Figure 6, due to the fixed area in the left side of the heart, the deformation 
of the left atrium and left ventricle is not considerable. After entering the right atrium, because of the 
one  direction  valves  function,  blood  can  move  only  in  one  direction.  Based  on  this  fact,  the 
deformation of the right atrium and right ventricle is sufficient to recirculate the blood and there is 
no necessity for the deformation of the left side of the heart. 

Normal stress and von Mises stress contours have been presented in Figure 7, Figure 8, and Figure 9. 
As  it is obvious in  Figure  7  and  at  t=0.5 s, the  maximum value of  the normal stress is in the  right 
ventricle wall (1.3 e +5 Pa). It worth to be noted that values of normal stress are noticeable in the 
right  atrium  and  left  ventricle.  By  more  investigation  in  Figure  8,  it  could  be  concluded  that  the 
maximum value of the stress is in the right ventricle and close to the interventricular septum. Another 
finding based on Figure 8 is the difference between stress values for the inner and outer layers of the 
myocardium. It  is observable that the outer layer  of the heart muscle is affected by  applied force 
during CPR significantly more than the inner layer.  

Figure 7: Normal stress distribution in the myocardium for different times 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Normal stress distribution in the cross-section for different times 

In  Figure  9  von  Mises  stress  contours  have  been  presented  for  different  times.  Similar  to  normal 
stress, the maximum value for von Mises stress is for t=0.5 s and in the right ventricle. In this figure, 
the influence of the applied force on the other parts of the heart is evident. This influence is such that 
in the left atrium there are some areas with high values of von Mises stress. 

Figure 9: Von Mises stress distribution in the myocardium for different times 

Conclusion  

The main purpose of CPR is to recirculate the blood in the heart. In this study using FEM, the CPR 
procedure was simulated on a realistic model consisting of different organs in the human chest. It 
was observed that the maximum displacement is in the right ventricle wall which helps to flow the 
blood to lungs. Also, displacement of the interventricular septum is notable which is helpful to send 
blood from the left article to different parts of the body through the aorta. The maximum value of the 
stress is in the area of the right ventricle near to interventricular septum. 

In a conclusion, it can be claimed that this model has a great potential to predict deformation and 
stress distribution in the heart and other parts of the human chest during CPR. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
References  

1. 

2. 
3. 
4. 

5. 

6. 
7. 

8. 

9. 
10. 
11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 
22. 

23. 

24. 
25. 

26. 

Baillargeon, B., et al., The living heart project: a robust and integrative simulator for human heart function. European Journal of 
Mechanics-A/Solids, 2014. 48: p. 38-47. 
Kumar, V., et al., Robbins and Cotra n Pathologic Basis of Disease. Elsevier. New York, USA, 2010. 
Lurie, K.G., et al., The physiology of cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Anesthesia & Analgesia, 2016. 122(3): p. 767-783. 
Zhang, G., et al., A mechanical chest compressor closed-loop controller with an effective trade-off between blood flow improvement 
and ribs fracture reduction. Medical & biological engineering & computing, 2015. 53(6): p. 487-497. 
Thielen, M., et al., An innovative design for cardiopulmonary resuscitation manikins based on a human-like thorax and embedded 
flow sensors. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part H: Journal of Engineering in Medicine, 2017. 231(3): 
p. 243-249. 
Bush, C.M., et al., Pediatric injuries from cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Annals of emergency medicine, 1996. 28(1): p. 40-44. 
Babbs, C.F., et al., Relationship of blood pressure and flow during CPR to chest compression amplitude: evidence for an effective 
compression threshold. Annals of emergency medicine, 1983. 12(9): p. 527-532. 
Moradicheghamahi, J., J. Sadeghiseraji, and M. Jahangiri, Numerical solution of the Pulsatile, non-Newtonian and turbulent blood 
flow in a patient specific elastic carotid artery. International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, 2019. 150: p. 393-403. 
Cowin, S.C. and J.D. Humphrey, Cardiovascular soft tissue mechanics. 2001: Springer. 
Humphrey, J., Cardiovascular Solid Mechanics: Cells, Tissues and Organs. 35 Springer-Verlag. New York, 2002. 
Hunter, P.J. and B.H. Smaill, The analysis of cardiac function: a continuum approach. Progress in biophysics and molecular 
biology, 1988. 52(2): p. 101-164. 
Huyghe, J.M., et al., A two-phase finite element model of the diastolic left ventricle. Journal of biomechanics, 1991. 24(7): p. 527-
538. 
Doyle, M.G., Simulation of myocardium motion and blood flow in the heart with fluid-structure interaction. 2011, Université 
d'Ottawa/University of Ottawa. 
Moulton, M.J. and T.W. Secomb, A low-order model for left ventricle dynamics throughout the cardiac cycle. Mathematical 
medicine and biology: a journal of the IMA, 2013. 30(1): p. 45-63. 
Lumens, J., et al., Three-wall segment (TriSeg) model describing mechanics and hemodynamics of ventricular interaction. Annals 
of biomedical engineering, 2009. 37(11): p. 2234-2255. 
Regen, D.M., Myocardial stress equations: fiberstresses of the prolate spheroid. Journal of theoretical biology, 1984. 109(2): p. 
191-215. 
Göktepe, S. and E. Kuhl, Electromechanics of the heart: a unified approach to the strongly coupled excitation–contraction 
problem. Computational Mechanics, 2010. 45(2): p. 227-243. 
Kerckhoffs, R.C., et al., Coupling of a 3D finite element model of cardiac ventricular mechanics to lumped systems models of the 
systemic and pulmonic circulation. Annals of biomedical engineering, 2007. 35(1): p. 1-18. 
Nordsletten, D., et al., Coupling multi-physics models to cardiac mechanics. Progress in biophysics and molecular biology, 2011. 
104(1-3): p. 77-88. 
Moulton, M.J., B.D. Hong, and T.W. Secomb, Simulation of left ventricular dynamics using a low-order mathematical model. 
Cardiovascular engineering and technology, 2017. 8(4): p. 480-494. 
Katrínardóttir, H., Finite element modeling of chest compressions in cpr. 2017. 
Mohamed, A., C. Davatzikos, and R. Taylor. A combined statistical and biomechanical model for estimation of intra-operative 
prostate deformation. in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. 2002. 
Springer. 
Hiesinger, W., et al., Myocardial tissue elastic properties determined by atomic force microscopy after stromal cell–derived factor 
1α angiogenic therapy for acute myocardial infarction in a murine model. The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery, 
2012. 143(4): p. 962-966. 
Pezowicz, C. and M. Głowacki, The mechanical properties of human ribs in young adult. Lateral (n= 1), 2012. 10: p. 8. 
Innocenti, B., et al., Automatic characterization of soft tissues material properties during mechanical tests. Muscles, ligaments 
and tendons journal, 2017. 7(4): p. 529. 
Forman, J.L. and R.W. Kent, Modeling costal cartilage using local material properties with consideration for gross heterogeneities. 
Journal of biomechanics, 2011. 44(5): p. 910-916. 

 
