A Probabilistic Framework for Power System Large-Disturbance 

Global Instability Risk Assessment in the Presence of Renewable 

Wind Generation 

Umair Shahzad 

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,  

University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA. 

Email: umair.shahzad@huskers.unl.edu 

Abstract 

The increasing demand of large scale wind integration in the conventional power system brings a 

lot  of  challenges.  One  of  them  is  the  stability  of  the  power  system  when  subjected  to  a  large 

disturbance,  such  as  a  fault.  This  paper  proposes  a  probabilistic  risk-based  framework  for 

computing a global instability index, incorporating angle, voltage, and frequency stability, for a 

large disturbance. Moreover, the impact of high wind penetration on this index is also observed. 

Case  studies  and  associated  simulations  are  conducted  on  the  IEEE  39-bus  test  system  using 

DIgSILENT PowerFactory software. The results show that higher penetration of wind generation 

enhances  the  global  stability  of  the  power  system.  Moreover,  the  impact  of  changing  system 

generation and load is studied on the global instability index. 

Keywords: fault, probabilistic, renewable energy, risk, stability, wind 

1.  Introduction 

Since the early 20th century, power system stability has been documented as a noteworthy subject 

in securing power system planning and operation [1-2]. Most of the blackouts caused by power 

system  instability  have  demonstrated  the  significance  of  this  phenomenon  [3-4].  Historically, 

transient stability has been the leading stability issue in most power networks. However, with the 

introduction of novel technologies and increasing load demands, several kinds of instability have 

arisen.  For  instance,  voltage  stability,  frequency  stability  and  interarea  oscillations  have  gained 

importance. This has necessitated an understanding of the basics of power system stability. A lucid 

concept of various kinds of instability is vital for the acceptable operation of power systems. [5] has 

broadly classified power system stability into three major kinds: frequency, voltage, and rotor angle. 

This is pictorially shown in Fig. 1. A brief description of these classifications follows. 

Frequency stability is the ability of a power system to maintain steady frequency after a severe 

system stress causes a substantial disparity between generation and load. It relies on the ability to 

maintain equilibrium between system generation and demand, with minimum inadvertent loss of 

load. Instability can manifest itself in the shape of sustained frequency swings, which subsequently 

cause tripping of generating units and loads. 

Figure 1.  Classification of power system stability 

Voltage stability is the ability of a power system to maintain steady voltages at all buses in the 

system, after being subjected to a disturbance from a given initial operating condition. It depends 

on the ability to maintain equilibrium between system demand and system generation. Instability 

may manifest itself in the shape of a continuing decrease or increase of voltages at some or all buses. 

The culprit for voltage instability is typically the loads. Large-disturbance voltage stability is the 

ability of a power system to maintain steady voltages after the occurrence of large disturbances, 

such as three-phase faults. The inherent features of system and load are major determinants of this 

ability.  The  period  of  interest  typically  ranges  from  a  few  seconds  to  tens  of  minutes.  Small-

disturbance  voltage  stability  is  the  system’s  ability  to  maintain  steady  voltages  when  small 

disturbances, such as steady changes in network load, take place.  

Rotor  angle  stability  is  the  ability  of  synchronous  machines  in  a  power  system  to  maintain 

synchronism  when  a  disturbance  is  applied.  Instability  can  result  when  the  angular  swing  of 

generators causes a loss in synchronism. Small-signal rotor angle stability deals with stability under 

small disturbances, such as minor load variations. Large-disturbance rotor angle stability, or much 

more commonly called transient stability, focuses on the ability of the power system to maintain 

 
synchronism when a severe disturbance, such as a three-phase short circuit on a transmission line, 

is applied. The resulting system response constitutes large excursions of generator rotor angles and 

is affected by the nonlinear power-angle relation. Transient stability relies, for the most part, on the 

initial  operating  state  of  the  system  and  the  severity  of  the  disturbance.  Instability  is  normally 

manifested in the form of aperiodic angular separations which are due to inadequate synchronizing 

torque. The time range for transient stability studies is about 3 to 5 seconds after the disturbance 

has occurred. It may range up to 10-20 seconds for much larger systems with leading inter-area 

swings. 

In  conventional  power  system  stability  analysis,  deterministic  stability  limit  is  used  which 

depends on the worst-case scenario. This confines the feasible stable operating condition and thus, 

restricts the technical capabilities of the power generation to meet the load demand [6]. Moreover, 

the deterministic approach for power system stability assessment does not give any information on 

the  status  of  present  operating  point  but  only  provides  information  regarding  the  stability  or 

instability  of  a  current  condition  of  operation  [7].  Moreover,  with  the  increasing  usage  of 

renewables such as wind and photovoltaics (PV), in addition to load uncertainties, assessing the 

stability in a deterministic manner is no longer pertinent [8].  

2. Literature Review and Background 

 [9] elaborates some characteristics of the Tunisian power system transient stability. Angular 

stability is analyzed using the fault clearing time (FCT). Many contingency cases are considered: 

the  outage  of  the  largest  generator  and  loss  of  load,  along  with  insufficient  operation  of  power 

system stabilizers (PSS). Although, the work considers different FCTs but only a three-phase fault 

at a specific line is chosen. Moreover, the integration of any renewable energy source is not part of 

this work. [10] proposes a probabilistic framework for power system transient stability assessment 

(TSA)  with  high  renewable  generation  penetration.  The  presented  framework  enables 

comprehensive calculation of transient stability of power systems with abridged inertia. A major 

drawback of the work is the ignorance of bus faults and only considering three-phase line faults. 

Moreover, impact of different wind technologies and penetration levels are not considered. [11] 

presents a study of the effects of some important power system parameters on transient stability. 

The  parameters  considered  for  this  assessment  include  fault  location,  load  increment,  machine 

damping factor, FCT and generator synchronous speed. The work only considers three-phase line 

faults and does not study the influence of renewable generation integration on transient stability.  

The transient stability analysis including wind power intermittency and volatility is proposed in 

[12]. The kinds of wind turbines considered in this work include the doubly fed induction generator 

(DFIG)  and  direct-driven  permanent  magnet  synchronous  generator  (PMSG).  The  Monte  Carlo 

(MC) simulation technique, joint with two evaluation indices, is tested on the IEEE 39-bus test 

system and a real China-Jiangxi power grid to investigate the impacts of intermittency and volatility 

of wind. Although, the work incorporates the effect of wake effect on transient stability, but it only 

considers a three- phase fault at a specific bus, which is cleared after a pre-selected time. [13] uses 

risk-based approach to analyze the transient stability of power networks incorporating wind farms. 

The proposed methodology of transient stability risk assessment is based on the MC method and 

eventually, an inclusive risk indicator, based on angle and voltage stability, has been devised. The 

work  only  considers  three  phase  line  faults  and  does  not  study  the  impact  of  different  wind 

technologies. In [14], the abridged version of an altered single machine infinite bus (SMIB) system, 

with a DFIG-based wind farm integration, is analyzed using the transient features of the DFIG-

based wind farm in the diverse periods of a fault.  The assessment specifies that the working of 

synchronous generator can be either enhanced or depreciated with DFIG integration. Only a three-

phase fault is considered on a specific line which clears after a pre-selected time. 

In [15], the transient and voltage stability with high penetration levels of the diverse distributed 

generations (DGs) are examined. With each penetration level of DGs, the performance of power 

system is analyzed, and results are equated with the performance of power system base case (no 

DG  integration).  Only  specific  fault  types  and  fault  locations  are  considered.  [16]  explores  the 

voltage  stability  of  wind  power  grid  integration.  Furthermore,  static  synchronous  compensator 

(STATCOM) and its sizing approach are proposed to improve the voltage stability of wind farm 

integrated grid. The results are valid for a specific fault and FCT. An approach for examining short-

term voltage stability of power system incorporating induction motors is proposed in [17]. This 

approach  considers  one  generator  as  the  reference  machine  and  the  relative  angle  difference  is 

considered  as  a  differential  variable.  Besides,  a  mathematical  approach  of  differential  equation 

series is devised in the polar coordinates. 

 [18] studies the impact on transient and frequency stability for high wind penetration. DFIG 

wind generation is used and a sensitivity analysis is conducted for various wind generator loading 

conditions. The study proves that transient stability evaluation is highly dependent on fault location 

in the system. Frequency stability analysis shows that areas with reduced inertia are most impacted 

by generator outage events. [19] studies the impact of a large PV plant on the frequency stability of 

a  power  network  when  subjected  to  small  and  large  disturbances.  With  the  help  of  automatic 

generation control (AGC) and phasor measurement unit (PMU) data, the power generation levels 

of conventional generators are attuned to alleviate the deviations in system frequency. Additionally, 

the impact of increased PV penetration is inspected. Only a three-phase fault with a fixed FCT is 

considered. 

In risk based stability assessment, the risk index is computed quantitatively for each possible 

contingency and its associated impact (severity) [20]. Some research work has been done in this 

area. For instance, [13] proposes a methodology to compute transient instability risk index based 

on angle and voltage instabilities. Although, the work considers the probabilistic nature of the FCT 

but the main drawback is the consideration of pre-determined fault locations of lines and associated 

probabilities.  [21]  proposes  a  methodology  to  compute  the  risk  of  transient  instability  of  an 

operating point  in  a  power  network.  The  work  includes  various  cost  parameters  to  quantify the 

consequences of the risk. 

From the literature review, some significant findings are obtained. Most works on probabilistic 

large-signal short term stability deals with only three phase faults. Although, the assumption may 

be suitable since it is the most severe fault, other faults cannot be ignored as their probabilities are 

higher,  and  must  be  included  in  probabilistic  stability  assessment.  [22-23]  indicate  the  need  to 

establish a comprehensive approach for power system stability incorporating all stabilities: angle, 

voltage and frequency. [24-26] indicate that risk-based stability approach is an open area of research 

and  requires  further  work.  Moreover,  the  impact  of  reduced  inertia  systems  (i.e.  higher  wind 

penetration) on power system stability is of great implication [27, 28]. Thus, the key contribution 

of  this  paper  is  to  present  a  probabilistic  approach  for  power  system  large-disturbance  global 

instability risk assessment, in the presence of renewable wind generation, incorporating all kinds of 

stability (angle, voltage and frequency).  

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 3 discusses the mathematical formulation 

of risk-based global instability index for a large disturbance. Section 4 elaborates the procedure for 

computing  this  index.  Section  5  briefly  discussed  the  modelling  approach  for  synchronous 

generators and DFIGs. Section 6 discuss case studies and associated simulations on the IEEE 39-

bus  test  system.  Section  7  presents  the  results  and  associated  discussion.  Finally,  Section  8 

concludes the paper with a suggested future research direction. 

3.  Mathematical Formulation of Risk-based Global Instability Index 

This section will discuss the formulation of risk-based global instability index. The product of 

probability  of  an  unforeseen  event  and  its  impact  is  commonly  known  as  risk,  which  is 

mathematically defined as (1) [29, 30]. The reader can refer to [31] and [32] for detailed theory on 

risk and its applications in power systems. 

(1) 

where

is  the  forecasted  operating  condition  at  time  t; 

is  the  jth  possible  loading  level; 

is  the  probability  of

given

has  occurred,  which  is  obtained  using  a 

probability  distribution  for  the  possible  load  levels; 

is  the  ith  contingency  and 

is  its 

probability; and

quantifies the impact of

occurring under the jth possible operating 

condition.  

Let 

be the risk index for angle instability, i.e.  

Where 

is given by  

(2) 

(3) 

, 

, and 

denote the probability of fault occurrence, fault location, and fault 

type, respectively for the ith MC sample. It is assumed that fault can occur on any line on the system 

and at any point along the line, hence, 

,rr,,,()P()(P(|)(,))tfitjtfitjijRiskXEXXSevEX=,tfX,tjXr,,P(|)tjtfXX,tjX,tfXiErP()iE,(,)itjSevEXiE,,,,1()Pr()((|)(,))NAtfitjtfitjijRXFPXXSevAX==Pr()iFPr()Pr()Pr()Pr()ioiLiTiFFFF=Pr()oiFPr()LiFPr()TiFAR   
             
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where 

 denotes total number of lines in the power system. 

(4) 

(5) 

denotes  probability  of  fault  type  and  will  be  chosen  based  on  discrete  distribution  as 

described in Section 4. 

  is  the  forecasted  operating  condition  at  time  t; 

is  the  jth  possible  loading  level; 

is the probability of this condition; 

is the ith fault and 

is its probability; and 

quantifies the impact of 

occurring under the jth possible operating condition. It is 

assumed that 

 denotes the severity under peak loading condition. For simplicity, it is 

represented by 

in the following equation. 

where TSIi is the angle stability index i.e. 

, 

(6) 

(7) 

Where 

 is the maximum angle difference between any two synchronous generators after the 

fault at ith line. A negative TSIi indicates an unstable system. As an illustration, 

 is indicated 

on Fig. 2 for a three-phase short circuit fault at Line 16-17 (line between bus 16 and bus 17) for 

the IEEE 39-bus system. The fault occurs at time t=1.0 s and clears at time t=1.1 s. 

1Pr()oiLFN=LN1Pr()100LiF=Pr()TiF,tfX,tjXr,,P(|)tjtfXXiFPr()iF,(,)itjSevAXiF,(,)itjSevAX()iSevA||, if  < 0()0, if 0iiiiTSITSISevATSI=maxmax360360iiiTSI−=+11iTSI−maximax 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Illustration of maximum rotor angle difference 

Let 

be the risk index for voltage instability, i.e.  

quantifies the impact of 

occurring under the jth possible operating condition. It is 

assumed that 

 denotes the severity under peak loading condition. For simplicity, it is 

represented by 

in the following equation.  

(8) 

indicates the voltage deviation for bus k, i.e. 

(9) 

(10) 

Where

  is the nominal voltage (1 pu) of each bus; 

is the post-fault steady-state voltage at 

kth bus; Nb denotes total number of buses in the system, N denotes number of MC samples. 

As an illustration, 

 (for Bus 20 of IEEE 39-bus system) is marked in Fig. 3 for a three-phase 

short circuit fault at Line 16-17. The fault occurs at time t=1.0 s and clears at time t=1.1 s. 

maxVR,,,,11()Pr()((|)(,))bNNVtfitjtfitjikjRXFPXXSevVX===,(,)itjSevVXiF,(,)itjSevVX()iSevV| |, if || 5%() 0, if || < 5%dkdkibdkVVSevVkNV=dkVdkratedkVVV=−ratedVkVkV 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Illustration of post-fault steady state voltage 

Let 

be the risk index for frequency instability, i.e.  

(11) 

quantifies the impact of 

occurring under the jth possible operating condition. It is 

assumed that 

 denotes the severity under peak loading condition. For simplicity, it is 

represented by 

in the following equation.  

(12) 

denotes  the  post-fault  deviation  of  frequency  from  nominal  frequency  (60  Hz)  for  kth 

generator; Ng denotes total number of generators in the system. To illustrate, 

is marked in Fig. 

4 for a three-phase short circuit fault at Line 16-17 (IEEE 39-bus system). The fault occurs at time 

t=1.0 s and clears at time t=1.1 s.  

kVFR,,,,11()Pr()((|)(,))gNNFtfitjtfitjikjRXFPXXSevFX===,(,)itjSevFXiF,(,)itjSevFX()iSevF|| , if || 0.5() 0, if || <0.5dGkdGkikgdGkffHzSevFGNfHz=dGkfdGjf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Figure 4.  Illustration of post-fault electrical frequency deviation 

Let 

,

and 

be  the  mean  (average)  values  of 

,

and 

,  respectively. 

Mathematically, 

(13) 

(14) 

(15) 

Where 

,

, 

 are the values of 

,

and 

for nth MC sample. 

Let G be the global instability risk index, i.e., 

(16) 

4.  Computation Procedure 

dGkfAMRVMRFMRARVRFR1NAnnAMRRN==1NVnnVMRRN==1NFnnFMRRN==AnRVnRFnRARVRFRmax{,,}AMVMFMGRRR= 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There are various factors which are involved in probabilistic TSA of power systems, such as 

fault  type,  fault  location,  and  FCT.  Suitable  distributions  are  used  to  model  these  factors.  The 

modeling approaches are described as follows. Normally, shunt faults, such as three-phase (LLL), 

double-line-to-ground (LLG), line-to-line (LL) and single-line-to-ground (LG) short circuits, are 

considered for evaluating probabilistic transient stability. A discrete distribution is normally used 

to model the fault type. Based on past system statistics, a usual practice is to select the probability 

of LLL, LLG, LL and LG short circuits, as 0.05, 0.1, 0.15 and 0.7, respectively [33]. This paper 

uses  the  same  approach.  The  probability  distribution  of  fault  location  on a  transmission  line is 

usually assumed to be uniform, i.e., the fault occurs with equal probability at any point along any 

line of the test network [10]. This paper uses the same approach. The procedure of fault clearing 

constitutes of three stages: fault detection, relay operation and breaker operation. If the primary 

protection and breakers are fully reliable, the clearing time is the only uncertain entity. A Normal 

distribution is generally used to model this time [10]. In this paper, fault is applied at 1 s and it is 

cleared, after a mean time of 0.2 s (12 cycles for a 60 Hz system) and standard deviation of 0.005s 

(based on the Normal distribution). The detailed computation procedure is shown in Fig. 5. In the 

first step, load flow is run on the base case under normal condition, i.e., without any fault. Then, a 

random line is selected for a fault. The line is selected based on uniform distribution as described 

above. Then, fault type and fault location on the line are selected. Fault in then cleared based on 

FCT Normal distribution. The transient stability time domain simulation is done for 10 s (which 

is usually the time for large disturbance power system stability study). After making sure that there 

are enough samples for convergence, risk indices for angle, voltage, and frequency are computed. 

Eventually, global instability risk index is computed. In this work, it was found that 30,000 MC 

samples are enough for convergence. The value of mean was used as the convergence criteria. The 

values of RAM, RVM, RFM, and G against N are shown in Table 1. From this Table, it is evident that 

30,000  samples  are  sufficient  to  use  in  MC  simulation.  This  is  because  further  increasing  the 

samples does not change the mean values:

,

,

and G. Thus, convergence is achieved. 

AMRVMRFMRFigure 5. Procedure for computing G 

Table 1. Values of G against N 

N 

1,000 

5,000 

30,000 

50,000 

RAM 

0.33 

0.35 

0.36 

0.36 

RVM 

0.25 

0.26 

0.27 

0.27 

RFM 

0.25 

0.27 

0.29 

0.29 

G 

0.33 

0.35 

0.36 

0.36 

5. Modeling of Generation Sources 

A. Synchronous Generator 

Standard 6th order model is used for modeling all synchronous generators. All synchronous 

machines  include  (TGOV1)  turbine  governor,  (IEEEX1)  exciter  and  (STAB1)  power  system 

stabilizer. The associated mathematical model for a standard 6th order synchronous generator is 

given by following equations [34]. 

(17) 

()JmcodTMMDdt=−−− 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(18) 

(19) 

(20) 

(21) 

(22) 

Where 

is generator inertia constant; 

is mechanical torque; 

 is electromagnetic torque; D 

is damping coefficient; 

is rotor speed; 

is synchronous speed; 

 is field voltage; 

 and 

are d and q axis components of  transient electric potential; 

and 

 are d and q axis 

components  of  subtransient  electric  potential; 

,

,

,

,

,

  are  d  and  q  axis 

synchronous reactance, transient reactance and subtransient reactance, respectively; 

 ,

are  d  and  q  axis  transient  time  constants,  and 

,

  are  d  and  q  axis  subtransient  time 

constants. 

C. Doubly Fed Induction Generator (DFIG) 

A reduced 3rd order model, which neglects the stator transients, is used to represent DFIGs. 

The model has  a structure  like that proposed by  WECC [35] and  IEC  [36].  Ignoring the stator 

current dynamics, the mathematical equations governing the DFIG model are as follows [37]. 

(23) 

(24) 

(25) 

(26) 

oddt=−''(')'qdofddddqdETExxIEdt=−−−'''''''(''')'''qqdoqdddqdodEdETExxIETdtdt=−−−++'''(')dqodqqqdETExxIdt=−+−'''''''(''')'''ddqodqqqdqodEdETExxIETdtdt=−−−++JTmMcMofdE'dE'qE''dE''qEdx'dx''dxqx'qx''qx'doT'qoT''doT''qoT11[(')]dmdqssqsqrmrbodeLeXXisevLLdtT−=−−+−+11[(')]qmqdssdsdrmrbodeLeXXisevLLdtT+−=−−−+1[()()]2rtwtwtwtrddsqqsgdKDeieidtH+=+−−'dssdsqsdvriXie=−++ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(27) 

(28) 

(29) 

Where 

,

are d and q components of internal voltage; 

,

 are active and reactive power of 

DFIG  absorbed  by  the  network; 

,

are  open-circuit  and  short-circuit  reactance; 

is  the 

transient open-circuit time constant; Hg is generator inertia constant; 

,

,

are system base 

speed, synchronous speed and rotor speed, respectively; s is generator slip; 

is the shaft twist 

angle (radians); 

,

 are the shaft stiffness and mechanical damping coefficients;

,

 are 

stator voltages;

,

 are rotor voltages; 

,

are stator currents; 

,

are rotor currents; 

is 

stator resistance; 

,

are magnetizing and rotor inductances. 

6.  Case Studies and Simulations 

The well-known IEEE 39-bus test transmission system, also known as the 10-machine New 

England  test  system,  operating  at  345  kV,  was  used  to  conduct  the  required  simulations.  The 

numerical data and parameters were taken from [38]. This system is a good choice for the study as 

it has been widely used by various researchers for studying large disturbance stability phenomenon 

in  power  transmission  systems  [39-41].  The  system  one-line  diagram  is  shown  in  Fig.  6.  The 

network consists of 10 synchronous generators, 34 transmission lines and 12 transformers. It has 

19  constant  impedance  loads  totaling  6097.1  MW.  The  installed  capacity  of  the  generators  is 

6140.81 MW. Transmission lines are modelled using the standard approach of equivalent pi circuit 

of a long transmission line. Every circuit breaker is represented by an ideal switch which can open 

at  current  zero  crossings.  All  wind  generators  are  assumed  to  be  operating  at  their  maximum 

outputs. This is a reasonable assumption as majority of stability issues can be investigated under 

this scenario, due to maximum acceleration of wind generators [42]. Thus, no variations in wind 

generation has been considered in this work. Initial operating conditions were obtained based on 

load flow analysis. Further, it is assumed the system load is at its peak value. Moreover, the period 

of transient stability (10 s) makes variation of load irrelevant as load changes are normally recorded 

at every 10 or 15-minute intervals. All time-domain (dynamic) simulations are RMS simulations 

'qssqsdsqvriXie=−−+wdsdsqsqsdrdrqrqrPvivivivi=+−−wqsdsdsqsQvivi=−deqewPwQX'XoTbsrtwtwKtwDdsvqsvdrvqrvdsiqsidriqrisrmLrL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
which are performed with the help of DIgSILENT PowerFactory commercial software (version 

2018) [43].  

Figure 6.  IEEE 39-bus test system 

7.  Results and Discussion 

Based  on  the  computation  procedure  described  in  Section  4,  values  of  RAM,  RVM,  RFM,  and 

eventually  G  were  computed.  In  the  next  step,  synchronous  generation  was  replaced  by  wind 

generation and corresponding values of G were computed. The penetration level in this paper is 

defined as follows. 

(30) 

To achieve the required penetration levels, selected synchronous generators (SGs) are replaced by 

renewable generation sources. Table 2 shows the generators which are replaced by renewable wind 

generations to achieve the required penetration level. 

Table 2. Description of penetration levels 

DFIG Penetration level (%) 

SGs replaced 

25 

50 

80 

G1, G3 

G1, G3, G5, G9, G10 

G1, G3, G4, G5, G6, G7, G9, G10 

Total renewable generation (MW)% Penetration level=100%Total system generation (MW) 
   
 
 
For instance, 25% DFIG penetration means that equivalent amount of synchronous generation (G1 

and  G3)  in  the  system  is  replaced  by  DFIG  (with  the  same  MW  and  MVA  rating).  Similar 

procedure is used to achieve other penetration levels. Fig. 7 shows the value of G for each MC 

sample. From Fig. 7, a distribution can be derived which is shown in. This is a Normal (Gaussian) 

Distribution with a mean value of 0.36 and a standard deviation of 0.05. Similar distributions for 

G are obtained for other cases as shown in Figs. 8-10. 

Figure 7. Variation of G with N (base case) 

Figure 8. Normal distribution (mean 0.36) of G (base case) 

 
 
 
Figure 9. Normal distribution (mean 0.32) of G (25% wind)  

Figure 10. Normal distribution (mean 0.29) of G (50% wind) 

 
 
 
Figure 11. Normal distribution (mean 0.25) of G (80% wind)  

From Figs. 8-11, value of G can easily be computed, i.e., the mean values of the corresponding 

Normal distribution. These values are shown in Table 3 and graphed in Fig. 12. 

Table 3. Values of G for different cases 

Case type  G 

Base case  0.36 

25% wind  0.32 

50% wind  0.29 

80% wind  0.25 

 
 
Figure 12. Variation of G with wind penetration 

It is evident from Fig. 12, that the addition of DFIG in conventional power system (having 

only synchronous generation) improves the overall system stability. This is because the value of 

G decreases with increasing wind penetration. A possible reason is the superior reactive power 

control capabilities of DFIG during faults.  

It is of great interest to observe the trend of increasing system generation and load on the 

value  of  G.  Fig.  13  shows  the  impact  of  increasing  system  generation  (keeping  system  load 

constant) on G. As system generation is increased, value of G starts to decrease. Hence, system 

tends to be less risky with respect to stability if system generation is plentiful. However, adding 

generation is expensive and care must be taken before doing that. It must be made sure that cost-

benefit analysis is conducted before adding new generation n the system. Fig. 14 shows the impact 

of increasing system load (keeping system generation constant) on G. As system load rises, there 

is a sharp hike in the value of G. This is understandable as there is not adequate generation to fulfil 

the system load demand. This makes the system riskier with respect to stability when there is a 

fault. Hence, power system operator must exercise caution to assure that critical loss of load does 

not occurs and if does occur, it must be restored as quickly as possible. 

 
Figure 13. Variation of G with increasing system generation 

Figure 14. Variation of G with increasing system load 

8.  Conclusion and Future Work  

The  work  proposed  a  global  instability  risk  index  for  a  power  system  in  the  presence  of 

renewable wind generation. IEEE 39-bus test system was used to conduct required simulations. 

The results showed  that  adding  DFIG wind penetration enhances the overall stability  of power 

system  under  fault  conditions.  Also,  it  was  determined  that  increasing  system  generation  is 

beneficial for power system stability. On the contrary, decreasing system load is detrimental for 

power  system  stability.  Moreover,  the  work  highlighted  the  significance  of  using  risk-based 

 
 
 
 
stability  criterion  in  planning  and  operation  procedures  of  a  typical  power  system.  As  a  future 

work, the impact of PV renewable generation can be observed on the proposed global instability 

index. Moreover, additional indices  can be devised for  quantifying the global instability index, 

incorporating both small and large disturbances. Multiple contingencies, including generator and 

transformer contingencies, can be considered to assess the overall risk-based system instability. 

 References 

      [1] C. P. Steinmetz, "Power control and stability of electric generating stations," Transactions of 

the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, vol. XXXIX, pp. 1215–1287, Jul. 1920. 

[2] AIEE Subcommittee on interconnections and stability factors, "First report of power system 

stability," Transactions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 261-

282, Feb. 1937. 

[3] G. S. Vassell, "Northeast blackout of 1965," IEEE Power Engineering Review, vol. 11, no. 1, 

pp. 4–8, Jan. 1991. 

[4] S. F. B. Shakil, N. Husain, M. D. Wasim, and S. Junaid, "Improving the voltage stability and 

performance  of  power  networks  using  power  electronics  based  FACTS  controllers,"  in  2014 

International Conference on Energy Systems and Policies, pp. 1-6. 

[5] P. Kundur et al., "Definition and classification of power system stability," IEEE Transactions 

on Power Systems, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1387-1401, May 2004. 

[6] K. Morison, "Power system security in the new market environment: Future directions," in 

2002 IEEE Power and Energy Society Summer Meeting, pp. 1416-1417.  

[7] M. Mohammadi and G. B. Gharehpetian, "Power system on-line static security assessment by 

using multi class support vector machines,"  Journal of Applied Sciences, vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 2226-

2233, Nov. 2008. 

[8] E. B. Elghali, M. Marsadek, and A. K. Ramasamy, " Risk of transient stability using rotor 

trajectory  index  as  severity  function,"  Indonesian  Journal  of  Electrical  Engineering  and 

Computer Science, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 591-601 , Jun. 2017. 

 
      [9] A. H. Hamida, K. B. Kilani and M. Elleuch, " Some aspects of the Tunisian power system 

transient stability," in 2017 International Multi-Conference on Systems, Signals & Devices, pp. 

383-388.  

[10] P. N. Papadopolous, "Probabilistic framework for transient stability  assessment of power 

systems with high penetration of renewable generation," IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 

vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 3078-3088, Jul. 2017. 

[11] J. U. Agber, P. E. Odaba, and C. O. Onah, "Effect of power system parameters on transient 

stability studies," American Journal of Engineering Research, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 87-94, 2015. 

[12] L. Shi, S. Sun, L. Yao, Y. Ni, and M. Bazargan, "Effects of wind generation intermittency 

and volatility on power system transient stability," IET Renewable Power Generation, vol. 8, no. 

5, pp. 509-521, Jul. 2014. 

[13]  L.  Miao,  J.  Fang,  and  J.  Wen,  "Transient  stability  risk  assessment  of  power  systems 

incorporating wind farms," Journal of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy, vol. 1, no. 2, 

pp. 134-141, Sep. 2013. 

[14]  Q.  Wang,  A.  Xue,  T.  Bi,  and  Y.  Zheng,  "Impact  of  DFIG-based  wind  farm  on  transient 

stability  of  single  machine  infinite  bus  system,"  in  2013  IEEE  PES  Asia-Pacific  Power  and 

Energy Engineering Conference (APPEEC), pp. 1-5. 

[15] D. Khani, A. S. Yazdankhah, and H. M. Kojabadi, "Impacts of distributed generations on 

power system transient and voltage stability," Electrical Power And Energy Systems, vol. 43, no. 

1,  pp. 488-500, Dec. 2012. 

[16] Z. Zou and K. Zhou, "Voltage stability of wind power grid integration," in 2011 International 

Conference on Electrical Machines and Systems, pp. 1-5. 

[17] Y. Wang, Y. Sun, and S. Mei, "Modeling of short-term large-disturbance voltage stability 

considering induction motors," in 2012 IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies, pp. 1-4. 

[18]  L.  Meegahapola  and  D.  Flynn,  "Impact  on  transient  and  frequency  stability  for  a  power 

system at very high wind penetration," in 2010 IEEE PES General Meeting, pp. 1-8. 

[19] A. Abdlrahem, G. K. Venayagamoorthy, and K. A. Corzine, "Frequency stability and control 

of a power system with large PV plants using PMU information," in 2013 North American Power 

Symposium, pp. 1-6. 

[20]  H.  Wan,  J.  D.  McCalley,  and  V.  Vittal,  "Risk  based  voltage  security  assessment,"  IEEE 

Transactions on Power System, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1247-1254, Nov. 2000. 

[21] V. Vittal, J. D. McCalley, V. V. Acker, W. Fu, and N. A. Samra, "Transient instability risk 

assessment", in 1999 IEEE Power Engineering Society Summer Meeting, pp. 206-211. 

[22] Y. Ma, S. Lv, X. Zhou, and Z. Gao, "Review analysis of voltage stability in power system," 

in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation (ICMA), pp. 7-12. 

[23] Y. Xue, T. Xu, B. Liu, and Y. Li, "Quantitative assessments for transient voltage security," 

IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1077-1083, Aug. 2000. 

[24] W. Li and J. Zhou, "Probabilistic reliability assessment of power system operations," Electric 

Power Components and Systems, vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 1102-1114, Sep. 2008. 

[25] K. N. Hasan, R. Preece, and J. V. Milanovic, "Existing approaches and trends in uncertainty 

modelling  and  probabilistic  stability  analysis  of  power  systems  with  renewable  generation," 

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 101, pp. 168-180, Mar. 2019. 

[26]  J.  V.  Milanovic,"Probabilistic  stability  analysis:  the  way  forward  for  stability  analysis  of 

sustainable power systems," Philosophical Transactions, vol. 375, no. 2100, pp. 1-22, Jul. 2017. 

[27] E. Rakhshani et al. ,"A key performance indicator to assess the frequency stability of wind 

generation dominated power system", IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 130957-130969, Sep. 2019. 

[28]  J.  Fang,  H.  Li,  Y.  Tang,  F.  Blaabjerg,  "On  the  inertia  of  future  more-electronics  power 

systems,"  IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 

2130-2146, Dec. 2019. 

[29] A. Dissanayaka, U. D. Annakage, B. Jayasekara and B. Bagen, “Risk-based dynamic security 

assessment,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 1302-1308, Aug. 2011. 

[30] D. H. Nguyen and  M. Negnevitsky, “A probabilistic approach for power system  security 

assessment,” in 2012  Australasian Universities Power Engineering Conference (AUPEC), pp. 1-

6. 

[31] C. Li, L. Jing, and C. Jing, "Research of risk-based security assessment of power system," in 

2011  International  Conference  on  Electric  Utility  Deregulation  and  Restructuring  and  Power 

Technologies (DRPT), pp. 1335-1340. 

[32] U. Shahzad and S. Asgarpoor, "Probabilistic evaluation of line loading and line active power 

in  an  active  distribution  network  using  numerical  and  analytical  approaches,"  in  2018  North 

American Power Symposium, pp. 1-6.  

[33]  M.  Abapour  and  M.  Haghifam,  “Probabilistic  transient  stability  assessment  for  on-line 

applications,” Electrical Power and Energy Systems, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 627–634, Nov. 2012. 

[34] Y. N. Zhu and J. X. Jin, “Simulation analysis of a synchronous generator system under fault 

conditions,”  in  2013  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Applied  Superconductivity  and 

Electromagnetic Devices, pp. 180-184. 

[35] WECC wind power plant dynamic modeling guide, WECC Renewable Energy Modeling 

Task Force, Apr. 2014 [Online]. Available: 

https://www.wecc.org/Reliability/WECC%20Wind%20Plant%20Dynamic%20Modeling%20G

uidelines.pdf   

[36] Wind Turbines - Part 27-1: Electrical Simulation Models - Wind Turbines, IEC 61400-27-

1, Oct. 2015 [Online]. Available: 

https://infostore.saiglobal.com/preview/is/en/2015/i.s.en61400-27-1-2015.pdf?sku=1841002  

[37] S. Xia, Q. Zhang, S. T. Hussain, B. Hong, and W. Zou, “Impacts of integration of wind farms 

on power system transient stability,” Applied Sciences, vol. 8, pp. 1-16, Aug. 2018. 

[38] M. A. Pai, Energy function analysis for power system stability, 1st ed. Boston, MA, USA: 

Kluwer, 1989. 

[39] P. Bhui and N. Senroy, "Real-time prediction and control of transient stability using transient 

energy function," IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 32, no. 2, pp.923-934, Mar. 2017. 

[40] L. Tang and W. Sun, “An automated transient stability constrained optimal power flow based 

on trajectory sensitivity analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 590-

599, Jan. 2017. 

[41] D. R. Gurusinghe and A. D. Rajapakse, "Post-disturbance transient stability status prediction 

using synchrophasor measurements," IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 

3656-3664, Sep. 2016. 

[42] L. Meegahapola, D. Flynn, and T. Littler, “Transient stability analysis of a power system 

with high wind penetration,” in 2008 International Universities Power Engineering Conference, 

pp. 1-5. 

[43] DIgSILENT PowerFactory User Manual, DIgSILENT GmbH, 2018. 

 
 
  
