2
2
0
2

y
a
M
1
3

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
6
7
5
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quality Characteristics of a Software Platform for
Human-AI Teaming in Smart Manufacturing

Philipp Haindl1, Thomas Hoch1, Javier Dominguez2, Julen Aperribai2, Nazim
Kemal Ure3, and Mehmet Tunçel3

1 Software Competence Center Hagenberg, Hagenberg, Austria
{philipp.haindl,thomas.hoch}@scch.at
2 IDEKO Research Center, Elgoibar, Spain
{jdominguez,japerribai}@ideko.es
3 Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
{ure,tuncelm}@itu.edu.tr

Abstract. As AI-enabled software systems become more prevalent in
smart manufacturing, their role shifts from a reactive to a proactive
one that provides context-speciﬁc support to machine operators. In the
context of an international research project, we develop an AI-based
software platform that shall facilitate the collaboration between human
operators and manufacturing machines.
We conducted 14 structured interviews with stakeholders of the prospec-
tive software platform in order to determine the individual relevance
of selected quality characteristics for human-AI teaming in smart man-
ufacturing. These characteristics include the ISO 25010:2011 standard
for software quality and AI-speciﬁc quality characteristics such as trust-
worthiness, explicability, and auditability. The interviewees rated trust-
worthiness, functional suitability, reliability, and security as the most
important quality characteristics for this context, and portability, com-
patibility, and maintainability as the least important. Also, we observed
agreement regarding the relevance of the quality characteristics among
interviewees having the same role. On the other hand, the relevance of
each quality characteristics varied depending on the concrete use case of
the prospective software platform.
The interviewees also were asked about the key success factors related to
human-AI teaming in smart manufacturing. They identiﬁed improving
the production cycle, increasing operator eﬃciency, reducing scrap, and
reducing ergonomic risks as key success criteria. In this paper, we also
discuss metrics for measuring the fulﬁllment of these quality character-
istics, which we intend to operationalize and monitor during operation
of the prospective software platform.

Keywords: Quality Characteristics · Human-AI Teaming · Smart Man-
ufacturing · Trustworthiness · Explicability · Auditability.

1

Introduction

The applications of AI in smart manufacturing are numerous, ranging from im-
proving maintenance times for machinery to detecting defects in the machine

 
 
 
 
 
 
Haindl et al.
2. RESEARCH CONTEXT

or the product to preventing injury to workers. In general, collaborative pro-
cesses in smart manufacturing are characterized by alternating phases of reactive
and proactive elements, with each actor supporting the other alternately. AI-
enabled smart manufacturing systems are capable of self-sensing, self-adapting,
self-organizing, and self-decision [21,19], enabling them to respond to physical
changes in the production environment in a variety of ways. AI-guided interac-
tions in the manufacturing process might include stopping machines, adapting
production tasks, or suggesting a change in production parameters. Achieving
eﬀective teaming between machine operators and AI-enabled manufacturing sys-
tems, however, requires mutual trust based primarily on self-sensing and self-
adaptation of each actor. In the frame of the EU-funded Teaming.AI project1,
we develop a software platform that allows for human-AI teaming in smart man-
ufacturing. While we already presented a reference architecture in [9], in this
work we elaborate on the individual relevance of diﬀerent quality characteristics
towards such a software platform. For this purpose we conducted 14 structured
interviews with diﬀerent stakeholders of the prospective platform in which they
rated the individual relevance of 11 diﬀerent quality characteristics. A further
objective of our study was the identiﬁcation of key success factors and met-
rics that serve to evaluate the fulﬁllment of these quality characteristics during
development and operation of the platform.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Subsequently, we sketch
the research context of the project in Section 2, before we elaborate on the
current state of research in this ﬁeld in Section 3. Afterwards, in Section 4
we describe our research questions and the used methodology in this study.
Following to that, in Section 5 we present the results of this study and discuss
our ﬁndings in Section 6. Subsequently, in Section 7 we describe possible threats
to the validity of our study and conclude our paper in Section 8.

2 Research Context

The research consortium of our project consists of six research and development
centers and universities, three specialized SMEs for software development of AI-
based software systems, two industry partners in the automotive industry for
plastic injection of car components, and one industry partner for wind power
plant assembly. One key contribution of this research project is the develoment
of an AI-based software platform for human-AI teaming in smart manufacturing.
In the following, we describe the use cases (UC) of the three industry partners
that shall be supported by this software platform.

2.1 UC1: Quality Inspection

Our ﬁrst industry partner manufactures injection molded components for the au-
tomotive industry. The main objective of this use case is to support the machine

1 https://www.teamingai-project.eu

Preprint: to appear in QUATIC’22 International Conference on the Quality of
Information and Communications Technology

Haindl et al.

2. RESEARCH CONTEXT

operator during visual quality inspection. The software platform shall classify
products as OK or not-OK (NOK) with the latter being double-checked by
the machine operator. Therefore, it interacts with the machine operator during
quality inspection and fault analysis and provides context-speciﬁc information
for adjusting parameters in order to mitigate product defects.

2.2 UC2: Parameter Optimization

The second industry partner also produces plastic parts for the automotive in-
dustry and its use case focuses primarily on optimizing injection parameters.
To this end, the software platform should predict possible process deviations
and identify likely root failure causes. Thereby, it can provide explanations for
its ﬁndings (e.g. likelihoods), and the machine operator can provide feedback
to the software platform. As opposed to the previous use case, in this instance
visual quality inspection is performed by the machine operator. Moreover, in
this use case, the software platform shall monitor the interaction between the
machine operator and the injection machine as well as analyze its sensor data
and parameters in order to detect process deviations prematurely.

2.3 UC3: Large-Scale Parts Assembly

The third industrial partner specializes in high-precision manufacturing of large-
scale parts used in wind turbines, as an example. In this time-consuming pro-
duction process, automated and manual tasks are incorporated. Both of these
production tasks are characterized by high variability in their execution times,
making task management challenging. The software platform should identify
manual tasks associated with milling operations of large-scale parts and collect
information about the estimated time for each of these tasks. With its tracking
system, the software platform can determine the location of the machine oper-
ator. By combining this information with context information, such as machine
data, the software platform acts as a mediator between the milling machine and
the operator. Therefore, it should (a) improve communication between the op-
erator and the machine, (b) allow rescheduling of similar assembly tasks, for
example, combining automatic milling tasks with manual tasks, and (c) perform
an ergonomic risk assessment of two simultaneous tasks as regards static loads.

2.4 Stakeholder Roles

In the following we describe the diﬀerent stakeholder roles with their exemplary
activities, which were identiﬁed during requirements engineering.

– Data Protection Oﬃcer (DPO): Ensures that a company respects the
laws protecting individuals’ personal data (e.g., the GDPR, by controlling
the processing of data and auditing the system.

– Software Scientist (SS): Queries runtime data of the software compo-
nents of the software platform, e.g., logging information, for evaluating and
optimizing the behaviour of the system.

Preprint: to appear in QUATIC’22 International Conference on the Quality of
Information and Communications Technology

Haindl et al.
3. RELATED WORK

– Data Scientist (DS): Applies statistical methods onto data processed by

the software platform, e.g., parameter tuning of ML components.

– Machine Operator (MO): Visually inspects the produced parts, clamping
and adjusting the workpieces or performing manual tasks on the machine,
e.g., obtaining measurements and making parameter adjustments.

– Production Line Manager (PLM): Monitors and optimizes the processes
for producing and assembling the product or its parts on the shopﬂoor.

3 Related Work

We separate the current state of research related to our study into three streams.
The ﬁrst stream focuses on quality requirements of ML-based software systems.
Based on a qualitative interview study with ten requirements engineers, Habibul-
lah and Horkoﬀ [8] explored the engineers’ experiences and perceptions of quality
requirements for ML-based software systems. The study shows that most engi-
neers in industrial settings have diﬃculties formulating quality requirements for
ML-based software systems. This often leads to quality requirements neither
being organized, prioritized, nor eﬀectively monitored during the development
of such systems. Vogelsang and Borg [26] interviewed four data scientists using
semi-structured questionnaires to examine how they elicit and specify functional
and quality requirements of ML-based software systems. The authors stress that
it is vital to understand ML-related performance measures to state good func-
tional requirements for such systems. Also, systems must be designed from the
beginning in such a manner that additional requirements towards explainabil-
ity, trustworthiness, or even speciﬁc legal requirements can later be implemented
with moderate eﬀort. Horkoﬀ [11] examined requirements engineering (RE) prac-
tices for eliciting quality requirements towards ML-based software systems. The
author states that researchers and users of ML-based software systems lack an
eﬀective methodology to express and specify quality requirements for ML-based
software systems, including targets and trade-oﬀs, e.g., based on domain-speciﬁc
best practices. Khan et al. [15] reviewed current RE methodologies for eliciting
and documenting quality requirements for ML-based IIoT systems. To this end,
the authors compared SysML, GORE-MLOps [12], and Pinto’s RE methodol-
ogy [20] for autonomous systems. The paper stresses the lack of a generic RE
methodology for elicitating quality requirements of ML-based software systems.
The second stream of related works examines quality characteristics of ML-
based software systems. Siebert et al. [23] presented a categorization of quality
characteristics complemented by an operational software quality model for ML-
based software systems. The deﬁnition and relevance of the quality character-
istics is based on a literature-based review, complemented by workshops with
industrial partners. The quality model allows to objectively assess the adher-
ence to quality requirements throughout the development of ML-based software
systems. An important prerequisite for the operationalization of the quality char-
acteristics relates to their decomposition using metrics which can be measured
throughout the engineering cycle of such systems. Lenarduzzi et al. [17] elabo-
rated a method for identiﬁcation of quality issues in ML-based software systems,

Preprint: to appear in QUATIC’22 International Conference on the Quality of
Information and Communications Technology

Haindl et al.

4. RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND METHODOLOGY

gathered from experience reports of their research group and self-ethnography.
According to the authors, root failure causes for the most frequent quality issues
can be attributed to six groups, ranging from lack of developer skills, deﬁciencies
in development and test processes, model version incompatibilities, and commu-
nication problems. They argue that training software developers is the most
eﬃcient way to mitigate quality issues in ML-based systems.

Finally, the third stream of related works focuses on quality assurance and
quality models for ML-based software systems. Fujii et al. [5] conducted a survey
to evaluate the usefulness of quality guidelines for ML-based software systems.
These quality guidelines address the handling of quality characteristics, test ar-
chitecture, and test viewpoints for diﬀerent domains. The authors criticize that
the analyzed guidelines do not address the integration of explainability tools in
the engineering activities of ML-based software systems. The authors assume
that in practice this often leads to disregarding the quality assurance of ex-
plainability requirements or conducting it incompletely. Kuwajima et al. [16]
studied quality models for safety-critical ML-based software systems. Therefore
they analyzed the gaps between the ISO 25010:2011 (SQuaRE) standard [13] for
software quality and quality characteristics relevant for ML-based software sys-
tems. Their results show that the quality requirements towards machine learning
models are often vaguely speciﬁed, which in turn negatively aﬀects their inter-
pretability and robustness. Felderer and Ramler [4] analyzed terminology and
challenges for quality assurance of AI-based software systems along the perspec-
tives of artifact type, process, and quality characteristics. In total, they identiﬁed
eight key challenges for this context, e.g., understandability and interpretabil-
ity of AI models, accuracy and correctness measures, or the handling of quality
requirements in AI-based software systems.

4 Research Questions and Methodology

Our study started with the deﬁnition of candidate scenarios [24,25] that en-
compass the context and the anticipated functionality from the stakeholders’
perspectives when interacting with the prospective software platform. These
scenarios were originally deﬁned by our research group and were therefore only
described at a high level of abstraction. Based on these candidate scenarios we
designed an interview-based case study to (a) reﬁne these scenarios into more
ﬁne-grained functional requirements, (b) assess the completeness of the scenar-
ios to fully cover the required functionality of the software platform, (c) assess
each of 11 quality characteristics in terms of its importance to the overall plat-
form from the stakeholders’ perspective, and (d) elicit the key success criteria
related to the software platform. Figure 1 shows the structure and process of the
case study. In total, we conducted 14 interviews with stakeholders from the 3
industry partners and from the 3 specialized SMEs for software development of
AI-based systems. The numbers of interviewees per stakeholder role distributed
as follows: DPO (2), SS (2), DS (3), MO (4), PLM (3). As in this paper our
research concentrates on the individual relevance of quality characteristics and

Preprint: to appear in QUATIC’22 International Conference on the Quality of
Information and Communications Technology

Haindl et al.
4. RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND METHODOLOGY

Fig. 1. Structure and process of the interview-based case study.

success criteria of the software platform, we only describe the results of steps 3
and 4 of the case study in more detail. To this end, we formulated the following
three research questions:

– RQ1: How do the stakeholders of the software platform assess the relevance
of the ISO 25010:2011 (SQuaRE) [13] characteristics for software quality, AI
trustworthiness, explicability, and auditability?

– RQ2: What are the key success factors of the stakeholders for human-AI

teaming in smart manufacturing?

– RQ3: What are potential metrics to evaluate these key success factors?

Based on the guidelines by Runeson and Höst [22], we designed a ques-
tionnaire2 for interviewing the stakeholders in step 3 and 4 of the case study
regarding the relevance of quality characteristics and their success criteria to-
wards the software platform. These interviews followed the reﬁnement of the
scenarios into functional requirements (step 1) and the completeness assessment
of the scenarios (step 2). We also conducted a pilot interview as suggested by
Yin [28] with a highly experienced stakeholder and used his feedback to improve
the questionnaire. Speciﬁcally, we reﬁned deﬁnitions of quality characteristics in
order to ensure a uniform level of understanding among the stakeholders.

At the beginning of the interviews we explained the research context of our
study - human-AI teaming in smart manufacturing - to the interviewees. Each
interviewee had a thorough understanding of the research context since they have
been participating in the project for over one year. Interviewees holding roles
such as production line manager, data protection oﬃcer, and machine operator
came from our industry partners. Likewise, interviewees holding roles such as
software and data scientists came from the three specialized SMEs for software
development of AI-based systems (cf. Section 2).

The questionnaire comprised two closed and one open questions. In the ﬁrst
closed question, we asked the interviewees to select the role (cf. Section 2.4) that
they most frequently perform. In order to not overlook any important stakeholder
role, we deliberately asked them whether their most frequently performed role is
on the presented list. The second closed question of the questionnaire examined

2 https://bit.ly/3lV3aFw

Preprint: to appear in QUATIC’22 International Conference on the Quality of
Information and Communications Technology

Candidate ScenariosScenario ReﬁnementScenario Completeness AssessmentRelevance Assessment of Quality CharacteristicsElicitation of Key Success CriteriaElicitation of Functional RequirementsSoftware Quality CharacteristicsAI Trustworthiness, Explicability & AuditabilityHaindl et al.

4. RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND METHODOLOGY

the individual relevance of 11 quality characteristics, i.e., 8 quality characteris-
tics of the ISO 25010:2011 (SQuaRE) [13] standard for software quality and 3
AI-speciﬁc quality characteristics such as trustworthiness, explicability, and au-
ditability. For easier reading, this question was divided into 11 sub-questions. To
ensure common understanding of the quality characteristics, we presented the
interviewees with a uniform deﬁnition of them. For the relevance assessment we
adapted the Quality Attribute Workshop format [1] and asked the interviewees
to assign, in total, 100 points to the diﬀerent quality characteristics according
to their subjective relevance for human-AI teaming in smart manufacturing. In
the ﬁnal open question, we asked them to describe the key success factors in this
context for their typical role.

Fig. 2. Overview of research process and activities to answer the research questions.

Figure 2 shows the research process that structures the activities and speci-
ﬁes the outcome of each process step. The interviews were conducted by two re-
searchers and the transcripts analyzed according to a predeﬁned coding scheme.
This scheme deﬁned the coding and extraction of quantitative and qualitative
data for each research question. The quantitative data related to RQ1 (relevance
assessments of the quality characteristics) did not require further analysis. In the
ﬁrst step of analyzing the qualitative data from RQ2 and RQ3, two researchers
highlighted the individual statements in the interview transcripts. After that,
they iteratively reﬁned the candidate key success criteria and evaluation metrics
until they arrived at a consolidated set of criteria and metrics. A third researcher
continuously checked and validated this reﬁnement process. We repeated this
process until we reached an agreement among all researchers.

Preprint: to appear in QUATIC’22 International Conference on the Quality of
Information and Communications Technology

Interview TranscriptsResearcher 1Researcher 2Assessments, Success CriteriaRQ1RQ2RQ3coding and extractionFinal Relevance AssessmentsCandidate Key Success CriteriaCandidate Evaluation Metrics Final Key Success CriteriaFinal Evaluation Metricsiterative reﬁnementiterative reﬁnementResearcher 3cross-check and validationHaindl et al.
5. RESULTS

5 Results

In the following we present the results of our research questions, as deﬁned in
Section 4.

5.1 RQ1

The results of this research question include the relevance ratings of the 11 qual-
ity characteristics by the interviewees. In Figure 3, we show the rating results
for each use case as well as the average rating for each quality characteristic.
As shown in the illustration, the interviewees considered trustworthiness, func-
tional suitability, and reliability as the most important quality characteristics
for human-AI teaming.

Figure 4 analyzes if the relevance assessments of the quality characteristics
are also inﬂuenced by the stakeholder role (cf. Section 2.4) of the interviewee.
As we can see, each quality characteristic has a diﬀerent relevance to each stake-
holder role. In the following, we present the two quality characteristics rated most
relevant for each stakeholder role, with the average rating in brackets. Software
Scientist (SS): Performance Eﬃciency (17.5) and Maintainability (15); Data
Scientist: (SS): Reliability (15) and Trustworthiness (11.7); Data Protection
Oﬃcer (DPO): Trustworthiness (30) and Security (25); Machine Operator
(MO): Trustworthiness (25) and Usability (10); Production Line Manager
(PLM): Functional Suitability/Trustworthiness (ex aequo 18.3) and Reliabil-
ity (10.7). In order to assess the dispersion of the relevance assessments, we
ﬁnally calculated the standard deviation per quality characteristic: Trustwor-
thiness (9.29), Maintainability (6.12), Security (6.04), Functional Suit-
ability (6.02), Performance Eﬃciency (5.89), Reliability (5.71), Compat-
ibility (5.57), Auditability (5.00), Explicability (4.86), Usability (4.84),
Portability (3.39). In this context, the standard deviation can serve as a ba-
sic indicator of consensus or disagreement among the interviewees about the
relevance of a quality characteristic.

5.2 RQ2 and RQ3

Following, we summarize key success criteria for human-AI teaming in smart
manufacturing and metrics for evaluating them for each stakeholder role.

Data Protection Oﬃcer (DPO): The interviewees mentioned (a) Traceabil-
ity of data processing, (b) Ensuring operator anonymity, and c) Ensuring oper-
ator and machine data conﬁdentiality as key success criteria. We consider these
identiﬁed success criteria to be functional requirements and did not formulate
metrics for them.

Preprint: to appear in QUATIC’22 International Conference on the Quality of
Information and Communications Technology

Haindl et al.

5. RESULTS

Fig. 3. Relevance assessments of the quality characteristics (per use case).

Software Scientist (SS): The condensed two key success criteria for this role
cover a) Monitoring of realtime and historical production data, and b) Cus-
tomizability of dashboards. Similary to the previous role, we regard these success
criteria as functional requirements and abstained from formulating metrics.

Data Scientist (DS): In Table 1 we enlist the condensed key success criteria
from the perspective of data scientists. Similarly to the previous roles, not for
all identiﬁed criteria meaningful metrics can be deﬁned.

Machine Operator: For this role, we identiﬁed eight key success criteria and
seven metrics for their evaluation. As shown in Table 2, the criteria and metrics

Preprint: to appear in QUATIC’22 International Conference on the Quality of
Information and Communications Technology

7.66.08.111.47.57.73.910.910.816.49.8AuditabilityCompatibilityExplicabilityFunctionalSuitabilityMaintainabilityPerformanceEfficiencyPortabilityReliabilitySecurityTrustworthinessUsability0102030PointsQuality CharacteristicUse CaseUC1UC2UC3Haindl et al.
5. RESULTS

Fig. 4. Relevance assessments of the quality characteristics (per stakeholder role).

tend to focus on time spans for failure detection and notiﬁcation, as well as idle
(waiting) times for either the machine or operator.

We use the frequency of particular unfavorable postures taken by the operator
within the manufacturing process to assess the ergonomic risk. In this context,
the notion of unfavorable postures is taken from workplace safety methods (e.g.,
WISHA Caution Zone Checklist [27], RULA [18], REBA [10], OWAS [14]). This
includes, for example, awkward postures, heavy hand forces, repetitive motions,
repeated impacts on the limbs, heavy or frequent lifting, and moderate to high
hand-arm vibrations.

Preprint: to appear in QUATIC’22 International Conference on the Quality of
Information and Communications Technology

Functional SuitabilityTrustworthinessUsabilitySecurityReliabilityAuditabilityPerformance EfficiencyExplicabilityPortabilityCompatibilityMaintainability010203001020300102030MODPODSPLMSSMODPODSPLMSSMODPODSPLMSSMODPODSPLMSSPointsRoleHaindl et al.

Table 1. Key success criteria and metrics for data scientists.

5. RESULTS

UC Key success criteria
1-3 Extensibility of data sources
1-3 Customizability of dashboards
1-3 Interoperability with Explainable

Metrics
-
-
-

AI frameworks

3 Reliable production scene recognition
3 Reliable operator posture recognition Operator posture recognition accuracy

Scene recognition accuracy

Table 2. Key success criteria and metrics for machine operators.

Shortening of production cycle time

UC Key success criteria
1 Reduction of scrap rate
1
1 Reliable prediction of faulty parts
1 Facilitating root cause analysis
2 Realtime detection of product

quality deviations
2 Realtime notiﬁcation of
production failures

3 Prevention of ergonomic risk
3

Improvement of operator eﬃciency

Metrics
Scrap rate
Production cycle time
Faulty part prediction accuracy
-
Time between product part analysis
and prediction result
Time between detection and
notiﬁcation of production failures
Freq. of unfavorable operator postures
Operator idle time

Table 3. Key success criteria and metrics for production line managers.

Shortening of production cycle time

UC Key success criteria
1 Reduction of scrap rate
1
1 Reliable prediction of faulty parts
1-3 Improvement of OEE
2 Realtime failure prediction

Shortening of machine downtimes
Shortening of machine idle times

2
2
3 Prevention of ergonomic risk

3
3

Improvement of OLE
Increasing operator satisfaction

Metrics
Scrap rate
Production cycle time
Faulty part prediction accuracy
OEE
Time between product part analysis
and failure notiﬁcation
Machine downtime
Machine idle time
Frequency of unfavorable operator
postures
OLE
Operator satisfaction score

Production Line Manager (PLM): As depicted in Table 3, the majority of
success criteria for this role focus on maximizing eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness in
the production process.

In this regard, Overall Equipment Eﬀectiveness (OEE) is used to determine
how well machines are utilized in comparison to their potential. Similarly, Overall
Labor Eﬀectiveness (OLE) quantiﬁes the utilization, performance, and quality
of the human workforce in the manufacturing process. In order to measure the
satisfaction of the machine operator, we deﬁne the Operator Satisfaction Score

Preprint: to appear in QUATIC’22 International Conference on the Quality of
Information and Communications Technology

Haindl et al.
6. DISCUSSION

similarly to the System Usability Score (SUS) [2,3]. It measures operator satisfac-
tion with speciﬁc aspects of the manufacturing process using Likert scales. This
shall facilitate detecting changes in operator satisfaction as a result to changes
in the production process.

6 Discussion

From the perspective of the use cases, the quality characteristics related to the
SQuaRE standard [13], portability, compatibility, and maintainability were rated
as least relevant. Out of the three AI-speciﬁc quality characteristics, the inter-
viewees rated auditability as the least important. Also it can be noted that the
relevance of each quality characteristic is assessed diﬀerently for each use case.
The use cases for parameter optimization (UC2) and large-scale parts assembly
(UC3) directly aﬀect the manufacturing process, whereas the use case for quality
inspection (UC1) only supports the machine operator during quality inspection.
The assessment results conﬁrm this slightly diﬀerent objective of the use cases,
with functional suitability and security ranking less important for UC1 than for
UC2 and UC3. However, we cannot identify a generic pattern that describes the
connection between the use cases and their impact on the relevance assessments
of each quality characteristic.

The qualitative analysis of the interview responses revealed that some of the
key success criteria are more closely related to functional requirements than to
quality (non-functional) requirements. Broy and Glinz [7,6] already pointed out
that there is often a lack of clarity in practice regarding the diﬀerence between
functional and quality requirements. Unlike functional requirements, however,
quality requirements can also be assessed by evaluating the extent to which they
have been met. Therefore, we only deﬁned metrics for key success criteria that
are implicitly linked to quality requirements.

7 Threats to Validity

Diﬀerent interpretations of the quality characteristics by the interviewees un-
dermine the construct validity of this study, which is primarily due to the fact
that they have diﬀerent roles and experiences. We tried to mitigate this threat
by showing each interviewee a uniform deﬁnition of the quality characteristics
that did not require any specialized knowledge. In addition, each interviewee
was asked to raise any questions prior to the interview so that we could clar-
ify any ambiguities. We also considered the role of each interviewee within the
company when summarizing the interview answers, so we could determine from
what perspective and with what intent each statement was delivered.

Because our research project focuses on the applicability of AI in smart man-
ufacturing, the greatest threat to internal validity can be observed among inter-
viewees, who tend to emphasize exclusively the AI-related quality characteristics.
In our opinion, however, this threat is negligible, since as soon as we noticed this

Preprint: to appear in QUATIC’22 International Conference on the Quality of
Information and Communications Technology

Haindl et al.

8. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

trend, we made the interviewee aware that overemphasizing one quality char-
acteristic may result in underestimating the signiﬁcance of others. In addition,
only 100 points were available to distribute among the quality characteristics to
reﬂect their relative importance.

As a ﬁnal point, we recognize that the small sample size of interviewees
in total might undermine the external validity of our study. To mitigate this
threat, we conducted interviews with diﬀerent companies and with interviewees
who hold diﬀerent roles. Despite this, we see a threat to the generalizability of
the results to other industries due to the functional and quality requirements
their products must meet.

8 Conclusion and Future Work

This paper presented the results of an interview-based case study to examine
the relevance of 11 quality characteristics for human-AI teaming in smart man-
ufacturing. The quality characteristics comprised the 11 characteristics of the
ISO 25010:2011 standard for software quality (SQuaRE) and 3 AI-speciﬁc qual-
ity characteristics such as trustworthiness, explicability, and auditability. In the
frame of an international research project, we develop an AI-based software plat-
form that shall facilitate the cooperation between machine operators and manu-
facturing systems. For the presented case study, we conducted 14 interviews with
stakeholders working in automotive industry, wind power plant assembly, and
software development for AI-based software systems to assess the individual rel-
evance of the 11 quality characteristics. Therefore, they were asked to distribute
100 points across the quality characteristics according to their relevance.

The interviewees rated trustworthiness, functional suitability, reliability, and
security as the most important quality characteristics, and portability, com-
patibility, and maintainability as the least important. Furthermore, the results
indicate consensus regarding the relevance of the quality characteristics among
interviewees with the same role. However, we also recognized that the relevance
of the quality characteristics varies according to the concrete use case for the
prospective software platform. Accordingly, we identiﬁed the improved produc-
tion cycle eﬃciency, lower faulty parts and scrap, and reduced ergonomic risks
as the key success criteria for human-AI teaming in smart manufacturing. The
time span for detecting deviations (product or process quality), Overall Equip-
ment Eﬀectiveness (OEE), Overall Labor Eﬀectiveness (OLE), the accuracy of
fault prediction and scene recognition, and the accuracy of operator posture
recognition are the most relevant metrics for evaluating these criteria.

Future research should focus on operationalizing these quality characteristics
so that they can be continuously monitored during operation of AI-based smart
manufacturing systems. In addition, an empirical study on the relevance of these
quality characteristics is recommended after the interviewees have acquired ex-
perience with the prospective software platform.

Preprint: to appear in QUATIC’22 International Conference on the Quality of
Information and Communications Technology

Haindl et al.
8. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

Acknowledgements

This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Re-
search and Innovation Programme under grant agreement number 957402.

References

1. Barbacci, M.R., Ellison, R.J., Lattanze, A., Staﬀord, J.A., Weinstock, C.B., Wood,

W.: Quality Attribute Workshops (QAWs), Third Edition (Aug 2003)

2. Brooke, j.: SUS: A ’Quick and Dirty’ Usability Scale. In: Usability Evaluation In

Industry. CRC Press (1996), num Pages: 6

3. Brooke, J.: SUS: a retrospective. Journal of Usability Studies 8(2), 29–40 (Feb

2013)

4. Felderer, M., Ramler, R.: Quality Assurance for AI-Based Systems: Overview and
Challenges (Introduction to Interactive Session). In: Winkler, D., Biﬄ, S., Mendez,
D., Wimmer, M., Bergsmann, J. (eds.) Software Quality: Future Perspectives on
Software Engineering Quality. pp. 33–42. Springer International Publishing, Cham
(2021)

5. Fujii, G., Hamada, K., Ishikawa, F., Masuda, S., Matsuya, M., Myojin, T., Nishi,
Y., Ogawa, H., Toku, T., Tokumoto, S., Tsuchiya, K., Ujita, Y.: Guidelines for
Quality Assurance of Machine Learning-Based Artiﬁcial Intelligence. International
Journal of Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering 30(11n12), 1589–1606
(Nov 2020), publisher: World Scientiﬁc Publishing Co.

6. Glinz, M.: On Non-Functional Requirements. In: 15th IEEE International Require-

ments Engineering Conference (RE 2007). pp. 21–26 (2007)

7. Glinz, M.: Rethinking the notion of non-functional requirements. In: Proceedings of
the Third World Congress for Software Quality (3WCSQ 2005). vol. 2, pp. 55–64.
Munich, Germany (2005)

8. Habibullah, K.M., Horkoﬀ, J.: Non-functional Requirements for Machine Learn-
ing: Understanding Current Use and Challenges in Industry. In: 2021 IEEE 29th
International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE). pp. 13–23 (Sep 2021),
iSSN: 2332-6441

9. Haindl, P., Buchgeher, G., Khan, M., Moser, B.: Towards A Reference Software Ar-
chitecture For Human-AI Teaming in Smart Manufacturing. In: 2022 IEEE/ACM
44th International Conference on Software Engineering: New Ideas and Emerging
Results (ICSE-NIER). p. to appear (May 2022)

10. Hignett, S., McAtamney, L.: Rapid Entire Body Assessment (REBA). Applied

Ergonomics 31(2), 201–205 (Apr 2000)

11. Horkoﬀ, J.: Non-Functional Requirements for Machine Learning: Challenges and
New Directions. In: 2019 IEEE 27th International Requirements Engineering Con-
ference (RE). pp. 386–391 (Sep 2019), iSSN: 2332-6441

12. Ishikawa, F., Matsuno, Y.: Evidence-driven Requirements Engineering for Uncer-
tainty of Machine Learning-based Systems. In: 2020 IEEE 28th International Re-
quirements Engineering Conference (RE). pp. 346–351 (Aug 2020), iSSN: 2332-
6441

13. ISO/IEC 25010: ISO/IEC 25010:2011, Systems and Software Engineering — Sys-
tems and Software Quality Requirements and Evaluation (SQuaRE) — System
and Software Quality Models (2011)

Preprint: to appear in QUATIC’22 International Conference on the Quality of
Information and Communications Technology

Haindl et al.

8. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

14. Karhu, O., Kansi, P., Kuorinka, I.: Correcting working postures in industry: A
practical method for analysis. Applied Ergonomics 8(4), 199–201 (Dec 1977)
15. Khan, A., Siddiqui, I.F., Shaikh, M., Anwar, S., Shaikh, M.: Handling Non-
Fuctional Requirements in IoT-based Machine Learning Systems. In: 2022 Joint In-
ternational Conference on Digital Arts, Media and Technology with ECTI Northern
Section Conference on Electrical, Electronics, Computer and Telecommunications
Engineering (ECTI DAMT NCON). pp. 477–479 (Jan 2022), iSSN: 2768-4644
16. Kuwajima, H., Yasuoka, H., Nakae, T.: Engineering problems in machine learning

systems. Machine Learning 109(5), 1103–1126 (May 2020)

17. Lenarduzzi, V., Lomio, F., Moreschini, S., Taibi, D., Tamburri, D.A.: Software
Quality for AI: Where We Are Now? In: Winkler, D., Biﬄ, S., Mendez, D., Wim-
mer, M., Bergsmann, J. (eds.) Software Quality: Future Perspectives on Software
Engineering Quality. pp. 43–53. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2021)

18. McAtamney, L., Nigel Corlett, E.: RULA: a survey method for the investigation of
work-related upper limb disorders. Applied Ergonomics 24(2), 91–99 (Apr 1993)
19. Phuyal, S., Bista, D., Bista, R.: Challenges, Opportunities and Future Directions
of Smart Manufacturing: A State of Art Review. Sustainable Futures 2, 100023
(2020)

20. Pinto, A.: Requirement Speciﬁcation, Analysis and Veriﬁcation for Autonomous
Systems. In: 2021 58th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC). pp.
1315–1318 (Dec 2021), iSSN: 0738-100X

21. Qu, Y.J., Ming, X.G., Liu, Z.W., Zhang, X.Y., Hou, Z.T.: Smart manufacturing
systems: state of the art and future trends. The International Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology 103(9), 3751–3768 (Aug 2019)

22. Runeson, P., Höst, M.: Guidelines for conducting and reporting case study research
in software engineering. Empirical Software Engineering 14(2), 131–164 (Apr 2009)
23. Siebert, J., Jöckel, L., Heidrich, J., Nakamichi, K., Ohashi, K., Namba, I., Ya-
mamoto, R., Aoyama, M.: Towards Guidelines for Assessing Qualities of Machine
Learning Systems. In: Shepperd, M.J., Abreu, F.B.e., Silva, A.R.d., Pérez-Castillo,
R. (eds.) Quality of Information and Communications Technology - 13th Interna-
tional Conference, QUATIC 2020, Faro, Portugal, September 9-11, 2020, Proceed-
ings. Communications in Computer and Information Science, vol. 1266, pp. 17–31.
Springer (2020)

24. Sutcliﬀe, A.: Scenario-based requirements engineering. In: Proceedings. 11th IEEE
International Requirements Engineering Conference, 2003. pp. 320–329 (Sep 2003),
iSSN: 1090-705X

25. Sutcliﬀe, A., Maiden, N., Minocha, S., Manuel, D.: Supporting scenario-based re-
quirements engineering. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 24(12), 1072–
1088 (Dec 1998), mAG ID: 2113223747

26. Vogelsang, A., Borg, M.: Requirements Engineering for Machine Learning: Per-
spectives from Data Scientists. In: 2019 IEEE 27th International Requirements
Engineering Conference Workshops (REW). pp. 245–251 (Sep 2019)

27. Washington State Department of Labour Industries: Hazard Zone Checklist (2022),

last accessed 11/04/2022

28. Yin, R.: Case Study Research and Applications: Design and Methods. SAGE Pub-

lications, Inc, Los Angeles, 6th edition edn. (Oct 2017)

Preprint: to appear in QUATIC’22 International Conference on the Quality of
Information and Communications Technology

