10th World Conference on Information Systems and Technologies (WorldCIST 2022), 
Budva, Montenegro, Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems (LNNS), Volume 468, 
pp. 346-355, Springer, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04826-5_34, 2022. 

Social Aspects of Software Testing: Comparative Studies 
in Asia 

Luiz F. Capretz*,1[0000-0001-6966-2369], Jingdong Jia2, Pradeep Waychal3, Shuib Basri4 

1Western University, London N6G5B9, Canada 
lcapretz@uwo.ca 
2Beihang University, Beijing, China  
jiajingdong@buaa.edu.cn 
3Chhatrapati Shadu Institute, Thane, India 
Pradeep.waychal@gmail.com 
4Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS, Malaysia 

shuib_basri@utp.edu.my

Abstract. This study attempts to understand motivators and de-motivators that 
influence the decisions of software students to take up and sustain software test-
ing careers across three different Asian countries, i.e., China, India, and Malay-
sia.  The  research  question  can  be  framed  as  “How  many  software  students 
across different Asian geographies are keen to take up testing careers, and what 
are the reasons for their choices?” Towards an answer,  we developed a cross-
sectional but simple survey-based instrument. In this work, we investigated how 
software  students  perceived  the  software  testing  role.  The  results  from  China 
and India revealed that students are not very keen on taking up a software tester 
career,  but  the  Malaysia  students’  show  a  more  positive  attitude  towards  soft-
ware testing. The study also pointed out the importance of considering software 
testing activities as a set of human-dependent tasks and emphasized the need for 
further research that examines critically individual assessments of software test-
ers about software testing activities. This investigation can academics involved 
in software testing courses to understand the impacting  factors on the motiva-
tion and de-motivators of their students, as well as to try convey positive view 
of testing as challenging and requires critical thinking and innovative ideas. 

Keywords: Social Aspects of Software Testing, Human Factors in Software 
Engineering, Software Testing, Software Careers, Cross-Cultural Study. 

1 

Introduction 

The importance of software quality has been on the rise and is expected to grow in the 
future. Software testing plays a vital role in the development of high quality and relia-
ble software systems. Software systems are becoming more complex due to the intri-
cacies of the problems that they are solving, their dependence on a  myriad of third-

 
 
347 

party software components, and the continuous shrinking of time to deployment. That 
complexity  is  inducing  increased  susceptibility  to  failures.  Coupled  with  that,  the 
pervasiveness of software systems, especially in mission-critical areas, is resulting in 
dangerous combinations. Vigilant testing with the help of appropriate processes, tech-
nology,  and  professionals  can  ease  the  situation.  Therefore,  the  importance  of  soft-
ware testing has been on the growth trajectory. 

In spite of its relevance, software testing is, arguably, the least understood part of 
the  software  life  cycle  and  still  the  toughest  to  perform  correctly.  Many  researchers 
and practitioners have been working to address the situation [1]. However, most of the 
studies  focus  on  the  process  and  technology  dimensions  [2]  and  only  a  few  on  the 
human dimension of testing [3], despite the reported relevance of human aspects dur-
ing testing [4]. Testers need to understand various stakeholders’ explicit and implicit 
requirements, be aware of how developers work individually and in teams, and devel-
op skills to report test results wisely to stakeholders. These multifaceted requirements 
lend  vitality  to  the  human  dimension  in  software  testing.  Exploring  this  dimension 
carefully may help understand testing in a better way. 

This study attempts to solve the basic problem of the human dimension of testing, 
i.e. the lack of competent testing professionals, by trying to understand the unwilling-
ness of software or computer engineering students across  different  geographies, and 
their reasons for not taking up testing careers. This paper compares samples from the 
India,  China,  and  Malaysia  –  three  Asian  countries.  Given  an  overall  Asian  culture, 
this study seeks to investigate any difference among Asian students in regard to soft-
ware  testing.  The  research  question,  therefore,  is;  why  software  and  computer  engi-
neering students (henceforth referred to as students) across different parts of the world 
are reluctant to consider software testing careers? 

After this introduction, the rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 de-
scribes  the  research  method,  instruments  and  techniques  applied  to  answer  our  re-
search questions, and section 3 presents our findings, which are discussed in Section 
4.  The  implications  of  the  study  are  given  in  section  5,  and  concluding  remarks  in 
section 6. 

2  Method 

Our  study  analyzed  the  opinions  of  students  whether  they  would  choose  testing  ca-
reers and what they felt were the advantages and drawbacks of the testing career. 

2.1  Objectives 

Software testing requires competent and  motivated professionals  [5]. However, very 
few students, across the globe, prefer testing careers, which robs the industry of com-
petent  testers  and  consequently,  quality  software.  This  study  attempts  to  understand 
reasons  for  such  apathy  towards  testing  careers.  The  study  is  cross-sectional  and 
mixed. It does not study students’ responses over time and seeks open-ended respons-
es to advantages and drawbacks of the testing career and categorical responses about 
choosing testing careers.  

 
348 

2.2 

Instrument Selection 

The  instrument  was  designed  to  understand  the  willingness  of  students  to  take  up 
software testing careers and the reasons thereof. Specifically, the students were asked 
for the probability of their choosing testing careers by selecting one of the following 
choices: ‘Certainly Yes,’ ‘Yes,’ ‘Maybe,’ ‘No,’ and ‘Certainly Not.’ The study asked 
the  respondents  to  provide  open-ended  but  prioritized  list  of  advantages  and  draw-
backs, and open-ended rationale regarding their decisions on taking up testing careers. 
Since there has been limited prior research in the area, especially in the geographies 
that  we  were  studying,  we  decided  to  use  such  a  qualitative  approach  to  investigate 
and understand the phenomena within their real-life context.  

Some  researchers  have  distilled  motivators  and  de-motivators  of  software  profes-
sion [6],  which could  have formed a  basis  for our investigation. However,  the  three 
studies  neither  converged  indicating  a  possibility  of  some  more  factors  nor  covered 
students’ perceptions. 

A  fresh  and  simple  survey  questionnaire,  therefore,  was  designed  in  consultation 
with  researchers  and  testing  professionals,  which  is  presented  in  Appendix  A.  The 
authors carried out a pilot survey using a sample of 20 Indian students and ascertained 
that the students neither had any queries nor reported any lack of clarity in the ques-
tionnaire. The survey was translated to Chinese and the Chinese responses were trans-
lated back in English to check the accuracy of the Chinese questionnaire. 

2.3 

Sampling 

The study used convenience sampling by seeking responses from 251 students from 
three different countries (70 from India, 99 from China, and 82 from Malaysia). The 
Indian  responses  were  sought  from  junior  students  towards  the  end  of  their  second 
semester,  the  Chinese  responses  from  senior  students  before  the  start  of  their  first 
semester, and the Malaysian responses  from senior students towards the end of their 
first semester. While the Indians and Chinese students had not taken a course on soft-
ware testing, the Malaysian students did. Thus students’ curricular background, rele-
vant for this study, and levels in the programs are comparable and their career deci-
sions  are  likely  to  be  due  to  the  local  situations  and  the  essential  nature  of  testing 
activities. 

2.4  Reliability and Validity 

A reliable and valid study indicates absence of bias and a high degree of truthfulness. 
A  qualitative  study  needs  to  be  trustworthy  and  rigorous,  and  of  good  quality.  We 
asked  the  respondents  to  list  advantages  and  drawbacks  of  testing  careers  and  the 
probability  that  they  would  choose  a  testing  career,  along  with  their  rationales.  We 
triangulated the rationales and advantages/drawbacks and practically did not find any 
divergence between them. All the responses were coded by the authors of the respec-
tive countries and reviewed by all authors.  

 
 
 
349 

3 

Data Collection: Results and Findings 

The objectives of the study were explained to students and their responses to the sur-
vey were sought. They were assured that their responses would not influence course 
grades in any  way and  were  offered an option of  not disclosing their identities. The 
responses  were  manually tagged and  iteratively coded until no further code changes 
were  possible.  The  next  subsection  presents  the  probabilities  of  students  taking  up 
testing careers (Table 1), and the following subsections list advantages and drawbacks 
indicated by all respondents. 

Table 1. Chances of students taking up testing careers. 

Response 
Certainly Not 
No 
May be 
Yes 
Certainly Yes 

India 
14% 
31% 
47% 
7% 
0% 

China 
24% 
0% 
74% 
2% 
0% 

Malaysia 
1% 
7% 
52% 
34% 
6% 

China. Most of the students (74%) chose the ‘May Be’ option. 24% were very clear 
that they would not take up the testing career and chose ‘Certainly Not’ and only 2% 
of students chose the ‘Yes’ option. 

India. No student chose the ‘Certainly Yes’ option and only 7% of students chose the 
‘Yes’  option.  14%  of  students  selected  ‘Certainly  Not’  and  31%  opted  for  the  ‘No’ 
option. 47% percent of students were unsure and chose ‘May Be’. 

Malaysia. 40% of students were willing to be testers and 6% of them responded with 
‘Certainly Yes’. That’s a huge number compared to the other two countries. Only 8% 
of the students were not ready to take up testing careers, and a mere 1% of them re-
sponded with ‘Certainly No’. A significant 52% chose the ‘May Be’ option.  

3.1  Advantages of Testing Careers 

The analysis of responses to the advantages resulted in the following factors: 

•  Learning opportunities – Testers can learn about different  products, technologies, 
techniques,  and  languages  as  well  as  domains  such  as  retail,  financial.  They  also 
can  develop  softer  skills  due  to  more  interactions,  many  of  them  being  difficult 
ones, with developers and customers. Testing activities provide the full background 
of a project’s scope and architecture in a short period of time and may span all pro-
ject stages. Further, testing requires focusing on details and is a growing field.  
•  Important job – Testers are accountable and responsible for the product quality. In 

that sense, testing is an important part of the software life cycle.  

350 

•  Easy  job – This  refers  to  students’  belief  that  testing  does  have  well  defined  and 

easy processes, etc.  

•  Thinking  job  – This  encompasses  views  about  testing  such  as  being  challenging, 

creative, innovative, and requiring logical and analytical thinking.  

•  More job  – This  states  that  more  testing  jobs  are  available  and  due  to  the  higher 

demands, the jobs are secure and stable.  

•  Monetary benefits – Testing jobs does not have bad salary packages. 
•  Fun to break things – Some students felt that it is fun to break things and find de-

fects in software. 

The responses from each country are analyzed and presented in Table 2. Since we 
excluded  advantages  that  were  less  than  5%  (too  small  to  consider)  of  the  total  ad-
vantages, the total in each column may not be 100%. 

Table 2. Percentages of Salient Advantages by country 

Advantages 
Learning Opportunities 
Important Job 
Easy Job 
Thinking job 
More jobs 
Monetary benefits 
Fun to break things 

India 
30% 
14% 
9% 
38% 

China  Malaysia 

8% 

44% 

22% 
13% 
6% 

53% 
37% 
28% 
20% 
37% 
29% 
7% 

China. 44% and 22% of advantages referred to testing being easy and offering more 
jobs, respectively. 13% of advantages indicated to proper monetary rewards for test-
ing professionals. ‘Learning opportunities’ (8%), and ‘fun to break things’ (6%) were 
the next set of advantages. 

India.  Indian  students’  most  voted  advantage  was  testing  being  a  ‘thinking  job’ 
(38%). Its learning opportunities and importance fetched 30% and 14% of advantages, 
respectively. Easiness of the jobs polled just 9% of advantages. 

Malaysia. 53% of advantages referred to the learning opportunities the testing careers 
offered. 37% of advantages recognized the testing jobs to be important and the same 
percentage  realized  that  there  are  more  testing  jobs  available.  While  29%  asserted 
testing as having proper monetary incentives. Testing jobs were also seen as ‘thinking 
job’ (20%) and with the prospect of ‘fun to break thing's’ (7%). 

3.2  Drawbacks of Testing Careers 

The analysis of responses of the drawbacks resulted in the following factors: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
351 

•  Second-class citizen – This points out that testers are not involved in decision mak-
ing and are blamed for poor quality but developers are rewarded for good quality. 
They also include the evident lack of support from management in terms of unreal-
istic schedules, poor allocation of resources, and inadequate recognition. 

•  Career  development  –  Students  believe  that  there  is  limited  growth  in  the  testing 
field. Some also believe that testers’ jobs are less secure and that they are the first 
ones to lose their jobs during business downturns. 

•  Complexity  –  This  covers  tester  facing  complex  situations  such  as  different  ver-
sions  of  software  products,  platform  incompatibilities,  defects  not  getting  repro-
duced, and testing not given sufficient time, but being held responsible for product 
quality.  This  also  includes  the  fact  that  testers  need  to  look  at  business  and  tech-
nology  artifacts  and  understand  many  abstractions.  The  lack  of  clarity  around  re-
quirements also adds to the difficulties. 

•  Tedious – This refers to the repetitive nature of testing and respondents have also 

used words such as monotonous and boring.  

•  Missed development – Some believe that they miss opportunities for professional 
development by taking up testing careers. While some testers do develop test au-
tomation  systems,  the  students  seem  to  consider  that  as  different  from  actual  de-
velopment  activity.  Some  also  think  that  they  lose  learning  opportunities  that  are 
available to developers. 

•  Less monetary benefits – Some testers believe that testers’ jobs do not have mone-

tary benefits at par with developers.  

•  Finding others’  mistakes – It is not pleasant to find  mistakes in others’  work and 
tell them, although testers have to report anything that adversely impacts the value 
of the product, which may not go well with some stakeholders. 

•  Stressful job: This has to do with work-life balance. 
•  No Interest – Some students just mentioned that they have no interest in the field of 

software testing. 

The responses of students from each country are analyzed and presented in Table 
3.  Since  we  excluded  drawbacks  that  were  less  than  5%  of  the  total  drawbacks,  the 
total in each column may not be 100%. 

China.  The  Chinese  students’  highest  votes  went  to  complexity  (37%)  and  tedious-
ness  (35%)  of  testing  jobs.  ‘Missing  development’  fetched  7%,  and  ‘limited  career 
development’ and ‘less monetary benefits’ polled around 6% each. 

India.  The  Indian  students’  most  important  drawbacks  were  treatment  as  ‘second-
class  citizens’  (25%)  and  testing  being  complex  (24%)  and  tedious  (24%).  15%  re-
ported to ‘missing development’ and 5% to a lack of personal interest. 

Malaysia. The most voted drawbacks for Malaysian students were tediousness (39%), 
missing development (18%) and treatment as second-class citizens (only 7%). Com-

352 

plexity and finding mistakes of others polled 33% and 34% each respectively, which 
are quite high percentages. 

Table 3. Percentages of salient drawbacks by country 

Drawbacks 
Second-class citizen 
Career development 
Complexity  
Tedious 
Missing development 
Less monetary benefits 
Finding others’ mistakes 
Stressful job 
No interest 

China 

6% 
37% 
35% 
7% 
6% 

India 
25% 

24% 
24% 
15% 

5% 

Malaysia 
7% 
29% 
33% 
39% 
18% 
6% 
34% 
15% 
17% 

4 

Discussions 

In  this  section,  we  gleaned  through  the  main  findings  of  our  research.  Testing  jobs 
remain unpopular across China and India, but not in Malaysia which has a significant 
fraction of students (40%), who wanted to take up testing careers. It is, perhaps, due 
to having a prior exposure to testing through a course. This survey was taken by Ma-
laysian students towards the end their course in software testing.. 

A large segment of the Chinese students was undecided as almost half of Chinese 
undergraduates  take  up  graduate  studies  and  not  jobs.  Many  Indian  students  were 
against  taking  up  testing  careers,  which  may  be  due  to  the  low  unemployment  rate. 
The  higher  percentage  of  naysayers  from  India  and  China  may  be  because  they  not 
having a course on testing. In case of Malaysia, the naysayers were minimum, a rare 
1% of the sample. This indicates the importance of proper treatment of testing in cur-
ricula, like the Malaysian curriculum. 

Testing  offers  learning  opportunities  as  reported  by  students  from  all  the  three 
countries,  but  not  as  the  most  voted  advantage.  That  was,  in  the  case  of  Indian  stu-
dents’,  testing  is  perceived  as  a  ‘thinking  job’.  Chinese  students’  most  voted  ad-
vantages  were  ease  and  the  number  of  testing  jobs  and  that  of  Malaysian  students’ 
were learning opportunities, importance and the number of jobs. 

The most prominent drawbacks appeared to be tediousness in the case of Malaysi-
an students, and both tediousness and complexity resulting in stress and frustration in 
the  case  of  Chinese  students.  For  Indian  students,  ‘second-class  citizen  treatment’ 
meted  out  to  the  testers,  tediousness  and  the  complexity  were  the  most  prominent 
drawbacks. The respondents from all the three countries indicated ‘missing develop-
ment’ as a drawback with Chinese students not feeling so strongly about that. 

There appeared to be some confusion among students as  the list included contra-
dictory factors such as easy and thinking jobs, less and more monetary benefits, and 
tedious and creative jobs. Moreover, some students expressed frustration arising from 
debugging, as if the testers would be correcting the software, a common misconcep-
tion about testing and debugging. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
353 

5 

Implications to Computer Science and Software Engineering 
Curricula 

The study has  many implications  for colleges, especially for computer and software 
engineering departments, and for industry leaders. 

Astigarraga  et  al.  [7]  present  a  survey  of  the  software  testing  curriculum  in  the 
United States and discuss efforts made to improve the status of testing in the academ-
ic curriculum. They report minimal content on software testing in the undergraduate 
curriculum.  Either  the  testing  topics  are  included  in  courses  such  as  software  engi-
neering, combined with quality assurance, or through independent but optional cours-
es.  The  IEEE  guide  to  software  engineering  body  of  knowledge  SWEBOK  [8]  and 
ACM  –  IEEE  Curriculum  Guidelines  for  Undergraduate  Degree  Programs  in  Soft-
ware  Engineering  [9]  are  the  most  widely  used  sources  for  developing  curricula  in 
software  engineering  and  allied  disciplines.  Their  treatment  of  software  testing  is 
limited to process and technology dimensions and does not bring out the thinking and 
communication  challenges  faced  by  software  test  engineers.  Therefore,  curricular 
changes may be required to bring out the right perspectives of testing activities. 

Since testing courses can improve the perception of testing careers, colleges can in-
troduce them in their curricula. They can regularly review the curricula by consulting 
their alumni and to ongoing research. Since testing offers additional jobs, the course 
can help colleges improve placement prospects of their students. 

The testing curriculum needs to reflect the understanding that testers need to pro-
vide  correct  information  to  various  stakeholders,  and  appreciate  that  testing  is  ‘ap-
plied  epistemology’  grounded  in  ‘cognitive  psychology’.  The  faculty  must  dispel 
beliefs such as, testing is just mechanically running tests and comparing outputs with 
expected results. Instead, they should explain the  importance of testing and the phi-
losophy behind it and impress upon the students that any testing assignment and de-
sign of effective test cases can be very creative. They should develop testers who can 
understand different domains and the needs of users in those domains, to understand 
the developer  mindset and anticipate  mistakes that  developers  may be  making as an 
individual and as a team, to test creatively and efficiently under the given constraints, 
and to report the findings wisely to all stakeholders. 

Colleges can also create better awareness of the importance of testing by introduc-
ing deployable projects. The projects would help students understand the connection 
between software quality and testing. It would also give them a first-hand experience 
of  the  advantages  of  testing  such  as  relevance  and  the  thinking  nature  and  learning 
opportunities including learning the critical soft skills. 

Additionally, the advantages and drawbacks of testing careers, as perceived by stu-
dents, can  help test  managers and team leaders  scale the challenge of recruiting test 
professionals. Understanding the common as well as country-specific advantages and 
drawbacks  may  help  managers  dealing  with  global  teams.  As  emphasized  before, 
software testing is a human activity and testers, who willingly take up testing careers, 
can influence the quality of the final product. 

Since ‘tediousness’ is coming out as a major drawback, industry leaders may want 
to introduce sufficient automation or recruit high-school graduates for testing techni-

354 

cian roles, and provide more creative work to engineering graduates. Automation also 
brings  in  the  development  element,  which  may  take  care  of  the  drawback  ‘miss  de-
velopment’.  Another important thing that industry  leaders need to  work on is elimi-
nating  the  feeling  of  testers  of  being  ‘second-class  citizens’;  although  students  have 
not indicated this as a critical issue, professionals have done so [10], understandably 
because  they  are  working  on  the  environment.  If  students  come  to  know  about  this 
factor, they will further veer away from the testing profession. Colleges can counter 
the ‘second-class citizen’ problem by organizing interactions with thought leaders in 
software testing. 

6 

Conclusions and Future Directions 

This investigation presents an analysis of the survey responses of 251 computer and 
software engineering students from three different countries studying at similar levels, 
about their  willingness to take up software testing careers  and the factors that influ-
ence their decisions. 

The  general  empirical  findings  on  the  advantages  as  perceived  by  students  from 
these countries do not seem to converge. While learning opportunities and easiness of 
the job are the common advantages, their percentages vary widely from 8% to 44%. 
While  Indian  students’  major  advantages  are  ‘testing  is  a  thinking  job’  and  ‘testing 
offers learning opportunities’, for Chinese students it is ‘easiness and plenty of testing 
jobs’,  and  for  Malaysian  are  the  ‘learning  opportunities,  importance  and  the  large 
number of testing jobs’. In case of drawbacks, there is relatively a better convergence. 
The  common  drawbacks  are  tediousness,  complexity,  and  ‘missing  development’, 
although the range varies widely from 6% to 50%. ‘Treatment as second-class citizen’ 
figures  high in the drawbacks Indian students, but it  is irrelevant for Malaysian stu-
dents. 

It is heartening to see that there are more work-related advantages, such as, ‘chal-
lenging job’ and ‘important job’  that relate to intrinsic  motivation than environmen-
tal/hygiene factors such as ‘monetary rewards’. However, it is important that students 
feel that they  will be valued and respected and not treated as ‘second-class citizens’ 
while  working  as  testers.  Since  this  study  provides  factors  that  were  identified  by 
many survey respondents, they may be transferable to other situations. 

The study has limitations with respect to the sample studied. As a future direction, 
increasing the number of participants with more variation of gender, curricula of stu-
dents, and geographies (covering European and Pacific Rim nations) is required. Fur-
ther,  willingness  to  take  up  a  career  is  influenced  by  industry  dynamics  as  well  as 
colleges’ dynamics,  which  may require a longitudinal study  to better understand the 
phenomenon. Despite these limitations, the study offers insights useful for education-
al  institutions  to  appropriately  develop  their  students,  and  industry  practitioners  to 
tackle recruitment and retention problems of software testing professionals. 

355 

Appendix A – Survey Questions 

1. What are the three PROs (in the order of importance) for taking up testing career? 

a)  

  b)  

  c) 

2. What are three CONs (in the order of importance) for taking up testing career? 

a)  

  b)  

  c) 

3. What are chances of my taking up testing career? 

Certainly Not     No     Maybe     Yes     Certainly Yes 
Reasons: 

4. Gender (optional): 
5. GPA (optional): 

References 

1.  Whittaker, J.A.: What is software testing? And why is it so hard?, IEEE software, 17(1), 

70-79 (2000). 

2.  Sanches-Gordon,  M.,  Rijal,  L., Colomo-Palacios,  R.:  Beyond  technical  skills  in  software 
testing. 13th International Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software En-
gineering, ICSE-CHASE, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 4 pages (2020). 

3.  Cruz, S., Silva, F.Q., Capretz, L.F.: Forty years of research on personality in software en-

gineering: A mapping study, Computers in Human Behavior, 46, 94-113 (2015). 

4.  Capretz,  L.F.:  Bringing  the  human  factor  to  software  engineering,  IEEE  Software  31(2), 

102-104 (2014). 

5.  Santos, R., Magalhaes, C. Correia-Neto, J., Silva, F. and Capretz, L.F.: Would you like to 
motivate software testers? Ask them how, Proceeding of Empirical Software Engineering 
and Measurement (ESEM), pp. 95-104 (2017). 

6.  Cerioli, M., Leotta, M., Ricca, F.: What 5 million job advertisements tell us about testing: 

a preliminary empirical investigation,” The 35th ACM/SIGAPP, 9 pages (2020). 

7.  Astigarraga,  T.,  Dow,  E.  M.,  Lara,  C.,  Prewitt,  R.,  Ward,  M.  R.:  The  emerging  role  of 
software testing in curricula, Proceedings of Transforming Engineering Education: Creat-
ing Interdisciplinary Skills for Complex Global Environments, pp. 1-13, (2010). 

8.  Bourque,  P.  and  Fairley,  R.  E.:  Guide  to  the  Software  Engineering  Body  of  Knowledge 
(SWEBOK), Version 3.0., IEEE Computer Society Press, Piscataway, New Jersey (2014). 
9.  ACM, Software Engineering - Curriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate Degree Programs 

in Software Engineering, ACM, New York, (2014) 

10.  Capretz, L.F., Waychal, P., Jia, J., Lizama, Y., Varona, D.: International comparative stud-

ies on the software testing profession, IEEE IT Profession, 23(5), 56-61 (2021). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
