2
2
0
2

y
a
M
7
2

]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[

1
v
1
8
0
4
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Towards Quantum Gravity in the Lab on Quantum Processors

Illya Shapoval1, Vincent Paul Su2, Wibe de Jong1, Miro Urbanek1, and Brian Swingle3

1Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Rd, CA 94720, USA
2Center for Theoretical Physics and Department of Physics, University of California,
Berkeley, CA 94720, U.S.A.
3Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02453, USA

May 30, 2022

Abstract

The holographic principle and its realization in the AdS/CFT correspondence led to unexpected
connections between general relativity and quantum information. This set the stage for studying aspects
of quantum gravity models, which are otherwise diﬃcult to access, in table-top quantum-computational
experiments. Recent works have designed a special teleportation protocol that realizes a surprising
communication phenomenon most naturally explained by the physics of a traversable wormhole.
In
this work, we have carried out quantum experiments based on this protocol on state-of-the-art quantum
computers. The target quantum processing units (QPUs) included the Quantinuum’s trapped-ion System
Model H1-1 and ﬁve IBM superconducting QPUs of various architectures, with public and premium
user access. We report the observed teleportation signals from these QPUs with the best one reaching
80% of theoretical predictions. We outline the experimental challenges we have faced in the course of
implementation, as well as the new theoretical insights into quantum dynamics the work has led to.
We also developed QGLab — an open-source end-to-end software solution that facilitates conducting
the wormhole-inspired teleportation experiments on state-of-the-art and emergent generations of QPUs
supported by the Qiskit and tket SDKs. We consider our study and deliverables as an early practical
step towards the realization of more complex experiments for the indirect probing of quantum gravity in
the lab.

1

Introduction

The twin pillars of quantum ﬁeld theory and general relativity provide an accurate description of nature
across more than 40 orders of magnitude from the tiny constituents of nuclei to the large-scale structure
of the universe. However, these two theories of nature have not yet been fused to give a theory of the
quantum physics of spacetime and gravity. The search for mathematically consistent models of quantum
spacetime and the experimental challenge of determining which model describes nature constitute the
problem of quantum gravity.

Experimental access to quantum gravity is challenging at present since it apparently requires the
ability to measure miniscule physical eﬀects. Hence, much of the activity in the ﬁeld to date has focused
on formulating mathematically consistent models of quantum gravity. The quantum physics of black holes
plays a central role in this search. Indeed, since the theoretical discovery of black hole entropy [1, 2, 3, 4]
(a general result which follows from mild assumptions about the unknown full theory), the community
has invested enormous eﬀort into the problem of accounting for the microstates underlying black hole
entropy, e.g. [5].

This line of inquiry led to the AdS/CFT correspondence [6, 7, 8], which is currently our only candidate
for a complete model of quantum gravity. This theory has spurred enormous activity in the ﬁeld, and has
led to unexpected connections between quantum gravity, quantum information, and many-body physics,
e.g. [9]. However, as presently formulated, AdS/CFT only applies to universes that are qualitatively
diﬀerent from the universe we observe. So the search continues for consistent models of the kind of
cosmology we see in the sky.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
With experimental access to the quantum properties of the naturally occurring gravitational ﬁeld still
far away, a new idea has emerged: perhaps we can use quantum simulators and quantum computers to
indirectly probe quantum gravity in the lab [10, 11, 12, 13]. Of course, such experiments will not reveal
the ﬁne details of the quantum nature of gravity in our universe, but they could shed light on shared
structural issues and hard problems arising from the strong coupling dynamics that is likely inherent
to any realistic model of quantum gravity. Moreover, quantum many-body systems hosting collective
excitations whose most succinct description is in terms of an emergent quantum gravitational ﬁeld are
fascinating and worthy of study in their own right. We also emphasize that these experiments are distinct
from studies of analogue gravity, e.g. [14], and from eﬀorts to directly probe the quantum nature of the
gravitational attraction that holds us to the Earth, e.g. [15].

In this paper, we take a practical step towards the goal of quantum gravity in the lab in the context
of commercial quantum processors. Following recent proposals in the literature, we have designed and
carried out “wormhole-inspired” many-body teleportation experiments on IBM and Quantinuum quan-
tum processors and we observe a signal consistent with the predictions in [13, 16, 17] up to an overall
reduction in ﬁdelity. The experimental protocol we consider is inspired by the physics of quantum gravity
and, in the right parameter regime, does directly detect holographic wormholes. However, that regime is
still inaccesible on current devices, so here we study a simpler situation where the phenomena of interest
arise in quantum chaotic systems generally. To be clear, models of quantum gravity are expected to
exhibit strongly coupled chaotic dynamics and the protocol itself arose from considerations of quantum
gravity, but we do not yet claim to observe an eﬀect unique to quantum gravity.

Our long-term vision is to develop a set of (quantum) computational tools accessible to all interested
members of the quantum gravity community. To this end, in addition to our experimental results, we
developed a software package built to run our experiments on IBM quantum processors. The package
can also be interfaced to Quantinuum systems. In addition to facilities for customized optimization and
running the basic experiments, this package includes various methods of error mitigation. Even as the
ﬁeld moves toward fault tolerance, error mitigation will continue to play an important role in practical
implementations. We show that, on IBM devices, by optimizing the circuits of interest we can already
achieve a signal with 20% signal ﬁdelity of the ideal result, and we demonstrate that error mitigation can
yield another 15% towards the ideal limit. We also demonstrate that the Quantinuum quantum processor
yields a signal with 80% ﬁdelity of the ideal result without employing any error mitigation techniques.
Importantly, the coupling dependence is qualitatively reproduced in both cases, again up to the same
overall ﬁdelity reduction.

The concrete data presented in this paper refer to experiments involving 7 and 6 qubits on the IBM
and Quantinuum quantum processors, respectively. These were the simplest non-trivial cases we could
consider physics-wise given the architectural characteristics and features of the IBM and Quantinuum
quantum processors and the run time allocations we had on the platforms. We do observe interesting
physics already in this case, and we emphasize that the machinery we have developed can be immediately
applied to larger systems or other kinds of interaction topologies as they become available.

The experimental sizes we consider are also comparable to other pioneering experimental studies of
quantum scrambling and teleportation, including [18, 19]. In these works, the scrambling unitary was
constructed by clever manipulation to enhance the size of local operators. In contrast, our unitary is
generated by time evolution of a simple spin chain. One price we pay is that we do not teleport the full
quantum state, but rather a classical bit of information. Another diﬀerence is that our protocol does not
rely on a probabilistic post-selection on Bell pairs, but rather simply applies a two-sided coupling. Here
we emphasize that, unlike those works, we had no control over the target quantum processors and we
did not employ pulse-level control in our experiments to achieve the results. For instance, the way we
adapted to the error physics in these devices was only to use the provided circuit optimization algorithms
and standard error mitigation techniques.

In particular, we faced an interesting experimental challenge: how can we choose the parameters of
our model to give the largest possible signal given the architectural and noise constraints. As we discuss in
detail below, this experimentally driven process of exploration led to an unexpected result, a regime of the
model where we could achieve perfect transmission of a classical bit in the ideal noiseless setting using the
wormhole-inspired protocol. This is still a surprising result, since one does not expect strongly scrambling
systems to be able to transmit even classical bits, not to mention qubits. We were ultimately able to
explain this physics using the same operator-size-based language that underlies the traversable wormhole
physics and teleportation-by-size [13, 16, 17], but the larger lesson is that the process of developing
a practical experimental protocol itself led to new theoretical insights into quantum dynamics. This
will surely remain true as we continue to work towards experimental simulations of quantum gravity.
Indeed, our ﬁndings already raise new questions about potential regimes in AdS/CFT where traversable

2

wormholes can transmit classical but not quantum data.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the holographic teleportation
protocol considered in this work. We discuss both the holographic motivation as well as the concrete
model we consider, a quantum spin chain introduced by Bertini-Kos-Prosen (BKP) in Ref. [20, 21]. We
review the ideal case for the BKP model and discuss the particular parameter choice we used in the
experiments. In Section 3, we outline our implementation choices and solutions, including applied circuit
optimization and error mitigation techniques, as well as provide motivation for and an overview of the
QGLab software tools. Finally, we report the experimental results in Section 4 and, in Section 5 oﬀer a
vision for subsequent research in this direction.

2 From Quantum Gravity to Qubits

In this section we review the wormhole-inspired teleportation (WIT) protocol that forms the basis for
our experimental results. Though its origins come from studying traversable wormholes [22, 23] in the
AdS/CFT correspondence [6], recent work [13, 16, 17] has elucidated its quantum mechanical workings
by studying a quantity known as operator size, which we brieﬂy discuss. A necessary ingredient of WIT is
chaotic time evolution. Thus, we also discuss the BKP model [24, 21], whose time evolution is particularly
amenable to implementation on near term quantum devices.

2.1 Wormhole-Inspired Teleportation

Let us begin with the existence of a surprising phenomenon. There is an experimental protocol whereby
the quantum dynamics of two entangled systems undergoing chaotic and scrambling time evolution
generates an eﬀective channel that teleports quantum information from one system to the other. Whereas
chaos tends to be associated with eﬀectively erasing the initial conditions, the transmission of information
succeeds precisely when scrambling is maximal. The origins of this protocol stem from the consideration
of entangled black holes in AdS/CFT. A negative energy coupling between the pair allows information to
teleport from one exterior to the other, a feat that would violate causality without the coupling [22, 25, 26].
Physically, the coupling transforms a pre-existing spatial connection generated by entanglement into a
traversable wormhole. As we gain more control over quantum devices, one expects that the CFT side
of the duality could in principle be simulated, indirectly probing such wormhole phenomena and other
aspects of quantum gravity via the AdS/CFT duality.

A natural question is to ask how far we are from probing such eﬀects on a near term quantum device.
Surprisingly, for a handful of qubits, far from a regime where quantum gravitational eﬀects are expected
to be relevant, we can directly observe quantum teleportation, albeit with dephasing noise. The lesson
here is a surprising one. Rather than the usual quest to discern which quantum mechanical principles
survive in a full theory of quantum gravity, a phenomena occurring in quantum gravity has inspired us
to search for an analog in quantum mechanics without gravity, leading to rich discoveries about operator
size. Put another way, in the pursuit of investigating quantum gravitational phenomena, we learned
something new about something we thought we already knew.

We now turn to introducing the WIT protocol that forms the basis for our experimental results in
greater detail. The ﬁrst ingredient, much like the original quantum teleportation protocol, is a number,
n, of Bell pairs. Half of each Bell pair is sequestered into the “left” system consisting of n qubits, leaving
a maximally mixed state on the left that is puriﬁed by a “right” system consisting of the other half of
each Bell pair. Supposing each of the two systems share the same Hamiltonian (up to a transpose in the
computational basis), one evolves the left system backwards in time by an amount t0. The state |ψ(cid:105) to
be teleported is then swapped with the ﬁrst qubit and scrambled with the rest of the system by evolving
forwards in time again by an amount t0. A two-sided coupling of the form eigV ,

V =

1
K

K
(cid:88)

j

σz
j,Lσz

j,R,

(1)

acts on the remaining K = n − 1 entangled partners, sometimes referred to as carrier qubits, on the
left and right with g setting the strength of the interaction. By allowing the right system to simply
time evolve an amount t0, the state |ψ(cid:105) reappears. Somehow the scrambling dynamics which deﬁne the
system actually serve to exactly refocus the quantum information to a single register. These steps are
summarized in Figure 1.

This experiment highlights one surprising aspect of quantum dynamics, and it is particularly tantaliz-
ing to ask whether this can indeed be used to probe quantum gravitational eﬀects, as proposed in Ref [13].

3

Figure 1: Overview of wormhole-inspired teleportation (WIT) protocol. The key ingredients are preparation
of Bell pairs (blue), forwards (green) and backwards (red) time evolution, and a two sided coupling (orange) of
the form (1). Note that successful teleportation of the state |ψ(cid:105) can be diagnosed by studying the correlators
of time-evolved operators as described in [17]. For more detailed versions of the circuit for our experimental
setup, see Figure 4.

While we again do not claim to have reached this stage, we outline here two necessary ingredients. (1)
The ability to prepare entangled states on large numbers of qubits. Speciﬁcally, access to thermoﬁeld
n e−βEn/2 |n(cid:105)L |¯n(cid:105)R at various temperatures1. The Bell
double states of the form |TFD(β)(cid:105) ≡ 1
Z
pair used above is simply the inﬁnite temperature limit |TFD(0)(cid:105). (2) Implementation of forwards and
backwards time evolution for a theory with a gravitational dual, such as N = 4 Super Yang-Mills.

1/2
β

(cid:80)

Because our code is written in a hardware agnostic way, we hope that it will be immediately useful as
future quantum devices with larger quantum volume [31] come online. It is of course an open question to
ﬁnd out what other theories have a simple gravitational dual, and the presence of holographic wormholes
is one useful diagnostic of a simple dual.

2.2 Successful Teleportation via Operator Size

We now turn to a brief review of teleportation by size, as explained in [13, 17], which provides a micro-
scopic mechanism that enables the WIT protocol to work.

A fundamental notion is the deﬁnition of operator size. Consider a generic operator O on a system

of m qubits expressed in the basis of Pauli strings of length m.

O =

(cid:88)

cP P

P ∈Pm

(2)

We consider both the winding size distribution qO(l) and the size distribution QO(l) of the operator
which are deﬁned as

qO(l) =

(cid:88)

c2
P

, QO(l) =

(cid:88)

|cP |2,

(3)

|P |=l

|P |=l

where |P | denotes the number of non-identity terms in the Pauli string P . In the case of real coeﬃcients
cP , as will be the case for our experiment, the two deﬁnitions coincide, though the former is expected to
be relevant when there is a dual gravitational picture [13].

Since the state injection on the “left” in the WIT protocol can be thought of as an arbitrary pertur-
bation at some time in the past and we would like to compare this to the state emerging in the future
on the “right”, it suﬃces to study time-evolved operators O(t) = e+iHtOe−iHt. Assuming that the time
evolution is maximally scrambling, one expects that at late times the size distribution of O(t) has most
of its support at size m since the operator would have spread to the entire system.

Finally, it is instructive to understand the eﬀect of the two sided coupling. It is easiest to consider
with
the maximally entangled state between the left and right systems as previously described. It

the action again in the Pauli string basis. We start with states of the form |P (cid:105)LR = PR
(cid:12)
(cid:12)φ+(cid:11)
turns out that |P (cid:105)LR is in fact an eigenstate of V .

(cid:12)
(cid:12)φ+(cid:11)

LR

LR

1In certain systems, preparing the TFD can be recast as a ground state problem [27, 28] which is how Refs [29, 30] approach

TFD preparation.

4

V |P (cid:105)LR = (1 − SK,Z [P ]) |P (cid:105)LR

(4)
where SK,Z [P ] counts the number of terms in P that do not commute with σz restricted to the K
carrier qubits. Assuming all Pauli terms are equally likely as would be the case in a maximally scrambled
system, in expectation, this gives a measure of the size of P up to some prefactors. Thus, the coupling
has the action of applying a size-dependent phase in the Pauli basis. If the size distribution of O is highly
concentrated, as would be the case if most of the support is in high-weight Pauli strings, then the state
O (cid:12)

(cid:12)φ+(cid:11)
Putting it all together, therefore, when OL(−t) is tightly peaked as a result of time evolution on
the left side, the two sided coupling applies a global phase that is unwound by the corresponding time
evolution on the right side, uncovering the original message sent in on the left side.

would also be an approximate eigenstate of the coupling.

LR

A succinct diagnostic for successful quantum teleportation based on the above ingredients was given

in [17]. The two necessary and suﬃcient conditions are:

1. The correlator (cid:10)OL(−t)eigV OR(t)(cid:11) = reiθO has maximal magnitude (r = 1) for all choices of O.
2. The phases, θO, of each of the correlators are aligned for all operators acting on the message Hilbert

space.

When dealing with Bell pairs, the ﬁrst condition is trivially satisﬁed. It is the operator phases that
are relevant for our experimental teleportation results. As noted, when acting on Bell pairs, these phases
are proportional to the size of time evolved operators. In our model, not all operators will share the
same size distribution as a function of time, leading to sub-maximal teleportation. We elaborate on these
ﬁndings in the next subsection.

2.3 Theoretical Expectations in the BKP Model

Since a primary goal of this work is to demonstrate successful teleportation on an available quantum
device, we turn to reviewing the self-dual kicked Ising model introduced by Bertini-Kos-Prosen [20, 21].
Later in this section, we will also present the analytical and numerical expectations for our quantum
experiment. Of course, we are far from probing quantum gravity as outlined in the above requirements.
Nonetheless, the BKP model is suﬃcient for observing successful teleportation in the WIT protocol.
Time evolution in the BKP model is discretized with each time step featuring two alternating components
U = UK UI with

(cid:32)

n
(cid:88)

(cid:33)

(cid:32)

n−1
(cid:88)

n
(cid:88)

(cid:33)

UK = exp

ib

σx
j

, UI = exp

iJ

j σz
σz

j+1 + i

hjσz
j

(5)

j

j

j

A nice feature that makes it suitable to implementation on a quantum devices is that both UK and UI
are individually composed of commuting terms.

Much recent theoretical excitement around this model is due to its maximally chaotic behavior at
the “self-dual” point, where |b| = |J| = π/4 and the hj are initialized as independently distributed
random variables [20].
In the thermodynamic limit, the authors of [20] show that the spectral form
factor, the Fourier transform of the two point function of spectral density, in this model matches the
expected behavior from random matrix theory, a powerful framework for describing quantum chaotic
systems. Another important sense in which it is maximally chaotic is that the entanglement entropy of
a subregion grows as fast as possible, namely linearly with time for this one dimensional model [21].

Using available quantum simulation packages, we carry out the above WIT protocol using the BKP
model. Based on realistic hardware error rates, we considered n = 3 qubits per side for T = 3 time steps.
We ﬁnd that the teleportation signal, which we describe in more detail momentarily, is indeed maximized
at the self-dual point. A surprising ﬁnding was that the particular choice of zero on-site magnetic ﬁeld
hj = 0 also increased the signal, deﬁned as the expected value of Z on the output qubit. In this limit, our
teleportation circuit is actually Cliﬀord, allowing for easier analysis of operator size. See Appendix A for
details. From here on, we refer to this set of parameters {b = J = π/4, hj = 0, n = 3, T = 3} as BKP∗.

A theoretical calculation using Haar random unitaries, in place of time evolution generated by a
Hamiltonian, was carried out in [13], showing that the eﬀective channel is a depolarizing channel followed
by a ﬂip about the Y axis.

EHaar(ρ) : ρ → Y ∆λ(ρ)Y

(6)

where ∆λ is a depolarizing channel with degradation 1 − λ, which depends on the two-sided coupling
strength g.

Compared to the Haar random case, we ﬁnd that our choice of time evolution leads to perfect
transmission of a classical bit in the ideal case for T = 3 time steps. That is, teleportation of the

5

Figure 2: Teleportation ﬁdelity of the state |ψ(cid:105) = |0(cid:105) under the WIT protocol (Fig. 1) with the special set of
parameters BKP∗. The parameter g controls the strength of the two-sided coupling and aﬀects the phases
θO. Perfect transmission occurs when (cid:104)Z(cid:105) = −1. When the coupling g = π
2 , phase alignment occurs between
θI = eig and θZ = ei(π−g). For the same experimental parameters, both (cid:104)Y (cid:105) and (cid:104)X(cid:105) are 0. For the same
circuit, input states that are eigenstates of the X, Y operators lead to ρout = I, which fails to teleport any
information.

quantum state with complete dephasing noise. Using process tomography (see [32] for a review) to
characterize the qubit channel that takes ρin to ρout, we ﬁnd that

EBKP∗ (ρ) : ρ → Y ∆λ(Φ(ρ))Y

(7)

where Φ is a perfectly dephasing channel Φ(ρ) : ρ → 1
2 (ρ + ZρZ). In other words, eigenstates of Z get
ﬂipped with unit ﬁdelity while eigenstates of X and Y lead to a maximally mixed state. The fact that
we obtained this channel is directly related to the fact that we tried to maximize the expectation value
of Z on the output when the input was a Z eigenstate. This was possible because the circuit had the
surprising ability to transmit a classical bit perfectly at the cost of losing coherence. Other choices are
also worth exploring and could plausibly lead to other interesting regimes of the dynamics.

Let us emphasize two important points about this channel characterization. The ﬁrst is that this
description is highly sensitive to the experimental parameters we discussed, including model parameters,
system size, and number of time steps. If we reduce the number of time steps by 1, the channel would
instead dephase in the Y basis rather than the Z (computational) basis. Additionally, in this Cliﬀord
regime, the dynamics are periodic and thus, the channel of this circuit does not settle to a “late time”
limit expected to occur after a scrambling time. Secondly, we point out that this simpliﬁed, though
ﬁne-tuned circuit, manages to reproduce the characteristic coupling-dependent depolarization as in the
Haar random case. This is a rather non-trivial check that the same physics is at play, even though our
circuit only sends a classical bit’s worth of information rather than a full qubit state.

Interestingly, this case of sub-perfect teleportation can be precisely understood by analyzing the con-
ditions laid out in the previous subsection. For our circuit that teleports one qubit’s worth of information,
we need to analyze correlators for the single qubit operators {I, X, Y, Z}. Condition 1 is trivially satisﬁed,
but the phases are not aligned for any choice of g. This is because the sizes of the time-evolved operators
do not match. We list time-evolved operators in Appendix B. This is analogous to the late time, high
temperature regime described in [17]. However, note that the Cliﬀord dynamics are actually periodic,
so there is not a well deﬁned notion of scrambling time, and thus no well-deﬁned notion of late time in
terms of the operator growth.

To simplify the necessary measurements for the experiment, we take the input state |ψ(cid:105) to be the plus
eigenstate of the Z operator, |0(cid:105). The output ﬁdelity can then simply be measured as the expectation
value of the Z operator, where perfect ﬁdelity would result in an expectation value of (cid:104)Z(cid:105)|ψ(cid:105)out
= −1. We
then calculated the expectation value of (cid:104)Z(cid:105) as a function of the two sided coupling g, ﬁnding that indeed

6

it is maximized at g = π/2, which coincides with phase alignment between Z and the identity operator
I. See Figure 2. Having these phases aligned is signiﬁcant because the density matrix for |ψ(cid:105) = |0(cid:105) can
be expressed as a linear combination of I and Z.

That this quantum chaotic circuit transmits classical information is rather unexpected. One inter-
pretation of these results is that it suggests that holographic teleportation may not always correspond to
perfect quantum teleportation. In the case of holography, we expect this transmission to correspond to
travelling through a wormhole. However, it is possible to engineer scenarios where the infalling particle
interacts with some other matter behind the horizon, leading to a type of decoherence similar to one as
we have observed. For example, if one starts not with the TFD state but a slightly perturbed one, the
interior geometry may no longer simply be the vacuum. Carrying out the protocol with these diﬀerent
initial conditions is the so-called “wormhole tomography” suggested in [13].

3

Implementation

We now turn to the implementation of the WIT on quantum processors. As the global race for scalable
quantum processors heats up, the manifold of digital quantum processors fabricated by research labs,
startups and technology companies worldwide is rapidly expanding.
In this work, we used quantum
systems from IBM and Quantinuum to experiment with the WIT. On the one hand, we chose IBM
Quantum [33] for its full quantum stack embracing a wide family of superconducting quantum processor
units (QPUs), which are available through IBM Cloud®, and the open-source software development kit
for programming and using the QPUs. Furthermore, our access to the premium QPU lineup through the
IBM Quantum Network opened additional degrees of freedom. On the other hand, we countered that
with a Quantinuum system based on trapped-ion qubits, which provided us with leading-edge error rates
and all-to-all topology. In this section, we will introduce the QPUs of our choice and will walk through
the main aspects of adapting the protocol to the architectures of our choice.

3.1 Quantum processors

3.1.1

IBM Quantum processors

State-of-the-art IBM quantum systems implement an electrically controlled solid-state quantum com-
puter. The implementation is based on ﬁxed-frequency superconducting transmon qubits. The set of
native gates, implemented in microwave pulses, consists of single-qubit I, RX, RZ and two-qubit CX
gates. Select pairs of qubits are coupled by coplanar waveguide bus resonators thus forming a lattice of a
certain topology. The CX gate can only act on directly connected qubits, imposing the lattice topology
to be a circuit-routing constraint in cases when the algorithmic coupling graph is not a subgraph of the
QPU lattice.

Figure 3: The square-lattice architecture of the Canary-family public-access 15-qubit ibmq 16 melbourne
chip (left) and the heavy-hexagonal lattice of the Falcon-family premium-access 27-qubit ibmq montreal chip
(right) featuring lower-degree vertices.

Figure 3 shows two types of lattices we experimented with that are notably diﬀerent in terms of
topology satisﬁability for our purposes. The square lattice of ibmq 16 melbourne – one of the early-
generation IBM Quantum Canary processors – matches perfectly the coupling requirements of the WIT
protocol. In general, a perfectly matching topology allows to avoid the qubit routing overhead and so,
with all other conditions being equal, yields better experimental results. However, ibmq 16 melbourne
suﬀered from relatively high error rates that were diﬃcult to mitigate, leading to mediocre results in

7

our experiments. On the other hand, the heavy-hexagonal lattice2 of the Falcon-family ibmq montreal
processor led to superior signal yield for our protocol. In this case, the unavoidable routing overhead in
the number of gates caused by the lattice topology mismatch was entirely oﬀset by the beneﬁts of lower-
sparsity heavy-hex topology, the most crucial of which were increased zero-frequency collision yield [34]
and improved overall gate ﬁdelity [35]. These improvements, as well as others in gate design, qubit
readout, and control software, allowed ibmq montreal to reach the IBM-stated quantum volume of 128
— the highest quantum volume across all accessible IBM devices to date3. These considerations made
ibmq montreal, as well as three other heavy-hexagonal processors of lower quantum volume — ibmq paris,
ibmq manhattan, ibmq toronto4 — our target devices for this study.

3.1.2 Quantinuum processor

Quantinuum’s universal quantum computers use moveable ions as qubits within a trapped-ion quantum
charge-coupled device [36]. All experiments were done on Quantinuum’s 10-qubit linear-architecture
System Model H1-1, powered by Honeywell. Its gate set consists of single-qubit RX, RY, RZ and two-
qubit ZZ gates. CX gate can be readily implemented through a combination of one-qubit operations
combined with one ZZ. In addition, the system has a highly accurate reset gate operation available to
its users. The trapped ion has an all-to-all qubit connectivity, with ions being shuttled to enable direct
connections with all qubits. The H1-1 has demonstrated average ﬁdelities of 99.99% for single-qubit
operations, and 99.7% for two-qubit gate operations and state preparation and measurement, claiming
a quantum volume of 1024 [37].

3.2 Circuit compilation and optimization

In section 2.1, we formulated the protocol as a hardware-agnostic abstraction. To execute the protocol
on quantum hardware, the high-level circuit representation must be compiled to target device to account
for the physical constraints and properties of its architecture. The bare minimum of such compilation
includes three phases: decomposition of high-level gates to basis gates, initial mapping of logical qubits to
physical ones, and routing the circuit to account for the qubits’ coupling constraints, if any. Optionally,
the main phases can be interleaved with various optimizations making compiled circuit shallower. Finally,
the mapping and routing phases can be performed under the requirement of minimizing the amount of
noise the compiled circuit would accrue from gate and measurement errors. Circuit optimization and the
noise-aware mode of mapping and routing, despite being optional, are often determinant for the quality
or even feasibility of a quantum experiment on the NISQ QPUs. The extent of optimization and noise
minimization turned out to be critical for the success of our experiments on the IBM systems.

State-of-the-art quantum compilers, such as those provided by Qiskit and tket SDKs, can automate
the above-mentioned circuit translations to a certain degree. Default turnkey compilation workﬂows yield
excellent results for simple input circuits. In general, however, ﬁnding an optimal compilation solution
for a circuit of arbitrary type and complexity on the one hand, and faulty and constrained hardware
on the other, is non-trivial and, in practice, heuristic.
In this light, in addition to the main goal of
demonstrating the WIT protocol on the cutting-edge hardware, we also aimed to evaluate the current
capacity of available software to compile optimally — either out-of-the-box, or with minimal tweaks —
the circuits of nature and size similar to the one of our interest (see Figure 4), and to create a reference
point for related circuit extensions that might be of further interest for quantum gravity studies.

3.2.1 Compiling for IBMQ Montreal

Table 1 summarizes the compilation outputs obtained with Qiskit and tket over a set of conﬁgurations on
ibmq montreal, the processor that we found to be the most capable in the IBM lineup for our purposes.
The researched phase space spanned default and moderately tuned workﬂows, as well as more intrusive
workﬂow re-conﬁgurations.

The results are ordered by CX gate counts. The worst compilation output, solution A, was generated
by Qiskit with its default pass manager in default conﬁguration. No teleportation yield — neither raw

2The heavy-hex lattice is the fourth and the latest generation of topology for IBM QPUs, which has been made the basis

for all in-production processors with 16 or more qubits since August 2021.

3In April of 2022, IBM announced achieving a quantum volume of 256 on the Falcon-family ibmq prague. However, the

processor is not yet publicly accessible at the time of this writing.

4All experiments on IBM processors were run over the period of several months, until September 2021, spanning multiple
generations of processors. As of this writing, ibmq 16 melbourne, ibmq paris, and ibmq manhattan are decommissioned by IBM.

8

Figure 4: High-level WIT quantum circuit at g = π/2 with 3 qubits per side for +Z initial state and ﬁnal
Z measurement. Message is inserted with the SWAP gate (blue line connecting two crosses). [Drawn with
IBM’s Qiskit SDK]

nor error-mitigated — was measured on ibmq montreal in this case due to the amount of noise accrued by
the compiled circuit. In solution B, the improvements in gate counts brought by tket’s default sequence
of passes were still not suﬃcient to overcome the noise.
It is with solution C that we were able to
extract a weak teleportation signal with error-mitigation enabled. The change became possible with
(1) reconﬁguration of the pass manager used in case A to use SABRE [38] — the iterative swap-based
bidirectional heuristic algorithm for routing of the input circuit, and (2) selection of a solution with
minimal CX count across a thousand of identically conﬁgured compilations. We also implemented a
custom sequence of passes for tket eliminating 11 CX gates as compared to the tket’s default sequence of
passes (solution D). Finally, the best solution (E) (see Figure 6 of Appendix C) was generated, somewhat
unconventionally, chaining both compilers: ﬁrst, applying tket in conﬁguration D, followed by Qiskit in
conﬁguration A.

3.2.2 Compiling for Quantinuum System Model H1-1

The high-level WIT circuits (see Figure 4) generated by QGLab (see Section 3.4) were compiled for H1-1
manually. Firstly, we adapted the circuits to the processor’s gate set. Secondly, the fast mid-circuit
reset gate featured by the processor allowed to reduce the number of involved qubits from seven to six

9

Compilation output

CX

SX

RZ

Depth

Size

A: Qiskit: default passes
B: tket: default passes
C: Qiskit: reconﬁgured case A
D: tket: custom pass sequence
E: Hybrid: tket & Qiskit

73–92
49
39
38
34

64–80
83
59–78
82
64–69

83–96
103
69–96
123
81–86

115–147
131
72–90
123
84–90

227–265
237
171–214
244
183–190

Table 1: Gate counts of the WIT circuit (see Figure 4) compiled for ibmq montreal. Optimization levels in
all stages of tket (v0.11.0) and Qiskit (v0.26.2) are maximal. The outcomes are ordered by CX counts —
the major factor for experiment ﬁdelity. Ranges in counts reﬂect variability of output over 14 compilation
trials, with the variability arising from stochastic techniques of the Qiskit’s compiler. Chaining tket and
Qiskit lead to the best compilation solution.

by eliminating the swap gate used for message insertion on IBM QPUs. Also, the all-to-all topology
of the processor allowed to avoid qubit routing. Finally, we did not apply any gate-level optimizations
to the circuit on this processor. The compiled circuits thus contained 43 CX gates and preserved the
original square-lattice structure of the protocol. In Section 4, we will see whether the advantage of the
best solution for the IBM Montreal QPU in terms of the number of CX gates (see Table 1) transformed
into any advantage in experimental signal yield on the IBM processor.

3.3 Error-mitigation techniques employed on the IBM QPUs

Current quantum computers are sensitive to various errors. These errors can be broadly separated
into coherent and incoherent errors. Coherent errors are typically caused by slight miscalibrations of
gate parameters and lead to under-rotations or over-rotations of gate actions on qubits. They can be
characterized by unitary matrices and are typically repeated in series of experiments. On the other hand,
incoherent errors typically originate from interactions between the system and the environment. They
are stochastic and transform a pure quantum state into a mixed state.

Another source of error are state preparation and readout errors. We assume that all qubits in the
system are prepared in the perfect zero state. This is not always the case as there may exist a small
population of excited states. Readout errors are caused by a measurement apparatus.
In supercon-
ducting qubits, there is a balance between the duration of the measurement and its uncertainty. Long
measurement lead to decay of qubits, so the measurement duration has to be properly tuned. There is
also a certain chance of measuring the incorrect qubit outcome due to small overlap between probability
distributions of the measured physical quantities.

In this study, we employed the following techniques to mitigate errors in experiments on the IBM

QPUs:

• Heralding. A measurement of all qubits is performed at the beginning of a circuit. If the outcome
is not the zero state, the ﬁnal results of the circuit execution is discarded. It can be alternatively
implemented as active qubit reset. Heralding mitigates errors in state preparation.

• Readout-error correction. Readout errors are caused by statistical uncertainty and long duration of
measurement. To correct them, we ﬁrst measure a readout response matrix, i.e., we prepare each
computational state and sample the outcome statistics. Then we use the response matrix to correct
the measured statistics for the target circuit [39, 40].

• Randomized compiling. This technique transforms coherent errors into incoherent errors that can be
mitigated more eﬃciently. We replace each CX gate by a pair of single-qubit gates, a CX gate, and
another pair of single-qubit gates acting on the respective qubits. The single-qubit gates are picked
from {I, X, Y, Z }, where I is the identity gate, and X, Y, and Z are the Pauli gates. They are
chosen randomly, but in a way that the total action of all ﬁve gates is again a CX gate. The ideal
circuit output therefore does not change, but each individual CX is now applied in a randomized
frame. By executing many randomized instances of such circuits, we eﬀectively convert coherent
errors in the CX gates into incoherent errors [41].

• Mitigation with estimation circuits. We replace all CX gates in the circuit with identities to create
an estimation circuit from the target circuit. We then use the estimation circuit to measure the

10

global noise rate and use the noise rate to correct an output of the target circuit [42].

• Zero-noise extrapolation. With this method we vary the amount of noise by replacing each CX
gate with three and ﬁve CX gates. We execute the modiﬁed circuits to measure expectation values
with increased circuit noise. Then we extrapolate to the zero-noise limit to obtain a corrected
expectation value [43, 44, 45].

Heralding, readout-error correction, and randomized compiling were applied to each executed circuit.
We performed mitigation with estimation circuits on each circuit required for zero-noise extrapolation.
The zero-noise extrapolation was used to obtain the ﬁnal mitigated values. Detailed discussion of the
mitigation protocol can be found in Ref. [42].

3.4 QGLab: automating holographic teleportation experiments

The nature and architecture of state-of-the-art quantum processors and services entail several peculiarities
in assembling and postprocessing a quantum computation as compared to its classical counterpart. In
particular, the assembling stage is more ambiguous, hardware-dependent, and time-bound. For example,
a compilation solution for a given processor may degrade over time in terms of associated computation
yield due to the inherent drift of the hardware. For circuits of suﬃcient size and noise accrual power,
the eﬀect may undermine experimental results or even wipe them out in cases when the measured
quantities are theoretically marginal. This prompts just-in-time revaluation of compilation solutions for
each experiment session. The problem of a compilation solution going obsolete can, however, extend
further due to the QPU contention among the ever-growing number of users of cloud-based quantum
services, which results in the execution time being delayed for hours, days, or, sometimes, weeks. In
addition, a user of cloud-based quantum service faces relatively frequent QPU ﬁrmware upgrades, the
retirement of old and releases of new QPU generations. All aforementioned factors necessitate the ability
to switch between processors having, in general, incompatible topology or basis gates with minimal
eﬀort — preferably, in an automatized way — while maximizing the expected computation outcome.
The dimensions of scalability and extensibility of experiments, hardware-speciﬁc job partitioning call for
more automation, which, if implemented, would make the physical experiments more streamlined.

We developed QGLab [46] — an open-source end-to-end software solution that facilitates conducting
the holographic teleportation experiments on state-of-the-art and emergent generations of QPUs sup-
ported by the Qiskit and tket SDKs. The code bundles all stages of an experiment as a single conﬁgurable
workﬂow. This allows for faster development and experimentation cycles under the above-outlined char-
acteristic traits of the quantum computing environment. The workﬂow comprises the following stages:

1. Conﬁgure compiler, optimization methods, and output resolution.

2. Interactively select a QPU based on live occupancy.

3. Compile experiment’s circuits (optionally, with search for supersolutions)

4. Prepare and submit batch jobs to the cloud (optionally, asynchronously).

5. Fetch and post-process the results.

The listing in Appendix D shows a typical command output of the workﬂow.

The compilation stage optionally invokes an additional mechanism for maximizing the yield of an
experiment on target QPU, extending conventional quantum compilation steps. This was motivated by
the observation that both graph-based and noise-adaptive solutions derived by Qiskit and tket compilers
in the default setting often turned out to be suboptimal.
Instead of letting the compilers produce a
single solution, the mechanism requests a set of solutions satisfying a chosen placement strategy and
ranks them by the deviation of the experiment’s outcome, obtained in a noisy simulation, from the
noiseless prediction. The mechanism allowed us to systematically improve the results on the type and
size of circuits of our interest. Interestingly, being guided by this feature, we often observed solutions of
somewhat higher routing overhead producing better results in the actual quantum experiments.

The code also provides the following beneﬁts:

1. Ease of installation.

2. Ease of switching between QPUs supported by Qiskit and tket.

3. Ease of experiment resolution scaling (based on automatic jobs’ batching).

4. Ease of scaling to more qubits and time steps.

5. Automatic readout error mitigation.

11

6. Automatic reproducibility analysis.

7. Ease of plugging new types of experiments.

Our vision is that the development of open-source specialized software for embedding, driving, scaling
and replicating experiments related to quantum gravity on NISQ QPUs may beneﬁt the community
accelerating further progress in this ﬁeld. We hope QGLab is one of the ﬁrst steps toward this goal.

4 Results

In Figure 5, we present and compare our best results obtained from experiments on the IBM and Quantin-
uum QPUs.

Figure 5: Experimental WIT as a function of two-sided coupling g measured on the IBM ibmq montreal
v1.10.4 and the Quantinuum System Model H1-1. We compare the results to the theoretical, noiseless
calculation. (1) Each data point and error bar are the mean and the standard deviation, respectively, of
a set of 10 (cid:104)Z(cid:105) measured in 10 independent experiments, without error mitigation. The mean from each
(2) The error-mitigated data is processed as per the protocol
experiment is calculated over 8192 shots.
described in Section 3.3. The error bars are the standard error of processed data. (3,4) The two curves
correspond to two series of experiments without error mitigation run on 7-17-2021 (3) and 9-21-2021 (4).
Each data point is the mean over 1000 shots.

We ran the WIT experiments on ﬁve IBM processors (see Section 3.1.1) representing square-lattice
and heavy-hex topologies, and three processor families: Canary, Hummingbird, and Falcon. The QGLab
automation tools introduced in 3.4 facilitated the exploration of the compilation solution space and
selection of the best solutions on each of the processors. The teleportation signal produced by the
ibmq montreal — the strongest and most stable signal across all the target IBM processors, both in raw
and error-mitigated yields — is shown in Figure 5. Application of the error mitigation techniques outlined
in subsection 3.3 reproducibly improved the raw outcome by about 93.8% at the peak of the signal,
with dominant corrections coming from randomized compiling and mitigation with estimation circuits.
However, the error-mitigated signal on this processor was still about 65% lower than the theoretical
prediction at the peak.

In contrast to experiments on the IBM QPUs, the ones on H1-1 had fewer runs and no error mitigation
due to our limited run time allocation on the QPU. Two sets of independent experiments, with 1000
shots each, were run for every two-sided coupling g. The result exceeded four-fold the corresponding raw
outcome obtained on ibmq montreal reaching about 80% of the theoretical prediction.

Higher-ﬁdelity gates and measurement, and longer coherence times of H1-1 were likely the dominant
drivers of signiﬁcant improvement in the raw teleportation signal yield. Note that the experiments on
H1-1 involved six more CX gates as compared to experiments on the IBM Montreal. Subsequently, we

12

were able to reduce the number of CX gates to 20 when compiling for the H1-1 with QGLab/tket while
factoring in the processor’s all-to-all topology. Thus, we expect fully matching the theoretical prediction
in the WIT parameter regime considered in this work to be relatively straightforward on the H1-1, even
without error mitigation.

5 Outlook

These results are an early step towards investigating quantum gravity in the lab, but based on our results
and experience with these machines, we conclude that we have likely reached a point where it becomes
possible to obtain both qualitatively and quantitatively signiﬁcant results from even more advanced
experiments in this direction. For example, we believe that the H1-1 generation at its current quantum
volume of 1024 may already allow to scale up the experiments outlined in this study in the number of
qubits and time steps.

One upcoming milestone we envision on this journey is performing the experiment with access to ﬁnite
temperature TFD states, dual to two-sided black holes [26]. For recent work on preparing TFD states in
the context of near-term quantum devices, see [47, 48, 29]. For example, the Quantinuum System Model
H1-2 — the second generation H1 processor that has recently demonstrated a quantum volume of 2048
— may make extension of the WIT experiments with ﬁnite temperature TFD initial states feasible.

For the purposes of probing quantum gravity, we expect that a larger number of qubits will be
important as well, though it may also be interesting to use the teleportation protocol as a benchmark
of coherent evolution on future devices. Some additional interesting questions on the gravitational side
include searching for theories with simple holographic duals, testing the sensitivity of the protocol to
initial conditions, looking for bulk avatars of boundary noise, and probing behind-the-horizon physics.

Finally, it is interesting to better understand the classical information transmission phenomenon we
observed. For example, how can we arrange a similar situation in AdS/CFT and are there advantages
to transmitting classical data using quantum scrambling? Also, can we understand how the coherence
in the Z-basis is hidden in the overall many-body state?

Acknowledgments

This research used resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility, which is a DOE Oﬃce
of Science User Facility supported under Contract DE-AC05-00OR22725. This research was supported
by the U.S. Department of Energy, Oﬃce of Science, Oﬃce of Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing Research
under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231 by the Accelerated Research for Quantum Computing (I.S.
and W.A.d.J.) and Quantum Algorithms Team (M.U.) Programs. V.P.S. gratefully acknowledges support
by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE 1752814, the DOE Oﬃce of
Science under QuantISED Award DE-SC0019380, and by the BCTP Graduate Student Support Fund.

References

[1] J. D. Bekenstein. Black holes and the second law. Lettere al Nuovo Cimento (1971-1985), 4, 1972.

[2] Jacob D. Bekenstein. Black holes and entropy. Phys. Rev. D, 7:2333–2346, Apr 1973.

[3] Jacob D. Bekenstein. Generalized second law of thermodynamics in black hole physics. Phys. Rev.

D, 9:3292–3300, 1974.

[4] S. W. Hawking. Black hole explosions? Nature, 248(5443):30–31, March 1974.

[5] Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa. Microscopic origin of the bekenstein-hawking entropy.

Physics Letters B, 379(1):99–104, 1996.

[6] Juan Martin Maldacena. The Large N limit of superconformal ﬁeld theories and supergravity. Adv.

Theor. Math. Phys., 2:231–252, 1998.

[7] S.S. Gubser, I.R. Klebanov, and A.M. Polyakov. Gauge theory correlators from non-critical string

theory. Physics Letters B, 428(1-2):105–114, may 1998.

[8] Edward Witten. Anti De Sitter Space And Holography, 1998.

[9] John McGreevy. Holographic duality with a view toward many-body physics. Advances in High

Energy Physics, 2010:1–54, 2010.

13

[10] L. Garc´ıa- ´Alvarez, I. L. Egusquiza, L. Lamata, A. del Campo, J. Sonner, and E. Solano. Digital

Quantum Simulation of Minimal AdS/CFT. Phys. Rev. Lett., 119(4):040501, 2017.

[11] Ippei Danshita, Masanori Hanada, and Masaki Tezuka. Creating and probing the sachdev–ye–kitaev
model with ultracold gases: Towards experimental studies of quantum gravity. Progress of Theoret-
ical and Experimental Physics, 2017(8), Aug 2017.

[12] M. Franz and M. Rozali. Mimicking black hole event horizons in atomic and solid-state systems.

Nature Rev. Mater., 3:491–501, 2018.

[13] Adam R. Brown, Hrant Gharibyan, Stefan Leichenauer, Henry W. Lin, Sepehr Nezami, Grant
Salton, Leonard Susskind, Brian Swingle, and Michael Walter. Quantum Gravity in the Lab: Tele-
portation by Size and Traversable Wormholes, 11 2019.

[14] Matt Visser, Carlos Barcelo, and Stefano Liberati. Analogue models of and for gravity. arXiv

e-prints, pages gr–qc/0111111, November 2001.

[15] Daniel Carney, Philip C E Stamp, and Jacob M Taylor. Tabletop experiments for quantum gravity:

a user’s manual. Classical and Quantum Gravity, 36(3):034001, jan 2019.

[16] Sepehr Nezami, Henry W. Lin, Adam R. Brown, Hrant Gharibyan, Stefan Leichenauer, Grant
Salton, Leonard Susskind, Brian Swingle, and Michael Walter. Quantum Gravity in the Lab: Tele-
portation by Size and Traversable Wormholes, Part II, 2 2021.

[17] Thomas Schuster, Bryce Kobrin, Ping Gao, Iris Cong, Emil T. Khabiboulline, Norbert M. Linke,
Mikhail D. Lukin, Christopher Monroe, Beni Yoshida, and Norman Y. Yao. Many-body quantum
teleportation via operator spreading in the traversable wormhole protocol, 1 2021.

[18] K. A. Landsman, C. Figgatt, T. Schuster, N. M. Linke, B. Yoshida, N. Y. Yao, and C. Monroe.

Veriﬁed Quantum Information Scrambling. Nature, 567(7746):61–65, 2019.

[19] M. S. Blok, V. V. Ramasesh, T. Schuster, K. O’Brien, J. M. Kreikebaum, D. Dahlen, A. Morvan,
B. Yoshida, N. Y. Yao, and I. Siddiqi. Quantum Information Scrambling on a Superconducting
Qutrit Processor. Phys. Rev. X, 11(2):021010, 2021.

[20] Bruno Bertini, Pavel Kos, and Toma ˇz Prosen. Exact spectral form factor in a minimal model of

many-body quantum chaos. Phys. Rev. Lett., 121:264101, Dec 2018.

[21] Bruno Bertini, Pavel Kos, and Tomaˇz Prosen. Entanglement spreading in a minimal model of

maximal many-body quantum chaos. Phys. Rev. X, 9(2):021033, 2019.

[22] Ping Gao, Daniel Louis Jaﬀeris, and Aron C. Wall. Traversable Wormholes via a Double Trace

Deformation. JHEP, 12:151, 2017.

[23] Juan Maldacena, Douglas Stanford, and Zhenbin Yang. Diving into traversable wormholes.

Fortschritte der Physik, 65(5):1700034, May 2017.

[24] Bruno Bertini, Pavel Kos, and Tomaˇz Prosen. Exact Spectral Form Factor in a Minimal Model of

Many-Body Quantum Chaos. Phys. Rev. Lett., 121(26):264101, 2018.

[25] Thomas Hartman, Sandipan Kundu, and Amirhossein Tajdini. Averaged Null Energy Condition

from Causality. JHEP, 07:066, 2017.

[26] Juan Maldacena and Leonard Susskind. Cool horizons for entangled black holes. Fortsch. Phys.,

61:781–811, 2013.

[27] William Cottrell, Ben Freivogel, Diego M. Hofman, and Sagar F. Lokhande. How to build the

thermoﬁeld double state. Journal of High Energy Physics, 2019(2), feb 2019.

[28] Juan Maldacena and Xiao-Liang Qi. Eternal traversable wormhole, 4 2018.

[29] Vincent Paul Su. Variational preparation of the thermoﬁeld double state of the sachdev-ye-kitaev

model. Phys. Rev. A, 104:012427, Jul 2021.

[30] Juan Maldacena and Alexey Milekhin. SYK wormhole formation in real time. JHEP, 04:258, 2021.

[31] Andrew W. Cross, Lev S. Bishop, Sarah Sheldon, Paul D. Nation, and Jay M. Gambetta. Validating

quantum computers using randomized model circuits. Phys. Rev. A, 100:032328, Sep 2019.

[32] Michael A. Nielsen and Isaac L. Chuang. Quantum Computation and Quantum Information: 10th

Anniversary Edition. Cambridge University Press, USA, 10th edition, 2011.

[33] IBM Quantum. https://www.ibm.com/quantum-computing. Online. Accessed on 19-May-2022.

14

[34] Jared B. Hertzberg, Eric J. Zhang, Sami Rosenblatt, Easwar Magesan, John A. Smolin, Jeng-Bang
Yau, Vivekananda P. Adiga, Martin Sandberg, Markus Brink, Jerry M. Chow, and Jason S. Orcutt.
Laser-annealing josephson junctions for yielding scaled-up superconducting quantum processors. npj
Quantum Information, 7(1), aug 2021.

[35] Maika Takita, Andrew W. Cross, A. D. C´orcoles, Jerry M. Chow, and Jay M. Gambetta. Exper-
imental demonstration of fault-tolerant state preparation with superconducting qubits. Physical
Review Letters, 119(18), oct 2017.

[36] J. M. Pino, J. M. Dreiling, C. Figgatt, J. P. Gaebler, S. A. Moses, M. S. Allman, C. H. Baldwin,
M. Foss-Feig, D. Hayes, K. Mayer, C. Ryan-Anderson, and B. Neyenhuis. Demonstration of the
trapped-ion quantum ccd computer architecture. Nature, 592(7853):209–213, Apr 2021.

[37] Honeywell system model h1 ﬁdelity and quantum volume.

https://www.honeywell.com/us/
en/news/2021/07/honeywell-sets-another-record-for-quantum-computing-performance. Ac-
cessed: 2021-09-24.

[38] Gushu Li, Yufei Ding, and Yuan Xie. Tackling the qubit mapping problem for nisq-era quantum
devices. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS ’19, page 1001–1014, New York, NY,
USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery.

[39] Abhinav Kandala, Antonio Mezzacapo, Kristan Temme, Maika Takita, Markus Brink, Jerry M.
Chow, and Jay M. Gambetta. Hardware-eﬃcient variational quantum eigensolver for small molecules
and quantum magnets. Nature, 549(7671):242–246, Jan 2017.

[40] Benjamin Nachman, Miroslav Urbanek, Wibe A. de Jong, and Christian W. Bauer. Unfolding

quantum computer readout noise. npj Quantum Inf., 6(1):84, Sep 2020.

[41] Joel J. Wallman and Joseph Emerson. Noise tailoring for scalable quantum computation via ran-

domized compiling. Phys. Rev. A, 94:052325, Nov 2016.

[42] Miroslav Urbanek, Benjamin Nachman, Vincent R. Pascuzzi, Andre He, Christian W. Bauer, and
Wibe A. de Jong. Mitigating depolarizing noise on quantum computers with noise-estimation cir-
cuits. Phys. Rev. Lett., 127:270502, Dec 2021.

[43] Ying Li and Simon C. Benjamin. Eﬃcient variational quantum simulator incorporating active error

minimization. Phys. Rev. X, 7:021050, Jun 2017.

[44] Kristan Temme, Sergey Bravyi, and Jay M. Gambetta. Error mitigation for short-depth quantum

circuits. Phys. Rev. Lett., 119:180509, Nov 2017.

[45] Abhinav Kandala, Kristan Temme, Antonio D. C´orcoles, Antonio Mezzacapo, Jerry M. Chow, and
Jay M. Gambetta. Error mitigation extends the computational reach of a noisy quantum processor.
Nature, 567(7749):491–495, Mar 2019.

[46] QGLab. https://gitlab.com/ishapova/qglab. Online. Accessed on 8-Feb-2022.

[47] D. Zhu, S. Johri, N. M. Linke, K. A. Landsman, C. Huerta Alderete, N. H. Nguyen, A. Y. Matsuura,
T. H. Hsieh, and C. Monroe. Generation of thermoﬁeld double states and critical ground states with
a quantum computer. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(41):25402–25406, 2020.

[48] Jingxiang Wu and Timothy H. Hsieh. Variational thermal quantum simulation via thermoﬁeld

double states. Phys. Rev. Lett., 123:220502, Nov 2019.

15

A BKP Model with hj = 0

One step of time evolution is generated by U = UK UI with

(cid:32)

UK = exp

ib

(cid:33)

L
(cid:88)

σx
j

j

(cid:32)

, UI = exp

iJ

(cid:33)
.

j σz
σz

j+1

L−1
(cid:88)

j

(8)

In this section, we consider J = b = π/4 and all the onsite z magnetic ﬁelds hj set to zero.

It is useful to consider the operator dynamics of this model. Take ﬁrst the action of UK on single

Pauli operators. A short calculation gives

and

U †

K XiUK = Xi,

U †

K YiUK = Zi,

U †

K ZiUK = −Yi.

(9)

(10)

(11)

Note that UK (and U −1
Cliﬀord group.

K = U †

K ) maps each Pauli string to another Pauli string, so it is an element of the

For UI , the action on single Paulis is

U †

I XiUI = −Zi−1XiZi+1,

U †

I YiUI = −Zi−1YiZi+1,

(12)

(13)

and

U †

I ZiUI = Zi.
The action on general Pauli strings follows from these basic formulae. In particular, UI maps each Pauli
string to another Pauli string, so it to is an element of the Cliﬀord group. Hence, U itself is an element
of the Cliﬀord group.

Consider also the unitary Q = ei π

4 ZLZR . Note that with N = 3 qubits on a side and K = 2 qubits
participating in the V interaction, the unitary eigV with g = π/2 gives precisely Q for each of the K
qubits partipating in V . The action of Q on a left Pauli is

(14)

and

Q†XLQ = YLZR,

Q†YLQ = −XLZR,

Q†ZLQ = ZL.

(15)

(16)

(17)

Hence, Q, and for the right value of g also eigV , is also a element of the Cliﬀord group.

16

B Operator Growth

Here we analyze the conditions for successful teleportation in detail by studying the time-dependent
operator size. Since we are teleporting a one qubit state, it suﬃces to consider the operators {I, X, Y, Z}
acting on the message qubit in the ﬁrst register on the “left” side. Because the dynamics of the critical
BKP model are Cliﬀord when hj = 0, the time evolution of Pauli operators results not in a sum of
Pauli operators but a single Pauli operator. Below, we write out explicitly the time evolution of these
operators. Note that the evolution is also periodic.

Time
t=0
t=1
t=2
t=3
t=4
t=5
t=6

YL(−t)
IL(−t) XL(−t)
XIIIII
IIIIII
YIIIII
-ZYIIII XYIIII
IIIIII
-IZYIII XXYIII
IIIIII
XXZIII
IIXIII
IIIIII
XZIIII
-IYZIII
IIIIII
ZIIIII
-YZIIII
IIIIII
-YIIIII
XIIIII
IIIIII

ZL(−t)
ZIIIII
-YIIIII
-XYIIII
-XXYIII
-XXZIII
-XZIIII
-ZIIIII

Recall that the success criteria for teleportation comes from the phase alignment of operators θO.
With the form of the coupling as in Eq. (1), the phase depends on the Z-size of time evolved operators.
Whereas the typical size refers to the number of non-identity terms in a Pauli string, by Z-size we mean
the number of terms that fail to commute with the Z operator. Thus, the Z-size measures the number
of X and Y terms in a Pauli string.

As a concrete example, at t = 3, the operator sizes of {I, X, Y, Z} are {0, 1, 1, 2} respectively. With
the value of the two sided coupling of g = π/2, the phases of Z and I are aligned whereas the phases of
X and Y are not. This explains why the eﬀective channel at this special set of parameters is given by
teleportation with dephasing noise.

17

C WIT circuit compiled for IBM Montreal QPU

Figure 6: The WIT circuit in Figure 4 compiled for ibmq montreal. Applied compilation passes as per
compiler conﬁguration E in Table 1. Nodes are numbered according to the physical map of qubits on the
processor. [Drawn with IBM’s Qiskit SDK]

18

D Example of QGLab executing a holographic teleporta-
tion experiment

Listing 1: Log of a typical WIT experiment. This experiment was conducted on ibmq montreal
in advanced compilation mode. Some verbose parts of the log were replaced with ellipsis to make
the output more readable.

$ wormhole . py -- points 14 -- retrials 10 \

-- qpu ibmq_montreal \
-- toolkit tket \
-- insert - message - with swap \
-- layout - method noise_adaptive \
-- layout select

Qubits per side :
Time steps :
Message insertion method :

3

3

swap

Building the library of transpiled circuits ...

... 1: { q [0]: n [11] , q [1]: n [14] , ... , q [5]: n [8]}
... 2: { q [0]: n [5] , q [1]: n [8] , ... , q [5]: n [3]}
... 3: { q [0]: n [13] , q [1]: n [14] , ... , q [5]: n [12]}
... 4: { q [0]: n [11] , q [1]: n [8] , ... , q [5]: n [14]}
... 5: { q [0]: n [16] , q [1]: n [14] , ... , q [5]: n [19]}
... 6: { q [0]: n [13] , q [1]: n [14] , ... , q [5]: n [12]}
... 7: { q [0]: n [16] , q [1]: n [14] , ... , q [5]: n [19]}
... 8: { q [0]: n [11] , q [1]: n [14] , ... , q [5]: n [8]}
... 9: { q [0]: n [13] , q [1]: n [12] , ... , q [5]: n [14]}
... 10: { q [0]: n [15] , q [1]: n [12] , ... , q [5]: n [18]}

Probing registered initial layouts on default noise model :

probing layout (1)
... running on aer_simulator ( ibmq_montreal )
... ’run ’ wall - clock time is 12 s
... building calibration matrix for readout error

mitigation on qubits : [14]

... ’ get_readout_filter ’ wall - clock time is 0.01 m
... building calibration matrix for readout error

mitigation on qubits : [11]

... ’ get_readout_filter ’ wall - clock time is 0.01 m
probing layout (2)
... running on aer_simulator ( ibmq_montreal )
... ’run ’ wall - clock time is 12 s
... building calibration matrix for readout error

mitigation on qubits : [9]

... ’ get_readout_filter ’ wall - clock time is 0.01 m
... building calibration matrix for readout error

mitigation on qubits : [5]

... ’ get_readout_filter ’ wall - clock time is 0.01 m

.......

L <Z > med . CX@Meas
8 -0.238
9 -0.242
7 -0.284

[10] [31 ,34 ,34 ,...] [73 ,85 ,...] [157 ,181 ,...]
[10] [31 ,34 ,34 ,...] [71 ,85 ,...] [156 ,181 ,...]
[10] [31 ,34 ,34 ,...] [71 ,85 ,...] [156 ,181 ,...]

CXs / g

Depth / g

Size / g

19

0 -0.286
4 -0.289
5 -0.292
3 -0.292
6 -0.294
2 -0.295
1 -0.310

[10] [31 ,34 ,34 ,...] [74 ,89 ,...] [160 ,189 ,...]
[10] [31 ,34 ,34 ,...] [71 ,85 ,...] [156 ,182 ,...]
[10] [31 ,34 ,34 ,...] [71 ,85 ,...] [156 ,181 ,...]
[10] [40 ,43 ,43 ,...] [79 ,95 ,...] [159 ,196 ,...]
[10] [31 ,34 ,34 ,...] [74 ,85 ,...] [159 ,182 ,...]
[10] [31 ,34 ,34 ,...] [74 ,89 ,...] [156 ,189 ,...]
[16] [33 ,37 ,37 ,...] [70 ,88 ,...] [165 ,191 ,...]

Choose your layout #: 1

Measured qubits across all circuits : [[9] , [5]]

Dumping transpiled circuits diagrams

and QASM representations ...

Analyzing transpiled circuits ’ composition

for each point ...

g
0.00
0.24
0.48
0.72
0.97
1.21
1.45
1.69
1.93
2.17
2.42
2.66
2.90
3.14

Depth Size Gates
165
70
191
88
187
88
189
86
185
84
190
88
191
86
183
84
186
86
193
88
192
86
190
88
190
88
169
68

[( ’ rz ’ , 71) , ( ’ sx ’ , 60) , ( ’ cx ’ , 33)]
[( ’ rz ’ , 84) , ( ’ sx ’ , 69) , ( ’ cx ’ , 37)]
[( ’ rz ’ , 83) , ( ’ sx ’ , 66) , ( ’ cx ’ , 37)]
[( ’ rz ’ , 85) , ( ’ sx ’ , 66) , ( ’ cx ’ , 37)]
[( ’ rz ’ , 81) , ( ’ sx ’ , 66) , ( ’ cx ’ , 37)]
[( ’ rz ’ , 84) , ( ’ sx ’ , 68) , ( ’ cx ’ , 37)]
[( ’ rz ’ , 85) , ( ’ sx ’ , 68) , ( ’ cx ’ , 37)]
[( ’ rz ’ , 80) , ( ’ sx ’ , 65) , ( ’ cx ’ , 37)]
[( ’ rz ’ , 84) , ( ’ sx ’ , 64) , ( ’ cx ’ , 37)]
[( ’ rz ’ , 85) , ( ’ sx ’ , 70) , ( ’ cx ’ , 37)]
[( ’ rz ’ , 86) , ( ’ sx ’ , 68) , ( ’ cx ’ , 37)]
[( ’ rz ’ , 83) , ( ’ sx ’ , 69) , ( ’ cx ’ , 37)]
[( ’ rz ’ , 83) , ( ’ sx ’ , 69) , ( ’ cx ’ , 37)]
[( ’ rz ’ , 71) , ( ’ sx ’ , 64) , ( ’ cx ’ , 33)]

Sampling Z expectations from quantum experiments

on ibmq_montreal ...

... submitting jobs to ibmq_montreal

Job set name : wormhole_experiment_2021 -09 -01 _16 :28:48

ID : bd6b49 ...25 bb9ff6094143e -16305...0049534

tags : []

Summary report :

Total jobs : 1
Successful jobs : 0
Failed jobs : 0
Cancelled jobs : 0
Running jobs : 0
Pending jobs : 1

Detail report :

experiments : 0 -139

job index : 0
job ID : 61300 c ...6 fa7a68d
name : wormhole_experiment_2021 -09 -01 _16 :28:48 _0_
status : job is being validated

... verifying job submissions

... waiting for jobs to complete

20

= > Monitoring 1/1 job :
Job Status : job has successfully run

... fetching results
... ’ _fetch_results ’ wall - clock time is 0.01 m
... ’run ’ wall - clock time is 7.31 m
... building calibration matrix for readout error

mitigation on qubits : [9]

... ’ get_readout_filter ’ wall - clock time is 0.01 m
... building calibration matrix for readout error

mitigation on qubits : [5]

... ’ get_readout_filter ’ wall - clock time is 0.01 m

Simulating ideal Z expectations exactly ...

... ’ exact_expectation ’ wall - clock time is 0.02 m

Sampling ideal Z expectations ...

... running on aer_simulator
... ’run ’ wall - clock time is 0.01 m

Sampling Z expectations on mimicked ibmq_montreal ...

... running on aer_simulator ( ibmq_montreal )
... ’run ’ wall - clock time is 0.21 m
... building calibration matrix for readout error

mitigation on qubits : [9]

... ’ get_readout_filter ’ wall - clock time is 0.01 m
... building calibration matrix for readout error

mitigation on qubits : [5]

... ’ get_readout_filter ’ wall - clock time is 0.01 m

Done !

21

