Beam Aware Stochastic Multihop Routing for
Flying Ad-hoc Networks

Anay Ajit Deshpande1, Roberto Pereira2, Federico Chiariotti3,
Adriano Pastore2, Xavier Mestre2, and Andrea Zanella1

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
4
2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
4
8
1
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Routing is a crucial component in the design of
Flying Ad-Hoc Networks (FANETs). State of the art routing
solutions exploit the position of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
and their mobility information to determine the existence of
links between them, but this information is often unreliable, as
the topology of FANETs can change quickly and unpredictably.
In order to improve the tracking performance, the uncertainty
introduced by imperfect measurements and tracking algorithms
needs to be accounted for in the routing. Another important
element to consider is beamforming, which can reduce inter-
ference, but requires accurate channel and position information
to work. In this work, we present the Beam Aware Stochastic
Multihop Routing for FANETs (BA-SMURF), a Software-Deﬁned
Networking (SDN) routing scheme that takes into account the
positioning uncertainty and beamforming design to ﬁnd the most
reliable routes in a FANET. Our simulation results show that
joint consideration of the beamforming and routing can provide
a 5% throughput improvement with respect to the state of the
art.

Index Terms—Flying Ad-Hoc Networks, mmWave Communi-

cation, Beamforming, Position Uncertainty

I. INTRODUCTION

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) are used in a wide
range of applications, from tracking and monitoring animals
in remote areas [1] to military applications [2]. In order
to effectively accomplish tasks over wider areas, it can be
necessary to deploy multiple UAVs, which are expected to
coordinate actions in an autonomous fashion or execute direct
instructions from a control center, all of which are relayed
through a Flying Ad-Hoc Network (FANET).

In many scenarios, the UAVs need to exchange a relatively
large amount of data with other members of the swarm
and/or with the control station to support a given service.
For example, distributed area monitoring/patrol applications
may require the UAVs to stream high deﬁnition video or
thermal camera recordings to the control station. Conversely,
high bit rate data trafﬁc demands wideband communication

This project has received funding from the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Skłodowska-
Curie Grant agreement No. 813999. The work of A. Pastore and
X. Mestre was supported by Grant RTI2018-099722-B-I00 funded by
MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by “ERDF A way of making Eu-
rope”. The author afﬁliations and emails are as follows:
1Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, Italy. Emails:
{deshpande,zanella}@dei.unipd.it
2Research Unit for Information and Signal Processing for Intelligent Com-
munications (ISPIC), Centre Tecnol`ogic Telecomunicacions de Catalunya,
Barcelona, Spain. Emails: {rpereira,apastore,xmestre}@cttc.es
3Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University, Denmark. Email:
fchi@es.aau.dk

technologies (e.g., mmWave) that typically have limited cov-
erage range, so that providing such services over wide areas
may require multi-hop data connections, where the UAVs
themselves can act as relays for other nodes in the network [3].
On the other hand, the UAVs and the control station also
need to exchange light control trafﬁc, which usually has strict
latency and reliability constraints, but low bit rate require-
ments. This control channel can be used by the UAVs to
send periodic tracking updates to the control center, which
can use these messages to track the UAV positions [4], [5]. In
these scenarios, the UAVs and the control center can use dif-
ferent technologies to carry information and signaling trafﬁc,
physically separating the data and control planes. The control
trafﬁc can be carried by low-rate long-range communication
technologies such as LoRa [6], which can provide direct
links between the UAVs and the control center. Following the
Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN) paradigm, the control
center, which has the most complete view of the state of the
network, can determine and propagate routes in a centralized
fashion through the same control channel [7].

Routing is a complex problem in FANETs: even if the
control center knows each UAV’s position at a given instant,
the dynamic,
three-dimensional nature of a swarm makes
maintaining stable routes a difﬁcult problem. Most routing
protocols for FANETs have been devised as an extension to
the traditional Mobile Ad-Hoc Network (MANET) protocols
such as Ad-Hoc On Demand Distance Vector Routing (AODV)
and Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) [8]–[12].

Moreover, the high bandwidth of mmWave technologies
comes at the cost of a signiﬁcantly higher path loss, reducing
the effective range of communication. To mitigate this issue,
mmWave systems often use beamforming techniques that can
direct the signal towards the receiver, wasting less power on
other directions and reducing interference. However, accurate
beamforming requires an accurate knowledge of the transmit-
ter’s and receiver’s positions, which is not always possible
in a FANET: the UAVs are moving, often at relatively high
speed, and can only rely on imperfect sensors to measure
their position. Additionally, sharing positioning information
requires some signaling [13], which can be performed over
long-range and low-bitrate technologies.

The use of beamforming with imperfect information intro-
duces another challenge when making routing decisions, as
UAVs at a shorter distance might have a higher probability of
remaining in range, but also suffer more from beamforming
errors: if the distance between two nodes is small, the effect of

 
 
 
 
 
 
the positioning error on the beamforming angle is proportion-
ally larger. In this work, we build on the Stochastic Multipath
Routing for FANETs (SMURF) scheme, which we presented
in our previous work [14], to build a scheme that can jointly
consider routing and beamforming with uncertain position
information. Our simulation results show that the proposed
Beam Aware Stochastic Multihop Routing for FANETs (BA-
SMURF) scheme can increase the average throughput by
5% over both SMURF and Distance-Based Routing (DBR),
an improvement
that holds across different UAV network
densities and antenna conﬁgurations.

The rest of this paper is divided as follows: Sec. II presents
the model of the swarm of UAVs as a network and the
beamforming and channel model. Sec. III deﬁnes the routing
design while considering beamforming and position uncer-
tainty information. Sec. IV shows the simulation results for
the BA-SMURF and its comparison with SMURF and DBR.
Sec. V explains the conclusions of the entire routing protocol.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

We describe the connectivity in a FANET as a time-varying
graph G = (K, E(t)), where K represents the set of UAVs
in the network and E(t) the set of active links at time t.
Each drone moves independently from the rest and has its
attitude characterized by a 5-tuple: the coordinates in space
xk(t) = (xk(t), yk(t), zk(t)) and the yaw and pitch angles.
So, the quality of the link between a pair of drones (i, j)
depends on their Euclidean distance [14]:

dij(t) = (cid:107)xi(t) − xj(t)(cid:107)2.

Since UAVs ﬂy high from the ground, the space between them
is assumed to be free, i.e., without obstacles or reﬂections. We
can then consider that there is predominantly Line of Sight
(LoS) communication [15]. Thus, the pathloss between two
UAVs is described by

PL(dij) =

(cid:18)

c
4πf0dij

(cid:19)γ

,

(1)

where f0 is the carrier frequency, c is the speed of light,
and γ is the path loss exponent. As a result, if two UAVs
are nearby, then there exists a link between them. Otherwise,
communication becomes impractical due to low SNR. More
formally, we can describe the set of active links by

E(t) = {eij(t) : dij < D},

(2)

where the choice of D often depends on the environment and
the wireless technology used for communication [16].

Unfortunately, in more realistic scenarios, the real position
of all drones is unknown, but the central controllers maintain
estimators to predict the UAVs’ positions based on current and
previous location updates [13]. Hence, the position estimate is
deﬁned as:

ˆxk(t) = xk(t) + nk(t),

(3)

where the noise nk(t) ∼ N (0, Σk) is associated to the kth
user where Σk refers to the uncertainty covariance in the three

coordinates. Hence, Σk is a symmetric matrix. Note that, even
if Σk is a symmetric matrix, it is not an identity matrix, i.e.
the error in estimate is not equal in all three coordinates. This
is due to the fact that the error in estimate will be larger in
the direction of movement for the UAV and smaller in other
directions. In order to account for this uncertainty, one can also
re-write (2) in terms of the probability that the two endpoints
are within a sphere of radius D. As a result, the link existence
probability can be deﬁned as

ˆE(t) = {(i, j) : i (cid:54)= j; Pij(t)}

(4)

where the probability Pij(t) that the link between i and j is
active at time t is given by:

(cid:90)

e− 1

2 (x−∆ˆxij (t))T(Σij (t))−1(x−∆ˆxij (t))

Pij(t) =

BD(0)

2π|Σij(t)| 1

2

dx.

(5)
Here, we have deﬁned ∆ˆxij(t) = ˆxi(t) − ˆxj(t), Σij(t) =
Σi(t) + Σj(t) and BD(0) as the sphere with radius D and
center in the origin.

To introduce beamforming into the system, we consider
each UAV to be equipped with an Uniform Planar antenna
Array (UPA) of dimension M = MH × MV, where antennas
are spaced dH (horizontally) and dV (vertically) wavelengths
from one another [17]. This allows each drone to communicate
with other devices in the same altitude, as well as, with drones
at different heights. As discussed above, due to the nature of
the open environment, we assume that there is predominantly
the UAVs can also
LoS communication. In this scenario,
apply beamforming to improve the Signal
to Interference
plus Noise Ratio (SINR) by increasing antenna gain. To
determine the steering vector for beamforming, we need to
determine the angular separation between the corresponding
UAVs. Fig. 1 shows the 2-D representation of the angular
separation, i.e. azimuth angle, between the UAVs i and j for
perfect knowledge of position and attitude. Since ˆxi(t) and
ˆxj(t) are imperfect estimates, the angle between the estimated
position ˆxj(t) of UAV j with respect to ˆxi(t) of UAV i is itself
a random variable. In the following, we omit the time index
t for simplicity. Hence, the steering vector is deﬁned based
on the estimated azimuth ∆ ˆφij and elevation ∆ˆθij angles
between the jth and ith UAVs, respectively, described by,

∆ ˆφij = π1(ˆxj − ˆxi) + arctan
(cid:32)

∆ˆθij = arctan

(cid:19)

(cid:18) ˆyj − ˆyi
ˆxj − ˆxi

− ˆφi;
(cid:33)

(6)

ˆzj − ˆzi
(cid:112)(ˆxj − ˆxi)2 + (ˆyj − ˆyi)2

− ˆθi,

(7)

where 1(x) is the step function, equal to 1 if x > 0 and 0
otherwise and ˆφi and ˆθi refers to the estimated yaw and pitch
angles of the UAV. We can then compute the beamforming
gain due to uncertainty in position information as a function
of ∆ ˆφij and ∆ˆθij:

g(∆ ˆφij, ∆ˆθij) =

1
MHMV

1
∆xij

hRxhT x,

(8)

where N0 is the noise power spectral density and B the
bandwidth of the channel. Naturally, the distribution of this
capacity is extremely complex, as it is a highly nonlinear
function of the estimated positions and attitudes in the swarm.
As such, it is extremely hard to estimate directly, but we can
use a Monte Carlo sampling method to draw the real state of
the swarm from the belief distribution, which can approximate
the real distribution when given enough samples.

A. Analog Beamforming Design

The design of the beamforming vectors wT x and wRx
directly inﬂuences the behaviour of the power response P (r)
ij .
For a ﬁxed transmitter to simultaneously communicate with
multiple receivers, it is essential to design a beamforming
that directs the emitted signal towards these receivers while
keeping the interference from other receivers as low as possi-
ble. For instance, when the Channel State Information (CSI)
of all receivers is perfectly known at the transmitter, one
can design wT x and wRx as a zero-forcing beamformers
[17]. This type of beamforming design is primarily applicable
for traditional ﬁxed-transmitter communication systems. Our
scenario, however, differs in at least three aspects from this
traditional scheme. Firstly, each UAV is only interested in
communicating with a single receiver at a particular time based
on the route devised by the routing protocol. Secondly, the
control station does not have the current CSI for each of the
UAVs. In fact, keeping track of all CSIs among the different
UAVs in this scenario is a hard task due to high mobility of
the UAVs. Finally and the most important characteristic of the
scenario is the mobility of the transmitter. In our scenario,
UAVs are mobile transmitters which can easily be rotated
towards a desired direction. Thus, in our devised scenario,
alignment happens by rotating pairs of UAVs towards each
other.

Moreover, due to the characteristics mentioned above, de-
signing wT x and wRx for our communication scheme boils
down to choosing a narrow or wide beam. Notice that, in
the former, a narrow beam potentially reduces the amount of
interference leaked towards other UAVs, but requires knowl-
edge over the true position xk. In contrast, designing a wide
beam can compensate for the uncertainty over the desired loca-
tion while potentially increasing interference among different
UAVs. We simulate this behaviour by turning on/off the last
rows or columns of the UPA of each UAV. To simulate this
idea, let us consider the logical matrix W with entries {0, 1}
and dimension MH × MV . We can design the beamforming
vector w by stacking the columns of matrix W, i.e.,

w =








W1
W2
...
WV








(14)

(13)

where Wk denotes the kth column of the logical matrix.
Then choosing a wide beam translates into setting the last
rows/columns of the matrix W to zero and the remaining

Fig. 1: 2-D representation of the angular separation between
UAVs i and j for perfect knowledge of position and attitude.

where,

hT x = |a(∆ ˆφij, ∆ˆθij)HwT x|,
hRx = |a(π + ∆ ˆφij, π + ∆ˆθij)HwRx|,
where wT x/wRx ∈ CM ×1 denotes the beamforming vector
used for transmission/reception and

(10)

(9)

a(φ, θ) =

(cid:104)
ejκT(φ,θ)u1, . . . , ejκT(φ,θ)uM

(cid:105)T

,

(11)

is the steering vector matrix associated to the azimuth (φ) and
elevation (θ) angles. Also, note that, the azimuth for the jth
UAV with respect to ith UAV is opposite of the angles of ith
UAV with respect to jth UAV, i.e., these angles are supple-
mentary due to the central controller devising the directions
the UAVs have to orient themselves for transmission/reception.
The same analogy is valid for the elevation angles between
these UAVs. For simplicity, we have also deﬁned κ(α, θ) as
the wave vector for a planar wave impinging with angles
φ and θ, λ is the wavelength and um is the 3D spatial
location of the mth element of the antenna array. Speciﬁcally,
for UPA, um = [0, i(m)dH λ, j(m)dV λ]T where we also
consider the auxiliary functions i(l) = mod(l − 1, MH) and
j(l) = (cid:98)(l − 1)/MV(cid:99).

We can then compute the expected received power P (r)

ij over

link (i, j) as:

P (r)

ij =

PTx|g(∆ ˆφij, ∆ˆθij)|2
PL(dij)

.

(12)

The received power only depends on the transmission power
PTx, the beamforming gain for the transmission and reception,
and the distance dij. Note that, the central controller devises
the transmit and receive beamforming vector wRx based on the
estimated positions of the UAVs and thereby determines the
expected received power at the receiver. By using the Shannon
rate formula, we can then get the expected capacity Cij(t)
under interference

Cij(t) = B log2




1 +

P (r)

ij (t)

P (r)

(cid:96)j (t) + N0B

(cid:80)
(cid:96)(cid:54)=i




 ,

(xi,yi)(xj,yj)xyyiyjxixjϕ(i,j)ϕ(i,j)zAzimuth Angle ϕ(i,j)  between UAVs i and jentries to one. For instance, to have a omnidirectional trans-
mission, it is sufﬁcient to have a single active antenna [18].
Opposite to that, setting all entries of W to one results in
the narrow beam pattern. Using this idea we derive wider and
narrower beams during our simulations. Moreover, we assume
every transmitter to use the same beamformer over the entire
route.

Finally, we also assume that there is no interference between
the routes, that have common UAVs as their intermediate
relays, by deﬁning a simpliﬁed Time Division Multiple Access
(TDMA) mechanism which divides the total time of commu-
nication equally among all different routes for the common
UAV. This TDMA mechanism is deﬁned by the control station,
which knows all the concurrent routes in the network at a
particular time.

III. POSITION UNCERTAINTY BASED BEAMFORMED
ROUTING

Using the beamforming vectors deﬁned in the previous
section, we deﬁne the BA-SMURF protocol. In this protocol,
the edge weight ˆeij ∈ ˆE(t) represents the average expected
capacity of the link between UAVs i and j, denoted by Cij(t).
Hence, we design this routing problem as a standard maximum
capacity route problem [19] over the graph ˆG = (K, ˆE(t)),
which can be solved by determining the maximum spanning
tree using the link capacities, weighted by the source load, as
a weighting metric for the graph edges. So, for a given beam-
former, we apply a maximum spanning tree on the network
graph G to determine the route with maximum achievable
capacity.

Hence, using (13), we devise the routes that maximize the
minimum expected capacity. We assume that each UAV i is
occupied in transmitting or receiving cross-trafﬁc for a fraction
ρi of the time i.e. ρi = [0, 1], which must be subtracted to
determine the available capacity of the link for UAV i. As
transmission is not full-duplex, we also assume that each node
can spend at most half the time transmitting. So, the expected
capacity of each link can be approximated by Monte Carlo
sampling, and we can build a graph, knowing that the capacity
of a route r is given by:

C(r) = min
(i,j)∈r

(1 − ρi)Ci,j
2

.

(15)

The entire routing algorithm is devised at

the central
controller which tracks the positions of all the UAVs [13].
This, however, limits the beamforming adaptability over a
single route, i.e., all the UAVs in the route follow the same
beamforming pattern. In this work,
the central controller
devises the beamforming patterns for all the UAVs in the entire
route based on the estimated position of the receiver UAV
with respect to transmitter UAV, i.e., the central controllers
designs the beamsteering vector shown in (11). In principle,
it might seem sub-optimal to ﬁx the beamforming pattern
and only design the beamsteering vector (i.e., deploy analog
beamforming), but to devise beamformed routes, the central
controller needs to have a perfect instantaneous knowledge

TABLE I: Parameters of the Simulations

Simulation Parameter
Map Size [m]
Density of UAVs [UAVs/km3]
UAV Position Model
Maximum Transmission Distance [m]
MIMO Antenna
Antenna Conﬁgurations for the UAVs
Transmission Power [W]
Number of Simulated Networks
Bandwidth (MHz)

Simulation Value
200 × 200 × 10
{25000 − 75000}
Unscented Kalman Filter
100
Uniform Planar Array (UPA)
{1, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64}
1
240
100

of the channel (i.e., deploy digital beamforming), which is
difﬁcult in the current scenario.

IV. RESULTS

In order to numerically evaluate the effects of position
uncertainty and beamforming in routing protocols, we deploy
a Monte Carlo simulation in MATLAB where the protocols
are evaluated over randomly generated networks. The simu-
lation parameters for the system are described in Tab. I. The
protocols evaluated in the Monte Carlo simulation are:

1) DBR: A purely distance-based protocol, which does not

consider positioning uncertainty;

2) SMURF: our scheme from [14], limited to a single path,
which considers positioning uncertainty but does not
include beamforming in the probability calculation;
3) BA-SMURF: the proposed scheme, which takes into
account the position uncertainty and beamforming.
These protocols are evaluated for both the ideal and tracked
position. We indicate the former by attaching “-I” to the end of
the respective protocol name, and the latter by attaching “-T’.
Moreover, the tracked position information is obtained from
the output of the Kalman ﬁlter at the central controller. Hence,
the performance of the protocols evaluated in this scenario
is the performance achieved based on the available tracked
information of the UAVs. By taking into account the true
position of the UAVs, we can determine the ideal performance
of the protocol, which represents an upper bound to the
practically achievable performance. Additionally, each UAV
is equipped with the same UPA antenna conﬁguration and is
able to communicate with other drones using the beamforming
design deﬁned in the previous section.

To accurately determine the performance achieved for all
the protocols, we carry out simulations with different antenna
conﬁgurations and different densities. Fig. 2 compares the
average throughput of all the protocols applied in a network
with density of 50000 UAVs/km3 (which corresponds to about
20 drones in network) and for the antenna conﬁguration of
MH = MV = 4, i.e., M = 16 elements in the antenna. Firstly,
it is easy to see that the most important factor is the availability
of the true position:
the real protocols, which operate on
uncertain information, have a throughput that is lower by about
10% than the one obtained by their respective ideal versions.
However, BA-SMURF outperforms both SMURF and DBR
for both true and tracked positions. This indicates that the
routes chosen by BA-SMURF are able to provide median

)
s
/
b
M

(

t
u
p
h
g
u
o
r
h
T

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

950

900

850

800

750

700

F - T

R

S M U

S M U

F -I

R

R - T

B

D

R -I

B

D

R

A - S M U

B

B

F -I

R

F - T
A - S M U

Fig. 2: Boxplot of the average throughput obtained for all the
protocols in different experiments with a network density of
50000 UAVs/km3 and M = 16 antenna elements.

True
Positions

Tracked
Positions

SMURF-T
SMURF-I
DBR-T
DBR-I
BA-SMURF-T
BA-SMURF-I

)
s
/
b
M

(

t
u
p
h
g
u
o
r
h
T

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

900

880

860

840

820

800

780

760

2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8
Density (UAVs/km3)

·104

Fig. 3: Average throughput obtained by the protocols for
different UAV densities with M = 16 antenna elements.

)
s
/
b
M

(

t
u
p
h
g
u
o
r
h
T

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

850

800

750

SMURF-T
SMURF-I
DBR-T
DBR-I
BA-SMURF-T
BA-SMURF-I

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Number of Antenna Elements

Fig. 4: Average throughput obtained by the protocols for
different UAVs antenna conﬁgurations for a network density
of 50000 UAVs/km3.

)

B
d
(

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
r
e
t
n
I

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

30

20

10

0

4

1
64
Number of Antenna Elements

16

32

8

Fig. 5: Average interference incurred for different UAVs
antenna conﬁgurations.

as well as the worst case throughput (i.e., 25th percentile)
higher than SMURF and DBR for both tracked and true
scenarios. Hence, BA-SMURF is able to outperform the other
two protocols by about 5% even with a static beamforming
scheme.

A similar behavior is observed when comparing all the
protocols considering different UAV densities. Considering
the same antenna conﬁguration as above, Fig. 3 illustrates
this density comparison. Both SMURF and the enhanced BA-
SMURF version can exploit high-density network to ﬁnd
better routes, i.e., routes with high link existence probability
(for SMURF) and high minimum expected capacity (for BA-
SMURF). On the other hand, DBR’s throughput does not
increase with increasing density, as the protocol only takes into
account the distance between the tracked positions, without
considering the uncertainty: consequently, it will not choose
safer routes, which are available if the density of the network
increases. It is also evident from the ﬁgure that BA-SMURF
outperforms both SMURF and DBR for all densities and for
both the tracked and true position information, thanks to its
joint consideration of the position uncertainty and beamform-
ing pattern. Additionally, considering the beamforming design
can allow the system to potentially reduce interference to other
established routes, as well as allowing for more efﬁcient power
allocation for the transmission towards the receiver UAV.

Another interesting evaluation is the impact of different
antenna conﬁgurations, i.e., different beamforming patterns,
assuming a ﬁxed power allocation for the antenna. Fig. 4
shows the performance achieved by all
the protocols for
different antenna conﬁgurations in a network with a density
of 50000 UAVs/km3. The performance of the protocols when
taking into account true positions of the UAVs in the network
is similar for all different antenna conﬁgurations. This shows
that beamforming does not impact the performance when the
true positions are known by the protocols, as the transmitter
UAV is able to beamform the signal in the correct direction.
However, when considering the tracked position information,
beamforming becomes a problem: as the number of elements

in the antenna increases, the transmitted beam narrows, leading
to a stronger impact of the position uncertainty, and conse-
quently, to a lower throughput. The loss in performance is
due to the fact that the central controller does not know the
true position of the UAVs and it devises the beamsteering
vector al(φ, θ) based on the expected position of the UAVs:
the narrower the beam gets, the larger the impact of pointing
errors becomes. When the number of elements is 1,
the
performance of all the protocols is similar for tracked and true
position information, since the antenna is omnidirectional. Ad-
ditionally, BA-SMURF outperforms SMURF and DBR both
when considering perfect information for the protocols and in
the more realistic setting for all the antenna conﬁgurations.
This highlights the importance of incorporating beamforming
information to determine routes in FANETs.

While the average throughput for the considered route
is higher when choosing a single antenna element (i.e., an
omnidirectional antenna), the downside of this conﬁguration is
the high interference to neighboring UAVs, as shown in Fig. 5:
an omnidirectional transmission will have an increased impact
on other transmissions. When the network is interference-
limited, the use of narrow beamforming design to reduce the
neighbourhood interference is beneﬁcial: the lower received
power due to pointing errors is compensated by the lower
interference. On the other hand, when the network is noise-
limited, the use of wide beamforming is beneﬁcial, as it can
reduce the impact of UAV positioning uncertainty. Our results
also show that the need for adaptive beamforming for each
UAV is crucial, as having the same beamforming design for
the entire network can reduce the overall performance achieved
by the network.

V. CONCLUSION

In this work, we provide a statistical analysis of a FANET
with tracked position information and beamforming design,
and derive the minimum expected capacity for both single
links and entire routes. We then present the BA-SMURF pro-
tocol, a multihop routing protocol, which computes the route
with the highest expected capacity. The simulation results
show that BA-SMURF can outperform the existing protocols
in realistic network conditions. It is also shown to outperform
state of the art approaches for different UAV network densities
and different antenna conﬁgurations.

Moving forward, an interesting avenue of future research
is to deﬁne beamforming optimization scenarios with respect
to the tracking information available for each UAV in the
networks, jointly optimizing them and the routing process
based on the UAVs’ tracked positions and the estimation
uncertainty.

REFERENCES

[1] L. F. Gonzalez, G. A. Montes, E. Puig, S. Johnson, K. Mengersen, and
K. J. Gaston, “Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and artiﬁcial intel-
ligence revolutionizing wildlife monitoring and conservation,” Sensors,
vol. 16, no. 1, p. 97, Jan 2016.

[2] M. A. Ma’Sum, M. K. Arroﬁ, G. Jati, F. Ariﬁn, M. N. Kurniawan,
P. Mursanto, and W. Jatmiko, “Simulation of intelligent unmanned aerial
vehicle (UAV) for military surveillance,” in International Conference
on Advanced Computer Science and Information Systems (ICACSIS).
IEEE, Mar 2013, pp. 161–166.

[3] B. Ji, Y. Li, B. Zhou, C. Li, K. Song, and H. Wen, “Performance analysis
of UAV relay assisted IoT communication network enhanced with energy
harvesting,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 38 738–38 747, 2019.

[4] Y. Wan, K. Namuduri, Y. Zhou, and S. Fu, “A smooth-turn mobility
model for airborne networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technol-
ogy, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 3359–3370, Mar 2013.

[5] J.-D. M. M. Biomo, T. Kunz, and M. St-Hilaire, “An enhanced Gauss-
Markov mobility model for simulations of unmanned aerial ad hoc
networks,” in 7th IFIP Wireless and Mobile Networking Conference
(WMNC).

IEEE, May 2014, pp. 1–8.

[6] M. O. Farooq, “Multi-hop communication protocol for LoRa with
software-deﬁned networking extension,” Internet of Things, vol. 14, p.
100379, 2021.

[7] Z. Zhao, P. Cumino, A. Souza, D. Rosario, T. Braun, E. Cerqueira, and
M. Gerla, “Software-deﬁned unmanned aerial vehicles networking for
video dissemination services,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 83, pp. 68–77,
Feb. 2019.

[8] C. J. Katila, A. Di Gianni, C. Buratti, and R. Verdone, “Routing
protocols for video surveillance drones in IEEE 802.11s wireless mesh
networks,” in European Conference on Networks and Communications
(EuCNC).

IEEE, Jun 2017, pp. 1–5.

[9] N. E. H. Bahloul, S. Boudjit, M. Abdennebi, and D. E. Boubiche,
“A ﬂocking-based on demand routing protocol for Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles,” Journal of Computer Science and Technology, vol. 33, no. 2,
pp. 263–276, Mar 2018.

[10] M. Song, J. Liu, and S. Yang, “A mobility prediction and delay pre-
diction routing protocol for UAV networks,” in 10th International Con-
ference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP).
IEEE, Oct 2018, pp. 1–6.

[11] P. Xie, “An enhanced OLSR routing protocol based on node link
expiration time and residual energy in ocean FANETs,” in 24th Asia-
Paciﬁc Conference on Communications (APCC).
IEEE, Nov 2018, pp.
598–603.

[12] S. N. Pari and D. Gangadaran, “A reliable prognostic communication
routing for ﬂying ad hoc networks,” in 2nd International Conference on
Trends in Electronics and Informatics (ICOEI).
IEEE, May 2018, pp.
33–38.

[13] F. Mason, F. Chiariotti, M. Capuzzo, D. Magrin, A. Zanella, and
M. Zorzi, “Combining LoRaWAN and a New 3D Motion Model for
Remote UAV Tracking,” in IEEE INFOCOM Wireless Sensor, Robot
and UAV Networks (WiSARN) Workshop, Jul 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.04849

[14] A. A. Deshpande, F. Chiariotti, and A. Zanella, “SMURF: Reliable
Multipath Routing in Flying Ad-Hoc Networks,” in 2020 Mediterranean
Communication and Computer Networking Conference (MedComNet).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–8.

[15] A. Al-Hourani, “On the probability of Line-of-Sight in urban environ-
ments,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1178–
1181, 2020.

[16] F. Noor, M. A. Khan, A. Al-Zahrani, I. Ullah, and K. A. Al-Dhlan, “A
Review on Communications Perspective of Flying Ad-Hoc Networks:
Key Enabling Wireless Technologies, Applications, Challenges and
Open Research Topics,” Drones, vol. 4, no. 4, p. 65, 2020.

[17] E. Bj¨ornson, J. Hoydis, and L. Sanguinetti, “Massive MIMO networks:
Spectral, energy, and hardware efﬁciency,” Foundations and Trends in
Signal Processing, vol. 11, no. 3-4, pp. 154–655, 2017.

[18] D. Qiao, H. Qian, and G. Y. Li, “Broadbeam for massive MIMO
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 64, no. 9, pp.
2365–2374, 2016.

[19] T. Hu, “The maximum capacity route problem,” Operations Research,

vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 898–900, Dec. 1961.

