EUROPEAN ORGANIZATION FOR NUCLEAR RESEARCH (CERN)

May 27, 2022

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
6
2

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
7
7
4
3
1
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Measurement of thermal properties
of the LHCb VELO detector using
track-based software alignment

The LHCb VELO group

Abstract

The thermal properties of the LHCb Vertex Locator (VELO) are studied using the
real-time detector alignment procedure. The variation of the position and orientation
of the detector elements as a function of the operating temperature of the VELO
is presented. This study uses a dataset collected by the LHCb experiment during
a VELO temperature scan performed at the end of LHC Run 2 (October 2018).
Signiﬁcant shrinkage of the VELO modules is observed at the operating temperature
of −30◦C compared to the laboratory measurements on a single module taken at
a range of temperatures from +45◦C to -25◦C. The thermal shrinkage expected
from the extrapolation of laboratory measurements to lower temperatures, and the
results of this alignment study are in good agreement.

Submitted to JINST

© 2022 CERN for the beneﬁt of the LHCb collaboration. CC-BY-4.0 licence.

 
 
 
 
 
 
ii

1

Introduction

The LHCb experiment [1] was designed to investigate the diﬀerence between matter and
antimatter by studying decays of beauty and charm hadrons. It is located at the LHC
(Large Hadron Collider) situated at CERN. Precision measurements of the properties
of b and c hadron decays and searches for rare decays help understanding the Standard
Model and are among the most promising strategies to search for new particles and
couplings. As the production of the b-nadrons is concentrated in the forward direction, the
LHCb experiment was constructed as a single arm forward spectrometer which covers the
pseudorapidity region of 2 < η < 5. The closest detector to the proton-proton interaction
region is the Vertex Locator (VELO). The VELO is a silicon detector that reconstructs
trajectories of the particles passing through and distinguishes between primary and
secondary vertices. The tracking system reconstructs the particles’ trajectories (tracks)
and determines their momentum. The RICH (Ring Imaging Cherenkov) detectors provide
particle identiﬁcation using Cherenkov radiation. A dipole magnet curves the paths of
charged particles and allows the momenta to be determined. Their energy is measured by
an electromagnetic and hadronic calorimeter. The last sub-detector of the experiment is
the muon system which detects muons and measures their properties. The trigger system
of the experiment determines which events are recorded and selected to be analysed. From
the recorded information, diﬀerent variables for the decay particles can be calculated and
used for further data selection and analysis.

Figure 1: Side view of the LHCb experiment. Figure taken from [1].

This paper presents the VELO module position stability as a function of the operational
temperature variation. The ideal tool for this study is the alignment procedure applied to
a sample of reconstructed tracks, which is used to detect translations and rotations of
detector elements.

1

2 Design of the VELO for LHC Runs 1 - 2 (2010 -

2018)

The VELO has the role of locating primary vertices, deﬁned as the proton-proton inter-
action points, and secondary vertices from decays of long lived particles. The Run 1 -
2 VELO design [2] consists of 42 silicon modules arranged perpendicularly to the beam
operating at a set temperature of −30◦C (the set point of the cooling system). The VELO
modules each provide a measurement of R and φ coordinates using the 84 single-sided
radial (R) and azimuthal-angle (φ) strip sensors. The R and φ sensors are mounted on
both sides of a highly thermally conductive spine which supports the readout hybrid, and
the modules are supported with a carbon ﬁbre paddle stand. The R sensor strips are
arranged into four approximately 45◦ segments and have routing lines perpendicular to
the strips. The φ sensor has two zones with inner and outer strips. The routing lines
of the inner strips are orientated parallel to the outer strips (schematically depicted in
Fig. 2a and photographed in Fig. 2b).

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: Schematic representation of an R and a φ sensor (a) and a photograph of the VELO
strip detector module (b). Figures taken from [3] and [4].

The VELO modules are arranged perpendicularly to the beam along a length of about
1 m (see Fig. 3a). Their layout along the z direction, same as the beam direction, is
shown on Fig. 3c. The module number takes the odd numbers on the right half and
the even numbers on the left half of the detector (important later for the alignment
plots). The temperature of the detector is maintained constant via a cooling system that
uses mixed-phase CO2 that is supplied as a liquid into a number of stainless steel pipes
embedded within aluminium pads which are clamped to the base of the module. The
mechanical and thermal link to the sensors is provided by the carbon ﬁbre support. As
result of the temperature variation during the cooling the Copper (Cu) cables eﬀectively
pull the module along z [1], hence this movement had to be limited. This was achieved by
installing a z-constraint system. The constraint system is composed of precisely designed

2

slots (about 100 µm wider than the thickness of the modules) in which the modules were
inserted, shown on Fig. 3b. This ensured the modules remained around their nominal z
position. The whole detector operates in secondary vacuum conditions separated from the
LHC vacuum by a thin aluminium foil (Fig. 3a). The two halves are retracted at ± 29
mm from the LHC beam for safety during the beam injection and beam operation. When
stable beam is declared, the halves are closed with an accuracy of 10 µm around the beam
at an approximate distance of 8 mm. This VELO detector operated from October 2009
up to the end of LHC Run 2 in December 2018. It is being replaced by a new detector in
Run 3.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3: The Run 1-2 VELO design. One of the two removable halves of the detector is shown
with the beam axis placed along the z direction (a) [4]. A photograph of one of the slots of the
VELO constraint system (b). The VELO module layout along the z direction (c).

3 The VELO alignment

The performance of the LHCb VELO has ensured track reconstruction eﬃciency above
98%, a vertex resolution along the beam axis of about 70 µm, and a decay time resolution
of about 45 fs [3]. One of the key ingredients to achieve such performance is the alignment.
The correct VELO alignment contributes to correctly distinguishing primary and secondary
vertices and to improve the quality of the impact parameter. The alignment of the VELO
is determined by a Kalman ﬁlter [5,6] track model that is used in a minimum-χ2 algorithm

3

to determine the position of the detector elements (halves, modules and sensors) from
a sample of reconstructed tracks. The position of each detector element is stored in a
database that is accessed by the software for reconstruction. The alignment algorithm
estimates the misplacement of a set of positions of detector elements with respect to their
expected positions after closure of the VELO. The software aligns for three translations
(Tx, Ty, Tz) and three rotations (Rx, Ry, Rz) along/around the x, y or z axis of the VELO
which are known as alignment constants.

For the Run 2 data-taking period the LHCb experiment developed a new data taking
strategy [7] including the full-detector real-time alignment and calibration procedure [8].
During data taking, when the LHC beams are declared stable, the halves of the VELO move
towards the beam and the VELO is closed. The closing and opening of the VELO repeats
for each ﬁll of the LHC, which can lead to alignment changing in each ﬁll. The alignment
has to be run at the beginning of the ﬁll in order to check if the detector elements have the
expected position and orientation, which assures high track reconstruction performance
and unbiased vertex position reconstruction. If there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between
the alignment constants calculated by two consecutive alignments, the most recent values
are used to update the alignment. The whole alignment procedure can run over several
iterations until it converges. A convergence is reached if a certain condition for the χ2 of
tracks is fulﬁlled. The alignment minimizes the total χ2 of a sample of tracks, with the χ2
deﬁned as

tracks
(cid:88)

χ2

tot =

χ2

track.

(1)

track
The tracks are ﬁtted with the standard LHCb Kalman ﬁlter track ﬁt, which includes
corrections from multiple scattering. In the LHCb algorithm for the VELO alignment
the χ2 receives additional terms from vertex constraints [6] and terms to account for the
knowledge of detector positions from survey. The algorithm allows to apply the survey
constraints at diﬀerent levels of granularity, which in case of the VELO are the surveyed
positions of modules in the halves, and the positions of the halves in the global LHCb
frame. The assigned uncertainty of the VELO module survey in the VELO half frame
is 20 µm for translations and 200 µrad for rotations. The alignment uses reconstructed
tracks and imposes selection on the track quality. A requirement of the number of hits and
cuts on momentum and χ2 of tracks are applied. Along with the tracks, the reconstructed
primary vertices are used as an input to the VELO alignment. A selection that contains
the maximum and minimum number of tracks of the vertex and requirement on the χ2
for the vertex ﬁt is used. To assess the convergence of the alignment the total predicted
change in the χ2 is considered, which is deﬁned as

δχ2 = αT Cov(α−1)α,

(2)

ndof < 4, and for each alignment mode δχ2

where α is the change in the alignment parameters. In the minimization procedure the
set of alignment parameters is translated into a set of independent alignment modes by
diagonalizing the covariance matrix. The alignment is considered converged when both the
total δχ2
i < 25. The alignment needs to perform
an update of the position of the detector elements if there has been a signiﬁcant variation
during data-taking. A variation is considered signiﬁcant when the diﬀerence between
the value of the alignment constant determined in the most recent alignment, and the
previous value, exceeds the “min variation” values reported in Table 1. In order to reduce

4

the sensitivity to statistical eﬀects, the alignment parameters used for data processing
are only updated if the variation determined by the alignment algorithm is considered
signiﬁcant. Any variation below the “min variation” threshold is considered as ﬂuctuation
within the accuracy of the alignment. The constants are updated every few ﬁlls and
overall good stability is found [9]. The threshold values account for the accuracy and
precision of the alignment, evaluated using samples of LHCb simulated events generated
with Run 2 conditions [10], and compared to the alignment constants variations observed
in 2012 and 2015 data for which the numbers are reported in Table 1.

d.o.f

Min variation

Tx, Ty [ µm ]
Tz [ µm ]
Rx, Ry [ µrad ]
Rz [ µrad ]

1.5
5
4
30

Table 1: Alignment constants thresholds used for the online update [10]

4 Survey and metrology measurements

During the construction and assembly of the VELO a series of survey measurements were
taken to evaluate the position of the each element of the detector [11, 12]. This included a
Coordinate Measuring Machine (CMM) metrology for each module after its assembly in
each VELO half. All these measurements were taken at the ambient temperature, about
25◦C. The accuracy of the module position was evaluated to be of about 15 µm, 50 µm,
and 200 µm for translations along the x, y, and z axis, respectively, and of the order of
1 mrad for rotations around the x and y axes and 0.2 mrad for rotations around the z axis.
The positions of the two VELO halves were determined in photogrammetry measurements
performed at the ﬁnal VELO setup in the experimental cavern before insertion of the two
detector halves [13]. The accuracy of the single measurement is about 100 µm for the
translations and 100 µrad for the rotations around the x and y axes.

These measurements were used as initial position of the detector for the alignment
procedure based on the reconstructed tracks. The track-based alignment results have a
higher accuracy. The accuracy of the survey measurements was expected to be comparable
with the diﬀerence between the survey measurements and the alignment results. A
variation of the alignment of the detector halves up to 10 µm between ﬁlls is expected,
due to the precision of the resolvers as part of the motion system [1]. This applies to the
alignment of the detector halves, not to modules within the halves. Instead the alignment
of the two halves showed a signiﬁcant misalignment along the x axis of about 160 µm
for each half, beyond the accuracy of the survey measurements. This corresponds to
a distance of about 320 µm between the 2 halves at the nominal closed position of the
VELO. The track eﬃciency of the detector was not aﬀected by this opening because in its
nominal position the acceptance of the two VELO halves overlaps by about 1.7 mm in x.
The survey campaigns were taken at the ambient temperature, while the operation
temperature of the VELO is −30◦C. To investigate if the cause of these displacements
were due to the temperature diﬀerence between the survey campaign and the operation

5

condition, CMM metrology on a single spare module was taken at diﬀerent temperatures
in the laboratory. It should be considered that there is a temperature gradient along the
silicon and the hybrid due to the to isothermal eﬀect, shown in Fig. 4a as illustrative
example in the case of a cooling temperature at −25◦C. Fig. 4b shows the diﬀerent
points measured in this campaign. The measurements were taken at the following cooling
temperature: +45◦C, +20◦C, −15◦C, −25◦C. The position was studied as a function of
the cooling temperature and the shrinkage at −30◦C was extrapolated by a linear ﬁt on
the measurements.

At the operational temperature of −30◦C, the shrinkage of the silicon sensor and the
hybrid is -31 µm. This corresponds to about 1 µm per K temperature variation. The main
responsible of the shrinkage is the Cu present in the hybrid. This explains an opening
distance between the 2 halves for about 70 µm.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Temperature gradient along the silicon and the hybrid due to the to isothermal eﬀect,
in the case of a cooling temperature at −25◦C (a). A drawing of the VELO module illustrating
the approximate positions of the survey points (b).

5 VELO Temperature Scan

At the end of Run 2, a temperature scan of the VELO was performed to evaluate the
temperature eﬀect on the detector position. During one of the last ﬁlls of the LHC Run
2, in October 2018, the operating temperature of the detector was changed from −30◦C
to −20◦C using two intermediate steps with temperatures −26◦C and −24◦C. Before
reaching the stable temperature of −24◦C the high voltage was changed from 350 V to
250 V. To avoid eﬀects due to the accuracy of the closing system the data were collected
in the same ﬁll. In order to reach thermal stability the data was collected 5 minutes after
the temperature change. The data samples were saved at each temperature point, and
the samples are used to study the eﬀect on the detector performance. In the next section
we present the study of the detector movements as a function of the temperature.

5.1 Results

The alignment procedure was run to evaluate the detector element positions (position
of each module and of the halves) at each temperature. The variation of the position is
evaluated as the variation of the alignment constants with respect to the constants at the

6

Issues: VELO Closing  (June 2010)Themis Bowcock3-10C-22C+21CHybrid/Paddle Temp-13C3cm      <-17C>12cm     <-11.5C>      2cm       <-22C>25cm       <-2C>Temp Hybrid ~<-14C> corresponding to T(-30C)     ->   -35m Hybridnon thermally isolated                               Pedestal ~( -1)      ->  +1m Pedestal(thermally isolated                                     Pedestal ~( -25)    ->  +3mPedestal)T(+25C)-> +25um HybridT (-25C) -> -2um  PedestalShift expected is approx -32 to -34m/sideOpening ~ -62m to -68umi.e. O(70um)About  30% of 300micron   opening atrributableto module shrinkage-22CVELO operation temperature (−30◦C). These variations are analysed as a function of
temperature and a linear dependency is expected. To disentangle any variation due to the
alignment procedure, the results obtained with diﬀerent constraints are compared. The
alignment of the modules is performed together with the 2 half alignment. The modules
are aligned for the main d.o.f., Tx, Ty and Rz, while the halves are aligned for all d.o.f.:
the x, y, z translations and rotations. The alignment uses as constraint the modules 10,
11, 32, 33 (that are not aligned) and the average position of the two VELO halves. Module
10, 32 are mounted on the C-side(right) of the VELO and 11, 33 are at the A-side(left).
Diﬀerent constraints are considered in the systematic check.

5.2 Halves alignment

On Fig. 5, the variations of the translations in all directions (x, y and z) for the VELO
halves are shown as a function of temperature. The halves are identical per construction
and the same movement is expected. The alignment constants for the VELO right half take
the same values but opposite sign and the plots that show the temperature dependence
are symmetrical. Therefore, we report the results of only one half (VELO left). A linear
trend is visible for all degrees of freedom, indicating higher temperature leads to larger
variations. The largest variation is for Tx up to 10 µm and all the rest of the points
exhibit a variation larger than accuracy of the alignment procedure [10]. The variations of
Ty and Tz are up to 3 µm and considered almost negligible as they are comparable with
the alignment accuracy (Table 1). Table 2 shows the linear ﬁt results for the translation
variation along x for the VELO halves as a function of temperature. It results a variation
of 0.94 µm per K. Fig. 5 shows the variations of the rotations as a function of temperature.
The variations are in the range between -20 µrad and +20 µrad for Rz and up to 5 µrad
for Rx and Ry. All the variations are compatible with the alignment accuracy from Table
1 and hence they are not signiﬁcant.

5.3 Modules alignment

The shrinkage of modules as function of the temperature is expected to be similar for all
the modules and the variations are expected to be signiﬁcantly smaller than the average

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: Variations of translation (a) and rotation (b) d.o.f of the left VELO, calculated when
two halves and modules alignment is performed. The dashed grey line in the left plot is the min
variation needed for an update in Tx.

7

30-25-20-C](cid:176)Temperature [8-6-4-2-02m]m Variations of translation d.o.f [Tx VELO leftTy VELO leftTz VELO leftLHCb VELO30-25-20-C](cid:176)Temperature [20-15-10-5-0rad]m Variations of rotation d.o.f [Rx VELO leftRy VELO leftRz VELO leftLHCb VELOVELO Left

Tx = p0 + p1T

Alignment constant
Tx

p0 [ µm ]

p1 [ µm/K]

−28.24 ± 0.06 −0.942 ± 0.003

χ2/d.o.f
3.9

Table 2: Linear ﬁt results for variations of Tx alignment constants aligning for halves and
modules of the left half of the VELO.

shrinkage of all the modules included in the the half alignment constants. The observed
variation for the translation along the x direction for the modules has a linear behaviour
as a function of the temperature and is a factor of ∼ 3 smaller than the half Tx variation.
The variations in Ty are smaller than 1 µm, except for the ﬁrst two modules for which
the variation can be as large as 2 µm. Given that the alignment accuracy is 1.5 µm, these
variations are considered negligible. The Rz variation of the modules in the left and
the right VELO half is up to 60 µrad and most of the points are below the accuracy of
30 µrad. One can evaluate the module position in the global reference system adding the
evaluated movement of the half that is obtained by the 2 half alignment. These variations
are analysed as function of the z position of the modules. Within this we can study
any eventual dependency of the shrinkage on the z-position of the module. The 2 half
alignment represents the average movement of the modules, while the module alignment
is an overall correction on the single module behaviour.

Figure 6: Variations of Tx d.o.f. of the VELO modules of the left VELO half, in the global
reference frame as a function of z position of modules. The grey and green vertical lines
correspond to the positions of modules 11 and 33, respectively.

Fig. 6 shows the variations for the modules of the left VELO half as a function of their
position in the global frame. One can see a main movement due to the temperature change,
up to 12 µm for a 10◦C temperature variation (Fig. 6). The other VELO half has a similar
behaviour. The variations among modules have a negligible dependence as a function of
their z position, except in the backward region, where the variation is up to 6 µm. This
variation could be due to the fact that this region is less constrained in the alignment
procedure. Due to the fact that halves and modules were aligned simultaneously, with
the survey constraints ﬁxing the relative alignment, the presented numbers show a few

8

0500 position [mm]z16-14-12-10-8-6-4-2-0m]m Tx [ (cid:176)-30(cid:176)-26(cid:176)-24(cid:176)-20LHCb VELOmicron variation depending on how the global weak modes were ﬁxed.

6 Comparison with previous temperature studies

The laboratory measurements on a single module can be compared to the half x position
variation evaluated by the alignment procedure at each temperature (Fig. 7).

Figure 7: Variations of Tx as a function of temperature (alignment using halves and modules)
compared with the study at the single module in laboratory (blue dashed line on the plot).

Fig. 7 shows the modules variations of Tx as function of temperature for the alignment
performed for both the halves and the modules. The measurements on a single module
are shown in blue. The two results are in good agreement. This conﬁrms the thermal
expansion of the VELO modules is as expected from laboratory measurements. By a linear
extrapolation, this results a shrinkage of about 30 µm for each half due to the diﬀerence
of the temperature during the metrology campaign and the operation campaign. This
explains about one third of the observed 320 µm distance between the two halves when
the VELO is in the nominal closing position. The other part can be explained by a 0.6%
calibration of the motion system along the x direction [3]. This was evaluated thanks to
the tracking alignment evaluated at diﬀerent opening position of the VELO halves with
the ﬁrst collision data.

7 Conclusion

The thermal properties of the VELO modules are studied using the alignment. Data
samples were collected at four operating temperatures between −30◦C and −20◦C and
the alignment procedure was used to evaluate the VELO alignment constants variations
as a function of the temperature. Both VELO halves and modules have been aligned
for translations and rotations at each temperature point. The alignment constants are
found to vary linearly as function of temperature. The only signiﬁcant variation is for the
translations along the x axis. The modules variations have a nonlinear behaviour with
small variations within 2 µm at the same temperature. The variations in Ty and Rz are

9

30-25-20-C](cid:176)Temperature [8-6-4-2-0m]m Variations of translation d.o.f [Tx VELO leftsingle moduleTemperature study on aLHCb VELOnot signiﬁcant as they are within the alignment accuracy. These results are compared with
the measurements performed on a single module in laboratory conditions. The variation
observed for Tx is compatible with those measurements. The two results are in good
agreement and conﬁrm a shrinkage of 1 µm per K. The diﬀerence between the temperature
at which the survey measurements were performed (+25◦C) and the operation temperature
of the detector (−30◦C) leads to a thermal shrinkage of about 30 µm for each half.

10

References

[1] LHCb collaboration, A. A. Alves et al., The LHCb Detector at the LHC, JINST 3

(2008) 08:S08005.

[2] LHCb collaboration, LHCb VELO (VErtex LOcator): Technical Design Report,

CERN-LHCC-2001-011.

[3] R. Aaij et al., Performance of the LHCb Vertex Locator, JINST 9 (2014) P09007,

arXiv:1405.7808.

[4] E. Buchanan, The LHCb Vertex Locator (VELO) Pixel Detector Upgrade, JINST 12

(2017) C01013. 10.

[5] W. D. Hulsbergen, The global covariance matrix of tracks ﬁtted with a Kalman ﬁlter
and an application in detector alignment, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 600 (2009) 471.

[6] J. Amoraal et al., Application of vertex and mass constraints in track-based alignment,

Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 712 (2013) 48, arXiv:1207.4756.

[7] LHCb collaboration, R. Aaij et al., Design and performance of the LHCb trigger
and full real-time reconstruction in Run 2 of the LHC, JINST 14 (2019) P04013,
arXiv:1812.10790.

[8] LHCb collaboration, S. Borghi, Novel real-time alignment and calibration of the LHCb

detector and its performance, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A A 845 (2017) 560.

[9] A. Dziurda, L. Grillo, F. Polci, and M. Sokoloﬀ, Real-time alignment and recon-
struction: performance and recent developments at the LHCb experiment, Journal of
Physics: Conference Series 1085 (2018) 042003.

[10] G. Dujany, Real-time alignment of the LHCb vertex detector and observation of
charmless baryonic decays B0
(s) → pph+h(cid:48)−, PhD thesis, The University of Manchester,
Mar, 2017, CERN-THESIS-2017-076, Presented 25 Apr 2017,https://cds.cern.
ch/record/2272135.

[11] T. Huse, VELO Module Production - Sensor to Sensor Metrology, Tech. Rep.
CERN-LHCb-2007-085, CERN, Geneva, Nov, 2007. http://cds.cern.ch/record/
1067148.

[12] P. Sutcliﬀe, VELO Module Production - Final Module Metrology, Tech. Rep. CERN-
LHCb-2007-087, CERN, Geneva, Jan, 2008. http://cds.cern.ch/record/1082459.

[13] H. de Vries, Alignment of the center frame and inner frames of the VELO detector,
Tech. Rep. EDMS-908162, CERN, Geneva, Oct, 2007. https://edms.cern.ch/
document/908162/1.

,

11

