2
2
0
2

y
a
M
5

]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[

1
v
3
8
4
2
0
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Vector Field Visualization of Single-Qubit State
Tomography

Adrien Suau
LIRMM, University of Montpellier
Montpellier, France
CERFACS, Toulouse, France
0000-0002-2412-7298

Marc Vuffray
Theoretical Division
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
0000-0001-7999-9897

Andrey Y. Lokhov
Theoretical Division
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
0000-0003-3269-7263

Lukasz Cincio
Theoretical Division
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
0000-0002-6758-4376

Carleton Coffrin
Advanced Network Science Initiative
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
0000-0003-3238-1699

Abstract—As the variety of commercially available quantum
computers continues to increase so does the need for tools that
can characterize, verify and validate these computers. This work
explores using quantum state tomography for characterizing
the performance of individual qubits and develops a vector
ﬁeld visualization for presentation of the results. The proposed
protocol is demonstrated in simulation and on quantum com-
puting hardware developed by IBM. The results identify qubit
performance features that are not reﬂected in the standard
models of this hardware, indicating opportunities to improve the
accuracy of these models. The proposed qubit evaluation protocol
is provided as free open-source software to streamline the task
of replicating the process on other quantum computing devices.
Index Terms—Quantum computing, Quantum state tomogra-

phy, Qubit benchmark

I. INTRODUCTION

The emergence of commercial Quantum Computing (QC)
hardware has made tools for quantum characterization, veriﬁ-
cation, and validation (QCVV) [1] more important than ever.
Especially in the era of Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum
(NISQ) [2] devices, QCVV methods provide the means for
QC users to measure and quantify the performance of quantum
hardware platforms and enables consistent comparisons across
different hardware architectures. The scope of QCVV is broad
and ranges from testing individual quantum operations (e.g.,
error rates of one- and two-qubit gates [3]), verifying small
circuits (e.g., Quantum State Tomography [4], Randomized
Benchmarking [5], [6], Gate Set Tomography [7]), to full
system-level protocols (e.g., quantum volume estimation [8],
random quantum circuits [9]). Over the years these QCVV
tools have become an invaluable foundation for benchmarking
and measuring progress of quantum processors [10], culminat-
ing in multiple quantum supremacy demonstrations [11], [12].
In many ways quantum state tomography provides a gold
standard for QCVV in that, it can theoretically provide an
exact reconstruction of the full quantum state of QC hard-
ware, with sufﬁcient data. At its most basic level, quantum

state tomography provides a protocol for combining multiple
observations to uniquely identify the state of a quantum system
(i.e., a density matrix). On small quantum systems, where data
collection and result computations are feasible, quantum state
tomography provides a precise measure of how accurately a
quantum hardware device can execute a desired quantum com-
putation. The strength of quantum state tomography for QCVV
is that it can provide a comprehensive picture of hardware
performance. The weakness of quantum state tomography is
that it often requires a prohibitively large amount of data and
the interpretation of the results can be difﬁcult. Indeed, the
objective of many other QCVV protocols (e.g. Randomized
Benchmarking [5], [6], Gate Set Tomography [7]) is to provide
trade offs in data collection and result detail resulting in more
scalable QCVV alternatives to quantum state tomography.

This work explores the use of quantum state tomography for
conducting QCVV on commercially available QC platforms.
We focus on quantum state tomography of single-qubits to
minimize the data collection requirements and to develop a
protocol that can be executed in parallel for all of the qubits in
a given hardware platform. The core contributions of this work
are a Vector Field Visualization of single-qubit quantum state
tomography and an open-source software tool for data col-
lection, state reconstruction and result presentation. Through
experiments on QC hardware available in IBM’s Q-Hub, we
show that the proposed method can identify qubit performance
features that are not easily identiﬁed with captured with a
single value and provide clear signatures that distinguish qubit
performance from both perfect and noisy simulators of this
hardware.

This work begins by introducing the foundations of quan-
tum state tomography for a single-qubit in Section II and
reviews the maximum likelihood estimation method [4] for
reconstructing a quantum state from measurements. Section III
then proposes the vector ﬁeld visualization for presenting the
single-qubit quantum state tomography results and illustrates

 
 
 
 
 
 
how this visualization can be leveraged to provide unique in-
sights into qubit performance. Section IV investigates how the
results from different quantum state tomography algorithms
can be combined with the vector ﬁeld visualization to identify
signatures of data corruption. The details of the open-source
software are provided in Section V and the paper concludes
with a discussion of the usefulness of the proposed protocol
and future work in Section VI.

II. SINGLE-QUBIT STATE TOMOGRAPHY

|

φ

×

φ
(cid:104)

0 for all

The state of a quantum system composed of n qubits is
fully described by a 2n
2n Hermitian matrix ρ, the so-called
density matrix. Density matrices are positive semi-deﬁnite,
C2n
normalized matrices, i.e.,
,
ρ
|
and Tr [ρ] = 1. A measurement outcome of a quantum system
is represented by a real random variable, A, associated with
a Hermitian matrix, customarily also denoted by the same
letter. Measuring A is linked in expectation to the density
matrix through the well-known formula E [A
ρ] = Tr [ρA].
This expression implies that only projections of the density
matrix can be observed, as the trace is an inner product over
Hermitian matrices.

(cid:105) ≥

(cid:105) ∈

φ

|

|

−

The task of reconstructing density matrices from repetitive
observations of these projections is called Quantum State
Tomography (QST). Since the space of density matrices has
4n
1 real parameters, exact QST can only be done if one
records at least 4n
1 different projections. Therefore, general
QST remains prohibitive for quantum systems of moderate
to large size due to the exponential growth in the number
of required observations. However, for single-qubits, QST is
tractable and provides a complete description of the quantum
system, making it a powerful tool for conducting QCVV of
individual qubits in QC hardware.

−

A. Maximum-Likelihood Quantum State Tomography

There exists multiple methods (i.e., statistical estimators)
that can be used for QST. Each of these estimators comes
with its own advantages and disadvantages such as improved
reconstruction quality with respect to speciﬁc metrics, ease
of implementation, or computational beneﬁts. Some popu-
lar choices for QST include linear regression based meth-
ods [13], nuclear norm constrained reconstructions [14] and
the Maximum-Likelihood Estimator (MLE) [15]. In this work,
we adopted the MLE method as it is widely used in practice,
theory principles and can
leverages fundamental statistical
be easily implemented for small quantum systems. However,
a sensitivity study on simulated data suggested that all of
these methods produce similar results under the speciﬁc data
collection settings used in this work.

The Maximum-Likelihood approach for QST consists in
ﬁnding the density matrix ρ that will maximize the probability
of realized measurements. Our observables are measures k
that is the union
described by an ensemble of projectors
of all measurement bases or more precisely the Projection-
Valued Measures (PVMs) that we consider. What is recorded,
and what serves as an input to the MLE algorithm, are the

Pk}
{

number of times, nk, that a particular measure k has been
observed. The log-likelihood functions is then expressed in
terms of our statistics as follows,
(cid:88)

ρ] =

nk ln Tr [ρPk] .

(1)

ln P [
nk} |
{

k

The reconstructed density matrix ρout is the output of the
following concave maximization problem on the positive semi-
deﬁnite cone,

ρout = arg max

ρ(cid:60)0
Tr[ρ]=1

(cid:88)

k

nk ln Tr [ρPk]

(2)

Due to the limitations of off-the-shelf optimization software, in
practice, enforcing the positive semi-deﬁnite (PSD) constraint,
ρ (cid:60) 0, may require a specialized optimization algorithm.
One possible approach to solving (2) consists in using local
gradient ascent algorithm interleaved with eigendecomposition
based projections onto the SDP cone. However, we will see
that for single-qubit QST, the SDP constraint has a convenient
simpliﬁcation.

B. Specializing to Single-Qubit State Tomography

·

∈

2 (I + (cid:126)a

The Bloch vector representation of quantum states enables
us to signiﬁcant simplify QST for an individual qubit. In this
R3
representation, density matrices are encoded as vectors (cid:126)a
by ρ = 1
(cid:126)σ) where (cid:126)σ is the vector of Pauli matrices.
The PSD constraint that ρ must satisfy is enforced through
the requirement that its corresponding vector lies within the
1. Projectors are described in a similar
unit sphere, i.e.
(cid:126)a
(cid:107) ≤
(cid:107)
fashion by P(cid:126)u = 1
= 1. Any PVM is
(cid:126)u
2 (I + (cid:126)u
(cid:107)
(cid:107)
composed of only two projectors P(cid:126)u and P
P(cid:126)u, and
therefore can be identiﬁed by a single unit vector (cid:126)u. Since we
choose to perform the same number of measurements N in
each PVMs, we only need to record the empirical probability
p(cid:126)u = n(cid:126)u/N of measuring the observable associated with (cid:126)u.
The MLE estimator from Eq. (2) is then simplﬁed into the
following program,

(cid:126)σ), where

(cid:126)u = I

−

−

·

(cid:126)aout = arg max

(cid:88)

p(cid:126)u ln (1 + (cid:126)a

(cid:126)a

(cid:107)

(cid:107)≤

1

(cid:126)u

(cid:126)u) + (1

p(cid:126)u) ln (1

(cid:126)a

·

−

(cid:126)u) .

−

·

(3)

The maximization problem in Eq. (3) is amenable to standard
optimization software for it is a simple concave non-linear
problem in R3 with the cumbersome SDP constraint from
Eq. (2) replaced with a unit sphere constraint.

C. Single-Qubit State Tomography Experiment Design

Our main goal is to reconstruct the state of a single qubit
R†θ,φ,
programmed to be in the pure state ρin := Rθ,φ |
0
(cid:105)(cid:104)
where the rotation matrix is implemented through elemen-
tary rotations on the y and z axis Rθ,φ = Rz(φ)Ry(θ)
as depicted in Figure 1. The programmed density matrix
ρin is represented on the Bloch sphere with the unit vector
(cid:126)ain(θ, φ) = (sin(θ) cos(φ), sin(θ) sin(φ), cos(θ)). Using the
MLE estimator from Eq. (3), we will assess the quality of the

0
|

Fig. 1: The state preparation procedure used to initialise a
single-qubit quantum state where the elementary rotations are
iZφ/2).
deﬁned by Ry (θ) = exp (

iY θ/2) and Rz (φ) = (

−

−

state preparation for a speciﬁc qubit by comparing (cid:126)ain(θ, φ)
with the corresponding (cid:126)aout for multiple values of φ and θ.

In our experiments, we are limited to measurements in the
computational basis, that is to say, to the PVM associated
with the vector (0, 0, 1). To remedy to this issue, we rotate
the qubit before measuring it with the matrix R†α,β to emulate
a PVM on (cid:126)u = (sin(α) cos(β), sin(α) sin(β), cos(α)). The
rotation matrix is again implemented with elementary rotations
β). The complete circuit is shown in
R†α,β = Ry(
Figure 2.

α)Rz(

−

−

Fig. 3: The Bloch sphere representation of PVMs that can
be considered for single-qubit state tomography. The Pauli
operators (left) provide a minimal set of PVMs while the
tetrahedral PVMs used in this work (right) provides data
redundancy and improved reconstruction accuracy. In this
),
ﬁgure, P0 =
1
+
0
(
(cid:105)
(cid:105)
|
(cid:105)
|
(cid:113) 2
3 ei 2
3 kπ
.
+
}

, P1 = 1
0
√2
(cid:105)
|
and Tk = 1
0
√3 |

), P2 = 1
√2
for k

1
0
(cid:105)
|
|
1, 2, 3

T0 =

1
(cid:105)
|

0
(cid:105)

∈ {

+ i

(

(cid:105)

|

Fig. 2: The state preparation and tomography procedure used
to initialise a single-qubit quantum state.

∈ {

(0, 0), (π/2, 0), (π/2, 0)
}

Conducting QST on a single qubit requires measurements
from at least 3 different linearly independent PVMs. One
natural choice are the Pauli PVMs along canonical axes (i.e.,
). However, having more
(α, β)
than the minimum number of PVMs can be beneﬁcial in
reducing the statistical error in state reconstruction. In this
work we leverage a tetrahedral set of PVMs using (α, β)
∈
(cid:8)(0, 0), (cos−
3 )(cid:9)
2π
1( −
to provide a balance of mitigating statistical error and
data collection requirements. The Bloch sphere vectors
representing both the Pauli and tetrahedral PVMs are depicted
in Figure 3.

1
1( −
3 ), 0), (cos−

3 ), (cos−

3 ), 2π

1
3 ), −

1( −

1

The experimental procedure for conducting single-qubit
QST proposed in this work uses the tetrahedral PVMs with the
MLE model from (3) as follows. For a given state (cid:126)ain (θ, φ)
on the Bloch sphere, four variants of the tomography circuit
(Figure 2) are executed, one for each (α, β) combination
in the tetrahedral PVMs. State measurement statistics are
collected for each of these circuits and converted into empirical
probabilities p(cid:126)u providing the information required for posing
the MLE problem (3). The optimal solution to (3), (cid:126)aout,
encodes the most likely density matrix that was implemented
by the qubit at the state (cid:126)ain (θ, φ).

An important subtlety in using a QST workﬂow in practice
is to quantify how the accuracy of the empirical probability
impacts the solution quality of model (3). On a quantum
hardware platform one only has access to a ﬁnite number
of measurements, N (a.k.a., shots), to estimate the empiri-
cal probabilities p(cid:126)u. If the number of measurements is not

sufﬁcient, ﬁnite sample errors can yield signiﬁcant artifacts
in (cid:126)aout. We performed a sensitivity study to quantify this
statistical error on simulated data. For a given prepared state
(cid:126)ain (θ, φ), we sample N = 20, 000 observations for each
of the tetrahedral PVMs, and then reconstruct (cid:126)aout with our
QST MLE algorithm. We repeat this procedure 104 times to
accumulate an empirical histogram of the statistical error for
each state, (θ, φ), and estimate the 99-th percentile of the
Euclidean distance error (cid:15) (i.e., P [
(cid:15)] = 0.99).
(cid:126)aout −
(cid:126)ain(cid:107) ≤
(cid:107)
We ﬁnd empirically that (cid:15)
0.02 for all angles (θ, φ). There-
fore, throughout this work we standardized on N = 20, 000
observations per circuit to ensure that statistical ﬂuctuations
will only contribute to an error in the second digit, with high
conﬁdence.

≤

III. VECTOR FIELD VISUALISATION OF SINGLE-QUBIT
STATE TOMOGRAPHY

To illustrate the potential usefulness of single-qubit QST,
this work investigates two questions arising in QCVV: (1) how
accurate is single-qubit state preparation; (2) how consistent is
the state preparation quality throughout the Bloch sphere. The
ﬁrst question amounts to quantifying the difference between
the ideal quantum state, (cid:126)ain(θ, φ), and the reconstructed
quantum state resulting from the QST protocol, (cid:126)aout. The
second question consists of repeating the state tomography
protocol for a wide variety of possible state preparations and
investigating how the reconstructed states vary. Throughout
this section we develop the idea of a vector ﬁeld visualisation
for presenting the results of single-qubit QST to visually
investigate these two questions. A variety of examples are then
used to illustrate the usefulness of the proposed approach.

For a given single-qubit state, (cid:126)ain(θ, φ), the tomography
procedure described in Section II yields a density matrix ρout
R3. Many metrics can be
in the form of a vector in (cid:126)aout ∈
(cid:3))
computed from (cid:126)aout such as quantum state purity (Tr (cid:2)ρ2
or ﬁdelity (Tr (cid:2)(cid:112)
(cid:3)). A natural way to visualize

√ρinρout√ρin

out

Ry(θ)Rz(φ)qRy(θ)Rz(φ)R†z(β)R†y(α)z|0icStatepreparationQuantumstatetomographyP0P1P2T0T1T2T3·

2 (I + (cid:126)a

(cid:126)aout is a point within the Bloch sphere using the relation
ρ = 1
(cid:126)σ) from Section II. However, this representation
is difﬁcult to interpret without an interactive visualization as
many points with-in the sphere are co-located in standard
orthographic projections, such as Figure 3. In particular, it is
hard to distinguish if a given point is “on the front” or “on the
back” of the sphere, it is hard to distinguish a pure state, that is
represented on the surface of the Bloch sphere, from a mixed
state, that is represented strictly within the Bloch sphere.

This work carefully combines three visualization tools to
address the challenge of presenting this data. The ﬁrst idea is
to embed the single qubit states on the two-dimensional plane
using established spherical projection methods. In this work
we leverage the Robinson projection to place the QST results
on a two-dimensional plot.1 The second idea is to leverage
a heatmap on this 2-dimensional representation to visualize a
key metric of interest, such as the reconstructed state’s purity
or ﬁdelity. Throughout this work the color of the plot is used
to present the state’s purity. The third idea is to use arrows
to illustrate the locations difference between the ideal and
reconstructed states, with each arrow starting at the ideal state
and ending at the corresponding reconstructed state, projected
onto the surface of the Bloch sphere. This communicates the
rotational error that occurs in the reconstructed state. Overall,
we call this representation of single-qubit QST the Vector Field
Visualisation (VFV).

A. Vector Field Visualisation Examples

To verify the correctness of the proposed VFV approach,
and to illustrate its usefulness, we begin with a series of
QST studies of 200 quantum states spaced approximately
equidistantly around the Bloch sphere using the ibm_lagos
computer. The results are presented in Figure 4. As a validation
exercise, we begin by performing the full QST protocol on an
ideal quantum simulator in Figure 4a. This procedure yields
reconstructed states with very high quality (purity 0.999, on
average) with no rotational errors, conﬁrming the correctness
of the workﬂow’s implementation. The slight variability in
these results illustrates the small errors that occur due to ﬁnite
samples.

The second experiment, Figure 4b, consists of performing
QST on data from a simulator of a noisy quantum computer.
IBM’s Q-Hub tracks various performance properties of their
qubits (e.g., gate and measurement errors) and provides an in-
terface to perform noisy simulations using these properties. As
expected, this procedure yields less consistent reconstructed
states (purity 0.983, on average) with no rotational errors.
Most notably, the simulated noisy qubit performance shows
no rotational errors and is very homogeneous regardless of
the quantum state that is being inspected.

The third and most

interesting experiment, Figure 4c,
consists of performing the state tomography protocol with

1Note that any 2-dimensional projection of a 3-dimensional sphere is bound
to imperfectly represent some of the features. The Robinson projection is a
compromise and is neither angle-preserving nor equal-area, but a balance
designed to reduce the overall distortion.

(a) Data obtained on an ideal simulator.

(b) Data obtained on a noisy simulator conﬁgured with the calibration
data of ibm_lagos at the time of hardware data collection.

(c) Data obtained on ibm_lagos.

Fig. 4: Vector Field Visualisations of the reconstructed states
using the single-qubit state tomography protocol from Sec-
tion II using 20, 000 shots on qubit 1 of ibm_lagos. The
heatmap indicates the purity of the reconstructed quantum state
and the horizontal red line in the color scale indicates the
average purity of the states.

real data from the ibm_lagos computer. Three interesting
observations can be made when comparing this result to the
two simulations: (1) This is the ﬁrst dataset where the vector
ﬁeld arrows are visible, indicating a type of rotational error
that is not captured the simulations; (2) The purity of the
reconstructed states is more heterogeneous than the simulators;
(3) the purity of the reconstructed states is similar in average
to the noisy simulator (0.983 compared to 0.972) but has a
notably higher standard deviation (0.004 compared to 0.013).
All of these observations indicate the potential for a state-
dependent error model to better capture this qubit’s perfor-

Fig. 5: Quantum state-preparation circuit used to visualise the
effect of state degradation over time. The original protocol is
obtained by setting the delay time t = 0. Increasing t shows
the errors that arise in idle open-quantum systems. On IBM
Quantum chips, t is given as a multiple of a speciﬁc time dt.
On ibm_lagos, dt = 2

9 ns.

mance. Overall, the value of VFV approach is highlighted by
the distinct motifs that are clear in each of these ﬁgures and
may provide inspiration for new qubit performance measures
and noise mitigation schemes.

B. Visualisation of State Degradation

One of the primary uses of data presentation tools like
the VFV is to examine features of qubit performance that
are not captured by current QC simulators. This can provide
inspiration for which features could make simulators more
faithful proxies of real-world QC hardware. To illustrate the
point this section explores the impacts of adding a delay(t)
instruction into the state preparation protocol, as shown in
Figure 5. In this circuit the state preparation procedure used
in the original protocol is now followed by a delay during
which the qubit experiences the effects of an open-quantum
system before the QST measurements are performed. Note that
this delayed QST experiment would produce identical results
in the case of closed-system simulations that are considered in
Figure 4. This type of experiment is only interesting on QC
hardware or simulations of open-quantum systems [16], [17].
Results of the time delay experiments are shown in Figure
6. Two notable observations can be made from these results.
First we can see that the average of the state’s purity degrades
steadily, starting with an average value of 0.972 and degrading
to 0.959 and then 0.945. The second observation is that the
rotational error of the state is also increasing steadily and
non-uniformly with time; notice how the rotational bias at
the top of the VFV is very different from the bottom. It is
also suprizing to see a systematic rotational shift from left to
right that appears to be state-dependent. Although this study is
only a proof-of-principle, it highlights the potential usefulness
of VFV for designing models of open-quantum systems and
provides some intuition for what decoherence looks like on
this QC hardware.

IV. SIGNATURES OF SINGLE-QUBIT DATA CORRUPTION

(a) Data obtained on ibm_lagos with a delay of t = 0 dt.

(b) Data obtained on ibm_lagos with a delay of t = 800 dt.

(c) Data obtained on ibm_lagos with a delay of t = 1600 dt.

Fig. 6: Vector Field Visualisations of the reconstructed states
of the state preparation with delay circut using 20, 000 shots
on qubit 1 of ibm_lagos using three different delay values.
The heatmap indicates the purity of the reconstructed quantum
state and the horizontal red line in the color scale indicates the
average purity of the states.

probabilities. For a single qubit system, the LR method solves
the following optimization task on the Bloch sphere,

(cid:126)aLR
out = arg min
1
(cid:107)

(cid:107)≤

(cid:126)a

(cid:88)

(cid:126)u

(1 + (cid:126)u

(cid:126)a

·

−

2p(cid:126)u)2 .

(4)

In this section we explore how different QST reconstruc-
tion methods can be combined to identify additional issues
with the performance of individual qubits. In particular, we
compare reconstructed states using the MLE method with
those produced by the Linear Regression (LR) method [13]. In
short, LR QST identiﬁes a density matrix that minimizes the
difference between the observed and predicted measurement

Using the statistical error analysis from Subsection II-C, we
ﬁnd that the 99-th percentile of the Euclidean distance error
of LR is less than 0.02 for 20,000 observations, which is
comparable to the MLE method.

The key insight of this section is that the difference in
purity between the reconstructed states of MLE and LR should
in practice is it not always the case.
be very small, but

Ry(θ)Rz(φ)Delay(t)q≥

0.02(cid:3)

(cid:12)
(cid:126)aMLE
(cid:12)
out (cid:107)

(cid:126)aLR
out(cid:107) − (cid:107)
(cid:107)

Speciﬁcally, when using identical input statistics, the 99-th per-
centile of the Euclidean distance between the state estimates of
MLE and LR is also less than 0.02 with 20,000 observations
(i.e., P (cid:2)(cid:12)
0.99). However, in
(cid:12)
≤
practice, we observe that some qubits produce data where the
differences in state reconstructions by MLE and LR cannot be
reasonably explained by statistical ﬂuctuations, as shown in
Figure 7. This suggests that the the measured statistics of these
qubits are corrupted after the state preparation occurs. It is
likely that the elementary rotations Ry(
β) used
for changing measurement basis introduce state-dependant
errors that are incompatible with the QST models considered
in this work. Nevertheless, the analysis in Figure 7 indicates
that combining multiple tomography methods can be a useful
and effective tool for identifying signatures of data corruption.

α) and Rz(

−

−

V. OPEN-SOURCE SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATION

In the last couple of years, IBM’s Qiskit python package
has emerged as a de facto standard for gate-based QC and
can be used to access a wide variety of hardware platforms,
even beyond those provided by IBM. As such, the libraries
developed in this work leverage Qiskit for data collection
on QC hardware. Even though Qiskit is the only supported
framework for the moment, particular attention has been given
to enable extending to other frameworks in the future.

The single-qubit QST protocol presented in this work is
organized into two packages: sqt and sqmap. The ﬁrst
package, sqt (short for Single-Qubit Tomography), imple-
ments all the functions and interfaces to perform a single-
qubit QST efﬁciently. In particular, it provides various single-
qubit
tomography basis and quantum state reconstruction
methods. sqt also provides ways to parallelize a single-qubit
experiment over all the available qubits in QC hardware for a
quick assessment of the qubit performance across a full-chip.
The second package, sqmap (short for Single-Qubit Map),
provides various ways of visualising single-qubit tomography
results obtained with sqt, such as the VFV ﬁgures presented
in this work.

All of the QST procedures and plotting facilities used in
this paper are available as open-source at https://github.com/
nelimee/sqt and https://github.com/nelimee/sqmap and can be
used freely by anyone to benchmark their QC platform.
Installation of these packages can be done with the ofﬁcial
Python package manager pip.

VI. CONCLUSION

As the variety of quantum computing platforms continues to
increase so does the need of tools to inspect their performance
characteristics. In this work we have demonstrated that quan-
tum state tomography of individual qubits is a viable approach
for inspecting qubit performance, although similar procedures
are unlikely to scale to much larger systems due to the notable
data collection requirements. Through the careful design of
data collection, state reconstruction and result visualization,
this work illustrates that the proposed QCVV procedures can
highlight elusive patterns in qubit performance that are difﬁcult

(a) Data obtained on ibmq_belem and reconstructed with MLE.

(b) Data obtained on ibmq_belem and reconstructed with LR.

(c) Reconstructed quantum states where the purity difference between
MLE and LR reconstruction methods is above the 0.02 threshold.

Fig. 7: A comparison of
the quantum state reconstruc-
tion methods MLE and LR on qubit 3 of ibmq_belem,
where the reconstruction methods do not entirely agree. Each
post-processing method is given the same raw data from
ibmq_belem.

to capture with simpler metrics. The results indicate that there
is room for improvement on the simulation models that are
currently used and highlight the importance of modeling open-
quantum system effects at medium time scales. A careful
comparison different tomography methods also indicates that
more general models for quantum state tomography should
be considered to better capture the exotic effects that can be
observed is current QC platforms. We hope that the proposed
QCVV procedure and vector ﬁeld visualization will be a valu-
able tool for the quantum computing community in evaluating
qubit performance and have provided the implementation as
open-source to support that aim.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was partly supported by the U.S. DOE through a
quantum computing program sponsored by the Los Alamos
National Laboratory (LANL) Information Science & Tech-
nology Institute and the Laboratory Directed Research and
Development (LDRD) program of LANL under project num-
bers 20210116DR, 20210114ER and the Center for Non
Linear Studies. This research was also partly supported by
the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Ofﬁce of Science,
Ofﬁce of Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing Research, under
the Accelerated Research in Quantum Computing (ARQC)
program. This research used quantum computing resources
provided by the LANL Institutional Computing Program,
which is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Na-
tional Nuclear Security Administration under Contract No.
89233218CNA000001. Adrien Suau also thanks TotalEnergies
for their general support of this work. Adrien Suau also thank
Gabriel Staffelbach and Aida Todri-Sanial for interesting and
lively discussions around the paper.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Eisert, D. Hangleiter, N. Walk, I. Roth, D. Markham, R. Parekh,
U. Chabaud, and E. Kasheﬁ, “Quantum certiﬁcation and benchmarking,”
Nature Reviews Physics, vol. 2, no. 7, pp. 382–390, Jul 2020. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-020-0186-4

[2] J. Preskill, “Quantum Computing in the NISQ era and beyond,”
[Online]. Available: https:

Quantum, vol. 2, p. 79, Aug. 2018.
//doi.org/10.22331/q-2018-08-06-79

[3] K. Wright, K. M. Beck, S. Debnath,

J. M. Amini, Y. Nam,
N. Grzesiak, J.-S. Chen, N. C. Pisenti, M. Chmielewski, C. Collins,
K. M. Hudek, J. Mizrahi, J. D. Wong-Campos, S. Allen, J. Apisdorf,
P. Solomon, M. Williams, A. M. Ducore, A. Blinov, S. M. Kreikemeier,
V. Chaplin, M. Keesan, C. Monroe, and J. Kim, “Benchmarking
an 11-qubit quantum computer,” Nature Communications, vol. 10,
no. 1, p. 5464, Nov 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-019-13534-2

[4] Z. Hradil, “Quantum-state estimation,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 55, pp.
R1561–R1564, Mar 1997. [Online]. Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/
10.1103/PhysRevA.55.R1561

M. Hoffmann, T. Huang, T. S. Humble, S. V. Isakov, E. Jeffrey,
Z. Jiang, D. Kafri, K. Kechedzhi, J. Kelly, P. V. Klimov, S. Knysh,
A. Korotkov, F. Kostritsa, D. Landhuis, M. Lindmark, E. Lucero,
D. Lyakh, S. Mandr`a, J. R. McClean, M. McEwen, A. Megrant, X. Mi,
K. Michielsen, M. Mohseni, J. Mutus, O. Naaman, M. Neeley, C. Neill,
M. Y. Niu, E. Ostby, A. Petukhov, J. C. Platt, C. Quintana, E. G. Rieffel,
P. Roushan, N. C. Rubin, D. Sank, K. J. Satzinger, V. Smelyanskiy,
K. J. Sung, M. D. Trevithick, A. Vainsencher, B. Villalonga, T. White,
Z. J. Yao, P. Yeh, A. Zalcman, H. Neven, and J. M. Martinis, “Quantum
supremacy using a programmable superconducting processor,” Nature,
vol. 574, no. 7779, pp. 505–510, Oct 2019.
[Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1666-5

[12] Y. Wu, W.-S. Bao, S. Cao, F. Chen, M.-C. Chen, X. Chen, T.-H.
Chung, H. Deng, Y. Du, D. Fan, M. Gong, C. Guo, C. Guo,
S. Guo, L. Han, L. Hong, H.-L. Huang, Y.-H. Huo, L. Li, N. Li,
S. Li, Y. Li, F. Liang, C. Lin, J. Lin, H. Qian, D. Qiao, H. Rong,
H. Su, L. Sun, L. Wang, S. Wang, D. Wu, Y. Xu, K. Yan,
W. Yang, Y. Yang, Y. Ye, J. Yin, C. Ying, J. Yu, C. Zha, C. Zhang,
H. Zhang, K. Zhang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhao, Y. Zhao, L. Zhou, Q. Zhu,
C.-Y. Lu, C.-Z. Peng, X. Zhu, and J.-W. Pan, “Strong quantum
computational advantage using a superconducting quantum processor,”
Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 127, p. 180501, Oct 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.127.180501

[13] B. Qi, Z. Hou, L. Li, D. Dong, G. Xiang, and G. Guo, “Quantum state
tomography via linear regression estimation,” Scientiﬁc reports, vol. 3,
no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2013.

[14] D. Gross, Y.-K. Liu, S. T. Flammia, S. Becker, and J. Eisert,
“Quantum state tomography via compressed sensing,” Phys. Rev.
Lett., vol. 105, p. 150401, Oct 2010.
[Online]. Available: https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.150401

[15] Z. Hradil, “Quantum-state estimation,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 55, pp.
R1561–R1564, Mar 1997. [Online]. Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/
10.1103/PhysRevA.55.R1561

[16] H. Chen and D. A. Lidar, “Hoqst: Hamiltonian open quantum system

toolkit,” 2020.

[17] J. Johansson, P. Nation, and F. Nori, “Qutip: An open-source python
framework for the dynamics of open quantum systems,” Computer
Physics Communications, vol. 183, no. 8, pp. 1760–1772, 2012.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0010465512000835
LA-UR-22-23640

[5] E. Magesan,

J. M. Gambetta, and J. Emerson, “Scalable and
randomized benchmarking of quantum processes,” Phys.
[Online]. Available:

robust
Rev. Lett., vol. 106, p. 180504, May 2011.
https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.180504

[6] E. Knill, D. Leibfried, R. Reichle, J. Britton, R. B. Blakestad, J. D. Jost,
C. Langer, R. Ozeri, S. Seidelin, and D. J. Wineland, “Randomized
benchmarking of quantum gates,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 77, p. 012307, Jan
2008. [Online]. Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.
77.012307

[7] E. Nielsen, J. K. Gamble, K. Rudinger, T. Scholten, K. Young, and

R. Blume-Kohout, “Gate set tomography,” 2020.

[8] A. W. Cross, L. S. Bishop, S. Sheldon, P. D. Nation, and J. M.
Gambetta, “Validating quantum computers using randomized model
circuits,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 100, p. 032328, Sep 2019. [Online].
Available: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.100.032328
[9] S. Boixo, S. V. Isakov, V. N. Smelyanskiy, R. Babbush, N. Ding,
Z. Jiang, M. J. Bremner, J. M. Martinis, and H. Neven, “Characterizing
quantum supremacy in near-term devices,” Nature Physics, vol. 14,
no. 6, pp. 595–600, Jun 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41567-018-0124-x

[10] J. Gambetta and S. Sheldon, “Cramming more power into a quantum
device,” Published online at https://www.ibm.com/blogs/research/2019/
03/power-quantum-device/, 2019, accessed: 03/28/2021.

[11] F. Arute, K. Arya, R. Babbush, D. Bacon, J. C. Bardin, R. Barends,
R. Biswas, S. Boixo, F. G. S. L. Brandao, D. A. Buell, B. Burkett,
Y. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, R. Collins, W. Courtney, A. Dunsworth,
E. Farhi, B. Foxen, A. Fowler, C. Gidney, M. Giustina, R. Graff,
K. Guerin, S. Habegger, M. P. Harrigan, M. J. Hartmann, A. Ho,

