A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

Léo R. Belzile*, Christophe Dutang†, Paul J. Northrop‡, and Thomas Opitz§

Abstract

This review paper surveys recent development in software implementations for extreme value analy-
ses since the publication of Stephenson and Gilleland (2006) and Gilleland et al. (2013), here with a focus
on numerical challenges. We provide a comparative review by topic and highlight differences in existing
routines, along with listing areas where software development is lacking. The online supplement con-
tains two vignettes providing a comparison of implementations of frequentist and Bayesian estimation
of univariate extreme value models.

1. Introduction

Extreme value analysis has seen strong development over the years. While software development typi-
cally lags behind methodological developments due in part to lack of recognition of the effort needed to
provide reliable software, reproducibility requirements and individual efforts have led to a growth in the
coverage of statistical methods. Many procedures developed in the last decades are now available, but
the diversity of numerical implementations complicates somewhat the choice of routine to adopt.

Our intention, rather than to solely provide a catalog of existing software, is to discuss and compare
existing implementations of statistical methods and to highlight numerical issues that are of practical
importance yet are not typically discussed in theoretical or methodological papers. Our work also pro-
vides an update including the most recent software development since the reviews of Stephenson and
Gilleland (2006); Gilleland et al. (2013); Gilleland (2016).

Given its ongoing popularity, we focus on implementations using the R programming language, unless
stated otherwise. The Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) Task View on Extreme values provides
an extensive list of package functionalities organized by topics; we follow this approach and broadly sep-
arate implementations into univariate, multivariate and functional extremes rather than present func-
tionalities package by package. Using the RWsearch package (Kiener, 2022), we automated the process
of searching for extreme-related packages on the CRAN and inspected all of the packages that have “ex-
treme value” or “peak over threshold” as keywords in the package description. Additional searches were
done for unpublished packages.

2. Univariate extremes

2.1. Asymptotic theory for univariate extremes

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
6
1

]

O
C

.
t
a
t
s
[

1
v
4
1
7
7
0
.
5
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

The starting point for univariate extreme value analysis is the extremal types theorem. For convenience,
we state the result in terms of point process representations, i.e., of the behavior of random point clouds:
let Xi be independent and identically distributed random variables with distribution F , where F has lower
∗ = sup{x : F (x) < 1}. If there exist normalizing
endpoint x∗ = inf{x : F (x) > 0} and upper endpoint x
sequences an > 0 and bn ∈ (cid:82) such that the distribution of the bidimensional point process
i
n + 1

, i = 1, . . . , n

Xi − bn
an

Pn =

(cid:189)(cid:181)

(cid:190)

(cid:182)

,

*HEC Montréal, Department of Decision Sciences, HEC Montréal (leo.belzile@hec.ca)
†CEREMADE, CNRS and Université Paris Dauphine - PSL, Paris, France
‡Department of Statistical Science, University College London, United Kingdom
§Biostatistics and Spatial Processes, INRAE, Avignon, France

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

converges to an inhomogeneous Poisson point process on sets of the form (a, b) × (z, ∞) for 0 ≤ a ≤ b ≤ 1
and z > z∗ = limn→∞{(x∗ − bn)/an}, the intensity measure of the limiting process, which gives the ex-
pected number of points falling in a set, is (cf., Coles, 2001)

Λ{(a, b) × (z, ∞)} =

(cid:40)
(cid:162)−1/ξ
(b − a) (cid:161)1 + ξ z−µ
+
(b − a) exp (cid:161) z−µ
(cid:162) ,

σ

σ

, ξ (cid:54)= 0
ξ = 0

,

µ ∈ (cid:82), σ > 0,

(1)

where x+ = max{0, x}. Equipped with this convergence statement, we can consider various tail events.
For example, the limiting distribution of the maximum of n observations is

n→∞ Pr
lim

(cid:181) maxn

i =1 Xi − bn

an

(cid:182)

≤ x

= exp [−Λ{(0, 1) × (x, ∞)}] .

(2)

The right hand side of Equation (2) is the distribution function of the generalized extreme value distribu-
tion, say G(x), with location parameter µ ∈ (cid:82), scale parameter σ ∈ (cid:82)+ and shape parameter ξ ∈ (cid:82),

deﬁned on {x ∈ (cid:82) : ξ(x − µ)/σ > −1}. For historical reasons, the distribution is categorized based on
the sign of ξ in so-called “domains of attraction”. If ξ < 0, the distribution has a bounded upper tail, ξ = 0
leads to an exponential “light” tail and ξ > 0 to a “heavy tail” with polynomial decay with ﬁnite moments
only of order r < 1/ξ.

We can also consider conditional exceedances of a threshold u as the latter increases to the upper

∗

endpoint x

where

; for threshold exceedances over u > z∗, there exists au > 0 such that

Pr(a

−1
u X > x + u)
Pr(a−1
u X > u)

lim
u→x∗

=

Λ{(0, 1) × (x + u, ∞)}
Λ{(0, 1) × (u, ∞)}

= 1 − H (x),

1 − H (x) =






(cid:110)

(cid:179) x
σu

(cid:180)(cid:111)−1/ξ
1 + ξ
+
exp(−x/σu)

, ξ (cid:54)= 0,
ξ = 0;

(3)

(4)

and σu = σ+ξ(u−µ). The right-hand side of Equation (4) is the survival function of the generalized Pareto
distribution with scale σu and shape ξ ∈ (cid:82).

2.2. Maximum likelihood estimation

We can approximate the log likelihood by taking the limiting relations of Equations (1) to (3) as exact for
the maximum of a ﬁnite block of m observations or for exceedances above a large quantile u; the un-
known normalizing constants an, bn (respectively au) are absorbed by the location and scale parameters.
For example, the log likelihood obtained through the limiting inhomogeneous Poisson point process for
a sample of N independent observations with exceedances y1, . . . , ynu is

(cid:96)(µ, σ, ξ; y) = −nu log(cσ) −

(cid:181)
1 +

(cid:182)

1
ξ

(cid:110)

1 + ξ

log

(cid:179) yi − µ
σ

(cid:180)(cid:111)

+

nu(cid:88)
i =1
(cid:179) u − µ
σ

(cid:110)
1 + ξ

− c

(cid:180)(cid:111)−1/ξ

+

,

µ, ξ ∈ (cid:82), σ > 0.

(5)

The quantity c, which does not appear in Equation (1), is a tuning parameter (Coles, 2001, § 7.5): if we take
c = N /m, the parameters of the point process likelihood correspond to those of the generalized extreme
value distribution ﬁtted to the maximum of blocks of m observations. This parametrization however
induces strong correlation between the parameters (µ, σ, ξ).

Likelihood-based inference for extreme value distributions is in principle straightforward, even if
there is no closed-form solution for the maximum likelihood estimators (MLE). The latter must solve
the score equations S(θ) = 0 (i.e., the log likelihood must have gradient zero) unless (cid:98)ξ = −1, but with
nonlinear inequality constraints depending on the sign of ξ (e.g., max(x) ≤ µ − σ/ξ if ξ < 0 for the gener-
alized extreme value distribution). Constrained gradient-based optimization algorithms are thus logical

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

3

choices for ﬁnding the MLE. Many numerical implementations of the log likelihood simply return very
large ﬁnite values for parameter combinations outside of the support, which can impact the convergence
of gradient-based optimization routines: the user is invited to check convergence of whichever software
is employed by evaluating the score function at the MLE conﬁguration to make sure it is indeed a root of
the score vector S(θ). Even then, the solution returned may not be a global maximum: Figure 1 shows
the conditional log likelihood surface for an inhomogeneous Poisson process model, obtained by ﬁxing
the scale. The feasible region is deﬁned by a hyperbola and features two local maxima; depending on the
starting value, a gradient algorithm would converge to different values.

Particular attention must be paid to numerical overﬂow when implementing the likelihood, score
and information matrix of the generalized extreme value distribution, especially for terms of the form
log(1+ξx) when ξ → 0 for the information and cumulants. For example, the expected information matrix
satisﬁes Iξξ = f (ξ)/ξ−4 (Prescott and Walden, 1980) and the limit as ξ → 0 is well-deﬁned, but this expres-
sion is numerically unstable when ξ ≈ 0. High precision functions such as log1p can be used to alleviate
this somewhat, and interpolation of the cumulants when ξ ≈ 0 is recommended.

The extreme value distributions do not satisfy regularity conditions because their endpoint depends
on the parameter values. Maximum likelihood estimators for both the generalized extreme value and
generalized Pareto distributions ﬁtted to respectively block maxima and threshold exceedances are nev-
ertheless asymptotically Gaussian and the models are regular whenever ξ > −1/2 (Smith, 1985; de Haan
et al., 2004; Bücher and Segers, 2017; de Haan and Ferreira, 2006, § 3.4).

Moments of some of the kth order derivatives of the log likelihood exist only if the shape ξ > −1/k.
Thus, when ξ ≤ −1, the MLE does not solve the score equation. The likelihood functions for the inhomo-
geneous Poisson point process of exceedances and the r -largest observations, the generalized Pareto, the
generalized extreme value, are unbounded if (cid:98)ξ < −1, as there exists a combination of parameters that lead
to inﬁnite log likelihood values. This means one should restrict the parameter space to {ξ : ξ ≥ −1} and
check that the solution does not lie on the boundary of the parameter space: for the generalized extreme
σ = max(y) − y,
value distribution, the conditional maximum likelihood estimator for ξ = −1 is (cid:98)
σ = max(y), for the likelihood of the r -largest order statis-
whereas for the generalized Pareto distribution, (cid:98)
tics, (cid:98)

σ = {max(y) − y (r )}/r, (cid:98)
The (lack of) existence of cumulants also impacts the calculation of standard errors, as elements of the
Fisher information matrix are deﬁned only if ξ > −1/2. Most software implementation compute standard
errors based on the inverse Hessian matrix computed via ﬁnite-difference, but these are misleading if
ξ ∈ [−1/2, −1).

µ = y and (cid:98)

µ = max(y) −

σ, etc.
(cid:98)

We can sometimes deploy dimension reduction strategies to facilitate numerical optimization. For
the generalized Pareto distribution, Grimshaw (1993) uses a proﬁle likelihood to reduce the problem to a
one-dimensional optimization. This is arguably one of the safest maximum likelihood estimation proce-
dures and the exponential sub-case, for which the proﬁle likelihood is unbounded, can be easily handled
separately. The left panel of Figure 1 shows proﬁle log likelihoods for two simulated datasets, including
one for which (cid:98)ξ lies on the boundary of the parameter space.

As noted before, the MLE of the parameters of the inhomogeneous Poisson point process are hard to
obtain because of the strong dependence between parameters: the optimization in packages such as is-
mev (Heffernan and Stephenson., 2018; Coles, 2001) or evd (Stephenson, 2002) often fails to converge,
mostly because of poor starting values and existence of several local maxima. Sharkey and Tawn (2017)
propose a reparametrization that ensures approximate orthogonality of the parameters, but the following
trick can also help with this: if the estimated probability of exceedance is small, the Poisson approxima-
tion implies

(cid:110)
1 + ξ

c

(cid:179) u − µ
σ

(cid:180)(cid:111)−1/ξ

≈ nu.

We can thus ﬁt a generalized Pareto distribution to threshold exceedances, whose maximum likelihood
estimates we denote ((cid:98)

σu, (cid:98)ξ), and then use as starting values for the point-process optimization routine

µ0 = u − σ0{(nu/c)

−(cid:98)ξ − 1}/(cid:98)ξ,

σ0 =

σu × (nu/c)(cid:98)ξ
,
(cid:98)

ξ0 = (cid:98)ξ.

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

4

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

Figure 1: Left: proﬁle log likelihood of η = −ξ/σ for a generalized Pareto distribution with scale σ and shape
ξ. The black line shows one data set for which the conditional maximum (cid:98)ξ
η = −1 lies on the boundary of
(cid:98)
η > −1 (grey). Right: conditional log likelihood surface for the
the parameter space (black) and one with (cid:98)ξ
(cid:98)
σ for simulated data (larger values have darker grey-scale shade). The
inhomogeneous Poisson process at (cid:98)
white dot indicates the maximum likelihood estimate, while the hyperbola deﬁnes the feasible region of the
parameter space given by the support constraints.

2.2.1 Case study

We performed some sanity checks for various implementations of maximum likelihood estimation rou-
tines and parametric models. Speciﬁcally, we veriﬁed that density functions are non-negative and evalu-
ate to zero outside of the domain of the distribution, and that distribution functions are non-decreasing
and map to the unit interval. Certain packages have incorrect implementations of density and distribu-
tion functions.

To assess the quality of the optimization routines for extreme value distribution, we simulated ex-
ceedances and block maxima from parametric distributions with varying tail behaviors. We compared
the maximum likelihood estimates returned by default estimation procedures for different packages for
simulated data, checking that the value returned is a global optimum and the gradient evaluated at the
value is approximately zero whenever (cid:98)ξ > −1. The purpose of the exercise was to check the reliability
for a range of sample sizes; when systematic differences in maximum log likelihood and/or parameter
estimates arose compared to other packages, then they are attributable to poor starting values, incor-
rect implementation of the density function, lack of handling of boundary constraints or the choice of
optimization algorithm.

Figure 2 shows results for 1000 simulations, each based on n = 400 observations from a gamma distri-
bution with shape 3 and scale 2; we set the threshold to the 0.95 theoretical quantile of the distribution,
which leads to an average of 20 threshold exceedances. The left panel shows the distribution of the gra-
dient of the log likelihood of the generalized Pareto distribution evaluated at the maximum likelihood
estimate over all replicates for the shape parameter. Most instances of non-zero gradient are attributable
to boundary cases, with (cid:98)ξ = −1 not accounted for. Other discrepancies are due to differences in numeri-
cal tolerance, but the differences in log likelihood relative to the maximum over all routines are negligible
in most non-boundary cases investigated.

The right panel of Figure 2 shows the source of some oddities: the QRM package has unexpected small
spread and a positive bias for estimation of ξ, different from other packages because it fails more often

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

5

Figure 2: Diagnostics for maximum likelihood estimation of the generalized Pareto distribution based on
1000 samples simulated from a gamma distribution with shape 3 and scale 2 and a random number of ex-
ceedances (average 20) above the theoretical 0.95 quantile. Left: density plots of the absolute value of log
σ, (cid:98)ξ), split by simulations yielding a bound-
gradient ∂(cid:96)/∂ξ evaluated at the maximum likelihood estimator ((cid:98)
ary case ((cid:98)ξ = −1, blue) and regular case ((cid:98)ξ > −1, orange); the y-axis scale for each package is different to ease
visualization. Right: dot plots of the shape parameter estimates. Results for samples for which the numerical
routines failed to converge are omitted.

when ξ is negative due to poor starting values. Both ercv and extRemes ﬁt have noticeable point masses
at ξ = 0, suggesting something is amiss. Many packages do not enforce boundary constraints and may
return (cid:98)ξ < −1 with near-inﬁnite gradient estimates, responsible for the large gradients in the left panel
of Figure 2: Renext returns a hard-coded lower bound that is larger than −1, while SpatialExtremes and
mev correctly return −1.

By contrast, the optimization routines for the generalized extreme value distribution yielded similar
behavior and nearly all packages give identical results. However, we noticed that some packages fare
poorly when location or scale parameters are orders of magnitude larger than scaled components: since
the generalized extreme value distribution is a location-scale family, scaling the data before passing them
to the routine and back-transforming after the optimization may solve such issues.

2.3. Regression modeling

Most data encountered display various forms of nonstationarity, including trends, seasonality and co-
variate effects, which the extreme value distributions cannot capture without modiﬁcation. One can thus

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

6

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

consider regression models in which the parameters of the extreme value distributions are functions of
covariates or vary smoothly in space or time. These parameters may be suitably transformed via a link
function to ensure that the functions satisfy the usual range or positivity constraints. If we assume inde-
pendent observations, then

maximum likelihood estimates, standard errors, etc. are obtained as before by maximizing the log
likelihood function, which is now a function of the regression coefﬁcients and of other parameters aris-
ing in the nonstationary formulation of the extreme value distribution. In models with a relatively large
number of parameters, it becomes useful to include an additive penalty term in the log likelihood: for
example, generalized additive models for the parameters include smooth functions (smooths in short)
via basis function representations (e.g., B -splines), with a penalty that controls the wiggliness of the es-
timated predictor functions, which is typically evaluated using the second-order derivative of the basis
functions. The obvious difﬁculty for numerical maximization of the log likelihood is again the presence of
support constraints, since there are now potentially as many inequality constraints as there are observa-
tions. A general advice for models with covariates is that inputs should be centred and scaled to facilitate
the optimization.

The ismev, texmex, eva and extRemes packages allow users to provide a model matrix (containing one
covariate in each of its columns) for each parameter of the generalized Pareto and generalized extreme
value distributions, thus enabling generalized linear modeling of the parameters, while the evd package
only allows for linear modeling of the location parameter of the generalized extreme value distribution
and bivariate counterparts; in both cases, no penalty terms are added to the log likelihood, while texmex
allows for L1 and L2 penalties for the coefﬁcients. The lax package supplements the functionality of these,
and other, packages by providing robust sandwich estimation of parameter covariance matrix and log
likelihood adjustment (Chandler and Bate, 2007) for their ﬁtted model objects. The GEVcdn package uses
a neural network to relate the parameters of the generalized extreme value distribution with covariates
(Cannon, 2010).

The scale parameter of the generalized Pareto distribution, σu, varies with the threshold u: it is rec-
ommendable to pay special attention to the parametrization of the scale and shape functions with co-
variates to ensure that the threshold stability property, which is used for extrapolation, is not lost (Eas-
toe and Tawn, 2009). It may be tempting to use directly the likelihood of eq. (5) instead (see Northrop
et al., 2016). Chavez-Demoulin and Davison (2005) use an orthogonal reparametrization (η, ξ), where
η = σ(1 + ξ) along with bootstrap routines for uncertainty quantiﬁcation; their generalized additive mod-
eling framework is available via ismev.

Penalty terms are often used in regression models with many coefﬁcients to control the local variabil-
ity of the estimated predictors, and they allow obtaining useful estimates for coefﬁcients whose value
would otherwise not directly depend on any observations in the sample (e.g., in the case where the re-
gression function is intended to capture spatial variability of extreme value parameters but some regions
of space do not contain any observation locations). Many general packages implement generalized ad-
ditive modeling with some support for extreme value distributions, including VGAM (Yee and Stephen-
son, 2007). The recent evgam package (Youngman, 2020), dedicated to extreme value models, uses the
methodology of Wood et al. (2016) for general distributions to marginalize out the regression coefﬁcients
using Laplace’s method to obtain estimates of the hyperparameters (e.g., variance and autocorrelation of
regression coefﬁcients) controlling the penalty strength and shape — these are estimated simultaneously
with all of the other parameters through maximum likelihood.

The evgam package builds on generic model building tools available in packages such as mgcv (Wood,
2017) and provides state-of-the-art methodology tailored for extremes, including generalized additive
models for extreme value distributions, quantile regression and in addition functionalities for obtaining
return levels for the nonstationary models.

There usually is a Bayesian interpretation of such quadratic penalty terms as corresponding to some
multivariate Gaussian prior distribution on the regression coefﬁcients. Fitting regression (or multilevel)
models is natural in the Bayesian setting, and many of the packages discussed in the next section have
capabilities for ﬁtting multilevel models.

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

7

package

functions

type

link

model

ismev
evd
texmex
eva
extRemes
ismev
GEVcdn
VGAM
evgam

gpd.fit, gev.fit
fgev
emv
gevrFit, gpdFit
fevd
gamGPDfit
gevcdn.fit
gev, gp
fevgam

GEV, GP
GEV (loc)
—
GEVR, GP

linear
custom
linear
linear
linear
log (scale)
linear
custom
linear
linear/log (scale) —
ﬁxed
GAM
neural network ﬁxed
GAM
GAM

custom
ﬁxed

GP

GEV
GEV, GP, *
GEVR, GP, *

Table 1: Functionalities for generalized linear (linear) or generalized additive modelling (GAM) of the pa-
rameters of extreme value distributions. Model families supported include generalized extreme value distri-
bution (GEV), generalized Pareto (GP), r -largest extremes (GEVR) and more general families or special cases
of extreme value distributions, miscellaneous (*).

2.4. Bayesian modeling

2.4.1 Generalities

In the Bayesian paradigm, the likelihood of the data vector Y is combined with prior distributions for
(cid:62) ∈ Θ, with prior density p(θ); we use the generic notation p(. . .)
the model parameters θ = (θ1, . . . , θm)
for various conditional and unconditional densities. The distribution of the data given the parameter is
obtained from the likelihood function p(y | θ) ∝ exp{(cid:96)(θ; y)}, where ∝ denotes proportionality.

The posterior distribution,

p(θ | y) =

p(y | θ)p(θ)
(cid:82) p(y | θ)p(θ)dθ

,

(6)

is proportional as a function of θ to the product of the likelihood and the priors in the numerator, but
the integral appearing in the denominator of Equation (6) is untractable in general. In such cases, the
posterior density p(θ | y) usually does not correspond to any well-known distribution family, and pos-
terior inferences about the components of θ further involve marginalizing out the other components.
For instance, to obtain the posterior density p(θ1 | y) of the ﬁrst parameter in θ, we have to evaluate
the (m − 1)-dimensional integral (cid:82) p(θ | y) d(θ2, . . . , θm). Most of the ﬁeld of Bayesian statistics revolves
around the creation of algorithms that circumvent the calculation of the normalizing constant (or else
provide accurate numerical approximation of the latter) or that allow for marginalizing out all parame-
ters except for one.

Rather than a point estimate (cid:98)θ of the parameter vector, the target of inference is the whole posterior
distribution. The majority of Bayesian estimation algorithms are simulation-based, and their typical out-
put is an (approximate) sample drawn from the posterior distribution p(θ | y), from which any functional
of interest can be estimated by Monte Carlo methods. Of particular interest is the posterior predictive
distribution, which is obtained by simulating new observations from the response model by forward-
sampling from p(y | θ(b)) one new observation for each draw of θ(b) from the posterior.

In simple problems,
exact sampling algorithms can provide independent and identical samples from the posterior. This is
the exception rather than the norm; most of the time, users resort to Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
algorithms for more complex settings: these algorithms admit the posterior distribution as the stationary
distribution of a Markov chain with appropriately designed transition probabilities and provide auto-
correlated samples from it. Another popular solution is through Laplace approximation for regression
models when multivariate Gaussian priors are put on the vector of regression coefﬁcients arising in the

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

8

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

latent layer of the model, from which observations are conditionally independent; see the discussion
in Section 2.3. In this setting, Laplace approximations give fast deterministic approximation of high-
dimensional integrals, which avoids resorting to simulation-based MCMC estimation. Laplace approxi-
mations are particularly accurate when they are applied twice in a certain nested way, which is known as
the integrated nested Laplace approximation (INLA, Rue et al., 2009), implemented in the general INLA
package offering extreme value functionality for generalized Pareto and generalized extreme value distri-
butions.

Despite the computational overhead associated, the Bayesian paradigm has many beneﬁts, including
the capacity to incorporate physical constraints and expert opinion through the prior distributions (Coles
and Tawn, 1996). It is easier and more natural to deﬁne hierarchical structures for parameters to pool
information. For multivariate and functional extremes, priors can be used for regularization purposes to
pool information, for instance across time and space.

2.4.2 Speciﬁcity of extremes

Readers wishing to learn more about Bayesian modeling for extreme values are referred to the extensive
overview in Stephenson (2016). While Bayesian inference for extreme value models does not differ much
from that of general models, additional care is required with prior speciﬁcation. For example, in order
to get a well-deﬁned posterior distribution, improper reference priors such as the maximal data infor-
mation (MDI) and Jeffreys priors for ξ may need to be truncated (Northrop and Attalides, 2016) to result
in proper (i.e., integrable) posterior distributions. Martins and Stedinger (2000) proposed using a shifted
Beta distribution for ξ to constrain the support of the latter to [−0.5, 0.5]. Other popular choices are vague
normal priors for location, log-scale and shape parameters, or else penalized complexity priors (Simpson
et al., 2017; Opitz et al., 2018). To avoid issues related to the ﬁnite and parameter-dependent lower end-
point in the generalized extreme value distribution for ξ > 0, the INLA package implements so-called
blended generalized extreme value distribution that replaces the bounded lower distribution tail with the
unbounded one of a Gumbel distribution through a mixture representation (Castro-Camilo et al., 2021).
Three packages, evdbayes, extRemes and MCMC4Extremes, provide MCMC algorithms for extreme
value distributions, which implement so-called random walk Metropolis–Hastings steps. MCMC4Extremes
(do Nascimento and Moura e Silva, 2016) is superseded by the implementation of evdbayes (Stephenson
and Ribatet, 2014) which is more efﬁcient, thanks to default tuning of proposal standard deviations and
more ﬂexible choices of priors. The user guide of evdbayes gives more details.

The underlying implementation of the MCMC algorithm for the function posterior in evdbayes
allows for a linear trend in the location parameter and supports inclusion of positive point mass at zero
for the shape parameter (Gumbel distribution for generalized extreme value distribution/exponential
distribution for the generalized Pareto distributions) by leveraging an MCMC implementation using re-
versible jumps, following Stephenson and Tawn (2004). The gamma priors for quantile differences, used
for expert prior elicitation, are provided.

Contrary to most implementations, evdbayes returns a list of posterior samples and relies on methods
implemented in coda (Plummer et al., 2006) for diagnostic, summary and plots. The extRemes package
(Gilleland and Katz, 2016) also has functionalities for computing posterior summaries for univariate ex-
tremes through the fevd function, which allows users to specify their own priors and proposal distribu-
tions, but the sampling is notably slower than in other packages

and more cumbersome to set up, as the default values are not adequate in most cases. Linear model-
ing of the parameters with covariates is also possible, and Bayes factors for comparisons between models
are also supported even if the methods used to compute them are not recommended. Package texmex
also includes maximum a posteriori estimation and simulation from the posterior for extreme value dis-
tributions (with linear modeling of covariates) via the function evm, but only with normal priors. Behind
the scenes, the texmex implementation uses an independent Metropolis–Hastings step with multivari-
ate Cauchy/normal proposals with location vector and scale matrix based on a normal approximation to
the posterior, using maximum a posteriori estimates. This translates into smaller autocorrelation (and
thus larger effective sample size) than other package implementation, and it is the fastest of all MCMC
implementations.

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

9

package

function

models

covariates

sampling prior choice

evdbayes
extRemes
INLA
MCMC4Extremes
revdbayes
texmex

posterior
fevd
inla
ggev, . . .
rpost
evm

1–4
1–4,*
1–2,*
1–2,*
1–4
1–2,*

loc./thresh RWMH
RWMH
all
loc./thresh –
no
no
all

RWMH
RU
IMH

multiple
custom
PC
ﬁxed
custom
Gaussian

Table 2: Comparison of R packages for Bayesian univariate extreme value modeling. Families: generalized
extreme value distribution (1), generalized Pareto distribution (2), inhomogeneous Poisson process (3), or-
der statistics/r -largest (4) or custom/other (*). Sampling: random walk Metropolis–Hastings (RWMH), exact
sampling ratio-of-uniforms (RU), independent Metropolis–Hastings (IMH); the INLA package uses deter-
ministic Laplace approximations. “PC” priors refer to penalized complexity priors. All packages, except
evdbayes, also provide S3 methods (notably plot and summary). All packages return a matrix of posterior
draws.

The data-driven prior proposed by Zhang and Stephens (2009), reputed to give better results than
maximum likelihood, is implemented in mev and is the default method for Pareto-smoothed impor-
tance sampling (Vehtari et al., 2017) from the loo package (Vehtari et al., 2020). However, because it uses
the data to construct the prior, performance benchmarks alleging superior performances are misleading
because of double dipping.

The current state-of-the-art method for sampling from the posterior of univariate models in simple
analyses without covariates is the revdbayes package, which relies on the ratio-of-uniforms method to
generate independent samples from the posterior distribution of the models. Use of advanced tech-
niques such as mode relocation, marginal Box–Cox transformations and rotation can drastically improve
the efﬁciency of this accept-reject scheme and make it very competitive. The ratio-of-uniforms method
generates independent draws, thus avoiding the need to monitor convergence to the stationary distribu-
tion of the Markov chain and removing tuning parameters. The package uses the Rcpp interface (Eddel-
buettel and Balamuta, 2018) to speed up sampling, and the sampling is an order of magnitude faster than
other implementations.

While the aforementioned packages are dedicated to extreme value distributions, other popular pro-
gramming languages could be used even if they would require users to implement likelihood functions
themselves. Notably, the Stan programming language (Team, 2022)

uses Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, a state-of-the-art MCMC method, for simulating samples from the
posterior distribution. The latter can easily be combined with multilevel models, but requires imple-
mentation of bespoke code for likelihood and priors that are speciﬁc to extreme value analysis. The
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo sampling algorithm leads to rejection due to boundary constraints and leads
to incorrect posterior draws for, e.g., the generalized extreme value distribution when ξ ≈ 0; this can be
corrected by using a Taylor series approximation. The Matlab package NEVA uses a differential evolution
Markov chain algorithm for estimating univariate nonstationary models (Cheng et al., 2014).

2.5. Semiparametric inference for univariate extremes

In the semiparametric approach to extremes,

some components of the probability structure are handled through a relatively general (and nonpara-
metric) asymptotic structure, which can be extrapolated towards higher yet unobserved quantile levels,
for instance for the purpose of extreme-quantile estimation. The parametric form includes the shape pa-
rameter ξ and potentially second-order regular variation indices, ρ. Caeiro and Gomes (2016) provides a
review of many estimators discussed next with an emphasis on the choice of the number of order statis-
tics to keep for inference, which has close ties to threshold selection methods discussed in Section 2.6.

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

10

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

Consider a sample of independent and identically distributed variables X1, . . . , Xn with quantile func-
tion Q(x). Assuming heavy-tailed distributions with limiting shape parameter ξ > 0, the survival function
S(x) = x
LU (x), with ξ the shape parameter, and LF and LU slowly
varying functions, meaning limx→∞ L(t x)/L(x) = 1 for any t > 0 (Ledford and Tawn, 1996, § 5).

LF (x) if and only if Q(1 − 1/x) = x

−1/ξ

ξ

Nonparametric estimators of the extreme value index are widespread, most of them variants of the
Hill (1975) estimator. Let X1,n ≤ · · · ≤ Xn,n be the order statistics of the sample of size n: the Hill estimator
is the mean excess value of log-transformed data of the k largest values,

Hk,n =

1
k

k
(cid:88)

j =1

log

(cid:181) Xn− j +1,n
Xn−k,n

(cid:182)

.

(7)

The Hill estimator is generally computed for a wide range of values of k, which leads to so-called Hill plots
(k, Hk,n), k = 1, . . . , n. Under certain regularity conditions, the Hill estimator (7) is asymptotically normal
(e.g., Beirlant et al., 2004, Section 4.4). A large number of R packages provides functions to estimate (7)
and to make Hill plots such as evir (Pfaff and McNeil, 2018), evmix (Hu and Scarrott, 2018), extremeﬁt
(Durrieu et al., 2018), ExtremeRisks (Padoan and Stupﬂer, 2020), ptsuite (Munasinghe et al., 2019), QRM
(Pfaff and McNeil, 2020), ReIns (Reynkens and Verbelen, 2020) and tea (Ossberger, 2020).

The performance of the Hill estimator strongly depends on the number of observations kept to esti-
mate the tail index: Hk,n has a large variance if k is too small, whereas the Pareto-type tail behavior might
not be veriﬁed for the selected k largest values if k is too large. The choice of k is typically based either on
an empirical rule to ﬁnd the area where Hk,n is “stable” or by minimizing the asymptotic mean squared
error (AMSE). A large number of those algorithms to minimize the latter are provided in tea along with
the bootstrap methods of Hall and Welsh (1985), Hall (1990), Danielsson et al. (2001), Caeiro and Gomes
(2014) and Caeiro and Gomes (2016).

The Hill estimator (7) has a number of drawbacks: it supposes ξ > 0, it is not consistent, is not trans-
lation invariant and it behaves erratically for large k. Many alternative estimators try to palliate these
lacks.

Since the Hill estimator has nondifferentiable sample paths with respect to the threshold value, the
choice of threshold is notoriously difﬁcult. Resnick and Stˇaricˇa (1997) proposed a smoothed version of the
Hill estimator based on averaging consecutive estimates via a moving window; these plots are provided
in evmix and tea. The random block maximum estimator (Wager, 2014), constructed as a U statistic,
has inﬁnitely differentiable sample paths and is thus much less sensitive to the choice of k than most
Hill-type estimators. The unpublished package rbm is available from Github.

Packages evt0 (Manjunath and Caeiro, 2013) and ReIns implement the generalized Hill estimator

based on a uniform kernel estimation (Beirlant et al., 1996).

evt0 also provides functions for the location-scale invariant version of the Hill estimator introduced by
Santos et al. (2006) and the biased-reduced version of Figueiredo et al. (2012), as well as a mixed moment
estimator and location invariant alternative.

The package extremeﬁt implements the kernel-weighted version of the Hill estimator of Grama et al.

(2008);

the authors provide an automatic selection procedure for the threshold u, with functions to handle
these weighted estimators either for user-supplied weights or for weights automatically selected using an
adaptative selection.

2.5.1 Moment estimators and other alternative estimators

While maximum likelihood estimation and Hill-type estimators are most commonly used for the shape
parameter, other estimators are available and may be more robust in small samples. One such was pro-
posed by Dekkers et al. (1989) and evt0 provides a generalization of the latter by Santos et al. (2006).
Since moments of extreme value distributions may not exist if ξ > 0, we can consider instead a bijection
between the parameter vector θ and probability weighted moments of the form E[X p F (X )q {1 − F (X )}r ]
for integers p, q, r (Hosking and Wallis, 1987). Another avenue is to match sample linear combinations
of order statistics with their theoretical counterparts using (trimmed) L-moments (Hosking, 1990). A

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

11

group of R packages, including lmom (Hosking, 2019), lmomco (Asquith, 2021), TLMoments (Lilienthal,
2022) implement these approaches for a variety of common distributions (as does the Python package
lmoments), but some also allow custom distribution functions. extRemes also implements L-moments,
while RobExtremes (Ruckdeschel et al., 2019) provides robust estimators of the extreme value parame-
ters and laeken (Alfons and Templ, 2013) proposes robust modelling of Pareto data. Package extremeStat
(Boessenkool, 2017) includes functionalities to compute extreme quantiles based on L-moments estima-
tor.

2.5.2 Quantile, expectile and extremiles
In the heavy-tailed setting with ξ > 0, Weissman (1978) proposed estimating the tail quantile Q(1 − p) for
given small tail probability p using

qW
k,n(p) = Xn−k,n

(cid:189) k + 1

(cid:190)Hk,n

p(n + 1)

,

where Hk,n is the Hill estimator (7). ReIns implements the Weissman estimator either speciﬁed by the
probability level p or by the return period 1/p. The Weissman-type estimator for the class of estimators
proposed by Santos et al. (2006) are provided by evt0, whereas R package extremeﬁt gives the quantile
corresponding to weighted Hill estimator. Bias-corrected versions of the Weissman estimator also exist,
yet are seemingly not implemented in software.

Quantiles can be formulated as the solution of an asymmetric piecewise linear loss function. Taking
instead an asymmetric quadratic loss function yields expectiles (Newey and Powell, 1987), another risk
measure gaining popularity in risk management (Bellini and Di Bernardino, 2017). Many recent work
studies their extremal property: on the software side, ExtremeRisks implements the methodology of
Davison et al. (2021); Padoan and Stupﬂer (2022), including estimation of expectiles using Hill-type es-
timators, test of equality of tail expectiles and conﬁdence regions for extreme expectiles. An alternative
risk measures, the so-called extremiles, has been developed recently (e.g., Daouia et al., 2022) but no
software implementation exists at the time of writing.

package

estimation

function

evir
evmix
evt0
extremeﬁt
ExtremeRisks
fExtremes
ptsuite
QRM
rbm
ReIns
tea

—
smoothing
location invariant
weighted, time series
time series, CI
—
—
—
random block
conditional, censoring
smoothing

hill
hillplot
gh, PORT.Hill
hill, hill.adapt, hill.ts
HTailIndex, EBTailIndex
hillPlot, shaparmHill
alpha_hills
hill, hillPlot
rbm, rbm.plot
(c)Hill, (c)genHill, crHill, . . .
althill, avhill

features

e,p
p
p, q
e, p, q, o
e, o
e, p
e
e, p
e, p
e, p
p

Table 3: Main functionalities of R packages for nonparametric Hill-type estimators of the shape parameter,
including functionalities for estimation of the shape or tail index (e), Hill threshold diagnostic plots (p),
quantile estimates (q) and other methods (o).

2.6. Threshold selection

Many methods are driven by analyses of the most extreme observations. In the univariate case, these
are the k largest order statistics or, equivalently, observations that exceed a threshold u as presented

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

12

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

package

stability

models proﬁle

inference MRL

eva
evd
evir
evmix
extRemes
fExtremes
ismev
mev
POT
QRM
ReIns
texmex
threshr

gpdDiag
tcplot
shape
tcplot
threshrange.plot
gpdShapePlot, . . .
gpd.fitrange, pp.fitrange
tstab.egp, tstab.gpd
tcplot
xiplot
1Dmle
egp3RangeFit, gpdRangeFit
stability

1
1,2
1
1
1,2
1
1,2
1,3
1
1
1
1,3
1

yes
no
no
no
no
no
no
yes
no
no
—
no
yes

MLE
MLE/B

MLE

MLE

MLE

MLE

MLE
MLE/B

MLE

MLE

MLE
MLE/B

MLE

mrlPlot
mrlplot
meplot
mrlplot
mrlplot
mrlPlot
mrl.plot
automrl
mrlplot
MEplot
MeanExcess
mrl
—

Table 4: Comparison of R packages for classical visual methods. Stability: function name for a threshold
stability plot; models: either generalized Pareto (1), inhomogeneous Poisson process (2) or extended gener-
alized Pareto model of Papastathopoulos and Tawn (2013) (3); inference: method of inference, either maxi-
mum likelihood estimation (MLE) or Bayesian (B); MRL: mean residual life plot, if applicable.

in the previous section. The underlying theory considers limiting behavior as the threshold increases.
In practice, a suitably high threshold is set empirically, balancing the bias from using a low threshold
that violates the theory with statistical imprecision from using a threshold that is unnecessarily high.
For information about many of the following methods, see the review of Scarrott and MacDonald (2012).
Methods for semiparametric estimators based on variants of Hill’s estimator for the shape were presented
in Section 2.5.

2.6.1 Visual threshold selection diagnostics

In a threshold stability plot, point and interval estimates of parameters are plotted against a range of
threshold values. A particular example is the Hill plot featured in Section 2.5 (see Table 3 for an overview
of available implementations). In the univariate case, the focus is often on the shape parameter ξ: we
choose the lowest threshold above which we judge the point estimates of ξ to be approximately constant
in threshold, bearing in mind statistical uncertainty quantiﬁed by the interval estimates. These inferences
may be based on the generalized Pareto distribution (4) for threshold excesses or the inhomogeneous
Poisson process model (1), using a frequentist or Bayesian analysis. In the generalized Pareto case, the
threshold-independent scale parameter σ∗
= σu − ξu is used. In the frequentist case, it is useful to have
u
the option to calculate the intervals using proﬁle likelihoods, because they tend to have better coverage
properties than Wald intervals, especially for high thresholds.

If a generalized Pareto distribution with ξ < 1 applies at threshold u then the mean excess E(X − v |
X > v) is a linear function of v for all v > u. This motivates the mean residual life (MRL) plot, in which
the sample mean of excesses of a range of thresholds are plotted against the threshold, with pointwise
conﬁdence intervals superimposed. We choose the lowest threshold above which the plot appears linear.
Table 4 summarises the functionality of R packages in terms of these plots.

The lmomplot function in the POT package can help to identify for which thresholds the sample
L-skewness and L-kurtosis of excesses are related as expected under a generalized Pareto distribution.
These plots require the use of subjective judgement to select a threshold. More formal methods seek to
reduce subjectivity and perhaps introduce a greater degree of automation.

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

13

2.6.2 More formal methods

Penultimate models. Formal testing procedures compare the null hypothesis of having a generalized
Pareto distribution above a threshold u against an alternative model. Theoretically-justiﬁed alternative
models can be derived from the penultimate approximation to extremes, either by selecting piecewise
constant shape (Northrop and Coleman, 2014) or by using tilting function to provide more general models
that should have faster convergence. The models proposed in Papastathopoulos and Tawn (2013) lead to
a threshold stability plot for an additional parameters. These approaches are implemented in mev.

Goodness-of-ﬁt diagnostics. One drawback of the threshold stability plot and tests is that they do not
entirely indicate whether the tail model ﬁts the data well. Goodness-of-ﬁt diagnostics can thus com-
plement other diagnostics. The eva package (Bader and Yan, 2020) provides multiple testing methods
with the Cramér–von Mises and Anderson–Darling criteria and Moran’s tests, all with control for the false
discovery rate (Bader et al., 2018). The beneﬁt of this approach, compared to visual diagnostics, is that it
does not require user input and is more readily implementable with large multivariate or spatial data sets.
The approach of Dupuis (1999), based on examination of the weights attached to the largest observations
from the sample and obtained using a robust ﬁtting procedure, can be obtained via mev.

Sequential analysis and changepoints. Parameter estimates obtained by ﬁtting a tail model at multiple
consecutive thresholds are dependent because of the non-negligible sample overlap. The mev package
provides the method of Wadsworth (2016), which exploits a technique from sequential analysis by ﬁtting
a point process over a range of thresholds and building an approximate white noise sequence from the
differences between consecutive estimates using their asymptotic covariance matrix, suitably rescaled
to be standard normal. The tea package provides the Pearson χ2 test of normality applied to sequences
of differences of scale estimates, following Thompson et al. (2009), while threshold stability plots based
on estimates of the coefﬁcient of variation and sequential testing of del Castillo and Padilla (2016) are
included in ercv.

Gerstengarbe–Werner plots (cf., Cebrián et al., 2003, Appendix B) are graphical diagnostic plots de-
rived from consecutive differences between order statistics. Sequential Mann–Kendall tests are per-
formed from smallest to largest order statistics (and vice-versa), with the intersection point used as a
changepoint candidate; such plots can be created with tea.

Predictive performance. The threshr package (Northrop et al., 2017) looks at the predictive performance
of the generalized Pareto for a binomial-generalized Pareto model ﬁtted using the Bayesian approach.
The scheme uses a leave-one-out cross validation scheme for values at a ﬁxed validation threshold v at
or above the range of potential thresholds considered.

Mixture models. The generalized Pareto speciﬁes a distribution only for exceedances above a threshold
u, but having a model below this threshold may be desirable, with some options enabling automatic
threshold selection. The evmix package (Hu and Scarrott, 2018) provides implementations of most of the
mixture models listed in Scarrott and MacDonald (2012): this includes parametric models for the bulk
of the data (for which users can inform threshold selection by looking at the proﬁle likelihood for u),
nonparametric and kernel-based approaches for the data below the threshold. Many such models are
discontinuous at the threshold and require choosing a ﬁxed threshold. The extremeﬁt package (Durrieu
et al., 2018) provides a mixture model implementation with a kernel-based bulk model and adaptive se-
lection rules for the bandwidth parameter. The mev package provides the extended generalized Pareto
model of Naveau et al. (2016) for modeling rainfall.

Univariate extremes implementations in other programming languages

While R is arguably the programming language boasting the most software implementations used for
extreme value analyses, some basic routines are available elsewhere for estimation of univariate models
using maximum likelihood or probability weighted moments: these include the Julia package Extremes,
the Matlab EVIM package and the Python packages wafo, pyextremes and scikit-extremes.

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

14

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

type

methods

package

function

penultimate

Northrop and Coleman (2014)
mev
Papastathopoulos and Tawn (2013) mev

goodness-of-ﬁt Gerstengarbe and Werner (1989)

sequential

predictive
mixture

Hosking and Wallis (1997)
Bader et al. (2018)
Wadsworth (2016)
Thompson et al. (2009)
del Castillo and Padilla (2016)
Northrop et al. (2017)
Scarrott and MacDonald (2012)
Durrieu et al. (2015)
Naveau et al. (2016)

tea
POT
eva
mev
tea
ercv
threshr
evmix
extremeﬁt
mev

NC.diag
tstab.egp
ggplot
lmomplot
gpdSeqTests
W.diag
TH
cvplot, thrselect
ithresh
—
·paretomix
fit.extgp

Table 5: Overview of formal threshold selection methods and numerical implementations

3. Multivariate extremes

The lack of ordering of (cid:82)D leads to multiple deﬁnitions of extremes (Barnett, 1976). We focus on com-
ponentwise maxima and concomitant exceedances, which lead to the multivariate analog of block max-
imum and peaks over threshold methods. Another option, structure variables, reduces the data to uni-
variate summaries and can be dealt with using tools presented before.

3.1. Multivariate maxima

Consider independent and identically distributed sequence of D-variate random vectors {Y i }i ≥1, where
each vector Y i has marginal distribution functions F j ( j = 1, . . . , D). Paralleling the univariate case, we
consider the vector of componentwise maxima M n = (Mn,1, . . . , Mn,D ), where Mn, j = max{Y1, j , . . . , Yn, j }. If
there exists sequences of location and scale vectors an ∈ (cid:82)D

+ and bn ∈ (cid:82)D such that

for G non-degenerate, then the limiting distribution is of the form

n→∞ Pr (cid:169)a

lim

n (M n − bn)(cid:170) = G(y),
−1

G(y) = exp

(cid:90)

(cid:189)
−D

max

(cid:83)D

(cid:180)

(cid:179) w
z

(cid:190)

dH (w )

,

(8)

where the so-called spectral measure H is a probability measure on the D-simplex (cid:83)D = {ω ∈ (cid:82)D
+ :
(cid:107)ω(cid:107)1 = 1} and the margins are generalized extreme value distributed. Distributions of the form eq. (8) are
termed multivariate extreme value, or max-stable. The simple max-stable distribution is obtained upon
setting µ = 1, σ = 1, ξ = 1 for each margin, corresponding to the unit Fréchet.

The lack of speciﬁcation for H , other than the D moment constraints E(S j ) = 1/D ( j = 1, . . . , D) for
S ∼ H , means that the set of probability measures satisfying the moment constraint is inﬁnite, unlike in
the univariate case. The copula package includes three tests of the max-stability assumption; see Kojadi-
novic et al. (2011); Kojadinovic and Yan (2010); Ben Ghorbal et al. (2009), while the graphical diagnostic
proposed by Gabda et al. (2012) is part of mev.
Likelihood-based estimation. The likelihood of a simple max-stable random vector Z with a paramet-
ric model for V is obtained by differentiating the distribution function exp{−V (z)} with respect to each
z1, . . . , zD .

The number of terms in the likelihood is the Dth Bell number, which is the total number of parti-
tions of D elements into k (k = 1, . . . , D) elements. Even in moderate dimensions, the number of distinct

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

15

likelihood contributions is huge and the calculations become prohibitive. One way to circumvent this
problem is to add the information about the partition if occurrence times are recorded (Stephenson and
Tawn, 2005); this is implemented in the evd, but only for bivariate models. In practice, we replace the
limiting partition with the empirical one. The likelihood is biased unless n (cid:192) D since the empirical par-
tition also needs to converge to the limiting hitting scenario; for weakly dependent processes, use of the
observed partition may induce bias (Wadsworth, 2015). Instead, Thibaud et al. (2016) propose to impute
the partition using a Gibbs sampler, while Huser et al. (2019) use a stochastic expectation-maximisation
algorithm; the E -step for the missing partition uses a Monte-Carlo estimator, where approximate draws
are obtained from the Gibbs sampler of Dombry et al. (2013). None of these extensions have been imple-
mented in publicly available software packages.
Parametric models. While max-stable models have been around for a while, there are few software im-
plementations for estimating such models. The evd and copula packages provide functionalities that are
restricted to the bivariate setting. The SpatialExtremes and CompRandFld packages have methods for
ﬁtting max-stable processes using pairwise composite likelihood for spatial models; see Section 4.

There are only handful of useful parametric models that generalize to dimension D > 2. The prime
example is the logistic multivariate extreme value model, which is overly simplistic and lacks ﬂexibility
since the distribution is exchangeable. Many existing models are special cases of a Dirichlet family of
distributions (Belzile and Nešlehová, 2017) and obtained through tilting (Coles and Tawn, 1991) to satisfy
the moment constraint. These all have the drawback that the number of parameters is constant or grows
linearly with the number of dimensions O(D) and this typically isn’t enough for characterizing complex
data. Two models derived from elliptical distributions, the Hüsler–Reiss model (Hüsler and Reiss, 1989)
and the extremal Student-t (Nikoloulopoulos et al., 2009), are more useful in large dimensions because
their scale matrix can be used to parametrize the pairwise dependence individually with O(D 2) entries,
and they can be more readily adapted to the functional setting, with extensions for skew-symmetric fam-
ilies (Beranger et al., 2017). The last parametric family, of which the most prominent example is the
asymmetric logistic distribution, are max-mixtures (Stephenson and Tawn, 2005) that assign different
weights to multiple simultaneous combinations of extremes. This allows for some degree of asymmetry
and asymptotic independence, but such models are overparametrized with O(2D ) coefﬁcients.

Joint estimation of all marginal and dependence parameters is complicated because of the poten-
tial high-dimensionality of the optimization problem, but also because of potential model misspeciﬁca-
tion that leads to unplausible parameter estimates. It is therefore common to use a two-stage approach,
whereby data are ﬁrst transformed to standardized margins

and then dependence parameters are ﬁtted separately. The function fbvevd in evd allows the user
to pass ﬁxed values for some parameters. The tailDepFun package contains routines for ﬁtting the con-
tinuous updating weighted least squares estimator, along with goodness-of-ﬁt tests, for multivariate and
functional models including max-linear models (Einmahl et al., 2018).

A different avenue is to estimate an equivalent form of H termed the Pickands dependence function

(cf., Falk et al., 2011, p. 150), which is equivalent to eq. (8).

Enforcing properties of the Pickands dependence function, notably convexity and known values on

the corners of the simplex, can improve estimation.

The evd package allows users to estimate nonparametrically the bivariate dependence function based
on the estimators of Pickands (1981) and Caperaa et al. (1997) for block maxima; additional options cor-
rect for boundary and convexity constraints.

While most estimators are restricted to the bivariate case, copula with its function An provides gen-
eralization to higher dimensions for multiple estimators (Gudendorf and Segers, 2012). Multivariate es-
timators based on Bernstein polynomials that guarantee convexity (Marcon et al., 2017) are provided by
the beet procedure in ExtremalDep, along with the madogram estimator. Bayesian estimation is also
available in the bivariate case, imposing a prior on the order of the Bernstein polynomials. The package
also includes a procedure for computing pointwise conﬁdence intervals using a nonparametric boot-
strap. The UniExtQ from ExtremalDep provides credible intervals for bivariate extreme quantile regions
(Beranger et al., 2021), estimated using an extension of this approach. Lastly, fCopulae provides para-
metric dependence function, correlation coefﬁcient and tail dependence measures for bivariate extreme

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

16

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

value copulas.
Unconditional simulation algorithms. For a long time, exact unconditional simulation algorithms for
max-stable processes were elusive outside of special cases (Schlather, 2002). Both mev and graphicalEx-
tremes implement the algorithm of Dombry et al. (2016) for selected multivariate models (including for
the latter extremal graphical models on trees) ensuring exact simulation, whereas evd uses dedicated al-
gorithms for logistic and asymmetric logistic models in arbitrary dimensions (Stephenson, 2003). The
copula (evCopula objects) (Yan, 2007) and SimCop packages (Tajvidi and Turlach, 2018) have function-
alities for simulation of some bivariate extreme value distributions and the multivariate logistic model,
or Gumbel copula. Packages mev and BMAmevt provide random number generators for selected para-
metric angular density models.

3.2. Threshold models

+ : (cid:107)X (cid:107)1 > u} has risk measure Λ(R) = Du

Multivariate regular variation, which underlies the max-stable distribution of Equation (8), can also be
used for threshold exceedances by considering the associated Poisson point process of extremes with in-
tensity measure Λ on a risk region R ⊂ (cid:82)D
+ \ {0D }, i.e., the positive orthant excluding the origin (Resnick,
1987). Assuming the intensity measure is absolutely continuous, the intensity function λ(x) = ∂D Λ(x)/(∂x1 · · · ∂xD )
exists and we can deﬁne a density over R by renormalizing λ(x) by the measure of the risk region Λ(R).
The resulting likelihoods of the point process, multivariate generalized Pareto distributions and more
general threshold models are much simpler than their max-stable counterpart, but there are typically
two numerical bottlenecks associated to ﬁtting these models. The ﬁrst arises from the calculation of the
measure of the risk region, which is often intractable and must thus be estimated using Monte Carlo
methods. There are closed-form expressions for the special case R = {x ∈ (cid:82)D
+ : xi > u}; if ξ = 1D , then
−1 irrespective of the model for Λ. The second bottle-
R = {x ∈ (cid:82)D
neck is due to censoring: not all components of a random vector may be extreme and the limiting model
may be a poor approximation at ﬁnite levels for weakly dependent vectors (Ledford and Tawn, 1996). To
reduce the bias arising from consideration of the asymptotic distribution, it is customary to left-censor
observations falling below marginal thresholds. Most multivariate peaks over threshold models are based
on the multivariate generalized Pareto (Rootzén and Tajvidi, 2006), whereby R = {x ∈ (cid:82)D
j =1 x j > u}
— other constructions are described in Rootzén et al. (2018). Kiriliouk et al. (2019) provide expressions for
the likelihood of many parametric models with strategies for diagnostics; these are not currently imple-
mented in software. The point process likelihood can also be used in place of the multivariate generalized
Pareto: in the bivariate case, the evd package proposes the point process likelihood (Smith et al., 1997),
but the bivariate censored likelihood implemented therein actually uses the max-stable copula instead
(Ledford and Tawn, 1996).

+ : maxD

Most implementations are restricted to the bivariate setting or are reserved for spatial data. The
graphicalExtremes package (Engelke and Hitz, 2020) is a notable exception: it implements the multivari-
ate Hüsler–Reiss generalized Pareto distribution for graphical models. Exploiting the relation between the
model and conditional extremal dependence, the parameters of the Hüsler–Reiss or Brown–Resnick pro-
cess are directly related to the variogram matrix, whose entries are estimated empirically using pairwise
empirical estimators of χ. The full likelihood can be used (including censoring), but the factorization of
the likelihood over cliques allows for higher-dimensional models to be ﬁtted through maximum likeli-
hood at reasonable cost, since each component is low dimensional. The bvtcplot function in the evd
package provides threshold stability plots in the bivariate case based on the spectral measure. mev pro-
vides composition sampling algorithms for threshold models for various risk functionals R in the multi-
variate setting (Ho and Dombry, 2019).

Rather than condition on the maximum component exceeding a threshold, we can focus instead
on exceedances of the j th component, i.e., consider a limiting model for Y − j | Y j > u. Heffernan and
Tawn (2004) showed that a particular choice of normalizing sequences allows for the existence of non-
degenerate limiting measure, including for asymptotically independent models. Inference for the con-
ditional extremes model is usually performed in two stages. In the ﬁrst, the marginal distributions are
estimated semiparametrically and data are transformed to Laplace margins (Keef et al., 2013). In the sec-
ond step, the dependence parameter vectors are estimated using a nonlinear regression model under the

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

17

assumption of Gaussian residuals.

Inference for the conditional extremes model as implemented in the texmex package relies on simula-
tion: the probability of extreme events is obtained by calculating the fraction of simulated points falling in
the risk region and uncertainty quantiﬁcation is done using the bootstrap scheme described in Heffernan
and Tawn (2004).

The multivariate regular variation representation provides another modeling approach for peaks over
threshold using radial exceedances. For this, the data are ﬁrst transformed to standardized scale with
unit shape and the resulting components Y are mapped to pseudo-angles (R, Θ), with, e.g., R = (cid:107)Y (cid:107)1 and
Θ = Y −D /R. Since R and Θ become stochastically independent as R tends to inﬁnity, one can focus on
modelling the spectral measure H (θ) appearing in eq. (8). ExtremalDep supports composite likelihood
maximum estimation with pseudo-angles for D-dimensional distributions, with composite likelihood in-
formation criterion estimates to compare models, with density functions, plots and associated functions
for each parametric model. Nonparametric estimation of the spectral measure only requires the user to
impose mean contraints. Starting from a sample of pseudo-angles, these can be enforced through em-
pirical likelihood method (Einmahl and Segers, 2009) or Euclidean likelihood (de Carvalho et al., 2013).
The extremis package (de Carvalho et al., 2020) implements these functionalities in the bivariate setting,
and mev in higher dimensions. The unpublished EVcopula package implements the bivariate model of
Wadsworth (2016) along with likelihood-based estimation methods and can be used to estimate probabil-
ities of large bivariate quantiles for both asymptotic (in)dependence scenarios. The BMAmevt package
is dedicated to the implementation of a Bayesian nonparametric model that uses a trans-dimensional
Metropolis algorithm for ﬁtting a Dirichlet mixture to the spectral measure based on pseudo-angles in
moderate dimensions (Sabourin and Naveau, 2014).

3.3. Coefﬁcients of tail dependence and structural variables

In multivariate settings, knowing the speed of decay of the dependence between pairs of random variable
is useful for risk assessment. This also helps validate empirically if asymptotic multivariate extreme value
models that assume multivariate regular variation are warranted or not. The tail correlation coefﬁcient
(Coles et al., 1999),

χ(v) =

Pr[mini {Fi (Yi ) > v}]
1 − v

,

(9)

with χ = limv→1 χ(v), is used to assess whether extremes are asymptotically independent (χ = 0) or de-
pendent (χ > 0). Equation (9) suggests replacing the unknown distribution functions by their empirical
counterpart. The bivariate empirical estimator is usually deﬁned as 2 − log{ (cid:98)C (v12)/ log(v) rather than
{1 −C (v, v)}/(1 − v) by making the approximation 1 − v ∼ − log(v), 1 −C (v, v) ∼ − log{C (v, v)} for v (cid:191) 1.

A related coefﬁcient measuring dependence is the coefﬁcient of tail dependence, often denoted η.
is such

With data transformed to unit Pareto margins, say Y p, the structural variable T p = minD
that, for large u (Ledford and Tawn, 1996, eq. 5.6),

j =1 Y p

j

Pr (cid:161)T p > u + t | T p > u(cid:162) ∼

L(u + t )
L(u)

(1 + t /u)

−1/η

,

(10)

with L(x) a slowly varying function. The η coefﬁcient can be estimated by ﬁtting a generalized Pareto
distribution with shape η and scale ηu to exceedances of T p above u. If data are transformed to the
exponential scale instead, the scale parameter of the structural variable is η and the maximum likelihood
estimator of the latter coincides with Hill’s estimator (Section 2.5).

The coefﬁcient of tail dependence takes values in (0, D

−1 for independent variables, and η ∈ (D

−1) if the variables are negatively associated,
−1, 1] if the variables exhibit positive association. In the
η = D
multivariate setting, the coefﬁcients ηC for subsets C ⊂ {1, . . . , D} satisfy ordering constraints with ηC ≤ η
(Schlather and Tawn, 2003).

In the bivariate setting, it is customary to consider ¯χ = 2η−1 instead of η, which gives ¯χ ∈ (−1, 1] (Coles
et al., 1999). The evd package function chiplot provides plots of χ and ¯χ based on the empirical distribu-
tion of the minimum, with approximate pointwise standard errors through the delta-method. The mev

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

18

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

package provides various estimators of η and χ, while graphicalExtremes includes empirical estimators
emp_chi that can be used to obtain empirical estimates of the dependence matrix of the Hüsler–Reiss
distribution.

Extensions that consider different tail decays have emerged in the last decade: for example, Beirlant
et al. (2011) and Dutang et al. (2014) consider projections of the form Zω = min{Y p
ω/(1 − ω)} for
ω ∈ (0, 1) a ﬁxed angle. Under a regular variation assumption, the distribution of Zω can be approximated
by the so-called extended Pareto distribution. The parameters of the latter can be estimated using the
minimum density power divergence (MDPD) criterion (Dutang et al., 2014), which includes the maxi-
mum likelihood estimator as a special case.

1 , Y p

2

The RTDE package (Dutang, 2020) provides various functions to estimate the parameters of this model,

and

the returned
objects allow users to summarize/plot ﬁtted outputs, to compute the bivariate tail probability as well
as to perform a simulation analysis. A similar approach is considered in Wadsworth and Tawn (2013) and
implemented in lambdadep function of the mev package; the authors

look at different extrapolation paths by replacing the multivariate regular variation by a collection of
univariate regular variation assumptions. Mhalla et al. (2019) also use such ideas to implement general-
ized additive regression for extremal dependence parameters.

The drawback of these approaches, termed structural variables since they use univariate projections,

is that estimation is carried independently for every angle ω.

3.4. Time series and graphical models

Data on a single variable collected over time often exhibit short-term temporal dependence, which can
lead to extremes occurring in clusters. As a minimum, statistical methods for time series extremes need to
account for dependence in the data and to estimate the extent to which extremes cluster, either directly
or using a dependence model. For reviews of this area see Chavez-Demoulin and Davison (2012) and
Reich and Shaby (2016).

3.4.1 Extremal index estimation

For stationary processes satisfying the D(un) condition, which limits long-range dependence at extreme
levels, the strength of local serial extremal dependence is commonly measured by the extremal index. The
latter can be interpreted as the reciprocal of the limiting mean cluster size in a Poisson cluster process of
exceedances of increasingly high thresholds. Table 6 gives basic information about the direct estimators
of the extremal index that feature in this section, while Table 7 summarises implementations of these es-
timators, including information about diagnostics for the choice of tuning parameters. When a threshold
is involved these diagnostics can be used for threshold selection. The diagnostics in the evd, evir, exdex,
fExtremes and texmex packages are threshold stability plots for the extremal index. The information ma-
trix test of Süveges and Davison (2010), which is based on a model for truncated inter-exceedance times
called K -gaps, is provided by the mev and exdex packages. The packages evd (function clusters), ex-
tRemes (decluster), fExtremes (deCluster), POT (clust) and texmex (declust) use an estimate of
the extremal index to decluster exceedances of a threshold to form a series of sample cluster maxima.

3.4.2 Marginal modeling

Suppose that interest is limited to marginal extremes. The limiting distributions of cluster maxima and
a randomly chosen threshold exceedance are identical, so inferences can be made using a marginal gen-
eralized Pareto model for sample cluster maxima or for all exceedances. The texmex (Southworth et al.,
2020) package is the most complete implementation of the analysis of cluster maxima: it uses a semi-
parametric bootstrap procedure to account for uncertainty in declustering and in marginal inference
and can also accommodate covariate effects. The declustering approach is wasteful of data and Fawcett
and Walshaw (2012) show that the difﬁculty of identifying clusters reliably can lead to substantial bias.
When using all exceedances appropriate adjustment must be made for dependence in the data and for
the value of the extremal index (Fawcett and Walshaw, 2012): the lite package uses the methodology of

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

19

estimator

reference

tuning parameter(s)

runs
blocks (blocks 1)
modiﬁed blocks (blocks 2)
intervals (FS)
iterative least squares (ILS)
K -gaps
semiparametric maxima (SPM) Northrop (2015)

Smith and Weissman (1994)
Smith and Weissman (1994)
Smith and Weissman (1994)
Ferro and Segers (2003)
Süveges (2007)
Süveges and Davison (2010)

run length, threshold
block size, threshold
block size, threshold
threshold
threshold
run length K , threshold
block size

Table 6: Overview of some direct estimators of the extremal index with associated references and tuning
parameters.

package

estimator(s)

estimation

UQ diagnostics

evd
evir
extRemes
exdex

fExtremes

mev

runs, FS
blocks 2
runs, FS
ILS
K -gaps
SPM
runs
blocks 1
blocks 2
intervals
ILS, FS
K -gaps
runs

POT
revdbayes K -gaps
texmex
tsxtreme

FS
runs

exiplot
exindex

choose_uk
choose_b
exindexPlot
exindexesPlot

exi
exindex
extremalindex
iwls
kgaps
spm
runTheta
clusterTheta
blocktheta
ferrosegersTheta
ext.index
ext.index
fitexi
kgaps_post
extremalIndex
thetaruns

no
no
yes —
no —
yes
yes
no
no
no
no
no
no
no
yes —
yes
yes —

ext.index
infomat.test, ext.index
exiplot

extremalIndexRangeFit

Table 7: Comparison of R packages for the direct estimation of the extremal index. Estimator(s): name(s) of
the estimators available; estimation: function name(s) for estimation; uncertainty quantiﬁcation (UQ): are
methods for estimating uncertainty provided?; diagnostics: function names(s) for choosing tuning parame-
ters.

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

20

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

reference

package

function(s)

area

Fawcett and Walshaw (2012)
Fawcett and Walshaw (2012)
Durrieu et al. (2018)
Davis and Mikosch (2009)
Lugrin et al. (2016)
Smith et al. (1997)
Smith et al. (1997)
Noven et al. (2018)
Hees et al. (2021)

declust, evm
flite
hill.ts

texmex
lite
extremeﬁt
extremogram extremogram1, bootconf1, . . .
tsxtreme
evd
POT
ev.trawl
CTRE

depfit, dep2fit
evmc
fitmcgpd, simmc
FullPL, rtrawl
MLestimates

m
m
m
e
d
d
d
d
d

Table 8: Overview of packages and main functions for modeling time series extremes by area: marginal
modelling (m); exploratory analysis (e); dependence modelling (d).

Chandler and Bate (2007) to estimate a marginal log likelihood that has been adjusted for clustering using
a sandwich estimator of the covariance matrix of the marginal parameters and combines this with a log
likelihood for the extremal index under the K -gaps model. The extremeﬁt package provides a semipara-
metric procedure for time series extremes, as described in Section 2.5. Table 8 gives summaries of these
packages and the packages that enable the estimation of time series dependence.

3.4.3 Models for dependence

In some applications it is important to infer more about the behavior of an extreme event than the size
of a cluster of extreme values. For example, the duration of an extreme event or an accumulation of the
extreme values may be of interest. This requires the nature of serial extremal dependence to be modeled.
The extremogram package implements the extremogram (Davis and Mikosch, 2009; Davis et al., 2011,
2012) to inform modeling by exploring quantitatively serial extremal dependence within stationary time
series and between different time series. In the univariate case, it gives estimates of the conditional prob-
abilities that a variable exceeds a user-supplied high threshold at time t + l given that it exceeded this
threshold at time t . The stationary bootstrap is used to provide conﬁdence intervals.

The fitmcgpd function in the POT package performs maximum likelihood inference using a ﬁrst-
order Markov chain model, in which one of several bivariate extreme value distributions is used as a
model for successive threshold exceedances (Smith et al., 1997). The function simmc simulates from
this type of model, as does the evmc function in the evd package. The tsxtreme package models time
series dependence using the conditional extremes approach of Heffernan and Tawn (2004), which en-
ables a greater range of dependence structures to be modeled. Inferences are performed using two-step
maximum likelihood ﬁtting and a Bayesian approach in which inferences are made about a more ﬂex-
ible model in which all inferences are performed simultaneously (Lugrin et al., 2016). The functions
theta2fit (MLE) and thetafit (Bayesian) provide inferences for the sub-asymptotic extremal index
of Ledford and Tawn (2003).

The ev.trawl package implements the modeling approach described in Noven et al. (2018), which is
based on the representation of a generalized Pareto distribution as a mixture of exponential distributions
in which the exponential rate has a gamma distribution. An exponential trawl process introduces time
series dependence in a latent gamma process, while a marginal probability integral transform allows both
negative and positive shape parameter values. The CTRE package deals with processes for which inter-
exceedance times have a heavy-tailed distribution and therefore a Poisson cluster representation is not
appropriate (Hees et al., 2021). Parameter stability plots are provided as a means of selecting a suitable
threshold.

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

21

3.4.4 Graphical extremes

Under the ﬁrst-order Markov chain model for time series extremes of Smith et al. (1997), the value of a
variable at time t + 1 is assumed to be conditionally independent of its value prior to time t given the
value at time t . This simple dependence structure could be represented as a graphical model in which
nodes representing the value of the variable are only connected by an edge if they correspond to adjacent
time points.

The packages graphicalExtremes (Engelke and Hitz, 2020) and gremes (Asenova et al., 2021) provide
more general graphical modeling frameworks for extremes, based on a multivariate Hüsler–Reiss gen-
eralized Pareto model for peaks over thresholds; see also Section 3.2. A graph represents conditional
independences between variables. If the graph is sparse then the joint distribution decomposes into the
product of lower-dimensional distributions, which results in a more parsimonious and tractable model.
If the graph is a tree, that is, there is exactly one path along edges between any pair of nodes, then this
decomposition is particularly simple. The graphicalExtremes and gremes packages provide functions
to ﬁt a multivariate Hüsler–Reiss generalized Pareto model given a user-supplied graph and functions to
simulate from this model. The speciﬁcs of the theory underlying these packages differ but the resulting
model structures coincide when based on a tree.

In some applications, such as the analysis of extreme river ﬂows, there is a physical network from
which the graph can be constructed. In other cases the graph is conceptual: graphicalExtremes also
provides a means to infer the structure of a graph from data.

4. Functional extremes (including spatial extremes)

Functional extremes designates a relatively recent branch of extreme value analysis concerned with stochas-
tic processes over inﬁnite-dimensional spaces, especially spatial and spatio-temporal extremes in geo-
graphic space (Davison et al., 2012; Huser and Wadsworth, 2022). We here use the term space for (cid:82)d with
d ≥ 1, including the combination of geographic space and time (d = 3), and we explicitly refer to time
only where necessary. In practice, we usually work with ﬁnite discretizations of the study domain, such
that many multivariate results and techniques carry over to the functional setting, although usually in
relatively high dimension.

Common exploratory tools for extremal dependence are coefﬁcients for bivariate distributions as-
sessed as a function of spatial distance or temporal lag (e.g., extremal coefﬁcient function based on bivari-
ate extremal coefﬁcients θ2, tail correlation function based on the χ measure, F -madogram, concurrence
probability for maxima).

The asymptotic mechanisms for functional maxima and threshold exceedances are similar to the mul-
tivariate setting. Available statistical implementations are summarized in Section 4.1. Marginal and de-
pendence modeling is discussed in Section 4.3. Aspects that we consider as still underdeveloped in exist-
ing implementations are listed in Section 4.4.

We use notation X = {X (s)} for stochastic processes indexed by s ∈ S ⊂ (cid:82)d , representing the process
of the original event data. Usually we have a dataset of observations Xi (s j ) for j = 1, . . . , m locations
observed at i = 1, . . . , n time points.

Max-stable processes are the natural class of models for locationwise maxima taken over temporal
blocks of the same length, such as annual maxima observed at ﬁxed spatial locations. A max-stable pro-
cess possesses ﬁnite-dimensional max-stable distributions, and convergence to a max-stable process can
be deﬁned through the convergence of all ﬁnite-dimensional distributions, such that strong links arise
with the univariate and multivariate setting. If there exist sequences of normalizing functions an(s) > 0
and bn(s) such that

an(s){Mn(s) − bn(s)} → Z (s),

s ∈ S , n → ∞,

(11)

with Z (s) a nondegenerate limit process, then Z (s) is max-stable.

Generalized r -Pareto processes (Ferreira and de Haan, 2014; Thibaud and Opitz, 2015; Dombry and
Ribatet, 2015; de Fondeville and Davison, 2018; Engelke et al., 2019) arise asymptotically when a sum-

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

22

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

mary functional r (X ) of the process X exceeds a threshold that tends towards the upper endpoint of the
probability distribution of the functional r .

Limit theory and statistical methodology in this peaks over threshold setting was formulated under
the assumption that realizations of X correspond to continuous functions over a compact domain S .
The most widely used setting for functional peaks over threshold follows the multivariate setting by as-
suming that data have been standardized, i.e., marginally transformed with a transformation T that is
strictly monotonic (i.e., T (x2) > T (x1) if x2 > x1), and that ensures positivity (i.e., T (x) ≥ 0) with stan-
dardized tails of transformed random variables for which limx→∞ x Pr[T {X (s)} > x] = 1. We can choose
Ts {X (s)} = 1/[1 − Fs {X (s)}], where Fs is the marginal distribution of X (s). Typically, summary functionals
r are homogeneous (i.e., r (t x) = t r (x) for t > 0) ; examples include the average r (x) = |S |−1 (cid:82)
S x(s) ds,
the minimum r (x) = mins∈S x(s), the maximum r (x) = maxs∈S x(s), or the median. Convergence is as-
sumed in the space of continuous functions over compact S , such that the distribution of the functional
r [Ts {X (s)}] is well deﬁned. Functional convergence of maxima in (11) implies functional convergence to
r -Pareto processes Y

= {Y

(cid:63)
r

(cid:63)
r (s)}:

Ts {X (s)} | r [Ts {X (s)}] ≥ u → {Y

(cid:63)
r (s)} u → ∞.

(12)

Max-stable and generalized Pareto processes have different probabilistic structures, but there always
is a one-to-one correspondence between their dependence structures. Estimation of the marginal dis-
tributions and of the dependence structure is often conducted in two separate steps. The space-time
dependence between sites is normally captured by correlation functions or variograms, which leads to
much fewer parameters to infer than in the unstructured multivariate setting.

These asymptotic models can accommodate either asymptotic dependence or full independence among

the variables X (s1) and X (s2) at locations s1, s2 ∈ S . The coefﬁcient of tail dependence introduced in
(10), if considered for D sites s1, . . . , sd , is therefore restricted to values η ∈ {1/D, 1}. More ﬂexible de-
pendence structures can be achieved within the conditional extremes framework with conditioning on a
ﬁxed location (Wadsworth and Tawn, 2019; Simpson et al., 2020). Finally, so-called subasymptotic mod-
els do not arise as classical extreme value limits but focus on ﬂexibly capturing dependence remaining at
subasymptotic levels, for instance with asymptotic independence where 1/D < η(s1, s2) < 1 is possible;

for example, the class of max-inﬁnitely divisible processes (Huser et al., 2021), which is useful for
ﬂexible modeling of location-wise maxima. Most such proposals do not come with packaged and generic
software implementations so far.

4.1. Max-stable processes for maxima data
Suppose that data consist of locationwise block maxima Mi (s j ), where i = 1, . . . , nblock indexes the blocks,
e.g., the observation year in case of annual block maxima. The SpatialExtremes package provides the
most comprehensive collection of functions for exploration and statistical inference with max-stable pro-
cesses for spatial maxima data in geographical space (d = 2). While standard full likelihoods are not
tractable even for moderately many locations with the common models, pairwise likelihood has become
the standard approach for ﬁtting max-stable processes, with implementations in SpatialExtremes and
CompRandFld. Global dependence measures such as concurrence maps (Dombry et al., 2018), avail-
able from concurrencemap in SpatialExtremes, can be constructed from bivariate summaries. The in-
tractability of the multivariate max-stable distribution function G, described in eq. (8), has led to pairwise
likelihood becoming the standard estimation method for spatial max-stable processes. In SpatialEx-
tremes, joint frequentist estimation of marginal and dependence parameters is possible, where auxiliary
variables can be ﬂexibly included in the three parameters of the marginal generalized extreme value dis-
tribution. Similar to generalized additive models, smoothness penalties can be imposed on nonlinear
effects modeled through spline functions. In contrast to the aforementioned generalized additive model
approach without dependence, the numerical optimization becomes more involved here, such that only
a moderate number of marginal parameters can be reasonably estimated.

RandomFields (Schlather et al., 2015) provides a large variety of max-stable models and particularly
of tail correlation functions, with a focus on implementing simulation from such models. Moreover, the
package encapsulates vast functionality, especially simulation, for Gaussian random ﬁelds, which are

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

23

often the building blocks for the more sophisticated extreme value models. The package provides multi-
ple state-of-the-art algorithms for simulating Brown–Resnick max-stable processes. Exact unconditional
simulation of max-stable processes is available in RandomFields, mev and SpatialExtremes, but only
the latter offers conditional simulation of max-stable random ﬁelds (conditional on observed values at
given locations) using Gibbs sampling (Dombry et al., 2013). CompRandFld’s simulation routine for max-
stable processes uses an interface to RandomFields. For a particular hierarchically structured max-stable
dependence model, known as the Reich–Shaby model (Reich and Shaby, 2012) that is constructed using
spatial kernel functions and is derived from the spectral representation of a max-stable process based
on a lp -norm (Oesting, 2018), estimation tools are available in the hkevp package and the experimental
abba function in extRemes. It is difﬁcult to ﬁt because of the dual role of its nugget parameter α > 0. The
hkevp package provides a Metropolis-within-Gibbs algorithm for Bayesian estimation of the model and
for simulation, whereas the abba is ﬂagged as experimental and is less comprehensive.

4.2. Peaks-over-threshold modeling

For functional peaks over threshold, mvPot (de Fondeville and Belzile, 2021) provides parametric simu-
lation and estimation tools for various r -Pareto processes using Brown–Resnick and extremal Student-t
dependence structures. Parameter estimates are computed using optimization of either full likelihood
or gradient score functions; the latter remains computationally tractable for settings where full likelihood
does not. Estimation of the marginal transformation T is not implemented and has to be performed prior
to estimating the extremal dependence parameters using mvPot. A competitive estimation procedure is
the gradient score estimating equation of de Fondeville and Davison (2018), which does not require calcu-
lation of the normalizing constant of the model and also replaces censoring with downweighting. While
statistically less efﬁcient than full likelihood estimation, the procedure is more robust and can be applied
in very high-dimensional settings. For estimation, numerical implementations are currently restricted
to the Brown–Resnick model but tools for simulation and calculation of likelihoods are available for the
extremal-t dependence model. The mev package also proposes likelihood functions and unconditional
simulation routines for generalized r -Pareto processes (de Fondeville and Davison, 2021).

Some other implementations allowing estimation of asymptotic dependence structures use original
event data Xi (s j ) and can be viewed as working on the interface of max-stable and peaks over threshold
models. For example, moment-based estimation of parametric models, based on contrasting empirical
and parametric versions of a variant of the so-called tail dependence function, is implemented in the
package tailDepfun (Einmahl et al., 2018).

4.3. Modeling spatially varying marginal distributions

In practice, marginal distributions Fs in functional data are usually not stationary, such that variation of
marginal extreme value parameters with respect to space and time, or with respect to other available aux-
iliary variables, has to be captured. In the locationwise maxima setting, we can use use the generalized
extreme value distribution and consider its parameters as functions of space, i.e., ξ(s), µ(s), σ(s). Different
options exist in the peaks over threshold setting. A common approach is to ﬁx a high, potentially nonsta-
tionary threshold u(s), and then estimate the threshold exceedance probability p(s) = Pr{X (s) > u(s)} =
1 − Fs {u(s)} and the generalized Pareto parameters ξ(s), σ(s) based on observations of the exceedances
X (s) − u(s) > 0.

The regression frameworks discussed in Section 4.3 are relevant for modeling marginal extreme value
parameters that vary with location in a ﬁrst modeling step. Generalized additive modeling allows cap-
turing complex nonlinear patterns of spatial nonstationarity using relatively large numbers of parame-
ters. Some care may be required in tuning smoothing hyperparameters since in this step one usually
assumes independence of observations Xi (s j ), so functional dependence across space or time is disre-
garded. Speciﬁcally, MCMC-based Bayesian estimation of marginal parameters (using Gaussian process
priors) for generalized extreme value distributions for maxima is possible through SpatialExtremes (Ri-
batet, 2022), and hkevp (Sebille, 2016) includes a similar function. The SpatialGEV package (Chen et al.,
2021) provides a template for ﬁtting latent spatial models with marginal generalized extreme value distri-
butions and Gaussian process priors on the parameters using quadratic approximations to the marginal

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

24

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

posterior. The unpublished package SpatGEVBMA, formerly on the CRAN, ﬁts a latent model with gen-
eralized extreme value margins whose parameters follow Gaussian process priors with explanatory vari-
ables. Its deﬁning functionalities are the use of Laplace approximation for automating proposals and
efﬁcient exploration of the posterior, and Bayesian model averaging to account for variable selection un-
certainty (Dyrrdal et al., 2014).

An important alternative to Monte Carlo methods is to estimate complex integrals arising from Equa-
tion (6) through the integrated nested Laplace approximation (INLA). The INLA package proposes com-
putationally convenient representations of the spatial Matérn covariance function through the stochas-
tic partial differential equation approach of Lindgren et al. (2011) for spatial and spatio-temporal latent
Gaussian modeling. As mentioned in Section 2.4, INLA provides implementation for generalized extreme
value distributions (with covariates and random effects in the location parameter) and the generalized
Pareto distribution (with covariates and random effects in a quantile at a probability level α ∈ (0, 1) spec-
iﬁed by the user; see Opitz et al. (2018) and Krainski et al. (2018, Chapter 6).

The package further allows joint estimation of several regression designs where some of the random
effects can be in common (i.e., shared through a scaling coefﬁcient) among these, which is beneﬁcial to
obtain cross-correlation in the posteriors of the predictors of several response types. For example, we
could combine a logistic regression for the exceedance probability with a generalized Pareto regression
for the excess above the threshold, and a shared random effect with a positive sharing coefﬁcient would
entail positive posterior correlation between the exceedance probability and the size of the excess.

4.4. Outlook for functional extremes

The coverage of max-stable processes, which remains an area of very active research, is much more com-
prehensive than others, with the notable exception of composite or full log likelihood inference for max-
stable processes. Formulae exist for many partial derivatives of the exponent function V arising in the
multivariate max-stable cumulative distribution functions and, in principle, the Stephenson–Tawn like-
lihood (or a bias-corrected version thereof) could be programmed for full likelihood inference beyond
the bivariate case. Most of the models are also implemented with spatial applications in mind, even if
temporal or spatio-temporal applications are possible. Max-inﬁnitely divisible models are not covered
in software yet, and Bayesian models with latent processes are often not provided with numerical imple-
mentation because of the complexity of implementation and also sometimes very long execution times
of codes.

There are much fewer implementations for threshold models. Whereas their construction can be
viewed as more ﬂexible and intuitive than the one of the corresponding max-stable processes, they are
conditional models with respect to threshold exceedance of the summary functional r . In the ﬁnite-
sample setting of statistical practice, this means that observations at some locations may not correspond
to marginal exceedances and may therefore not be coherent with the asymptotic model. A common rem-
edy is censoring, but this makes estimation more costly because the likelihood functions now include
high-dimensional distribution functions which typically must be calculated via Monte-Carlo methods for
each vector of observation. Generic full likelihood estimation procedures have been proposed, and are
implemented (though computationally costly) for some models. However, available implementations do
not yet come with a comprehensive set of available models and methods for parameter inference, model
validation and comparison. An obvious solution to facilitate such implementation, provided that param-
eters are identiﬁable from lower-dimensional summaries, would be to use composite likelihood, but this
is not implemented. Likewise, Bayesian generalized Pareto models with latent Gaussian process priors
could be easily implemented in many probabilistic programming languages outside of R, such as Stan,
but no general-purpose routines exist so far.

Simulation algorithms for unconditional simulation from generalized r -Pareto processes with arbi-
trary risk functionals r are still elusive, as designing efﬁcient accept-reject methods requires case-by-case
analysis. Available conditional simulation code typically amounts to simulation of elliptical distributions
(log-Gaussian or Student-t ) with linear constraints.

Implementations with documented code are often available as supplementary material to method-
ological papers but have not been encapsulated in ofﬁcially validated packages; see Huser and Wadsworth

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

25

methods

package

copula
SimCop
Tajvidi and Turlach (2018)
evd
Stephenson (2003)
mev
Dombry et al. (2016)
graphicalExtremes
Engelke and Hitz (2020)
ExtremalDep
Beranger et al. (2017)
CompRandFld
Padoan and Bevilacqua (2015)
SpatialExtremes
Dombry et al. (2013)
SpatialExtremes
Dombry et al. (2016)
RandomFields
Schlather et al. (2015)
hkevp
Reich and Shaby (2012)
BMAmevt
Ballani and Schlather (2011)
mev
Ho and Dombry (2019)
de Fondeville and Davison (2018) mev
de Fondeville and Davison (2018) mvPot
de Fondeville and Davison (2021) mev

functions
rCopula∗
—
rbvevd, rmvevd
rmev, rmevspec
rmstable
r_extr_mod
RFsim∗
condrmaxstab
rmaxstab
RFsimulate∗
hkevp.rand
rnestlog, rpairbeta
rparpcs
rparp
—
rgparp

scope

b, m
b
b, m
a, m, f
m, f
m, f
f
f
f
f
f
a
p
p
p
p

Table 9: Overview of simulation algorithms for bivariate (b) and multivariate (m) max-stable distributions
and for max-stable processes (f), and for angular (a) and Pareto processes (p) with associated references.
Some of the listed functions (
) are generic and include speciﬁc classes for max-stable models, but other
models as well.

∗

(2019); Bacro et al. (2020); Simpson et al. (2020) for recent examples. Huser and Wadsworth (2019) has
companion code for frequentist estimation of a ﬂexible subasymptotic spatial model in the unpublished
package spatialADAI. An INLA-based implementation for Bayesian conditional extremes models for spa-
tial and spatio-temporal data is provided for Simpson et al. (2020) as supplementary material. The im-
plementation of many Bayesian extreme value models in the literature is achieved with standard MCMC
algorithms that are tailored to the particular data application, but often generic and easily reusable or
reproducible code is not provided, which hinders reproducibility.

5. Specialized topics

While our review has ranged mostly over software providing implementation of relatively generic meth-
ods that can be useful in various application contexts, there also has been active development of software
libraries targeting speciﬁc application ﬁelds, and we here cite some of them.
Hydrology and climate: Regional frequency analysis using L-moments is possible with the lmomrfa
package. The climextRemes package leverages extRemes for climate extremes and implements meth-
ods highly relevant for this ﬁeld, such as local likelihood ﬁtting; the package is also available in Python.
IDF provides intensity-duration-frequency (IDF) curves (Ulrich et al., 2020). jointPm implements the
method of Zheng et al. (2015) for evaluating bivariate probabilities of exceedance. An example of a highly
specialized package is futureheatwaves and facilitates ﬁnding, characterizing and exploring heatwaves
in climate projections, while the Python package teca is dedicated to tracking extremes of large scale cli-
mate models. Renext includes methods for peaks over threshold with a variety of distributions and the
possibility to include historical maximum records, along with tests of exponentiality and goodness-of-ﬁt.
Financial and actuarial science: Some packages provide implementation of various generic models and
methods for extreme values, but make strong use the semantics of those ﬁelds in their documentation.
The packages QRM (and its successor qrmtools) and ReIns implement various functions to accompany
the books McNeil et al. (2015) and Albrecher et al. (2017), respectively.

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

26

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

reference

package

functions

Coles and Tawn (1991)

Einmahl et al. (2018)

Pickands (1981) and

Caperaa et al. (1997)

evd
copula
tailDepFun
evd

fbvevd
fitCopula
Estimation· · ·
abvnonpar

Gudendorf and Segers (2012)

Einmahl and Segers (2009) and

de Carvalho et al. (2013)

Marcon et al. (2017)

Wadsworth (2016)

Sabourin and Naveau (2014)

Smith et al. (1997)

Engelke et al. (2019)

Heffernan and Tawn (2004)

Davison et al. (2012)

Padoan and Bevilacqua (2015)

Reich and Shaby (2012)

Reich and Shaby (2012)

copula
extremis
mev
ExtremalDep
EVcopula
BMAmevt
evd
graphicalExtremes
texmex
SpatialExtremes
CompRandFld
hkevp
extRemes

An
angcdf
angmeas
madogram, beet
fit.EV.copula
posteriorMCMC
fbvpot
fmpareto_graph_HR
mex
fitcopula, fitmaxstab
FitComposite
hkevp.fit
abba

dim data

max
b
b
max
m, f max
ang
b

b, m ang
ang
b
ang
m
ang
m
ang
b
ang
m
pot
b
pot
m
pot
m
max
f
max
f
max
f
max
f

Table 10: Overview of multivariate and functional estimation procedures for extremes based on dimension,
either bivariate (b), multivariate (m) or functional (f) and data type/paradigm, one of block maximum (max),
pseudo-angles (ang) or threshold exceedances (pot). Packages which only include likelihood but no wrapper
are excluded.

The package fExtremes (Wuertz et al., 2017) provides functions for ﬁnancial analysis used by the

Rmetrics project.

The package VaRES (Nadarajah et al., 2013) provides two popular risk measures (value at risk and ex-
pected shortfall) for a large collection of probability distributions, including many heavy-tailed distribu-
tions. The extremis package proposes functionalities to cluster multivariate ﬁnancial time series based
on their frequency and magnitude of extreme events.
Machine learning: The interface between statistical machine learning and extreme values has been grow-
ing in recent years, with proposals encompassing the use of gradient boosting for extremes (Velthoen et al.
(2021), unpublished package gbex) and of extremal random forests (Gnecco et al. (2022), package erf) for
modeling high quantiles of a univariate distribution. Another area of active research is open-set classiﬁ-
cation, dealing with classiﬁcation of observations in categories not observed in training data: the Python
package EVM implements the extreme value machine of Rudd et al. (2018), whereas R package evtclass
includes the algorithms described in Vignotto and Engelke (2020).
Survival analysis: Presence of censoring or truncation mechanisms, common in survival analysis, require
dedicated software implementations because they affect the likelihood contribution of observations. The
Matlab LATools (Rootzén and Zholud, 2017) proposes an interface for interval-truncated generalized
Pareto observations, while the longevity package handles more general partial observation schemes.

6. Discussion and conclusion

We have covered in this review a wide range of available software implementations for extremes, and we
sincerely hope without omissions that are considered as important by authors or users. The development
of extreme value software is key to extreme value analysis in practice and has become an active area of
research, but the availability of implementations tends to lag behind methodological innovations since
these are often not accompanied by generic, easily reusable and validated codes. To encourage modelers

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

27

in applied sciences and in operational services to make use of the most advanced methods and models,
off-the-shelf implementations are desirable. However, generic code may be difﬁcult to provide due to
the high sophistication of approaches as, for instance, with functional extremes. Designing generic es-
timation procedures that are ﬂexible enough to be useful while at the same time being robust requires
particular care. Writing this review made us aware of how challenging it is for the extreme value commu-
nity to develop tested and easily reusable software that keeps pace with methodological progress: most
software was written a decade ago, there are only handful of active maintainers, and most models pro-
posed in the literature are not put together with software.

Many methods proposed in the last two decades are still not available; lack of implementation of be-
spoke code is a major impediment for their adoption. The most obvious gap is in software for ﬁtting
multivariate max-stable models (with composite likelihood) and multivariate generalized Pareto distri-
butions with censoring in moderate dimensions for the parametric models with suitable tools. The con-
ditional spatial extremes model, which extends the Heffernan–Tawn approach to the spatial setting, has
been used in many recent papers but no software has been released.

More methods and more reﬁned tools are also required for the nonstationary exploration and in-
ference of extreme values. In many application ﬁelds, physical change processes (e.g., climate change,
land-use change) require tools to explore, model and infer nonstationary behavior in extremes, for in-
stance for climate-change detection and attribution. Currently, nonstationary modeling is implemented
for marginal distributions through regression designs, but implementations providing dedicated meth-
ods for extreme value detection and attribution under climate change are scarce, and easily reusable
codes for nonstationary extreme value dependence structures are yet missing.

Acknowledgements

Funding in partial support of this work was provided by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council (RGPIN-2022-05001, DGECR-2022-00461).

References

Albrecher H, Beirlant J, Teugels J (2017) Reinsurance: Actuarial and Statistical Aspects. Wiley
Alfons A, Templ M (2013) Estimation of social exclusion indicators from complex surveys: The R package

laeken. Journal of Statistical Software 54(15):1–25, doi:10.18637/jss.v054.i15

Asenova S, Mazo G, Segers J (2021) Inference on extremal dependence in the domain of attraction of
a structured Hüsler–Reiss distribution motivated by a Markov tree with latent variables. Extremes
24(3):461–500, doi:10.1007/s10687-021-00407-5

Asquith W (2021) lmomco — L-moments, censored $L$-moments,

trimmed $L$-moments, $L$-

comoments, and many distributions. R package version 2.3.7

Bacro JN, Gaetan C, Opitz T, Toulemonde G (2020) Hierarchical space-time modeling of asymptotically
independent exceedances with an application to precipitation data. Journal of the American Statistical
Association 115(530):555–569, doi:10.1080/01621459.2019.1617152

Bader B, Yan J (2020) eva: Extreme value analysis with goodness-of-ﬁt testing. R package version 0.2.6
Bader B, Yan J, Zhang X (2018) Automated threshold selection for extreme value analysis via or-
dered goodness-of-ﬁt tests with adjustment for false discovery rate. The Annals of Applied Statistics
12(1):310–329, doi:10.1214/17-AOAS1092

Ballani F, Schlather M (2011) A construction principle for multivariate extreme value distributions.

Biometrika 98(3):633–645, doi:10.1093/biomet/asr034

Barnett V (1976) The ordering of multivariate data (with discussion). Journal of the Royal Statistical Soci-

ety Series A (General) 139(3):318–355, doi:10.2307/2344839

Beirlant J, Vynckier P, Teugels JL, et al. (1996) Excess functions and estimation of the extreme-value index.

Bernoulli 2(4):293–318, doi:10.2307/3318416

Beirlant J, Goegebeur Y, Teugels J, Segers J (2004) Statistics of extremes: Theory and applications. Wiley &

Sons

Beirlant J, Dierckx G, Guillou A (2011) Bias-reduced estimators for bivariate tail modelling. Insurance:

Mathematics and Economics 49(1):18–26, doi:10.1016/j.insmatheco.2011.01.010

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

28

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

Bellini F, Di Bernardino E (2017) Risk management with expectiles. The European Journal of Finance

23(6):487–506, doi:10.1080/1351847X.2015.1052150

Belzile LR, Nešlehová JG (2017) Extremal attractors of Liouville copulas. Journal of Multivariate Analysis

160:68–92, doi:10.1016/j.jmva.2017.05.008

Belzile LR, et al. (2022) mev: Modelling extreme values. R package version 1.14
Ben Ghorbal N, Genest C, Nešlehová J (2009) On the Ghoudi, Khoudraji, and Rivest test for extreme-value

dependence. Canadian Journal of Statistics 37(4):534–552, doi:10.1002/cjs.10034

Beranger B, Padoan SA, Sisson SA (2017) Models for extremal dependence derived from skew-symmetric

families. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics 44(1):21–45, doi:10.1111/sjos.12240

Beranger B, Padoan SA, Sisson SA (2021) Estimation and uncertainty quantiﬁcation for extreme quantile

regions. Extremes 24(2):349–375, doi:10.1007/s10687-019-00364-0

Boessenkool B (2017) extremeStat: Extreme value statistics and quantile estimation. R package version

1.4.0

Bücher A, Segers J (2017) On the maximum likelihood estimator for the generalized extreme-value distri-

bution. Extremes 20(4):839–872, doi:10.1007/s10687-017-0292-6

Caeiro F, Gomes MI (2014) On the bootstrap methodology for the estimation of the tail sample fraction.

In: Proceedings of COMPSTAT 2014, pp 545–552

Caeiro F, Gomes MI (2016) Threshold selection in extreme value analysis. In: Dey DK, Yan J (eds) Extreme
Value Modeling and Risk Analysis: Methods and Applications, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp 69–86
Cannon AJ (2010) A ﬂexible nonlinear modelling framework for nonstationary generalized extreme value

analysis in hydroclimatology. Hydrological Processes 24(6):673–685, doi:10.1002/hyp.7506

Caperaa P, Fougères A, Genest C (1997) A non-parametric estimation procedure for bivariate extreme

value copulas. Biometrika 84:567–577, doi:10.1093/biomet/84.3.567

de Carvalho M, Oumow B, Segers J, Warchoł M (2013) A Euclidean likelihood estimator for bi-
variate tail dependence. Communications in Statistics — Theory and Methods 42(7):1176–1192,
doi:10.1080/03610926.2012.709905

del Castillo J, Padilla M (2016) Modelling extreme values by the residual coefﬁcient of variation. Statistics

and Operations Research Transactions 40(2):303–320, doi:10.2436/20.8080.02.45

del Castillo J, na Soler DM, Serra I (2019) ercv: Fitting tails by the empirical residual coefﬁcient of varia-

tion. R package version 1.0.1

Castro-Camilo D, Huser R, Rue H (2021) Practical strategies for GEV-based regression models for ex-

tremes. arXiv:210613110

Cebrián AC, Denuit M, Lambert P (2003) Generalized Pareto ﬁt to the Society of Actuaries’ large claims

database. North American Actuarial Journal 7(3):18–36, doi:10.1080/10920277.2003.10596098

Chandler RE, Bate S (2007) Inference for clustered data using the independence loglikelihood. Biometrika

94(1):167–183, doi:10.1093/biomet/asm015

Chavez-Demoulin V, Davison AC (2005) Generalized additive modelling of sample extremes. Jour-
nal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics) 54(1):207–222, doi:10.1111/j.1467-
9876.2005.00479.x

Chavez-Demoulin V, Davison AC (2012) Modelling time series extremes. REVSTAT 10(1):109–133
Chen M, Ramezan R, Lysy M (2021) Fast approximate inference for spatial extreme value models.

arXiv:211007051

Cheng L, AghaKouchak A, Gilleland E, Katz RW (2014) Non-stationary extreme value analysis in a chang-

ing climate. Climatic Change 127(2):353–369, doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1254-5

Coles SG (2001) An Introduction to Statistical Modeling of Extreme Values. Springer–Verlag, London
Coles SG, Tawn JA (1991) Modelling extreme multivariate events. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society

Series B (Methodological) 53(2):377–392, doi:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1991.tb01830.x

Coles SG, Tawn JA (1996) A Bayesian analysis of extreme rainfall data. Journal of the Royal Statistical So-

ciety Series C (Applied Statistics) 45(4):463–478, doi:10.2307/2986068

Coles SG, Heffernan JE, Tawn JA (1999) Dependence measures for extreme value analyses. Extremes

2(4):339–365, doi:10.1023/A:1009963131610

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

29

Danielsson J, de Haan L, Peng L, de Vries C (2001) Using a bootstrap method to choose the sample fraction
in tail index estimation. Journal of Multivariate Analysis 76(2):226–248, doi:10.1006/jmva.2000.1903
Daouia A, Gijbels I, Stupﬂer G (2022) Extremile regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association

doi:10.1080/01621459.2021.1875837

Davis RA, Mikosch T (2009) The extremogram: A correlogram for extreme events. Bernoulli 15(4):977–

1009, doi:10.3150/09-BEJ213

Davis RA, Mikosch T, Cribben I (2011) Estimating extremal dependence in univariate and multivariate

time series via the extremogram. arXiv:11075592

Davis RA, Mikosch T, Cribben I (2012) Towards estimating extremal serial dependence via the boot-
strapped extremogram. Journal of Econometrics 170(1):142–152, doi:10.1016/j.jeconom.2012.04.003
Davison AC, Padoan SA, Ribatet M (2012) Statistical modeling of spatial extremes. Statistical Science

27(2):161–186, doi:10.1214/11-STS376

Davison AC, Padoan SA, Stupﬂer G (2021) Tail risk inference via expectiles in heavy-tailed time series.

arXiv:200404078 2004.04078

de Carvalho M, Rubio R, Palacios V (2020) extremis: Statistics of extremes. R package version 1.2
de Fondeville R, Belzile L (2021) mvPot: Multivariate peaks-over-threshold modelling for spatial extreme

events. R package version 0.1.5

Dekkers ALM, Einmahl JHJ, de Haan L (1989) A moment estimator for the index of an extreme-value

distribution. The Annals of Statistics 17(4):1833–1855, doi:10.1214/aos/1176347397

Deville Y, IRSN (2016) Renext: Renewal method for extreme values extrapolation. R package version 3.1-0
do Nascimento FF, Moura e Silva WV (2016) MCMC4Extremes: Posterior distribution of extreme value

models in R. R package version 1.1

Dombry C, Ribatet M (2015) Functional regular variations, Pareto processes and peaks over threshold.

Statistics and its Interface 8(1):9–17, doi:10.4310/SII.2015.v8.n1.a2

Dombry C, Éyi Minko F, Ribatet M (2013) Conditional simulation of max-stable processes. Biometrika

100(1):111–124, doi:10.1093/biomet/ass067

Dombry C, Engelke S, Oesting M (2016) Exact simulation of max-stable processes. Biometrika 103(2):303–

317, doi:10.1093/biomet/asw008

Dombry C, Ribatet M, Stoev S (2018) Probabilities of concurrent extremes. Journal of the American Sta-

tistical Association 113(524):1565–1582, doi:10.1080/01621459.2017.1356318

Dupuis D (1999) Exceedances over high thresholds: A guide to threshold selection. Extremes 1(3):251–

261, doi:10.1023/A:1009914915709

Durrieu G, Grama I, Pham QK, Tricot JM (2015) Nonparametric adaptive estimation of conditional prob-
abilities of rare events and extreme quantiles. Extremes 18(3):437–478, doi:10.1007/s10687-015-0219-z
Durrieu G, Grama I, Jaunatre K, Pham QK, Tricot JM (2018) extremefit: A package for extreme quantiles.

Journal of Statistical Software 87(12):1–20, doi:10.18637/jss.v087.i12

Dutang C (2020) RTDE: Robust tail dependence estimation. R package version 0.2-1
Dutang C, Goegebeur Y, Guillou A (2014) Robust and bias-corrected estimation of the coefﬁcient of tail

dependence. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics 57

Dyrrdal AV, Lenkoski A, Thorarinsdottir TL, Stordal F (2014) Bayesian hierarchical modeling of extreme

hourly precipitation in norway. Environmetrics 26(2):89–106, doi:10.1002/env.2301

Eastoe EF, Tawn JA (2009) Modelling non-stationary extremes with application to surface level ozone.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics) 58(1):25–45, doi:10.1111/j.1467-
9876.2008.00638.x

Eddelbuettel D, Balamuta JJ (2018) Extending R with C++: A brief introduction to Rcpp. The American

Statistician 72(1):28–36, doi:10.1080/00031305.2017.1375990

Einmahl JHJ, Segers J (2009) Maximum empirical likelihood estimation of the spectral measure of an

extreme-value distribution. The Annals of Statistics 37(5B):2953–2989, doi:10.1214/08-AOS677

Einmahl JHJ, Kiriliouk A, Segers J (2018) A continuous updating weighted least squares estimator of tail

dependence in high dimensions. Extremes 21(2):205–233, doi:10.1007/s10687-017-0303-7

Engelke S, Hitz AS (2020) Graphical models for extremes (with discussion). Journal of the Royal Statistical

Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 82(4):871–932, doi:10.1111/rssb.12355

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

30

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

Engelke S, de Fondeville R, Oesting M (2019) Extremal behaviour of aggregated data with an application

to downscaling. Biometrika 106(1):127–144, doi:10.1093/biomet/asy052

Falk M, Hüsler J, Reiss RD (2011) Laws of Small Numbers: Extremes and Rare Events, extended edn.

Birkhäuser, doi:10.1007/978-3-0348-0009-9

Fawcett L, Walshaw D (2012) Estimating return levels from serially dependent extremes. Environmetrics

23(3):272–283, doi:10.1002/env.2133

Ferreira A, de Haan L (2014) The generalized Pareto process; with a view towards application and simula-

tion. Bernoulli 20(4):1717–1737, doi:10.3150/13-BEJ538

Ferro CAT, Segers J (2003) Inference for clusters of extreme values. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:

Series B (Statistical Methodology) 65(2):545–556, doi:10.1111/1467-9868.00401

Figueiredo F, Gomes MI, Henriques-Rodrigues L, Miranda MC (2012) A computational study of a quasi-
PORT methodology for VaR based on second-order reduced-bias estimation. Journal of Statistical
Computation and Simulation 82(4):587–602, doi:10.1080/00949655.2010.547196

de Fondeville R, Davison AC (2018) High-dimensional peaks-over-threshold inference. Biometrika

105(3):575–592, doi:10.1093/biomet/asy026

de Fondeville R, Davison AC (2021) Functional peaks-over-threshold analysis. arXiv:200202711
Gabda D, Towe R, Wadsworth J, Tawn J (2012) Discussion of “Statistical modeling of spatial extremes” by
A. C. Davison, S. A. Padoan and M. Ribatet. Statistical Science 27(2):189–192, doi:10.1214/12-STS376B
Gerstengarbe FW, Werner PC (1989) A method for the statistical deﬁnition of extreme-value regions and

their application to meteorological time series. Zeitschrift fuer Meteorologie 39(4)

Gilleland E (2016) Computing software. In: Extreme Value Modeling and Risk Analysis, Chapman and

Hall/CRC, pp 525–536

Gilleland E, Katz R (2016) extRemes 2.0: An extreme value analysis package in R. Journal of Statistical

Software 72(8):1–39, doi:10.18637/jss.v072.i08

Gilleland E, Ribatet M, Stephenson AG (2013) A software review for extreme value analysis. Extremes

16(1):103–119, doi:10.1007/s10687-012-0155-0

Gnecco N, Merga Terefe E, Engelke S (2022) Extremal random forests. arXiv:220112865
Grama I, Spokoiny V, et al. (2008) Statistics of extremes by oracle estimation. The Annals of Statistics

36(4):1619–1648, doi:10.1214/07-AOS535

Grimshaw SD (1993) Computing maximum likelihood estimates for the generalized Pareto distribution.

Technometrics 35(2):185–191, doi:10.1080/00401706.1993.10485040

Gudendorf G, Segers J (2012) Nonparametric estimation of multivariate extreme-value copulas. Journal

of Statistical Planning and Inference 142(12):3073–3085, doi:10.1016/j.jspi.2012.05.007
de Haan L, Ferreira A (2006) Extreme Value Theory: An Introduction. Springer, New York
de Haan L, Drees H, Ferreira A (2004) On maximum likelihood estimation of the extreme value index. The

Annals of Applied Probability 14(3):1179–1201, doi:10.1214/105051604000000279

Hall P (1990) Using the bootstrap to estimate mean squared error and select smoothing parame-
ter in nonparametric problems. Journal of Multivariate Analysis 32(2):177–203, doi:10.1016/0047-
259X(90)90080-2

Hall P, Welsh AH (1985) Adaptive estimates of parameters of regular variation. The Annals of Statistics

13(1):331–341, doi:10.1214/aos/1176346596

Hees K, Nayak S, Straka P (2021) Statistical inference for inter-arrival times of extreme events in bursty

time series. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 155:107096, doi:10.1016/j.csda.2020.107096

Heffernan JE, Stephenson AG (2018) ismev: An introduction to statistical modeling of extreme values. R

package version 1.42

Heffernan JE, Tawn JA (2004) A conditional approach for multivariate extreme values (with discus-
sion). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 66(3):497–546,
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9868.2004.02050.x

Hill B (1975) A simple general approach to inference about the tail of a distribution. Annals of Statistics

3:1163–1174, doi:10.1214/aos/1176343247

Ho ZWO, Dombry C (2019) Simple models for multivariate regular variation and the Hüsler–Reiss Pareto

distribution. Journal of Multivariate Analysis 173:525–550, doi:10.1016/j.jmva.2019.04.008

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

31

Hosking JRM (1990) l -moments: Analysis and estimation of distributions using linear combinations
of order statistics. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B (Methodological) 52(1):105–124,
doi:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1990.tb01775.x

Hosking JRM (2019) L-moments. R package, version 2.8
Hosking JRM, Wallis JR (1987) Parameter and quantile estimation for the generalized Pareto distribution.

Technometrics 29(3):339–349, doi:10.1080/00401706.1987.10488243

Hosking JRM, Wallis JR (1997) Regional Frequency Analysis: An Approach Based on L-Moments. Cam-

bridge University Press, doi:10.1017/CBO9780511529443

Hu Y, Scarrott C (2018) evmix: An R package for extreme value mixture modeling, threshold estima-
tion and boundary corrected kernel density estimation. Journal of Statistical Software 84(5):1–27,
doi:10.18637/jss.v084.i05

Huser R, Wadsworth JL (2019) Modeling spatial processes with unknown extremal dependence class.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 114(525):434–444, doi:10.1080/01621459.2017.1411813
Huser R, Wadsworth JL (2022) Advances in statistical modeling of spatial extremes. Wiley Interdisciplinary

Reviews: Computational Statistics 14(e1537), doi:10.1002/wics.1537

Huser R, Dombry C, Ribatet M, Genton MG (2019) Full likelihood inference for max-stable data. Stat

8(1):1–14, doi:10.1002/sta4.218

Huser R, Opitz T, Thibaud E (2021) Max-inﬁnitely divisible models and inference for spatial extremes.

Scandinavian Journal of Statistics 48(1):321–348, doi:10.1111/sjos.12491

Hüsler J, Reiss RD (1989) Maxima of normal random vectors: between independence and complete de-

pendence. Statist Probab Lett 7(4):283–286, doi:10.1016/0167-7152(89)90106-5

Keef C, Tawn JA, Lamb R (2013) Estimating the probability of widespread ﬂood events. Environmetrics

24(1):13–21, doi:10.1002/env.2190

Kiener P (2022) RWsearch: Lazy search in R packages, task views, CRAN, the web. all-in-one download. R

package version 5.0.5

Kiriliouk A, Rootzén H, Segers J, Wadsworth JL (2019) Peaks over thresholds modeling with multivariate
generalized Pareto distributions. Technometrics 61(1):123–135, doi:10.1080/00401706.2018.1462738
Kojadinovic I, Yan J (2010) Nonparametric rank-based tests of bivariate extreme-value dependence. Jour-

nal of Multivariate Analysis 101(9):2234–2249, doi:10.1016/j.jmva.2010.05.004

Kojadinovic I, Segers J, Yan J (2011) Large-sample tests of extreme-value dependence for multivariate

copulas. Canadian Journal of Statistics 39(4):703–720, doi:10.1002/cjs.10110

Krainski E, Gómez-Rubio V, Bakka H, Lenzi A, Castro-Camilo D, Simpson D, Lindgren F, Rue H (2018)
Advanced spatial modeling with stochastic partial differential equations using R and INLA. Chapman
and Hall/CRC

Ledford AW, Tawn JA (1996) Statistics for near independence in multivariate extreme values. Biometrika

83(1):169–187, doi:10.1093/biomet/83.1.169

Ledford AW, Tawn JA (2003) Diagnostics for dependence within time series extremes. Journal of the Royal

Statistical Society Series B (Statistical Methodology) 65(2):521–543, doi:10.1111/1467-9868.00400

Lilienthal J (2022) TLMoments: Calculate TL-moments and convert them to distribution parameters. R

package version 0.7.5.3

Lindgren F, Rue H, Lindström J (2011) An explicit link between Gaussian ﬁelds and Gaussian Markov
random ﬁelds: the stochastic partial differential equation approach. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 73(4):423–498, doi:10.1111/j.1467-9868.2011.00777.x

Lugrin T, Davison AC, Tawn JA (2016) Bayesian uncertainty management in temporal dependence of ex-

tremes. Extremes 19(3), doi:10.1007/s10687-016-0258-0

Manjunath BG, Caeiro F (2013) evt0: Mean of order p, peaks over random threshold Hill and high quan-

tile estimates. R package version 1.1-3

Marcon G, Padoan S, Naveau P, Muliere P, Segers J (2017) Multivariate nonparametric estimation of the
Pickands dependence function using Bernstein polynomials. Journal of Statistical Planning and Infer-
ence 183:1–17, doi:10.1016/j.jspi.2016.10.004

Martins ES, Stedinger JR (2000) Generalized maximum-likelihood generalized extreme-value quantile es-
timators for hydrologic data. Water Resources Research 36(3):737–744, doi:10.1029/1999WR900330

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

32

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

McNeil A, Frey R, Embrechts P (2015) Quantitative Risk Management: Concepts, Techniques and Tools -

Revised Edition. Princeton Series in Finance, Princeton University Press

Mhalla L, Opitz T, Chavez-Demoulin V (2019) Exceedance-based nonlinear regression of tail dependence.

Extremes 22(3):523–552, doi:10.1007/s10687-019-00342-6

Munasinghe R, Kossinna P, Jayasinghe D, Wijeratne D (2019) ptsuite: Tail index estimation for power

law distributions. R package version 1.0.0

Nadarajah S, Chan S, Afuecheta E (2013) VaRES: Computes value at risk and expected shortfall for over

100 parametric distributions. R package version 1.0

Naveau P, Huser R, Ribereau P, Hannart A (2016) Modeling jointly low, moderate, and heavy
intensities without a threshold selection. Water Resources Research 52(4):2753–2769,

rainfall
doi:10.1002/2015WR018552

Newey WK, Powell JL (1987) Asymmetric least squares estimation and testing. Econometrica 55(4):819–

847, doi:10.2307/1911031

Nikoloulopoulos AK, Joe H, Li H (2009) Extreme value properties of multivariate t copulas. Extremes

12(2):129–148, doi:10.1007/s10687-008-0072-4

Northrop PJ (2015) An efﬁcient semiparametric maxima estimator of the extremal index. Extremes

18(4):585–603, doi:10.1007/s10687-015-0221-5

Northrop PJ (2020) revdbayes: Ratio-of-uniforms sampling for Bayesian extreme value analysis. R pack-

age version 1.3.9

Northrop PJ (2022) lite: Likelihood-based inference for time series extremes. R package version 1.0.0
Northrop PJ, Attalides N (2016) Posterior propriety in Bayesian extreme value analyses using reference

priors. Statistica Sinica 26(2):721–743, doi:10.5705/ss.2014.034

Northrop PJ, Attalides N (2020) threshr: Threshold selection and uncertainty for extreme value analysis.

R package version 1.0.3

Northrop PJ, Christodoulides C (2022) exdex: Estimation of the extremal index. R package version 1.2.1
Northrop PJ, Coleman CL (2014) Improved threshold diagnostic plots for extreme value analyses. Ex-

tremes 17(2):289–303, doi:10.1007/s10687-014-0183-z

Northrop PJ, Yin C (2021) lax: Loglikelihood adjustment for extreme value models. R package version

1.2.0

Northrop PJ, Jonathan P, Randell D (2016) Threshold modeling of nonstationary extremes. In: Dey DK,
Yan J (eds) Extreme Value Modeling and Risk Analysis: Methods and Applications, CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL, pp 87–108

Northrop PJ, Attalides N, Jonathan P (2017) Cross-validatory extreme value threshold selection and un-
certainty with application to ocean storm severity. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C
(Applied Statistics) 66(1):93–120, doi:10.1111/rssc.12159

Noven R, Veraart A, Gandy A (2018) A latent trawl process model for extreme values. Journal of Energy

Markets 11(3):1–24, doi:10.21314/JEM.2018.179

Oesting M (2018) Equivalent representations of max-stable processes via (cid:96)p -norms. Journal of Applied

Probability 55(1):54–68, doi:10.1017/jpr.2018.5

Opitz T, Huser R, Bakka H, Rue H (2018) INLA goes extreme: Bayesian tail regression for the estimation of

high spatio-temporal quantiles. Extremes 21(3):441–462, doi:10.1007/s10687-018-0324-x

Ossberger J (2020) tea: Threshold estimation approaches. R package version 1.1
Padoan S, Stupﬂer G (2020) ExtremeRisks: Extreme risk measures. R package version 0.0.4
Padoan SA, Bevilacqua M (2015) Analysis of random ﬁelds using CompRandFld. Journal of Statistical Soft-

ware 63(9):1–27, doi:10.18637/jss.v063.i09

Padoan SA, Stupﬂer G (2022) Joint inference on extreme expectiles for multivariate heavy-tailed distribu-

tions. Bernoulli 28(2):1021 – 1048, doi:10.3150/21-BEJ1375

Papastathopoulos I, Tawn JA (2013) Extended generalised Pareto models for tail estimation. Journal of

Statistical Planning and Inference 143(1):131–143, doi:10.1016/j.jspi.2012.07.001

Pfaff B, McNeil A (2018) evir: Extreme values in R. R package version 1.7-4
Pfaff B, McNeil A (2020) QRM: Provides R-language code to examine quantitative risk management con-

cepts. R package version 0.4-31

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

33

Pickands J (1981) Multivariate extreme value distributions. In: Proceedings 43rd, Session of International

Statistical Institution

Plummer M, Best N, Cowles K, Vines K (2006) CODA: Convergence diagnosis and output analysis for

MCMC. R News 6(1):7–11

Prescott P, Walden AT (1980) Maximum likelihood estimation of the parameters of the generalized

extreme-value distribution. Biometrika 67(3):723–724, doi:10.1093/biomet/67.3.723

Reich BJ, Shaby BA (2012) A hierarchical max-stable spatial model for extreme precipitation. The Annals

of Applied Statistics 6(4):1430–1451, doi:10.1214/12-AOAS591

Reich BJ, Shaby BA (2016) Bayesian inference for extreme value modelling. In: Dipak K Dey JY (ed) Ex-
treme Value Modeling and Risk Analysis: Methods and Applications, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp
131–151

Resnick S, Stˇaricˇa C (1997) Smoothing the Hill estimator. Advances in Applied Probability pp 271–293,

doi:10.2307/1427870

Resnick SI (1987) Extreme values, regular variation, and point processes, Applied Probability. A Series of

the Applied Probability Trust, vol 4. Springer–Verlag, New York

Reynkens T, Verbelen R (2020) ReIns: Functions from “Reinsurance: Actuarial and Statistical Aspects”. R

package version 1.0.10

Ribatet M (2022) SpatialExtremes: Modelling spatial extremes. R package version 2.1-0
Rootzén H, Tajvidi N (2006) Multivariate generalized Pareto distributions. Bernoulli 12(5):917–930,

doi:10.3150/bj/1161614952

Rootzén H, Zholud D (2017) Human life is unlimited — but short (with discussion). Extremes 20(4):713–

728

Rootzén H, Segers J, Wadsworth JL (2018) Multivariate peaks over thresholds models. Extremes 21(1):115–

145, doi:10.1007/s10687-017-0294-4

Ruckdeschel P, Kohl M, Horbenko N (2019) RobExtremes: Optimally robust estimation for extreme value

distributions. R package version 1.2.0

Rudd EM, Jain LP, Scheirer WJ, Boult TE (2018) The extreme value machine. IEEE Transactions on Pattern

Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI) 40(3):762–768, doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2017.2707495

Rue H, Martino S, Chopin N (2009) Approximate Bayesian inference for latent Gaussian models by using
integrated nested Laplace approximations (with discussion). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
Series B (Statistical Methodology) 71(2):319–392, doi:10.1111/j.1467-9868.2008.00700.x

Sabourin A, Naveau P (2014) Bayesian Dirichlet mixture model for multivariate extremes: A re-
parametrization. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 71:542–567, doi:10.1016/j.csda.2013.04.021
Santos PA, Alves MF, Gomes M (2006) Peaks over random threshold methodology for tail index and quan-

tile estimation. REVSTAT 4(3):227–247

Scarrott C, MacDonald A (2012) A review of extreme value threshold estimation and uncertainty quantiﬁ-

cation. REVSTAT 10(1):33–60
Schlather M (2002) Models
doi:10.1023/A:1020977924878

for

stationary max-stable random ﬁelds. Extremes 5(1):33–44,

Schlather M, Tawn JA (2003) A dependence measure for multivariate and spatial extreme values: Proper-

ties and inference. Biometrika 90(1):139–156, doi:10.1093/biomet/90.1.139

Schlather M, Malinowski A, Menck PJ, Oesting M, Strokorb K (2015) Analysis, simulation and prediction
of multivariate random ﬁelds with package RandomFields. Journal of Statistical Software 63(8):1–25,
doi:10.18637/jss.v063.i08

Sebille Q (2016) hkevp: Spatial extreme value analysis with the hierarchical model of Reich and Shaby

(2012). R package version 1.1.4

Sharkey P, Tawn JA (2017) A Poisson process reparameterisation for Bayesian inference for extremes. Ex-

tremes 20(2):239–263, doi:10.1007/s10687-016-0280-2

Simpson D, Rue H, Riebler A, Martins TG, Sørbye SH (2017) Penalising model component complexity:
A principled, practical approach to constructing priors. Statistical Science 32(1):1–28, doi:10.1214/16-
STS576

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

34

Belzile, Dutang, Northrop and Opitz

Simpson ES, Opitz T, Wadsworth JL (2020) High-dimensional modeling of spatial and spatio-temporal

conditional extremes using INLA and the SPDE approach. arXiv:201104486

Smith RL (1985) Maximum likelihood estimation in a class of nonregular cases. Biometrika 72(1):67–90,

doi:10.1093/biomet/72.1.67

Smith RL, Weissman I (1994) Estimating the extremal index. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series

B (Methodological) 56(3):515–528, doi:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1994.tb01997.x

Smith RL, Tawn JA, Coles SG (1997) Markov chain models for threshold exceedances. Biometrika

84(2):249–268, doi:10.1093/biomet/84.2.249

Southworth H, Heffernan JE, Metcalfe PD (2020) texmex: Statistical modelling of extreme values. R pack-

age version 2.4.8

Stephenson A, Ribatet M (2014) evdbayes: Bayesian analysis in extreme value theory. R package version

1.1-1

Stephenson AG (2002) evd: Extreme value distributions. R News 2(2)
Stephenson AG (2003) Simulating multivariate extreme value distributions of logistic type. Extremes

6(1):49–59, doi:10.1023/A:1026277229992

Stephenson AG (2016) Bayesian inference for extreme value modelling. In: Dey DK, Yan J (eds) Extreme
Value Modeling and Risk Analysis: Methods and Applications, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp 257–280
Stephenson AG, Gilleland E (2006) Software for the analysis of extreme events: The current state and

future directions. Extremes 8:87–109, doi:10.1007/s10687-006-7962-0

Stephenson AG, Tawn JA (2004) Bayesian inference for extremes: Accounting for the three extremal types.

Extremes 7(4), doi:10.1007/s10687-004-3479-6

Stephenson AG, Tawn JA (2005) Exploiting occurrence times in likelihood inference for componentwise

maxima. Biometrika 92(1):213–227, doi:10.1093/biomet/92.1.213

Süveges M (2007) Likelihood estimation of the extremal index. Extremes 10(1):41–55, doi:10.1007/s10687-

007-0034-2

Süveges M, Davison AC (2010) Model misspeciﬁcation in peaks over threshold analysis. The Annals of

Applied Statistics 4(1):203–221, doi:10.1214/09-AOAS292

Tajvidi N, Turlach B (2018) A general approach to generate random variates for multivariate copulae.

Australian & New Zealand Journal of Statistics 60(1):140–155, doi:10.1111/anzs.12209

Team SD (2022) RStan: the R interface to Stan. R package version 2.21.5
Thibaud E, Opitz T (2015) Efﬁcient inference and simulation for elliptical Pareto processes. Biometrika

102(4):855–870, doi:10.1093/biomet/asv045

Thibaud E, Aalto J, Cooley DS, Davison AC, Heikkinen J (2016) Bayesian inference for the Brown–Resnick
process, with an application to extreme low temperatures. The Annals of Applied Statistics 10(4):2303–
2324, doi:10.1214/16-AOAS980

Thompson P, Cai Y, Reeve D, Stander J (2009) Automated threshold selection methods for extreme wave

analysis. Coastal Engineering 56(10):1013–1021, doi:10.1016/j.coastaleng.2009.06.003

Ulrich J, Jurado OE, Peter M, Scheibel M, Rust HW (2020) Estimating IDF curves consistently over dura-

tions with spatial covariates. Water 12(11:3119), doi:10.3390/w12113119

Vehtari A, Gelman A, Gabry J (2017) Practical Bayesian model evaluation using leave-one-out cross-

validation and WAIC. Statistics and Computing 27:1413–1432, doi:10.1007/s11222-016-9696-4

Vehtari A, Gabry J, Magnusson M, Yao Y, Bürkner PC, Paananen T, Gelman A (2020) loo: Efﬁcient leave-

one-out cross-validation and WAIC for Bayesian models. R package version 2.4.1

Velthoen J, Dombry C, Cai JJ, Engelke S (2021) Gradient boosting for extreme quantile regression.

arXiv:210300808

Vignotto E, Engelke S (2020) Extreme value theory for anomaly detection – the GPD classiﬁer. Extremes

23(4):501–520, doi:10.1007/s10687-020-00393-0

Wadsworth JL (2015) On the occurrence times of componentwise maxima and bias in likelihood inference

for multivariate max-stable distributions. Biometrika 102(3):705–711, doi:10.1093/biomet/asv029

Wadsworth JL (2016) Exploiting structure of maximum likelihood estimators for extreme value threshold

selection. Technometrics 58(1):116–126, doi:10.1080/00401706.2014.998345

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

Author’s Original Version

A modeler’s guide to extreme value software

35

Wadsworth JL, Tawn J (2019) Higher-dimensional spatial extremes via single-site conditioning.

arXiv:191206560

Wadsworth JL, Tawn JA (2013) A new representation for multivariate tail probabilities. Bernoulli

19(5B):2689–2714, doi:10.3150/12-BEJ471

Wager S (2014) Subsampling extremes: From block maxima to smooth tail estimation. Journal of Multi-

variate Analysis 130:335–353, doi:10.1016/j.jmva.2014.06.010

Weissman I (1978) Estimation of parameters and large quantiles based on the k largest observations.

Journal of the American Statistical Association 73:812–815, doi:10.1080/01621459.1978.10480104
Wood S (2017) Generalized Additive Models: An Introduction with R, 2nd edn. Chapman and Hall/CRC
Wood SN, Pya N, Säfken B (2016) Smoothing parameter and model

selection for gen-
the American Statistical Association 111(516):1548–1563,

smooth models.

eral
Journal of
doi:10.1080/01621459.2016.1180986

Wuertz D, Setz T, Chalabi Y (2017) fExtremes: Rmetrics - Modelling extreme events in ﬁnance. R package

version 3042.82

Yan J (2007) Enjoy the joy of copulas: With a package copula. Journal of Statistical Software 21(4):1–21,

doi:10.18637/jss.v021.i04

Yee TW, Stephenson AG (2007) Vector generalized linear and additive extreme value models. Extremes

10:1–19, doi:10.1007/s10687-007-0032-4

Youngman BD (2020) evgam: An R package for generalized additive extreme value models
Zhang J, Stephens MA (2009) A new and efﬁcient estimation method for the generalized Pareto distribu-

tion. Technometrics 51(3):316–325, doi:10.1198/tech.2009.08017

Zheng F, Leonard M, Westra S (2015) Efﬁcient joint probability analysis of ﬂood risk. Journal of Hydroin-

formatics 17(4):584–597, doi:10.2166/hydro.2015.052

Author’s Original Version

preprint, version of May 17, 2022

