Narratives: the Unforeseen Inﬂuencer of Privacy
Concerns

Ze Shi Li, Manish Sihag, Nowshin Nawar Arony, Joao Bezerra Junior, Thanh Phan, Neil Ernst, Daniela Damian
Department of Computer Science
University of Victoria, Victoria, Canada
{lize, manishsihag, nowshinarony, joaobatistajr, thanhpc, nernst, danielad}@uvic.ca

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

1
1

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
0
6
5
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Privacy requirements are increasingly growing in
importance as new privacy regulations are enacted. To adequately
manage privacy requirements, organizations not only need to
comply with privacy regulations, but also consider user pri-
vacy concerns. In this exploratory study, we used Reddit as a
source to understand users’ privacy concerns regarding software
applications. We collected 4.5 million posts from Reddit and
classiﬁed 129075 privacy related posts, which is a non-negligible
number of privacy discussions. Next, we clustered these posts and
identiﬁed 9 main areas of privacy concerns. We use the concept
of narratives from economics (i.e., posts that can go viral) to
explain the phenomenon of what and when users change in their
discussion of privacy. We further found that privacy discussions
change over time and privacy regulatory events have a short
term impact on such discussions. However, narratives have a
notable impact on what and when users discussed about privacy.
Considering narratives could guide software organizations in
eliciting the relevant privacy concerns before developing them
as privacy requirements.

Index Terms—requirements elicitation, privacy concerns, nar-

ratives, forum mining, crowd data

I. INTRODUCTION

Privacy is becoming, arguably more than ever, a critical
non-functional requirement for software products and develop-
ment organizations. Its importance is evident from the recent
enactment of privacy regulations in jurisdictions worldwide
[1]–[4]. Non-compliance with these privacy regulations can
result in heavy penalties for software organizations [1]. In
addition, organizations are also amenable to users who are
more vocal than ever with concerns related to privacy breaches
and infringements that captured global attention [5]–[7]. User
concerns about their privacy are warranted and understandable.
After all, serious personal data such as personally identiﬁable
information or credit card information can be exposed when
software fails to adequately protect or purposefully misuses
personal data.

Although seemingly separate, privacy regulations and user
concerns are in fact interrelated. For example, recent privacy
regulations such as the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) and California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) are
impacting user privacy concerns. For an organization that
must comply with privacy regulations, it is important that it
recognizes and complies with not only regulatory mandated
requirements, but also shared user concerns. This is however
challenging for many organizations, particularly small resource
constrained ones, that struggle with privacy compliance and

must strike a delicate balance between regulatory compliance
and business requirements. Consequently, user involvement
and feedback is becoming an important avenue for organi-
zations to identify areas of privacy concerns that users may
have about their software, as well as privacy requirements that
could be developed to address these concerns [8]. Determining
when and what concerns users express about privacy can be
critical success factors for an organization’s privacy measures.
Requirements engineering research has recognized the value
of monitoring user feedback for the development of product
requirements, though advances had been largely in identifying
user feedback and functional requirements from app stores and
forums [9]–[11].

Furthermore, user concerns may be inﬂuenced by Narratives
– a concept known in economics [12], [13], [14] as “a song,
joke, theory, explanation, or plan that has emotional resonance
and that can easily be conveyed in casual conversation” [15].
With the increase of social media platforms engaging millions
of users, stories are being shared and retold thousands of
times forming different narratives [16], which further impacts
the user discussions on platforms. Thus, narratives can be
leveraged to identify the user feedback related to a software
product.

We report from an empirical study of Reddit as it allows
for rich discussion between users in online communities. In
Reddit each community is known as a “subreddit” and allows
users to engage in online discourse about a speciﬁc topic. A
software developing organization can beneﬁt from monitoring
their associated subreddit and eliciting potential requirements
from user feedback.

Posts in a Reddit software forum have a higher character
limit for their discussion as compared to app store reviews.
This allows users to provide a more detailed review or longer
discussion that covers multiple facets about a software, par-
ticularly non-functional requirements like privacy, which may
be difﬁcult to describe succinctly.

Hence, our study was guided by three research questions:

RQ1 To what extent do users discuss privacy in software

product forums?

RQ2 What privacy concerns do users discuss in software

product forums such as Reddit?

RQ3 How do the number of privacy discussions change over

time?

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
We collected 4.5 million posts from Reddit and used
machine learning to classify whether a post is privacy or
non-privacy related. We identiﬁed 129,075 privacy related
posts and which, by applying clustering techniques, revealed
9 main areas of privacy concerns such as “privacy issues
and recommendations” and ”privacy policy and permissions”
among others. We then mapped these posts over time to
see how privacy discussions changed over time, and sought
reasons for variations in user concerns.

Our process of arriving at narratives was started as part of
our preliminary analysis on the privacy posts and examination
of outlier behaviour in user discussions over time. We inves-
tigated if the privacy regulatory events could be the probable
reason behind these trends. However, these events could not
explain the outlier behaviour in the user discussion. To further
understand the factors that impacted such outlier behaviour in
posts related to a software product we conducted a manual
analysis and identiﬁed narratives, a concept that has been
studied in ﬁelds like economics, to explain a potential impact
on the outlier behaviour of posts. We conducted a top-down
as well as a bottom-up approach to explore if narratives do
have an impact on the discussions. Through this exploratory
analysis (Telegram vs WhatsApp and Firefox vs Chrome),
we hypothesized that narratives surrounding software products
could play a role in shaping the user perception eventually
impacting the user count on particular software products and
draw implications for software developing organizations.
Our work brings the following empirical contributions:
• automated identiﬁcation of privacy concerns in software

product forums through machine learning;

• empirical evidence on categories and temporal trends of

privacy concerns in online communities in Reddit;

• hypothesizes the inﬂuence of narratives on privacy con-
cerns, which may differ from that of the more objective
privacy policies.

II. METHODOLOGY

Fig. 1: Research Process

We conducted an exploratory study on user privacy concerns
and changes in privacy discussion over time in software
product related user communities using Reddit as our source.
Our methodology is summarized by Figure 1.

A. Data Collection

To answer our RQs we ﬁrst collected data from 66 online
communities (i.e., subreddits). 62 of the 66 are communities
that are associated with popular software products such as
WhatsApp, Telegram, AirBnb, or Instagram. We selected these
software related subreddits because these subreddits should
contain user discussions about the relevant software products.
For example,
if a user had a complaint or concern with
a software like WhatsApp, they should in theory expound
such issues in the WhatsApp subreddit. As our study was
exploratory, we selected subreddits of large, well-known soft-
ware products. We did not select subreddits for smaller, niche-
speciﬁc software and we note that these smaller software may
be a source for a future study. We identiﬁed a further four

privacy speciﬁc subreddits, as we thought they might contain
many user discussions about privacy regulations that we could
analyze for RQ3.

We collected each subreddit’s posts via Pushshift [17],
which is a large data store of all Reddit posts and comments
and has a public facing API that supports ease of download-
ing for data analysis. In total, we collected 6,052,258 posts
across the 66 subreddits. For the 62 software product related
subreddits, we collected 5,890,182 posts, and for the 4 privacy
related subreddits, we collected 162,076 posts. We looked only
at the original (possibly edited) post, not followup comments.
For a complete set of subreddits, please visit our replication
package at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6272629.

After collection, we ﬁltered the data to collect all posts
between the creation of the subreddit and December 2021.
We removed any duplicate posts and any post that was either
deleted by the author or removed by a moderator of the subred-

2

Data Collection and PreprocessingManual LabellingIdentify list ofsubreddits toacquire user postsScrape Reddit userposts fromsubreddits(6052258 posts)Remove duplicates,deleted, or removedposts (4488467posts remain)Pair coding of 400postsIndividual coding of4345 postsRQ1:  To what extent do users discussprivacy in software product forums?Train universalsentence encoder(USE) classifier onmanual labelledpostsApply classifier onremaining data(4483722 posts)Manually verify arandom sample of1000 postsclassified byclassifier RQ2: What privacy concerns do usersdiscuss in software product forums?Manually verify andaggregate privacyconcerns Perform clustering ofeach subreddit categoryusing DistilBERTencoding, UMAPdimension reduction,and K-means clusteringGroup subreddits bycategoriesRQ3: How do the number of privacydiscussions change over time?Graph and analyzeusers' privacy postsover time Map timeline ofprivacy regulationswith user concerns dit. Our data was left with 4,488,467 posts and we combined
the title and text of each post to use for classiﬁcation.

B. Manual Labelling

We manually labelled a ground truth dataset for training.
We collated a list of privacy terms that we believe would
be relevant such as “GDPR”, “CCPA”, “privacy” ,“leak”,
“consent” and “unlawful”, [1] and ran each post against the
list of privacy terms. Based on the privacy term count, we
randomly sampled 1721 0-privacy-term posts and 3024 1-or-
more-privacy-term-posts. Two of the co-authors of this pa-
per, with experience in privacy requirements and requirement
elicitation in industry, performed four rounds of pair coding
before individually coding the rest of the posts. The intent of
pair coding was to establish a shared understanding of what it
meant for a post to be privacy or non-privacy related. During
pair coding, the inter-rater agreement were 77%, 89%, 83%,
85% and the Cohen’s Kappa were 0.39, 0.53, 0.51, and 0.60,
which our agreement levels hovered around moderate levels
of agreement [18].

Subsequent to the pair coding, the two co-authors individu-
ally coded a further 4345 posts. Of the manually labelled 4745
posts, 794 posts were labelled as privacy related and 3951
were labelled as non-privacy related. Since a user may write
a post containing several critiques including, but not limited
to, privacy, we labelled a post as privacy related as long as
part of the post referred to privacy. For example, “I switched
from my former browser to Firefox recently... mainly for the
very useful add ons available. One set of add ons I added has
privacy in mind... one of these privacy focused add ons... was
Multi-Acc Containers...” (Firefox) was labelled as a privacy
post.

C. Training the Classiﬁer to Identify if Users Discuss About
Privacy in Software Product Forums

1) Model: We trained a classiﬁer to help us answer (RQ1)
and to identify privacy related posts that we could analyze for
user privacy concerns (RQ2) and change in number of privacy
discussion over time (RQ3). Previous work using Reddit data
[19] applied bag-of-words [20] and TF-IDF [21]. However,
Devine et al. [22] compared text embedding techniques for an-
alyzing user feedback and found that pre-trained deep learning
models, particularly Universal Sentence Encoder (USE) [23],
performed much better than word frequency models like TF-
IDF. The model we trained using the base USE model with the
transformer encoding mode [24] had a precision, recall, and
AUC of 0.84, 0.8, and 0.91. Privacy is not a common topic
in app reviews or users posts, so our data was imbalanced.
Like previous work on Reddit [19], we used the oversampling
technique SMOTE [25] to address the imbalance.

2) Manual Veriﬁcation of Classiﬁed Results: After running
our USE model
to identify whether users discuss privacy
in software product forums via Reddit (RQ1), we randomly
sampled 1000 posts from the data that contained 500 labelled
privacy and 500 non-privacy. We manually labelled the 1000
posts to check the performance of our USE model. We did

not have access to the model’s predictions until verifying the
classiﬁed results was ﬁnished to reduce bias. Our USE model
achieved a precision, recall, and accuracy of 96.8%, 96.8%,
and 96.7% on the balanced random sample.

D. Identifying the Privacy Concerns Users Discuss

We clustered similar privacy posts to ﬁnd main areas of
privacy concerns to answer (RQ2). We ﬁrst grouped similar
software together into categories as shown by Table I. For
(RQ2), we implemented clustering on the posts from each
of the categories to ﬁnd out the primary privacy concerns.
Next, we found the best number of cluster using the silhouette
coefﬁcient as the metric before combining similar clusters
across different categories into fewer clusters. We used Distil-
BERT [26] for embedding the data and performed dimension
reduction using UMAP [27] as part of clustering of our
data. Moreover, UMAP is a general purpose machine learning
dimension reduction algorithm that is both fast and scalable
[27]. After dimension reduction, we conducted clustering via
K-means [28] and tried clustering with 2 to 10 clusters for
each category. Clustering with more clusters (e.g. 20 clusters)
can result in a larger number of privacy concerns, but our goal
was to analyse the primary categories of privacy concerns so
we choose 2 - 10 clusters. We compared the results of different
clustering and embedding using the silhouettes coefﬁcient,
which represents the distance of each point to the center of
its cluster and with the closest neighboring cluster [29]. We
randomly sampled a minimum of 25 posts from each cluster
to compare with other clusters and merge similar clusters to
collate common concerns.

TABLE I: Categories used to group similar subreddits

Category

Subreddit

General Privacy
Social Media

Tools

Platform

Entertainment

Financial
Shopping
Food and Drink
Voice Assistant
Travel

lineapp,

facebook,

instagram,

discordapp,

degoogle, privacy, PrivacyGuides, privacytoolsIO,
facebookmessenger,
Bumble,
Fiverr,
linkedin, MicrosoftTeams,
Pinterest, signal, SLACK, snapchat, Telegram, Tinder,
Twitter, Upwork, WeChat, whatsapp
androidapps, chrome, duckduckgo, duolingo, ﬁrefox,
Google, kahoot, miband, operabrowser, zoom
Android, chromeos, microsoft, ios, windows, windows8,
windows10, Windows11,
DisneyPlus, HBOMAX, netﬂix, soundcloud, spotify,
youtube, YoutubeMusic
CoinBase, CashApp, venmo
Aliexpress, amazon, Ebay, Wish
deliveroos, doordash, McDonalds, starbucks, UberEats
amazonecho, googlehome, Siri
AirBnb, GoogleMaps, Lyft

E. Mapping User Privacy Posts Over Time

We mapped posts over time to observe the change in number
of privacy discussion over time (RQ3). We plotted the number
of posts based on monthly time intervals. Our rationale for
plotting the number of posts over time was to observe if
privacy regulations like the GDPR had any noticeable impacts
on the number of privacy posts. Speciﬁcally, we wanted to
visualize if there was an substantial increase of privacy posts

3

TABLE II: Result from classifying posts from all subreddits

Subreddits

Software

62
Subreddits

Classiﬁcation

Count

Percentage

Product

Non-Privacy

4274892

4 General Privacy Sub-
reddits

Privacy

78979

Non-Privacy

134596

Privacy

50096

Total Privacy
Total Posts

129075
4488467

98.2%

1.8%

96.3%

3.7%

2.9%
100%

when privacy regulations like the GDPR became law. Finally,
we normalized changes in privacy and non-privacy posts by
their median as shown by Figure 2.

III. FINDINGS
A. RQ1: To what extent do users discuss privacy in software
product forums?

The results of applying our classiﬁer are shown in Table
II: we identiﬁed 129,075 privacy related posts in our entire
dataset of 4,488,467 total posts. Privacy is represented by 2.9%
of all posts and 1.8% if only considering software product
subreddits. 1.8% is higher than the 0.12% found in prior work
on Android app reviews [30], but this was anticipated because
users have more space to comment on multiple concerns in
Reddit posts, and the Android sample was not focused on
privacy. Popular social media software such as WhatsApp and
Telegram not only had high numbers of privacy posts, but also
had a high proportion of privacy posts.

B. RQ2: What privacy concerns do users discuss in software
product forums?

TABLE III: Major privacy concerns and associated subreddit
categories (from Table I)

Privacy Concerns

Post Count

Subreddit Categories

Privacy
Recommendations

Issues

and

39771 (31%)

Privacy Policy and
Permissions

27128 (21%)

Information

Privacy Compromise
Experiences
Personal
Exposures
Unconﬁrmed Privacy
Compromises
Bug and Suspicious
Activity Complaints
Warnings and Advi-
sories
Privacy Breach Ef-
fects
Phishing Emails

7037 (5%)

23986 (19%)

10715 (8%)

15501 (12%)

3829 (3%)

226 (0.2%)

Tools,
Entertainment,
(8)
Food
Social
and Drink,
Media, Travel, Voice Assistant,
Platform, General Privacy
(8) Tools, Financial, Shopping,
Social Media, Travel, Voice As-
sistant, Platform, General Pri-
vacy
(5) Entertainment, Tools, Food
and Drink, Financial, Platform
(4) Food and Drink, Shopping,
Social Media, General Privacy
(4) Financial, Shopping, Social
Media, Travel
(3) Entertainment, Financial,
Shopping
(3) Entertainment, Food and
Drink, Travel
(2) Food and Drink, Travel

885 (0.7%)

(1) Financial

clusters and discovered that Reddit users primarily discuss 9
major privacy concerns.

Table III shows the total number and name of the subred-
dit categories representing these privacy concerns. The most
common concerns among the categories were about software
privacy policies and permissions, and user experienced privacy
issues and recommendations for remedying the issues. For
instance, the post “Apps which request sensitive permissions
must provide link to valid privacy policy in the app and Google
Play Developer Console” (Android) indicated the need of
transparency for sensitive permissions.

The next most common concern among subreddit categories
was regarding users sharing their experiences and stories of
privacy compromises and scams describing the consequences
of losing their privacy over the internet because of using a
particular software product. To illustrate, “I was hacked on
my just eat account Saturday night someone ordered food and
used my card details I had cleared my card details and sorting
it out...” (Deliveroos).

Unconﬁrmed privacy compromises were instance where
users discussed times they were unsure and suspected being
hacked or scammed. A similar frequency was noticed for con-
cerns where users are distressed about revealing their personal
or monetary information to the application and querying its
safety on the forum. For instance, “Quick question is it safe
to put your debit/credit card info in? I have bought a few
things from [AliExpress] before but used paypal... the seller
i want to buy from does not accept paypal so before I buy I
want to make sure its going to be safe.” (Aliexpress).

Furthermore, complaints about privacy related bugs and
suspicious account activities were observed. Users draws at-
tention to some issues they were facing that were neglected
by respective companies. For example, “I’ve been dealing
with this for several months now... I [struggle with Amazon],
calling Amazon’s customer service multiple times and asking
if there is a way to force every logged in device to sign out of
my account...Amazon should be able to secure my account...
I wanted to... see if other people are dealing with it too.”
(Amazon). Next, we observed posts conveying warnings and
advisories for other users to avoid scams and even recom-
mendations to avoid particular software to be secure from
privacy breaches. For instance, the post “Beware: WhtsApp
web violation the privacy of Firefox Users. Use Telegram
instead and uninstall this garbage!” (WhatsApp) speciﬁcally
warned the other users of WhatsApp terms and suggested to
others to use other apps.

The remaining concerns were about the effects of privacy
breaches that represented the consequence of the privacy issue
and violations of company rules and regulations by other users
(such as illegal AirBnB cameras), and user concerns about
phishing emails and email related scams.

C. RQ3: How do the number of privacy discussions change
over time?

After embedding data using USE and then clustering the
subreddit posts using K-means, we manually labeled those

To analyze how the number privacy discussions changed
over time we mapped the posts over time and normalized the

4

tives”, a story involving humans, to include songs, jokes, and
explanations. In economic narratives research, people analyze
historical events and have hypothesis on narratives that caused
economic events.

For example, one of the sharpest economic US contractions
ever occurred between 1920 to 1921 when consumer prices fell
16%. One possible narrative explanation for the cause was that
consumers were angry at supposed war proﬁteers in World
War I and decided to boycott the proﬁteers by holding off
buying necessary goods, thinking that they could get back at
the proﬁteers [12]. However, what people did not realize is that
they would help cause a short term depression in the process.
For understanding the reason behind the outlier behaviour
in the privacy discussion, we analyzed our data to see whether
narratives can explain trends in the user discussions about
privacy. This is another area that a software organization can
supplement as part of its requirements engineering processes.
It provides more understanding about the user’s perspective on
privacy. Moreover, for an organization this provides a whole
new dimension for risk analysis before the development of a
software product.

We approached narrative analysis in two ways. One ap-
proach, top-down, looks for well-known events and identiﬁes
what narratives form in response. We chose the enactment of
the GDPR as an example of this. The other approach is to
examine the data bottom-up and identify popular narratives
that emerge from user discussions. We highlight narratives
around chat apps Telegram and WhatsApp and browsing apps
Chrome and Firefox as two examples.

A. Introduction of the GDPR

Although the number of privacy regulation posts was only
a small fraction of our entire data, we found trends at various
points in time with similar patterns for both events.

We found a total of 1351 posts that are related to the GDPR.
The ﬁrst mention of GDPR was detected on 16 June 2015.
However, the number of conversations about it was low before
increasing in 2018. Since the GDPR was enacted (came into
effect) on 25 May 2018 [1], we assume the GDPR enactment
acted as a catalyst for the rise in posts during the deadline
week (21-27 May 2018). 78 posts mentioning GDPR were
posted that week, out of which 22 were on 25 May, which
is the maximum number of daily discussions on GDPR from
2015 to 2021. Observing Figure 2, we see that there is little
change in the number of privacy posts in the months around
May 2018. The number of privacy posts is hovering around
the median level, signiﬁcantly lower than the level observed
in 2020 or 2021.

These posts indicated user concerns over the use of their
data by software like Google and Facebook. Posts like “How
can individuals get access to all their personal data being
stored by companies like Google and Facebook... GDPR
coming into force today entitles users access to their personal
data... it would be fascinating to ﬁnd out exactly what data is
being stored and to what use it is being put...” (25 May 2018)
highlight such concerns.

Fig. 2: Change in all subreddits post count by month, normal-
ized by the median post count for privacy and non-privacy.

number of posts per month by the median post count starting
from May 2014. Although, we initially plotted the posts from
the beginning of the subreddits’ creation time, the number
of posts before May 2014 were not signiﬁcant enough to be
shown on the graph. Thus, we showed the plot from May 2014
to 2021. We can further see from Figure 2 that there was a
steady increase in the number of privacy posts per month over
time reaching a peak in January 2021. In consideration of this
peak, we observe a rise in the number of posts beginning in
September 2020, so we calculate the growth rate for the 4
months leading up to January. Privacy posts showed a 119%
increase per month, compared to a 34% increase per month for
non-privacy posts, between September 2020 to January 2021.
Part of this increase can be explained by the overall increase
in users posting on Reddit during this time, which aligns with
reports that more users joined Reddit the last few years [31].
Starting in January 2020 and culminating in January 2021,
privacy related posts increased signiﬁcantly over the median.
In January 2021, the number of privacy posts reached a new
high of more than four times the median. While total posts on
Reddit increased during this period, we can see from Figure 2
that non-privacy posts did not increase in the same magnitude.
To better understand factors for the increases in the number
of privacy discussions, we conducted a more thorough manual
analysis of these posts. Our preliminary analysis indicates that
an important factor for stimulating user privacy discourse are
privacy narratives that may trigger user behavior beyond the
inﬂuence of privacy regulations. We describe this analysis
next.

IV. NARRATIVES AS EXPLANATIONS OF VARIATIONS IN
PRIVACY DISCUSSIONS

Narratives are a story or way of understanding a series
of events that fosters a point of view [32]. We borrow the
term narratives from economics [15] where researchers try
to understand “how stories go viral & drive major economic
events”. They expand on the dictionary deﬁnition of “narra-

5

(a) Telegram Subreddit

(b) WhatsApp Subreddit

Fig. 3: Change in the number of posts per month, normalized by the median post count for privacy and non-privacy posts.

However, we noticed a gradual drop in GDPR-related dis-
cussions as news surrounding the event wore down. Although
the ﬁrst GDPR related posts were identiﬁed in 2015, we found
that the overwhelming majority of conversations regarding
the GDPR occurred in the short window leading up to, and
shortly after the privacy regulatory event. Moreover, most user
discussions primarily focused on the privacy policies of big
companies and user data concerns and not the regulation itself.
Our analysis on posts after mapping them over time con-
cerning privacy regulation indicates that privacy regulatory
events have a short term impact on people (we report on the
similar short-duration impact of the CCPA in our replication
package). Users mainly post about privacy regulations in the
short interval during the week that the regulations became law.
The enactment of the GDPR, while of short-term relevance,
never acquired a viral status to persist beyond this period
of time. We elaborate on the importance of the short-term
narrative in the Discussion section.

B. Telegram vs WhatsApp

After Facebook announced plans to merge the infrastructure
for WhatsApp, Instagram, Facebook, and Messenger [33], the
Reddit post data showed a outlier behaviour in posts from
users in those related subreddits criticizing the move and
expressing concern about the repercussions for their privacy
and also comparing it with telegram. We can see from Figure
3b and 3a that there were major outlier behaviour in the
months near January 2021. In fact, the month of January
2021 represented a month of signiﬁcant growth of the amount
of privacy conversation from Whatsapp and Telegram. If
software companies can identify the inﬂuence behind such
increases, they can potentially link these concerns to privacy
requirements and issues.

We thus manually analyzed 350 privacy posts from these
ﬁve social media subreddits to get a deeper understanding.
We found that
there was a common theme between the
privacy concerns for Telegram, WhatsApp, and to an extent

other Facebook related software such as Instagram, Facebook,
and Messenger and analysed these themes to understand the
narratives behind.

Narrative 1 - “WhatsApp is sharing advertising data”:
Users voiced concerns regarding the implications from shared
advertising data and merged infrastructure. For example, “Now
Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp are all
linked to pry
on you...[they] are all now linked. How deep this could
affect your privacy is not known” (Signal). The perception
is that Facebook intends to integrate WhatsApp and other
services,
thereby increasing Facebook’s advertising ability.
Users expressed concern for sharing advertising data, “We
talked about sweatshirts [sic] at WhatsApp with my friend now
[I] am seeing sweatshirts [sic] ads everywhere on Instagram,
[I] swear [I] did not googled or something else sweatshirts
[sic] word” (Facebook).

Narrative 2 - “Telegram is a privacy-centric alternative”:
We contrast the previous narrative with the narrative around
Telegram, a WhatsApp competitor, in which the perception is
that Telegram promotes user privacy. The perception before
and especially after Facebook’s announcement is that a user
could consider joining Telegram if they value their privacy,
“[Signal] and Telegram are better than whatsapp. Yes my
privacy is important to me...” (WhatsApp on 15 Jan 2021).
Similarly, “Well, I’ve been using WhatsApp since 2010 and
I honestly kinda wanted to quit
for years but everyone I
know kept using so what could I do? But with this new
privacy policy, many of my friends have made the switch
and I followed.” (WhatsApp on 11 Jan 2021). In addition to
merging infrastructure, Facebook also introduced a mandatory
and controversial privacy policy for WhatsApp [34]. A user
must accept it to continue using WhatsApp [34]. Narratives
surrounding WhatsApp quickly became about WhatsApp’s
perceived privacy issues.

However, not all users were convinced about Telegram’s
privacy. For example, “After WhatsApp’s new service policy,

6

I see majority of my friends are moving to Telegram. They
still believes It’s more secure than Signal. I don’t know why
they do so. ” (Signal on 23 Jan 2021) and “The mark of
Telegram is privacy, why only the secret chat has a good
encryption?... if they boast so much about privacy, well they
should show it, I don’t feel so safe using the app anymore.”
(Telegram on 20 June 2020) Still, we see from Figure 3a that
Telegram experienced about 1000% increase in privacy and
700% increase in non-privacy discussion from their median
counts around the time of WhatsApp’s controversial privacy
policy. Partially fueling this increase in user discussion was the
massive increase in ﬁrst time Telegram users. Similarly, we see
from Figure 3b, WhatsApp users discussing privacy a lot more
than normal during this time. Narratives about these software
seem like a potential driving force for the large spikes in user
privacy discussion during this time, at a time when there was
no other privacy regulation to inﬂuence privacy discussion.

In economics narratives, Shiller often compares narrative
hypothesis with GDP growth and other economic measures to
verify if narratives appear reasonable [12]. We conducted a
short comparison between the privacy policies between Tele-
gram and WhatsApp to investigate whether the user concerns
and privacy narratives regarding Telegram and WhatsApp are
accurate representations of reality.

Privacy Policy Comparison Between Telegram and What-
sApp: We acknowledge that for a complete comparison we
should compare the source code, infrastructure, and privacy
policies. However, we found in Section III-B that discussion
about privacy policy and software permissions is a primary
user concern, indicating the importance that users place on a
software’s privacy policy. One of our co-authors, a law scholar
experienced in the intersection between law and software engi-
neering, analyzed the respective privacy policies for WhatsApp
[35] and Telegram [36].

In contrast

to the privacy narrative fueling the drop in
WhatsApp users and attracting millions of Telegram users
their privacy policies demonstrates that user data is
[37],
collected. The privacy policies are complex legal documents
ﬁlled with “legal speak” that are not easy to understand
for those unfamiliar with the jargon and those who do not
have software engineering backgrounds. There are a host of
technical terms that are foreign to lay persons. At ﬁrst, both
privacy policies appear quite considerate of user data. As per
Section 3 of Telegram’s privacy policy [36], they do not collect
a user’s real name, but they collect phone number and email
address as a backup. WhatsApp does not collect real names nor
email, but it too collects phone number [35]. Both may collect
location data, but they will do so only with user approval.

Yet, later in the privacy policies, we saw statements that
suggest that someone using the software may have their data
collected. In Section 5.6 of Telegram’s Privacy Policy [36],
states that it does not collect one’s data for ad targeting or other
commercial purposes, but Section 6 of the same privacy policy
states that 3rd party bots can collect data. The statements seem
to contradict each other and leaves the question open whether
one’s data is truly private on the platform.

WhatsApp’s privacy policy also states that it may use and
share information from other Facebook Companies and that
information can be used for showing relevant offers and ads
across the Facebook Company Products [35]. WhatsApp’s
stated use and sharing of data seems consistent with the
narrative WhatsApp is sharing advertising data and criticisms
about the software’s data sharing practices seem accurate.
The perception around Telegram is that it will not share nor
compromise user data with anyone, but according to Section
8 of its privacy policy, Telegram may shares a user’s personal
data with companies in Telegram’s parent group [36].

This seems to contradict user perception, as many users are
likely not aware that Telegram is collecting personal data at
all, let alone sharing with other Telegram afﬁliated companies,
which appears problematic for user privacy. In contrast to the
narratives and perception that users should switch to Telegram
from WhatsApp, as Telegram is great for privacy and does not
share advertising data, it is unknown whether a user can truly
experience any beneﬁts because the two software systems
have similar data sharing practices.

C. Firefox vs Chrome

Narrative 1 - “Choose Firefox for its privacy”: While
Chrome is the more popular browser [38], we found that
users frequently express concerns about Chrome’s privacy and
praise Firefox for its perceived privacy-centric approach for
handling user privacy. To this end, we found instances of
users discussing their migration from Chrome to Firefox. For
example, “A friend had told me about the privacy issues
involved with Google Chrome so I decided to make the
switch to Firefox.” (Firefox) Our analysis indicates that users
encouraged others to switch, which suggests that narratives
could inﬂuence user perception and potentially even human
behaviour to an extent.

Privacy Policy Comparison Between Chrome and Firefox:
We compared the respective privacy policies of Firefox and
Chrome [39], [40] and the narratives that we observed from
manual analysis. Chrome’s privacy policy stresses that “You
don’t need to provide any personal information to use Chrome,
but Chrome has different modes that you can use to change
or improve your browsing experience. Privacy practices are
different depending on the mode that you’re using.” In other
words, a user who uses Chrome only with the basic mode
should in theory expect their browser data to be stored locally
on their system [40]. However, if a user signs into Chrome
with their Google Account, Chrome may offer to save a
user’s passwords, payment methods, and related information to
their Google Account, though a user can turn off this setting.
Similarly, if a user uses features in Firefox beyond the defaults
such as Firefox Suggest, what you type into the search bar and
location information used to suggest content based on country,
state, and city may be shared with Mozilla’s (i.e. Firefox’s
parent organization) partners [39].

Privacy-centric browsing modes provide users with more
options to address their privacy concerns, but we note that
it is unclear the prevalence of users who truly understand

7

the differences between the browsing modes and can decipher
the use cases for when and what parts of their data may be
shared. In 2019, Firefox began blocking third party trackers
as a default setting as part of a major update [41]. Although
the setting was originally introduced in 2017, a mere 3% of
Firefox users applied the setting prior to the 2019 update,
most likely because as suggested by a Firefox SVP, expecting
users to alter their browser settings placed an “undue burden”
on them [41]. Therefore, despite the narrative and perception
that a user should switch to Firefox if they value their
privacy, it is unreasonable to assume that their privacy
is secure without fully understanding the implications of
each privacy setting.

Our preliminary analysis suggests that narratives surround-
ing software may play a profound role in shaping the percep-
tion and concerns about software products, and may even im-
pact user behaviour. The privacy-centric narrative surrounding
Telegram helped it increase its user count during the backlash
against WhatsApp, at one point attracting 25 million new users
in a span of 3 days and reaching 500 million global users
overall [37]. Similarly, the privacy-centric narrative regarding
Firefox may have convinced some users to switch from
Chrome to Firefox.

Narratives can be identiﬁed top-down—using external
events to search for narratives—or bottom-up, browsing user
discussions. Based on the preliminary study that we performed
in this section, we conclude with this hypothesis for future
studies:

Hypothesis

Privacy related narratives impact user privacy con-
cerns about a software product.

V. DISCUSSION

Our study sought insights about privacy concerns in online
communities, how privacy discussions vary over time and
possible the causes for these variations. We used Reddit as
the source of data because the platform supports lengthy
and detailed user discussions. We found that many Reddit
users take advantage of the ability to engage in a community
discussion about privacy concerns surrounding a wide variety
of software (RQ1). We found that the privacy issues noted by
users can be broadly categorized into several groups including
“privacy compromise experiences” (RQ2), which often contain
elaborate stories that users share about their difﬁculties en-
countered in a software that pertains to privacy. These privacy
issues, some of which form bug reports and feature requests
[19], represent suggestions that may be developed into privacy
requirements and inform organizations about signiﬁcant issues
at hand.

We identiﬁed that privacy regulations can inﬂuence the
is
amount of privacy concerns over time, but
limited to the short time period when laws are enacted. Our
preliminary analysis on the contributing factors to variations in
privacy discussion showed that privacy regulatory events are

the extent

brief. We start our discussion by highlighting that users express
many privacy concerns on Reddit and users often achieve
this through elaborate and informative posts. Organizations
can utilize user privacy concerns as these concerns represent
needs and requirements from the users. An organization may
consider and analyze these user privacy concerns as part of
its requirements elicitation process. However, organizations
should also reﬂect on the importance of privacy narratives,
which we introduce in our preliminary analysis on causes
of variations of privacy discussion, on the nature of the user
discourse about privacy.

A. Reddit: A Rich Source of Privacy Concerns

Reddit provides a rich environment that supports online
communities that thrive from open discussion and posts that
encourage further discussion. In contrast to other forums which
have stringent length limits, such as Twitter, Google Play
Store, and Apple App Store, Reddit allows user communities
to discuss privacy concerns at length. For some users, Reddit
became the platform for them to share their personal stories
about using a software and dissuade or persuade new users
based on their experiences.

In one example, a user was able to explain in details about
am incident where he was defrauded from a sizable amount of
money via CashApp and was quite distraught from the whole
ordeal. Not only was the user angry, but they told all their
friends to stop using the app. Users who experience this will
often detail the ordeal on Reddit, which can generate negative
publicity around the incident. It has been shown that users will
refrain from using services when they do not feel that their
privacy is safe [42], but we found that users may take further
drastic measures if they feel their privacy is infringed.

We also observed users venting frustration about a new
software feature that does not ﬁt user requirements. “I recently
transitioned to the ‘new’ Facebook design as I assume most
people did... I’ve always kept all elements of my Facebook
proﬁle viewable to only my friends or just myself... There is
a “public timeline” for my proﬁle now with dozens of posts
and photos and videos that are, apparently, visible to anyone
on FB now... It’s insane how complicated they’ve made this. I
want to go back to having everything I post on FB be solely
visible to my Friends...” (Facebook)

Part of improving product and service offerings for an orga-
nization involves identifying the users and collecting feedback
is another
from them to derive requirements [43]. Reddit
avenue for collecting this feedback, much like app store
reviews [10], [44] or customer feedback. From the feedback,
organizations could extract speciﬁc requirements based on
criteria such as number of (angry) customers or ﬁt with product
roadmaps. The addition of these relevant user privacy concerns
to an organization’s requirements elicitation process could
assist the organization as it performs requirements analysis
and develops privacy requirements from all the sources of
feedback.

Our work brings empirical evidence that Reddit can be an
important source for insights and information in the form of

8

user discussion that organizations can leverage into developing
into privacy related requirements. However, we should note
that we studied large, popular software products in this study
and that we did not investigate smaller, less popular products,
which may not have a wealth of user discussions. These
smaller, less popular products may not attract the number of
users, nor is the scale of user discussions about the products
high, so our approach for analyzing Reddit posts may not
translate for these smaller products. In addition to Reddit,
we note there are other forums emerging daily (e.g., TikTok
videos).

B. Narratives: Unforeseen Inﬂuencer of Privacy Concerns

To our surprise, objective privacy regulations for organiza-
tions had less impact on user perception about privacy than
narratives. We found that privacy related narratives impacted
user perceptions about software systems and may have con-
tributed to an increase in users moving from one software to
another. The impact of narratives on human behavior is not
new [13]. We found in our work that many users believed
in the narrative that Telegram is more privacy conscious
than WhatsApp (and found something similar for Firefox vs
Chrome).

Although our exploratory analysis of the respective privacy
policies indicates that narratives may not be accurate in repre-
senting reality, at least not to the extent that many users are led
to believe, we see correlations with privacy concerns and these
narratives. The spread of narratives also shares similarities
with memes, where knowledge is spread and copied to other
individuals [45], but predicting the inﬂuence of narratives is
hard [12].

Narratives can spread quickly [12], as in the cases where
Whatsapp was going to share advertising data and Telegram
was great for privacy. Users that believed such narratives
and think that WhatsApp collects user data for proﬁt may
decide to ﬁnd alternative software. We cannot state that
WhatsApp or Telegram is more private than the other without
a full comparison of every aspect about the software, but
our qualitative analysis on their privacy policies shows that
their data collection practices are similar. However, Telegram
gained millions of users in part due to the “Whatsapp is
sharing advertising data” and “Telegram is a privacy-centric
alternative” narratives [37].

These narratives can have far reaching consequences that
heavily impact an organization’s business as Meta (i.e., What-
sApp and Facebook’s renamed parent company) suffered its
ﬁrst drop in daily users in its 18 year history during 2021
[46]. The organization’s stock also dropped more than 20%
in a single day, which was one of the single largest drops
to a single company in history [47] There are likely multiple
factors that contributed to this large drop in valuation and daily
users that extend beyond solely privacy concerns. Focusing
exclusively on traditional requirements gathering and product
management approaches is not sufﬁcient: the impact of user
concerns and perceptions also strongly inﬂuence the popularity
of a software and company reputations. If an organization

is able to identify a negative privacy narrative from user
discussion, the organization’s best course of action may be to
consider strategies or factors to mitigate the privacy narrative.
One strategy may involve developing privacy requirements
that aim to address the privacy narrative. Alternatively, an
organization may choose to employ branding or advertising to
diminish the effects of a negative privacy narrative. Exploring
how organizations manage privacy narratives is considered
future work and we elaborate more in the research implications
section.

As observed by our analysis on user concerns about the
GDPR, some narratives such as privacy regulatory events, may
have a short term impact on users. A small number of users
may hear about the privacy regulation in the media and large
organizations go ofﬂine as a result of the regulations [48],
causing user concerns for a brief period of time when the
regulation becomes law. Then user interest and relevance about
the privacy regulatory narrative quickly wanes, despite the
large implications that such regulations could have on software
organizations.

Ultimately, privacy narratives have non-negligible impact
on user perceptions around software. Our work not only
shows the potential for organizations to leverage user feedback
into privacy requirements, but also underscores the important
role that narratives play in shaping privacy concerns. Since
privacy narratives can impact privacy concerns in a way that
is subjective from reality, organizations could beneﬁt from
considering and analyzing privacy narratives so that they could
maximize the insights elicited from user feedback. Considering
and understanding privacy narratives could be a windfall for
an organization as it elicits privacy requirements from users.

C. Research Implications

We believe there are several research implications for future
work. First, although we identiﬁed a series of user privacy
concerns from user discussions on Reddit, developing privacy
requirements from these user privacy concerns was not part of
our study. Future work can explore deriving privacy require-
ments, perhaps through automated measures, based on user
discussions in online user communities. Moreover, our work
found plenty of privacy discussion from users of large, popular
software products, though future work could investigate if the
same is true for smaller, less popular software. In particular,
what
is the threshold for the amount of user feedback a
less popular software product needs before we can develop
narratives for the software. Furthermore, in the future we can
utilize different features of the posts in our dataset to better
understand the relevance of privacy discussions and the change
of a topic over time. Likewise, further research can investigate
how narratives form for less popular software products and
how those narratives impact the products.

Based on our preliminary analysis we hypothesize that
“privacy related narratives impact user privacy concerns about
a software product”. This hypothesis should be tested in future
work involving a deeper analysis on the impacts of privacy
narratives. Next, further research is necessary to develop

9

metrics or strategies to systematically identify narratives in
user feedback in the requirements engineering context. More
importantly, additional work is needed to understand identify
the narratives that become viral and signiﬁcantly impact an
organization’s software systems. Finally, further investigation
on if and how organizations consider and manage narratives
are important areas for future work. In particular, we need
to further study how we can incorporate identiﬁcation and
analysis of narratives as part of an organization’s requirements
elicitation process to more effectively achieve an understand-
ing of user requirements.

D. Practitioner Implications

Our work indicates that organizations could take advantage
of analyzing user discussions on Reddit as it is a platform
where rich discussions about software can take place. An
organization can elicit and learn about privacy concerns from
analyzing user discussions in the organization’s corresponding
subreddits. These privacy concerns may be further reﬁned
and developed into privacy requirements that an organization
can realize in the software. In addition, organizations should
be cognizant of narratives that could shape user perceptions
and concerns about privacy. As demonstrated in our work,
user behaviour and their concerns could be inﬂuenced by
narratives, which may not always be an accurate reﬂection
of reality. Hence, an organization should allocate resources
in considering these macro level narratives that could greatly
impact an organization’s software. Since a narrative represents
an aggregate of user feedback, an organization can develop
requirements from a narrative similar to how it may develop
requirements from several user feedback at a time. Our work
illustrates that an organization may expand its requirements
elicitation process to include the addition of user discussion
data from Reddit and analyzing it for privacy narratives. The
added insights from the requirements elicitation may facilitate
improvements to the organization’s understanding of user
privacy concerns and help it develop more relevant privacy
requirements. Finally, further investigation with respect to the
actual users’ understanding is needed to understand the scope
and validity of different narratives.

VI. THREATS TO VALIDITY

1) External validity: The ﬁrst threat is that generalizability
of our results could be limited because we collected only
66 subreddits. However,
to mitigate this we collected the
subreddit data from a wide range of applications and services.
Our data is comprised with subreddits that are associated
with popular software products such as AirBnb, or Instagram
which have relatively higher user counts, but our data also
contain popular software products with fewer number of user
posts. Since our focus was on popular software products that
generally have large numbers of users, it is possible that our
approach for identifying user privacy concerns and narratives
does not generalize well to software products that do not have
a high number of user discussions.

2) Construct validity: The threat applies to the manual la-
beling of posts to privacy and non-privacy which is to prepare
our ground-truth data. Manual labeling can cause experimental
bias as humans tend to be subjective in their judgment which
can be very difﬁcult to eliminate, but text classiﬁcation is
generally done manually. We tried to address this problem
by having two experts who are well versed, experienced, and
understand privacy. We calculated our Cohen’s kappa value
and the inter-rater agreement levels which also reﬂects our
labeling efﬁciency. A similar issue of subjectivity also applies
when it comes to analyzing and comparing privacy policies as
lawyers have different judgments of privacy policy implica-
tions. For example, lawyers had conﬂicts in the interpretation
of complaints in GDPR regulations [8]. The possibility of
different
interpretations cannot be eliminated. We tried to
mitigate this threat by having a law scholar compare these
policies.

3) Internal Validity: There are threats internal validity that
relate to our understanding of the data. It was not possible
for us to manually cluster each post to privacy concerns.
To mitigate this threat we took our 9 main areas of privacy
concerns and randomly sampled at least 25 posts from each
area to check if they belong. Furthermore, there are limitations
to our choice of time intervals for mapping user privacy
posts over time. A researcher would need to reduce the time
interval to daily or hourly if they want to visualize short-term
narratives. Contrastingly, one may need to expand the time
interval to yearly if they want to visualize the impact of long-
term narratives. We also acknowledge that ﬁnding all impacts
of privacy regulations on user concerns is not possible. To
address this we extracted all the combinations of terms for
GDPR, collected the relevant posts, and manually identiﬁed
if a post is talking about these regulations. One threat to our
work is that we did not take advantage of addition attributes
corresponding to a post such as number of comments or
number of up votes. As our primary focus was answering
our RQs we did not investigate the effect from the additional
information, we leave that for future work. However, we
address that we could not explore other aspects of the privacy
regulatory events such as considering the impact of changes
made in the products due to the enactment of the policies that
could potentially trigger the user discussion. Another potential
limitation of our work is our interpretations of narratives.
Our study of narratives was exploratory and our deﬁnition
originated from economics. We acknowledge that our approach
of identifying narratives from observing multiple similar user
posts and matching these with news stories from the same time
frame may not be the best approach, but we believe our work
still brings attention to this area of research. Future work may
leverage tools or strategies from social network analysis [49]
for further study of narratives.

VII. RELATED WORK

A. Privacy Related Requirements Elicitation

The enactment of privacy laws like GDPR and CCPA inﬂu-
ence organizations to link these laws to privacy requirements

10

for their software [50]. Breaux states that organizations can
derive value from improving privacy requirements and creating
a more personable experience for users [50]. Islam et al.
developed the foundation of a framework to identify and map
relevant legal terms to privacy requirements [51]. However,
these privacy laws are notoriously complex and have ambigu-
ous language [52]. Bhatia et al. empirically analyzed these
privacy policies using Tregex Patterns [53], and Reidenberg et
al. proposed a natural language processing (NLP) technique to
improve the clarity of the policies so companies can use them
[54]. Nonetheless, privacy requirements elicited from these
laws are not enough to address user concerns [55]. Some case
studies have focused on eliciting user privacy requirements
[55], [56].

There have been several studies that have examined user
perceptions regarding privacy and privacy policies [57]–[59].
Unlike studies that investigated developing privacy require-
ments or requirements elicitation, these studies focused on the
human aspects of privacy. Of particular relevance to our work
is the notion of the “privacy paradox” [59], in which users
complain about privacy (as in our paper) yet willingly trade
their privacy for minor advantages. Whether our narratives
reﬂect this paradox we leave for future work, although our
observance of WhatsApp’s decreasing and Telegram’s increas-
ing user numbers indicates that some connection may exist
between user concern and behaviour.

B. Eliciting Requirements from App Reviews

Numerous studies focused on improving the requirement
engineering process by understanding users’ perspectives from
the reviews on app marketplaces and user forums [9]–[11],
[60]. Pagano and Maleej [10] identiﬁed the patterns, topics,
and quality of user feedback in over one million Apple
App Store reviews and studied its impact on the software
requirements. Prior work has shown the importance of user
feedback from software forums [9] and social media platforms
[11], [19], [60]. Tizard et al. [9] analyzed user reviews and
feedback from the two product forums (VLC and Firefox)
and concluded that product forums are a valuable source of
consumer feedback that is essential for the evolution of the
product. For social media, Kanchev et al. [60] performed a
preliminary analysis of user discussions on Google maps from
Reddit discussions and presented examples of requirement-
related artifacts.

A recent study by Iqbal et al. [19] analyzed characteristics
of Reddit posts about software applications and found out that
more than half of the posts contains useful information such
as bug reports and feature requests.

Automating feature extraction from app stores to ﬁnd
crowd-based requirements engineering was looked at in [61],
[62]. For example, Guzman and Maalej [61] proposed to
identify ﬁne-grained app features by using collocations and
sentiment analysis about the identiﬁed features and grouping
them using topic modeling into a more meaningful high-level
feature.

Recent research include different approaches for the au-
tomatic processing of user reviews [44], [63], [64]. Since a
signiﬁcant amount of work has been done on App Reviews,
we focused on Reddit to analyze users’ privacy concerns and
identiﬁed inﬂuence of factors like narratives on the discus-
sions.

C. Narratives

Nobel Prize winning professor Robert J. Shiller explains that
one’s mind can be swayed by “narratives”, even if these stories
or trends are unfactual [12]. An example was when various
governments struggled to persuade citizens to adopt COVID-
19 tracing apps [65], despite the theoretical beneﬁts. Bano
et al. analyzed app reviews and news articles and found that
though governments tried to impose the COVID-19 contact-
tracing apps for the beneﬁt of their citizens, governments did
not anticipate the socio-political-cultural factors that caused
failure of the apps [66]. It supports Shiller’s point that we
need more research into narratives and how it impact human
behavior [12]. Nevertheless, stories (i.e., narratives) with pur-
pose can play powerful roles in understanding customer needs,
allowing product innovation [67].

To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to study
privacy concerns among users on forums and their temporal
evolution to observe ﬂuctuations over time using Reddit as
a source. We found that there were inexplicable ﬂuctuations,
leading us to analyze narratives as an important factor for
privacy concerns.

VIII. CONCLUSION

Analyzing user discussions on social media platforms has
become an essential aspect of requirement elicitation. We
focused on analyzing user discussions on software product
forums to investigate users privacy concerns and the number
of their concerns over time. We used Reddit, a host of many
online communities for software products, as the source of
our data. Our approach to classifying privacy related posts
and clustering them into nine main areas helped us identify
the types of privacy related conversations. We identiﬁed that
privacy concerns are inﬂuenced by narratives. Our study shows
that an organization can gather insights about user privacy
concerns from user discussions on Reddit to strengthen the
organization’s requirements elicitation; an organization may
also develop privacy requirements from the insights about user
privacy concerns as requirements analysis and development
is the next step following requirements elicitation. Our work
was exploratory so it may be worthwhile for future work
to comprehensively explore other developer communities.
Researchers can examine the discrepancy between user and
developer posts in other software forums regarding privacy
concerns. Furthermore, studies can explore methods to con-
sider the extent of inﬂuence of narratives on privacy concerns
and other research implications related to narratives.

11

REFERENCES

[1] O. Radley-Gardner, H. Beale,

and R. Zimmermann, Eds.,
Fundamental Texts On European Private Law. Hart Publishing,
2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.bloomsburycollections.com/book/
fundamental-texts-on-european-private-law-1

[2] “California Consumer Privacy Act

(CCPA),” Oct. 2018.

[Online].

Available: https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/ccpa

[3] E. Harding and L. H. Ji-Otto, “Five Immediate Steps to Take in Prepara-
tion for China’s New Comprehensive Privacy Law,” Nov. 2021. [Online].
Available: https://www.natlawreview.com/article/ﬁve-immediate-steps-
to-take-preparation-china-s-new-comprehensive-privacy-law

[4] J. K. Kadish

and
Privacy Law Now in Effect,” Sep.
able:
privacy-law-now-effect

“Brazil’s Comprehensive
[Online]. Avail-
https://www.natlawreview.com/article/brazil-s-comprehensive-

Thomas,

2020.

L.

of

US

and

half

data

Sep.

[6] J.

Facebook

Silverstein,

of millions

leak may
2017.

“Equifax
population,”

S. Musil,
the

[5] A. Ng
nearly
Available:
data-leak-hits-nearly-half-of-the-us-population/
“Hundreds

affect
[Online].
https://www.cnet.com/tech/services-and-software/equifax-

user
records were
exposed on Amazon cloud server,” Apr. 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cbsnews.com/news/millions-facebook-
user-records-exposed-amazon-cloud-server/
“235
Proﬁles
section:

YouTube User
Aug.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/daveywinder/2020/08/19/massive-data-
leak235-million-instagram-tiktok-and-youtube-user-proﬁles-exposed/
[8] Z. S. Li, C. Werner, N. Ernst, and D. Damian, “Towards privacy
compliance: A design science study in a small organization,” Information
and Software Technology, p. 106868, 2022.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950584922000362

Instagram,
TikTok
In Massive Data

And
Leak,”
Available:

Exposed
Cybersecurity.

[7] D. Winder,

[Online].

Million

2020,

[9] J. Tizard, H. Wang, L. Yohannes, and K. Blincoe, “Can a conversation
paint a picture? mining requirements in software forums,” in 2019 IEEE
27th International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), pp. 17–
27, ISSN: 2332-6441.

[10] D. Pagano and W. Maalej, “User feedback in the appstore: An empirical
study,” in 2013 21st IEEE International Requirements Engineering
Conference (RE), pp. 125–134, ISSN: 2332-6441.

[11] G. Williams and A. Mahmoud, “Mining twitter feeds for software
user requirements,” in 2017 IEEE 25th International Requirements
Engineering Conference (RE), pp. 1–10, ISSN: 2332-6441.

[12] R. J. Shiller, “Narrative Economics,” The American Economic Review,
vol. 107, no. 4, pp. 967–1004, 2017, publisher: American Economic
Association. [Online]. Available: https://www.jstor.org/stable/44251584
[13] Wydick, Bruce, “How narratives inﬂuence human behaviour,” Jan.
2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2015/01/
how-narratives-inﬂuence-human-behaviour/

[14] “Nerrative deﬁnation.”

[Online]. Available: https://www.merriam-

webster.com/dictionary/narrative

[15] R. J. Shiller, Narrative Economics: How Stories Go Viral and Drive
Major Economic Events. Princeton University Press, Sep. 2020, google-
Books-ID: YlDVDwAAQBAJ.

[16] “Introducing
Stories
in
Cambridge
Available:
introducing-shared-stories/B3781263C8A9272AAFE3BB4F843509F7

Shared
Cambridge:
University
[Online].
https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/narratives-online/

in Narratives Online:
R.
2018,

Shared
Stories,”
Social Media,
Press,

1–25.

Page,

Ed.

pp.

[17] “Pushshift github url.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/pushshift/

api

[18] J. R. Landis and G. G. Koch, “The measurement of observer agreement

for categorical data,” biometrics, pp. 159–174, 1977.

[19] T. Iqbal, M. Khan, K. Taveter, and N. Seyff, “Mining Reddit as a New
Source for Software Requirements,” in 2021 IEEE 29th International
Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), Sep. 2021, pp. 128–138,
iSSN: 2332-6441.

[20] Y. Zhang, R. Jin, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Understanding bag-of-words model:
a statistical framework,” International Journal of Machine Learning and
Cybernetics, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 43–52, 2010.

[21] T. Joachims, “A probabilistic analysis of the rocchio algorithm with
tﬁdf for text categorization.” Carnegie-mellon univ pittsburgh pa dept of
computer science, Tech. Rep., 1996.

[22] P. Devine, Y. S. Koh, and K. Blincoe, “Evaluating Unsupervised Text
Embeddings on Software User Feedback,” in 2021 IEEE 29th Interna-
tional Requirements Engineering Conference Workshops (REW), Sep.
2021, pp. 87–95.

[23] D. Cer, Y. Yang, S.-y. Kong, N. Hua, N. Limtiaco, R. S. John,
N. Constant, M. Guajardo-Cespedes, S. Yuan, C. Tar et al., “Universal
sentence encoder,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.11175, 2018.

[24] “Universal sentence encoder url.” [Online]. Available: https://tfhub.dev/

google/universal-sentence-encoder-large/5

[25] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer,
“Smote: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique,” Journal of
Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Research, vol. 16, p. 321–357, Jun 2002.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1613/jair.953

[26] V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, and T. Wolf, “Distilbert, a distilled

version of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter,” 2020.

[27] L. McInnes,

J. Healy,

“UMAP: Uniform
Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension Reduction,”
arXiv:1802.03426 [cs, stat], Sep. 2020, arXiv: 1802.03426. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03426

J. Melville,

and

[28] “K-means clustering.” [Online]. Available: https://tfhub.dev/google/

universal-sentence-encoder-large/5

[29] P. J. Rousseeuw, “Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation
and validation of cluster analysis,” Journal of Computational and
Applied Mathematics, vol. 20, pp. 53–65, 1987. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0377042787901257

[30] D. C. Nguyen, E. Derr, M. Backes, and S. Bugiel, “Short text, large
effect: Measuring the impact of user reviews on android app security
amp; privacy,” in 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),
2019, pp. 555–569.

[31] J. Kastrenakes, “Reddit reveals daily active user count for the ﬁrst time:
52 million,” Dec. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.theverge.com/
2020/12/1/21754984/reddit-dau-daily-users-revealed

[32] C. K. Riessman, “Narrative analysis,” in Narrative, Memory & Everyday
Life, N. Kelly, C. Horrocks, K. Milnes, B. Roberts, and D. Robinson,
Eds. Huddersﬁeld: University of Huddersﬁeld, April 2005, pp. 1–7.
[Online]. Available: http://eprints.hud.ac.uk/id/eprint/4920/
begins merging WhatsApp,

Instagram
and Messenger
[Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.axios.com/facebook-whatsapp-instagram-messenger-
a4ba5ff0-7399-4d7c-bec6-446068a87480.html

infrastructures,” Aug.

[33] U. Perano,

“Facebook

2015.

[34] D’Amore, Rachael, “WhatsApp’s new privacy policy sparks outcry.
| Globalnews.ca,”
[Online]. Available: https://globalnews.ca/news/7570323/

Here’s what you need to know - National
Jan. 2021.
whatsapp-facebook-privacy-policy-explained/

[35] “Privacy Policy.” [Online]. Available: https://www.whatsapp.com/waui

test/legal/privacy-policy/?lang=en

[36] “Telegram Privacy Policy.” [Online]. Available: https://telegram.org/

privacy

[37] N. Dailey, “Telegram hits 500 million active users following backlash
over WhatsApp’s changing privacy policy,” Jan. 2021.
[Online].
Available: https://www.businessinsider.com/telegram-hits-500-million-
users-after-whatsapp-backlash-2021-1

[38] “Stat counter url.” [Online]. Available: https://gs.statcounter.com/
[39] “Firefox Privacy Notice,” Nov. 2021.
//www.mozilla.org/en-US/privacy/ﬁrefox/

[Online]. Available: https:

[40] “Chrome Browser Privacy Policy - Google Chrome,” Sep. 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.google.com/intl/en ca/chrome/privacy/
[41] K. O’Flaherty, “Firefox Takes Aim At Google With A Bunch Of
[On-
New Security Features,” Jun. 2019, section: Cybersecurity.
line]. Available: https://www.forbes.com/sites/kateoﬂahertyuk/2019/06/
04/ﬁrefox-conﬁrms-new-security-features-heres-how-to-enable-them/

[42] A. Ballest´e, P. P´erez-Mart´ınez, and A. Solanas, “The pursuit of citizens’

privacy: A privacy-aware smart city is possible,” vol. 51.

[43] E. C. Groen, “Crowd out the competition,” in 2015 IEEE 1st Inter-
national Workshop on Crowd-Based Requirements Engineering (Crow-
dRE), 2015, pp. 13–18.

[44] W. Maalej and H. Nabil, “Bug report, feature request, or simply
praise? on automatically classifying app reviews,” in 2015 IEEE 23rd
International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), pp. 116–125,
ISSN: 2332-6441.

[45] Heylighen, F., “Memetics,” Nov. 2001.
//pespmc1.vub.ac.be/MEMES.html

[Online]. Available: http:

[46] L. DiBenedetto, “Meta Earnings Presentation Q4 2021,” p. 21, Feb.

2022.

12

https://www.cnet.com/health/contact-tracing-apps-have-a-trust-

able:
problem-even-if-they-do-protect-your-privacy/

[66] M. Bano, C. Arora, D. Zowghi, and A. Ferrari, “The Rise and Fall of
COVID-19 Contact-Tracing Apps: when NFRs Collide with Pandemic,”
in 2021 IEEE 29th International Requirements Engineering Conference
(RE), Sep. 2021, pp. 106–116, iSSN: 2332-6441.

[67] D. Snowden, “Story telling: an old skill

in a new context,”
Business
Information Review, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 30–37, Mar.
1999, publisher: SAGE Publications Ltd. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1177/0266382994237045

[47] E. Dwoskin, W. Oremus, and R. Lerman, “Facebook loses users
time in its history,” Washington Post, Feb. 2022.
for
[Online]. Available: https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2022/
02/02/facebook-earnings-meta/

the ﬁrst

[48] C. Lecher, “Major US news websites are going down in Europe
as GDPR goes
[Online].
Available: https://www.theverge.com/2018/5/25/17393894/gdpr-news-
websites-down-europe

into effect,” The Verge, May 2018.

[49] J. Golbeck, Analyzing the Social Web.

Elsevier Science &
Technology, 2013. [Online]. Available: https://ebookcentral-proquest-
com.ezproxy.library.uvic.ca/lib/uvic/detail.action?docID=1152671
[50] T. Breaux, “Privacy requirements in an age of increased sharing,” IEEE

Software, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 24–27, 2014.

[51] S. Islam, H. Mouratidis, and S. Wagner, “Towards a framework to
elicit and manage security and privacy requirements from laws and
regulations,” in Requirements Engineering: Foundation for Software
Quality, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, R. Wieringa and
A. Persson, Eds. Springer, pp. 255–261.

[52] T. Breaux and A. Ant´on, “Analyzing Regulatory Rules for Privacy and
Security Requirements,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 5–20, Jan. 2008, conference Name: IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering.

[53] J. Bhatia, M. C. Evans, S. Wadkar, and T. D. Breaux, “Automated
extraction of regulated information types using hyponymy relations,”
in 2016 IEEE 24th International Requirements Engineering Conference
Workshops (REW), pp. 19–25.

[54] J. R. Reidenberg, J. Bhatia, T. D. Breaux, and T. B. Norton,
“Ambiguity in privacy policies and the impact of regulation,” vol. 45,
pp. S163–S190, publisher: The University of Chicago Press. [Online].
Available: https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/full/10.1086/688669

[55] M. Gharib, M. Salnitri, E. Paja, P. Giorgini, H. Mouratidis, M. Pavlidis,
J. F. Ruiz, S. Fernandez, and A. D. Siria, “Privacy requirements:
Findings and lessons learned in developing a privacy platform,” in 2016
IEEE 24th International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE),
2016, pp. 256–265, ISSN: 2332-6441.

[56] C. Kalloniatis, E. Kavakli, and S. Gritzalis, “Addressing privacy
the PriS method,” Requirements
[Online]. Available:

in system design:
requirements
Engineering, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 241–255.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00766-008-0067-3

[57] S. Sheth, G. Kaiser, and W. Maalej, “Us and them: a study of privacy
requirements across north america, asia, and europe,” in Proceedings
of
the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering.
Hyderabad India: ACM, May 2014, pp. 859–870. [Online]. Available:
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2568225.2568244

[58] P. A. Norberg, D. R. Horne, and D. A. Horne, “The Privacy
Paradox: Personal Information Disclosure Intentions versus Behaviors,”
Journal of Consumer Affairs, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 100–126,
2007,
eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1745-
6606.2006.00070.x. [Online]. Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1111/j.1745-6606.2006.00070.x

[59] B. Brown, “Studying the Internet Experience,” Mar. 2001.
[60] G. M. Kanchev and A. K. Chopra, “Social media through the re-
quirements lens: A case study of google maps,” in 2015 IEEE 1st
International Workshop on Crowd-Based Requirements Engineering
(CrowdRE), pp. 7–12.

[61] E. Guzman and W. Maalej, “How do users like this feature? a ﬁne
grained sentiment analysis of app reviews,” in 2014 IEEE 22nd Interna-
tional Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), pp. 153–162, ISSN:
2332-6441.

[62] M. Harman, Y. Jia, and Y. Zhang, “App store mining and analysis:
MSR for app stores,” in 2012 9th IEEE Working Conference on Mining
Software Repositories (MSR), pp. 108–111, ISSN: 2160-1860.

[63] N. Chen, J. Lin, S. C. H. Hoi, X. Xiao, and B. Zhang, “AR-
miner: mining informative reviews for developers from mobile app
marketplace,” in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Software Engineering, ser. ICSE 2014. Association for Computing
Machinery, pp. 767–778. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
2568225.2568263

[64] L. V. G. Carre˜no and K. Winbladh, “Analysis of user comments: An
approach for software requirements evolution,” in 2013 35th Interna-
tional Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pp. 582–591, ISSN:
1558-1225.

[65] A.

even

Ng.
if

Contact-tracing
do

they

protect

apps

your

have

a
privacy.

trust
problem,
[Online]. Avail-

13

