2
2
0
2

n
u
J

0
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
4
9
4
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Semantic Technology based Usage Control for
Decentralized Systems

Ines Akaichi[0000−0002−6020−5572]

Institute for Information Systems & New Media,
Vienna University of Economics and Business
ines.akaichi@wu.ac.at

Abstract. The sharing of data and digital assets in a decentralized set-
tling is associated with various legislative challenges, including, but not
limited to, the need to adhere to legal requirements with respect to pri-
vacy (e.g. data protection legislation) and copyright (e.g. copyright legisla-
tion). In order to enable software platform providers to manage data and
digital assets appropriately and to provide more control to data and dig-
ital asset owners, usage control technologies could be used to make sure
that consumers handle data according to privacy preferences, licenses,
regulatory requirements, among others. In this research proposal, we ex-
plore the application of usage control in decentralized environments. In
particular, we address the challenges related to the speciﬁcation of us-
age control policies, the enforcement of the respective policies, and the
usability of the tools that are used to administer them.

Keywords: Policy · Usage Control · Reasoning · Semantic Web · Ad-
ministration · Decentralized Systems.

1

Introduction

Modern decentralized systems, such as the Internet of Things (IoT), virtual data
spaces, and distributed knowledge graph applications face a variety of challenges
from a data and digital asset management perspective. According to Pretschner
[19], data owners are reluctant to share their data with decentralized systems, as
often they have no control over how their data are used. Additionally, Park and
Sandhu [16] highlight that the sharing of data in decentralized environments goes
beyond traditional access control, as existing solutions do not provide control
over data usage once access to the data has been granted. Technologies that aim
to address this challenge, which are usually classiﬁed as usage control or policy-
based usage control, aim to ensure that data consumers handle data according
to usage policies stipulated by data owners. Generally speaking, usage control
is a generic term for data management software that supports data protection,
copyright, and/or various legislative and institutional policies in a variety of do-
mains, including, but not limited to, mobile software, cloud computing, industry
4.0, IoT, and collaborative software.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Ines Akaichi

Problem statement. In our proposal, we address the problem of policy speciﬁ-
cation, enforcement and administration in decentralized usage control. While
the majority of usage control policy languages are built according to domain-
speciﬁc requirements, it is unclear whether existing domain/use case-speciﬁc
proposals could be used for usage control in the general sense, where a single
system may need to support privacy preferences, regulatory requirements,
licensing, among others. Moving to the semantic web community, researchers
have proposed various general-purpose policy languages that have not pre-
viously been explored in the context of usage control. Therefore, it is also
unclear how these policy languages can be used to provide adequate support
for the common structures encountered in usage control requirements.
Contributions. In this proposal, we seek to explore the use of semantic tech-
nologies, i.e., ontologies and underlying semantics, to develop a uniﬁed and
ﬂexible policy language that supports diﬀerent types of usage control policies
in various domains. Additionally, we plan to include an enforcement frame-
work by using the semantics of our policy language in order to automatically
check for policy adherence. Finally, we plan to demonstrate the suitability of
our proposal by integrating our framework to the social linked data platform,
SOLID1, which currently only supports access control.

Paper structure. The remainder of this research proposal is structured as fol-
lows: in Section 2, we present related work. In Section 3, we outline the
working hypothesis that underlies our research proposal. Next, in Section 4,
we present our progress made to date. In Section 5, we describe the method-
ology that guides our research aside to our work plan. Finally, we conclude
our work in Section 6.

2 Related Work

The term usage control was ﬁrst introduced by Park and Sandhu [16] whose
research focus on supporting the continuous monitoring of digital asset usage
in dynamic distributed environments. Over the years, researchers have proposed
various usage control conceptual models (cf. [8, 16]), policy languages and frame-
works (cf. [12, 21]). Other works focused on enforcing the respective policies, via
proactive or reactive mechanisms that aim to prevent security breaches and pol-
icy violations (cf. [12, 2]).

When it comes to the semantic web community, researchers proposed general
policy languages and frameworks, such as KaoS [7], Rei [13], and Protune [6] to
govern and manage a range of constraints (e.g. access control, privacy prefer-
ences, regulatory constraints) that are encountered in a variety of distributed
systems, such as multi-agent systems, computing grids, enterprise information
systems, and pervasive environments. More recent studies proposed policy lan-
guages tailored to support access control (cf. [20, 22]), privacy preferences (cf.
[4, 10]), licensing (cf. [18, 24]) and regulatory requirements (cf. [4, 23]).

1 https://solidproject.org/

Semantic Technology based Usage Control for Decentralized Systems

3

In usage control, the majority of policy languages (cf. DUPO [8], LUCON
[21]) were developed according to domain-speciﬁc requirements in relation to
mobile software, cloud computing, IoT, industry 4.0., networking, operating sys-
tems, and collaborative software. Whereas, the policy languages that are meant
to be domain-agnostic are either not validated using use cases (e.g. OB-XACML
[14]) or are only evaluated in a speciﬁc domain (e.g. IND2UCE [12] and [25]).
Hence, it is unclear if the existing proposals could be used for usage control in the
general sense, where a single system may need to support privacy preferences,
regulatory requirements, licenses, among others. While on one hand, general se-
mantic policy languages can be used to express a variety of constraints, it is also
unclear how these policy languages can be used to provide adequate support for
the common structures encountered in usage control requirements (e.g. norma-
tive rules, obligations bound to condition, system and environmental conditions,
attributes update). On the other hand, tailored policy languages are bound to
the constraints for which they were developed and only cover requirements that
are encountered in their respective areas.

3 Gap & Hypothesis

Building on the existing challenge in the ﬁeld of usage control, we see the need
for a general policy language and framework that allows for the expression of
diﬀerent types of policies in usage control and is not tied to speciﬁc applica-
tions. As pointed out by Akaichi and Kirrane [1], a usage control framework is a
comprehensive framework that allows for the speciﬁcation, enforcement and ad-
ministration of usage policies. Accordingly, our framework has to incorporate the
following key components: (i) a formal machine-readable policy language that is
used to express usage control policies; (ii) an enforcement mechanism that can
monitor compliance with said policies; and (iii) an administration interface that
can be used to manage and monitor usage control policies.

Additionally, growing dynamic environments, such as the web or IoT-based
data sharing systems, where new users continuously join, pose new challenges in
terms of unpredictability and dynamicity. Therefore, decentralized environments
bring an additional set of considerations from a usage control perspective with
respect to: (i) controlling data that reside within multiple systems; (ii) securing
data sharing and usage; and (iii) enforcing policies across multiple systems. As
a result, the framework must also take into account the decentralized aspects of
usage control. To this end, we summarize the main hypothesis of our research
proposal as follows:

Eﬀective decentralized usage control may be achieved by: (i)
a general-purpose policy language that can support diﬀerent
domains and applications of usage control; (ii) an enforcement
mechanism that can address the challenges of dynamicity and
unpredictability in decentralized environments ; and (iii) an
administrative framework that oﬀers users more control, trust
and transparency over the use of their data.

4

Ines Akaichi

Fig. 1. Taxonomy of Usage Control Requirements

Our hypothesis leads to the following research questions:

1) How can semantic web technologies be used to enhance the ﬂexibility and
extensibility of usage control policy languages?
2)What are the most suitable mechanisms for enforcing usage control policies in
decentralized environments?
3) What are the most eﬀective tools and techniques that can be used to provide
data owners with more control, trust and transparency with respect to how their
data are being used?

4 Preliminary Results

In an eﬀort to establish an overview of what has been done in the ﬁeld of usage
control, a fundamental step was to gather and compare the predominant ap-
proaches to usage control, i.e., frameworks, found in the literature. To conduct
this comparison, a very initial task was to examine the diﬀerent requirements
that have been used to guide the development of various usage control solutions.
The requirements were then used to compare existing frameworks in order to
assess their overall completeness.

To this end, in our survey paper on usage control [1], which is submitted
to a Q1 journal and is currently under review, we outline the following key
contributions: (i) a taxonomy of usage control requirements brought from the
literature. The taxonomy, which is depicted in Figure 1, is divided into three
high level usage control dimensions, i.e. the speciﬁcation of the policy language,
the enforcement mechanism, and the robustness of the overall solution; (ii) the
results of a qualitative comparison of the predominant usage control proposals;
and (iii) various challenges and opportunities for the decentralized usage control
domain that were derived from our comparison.

Semantic Technology based Usage Control for Decentralized Systems

5

Fig. 2. Design Science Research Methodology Process Model adapted from [17]

5 Methodology & Work Plan

To answer our research questions, we adopt the design science research method-
ology (DSRM) presented by [17]. Design science research is a paradigm focused
on improving disciplinary knowledge based on the development of innovative
artifacts. In Figure 2, we present our process model for conducting our research,
which consists of the following activities:

Identify Problem & Motivate. This activity deﬁnes the research motivation by
pinpointing existing problems and gaps in a speciﬁc research area. To this end,
our review article [1] outlined the state of the art in decentralized usage control
and identiﬁed various gaps with respect to the speciﬁcation, enforcement, and
administration of policies.

Deﬁne Objectives of a Solution. The objectives of a solution can be deduced from
the problem deﬁnition. In our research, the objectives represent the requirements
collected in the literature whereby a usage control solution is expected to address.
Thus, we used the set of requirements to identify gaps in the domain by analyzing
solutions and to what extent they cover these requirements. The full list of
requirements is depicted in Figure 1.

Design & Development. In this activity, artifacts are created. The challenges
and opportunities presented in our overview paper drive the development of
new artifacts, while the requirements determine the desired functionality of these
artifacts. In our proposal, the following artifacts are to be considered:

A usage control policy language. We plan to develop a general purpose us-
age control policy language based on deontic operators with extended capa-
bility to include domain speciﬁc knowledge using semantic web technologies.
Inspired by the SPECIAL policy language [3], we began developing the Us-
age Control Policy (UCP) language designed on the basis of deontic concepts
(i.e., permission, prohibition, obligation, and dispensation) and constraints
or conditions on data usage. In addition, the policy language is built on top
of domain ontologies, which provides ﬂexibility in expressing diﬀerent types
of usage control policies. The initial version of our Usage Control Policy lan-
guage only supports very simple conditions. Concretely, we plan to examine

6

Ines Akaichi

the suitability of various ﬁne-grained conditions, such as actions that are
bounded by cardinality restrictions and conditions that are tightly coupled
to various actors and/or goals. Further, we want to study the expressiveness
of various obligations and conditions and how they can be eﬀectively struc-
tured into various policy proﬁles using Description Logic (DL) together with
well-understood semantics and complexity.

An enforcement framework. We plan to develop an enforcement framework
that is able to leverage oﬀ the shelf reasoners, such as HermiT and FaCT++.
Inspired by the works of [13, 6], the DL based policy proﬁles together with
the reasoning engine will be used to automatically check the compliance of
data usage against usage control policies. To this end, we plan to leverage
DL deductive reasoning capabilities to reason about usage control policies.
As mentioned in [4], the advantage of using DL and consequently, OWL2, is
that the majority of the policy-reasoning tasks are decidable and tractable,
which is very important when making decisions regarding policy compliance
in dynamic environments. In addition, we plan to explore the suitability of
enforcement strategies (e.g. sticky policies [15], logs [5], data ﬂow tracking
tools [11]) that enable the enforcement of decentralized usage control.
Data empowerment tools and technologies. Empowering users means fa-
cilitating their awareness through tools that give data owners more control,
trust and transparency over how their data are used. Thus, we plan to ex-
tend the existing SOLID administration application, which is initially used
to manage access controls, by including usage control. The enhanced appli-
cation aims to empower users by allowing them to share their preferences
for how their data should be used, transparently display system-related de-
cisions and actions in terms of how their data is actually used, and provide
a secure and trusted environment for users to share their data, among other
things. To this end, we plan to explore various tools and techniques that can
be used to provide data owners with more control, trust, and transparency,
such as using transparency enhancement tools or trust management tech-
niques. The development of this interface will be guided by various design
principles emerging from the literature that are likely to support control,
trust and transparency [9].

Demonstration. This activity is used to demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of artifacts
in a given context that supports various policies such as access control, licensing,
privacy, etc. We plan to evaluate the suitability of the artifacts by extending the
SOLID platform to support usage control, i.e., by integrating our usage control
policy language and enforcement framework. In particular, we plan to apply the
resulting platform to various use cases provided by the KnowGraphs2 project
partners. For instance, the ﬁrst use case originates from the IoT domain, in which
it describes a data sharing platform that connects users to various IoT devices
[1]. The second use case is from the ﬁnancial domain, depicting a market data
supply chain where diﬀerent parties exchange data for ﬁnancial instruments3.

2 https://knowgraphs.eu/
3 https://w3c.github.io/market-data-odrl-proﬁle/md-odrl-proﬁle.html

Semantic Technology based Usage Control for Decentralized Systems

7

Evaluation. This activity involves comparing the goals of a solution to the actual
results observed when using the artifact in the demonstration. The evaluation
of the adequacy of the policy language involves evaluating the expressiveness of
the policy using the set of requirements that involve the speciﬁcation dimension.
While, the evaluation of the enforcement framework depends on using the set
of requirements from the enforcement and robustness dimension. In turn, the
evaluation of the administration framework depends on a couple of usability
testing methods inspired by the work of legal and privacy researchers.

Communication. This activity concerns communicating the results of our re-
search. In our case, every artifact is mapped to a research article that will be
submitted to journals and conferences, as well as to draft speciﬁcations.

6 Conclusion

In this proposal, we explored the application of usage control in decentralized
environments. Our gap analysis in the area of usage control identiﬁed various
challenges in terms of speciﬁcation, enforcement and administration of usage
control policies. To this end, we discussed our research questions, our approach
to addressing these challenges, our preliminary results, our future work, and the
methodology that will guide our research.

Acknowledgements. This research is conducted under the supervision of Asst.
Prof. Sabrina Kirrane and is funded by the European Union Horizon 2020 re-
search and innovation program under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agree-
ment No 860801.

References

1. Akaichi, I., Kirrane, S.: Usage control speciﬁcation, enforcement, and robustness:

A survey (2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.04800

2. Basin, D., Harvan, M., Klaedtke, F., Z˘alinescu, E.: Monpoly: Monitoring usage-
control policies. In: International conference on runtime veriﬁcation. Springer,
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2011)
3. Bonatti, P., Kirrane, S., Petrova,

I., Sauro, L., Schlehahn, E.: SPECIAL
(2018),

rep., H2020 Project

Deliverable D2.5 Policy Language V2. Tech.
https://specialprivacy.ercim.eu

4. Bonatti, P., Kirrane, S., Petrova, I., Sauro, L.: Machine understandable policies

and gdpr compliance checking. KI - K¨unstliche Intelligenz (07 2020)

5. Bonatti, P., Kirrane, S., Polleres, A., Wenning, R.: Transparent personal data
processing: The road ahead. In: Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security. SAFE-
COMP. Springer International Publishing, Cham (09 2017)

6. Bonatti, P.A., Olmedilla, D.: Driving and monitoring provisional trust negotia-
tion with metapolicies. IEEE International Workshop on Policies for Distributed
Systems and Networks (2005)

8

Ines Akaichi

7. Bradshaw,
an

J.M., Dutﬁeld,
industrial-strength
ward
dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=267985.268008

open

S., Benoit, P., Woolley,

J.D.: Kaos:

agent

architecture

(1997),

to-
http://

8. Cao, Q.H., Giyyarpuram, M., Farahbakhsh, R., Crespi, N.: Policy-based usage
control for a trustworthy data sharing platform in smart cities. Future Generation
Computer Systems 107 (2020)

9. Fischer-H¨ubner, S., Angulo, J., Karegar, F., Pulls, T.: Transparency, privacy and
trust - technology for tracking and controlling my data disclosures: Does this work?
In: IFIPTM (2016)

10. Garcia, D.Z.G., de Toledo, M.B.F.: A web service privacy framework based on
a policy approach enhanced with ontologies. IEEE International Conference on
Computational Science and Engineering - Workshops (2008)

11. Hu, W., Ardeshiricham, A., Kastner, R.: Hardware information ﬂow tracking. ACM

Comput. Surv. 54 (may 2021)

12. Jung, C., Eitel, A., Schwarz, R.: Enhancing cloud security with context-aware
usage control policies. Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI), Proceedings - Series of
the Gesellschaft fur Informatik (GI) (2014)

13. Kagal, L., Finin, T.W., Joshi, A.: A policy language for a pervasive computing
environment. In: International Workshop on Policies for Distributed Systems and
Networks (POLICY). IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA (2003)
14. Kateb, D., Elrakaiby, Y., Mouelhi, T., Rubab, I., Le Traon, Y.: Towards a full
support of obligations in xacml. In: Risks and Security of Internet and Systems.
Springer International Publishing, Cham (08 2014)

15. Miorandi, D., Rizzardi, A., Sicari, S., Coen-Porisini, A.: Sticky policies: A survey.

IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 32 (2020)

16. Park, J., Sandhu, R.: The uconabc usage control model. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst.

Secur. 7 (Feb 2004)

17. Peﬀers, K., Tuunanen, T., Rothenberger, M., Chatterjee, S.: A design science re-
search methodology for information systems research. J. Manage. Inf. Syst. 24 (dec
2007)

18. Pellegrini, T., Havur, G., Steyskal, S., Panasiuk, O., Fensel, A., Mireles-Chavez,
V., Thurner, T., Polleres, A., Kirrane, S., Sch¨onhofer, A.: Dalicc: A license man-
agement framework for digital assets (2019)

19. Pretschner, A.: An overview of distributed usage control – extended abstract. In:
Proceedings of the International Conference on Knowledge Engineering (2009)
20. Sambra, A., Corlosquet, S.: Webid 1.0 - web identity and discovery.
https://dvcs.w3.org/hg/WebID/raw-ﬁle/tip/spec/identity-respec.html (2015)
21. Sch¨utte, J., Brost, G.S.: Lucon: Data ﬂow control for message-based iot systems.
In: International Conference On Trust, Security And Privacy In Computing And
Communications/International Conference On Big Data Science And Engineering
(TrustCom/BigDataSE). IEEE, USA (2018)

22. Steyskal, S., Polleres, A.: Deﬁning expressive access policies for linked data using
the odrl ontology 2.0. In: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Semantic Systems. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA
(2014)

23. Vos, M.D., Kirrane, S., Padget, J., Satoh, K.: Odrl policy modelling and compliance
checking. In: RuleML+RR. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2019)
24. W3C: The open digital rights language (odrl). https://www.w3.org/TR/odrl-

model/ (2018)

25. Weber, L.C.P., Silva, T.: A framework for usage control policy enforcement. Mas-

ter’s thesis (2010), supervised by Pretschner, Alexander

