Astronomy&Astrophysicsmanuscript no. Yark
June 23, 2022

©ESO 2022

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

2
2

]
P
E
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
1
2
9
0
1
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

The diurnal Yarkovsky effect of irregularly shaped asteroids

Yang-Bo Xu1, 2, Li-Yong Zhou1,2,3, Hejiu Hui4, and Jian-Yang Li5

1 School of Astronomy and Space Science, Nanjing University, 163 Xianlin Avenue, Nanjing 210046, China
2 Key Laboratory of Modern Astronomy and Astrophysics in Ministry of Education, Nanjing University, China
3 Institute of Space Astronomy and Extraterrestrial Exploration (NJU & CAST), Nanjing University, China
4 State Key Laboratory for Mineral Deposits Research & Lunar and Planetary Science Institute, School of Earth Sciences and

Engineering, Nanjing University

5 Planetary Science Institute, Tucson, AZ, USA

ABSTRACT

The Yarkovsky eﬀect plays an important role in the motions of small celestial bodies. Increasingly improving observations bring the
need of high-accuracy modelling of the eﬀect. Using a multiphysics software COMSOL, we model the diurnal Yarkovsky eﬀect in
three dimensions and compare the results with that derived from the widely adopted theoretical linear model. We ﬁnd that the linear
model presents a high accuracy for spherical asteroids in most cases. The ranges of parameters in which the relative error of the
linear model is over 10% are explored. For biaxial ellipsoidal asteroids (particularly oblate ones), the linear model systematically
10%. The diurnal eﬀect on triaxial ellipsoids is periodic for which no linear model
overestimates the transverse Yarkovsky force by
is available. Our numerical calculations show that the average eﬀects on triaxial ellipsoids are stronger than that on biaxial ellipsoids.
We also investigate the diurnal eﬀect on asteroids of real shapes and ﬁnd it be overestimated by the linear model averagely by 16%,
with a maximum up to 35%. To estimate the strength of Yarkovsky eﬀect directly from the shape, we introduce a quantity “eﬀective
area” for asteroids of any shapes, and ﬁnd a signiﬁcant linear relationship between the Yarkovsky migration rate and the eﬀective
area. This brings great convenience to the estimation in practice.

∼

Key words. celestial mechanics – minor planets, asteroids: general – methods: miscellaneous

1. Introduction

The Yarkovsky eﬀect is an important non-gravitational eﬀect for
meter-sized to kilometer-sized asteroids. Due to the rotation and
revolution around the Sun, an asteroid has an asymmetric tem-
perature distribution on its surface. Such temperature distribu-
tion produces asymmetric thermal re-radiation from the asteroid
and thus imposes a net recoil force, causing a slow but contin-
uous alteration of the asteroid’s orbit. Caused by rotation and
revolution, the eﬀect consists of two components, diurnal and
seasonal eﬀects.

This eﬀect was named after Ivan Osipovich Yarkovsky, a
Polish engineer in Russia who proposed in 1901 such a thermal
eﬀect to compensate for the resistance of “ether” (refer to Beek-
man (2005, 2006) for more information on Yarkovsky and the
discovery of his eﬀect). However, it had been forgotten for nearly
half a century until Öpik (1951) noticed it when he was studying
the motion of small objects orbiting the Sun. In the meantime,
Radzievskii (1952) described the same eﬀect without knowing
of Yarkovsky’s work. Rubincam (1987) observationally discov-
ered the Yarkovsky eﬀect from the unexpected variation of the
along-track acceleration of the geodetic satellite LAGEOS, and
developed a ‘LAGEOS-taylored’ technique for computing the
thermal force on a rapidly rotating body. Thus, sometimes the ef-
fect was also called Yarkovsky-Radzievskii eﬀect or Yarkovsky-
Rubincam eﬀect.

It becomes a hot topic because it has many implications in
the dynamic evolution of the solar system small bodies and the
dynamics of near-Earth asteroid, including hazard mitigation for

Send oﬀprint requests to: L.-Y. Zhou, e-mail: zhouly@nju.edu.cn

potentially hazardous asteroids (PHAs). Farinella et al. (1998)
provided a uniﬁed description of the Yarkovsky eﬀect in both
diurnal and seasonal variants, and discussed some issues in me-
teorite science relevant to the eﬀect. They proposed that small as-
teroid fragments in the main belt have enough mobility to reach
the resonances with the help of this eﬀect and then be deliv-
ered to the Earth-crossing region, which provides an explana-
tion for the fact that the meteorite cosmic ray exposure ages of
near-Earth objects are much longer than their dynamical life-
times. Farinella & Vokrouhlický (1999) calculated the semima-
jor axis displacements of asteroids between 1 and 10 kilometers
in mean radius over their collisional lifetimes, and proposed that
the semimajor axis drift may spread the tight clustering of an as-
teroid family in an observable way which is known later as the
V-shape in the distribution of family members.

Based on previous models (Peterson 1976; Afonso et al.
1995), Vokrouhlický (1998a, 1999) developed a complete lin-
ear model for the Yarkovsky force acting on spherical asteroids.
A general formulation for both diurnal and seasonal eﬀects was
provided for any orientation of the spin axis. The main assump-
tion is that the temperature throughout the body does not vary
much. Vokrouhlický (1998b) also developed a similar theory for
the diurnal force on spheroidal-shaped bodies. Compared with
the corresponding force on a spherical body of the same mass,
diﬀerences up to a factor of three were found.

With the theoretical modelling of the Yarkovsky eﬀect being
almost completed, more attentions were paid to the detection of
it and its application to the motion of small objects in the inner
Solar system such as main belt asteroids, near-Earth objects and
Trojans. Chesley et al. (2003) directly detected the eﬀect for the
ﬁrst time in the motion of a near-Earth asteroid, 6489 Golevka,

Article number, page 1 of 11

 
 
 
 
 
 
A&Aproofs: manuscript no. Yark

with radar observations. Then the ﬁrst detection of the eﬀect for
main belt asteroids was made by Nesvorný & Bottke (2004).

The Yarkovsky eﬀect could be beneﬁcial to the risk mitiga-
tion of hazardous near-Earth asteroids (NEA) colliding with the
Earth (Spitale 2002). For example, an albedo modiﬁcation tech-
nique was designed as a permanently-acting impact risk mitiga-
tion of a hazardous NEA (Hyland et al. 2010).

With a large number of asteroids and asteroid families, the
main belt provides a good opportunity to investigate the eﬀect.
Bottke et al. (2001) demonstrated that the spreading of Koronis
family could be caused by the Yarkovsky eﬀect instead of colli-
sions, which resolved the contradiction that the required ejection
velocities derived from collision models are much higher than
results from impact experiments and simulations. Tsiganis et al.
(2003) studied the 7/3 Kirkwood gap and proposed that the short-
lived asteroids in it were replenished by its neighbouring aster-
oids from the Koronis and Eos families. The Yarkovsky-aided
transit of asteroids across the 7/3 gap is further investigated in
great details recently by Xu et al. (2020a). Based on the V shape
spreading, Spoto et al. (2015) make a family classiﬁcation and
estimate their ages.

The Yarkovsky eﬀect also plays an important role in the
long-term dynamics of the Trojans of terrestrial planets. Scholl
et al. (2005b) concluded that primordial Venus Trojans of tad-
pole orbits would have disappeared by now due to this eﬀect. As
for Mars Trojans, Scholl et al. (2005a) showed that the eﬀect has
little inﬂuence on the currently known Mars Trojans but is strong
enough to destabilize Trojans smaller than 10 m within 4.5 Gyr.
Zhou et al. (2019) present the asymmetric stabilities of the pro-
grade and retrograde rotating Earth Trojans due to the Yarkovsky
eﬀect and rule out the existence of undetected primordial Earth
Trojans.

The improving accuracy of observations brings the need of
more accurate models. Although the linear model developed by
Vokrouhlický (1999) is convenient to use, its assumptions of
small variation of surface temperature and circular orbits may be
violated in practice. Vokrouhlický & Farinella (1998) developed
a one-dimensional numerical model of the seasonal eﬀect on
large asteroids, and they found that the linear approximation led
to an overestimation by about 15%. Spitale & Greenberg (2001)
simulated the diurnal and seasonal eﬀects on a sphere by directly
solving the heat equation in three dimensions with a ﬁnite diﬀer-
ence method, and they found that a stony asteroid on a high-
eccentricity orbit drifted in semimajor axis further than on a cir-
cular orbit. A similar numerical evaluation of Yarkovsky eﬀect
on the eccentricity was reported by Spitale & Greenberg (2002).
Chesley et al. (2003) computed the Yarkovsky eﬀect on the as-
teroid Golevka using a one-dimensional numerical model incor-
porating its radar-derived shape. Capek & Vokrouhlický (2005)
proposed a complex one-dimensional numerical model, and il-
lustrated its power by two examples including a tumbling rotator
and a binary system. Rozitis & Green (2011) developed a new
complex model called the Advanced Thermophysical Model to
take account of the beaming eﬀect caused by the surface rough-
ness and other eﬀects.

The beneﬁt of high accuracy of these numerical models is
limited by their high complexity and low eﬃciency in computa-
tion. The linear model is still widely adopted for its simplicity.
Few discussions on the accuracy of the linear model can be found
e.g. in Sekiya et al. (2012) for the diurnal eﬀect on a spherical
body. Based on the general solution of the temperature distribu-
tion analytically obtained from the linear model, Sekiya et al.
(2012) derive the nonlinear solution with an iterative method,
and ﬁnd that the maximum diﬀerence between the linear and

Article number, page 2 of 11

nonlinear solutions is 13% in terms of the rate of semimajor
axis changing. Using a multiphysics software COMSOL, Basart
et al. (2012) and Groath et al. (2014) estimated the Yarkovsky
eﬀect on the asteroid 101955 Bennu (provisional designation
1999 RQ36), considered it as a spherical body, and made a sim-
ple comparison with the results from Vokrouhlický (1999) and
Sekiya et al. (2012).

Considering the great convenience of the linear model of the
Yarkovsky eﬀect in application but few discussions on its accu-
racy, especially for asteroids with irregular shapes, it is worth-
while studying the applicability of the linear model in greater
detail. Here in this paper we report our investigations on the ap-
plicability of the linear model for the diurnal eﬀect by compar-
ing it with the numerical model. Our study concerns two issues.
One is the diﬀerence between the linear model and numerical
simulations for spheroidal asteroids, and the other is the devi-
ation caused by approximating irregular asteroids as spheroids
and treating them by the linear model. The rest of this paper is
organized as follows. In Sect. 2, we review the basic theory of
heat transfer problem and set up our numerical model. Then, in
Sect. 3 we compare the linear model with the numerical sim-
ulations, investigating the dependence of validity of the linear
model on thermal, dynamical and geometrical parameters of as-
teroids. Finally, conclusions are summarised in Sect. 4.

2. Method

2.1. Basic theory

The Yarkovsky eﬀect is a manifestation of the nonuniform tem-
perature distribution on an asteroid’s surface. Therefore, the core
issue in modelling the Yarkovsky eﬀect is to derive the tempera-
ture distribution in a heat transfer problem.

The heat transfer happens in two ways in an asteroid, i.e.,
radiation on the surface and conduction in the interior. In a ro-
tating body-ﬁxed frame, the conduction can be described by the
Fourier equation of temperature T :

ρC

∂T
∂t

= K

2T,

∇

(1)

∇

2 is the Laplace operator, K, C, ρ are the thermal conduc-
where
tivity, speciﬁc heat capacity and density of the material, respec-
tively. The radiation happens on the asteroid’s surface, which
leads to a boundary condition reﬂecting the conservation of en-
ergy:

ǫσT 4 + K

n

∂T
∂r

·

!

= α

E

.

(2)

The ﬁrst term on the left-hand side and the right-hand side are ra-
diation terms, accounting for the energy re-radiated by the aster-
oid to outer space and the energy absorbed from the Sun, respec-
tively. The second term accounts for the energy conducted to the
deeper layers of the asteroid. As for the notations, ǫ denotes the
emissivity, σ the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, n the unit vector
normal to the surface, α the absorption coeﬃcient and
the ex-
ternal (solar) radiation ﬂux. These two equations are diﬃcult to
solve analytically and some approximations must be made, e.g.,
the linear approximation proposed by Vokrouhlický (1998a).

E

As long as the temperature distribution is derived somehow,
and assuming a Lambert surface, the net recoil force of the ther-
mal radiation of the asteroid can be obtained:

F =

−

Z

2
3c

ǫσT 4n dS ,

(3)

 
Xu et al.: The diurnal Yarkovsky eﬀect of irregularly shaped asteroids

where c is the speed of light, S the unit surface area, and the
integral domain is the whole surface.

2.2. Numerical setup

The temperature distribution in our model is numerically simu-
lated using the commercial software, COMSOL Multiphysicsr
1, designed for solving complex physical problems involving
coupled physical processes in high degree of freedom. Unlike
in most 1D numerical models, the interactions among surface el-
ements, including surface-to-surface shading and radiation, are
considered in our simulations.

The model is set in three dimension (3D). The heat transfer
inside the body by conduction and on the surface by radiation are
calculated taking into account the surface-to-surface radiation. A
temporal (not stationary) distribution of surface temperature in
the rotating body-ﬁxed frame is calculated using COMSOL.

Assuming the asteroid is a perfect sphere, we create a sphere
of radius R = 1 m and set its physical parameters. For simplicity,
the thermal conductivity K and speciﬁc heat capacity C are set
as constants, and the emissivity equals the absorption coeﬃcient,
ǫ = α = 0.9. Initially the asteroid is assumed to be an isothermal
sphere, with the initial temperature determined by the equilib-
rium between its thermal radiation and absorption from the solar
radiation, i.e., 4πR2
The heat ﬂux

ǫσT 4 = πR2
·
depends on the distance between the aster-
oid and the Sun. In a rotating body-ﬁxed frame, the Sun orbits
the asteroid, acting as an external radiation source. The orbital
period of the Sun in fact is the rotation period of the asteroid P.
Observing from an inertial (non-rotating) frame, we are sup-
posed to see ﬁnally a static temperature distribution in the aster-
oid. When the temperature variation at the subsolar point on the
surface is less than 1% in a rotation period, we regard the equi-
librium is reached, which generally takes an integration time of
50 P in most cases of our simulations.

E

E

α

.

·

unless noted otherwise. We realize that the period of 1000 s is
really short even for a 1 m-radius small asteroid, but this value
does not aﬀect the following analyses in this paper and in fact
the value P can be traded with ρ and C, as we will see later.

As illustrated in Fig. 1, along the depth direction, the temper-
ature on each point varies with time as the asteroid rotates and
the heat propagates inside. For a point on the asteroid surface
(depth 0.0 mm) the temperature is high near local noon (when it’s
the subsolar point), and as the asteroid rotates the temperature
drops down through dusk, midnight and dawn. It is worth noting
that the hottest moment generally is not at noon but shortly after
noon due to the “thermal inertia” of the asteroid material. For the
same reason, on a subsurface point, e.g. at depth of 0.7 mm, the
temperature around dusk is higher than at noon. Going deeper
inside, the temperature approaches a constant value, i.e. below
a certain depth the asteroid core has a static temperature. In
practice, for the purpose of studying the thermodynamics, we
can simulate the asteroid by a spherical shell of a certain thick-
ness and a solid core of a constant temperature, as we mentioned
above in Section 2.2.

380

360

340

320

at noon
at dusk
at midnight
at dawn

)
K
(
T

300

280

260

240

220

One of the critical steps in numerical scheme of ﬁnite ele-
ment method (as in COMSOL) is to build the mesh. An appro-
priate mesh must be a compromise between accuracy and ef-
ﬁciency. After plenty of tests for the spherical asteroid model,
we generate prisms mesh to ﬁll the spherical shell and stuﬀ the
central hollow with tetrahedral mesh. The core of sphere barely
aﬀects the ﬁnal temperature on the surface, because the heat ﬂux
cannot penetrate deeply in most cases when the object is not too
small, thermal inertia not too high, and rotation not too slow.
Therefore in practice, a hollow sphere, instead of a solid one, is
accurate enough to model the asteroid if a boundary condition
of thermal insulation is set on the inner surface of the spherical
shell with an appropriate thickness.

200

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5
2.0
2.5
depth (mm)

3.0

3.5

4.0

Fig. 1. Temperature along a certain radius on equatorial plane at four
diﬀerent time. The depth is measured downward from the surface.

Since the heat transfer and temperature variation happen
mainly in the skin layer of the asteroid, the thickness of such
layer could be a good reference to our mesh building strategy.
In fact, a characteristic quantity called “penetration depth” in the
literature that can be derived by dimensional analysis is deﬁned
as (Wesselink 1948):

2.3. Mesh building

The heat transfer and temperature variation in an asteroid actu-
ally occur mainly on the surface and in the shallow subsurface
region, but not deep into the body. We show this by calculat-
ing the temperature in the body using a 1 m-radius asteroid as
an example. We parametrize the asteroid like a typical regolith-
3, a conductiv-
covered asteroid with a density ρ = 1500 kg m−
1, and a speciﬁc heat capacity C =
1 K−
ity K = 0.0015 W m−
1. A rotation period P = 1000 s, a spin axis obliq-
1 K−
680 J kg−
uity γ = 0◦, and a heliocentric distance r = 1 AU are also as-
signed. These parameters are adopted in the rest of the paper

1 COMSOL Multiphysicsr v. 5.6. www.comsol.com. COMSOL AB,
Stockholm, Sweden.

ls =

KP
2πρC

.

s

(4)

Taking the parameters assigned to the asteroid adopted in this
0.5 mm. At
paper, the penetration depth can be calculated ls
this depth, the ﬂuctuation of temperature decreases to 1/e of the
surface amplitude. Theoretically, at a depth of 9 times ls, the
4.
variation reduces to 1/e9

≈

10−

To determine a practical thickness of the hollow shell, a cou-
ple of tests have been performed. In these tests, we try diﬀerent
thickness of the shell and calculate the temperature on the sur-
face, with which the Yarkovsky force can be obtained through
Eq. (3). Since the force component in the transverse direction
(perpendicular to the incident solar radiation in the orbital plane)
dominates the Yarkovsky eﬀect on semimajor axis drifting, we

≈

Article number, page 3 of 11

A&Aproofs: manuscript no. Yark

Therefore, pure numerical simulations are still necessary in
many circumstances. Meanwhile, the linear model provides ap-
propriate estimation of the Yarkovsky eﬀect when the shape of
asteroid is unknown. It is worth assessing the deviation of the
linear model from the numerical simulations for asteroids with
diﬀerent shapes, which serves as the purpose of this section. We
will present our investigations on Yarkovsky eﬀect for spherical,
ellipsoidal and irregular asteroids.

0.5 mm thick
5 mm thick

270

315

360

3.1. Spherical asteroid

show the temperature proﬁle along the equator and the transverse
Yarkovsky force Ft in our tests in Fig. 2.

400

350

)
K
(

300

T

250

200

150

0

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

)
N
µ
(

t

F

45

90

135
180
225
longitude ( ◦ )

1.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.5

2.0
3.5
thickness (mm)

3.0

4.0

4.5

5.0

Fig. 2. Inﬂuence of adopted shell thickness on the simulated results.
Upper panel: Temperature distribution along the equator, for two values
of shell thickness. Lower panel: Dependence of the simulated transverse
Yarkovsky force on the adopted shell thickness.

As shown in Fig. 2, the adopted thickness of the presumed
shell inﬂuences the results signiﬁcantly. The temperature proﬁle
of the case with shell thickness 0.5 mm (= ls) is apparently dif-
ferent from the one of thickness 5.0 mm (upper panel), which
results in a signiﬁcant diﬀerence (about 70% relatively) in terms
of the transverse Yarkovsky force (lower panel). The calculated
force varies greatly ﬁrst as small thickness is adopted, and it
gradually converges to a certain value when the thickness in-
creases. Obviously the variation is an artiﬁcial eﬀect due to the
fact that the adopted shell is too thin to practically embody the
thermodynamic cycle of the surface layer within. We ﬁnd in the
lower panel of Fig. 2 that the deviation of Ft from the convergent
value (1.04497 µN) at a thickness of 2.5 mm is about 0.1% and
5 at 4.0 mm. So in this paper we conservatively
it reaches
set ten times of penetration depth (10ls) as the thickness of the
hollow shell, though we will suggest 5ls for general purposes.
From now on, the numerical model of an asteroid is assumed to
consist of a shell of thickness 10ls and an isothermal core inside
whose temperature is the same as on the inner boundary of the
shell.

10−

∼

Such mesh strategy leads to tens of thousands of mesh ele-
ments under which our desktop workstation computer takes typi-
cally one hour to ﬁnish the computation for each simulation case
till a steady temperature distribution is reached.

3. Comparisons with linear models

It is diﬃcult to obtain analytically the temperature distribution
on the surface of an asteroid from Eq. (1) and Eq. (2). However,
in the linear model, a solution has been found after assuming that
the temperature does not vary greatly throughout the asteroid’s
surface thus the term T 4 in Eq. (2) could be linearized via Taylor
expansion. But in fact, in the example shown in Fig. 1, the tem-
perature varies between a minimum of 215 K and a maximum
of 370 K, more than 70% higher than the minimum. In addition,
even if the linear model is used, the equations can only be solved
analytically for asteroids with certain speciﬁc regular shapes.

Article number, page 4 of 11

Assume a spherical asteroid of radius R = 1.0 m on a circular or-
bit at a distance r = 1.0 AU from the Sun, and use the numerical
simulation (via COMSOL) and the linear model (Vokrouhlický
1998a), we calculate the Yarkovsky eﬀect for diﬀerent values of
parameters. By these calculations, we can check the dependence
of the Yarkovsky eﬀect on parameters, and verify the validity
of the linear model under diﬀerent conditions. For this purpose,
we calculate the Yarkovsky force or the rate of semimajor axis
migration.

As mentioned in Sect. 2.3, the heat conduction is limited in
a thin layer (we adopt 10ls in this paper). The temperature dis-
tribution on an asteroid’s surface (thus the accuracy of the linear
model) is generally independent of the asteroid’s size unless the
penetration depth is comparable to the size. Thus we note that
the radius of R = 1.0 m adopted here is large enough to show the
relative accuracies of the linear theory.

3.1.1. Dependence on ρ, C and P

1K−

1K−

1, K = 0.0015 W m−

In Fig. 3 we show our calculations with density ρ as the vari-
able. To obtain the results in this ﬁgure, all parameters but ρ are
1, P = 1000 s
ﬁxed (C = 680 J kg−
as mentioned before). The heat transfers slower when the mate-
rial density is higher, and the hottest spot on the asteroid surface
diﬀers further from the subsolar point. As a result, the transverse
component of the Yarkovsky force, which is the net recoil force
of the thermal radiation, will increase as ρ increases, while the
radial component decreases for the same reason, just as we can
see from Fig. 3. In the meantime, the peak temperature decreases
with increasing ρ, and this is why the transverse force begins to
decrease when log ρ > 3.5.

Similar argument can be made too for the parameter of spe-
ciﬁc capacity C. In fact, if we regard the rotation period P as
a parameter and measure time in P, i.e. substitute time t by
τ = t/P, then Eq. (1) can be rewritten as

ρC
P

∂T
∂τ

= K

2T .

∇

(5)

We note that ρ, C and P appear only here in equations describ-
ing the thermal dynamics. Consequently, these three parameters
degenerate into a combination (ρC/P), and thus the Yarkovsky
eﬀect depends on C and 1/P in a similar way as on ρ (Fig. 3).
This has also been conﬁrmed by our numerical simulations.

The diﬀerences between the results from numerical simula-
tions and the linear model can be seen in Fig. 3, particularly in
the transverse component of the force that drives the asteroid
to drift in semimajor axis. It must be noted that the diﬀerences
are acceptable. The relative diﬀerence shown in the lower panel
of Fig. 3 is nearly always within 10%, implying that the linear
model works very well in most cases for spherical asteroids.

We note that the relative diﬀerence for transverse force is
3. Taking

a little above 10% for the density around

103 kg m−

∼

 
 
Xu et al.: The diurnal Yarkovsky eﬀect of irregularly shaped asteroids

simulated
theoretical

radial
transverse

]
)
N
µ
(
F
[
g
o
l

F
/
F
∆

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

−0.25

−0.50

0.10

0.05

0.00

−0.05

−0.10

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

log[ρ (kg m−

3)]

3.5

4.0

Fig. 3. Comparisons of the Yarkovsky forces derived from the linear
model (theoretical) and numerical simulations for varying density ρ.
Upper panel: The forces (blue for radial and red for transverse com-
ponents) versus ρ. Solid curves refer to simulated results while dashed
curves are for the linear model. Lower panel: The fractional diﬀerences
between results from two methods. Blue and red curves are for the radial
and transverse components, while the grey and light grey areas indicate
the diﬀerence less than 5% and 10%, respectively.

∼

680 J K−

the ﬁxed parameters C and P adopted in calculations, this cor-
1m−
1. In addition, at around
responds to ρC/P
1, the rel-
3s−
log ρ = 1.7 corresponding to ρC/P
35 J K−
ative deviations of both radial and transverse forces are very
3 and
close to zero simultaneously. If we ﬁx ρ = 1500 kg m−
1, these two ρC/P values can be translated
C = 680 J kg−
to rotation period of 1 500 s and 30 000 s, respectively.

1m−

1K−

3s−

∼

3.1.2. Dependence on K

Diﬀerent from ρ, C and P, the thermal conductivity K is involved
in both Eq. (1) and Eq. (2), which might make the dependence on
it more complicated. Meanwhile, being diﬃcult to measure di-
rectly in astronomical observation, K of an asteroid is generally
of high uncertainty. We make the similar calculations for varying
K as we have done for ρ, and summarize the results in Fig. 4.

In general, a large value of conductivity K is conducive to
the heat transfer inside an asteroid, so that the temperature on
its surface tends to reach a uniform distribution quickly, leading
to a small Yarkovsky eﬀect, which is reﬂected by the overall
descending proﬁle of curves in the upper panel of Fig. 4.

To describe the relaxation of surface temperature with re-
spect to the rotation, Farinella et al. (1998) introduced a pa-
rameter Θ, which is deﬁned as the ratio between the infrared
energy radiated away from the surface in a rotational period
4πR2ǫσ ¯T 4P) and the thermal energy stored in the “thermally-
(
≈
4πR2δρC ¯T ):
aﬀected surface shell” (
4πR2δρC ¯T
4πR2ǫσ ¯T 4P

≈
ρCδ
ǫσP ¯T 3

Θ =

(6)

=

,

where ¯T denotes the average temperature in the “thermally-
aﬀected surface shell” with a thickness of δ, which can be
roughly estimated as the penetration depth δ = ls. According
to the deﬁnition, Θ > 1 indicates that energy would be stored in
the surface layer eﬃciently while the temperature gradients on
the surface would be built up ineﬃciently, resulting in a small
Yarkovsky eﬀect, and vice versa.

]
)
N
(
F
[
g
o
l

−4

−6

−8

−10

−12

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

simulated
theoretical

Θ = 1

ls = R

radial
transverse

F
/
F
∆

−0.05

−0.10

−0.15

−5

−3

−1

1

3

5

log[K (Wm−

1K−

1)]

Fig. 4. Same as Fig. 3 but for varying thermal conductivity K. In the
upper panel, the vertical orange dotted line refer to the location of Θ = 1
while the vertical grey dashed line indicates where the penetration depth
equals the asteroid’s radius.

Three regimes can be seen in the upper panel of Fig. 4. From
left to right, in the ﬁrst regime of small K, the radial component
of the Yarkovsky force is higher than the transverse component,
implying that the radiation delay angle (the angle between the
hottest spot and the subsolar point) increases with K but is al-
ways beneath 45◦. This regime is expected to be separated by
Θ = 1 from the second regime where the radial Yarkovsky force
is almost the same as the transverse force.

In the second regime, the transverse Yarkovsky force being
approximately equal to the radial force implies a radiation delay
angle of almost 45◦. This regime ends when the thickness (δ)
of the thermally aﬀected layer equals the asteroid radius. Obvi-
ously, the thickness δ increases with K, thus for a given radius
R the condition δ = R is met at certain value of K. We plot the
location of δ = ls = R in Fig. 4. It is worth to note that two lines
of Θ = 1 and ls = R serve as the boundaries of three regimes
fairly well.

In the third regime where ls > R, the radial force deviates
from transverse force, i.e., the delay angle begins to decrease
from 45◦. When an asteroid is so small (or equivalently, the con-
ductivity is so large) that the heat may transfer easily across the
body from one side to the opposite side, the temperature gradi-
ents (even between the day and night sides) will be hardly built
and the Yarkovsky eﬀect begins to vanish quickly.

As shown in the lower panel of Fig. 4, the relative diﬀer-
ence between the numerical simulation and linear model is al-
ways within 10%, and it converges to zero with increasing K.
For large thermal conductivity, the energy from solar radiation
can be quickly conducted to other regions, and the variation of
temperature across the asteroid will be small so that the condi-
tion for linear model is very well satisﬁed. But the diﬀerence
does not vanish monotonically with increasing K because the
Yarkovsky force depends not only on the temperature asymme-
try on the surface but also on the average temperature.

Substitution of the thickness δ in Eq. (6) by the penetration
depth in Eq. (4) leads to Θ = √ρCK/(ǫσT 3 √2πP). We note that
ρ, C, K in the numerator are all parameters about the material. In
fact, the numerator is just the “thermal inertia”

Γ =

ρCK ,

p

(7)

Article number, page 5 of 11

A&Aproofs: manuscript no. Yark

which represents the capacity of a material to store heat and to
delay its transmission (Ferrari 2007). Γ = 0 indicates instanta-
neous equilibrium with solar radiation throughout the surface,
while Γ =
implies a surface with a constant temperature
(Spencer et al. 1989).

∞

The thermal inertia plays an important role in geophysics and
planetary science. It is the prime intermediary between remote
temperature observations and the geological information includ-
ing the particle size, rock abundance, bedrock outcropping and
the degree of induration (Palluconi & Kieﬀer 1981; Wang et al.
2010) which in turn determine the Yarkovsky eﬀect.

In general, the thermal inertia is supposed to dictate the
strength of the Yarkovsky eﬀect (Delbo et al. 2015). However,
results deduced from the linear model show that this is true only
for the asteroids of large sizes (Xu et al. 2020b). Here we verify
the statement with numerical simulations.

0.0

]
)
N
µ
(

t

F
[
g
o
l

−0.5

−1.0

−1.5

−2.0

R/ls = 1

−0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0
1.5
log[R/ls]

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

Fig. 5. The transverse Yarkovsky force of asteroids with given Γ but
diﬀerent sets of ρ, C, K (see text). The dotted line refers to R/ls = 1.

1s−

2K−

1K−

1K−

1, K = 0.0015 W m−

For a typical regolith-covered asteroid, ρ = 1500 kg m−

3,
1, thus the thermal
C = 680 J kg−
1/2. Keep this Γ0 constant, we vary
inertia Γ0 = 39.11 J m−
K and ρC according to K = Γ2
0/ρC, and make numerical simu-
lations of the Yarkovsky eﬀect. In addition, from the deﬁnition
of penetration depth, we have ls = √P/2πKΓ, thus a varying K
(but ﬁxed Γ) can be translated to a varying R/ls, where R is the
ﬁxed radius of the asteroid (1.0 m here). We show the transverse
Yarkovsky force of an asteroid with constant thermal inertia (Γ0)
but varying K in Fig. 5.

≫

For asteroids of large size (R

ls), the Yarkovsky force
remains constant, implying that it is determined (solely) by the
thermal inertia Γ. For small asteroids whose sizes are compara-
ble to or smaller than the penetration depth, however, the force
varies even the same Γ value is kept, implying that the Γ solely
is not suﬃcient to determine the strength of Yarkovsky eﬀect. In
fact, the solution in which the heat transfer depends only on Γ
can be obtained only when an adiabatic boundary condition was
fulﬁlled (Spencer et al. 1989), i.e. a deep layer of constant tem-
perature exists. When the asteroid is so small, or equivalently the
thermal conductivity K is so large, that its radius is comparable
to the penetration depth, which in practice is rare, the Yarkovsky
eﬀect cannot be correctly estimated if only the thermal inertia is
known.

Article number, page 6 of 11

3.1.3. Dependence on r

As the original drive of the Yarkovsky force, the solar radiation
ﬂux is inversely proportional to the square of heliocentric dis-
tance r, thus the Yarkovsky eﬀect changes with respect to r. Fix
other parameters at typical values but vary the heliocentric dis-
tance, we make the similar calculations and comparisons as in
previous subsections and summarize the results in Fig. 6.

−4

−6

−8

−10

−12

0.2

0.1

0.0

]
)
N
(
F
[
g
o
l

F
/
F
∆

−0.1

−0.2

−1.0

Θ = 1

simulated
theoretical

radial
transverse

−0.5

0.0

0.5
log[r (AU)]

1.0

1.5

2.0

Fig. 6. Same as Fig. 4 but for varying heliocentric distance r.

The Yarkovsky eﬀect declines quickly as the heliocentric dis-
tance r increases. Further away from the Sun, the equilibrium
temperature on an asteroid decreases, thus the thermal parameter
Θ in Eq. (6) increases. The upper panel of Fig. 6 can be divided
into two regimes. In the left regime of small r and Θ < 1, the
transverse force is smaller than the radial force. To the right of
Θ = 1, the Yarkovsky eﬀect is relatively weak but the radial and
transverse forces are almost equal to each other.

The lower panel of Fig. 6 shows that the relative diﬀerence of
the forces obtained from numerical simulations and derived from
the linear model is within 10% in most cases and converges to
null when r increases. However, the consistency is broken when
the asteroid is close to the Sun, with the diﬀerence between the
transverse forces derived from two methods reaching 20% at
r = 0.1 AU. Therefore, particular attention should be paid if we
apply the linear model to asteroids on orbit close to the Sun, or
equivalently if the central star has a high luminosity.

3.2. Biaxialellipsoid

Vokrouhlický (1998b) also developed a linear model for biaxial
ellipsoids rotating around the axis of symmetry. They considered
a class of biaxial ellipsoids with diﬀerent equatorial radii R and
polar radii e1R, and compared their Yarkovsky forces with those
of spherical bodies with the same volume.

Keeping the physical and dynamical parameters the same as
the ones adopted for the spherical asteroid model in previous
subsection, we make several calculations of the Yarkovsky eﬀect
for ellipsoids with the same volume as that of spherical asteroid
of radius 1.0 m but with oblateness e1 ranging from 0.3 to 3.0.
The results are summarized in Fig. 7. We note that the rotation
around the polar axis for ellipsoids with e1 > 1 is unstable and
thus rare in reality. Our main concern in this paper is the calcu-
lation of the Yarkovsky eﬀect.

radial
transverse

Xu et al.: The diurnal Yarkovsky eﬀect of irregularly shaped asteroids

Obviously, when e2 = 1 a triaxial ellipsoid reduces to a biaxial
ellipsoid. And we note that ellipsoids characterized by parameter
e2 and 1/e2 are the same in shape.

Without the rotational symmetry, the temperature distribu-
tion on a triaxial ellipsoid’s surface in the non-rotating frame
should be periodic rather than static, thus the Yarkovsky force
most probably is not constant, as the example in Fig. 8 shows.
Both the radial and transverse forces oscillate with a period of
half of the rotation period. And we ﬁnd that the oscillation am-
plitudes will be ampliﬁed if e2 increases. During the oscillation,
the transverse force may even change direction (from positive to
negative, or vice versa).

0
F
/
1
F

1
F
/
1
F
∆

1.75

1.50

1.25

1.00

0.75

0.50

0.2

0.1

0.0

−0.1

−0.2

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

e1

Fig. 7. The Yarkovsky forces acting on biaxial ellipsoids and the diﬀer-
ence between the linear model and numerical simulations. Upper panel:
The ratio of the forces acting on ellipsoids F1 to those on the sphere F0
versus oblateness e1. Lower panel: The relative diﬀerences between the
forces derived from linear model and numerical simulations. Blue and
red are for the radial and the transverse components, respectively.

)
N
µ
(
F

4

3

2

1

0

In Fig. 7, the Yarkovsky force acting on biaxial ellipsoids is
denoted by F1 and that on the same-volume sphere by F0. The
ratio F1/F0, both for the radial and transverse components, in-
1.75 when e1 increases. For oblate ellip-
creases from
soids (e1 < 1), the Yarkovsky forces are smaller because the nor-
mal vectors of facets on the surface are more likely to be aligned
with the spin axis. On the contrary, the forces are relatively larger
for prolate ellipsoids (e1 > 1).

0.5 to

∼

∼

The lower panel of Fig. 7 shows the relative diﬀerences
between the results for biaxial ellipsoids derived by the linear
model and numerical simulations. Although in most cases the
deviation (∆F1) of the linear model from the numerical simula-
tion (F1) is within 10% (for transverse force) or even 5% (for
radial force), it should be noted that the transverse force derived
from the linear model is always larger than the numerical results
(∆F1 > 0), implying a slight but systematic overestimation ex-
ists in the linear model for the semimajor axis drift driven by
the Yarkovsky eﬀect. We also note that for oblate ellipsoids the
diﬀerence goes up with decreasing oblateness parameter e1, and
0.3). In
it is worse for the radial force (up to
fact, the temperature variation around the equatorial area is rela-
tively large for oblate ellipsoids, so that the linear approximation
causes bigger deviation for the oblate ellipsoids than for prolate
ellipsoids.

20% when e1 →

∼

3.3. Triaxial ellipsoid

Releasing the assumption of having an axis of symmetry from
the biaxial ellipsoid model, we have a triaxial ellipsoid that could
serve as a better approximation to many asteroids, and there is
no any longer the linear model of Yarkovsky eﬀect available for
this case. The ellipsoids considered here have the same volume
as a sphere of radius 1.0 m, and they are characterized by three
free sem-axes (aX, aY, aZ). Two parameters e1, e2 describing the
shape are deﬁned as:

e1 =

aZ
√aXaY

,

e2 =

aX
aY

.

(8)

radial
transverse

−1

9000

9200

9400

9600

9800

10000

t (s)

Fig. 8. Evolutions of the radial force (blue) and transverse force (red)
acting on a triaxial ellipsoid in one rotation period. The ﬂattening
paramters e1 = 0.3 and e2 = 3.

As the net

recoil force of

the thermal radiation,

the
Yarkovsky force basically points to the opposite of the surface
normal direction at the hottest spot. Thus, the angle θ between
the radial-in vector (pointing from subsolar point to the Sun) and
the surface normal vector at the hottest spot determines the di-
rection of the Yarkovsky force. Apparently, for a prograde (ret-
rograde) spherical asteroid, θ > 0 (θ < 0) and the transverse
Yarkovsky force is positive (negative). But for a prograde rotat-
ing (around Z-axis) triaxial ellipsoid, when the long axis (X-axis
for e2 > 1) just overpasses the subsolar point, we may have θ < 0
for a while, of which the duration depends on e2 and thermal pa-
rameters. This is a simple explanation of why the curve of trans-
verse Yarkovsky force periodically crosses F = 0 in Fig. 8.

The oscillating force can be averaged over one rotation pe-
riod. To compare the Yarkovsky eﬀect on the triaxial ellipsoid to
biaxial ellipsoid, we calculate the time-averaged forces (denoted
by F2) for several triaxial ellipsoids, of which the volume, e1
value, and thermal parameters are the same as the corresponding
biaxial ellipsoids. We denote the forces on the biaxial ellipsoids
by F1 and plot the ratio F2/F1 in Fig. 9.

The results show that larger Yarkovsky forces are produced
on triaxial ellipsoids than biaxial ellipsoids, and the smaller e1,
the larger the diﬀerence. For a given e1, the ratio F2/F1 increases
as e2 increases. Especially for prolate ellipsoids (e1 > 1), the
Yarkovsky force on the triaxial ellipsoid is larger than the one on
the biaxial ellipsoid (F2 > F1), while the latter is larger than the
force on sphere of the same volume (F1 > F0, see Fig. 7). Con-
sequently, the Yarkovsky eﬀect on prolate ellipsoids is signiﬁ-
cantly stronger compared to the spherical asteroids. If we adopt

Article number, page 7 of 11

A&Aproofs: manuscript no. Yark

and not common, but the purpose of this paper is not to give the
Yarkovsky eﬀect for a speciﬁc asteroid, and in addition, as we
mentioned previously in Section 2.3, the period can be traded
with the density ρ and heat capacity C. Moreover, the depen-
dence of the Yarkovsky eﬀect on rotational period is already
known (see e.g. Xu et al. 2020b).

radial (e1 = 0.3)
transverse (e1 = 0.3)
radial (e1 = 1)
transverse (e1 = 1)
radial (e1 = 3)
transverse (e1 = 3)

1.40

1.35

1.30

1
F
/
2
F

1.25

1.20

1.15

1.10

1.05

1.6

1.8

2.0

2.2

2.4

2.6

2.8

3.0

e2

Fig. 9. Ratio of the forces acting on triaxial ellipsoids F2 to those on bi-
axial ellipsoids of the same volume F1 versus the ﬂattening parameters
e1 and e2. Blue and red are for radial and transverse forces, while solid
circles, triangles and squares refer to e1 = 0.3, 1 and 3, respectively.

∼

the linear model for spheres or for biaxial ellipsoids to calculate
the Yarkovsky eﬀect on a triaxial-ellipsoid-like asteroid, the es-
timation may have an error of up to
40% (Fig. 9), depending on
how much the shape deviates from a sphere or a biaxial ellipsoid.
Another interesting inference from above calculations is
about the evolution of binary asteroids. Consider a pair of as-
teroids that are similar in size, rotation and composition. If their
shapes are diﬀerent from each other, they might suﬀer signiﬁ-
cantly diﬀerent Yarkovsky eﬀects, resulting in the disassembly
of the binary. Therefore, we are likely to see that the pair of as-
teroids in a binary are similar to each other in shape.

3.4. Real asteroids

Although a growing number of observations indicate that aster-
oids are generally of irregular shapes even if small-scale struc-
tures are ignored, it is common to estimate the diurnal Yarkovsky
eﬀect by assuming the asteroid as an equal-volume sphere and
thus using the linear model. But on the one hand, small asteroids
that usually experience the Yarkovsky eﬀect the most more likely
have irregular shapes, because their self-gravity is too weak to
modify them towards symmetrical shapes unless other eﬀects
such as rotational deformation are in act. On the other hand, the
linear model introduces some errors even for regular shapes like
spheres or biaxial ellipsoids, as we have shown above. Instead of
creating more ﬁctitious shapes, here we use a sample of real as-
teroid shapes to check the diﬀerence between the approximation
of linear model and numerical simulations.

The shapes of 34 real asteroids adopted here are downloaded
from the Planetary Data System2, and we show 4 of them in
Fig. 10. To facilitate comparison, all asteroids are scaled to have
the same volume as a 10 m-radius sphere, and assumed to have
the same thermal parameters ρ, C and K as . All but one (4179
Toutatis, see Fig. 10) of them are assumed to rotate around the
principal axis of the maximum moment of inertia with a period
of 30 min (1800 s), and they are put on circular orbits at 1 AU
from the Sun. We emphasize here that these 34 asteroids pro-
vide us nothing else but a sample of diverse shapes. We note
that the arbitrarily selected rotation period (30 min) here is short

2 https://sbn.psi.edu/pds/shape-models/

Article number, page 8 of 11

(cid:886)(cid:883)(cid:889)(cid:891)(cid:3)(cid:23)(cid:145)(cid:151)(cid:150)(cid:131)(cid:150)(cid:139)(cid:149)

(cid:884)(cid:883)(cid:888)(cid:3)(cid:14)(cid:142)(cid:135)(cid:145)(cid:146)(cid:131)(cid:150)(cid:148)(cid:131)

Fig. 10. The shapes of four asteroids. The spin axis goes through the
barycentre (geometric centre) and is in the direction of Z-axis.

(cid:886)(cid:888)(cid:888)(cid:882)(cid:3)(cid:17)(cid:135)(cid:148)(cid:135)(cid:151)(cid:149)

(cid:884)(cid:890)(cid:888)(cid:889)(cid:3)(cid:22)(cid:150)(cid:135)(cid:139)(cid:144)(cid:149)

For the sake of making direct comparisons, we calculate the
rate of semimajor axis drifting (da/dt) instead of the surface tem-
perature or the Yarkovsky forces, simply because the semimajor
axis drifting is the most prominent manifestation of the diurnal
Yarkovsky eﬀect. We calculate the da/dt by a semi-analytical
method as follows.

In the study of diurnal Yarkovksy eﬀect, since the rotation
period is much shorter than the orbital period (1 yr), it is reason-
able to assume that the temperature distribution on the asteroid’s
surface has reached a (dynamical) equilibrium state at any phase
of its orbit.Therefore, it is possible to calculate the surface tem-
perature and average the Yarkovksy force over one rotational pe-
riod on each position along the orbit. Substitute the Yarkovsky
force, now described by a function of the orbital phase (true
anomaly), to the Gaussian planetary equations and average over
one revolution, we obtain the rate of semimajor axis da/dt.

∝

We summarize our calculations in Fig. 11, in which the
obliquity of spin axis γ of each asteroid is tested in the range
of from 0◦ to 180◦. In the linear model for a spherical aster-
oid, da/dt
cos γ, just as the dashed curve in Fig. 11 shows,
and it seems that this relation holds for asteroids of arbitrary
shapes. For all asteroids in the sample, the diurnal Yarkovsky
eﬀect drives the prograde-spinning asteroids (γ < 90◦) to mi-
grate outward (da/dt > 0) and the retrograde rotators (γ > 90◦)
inward (da/dt < 0). The dependence of migration direction on
obliquity is not aﬀected by the shape.
da/dt
However, the drifting rate

is moderately aﬀected.
|
Except for two “outliers” corresponding to Toutatis-like and
Kleopatra-like asteroids (see Fig. 10), all the rest 32 asteroids
of real shapes migrate in slower paces than that analytically
derived from the linear model for spherical asteroids (dashed
curve in Fig. 11). At γ = 0◦, the linear model gives da/dt =
0.0217 AU/Myr, while the numerical results of the 32 asteroids
distribute from 0.0160 AU/Myr to 0.0212 AU/Myr, with the av-

|

Xu et al.: The diurnal Yarkovsky eﬀect of irregularly shaped asteroids

)
r
y
M
U
A
(

/

t
d
/
a
d

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00

−0.01

−0.02

−0.03

0

30

60

90
γ ( ◦ )

120

150

180

Fig. 11. The rate of semimajor axis drifting da/dt versus the obliquity
of spin axis γ. Solid curves represent simulated results for 34 asteroids
of 10 m radius with real shapes while the dashed curve represents the
analytical result from the linear model for a 10 m-radius sphere.

erage value of 0.0187 AU/Myr. Such statistical result reveals the
possible error of the linear model. If we adopt the linear model
for spherical asteroids to calculate the semimajor axis drift of
asteroids with these real shapes, we will overestimate da/dt av-
eragely by 16%, while the maximum deviation can reach 35%.
The slowest Yarkovsky migration (0.0160 AU/Myr) is found
to happen on the Nereus-like asteroid, and the second slowest
one is Steins-like, both shown in Fig. 10. Compared to other
asteroids, they are apparently more oblate than others. On an
oblate asteroid, the normal directions of surface elements have
relatively small components parallel to the equatorial plane, thus
the recoil force of the thermal radiation (always in the normal
direction) is relatively small and the migration is relatively slow.
On the contrary, if the normal direction of surface elements
tends to be parallel to the equatorial plane, a relatively large
migration speed will be expected. We note that the two “out-
liers” of faster migration in Fig. 11 are the Toutatis-like aster-
oid (da/dt = 0.0287 AU/Myr) and the Kleopatra-like asteroid
(da/dt = 0.0229 AU/Myr). They do have more surface elements
facing outwards in direction parallel to the equatorial plane (see
Fig. 10). Particularly, in our calculations, 4179 Toutatis is simply
assumed to rotate around its long axis, although it is in fact in a
complex rotation state (see e.g. Zhao et al. 2015).

In fact, an index of shape can be deﬁned as follows to tell
directly the strength of the Yarkovsky eﬀect in driving the semi-
major axis drifting.

The shape of an asteroid can be uniquely described by a set
of surface elements with diﬀerent sizes dS and orientations n,
while the combination of (dS , n) determines the capability of
thermal re-radiation in a certain direction, i.e., the strength of
the Yarkovsky eﬀect.

∼

Since the penetration depth is very small compared to the
radius of the object with thermal parameters adopted in this pa-
per (
0.5 mm), the lateral heat transfer can be ignored and the
heat transfer in a rotational period must be strongly localized.
In a certain surface element, the thermodynamic process of ab-
sorption, storage and re-radiation of energy should occur mainly
inside the same surface element. As a result, the Yarkovsky ef-
fect, arising from the recoil force of re-radiation, is determined
by the energy budget and the orientation of each individual sur-

face element. The overall Yarkovsky eﬀect of an asteroid is the
integration of these surface elements across the whole surface.
And if we focus on the inﬂuence of shape on the Yarkovsky ef-
fect, we can use such integration as an index, and a comparison
to the index of a standard model (e.g. a sphere) will give directly
the relative strength of Yarkovsky eﬀect.

Consider a surface element dS of area dS at its local noon,
when the Sun is on the plane spanned by its normal vector n
and the Z-axis (spinning axis). We note that these vectors are
deﬁned in an asteroid-centred inertial frame. The dS absorbs the
solar radiation with a ﬂux (power) Ein:

Ein

dS

(

−

·

∝

nin) =

(n

−

·

nin)dS ,

(9)

where nin is the direction of incident radiation, lying in the equa-
torial plane (XY plane) when γ = 0. All the absorbed energy
will be re-radiated out from the same area (localization assump-
tion) after a delay which, depending on thermal inertia Γ, is con-
stant for each surface element. Correspondingly, the recoil force
n)
of the re-radiation will be at the reverse normal direction (
when dS reaches the peak temperature, and the deviation from
the local meridian normal direction is determined by the thermal
delay and the object’s rotation period P. In addition, considering
the fact that the thermal evolution of a surface element during
a rotational period is (approximately) symmetric with respect to
the peak temperature position, a simple calculation reveals that
the overall recoil force produced by this surface element during
a rotational period is proportional to the force when it is experi-
encing the peak temperature (at the same direction for sure).

−

Since all surface elements have the same Γ and P, a constant
delay between the absorption and re-radiation of energy for each
surface element indicates that the projection of the overall recoil
force of each surface element over a rotational period on the XY
plane points to the same direction. An integration of all these sur-
face elements across the whole surface of an object leads to the
overall Yarkovsky force, the projection of which on XY plane
surely points to the same direction too. Therefore, when we dis-
cuss the relative strength of Yarkovsky eﬀect among asteroids
with the same Γ and P, we know that they all have the same
delay in direction and the speciﬁc value of delay does not mat-
ter. Without loss of generality, the delay is assumed to be null,
i.e. the re-radiation is assumed to happen simultaneously as the
absorption in the direction n at noon.

In this paper, we investigate the semimajor axis migration
due to the Yarkovsky eﬀect, thus only the force component in
the orbital plane (coinciding with the equatorial XY plane when
γ = 0◦) is of interest. Finally, for null delay, the re-radiation
power from dS that produces recoil force on the orbital plane is

Eout

[n

(

−

·

∝

nin)] Ein

(n

·

∝

nin)2dS .

(10)

nin)2dS over
The total eﬀect can be obtained by integrating (n
the whole surface of an object. We note that this integration
should be done by rotating the object in the asteroid-centered in-
ertial frame, and the result is an “eﬀective area”. As a “standard
shape”, the eﬀective area of a sphere with radius R is 8πR2/3.

·

The eﬀective area tells the capability of an object to produce
the recoil force by re-radiation, thus can serve as the index of
relative strength of the Yarkovsky eﬀects acting on asteroids of
diﬀerent shapes but the same thermal parameters. Again, use the
34 real asteroids (all scaled to have the volume of a 10 m-radius
sphere) as examples, we calculate their eﬀective areas, and we
show in Fig. 12 the relation between the da/dt of these asteroids
with obliquity γ = 0◦ and their eﬀective areas. The da/dt values

Article number, page 9 of 11

A&Aproofs: manuscript no. Yark

0.030

0.028

0.026

0.024

0.022

0.020

0.018

0.016

)
r
y
M
U
A
(

/

t
d
/
a
d

700

800

900

1000

effective area (m

1100
2
)

1200

1300

Fig. 12. The semimajor axis drifting rate versus the eﬀective area (see
text). The red solid triangle stands for the numerical results of a spheri-
cal asteroid and the red star is from the linear model for the same aster-
oid. The solid line is the least squares ﬁt of the results of 34 shapes.

obtained from the numerical simulation and derived from the lin-
ear model for the asteroid of standard shape (10 m-radius sphere,
with an eﬀective area of 838 m2) are also plotted for reference.
Just as expected, an apparent linear relationship for all nu-
merical results can be seen in Fig. 12, even the two “outliers” in
Fig. 11 (Kleopatra-like and Toutatis-like asteroids) are found to
tightly sit on the line. Since the linear model overestimates the
Yarkovsky eﬀect, the result derived from it (the red star) devi-
ates from the linear relation. Corresponding to the widely vary-
ing shapes, the eﬀective areas of the 34 asteroids in the sample
spread from 684 m2 (Stein-like) to 1252 m2 (Toutatis-like), and
all of them follow the same linear relation very well, indicating
that this relationship is robust.

≫

aX

All asteroids have been assumed to rotate around Z-axis
which makes the Tuotatis-like asteroid very eﬃcient in pro-
ducing the Yarkovsky force since it has the longest axis in Z-
direction (and thus the largest eﬀect area). As shown in Fig. 10,
the shape of Toutatis is more or less like a triaxial ellipsoid with
axes satisfying aZ
aY. If such an asteroid rotates around
its short axes, the sharp ends of the long axis would cause the
transverse force (thus da/dt) to change from positive to negative
when the long axis overpasses the subsolar point (see Fig. 8 and
explanation there). However, in calculating the eﬀective area,
each surface element has been simply assumed to provide a con-
tribution always in a same direction. Therefore, if a Tuotatis-
like asteroid rotates around the short axes, the Yarkovsky eﬀect
will be overestimated, and the corresponding point would devi-
ate from (and locate below) the ﬁtting line in Fig. 12.

≈

In fact, Toutatis is a tumbling asteroid. It rotates basically
around its long axis which is simultaneously precessing with
a comparable period (Zhao et al. 2015). Thus its angular ve-
locity vector ω describes a cone whose axis tilts by angle α
from the normal of the orbital plane and whose aperture is 2β
(thus the precession amplitude is β). Our preliminary calcula-
tions show that the average Yarkovsky eﬀect is proportional to
cos α cos β, therefore the corresponding eﬀective area of such a
tumbler can be deﬁned as the original eﬀective area (as principal
rotator around Z-axis) multiplied by cos α cos β. We note that as
β
0, this tumbler reduces to a principal rotator with spin obliq-
uity γ = α, and the Yarkovsky drift da/dt
cos γ, as both the

→

∝

Article number, page 10 of 11

linear theory and numerical simulations agree. However, further
investigation on the eﬀective area for asteroids in complicated
rotation states is needed.

We emphasize that the eﬀective area is independent of the
thermal physical process, but only determined by the asteroid’s
shape. With this relationship, we are now be able to obtain di-
rectly the Yarkovsky eﬀect of any irregular asteroid by compar-
ing its eﬀective area to the one of standard shape (sphere), free
from complicated and expensive calculations of temperature on
the complex surface.

4. Conclusions

In the past three decades, observations have been showing the
importance of the Yarkovsky eﬀect on the motions of small ce-
lestial bodies. The recoil force of thermal irradiation may modify
the rotation and orbit of asteroids, and the semimajor axis drift-
ing is the most prominent long-term eﬀect.

The linear model proposed by Vokrouhlický (1998a,b) has
been widely adopted and successfully produced good estima-
tions for Yarkovsky eﬀects on asteroid populations. In the linear
model, the temperature variation on the asteroid surface (∆T ) is
assumed to be so small that ( ¯T + ∆T )4 can be approximated by
¯T 4 + 4∆T , and the shape of asteroid is supposed to be spheri-
cal or close to a sphere. However, these two conditions could be
deviated in reality. In this paper, using a multiphysics software
COMSOL, we numerically calculate the diurnal Yarkovsky ef-
fect in three dimensions and make comparisons with the results
derived from the linear model.

In the calculations, we ﬁnd that the radiation ﬂux from the
Sun introduces temperature ﬂuctuation only into a thin layer un-
der the surface of the asteroid. Depending on the thermal con-
ductivity, the thickness of this thermally-aﬀected-layer, beneath
which the temperature is constant, is about ten times the penetra-
tion depth. Therefore, the numerical calculation of surface tem-
perature that determines the Yarkovsky eﬀect can be performed
only in this subsurface layer, that is, the asteroid can be regarded
as the combination of a thermally aﬀected shell and an isother-
mal core.

After obtaining numerically the temperature distribution, we
calculate the Yarkovsky force or the semimajor axis drifting rate.
Comparisons with results derived from the linear model prove
that the linear model for spherical bodies works very well, with
the relative errors being within 10% in most cases. However, the
linear model could moderately deviate from the real situation
when the asteroid conducts heat poorly (small conductivity) or it
is very close to the Sun.

The thermal inertia Γ indicates the capacity to store energy
and to delay the transmission of heat in the material. We ﬁnd that
Γ dictates the strength of diurnal Yarkovsky eﬀect for large bod-
ies. But when the asteroid is so small (or equivalently the thermal
conductivity is so large) that its size is comparable to the penetra-
tion depth, the Yarkovsky eﬀect cannot be solely decided by Γ.
Another thermal parameter Θ, that speciﬁes the body’s ability of
retaining temperature changes over a rotation period, may con-
trol the delay angle between the subsolar point and the hottest
spot on the surface thus determines the ratio between radial and
transverse components of the Yarkovsky force.

Compared to sphere, a prolate biaxial ellipsoid produces
stronger diurnal eﬀect while an oblate ellipsoid has a weaker
eﬀect. The results derived from the linear model for biaxial el-
lipsoids are overall consistent with numerical simulations. But a
systematic overestimation of transverse Yarkovsky force can be

Xu et al.: The diurnal Yarkovsky eﬀect of irregularly shaped asteroids

found in the linear model, and the deviation is greater for oblate
ellipsoids.

For triaxial ellipsoids, the diurnal Yarkovsky eﬀect turns to
be a periodic eﬀect, for which no theoretical solution is available
now. Within one rotation period, the transverse Yarkovsky force
could change direction, from positive to negative and vice versa.
Our numerical results show that a triaxial ellipsoid always re-
ceives a stronger average diurnal Yarkovsky eﬀect than that act-
ing on the biaxial ellipsoid with the same volume and ﬂattening
parameter e1. When a linear model is used to calculate the eﬀect,
the deviation from numerical results may reach 40%, depending
on the ﬂattening parameters.

Apart from these ﬁctitious regular shapes, we have also con-
sidered 34 real shapes, many of which are extremely irregular.
Our calculations show that the semimajor axis drifting rates tend
to be overestimated by 16% on average and up to 35% if the
linear model for spheres is applied. We introduce the “eﬀec-
tive area” to quantify the relative diurnal Yarkovsky eﬀect on
irregularly-shaped asteroids, and we ﬁnd a perfect linear rela-
tionship between the semimajor axis drifting rate and the eﬀec-
tive area. For an asteroid of any shape, by comparing its eﬀective
area with that of a standard model (e.g. a spherical asteroid), the
Yarkovsky eﬀect can be obtained directly without calculating the
temperature distribution on the surface assuming the same ther-
mal parameters. Combined with our analysis of the deviation of
linear model for Yarkovsky eﬀect, the eﬀective area provides an
eﬃcient approach to accurately calculate the Yarkovsky eﬀect
for asteroids of irregular shapes analytically.

The eﬀective area deﬁned here reﬂects only the geometrical
property of the surface, and the shadowing eﬀect has been ne-
glected, and we also assume that the heat transfer is localized.
These assumptions are reasonable for the majority of real aster-
oids, given the penetration depth is much smaller than the radius.
However, the eﬀective area for asteroids of extremely irregular
shape and/or of complicated rotation needs to be improved. Sim-
ilarly, an “eﬀective torque” can also be deﬁned to estimate the
YORP eﬀect, which will be discussed in a separate paper.

Acknowledgements. We thank the anonymous referee for the valuable com-
ments. This work has been supported by the National Key R&D Program of
China (2019YFA0706601) and National Natural Science Foundation of China
(NSFC, Grants No.11933001 & No.11473016). We also acknowledge the sci-
ence research grants from the China Manned Space Project with NO.CMS-
CSST-2021-B08. JYL’s contribution to this work is not supported by any funds.
The temperature distribution on the asteroid’s surface is computed using COM-
SOL software.

References

Afonso, G. B., Gomes, R. S., & Florczak, M. A. 1995, Planet. Space Sci., 43,

787

Basart, J., Goetzke, E., Setzer, C., & Wie, B. 2012, in AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics

Specialist Conference, 5058 ADS

Beekman, G. 2005, Journal of the British Astronomical Association, 115, 207
Beekman, G. 2006, Journal for the History of Astronomy, 37, 71
Bottke, W. F., Vokrouhlický, D., Brož, M., Nesvorný, D., & Morbidelli, A. 2001,

Science, 294, 1693 ADS

Capek, D. & Vokrouhlický, D. 2005, in IAU Colloq. 197: Dynamics of Popula-
tions of Planetary Systems, ed. Z. Kneževi´c & A. Milani, 171–178 ADS
Chesley, S. R., Ostro, S. J., Vokrouhlický, D., et al. 2003, Science, 302, 1739

ADS

Delbo, M., Mueller, M., Emery, J. P., Rozitis, B., & Capria, M. T. 2015, Asteroid

Thermophysical Modeling, 107–128 ADS

Farinella, P. & Vokrouhlický, D. 1999, Science, 283, 1507 ADS
Farinella, P., Vokrouhlický, D., & Hartmann, W. K. 1998, Icarus, 132, 378 ADS
Ferrari, S. 2007, in 2nd PALENC Conference and 28th AIVC Conference on
Building Low Energy Cooling and Advance Ventilation Technologies in the
21st Century, Greece, 346–351 ADS

Groath, D. J., Basart, J. P., & Wie, B. 2014, in AIAA/AAS Astrodynamics Spe-

cialist Conference, 4145 ADS

Hyland, D. C., Altwaijry, H. A., Ge, S., et al. 2010, Cosmic Research, 48, 430

ADS

Nesvorný, D. & Bottke, W. F. 2004, Icarus, 170, 324 ADS
Öpik, E. J. 1951, Proc. R. Irish Acad. Sect. A, 54, 165 ADS
Palluconi, F. D. & Kieﬀer, H. H. 1981, Icarus, 45, 415
Peterson, C. 1976, Icarus, 29, 91
Radzievskii, V. V. 1952, AZh, 29, 162 ADS
Rozitis, B. & Green, S. F. 2011, MNRAS, 415, 2042 ADS
Rubincam, D. P. 1987, J. Geophys. Res., 92, 1287 ADS
Scholl, H., Marzari, F., & Tricarico, P. 2005a, Icarus, 175, 397 ADS
Scholl, H., Marzari, F., & Tricarico, P. 2005b, AJ, 130, 2912 ADS
Sekiya, M., Shimoda, A. A., & Wakita, S. 2012, Planet. Space Sci., 60, 304 ADS
Spencer, J. R., Lebofsky, L. A., & Sykes, M. V. 1989, Icarus, 78, 337 ADS
Spitale, J. & Greenberg, R. 2001, Icarus, 149, 222 ADS
Spitale, J. & Greenberg, R. 2002, Icarus, 156, 211 ADS
Spitale, J. N. 2002, Science, 296, 77 ADS
Spoto, F., Milani, A., & Kneževi´c, Z. 2015, Icarus, 257, 275 ADS
Tsiganis, K., Varvoglis, H., & Morbidelli, A. 2003, Icarus, 166, 131 ADS
Vokrouhlický, D. 1998a, A&A, 335, 1093 ADS
Vokrouhlický, D. 1998b, A&A, 338, 353 ADS
Vokrouhlický, D. 1999, A&A, 344, 362 ADS
Vokrouhlický, D. & Farinella, P. 1998, AJ, 116, 2032 ADS
Wang, J., Bras, R. L., Sivandran, G., & Knox, R. G. 2010, Geophys. Res. Lett.,

37, L05404

Wesselink, A. J. 1948, Bull. Astron. Inst. Netherlands, 10, 351 ADS
Xu, Y.-B., Zhou, L.-Y., & Ip, W.-H. 2020a, A&A, 637, A19 ADS
Xu, Y.-B., Zhou, L.-Y., Lhotka, C., & Ip, W.-H. 2020b, MNRAS, 493, 1447 ADS
Zhao, Y., Ji, J., Huang, J., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 450, 3620 ADS
Zhou, L., Xu, Y.-B., Zhou, L.-Y., Dvorak, R., & Li, J. 2019, A&A, 622, A97

ADS

Article number, page 11 of 11

