2
2
0
2

n
u
J

6
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
9
9
7
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Deconstructing written rules and hierarchy in peer produced
software communities

Mahasweta Chakraborti∗, Qiankun Zhong, Beril Bulat, Seth Frey

University of California, Davis, USA

Anamika Sen

UMass Amherst, Amherst, MA, USA

June 17, 2022

1

Introduction

The internet has changed how we build organizations, and poses fundamental challenges to basic
organizational scholarship (Kollock et al., 1999). Peer production in particular has changed how we
view hierarchy, empowerment, motivation, and authority. And yet, other scholarship has challenged
the revolutionary view of peer production, demonstrating that despite a rhetoric of ﬂatness and
democratic access, it is vulnerable to the emergence of the power structures typical of traditional
organizations (Shaw & Hill, 2014).

This tension is particularly clear in the case of Open Source Software development (OSS). OSS is a
multi billion dollar industry and the backbone of major enterprise level software products and
services (Schweik & English, 2012). OSS projects are largely volunteer driven initiatives where
ﬂeeting developers join, cooperate or cease contributing of their own volition. Thus, there are less
bindings and contracts when compared against the monolithic software companies comprising of
dedicated paid employees and established hierarchies (Hertel, Niedner, & Herrmann, 2003). On the
other hand, these OSS projects are often mentored and supported by OSS organizations in
surprisingly hierarchical structures, in terms of outreach, licensing, infrastructure and other logistics
(Lindman & Hammouda, 2017).

Established in 1999, the Apache Software Foundation is one of the most recognizable and well
documented OSS organizations, which currently houses over 350 projects. The ASF is a strong
proponent of the core OSS philosophy of free, open participation, resists authoritative hierarchy
(ASF, 2021) and encourages community building and consensus-based self governance in projects.

We employ recent advances in computational institutional analysis and NLP to investigate the
systems of authority that are reﬂected in the written policy documents of the ASF. Our study to
decipher the eﬀective similarities or departures of the ASF model from conventional software
companies reveals evidence of both ﬂat and bureaucratic governance in a peer production set up,
suggesting a complicated relationship between business-based theories of administrative hierarchy
and foundational principles of the OSS movement.

∗Corresponding Author

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Literature Review

OSS has been described as peer-produced public good generation through generalized exchange
where developers are set to mutually beneﬁt as contributors as well as users (Kollock et al., 1999).In
the past twenty years, the emergence of peer production has drawn much attention in communication
(Meng & Wu, 2013; Shaw & Hill, 2014), economics(Benkler & Nissenbaum, 2006; Birkinbine, 2020),
and political science(Johnson, Crawford, & Palfrey Jr, 2004). While the early scholars are fascinated
about the idea of cooperation and decentralization in the process of producing and distributing
digital information (Benkler & Nissenbaum, 2006), later scholars started to consider how much real
diﬀerence peer production organizations have with the conventional model of authority and
bureaucracy (Kreiss, Finn, & Turner, 2011) based on the increasing number of empirical work (e.g.,
Bennett, Segerberg, & Walker, 2014).

The early optimists focus mostly on the fundamental changes this new form of information
production brings to the power structure and cooperation norms in the organization. Speciﬁcally,
Benkler(2006) argues that reduced cost in information production and distribution creates market
incentives for individuals to get involved, which motivates a strong norm of cooperation. At the same
time, the process of peer production provides the contributor with a sense of belonging and bonding
(Benkler & Nissenbaum, 2006). Thus, peer production is expected to have a structural eﬀect on
organizations and societies towards a more egalitarian and decentralized model compared to the
conventional Weberian models (e.g., Bauwens, 2008; De Valk & Martin, 2006).

For some others, peer production projects closely approximate conventional organizational forms.
This perspective has a long tradition (Weber, 1964), and views top-down structures as a requirement
for eﬃciency and consistency. Some argue that bureaucratic structures are essentially ﬂexible
instruments for achieving organizational goals, a means for power centralization (Perrow, 1986). But
power is an inherently unstable concept, which must be understood within context-speciﬁc terms
(Perrow, 1986). How power is structured within an organization, therefore, depends on how task
speciﬁcation relates to the hierarchy for achieving organizational goals. There is evidence that
supports this ﬂexible view of organizational structures in the online context. Shaw and Hill (2014)
found, for instance, that large-scale peer production projects, such as wikis, might exhibit an
oligarchic structure rather than democratic, where authority positions are monopolized among a few
early users. And, as the number of voluntary contributors grows, power gets increasingly centralized,
despite missing an established bureaucratic structure.

An important and often overlooked source of insight into authority in organizations are it’s written
policies, which collectively specify the governance institution that it operates as. Institutions
comprise of basic units in the form of rules, norms and strategies (Institutional Statements) which
seek to deﬁne and regulate behaviour of individuals who participate in it(Crawford & Ostrom, 1995).
To analyze ASF policy documents for ﬁner-grained insight into the administrative structure of OSS
institutions, we use a tool called the institutional grammar (ABDICO) (Frantz & Siddiki, 2021),
which was formulated as means towards systematic analysis of institutional conﬁguration, structural
emergence and policy outcomes from policy texts. ABDICO sets up a protocol to decompose
statements of institutional structure, such as rules and norms, into syntactic components. The
components identiﬁed under the framework include (i) Agent(A) or the actor who the institutional
statement concerns (called the Attribute in the ABDICO literature) (ii) Object(B) animate or
inanimate, receives the action from the actor. (iii) Deontics(D) or modals indicate the extent to
which the statement needs to be observed/enforced (ex. must/may/must not) (iv) Aim(A) or the
action performed by Attribute (v) Context(C), introduced as a supplement to ’Conditions’ in the
original IAD. Encompasses the conditions and constraints under which action needs to be performed
(vi) Or else (O) states the penalty for non observance of the Institutional Statement. With these
components, we extend familiar organizational understandings to hierarchy and authority to include
quantitative representations of those constructs as they are encoded in organizations’ written
institutional structures.

It is still not clear if open source software development projects are susceptible to conventional power
structures, or if they actually present a democratic case of peer production as a voluntary
organization. This work represents an attempt to explore this question:

2

RQ: What are the interactional dynamics of project mentorship in OSS projects, and how
are they diﬀerent from conventional organizations, if at all?

3 Methodology

3.1 Data

Our data set comprises of 328 policy statements that were hand coded by an expert annotator through
a comprehensive analysis of the Apache Incubator Policy, Community Guide, PPMC Guide, Apache
Cookbook, Mentor Guide, Graduation Guide, Retirement Guide and the Release Management Guide.

Policy Document
Apache Incubator Policy
Community Guide
PPMC Guide
Apache Cookbook
Mentor Guide
Graduation Guide
Retirement Guide
Release Management Guide

Policy count
45
28
61
58
36
51
22
26

Table 1: ASF policy documents used for analysis in our study and the number of rules in each.

3.2

IGextract and Topic Modeling

We begin our analysis of ASF policies by automated extraction of the ABDICO 2.0 components from
the statements in the dataset through the IGextract library (Rice, Siddiki, Frey, Kwon, & Sawyer,
2021). The IGextract was initially developed for ABDICO codiﬁcation of food policies (Siddiki,
2014). For our current purposes, we extended the IGextract pipeline beyond training and validation,
to generalize ABDICO label prediction for new data. This involved generating word level
dependency-based features as well as contextual vectors (Manning et al., 2014) using BERT(Devlin,
Chang, Lee, & Toutanova, 2018) across all statements in the annotated training data as well as ASF
policies, followed by training and prediction through a dense, linear neural network. Labels were
generated for every word in a statement. Contiguous words with the same ABDICO label were
grouped together.

Following ABDICO coding, we apply unsupervised topic modelling on these extracted components in
order to group rules by their Attributes, Objects and Deontics. We particularly focus on the these
components in order to determine the scope of the rules and norms in the ASF. The clustering
employs BertTopic,(Grootendorst, 2020) which identiﬁes topics and clusters across a set of
documents. For each component extracted across all the statements, BertTopic generates contextual
vector representations through BERT, which undergo dimensionality reduction through UMAP
followed by clustering with HDBSCAN. BertTopic parameters were selected for localised clustering.

3.3 Clustering Agents and Objects

The semantic clustering was followed by manual aggregation of associated clusters based on domain
understanding of the Apache ecosystem. We then identiﬁed each of these super clusters with high
level Agents(Authority and Participants) and Objects(Participants, Product, Project Management
and Product Management). For details on these clusters see Appendix.

3

Figure 1: Agent clusters in the ASF policies could be identiﬁed as either authority ﬁgures of partici-
pants

Figure 2: Object clusters found in the ASF policies were found to be associated with at least one of
Product management, Project management, authority, product or participants

4 Analysis and Results

Despite their democratic potential to decentralize knowledge production and distribution, OSS
projects show a similar administrative structure and hierarchical labor division to conventional
organizations, with more rules constraining lower-level than higher-level agents (Figure 3 and 4).
However, when comparing the content of those institutional constraints, we did support the claim
that OSS projects reﬂect a more egalitarian governance style. An examination of how increasingly
harsh rule conditions (deontics) are imposed upon authorities versus participants showed no
statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences (χ2
that agents at lower levels, even if they are regulated with more rules, are not regulated with more or
less imposing rules: they are regulated in the same way.

2 = 0.38, p = 0.83; N = 63), indicating

2 = 0.021, p = 0.99; χ2

We then look into what is being governed and managed in OSS projects by analyzing the
grammatical object in institutional statements, including environment (i.e. community) and
resources (i.e. code ﬁles). We found that most of the agent behaviors were governed with respect to

4

Figure 3: More rules govern volunteer participant behavior than volunteer administrator
behavior. Volunteer contributors in the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) are engaged in peer
production around open source software, constrained in part by written institutional statements. Af-
ter aggregating the lower-level agents of those sentences by their relative authority into Participants
and Authorities, this histogram demonstrates that more institutional statements govern behavior of
participants than authorities, consistent with a surprisingly conventional approach to administrative
hierarchy. See Figure 1 for the mapping of lower-level agents to these two categories. See Figure 8
for a histogram of the component clusters of low-level agents.

the project management infrastructure or other participants (Figure 4).

We also use the deontic component of institutional statements to measure the strength of the
requirements prescribed by the rules. For instance, deontics such as “must” or “will” indicate
stronger institutional enforcement than “may” or “can”. In our dataset, we found a larger part of the
institutional statements governing ASF activity was in this former category (Figure 5). But there
was no proportional diﬀerence in how they were distributed between participants and authorities
(Figure 6a), suggesting that the hierarchies that peer-production organizations implement do, in
their details, continue to reﬂect their egalitarian ideals in balancing the kinds of constraints they
impose on their diﬀerent kinds of volunteer.

5

Figure 4: Agent behavior in the ASF is mostly coordinated around project management
and participants. In the context of the institutional grammar, an institutional statement can deﬁne
or constrain an agent’s behavior with respect to a grammatical object. The object can be a part of the
institution or it’s environment, membership, or resources. According to this histogram, agents behavior
is most often governed with respect to a project’s management infrastructure (repositories, mailing
lists, voting protocols), or other participants. Authorities and product management infrastructure
are less likely to be the vertex of an institutional statement’s governance eﬀort. See Figure 1 for the
mapping of lower-level objects to these ﬁve categories. See Figure 8 for a histogram over unaggregated
low-level objects

Figure 5: Most institutional statements with a deontic component indicated stronger
requirements. The deontic in an institutional statement can indicate the strength of an institutional
prescription, with “must” or “will” deﬁning a stronger rule than “may,” “can,” or even “should.” The
histogram indicates that institutional statements governing ASF activities are more likely to rely on
strong deontics, and less likely to use proscriptions (will not), verbs for deﬁning institutional state
(is/are), or weak deontics (should or may). This is again consistent with a surprisingly conventional
view of administrative hierarchy as it applies to the volunteer labor of OSS developers.

6

Figure 6: Participants are governed by the same ratio of strong deontics as administra-
tors, in both the agent and object roles. These two tables show a “zoomed in” subset of the
crosstabulation of deontics against agents and objects, focused on how participants and authorities
interact with the top three most common deontics (full tables in Figure 6). Participants and authori-
ties receive the same proportion of strong “must” and “will” than weak “can” or “may” deontics. This
suggests that participants and authorities are governed by equally strong constraints. These results
are consistent with a conventional understanding of volunteer-driven peer production as expressing a
non-traditional understanding of hierarchy and authority.

7

5 Discussion

This research uses novel text data and recent natural language processing tools to explore the
administrative hierarchy of a peer production organization. Our results show that although formal
rules regulated participants more than administrators in ASF organizations, the content of those
rules was not more restrictive for participants than administrators, indicating that even if
participants are subject to a greater number of regulatory constraints, the nature of those constraints
is balanced and egalitarian, compared to administrators. This result is consistent with the argument
that peer production shifts the power structures and promote more egalitarian administrative
systems in making decisions, delegating responsibility and validating individuals’ responsibility. Even
with the Weberian lens, we still need to recognize the fundamental diﬀerence peer governance
mechanisms have compared to conventional centralized organizations.

Whether this type of administrative structure is eﬃcient for information production and distribution
requires further investigation. Built upon current research project, we will analyze the temporal
changes in the hierarchy and eﬃciency, and eventually compare the eﬃciency of ASF with other
more hierarchical peer production organizations in future work.

References

ASF. (2021). Apache software foundation : How it works. http://www.apache.org/foundation/

how-it-works.html.

Bauwens, M. (2008). Ladder of participation: Business models for peer production. Open Source

Business Resource(January 2008).

Benkler, Y., & Nissenbaum, H.
political philosophy, 14 (4).

(2006). Commons-based peer production and virtue. Journal of

Bennett, W. L., Segerberg, A., & Walker, S. (2014). Organization in the crowd: peer production in
large-scale networked protests. Information, Communication & Society, 17 (2), 232–260.
Birkinbine, B. J. (2020). Political economy of peer production. The Handbook of Peer Production,

33–43.

Crawford, S., & Ostrom, E. (1995). A grammar of institutions. American Political Science Review ,

89 (3), 582–600.

De Valk, G., & Martin, B. (2006). Publicly shared intelligence.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional

transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 .

Frantz, C. K., & Siddiki, S.

(2021).

Institutional grammar 2.0: A speciﬁcation for encoding and

analyzing institutional design. Public Administration.

Grootendorst, M. (2020). Bertopic: Leveraging bert and c-tf-idf to create easily interpretable topics.
doi: 10.5281/zenodo

Zenodo. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4381785
.4381785

Hertel, G., Niedner, S., & Herrmann, S.

(2003). Motivation of software developers in open
source projects: an internet-based survey of contributors to the linux kernel. Research Pol-
icy, 32 (7), 1159-1177. Retrieved from https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0048733303000477 (Open Source Software Development) doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0048-7333(03)00047-7

Johnson, D. R., Crawford, S. P., & Palfrey Jr, J. G. (2004). The accountable internet: Peer production

of internet governance. Va. JL & Tech., 9 , 1.

Kollock, P., et al. (1999). The economies of online cooperation: Gifts and public goods in cyberspace.

Communities in cyberspace, 239 .

Kreiss, D., Finn, M., & Turner, F. (2011). The limits of peer production: Some reminders from max

weber for the network society. new media & society, 13 (2), 243–259.

Lindman, J., & Hammouda, I. (2017). Investigating relationships between ﬂoss foundations and ﬂoss
projects. In F. Balaguer, R. Di Cosmo, A. Garrido, F. Kon, G. Robles, & S. Zacchiroli (Eds.),
Open source systems: Towards robust practices (pp. 14–22). Cham: Springer International
Publishing.

8

Manning, C. D., Surdeanu, M., Bauer, J., Finkel, J. R., Bethard, S., & McClosky, D. (2014). The
stanford corenlp natural language processing toolkit. In Proceedings of 52nd annual meeting of
the association for computational linguistics: system demonstrations (pp. 55–60).

Meng, B., & Wu, F.

(2013). Commons/commodity: peer production caught in the web of the

commercial market. Information, communication & society, 16 (1), 125–145.

Perrow, C. (1986). Complex organizations. A critical essay (3rd ed.). Glcnview. lL: Scott-Forcs.
Rice, D., Siddiki, S., Frey, S., Kwon, J. H., & Sawyer, A. (2021). Machine coding of policy texts with

the institutional grammar. Public Administration, 99 (2), 248–262.

Schweik, C. M., & English, R. C. (2012). Internet success: a study of open-source software commons.

MIT Press.

Shaw, A., & Hill, B. M. (2014, 03). Laboratories of Oligarchy? How the Iron Law Extends to Peer
Production. Journal of Communication, 64 (2), 215-238. Retrieved from https://doi.org/
10.1111/jcom.12082 doi: 10.1111/jcom.12082

Siddiki, S. (2014). Assessing policy design and interpretation: An institutions-based analysis in the
context of aquaculture in f lorida and v irginia, u nited s tates. Review of Policy Research, 31 (4),
281–303.

Weber, M. (1964). The theory of social and economic organization: Transl. by am henderson and

talcott parsons. Free Press.

A Appendix

Figure 7: Full crosstabs for visualizing interactions between Agents and Objects

9

Figure 8: ASF’s youngest projects (“podlings”) and their governing committees are the
most regulated agents in the ASF policy documents. Podlings are also the most likely to
be the object against which another agent’s behavior is regulated, following by project management
constructs such as votes, releases, and records. These two tables give the low-level agents and objects
that Figures 3 and 4 were aggregated from. The ﬁrst concisely represents the range of stakeholders
in the ASF’s institutional ecosystem, both agents in authority roles (IPMCs, mentors, and the ASF
itself) and in participant roles (the remainder). It is apparent that number of objects exceeds that of
agents because objects can be animate or inanimate, but it also indicates the variety of institutional
arenas that merit behavioral regulation. Speciﬁcs of the mapping are reported in Appendix.

10

