2
2
0
2

n
u
J

6

]

M
R
.
n
i
f
-
q
[

1
v
2
8
5
2
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

∆-CoES

Aleksy Leeuwenkamp∗

May 2022

Abstract

In this paper the ∆-CoVaR method is extended in both the conditional and unconditional cases to be
based on the Expected Shortfall (ES) using quantile regression with a more expansive distress deﬁnition.
We ﬁnd the resulting ∆-CoES measure to be complementary to the ∆-CoVaR and to be more eﬀective
than the ∆-CoVaR in measuring short-term changes in systemic risk and in identifying heterogeneity in
the systemic risk contributions of ﬁnancial institutions and linkages between institutions due to its lower
robustness. For regulators, risk managers and market participants these properties are interesting from
an economic standpoint when they require the increased sensitivity and heterogeneity of the ∆-CoES to
set short-term capital requirements/risk limits, ﬁnd problematic ﬁnancial linkages, problematic ﬁnancial
institutions or have some kind of early warning system for the emergence of systemic risk. Lastly, the
∆-CoES is straightforward to estimate and would ﬁt within recent regulatory frameworks such as the
FRTB. To show the statistical advantages and properties empirically, the ∆-CoVaR and ∆-CoES meth-
ods are used on a large sample (from 31-12-1970 to 31-12-2020 1564 ﬁrms) of daily equity data from US
ﬁnancial institutions both in a system and network fashion. On a sample of 9 US-based GSIBS we also
show the properties and the utility of the ∆-CoES when it comes to identifying problematic ﬁnancial links.

Keywords— Expected shortfall, Systemic Risk, Contagion, Financial Networks, ∆-CoVaR, Quantile re-
gression, Tail dependence
JEL— C21, C51, C58, E32, G01, G12, G17, G20, G32

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Systemic risk

2.1 Economic aspects of systemic risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Tail risk and tail dependency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Measuring systemic risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4 The ∆-CoVaR measure: deﬁnition and estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4.1 Measuring externalities, causal eﬀects and herd behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4.2 Unconditional . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.4.3 Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5 SRISK and MES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
∗KU Leuven Faculty of Economics and Business (FEB) Department of Accounting, Finance & Insurance (AFI),

2

4
4
5
5
6
6
6
7
7

Naamsestraat 69 3000 Leuven Belgium Email: aleksy.leeuwenkamp@kuleuven.be . The author would like to thank Roman
Goncharenko and Florian Hoﬀmann for the rigorous and diligent supervision. The author also thanks Lars Van Cutsem,
Roman Gonachrenko , Ralph De Haas, Hamza Hanbali, Florian Hoﬀmann,Wentao Hu, C´edric Huylebroek, Sotirios Kokas and
Ivan Markovic for comments, suggestions and other forms of assistance.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
3 The ∆-CoES measure: Deﬁnition and estimation

3.1 Unconditional . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1.1 Univariate version . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1.2 Multivariate version . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Sub-additivity and robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Example: Goldman Sachs systemic and network ∆-CoVaR/CoES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.5 Theoretical properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.6 Conditional

4 Data

5 Results

5.1 Summary statistics of the ﬁnancial and banking system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Summary statistics of the GSIBs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Cross-sectional and time-series properties of the ∆-CoES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.4 Unconditional network model on GSIBs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.5 Conditional network model on GSIBs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 Conclusion

7 References

8
8
8
9
10
11
11
12
12

12

13
13
14
14
16
20

22

23

8 Appendix

28
8.1 Theoretical Analysis: ∆-CoES under normality conditional on X = VaRq(X) . . . . . . . . .
28
8.2 Theroretical Analysis: ∆-CoVaR ∆-CoES under a t-distribution conditional on X = VaRq(X) 28
29
8.3 Theoretical Analysis: Robustness of the ∆-CoES ∆-CoVaR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
8.4 Bank sector analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
8.5 Data Filtering procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8.5.1 GSIB selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8.6 Supplementary Tables and Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.7 Details of computer and R setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1 Introduction

Since the Great Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008 but also more recently after the Covid crisis of 2020- systemic
risk of ﬁnancial institutions has become a topic of interest. Mainly because the Covid crisis provided a real
world test of the resiliency of the ﬁnancial system post-GFC. Systemic risk refers to the fact that an adverse
event aﬀecting one or multiple ﬁnancial institutions can aﬀect the stability of the ﬁnancial system as a whole
and have a negative impact on the broader economy through the externalities that ﬁnancial institutions
pose on each other, the ﬁnancial system and the real economy [36]. An ailing ﬁnancial sector through the
ﬁnancial accelerator mechanism [10] can drag the real economy down as well causing mass unemployment,
productivity losses, a decrease in wealth and the quality of life of citizens (see GFC and the Great Depres-
sion). Governments and regulators would like to implement regulation and control mechanisms that seek to
minimize the likelihood and severity of systemic risk while also ensuring ﬁnancial stability even when shocks
do occur.

A common issue in estimating systemic risk or any kind of risk in ﬁnancial markets is that tail events very
much inﬂuence ﬁnancial markets. By their nature these events do not happen often yet can have grave con-
sequences for individual institutions, the whole ﬁnancial system and the economy. This makes estimating the
likelihood and severity of the occurrence of such events a complex aﬀair. Furthermore, ﬁnancial markets also
exhibit regime shifts between calm and volatile periods. Financial markets and institutional networks are
very complex in the sense that identifying fragile institutions is a hard task as one needs to take into account

2

direct and indirect links for each institution. This begs a ﬂexible approach when it comes to estimating and
managing risks. The CoVaR method developed by Adrian and Brunnermeier aims to address both problems
but still is inﬂexible in the sense that it deﬁnes distress too narrowly and only makes use of a VaR-based
approach. Yet, it has been eﬀective in quantifying long-term systemic risk evolution. The question we aim
to answer is then:“ What are the statistical properties of the ES-based extensions of the CoVaR and how
does the CoES compare to the CoVaR?” Naturally, this also leads to the problem of which of the two risk
measures should be used for certain purposes.

This paper seeks to contribute to the abundant and growing literature on measuring systemic risk, ﬁnancial
networks and externalities that banks pose on each other, the ﬁnancial system and the economy. We aim to
contribute to this literature by extending the ∆-CoVaR method [4] to one based on the Expected Shortfall
called the ∆-CoES which conditions on a more expansive deﬁnition of distress. While recent papers have
used ∆-CoES in the context of other models [19, 83]. None of these papers delve into the statistical aspects
and economic justiﬁcations for using it and use the restricted deﬁnition of distress. There are papers argu-
ing that the conditioning used in [4] is inappropriate and leads to underestimation of tail risks/dependence
[40, 66]. The goal of the extension is to obtain a risk measure that is more sensitive to tail risks/dependence
and hence could be used to to set short-term capital requirements, ﬁnd problematic ﬁnancial linkages, prob-
lematic ﬁnancial institutions or have some kind of early warning system for the emergence of systemic risk.
The need to accurately assess tail risks and extreme ﬁnancial linkages has become more pronounced due to
new developments in theoretical macro-ﬁnance such as [16] and the literature on ﬁnancial networks such as
[1, 6, 34, 42, 50, 72]. We combine this theoretical justiﬁcation with a practical one based on the framework of
the robustness of risk measures developed by [25]. This framework characterizes risk measures not by axioms
such as sub-additivity [8] but rather by the sensitivity of risk measures and their estimators to extreme data
points. We argue that the practical implications of this framework are a trade-oﬀ between robustness and the
ability to quantify long-term risk build-up on one hand and the ability to quickly react to changing market
conditions, act as an early warning system and quantify extreme ﬁnancial linkages on the other hand. We
argue that the ∆-CoVaR fulﬁlls the former role while the ∆-CoES fulﬁlls the latter role. Hence, both risk
measures serve complementary goals and practical priorities should guide which one is most appropriate to
use. In the portfolio management literature this kind of trade-oﬀ between the ES and VaR is known and
has resulted in the development of a risk measure which is a convex combination based on risk preferences
[48]. Comparing and choosing risk measures based on statistical robustness is to our knowledge a rather
novel approach in the systemic risk literature. Furthermore, as the ∆-CoVaR is based on the Value-at-Risk
risk measure and regulators for technical reasons increasingly move to risk measures based on the Expected
Shortfall (see [11]) this extension makes sense from a regulatory perspective. We further aim to contribute
to the literature by extending the CoVaR method to be based on the Expected Shortfall, investigating the
trade-oﬀ between the two and showing the appropriate conditioning does make a diﬀerence in the case of
the CoES. These aims will be achieved by a mix of theoretical and empirical results1. By using an enlarged
sample 2 which includes the recent Covid crisis and studying the GSIBs located in the US we aim to show
the utility and eﬃcacy of making this method based on the Expected Shortfall and also aim to identify not
just problematic ﬁnancial institutions when it comes to systemic risk but also when it comes to risk they
pose on other institutions. This is another extension which [4] has already been dubbed ”network ∆-CoVaR”.

In section 2 the economic aspects of systemic risk, the importance of tail risk, how to measure systemic risk,
the ∆-CoVaR and some other prominent methods for measuring systemic risk are discussed. In section 3 we
deﬁne our extension called the ∆-CoES, show the extension to measuring network risk, provide an intuitive
example that shows how both are estimated and also build the framework used to compare the ∆-CoES and
∆-CoVaR . In section 4 we discuss the dataset used. In section 5 we show the relevant summary statistics.
In section 5.3 we show the statistical properties of our extension while looking at systemic risk. In section 3.3
we look at the properties of our measure when measuring network risk and ﬁnancial linkages. We conclude
this paper in section 6.

1Empirical results will be based on both real-world data analysis and a simulation study (to be added).
2Compared to the sample in [4].

3

2 Systemic risk

2.1 Economic aspects of systemic risk

The GFC has confronted regulators and academics with the fact that just assessing and regulating the risk of
ﬁnancial institutions in isolation (microprudential policy) is not suﬃcient to ensure ﬁnancial system stability
and suﬃciently reduce systemic risk [23, 36]. Consequently, in the wake of the GFC macroprudential policy
has become increasingly important. According to [23] macroprudential policy seeks to regulate banks and the
ﬁnancial system as a whole rather than in isolation by reducing the possibility of contagion and making the
system as a whole more resilient to shocks through policies that aim to address the externalities, the intercon-
nectedness and the pro-cyclical build up of risks in the ﬁnancial system . For a comprehensive overview and
survey on all the literature concerning systemic risk, related ﬁnancial regulation and macroprudential policy
we refer the reader to [12, 36]. Along the lines of [23, 36] we summarize the economic aspects of systemic risk.
Any systemic risk measure must take some of these aspects into account in order to be useful and convincing.

Systemic risk involves two key dimensions of systemic risk which are [23, 36]:

1. The time-series dimension: Systemic risk builds up over time. The underlying risks are mostly accu-
mulated in relatively calm periods and periods of economic growth while manifesting themselves in
times of crisis. This phenomenon is also referred to as the volatility paradox [16] and it can amplify
the cycles present in the ﬁnancial system which is referred to as procyclicality.

2. The cross-sectional dimension: This refers to the fact that systemic risk is generated by the ﬁnancial
relationships and exposures between distinct institutions. Hence, it refers to the degree of intercon-
nectedness in the ﬁnancial system.

Next, one has to take into account the externalities which underlie the build-up of systemic risk as well. The
most important of these externalities are [23, 36]:

1. Externalities related to interconnectedness: These are the consequence of shocks spreading through
the system through the ﬁnancial relationships between institutions. The resulting phenomenon is also
referred to as contagion.

2. Externalities related to strategic complementarities: These are the result of strategic interactions
between ﬁnancial institutions and agents. For example when the payoﬀ of certain ﬁnancial instruments
is contingent on the amount of investors participating in it the result can be that institutions pile in
which exposes all institutions to the same source of risk if the instrument were to perform poorly.

3. Externalities related to ﬁre-sales and credit crunches: This emerges during periods of ﬁnancial stress
where market participants engage in a broad sell-oﬀ of assets. As a consequence asset prices are put
under negative pressure and the balance sheets of institutions deteriorate which makes it harder for
them to provide or obtain credit.

The ﬁrst type of externalities is more direct and arises from contractual links and direct transactions between
institutions whereas the second and third type are indirect and arise from the eﬀects that behavior of some
institutions can have on the rest of the system. Therefore, we must distinguish between institutions acting
individually systemic and those acting systemic as a herd. In [4] it is argued that the ∆-CoVaR aims to
capture direct and indirect externalities along with individually and as a herd systemic behavior.

Any measure of systemic risk must to some extent quantify the two dimensions and the externalities. The
ﬁrst one can be done by having a systemic risk measure that depends on time and on the institutions which
make up the system. The second can be done by constructing the systemic risk measure in such a way that
it clearly attempts to capture the spill-overs of externalities. One must be very wary here of the direction
of relationship which the measure uses. To clarify, if one wants to measure externalities that one institution
poses on the system one should look at the performance of the system conditional on the performance of
a given institution as this conforms to the deﬁnition of externalities used in textbooks as [67]. The other
direction would be more useful when one wants to measure the resiliency of an institution to bad systemic

4

performance and hence would be a more indirect way of measuring these externalities3. Of course, there
can be overlap between the actions and events that are included in both kinds of measures but the resulting
measures are not identical. Hence, one must be sure to use measures that aim to measure the appropriate
direction of the impact in order to measure externalities as directly as possible.
It must be noted that
externalities might be hard to measure as in equilibrium institutions might engage in behavior to reduce
their exposure to externalities [4]. In our context this involves at choosing the appropriate set of data to
condition on. For the ∆-CoVaR measure this topic will be further addressed in section 2.4.1.

2.2 Tail risk and tail dependency

A key feature of the ∆-CoES measure is that it should take tail risk from individual agents and tail depen-
dencies between agents better into account [92]. This can have qualitative economic consequences as well
rather than just more accurate estimates of said risks [93]. The importance on the sizes of tail risks for
qualitative outcomes in the economy can be seen in the model by [16]. In this macro-economic model due
to the inherent non-linearities and risk-asymmetry, the sizes of adverse shocks matter as they can nudge the
economy to a sticky region where most of the assets are held by the least productive agents, where investment
is sub-optimal and where consumption is distorted in the sense that agents postpone consumption. In turn,
this results in economic stagnation. Furthermore, the size of tail dependencies matter in the sense that the
size of a shock to an agents net worth along with the leverage of the agent determine if the agent is in need
of cash. If this is the case the agent can cause contagion throughout the system by selling some assets at ﬁre
sale prices. Mind this mechanism and the possible resulting eﬀects on the economic system are also present
when agents are not leveraged and a credit market does not even exist [56]. The ﬁre sales and its eﬀect
on asset prices result in non-linearities in the Brunnermeier-Sannikov economy which can further amplify
the initial shock. Due to said non-linearities it is important to have an accurate estimate of tail risks as
the reaction of other agents and the economic system will depend on the exact size of the shock and could
diﬀer signiﬁcantly for shock sizes even in a small region around the shock. This property along with ergodic
instability in the model make it so that conventional steady-state based macroeconomic analysis could be
inappropriate as suﬃciently large shocks can lead to persistent eﬀects rather than quick convergence to the
steady-state. In this model one of the second-best solutions for the regulator is to oﬀer tail insurance to
agents. A condition for this tail insurance to be eﬀective is that it fairly prices the risk of tail events and tail
dependencies between agents to avoid contagion. Hence, the model provides a clear theoretical justiﬁcation
and implies accurately quantifying the size of tail risk and tail dependencies also matters in a qualitative
sense. Regarding ﬁnancial networks, a model which emphasizes the size of adverse shocks in a qualitative
sense is one by [1]. In this model ﬁnancial contagion exhibits a phase transition where depending on the size
of the adverse shock a network structure that performs best in one regime might perform worst in the other
regime in terms of ﬁnancial stability. Further empirical and theoretical literature support taking into account
heterogeneity within ﬁnancial networks and identifying contagious links [6, 34, 42, 50, 72]. Therefore, also
in the network case there is a need for a risk measure which is more sensitive to the sizes of shocks and the
heterogeneity between banks in order to identify particularly contagious links. The need for more accurate
estimation of tail risks is also a main argument in the FRTB [11] for the move from VaR- to ES-based
risk measures. A practical implication of the theoretical justiﬁcation and regulatory need would be that we
require a risk measure that is highly sensitive to tail risk, changes in tail risk over time and diﬀerences in tail
risk between distinct agents. In section 3.2 it is argued that, based on the statistical robustness properties
of the ES, the ∆-CoES is an appropriate risk measure to use for this purpose.

2.3 Measuring systemic risk

In the literature, many approaches to measure systemic risk exist. Along the lines of [36] we summarize the
main approaches here and go in detail on some of them in the next subsections. According to [36] the main
approaches to measure systemic risk are:

3Mixing up direct and indirect measures can cause confusion. For example, as can be seen in the market for ESG investments.
There, one of the most prominent ESG measures (MSCI [70]) ) mostly looks at a ﬁrms exposure to ESG-related risks rather
than a ﬁrms impact on ESG-factors. These problems have come under recent media attention and scrutiny [5, 82].

5

1. Measures based on fundamentals: these measures are based on balance sheet information that is
available to market participants or regulators. This includes measures based on sector information of
credit, leverage and asset prices, measures based on interbank liquidity [29] networks obtained from
balance sheet information, stress tests and the contingent claims approach.

2. Measures based on market data: these measures are based on equity or other ﬁnancial asset returns
data. This includes measures using extreme value theory [45, 44], measures using tail networks [46, 47],
measures based on CDS and bond price data [39] and then measures such as the ∆-CoVaR, SES and
SRISK [2, 4, 14].

For more details on any of these methods the reader is referred to [36] or the respective papers. For an
in-depth survey on methods for measuring systemic risks and a more detailed classiﬁcation the reader is
referred to [12]. The last three measures ∆-CoVaR, SES and SRISK will be elaborated upon later. Because
we have chosen a measure based on market data as market data are available on a daily frequency, accessible
to most market participants and covers all possible sources of risk and externalities mentioned before. This
argument is further expanded upon in [4]. While this makes our results very general it does imply that once
risks are identiﬁed pinpointing the source of the risk is much harder if not impossible. Lastly, because we
use market data we are committed to the eﬃcient market hypothesis and a too-big-to-fail eﬀect could be
priced in which distorts markets risk assessment [69].

2.4 The ∆-CoVaR measure: deﬁnition and estimation

2.4.1 Measuring externalities, causal eﬀects and herd behavior

The ∆-CoVaR systemic risk measure is based on quantile regression to model the dependence of quantiles
between an institution and the ﬁnancial system or between two distinct institutions. It was ﬁrst proposed
in [4]. As stated in section 2.1 care must be applied in order to make sure the relevant externalities are
appropriately measured. The ∆-CoVaR aims to do this by always conditioning on one particular institution.
By doing this, the aim is to measure the potential spill-over that distress of one institution could have on
the system as a whole or on another institution.

We must stress that the ∆-CoVaR method does not identify causal links [4]. It just examines the risk for
the system or an institution that could emerge when a given institution is in distress. The exact channel
and the source of the risk are not identiﬁed as well. Hence, the ∆-CoVaR also covers the possibility that
some institutions are systemic as a herd rather than on their own, feedback loops and more complex ways
through which shocks can propagate through the system. These points are elaborated further in [4] but all
of the points apply to the ∆-CoES as well.

Lastly,as the example in section 3.4 will show the ∆-CoVaR and ∆-CoES are quite straightforward to
interpret/explain and not diﬃcult to estimate given market data and statistical software.

2.4.2 Unconditional

First, we cover the unconditional case where the time-series dimension is disregarded and just the uncondi-
tional loss distribution is examined. In this case the CoVaR of the ﬁnancial system at level q% given that
ﬁnancial institution i is in distress and the ∆-CoVaR are deﬁned as follows.

VaRi
q
Deﬁnition 2.4.1. Adrian & Brunnermeier 2016: the CoVaR
(Xsys | i) or the VaR of the ﬁnancial
q
system (or another institution j (cid:54)= i) at level q% given that the ﬁnancial institution i is in distress is deﬁned
as follows:

VaRi
q
CoVaR
q

(Xsys | i) = inf{Xsys | Xi = VaRq(Xi)}.

Then, the systemic risk which can be attributed to institution i is:

∆-CoVaRq(Xsys | i) = CoVaR

VaRi
q
q

(Xsys | i) − CoVaRVaRi

50

q

(Xsys | i)

6

In other words, the ∆-CoVaR measures the change in the VaR at a level q of the ﬁnancial system of an
institution j if a ﬁnancial institution institution i moves from its median loss to the q-th VaR loss. Hence, for
example it measures how much the 99% VaR of the ﬁnancial system changes as the losses of JP Morgan move
from its median state to its 99% VaR level. This measure does indeed seem to neatly cover the externalities
that the distress of JP Morgan could pose on other institutions or the entire ﬁnancial system. If the losses are
statistically independent (even in the tails) this change should be equal to 0. A positive number will denote
a positive association between the losses of JP Morgan in its distress state and the losses of the ﬁnancial
system or another institution. Hence, it shows that JP Morgan in this example can have a negative impact
on the ﬁnancial system. The CoVaRs are estimated using a quantile regression [58] of the form:

F −1
q

(Xsys | Xi) = αi

q + βi

qXi.

q

i = V aRq(Xi) and X ∗

Where F −1
(Xsys | Xi) denotes the estimated conditional quantile function of Xsys at level q. The predicted
values of this regression given X ∗
i = median(Xi) are the respective CoVaRs. Quantile
regression is used here as it provides a direct link between the VaRs of two random variables (since those
are just their quantiles). This method does not require any stringent distributional assumptions [58] besides
that the conditional quantile function at a given level q can be represented by a linear equation with two
parameters. Even in the case of misspeciﬁcation the estimator will be an accurate approximation of the
conditional quantile function [7]. The linear speciﬁcation also keeps the estimation procedure simple and the
statistical model parsimonious. In fact for extreme quantiles (above 95% it seems to work pretty well even
given extreme values [21]). While there are many diﬀerent ways to estimate CoVaR (see [4]) for the sake
of simplicity and exposition of the properties of the CoES we use the simple quantile regression method.
Contrary to [4] we do not make use of the macroeconomic control variables in order to keep the model as
simple as possible.

Another possible deﬁnition of the CoVaR is from [40, 66] and uses Xi ≥ VaRq(Xi) as a distress event
to condition on instead of Xi = VaRq(Xi) because this distress deﬁnition does not imply conditioning on an
event of probability zero, it should better take tail dependence into account as distress beyond the VaR-level
is taken into account and it is suitable for backtesting. However, as shown in [40] in the context of using
multivariate GARCH models to estimate the CoVaR with this deﬁnition of distress one has to numerically
solve an integral which could be complex to implement well and quantile estimation to obtain the CoVaR
will not be feasible [63]. For these reasons and because a large part of the recent literature keeps using the
traditional deﬁnition [9, 15, 55, 85] we continue to use the traditional deﬁnition of the CoVaR by Brunner-
meier and Adrian. However, because for the CoES it is simpler to obtain estimates based on more expansive
deﬁnition of a distress event and using the traditional deﬁnition there could lead to deceptive results we use
the expanded deﬁnition there.

When it comes to empirical applications the ∆-CoVaR has been used in many empirical studies related
to systemic risk. Recent examples which are far from exhaustive are [9, 15, 55, 85] with [55, 85] examining
ﬁnancial networks using the network ∆-CoVaR.

2.4.3 Network

The extension to a network-based version of the ∆-CoVaR is rather trivial as it involves just replacing the
ﬁnancial system in the method described above by another institution j. As a sanity check of the data
and the method if one regresses the losses of institution i on itself and computes the predicted value for
X ∗
the CoVaR conditional on the median state is equal or very close to 0.

(Xi | i) = VaRq(Xi). The same holds for the ∆-CoVaR if

i = VaRq(Xi) one should get that: CoVaR

VaRi
q
q

2.5 SRISK and MES

In [2] the Marginal Expected Shortfall (MES) is proposed. This measure looks at the eﬀect of systemic
losses on individual institutions based on their level of capitalization. Therefore, as argued in section 2.1
this risk measure aims to measure the resiliency of a given institution and the externalities the ﬁnancial
system poses on it rather than the systemic risk of an institution and the externalities the institution poses

7

on the ﬁnancial system. However, mathematically this risk measure is still very much related to the CoVaR
[66]. The SRISK [14] further extends this method by taking into account institution leverage and by being
based on a model of the balance sheet of a ﬁnancial institution. Both measures are popular alongside the
∆-CoVaR and are used in the same papers for example [9, 15].

3 The ∆-CoES measure: Deﬁnition and estimation

3.1 Unconditional

3.1.1 Univariate version

Using the deﬁnition of the ES and considering the ES is based on the VaR a univariate (when the set of inde-
pendent variables is univariate) extension of the ∆-CoVaR measure to the ∆-CoES is quite straightforward.
This is not surprising as the ES of a random variable X at level q is already conditional on X ≥ V aRq(X)
so now we have to condition on the other random variable being above the CoVaR at level q.

Deﬁnition 3.1.1. the CoES
at level q% given that the ﬁnancial institution i is in distress is deﬁned as follows:

(Xsys | i) or the ES of the ﬁnancial system (or another institution j (cid:54)= i)

VaRi
q
q

VaRi
q
CoES
q

(Xsys | i) = E

(cid:20)
VaRi
q
Xsys ≥ CoVaR
q

(Xsys | i) | Xi ≥ VaRq(Xi | i)

.

(cid:21)

Then, the systemic risk which can be attributed to institution i is:

∆-CoESq(Xsys | i) = E

(cid:20)
VaRi
q
Xsys ≥ CoVaR
q

(cid:21)
(Xsys | i) | Xi ≥ VaRq(Xi)

−

E

(cid:104)
Xsys ≥ CoVaRVaRi

50

q

(cid:105)
(Xsys | i) | Xi ≥ VaR50(Xi)

We must note that this deﬁnition is diﬀerent from the one used in [3, 19, 83] for example. However, as
shown in simulations by [66] this deﬁnition does result in the measure being a monotonic function of tail
dependence whereas the other does not. Furthermore, according ot [66] this deﬁnition insures the CoES is
coherent in the sense of [8]. The CoES can be seen as the ES of the ﬁnancial system or another institution
j given that the losses of institution i are at a speciﬁed VaR level or worse. The ∆-CoES at level q is then
the change in the ES at level q of the ﬁnancial system or another institution j given that institution i moves
from its median level of losses (or worse) to its VaR level (or worse) at q. A has been demonstrated in
simulations in [66] by using the CoES with appropriate conditioning the tail dependence and the behavior
of the returns past the VaR level are captured more adequately. We also demonstrate analytically in section
3.5 that in simple returns models the deﬁnitions by [3, 4] of the CoVaR and CoES lead to superﬂuous results.

In order to estimate this one needs to be aware of the quantile regression model used to estimate the
CoVaRs. Since this regression model is a model for the conditional distribution we avoid the need of having
to use kernel-based methods which are necessary when estimating the conditional ES when no model for
the conditional distribution is speciﬁed [18, 20, 80]. We have to be careful here to adhere to the double
conditioning as given in deﬁnition 2.4.1 otherwise one might be tempted to apply [84]. However, this
method estimates the ES of the conditional distribution above the quantile regression line instead of the
ES of the conditional distribution with boundaries given by the VaR and CoVaR. However, this paper still
served as inspiration since it used quantile regression to model the conditional distribution but estimated
their conditional ES using an adaptation of the historical method. Given the good statistical properties of
the historical method for estimating the ES [20, 22] this approach seemed sensible. Also, deﬁnition 3.1.1
leads us to estimate a simple expectation in the upper right quadrant of the axis system deﬁned by the VaR
and CoVaR line in the plane. This led to the following estimator for the CoES:

ˆCoESq(Xsys | i) =

1
nc

nc(cid:88)

k=1

X c

sys,k.

8

ˆCoVaRq.

sys,k is the Xsys coordinate of the k-th element in Nc.
ˆCoESq =

ˆCoVaRq and Xi ≥ ˆVaRq(Xi),
Where Nc is the set of all observations (Xi, Xsys) ∈ R2 satisfying Xsys ≥
nc = Card(Nc) and X c
If the case occurs where
Card(Nc)=0 we take
In more intuitive terms we just take the sample mean of all
observations that are in the area bounded by VaRq(Xi) and CoVaRq(Xsys | i). To make the estimation
procedure clear in visual terms in both the systemic and the network case we refer the reader to section 3.4.
The estimation for the ∆-CoES then follows as this estimator can also be used to estimate the second term in
the deﬁnition of the ∆-CoES but then one of the bounds will be VaR50(Xi) = median(Xi). This estimation
method is consistent in the sense that if one were to regress the losses of i on itself and compute the CoES at
level q the estimate will be identical to the estimate for the ES of the losses of i at level q. Furthermore, the
estimation conforms to the notion of straightforwardly applying the historical ES estimator on a conditional
distribution but with the conditional model given by the results of the quantile estimation. Lastly, this
ˆCoVaRq(Xsys | i)
deﬁnition and estimation also make sense as an ES in the sense that
and CoESq(Xsys | i) ≥ CoVaRq(Xsys | i) which corresponds to ˆESq(Xi) ≥ ˆVaRq(Xi) and ESq(Xsys |
i) ≥ VaRq(Xsys | i) for the marginals. We must note this monotonicity is not neccesarily preserved for
the ∆ measures and their estimators due to the subtraction. As a consequence the correlation between
the marginal ES/VaR and the ∆-measures can be weak which is already observed in [4] and shows the ∆-
measures capture a dimension of risk that can be unrelated to the marginal risk. The economic consequence
is that examining an institutions risk on a microprudential level (using the marginal risk measures) can
give diﬀerent results from examining an institutions risk on a macroprudential level (using the ∆ measures).
Letting the estimator depend on this quadrant given by the level q connects this estimator to a commonly
used notion of tail dependence; Joes Lambda [51, 52]. Lastly, this estimator also seems to be quite universal
given the plethora of methods that exist to estimate the CoVaR as it involves taking a sample mean of a
subset of excess returns. However, in some cases one might ﬁrst have to smooth the excess returns as in
done in [83] for example.

ˆCoESq(Xsys | i) ≥

3.1.2 Multivariate version

When one wants to condition the CoVaR and CoES on more events by including more explanatory variables
in the quantile regression model the CoVaR and CoES could potentially become quite complicated and sub-
ject to the curse of dimensionality 4 as for any given region in Rp (with p the amount of explanatory variables)
the data become increasingly sparse as p grows especially if the conditions on all p variables involve going
to high or low quantiles on all of these variables simultaneously. Consequently, when estimating the CoES
there could be no data points in this region to compute it and one has to resort to the CoVaR. Additionally,
the quantiles of multivariate random variables do not have a single and unambiguous deﬁnition yet although
research has been conducted in this area [43]. Therefore, conditioning on all p variables being equal to their
respective VaRs is unlikely to correspond to any multivariate notion of a quantile. However, looking from
the deﬁnitions used in these higher-dimensional cases, there does not seem to be as much as a problem due
to the conditioning used.

In the case where one uses additional macroeconomic and ﬁnancial state variables in the CoVaR [4] have
already deﬁned how to compute the CoVaR. In this case, the CoVaR is conditional on the value of the state
variables at time t − 1 and the losses of bank i are at their VaR level. This avoids both the curse of di-
mensionality and the multivariate quantile problems as in the former case the state variables are most often
located in the centers of their marginals and only one variable is taken to a high or low quantile. Hence, only
one of the variables is taken to their quantile. The case of stimating the network-CoVaR between institutions
i, j while controlling on a set of other institutions excluding institution i and j is addressed in [85]. The
solution is to condition on the losses of all other banks besides i and j being equal to their median 5 loss
while conditioning on the loss of i being equal to its VaR at level q. Again, this seems to avoid the curse
of dimensionality mostly while also avoiding the multivariate quantile problem. Estimating the ∆-CoES in

4On the other hand, the blessing of dimensionality also exists. This refers to the advantages of data and random variables
in high-dimensions and is mathematically grounded in the concentration of measure phenomenon [32, 62] and has been applied
in empirical research [53].

5It must be noted that the coordinate wise multivariate median may not lie in the convex hull of the data when the dimension

of the dataset is greater than 3. As an example take {(1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0), (0, 0, 1)} then the coordinate wise median is (0, 0, 0).

9

both cases would then be analogous to the univariate case.

Therefore, if these solutions are used in the multivariate case these problems are likely to not plague the Co-
VaR and CoES estimates. Moreover, if the amount of explanatory variables is kept limited as is recommended
in [4] to reduce overﬁtting then the problem should be contained.

3.2 Sub-additivity and robustness

Being an ES-based measure the CoES inherits some properties from ES-based measures. In this section we
will investigate the most important properties of the ES and state how the CoES could exhibit those as well.
We will also compare said properties to the properties of VaR-based measures such as the CoVaR and use
the comparison to denote the use cases where each measure is most appropriate to use.

Sub-additivity: the VaR famously does not always satisfy sub-additivity [8] whereas the ES does. This
property is convenient for example when one constructs portfolios or sums of risks of diﬀerent instruments
or companies. However, this property is not always desirable from a practical standpoint [30] and in most
practical scenario’s the VaR does satisfy sub-additivity [28]. As the ES sub-additive we suspect the CoES is
as well. Hence, in constructing a risk index by sub-additivity we know this index provides an upper bound
on the risk as computed on the index. The result by [86] further states that in the case of the ES this upper
bound is equal to the risk computed on the index if all entities share a common tail risk. As stated in [25]
there is a trade-oﬀ between sub-additivity and robustness. Therefore, we argue that sub-additivity should
not be an important property to compare these risk measures. Instead, we will argue that robustness should
be used as it has direct practical implications and is related to sub-additivity.

Robustness: as an alternative framework to the axiomatic framework of [8, 86] which is common in the
risk measure literature in [25] the notion of robustness of risk measures is proposed. The robustness of a
risk measure more directly relates to practical problems as it denotes how sensitive a risk measure and its
estimators are to outliers/extreme data points. In [25] it is proven that the VaR is more robust than the ES
and the ES has a linear sensitivity function while the sensitivity function of the VaR is bounded. This result
is independent of the estimator that is used. Therefore, we argue that the robustness CoVaR and CoES
are the same as those of the VaR and ES. Furthermore, we argue that the robustness property is crucial
in practical applications of risk measures and could be used to determine when certain risk measures are
appropriate. To elaborate on this, we consider the following two points.

1. Less robust risk measures such as the ES could be more useful for applications where capital require-
ments or other reserves need to be determined frequently and should highly depend on the short-term
conditions of the market at a given time. These measures could also serve as early warning system for
regulators as they quickly react to changing market conditions. So we expect them to exhibit more
time-series heterogeneity. Also, for the robustness reason and the reason that the ES captures the tail
beyond the VaR level we expect ES-based measure to exhibit more cross-sectional heterogeneity as
well when comparing diﬀerent institutions.

2. Conversely, more robust risk measures such as the VaR could be more useful for applications where
capital requirements or other reserves are only determined infrequently and it is more desirable for
them to remain relatively stable as raising this capital could be costly. Therefore, if long-term risk
does build up in markets the risk measure should react slowly in response to this so institutions can
adjust their capital in a smooth manner. Therefore we expect these risk measures to exhibit less time-
series heterogeneity. Analogous to the ﬁrst point we also expect that less robust risk measures such
as the VaR exhibit less cross-sectional heterogeneity as wildly diﬀerent loss distributions can have the
same or a similar VaR.

As proven in [25] ES-based risk measures are less robust than VaR-based risk measures. Therefore, we argue
that the CoES will exhibit the properties stated in point 1 whereas the CoVaR will exhibit the properties
stated in point 2. Consequently, this would also imply the CoES is more suitable for measuring short-term
risk build-up and risk heterogeneity between institutions. Hence, the CoES should help in addressing the

10

theoretical points in section 2.2. Because the CoES is hypothesized to be more sensitive to short-term risk
changes while the CoVaR is hypothesized to react in a long-term fashion it is expected that the CoES leads the
CoVaR and that the CoVaR is more persistent. Therefore, we expect a signiﬁcant cross-correlation between
the CoES and CoVaR at negative lags and we expect the CoVaR to exhibit higher auto-correlations that
decay more slowly. When it comes to network risk, we expect due to the sensitivity and the more expansive
deﬁnition of distress that the CoES is able to better estimate tail dependency between institutions. As a
ﬁnal point of note we refer to the fact that these two points are also related to the famous bias-variance
trade-oﬀ in statistics where a high bias and low variance estimator smoothes the data while a low bias and
high variance estimator ﬂuctuates. The diﬀerence is that here practical requirements rather than just the
MSE of an estimator determine what trade-oﬀ between bias and variance is chosen.

3.3 Network

Just as before the extension to the network setting revolves around replacing Xsys by Xj.

3.4 Example: Goldman Sachs systemic and network ∆-CoVaR/CoES

To show the method in action and provide appropriate and clear intuition as to how it works, we apply the
method on a ”toy” example where we take the stock losses of Goldman Sachs and compare those to the
losses of the ﬁnancial system and Morgan Stanley. We then demonstrate graphically how the ∆-CoVaR and
∆-CoES are estimated in both cases.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: 1(a): Daily equity losses of Goldman Sachs vs ﬁnancial system losses, 1(b): Daily equity losses of
Goldman Sachs vs Morgan Stanley.

In Figure 1(a) we can see the quantile estimation at a given level (here the 99%) produces a line (in red).
Next, the VaR of Goldman Sachs is computed (dotted black line). The system loss coordinate of the point
where this line crosses the estimated quantile regression line is the value of the CoVaR at 99% (black solid
line). The CoES is then computed by taking a sample average of all losses in the quadrant on the right side
of the VaR line and the upside of the CoVaR line. To compute the ∆ measures this operation is repeated but
instead of the VaR line of Goldman Sachs the line corresponding to the median is used. This provides us with
the CoVaR line at 50% and from this also the CoES at 50%. In the last step the ∆-CoVaR at 99% is then the
CoVaR at 99% minus the CoVaR at 50% and the same holds for the ∆-CoES but then we use the ES based
measures instead. This estimation of CoES takes into account that the CoES is not just conditional on the
CoVaR level but also on the VaR level. Also, if we were to regress Goldman Sachs losses against Goldman
Sachs losses the CoES would result in the ES of Goldman Sachs (Same holds for the CoVaR) which indeed
shows this is the appropriate way to estimate the CoES. Mind that absent any conditional model we could
not have estimated the CoES in this simple way [18] but require kernel regression [80] or some parametric
model to provide us with a conditional distribution. Lastly, the Figure also shows what kind of events the
model is made for. as the points in the box correspond to events where both Goldman Sachs and the ﬁnancial

11

system suﬀered substantial daily losses while if we look at the main part of the bivariate distribution the
losses seem heavy tailed but independent (along the lines of a bivariate t with 3 or 4 degrees of freedom).
These tail events where suddenly the losses are dependent are exactly the events that the model aims to
capture. The visualisation also shows how the CoES is related to tail dependence. Note also the rarity of
such events despite the amount of observations being 8767 (see Table 6). In the network case where we look
at the risk an institution i poses on another institution j the method works the same as before. However,
this case is of note as the correlation and the tail dependence can be much stronger between two diﬀerent
institutions versus an institution and the entire system (Figure 1(b)). This certainly seems to be the case
for Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley. With this method we aim to ﬁnd problematic links between pairs
or even groups of institutions that would not show up if we were to only regress individual institution vs the
ﬁnancial system.

3.5 Theoretical properties

i = VaRq(X t

Under the assumption of a bivariate normal and t-distribution (degrees of freedom greater than 2) and
conditioning on X t
i ) we show that the analytical expressions for the ∆-CoVaR and ∆-CoES are
equivalent. The equivalence leads to the conclusion that even under the rather realistic model of t-distributed
asset returns with fatter tails the conditioning used by [4] leads to the superﬂuous result that one could have
used linear regression instead and to risk measures which do not seem to do much with tail dependence or tail
risk. We also aim to show this in a simulation study (to be added) comparing the two ways of conditioning
under a counter-example of a bivariate distribution where most returns are independent from some elliptical
distribution but with some highly dependent tail returns. It is expected the CoES based on the traditional
conditioning to be virtually zero while the CoES based on conditioning on X t
i ) will appropriately
pick up on the tail dependence (to be added). Furthermore, we aim to derive sensitivity functions along the
line of [25] (to be added).

i ≥ VaRq(X t

3.6 Conditional

In this paper we do not use the full conditional CoVaR estimation framework that [4] employs. Rather, we
use the simple market equity based quantile regression and estimate it using rolling windows to make the
estimation conditional. We aim to show that even in this simple case the hypothesized properties of the
CoES and CoVaR given in section 3.2 are already evident. For a comprhensive survey on conditional VaR
estimation methods which often underpin condtional CoVaR estimation we refer the reader to [60].

4 Data

The dataset used for this paper is daily equity data of US ﬁnancial institutions from CRSP. The dataset
spans a time period from 31-12-1970 to 31-12-2020. Therefore, the dataset includes plenty of crises and rare
events such as Black Monday, the Dotcom Bubble, the Great Financial Crisis and most recently the Covid
crisis. Next to these aggregate shocks the data also contain some idiosyncratic shocks. Some examples of
these shocks will be given in Section 5.2. In line with [4] we deﬁne a ﬁnancial institution as a ﬁrm having
an SIC-code between 6000 and 6800. In line with the literature on asset pricing we exclude ADRs, SDIs
and REITs. Furthermore, we exclude missing returns and prices (as well as prices lesser than or equal to
zero) and exclude companies with less than 260 weeks of returns data. Only active companies are kept in
the sample. The CRSP data is also merger adjusted in a sense that at any given moment only companies
that were not acquired until that moment are in the dataset. Through the PERMNO identiﬁer we aim to
keep track of companies that have changed name, SIC code or even stock ticker over time. We must note
that its fairly rare for a company to change SIC codes, a few prominent examples include Goldman Sachs
changing to the 6730 (bank holding company) SIC code during the GFC and VISA and Mastercard changing
to the 7389 SIC code (Business services, not elsewhere classiﬁed). This last change has as a consequence
that these two ﬁrms are kept out of the sample as there are less than 260 weeks of returns data between the
IPO date and the SIC code change. For a full and precise list of all variables and the ﬁltering procedures
we refer the reader to Section 8.5. In the end we obtain a dataset of in total 6.182.652 observations over
18.613 days and over 1564 companies. Mind that since not all companies have data available for the entire

12

time span the panel dataset is unbalanced. To analyse the data R [77] is used. For the details regarding
the computer and R setup including packages used we refer the reader to section 8.7. Lastly, to aid in
weekly aggregation of our data we deﬁne a trading week to consist of 5 days and a trading year to consist
of 51 weeks. This division results in a total of 2523 weeks. For the weekly returns aggregation daily returns
ri were aggregated according to the following formula (cid:81)5
i=1(1 + ri) − 1 for day i = 1, . . . , 5 in order to
avoid the instabilities faced when using daily prices as for some ﬁrms the price and outstanding share data
exhibited jumps that could not be seen when looking at share data of the same companies on for exam-
ple Yahoo Finance. However, returns did not seem to be subject to these anomalies and also the anomalies
do not aﬀect market value calculations as even with the jumps the total market value would not change much.

The losses of the ﬁnancial system index are deﬁned as follows:

Deﬁnition 4.0.1. Let X 1
t = 1, . . . , T . Let MVt
at time t is deﬁned as:

i , . . . , X T

i be the equity returns of institution i with i = 1, . . . , N from time
i be the market-value of institution i at time t. Then the loss of the ﬁnancial system

X t

sys =

N
(cid:88)

−

MVt

iX t
i

i=1
N
(cid:88)

i=1

MVt
i

This deﬁnition is equivalent to the one in [4]. The deﬁnition applies to both daily and weekly equity data.

5 Results

5.1 Summary statistics of the ﬁnancial and banking system

In this section we brieﬂy describe the stylized properties of the dataset. All summary statistics are computed
on the complete data as of 31-12-2020. We compute all VaR- and ES-based risk measures at the 95%, 97.5%
and 99% levels as these levels are common in risk management and regulation [11, 49]. In order to have a
fair comparison and due to the level stated in [11] we report the results compare all measures at the 97.5%
level.

From the summary statistics and the ﬁgures it becomes apparent that the majority of the losses data
follows a symmetric distribution whose mean and median are slightly negative and which is slightly fatter
tailed than a normal distribution (for the robust kurtosis measure a standard normal distribution would
result in 2.9058 [81]). However, the extreme events really add ”spice” to the data by severely fattening the
tails and introducing apparent skewness to either the loss or gain side. This is made graphically apparent in
Figure 9 where we can clearly see the separation between the majority of the data and the extreme events.
To note, these phenomena would not be visible by looking at Figures 8 and 10 or by using only classical
estimators in Table 5. Lastly, as from Figure 8 it seems to be that the time series is weakly stationary an
Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) test is performed. This test indicated that the series is stationary at the 5%
signiﬁcance level. Hence, the interesting conditional behavior in the series seems to come from the variance
and its higher moments as the mean does not shift over time. These ﬁndings are consistent with known facts
on the empirical behavior of ﬁnancial time series [24]. The apparent volatility clustering in the data along
with the stationarity and conditional behavior show that conditional models like GARCH or GARCH with
extreme value analysis of the residuals like in [68] could work well. Next, we look at the weekly ﬁnancial
system returns in a similar manner.

Along the lines of the analysis in the previous section when aggregated to the level of one week (5 days) we
ﬁnd very similar behavior. However, now the skewness and kurtosis (both the classical and robust estimates)
are less pronounced. This in contrast to the mean, median, minimum, maximum and standard deviation
(both classical and robust) which have increased. The results are consistent with the aggregate Gaussianity
property at longer time scales stated in [24]. These properties are visible in Figure 12 where the majority

13

of the distribution has thinner tails than in Figure 9 with only a few isolated extremes while in Figure 9
there were larger clusters of events that seemed separate from the majority of the data but are also separate
from the extremes. Due to aggregation the extremes that exist are larger in magnitude as these consist of
weeks where for days in a row substantial losses were sustained by the ﬁnancial system. When performing
the same ADF test on this data we ﬁnd that the data are weakly stationary at the 5% signiﬁcance level.
A last diﬀerence to the daily series is that it seems for weekly data the higher moments of the distribution
do not play as much of a role and there are just a few extreme events. However, for regulators or market
participants these extremes are more important as they persist despite the aggregation. As the extremes are
also more isolated from a thinner tailed distribution, we claim that the weekly risk measures will be most
important and show the most pronounced results.

5.2 Summary statistics of the GSIBs

In a similar vein to the previous section here we provide the summary statistics of the loss time series of all
the US based GSIBs in the dataset. From the tables and ﬁgures (see Appendix section 8.6 Figures 14,16)
it seems that the majority of the GSIB return data are very similar between banks. Again, we can see
properties like those mentioned in [24]. However, it also becomes evident that the banks are diﬀerent when
it comes to the severity of extreme events and risk measures. From these it seems that Deutsche Bank and
Citigroup are the most risky in terms of their 99% Expected Shortfall. From Table 7 we can also see that
the ranking of institutions according to a given quantile level is diﬀerent between the VaR and the ES. Here,
we see the property of the ES to pick up on the shape of the tail beyond the VaR level while the VaR ignores
this. Also, we can see the sensitivity of the historical ES estimator to high losses above the VaR level as
State Streets 99% ES is biased upwards due to the one time daily loss of almost 60% that its far above the
rest of the loss distribution as is visible in Figure 15. The loss is not due to some anomaly or a data error as
it can be found in media reports [78]. The same holds for many of the extreme losses of other banks. It is a
consequence of the robustness properties of the ES [25] and suggests that one should investigate the extreme
events when using them. Though the bias seems not to manifest itself on lower ES levels such as 97.5%.
Despite this issue the statistical properties of the historical ES estimator are still very desirable [20, 71].If we
compare the ES 97.5% rankings to the ranking as given by FSB additional GSIB capital buﬀers (see Table
3) we see that they reasonably line up except for JP Morgan Chase. A possible explanation for the ranking
discrepancy could be that JP Morgan Chase is seen as more systemically important due to its sheer size,
importance in ﬁnancial markets, complexity and international presence. Lastly, from Figure 15 we can see
that there are substantial possibilities for extreme tail dependence. However, to check if this really is the
case one must either plot the empirical distribution functions of the losses of the banks against each other
or perform the ∆-CoVaR/∆-CoES analysis to see if indeed some of the tail losses of these banks comove.
Therefore, we expect the network analysis to show unique links between extreme losses of banks. Just as in
the previous section we also examine the statistical behavior of the weekly equity losses of GSIBs. Looking
at the behavior of weekly returns we see that aggregation over a larger time scale makes the returns look
more normally distributed, has increased the mean, median, minimum, maximum and standard deviation
while skewness has remained stable and kurtosis has decreased. This is in line with the general stylized facts
and empirical ﬁndings regarding ﬁnancial returns data [24].

5.3 Cross-sectional and time-series properties of the ∆-CoES

In this section, we aim to empirically check some of the properties of the CoVaR and CoES hypothesized in
section 3.2. We do this by looking at the the CoVaR and CoES of each GSIB institution versus the entire
ﬁnancial system. We compare these in a cross-sectional manner at some ﬁxed time points but also examine
the time-series properties by considering multiple ﬁxed time points. Furthermore, we construct an average
CoVaR and CoES measure over all GSIBs versus the system to examine the time-series properties in more
detail. To start oﬀ, ﬁrst the weekly ∆-CoVaR/CoES using a rolling window with length of 300 weeks (to
have a suﬃciently long estimation window covering broad economic cycles as well as to not be aﬀected by
Citigroup returns data issues) are estimated on the entire time period for all US-based GSIBs.

14

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: 2(a): Weekly ∆-CoVaR 97.5% over time for the GSIBs. 2(b): Weekly ∆-CoES 97.5% over time
for the GSIBs. Events: 59 weeks before Black Monday, Week before Black Monday, Week between Black
Monday and start subprime crisis, Week of start subprime crisis, Week of Lehman bankruptcy, Week of
Dodd-Frank, Week of start Covid pandemic, 3rd last week. If the GSIB is unlisted the risk measures are set
to zero.

In Figure 2 we can see that the ∆-CoES indeed exhibits both higher cross-sectional and time-series het-
erogeneity while the ∆-CoVaR is relatively uniform across institutions, is more persistent and reacts more
slowly to changing economic conditions. Hence, it seems less suitable when one seeks to identify institutions
that are particularly risky or less resilient. Mind that some GSIBs were not listed on the stock exchange for
the entire period studied here. Hence, some institutions have risk measures equal to zero. For more details
on the time-series properties we look at the average ∆-CoVaR and ∆-CoES over the 9 GSIBs over the whole
time period of the dataset.

Figure 3: Weekly average GSIB 97.5% ∆-CoES/CoVaR over time. Lines: Dark green: Black Monday, red:
start subprime crisis, Blue: Lehman Bankruptcy, brown: Dodd-Frank act, purple: Start Covid pandemic

15

In Figure 3 it can be seen that both measures capture similar eﬀects. Also, we can see that over time the
average systemic risk of the GSIBs has increased. This is conﬁrmed when computing a 300 week rolling
average of these series. The rolling average further conﬁrms that the ∆-CoVaR can smooth out too much
as there the bump resulting from Black Monday is not visible (See Appendix section 8.6, Figure 18). Even
without the rolling average this smoothing is visible in Figures 2 and 3. Also, the time-series heterogeneity
of the ∆-CoES is apparent here while the ∆-CoVaR seems to smooth out too much. Furthermore, it seems
that the ∆-CoES leads the ∆-CoVaR. Especially around the Lehman bankruptcy. This supports the notion
that the ∆-CoES could be used as an early warning system for regulators as it reacts quickly to changing
market conditions and systemic risk manifestation. This notion is supported by looking at a zoomed-in
view of this plot around the Lehman bankruptcy (see Appendix section 8.6, Figure 23). When looking at
a plot of the ∆-CoVaR and ∆-CoES of all individual GSIBs around the GFC (see Appendix section 8.6,
Figure 21) we see even more pronounced that for most banks the ∆-CoVaR reacts late whereas the ∆-CoES
shoots up instantly. Furthermore, the hypothesis that the ∆-CoES leads the ∆-CoVaR and is less persistent
is conﬁrmed by these ﬁgures and also by plots of the cross-correlation and auto-correlation functions (see
Appendix section 8.6 Figures 19,20). These ﬁndings do support the hypotheses on the stylized facts and
statistical behavior of the ∆-CoES and ∆-CoVaR made in section 3.2. We must note that the ∆-CoES
dips substantially on average and also for the individual banks prior to the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy.
This could be due to the ﬁnancial system being in distress while these institutions are relatively unaﬀected6.
However, the ∆-CoES dropping could also be due to lower tail risks. Hence, by just looking at the ∆-CoES
one could be fooled by seeing a drop. This implies that both systemic risk measures can serve distinct but
complementary purposes for regulators and market participants. The ∆-CoVaR is more suited to measuring
long-term systemic risk trends and determining bank capital requirements while the ∆-CoES is more suited to
measuring short term changes in systemic risk contribution, acting as an early warning system, determining
weekly/daily risk limits and buﬀers and to identify particularly risky or fragile institutions. These two
distinct and complementary purposes are of course a consequence of the robustness properties of both risk
measures.

5.4 Unconditional network model on GSIBs

After examining the statistical properties of both risk measures when looking at the ﬁnancial system we now
focus on the properties when looking at network risk. Since in general it does not hold that ∆-CoVaR(i,j)=∆-
CoVaR(j,i) with i (cid:54)= j(same holds for the ES based version) and the dataset contains 1523 instutions this
would involve estimating n(n − 1) = 2.318.006 ∆-CoVaRs and ∆-CoESs for each conﬁdence level. In the
literature on ﬁnancial networks methods like LASSO (Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator),
Elastic Net and SCAD (Smoothly Clipped Absolute Deviation) are used to reduce this complexity [47, 55, 85].
However, our aim is to examine the properties of the network ∆-CoES/CoVaR irrespective of the method
used to obtain the important links. Hence, to reduce computational complexity and demonstrate these
properties in a simple way we have reduced the problem to just estimating these measures on the set of
9 GSIBs. This would result in estimating just 72 ∆-CoVaRs and ∆-CoESs for each conﬁdence level. In
accordance with the FRTB we mostly compare the risk measures at the 97.5% level although results at the
95% and 99% levels are provided in the Appendix (Section 8.6) and discussed when relevant. To illustrate
the diﬀerence between this method and looking at Pearson correlations between institution losses, we also
provide a correlation table. Since correlation matrices are symmetric an already noticeable diﬀerence will be
that correlations treat a link between institution i and j with i (cid:54)= j the same whereas due to its asymmetry
∆-CoVaR and ∆-CoES will not. As a note all the results in this section are on the full set of data available
for each institution until 31-12-2020.

In Figure 24 it can be seen that most correlations are fairly homogeneous and situated in the interval
[0.60, 0.70]. However for example the relatively high correlation between Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stan-
ley is apparent. This suggests that the distribution seen in Figure 1(b) is more of a special case but that
overall the institutional losses are quite strongly correlated. Also, the correlations between JP Morgan/Citi-

6Out of curiosity and as a comparison to [4] we also look at both risk measures during the GFC for Lehman Brothers (see
Figure 22). We ﬁnd, similar to [4], that the CoVaR stays relatively constant while the CoES dips down after the BNP Paribas
event and later slowly increases until the point of Lehmans bankruptcy.

16

group, JP Morgan/Goldman Sachs and Bank of America/Citigroup fall outside the interval and hence stand
out. We must note that the Pearson correlation is a measure of central comovement of random variables.
However, if two random variables are normally distributed with a correlation of 1 then their tail dependence
is maximal as all the observations are on a straight increasing line. Hence, correlations do contain some
information on tail dependence.

From Figures 25-27 it is already evident that using the ∆-CoVaR to measure institutional tail dependence
results in a more heterogeneous picture. In order to make the ﬁgures most comparable and show which meth-
ods results in more heterogeneity, the scale has been standardized based on the minimum and maximum
over all daily or weekly network-∆-CoVaR/CoES matrices. Now, it is clear that banks like State Street and
Bank of New York Mellon pose lower risks on other GSIBs than their peer GSIB banks and are also the least
exposed to their peer GSIBs. We also see, due to the asymmetry of the risk measure that, the link between
Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley unveiled by the correlation measure is still there with the direction
Goldman Sachs to Morgan Stanley being more risky than the reverse. The diﬀerence in riskiness increases as
the quantile increases which is a sign that indeed we are measuring a strong tail dependence between these
two institutions. As the quantiles move up it is revealed that Citigroup and Bank of America are particularly
exposed to shocks of their peers. The overall variability in the network-∆-CoVaR is still quite limited even
when moving to the 99% level. However, due to its statistical properties we expect to see an even more dif-
ferent picture when looking at the ∆-CoESs as it will be less robust and provide a more heterogeneous picture.

In Figures 28-30 it can be seen that due to the properties of the ES the tails of the loss distributions
are better taken into account. This increases the overall amount of heterogeneity in the network structure
but it also highlights particularly problematic links as now even on the 95% level the link between Goldman
Sachs and Morgan Stanley is much more apparent. Again, from the lowest quantile on it is much more
apparent that Citigroup and Bank of America seem to be the least resilient overall to shock from their GSIB
peers. The same follows for links that Deutsche Bank has with other banks. Looking at Figures 25-27 it is
clear that the network ∆-CoVaR seems to miss the tail dependencies present between Deutsche Bank and
other institutions while the network ∆-CoES picks up on them. It is clear from these examples these two
network/contagion risk measures imply diﬀerent conclusions when it comes to assessing which links between
banks are risky and therefore between which banks it is more likely for contagion to occur. Especially of
note is the link between Deutsche Bank and State Street.While using the VaR-based measure this link only
becomes somewhat worrying at the 99% level but the ES-based measures pick up on this link at the 97.5%
level and even the 95% level already. Also, now it seems that State Street is much less resilient to shocks
from peer GSIBs than Bank of New York Mellon is while a VaR-based analysis aﬀords both comparable
resiliency. These diﬀerences seem to indicate there are some losses between these two institutions which
happened simultaneously and were also far from the rest of the loss distribution while there are ample losses
that do not sit far from the loss distribution. This makes the VaR-based measures appear more normal while
the ES-based measures are pulled upwards.

Next, the same set of network/contagion risk measures is used but computed on weekly equity losses. As
seen before, weekly equity losses seem to be more useful as outliers in these capture more sustained adverse
events than one time extremes. Also, as hypothesized in section 5.2 the weekly measures also allow for more
heterogeneity between the institutions. The correlation matrix based on weekly data does not deviate a lot
from the one based on daily data and it can be found in the Appendix (Section 8.6). The lack of diﬀerences
are probably due to the Pearson correlation being a more central measure of comovement while in Section
5.2 it could be seen that the centers of the GSIB loss distributions for daily and weekly data are not that
diﬀerent. In fact, as also stated in [24] the weekly loss distributions become more like a normal distribution.
This increases the correlations between any two given loss distributions a bit but overall not much change
can be expected. Instead, it is conjectured that the VaR- and ES-based network risk measures really show
their merits as with weekly data the tail behavior is more crucial and pronounced (see Figure 15 versus 17).

The most important results are shown in Figure 4. With weekly data the network ∆-CoVaR already shows
promise as the link between Goldman Sachs as pointed out in daily data and the correlation matrix seems to
persist. Furthermore, the vulnerability of Citigroup and Bank of America seems to persist. Again, Deutsche

17

Bank seems to be a possible source of contagion as its ∆-CoVaRs vs its peer institutions are relatively ele-
vated. In contrast to the Figures 25-27 these risky links already are visible at the lowest quantile. Overall,
the custodian banks State Street and Bank of New York Mellon seem to be pretty safe both as sources and
recipients of shocks. However, again a problematic link between Deutsche Bank and State Street emerges
which is not there for Bank of New York Mellon and overall Bank of New York Mellon seems to be more
resilient than State Street. It would be interesting to investigate if this link has some real fundamentals
such as interbank exposures, State street being a custodian for Deutsche Bank, derivatives exposures, shared
syndicated loan market exposures etc. The overall heterogeneity has increased but still remains limited
compared to the network-∆-CoES. Just as before, it is expected that the ES-based network risk measures
will add more information on the tail dependencies between institutions.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Weekly network: 4(a):∆-CoVaRs at 97.5% in % and 4(b):∆-CoES at 97.5% in %. The institutions
in the rows are assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

Looking at the ∆-CoES results the increased heterogeneity of the estimates is visible. Whereas before only
some of the most extreme links were just noticeable now they are immediately apparent. Also, some less
risky links the ∆-CoVaR seems to smooth out too much now become visible as well. We further highlight the
heterogeneity by computing a sum of the moduli of the eigenvalues of both matrices (as non-symmetric real-
values matrices have complex eigenvalues and just summing them would cancel out the conjugate solutions).
This results in a value of 0.8883483 for the ∆-CoVaR matrix and a value of 1.321207 for the ∆-CoES matrix.
Looking in more detail at the eigenvalues themselves the ∆-CoES matrix has eigenvalues with both a higher
and lower modulus than the ∆-CoVaR matrix which is a testament to the higher variability. We also argue
that the increased heterogeneity of the ∆-CoES matrix serves a practical purpose. To this end the average
row and column values of both matrices like in [85] are computed. As in [85] the average row value denotes
the average network importance of each institution while the average column value denotes the average
resiliency of each institution.

18

Institution
MS
GS
JPM
C
BAC
WFC
DB
BK
STT

Systemic importance CoVaR Resiliency CoVaR Systemic importance CoES Resiliency CoES

6.997012
7.738296
6.638206
6.546733
5.642950
5.776834
8.318178
6.266718
6.318160

7.316467
5.959193
6.319260
8.775417
7.811761
5.728490
6.984428
5.330297
6.017773

11.535163
13.773165
11.1425717
10.643364
9.613577
10.860286
16.324329
11.617160
11.688231

13.132982
9.715059
11.007751
18.604816
15.822265
9.678820
10.794536
6.904910
11.536708

Table 1: Average row and column values for all the GSIB network-∆-CoVaR/CoES. Values from Figure 4.
Importance values; low values denote low importance. Resiliency values; low values denote high resiliency.

The table shows that the properties of the ∆-CoES also can have practical consequences as is evident by
ranking the institutions according to their values. The systemic importance values based on the ∆-CoES for
both custodian banks are among the highest while for the ∆-CoVaR based values are among the lowest. The
∆-CoES based values more accurately reﬂect the important role custodian banks play in times of distress
as these banks hold accounts and securities for other ﬁnancial institutions they are hard to replace (low
substitutability [41, 75]) and can have long sub-custody chains containing hidden risks [33]. However, since
their market exposures tend to be fairly limited (State Street is an exception due it being one of the largest
provider of ETFs) their resiliency tends to be on the high side. Also, the fragility of Morgan Stanley,
Citigroup and Bank of America are now obvious whereas their CoVaR based values are not so diﬀerent
from the others.This again reﬂects results like [41, 75]. The big exception in both cases is JP Morgan which
seems relatively safe according to both measures even though according to [41] it scores the highest on all
GSIB dimensions. It could be the result of diﬀerences in risk management practices [54] or the expectation
of government and central bank support (too-big-to fail) as it is the worlds most systemically important
bank [69]. The consequences of the diﬀerence in heterogeneity get further ampliﬁed if we multiply the values
by some accounting measure of each bank (Total assets, leverage, NPLs etc). As an exercise we multiply
the values by each banks market value in table 10. Lastly, as an exercise we look at the chains between
institutions as implied by both risk measures. We do this by examining the highest value in each row
(excluding the eﬀects the banks has on itself). Then we go to the row that corresponds to the receiving bank
and repeat. This results in a few chains and cycles.

19

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: Networks based on the ∆-CoVaR and the ∆-CoES.

In Figure 5 it can be seen that the CoES identiﬁes just one central cycle rather than two separate ones by
showing that Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs extreme equity losses also primarily spill over onto Bank
of America and Citigroup. Therefore, the implied network structure is a money center structure with Bank
of America and Citigroup being the important institutions. It must be noted that Wells Fargo, JP Morgan
Chase, Bank of America and Citigroup were recapitalized the most under TARP[76]. These results could
be aﬀected by the GFC but they are in line with results obtained by using more complex methods such as
[47, 55]. Hence, to see if the chains and network structure change over time in the next section we compare
the network ∆-CoVaR and ∆-CoES over time.

5.5 Conditional network model on GSIBs

Here we compare the network structure implied by the ∆-CoVaR and ∆-CoES at the 97.5% level estimated
using a 300 day window before Black Monday 1987, the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy and just before the
Covid-19 crisis. The ﬁrst period is chosen as it was an unexpected and largely exogenous shock to the US
ﬁnancial system [13] without long lasting negative consequences, the second period as it includes the height
of the GFC and subprime crisis and the latter period is chosen as it was just before the advent of a large
exogenous shock which marked the end of years of relative calm on US ﬁnancial markets. As before we
mostly compare results at the 97.5% quantile but results for other quantiles can be found in the Appendix.

20

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: Weekly network during the week of Lehman Brothers’ Bankruptcy: 43:∆-CoVaRs at 97.5% in
% and 6(b):∆-CoES at 97.5% in %. The institutions in the rows are assumed to originate the shock. The
institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

In Figure 6 the network ∆-CoVaR and ∆-CoES matrices ﬁtted on data 300 weeks before the bankruptcy
of Lehman Brothers are shown. Now it becomes even more evident that the ∆-CoES better identiﬁes tail
risks during an endogenously triggered ﬁnancial crises thanks to its higher sensitivity to tail events whereas
the ∆-CoVaR fails to pick up these events all together. The network implied by the ∆-CoES network is
highly concentrated with very strong links. Again, with vital roles for Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs,
Citigroup, Bank of New York Mellon and State Street. In order to see if the ∆-CoES really does respond
to endogenously triggered ﬁnancial crises we compare these results with those obtained just before Black
Monday in 1987 and before the WHO announcement of the Covid-19 pandemic. Both events are seen as
rather exogenous to the US ﬁnancial system with the former even being seen as highly unexpected and with
no long term negative consequences to the US ﬁnancial system or the US economy [13].

(a)

(b)

Figure 7: Weekly network: 7(a):∆-CoES at 97.5% in % before Black Monday 1987 (GS and C were unlisted
at this time and have been set to zero) and 7(b):∆-CoES at 97.5% in % before the WHO announcement of
the Covid-19 pandemic. The institutions in the rows are assumed to originate the shock. The institutions
in the columns are the receiving institutions

21

In Figure 7 it can be seen that just before both of these events the network ∆-CoES imply a much more
stable ﬁnancial system with only a few worrying links in Figure 7(a).

6 Conclusion

Based on the results in section 5 we can conﬁrm the hypotheses on the statistical properties of the ∆-CoVaR
and ∆-CoES stated in section 3.2. The main implications for individual institutions are that the ∆-CoVaR
is more suited to measure long-term build-up of systemic risk and hence to set capital requirements on a
bank- or system-wide level while the ∆-CoES is more suited as an early warning system for regulators and to
measure short-term changes in systemic risk and market conditions which is more suited to setting sort-term
risk levels and capital requirements for trading departments. The main implication for ﬁnancial linkages is
that the ∆-CoES is more suitable to measure those as it allows for more heterogeneity and hence a higher
discriminatory power in quantifying these linkages. In our empirical research it results in the ∆-CoES picking
up linkages which the ∆-CoVaR mostly smooths out and ignores. All in all, we still advocate for the use
of both risk measures in a complementary fashion in order to have a more complete picture and to avoid
possible issues both measures on their own can have. Additionally, as can be seen in Figure 3 when the
∆-CoES goes below the ∆-CoVaR and the diﬀerence increases these could be signs of excessive risk build-up.
To conclude, using robustness and the associated trade-oﬀ to compare risk measures allows for choices of
risk measures that are more related to practical problems even considering the new FRTB regulations [11]
would require banks to use ES-based risk measures for their internal models.

22

7 References

[1] Daron Acemoglu, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi. Systemic risk and stability in ﬁnancial

networks. American Economic Review, 105(2):564–608, 2015.

[2] Viral V. Acharya, Lasse H. Pedersen, Thomas Philippon, and Matthew Richardson. Measuring Systemic

Risk. The Review of Financial Studies, 30(1):2–47, 10 2016.

[3] Tobias Adrian and Markus Brunnermeier. Covar: A method for macroprudential regulation. 02 2008.

[4] Tobias Adrian and Markus K. Brunnermeier. Covar. American Economic Review, 106(7):1705–41, July

2016.

Almaro(CNBC).
a
ESG

[5] Sylvia
placebo’.
thinks
blackrocks-former-sustainable-investing-chief-says-esg-is-a-dangerous-placebo.html,
2021.

now
https://www.cnbc.com/2021/08/24/

Blackrock’s

sustainable

‘dangerous

investing

former

chief

is

[6] Hamed Amini, Rama Cont, and Andreea Minca. Resilience to contagion in ﬁnancial networks. Mathe-

matical Finance, 26(2):329–365, 2016.

[7] Joshua Angrist, Victor Chernozhukov, and Iv´an Fern´andez-Val. Quantile Regression under Misspeciﬁ-

cation, with an Application to the U.S. Wage Structure. Econometrica, 74(2):539–563, 2006.

[8] Philippe Artzner, Freddy Delbaen, Jean-Marc Eber, and David Heath. Coherent measures of risk.

Mathematical Finance, 9(3):203–228, 1999.

[9] Thorsten Beck, Deyan Radev, and Isabel Schnabel. Bank resolution regimes and systemic risk. 2020.

[10] Ben S Bernanke, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. The ﬁnancial accelerator and the ﬂight to quality.

https://www.nber.org/papers/w4789, 1994.

[11] BIS. Fundamental review of the trading book: A revised market risk framework. https://www.bis.

org/publ/bcbs265.pdf, 2014.

[12] Dimitrios Bisias, Mark Flood, Andrew W Lo, and Stavros Valavanis. A survey of systemic risk analytics.

Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ., 4(1):255–296, 2012.

[13] John C. Bogle. Black Monday and Black Swans. Financial Analysts Journal, 64(2):30–40, 2008.

[14] Christian Brownlees and Robert F. Engle. SRISK: A Conditional Capital Shortfall Measure of Systemic

Risk. The Review of Financial Studies, 30(1):48–79, 08 2016.

[15] Markus Brunnermeier, Simon Rother, and Isabel Schnabel. Asset price bubbles and systemic risk. The

Review of Financial Studies, 33(9):4272–4317, 2020.

[16] Markus K Brunnermeier and Yuliy Sannikov. A macroeconomic model with a ﬁnancial sector. American

Economic Review, 104(2):379–421, 2014.

[17] G. Brys, M. Hubert, and A. Struyf. A robust measure of skewness. Journal of Computational and

Graphical Statistics, 13(4):996–1017, 2004.

[18] Zongwu Cai and Xian Wang. Nonparametric estimation of conditional var and expected shortfall.
Journal of Econometrics, 147(1):120–130, 2008. Econometric modelling in ﬁnance and risk management:
An overview.

[19] Jie Cao, Lianghai Lei, Rong Zhang, and Qiran Lei. Risk of spillovers between the Chinese and interna-
tional crude oil futures’ markets: A dynamic Copula-CoES approach. In Journal of Physics Conference
Series, volume 1941 of Journal of Physics Conference Series, page 012059, June 2021.

23

[20] Song Xi Chen. Nonparametric Estimation of Expected Shortfall. Journal of Financial Econometrics,

6(1):87–107, 11 2007.

[21] Victor Chernozhukov and Songzi Du. Extremal quantiles and value-at-risk.

In The New Palgrave

Dictionary of Economics, pages 4321–4334. Palgrave Macmillan UK, London, 2018.

[22] Eliana Christou and Michael Grabchak. Estimation of expected shortfall using quantile regression: A

comparison study. Computational economics, 2021.

[23] Stijn Claessens. An overview of macroprudential policy tools. Annual Review of Financial Economics,

7(1):397–422, 2015.

[24] R. Cont. Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statistical issues. Quantitative Finance,

1(2):223–236, 2001.

[25] Rama Cont, Romain Deguest, and Giacomo Scandolo. Robustness and sensitivity analysis of risk

measurement procedures. Quantitative Finance, 10(6):593–606, 2010.

[26] Gabor Csardi and Tamas Nepusz. The igraph software package for complex network research. Inter-

Journal, Complex Systems:1695, 2006.

[27] David B. Dahl, David Scott, Charles Roosen, Arni Magnusson, and Jonathan Swinton. xtable: Export

Tables to LaTeX or HTML, 2019. R package version 1.8-4.

[28] Jon Danielsson, Bjørn N Jorgensen, Sarma Mandira, Gennady Samorodnitsky, and Casper G De Vries.
Subadditivity re-examined: the case for Value-at-Risk. Technical report, Cornell University Operations
Research and Industrial Engineering, 2005.

[29] Hans Degryse and Gr´egory Nguyen. Interbank exposures: An empirical examination of contagion risk

in the belgian banking system. International Journal of Central Banking, 3(2):123–171, 2007.

[30] Jan Dhaene, Mark J. Goovaerts, and Rob Kaas. Economic Capital Allocation Derived from Risk

Measures. North American Actuarial Journal, 7(2):44–56, 2003.

[31] Peng Ding. On the Conditional Distribution of the Multivariate t Distribution. The American Statis-

tician, 70(3):293–295, 2016.

[32] David L Donoho et al. High-dimensional data analysis: The curses and blessings of dimensionality.

AMS math challenges lecture, 1(2000):32, 2000.

[33] Thomas Droll, Natalia Podlich, and Michael Wedow. Out of sight, out of mind? On the risk of sub-

custodian structures. Journal of Banking & Finance, 68:47–56, 2016.

[34] Matthew Elliott, Benjamin Golub, and Matthew O. Jackson. Financial networks and contagion. Amer-

ican Economic Review, 104(10):3115–53, October 2014.

[35] Robert F. Engle and C. W. J. Granger. Co-integration and error correction: Representation, estimation,

and testing. Econometrica, 55(2):251–276, 1987.

[36] X. Freixas, L. Laeven, and J.L. Peydr´o. Systemic Risk, Crises, and Macroprudential Regulation. EBL-

Schweitzer. MIT Press, 2015.

[37] X. Freixas and J.C. Rochet. Microeconomics of Banking, Second Edition. Mit Press. MIT Press, 2008.

[38] Financial Stability Board (FSB). 2021 List of Global Systemically Important Banks (G-SIBs). https:

//www.fsb.org/2021/11/2021-list-of-global-systemically-important-banks-g-sibs/, 2021.

[39] Stefano Giglio. Credit default swap spreads and systemic ﬁnancial risk. Technical report, ESRB Working

Paper Series, 2016.

[40] Giulio Girardi and A. Tolga Erg¨un. Systemic risk measurement: Multivariate GARCH estimation of

CoVaR. Journal of Banking & Finance, 37(8):3169–3180, 2013.

24

[41] Paul Glasserman, Bert Loudis, et al. A Comparison of US and International Global Systemically

Important Banks. Oﬃce of Financial Research Brief Series, 15(07), 2015.

[42] Paul Glasserman and H. Peyton Young. How likely is contagion in ﬁnancial networks? Journal of

Banking & Finance, 50:383–399, 2015.

[43] Marc Hallin, Davy Paindaveine, Miroslav ˇSiman, Ying Wei, Robert Serﬂing, Yijun Zuo, Linglong Kong,
and Ivan Mizera. Multivariate quantiles and multiple-output regression quantiles: From l1 optimization
to halfspace depth. The Annals of Statistics, 38(2):635–703, 2010.

[44] P Hartmann, S Straetmans, and C. G. de Vries. Asset market linkages in crisis periods. The review of

economics and statistics, 86(1):313–326, 2004.

[45] Philipp Hartmann, Stefan Straetmans, and Casper G De Vries. Banking system stability: A cross-
atlantic perspective. Working Paper 11698, National Bureau of Economic Research, October 2005.

[46] Nikolaus Hautsch, Julia Schaumburg, and Melanie Schienle. Forecasting systemic impact in ﬁnancial

networks. International Journal of Forecasting, 30(3):781–794, 2014.

[47] Nikolaus Hautsch, Julia Schaumburg, and Melanie Schienle. Financial network systemic risk contribu-

tions. Review of Finance, 19(2):685–738, 2015.

[48] Wentao Hu, Cuixia Chen, Yufeng Shi, and Ze Chen. A Tail Measure With Variable Risk Tolerance: Ap-
plication in Dynamic Portfolio Insurance Strategy. Methodology and Computing in Applied Probability,
pages 1–44, 2022.

[49] John Hull. Risk management and ﬁnancial institutions,+ Web Site, volume 733. John Wiley & Sons,

2012.

[50] Rajkamal Iyer and Jos´e-Luis Peydr´o. Interbank Contagion at Work: Evidence from a Natural Experi-

ment. The Review of Financial Studies, 24(4):1337–1377, 04 2011.

[51] Harry Joe. Multivariate concordance. Journal of multivariate analysis, 35(1):12–30, 1990.

[52] Harry Joe. Multivariate models and multivariate dependence concepts. CRC Press, 1997.

[53] Kwangmin Jung, Donggyu Kim, and Seunghyeon Yu. Next generation models for portfolio risk man-

agement: An approach using ﬁnancial big data. Journal of Risk and Insurance, 2021.

[54] Robert S Kaplan, Anette Mikes, et al. Managing risks: a new framework. Harvard business review,

90(6):48–60, 2012.

[55] Georg Keilbar and Weining Wang. Modelling systemic risk using neural network quantile regression.

Empirical Economics, 62(1):93–118, 2022.

[56] Nataliya Klimenko, Sebastian Pfeil, and Jean-Charles Rochet. A simple macroeconomic model with

extreme ﬁnancial frictions. Journal of Mathematical Economics, 68:92–102, 2017.

[57] Roger Koenker. quantreg: Quantile Regression, 2021. R package version 5.86.

[58] Roger Koenker and Gilbert Bassett. Regression Quantiles. Econometrica, 46(1):33–50, 1978.

[59] Lukasz Komsta and Frederick Novomestky. moments: Moments, cumulants, skewness, kurtosis and

related tests, 2015. R package version 0.14.

[60] Keith Kuester, Stefan Mittnik, and Marc S. Paolella. Value-at-Risk Prediction: A Comparison of

Alternative Strategies. Journal of Financial Econometrics, 4(1):53–89, 10 2005.

[61] Zinoviy M. Landsman and Emiliano A. Valdez. Tail Conditional Expectations for Elliptical Distribu-

tions. North American Actuarial Journal, 7(4):55–71, 2003.

25

[62] Michel Ledoux. The concentration of measure phenomenon. Number 89. American Mathematical Soc.,

2001.

[63] Ruicheng Liu and Chi Seng Pun. Machine-learning-enhanced systemic risk measure: A two-step super-

vised learning approach. Journal of Banking & Finance, 136:106416, 2022.

[64] Claudio Lupi. Unit root cadf testing with R. Journal of Statistical Software, 32(2):20, 2009.

[65] Martin Maechler, Peter Rousseeuw, Christophe Croux, Valentin Todorov, Andreas Ruckstuhl, Matias
Salibian-Barrera, Tobias Verbeke, Manuel Koller, ”L. T.”) Conceicao c(”Eduardo”, and Maria Anna
di Palma. robustbase: Basic robust statistics r package version 0.93-9, 2021.

[66] Georg Mainik and Eric Schaanning. On dependence consistency of CoVaR and some other systemic risk

measures. Statistics & Risk Modeling, 31(1):49–77, 2014.

[67] Andreu Mas-Colell, Michael Dennis Whinston, Jerry R Green, et al. Microeconomic Theory, volume 1.

Oxford university press New York, 1995.

[68] Alexander J. McNeil and R¨udiger Frey. Estimation of tail-related risk measures for heteroscedastic
ﬁnancial time series: an extreme value approach. Journal of Empirical Finance, 7(3):271–300, 2000.
Special issue on Risk Management.

[69] Sebastian C. Moenninghoﬀ, Steven Ongena, and Axel Wieandt. The perennial challenge to counter
too-big-to-fail in banking: Empirical evidence from the new international regulation dealing with global
systemically important banks. Journal of Banking & Finance, 61:221–236, 2015.

[70] MSCI. ESG Ratings, Measuring a company’s resilience to long-term, ﬁnancially relevant ESG risks.

https://www.msci.com/our-solutions/esg-investing/esg-ratings, 2022.

[71] Saralees Nadarajah, Bo Zhang, and Stephen Chan. Estimation methods for expected shortfall. Quan-

titative Finance, 14(2):271–291, 2014.

[72] Erlend Nier, Jing Yang, Tanju Yorulmazer, and Amadeo Alentorn. Network models and ﬁnancial
stability. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31(6):2033–2060, 2007. Tenth Workshop on
Economic Heterogeneous Interacting Agents.

[73] Matthew Norton, Valentyn Khokhlov, and Stan Uryasev. Calculating CVaR and bPOE for Common
Probability Distributions With Application to Portfolio Optimization and Density Estimation. arXiv
e-prints, page arXiv:1811.11301, November 2018.

[74] Gary W. Oehlert. A Note on the Delta Method. The American Statistician, 46(1):27–29, 1992.

[75] Oﬃce of Financial Research (OFR). Bank Systemic Risk Monitor. https://www.financialresearch.

gov/bank-systemic-risk-monitor/, 2021.

[76] U.S. Department of Treasury. Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP). https://home.treasury.gov/

data/troubled-assets-relief-program, 2022.

[77] R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical

Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2021.

[78] Svea Herbst-Bayliss (Reuters). State Street unrealized losses rise, stock falls. https://www.reuters.

com/article/us-statestreet-idUSTRE50J3S320090120, 2009.

[79] Peter J. Rousseeuw and Christophe Croux. Alternatives to the median absolute deviation. Journal of

the American Statistical Association, 88(424):1273–1283, 1993.

[80] Olivier Scaillet. Nonparametric Estimation of Conditional Expected Shortfall. FAME Research Paper
Series rp112, International Center for Financial Asset Management and Engineering, May 2004.

26

[81] Friedrich Schmid and Mark Trede. Simple tests for peakedness, fat tails and leptokurtosis based on

quantiles. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, 43(1):1–12, 2003.

[82] Cam Simpson, Akshat Rathi, and Kishan Saijel (Bloomberg). The ESG mirage . https://www.

bloomberg.com/graphics/2021-what-is-esg-investing-msci-ratings-focus-on-corporate-bottom-line/,
2021.

[83] Ender Su and Kai Wen Wong. Measuring bank downside systemic risk in Taiwan. The Quarterly Review

of Economics and Finance, 70:172–193, 2018.

[84] James W. Taylor. Using Exponentially Weighted Quantile Regression to Estimate Value at Risk and

Expected Shortfall. Journal of Financial Econometrics, 6(3):382–406, 05 2007.

[85] Gabriele Torri, Rosella Giacometti, and Tom´aˇs Tich´y. Network tail risk estimation in the European

banking system. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 127:104125, 2021.

[86] Ruodu Wang and Riˇcardas Zitikis. An axiomatic foundation for the expected shortfall. Management

Science, 67(3):1413–1429, 2021.

[87] Taiyun Wei and Viliam Simko. R package ’corrplot’: Visualization of a Correlation Matrix, 2021.

(Version 0.92).

[88] Hadley Wickham, Mara Averick, Jennifer Bryan, Winston Chang, Lucy D’Agostino McGowan, Romain
Fran¸cois, Garrett Grolemund, Alex Hayes, Lionel Henry, Jim Hester, Max Kuhn, Thomas Lin Pedersen,
Evan Miller, Stephan Milton Bache, Kirill M¨uller, Jeroen Ooms, David Robinson, Dana Paige Seidel,
Vitalie Spinu, Kohske Takahashi, Davis Vaughan, Claus Wilke, Kara Woo, and Hiroaki Yutani. Welcome
to the tidyverse. Journal of Open Source Software, 4(43):1686, 2019.

[89] Hadley Wickham, Romain Fran¸cois, Lionel Henry, and Kirill M¨uller. dplyr: A Grammar of Data

Manipulation, 2021. R package version 1.0.7.

[90] Hadley Wickham and Evan Miller. haven: Import and Export ’SPSS’, ’Stata’ and ’SAS’ Files, 2021. R

package version 2.4.3.

[91] Diethelm Wuertz.

timeSeries: Financial Time Series Objects (Rmetrics), 2020. R package version

3062.100.

[92] Yasuhiro Yamai and Toshinao Yoshiba. Comparative Analyses of Expected Shortfall and Value-at-Risk
(3): Their Validity under Market Stress. Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, 20(3):181–
237, October 2002.

[93] Yasuhiro Yamai and Toshinao Yoshiba. Value-at-risk versus expected shortfall: A practical perspective.

Journal of Banking & Finance, 29(4):997–1015, 2005.

[94] Achim Zeileis and Gabor Grothendieck. zoo: S3 infrastructure for regular and irregular time series.

Journal of Statistical Software, 14(6):1–27, 2005.

27

8 Appendix

8.1 Theoretical Analysis: ∆-CoES under normality conditional on X = VaRq(X)

Just as [4] we assume that the losses of the ﬁnancial system and an institution i follow a bivariate normal
distribution. Hence,

with

(cid:19)

(cid:18)X sys
t
X i
t

∼ N

(cid:19)

(cid:18)(cid:18)0
0

(cid:19)

, Σ

Σ =

(cid:18) (σsys
)2
t
σsys
t σi
tρt

σsys
t σi
tρt
t)2
(σi

(cid:19)
.

If we assume a linear relationship between the two variables then we know that:

X sys
t

| X i

t ∼ N

(cid:16) X i

t σsys
t ρt
σi
t

, (1 − ρ2

t )(σsys

t

)2(cid:17)

.

From the results of [4] it follows that:

CoVaRq1,q2

t

= Φ−1(q1)

(cid:113)

1 − ρ2

t σsys

t + Φ−1(q2)σsys

t ρt

with q1 the level of the CoVaR and q2 the level of the VaR of X i

t . Then

∆CoVaRq

t = Φ−1(q)σsys

t ρt,

With q = q1.Similarly using the ES formula from [73] we obtain:

CoESq1,q2
t

(cid:113)

= Φ−1(q1)

1 − ρ2

t σsys

t

φ(Φ−1(q1))
q1

+ Φ−1(q2)σsys

t ρt.

Then

∆CoESq

t = Φ−1(q)σsys

t ρt.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

t =VaR(X i

Therefore, under normality both systemic risk measures are equivalent. This is not surprising as the normal
distribution is fully determined by its mean and variance and since we condition on an event of probability
zero (X i
t beyond this level is not taken into account. This leads to straightforward
expressions for the CoVaR and CoES which are very similar. As the term that does diﬀer drops out when
computing the ∆ measures we end up with equivalent results for both. Analytical expressions for the more
complex and interesting event X i
t ) are not available as the resulting integral involves a copula
function which must be solved numerically [66].

t )) the tail of X i

t ≥VaR(X i

8.2 Theroretical Analysis: ∆-CoVaR ∆-CoES under a t-distribution condi-

tional on X = VaRq(X)

Now we assume the losses of the system and institution i follow a bivariate generalized t-distribution with
degrees of freedom ν. Hence,

with

(cid:19)

(cid:18)X sys
t
X i
t

∼ T

(cid:19)

(cid:18)(cid:18)0
0

(cid:19)

, Σ, ν

Σ =

(cid:18) (σsys
)2
t
σsys
t σi
tρt

σsys
t σi
tρt
t)2
(σi

(cid:19)
.

Then applying the result of [31] we have that:
(cid:16) X i

X sys
t

| X i

t ∼ T

t σsys
t ρt
σi
t

, ν+d1

ν+1 (1 − ρ2

t )(σsys

t

(cid:17)

)2, ν + 1

28

(cid:17)2

(cid:16) X i
t
σi
t

with d1 =
similar reasoning as in [4] we obtain that

. Therefore, the conditional distribution is also a generalized t-distribution. Now using

(cid:32)

S =

X sys
(cid:113) ν+d1

t σsys
t −X i
ν+1 (1−ρ2

t ρt/σi
t
t )(σsys
)2

t

(cid:33)

∼ T (0, 1, ν + 1).

Hence, E[S] = 0, Var(S) = ν+1
(q) where T −1
σi
t · T −1
ν
t = VaRi
Setting X i

ν

ν−1 as S follows a standardized t-distribution. The VaR of i is then VaRi
q,t =
(q) is the inverse cdf of the standardized t-distribution with ν degrees of freedom.

q,t, applying the deﬁnition of the CoVar and solving for the CoVaR we obtain

CoVaRq1,q2

t

= T −1

ν+1(q1)

(cid:114) ν + d1
ν + 1

(1 − ρ2

t )σsys

t + T −1

ν

(q2)σsys

t ρt.

(5)

With d1 = (T −1
CoVaR under normality. Then it follows that:

ν

(q))2.We can check the result by taking ν −→ ∞. As expected the result is equivalent to the

∆-CoVaRq

t = T −1

ν

(q)σsys

t ρt.

(6)

Using the ES formula from [73] we obtain

CoESq1,q2
t

= τν+1(T −1

ν+1(q1))

(cid:32)

ν + 1 + T −1
ν(1 − q)

ν+1(q1)2

(cid:33) (cid:114) ν + d1
ν + 1

(1 − ρ2

t )σsys

t + T −1

ν

(q2)σsys

t ρt

(7)

where τν(x) is the pdf of the standardized t-distribution. Again, taking ν −→ ∞ results in the CoES expression
under normality. As before we then get that

∆-CoESq

t = T −1

ν

(q)σsys

t ρt.

(8)

This result is interesting because with ν the kurtosis can be made arbitrarily large. It must be noted that
all these results are only valid for ν + 1 > 2. While this excludes a multivariate Cauchy distribution (ν = 1)
it encompasses distributions whose excess kurtosis can be made arbitrarily large ( for a standardized t-
6
distribution this is
ν−4 for ν > 4 otherwise the kurtosis does not exist). We must note that all these results
hinge on a linear relationship (or at least approximately linear) between the losses of the ﬁnancial system
and an institution i. Therefore, it seems that for the two risk measures to diverge we need the more complex
conditioning, extreme values, non-linear relationships between losses or more complex mixture distributions.
We must note this result was not obtained in earlier work such as [66] and again shows how conditioning on
X i
t = VaR(X) leads to risk measures which fail to capture the tail. The robustness in the section will show
this by showing how an arbitrarily small perturbation to the distribution will aﬀect the estimators of both risk
measures resulting in diverging estimates and how the CoES measures will theoretically be better equipped
to react to the extremes. We conjecture this equivalence result can be further generalized to the family of
elliptical distributions (except the Cauchy) as at least for the ES-based measures the structure seems to be
known and similar across this whole family [61]. Lastly, using a ﬁrst-order Taylor approximation similar to
the Delta Method [74] we can extend both results above to non-linear functions f (X sys
t ) assuming f
has continuous ﬁrst derivatives and can reasonably approximated by a ﬁrst-order Taylor approximation.

| X i

t

8.3 Theoretical Analysis: Robustness of the ∆-CoES ∆-CoVaR

Using the results of [25] we will now derive the sensitivity functions for the CoVaR and CoES to show the
eﬀect of extreme observations. While the mathematical framework originates in robust statistics where the
eﬀect of outliers on estimators is studied as this framework shows how large values with an arbitrarily small
mass (point mass) aﬀect estimators it seems ﬁtting to use it in order to show the eﬀects of very uncommon
but severe extreme losses as well. We ﬁrst introduce some necessary objects from this mathematical frame-
work.

29

First, assume a random variable L denoting losses with some cdf F (L) = F . Then a perturbed distri-
bution F(cid:15) will be F(cid:15) = (1 − (cid:15))F + (cid:15)δz with δz a dirac delta distribution at z ∈ R. Let ρ : L −→ R be a risk
measure. Then the sensitivity function is

S(z) = lim
(cid:15)−→0+

ρ(F(cid:15)) − ρ(F )
(cid:15)

for any z such that the limit exists. Interpreting S(z) as a derivative the sensitivity function quantiﬁes the
eﬀect on ρ at F in the direction of δz. For the historical VaR and ES under appropriate conditions on F
[25] has derived the sensitivity functions.

8.4 Bank sector analysis

In order to show that the ﬁnancial sector index still captures the performance of the banking sector while
being more general we provide the same information given in Section 5.1 but then with the bank sector losses
as underlying time series. Furthermore, we aim to convince the reader that using the ﬁnancial sector index
instead still captures the relevant statistical behavior of the banking sector while being more general.Using
a co-integration test (using the Engle Granger method [35]) we ﬁnd that the series are a linear combination
of each other. Hence, we use the ﬁnancial system index.

8.5 Data Filtering procedure

The table below contains the ﬁltering procedures and all variables of the dataset.

Reason

Filter applied on WRDS
Variable
Only PERMNOs from the Brunnermeier dataset [4] Consistency with said dataset
PERMNO
include 6000-6800 exclude all the rest
SIC
include only if < 200
Share code
> −66
returns
> 0
Price (PRC)
< 200
Delist
No restriction
Ticker
31-12-1970 to 31-12-2020
date
No restriction
Company name
No restriction
PERMCO
Shares (SHROUT) No restirction

Same as Brunnermeier
To exclude ADRs, SDIs, REITs etc.
Excludes missing values.
To exclude zero and negative prices
To exclude inactive ﬁrms
None needed
Extend time span to maximum
None needed
None needed
None needed

Table 2: All variables obtained from CRSP and ﬁlters/restrictions.

As stated in Section 4 the returns data were further ﬁltered to include only companies that have at least 260
weeks of returns data. Since the assumption is that trading weeks consist of 5 days this implies including
companies that have at least 1300 trading days of returns. This resulted in the sample size of companies
decreasing to 1564 from 1688. None of the variables have been winsorized as this would eliminate the extreme
events we are interested in. Also, due to discrepancies noticed between our dataset and that of Brunnermeier
we also downloaded a version from CRSP without any restrictions and compared the SIC codes between
the two datasets. From this it became apparent that the Brunnermeier datset contains companies whose
SIC codes are not between 6000 and 6800. Before the ﬁlter on the amount of returns days this diﬀerence
amounts to 135 companies while after the ﬁlter it has increased to 259 companies.

As noted in Section 4 Mastercard and Visa have been excluded. This applies to Paypal as well as its registered
under the same SIC code (7389) as Visa and Mastercard. Hence, the three companies are excluded from
the ﬁnancial sector index. The exclusion could pose issues considering how representative said index is as
the market capitalisation of all three companies are among the top 50 of the S&P 500 in terms of market
capitalisation. However, as these companies mainly provide payment processing their systemic risk proﬁle
might be diﬀerent from more traditional ﬁnancial companies which tend to have interconnected claims against

30

each other. We note though that according to [37] large value payment systems are given as one of the 4
sources of ﬁnancial contagion.

8.5.1 GSIB selection

The GSIBs are selected according to the 2021 GSIB list of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) [38]. This
list is based on data from 2020 and is therefore not based on events that could not have been happened in
the time span of our dataset. From this list the US-based GSIBs were identiﬁed. Also Deutsche Bank was
added as it is separately listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), the listing is not an ADR, the
parent ﬁrm is a GSIB with substantial exposure to the US and the US-based subsidiary is regulated by the
Fed, OCC and FDIC. The list of selected GSIBs is as follows.

GSIB
JP Morgan Chase
Citigroup
Bank of America
Deutsche Bank
Goldman Sachs
Bank of New York Mellon
Morgan Stanley
State Street
Wells Fargo

Capital Surcharge
2.5%
2.0%
1.5%
1.5%
1.5%
1.0%
1.0%
1.0%
1.0%

Table 3: Table of selected GSIBs alongside the additional capital buﬀers imposed on them as of 2021 [38].

8.6 Supplementary Tables and Figures

Mean Median
-0.07791
-0.0756

Min
-16.38438

Max
15.1197

Sd
1.3871

Qn
0.95828

Skew
-0.31856

Mc
0.00841

Kurt
18.5418

LKurt
4.45360

Table 4: Summary statistics for the daily ﬁnancial system losses in %. Sd: Standard Deviation, Qn (a more
robust standard deviation estimator by [79]), Skew:skewness, Mc:Medcouple (a more robust estimator of
skewness by [17]), Kurt: kurtosis, LKurt (robust leptokurtosis measure from [81]).

Mean Median
-0.39831
-0.3393

Min
-34.2416

Max
27.4937

Sd
3.3008

Qn
2.5906

Skew
-0.215574

Mc
0.03037436

Kurt
13.6859

LKurt
3.608273

Table 5: Summary statistics for the weekly ﬁnancial system losses in %. Sd: Standard Deviation, Qn (a
more robust standard deviation estimator by [79]), Skew:skewness, Mc:Medcouple (a more robust estimator
of skewness by [17]), Kurt: kurtosis, LKurt (robust leptokurtosis measure from [81]).

31

Institution Mean Median
0.0000
-0.0315
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

-0.0799
-0.0568
-0.0625
-0.0500
-0.0710
-0.0643
-0.0190
-0.0607
-0.0818

MS
GS
JPM
C
BAC
WFC
DB
BK
STT

Min
-86.9835
-26.4678
-25.0967
-57.8249
-35.2691
-32.7645
-24.8169
-24.8065
-31.3456

Max
25.8929
18.9596
27.7193
39.0244
28.9694
23.8223
18.9405
27.1578
59.0371

Sd
2.8003
2.3782
2.1497
2.9104
2.4453
2.0530
2.7876
2.0064
2.3934

Qn
1.8848
1.7542
1.5701
1.8275
1.6255
1.4491
2.0824
1.4564
1.6053

Skew
-3.6612
-0.7353
-0.4536
-1.2034
-0.7204
-1.1939
-0.3922
-0.4971
0.8067

Mc
-0.0294
-0.0052
-0.0309
-0.0281
-0.0291
-0.0225
-0.0013
-0.0204
-0.0398

Kurt
117.8793
13.1781
14.7573
44.0115
27.8178
27.8265
9.3723
16.0514
56.8725

LKurt
4.4175
4.2686
4.4053
4.7088
4.5595
4.2269
4.1332
4.4862
4.5391

n
8767
5452
12613
7361
10483
12608
4845
12608
9211

Table 6: Summary statistics for the daily losses of the GSIBs in %. Sd: Standard Deviation, Qn (a more
robust standard deviation estimator by [79]), Skew:skewness, Mc:Medcouple (a more robust estimator of
skewness by [17]), Kurt: kurtosis, LKurt (robust leptokurtosis measure from [81]),n= amount of daily
observations.

Institution VaR 95% VaR 97.5% VaR 99% ES 95% ES 97.5% ES 99%
10.8748
9.1080
8.0323
12.6426
10.1100
7.9870
11.0524
7.6284
9.3879

3.5750
3.3949
3.0075
3.6574
3.1250
2.7530
3.9696
2.8024
3.1561

7.2634
6.2758
5.3423
7.2315
6.0823
5.2613
7.7640
5.0250
6.1596

5.9903
5.2653
4.6874
6.3958
5.3314
4.4648
6.3641
4.3865
5.1802

4.9509
4.4240
4.0000
5.0505
4.3107
3.7037
5.2360
3.7043
4.1963

7.8308
6.6859
5.9337
8.5326
7.0564
5.7467
8.2074
5.5869
6.7198

MS
GS
JPM
C
BAC
WFC
DB
BK
STT

Table 7: Daily GSIB VaR and Expected Shortfall in %.MS: Morgan Stanley, GS: Goldman Sachs, JPM:
JP Morgan Chase, C: Citigroup, BAC: Bank of America, WFC: Wells Fargo, DB: Deutsche Bank (US
subsidiary), BK: Bank of New York Mellon and STT: State Street

Institution Mean Median
-0.4371
-0.3243
-0.2652
-0.3054
-0.3069
-0.3140
0.00003
-0.1345
-0.3402

-0.3946
-0.2750
-0.3097
-0.2641
-0.3745
-0.3199
-0.0904
-0.2950
-0.4061

MS
GS
JPM
C
BAC
WFC
DB
BK
STT

Min
-60.3260
-51.9037
-39.7592
-76.0086
-84.5426
-71.7980
-56.2663
-34.0812
-50.9666

Max
46.3594
31.2233
37.1337
58.5366
46.0269
43.6111
33.5662
25.9575
56.0730

Sd
6.0761
5.1629
4.7327
6.6333
5.8681
4.5669
6.2078
4.3028
5.3430

Qn
4.6199
4.0636
3.8473
4.3188
3.9098
3.2869
4.8603
3.5394
4.0526

Skew
-0.7989
-0.8753
-0.2125
-1.0072
-1.8283
-1.5269
-1.0524
-0.3635
-0.1591

Mc
0.0414
0.0420
0.0087
0.0355
-0.0021
0.0194
-0.0109
-0.0543
-0.0117

Kurt
14.2753
12.8952
7.8206
29.2958
36.2628
34.7460
13.4879
5.9413
16.9264

LKurt
3.8828
3.7302
3.8517
4.4413
4.2599
4.1147
3.9967
3.8101
3.9463

n
1754
1091
2523
1474
2098
2523
970
2523
1843

Table 8: Summary statistics for the weekly losses of the GSIBs in %. Sd: Standard Deviation, Qn (a more
robust standard deviation estimator by [79]), Skew:skewness, Mc:Medcouple (a more robust estimator of
skewness by [17]), Kurt: kurtosis, LKurt (robust leptokurtosis measure from [81]),n= amount of weekly
observations.

32

Institution VaR 95% VaR 97.5% VaR 99% ES 95% ES 97.5% ES 99%
21.0410
18.1183
16.9735
27.9143
23.1924
16.7767
21.3976
15.1415
20.3314

12.7787
10.9274
9.9370
14.2173
12.1282
9.4345
13.3162
9.0756
11.3491

11.0098
9.5174
8.3644
11.1475
9.7780
7.7830
11.8468
7.7671
9.0177

15.9772
13.7061
12.5677
18.8163
15.7684
12.1618
16.5156
11.3771
14.7614

14.1297
12.3361
11.4198
16.7586
12.7220
11.2582
15.1999
10.8179
13.1286

8.4617
6.9716
6.6005
8.2560
7.1326
5.9492
9.0770
6.0339
6.9215

MS
GS
JPM
C
BAC
WFC
DB
BK
STT

Table 9: Weekly GSIB VaR and Expected Shortfall in %.MS: Morgan Stanley, GS: Goldman Sachs, JPM:
JP Morgan Chase, C: Citigroup, BAC: Bank of America, WFC: Wells Fargo, DB: Deutsche Bank (US
subsidiary), BK: Bank of New York Mellon and STT: State Street

Figure 8: Daily ﬁnancial system losses

33

Figure 9: QQ-plot of the daily ﬁnancial system losses.

Figure 10: Histogram of the daily ﬁnancial system losses.

34

Figure 11: Weekly ﬁnancial system losses.

Figure 12: QQ-plot of the weekly ﬁnancial system losses.

35

Figure 13: Histogram of the weekly ﬁnancial system losses.

Figure 14: Daily losses of the US based GSIBs in the dataset. MS: Morgan Stanley, GS: Goldman Sachs,
JPM: JP Morgan Chase, C: Citigroup, BAC: Bank of America, WFC: Wells Fargo, DB: Deutsche Bank
(US subsidiary), BK: Bank of New York Mellon and STT: State Street. The amount of days is given as the
amount of days since the return data were available in the dataset. For a bank like JP Morgan this means
it has returns for the entire time period of the dataset.

36

Figure 15: QQ-plot (reference distribution is standard normal) of daily equity losses of GSIBs.MS: Morgan
Stanley, GS: Goldman Sachs, JPM: JP Morgan Chase, C: Citigroup, BAC: Bank of America, WFC: Wells
Fargo, DB: Deutsche Bank (US subsidiary), BK: Bank of New York Mellon and STT: State Street

37

Figure 16: Weekly losses of the US based GSIBs in the dataset. MS: Morgan Stanley, GS: Goldman Sachs,
JPM: JP Morgan Chase, C: Citigroup, BAC: Bank of America, WFC: Wells Fargo, DB: Deutsche Bank
(US subsidiary), BK: Bank of New York Mellon and STT: State Street. The amount of days is given as the
amount of days since the return data were available in the dataset. For a bank like JP Morgan this means
it has returns for the entire time period of the dataset.

38

Figure 17: QQ-plot (reference distribution is standard normal) of weekly equity losses of GSIBs.MS: Morgan
Stanley, GS: Goldman Sachs, JPM: JP Morgan Chase, C: Citigroup, BAC: Bank of America, WFC: Wells
Fargo, DB: Deutsche Bank (US subsidiary), BK: Bank of New York Mellon and STT: State Street

39

Figure 19: Cross-correllogram between ∆-CoES and ∆-CoVaR. The blue dotted lines indicate point-wise
95% conﬁdence intervals for the crosscorrelations.

Figure 18: 300-week rolling average of average ∆-CoES and ∆-CoVaR

40

(a)

(b)

Figure 20: ACF plots of the average ∆-CoVaR and the ∆-CoES. The blue dotted line indicate point-wise
95% conﬁdence intervals for the autocorrelations.

41

Figure 21: Weekly ∆-CoVar (grey) and ∆-CoES (black) for the 9 US GSIBs around the Great Financial
Crisis. Estimates of each week are based on a 300-week estimation window. Marked events: Start subprime
crisis (red), Lehman Brothers Bankruptcy (blue), Enactment of TARP (green), Enactment of Dodd-Frank
(brown).

42

Figure 22: Weekly ∆-CoVaR (grey) vs. ∆-CoES (black) for Lehman Brothers during the GFC.Marked
events: Start subprime crisis (red), Lehman Brothers Bankruptcy (blue), Enactment of TARP (green),
Enactment of Dodd-Frank (brown).

43

Figure 23: Reaction of the ∆-CoES and ∆-CoVaR around the Lehman bankrupty. Red line: start subprime
crisis, blue line: Lehman bankruptcy, green line: TARP bill signed by President Bush, brown line: Dodd-
Frank act signed.

Figure 24: Correlation matrix for the GSIBs based on daily loss data.

44

Figure 25: Daily network ∆-CoVaRs at 95% in %, the institutions in the rows are assumed to originate the
shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions. Note that for daily data the medians
of most institutions equals 0 (see table 6). Hence, the elements on the diagonal for those institutions are
equal to their VaR at 95%.

Figure 26: Daily network ∆-CoVaRs at 97.5% in %, the institutions in the rows are assumed to originate the
shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions. Note that for daily data the medians
of most institutions equals 0 (see table 6). Hence, the elements on the diagonal for those institutions are
equal to their VaR at 97.5%.

45

Figure 27: Daily network ∆-CoVaRs at 99% in %, the institutions in the rows are assumed to originate the
shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions. Note that for daily data the medians
of most institutions equals 0 (see table 6). Hence, the elements on the diagonal for those institutions are
equal to their VaR at 99%.

Figure 28: Daily network ∆-CoESs at 95% in %, the institutions in the rows are assumed to originate the
shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions.

46

Figure 29: Daily network ∆-CoESs at 97.5% in %, the institutions in the rows are assumed to originate the
shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions.

Figure 30: Daily network ∆-CoESs at 99% in %, the institutions in the rows are assumed to originate the
shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions.

47

Figure 31: Correlation matrix for the GSIBs based on weekly loss data

Figure 32: Weekly network ∆-CoVaRs at 95% in %, the institutions in the rows are assumed to originate
the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions.

48

Figure 33: Weekly network ∆-CoVaRs at 99% in %, the institutions in the rows are assumed to originate
the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions.

Figure 34: Weekly network ∆-CoES at 95% in %, the institutions in the rows are assumed to originate the
shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions.

49

Figure 35: Weekly network ∆-CoES at 99% in %, the institutions in the rows are assumed to originate the
shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions.

Figure 36: Weekly network ∆-CoES at 95% in % before Black Monday, the institutions in the rows are
assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

50

Figure 37: Weekly network ∆-CoES at 99% in % before Black Monday, the institutions in the rows are
assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

Figure 38: Weekly network ∆-CoVaR at 95% in % before Black Monday, the institutions in the rows are
assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

51

Figure 39: Weekly network ∆-CoVaR at 99% in % before Black Monday, the institutions in the rows are
assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

Figure 40: Weekly network ∆-CoES at 95% in % at the Lehman Bankruptcy, the institutions in the rows
are assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

52

Figure 41: Weekly network ∆-CoES at 99% in % at the Lehman Bankruptcy, the institutions in the rows
are assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

Figure 42: Weekly network ∆-CoVaR at 95% in % at the Lehman Bankruptcy, the institutions in the rows
are assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

53

Figure 43: Weekly network ∆-CoVaR at 97.5% in % at the Lehman Bankruptcy, the institutions in the rows
are assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

Figure 44: Weekly network ∆-CoVaR at 99% in % at the Lehman Bankruptcy, the institutions in the rows
are assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

54

Figure 45: Weekly network ∆-CoES at 95% in % before the Covid-19 pandemic, the institutions in the rows
are assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

Figure 46: Weekly network ∆-CoES at 99% in % before the Covid-19 pandemic, the institutions in the rows
are assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

55

Figure 47: Weekly network ∆-CoVaR at 95% in % before the Covid-19 pandemic, the institutions in the
rows are assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

Figure 48: Weekly network ∆-CoVaR at 97.5% in % before the Covid-19 pandemic, the institutions in the
rows are assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

56

Figure 49: Weekly network ∆-CoVaR at 99% in % before the Covid-19 pandemic, the institutions in the
rows are assumed to originate the shock. The institutions in the columns are the receiving institutions

Institution
MS
GS
JPM
C
BAC
WFC
DB
BK
STT

Systemic importance CoVaR Resiliency CoVaR Systemic importance CoES Resiliency CoES

79561579
531131656
169578727
91795988
126562735
47622766
17224228
14763623
12802442

83194038
40901980
161430985
123045821
175205838
47224227
14462468
12557530
12193770

131163949
94534561
284646667
149237517
215617836
89529462
33802351
27368613
23683778

149332418
66681028
281202555
260870208
354869197
79789753
22351958
16267126
23376748

Table 10: Average row and column values for all the GSIB network-∆-CoVaR/CoES. Values from Figure
4 scaled by market value of each bank as of 31-12-2020 in thousands of $. Importance values; low values
denote low importance. Resiliency values; low values denote high resiliency.

8.7 Details of computer and R setup

Computer setup:

• HP Elitebook 2020

• CPU: AMD Ryzen 7 PRO 4750U with Radeon Graphics @ 1.70 GHz

• RAM: 32 GB

• OS: Windows 10 Enterprise 21H2 build: 19044.1466

Software setup:

• RStudio 2022.02.2+485 ”Prairie Trillium” Release (8acbd38b0d4ca3c86c570cf4112a8180c48cc6fb, 2022-
04-19) for Windows Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 10.0; Win64; x64) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like
Gecko) QtWebEngine/5.12.8 Chrome/69.0.3497.128 Safari/537.36

• R version: 4.2.0 (22-04-2022)[77]

R packages:

57

• robustbase [65]

• quantreg [57]

• timeSeries [91]

• CADFtest [64]

• moments [59]

• zoo [94]

• tidyverse [88]

• dplyr [89]

• xtable [27]

• haven [90]

• corrplot [87]

• igraph [26]

58

