Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core
Fault Current Limiters in a Power Grid by Numerical
Method

Aydin Zaboli

Department of Electrical Engineering,
Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
a.zaboli@aut.ac.ir

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

4
1

]

Y
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
7
7
0
7
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract. Short circuit fault currents are increasing due to growing demand for electricity
and high complexity in power systems. Because the fault currents reach the highest value
which the breakers are unable to restrict, the electrical grid’s security is under jeopardy.
By entering a limiting impedance into a transmission line in series, these impedances
restrict the rising amounts of fault currents to levels that are acceptable. Saturated core
fault current limiters (SCFCLs) are a pivotal tool for limiting fault currents rise in power
networks that have good performance characteristics. In a normal condition, these limiters
have slight eﬀects on the system and can eﬀectively limit short-circuit currents when occur.
In this chapter, various structures of SCFCLs with diﬀerent arrangements of ac windings
& dc windings are presented and the currents passing through the FCLs under the normal
and faulty system conditions are assessed and compared. The ﬂux density in various regions
of the core in diﬀerent arrangements has been investigated as well and the desired analyzes
have been performed. Simulation will be presented based on COMSOL Multiphysics 5.4, a
ﬁnite element software package which can provide a precious assessment to compare these
protective devices with diﬀerent conﬁgurations.1

1 Introduction

Increase in fault currents in power grids is due to the ongoing expansion in energy generation and
demand, as well as the trend to parallelize the network sections. As a result, there is a global eﬀort
underway to ﬁnd solutions to the fault currents problem in order to prevent having to replace
existing circuit breakers or to postpone their replacements Naphade et al. (2021); Jia et al. (2017);
Zhao et al. (2014); Zhou et al. (2020a); Yuan et al. (2020b); Zhou et al. (2019); Liu et al. (2021);
Wei et al. (2020); Ouali and Cherkaoui (2020); Alam et al. (2018). Using various types of fault
current limiters (FCLs) could be an option. This device essentially makes a series connection to
the power grid with a variable impedance. The impedance is low when it performs at its best
situation. When a fault arises, however, the impedance of the system increases dramatically,
preventing amplitude currents from ﬂowing to greater levels. Since the failures in the converters
and rotor circuit might result dangerously in FCLs, on the other hand, may be employed to
maintain the generator’s grid connection for as long as possible. Short circuit current is limited
by such circuits, but the generator is not disconnected from the grid Zhang and Zhang (2019);
Li et al. (2019); Shen et al. (2018a). Despite being advantageous to utilities, these new methods
have created a signiﬁcant problem in terms of short-circuits. Symmetrical or asymmetrical short
circuits are unavoidable in power networks and result in large magnitude short circuit currents,

1This is the author’s pre-print of a book chapter accepted for publication in “Modernization of

Electric Power Systems” Springer.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Aydin Zaboli

particularly in high voltage power networks. These currents have negative thermal and mechanical
consequences Safaei et al. (2020). Diﬀerent types of these devices can be classiﬁed by their
functionalities, materials, structures, expenditures, etc. They may be classiﬁed into two general
groups based on the most signiﬁcant functional characteristics Shen et al. (2018b); Wei et al.
(2018); Yuan et al. (2018); Baferani et al. (2018): 1- Limiters that have a built-in reaction to a
fault. 2- Limiters with a delayed error response. SCFCLs oﬀer numerous beneﬁts over other types,
however, they necessitate a signiﬁcant quantity of magnetic substances, resulting in a high upfront
cost and a considerable scale. These FCLs can be as non-superconducting and superconducting
which our attention is on non-superconducting FCLs in this chapter. Superconducting FCLs have
at least a superconductor tape or coil in their conﬁgurations which can be eﬀective in limiting
the fault currents, however, there are some problems in using these types of limiters. Some issues
are such as cooling system volume and superconductor costs that make barriers for researchers
and engineers to provide a suitable design of power grid including the superconducting FCLs Jia
et al. (2017); Ruiz et al. (2014); Tan et al. (2015); Chen et al. (2016); Commins and Moscrop
(2012b). Nowadays these FCLs are constructed in small scales in laboratories and test in some
small sections of power grids Tan et al. (2015). There are diﬀerent types of FCLs including
saturated core FCL, inductive FCL, magnetic FCL, open core FCL, etc. that every conﬁguration
has special structure and material, but the same functionality.
The saturated core FCL is made up of three parts including copper dc & ac coils, and an iron
core, each of which has its own structure. The power supply is linked in series to the ac coils,
while the dc coils are connected to a separate direct current source. These sorts of limiters, on the
other hand, confront problems such as increasing the needed magnetic material, which maybe
partially addressed by introducing novel structures and arrangements. To address the issue of
big volume and high cost, many structures are oﬀered Shen et al. (2018a,b); Linden et al. (2019,
2020); Commins and Moscrop (2012a). By introducing an air gap into the core, the volume of
the magnetic substance may be decreased. This approach is applicable to nonlinear inductors
in general. The air gap is not just a component of an alternating current circuit, but it is also
a component of a direct current magnetic circuit. In this situation, core saturation is diﬃcult,
and the FCL’s usual impedance is decreased. As a result, designs with three legs are possible,
and the arrangement of ac and dc windings may be modiﬁed such which there is no dc ﬂux
passing through the middle leg of the core. As a result, an air gap in the intermediate branch
may be generated without raising the dc excitation to saturate the nucleus. This air gap also
guarantees that the core size is reduced for the same voltage level. The conﬁguration of the ac
and dc windings allows one of the two outer legs to go out of saturation during each half cycle
of the fault, limiting the fault current. The weight of the FCL may be decreased by utilizing the
proper construction when compared to induction type designs, which depends on how the ac and
dc coils are positioned and put on distinct legs. The ratio of the defective phase voltage to the
overall fault current determines the eﬀective fault impedance Cvoric et al. (2009a, 2016, 2008).

2 Literature Review

There are many FCL conﬁgurations tested or implemented all over the world to relieve the
risks of these hazardous currents in a power grid. These can help the power system to be safe,
reliable, and stable Safaei et al. (2020). Ruiz et al. Ruiz et al. (2014) has been investigated the
Resistive-type Superconducting FCLs in terms of their working principles, numerical modeling,
and superconducting materials with experimental concepts. Tan et al. presented a resistive SFCL
with diﬀerent current ﬂowing time by an YBCO tape as a superconductor material Tan et al.
(2015). Assessment of thermoelectric model of RSFCL by root mean squared method is conducted
by Branco et al. in Branco et al. (2010). Related to inductive SFCL, Yamaguchi et al. presented

Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core

3

a transformer type SFCL that analyze the relation between the current limiting characteristics
and transformer ratings in Yamaguchi et al. (2004). Recently, a transformer-type SFCL with an
external circuit has been developed that may minimize the fault current utilizing twice quench
operations. The impact of current limitation on the winding path of two isolated windings has
been addressed Han et al. (2018). A comprehensive review of Flux-locked type FCLs (FLSFCLs)
was recently published in Badakhshan et al. (2018), which included a detailed assessment of
research conductions and applications of FLSFCLs in power grids. A FLSFCL was used to enrich
the quality of power indexes in a distribution system Lim (2011). A voltage-sourced inverter has
been used to incorporate the planned FLSFCL. The coordination of overcurrent relays with
FLSFCL is discussed in Kim et al. (2010). In Zhao et al. (2014), the impacts of these windings
on FLSFCL’s performance in an iron closed-core were investigated. Tripathi et al. Tripathi and
Chatterjee (2021) has been conducted a conﬁguration with two ac winding and a dc winding
SCFCL for improving a doubly fed induction generator (DFIG) system.

3 Principles of Fault Current Limiting

FCLs are widely studied during recent years in which researchers are introduced many conﬁgu-
rations with diﬀerent material, performance type, arrangements, etc. Two fault current liming
basis are as follows: Adding resistive impedance and reactive impedance (an inductor or a com-
bination of an inductor and a capacitor) Safaei et al. (2020).
There is a sample transmission line with FCL is represented in which this device is in series with
other power grid components. FCLs usually limit fault currents to an acceptable level which it
is relied on the system requirements. That means they do not act during normal conditions of a
power grid. Also, they do not apply any changes, damage, or restrictions to the system, so could
be safe and reliable.

Fig. 1. Sample power system circuit

Eq. (1) may describe the fault current in the system, such as the single-phase fault to ground
(see Fig. 1) in which if ault(t) represents the fault current, UL(t), the line voltage, L the phase
angle of the transmission line impedance, ZL the impedance of transmission line, IL,tf the value
of a current of transmission line at the start time during a fault condition, tf the start time of a
fault, and τ the line time constant Yuan et al. (2018):

if ault(t) =

UL × sin(ωt − φL)
|ZL|

+ (IL,tf −

UL × sin(ωt − φL)
|ZL|

) × e−

t−tf
τ

(1)

When a resistive or inductive types of fault current limiters are utilized, the diﬀerence in
system’s fault performance is in the time constant value of the system, resulting in a diﬀerence
in the value of the fault current’s dc portion. The transmission line time constant of a fault is
less than the inductive FCL for the same FCL impedance when a resistive FCL is employed, as

4

Aydin Zaboli

demonstrated by Eqs. (2) and (3) which LL is line leakage inductance, RL, line leakage resistance,
and RF CL and LF CL are resistive and inductive impedances, correspondingly.

τRF CL =

τXF CL =

LL
RL + RF CL

LL + LF CL
RL

(2)

(3)

As a result, given the same FCL impedance, the initial fault current peak for resistive lim-
iting impedance is less than the inductive impedance. Another distinction is that the resistive
FCL dissipates energy during the fault, whereas the inductive FCL accumulates energy in the
magnetic ﬁeld during the failures and restores it to the system at the end of each cycle. Hence,
inductive FCLs do not result in power loss for the system if normal system operation is resumed
without interruption of current ﬂow (regardless of inductor’s resistance). When the transmission
line is terminated, the energy accumulated in the previous cycle is merely the power loss in the
circuit breaker Tan et al. (2015); Zhou et al. (2020b).
To limit the fault current, inductive FCL can employ both an inductor and a capacitor, simulta-
neously. The FCL can be substituted by a parallel inductor and capacitor in this case to arrange
to conduct the network frequency to a resonance state. The CF CL capacitor is connected in se-
ries via a transmission line, and its quantity is adjusted to compensate the leakage inductance of
the transmission line. By occurring a fault, the LF CL inductance is connected in parallel to the
capacitor, and the parallel LC circuit’s resonant impedance restricts the fault current as follows:

Zres,F CL = j ×

ωLF CL
1 − ω2LF CLCF CL

(4)

This section brieﬂy discussed the limitation of fault currents. Then a comprehensive com-
parison will be given to assess the diﬀerent conﬁgurations by numerical method in the next
sections.

4 Basis of SCFCLs

The nonlinear inductor impedance is determined by the average longitude of the ﬂux direction,
lmean, the cross-sectional area of the core, Acore, winding’s turn number, Nind, and the core’s
relative permeability, µr (Fig. 2). By conducting the core to a saturation mode, the inductance
is smaller when the hysteresis curve’s operational point is outside of the saturation zone (Fig. 3)
Cvoric et al. (2009b).

The estimated inductances for saturated and unsaturated situations are given in the following

equations:

Lx = µ0µr ×

N 2

indAcore
lmean

Ly = µ0µr,sat ×

N 2

indAcore
lmean

(5)

(6)

Where Lx and Ly are the FCL impedances during the fault and normal conditions, and µ0
and µr,sat are the air permeability and relative permeability coeﬃcients of the core at a saturation
condition. The core must be saturated under normal system conditions, but not over-saturated.
The core should be de-saturated under fault situations. An additional dc current-carrying coil
provided by an auxiliary source, or a permanent magnet (PM) can be used to saturate the core,

Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core

5

Fig. 2. Nonlinear inductor

Fig. 3. Nonlinear B-H (hysteresis) curve in an iron core

6

Aydin Zaboli

as illustrated in Fig. 4.
A dc coil, a copper ac coil, and an iron core make up generally the saturated core fault current
limiters, the arrangement of which changes depending on the diﬀerent constructions and used
materials. The ac coils are linked to a power system in series, and the resulting magnetic ﬁeld
is directed in opposite directions. The dc coils are connected to a separate direct current source,
as demonstrated in Fig. 5.

Fig. 4. Saturation methods of FCL core. (a) by direct current (b) by PM

The SCFCL works in its usual non-limiting state under normal power system circumstances,
which is also the mode of operation for most of the time and has no impacts on a power grid.
The rated current will ﬂow between the ac winding windings, and the huge current in the dc
winding will make the bias of the large dc magnetic ﬁeld within a core in this case. During
each ac cycle, deep saturation and low magnetic permeability are maintained in iron cores. The
SCFCL reactance is low and has slight impact on the rest of the power system because of the
inductance relation with the permeability Jia et al. (2017); Cvoric et al. (2009a); Gunawardana
et al. (2016); Nikulshin et al. (2016).

A substantial fault current ﬂows between the ac windings when short circuits occur, and the
limiter enters its own current limiting mode. The dc current is instantly shut oﬀ for active type
SCFCLs, and regardless of the short circuit fault, the same dc bias is created for inactive type
SCFCLs. The iron cores in both types will not always be at deep saturation for a long period due
to the high fault currents. The permeability rises by several thousand while the cores operate in
the linear area of the hysteresis characteristic, therefore the average limiter reactance enhances.
The limiter can restrict the fault current due to reactance Chen et al. (2016); Baimel et al.
(2021). Soft iron has nonlinear magnetic characteristics, which are dictated by the hysteresis

Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core

7

Fig. 5. Schematic of main components of SCFCLs

characteristic of material and is used to represent in this case. The following graph (Fig. 6)
illustrates some advantages of employing this type of limiter.

Fig. 6. SCFCL characteristics

The cores of limiters are adequately saturated to the point that typical current ﬂux changes
cannot restore them to the linear area depicted in Fig. 7. The operating point of B-H graph is
de-saturated in the case a fault occurrence, increasing the limiter impedance. The safe margin
width indicated in the ﬁgure determines the fault ﬂow level at which the FCL commences to
restrict. The width of this portion may be ignored due to the small fault current peak, and the
FCL can serve on spot.

8

Aydin Zaboli

Fig. 7. FCL performance during normal regime – ﬂux changes

The relationship between dc current, Idc, line current, IL, and the magnetic ﬁeld in the core,
H is as follows. To calculate the safe zone width, Hs, Eq. (7) must be rewritten as Eq. (8) Cvoric
et al. (2016):

NdcIdc − NacIL,max > Hsatlmean

NdcIdc − NacIL,max = (Hsat + Hs)lmean

(7)

(8)

After the fault has been cleared, the core comes back to saturated mode. Therefore, when the
amount of transmission current decreases, the ac winding’s impedance decreases with no latency.
As a result, the inductive FCL can limit a countless number of continuous faults.
Because of the inductive essence of the fault current limiter’s impedance, there have been no
energy losses throughout the restriction, but there is a loss owing to the resistance of a winding.
When compared to the transmission line’s nominal power, the dissipative power is rather low.
Unlike resistive fault current limiters, the limiting operation period is not constrained by an
acceptable quantity of thermal transfer at impedance. Because inductive limiters can’t operate as
a breaker, the fault current must be eliminated by other protection apparatus like circuit breakers.
However, attributed to the design issues, they have not yet been industrialized Yuan et al. (2020a):
1- The scale and expense of the materials are both signiﬁcant, 2- Inductive overvoltage passing
through the dc current source during fault operation.

5 Circuit Diagram of a Simple Power System

Test circumstances of FCLs and their impacts on current limiting and other network parameters
are in the form of a simpliﬁed power network test circuit with resistance, inductor, power supply,
and load resistance, which act in fault and normal operations utilizing the various architectures
of SCFCLs. The sample circuit system associated with their values are illustrated in Fig. 8 and
Table 1. It is our purpose to test the diﬀerent type of saturated core FCLs on the sample network

Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core

9

by providing a model by ﬁnite element method simulated by COMSOL Multiphysics software
in a computer system with Intel core i7, 6500U, 64-bit, 12 GB RAM and provide a comparison
between them in terms of appropriate parameters. Various arrangements of these FCLs are given
in the next section.

Fig. 8. Power system equivalent circuit with single phase to ground fault

6 Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of SCFCLs

We propose some SCFCL conﬁgurations such as 100% magnetic separation, partial magnetic
separation, short circuit dc winding, etc. The performance of these FCLs is tested on the sample
power system, and comparisons are provided.

Table 1. Equivalent circuit parameters

Parameter

Power Supply (UL) (rms)

Description
√

10

2kV

RL

LL

Zload

0.1095Ω

5.63419 × 10−4H

8.79Ω

6.1 SCFCL with 100% Magnetic Separation

Because of resistive essence of ac winding in SCFCLs, there will be a voltage drop which is a
coeﬃcient of voltage during normal operation (up to 2%). However, phase voltage of UL(t), is
applied to the ac winding while a fault occurs. An overvoltage (UF CL,dc(t)) is produced by a dc
source as a result of windings’ coupling in a transformer in which the number of turns in the ac
and dc windings are Nac and Ndc, correspondingly Li et al. (2019); Wei et al. (2018).

UF CL,dc(t) =

Ndc
Nac

× UL(t)

(9)

The induced overvoltage problem can be solved by magnetic separation of ac and dc windings.

Fig. 9 depicts this arrangement in this case.

10

Aydin Zaboli

Fig. 9. SCFCL conﬁguration with 100% magnetic separation of dc and ac circuit

In this situation, the dc ﬂux only crosses over the core’s left and center legs and reaches
saturation there. A leg with a signiﬁcant reluctance possessing an air gap deﬂects the passing
ﬂux away from the path as Eq. (10):

(cid:60)m =

(cid:60)rr =

lmm
µ0µrAcm
lmr + µrlg
µ0µrAcr






−→ (cid:60)m << (cid:60)rr

that

(10)

- (cid:60)m is middle leg reluctance
- (cid:60)rr is right leg reluctance
- lmm is average length of middle leg
- lmr is average length of right leg
- lg is air gap length
- Acm is cross-section of middle leg
- Acr is cross-section of right leg

During the fault condition, the ac ﬂux merely ﬂows through the center and right legs which
is induced by fault currents. The reluctance of left side is much higher than right one (with air
gap) owing to a saturation state Cvoric et al. (2016):

(cid:60)lf =

lmf
µ0µrAcl
lmr + µrlg
µ0µrAcr

(cid:60)rr =






−→ (cid:60)lf >> (cid:60)rr

that

(11)

- (cid:60)lf is left leg reluctance
- lmf is average length of left leg
- Acl is cross-section of left leg

The dc winding does not sense any ﬂux change in this situation since it is not aware of the ac
ﬂux. As a result, no induced overvoltage occurs. Fig. 10 depicts the ﬂow distribution, with two
cores utilized for each phase.

Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core

11

Fig. 10. Flux distribution in SCFCL with 100% magnetic separation

This conﬁguration, however, has a design ﬂaw. During normal operation, the ac winding has
a very high impedance. Non-deep saturation of the mid-leg results in high impedance. Because
the dc winding is on the opposite leg of the core, it can only saturate the same leg.

6.2 SCFCL with Partial Magnetic Separation

The saturated core FCL with 100% magnetic separation has a limiting diﬃculty in that a coil
placed in the opposite leg of the core cannot be thoroughly saturated, as detailed in the preced-
ing section. The ac leg falls out of saturation even with a regular current, increasing the FCL
impedance during normal operation. The core size must be large enough to get an acceptable
low value for the FCL’s normal state impedance, it may be inferred Naphade et al. (2021).
An improved design of a SCFCL with partial magnetic separation is illustrated in Fig. 11. There
is an ac leg with an appended dc auxiliary coil to conduct it to a stronger saturated mode. The
eﬀect of the auxiliary dc coil is depicted in Fig. 12. This auxiliary coil propels the working point
outside the knee area, allowing it to saturate better. SCFCL parameters are presented in Table
2.

Fig. 11. SCFCL with partial magnetic separation

Eq. (12) illustrates a relationship between Nac,aux and Nac as follows:

Ndc,auxIdc = NacIL that

Idc = dc current,

IL = Line current

(12)

12

Aydin Zaboli

Fig. 12. Deep saturated mode of an AC leg provided by an dc auxiliary coil

Table 2. SCFCL parameters

Parameter

Description

Value

Value

100% magnetic separation Partial magnetic separation

Nac
Ndc
Idc
lgap
Ndc,aux

No. of turns in ac winding
No. of turns in dc winding
dc current
air gap length
No. of turns in auxiliary winding

60
500
450
0.3
-

60
500
450
0.3
76

The design parameters are analogous to the previous mode for this case and the auxiliary
winding has 76 turns, which is obtained using Eq. (12). The FCL also comes with the same
speciﬁcations as the auxiliary dc coil, except that the main dc coil is short-circuited.

6.3 SCFCL with DC Coil through short-circuited terminals

Even though the primary dc coil has more turns than the auxiliary one, the primary coil’s share
of ac leg saturation is less than that of the auxiliary dc coil illustrated in Fig. 13. To raise the
dc reluctance and control the ac ﬂux via the air gap, more turns of the dc primary coil are
indispensable. Otherwise, the induced voltage at the dc source will rise due to the spreading of
ac ﬂux via the dc leg Wei et al. (2020); Yuan et al. (2020a).
If the primary winding is cut oﬀ from the rest of the circuit, the limiter functionality will not
change as shown in the ﬁgure below. The ac current ﬂowing via the dc leg causes a current in the
coil with short-circuited terminals, which drives the ac ﬂux. The dc leg is not fully saturated in
this scenario. A supplementary coil navigates it to the knee area. However, the FCL impedance
does not increase when everything is running smoothly because it is where the ac ﬂux ﬂows.

The level of ﬂux variation in the dc side determines the induction current in the short-circuit
coil, which is oppositely proportional to Ndc. The quantity of induction current increases as a
reduction of the coil’s turn numbers. Considering that, the entire amount of material could be
substantially reduced in this circumstance. The overall amount of FCL coil material is lowered by
substituting the primary dc coil with a short-circuit one by partial magnetic separation Cvoric
et al. (2009a).

Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core

13

Fig. 13. SCFCL with DC Coil through short-circuited terminals

7 Simulation Results for Conﬁgurations with One AC Winding

In this section, we evaluate the simulation results of these models, which we deﬁne the models
as Fig. 14 and the components of this type of limiter as Fig. 15:

Fig. 14. SCFCL structures including partial magnetic separation (Model A), 100% magnetic separation
(Model B) and a dc coil with short-circuited terminals (Model C)

Also, the geometrical dimensions of the design are demonstrated in Fig. 16:
Using the sample power system for assessing the FCL performance in the circuit in fault
conditions, the current curves passing through the system and the ﬂux density and ﬁeld strength
curves can be obtained, as well as the distribution of ﬂux density or ﬁeld strength in diﬀerent
situations. A transient analysis was performed for the conﬁgurations versus time and its per-
formance in the presence of fault is compared and assessed. Even though the limiter exists in
a power system during normal situation, it should not have impacts on the circuit. Therefore,
the current passing through the grid without the presence of FCL and with the presence of FCL
under normal operating conditions of the system is compared, which is shown in Fig. 17. Red
line demonstrated the electric current without FCL with amplitude of 1000 A. Other models
illustrate some changes in current speciﬁcally at the outset of time. It originates from copper
structure of FCL and is due to winding positions that reduces the amplitude of current at the
models.

14

Aydin Zaboli

Fig. 15. SCFCL components

Fig. 16. Conﬁguration dimensions

Fig. 17. Current passing through the system in normal operating conditions

Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core

15

Fig. 18. Current passing through the system in normal and fault operation without SCFCL

In models A, B and C, the limiter is in the electric circuit. Moreover, a maximum current
passing through the system is about 1000 A, which with the presence of FCL (because of series
connection to the circuit) due to a slight voltage drop (very small impedance input), the amount
of current is slightly reduced. Also, the general diagram of the current without the presence of
FCL under normal and fault operating conditions is illustrated in Fig. 18, where the fault was
initially entered into the system and the analysis was performed on the circuit for 50 ms. As you
can observe, the fault impact on the electric current is highly signiﬁcant.
Also, as mentioned, only the dc leg goes to deep saturation in model B, and to further saturate
the ac leg, a dc auxiliary winding is added to it that a ﬂux density diagram is shown in Fig. 19.
As you can observe, the ﬂux density in Model A (partial mode) is slightly better saturated due to
the auxiliary winding. Also in the Model C, the dc leg is not deeply saturated and is conducted
by an auxiliary winding to the knee area, which has low values of ﬂux density, as depicted in
Fig. 19.

Fig. 19. Magnetic ﬂux density changes versus time for diﬀerent models

16

Aydin Zaboli

Now, if we examine the ﬂux density for model A in normal operation and fault mode, we
perceive that the ﬂux density in fault mode is generally higher than normal condition, which the
fault causes more saturation of the core and a larger impedance. The ﬂux density is shown in
Fig. 20 that represents this type of SCFCL is eﬀective in density reduction and the maximum
amount of B reaches almost 1.3 T.

Fig. 20. Magnetic ﬂux density passing through the core for both conditions in model A

Fig. 21 depicts the magnetic ﬁeld strength of the iron core for Model A as well, which is

relatively higher in the fault state.

For a general comparison of ﬂux density in the models presented above, their diagrams in
normal operation and fault modes are represented in Fig. 22. The lowest ﬂux density value is
related to dc short-circuited winding mode in normal operation which is in saturation mode.
Most of the mode is related to the partial model in the fault mode, which possesses deeper
saturation. Signiﬁcant diﬀerence in normal and fault modes for Model C is due to the presence
of short-circuited dc winding that the impact of this type of SCFCL is very advantageous. Other
structures have smaller decline in ﬂux density than Model C.

The amount of current ﬂow in this model in fault mode has also been investigated in the

presence of SCFCL. In this case we have

B = µH

if
−→ B ↑→ H ↑,

H = N I
l

N−→ I(variable),

Which can be analyzed using the ﬂux density diagram.

For example, a fault has been occurred on 23 ms, and the FCL performance for Model A has
been investigated, as shown in Fig. 24. As you can see, there is no fault until 23 ms and the FCL
is in the circuit, so it should not normally have much of an eﬀect on the circuit, which makes
sense. After starting the fault in the ﬁrst peak, the current was almost 116 kA, and then the
peak of fault current was reduced, which the FCL has ampliﬁed properly (we applied this type
of fault on 23 ms in this section Because the calculation volume is very high and time consuming
and for analysis and comparison, so a fault has been applied in this moment).

Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core

17

Fig. 21. Magnetic ﬁeld strength passing through the iron core for model A in normal and fault modes

Fig. 22. Comparison of ﬂux density in normal and fault operations

18

Aydin Zaboli

Fig. 23. Current passing through the system during a fault condition with SCFCL

Fig. 24. Current passing through the system by applying a fault in 23 ms

Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core

19

We now examine the ﬂux density distribution at diﬀerent points in these three models and
make a comparison between them. First, we show how the ﬂux density changes in Model A,
which is in the form of Fig. 25 and Fig. 26 (for an air gap length of 0.3 m). In Fig. 25, there is a
ﬂux density reduction in middle leg that increases near the fault point. After fault occurrence,
there is a huge drop of ﬂux density that density’s concentration is on the top of middle leg at 5
ms. Then, the ﬂux density distributes to other legs after 5 ms that middle leg experiences the
highest ﬂux density. Afterwards, the high-density transfer to the right leg.

Fig. 25. Flux density illustration during normal mode for Model A

As you can see, the ﬂux density gradually decreases in the central leg and goes out of satu-
ration until it rises again in about 21 ms, but it has never entered deep saturation in this case.
Now, the ﬂux density is very high in some positions, due to the fault originating the passage of
current through the ac windings. The middle leg is deeply saturated, which is done using the dc
auxiliary winding in 10 ms. Flux density is gradually directed from the middle leg to the leg at
an air gap, creating little saturation in those areas. Also, the ﬂux density distribution is given
for these three models as an example in 5 ms that the diagram has already been given.

8

Inductive SCFCL

The conﬁguration of a single phase inductive SCFCL is shown in Fig. 28. In this structure, they
alternate from one half-cycle to the other half-cycle because the two legs have an ac winding
separately, and the leg with the air gap directs the ac ﬂux produced in this leg. Therefore, there
are three magnetic legs in this architecture, each with dc and ac coils. The ac coils are placed to
the transmission line in series, whilst the dc coils are connected to the direct current source in
series Cvoric et al. (2016, 2008); Pirhadi et al. (2020).

The dc windings are connected in a way that the dc ﬂux receives a rotational current. As
a result, the outside legs of the core are saturated, but the dc ﬂux does not pass through the

20

Aydin Zaboli

Fig. 26. Flux density distribution for Model A during fault mode

Fig. 27. Comparison of ﬂux density distribution at 5 milliseconds

Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core

21

Fig. 28. Single phase inductive SCFCL

central leg. So, dc saturation level does not rely on the length of the air gap (lgap), so we have
Linden et al. (2019):

Bmid = 0, Bo = µr,sat ×

NdcIdc
lmean,outer

+ (Bsat − µsatHsat)

(13)

Where Bo and Bmid and are the dc ﬂux densities in the outer and central legs, correspondingly,
and lmean,outer is the average lengths of the outer leg and Hsat is the saturation values of the
magnetic ﬁeld. The central leg makes a parallel route for the ac ﬂux, allowing the air gap to be
merely in the ac magnetic circuit. After the fault commences, the left and right legs of the core
alternate from saturation mode. The connection of the ac windings is during a half cycle, the ac
and dc ﬂuxes are in the same direction but in the other outer leg are in opposite directions. Since
the reluctance of the right leg is quite high, the ac ﬂux of the left leg blocks its pathway via the
center part due to saturation. Inductance of SCFCL can be expressed during normal and fault
conditions as Eqs. (14) and (15) Commins and Moscrop (2012b,a); Zhou et al. (2020b); Cvoric
et al. (2009b); Pellecchia et al. (2016):

LF CL,sat = µ0 ×

N 2
ac × Acore,outer
lmean,outer + lgap

= µ0 ×

N 2

ac × Acore,outer
(lmean,outer/lgap + 1) × lgap

LF CL,lin = µ0 ×

N 2

ac × 2Acore,outer
lgap

= f (2Acore,outer)

(14)

(15)

Where LF CL,sat is FCL inductance in saturation mode, Acore, outer cross-sectional area of

the outer leg, and LF CL,lin is FCL inductance out of saturated mode (in fault mode).

9 SCFCL with DC Single-Core Short-Circuited Windings

SCFCL with dc short-circuited windings uses two cores in each phase. The two cores can be
combined to further reduce the magnetic materials. This topology is illustrated in Fig. 29. As
you can observe, because the dc leg’s main purpose was to make a low reluctance path for the dc
ﬂux, it was eliminated. In this setup, an extra ac leg takes over the dc leg’s role. The ac ﬂux is
directed from each ac winding to the air gap legs using short-circuited windings Baferani et al.
(2018); Commins and Moscrop (2012a); Pellecchia et al. (2016); Vilhena et al. (2018).

22

Aydin Zaboli

Fig. 29. Single-core SCFCL conﬁguration with short-circuited windings

In this section, we evaluate the simulation results of models D and E, which we deﬁne as the
models in Fig. 30. The current passing through the system in the presence of FCL in normal
operating conditions has been investigated in this case. By mentioning to Fig. 31, it can be seen
that these two models have larger impedances than models A, B and C in the normal operating
mode which is not desirable and their current has reached up to 400 A or more even in the ﬁrst
peak, although the rated current of the system has a peak of 1000 A. Model D is more desirable
than model E in this state (because model E has a larger number of windings and therefore it has
more resistance and impedance in a normal operation). There is a drop at the outset of electric
current of Model D because of air gap presence at the middle leg.

Fig. 30. SCFCL conﬁgurations including an inductive saturated core FCL (Model D) and a single-core
saturated core FCL with short-circuited windings (Model E)

Model D has better saturation than model E, because the outer legs in model D have dc
winding and are better saturated, while on model E, the dc winding has short-circuited. It
causes the iron core to saturate around it later, as shown in Fig. 32 that the ﬂux density changes
at fault mode for models D and E.

It is also possible to show the amount of current in fault mode for models D and E, which due
to the further voltage drops of them in which their limitation is even less than the nominal current

Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core

23

Fig. 31. Current passing through the system with SCFCL in a normal mode

Fig. 32. Flux density of iron core during fault mode for Models D and E

24

Aydin Zaboli

(Fig. 33). Fig. 33 observes higher current amplitude than Fig. 31. These structures have slight
eﬀect on reducing the fault in comparison with conﬁgurations introduced in previous section and
has more material consuming.

Fig. 33. Current passing through during fault condition with SCFCL

Now, we want to evaluate the ﬂux density distribution in Model D, which are in Fig. 34 and
Fig. 35 for diﬀerent times in normal and fault states. By comparing the above two states of
ﬂux density distribution, because of the occurrence of a fault, two outer legs gradually deviate
from the saturation state, so the ﬂux density is greater than the fault state in the normal mode.
It should also be not-ed that we must apply much dc current to dc winding to fully enter the
saturation zone at the beginning of the design that the analogical diagram for two normal and
fault modes for model D is shown for 100 milliseconds.

It is also possible to provide a ﬂux density distribution for Model E, which is as follows. As
it can be perceived, the middle legs are not deeply saturated from the beginning, because of the
presence of short-circuit windings at the top and bottom of the core, and a large dc current must
be applied to the winding to achieve this. The middle legs become gradually saturated over time
and the ﬂux slowly disperses at the surface of the iron core, with the middle legs alternating
between saturated and unsaturated modes. There is a summary of proposed conﬁgurations and
their speciﬁcations as Table 3.

10 Conclusion

Nowadays fault current limiters can have considerable eﬀect on any failure or outage in power
systems. They are very beneﬁcial to postpone the replacement of power devices and take an
important role in mitigation of fault impacts. Saturated-core FCLs can be attractive because
of saturation features and prompt changes of ﬂux between the diﬀerent parts of an iron core.
Suitable designs of this type of FCLs in terms of material, volume, type of winding placement,
etc. can be helpful for industrial engineers to utilize an eﬃcient conﬁguration regarding their
applicability. This device can remarkably reduce the vulnerability of a power grid. This chapter
presents an analysis of diﬀerent conﬁgurations of SCFCLs that their design is relied on number of

Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core

25

Fig. 34. Flux density distribution for Model D during normal mode

Fig. 35. Flux density distribution for Model D during fault mode

26

Aydin Zaboli

Fig. 36. Flux density for Model D during normal and fault operations

Fig. 37. Flux density distribution for Model E during normal operation

Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core

27

Table 3. Summary of proposed SCFCL conﬁgurations

SCFCL Conﬁguration

Design Speciﬁcations

– Every phase has two cores.
– Partial magnetic separation of dc &

ac ﬂuxes

– An air gap in side leg
– Voltage is induced in dc winding
– FCL impedance is declined during

normal conditions

– Every phase has two cores
– There is no voltage induced
– 100% magnetic separation of dc &

ac ﬂuxes

– An air gap in sidelong leg
– There is no deep saturation in the
middle leg because of one ac wind-
ing

– FCL impedance is increased during

normal conditions

– Every phase has two cores
– Partial magnetic separation of dc &

ac ﬂuxes

– An air gap in sidelong leg
– Volume of winding material is mit-
igated because of short-circuited dc
winding

– Existence of an air gap in middle

leg

– Partial magnetic separation of dc &

ac ﬂuxes

– Single phase inductive SCFCL (ev-

ery phase has a core)

– Conduction of ac ﬂux across the leg

with air gap is suﬃcient

– Partial magnetic separation of dc &

ac ﬂuxes

– Single phase inductive SCFCL (ev-

ery phase has a core)

– Changes in ﬂux distribution be-

cause of winding positions

28

Aydin Zaboli

windings, winding positions, etc. Various parameters of this protective device including electric
current, magnetic ﬂux density, magnetic ﬁeld strength, etc. are assessed and compared. Numerical
analysis with ﬁnite element method is carried out to provide a comprehensive information related
to SCFCLs to demonstrate the variables’ changes during normal operation or fault mode better.

Bibliography

Alam, M. S., Abido, M. A. Y., and El-Amin, I. (2018). Fault current limiters in power systems:

A comprehensive review. Energies, 11(5):1025.

Badakhshan, M. et al. (2018). Flux-lock type of superconducting fault current limiters: A com-

prehensive review. Physica C: Superconductivity and its Applications, 547:51–54.

Baferani, M. A., Chalaki, M. R., Fahimi, N., Shayegani, A. A., and Niayesh, K. (2018). A novel
arrangement for improving three phase saturated-core fault current limiter (scfcl). In 2018
IEEE Texas Power and Energy Conference (TPEC), pages 1–6. IEEE.

Baimel, D., Chowdhury, N., Belikov, J., and Levron, Y. (2021). New type of bridge fault current
limiter with reduced power losses for transient stability improvement of dﬁg wind farm. Electric
Power Systems Research, 197:107293.

Branco, P. C., Almeida, M., and Dente, J. (2010). Proposal for an rms thermoelectric model for
a resistive-type superconducting fault current limiter (sfcl). Electric power systems research,
80(10):1229–1239.

Chen, B., Wei, L., Tian, C., Lei, Y., and Yuan, J. (2016). Parameter design and performance
investigation of a novel bridge-type saturated core fault current limiter. IEEE Transactions
on Power Delivery, 32(2):1049–1057.

Commins, P. A. and Moscrop, J. W. (2012a). Analytical nonlinear reluctance model of a single-
phase saturated core fault current limiter. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, 28(1):450–
457.

Commins, P. A. and Moscrop, J. W. (2012b). Three phase saturated core fault current limiter
performance with a ﬂoating neutral. In 2012 IEEE Electrical Power and Energy Conference,
pages 249–254. IEEE.

Cvoric, D., De Haan, S., and Ferreira, J. (2009a). New saturable-core fault current limiter
topology with reduced core size. In 2009 IEEE 6th International Power Electronics and Motion
Control Conference, pages 920–926. IEEE.

Cvoric, D., de Haan, S. W., and Ferreira, J. (2008). Comparison of the four conﬁgurations of the
inductive fault current limiter. In 2008 IEEE Power Electronics Specialists Conference, pages
3967–3973. IEEE.

Cvoric, D., de Haan, S. W. H., and Ferreira, J. A. (2009b). Guidelines for 2d/3d fe transient
modeling of inductive saturable-core fault current limiters. In 2009 International Conference
on Electric Power and Energy Conversion Systems, (EPECS), pages 1–6.

Cvoric, D., Lahaye, D., de Haan, S., and Ferreira, B. (2016). 3d nonlinear transient ﬁeld-circuit
modeling of inductive fault current limiters. International Journal of Numerical Modelling:
Electronic Networks, Devices and Fields, 29(2):354–360.

Gunawardana, S., Commins, P., Moscrop, J., and Perera, S. (2016). Transient modeling of
saturated core fault current limiters. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, 31(5):2008–2017.
Han, T.-H., Ko, S.-C., and Lim, S.-H. (2018). Fault current limiting characteristics of transformer-
type superconducting fault current limiter due to winding direction of additional circuit. IEEE
Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 28(3):1–6.

Jia, Y., Ainslie, M. D., Hu, D., and Yuan, J. (2017). Numerical simulation and analysis of
a saturated-core-type superconducting fault current limiter. IEEE Transactions on Applied
Superconductivity, 27(4):1–5.

Kim, J.-S., Lim, S.-H., and Kim, J. (2010). Study on protection coordination of a ﬂux-lock type
sfcl with over-current relay. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 20(3):1159–1163.

30

Aydin Zaboli

Li, B., Cui, H., Jing, F., Li, B., and Liu, Y. (2019). Current-limiting characteristics of saturated
iron-core fault current limiters in vsc-hvdc systems based on electromagnetic energy conversion
mechanism. Journal of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy, 7(2):412–421.

Lim, S. (2011). Analysis on current limiting characteristics of a ﬂux-lock type sfcl with two
triggering current levels. Physica C: Superconductivity and its Applications, 471(21-22):1354–
1357.

Linden, J., Nikulshin, Y., Friedman, A., Yeshurun, Y., and Wolfus, S. (2019). Design optimization

of a permanent-magnet saturated-core fault-current limiter. Energies, 12(10):1823.

Linden, J., Nikulshin, Y., Friedman, A., Yeshurun, Y., and Wolfus, S. (2020). Phase-coupling
IEEE

eﬀects in three-phase inductive fault-current limiter based on permanent magnets.
Transactions on Magnetics, 56(2):1–7.

Liu, Y., Guan, L., Tan, Z., Yang, K., Guo, F., Chen, Y., Liu, R., and Zheng, F. (2021). Design
of a multifunction novel ﬂexible fault current limiter for ac distribution network. Plos one,
16(4):e0245956.

Naphade, V., Ghate, V., and Dhole, G. (2021). Experimental analysis of saturated core fault cur-
rent limiter performance at diﬀerent fault inception angles with varying dc bias. International
Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems, 130:106943.

Nikulshin, Y., Wolfus, Y., Friedman, A., Yeshurun, Y., Rozenshtein, V., Landwer, D., and Garbi,
U. (2016). Saturated core fault current limiters in a live grid. IEEE Transactions on Applied
Superconductivity, 26(3):1–4.

Ouali, S. and Cherkaoui, A. (2020). Integration of fault current limiters in electric power systems:

A review. IEEE Systems Journal, 15(3):4470–4479.

Pellecchia, A., Klaus, D., Masullo, G., Marabotto, R., Morandi, A., Fabbri, M., Goodhand, C.,
and Helm, J. (2016). Development of a saturated core fault current limiter with open magnetic
cores and magnesium diboride saturating coils. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconduc-
tivity, 27(4):1–7.

Pirhadi, A., Shayan, H., and Bina, M. T. (2020). Design of an unsaturated core-based fault
current limiter to tackle unsymmetrical faults. Electric Power Systems Research, 187:106482.
Ruiz, H. S., Zhang, X., and Coombs, T. (2014). Resistive-type superconducting fault current
limiters: concepts, materials, and numerical modeling. IEEE Transactions on Applied Super-
conductivity, 25(3):1–5.

Safaei, A., Zolfaghari, M., Gilvanejad, M., and Gharehpetian, G. B. (2020). A survey on fault
current limiters: Development and technical aspects. International Journal of Electrical Power
& Energy Systems, 118:105729.

Shen, H., Mei, F., Zheng, J., Sha, H., and She, C. (2018a). Three-phase saturated-core fault

current limiter. Energies, 11(12):3471.

Shen, H., Zheng, J., Sha, H., She, C., and Mei, F. (2018b). Study of a new structure of three-
phase saturated-core fault current limiter. In 2018 International Conference on Smart Grid
and Clean Energy Technologies (ICSGCE), pages 239–243. IEEE.

Tan, Y. X., Yang, K., Xiang, B., Yan, J., San Geng, Y., Liu, Z. Y., Wang, J. H., and Yanabu,
S. (2015). Resistive type superconducting fault current limiter and current ﬂowing time.
In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Applied Superconductivity and Electromagnetic
Devices (ASEMD), pages 290–291. IEEE.

Tripathi, P. M. and Chatterjee, K. (2021). Real-time implementation of ring based saturated
core fault current limiter to improve fault ride through capability of dﬁg system. International
Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems, 131:107040.

Vilhena, N., Murta-Pina, J., Pronto, A., and ´Alvarez, A. (2018). A design methodology for
the optimization of three-phase sfcl of saturated cores type. IEEE Transactions on Applied
Superconductivity, 28(4):1–5.

Comparison of Diﬀerent Conﬁgurations of Saturated Core

31

Wei, L., Chen, B., Liu, Y., Tian, C., Yuan, J., Bu, Y., and Zhu, T. (2018). Performance investi-
gation and optimization of a novel hybrid saturated-core fault-current limiter considering the
leakage eﬀect. Energies, 11(1):61.

Wei, L., Chen, B., and Yuan, J. (2020). Limiting mechanism and equivalent analytical model of a
bridge-type saturated core fault current limiter. Electric Power Systems Research, 180:106134.
Yamaguchi, H., Kataoka, T., Yaguchi, K., Fujita, S., Yoshikawa, K., and Kaiho, K. (2004). Char-
acteristics analysis of transformer type superconducting fault current limiter. IEEE transac-
tions on applied superconductivity, 14(2):815–818.

Yuan, J., Gan, P., Zhang, Z., Zhou, H., Wei, L., and Muramatsu, K. (2020a). Saturated-core fault
current limiters for ac power systems: Towards reliable, economical and better performance
application. High Voltage, 5(4):416–424.

Yuan, J., Zhang, Z., Zhou, H., Gan, P., and Chen, H. (2020b). Optimized design method of per-
manent magnets saturated core fault current limiters for hvdc applications. IEEE Transactions
on Power Delivery, 36(2):721–730.

Yuan, J., Zhou, H., Gan, P., Zhong, Y., Gao, Y., Muramatsu, K., Du, Z., and Chen, B. (2018). A
novel concept of fault current limiter based on saturable core in high voltage dc transmission
system. Aip Advances, 8(5):056636.

Zhang, X. and Zhang, Y. (2019). A viable approach for limiting fault currents in electric networks.

IEEJ Transactions on Electrical and Electronic Engineering, 14(4):556–560.

Zhao, Y., Krause, O., Saha, T. K., and Li, Y. (2014). Performance analysis of ﬂux-lock type sfcl
inﬂuenced by characteristics of two coils. In 2014 IEEE PES General Meeting— Conference
& Exposition, pages 1–5. IEEE.

Zhou, H., Yuan, J., and Chen, F. (2020a). Hybrid-material based saturated core fcl in hvdc
system: Modeling, analyzing and performance testing. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Elec-
tronics, 68(12):11858–11869.

Zhou, H., Yuan, J., Chen, F., and Chen, B. (2020b). Inductive fault current limiters in vsc-hvdc

systems: A review. IEEE Access, 8:38185–38197.

Zhou, H., Yuan, J., Chen, F., Chen, B., and Muramatsu, K. (2019). Performance investigation
on a novel high inductance changing ratio mmc-based direct current system saturated core fcl.
IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, 35(3):1502–1514.

