A low-cost and reliable laser shutter interlock using a software-command interface

Joshua P. Rogers, Andrew J. Murray
Photon Science Institute, School of Physics & Astronomy,
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom
(Dated: June 22, 2022)

A simple and low-cost laser interlock is presented that operates via software commands issued by
an ESP32 microcontroller. The architecture of the device is constructed to ensure the laser output
is shut oﬀ in the event of either an open circuit on the interlock signal line from the laser enclosure
or loss of power to the device. Unintentional exposure to the laser beam is prevented by overruling
local controls (such as a keypad), until both the enclosure is re-interlocked and the user actively
intervenes. The device presented is designed to close the mechanical shutter of a Spectra-Physics
Millennia Pro pump laser while it continues to operate internally. The hardware and coding are
versatile enough to be deployed on any instrument that receives software commands via a serial
interface.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Laser safety in a working research laboratory is ex-
In the UK in recent years, many
tremely important.
laser users have had to suspend activities for weeks or
months to make improvements in laser safety measures
following inspections by the Health and Safety Execu-
tive. In the hierarchy of controls for the safety of work-
ers [1], engineered containment of a hazard is preferred
over both administrative controls and personal protec-
tive equipment (PPE). Containment is superseded only
by elimination or substitution of the hazard. Many laser
laboratories use high power class 3B and 4 lasers, which
exceed maximum permissible exposure irradiance limits
to the eye and often also to the skin.
If it cannot be
eliminated, the laser emission hazard therefore requires
robust containment infrastructure to protect all labora-
tory occupants and reduce reliance on PPE, such as laser
goggles and gloves.
Ideally, all laser beams are always
fully enclosed and inaccessible to all lab users. However,
a door or curtain interlock is an essential component in
these safety measures, particularly when the room itself
becomes the laser enclosure while open-beam work is in
progress. This situation occurs during manual alignment
of the optical path, or when adjusting a laser cavity to
optimize its output.

The ideal interlock is ‘fail-safe’, such that not only a
discontinuity in the enclosure but also power or compo-
nent failure in the interlock itself will immediately halt
Interlocks therefore typically employ a
laser emission.
switching circuit that is closed only when the enclosure
is shut. Depending on the type of laser system that is
used, the interlock may directly shut oﬀ power to the
source of emission or it may mechanically obstruct the
beam using a shutter. Whereas cutting oﬀ the power to
the laser will deﬁnitively remove the hazard, consider-
ation must also be given to whether this is practicable
under research conditions. This is particularly true if
the laser or downstream components in the optical chain
could be damaged by sudden loss of power. Strategically
positioned mechanical shutters are therefore often more
appropriate in these situations as they are less disruptive

to research activity while providing the same degree of
protection to users.

The interlock system described here has been designed
to interface with the 15 W Spectra-Physics Millennia Pro
laser, which is used to pump several tuneable laser sys-
tems in our laboratory. This laser features an electrical
interlock interface in series with its power supply, which
ensures that emission stops immediately when the laser
enclosure interlock circuit is opened. Once the enclo-
sure interlock switch is re-engaged the laser must then
be restarted and the warming-up procedure to reach full
power and stability can be implemented. This can intro-
duce signiﬁcant delay and disruption to research activity,
particularly when frequent access to the laser enclosure
is required. Despite being highly dependable, this is not
a practicable method for interlocking the laser system to
its enclosure. Although interlock overrides are often used
to circumvent this problem, disabling a safety system,
even temporarily, increases the probability of accidental
exposure to the hazard.

The Millennia also features a gravity-fed mechanical
shutter inside the laser head, operated by a handheld
controller. The shutter is normally-closed and, rather
than interrupting power to the laser head, merely physi-
cally obstructs the beam, keeping it within the Millenia’s
housing. The shutter can also be actuated by software
commands via an RS232 interface on the rear of the
power supply. Since shutting the shutter ensures com-
plete containment of the beam while maintaining stable
laser operating conditions internally, it is clearly prefer-
able to use this method to eliminate the hazard when the
enclosure is opened during open-beam work.

In this design note a simple and low-cost interlock solu-
tion is presented that satisﬁes the requirements of being
fail-safe, reliable and practicable. This solution utilises
an ESP32 microprocessor on a commercial development
board that interfaces with the Millennia’s software com-
mand interface to actuate its mechanical shutter. The
ESP32 continuously monitors the status of both the in-
terlock and the shutter and will shut oﬀ the laser beam if
the enclosure is opened. The laser power supply therefore
remains operational throughout so that the long term

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

0
2

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
8
5
8
9
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
stability of the laser is not disturbed.

An interlock that utilises software commands can have
more potential points of failure compared to a simple
hardware interlock. It is therefore important to ensure
that it is fail-safe under all operating conditions. The
ESP32 microcontroller serves this purpose well because
it is a robust device that operates independently of an
operating system and does not need to interface to a
network. The code that has been written for the micro-
controller only performs the dedicated task of monitoring
the interlock status and writing commands to the RS232
interface. This ensures continuous, reliable and safe op-
eration once installed and does not require the user to
override its function.

II. METHODS

The principle of the interlock is a basic state machine,
the logic of which is shown in Fig. 1. If the enclosure in-
terlock switch opens, a serial command is sent to the laser
to immediately shut the mechanical shutter if it is open.
When the enclosure interlock is re-engaged, a physical
reset button on the interlock box must be pressed before
the laser shutter will open again. This ensures that the
user is active in controlling the safety aspects of the sys-
tem. A 20 ms loop that continuously checks the status of
the enclosure interlock was chosen over interrupt logic
due to severe bouncing in the interlock switch signal.
This loop duration is long enough to prevent rapid re-
peated actuation of the shutter due to this switch bounce.
It is also short enough to act on the same time scale as
the motion of the shutter and appear instantaneous to
the user; including the transmission of the serial data,
the shutter will always begin to close within 32 ms of the
enclosure interlock switch opening.

The ESP32 development board that controls the inter-
lock sits in a small box and is mounted on a bespoke PCB
that delivers +5 V DC power and breakout connections.
It is wired to both the enclosure interlock switch and the
laser power supply RS232 interface. A schematic of the
interlock circuit is shown in Fig. 2 and the values for
the components are listed in Table I. The ESP32 mon-
itors the status of the enclosure interlock via two of its
general-purpose input/output (GPIO) pins. For a ‘pas-
sive’ normally-open circuit, switch SW1 shorts to ground
when the enclosure interlock is shut. The GPIO pin 12
monitors this switch and is set to use an internally en-
abled pull-up resistor, so that the input is high when
the curtain is open and is low when the switch SW1 is
closed. A 1N4148 diode (D2) protects this input from
any accidental positive voltage input up to 100 V. If an
‘active’ enclosure interlock system is used (with a range
from +5VDC to +24VDC), then this is input via a sep-
arate socket (see Fig. 3). This active interlock voltage is
monitored by GPIO pin 26, which is protected by a 4.7 V
Zener diode (D3) as shown. The 10 kΩ resistor R3 limits
the current from the interlock supply while ensuring the

2

start

is the door/curtain open?

no

yes

is the shutter open?

yes

no

is the shutter open?

yes

shut the shutter

set reset flag 
to unready

did the handheld 
controller shut
 the shutter?

no

yes

wait 20 ms

no

no

has the reset button 
been pressed?

yes

open the shutter

reset button interrupt

loss of power interrupt

set reset flag
to ready

shut the shutter

Figure 1. A ﬂow diagram showing the logic of the state ma-
chine coded on the ESP32.

Zener diode is switched on.

Pin 13 is conﬁgured as an output and provides a signal
to an indicator LED (LED1) on the side of the box that
illuminates when the shutter is open.

Pin 27 monitors the ESP32 power supply. If it is pulled
low (eg by a +5 V DC power supply failure), the 1 mF ca-
pacitor (C1) across the power input holds enough charge
to ensure that a ﬁnal command can be sent to close the
shutter before the ESP32 stops operating. This feature
ensures that the interlock is fail-safe against accidental
loss of power.

Pin 14 is set with the pull-up resistor enabled and is
used to interrupt the code loop to indicate when the re-
set button is pressed. This interrupt ﬂag ensures that
open beam work cannot resume until the user intervenes
directly. The software allows the handheld laser con-
troller to be used normally while the enclosure interlock
is shut, however the ESP32 system overrides the manual
controller to ensure the shutter remains closed while the
enclosure is open.

Pins 22 and 23 are assigned respectively to receive and
transmit serial data. The serial interface of the ESP32
operates on normal transistor-transistor logic (TTL) lev-
els. The Millennia communicates over RS232, which
uses inverted high and low logic levels in the range

3

+5 V

+5 → +24 V

LED1

or
SW1

D2

R1

R2

SW2

D3

R3

C1

ESP32

D1

IO 27

IO 12

IO 13

IO 14

IO 26

VCC

IO 22

IO 23

GND

MAX3232

to Millennia Pro

(a)

(b)

Figure 2. The electrical schematic of the interlock. The dot-
ted grey boundary represents the box containing the ESP32,
MAX3232 IC, bespoke PCB and panel connectors. Both va-
rieties of enclosure interlock circuit (passive and active) are
shown with their respective switches on the left. The thick
grey arrow on the bottom right represents the RS232 cable
connected to the Millennia Pro power supply. The values for
the components are listed in Table I.

component
R1
R2
R3
C1
D1
D2
D3
LED1

value
150 Ω
10 kΩ
1 kΩ
1 mF
RR264M-400TR
1N4148W-7-F
MMSZ4688T1G
703-0090

Table I. Values for the components in Fig. 2.

±3 − 15 V [2]. The serial communication protocol of the
Millennia power supply operates at 9600 baud, with no
parity bit, 8 data bits, 1 stop bit and no hardware ﬂow
control (conﬁg SERIAL 8N1) [3]. To translate between
the TTL and RS232 protocols, a MAX3232 IC is used as
shown in Fig. 2.

It is important to note that there are several ESP32
development boards available that use diﬀerent pin-outs.
The bespoke PCB in this interlock is compatible with
the 38-pin NodeMCU ESP32 board. Its design is shown
in Fig. 3 (a), together with images of the ﬁnished in-
terlock box (b). The ESP32 is mounted onto the PCB
on two rows of header sockets, which serve to break-
out the GPIO pins to Molex KK 254 series connec-
tors. This modular design ensures that if the board, the
ESP32 or a port on the box fails, replacements can be in-
serted easily. The bill of materials (10.48420/20037140),

Figure 3. (a) The bespoke PCB front (red) and back (blue)
planes. (b) Pictures of the ﬁnished interlock box, measuring
9 × 6 × 4 cm.

ESP32 software (10.48420/20037176) and PCB design
ﬁles (10.48420/20037185) are all available online at their
respective DOIs.

III. DISCUSSION

The interlock system described in this design note was
built to ensure versatility, reliability and modularity. It
features two physical input ports for the enclosure inter-
lock switch, depending on whether the external circuit is
active or passive. If active, the system can accept any
voltage between 5 - 24V. The ESP32 platform is simple,
robust and low maintenance, with only periodic func-
tionality checks being required. Components are easily
swapped in case of failure. Although the software code is
written speciﬁcally for the Millennia Pro pump laser, sim-
ple edits are all that are required for it to be deployed on
any instrument that is controlled by serial software com-
mands. The interlock system described here costs around
£75 per unit, including the bespoke PCB manufactured
at a prototyping fabricator.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

Operational safely is the ﬁrst priority in any labora-
tory that uses high power laser systems. Engineered so-

lutions that are reliable, cost-eﬀective and practicable are
therefore essential for maximising uptime and project re-
sources. The interlock system described here can be im-
plemented with only a small degree of prior experience
in electronics, or it can even be used as an exercise to
develop the necessary skills in this area. These principles
are also easily conﬁgurable to enable hardware-triggered
automation in any similar laboratory device that uses an

4

RS232 interface.

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by the Engineering and Phys-
ical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), United King-
dom, through research grant EP/V027689/1. Thanks
are also given to Derrick Bradshaw in the PCB fabri-
cation lab of the University of Manchester Department
of Engineering for manufacturing the bespoke boards.

[1] Wes Chase, “Non-beam to the extreme!” in International
Laser Safety Conference (Laser Institute of America,
2019).

[2] Shawn, “RS232 vs TTL: Beginner guide to serial

communication,” https://www.seeedstudio.com/blog/
2019/12/11/

rs232-vs-ttl-beginner-guide-to-serial-communication
(2020), accessed 20/05/2022.

[3] Millennia Pro s-Series Diode-Pumped, CW Visible Laser
Systems, Spectra-Physics, 1335 Terra Bella Avenue,
Mountain View, CA 94043 (2005).

