Draft version June 16, 2022
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX631

Molecular Cloud Populations in the Context of Their Host Galaxy Environments:
A Multiwavelength Perspective

Jiayi Sun (孙嘉懿) , Adam K. Leroy, Erik Rosolowsky, Annie Hughes, Eva Schinnerer, Andreas Schruba,
Eric W. Koch, Guillermo A. Blanc, I-Da Chiang (江宜達) , Brent Groves, Daizhong Liu, Sharon Meidt,
Hsi-An Pan, J´erˆome Pety, Miguel Querejeta, Toshiki Saito, Karin Sandstrom, Amy Sardone, Antonio Usero,
Dyas Utomo, Thomas G. Williams, Ashley T. Barnes, Samantha M. Benincasa, Frank Bigiel,
Alberto D. Bolatto, M´ed´eric Boquien, M´elanie Chevance, Daniel A. Dale, Sinan Deger, Eric Emsellem,
Simon C. O. Glover, Kathryn Grasha, Jonathan D. Henshaw, Ralf S. Klessen, Kathryn Kreckel,
J. M. Diederik Kruijssen, Eve C. Ostriker And David A. Thilker

as part of the PHANGS collaboration

ABSTRACT
We present a rich, multiwavelength, multiscale database built around the PHANGS–ALMA CO (2–1)
survey and ancillary data. We use this database to present the distributions of molecular cloud popula-
tions and sub-galactic environments in 80 PHANGS galaxies, to characterize the relationship between
population-averaged cloud properties and host galaxy properties, and to assess key timescales relevant
to molecular cloud evolution and star formation. We show that PHANGS probes a wide range of
kpc-scale gas, stellar, and star formation rate (SFR) surface densities, as well as orbital velocities and
shear. The population-averaged cloud properties in each aperture correlate strongly with both local
environmental properties and host galaxy global properties. Leveraging a variable selection analysis,
we ﬁnd that the kpc-scale surface densities of molecular gas and SFR tend to possess the most pre-
dictive power for the population-averaged cloud properties. Once their variations are controlled for,
galaxy global properties contain little additional information, which implies that the apparent galaxy-
to-galaxy variations in cloud populations are likely mediated by kpc-scale environmental conditions.
We further estimate a suite of important timescales from our multiwavelength measurements. The
cloud-scale free-fall time and turbulence crossing time are ∼5−20 Myr, comparable to previous cloud
lifetime estimates. The timescales for orbital motion, shearing, and cloud–cloud collisions are longer,
∼100 Myr. The molecular gas depletion time is 1−3 Gyr and shows weak to no correlations with the
other timescales in our data. We publish our measurements online and expect them to have broad
utility to future studies of molecular clouds and star formation.

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

4
1

]

A
G
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
5
5
0
7
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Corresponding author: Jiayi Sun
sun208@mcmaster.ca

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

1. INTRODUCTION

Molecular clouds are deeply integrated with their host
galaxies by a number of intertwined physical processes.
The gas distribution, gravitational potential, radiation
ﬁeld, and feedback-driven ﬂows in the host galaxy reg-
ulate molecular cloud formation and evolution (Dobbs
et al. 2014; Ballesteros-Paredes et al. 2020). The inter-
nal structure and dynamical properties of these clouds in
turn set the initial conditions for star formation, which
over time reshapes the matter and radiation distribution
in the galaxy (McKee & Ostriker 2007; Padoan et al.
2014; Klessen & Glover 2016; Girichidis et al. 2020).
These complex interactions lead to strong, observable
correlations between the properties of molecular clouds
and the local and global properties of the host galaxy.
Characterizing these cloud–environment correlations is
thus a promising avenue for understanding the physics
governing molecular cloud evolution and, consequently,
star formation and galaxy evolution.

Observations of molecular clouds in our Galaxy and a
number of nearby galaxies have identiﬁed various empir-
ical trends manifesting such cloud–environment correla-
tions. Within a galaxy, molecular clouds located closer
to the galaxy center appear denser, more massive, and
more turbulent (e.g., Oka et al. 2001; Colombo et al.
2014; Freeman et al. 2017; Hirota et al. 2018; Miura et al.
2018; Brunetti et al. 2021, also see Heyer & Dame 2015).
Similar trends have been found in galaxy-scale numerical
simulations (e.g., Pan et al. 2015; Jeﬀreson et al. 2020;
Treß et al. 2021). Recent observational works also re-
port that more massive and actively star-forming galax-
ies tend to host clouds with typically larger sizes, masses,
surface densities, and velocity dispersions (Hughes et al.
2013a; Leroy et al. 2015, 2016; Schruba et al. 2019; Sun
et al. 2020a, but see Bolatto et al. 2008; Fukui & Kawa-
mura 2010; Donovan Meyer et al. 2013).

To proceed from the existing empirical knowledge to
more concrete understandings of the cloud–environment
correlations, major advances on two issues are necessary.
First, the characterization of environmental dependence
often stops at a qualitative level in the molecular cloud
literature: the “environments” are commonly deﬁned
in crude, categorical ways (e.g., galaxy centers, stellar
bars, spiral arms), and they are merely considered as
a secondary, moderating factor on the scaling relations
followed by molecular clouds. To better understand the
underlying physics, a more direct approach would be
to quantify the dependence of molecular cloud proper-
ties on a set of quantitative “environmental metrics,”
such as the local gas and stellar mass surface density,
star formation rate (SFR) surface density, and orbital
shear (e.g., Hughes et al. 2013a; Schruba et al. 2019).
Second, many previous works (especially earlier ones)
had to rely on observations in a small number of galax-
ies or sub-galactic regions, and thus only probed a lim-
ited range of host galaxy properties. While such case

studies could yield unique insights for speciﬁc targets,
only systematic surveys across large galaxy samples can
cover a wide, continuous range of host galaxy properties,
produce representative population statistics, and make
meaningful connections to galaxy evolution models.

The PHANGS–ALMA survey (Leroy et al. 2021a)
was designed to address both of these issues. This
survey provides sensitive, high resolution, wide ﬁeld-
of-view CO (2–1) imaging data for ∼90 nearby, high-
mass, star-forming galaxies. With these galaxies sam-
pled uniformly along the star-forming main sequence,
PHANGS–ALMA enables systematic studies of giant
molecular clouds (GMCs; M (cid:38) 105 M(cid:12)) across an ar-
ray of environments where most stars form in the local
universe. Furthermore, a rich set of multiwavelength an-
cillary data furnishes a multifaceted depiction of these
host galaxies, making it possible to study their molecu-
lar cloud populations in full environmental context.

Indeed, one of the core science goals that motivated
the PHANGS–ALMA survey was to characterize the de-
pendence of molecular cloud populations on global and
local galaxy properties. Studies on this data set have
presented population statistics for key molecular cloud
properties such as mass, size, surface density, velocity
dispersion, and virial parameter (Sun et al. 2018, 2020a;
Rosolowsky et al. 2021, A. Hughes et al. in preparation).
They also noted signiﬁcant variations among galaxies
and across morphological regions within galaxies (e.g.,
centers, bars). In the direct predecessor of this paper,
Sun et al. (2020b) conducted a joint analysis on the
PHANGS–ALMA CO data and multiwavelength ancil-
lary data. They showed that the variations in molecular
gas turbulent pressure can be attributed to the dynami-
cal balance between gravity and internal/external pres-
sure in the gas, as previously argued in Galactic and
extragalactic molecular cloud studies (e.g., Field et al.
2011; Hughes et al. 2013a; Schruba et al. 2019).

In this paper, we directly address this core science
goal of the PHANGS–ALMA survey. We build on
a cross-spatial-scale analysis framework used by Sun
et al. (2020b) and calculate population statistics for the
molecular cloud properties measured in Sun et al. (2018,
2020a); Rosolowsky et al. (2021); and A. Hughes et al.
(in preparation). We further cross-match them with a
large suite of environmental metrics depicting the lo-
cal gas and stellar mass distribution, orbital kinematics,
morphological structures, and star formation activities
in the host galaxy. This allows us to (1) present the
full range of cloud populations and host galaxy envi-
ronments captured by PHANGS–ALMA, (2) delineate
the quantitative relationships between cloud character-
istics (e.g., mass, surface density, velocity dispersion)
and environmental metrics (e.g., gas, star, and SFR sur-
face densities), and (3) identify a subset of relationships
that carry unique explanatory/predictive power among
all the observed cloud–environment correlations.

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

3

Another goal of this paper is to present a set of
machine-readable data tables that consolidate all the
aforementioned measurements from PHANGS-ALMA
and ancillary surveys. These high-level data products
have already been used in a number of studies. Her-
rera et al. (2020) and Barnes et al. (2021) have utilized
previous versions of these tables to quantitatively assess
several physical mechanisms relevant to molecular cloud
and H ii region evolution, including stellar feedback and
pressure balance. Several ongoing works also rely on
these tables to calculate the star formation eﬃciency and
its link to small-scale turbulence, orbital shear, and disk
instabilities (E. Rosolowsky et al. in preparation; J. Sun
et al. in preparation; T. Williams et al. in preparation).
In this paper, we also utilize the measurements in these
tables to calculate a suite of characteristic timescales re-
lated to the gravity, turbulent motions, orbital motions,
and star formation rate of molecular clouds. The ratios
among these timescales provide unique constraints on
the viable mechanisms regulating molecular cloud evolu-
tion and star formation (also see e.g., Wong 2009; Jeﬀre-
son & Kruijssen 2018; Kruijssen et al. 2019a; Chevance
et al. 2020a,b; Kim et al. 2021a).

The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2
describes our galaxy sample and the sources of all data
we use. Section 3 elaborates the cross-spatial-scale anal-
ysis framework we use to assemble the multiwavelength
measurements into a coherent data structure. Section 4
presents the distribution of various molecular cloud pop-
ulation properties and sub-galactic environmental prop-
erties measured in this work, and Section 5 characterizes
the correlations between these two types of measure-
ments. To demonstrate an application scenario of our
rich multiwavelength measurements, Section 6 presents
a set of characteristic timescales relevant to molecular
cloud evolution and star formation. Finally, Section 7
summarizes all our ﬁndings.

2. DATA

In this paper, we focus on a sample of 80 galax-
ies (see Table A1) selected from the full PHANGS–
ALMA survey sample (90 galaxies; see Leroy et al.
2021a). We select these galaxies according to two cri-
teria: (1) their PHANGS–ALMA CO (2–1) observations
have beam full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) sizes cor-
responding to physical scales of 150 pc or smaller, so
that each beam roughly probes a GMC-sized molecular
gas structure; and (2) they are not too heavily inclined
(i (cid:46) 75◦), so that we can unambiguously determine the
locations of molecular clouds in the host galaxy. A sub-
set of 28 galaxies in this sample already appeared in
Sun et al. (2020b), where they utilized earlier versions
of the same observational data sets and data analysis
infrastructure.

In addition to the PHANGS–ALMA CO data, our tar-
get galaxies have abundant multiwavelength coverage,
including radio, mid-/near-infrared (MIR/NIR), opti-

cal, and near-/far-ultraviolet (NUV/FUV) data (Sec-
tions 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, and 2.7). High-level measurements
such as CPROPS object catalogs created from CO data
cubes (Rosolowsky et al. 2021), rotation curves derived
from CO line kinematics (Lang et al. 2020), and morpho-
logical feature masks constructed from near-IR images
(Querejeta et al. 2021) are also available for most tar-
gets (Sections 2.1.1, 2.5, and 2.6). These rich ancillary
data provide us with comprehensive information about
the multiphase ISM, stellar disk structures, star forma-
tion, and galactic dynamical properties on (cid:46) kpc scales
for our target galaxies.

In the following subsections, we detail the sources and
characteristics of all raw data and high-level data prod-
ucts used in this study. We provide a schematic sum-
mary of these input data at the top of Figure 1.

2.1. PHANGS–ALMA CO Data
We use the PHANGS–ALMA CO (2–1) imaging data1
(Leroy et al. 2021a) to probe molecular gas properties
on (cid:46)150 pc scales. These data cover the actively star-
forming area in each galaxy (∼100 kpc2 on average) and
have suﬃcient depth and resolving power to detect and
isolate the CO emission from individual GMCs (with a
typical mass of (cid:38) 105 M(cid:12)). They include both interfero-
metric and single dish observations and thus provide sen-
sitivity to emission on all spatial scales. We refer inter-
ested readers to Leroy et al. (2021a) for more details re-
garding sample selection, observational setup, and data
product characteristics, and Leroy et al. (2021b) for an
in-depth description of data calibration, imaging, and
product creation procedures.

In this study, we measure properties of molecular
cloud populations from the PHANGS–ALMA CO data
using two diﬀerent approaches. The ﬁrst approach mea-
sures molecular gas properties “object-by-object.” In
this case, the objects of interest are identiﬁed by ap-
plying the cloud segmentation algorithm CPROPS to
the PHANGS–ALMA CO data cubes (Rosolowsky &
Leroy 2006; Rosolowsky et al. 2021, A. Hughes et al. in
preparation). The second approach treats the molecu-
lar gas as a spatially continuous medium and extracts
measurement in a “pixel-by-pixel” fashion directly from
the PHANGS–ALMA CO line moment maps, where the
beam size corresponds roughly to the typical size of an
individual GMC or giant molecular association (Leroy
et al. 2016; Sun et al. 2018, 2020a).

While the two approaches access similar physical prop-
erties and often lead to similar results (see Sun et al.
2020a; Rosolowsky et al. 2021), they complement each
other in important ways. The object-by-object approach
treats each identiﬁed object as a fundamental struc-
tural unit, and by providing size estimates for these

1 We use PHANGS–ALMA internal data release v4, which corre-

sponds to the ﬁrst full public release.

4

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

Figure 1.
within this paper, we also note the section number relevant to each input data product and output quantities.

Schematics of the data sources, aggregation methods, and the derived physical quantities. For easier navigation

objects it probes the spatial organization of molecular
gas. The pixel-by-pixel method instead treats each res-
olution element as a fundamental unit, which preserves
information from the smallest recoverable scale while
remaining agnostic about the organization of the gas
on larger scales. When presenting our measurements in
Section 4, we compare the two approaches to illustrate
how methodological choices could inﬂuence the main re-
sults.

2.1.1. Object-by-object Measurements

We extract a set of molecular gas measurements
for each object tabulated in the PHANGS–ALMA
CPROPS catalogs2 (Rosolowsky et al. 2021, A. Hughes
et al. in preparation). These catalogs are constructed by
running CPROPS (Rosolowsky & Leroy 2006) on data
cubes at a set of common spatial resolutions (60, 90, 120,
and 150 pc whenever available). Note that A. Hughes
et al. (in preparation) present two versions of CPROPS
catalogs for the PHANGS-ALMA sample: one is con-
structed from data cubes whose noise levels are homog-
enized among all galaxies, and the other from data cubes
with the native noise. We use the latter version in this
paper, because (a) we would like to compare the object-

by-object measurements to the corresponding pixel-by-
pixel ones, which were derived from the original data
cubes without noise homogenization; and (b) we would
like to recover as much CO emission above the noise
ﬂoor as possible.

For each object identiﬁed by the CPROPS algo-
rithm, the catalog records its integrated CO line lu-
minosity, LCO, obj, CO line width, σCO, obj, and the
two-dimensional projected radius on the sky3, R2D, obj.
These numbers are calculated after radially extrapo-
lating each object to a hypothetical boundary at 0 K
brightness temperature and then deconvolving the beam
size and channel width. From these basic observables,
we estimate the following physical properties for each
object:

• Molecular gas mass, Mobj. This is derived from the
integrated CO (2–1) line luminosity LCO, obj (in units
of K km s−1 pc2) via

Mobj = αCO(1–0)R−1

21 LCO, obj .

(1)

Here R21 = 0.65 is the adopted CO (2–1) to CO (1–0)
line ratio (den Brok et al. 2021; Leroy et al. 2021c),
and αCO(1–0) is a varying CO-to-H2 conversion factor

2 We use the v4 resolution-matched catalogs as described in

A. Hughes et al. (in preparation).

3 This radius is deﬁned as the geometrical mean of the ﬁtted
semi-major and semi-minor axes for each identiﬁed object (see
Rosolowsky et al. 2021).

Output DatabaseHI21cm Line(VLA & ATCA)Moment Maps(§2.2)Localized (kpc-scale) Host GalaxyEnvironmental Metrics (§3.3)Molecular Cloud Population Average Properties (§3.2)Pixel-based StatisticsObject-based StatisticsGalactic Orbital KinematicsAtomicGas Mass Surface DensityStellarMass Surface DensitySFRSurface DensityMorphologicalEnvironmentAssignmentMolecular Gas Mass Surface DensityCO (2-1) Line(ALMA)Moment Maps(§2.1.2)CPROPS Catalogs(§2.1.1)Rotation Curves(§2.5)H⍺Line(du Pont & MPG/ESO)Cleaned Images(§2.7)UV(GALEX)Cleaned Images(§2.4)Mid-IR(WISE)Cleaned Images(§2.4)Near-IR(WISE & IRAC)Cleaned Images(§2.3)Environ.Masks(§2.6)Mass-weighted Ensemble AverageModelInterpolationArea-weightedRegion AverageCO Signal Location BookkeepingMolecular Clouds in Environmental Context

5

for the CO (1–0) line. By default, we use a metallicity-
dependent αCO prescription as described in Sun et al.
(2020b):

αCO(1–0) = 4.35 Z (cid:48)−1.6 M(cid:12) (K km s−1 pc2)−1 . (2)

Here, Z (cid:48) is the inferred local gas phase abundance
normalized to the solar value (see Section 3.3). While
we use Equation 2 as our ﬁducial prescription, we
also calculate αCO using several alternative prescrip-
tions and include them in the data products (see Ap-
pendix B).

• Molecular gas surface density, Σobj. This is derived

from Mobj and R2D, obj via

Σobj =

1
2 Mobj

πR2

2D, obj

cos i =

Mobj

2πR2

2D, obj

cos i .

(3)

Following Rosolowsky et al. (2021), this estimate as-
sumes a two-dimensional Gaussian proﬁle for the pro-
jected gas mass distribution and focuses on the area
within a FWHM, which includes half of the total gas
mass. The cos i term accounts for galaxy inclination
(see Table A1) by correcting the derived surface den-
sities to face-on projection. This correction was not
present in the formulae used by Rosolowsky et al.
(2021) and previous similar work. We motivate this
correction in Appendix C.

• One-dimensional velocity dispersion, σobj. This is de-
rived from the measured CO line width σCO, obj via

assumes a spheroidal geometry when the object diam-
eter on the sky exceeds this line-of-sight depth, and a
spherical geometry otherwise. This is similar to the
treatments in Rosolowsky et al. (2021), except that
here we also correct for galaxy inclination (also see
Appendix C).

Our adopted value for H is likely uncertain by a
factor of ∼ 2 due to variations within a galaxy and
among galaxies (e.g., Yim et al. 2014; Bacchini et al.
2019). Systematic trends with galactocentric radius
and global galaxy mass are also expected. A ﬁxed
value of H = 100 pc cannot capture these variations,
which means that our inferred Robj values (and any
measurements that rely on them, see bullet points be-
low) are aﬀected accordingly. Nevertheless, the func-
tional form of Equation 5 suggests that at most 1/3
of the fractional uncertainty on H will propagate to
Robj, which would only be marginally signiﬁcant in
comparison to other sources of systematic uncertain-
ties (see discussions in Section 4.2 and Appendix E).

• Turbulent pressure, Pturb, obj. This is derived from

Mobj, σobj, and Robj via

Pturb, obj ≡ ρobjσ2

obj =

1
2 Mobj
4
3 πR3

obj

σ2
obj =

3Mobjσ2
8πR3

obj

obj

.

(6)
Here the mean density ρobj is derived from Robj and
the mass within the FWHM of a two-dimensional
Gaussian proﬁle (Equation 16 in Rosolowsky et al.
2021).

σobj = σCO, obj(cos i)0.5 .

(4)

• Virial parameter, αvir, obj. This is derived from Mobj,

comes

from the

Here σCO, obj
second moment
(moment-2) of the CO line proﬁle and is corrected
for broadening due to the line spread function (LSF;
see Rosolowsky et al. 2021). The extra (cos i)0.5 term
is an empirically determined correction that accounts
for the dependence of the observed CO line width on
galaxy inclination. Appendix C details the origin of
this term and the rationale for including it here.

In the following discussions, we will assume that
σobj is dominated by turbulent motions, though this
measurement will
include additional contributions
from thermal or ordered, streaming motions. Funda-
mentally, it reﬂects the velocity dispersion along the
line of sight direction within each object.

• Three-dimensional mean radius, Robj. This quantity

is inferred from R2D, obj via

(cid:34)

Robj = min

(cid:114)
R2D, obj, 3

R2

2D, obj

(cid:35)

H
2 cos i

.

(5)

Here H = 100 pc is an assumed molecular gas disk
thickness perpendicular to the galaxy plane (Heyer
& Dame 2015), and H
cos i would be the expected line-
of-sight depth given the disk inclination. Equation 5

σobj, and Robj via

αvir, obj ≡

2Ekin
|Egrav|

=

5 σ2
G( 1

objRobj
2 Mobj)

=

10 σ2

objRobj

GMobj

. (7)

This formula is derived by calculating the kinetic en-
ergy (Ekin) and gravitational potential energy (Egrav)
for the gas within the two-dimensional FWHM size,
assuming a uniform density distribution (consistent
with Rosolowsky et al. 2021). With this deﬁnition, a
virialized object would have αvir, obj = 1, whereas an
object in energy equipartition would have αvir, obj = 2.
But we note that the virial parameter estimated in
this way might not be a complete description of cloud
dynamical states if there are strong magnetic ﬁeld,
surface pressure, or external tidal forces (see discus-
sions in, e.g., Ballesteros-Paredes 2006; Sun et al.
2020b; Kim et al. 2021b; Liu et al. 2021).

2.1.2. Pixel-by-pixel Measurements

As an alternative to the object-by-object approach, we
also derive molecular gas properties at ﬁxed spatial reso-
lutions (60, 90, 120, and 150 pc whenever available) mea-
sured pixel-by-pixel from the PHANGS–ALMA CO mo-
ment maps (see Sun et al. 2018, 2020a). The PHANGS-

6

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

ALMA data reduction pipeline (Leroy et al. 2021b) pro-
duces two versions of moment maps: a “broad” ver-
sion that prioritizes high CO ﬂux completeness through
highly inclusive signal masking, and a “strict” version
that features high signal-to-noise (S/N) CO line moment
measurements thanks to more restrictive masking. For
our pixel-by-pixel analysis, we primarily use the “strict”
moment maps so that only pixels with reliable measure-
ments are included in our calculation. To account for
the lower CO ﬂux completeness of the “strict” maps,
we later estimate their ﬂux completeness by comparing
the “strict” and “broad” maps, and further correct for
sensitivity-induced biases (see Section 3.2.2).

The “strict,” beam-matched moment maps provide
CO line integrated intensity (moment-0), ICO, pix, CO
line eﬀective width (see Heyer et al. 2001), σCO, pix, and
their associated uncertainties for every pixel with de-
tected CO emission. From these basic observables, we
derive a set of molecular gas physical properties mirror-
ing those from the object-by-object approach, and es-
timate their statistical uncertainties through Gaussian
error propagation:

• Molecular gas surface density, Σpix. This quantity
is derived from the integrated CO (2–1) line intensity
ICO, pix (in units of K km s−1) for each pixel, via

Σpix = αCO(1–0)R−1

21 ICO, pix cos i .

(8)

Here R21 and αCO(1–0) represent the adopted CO
line ratio and CO (1–0)-to-H2 conversion factor as in
Equation 1. The same cos i inclination correction
from Equation 3 also applies here.

• Molecular gas mass, Mpix. We also record the total

molecular gas mass captured in each beam4 via

Mpix = αCO(1–0)R−1

21 ICO, pixAbeam .

(9)

Here Abeam = (π/4 ln 2)D2
beam is the eﬀective area of
the beam with a FWHM of Dbeam (i.e., 60, 90, 120,
or 150 pc). No inclination correction is required here
since both ICO, pix and Abeam are measured/deﬁned
in the projected plane of the sky.

• One-dimensional velocity dispersion, σpix. This quan-
tity is derived from the LSF-corrected CO line width
σCO, pix in each pixel and uses the same inclination
correction as Equation 4:

σpix = σCO, pix(cos i)0.5 .

(10)

4 Since the beam is usually over-sampled by the pixel grid in ob-
servational data, in theory Mpix should only be derived for each
independent beam (rather than for each pixel) in order to con-
serve the total molecular gas mass budget.
In this work, we
only use Mpix as an intermediate quantity to derive other pixel-
based measurements, and none of these measurements requires
an accurate gas mass accounting. Therefore, we do not explicitly
distinguish between measurements per beam versus per pixel.

Here σCO, pix represents the CO line eﬀective width,
which is a diﬀerent line width metric than the one
based on the second moment used in Equation 4. The
eﬀective width is a more robust line width metric than
moment-2 at low S/N, but it could give biased results
when there are multiple velocity components along
the line of sight (Henshaw et al. 2020).

• Three-dimensional mean radius, Rpix. We adopt the
following three-dimensional size for the gas structure
captured in each beam, mirroring Equation 5:

(cid:34)

Rpix = min

Dbeam
2

(cid:114)
, 3

D2

beamH
8 cos i

(cid:35)

.

(11)

Again, the cos i term accounts for galaxy inclination
by converting the molecular gas disk thickness (per-
pendicular to the galaxy plane) to the depth along
the line of sight. Note that Equation 11 yields a sin-
gle Rpix value for each given beam size.

• Turbulent pressure, Pturb, pix. This is derived from

Σpix and σpix via

Pturb, pix ≡ ρpixσ2

pix =

3Mpixσ2
4πR3

pix

pix

.

(12)

This assumes that the gas mass captured in each
beam is uniformly distributed within a radius of Rpix.
This is consistent with the geometrical assumptions
adopted in previous studies (e.g., Sun et al. 2020b),
yet it leads to an inconsistency with the object-based
approach (Equation 6). We comment on this issue in
Section 2.1.3.

• Virial parameter, αvir, pix. This is derived from Σpix

and σpix via

αvir, pix ≡

2Ekin
|Egrav|

=

5 σ2

pixRpix
GMpix

.

(13)

This also assumes a spherical geometry and a uni-
form density distribution within Rpix. Similar to the
situation with our turbulent pressure estimates, the
geometrical assumptions here are not fully consistent
with those adopted for the object-based analysis (see
Section 2.1.3 for further comments).

2.1.3. Notes on the Common Grounds and Diﬀerences

between the Object-based and Pixel-base Approaches

The object-based and pixel-based approaches show an
apparent symmetry, in the sense that they have many
measured quantities in common, such as molecular gas
surface density, velocity dispersion, turbulent pressure,
and virial parameter. This allows us to make direct com-
parisons between the two approaches and assess how our
methodological choices might inﬂuence the quantitative
results. However, it is worth emphasizing that, for sev-
eral reasons, we do not necessarily expect the two ap-
proaches to yield exactly the same quantitative results.

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

7

First and foremost, the two approaches are motivated
by two slightly diﬀerent views for the structure and ge-
ometry of the molecular ISM in galaxies. The object-
based approach views the molecular ISM as a collection
of dense, centrally concentrated structures, and the cen-
tral goal of the CPROPS algorithm is to segment the
observed CO emission distribution such that each identi-
ﬁed CO-emitting object corresponds to a coherent struc-
ture like a GMC or a giant molecular association. The
pixel-based approach instead views the molecular ISM
as a continuous distribution of gas while being agnostic
about its spatial clustering, and the measurement pro-
cess simply characterizes the gas captured in each beam.
In a sense, the two approaches see the same observa-
tional data through diﬀerent lenses, and each attempts
to extract measurable properties in a way that is most
consistent with its adopted view.

Reﬂecting these diﬀerent views, there are also impor-
tant, practical diﬀerences in the methodologies between
these two approaches, which make it non-trivial to draw
direct comparisons between them.
In particular, the
object-based approach aims to measure the true size and
mass of each identiﬁed object by deconvolving the beam
and extrapolating the detected part of each object to a
hypothetical boundary at 0 K brightness temperature.
Such operations could in principle account for biases due
to the ﬁnite resolution and sensitivity of the observa-
tions, but they are implicitly model-dependent and not
easily adaptable to ﬁt the pixel-based approach.

The distinct physical models underlying these two ap-
proaches are also reﬂected in the diﬀerent auxiliary as-
sumptions they adopt when calculating physical quan-
tities. The object-based approach assumes compact,
Gaussian-shaped gas distributions and calculate gas sur-
face density, turbulent pressure, and virial parameter for
only the half of the gas located within the Gaussian
FWHM (Equations 3–7, consistent with Rosolowsky
et al. 2021). In contrary, the pixel-based approach con-
siders all the gas mass detected in each beam and as-
sumes it is uniformly distributed within the beam area
(Equations 12–13, in line with Sun et al. 2018, 2020a).
Considering these complications, we do not necessarily
expect the two approaches to agree in their quantitative
results, even though we start from the same CO data
cubes and attempt to deﬁne measurable properties in a
symmetric way.

2.2. H i Data
We use interferometric H i 21 cm line data to trace
the distribution of neutral atomic gas in each galaxy.
These include both new and archival observations taken
by the Karl G. Jansky Very Large Array (VLA) and the
Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA).

Among the 53 galaxies with H i data (see Table A1), 20
have been observed as part of the PHANGS–VLA sur-
vey (A. Sardone et al. in preparation). The other galax-
ies have archival data from either large nearby galaxy

surveys such as THINGS (nine galaxies; Walter et al.
2008), VIVA (six galaxies; Chung et al. 2009), HERA-
CLES (four galaxies; Leroy et al. 2009), LVHIS (three
galaxies; Koribalski et al. 2018), EveryTHINGS (two
galaxies; I. Chiang et al. in preparation), or individ-
ual case studies with the VLA (seven galaxies) and the
ATCA (two galaxies; Murugeshan et al. 2019). These
H i data sets have typical angular resolution of 15(cid:48)(cid:48)−35(cid:48)(cid:48)
(16−84 percentile), which corresponds to linear scales
of 0.7−2.8 kpc (see Section 3.3 for further discussions
about H i data resolution). The 3σ sensitivity limit
ranges 10−100 K km s−1 for the H i line intensity.

Assuming optically thin 21 cm emission, we convert
21 cm line intensity I21cm to atomic gas surface density
Σatom via

Σatom
M(cid:12) pc−2 = 2.0 × 10−2

(cid:18) I21cm

(cid:19)

K km s−1

cos i .

(14)

Here Σatom includes the (extra 35%) mass of helium and
heavier elements. The cos i term accounts for galaxy
inclination.

2.3. Near-IR Data

We use near-IR imaging data from the Spitzer Space
Telescope and the Wide-ﬁeld Infrared Survey Explorer
(WISE) to trace the old stellar mass distribution (see
Table A1, column 8). For 61 galaxies in our sample, we
use Spitzer IRAC 3.6 µm images from the S4G survey
(Sheth et al. 2010). For those without S4G data, we in-
stead use WISE W1 band (3.4 µm) images compiled by
the z0MGS project (Leroy et al. 2019). All these data
are postprocessed by subtracting background emission,
masking foreground stars in the ﬁeld of view, and con-
volving the non-Gaussian point spread function (PSF)
to a 7.5(cid:48)(cid:48) Gaussian PSF using appropriate convolution
kernels (Aniano et al. 2011).

We convert the stellar continuum intensity at 3.4 µm
and 3.6 µm to stellar mass surface density, Σ(cid:63), location-
by-location via

Σ(cid:63)

M(cid:12) pc−2 = 350

Σ(cid:63)

M(cid:12) pc−2 = 330

(cid:18) Υ3.4 µm
0.5
(cid:18) Υ3.4 µm
0.5

(cid:19) (cid:18) I3.6 µm
MJy sr−1
(cid:19) (cid:18) I3.4 µm
MJy sr−1

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

cos i ,

(15)

cos i .

(16)

Here, Υ3.4 µm is the stellar mass-to-light (M/L) ratio
at 3.4 µm, which should be nearly identical to that at
3.6 µm. We adopt a spatially varying M/L ratio, which
was estimated by Leroy et al. (2021a) for all PHANGS-
ALMA targets based on an empirical relation between
Υ3.4 µm and the local SFR surface density to 3.4 µm
surface brightness ratio.

2.4. Mid-IR and UV Data

We use mid-IR images from WISE and far-/near-UV
images from the Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX)

8

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

to trace the distribution of obscured and unobscured
star formation. These data are also compiled by the
z0MGS project (Leroy et al. 2019) and have been post-
processed by subtracting background emission, masking
foreground stars, reprojecting to a shared astrometry,
and then convolving to a 15(cid:48)(cid:48) Gaussian PSF.

We combine the mid-IR and UV data and calcu-
late the local star formation rate (SFR) surface den-
sity following the prescriptions described in Leroy et al.
(2021a). By default we use the combination of GALEX
FUV (154 nm) and WISE 22 µm data to calculate the
local SFR surface density

ΣSFR
M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2 =

(cid:18)

8.9 × 10−2

+ 3.0 × 10−3

I154 nm
MJy sr−1
I22 µm
MJy sr−1

(cid:19)

cos i .

(17)

For galaxies that do not have FUV data (see Table A1,
column 9), we instead combine GALEX NUV (231 nm)
and WISE 22 µm data (when NUV is available) or use
the WISE data alone (when NUV is not available either)
to calculate SFR surface density

ΣSFR
M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2 =

(cid:18)

8.9 × 10−2

+ 2.6 × 10−3

I231 nm
MJy sr−1
I22 µm
MJy sr−1

(cid:19)

cos i ,

(18)

ΣSFR

M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2 = 3.8 × 10−3

(cid:18) I22 µm

(cid:19)

MJy sr−1

cos i .

(19)

These prescriptions assume a Chabrier initial mass func-
tion (IMF; Chabrier 2003) via their calibration against
Salim et al. (2016), which is also consistent within
≈ 5% with calibrations using a Kroupa IMF (Kroupa
2001). The quantitative results agree with extinction-
corrected Hα-based SFR estimates from the PHANGS–
MUSE survey (Emsellem et al. 2021, F. Belﬁore et al.
in preparation) at a ∼20−30% level overall, but there is
divergence in low SFR regions due to contributions from
IR cirrus and/or old stellar populations (Boquien et al.
2016). We refer the reader to Leroy et al. (2021a) for
more details on the calibration of these SFR prescrip-
tions.

2.5. Rotation Curves

We use rotation curves derived from CO line kinemat-
ics by Lang et al. (2020) to characterize galactic orbital
kinematics (e.g., orbital period and shear) locally within
each galaxy. These rotation curves are measured from
the same PHANGS–ALMA CO data set, and therefore
cover roughly the same galactocentric radius range as
the CO maps themselves. They are available for 62 out
of the 80 galaxies.

The rotation curves in Lang et al. (2020) are measured
and recorded with ﬁnite radial bin sizes (∼150 pc). Due
to the sparse distribution of CO detections across the
ﬁeld of view and the likely presence of unaccounted lo-
cal streaming motions in the gas, the measured circular
velocity sometimes ﬂuctuates considerably between ad-
jacent radial bins. These bin-to-bin ﬂuctuations make
it challenging to reliably estimate any parameter that
depends on the derivative of the rotation curves.

To address this issue, we use a set of functional ﬁt-
ting models constructed from the measured rotation
curves (J. Nofech et al.
in preparation) rather than
the raw measurements themselves. These ﬁtting mod-
els adopt the “universal rotation curve” functional form
suggested by Persic et al. (1996). The ﬁtting process ef-
fectively forces the rotation curve models to be smooth
and have physically sensible slopes (i.e., with its loga-
rithmic derivative between -0.5 and 1), while still match-
ing the actual measurements as closely as possible. We
visually inspect all ﬁtting results and conclude that the
models represent the raw measurements reasonably well.
Based on these best-ﬁt analytical models of the CO
rotation curves and the estimated uncertainties on the
model parameters, we extract at each radius the circular
velocity, Vcirc, the corresponding angular velocity, Ωcirc,
the logarithmic derivative of the rotation curve

β =

d ln Vcirc
d ln rgal

,

(20)

and Oort’s A parameter

AOort =

1
2

Ωcirc(1 − β) .

(21)

These parameters (and their associated uncertainties)
will be used to describe the local galactic dynamical
properties at various locations within the target galax-
ies.

2.6. Morphological Environment Masks

We use the environment masks presented in Quere-
jeta et al. (2021) to distinguish diﬀerent morphological
regions in each galaxy. These masks are constructed
based on structural decomposition analysis and visual
inspection of the IRAC 3.6 µm data (also see Herrera-
Endoqui et al. 2015; Salo et al. 2015). The full set of
environment masks mark the area covered by morpho-
logical features such as galaxy centers, stellar bars, spiral
arms, rings, and lenses (see the last panel in Figure 2).
The typical width of these environmental masks are set
by the physical extent of the corresponding morpholog-
ical features, which are often (cid:38) 1 kpc wide for stellar
bars and spiral arms but can be much narrower for the
other features.

In this work, we primarily use these masks to divide
each galaxy into two types of environment: the area
that falls into galaxy centers and stellar bars (referred

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

9

to as “center/bar” hereafter), and the remaining outer
disk area (“disk” hereafter). We make this distinction
because we expect the physical conditions inﬂuencing
GMCs to be diﬀerent between these two regimes: the
“center/bar” environment often sees galactic dynam-
ics (i.e., gravitational torque and shear) playing a more
prominent role, and in some galaxies AGN feedback can
signiﬁcantly impact the molecular gas in its central re-
gion.

2.7. Other Data

In addition to what has been described above, we also
include measurements derived from other data sets in
the analysis. These measurements are not presented
among the main scientiﬁc results in this paper, but they
are part of our ﬁnal data products and they have ap-
peared in publications that used our data products (e.g.,
Querejeta et al. 2021).

We use continuum-subtracted, narrow-band Hα imag-
ing data to provide alternative estimates of star forma-
tion rate in 60 out of our 80 targets. These observations
were obtained as part of the PHANGS–Hα survey5 by
either the Wide Field Imager (WFI) on the ESO/MPG
2.2-m Telescope or the Direct CCD on the CIS 2.5-m
Ir´en´ee du Pont Telescope (A. Razza et al. in prepara-
tion). The narrow-band Hα data have been calibrated
astrometrically and photometrically, corrected for sky
emission, and masked for foreground stars; the contin-
uum contribution was removed based on the associated
R-band observations; and the continuum-subtracted
data were further corrected for ﬁlter transmission and
[N ii] contamination.

We combine Hα data with WISE 22 µm data to derive
an attenuation-corrected SFR surface density following
Calzetti et al. (2007) and Murphy et al. (2011):

ΣSFR
M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2 =

(cid:18)

2.7 × 1013

+ 2.7 × 10−3

IHα
erg s−1 cm−2 arcsec−2
(cid:19)

I22 µm
MJy sr−1

cos i ,

(22)

This prescription assumes constant star formation over
100 Myr and a Kroupa IMF (Kroupa 2001). Given that
the Hα data and WISE data have very diﬀerent angular
resolution (∼1(cid:48)(cid:48) versus 15(cid:48)(cid:48)), we ﬁrst convolve the Hα
images to the WISE resolution and estimate ΣSFR via
Equation 22. Then we determine the spatially varying
ΣSFR-to-Hα ratio at that coarser resolution and multiply
it to the native resolution Hα images to get the ﬁnal,
high resolution ΣSFR maps. This approach ensures that
the average ΣSFR value over a large area converges to
the expectation from Equation 22.

3. CROSS-SPATIAL-SCALE ANALYSIS

We adopt a “cross-spatial-scale” analysis framework
to connect molecular cloud properties (measured on
60−150 pc scales) to galactic environmental properties
(mostly measured on ∼kpc scales). This analysis frame-
work is inspired by a number of previous works (e.g.,
Sandstrom et al. 2013; Leroy et al. 2016). Brieﬂy, we
divide the sky footprint of each galaxy into a set of av-
eraging apertures, within which we aggregate high res-
olution molecular gas measurements to characterize the
underlying cloud population. We also attempt to build a
full inventory of ancillary measurements to characterize
various aspects of the host galaxy itself. In this way, we
assemble the diverse set of observational data described
in Section 2 into a coherent, multiwavelength database.
An early version of this database was constructed by
Sun et al. (2020b), with its subsequently improved ver-
sions used in several publications (e.g., Herrera et al.
2020; Jeﬀreson et al. 2020; Barnes et al. 2021; Querejeta
et al. 2021; Stuber et al. 2021). The source code for
database construction, including generic tools for aggre-
gating measurements from maps and catalogs into the
existing database, is available on GitHub6, and a copy
of the version used in this article is published on Zenodo
(Sun 2022).

3.1. Deﬁning Averaging Apertures

We divide the sky footprint of each galaxy into a set
of hexagonal apertures, as illustrated in Figure 2. These
apertures form a regular tiling in the plane of the sky,
with a “central” aperture positioned right at the galaxy
center. Adjacent apertures are separated by a linear dis-
tance of 1.5 kpc, which implies that each aperture has
a projected area of 1.95 kpc2 on the sky. The conﬁgu-
ration of the hexagonal apertures here is analogous to
the “solution pixels” used in Sandstrom et al. (2013),
except that the apertures in the current work do not
overlap with each other.

For a complete coverage of the galaxy footprint, we
include all apertures covering out to rgal = 1.5r25 in
each galaxy, where r25 is the galaxy radius deﬁned by
its 25 mag/arcsec2 isophote (in B band; see Table A1).
This way, the constructed database for each galaxy in-
cludes almost all valid measurements from all data sets
described in Section 2. However, this work focuses on
the correlation of molecular clouds and their galactic en-
vironments, and thus we will only present results from a
subset of apertures that enclose non-zero signals in the
PHANGS-ALMA CO moment maps.

In addition to the hexagonal tiling method described
above, we also run a parallel line of analysis with a dif-
ferent binning scheme. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne a series of
radial bins that are 500 pc in width and again cover out

5 We use PHANGS–Hα internal data release version 2.3.

6 https://github.com/PhangsTeam/MegaTable

10

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

Figure 2. This ﬁgure showcases a subset of the multiwavelength data that we assemble for the galaxy NGC 628. The top row
displays the PHANGS–ALMA CO (2–1) line intensity map (tracing molecular gas), the THINGS VLA H i 21-cm line intensity
map (tracing neutral atomic gas), and the S4G Spitzer IRAC 3.6 µm image (tracing stellar mass). The bottom row displays the
GALEX 154 nm image (tracing unobscured star formation), the WISE 22 µm image (tracing obscured star formation), and the
PHANGS environment mask. In each panel, the scale bar at the lower-right corner shows the spatial extent of 1 kpc, whereas
the white ellipse at the lower-left gives the beam size (except for the last panel). The white grids demarcate the hexagonal
apertures (1.5 kpc in size) in which we extract molecular cloud population statistics and build a comprehensive inventory of
host galaxy structural, kinematic, and star formation properties.

to rgal = 1.5 r25 in each galaxy. Assembling measure-
ments in these radial bins allows us to rigorously cal-
culate their radial proﬁles, but at the expense of losing
all non-axisymmetric information. We publish the data
products from these radial proﬁle calculations together
with those from the hexagonal aperture analysis (see Ap-
pendix F). We do not present the results of this parallel
line of analysis in this paper, but we expect the dis-
tributions of most measurements to be consistent with
the hexagonal aperture averages once we use consistent
weighting schemes (e.g., by the enclosed area or molec-
ular gas mass; see Section 4) for each aperture/ring.

3.2. Aggregating Molecular Cloud Measurements

Within each aperture, we calculate the ensemble aver-
age of molecular cloud measurements using a molecular
gas mass-weighted averaging scheme. This is equiva-

lent to a CO intensity-weighted averaging, because the
αCO value is calculated per aperture rather than per ob-
ject/pixel in this study (see Appendix B). We use a “(cid:104)(cid:105)”
symbol to denote this averaging operation:

(cid:104)Xθ pc(cid:105) =

(cid:80)
i

Mi Xi, θ pc

(cid:80)
i

Mi

.

(23)

Here, Xi, θ pc represents a molecular gas property mea-
sured for the i-th object or pixel at θ pc resolution
(θ = 60, 90, 120, 150);
it can be any of the object-
or pixel-based measurements deﬁned in Sections 2.1.1
and 2.1.2. Mi is the molecular gas mass associated with
the object or pixel for which Xi, θ pc is measured. The
summation in Equation 23 includes all detected objects/
pixels with their center coordinates located inside the
sharp boundary of the averaging aperture. In this case,

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

11

each object/pixel belongs to a unique averaging aper-
ture, and thus the averaging results in adjacent aper-
tures are independent by construction.

Based on Equation 23, we can also estimate statistical
uncertainties for the population-averaged cloud proper-
ties through Gaussian error propagation. We take into
account the uncertainties on both the quantity to be av-
eraged, Xi, θ pc, and the weight, Mi. When aggregating
the pixel-by-pixel measurements, we further consider the
built-in correlation between adjacent pixels and scale the
estimated uncertainty of the population average accord-
ing to the oversampling factor.

Our aperture averaging scheme resembles the one
adopted by Leroy et al. (2016) but diﬀers from that ap-
proach in important ways. In that work, the averaging is
performed via a Gaussian kernel convolution, in which
case the averaging result at any given location has a
nonzero response to molecular clouds far away from that
location. This response pattern is designed to replicate
the Gaussian beam of low-resolution data sets, and thus
it may be preferable for rigorous calculations combin-
ing cloud-scale and kpc-scale measurements (e.g., Leroy
et al. 2017; Utomo et al. 2018, see also L. Neumann
in preparation). However, such an extended response
pattern can lead to built-in correlations between aver-
aging results at adjacent locations. More importantly, it
can yield biased population statistics when, for example,
studying a region with little molecular gas next to a very
gas-rich region (such as a galaxy center). Since one of
the main goals of this work is to derive reliable molecular
cloud population statistics, we deem the “sharp bound-
ary” scheme more appropriate here and will use it con-
sistently for calculating both cloud population statistics
and host galaxy properties (also see Section 3.3).

3.2.1. Molecular Gas Clumping Factor

The averaging operation described above essentially
extracts the (mass-weighted) expectation value of a
molecular gas property from its probability distribution
within each averaging aperture. But one can also ex-
tract other types of statistics from the same distribution,
such as the standard deviation of the gas surface den-
sity distribution (which quantiﬁes the inhomogeneity of
the medium), or the slope of the GMC mass function.
These other types of statistics can also provide unique
observational constraints on the physical processes driv-
ing molecular cloud formation and evolution.

As part of the analysis done for this work, we cal-
culate the molecular gas “clumping factor,” which is a
dimensionless characterization of the surface density in-
homogeneity in each aperture (Leroy et al. 2013):

cpix, θ pc =

(cid:18)

(cid:80)
i
(cid:18)

(cid:19)

Σ2

i, θ pc

(cid:80)
i

Σi, θ pc

Npix

(cid:19)2

.

(24)

Here Σi, θ pc is the molecular gas surface density mea-
sured in the i-th pixel at θ pc resolution. Similar to
Equation 23, the summation includes all pixels with CO
detections within the averaging aperture, and Npix is
the total number of such pixels. The right hand side
of Equation 24 can be interpreted as the ratio between
the mass-weighted mean and the area-weighted mean
of molecular gas surface density in the limit of inﬁnite
sensitivity (see Leroy et al. 2013).

We note that cpix is a measure of the width (i.e., sec-
ond moment) of the surface density distribution among
many similar parametrizations in the literature (e.g., the
smoothness index and the Gini coeﬃcient; see Davis
et al. 2022, and references therein). To measure this
type of parameter reliably, a careful treatment of non-
detections is particularly important. We describe our
strategy to handle non-detections in Section 3.2.2, and
we illustrate the amplitude of the necessary corrections
in Section 4.2 and Appendix D.

3.2.2. CO Flux Completeness and Corrections

The ensemble-average molecular cloud properties
(Equation 23) and the molecular gas clumping factor
(Equation 24) are both calculated based on pixels/
objects that are detected in the PHANGS–ALMA CO
data. For these calculations to reﬂect the true statistics
of the entire molecular cloud population in each region,
the CO detections need to be reasonably complete, such
that they represent a signiﬁcant portion of the underly-
ing cloud population.

Our object- and pixel-based measurements come
from the PHANGS–ALMA CPROPS catalogs and the
“strict” moment maps (Sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.2), thus
the completeness of our analysis is determined by the
completeness of these data products. Both data prod-
ucts adopt similar signal identiﬁcation criteria to extract
high-conﬁdence CO detections in the original data cubes
(Leroy et al. 2021b; Rosolowsky et al. 2021), which en-
sure reliable CO line measurements for the detected pix-
els/objects. However, this comes at the price of exclud-
ing faint CO emission, which renders these data prod-
ucts incomplete in terms of both ﬂux coverage and area
coverage.

The extent of this eﬀect can be quantiﬁed by the
CO ﬂux completeness, fﬂux, and area coverage frac-
tion, farea, of the CPROPS catalog or the strict moment
maps (see tables 15 and 16 in Leroy et al. 2021a). Here,
we calculate fﬂux and farea for each averaging aperture
and report these values along with the ensemble-average
molecular cloud properties. Speciﬁcally, within the foot-
print of each aperture, we calculate farea by comparing
the total area covered by CO detections in the “strict”
moment-0 map to the total area of the aperture. We cal-
culate fﬂux by comparing the total CO ﬂux included in
the “strict” moment-0 map to that in the corresponding
“broad” moment-0 map. The latter map is constructed
with much more inclusive signal identiﬁcation criteria

12

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

than the strict map and has nearly 100% ﬂux complete-
ness (for more details, see Leroy et al. 2021b).

The incomplete CO ﬂux and area coverage of the
“strict” moment maps and CPROPS catalogs introduces
a selection bias in our analysis. The sense of this bias
is that we miss places where CO emission is too faint to
meet the masking criteria (e.g., areas occupied by small,
low-mass molecular clouds or a diﬀuse gas component).
This selection bias aﬀects many of the ensemble-average
cloud properties calculated in this study, and is particu-
larly severe for the clumping factor (see Section 4.2 and
Appendix D).

To account for this systematic bias, we introduce a
correction factor for our measurements in each aper-
ture based on the fﬂux and farea values in that aper-
ture (see Appendix D for detailed derivations). We as-
sume that the CO intensity distribution (or equivalently,
molecular gas surface density distribution) has a lognor-
mal shape within each averaging aperture, and that the
aforementioned selection bias prevents us from detect-
ing CO emission below an intensity threshold. Under
these assumptions, we can solve for the width of the
lognormal intensity distribution as well as its centroid
(relative to the intensity threshold) from fﬂux and farea.
This in turn allows us to calculate the appropriate cor-
rection factors to apply to the ensemble-average molec-
ular cloud surface density, (cid:104)Σobj(cid:105) and (cid:104)Σpix(cid:105), and the
clumping factor, cpix. We then assume that the correc-
tion factor calculated for (cid:104)Σobj(cid:105) and (cid:104)Σpix(cid:105) also applies
to the ensemble-average cloud mass and turbulent pres-
sure, but we leave molecular cloud size, velocity disper-
sion, and virial parameter uncorrected. Though these
latter quantities likely do suﬀer sensitivity-induced se-
lection biases (e.g., see the illustration of selection func-
tions in Sun et al. 2018), the appropriate functional
forms of their completeness corrections remain uncertain
at present. Finally, we scale the corresponding (statisti-
cal) uncertainty for each ensemble-average value by the
same correction factor.

As

illustrated in Section 4.2 and Appendix D,
thanks to the relatively high ﬂux completeness of the
PHANGS–ALMA CO data, the correction factors on the
average cloud surface densities and the clumping factor
are both moderate (<0.3 dex for 90% of the apertures
with CO detections). Nevertheless, we do expect our
completeness correction scheme to be less reliable for
apertures with low fﬂux and/or farea, in which case the
extrapolation is done based on very few measurements.
For this reason, we will exclude apertures with low fﬂux
or farea when performing analyses that requires accurate
cloud population statistics in individual apertures (see
Section 5 and Appendix D).

3.3. Aggregating Local Environmental Metrics

In addition to the compilation of ensemble-average
molecular cloud properties described above, we assemble
an inventory of “environmental metrics” that delineate

various host galaxy local properties within each averag-
ing aperture. This inventory covers orbital kinematic
properties (derived from rotation curves), gas-phase
metallicity (predicted from scaling relations), surface
densities of molecular gas, atomic gas, stellar mass, and
SFR (estimated from multiwavelength imaging data),
and morphological environment information (inherited
from environmental masks).

We generally use two schemes to integrate these envi-
ronmental metrics into the databases of aperture-wide
statistics. For those metrics that are calculated analyti-
cally (e.g., galactocentric coordinates, metallicity) or in-
terpolated from analytical models (e.g., rotation curve-
related properties), we directly record their values at
the location of the aperture center. For those metrics
that rely on two-dimensional images, we use the native
resolution images and calculate the unweighted average
among all pixels inside the sharp boundary of each aper-
ture. This latter scheme is consistent with the averaging
scheme we used for aggregating molecular cloud prop-
erties (modulo the diﬀerent weighting), and thus allows
for direct comparisons between the averaging results.

We elaborate the speciﬁc treatment for each type of

environmental metric below:

• Coordinates. For each hexagonal aperture, we record
its central R.A. and Dec. coordinates. Then based on
the center coordinates, inclination angle, position an-
gle, and the distance of the galaxy (see Table A1), we
calculate the deprojected galactocentric radius, rgal,
(in kpc units) at the aperture center and the depro-
jected azimuthal angle, φgal, in the galaxy plane with
respect to the major axis direction. These coordinates
uniquely determine the location of each aperture both
on the sky and in the deprojected galaxy plane.

• Orbital kinematics. We report local orbital kine-
matic properties for apertures in the galaxy sample
and galactocentric radius range covered by the ro-
tation curve measurements from Lang et al. (2020).
As detailed in Section 2.5, these orbital properties
include the circular velocity, Vcirc, angular velocity,
Ωcirc, logarithmic derivative of the rotation curve, β,
and Oort’s A parameter, AOort. They are calculated
by interpolating the functional ﬁtting model of the
rotation curves at the location of the aperture center.

• Metallicity. We report the predicted gas-phase metal-
licity in each aperture using a prescription similar to
the one described in Sun et al. (2020b), but with a
few methodological improvements. In short, we ﬁrst
infer the metallicity at rgal = 1.0 re in each galaxy
based on a galaxy global mass–metallicity relation-
ship (S´anchez et al. 2019), and then extrapolate to
all rgal assuming a ﬁxed radial metallicity gradient of
−0.1 dex/re within each galaxy (S´anchez et al. 2014).
For better methodological consistency with the orig-
inal references, here we approximate the galaxy ef-

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

13

fective radius as re ≈ 1.68 rdisk, where rdisk is the
stellar disk scale length. We also elevate the global
stellar masses in Table A1 by 0.1 dex before substi-
tuting their values into the mass–metallicity relation-
ship. We refer interested readers to Appendix B for
more details about these adjustments.

• Molecular gas surface density (kpc-scale). We report
the area-weighted mean molecular gas surface density,
Σmol, in each kpc-scale aperture. We emphasize the
distinction between this measurement and the mass-
weighted average of molecular cloud surface density,
(cid:11), deﬁned in Section 3.2. The area-weighted
(cid:10)Σ[pix|obj]
mean Σmol here is calculated from the total CO ﬂux
inside the hexagonal boundary of each kpc-sized aper-
ture divided by its total deprojected area. For this
particular calculation, we use the native resolution
“broad” moment-0 map to ensure a high ﬂux com-
pleteness (see Section 3.2.2). We then use the same
metallicity-dependent CO-to-H2 conversion factor to
convert CO line intensity into mass surface density
unit, as we do in Equation 8.

We note that our methodology for calculating this
kpc-scale aperture averaged Σmol is diﬀerent from the
one used in Sun et al. (2020b). There, the kpc-scale
Σmol was derived via convolving the CO moment-0
maps to a ﬁxed 1 kpc resolution and then sampling
the convolved maps at the aperture centers. As dis-
cussed above, the new averaging scheme in this paper
leads to better methodological consistency with our
calculation of molecular cloud population statistics.

• Atomic gas surface density. We report the area-
weighted mean atomic gas surface density, Σatom, in
all apertures for which we have H i data (see Ta-
ble A1). This is calculated in the same way as the
area-weighted mean Σmol: we divide the total H i
21 cm line ﬂux inside the hexagonal aperture by the
aperture area, and then convert it to mass surface
density unit via Equation 14.

Since the H i data resolution is typically compara-
ble to or coarser than our adopted aperture size, our
calculated Σatom might not reﬂect the true atomic
gas surface density inside the sharp aperture bound-
aries, but rather a slightly “smoothed” version of it.
However, the atomic gas distribution is usually much
smoother than the molecular gas (e.g., see Leroy et al.
2013), and Σatom only plays a minor role throughout
this paper. The resolution degradation is thus not a
serious concern for the following analysis.

• Stellar mass surface density. We report the area-
weighted mean stellar mass surface density, Σ(cid:63), in
each aperture. We calculate Σ(cid:63) via Equations 15 or 16
based on the mean WISE 3.4 µm or IRAC 3.6 µm sur-
face brightness at 7.5(cid:48)(cid:48) resolution within sharp aper-
ture boundaries. We determine the stellar M/L ratio,
Υ3.4 µm, for each aperture by sampling the M/L ratio

maps from Leroy et al. (2021a) at the location of the
aperture center.

• SFR surface density. We report the area-weighted
mean SFR surface density, ΣSFR, in each aperture.
This is primarily calculated via Equations 17–19
based on the best available UV/IR data combina-
tion (see Table A1) at 15(cid:48)(cid:48) resolution. We note that
this resolution could approach the averaging aper-
ture size in the more distant targets in our sam-
in which case concerns about correlated mea-
ple,
surements could again arise. To evaluate these con-
cerns, we compare the UV/IR-based ΣSFR measure-
ments with Hα-based measurements (the latter in-
cludes data at much higher angular resolution; see
Section 2.7). We ﬁnd quantitatively consistent results
at ΣSFR (cid:38) 10−3 M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2, which is the range
of interest in this paper (see Figure 3 below).

• Morphological environment. We keep track of the
morphological regions each averaging aperture inhab-
its in the host galaxy (see Section 2.6). Because of
the kpc-scale sizes of these apertures, some of them
could stretch across multiple morphological regions.
To deal with this ambiguity, we calculate the fraction
of CO ﬂux originating from each morphological region
(especially galaxy centers and stellar bars) relative to
the sum over the entire aperture. We then classify all
apertures that have a non-zero7 CO ﬂux contribution
from galaxy centers or stellar bars as “center/bar”
apertures, and all the remainder as “disk” apertures.

3.4. Outcome of the Cross-spatial-scale Analysis

Our analysis yields a rich value-added database for
each of the 80 galaxies listed in Table A1. These
databases present the molecular cloud populations re-
siding in each galaxy, along with the large-scale gas and
stellar mass distribution, kinematic information, mor-
phological structures, and star formation activities of
the galaxy disk itself. Together, these high-level mea-
surements have a broad range of applications (see Sec-
tion 7). They are published in the form of machine-
readable tables online (see Appendix F).

Our databases include 46,628 apertures in total.
These apertures collectively cover the footprint of ev-
ery target galaxy out to a galactocentric radius limit of
1.5 r25. The majority of these apertures have local envi-
ronmental measurements derived from multiwavelength
data (such as UV, and IR), yet only a smaller subset
of them have valid molecular gas measurements from
PHANGS-ALMA CO data. This is because the foot-
print of the PHANGS–ALMA survey is often more con-
ﬁned and covers only the inner, molecular gas-rich part

7 Given the large aperture size, choosing a diﬀerent threshold (e.g.,
10%) would make a negligible diﬀerence in the classiﬁcation re-
sults.

14

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

of the galaxy disk (see Leroy et al. 2021a). Since this
paper focuses on linking the molecular cloud population
to their local environment, in the following sections, we
restrict ourselves to a subset of 3,383 apertures that are
inside the PHANGS–ALMA survey footprint and show
detectable CO emission in the 60–150 pc scale “strict”
moment maps. Nonetheless, the full set of 46,628 aper-
tures will be included in the public data release given
the rich information provided by the multiwavelength
ancillary data alone.

4. DISTRIBUTIONS OF AVERAGE MOLECULAR
CLOUD PROPERTIES AND SUB-GALACTIC
ENVIRONMENTS IN PHANGS–ALMA

In this section, we characterize the distributions of
region-averaged molecular cloud properties and host
galaxy local properties across the full PHANGS–ALMA
data set. To do this, we use the databases constructed
in Sections 3 and focus on 3,383 apertures with CO
measurements from PHANGS-ALMA (including 2,724
apertures classiﬁed as “disk” and the remainder as “cen-
ter/bar”).
In the main text, we will only present the
statistics of molecular cloud measurements at 150 pc
scales, which is the best common resolution achievable
for all galaxies. Quantitative comparisons across diﬀer-
ent resolutions are shown in Appendix E.

4.1. Sub-galactic Environments Probed by

PHANGS–ALMA

Our multiwavelength measurements provide a multi-
faceted depiction of the range of local galactic environ-
ments probed by the PHANGS-ALMA survey. To this
end, Figure 3 shows the histograms of 12 local environ-
mental metrics across 3,383 apertures. We also calculate
statistics such as the median value and 16−84 percentile
range for each environmental metric and tabulate them
in Table 1. These statistics are calculated from the his-
togram using two diﬀerent weighting schemes: simple
counting of the number of apertures or weighting each
aperture by the molecular gas mass it encloses. The
ﬁrst scheme treats all apertures equally, and the calcu-
lated statistics reﬂect a typical kpc-sized area covered by
PHANGS-ALMA; the latter scheme instead treats each
unit of gas mass equally, and the calculated statistics
reﬂect the local environment in which most molecular
gas resides.

Below we split the 12 environmental metrics into four
topical groups and comment on the corresponding his-
tograms and statistics.

• Galactocentric radii. The PHANGS–ALMA CO mea-
surements cover a wide radial range in terms of both
absolute and normalized rgal (panels a and b). When
weighting by the number of apertures, we ﬁnd me-
dian values and ±1σ ranges of rgal = 5.4+3.1
−2.7 kpc
and rgal/rdisk = 1.8+1.0
−0.8 across all apertures. We ﬁnd
smaller values when weighting each aperture by its

encircled molecular gas mass. This reﬂects that the
molecular gas distribution typically peaks toward the
galaxy center, and thus apertures at smaller radii of-
ten enclose more molecular gas mass.

We note that the rgal histogram appears “quan-
tized” simply due to the ﬁxed 1.5 kpc linear size of the
hexagonal apertures and their tiling pattern on the
sky. This behavior is not obvious in the rgal/rdisk his-
togram because the normalization factor rdisk varies
among galaxies, which eﬀectively “smooth” the his-
togram.

• Kinematic properties. For the subset of apertures
located in the 62 galaxies with CO kinematic mea-
surements, we report the distributions of orbital
angular velocity (panel c) and Oort’s A parame-
ter (panel d ). Weighting all apertures equally, we
ﬁnd typical Ωcirc = 32+16
−8 Gyr−1 and AOort =
14+6
−4 km s−1 kpc−1 across galaxy disks, which trans-
late to an orbital period of ∼ 200 Myr and a local
shearing timescale of ∼ 70 Myr (i.e., the reciprocal of
AOort; also see Section 6). These values suggest that
the kinematic properties of a typical kpc-sized area
probed by PHANGS-ALMA are very similar to those
of the Solar Neighborhood (Ωcirc = 27.8 Gyr−1 and
AOort = 15.3 km s−1 kpc−1; Bovy 2017a).

We also ﬁnd that apertures located in galaxy cen-
ters and stellar bars show systematically higher Ωcirc
and AOort values. This is expected from their loca-
tions at smaller rgal and the stronger shear often ob-
served in these environments.

• Galaxy disk mass components. Weighting all aper-
tures in galaxy disks equally, we ﬁnd typical sur-
face densities of Σ(cid:63) = 65+80
−34 M(cid:12) pc−2 and Σmol =
5.4+10.8
−3.7 M(cid:12) pc−2 (panels e and f ). Among the 53
galaxies with H i 21 cm line data (see Table A1),
we ﬁnd a typical total gas surface density of Σgas =
Σmol + Σatom = 13+14
−7 M(cid:12) pc−2 (panel g). This gives
a typical gas fraction of fgas = Σgas/(Σ(cid:63) + Σgas) =
0.16+0.14
−0.07 (panel i ) and a molecular fraction of fmol =
Σmol/Σgas = 0.53+0.22
−0.30 (panel j ). These values are
modestly higher than the Solar Neighborhood values
(Σ(cid:63) = 33.4 M(cid:12) pc−2, Σatom = 10.9 M(cid:12) pc−2, and
Σmol = 1.0 M(cid:12) pc−2; see McKee et al. 2015, and ref-
erences therein).

Examining the corresponding molecular gas mass-
weighted statistics for galaxy disks, we ﬁnd that most
molecular gas mass resides in environments with even
higher surface densities (Σ(cid:63) = 110+140
−60 M(cid:12) pc−2,
Σmol = 17+29
−11 M(cid:12) pc−2, Σgas = 28+30
−15 M(cid:12) pc−2) and
molecular fraction (fmol = 0.71+0.13
−0.20). For compari-
son, these gas surface densities are likely higher than
the averaged value across any kpc-sized neighborhood
in our Galaxy (e.g., Nakanishi & Sofue 2006; Spilker
et al. 2021, though the central 1 kpc might be an ex-

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

15

Figure 3. The full range of host galaxy local properties sampled by PHANGS–ALMA, outlined here by stacked histograms of
12 “local environmental metrics” across 3,383 apertures. The panels show: (a) galactocentric radius, (b) galactocentric radius
normalized by the disk scale length, (c) orbital angular velocity, (d) Oort’s A parameter, (e) stellar surface density, (f) molecular
gas surface density, (g) total gas surface density, (h) SFR surface density, (i) gas fraction, (j) molecular fraction of the gas, (k)
molecular gas depletion time, and (l) total gas depletion time. We use blue and orange colors to distinguish the contributions
from the “disk” and the “center/bar” subsamples in the summed histogram (black solid outline). The symbols and horizontal
error bars at the top show the median value and ±1σ range (i.e., 16−84 percentile range) within each subsample. The two
symbol types correspond to two diﬀerent weighting schemes for calculating the median values and percentiles: weighting by
number of apertures (open squares) versus weighting by molecular gas mass (solid circles).

ception given uncertainties in the conversion factor
there).

(panel k ) and tdep, gas = Σgas/ΣSFR = 3.3+2.2
for the total gas (panel l ).

−1.3 Gyr

is ΣSFR = 3.5+6.8

• Star formation activity. The typical range of SFR
surface density of “disk” apertures, when weighted
−2.1 ×
by simple number counts,
10−3 M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2 (panel h).
This is again
comparable to the estimated Solar Neighborhood
SFR surface density at the present day (ΣSFR =
1.7 × 10−3 M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2; Bovy 2017b). Combined
with the measured Σmol and Σgas in our sample,
this implies typical depletion times of tdep, mol =
Σmol/ΣSFR = 1.5+1.0
−0.7 Gyr for the molecular gas

In comparison, the molecular gas mass-weighted
statistics reveal that most of the molecular gas mass
resides in more actively star-forming environments
with ΣSFR = 9.6+20.9
−6.4 × 10−3 M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2. Yet
associated gas depletion times appear similar to the
aperture number-weighted values, with tdep, mol =
1.8+1.0
In other
words, the SFR surface density is proportionally
higher in these environments as their gas surface den-
sities are.

−0.7 Gyr and tdep, gas = 2.8+1.7

−1.1 Gyr.

16

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

In summary, the PHANGS-ALMA survey covers an
wide variety of host galaxy local environments. When
weighting all apertures equally, the most representative
local environment in our sample closely resembles the
Solar Neighborhood in many aspects. Comparatively,
most molecular gas mass is hosted in regions that are
closer to the galaxy center, have higher surface densities
of stars, gas, and SFR, and are possibly not matched by
any kpc-scale regions in our Galaxy.

4.2. Molecular Cloud Populations in PHANGS-ALMA

Our calculations aggregate individual molecular cloud
measurements to yield mass-weighted average proper-
ties for each aperture (Section 3.2). The distribu-
tions of these population-averaged measurements oﬀer
a comprehensive portrait of how cloud populations vary
across PHANGS–ALMA. This is demonstrated by Fig-
ure 4, which shows histograms of population-averaged
cloud properties measured from object/pixel-based ap-
proaches (originally measured at 150 pc). These his-
tograms include all 3,383 apertures with pixel-based
data and 2,784 apertures with object-based data. The
latter number is smaller because CPROPS uses a
slightly more stringent criterion for identifying objects
in CO data cubes (objects made of too few cube pix-
els are rejected even when they satisfy the S/N criteria;
Rosolowsky et al. 2021).

Similar to Section 4.1, here we calculate the median
values and 16−84 percentile ranges with two diﬀerent
weighting schemes (Table 2). We note that because most
variables depicted in Figure 4 (except cpix) are already
mass-weighted averages within individual apertures, an
additional mass-weighted averaging step across all aper-
tures can be interpreted as the mass-weighted average
cloud properties combining all clouds in all galaxies in
PHANGS–ALMA. In comparison, the other weighting
scheme (i.e., same weight for all apertures) gives us a
view of the typical molecular cloud population likely to
be found at a random location in a PHANGS–ALMA
galaxy. As results from the latter weighting method is
less straightforward to interpret, below we focus mostly
on the mass-weighted statistics in our discussion.

• Molecular cloud mass and size. The mass-weighted
average molecular cloud mass at 150 pc resolution
is 6.9+10.5
−4.5 × 106 M(cid:12) for all clouds in galaxy disks
(panel a). This value is high compared to the typical
mass of molecular clouds in the Milky Way (e.g., Rice
et al. 2016; Miville-Deschˆenes et al. 2017; Colombo
et al. 2019), but is consistent with numbers measured
in nearby galaxy studies (e.g., Hughes et al. 2013a).
As pointed out by Rosolowsky et al. (2021), the ﬁnite
resolution and sensitivity of the PHANGS–ALMA CO
data limit our ability to identify molecular clouds with
mass (cid:46) 105 M(cid:12). Speciﬁcally, the 60–150 pc resolu-
tion of the PHANGS–ALMA data would lead to in-
dividual, moderate size clouds being blended into a

single object by CPROPS (also see discussions on the
resolution-dependence of average cloud mass in Ap-
pendix E). That said, our completeness correction can
partly remedy sensitivity-related biases by compen-
sating for isolated, less massive clouds undetected in
the high resolution CO observations (the histograms
for the corrected measurements extend to lower values
than those for the uncorrected measurements).

In line with this consideration, the mass-weighted
cloud eﬀective radius measured at the same resolu-
tion spans 90+19
−15 pc, which slightly exceeds half the
beam FWHM size (panel b). This is consistent with
a series of previous studies, all of which found that
cloud segmentation algorithms tend to identify ob-
jects comparable to or slightly larger than the beam
size (e.g., Verschuur 1993; Pineda et al. 2009; Hughes
et al. 2013a; Leroy et al. 2016).

• Molecular cloud surface density. At 150 pc resolution,
the mass-weighted molecular cloud surface density in
galaxy disks is 78+124
−50 M(cid:12) pc−2 from the object-based
approach and 33+60
−22 M(cid:12) pc−2 from the pixel-based
approach (both weighted by gas mass; see panels d
and h). These values are on the low end of the surface
density distribution of Galactic molecular clouds (e.g.,
Colombo et al. 2019). This likely reﬂects the coarser
spatial resolution of our data compared to most Galac-
tic studies, which means our measurements would be
“diluted” by low column density sightlines within each
beam.

The quantitative diﬀerences between the object-
and pixel-based approaches reﬂect that the they at-
tempt to measure fundamentally diﬀerent quantities
(see Section 2.1.3). In particular, the CPROPS algo-
rithm attempts to measure the true surface density
of an identiﬁed object. Therefore, it includes addi-
tional de-convolution and extrapolation procedures,
which lead to smaller cloud sizes and larger masses,
and thus larger surface densities. The pixel-by-pixel
analysis instead measures the surface density point-
by-point from a contiguous molecular gas distribution.
Without a priori expectation for the gas spatial dis-
tribution, it does not perform any de-convolution but
simply extracts measurements at the resolution of the
observations. Given these diﬀerences, for marginally
resolved clouds the pixel-based approach would sim-
ply yield the native, beam-averaged value at the data
resolution, whereas the object-based approach would
yield higher surface densities as a result of the de-
convolution.

Compared to the results for disk apertures, the
cloud populations
in galaxy centers and stellar
bars have much higher mass-weighted mean sur-
face densities of 210+560
−160 M(cid:12) pc−2 (object-based) or
200+840
−160 M(cid:12) pc−2 (pixel-based). Such a trend has
been highlighted in previous works on the same galax-
ies (Sun et al. 2018, 2020a; Rosolowsky et al. 2021)

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

17

Figure 4. The “demographic proﬁle” of molecular cloud populations captured in PHANGS–ALMA, illustrated here by stacked
histograms of 11 population-averaged molecular cloud measurements derived from either object- or pixel-based approaches. As
described in Sections 2.1 and 3, these quantities represent aperture-wise mass-weighted averages and their derivation accounts
for the eﬀect of galaxy inclination and ﬁnite data sensitivity. The panels show: (a) object molecular gas mass, (b) object radius,
(c) pixel-wise molecular gas clumping factor, (e–g) object-based molecular gas surface density, velocity dispersion, turbulent
pressure, and virial parameter, (h–k) pixel-based molecular gas surface density, velocity dispersion, turbulent pressure, and
virial parameter. The derivation of these properties accounts for the eﬀect of galaxy inclination (Section 2.1.1–2.1.2). We have
also applied completeness corrections on a subset of these quantities to oﬀset sensitivity-related biases (Section 3.2.2). The
histograms of uncorrected measurements (gray, unﬁlled) are shown in contrast to those of the corrected measurements (black).

and is also consistent with observations in our Galaxy
(Oka et al. 2001). We do caution that these results
are more sensitive to the choice of αCO prescriptions
(see Appendix B). Several lines of evidence suggest
lower αCO in galaxy centers (e.g., see Bolatto et al.
2013; Sandstrom et al. 2013; Israel 2020; Teng et al.
2021) and our ﬁducial prescription only mildly de-
presses αCO near galaxy centers.

• Molecular gas velocity dispersion.

For molec-
located in galaxy disks,
ular cloud populations
we ﬁnd mass-weighted average velocity disper-
sions of 5.8+1.9
−1.5 km s−1 (object-based; panel e) or

4.7+2.2
−1.7 km s−1 (pixel-based; panel i ). The cloud pop-
ulations in galaxy centers or stellar bars show sys-
tematically higher values (9.0+3.6
−3.0 km s−1 from object-
based and 16+11
−10 km s−1 from pixel-based statistics).
These typical values and their environmental depen-
dence are broadly consistent with previous galactic
and extragalactic studies (e.g., Heyer et al. 2009;
Donovan Meyer et al. 2013; Hughes et al. 2013a; Leroy
et al. 2015; Sun et al. 2020a; Rosolowsky et al. 2021).
The quantitative discrepancies between the two ap-
proaches here can also be explained by methodological
diﬀerences. As described above, the objects identi-
ﬁed by CPROPS are often slightly larger than the

18

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

beam size. We would then expect larger CO line
width measurements from the object-based approach
due to both the size–line width relation in molecu-
lar clouds (e.g., Larson 1981) and additional contribu-
tions from galaxy rotation and large-scale gas stream-
ing motions. This explains the sense of deviation
for the measurements in galaxy disks. However, in
places where molecular clouds are spatially crowded
(such as galaxy centers), the ppv space segmentation
in CPROPS helps to demarcate clouds that fall along
the same line of sight but are separable in velocity
space, whereas the pixel-based analysis simply mea-
sures the line eﬀective width and thus cannot tell them
apart (see e.g., Henshaw et al. 2016). This explains
why the pixel-based approach yields higher velocity
dispersions with a wider spread in these environments.

• Molecular cloud turbulent pressure. Molecular clouds
in galaxy disks have mass-weighted average tur-
bulent pressure of 2.1+7.2
−1.6 × 105 K cm−3 (object-
f ) or 1.1+5.4
−0.9 × 105 K cm−3 (pixel-
based; panel
based; panel j ). These values are at least an or-
der of magnitude higher in galaxy centers and stel-
lar bars (1.8+6.8
−1.6 × 106 K cm−3 from object-based and
6.5+106.4
−6.4 × 106 K cm−3 from pixel-based statistics),
as anticipated from the high environmental pressure
there (see Schruba et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2020b, for
explicit comparisons between the two).

The sense of deviation between the two approaches
here is similar to that of the surface density and ve-
locity dispersion measurements. It is most apparent
near the low pressure end, where the distribution al-
most always exceeds 104 K cm−3 in the object-based
statistics but extends to below 103 K cm−3 in the
pixel-based statistics. This aligns with the intuition
that the object-based calculations focus on the denser
inner portion of molecular clouds (i.e., the half of gas
within the FWHM of each object), whereas the pixel-
based analysis treats every chunk of molecular gas
equally at ﬁxed resolution, and thus can reﬂect the
behavior of the lower pressure, more diﬀuse gas when
it dominates the mass budget.

• Molecular cloud virial parameter. Molecular cloud
populations in galaxy disks exhibit a narrow range
of mass-weighted average virial parameters: 1.1+0.8
−0.4
(object-based; panel g) or 1.6+0.9
(pixel-based;
−0.6
panel k ). If taken at face value, these values would
suggest that the dynamical state of molecular clouds
are somewhere between virial equilibrium (αvir = 1)
and energy equipartition (αvir = 2; see also Sun et al.
2018, 2020a; Rosolowsky et al. 2021). However, sys-
tematic uncertainties related to the sub-resolution gas
distribution and the CO-to-H2 conversion factor are
especially concerning for the αvir measurements given
the narrow dynamic range. More, it can be challeng-
ing to determine the true dynamical state of the ob-

served gas structures from a measured αvir alone (e.g.,
Ballesteros-Paredes et al. 2011; Ib´a˜nez-Mej´ıa et al.
2016; Lu et al. 2020). The most conservative conclu-
sions from these data are that molecular cloud pop-
ulations show a relatively narrow range of dynamical
states and appear near energy equipartition across a
wide range of environments.

Comparing the mass-weighted average αvir between
cloud populations in galaxy disks versus those in
galaxy centers and stellar bars, the pixel-based statis-
tics indicate higher αvir values for the latter, while
the object-based statistics show essentially no diﬀer-
ence. This can be explained by the same line-of-sight
blending eﬀect that drive the pixel-based velocity dis-
persion measurements higher in centers and bars (also
see Henshaw et al. 2016; Kruijssen et al. 2019b). We
suggest to prefer the object-based results in this case,
but again caution that we may be overestimating αCO
in these regions. If this is the case, the correct object-
based values would also suggest higher αvir in bars
and galaxy centers.

• Molecular

gas

factor.

clumping

We ﬁnd a
completeness-corrected clumping factor of 1.9+1.1
−0.4
(uniform weight per aperture) or 1.9+1.0
−0.4 (weighted by
molecular gas mass in each aperture) across our sam-
ple (panel c). These values are markedly smaller than
those reported in Leroy et al. (2013, median value of
∼7 at 20–300 pc resolution), which were calculated
from early CO observations targeting a handful of
very nearby galaxies (including several CO-poor Lo-
cal Group members). This is partly due to the much
higher sensitivity of the PHANGS–ALMA data set,
and partly due to the improvement in the treatment of
non-detections. The small clumping factors we derive
suggest that the molecular gas is much less clumpy
than reported in previous studies on a smaller set of
galaxies.

In summary, we observe substantial variations in the
molecular cloud population-averaged properties across
all apertures in our sample. The mass-weighted aver-
age of all clouds in PHANGS-ALMA yields high masses,
large sizes, and low surface densities compared to the
cloud population in our Galaxy. The contrast of cloud
populations in galaxy disks and those in center/bar
environments are qualitatively consistent with ﬁndings
in previous extragalactic and Galactic studies. While
the object-based and pixel-based results display qualita-
tively similar trends, there exist important quantitative
discrepancies, which reﬂect their diﬀerent measurement
approaches in expected ways. Finally, after correcting
for the completeness of CO detections, we ﬁnd that the
molecular gas in PHANGS-ALMA galaxies appears sig-
niﬁcantly less clumpy than previously determined from
low sensitivity CO observations of a few very nearby
galaxies.

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

19

Table 1. Statistics of Galactic Environmental Properties

Quantity

Weighted by number of apertures

Weighted by molecular gas mass

All

Disk

Center/bar

All

Disk

Center/bar

(1)

rgal [kpc]
rgal/rdisk
Ωcirc [Gyr−1]
AOort [km s−1 kpc−1]
Σ(cid:63) [M(cid:12) pc−2]
Σmol [M(cid:12) pc−2]
Σgas [M(cid:12) pc−2]
ΣSFR [10−3 M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2]
fgas
fmol
tdep, mol [Gyr]
tdep, gas [Gyr]

(2)
5.4+3.1
−2.7
1.8+1.0
−0.8
34+23
−9
15+8
−4
77+129
−42
6.0+13.3
−4.1
13+16
−7
4.0+8.3
−2.5
0.14+0.13
−0.08
0.58+0.22
−0.31
1.5+1.1
−0.8
3.0+2.2
−1.2

(3)
5.8+3.2
−2.4
1.9+1.0
−0.7
32+16
−8
14+6
−4
65+80
−34
5.4+10.8
−3.7
13+14
−7
3.5+6.8
−2.1
0.16+0.14
−0.07
0.53+0.22
−0.30
1.5+1.0
−0.7
3.3+2.2
−1.3

(4)
3.1+2.9
−1.5
0.9+0.9
−0.5
53+30
−21
18+17
−6
190+280
−110
10+24
−7
14+24
−9
7.2+18.7
−5.0
0.07+0.07
−0.05
0.76+0.18
−0.27
1.5+1.3
−0.8
2.2+1.6
−1.1

(5)
3.5+3.4
−3.5
1.2+1.1
−1.2
45+34
−16
18+10
−6
200+750
−130
28+118
−20
35+71
−21
16+92
−12
0.16+0.13
−0.08
0.78+0.18
−0.21
1.7+1.0
−0.9
2.4+1.7
−1.1

(6)
5.0+3.0
−2.1
1.7+0.9
−0.7
37+21
−11
17+8
−5
110+140
−60
17+29
−11
28+30
−15
9.6+20.9
−6.4
0.18+0.13
−0.07
0.71+0.13
−0.20
1.8+1.0
−0.7
2.8+1.7
−1.1

(7)
1.5+2.0
−1.5
0.2+0.8
−0.2
66+25
−25
21+20
−6
550+2000
−360
83+449
−66
71+176
−52
45+469
−36
0.11+0.08
−0.06
0.92+0.07
−0.15
1.6+0.9
−0.9
2.0+1.1
−1.2

Note— The median value and ±1σ range (i.e., 16−84 percentile range) of the galactic environmental metrics
shown in Figure 3. Results in columns (2) to (4) are calculated by weighting each aperture equally, whereas
those in columns (5) to (7) are calculated by weighting each aperture by the molecular gas mass it contains.

Table 2. Statistics of Molecular Cloud Population Properties

Quantity

Weighted by number of apertures

Weighted by molecular gas mass

(1)

(2)

(cid:104)Mobj, 150pc(cid:105) [106 M(cid:12)]
(cid:104)Robj, 150pc(cid:105) [pc]
(cid:104)Σobj, 150pc(cid:105) [M(cid:12) pc−2]
(cid:104)σobj, 150pc(cid:105) [km s−1]
(cid:104)Pturb, obj, 150pc(cid:105) [105 K cm−3]
(cid:104)αvir, obj, 150pc(cid:105)

(cid:104)Σpix, 150pc(cid:105) [M(cid:12) pc−2]
(cid:104)σpix, 150pc(cid:105) [km s−1]
(cid:104)Pturb, pix, 150pc(cid:105) [105 K cm−3]
(cid:104)αvir, pix, 150pc(cid:105)
cpix, 150pc

All (uncor.)

All

Disk

Center/bar All (uncor.)

(5)

(4)

(3)

(6)
Object-based Population Statistics (2,784 Apertures)
11+30
−7
–
130+260
−90
–
4.7+31.8
−3.8
–

3.2+6.1
−2.0
92+23
−21
35+64
−23
5.0+1.9
−1.4
0.75+3.03
−0.57
1.4+1.2
−0.6

2.9+4.9
−1.8
91+22
−22
33+58
−20
4.8+1.6
−1.3
0.65+2.20
−0.49
1.3+1.0
−0.6

4.6+12.5
−3.0
96+24
−19
45+102
−31
6.2+3.0
−1.7
1.5+10.5
−1.2
1.7+1.8
−0.8

4.2+6.1
−2.3
–
47+77
−28
–
1.0+3.3
−0.7
–

Pixel-based Population Statistics (3,383 Apertures)

17+29
−9
–
0.29+1.92
−0.22
–
1.4+0.4
−0.3

12+27
−8
3.3+2.2
−1.0
0.20+1.77
−0.16
1.7+1.1
−0.6
1.9+1.1
−0.4

10+21
−7
3.1+1.6
−0.9
0.16+0.95
−0.13
1.6+0.9
−0.6
1.9+1.0
−0.4

21+64
−15
4.8+6.1
−2.0
0.76+16.64
−0.68
2.5+1.7
−0.9
1.9+1.2
−0.5

61+316
−43
–
3.4+230.1
−3.1
–
1.7+0.6
−0.3

All

(7)

Disk

Center/bar

(8)

(9)

10+30
−7
95+21
−16
110+250
−80
6.7+3.7
−1.9
4.3+32.2
−3.6
1.1+0.9
−0.5

55+294
−41
5.9+14.0
−2.5
3.1+216.3
−2.8
1.9+1.6
−0.6
1.9+1.0
−0.4

6.9+10.5
−4.5
90+19
−15
78+124
−50
5.8+1.9
−1.5
2.1+7.2
−1.6
1.1+0.8
−0.4

33+60
−22
4.7+2.2
−1.7
1.1+5.4
−0.9
1.6+0.9
−0.6
1.8+0.8
−0.4

27+91
−21
100+20
−20
210+560
−160
9.0+3.6
−3.0
18+68
−16
1.0+1.2
−0.6

200+840
−160
16+11
−10
65+1064
−64
2.5+2.2
−1.0
2.1+1.2
−0.7

Note— The median value and ±1σ range (i.e., 16−84 percentile range) of the population average molecular cloud properties shown in
Figure 4. Results in columns (2) to (5) are calculated by weighting each aperture equally, whereas those in columns (6) to (9) are
calculated by weighting each aperture by the molecular gas mass it contains. Columns (2) and (6) correspond to measurements without
applying completeness corrections (see Section 3.2.2).

5. ENVIRONMENTAL DEPENDENCE OF

MOLECULAR CLOUD POPULATIONS IN
PHANGS-ALMA

In the previous section, we see strong variations in
both the molecular cloud populations and the host
galaxy local environments from aperture to aperture.
These variations are also known to correlate with each
other — numerous studies have shown that the physi-

cal properties of molecular clouds depend on their host
galaxy environment in various ways (see discussions in
Section 1). The rich set of measurements derived in
this study allow for a systematic characterization of
such cloud–environment connections across an unprece-
dented range of physical conditions. In this section, we
ﬁrst summarize the basic, pairwise correlations between
the population-averaged cloud properties and the lo-

20

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

cal/global host galaxy properties (Section 5.1). We then
perform a variable selection method to identify a subset
of host galaxy properties carrying the most predictive
power, and to construct empirical predictive models for
the molecular cloud properties (Section 5.2).

Both the pairwise correlation analysis and the vari-
able selection procedure requires high quality measure-
ments for the cloud population statistics. The latter
also needs to be applied on a consistent sample of aper-
tures that all have the relevant variables measured to
good quality. To meet these requirements, this part of
the analysis works with a subsample of 871 apertures
from 42 galaxies. These apertures are selected because:
(1) they have the most complete multiwavelength data
coverage, such that none of the cloud population statis-
tics or host galaxy environmental metrics are missing;
and (2) the PHANGS–ALMA CO data have reasonably
high ﬂux completeness and area coverage fraction in-
side these apertures (fﬂux > 0.5 and farea > 0.2, see
Appendix D), such that our measured cloud population
statistics represent a signiﬁcant portion of the molecular
gas residing in that area. This down-selection primarily
restricts our sample to regions with higher Σmol (with all
apertures weighted equally, the median value and 16–84
percentile range is 14+17
−8 M(cid:12) pc−2 for the sub-sample,
in comparison to 6.0+13.3
−4.1 M(cid:12) pc−2 for the parent sam-
ple). Consequently, it also tends to select apertures in
more massive, molecular gas-rich galaxies and at smaller
rgal within each galaxy (4.4+2.4
−1.8 kpc for the sub-sample
versus 5.4+3.1
−2.7 kpc for the parent sample). Nevertheless,
the selected apertures still cover a considerable range of
the relevant parameter space to allow for the following
analyses.

5.1. Pairwise Correlation

To provide an empirical characterization of the ob-
served cloud–environment connections, we calculate
Spearman’s rank correlation coeﬃcients for each pair of
population-averaged molecular cloud property and host
galaxy environmental metric within the sub-selected 871
apertures. For this analysis, we consider seven local en-
vironmental metrics (rgal, Σmol, Σatom, Σ(cid:63), ΣSFR, Ωcirc,
and AOort), each of which holds a unique piece of infor-
mation unavailable to all other variables. We comple-
ment these local properties with ﬁve global galaxy prop-
erties (rdisk, Mmol, Matom, M(cid:63), and SFR), so that our
correlation analysis can also capture galaxy-to-galaxy
trends. These global properties are measured by (Leroy
et al. 2021a) for all PHANGS-ALMA galaxies.

The top left part of Figure 5 summarize the outcome
of this pairwise analysis. Broadly speaking, we ﬁnd sig-
niﬁcant correlations between most pairs of population-
averaged cloud properties and environmental metrics.
The signs of the correlation coeﬃcients indicate that an
average molecular cloud tends to be denser, more mas-
sive, more turbulent, and more strongly self-gravitating
at places that are closer to the galaxy center, have higher

gas and stellar content, show more active star forma-
tion, and feature shorter orbital period and stronger lo-
cal shear. The correlations of population-averaged cloud
properties versus global galaxy properties are weaker,
but most of them are statistically signiﬁcant. These
ﬁndings agree well with previous observations targeting
individual galaxy or smaller galaxy samples (see refer-
ences in Section 1).

Beyond these general trends, we highlight three inter-
esting patterns in Figure 5. First, most molecular cloud
properties show the strongest correlation with the (kpc-
scale) aperture-averaged molecular gas surface density,
Σmol. While some systematic eﬀects (e.g., uncertainties
in the CO-to-H2 conversion factor or calibrations of the
raw data) could inﬂuence both the independent and de-
pendent variables here, these correlations, including the
ones regarding cloud surface densities, still carry real in-
formation about multi-scale structures in the molecular
gas. Speciﬁcally, the correlation strength between the
cloud-scale and kpc-scale surface densities partly reﬂects
the inhomogeneity of the molecular gas on spatial scales
between 1.5 kpc (aperture size) and 60−150 pc (data
resolution). The limiting case of a perfect correlation
appears only if the gas distribution is completely homo-
geneous, or if it is structured in a way that the clumping
factor is the same in all apertures (which is not far from
the reality given the narrow range of clumping factors
observed across our sample; see Section 4.2). On the
contrary, we would expect no correlation if all molecu-
lar gas is concentrated into small, isolated clouds with
ﬁxed surface densities.

Second, for the cloud radius and virial parameter, the
correlations with environmental metrics are weaker com-
pared to the other cloud properties. This is mainly
due to the narrow dynamic range of these quantities
in our data. For the cloud radius, the narrow range is
somewhat imposed by the limited data resolution and
our adopted object identiﬁcation algorithm (see Sec-
tion 2.1.1 and 4.2). For the virial parameter, the narrow
range across our sample is more intrinsic and reﬂects the
relative uniformity of the cloud dynamical state (see Sun
et al. 2018, 2020b; Rosolowsky et al. 2021).

Third, when comparing some of the local environmen-
tal metrics to their corresponding “integrated”, galaxy
global measurements (i.e., Σmol–Mmol, Σatom–Matom,
Σ(cid:63)–M(cid:63), and ΣSFR–SFR), the correlation coeﬃcients for
the latter are always smaller. One possible explanation
is that the correlations between cloud populations and
their local environment are more fundamental, to the ex-
tent that all galaxy-to-galaxy trends arise as their con-
sequences.
In other words, the apparent relationships
between cloud populations and global galaxy properties
might be completely mediated by the local properties.
This hypothesis is challenging to test based on the pair-
wise correlation coeﬃcients alone, as the strengths of
mutual correlations between the independent variables
(a.k.a., multicollinearity) are not explicitly modeled.

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

21

Figure 5.
Top left: Spearman’s rank correlation coeﬃcients between the population-average molecular cloud properties
(dependent variables) and the host galactic properties (independent variables). Darker red/blue colors indicate stronger positive/
negative correlations. The number in each entry is the corresponding correlation coeﬃcient, with black/gray font colors indicating
p-values smaller/larger than 0.001. Bottom left: Variance inﬂation factors (VIFs) calculated for the independent variables.
Larger VIFs indicates higher multicollinearity, i.e., stronger mutual correlations among the independent variables. Right:
Example scatter plots illustrating the correlations between three molecular cloud property–host galaxy property pairs.

The issue of multicollinearity is in fact a general con-
cern that impacts more than the local–global quantity
pairs identiﬁed above. Many local environmental met-
rics considered here are known to follow scaling relations
(e.g., see reviews by Kennicutt & Evans 2012; S´anchez
et al. 2021), and the same is true for the global galaxy
properties (e.g., Saintonge & Catinella 2022). This issue
poses challenges to determining whether there are any
secondary trends on top of the cloud–environment re-
lationships with the largest correlation coeﬃcients. To
quantify the severity of this issue, the bottom left part
of Figure 5 shows the variance inﬂation factors (VIFs) of
the same independent variable set. A larger VIF means
that a larger fraction of variations in that particular in-
dependent variable can be explained by the other inde-
pendent variables. The VIFs for many variables exceed
commonly adopted cutoﬀ values of 5−10 (James et al.
2013), signaling strong multicollinearity.

In the following section, we address this issue of multi-
collinearity with an information criterion-based variable
selection method.

5.2. Variable Selection

The goal of this section is to identify a subset of en-
vironmental metrics that are most directly relevant for
setting each population-averaged cloud property. We
attempt to distinguish the most fundamental cloud–
environment correlations from the ones that likely arise
as indirect consequences of covariance among environ-
ment metrics. Here we distinguish these underlying re-
lations through variable selection. For each cloud prop-
erty (as a target variable), we compose an empirical pre-
dictive model using a minimal set of environmental met-
rics (feature variables) that carry most predictive power.
This approach has the advantage of removing irrelevant
feature variables while optimizing prediction accuracy in
the face of multicollinearity. While this approach is still
limited by the precision at which we can estimate each

22

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

quantity of interest, it is an eﬀective way to collapse a
high-dimensional data set into concise and highly inter-
pretable predictive models.

5.2.1. Variable Selection Methodology

The basis of this analysis is a multivariable linear re-
gression in the logarithmic space. That is, we restrict the
model functional forms to simple linear combinations
of logarithmic variables (including an intercept term),
which are equivalent to products of power-laws of the
original variables (with a normalization constant). The
regression is done independently for each population-
averaged cloud property as a target variable, using all
the environmental metrics in Figure 5 as available fea-
tures. Although we have applied inclination corrections
to the measured cloud properties, we still include cos i
as an extra feature to capture residual trends with incli-
nation when they are present. After converting our fea-
ture and target variables to their logarithms, we median-
subtract all features to further reduce correlations be-
tween the ﬁtting variables (i.e., power-law slopes versus
the normalization constant).

With this regression setup, we perform a lasso model
ﬁt (Tibshirani 1996) and use the Bayesian Information
Criterion (BIC; Schwarz 1978) for model selection. This
is implemented with the LassoLarsIC function in the
scikit-learn Python library.
In detail, for a linear
predictive model with the form ˆyi = β0 + (cid:80)m
j=1 βjxij,
the lasso regression minimizes the following objective
function:

1
2n

n
(cid:88)

i=1

(yi − ˆyi)2 + α

m
(cid:88)

j=1

|βj| .

(25)

Here i = 1, 2, ..., n is the index of data (index of averag-
ing aperture in our case) and j = 1, 2, ..., m is the index
of features in the model. The α parameter is a non-
negative hyper-parameter, so that the second term in
Equation 25 adds a penalty for the use of any non-zero
slope in the ﬁtted model. This particular “regulariza-
tion” term is the reason that the lasso as a regression
method can also be used for variable selection.

The lasso regression yields a best-ﬁt model that min-
imizes Equation 25 for each choice of the α parameter.
To guide subsequent model selection, we calculate the
BIC value for each such model via

BIC = n ln(2πσ2) +

(cid:80)n

i=1(yi − ˆyi)2
σ2

+ d ln(n) ,

(26)

where d is the number of features with non-zero slope in
that particular model, and σ2 is the noise variance for
the target variable. This expression of BIC is derived
from its formal deﬁnition of d ln(n) − 2 ln( ˆL) assuming
Gaussian error, with ˆL being the maximum of the likeli-
hood function. It is consistent with other deﬁnitions in
the literature (e.g., James et al. 2013) up to irrelevant
constants.

For the noise variance σ2, the contribution from sta-
tistical uncertainties is generally small for our measure-
ments (typical fractional error ∼1–10%). We thus ex-
pect several sources of systematic uncertainties on the
level of at least 0.1–0.3 dex to dominate the total noise
variance. These sources include (but are not limited
to) the estimated αCO and the adopted R21 values, the
unknown sub-resolution gas spatial and kinematic struc-
tures, and calibrations of the ALMA data. Considering
these uncertainties, we conservatively use a noise vari-
ance of σ2 = 0.1 dex2 (i.e., about a factor of 2) for the
cloud masses, sizes, surface densities, and velocity dis-
persions. We use a larger variance of σ2 = 0.25 dex2
(i.e., about a factor of 3) for the turbulent pressures
and virial parameters, as they are particularly sensitive
to the assumed geometry of the gas.

To complete the model selection procedure, we com-
pare the BIC of all candidate models to their minimum
(BICmin) and identify a subset of candidate models that
satisfy ∆BIC ≡ BIC − BICmin ≤ 10 (see e.g., Kass
& Raftery 1995, for justiﬁcations of this ∆BIC = 10
threshold). Among this subset, we select the one model
that corresponds to the largest α value, which typically
includes the fewest features. This last step allows us to
further suppress any less relevant features, as there is
less strong evidence for their inclusion in the model.

5.2.2. Variable Selection Outcomes

With the lasso regression and the BIC-based model
selection, we ﬁnd a set of “preferred” power-law pre-
dictive models, whose analytical forms are tabulated in
Table 3. We also report in Table 3 the model resid-
ual scatter, the model coeﬃcient of determination (R2,
which quantiﬁes the model explanatory power), and the
BIC diﬀerence between the preferred model and a null
model with only the normalization term. Figure 6 il-
lustrates the full path of the lasso regression up to the
“preferred” model. The model residual scatter reduces
as each new feature variable is added into the model.

We ﬁnd that only a small number (0−4) of environ-
mental metrics are included in the preferred model for
each molecular cloud property, which means that most
of the correlations in Figure 5 can be attributed to a
more concise set of fundamental correlations. This re-
sult is in sharp contrast to the impression one would get
from the correlations in Figure 5, which indicates ubiq-
uitous, signiﬁcant trends for nearly all local and global
galaxy properties. Evidently, for most galactic proper-
ties considered in this work, their apparent correlations
with molecular cloud properties are potentially explica-
ble via their covariance with other galaxy properties,
such that the predictive models need only a few vari-
ables. Once the modulating eﬀect of those few variables
are accounted for, we see no evidence that the remain-
der play a signiﬁcant role at the current precision level
of our measurements.

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

23

Table 3. Power-law Predictive Models

Model

Σmol
10 M(cid:12) pc−2

(cid:17)0.75

(cos i)−0.50

= 100.59 (cid:16)
= 100.99

(cid:104)Mobj,150pc(cid:105)
106 M(cid:12)
(cid:104)Robj,150pc(cid:105)
10 pc
(cid:104)Σobj,150pc(cid:105)

(cid:17)0.78 (cid:16)

(cid:17)0.77 (cid:16)

(cid:17)0.10 (cid:16)

(cid:17)0.18 (cid:16)

(cid:104)σpix,150pc(cid:105)

(cid:104)σobj,150pc(cid:105)

(cid:104)Σpix,150pc(cid:105)

102 M(cid:12) pc−2 = 10−0.37 (cid:16)
102 M(cid:12) pc−2 = 10−0.65 (cid:16)
10 km s−1 = 10−0.24 (cid:16)
10 km s−1 = 10−0.33 (cid:16)
104 K cm−3 = 101.07 (cid:16)
104 K cm−3 = 100.87 (cid:16)
(cid:104)Pturb,pix,150pc(cid:105)
(cid:104)αvir,obj,150pc(cid:105) = 100.15 (cid:16)
(cid:104)αvir,pix,150pc(cid:105) = 100.25 (cid:16)

Σmol
10 M(cid:12) pc−2
Σmol
10 M(cid:12) pc−2
Σmol
10 M(cid:12) pc−2
Σmol
10 M(cid:12) pc−2
Σmol
10 M(cid:12) pc−2
Σmol
10 M(cid:12) pc−2
Σmol
10 M(cid:12) pc−2
AOort
10 km s−1 kpc−1

(cid:104)Pturb,obj,150pc(cid:105)

(cid:17)0.93 (cid:16)

(cid:17)1.05 (cid:16)

(cid:17)0.13

ΣSFR
10−2 M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2
ΣSFR
10−2 M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2
ΣSFR
10−2 M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2
ΣSFR
10−2 M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2

(cid:17)0.08

(cid:17)0.13

(cid:17)0.06

(cid:17)0.08

(cid:17)0.28

ΣSFR
10−2 M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2
(cid:17)0.08 (cid:16)

Σ(cid:63)
102 M(cid:12) pc−2

(cid:17)−0.30 (cid:16) Ωcirc

(cid:17)0.27 (cid:16)

30 Gyr−1

AOort
10 km s−1 kpc−1

(cid:17)0.14

(cos i)0.26

ΣSFR
10−2 M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2

(cid:17)0.39

Residual [dex] R2

∆BIC

0.17

0.09

0.19

0.14

0.10

0.11

0.30

0.34

0.20

0.19

0.70

678.18

0.00

–

0.74

968.54

0.85

1046.80

0.32

32.82

0.52

119.87

0.69

764.43

0.71

1104.86

0.35

49.23

0.09

6.72

Note— The ﬁrst column lists the power-law predictive models given by the lasso regression and BIC-based model selection
(Section 5.2). The second column shows the residual scatters around these models. The third column quotes the coeﬃcients
of determination, i.e., the fraction of variation in the dependent variable that is explained by the model. The last column
records the BIC diﬀerence between the selected model and a null model with only the normalization term.

Our variable selection exercise allows us to draw some
interesting conclusions based on the functional form of
the power-law predictive models in Table 3. First of
all, the absence of global galaxy properties (except in-
clination angle, see below) in these models implies that
their correlations with cloud properties are not funda-
mental: these correlations probably originate from the
tighter connections between molecular clouds and their
local (sub-galactic) environment. As star-forming galax-
ies follow various scaling relations, galaxies with larger
size, mass, and SFR would include more sub-galactic re-
gions with higher mass and SFR surface densities, which
subsequently entails cloud populations with higher av-
erage masses, surface densities, velocity dispersions, and
turbulent pressures. This is likely the driver of the ob-
served systematic variations in molecular cloud proper-
ties from galaxy to galaxy (e.g., Hughes et al. 2013a;
Sun et al. 2020a; Rosolowsky et al. 2021).

Furthermore, the galactocentric radius rgal does not
appear in any of the predictive models either. Given
that most physical properties of the host galaxy (in-
cluding many not considered in this work) are strong
functions of galactocentric radius, its general absence
in the predictive models is rather encouraging. It sug-
gests that those environmental metrics included in the
models are doing a decent job in capturing most system-
atic trends: they likely make better proxies than rgal for
many relevant physical quantities not considered in this
work (e.g., radiation ﬁeld, magnetic ﬁeld, and cosmic
ray strength).

The predictive models for speciﬁc molecular cloud
properties also provide insights into various aspects of

molecular cloud formation and evolution. Below we
comment on these models individually:
• Molecular cloud mass. The average molecular cloud
mass shows primary dependence on the kpc-scale
molecular gas surface density and galaxy inclination:
together, these two quantities can explain 70% of all
variations. On the one hand, we can make sense of
the former dependence in light of the theoretical ex-
pectation that gravitationally unstable gas disks tend
to fragment into objects at a speciﬁc mass scale (i.e.,
the Toomre mass). This mass scale is often linked
to the local gas surface density and the disk verti-
cal scale height H via MT ≈ πH 2Σmol (e.g., Murray
et al. 2010). While H is not available for variable se-
lection, our derived predictive models for molecular
cloud mass do exhibit slightly sub-linear dependen-
cies on Σmol. This is consistent with the expected
anti-correlation between Σmol and H, as Σmol rapidly
declines with galactocentric radius, while H mildly in-
creases with it in the inner part of nearby disk galaxies
(e.g., Yim et al. 2011, 2014).

On the other hand, a non-trivial portion of the
trends with Σmol and cos i could originate from obser-
vational and methodological limitations. The nearly
constant cloud radii given by CPROPS, in combina-
tion with small clumping factors (see Section 4.2),
would naturally produce strong correlations between
masses of the identiﬁed clouds and the large-scale
Σmol. The additional cos i dependence also signiﬁes
stronger source blending in more inclined galaxies,
despite CPROPS’s attempt to deblend based on in-
formation in the velocity space (see Section 2.1.1).

24

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

Figure 6. The full path of the lasso regression up to the “preferred” model for each population-averaged cloud property as
a target variable. The model residual scatter decreases as each new feature variable is added into the model. The “preferred”
model (large black dot) is selected by comparing the BIC of all models along the full regression path, as explained in Section 5.2.1.
Its coeﬃcient of determination (R2, see text label) can be calculated from the model residual scatter and the total scatter in
the target variable (horizontal dotted line).

Therefore, any attempt to interpret the predictive
model should also take these non-physical factors into
consideration.

• Molecular cloud radius. The BIC-based variable selec-
tion favors the “null” model for the average molecular
cloud radius, i.e., the one that includes only a normal-
ization term and nothing else. In other words, there is
no strong evidence that any of the environmental met-
rics considered here can eﬀectively predict the (small)
variations in the cloud radius. This agrees with the
notion that the sizes of the CPROPS-identiﬁed ob-
jects are more inﬂuenced by algorithm-related fac-
tors (e.g., deblending criteria) and data characteristics
(e.g., beam size; see Figure E1) than physical prop-
erties of the gas or the host galaxy environment (also
see Hughes et al. 2013a; Rosolowsky et al. 2021).

• Molecular cloud surface density. For this quantity
(measured with either object-based or pixel-based ap-

proach), we ﬁnd signiﬁcant, secondary trends with
ΣSFR on top of the prominent correlations with the
large-scale Σmol. A possible explanation is that re-
larger
gions with more clumpy molecular gas (i.e.,
clumping factor, higher (cid:104)Σ150 pc(cid:105) /Σmol ratio) are pos-
sibly more subject to gravitational instabilities and
the gas there has more chance to form stars. This
points at a possibility that knowing the molecular gas
clumping factor on 60–150 pc scales could allow for
better prediction of ΣSFR at a given Σmol on kpc scales
(i.e., improving upon the Schmidt-Kennicutt relation;
Schmidt 1959; Kennicutt 1998a).

It is also worth noting that the preferred models
for the average cloud surface densities do not include
a cos i dependent term. Though partly by construc-
tion, this still aﬃrms the eﬀectiveness of the incli-
nation correction on the cloud surface densities (see
Section 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 as well as Appendix C).

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

25

• Molecular gas clumping factor. We do not separately
construct a power-law predictive model for the clump-
ing factor because this quantity can be well approx-
imated by (cid:104)Σpix(cid:105) /Σmol when the data sensitivity is
suﬃciently high (see Section 3.2.1). Instead, one can
easily derive a predictive model for this quantity by
dividing the model for (cid:104)Σpix(cid:105) by Σmol.

• Molecular cloud velocity dispersion. The preferred
models for this quantity include the same environ-
mental metrics, Σmol and ΣSFR, as the models for
the cloud surface densities. Since molecular gas sur-
face density and velocity dispersion correlate strongly
even on a cloud-to-cloud level (see discussions in Sec-
tion 1), it is not surprising that the same environ-
mental metrics turn out to be most relevant for both
molecular cloud properties after population averaging.
However, the preferred predictive models for the cloud
velocity dispersion explain a much less fraction of its
total observed scatter (32–52%) compared to those for
the cloud surface density (74-85%). At least part of
this is attributable to the latter fraction being exag-
gerated, because the cloud-scale and kpc-scale molec-
ular gas surface densities tend to co-vary for many
non-physical reasons (e.g., relying on the same con-
version factor).
It is also possible that the physical
drivers of gas velocity dispersion variations are less
well-captured by the set of environmental metrics in-
cluded in this work (e.g., gas inﬂow rate is another
possible driver of velocity dispersion variations; see
Krumholz & Burkert 2010).

• Molecular cloud turbulent pressure. The functional
forms of the preferred models for this cloud property
are broadly consistent with the expectation from the
models for the average cloud surface density and ve-
locity dispersion.
Interestingly, the preferred model
for the pixel-based turbulent pressure also includes an
extra term depending on the large-scale stellar mass
surface density, Σ(cid:63), albeit with a small power-law in-
dex (0.08). Adding this term improves the model R2
by only a small amount (from 0.70 to 0.71; see Fig-
ure 6), but it lowers the model BIC by more than 10,
which means that our data clearly favor the model
with an extra dependence on Σ(cid:63). This extra depen-
dence is in line with theoretical models proposing that
molecular clouds can be inﬂuenced by the external
gravitational potential of the host galaxy stellar disk
(e.g., Meidt et al. 2018, 2020; Sun et al. 2020b; Liu
et al. 2021).

• Molecular cloud virial parameter. For this quantity,
the preferred models for the object-based and pixel-
based results show the largest deviation. The pre-
ferred model for the object-based measurement in-
cludes four galaxy properties (Σmol, Ωcirc, AOort, and
cos i), whereas that for the pixel-based only includes
AOort. This diﬀerence is probably related to the

narrower dynamic range in (cid:104)αvir, pix, 150pc(cid:105) than in
(cid:104)αvir, obj, 150pc(cid:105) (see Section 4.2).

Moreover, the appearance of Ωcirc, AOort, and cos i
in the models points at potential inﬂuence of galactic
rotation on the inferred cloud dynamical state. Par-
ticularly, if the measured velocity dispersion includes
contributions from diﬀerential galactic rotation (i.e.,
beam smearing), it would lead to positive correlations
with Ωcirc and AOort because they reﬂect the strength
of the diﬀerential motion, and with cos i because the
beam smearing eﬀect is more prominent in more in-
clined galaxies.

In summary, through the lasso regression and BIC-
based model selection we compose power-law predic-
tive models for all population averaged molecular cloud
properties. These models capture the primary cloud–
environment correlations with at most four environmen-
tal metrics as independent variables. The most com-
monly involved environmental metrics in these models
are the large-scale molecular gas surface density, Σmol,
and SFR surface density, ΣSFR. Furthermore, the gen-
eral absence of global galaxy properties in these mod-
els suggests that galaxy-to-galaxy variations in molecu-
lar cloud populations might be the mere consequences
of their tighter connections with sub-galactic environ-
ments.

6. CHARACTERISTIC TIMESCALES OF
MOLECULAR CLOUD EVOLUTION IN
PHANGS–ALMA

Molecular cloud formation and evolution are inﬂu-
enced by a number of physical processes including
turbulence driving and cascade, gravitational collapse,
galactic rotation and shearing motions, cloud–cloud
collisions, and gas depletion due to star formation.
These processes not only operate over a vast span of
spatial scales, but also feature diﬀerent characteristic
timescales. Estimating their timescales across diverse
galactic environments allows us to demonstrate the bal-
ance (or not) between these processes and infer how star
formation is regulated under distinct physical conditions
(Wong 2009; Jeﬀreson & Kruijssen 2018; Kruijssen et al.
2019a; Chevance et al. 2020a,b; Kim et al. 2021a).

In this section, we estimate six diﬀerent characteris-
tic timescales as a use case demonstration for our rich
multiwavelength measurements. We detail the deﬁni-
tion and derivation of each timescale in Section 6.1, and
compare the quantitative results in Section 6.2.

6.1. Timescale Deﬁnitions

• Free-fall time, tﬀ . This is the timescale for a molecu-
lar cloud to collapse in free-fall due to self-gravity, pro-
vided no pressure support to counterbalance it. We
estimate this timescale from the mean volume density
of molecular clouds under the assumption of spherical
symmetry. The population-average free fall time, ¯tﬀ ,

26

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

is subsequently calculated via

1
¯tﬀ

=

(cid:29)

(cid:28) 1
tﬀ

(cid:39)

(cid:42)(cid:114)

32Gρmol
3π

(cid:43)

(cid:42)(cid:115)

=

(cid:43)

.

8GMmol
π2R3

cloud

(27)
Here Mmol and Rcloud are the cloud mass and ra-
dius, estimated from either object- or pixel-based ap-
proaches8. The “(cid:104)(cid:105)” symbol denotes the same mass-
weighted averaging scheme as deﬁned in Section 3.1.
We deﬁne this population-averaged free fall time as
a mass-weighted harmonic mean so that it appropri-
ately reﬂects the overall timescale for the whole cloud
population9 (also see Jeﬀreson & Kruijssen 2018;
Utomo et al. 2018). We apply a similar complete-
ness correction to this measurement as we did for the
other population-averaged cloud properties (see Ap-
pendix D for more detail).

• Turbulence crossing time, tcr. This is the timescale
for the turbulent ﬂow to cross the span of a molecular
cloud. We drive it from the cloud radius and the (one-
dimensional) turbulent velocity dispersion, and then
calculate the mass-weighted harmonic mean as

1
¯tcr

=

(cid:29)

(cid:28) 1
tcr

(cid:39)

(cid:28) σmol
Rcloud

(cid:29)

.

(28)

Here Rcloud and σmol are the radius and one-
dimensional velocity dispersion of individual molec-
ular clouds, again derived from either object-based
or pixel-based analyses (see Sections 2.1.1 to 2.1.2).
Under this deﬁnition, the crossing time is related
to the free-fall time and the virial parameter via
tﬀ /tcr ≈ 0.50 α0.5
vir . Therefore, the crossing time of a
virialized molecular cloud would be roughly two times
longer than its free-fall time.

• Orbital time, torb. This is the period of the orbital rev-
olution around the galaxy center. We derive it from
the orbital angular velocity measured from the CO
rotation curves (see Section 2.5):

torb = 2π/Ωcirc .

(29)

• Shearing time, tshear. This is the timescale for two
objects to move closer/farther by a unit length az-
imuthally, given that they are on two circular orbits
separated radially by the same unit length. It equals
the reciprocal of Oort’s A parameter (see Section 2.5):

8 We use Mmol = Mobj/2 for the object-based measurements to

be consistent with our calculations in Section 2.1.1.

9 This mass-weighted harmonic mean can be very convenient in the
following scenario: if all clouds form stars on their corresponding
free-fall timescale with the same eﬃciency per free-fall time ((cid:15)ﬀ ),
one can easily derive the total SFR of a cloud population via
(cid:15)ﬀ Mtot/¯tﬀ , where Mtot is the total gas mass held by the cloud
population, and ¯tﬀ the population-averaged free fall time deﬁned
by the mass-weighted harmonic mean.

tshear = A−1

Oort =

2
Ωcirc (1 − β)

.

(30)

• Cloud–cloud collision time, tcoll. Most generally, this
is the timescale for any particular molecular cloud to
collide with another cloud (i.e., it is not the timescale
for such collisions to happen within a given area). We
estimate this timescale following a simpliﬁed model
of shear-induced collision (Tan 2000). The key as-
sumptions are that molecular clouds are randomly
distributed in each aperture, and that cloud–cloud
collision happens only when clouds catch up with
other clouds on adjacent circular orbits due to orbital
shear. In this scenario, we can estimate a population-
averaged collision time, ¯tcoll, via:

1
¯tcoll

=

(cid:29)

(cid:28) 2vshear
λmfp

(cid:39)

=

(cid:28) 2Rcloud/tshear

(cid:29)

(2RcloudNcloud)−1
4
tshear

Ncloud

(cid:10)R2

cloud

(cid:11) .

(31)

Here vshear (cid:39) Rcloud/tshear is the shear velocity of
two orbits separated radially by Rcloud, the aver-
age impact parameter among all collisions. λmfp (cid:39)
(2RcloudNcloud)−1 is the mean free path of cloud–
cloud collisions given a linear cross section of 2Rcloud
and an area number density of Ncloud. The extra fac-
tor of 2 on the numerator accounts for the fact that
the other cloud can be located on either an inner orbit
(smaller rgal) or an outer orbit (larger rgal) relative to
the cloud in question (Tan 2000).

Equation 31 makes it straightforward to estimate
¯tcoll from measurable quantities in the object-based
approach (or speciﬁcally, Ncloud as area density of
identiﬁed objects and (cid:10)R2
(cid:11) as mass-weighted av-
cloud
erage of object radius squared). Yet it is not trivial
to measure them with the pixel-based approach in a
totally symmetric way. Alternatively, we follow a sim-
ilar line of reasoning as Tan (2000) to approximate
¯tcoll from other pixel-based measurements:

1
¯tcoll

(cid:39)

4
tshear

Ncloud R2

cloud (cid:39)

(cid:39)

Σmol
4
tshear
πΣcloud
4
π tshear cpix

.

(32)

The second step assumes all molecular gas is con-
centrated into clouds with characteristic surface den-
sities Σcloud and radii Rcloud, such that Σmol ≈
Ncloud (Σcloud πR2
cloud). The third step follows from
the deﬁnition of the molecular gas clumping factor,
cpix, as the contrast between molecular gas surface
densities on cloud scales and kpc scales (see discus-
sion in Section 3.2.1 and Leroy et al. 2013).

We caution that the simplifying assumptions in-
volved in Equations (31) and (32) likely bias our ¯tcoll
In reality, molecular clouds are not
estimates high.

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

27

evenly distributed and have random motions in addi-
tion to circular rotation (also see Dobbs et al. 2015).
Possible blending of multiple clouds in a single beam
or a single identiﬁed object can also lead to longer
estimated collision timescales than reality.

• Molecular gas depletion time, tdep, mol. This is the
timescale to convert all molecular gas into stars at
the current SFR, provided no other sources or sinks
for the gas:

tdep, mol = Σmol/ΣSFR .

(33)

6.2. Timescale Comparisons

Figure 7 shows the statistical distributions of all six
timescales, including their variants derived from object-
or pixel-based measurements. For reference, we also
mark the range of molecular cloud lifetimes, tlife, mea-
sured from the spatial (de-)correlation of molecular gas
and young star tracers in a subset of PHANGS–ALMA
targets (Chevance et al. 2020a,b; Kim et al. 2021a). Ta-
ble 4 summarizes the median values and 1σ ranges of all
our estimated timescales.

Based on Figure 7 and Table 4, we can identify three
distinct groups of timescales separated by roughly an or-
der of magnitude apart from each other. The ﬁrst group
consists of ¯tﬀ and ¯tcr, both around 5−20 Myr. These
timescales correspond to physical processes taking place
inside molecular clouds. The median values of tﬀ and tcr
diﬀers by less than a factor of two, which is no more than
a restatement that most molecular clouds have virial pa-
rameters of order unity. Furthermore, they appear com-
parable to (or only slightly shorter than) tlife, as seen
in previous observations and simulations10 (Fukui et al.
1999; Elmegreen 2000; Kawamura et al. 2009; Murray
2011; Grudi´c et al. 2018; Kim et al. 2018; Kruijssen et al.
2019a; Benincasa et al. 2020; Chevance et al. 2020a).
This is not inconsistent with our estimated αvir = 1−2,
as even clouds in free-fall collapse can yield apparent
virial parameters of ∼2 (e.g., Ballesteros-Paredes et al.
2011; Camacho et al. 2016).

The second group of timescales consists of tshear, torb,
and ¯tcoll, all of which are ∼100 Myr. These timescales
characterize dynamical processes taking place on kpc
scales or even over entire galaxies. The order of magni-
tude contrast between them and the cloud “internal”
timescales discussed above implies that the eﬀects of
galactic-scale dynamics on individual molecular clouds
are likely modest. More speciﬁcally, tshear (cid:29) ¯tcr or ¯tﬀ
indicates that shearing motions are generally small on

10 We note that some studies in the literature argue for a longer
molecular cloud lifetime on the order of 100 Myr (e.g., Scoville
& Hersh 1979; Koda et al. 2009). These studies typically use
the timescales of galactic dynamical processes (such as orbital
time or spiral arm crossing time) as anchoring points to derive
molecular cloud lifetimes, which might partly explain why their
estimated cloud lifetimes are comparatively longer.

Figure 7. Stacked histograms of molecular cloud free-fall
time (a & b), turbulence crossing time (c & d ), shearing time
(e), orbital time (f ), cloud–cloud collision time (g & h), and
molecular gas depletion time (i). Symbols and colors have
the same meaning as in Figure 3. The shaded region in light
brown marks the range of molecular cloud lifetimes mea-
sured in a subset of PHANGS–ALMA galaxies (10−30 Myr;
Chevance et al. 2020a,b; Kim et al. 2021a).

cloud scales relative to motions generated by turbu-
lence or gravitational collapse (at least in most regions
targeted by PHANGS–ALMA; also see Utreras et al.
2020); torb (cid:29) tlife means that molecular clouds can only
last a small fraction of a complete orbital revolution
around the galaxy center (see Chevance et al. 2020a);
and ¯tcoll (cid:29) tlife suggests that cloud–cloud collisions do

28

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

Figure 8. Correlations between molecular gas depletion time (tdep mol) versus each of the other timescales shown in Figure 7.
The x-axes of all panels are scaled to show the same logarithmic range. Measurements in the “disk” and “center/bar” samples are
denoted by data points in blue and orange, respectively. We display Spearman’s rank correlation coeﬃcient for all measurements
at the lower right corner in each panel, with black (gray) font color indicating a p-value smaller (larger) than 0.001.

not happen to most molecular clouds throughout their
lifetimes (Blitz & Shu 1980; Jeﬀreson & Kruijssen 2018,
c.f. Dobbs et al. 2015).

The last group consists of tdep, mol by itself, which is
about 1−3 Gyr across our sample. This range is consis-
tent with many previous studies on the molecular dom-
inated regions in nearby, massive, star-forming galaxies
(e.g., Bigiel et al. 2008; Leroy et al. 2008; Utomo et al.
2017; Muraoka et al. 2019; Ellison et al. 2021). The
large ratios between tdep, mol and all other characteristic
timescales reaﬃrm the notion that star formation is in-
eﬃcient: the implied star formation eﬃciency is 0.5−1%
per free-fall time or turbulence crossing time (see Evans
et al. 2014; Lee et al. 2016; Vutisalchavakul et al. 2016;
Utomo et al. 2018, J. Sun et al. in preparation), ∼1% per
cloud lifetime (Kruijssen et al. 2019b; Chevance et al.
2020a, 2021; Kim et al. 2021a), and ∼10% per orbital
revolution or cloud–cloud collision (Silk 1997; Kennicutt
1998b).

Beyond the typical values of the estimated timescales
and their ratios, we also examine which timescales cor-
relate the best with tdep, mol. Figure 8 shows that all the
other timescales we considered show weak to no corre-
lations with tdep, mol (judging from the small correlation
coeﬃcients). The only statistically signiﬁcant trends are
with tshear and torb. They exhibit mild positive corre-
lations with tdep, mol with coeﬃcients of ρ = 0.18 and
0.14, quantitatively consistent with the results in Wong

(2009). Since these two timescales only diﬀer by a fac-
tor of π/(1 − β), and the measured 1 − β has a narrow
dynamic range across our sample and a relatively large
uncertainty, it is expected that tshear and torb contain
virtually the same amount of information and have sim-
ilar predictive power for tdep, mol.

7. SUMMARY

This work examines the fundamental correlations be-
tween molecular clouds and their host galaxy environ-
ments in 80 nearby, massive, star-forming galaxies tar-
geted by the PHANGS–ALMA survey. It directly ad-
dresses one of the core science questions that motivated
the PHANGS–ALMA survey: how do molecular cloud
populations depend on local and global properties of the
host galaxy? Taking advantage of the large, representa-
tive galaxy sample and the homogeneous, high-quality
data provided by PHANGS–ALMA, we provide a ﬁrst
systematic description of the environmental dependence
of the cloud populations residing in typical star-forming
environments across the local universe.

To achieve this overarching goal, we use PHANGS–
ALMA CO (2–1) imaging data products (Sun et al. 2018,
2020a; Leroy et al. 2021a,b) and CPROPS-based object
catalogs (Rosolowsky et al. 2021, A. Hughes et al. in
preparation) to determine a rich set of molecular gas
properties on 60−150 pc scales. We further comple-
ment these molecular cloud scale measurements with

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

29

Table 4. Statistics of Characteristic Timescales

Quantity

Weighted by number of apertures Weighted by molecular gas mass

All

Disk

Center/bar

All

Disk

Center/bar

(1)
¯tff, obj [Myr]
¯tff, pix [Myr]
¯tcr, obj [Myr]
¯tcr, pix [Myr]
tshear [Myr]
torb [Myr]
¯tcoll, obj [Myr]
¯tcoll, pix [Myr]
tdep, mol [Gyr]

(2)
9.3+4.2
−3.4
10.5+4.7
−3.8
15.6+7.1
−4.2
15.3+6.1
−4.6
59+25
−19
160+70
−60
74+101
−37
90+61
−36
1.8+0.9
−0.6

(3)
9.2+4.5
−3.3
10.9+4.8
−3.9
16.1+7.0
−4.1
15.7+6.4
−4.1
62+23
−19
170+70
−50
85+99
−45
92+53
−35
1.7+0.8
−0.5

(4)
9.5+3.1
−3.9
9.9+4.0
−4.1
14.0+7.3
−4.1
13.1+4.8
−6.2
52+32
−23
120+70
−50
57+64
−31
77+84
−29
1.9+1.0
−1.0

(5)
6.6+3.9
−2.0
7.7+4.1
−2.5
13.1+6.6
−3.0
12.5+4.4
−4.1
54+24
−20
140+60
−60
62+71
−32
80+52
−31
1.9+0.9
−0.6

(6)
6.7+3.8
−1.9
8.0+4.2
−2.2
13.8+6.8
−2.9
13.3+4.3
−3.1
57+22
−16
160+60
−60
73+74
−38
84+47
−32
1.8+0.8
−0.6

(7)
6.5+3.9
−2.2
6.8+4.5
−2.5
11.5+5.4
−2.0
9.2+6.2
−3.6
44+29
−20
100+60
−30
45+37
−24
68+85
−27
2.0+1.0
−0.9

Note— The median value and 1σ range (i.e., 16−84 percentile range) of the characteristic
timescales shown in Figure 7. Results in columns (2) to (4) are calculated by weighting
each aperture equally, whereas those in columns (5) to (7) are calculated by weighting
each aperture by the molecular gas mass it contains.

multiwavelength observations covering UV, optical, IR,
and radio bands (e.g., Leroy et al. 2019; Querejeta et al.
2021, A. Razza et al. in preparation, A. Sardone et al. in
preparation), as well as high-level data products includ-
ing rotation curves (Lang et al. 2020) and morphological
feature catalogs (Querejeta et al. 2021). Together, these
ancillary data present the kpc-scale gas and stellar mass
distributions, star formation activities, kinematic prop-
erties, and morphological structures in the host galaxy
(see Figure 1 for a schematic summary).

Following the cross-spatial-scale analysis framework
developed by Sun et al. (2020b), we divide the sky
footprint of each target galaxy into a series of hexag-
onal apertures, each 1.5 kpc in size (Figure 2). We ag-
gregate cloud-scale molecular gas measurements within
each aperture, and then calculate the mass-weighted,
population-averaged properties. We also compile mea-
surements of host galaxy properties as area-weighted
averages across the ∼kpc-scale apertures. Our anal-
ysis covers 46,628 apertures in total, and 3,383 aper-
tures with both cloud population measurements and host
galaxy measurements. We publish these rich multiwave-
length measurements online in machine-readable for-
mats (see Appendix F).

Utilizing these databases, we construct basic statis-
tical proﬁles for both the molecular cloud populations
probed by the PHANGS–ALMA survey and the kpc-
scale sub-galactic environments they inhabit. We quan-
tify empirical correlations between cloud population
properties and host galaxy environmental metrics. We
further perform a data-driven variable selection tech-
nique and identify a small subset of environmental met-
rics as primary predictors of the cloud population statis-
tics. Our main ﬁndings are as follows:

1. The PHANGS–ALMA survey samples a wide range
of host galaxy local properties. This is illustrated by

the broad distributions of galactocentric radii, orbital
kinematic properties, as well as kpc-scale gas, stellar,
and star formation rate surface densities among all the
kpc-scale averaging apertures (Figure 3 and Table 1).
Judged purely by aperture number counts, the most
typical sub-galactic environment in our sample closely
In comparison,
resembles the Solar Neighborhood.
most molecular gas mass is hosted in apertures with
higher gas, stellar, and SFR surface densities, which
are likely not matched by any kpc-scale region in the
Milky Way.

2. Molecular cloud populations vary substantially across
kpc-scale regions. This is seen in population-averaged
cloud properties such as mass, surface density, veloc-
ity dispersion, and turbulent pressure from aperture
to aperture (Figure 4 and Table 2). These population-
averaged measurements have been corrected for the
eﬀect of galaxy inclination and ﬁnite data sensitiv-
ity with novel methods. We conclude that variations
of cloud properties within and among galaxies are not
merely random scatter from cloud to cloud, but reﬂect
systematic change across sub-galactic environments.

3. Cloud population average properties appear signiﬁ-
cantly correlated with many local and global host
galaxy properties (Figure 5). The sense of these cor-
relations indicate that cloud populations with higher
average mass, surface density, and turbulence strength
prefer galactic environments at smaller galactocen-
tric radii, higher gas, star, and SFR surface densities,
shorter orbital period, and stronger shear. Similar
trends are also present with global galaxy properties.

4. Our BIC-based variable selection analysis yields a set
of power-law predictive models that capture the most
prominent trends for each cloud population-averaged
property (Table 3). The small number of indepen-

30

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

dent variables appeared in these models suggests that
most cloud–environment correlations can be reduced
to the primary dependencies on a few local environ-
mental metrics, especially on the kpc-scale molecular
gas and SFR surface densities. The absence of global
galaxy properties in these predictive models suggests
that the correlations between molecular clouds and
their local kpc-scale environment are more fundamen-
tal, and that galaxy-to-galaxy variations might arise
merely as their consequences.

The rich multiwavelength measurements derived in
this work have broad applications. We demonstrate one
application scenario by deriving and comparing a set
of characteristic timescales relevant to molecular cloud
evolution and star formation (Figure 7 and Table 4).
This further inquiry leads to the following ﬁndings:

5. The molecular cloud population average free-fall time
and turbulent crossing time are around 5−20 Myr,
comparable to typical molecular cloud lifetimes esti-
mated in a subset of our target galaxies (Kruijssen
et al. 2019b; Chevance et al. 2020a, 2021; Kim et al.
2021a). These results support the notion that, when
averaged across co-spatial populations, typical molec-
ular clouds have virial parameters of order unity and
only live for a few “internal” dynamical timescales.

6. The characteristic timescales of galactic-scale dynam-
ical processes (including orbital revolution, shear-
ing, and cloud–cloud collision) are around 100 Myr,
or about an order of magnitude longer than the
cloud “internal” timescales or their estimated life-
times. This contrast seems to suggest that galactic
dynamical processes would have to be highly eﬃcient
to have a pronounced impact on molecular clouds
throughout their short lifetime.

7. The molecular gas depletion time ranges 1−3 Gyr
across our sample, implying star formation eﬃciencies
of 0.5−1% per cloud free-fall time or crossing time,
∼1% per cloud lifetime, and ∼10% per orbital time
or cloud–cloud collision time.

8. Among all molecular cloud internal timescales and
galactic dynamical timescales we considered, only or-
bital time and shearing time show statistically signif-
icant (yet weak) correlations with the molecular gas
depletion time (Figure 8).

Our rich multiwavelength measurements have already
supported multiple observational studies on PHANGS
galaxies. These studies cover a broad range of topics,
including the dynamical equilibrium of the ISM (Sun
et al. 2020b), pressures in H ii regions (Barnes et al.
2021), morphological features in the stellar disks (Quere-
jeta et al. 2021), nuclear gas outﬂows (Stuber et al.
2021), and the molecular gas–star formation cycle (Pan
et al. 2022). We also expect similar applications in fu-
ture studies on PHANGS targets examining molecular

cloud lifecycle (J. Kim et al. in preparation), molecular
cloud star formation eﬃciency per free-fall time (J. Sun
et al. in preparation), and galaxy disk global instabilities
(T. Williams et al. in preparation).

Beyond the projects mentioned above, we expect these
databases to be useful for many purposes, and we high-
light as few of them here. (1) Our cloud population mea-
surements can be directly compared to similar measure-
ments in other types of galaxies, such as dwarf galaxies
(Mizuno et al. 2001; Leroy et al. 2006; Schruba et al.
2017; Imara & Faesi 2019), starburst galaxies (Ueda
et al. 2012; Brunetti et al. 2021; Krieger et al. 2021),
bulge-dominated early-type galaxies (Utomo et al. 2015;
Espada et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2021), or even lensed, high-
z galaxies (Dessauges-Zavadsky et al. 2019). Such com-
parisons could highlight commonalities and diﬀerences
among star-forming environments across the universe.
(2) Both our database and our power-law models can be
used to predict molecular cloud properties in other sam-
ples of star-forming galaxies with only kpc-resolution
data (e.g., Bolatto et al. 2017; Sorai et al. 2019; Lin et al.
2020). (3) Our databases provide a comprehensive set
of initial conditions and outcome properties for bench-
marking numerical simulations of the cold interstellar
gas at high spatial resolution (e.g., Benincasa et al. 2013;
Kim & Ostriker 2017; Dobbs et al. 2019; Jeﬀreson et al.
2020; Li et al. 2020; Treß et al. 2021). (4) Our measure-
ments allow for crucial tests of analytical star formation
theories (e.g., Krumholz & McKee 2005; Hennebelle &
Chabrier 2011; Padoan & Nordlund 2011; Federrath &
Klessen 2012; Krumholz et al. 2018; Burkhart & Mocz
2019; Orr et al. 2021), as well as empirical calibrations
of “sub-grid star formation recipes” in galaxy evolution
models (e.g., Olsen et al. 2017; Vallini et al. 2018; Pop-
ping et al. 2019).

We plan to keep maintaining and improving the
databases, thereby making them a long-term reference
for the community. In particular, crucial next steps will
come from incorporating measurements of ionised gas
and stellar populations from the PHANGS–MUSE sur-
vey (Emsellem et al. 2021), as well as star clusters from
the PHANGS–HST survey (Lee et al. 2021). Future
versions of these databases will be released at the same
location online as indicated in Appendix F.

This work was carried out as part of the PHANGS
collaboration. The work of JS is partially supported by
the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Coun-
cil of Canada (NSERC) through the Canadian Institute
for Theoretical Astrophysics (CITA) National Fellow-
ship. The work of JS, AKL, and DU is partially sup-
ported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) un-
der Grants No. 1615105, 1615109, and 1653300. The
work of JS and AKL is partially supported by the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
under ADAP grants NNX16AF48G and NNX17AF39G.
EWR acknowledges the support of the NSERC, funding

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

31

reference number RGPIN-2017-03987. EWK acknowl-
edges support from the Smithsonian Institution as a
Submillimeter Array Fellow. GAB gratefully acknowl-
edges support by the ANID BASAL project FB210003.
HAP acknowledges funding from the European Re-
search Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant
agreement No. 694343) and the Ministry of Science
and Technology of Taiwan under grant 110-2112-M-
032-020-MY3. JP acknowledges support by the Pro-
gramme National “Physique et Chimie du Milieu In-
terstellaire” (PCMI) of CNRS/INSU with INC/INP,
co-funded by CEA and CNES. MQ acknowledges sup-
port from the Spanish grant PID2019-106027GA-C44,
funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033. AS is
supported by an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics
Postdoctoral Fellowship under award AST-1903834.
TGW acknowledges funding from the ERC under the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme (grant agreement No. 694343). ATB and FB
would like to acknowledge funding from the ERC under
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and inno-
vation programme (grant agreement No. 726384/Em-
pire). MB gratefully acknowledges support by the
ANID BASAL project FB210003. MC gratefully ac-
knowledges funding from the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft (DFG) in the form of an Emmy Noether
Research Group (grant number CH2137/1-1). MC and
JMDK gratefully acknowledge funding from the DFG in
the form of an Emmy Noether Research Group (grant
number KR4801/1-1) and the DFG Sachbeihilfe (grant
number KR4801/2-1), and from the ERC under the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innova-
tion programme via the ERC Starting Grant MUS-
TANG (grant agreement No. 714907).
SCOG and
RSK acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the DFG via
the collaborative research center (SFB 881, Project-ID
138713538) “The Milky Way System” (subprojects A1,
B1, B2, and B8). They also acknowledge funding from
the Heidelberg Cluster of Excellence “STRUCTURES”
in the framework of Germany’s Excellence Strategy
(grant EXC-2181/1, Project-ID 390900948) and from
the European Research Council via the ERC Synergy
Grant “ECOGAL” (grant 855130). KG is supported
by the Australian Research Council through the Dis-
covery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA) Fel-
lowship DE220100766 funded by the Australian Gov-
ernment. KK gratefully acknowledges funding from the
DFG in the form of an Emmy Noether Research Group
(grant number KR4598/2-1, PI Kreckel). The work of
ECO is partially supported by NASA under ATP grant
No. NNX17AG26G.

This paper makes use of the following ALMA data,
which have been processed as part of the PHANGS–
ALMA CO (2–1) survey:
ADS/JAO.ALMA#2012.1.00650.S,
ADS/JAO.ALMA#2013.1.00803.S,

ADS/JAO.ALMA#2013.1.01161.S,
ADS/JAO.ALMA#2015.1.00121.S,
ADS/JAO.ALMA#2015.1.00782.S,
ADS/JAO.ALMA#2015.1.00925.S,
ADS/JAO.ALMA#2015.1.00956.S,
ADS/JAO.ALMA#2016.1.00386.S,
ADS/JAO.ALMA#2017.1.00392.S,
ADS/JAO.ALMA#2017.1.00766.S,
ADS/JAO.ALMA#2017.1.00886.L,
ADS/JAO.ALMA#2018.1.01321.S,
ADS/JAO.ALMA#2018.1.01651.S,
ADS/JAO.ALMA#2018.A.00062.S.
ALMA is a partnership of ESO (representing its member
states), NSF (USA), and NINS (Japan), together with
NRC (Canada), NSC and ASIAA (Taiwan), and KASI
(Republic of Korea), in cooperation with the Republic
of Chile. The Joint ALMA Observatory is operated
by ESO, AUI/NRAO, and NAOJ. The National Radio
Astronomy Observatory (NRAO) is a facility of NSF
operated under cooperative agreement by Associated
Universities, Inc (AUI).

This work is based in part on observations made with
NSF’s Karl G. Jansky Very Large Array (VLA; project
code: 14A-468, 14B-396, 16A-275, 17A-073, 18B-184).
VLA is also operated by NRAO.

This work is based in part on observations made
with the Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA).
ATCA is part of the Australia Telescope National Facil-
ity, which is funded by the Australian Government for
operation as a National Facility managed by CSIRO.

This work is based in part on observations made with
the Spitzer Space Telescope, which is operated by the
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Tech-
nology under a contract with NASA.

This work makes use of data products from the Wide-
ﬁeld Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE), which is a joint
project of the University of California, Los Angeles, and
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory/California Institute of
Technology, funded by NASA.

This work is based in part on observations made with
the Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX). GALEX is a
NASA Small Explorer, whose mission was developed in
cooperation with the Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales
(CNES) of France and the Korean Ministry of Science
and Technology. GALEX is operated for NASA by the
California Institute of Technology under NASA contract
NAS5-98034.

This work is based in part on data gathered with the
CIS 2.5m Ir´en´ee du Pont Telescope and the ESO/MPG
2.2m Telescope at Las Campanas Observatory, Chile.

This work has made use of the NASA/IPAC Infrared
Science Archive (IRSA) and the NASA/IPAC Extra-
galactic Database (NED), which are funded by NASA
and operated by the California Institute of Technology.
Relevant datasets to this work include S4G team (2010)
and Sandstrom (2019).

32

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

We acknowledge

the HyperLeda
database11 (Makarov et al. 2014) and the SAO/NASA
Astrophysics Data System12.

the usage of

Facilities: ALMA, VLA, ATCA, Spitzer, WISE,

GALEX, Max Planck:2.2m, Du Pont, IRSA

Software:

NumPy (Harris et al. 2020), SciPy (Vir-
tanen et al. 2020), Astropy (Astropy Collaboration
et al. 2013, 2018), pandas (The pandas development
team 2021), scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al. 2011),
Matplotlib (Hunter 2007), APLpy (Robitaille & Bressert
2012), MegaTable (Sun 2022), adstex (https://github.
com/yymao/adstex).

We list our galaxy sample in Table A1.

APPENDIX

A. GALAXY SAMPLE

Table A1. Galaxy Sample

Galaxy

d

i

P.A.

r25

rdisk

M(cid:63)

SFR

H i Data

IR Data

UV Data

[Mpc]

[deg]

[deg]

[kpc]

[kpc]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

[1010M(cid:12)]
(7)

[M(cid:12)/yr]
(8)

Circinus

IC 1954

IC 5273

IC 5332

NGC 253

NGC 300

NGC 628

NGC 685

NGC 1087

NGC 1097

NGC 1300

NGC 1317

NGC 1365

NGC 1385

NGC 1433

NGC 1511

NGC 1512

NGC 1546

NGC 1559

NGC 1566

NGC 1637

NGC 1792

NGC 1809

NGC 2090

NGC 2283

NGC 2566

NGC 2775

NGC 2835

4.2

12.8

14.2

9.0

3.7

2.1

9.8

19.9

15.9

13.6

19.0

19.1

19.6

17.2

18.6

15.3

18.8

17.7

19.4

17.7

11.7

16.2

20.0

11.8

13.7

23.4

23.1

12.2

64.3

57.1

52.0

26.9

75.0

39.8

8.9

23.0

42.9

48.6

31.8

23.2

55.4

44.0

28.6

72.7

42.5

70.3

65.4

29.5

31.1

65.1

57.6

64.5

43.7

48.5

41.2

41.3

36.7

63.4

234.1

74.4

52.5

114.3

20.7

100.9

359.1

122.4

278.0

221.5

201.1

181.3

199.7

297.0

261.9

147.8

244.5

214.7

20.6

318.9

138.2

192.5

355.9

312.0

156.5

1.0

5.3

5.6

6.3

8.0

14.4

5.9

14.1

8.7

6.9

20.9

16.4

8.5

34.2

8.5

16.8

8.2

23.1

9.5

11.8

18.6

5.4

13.1

10.9

7.7

5.5

14.5

14.3

11.4

1.8

1.5

1.3

2.8

2.8

1.3

2.9

3.1

2.1

4.3

3.7

2.4

13.1

2.6

6.9

1.7

6.2

2.1

2.4

3.9

1.8

2.4

2.4

1.7

1.9

4.0

4.1

2.2

3.4

0.47

0.53

0.47

4.3

0.18

2.2

1.2

0.86

5.7

4.1

4.2

9.8

0.95

7.3

0.81

5.2

2.2

2.3

6.1

0.88

4.1

0.59

1.1

0.78

5.1

12

1.0

4.1

0.36

0.54

0.41

5.0

0.15

1.8

0.42

1.3

4.7

1.2

0.48

17

2.1

1.1

2.3

1.3

0.83

3.8

4.5

0.64

3.7

5.7

0.41

0.52

8.7

0.87

1.2

Table A1 continued

11 http://leda.univ-lyon1.fr
12 http://www.adsabs.harvard.edu

(9)

ATCA:LVHIS

(10)

WISE

(11)

–

–

–

–

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

ATCA:LVHIS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

ATCA:LVHIS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:THINGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

–

IRAC & WISE

–

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:AH539

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

–

–

WISE

FUV & NUV

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

–

–

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:AT285

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

–

–

–

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

IRAC & WISE

NUV

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:AR351

IRAC & WISE

–

ATCA:literature

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

–

–

VLA:PHANGS

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE

NUV

WISE

WISE

WISE

FUV & NUV

–

–

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:PHANGS

WISE

FUV & NUV

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

33

Table A1 (continued)

Galaxy

d

i

P.A.

r25

rdisk

M(cid:63)

SFR

H i Data

IR Data

UV Data

[Mpc]

[deg]

[deg]

[kpc]

[kpc]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

[1010M(cid:12)]
(7)

[M(cid:12)/yr]
(8)

NGC 2903

NGC 2997

NGC 3059

NGC 3137

NGC 3239

NGC 3351

NGC 3489

NGC 3507

NGC 3511

NGC 3521

NGC 3596

NGC 3599

NGC 3621

NGC 3626

NGC 3627

NGC 4254

NGC 4293

NGC 4298

NGC 4303

NGC 4321

NGC 4457

NGC 4459

NGC 4476

NGC 4477

NGC 4496A

NGC 4535

NGC 4536

NGC 4540

NGC 4548

NGC 4569

NGC 4571

NGC 4596

NGC 4689

NGC 4731

NGC 4781

NGC 4826

NGC 4941

NGC 4951

NGC 5042

NGC 5068

NGC 5128

NGC 5134

NGC 5236

NGC 5248

NGC 5530

NGC 5643

10.0

14.1

20.2

16.4

10.9

10.0

11.9

23.5

13.9

13.2

11.3

19.9

7.1

20.0

11.3

13.1

15.8

14.9

17.0

15.2

15.1

15.9

17.5

15.8

14.9

15.8

16.2

15.8

16.2

15.8

14.9

15.8

15.0

13.3

11.3

4.4

15.0

15.0

16.8

5.2

3.7

19.9

4.9

14.9

12.3

12.7

66.8

33.0

29.4

70.3

60.3

45.1

63.7

21.7

75.1

68.8

25.1

23.0

65.8

46.6

57.3

34.4

65.0

59.2

23.5

38.5

17.4

47.0

60.1

33.5

53.8

44.7

66.0

28.7

38.3

70.0

32.7

36.6

38.7

64.0

59.0

59.1

53.4

70.2

49.4

35.7

45.3

22.7

24.0

47.4

61.9

29.9

203.7

108.1

345.2

359.7

72.9

193.2

70.0

55.8

256.8

343.0

78.4

41.9

343.8

165.2

173.1

68.1

48.3

313.9

312.4

156.2

78.7

108.8

27.4

25.7

51.1

179.7

305.6

12.8

138.0

18.0

217.5

120.0

164.1

255.4

290.0

293.6

202.2

91.2

190.6

342.4

32.2

311.6

225.0

109.2

305.4

318.7

17.4

21.0

11.2

13.2

5.7

10.5

5.9

10.0

12.2

16.0

6.0

6.9

9.8

8.6

16.9

9.6

14.3

5.5

17.0

13.5

6.1

9.6

4.3

8.5

7.3

18.7

16.7

5.0

13.1

20.9

7.7

9.0

8.3

12.2

6.1

6.7

7.3

6.9

10.2

5.7

13.7

7.9

9.7

8.8

8.6

9.7

3.5

4.0

3.2

3.0

2.0

2.1

1.4

2.3

2.4

4.9

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.1

3.7

1.8

2.8

1.6

3.1

3.6

2.2

3.3

1.2

2.1

1.9

3.8

2.7

1.4

3.0

4.3

2.0

3.8

3.0

3.0

1.1

1.1

2.2

1.9

2.4

1.3

4.1

2.1

2.4

2.0

1.7

1.6

4.3

5.4

2.4

0.77

0.15

2.3

1.9

2.5

1.1

11

0.45

1.1

1.1

2.9

6.8

2.7

3.2

1.0

3.3

5.6

2.6

4.8

0.65

3.9

0.34

3.4

2.5

0.61

4.9

6.4

1.2

3.9

1.6

0.30

0.44

1.7

1.5

0.62

0.80

0.25

9.4

2.6

3.4

2.5

1.2

2.2

3.1

4.4

2.4

0.49

0.39

1.3

0.023

0.99

0.81

3.7

0.30

0.047

0.99

0.21

3.8

3.1

0.51

0.46

5.3

3.6

0.31

0.22

0.040

0.079

0.61

2.2

3.4

0.17

0.52

1.3

0.29

0.11

0.40

0.60

0.48

0.20

0.44

0.35

0.60

0.28

1.2

0.45

4.2

2.3

0.33

2.6

(9)

(10)

(11)

VLA:THINGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:PHANGS

–

VLA:PHANGS

VLA:PHANGS

WISE

WISE

WISE

WISE

FUV & NUV

–

FUV & NUV

FUV & NUV

VLA:THINGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

–

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:THINGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:EveryTHINGS

IRAC & WISE

NUV

–

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:THINGS

WISE

FUV & NUV

VLA:AJ255

IRAC & WISE

NUV

VLA:THINGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:HERACLES

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:VIVA

VLA:VIVA

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:AW536

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:HERACLES

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:VIVA

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

–

–

–

WISE

WISE

WISE

FUV & NUV

FUV & NUV

FUV & NUV

VLA:EveryTHINGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:VIVA

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:HERACLES

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:VIVA

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:HERACLES

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

–

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:VIVA

IRAC & WISE

–

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:THINGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:AM384

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

–

WISE

FUV & NUV

VLA:PHANGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:THINGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:AS787

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

–

–

WISE

WISE

–

–

Table A1 continued

34

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

Table A1 (continued)

Galaxy

d

i

P.A.

r25

rdisk

M(cid:63)

SFR

H i Data

IR Data

UV Data

[Mpc]

[deg]

[deg]

[kpc]

[kpc]

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

[1010M(cid:12)]
(7)

[M(cid:12)/yr]
(8)

NGC 6300

NGC 6744

NGC 7456

NGC 7496

NGC 7743

NGC 7793

11.6

9.4

15.7

18.7

20.3

3.6

49.6

52.7

67.3

35.9

37.1

50.0

105.4

14.0

16.0

193.7

86.2

290.0

9.0

21.4

9.4

9.1

7.7

5.5

2.1

4.8

2.9

1.5

1.9

1.1

2.9

5.3

0.44

0.99

2.3

0.23

1.9

2.4

0.37

2.3

0.21

0.27

(9)

ATCA:literature

–

–

–

–

(10)

WISE

WISE

(11)

–

FUV & NUV

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

VLA:THINGS

IRAC & WISE FUV & NUV

Note— (2) distance (Anand et al. 2021); (3) inclination angle (Lang et al. 2020); (4) position angle (Lang et al. 2020); (5) isophotal radius
at 25 mag/arcsec2 in B band (LEDA); (6) stellar disk scale length (Leroy et al. 2021a); (7) global stellar mass (Leroy et al. 2021a); (9)
H i data source (VLA:PHANGS – A. Sardone et al., in preparation; VLA:EveryTHINGS – I. Chiang et al., in preparation; VLA:THINGS
– Walter et al. 2008; VLA:HERACLES – Leroy et al. 2009; VLA:VIVA – Chung et al. 2009; ATCA:LVHIS – Koribalski et al. 2018;
ATCA:literature – Murugeshan et al. 2019); (10) IR data source (Spitzer IRAC – S4G, Sheth et al. 2010, WISE – z0MGS, Leroy et al.
2019); (11) UV data source (GALEX FUV and NUV – z0MGS, Leroy et al. 2019).

B. PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE METALLICITY AND THE CO-TO-H2 CONVERSION FACTOR
In this work, we adopt empirical relation-based prescriptions to infer a local gas-phase metallicity (Section 3.3) and
its associated CO-to-H2 conversion factor (Sections 2.1.1 to 2.1.2) in each kpc-sized aperture. Here we detail these
prescriptions and the rationale behind them.

B.1. Metallicity

To account for possible variations of CO-to-H2 conversion factor across our galaxy sample, a key ﬁrst step is to get
homogeneous and reliable metallicity estimates. Although extensive compilations of (global and resolved) metallicity
measurements for nearby galaxies exist in the literature (e.g., Pilyugin et al. 2014; De Vis et al. 2019), we do not
yet have a uniform sample of resolved metallicity measurements with the same calibration scheme for all PHANGS–
ALMA targets. In this work, we instead rely on two well-calibrated scaling relations to capture the general trends of
metallicity variation across our sample.

We assume a global galaxy mass–metallicity relation (S´anchez et al. 2019) and a ﬁxed radial metallicity gradient

within each galaxy (S´anchez et al. 2014), such that

log10Z (cid:48)(re) = 0.04 + 0.01

(cid:18)

log10

M(cid:63)
M(cid:12)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

− 11.5

exp

− log10

(cid:19)

+ 11.5

,

M(cid:63)
M(cid:12)

log10Z (cid:48)(rgal) = log10Z (cid:48)(re) − 0.1

rgal
re

.

(B1)

(B2)

Here Z (cid:48)(re) is the local gas-phase abundance at rgal = re normalized by the solar value [12+log (O/H) = 8.69], Z (cid:48)(rgal)
is the normalized abundance at arbitrary rgal, and M(cid:63) is the galaxy global stellar mass derived by assuming a Chabrier
IMF (Chabrier 2003). Note that these scaling relations are appropriate for abundance measurements adopting the
O3N2 calibration in Pettini & Pagel (2004).

While Equations B1 and B2 are identical to the formulae used in Sun et al. (2020b), we make two methodological
improvements when applying them in this work. First, we elevate the M(cid:63) values in Table A1 by 0.1 dex before inserting
them into Equation B1. According to S´anchez et al. (2019), this 0.1 dex oﬀset can largely correct for systematic eﬀects
due to (a) diﬀerences between Salpeter and Chabrier IMFs, and (b) the ﬁnite aperture size of their IFU data (see their
Appendix A and Figure A1). Second, we estimate re by multiplying the stellar disk scale length, rdisk, by a factor
of 1.68. This step mirrors the procedure for deriving re in S´anchez et al. (2019). Overall, these two methodological
changes improve the self-consistency of our metallicity prescription.

As a sanity check, we compare our predictions to the observed two-dimensional metallicity distributions in 18 galaxies
in the PHANGS–MUSE survey (Williams et al. 2021, also see Emsellem et al. 2021). Modulo the uncertain translation
between diﬀerent metallicity calibration schemes (i.e., O3N2 versus S-cal; see Pettini & Pagel 2004; Pilyugin & Grebel
2016), the predictions and the actual measurements show similar median values (within 0.05 dex) across this subsample,
although the dynamic range of our predictions appears narrower than the observed range (0.12 dex versus 0.21 dex).

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

35

B.2. CO-to-H2 Conversion Factor
The CO-to-H2 conversion factor, αCO, is expected to depend strongly on metallicity (e.g., Wilson 1995; Arimoto
et al. 1996; Israel 1997; Wolﬁre et al. 2010; Glover & Mac Low 2011; Feldmann et al. 2012; Narayanan et al. 2012;
Schruba et al. 2012; Amor´ın et al. 2016; Accurso et al. 2017; Gong et al. 2020). Within a star-forming galaxy, αCO can
vary by more than a factor of 2 (Leroy et al. 2011; Blanc et al. 2013; Sandstrom et al. 2013), with part of it attributable
to metallicity variations (at least in the low temperature “outer disk” regime). These considerations motivate us to
use a metallicity-dependent αCO prescription as a ﬁducial choice in this work. Nevertheless, we also consider a few
other prescriptions and provide these alternative estimates in the published datasets.

Our ﬁducial estimate follows the same metallicity-dependent prescription as described in Sun et al. (2020b):

αCO(1–0)

M(cid:12) pc−2 (K km s−1)−1 = 4.35 Z (cid:48)−1.6 ,
where Z (cid:48) is the predicted local metallicity from Equations B1 and B2. The adopted power-law slope in Equation B3 is
motivated primarily by the metallicity-dependent part of the xCOLD GASS calibration (Accurso et al. 2017), whereas
the normalization is anchored to the Galactic value at solar metallicity (including the gas mass contribution by helium;
see Bolatto et al. 2013). This prescription gives similar predictions to many other prescriptions in the literature (e.g.,
Genzel et al. 2012; Schruba et al. 2012; Amor´ın et al. 2016) within the metallicity range probed in this work (e.g., see
Figure 6 in Accurso et al. 2017).

(B3)

Beyond this ﬁducial αCO prescription, we calculate four alternative prescriptions, following and expanding on Sun

et al. (2020b). The ﬁrst is simply a constant value matching the Galactic average:

M(cid:12) pc−2 (K km s−1)−1 = 4.35 .
The second prescription follows Narayanan et al. (2012) and infers αCO from both metallicity (Z (cid:48)) and the ﬂux-

(B4)

weighted CO (2–1) line intensity ((cid:10)ICO(2−1)

(cid:11)):

αCO(1–0)


M(cid:12) pc−2 (K km s−1)−1 = 8.5 Z (cid:48)−0.65 min

αCO(1–0)

1, 1.5 ×

(cid:32) (cid:10)ICO(2−1)
K km s−1

(cid:11)

(cid:33)−0.32

 .

(B5)

The above formula is adapted from equation (11) in Narayanan et al. (2012) with two notable distinctions. First, the
original formula depends on (cid:10)ICO(1−0)
(cid:11) assuming a line
ratio of R21 = 0.65 (den Brok et al. 2021; Leroy et al. 2021c). Second, we increase the normalization by a factor of
1.36 to correct for helium contribution.

(cid:11), whereas our formula converts that dependence to (cid:10)ICO(2−1)

The third prescription follows Bolatto et al. (2013) and infers αCO from metallicity (Z (cid:48)), molecular cloud surface

density (proxied by (cid:104)Σmol, pix(cid:105)), and kpc-scale total surface density including both gas and stellar mass (Σtotal):

αCO(1–0)

M(cid:12) pc−2 (K km s−1)−1 = 2.9 exp
(cid:40)

(cid:18) 40 M(cid:12) pc−2
Z (cid:48) (cid:104)Σmol, pix(cid:105)

(cid:19) (cid:18)

Σtotal
100 M(cid:12) pc−2

(cid:19)−γ

,

with γ =

0.5,

0.

if Σtotal > 100 M(cid:12) pc−2
otherwise

(B6)

Since calculating (cid:104)Σmol, pix(cid:105) and Σtotal relies on knowing αCO in the ﬁrst place, we solve for αCO iteratively until the
output of Equation B6 converges to the assumed value for calculating (cid:104)Σmol, pix(cid:105) and Σtotal (also see Equations 24–26
in Sun et al. 2020b).

We combine the above prescriptions for αCO(1–0) with the adopted CO (2–1)-to-CO (1–0) line ratio R21 = 0.65 (den
Brok et al. 2021; Leroy et al. 2021c) to get the appropriate conversion factor for the CO (2–1) line, αCO(2–1). We then
apply these αCO(2–1) values on a per aperture basis — that is, we assume a constant conversion factor within the ∼kpc
scale extent of each averaging aperture. These treatments largely follow Sun et al. (2020b).

As another improvement over Sun et al. (2020b), here we add a fourth alternative prescription following Gong
et al. (2020). This simulation-motivated prescription considers the dependence on metallicity (Z (cid:48)), CO line integrated
intensity (ICO), and the physical beam size (Dbeam). It directly predicts the conversion factor for the CO (2–1) line
without relying on a separately assumed R21 value. The original formula is expressed in number column density
convention (i.e., Equation 4b in Table 3 in Gong et al. 2020):

XCO(2–1)
1020 cm−2 (K km s−1)−1

= 21.1 Z (cid:48)−0.50

(cid:18) ICO(2–1)
K km s−1

(cid:19)−0.97+0.34 log10

(cid:16) Dbeam
pc

(cid:17)

(cid:19)−0.41

(cid:18) Dbeam
pc

.

(B7)

36

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

We convert it into mass surface density units via

αCO(2–1)

M(cid:12) pc−2 (K km s−1)−1 = 2.18

(cid:18)

XCO(2–1)
1020 cm−2 (K km s−1)−1

(cid:19)

.

(B8)

Since this prescription is calibrated at (cid:46) 100 pc scales, we derive the αCO(2–1) values pixel-by-pixel at 60–150 pc scales
and then calculate CO line intensity weighted mean values within the ∼kpc-scale averaging apertures. This is done
for all four resolution levels considered in this work (60, 90, 120, and 150 pc).

We include our estimated αCO(2–1) values from all aforementioned prescriptions in the published databases. This
allows for easy conversions if the reader wish to adopt an alternative prescription instead of our ﬁducial choice.
Concretely, our molecular cloud measurements scale with the adopted conversion factor as (cid:104)M (cid:105) ∝ (cid:104)Σ(cid:105) ∝ (cid:104)Pturb(cid:105) ∝
αCO(2–1) and (cid:104)αvir(cid:105) ∝ α−1
CO(2–1); the kpc-scale molecular gas surface density scales as Σmol ∝ αCO(2–1); the timescale
measurements scale as ¯tﬀ ∝ α−0.5
CO(2–1) and tdep, mol ∝ αCO(2–1). The impact of diﬀerent prescriptions on some of the
molecular gas measurements is examined in detailed by Sun et al. (2020b).

We expect future works to improve the handling of the CO-to-H2 conversion factor even further. Particularly,
combining a varying R21 (either observed directly or predicted based on similar observations; Leroy et al. 2021c) with
an R21-dependent αCO prescription (Gong et al. 2020) would allow us to better capture the gas excitation temperature
variations, especially in galaxy centers where this eﬀect becomes very pronounced. We also defer a more thorough
comparisons between the diﬀerent αCO prescriptions to a subsequent paper.

C. INCLINATION CORRECTIONS

In Section 2.1.1 and 2.1.2, we introduce inclination corrections on several molecular cloud properties measured at 60–
150 pc scales. These corrections represent an important methodological change, as many previous works (including Sun
et al. 2018, 2020a; Rosolowsky et al. 2021, using the same data set) have assumed spherical geometry for observations
on these spatial scales and, consequently, have not applied such corrections. This spherical approximation assumes that
at the resolution scale, the structure of the molecular ISM is isotropic. While this assumption is common throughout
the literature, it is not well tested. Furthermore, the 60–150 pc resolutions are also comparable to the thickness of the
molecular gas disk, which implies anisotropy. In this appendix, we show that there is an inclination dependence in our
measurements and motivate speciﬁc functional forms for empirical corrections.

The primary motivation for introducing these corrections is that the observed molecular gas properties (such as sur-
face density and velocity dispersion) at ∼ 100 pc scales show apparent correlations with the host galaxy inclination an-
gle. For example, A. Hughes et al. (in preparation) found such trends in the measured properties of CPROPS-identiﬁed
objects among the PHANGS-ALMA galaxy sample. A parallel examination of the pixel-by-pixel measurements derived
from the same dataset (Sun et al. 2020a) also reveals a similar trend (see Figure C1 left panel). Since inclination angle
is not an intrinsic property of galaxies, the presence of these inclination-related trends signiﬁes systematic biases in
the molecular gas measurements derived with both CPROPS-based and pixel-by-pixel approaches.

To quantify these biases, we carry out a modiﬁed version of the variable selection analysis in Section 5.2. We suppress
the inclination corrections for all molecular cloud properties (i.e., the cos i terms in Equations 1–13) while keeping
cos i in the list of feature variables. This re-analysis yields a new set of power-law predictive models similar to those
in Table 3, but many of these models now carry an extra (cos i)β term. Speciﬁcally, in the predictive models for Σobj
and Σpix, the power of the cos i terms are close to β = −1.0; while in the models for σobj and σpix they are close to
β = −0.5. In other words, to eliminate the apparent cos i dependence in these models (which should not be present
were these models reﬂecting purely physical trends), one would have to multiply cos i to the measured surface densities
and (cos i)0.5 to the velocity dispersions. This motivates the correction terms in Equations 3, 4, 8, and 10.

We also inspect the eﬀects of these inclination corrections on the original pixel-by-pixel measurements in Sun et al.
(2020a) without doing any cloud population averaging. Figure C1 compares the surface density–velocity dispersion
relation before and after applying the inclination corrections. Without these corrections, the median velocity dispersion
at given surface densities appears tends to be higher in galaxies with high inclination angles (smaller cos i). This trend
largely disappears when we apply the inclination corrections to both axes. This result suggests that, despite being
motivated by the observed cloud–environment correlations, our adopted inclination corrections can also remove the
unphysical inclination dependence in the relationships among molecular cloud internal properties.

Our adopted inclination corrections are empirical and data-driven, but their functional forms have physical impli-
cations. For the surface densities, a multiplicative term of cos i is the exact correction one would use for disk-like
structures with their orientations aligned with the whole galaxy disk. Our proposed interpretation is that the inter-
stellar gas forms ﬁlamentary networks, which preferentially align with the large-scale galaxy disk even at ∼ 100 pc
scales (Zucker et al. 2018). This preference in orientation should eventually disappear at smaller scales, but evidently,
the PHANGS-ALMA observations do not yet reach the transitional spatial scale.

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

37

Figure C1. The relationship between molecular gas surface density (Σmol) and velocity dispersion (σmol) measured pixel-by-
pixel at 150 pc scales, without and with inclination corrections (left and right, respectively). Both plots are made using the
published data tables in Sun et al. (2020a). The colors of the data points represent the cos i values of the host galaxies (see
colorbar), but have been median-ﬁltered to bring out the overall trend across the parameter space. The four colored lines in
each panel show the running median of σmol at ﬁxed Σmol for galaxies in four diﬀerent inclination bins. The left panel (without
inclination corrections) reveals a mild but statistically signiﬁcant trend of elevated σmol at ﬁxed Σmol in galaxies with higher
inclination (i.e., smaller cos i). This trend largely disappears in the right panel (with the inclination corrections applied).

For the velocity dispersions, there are at least two eﬀects that can produce some inclination dependence: (1) con-
tributions from ordered, in-plane motions of the gas (e.g., beam smearing), and (2) anisotropy of the gas velocity
dispersion (usually with the in-plane components larger than the vertical component; see e.g., Jeﬀreson et al. submit-
ted). Both eﬀects would predict higher velocity dispersions at higher inclination angles, which is consistent with the
direction of the adopted correction factor, but neither would call for a speciﬁc functional form of (cos i)0.5 for this
correction. Alternatively, if one assumes that the velocity structure of the turbulent gas can be described by a line
width–size relation of σmol(l) ∝ l0.5 (e.g., Solomon et al. 1987), and that this relationship still holds at 60–150 pc
scales, then the varying line-of-sight depth with inclination (i.e., l ∝ 1/ cos i) could imply σmol ∝ (cos i)−0.5, which
matches our empirical result.

We stress that all the inclination-dependent trends we identify above are real measurements that only emerge in
statistical analysis of many galaxies at similarly high resolution. They imply that the molecular gas structures are
clearly anisotropic at 60–150 pc scales. Existing and future surveys at even higher resolution (e.g., in very nearby
galaxies or in CO-bright sub-regions of PHANGS galaxies) can help us extend this analysis to smaller spatial scales,
where the transition from anisotropic to isotropic structures presumably occurs. This transitional spatial scale can
be further compared with estimates of the gas disk scale height from independent methods (e.g., Koch et al. 2020,
Jeﬀreson et al. submitted).

D. COMPLETENESS CORRECTIONS

In Section 3.2.2, we identify a systematic bias aﬀecting the population-averaged molecular cloud properties. This
systematic bias originates from the incomplete CO ﬂux recovery in the PHANGS–ALMA “strict” moment maps and
the associated CPROPS catalogs. We introduce a completeness correction to account for this bias, making use of the
measured CO ﬂux completeness, fﬂux, and area coverage fraction, farea, in each averaging aperture. In this appendix,
we present the mathematical derivation of this completeness correction method.

We assume that the intrinsic CO intensity probability distribution function (PDF) within each averaging aperture

follows a lognormal distribution:

P (ICO) =

√

1
2π σint ICO

(cid:20)

exp

−

(ln ICO − ln ¯ICO, int)2
2σ2
int

(cid:21)

.

(D1)

This assumption is motivated by observational constraints on the CO intensity distribution in nearby galaxies (e.g.,
Hughes et al. 2013b; Leroy et al. 2016; Egusa et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2018, 2020a). We further assume that the CO

38

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

emission included in the “strict” moment maps constitutes everything above a threshold intensity ICO, th (i.e., the
maps have a sharp, well-deﬁned sensitivity limit), and that the “strict” maps capture all emission along the sightlines
with CO detections. Under these assumptions, we can express fﬂux and farea in terms of σint, ¯ICO, int, and ICO, th:

(cid:90) +∞

farea =

P (ICO) dICO =

(cid:20)

1 − erf

1
2

(cid:18) ln(ICO, th/ ¯ICO, int)
√

2σint

(cid:19)(cid:21)

,

ICO, th
(cid:82) +∞
ICO, th
(cid:82) +∞
0

fﬂux =

ICO P (ICO) dICO

ICO P (ICO) dICO

(cid:20)

1 − erf

=

1
2

(cid:18) ln(ICO, th/ ¯ICO, int) − σ2
√

int

2σint

(cid:19)(cid:21)

.

(D2)

(D3)

Notice that these two relations allow us to inversely solve for σint and ln(ICO, th/ ¯ICO, int) and express their combinations
in terms of the measurable quantities farea and fﬂux:

ln(ICO, th/ ¯ICO, int)
σint

=

σint =

√

√

2 erf −1(1 − 2farea) ,
2 (cid:2)erf −1(1 − 2farea) − erf −1(1 − 2fﬂux)(cid:3) .

(D4)

(D5)

Here “erf −1” stands for the inverse error function.

We then calculate the appropriate correction factors for the population-averaged molecular cloud properties and
express them in terms of farea and fﬂux. The three population-averaged properties we consider here are the the ﬂux-
weighted average cloud surface density, (cid:104)Σ(cid:105) (Section 2.1.1–2.1.2), the molecular gas clumping factor, cpix (Section 3.2.1),
and the ﬂux-weighted average of the reciprocal of free-fall time, (cid:10)t−1

(cid:11) (Section 6.1).

ﬀ

Fcorrect, Σ ≡

(cid:104)Σ(cid:105)true
(cid:104)Σ(cid:105)obs

∝

(cid:82) +∞
0
(cid:82) +∞
0

I 2
CO P (ICO) dICO
ICO P (ICO) dICO





I 2
CO P (ICO) dICO

ICO P (ICO) dICO



−1



=

fﬂux
fcompl(2)

,

(cid:82) +∞
ICO, th
(cid:82) +∞
ICO, th


(cid:82) +∞
0
(cid:16)(cid:82) +∞
0

I 2
CO P (ICO) dICO

ICO P (ICO) dICO




(cid:17)2

(cid:16)(cid:82) +∞

ICO, th

I 2
CO P (ICO) dICO

(cid:17) (cid:16)(cid:82) +∞

ICO, th

(cid:16)(cid:82) +∞

ICO, th

ICO P (ICO) dICO

P (ICO) dICO
(cid:17)2

Fcorrect, c ≡

cpix, true
cpix, obs

Fcorrect, t ≡

ﬀ

(cid:10)t−1
(cid:11)
(cid:10)t−1

ﬀ

true
(cid:11)

obs

∝

=

∝

where

fcompl(β) =

=

f 2
ﬂux
farea fcompl(2)

,

I 3/2
CO P (ICO) dICO
ICO P (ICO) dICO





(cid:82) +∞
ICO, th
(cid:82) +∞
ICO, th

I 3/2
CO P (ICO) dICO
ICO P (ICO) dICO



−1



=

fﬂux
fcompl(3/2)

,

I β
CO P (ICO) dICO
I β
CO P (ICO) dICO

=

(cid:20)

1
2

1 − erf

(cid:18) ln(ICO, th/ ¯ICO, int) − βσ2
√

int

2σint

(cid:19)(cid:21)

(cid:16)

β erf −1(1 − 2fﬂux) − (β − 1) erf −1(1 − 2farea)

(cid:17)(cid:105)

.

(cid:82) +∞
0
(cid:82) +∞
0
(cid:82) +∞
ICO, th
(cid:82) +∞
0
(cid:104)
1 − erf

1
2



−1

(cid:17)




(D6)

(D7)

(D8)

Note that the second steps in Equations D6–D8 is valid because we adopt a constant αCO within each aperture.

Figure D1 shows the joint distribution of farea and fﬂux for all 3,383 hexagonal apertures, with color-codes reﬂecting
the amplitude of the derived correction factors Fcorrect, Σ and Fcorrect, c. The farea and fﬂux values for ∼68% of
apertures are consistent with intrinsic lognormal ICO-PDFs with σint ranging from 0 to 1.0 dex. This broadly matches
the observed ICO-PDF widths of 0.2 to 0.6 dex in sub-regions of nearby galaxies (e.g., Hughes et al. 2013b; Sun et al.
2018, 2020a) The implied ICO PDF widths for another ∼12% of apertures exceed 1.0 dex, which seem too high to be
physical. These apertures tend to have low farea, possibly suggesting that these apertures include true “empty” areas
devoid of CO emission, in which case the lognormal PDF assumption is no longer appropriate. Finally, the remaining
∼20% of apertures have fﬂux < farea. Given the high farea in most of these regions, it is likely that there is missing CO
ﬂux along sight lines with CO detections. We calculate the completeness correction for these apertures by assuming
an ad-hoc fﬂux value equal to farea.

The color trends in Figure D1 indicate that apertures with low fﬂux or farea would require very signiﬁcant complete-
ness corrections, which means that the CO detections in these apertures are too “unrepresentative” of the underlying
cloud population for us to extract reliable statistics. This motivates us to select a subsample of apertures with high

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

39

Figure D1.
Area coverage fraction, farea, versus CO ﬂux recovery fraction, fﬂux, on 150 pc scales within each of the
3,383 hexagonal apertures. Black lines show the expected farea vs. fﬂux relations for sensitivity-limited CO observations given
lognormal-shaped intrinsic ICO-PDFs (diﬀerent line styles correspond to lognormal PDFs with 1σ widths ranging from 0 to
1.0 dex). The colors of the data points reﬂect the amplitude of the appropriate correction factors on (cid:104)Σ150pc(cid:105) (left) and cpix, 150pc
(right) according to Equations D6 and D7. A red box highlights the parameter space with fﬂux > 0.5 and farea > 0.2, which
are the criteria for selecting the subsample of 871 apertures with high ﬁdelity measurements in Section 5.

fﬂux and high farea for the more careful correlation analyses in Section 5. The selection criteria, fﬂux > 50% and
farea > 20%, are also illustrated in Figure D1. Among all apertures that meet these criteria, the correction factors
on (cid:104)Σ(cid:105) have a median value of 0.03 dex and a maximum of 0.2 dex, which means that the uncorrected (cid:104)Σ(cid:105) values are
already close to the inferred true population average. For the same set of apertures, the correction factors on cpix have
a smaller median of 0.01 dex but a much larger maximum of 0.6 dex. The few apertures with very large correction
factors are those with high fﬂux but low farea, where a simple lognormal PDF is likely not a good description of the
underlying CO intensity distribution.

E. RESOLUTION DEPENDENCE

In this work, we derive molecular cloud measurements from the PHANGS–ALMA CO data at four common resolution
levels: 60, 90, 120, and 150 pc. The main text focuses on results derived at 150 pc scale so as to cover the full sample
of apertures while keeping the presentation succinct. In this appendix, we draw comparisons across all four spatial
scales to illustrate the scale-dependence of the measured molecular cloud properties.

The molecular cloud measurements are available for fewer and fewer apertures/galaxies as the resolution goes from
150 pc to 60 pc (see Leroy et al. 2021a). To control for changes in the aperture/galaxy sample and any associated
selection eﬀects, here we focus on a subset of 328 apertures in 15 galaxies with data at all four spatial scales. Besides,
the data sensitivity also drops as the beam size decreases, which could also leads to systematic biases in our molecular
cloud population statistics. We address this issue by applying completeness corrections to all population-averaged
measurements according to the ﬂux completeness and area coverage fraction of the CO moment maps at each resolution
(see Section 3.2.2).

Figure E1 illustrates that most molecular cloud properties presented in Figure 4 show some level of resolution
dependence.
In detail, the average molecular cloud mass and radius both increase strongly as the data resolution
gets coarser (the former is most likely driven by the latter). This reinforces the conclusion that the sizes of the
CPROPS-identiﬁed objects are primarily set by data resolution rather than physical properties of the gas distribution
(see Section 5.2). The slope of the (cid:104)Rojb(cid:105) trend appears sub-linear ((cid:104)Robj(cid:105) ∝ D0.6
beam), which seems to suggest that
the molecular gas structure is not completely scale-free between 60–150 pc. The average cloud surface density mildly
decreases with beam size, as expected from more beam dilution. The average cloud velocity dispersion increases with
beam size, but with a power-law slope of ∼0.20–0.23, shallower than the line width–size relation for molecular clouds
in the Milky Way disk (e.g., Solomon et al. 1987). The average cloud turbulent pressure mildly declines toward coarser
resolution, whereas the average virial parameter largely remains roughly constant. Both trends are predictable from

40

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

Figure E1. Resolution dependence of the molecular cloud population-averaged properties shown in Figure 4. In each panel,
the four “violins” represent histograms of the corresponding cloud properties at 60, 90, 120, and 150 pc resolutions. These
histograms are made from a common set of apertures for which measurements at all four resolutions are available. The black
open square and vertical bar indicate the median value and 16–84 percentile range (assigning equal weight per aperture).

their functional relations with cloud mass, size, and velocity dispersion. Finally, as the molecular gas surface density
distribution becomes more homogeneous at coarser resolutions, the estimated clumping factor diminishes accordingly.

F. MACHINE-READABLE TABLES

We publish our high-level measurements in the form of machine-readable data tables via the PHANGS CANFAR
storage13. A permanent copy of the version used in this article will also be available via the CANFAR Data Publication
Service14. This version includes two types of tables. The ﬁrst records the hexagonal aperture measurements, and the
second presents the radial bin measurements (see Section 3.1). Here we provide column-by-column descriptions of
the hexagonal aperture tables in Table F1. For clarity, we also add links to the relevant sections and equations for
each derived quantity. We do not separately provide column-by-column descriptions for the radial bin tables, but
simply note that the set of columns therein are almost identical, except that the radial bin tables lack the RA, DEC,
and phi_gal columns.

We plan to keep improving these data tables and release subsequent versions via the same CANFAR storage13.
Future versions will cover a larger sample of galaxies and include more measurements derived from other data sets,
such as H ii regions and stellar populations from the PHANGS–MUSE survey (Emsellem et al. 2021) and star clusters
from the PHANGS–HST survey (Lee et al. 2021).

13 https://www.canfar.net/storage/vault/list/phangs/

RELEASES/Sun etal 2022

14 https://doi.org/10.11570/22.0072

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

41

Table F1. Column-by-column Descriptions of the Published Machine-readable Tables

Column name

Unit

Description

ID

RA

DEC

r_gal

phi_gal

frac_CO21_center

frac_CO21_bars

V_circ_CO21_URC

e_V_circ_CO21_URC

beta_CO21_URC

e_beta_CO21_URC

Zprime

alpha_CO21_S20

alpha_CO21_N12

alpha_CO21_B13

<alpha_CO21_G20ICO_Xpc>

Sigma_mol

e_Sigma_mol

Sigma_atom

e_Sigma_atom

MtoL_3p4um

Sigma_star

e_Sigma_star

Sigma_star_3p6um

e_Sigma_star_3p6um

Sigma_star_3p4um

e_Sigma_star_3p4um

Sigma_SFR

e_Sigma_SFR

Sigma_SFR_FUVW4

e_Sigma_SFR_FUVW4

Sigma_SFR_NUVW4

e_Sigma_SFR_NUVW4

Sigma_SFR_W4ONLY

e_Sigma_SFR_W4ONLY

Sigma_SFR_HaW4

e_Sigma_SFR_HaW4

fracA_CO21_pix_Xpc

fracF_CO21_pix_Xpc

corr_I_CO21_pix_Xpc

corr_c_CO21_pix_Xpc

corr_t_ff^-1_pix_Xpc

c_CO21_pix_Xpc

e_c_CO21_pix_Xpc

<Sigma_mol_pix_Xpc>

e_<Sigma_mol_pix_Xpc>

<vdisp_mol_pix_Xpc>

e_<vdisp_mol_pix_Xpc>

<P_turb_pix_Xpc>

e_<P_turb_pix_Xpc>

◦

◦

kpc
◦

km s−1
km s−1

Aperture ID
Right Ascension of the aperture center (§3.3)
Declination of the aperture center (§3.3)
Deprojected galactocentric radius (§3.3)
Deprojected azimuthal angle (0 = receding major axis; §3.3)
Fraction of CO (2–1) ﬂux in the central region (§2.6, §3.3)
Fraction of CO (2–1) ﬂux in the bar region (§2.6, §3.3)
CO-derived circular velocity (Persic+96 model; §2.5, §3.3)
Statistical error on CO-derived circular velocity
Logarithmic derivative of CO rotation curve (Persic+96 model; §2.5, §3.3)
Statistical error on logarithmic derivative of CO rotation curve

Gas-phase metallicity relative to solar (Eq. B1–B2)

s M(cid:12) K−1 km−1 pc−2 CO (2–1)-to-H2 conversion factor (ﬁducial; Sun+20; Eq. B3)
s M(cid:12) K−1 km−1 pc−2 CO (2–1)-to-H2 conversion factor (Narayanan+12; Eq. B5)
s M(cid:12) K−1 km−1 pc−2 CO (2–1)-to-H2 conversion factor (Bolatto+13; Eq. B6)
s M(cid:12) K−1 km−1 pc−2
M(cid:12) pc−2
M(cid:12) pc−2
M(cid:12) pc−2
M(cid:12) pc−2
M(cid:12) L−1
(cid:12)
M(cid:12) pc−2
M(cid:12) pc−2
M(cid:12) pc−2
M(cid:12) pc−2
M(cid:12) pc−2
M(cid:12) pc−2
M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2
M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2
M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2
M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2
M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2
M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2
M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2
M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2
M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2
M(cid:12) yr−1 kpc−2

Flux-weighted mean CO (2–1)-to-H2 conversion factor (Gong+20 ICO-based @ X* pc; Eq. B7)
Region-average molecular gas surface density (PHANGS-ALMA; §3.3)
Statistical error on region-average molecular gas surface density
Region-average atomic gas surface density (PHANGS-HI; Eq. 14, §3.3)
Statistical error on region-average atomic gas surface density
Stellar mass-to-light ratio at 3.4 µm (Leroy+21; §2.3)
Region-average stellar mass surface density (ﬁducial; §2.3, §3.3)
Statistical error on region-average stellar mass surface density (ﬁducial)
Region-average stellar mass surface density (3.6 µm + varying M/L; Eq. 15, §3.3)
Statistical error on region-average stellar mass surface density (3.6 µm + varying M/L)
Region-average stellar mass surface density (3.4 µm + varying M/L; Eq. 16, §3.3)
Statistical error on region-average stellar mass surface density (3.4 µm + varying M/L)
Region-average SFR surface density (ﬁducial; §2.4, §3.3)
Statistical error on region-average SFR surface density (ﬁducial)
Region-average SFR surface density (GALEX FUV + WISE4; Eq. 17, §3.3)
Statistical error on region-average SFR surface density (GALEX FUV + WISE4)
Region-average SFR surface density (GALEX NUV + WISE4; Eq. 18, §3.3)
Statistical error on region-average SFR surface density (GALEX NUV + WISE4)
Region-average SFR surface density (WISE4 only; Eq. 19, §3.3)
Statistical error on region-average SFR surface density (WISE4 only)
Region-average SFR surface density (Hα + WISE4; Eq. 22, §3.3)
Statistical error on region-average SFR surface density (Hα + WISE4)
Area ﬁlling fraction of CO (2–1) detection @ X* pc (§3.2.2)
Flux completeness of CO (2–1) detection @ X* pc (§3.2.2)
Completeness correction on ﬂux-weighted mean cloud surface density @ X* pc (Eq. D6)
Completeness correction on CO (2–1) clumping factor @ X* pc (Eq. D7)
Completeness correction on ﬂux-weighted mean reciprocal of free-fall time @ X* pc (Eq. D8)
Clumping factor of CO (2–1) emission @ X* pc (Eq. 24)
Statistical error on clumping factor of CO (2–1) emission @ X* pc
Flux-weighted mean molecular gas surface density @ X* pc (Eq. 8, §3.2)
Statistical error on ﬂux-weighted mean molecular gas surface density @ X* pc
Flux-weighted mean molecular gas velocity dispersion @ X* pc (Eq. 10, §3.2)
Statistical error on ﬂux-weighted mean molecular gas velocity dispersion @ X* pc
Flux-weighted mean molecular gas turbulent pressure @ X* pc (Eq. 12, §3.2)
Statistical error on ﬂux-weighted mean molecular gas turbulent pressure @ X* pc

M(cid:12) pc−2
M(cid:12) pc−2
km s−1

km s−1

K cm−3

K cm−3

Table F1 continued

42

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

Table F1 (continued)

Column name

Unit

Description

<alpha_vir_pix_Xpc>

e_<alpha_vir_pix_Xpc>

<t_cross^-1_pix_Xpc>

Myr−1

e_<t_cross^-1_pix_Xpc> Myr−1

<t_ff^-1_pix_Xpc>

e_<t_ff^-1_pix_Xpc>

N_obj_Xpc

fracF_CO21_obj_Xpc

<M_mol_obj_Xpc>

e_<M_mol_obj_Xpc>

<Sigma_mol_obj_Xpc>

e_<Sigma_mol_obj_Xpc>

<vdisp_mol_obj_Xpc>

e_<vdisp_mol_obj_Xpc>

<R_3d_obj_Xpc>

e_<R_3d_obj_Xpc>

<P_turb_obj_Xpc>

e_<P_turb_obj_Xpc>

<alpha_vir_obj_Xpc>

e_<alpha_vir_obj_Xpc>

Myr−1

Myr−1

M(cid:12)

M(cid:12)
M(cid:12) pc−2
M(cid:12) pc−2
km s−1

km s−1

pc

pc

K cm−3

K cm−3

<t_cross^-1_obj_Xpc>

Myr−1

e_<t_cross^-1_obj_Xpc> Myr−1

<t_ff^-1_obj_Xpc>

e_<t_ff^-1_obj_Xpc>

Myr−1

Myr−1

∗ X = 60, 90, 120, and 150.

Flux-weighted mean virial parameter @ X* pc (Eq. 13, §3.2)
Statistical error on ﬂux-weighted mean virial parameter @ X* pc
Flux-weighted mean reciprocal of crossing time @ X* pc (Eq. 28, §3.2)
Statistical error on ﬂux-weighted mean reciprocal of crossing time @ X* pc
Flux-weighted mean reciprocal of free-fall time @ X* pc (Eq. 27, §3.2)
Statistical error on ﬂux-weighted mean reciprocal of free-fall time @ X* pc
Number of CPROPS objects in each aperture @ X* pc
Flux completeness of CPROPS objects @ X* pc (§3.2.2)
Flux-weighted mean object molecular gas mass @ X* pc (Eq. 1, §3.2)
Statistical error on ﬂux-weighted mean object molecular gas mass @ X* pc
Flux-weighted mean object molecular gas surface density @ X* pc (Eq. 3, §3.2)
Statistical error on ﬂux-weighted mean object molecular gas surface density @ X* pc
Flux-weighted mean object velocity dispersion @ X* pc (Eq. 4, §3.2)
Statistical error on ﬂux-weighted mean object velocity dispersion @ X* pc
Flux-weighted mean object 3d radius @ X* pc (Eq. 5, §3.2)
Statistical error on ﬂux-weighted mean object 3d radius @ X* pc
Flux-weighted mean object molecular gas turbulent pressure @ X* pc (Eq. 6, §3.2)
Statistical error on ﬂux-weighted mean object molecular gas turbulent pressure @ X* pc
Flux-weighted mean object virial parameter @ X* pc (Eq. 7, §3.2)
Statistical error on ﬂux-weighted mean object virial parameter @ X* pc
Flux-weighted mean reciprocal of object crossing time @ X* pc (Eq. 28, §3.2)
Statistical error on ﬂux-weighted mean reciprocal of object crossing time @ X* pc
Flux-weighted mean reciprocal of object free-fall time @ X* pc (Eq. 27, §3.2)
Statistical error on ﬂux-weighted mean reciprocal of object free-fall time @ X* pc

REFERENCES

Accurso, G., Saintonge, A., Catinella, B., et al. 2017,

Ballesteros-Paredes, J., Hartmann, L. W.,

MNRAS, 470, 4750

Amor´ın, R., Mu˜noz-Tu˜n´on, C., Aguerri, J. A. L., &

V´azquez-Semadeni, E., Heitsch, F., & Zamora-Avil´es,
M. A. 2011, MNRAS, 411, 65

Planesas, P. 2016, A&A, 588, A23

Ballesteros-Paredes, J., Andr´e, P., Hennebelle, P., et al.

Anand, G. S., Lee, J. C., Van Dyk, S. D., et al. 2021,

2020, SSRv, 216, 76

MNRAS, 501, 3621

Barnes, A. T., Glover, S. C. O., Kreckel, K., et al. 2021,

Aniano, G., Draine, B. T., Gordon, K. D., & Sandstrom, K.

MNRAS, arXiv:2110.05492

2011, PASP, 123, 1218

Benincasa, S. M., Tasker, E. J., Pudritz, R. E., & Wadsley,

Arimoto, N., Sofue, Y., & Tsujimoto, T. 1996, PASJ, 48,

J. 2013, ApJ, 776, 23

275

Benincasa, S. M., Loebman, S. R., Wetzel, A., et al. 2020,

Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J.,

MNRAS, 497, 3993

et al. 2013, A&A, 558, A33

Bigiel, F., Leroy, A., Walter, F., et al. 2008, AJ, 136, 2846

Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sip˝ocz, B. M.,

Blanc, G. A., Schruba, A., Evans, Neal J., I., et al. 2013,

et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 123

ApJ, 764, 117

Bacchini, C., Fraternali, F., Iorio, G., & Pezzulli, G. 2019,

Blitz, L., & Shu, F. H. 1980, ApJ, 238, 148

A&A, 622, A64

Bolatto, A. D., Leroy, A. K., Rosolowsky, E., Walter, F., &

Ballesteros-Paredes, J. 2006, MNRAS, 372, 443

Blitz, L. 2008, ApJ, 686, 948

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

43

Bolatto, A. D., Wolﬁre, M., & Leroy, A. K. 2013, ARA&A,

Emsellem, E., Schinnerer, E., Santoro, F., et al. 2021, A&A

51, 207

submitted. https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.03708v1

Bolatto, A. D., Wong, T., Utomo, D., et al. 2017, ApJ, 846,

Espada, D., Verley, S., Miura, R. E., et al. 2019, ApJ, 887,

159

88

Boquien, M., Kennicutt, R., Calzetti, D., et al. 2016, A&A,

Evans, Neal J., I., Heiderman, A., & Vutisalchavakul, N.

591, A6

Bovy, J. 2017a, MNRAS, 468, L63

—. 2017b, MNRAS, 470, 1360

2014, ApJ, 782, 114

Federrath, C., & Klessen, R. S. 2012, ApJ, 761, 156

Feldmann, R., Gnedin, N. Y., & Kravtsov, A. V. 2012,

Brunetti, N., Wilson, C. D., Sliwa, K., et al. 2021, MNRAS,

ApJ, 747, 124

500, 4730

Field, G. B., Blackman, E. G., & Keto, E. R. 2011,

Burkhart, B., & Mocz, P. 2019, ApJ, 879, 129

MNRAS, 416, 710

Calzetti, D., Kennicutt, R. C., Engelbracht, C. W., et al.

Freeman, P., Rosolowsky, E., Kruijssen, J. M. D., Bastian,

2007, ApJ, 666, 870

N., & Adamo, A. 2017, MNRAS, 468, 1769

Camacho, V., V´azquez-Semadeni, E., Ballesteros-Paredes,

Fukui, Y., & Kawamura, A. 2010, ARA&A, 48, 547

J., et al. 2016, ApJ, 833, 113

Chabrier, G. 2003, PASP, 115, 763

Fukui, Y., Mizuno, N., Yamaguchi, R., et al. 1999, PASJ,

51, 745

Chevance, M., Kruijssen, J. M. D., Hygate, A. P. S., et al.

Genzel, R., Tacconi, L. J., Combes, F., et al. 2012, ApJ,

2020a, MNRAS, 493, 2872

746, 69

Chevance, M., Kruijssen, J. M. D., Vazquez-Semadeni, E.,

Girichidis, P., Oﬀner, S. S. R., Kritsuk, A. G., et al. 2020,

et al. 2020b, SSRv, 216, 50

SSRv, 216, 68

Chevance, M., Kruijssen, J. M. D., Krumholz, M. R., et al.

Glover, S. C. O., & Mac Low, M. M. 2011, MNRAS, 412,

2021, MNRAS, arXiv:2010.13788

337

Chung, A., van Gorkom, J. H., Kenney, J. D. P., Crowl, H.,

Gong, M., Ostriker, E. C., Kim, C.-G., & Kim, J.-G. 2020,

& Vollmer, B. 2009, AJ, 138, 1741

ApJ, 903, 142

Colombo, D., Hughes, A., Schinnerer, E., et al. 2014, ApJ,

Grudi´c, M. Y., Hopkins, P. F., Faucher-Gigu`ere, C.-A.,

784, 3

et al. 2018, MNRAS, 475, 3511

Colombo, D., Rosolowsky, E., Duarte-Cabral, A., et al.

Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al.

2019, MNRAS, 483, 4291

2020, Nature, 585, 357

Davis, T. A., Gensior, J., Bureau, M., et al. 2022, arXiv

Hennebelle, P., & Chabrier, G. 2011, ApJL, 743, L29

e-prints, arXiv:2203.01358

Henshaw, J. D., Longmore, S. N., Kruijssen, J. M. D., et al.

De Vis, P., Jones, A., Viaene, S., et al. 2019, A&A, 623, A5

2016, MNRAS, 457, 2675

den Brok, J. S., Chatzigiannakis, D., Bigiel, F., et al. 2021,

Henshaw, J. D., Kruijssen, J. M. D., Longmore, S. N., et al.

MNRAS, 504, 3221

2020, Nature Astronomy, 4, 1064

Dessauges-Zavadsky, M., Richard, J., Combes, F., et al.

Herrera, C. N., Pety, J., Hughes, A., et al. 2020, A&A, 634,

2019, Nature Astronomy, 3, 1115

A121

Dobbs, C. L., Pringle, J. E., & Duarte-Cabral, A. 2015,

Herrera-Endoqui, M., D´ıaz-Garc´ıa, S., Laurikainen, E., &

MNRAS, 446, 3608

Salo, H. 2015, A&A, 582, A86

Dobbs, C. L., Rosolowsky, E., Pettitt, A. R., et al. 2019,

Heyer, M., & Dame, T. M. 2015, ARA&A, 53, 583

MNRAS, 485, 4997

Heyer, M., Krawczyk, C., Duval, J., & Jackson, J. M. 2009,

Dobbs, C. L., Krumholz, M. R., Ballesteros-Paredes, J.,

ApJ, 699, 1092

et al. 2014, in Protostars and Planets VI, ed. H. Beuther,
R. S. Klessen, C. P. Dullemond, & T. Henning, 3

Heyer, M. H., Carpenter, J. M., & Snell, R. L. 2001, ApJ,

551, 852

Donovan Meyer, J., Koda, J., Momose, R., et al. 2013, ApJ,

Hirota, A., Egusa, F., Baba, J., et al. 2018, PASJ, 70, 73

772, 107

Hughes, A., Meidt, S. E., Colombo, D., et al. 2013a, ApJ,

Egusa, F., Hirota, A., Baba, J., & Muraoka, K. 2018, ApJ,

779, 46

854, 90

Hughes, A., Meidt, S. E., Schinnerer, E., et al. 2013b, ApJ,

Ellison, S. L., Lin, L., Thorp, M. D., et al. 2021, MNRAS,

779, 44

501, 4777

Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering,

Elmegreen, B. G. 2000, ApJ, 530, 277

9, 90

44

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

Ib´a˜nez-Mej´ıa, J. C., Mac Low, M.-M., Klessen, R. S., &

Lee, E. J., Miville-Deschˆenes, M.-A., & Murray, N. W.

Baczynski, C. 2016, ApJ, 824, 41

2016, ApJ, 833, 229

Imara, N., & Faesi, C. M. 2019, ApJ, 876, 141

Lee, J. C., Whitmore, B. C., Thilker, D. A., et al. 2021,

Israel, F. P. 1997, A&A, 328, 471

—. 2020, A&A, 635, A131

arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2101.02855

Leroy, A., Bolatto, A., Walter, F., & Blitz, L. 2006, ApJ,

James, G., Witten, D., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. 2013,

643, 825

An introduction to statistical learning, Vol. 112
(Springer), doi:10.1007/978-1-4614-7138-7

Leroy, A. K., Walter, F., Brinks, E., et al. 2008, AJ, 136,

2782

Jeﬀreson, S. M. R., & Kruijssen, J. M. D. 2018, MNRAS,

Leroy, A. K., Walter, F., Bigiel, F., et al. 2009, AJ, 137,

476, 3688

4670

Jeﬀreson, S. M. R., Kruijssen, J. M. D., Keller, B. W.,

Leroy, A. K., Bolatto, A., Gordon, K., et al. 2011, ApJ,

Chevance, M., & Glover, S. C. O. 2020, MNRAS, 498, 385

737, 12

Kass, R. E., & Raftery, A. E. 1995, Journal of the

American Statistical Association, 90, 773.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2291091

Leroy, A. K., Lee, C., Schruba, A., et al. 2013, ApJL, 769,

L12

Leroy, A. K., Bolatto, A. D., Ostriker, E. C., et al. 2015,

Kawamura, A., Mizuno, Y., Minamidani, T., et al. 2009,

ApJ, 801, 25

ApJS, 184, 1

Kennicutt, Robert C., J. 1998a, ARA&A, 36, 189

—. 1998b, ApJ, 498, 541

Kennicutt, R. C., & Evans, N. J. 2012, ARA&A, 50, 531

Kim, C.-G., & Ostriker, E. C. 2017, ApJ, 846, 133

Kim, J., Chevance, M., Kruijssen, J. M. D., et al. 2021a,

MNRAS, 504, 487

Kim, J.-G., Kim, W.-T., & Ostriker, E. C. 2018, ApJ, 859,

68

Kim, J.-G., Ostriker, E. C., & Filippova, N. 2021b, ApJ,

911, 128

Klessen, R. S., & Glover, S. C. O. 2016, Saas-Fee Advanced

Course, 43, 85

Koch, E. W., Chiang, I.-D., Utomo, D., et al. 2020,

MNRAS, 492, 2663

Koda, J., Scoville, N., Sawada, T., et al. 2009, ApJL, 700,

L132

Koribalski, B. S., Wang, J., Kamphuis, P., et al. 2018,

MNRAS, 478, 1611

Krieger, N., Walter, F., Bolatto, A. D., et al. 2021, ApJL,

915, L3

Kroupa, P. 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231

Kruijssen, J. M. D., Schruba, A., Chevance, M., et al.

2019a, Nature, 569, 519

Leroy, A. K., Hughes, A., Schruba, A., et al. 2016, ApJ,

831, 16

Leroy, A. K., Schinnerer, E., Hughes, A., et al. 2017, ApJ,

846, 71

Leroy, A. K., Sandstrom, K. M., Lang, D., et al. 2019,

ApJS, 244, 24

Leroy, A. K., Schinnerer, E., Hughes, A., et al. 2021a,

arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2104.07739

Leroy, A. K., Hughes, A., Liu, D., et al. 2021b, ApJS, 255,

19

Leroy, A. K., Rosolowsky, E., Usero, A., et al. 2021c, arXiv

e-prints, arXiv:2109.11583

Li, H., Vogelsberger, M., Marinacci, F., Sales, L. V., &

Torrey, P. 2020, MNRAS, 499, 5862

Lin, L., Ellison, S. L., Pan, H.-A., et al. 2020, ApJ, 903, 145
Liu, L., Bureau, M., Blitz, L., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 505,

4048

Lu, Z.-J., Pelkonen, V.-M., Padoan, P., et al. 2020, ApJ,

904, 58

Makarov, D., Prugniel, P., Terekhova, N., Courtois, H., &

Vauglin, I. 2014, A&A, 570, A13

McKee, C. F., & Ostriker, E. C. 2007, ARA&A, 45, 565
McKee, C. F., Parravano, A., & Hollenbach, D. J. 2015,

ApJ, 814, 13

Meidt, S. E., Leroy, A. K., Rosolowsky, E., et al. 2018,

Kruijssen, J. M. D., Dale, J. E., Longmore, S. N., et al.

ApJ, 854, 100

2019b, MNRAS, 484, 5734

Krumholz, M., & Burkert, A. 2010, ApJ, 724, 895

Krumholz, M. R., Burkhart, B., Forbes, J. C., & Crocker,

R. M. 2018, MNRAS, 477, 2716

Krumholz, M. R., & McKee, C. F. 2005, ApJ, 630, 250

Lang, P., Meidt, S. E., Rosolowsky, E., et al. 2020, ApJ,

897, 122

Meidt, S. E., Glover, S. C. O., Kruijssen, J. M. D., et al.

2020, ApJ, 892, 73

Miura, R. E., Espada, D., Hirota, A., et al. 2018, ApJ, 864,

120

Miville-Deschˆenes, M.-A., Murray, N., & Lee, E. J. 2017,

ApJ, 834, 57

Mizuno, N., Rubio, M., Mizuno, A., et al. 2001, PASJ, 53,

Larson, R. B. 1981, MNRAS, 194, 809

L45

Molecular Clouds in Environmental Context

45

Muraoka, K., Sorai, K., Miyamoto, Y., et al. 2019, PASJ,

Saintonge, A., & Catinella, B. 2022, arXiv e-prints,

71, S15

arXiv:2202.00690

Murphy, E. J., Condon, J. J., Schinnerer, E., et al. 2011,

Salim, S., Lee, J. C., Janowiecki, S., et al. 2016, ApJS, 227,

ApJ, 737, 67

2

Murray, N. 2011, ApJ, 729, 133
Murray, N., Quataert, E., & Thompson, T. A. 2010, ApJ,

Salo, H., Laurikainen, E., Laine, J., et al. 2015, ApJS, 219, 4

S´anchez, S. F., Rosales-Ortega, F. F., Iglesias-P´aramo, J.,

709, 191

et al. 2014, A&A, 563, A49

Murugeshan, C., Kilborn, V., Obreschkow, D., et al. 2019,

S´anchez, S. F., Barrera-Ballesteros, J. K., L´opez-Cob´a, C.,

MNRAS, 483, 2398

Nakanishi, H., & Sofue, Y. 2006, PASJ, 58, 847
Narayanan, D., Krumholz, M. R., Ostriker, E. C., &

Hernquist, L. 2012, MNRAS, 421, 3127

Oka, T., Hasegawa, T., Sato, F., et al. 2001, ApJ, 562, 348
Olsen, K., Greve, T. R., Narayanan, D., et al. 2017, ApJ,

846, 105

Orr, M. E., Fielding, D. B., Hayward, C. C., & Burkhart,

B. 2021, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2109.14656

Padoan, P., Federrath, C., Chabrier, G., et al. 2014, in

Protostars and Planets VI, ed. H. Beuther, R. S. Klessen,
C. P. Dullemond, & T. Henning, 77

Padoan, P., & Nordlund, ˚A. 2011, ApJ, 730, 40
Pan, H.-A., Fujimoto, Y., Tasker, E. J., et al. 2015,

MNRAS, 453, 3082

Pan, H.-A., Schinnerer, E., Hughes, A., et al. 2022, arXiv

e-prints, arXiv:2201.01403

Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., et al. 2011,

Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 2825.
http://jmlr.org/papers/v12/pedregosa11a.html

Persic, M., Salucci, P., & Stel, F. 1996, MNRAS, 281, 27
Pettini, M., & Pagel, B. E. J. 2004, MNRAS, 348, L59
Pilyugin, L. S., & Grebel, E. K. 2016, MNRAS, 457, 3678
Pilyugin, L. S., Grebel, E. K., & Kniazev, A. Y. 2014, AJ,

147, 131

Pineda, J. E., Rosolowsky, E. W., & Goodman, A. A. 2009,

ApJL, 699, L134

Popping, G., Narayanan, D., Somerville, R. S., Faisst,
A. L., & Krumholz, M. R. 2019, MNRAS, 482, 4906
Querejeta, M., Schinnerer, E., Meidt, S., et al. 2021, arXiv

e-prints, arXiv:2109.04491

et al. 2019, MNRAS, 484, 3042

S´anchez, S. F., Barrera-Ballesteros, J. K., Colombo, D.,

et al. 2021, MNRAS, 503, 1615

Sandstrom, K. 2019, z=0 Multiwavelength Galaxy

Synthesis, IRSA, doi:10.26131/IRSA6.
https://doi.org/10.26131/IRSA6

Sandstrom, K. M., Leroy, A. K., Walter, F., et al. 2013,

ApJ, 777, 5

Schmidt, M. 1959, ApJ, 129, 243

Schruba, A., Kruijssen, J. M. D., & Leroy, A. K. 2019,

ApJ, 883, 2

Schruba, A., Leroy, A. K., Walter, F., et al. 2012, AJ, 143,

138

Schruba, A., Leroy, A. K., Kruijssen, J. M. D., et al. 2017,

ApJ, 835, 278

Schwarz, G. 1978, The Annals of Statistics, 6, 461

Scoville, N. Z., & Hersh, K. 1979, ApJ, 229, 578

Sheth, K., Regan, M., Hinz, J. L., et al. 2010, PASP, 122,

1397

Silk, J. 1997, ApJ, 481, 703

Solomon, P. M., Rivolo, A. R., Barrett, J., & Yahil, A.

1987, ApJ, 319, 730

Sorai, K., Kuno, N., Muraoka, K., et al. 2019, PASJ, 71, S14

Spilker, A., Kainulainen, J., & Orkisz, J. 2021, A&A, 653,

A63

Stuber, S. K., Saito, T., Schinnerer, E., et al. 2021, A&A,

653, A172

Sun, J. 2022, PhangsTeam/MegaTable: PHANGS
mega-table pipeline public release, v3.0, Zenodo,
doi:10.5281/zenodo.6584842

Rice, T. S., Goodman, A. A., Bergin, E. A., Beaumont, C.,

Sun, J., Leroy, A. K., Schruba, A., et al. 2018, ApJ, 860,

& Dame, T. M. 2016, ApJ, 822, 52

Robitaille, T., & Bressert, E. 2012, APLpy: Astronomical
Plotting Library in Python, Astrophysics Source Code
Library, ascl:1208.017

Rosolowsky, E., & Leroy, A. 2006, PASP, 118, 590
Rosolowsky, E., Hughes, A., Leroy, A. K., et al. 2021,

172

Sun, J., Leroy, A. K., Schinnerer, E., et al. 2020a, ApJL,

901, L8

Sun, J., Leroy, A. K., Ostriker, E. C., et al. 2020b, ApJ,

892, 148

Tan, J. C. 2000, ApJ, 536, 173

MNRAS, 502, 1218

Teng, Y.-H., Sandstrom, K. M., Sun, J., et al. 2021, ApJ

S4G team. 2010, Spitzer Survey of Stellar Structure in

submitted

Galaxies, IRSA, doi:10.26131/IRSA425.
https://doi.org/10.26131/IRSA425

The pandas development team. 2021, Pandas-Dev/Pandas:
Pandas, vv1.3.4, Zenodo, doi:10.5281/zenodo.5574486

46

Sun et PHANGS Collaboration

Tibshirani, R. 1996, Journal of the Royal Statistical

Vutisalchavakul, N., Evans, Neal J., I., & Heyer, M. 2016,

Society. Series B (Methodological), 58, 267.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2346178

Treß, R. G., Sormani, M. C., Smith, R. J., et al. 2021,

MNRAS, 505, 5438

Ueda, J., Iono, D., Petitpas, G., et al. 2012, ApJ, 745, 65
Utomo, D., Blitz, L., Davis, T., et al. 2015, ApJ, 803, 16
Utomo, D., Bolatto, A. D., Wong, T., et al. 2017, ApJ, 849,

ApJ, 831, 73

Walter, F., Brinks, E., de Blok, W. J. G., et al. 2008, AJ,

136, 2563

Williams, T. G., Kreckel, K., Belﬁore, F., et al. 2021, arXiv

e-prints, arXiv:2110.10697

Wilson, C. D. 1995, ApJL, 448, L97

26

Wolﬁre, M. G., Hollenbach, D., & McKee, C. F. 2010, ApJ,

Utomo, D., Sun, J., Leroy, A. K., et al. 2018, ApJL, 861,

716, 1191

L18

Utreras, J., Blanc, G. A., Escala, A., et al. 2020, ApJ, 892,

94

Wong, T. 2009, ApJ, 705, 650

Yim, K., Wong, T., Howk, J. C., & van der Hulst, J. M.

Vallini, L., Pallottini, A., Ferrara, A., et al. 2018, MNRAS,

2011, AJ, 141, 48

473, 271

Verschuur, G. L. 1993, AJ, 106, 2580
Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020,

Nature Methods, 17, 261

Yim, K., Wong, T., Xue, R., et al. 2014, AJ, 148, 127

Zucker, C., Battersby, C., & Goodman, A. 2018, ApJ, 864,

153

All Authors and Aﬃliations

Jiayi Sun (孙嘉懿) ,1, 2, 3, ∗ Adam K. Leroy,3, 4 Erik Rosolowsky,5 Annie Hughes,6, 7 Eva Schinnerer,8

Andreas Schruba,9 Eric W. Koch,10 Guillermo A. Blanc,11, 12
Daizhong Liu,8 Sharon Meidt,16 Hsi-An Pan,17

I-Da Chiang (江宜達) ,13, 14 Brent Groves,15
J´erˆome Pety,18, 19 Miguel Querejeta,20 Toshiki Saito,21, 22

Karin Sandstrom,14 Amy Sardone,3, 4 Antonio Usero,20 Dyas Utomo,23, 3 Thomas G. Williams,8
Ashley T. Barnes,24 Samantha M. Benincasa,3, 4 Frank Bigiel,24 Alberto D. Bolatto,25
M´ed´eric Boquien,26 M´elanie Chevance,27, 28 Daniel A. Dale,29 Sinan Deger,30 Eric Emsellem,31, 32

Simon C. O. Glover,28 Kathryn Grasha,15, 33, †
Kathryn Kreckel,27

J. M. Diederik Kruijssen,27 Eve C. Ostriker36 And David A. Thilker37

Jonathan D. Henshaw,8, 34 Ralf S. Klessen,28, 35

as part of the PHANGS collaboration

1Department of Physics and Astronomy, McMaster University, 1280 Main Street West, Hamilton, ON L8S 4M1, Canada
2Canadian Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics (CITA), University of Toronto, 60 St George Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3H8, Canada
3Department of Astronomy, The Ohio State University, 140 West 18th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
4Center for Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics (CCAPP), 191 West Woodruﬀ Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
5Department of Physics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2E1, Canada
6CNRS, IRAP, 9 Av. du Colonel Roche, BP 44346, F-31028 Toulouse cedex 4, France
7Universit´e de Toulouse, UPS-OMP, IRAP, F-31028 Toulouse cedex 4, France
8Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Astronomie, K¨onigstuhl 17, D-69117, Heidelberg, Germany
9Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur extraterrestrische Physik, Giessenbachstraße 1, D-85748 Garching, Germany
10Center for Astrophysics | Harvard & Smithsonian, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
11Observatories of the Carnegie Institution for Science, 813 Santa Barbara Street, Pasadena, CA 91101, USA
12Departamento de Astronom´ıa, Universidad de Chile, Camino del Observatorio 1515, Las Condes, Santiago, Chile
13Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Academia Sinica, No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Road, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
14Center for Astrophysics and Space Sciences, Department of Physics, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla,
CA 92093, USA
15Research School of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2611, Australia
16Sterrenkundig Observatorium, Universiteit Gent, Krijgslaan 281 S9, B-9000 Gent, Belgium
17Department of Physics, Tamkang University, No.151, Yingzhuan Rd., Tamsui Dist., New Taipei City 251301, Taiwan
18Institut de Radioastronomie Millim´etrique (IRAM), 300 Rue de la Piscine, F-38406 Saint Martin d’H`eres, France
19Sorbonne Universit´e, Observatoire de Paris, Universit´e PSL, CNRS, LERMA, F-75014, Paris, France
20Observatorio Astron´omico Nacional (IGN), C/Alfonso XII, 3, E-28014 Madrid, Spain
21Department of Physics, General Studies, College of Engineering, Nihon University, 1 Nakagawara, Tokusada, Tamuramachi,
Koriyama, Fukushima, 963-8642, Japan
22National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, 2-21-1 Osawa, Mitaka, Tokyo, 181-8588, Japan
23National Radio Astronomy Observatory, 520 Edgemont Road, Charlottesville, VA 22903-2475, USA
24Argelander-Institut f¨ur Astronomie, Universit¨at Bonn, Auf dem H¨ugel 71, 53121 Bonn, Germany
25Department of Astronomy, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
26Centro de Astronom´ıa (CITEVA), Universidad de Antofagasta, Avenida Angamos 601, Antofagasta, Chile
27Astronomisches Rechen-Institut, Zentrum f¨ur Astronomie der Universit¨at Heidelberg, M¨onchhofstraße 12-14, D-69120 Heidelberg,
Germany
28Universit¨at Heidelberg, Zentrum f¨ur Astronomie, Institut f¨ur Theoretische Astrophysik, Albert-Ueberle-Str 2, D-69120 Heidelberg,
Germany
29Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071, USA
30TAPIR, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
31European Southern Observatory, Karl-Schwarzschild Straße 2, D-85748 Garching bei M¨unchen, Germany
32Univ Lyon, Univ Lyon 1, ENS de Lyon, CNRS, Centre de Recherche Astrophysique de Lyon UMR5574, F-69230 Saint-Genis-Laval,
France
33ARC Centre of Excellence for All Sky Astrophysics in 3 Dimensions (ASTRO 3D), Australia
34Astrophysics Research Institute, Liverpool John Moores University, IC2, Liverpool Science Park, 146 Brownlow Hill, Liverpool L3 5RF,
UK
35Universit¨at Heidelberg, Interdisziplin¨ares Zentrum f¨ur Wissenschaftliches Rechnen, Im Neuenheimer Feld 205, D-69120 Heidelberg,
Germany
36Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA
37Department of Physics and Astronomy, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA

