1 

 Towards a secured smart IoT using light weight 
blockchain: An aim to secure Pharmacy 
Products   

Md. Faruk Abdullah Al Sohan 
Department of Computer Science, American International University-Bangladesh, Dhaka  
Email: faruk.sohan@aiub.edu 
Samiur Rahman Khan 
Department of Computer Science, American International University-Bangladesh, Dhaka  
Email : samiurk70@gmail.com 
Nusrat Jahan Anannya 
Department of Computer Science, American International University-Bangladesh, Dhaka  
Email : nusratanajahan786@gmail.com 
Dr. Md Taimur Ahad 
Department of Computer Science, American International University-Bangladesh, Dhaka  
Email : taimur.ahad@aiub.edu 

--------------------------------------------------------------------ABSTRACT----------------------------------------------------------- 
Blockchain  has  proven  a  very  developed  and  secured  technology.  It  ensures  data  integrity  with  authentic 
connected  nodes.  Now-a-days,  blockchain  with  IoT  is  a  great  combination  for  secured  and  smart  end  to  end 
product delivery. This observation has motivated the research to develop a conceptual model to provide a secure 
pharmaceutical  product  delivery  by  developing  a  IoT  integrated  with  lightweight  blockchain.  The  undeveloped 
and  most  of  the  developing  countries  are  facing  problems  such  as  drug  counterfeits,  shortages,  opiates  and 
tracking  them  became  difficult  because  of  less  transparency.  Also,  nature  sensitive  medicines  need  to  be  stored 
under  controlled  temperature  known  as  cold-chain  shipping.  The  storage  of  these  information  in  the  recent 
software  is  done  in  the  centralized  databases  that  is  prone  to  data  manipulations  and  hacks.  Due  to  less 
production  drugs  needed  to  be  imported  with  maintaining  drug  supply  chain  regulations  by  law.  This  paper 
proposes  a  lightweight  blockchain  model  for  pharmaceutical  industries  by  using  IoT.  This  model  ensures 
traceability of drugs within a very simple way which is less complex compared to the existing ones. 

Keywords – developing, counterfeits, transparency, centralized, manipulation, production, traceability.  

1. INTRODUCTION 

IoT,  the  Internet  of  Things  is  a  system  of  interconnected  devices  with  unique  identification  (UIDs)  and  a  network 

communication capacity without needing contact between human beings or human beings. An IoT eco system consists of 
web  smart  devices,  used  for  the  collect,  distribute  and  act  on  data  that  they  collected  from  their  environments,  using 
integrated systems including processors, sensors, and communication hardware. IoT devices exchange sensor data  that 
they collect through the link to an IoT portal or other edge system where they either send data to the cloud for analysis or 
local analysis. Often, they interact and act on the information they receive from each other with other similar devices [1]. 
Kevin Ashton stated this concept in 1999 [2]. IoT based devices are wirelessly linked with each other. It is estimated that 
by 2025, there will be 75 billion IoT devices, and an article claims that IoT security problems are mostly ignored [3]. 

Blockchain (BC) is a technology invented by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008 [4]. The basic goal of the BC is to store data and 
information  digitally  without  the  intrusion  of  a  third  party or  a  centralized  system  [5].  On  the  contrary  of  Centralized 
network, Decentralized network system has gained quite a monetary and distinguishable value on the global IT sector of 
the world. Staging itself a brand-new economy based on cryptocurrency where the estimated monetary value outreaches 
1$  trillion  [6].  The  technological  system  which  delivered  such  high  scale  stable  market  for  cryptocurrency  is  the 
Decentralized  Blockchain  environment.  One  of  the  bright  sides  of  such  a  technical  environment  is  overcoming  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

security  Secure  sharing,  Anti-money  laundering,  Real-time  IoT,  Personal  identity  security  shortcomings  of  the 
centralized network models. Moreover, such features of this technology can be implemented over the revolutionary IoT 
systems that can benefit in all the IoT impacted sectors. BC will become one of the upcoming technological revolutions 
owing to its key characteristics: no central authority, no middlemen, real-time settlement, substantial cost reductions, and 
high degrees of transparency. It may be used in a variety of fields, including governance, healthcare, banking, the Online 
of Things, energy internet information security, public and social services, reputation systems, and education. In [7], they 
provide secrecy by employing the AES algorithm before making transactions, as well as other features such as real-time 
online  verification,  third-party  verification,  usability,  and  revocation  when  issuing  certificates  for  students.  However, 
incorporating BC into IoT is a difficult endeavor since delivering the vast number of resources and power that BC needs 
is difficult, if not impossible, for IoT devices. The major goal is to create a system that is more secure and speedier while 
requiring  no high-power  energy usage  [8].  In  the pharmacy  sector,  blockchain  can play  an  important  role  to  make  the 
existing  system  more  flexible.  The  pharmacy  supply  chain  management  system  itself  is  one  of  the  core  sectors  of  the 
economy and public welfare of any country where the production, supply management and distribution takes place which 
in the current and previous time being has faced many stability issues and obstacles that objectively put it in a position of 
revaluating its fundamentals which mainly addresses its work mechanisms. The complexity of the structure for such a 
mechanism  generates  both  technical  and  real-time  problems  like  data  validation,  transparency  issues,  information 
inaccuracy  and  source  of  data.  Furthermore,  drug  counterfeiting  has  been  a  major  problem  this  system  still  cannot 
address, and it brings the Healthcare industry to a financial loss like mislabeling drugs with and selling it as the legit one 
[9]. This counterfeiting is way worse in the third world countries where illegal manipulation of drugs and drug trafficking 
is  a  constant  process.  Therein  the  current  system  having  no  other  way  to  tackle  the  aforesaid  issues,  requires  a  heavy 
progression such that could c Medicine being one of the fundamentals needs of the public relies solely on the pharmacy 
supply  chain management  system  to deliver  it  to  the  consumers  and  in  doing  so  ensure the  validity  of  the  drug or  the 
pharmaceutical product. This supply chain functions in a complex web of self-sufficient entities that regulate resources, 
raw materials, production, receiving etc. and they are commonly termed as supplier, distributor, manufacturer, patients, 
pharmacies, and hospitals [10]. These functionalities of this network cannot be tracked due to lack of a centralized entity 
and  relationships  among  the  stakeholders  which  provides  us  with  no  information  on  few  entities.  As  such  counterfeit 
products  can  easily  be  produced  in  this  system  and  mislabeled  to  match  with  the  source  product  and  will  appear  as 
genuine.  One  of  the  newer  technologies  that  emerged  and bloomed  in  the  past  decade  and  got  widely  accepted  in  the 
global  IT  community  is  none  other  than  Blockchain.  It  features  Smart  Contracts  that  makes  this  technology  a  game 
changer  in  the  business  and  enterprise  system  like  the  Supply  Chain  Management  System  (SCMS)  [11].  The  tracing 
mechanism for this technology has been research and development and was reported that it could be applied in vehicle 
tracing, academic certifications, IOT integration and pharmaceutical industry [12].  

In this research, we developed a novel model that might improve system performance. It is structured as follows: Section 
II  discusses  related  works.  Figures  are  used  to  describe  the  proposed  model  in  Section  III.  Section  IV  describes  the 
mining process. The system's operation is explained in Section V. Section VI discusses traceability,  while Section VII 
discusses security and Section VIII delves into the conclusion. 

2. RELATED WORKS 
Blockchain  has  developed  as  a  ground-breaking  technology  that  safely,  fault-tolerant,  and  transparently  holds  and 
transmits information. Blockchain has demonstrated the ability to transform the conventional supply chain industry into a 
supply  chain  that  is  encrypted,  digital,  anonymous,  continuous,  readable,  and  decentralized.  According  to  distributed 
ledger-based  technology,  this  is  possible.  The  blockchain has  the  full  chance  to  generate  it  safer,  effective,  accessible, 
and decentralized for any organization.  

Pharmaceutical  companies  have  been  struggling  to  monitor  their  drugs  during  the  supply  chain  process  since  the  last 
decade, empowering counterfeiters to sell their fake medicines. Such medications do not help patients recover from the 
illness, but they may have several other harmful side effects. Counterfeit products are evaluated internationally as a very 
massive  challenge  for  the  pharmaceutical  industry.  A  new  blockchain  and  machine  learning-based  drug  supply  chain 
management and recommendation framework have been proposed being introduced by Khizar Abbas, and Wang-Cheol 
Song. Through using this machine learning-based drug supply chain management system, each user of the system will 
control  the  delivery  of  the  drug.  In  addition,  between  the  linked  peer  nodes,  the  proposed  system  can  execute  CRUD 
(create, read, update, delete) operations. In health care, the scheme is using machine learning algorithms and blockchain 
technologies  with  excellent  performance.  This  method  allows  pharmaceutical  firms  to  reduce  the  issue  of  counterfeit 
drugs and to improve business dramatically [13]. 

With the rise of Internet pharmacies, it has become increasingly difficult to standardize medication protection. Because 
these  pharmaceuticals  go  via  many  complicated  dispersed  networks,  counterfeits  are  difficult  to  identify,  offering 
possibilities  for  counterfeits  to  enter  the  actual  supply  chain.  The  safeguarding  of  the  pharmaceutical  supply  chain  is 
becoming a serious concern for human health, which is a collective operation. Faisal Jamil and Lei Hang have presented 

 
 
 
 
3 

a novel medicine supply chain management system based on Hyperledger Fabric and blockchain technology to handle 
secure drug supply chain data. The proposed system is distinguished from existing blockchain-based systems by the fact 
that  it  is  built  on  a  licensed  network.  This  feature  allows  only  a  valid  participant  to  participate  and  enroll  in  the 
blockchain  network  through  a  user  identity  manager.  The  user  identity  manager  oversees  issuing  user  enrollment  and 
authentication  certificates.  Their  tests  revealed  that  using  blockchain  technology  enhances  throughput  and  reduces 
latency in the proposed system while using less resources [14]. 

A blockchain-based approach has been introduced by Kavita Kumari and Kavita Saini that can monitor the movement of 
drugs across the supply chain, from the distributor to the end patients. This system will help in fighting the counterfeiting 
of  drugs  and  reduce  them  to  great  extent.  Data  handling  and  Drug  traceability  are  very  important  in  blockchain 
technology in the healthcare [15]. 

Jen-Hung Tseng and Yen-Chih Liao propose gcoin blockchain to establish straightforward drug transaction data  as the 
basis  of  the  drug  data  flow.  All  products  that  are  involved  in  the  drug  supply  chain  would  be  able  to  participate 
simultaneously to prevent counterfeit drugs and to protect public health, including patients [16].   

Bidi Ying, Wen Sun et al. proposed a secure blockchain model based on the patient’s prescriptions. In the model, there 
were  different  blocks  with  different  duties.  The  blocks  are  Health  Department  Center  (HDC),  Pharmacy  Agent  (PA), 
Pharmacy Industry (PI). All the blocks are trustworthy. HDC is responsible for registration. They register the PAs. PAs 
are  responsible  for  communicating  with  the  users.  It  also  provides  a  connection  with  the  PI.  PI  provides  sufficient 
medicine  supply  in  the  pharmacy.  It  can  also  trace  the  medicine  from  the  beginning.  Overall,  the  system  provides  a 
secure drug supply in the health-care System [17]. 

Rajani et al. focus on enhancing blockchain systems to make them appropriate for IoT-based supply chain management 
systems  since  blockchain  and  IoT  sensors  play  an  important  role  in  supply  chain  management  systems.  To  create  a 
medicine  supply  chain,  the  researchers  use  blockchain  and  IoT.  The  Raft  consensus  mechanism  was  employed  to 
improve the system's output, while the Blockchain Distributed Network (BDN) and bloXroute servers were deployed to 
increase  network  scalability.  To  maintain  the  system's  security  integrity,  an  innovative  hybrid  method  combining 
numerous  cryptographic  approaches  was  applied.  The  system's  and  its  components'  needs  may  be  altered,  making  the 
framework  adaptable.  Furthermore,  by  employing  bloXroute  to  solve  the  network  bottleneck  issue,  the  suggested 
architecture may support a higher consensus method with greater fault tolerance. The researchers develop and install the 
system, as well as undertake numerous performance and security analyses on a blockchain network [18]. 

The  paper  researched  the  possible  ways  to  use  blockchain  technology  in  pharmaceutical  domain  to  detect  forgery  or 
poor-quality medicinal products. Also, the regulations regarding the system were also discussed. The cause for the legal 
service  of  the  blockchain  technology  in  pharmaceutical  domain  were  examined  to  protect  the  rights  of  patients.  It 
revealed the process of the application of the technology in pharmaceutical activities. It was acknowledged that the legal 
basis  of  using  blockchain  technology  was  not  perfect.  Using  blockchain  technology  reduced  the  hazard  of  supplying 
forgery medicines to patients, ensured clarity of delivery and less organizing costs [19]. 

Ahamad Musamih, Khaled Salah and et al proposed an approach for drug traceability in healthcare supply chain. In the 
model  they  used  smart  contract.  There  were  also  stakeholders.  The  whole  system  works  on  the  Application  Program 
Interface (API) which is used decentralized storage system. It uses different types of APIs such as Web3, JSON RPC, 
Infura, and so on. The stakeholders collect data  with the help of the smart contact. In the  stakeholders, there  are some 
agencies. Decentralized Storage System is very low in cost. Mainly the stakeholders are responsible for tracing the drugs. 
Some of the agencies are always tracing the drugs from the manufacturing process. The system provides a good result 
rather than the existing one [20]. 

In [21], the authors implement a model for the patients using cloud computing which is able to give fast relief treatment 
to  prevent  multiple  times  admitting  to  hospital.  This  application  can  be  used  any  organization  to  store  the  necessary 
documents.  It  provides  high  security  as  here  Attribute  Based  Encryption  (ABE)  is  used.  It  is  a  unique  and  not  easily 
hackable application.  

Drugledger, a structure aiming blockchain system to trace and regulate drug was proposed by Huang et al. The following 
system  recreated  an  entire  service  architecture  by  isolating  service  provider  in  three  individual  service  tools  such  as 
Certificate service provider (CSP), query service provider (QSP), and anti-attack service provider (ASP). The traditional 
p2p architecture’s solutions ensured flexibility. The paper suggested to cut back blockchain depend on the drug’s date of 
expiration and provide the corresponding algorithm, which helps the blockchain to gain a stable storage that seemed to be 
disregarded  in  the  blockchain  academic  community  that  cares  more  about  absoluteness  rather  than  usability  and 
feasibility  [22].  Drugledger  can  contradict  sybil  attack  and  assured  the  stakeholders’  traceability  information’s privacy 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

and authenticity without losing flexibility of the system. An end to the data storage assured scalability with time being in 
storage [23]. 

3. CORE COMPONENTS 
This section describes the main components of the proposed model, as seen in Fig 1. The core components are Block-
chain, Overly Network, & Cloud Storage. 

Fig 1. Overview & core components of the model 

3.1. Blockchain 
Block-chain is one of the core components of this model. It consists of six blocks. They  are Producer, Miner, Supplier, 
Distributor, Pharmacist & Customer. All are connected to each other.   

•  Producer: Producer stores the raw elements of the drugs and by using them they produce drugs according to the 
demand.  Prior  to  legal  clearance,  a  pharmaceutical  firm  must  do  appropriate  research  and  development  work 
before it is permitted to produce a medicine. A medication is finally able to be commercialized and launched into 
the market after undergoing several producer and quality assurance procedures. The amount of product produced 
by  the  producer  is  determined  by  the  needs  of  the  consumer.  Before  a  medicine  may be  put  into production,  it 
must first pass a series of tests and meet strict criteria.  by maintain all the procedure, they produce drugs and sent 
them to the miner for further processing. 

•  Miner:  Miner  receives  medicine  from  the  producer.  Miner  plays  a  significant  role  for  ensuring  genuine  drugs. 
Miner’s job is to make sure that the quality of medicine is right. If the quality of medicine is maintained all the 
conditions, then Miner will deliver the medicines to the supplier and if not, then miner will return the medicines to 
the producer for reproduction. At the same time, miner will check the expiration date of medicine. As a result, the 
quality of the medicine is ensured before going to the supplier. 

•  Supplier: At any point of the life cycle of a product, suppliers play a significant role. It is essential for suppliers to 
guarantee the best quality and price for their distribution partners to preserve the faith among them. It will further 
ensure future repeat business. A new client will visit a supplier because they need anything in advance. We must 
have  it  ready  for  them.  All  is  urgently  required  for  those  who  require  emergency  medicine  supplies.  It  is 
imperative that suppliers always have a diverse supply. Supplier sends the pharmaceutical drugs to the distributor. 
The  supplier  rechecks  the  expiration  date  of  the  medicine  before  handing  it  over  to  the  distributor.  If  the 
expiration date of the medicine is sufficient then, the supplier sends the medicine to the distributor, otherwise the 
supplier returns the medicine to the producer. 

•  Distributor: Prescription drugs and other healthcare products are purchased directly from pharmacy suppliers and 
stored in pharmacies and distribution facilities throughout the country by pharmaceutical distributors. Drugstores, 
medical  clinics,  and  service  providers  with  state  and  county  approvals  place  orders  with  distributors  for  the 
medications  and  supplies  they  need,  and  the  distributor  manages  and  provides  the  orders  on  a  regular  basis. 
Primary  distributors  will  accept  orders  for  ongoing  operations  to  send  them  so  quickly  as  possible  to  their 
destination. It always maintains the quantity of the drugs. 

•  Pharmacist:  When  the  medicine  is  transferred  to  the  pharmacy,  a  medication  pharmacist  is  responsible  for 
providing the customers with the right dosage and type of the medicine. The delivery of medicine is the last phase 
of  the  supply  chain  for  pharmaceutics.  Along  with  dispensing  medications,  this  final  phase  includes  after-sales 
services such as supplying accurate reports to consumers and processing refund requests, ensuring that customers 
get completely profit from the medication they bought. It also ensures that the drugs are genuine. 

•  Customer:  A  customer  will  visit  a  pharmacist  to  take  the  medicine  as  per  the  requirement.  Pharmacist  needs  to 
ensure that customers get the best quality of medicine. Customers will also check the quality of the medicine to 
ensure that if he has received superior quality medicine. If he/she finds any fault, he/she can return  the drugs to 
the producer directly.                                                                

 
 
3.2. Overlay Network  
It  establishes  logical  or  physical  connections  between  nodes  in  a  network  design.  All  the  blocks  in  a  blockchain 
technology create a peer-to-peer network, which refers to the distributed system that highlights the notion of the overlay 
network.  It  provides  a  network-like  capability  that  allows  you  to  operate  on  top  of  another  network.  Because  of  the 
overlay network, it is now easy to add or remove new blocks from the system. 

5 

3.3. Cloud Storage  
Cloud  storage  is  a  popular  and  efficient  data  storage.  It 
provides more data security with an extremely low cost. The 
blockchain  technology  deals  with  a  huge  data.  Because  of 
having  huge  data,  sometimes  it  may  not  provide  faster 
communications. All kinds of data will be stored in the cloud 
storage.  In  the  cloud  storage  for  this  model,  there  are  two 
components.  One  is  for  storing  only  list  of  medicines  and 
another  one  is  used  for  storing  all  the  hashes  and  the 
transaction details that means data. All the blocks can access 
the  cloud  storage.  It  helps  to  reduce  the  pressure  of  the 
blockchain. 

4. MINING PROCESS 
The  term  “Mining  Process”  refers  to  the  creation  of  new  Blocks  in  the  Blockchain  ledger  but  one  of  the  key 
functionalities of this process is also to verify all the transaction listings according to legitimate information [24]. In our 
conceptual model this process can help in evaluating the medicine listing using the right components and requirement of 
the  clients.  This  process  can  be  varied  and  modified  according  to  the  needs  of  a  specific  system.  As  we  know  that 
blockchain itself is an immutable ledger that helps in transaction recording and assets tracking in the given network, the 
transactions  within  these  blocks  are  made  verified  and  secured  using  the  mining  process  [25,26].  It  validates  the 
information  with  the  help  of  miners  who  reside  in  the  same  network  as  the  blockchain,  and  they  utilize  a  set  of 
methodologies for the evaluation purpose [25]. Such techniques are followed by all the miners in the network and if there 
is any wrong data provided in the transaction it will be shared among all the miners so that every detail in each step of the 
process  is  shared  for  verifying  the  legitimacy  of  the  list  of  transactions  [26].  In  case  of  our  conceptual  system  model 
setting  some  necessary  procedures  of  the  miners  to  follow  can  help  in  validating  all  the  medicine  list  with  respect  to 
quality, drug effectiveness and required amounts from the clients. 

Fig 2. Mining Process of the system 

From  the  Fig  2.  we  can  observe  how  the  overall  mining  process  and  the  Evaluation  Procedures  followed  for  our 
conceptual model to ensure the best medicine supplied to the client. 

4.1. Checking Correct Ingredient  
In  the  first  step  the  miners  check  the  ingredient  of  the  specific  medicine  from  the  medicine  list,  and  they  verify  the 
authenticated amount of ingredients required in that medicine from the pharmacopeia and drug formulary provided in the 

 
 
 
6 

miner network for this purpose. If the medicine in the list is found not to match with the correct amount of ingredients, 
then  it  will  be  sent  to  the  Producer  Block  with  a  message  regarding  its  inaccuracy  in  ingredients  and  if  it  is  found  to 
match correctly with the given directory it will move to the next stage of the evaluation procedure. 

4.2. Production Amount 
It  is  the  second  step  where  the  miners  evaluate  the  quantity  of  medicines  requested  from  the  client  or  distributor. 
Verification is mainly done by checking the demand of that medicine requested from the client and by monitoring the 
past orders of that medicine from hospitals. If the quantity is found to be not sufficient then it's sent to the producer block 
with message entitled as Insufficient quantity else the miners move on the next stage.    

4.3. Temperature Safety 
Medicines  need  to  be  preserved  after  manufacturing  or  its  property  may  get  damaged.  Reports  of  the  temperature 
conditions of all the medicine list can be accessible by the miners who then evaluate all the medicine list to confirm if 
they are well maintained or not. If report of any medicine list is missing or from the reports any of them are found to be 
preserved in wrong temperature, then it will be sent to the producer block reporting “Unsafe Temperature” as comment. 
The miners will move to the next phase with the correctly preserved medicine lists. 

4.4. Expiry Date 
In many cases expired medicines are sold off in many pharmacies and the expiry dates are found to modified which is 
very harmful for the customers. In our conceptual model the production takes place within the blockchain network so all 
the registries of the medicines produced are stored within our network which helps the miners to validate the authenticity 
of  the  expiry  date  and  since  blockchain  is  an  immutable  platform  [26]  the  expiry  dates  can  never  be  changed  or 
adulterated. So, if any medicine is expired it will be sent to the producer block labelled “Date Expired” and miners will 
move on to the next stage with the rest of the medicine lists. 

4.5. Quality Assurance  
Here the miners determine the standards for safety testing of products from the quality assurance reports provided by the 
manufacturer of all the medicines in the list. Quality related issues found from quality control testing is reported to the 
miner network which helps in evaluating  the quality assurance status of all the transactions in the medicine lists. If the 
requirements  are  not  met,  then  it  will  be  sent  back  to  the  producer  block  reporting  quality  assurance  problem  as  a 
comment otherwise, it will be sent to the supplier block as all the steps in Evaluation Procedure are satisfied.  

5. WORKING PRINCIPLE 
The  major  goal  of  the  system  is  to  make  people's  lives  simpler  by  providing  a  traceability  feature  for  the  drug.  As 
blockchain is a very secure system, the users can give their personal information without any hesitation. By using this 
system, the users can trace their medicine from the beginning. The system also provides enough drugs, as a result, there 
will not arise any shortage or excess of drugs. As all the bocks of the blockchain can trace the drugs so, it ensures that the 
drugs are genuine. Without any hesitation, anyone can take these drugs.  The system defines a set of tasks that must be 
followed for drugs to be delivered. The model's operation is depicted in Fig 3. 

•  Step  1:  According  to  the  demand  of  the  customers  which  are  collected  before  from  the  pharmacist,  producer 

produce medicine and sends them to the miner for quality checking. 

•  Step 2: Miner checks the quality of the medicines according to the  mining process. If any of the medicine is not 
satisfied the mining condition, then it will be returned to the producer for reproducing it again with high quality. If 
the medicines are good in quality, then these are sent to the supplier for validity checking. It always maintains the 
demand of the customers. 

 
 
7 

•  Step 3: Supplier checks the validity of the medicines. Mainly expire date of the medicine will be checked here. If 
the  expire data  is not sufficient,  then it will be returned to the producer. The good quality products send to the 
distributer for further processing. It also takes care of the maintaining matter. 

•  Step  4:  Distributor  controls  the  quantity  of  the  medicines.  It  distributes  them  among  the  pharmacists.  It  always 
cheeks the quantity and according to the demand, it provides the right quantity of medicines to the pharmacist. As 
a result, there never arises shortage of medicines.  

•  Step  5:  Pharmacist  receives  medicines  from  the  distributors  and  sends  to  the  customers.  It  ensures  that  the 

medicines are genuine. It always gives priority of the safety issue of the customers.   

•  Step 6: Customer gets the required medicines after completing a full cycle of the model. Customers can give their 
valuable  feedback  and  if  anyone  has  a  little  bit  confusion  about  the  medicine,  he/she  can  directly  report  to  the 
producer. After investigating the matter, producer give feedback to the customer.  

Fig 3. Working Principle of the system 

6. TRACEABILITY 
The  ability  of  acquiring  some  information  about  an  object  under  consideration  such  as  the  Traceable  Resource  Unit 
(TRU) via recorded identifications during life cycle is known as traceability [9]. Traceability objectives could be double-
edged  such  as  Tracking  the  transactions  history  and  TRU’s  real-time  position.  Day  by  day  fake  drugs  or  counterfeit 
problem is increasing rapidly, which not only harmful for the patients’ health but also affective for the reputation of the 
drug  manufacturing  company  and  the  involved  stakeholders.  So,  to  overcome  the  situation  a  secured  drug  traceability 
system became essential. Various steps were already taken by the governments across the world for drug traceability so 
that stakeholders as well as patients could verify drugs’ authenticity and trace the location of the drug in the drug supply 
chain.  Many  countries  like  the  U.S.  and  Chine  mandated  and  prioritized  the  essentiality  of drug  traceability.  The  U.S. 
Drug  Supply  Chain  Security  Act  (DSCSA)  made  it  compulsory  for  the  healthcare  industry  to  create  a  compatible 
electronic system which can track and identify drugs while distributing around the United States and China recorded data 
or information of all pharmaceutical products in an IT system while supplying to warehouses [9]. Visibility, regulatory 
consents,  and  cold-chain  problems  showed  the  essentiality  of  blockchain  in  drug  traceability  with  common  drug 
traceability approaches [15]. Visibility lacking causes problems like opiates, counterfeits, and drug shortages where on 
the  other  hand  because  of  less  transparency  patients  and  other  stakeholders  have  problem  in  tracking  drug’s  location. 
Research  showed  that  traceability  and  security  became  the  most  important  factor  of  blockchain  system  adoption  in 
pharmaceutical industry and the most concern to drug countified is drug traceability distribution process [11]. The supply 
chain pipeline for pharmaceutical products is quite long in our proposed system, which after production is verified by the 
miner, supplier and distributor for quality, validity, and quantity correspondingly before it is available in the pharmacies. 

 
 
 
 
 
8 

Hence, to provide the proper security and quality products in the market, our method will track the product in every step 
of the supply chain. 

7. SECURE INTRA-BLOCK COMMUNICATION 
As all the bocks are connected to each other, communication among them must be secured. We can say that a system is 
secured  if  it  is  able  to  ensure  three  basic  terms:  confidentiality,  integrity,  and  availability.  Confidentiality  ensures  that 
only sender and receiver are capable to understand the message. Integrity ensures that no one can modify the message. It 
provides consistency of the data. Availability ensures that the legitimate users can get accessed to the resources whenever 
they want. In this system, an asymmetric algorithm (RSA) is used to encrypt the data. For data encryption, it generates 
hashes. It uses two different keys, one is for encryption (public key), and another is for decryption (private key). Public 
key  is  sent  to  all,  but  the private  key  is  sent  only  the  actual  receiver.  So, no  one  can  easily  decrypt  the  message.  The 
hashes indicate that, here no one is malicious as all the hashes are known to all the blocks. RSA is one of the most useful 
algorithms for ensuring data confidentiality and integrity. 

8. CONCLUSION 
Blockchain with IoT makes a very developed technology. In this paper, a very simple and light weight model is proposed 
where a better solution of problems, better performance and tracking the drugs in drug supply chain are provided. In this 
model any customer can trace their drugs. This model will also provide genuine drugs with perfect quality. It also ensures 
that  all  the  time  all  the  customers  can  get  their  required  drugs.  In  this  model  there  are  total  six  blocks  which  have 
different  responsibilities.  This  system  maintains  drug  traceability  so,  any  customer  can  trace  their  drugs  at  any  time. 
Though it is a hypothetical model, it may be useful for comparable IoT-based systems. The next step will be to develop 
the conceptual model with additional features in order to evaluate the system's performance. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  "What  is  IoT  (Internet  of  Things)  and  How  Does  it  Work?"  IoT  Agenda,  2021.  [Online].  Available: 

https://internetofthingsagenda.techtarget.com/definition/Internet-of-Things-IoT. 

[2]   K.  D.  Foote,  "A  Brief  History  of  the  Internet  of  Things  –  DATAVERSITY,"  DATAVERSITY,  2021.  [Online]. 

Available: https://www.dataversity.net/brief-history-internet-things/. 

[3]  O.  Sullivan,  “The  Worst  and  Weirdest  IoT  Hacks  of  All  Times,”  Finance  Monthly  |  Monthly  Finance  News 
Magazine, 03- Sep-2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.financemonthly.com/2019/09/the-worst-and-weirdest-iot-
hacks-of-alltimes/. 

[4]  B.  Marr,  “A  Very  Brief  History  Of  Blockchain  Technology  Everyone  Should  Read,”  Forbes,  20-Mar-2018. 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/02/16/a-very-briefhistory-of-blockchain-

[Online].  Available: 
technology-everyone-shouldread/#284cbee97bc4.  
Explained,” 

“Blockchain 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/blockchain.asp. 

Conway, 

[5]  L. 

Investopedia, 

18-Nov-2020. 

[Online]. 

Available: 

[6]  E. Leka and B. Selimi, "BCERT--A DECENTRALIZED ACADEMIC CERTIFICATE SYSTEM DISTRIBUTION 
USING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY", International Journal on Information Technologies & Security, vol. 12, 
no. 4, 2020. 

[7]  S.  Subramanian,  "Crypto  is  now  the  world’s  fifth-most  circulated  currency  by  value",  Quartz,  2021.  [Online]. 
https://qz.com/1954555/all-the-worlds-crypto-is-now-worth-

Available: 
morethantrillion/#:~:text=A%20week%20into%20the%20new,only%20to20around%20%24260%20billion. 

[8]  S.  Yasmin,  M.  F.  A.  A.  Sohan,  M.  N.  B.  Anwar,  M.  Hasan  and  G.  M.  Farhad  Hossain,  "SFC:  A  Lightweight 
Blockchain Model for Smart Food Industry," 2021 2nd International Conference on Robotics, Electrical and Signal 
Processing Techniques (ICREST), 2021, pp. 699-703. 

[9]  A.  Musamih  et  al.,  "A  Blockchain-Based  Approach  for  Drug  Traceability  in  Healthcare  Supply  Chain",  IEEE 

Access, vol. 9, pp. 9728-9743, 2021. Available: 10.1109/access.2021.3049920. 
[10] D. Mohey El-Din, “A Pharmacy Blockchain System Enhanced by Crowd Sourcing”.  
[11] Fernando,  Erick,  “Essential  Blockchain  Technology  Adoption  factors  in  Pharmaceutical  Industry”,  2019  4th 
International Conference on Information Technology, Information Systems and Electrical Engineering (ICITISEE). 
IEEE, pp. 523-526, 2019. Available: 10.1109/ICITISEE48480.2019.9003997. 

[12] I.  Radanović  and  R.  Likić,  “Opportunities  for  Use  of  Blockchain  Technology  in  Medicine”,  Appl.  Health  Econ. 

Health Policy, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 583–590, 2018.  

[13] K. Abbas, M. Afaq, T. Ahmed Khan and W. Song, "A Blockchain and Machine Learning-Based Drug Supply Chain 
Management  and  Recommendation  System  for  Smart  Pharmaceutical  Industry",  Electronics,  vol.  9,  no. 5,  p.  852, 
2020. 

 
 
9 

[14] F.  Jamil,  L.  Hang,  K.  Kim  and  D.  Kim,  "A  Novel  Medical  Blockchain  Model  for  Drug  Supply  Chain  Integrity 

Management in a Smart Hospital", Electronics, vol. 8, no. 5, p. 505, 2019. 

[15] K. Kumari and K. Saini, "Data Handling & Drug Traceability: Blockchain Meets Healthcare To Combat Counterfeit 

Drugs", vol. 9, 2020. 

[16] J.  Tseng,  Y.  Liao,  B.  Chong  and  S.  Liao,  "Governance  on  the  Drug  Supply  Chain  via  Gcoin  Blockchain", 

International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, vol. 15, no. 6, p. 1055, 2018. 

[17] B. Ying, W. Sun, N. Mohsen and A. Nayak, "A Secure Blockchain-based Prescription Drug Supply in Health-care 
Systems",  2019  International  Conference  on  Smart  Applications,  Communications  and  Networking  (SmartNets), 
2019. Available: 10.1109/smartnets48225.2019.9069798. 

[18] R.  Singh,  A.  Dwivedi  and  G.  Srivastava,  "Internet  of  Things  Based  Blockchain  for  Temperature  Monitoring  and 
Counterfeit Pharmaceutical Prevention", Sensors, vol. 20, no. 14, p. 3951, 2020. Available: 10.3390/s20143951. 
[19] V.  Pashkov  and  O.  Soloviov,  "Legal  implementation  of  blockchain  technology  in  pharmacy",  SHS  Web  of 

Conferences, vol. 68, p. 01027, 2019. Available: 10.1051/shsconf/20196801027. 

[20] A.  Musamih  et  al.,  "A  Blockchain-Based  Approach  for  Drug  Traceability  in  Healthcare  Supply  Chain",  IEEE 

Access, vol. 9, pp. 9728-9743, 2021. Available: 10.1109/access.2021.3049920. 

[21] "Drug  Supply  Chain  Security  Act  (DSCSA)",  U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  2021.  [Online].  Available: 

https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-supply-chain-integrity/. 

[22] B. Prasanna, A. Prema and K. Chelladurai, "E-Health for Security and Privacy in Health Care System Using Hadoop 
Map Reduce", International Journal of Advanced Networking & Applications (IJANA), vol.  8,  no. 5, pp. 101-104, 
2017. 

[23] "On  suspension  of  drug  electronic  supervision  system",  State  Food  and  Drug  Administration  of  China,  2016. 

[Online]. Available: http://www.sda.gov.cn/WS01/CL0051/144782.html. 

[24] Y. Huang, J. Wu and C. Long, "Drugledger: A Practical Blockchain System for Drug Traceability and Regulation," 
2018  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Internet  of  Things  (iThings)  and  IEEE  Green  Computing  and 
Communications  (GreenCom)  and  IEEE  Cyber,  Physical  and  Social  Computing  (CPSCom)  and  IEEE  Smart  Data 
(SmartData), Halifax, NS, Canada, 2018, pp. 1137-1144, doi: 10.1109/Cybermatics_2018.2018.00206. 

[25] S.  Khan,  M.  Al-Amin,  H.  Hossain,  N.  Noor  and  M.  Sadik,  "A  Pragmatical  Study  on  Blockchain  Empowered 
Decentralized  Application  Development  Platform",  Proceedings  of  the  International  Conference  on  Computing 
Advancements, 2020. Available: 10.1145/3377049.3377136. 

[26] S.  Ghimire,  "Analysis  of  Bitcoin  Cryptocurrency  and  Its  Mining  Techniques",  Digital  Scholarship@UNLV,  2021. 

[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.34917/15778438. 

Biographies and Photographs 

Md.  Faruk  Abdullah  Al  Sohan  received  his  both  B.Sc.  degree  in  Computer  Science  and 
Engineering  and  M.Scs.  degree  in  Computer  Network  and  Architecture  from  American 
International University-Bangladesh (AIUB), and currently he is working as a Lecturer at American 
International University-Bangladesh (AIUB).  
From  spring  2019-2020  to  summer  2019-2020,  he  was  a  Teaching  Assistant  at  American 
International  University-Bangladesh  (AIUB).  Some  of  his  research  works  have  been  published 
already  in  many  journals  &  conferences.  His  research  interest  includes,  and  passion  are  mostly 
based  on  Network  Security,  Neural  Network,  Image  Processing,  Internet  of  Things  (IoT),  Block 
Chain Technology, Artificial   Intelligence, Machine Learning and Database Design.  

Dr. Md Taimur Ahad is an Assistant Professor of Computer Science of American International 
University,  Bangladesh.  Taimur  Ahad  received  his  Ph.D  (Computer  Science)  from  Macquariey 
University,  MSc  (Computing)  form  UTS,  Australia,  Masters  in  IT  from  Western  Sydney 
University,  Bachelor  in  Computing  (Honors)  from  Carles  Sturt  University  and  Bachelor  in 
information  system  from  Southern  Cross  University,  Australia.  Taimur  is  mainly  interested  in 
utilizing  affordances  of  computer  science  for  Empowering  people  who  are  often  overlooked, 
Paving  the  way  for  a  more  equitable  world,  accelerating  healthcare  progress  and  increase 
business  agility  using  digital  technology.    IoT,  Big  data  analysis,  Parallel  computing  and 
Blockchain technology are some of research areas of Taimur. 

Samiur  Rahman  Khan  received  his  B.Sc.  degree  in  Computer  Science  (CS)  in  2019  from 
American  International  University-Bangladesh  (AIUB).  His  Bachelor  thesis  research  work  on 
Blockchain Empowered Decentralized Application Development Platform was published on ACM 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceeding.  Distributed  System,  Grid  Computing,  Blockchain,  Internet  of  Things  (IoT),  and  Information  System 
Management are his main research domain. He is currently completing Master of Science in Computer Science (MScs) in 
American  International  University-Bangladesh  (AIUB)  and  his  ongoing  research  is  on  Smart  Sustainable  City  and 
metaverse.

10 

 
11 

 Nusrat  Jahan  Anannya  is pursuing her  M.Sc.  in  Computer  Science  at  American International 
University  -  Bangladesh,  Dhaka,  Bangladesh.  Previously  she  received  her  B.Sc.  in  Computer 
Science  and  Engineering  from  the  American  International  University  -  Bangladesh,  Dhaka, 
Bangladesh  in  2021.  She  is  currently  working  as  a  Lecturer  at  International  University  of 
Scholars,  Dhaka,  Bangladesh.  Nusrat  Jahan  Anannya  has  received  several  awards  including  the 
Dean’s  List  of  Honors  and  Magna  Cum  Laude  from  the  Faculty  of  Science  and  Technology, 
American International University-Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh. Her primary research interest 
lies in Networking and Computer Security. 

 
 
 
