HardwareX 10 (2021) e00249

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

HardwareX

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / o h x

Scan4CFU: Low-cost, open-source bacterial colony tracking
over large areas and extended incubation times
Santosh Pandey a,⇑

, Yunsoo Park a, Ankita Ankita a, Gregory J. Phillips b,⇑

a Electrical and Computer Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA
b Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 31 July 2021
Received in revised form 1 November 2021
Accepted 21 November 2021

Keywords:
Antimicrobial resistance
Antibiotics
Incubation chamber
Scanner
Phenotype
Image analysis
Bacteria imaging

A hallmark of bacterial populations cultured in vitro is their homogeneity of growth, where
the majority of cells display identical growth rate, cell size and content. Recent insights,
however, have revealed that even cells growing in exponential growth phase can be
heterogeneous with respect to variables typically used to measure cell growth. Bacterial
heterogeneity has important implications for how bacteria respond to environmental
stresses, such as antibiotics. The phenomenon of antimicrobial persistence, for example,
has been linked to a small subpopulation of cells that have entered into a state of dormancy
where antibiotics are no longer effective. While methods have been developed for identi-
fying individual non-growing cells in bacterial cultures, there has been less attention paid
to how these cells may inﬂuence growth in colonies on a solid surface. In response, we have
developed a low-cost, open-source platform to perform automated image capture and
image analysis of bacterial colony growth on multiple nutrient agar plates simultaneously.
The descriptions of the hardware and software are included, along with details about the
temperature-controlled growth chamber, high-resolution scanner, and graphical interface
to extract and plot the colony lag time and growth kinetics. Experiments were conducted
using a wild type strain of Escherichia coli K12 to demonstrate the feasibility and operation
of our setup. By automated tracking of bacterial growth kinetics in colonies, the system
holds the potential to reveal new insights into understanding the impact of microbial
heterogeneity on antibiotic resistance and persistence.
(cid:1) 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Speciﬁcations Table

Hardware name

Subject area

Hardware type
Closest commercial analog

Bacterial Growth, Imaging, and Analysis Station (Scan4CFU)

(cid:1) Biological Sciences (Microbiology)
(cid:1) Environmental, Planetary and Agricultural Sciences
(cid:1) Imaging tools
QuebecTM Dark-Field Colony Counter, IncuCountTM Colony Counter, Corning Cell
Counter, and Bel-ArtTM SP SciencewareTM Plate Reader

(continued on next page)

⇑ Corresponding authors.

E-mail addresses: pandey@iastate.edu (S. Pandey), yunsoopk@iastate.edu (Y. Park), ankita@iastate.edu (A. Ankita), gregory@iastate.edu (G.J. Phillips).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ohx.2021.e00249
2468-0672/(cid:1) 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

S. Pandey, Y. Park, A. Ankita et al.

HardwareX 10 (2021) e00249

a (continued)

Hardware name

Bacterial Growth, Imaging, and Analysis Station (Scan4CFU)

Open Source License
Cost of Hardware
Source File Repository

CC-BY-SA 4.0
$306.40
Zenodo Data Repository Pandey, Santosh (2021), ‘‘ScanCFU: Low-cost, open-source
bacterial colony tracking over large areas and extended incubation times ”, Zenodo,
V1, /https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5636769

Hardware in context

Counting bacterial colonies that form on nutrient agar plates (i.e., plate counting) is a standard practice in microbiology in
order to quantify the number of individual bacteria within a culture, and is based on reporting on the number of colony
forming units (CFU)/mL of culture. However, this method is not designed to measure growth kinetics of bacteria as they form
visible colonies [1]. There are multiple studies, however, that would beneﬁt from the ability to monitor growth kinetics of
bacterial colonies over prolonged time scales. For example, since bacteria growing in broth culture encounter different envi-
ronmental conditions than those growing on a solid substrate, such as spatial limitations and oxygen availability, measuring
the impact of these differences would be valuable. It is also now clear that even bacteria growing in exponential growth
phases, under so called ‘‘balanced” growth conditions can exhibit heterogeneity with respect to growth rate, cell size and
content [2–4]. Importantly, these cells have been linked to the phenomenon of antibiotic persistence, where a small subpop-
ulation of cells reside in a state of dormancy causing them to be less susceptible to the lethal action of antibiotics [4–6].
Because persistence is associated with the emergence of antibiotic resistance and reoccurrence of bacterial infections [3],
new methods are needed to understand the contribution of persister cells, and cells that have entered into an asynchronous
growth phase in general, to overall bacterial growth and adaptation [7,8]. For example, the impact that cells (that are not in a
state of synchronous growth) have on the formation of individual colonies is not known [7,9,10].

Automated counting of bacterial colonies has been pursued by researchers in both academics and industry to improve the
experimental throughput, reproducibility, processing time, and documentation [7–12]. Commercialized products for bacte-
rial enumeration include optical density counters (e.g., spectrophotometer), digital colony counters (e.g., Neutec Group’s
Sphere Flash Colony Counter), and automated image analysis systems (e.g., BD Kiestra System). Some other examples are
the QuebecTM Dark-Field Colony Counter, IncuCountTM Colony Counter, Corning Cell Counter, and Bel-ArtTM SP SciencewareTM
Plate Reader. These commercialized products are expensive, typically priced between $1000 to $10,000 USD per system.
The commercialized image processing software are usually proprietary and restrictive, and do not fully support user mod-
iﬁcation or sharing within communities.

As an alternative to commercialized products, there is a need to democratize microbiology tools for bacterial image cap-
ture and image analysis [9]. Previous researchers have recorded digital images of Petri dish using webcams, DSLR cameras,
smartphones, and ﬂatbed scanners [7]. For example, a recent study used a Canon EOS 500D 15 MP SLR Camera to record dig-
ital plate images in grayscale and RGB color at 300 and 800 dpi resolution, respectively [11]. Another recent study employed
the Canon EOS 1200D reﬂex camera triggered by an Arduino controller to record plate images [2]. In addition, a number of
open source software have been released for this application [7,9–13]. Over the years, image processing and analysis tech-
niques have signiﬁcantly reﬁned to improve robustness, versatility, and user-friendliness. Various algorithms and plug-ins
have been added to overcome the common artifacts and imperfections during image capture, background, color, contrast,
edge effects, and colonies amongst agar plates. One example is the open-source ImageJ software originally developed by
Wayne Rasband at the National Institutes of Health [14]. In recent years, GitHub has emerged as the public repository for
open-source software for bacterial counting from images of plates, such as the DDot Counter based on the watershed algo-
rithm [13].

While signiﬁcant improvements have been made in image recognition and analysis, there is a dearth of open-source hard-
ware for incubating bacterial colonies and tracking their growth on multiple agar plates in parallel and over several hours. In
this work, we address this need by presenting an open-source station to study the growth kinetics and lag time of bacterial
colonies. The image capture is conducted inside a temperature-controlled acrylic chamber by placing multiple nutrient agar
plates with seeded cells on a high-resolution ﬂatbed scanner (resolution of 2400 dpi or higher). The scanned images of every
plate are automatically recorded at ﬁxed intervals and stored in a designated folder through the course of the experiment.
The image analysis is performed on the recorded images to extract various growth parameters of single colonies within each
plate. A graphical user interface (GUI) is developed to navigate through the various steps of image processing. The hardware
and software for image capture and image analysis are described, along with the bill of materials, and instructions for build-
ing and operating the system. Lastly, the limitations of the presented technology and future directions are discussed. The
hardware and software are open-source and made available in the online Zenodo Data Repository at /https://doi.org/10.
5281/zenodo.5636769

2

S. Pandey, Y. Park, A. Ankita et al.

HardwareX 10 (2021) e00249

Fig. 1. Open-source hardware to track the growth and imaging of bacterial colonies on agar plates. (A) The enclosure for housing the scanner is shown,
along with the heating unit, thermostat to monitor the internal temperature, ventilation tubing, and desktop computer. (B) Four nutrient agar plates are
placed on the EPSON ﬂatbed scanner. Scanned image of the four agar plates are displayed on the monitor. The inset shows the temperature within the
enclosure as a function of time.

3

S. Pandey, Y. Park, A. Ankita et al.

Hardware description

HardwareX 10 (2021) e00249

Our bacterial growth and imaging hardware consists of two chambers (i.e., interior and exterior chambers) to enclose a
high-resolution scanner, a side chamber with an attachable heater/fan unit, and a vent system to regulate the air ﬂow
through the chambers (Fig. 1). The interior chamber has 1-inch diameter holes to avoid direct air ﬂow over the scanner.
The chambers were custom-built using acrylic material, but other durable materials can also be used. The heater/fan unit
was low cost and purchased from an outside vendor. Other vendors for a portable heater and fan are available at local hard-
ware stores. The main imaging module is the Epson Perfection V750 Pro Scanner having a 6400 dpi scan resolution and a
maximum scan area of 21.6 cm (cid:3) 29.7 cm. A cheaper option is the Epson V19 Flatbed Scanner that has a resolution of
4800 dpi which is sufﬁcient for the imaging experiments. The system described here builds upon our previous work on single
cell imaging studies that employed an acrylic incubation chamber to house a student upright microscope [8].

For plating and growing the bacteria, nutrient agar plates (3-inch diameter) have been used (Fig. 1B). One imaging exper-
iment can image up to six such nutrient agar plates. Other sizes of agar plates can be used, provided that all the plates ﬁt
within the maximum scanning area (21.6 cm (cid:3) 29.7 cm). For plating cells on the agar surface, our goal was to have less than
250 colonies in the entire plate. This is because an appropriate colony count is between 25 and 250 colony forming units (CFU)
per plate, according to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [15]. If the colonies are over 250 CFUs, the growth may
be inhibited for some bacteria [15]. On the other hand, plates with less than 25 CFUs are not considered statistically repre-
sentative of the test sample [15]. Each CFU on the plate is assumed to have emerged from a single cell or a small group of
cells. We tried to reduce occurrence of colony clusters during initial plating of cells by appropriately shaking the cell pop-
ulations and choosing a suitable dilution before seeding.

Software description

Our custom software is designed to convert a group of scanned plate images into a video ﬁle for easy visualization, to
remotely control the operation of the EPSON scanner, to effectively subtract background from the scanned plate images,
to isolate and detect individual bacterial colonies, and to plot the increasing area of different colonies as a function of time.
The software is written as a collection of Matlab Files with instructions in the readme ﬁle. Upon downloading and running
the ﬁles according to the instructions, a new window pops up as shown in Fig. 2. A number of colonies are automatically
selected with unique color codes, and some of them can be de-selected if they are touching or merging with one another.
An X-Y cursor is used to select the background area. Thereafter, the background is subtracted from the images, and all
the individual colonies are found and tracked by their respective area and centroid position. A plot of the tracked bacterial
colony area is then generated as a function of the recording time.

Design ﬁles

Design ﬁles summary

The Design ﬁles correspond to the CAD ﬁles to build the acrylic chamber housings around the scanner and heater/fan unit,
.exe ﬁles for automated image capture from the scanner (zip ﬁle folder: Automated Image Capture). and MatLab ﬁles (zip ﬁle

Fig. 2. Open-source software to track the growth and imaging of bacterial colonies on agar plates. The graphical interface is shown on the left that has
clickable buttons to select image ﬁles and de-select colonies that are merged or touching one another. An X-Y cursor is used to select the background area
for subsequent background subtraction and identiﬁcation of bacterial colonies. Thereafter, a number of parameters can be plotted, such as colony area,
diameter, and emergence. The data is exported to Microsoft Excel for further analysis. A representative image of the nutrient agar plate is shown on the right
with (cid:3) and y slide bars.

4

S. Pandey, Y. Park, A. Ankita et al.

HardwareX 10 (2021) e00249

folder name: MATLAB_Files_for_Bacteria_Tracking) to automatically detect bacterial colonies from a sequence of images and
track the colony area as a function of time. The source ﬁles mentioned below are posted in the Zenodo Data Repository, V1, /
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5636769

Design ﬁle name

File type

Open source
license

Location of the ﬁle

Exterior Chamber
Interior Chamber
Heater Chamber
Automated Image Capture
Readme(Scanner)
BacteriaTrackerFiles
Readme(BacteriaTrackingSteps)

CC-BY-SA 4.0
CAD ﬁle (.dwg)
CC-BY-SA 4.0
CAD ﬁle (.dwg)
CC-BY-SA 4.0
CAD ﬁle (.dwg)
CC-BY-SA 4.0
Executable Files (.exe)
CC-BY-SA 4.0
Instructions for Scanner Use (.docx)
CC-BY-SA 4.0
Matlab ﬁles (.m)
Instructions for Bacteria Tracking (.docx) CC-BY-SA 4.0

available with the article
available with the article
available with the article
available with the article
available with the article
available with the article
available with the article

Bill of materials

The Bill of Materials correspond to the acrylic sheets, tubing, and hinges to construct the chambers for the scanner and
heater unit. There is an aluminum duct that provide the passage for steady air ﬂow and a constant pre-set temperature
through the chambers.
Bill of materials

#

1

2
1
2
2
2
1
2
2
1
4

4

1

Designator

Component

IncuKitTM XL for
Reptile Incubators

1200 x 9.500 x 3/800
1200 x 1200 x 3/800
11.2500 x 9.500 x 3/800
17.7500 x 9.500 x 3/800
2500 x 9.500 x 3/8
2500 x 17.7500 x 3/800
2700 x 10.500 x 3/800
2000 x 10.500 x 3/800
27.7500 x 2000 x 3/800
Hinges

Tubing (diameter 40’
and length 20’)
4-in. (cid:3) 8 ft. ﬂexible
dryer vent duct
1/4 in.-20 (cid:3) 1/2 in.
Combo Round Head
Zinc Plated Machine
Screw
Flatbed Scanner
(4800 dpi)

Incubator (all-in-
one digital
thermostat,
heater, fan
control)

Acrylic sheets for
incubation
chamber

Acrylic Hinges

Acrylic tubing

Aluminum Duct

Screws/Nails

EPSON Perfection

V19

Build instructions

Cost per
unit –USD

Total
cost -USD

$85.99

$86

Source of materials

https://
incubatorwarehouse.com/
incukit-xlrk.html

Material
type

Electrical
Units,
Sensors

$90

$90

https://countryplasticsia.com/
homepage/shop/

Acrylic

$3

$6

$10

$12

$24

$10

https://countryplasticsia.com/
homepage/shop/
https://countryplasticsia.com/
homepage/shop/
http://homedepot.com

48 $0.30

$14.40

http://homedepot.com

1

$69.99

$69.99

http://adorama.com

Acrylic

Acrylic

Aluminum

Stainless
Steel

Imaging
Unit

To build the bacterial growth and imaging hardware, the acrylic sheets are received from a machine shop and sorted
according to their dimensions listed in Bill of Materials. First, the structure of the side enclosure is assembled as shown
in Fig. 3A. To hold the structure in place, holes are drilled at the wall junctions of the side enclosure using an electric drill

5

S. Pandey, Y. Park, A. Ankita et al.

HardwareX 10 (2021) e00249

Fig. 3. CAD model assembly of the open-source hardware. (A) Hold the side enclosure in the upright position shown here. (B) Afﬁx the heater/fan unit to the
side enclosure. (C) Connect and install the interior scanner enclosure to the side enclosure as shown in the image. (D) Install the exterior scanner enclosure
over the perforated interior enclosure.

and screws are inserted in the holes to construct the side enclosure. Then, the heater/fan unit and acrylic tubing are manually
put in the opening of the side enclosure as shown in Fig. 3B. Next, the structure of the interior scanner enclosure is assem-
bled, holes are drilled in the interior scanner enclosure, and screws are inserted in the holes to construct the interior scanner
enclosure. Thereafter, the interior scanner enclosure is attached to the side enclosure as shown in Fig. 3C. Next, the structure

6

S. Pandey, Y. Park, A. Ankita et al.

HardwareX 10 (2021) e00249

of the exterior scanner chamber is assembled, holes are drilled in the exterior scanner chamber, screws are inserted in the
holes to construct the exterior scanner chamber. The exterior scanner chamber is then placed over to the interior scanner
enclosure as shown in Fig. 3C. Two aluminum ducts are cut to suitable size and connected between the two openings of
the side enclosure and those of the exterior scanner chamber for air ﬂow as shown in Fig. 1A. The EPSON Perfection V750
Pro Scanner (or the EPSON Perfection V850 Pro Scanner) is placed within the interior scanner chamber and connected to
a desktop computer. The power supply is connected to the heater/fan unit and scanner. Two cheaper versions of the EPSON
scanner with a 4800 dpi resolution are the Epson Perfection V19 and V39 Flatbed scanner that cost $70 and $100,
respectively.

Operation instructions

At the start of the experiment, the chambers and scanner are ensured to be clear of any unnecessary items, such as plates
from previous experiments. The nutrient agar plates are prepared. The bacterial cultures (Escherichia coli wild-type), previ-
ously grown overnight, are diluted to approximately 50 to 100 CFU per mL. The controller of the heater/fan unit is turned on
and the desired temperature is set for 37 (cid:3)C. The temperature probe is placed inside the interior scanner enclosure. The
chamber temperature reaches 37 (cid:3)C after a wait time of around 35 to 40 min. The wild-type (mg1655) E. coli cells are plated
as a cell suspension separately on six 3-inch nutrient agar plates using a pipette, and placed on the scanner. A custom .exe
program is run, along with the Epson Scan Utility software, to automatically repeat the scanning operation every 5, 15 or
30 min for a total of 20 h, while saving the recorded image of six plates to a ﬁle folder. The .exe program allows users to
select speciﬁc areas in the scanned A4-size image of six plates, and save them separately into a destination folder as six sep-
arate images of individual plates. This .exe custom program is written using the ‘AutoIt’ scripting language and available in a
zip folder (‘‘Automated Image Capture”). At the end of the experiment, the heater unit is turned off. Thereafter, the agarose
plates are removed from the scanner, opened off their lids, sprayed with 70% ethanol to kill the bacteria, and disposed of in a
bio-waste disposal unit. It is important to turn off the scanner and heater/fan unit immediately after the experiment to min-
imize equipment burn out. The heater/fan unit may break down after prolonged use, but affordable replacements are readily
available from the manufacturer (mentioned in the Bill of Materials).

There are potential safety concerns with the hardware components. It is advisable not to physically touch or come close to
the heater/fan unit or the vent system during or after its operation because its hot surface may damage the skin. The elec-
trical wiring must be securely taped outside the chambers and away from the common space for handling. It is advised to
open/close the acrylic chamber slowly and carefully to avoid physical injuries. All biosafety protocols should be followed
while handling the nutrient agar plates with bacterial colonies. For working with nonpathogenic strain of E. coli, Biosafety
Level 1 (BSL-1) protocols need to be followed. Key points to consider here are: (i) cleaning and disposing the agar plates after
the experiments, (ii) turning off the heater and/or scanner after the experiments, and (iii) frequently checking that the image
ﬁles are being saved properly and the scanner operations are working well.

Validation and characterization

After constructing the chamber housing, the heater/fan unit was set at 37 (cid:3)C. The internal temperature within the cham-
bers was observed monitored every few minutes for three separate days (Fig. 1 B). We found that the internal temperature
was maintained at the pre-set temperature throughout the monitoring period. The heater fan ensured that the temperature
was uniform throughout the two chambers. Trial runs were conducted to determine the optimum concentration of bacteria
required for seeding on the plates. Time-scanned images of representative nutrient agar plates comprising the wild-type
E. coli are shown in Fig. 4. The saved images of agarose plates were run through our custom MatLab programs (listed in

Fig. 4. Growth and imaging of wild-type E. coli with our system. The colonies are noticeable within less than 8 h and the colony area grows with time for
ﬁve different sets of experimental runs (N = 5).

7

S. Pandey, Y. Park, A. Ankita et al.

HardwareX 10 (2021) e00249

Fig. 5. Lag time and growth kinetics of bacterial colonies. (A, B) The colonies of wild-type E. coli emerge within 5 to 8 h of plating with an exponential rise
and eventual saturation phase.

Design Files Summary) to extract the area of different bacterial colonies at different time points. Almost all the wild-type
colonies emerge within 5 to 8 h of plating on agarose plates (Fig. 5).

Limitations and future scope

Our open-source station can be constructed with minimal costs to conduct experiments in microbiology where auto-
mated tracking the growth of bacterial colonies is made possible. Purchasing commercial setups for this purpose may not
be cost-effective and are often closed source for any system modiﬁcations. However, there are certain limitations of the pre-
sented technology. As with most experiments in bacteriology, the natural heterogeneity in different cell populations makes it
challenging to standardize the image processing steps for all experiments [3]. At the start of experiment, it is difﬁcult to esti-
mate the optimal dilution to start with, but we have seen that a low to mid CFU per mL (i.e. 50 to 100) helps to prevent
grouping of cells or merging of colonies. Only a ﬁnite number of bacterial colonies (less than250 CFU per mL [15]) can be
tracked over time within the maximum scanning area, and the imaging has to be completed before the colonies merge or
start competing for nutrients. It is difﬁcult to ascertain the actual number of cells in each colony by scanning plate images.
Single cell studies are not possible with this method but can be performed using microﬂuidic chips at a lower dilution
(Fig. 6). Finally, considering that each image ﬁle may be over 10 Mb, there is a ﬁnite number of high-resolution images that
can realistically be captured by the scanner during each experiment.

Fig. 6. Microﬂuidic chips to quantify elongation and division of single bacterial cells. (A) Microﬂuidic channels were fabricated to hold multiple discrete
rows of single cells with slow perfusion of nutrient media. (B) Snapshots of different sections of the microﬂuidic chip, showing the elongation and cell
division with adequate resolution. These single cell studies complement the population-scale quantiﬁcation of colony growth and lag time.

8

S. Pandey, Y. Park, A. Ankita et al.

HardwareX 10 (2021) e00249

In the near future, there is scope to expand the imaging functionalities to unravel new phenotypic traits and characterize
the natural heterogeneity in bacterial populations. For example, our method can be adapted to probe other characteristics of
bacterial colonies, such as their morphology, organization, and/or color for addressing unanswered questions in bioﬁlm for-
mation and antibiotic resistance. Persistence is still poorly understood and there are many attributes that could be quantiﬁed
by the measuring the lag time and growth kinetics of different persistors under different stressful conditions. The results
obtained from our scanner-based imaging method can further be validated with conventional tools in microbiology, such
as ﬂow cytometry, optical plate readers, turbidity measurements, and single cell analysis. An example of open source hard-
ware and software for the automated counting of bacterial colonies showed that high-resolution images from ﬂatbed scan-
ners (1200 dpi and higher) were superior than those from digital cameras for bacterial enumeration [16]. Besides
applications in microbiology, our bacterial enumeration system can be diversiﬁed for imaging, counting, and tracking other
microorganisms on agar plates, such as C. elegans and parasitic nematodes [17–20]. For this purpose, a number of open
source image processing and analysis techniques are freely available through the ImageJ software and the scientiﬁc imaging
community [14,21,22]. Finally, the presented system offers a range of possibilities for STEM education and direct hands-on
training for undergraduate and graduate students who want to tinker with the system and methods to optimize its perfor-
mance and throughout at a low cost(cid:4)something that is difﬁcult with commercial cell trackers. For example, students can
learn to prepare microbiology experiments, construct incubation chambers from CAD drawings and off-the-shelf compo-
nents, and write open source software to control the scanner operations and track colonies over time.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Santosh Pandey: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Investigation, Writing – review & editing, Funding acqui-
sition, Software, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Data curation, Supervision, Resources. Yunsoo Park: Conceptualiza-
tion, Methodology, Validation, Investigation, Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Software, Writing – original
draft, Visualization, Data curation, Supervision, Resources. Ankita Ankita: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation,
Investigation, Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Software, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Data cura-
tion, Supervision, Resources. Gregory J. Phillips: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Funding
acquisition, Writing – original draft, Investigation, Visualization, Resources.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have

appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgements

This work was partially supported by the U.S. Defense Threat Reduction Agency (HDTRA1-15-1-0053) and U.S. National
Science Foundation (NSF IDBR-1556370). We are grateful to all our past graduate students who worked on the bacterial
imaging system, including Zach Njus, Upender Kalwa, Taejoon Kong, Nicholas Backes, Augustine Beeman, Jared Jensen, Eliz-
abeth Wlezien, and Christopher Legner. We also thank Dr. Gregory Tylka and his laboratory personnel for improving the sys-
tem functions to image populations of soybean cyst nematodes.

References

[1] L.M. Young, D.J. Rieman, L. Walden, V.A. Motz, In search of a counter you can count on: relative efﬁcacy of human visual and automated colony

counting, Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 66 (2018) 188–193. /10.1111/lam.12851.

[2] J. Bär, M. Boumasmoud, R.D. Kouyos, A.S. Zinkernagel, C. Vulin, Efﬁcient microbial colony growth dynamics quantiﬁcation with ColTapp, an automated

image analysis application, Sci. Rep. 10 (2020) 16084. /10.1038/s41598-020-72979-4.

[3] F. Goormaghtigh, L. Van Melderen, Single-cell imaging and characterization of Escherichia coli persister cells to oﬂoxacin in exponential cultures, Sci.

Adv. 5 (2019) eaav9462. /10.1126/sciadv.aav9462.

[4] R.A. Fisher, B. Gollan, S. Helaine, Persistent bacterial infections and persister cells, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 15 (2017) 453–464. /10.1038/nrmicro.2017.42.
[5] N.R. Cohen, M.A. Lobritz, J.J. Collins, Microbial persistence and the road to drug resistance, Cell Host Microbe. 13 (2013) 632–642. 10.1016/

j.chom.2013.05.009.

[6] A. Jo~ers, N. Kaldalu, T. Tenson, The frequency of persisters in Escherichia coli reﬂects the kinetics of awakening from dormancy, J. Bacteriol. 192 (13)

(2010) 3379–3384.

[7] I. Levin-Reisman, O. Gefen, O. Fridman, I. Ronin, D. Shwa, H. Sheftel, N.Q. Balaban, Automated imaging with ScanLag reveals previously undetectable

bacterial growth phenotypes, Nat. Methods. 7 (2010) 737–739. /10.1038/nmeth.1485.

[8] T. Kong, N. Backes, U. Kalwa, C. Legner, G.J. Phillips, S. Pandey, Adhesive Tape Microﬂuidics with an Autofocusing Module That Incorporates CRISPR

Interference: Applications to Long-Term Bacterial Antibiotic Studies, ACS Sensors. 4 (2019) 2638–2645. /10.1021/acssensors.9b01031.

[9] Q. Geissmann, OpenCFU, a New Free and Open-Source Software to Count Cell Colonies and Other Circular Objects, PLoS One. 8 (2013). /10.1371/journal.

pone.0054072.

[10] M. Putman, R. Burton, M.H. Nahm, Simpliﬁed method to automatically count bacterial colony forming unit, J. Immunol. Methods. 302 (2005) 99–102. /

10.1016/j.jim.2005.05.003.

[11] L. Hogekamp, S.H. Hogekamp, M.R. Stahl, Experimental setup and image processing method for automatic enumeration of bacterial colonies on agar

plates, PLoS One. 15 (2020) e0232869. /10.1371/journal.pone.0232869.

9

S. Pandey, Y. Park, A. Ankita et al.

HardwareX 10 (2021) e00249

[12] S.D. Brugger, C. Baumberger, M. Jost, W. Jenni, U. Brugger, K. Mühlemann, S. Bereswill, Automated Counting of Bacterial Colony Forming Units on Agar

Plates, PLoS One. 7 (3) (2012) e33695.

[13] D. Johnston, DDot Counter, GitHub. (2019). https://github.com/microbialman/DDotCounter.
[14] C.A. Schneider, W.S. Rasband, K.W. Eliceiri, NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis, Nat. Methods. 9 (2012) 671–675. /10.1038/nmeth.2089.
[15] J.T.P. Larry Maturin, B.A.M. Chapter, 3: Aerobic Plate Count, U.S, Food Drug Adm. (2001). https://www.fda.gov/food/laboratory-methods-food/bam-

chapter-3-aerobic-plate-count.

[16] M.L. Clarke, R.L. Burton, A.N. Hill, M. Litorja, M.H. Nahm, J. Hwang, Low-cost, high-throughput, automated counting of bacterial colonies, Cytom. Part A.

77A (2010) 790–797. /10.1002/CYTO.A.20864.

[17] S. Pandey, A. Joseph, R. Lycke, A. Parashar, Decision-making by nematodes in complex microﬂuidic mazes, Adv. Biosci. Biotechnol. 02 (2011) 409–415. /

10.4236/abb.2011.26060.

[18] A.Q. Beeman, Z.L. Njus, S. Pandey, G.L. Tylka, Chip technologies for screening chemical and biological agents against plant-parasitic nematodes,

Phytopathology. 106 (12) (2016) 1563–1571.

[19] A.Q. Beeman, Z.L. Njus, S. Pandey, G.L. Tylka, The effects of ILeVO and VOTiVO on root penetration and behavior of the soybean cyst nematode,

heterodera glycines, Plant Dis. 103 (3) (2019) 392–397.

[20] J.P. Jensen, A.Q. Beeman, Z.L. Njus, U. Kalwa, S. Pandey, G.L. Tylka, Movement and motion of soybean cyst nematode heterodera glycines populations

and individuals in response to abamectin, Phytopathology. 108 (7) (2018) 885–891.

[21] Z. Njus, T. Kong, U. Kalwa, C. Legner, M. Weinstein, S. Flanigan, J. Saldanha, S. Pandey, Flexible and disposable paper- A nd plastic-based gel micropads

for nematode handling, imaging, and chemical testing, APL Bioeng. 1 (2017) 16102. /10.1063/1.5005829.

[22] U. Kalwa, C. Legner, E. Wlezien, G. Tylka, S. Pandey, New methods of removing debris and highthroughput counting of cyst nematode eggs extracted

from ﬁeld soil, PLoS One. 14 (2019) e0223386. /10.1371/journal.pone.0223386.

Santosh Pandey is an Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Iowa State University. He
supervises the Micro/Nano Systems Laboratory in Coover Hall where research projects are conducted in experimental areas of
sensors, microﬂuidics, instrumentation, imaging, and software processing, and data analytics.

Yunsoo Park is a Master Student at Iowa State University. His research interests include machine learning, imaging, sensors,
low-powered PCB design and low-powered wireless communication. He participated in the Micro/Nano Systems Laboratory in
Coover Hall.

Ankita is a Ph.D. student at Iowa State University. She works in the Micro/Nano Systems Laboratory in Coover Hall. Her research
interests include bioengineering, machine learning, low-power PCB design, video analytics and image processing.

10

S. Pandey, Y. Park, A. Ankita et al.

HardwareX 10 (2021) e00249

Gregory Phillips is a Professor in Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine at Iowa State University. His research
interests are in genomics and metagenomics, microbiome/host interactions, antibiotic persistence in bacterial pathogens, and
bacterial membrane protein localization. He received the Pﬁzer award for research excellence in veterinary medicine. He is in
the editorial board of Plasmid, Journal of Bacteriology, and EcoSal.

11

