Preprint

Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XXX
J.E. Ruiz, F. Pierfederici, and P. Teuben, eds.
ASP Conference Series
©2021 Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc

Tricolour: an optimized SumThreshold ﬂagger for MeerKAT

Benjamin V. Hugo1,2, Simon Perkins1, Bruce Merry1, Tom Mauch1 and
Oleg M. Smirnov2,1

1South African Radio Astronomy Observatory, Cape Town, South Africa;
bhugo@ska.ac.za

2Rhodes University, Makhanda (Grahamstown), Eastern Cape, South Africa

Abstract. We present Tricolour, a package for Radio Frequency Interference miti-
gation of wideband ﬁnely channelized MeerKAT correlation data. The MeerKAT pass-
band is heavily aﬀected by interference from satellite, mobile, aircraft and terrestrial
transponders. Coupled with typical data rates in excess of 100 GiB/hr at 208kHz chan-
nelization resolution, mitigation poses a signiﬁcant processing challenge. Our ﬂagger is
highly conﬁgurable, parallel and optimized, employing Dask and Numba technologies
to implement the widely used SumThreshold and MAD interference detection algo-
rithms. We ﬁnd that typical 208kHz channelized datasets can be processed at rates in
excess of 400 GiB/hr for a typical L-band ﬂagging strategy on a modern dual-socket
Intel Xeon server.

1. Radio Frequency Interference impacts on MeerKAT observation

Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) can be deﬁned as any interfering signal that neg-
atively aﬀects the observable instrumental bandwidth of a radio telescope. The most
prominent RFI impacting cm wavelength observations using MeerKAT (Jonas et al.
2018) are spatially coherent man-made telecommunications and navigational satellite
transmissions. These substantially impacts all observation, particularly that of L-band,
shown in Fig. 1 for a typical observation.

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

8
1

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
9
7
1
9
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1. Mean visibility amplitude of a typical unﬂagged and uncalibrated L-
band MeerKAT observation. Darkened areas show subbands where persistent inter-
ference is most likely, and serves as a “static” background mask during application
of mitigation routines.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Preprint

Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XXX
J.E. Ruiz, F. Pierfederici, and P. Teuben, eds.
ASP Conference Series
©2021 Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc

2

Hugoet. al.

RFI aﬀecting large portions of the bandwidth presents a substantial risk for, es-
pecially, sensitive continuum radio science projects, because the sensitivity of such
observations scale as the square root of the observable bandwidth. As shown in Fig. 1,
man-made interference power is orders of magnitude above the relatively dominating
sub-Jy Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN) population at cm wavelengths — even on a bright
calibrator ﬁeld! A large number of science cases require very long observations to tar-
get imaging sensitivities at the level of only a few µJy/beam RMS noise, e.g. Mauch
et al. (2020). Multi-hour observations using all available bandwidth is only one factor
determining image observation sensitivity — another important factor is the number of
unique interferometer spacings (baselines) contributing to the ﬁnal synthesized image.
This scales, roughly, quadratically with the number of antennae in the interferometric
array.

The dump rate of MeerKAT’s raw correlated visibilities (excluding metadata) is
0.14 and 1.10 TiB / hr for coarse and ﬁne channelization respectively, at a typical
dump rate of 8s. RFI mitigation on a large wideband sensitive array therefore poses
a signiﬁcant processing challenge, requiring a ﬂexible and parallel implementation of
mitigation routines.

2. RFI detection and mitigation

Outlier detection routines are commonly used to detect and mitigate RFI in interferom-
etry. The results are stored in a spectro-polarimetric ﬂag array with the same shape as
the data column, which is used in further calibration and imaging of the radio product.
Mitigation of man-made RFI is substantially simpliﬁed by two properties of the
measured signal. Firstly, transmission signals are ordinarily highly polarized. Much
of the bright cm dominating radio AGN population is linearly polarized to a couple
of percent. Secondly, a radio interferometer measures phase information of the spatial
locality of emitting sources. The complex vector rotates quickly on long spacings for all
declinations away from the celestial poles. Through complex averaging, a substantial
portion of the detectable RFI is washed out.

Various simple and eﬀective outlier detection techniques that can be used to detect
the remaining RFI not washed out in the fringes of the interferometer, are discussed
in Oﬀringa et al. (2010). The SumThreshold algorithm is a simple and fast windowed
procedure widely used for RFI detection that can be applied to two dimensions —
that of time and frequency per spacing. The method clips values where the sum of
the values within a time and channel window exceeds an interatively adjusted average
threshold. The method is very sensitive to RFI while maintaining good false-positive
classiﬁcation rates for large enough window sizes. The algorithm is trivially parallel
over the unique interferometer spacings (baselines), but requires a reordering step to
select the time and frequency subsets per baseline from data that is traditionally stored
in time-sorted row order. For a large array such as MeerKAT this step is amortized by
the dominating run time of the sum-thresholding for various window sizes and number
of iterations. To aid in background estimation on short spacings, we provide options
to apply “static” masks to ﬂag large bands of persistent RFI (such as the one shown
in Fig. 1) on adjustable ranges of baseline length, as well as options to form residual
products based on predicted sky models.

The sizes of the windows, as well as the sensitivity adjustment parameter, have
to be ﬁne tuned by hand for the particular science case and channelization regime of

Preprint

Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XXX
J.E. Ruiz, F. Pierfederici, and P. Teuben, eds.
ASP Conference Series
©2021 Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc

Tricolour: anoptimized SumThreshold ﬂaggerforMeerKAT

3

Figure 2.
Here we show bandwidth and spatial ﬂagging statistics after applying
typical multi-pass ﬂagging strategies for L (ﬁrst row) and UHF (second row) bands
of calibrator PKS B1934-638. UHF band is generally very clean compared to L-
band, however we note that the large spread in visibility amplitudes at the bottom
of the band is due to the substantial cumulative contribution from the oﬀ-axis AGN
population, due to the wide ﬁeld of view of the instrument. The contribution from
navigational systems is substantially reduced in comparison to what was seen in
Fig. 1

the observation, to minimize false positives. To achieve this we provide a YAML-based
interface to the user to allow users to customize strategies to their requirements. Typical
ﬂagging statistics and results for MeerKAT are shown in Figure 2.

3. A parallel, scalable implementation

Our ﬂagger is distributed as an Open Source Python package, available on the Python
Package Index as “tricolour". We have implemented the SumThreshold method
written in Numpy (Harris et al. 2020) and cache-optimized Numba (Lam et al. 2015)
kernels. The user-available version of the ﬂagger ingests data from Measurement Set
v2.0 columns exposed as chunked Dask Arrays by Dask-ms . This architecture is more
fully described in Perkins et al. (2021a). A trimmed version of the ﬂagger is used in
the online MeerKAT Science Data Processor which ﬂags most of the substantial RFI in
buﬀered raw data at line rates, before storage to the MeerKAT archive.

We proﬁled our implementation with a dual-socket Intel Xeon 8160 system with
550 GiB of memory applying a typical multi-pass L-band ﬂagging strategy to a suﬃ-
ciently large (> 100 GiB) coarsely channelized (208kHz) dataset captured at a dump
rate of 1s. After tuning thread aﬃnity and chunk size to optimize cache performance
(through non-intrusive L3 cache proﬁling with the Linux kernel utility perf) we show
that our ﬂagger scales well to more than 20 physical cores (Figure 3) and ﬂags data at
over 400 GiB/hr.

4. Conclusions

We have built a highly conﬁgurable and scalable RFI ﬂagger for the MeerKAT radio
telescope, that is capable of processing coarsely channelized wideband data well above

Preprint

Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems XXX
J.E. Ruiz, F. Pierfederici, and P. Teuben, eds.
ASP Conference Series
©2021 Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc

4

Hugoet. al.

Figure 3.
Scaling performance of our ﬂagging software after ﬁne-tuning cache
performance through the chunk size parameters in the user interface. Dashed line
represents perfect linear scaling for reference. Overall core occupancy is good al-
though scaling is ultimately limited by the memory intensity of the underlying algo-
rithm.

line rate with typical ﬂagging strategies. Our ﬂagging software has substantially cut
down on the processing time needed for telescope commissioning, as well as recent
continuum science observation processing through the CARACal (Jozsa et al. 2021)
pipeline, as well as processing of the Mightee continuum survey (Delhaize et al. 2020)
through the Oxkat (Heywood 2020) pipeline.

While Tricolour is currently restricted to operation on a single node, Dask oﬀers
the potential for horizontal scaling on a cluster, as described in Perkins et al. (2021b).
As we support data ingest through the generic, defacto standard, Measurement Set
v2.0 interface, modiﬁcation of the ﬂagger to support instruments other than MeerKAT
should not be diﬃcult to accomplish.

Acknowledgements

All ﬁgures in this paper were generated using Matplotlib - a 2D graphics package used for Python for
application development, interactive scripting,and publication-quality image generation across user inter-
faces and operating systems. The MeerKAT radio telescope is a facility operated by the South African
Radio Astronomy Observatory. A business unit of the National Research Foundation of South Africa.

References

Delhaize, J., et al. 2020, MIGHTEE: Are giant radio galaxies more common than we thought?

MNRAS,accepted

Harris, C. R., et al. 2020, Nature, 585, 357
Heywood, I. 2020, oxkat: Semi-automated imaging of MeerKAT observations. 2009.003
Jonas, J., et al. 2018, in MeerKAT Science: On the Pathway to the SKA (SISSA Medialab), vol.

277, 001

Jozsa, G., et al. 2021, in ADASS XXX, edited by J.-E. Ruiz, & F. Pierfederici (San Francisco:

ASP), vol. TBD of ASP Conf. Ser., 999 TBD

Lam, S. K., et al. 2015, in Proceedings of the Second Workshop on the LLVM Compiler Infras-

tructure in HPC, 1

Mauch, T., et al. 2020, The Astrophysical Journal, 888, 61
Oﬀringa, A., et al. 2010, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 405, 155
Perkins, S., et al. 2021a, in ADASS XXX, edited by J.-E. Ruiz, & F. Pierfederici (San Francisco:

ASP), vol. TBD of ASP Conf. Ser., 999 TBD

— 2021b, in ADASS XXX, edited by J.-E. Ruiz, & F. Pierfederici (San Francisco: ASP), vol.

TBD of ASP Conf. Ser., 999 TBD

This figure "mkLRFI.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2206.09179v1

This figure "mk_lband_1934_band.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2206.09179v1

This figure "mk_lband_bandpercentages.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2206.09179v1

This figure "mk_lband_uvpercentages.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2206.09179v1

This figure "mk_uband_1934_band.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2206.09179v1

This figure "mk_uband_bandpercentages.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2206.09179v1

This figure "mk_uband_uvpercentages.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2206.09179v1

This figure "tricol_occ.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2206.09179v1

This figure "tricol_scaling.png" is available in "png"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/2206.09179v1

