MAI-SIM: interferometric multicolor structured 
illumination microscopy for everybody 

Edward  N.  Ward,  Lisa  Hecker,  Charles  N.  Christensen,  Jacob  R  Lamb,  Meng  Lu,  Luca 
Mascheroni,  Chyi  Wei  Chung,  Anna  Wang,  Christopher  J.  Rowlands,  Gabriele  S.  Kaminski 
Schierle, Clemens F. Kaminski

Sub-diffraction  resolution,  gentle  sample  illumination,  and  the  possibility  to  image  in  multiple  colors  make 
Structured  Illumination  Microscopy  (SIM)  an  imaging  technique  which  is  particularly  well  suited  for  live  cell 
observations. Here, we present Machine learning Assisted Interferometric-SIM (MAI-SIM), an easy-to-implement 
method for high speed SIM imaging in multiple colors. The instrument is based on an interferometer design in 
which  illumination  patterns  are  generated,  rotated,  and  stepped  in  phase  through  movement  of  a  single 
galvanometric mirror element. The design is robust, flexible, and the pattern generation process works for all 
wavelengths. We complement the unique properties of interferometric SIM with a machine learning toolbox that 
is simple and efficient to use and is superior to existing methods for the reconstruction of super-resolved images 
recorded by the instrument. The framework permits real-time SIM reconstructions to be performed in multiple 
colors, providing the user with instant visualization of the super-resolved images. We demonstrate the capability 
of MAI-SIM on live biological samples and capture super-resolution images in multiple colors simultaneously over 
large fields of view.  Finally, we embrace a fully open design philosophy to bring the advantages of MAI-SIM to as 
many users as possible and provide full details on system design and software. 

Super-resolution microscopy has enabled the observation of increasingly smaller features in biological specimens, 

but many challenging problems remain, for example in the imaging of intracellular transport processes and small 

organelle interactions in live cells. Reasons for this are limitations in acquisition speed, restrictions on fluorescent 

labels or required buffers, and the need for use of illumination intensities compatible with viewing live samples. 

Structured  Illumination  Microscopy  (SIM)  stands  out  as  a  technique  for  sub-diffraction  imaging  of  live  biological 

specimens as it strikes an optimal balance in resolution and imaging speed at light intensities where phototoxicity 

levels are tolerable.1,2As SIM uses widefield detection and requires only a linear fluorescent response, large fields of 

view can be imaged at low excitation powers and high speeds. 

In  SIM,  a  spatially  modulated  illumination  pattern  is  projected  onto  the  sample,  which  mixes  with  high  spatial 

frequency content in the sample structure to generate beat frequencies.  The low frequency beat patterns, or Moiré 

fringes, contain high resolution sample information, which can be reconstructed into super-resolved images. In most 

implementations of SIM, a striped excitation pattern with sinusoidal modulation is used, containing a single spatial 

frequency. The resulting high-resolution image is reconstructed from a series of nine sequentially recorded images 

corresponding to three linear translations of the pattern (phase stepping) and three rotation steps of 120° to obtain 

isotropic  resolution  enhancement.  In  such  a  scheme,  spatial  frequencies  in  the  sample  are  downshifted  by  an 

amount equal to the spatial frequency of the striped illumination. As the excitation pattern is itself limited by the 

 
 
 
frequency passband of the imaging system, 2NA/𝜆, spatial frequencies of twice this limit can be downshifted into 

the passband, leading to an approximately twofold increase in resolution.  

A number of SIM variants have been developed which differ in the way patterns are generated and projected onto 

the  sample.  In  the  earliest  implementations  of  SIM,  illumination  patterns  were  created  with  fixed  diffraction 

gratings.2 The excitation was diffracted into multiple beams which were recombined in the sample plane to form 

striped interference patterns. However, the fixed periodicity of the grating corresponds to a fixed spatial frequency. 

In practice, this means that the method could only be optimized for a single wavelength.  For multi-color imaging 

this  requires  use  of  multiple  grating,  which  is  practically  complex,  or  it  must  be  accepted  that  the  method  will 

perform sub-optimally for other wavelengths. Pattern changing was achieved by mechanical rotation and translation 

of  the  diffraction  grating,  limiting  operation  at  high  speed.  Later  implementations  make  use  of  Spatial  Light 

Modulators  (SLMs)  based  on  either  liquid  crystal  technologies3–5    or  Digital  Micro-mirror  Devices  (DMDs)6–8  for 

pattern generation, which increases acquisition speed by an order of magnitude. However, these methods have their 

own limitations. For example, as is the case for diffraction gratings, new patterns have to be generated for every 

color to obtain the best  resolution, and again channels must  be recorded sequentially. Additionally, the discrete 

number and finite size of pixels in such devices restrict the periodicity of the patterns to integer numbers of pixels 

and introduce unwanted diffraction orders, which reduce photon efficiency.3 Finally, all of these methods are highly 

sensitive on the polarization state of the incoming light, and this must be controlled in synchronicity with the pattern 

orientation to maximize pattern contrast in the sample.9  

Here, we present an interferometric method to generate illumination patterns for SIM, MAI-SIM. The method makes 

use of an interferometer to generate fringes which are projected into the sample. The instrument projects patterns 

of optimal spatial frequency into the sample, irrespective of excitation wavelength.  The method is fast, low in cost, 

and straightforward to implement.  We demonstrate simultaneous SIM imaging in three colors over large fields of 

view (44 x 44 µm2) at several frames per second recording speed.  We maximize the potential of MAI-SIM with a 

suite of freely available software tools for image reconstruction.  We call the method Machine learning Assisted 

Interferometric  SIM,  MAI-SIM,  which  is  constructed  using  open  design  principles.    All  hardware  and  software 

modules to implement MAI-SIM are fully described, for anyone to implement on standard fluorescence microscopy 

frames.  Finally, we demonstrate the power of MAI-SIM through application in live cell samples, where we image 

dynamic organelle-organelle interactions in three colors.  MAI-SIM records, renders, and visualizes super-resolution 

output in real time. 

 
 
Figure 1. Working principle of MAI-SIM. A(i-iii): Schematic of the interferometric design. Three small mirror pairs, each forming a 

Michelson interferometer, are tilted to form interference patterns at angles, θ1-3, separated by 2π/3. Large steps of the scanning 

mirror change the mirror pair addressed by the incoming beam (dashed line) and hence the rotation of the fringe pattern. Small 

steps of the scanning mirror laterally displace the position of the interference fringes and cause a phase shift, δφ, in the excitation 

pattern. B: Using several dichroic mirrors and emission filters, the three-way image splitter allows for the simultaneous display of 

up to three color channels on the camera chip. For full details on the optical setup and a rendering of the layout see SI Figure S1. 

 
 
 
 
Results  

Hardware implementation  

The  core  component  of  the  presented  microscope  is  a  Michelson  interferometer,  where  wavelength-dependent 

wedge fringes are projected onto the sample. A single high-speed mirror galvanometer is used to address one of 

three pairs of complementary 0.5” mirrors (Figure 1A). Each pair of mirrors forms fringes of constant thickness whose 

period is governed by the wavelength of the excitation light and the inclination of the mirrors with respect to one 

another.  An image of these  fringes, corresponding to an  image of the surface of these mirrors, is  subsequently 

relayed onto the sample (SI Figure 1&2).  Furthermore, by adjusting the tilt of each mirror individually, fringes are 

produced such that moving from one mirror pair to the next rotates the fringe pattern around the optical axis. Thus, 

stepping from one mirror pair to another (Figure 1) rotates the pattern by 120°. Finally, phase shifting of the pattern 

is achieved using small galvanometer steps to translate the beam across each mirror pair, which yields a fixed lateral 

shift  in  the  projected  image  plane.  This  implementation  greatly  reduces  the  complexity  associated  with 

interferometric  system  which  typically  require  multiple  moving  comments  which  need  to  be  precisely 

synchronised.10,11 Because the fringes are coherently formed, it is critical that the coherence lengths of lasers used 

in the setup exceeds the maximum path difference between the interfering beams. Good temporal coherence is 

thus important, in contrast to SLM based SIM systems. In our setup, mirror pairs are on individual translation stages 

so that the path length difference can be precisely controlled to obtain optimal fringe contrast.  

A key issue with SIM in high Numerical Aperture (NA) imaging systems is that the modulation depth of the pattern, 

which governs the strength of the super-resolution information collected, depends on the polarization orientation 

of the incident light. For high pattern contrast, s-polarization must be maintained for all pattern rotations. In many 

SIM systems, this is achieved through use of electro-optic liquid crystal devices which must be synchronized to the 

pattern generation process and the wavelength chosen. Here we chose to use a wedge polariser placed in the Fourier 

plane of the microscope as pioneered by Heintzmann et al.12 To maintain the correct linear polarization at the back 

aperture of the objective, a matched pair of quad-band dichroic mirrors was used to compensate for the inherent 

ellipticity introduced by such mirrors. The detection path of the system was equipped with a commercial three-way 

image splitter, which included dichroic mirrors and emission filters to enable the simultaneous detection of three 

different fluorophores on a single high-speed camera (Figure 1B). The synchronization of the individual components 

is simpler than for many other SIM systems, as fewer active elements need to be considered. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  Instrument characterization 

To  quantify  the  lateral  resolution  improvement,  100  nm  fluorescent  spheres  were  imaged  at  an  excitation 

wavelength of 488 nm. We determined the full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) of the intensity profiles for individual 

point emitters by fitting the images to a 2D Gaussian profile (SI Figure S5). The mean FWHM of 70 emitters was 

measured  as  200  nm  for  deconvolved  widefield  images  and  120  nm  for  reconstructed  SIM  images,  which  is  as 

expected for the spatial frequency of the fringe pattern. The performance of the system was tested using fluorescent 

microspheres with 200 nm diameter as well as mCherry-labeled tubulin, both of which have well-defined structures. 

The  samples  were  imaged  with  an  excitation  wavelength  of  561  nm,  and  reconstructed  using  an  inverse  matrix 

approach implemented in MATLAB.13 Figure 2 compares the reconstructed SIM data with the corresponding Wiener 

filtered  widefield  images.  While  the  latter  provides  a  suppression  of  out-of-focus  light  and  an  enhanced  visual 

appearance,  SIM  is  capable  of  significantly  enhancing  the  resolution,  which  is  crucial  to  distinguish  individual 

particles and filaments.  

Figure 2: Demonstration of the MAI-SIM on samples excited at a wavelength of 561 nm. In the deconvolved widefield images, 

adjacent 200 nm beads (top) and entangled microtubule filaments (bottom) remain unresolved, but are clearly distinguishable in 

the SIM image. Images were reconstructed using the inverse matrix method.13 Scale bars are 1 µm. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The use of neural networks leads to enhanced image reconstruction in MAI-SIM 

In MAI-SIM, patterns of  multiple colors can be projected into a  sample plane  simultaneously.  Phase  stepping is 

achieved through small lateral shifts across specific mirror pairs (see Figure 1A).  As the fringe spacing is different for 

each  wavelength,  this  means  that  not  all  colors  will  experience  the  same  phase  shift  for  the  same  lateral 

displacement.  In practice, this means that the transverse  pattern shifts required to reconstruct images may not 

correspond to the ideal 2π/3 phase steps. In sequential imaging this is not a problem, since the shifts can then be 

adjusted to be optimal for each individual wavelength.  For the case of uneven phase steps, traditional Fourier based 

reconstruction techniques do not perform optimally.10,13–16 We have compared the performance of several widely 

used reconstruction methods, specifically, the FairSIM-imageJ plugin16, an inverse matrix method13, an iterative blind 

SIM method17, and finally our Machine Learning-SIM (ML-SIM) approach.18 FairSIM is an easy-to-implement plugin 

with well-documented and versatile pre- / post-processing techniques19 which are familiar to existing SIM users. In 

principle, FairSIM offers the capability of estimating phase step sizes from SIM patterns, however this capability only 

works  for  even  phase  steps.  The  inverse  matrix  method  implements  a  more  sophisticated  method  for  phase 

estimation which is capable of performing reconstructions with uneven phase shifts. Its disadvantage compared to 

FairSIM  is  its  limited  versatility  in  pre-  and  post-processing  modalities.  Iterative  blind  SIM  reconstruction  is  a 

fundamentally different approach and was developed for the reconstruction of SIM data acquired under random 

excitation patterns.20–22 This makes the technique inherently agnostic to the specifics of phase steps used so long as 

a sufficiently good initial estimate for the sample image can be made.17 For our ML-SIM, even steps are also not 

necessary and the method is specifically optimized for the reconstruction of interferometric SIM data, although it 

works equally well with all other implementations for SIM.  

 
 
Figure 3: Reconstructions of MAI-SIM data from fixed COS7 cells containing beta-tubulin labelled with secondary anti-bodies 
conjugated to ALexa568 dye. Top left: comparison of diffraction limited widefield images and ML-SIM reconstruction over the 
full FOV. Scale bar is 5 µm. Top right: ML-SIM reconstruction for magnified region indicated in the left-hand panel. Scale bar is 
1 µm. Bottom, from left to right: wide field, blind SIM, FairSIM, and inverse matrix reconstructions over the same region. In all 
reconstruction methods, a resolution increase is apparent compared to the widefield image. In the case of ideal phase shifting, 
the FairSIM and inverse matrix reconstructions have performed comparably. The resolution increase achieved by the blind SIM 
method is less than that of the other techniques and there is significant amplification of background noise. Scale bars are 1 µm. 

ML-SIM is a  deep neural network consisting of approximately 100 convolutional  layers, similar in architecture to 

residual channel attention networks.23 These are designed for single-image upsampling, where here the architecture 

is modified to take nine raw SIM frames as input from which the image is reconstructed. For this study, our previously 

published  approach  was  developed  to  address  the  specific  challenges  of  MAI-SIM.  The  model  is  trained  on 

synthetically generated SIM data with a full physical model of the SIM process, which includes experimental factors 

such as spherical aberrations, Poisson noise, and finite pattern contrast. Data are simulated for various point spread 

functions, illumination angles, phase steps, and noise sources. The imaging parameters are randomized, such that 

the model learns to be robust irrespective of the specifics of a particular SIM imaging setup. 

 
Figure 4: ML-SIM outperforms classical SIM reconstruction algorithms for the analysis of data acquired with uneven phase steps. 
Reconstructions of SIM data from GFP-labelled mitochondria in live samples with data acquired during simultaneous three color 
imaging (only one color channel shown here). GFP was excited at 488 nm, but phase steps were optimized for the separate 561 
nm color channel, leading to phase steps that differ from 2π/3.  Top left: comparison of diffraction limited imaging and ML-SIM 
over the full FOV. Both resolution and background rejection are enhanced in the ML-SIM reconstruction. Scale bar is 5 µm. Top 
right: ML-SIM reconstruction of magnified view indicated in left hand panel. The ML-SIM method is unaffected by the uneven 
phase stepping and resolution is improved without reconstruction artefacts. Scale bar is 1 µm. Bottom left to right: wide field, 
blind  SIM,  FairSIM  and  inverse  matrix  reconstructions  for  indicated  region.  The  uneven  phase  stepping  leads  to  significant 
reconstruction artefacts, including, striping artefacts and honeycombing. While the inverse matrix approach remains free from 
striping artefacts, additional honeycombing is apparent due to low signal to noise ratios. The blind SIM reconstruction shows a 
limited increase in resolution over the widefield image and amplification of background noise. Striping artefacts are also present 
as a result of a poor initial estimate of the sample. Scale bars are 1 µm. 

The quality of these reconstructions is compared in Figures 3 and 4. Figure 3 demonstrates the performance on 

interferometric SIM data from a sequential acquisition of multiple color channels. This permits the phase shifts to 

be optimized individually for all wavelengths. As expected under these conditions, the performance of the inverse 

matrix and FairSIM is comparable, because the assumption of equidistant phase steps of 2π/3 is valid. In contrast, 

while  a  resolution  improvement  over  the  widefield  image  is  still  apparent,  the  blind  SIM  approach  introduces 

noticeable reconstruction artifacts, associated with the amplification of noise. Figure 4, on the other hand, compares 

the performance of these reconstruction techniques on data acquired during simultaneous acquisition of all color 

 
 
 
channels.  Here, the phases were optimized for 561 nm excitation, i.e. with equidistant phase steps separated at 

2π/3, however the images shown are for the 488 nm excitation channel, where phase steps are no longer equidistant 

and  differ  significantly  from  2π/3.  As  seen,  ML-SIM  outperforms  the  classical  reconstruction  methods  by  a 

considerable margin. The algorithm handles uneven phase steps and deals better with data acquired at low Signal-

to-Noise Ratios (SNR).  For the imaging of dynamically changing and light sensitive samples, where short camera 

exposure  times  and  low  excitation  intensities  have  to  be  used,  this  presents  very  significant  advantages.  We 

quantified the relative performance of the different methods using NanoJ analysis software24 (SI Figure S8, and SI 

table 1).   

In addition to an increased robustness to noise and pattern phase errors, the use of machine learning for SIM enables 

image reconstruction that is considerably faster than Fourier or iterative methods. We leverage this advantage to 

demonstrate  on-the-fly  reconstructions  of  live  generated  SIM  data.  On  an  entry-level  graphics  card,  image 

acquisition, reconstruction, and visualization of up to three color channels can be performed simultaneously at a 

frame rate of 1 Hz over a 44 x 44 µm field of view (SI Figure S8). Video 1 in the SI presents a demonstration of live 

MAI-SIM imaging, demonstrating the responsiveness and ease of use of the method, even for non-experts. 

MAI-SIM enables imaging in multiple color channels 

To  assess  the  performance  of  MAI-SIM  for  imaging  in  multiple  colors,  we  first  imaged  labeled  fluorescent 

microspheres and intracellular organelles in fixed COS-7 cells. Figure 5 shows multicolor microspheres excited at 488 

nm, 561 nm and 647 nm, respectively. Data in the three channels were acquired sequentially so that phase steps 

could be optimized for every color.  In this case, classical reconstruction algorithms work well.  Images shown were 

reconstructed  using  the  inverse  matrix  method  and  are  clearly  better  resolved  than  the  deconvolved  widefield 

images  shown  for  comparison.  Figure  5B  shows  fixed  GFP  expressing  mitochondria  (blue),  fixed  mApple  stained 

endoplasmic reticulum (ER, yellow), and fixed microtubules labeled with Alexa647 immunostaining (red). In all three 

images, filament networks, bundles, and junctions can be resolved at sub-diffraction resolution. This demonstrates 

that artifact-free, high-resolution SIM can be obtained for a variety of samples and labeling methods with classical 

reconstruction methods.  

 
 
 
Figure  5.  Multi-color  imaging  capability  of  the  developed  instrument.  A:  200  nm  TetraSpeck  microspheres  imaged  with 

excitation/emission wavelengths of 488/515 nm, 561/580 nm, and 647/680 nm, respectively. In each panel, the top left corner 

shows the deconvolved widefield image, and the lower right corner shows the inverse matrix SIM reconstructions. Scale bars are 

2  µm.  B:  Multicolor  imaging  of  cellular  organelles  with  different staining  strategies.  (i)  Fixed  mitochondria (GFP),  (ii)  fixed ER 

(mApple), (iii) fixed and immunostained tubulin (Alexa647). Scale bars are 5 µm (top/middle) and 500 nm (bottom).  

Finally, we assess the use of MAI-SIM for the investigation of live biological samples. The ability to image multiple 

color  channels  simultaneously  without  temporal  offset  is  crucial  for  the  investigation  of  dynamic  interactions 

between  different  biological  structures,  yet  is  not  available  with  existing  SIM  modalities.  To  demonstrate  this 

capability,  live  COS7  cells  were  labeled  with  mitotrackerGreen,  mApple-Sec61b-C1  conjugate,  and  SiR-lysosome. 

Figure  6  shows  a  visualization  of  mitochondria-ER  interactions  during  ER  reorganization.  The  simultaneous 

acquisition  of  SIM  frames  in  the  different  color  channels  permits  the  observation  of  ER  structures  wrapping 

 
  
 
dynamically around the mitochondrial periphery without any temporal offsets. The arrow indicates the location of 

a contact site between the ER (magenta) and a mitochondrion (cyan). As the mitochondrion moves, contact between 

the  two  structures  is  seen  to  be  maintained,  an  observation  that  could  not  have  been  made  with  sequentially 

performed SIM imaging (see video 2 in SI).  

Widefield 

SIM 

Figure  6.  Simultaneous  imaging of  live  cells  in  multiple  color  channels.  COS7  cells  were  stained  with  mitotrackerGreen  and 

transfected with mApple-Sec61b-C1 to label ER. Top panel: Timelapse images of mitochondria embedded in rapidly reorganizing 

ER networks. The arrow indicates a contact site between the mitochondria and the ER. Contact is seen to be maintained as the 

structures reorganize. Images were taken at 0.5 s intervals. Scale bar is 2 μm. Bottom: Comparison of diffraction-limited (left)  

and SIM (right) images. Scale bar is 5 μm. Simultaneous imaging of multiple channels permits interactions between rapidly 

moving small structures to be investigated without temporal (and thus spatial) offsets. 

 
 
Figure 7. Simultaneous imaging with MAI-SIM improves temporal resolution and image reliability. COS7 cells stained with SiR-

lysosome  (yellow)  and  transfected  with  mApple-Sec61b-C1  to  label  ER  (magenta).  A:  Time  series  of  two  ER  network 

reorganization events visualized with MAI-SIM. One lysosome (blue marker) can be seen to pull a new filament from the network 

which fails to make a connection and is subsequently released. A second lysosome (green marker) moves rapidly along the ER 

network and cleaves an ER filament (white arrow) to form two new filaments. Scale bar is 2 μm. B: The same ER network events 

visualized  in  a  sequential  SIM  acquisition.  In  this  case  the  temporal  offset  between  the  color  channels  means  that  the  fast 

cleaving event (white arrow) appears independent of lysosome transport. Scale bar is 2 μm. C: Full field of view of ER network 

in widefield (left) and MAI-SIM (right) imaging. The region showing the time series data is indicated by the white square. Scale 

bar is 10 μm. 

 
 
 
It has recently been suggested that lysosomes play an active role in the rapid reorganization of ER network topology, 

providing the pulling force for rapid tubule formation and the forming of ER network connections.25  Figure 7 shows 

the unique capability of MAI-SIM to track such dynamic cellular processes.  In the images shown, lysosomes appear 

in yellow, and the ER network in magenta.  Using MAI-SIM with the detection splitting optics (Figure 7A) leads to 

perfect co-registration of the two color channels in time, and an effective doubling of the achievable frame rate with 

respect to sequential SIM imaging. The bottom row shows the same event, but this time using the camera frames in 

the data that mimic a sequentially recorded SIM image (Figure 7B).  The camera frame rate was 20 frames per second 

over a 44 x 44 µm2 field of view; the panels shown in the sequences are cropped regions from the full frame view 

(Figure 7C). Two events are seen taking place.  As demonstrated in Figure 7, a lysosome (indicated with the blue 

marker) is seen to pull an ER tubule towards another region of the ER but ultimately fails to make a connection, the 

lysosome detaches, and the tubule subsequently retracts.  A fast moving lysosome (green marker) is seen to travel 

downwards, cleaving an existing tubule (white arrow) to form two new tubules.  Both of these events would have 

been hard to visualize or interpret on sequentially recorded SIM data.  We simulated sequentially recorded SIM by 

analyzing the nine frames required to generate a SIM image for the lysosome channel and the following nine frames 

for the ER channel.  The sequencing of the frames thus simulates a traditional SIM experiment and leads to a halving 

of  the  effective  frame  rate.    The  corresponding  data  are  shown  in  Figure  7B.  Neither  of  the  two  phenomena 

described above could have been correctly interpreted in the sequential data, because the correlation between the 

organelle locations is lost. MAI-SIM is thus an ideal technology to study organelle biology such as these transient 

interactions between lysosomes and the ER.25  

Discussion 

We  have  developed  a  fast,  structured  illumination  microscope  which  uses  2  beam  interferometry  to  generate 

illumination patterns. The method is ideally suited for the investigation of fast biological processes in multiple color 

channels. The pattern generation process is optimal for any color, and patterns can be projected into the sample 

simultaneously.  Combined with a multichannel image detection system, this allows for sub-diffraction resolution 

imaging in multiple colors simultaneously while maintaining optimal resolution for all excitation wavelengths. 

The process is straightforward and cost-effective to implement on existing widefield microscope frames.  There are 

unique aspects to interferometric SIM which make the use of traditional reconstruction algorithms challenging. We 

address this problem by modeling the physical process of interferometric SIM to generate in silico data that can be 

used to train a neural network. The hardware and software together provide a powerful and easy-to-use high speed 

SIM platform.   

Our approach allows for the reliable reconstruction of low SNR SIM images in which pattern phase shifts cannot be 

precisely controlled, for example during simultaneous data acquisition in multiple color channels where the system 

has been optimized for the central excitation wavelength. The analysis package is also applicable for use in traditional 

 
 
SIM modalities but has the added advantage of speed. Once the network is trained, reconstruction and visualization 

can be achieved in multiple colors frame rates exceeding 1Hz (higher for smaller fields of view). MAI-SIM data is 

acquired  with  no  temporal  offsets  between  the  channels,  enabling  the  observation  of  organelle-organelle 

interactions in real time. Live analysis and visualization of MAI-SIM data is possible. We demonstrate the method in 

the study of interactions between mitochondria, ER and lysosomes, and highlight how their interactions control and 

affect ER remodeling processes. The presented system is compact and, with only one actively moving component, 

does  not  require  complex  synchronization  procedures,  electronic  control  of  the  polarization  state,  or  use  of 

expensive  and  photon-inefficient  spatial  light  modulators.  MAI-SIM  could  easily  be  extended  to  permit  TIRF-SIM 

imaging26 and an extension of the method to enable 3D SIM would be possible through the addition of a third arm 

to the interferometer (see SI Figure S8 for a proposal on how this might be achieved).27,28 The microscope is suitable 

for  use  in  a  variety  of  biological  applications  and  is  a  powerful  tool  for  multicolor  imaging  of  living  cells  and 

intracellular organelle interactions in real time. We therefore envisage MAI-SIM to be an attractive alternative to 

commercial  and  SLM-based  SIM  instruments,  making  high-resolution  imaging  available  for  a  wide  scientific 

community. 

Methods 

Methods, including statements of data availability and any associated accession codes and references are available 

in the online version of the paper. The code used for hardware control and data processing and live ML-SIM can be 

found at the GitHub repository: https://github.com/edward-n-ward/MAI-SIM 

Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to acknowledge James Manton and Florian Ströhl for their helpful insights and contributions 

to the design.   

Author contributions 

ENW and LH designed and constructed the system, developed the image processing software and collected data. 

CNC, ENW and JRL developed the machine learning reconstruction. AW and JRL contributed to the design of the 

setup.  AW  and  ENW  developed  the  iterative  reconstruction  method.  CWC,  LM,  and  ML  prepared  fixed  and  live 

biological samples. CFK and CJR conceived the interferometry method. CFK and GSK supervised the project.  ENW, 

LH, and CFK wrote the manuscript. 

 
 
 
References 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

Heintzmann, R. & Cremer, C. G. Laterally modulated excitation microscopy: Improvement of resolution by 
using a diffraction grating. in (eds. Bigio, I. J., Schneckenburger, H., Slavik, J., Svanberg, K. & Viallet, P. M.) 
185–196 (1999). doi:10.1117/12.336833. 
Gustafsson, M. G. Surpassing the lateral resolution limit by a factor of two using structured illumination 
microscopy. J. Microsc. 198, 82–87 (2000). 
Young, L. J., Ströhl, F. & Kaminski, C. F. A Guide to Structured Illumination TIRF Microscopy at High Speed 
with Multiple Colors. J. Vis. Exp. (2016) doi:10.3791/53988. 
Lu-Walther, H.-W. et al. fastSIM: a practical implementation of fast structured illumination microscopy. 
Methods Appl. Fluoresc. 3, 014001 (2015). 
Chang, B.-J., Chou, L.-J., Chang, Y.-C. & Chiang, S.-Y. Isotropic image in structured illumination microscopy 
patterned with a spatial light modulator. Opt. Express 17, 14710 (2009). 
Křížek, P., Raška, I. & Hagen, G. M. Flexible structured illumination microscope with a programmable 
illumination array. Opt. Express 20, 24585 (2012). 
York, A. G. et al. Resolution doubling in live, multicellular organisms via multifocal structured illumination 
microscopy. Nat. Methods 9, 749–754 (2012). 
Heintzmann, R., Hanley, Q. S., Arndt-Jovin, D. & Jovin, T. M. A dual path programmable array microscope 
(PAM): Simultaneous acquisition of conjugate and non-conjugate images. J. Microsc. 204, 119–135 (2001). 
O’Holleran, K. & Shaw, M. Polarization effects on contrast in structured illumination microscopy. Opt. Lett. 
37, 4603 (2012). 
Roth, J., Mehl, J. & Rohrbach, A. Fast TIRF-SIM imaging of dynamic, low-fluorescent biological samples. 
Biomed. Opt. Express 11, 4008 (2020). 
Chen, Y. et al. Widefield and total internal reflection fluorescent structured illumination microscopy with 
scanning galvo mirrors. J. Biomed. Opt. 23, 1 (2018). 
Förster, R. et al. Simple structured illumination microscope setup with high acquisition speed by using a 
spatial light modulator. Opt. Express 22, 20663 (2014). 
Cao, R. et al. Inverse matrix based phase estimation algorithm for structured illumination microscopy. 
Biomed. Opt. Express 9, 5037 (2018). 
Křížek, P., Lukeš, T., Ovesný, M., Fliegel, K. & Hagen, G. M. SIMToolbox: a MATLAB toolbox for structured 
illumination fluorescence microscopy. Bioinformatics btv576 (2015) doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btv576. 

15.  Wicker, K., Mandula, O., Best, G., Fiolka, R. & Heintzmann, R. Phase optimisation for structured 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

illumination microscopy. Opt. Express 21, 2032 (2013). 
Müller, M., Mönkemöller, V., Hennig, S., Hübner, W. & Huser, T. Open-source image reconstruction of 
super-resolution structured illumination microscopy data in ImageJ. Nat. Commun. 7, 10980 (2016). 
Labouesse, S. et al. Joint Reconstruction Strategy for Structured Illumination Microscopy With Unknown 
Illuminations. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 26, 2480–2493 (2017). 
Christensen, C. N., Ward, E. N., Lu, M., Lio, P. & Kaminski, C. F. ML-SIM: universal reconstruction of 
structured illumination microscopy images using transfer learning. Biomed. Opt. Express 12, 2720 (2021). 
Karras, C. et al. Successful optimization of reconstruction parameters in structured illumination microscopy 
– A practical guide. Opt. Commun. 436, 69–75 (2019). 
Mudry, E. et al. Structured illumination microscopy using unknown speckle patterns. Nat. Photonics 6, 
312–315 (2012). 
Min, J. et al. Fluorescent microscopy beyond diffraction limits using speckle illumination and joint support 
recovery. Sci. Rep. 3, 2075 (2013). 
Ayuk, R. et al. Structured illumination fluorescence microscopy with distorted excitations using a filtered 
blind-SIM algorithm. Opt. Lett. 38, 4723 (2013). 
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S. & Sun, J. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. in 2016 IEEE Conference 
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 770–778 (IEEE, 2016). doi:10.1109/CVPR.2016.90. 
Culley, S. et al. NanoJ-SQUIRREL: quantitative mapping and minimization of super-resolution optical 
imaging artifacts. Nat. Methods 15, 263–266 (2018). 
Lu, M. et al. The structure and global distribution of the endoplasmic reticulum network are actively 
regulated by lysosomes. Sci. Adv. 6, (2020). 

 
26. 

27. 

28. 

Kner, P., Chhun, B. B., Griffis, E. R., Winoto, L. & Gustafsson, M. G. L. Super-resolution video microscopy of 
live cells by structured illumination. Nat. Methods 6, 339–42 (2009). 
Gustafsson, M. G. L. et al. Three-dimensional resolution doubling in wide-field fluorescence microscopy by 
structured illumination. Biophys. J. 94, 4957–4970 (2008). 
Shao, L., Kner, P., Rego, E. H. & Gustafsson, M. G. L. Super-resolution 3D microscopy of live whole cells 
using structured illumination. Nat. Methods 8, 1044–1046 (2011). 

 
 
 
 
[This page intentionally left blank] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAI-SIM: interferometric multicolor structured 
illumination microscopy for everybody – 
Supplementary information 

Edward  N.  Ward,  Lisa  Hecker,  Charles  N.  Christensen,  Jacob  R.  Lamb,  Meng  Lu,  Luca 
Mascheroni,  Chyi  Wei  Chung,  Anna  Wang,  Christopher  J.  Rowlands,  Gabriele  S.  Kaminski 
Schierle, Clemens F. Kaminski 

Supplementary Figure 1 

Optical path for fringe generation 

Supplementary Note 1 

MAI-SIM Hardware 

Supplementary Figure 2 

Influence of path length on modulation depth 

Supplementary Figure 3 

Optimization of pattern orientation 

Supplementary Figure 4 

Pattern phase optimization 

Supplementary Figure 5 

Effects of phase shifting on reconstruction quality 

Supplementary Note 2 

Reconstruction methods  

Supplementary Figure 6 

Resolution estimation on single beads 

Supplementary Figure 7 

Error map comparison of reconstruction quality 

Supplementary Table 1 

Reconstruction quality measured by RSP and RSE 

Supplementary Figure 8 

Live image reconstruction with machine learning 

Supplementary Note 3 

Sample preparation 

Supplementary Note 4 

Extension to 3D-SIM 

Supplementary Figure 9 

Proposed optical setup for 3D MAI-SIM 

 
 
A 

B 

Figure S1: Optical path for fringe generation 

Simplified optical schematic (A) and rendering of typical setup (B) for MAI-SIM pattern generation. Three laser lines 
are used in the MAI-SIM system with wavelengths of 491 nm (Cobolt Calypso, 200 mW),  561 nm (Oxxius SLIM-561-
150, 500 mW) and 647 nm (Toptica iBeam SMART, 100 mW). These are combined coaxially using dichroic mirrors. 
The  beam  profiles  are  cleaned  using  a  pinhole  at  the  focus  of  a  Keplerian  beam  expander  to  provide  uniform 
illumination across the whole FOV. The expanded beam is focused onto the scan mirror (SM) (Scanlab, dynAXIS-M) 
using a 150 mm focal length lens (Thorlabs, AC254-150-A) and a D-mirror, DM, (Thorlabs, PFD10-03-F01) to separate 

 
 
the  incoming  and  outgoing  beams  of  the  interferometer.  After  reflection  by  the  scan  mirror,  the  beam  is  re-
collimated by a scan lens, SL, (Thorlabs, AC508-150-A) and subsequently enters the interferometer. A 2-inch 50:50 
beam splitter cube (Thorlabs, BS031) is used for amplitude splitting and the two resulting beams each hit one of two 
complementary mirrors in an arrangement of 3 pairs of individually adjustable ½-inch mirrors (Thorlabs, BB05-E01). 
Complementary mirrors are tilted with respect to another to generate wedge fringes of the correct orientation. The 
small mirrors are additionally placed individually on micrometer translation stages (Thorlabs, XRN25P / XRN25C) and 
This  enables  the  adjustment  of  the  path  length  difference  for  each  interferometer  configuration  individually  to 
achieve optimal contrast in all orientations (SI figure 3).1 The two beams reflected from one of the pairs pass back 
through the beam splitter and the scan mirror. Both beams then pass over the top of the D-mirror and are combined 
by a series of 150 mm focal length lenses, RL1-3, (Thorlabs, AC508-150-A) to form an interference pattern at an angle 
determined by the scan mirror position and corresponding angle of small mirror Main text (figure 1A). The beams 
are  then  relayed  through  a  wedged  polarizer,  WP,  (CODIXX,  custom  part).  This  static  element  ensures  the 
polarization is correct for all orientations, while maintaining the multicolor capabilities of the system.2 An achromatic 
quarter waveplate, QWP, placed in the image plane of the relay is used to generate circularly polarized light before 
the beam hits the wedged polarizer.  This ensures equal intensities for all fringe orientations. The beams enter the 
inverted microscope frame (Olympus, IX73) via a quad-band dichroic mirror, D1, (Chroma, ZT405/488/561/640rpcv), 
which is from the same production batch as the dichroic mirror mounted in the microscope frame. The arrangement 
separates excitation and emission light paths. Pairing these mirrors from the same batch ensures that any ellipticity 
introduced by birefringence of one mirror is cancelled out by the other. Thus s-polarization can be maintained for 
all orientations.  Similar consideration apply to other conjugate mirror pairs  in the optical setup.3  The beams are 
focused onto the back focal plane of the objective lens (Olympus, UPLSAPO60XW) by 300 mm focal length tube lens, 
TL, (Thorlabs, AC508-300-A) and interfere in the sample plane to form a sinusoidal illumination pattern. Intermediate 
image planes (i.e. the location of fringe formation) are shown with blue dashed lines. The resulting fluorescent signal 
is collected by the same objective and passes  through the  dichroic mirror,  onto an image splitting device (Cairn, 
Optosplit  III).  The  image  splitter  consists  of  2  dichroic  mirrors  and  corresponding  passband  emission  filters  to 
separate individual color channels according to the chosen fluorophores. Up to three channels are then displayed 
side by side on a sCMOS camera with 2048 x 2048 pixel chip and 6.5 x 6.5 μm² pixel size (PCO edge 4.2 bi).  

Synchronization  in  the  final  system  is  achieved  by  controlling  the  camera  exposure,  stage  control,  and  mirror 
movement through a LabVIEW interface, while the image data was read in a separate application (Micromanager).4 
Digital I/O lines from a  DAQ card (National Instruments, BNC-2110) were used to control the exposure time and 
monitor the data readout from the camera using the I/O lines from the camera. In parallel, the mirror position was 
controlled using the analogue I/O lines from the same DAQ card. We found that the time taken to move and settle 
the mirror at different positions is comparable to the data readout time for a 512x512 pixel image. Frame rate was 
therefore  maximized  by  moving  the  mirror  after  the  exposure  had  finished  while  the  data  were  read  from  the 
camera. Small digital delays were added before and after mirror movement ensure that the mirror was stationary 
during camera  exposure.  The stage  was controlled using  serial commands  in the same  LabVIEW interface. Stage 
movement was similarly synchronized to camera readout to maximize framerates although extra digital delays were 
needed before the following acquisition as z-movements were significantly slower than camera readout. All digital 
delays (see timing diagram on project page) were determined empirically by imaging a thin fluorescent layer and 
verifying that stripe patterns were steady during exposures. It was found that settle times depended heavily on the 
mirror step distance and longer settle times were after changing fringe orientation than after phase stepping.  

 
 
Supplementary Note 1: MAI-SIM Hardware  

The Michelson interferometer: 

The Michelson interferometer is a commonly used amplitude splitting interferometer which, due to its simplicity 
and high accuracy, is popular in a wide range of applications.1 In such a system, a beam splitter divides a primary 
wave into two beams which are subsequently reflected by two mirrors in the corresponding optical path. The two 
returning beams interfere after being recombined by a condensing lens and create periodic intensity fringes, when 
incident on a screen or detector. A tilted mirror pair leads to the formation so called fringes of constant thickness. 
The angle of mirror inclination determines the frequency of the pattern, while the path length difference (among 
other factors) defines the pattern contrast for non-monochromatic sources. For a clean sinusoidal fringe pattern 
with a high contrast, good quality light sources with high thermal stability and a narrow bandwidth are essential. 
Temporal coherence of the two interfering beams is important for the pattern quality as high contrast interference 
patterns  will  only  be  visible  if  the  optical  path  length  difference  (i.e.  twice  the  wedge  thickness)  between  the 
interfering  beams  is  smaller  than  the  coherence  length  of  the  light  source.  The  alignment  of  the  interferometer 
mirrors is greatly facilitated when lasers coherence lengths of several mm or more are used.  
To adjust the path length differences and optimize the fringe contrast in the MAI-SIM system, a camera was mounted 
in  an  intermediate  image  plane  to  directly  observe  changes  to  the  illumination  pattern.  The  optical  path  length 
difference was then adjusted for each chosen set of mirrors, using the micrometer translation stages on which one 
of the mirrors was mounted.  

Figure S2: Dependency of pattern frequency for low coherence length 647nm diode laser. A: Plot of fringe contrast measured on 
a camera in an intermediate image plane as a function of translation stage position. C: Images acquired on the intermediate 
camera with un-optimized (i) and optimized (ii) stage positions.  

 
 
Figure  S3:  Positioning  of  the  excitation  spots  at  the  back  of  the  objective.  A:  An  alignment  target  is  used  to  provide  an 
approximate estimate of mirror positions. B i-iii: The fringes are then viewed on a spincoated fluorescent layer of 100 nm beads 
and the Fourier transform of the acquired image is then used to determine an appropriate fringe spacing. C: The pattern rotation 
is optimized using the average Fourier transform for all pattern orientations.  

Pattern  alignment:  Pattern  orientation  and  period  are  controlled  by  directing  the  beams  into  the  appropriate 
positions  at  the  back  of  the  objective  by  adjusting  the  three  pairs  of  small  mirrors.  For  precise  alignment,  a 
fluorescent  bead  monolayer  was  viewed  and  the  stripes  brought  into  focus  (Figure  S3).  A  live  FFT  implemented 
through MATLAB was then used to view the frequency components of the stripes in real-time, permitting precise 
alignment of the spots in the back focal plane of the objective.  

Pattern orientation change and phase stepping: The system utilizes one scan mirror to achieve both rotation of the 
the fringe pattern in the sample (by stepping from one mirror pair to the next) and phase stepping (by small angular 
displacements).    To  determine  the  step  size  required  for  adequate  phase  shifts,  a  camera  is  placed  in  the 
intermediate image plane, once the spot position and pattern frequency have been optimized. This enables a direct 
observation of the pattern and voltages supplied to the scan mirror are adjusted until a phase shift of approximately 
2pi/3 is observed on the camera. After thus coarse visual adjustment, a finer adjustment is achieved by summing 
the images from the three phase steps and confirming a cancellation of the stripes in the resulting image, which 
should be uniform in intensity (SI figure 5). If sequential imaging of different color channels is to be performed, this 
process  can  be  optimized  for  each  color  separately.  For  simultaneous  multi-color  in  conjunction  with  the  image 
splitter, the central wavelength (in our case 561 nm) is chosen to optimize the phase steps. While this enables fast 
imaging, the phase steps will no longer be 2pi/3 for the other colors, and inverse or Fourier based reconstruction 
methods may no longer work leading to reconstruction artefacts (figure S6). As an additional control correct pattern 
shifting, the process described above is repeated by imaging the pattern shifts in the actual sample plane.  

 
Figure: S4 Pattern phase optimization. A: fringes formed by the 561nm laser viewed on the intermediate camera. B: After correct 
selection  of  scan  mirror  voltages,  the phases  were  checked by  summing  images  acquired  for all  three pattern  phase  shifts  to 
produce even and flat illumination. C: Widefield images of mApple labelled ER in COS7 cells produced by summing images acquired 
at  three  pattern  phases.  Poorly  (i)  and  well  (ii)  adjusted  phase  voltages  can  be  confirmed  by  checking  for  residual  pattern 
modulation in the widefield image. Scale bar is 5µm 

 
 
 
 
Figure: S5 Results of pattern phase optimization on image reconstruction. A i: Fourier spectra of the widefield image taken as 
the average of the 9 raw SIM frames. Peaks can be seen corresponding to stripes on the image. A ii: SIM reconstruction performed 
with FairSIM on SIM images with un-optimized phase steps. Uneven phase stepping results in significant reconstruction artefacts. 
B i: Fourier spectra of the widefield image taken as the average of the 9 raw SIM frames. No residual peaks can be seen meaning 
a correct 2pi/3 phase step has been achieved for all pattern orientations. B ii: SIM reconstruction performed with FairSIM on SIM 
images with optimized phase steps. Images of 200nm beads were acquired upon excitation with the 561nm laser line. Scale bar is 
1µm 

 
Figure S6: Resolution enhancement on single beads. The resolution improvement provided by the instrument is quantified using 
100 nm fluorescent microspheres excited by the 488 nm laser line. Top: the particle size in SIM (right) is significantly reduced 
compared to the widefield image (left). Scale bars 500 nm. Bottom: the measurement of 70 particles suggested a mean diameter 
of 120 nm for particles imaged with SIM, while spheres in widefield mode have a diameter of 200 nm. 

Detection optics and channel registration 

For a coarse alignment of the detection system and channel registration, a ruled grid slide (Thorlabs, R1L3S2P) was 
illuminated with the brightfield lamp of the system, brought into focus, and centered on the camera. The filter cubes 
of the image splitter, containing 2 dichroic mirrors and 3 emission filters, were inserted and the adjustable mirrors 
in  the  device  were  aligned  such  that  the  same  region  of  the  slide  was  visible  in  all  three  color  channels.  Fine 
adjustment of the channels was performed before each measurement. The required dichroic mirrors and emission 
filters were inserted into the filter cubes according to the fluorophores in the sample. Fluorescent 100 nm diameter 
which emit into all three color channels were imaged onto the camera and the mirrors in the image splitting devices 
were adjusted for a chosen cluster of beads to line up in the same position in all channels. Images were then recorded 
in two or three colors simultaneously and fine registration was performed after acquisition using a calibration image 
of a sparse 100 nm bead sample. 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure  S7:  Error  map  comparison  of  MAI-SIM  reconstruction  techniques.  Top:  Comparison  of  widefield  and  ML-SIM 
reconstructions of MAI-SIM data acquired of GFP labelled mitochondria in live COS7 cells. Pattern phase shifts were optimized for 
561 nm excitation while imaging was performed with 488 nm excitation, leading to uneven phase stepping.  Scale bar is 10 µm 
Bottom: Normalized reconstruction error maps for figure 4 (main text) calculated using NanoJ SQUIRREL. From left to right; Blind 
SIM:  diagonal  striping  artefacts  (white  arrow)  are  present  in  the  image.  As  blind  SIM  does  not  require  specific  illumination 
patterns, these artefacts can be attributed to an improper initial estimate of the sample, indirectly caused by irregular phase 
shifts. FairSIM: honeycombing and vertical stripe artefacts are present (white arrow) which result from irregular phase shifts, poor 
estimates of pattern frequency and reduced modulation depth. Inverse matrix: As with Blind SIM, the principal artefact is diagonal 
striping (white arrow). In the case of the inverse matrix reconstruction, this is a result of pattern phase shifting being irregular and 
beyond  what  the  algorithm  is  capable  of  handling.  ML-SIM:  the  error  in  ML-SIM  reconstructions  is  primarily  limited  to  the 
background (white arrow) where out of focus signal dominates and not the key sample structures. Scale bar is 2 µm 

Supplementary Note 2: Reconstruction methods 

During  high-speed  multi-color  imaging,  low  signal  levels  and  imperfect  phase  stepping  make  reconstruction 
challenging with conventional techniques. We compare four reconstruction methods on simulated and experimental 
MAI-SIM data. FairSIM5 and the inverse matrix6 methods represent implementations of original SIM reconstruction 
algorithm proposed by Gustafsson.7 In both cases the pattern periods and orientations are determined by iterative 
cross  correlation  of  the  Fourier  transforms  of  the  data  and  the  two  techniques  differ  by  the  phase  estimation 
approaches used. By assuming an equidistant phase separation (i.e. phases separated by 2𝜋
3⁄  ), FairSIM reduces the 
parameter  estimation  process  to  extraction  of  only  a  single  global  phase  offset.  In  contrast,  the  inverse  matrix 
approach recovers the phases by analytically solving a trigonometric linear equation without the need for iterative 

 
 
 
optimization, recovering absolute phase values for each image. Frequency reassignment is performed with the same 
method for both FairSIM and the inverse matrix approach and the methods differ only in the phases used for this 
reassignment. The blind SIM approach used was a MATLAB implementation of a joint reconstruction strategy where 
both  the  reconstructed  image  and  the  illumination  pattern  are  iteratively  optimized  from  initial  estimates.8  The 
initial estimate for the sample was taken as the average of the nine raw SIM frames and an initial estimate of the 
pattern was calculated by element-wise division of the sample estimate by each raw frame.  

The machine learning approach used to address uneven phase stepping is based on previously described work using 
transfer  learning  to  train  a  convolutional  neural  network  (CNN)  on  simulated  SIM  images.9  Training  data  were 
generated by modelling the  SIM image formation process on artificial “samples” taken as  512x512 pixel  patches 
from  images  in  the  high  resolution  DIV2K  image  dataset.10  The  imaging  parameters  for  pixel-size;  excitation  and 
emission  wavelengths;  fringe  spacing,  orientation  and  modulation  depth;  and  imaging  depth  were  randomized 
within the bounds of the expected imaging conditions. Random Poisson and Gaussian noise were then added to the 
images. The model was then trained in a supervised fashion where the original image patches were used as  the 
ground-truth. The Adam  optimizer and mean-square error were used for training and the model was trained on 
5000+ samples for 300 epochs. Python code and the PyTorch11 machine learning library were used throughout. The 
code used to generate the training data, train the ML-SIM models and evaluate the model on experimental data is 
available in the GitHub repository. Three models with different network architectures are available for evaluation in 
this repository. The first is a broad model with 96 feature maps, 10 residual blocks and 3 residual groups.9 The second 
is a narrower model which can be evaluated faster consisting of 48 feature maps, 10 residual blocks and 3 residual 
groups. Live ML-SIM reconstructions were performed with the shallower model for best execution speed. Static ML-
SIM  reconstructions  were  performed  using  the  broader  model  and  reconstructions  of  dynamic  structures  were 
performed after acquisition using an experimental visual transformer model which has improved performance on 
dynamic structures at the expense of increased reconstruction times.12   

To evaluate the performance of the techniques on data with uneven phases steps we first quantitatively measure 
the  Resolution  Scaled  Pearson  (RSP)  coefficient  and  the  Resolution  Scaled  Error  (RSE)  implemented  through  the 
NanoJ plugin for imageJ.13 These provide a measure of the likelihood that a reconstruction could represent the real 
sample based on comparison between a predicted and real diffraction limited image. RSP values range from 0 to 1, 
with 1 representing a perfect correlation and ideal reconstruction. The RSE is a measure of the mean square error 
values  between  the  predicted  widefield  and  the  observed  widefield  with  a  lower  value  showing  a  better 
reconstruction. Table S1 compares the performance of the reconstruction techniques on simulated SIM data with 
ideal and imperfect pattern phase stepping. The use of simulated targets allows for the effects of only phase errors 
to  be  assessed  without  other  factors  (such  as  background  fluorescence  and  artefacts  in  the  reference  image) 
affecting the reconstruction quality metric. The code to generate the simulated images can be found on the project 
GitHub and the images used can be found in the raw data. In all cases the reconstructions have performed better on 
data  with  the  correct  phase  steps,  which  is  expected.  Notably,  ML-SIM  out-performs  all  methods  except  for  the 
inverse matrix method when ideal phase shifts are used. For this reason, the inverse matrix method was used for 
sequential data and ML-SIM reconstruction was used on simultaneous acquisitions.    

 
 
 
Table S1: Reconstruction quality measured by RSP and RSE. For all reconstruction techniques, reconstructions are better on data 
with correct phase stepping. In the case of FairSIM this is expected as phases cannot be calculated. For Blind SIM, this discrepancy 
can be attributed to  the initial estimate of the sample containing residual fringe patterns. For the inverse matrix and ML-SIM 
methods,  reduced  performance  is  likely  a  result  of  reduced  information  being  available  on  regions  of  the  sample  unevenly 
illuminated or residual striping in the widefield image.   

Bad phases 

Method 

RSP 
0.991 
ML-SIM 
0.978 
Blind SIM 
0.975 
FairSIM 
Inverse Matrix  0.980 

RSE 
1497 
2280 
2419 
2196 

   Good phases 
  RSP 
  0.994 
  0.983 
  0.992 
  0.995 

RSE 
1134 
1960 
1362 
1085 

Live ML-SIM reconstruction was achieved by using the Pycromanager14 and NI-DAQmx libraries in Python. A multi-
threaded  approach  was  implemented  whereby  image  acquisition,  reconstruction  and  display  were  performed  in 
parallel. The GUI to perform real-time reconstructions is shown in Figure S8 Full details on the implementation can 
be found in the documentation available for the MAI-SIM software and a video of GUI operation is found in the data 
repository.   

Figure: S8 GUI for live ML-SIM reconstruction. Image shows a 2-color reconstruction of fixed COS7 cells over a 44x44 µm field of 
view.  Immunostained  AlexaFluor647-Tubulin and  GPF-tagged  mitochondria are  shown  in green and red  respectively.  Video  of 
operation can be found in the supplementary data.  

 
 
 
 
 
Supplementary Note 3: Sample preparation  

Bead preparation: Bead samples were prepared according to manufacturer protocols. Briefly 200 nm and 100 nm 
bead  monolayers  (ThermoFisher,  TetraSpeck)  were  formed  by  air-drying  onto  a  12  mm  coverglass  5  µl  of  bead 
suspensions at 2.3 x 107 and 1.8 x 108 particles/mL respectively. The samples were then mounted in 15 µl DI water 
and secured to glass slides with spacers before being sealed with nail polish. 

Fixed cell imaging: COS-7 cells (from monkey kidney tissue) were plated onto 13 mm round coverslips in a 4 well 
plate at 20,000 cells per well and cultured under standard conditions (37°C, 5% CO2) in minimum essential medium 
(Sigma Aldrich) supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum (Gibco) and 2 mM L-lutamine (GlutaMAX, Gibco). The 
next day, cells were transfected using CellLight Mitochondria-GFP (Invitrogen), dispersing 8 μL of the transfecting 
reagent in the cell culture medium and incubating the cells for 24 hours under standard conditions. Cells were fixed 
by incubation with 4% methanol-free formaldehyde and 0.1% glutaraldehyde in cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4) for 15 
minutes  at  room  temperature,  washed  three  times  with  PBS  and  then  permeabilized  by  incubation  with  a  0.2% 
solution of saponin in PBS for 15 minutes. Unspecific binding was blocked by incubating with 10% goat serum and 
100 mM glycine in PBS and 0.2% saponin for 30 minutes at room temperature. Without washing, the samples were 
incubated with the primary antibodies (mouse anti-beta-tubulin: ab131205, rabbit anti-calnexin: ab22595) diluted 
1:200 in PBS containing 2% BSA (bovine serum albumin) and 0.2% saponin overnight at 4°C. After three washes in 
PBS, the samples were incubated with the secondary antibodies (goat anti-mouse conjugated to AlexaFluor568, goat 
anti-rabbit conjugated to AlexaFluor647) diluted 1:400 in PBS containing 2% BSA and 0.2% saponin for 1 Hour at 
room temperature in the dark. Samples were then washed 3 times with PBS. Finally, the coverslips were mounted 
on glass slides using a Mowiol-based mounting medium. 

Live cell imaging of ER-lysosome-mitochondria dynamics: COS-7 cells were plated into 8 well plates (Ibidi) at 5,000 
cells per well and cultured under standard conditions (37°C, 5% CO2) in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Media (DMEM, 
ThermoFisher) supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum (Gibco) and 2 mM L-glutamine (GlutaMAX, Gibco). 24 
hours  before  imaging,  cells  were  transfected  with  the  plasmid  construct  mApple-Sec61β-C1  (Addgene  plasmid 
#90993)  using  Lipofectamine  2000  (ThermoFisher)  according  to  the  manufacturer’s  protocol.  20  hours  prior  to 
imaging cells were stained with SiR-Lysosome (Cytoskeleton Inc.) and Verapamil (Cytoskeleton Inc.) at 1 μM and 10 
μM respectively. 30 minutes prior to imaging cells were stained with MitoTracker Green FM (Thermofisher) at 250 
nM  and  washed  immediately  before  imaging  with  DMEM.  Imaging  was  performed  with  a  stage-top  incubator 
(OKOLab) at 37°C and 5% CO2. 

 
 
 
Supplementary Note 4: Extension to 3D-SIM 

Figure: S9 Proposed optical setup for 3D MAI-SIM. By replacing the D-mirror with a second beamsplitter cube (BS2) and additional 
arm can be introduced to the interferometer to allow for 3-beam interference in the sample. A third beamsplitter (BS3) preserves 
the path length of the beams and ensure equal beam intensity. 

 
 
 
References 

1. 
2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

P. Hariharan. Basics of Interferometry. (Elsevier, 2007). doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-373589-8.X5000-7. 
O’Holleran, K. & Shaw, M. Polarization effects on contrast in structured illumination microscopy. Opt. Lett. 
37, 4603 (2012). 
Ejlli, A., Della Valle, F. & Zavattini, G. Polarisation dynamics of a birefringent Fabry–Perot cavity. Appl. Phys. 
B 124, 22 (2018). 
Edelstein,  A.  D.  et  al.  Advanced  methods  of  microscope  control  using  μManager  software.  Journal  of 
Biological Methods vol. 1 e10 (2014). 
Müller, M., Mönkemöller, V., Hennig, S., Hübner, W. & Huser, T. Open-source image reconstruction of super-
resolution structured illumination microscopy data in ImageJ. Nat. Commun. 7, 10980 (2016). 
Cao,  R.  et  al.  Inverse  matrix  based  phase  estimation  algorithm  for  structured  illumination  microscopy. 
Biomed. Opt. Express 9, 5037 (2018). 
Gustafsson,  M.  G.  Surpassing  the  lateral  resolution  limit  by  a  factor  of  two  using  structured  illumination 
microscopy. J. Microsc. 198, 82–87 (2000). 
Labouesse,  S.  et  al.  Joint  Reconstruction  Strategy  for  Structured  Illumination  Microscopy  With  Unknown 
Illuminations. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 26, 2480–2493 (2017). 
Christensen, C. N., Ward, E. N., Lu, M., Lio, P. & Kaminski, C. F. ML-SIM: universal reconstruction of structured 
illumination microscopy images using transfer learning. Biomed. Opt. Express 12, 2720 (2021). 
Agustsson, E. & Timofte, R. NTIRE 2017 Challenge on Single Image Super-Resolution: Dataset and Study. in 
2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW) 1122–1131 (IEEE, 
2017). doi:10.1109/CVPRW.2017.150. 
Paszke,  A.  et  al.  PyTorch:  An  Imperative  Style,  High-Performance  Deep  Learning  Library.  in  Advances  in 
Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (eds. Wallach, H. et al.) 8024–8035 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2019). 
Christensen, C. N., Lu, M., Ward, E. N., Lio, P. & Kaminski, C. F. Spatio-temporal Vision Transformer for Super-
resolution Microscopy. (2022). 
Culley, S. et al. NanoJ-SQUIRREL: quantitative mapping and minimization of super-resolution optical imaging 
artifacts. Nat. Methods 15, 263–266 (2018). 
Pinkard,  H.  et  al.  Pycro-Manager:  open-source  software  for  customized  and  reproducible  microscope 
control. Nat. Methods 18, 226–228 (2021). 

 
 
 
