Demo: Low-power Communications Based on RIS
and AI for 6G

Mingyao Cui, Zidong Wu, Yuhao Chen, Shenheng Xu, Fan Yang, and Linglong Dai

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Emails: {cmy20, wuzd19, chen-yh21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {shxu, fan yang, daill}@tsinghua.edu.cn

2
2
0
2

y
a
M
1
2

]
P
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
0
9
4
7
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Ultra-massive multiple-input-multiple-output (UM-
MIMO) is promising to meet the high rate requirements for
future 6G. However, due to the large number of antennas and
high path loss, the hardware power consumption and computing
power consumption of UM-MIMO will be unaffordable. To
address this problem, we implement a low-power communication
system based on reconﬁgurable intelligent surface (RIS) and
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) for 6G. For hardware design, we employ
a 256-element RIS at the base station to replace the traditional
phased array. Moreover, a 2304-element RIS is developed as
a relay to assist communication with much reduced transmit
power. For software implementation, we develop an AI-based
transmission design to reduce computing power consumption.
By jointly designing the hardware and software, this prototype
can realize real-time 4K video transmission with much reduced
power consumption.

Index Terms—Reconﬁgurable intelligent surface, artiﬁcial in-

telligence

I. THEMES AND MOTIVATION
Wireless communications have greatly changed people’s
lifestyles. In the future, 6G wireless communications are
essential
to support new applications, such as meta-verse
and holographic video. Massive multiple-input-multiple-output
(MIMO) is the most important technique for current 5G, which
employs hundreds of antennas to achieve the high data rate
of several Gbps. To achieve a 10-fold increase in data rate
for future 6G, massive MIMO is evolving to ultra-massive
MIMO (UM-MIMO), where thousands of antennas or even
more are employed to improve the spectral efﬁciency by orders
of magnitude [1].

One of the key challenges for 6G UM-MIMO,

is the
unaffordable power consumption due to the following two
reasons [2].

• Firstly, existing UM-MIMO systems usually employ
phased arrays. These phased arrays require a large num-
ber of transceiver modules and phase shifters, which re-
sults in very high circuit power consumption. In addition,
due to the high path loss of high-frequency signals, the
transmitting power of base station required to achieve
reliable communications increases a lot,
leading to a
high ampliﬁer power consumption. As a consequence,
the hardware power consumption of 6G base station is
unaffordable.

• Secondly, with the substantial increase of the antenna
number and required data rate, the computing complexity

Fig. 1. System setup.

of traditional signal processing modules also increases
signiﬁcantly, which leads to a high computing power
consumption of 6G communication systems in the future.
In conclusion, a low-power communication implementation

for future 6G is essential.

II. SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION

To address the challenge mentioned above, by jointly de-
signing the hardware and software, we develop a low-power
communication system based on reconﬁgurable intelligent
surface (RIS) and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) for 6G as shown
in Fig. 1.

For hardware design, we utilize low-power RIS to replace
the phased array. RIS integrates the phase shifters and the
emission module. It consists of hundreds or thousands of
low-power sub-wavelength meta-materials [3], [4]. The exper-
iments carried out in our anechoic chamber demonstrate that
RIS can generate high-gain beams with low-power consump-
tion by intelligently controlling the electromagnetic waves [5].
As shown in Fig. 2 (a), in our system, a RIS with 256 elements
is employed at the base station to replace the phased array.
Moreover, as shown in Fig. 2 (b), a RIS with 2304 elements is
employed as a relay to assist the communication with reduced
transmit power.

For software design, we develop an AI-based transmission
design to reduce the computing power consumption. A single
neural network-based signal processing module is utilized to
replace traditional complex signal processing modules, includ-
ing modulation, demodulation, channel coding, decoding, and
etc. Speciﬁcally, according to [6], in the ofﬂine training stage,
a fully connected neural network is ﬁrst trained by optimizing

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. The developed communication prototype.

The result shows that this prototype can achieve a real-time
data rate of 1.68 Gbps. The hardware power consumption can
be reduced by 40%, and the computing power consumption
is reduced by 20%. Based on the prototype, we have also
developed cooperation with HUAWEI, ZTE, China Mobile,
and British Telecom to promote the application in future 6G
systems.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we implemented a low-power communication
system based on RIS and AI. This prototype can realize
real-time 4K video transmission with much reduced power
consumption, which provides a new possibility for future low-
power 6G communications.

REFERENCES

[1] E. Bj¨ornson, L. Sanguinetti, H. Wymeersch, J. Hoydis, and T. L. Marzetta,
“Massive MIMO is a reality – what is next? ﬁve promising research
directions for antenna arrays,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.07678, Jun.
2019.

[2] R. W. Heath, N. Gonz´alez-Prelcic, S. Rangan, W. Roh, and A. M. Sayeed,
“An overview of signal processing techniques for millimeter wave MIMO
systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 436–453,
Apr. 2016.

[3] W. Tang, M. Z. Chen, X. Chen, J. Y. Dai, Y. Han, M. Di Renzo,
Y. Zeng, S. Jin, Q. Cheng, and T. J. Cui, “Wireless communications with
reconﬁgurable intelligent surface: Path loss modeling and experimental
measurement,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 421–
439, Jan. 2021.

[4] V. Arun and H. Balakrishnan, “Rfocus: Beamforming using thousands
of passive antennas,” in Proc. 17th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI’20),, Feb. 2020, pp. 1047–
1061.

[5] Z. Zhang, L. Dai, X. Chen, C. Liu, F. Yang, R. Schober, and H. V. Poor,
“Active RIS vs. passive RIS: Which will prevail in 6G?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.15154, Mar. 2020.

[6] S. Cammerer, F. A. Aoudia, S. D¨orner, M. Stark, J. Hoydis, and S. ten
Brink, “Trainable communication systems: Concepts and prototype,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 5489–5503, Sep. 2020.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2.

(a) RIS with 256 elements. (b) RIS with 2304 elements

the bit error rate (BER) in an end-to-end manner. Then, this
neural network is employed in the FPGA modules of the
transceiver and receiver for practical online transmission.

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND CONTRIBUTIONS

These two designs have been implemented on our
millimeter-wave (mmWave) communication platform to test
their performance in real communication environments. As
shown in Fig. 3, This platform consists of the base station side,
the relay side, and the user side. The prototype is developed
based on NI mmWave Transceiver System (MTS). The base
station and user utilize the software-deﬁned radio (SDR)
platform, composed of the PXI hardware architecture and the
LabVIEW system, to realize transmission at the mmWave
band.

At the base station, a 4K video stream is ﬁrst delivered by
the transceiver host to the FPGA module. The FPGA module
is responsible for the AI-based signal processing, for instance,
the transmitted data is mapped to the constellation trained by
the neural network. Then, the processed data is upconverted
to the mmWave band for transmission in wireless channel.
After that, the mmWave signals are radiated to a RIS with 256
elements through a feed source to form a high gain beam.

At the relay side, a RIS with 2304 elements is utilized to
reﬂect the signals from the base station to the user with a high
array gain, so as to reduce the transmit power.

At the user side, the signals are ﬁrst received by the Rx horn
antenna and then down converted to the base band. Then, real-
time data reception is accomplished by a neural network in the
receiver FPGA module. As shown in Fig. 3, The receiver host
shows the received constellation, the data rate and displays the
recovered 4K videos.

