GFET Lab: A Graphene Field-Effect Transistor TCAD Tool

Nathaniel J. Tye
Cambridge Graphene Centre,
Department of Engineering,
University of Cambridge
njt48@cam.ac.uk

Abdul Wadood Tadbier
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
awt34l@cam.ac.uk

Stephan Hofmann
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
sh315@cam.ac.uk

Phillip Stanley-Marbell
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
phillip.stanley-marbell@eng.cam.ac.uk

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

4
2

]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[

1
v
9
3
2
3
1
.

6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Graphene ﬁeld-effect transistors (GFETs) are experimental
devices which are increasingly seeing commercial and research applica-
tions. Simulation and modelling forms an important stage in facilitating
this transition, however the majority of GFET modelling relies on user
implementation. To this end, we present GFET Lab, a user-friendly, open-
source software tool for simulating GFETs.

We ﬁrst provide an overview of approaches to device modelling and
a brief survey of GFET compact models and limitations. From this
survey, we identify three key criteria for a suitable predictive model
for circuit design: it must be a compact model; it must be SPICE-
compatible; it must have a minimal number of ﬁtting parameters. We
selected Jimenez’s drain-current model as it best matched these criteria,
and we introduce some modiﬁcations to improve the predictive properties,
namely accounting for saturation velocity and the asymmetry in n- and
p-type carrier mobilities.

We then validate the model by comparing GFETs simulated in our
tool against experimentally-obtained GFET characteristics with the same
materials and geometries and ﬁnd good agreement between GFET Lab
and experiment. We demonstrate the ability to export SPICE models for
use in higher level circuit simulations and compare SPICE simulations
of GFETs against GFETs simulated in GFET Lab, again showing good
agreement.

Lastly, we provide a brief tutorial of GFET Lab to demonstrate and
encourage its use as a community-developed piece of software with both
research and educational applications.

I. INTRODUCTION

Since the observation of the electric ﬁeld effect in atomically
thin carbon by Geim and Novoselov in 2004 [28], there has been a
proliferation of research into graphene and related materials (GRMs).
A key focus of research into electronic devices based on GRMs is
the realisation of ﬁeld-effect transistors (FETs), due to their potential
in overcoming the limitations of conventional CMOS devices. One of
the main attractions of GRMs is that they overcome short channel
effects.

Graphene FETs (GFETs) have a channel made of single- or multi-
layer graphene, rather than a semiconducting material such as silicon
or germanium [33]. Unlike traditional semiconductors, graphene’s
conduction and valence bands don’t overlap and instead meet at a
single point, known as the Dirac point. Electrons at the Dirac point
are effectively massless and so can have very high electron mobilities,
with the room-temperature phonon-limited carrier mobility of graphene
on SiO2 being predicted to be around 200,000 cm2V−1s−1 [4].

Although high electron mobilities result in more efﬁcient ﬂow
of charge, the lack of a band gap means GFETs have low on- to
off-current ratios and can never completely turn off, making them
unsuitable for digital logic applications [13]. However, the poor on-
to off-current ratios of GFETs in digital logic applications does not
preclude their use in other areas. GFET-based sensors have applications
in gas [31], biological [20], and chemical [23] sensing applications,
and wafers consisting of multiple GFETs are available off-the-rack
from companies including Graphenea [10] and BGT Materials [21],
and others utilise GFET-based sensors as part of a larger system,

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Illustrations of the three most common forms of GFET. (a) is a
Fig. 1.
back-gated GFET, (b) is a top-gated GFET, and (c) is a dual-gated GFET. The
dark grey layer at the bottom represents a doped semiconducting substrate
(e.g., p-type Si), the purple layer represents the oxide layer (e.g., SiO2), the
graphene channel is represented by the hexagonal layer, the top dielectric
(e.g., AlO2, HfO2...) is represented by the light green layer and the relevant
contacts are as illustrated. The circuit terminals are also shown in the ﬁgures.
(d) shows the GFET die we fabricated and characterised in [35] and which
we use to validate our simulations in Figure 3(a) and b.

such as Hexagonfab’s protein analyser [9]. Due to their high-mobility,
GFETs also have utility in analogue high frequency (HF) applications
as the lack of a bandgap and resulting small on-off ratios is not an
issue [39], with Vicarelli et al. reporting GFET responsivities on the
order of hundreds of GHz at room temperature [37].

As GFET research becomes more application-focused, these models
and tools will be increasingly important. Simulation and modelling is
a vital part in the design and development of new devices. Technology
computer-aided-design (TCAD) is a process in the semiconductor
industry which models the fabrication (process TCAD) and operation
of semiconductor devices (device TCAD). The latter process models
the behaviour of a device based on fundamental physics and comes
in two main forms: physics-driven and compact models. The former
is a more accurate description, though it is slow as a result, whereas
the latter is faster, but less accurate, as the compact models often
work one or more assumptions about device behaviour. The speed
of compact models does however make them suitable for use with
higher-level circuit simulation tools, such as SPICE or Verilog-A.

Our contributions in this article are as follows:
1) A brief survey of existing GFET modelling solutions and the

motivation for our tool;

Single (back) gated GFETDual (top and back) gated GFETSingle (back) gated GFETDual (top and back) gated GFET 
 
 
 
 
 
2) Realisation of an open-source, user-friendly software tool for
rapid simulation of GFETs to speed up the design and research
process;

3) A veriﬁcation of the utility and versatility of our tool through
comparisons to real devices with simulated devices with the
same geometries;

4) A brief description of how to use the tool and how to contribute

to further development.

II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK

A. Background to Graphene Field-Effect Transistors

First demonstrated by Lemme et al. in 2007 [18], GFETs have
since been the subject of an intense research focus, as a result of
their unique properties when compared to conventional metal-oxide
semiconductor FETs (MOSFETs), such as their high mobilities, fast
switching speeds, and ambipolarity.

The vast majority of GFETs consist of a semiconductor/oxide
substrate, single- or few-layer graphene channel, produced either
via chemical vapour deposition (CVD), or mechanical exfoliation,
metal source and drain contacts, and either a back gate, additional
dielectric and top gate, or both. Figure 1 shows these three common
GFET topologies. The ﬁrst consists of a graphene channel on a
semiconducting substrate, e.g., Si/SiO2, with source and drain contacts
deposited on top and the doped semiconducting layer used as a back
gate. The second is similar to the ﬁrst, except with the addition of a
top gate contact, typically separated from the graphene channel with
a dielectric material, such as AlO2, however other dielectrics, such as
ion-gels can be used [14].

The ﬁrst

topology, owing to the relatively small number of
fabrication steps, is amongst the most common and many off-the-
shelf GFETs feature this geometry. For sensing applications where
interactions between surface adsorbents (e.g., gas molecules or
proteins) and the graphene channel change the conductivity, this
structure is necessary. However, graphene degrades in the air, with
p-type doping as a result of moisture adsorption being a common
defect. The second and third geometries, where the graphene channel is
encapsulated by an insulating dielectric layer provides greater stability,
although there is an impact on the electrical characteristics, namely
the mobility, owing to phonon interactions between the oxides and
the graphene channel.

However, these are not the only types of GFET. Graphene nano-
ribbon FETs (GNRFETs), are another form of GFET which are the
subject of active research. GNRFETs are an approach to engineering
a bandgap in graphene by slicing graphene into narrow ribbons. This
results in a splitting of the usual 2D energy dispersion of graphene
into a number of 1D modes [5], leading to the formation of a bandgap,
as some of the 1D modes do not pass through the Dirac point.

Bilayer GFETs also offer a way to induce a bandgap in graphene,
with the advantage of it being electrically tunable [42]. Such devices
have a virtually identical structure to conventional monolayer GFETs,
however these instead have two graphene layers. Due to the relative
ease of scalable manufacture, these devices are potentially of greater
interest than GNRFETs for commercialisation, however the on/off
ratios are typically on the order of 100 [40] and the band gaps are
small, typically on the order of a few hundred meV [42] [40], meaning
they are unlikely to be a direct replacement for silicon-based transistors
in many applications.

Tunnelling GFETs form another class of device which attempts to
induce a bandgap in graphene. First reported by Britnell et al. [1],
tunnelling GFETs generally consist of a heterostructure of graphene
and another GRMs such as MoS2 or hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN)

which acts as a tunnel barrier. Compared to e.g., bilayer GFETs, such
devices can have on/off ratios as high as 104, however this is still
several orders of magnitude short of the standard for digital CMOS
logic.

B. Related Work

There is already a substantial body of work on the simulation
of GFETs, with Meric et al. presenting the ﬁrst GFET compact
model [25] in 2008. The literature has grown to include both compact
and physics-driven models, as well as models for different forms
of GFET, including GNRFETs. We do not intend for this article to
serve as a review of GFET modelling, instead focusing on the use
of modelling as part of the research and development process, so we
direct the interested reader to Lu et al.’s comprehensive survey of
GFET compact models [22].

Currently, very few open-source, user-friendly tools for simulating
GFETs or other devices exist. GFET Tool, by Pop and Lian [29],
is limited in the characteristics and properties simulated, as well
as the device structure and so has limited use for higher-level
simulations. Leong et al. developed a tool called GFETSIM [19]
which is implemented in MATLAB and features a GUI. However,
this tool has a different focus to that which we envisage: Leong et
al.’s tool simulates interface charge densities in GFETs based on
measured characteristics of real devices. Other models rely mainly
on user implementation, as they provide SPICE-compatible models
or implementations, rather than being self-contained tools.

III. GFET LAB

A. Model Criteria

For predicting device characteristics, it is necessary to identify the
criteria which make a suitable model for use in GFET Lab. What
follows is an overview and justiﬁcation of the criteria we establish.
1) Criteria 1: Compact Models: Models of GFETs exist at
varying levels of abstraction and Fiori and Iannaccone [6] provide a
comprehensive overview of these. We provide a brief overview below.
The most complex models are ab initio models, which typically
make use of techniques such as density functional theory (DFT).
These models are computationally intensive however and become very
inefﬁcient for systems larger than a few hundred atoms. The next
tier of abstraction is atomistic modelling, which predicts electronic
properties of materials by deﬁning a given system’s Hamiltonian on
an atomistic basis set. Increasing the level of abstraction further is
semiclassical device modelling, which is based on the Poisson equation
and a transport equation (e.g., drift-diffusion model or Boltzmann
transport equation), where parameters are determined either based on
empirically measured device characteristics or from the results of ab
initio or atomistic simulations. Analytical models form the ﬁnal layer
of abstraction. These, as a result of the assumptions required to make
the necessary simpliﬁcations, are best suited to speciﬁc devices. As
a result of their simplicity, analytical models best lend themselves
to circuit simulation, rather than individual device simulations and
are more likely to be compatible with other modelling tools such as
SPICE or Verilog-A.

2) Criteria 2: SPICE Compatibility: As we intend GFET Lab to
form part of a larger workﬂow, the ability to export a design to be
used in higher-level simulations is vital. Simulation tools such as
SPICE and Verilog-A depend on compact models and so was another
important consideration when choosing which model to implement.

3) Criteria 3: Minimal Fitting Parameters: Another criteria we
specify is that the number of ﬁtting parameters in a model is kept
to a minimum. Often, published models introduce empirical ﬁtting
parameters which make them better correspond to the characteristics
of real devices. This can be an invaluable tool when demonstrating
a proof-of-concept, e.g., when one wishes to explore how an array
of their experimental device that may otherwise be prohibitively
time-consuming or expensive to fabricate would perform in a given
application. However, for the initial design process of a device, this
would not make sense, as one cannot know the characteristics of
a device before they fabricate it. The one exception we make here
is for the carrier mobility (µ), as this is a fundamental part of the
expression for the drain current, but can only be determined by
electrical characterisation, e.g., using a four-point probe.

In Section IV, we evaluate the simulated characteristics of GFET
Lab against a number of real devices, and thus give estimates of the
mobilities in the accompanying tables, for speciﬁc device geometries,
however the mobility is dependent on many factors, including dielectric
material(s), whether the graphene channel is grown by CVD or
mechanically exfoliated, the presence of surface impurities and also
bias voltages so these are only rough estimates.

B. Limitations of GFET Lab

Modelling of devices is rarely perfect and GFET Lab also has a
number of inherent limitations. The ﬁrst limitation is that it makes
no distinction between whether the device one is designing will use
CVD or mechanically exfoliated graphene. Typically, the latter is of
higher quality and has more ideal properties, as well as less impurities,
however it is also not an easily-scalable process, unlike CVD and so
the latter is more popular for this reason.

The second limitation is that models do not account for hysteresis
in device characteristics. Many GFET transfer characteristics exhibit
hysteresis in the form of a shift in the Dirac point position between
forward- and reverse-gate voltage sweeps. This is contributed to by
multiple factors, including charge trapping between the graphene
channel and the dielectric layers [17], capacitive gating, which causes
a negative shift in the position of the Dirac point, and charge transfer
which causes a positive shift [38] in the Dirac point with respect to
gate voltage.

A third limitation is that GFET models tend to be symmetrical, i.e.,
one expects the same drain current at equal distances either side of the
Dirac point. However, in real devices, an asymmetry is often present,
typically for positive gate voltages, i.e., the region dominated by p-type
conductivity. Because this asymmetry is again the result of a number
of contributing factors, it is hard to precisely quantify or predict
without the introduction of empirical ﬁtting parameters. Mukherjee
et al.’s model [27] attempts to account for this by considering drain
current as having two components, current from n-type carriers and
current from p-type carriers, each with their own mobility, however
this relies on one making assumptions about asymmetry.

A ﬁnal limitation is the breadth of models considered. As discussed
in Section II, a number of classes of GFETs exist, including GNRFETs,
Bilayer GFETs, Tunnelling GFETs, those using electrolytes or ionic
gels as gates, and those with functionalised graphene channels. GFET
Lab does not presently include models for such devices. At the time of
writing, we are aware of models for a range of devices, such as Karimi
et al.’s solution-gated GFET biosensor model [12], Mackin’s model for
electrolyte-gated GFETs [24], Cheli’s model for a bilayer GFET [2]
and Guo’s review of GNRFET models [8]. However, as we discuss
in Section V, we intend for GFET Lab to be a tool contributed to by
the community, making it open source so that individuals and groups

can tailor it to their speciﬁc needs and share these developments with
the wider research community.

C. The Implemented Model

Lu et al.’s survey of compact GFET models [22] formed a useful
starting point to determine which model(s) to implement. Certain
models built upon previous models, forming a chronology. For
example, Thiele [34] builds upon the early model of Meric [25],
however Thiele’s model is not compact and thus not SPICE-compatible.
Fregonese [7] derived a compact solution to Thiele’s model, from
which Rodriguez [30] provided a further simpliﬁcation to aid with
hand-calculations.

The criteria outlined above helped limit our search and we further
limited our search by not considering models for GNRFETs, bilayer
GFETs, or tunnelling GFETs. However, there remained a large number
of compact models which exist in the literature and so we skip
providing a comparison of each and our resulting justiﬁcation for the
model’s inclusion or not for brevity. In general, we selected models
with minimal ﬁtting parameters, lower computational load, and which
appeared to accurately predict the characteristics of real devices. We
also veriﬁed the dimensional consistency of models, to ensure that the
user-deﬁned parameters give correct output by performing internal
conversions where necessary (e.g., from meV to Joules).

At the time of writing, we have implemented Jimenez et al.’s
model [11] (Table I), as it appeared to best meet the criteria we
outline above. We made several modiﬁcations to the model. Firstly,
Jimenez et al.’s model does not account for the saturation velocity,
vsat and so we use the following expression from Mukherjee et al.’s
model to replace the Fermi velocity, vF in the expression for the
effective channel length, Leﬀ , in the Jimenez model:

vsat =

ω
(cid:113) π|Qnet|

q + npud

2

,

(1)

where ω is derived from the expression for the surface phonon
energy, E, (E = ω(cid:126)), Qnet is the net charge in the channel, given by
Qnet = βVc|Vc|, and npud is a constant which accounts for charge
puddles that arise due to the spatial inhomogeneity of the graphene
sheet, i.e., as a result of the substrate roughness and is given by:

npud =

∆2
π (vF (cid:126))2 .

(2)

Here, ∆ (cid:117) 54 meV and represents the electrostatic potential when
vF =1.3×106 [43]. To account for the asymmetry typically observed
in GFET transfer characteristics, we also introduce a dimensionless
parameter, α = µn
, which is simply the ratio of the n- to p-type
µp
mobilities (µn and µp respectively). This applies when the dominant
carrier type is n-type, i.e., for Vgs −Vgs0 −Vds +Vbs −Vbs0 −Vds > 0
(Vgs = gate-source voltage, Vgs0 = gate-source threshold voltage,
Vbs = back gate voltage, Vgs0 = back gate threshold voltage, and
Vds = source-drain voltage). Lastly, we assume the device mobility,
µav, is the average of the n- and p-type mobilities: µav = µn+µp

.

2

Lee et al.’s model for a single back-gated monolayer GFET (as in
Figure 1(a)) appeared to be the only such model in the literature [16],
however, as it does not account for quantum capacitance, we have
decided to exclude it from GFET Lab. Thus, there are presently no
models for such a device structure. Instead, we provide the option
for one to select air as the back-gate dielectric material ((cid:15)r = 1)
with inﬁnite thickness and treat the top-gate as the back gate. This
effectively corresponds to a zero-valued gate capacitance, which results

TABLE I
EQUATIONS FOR THE JIMENEZ MODEL [11].

Equation

µavk
2

W
Leff
L + µav

{g (Vc)}Vcd
Vcs
Vds
vsat
− sign (Vc)

kV 4
c
4(Ct−Cb)

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

−V 3
c
3

−(Ct+Cb)+

(cid:113)

[α]

(Ct+Cb)2±2k[(Vgs−Vgs0−V )Ct+(Vbs−Vbs0−V )Cb]

(cid:16) 2q2
π

±k
(cid:17) (cid:16) q

((cid:126)νF )

(cid:17)

Term

ID
Leﬀ

g

Vc

k

Meaning (Units)

Drain current (A)

Effective channel length (µm)

Channel conductance (S)

Channel voltage (V)
Constant term ( C3
Jm )

in a division by zero when determining the Vbg0 term and so, in this
scenario, we assume Vbg0 = 0.

Many of the expressions involve standard physical and material
constants: (cid:15)r and (cid:15)0 are the relative and vacuum permittivities
respectively, q is the elementary charge, (cid:126) is the reduced Planck
constant, ηF is the Fermi velocity, kB is Boltzmann’s constant, T
is the operating temperature, EF is the Fermi level and EC is the
conduction band energy. Nf is the dopant carrier density. Table II
shows the dielectrics available in GFET Lab, as well as the associated
parameters.

TABLE II
COMMON DIELECTRICS, THEIR RELATIVE PERMITTIVITIES AND
SURFACE-PHONON ENERGIES. ALL EXCEPT H-BN ADAPTED FROM [15],
VALUES FOR H-BN ADAPTED FROM [32].

Material

Relative Permittivity ((cid:15)r)

Surface-Phonon
Energy (meV)

SiO2
SiC
Al2O3
AlN
HfO2
ZrO2
h-BN

3.9
9.7
12.53
9.14
22.0
24.0
5.09

59.98
116
55.01
83.60
19.42
25.02
101.6

The remaining terms relate to the device geometry: ttox and tbox
are the top and back gate oxide thicknesses, W and L are the channel
width and length and x is the position along the channel. Ct and Cb
are the top- and back-gate capacitances and are deﬁned by (cid:15)r (cid:15)0
and
ttox
(cid:15)r (cid:15)0
tbox

respectively.

Another material parameter which arises in some models is the
intrinsic Fermi level of undoped graphene (EF ), which is reported to
be around 4.57 eV [41], however it is also given by EF = (cid:126)νF
πn
for monolayer graphene [43], where n is the carrier density. Although
the model we implement does not account for these, we include them
in GFET Lab to ensure ease of integration for user-deﬁned models.
The one ﬁtting parameter that is essential for device modelling is
the carrier mobility, µ. This can be measured either using a four-point
measurement, or calculated from electrical characterisation using the
following expression:

√

µ =

L
VdsCoxW

dIds
dVgs

.

(3)

However mobility is a key parameter for calculations of the device
characteristics and so one must assume a value. The mobility is
dependent on a number of factors, with shorter channels having
lower mobilities, as well as CVD graphene generally having lower
mobilities than mechanically exfoliated graphene [36]. Additionally,
some models use the intrinsic carrier mobility, whereas others consider
two regions of conductivity: that dominated by n-type carriers (i.e.,

electrons) and those dominated by p-type carriers (i.e., holes). In
exfoliated graphene, these mobilities are theoretically symmetrical,
however, due to imperfections such as doping arising from fabrication
processes, there is often an asymmetry in their values and this is more
pronounced for CVD graphene [3].

One limitation of the model is that it does not account for operating
temperature. Modiﬁcations to account for this can be made by using
the following expression for npud in place of the equation (2) [43],
(cid:18) ∆2
2

2
π (vF (cid:126))2

npud =

BT 2
k2

π2
6

(4)

+

(cid:19)

,

however, during testing, we found limited impact so opted to use the
simpler form. Temperature may also be incorporated by considering it
in the contact resistance using expressions from Mukherjee et al. [27]
(Rd/s0 = Rc + rd/s0 exp qΦB
kB T ), however, during development, we
found these had a very limited inﬂuence on the simulated device
characteristics. We also do not account for contact resistance and
assume that Vgs and Vds are intrinsic, however these are related to the
extrinsic drain-source and gate-source voltages, Vgs_ext and Vds_ext,
by:

Vds = Vds_ext − Ids (Rd + Rs) ,

and

Vgs = Vgs_ext − IdsRs.

(5)

(6)

Note that Vds and Vgs are functions of Ids and Ids is a function
of Vds and Vgs, meaning that these would typically need to be solve
self-consistently, e.g., using the Newton-Raphson method. However,
by considering the voltages used in the simulations as the intrinsic
voltages, one can rearrange the above expressions for the extrinsic
voltage and calculate the extrinsic voltages from the values of contact
resistance and simulated drain current and plot the drain current
against the calculated extrinsic voltage. In practise, this means one
assumes that the Vds and Vgs values used in the simulation are
intrinsic and, once Ids values are simulated, these are combined with
the intrinsic Vds or Vgs values in the above expressions to calculate the
extrinsic Vds and Vgs values. One then plots the simulated Ids values
against the calculated extrinsic Vds or Vgs values. Although Verilog-A
and SPICE models have some capacity to perform Newton-Raphson
iteration, this is typically used for ﬁnding operating points of circuits,
rather than component simulation. Thus, the above approach makes
the implementations both simpler to compute and also SPICE and
Verilog-A compatible.

IV. SIMULATION EVALUATION

A. Model Validation

To verify the applicability of our tool, it is worthwhile to compare
the performance to real GFETs. We compare a number of devices with
different geometries, shown in Table III, to validate the versatility

TABLE III
PARAMETERS OF THE EXPERIMENTAL GFETS USED FOR MODEL EVALUATIONS.

Parameter

GFET 1 [35] GFET 2 [10] GFET 3 [10] GFET 4 [10]

Unit

Channel Length (L)
Channel Width (W )
Top Oxide Thickness (ttox)
Bottom Oxide Thickness (ttox)
Top Oxide Permittivity ((cid:15)r)
Bottom Oxide Permittivity ((cid:15)r)
n-type Carrier Mobility (µn)
p-type Carrier Mobility (µp)

120
40
50
50
9.14
9.14
7700
8400

10
50
90
1
3.9
1
39
43

180
50
90
1
3.9
1
2400
2900

30
10
90
1
3.9
1
4800
6500

µm
µm
nm
nm
-
-
cm2V-2s-1
cm2V-2s-1

of GFET Lab. Figure 3 shows comparisons of the simulated and
experimentally-obtained transfer and I-V characteristics of GFETs
with different channel geometries and dielectric materials. The ﬁrst
GFET (GFET 1) consists of an SiO2 substrate with an Au back
gate, a 50 nm AlO3 dielectric layer, a monolayer graphene channel
with Au source/drain contacts, another 50 nm AlO3 dielectric layer
and an Au top gate. We describe the fabrication and characterisation
of the GFET in a previous work [35]. We then validate the tool’s
performance for both alternative device structures, as well as for
the same fabrication process with different channel dimensions, by
comparing simulated and experimental characteristics for several
devices (GFETs 2-4 in Table III) from the Graphenea S10, an off-the-
shelf die consisting of 36 graphene devices with various geometries.
In all simulations, we take Nf to be 5 × 1015. We attempted a naïve
derivation of carrier mobility values from the experimental data using
equation (3), however these values did not appear accurate and so,
for the purposes of validation, we estimate values of mobility which
provide a good ﬁt to the data. We measured the output characteristics
by measuring the GFET drain current (Ids) as a function of the
drain-source voltage (Vds). Different factors in GFETs can cause
poor current saturation including the lack of bandgap, interfacial
phonon scattering and inadequate electrostatic control [25] [26]. This
leads to a large region of linear output characteristics. This region
is valuable for extracting various parameters, including the quality
of the contact resistance. We obtained the transfer characteristics
of GFET by measuring the drain current as a function of the gate
voltage (Vgs) for constant Vds. Resistivity (conductivity) and mobility
which are important parameters of GFETs can be extracted from
transfer characteristics. We performed electrical characterisation of
the Graphenea S10 devices using a Keithley 4200 semiconductor
characteristic analyser system (Keithley, 4200 SCS) combined with a
probe station in the air.

Figures 3 (a) and (b) show the experimentally-obtained and
simulated transfer and I-V characteristics for GFET 1. (a) shows
multiple transfer characteristics for the same device, with Vds bias
voltages ranging from 0.2 to 1 V. The model matches the experimental
data to a reasonable degree, with the orders of magnitude being
relatively close to the measured data, although the on/off ratio shows
some discrepancy: the on/off ratio for the experimental data ranges
from 2.27 to 2.41, whereas the on/off ratios for the simulations range
between 7.5 to 25. In real devices, a voltage sweep typically causes a
shift in the position of the Dirac point as a result of changing charge
trap densities, as accounted for by npud, inﬂuencing the mobilities
and saturation velocity, however our model does not account for this
and assumes a constant npud. This explains in part the discrepancy
in on/off ratios, as, by equation (1), vsat depends on npud. When the
net channel charge, Qnet is small, i.e., when Vc (cid:117) 0, npud becomes
the dominant factor in the value of vsat and so discrepancies between

this value and the actual value will translate to variations in the on/off
ratio.

Figure 3 (b) shows the IV characteristics for the same device,
with Vgs bias voltages ranging from 0.2 to 1 V. The simulation and
experimental characteristics, although on the same order of magnitude,
show a larger discrepancy. In the IV characteristics simulation, we
used a Vbg bias of -1 V, which gives reasonable agreement with
the experiment, being of the same order of magnitude and similar
values for the same bias voltages. Both characteristics show a point of
inﬂection as expected for a GFET, however the point occurs at around
2 V in the simulation, compared to around 4 V in the experiment. In a
real device, bias conditions will be different depending on the nature
of the voltage sweep and thus inﬂuence other parameters which the
model assumes are constant, such as the mobility and carrier velocity.
Figures 3 (c)-(e) shows simulated and measured transfer character-
istics for three GFETs from the Graphenea S10 [10] whose details
are described in Table III. As the S10 devices have a single back gate,
we treat the back gate in the model as a top gate with a 90 nm SiO2
dielectric. We account for the large shift in the Dirac point position
in the experimental characteristics by adding a back gate bias voltage,
Vbg. We consider the virtual gate oxide to be 1 nm thick with a
dielectric constant equal to the vacuum permittivity. Again, the shape
and order of magnitude of the simulated device is relatively close to the
experimental data, however there is a discrepancy between the on/off
ratios of the experimental and simulated GFETs. The experimental
data have on/off ratios ranging between about 4 and 7, whereas the
on/off ratios for the simulations range from about 153 to 530.

In each device, there are discrepancies between the simulated and
real device characteristics, which are likely due to non-idealities
which arise in devices. For example, asymmetries in the measured
characteristics versus the modelled characteristics can arise due to
unintentional doping as a result of the fabrication process or device
degradation, something which many models don’t account for, however
our introduction of the parameter α appears to account well for this.
Additional ﬁtting parameters and ﬁne-tuning of the model would give
a closer response, however, as our intention here is a generalised tool
for predicting device characteristics, rather than ﬁtting a model closely
to a single device, these results suggest broadly good agreement with
experiments. As ﬁtting parameters are typically empirical in nature,
this only really makes them useful after fabrication, e.g., when one
wishes to simulate a circuit consisting entirely of fabricated devices,
rather than to predict the characteristics of a device before fabrication.
A systematic way to quantify the inﬂuence of the fabrication process
would be very useful, e.g., by considering ﬁtting parameters as process
parameters. For example, coefﬁcients to denote CVD vs exfoliated
graphene, doping as a result of the transfer and patterning processes,
the inﬂuence of the growth substrate etc., with values determined by
fabrication (e.g., establishing a relationship between resist etching

(a)

(b)

(c)

(a) a photograph of the experimental setup used to obtain the GFET characteristics in Figure 3a and b. The inset shows the input-protection circuit on
Fig. 2.
a breadboard consisting of two Zener diodes, via which the GFET is connected to the SMUs; (b) a photograph of the GFET die in Figure 1 (d) wire-bonded
to the experimental platform; (c) microscope image of the GFET whose characteristics we present in Figure 3(a) and b. We presented (b), (c), and (d) in a
previous article [35].

time and doping levels in electrical characteristics), could provide a
more rigorous framework for device design and simulation.

B. Integration with Higher-Level Tools

We also verify the correct output for exported SPICE models.
Figure 4 shows the simulated transfer and I-V characteristics both in
GFET Lab using the exported models in LTSpice for GFETs 1-4. As
the ﬁgure shows, the LTSpice simulation and GFET Lab transfer and
I-V characteristics are consistent.

V. GFET LAB: USAGE AND OPEN-SOURCING

A. GFET Lab Tutorial Overview

As a stand-alone software tool, GFET Lab is intended to be used
exclusively through the GUI. Figure 5 shows the main screen of the
program.

At the top, a button to run the simulations, alongside drop-down
menus for ﬁle I/O functionality is provided. The ﬁrst menu allows
users to load custom voltage sweeps, as well as exporting a template
ﬁle which is in a readable format for GFET Lab. The second drop-
down menu allows users to export simulation results and SPICE
models. Figure 6 shows the options in each menu.

The left-hand frame forms the virtual laboratory aspect of the
software, where the users can specify device and sweep parameters,

as well as selecting the device model they wish to use. The “Device
Parameters” tab is where the user speciﬁes the device geometry
(dielectric thickness(es), channel dimensions), the dielectric material
(e.g., AlO2, HfO2...), the operating temperature and other material
parameters, such as the carrier mobility, the Fermi velocity, the surface
phonon energy and the effective dopant density.

The “Sweep Parameters” tab allows the user to deﬁne the GFET
model to be used, as well as the voltage sweeps they wish to simulate.
For example, whether to sweep the gate voltage or the source-drain
voltage and the shape of the sweep (linear, logarithmic etc.). These
settings are based on the functionality of the Keithley 2400 source-
measure unit, a common tool for device electrical characterisation.
There are two main plots used for the characterisation of transistors,
a transfer characteristic plot, where the source-drain voltage is kept
constant and the gate voltage is swept, and an I-V characteristics plot,
where the gate voltage remains constant and the source-drain voltage
is swept. As both use slightly different loops in the code, we provide
both in separate tabs and a single simulation run will conduct both.
The right-hand frame displays the simulation results. The user
simply selects a given tab to display the plot they wish to see. In
addition to the transfer and I-V characteristics, the software also plots
the transconductance and transit frequency of the simulated device,
both of which are often of interest to researchers.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 3. Comparison of simulated and experimentally measured GFET transfer ((a)) and I-V ((b)) characteristics. (c)-(e): Comparison of simulated and
experimentally measured GFET transfer characteristics for several GFETs from the Graphenea S10. In all cases, the stars represent experimental data and the
crosses represent the simulation results.

B. Community Contribution

We developed the tool with two main motivations. Firstly to help in
the development of GFET circuits, by allowing for rapid simulation
of GFET characteristics with different parameters. These include
bias voltages and device structures (i.e., gate oxide thickness, oxide
material, channel dimensions), so desired characteristics can be easily
determined and compared before embarking on an involved and time-
consuming fabrication process. This also allows for prediction of ideal
device and/or circuit behaviour, against which realised devices can be
evaluated. Our second motivation is that our software has value as an
educational tool. GFETs aren’t available as off-the-shelf components
in the same scale, quantities or price as conventional transistors, and
so the ability to experiment with GFET behaviour, based on veriﬁed
models is valuable for training and familiarising non-experts with
these devices.

As part of this, we provide the ability to export models for use in
SPICE simulators such as LTSpice. We have only implemented the
model discussed in the article, but the typical format of an exported
SPICE model is as follows:

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

* n1=Top Gate, n2=Drain, n3=Source, n4=Back Gate
.subckt GFETModel n1 n2 n3 n4
.params
+(Physical and geometric constants)
.func x={}
...
B1 n1 n3 I = (Drain Current Expression)
.ends GFETModel

We encourage others to contribute and expand on the software to
maximise its utility, either by expanding the library of available GFET
models by translating others from the literature, by expanding the
functionality to better represent experiments one might conduct using
GFETs, or by submitting bug reports.

-10-50510VGS (V)00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.82IDS (A)10-4VDS = 1VVDS = 0.6VVDS = 0.4VVDS = 0.8VVBG = 3VVDS = 0.2V0246810VDS (V)00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.8IDS (A)10-3VTG = 0.2V (Simulation)VTG = 0.4V (Simulation)VTG = 0.6V (Simulation)VTG = 0.8V (Simulation)VTG = 1V (Simulation)VTG = 0.2V (Experiment)VTG = 0.4V (Experiment)VTG = 0.6V (Experiment)VTG = 0.8V (Experiment)VTG = 1V (Experiment)VBG = -1V-30-20-10010203040VGS (V)00.511.522.533.544.5IDS (A)10-7SimulationExperimentVDS = 0.01VVBG = -0.5V-30-20-10010203040VGS (V)00.511.522.533.544.5IDS (A)10-6SimulationExperimentVDS = 0.03VVBG = -0.9V-30-20-10010203040VGS (V)00.511.522.533.5IDS (A)10-6SimulationExperimentVDS = 0.01VVBG = -0.4V(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(a) Comparison of the simulated transfer characteristics of GFET 1 from both GFET Lab and the exported SPICE model for Vds = 0.2 − 1 V; (b)
Fig. 4.
Comparison of the simulated I-V characteristics of GFET 1 from both GFET Lab and the exported SPICE model for Vgs = 0.2 − 1 V; (c) Comparison of the
simulated transfer characteristics of GFET 2 from both GFET Lab and the exported SPICE model; (d) Comparison of the simulated I-V characteristics of
GFET 3 from both GFET Lab and the exported SPICE model; (e) Comparison of the simulated I-V characteristics of GFET 4 from both GFET Lab and
the exported SPICE model. In each, the LTSpice and GFET Lab model parameters are the same as in Figure 3. In both, crosses correspond to GFET Lab
simulations and dashes correspond to LTSpice simulations.

What follows is a demonstrative description of model imple-
mentation in GFET Lab. Each model
is a class which takes
as arguments the contents of the user-deﬁned sweep and device
parameter boxes. Each model has the following methods: init,
fnIds, calculateTransferChars, and calculateIVChars. The
ﬁrst initialises the model class with the relevant device and sweep
parameters, the second performs the calculation of the drain current,
the third simulates the device transfer characteristics, transconductance
and transit frequency, and the fourth simulates the I-V characteristics.
Additional functions, such as those to determine channel voltage or
saturation velocity may also be implemented. In principle, GFET
Lab can be extended to model other 2D materials by implementing a
suitable model, enhancing its value as a research tool.

1 class GFETModel:
2
3

def __init__(self, params, ivSweep, transSweep, eps):

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

self.ivVds = ivSweep["Vds"]
self.ivVtg = ivSweep["Vtg"]
self.ivVbg = ivSweep["Vbg"]
self.transVds = transSweep["Vds"]
self.transVtg = transSweep["Vtg"]
self.transVbg = transSweep["Vbg"]
...

(Model-dependent parameters, e.g.,

geometry, calculation of capaitances,
contace resistances...)

...

(Additional functions required by the model)
...

def fnIds(self, Vtg, Vbg, Vds):

(Expressions required, e.g., to determine effective

channel length)

return (Model expression of the drain current)

def calculateTransferChars(self):

Ids = []

-10-50510VDS (V)00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.8IDS (A)10-40246810VDS (V)00.20.40.60.811.21.41.6IDS (A)10-3-30-20-10010203040VGS (V)00.511.522.533.54IDS (A)10-7GFET LabLTSpice-30-20-10010203040VGS (V)00.511.522.533.544.55IDS (A)10-6GFET LabLTSpice-30-20-10010203040VGS (V)00.511.522.533.5IDS (A)10-6GFET LabLTSpice36
37

38

for Vtg in self.ivVtg:

Ids.append([self.fnIds(Vtg, self.ivVbg, Vds) for Vds in self.
ivVds])
return Ids

VI. CONCLUSIONS

We have surveyed the GFET modelling literature, providing both
a background and brief overview of the ﬁeld, as well as discussing
limitations of device modelling. Based on the survey, we identify
three criteria for a suitable predictive device model. Such a model
should be compact, SPICE-compatible, and require a minimal number
of ﬁtting parameters. Based on these criteria, we selected Jimenez
et al.’s explicit drain-current GFET model and implemented it in
a user-friendly software tool called GFET Lab. We then simulate
GFET characteristics based on the geometries and materials of real
devices in the software and compare the simulations to empirically-
measured characteristics of the devices to validate the model and
software. The characteristics show good agreement with the real
devices, being of the correct order of magnitude for the same voltage
sweeps and bias conditions, with the main discrepancy being the on/off
ratio. The reasonable agreement between simulation and experiment
demonstrates GFET Lab’s utility as both a research and educational
tool. We also propose the notion of process parameters for device
modelling, where ﬁtting parameters are determined as functions of
the fabrication process, allowing for models to account for variations
which arise as a result of the fabrication process, e.g., doping due
to wet-transfer, or the more pronounced asymmetry between n-type
and p-type conductance in CVD graphene compared to exfoliated
graphene. We then demonstrate good agreement between the simulated
characteristics of GFET Lab and the exported SPICE models when
simulated in LTSpice. Lastly, we provide a short tutorial to GFET
Lab, as well as detail how members of the community can contribute
to the software to maximise its potential as a research tool.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

P. Stanley-Marbell is supported by an Alan Turing Institute award
TU/B/000096 under EPSRC grant EP/N510129/1, by EPSRC grant
EP/V047507/1, and by the UKRI Materials Made Smarter Research
Centre (EPSRC grant EP/V061798/1). N.J. Tye acknowledges funding
from EPSRC grant EP/L016087/1. We also thank David Jimenez
for his advice on model implementation, particularly in regards to
considering intrinsic and extrinsic voltages, Giorgio Mallia for the
photographs on the experimental setup in Figure 2, and Bilgesu Bilgin
for fabricating GFET1 which we characterise in this article.

CODE AVAILABILITY

The

full

source

code

for GFET Lab is

available

at:

https://github.com/physical-computation/gfet-simulator.

REFERENCES

[1] L. Britnell, R. V. Gorbachev, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, F. Schedin,
A. Mishchenko, T. Georgiou, M. I. Katsnelson, L. Eaves, S. V. Morozov,
N. M. R. Peres, J. Leist, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov, and L. A.
Ponomarenko. Field-effect tunneling transistor based on vertical graphene
heterostructures. Science, 335(6071):947–950, 2012.

[2] M. Cheli, G. Fiori, and G. Iannaccone. A semianalytical model of
bilayer-graphene ﬁeld-effect transistor. IEEE Transactions on Electron
Devices, 56(12):2979–2986, 2009.

[3] B. Chen, H. Huang, X. Ma, L. Huang, Z. Zhang, and L.-M. Peng. How
good can cvd-grown monolayer graphene be? Nanoscale, 6:15255–15261,
2014.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 5. (a) screenshot showing the main screen when the program is launched.
Here, the user can specify the parameters of the transfer characteristics sweep,
as well as selecting the model they wish to use; (b) screenshot showing the
tab where the user can specify the device parameters, such as gate dielectric,
channel dimensions, carrier mobility and others. The parameters used will
depend on the selected model and so some parameters will be ignored for
some models.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 6. These screenshots show to possible import and export options for the
simulator. (a) shows the importing options for loading external sweeps, as well
as allowing users to export a template sweep ﬁle for ease of use. (b) shows
the various data exporting options, including the transfer characteristics, the
I-V characteristics, frequency response and a SPICE model of the simulated
device.

for Vds in self.transVds:

Ids.append([self.fnIds(Vtg, self.transVbg, Vds) for Vds in self.
transVtg])

(Calculation of transconductance and transit frequency)

return Ids, gm, fT, Vg

def calculateIVChars(self):

Ids = []

27
28

29
30
31
32
33
34
35

[4] J.-H. Chen, C. Jang, S. Xiao, M. Ishigami, and M. S. Fuhrer. Intrinsic
and extrinsic performance limits of graphene devices on sio2. Nature
Nanotechnology, 3(4):206–209, 2008.

[5] Z. Chen, Y.-M. Lin, M. J. Rooks, and P. Avouris. Graphene nano-ribbon
electronics. Physica E: Low-dimensional Systems and Nanostructures,
40(2):228–232, 2007.

[6] G. Fiori and G. Iannaccone. Multiscale modeling for graphene-based
nanoscale transistors. Proceedings of the IEEE, 101(7):1653–1669, 2013.
[7] S. Frégonèse, N. Meng, H.-N. Nguyen, C. Majek, C. Maneux, H. Happy,
and T. Zimmer. Electrical compact modelling of graphene transistors.
Solid-State Electronics, 73:27–31, 2012.

[8] J. Guo. Modeling of graphene nanoribbon devices. Nanoscale, 4:5538–

5548, 2012.

[9] HexagonFab. Hexagonfab bolt. https://www.hexagonfab.com/products.

Accessed: 2021-07-20.

[10] G. Inc. Gfet-s10 for sensing applications. https://www.graphenea.com/
products/gfet-s10-for-sensing-applications-10-mm-x-10-mm?variant=
39420477243550s. Accessed: 2022-01-8.

[11] D. Jimenez. Explicit drain current, charge and capacitance model of
graphene ﬁeld-effect transistors. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices,
58(12):4377–4383, 2011.

[12] H. Karimi, R. Yusof, R. Rahmani, H. Hosseinpour, and M. T. Ahmadi.
Development of solution-gated graphene transistor model for biosensors.
Nanoscale Research Letters, 9(1):71, Feb 2014.

[13] R. W. Keyes. What makes a good computer device?

Science,

230(4722):138–144, 1985.

[14] B. J. Kim, H. Jang, S.-K. Lee, B. H. Hong, J.-H. Ahn, and J. H. Cho.
High-performance ﬂexible graphene ﬁeld effect transistors with ion gel
gate dielectrics. Nano Letters, 10(9):3464–3466, 2010. PMID: 20704323.
[15] A. Konar, T. Fang, and D. Jena. Effect of high-κ gate dielectrics on
charge transport in graphene-based ﬁeld effect transistors. Phys. Rev. B,
82:115452, Sep 2010.

[16] J. Lee, H. Shin, H.-J. Chung, J. Lee, J. Heo, H. Yang, S.-H. Lee, and
S. Seo. Compact modeling of extremely scaled graphene fets. Journal
of the Korean Physical Society, 61(11):1797–1801, Dec 2012.

[17] M. Lemme. Current status of graphene transistors. In Gettering and
Defect Engineering in Semiconductor Technology XIII, volume 156 of
Solid State Phenomena, pages 499–509. Trans Tech Publications Ltd, 1
2010.

[18] M. C. Lemme, T. J. Echtermeyer, M. Baus, and H. Kurz. A graphene
ﬁeld-effect device. IEEE Electron Device Letters, 28(4):282–284, 2007.
[19] C. H. Leong, H. C. Chin, C. W. Ang, C. Khai Ng, F. Najam, C. S. Lim,
S. C. Tan, and M. L. P. Tan. Gfetsim: Graphene ﬁeld-effect transistor
simulator of interface charge density. Journal of Nanoelectronics and
Optoelectronics, 12(4):304–315, 2017.

[20] M. B. Lerner, F. Matsunaga, G. H. Han, S. J. Hong, J. Xi, A. Crook, J. M.
Perez-Aguilar, Y. W. Park, J. G. Saven, R. Liu, and A. T. C. Johnson.
Scalable production of highly sensitive nanosensors based on graphene
functionalized with a designed g protein-coupled receptor. Nano Letters,
14(5):2709–2714, 2014. PMID: 24742304.

[21] B. M. Ltd. Grat-fet. https://www.bgtmaterials.com/products_grat_fet.php.

Accessed: 2021-07-20.

[22] N. Lu, L. Wang, L. Li, and M. Liu. A review for compact model of
graphene ﬁeld-effect transistors. Chinese Physics B, 26(3):036804, mar
2017.

[23] Y. Lu, B. R. Goldsmith, N. J. Kybert, and A. T. C. Johnson. Dna-decorated
graphene chemical sensors. Applied Physics Letters, 97(8):083107, 2010.
[24] C. Mackin, L. H. Hess, A. Hsu, Y. Song, J. Kong, J. A. Garrido, and
T. Palacios. A current–voltage model for graphene electrolyte-gated ﬁeld-
[28] K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V.
Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva, and A. A. Firsov. Electric ﬁeld effect in
atomically thin carbon ﬁlms. Science, 306(5696):666–669, 2004.

effect transistors. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, 61(12):3971–
3977, 2014.

[25] I. Meric, M. Y. Han, A. F. Young, B. Ozyilmaz, P. Kim, and K. L.
Shepard. Current saturation in zero-bandgap, top-gated graphene ﬁeld-
effect transistors. Nature Nanotechnology, 3(11):654–659, 2008.
[26] S. B. Mitta, M. S. Choi, A. Nipane, F. Ali, C. Kim, J. T. Teherani,
J. Hone, and W. J. Yoo. Electrical characterization of 2d materials-based
ﬁeld-effect transistors. 2D Materials, 8(1):012002, nov 2020.

[27] C. Mukherjee, J.-D. Aguirre-Morales, S. Frégonèse, T. Zimmer, and
C. Maneux. Versatile compact model for graphene fet targeting reliability-
aware circuit design. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, 62(3):757–
763, 2015.

[29] E. Pop and F. Lian. Gfet tool, Jul 2011.
[30] S. Rodriguez, S. Vaziri, A. Smith, S. Frégonése, M. Ostling, M. C.
Lemme, and A. Rusu. A comprehensive graphene fet model for circuit
design. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, 61(4):1199–1206, 2014.
[31] F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I.
Katsnelson, and K. S. Novoselov. Detection of individual gas molecules
adsorbed on graphene. Nature Materials, 6(9):652–655, Sep 2007.
[32] J. Schiefele, F. Sols, and F. Guinea. Temperature dependence of the
conductivity of graphene on boron nitride. Phys. Rev. B, 85:195420,
May 2012.

[33] F. Schwierz. Graphene transistors. Nature Nanotechnology, 5(7):487–496,

2010.

[34] S. A. Thiele, J. A. Schaefer, and F. Schwierz. Modeling of graphene
metal-oxide-semiconductor ﬁeld-effect transistors with gapless large-area
graphene channels. Journal of Applied Physics, 107(9):094505, 2010.

[35] N. J. Tye, J. T. Meech, B. A. Bilgin, and P. Stanley-Marbell. A
system for generating non-uniform random variates using graphene
ﬁeld-effect transistors.
In 2020 IEEE 31st International Conference
on Application-speciﬁc Systems, Architectures and Processors (ASAP),
pages 101–108, 2020.

[36] A. Venugopal, J. Chan, X. Li, C. W. Magnuson, W. P. Kirk, L. Colombo,
R. S. Ruoff, and E. M. Vogel. Effective mobility of single-layer graphene
transistors as a function of channel dimensions.
Journal of Applied
Physics, 109(10):104511, 2011.

[37] L. Vicarelli, M. S. Vitiello, D. Coquillat, A. Lombardo, A. C. Ferrari,
W. Knap, M. Polini, V. Pellegrini, and A. Tredicucci. Graphene ﬁeld-effect
transistors as room-temperature terahertz detectors. Nature Materials,
11(10):865–871, Oct 2012.

[38] H. Wang, Y. Wu, C. Cong, J. Shang, and T. Yu. Hysteresis of electronic
transport in graphene transistors. ACS Nano, 4(12):7221–7228, 2010.
PMID: 21047068.

[39] Y. Wu, Y.-m. Lin, A. A. Bol, K. A. Jenkins, F. Xia, D. B. Farmer,
Y. Zhu, and P. Avouris. High-frequency, scaled graphene transistors on
diamond-like carbon. Nature, 472(7341):74–78, Apr 2011.

[40] F. Xia, D. B. Farmer, Y.-m. Lin, and P. Avouris. Graphene ﬁeld-effect
transistors with high on/off current ratio and large transport band gap at
room temperature. Nano Letters, 10(2):715–718, 2010. PMID: 20092332.
[41] Y.-J. Yu, Y. Zhao, S. Ryu, L. E. Brus, K. S. Kim, and P. Kim. Tuning the
graphene work function by electric ﬁeld effect. Nano Letters, 9(10):3430–
3434, 2009. PMID: 19719145.

[42] Y. Zhang, T.-T. Tang, C. Girit, Z. Hao, M. C. Martin, A. Zettl, M. F.
Crommie, Y. R. Shen, and F. Wang. Direct observation of a widely
tunable bandgap in bilayer graphene. Nature, 459(7248):820–823, Jun
2009.

[43] W. Zhu, V. Perebeinos, M. Freitag, and P. Avouris. Carrier scattering,
mobilities, and electrostatic potential in monolayer, bilayer, and trilayer
graphene. Phys. Rev. B, 80:235402, Dec 2009.

