2
2
0
2

n
u
J

3
2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
9
6
1
1
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

6G opens up a New Era for Aeronautical
Communication and Services
Arled Papa∗, J¨org von Mankowski∗, Hansini Vijayaraghavan∗, Babak Mafakheri†, Leonardo Goratti†, Wolfgang
Kellerer∗
∗Chair of Communication Networks, Technical University of Munich
†Safran Passenger Innovations, Weßling Germany
∗arled.papa@tum.de, ∗joerg.von.mankowski@tum.de, ∗hansini.vijayaraghavan@tum.de,
†babak.mafakheri@zii.aero, †leonardo.goratti@zii.aero, ∗wolfgang.kellerer@tum.de

Abstract—While 5G delivers high quality services mostly in a
two dimensional terrestrial area covering our planet’s surface,
with 6G we aim at a full exploitation of three dimensions.
In this way, 6G includes all kinds of non-terrestrial networks.
In particular, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), High-Altitude
Platforms (HAPs), (self-)ﬂying taxis and civil aircrafts are new
additions to already existing satellite networks complementing the
cellular terrestrial network. Their integration to 6G is promising
with respect to service coverage, but also challenging due to
the so far rather closed systems. Emerging technology concepts
such as Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) and Software-Deﬁned
Networking (SDN) can provide a basis for a full integration of
aeronautical systems into the terrestrial counterpart. However,
these technologies render the management and orchestration of
aeronautical systems complex. As a step towards the integration
of aeronautical communication and services into 6G, we propose
a framework for the collection, monitoring and distribution
of resources in the sky among heterogeneous ﬂying objects.
This enables high-performance services for a new era of 6G
aeronautical applications. Based on our aeronautical framework,
we introduce emerging application use-cases including Aeronau-
tical Edge Computing (AEC), aircraft-as-a-sensor, and in-cabin
networks.

Index Terms—6G, Aeronautical Systems, Aeronautical Edge

Computing, Softwarization

I. INTRODUCTION

While 5G cellular communication networks are being de-
ployed, research started to address the next generation target-
ing the year 2030. Whereas 5G has put the focus on machine-
type communication, 6G is expected to bring the consumer
in the center. In particular, the goal is to extend the human
intelligence in any situation and environment. In this way,
6G is envisioned to advance the initial efforts of 5G for
embracing also networks that have not been in the core focus
of terrestrial cellular communications so far. Thus, including
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), High-Altitude Platforms
(HAPs), (self-)ﬂying taxis and civil aircrafts [1]. Furthermore,
6G is anticipated to extend ubiquitous networking and service
access in a full three-dimensional sphere, where aeronautical
and non-terrestrial networks play an important role [2]. More-
over, as presented in [3], 5G networks can cater for mobility
speeds of up to 500 km/h, which is not suitable for aeronautical
communication, yet it could be accommodated with 6G.

The main objective for aeronautical systems is a full in-
tegration into the 6G infrastructure to extend the range of

applications and use cases. That entails full
incorporation
of 6G features into the aeronautical architecture, aiming at
achieving end-to-end Quality of Service (QoS). Emerging 6G
applications [4] range from holographic telepresence over tele-
operation in medicine, industrial robot swarms and digital
twins to self-driving vehicles. The natural question then arises.
What are the most important 6G features supporting such
applications and can they be mapped to aeronautical net-
works? Most of the emerging 6G technologies include cog-
nitive spectrum sharing, new communication paradigms (e.g.,
quantum communication, semantic communication), Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI)-driven communication, Mobile Edge Com-
puting (MEC), localization and sensing, extreme performance
guarantees, security, privacy and sustainability. In the latter,
we show that the aforementioned technologies can also be
mapped to aeronautical networks.

In particular, to leverage the full potential of AI, MEC,
localization, sensing, security, privacy and sustainability in the
sky an end-to-end integration and cooperation of the different
heterogeneous aeronautical systems is necessary to deliver
high performance services. To date, the heterogeneous aero-
nautical systems are rather closed and have been developed
independently from terrestrial networks [1]. Emerging tech-
nology concepts such as in-network computing and Software-
Deﬁned Networking (SDN) can provide a basis for a full
integration of aeronautical systems to terrestrial communica-
tion. The big challenge lies in the necessary management and
orchestration approaches to address and control the resources
of all participating aeronautical components in the sky forming
a uniﬁed three-dimensional 6G system.

In this article, we sketch a 6G aeronautical network architec-
ture with a novel middle layer between satellite networks and
terrestrial networks. We regard the communication, processing
and storage resources of all systems in the sky as the key
elements of our architecture. To leverage these resources, we
advocate for a federation framework for the collection, mon-
itoring and distribution of these resources among the hetero-
geneous ﬂying objects to offer end-to-end high-performance
services for new aeronautical applications. Our description of
the envisaged federation framework is complemented by the
elaboration of three use cases including Aeronautical Edge
Computing (AEC), aircraft-as-a-sensor, and Aircraft Cabin
Networks. We further use those scenarios to derive research

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

(IALs) for the communication among various aeronautical
components, Inter-Satellite Links (ISLs) for the communica-
tion among satellites, Direct-Air-to-Ground (DA2G) links and
Satellite-to-Gateway links (SA2G). To establish the integration
of the satellite and aeronautical components to the terrestrial
network, Satellite Gateways (SATs), DA2G gateways and Base
Stations (BSs) are placed in what we call wireless access
network. The wireless access network further connects to the
core network. In the latter, we will elaborate how resources
can be gathered and allocated to consumers to provide the
required applications through a federation entity in the sky.

III. RELATED WORK
In the last couple of years, satellite and aeronautical net-
works have attracted a lot of attention to establish network
ubiquity. In the context of 6G communication, aeronauti-
cal networks play a major role in complementing terrestrial
networks [1]. It is even suggested that several components
of the aeronautical networks shall be enhanced with mobile
radio capabilities. For instance, enhancing HAPs and UAVs
operating as ﬂying BSs [2] in order to serve UEs ubiquitously
and in a timely manner. With so much processing demand it
is of utmost importance to build a highly reliable and effective
management and orchestration entity in the sky to complement
a similar one on the ground.

Moreover, the aeronautical network can be utilized as a
surveillance system, which can alleviate the resource allo-
cation and Virtual Network Function (VNF) placement for
different services as proposed in [7]. Likewise, the concepts
of AI can enhance network capabilities as presented in [8].

In a similar fashion, satellite networks are gaining high
traction in recent years, which has led to the development of
methods to bridge the air and ground networks. As a result,
the concept of SDN has also been incorporated [9]. Given
all the aforementioned concepts anticipated for satellites, the
requirement for high computing entities becomes mandatory.
While providing those services to satellites from the ground
network is possible, it introduces extremely high and non-
tolerable delays for 5G networks (i.e., > 10 ms). To avoid
such issues, MEC-enabled sky solutions are suggested. In this
work, we stress the importance of such a component in the
sky and shed light on a framework that fully establishes these
requirements, while detailing the main elements and interfaces
that allow for a normal operation and integration with other
network system components.

A similar approach for a collaborative MEC system based
on air and ground is presented in [10] and [11], which are the
closest to our proposal. However, as the majority of the state-
of-the-art, they both consider MEC establishment mainly for
the service of UEs and enhancing their performance. Further-
more, they do not provide clear instructions with respect to
the MEC operation, interaction among components as well
as interfaces for UEs or third parties to collaborate with.
In contrast to already existing work, in this paper we focus
explicitly on proposing clear instructions for the interaction
among functions as well as interfaces compliant to 3GPP
standardization. In that regard, we demystify in depth the use-
case of edge computing in the sky (i.e., AEC) and demonstrate

Figure 1: Envisioned 6G network architecture, including terrestrial,
satellite and aeronautical networks. The satellite and aeronautical
networks connect to the core network through the wireless access
network. The consumer space consists of satellites, aircrafts and UEs.
Resources consist of communication, computing and storage.

challenges for 6G aeronautical networks.

II. 6G AERONAUTICAL NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
Next generation 6G networks anticipate the connection of
everything, leading to the merging of terrestrial with non-
terrestrial networks. However, as pointed out in [5], a middle
layer between the satellite and terrestrial layers, namely the
aeronautical layer is required in order to provide improved
resource sharing and spectral efﬁciency. Consequently, civil
aircrafts, UAVs and HAPs will be utilized in combination with
mm-wave links to provide high bandwidth. This envisions a
three-dimensional network architecture, which includes terres-
trial i.e., Radio Access Networks (RANs), non-terrestrial i.e.,
satellites and aeronautical networks as elaborated in [1], [6]. A
detailed overview of the envisioned architecture is portrayed
in Fig. 1.

Different from previous network generations and current
research for aeronautical systems, we introduce a new concept
for the network consumer. In our perspective, a consumer
could be traditional User Equipment (UEs), as well as UEs
within the aircrafts requesting In-Flight Entertainment and
Connectivity Services (IFECS). Furthermore, aircrafts them-
selves requiring for instance weather predictions, sensing and
localization data could be considered consumers. In turn,
traditional satellites may envision processing capacity or in-
telligence to run sophisticated algorithms which require SDN,
Network Function Virtualization (NFV) and AI capabilities.
For the remainder of this paper, we will refer to the services
provided to consumers as applications.

In order to map 6G features to our architecture, key elements
are communication, processing and storage resources of all
components in the sky. Not only terrestrial networks, but also
the aeronautical networks shall be equipped with servers that
can in turn be utilized to improve the network performance,
which advocate the concept of federated in-network comput-
ing. Regarding the vicinity to the consumer, they are classiﬁed
from cloud to edge and premise computing. These servers
constitute the processing and storage resources. The com-
munication resources in the sky consist of Inter-Aerial Links

3

Figure 3: Flow diagram of the interaction among the federation
framework components during an application request.

3. Resource Catalog: as the name suggests it contains and
preserves all the resources of the federation framework.
3a. Processing Resources: resources that concern processing
capabilities. This can range from cloud computing to edge
and premise computing.

3b. Storage Resources: resources that concern content stor-

age. For instance caching and servers.

3c. Communication Resources: resources that deal with the
communication aspect. These resources can consist of
satellite links, aeronautical links, satellite-ground links or
radio access terrestrial network links.

4. Resource Negotiator: responsible for negotiating and
obtaining resources from the infrastructure providers. The
goal of this block is to secure resources in a smart manner
in order to maximize proﬁt. This process is realized
through the southbound API.

5. Resource Distributor: function responsible for the com-
munication with the resource catalog to identify available
resources. It further forwards resource information to
the SDN controller and ﬁnally distributes resources to
applications.

B. Federation Framework Block Interaction

To better highlight the communication among all federation
blocks, and to detail the exchanged information, a ﬂow chart
is presented in Fig. 3.

According to Fig. 3, the federation framework communi-
cates with other entities i.e., applications, services and infras-
tructure providers while using APIs. We refer to these APIs as
northbound for the communication with the applications and
southbound for the collection of resources, accordingly. The

Figure 2: Overview of the federation framework. It provides details
of the blocks that compose the federation, as well as the interaction
among them.

how different vendors and actors in the sky can beneﬁt from
such a structure.

IV. ENABLING 6G APPLICATIONS IN THE SKY:
AERONAUTICAL FEDERATION FRAMEWORK
To group available resources and create an infrastructure
to collect and distribute them accordingly when needed, we
propose a federation framework for management and or-
chestration. The location of the federation framework could
be any of the aeronautical components with adequate process-
ing capabilities, for instance the federation framework could
be established in a powerful HAP or speciﬁcally designed
aircrafts. The main goal is to group computing, storage and
communication resources from infrastructure providers (i.e.,
satellite network providers, aircraft manufacturers, storage
and computing providers). Furthermore, with the collected
resources, an intelligent SDN controller is responsible for
the optimal allocation of the aforementioned resources to the
incoming applications. In the latter, we provide a detailed
description of the management and orchestration procedures.

A. Management and Orchestration

The main components of the federation framework are
depicted in Fig. 2. Each component provides a unique function
through the interaction with other components. An elaborated
explanation is provided as follows:

1. Application Processor:

function responsible for

the
communication with the application layer. Through the
northbound Application Programming Interface (API),
the application processor obtains all application requests
and forwards them to the federation framework.

2. SDN Controller: is the heart of the federation frame-
work. The SDN controller manages and distributes all
system resources to the respective applications, regarding
their needs. It is composed of a database to store informa-
tion with respect to applications (i.e., resource utilization,
network characteristics) as well as an optimization block
that performs optimal resource allocation.

SDN ControllerApplication ProcessorResource DistributorResource NegotiatorResource CatalogNorthbound application requestSouthbound resource collectionInitial App requestUpdate resource catalogVerify resource availabilityResource availability checkedInitiate optimizationResource allocationResource allocationUpdate resource availabilityAPIs include the 5G information model known as Network Re-
source Model (NRM) based on Extensible Markup Language
(XML) or JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) formats.

Initially, the resource negotiator acquires the computing,
storage and communication resources from the service and in-
frastructure providers through the southbound API. This serves
as an intermediary, where several algorithms can be utilized
to obtain this goal, e.g., game theory. Once the resources
have been secured, a connection with the resource catalog
is established to update the resource availability. Equivalently,
applications request resources from the federation framework
using the northbound API through the application processor.
Once the request has been gathered and processed by the
application processor, the ﬂow of the data is transferred to
the resource distributor. The resource distributor in turn
communicates with the resource catalog to verify resource
availability. If resources are available, a positive feedback is re-
ported to the resource distributor. Now, the SDN controller
block is triggered, which is in charge of optimal resource
allocation. In this block, several optimization algorithms can
be deployed,
including recent advanced AI solutions [8].
Once the optimal decision is acquired, the SDN controller
forwards the information of resource allocation to the resource
distributor. Finally, the decision is made available to the
applications through the application processor.

V. 6G AERONAUTICAL APPLICATIONS

The proposed federation framework enables new aeronau-
tical use cases that beneﬁt from a full integration of aero-
nautical communication and services in the 6G ecosystem. In
this section, we discuss three use cases in particular, while
demystifying how the federation framework alleviates their
functionality.

A. Aeronautical Edge Computing (AEC)

As aforementioned, satellite networks are gaining increased
attention in the 5G/6G era, where concepts such as SDN, AI
and NFV are envisioned to be incorporated into them. How-
ever, given the limited hardware capabilities that satellites pos-
sess i.e., low processing units and memory, such applications
become difﬁcult to be executed. Furthermore, aeronautical
elements such as UAVs and HAPs are anticipated to serve as
ﬂying BSs and provide computing capabilities to UEs. In turn,
already existing IFECS are urging for maintaining emerging
delay and throughput critical applications to passengers. To
this end, existing non-terrestrial and aeronautical network
infrastructures relying solely on the terrestrial networks and
core network servers to achieve their services become obsolete.
To overcome the aforementioned issues, we envision an
AEC solution, which we make available through the pro-
posed aeronautical federation framework. In our proposal,
aeronautical components serve as ﬂying computing entities.
This solution, not only maintains low latency for emerging
6G applications in the sky, but also increases the importance
of non-terrestrial and aeronautical systems in the 6G era.

An overview of the proposed approach is demonstrated in
Fig. 4. Here we portray how the aeronautical network can

4

Figure 4: Envisioned 6G AEC use case through the proposed aeronau-
tical federation framework. Processing, storage and communication
resources marked with green are acquired by the infrastructure
provides through the southbound API. Application requests, marked
with red are forwarded to the federation framework through the
northbound API.

be enhanced with computing entities, which can be utilized
to always follow ﬂight paths and satellites serving them. In
the ﬁgure, IALs, ISLs, DA2G links and SA2G links form the
communication resources. Drones, HAPs and aircrafts with
storage and processing capabilities constitute the storage and
processing resources respectively. These resources, portrayed
with green color in Fig. 4, are acquired by the federation
framework using the southbound API through the resource
negotiator block as explained in Section IV-B.

SDN/NFV and AI-enabled satellites, UEs within the aircraft
(i.e., IFECS) as well as UEs on the ground compose the
applications. Application requests, marked with red in Fig. 4,
are forwarded through the northbound API to the federation
framework and are processed from the application processor.
Once the optimal solution is provided by the SDN controller,
the application requirements are established. Therefore, the
necessity to acquire resources from the terrestrial network is
eliminated and low latency is achieved.

B. Aeronautical Sensor Networks

6G holds the potential for different applications of sensing
inside and outside an aircraft. Inside an aircraft, for instance, it
may be used to localize passengers with an expected centime-
ter resolution via their mobile devices and seat screens. This
allows an automated and accurate identiﬁcation of passengers
enabling new passenger seat centered services, such as targeted
advertisements or differential customer experience depending
on the passenger category. Moreover, UE localization in the
aircraft fosters an automated installation of 6G-enabled seat
hardware, compared to the current manual conﬁguration.

The envisaged 6G AI capability will allow to predictively
deliver data to individual
in-cabin elements, such as seat
screens of the entertainment system or passenger devices. The
sensing feature could also be used in conjunction with the AI
capability to perform predictive maintenance and anticipate
which parts of the connected aircraft are at the risk of failure
and thus need proactive replacement. Additionally, the sensing

5

crew and cockpit communications have a stricter latency
and reliability requirement compared to all aforementioned
applications, especially due to the security and safety concerns.
In turn, IFECS demand a high bandwidth. Multiple wireless
technologies cooperating together are envisioned to satisfy
these extreme performance requirements in 6G networks.

The key challenge in enabling such cooperation is to opti-
mize the resource allocation of multiple access technologies
considering UE requirements, environment mobility, network
in a multi-
constraints, and failovers. Such optimization,
technology environment, requires a framework connecting
different network components for seamless interaction. The
federation framework introduced in this work functions as an
enabler for resource management and orchestration of an in-
cabin network with various wireless access technologies.

This federation framework pools together all communica-
tion resources and hence can allocate them across multiple
access technologies as depicted in Fig. 5. This enables the
aggregation of wireless links of the various wireless tech-
nologies which is executed by multi-path transport protocols
like Multi Path Transport Control Protocol (MPTCP) [14].
Link aggregation also has the advantage of enabling seamless
and ﬂexible switching between the different technologies in
case of a link failure. Link aggregation can be best uti-
lized by access technologies that do not interfere with each
other. In recent years, Light-Fidelity (LiFi) has emerged as
a promising technology that can be integrated into aircraft
cabin networks. This envisioned in-aircraft LiFi-RF network
is depicted in Fig. 5. Since MPTCP combines the technologies
on the transport layer without changing the underlying network
infrastructure, it requires no major changes to the network
architecture or user devices thus enabling easy integration with
existing infrastructure.

VI. INITIAL SYSTEM VALIDATION
In order to discuss the validity of the presented concept of
the aeronautical federation framework described in Section IV,
we focus on the Aeronautical Edge Computing (AEC) use
case. In our previous work [15] we describe a prototype of this
concept. We envision the aeronautical federation framework to
be established within an aircraft. As in our proposed concept,
the provisioning of services is extended across the sky, where
UEs in other aircrafts could be additionally served to extend
the operational region of the proposed framework.

To illustrate the beneﬁts of the federation framework, we
show some results based on the optimization problem de-
scribed in [15]. Here, we maximize the number of served
network slices in an aircraft by optimally allocating caching
and satellite link resources. We refer to a network slice as a
group of UEs that share similar characteristics (e.g., request
the same video ﬁles) and that have the same delay require-
ments. For the evaluation of our federation engine concept,
we consider two approaches. The ﬁrst approach utilizes both
caching resources (i.e., storage resources) and satellites links
(i.e., communication resources) to serve UEs within aircrafts
demonstrating the AEC feature. In contrast, the second ap-
proach only utilizes satellite resources (i.e., current network
infrastructures). The latter serves as our baseline.

Figure 5: Overview of in and outside aircraft applications enabled
through the aeronautical federation framework. Storage and process-
ing resources are marked with green, whereas sensing, AI-enabled,
entertainment and connectivity applications are labeled with red.

capability can be combined with the usage of intelligent
surfaces [12]. This can improve spectral efﬁciency inside the
aircraft by increasing the spectral diversity in Multi-Input
Multi-Output (MIMO) communication or by focusing the
beam in beamforming resulting in a higher throughput.

Finally, sensing combined with 6G’s context awareness
informs applications about the ideal time to communicate [13].
Thereby reducing the energy consumption of transmissions
and contributing to the energy efﬁciency of the aircraft’s
network. All aforementioned use cases beneﬁt from the fed-
eration framework proposed in this work. Furthermore, the
federation framework also enables applications outside an
aircraft using 6G’s sensing and AI capabilities. Speciﬁcally,
the collected weather data by an aircraft can be used to
perform better channel estimations. Channel estimations, in
turn, could also be used to improve the weather forecast.
An illustration for a sensing and weather prediction scenario
utilizing the aeronautical federation framework is depicted in
Fig. 5. In this setup, processing and storage resources marked
as green are acquired by the federation framework through the
southbound interface. Applications labeled with red, consist
of in-cabin sensing features and AI-based weather forecast.
The applications’ requests are forwarded to the federation
framework through the northbound API. The built-in SDN
controller and optimizer is used to optimally allocate resources
for the multiple access points found in an aircraft. It also
coordinates the conﬁguration of the intelligent surfaces to
broadcast efﬁciently weather prediction data to avoid Non-
Line of Sight (NLoS) and bad wireless channel conditions.

C. Aircraft Cabin Networks

In-cabin communication applications, such as entertainment
services, video streaming, passenger communication, crew
and cockpit communication, and passenger health and safety
monitoring, have diverse QoS requirements. For example,

6

integrated federated system to provide end-to-end communi-
cation services. Our proposed federation framework allows
to utilize communication, processing and storage resources
across different entities. This concept is envisioned to pro-
vide better network usage and reduce the network latency
and increase reliability while enabling emerging technologies
such as AI and SDN in the sky. Furthermore, we highlight
three speciﬁc 6G-enabled aeronautical use cases and elaborate
potential research directions. For the use case of AEC, we
demonstrate with an example how our proposed framework
can reduce network latency and thus serve more network slices
compared to traditional network architectures in the sky that
utilized only satellite resources.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The authors acknowledge the ﬁnancial support by the Fed-
eral Ministry of Education and Research of Germany (BMBF)
in the programme of ”Souver¨an. Digital. Vernetzt.” joint
project 6G-life, project identiﬁcation number 16KISK002.

REFERENCES

[1] M. M. Azari, S. Solanki, S. Chatzinotas, O. Kodheli, H. Sallouha,
A. Colpaert, J. F. M. Montoya, S. Pollin, A. Haqiqatnejad, A. Mostaani
et al., “Evolution of Non-Terrestrial Networks From 5G to 6G: A
Survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06881, 2021.

[2] E. C. Strinati, S. Barbarossa, T. Choi, A. Pietrabissa, A. Giuseppi,
E. De Santis, J. Vidal, Z. Becvar, T. Haustein, N. Cassiau et al., “6G
in the sky: On-demand Intelligence at the edge of 3D networks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.09463, 2020.

[3] S. Henry, A. Alsohaily, and E. S. Sousa, “5G is Real: Evaluating the
Compliance of the 3GPP 5G New Radio System with the ITU IMT-2020
Requirements,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 42 828–42 840, 2020.

[4] H. Viswanathan and P. E. Mogensen, “Communications in the 6G era,”

IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 57 063–57 074, 2020.

[5] X. Huang, J. A. Zhang, R. P. Liu, Y. J. Guo, and L. Hanzo, “Airplane-
Aided Integrated Networking for 6G Wireless: Will it work?” IEEE
Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 84–91, 2019.
[6] N.-N. Dao, Q.-V. Pham, N. H. Tu, T. T. Thanh, V. N. Q. Bao, D. S.
Lakew, and S. Cho, “Survey on Aerial Radio Access Networks: Toward
a Comprehensive 6G Access Infrastructure,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1193–1225, 2021.

[7] J. Sun, F. Liu, Y. Zhou, G. Gui, T. Ohtsuki, S. Guo, and F. Adachi,
“Surveillance Plane Aided Air-Ground Integrated Vehicular Networks:
Architectures, Applications, and Potential,” IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 122–128, 2020.

[8] H. Yang, A. Alphones, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, J. Zhao, and K. Wu,
“Artiﬁcial-Intelligence-Enabled Intelligent 6G Networks,” IEEE Net-
work, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 272–280, 2020.

[9] A. Papa, T. De Cola, P. Vizarreta, M. He, C. Mas-Machuca, and
W. Kellerer, “Design and Evaluation of Reconﬁgurable SDN LEO con-
stellations,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management,
vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1432–1445, 2020.

[10] Z. Qin, H. Wang, Y. Qu, H. Dai, and Z. Wei, “Air-Ground Collaborative
Mobile Edge Computing: Architecture, Challenges, and Opportunities,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.07930, 2021.

[11] N. Cheng, W. Xu, W. Shi, Y. Zhou, N. Lu, H. Zhou, and X. Shen, “Air-
Ground Integrated Mobile Edge Networks: Architecture, Challenges, and
Opportunities,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 26–
32, 2018.

[12] H. Hashida, Y. Kawamoto, and N. Kato, “Intelligent Reﬂecting Surface
Placement Optimization in Air-Ground Communication Networks To-
ward 6G,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 146–151,
2020.

[13] A. Bourdoux, A. N. Barreto, B. van Liempd, C. de Lima, D. Dardari,
D. Belot, E.-S. Lohan, G. Seco-Granados, H. Sarieddeen, H. Wymeer-
sch, J. Suutala, J. Saloranta, M. Guillaud, M. Isomursu, M. Valkama,
M. R. K. Aziz, R. Berkvens, T. Sanguanpuak, T. Svensson, and Y. Miao,
“6G White Paper on Localization and Sensing,” 2020.

Figure 6: AEC scenario compared to baseline approach with no
caching for various cache sizes in terms of number of served slices
inside an aircraft.

For an initial validation, we consider the following pa-
rameters: a Geostationary Earth Orbit (GEO) satellite with
250 ms round-trip delay to the core network in the ground
and 112 Mbps bandwidth that is shared among UEs in the
aircraft. In turn, UEs are grouped into network slices, where
each network slice contains 15 UEs. Each UE within a network
slice requests video ﬁles from a catalog K of 10000 ﬁles.
The arrival rate per UE is 2 ﬁles/s and each ﬁle is of size
0.2 MB. In total there are 30 network slices, resulting in a
necessary storage of 60 GB. For the sake of simplicity and
due to space limitations, we assume that each network slice
has the same delay requirement of 1 s and its UEs request
video ﬁles following a zipf distribution with an exponent of 0
(i.e., uniform distribution of ﬁles in K). To represent the AEC
scenario, inside the aircraft a cache is shared among network
slices. Results for various cache sizes are portrayed in Fig. 6
and are compared to the baseline approach (i.e., no caching)
with respect to the number of served slices.

According to the results illustrated in Fig. 6,

the AEC
approach outperforms the baseline approach, 4 compared to
2 served slices for a cache size of 4 GB (i.e., ≈ 7% of
the total needed storage). However the difference between
the approaches increases with increasing cache size with 18
served slices compared to 2 for a cache size of 32 GB (i.e.,
≈ 50% of the total needed storage). The rationale behind these
results lies on the high round-trip delay introduced by satellites
that hinder the service of additional slices. Moreover, since
the baseline approach does not consider caching resources,
increasing the cache size does not beneﬁt the performance.
Thus, we can conclude that the utilizing caching inside an
aircraft is more beneﬁcial compared to the case when video
ﬁles are retrieved from the core network, as the round-trip
delay of the satellites is avoided.

VII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

In this work we discuss the potentials for aeronautical
applications in the 6G era. In that regard, we emphasize the
importance of a full integration of aeronautical systems and
networks into the 6G terrestrial network to form a three-
dimensional 6G network in the sky. Therefore, we propose
to leverage the resources of aeronautical systems to form an

AECBaselineApproach05101520Served SlicesCacheSize=4GBCacheSize=8GBCacheSize=16GBCacheSize=32GB[14] A. Ford, C. Raiciu, M. J. Handley, and O. Bonaventure, “TCP Extensions
for Multipath Operation with Multiple Addresses,” RFC 6824, Jan.
2013. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6824
[15] A. Papa, H. M. G¨ursu, L. Goratti, T. Rasheed, and W. Kellerer, “Cost

of Network Slice Collaboration: Edge Network Slicing for In-Flight
Connectivity,” in IEEE International Conference on Communications,
2021, pp. 1–6.

7

