2
2
0
2

n
u
J

3
2

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
3
9
1
1
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

TOWARDS A MATURITY MODEL FOR SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE
REVIEW PROCESS

A PREPRINT

Vinicius dos Santos
University of São Paulo (ICMC-USP)
São Carlos - São Paulo - Brazil
vinicius.dos.santos@usp.br

Elisa Yumi Nakagawa
University of São Paulo (ICMC-USP)
São Carlos - São Paulo - Brazil
elisa@icmc.usp.br

June 27, 2022

ABSTRACT

Background: Systematic literature review (SLR) has been widely adopted to synthesize evidence in
a reliable and unbiased manner. The process of conducting SLR is rigorous and well-known; however,
most SLR have not followed this process systematically, leading to various problems, including poor
documentation, lack of quality, and difﬁculty to be reproduced. These problems are added to the
inherent difﬁculties in conducting SLR, especially regarding effort and time consumption. Several
practices (including methods, techniques, and tools) have already been experimented with to mitigate
such problems. Still, it is unclear which practices should be prioritized to reduce such problems and
difﬁculties.
Aims: The main goal of this paper is to contribute to improving the SLR process being adopted by
the community. For that, we introduce the idea of the Maturity Model for SLR process (MM4SLR).
Method: We systematically examined the literature searching for practices destined to support or
improve the SLR process. After collecting 84 practices, we analyzed, grouped, and synthesized them
into 46 key practices further distributed into 15 speciﬁc goals. Inspired by the maturity model for
software development process, we also propose ﬁve process areas and an initial version of MM4SLR
containing four maturity levels.
Results: MM4SLR provides a new view on those practices that could be progressively adopted to
improve the SLR process. MM4SLR could deﬁne a pragmatic pathway that guides the adoption of
those practices, which better ﬁt the reality of who conducts SLR.
Conclusion: The SLR process is very complex and should be more investigated. We argue that
ways to better select and adopt the various existing practices are necessary. We conclude that a long
research agenda to be fulﬁlled addressing the SLR process still exists.

Keywords Secondary Studies · Systematic Literature Review · Maturity Model

1

Introduction

The Software Engineering (SE) community has adopted Systematic Literature Review (SLR) over the last years [20]
because it is a reliable way to summarize evidence from primary studies and support researchers in outlining the state
of the art of a given research topic [16]. SLR provides important beneﬁts, such as the possibility of dealing with
information from different studies in an unbiased manner [14, 22], production of auditable and repeatable results [15, 5],
and the opportunity to identify research gaps and also perspectives for future investigations [16].

At the same time, although SLR has a systematic process to be followed, some SLR have neglected the rigorous
application of this process leading to several problems, e.g., poor documentation [29, 5], poor quality [17], lack of
repeatability [15], bias in studies selection, data extraction, and summarization [2], and poor coverage and lack of
generalization of results [2]. These problems also lead researchers to doubt the rigor of the process and the reliability
of results. Consequently, they often need to re-conduct some activities (e.g., studies selection, data extraction, data

 
 
 
 
 
 
Towards a Maturity Model for Systematic Literature Review Process

A PREPRINT

synthesis) when they repeat/update an SLR or even start an SLR over from scratch. This scenario reveals that despite
SLR having a well-deﬁned process, the applied process indeed may be very immature.

The SE community has discussed over the years the barriers of the SLR process [7], its main threats to validity [2],
together with those inherent problems like time- and effort-consuming issues [12]. The problems of SLR resulted in the
proposal of several practices (including methods, techniques, and tools) to mitigate them, such as supporting tools for
SLR conduction/update [19], semi-automation/automation of SLR tasks [12] (e.g., for selecting primary studies [26]),
strategies to support update [21], strategies to create more useful SLR for the industry in a timely manner (e.g., rapid
reviews [6]), and different ways to transfer the SLR ﬁndings for practitioners (e.g., evidence brieﬁngs) [6]. However,
researchers have had difﬁculties to systematically apply these practices during the conduction of their SLR. There is
also a lack of a way that supports researchers to organize the application of these practices progressively and achieve a
more reliable and mature SLR process. Hence, the main research question addressed in this work is: Is it worth thinking
about a maturity model for the SLR process?

The main goal of this work is to contribute to improving the SLR process that has been adopted by the community. More
speciﬁcally, the goal is to introduce the idea of Maturity Model for SLR process (MM4SLR). This vision paper sheds
light on a novel model that could support researchers in identifying and prioritizing those practices that could/should be
applied while conducting their SLR.

To achieve our goal and answer the research question, we ﬁrst performed a literature review focusing on practices
proposed to improve the SLR process. After ﬁnding 84 practices, we analyzed, grouped, and synthesized them into 46
key practices, which were further distributed into 15 speciﬁc goals. Following this, we proposed ﬁve process areas
organized into four levels, resulting in MM4SLR. It is worth mentioning that we inspired ourselves in the maturity
model for the software development process, in particular, CMMI1 (Capability Maturity Model Integration), in which
the more mature the process, the higher the quality of the software system [8]. Hence, MM4SLR intends to create a
new and pragmatic pathway to improve the SLR process. It could also guide researchers to assess their SLR process,
identify feasible practices, and result in high-quality SLR.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the background and related works; Section 3
presents our research method; Section 4 presents an overview of process areas, speciﬁc goals and practices; Section 5
introduces MM4SLR; Section 6 discusses possible uses of MM4SLR, limitations, and future work; and, ﬁnally Section 7
presents the ﬁnal remarks.

2 Background and Related Work

This section presents a brief overview of maturity models for processes, their structure, and associated concepts to be
sufﬁcient to understand the rest of our work.

Maturity models started in the software development context aiming to improve the maturity of software processes
and, consequently, the quality of software products [25]. The idea of maturity model emerged in the late 1980s when
Software Engineering Institute (SEI) released a brief description of a software process maturity framework [23]. Later,
SEI also published the ﬁrst Capability Maturity Model (CMM) designed for software organizations [23]. This model
was intensively refactored over time through multiple versions. In the 2000s, the Capability Maturity Model Integration
(CMMI) was released combining other maturity models proposed earlier. In 2010, different versions for acquisition,
development, and services were released [8]. CMMI Institute has refactored this model and released its latest version in
2018 (CMMI V2.0).

CMMI is a reference model for appraising software process maturity and a normative model for helping software
organizations to evolve their processes from ad hoc and chaotic processes to mature and disciplined ones [8]. This
evolution occurs gradually and enables practitioners to tackle problems according to their priority and not overwhelm
their processes with unfeasible changes. CMMI ﬁve maturity levels [25]: (i) Initial - processes are usually ad hoc and
chaotic, and the organization does not provide a stable environment to support processes; (ii) Managed - processes are
planned, monitored, controlled, reviewed, and evaluated for the adherence to the process descriptions and must be in
accordance with organization policies; (iii) Deﬁned - processes are well-characterized, understood, and described in
standards, procedures, tools, and methods; (iv) Quantitatively Managed - organization and projects establish quantitative
objectives for quality and process performance and use them as criteria to manage their projects; and (v) Optimizing -
processes are continuously improved based on a quantitative understanding of business objectives and performance
needs.

1https://cmmiinstitute.com/

2

Towards a Maturity Model for Systematic Literature Review Process

A PREPRINT

CMMI also deﬁnes components and concepts that can guide practitioners to comprehend its structure and apply
these concepts to practice. A key component of CMMI is the process area, also known as Key Process Area (KPA)
[25]. A process area is a cluster of related practices that, when implemented collectively, satisﬁes a set of goals
considered necessary for improvement in that area. Another important component is the speciﬁc goal that refers to
unique characteristics that must be addressed to satisfy that process area. These goals are satisﬁed through the execution
of speciﬁc practices.
Together with CMMI, international standards, such as ISO/IEC 122072 and ISO/IEC 15504-73, have also contributed to
support organizations to go towards more mature processes. Inspired by CMMI and these standards, maturity models
have gone beyond software development as an attractive means in multiple areas that need tools to make their process
more mature [27]. For example, Crawford [9] presents a maturity model for project management, Lee et al. [18]
presents a maturity model for business processes, and Shen et al. [24] proposes a maturity model to assess the carbon
emission in cities. Like CMMI, all these models are staged and present concepts (such as process areas). Besides, these
models have beneﬁted these domains by providing a path for progressively maturing the processes, prioritizing actions
to be done, and introducing a cultural change in organizations [9]. Moreover, these models make it possible to analyze
the strengths and weaknesses of current processes and develop strategies to achieve objectives [18]. These models also
provide means to evaluate which process areas need more attention and make effective decisions [24]. In particular,
CMM can provide signiﬁcant gains in productivity and quality [23].

Similar to software development and other domains, SLR also have a process that is complex, has many activities,
involves different stakeholders, and should produce high-quality results. However, this process has not been sometimes
adequately performed, impairing the quality of SLR. At the same time, several existing practices could support such a
process, but it is unclear which practices should be prioritized to mitigate the existing problems of SLR. This scenario
motivated us to conduct this work.

3 Research Method

To propose MM4SLR, we performed the four steps presented in Figure 1, which summarizes our research method.

Figure 1: Research Method

In Step 1, we selected two tertiary studies [2, 29] that extracted the most common threats to validity of the SLR process
and strategies to mitigate them. Ampatzoglou et al. [2] analyzed 165 secondary studies published from 2007 to 2016,
and Zhou et al. [29] assessed 316 studies published from 2004 to 2015. We carefully examined the results of both
studies and identiﬁed 84 practices4 that could be adopted to mitigate problems/threats to validity in SLR. Next, we
analyzed each practice to remove duplication and applied Thematic Analysis [10], which synthesized those practices
into the 46 key practices (which will be discussed further in Section 4). In addition, we double-checked these practices
by revisiting the guidelines for conducting SLR [14] and those studies that investigate more speciﬁc topics, in particular,
techniques for better documenting SLR process [11, 5] and updating SLR [28].

In Step 2, we grouped the 46 key practices aforementioned into 15 speciﬁc goals (which will be detailed in Section
4). For this, we put together practices that address the same threat to validity. For example, several practices can be
adopted to ensure good coverage of a given SLR (i.e., all relevant primary studies were considered): (i) performing

2ISO/IEC 122207: https://www.iso.org/standard/63712.html
3ISO/IEC 15504-7: https://www.iso.org/standard/50519.html
4The list of 84 practices is available on https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6511347

3

Towards a Maturity Model for Systematic Literature Review Process

A PREPRINT

pilot studies to calibrate search string [2, 11, 29]; (ii) using snowballing [2, 28]; (iii) adopting broad search engines
(e.g., Scopus, Google Scholar) [2, 11, 29]; and (iv) combining automatic/manual searches [29]. Hence, the 15 speciﬁc
goals represent the critical points in the SLR process that deserve more attention from researchers.

In Step 3, we generated clusters of speciﬁc goals that address the same issues, resulting in ﬁve process areas (detailed
in Section 4). For example, those speciﬁc goals associated with the deﬁnition of strategies for searching studies were
assigned to the process area of Project Planning (PP). Hence, these areas represent broad topics that, when satisﬁed,
could contribute to improving the maturity of the SLR process. It is also worth highlighting we performed Steps 1, 2,
and 3 considering evidence from the literature and also our long-term experience researching, conducting, and updating
SLR. Finally, in Step 4, we analyzed the process areas and organized them into four levels. For this, we inspired
ourselves on CMMI [25] to derive the MM4SLR levels. The next section presents an overview of the process areas,
respective speciﬁc goals, and key practices.

4 Process Areas, Goals, and Practices

Table 1 presents the ﬁve process areas, 15 speciﬁc goals, and 46 key practices.

Project Planning (PP) is the ﬁrst area and covers the entire SLR planning, which deﬁnes how the review will be
conducted. SLR planning concerns, for instance, the need for a review, the amount of resources needed (including
budget, time, and human resources), and the review protocol. Planning an SLR is critical because decisions at this
stage signiﬁcantly impact the entire process. Due to the importance of this stage and its inherent complexity, it makes
sense to deﬁne PP as a process area. To accomplish this process area, four speciﬁc goals (SG1 to SG4 of PP in Table
1) were deﬁned to ensure research coverage and relevance, create systematic ways to deﬁne strategies for searching
studies, and reduce the time and effort consumed. Besides, 12 practices exist associated with these goals, such as using
additional search (e.g., snowballing), comparing studies selected with gold standards or other secondary studies, or even
using independent experts to review the search process. However, it is worth highlighting that PP must go beyond only
ensuring that researchers will strictly follow the recommendations. Instead, it must be broader and addresses multiple
aspects of the SLR process, such as presenting solutions to improve the relevance and applicability of results for the
target audience, techniques for better managing resources, and different strategies for better disseminating results. This
means that PP can guide researchers in planning their reviews, avoiding common pitfalls and offering directions to
achieve results that impact their target audience positively.

Technical Support (TS) is another process area and refers to the adoption of supporting tools and search engines (of
databases) during the conduction and update of SLR. Hence, TS is essential to mitigate several problems such as the
high time consumption of SLR. Carver et al. [7] highlighted that the most time-consuming tasks are the search for
studies in databases, selection of studies, data extraction, and assessment of the quality of studies; these tasks have been
major concerns of the SLR community. Several speciﬁc tools were proposed to support these tasks (e.g., SLuRp [4],
SLR-tool [13]); nevertheless, the most used tools are still those generic ones (e.g., Excel, references managers) [1]. In
this sense, current speciﬁc tools for SLR can still be considered immature [19], and there is a need for international
collaboration to enhance and integrate them [12]. TS does not aim to recommend speciﬁc tools; instead, it states that it
is essential to adopt those tools that better ﬁt the researchers’ needs while a more mature process can be achieved. TS
has four associated practices that recommend using tools to support the SLR process as a whole.

Results Documentation (RD) is the process area that provides ways to create reliable and complete documentation of
the conducted SLR, aiming that SLR results effectively impact the target audience. To create such documentation, three
speciﬁc goals (SG1 to SG3 of RD) and six associated practices recommend, for instance, documenting in detail the
whole process, providing access to the entire raw data (for anyone that intends to replicate or update the SLR), and
performing broad searches to ensure the generalization of SLR results. RD also considers proposals that have already
been done to disseminate the SLR results better (e.g., rapid reviews). However, the SE community has still noticed the
lack of impact of the SLR results on SE practitioners [3] and has then proposed new strategies for SLR documentation
such as evidence brieﬁngs [6], mainly aiming to impact the industry. Hence, RD addresses the main issues regarding
SLR documentation, not only revisiting the traditional guidelines to report SLR but also depicting critical elements that
must be prioritized and better detailed while documenting SLR.

Process and Product Quality Assurance (PPQA) groups four speciﬁc goals (SG1 to SG4 of PPQA) and several practices
focused on improving the SLR quality. In particular, these practices aim to mitigate bias in the SLR process, such as
handling inconsistencies, ensuring the validity of results, ensuring the reliability of venues and studies analyzed, and
avoiding bias in data extraction. PPQA states that it is necessary to have a systematic and quality-driven way to deal
with SLR problems and assures that researchers follow it. Many of these practices can require extra effort, but PPQA
can contribute to ensuring the quality of SLR, which is nowadays a recurrent concern of the SE community.

4

Towards a Maturity Model for Systematic Literature Review Process

A PREPRINT

Table 1: Process Areas, Speciﬁc Goals, and Key Practices to the SLR Process Improvement

Process areas (PA)

Speciﬁc Goals (SG)

Key Practices (SP)

Project planning (PP)

SG1 - Ensure that search process adequately
identiﬁes all relevant primary studies

SG2 - Adopt systematic methods to create
search strategy

SG3 - Ensure research relevance

SG4 - Develop strategies to reduce time and
effort consumed

Technical Support (TS)

SG1 - Adopt support tools

Results
Documentation (RD)

SG1 - Provide a reliable and careful docu-
mentation

SG2 - Ensure repeatability of the process

SG3 - Ensure study generalizability

SG1 - Develop strategies to handle inconsis-
tencies

Process and Product
Quality Assurance
(PPQA)

SG2 - Ensure results validity

SG3 - Ensure reliability of venues and stud-
ies

SG4 - Avoid bias in data extraction/synthesis

SG1 - Deﬁne a solid strategy to solve con-
ﬂicts with research group

SG2 - Use multiple opinions to double-
check results and decisions

SG3 - Consult authors to interpret results

Communication
Management (CM)

SP1.1 - Perform pilot search to train the search string [2, 29, 11]
SP1.2 - Use snowballing technique [2, 28]
SP1.3 - Use broad searches or generic search engines to identify relevant publication [2, 29]
SP1.4 - Combine automatic search and manual search [29]
SP2.1 - Adopt an speciﬁc strategy to systematically build search string [2]
SP2.2 - Compare the list of primary studies to golden standards or other secondary studies [2]
SP3.1 - Discuss and brainstorm among authors about the motivation for research questions [2, 29]
SP3.2 - Consult the target audience before setting the research goals [2]
SP3.3 - Use an independent expert to review your search process[29, 2, 14]
SP3.4 - Search exhaustively related work [2]
SP4.1 - Reuse components from other SLR [28, 2]
SP4.2 - Follow an iterative process[14, 11]
SP1.1 - Apply tools to support the conduction/update process [2, 28]
SP1.2 - Consider search engines peculiarities reducing the number of mistakes [29]
SP1.3 - Use multiple databases and tools to execute queries on the different sources [29]
SP1.4 - Use tools for bibliography management [2]
SP1.1 - Evaluate/ document search results and document the outcomes [2, 14]
SP1.2 - During the paper screening phase, document the reasons for the inclusion/exclusion
decision [29, 5]
SP2.1 - Make all data collected public [2]
SP2.2 - Document the whole process including protocol items and deviations during conduction
[14, 2, 29]
SP3.1 - Perform a broad search without an initial starting date and document the exact period
covered [2, 5]
SP3.2 - Compare the ﬁndings with existing studies [2]
SP1.1 - Develop strategies to handle duplicated studies (keep newer version or journal version)
[2]
SP1.2 - Read introduction to avoid misinterpretations during the screening phase [29]
SP1.3 - Use summaries to guarantee the correct identiﬁcation of duplication’s [2]
SP1.4 - Check papers twice to detect and remove duplication’s [29]
SP2.1 - Draw conclusion based on trends [2, 14]
SP2.2 - Use quality of primary studies to draw conclusions [2]
SP2.3 - Deﬁne quality thresholds [2]
SP2.4 - Focus your search on quality venues to ensure validity of extracted data [2]
SP2.5 - Use quality assessment as an inclusion criterion [2, 14]
SP2.6 - Use statistics to assess the validity of primary studies and their impact [2, 14]
SP3.1 - Select known venues/Digital Libraries or use select speciﬁc publication venues [2]

SP4.1 - Involve more than one researcher and include experienced stakeholders [14, 2, 28, 29]
SP4.2- Conduct reliability checks (post-SLR surveys with experts) [2]
SP4.3 - Use statistics to process quantitative data [2]
SP4.4 - Perform sensitivity analysis [2, 14]
SP4.5- Use formal synthesis methods [2]
SP1.1 - Use systematic voting to include or exclude studies [2]
SP1.2 - Solve conﬂicts discussing with the authors [29, 2]
SP1.3 - Perform pilot data extraction to test agreement between researchers [2, 29]
SP1.4 - Use kappa statistic to identify experts disagreement [2, 14]
SP2.1 - Discuss selection criteria among authors, revise them after pilot iterations [29, 2]
SP2.2 - Perform random screening among all authors [2, 14]
SP2.3 - Perform paper screening to cross-check data extraction [2, 14]
SP3.1 - Discuss and brainstorm among authors to reach possible interpretations of the ﬁndings
[2, 29]

Communication Management (CM) is a process area that handles communication among researchers involved in the
SLR conduction. The need for communication is not a novelty in the SLR process because when communication is
poorly managed, it can directly impact several aspects of SLR, including quality. Hence, CM outlines eight practices
that improve communication and solve conﬂicts among researchers (who are conducting SLR); for instance, using
systematic voting, adopting kappa statistics, brainstorming possible interpretations of ﬁndings, and cross-checking
data extracted from studies. CM provides means to gather and report insights from different perspectives, making the
contributions of SLR much more valuable for researchers and practitioners. Therefore, we advocate that CM is essential
to aid researchers in comprehending their role and make their participation effective in the entire SLR process.

Considering the process areas aforementioned, speciﬁc goals, and key practices, the next section presents the initial
version of MM4SLR.

5 Maturity Model for SLR Process

We inspired ourselves in the staged representation of CMMI to present MM4SLR. As illustrated in Figure 2, MM4SLR
contains four stages: Initial, Managed, Deﬁned, In optimization. Each stage represents a maturity level associated with
process areas, which contain a set of practices that could improve the SLR process. For instance, researchers must cover
the process areas PP, TS, and RD in their SLR process, aiming their process to have a given maturity level to ﬁt in Level

5

Towards a Maturity Model for Systematic Literature Review Process

A PREPRINT

2 (Managed). Next, we describe each maturity level, its characteristics, and the justiﬁcation of process areas allocated
in each level.

Figure 2: Maturity Model for SLR Process

Level 1 – Initial: At this level, the SLR process is “chaotic” with no clear methodology. It means that researchers do
not apply systematically recommended practices during the SLR conduction or neglect the use of techniques, methods,
and tools. At the same time, the quality of SLR is not a concern. We recognize that researchers can be applying some of
those practices but not accomplishing all concerns addressed by the process areas to make it possible for the advance of
their SLR process to the next level. No process area is associated with this level.

Level 2 – Managed: The main concern of this level is the management of the SLR process. This level addresses three
process areas: PP (which deals with SLR planning), TS (which refers to the adoption of supporting tools), and RD
(which concerns the SLR documentation). This means that the SLR process accomplishes requirements towards its
maturity and, hence, it can be considered managed. Despite that, the assurance of SLR quality is not the focus at this
level. Thus, the quality of SLR is often unpredictable and can vary depending on the abilities of the researchers involved.
The reliability of results can also be questionable, and many efforts are often needed to audit or replicate SLR.

Level 3 – Deﬁned: The main focus of this level is to assure the SLR quality. To fulﬁll the requirements for this level,
the SLR process must address two process areas: PPQA (which refers to quality assurance) and CM (which deals with
the communication). The SLR process itself becomes responsible for ensuring the SLR quality rather than depending
on the researchers’ skill. At this level, researchers apply practices to minimize bias, and handling inconsistencies
becomes a major concern. Many practices refer to double-checking SLR activities or running assessments, such as the
quality appraisal of primary studies and sensitivity analysis. CM is also assigned to this level because a well-deﬁned
and successful process clearly deﬁnes how communication among involved researchers occurs, including the way to
gather multiple perspectives from researchers and check agreements (and even disagreements) among researchers in
each activity contained in the SLR process.

Level 4 - In Optimization: At this level, the SLR process presents the highest level of maturity in which researchers
are concerned with continuously evaluating and improving their SLR process. SLR process at this level also produces
SLR that are living elements in the sense they are constantly updated and improved. It means that the researchers’
responsibility must not ﬁnish when they publish the SLR results, i.e., researchers must keep such results useful (updating
them) for a long-term period and keep the value of SLR results. There are still no speciﬁc practices, goals, or process
areas that focus on optimizing the SLR process and SLR themselves. Therefore, this particular level is an insightful
proposition that this work provides.

The following section discusses possible uses of MM4SLR, limitations, and future work.

6 Discussion

Well-deﬁned and well-known guidelines and process to conduct SLR exist [16] but most researchers do not follow them
systematically. At the same time, they are increasingly conducting and publishing SLR without much concern for the
quality of the process and product (i.e., SLR results). This scenario should be a concern of the SE community that
researches SLR. We also believe that several problems in the SLR process should be examined from an integrated novel
perspective. Motivated by this scenario, the idea of a maturity model for the context of SLR (i.e., MM4SLR) seems to
be relevant.

From a broader view, we believe that most SLR processes used to conduct SLR reported in the literature are in Levels
1 or 2 of MM4SLR. This means these processes seem to be chaotic (Level 1) or somehow managed (Level 2). We
also believe that few processes could be in Level 3, meaning that their authors are concerned with the quality of both

6

Towards a Maturity Model for Systematic Literature Review Process

A PREPRINT

processes and SLR. On the other hand, SLR processes in Level 4 have not been experimented yet. Besides characterizing
SLR processes being used, MM4SLR allows researchers to evaluate which practices they used in previous work and
understand which ones could be further adopted to mature their process. Hence, MM5SLR can shed light on a new
perspective capable of organizing practices proposed for SLR in a comprehensible and understandable way. MM4SLR
intends to open the mind of the SE community or other communities that have conducted SLR to a new staged view
that can characterize better the process being used to conduct SLR.

From the ﬁrst version presented in this paper, MM4SLR needs to be reﬁned. It is also worth highlighting that Table
1 does not intend to provide an exhaustive list of process areas, goals, and practices. Other areas can emerge after
more investigations. Similarly, practices proposed for SLR are in constant evolution; consequently, MM4SLR needs to
be updated to comprise new practices or reorganize or remove them. Hence, it is important to note that, as with any
maturity model (like CMMI for software development), MM4SLR needs to evolve continuously.

MM4SLR also requires that researchers prioritize adopting more effective practices since many of them have similar
objectives (e.g., electronic search, manual search or snowballing). Applying all practices simultaneously will possibly
make the work too expensive or even unfeasible.

To get started with this new research topic, there is a long research agenda that can be summarized as follows:

• Evaluation of MM4SLR: MM4SLR needs to be evaluated to verify: (i) the completeness, correctness, and coherence
of process areas and their respective goals and practices; and (ii) the correct distribution of process areas over the
maturity levels;

• Application of MM4SLR: An essential next step is to apply MM4SLR in the conduction of diverse SLR and also
observe its applicability, feasibility, and impact of using MM4SLR to improve the maturity of the SLR process and
mainly the quality of resulting SLR; and

• Evolution of MM4SLR: The maturity model needs to be continuously evolved following the evolution of the SLR as a
research area. In particular, new process areas, goals, and practices can be further incorporated. We also foresee that
MM4SLR can evolve by incorporating generic goals and generic practices, i.e., those goals and practices that could
better work for multiple applications of the SLR process independently from the preference of researchers.

7 Final Remarks

This vision paper introduces the idea of a maturity model for the SLR process (whose acronym we deﬁned as MM4SLR).
We recognize that MM4SLR is an ambitious idea that will require a change in the mindset of the evidence-based
software engineering (EBSE) community regarding a novel view of addressing the SLR process. Our intention with
this paper is to raise awareness about the importance of characterizing the SLR process in different maturity levels
and provide a pragmatic way to improve its maturity. Deﬁning this maturity model may be an essential step to better
deal with the current barriers that hinder SLR from achieving their objective and, ultimately, impacting stakeholders,
particularly the industry interested in the SLR results. Finally, answering our initial research question, we believe it is
worth investing in a maturity model for the SLR process.

8 Acknowledgements

This study was supported by FAPESP (grants: 2015/24144-7, 2019/23663-1), Capes (grants: PROEX-11308091/D),
and CNPq (grant: 312634/2018-8).

References

[1] A. Al-Zubidy and J. C. Carver. Identiﬁcation and prioritization of SLR search tool requirements: an SLR and a

survey. Empirical Software Engineering, 24(1):139–169, 2018.

[2] A. Ampatzoglou, S. Bibi, P. Avgeriou, M. Verbeek, and A. Chatzigeorgiou. Identifying, categorizing and mitigating
threats to validity in software engineering secondary studies. Information and Software Technology, 106:201–230,
2019.

[3] D. Badampudi, C. Wohlin, and T. Gorschek. Contextualizing research evidence through knowledge translation in
software engineering. In 23rd Int. Conf. on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE), pages
306–311, 2019.

7

Towards a Maturity Model for Systematic Literature Review Process

A PREPRINT

[4] D. Bowes, T. Hall, and S. Beecham. Slurp: A tool to help large complex systematic literature reviews deliver valid
and rigorous results. In 2nd International Workshop on Evidential Assessment of Software Technologies (EAST),
page 33–36, 2012.

[5] D. Budgen, P. Brereton, S. Drummond, and N. Williams. Reporting systematic reviews: Some lessons from a

tertiary study. Information and Software Technology, 95:62–74, 2018.

[6] B. Cartaxo, G. Pinto, and S. Soares. The role of rapid reviews in supporting decision-making in software
engineering practice. In 22nd Int. Conf. on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE), pages
24–34, 2018.

[7] J. Carver, E. Hassler, E. Hernandes, and N. Kraft. Identifying barriers to the systematic literature review process.

In 7th Int. Symp. on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM), pages 203–212, 2013.

[8] M. Chrissis, M. Konrad, and S. Shrum. CMMI for development. Addison-Wesley Educational, Boston, MA, 3

edition, 2011.

[9] J. Crawford. Project Management Maturity Model. Auerbach Publications, 2021.
[10] D. Cruzes and T. Dybå. Synthesizing evidence in software engineering research. In 4th Int. Symp. on Empirical

Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM), pages 1–10, 2010.

[11] S. Fabbri, K. Felizardo, F. Ferrari, E. Hernandes, F. Octaviano, E. Nakagawa, and J. Maldonado. Externalising

tacit knowledge of the systematic review process. IET Software, 7(6):298–307, Dec. 2013.

[12] K. Felizardo and J. Carver. Automating systematic literature review. In M. Felderer and G. Travassos, editors,

Contemporary Empirical Methods in Software Engineering, pages 327–355. Springer, 2020.

[13] A. Fernández-Sáez, M. Bocco, and F. Romero. Slr-tool - A tool for performing systematic literature reviews. In

2nd Int. Conf. on Software and Data Technologie (ICSOFT), pages 157–166, 2010.

[14] B. Kitchenham. Guidelines for performing systematic literature reviews in software engineering. Technical report,

Keele University, 2007.

[15] B. Kitchenham, P. Brereton, Z. Li, D. Budgen, and A. Burn. Repeatability of systematic literature reviews. In

15th Annual Conf. on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE), pages 46–55, 2011.

[16] B. Kitchenham, D. Budgen, and P. Brereton. Evidence-based software engineering and systematic reviews,

volume 4. CRC press, Boca Raton, USA, 2015.

[17] M. Kuhrmann, D. Fernández, and M. Daneva. On the pragmatic design of literature studies in software engineering:

an experience-based guideline. Empirical Software Engineering, 22(6):2852–2891, 2017.

[18] J. Lee, D. Lee, and S. Kang. An overview of the business process maturity model (BPMM). In Int. Conf. on

Web-Age Information Management (WAIM), LNCS, pages 384–395. 2007.

[19] C. Marshall and P. Brereton. Tools to support systematic literature reviews in software engineering: A mapping

study. In Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM), pages 296–299, 2013.

[20] E. Mendes, W. C., K. Felizardo, and M. Kalinowski. When to update systematic literature reviews in software

engineering. Journal of Systems and Software, 167:110607, 2020.

[21] E. Mendes, C. Wohlin, K. Felizardo, and M. Kalinowski. When to update systematic literature reviews in software

engineering. Journal of Systems and Software, 167:110607, 2020.

[22] M. Niazi. Do systematic literature reviews outperform informal literature reviews in the software engineering

domain? an initial case study. Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering, 40(3):845–855, 2015.

[23] M. C. Paulk. A history of the capability maturity model for software. ASQ Software Quality Professional,

12(1):5–19, 2009.

[24] L. Shen, X. Du, G. Cheng, and X. Wei. Capability maturity model (CMM) method for assessing the performance

of low-carbon city practice. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 87:106549, 2021.

[25] C. P. Team. Cmmi for development, version 1.3. Technical Report CMU/SEI-2010-TR-033, Software Engineering

Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 2010.

[26] W. Watanabe, K. Felizardo, A. Candido, E. Souza, J. Campos Neto, and N. Vijaykumar. Reducing efforts of
software engineering systematic literature reviews updates using text classiﬁcation. Information and Software
Technology, 128:106395, Dec. 2020.

[27] R. Wendler. The maturity of maturity model research: A systematic mapping study. Information and Software

Technology, 54(12):1317–1339, 2012.

8

Towards a Maturity Model for Systematic Literature Review Process

A PREPRINT

[28] C. Wohlin, E. Mendes, K. Felizardo, and M. Kalinowski. Guidelines for the search strategy to update systematic

literature reviews in software engineering. Information and Software Technology, 127:106366, 2020.

[29] X. Zhou, J. Yuqin, H. Zhang, S. Li, and X. Huang. A map of threats to validity of systematic literature reviews in
software engineering. In Asia-Paciﬁc Software Engineering Conference (APSEC), pages 153–160, 2016.

9

