manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Discrete Stochastic Optimization for Public Health

Interventions with Constraints

Zewei Li · James C. Spall

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract Many public health threats exist, motivating the need to ﬁnd optimal interven-

tion strategies. Given the stochastic nature of the threats (e.g., the spread of pandemic

inﬂuenza, the occurrence of drug overdoses, and the prevalence of alcohol-related threats),

deterministic optimization approaches may be inappropriate. In this paper, we implement

a stochastic optimization method to address aspects of the 2009 H1N1 and the COVID-19

pandemics, with the spread of disease modeled by the open source Monte Carlo simulations,

FluTE and Covasim, respectively. Without testing every possible option, the objective of the

optimization is to determine the best combination of intervention strategies so as to result

in minimal economic loss to society. To reach our objective, this application-oriented paper

uses the discrete simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation method (DSPSA), a

recursive simulation-based optimization algorithm, to update the input parameters in the

disease simulation software so that the output iteratively approaches minimal economic

loss. Assuming that the simulation models for the spread of disease (FluTE for H1N1 and

Covasim for COVID-19 in our case) are accurate representations for the population being

studied, the simulation-based strategy we present provides decision makers a powerful tool

to mitigate potential human and economic losses from any epidemic. The basic approach is

also applicable in other public health problems, such as opioid abuse and drunk driving.

Zewei Li
Northwestern University
Evanston, U.S.A
E-mail: zeweili2025@u.northwestern.edu

James C. Spall
The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
Laurel, U.S.A
E-mail: James.Spall@jhuapl.edu

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

7
2

]

C
O
.
h
t
a
m

[

1
v
4
3
6
3
1
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Zewei Li, James C. Spall

Keywords Discrete Optimization · Gradient-Free · Simultaneous Perturbation (SPSA) ·

Stochastic Optimization · H1N1 · COVID-19

1 Introduction

Numerous public health problems (e.g. global pandemic inﬂuenza, prescription drug over-

doses, and obesity) continuously threaten people’s lives, and ﬁnding optimal intervention

strategies for many of these threats can be formulated as an optimization problem. As an

example, by limiting the amount of opioids prescribed, regulating drug prices, and lecturing

about the dangers of overdosing, professionals aim to ﬁnd values that minimize costs related

to opioid overdoses. Moreover, public safety entities can optimize speed limits on highways,

locations of traﬃc lights, and traﬃc light cycles to ﬁnd settings that minimize motor vehicle

accidents. Solving public health optimization problems presents several challenges, including

devising objective functions to compare the eﬀectiveness of diﬀerent strategies and utilizing

suitable algorithms to optimize results under noisy measurement values since the inherent

randomness involved. The main goal of this paper is to demonstrate some applications of

a discrete stochastic optimization algorithm in determining optimal intervention strategies

to yield minimal economic losses in the face of public health threats. Our focus below is on

two infectious disease: inﬂuenza and COVID-19.

Researchers in the ﬁeld of epidemiology have attempted to solve optimization problems

related to pandemics in several ways. Prosser et al. [23] evaluated the cost-eﬀectiveness of

the H1N1 vaccination across the United States in terms of the incremental cost-eﬀectiveness

ratio (ICER) and reported that vaccinating only children and working-age adults is more

cost-eﬀective compared to other vaccination strategies. Khazeni et al. [15] measured the

cost-eﬀectiveness of H1N1 vaccinations for New York City by infections, death averted, and

qualiﬁed adjusted life-years, revealing that early vaccination is more cost eﬀective relative

to late vaccination. Piguillem and Shi [22] understood the optimal response to COVID-

19 as a welfare maximization problem of a planner, and observed that extreme measures

like mandatory quarantines seemed optimal for various curvatures of the welfare function.

They also found that testing is a very close substitute of quarantine and can substantially

reduce the need for indiscriminate quarantines. Hoertel et al. [13] evaluated the potential

impact of quarantine duration, quarantine lifting type, post-quarantine screening, and use of

a hypothetical eﬀective treatment against COVID-19 with a microsimulation model. They

Discrete Stochastic Optimization for Public Health Interventions with Constraints

3

projected that a two-step lifting of a quarantine according to age substantially lowered cu-

mulative mortality and incidence. Charpentier et al. [7] conducted a tractable quantitative

analysis of the impact of lockdowns and detection interventions using an extended SIR model

(Susceptible, Infectious, and Recovered compartment model) for COVID-19, identifying the

optimal lockdown policy to be an intervention structured in four successive phases.

In the studies reviewed above, researchers mainly conducted sensitive analyses over a

small range of candidate intervention strategies chosen on the basis of their prior knowledge

and then selected the optimal one. Some researchers implemented a numerical algorithm to

ﬁnd the optimal set of intervention parameters, but that was based on a model with trans-

mission dynamic of the pandemic governed by some known deterministic functions [24]. As

discrete event simulation (DES) models can test assumptions at low cost and observe poten-

tial outcomes of decisions prior to implementation [12], they can be useful tool for our goal

to develop improvement strategies. Among them, stochastic agent-based simulations can

incorporate individual characteristics and person-to-person contact networks. Deterministic

optimization algorithm will no longer be proper for such models as we only observe noisy

measurement values and the dynamics can be complex and unknown. Paleshi et al. [20]

implemented an agent-based model to simulate the spread of disease and optimized with

a ranking and selection procedure called NSGS [19] to ﬁnd a strategy on school closure

and home conﬁnement that minimized the eﬀects of pandemic inﬂuenza. However, with the

development of computational epidemiology, more factors can be taken into consideration

in the construction of agent-based models. Simulating every feasible solution in ranking and

selection algorithms becomes too computationally costly for high dimensional problems.

Therefore, we employ a stochastic model and stochastic optimization method to estimate

the optimal strategy among all possible options without testing every single one.

Our goal to determine the optimal strategy motivates the question of how to measure

the performance of an intervention strategy. We use a dynamic model built by [5] in our

application concerning 2009 H1N1 and an agent-based model developed by [14] in our appli-

cation concerning COVID-19. These two models simulate the spread of those two infectious

diseases in a given population using transmission parameters estimated from historical data.

The performance of each input intervention strategy is evaluated by its respective simulation

outcome. The models are Monte Carlo simulations to reﬂect the uncertainties surrounding

the transmission of infectious disease. Therefore, optimization of these kinds of problems can

only be performed with noisy measurements of the actual performance. In addition, because

4

Zewei Li, James C. Spall

the decision variables are discretely valued, the discrete simultaneous perturbation stochas-

tic approximation method (DSPSA) is suitable for this problem. An early study conducted

by [36] obtained the optimal intervention strategy by using DSPSA in simpliﬁed settings.

In contrast, one modiﬁcation of this report is the manner in which the intervention param-

eters are transformed in order to achieve better convergence in a relative small number of

iterations. We also use an improved approach for computing the inﬂuenza-related cost and

update the values into dollars of current purchasing power aligned with the Consumer Price

Index [4]. As noted in [34], non-constrained cases are rare in stochastic optimization, so we

address the constraints with appropriate projection functions. We will discuss the projection

function that is used to address the parameter constraints in Section 2 of this paper.

Our paper is organized as follows. First, we describe the DSPSA algorithm and discuss

how to choose the gain sequence in a discrete high noise setting. Next, we introduce an

application of the algorithm to the 2009 H1N1 pandemic, including the choice of simulator,

the construction of the loss function, the transformation of input parameters, and some

numerical results. Then we show a second application of the algorithm to the COVID-19

pandemic in the same manner. Finally, we discuss the potential real world interpretation

of the ﬁnal solution and oﬀer ideas about how similar approaches can be applied in ana-

lyzing the optimal intervention strategy for other public health problems. While this paper

is not oriented toward breaking new methodological ground, it does demonstrate some of

the nontrivial considerations involved in the application of a powerful method in stochastic

optimization in an important real-world problem.

2 Constrained DSPSA Algorithm

The DSPSA algorithm was introduced to solve discrete stochastic optimization problems

in [35]. Suppose θ ∈ Zp, where Z = {· · · , −1, 0, 1, · · · }. Our goal is to ﬁnd a parameter θ

that minimizes the loss function L(θ), given some constrained domain Θ; i.e.,

min
θ∈Θ

L(θ)

(1)

Adding a restriction is equivalent to adding a projection function that maps the original

θ to a subset Θ ⊂ Zp. When the constraint is a well-deﬁned range, we can easily deﬁne

the projection Ψ as a piecewise linear function. For example, when each component of

θ = (t1, t2, . . . , tp)T has a lower bound and an upper bound, li ≤ ti ≤ ui, i = 1, . . . , p, the

Discrete Stochastic Optimization for Public Health Interventions with Constraints

5

projection can be represented as

Ψ(ti) =






li

ti

ti < li

li ≤ ti < ui

ui − τ

ti ≥ ui

(2)

where τ > 0 is a very small number, and is used to ensure the correctness of the DSPSA

algorithm. Suppose y(θ) is a noisy measurement of L(θ); i.e., y(θ) = L(θ) + (cid:15)(θ), (cid:15)(θ) is

the noise. The DSPSA method uses y(θ) to ﬁnd the minimum of L(θ). Wang [34] gives a

complete description of the theory and extends DSPSA to the case of a bounded domain.

The algorithm is described below:

Step 1: Pick an initial guess ˆθ0 ∈ Zp, and set k = 0.

Step 2: Generate the random perturbation vector ∆k = (∆k1, ∆k2, · · · , ∆kp)T , where the

∆ki are independent Bernoulli random variables taking values ±1, each with probability

1/2, in this project. (Certain non-Bernoulli discrete distributions for ∆k may also be used

±
as long as ˆθ
k in step 4 takes on valid integer values.)

Step 3: Let π(ˆθk) = (cid:98)Ψ(ˆθk)(cid:99) + 1p/2, where 1p is a p-dimensional vector with all compo-
nents being unity, and (cid:98)Ψ(ˆθk)(cid:99) denotes the ﬂoor of all components (round down to nearest
integer). Note that π(ˆθk) is the middle point of a hypercube that contains ˆθk with all corner

points lying in Zp

±
Step 4: Evaluate y at the points ˆθ

k = π(ˆθk) ± ∆k/2, and form the estimate of the

sub-gradient ˆgk(ˆθk) such that

ˆgk(ˆθk) = (y(ˆθ

k ) − y(ˆθ

k ))∆−1
k ,

+

−

(3)

where ∆−1

k = (∆−1

k1 , ∆−1

k2 , · · · , ∆−1

kp )T and [·] is the round operator applied to all components

of the argument vector.

Step 5: Update ˆθk+1 according to

ˆθk+1 = ˆθk − ak ˆgk(ˆθk)

(4)

where ak = a/(1 + A + k)α is the gain sequence, a > 0, A ≥ 0, and 0.5 < α ≤ 1. Either

terminate the algorithm or set k = k + 1 and return to Step 2.

Step 6: After the terminal iteration (say, k = M ), set the approximated optimal solution

to be [Ψ(ˆθM )].

6

Zewei Li, James C. Spall

Suppose that θ∗ is the unique minimal point of L(θ). By [35], under some common

conditions of stochastic approximation algorithms, strong convergence of ˆθk to θ∗ holds for

the algorithm described above. Therefore, given a credible Monte Carlo simulation, we can

obtain the optimal intervention strategy that minimizes the societal cost from the algorithm

even though we only have noisy measurement values from a simulation.

3 Application to 2009 H1N1

3.1 Choice of epidemic model

In this application, we use a real-time agent-based inﬂuenza model (FluTE) developed by [5]

to simulate the spread of inﬂuenza across major metropolitan areas. An agent-based model

focuses on individual behavior. Individual agents with diﬀerent demographic characteris-

tics are programmed to behave and interact with other individuals in diﬀerent ways, which

makes the model more realistic than models based on aggregated responses.

FluTE is freely available at https://www.cs.unm.edu/∼dlchao/ﬂute/. It provides high

ﬂexibility over a variety of factors, including pre-existing immunity, vaccine eﬃcacy, re-

sponse delay, vaccination fraction, and antiviral policy, among other factors. The relation-

ship of these factors to one another is of such complexity that real-time simulation models

oﬀer a better approach to investigate the population-level eﬀects of mitigation strategies in

comparison to analytic models.

In order to obtain the noisy measurement y, we ﬁrst run FluTE with the perturbations

of current estimate ˆθk, which produces a summary in text format. The summary contains

demographic features of the simulated population, a record of the chosen intervention strate-

gies, and the outcome statistics, including the number of vaccines and antiviral agents used

and the total number of symptomatic individuals corresponding to diﬀerent age and risk

groups. We then calculate monetary loss using these outcomes.

3.2 Choice of Optimization Parameters and Transformation

We choose the optimization parameters to be vaccination fraction (F ), vaccination priorities

(a row vector, P), antiviral policy (A) and school closure weeks (S ). As DSPSA only works

with integer vectors, we discretize and map the decision parameters θ = (F , P, A, S )T into

integer vectors. Vaccination fraction (F ) is a scalar parameter taking real values between 0

Discrete Stochastic Optimization for Public Health Interventions with Constraints

7

and 1 and corresponding to the fraction of people to be vaccinated among each population

group that is assigned vaccines. For economic eﬃciency, we test for values of this fraction less

than 1 as we hope to achieve herd immunity by vaccinating only a fraction of population. We

discretize the interval [0,1] into 0, 0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1.0, divide the values by 0.1 and convert them

into integers 0, 1, 2, . . . , 10. This parameter will be mapped back to the feasible domain of

[0,1] when we run FluTE. Vaccine priorities (P) is a row vector of ﬁve integers, representing

the vaccine priority for ﬁve categories of individuals. Though FluTE enables diﬀerential

vaccine priorities setup for at most thirteen groups of individuals, some groups are included

as part of other groups; for example, the pregnant women group is a subset of the young

adults group (ages 19–29) and the older adults group (ages 30–64). Such overlap violates

the basic assumption for the convergence of DSPSA, which requires L(θ) to have a unique

minimal point. Also for the goal of understanding which age group aﬀects the eﬃciency of

the intervention strategy the most, we only focus on the ﬁve non-overlapping categories that

are grouped solely based on age, setting no speciﬁc priority for the other eight categories,

which corresponds to setting their priorities as 0 by the software. To facilitate convergence,

we have 3 indicate the highest priority, 2 be the next-highest priority, 1 indicates the third-

highest priority, and 0 represent no vaccination for that group. For antiviral policy (A)

and school closure weeks (S ), we use the same rule as that of [35], where A ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}

(0: “none”, 1: “treatment only”, 2: “HHTAP100”, 3:“HHTAP”, where HHTAP means that

household members all get prescribed drugs if one member is ascertained and HHTAP100

to be a special option for LA county: drugs can go to the ﬁrst 100 households that have a

member ascertained), S ∈ {0, 1, · · · } represents the number of weeks for school closure.

3.3 Loss Function

Although vaccination, antiviral medicines and school closure are all eﬀective for inﬂuenza

prevention and mitigation, we must also consider the cost they incur. This guides us in

the construction of loss function, which should contain the investment on prevention and

treatment and health beneﬁt loss incurred from infection as well as the possible hidden

loss (e.g. cost from side eﬀects of vaccines). We formulate the loss function in the following

8

general format:

Zewei Li, James C. Spall

L(θ) = E[Medication Cost(θ) + Vaccination Cost(θ) + Antiviral Cost(θ)

+ School Closure Cost(θ) + Death Cost(θ)]

Note that at a ﬁxed value of θ, the argument inside the [·] above is random due to

the inherent unpredictability in cost response. The expectation operator forms the av-

erage over these random costs at the speciﬁed value of θ. Medication consists of two

parts: non-hospitalized and hospitalized medications for inﬂuenza and its complications.

Non-hospitalized medication cost is deﬁned to be the summation of the cost of over-the

counter (OTC) medications, physician visit cost for uncomplicated inﬂuenza (cost for pre-

scription drugs included), physical visit cost for otitis media, and physician visit cost for

non-hospitalized pneumonia, where otitis and pneumonia are complications of inﬂuenza.

We assume both that all symptomatic individuals will use OTC medicine and that the age

distribution in our synthetic city is proportional to the 2000 U.S. census [28], on which

FluTE is based and which diﬀers no more than 2.5% from the population makeup in the

2010 census [29] for our age groups of interest. The probabilities of the above four types of

non-hospitalization medication and their corresponding costs of each age group are available

in Tables S1 and Table S2 of [23]. These tables also provide diﬀerent percentages of infection

and costs for high risk and low risk people. We follow their guidelines accordingly, but some

of their age group categories are diﬀerent from that of the FluTE. Therefore, we transform

the data provided in [23], with age categories adjusted according to the age distribution

provided by [28].

We calculate the hospitalized medication cost as the expectation of the total expense for

all infected people who required hospital or ICU care. Chao et al. [6] suggests the division

of each age group of symptomatic people into two risk-based subgroups: high risk and low

risk, where symptomatic high risk individuals have a higher rate of being hospitalized. We

employ the hospitalization ratio shown in Web Table 7 of [6] and follow [15]’s estimate that

hospitalized individuals required ﬁve days of hospital care and that 10% of hospitalized

patients required ten days of ICU care. According to Table 1 in [15], the average cost of hos-

pitalization and ICU are $2430 and $4960 per day per person, respectively, when adjusted

to 2019 dollars by multiplying the dollar amount by the ratio of 2019 CPI for medical care

and that of the year when the referenced amount is based [4].

Discrete Stochastic Optimization for Public Health Interventions with Constraints

9

Vaccination cost includes the cost of vaccines and the cost of vaccination-related ad-

verse events. The cost of vaccines is estimated as $40 (in 2019 dollars) per dose [36]. On

the other hand, vaccines can also incur medication costs from vaccination-related adverse

events, including systematic reactions, injection site reactions, anaphylaxis, and Guillain-

Barr syndrome [23]. The probability and cost of each event are estimated in Tables S1 and

Table S2 of [23]. The adjustment procedure is similar to what we did to the non-hospitalized

medication cost.

The total cost of antiviral agents is equal to the antiviral cost per dose times the number

of doses used. The antiviral cost per dose includes the production cost and dispensing cost,

which is approximately $74 (in 2019 dollars) per course [11]. The simulator outputs the total

number of antiviral agents used into the summary ﬁle. Multiplying this number by 74 gives

the antiviral treatment cost.

School closure cost is deﬁned to include the cost of making up classes and the cost of

the parents’ lost wages to take care of their children. We employ the cost for school closure

per day per students given by [11], which is $23 (in 2019 dollars), as the cost for making up

classes. For the cost incurred on parents’ lost wages, Halder et al. [11] estimate the average

wage of one person to be $980 (in 2019 dollars) weekly and Araz et al. [1] estimate the

number of days of work missed to be 2.5 for couples and 5 for single parents. Therefore,

school closure cost per student per day is calculated using the following formula:

School Closure Cost = Cost of Make Up Classes + Daily Wage of Parent

× Days Work Missed ×

1
5

The ﬁnal school closure cost per student per day is calculated to be $123 (after adjusting

to 2019 dollars). We then multiply this number by the number of students in each commu-

nity and by 5 to get the weekly school closing cost per community. Chao et al. [5] specify

the number of students in each community in FluTE. The number of communities can be

retrieved from the simulation summary ﬁle. The resulting school closing cost per week per

community is $221, 804, in 2019 dollars after we adjust the dollar amount by the ratio of

2019 General CPI to that of the year when the referenced amount is based [4]; therefore, we

expect the optimal school closing days to be very close or equal to 0 weeks (0 days).

We deﬁne the mortality loss to be the expected death cost, which has the following

10

formula:

Zewei Li, James C. Spall

Mortality Loss = Number of Symptomatic Individuals

× Fatality Ratio of Symptomatic Individual × Death Cost

The simulator outputs the total number of symptomatic individuals by age and the number

of symptomatic high-risk individuals by age into the summary ﬁle; both are vectors. By

subtracting the latter from the former, we can get the number of symptomatic non-high-

risk individuals by age. Chao et al. [6] give the fatality ratio by age and risk group in Web

Table 7. This table also shows that high-risk individuals have a higher fatality ratio than

non-risk individuals.

Molinari et al. [17] give the mortality loss in terms of both the value of a statistical life

(VSL) and the present value of future earnings. The VSL estimates the number of dollars

people are willing to pay for a certain number of reductions in mortality risks, whereas

the present value of future earnings reﬂects how much output society loses in dollar terms

when death occurs. In our context, the present value of future earnings better represents

the deﬁnition of death costs as it reﬂects the economic loss to society. Therefore, we employ

the data provided in Table 2 of [17], which are the present values of future earnings in 2003

dollars, and we adjust it to 2019 dollar values using historical CPI provided by [4].

3.4 Numerical Results

In this section, we present the numerical results of the performance of DSPSA algorithm.

The general setup is as follows. Our synthetic population consists of 99,617 people from 20

contiguous tracts of central Los Angeles County. To facilitate the possible duplication of

our experiment, we list the FIPS codes for the relevant tracts (FIPS codes specify the tract

within Los Angeles County chosen for the simulation) in Appendix B. For vaccine availabil-

ity, Chao et al. [6] gives a detailed U.S. pandemic H1N1 vaccine supply in its Web Table 3.

We follow their assumption that Los Angeles County receives 3.195% of the total supply for

the United States and that vaccine allocations after November 27, 2009 should be ignored. In

addition, we assume that the vaccine supply for our synthetic city is proportional to the Los

Angeles supply by population. We also set the initial inventory for all of the nine vaccines

to be 0. Chao et al. [6] argues that all vaccines will be available in Los Angeles County 9

days after the U.S. supply date. Thus, we construct a detailed delayed daily vaccine supply

Discrete Stochastic Optimization for Public Health Interventions with Constraints

11

table for our synthetic city, assuming that the simulation starts on September 1, 2009 and

ends 175 days (25 weeks) later.

The initial value for the optimization process is that no intervention policy is needed. This

value is expressed as ˆθ0 = (2, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0)T , which is equivalent to (0.5, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, none, 0)T

in terms of FluTE input. Following principles in section 7.5 of [25], section 3.3 of [34] pro-

vides the guidelines for coeﬃcient selection in the gain sequence ak = a/(1 + A + k)α. A is

recommended as 10% of the total number of iteration; α is recommended to take a value

approximately as small as formally allowed, and the value of a can be found numerically by
making the multiplication of a and the average magnitude of ˆg0(ˆθ0) equal to the desired
magnitude of change of ˆθk in early iterations. We set our number of iterations to be 10,000

and, following the guidelines above, we set A = 1000 and α = 0.501. For coeﬃcient a, we

ﬁnd an initial estimate a = 1.5.

Before running the algorithm for a large number of iterations, we test the common ran-

dom numbers (CRN) variance reduction technique [25, Chapter 14] for a small number of

iterations to determine whether it can improve the performance. Plots of trials reveal no

signiﬁcant improvement when using the CRNs. The lack of eﬀectiveness aligns with sep-

arate numerical experiments showing that no statistically signiﬁcant positive correlation

+
exists between y(ˆθ

k ) and y(ˆθ

renders the CRNs ineﬀective. A lack of synchronization in the two outputs y(ˆθ

−
k ) when using the same random number seed, a result that
−
k )

k ), y(ˆθ

+

from FluTE may be a possible reason for the lack of correlation. To bring this to light,

+
after some number of iterations, ˆθ
k may indicate that only one age group is prioritized in

receiving vaccines, while ˆθ

−
k indicates that two groups are prioritized. Then by the design

of the model, we need diﬀerent numbers of random variables in their simulations and ﬁxing

the same seed can only ensure partial alignment. Besides, we do not have the contribution

of the perturbation vector ∆k converging to zero in DSPSA, which is one of the conditions

that guarantees that CRNs aid in continuous variable versions of the SPSA algorithm. As a

result of little synchronization and the perturbation size not converging to zero, we do not

incorporate the CRNs technique into DSPSA in this application.

We ﬁrst check the reasonableness of applying the DSPSA algorithm by examining the

trends in total loss over the iterations. Fig. 1 illustrates the tendency of total loss over

10000 iteration steps averaged over 10 Monte Carlo trials. As there is an approximately

60% decrease in total loss relative to a strategy of no intervention, the DSPSA algorithm is

demonstrated to be suitable for seeking an optimal resource allocation in the epidemiological

12

Zewei Li, James C. Spall

Fig. 1: Change of Cost Averaged over 10 Runs Versus Number of Iterations

problem of interest here.

We then check the sensitivity of our simulation. In each trial, the solution greatly reduced

the total monetary cost from the initial guess. However, as the algorithm is based on noisy

measurement of L(θ), the noise level largely determines the reliability of the result. Fig. 2

shows the ﬂuctuation of a single trial, from which we can see that precise interpretation of

the result is a problem with a high-noise setting. If one strategy has a loss value L only

slightly below that of another strategy, such superiority might not be detected by the algo-

rithm in limited iterations. As a result, we may only obtain a set of good choice strategies,

but it is diﬃcult to discern the best strategy.

From the trials, we ﬁnd that the optimal vaccination strategy is to vaccinate solely the

school-age children and to vaccinate all of them. This result agrees with the conclusion

of [3], where vaccinating school-age children is the most eﬀective way to reduce the overall

inﬂuenza attack rate as well as the overall number of deaths. The result is derived as follows,

given the condition that pre-school, young adults, older adults, and the elderly will receive

no vaccine and that only school age children will receive vaccines, then we should target

to vaccinate 100% of them. Our purpose of setting a vaccination fraction is to vaccinate

only a proportion of the population to achieve herd immunity. Therefore, we want to verify

whether this proportion number follows the basic herd immunity threshold formula. From

[6], we know that the basic reproductive number R0 of H1N1 is 1.3, then the herd immunity

Discrete Stochastic Optimization for Public Health Interventions with Constraints

13

Fig. 2: Change of Cost in One Run Versus Number of Iterations

threshold for total population can be calculated as:

1 −

1
R0

= 1 −

1
1.3

= 23.1%

This number means that 23.1% of the total population should be vaccinated to achieve

herd immunity. Comparing to the optimal value above, the proportion of population that

actually gets vaccinated in the simulation of Fig.2 is:

number of school age children
total number of population

=

21, 976
99, 617

= 22.1%

The simulation optimization result is close to the analytical solution. We see that this

is the particular case when the school-age population is the dominating factor of H1N1

inﬂuenza transmission in a small population setup, and the optimal proportion of population

to vaccinate is that entire age group. This agrees with the argument in [16] that pushing high

vaccination coverage on school-age children is essential to building herd immunity for H1N1

inﬂuenza. Among four possible choices of antiviral policy, the optimal solution should be

HHTAP. This result is consistent with the result in [36], where they also assume an unlimited

antiviral agent supply. For school closure days, our initial guess of 0 weeks (0 days) is the

optimal solution as closing school cost is signiﬁcant compared to other parameters.

To determine the robustness of our solution, we carry out 500 independent Monte Carlo

14

Zewei Li, James C. Spall

simulation trials to get the noisy loss function values at the terminal iterate. Then we

estimate the mean and the variance of the terminal loss function value with the sample

mean and sample variance, and build an estimated 95% conﬁdence interval for the mean loss

function value from it, which is [3.75 × 106, 3.87 × 106]. Across the 500 trials, the minimum

noisy loss value is about 2.16 million, and the maximum noisy loss value is about 5.73

million. Then we compare the sample mean with average loss function values of optimal

intervention strategies suggested by other public health papers applied to the same L.A.

tracts. Halder et al. [11] supposed that a combination of antiviral policy (HHTAP) and

two weeks school closure was eﬀective for mitigating a pandemic inﬂuenza with 2009 H1N1

characteristics, and we compute the average noisy loss function value with such strategy

from 500 simulations, which is larger than $30.00 million. Prosser et al. [23] suggested that

vaccinating school age children and adults of age 30–40 would be most cost-eﬀective, and

the average loss function value for that strategy is about $4.41 million. Pasquini-Descomps

et al.[21] summarized that at least 60% of the population should be vaccinated, and we get

the average measurement value to be about $5.76 million. Khazeni et al. [15] claimed that

vaccinating 40% of population would be cost-saving; then we compute that the average cost

for such is about $5.14 million. Though strategies suggested by other papers are not based

on the same assumptions, we can see through the comparison that the optimal solution from

DSPSA has signiﬁcantly lower cost, which indicate that it is a reasonably good solution in

the setting of this paper. This comparison provides additional conﬁdence about the quality

of our optimal solution.

4 Application to COVID-19

4.1 Choice of epidemic model

We now consider the application of the above approach to COVID-19 prior to the availabil-

ity of vaccines. We use an agent-based simulator (Covasim) developed by [14] to model the

spread of the COVID-19 pandemic throughout a population. The model is freely available at

https://www.github.com/InstituteforDiseaseModeling/covasim, and it has some advantages

over other available models for the COVID-19 pandemic. Covasim incorporates randomness

in its simulation output, so it better captures the stochastic nature of the virus spread com-

pared to popular deterministic epidemic models like the Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered

Discrete Stochastic Optimization for Public Health Interventions with Constraints

15

(SIR) model. Covasim includes demographic information on age structure and population

size, and it builds a transmission network with multiple social layers, including households,

schools, workplaces, and communities to reﬂect individual contact in reality. Covasim also

supports an extensive set of interventions, which works for our goal to explore scenarios

under diﬀerent combination of intervention strategies (pre-vaccine).

To obtain the noisy measurement y, we ﬁrst run Covasim with the current estimate ˆθk.

Next, we collect some summary statistics from the simulation output, including the total

number of diagnostic testing performed, cumulative number of symptomatic individuals,

and others. We will then use these statistics to calculate the economic cost of the scenario,

with all cost values listed in 2020 U.S. dollars.

4.2 Choice of Optimization Parameter and Transformation

There are recent developments that would likely lead to future studies related to COVID-

19. First, vaccines for the COVID-19 have been developed and are serving as powerful

tools against the pandemic in many countries. Second, variants of the coronavirus (delta,

omicron, etc.) have also spread throughout the world. Additionally, general strategy related

to masking, social distancing, quarantining, and so on have been reﬁned over time as public

health authorities learn more about the disease. These changes aﬀect our goal of making a

factual representation of the current situation in the model. Therefore, for the evaluation

of the simulation optimization method, we restrict our attention to the pre-vaccine scenario

and do not include vaccination as an intervention strategy. In that sense, one may consider

this a “proof of concept” study, with vaccines and other interventions left for future study.

In this project, we choose optimization parameters that relate to four types of intervention

strategies: social distancing (D, including closure of workplace, cancellation of public events,

etc.), school closure (S), testing (T ), and contact tracing (C). For each type of intervention,

there are three parameters: the start and end day of the intervention and percentage level

of intensity of the policy. Because DSPSA works only with integer vectors, we discretize

the input vector θ = (D, S, T , C)T and map each parameter into integer values (each of

D, S, T , C are row vectors). Note that dim(θ) = 12. The percentage level of intensity for

each intervention strategy takes a real value between 0 and 100. We discretize the level

[0,100] into 0, 10, 20, · · · , 100, divide the values by 10, and convert them into integers

0,1,2,· · · , 10. These parameters will be mapped back to percentage levels in [0,100] when we

16

Zewei Li, James C. Spall

run Covasim. The start and end day for each intervention strategy should be kept within

the range of days of the simulation, so we make their lower bounds li in the projection

function (2) to be 1 and their upper bounds ui to be the length of days of the simulation.

Under this setup, the number of possible interventions in Θ would be about 1017. Taking

into consideration the fact that the start day of one intervention should not be later than

its end day, we add one more step following the projection function (2) in the algorithm:

we set the start day to be one day before the end day whenever the end day of any policy

turns out to be earlier than its start day after the projection function (2) in the algorithm.

4.3 Loss Function

All four types of intervention strategies mentioned above are eﬀective in helping control the

spread of COVID-19. To determine the optimal combination of strategies, we construct a

function to compute the socio-economic cost of each scenario. We formulate the loss function

as follows:

L(θ) = E[social distancing cost(θ) + school closure cost(θ) + testing cost(θ)

+ contact tracing cost(θ) + treatment cost(θ) + death cost(θ)]

All of the above costs are cumulative over the time period of interest. For the cost

of social distancing, Strong and Welburn [26] estimate the percentage decrease in weekly

household income for each state in the U.S. under several social distancing scenarios. Below

we consider scenario 5B, which includes closing schools, bars, and restaurants, banning large

events, closing nonessential businesses, and quarantining the most vulnerable. Thunstrom

et al. [27] assume that a set of social distancing measures similar to scenario 5B leads to

an average 38% decrease in individual contact rate, a measure to reﬂect the transmission

probability between an infected individual and a susceptible individual. Using the estimates

of the reduction in contact rate and decrease in household income, we assume a linear

relationship between the percentage level of intensity for social distancing and percentage

decrease in weekly household income. Next, we collect census data about the population and

number of households [30] to estimate the number of households for our synthetic population

in simulation. Then we use the average weekly household income from the census data [30]

Discrete Stochastic Optimization for Public Health Interventions with Constraints

17

to compute the social distancing cost by formula:

Social Distancing Cost =

Percentage level of intensity
38

× Total household income

× Percentage decrease in weekly household income

× Duration of the policy in weeks.

The total school closure cost is computed to be the sum of the cost of making up classes

and the cost of the lost wages for parents to take care of their children. We estimate the

cost for making up classes with the school closure cost per day per student given by [11],

which is $23, in 2020 U.S. dollars. For the cost incurred on parents’ lost wages, Halder et al.

[11] estimate the average wage of one person to be $992 (in 2020 dollars) weekly and Araz

et al. [1] estimate the number of days of work missed to be 2.5 for couples and 5 for single

parents. Using these estimates, the total school closure cost per student per day is calculated

to be $125 (after adjusting to 2020 dollars). Next, we use data from [30] to estimate the

total number of students in our synthetic population. Using the closure cost per student

and the total number of students, we get the daily school closure cost in our population

under a complete school shutdown. Then the cost of the intervention policy is computed by

multiplying the respective percentage level of intensity.

Though COVID-19 tests are currently free for individuals in the U.S., they will incur

a cost to health insurance companies or the government. We employ the cost of a test

performed by the CDC as given by [32], which is $36. Then we compute the total cost for

testing by multiplying it by the total number of tests performed, which is collected from the

simulation output.

As for the cost of contact tracing, Watson et al. [37] claim that 100,000 tracers would

be needed nationwide at an annual cost of $3.6 billion. We then compute the number of

tracers needed in our synthetic population and their sum cost by proportion. The total cost

will ﬁnally be multiplied by the percentage level of intensity to obtain the cost of contact

tracing policy.

For the treatment cost, Bartsch et al. [2] estimate the medical costs for non-hospitalized

patients with COVID-19 symptomatic infections to be $3, 994 and Cohen, Whittal, and

Murray [9] estimate the average cost to treat a hospitalized patient with coronavirus to be

about $30, 000. We assume that people who are symptomatic but have no severe or critical

symptoms require no hospitalization, while those who have severe symptoms or critical

18

Zewei Li, James C. Spall

symptoms, as well as those who die, all require hospitalization. Then we follow the previous

estimates and compute their treatment costs correspondingly.

To compute the cost of death, we use the Value of Statistical Life (VSL). Eichenbaum et

al. [10] estimate that the average VSL for a person in the U.S. to be $9.3 million, and we

multiply their estimate by the total number of deaths from the simulation output to obtain

the sum of death costs from the COVID-19 pandemic.

4.4 Numerical Results

In this section, we present some numerical results relating to the application of the DSPSA

algorithm. The general setup for our simulation is as follows. Our synthetic population con-

sists of 100,000 people with the same age structure as the state of Maryland, as revealed

by the census data [30]. We use the hybrid contact network in Covasim for our simulation,

which will be suitable to represent the realistic contact network of Maryland people in gen-

eral [14]. For parameters about the disease progression and transmission such as the recovery

time for severe cases, we use the default values in Covasim as denoted in Section 2.2 and

2.3 of [14]. We set the start day of the simulation to be March 1, 2020 and the length of the

simulation to be 60 days, with the initial number of infected people being 50. As a measure

of lack of sensitivity to the initial number, the length of time for social distancing in the

results change by less than 3 days on average when the number of initial infected people

varies between 5 and 500.

The initial value for the optimization process is that no intervention policy is imple-

mented. This value is expressed as ˆθ0 = (1, 2, 0, 1, 2, 0, 1, 2, 0, 1, 2, 0)T . We follow the guide-

lines provided in Section 3.3 of [34] and set the gain sequence to be ak = a/(1 + A + k)α,

where A is 10% of the total number of iterations and α is 0.501. The value of a can be found
numerically by making the multiplication of a0 and the average magnitude of ˆg0(ˆθ0) equal
to the desired magnitude of change of ˆθk in early iterations. We set our number of iterations

to be 5,000 and follow the guidelines to ﬁnd an initial estimate a = 0.08.

Before running the algorithm for a large number of iterations, we perform some tests

on the common random numbers (CRN) variance reduction technique [25, Chapter 14].

Numerical experiments indicate the existence of statistically signiﬁcant positive correlation

between y(ˆθ+

k ) and y(ˆθ−

k ) when using the same random number seeds, one condition that

renders the eﬀectiveness of the CRNs. Plots of trials also reveal improvement when using

Discrete Stochastic Optimization for Public Health Interventions with Constraints

19

Fig. 3: Change of Cost in One Run Versus Number of Iterations

CRNs. As a result, we incorporate CRNs into the algorithm in this application.

We ﬁrst determine the reasonableness of applying the DSPSA algorithm in ﬁnding the

optimal solution to this simulation by examining the ﬂuctuation of total noisy loss y(θ)

over the iterations (the true loss L(θ) is not available). Fig. 3 shows the tendency of total

loss over the ﬁrst 2,500 steps in a single trial. As there is approximately a 90% decrease in

total noisy loss, DSPSA appears to be suitable for seeking optimal intervention strategy for

COVID-19 in this simulation.

Next we check the sensitivity of our simulation results to alternative solutions. In each

trial, the solution greatly reduced the total monetary cost from our initial guess. While the

algorithm is based on noisy measurements of L(θ), the noise level largely determines the

reliability of the result. From Fig. 3 we can see that the level of ﬂuctuation decreases through

the iterations. Therefore, we have conﬁdence that the solution we get from the algorithm is

a reasonable solution. However, due to the scale of the plot, there is a reasonable chance that

one strategy might be superior to another by a tiny margin and such superiority may not

be detected by the algorithm in limited iterations. It is, therefore, possible that the solution

we ﬁnd is only one from a set of good choice strategies, but perhaps not the best one. From

Fig. 3 we also notice that after some number of iterations, the magnitude of ﬂuctuation

upward seems to be greater than that downward. This asymmetry appears to be related to

the transmission dynamics of the disease. When the input intervention strategies are close

20

Zewei Li, James C. Spall

to some optimal ones after some iterations, slight improvement in the intervention strate-

gies is no longer able to signiﬁcantly reduce the total number of infected people. However,

slight deterioration of the strategies may cause asymmetrically more people to get infected

by the end of the simulation through the high transmission rate of the SARS-CoV-2. Such

increase in the number of symptomatic individuals increases the societal cost of the disease

substantially, which determines the pattern in Fig. 3.

From the trials, we ﬁnd that the terminal solution is ˆθ5000 = [4, 18, 10, 1, 2, 0, 1, 20, 10, 1, 2, 0]T .

The solution is interpreted to impose a social distancing policy with an extremely aggressive

level of intensity (percentage level 100) for about two weeks starting from Day 4 of the sim-

ulation and to also implement massive testing of the general population (goal to test 100%

of the population) starting from the ﬁrst day for about 20 days. Then tests are performed

to individuals who are symptomatic for the rest of the 2 months, and those who are tested

positive are required to have two-week-home-based-quarantine. This solution relies on the

fact that the length of time after exposure before an individual is infectious is set to have

a mean of 4.6 days in Covasim [14], and it corresponds to suggestions from the CDC that

the timeframe for self-quarantine of suspected COVID-19 cases should be about 14 days

[31]. The recommendation of massive testing is also consistent with the results from [22]

that testing generates sizable welfare gains. As for the suggested level of intensity for the

social distancing policy, though it may not be possible to reach the extreme (100%) level of

intensity, and the number itself does not provide concrete ideas about speciﬁc measures that

the government should impose, we can seek some guidance from the eﬀect of established

policies of other countries and nations. According to [38], the average number of contacts

per individual in Wuhan, China decreased by about 86.3% through the duration of the so-

cial distancing policy imposed by the Chinese government, which corresponds to a social

distancing policy of about 86 percent level of intensity by our deﬁnition. As their levels

of intensity are close, we can learn that the desired social distancing policy suggested by

the optimal solution should be close to that of Wuhan, China. Therefore, the government

should impose similar measures including, but not limited to, compulsory wearing of masks

in public areas, banning large events, and closing all nonessential business, among other

measures [8].

Discrete Stochastic Optimization for Public Health Interventions with Constraints

21

5 Conclusions

In this paper, we considered two infectious-disease-related problems with the goal of ﬁnd-

ing optimal mitigation strategies using the DSPSA method of multi-dimensional stochastic

optimization for discrete problems. Numerical results reveal that the algorithm results in

a signiﬁcant decrease in loss after a reasonable number of iterations, which illustrates that

the DSPSA algorithm is a good approach to solving optimization problems with noisy loss.

Many previous public health studies analyze only a small set of candidate intervention

strategies; such approaches require prior knowledge on the likely solution and are conducted

on a case-by-case basis. Applications in this paper present a new approach that enables

researchers to optimize over the whole set of available intervention strategies without the

conceptual idea of a possible optimal strategy. This paper also sheds light on public health

optimization analysis by considering not only the goal of public health but also the aim of

minimal societal cost. Steps presented in this paper such as the loss function setup and the

transformation of parameters can provide guidance in analyzing other types of public health

problems, such as drug abuse (e.g., opioid) or further COVID developments (vaccines, an-

tivirals, etc.) or variants of COVID (delta, omicron, etc.).

We may also conduct the same type of study on a modiﬁcation of the DSPSA algorithm

called the mixed simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation (MSPSA), which ap-

plies to a mixture of discrete and continuous input parameters [33]. Because MSPSA is

similar to DSPSA, only slight modiﬁcations are needed for applications from this paper,

such as allowing the vaccine fraction (F ) to range from [0,1] continuously. By the nature

of the two algorithms, we expect that the solution will converge to an optimal solution in

a similar manner as applications in this paper, and we leave the implementation for future

study. As MSPSA formally allows for both continuous and discrete parameters, it can adapt

to a broader range of public health problems.

In summary, this paper is in response to a need to enhance response to public health

threats at regional or larger scale. While current models can support decision makers by

measuring the expected impact of factors such as school closures, vaccination campaigns,

vaccine fractions, and antiviral treatment strategies, they do not automatically provide

an optimal combination of the variables to achieve cost-eﬀective societal aims. This paper

demonstrated that a formal stochastic optimization method, DSPSA, combined with a user-

selected Monte Carlo simulation of disease transmission and economic impact can provide

22

Zewei Li, James C. Spall

solutions that are both practically realistic and potentially better than current ad hoc solu-

tions. Results presented in this paper can also motivate us to apply the SPSA family (DSPSA

or MSPSA) of algorithms in future public health mitigation studies such as developing coun-

termeasure for bioterrorism. In the long term, the DSPSA/MSPSA-based approach can also

adapt to improved simulation models, real-time data sources, better biological understand-

ing, and new candidate intervention strategies (e.g., the current availability of vaccines for

COVID-19) to help local and national authorities make better decisions.

Appendix

Since all the 20 tracts we picked are located within California State and Los Angeles County,

the State FPIS code and county FIPS code are 06 and 037 respectively for all tracts. The

tract FIPS code for the selected 20 tracts are: 101110, 101120, 101210, 101220, 101300,

101400, 102101, 102102, 103101, 103102, 103200, 103300, 103400, 104103, 104104, 104105,

104106, 104107, 104201, 104202.

Acknowledgements We thank Yan Zhou and Mengdan Zhang (the Johns Hopkins University) for all the

preliminary work done during the course of this research.

References

1. Araz, O.M., Damien, P., Paltiel, D.A., Burke, S., Van De Geijn, B., Galvani, A., Meyers, L.A.: Simulating

school closure policies for cost eﬀective pandemic decision making. BMC Public Health 12(1), 449–460

(2012)

2. Bartsch, S.M., Ferguson, M.C., McKinnell, J.A., O’Shea, K.J., Wedlock, P.T., Siegmund, S.S., Lee, B.Y.:

The Potential Health Care Costs And Resource Use Associated With COVID-19 In The United States.

Health Aﬀ. 39(6), 927–935 (2020)

3. Basta, N.E., Chao, D.L., Halloran, M.E., Matrajt, L., Longini, I.M., Jr: Strategies for pandemic and

seasonal inﬂuenza vaccination of schoolchildren in the United States. Am. J. Epidemiol. 170(6), 679–686

(2009)

4. Bureau of Labor Statistics: Consumer price index - all urban consumers, 2000–2020. United States De-

partment of Labor (2021). http://data.bls.gov

5. Chao, D.L., Halloran, M.E., Obenchain, V.J., Longini, I.M., Jr: FluTE, a publicly available stochastic

inﬂuenza epidemic simulation model. PLoS Comput. Biol. 6(1), e1000656 (2010)

6. Chao, D.L., Matrajt, L., Basta, N.E., Sugimoto, J.D., Dean, B., Bagwell, D.A., Oiulfstad, B., Halloran,

M.E., Longini, I.M., Jr: Planning for the control of pandemic inﬂuenza A (H1N1) in Los Angeles County

and the United States. Am. J. Epidemiol. 173(10), 1121–1130 (2011)

Discrete Stochastic Optimization for Public Health Interventions with Constraints

23

7. Charpentier, A., Elie, R., Lauri`ere, M., Tran, V.: COVID-19 pandemic control: balancing detection policy

and lockdown intervention under ICU sustainability. Math. Model. Nat. Phenom. 15(57) (2020)

8. Chen, S., Yang, J., Yang, W., Wang, C., B¨arnighausen, T.: COVID-19 control in China during mass

population movements at New Year. Lancet 395(10226), 764–766 (2020)

9. Cohen, M., Whittal, K., Murray, T.: COVID-19 Cost Scenario Modeling. Wakely consulting group LLC

(2020). https://www.ahip.org/documents/AHIP-COVID-19-Modeling.pdf

10. Eichenbaum, M.S., Rebelo, S., Trabandt, M.: The macroeconomics of epidemics. Rev. Financ. Stud.

34(11), 5149-5187 (2021)

11. Halder, N., Kelso, J.K., Milne, G.J.: Cost-eﬀective strategies for mitigating a future inﬂuenza pandemic

with H1N1 2009 characteristics. PloS One 6(7), e22087 (2011)

12. Hamrock, E., Paige, K., Parks, J., Scheulen, J., Levin, S.: Discrete event simulation for healthcare

organizations: a tool for decision making. J. Healthc. Manag. 58(2), 110—125 (2013)

13. Hoertel, N., Blachier, M., Blanco, C., Olfson, M., Massetti, M., Limosin, F., Leleu, H.: Facing the

COVID-19 epidemic in NYC: a stochastic agent-based model of various intervention strategies. MedRxiv

(2020)

14. Kerr, C., Stuart, R., Mistry, D., Abeysuriya, R., Hart, G., Rosenfeld, K., Selvaraj, P., Nunez, R.C.,

Hagedorn, B., George, L., Izzo, A., Palmer, A., Delport, D., Bennette, C., Wagner, B., Chang, S., Cohen,

J., Panovska-Griﬃths, J., Jastrzebski, M., Oron, A., Wenger, E., Famulare, M., Klein, D.J.: Covasim: an

agent-based model of COVID-19 dynamics and interventions. PLoS Comput. Biol. 17(7), e1009149 (2021)

15. Khazeni, N., Hutton, D.W., Garber, A.M., Hupert, N., Owens, D.K.: Eﬀectiveness and cost-eﬀectiveness

of vaccination against pandemic inﬂuenza (H1N1) 2009. Ann. Intern. Med. 151(12), 829–839 (2009)

16. Matsuoka, T., Sato, T., Akita, T., Yanagida, J., Ohge, H., Kuwabara, M., Tanaka, J.: High Vaccination

Coverage among Children during Inﬂuenza A(H1N1)pdm09 as a Potential Factor of Herd Immunity. Int.

J. Environ. Res. Public Health 13(10), 1017–1034 (2016)

17. Molinari, N.A., Ortega-Sanchez, I.R., Messonnier, M.L., Thompson, W.W., Wortley, P.M., Weintraub,

E., Bridges, C.B.: The annual impact of seasonal inﬂuenza in the US: measuring disease burden and costs.

Vaccine 25(27), 5086–5096 (2007)

18. National Center for Education Statistics: Table 2 Number of operating public schools and districts, state

enrollment, teacher and pupil/teacher ratio by state: School year 2012–13. United States Department of

Education (2014). https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2014/2014098/tables/table 02.asp

19. Nelson, B.L., Swann, J.L., Goldsman, D., Song, W.T.: Simple Procedures for Selecting the Best Simu-

lated System When the Number of Alternatives is Large. Oper. Res. 49, 950–963 (2001)

20. Paleshi, A., Bae, K.H., Evans, G., Heragu, S.: A simulation-based optimization approach for mitigation

of pandemic inﬂuenza. IISE Trans. Healthc. Syst. Eng. 7(2), 107–120 (2017)

21. Pasquini-Descomps, H., Brender, N., Maradan, D.: Value for Money in H1N1 Inﬂuenza: A Systematic

Review of the Cost-Eﬀectiveness of Pandemic Interventions. Value Health 20(6), 819-–827 (2017)

22. Piguillem, F., Shi, L.: Optimal Covid-19 Quarantine and Testing Policies. CEPR Discuss. Pap. Ser.,

DP14613 (2020)

23. Prosser, L.A., Lavelle, T.A., Fiore, A.E., Bridges, C.B., Reed, C., Jain, S., Dunham, K.M., Meltzer,

M.I.: Cost-eﬀectiveness of 2009 pandemic inﬂuenza A(H1N1) vaccination in the United States. PloS One

6(7), e22308 (2011)

24

Zewei Li, James C. Spall

24. Souza, P., Dias, C., de Arruda, E.: Optimal Control Model for Vaccination Against H1N1 Flu. Semin.

Ciˆenc. Exatas Tecnol. 41(1), 105-114 (2020)

25. Spall, J.C.: Introduction to Stochastic Search and Optimization: Estimation, Simulation, and Control.

Wiley-Interscience (2003)

26. Strong, A., Welburn, J.C.: An Estimation of the Economic Costs of Social-Distancing Policies. RAND

Corporation, RR-A173-1 (2020)

27. Thunstrom, L., Newbold, S., Finnoﬀ, D., Ashworth, M., Shogren, J.: The Beneﬁts and Costs of Using

Social Distancing to Flatten the Curve for COVID-19. J. Beneﬁt-Cost Anal. 11(2), 179–195 (2020)

28. U.S. Census Bureau: Census 2000 Summary File 1. United States Department of Commerce (2001).

https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/2000/dec/summary-ﬁle-1.html

29. U.S. Census Bureau: Census 2010 Summary File 1. United States Department of Commerce (2011).

https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/2010/dec/summary-ﬁle-1.html

30. U.S. Census Bureau: Census Bureau QuickFacts. United States Department of Commerce (2020).

https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/MD

31. U.S. Centers

for Disease Control and Prevention: Options

to Reduce Quarantine for Con-

tacts of Persons with SARS-CoV-2. United States Department of Health and Human Ser-

vices (2020). https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/science/science-briefs/scientiﬁc-brief-options-

to-reduce-quarantine.html

32. U.S. Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services: Medicare Administrative Contractor (MAC)

COVID-19 Test Pricing. United States Department of Health and Human Services

(2021).

https://www.cms.gov/ﬁles/document/mac-covid-19-test-pricing.pdf

33. Wang, L., Zhu, J., Spall, J.: Mixed Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Approximation for Gradient-

Free Optimization with Noisy Measurements. 2018 Am. Control Conf., 3774–3779 (2018)

34. Wang, Q.: Optimization with Discrete Simultaneous Perturbation Stochastic Approximation Using

Noisy Loss Function Measurements. Dissertation, Johns Hopkins University (2013)

35. Wang, Q., Spall, J.: Discrete simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation on loss function with

noisy measurements. Proc. 2011 Am. Control Conf., 4520–4525 (2011)

36. Wang, Q., Spall, J.: Discrete simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation for resource allocation

in public health. 2014 Am. Control Conf., 3639–3644 (2014)

37. Watson, C., Cicero, A., Blumenstock, J., Fraser, M.: A National Plan to Enable Comprehensive

COVID-19 Case Finding and Contact Tracing in the U.S. Association of State and Territorial Health Of-

ﬁcials (2020). https://www.centerforhealthsecurity.org/our-work/pubs archive/pubs-pdfs/2020/200410-

national-plan-to-contact-tracing.pdf

38. Zhang, J., Litvinova, M., Liang, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, W., Zhao, S., Wu, Q., Merler, S., Viboud, C.,

Vespignani, A., Ajelli, M., Yu, H.: Changes in contact patterns shape the dynamics of the COVID-19

outbreak in China. Science 368(6498), 1481–1486 (2020)

