Draft version June 29, 2022
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX63

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

8
2

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
9
7
0
4
1
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

An Injection System for the CHIME/FRB Experiment

Marcus Merryfield,1, 2 Shriharsh P. Tendulkar,3, 4 Kaitlyn Shin,5, 6 Bridget Andersen,1, 2 Alexander Josephy,1, 2
Deborah Good,7, 8 Fengqiu Adam Dong,9 Kiyoshi W. Masui,5, 6 Dustin Lang,10, 11 Moritz M¨unchmeyer,12
Charanjot Brar,1, 2 Tomas Cassanelli,13 Matt Dobbs,1, 2 Emmanuel Fonseca,14, 15 Victoria M. Kaspi,1, 2
Juan Mena-Parra,5 Ziggy Pleunis,16 Masoud Rafiei-Ravandi,1, 2 Ketan R. Sand,1, 2 Paul Scholz,16
Kendrick Smith,10 and Ingrid H. Stairs9

1Department of Physics, McGill University, 3600 rue University, Montr´eal, QC H3A 2T8, Canada
2McGill Space Institute, McGill University, 3550 rue University, Montr´eal, QC H3A 2A7, Canada
3Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, 400005, India
4National Centre for Radio Astrophysics, Post Bag 3, Ganeshkhind, Pune, 411007, India
5MIT Kavli Institute for Astrophysics and Space Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA
6Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
7Department of Physics, University of Connecticut, 196 Auditorium Road, U-3046, Storrs, CT 06269-3046, USA
8Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute, 162 5th Avenue, New York, NY 10010, USA
9Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia, 6224 Agricultural Road, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1 Canada
10Perimeter Institute of Theoretical Physics, 31 Caroline Street North, Waterloo, ON N2L 2Y5, Canada
11Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada
12Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1150 University Ave, Madison, WI 53706, USA
13Department of Electrical Engineering, Universidad de Chile, Av. Tupper 2007, Santiago 8370451, Chile
14Department of Physics and Astronomy, West Virginia University, PO Box 6315, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA
15Center for Gravitational Waves and Cosmology, West Virginia University, Chestnut Ridge Research Building, Morgantown, WV
26505, USA
16Dunlap Institute for Astronomy & Astrophysics, University of Toronto, 50 St. George Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3H4, Canada

ABSTRACT

Dedicated surveys searching for Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs) are subject to selection eﬀects which bias
the observed population of events. Software injection systems are one method of correcting for these
biases by injecting a mock population of synthetic FRBs directly into the realtime search pipeline.
The injected population may then be used to map intrinsic burst properties onto an expected
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), so long as telescope characteristics such as the beam model and
calibration factors are properly accounted for. This paper presents an injection system developed for
the Canadian Hydrogen Intensity Mapping Experiment Fast Radio Burst project (CHIME/FRB).
The system was tested to ensure high detection eﬃciency, and the pulse calibration method was
veriﬁed. Using an injection population of ∼85,000 synthetic FRBs, we found that the correlation
between ﬂuence and SNR for injected FRBs was consistent with that of CHIME/FRB detections in
the ﬁrst CHIME/FRB catalog. We also noted that the sensitivity of the telescope varied strongly as
a function of the broadened burst width, but not as a function of the dispersion measure. We
conclude that some of the machine-learning based Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) mitigation
methods used by CHIME/FRB can be re-trained using injection data to increase sensitivity to wide
events, and that planned upgrades to the presented injection system will allow for determining a
more accurate CHIME/FRB selection function in the near future.

1. INTRODUCTION

Corresponding author: Marcus Merryﬁeld
marcus.merryﬁeld@mail.mcgill.ca

Fast radio bursts, or FRBs, were ﬁrst discovered
through searching archival data from a pulsar sur-
vey using the 64-m Parkes Murriyang Radio Telescope
(Lorimer et al. 2007). This ﬁrst detection, dubbed the
“Lorimer burst,” bore characteristics of pulses emitted
by pulsars, but with a dispersion measure (DM) indi-
cating it must have originated far outside the Galaxy.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Since the discovery of the Lorimer burst, the extragalac-
tic nature of FRBs has been conﬁrmed (Chatterjee et al.
2017; Tendulkar et al. 2017) and the ﬁeld of FRB science
has bloomed (see Petroﬀ et al. 2021, for a recent review
of the ﬁeld). Many radio telescopes have now detected
FRBs and several dedicated FRB surveys are currently
underway.

A dedicated FRB survey from the Canadian Hydro-
gen Intensity Mapping Experiment (CHIME, CHIME
Collaboration et al. 2022a; CHIME/FRB Collaboration
et al. 2018), has led to a recent abundance of detected
FRBs. The ﬁrst catalog from the CHIME Fast Radio
Burst project (CHIME/FRB, CHIME/FRB Collabora-
tion et al. 2021) contains a total of 536 bursts from
492 sources, and more are constantly being discovered.
CHIME/FRB’s design allows for the highest FRB detec-
tion rate of all current surveys but, like any telescope, it
is subject to selection biases (some of which vary with
time or with RFI evolution) aﬀecting the observed pop-
ulation of bursts.

One way to correct for biases introduced in astrophys-
ical transient searches is for telescopes to develop sys-
tems which inject synthetic events into their detection
pipelines. By injecting pulses over a broad parameter
space and tracking their (non-)detection status,
it is
possible to construct a probability distribution of event
detection.
In principle this selection function can be
determined by injecting a suﬃciently large number of
simulated events to cover the entirety of the observ-
able, multi-dimensional parameter space. With a large
enough sample, the selection function would be given by
the detection fraction across ﬁne-grain histogram bins
spanning the full volume. In the case of FRBs, thought-
ful approximations must be made as the FRB parame-
ter space is very large. Injection systems also have other
uses besides determining the selection function. For ex-
ample, injected events test the eﬃciency and robustness
of complex data analysis systems, and provide a method
of continuous system sensitivity monitoring.

Though there are examples of injection systems else-
where in astronomy (such as in the Laser Interferom-
eter Gravitational-Wave Observatory, see Biwer et al.
2017), injection systems for FRB searches are not yet
in common use. Currently, an injection system exists
for the Molonglo Observatory Synthesis Telescope and
has been used to quantify biases in their FRB search
pipeline (Gupta et al. 2021). An injection analysis has
also been performed at Arecibo for the Pulsar Arecibo
L-band Feed Array survey single pulse pipeline (Patel
et al. 2018). Other such pipelines are in development
at the Very Large Array (Law et al. 2018) and at the
Green Bank Telescope (Agarwal et al. 2020). However,

the ﬁrst CHIME/FRB catalog is currently the only FRB
dataset which accounts for selection eﬀects based from
the results of an injection study (CHIME/FRB Collab-
oration et al. 2021). Speciﬁcally, an injection system
was developed which injected ∼85,000 synthetic FRBs
Input pa-
into the CHIME/FRB detection pipeline.
rameters for each synthetic pulse were stored, as were
output parameters for detections successfully matched
to injections. These injections demonstrated, among
other things, only modest selection eﬀects with disper-
sion measure in the survey, but much larger selection
eﬀects with scattering time and intrinsic burst width.

In this paper, we present the synthetic pulse injec-
tion system used by CHIME/FRB in the injection study
for the ﬁrst CHIME/FRB catalog. We also provide the
full dataset used to generate the CHIME/FRB selection
function. An overview of the CHIME/FRB detection
pipeline is provided in §2, and §3 provides the details of
the injection system architecture. An overview of how
synthetic FRBs are modelled is given in §4, and §5 de-
scribes the input distributions used in our synthetic FRB
population. Finally, in §6, we note the various ways the
injection system has been veriﬁed, including tests to en-
sure the synthetic FRBs are correctly ﬂux calibrated.
We also assess the eﬃciency of the pipeline, and note
where the telescope is most susceptible to missing FRB
detections.

2. THE CHIME TELESCOPE

The Canadian Hydrogen Intensity Mapping Experi-
ment (CHIME, see CHIME Collaboration et al. 2022a)
is a recently commissioned radio telescope near Pentic-
ton, British Columbia. CHIME was originally conceived
solely as a cosmology experiment, with the goal of de-
tecting a baryon acoustic oscillation (BAO) signal from
neutral hydrogen at z = 0.8–2.5, corresponding to ob-
serving frequencies from 400–800 MHz (CHIME Collab-
oration et al. 2022b). The telescope design requires a
large ﬁeld of view (∼200 deg2) and suﬃcient sensitivity
to detect the BAO signal. CHIME achieves this through
its four 20-m × 100-m cylindrical reﬂectors, which have
a combined collecting area of ∼8000 m2. Each cylinder
is outﬁtted with 256 dual polarization feeds suspended
above their axes, for a total of 1,024 feeds. CHIME’s
powerful FX correlator uses the inputs from each feed to
form 256 beams N-S via Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
beamforming and 4 beams E-W through exact phasing,
for a total of 1,024 closely spaced stationary beams tiling
the telescope’s primary beam (see Ng et al. 2017, for de-
tails). CHIME/FRB’s beamforming pipeline output is
sampled with 16,384 (hereafter 16k) frequency channels

Tree Index DS factor Widths searched (ms) Max DM (pc cm−3) ∆DM (pc cm−3)

0
1
2
3
4

1
2
4
8
16

1 ∼ 3 × 0.98304
1 ∼ 3 × 1.96608
1 ∼ 3 × 3.93216
1 ∼ 3 × 7.86432
1 ∼ 3 × 15.72864

1656.13
3312.27
6624.55
13249.11
13249.11

1.62
3.23
6.47
12.94
25.88

3

Table 1. Dedispersion trees searched by bonsai. For each downsampling tree, the downsampling factor, search widths,
maximum searched DM, and width of the trees’ DM bins (∆DM) are given. Note the downsampling factors, the temporal
search kernels, the width of the DM search bins, and the maximum DM of each tree are conﬁgurable.

at 0.98304 ms cadence (see CHIME/FRB Collaboration
et al. 2018, for more details).

2.1. The CHIME/FRB Detection Pipeline

CHIME/FRB searches for FRBs using 132 comput-
ing nodes to form a pipeline which is divided into four
“Levels,” L1–L4. L1 applies 128 of these nodes for
RFI mitigation and CHIME/FRB’s tree dedispersion
search algorithm (bonsai). L2/L3 uses two more nodes
for multi-beam grouping, further RFI mitigation, extra-
galactic event determination, and action determination
algorithms. L4 uses the ﬁnal two nodes for action im-
plementation and hosting of databases and web inter-
faces. A detailed overview of the CHIME/FRB detec-
tion pipeline is available in CHIME/FRB Collaboration
et al. (2018), whereas aspects relevant to this work are
highlighted below.

2.1.1. L1: RFI Mitigation and Dedispersion

Each L1 node receives all 16k frequency channels for
8 beams. The intensity array is ﬁrst sent through the
initial (L1) RFI mitigation algorithm. This process in-
volves both de-trending and “clipping” (truncation of
extreme values, see Raﬁei-Ravandi et al. 2022, in prepa-
ration). After initial RFI mitigation, bonsai searches
for FRBs in intensity data, which is the most computa-
tionally expensive part of the L1 process. This involves
tree dedispersion at the 0.98304 ms time resolution of
CHIME/FRB and at four downsampled time resolu-
tions, each binned by a factor of two up to a maximum
temporal binning of ∼16 ms. For low DM pulses dedis-
persion is performed in all downsampling trees, where
each “tree” is a 2D array of samples in (cid:0)ν−2, t(cid:1) space
which represent pulses of various dispersion (see Taylor
1974; Hall et al. 2012, for more details). Above the DM
thresholds given in Table 1 only downsampled trees are
searched.

CHIME/FRB searches over a 4D parameter space
(DM, β, t, W ), where β, t, and W are spectral in-
dex, arrival time of the pulse, and pulse width, respec-
tively. DMs are searched to a maximum of ∼13000 pc
cm−3. Widths are searched using four search kernels
with weights [1], [1, 1], [1, 3, 1], [1, 2, 2, 1], encompassing

Full Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) widths up to
approximately 3 × ∆ttree (where ∆ttree is the size of the
time bin in the tree). Widths and DMs searched in each
dedispersion tree are indicated in Table 1. Two values of
β are searched, β = ±3. Though a ﬂat β isn’t searched,
the chosen values of β greatly improve SNR for pulses
with emission located primarily in the top or bottom of
the band, while maintaining near-optimal search condi-
tions for ﬂatter pulses.

The search output is binned substantially in DM and
t by taking the maximum SNR event within a bin to
reduce the data volume. These “coarse-grained” events
with SNRs greater than a tunable threshold are then
vetted by a second RFI mitigation algorithm known as
L1b. L1b discriminates between astrophysical signals
and RFI using a neural network trained on a set of data
human-labelled as astrophysical or RFI. A concise “L1
header” is then produced containing detection meta-
data, including the coarse-grained DM and t, an RFI
rating from L1b, and SNR slices in DM and β around
the maximum SNR bin. Note that bonsai does not re-
port which width kernel resulted in a trigger, but does
report which tree the trigger was detected in. We thus
report a nominal bonsai detection width of 2 × ∆ttree
in our data.

2.1.2. L2/L3: Grouping and Further RFI Mitigation

After L1 processing, L1 headers for each beam are
sent to L2/L3, which ﬁrst attempts to group them in
DM, t, and sky position to determine if a given event
was detected in multiple beams. Events whose param-
eters all match within speciﬁed thresholds are grouped
together. DM and time thresholds reﬂect the size of the
coarse-grain L1 triggers, while spatial thresholds reﬂect
the size of the CHIME/FRB beams. The grouped set
of L1 headers becomes an L2 header, from which event
positions are reﬁned.

L2 then performs a second RFI excision based on
the SNR distribution of L2 headers in neighboring
beams. Astrophysical events, because they are in the
far-ﬁeld of the telescope, should have narrow SNR dis-
tributions within grouped beams. By contrast, RFI

4

Figure 1. Schematic of the CHIME/FRB injection system. Each L1 node handles two datastreams containing full resolution
intensity data for four beams. The injection API (mimic) interacts with the L1 nodes through Remote Procedure Calls (RPC).
Requests to the API are made to send duplicated intensity data from four beams at a time to the L1(cid:48) receiver. Once L1(cid:48) has
started receiving data, injections may be requested to any of the four beams. The detection properties of injections are then
measured on L1(cid:48), and the (non-)detection parameters are stored in a database alongside the input parameters.

events are typically terrestrial,
in the near-ﬁeld, and
have much broader SNR distributions within grouped
beams. A machine learning classiﬁer assigns an L2 RFI
grade for each event. Aircraft transits are one major
source of RFI, as they reﬂect terrestrial noise into the
CHIME/FRB ﬁeld of view and create RFI events across
many beams for several minutes. Such events are very
temporally wide and broadband.

After RFI classiﬁcation, the DM and sky location of
the L2 events are compared to a database of known
sources.
If the event matches a source within a spec-
iﬁed, tunable threshold, the event is labelled as associ-
ated with the known source. If there is no connection to
a known source, the pulse’s DM is compared to Galactic
DM models (Cordes & Lazio 2002; Yao et al. 2017) to
determine if the event is likely extragalactic.

The last step in L2/L3 is to determine “actions” for
each event based on criteria it fulﬁlls. Most importantly,
intensity and baseband data callbacks are queued for

unknown extragalactic sources above a SNR threshold.
These actions can (and have) been adjusted as improve-
ments are made to the system. For example, the SNR
threshold for intensity callback of unknown extragalactic
candidates was 10σ in the early days of the experiment,
9σ for the majority the ﬁrst CHIME/FRB catalog, and
is currently 8σ.

3. THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE INJECTION

SYSTEM

The CHIME/FRB injection system consists of mul-
an application program interface
tiple components:
(API) which sends injection requests to L1, an injec-
tions database which confers the status of injections
with L2/L3, and an injection “driver” which manages
the process of systematically injecting synthetic pulses.
Note that rather than injecting simulated pulses into the
live CHIME/FRB data stream, we make a copy of the
data stream and then inject simulated pulses into the

duplicated data stream. This avoids the possibility of
injected data interfering with the live data stream.

The injection system is run as a Docker1 stack on the
CHIME/FRB analysis cluster. Docker is an OS-level
virtualization service that is used to make CHIME/FRB
container images, allowing for analysis tasks to be per-
formed in a standardized runtime environment. This
enables the CHIME/FRB analysis cluster, consisting of
ten worker nodes, to easily run containerized tasks that
otherwise may have had very diﬀerent software depen-
dencies. The injection system’s API (mimic) is outlined
in §3.1. Requests to inject synthetic pulses are sent to
the API via the InjectionDriver (§3.2). The param-
eters of each requested pulse are stored in the Injec-
tion Database (§3.3), which is queried in L2/L3 by the
InjectionSnatcher (§3.4) in order to match incoming
event headers with injections. The full set of interac-
tions between the injection system and CHIME/FRB
nodes is shown in Figure 1.

3.1. The Injection API

Injections are orchestrated by an API named mimic.
This API is written in the sanic2 framework, and is
naturally asynchronous, meaning it can handle many
simultaneous requests from multiple clients. At its core,
mimic manages injections in the realtime pipeline by
interacting with L1 nodes via remote procedure calls
(RPCs). A summary of how mimic interfaces with the
realtime pipeline is given in Figure 1. The RPC servers
outﬁtted on each L1 node have two crucial functions for
the purposes of injections.

First, requests can be made to start (or stop) the
duplication of on-sky data for one set of four intensity
beams that are being processed by a given node. One
of the 128 L1 nodes has been outﬁtted as a “receiver
node” (L1(cid:48)) which processes duplicated beams from the
“sender node” using the same software as the other
L1 nodes. Though this reduces the amount of beams
searched in the CHIME/FRB experiment (as the beams
that would have been processed by L1(cid:48) are replaced by
duplicated beams), the L1 node processing the least sen-
sitive beams in the array was chosen to host L1(cid:48) so as
to maintain as much exposure as possible.

Second, a request can be made to the L1(cid:48) node to add
a synthetic FRB into the datastream of one of the du-
plicated beams. The data from the receiver node are
tagged with an arbitrary oﬀset in their labelled beam
numbers before being sent to L2/L3, which prevents
the misclassiﬁcation of injections as astrophysical sig-

5

nals. Because synthetic bursts are added into duplicated
beams, CHIME/FRB remains nominally sensitive to as-
trophysical signals in the non-duplicated beams.

3.2. The InjectionDriver

The mimic server only handles requests to start/stop
into dupli-
beam duplication and inject pulses
cated beams.
A separate module known as the
InjectionDriver organizes a list of injection requests
to be sent to the API. The InjectionDriver operates
by reading an hdf53 ﬁle containing a population of FRBs
which have been generated for injection. The orchestra-
tion of these injections is more-or-less straightforward,
but with some important technical considerations.

The outgoing L1 sender network can only handle du-
plicating one set of four beams at a given time, and
bonsai requires a moderate amount of time (∼several
minutes) for its variance estimation of incoming data
to reach a steady state. Given these two restrictions,
the driver schedules injections in bundles of four beams.
Each bundle’s injections are run to completion before
moving on to the next. This approach is not as ideal
as fully randomizing the injections across all beams, be-
cause intermittent RFI could plague the detection statis-
tics for injections in a given set of beams. However, it
is time eﬃcient since bonsai’s running variance estima-
tion needs to stabilize each time a new set of beams is
streamed to L1(cid:48). Thus, going through four sequential
sender beams at a time minimizes the waiting time.

The InjectionDriver handles four parallel threads
at a time. Each thread is responsible for making re-
quests to the injections API to generate pulses for one
beam. The threads keep a running tally of the injections
they have completed. The tallies from each thread are
relayed to the InjectionDriver, which in turn keeps
track of completed injections for a given schedule ﬁle.
Such bookkeeping is important because networking is-
sues or unplanned system shutdowns can otherwise in-
terrupt injections.

3.3. The Injection Database

Injection and detection parameters for injections
are stored in a RethinkDB4 database hosted on the
CHIME/FRB archiver. The database itself is not a part
of the mimic stack, but rather is built as a part of an-
other containerized project which manages various ser-
vices and databases for CHIME/FRB. When injecting
synthetic pulses, each injection is labelled with a unique
ID. Further, a program name can be given to a set of

1 https://www.docker.com/
2 https://github.com/huge-success/sanic

3 https://www.hdfgroup.org/solutions/hdf5/
4 https://rethinkdb.com/

6

Injection Parameters
Expected Arrival Time
Dispersion Measure
Fluence
Width (Gaussian FWHM)
τ1 GHz
Spectral index (β)
Spectral running (ζ)
Beam number
Beam coordinates

Detection Parameters
Detection Time
bonsai DM
bonsai SNR
bonsai downsampling tree
bonsai spectral index (β(cid:48))
L2 RFI Grade

Units
UTC timestamp
pc cm−3
Jy ms
ms
ms
Unitless
Unitless
Unitless
Unitless

Units
UTC Timestamp
pc cm−3
Unitless
Unitless
Unitless (May be ±3)
Unitless (Graded from 0–10)

Table 2. A list of the injection parameters currently avail-
able as input to mimic, and relevant detection parameters for
injections detected in the realtime pipeline.

injections to make the full results of any given run re-
trievable using the program name as a key.

The injection database’s role is to store both the in-
jection parameters and header detection parameters for
each injection. A list of relevant parameters stored is
given in Table 2. RethinkDB is a good choice of architec-
ture for the injections database because it is malleable
– if the capability of injections is expanded with new
input parameters (e.g.
scattering index α), then pre-
vious database entries will remain unaﬀected. Within
RethinkDB it is also possible to tag database entries
with an expiration time. This is useful because it al-
lows a list of active injections to be retrieved, which will
expire if undetected by the InjectionSnatcher within
the expiration time. After expiration, injections are re-
moved from the list of active injections, and labelled as
non-detections.

within twice the DM error of an active injection, then
the detection is taken as a match to the injection. The
detection parameters for the event are then sent to the
database, matched with the corresponding injection pa-
rameters.

4. MODELLING SYNTHETIC FRBS

An important part of ensuring the injection system
simulates realistic on-sky FRBs is the process of prop-
erly modelling both the FRB itself and the eﬀects of the
detection system.
In the case of CHIME/FRB, injec-
tions are input into beamformed intensity data. Thus,
beyond modelling the FRB itself, beamforming eﬀects
must be forward modelled.

4.1. The simpulse Library
The simpulse5 library generates dispersed, scattered
FRBs, assuming Gaussian intrinsic burst widths. While
the process of generating a dispersed pulse with a Gaus-
sian width then convolving with a one-sided scattering
exponential is simple, simpulse also forward models dis-
persion smearing, ensuring a realistic mock FRB.

For now, simpulse assumes that the scattering index
α is ﬁxed to −4, and that pulse dispersion is exactly
proportional to ν−2. Spectrally, FRB emission (par-
ticularly from repeating sources) is not always well de-
scribed by a power law, as very band-limited patches
of emission are often observed (see e.g. CHIME/FRB
Collaboration et al. 2019a). This motivates instead the
use of a “running” power law to describe FRB spectra,
with an additional index ζ known as the spectral run-
ning (Pleunis et. al. 2021):

(cid:19)β+ζ ln (ν/ν0)

Sν ∝

(cid:18) ν
ν0

,

(1)

where ν0 is known as the “pivotal frequency” and is a
chosen, ﬁxed constant.

3.4. The InjectionSnatcher

4.2. The Beam Model

One of the most important aspects of the injection
system is properly ﬂagging injections as they come
through the realtime pipeline, labelling them as either
detected or not detected. The InjectionSnatcher,
which acts as a module in the L2/L3 pipeline, fulﬁlls
this purpose. Built largely from the framework of the
KnownSourceSifter (see CHIME/FRB Collaboration
et al. 2018; Pleunis 2021), the InjectionSnatcher in-
spects all incoming L2 event header metadata and com-
pares their expected arrival times and DMs to the list of
active injections in the database. If the arrival time of
an L2 header matches within half a second of an active
injection and if the DM of that same L2 header matches

Aside from an FRB’s intrinsic properties, the injection
system models the combined spectral signatures of the
CHIME telescope’s primary beam and the FFT synthe-
sized beams. While the eﬀect of the FFT synthesized
beams is known precisely and can be calculated, this
is not true of the telescope’s primary beam. To model
the telescope primary beam, the CHIME Intensity Map-
ping team developed a method which ﬁts a coupled an-
tenna model using a cylindrical reﬂector to holography
data of steady source and solar transits. The results

5 https://github.com/kmsmith137/simpulse

7

Figure 2. A comparison between the expected and measured ﬂuence of Cygnus A from CHIME/FRB intensity data. The
spectrum was observed on 2020 September 7, after the application of the f 2
good factor in the gain conversion process. Frequencies
without measured data points are excised due to contamination from RFI.

of the ﬁt were saved to a ﬁle, which has been inter-
polated into a beam model module used for sensitivity
calculations with CHIME/FRB (see CHIME Collabora-
tion et al. 2022a,c, for examples of the CHIME primary
beam). We provide a public release of one of the early
versions of the beam model used for the purposes of in-
jections.6

The beam model uses an (x, y) coordinate system,
which is topocentric. In these coordinates, x and y rep-
resent the projection of the sky on a unit circle drawn
on the local ground plane, with zenith as the origin. So,
an (x, y) coordinate can be seen as a transformation of
(RA, Dec) for a speciﬁc date and time. CHIME refer-
ences its calibration to the position of CygA in the beam
at meridian, (xCygA, yCygA), meaning the beam sensitiv-
ities for each of the 16k frequencies is ﬁxed at unity at
that location. From there, the sensitivity arrays are in
units relative to the sensitivity at that location, with
frequency averaged sensitivities at the center of each of
the 1,024 beams ranging from ∼0.05−1.1 depending on
the beam’s location. The full array of sensitivities from
the beam model are passed as input to the simpulse
workers, and modulate the pulse before it is sent to du-
plicated beams for injection. The integrated ﬂuence of

6 https://github.com/chime-frb-open-data/

chime-frb-beam-model

the pulse is not conserved in this process, since the beam
sensitivity aﬀects the observed brightness.

4.3. Calibration

Ensuring that synthetic pulses are being injected in
meaningful, physical energy units is a critical step in
the process of simulating injections. Because CHIME
calibrates daily on steady sources, beamformed intensity
data for CHIME/FRB are calibrated up to a constant
multiplied by the beam model. The total conversion
factor is:

C =

(1024fgood)2 × 128
42 × 0.806745 × 400

BF units Jy−1,

(2)

are

the units

of beamformed
where BF units
CHIME/FRB data. Each of the numerical
factors
in Equation 2 comes from careful bookkeeping in the
CHIME calibration process and the intensity data chan-
nelization:

• The factor of (1024fgood)2 represents the coherent
sum of 1,024 antenna signals weighted by the num-
ber of CHIME feeds that are labelled as “good”
during the array calibration process (fgood, typi-
cally ranges from 0.9 to 1.0). Feeds not labelled as
good have an issue in their analog system, result-
ing in either a lack of signal or excess noise, and
are given zero weight in the beamformer.

8

Figure 3. Top: A cumulative histogram showing the fraction of detected injections with respect to the absolute diﬀerence
between the expected and detected arrival time of the injection (f (≤ ∆t), ∆t = |ti − td| where ti refers to the expected
arrival time and td refers to the detected arrival time). Colored lines show the expected detection time uncertainty for each L1
dedispersion tree, introduced as a result of the DM uncertainty from 400–800 MHz (0−4, see Table 1). Bottom: A similar
cumulative histogram for the absolute diﬀerence between the injected and detected DM of the injection (∆DM = |DMi − DMd|).
Colored lines show the DM uncertainty for each L1 dedispersion tree (0–4, see Table 1).

• The factor of 128 represents the incoherent sum of
128 time samples in the up-channelization process.

• The factor of 1

42 comes from a factor of 4 intro-
duced in the baseband data during the East-West
beamforming process across CHIME’s 4 cylinders.

•

1

0.806745 is a factor that is introduced in the
polyphase ﬁlter bank (PFB) bandpass correction
(see Price 2016). The up-channelization process,
coupled with the sample-to-sample correlations in-
duced by the PFB, results in a factor-of-2 ripple
in the bandpass on 400 kHz scales, which must be
corrected. The correction introduces the quoted
overall scaling factor.

• The factor of

1
400 is a conﬁgurable, deterministic
factor that was chosen solely to adjust the scale
of the downstream data. Its value has been static
since CHIME/FRB’s commissioning.

Given the calibration factor C, data can be converted
between CHIME/FRB BF units and Jy units. When
CHIME/FRB began its pre-commissioning phase, the
input data from L0 to L1 did not account for the fac-
tor f 2
good. Since the value fgood varies with time, the
L1 intensity data could not be calibrated to a static
factor in real time. However, in 2020 April, a correc-
tion for the factor f 2
good was applied to the script which

manages gain conversions, making CHIME/FRB inten-
sity data calibrated in real time up to a static factor
and beam model. The use of this calibration constant
was tested against CygA transit data and compared to
CygA’s expected Jy spectrum, as shown in Figure 2.
The calibrated ﬂux was consistently within ∼5% of the
expectation.

5. A POPULATION OF SYNTHETIC FRBS

When generating a population of FRBs to be injected,
a set of input FRB property distributions must be cho-
sen. Ideally, the distribution of synthetic burst parame-
ters should result in a reasonable fraction of detected
events while still spanning many interesting parts of
parameter space, such as large DM and/or scattering.
Injection distributions should in principle be based on
physical models, as then the model parameters in the
true population of bursts could be better understood
when comparing the results of injections to the detected
FRB population. However, there are not yet physically
well-motivated property distributions on which to model
FRB populations.

In order to ensure synthetic bursts occupy an inter-
esting region of parameter space while remaining de-
tectable, CHIME/FRB currently uses kernel density
estimation alongside a combination of uniform,
log-
normal, and power-law distributions, parts of which
come from ﬁts to the detection distributions in the ﬁrst

9

Figure 4. A comparison of the injected ﬂuence and ﬂu-
ence pipeline output for a synthetic test pulse across a range
of injected ﬂuences. There are two sets of points for each
injected ﬂuence: the lighter blue points show the calibra-
tion pipeline output without correcting for the beam model
(BM) sensitivities, whereas the darker blue points include a
BM correction. Error bars represent an approximately 1σ
uncertainty. The dashed gray line shows where the ﬂuence
pipeline output would perfectly match the injection input
ﬂuence and the gray points show where the ﬂuence pipeline
began reporting the ﬂuence of a noise peak instead of the
synthetic pulse.

CHIME/FRB catalog (“catalog distributions”). The de-
tails of the distributions for the relevant injection pa-
rameters in Table 2 are described here brieﬂy:

• For the DM distribution, 90% of the population
is drawn from a log-normal ﬁt to the catalog dis-
tribution, while 10% of the population is drawn
from a uniform distribution between 0 and 5000
pc cm−3.

• For the ﬂuence distribution, the population is
drawn from a power-law distribution with index
γ = −1.0. The power law distribution was chosen
to be shallower than the Euclidean γ = −1.5 so as
to more eﬃciently sample rare, bright bursts.

• For the intrinsic width distribution, 90% of the
population is drawn from a log-normal ﬁt to the
catalog distribution, while 10% of the population
is drawn from a uniform distribution between 0
and 100 ms.

• The distributions for the spectral indices (β and
ζ) are drawn from a kernel density estimator ﬁts
to the catalog distributions.

Figure 5. The ﬂuence and SNR relationship for bursts
in the ﬁrst CHIME/FRB catalog (coloured by broadened
width) and detected injections (in gray). Note a cut has
been made to include only events within the FWHM sensi-
tivity of the most sensitive beam column. This is because
FRBs detected there have the most trustworthy ﬂuences in
the catalog sample.

• For the scattering distribution, 90% of the popula-
tion is drawn from a log-normal ﬁt to the catalog
distribution, while 10% of the population is drawn
from a uniform distribution between 0 and 100 ms.

For their spatial distribution, we randomly sample 106
locations uniformly distributed on the celestial sphere
in telescope coordinates (coordinates in which the tele-
scope is ﬁxed). Each coordinate is sampled indepen-
dently. Of these, we discard all locations: that are below
the horizon; for which the band-averaged primary beam
response is less than 10−2 in beam model units; and for
which the band-averaged response does not reach 10−3
in any of the 1,024 synthesized beams. The fraction of
sky locations surviving these cuts is fsky = 0.0277 (an
important factor in the all-sky completeness account-
ing).

For the ﬁrst CHIME/FRB catalog, a set of 5 million
synthetic FRBs were ﬁrst generated from the above dis-
tributions and randomly assigned to the surviving sky
locations. For each FRB we calculate an upper limit
on the SNR assuming the only radiometer noise is a
system equivalent ﬂux density (SEFD) of 45 Jy (on
meridian at the declination of Cyg A). This is on the
lower end of measurements of the SEFD, which vary
from 30 to 80 Jy across the band. We account for the
frequency-dependent beam model, FRB spectrum, and
FRB temporal width, and assume an optimal signal-to-

10

noise weighted average over frequency. In early trials we
injected events for which this upper limit exceeded 9σ
(CHIME/FRB’s detection threshold for the majority of
the ﬁrst catalog). However, the idealized assumptions in
the limit turned out to be too conservative, resulting in
a very low detection eﬃciency. As such, we raised this
threshold to 20σ, resulting in an acceptable eﬃciency.

The result was a population whose sky distribution
traced the beam sensitivity. This allowed not only for in-
jections in the primary lobe of the CHIME/FRB beam,
but also for very bright injections in the sidelobes.

Of the 5 million synthetic FRBs, ∼97,000 were de-
termined to be potentially detectable by CHIME/FRB.
The InjectionDriver requested the injection of these
events between 2020 August 14 and 2020 September 22.
Of the ∼97,000 events, only ∼85,000 were actually in-
jected, as some injection requests were dropped due to
networking issues. Of the successful injections, ∼30,000
were detected by L1 with SNR > 9 and an L2 RFI grade
> 5 (the threshold set to distinguish RFI and astrophys-
ical events), or an SNR > 100 (a high SNR override put
in place to avoid losing very bright events). The full
dataset of 5 million synthetic FRBs, the subset of those
that were injected, and a data usage tutorial is available
at the CHIME/FRB Open Data portal.7

6. RESULTS

6.1. Verifying the InjectionSnatcher

Because the L1 system generates so many triggers,
it was important to ensure the InjectionSnatcher was
properly classifying injected bursts and not triggers from
RFI. During the construction of the injection system,
the InjectionSnatcher was tested for a set of several
thousand simple, bright bursts to ensure its eﬃcacy. The
snatcher successfully retrieved these bursts with nearly
100% detection eﬃciency, assuring its ability to match
active injections with the corresponding detections.

A cumulative histogram of the absolute DM and time
diﬀerence between injections and detections in the ﬁnal
injection sample is shown in Figure 3. The large major-
ity of events are detected within the ﬁrst few trees’ DM
and time search widths, which gives conﬁdence that few
(if any) headers produced by RFI are being incorrectly
classiﬁed as injections.

6.2. Verifying Pulse Calibration

Although the injection constant shown in Equation
2 was tested against steady source transit data, the
calibration of synthetic pulses also needed to be veri-

7 https://chime-frb-open-data.github.io/

Figure 6. The fraction of events labelled as RFI (fRFI) for
each bonsai downsampling tree. While there is a slight in-
crease in the fraction of events labelled as RFI going from
trees 0–3, fRFI is very large (∼75%) for the largest down-
sampling tree.

ﬁed. Since injections were performed after the L1 inten-
sity data buﬀer, it was not possible to request callback
data of injected FRBs and test their calibration using
either CHIME/FRB’s calibration pipeline or the cali-
bration constant. Instead, calibration was tested oﬄine
by injecting a synthetic pulse into the intensity callback
data of an FRB detected in one of the most sensitive
CHIME/FRB beams after the implementation of the
fgood scaling.

The test pulse used to verify calibration was narrow
(∼1 ms) and unscattered, and injected across a range
of ﬂuences without dispersion, as FRB detections are
dedispersed before being sent to the calibration pipeline.
Sensitivities from the beam model were applied assum-
ing the pulse was detected in the center of the formed
beam. The resulting synthetic data were run through
the CHIME/FRB calibration pipeline in order to com-
pare the injection ﬂuence and the pipeline output ﬂuence
(see Andersen 2021, for details on the CHIME/FRB
ﬂuence pipeline). The comparison is shown in Figure
4. Normally the ﬂuence estimation from the calibration
pipeline does not take into account the primary beam
model, which explains why the raw ﬂuence pipeline out-
put is systematically lower than the input ﬂuence of the
synthetic pulses. When a correction incorporating the
sensitivity of the beam model is applied, the ﬂuence
pipeline output matches almost exactly the input ﬂu-
ence for most pulses, as expected. The two test pulses
at and below the 1 Jy ms input ﬂuence level in Fig-
ure 4 do not have reasonable ﬂuence pipeline output as
upon inspection those bursts were too faint, causing the
pipeline to measure a noise peak.

Figure 5 compares the correlation of ﬂuence and SNR
for FRBs in the ﬁrst CHIME/FRB catalog and the
population of injections used for the inference analysis.
To best compare the ﬂuences of injections and catalog
bursts, a cut was made on both samples to contain only
pulses within the FWHM sensitivity of the most sen-
sitive beam column. This cut was necessary because

11

Figure 8.
Similar to Figure 7, but as a function of
DM instead of broadened width. Only pulses with DM
> 100 pc cm−3 are shown, as few injections had a lower
DM. There is no obvious correlation of detection fraction as
a function of DM for any ﬂuence bins, unlike in Figure 7.

the width and inversely proportional to the DM) when
detrending along the frequency axis (Raﬁei-Ravandi et
al. 2022, in preparation). Though the algorithm has
been iteratively improved, there is clearly a plateau in
Figure 5 past ∼100 Jy ms beyond which ﬂuence is not
a strong indicator of SNR. Though part of this plateau
may be attributed to clipping, it may also be attributed
to detections of bright events in the sidelobes of CHIME.
The most impactful bias of CHIME/FRB comes from
classifying events with large broadened widths, particu-
larly due to a high degree of scattering. We deﬁne the
broadened width similar to (Chawla et al. 2017):

(cid:113)

Wb =

W 2

i + t2

samp + t2

chan + τ 2

600 MHz .

(3)

Here, Wi is the intrinsic width, tsamp is the sampling
time, tchan is the dispersive delay within a frequency
channel, and τ600 MHz is the scattering time at 600 MHz.
Wb is used as a burst width metric because bonsai
does not include a scattering tail in its search, making
it diﬃcult to disentangle the eﬀects of scattering and
width on pipeline sensitivity. Figure 6 shows the frac-
tion of injected pulses classiﬁed as RFI as a function
of the bonsai tree index (see Table 1). While the RFI
fraction increases somewhat steadily from trees 0-3, its
increase is dramatic in tree 4, where all of the widest
pulses are detected. The selection eﬀects as a function
of width are also apparent in Figure 7, where the de-
tection fraction of events steadily decreases as width in-
creases. The system’s bias against the widest events can
largely be explained by the data used to train L1b and
L2’s RFI excision algorithms. The astrophysical dataset

Figure 7. 2D histogram showing the detection fraction of
events as a function of ﬂuence and broadened width. The
histogram only shows bins with ﬂuences < 103 Jy ms, as
pulses with larger ﬂuences made up only a small fraction of
injections. Black crosses mark bins where there were fewer
than 10 events and do not give a reliable detection fraction.
For each ﬂuence bin, there is an obvious gradient where de-
tection fraction increases as pulse width decreases.

CHIME/FRB calibrates its FRBs using steady source
transits from the center of beams in the most sensitive
beam column only, making the derived ﬂuences of bursts
detected outside of these regions lower bounds.

The relationship between ﬂuence and SNR should be
consistent between injections and CHIME/FRB catalog
bursts because the population inference analysis meth-
ods used in CHIME/FRB Collaboration et al. (2021)
employ the detection SNR as a proxy for the ﬂuence.
While it’s diﬃcult to statistically compare the 2D dis-
tributions, it is clear by eye that the two populations
follow a similar trend.

6.3. Pipeline Eﬃciency

Many aspects of the CHIME/FRB pipeline have in-
trinsic biases when detecting FRBs. This was noted
ﬁrst in CHIME/FRB Collaboration et al. (2019b), where
many highly scattered events were detected even though
simulations of the L1 pipeline indicated CHIME/FRB
is biased against these kinds of events. However, the
implementation of the injection system has allowed
a greater understanding of where these biases arise
throughout the CHIME/FRB pipeline, and how they
impact the selection function described in CHIME/FRB
Collaboration et al. (2021).

One way bright, low-DM FRBs can be missed by the
pipeline is through clipping during L1 RFI mitigation.
In particular, wide bursts at low-DM tend to have a
signiﬁcant amount of signal removed (proportional to

12

for this training comprised primarily pulsar pulses de-
tected by CHIME/FRB, which are typically narrow. By
contrast, the RFI dataset contained many RFI signals
resulting from aircraft transits, which are typically very
wide. The result is a machine learning classiﬁer that is
strongly biased against highly scattered events, which is
reﬂected in CHIME/FRB’s selection function.

It is also interesting to consider any potential biases
in the pipeline to high DM events. Events with large
DMs are particularly useful for probing the IGM, and it
is interesting to note that the ﬁrst CHIME/FRB catalog
only contains a few events with DM > 1000 pc cm−3.
However, CHIME/FRB Collaboration et al. (2021) did
not ﬁnd major selection eﬀects as a function of DM. This
is apparent in Figure 8, where the detection fraction
does not depend strongly on DM. Since this is the case,
it is an indication that FRBs with higher DMs than that
detected by CHIME/FRB are fainter, as CHIME/FRB
is not biased against them by their high DM alone. This
will be explored in the future by including correlations
between DM and brightness in the selection function
(see, e.g., James et al. 2022).

7. SUMMARY & FUTURE PLANS

We have presented the injection system used in
CHIME/FRB Collaboration et al. (2021) to determine
the selection function of the CHIME/FRB pipeline. The
system was also used to monitor system sensitivity in the
presence of factors such as a changing RFI environment
and periodically re-trained RFI mitigation algorithms.
We used the system to inject a population of ∼85,000
FRBs as described in §3. The synthetic pulses were cal-
ibrated in real time and drawn from populations based
on the detected CHIME/FRB distributions.

We have learned what aspects of the CHIME/FRB

pipeline impact the selection function:

• The truncation of extreme values for very bright
events (“clipping”) limits CHIME/FRB’s sensitiv-
ity to the brightest FRBs. This eﬀect, along-
side bright events being detected in CHIME’s low-
sensitivity sidelobes, contribute to a plateau in the
Fluence and SNR relationship seen in Figure 5.

• The CHIME/FRB pipeline has a bias against
highly scattered events (Figures 6 and 7), likely
resulting from the choice of data used to train
the RFI mitigation algorithms. As described in
CHIME/FRB Collaboration et al. (2021), this sug-
gests a large population of highly scattered events
remain presently undetected by CHIME/FRB.

• There is an absence of a strong selection against
high DM events (Figure 8) suggesting that the

dearth of high DM events in Catalog 1 is real and
could arise from a DM-ﬂuence correlation (Shin et
al. 2022, in preparation).

In the future, we plan on expanding the injection
system to operate on the entire array of CHIME/FRB
beams at once, instead of only four replicated beams at
a time. This will make the injection process far more ef-
ﬁcient, allowing for a much larger sample of injections in
preparation for the second CHIME/FRB catalog. With
a larger sample, we will be able to generate an improved
selection function, including correlations between im-
portant parameters such as DM and ﬂux/scattering, and
hence more accurately characterize the true population
of FRBs based on the sample detected by CHIME/FRB.
We also plan to use the information gained from the in-
jection system to improve the CHIME/FRB pipeline’s
sensitivity. For example, the machine learning algo-
rithms which currently bias the FRB search against de-
tecting highly scattered bursts will be retrained on more
robust astrophysical and RFI sources.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge that CHIME is located on the
traditional, ancestral, and unceded territory of the
Syilx/Okanagan people. We are grateful to the staﬀ
of the Dominion Radio Astrophysical Observatory,
which is operated by the National Research Council
of Canada. CHIME is funded by a grant from the
Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI) 2012 Leading
Edge Fund (Project 31170) and by contributions from
the provinces of British Columbia, Qu´ebec and Ontario.
The CHIME/FRB Project is funded by a grant from the
CFI 2015 Innovation Fund (Project 33213) and by con-
tributions from the provinces of British Columbia and
Qu´ebec, and by the Dunlap Institute for Astronomy and
Astrophysics at the University of Toronto. Additional
support was provided by the Canadian Institute for Ad-
vanced Research (CIFAR), McGill University and the
McGill Space Institute thanks to the Trottier Family
Foundation, and the University of British Columbia.

F.A.D is supported by the four year fellowship FRB
research at UBC is supported by an NSERC Discov-
ery Grant and by the Canadian Institute for Advanced
Research. J.M.P is a Kavli Fellow. K.S. is supported
by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program.
K.W.M.
is supported by an NSF Grant (2008031).
M.D. is supported by a Canada Research Chair, Kil-
lam Fellowship, NSERC Discovery Grant, CIFAR, and
by the FRQNT Centre de Recherche en Astrophysique
du Qu´ebec (CRAQ) M.Me. is supported by an NSERC

13

PGS-D award. M.Mu.
is supported by a DOE grant
(DE-SC0022342) P.S. is a Dunlap Fellow. V.M.K. holds
the Lorne Trottier Chair in Astrophysics & Cosmology,
a Distinguished James McGill Professorship, and re-

ceives support from an NSERC Discovery grant (RGPIN
228738-13), from an R. Howard Webster Foundation Fel-
lowship from CIFAR, and from the FRQNT CRAQ. Z.P.
is a Dunlap Fellow.

REFERENCES

Agarwal, D., Lorimer, D. R., Surnis, M. P., et al. 2020,

Hall, M., Courteau, S., Dutton, A. A., McDonald, M., &

MNRAS, 497, 352

Andersen, B. 2021, PhD thesis, McGill University
Biwer, C., Barker, D., Batch, J. C., et al. 2017, PhRvD, 95,

062002

Chatterjee, S., Law, C. J., Wharton, R. S., et al. 2017,

Nature, 541, 58

Chawla, P., Kaspi, V. M., Josephy, A., et al. 2017, The

Astrophysical Journal, 844, 140

Zhu, Y. 2012, MNRAS, 425, 2741

James, C. W., Prochaska, J. X., Macquart, J. P., et al.

2022, MNRAS, 509, 4775

Law, C. J., Bower, G. C., Burke-Spolaor, S., et al. 2018, in
Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series,
Vol. 517, Science with a Next Generation Very Large
Array, ed. E. Murphy, 773

Lorimer, D. R., Bailes, M., McLaughlin, M. A., Narkevic,

CHIME Collaboration, Amiri, M., Bandura, K., et al.

D. J., & Crawford, F. 2007, Science, 318, 777

2022a, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2201.07869
—. 2022b, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2202.01242
—. 2022c, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2201.11822
CHIME/FRB Collaboration, Amiri, M., Bandura, K., et al.

2018, The Astrophysical Journal, 863, 48

CHIME/FRB Collaboration, Andersen, B. C., Band ura,
K., et al. 2019a, The Astrophysical journal, 885, L24

CHIME/FRB Collaboration, Amiri, M., Bandura, K., et al.

2019b, Nature, 566, 230

CHIME/FRB Collaboration, :, Amiri, M., et al. 2021,

arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2106.04352

Cordes, J. M., & Lazio, T. J. W. 2002, arXiv preprint

astro-ph/0207156

Gupta, V., Flynn, C., Farah, W., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 501,

2316

Ng, C., Vanderlinde, K., Paradise, A., et al. 2017, arXiv

e-prints, arXiv:1702.04728

Patel, C., Agarwal, D., Bhardwaj, M., et al. 2018, The

Astrophysical Journal, 869, 181

Petroﬀ, E., Hessels, J. W. T., & Lorimer, D. R. 2021, arXiv

e-prints, arXiv:2107.10113

Pleunis, Z. 2021, PhD thesis, McGill University
Pleunis et. al., Z. 2021, The Astrophysical Journal

Price, D. C. 2016, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1607.03579
Taylor, J. H. 1974, AAPS, 15, 367
Tendulkar, S. P., Bassa, C. G., Cordes, J. M., et al. 2017,

The Astrophysical journal, 834, L7

Yao, J. M., Manchester, R. N., & Wang, N. 2017, The

Astrophysical Journal, 835, 29

