Leaky wave characterisation using spectral methods

Evripides Georgiades,∗ Michael J.S. Lowe, and Richard V. Craster†
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Imperial College London, London, SW7 1AY, United Kingdom

(Dated: June 15, 2022)

Leaky waves are an important class of waves, particularly for guiding waves along structures
embedded within another medium; a mismatch in wavespeeds often leads to leakage of energy from
the waveguide, or interface, into the medium, which consequently attenuates the guided wave. The
accurate and eﬃcient identiﬁcation of theoretical solutions for leaky waves is a key requirement for
the choices of modes and frequencies required for non-destructive evaluation inspection techniques.
We choose a typical situation to study: an elastic waveguide with a ﬂuid on either side. Historically,
leaky waves are identiﬁed via root-ﬁnding methods that have issues with conditioning, or, numerical
methods‘ that struggle with the exponential growth of solutions at inﬁnity. By building upon a
spectral collocation method, we show how it can be adjusted to ﬁnd exponentially growing solutions,
i.e. leaky waves, leading to an accurate, fast and eﬃcient identiﬁcation of their dispersion properties.
The key concept required is a mapping, in the ﬂuid region, that allows for exponential growth of
the physical solution at inﬁnity, whilst the mapped numerical setting decays. We illustrate this by
studying leaky Lamb waves in an elastic waveguide immersed between two diﬀerent ﬂuids and verify
this using the commercially available software Disperse.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Ultrasonic guided waves are of enduring interest for
Non-Destructive Evaluation (NDE), where guided waves,
such as Lamb waves [1], are utilised for the inspection or
structural health monitoring of single or multilayered sys-
tems of plates or pipes [2–5]; the complexities and charac-
teristics of Lamb wave propagation for diﬀerent systems
and media is of paramount importance in identifying the
appropriate choices in terms of frequencies and modes[6].
The route to eﬀective inspection techniques depends crit-
ically upon predictive models focused on identifying the
dispersion curves and associated stress and displacement
ﬁelds which have consequentially been the focus of much
attention.

Leaky waves arise in immersed guiding structures: it is
common for a structure of interest to consist of an elastic
waveguide partially in contact or fully immersed in ﬂu-
ids. In this scenario the Lamb waves change their char-
acter as energy is no longer necessarily conﬁned within
the boundaries of a solid waveguide. When coupled to
inviscid ﬂuid(s) of inﬁnite extent, two types of guided
waves arise [7]. The ﬁrst are guided waves remaining
conﬁned to the solid and immediately-adjacent ﬂuid, be-
cause their wave speeds are below the speed of bulk waves
in the adjacent ﬂuid; these include, at high frequencies,
Scholte waves [8]; these are not the focus of this article.
The second type of guided wave has energy leakage, in

∗ evripides.georgiades18@imperial.ac.uk
† Also at: Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London,

London, SW7 1AY, United Kingdom

the form of acoustic energy radiation from the waveguide
into the adjacent ﬂuid(s). This leads to attenuation, i.e.
decay in amplitude, along the waveguide, and modes in
the ﬂuid(s) whose amplitudes grow exponentially in the
direction transverse to the waveguide. These are known
as leaky Lamb waves [9–11] and are the focus of this
study.

A key role in multiple areas of wave physics is played
by leaky waves, for instance in guiding structures in elec-
tromagnetism [12] where a mismatch of refractive indices
between waveguide and exterior medium leads to energy
leakage and analogous leaky waves. A comprehensive re-
cent review [13], in the electromagnetic waveguiding set-
ting, usefully rationalises the phenomenon of the expo-
nential growth of leaky waves and outlines applications in
optics and electromagnetism. In acoustics and elasticity,
leaky Rayleigh waves feature prominently in acoustic mi-
croscopy [14], in material characterisation of the waveg-
uide [15] or of the exterior ﬂuid [16], and underwater
structural acoustics [17], while leaky Lamb waves [9, 18]
feature in the NDE of composites; there is therefore natu-
rally considerable interest in their accurate identiﬁcation.

An, initially counter-intuitive, exponential growth of
amplitude at inﬁnity, and corresponding complex-valued
roots of dispersion relations, characterise leaky waves and
this results in numerical issues when cleanly attempting
to identify their dispersion characteristics, while doing so
remains a challenge [19]. For those unfamiliar with leaky
waves, the exponential growth of the mode might appear
to be perplexing and to contradict energy conservation; a
schematic showing the origin of this growth can be seen
in Fig. 1. We choose an observation point, P , along

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

8

]
n
y
d
-
u
l
f
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
7
7
9
6
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
a waveguide with attentuating waves propagating along
the waveguide with propagation constant kx, and then
consider the far-ﬁeld perpendicular to the guide. In the
far-ﬁeld we are observing the result of energy that leaked
from points preceding our observation point: the further
we go back along the guide then the larger the amplitude
of the energy that we observe. On this basis the expo-
nential growth we observe is actually a consequence of
energy conservation.

For non-leaky guided waves, tools for the retrieval of
dispersion characteristics are well-developed. Many nu-
merical methods have been employed thus far, with one
of the most established ones being Partial Wave Root
Finding (PWRF). The general principle of PWRF rou-
tines is the production of a matrix formulation of the
system in question, through a partial wave description
of the problem, and the subsequent employment of root-
ﬁnding routines for the evaluation of the roots of its char-
acteristic equation and dispersion curves. There exist
numerous such matrix formulations for single or multi-
layered systems, with the Transfer Matrix [20, 21] and
Global Matrix [22] methods being particularly appealing
due to their relatively simple formulations. In fact, the
commercially available software DISPERSE [23] utilises
some of these PWRF techniques for the computation of
dispersion characteristics of free and immersed systems,
providing an excellent veriﬁcation tool for the results of
our study. An overview of the main matrix formulations
used in PWRF routines for multilayered waveguides are
in Lowe [24].

Alas, PWRF routines have their limitations. To start
with, their dependence on matrix formulations can re-
sult in spurious solutions when these matrices become
computationally ill-conditioned. There are a couple of
notable instances when this can happen. Firstly, when
the product of layer thickness with frequency is large, and
evanescent waves are to be found, some matrix formula-
tions (e.g. Transfer Matrix) become unstable due to the
existence of coeﬃcients that grow and coeﬃcients that
decay within the matrices; this is known as the “large
fd" problem [25]. Secondly, matrices can become com-
putationally ill-conditioned when solutions near any of
the bulk wavespeeds of a multilayered structure are be-
ing searched for. In that scenario, careful ﬁltering needs
to be applied to discard such solutions; a task that be-
comes increasingly diﬃcult when genuine modes exist
nearby. Another important caveat of PWRF is that the
root ﬁnding algorithm sometimes fails to capture a root
of the characteristic equation and moves on to search-
ing for the next one. A ﬁne tuning of the convergence
parameters of the algorithm ﬁxes this problem, but re-
quires empirical knowledge of the existence of the mode

2

that was missed. This is especially problematic when
searching for the complex wavenumber solutions of leaky
or attenuating modes. Complex roots are a step change
in complexity beyond real roots and are an area in which
root-ﬁnding routines are known to struggle.

An alternative to PWRF routines are the more re-
cent methods based on a Semi-Analytical Finite Elements
(SAFE) approach. An early popular work using SAFE
was that of Gavric [26] on the study of waves propagat-
ing in a free rail. In that study, Hamilton’s principle was
applied for the derivation of the diﬀerential equations
of motion while Finite Elements (FE) were used for the
discretisation of the waveguide domain and the conver-
sion of the equations of motion into a solvable eigenvalue
problem. This allowed for the algebraic retrieval of all
the roots of the characteristic equation in the form of
eigensolutions. Moreover, SAFE allows for more ﬂexibil-
ity when compared to the more traditional PWRF meth-
ods, as it can be used for spatially-irregular waveguides
and complex structures where the latter becomes unsta-
ble. A few examples of this include the use of SAFE for
the study of wave propagation in systems of viscoelas-
tic media of arbitrary cross section [27], in axisymmetric
damped waveguides [28] and in systems of arbitrary cross
section coupled to inﬁnite solid media [29].

In line with the idea of discretising the domain of the
structure in question and then obtaining a solution of the
dispersion relation in the form of eigenvalues of an alge-
braic eigenvalue problem, Spectral Collocation Methods
(SCM) have also been employed in recent years for the
solution of guided wave problems [30]. The use of SCM
in physics [31–33], can be very intuitive and numerically
robust, making them an accessible tool for the algebraic
solution of diﬀerential equations in the form of eigenvalue
problems. Also, just like SAFE, and very importantly to
our study of leaky waves, SCM guarantee the retrieval of
all solutions of the diﬀerential equation, including com-
plex valued ones. Most notably, the use of global inter-
polants, such as polynomials or trigonometric functions,
as opposed to local ones, like the piece-wise polynomials
used in FE models, makes for an improved convergence
rate of discretisation and accuracy of the solution when
compared to SAFE methods.

Adamou and Craster [30] presented solutions for
guided waves in simple cylindrical geometries, using SCM
with Chebyshev polynomials, demonstrating their poten-
tial applications in the ﬁeld of guided waves. Following
[34] successfully used spectral
that, Karpﬁnger et al.
collocation to study multilayered cylindrical structures
consisted of isotropic media, Zharnikov et al.
[35] used
SCM to study and plot the dispersion curves of an in-

3

FIG. 1. The exponential growth of leaky Lamb waves, as a result of energy radiation at a ﬂuid-solid interface.

homogeneous anisotropic waveguide while Quintanilla et
[36–38] utilised the ﬂexibility of SCM for the study
al.
of ﬂat and cylindrical multilayered viscoelastic and gen-
erally anisotropic systems.

The studies mentioned above focus on closed waveg-
uide domains, however, the existence of open ﬂuid do-
main(s) adjacent to the waveguide constitutes a much
harder problem, with leaky waves posing a particularly
diﬃcult challenge due to the exponential growth of their
amplitude far into the open domain(s). While attempt-
ing to solve for a ﬂuid-loaded waveguide, root ﬁnding
techniques on the characteristic equation of Lamb waves
[23, 39, 40], suﬀer from the aforementioned limitation
of missing solutions of PWRF methods, while the often
purely complex solutions to be found increase this oc-
currence. As a result, PWRF can be quite cumbersome
when it comes to solving for leaky wave characteristics.

To overcome the issues of PWRF and complex roots,
researchers have recently turned their attention to the
discretisation of the domains of their problem in order
to obtain algebraic solutions through eigenvalue prob-
lems. Mazotti et al.
[41] presented a solution in which
a SAFE discretisation of the closed waveguide domain
was combined with a two and-a-half dimensional bound-
ary element method to represent an unbounded ﬂuid sur-
rounding. To obtain a solution, contour integrals on ar-
eas of the complex plane where solutions may lie were
performed. It was concluded that, in addition to the a
posteriori knowledge of areas of the complex plane where
possible solutions might exist, the formulation would be
numerically unstable when the guided modes’ poles lie
close to the compressional wavespeed in the ﬂuid. An-
other solution method was presented by Kiefer et al. [19]
where SCM were implemented for the discretisation of
the waveguide domain of a plate loaded on one or both
sides by an inviscid ﬂuid, the ﬂuid being identical on

both sides in the double-sided case.
In that study, in-
terface and boundary conditions were used to account
for ﬂuid loading, and a nonlinear eigenvalue problem, in
terms of the wavenumber along the length of the waveg-
uide, was produced. Through a change of variables [42],
the resulting nonlinear eigenvalue problem was reduced
to a polynomial one, and was later solved by a compan-
ion matrix linearisation [43] using traditional eigenvalue
problem solvers. This method can handle both leaky
and trapped modes in a single-sided ﬂuid loaded plate,
however, to the best of our knowledge, there is no suit-
able change of variables to reduce and solve the nonlinear
eigenvalue problem that is presented by a waveguide in
contact with two diﬀerent inviscid ﬂuids.

Alternatively, one could avoid having to deal with a
nonlinear eigenvalue problem by eﬀectively discretising
the open ﬂuid domain(s) and producing a linear prob-
lem. Unfortunately, the diﬃculties associated with accu-
rately capturing the exponential growth of leaky waves
in such a discretision, often forces the derivation of elab-
orate discritisation techniques such as the use of absorb-
ing layers or absorbing boundary conditions. Fan et al.
[44], implemented a SAFE method to model the prop-
agation of leaky waves along an immersed waveguide
with arbitrary non-circular cross section. A linear eigen-
value problem was achieved via the discretisation of the
ﬂuid domain through the application of an Absorbing
Region. Quintanilla [45] utilised SCM together with a
Perfectly Matched Layer to deal with the inﬁnite sur-
rounding medium. The accuracy of such models is, how-
ever, considerably dependent on the choice of absorbing
layers which in turn are dependent on the nature of the
problem and its speciﬁc solutions. This means that these
choices cannot be made for the general case in advance of
performing the solution; a further complicating feature.

Here we overcome the various diﬃculties outlined ear-

lier and we develop a SCM for the solution of leaky Lamb
waves propagating along a waveguide that is in contact
with two diﬀerent inviscid ﬂuid half-spaces. This new
solution is applied and demonstrated using a speciﬁc ex-
ample of a ﬂat elastic plate with a diﬀerent inviscid ﬂuid
half-space on each side. However, the solution has pow-
erful generic potential which we believe will enable all
classes of leaky waves to be solvable in follow-on devel-
opments.

For the discretisation of the closed waveguide domain,
Chebyshev polynomials are used. It is worth noting that
SAFE could have also been chosen here for the discretisa-
tion of the waveguide domain. We opt not to make that
choice as the simple geometry of the elastic waveguide
does not require the spatial versatility of SAFE, while,
on the other hand, it allows for the favourable spectral
accuracy of spectral collocation to easily be exploited.
To deal with the open ﬂuid half-spaces and the inher-
ent exponential growth of leaky waves, a new technique
for the discretisation of the open domains, that is based
on Rational Chebyshev polynomials and does not require
the use of any absorbing boundaries, is presented here.
A polynomial eigenvalue problem is then produced and
solved using a companion matrix linearisation and con-
ventional numerical solvers. Finally, the dispersion char-
acteristics and displacement ﬁelds of leaky Lamb waves
are computed. The case we present here is veriﬁed via
DISPERSE, to demonstrate the ability of our method to
produce accurate results. This is however, without a loss
of generality of our method.

This paper is organised as follows - Section II presents a
brief summary of the theory relevant to the solution of the
leaky Lamb wave problem of a waveguide in contact with
two diﬀerent inviscid ﬂuid half-spaces. This is followed
by a description of the discretisation method in Section
III, and a discussion of our results in Section IV.

4

FIG. 2. Schematic of an elastic waveguide of thickness 2d,
inﬁnite extent in the x and z directions, density ρ, longitudinal
wavespeed cl and transverse wavespeed ct, lying between two
inviscid ﬂuids of densities ρf1 , ρf2 and wavespeeds cf1 and
cf2 respectively.

The centreline of the waveguide is along y = 0, and
the axis orientation has waves propagating in the posi-
tive x direction with wavenumber kx. For given angu-
lar frequency, ω, the phase velocity is given by cph =
ω/(cid:60)(kx) and attenuation in the propagation direction is
αx = (cid:61)(kx), with (cid:60)(·) and (cid:61)(·) denoting real and imagi-
nary components of a complex number . Waves with dis-
placements in the z direction decouple from those with
displacements in the x and y directions [46]; the latter
encompass the leaky Lamb waves that we aim to deter-
mine and hence we only require displacements ¯ux, ¯uxf1
and ¯uxf2

and ¯uy, ¯uyf1

and ¯uyf2

.

We denote with ¯u the vector displacement in the

waveguide

¯u =



 ,





¯ux
¯uy
0

(1)

and by ¯uf1, ¯uf2 the vector displacements in the two ﬂu-
ids. By employing a Helmholtz decomposition [47, 48],
they can be written as

¯uf1 =





¯uxf1
¯uyf1
0


 = ∇ ¯φf1,

¯uf2 =


 = ∇ ¯φf2, (2)





¯uxf2
¯uyf2
0

II. THEORY

We consider a homogeneous, isotropic, linear-elastic
waveguide of inﬁnite extent in the x and z directions, and
ﬁnite thickness, 2d, which is immersed between two invis-
cid ﬂuids. The ﬂuids can be diﬀerent above, and below,
the waveguide and have densities ρf1, ρf2 and wavespeeds
cf1 and cf2 respectively, while the waveguide has density
ρ, longitudinal wavespeed cl and transverse wavespeed
ct. A schematic of the cross section of the waveguide,
also showing the coordinate axes, is shown in Fig. 2.

with ¯φf1 and ¯φf2 the displacement potentials in the two
ﬂuids. The quantities ¯ux, ¯uy, ¯φf1 and ¯φf2 are functions
of x, y and t. We are assuming plane harmonic waves in
the form

¯ux(x, y, t) = ux(y) exp(i(kxx − ωt)),

(3)

with the common exponential factor henceforth omit-
ted and considered understood, and similarly for
¯uy(x, y, t), ¯φf1 (x, y, t), ¯φf2(x, y, t).

The two dimensional wave motion in the isotropic solid

is governed by the momentum equations [49]

ρω2ux − (λ + 2µ)k2

xux + (λ + µ)ikx

∂uy
∂y

+ µ

ρω2uy − µk2

xuy + (λ + µ)ikx

∂ux
∂y

+ (λ + 2µ)

∂2ux
∂y2 = 0,
(4)

∂2uy
∂y2 = 0,
(5)

with λ, µ the elastic Lamé parameters. We follow Nayfeh
and Nagy [18] for the ﬂuids, specialising their viscous
model to be inviscid, to obtain ﬂuid momentum equations
[49]

ρfj ω2φfj − λfj k2

xφfj + λfj

∂2φfj
∂y2 = 0,

(6)

with the subscripts j = 1, 2 corresponding to the ﬂuids
above and below the waveguide respectively, and λfj the
Lamé parameter of each ﬂuid.

To fully describe wave motion in the immersed waveg-
uide system, in addition to Eqs. (4)-(6), interface con-
ditions are required. For a two-sided ﬂuid-loaded plate,
these are continuity of traction and of normal displace-
ments at the two ﬂuid-solid interfaces [48]; for interfaces
located at y1 = −d and y2 = d, the traction condi-
− σy)|y=yj = 0 and σxy|y=yj = 0,
tions translate to (σyfj
and the displacement conditions to (uyfj
− uy)|y=yj = 0.
These are explicitly expressed [49] as

(cid:20)

(λ + 2µ)

∂uy
∂y

+ λikxux + ρfj ω2φfj

(cid:20)

ikxuy +

(cid:20) ∂φfj
∂y

∂ux
∂y

− uy

(cid:21)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)y=yj
(cid:21)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)y=yj
(cid:21)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)y=yj

= 0,

(7)

= 0,

(8)

= 0.

(9)

Wave propagation in the waveguide is captured by a
single wavenumber, kx, whereas the inhomogeneous bulk
waves that propagate in the ﬂuids, at an angle from the
waveguide, see Fig. 2, require additional wavenumbers;
these represent partial waves propagating in the trans-
verse, y direction. The aforementioned wavenumbers are
denoted by ky1 and ky2 for the two ﬂuids. Similar to kx,
the real parts of these transverse wavenumbers describe
the speed of propagation of the waves in the y direction
and their imaginary parts describe their attenuation or
growth as they propagate along the same direction. We
deﬁne the propagation wave vectors of these inhomoge-
neous bulk waves as

kf1 :=

(cid:19)

(cid:18) kx
ky1

and kf2 :=

(cid:19)

.

(cid:18) kx
ky2

5

(10)

For inviscid ﬂuids, the magnitude of these wave vectors

is real and is given by

kfj := |kfj | =

ω
cfj

, for j = 1, 2,

(11)

and the following trigonometric relations hold

k2
fj

= k2

x + k2
yj

, for j = 1, 2.

(12)

Consequently, the longitudinal wave potentials, φf1

and φf2, in the two ﬂuid half-spaces, are [18, 50]

φf1(y) = A1 exp(−iky1(y + d)),
φf2(y) = A2 exp(iky2 (y − d)),

(13)

(14)

where A1, A2 are constants.

(13), (14) in Eqs.

One approach to formulating the problem mathemat-
(6)-(9),
ically is to substitute Eqs.
discretise the waveguide and arrive at a nonlinear eigen-
value problem [19]. For a single ﬂuid, either on one side
or on both sides, and leaky Lamb waves in a waveguide,
Kiefer et al. [19] employ a spectral collocation method us-
ing Chebyshev polynomials to discretise the waveguide; a
neat change of variables [42] reduces the algebraic nonlin-
ear eigenvalue problem to a polynomial eigenvalue prob-
lem which is then solvable with well-established methods.
We are aiming at a general approach for leaky waves in
immersed waveguides or pipes, while ﬂuid coupling of
even straight waveguides, by two diﬀerent ﬂuids, leads to
a more complicated nonlinear eigenvalue problem that
appears not to reduce quite so pleasantly. We employ
a spectral collocation discretisation of both the waveg-
uide and of the two open spaces of the inviscid ﬂuids; the
key being the discretisation of the ﬂuids which we de-
scribe in detail in the following section. This discretisa-
tion results in a polynomial eigenvalue problem with the
complex wavenumber kx as its eigenvalue and the wave
displacements, complemented by the wave amplitudes of
Eqs. (13) and (14), as the eigenvector; this deals with
the exponential growth of the leaky modes without the
need to use any absorbing or perfectly matched layers
in the ﬂuid domains and leads to an eigenvalue problem
that can be solved with standard methods.

III. DISCRETISATION

The discretisation of both the waveguide and the open
ﬂuid domains is done using spectral collocation [32, 51].

In brief, spectral collocation revolves around creating
diﬀerentiation matrices: consider a continuous function
g(y), with y in some domain C, whose derivative is to
be approximated. A set of distinct interpolation points
i=1 ∈ C, for some N ∈ N, also known as colloca-
{yi}N
tion points [33, 51], are ﬁxed and then g, the vector of g
evaluated at the collocation points, and g(l), the vector of
their lth derivatives, are related via the lth diﬀerentiation
matrix of g, D(l), such that

g(l) ≈ D(l)g.

(15)

The identiﬁcation of the collocation points is the key
step, and a common choice, when C is a bounded in-
terval and g is a smooth function, is that of Chebyshev
collocation points for which the Chebyshev diﬀerentia-
tion matrices exhibit spectral accuracy [33, 51]. This ac-
curacy, together with their ﬂexibility and established use
in guided wave problems [19, 30, 36], motivates our use of
them for the waveguide region. To treat the open spaces
of ﬂuid, we use a generalisation of Chebyshev methods -
speciﬁcally of rational Chebyshev [33] approaches; these
have been used for guided waves in optics, i.e.
in the
modal analysis of a multilayered optical waveguide [52].
Rational Chebyshev nodes arise from the mapping of
Chebyshev collocation nodes onto an open space, inﬁ-
nite or semi-inﬁnite, and preserve the performance bene-
ﬁts of traditional Chebyshev diﬀerentiation matrices. We
use the diﬀerentiation matrix suite provided by Weide-
man and Reddy [31] to obtain the ﬁrst and second or-
der diﬀerentiation matrices, denoted by D(1) and D(2)
respectively, using N Gauss–Lobatto Chebyshev colloca-
tion points

yi = cos

(cid:18) (i − 1)π
N − 1

(cid:19)

,

(16)

for i = 1, . . . , N and yi ∈ [−1, 1].

The treatment of the waveguide follows [30]: multipli-
cation by d maps the N collocation points of Eq. (16)
onto the bounded interval of the waveguide, [−d, d]; the
collocation points in that interval are {yi
i=1. The cor-
responding diﬀerentiation matrices, approximating the
ﬁrst and second order derivatives in the solid domain,
are D(1)

(cid:1) D(1) and D(2)

(cid:1) D(2).

p = (cid:0) 1

p}N

p = (cid:0) 1
d2

d

To treat the ﬂuid domains, and build in the exponential
growth of leaky waves, we follow a diﬀerent approach.
Consider the complex variable mappings hf1 : [−1, 1] −→
C and hf2 : [−1, 1] −→ C given by

hf1 : y −→ −d − ζf1

hf2 : y −→ d + ζf2

1 − y
1 + y
1 + y
1 − y

,

,

6

(17)

(18)

with ζf1 , ζf2 ∈ C; the choice of the two complex parame-
ters ζf1 and ζf2 plays an important role in our discretisa-
tion of the ﬂuid domains as importantly we are mapping
a real interval to a semi-inﬁnite interval in complex space.
To guide their choice we note that the wave potentials in
Eqs. (13) and (14), for exponential growth of the outgo-
ing leaky waves, require the transverse wavenumbers ky1
and ky2 to lie in the 4th complex quadrant.

i.e.

The key step is the mapping to complex space, and
not to a real domain: A choice in previous work of
ζf1 , ζf2 ∈ R>0,
real, as used in, say, the optics
waveguide [52], maps the collocation points of Eq. (16),
through hf1 and hf2 , to [−∞, −d] and [d, ∞] respectively.
The implicit exponential growth of leaky waves prevents
the QZ-algorithm of conventional eigenvalue solvers from
reliably retrieving the solution and requires the use of
perfectly matched, absorbing layers or outgoing wave
boundary conditions at inﬁnity which simply transfers
the numerical problems normally encountered to else-
where in the problem.

Instead, we take ζf1, ζf2 ∈ C, i.e. complex, and to lie
in the 1st complex quadrant. This choice has hf1 map-
ping the collocation points of Eq. (16) to a path in the
3rd complex quadrant, with the point at 1 being mapped
to the interface at y = −d. Similarly, hf2 maps the col-
location points to a path in the 1st complex quadrant,
with the point at −1 being mapped to the interface at
y = d. These result in a discretisation of two paths in
the complex quadrants, which we denote by Cf1 and Cf2
respectively.

The analytic continuations of each of the ﬂuid wave
potentials of Eqs. (13) and (14), with domains of deﬁ-
nition the complex paths Cfj are henceforth referred to
as the complex ﬂuid wave potentials and are denoted by
˜φfj . Both of ˜φf1 and ˜φf2 still satisfy the momentum
equations of Eq. (6) for the two ﬂuids and all six of the
interface conditions of Eqs. (7)-(9). Importantly, choices
of ζf1, ζf2 , make the numerical problem have exponential
decay, even for leaky modes, while simultaneously attain-
ing the physical solution on the two ﬂuid-solid interfaces,
as the choice of mapping guarantees a collocation point
on the real space of those interfaces; the inhomogeneous
plane waves in the two ﬂuids mean that values at the in-
terfaces fully determine motion in each ﬂuid, hence solv-
ing the complex valued problem arising from using hf1
and hf2, gives the physical solution for the leaky waves.

Using the mappings we can create diﬀerentiation ma-
trices, taking Nf1 and Nf2 as the number of collocation
Nf1
points for each of the ﬂuids, we set {ym
m=1 the colloca-
}
f1
Nf2
tion points in Cf1 and {yn
}
n=1 the collocation points in
f2
Cf2; repeated use of the chain rule gives the diﬀerentia-
tion matrices for the ﬂuids in the two complex domains.
The Nf1 × Nf1 diﬀerentiation matrices for the ﬂuid at
the top of the plate are given by

7





tor form by ux =

points within the domain of the solid, are given in vec-

ux(y1
p)
...
ux(yN
p )
while the complex ﬂuid wave potentials evaluated at
the collocation points of each of the ﬂuids are given by

uy(y1
p)
...
uy(yN
p )


 and uy =












˜φf1 =









)

˜φf1 (y2
f1
...
˜φf1(y

Nf1
f1

and ˜φf2 =




)







)

˜φf2 (y1
f2
...
Nf2 −1
f2

˜φf2(y



.




)

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

D(1)
f1

=diag

D(2)
f1

=diag

+ diag

2ζf1
[ζf1 − (yf1 + d)]2
4ζf1
[ζf1 − (yf1 + d)]3
(cid:32)

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

D(1),

D(1)

4ζ2
f1
[ζf1 − (yf1 + d)]4

(cid:33)

D(2),

(19)

(20)

We can now proceed to generate the eigenvalue prob-
lem we wish to solve. We start by representing the diﬀer-
ential operators of Eqs. (4)-(6), using the diﬀerentiation
matrices D(l)
, for j = 1, 2 and l = 1, 2, as the
matrix operators

p and D(l)
fj

and the Nf2 × Nf2 ones for the ﬂuid at the bottom of the
plate are given by

Lp =

Lfj = k2

,

(cid:19)

(cid:18)Lp1
Lp2
x(−λfj I) + ρfj ω2I + λfj D(2)
fj

(23)

,

(24)

(cid:18)

(cid:18)

D(1)
f2

=diag

D(2)
f2

=diag

+ diag

2ζf2
[ζf2 + (yf2 − d)]2
−4ζf2
[ζf2 + (yf2 − d)]3
(cid:32)

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

D(1),

D(1)

4ζ2
f2
[ζf2 + (yf2 − d)]4

(cid:33)

D(2).

(21)

(22)

with

Lp1 =k2
x

+

and

(cid:2)−(λ + 2µ)I 0(cid:3) + kx
(cid:104)

ρω2I + µD(2)

(cid:105)
0

,

p

(cid:104)

0 i(λ + µ)D(1)

p

(cid:105)

(25)

Here, yf1 and yf2 are vectors containing the collocation
points for the two ﬂuids, d = (d, . . . , d)T is a column
vector of appropriate size, and likewise for ζf1 and ζf2.
The diagonal matrices in Eqs. (19)-(22) are the matrices
whose diagonals are the expressions in parenthesis, eval-
uated at each of the collocation points, and have zeros
everywhere else.

Due to our choice of discretisation, now numerically
extracting a decaying function rather than an exponen-
tially growing one, the choice of boundary condition at
inﬁnity is relevant only insofar as we want to ensure
the solution tends to zero at inﬁnity; this is achieved
by taking Dirichlet zero boundary conditions at the far-
thest collocation point in the complex space. This is
applied by deleting the corresponding rows and columns
of our diﬀerentiation matrices, as well as the correspond-
ing collocation point. For the top ﬂuid, we delete y1
f1
and the ﬁrst rows and columns of D(1)
and for
f1
the bottom ﬂuid, we delete y
columns of D(1)
. The x and y displacements
f2
in the waveguide, each evaluated at the N collocation

and D(2)
f1
and the last rows and

and D(2)
f2

Nf2
f2

Lp2 =k2
x

+

(cid:104)

i(λ + µ)D(1)

p

(cid:105)

0

(cid:2)0 −µI(cid:3) + kx
(cid:104)

0 ρω2I + (λ + 2µ)D(2)

p

(cid:105)

.

(26)

In Eqs. (24)-(26), I is the identity matrix of appro-
priate size; these matrix operators allow us to write the
equations of motion of the immersed plate problem as
the eigenvalue problem

˜Lu = 0,

(27)

with ˜L =





Lf1
0
0 Lp
0

0
0
0 Lf2



 and u =










.



In Eqs.

˜φf1
ux
uy
˜φf2

(23)-(26), we separate the matrix operators into k2
x-
dependent, kx-dependent and constant components; this
is convenient for the polynomial eigenvalue problem for-
mulation we use later. Similarly, we separate ˜L with
˜L2, ˜L1 and ˜L0 being the matrices for the k2
x-dependent,

8

kx-dependent and constant components respectively: Eq.
(27) is rewritten as

(cid:16)

k2
x

˜L2 + kx ˜L1 + ˜L0

(cid:17)

u = 0.

(28)

The ﬁnal step is to incorporate the interface condi-
tions Eqs. (7)-(9). To achieve this, we ﬁrstly write each
of those interface conditions as rows of two 3 × (Nf1 +
2N +Nf2 −2) matrices. For simplicity, we represent those
with two 3 × 4 matrices. Their ﬁrst and last columns cor-
respond to ˜φf1 and ˜φf2 , whereas the second and third
columns correspond to ux and uy. The matrix of inter-
face conditions at the top interface is

Secondly, we incorporate those interface conditions in
˜L by replacing the rows of ˜L that correspond to the two
interfaces, with rows from the interface conditions, as
those were described in Eqs. (29) and (30). Again, due to
our discretisation and construction of ˜L from the matrix
diﬀerential operators of Eqs. (23) and (24), the rows of
˜L corresponding to the interface y = −d are Nf1 − 1, Nf1
and Nf1 + N . We replace each of those with a row from
Eq. (29). Similarly, the rows of ˜L corresponding to the
interface at y = d are Nf1 + N − 1, Nf1 + 2N − 1 and
Nf1 + 2N , and we replace each of those with a row from
Eq.
(30). Finally, we arrive at a matrix, L, with an
analogous decomposition to the one of Eq. (28). The
resulting polynomial eigenvalue problem is

IC−d = kx

+



0 iλI 0 0
iI 0
0

0 0
0

0
0






ρf1ω2I
0
D(1)
f1

0
D(1)
p
0

(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)y=−d
(λ + 2µ)D(1)
0
−I

p

(cid:0)k2

xL2 + kxL1 + L0

(cid:1) u = 0,

(31)

(29)

(cid:12)

0
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

0
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
0
(cid:12)y=−d

,

where for a given ω, kx is our eigenvalue and u is our
eigenvector. To solve the polynomial eigenvalue problem,
we employ companion matrix linearisation [43] by setting
U = [kxu, u]T and deﬁne the square companion matrices

where the elements are row vectors, representing the dis-
crete evaluation of the diﬀerential operators of the inter-
face conditions at the interface y = −d. This evaluation
at y = −d, corresponds to picking the rows of the diﬀer-
ential operators appearing in Eq. (29) that correspond to
the collocation point at that interface. By our choice of
discretisation, for the complex ﬂuid potential of the ﬂuid
at the top of the plate, we need to pick the (Nf1 − 1)th
row of the matrices whereas for the plate displacements,
we need to pick the 1st rows of the matrices.

Similarly, the matrix of interface conditions at the bot-

tom interface is

ICd =kx

+



0
0

0 iλI 0 0
iI 0
0

0 0
0

0
0
0 D(1)

p

0
0

(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)y=d
(λ + 2µ)D(1)
0
−I

p

(30)

ρf2ω2I
0
D(1)
f2

(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)y=d

.

The same convention for the evaluation of the diﬀerential
operators is used here. For the evaluation at the interface
y = d, we need to pick the 1st row of the operators for
the complex ﬂuid potential of the ﬂuid at the bottom of
the plate and the N th row of the operators for the plate
displacements.

A =

B =

(cid:20)−L1 −L0
0

I
(cid:20)L2 0
0 I

(cid:21)

,

(cid:21)

,

(32)

(33)

with I the identity matrix of dimension (Nf1 + 2N +
Nf2 − 2) × (Nf1 + 2N + Nf2 − 2). Then, the eigenvalue
problem of Eq. (31) is equivalent to the generalised linear
eigenvalue problem,

(A − kxB)U = 0,

(34)

which is solvable with conventional eigenvalue solvers,
with eigenvalue kx and eigenvector U .

IV. RESULTS & DISCUSSION

The leaky wave SCM is now employed to ﬁnd the dis-
persion curves of the leaky modes for an elastic waveguide
with diﬀerent inviscid ﬂuids above and below the waveg-
uide; these curves are validated with the commercially
available software DISPERSE [23] as are the displace-
ments obtained as the eigenvectors of the leaky SCM.
DISPERSE is a well-established software designed for
the generation of dispersion curves in multilayered me-
dia, embedded or in vacuo, using matrix techniques and

a PWRF algorithm [23, 53] and it provides a good ba-
sis for comparison with our method as its reliability has
been demonstrated in multiple scenarios [54–58].

We choose a typical example and compute the disper-
sion curves of a 1mm thick brass plate (ρ = 8.4 g/cm3,
ct = 2.2 m/ms, cl = 4.4 m/ms) loaded on the top side
by water (ρf1 = 1 g/cm3, cf1 = 1.5 m/ms) and at the
bottom side by diesel oil (ρf2 = 0.8 g/cm3, cf2 = 1.25
m/ms). For the choice of complex parameters ζfj , we
draw upon [49]. For a complex wavenumber solution kx,
and corresponding transverse wavenumbers kyj , a choice
of ζfj such that

(cid:61)(ζfj ) > −(cid:60)(ζfj )

(cid:61)(kyj )
(cid:60)(kyj )

,

(35)

results in exponentially decaying potentials on the com-
plex paths Cfj . Without loss of generality, we make the
choice of (cid:60)(ζfj ) = 1, maintaining in this way the span of
the Gauss–Lobatto Chebyshev collocation points of Eq.
(16), along the complex paths Cfj ; we can without loss
of generality choose (cid:61)(ζfj ) > −(cid:61)(kyj )/(cid:60)(kyj ).

The choice can be automated and we use the follow-
ing rule-of-thumb: we ﬁrst solve for the same waveguide
immersed in two identical inviscid ﬂuids [19]. This is
done twice, solving for a brass waveguide fully immersed
in water and then in oil, each time recording the maxi-
mum value of the ratio −(cid:61)(ky)/(cid:60)(ky) for leaky wave so-
lutions in the frequency range of interest of our problem.
These maximum ratios provide initial guesses for the ra-
tios −(cid:61)(kyj )/(cid:60)(kyj ); in the angular frequency range 0-20
MHz, those were found to be less than 1.

In light of this,

for the computation of dispersion
curves with our SCM, we take the conservative choice
of ζfj = 1 + 10i, satisfying in this way Eq. (35). As this
translates to a rapidly decaying solution, we also choose
a suﬃcient number of collocation points to capture this
decay. A conservative choice is N = Nf1 = Nf2 = 30,
which yields a convergent solution. We have investigated
the stability of the algorithm regarding the choices of ζfj
and the numbers of collocation points and the scheme is
very robust to the choices taken. All results are obtained
on a computer with 32GB RAM memory and an i7-10700
CPU.

The SCM results are compared with those from DIS-
PERSE in Fig.
3 with pleasing agreement for both
the phase velocity and attenuation. There are inﬁnitely
many possible modes that can propagate through the
waveguide and we have performed ﬁltering prior to plot-
ting so we illustrate those modes of most physical in-
terest. The ﬁltering comprises a positively propagating

9

FIG. 3. Comparison of dispersion curves obtained from our
SCM and from DISPERSE, for a 1mm thick brass plate,
loaded on one side by water and on the other by diesel oil.
Fig. 3a plots phase velocity against frequency, while Fig. 3b
plots attenuation against frequency.

wave requirement with (cid:60)(kx) > 0 and attenuation with
(cid:61)(kx) > 0 and |kx| (cid:54)= ∞. For plotting purposes we took
an arbitrary choice of cut-oﬀ attenuation at 1 Np/mm.

The SCM conveniently retrieves the values of the am-
plitudes of the ﬂuid potential and the displacements
in the solid from the eigenvector through U ; as these
fully describe the acoustic ﬁelds in the ﬂuids and the
solid, we get the whole of the wave ﬁeld without any
extra eﬀort. The displacements in the ﬂuids are com-
puted using the Helmholtz decomposition of the ﬂuid
displacements in Eq.
(2), and the wave potentials in
Eqs.
(13) and (14). Using the water-brass-oil system
of Fig. 3, we compare the y-dependent component of
the displacements, in both the direction of propagation
and the normal direction, with the corresponding DIS-
PERSE solution.
In Fig. 4, we compare the displace-
ments of an arbitrarily selected frequency-phase veloc-

V. CONCLUSION

10

The leaky Lamb wave problem, for a plate loaded on
both sides by two diﬀerent ﬂuids, is an exemplar of leaky
waves and exhibits the key diﬃculty of studying such
systems; the nonlinear eigenvalue problem is diﬃcult
to solve, a neat change of variables to transform it is
not easily available, the exponential growth poses a
numerical challenge to the retrieval of accurate solutions.
To overcome this inherent diﬃculty a mapping of the
ﬂuid domains onto paths in complex domains was
performed; the exponential growth is then built into
this and we can reformulate as a polynomial eigenvalue
problem solved using standard solvers; thence we obtain
the complete physical solution in a robust and accurate
manner. The spectral collocation methods, based on
Chebyshev approaches to discretise both the open and
closed domains of our system, provides our method
with speed, accuracy and robustness whilst keeping
the eigenvalue systems compact. The formulation leads
to systems amenable to standard eigensolvers and we
are able to obtain all the complex wavenumbers and
displacement ﬁelds of leaky Lamb waves for any given
frequency.

The complex mapping and the treatment of the
exponential growth of the leaky waves of our system is
not unique to the planar elastic waveguiding problem:
the methodology we have introduced can be extended
to multilayered elastic systems of plain or cylindrical
geometries. The underlying SCM technique is also
general and can be extended to more complicated
geometries and guiding structures, and also to more
general media i.e. anisotropic or viscoelastic guides, and
thereby together with the leaky wave SCM provides a
methodology for all wave systems of this generic type
including those in electromagnetism.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

EG and RVC are supported by the EU H2020 FET

Open “Boheme” Grant No. 863179

FIG. 4. Mode shapes displaying the y-dependent component
of displacements for a 1mm thick brass plate loaded on one
side by water and on the other by diesel oil, for the frequency-
phase velocity pair (f, cph) ≈ (2.02, 6.18). Fig. 4a plots the
real and imaginary parts of ux(y) and Fig. 4b plots the real
and imaginary parts of uy(y). In both plots, the results from
DISPERSE and the scaled results from our SCM are pre-
sented.

ity pair (f, cph) ≈ (2.02, 6.18), taken from Fig. 3, again
showing a good match. The SCM solutions are obtained
as an eigenvector of a polynomial eigenvalue problem,
and any scalar multiple remains a solution. To ﬁx upon
a solution we impose ux at the interface y = −d to be
the same for both SCM and DISPERSE solutions.

[1] H. Lamb, On Waves in an Elastic Plate, Proc. R. Soc. A

81, 114 (1916).

[2] D. N. Alleyne and P. Cawley, Optimization of Lamb wave

inspection techniques, NDT E Int. 25, 11 (1992).

[3] D. N. Alleyne, B. Pavlakovic, M. J. Lowe, and P. Cawley,
Rapid long-range inspection of chemical plant pipework
using guided waves, Insight 43, 93 (2001).

[4] P. Fromme, P. Wilcox, M. Lowe, and P. Cawley, On the
development and testing of a guided ultrasonic wave ar-
ray for structural integrity monitoring, IEEE Trans. Ul-
trason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control 53, 777 (2006).

[5] R. Long, M. J. S. Lowe, and P. Cawley, Attenuation char-
acteristics of the fundamental modes that propagate in
buried iron water pipes, Ultrasonics 41, 509 (2003).

11

[6] P. D. Wilcox, M. J. S. Lowe, and P. Cawley, Mode and
transducer selection for long range lamb wave inspection,
J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct. 12, 553 (2001).

[25] J. W. Dunkin, Computation of modal solutions in lay-
ered, elastic media at high frequencies, Bull. Seismol. Soc.
Am. 55, 335 (1965).

[7] F. Treyssède, K. L. Nguyen, A. S. Bonnet-BenDhia, and
C. Hazard, Finite element computation of trapped and
leaky elastic waves in open stratiﬁed waveguides, Wave
Motion 51, 1093 (2014).

[8] J. G. Scholte, The range of existence of Rayleigh and

Stoneley waves, Geophys. J. Int. 5, 120 (1947).

[9] D. E. Chimenti and A. H. Nayfeh, Leaky Lamb waves
in ﬁbrous composite laminates, J. Appl. Phys. 58, 4531
(1985).

[10] P. B. Nagy, W. R. Rose, and L. Adler, A Single Trans-
ducer Broadband Technique for Leaky Lamb Wave De-
tection, Review of Progress in QNDE 6A, 483 (1987).

[11] A. H. Nayfeh and D. E. Chimenti, Propagation of guided
waves in ﬂuid-coupled plates of ﬁber-reinforced compos-
ite, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 83, 1736 (1988).

[12] A. Snyder and J. Love, Optical Waveguide Theory (Chap-

man and Hall, London, 1983).

[26] L. Gavrić, Computation of propagative waves in free rail
using a ﬁnite element technique, J. Sound Vib. 185, 531
(1995).

[27] I. Bartoli, A. Marzani, F. Lanza di Scalea, and E. Viola,
Modeling wave propagation in damped waveguides of ar-
bitrary cross-section, J. Sound Vib. 295, 685 (2006).
[28] A. Marzani, E. Viola, I. Bartoli, F. Lanza di Scalea, and
P. Rizzo, A semi-analytical ﬁnite element formulation
for modeling stress wave propagation in axisymmetric
damped waveguides, J. Sound Vib. 318, 488 (2008).
[29] M. Castaings and M. Lowe, Finite element model for
waves guided along solid systems of arbitrary section cou-
pled to inﬁnite solid media, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 123, 696
(2008).

[30] A. T. I. Adamou and R. V. Craster, Spectral methods
for modelling guided waves in elastic media, J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 116, 1524 (2004).

[13] J. Hu and C. R. Menyuk, Understanding leaky modes:
Slab waveguide revisited, Adv. Opt. Photonics 1, 58
(2009).

[31] J. A. C. Weideman and S. C. Reddy, A MATLAB Dif-
ferentiation Matrix Suite, ACM Trans. Math. Softw. 26,
465 (2000).

[14] A. G. Every and G. A. D. Briggs, Surface response of
a ﬂuid-loaded solid to impulsive line and point forces:
Application to scanning acoustic microscopy, Phys. Rev.
B 58, 1601 (1998).

[15] O. Lefeuvre, P. Zinin, and G. A. D. Briggs, Leaky surface
waves propagating on a fast on slow system and the im-
plications for material characterization, Ultrasonics 36,
229 (1998).

[16] F. B. Cegla, P. Cawley, and M. J. Lowe, Fluid bulk ve-
locity and attenuation measurements in non-Newtonian
liquids using a dipstick sensor, Meas. Sci. Technol. 17,
264 (2006).

[17] A. D. Stuart, Acoustic radiation from submerged plates.
I. Inﬂuence of leaky wave poles, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 59,
1160 (1976).

[18] A. H. Nayfeh and P. B. Nagy, Excess attenuation of leaky
Lamb waves due to viscous ﬂuid loading, J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 101, 2649 (1997).

[19] D. A. Kiefer, M. Ponschab, S. J. Rupitsch, and M. Mayle,
Calculating the full
leaky Lamb wave spectrum with
exact ﬂuid interaction, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 145, 3341
(2019).

[20] W. T. Thomson, Transmission of elastic waves through
a stratiﬁed solid medium, J. Appl. Phys. 21, 89 (1950).
[21] N. A. Haskell, The dispersion of surface waves on multi-

layered media, Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 54, 431 (1964).

[22] L. Knopoﬀ, A matrix method for elastic wave problems,

Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 54, 431 (1964).

[23] B. Pavlakovic, M. J. S. Lowe, O. Alleyne, and P. Caw-
ley, Disperse: A general purpose program for creating
dispersion curves, Review of Progress in QNDE 16, 185
(1997).

[24] M. J. S. Lowe, Matrix Techniques for Modeling Ultra-
sonic Waves in Multilayered Media, IEEE Trans. Ultra-
son. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control 42, 525 (1995).

[32] L. N. Trefethen, Spectral Methods in Matlab (SIAM,

Philadelphia, 2008) pp. 1–160.

[33] J. P. Boyd, Chebyshev and Fourier Spectral Methods, sec-
ond edition ed. (Dover Publications, Mineola, New York,
2000) pp. 1–594.

[34] F. Karpﬁnger, B. Gurevich, and A. Bakulin, Modeling
of wave dispersion along cylindrical structures using the
spectral method, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 124, 859 (2008).

[35] T. Zharnikov, D. Syresin, and C. J. Hsu, Application of
the spectral method for computation of the spectrum of
anisotropic waveguides, in Proc. Mtgs. Acoust., Vol. 19
(2013).

[36] F. H. Quintanilla, Z. Fan, M. J. S. Lowe, and R. V. Cras-
ter, Guided waves’ dispersion curves in anisotropic vis-
coelastic single- and multi-layered media, Proc. R. Soc.
A 471, 10.1098/rspa.2015.0268 (2015).

[37] F. H. Quintanilla, M. J. S. Lowe, and R. V. Craster,
Modeling guided elastic waves in generally anisotropic
media using a spectral collocation method, J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 137, 1180 (2015).

[38] F. H. Quintanilla, M. J. S. Lowe, and R. V. Craster, Full
3D dispersion curve solutions for guided waves in gener-
ally anisotropic media, J. Sound Vib. 363, 545 (2016).

[39] A. Grabowska, Propagation of elastic wave in solid layer-

liquid system, Arch. Acoust. 4, 57 (1979).

[40] S. I. Rokhlin, D. E. Chimenti, and A. H. Nayfeh, On the
topology of the complex wave spectrum in a ﬂuid-coupled
elastic layer, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 85, 1074 (1989).
[41] M. Mazzotti, I. Bartoli, and A. Marzani, Ultrasonic leaky
guided waves in ﬂuid-coupled generic waveguides: Hybrid
ﬁnite-boundary element dispersion analysis and experi-
mental validation, J. Appl. Phys. 115, 10.1063/1.4870857
(2014).

[42] A. Hood, Localizing the eigenvalues of matrix-valued
functions: Analysis and applications, Ph.D. thesis, Cor-

12

nell University, Ithaca (2017).

52, 776 (2005).

[43] D. S. Mackey, N. Mackey, C. Mehl, and V. Mehrmann,
Structured polynomial eigenvalue problems: Good vibra-
tions from good linearizations, SIAM J. Matrix Anal.
Appl. 28, 1029 (2006).

[44] Z. Fan, M. J. S. Lowe, M. Castaings, and C. Bacon, Tor-
sional waves propagation along a waveguide of arbitrary
cross section immersed in a perfect ﬂuid, J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 124, 2002 (2008).

[45] F. H. Quintanilla, Pseudospectral Collocation Method
for Viscoelastic Guided Wave Problems in Generally
Anisotropic Media, Ph.D. thesis, Imperial College Lon-
don, London (2016).

[46] F. H. Quintanilla, M. J. S. Lowe, and R. V. Craster, The
symmetry and coupling properties of solutions in general
anisotropic multilayer waveguides, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
141, 406 (2017).

[47] J. D. Achenbach, Wave propagation in elastic solids

(North-Holland Pub. Co, 1973) p. 425.

[48] J. L. Rose, Ultrasonic Guided Waves in Solid Media

(Cambridge University Press, 2014) pp. 1–512.

[49] See supplementary material for the derivation of the mo-
mentum and interface equations, a brief discussion on the
theory of diﬀerentiation matrices and a discussion on the
choice of complex parameters.

[50] N. F. Declercq, R. Briers, J. Degrieck, and O. Leroy,
The history and properties of ultrasonic inhomogeneous
waves, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control

[51] B. Fornberg, A Practical Guide to Pseudospectral Meth-
ods (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996) pp.
1–231.

[52] A. Abdrabou, A. M. Heikal, and S. S. A. Obayya, Eﬃ-
cient rational Chebyshev pseudo-spectral method with
domain decomposition for optical waveguides modal
analysis, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 24, 10495 (2016).

[53] M. Lowe and B. Pavlakovic, User’s Manual A system for

Generating Dispersion Curves (2013).

[54] O. Diligent, M. J. S. Lowe, E. Le Clézio, M. Castaings,
and B. Hosten, Prediction and measurement of nonprop-
agating Lamb modes at the free end of a plate when the
fundamental antisymmetric mode A[sub 0] is incident, J.
Acoust. Soc. Am. 113, 3032 (2003).

[55] T. K. Vogt, M. J. S. Lowe, and P. Cawley, Measure-
ment of the Material Properties of Viscous Liquids Using
Ultrasonic Guided Waves, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferro-
electr. Freq. Control 51 (2004).

[56] F. B. Cegla, P. Cawley, and M. J. S. Lowe, Material
property measurement using the quasi-Scholte mode—A
waveguide sensor, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 117, 1098 (2005).
[57] J. Ma, M. J. Lowe, and F. Simonetti, Feasibility study of
sludge and blockage detection inside pipes using guided
torsional waves, Meas. Sci. Technol. 18, 2629 (2007).
[58] E. Leinov, M. J. S. Lowe, and P. Cawley, Ultrasonic iso-
lation of buried pipes, J. Sound Vib. 363, 225 (2016).

