2
2
0
2

n
u
J

2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
6
8
0
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

6G Survey on Challenges, Requirements,
Applications, Key Enabling Technologies, Use
Cases, AI integration issues and Security aspects

Muhammad Sajjad Akbar∗, Zawar Hussain∗†, Quan Z. Sheng∗ and Subhas Mukhopadhyay‡
∗School of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia
Email: [muhammadsajjad.akbar, michael.sheng, subhas.mukhopadhyay]@mq.edu.au
†School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Australia
Email: zawar.hussain@unsw.edu.au
‡School of Engineering, Macquarie University, Australia

Abstract—The ﬁfth-generation (5G) network is likely to bring
in high data rates, more reliability, and low delays for mobile,
personal and local area networks. Alongside the rapid growth
of smart wireless sensing and communication technologies, data
trafﬁc has signiﬁcantly risen, and existing 5G networks are not
fully capable of supporting future massive data trafﬁc in terms
of services, storage, and processing. To meet the forthcoming
challenges, the research community is investigating the Terahertz-
based sixth-generation (6G) wireless network which is supposed
to be offered for industrial usage in around 10 years. This is
right time to explore and learn about various 6G aspects that
will play a key role in successful execution and implementation
of 6G networks in future. This survey provides a review on
speciﬁcation, requirements, applications, enabling technologies
including disruptive and innovative,
integration of 6G with
advanced architectures and networks like software deﬁned net-
works (SDN), network functions virtualization (NFV), cloud/fog
computing etc, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) oriented technologies,
privacy and security issues and solutions, and potential futuristic
use cases: virtual reality, smart healthcare and Industry 5.0.
Furthermore, based on the conducted review, challenges and
future research directions are highlighted to aid the deployment
of 6G networks.

will improve the performance of different technological areas
including location awareness, imaging, and telepresence, etc.
6G networks will also incorporate the machine learning and
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) technologies, and these technologies
will make the 6G-autonomous systems. 6G is expected to
provide high transmission rates of up to 1 terabyte per second
(Tbps) using the Terahertz spectrum.

Such a level of network capacity with very low latency is ex-
ceptional and it will also increase the performance efﬁciency of
some existing applications. Furthermore, the high frequencies
in 6G networks will lead to a higher sampling rate which will
increase the transmission quality of wireless devices. Figure 1
shows the THz spectrum with the range 100 GHz to 3 THz
which is going to be used as 6G’s spectrum.

Index Terms—5G,

automa-
tion,machine learning, security, massive connectivity, virtual
reality, terahertz.

intelligence,

artiﬁcial

6G,

Fig. 1. TeraHertz Spectrum [121]

I. INTRODUCTION

6th generation (6G) networks are considered as a successor
to 5G networks and will be capable of using higher frequencies
than frequencies used by 5G networks, and also delivering
signiﬁcantly higher capacity and very low latency [30, 123].
One of the milestones of 6G is to provide one-microsecond
transmission latency which will be 1,000 times faster than
one millisecond available in 5G networks [77]. 6G networks

It is expected that 6G will be commercially available in
2030. The research and industrial efforts have already been
started. The research activities for 6G networks are initi-
ated under the International Mobile Telecommunications 2030
project [29]. China already initiated the project Broadband
Communications and New Networks [61] for 2030. The Euro-
pean Commission Horizon 2020 program has funded various
projects for 6G networks like TERRANOVA (Tb/s wireless

 
 
 
 
 
 
connectivity using THz band with the optical network) [18].
The Semiconductor Research Corporation in the United States
funded a research project on future communication over THz
band in cellular architecture [123]. The Federal Communica-
tions Commission (FCC) has begun investigating 6G networks
using the THz band. Similarly, the International Telecommuni-
cation Union (ITU) has established a research group focusing
on network requirements for the year 2030. Finland funded
6Genesis [28] and arranged the in 2019. Each of these research
activities shows how important it is to explore beyond 5G to
fulﬁll future quality of service (QoS) requirements [94].

Similar to the 5G which, is facing various deployment chal-
lenges, there will be many new challenges for 6G deployment
as well. One of the prominent challenges is the development of
commercial transceivers that operates on THz frequencies. The
electronics and networking component providers need to play
their role by introducing new innovative transceiver designs. It
is expected that in the near future, trillions of sensors will be
implanted into cities, homes, and industries, and these sensor-
based systems will create a plethora of new applications,
therefore, smart transceivers’ design could play an important
role to manage these huge sensor-based implementations.

This survey provides a comprehensive review of the var-
ious aspects of the 6G technology and the challenges in
its adoption. We have explored major databases like ACM
Digital Library, Science Direct, IEEE Xplore, and Scopus
and have selected papers from well-known publishers such
as IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, IEEE Access,
IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, and IEEE Sensors. We have
searched for works related to 6G using the search term such
requirements, use cases, advanced architectures, integration,
SDN, IoT, big data, ML and security issues, etc. We have
focused on recent articles which are published during the last
decade and selected around 50 papers for our review.

We address four key areas for 6G: potential use cases, en-
abling technologies, AI technologies, and applications. Figure
2 presents the taxonomy of this survey. Potential use cases
are further discussed in three aspects including virtual reality,
smart healthcare, and Industry 5.0. Enabling technologies are
sub-divided and discussed into three main categories: innova-
tive architectures, disruptive, and intelligence integration. AI
technologies are discussed in terms of big data, optimization
of existing algorithms, and cases of intelligent communication.
Various 6G-based applications with respect
to challenges,
security and privacy, and distributed ML are also discussed

at the end of this work. We review state-of-the-art works
to address all these aspects of 6G networks and provide the
user with a comprehensive overview of all the opportunities,
challenges, and requirements of the 6G network. To ease the
reading, a list of acronyms used throughout this paper is given
in Table I.

The key contributions of this work are as follows:

• This work links the various technologies and architectures
(such as Blockchain, Industry 5.0, augmented reality
(AR), mixed reality (MR), virtual reality (VR), mmwave,
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), software-deﬁned net-
works (SDN) and many more) with 6G networks by
addressing their integration issues.

• Most of the previous surveys used only Yes or No for
comparing different factors which hardly provides any
details. Unlike the previous surveys, this work provides
a ﬁne-grained comparison like Low (L), Medium (M),
High (H), and No (N) for different factors.

• This survey provides a detailed categorization of various
6G-related aspects. For instance, use cases are categorised
into VR, health, and Industry 5.0, enabling technologies
(disruptive and innovative), and AI (machine learning
(ML) and big data, etc.).

• Suggestions for the integration of various technologies

with 6G are provided in this survey.

• New 6G performance metrics are proposed which were
previously ignored in the literature. These include Indus-
try 5.0, big data, integration (6G and disruptive technolo-
gies), and security and privacy.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Sec-
tion II discusses the related work and Section III provides
the background for communication technologies. Section IV
describes the 6G key enabling technologies while Section V
provides discussion on AI-enabled technologies for future 6G.
Section VI presents the potential use cases of 6G technology.
Section VII presents AI-based 6G applications. Section VIII
discusses the challenges in 6G network and the future research
directions. Section IX concludes this work.

II. RELATED WORK

There are several surveys in the literature which have
reviewed the research work conducted in the area of 6G. These
surveys have focused on different aspects of 6G technologies.
This section provides an overview of some of the most recent
surveys and also provides a comparison with our work.

The survey [95] discusses the 6G-based features and chal-
lenges for Cellular IoT which can connect enormous physical

Fig. 2. Survey Taxonomy

and virtual objects to the Internet using cellular networks.
These issues include delay and throughput provision for
bandwidth-hungry applications like holographic communica-
tion etc. The survey also discusses various aspects of 6G
networks like needs, requirements, applications, key perfor-
mance indicators, and the potential key enabling technologies.
However, it doesn’t provide the details about security, ML/AI,
and various potential use cases like industry 5.0.

The article [43] provides a comprehensive survey on 6G-
enabled massive IoT. A detailed discussion is provided re-
garding the driving forces and requirements of the emerging
IoT-enabled applications, alongside the constraints of 5G/6G.
The authors also discussed the 6G core areas that can be
linked with IoTs, these areas include technical requirements,
use cases, and trends. The authors proposed an architecture of
IoTs that is supposed to use 6G technologies, this architecture
is called space–air-ground–underwater/sea networks and it’s
incorporated the ML mechanisms. The article lacks the 6G-
related discussion about security, and also various use cases
are ignored in the survey including VR, industry 5.0, big data,
and health applications.

The article [110] discusses a vision of the recent paradigm
shift of 6G wireless communication networks and provides

performance evaluation metrics for such a network. The fo-
cus of the survey is to provide a comprehensive analysis
of channel characteristics on various 5G and 6G frequency
channels including mm-wave, terahertz, and optical wireless
communication. These channel characteristics are discussed in
application scenarios of satellite, UAV, maritime, and under-
water. The future challenges of 6G channel measurements and
models were pointed out; however, the article lacks details on
6G-based disruptive technologies. The article also ignored the
security challenges on these channels which is a critical aspect
of 6G networks.

The articles [81, 40] review the generations of mobile
wireless technologies including requirements, advantages, and
disadvantages. The authors focused on the channel modeling,
especially the channel modeling options of the 6G networks.
The cost-beneﬁt analysis is also provided. However, the ar-
ticles lack the discussion of the integration of the channel
models with 6G networks.

Free space optical (FSO) [37] is an emerging technology for
6G networks and has the potential to resolve the bandwidth
bottleneck. The authors discussed the issues caused by the
fog’s attenuation to FSO and they proposed an empirical
prediction model to calculate its impact.

Survey TaxonomyEnabling TechnologiesPotential Use CasesApplicationsAI TechnologiesIndustry 5.0•Indoor Coverage•Smart City•Unmanned Vehicles•Internet of EverythingSmart Healthcare•Brain Computer Interaction•Senses MonitoringVirtual Reality•Extended Reality•Holographic TelepresenceDisruptive•Terahertz•Optical Wireless•Full-Duplex•Channel Estimation•Network Localization•Advanced MIMOInnovative Architecture•Cell-Less•3D Network•Virtualization•Backhaul•Energy Harvesting•Blockchain•WIETIntelligence Integration•Supervised Learning•Unsupervised LearningBig DataOptimizationIntelligent CommunicationTrends/ChallengesSecurity & PrivacyDistributed MLTABLE I
LIST OF ACRONYMS AND THE CORRESPONDING DEFINITIONS

Acronyms Deﬁnition
Tbps

Terabyte per second

Acronyms Deﬁnition
1/2/3
/4/5/6 G

First/Second/Third
/Fourth/Fifth/Sixth
Generation
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
3rd Generation Part-
nership Project
mmWave millimeterWave

AI
3GPP

THz
GHz

FCC

QoS

Quality of Service

NMR

GSM

EDGE

UMTS

D2D
ML
MR
UAV

SDN

FSO
BCI

HCI

DAS

MIMO

VLC

NFV

Mobile

System
Mobile

Global
for
Communication
Enhanced Data Rates
for GSM Evolution
Universal
Telecommunication
System
Device to Device
Machine Learning
Mixed Reality
Unmanned Aerial Ve-
hicle
Software
Network

Deﬁned

Free Space Optical
Brain Computer Inter-
action
Human Computer In-
teraction
Distributed Antenna
Systems
Multiple-Input-
Multiple-Output
Visible Light Com-
munication
Network
Virtualization

Functions

SMS

GPRS

CDMA

LTE
VR
AR
eMBB

URLLC

IoT
IoE

M2M

UGV

UUV

RF

WIET

Tera Hertz
Giga Hertz

Federal Communica-
tions Commission
Nordic Mobile Radio
System
Short Messaging Ser-
vice

General Packet Radio
Service
Code Division Multi-
ple Access

Mobile

Long-Term Evolution
Virtual Reality
Augmented Reality
Enhanced
Broadband
Ultra-Reliable
low
Communications
Internet of Things
Internet
Thing
Machine to Machine

Latency

Every

of

Ground

Unmanned
Vehicle
Unmanned Underwa-
ter Vehicle
Radio Frequency

Wireless Information
and Energy Transfer

The goal of the survey [109] is to provide the state of
UAVs and understand the telecommunications-related issues
that need to be resolved. A schematic architecture is described
along with the implementation proposed for UAVs. The author
provides an analysis of aviation-speciﬁc Automatic dependent
surveillance-broadcast (ADS-B) to 5G/6G cellular networks.
The authors only discussed the fundamental requirements of
6G networks for UAVs; the detailed use cases and security
aspects must be provided.

In this survey [12],

the authors presented a framework
for developing ﬂexible radio access technologies (RATs) for
6G networks and their related requirements. The framework

provides ﬂexibility for the selection of RATs. This framework
also highlights the inefﬁciency of the ﬁxed waveform param-
eterization of 5G/6G numerologies. However, the article lacks
a discussion about the security issues of RATs.

The survey [87] provides the evolution of wireless networks
in terms of the 5G/6G heterogonous networks architecture
along with its requirements and challenges. Further, the au-
thors also discussed the integration of emerging 6G tech-
nologies including Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN) and
Machine to Machine Communications (M2M) in the context
of 5G/6G networks. However, the survey lacks a detailed
discussion about the integration of these domains with 6G
networks.

The authors in [89] gives a detailed survey on the Smart
grid based on IoT frameworks. Various performance metrics
are identiﬁed to evaluate such a framework, these metrics
include delay, high throughput, power management, security,
etc. The authors concluded that a lack of effort was being
done to secure IoT-based frameworks and suggested that cyber
security should be incorporated as a compulsory aspect of
these systems in the future. The survey lacks the discussion
about 6G applications, requirements, integration of IoTs with
advanced network architectures, etc.

The survey [119] presents a detailed discussion on ar-
chitectures and requirements of 6G networks. The authors
evaluated the recommended architectures based on perfor-
mance parameters including latency and throughput to check
their suitability for 6G networks. The evaluation is done
with various applications including senses like 3D video and
sensitivity (touch, smell, texture, etc.). The authors concluded
that 6G networks with mentioned applications required Super
Ultra-Low Latency, High-Precision Latency, and ultra-delays.
The survey [70] discusses a comprehensive review of a
cellular system in the context of software-deﬁned 5G/6G
networks. A detailed discussion is provided regarding appli-
cation scenarios, challenges, and key technologies for 6G-
based SDN. The authors also discussed the requirements of
advanced sensors and monitoring technologies that will be
used with upcoming 6G networks. Various important aspects
of 6G networks are ignored like cyber security, industry 5.0,
big data and ML, etc.

The survey [86] provides a detailed discussion of security
and privacy aspects of the 6G networks by visualizing vari-
ous use cases; however, the authors did not provide enough
discussion for the ML, AI, key technologies, and industry 5.0.
The article [104] presents a survey on several ML tech-
niques linked to networking, transmission, and security aspects

of the vehicular networks. The authors also visualize the
ways of enabling AI toward a future 6G vehicular network,
these visualized areas include intelligent radio (IR), network
intelligence, self-learning with proactive exploration, etc. AI
mechanisms will enable ultralow delay, better reliability, se-
curity, and high bandwidth.

This article [118] discusses the future trends in the evolu-
tion of ubiquitous connectivity in rural areas and linked the
requirements to the 6G networks. The authors also discussed
the application and requirement aspects of the 6G network;
however, the article lacks a discussion about ML and security
aspects.

Table II provides the comparison of the 6G’s surveys. This
comparison is conducted based on important and futuristic
performances metrics, some of which (virtual reality (VR),
health, machine learning (ML), architectures, trends, and dis-
ruptive technologies) are extracted from literature and some
are proposed metrics from our side like integration, security
and privacy, Industry 5.0, and Big data. It can be seen from
Table II that most of the surveys lack in the areas like security,
integration, Big data, and industry 5.0. Almost all of them
discuss the ML, architectures, and challenges in detail. Our
survey provides a detailed discussion of all these comparative
metrics.

III. BACKGROUND, SPECIFICATION AND REQUIREMENTS

Before jumping to the 6G requirements, it is important to
analyze the available generations. In the following section,
we provide a brief revision of all the generations with their
strengths and limitations. We also discuss the speciﬁcations
and requirements for 6G networks.

A. Background of Communication Generations

Since the beginning of the ﬁrst analog communication
system in the early eighties, a new mobile communication
generation has been launched after every ten years. In the
following sections, we go through these generations and
present their strengths and limitations.

1) First Generation: First Generation (1G) provided the
service of voice calling with a large network coverage. A
partial fax service was also introduced in 1G networks. 1G
networks faced the issues like incompatibility of different
market standards. For instance, at that time USA was using
an advanced mobile phone system; whereas several European
countries adopted the nordic mobile radio system (NMR). Both
standards were incompatible with each other. Digital speech
codecs were not introduced in the 1G era [102].

2) Second Generation: The global system for mobile com-
munications (GSM) is considered the key standard of second-
generation (2G). It began in Europe with a French name
Groupe Speciale Mobile, and within years, GSM had around
90 percent of the market share. In GSM, newer voice codecs
improved the voice quality. One of the key features of the
GSM was the short messaging service (SMS). In addition,
GSM also launched digital data services [99]. Initially, a data
rate of 9.6 kb/s was achieved; later, the data rate was further
improved to 200 kb/s with the launch of general packet radio
service (GPRS) and enhanced data rates for GSM evolution
(EDGE). 2G had various challenges that include low data rate,
high cost, delay, etc.

3) Third Generation: Several European regulators agreed
to establish a new approach to granting licenses by the mid
and end of the 1990s. It was expensive to buy a spectrum
from auctions in open markets. Even after the license was
granted, no standard came out. However, after several years
of license granting, the universal mobile telecommunication
system (UMTS)-based cell phones came into the market.
UMTS used code division multiple access (CDMA). Initially,
UMTS provided the data rates up to 364 kb/s which was far
less than the expected rate; however, in the later modiﬁcations,
higher data rates were achieved. UMTS could not provide
the expected performance due to bandwidth issues. Therefore,
operators decided to move towards 4G long-term evolution
(LTE) [88].

4) Fourth Generation: While working with UMTS, oper-
ators learned lessons and they were not fully conﬁdent to
invest in the fourth generation (4G). Also, various technologies
were introduced regarding spectrum efﬁciency which provided
the ﬂexibility for operators to select the appropriate option
according to their requirements. Most of the LTE standards
kept upgrading 3G UMTS to develop 4G communications.
The LTE aimed at simplifying the existing UMTS architecture
from circuit and packet switching to IP-based architecture.
LTE provides up to 300 Mb/s and uploads data rates of up to
75 Mb/s. LTE offers low latency (up to 5 ms) with mobility
support. It uses orthogonal frequency division multiple access
(FDMA). Although, 4G provides solutions to several problems
faced by 3G like low data rates and higher latency values; 4G
faced other issues such as performance management for the
rapid growth of the number of devices that required ubiquitous
connectivity and higher data rates [54].

5) Fifth Generation: The ﬁfth-generation (5G) is the new
generation of cellular networks. According to the 3GPP
project, if a device is using 5G new radio (5G NR) software,

Survey

Year

Requirements
Challenges

Use Cases
(VR, Health, Industry5.0)

Enablers
(Disruptive, Innovative)

AI
(ML, Architectures, Big data, Trends)

Technological
Integration

Security
Privacy

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF EXISTING 6G SURVEYS

[40]
[81]
[109]
[37]
[87]
[12]
[119]
[89]
[70]
[104]
[118]
[110]
[95]
[43]
Our survey

2015
2015
2016
2016
2017
2017
2018
2018
2019
2019
2020
2020
2021
2021
2022

M
M
H
M
M
M
L
M
L
M
L
M
H
L
H

(N, H, N)
(L, M, N)
(N,M,N)
(N, M, N)
(L, M, L)
(L, M, L)
(L, M, L)
(L, M, L)
(L, M, L)
(L, M, L)
(N,M,N)
(N, M, N)
(L, H, N)
(H. M, N)
(H, H, H)

(L, L)
(L, M)
(L, M)
(L, L)
(M, L)
(L, L)
(M, L)
(L, L)
(M, L)
(L, L)
(L, M)
(L, M)
(L, M)
(L, M)
(H, H)

it is called a 5G device. 5G network is supposed to provide
data rates of up to 20 Gb/s. The 5G technology promises to
offer a latency between 1 to 5 ms. The speed of 5G in the sub-
6GHz band will be greater than the 4G with a similar number
of antennas and spectrum. Overall, 5G uses a high-frequency
band (above 30 GHz). In recent years, mmWave appeared
as one of the potential candidates for 5G by providing data
rates in gigabits/sec. It uses a spectrum between 30 and 300
GHz and corresponds to wavelengths between 10mm to 1mm.
The characteristics of mmW includes high bandwidth, short-
wavelength/high frequency, and high attenuation [31]. High-
power levels are required to overcome the huge path loss,
which is expected in mmW communications. The coverage
is up to 20 meters at 60 GHz. IEEE 802.15.3c and IEEE
802.11ad standards provide the support of mmW. Moreover,
5G will deliver the services like device-to-device (D2D) con-
nectivity and massive machine-to-machine communications,
etc. 5G bands have several challenges including poor foliage
penetration, atmospheric and free space path loss, and high
deployment cost.

Table III shows a performance comparison for different

generations of the communication systems.

B. Speciﬁcations and Requirements

There are several performance trade-offs in reliability, delay,
throughput, and power consumption for 5G networks and
these trade-offs give an impression that 5G could not fulﬁll
the market challenges beyond 2030. The characteristics and
to overcome
features of 6G networks have the potential
these challenges. The main features of 6G networks include
high data rates, energy efﬁciency, reliability, and intelligent

(L, M, M, H)
(N, L, M, M)
(H, H, L, M)
(M, L, N, L)
(L, H, L, L)
(H, M, L, M)
(L, H, L, L)
(H, M, L, M)
(L, H, L, L)
(H, M, L, M)
(H, H, L, M)
(M, L, N, L)
(H, M, M, H)
(H, L, M, M)
(H, H, H, H)

L
L
M
L
N
L
N
L
N
L
M
L
L
L
H

L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
H

TABLE III
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON AMONG 4G, 5G AND 6G

Characteristics
Device peak data
rate
Latency
Maximum spec-
tral efﬁciency
Mobility
Network energy
efﬁciency

4G
1Gbps

5G
10-20 Gbps

6G
1Tbps

100 ms
15 bps/Hz

5-10 ms
30 bps/Hz

10-100 micro sec
100 bps/Hz

350 Km/hr
1x

500 km/h
10-100 x of
4G

up to 1000 km/h
10-100 x of 5G

decision-making per device as well as a whole network at
the global scale. The 6G networks are supposed to pro-
vide services including enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB),
ultra-reliable low latency communications (URLLC), massive
machine-type communication (mMTC), and AI and machine
learning integration. URLLC, promises to provide a delay of
less than 1 ms [105]. Furthermore, the 6G system makes use
of energy harvesting techniques so that ultra-lifetime could be
provided to the devices.

For the satellite integrated network, 6G is expected to
provide improved QoS for satellite communication. 6G aims
to make a single wireless operating network by integrating
the terrestrial and satellite networks. 6G will provide massive
connectivity to wireless devices in the form of IoE; however,
such huge connectivity creates challenges like quick process-
ing and transmission delays. To cater to this, 6G will make use
of extensive AI techniques at each phase of the communication
including signaling, forwarding, and decision making [68].

Ubiquitous connectivity is considered one of the key re-

quirements for 6G networks. In a broader aspect, drones and
the satellites in orbits will help to create super-3D connectivity
for 6G to provide ubiquitous communication [68]. 5G success-
fully uses the small cell communication networks to improve
QoS including throughput, energy, signal quality, and spectral
efﬁciency; however, it lacks the integration of disciplines like
AI, ML, and automation [23, 97, 75].

6G networks will incorporate the approach of small cell net-
works in a larger aspect. Due to massive device connectivity,
the future 6G networks will be ultra-dense with heterogeneous
connectivity characteristics.

In recent years, millimeter wave (mmW) appeared as one
of the potential candidates for 5G by providing data rates
up to gigabits/sec and it could be also useful for the initial
implementation of 6G networks. It uses a spectrum between 30
and 300 GHz and corresponds to wavelengths between 10 mm
to 1mm. The characteristics of mmW include high bandwidth,
short-wavelength/high frequency, and high attenuation [69,
83]. Huge path loss is expected in mmW communications,
to recover from these path losses, high power levels are
required. Due to high attenuation from solid material (bricks
and buildings), mmW requires line of sight (LoS) for efﬁcient
and reliable communication. The interference levels in mmW
communication are much lower than the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz.
Multiple-antennas solutions in mmW allow the transmission
to use narrow beams which help to reduce the attenuation
and the interference [113, 58, 45]. There have been several
standardization activities for mmW MAC in the 60 GHz band.
Most of these standardization efforts are for personal and
local area networks under IEEE 802.15.3c and IEEE 802.11ad.
IEEE 802.15.3c standard also known as piconet speciﬁes the
mmW by supporting a high data rate over 2 Gbps in the
60 GHz band. Among a cluster of IEEE 802.15.3c-based
devices, one will be selected as the piconet coordinator (PNC)
which manages the synchronization among devices by broad-
casting beacon messages. The devices content for the time
slots using carrier sense multiple access/collision avoidance
(CSMA/CA) and sending data using time division multiple
access (TDMA) [108, 116]. The IEEE 802.11ad introduced
several modiﬁcations at MAC and the physical layer of the
existing IEEE 802.11 standard to enable mmW support. It
claims to provide a 6.75 Gbps data rate. The coordinator uses
a superframe structure to manage the channel access of the
connected stations which is composed of beacons, contention
access period (CAP) and contention-free period (CFP) [1, 4,
7, 3, 5].

It is important to understand the performance computation
process for various technologies under the 6G network could
be different and dependent on a speciﬁc technology. As an
example, a discussion is provided regarding the performance
evaluation of a 5th generation’s medium access control (MAC)
mechanism of the IEEE 802.15.3C standard in terms of end-to-
end delay (ED) and maximum throughput (MT). The purpose
is to understand how much time it takes for a CTA request in
the worst-case scenario. The ED can be calculated as given in
Equation (1) [6, 7, 2]:

ED = Tf rame + TACK + TCH

(1)

Where Tframe represents frame transmission time for a CTA
request frame. Further, Tframe can be computed as given in
Equation (2):

Tf rame = TP reamble(P HY )+THeader(M AC+P HY )+TP ayload (2)

Where TPreamble is the duration of PLCP preamble, THeader
is the duration of PLCP header and TPayload is the duration of
the payload. These durations are given in the IEEE 802.15.3C
standard.

TACK represents the time duration of the ACK, in this case,

ACK duration computed as given in Equation (3):

TACK = TImmACK + 2SIF S

(3)

Where TImmACK is time duration of the immediate ACK and
can be computed as given in Equation (4):

TImmACK = TP reamble + THeader

(4)

The ACK of the ImmACK has only MAC header and not
a payload as each packet is expected to be acknowledged
immediately. TCH represents the time to access the channel,
which is computed as given in Equation (5):

TCH = (RC ∗ BIF S) + (BC ∗ pBackof f Slot)

(5)

Where RC is the retry counter in the backoff process and its
value will be 3 in the worst case as default, BIFS is the backoff
IFS and it is calculated by Equation (6):

BIF S = pSif sT ime + pCcaDetectT ime

(6)

The values of pSifsTime and pCcaDetectTime are given in the
Table I mentioned by the in the IEEE 802.15.3C standard. BC
is the backoff counter calculated as given in Equation (7):

BC = Rand(0, BW )

(7)

BC is computed using a random function that ﬁnds a random
integer value between zero and BW (backoff window). The
value of BW is given in Table IV.

TABLE IV
TIMING AND SPACE PARAMETERS MENTIONED BY IEEE 802.15.3C
STANDARD [107]

PHY Parameter
pSIFSTime
pCcaDetectTime
pBackoffSlot
T Preamble
T Header
Backoff Windows
Retry Count
CAP duration (µs)
Superframe duration (µs)
MAC header (bytes)
PHY header (bytes)
Acknowledgement (bytes)
Beacon packet (bytes)
Data frame (bytes)
Channel data rate (Gbps)

Duration HSI (µs)
2.5
2.5
5
1.31
0.44
[7, 15, 31, 63]
0 to 3
0 to 65,535
0 to 65,535
10
48
10
100
512 to 8,388,608
1.5, 3, 5

The maximum throughput (MT) is deﬁned as a ratio of
transmitted information in bits to the transmission duration.
Throughput is deﬁned as the ratio of payload size (x) to the
total time required to transmit the payload, in the case when
there is no priority set the maximum network throughput can
be computed as given in Equation (8):

M T = X/ED

(8)

In this regard, multi-tier network architecture will help to
manage these ultra-dense networks in 6G. To manage the huge
trafﬁc in 6G networks, high-capacity backhaul networks are
required [8]. This can be possible by using free-space optical
(FSO) systems and a fast optical ﬁber network. Overall, 6G
wireless networks will be able to:

• Provide super-high-deﬁnition (SHD) and extremely high-
deﬁnition (EHD) video transmission which requires ultra-
high throughput.

• Support extremely low latency up to 10 micro-second.
• Manage the Internet of Nano-Things and Internet of
Bodies using smart implantable and wearable devices
under very low power consumption.

• Enable efﬁcient underwater and space transmissions to
drastically increase the limits of human activity, for
example, deep-sea exploration and space traveling.

• Support various advanced service practices like hyper-

high-speed railway (HSR).

• Improve 5G applications, like the huge Internet of Things

(IoT) and entirely autonomous vehicles.

• Support enhanced mobile broadband communications,
enhanced
and

ultra-huge machine-type
ultra-reliable
long-distance and high mobility communications.

and low-latency communications,

communications,

IV. 6G ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES

This section describes the technological enablers that are
supposed to provide the 6G revolution. These key enablers
will
justify the migration from 5G to 6G networks. We
discuss various technologies including Terahertz (THz), optical
wireless technology, full-duplex communication, channel esti-
mation techniques, network localization, MIMO, 3D network
architecture, network virtualization, FSO, energy harvesting
techniques, blockchain, WIET, and supervised and unsuper-
vised learning [57, 64, 41, 11, 93, 112, 8, 106, 100, 42, 33, 10].
Based on technological characteristics, we categorize enabling
technologies into three main categories: disruptive, innovative,
and intelligence integration. We discuss these technologies in
the following sections.

A. Disruptive Communication Technologies

Communication technologies like multiple-input-multiple-
output (MIMO) and mmWave are considered key enablers
of 5G networks and provide required QoS. To meet
the
requirements of 6G networks, 6G will exploit the unused
terahertz band and visible light communications (VLC).

1) Terahertz Communications: The radio frequency (RF)
band is nearly exhausted and not enough to fulﬁll the 6G
requirements. Spectral efﬁciency can be enhanced by ex-
panding the bandwidth, which can be achieved by applying
THz bands and massive MIMO technologies. The THz band
will play an important role in 6G communication [106]. The
THz band is intended to be the next frontier of high-data-
rate communications. THz communications use the frequency
bands between 100 GHz and 10 THz with wavelengths in the
0.03 mm – 3 mm range. ITU-R recommends 275 GHz - 3 THz
bands for the communication of cellular networks [100]. In
comparison with mmWave, THz faces challenges due to ultra-
high frequencies. The main challenges that are hurdles for
terahertz’s commercial adoption are the propagation loss, the
molecular absorption at a higher frequency, the high penetra-
tion loss for solid objects, and, the antenna design complexity.
In mmWave, the propagation loss can be controlled using the
directional antenna arrays mechanism. However, some of the
frequencies in the terahertz spectrum are more sensitive to

atmospheric molecular absorption. This issue can be avoided
by only using selected frequencies band in Terahertz spectrum
[57].

2) Optical Wireless Technology: Optical wireless technol-
ogy (OWC) is considered a key enabler for 6G communica-
tions; however, it is already being used partially in 4G/5G
networks. Main OWC technologies include light ﬁdelity, op-
tical camera communication, VLC, and FSO communication
[22, 21, 49, 50]. Networks with OWC technologies have the
potential to provide ultra-throughput and very low latency.
VLC is proposed to support RF communications using the
light-emitting diode (LED) luminaries. These devices can
switch among various light intensities to modulate the signal.
The research activities on VLC are more progressive than
the terahertz communications. Although, the IEEE 802.15.7
standard is proposed for VLC, yet not been adopted by 3GPP.
VLC has a short-range, requires an illumination source for
communication, and is also sensitive to the noise created by
any light source including the sun [64]. Due to these reasons,
it is mostly recommended for indoor environments.

3) Full-Duplex Communication: Recently, cellular net-
works are adopting full-duplex solutions which will make the
base station’s transceiver capable of transmitting a signal while
receiving within a limited range, such design is achievable us-
ing innovative design of self-interference suppression circuits
[41]. The main innovation is being achieved by improving the
design of the antenna and circuit which reduces the cross-talk
between receiver and transmitter for a wireless device [44].

In future, technological advancement will be capable of
simultaneous transmission and reception. Such advancements
enhance the multiplexing capabilities of the existing cellular
systems in terms of throughput. 6G network could be very
useful for such a full-duplex network in terms of performance
requirements.

4) Novel Channel Estimation Techniques: For cellular net-
works, channel estimation for beam tracking is considered
an important element for ultra-high frequencies. Therefore,
advanced channel estimation techniques will be highly ben-
eﬁcial in cellular networks. If we talk about mmWave, design
challenges exist for channel estimation techniques due to
is
complex antenna architectures. A recent research effort
made to provide channel estimation for mmWave, known as
out-of-band estimation, which provides an improvement in the
reactiveness of beam management schemes [11].

5) Sensing and Network-Based Localization: Techniques
based on RF signals have been broadly used to empower
concurrent operation of localization and mapping techniques

[120]. However, it is still not adopted for the case of cellu-
lar networks. In this regard, 6G will provide an integrated
localization and mapping mechanisms
interface to support
which will offer multiple advantages including enhancement
in control operations, less interference and novel services for
applications like eHealth.

6) Advanced Multiple-Input-Multiple-Output: Multiple an-
tenna technologies have achieved considerable response from
both academia and industry as they are capable of providing
high geographical coverage and spatial multiplexing which
helps to boost spectral efﬁciency [39, 15] and could be very
useful
to achieve the performance goals of 6G networks.
Therefore MIMO is a potential area that can integrate itself
with 6G networks which will increase the capability of 6G
network devices in terms of transmission.

B. Innovative Network Architectures

6G network offers various innovations to the existing com-
munication architecture e.g., virtualization. In this section, we
will discuss some of the promising architectural domains.

1) Cell-Less Architecture and Tight Integration of Multiple
Frequencies: The 6G network will create a strong relation-
ship between cells and the user equipment (UEs) and will
create cell-less architecture. This can be accomplished using
dual-band techniques with multiple radios. Such architectures
provide high mobility support with fewer overheads. It will
increase the user capacity by seamlessly transitioning to mul-
tiple heterogeneous links (e.g., to identify the best channel)
without any prior conﬁgurations.

3) Virtualization of Networking Equipment:

2) 3D Network Architecture: 6G networks will support
three-dimensional (3D) visualisation by using heterogeneous
architecture. Communication technologies like drones and
satellites will use these architectures to improve related QoS.
these heterogeneous communication architec-
Furthermore,
tures could be easily deployed in rural and disaster areas [117].
In 6G net-
works, network virtualization will be one of the key concepts.
The virtualization will be implemented at different layers i.e.,
network layer, MAC layer, and physical layer. It will reduce
the management burden from hardware devices in a cost-
effective way. It will create a centralized virtual controller
which will be responsible for the policy and data forwarding
[9].

4) Advanced Access-Backhaul Network (FSO) Integration:
In 6G networks, technologies are supposed to provide ultra-
high data rates which also require sufﬁcient expansion of
backhaul capacity. Furthermore, future VLC and terahertz

implementations will use a massive number of devices, which
need backhaul connectivity with the core network and neigh-
bouring nodes [93].

In some cases, such as, at remote geographical locations
(e.g., sea, space and underwater), it is not feasible to deploy
optical ﬁbre as a backhaul network. For such scenarios, the
FSO backhaul network is a potential communication system
for 6G networks [42, 33, 16]. FSO performs like an optical
ﬁbre network and provides similar communication services.
FSO can provide a large communication range, even greater
than 10,000 km. Figure 3 shows an example of an integrated
backhaul link.

Fig. 3.

Integrated backhaul link [32]

5) Energy Harvesting Strategies for Low-Power Consump-
tion Network: Energy/power harvesting is deﬁned as the
process by which energy is extracted from external resources
including solar, thermal, wind, and kinetic energy, etc., and
then preserved for wireless autonomous devices, like wearable
biomedical monitoring sensors. The energy harvesting process
is capable of producing a small amount of energy which
is an ongoing challenge for the industry. One of the oldest
applications of energy derived from ambient electromagnetic
radiation (EMR) is known as crystal radio [85].

5G networks do consider energy harvesting techniques;
however, not much work is done on that due to a lack of
interest from manufacturers. As 6G networks deal with a
massive number of interconnected smart devices (e.g., IoT
devices ) that require energy resources to keep the device
alive. There is a need to identify the suitable energy-efﬁcient
mechanisms for such devices [112].

6) Blockchain: Blockchain manages huge datasets in an
efﬁcient way [46, 14, 80]. Blockchain works using the ap-
proach of distributed ledger technology. A distributed ledger’s
database operates in a distributed manner by using various
nodes. Every node replicates a copy of the ledger. The nodes
can work independently without
involving the centralized
node. In the blockchain, the data is managed in the form

of blocks that are connected securely. The blockchain can
manage huge data involved in IoTs-based systems [26]. Hence,
6G capabilities will support blockchain-based applications in
terms of their performance goal.

7) Integration of Wireless Information and Energy Transfer
(WIET): Recently, producing energy from the open environ-
ment is one of the potential areas which can help to in-
crease the lifetime of battery-operated wireless sensor devices.
WIET is recognized as one of the innovative technologies
for 6G networks. WIET also utilizes the wireless spectrum
for communication. WEIT can be very useful for battery-less
devices which are supposed to operate in 6G networks. The
base stations in 6G will be used for transferring power as
Wireless Information and Energy Transfer (WIET) uses the
same ﬁelds and waves used in communication systems. WIET
is an innovative technology that will allow the development
of battery-less smart devices, charging wireless networks, and
saving the battery life-time of other devices [35, 111].

C. Integrating Intelligence in the Network

The 6G network complexity in terms of architecture and
data demands AI and machine learning techniques to play their
role in the successful execution of 6G services. Although 6G
does not specify speciﬁc techniques, more likely AI based on a
data-driven model could be used for the successful deployment
of 6G networks [112]. Currently, 5G networks only integrate
partial AI and ML techniques while it is expected that in 6G
networks AI and ML will be fully integrated with 6G networks
like the concept of Industry 5.0.

1) Unsupervised and Reinforcement Learning: Unsuper-
vised and reinforcement learning techniques could be used as
a potential learning technique in 6G networks. In 6G networks,
a massive amount of data will generate and it will not be an
easy task to assign labels as required in supervised learning;
whereas, unsupervised learning does not require such labeling
and is capable of representing a learning model for such data.
Furthermore, unsupervised learning in a combination with
reinforcement learning could produce efﬁcient autonomous
systems [68].

D. Summary

Table V provides a comparison of 4G, 5G, and 6G tech-
nologies in terms of the usage scenarios, applications, network
characteristics, and technologies. In 4G networks, a simple
implementation of MBB was available which evolved into
eMBB and provides better mobile broadband. 5G networks
also support eMBB, mMTC, and URLLC and it is expected

TABLE V
NETWORK FEATURES OF 4G, 5G AND 6G

Usage Scenarios

4G
• MBB

5G
• eMBB
• URLLC
• mMTC

Applications

• High-Deﬁnition Videos
• Voice
• Mobile TV
• Mobile Internet
• Mobile Pay

• VR/AR/360° Videos
• UHD Videos
• V2X
• IoT
• Smart City
• Telemedicine
• Wearable Devices

Network Characteristics

• Flat and All-IP based

Technologies

• OFDM
• MIMO
• Turbo Code
• Carrier Aggregation
• Hetnet
• ICIC
• D2D Communications
• Unlicensed Spectrum

• Intelligence integration
• Clouds architecture
• Software virtualization
• Slicing
• mm-wave Communications
• Massive MIMO
• LDPC and Polar Codes
• Flexible Frame Structure
• Ultradense Networks
• NOMA
• Cloud Computing
• Fog/Edge Computing
• SDN/NFV

6G
• umMTC
• ERLLC
• ELPCs
• LDHMC
• FeMBB
• umMTC
• Holographic Verticals and Society,

Tactile/Haptic Internet

• Full-Sensory Digital Sensing and Re-

ality, Fully Automated Driving
• Industrial Internet, Space Travel
• Deep-Sea Sightseeing
• Internet of Bio-Nano-Things
• Cloudization
• Softwarization
• Virtualization
• Slicing
• THz Communications
• SM-MIMO
• LIS and HBF
• OAM Multiplexing
• Laser and VLC
• Blockchain-Based Spectrum Sharing
• Quantum Communications and Com-

puting

• AI/Machine Learning

that these technologies with further enhanced like umMTC
and ERLLC will support enhanced low latency and massive
machine to machine communication. The use of ERLLC,
umMTC, and FeMBB 6G will support innovative applications
like Holographic verticals, Internet of bio-Nano-Things and
deep-sea sightseeing, etc. A huge shift in technologies can
also be seen among 4G, 5G, and 6G networks. 4G mainly used
OFDM and MIMO; 5G uses mm-wave and massive MIMO,
and 6G will use THz band and SM-MIMO, etc. to achieve its
goal in terms of delay and throughput.

V. AI-ENABLED TECHNOLOGIES FOR 6G WIRELESS
NETWORKS

The rapid advancement of wireless networks will make
6G signiﬁcantly distinct from the earlier generations, as it
will be exempliﬁed by a high level of heterogeneity in sev-
eral aspects including network infrastructures, network access
mechanisms, dual-band devices, processing resources, etc.
Furthermore, the size of the massive data generated in wireless
networks is rising substantially. In this section, we promote AI
as an essential tool to expedite intelligent decision-making and
learning for 6G wireless networks [59]. We discuss and review

different works which addressed these issues [16, 39, 15, 46,
73, 79, 59, 22, 21, 49, 50, 42, 34, 17].

A. Big Data Analytics for 6G

For 6G wireless networks, there are four main categories of
data analytics that can be potentially applied. These categories
include descriptive, diagnostic, predictive, and prescriptive an-
alytics. Descriptive analytics uses historical data sets to obtain
perceptions performance indicators including trafﬁc proﬁles,
channel states, user viewpoints, etc. Descriptive analysis helps
to extend the familiarity of the network operators [71, 76, 92].
Diagnostic analytics is used for the identiﬁcation of network
failures with the potential reason of failure or fault so that
future systems can be improved. Predictive analytics closely
observes the data pattern in historical data and predicts future
behavior and predictions. Predictive analytics are tied with
machine learning techniques to get optimal results. Prescrip-
tive analytics helps to improve various domains in learning
including resource allocation, network virtualization, cache
management, edge, fog computing, etc [79].

B. AI-Enabled Closed-Loop Optimization

Existing optimization mechanisms for wireless networks
are considered to be inappropriate for 6G wireless networks
due to various characteristics of 6G including dynamicity,
complexity, the massive density of devices, and heterogeneity.
Furthermore, existing mathematical optimization techniques
have shortcomings for such massive 6G networks. For ex-
ample,
the objective functions in the algebraic form help
optimizers and make a simple solution; however, 6G wireless
networks have different scenarios, and these solutions are not
suitable. One of the potential AI mechanisms is an automated
and closed loop that can be used for 6G wireless networks.
In this regard, current AI mechanisms, like reinforcement and
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) can be used, which can
establish a feedback loop between the decision process and the
wireless network system. By using this approach, the decision-
making process will make the best decision based on current
situation [73].

C. Self-healing in Wireless Networks

Advanced AI technologies could be useful

to optimize
the physical layer’s performance of wireless networks. The
existing wireless systems have various physical layer issues
including noise, channel and hardware impairments, quadra-
ture imbalance, interference, and fading. AI technologies can
provide an optimal way to communicate among different
hardware. In the future, AI is supposed to provide self-healing
and self-optimizing mechanisms for sensor-based 6G networks
[90].

D. Summary

It is expected that in 6G networks, a fully ML and AI-
enabled network will be in operation. That’s why it is very
important to provide a detailed analysis of upcoming network
architectures with their requirement in terms of AI. Table VI
shows the link between various existing and future network
architectures and related AI algorithms. SDN, NFV, and
Cloud/fog/edge computing are considered potential network
architectures that will use a fully AI-based environment to
support 6G networks. Currently, these architectures partially
support AI and ML aspects.

VI. 6G POTENTIAL USE CASES

technology will bring a huge performance improvement for
various existing communication technologies. For example, it
is estimated that cellular data will expand 3-fold from 2016
to 2021 and there will be more than 125 billion connected
cellular users globally by 2030 [30].

This section discusses the characteristics and requirements
of some potential use cases of 6G networks. There are many
research works that discuss the potential use cases for 6G
technology [117, 121, 84, 67, 114, 120, 72, 20, 53, 31, 101,
98, 56, 13, 55, 91, 27, 118, 110, 10]. Based on the technology
used, we categorize the potential use cases into three broader
categories: VR, health, and Industry 5.0 as shown in Figure
2. These categories have various sub-categories which are
discussed in this section.

A. Virtual Reality (VR)

VR can be further divided into the following two categories:
1) Extended Reality (XR): XR is a broader term that
includes technologies to enhance our senses [24]. It mainly
includes augmented reality (AR), mixed reality (MR), and
virtual reality (VR). AR, MR, and VR over wireless links
have been emerging as the potential future applications target-
ing various areas such as education, training, entertainment,
tourism, sport, and gaming.

AR takes a real-world environment and adds a computer-
based input to the environment. Hence, AR is a collaborative
activity where real-world environment experience is obtained.
The environment is built of enhanced objects and these objects
are available in a real-world environment. AR technology
makes use of the various sensors to experience the modalities
like visual, haptic, olfactory, motion, and somatosensory. AR
consists of three basic features: 3D visualization of objects,
real-time collaboration, and a mixture of virtual and real-world
environments [25].

Figure 4 shows the AR-based user interface for the mobile
applications of IKEA, where customers can try various options
according to their real-world environment. For example, in a
dulux-based AR application, a customer can apply different
colors in his real home environment, and in an IKEA appli-
cation, a customer can try various furniture in a real home
environment. Furthermore, these applications also handle the
measurement and size issues where you need to deploy the
furniture.

6G network acts as a successor to the 5G cellular network.
6G networks will operate on higher frequencies than the
5G networks to provide higher bandwidth (in terabytes) and
ultra-low latency (in microseconds). It is expected that 6G

VR provides a purely virtual environment without con-
sidering user surroundings. VR-based devices such as HTC
Vive and Google Cardboard provide users with a completely
imaginary environment such as a squawking penguin colony

TABLE VI
NETWORK ARCHITECTURES AND AI ALGORITHMS

Network Functions
Software Deﬁned Networks (SDN)

Descriptions
In SDN, the control and data-forward func-
tion are decoupled to achieve programmable
network management and conﬁguration

Network functions virtualization
(NFV)

In NFV, hardware is decoupled from Soft-
ware and reduce the dependency of network
functions over hardware

Cloud/Fog/Edge Computing

Cloud computing represents a large pool of
servers and systems which Provides data
access and use networks of shared IT archi-
tecture. Fog computing extends the edge of
the network and enhances the operation of
computing, resources, and services between
end devices and data centers over cloud ar-
chitectures. Edge computing brings process-
ing near to the data centers which improve
the performance of data transmission.

AI Algorithms
• DNN
• Enhanced Q-Learning
• Support Vector Machines
• Self-Organizing Maps
• Biological Danger Theory
• Gradient-Boosted Regression
• Deep Reinforcement Learning
• Self-Organizing Maps
• Biological Danger Theory
• Gradient-Boosted Regression
• Deep Reinforcement Learning
• Enhanced Q-Learning
• Support Vector Machines
• Self-Organizing Maps
• Biological Danger Theory
• Gradient-Boosted Regression
• Deep Reinforcement Learning

be depleted due to the increasing use of these data-intensive
applications as they demand system capacity up to 1 Tbps
[47]. One of the reasons for high system capacity is that the
data used in AR/VR/MR-based applications cannot be com-
pressed as it is presenting real-time interaction. Furthermore,
managing real-time user interaction with AR/VR/MR-based
data-intensive applications requires a delay in micro-second.
2) Holographic Telepresence: Holographic telepresence is
a growing technology for fully interactive 3D video conferenc-
ing. Holographic telepresence systems are capable to present
real-time, full-motion-based 3D images of people and objects
in a room. It also accommodates real-time audio and associates
it with a particular 3D image of a person. Images of people
and surrounding objects at a remote location are initially
captured, then compressed and transmitted over a broadband
network. At the destination, the data is decompressed and
similarly projected through laser beams as a conventional
hologram is produced. Holographic telepresence is capable of
revolutionizing various types of communications. For example,
telepresence in teleoperation can allow medical specialists to
engage in real-time complex operations from thousands of
miles away. Furthermore,
this technology can also reduce
the travel requirement for personal and business meetings.
Distance learning using telepresence can shape the future of
universities and colleges. Other prominent examples include

Fig. 4.

IKEA AR-based applications for customers [17]

with dragons. MR combines the characteristics of VR and
AR. MR technology has started to take off with Microsoft’s
HoloLens, one of the most famous mixed reality apparatuses
[115].

These applications process exceptional QoS challenges in-
cluding quality of experience, latency, and capacity/user. To
achieve this, technologies like fog and cloud computing will
help to act as computing and intelligence layer for AR/VR
applications. 4G has been proven as a key enabling technology
for data-hungry applications like video-over-wireless. Later,
the high use of these multimedia applications was managed by
5G using the mmW spectrum. The mmW spectrum attracted
more data-intensive applications like AR, VR, and MR. It
is expected that in the coming years, the 5G spectrum will

programmed movies, entertaining games, 3D navigation appli-
cations, etc. The applications mentioned above like a 3D holo-
graphic display require a set of high-level QoS requirements.
According to a study, [17], a raw uncompressed hologram
having colors, and parallax, with 30 fps requires a data rate
of up to 4.32 Tbps with a strictly bounded delay of a few
milliseconds. 3D holographic requires such a high data rate
due to the requirement of thousands of synchronized angles.
6G network is capable of providing such high throughput
and less delay required by these applications. Furthermore,
an acceptable visual quality at the remote site is a challenging
task.

B. Smart Healthcare

The key healthcare challenges for the world’s population
the
include the increasing rate of the elderly population,
increase in healthcare cost, and the high death rate because
of chronic diseases [2, 19]. In counties like the United States,
Germany, United Kingdom, France, Switzerland, Japan, and
Australia, the life expectancy has inclined to 79.3 years, 81
years, 81.2 years, 82.4 years, 83.4 years, 83.7 years, and, 82.8
years respectively. It is expected that a high growth rate will
overload the performance of existing healthcare systems and
the healthcare cost will also increase. Furthermore, a large
number of the population dies from fatal and chronic diseases
like blood pressure, cardiovascular, diabetes, and asthma.
Research efforts revealed that
the effect of these diseases
can be controlled if they could be identiﬁed in the initial
stage. To achieve this, future healthcare systems should be
revolutionized using digital and communication technologies
so that proactive wellness could be provided through early
detection and monitoring services. It is estimated that the
need for remote healthcare monitoring services will reach 761
million in 2025 [66, 122].

These services will extend from monitoring to telemedicine
solutions like remote real-time surgery etc. The existing 5G
spectrum has started its role in remote healthcare; however, the
use cases like remote surgeries, intensive health monitoring
in an elderly care center where each person is equipped
with enormous biomedical sensors, and remote healthcare for
thousands of soldiers in battle-ﬁelds require ubiquitous health
monitoring with high data rates in Gbps and Tbps, and ultra-
low throughput to accommodate real-time solutions. In this
context, 6G networks are capable to revolutionize remote
healthcare by reducing time and space obstructions [121].
6G’s technological enhancements will showcase the eHealth

Fig. 5. Remote patient monitoring in a hospital

applications using technological revolutions like mobile edge
computing, AI, fog, and cloud computing.

Figure 5 shows a typical remote patient monitoring system
for hospitals where patients, nurses, and medical devices are
equipped with various healthcare sensors, and the monitoring
data is sent to the Internet and cloud computing architectures
for further processing. The doctors can see the different results
online and can monitor and diagnose the patients in real-time
from any remote location.

1) Brain–Computer Interaction: A brain-computer inter-
face (BCI) is a communication pathway between a sensor-
equipped and an external device. The main objectives of BCIs
include repairing human cognitive or sensory-motor functions
[107, 53]. The sensors collect the brain signals and send them
to a digital device for analysis.

Research on BCIs started at the University of California,
Los Angeles (UCLA) in the early 1970s, under research fund-
ing from the National Science Foundation. Recent studies in
the area of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) show that ma-
chine learning algorithms can play a key role in successfully
extracting features from the frontal lobe and then classifying
mental states (Normal, Neutral, focused) and emotional states
(Good/bad mood) using EEG generated brain-data [107, 53].
Such communication requires ultra-reliable communication
with very low delay, values in microseconds. The character-
istics of 6G architecture will support the deployment of BCI
systems.

2) Human Senses-Based Applications: Humans have ﬁve
basic senses: hearing, vision, taste, smell, and touch. In the
future, applications will be available that will be capable

of transferring human senses data to a remote location for
processing. Such applications use sensor-based technologies
which make use of neurological methods. It requires ultra-low
delay and high throughput. The 6G networks can provide such
services [30, 95].

C. Industry 5.0

Industry 5.0 or the Fourth Industrial Revolution, is the recent
revolution of traditional manufacturing using smart technol-
ogy. Technically, it mainly emphasizes the usage of large-scale
machine-to-machine communication (M2M) with the help of
Internet of Things (IoT) architectures and deployments to
obtain automation [98]. Industry 5.0 will make the machine’s
components capable to perform self-diagnostic and predicting
any possible future issues using AI algorithms so that any
future failure could be avoided. Such decisions constitute the
ﬁrst steps of the Industry 5.0 era, where machines will make
autonomous decisions and these decisions will have signiﬁcant
effects on people’s lives. High achievements obtained in many
areas with AI algorithms are the basis of these developments
in the industry.

Furthermore, machine components should be capable of
communicating with the other components and other ma-
chines. Predictive maintenance, IoTs, smart sensors, and 3D
printers are the main key enablers for Industry 5.0. 6G technol-
ogy will further promote the Industry 5.0 concept which was
initiated with 5G. Industry 5.0 introduced the idea of the digital
transformation of manufacturing through cyber-physical sys-
tems (CPS), which opens the gates between physical factories
and virtual computation. Such a combination will promote new
emerging technologies like M2M communications in a cost-
effective way [98]. Efﬁcient automation systems in terms of
asynchronous communication are considered key enablers of
Industry 5.0, in this regard, 6G is proposing the use of terahertz
domains to provide the required QoS for smart integrated
systems. Figure 6 shows the evolution of Industry 5.0.

Fig. 6. Automation under Industry 5.0 [51]

1) Indoor Coverage: The 5G infrastructure usually oper-
ates under the milimeterWave spectrum (60 GHz) for indoor
scenarios; however, it faces issues like penetration in solid
materials. 5G also proposed the use of distributed antenna
systems (DASs) for indoor environments which poses issues
like scalability and deployment. 6G focuses on cost-efﬁcient
solutions for indoor communication scenarios using ultra-high
capacity wireless relays with the visible light spectrum [84].
2) Smart City: A smart city can be deﬁned as an urban
area equipped with various types of sensors that collect data
and then perform analysis of the collected data to manage
and improve the infrastructure, services, and quality of life.
The collected data may belong to various resources including
citizens, installed devices, and buildings. The embedded data
analytical capabilities help to manage trafﬁc systems, power
plants, schools, libraries, hospitals, water supply networks,
waste handling, crime detection, etc [62].

5G technologies act as a key enabler for a smart city;
however, 5G only made the city partially smart which means
that inside a city, only the fragments (trafﬁc management,
water management, electricity, etc.) are individually smart but
not holistically as a smart city. 6G technologies have the
potential to speed up the adoption of smart cities by offering
required QoS using innovative and disruptive communication
technologies [120].

6G will provide support for user-centric M2M transmissions
to further improve the deployment of smart cities. Further-
more, to provide a long battery life for the devices in smart
cities, energy harvesting approaches will be used, though, 5G
initially promised to adopt energy harvesting solutions but still,
it is not being adopted.

3) Unmanned Vehicular Mobility: Unmanned vehicular
mobility refers to vehicular mobility without a driver/pilot on
board. These vehicles can be controlled remotely and they are
capable of operating and navigating autonomously by sensing
their environment. There are different
types of unmanned
vehicles including Unmanned ground vehicles (UGV) like cars
and combat vehicles, Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) such as
drones and autonomous spaceport drone ships, and unmanned
underwater vehicles (UUV) and driver-less trains.

The locomotive industry is precipitously advancing towards
fully autonomous transport systems which will ease the man-
agement burden on the organization [72]. Connected and
autonomous vehicles (CAVs) are one of the potential use cases
for future unmanned mobility. However, its deployment is still
challenging in terms of time-bounded services and high mo-
bility (up to 1000 Km/h). Further, it is estimated that vehicles

will be ﬁtted out with a high number of sensors (greater
than 200 per vehicle by 2020) which can be only served
with terahertz spectrum [20]. Figure 7 shows a self-driving
car example in Australia with all embedded features and
requirements. Moreover, ﬂying vehicles like drones indicate a
massive potential for several use cases: industrial construction,
agriculture sector, and entertainment. 6G can provide services
for such massive data-hungry use cases.

Fig. 7. An unmanned car with numerous sensors [60]

4) Internet of Everything: The term IoE evolved a few
years ago, and there is a clear difference between the deﬁnition
of IoE and IoT. IoE is deﬁned as intelligent connectivity
among things, data, processes, and people. The data is con-
information and delivered to the right
verted into useful
person/object at right time. Billions of objects update their
status by using various sensors. The IoT can be deﬁned as
the network of physical objects that are accessed on the
Internet. IoE incorporates a massive network of things where
each thing-network is an autonomous system and capable of
coordination with other networks [31]. IoT and IoE have
the same purpose in terms of connectivity; however, IoE’s
terminology is used for a broader aspect with massive data.
IoE also introduces the intelligence layer for decision-making.
The IoE is expected to provide massive connectivity in various
domains including healthcare, agriculture, logistics, manufac-
turing, and education. The 6G networks will support such
massive data connectivity using its ﬂexible heterogeneous
architecture [101].

D. Summary

Section II provides a categorization of potential use cases
for 6G networks, the categorization includes VR, health, and
Industry 5.0. VR is further sub-divided into two categories
including XR and teleportation. Both XR and teleportation

are discussed in detail with examples. The second important
category belongs to healthcare and a couple of potential use
cases are discussed under this category including BCI and
human sense-based applications. The discussion about
the
implementation of BCI for the 6G network is provided. In-
dustry 5.0 is discussed as the last category of the potential use
cases which maps the AI and ML with industrial applications.
Industry 5.0 is being considered a revolution for the automated
industry and it is vital to link it with upcoming 6G networks.

VII. 6G APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND CHALLENGES

Recently, a variety of AI-based mobile applications emerged
that require stringent QoS communication services. Many
works have tried to address these requirements [114, 105, 23,
97, 75, 14, 80, 26, 111, 82, 36]. This section discusses how
6G will manage mobile AI applications.

A. Trends and Challenges

AI has performed well in many domains including computer
language processing. AI processes are
vision and natural
computationally rigorous and implemented at data centers with
custom-designed servers. With the advancement of mobile
communication and Internet of Things devices, numerous
applications will be operating in the future and are expected
to implement at the edge of wireless networks. The design of
the 6G wireless network needs to consider the hardware, QoS,
and software requirements for IoT-based applications. Wireless
networks in the 6G-AI context face various challenges includ-
ing privacy, data storage, resource limitations on edge devices,
managing heterogeneous devices, and performance QoS [79].
The AI techniques like federated learning, deep learning, and
neural learning have the potential to cater to the challenges of
6G wireless networks [73].

B. Security and Privacy

Security and privacy are the key issues in 6G, and it is
very important to understand security and privacy concerning
various enabling technologies which we already discussed in
the previous sections. The security and privacy issues include
access control, malicious activity detection, authentication,
encryption, etc. In the 6G network, IoT will be one of the
dominating areas with its applications in healthcare (sensing
devices) and industrial automation, etc., therefore, it is impor-
tant to address the recent privacy and security issues otherwise
6G will not be able to get its performance boom. In Table VII,
we map these issues with enabling technologies. These is-
sues are discussed according to the technologies including

Terahertz, AI, and blockchain. For Terahertz communications,
electromagnetic signatures are proposed to address the issue
of authentication. In [74], the authors proposed a mechanism
to identify the malicious activity in Terahertz. In [71, 76, 92,
48, 82], the authors proposed an access control mechanism,
malicious activity detection, authentication, and encryption.
The authors in [63, 65, 38] provided security solutions for
blockchain in terms of authentication, access control, and
communication. All these proposed mechanisms apply to 6G
networks.

C. Communication for Distributed Machine Learning

Along with AI techniques, high-level distributed machine
learning techniques are required to make a successful execu-
tion of wireless networks in a 6G environment. The machine
learning techniques elevate the complexities of the cloud
wireless architecture, decision making at the network edge,
and end devices.

1) Communication-Efﬁcient Distributed Training: The ex-
panding processing and storage capacity of advanced commu-
nication make devices capable of on-device training, learning,
and processing of received data. Yet, transmitting over the
unpredictable wireless channel turns into a substantial per-
formance bottleneck for the mobile distributed networks. To
handle the security and privacy issues, federated learning [59]
keeps the training data at each device. Federated learning is
an emerging distributed ML/AI approach with privacy preser-
vation, is speciﬁcally useful for various wireless applications,
and is used as one of the key solutions to obtain ubiquitous
AI in 6G.

2) Communication-Efﬁcient Distributed Inference:

In 6G
networks, it is expected that AI services will be implemented
at data centers and end IoT devices, e.g., unmanned vehicles
and drones. A lot of research efforts have been made to design
inference processes with very low latency and cost. To handle
the issues like massive computation, processing, power, and
privacy in 6G networks, mobile edge computing is considered
as a potential candidate [73]. For instance, in the case of
a deep neural network, at end devices, the features can be
extracted for decision making, and later this information can be
communicated to the edge/cloud computed devices. However,
the heterogeneous nature of devices in 6G networks makes
computing and inter-processing mechanisms more challenging
for neural networks [79].

D. Summary

Table VIII shows the relation between various network
layers and potential AI algorithms for those layers. AI algo-

rithms can play a critical role to improve the performance
of operational activities of the network model
layers. AI
algorithms will somehow automate the functionality of these
layers. For the physical layer, K-Means, DNNs, CNNs, and
CCNSs algorithms are suggested. These algorithms can easily
be mapped with physical layer modulating techniques like
OFDM and MIMO. To optimize the frame performance in
terms of scheduling and error detection, at the data link layer,
Q-Learning, supervised learning, and reinforcement learning is
suggested. At the network layer, to increase the performance
for routing and mobility, reinforcement learning, supervised
and unsupervised learning, K-Mean and Q-Leaning are ad-
vised.

VIII. FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS

Numerous technical

issues need to be resolved for the
successful deployment of 6G networks. Some of the important
concerns are discussed below.

A. High-Level Propagation and Atmospheric Absorption of
THz

The THz frequency bands offer very high data rates. Yet,
the THz bands require to resolve an important issue regarding
data transmission over quite long distances which is high
propagation loss due to atmospheric absorption character-
istics, therefore, absorptive effects are witnessed [77]. The
atmospheric situation is often variable and as a result very
unpredictable. To solve this issue, a new transceiver architec-
ture with efﬁcient antennas for the THz frequency bands is
required. Furthermore, health and safety issues related to the
THz band need to be resolved.

B. Complexity in Resource Management for 3D Networking

3D networking is a capability where someone can create
a stunning 3D network diagram for a better understanding of
the network. 3D networking is considered one of the powerful
future networking aspects that will merge with the 6G network.
The 3D-based networks expanded in the vertical direction
and it requires innovative methods for resource management,
routing protocol, mobility support, and channel access. Huge
attention is required from industry and academia to implement
the concept. It will merge with 6G networks and provide better
networking operations and management [52].

C. Heterogeneous Hardware Constraints

6G network is envisioned as a massive collection of hetero-
geneous devices, frequency bands, architectures, typologies,
and operating systems. Furthermore, hardware operational

TABLE VII
SECURITY AND PRIVACY ISSUES IN 6G-ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES

Paper

Security Issues

Proposed Solution

Enabling
Technology
Terahertz

Terahertz

[8]

[74]

Authentication

Malicious activity

Artiﬁcial Intelligence

[71]

Access control

Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Artiﬁcial Intelligence

[76]
[92]

Malicious activity
Authentication

Artiﬁcial Intelligence

[48]

Communication

Artiﬁcial Intelligence

[82]

Encryption

Blockchain

Blockchain

Blockchain

[63]

[65]

[38]

Authentication

Access control

communication

Electromagnetic signatures are pro-
posed
The authors highlighted that signal is
transmitted via a narrow beam, it can
still be intercepted by an eavesdropper
Authors proposed ﬁne grained control
processes
Proposed anomaly detection system
Unsupervised learning process is used
as solution
Antenna
is
mapped with AI algorithm as a secure
solution
ML and quantum based encryption
schemes
A novel architecture is proposed for
authentication
Proposed a method that improves ac-
cess control
Proposed to use hashing mechanism to
validate transactions

communication

based

settings for the mobile terminals and the signaling devices
will be substantially different. The MIMO technique will be
more advanced in 6G with a further complex architecture than
the 5G. Moreover, 6G will need to adjust to the complex
communication protocols having complicated algorithms. The
addition of advanced AI and machine learning techniques
like unsupervised and reinforcement
learning could make
hardware operations more complex. Subsequently, it will be
very challenging to incorporate all the heterogeneous aspects
into a single platform [103].

D. Autonomous Wireless Systems

Designing autonomous wireless systems with simultane-
ous responses in real-time is not an easy task and cannot
be achieved by incremental changes to existing control and
optimization methodologies. It needs a fundamental shift in
the system by merging machine intelligence in wireless ar-
chitecture and infrastructure. Autonomous wireless systems in
6G networks will be a combination of several heterogeneous
technological components like computing, machine learning,
autonomous cloud computing systems, and heterogeneous
wireless systems [34]. All the mentioned components require
a speciﬁed quality of service parameters to make a fully
autonomous system, these parameters include ML capabilities,
quick data processing, huge storage capability, hi Internet
availability, and security services. With the advanced infras-

tructure and features of the 6G networks, it is expected that it
will provide fully autonomous systems for various machines
including cars, UAVs, drones, etc. UAVs, are emerging as one
of the potential 6G applications as they can provide ultra-
high data rates and ubiquitous wireless connectivity. UAVs’
special features such as ease of deployment, high LoS link
probability, and a large degree of freedom are given through
their controlled mobility. UAVs can be deployed to extend
wireless connectivity in case of disasters such as natural dis-
asters etc. Allowing UAVs to adaptively reposition according
to environmental changes and users’ demands is one of the
most valuable UAV features. The objective of connecting the
independent components to be joined by the 6G will be made
possible by aerial BSs due to simple deployment.

E. Device Capability

The start-up of the THz spectrum will deliver new sens-
ing capabilities to the 6G devices, these capabilities include
high-deﬁnition imaging and frequency spectroscopy, etc. In
sequence with high precision, these augmented sensing capa-
bilities are subservient in understanding the context and could
help to build a trusted and secure environment. The 6G system
requires more capabilities from devices to efﬁciently operate.
For example, advanced smartphones equipped with AI, XR,
and integrated sensing, should be resourceful to enable 6G’s
new features like a throughput of 1 Tb/s. The existing 5G

TABLE VIII
COMMUNICATION LAYERS AND AI ALGORITHMS

Network Functions
Physical Layer

Data Link Layer

Descriptions
Physical
layer transmits the data on the wireless
medium using different modulating schemes includ-
ing channel coding, advanced modulation schemes
like OFDM and MIMO etc.

Data link layer is mainly responsible for the frame
Performance issues i.e., scheduling, error identiﬁca-
tion and correction mechanisms, ﬂow control mech-
anisms, synchronization, queuing etc.,

AI Algorithms
• K-Means
• DNN
• CNNs
• CCNNs
• Auto-encoder
• DNNs
• Q-Learning
• Reinforcement

Learning

Network Layer

Network layer is responsible for connection man-
agement, mobility management,
load and routing
protocols management

• Supervised Learning
• Transfer Learning
• DNNs
• Reinforcement

Learning

• Supervised Learning
• Unupervised Learning
• K-Means
• Q-Learning

devices may have shortcomings to support some of the 6G
features. A massive number of devices connected in 5G should
be compatible with 6G.

F. High Capacity Backhaul Network Connectivity

One signiﬁcant element in the connectivity solution is an
efﬁcient backhaul connection. An appropriate backhaul design
could be very challenging for remote areas. High-level density
access networks for 6G networks are very distinct and perva-
sive. These access networks will be capable of providing ultra-
high data rates. In the future, the backhaul network will have
a critical role in providing massive connectivity between core
and access networks. Evolving satellite constellations such as
Starlink by SpaceX and the systems by OneWeb and Telesat
have a lot of potential to support such scenarios; however,
these are expensive solutions. The optical ﬁber and FSO
networks are the more appropriate options and in 6G networks
they have the potential to further improve the performance of
back-haul networks, hence advancement is required for the
back-haul networks [96].

G. Spectrum and Interference Management

The shortage of the spectrum at higher frequencies and
their interference problems require efﬁcient and innovative
spectrum sharing schemes. Effective spectrum management
schemes are vital to achieving optimal resource utilization
with QoS maximization. For efﬁcient deployment of 6G,
researchers need to tackle concerns like spectrum management

for the heterogeneous networks and devices under the same
frequency band [78].

H. Beam Management in THz Communications

Beamforming via advanced MIMO systems is a potential
technology to support high data rates. Though, beam manage-
ment for high-frequency bands like the THz band is a chal-
lenging task due to the propagation characteristics. Therefore,
the design of an effective beam management scheme to handle
the propagation characteristics for advanced MIMO will be a
challenging task. However, for seamless handover, it is also
important to choose the optimal beam efﬁciently in high-speed
vehicular systems [77].

IX. CONCLUSION

In this survey, we initially evaluated the key successes and
challenges of 1G to 5G, and then focused on the potential ap-
plications, enabling technologies, speciﬁcations, and require-
ments, and AI-based wireless applications and technologies of
6G. The 5G communication system is expected to be fully de-
ployed globally in 2022. However, the current 5G technologies
are not capable of catering to the increasing demand for the
future wireless communication which is envisioned for 2030.
Research activities on 6G technologies and systems are
yet in their early stages. This survey envisions the options
and methods to accomplish the objectives of 6G wireless
communication. In this paper, we also presented the potential
applications for 6G with key enabling technologies so that
stringent QoS requirements of future applications can be

fulﬁlled. These requirements are ultra-high throughput (1Tb/s
to 20 Tb/s), extreme -low latency (tens of microseconds),
high reliability, ubiquitous network connectivity, and very low
power consumption. To support such QoS, advanced network
architectures and technologies like fog computing, cloud com-
puting, software-deﬁned networks, optical wireless networks,
network virtualization, and THz spectrum communications are
required. Moreover, future applications will generate massive
data, to handle such big data, advanced AI techniques and
algorithms are required. We summarized some of the potential
AI methods for speciﬁc network architectures. Along with
explaining the vision and goal of 6G communications, we have
identiﬁed the numerous technologies that could be used for
6G communication. We also discussed the probable challenges
and research directions to achieve the goals for 6G.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Agrawal, V. K. Mishra, A. Gupta, and B. Bansal.
“Performance analysis of beamforming aided uncor-
related mm-Wave MIMO system for IEEE 802.15.
3c standard”. In: Physical Communication 41 (2020),
p. 101114.

[2] M. S. Akbar. “Modelling, analysis and design of MAC
and routing protocols for wireless body area sensor
networks.” PhD thesis. Bournemouth University, 2018.
[3] M. S. Akbar, H. Yu, and S. Cang. “A holistic sim-
remote patient monitoring sys-
ulation model
tems using Wireless Body Area Sensor Networks
(WBASNs)”. In: 9th International Conference on Soft-
ware, Knowledge, Information Management and Ap-
plications (SKIMA). IEEE. 2015, pp. 1–5.

for

[4] M. S. Akbar, H. Yu, and S. Cang. “Delay, reliability,
and throughput based QoS proﬁle: A MAC layer
performance optimization mechanism for biomedical
applications in wireless body area sensor networks”.
In: Journal of Sensors 2016 (2016).

[5] M. S. Akbar, H. Yu, and S. Cang. “Implanted medical
devices as future of wireless healthcare monitoring:
Investigation and performance evaluation using novel
numerical modeling”. In: 22nd International Confer-
ence on Automation and Computing (ICAC). IEEE.
2016, pp. 522–528.

[6] M. S. Akbar, H. Yu, and S. Cang. “TMP: Tele-
medicine protocol for slotted 802.15. 4 with duty-cycle
optimization in wireless body area sensor networks”.
In: IEEE Sensors Journal 17.6 (2016), pp. 1925–1936.

[8]

[7] M. S. Akbar, H. Yu, and S. Cang. “IEEE 802.15. 4
frame aggregation enhancement to provide high per-
formance in life-critical patient monitoring systems”.
In: Sensors 17.2 (2017), p. 241.
I. F. Akyildiz, J. M. Jornet, and C. Han. “Terahertz
band: Next frontier for wireless communications”. In:
Physical Communication 12 (2014), pp. 16–32.
I. Alam, K. Sharif, F. Li, Z. Latif, M. M. Karim, S.
Biswas, B. Nour, and Y. Wang. “A survey of network
virtualization techniques for Internet of Things using
SDN and NFV”. In: ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)
53.2 (2020), pp. 1–40.

[9]

[10] R. Alghamdi, R. Alhadrami, D. Alhothali, H. Almorad,
A. Faisal, S. Helal, R. Shalabi, R. Asfour, N. Hammad,
A. Shams, et al. “Intelligent surfaces for 6G wireless
networks: A survey of optimization and performance
analysis techniques”. In: IEEE Access 8 (2020).
[11] A. Ali, N. Gonz´alez-Prelcic, and R. W. Heath. “Mil-
limeter wave beam-selection using out-of-band spatial
information”. In: IEEE Transactions on Wireless Com-
munications 17.2 (2017), pp. 1038–1052.

[12] Z. E. Ankarali, B. Pek¨oz, and H. Arslan. “Flexible
radio access beyond 5G: A future projection on wave-
form, numerology, and frame design principles”. In:
IEEE Access 5 (2017), pp. 18295–18309.

[13] A. Al-Ansi, A. M. Al-Ansi, A. Muthanna, I. A. El-
gendy, and A. Koucheryavy. “Survey on Intelligence
Edge Computing in 6G: Characteristics, Challenges,
Potential Use Cases, and Market Drivers”. In: Future
Internet 13.5 (2021), p. 118.

[14] T. Aste, P. Tasca, and T. Di Matteo. “Blockchain
technologies: The foreseeable impact on society and
industry”. In: Computer 50.9 (2017), pp. 18–28.
[15] M. Attarifar, A. Abbasfar, and A. Lozano. “Modiﬁed
conjugate beamforming for cell-free massive MIMO”.
In: IEEE Wireless Communications Letters 8.2 (2019),
pp. 616–619.

[16] B. Bag, A. Das, I. S. Ansari, A. Prokeˇs, C. Bose,
and A. Chandra. “Performance analysis of hybrid FSO
systems using FSO/RF-FSO link adaptation”. In: IEEE
Photonics Journal 10.3 (2018), pp. 1–17.
J. Carmigniani and B. Furht. “Augmented reality: an
overview”. In: Handbook of augmented reality (2011),
pp. 3–46.

[17]

[18] C. Castro, R. Elschner, T. Merkle, F. Rodrigues, J.
Machado, A. Teixeira, and C. Schubert. “THz Commu-

nications: Paving the Way Towards Wireless Tbps”. In:
THz Communications. Springer, 2022, pp. 417–421.

[20]

[19] L. Catarinucci, D. De Donno, L. Mainetti, L. Palano,
L. Patrono, M. L. Stefanizzi, and L. Tarricone. “An
IoT-aware architecture for smart healthcare systems”.
In: IEEE Internet of Things 2.6 (2015), pp. 515–526.
J. Choi, V. Va, N. Gonzalez-Prelcic, R. Daniels,
C. R. Bhat, and R. W. Heath. “Millimeter-wave ve-
hicular communication to support massive automotive
sensing”. In: IEEE Communications Magazine 54.12
(2016), pp. 160–167.

[21] M. Z. Chowdhury, M. T. Hossan, M. K. Hasan, and
Y. M. Jang. “Integrated RF/optical wireless networks
for improving QoS in indoor and transportation appli-
cations”. In: Wireless Personal Communications 107.3
(2019), pp. 1401–1430.

[22] M. Z. Chowdhury, M. T. Hossan, A. Islam, and Y. M.
Jang. “A comparative survey of optical wireless tech-
nologies: Architectures and applications”. In: IEEE
Access 6 (2018), pp. 9819–9840.

[23] M. Z. Chowdhury, M. T. Hossan, and Y. M. Jang.
“Interference management based on RT/nRT trafﬁc
classiﬁcation for FFR-aided small cell/macrocell het-
erogeneous networks”. In: IEEE Access 6 (2018),
pp. 31340–31358.

[24] S. H.-W. Chuah. “Why and who will adopt extended
reality technology? Literature review, synthesis, and
future research agenda”. In: Literature Review, Syn-
thesis, and Future Research Agenda (2018).

[25] A. C¸ ¨oltekin, I. Lochhead, M. Madden, S. Christophe,
A. Devaux, C. Pettit, O. Lock, S. Shukla, L. Herman,
Z. Stachoˇn, et al. “Extended reality in spatial sciences:
A review of research challenges and future directions”.
In: ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information
9.7 (2020), p. 439.

[26] H.-N. Dai, Z. Zheng, and Y. Zhang. “Blockchain for
Internet of Things: A survey”. In: IEEE Internet of
Things 6.5 (2019), pp. 8076–8094.

[27] N.-N. Dao, Q.-V. Pham, N. H. Tu, T. T. Thanh,
V. N. Q. Bao, D. S. Lakew, and S. Cho. “Survey on
aerial radio access networks: toward a comprehensive
6g access infrastructure”. In: IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials 23.2 (2021), pp. 1193–1225.
[28] D. Dardari, F. Guidi, A. Guerra, and E. Leoni. “Initial
Access Techniques for 5G Systems”. In: Masters’
Thesis (2018).

[29] K. David and H. Berndt. “6G vision and requirements:
Is there any need for beyond 5G?” In: IEEE Vehicular
Technology Magazine 13.3 (2018), pp. 72–80.
[30] C. De Alwis, A. Kalla, Q.-V. Pham, P. Kumar, K. Dev,
W.-J. Hwang, and M. Liyanage. “Survey on 6G fron-
tiers: Trends, applications, requirements, technologies
and future research”. In: IEEE Open Journal of the
Communications Society 2 (2021), pp. 836–886.
[31] L. DeNardis. The Internet in Everything. Yale Univer-

sity Press, 2020.

[32] M. Deva Priya, A. Christy Jeba Malar, S. Sam Peter,
G. Sandhya, L. Vishnu Varthan, and R. Vignesh. “Dy-
namic Resource Aware Scheduling Schemes for IEEE
802.16 Broadband Wireless Networks”. In: Progress
in Advanced Computing and Intelligent Engineering.
Springer, 2021, pp. 218–230.

[33] A. Douik, H. Dahrouj, T. Y. Al-Naffouri, and M.-S.
Alouini. “Hybrid radio/free-space optical design for
next generation backhaul systems”. In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Communications 64.6 (2016), pp. 2563–2577.
[34] D. Elliott, W. Keen, and L. Miao. “Recent advances
in connected and automated vehicles”. In: Journal
of Trafﬁc and Transportation Engineering (English
Edition) 6.2 (2019), pp. 109–131.

[35] S. Elmeadawy and R. M. Shubair. “Enabling tech-
nologies for 6G future wireless communications:
In: arXiv preprint
Opportunities and challenges”.
arXiv:2002.06068 (2020).

[36] M. Elsayed and M. Erol-Kantarci. “AI-enabled future
wireless networks: Challenges, opportunities, and open
issues”. In: IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine 14.3
(2019), pp. 70–77.

[37] M. A. Esmail, H. Fathallah, and M.-S. Alouini.
“Outdoor FSO communications under fog: attenuation
modeling and performance evaluation”. In: IEEE Pho-
tonics Journal 8.4 (2016), pp. 1–22.

[38] P. Ferraro, C. King, and R. Shorten. “Distributed
ledger technology for smart cities, the sharing econ-
omy, and social compliance”. In: IEEE Access 6
(2018), pp. 62728–62746.

[39] H. Gao, Y. Su, S. Zhang, and M. Diao. “Antenna
selection and power allocation design for 5G massive
MIMO uplink networks”. In: China Communications
16.4 (2019), pp. 1–15.

[40] A. U. Gawas. “An overview on evolution of mobile
wireless communication networks: 1G-6G”. In: Inter-

national Journal on Recent and Innovation Trends in
Computing and Communication 3.5 (2015), pp. 3130–
3133.

mounted displays: Scope, challenges, solutions, and
applications”. In: IEEE Communications Magazine
57.2 (2019), pp. 26–32.

[41] S. Goyal, P. Liu, S. S. Panwar, R. A. Difazio, R.
Yang, and E. Bala. “Full duplex cellular systems:
will doubling interference prevent doubling capac-
ity?” In: IEEE Communications Magazine 53.5 (2015),
pp. 121–127.

[42] Z. Gu, J. Zhang, Y. Ji, L. Bai, and X. Sun. “Net-
work topology reconﬁguration for FSO-based fron-
thaul/backhaul in 5G+ wireless networks”. In: IEEE
Access 6 (2018), pp. 69426–69437.

[43] F. Guo, F. R. Yu, H. Zhang, X. Li, H. Ji, and
V. C. Leung. “Enabling massive IoT toward 6G: A
comprehensive survey”. In: IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 8.15 (2021), pp. 11891–11915.

[44] K. Hausmair, P. N. Landin, U. Gustavsson, C. Fager,
and T. Eriksson. “Digital predistortion for multi-
antenna transmitters affected by antenna crosstalk”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques 66.3 (2017), pp. 1524–1535.

[45] S. He, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Ren, Y. Zhang,
W. Zhuang, and X. Shen. “A survey of millimeter-
wave communication: Physical-layer technology spec-
iﬁcations and enabling transmission technologies”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE 109.10 (2021), pp. 1666–
1705.

[46] R. Henry, A. Herzberg, and A. Kate. “Blockchain
access privacy: Challenges and directions”. In: IEEE
Security & Privacy 16.4 (2018), pp. 38–45.

[47] M. N. Hindia, F. Qamar, H. Ojukwu, K. Dimyati,
A. M. Al-Samman, and I. S. Amiri. “On platform
to enable the cognitive radio over 5G networks”.
In: Wireless Personal Communications 113.2 (2020),
pp. 1241–1262.

[48] T. Hong, C. Liu, and M. Kadoch. “Machine learning
based antenna design for physical layer security in
ambient backscatter communications”. In: Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing 2019 (2019).
[49] M. Hossan, M. Z. Chowdhury, M. Hasan, M. Shah-
jalal, T. Nguyen, N. T. Le, Y. M. Jang, et al. “A
new vehicle localization scheme based on combined
optical camera communication and photogrammetry”.
In: Mobile Information Systems 2018 (2018).
[50] M. T. Hossan, M. Z. Chowdhury, M. Shahjalal, and
Y. M. Jang. “Human bond communication with head-

[51] https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Industry 4.0.

png. 2020.

[52] K. M. S. Huq, J. Rodriguez, and I. E. Otung. “3D
network modeling for THz-enabled ultra-fast dense
networks: a 6G perspective”. In: IEEE Communica-
tions Standards Magazine 5.2 (2021), pp. 84–90.
[53] S. R. A. Jafri, T. Hamid, R. Mahmood, M. A. Alam,
T. Raﬁ, M. Z. U. Haque, and M. W. Munir. “Wireless
brain computer interface for smart home and medical
system”. In: Wireless Personal Communications 106.4
(2019), pp. 2163–2177.

[54] M. Jaloun, Z. Guennoun, et al. “Wireless mobile
evolution to 4G network”. In: Wireless Sensor Network
2.04 (2010), p. 309.

[55] B. Ji, Y. Wang, K. Song, C. Li, H. Wen, V. G.
Menon, and S. Mumtaz. “A survey of computational
intelligence for 6G: Key technologies, applications and
trends”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informat-
ics 17.10 (2021), pp. 7145–7154.

[56] W. Jiang, B. Han, M. A. Habibi, and H. D. Schotten.
“The road towards 6G: A comprehensive survey”. In:
IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society 2
(2021), pp. 334–366.
J. M. Jornet and I. F. Akyildiz. “Channel modeling and
capacity analysis for electromagnetic wireless nanonet-
works in the terahertz band”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications 10.10 (2011), pp. 3211–
3221.

[57]

[58] S. Ju, Y. Xing, O. Kanhere, and T. S. Rappaport.
“Millimeter wave and sub-terahertz spatial statistical
channel model for an indoor ofﬁce building”. In: IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 39.6
(2021), pp. 1561–1575.

[59] N. Kato, Z. M. Fadlullah, F. Tang, B. Mao, S. Tani,
A. Okamura, and J. Liu. “Optimizing space-air-ground
integrated networks by artiﬁcial intelligence”. In: IEEE
Wireless Communications 26.4 (2019), pp. 140–147.
[60] S. K. Khan, U. Naseem, H. Siraj, I. Razzak, and
M. Imran. “The role of unmanned aerial vehicles and
mmWave in 5G: Recent advances and challenges”. In:
Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Tech-
nologies 32.7 (2021), e4241.

[61] N. Khiadani. “Vision, Requirements and Challenges
of Sixth Generation (6G) Networks”. In: 6th Iranian
Conference on Signal Processing and Intelligent Sys-
tems (ICSPIS). IEEE. 2020, pp. 1–4.

[62] T.-h. Kim, C. Ramos, and S. Mohammed. Smart city

and IoT. 2017.

[63] S. Kiyomoto, A. Basu, M. S. Rahman, and S.
Ruj. “On blockchain-based authorization architecture
for beyond-5G mobile services”. In: 12th Interna-
tional Conference for Internet Technology and Secured
Transactions (ICITST). IEEE. 2017, pp. 136–141.

[64] T. Komine and M. Nakagawa. “Fundamental analysis
for visible-light communication system using LED
lights”. In: IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electron-
ics 50.1 (2004), pp. 100–107.

[65] K. Kotobi and S. G. Bilen. “Secure blockchains for
dynamic spectrum access: A decentralized database
in moving cognitive radio networks enhances security
and user access”. In: IEEE Vehicular Technology Mag-
azine 13.1 (2018), pp. 32–39.

[66] A. Kumar, R. Krishnamurthi, A. Nayyar, K. Sharma,
V. Grover, and E. Hossain. “A novel smart health-
care design, simulation, and implementation using
healthcare 4.0 processes”. In: IEEE Access 8 (2020),
pp. 118433–118471.
J. Lee, B. Bagheri, and H.-A. Kao. “A cyber-physical
systems architecture for industry 4.0-based manufac-
turing systems”. In: Manufacturing Letters 3 (2015),
pp. 18–23.

[67]

[68] K. B. Letaief, W. Chen, Y. Shi, J. Zhang, and Y.-J. A.
Zhang. “The roadmap to 6G: AI empowered wireless
networks”. In: IEEE Communications Magazine 57.8
(2019), pp. 84–90.

[69] Y.-N. R. Li, B. Gao, X. Zhang, and K. Huang. “Beam
management in millimeter-wave communications for
5G and beyond”. In: IEEE Access 8 (2020), pp. 13282–
13293.

[70] Q. Long, Y. Chen, H. Zhang, and X. Lei. “Software
deﬁned 5G and 6G networks: a survey”. In: Mobile
Networks and Applications (2019), pp. 1–21.
[71] L. Lov´en, T. Lepp¨anen, E. Peltonen, J. Partala, E.
Harjula, P. Porambage, M. Ylianttila, and J. Riekki.
“EdgeAI: A vision for distributed, edge-native artiﬁcial
intelligence in future 6G networks”. In: The 1st 6G
Wireless Summit (2019), pp. 1–2.

[72] N. Lu, N. Cheng, N. Zhang, X. Shen, and J. W. Mark.
“Connected vehicles: Solutions and challenges”. In:
IEEE Internet of Things 1.4 (2014), pp. 289–299.

[73] N. C. Luong, D. T. Hoang, S. Gong, D. Niyato,
P. Wang, Y.-C. Liang, and D. I. Kim. “Applications
learning in communications
of deep reinforcement
and networking: A survey”. In: IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials 21.4 (2019), pp. 3133–3174.
J. Ma, R. Shrestha, J. Adelberg, C.-Y. Yeh, Z. Hossain,
E. Knightly, J. M. Jornet, and D. M. Mittleman. “Se-
curity and eavesdropping in terahertz wireless links”.
In: Nature 563.7729 (2018), pp. 89–93.

[74]

[75] A. J. Mahbas, H. Zhu, and J. Wang. “Impact of
small cells overlapping on mobility management”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications 18.2
(2019), pp. 1054–1068.

[76] M. N. Mahdi, A. R. Ahmad, Q. S. Qassim, H. Na-
tiq, M. A. Subhi, and M. Mahmoud. “From 5G to
6G Technology: Meets Energy, Internet-of-Things and
Machine Learning: A Survey”. In: Applied Sciences
11.17 (2021), p. 8117.
I. Markit. “The Internet of Things: a movement, not a
market”. In: Critical IoT Insights (2017), pp. 1–9.

[77]

[78] M. Matinmikko-Blue, S. Yrj¨ol¨a, and P. Ahokangas.
“Spectrum management in the 6G era: The role of
regulation and spectrum sharing”. In: 2nd 6G Wireless
Summit (6G SUMMIT). IEEE. 2020, pp. 1–5.
[79] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and
B. A. y Arcas. “Communication-efﬁcient learning of
deep networks from decentralized data”. In: Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR. 2017, pp. 1273–
1282.

[80] D. Miller. “Blockchain and the internet of things in
the industrial sector”. In: IT Professional 20.3 (2018),
pp. 15–18.

[81] S. Mondal, A. Sinha, and J. Routh. “A survey on
evolution of wireless generations 0G to 7G”. In: Inter-
national Journal of Advance Research in Science and
Engineering (IJARSE) 1.2 (2015), pp. 5–10.

[82] S. J. Nawaz, S. K. Sharma, S. Wyne, M. N. Patwary,
and M. Asaduzzaman. “Quantum machine learning
for 6G communication networks: State-of-the-art and
vision for the future”. In: IEEE Access 7 (2019),
pp. 46317–46350.

[83] S.-i. Ohkoshi, M. Yoshikiyo, K. Imoto, K. Nakagawa,
A. Namai, H. Tokoro, Y. Yahagi, K. Takeuchi, F.

Jia, S. Miyashita, et al. “Magnetic-Pole Flip by Mil-
limeter Wave”. In: Advanced Materials 32.48 (2020),
p. 2004897.

[84] P. H. Pathak, X. Feng, P. Hu, and P. Mohapatra.
“Visible light communication, networking, and sens-
ing: A survey, potential and challenges”. In: IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials 17.4 (2015),
pp. 2047–2077.
J. Pei, F. Guo, J. Zhang, B. Zhou, Y. Bi, and R. Li.
“Review and analysis of energy harvesting technolo-
gies in roadway transportation”. In: Journal of Cleaner
Production 288 (2021), p. 125338.

[85]

[86] P. Porambage, G. G¨ur, D. P. M. Osorio, M. Liyanage,
A. Gurtov, and M. Ylianttila. “The roadmap to 6G
security and privacy”. In: IEEE Open Journal of the
Communications Society 2 (2021), pp. 1094–1122.
I. S. Al-Qasrawi. “Proposed technologies for solving
future 5G heterogeneous networks challenges”. In:
International Journal of Computer Applications 975
(2017), p. 8887.

[87]

[88] R. Ramachandran. “Evolution to 3G mobile commu-
nication”. In: Resonance 8.11 (2003), pp. 37–51.
[89] S. S. Reka and T. Dragicevic. “Future effectual role of
energy delivery: A comprehensive review of Internet of
Things and smart grid”. In: Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews 91 (2018), pp. 90–108.

[90] T. Reshmi and M. Azath. “Improved self-healing
technique for 5G networks using predictive analysis”.
In: Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications 14.1
(2021), pp. 375–391.

[91] A. Salh, L. Audah, N. S. M. Shah, A. Alhammadi, Q.
Abdullah, Y. H. Kim, S. A. Al-Gailani, S. A. Hamzah,
B. A. F. Esmail, and A. A. Almohammedi. “A Survey
on Deep Learning for Ultra-Reliable and Low-Latency
Communications Challenges on 6G Wireless Sys-
tems”. In: IEEE Access 9 (2021), pp. 55098–55131.

[92] R. Sattiraju, A. Weinand, and H. D. Schotten. “AI-
assisted PHY technologies for 6G and beyond wire-
less networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09523
(2019).
J. Schloemann, H. S. Dhillon, and R. M. Buehrer.
“Toward a tractable analysis of localization fundamen-
tals in cellular networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications 15.3 (2015), pp. 1768–1782.

[93]

[94] M. Series. “IMT Vision–Framework and overall objec-
tives of the future development of IMT for 2020 and
beyond”. In: Recommendation ITU 2083 (2015), p. 0.
[95] A. Shahraki, M. Abbasi, M. Piran, M. Chen, S. Cui,
et al. “A comprehensive survey on 6g networks: Appli-
cations, core services, enabling technologies, and fu-
ture challenges”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.12475
(2021).

[96] T. Sharma, A. Chehri, and P. Fortier. “Review of
optical and wireless backhaul networks and emerging
trends of next generation 5G and 6G technologies”. In:
Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Tech-
nologies 32.3 (2021), e4155.

[97] A. Z. Shifat, M. Z. Chowdhury, and Y. M. Jang.
“Game-based approach for QoS provisioning and in-
terference management in heterogeneous networks”.
In: IEEE Access 6 (2017), pp. 10208–10220.
[98] P. L. Show, K. W. Chew, and T. C. Ling. The Prospect
of Industry 5.0 in Biomanufacturing. CRC Press, 2021.
[99] S. Shukla, V. Khare, S. Garg, and P. Sharma. “Com-
parative Study of 1G, 2G, 3G and 4G”. In: Jour-
nal of Engineering, Computers, and Applied Sciences
(JEC&AS) 2.4 (2013), pp. 55–63.
I. Siaud and A.-M. Ulmer-Moll. “THz Communi-
cations: An Overview and Challenges”. In: Future
Networks (2019).

[100]

[101] T. Snyder and G. Byrd. “The internet of everything”.
In: IEEE Computer Architecture Letters 50.06 (2017),
pp. 8–9.

[102] V. Sytnikov, V. Vysotsky,

I. Radchenko, and N.
Polyakova. “1G versus 2G-comparison from the practi-
cal standpoint for HTS power cables use”. In: Journal
of Physics: Conference Series. Vol. 97. 1. IOP Pub-
lishing. 2008, p. 012058.
J. Tan and L. Dai. “THz precoding for 6G: Appli-
cations, challenges, solutions, and opportunities”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10752 (2020).

[103]

[104] F. Tang, Y. Kawamoto, N. Kato, and J. Liu. “Future
intelligent and secure vehicular network toward 6G:
Machine-learning approaches”. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE 108.2 (2019), pp. 292–307.

[105] F. Tariq, M. R. Khandaker, K.-K. Wong, M. A. Imran,
M. Bennis, and M. Debbah. “A speculative study on
6G”. In: IEEE Wireless Communications 27.4 (2020),
pp. 118–125.

and Signal Processing (ICSP). IEEE. 2021, pp. 687–
691.

[117] X. Xu, Y. Pan, P. P. M. Y. Lwin, and X. Liang. “3D
holographic display and its data transmission require-
ment”. In: International Conference on Information
Photonics and Optical Communications. IEEE. 2011,
pp. 1–4.

[118] E. Yaacoub and M.-S. Alouini. “A key 6G challenge
and opportunity—connecting the base of the pyramid:
A survey on rural connectivity”. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE 108.4 (2020), pp. 533–582.

[119] A. Yastrebova, R. Kirichek, Y. Koucheryavy, A.
Borodin, and A. Koucheryavy. “Future networks 2030:
Architecture & requirements”. In: 10th International
Congress on Ultra Modern Telecommunications and
Control Systems and Workshops (ICUMT).
IEEE.
2018, pp. 1–8.

[120] A. Zanella, N. Bui, A. Castellani, L. Vangelista, and
M. Zorzi. “Internet of things for smart cities”. In: IEEE
Internet of Things 1.1 (2014), pp. 22–32.

[121] Q. Zhang, J. Liu, and G. Zhao. “Towards 5G en-
abled tactile robotic telesurgery”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.03586 (2018).

[122] H. Zhu, C. K. Wu, C. H. Koo, Y. T. Tsang, Y.
Liu, H. R. Chi, and K.-F. Tsang. “Smart healthcare
in the era of internet-of-things”. In: IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine 8.5 (2019), pp. 26–30.
[123] B. Zong, C. Fan, X. Wang, X. Duan, B. Wang,
and J. Wang. “6G Technologies: Key drivers, core
requirements, system architectures, and enabling tech-
nologies”. In: IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine
14.3 (2019), pp. 18–27.

[106] K. Tekbıyık, A. R. Ekti, G. K. Kurt, and A. G¨orc¸in.
“Terahertz band communication systems: Challenges,
novelties and standardization efforts”. In: Physical
Communication 35 (2019), p. 100700.

[107] A. K. Tripathy, S. Chinara, and M. Sarkar. “An
application of wireless brain–computer interface for
drowsiness detection”. In: Biocybernetics and Biomed-
ical Engineering 36.1 (2016), pp. 276–284.
[108] A. N. Uwaechia and N. M. Mahyuddin. “A compre-
hensive survey on millimeter wave communications
for ﬁfth-generation wireless networks: Feasibility and
challenges”. In: IEEE Access 8 (2020), pp. 62367–
62414.

[109] E. Vinogradov. “Key Wireless Technologies for Civil
UAV Trafﬁc Management: A Survey”. In: Networks
18.2 (2016), pp. 1123–1152.

[110] C.-X. Wang, J. Huang, H. Wang, X. Gao, X. You,
and Y. Hao. “6G wireless channel measurements and
models: Trends and challenges”. In: IEEE Vehicular
Technology Magazine 15.4 (2020), pp. 22–32.
[111] H. Wang, W. Wang, X. Chen, and Z. Zhang. “Wireless
information and energy transfer in interference aware
massive MIMO systems”. In: 2014 IEEE Global Com-
munications Conference. IEEE. 2014, pp. 2556–2561.
[112] M. Wang, Y. Cui, X. Wang, S. Xiao, and J. Jiang. “Ma-
chine learning for networking: Workﬂow, advances
and opportunities”. In: IEEE Network 32.2 (2017),
pp. 92–99.

[113] P. Wang, J. Fang, H. Duan, and H. Li. “Compressed
channel estimation for intelligent reﬂecting surface-
assisted millimeter wave systems”. In: IEEE Signal
Processing Letters 27 (2020), pp. 905–909.

[114] M. Wollschlaeger, T. Sauter, and J. Jasperneite. “The
future of industrial communication: Automation net-
works in the era of the internet of things and industry
4.0”. In: IEEE Industrial Electronics Magazine 11.1
(2017), pp. 17–27.

[115] S. Wu, L. Hou, and G. K. Zhang. “Integrated applica-
tion of BIM and eXtended reality technology: a review,
classiﬁcation and outlook”. In: International Confer-
ence on Computing in Civil and Building Engineering.
Springer. 2020, pp. 1227–1236.

[116] S. Xin, W. Ben-yuan, G. Li, and A. M. Liton. “Low
Delay and Low Overhead Terahertz Wireless Personal
Area Networks Directional MAC Protocols”. In: 6th
International Conference on Intelligent Computing

