Keck et al.

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

4
2

]
t
e
d
-
s
n
i
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

1
v
2
1
3
2
1
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

RESEARCH

Design of an enhanced mechanism
for a new Kibble balance directly
traceable to the quantum SI

Lorenz Keck, Frank Seifert, David Newell, Stephan Schlamminger, Ren´e
Theska and Darine Haddad

Abstract

The “Quantum Electro-Mechanical Metrology Suite” (QEMMS) is being
designed and built at the National Institute of Standards and Technology. It
includes a Kibble balance, a graphene quantum Hall resistance array and a
Josephson voltage system, so that it is a new primary standard for the unit of
mass, the kilogram, directly traceable to the International System of Units (SI)
based on quantum constants. We are targeting a measurement range of 10 g to
200 g and optimize the design for a relative combined uncertainty of 2 × 10−8 for
masses of 100 g. QEMMS will be developed as an open hardware and software
design. In this article, we focus on the design of an enhanced moving and
weighing mechanism for the QEMMS based on ﬂexure pivots.

Keywords: Kibble balance; Mechanism; Flexure; Quantum SI

Introduction
The Kibble balance is the instrument for the precise primary realization of the
unit of mass in the International System of Units (SI) based on electro-mechanical
metrology principles and quantum physics. Due to the design of a new version of
the Kibble balance at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
as part of the so-called “Quantum Electro-Mechanical Metrology Suite”, QEMMS,
this article describes the components integrated in QEMMS as well as the design
of the new ﬂexure-based moving and weighing mechanism.

The Kibble balance
The measuring principle of the Kibble balance was invented in 1976 by the metrol-
ogist Dr. Bryan Kibble at the National Physical Laboratory of the United King-
dom [1]. It was one of the main experiments contributing to the redeﬁnition of the
SI in the year 2018 [2, 3]. The redeﬁnition of the unit of mass, the kilogram, based
on the ﬁxed values of three constants of nature – the Planck’s constant, h, the speed
of light, c, and the hyperﬁne transition frequency of Caesium, ∆νCs – provides a
means to realize mass through electrical metrology using absolute precision balances
without the need to compare to a physical object.

Until 2018, only the values for c and ∆νCs were ﬁxed, and the International
Prototype Kilogram (IPK) was the last physical artifact deﬁning one of the seven SI
base units. Using the Kibble balance principle and decades of hard work, scientists
were able to measure and deﬁne a numerical value for h based on the mass of

 
 
 
 
 
 
Keck et al.

Page 2 of 20

the IPK, the speed of light and the hyperﬁne transition frequency of Caesium. As a
result, the Kibble balance can be operated in a reversed fashion and realize virtually
any macroscopic mass value directly from the deﬁned value of h. A visualization of
this relation is shown in ﬁgure 1.

Figure 1: The relation between the IPK, natural constants and the unit of mass
in the Kibble balance in traditional and reversed operation.

The Kibble balance uses two modes of operation for an absolute mass measure-
ment. In the ﬁrst one, the weighing mode, the gravitational force of a test mass is
directly compensated by a counter force such that the test mass stays at a deﬁned
null position. The counter force is provided by a magnet-coil system and can be
controlled by adjusting the current through the coil.

The equation for this mode of operation is

−m g = N

∂Φ
∂z

I,

(1)

where m is the mass of the test mass, g the local gravitational acceleration, N the
number of turns of the wire in the coil, Φ the magnetic ﬂux through the coil, z the
position of the coil along the vertical direction, and I the electric current through
the coil.

Since the magnetic ﬂux gradient N ∂Φ/∂z is very hard to obtain with suﬃcient
uncertainty, a second mode of operation, the velocity mode, allows for direct mea-
surement of the N ∂Φ/∂z with the required precision. Here, the coil is moved up
and down in the magnetic ﬁeld of the magnet such that a voltage is induced in the
coil. Derived from Faraday’s induction law it yields,

V = −N

∂Φ
∂z

v,

(2)

where V is the voltage induced in the coil in the velocity mode, and v is the vertical
velocity of the coil with respect to the magnet. The velocity in high precision Kibble
balances is usually measured with an interferometer and vacuum operation of the
balance creates an environment with a stable index of refraction. Solving both
equation (1), and equation (2) for N ∂Φ/∂z and equating them yields

m g v = I V.

(3)

On the left hand side in equation (3), we see the expression for mechanical power,
and on the right hand side, the one for electrical power. The original name of the

Keck et al.

Page 3 of 20

Figure 2: The principle of operation
in the Kibble balance in the weigh-
ing mode. The gravitational force of
a test mass m is compared with
the magnetic force produced by the
magnet-coil system to keep the test
mass in a deﬁned, feedback-controlled
position.

Figure 3: Schematics for the principle
of operation in the Kibble balance in
the velocity mode. The coil is moved
by a motor through the magnetic ﬁeld
of the magnet with vertical velocity v,
and a voltage V is induced in the coil.
The voltage measurement is synchro-
nized with the position measurement
of the coil using a time counter.

Kibble balance, “watt balance”, is a reﬂection of the power balance principle de-
scribed here.

A direct measurement of mass traceable to the new SI as in the QEMMS would
not be possible without two quantum eﬀects: The Josephson eﬀect and the quantum
Hall eﬀect. The electric current I through the coil in the weighing mode is usually
measured according to Ohm’s law by monitoring a voltage drop over a traditional
resistor R with very precisely known value (see ﬁgure 2), which is calibrated against
a quantum Hall resistor (QHR) standard RH = h/(ie2) where i is the Landau level
ﬁlling factor [4, 5] and e is the elementary charge. A Programmable Josephson
Voltage System (PJVS) is a frequency to voltage converter, that is, V = ν/KJ
where KJ = 2e/h [6] and ν is a frequency. The PJVS provides a primary realization
for voltage and is put parallel to the resistor in the electric circuit. It is used to
create a voltage nominally equal to the drop over the resistor and a calibrated
voltmeter monitors the remaining potential diﬀerence in the circuit. The voltage,
hence, appears in the weighing mode, and the velocity mode. Adding the Josephson
and quantum Hall eﬀect to equation 3 yields the link of mass with Planck’s constant
established with the Kibble balance:

m =

i n2 ν2
4 v g

h.

(4)

Keck et al.

Page 4 of 20

Furthermore, the velocity and the local gravitational acceleration in equation 4
are measured using primary standards of length and time based on the deﬁnition
of the second and meter traceable to ∆νCs and c, respectively.

More detailed information on the link of the quantum eﬀects with the Kibble

balance equation can be found in [7, 8].

The QEMMS
There are multiple Kibble balance experiments around the globe. The design of
each Kibble balance is unique, however, one feature seems to be common to all:
The resistor in the electrical circuit for the weighing mode (see ﬁgure 2) is cali-
brated using transfer standards against a QHR as primary standard for resistance.
QEMMS will overcome the inconvenience of external resistor calibration and thus
eliminate the resistance calibration uncertainty by implementing a QHR directly in
the Kibble balance’s electrical circuit. This QHR is based on the quantization eﬀect
of monolayer graphene [9]. Among the advantages oﬀered by graphene-based QHR
standards is their ability to maintain the fully quantized state at higher currents and
temperature. NIST researchers fabricated thirteen single element graphene QHR
standards in parallel and operate at the Landau level i = 2 plateau, giving a nomi-
nal value of RK/26 ≈ 992.8 Ω [10]. Even though the graphene QHR array in Panna
et al. show experiments with maximum currents up to 0.3 mA, measurements have
already been published showing single Hall bar graphene devices maintaining quan-
tization for currents up to 0.7 mA [11]. Furthermore, creating arrays with higher
currents is subject to extensive research eﬀorts at NIST. In context of QEMMS,
these allow for a measurement of masses up to 200 g, depending on the design of
the coil in the magnetic ﬁeld [12].

Hence, this will be the ﬁrst integrated instrument in the world to feature all
three: a Kibble balance for the actual mass measurement, a PJVS, and a primary
reference resistor directly implemented in the instrument, which provides an outlook
for improved overall measurement uncertainty for masses. The entire QEMMS will
ﬁt in one room of the size of approximately 4 m × 5 m (width × length). Through
the direct link to all three natural constants h, c and ∆νCs, it is providing direct
SI realization for the units of mass, time, length, electrical resistance, voltage, and
current. Thus, the QEMMS can be seen as a metrology institute in one single
experiment.

As opposed to traditional Kibble balances [8] which were designed and optimized
to measure 1 kg, the QEMMS is being built to cover a mass range of 10 g to 200 g. We
optimize the design speciﬁcally targeting a relative combined measurement uncer-
tainty of 2 × 10−8 at nominal mass value of 100 g. Here, we want to take advantage
of the direct implementation of the new quantum SI in the instrument for mass
scaling. A factor of 20 in the total mass range has proven convenient for systematic
studies on the balance, which motivates the covered range around the nominal value.
Furthermore, smaller nominal mass values allow for a more robust and compact de-
sign, which makes the technology more accessible for other metrology institutes as
well.

Since a QHR has been designed for this purpose [10], we put the focus on the
redesign and optimization of the Kibble balance. Each individual subsystem of the

Keck et al.

Page 5 of 20

Kibble balance is being investigated regarding new opportunities for improvement.
The permanent magnet system [12] and a vacuum chamber [13] have already been
acquired. In the current design step, improvement of the mechanical components in
the balance, especially the mechanism, is of key interest since the state of the art
seems to be one of the limiting factors for the overall balance uncertainty. Hence,
the design of the QEMMS mechanism is the focus of the following chapters.

Requirements to the QEMMS mechanism
The mechanism in the QEMMS has two functions: It provides suspension and de-
ﬁnes the trajectory of moving components. The former entails suspending all func-
tional components of the balance such as the mass pan, the coil, a counterweight
for balancing, the coil suspension and optics for the interferometer. The latter re-
quires the mechanism to move the coil in a vertical trajectory through the magnet
in velocity mode. We are seeking to integrate these two main functions in the same
mechanism so that one mechanical system is used to perform both modes of oper-
ation in the QEMMS.

Table 1: Requirements for the design of the QEMMS mechanism

Requirement
Coil travel in velocity mode
Stiﬀness1
Linear guiding of coil
Guiding imperfection of coil
Hysteretic force
Carrying capacity
Installation space2

Value
±30
≤ 0.01 N m−1

Unit
mm

–
≤ 10
≤ 0.1
≈ 15
≤ 500

–
µm
µg
kg
mm

1 The stiﬀness should be constant along the travel in the velocity mode, and over time. It should not
change with, e.g., temperature ﬂuctuation.
2 This indicates the maximum horizontal dimension.

A set of important requirements pre-deﬁne a successful mechanism design. The
most important aspects that can directly be impacted by conceptual decisions in
an early state of design are listed in table 1.

In general, it is important to keep all uncertainty contributions of the mechanical
system to the measurement suﬃciently small that their combination does not exceed
the targeted uncertainty. For the QEMMS we deﬁne this as on the order of parts
in 109. In the following, each requirement from table 1 is explained in more detail
regarding the background of its origin and importance.

Coil travel in the velocity mode
For a measurement of N ∂Φ/∂z in the velocity mode, the coil will be moved up
and down in the magnetic ﬁeld of the permanent magnet for the QEMMS. At ﬁrst,
it is accelerated to a velocity of vz = 2 mm s−1. Then it will travel with constant
speed for 40 mm. Finally, the coil is decelerated to a stop at the end of each sweep.
The permanent magnet for the QEMMS has been designed and built to provide
uniform ∂Φ/∂z proﬁle over the course of the travel with constant speed. This area
is referred to as the precision air gap. [12]

Hence, the travel range of the coil is given by the length of the precision air gap
plus additional travel for acceleration and deceleration of the coil. A conservative
estimate of the total travel length based on experience with previous Kibble balance

Keck et al.

Page 6 of 20

designs is 60 mm. We will use this number as an input parameter for the mechanism
design of QEMMS.

Stiﬀness
To keep measurement errors at the necessary minimum and to achieve the required
resolution, the balance mechanism needs to have a low stiﬀness. More importantly,
we want the stiﬀness to be constant in time and over all possible coil positions for
the following three reasons:

(a) The noise in the balance position feedback converts to force noise by multi-
plying the position noise with the stiﬀness of the mechanism. Hence, a low stiﬀness
produces a small force noise at a stable position which reduces averaging time. Since
QEMMS will be optimized to measure 100 g mass artifacts with an overall relative
standard uncertainty of 2 × 10−8, we are aiming for a resolution of the balance
of 1 × 10−9 on 100 g. This yields an absolute mass resolution of 0.1 µg, which is
roughly equivalent to a force resolution of 1 nN. We assume we can average the
position feedback uncertainty down to 100 nm, which means that the mechanism
needs to have a stiﬀness of ≤ 0.01 N m−1 at the weighing position to be within the
resolution requirements.

(b) A constant stiﬀness value along the coil travel is important for an accurate
and stable feedback control during the velocity mode. A higher order stiﬀness term
causes the balance to become unstable or stiﬀen up along the travel if the stiﬀness at
the weighing position, which is in the middle of the coil travel, is adjusted down to 0.

(c) The stiﬀness needs to be constant with time, because changes over time result
in a change in the restoring force of the mechanism, which leads to a drifting equi-
librium position of the balance and therefore drift in the force signal, which might
be limiting for the balance performance.

At present, we are conﬁdent that a mechanism stiﬀness of ≤ 0.01 N m−1 will satisfy
the above requirements. Experimental validation will follow in the near future.
Optionally, we include a stiﬀness adjustment unit. This can be realized by applying
a negative stiﬀness to the mechanism by means of, e.g., an inverted pendulum,
astatic stiﬀness adjustment, or a negative spring restoring torque [14, 15, 16].

Guiding of the coil
For QEMMS, the maximum horizontal parasitic motion along the vertical coil travel
is 10 µm. Furthermore, we are seeking to create a trajectory with the QEMMS mech-
anism that is repeatable between weighing and velocity mode as well as between
each sweep in the velocity mode.

The coil speed in the velocity mode is measured with a heterodyne interferometer
reﬂecting a laser beam oﬀ of a retroreﬂector that is attached to the moving coil (see
ﬁgure 3). The most basic criterion to run a measurement in the velocity mode is that
the interference detector does not lose the beam signal in the sweeping phase. The
laser beam of the interferometer needs to be fully reﬂected. Horizontal displacements

Keck et al.

Page 7 of 20

and imperfections of the trajectory from the vertical can cause the beam to be
clipped. However, before clipping the beam, other impacts to the measurement
occur due to imperfections in the coil trajectory from the vertical [17, 18]. Limiting
the explanations to the x-direction, these are proportional to the term vx/vz, where
vx is a horizontal and vz is the vertical coil velocity. In appendix A, we discuss three
biases that occur with horizontal motion. For all, the ﬁgure of merit is vx/vz =
∆x/∆z ≈ 1.67 × 10−4.

Low hysteretic force
Non-linearities from mechanical hysteresis can be a problem in Kibble balances. If
hysteresis is too large, then a precise measurement cannot be done because the this
is a limitation in the resolution of the balance.

The magnitude of a hysteretic force in general, depends on the load to the pivots
and on excitations of the balance, e.g., due to a response of the balance during a
mass transfer or the mechanism movement during the velocity mode. There are two
general ways to reduce hysteretic forces in balances: (1) Minimizing the excursion
during mass placement by adjusting mass lift speed and by optimizing feedback
control. (2) Using an erasing procedure where the center pivot point is exercised in
a damped sinusoidal motion after each excursion of the balance. However, a small
part of hysteresis remains in the system. The goal is to have a remaining hysteretic
loss in the mechanism equivalent to ≤ 0.1 µg.

The cause and magnitude of a hysteretic force is also driven by the type of mecha-
nism used in the balance. All balance mechanisms can be divided based on their type
of center pivot into two groups: knife edge-based and ﬂexure pivot-based balances.
In the QEMMS mechanism, ﬂexure pivots will be employed.

The main advantage of a ﬂexure over a knife edge with regards to hysteresis is
that in the ﬂexure only elastic deformation contributes to this eﬀect, whereas in a
knife edge elastic and plastic deformation need to be considered. After a change in
the load and a deﬂection, a ﬂexure shows anelastic behavior because it takes time
to relax back to its internal equilibrium state. However, despite the similarities to
the knife edge, the hysteretic forces in a ﬂexure are known to be smaller. Reviewing
literature, T. Quinn [19] published results for a 1 kg mass comparator stating that
a ﬂexure-based balance performs mass measurements with precision of up to six
orders of magnitude better than a knife edge-based balance. Note that he admits
that the knife edge-based balance was probably not ultimately optimized in terms
of knife and ﬂat materials and geometry.

[19, 20, 21]

Note also that all published anelasticity data concerning ﬂexures in precision bal-
ances were gathered using mass comparators which only use the weighing mode. The
anelastic characteristic of ﬂexures was never shown in Kibble balances where the
weighing and the velocity mode are both performed by a single ﬂexure mechanism.
Conducting a series of experiments is necessary to learn about this eﬀect because it
cannot be quantitatively pre-determined during the design process. Unfortunately,
theoretical calculation or simulation cannot provide quantitative knowledge regard-
ing hysteretic forces because theories on this topic are not very well developed or
validated. There are only general design recommendations that can be applied for
minimizing the amount of anelasticity in ﬂexures, for example: (1) designing the

Keck et al.

Page 8 of 20

Figure 4: The requirements to the mechanism in the Kibble balance of the
QEMMS summed up in a drawing.

ﬂexure as thin as possible in the region of bending, (2) designing it long and (3)
using a ﬂexure material with low internal damping coeﬃcient. These recommenda-
tions minimize the geometric and elastic part of the stiﬀness, the internal material
friction and therefore the energy stored and dissipated in the ﬂexure during deﬂec-
tion, which is a measure for low hysteresis according to Speake [21].

Carrying capacity and installation space

The central pivot in the QEMMS mechanism needs to support a total load of 15 kg.
Furthermore, with this load it must be capable of rotating by ±7 ◦ to provide the de-
sired ±30 mm of vertical travel, assuming the maximum dimension of a beam/wheel
limited by the maximum installation space in QEMMS. Since the Kibble balance
in QEMMS is designed to be similar in size to commercial high precision vacuum
mass comparators, we allow for a maximum horizontal dimension of the mechanism
of ≈ 500 mm. This limits the maximum dimension of one beam or wheel arm in
the balance to 250 mm considering symmetric balance design. Also, the mechanism
itself needs to be as compact as possible to keep free space for optical systems and
a mass exchange unit in the vacuum chamber. The sensitivity of a balance scales
as the square of the balance arm [16]. Hence it should be as large as is practically
allowed.

Figure 4 visualizes the above explained requirements in a drawing.

Design of the QEMMS mechanism

We are quite conﬁdent that a ﬂexure-based mechanism design keeps the mechanical
hysteresis in the QEMMS mechanism small and provides a repeatable movement.
Furthermore, the new mechanism should be more compact, lighter, and require
less auxiliary control features to deﬁne a one-dimensional coil trajectory than exist-
ing versions of Kibble balance mechanisms. Henceforth, we favor passive mechanical

Keck et al.

Page 9 of 20

components built from ﬂexure elements for deﬁning the balance trajectory over aux-
iliary electrical components. Figure 5 shows the separation of the QEMMS mecha-
nism function in two sub-components integrated in a single mechanical system. One
component is for balancing, the other one for deﬁning a linear trajectory of the coil.

Figure 5: Close up of the weighing and velocity functionality. The motor is indi-
cated to show where a driving force/torque for the velocity mode is put into the
mechanism. Here, F and τ denote a force or torque applied to the mechanism
by the motor used to move the coil in the velocity mode. Furthermore, ϕ and ω
are the deﬂection angle and angular velocity of the main pivot. Finally, ∆z and
v are the translational displacement and velocity of the coil in vertical direction
constrained by a guiding mechanism.

We will take a look into how to realize each functional component in ﬁgure 5 with
a ﬂexure design and integrate them into a mechanism that satisﬁes the requirements
for the QEMMS.

Main ﬂexure

The trade-oﬀ in the design of the main ﬂexure is to keep the maximum stress in
the ﬂexure at the maximum deﬂection angle at an acceptable level. A safety factor
of 2 to 3 is desired. Also, a low elastic ﬂexure stiﬀness is recommended in order to
reduce the anelastic eﬀect in the ﬂexure after deﬂection [21]. This calls for a ﬂexure
as thin as possible.

Furthermore, a material with low internal damping/anelasticity must be used in
order to avoid hysteretic eﬀects upfront as much as possible. A metal with very high
yield strength (≈ 1000 MPa) and small anelastic after eﬀect is a hardened Copper
Beryllium alloy as used for ﬂexures in balance experiments, e.g., in [19].

These materials are typically machined using wire electrical discharge machining,
grinding, high speed milling or etching. In notch ﬂexures, minimal ﬂexure thick-
nesses of ≈ 50 µm can be achieved.

The main ﬂexure needs to be carefully designed and analyzed by means of ﬁnite
element analysis in order to evaluate stress-reducing parameters in the ﬂexure ac-
curately. One key factor to evaluate is the stress concentration near axis of rotation

Keck et al.

Page 10 of 20

Figure 6: Finite element simulation of a conventional notch ﬂexure with a notch
radius of 3 mm and a ﬂat ﬂexure with a length of 3.25 mm. Both have a width
of 10 mm and a minimal notch thickness of 0.05 mm. Boundary conditions: Each
ﬂexure is ﬁxed supported at the left end and a rotation of 7 ◦ is induced at the
nodes at the right end. A point mass of 15 kg, which mimics the weight of the
balance components, is attached on the right end. The color bars show the results
for the maximum equivalent stress in the geometry after deﬂection in MPa. In
the ﬂat ﬂexure the high stress concentration is close to the right edge of the ﬂat
region.

of the ﬂexure due to the high axial load and high deﬂection. Widely used hinge ge-
ometries such as ﬂat or conventional circular hinges have limitations for application
in the QEMMS because they show high stress values derived from the simulations
in ﬁgure 6. Maximum equivalent stresses of > 1000 MPa exceed the static yield
strength for the high strength ﬂexure material we chose (≈ 1000 MPa).

Figure 7: Visualization of the modiﬁed ﬂexure geometry. As opposed to a regular
circular ﬂexure, the region of bending here has a very large radius Rm over the
ﬂexing length Lm, with the characteristics Rm >> Lm. It has a minimal notch
height h0 and a width w. Ra smoothens the transition from the bending region
to the stiﬀ part of the notch ﬂexure.

In the investigated conventional ﬂexure geometries, the bending radius is very
small, which causes a high stress concentration in the region of ﬂexing. Thus, we
explore a modiﬁed ﬂexure geometry that causes the bending radius of the ﬂexure to
become larger. This shows a positive eﬀect to the maximum equivalent stress in the
ﬂexure. A representation for the modiﬁed geometry with an acceptable maximum
stress value is shown in ﬁgure 7.

Keck et al.

Page 11 of 20

Figure 8: Finite element analysis stress plot of a representation of the modiﬁed
ﬂexure geometry. The parameters are Rm = 200 mm, Lm = 20 mm, Ra = 1.5 mm,
La = 3 mm, H = 5 mm, w = 10 mm, and h0 = 0.05 mm. Boundary conditions
are the same as in ﬁgure 6. The color bars show the results for the maximum
equivalent stress in the ﬂexure after deﬂection in MPa. The simulation shows a
maximum equivalent stress of 359 MPa in the ﬂexure, which is about 36 % of the
yield strength (≈ 1000 MPa) of the ﬂexure material.

Figure 8 only represents one set of parameters for a ﬂexure suitable for the ap-
plication in the QEMMS mechanism. Other variations are possible, but further
elaboration on this matter is not within the scope of this manuscript. The opti-
mization of the geometry not only regarding the stress in the ﬂexure but also the
elastic stiﬀness is work in progress at NIST and will be published in a later on.

Kinematics
In addition to the main pivot, a sub-mechanism for guiding with a proper link
to the main ﬂexure completes the kinematics of the balance. Examples, where a
guiding mechanism is combined and linked with a balance beam can be found in,
e.g., commercial weighing cells or in the Planck balance at Physikalisch-Technische
Bundesanstalt (PTB) [22]. An approach for an integrated design of main ﬂexure and
guiding mechanism in a parallel four bar linkage was used at NIST for electrostatic
force balance experiments [16, 23]. The mechanisms in [16, 22, 23] show a systematic
arc motion caused by the use of a parallel four bar linkage for guiding and use only
small travel ranges on the order of micro meters during operation. Thus, these
concepts can inspire a new design, but may not be directly used in the QEMMS
due to the requirement for purely vertical motion of the coil over a relatively large
travel. Other options for building ﬂexure-based guiding mechanisms providing a
linear motion need to be explored.

Since a single ﬂexure hinge is always a rotating pivot, only a chain of multiple
hinges can provide a (nearly) linear motion of a moving member. An overview and
further references to useful literature about principles to combine a series of rota-
tional pivots are provided in [24]. The dissertation thesis addresses the correction
of unwanted parasitic motions as well as the change of the degree of freedom in a
kinematic structure in order to achieve a certain trajectory. Such principles are, e.g.,
the design of parallel or serial kinematic structures, or applying nested or external
linkage structures to avoid under-constraint in a mechanism [25]. An example based
on a planar parallelogram linkage is provided in ﬁgure 11 in appendix B.

However, due to simplicity, correction of lateral error motions, compactness, and
the convenience in machining of a planar ﬂexure mechanism, we favor the folded

Keck et al.

Page 12 of 20

Figure 9: Conceptual visualization of the kinematics for the QEMMS mechanism.
The principle of operation is based on a symmetric folded parallelogram linkage
with external linkage. The drawing shows a representation of a wheel balance
where bands roll oﬀ two wheels at the balancing structure.

parallelogram linkage as a guiding mechanism for the QEMMS. We will integrate a
weighing beam/wheel as the external linkage as shown in option (4.2) in ﬁgure 11
(appendix B) and use this directly as a link to the main ﬂexure. A visualization of
the kinematic system for the QEMMS mechanism is shown in ﬁgure 9.

In a next step, a comparison of using a beam balance versus a wheel balance is

addressed.

Beam balance vs. wheel balance

There is a fundamental diﬀerence between the kinematics of the two balance types.
The end points of the beam balance perform a rotational motion along a ﬁxed
circle. Only by the use of a further guiding mechanism, the movement of suspended
components can take place parallel to the vector of gravity as shown in ﬁgure 12
(appendix C).

In contrast, with the wheel balance, a rolling of a band on the wheel is performed.
This results, in theory, in a direct conversion of a rotational movement of the wheel
into a linear displacement of suspended components parallel to the vector of the
gravitational force. In order to achieve a further improvement in the quality of the
linear motion and to avoid unwanted oscillations, a guiding mechanism as shown
in ﬁgure 9 can be used. The resulting overconstrained design can be dealt with by
adjustment.

At ﬁrst glance, this diﬀerence in use of a beam to a wheel balance seems to be
negligible for application in a balance. Indeed, in a mass comparator, where the
mechanism operates closely around its deﬁned zero position, there is no theoretical
functional advantage to either solution. All parasitic eﬀects in the kinematics are
small due to small deﬂections of the ﬂexures. Convenience in machining and assem-
bling of small planar (sometimes monolithic) mechanisms seems to be causing the
favor for beam balances here.

Keck et al.

Page 13 of 20

However, with the large travel required in the QEMMS, not all of the usually
negligible eﬀects in the mechanism remain harmless to the mechanical properties
of the instrument. In fact, there is one impact that causes a major disadvantage of
a beam balance compared to a wheel balance from a kinetic perspective: there is a
horizontal force acting upon the connecting links between the guiding mechanism
and the beam when the eﬀective horizontal length of the balance beam shortens by
the cosine of the deﬂection angle.

This results in a non-linear stiﬀness term and parasitic forces to the guiding
mechanism which cause unwanted deformations and error motions in the guide. An
analysis of this eﬀect is provided appendix C.

We could think of compensating the parasitic horizontal force on the stages by
applying a symmetric compensation design approach by adding more components
to a beam balance-based mechanism. However, this would increase the complexity
of the mechanism to a level that we do not desire. The fact that the wheel balance
prevents this horizontal force by design causes a favor of the wheel over the beam
balance for the QEMMS mechanism.

Modular design
The mechanism has been designed based on a wheel balance and a rendering of
the frame and the moving parts can be seen in ﬁgure 10. We favor a prototype of
modular build to allow for variation of single components in experiments. Interesting
elements for variation would be, e.g., the main ﬂexure or the guiding mechanism
ﬂexures with view on the hysteretic properties of the mechanism or the guiding
quality of the compliant structure.

Figure 10: Render of the moveable parts of the QEMMS mechanism.

The wheels are designed with wheel parts that are positioned and bolted down
on a carrier beam structure. Multiﬁlament bands are clamped, roll oﬀ the wheel

Keck et al.

Page 14 of 20

surfaces and connect the intermediate and ﬁnal stages of the guiding mechanisms
with the inner and outer wheel.

The modular design furthermore provides us with the opportunity to methodi-
cally investigate the eﬀect of certain misalignments to the movement and hysteretic
properties of the QEMMS mechanism. This helps to further clarify which design
parameters matter not just from a theoretical, but from a practical point of view
and highlights practical requirements to precision in assembling.

Conclusion
In this article we discuss the requirements and design for a new mechanism for
the Kibble balance in the Quantum Electro-Mechanical Metrology Suite (QEMMS)
currently under construction at NIST. Summarizing the explanations on the pre-
vious pages, we designed a fully mechanical and ﬂexure-based balance mechanism
that can execute both modes of operation in the Kibble balance experiment – the
weighing and the velocity mode. This mechanism constrains the trajectory of the
moving components to a purely linear, one-dimensional motion by design without
requiring auxiliary active control features.

Experiments regarding the guiding quality and repeatability of the mechanism
will show the technological limitations of the ﬂexure design. Due to the modular
design, we can optimize the mechanism after evaluation of experimental results
methodically piece by piece to converge to a design with the properties we desire
for the QEMMS mechanism.

A prudent design is to theoretically minimize the known factors contributing to
the hysteretic eﬀect, such as the spring constant and loss factor. However, ambiguity
remains about the contribution of mechanical hysteresis to the uncertainty budget.

Keck et al.

Page 15 of 20

Appendix A
Here, we discuss three errors introduced to the measurement with the Kibble balance
in the velocity mode stemming from imperfections in the motion of the coil from
the vertical. We limit the explanations to the x-direction and linear assumptions
for simplicity. The errors describe systematic biases, that we are estimating with an
upper limit value. In reality, once we build the experiment, we will measure all the
imperfection terms in situ, e.g., the wave front distortion, the beam diameter, the
horizontal motion of the balance mechanism, . . . , and apply corrections for these
biases.

Voltage bias
Horizontal velocities also cause a bias eV in the readouts of the induced voltage in
the velocity mode. This stems from both horizontal forces Fx to the coil produced
in the weighing mode – when the electrical center of the coil is not aligned with the
magnetic center of the permanent magnet – and horizontal velocities in the velocity
mode. The relative bias is expressed as follows

eV =

Fx
Fz

∆x
∆z

,

(5)

where Fz is the force applied in the vertical direction by the magnet-coil system in
weighing mode. The factor Fx/Fz is typically on the order of 1 × 10−5 [17, 18], thus
this bias yields eV = 1.7 × 10−9. However, this eﬀect can be cancelled according
to [26] when employing a balance mechanism that performs the exact same motion
in the weighing and the velocity mode, which is the goal for the QEMMS mechanism.

Beam shear bias
A contribution to a bias in the velocity mode is the beam shear error eBS in the
interferometer. It occurs when the coil moves horizontal and the back-reﬂected
interferometer beam gets displaced horizontally such that there is change in overlap
between the reference beam and the beam reﬂected oﬀ of the moving retroreﬂector
at the coil. The important values here are the wavelength of the laser, λ, the wave
distortion at the optics – we assume λ/10 – the beam shear/horizontal coil motion,
∆x, and the diameter of the laser beam in the interferometer, dBeam. The equation
for this relative bias derived from [27] is

eBS =

λ
10

2
dBeam

∆x
∆z

.

(6)

The wavelength of the laser is λ = 633 nm with a beam diameter of dBeam = 6 mm

which yields a bias of eBS = 3.52 × 10−9.

Velocity bias
Another measurement bias, ev, comes from horizontal velocities during the velocity
mode. These are derived from a misalignment of the interferometer with respect

Keck et al.

Page 16 of 20

Figure 11: In ﬁrst approximation, ﬂexure mechanisms can be modelled with
rigid links connected to rotational pivots. This diagram shows an example for
the correction of unwanted motions in the kinematic structure of mechanisms
consisting of rotational joints. Starting with a purely rotational joint (1.) and
ending with a linear motion provided by a chain of rotational joints, (4.1) and
(4.2). The principles of serial and parallel setup of pivots as well as an external
linkage are applied.

to gravity, α, and from the horizontal motion, ∆x, along the vertical coil travel
∆z [18, 28]. The equation for the bias is

ev = α

∆x
∆z

.

(7)

Assuming a reasonable value α = 45 µrad, we get a relative measurement bias of

ev = 7.5 × 10−9, which is on the order of magnitude we desire to have.

Appendix B
Figure 11 explains design principles to correct for motion imperfections in kinematic
chains transitioning from a purely rotational to a purely translational motion of a
moving member in a mechanism.

A purely rotational motion (1.) is turned into a quasi-linear motion of a plane
with a systematic horizontal part (x(cid:48)) through parallel setup of two beams as in
a parallel four bar linkage (2.). Now we can use a serial (folded) chain of these
linkages. By moving (z(cid:48)(cid:48)) half the distance of (z(cid:48)) we can correct for the parasitic
horizontal part of the motion in the ﬁnal stage. However, this is a movable system
with two degrees of freedom, where the movement of the intermediate stage on the
right (z(cid:48)(cid:48)) is not coupled to the ﬁnal stage on the left (z(cid:48)) (3.). Furthermore, if the

Keck et al.

Page 17 of 20

equation z(cid:48)(cid:48) = 2z(cid:48) is not fulﬁlled here, there is going to be a certain x(cid:48) in the ﬁnal
trajectory. In a ﬁnal step, applying an external linkage (4.1) or parallel setup (4.2)
we can constrain the motion to a single degree of freedom, as long as the condition
z(cid:48)(cid:48) = 2z(cid:48) is fulﬁlled by design.

Option (4.1) was used, e.g., as the mechanism in an electrostatic balance at
NIST [29], and option (4.2) as the dedicated guiding mechanism for the Mark II
Kibble balance of the Federal Institute of Metrology (METAS) of Switzerland [30].

Appendix C
We derive the non-linear stiﬀness from the simpliﬁed model of a beam balance
connected with a guiding mechanism on both sides in ﬁgure 12.

Figure 12: Simpliﬁed model of a beam balance combined with guiding mecha-
nisms on both sides.

The horizontal force FH depending on the rotational deﬂection ϕ is described with

FH(ϕ) = m g

l1
l2

ϕ2
2

,

(8)

truncating the Taylor approximations for sine and cosine after the second order

term.

The lever arm z(cid:48) = l1 ϕ introduces a moment MH(ϕ) through each side of the

beam according to

MH(ϕ) = m g

l2
1
l2

ϕ3,

(9)

which points out a third order dependency of the induced moment on the deﬂec-

tion angle ϕ.

For simpliﬁcation, we assume that we compensate a constant, elastic part of the
ﬂexure stiﬀness in the mechanism entirely by using, e.g., an inverted pendulum.
Building the derivative of the previous equation due to ϕ yields the non-linear
rotational stiﬀness term induced by the parasitic horizontal force FH

K =

dM
dϕ

= 3 m g

l2
1
l2

ϕ2.

(10)

Keck et al.

Page 18 of 20

Figure 13: Results of a ﬁnite element analysis (FEA) at a beam balance model of
the QEMMS mechanism. Upper plot: the left axis shows a third order ﬁt of the
displacement force and the right axis the derived stiﬀness along the vertical (z)
displacement axis. The solid lines are from ﬁnite element analysis and the dashed
line is from the analytical model for the mechanism stiﬀness. The parameters for
the simulation are: m = 6 kg, g = 9.81 N kg−1, l1 = 250 mm, l2 = 100 mm. Lower
plot: shows the horizontal trajectory error of the ﬁnal stage of the mechanism
dx over z.

Unfortunately, this term becomes highly dominant with larger deﬂections as can
be seen in the upper plot in ﬁgure 13. With reasonable values for the system pa-
rameters shown in ﬁgure 12, a study at a simpliﬁed beam balance-based mechanism
model using ﬁnite element analysis was conducted. Figure 14 shows the model and
boundary conditions therefore.

The force over displacement curve of the ﬁnal stage of the mechanism was moni-
tored and compared to the analytical model. The rotational stiﬀness in equation 10
can be transferred to a linear stiﬀness at the guiding mechanism in vertical direc-
tion by dividing equation 10 by the square of the balance lever arm l2
1. Furthermore,
ϕ ≈ ∆z/l1.

Note that the constant oﬀset of the dashed from the solid green line in ﬁgure 13
stems from a residual constant stiﬀness part in the simulation model, which can, in
practice, be compensated by adjusting the center of mass of the beam [16].

Furthermore, the horizontal force FH acting upon the ﬂexure-based guiding mech-
anism aﬀects the quality of guiding. The simulation yielding the results for the stiﬀ-
ness of the mechanism in ﬁgure 13 also provides insights to this horizontal trajectory
error, dx, along the vertical displacement axis in z-direction displayed in the lower
plot in ﬁgure 13. We see that the total horizontal error motion is approximately 20
times larger than allowed.

Keck et al.

Page 19 of 20

Figure 14: Total deformation plot of a ﬁnite element analysis at the beam bal-
ance model for the QEMMS mechanism. The ﬁnal stage was displaced step-wise
±30 mm in z-direction and the force reaction as well as the error motion in
x-direction was monitored. The result is shown in ﬁgure 13.

Author details
References

1. Kibble, B.: A measurement of the gyromagnetic ratio of the proton by the strong ﬁeld method. In: Atomic

Masses and Fundamental Constants, vol. 5, pp. 545–551 (1976)

2. The BIPM and the metre convention: The International System of Units (SI), 117–216 (2019)
3. Tiesinga, E., Mohr, P., Newell, D., Taylor, B.: Codata recommended values of the fundamental physical

constants: 2018. Rev. Mod. Phys. 93 (2021)

4. Delahaye, F., Jeckelmann, B.: Revised technical guidelines for reliable dc measurements of the quantized hall

resistance. Metrologia 40, 217–240 (2003)

5. Jeckelmann, B., Jeanneret, B.: The quantum hall eﬀect as an electrical resistance standard. Rep. Prog. Phys.

64, 1603–1658 (2001)

6. Hamilton, C.: Josephson voltage standards. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 71, 3611–3626 (2000)
7. Haddad, D., Seifert, F., Chao, L., Li, S., Newell, D., Pratt, J., Williams, C., Schlamminger, S.: Bridging

classical and quantum mechanics. Metrologia 53, 83–85 (2016)

8. Robinson, I., Schlamminger, S.: The watt or Kibble balance: a technique for implementing the new SI deﬁnition

of the unit of mass. Metrologia 53, 46–74 (2016)

9. Kruskopf, M., Pakdehi, K. DM.and Pierz, Wundrack, S., Stosch, R., Dziomba, T., G¨otz, M., Baringhaus, J.,
Aprojanz, J., Tegenkamp, C., Lidzba, J.: Comeback of epitaxial graphene for electronics: large-area growth of
bilayer-free graphene on sic. 2d materials. 2D Materials 3 (2016)

10. Panna, A., Hu, I., Kruskopf, M., Patel, D., Jarrett, D., Liu, C., Payagala, S., Saha, D., Rigosi, A., Newell, D.,
Liang, C., Elmquist, R.: Graphene quantum Hall eﬀect parallel resistance arrays. PHYSICAL REVIEW B
103(075408) (2021)

11. Rigosi, A., Panna, A., Payagala, S., Kruskopf, M., Kraft, M., Jones, G., Wu, B., Lee, H., Yang, Y., Hu, J.,

Jarrett, D., Newell, D., Elmquist, R.: Graphene devices for tabletop and high-current quantized Hall resistance
standards. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 68, 1870–1878 (2019)

12. Marangoni, R., Haddad, D., Seifert, F., Chao, L., Newell, D., Schlamminger, S.: Magnet system for the

quantum electromechanical metrology suite. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 69, 5736–5744 (2020)

13. Marangoni, R., Haddad, D., Seifert, F., Chao, L., Pratt, J., Newell, D., Schlamminger, S.: Design of the Kibble

balance for the QEMMS. In: 2020 Conference on Precision Electromagnetic Measurements (CPEM), pp. 1–2
(2020)

14. Darnieder, M., Pabst, M., Wenig, R., Zentner, L., Theska, R., Fr¨ohlich, T.: Static behavior of weighing cells.

Journal of Sensors and Sensor Systems 2, 587–600 (2018)

15. Darnieder, M., Pabst, M., Fr¨ohlich, T., Zentner, L., Theska, R.: Mechanical properties of an adjustable

weighing cell prototype. In: Euspen’s 19th International Conference and Exhibition (2019)

16. Pratt, J., Newell, D., Kramar, J.: A ﬂexure balance with adjustable restoring torque for nanonewton force

measurement. In: International Measurement Confederation (2002)

17. Sanchez, C., Wood, B., Green, R., Liard, J., Inglis, D.: A determination of Planck’s constant using the NRC

watt balance. Metrologia 51, 5–14 (2014)

Keck et al.

Page 20 of 20

18. Haddad, D., Seifert, F., Chao, L., Li, S., Newell, D., Pratt, J., Williams, C., Schlamminger, S.: Invited article: A

precise instrument to determine the Planck constant, and the future kilogram 87 (2016)

19. Quinn, T.: The beam balance as an instrument for very precise weighing. Meas. Sci. Technol. 3, 141–159

(1992)

20. Speake, C.: Fundamental limits to mass comparison by means of a beam balance. Proceedings of the Royal

Society of London. A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences 414, 333–358 (1987)
21. Speake, C.: Anelasticity in ﬂexure strips revisited. Metrologia 55, 114–119 (2018)
22. Rothleitner, C., Schleichert, J., Rogge, N., G¨unther, L., Vasilyan, S., Hilbrunner, F., Knopf, D., Fr¨ohlich, T.,

H¨artig, F.: The Planck-Balance—using a ﬁxed value of the Planck constant to calibrate E1/E2-weights. Meas.
Sci. Technol. 29, 074003 (2018)

23. Keck, L., Shaw, G., Theska, R., Schlamminger, S.: Design of an electrostatic balance mechanism to measure

optical power of 100 kW. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 70, 1–9 (2021)

24. Linß, S.: Ein Beitrag zur geometrischen Gestaltung und Optimierung prismatischer Festk¨orpergelenke in
nachgiebigen Koppelmechanismen. PhD thesis, Technische Universi¨at Ilmenau, Fachgebiet Nachgiebige
Systeme (2015)

25. Panas, R., Hopkins, J.: Eliminating underconstraint in double parallelogram ﬂexure mechanisms. Journal of

Mechanical Design 137, 1–9 (2015)

26. Kibble, B., Robinson, I.: Principles of a new generation of simpliﬁed and accurate watt balances. Metrologia 51,

132–139 (2014)

27. Niebauer, T.M., Sasagawa, G.S., Fallel, J.E., Hilt, R., Klopping, E.: A new generation of absolute gravimeters.

Metrologia 32 (1995)

28. Gillespie, G., Fujii, K., Newell, D.B., Olsen, P.T., Picard, O.A., Steiner, R.L., Stenbakken, G.N., Williams, E.R.:

Alignment uncertainties of the NIST watt experiment. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 46, 605–608 (1997)
29. Kramar, J., Newell, D., Pratt, J.: NIST electrostatic force balance experiment. In: International Measurement

Confederation (2002)

30. Cosandier, F., Eichenberger, A., Baumann, H., Jeckelmann, B., Bonny, M., Chatagny, V., Clavel, R.:

Development and integration of high straightness ﬂexure guiding mechanisms dedicated to the METAS watt
balance Mark II. Metrologia 51, 88–95 (2014)

