The role of open data in the transformation to Society 5.0: a resource 
or a tool for SDG-compliant Smart Living?  

Anastasija Nikiforova1,2, Miguel Angel Alor Flores3 and Miltiadis D. Lytras 4 

Abstract–Open  data  are  characterized  by  a  number  of  economic,  technological,  innovative  and  social 
benefits. They are seen as a significant contributor to the city's transformation into Smart City. This is all the 
more so when the society is on the border of Society 5.0,  i.e., shift from the information society to a super 
smart  society  or  society  of  imagination  takes  place.  However,  the  question  constantly  asked  by  open  data 
experts is, what are the key factors to be met and satisfied in order to achieve promised benefits? The current 
trend  of  openness  suggests  that  the  principle  of  openness  should  be  followed  not  only  by  data  but  also 
research,  education,  software,  standard,  hardware  etc.,  it  should  become  a  philosophy  to  be  followed  at 
different  levels,  in  different  domains.  This  should  ensure  greater  transparency,  eliminating  inequalities, 
promoting, and achieving sustainable development goals. Therefore, many agendas now have openness as a 
prerequisite.  This  chapter  deals  with  concepts  of  open  (government)  data  and  Society  5.0  pointing  to  their 
common objectives, providing some success stories of open data use in smart cities or transformation of cities 
towards smart cities, mapping them to the features of the Society 5.0. We believe that this trend develops a 
new form of society, which we refer to as “open data-driven society”. It forms a bridge from Society 4.0 to 
Society 5.0. This Chapter attempts to identify the role of openness in promoting human-centric Smart Society, 
Smart city, and Smart Living. 

Keywords  -  collective  intelligence,  OGD,  open  data,  open  innovation,  smart  city,  society  5.0,  sustainable 
development 

1 

INTRODUCTION 

Today, in the digital transformation- and smart city- driven world, citizens have become a fundamental part of 
the design, implementation, and governance of cities and, in particular, their infrastructure (Hernàndez, 2021). 
With  the  digitization  and  rapid  development  of  emerging  smart  /  intelligent  technologies,  more  and  more 
attention is paid to human- and citizen-cantered development.  

According to (Verhulst et al., 2021), emerging uses of technology can generate four forms of intelligence 
(4Is)  -  data  intelligence,  artificial  intelligence,  embodied  intelligence,  and  collaborative  intelligence.  These 
forms  of  intelligence  are  able  to  improve  the  decision-making  capacity  of  development  practitioners  by 
enabling them to better understand or communicate relevant insights, as well as to accelerate progress towards 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). While some of them, such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), have 
already  become  buzzwords  and  are  not  anymore  linked  to  one  specific  area  only  since  becoming  daily 
phenomena, there are some, which, although commonly used, are covered relatively rarely. This refers to the 
intelligence that Verhulst et al. (2021) call "collective intelligence" also known as "wisdom-of-crowd" (Suran 
et  al.,  2021).  It  is  based  on  group  interaction  and  improvements  in  communications,  involving  the  use  of 
technologies  such  as  co-creation  and  crowdsourcing  systems,  smarter  crowdsourcing  tools,  digital  citizen 
assemblies, and open innovation platforms. The other 4Is components are embodied- and data- intelligence. 
Latest, however, is also closely linked with the subject of this Chapter since it relates to the use-cases reliant 
on datafication and analytics, involving the use of technologies such as open data and data collaboratives, in 
addition to others, such as the Internet of Things (IoT). 

The  openness  of  data  is  considered  one  of  the  crucial  drivers  for  the  sustainable  economy  and  the 
knowledge-based  economy  in  particular.  It  might  have  an  impact  on  information  and  communication 
technology (ICT) innovation and creativity bridge in developing a new ecosystem in Industry 4.0 and Society 
5.0 (Sołtysik-Piorunkiewicz & Zdonek, 2021; Nikiforova, 2021). This Society 5.0 is also known as the super-
smart society and sometimes referred to as the “society of imagination”  (Fukuyama et al., 2018), (Sołtysik-
Piorunkiewicz et al.,  2020)  is  expanding  transparency  and  active  participation in  social issues  by  providing 
equal opportunities for all people and by integrating innovative technologies and society. 

 
 
 
 
According to recent studies  (Yoshida et al., 2021) in the recent movement towards smart societies, smart 
governments supported by GovTech and smart cities developed through Civic Tech have become known as 
dominant structures enabled by ICT. Both GovTech and Civic Tech share the common goal of giving citizens 
better and safer lives through their engagement with government and technology. Therefore, the development 
of  online  public  services  (e-services)  is  characterized  using  collaborative  production  methods  involving 
various stakeholders and players. Open data plays a key role in it. Governments are the primary beneficiaries 
of so-called GovTech, where policies regarding OGD, and government transparency are developed to enable 
citizens’  access  to  information  and  participation  in  government.  This  results  in  efficiency  gains  and  saved 
costs.  Civic  Tech,  however,  encompasses  a  range  of  projects  that  use  open  government  data  to  act  in  the 
public good (Yoshida et al., 2021).  

What is more, the openness in both, data, science, technology (software or hardware) is considered as one 
of the keys for meeting Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), while supporting some of them “by default” 
simultaneously  (general  principles  of  open  data  covered  by  Open  Data  Charter  applicable  to  all  data  to 
perceive and treat it as open data) and domain, which the open data represents. This was also emphasized at 
the  76th  session  of  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly,  highlighting that  the  openness  contributes  to the 
attainment of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). This is also in line with Meschede 
&  Siebenlist  (2021),  according  to  which  open  (urban)  data  promote  smart  and  sustainable  development  in 
cities. They can also supply viable data for measuring progress toward the SDG. 

Another  point  to  be  mentioned  is  that  some  challenges,  especially  those  of  global  scale,  such  as  climate 
change, pandemics and poverty are complex and there is little time to rectify them (Verhulst et al., 2021). This 
is  also  the  case  for  crisis-management  of  different  kinds,  such  as  pandemics  as  COVID-19  we  experience 
now, or other types of crises, including but not limited to economic, natural crises of the country or region. 
The  level  of  complexity  and  especially  short  time  slots  within  which  solutions  should  or  even  must  be 
developed makes open data an unprecedented artifact that allows individuals or groups of individuals to have 
an  idea  on  how  to  combat  the  challenge  to  access  the  data  without  the  need  for  their  collection  and 
preparation. This makes the possibility of the solution to be found to either a very tiny issue or even a very 
complex  problem  /  crisis  /  disaster more likely  compared to  the  closed  data  ecosystems,  by  which  our  past 
could  be  characterized.  This  is  even  more  the  case  if  the  well-established  environment  for  the  above-
mentioned co-creation is in place.  

Of  course,  we  do  not  pose  the  open  (government)  data  as  a  “silver  bullet”  because,  first,  it  should  be 
available  and  accessible,  but  what  is  more  important  and  crucial,  a  long  list  of  prerequisites  should  be 
fulfilled.  This  list  is  related  to  both  data  usability,  where  the  usability  is  a  very  multidimensional  concept, 
including the trust in data, their quality, accuracy, timeliness, up-to-dateness, accessibility via API, their value 
that refers to the identification and opening of so-called “high-value datasets” etc. What is more, relevant ICT 
infrastructure from both technological and managerial perspectives with appropriate level of transparency is 
crucial,  as  well  as  the  level  of  skills,  knowledge  and  education  forming  both  internet-  and  digital  literacy 
should  be  met  by  individuals  involved  in  both  data  supply  and  consumption.  For  the  later,  considering  the 
specificalities of open (government) data, their provision, use and reuse, specific term of “open data literacy” 
has been introduced (Weber et al., 2018; Loría-Solano & Raffaghelli, 2022). 

What is more, open innovation typically considered as one of major benefits that open (government) data 
can  bring,  suppose  additional  requirements  referring  to  the  more  complex  concept  of  sustainable  open  data 
ecosystem  (Linåker  &  Runeson,  2021;  Lakomaa  and  Kallberg  2013;  Janssen,  Charalabidis,  and  Zuiderwijk 
2012).  This  is  also  the  case  for  smart  open  (government)  data  portals.  It,  in  addition  to  above  mentioned 
points,  and  considering  actors  dealing  with  the  open  (government)  data  at  different  levels,  requires 
mechanisms for enabling cooperation and collaboration of different parties, thereby  leading, and facilitating 
co-creation. The latter,  i.e., enabling collaboration in a sustainable, collaboration- and cooperation- oriented 
open data ecosystem, is another very complex concept, which is not much studied, yet.  

The  objectives  of this  Chapter  are two-fold: to  define  the  Society  5.0  and  OGD  concepts  and emphasize 
their  interconnection,  as  well  as  to  provide  real-world  examples  proving  these  concepts  are  interconnected. 
The latter is expected to be achieved by providing a mapping of Society 5.0 determinants on the outputs of the 

 
 
OGD-driven Smart City examples. This also includes identification and elaboration on both determinants or 
prerequisites  capable  of  promoting  the  development of  the  Society 5.0  by  means  of  open  data and  barriers, 
which  stakeholders  of  different  types  may  face  on  the  way  towards  sustainable  smart  city  and  super  smart 
society.  

The  Chapter  is  therefore  structured  as  follows:  Section  2  defines  the  concepts  of  open  data,  open 
innovation, Society 5.0, Section 3 presents real-world use-cases and maps them on the features of Society 5.0, 
Section 4 establishes a discussion and concludes the Chapter. 

2.  MAIN CONCEPTS: OPEN (GOVERNMENT) DATA, OPEN INNOVATION, SOCIETY 

5.0 

2.1.  Open data and open innovation 

Open data, and open government data in particular, are considered a major enabler for transparency and trust, 
especially in the case of open government data and citizens’ trust to the government, which is a pre-condition 
for the development of participative and smart community or city, and development at both social, economic 
and  environmental  levels.  There  is  empirical  evidence  of  the  significant  and  positive  direct  relationship 
between  open  government  data  and  institutional  trust  (Gonzálvez-Gallego  et  al.,  2020),  although  there  still 
exist areas for development. Open data are widely used for innovation, economic growth, competitiveness, job 
creation  and  societal  progress  (Francey  and  Mettler,  2021),  as  well  as  raising  awareness  about  the  events, 
including  but  not  limited  to  COVID-19,  spread  of  the  disease,  vaccination  etc.,  forecasting,  predicting, 
monitoring, tracking, contributing to data-driven decision-making and crisis management as well as the whole 
contemporary society.  

Open  data  are  more  and  more  frequently  used  and  transformed  into  value-added  services  and  are 
considered driver for open innovation that is beneficial to society (Linåker and Runeson, 2021), (Smith and 
Sandberg,  2018),  (Leviäkangas  and  Molarius,  2020).  However,  there  is  a  lack  of  understanding  and 
knowledge  whether  there  exist  real  world  examples,  which  prove  open  data-based  services  and  solutions 
actually change / improve our lives and make our cities “smart”? This question was raised by Mainka et al. 
(2015)  and  is  still  valid.  Unfortunately,  there  is  a  limited  number  of  quantitative  indicators  of  benefits  of 
turning open data into (economic) value. However, there are a few interesting pieces of evidence found in the 
literature related to transportation, where probably two most expressive are (Leviäkangas and Molarius, 2020) 
and  (Stone  and  Aravopoulou,  2018).  They  show  that  they  can  trigger  the  development  of  other  derived 
services  or  those  using  the  data  provided,  as  well  as  provide  direct  benefits  for  both  users  and  public 
authorities. We will elaborate on these examples and respective evidence in Section 3.  

However,  although  the  potential  of  open  data  is  estimated  to  be  very  high  and  we  will  see  it  in  the 
respective Section, there is a list of prerequisites / preconditions to be fulfilled in order to be able to gain those 
promised and expected benefits. Let us elaborate on the most widely discussed in more detail. Recent studies 
demonstrate that there are barriers / issues, which are emphasized in almost every study exploring this topic, 
which can potentially disrupt open data innovation development and open data initiative as a whole. Referring 
to the open innovation, Smith and Sandberg (2018), who aimed to explore how innovation barriers affect the 
use  of  OGD in different  phases  of the  service lifecycle  and  how the  perceptions  of the  barriers  vary  across 
different types of OGD users, have identified 38 barriers. Main barriers were further classified into  5 groups 
depending  on  the  phase  of  service  lifecycle:  (1)  strategy  phase,  (2)  design  phase,  (3)  transition  phase,  (4) 
operation  phase,  (5)  continual  improvement  phase,  where  the  overlapping  of  these  phases  is  obviously 
permitted. More precisely: 

• strategy  phase  associated  with  such  barriers  as  lack  of  cooperation,  understanding,  domain 

knowledge, influencing and getting help from OGD providers and potential business partner; 

 
 
 
 
• design  phase  is  linked  with  lack  of  data,  impeding  data  formats,  poor  documentation,  poor  data 
quality,  and  high  task  complexity,  including  lack  of  coding  skills  and  knowledge  of  API  use 
practices; 

• transition phase described by lack of communication and support, slow data provision and issues with 
data maintenance, i.e., lack of up-to-date data, lack of time to develop services, and difficulties in 
developing services with unique value propositions and in gaining end-users, which is probably the 
phase which barriers are the least open data-related; 

• operation phase characterized by a lack of communication from OGD providers, poor support, slow 

data provision and slow back-end reliability; 

• (continual)  improvement  phase  linked  with  the  lack  of  understanding  of  how  the  services  could  be 

improved and difficulties in motivating efforts to do so. 

Although it can be seen that many barriers relate to the overall digital literacy and lack of knowledge and or 
skills  of  developing  innovative  services,  there  are  many  barriers,  which  are  developer-agnostic.  In  other 
words, while some barriers can be overcome either by seeking for appropriate team members or by acquiring 
required knowledge and skills, those open data-related are of more serious nature since can be understood as 
external and extrapolated on all potential stakeholders and innovative service makers. 

This is something similar with what the most recent study (Linåker and Runeson, 2021) found, i.e., there is 
an expressed need for improved and more efficient feedback loops, collaboration, and a more demand-driven 
publication of OGD, i.e., rich data of high-quality, which refer us again to the concept of “high-value data” in 
addition to the need of establishing data quality as a default and mandatory pre-condition.  

In addition to these activities, Mainka et al. (2015) point out that open data holders should also think about 
how  to  animate  citizens,  start-ups,  and  other  stakeholders  to  reuse  the  data.  They  emphasize  the  role  of 
workshops  and  hackathons  organized  with  the  goal  to  reuse  open  government  data  collectively  to  be  then 
capable of doing so. This points out that it is not sufficient to provide data compliant with classical open data 
principles  on  the  entry  point  such  as  national  open  data  portal,  and  there  is  a  highly  expressed  need  for 
additional  requirements  to  be  fulfilled  and  continuous  promotion  activities  in  order  to  make  open  data 
initiatives  successful,  effective,  efficient  and  sustainable.  Furthermore,  these  prerequisites  should  also  be 
managed  and  complemented  if  needed  to  be  compliant  with  users’  needs  and  current  socio-economic  and 
technological trends. 

While the benefits of open data for data consumers are numerous, this is also the case for data producers 
and  holders,  who  in  many  cases  appreciate  the  benefits  of  the  openness  concept,  especially  “once-only 
principles”.  This  was  even  more  expressed  in  terms  of  COVID-19  pandemics.  More  precisely,  the  opening 
and  publishing  of  data  on  the  open  data  portal  reduces  the  number  of  individual  requests  for  information, 
thereby  allowing  resources  to  be  rearranged  to  other  tasks  and  to  combat  COVID-19  infection.  This, 
indisputably, can be generalized and extrapolated on the open (government) data as a whole. However, this 
requires the data to be not only available and accessible, as well as of high quality, but also well-maintained. 
This requires additional resources to be spent since the data and all weaknesses associated with them become 
publicly available for the whole society. Therefore, in many cases there can be a resistance to open the data. 
Therefore, there are studies exploring challenges associated with the opening of these data,  i.e., supply-side 
resistance  to  the  OGD.  As  an  example,  Mainka  et  al.  (2015)  have  presented  challenges,  by  which  can  be 
characterized  one  of  the  most  promising  subsets  of  open  data  -  open  urban  government  data.  They  have 
classified them into: (1) political challenges mainly related to the fear of losing monopoly in public affairs, (2) 
legal challenges, where security, privacy, and copyright reasons are usually used to speculate, (3) governance 
challenges, (4) human resource challenges related to the above mentioned digital literacy of both data supplier 
and  data  consumer,  (5)  IT  infrastructure  challenges,  (6)  IT  budget  challenges  related  to  the  associated 
potential  financial  risk  and  different  models  of  funding  the  open  data  initiative  depending  on  the  available 
budget.  

Thus,  although  open  (government)  data  can  be  characterized  by  a  long  list  of  potential  benefits, 
unfortunately, its full potential has not been opened, yet due to some obstacles, which in many cases leads to 
the resistance from both parties,  i.e., data supplier and data consumer, thereby delaying the development of 

 
 
Smart city and Society 5.0. As regards the latter, it is time to refer to the discussion on what this term stands 
for and how it relates to the concept of open data and how it affects Smart Cities and Smart Living.  

2.2 

Society 5.0: what was before? 

Now, let us briefly define Society 5.0. First, let us briefly cover earlier “versions” of the society and determine 
what the current form is.  

The first version of society, as we know it, is known as Society 1.0, or the “hunting society”, which can be 
described  as  a  society,  where  people  coexisted  with  nature.  This  was  followed  by  the  Society  2.0  or  the 
“agrarian  society”,  whose  main  activities  were  related  to  the  development  of  irrigation  techniques  and  the 
strict  establishment  of  a  settlement.  Then  there  was  perhaps  a  more  noticeable  paradigm  shift  with  the 
invention of the industry, when an earlier version of the society evolved into so-called Society 3.0 also known 
as the “industrial society”, which is characterized and known for inventing a steam locomotive and launching 
mass  production.  Similarity  and  association  with  “Industry  x”  is  not  an  accident,  since  the  Society  3.0  has 
launched an Industry concept and movement that has evolved rapidly from the Industry 1.0, described mainly 
by  mechanization  and  water  and  steam  energy,  to  Industry  2.0  associated  with  the  beginning  of  mass 
production,  assembly  line  and  electricity.  And  then,  with  the  invention  of  the  computer,  the  subsequent 
distribution of data and information, the era of Society 4.0, also known as “information society”, and Industry 
3.0 - computer and automation, have begun.  

And now, we are talking about the next and most advanced version of society - Society 5.0, also called the 
super smart society. It is a new societal phenomenon, characterized as a highly human-centered society and 
even  a  society  of  the  imagination.  This  form  of  society  is  characterized  by  the  transformation  of  data  and 
information into value by means of the imagination and creativity of different people or group of individuals, 
leading  to  human-centred  data-driven  solutions  and  value  creation,  usually  by  means  of  technological 
transformation  and  technological  advances  stemming  from  Industry  4.0  (Sołtysik-Piorunkiewicz,  2021; 
Federation,  2016).  In  other  words,  we  use  one  of  the  most  valuable  and  influential  forms  of  a  non-natural 
resource  brought  to  us  by  Society  4.0  -  the  data  and  information.  This  is  expected  to  remain  valid  in  the 
context of the new currently open and evolving paradigm of the Industry 5.0 posed by European Commission 
(2021)  as  the  industry,  which  should  facilitate  the  further  development  of  the  collaborative  and  co-creative 
vision, thereby complementing “the existing Industry 4.0 paradigm by highlighting research and innovation 
as drivers for a transition to a sustainable, human-centric and resilient .... It moves focus from shareholder to 
stakeholder  value,  with  benefits  for  all  concerned.  Industry  5.0  attempts  to  capture  the  value  of  new 
technologies,  providing  prosperity  beyond  jobs  and  growth,  while  respecting  planetary  boundaries,  and 
placing the wellbeing of the industry worker at the centre of the production process”. The question naturally 
stems from above - whether we are already part of this society or rather are on our way to Society 5.0? And 
in the latter case, how it differs from country to country and what are prerequisites for determining the level of 
compliance with Society 5.0. First, let us refer to the origin of the concept. 

Society 5.0 origins 

2.2.1 
The term Society 5.0 was approved by the Japanese Cabinet as a result of the 5th Science and Technology 
Basic  Plan  by  the  Council  for  Science,  Technology  and  Innovation  in  early  2016  (Sphinx  IT,  2019).  The 
reason Japan was a country that has introduced the concept of the Society 5.0, although it is still unknown to 
many  countries,  relies  on  its  highly  developed  economy,  facing  challenges  including  those,  which  are  not 
typical for most countries, including natural disasters and the increasingly ageing population. It made a call 
for Japan to take action, and it came up with an ambitious societal – digital transformation plan. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
They  emphasize  that  the  industry  in  its  current  stage  does  not  organically  transform  societies,  therefore 
there is a need for changes to be implemented in order to align the human with the industrial environment in 
an as natural way as possible. 

The  movement  inspired  other  countries,  their  societies  and  economies  and  was  the  subject  of  discussion 
during  the  2019  World  Economic  Forum.  Yet  despite  5  years  already  passed  from  the  invention  of  this 
concept, most countries still are not aware of it. Most of them, though not familiar with the concept and its 
specifics, make at least some Society 5.0 compliant actions and policies. In order to better understand this, i.e., 
what  these  actions  are,  behaviour,  policies,  let  us  refer  to  some  basics  underpinning  it.  As  the  Information 
Society  is  a  concept  to  which  we  are  very  familiar  with,  we  will  provide  a  comparison  of  these  basics  and 
emphasize the major changes. This should allow you to ask yourself if you live in Society 4.0 or rather Society 
5.0? 

2.2.2 

Society 5.0: main features 

In order to better understand the concept of Society 5.0 and what it refers to, let us turn to the above-
mentioned World Economic Forum 2019 and Keidanren (Japan Business Federation) first invented this 
concept (Nakanishi, 2019), (Keidanren, 2018)), which has introduced this concept and has provided us with 
the first set of features of Society 5.0, emphasizing the main differences with the previous form, i.e. Society 
4.0. 

Society 5.0 was presented as the “Imagination Society, where digital transformation combines with the 
creativity of diverse people to bring about "problem solving" and "value creation" that lead us to sustainable 
development”. This concept should contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) adopted by the United Nations, i.e., both sharing the same objectives. More precisely, it is 
characterized by 5 key areas: (1) problem solving and value creation, (2) diversity, (3) decentralization, (4) 
resilience, (5) sustainability and environmental harmony. All of them, being the core of Society 5.0, differ 
significantly from Society 4.0.  

Firstly, when it comes to problem solving and value creation, according to which the course to “a society, 
where value is created” should be taken, there is a liberation of the focus on efficiency (economies of scale) 
established under the paradigm of Society 4.0 often referred to as plan-do-check-act (PDCA or Deming 
cycle). Instead, an emphasis is expected to be put on satisfying individual needs, solving problems, and 
creating value, which does not require the mandatory following of a uniform set of guidelines or standardized 
process. 

Diversity refers to “a society, where anyone can exercise diverse abilities”, which is not a “uniformity” 
anymore, but a liberation from suppression of individuality, including discrimination and alienation by ways 
of thinking and sense of values. This intends to make businesses more unique and diverse, i.e., it is expected 
that diverse individuals or groups of individuals will exercise diverse abilities to pursue diverse values in 
society. This should allow them to identify diverse tasks, challenges and needs in society and turn them into 
real business.  

Decentralization by achieving “a society, where anyone can get opportunities anytime, anywhere” is an 
alternative to the previous concentration achieved by means of a liberation from disparity. This means that 
anyone will be able to get opportunities to participate at any time and any place. It must be pointed out here 
that, although a few years ago before pandemic, it would be difficult to imagine in on a global scale, where 
only a few players were ready for this, the pandemic and restriction that were assigned to us during the 
COVID-19 have shown that it can be done in at least a certain sense, i.e., by means of remote work. While 
many sectors have made clear that this model is appropriate and should be followed even after the pandemic, 
in some cases there is still strong resistance to this model. However, it is clear that the remote or a hybrid 
working mode serves only as one small example of this principle, as this principle applies to other forms such 
as participation in processes and data sharing with others, perhaps smaller companies, or educational and 
working opportunities provided to people born in poverty or remote areas.  

 
 
 
Resilience (especially against terrorism and disasters in physical spaces and attacks in cyberspace) and 
sustainable development standing for “a society, where people can live and pursue challenges in security” 
aimed at ensuring liberation from anxiety and vulnerability. This is intended to be achieved by means of a 
new, diversified, and decentralized social infrastructure.  

Sustainability and environmental harmony which refers to “a society, where humankind lives in harmony 

with nature”, which is understood as a liberation of resources and environmental constraints that we have 
experienced in recent decades due to the mass consumption of resources, with a major impact on the 
environment. 

Society 5.0 aims to address and resolve the critical social issues facing humankind today from poverty to 
clean energy that contributes significantly to the achievement of the SDGs. Thus, both the Society 5.0 and the 
United Nations SDGs are considered to be sharing common objectives and being interrelated (for a broader 
discussion on how the Society 5.0 expects to meet SDGs, see (Keidanren, 2018)). 

2.3 

Society 5.0: the role of open data 

Now,  let  us  emphasize  the  compliance  of  the  open  (government)  data  objectives  with  those  forming  the 
Society 5.0, thereby inviting to treat the open data as the source and even a tool for achieving and maintaining 
Society 5.0. Although this compliance and  overlapping of main principles of the concepts  mentioned above 
are  somewhat  obvious,  current  literature  presents  only  several  studies  acknowledging  this,  more  precisely 
(Sołtysik-Piorunkiewicz et al., 2020) and (Nikiforova, 2021).  

Sołtysik-Piorunkiewicz et al. (2020) were the first, who found that the concept of “open data” is closely 

linked with the Society 5.0 term. Their findings were based on the results of the bigram-centred analysis, 
where common concepts and techniques (including machine learning (ML), artificial intelligence (AI), 
predictive models, visualizations, interactive maps etc.) have been identified and mapped one onto another, 
identifying them as artifacts shared by both concepts. As regards types of data used, the authors identified that 
geodata/ geospatial data are the most popular type of data, followed by transportation-related and health-
related (open) data. This study, however, was inspired by Zuiderwijk et al. (2015), in which “open data 
performance expectancy” involved reflecting the benefits of using open data, which positively influences 
behavioural intention to adopt open data technologies. Sołtysik-Piorunkiewicz et al. (2020) found that the co-
creation of a value for the sustainable ecosystem is in creating a bridge between Industry 4.0 and Society 5.0, 
where open government data play a role being a resource and a tool at the same time.  

The authors found that the main course of presenting the benefits of open data services is to promote them 

as tools to provide real-time data and information on public issues in areas such as transport, health, 
economics and finance, education, culture, and sport. Based on their bigram’s analysis, “real-time” was found 
to be the most popular in the description of open data-based services, followed by bigrams related to specific 
business sectors dominated by transport, location, traffic, and parking, which could be associated with Internet 
of Things (IoT) and more specifically Internet of Transportation and Internet of Vehicles, smart 
transportation. Surprisingly, geospatial data, while found popular, was significantly less popular, as might be 
expected, the service description cites 13 times less than “real time”. However, analysis of the used data types 
revealed that geospatial data was one of the most popular types of data to be used in developing these 
services. Geodata/ geospatial data is thus the most popular type of data, followed by transport-related and 
health-related open data. As in (Nikiforova, 2021), we believe that today, in the light of COVID-19, health-
related data and pandemic-related OGD and their further reuse would be one of the most popular data 
domains. 

Taking a step back to the fact that only several studies have previously acknowledged the common 

objectives of both, this is something similar to what we have referred to before, i.e., although the concept of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Society 5.0 may be unknown for many societies and governments, the principles by which Society 5.0 is 
characterized are sometimes the focus for their agendas or even already in place. 
More precisely, they can be divided into those principles of Society 5.0, which can be mapped onto open data 
principles, and the aim / objective of the open (government) data. As regards the principles of open data, they 
are generally 8 (Sunlight Foundation, 2007), i.e., data may be considered as open data if they are: complete, 
primary,  timely,  accessible,  machine-readable  /  machine-processable,  non-discriminatory,  non-proprietary, 
licence-free. This means that the data should be as complete as possible, available to everyone without any 
restriction on gender/sex, race, religion, citizenship etc. without registration requirements and copyright, made 
available as soon as possible - as they are gathered and collected - in order to maintain their value, reflecting 
all those recorded about a particular subject, and in a format on which no entity has exclusive control.  

This  means  that  open  data  by  themselves,  i.e.,  by  definition,  fulfil  requirements  diversity  and 
decentralization. Problem solving and value creation, as well as resilience, sustainability, and environmental 
harmony,  however,  are  objectives to  be  met  by  the  reuse  of  open  data  -  their  transformation  into  the  value 
facilitating innovation and promoting societal progress.  

For  this  purpose,  an  extensive  research  is  made  over  the  decades  to  identify  key  factors  affecting  users’ 
willingness to use them and providing them with the opportunity of doing so by both technological advances 
by which the open data portals get supplied and social activities such as webinars, hackathons etc. aiming at 
raising awareness of data, how they can be reused and transformed into the value and determining the areas, in 
which  the  solution  are  actually  needed.  Here,  as  an  example,  hackathons  devoted  to  smart  city  or  crisis 
management (not only pandemic but also natural disasters) topics are becoming increasingly popular. They, 
however, in some cases, are then turned into start-ups, which might be also in line with the above-mentioned 
diversity  and  unique  approach to be followed  depending on the  task  solved  by  the individual  or  a  group of 
individuals. 

In  other  words,  open  data and  OGD  in particular, share the  same principles  as Society  5.0  with  some  of 
them lying in the definition and prerequisites to be fulfilled by data to be considered as open data, while others 
are the objectives of OGD availability.  

To prove the latter on more specific examples, we have to refer to real-life examples and examine whether 

and how they facilitate “sustainability and environmental harmony” and “resilience”. 

3. USE-CASES 

In this section we refer to the real-world use-cases, which were selected based on several factors forming an 
inclusion criterion. First, they should mandatory utilize open (government) data as either the main source of 
the data or as a secondary or auxiliary source of data. In addition, they may produce open data. Second, in 
order to make an intersection and close relationships between both concepts of the open data and Society 5.0 
more  visible,  we  seek  for  the  use-cases  that  represent  Society  5.0  focus  areas.  They  are  cities  and  regions, 
energy,  disaster  prevention,  healthcare,  agriculture  and  food,  logistics,  manufacturing  and  services,  finance, 
public  services  (Mavrodieva  et  al.,  2020).  Considering  the  definition  of  these  areas  and  the  nature  of  the 
concepts  we  refer  to,  we  do  not  treat  manufacturing  and  services  as  an  independent  category,  being 
overlapping  with  other  areas  that  will  be  demonstrated  in  the  following  subsections.  Thirdly,  which  partly 
overlaps with the previous one, considering the fact that the open data are often discussed in the context of the 
SDG  and  their  support,  we  were  seeking  for  the  examples/  showcases,  which  would  cover  different  SDGs, 
thereby extending the scope of the areas in which these showcases appear.  

First, we discuss the use-case selected. We cover use-cases, with which we are either familiar with, by 

being involved in their development and involvement or by being familiar with people who have been 
involved in it or have access to sufficient documentation of these showcases. In some cases, very prospective 
but less widely discussed use-cases have been selected to emphasize more promising examples or areas by 

 
 
 
moving towards Society 5.0 and Industry 5.0. Then, we map their characteristics on the main features of 
Society 5.0 we have discussed in the previous Chapter.  
Table  I  provides  a  summary  of  these use-cases  providing both  the focus  area,  country in  which  it  has  been 
developed, organization and project within which it has been developed and a brief description of the case. 

Table 3.1. Summary of use-cases by focus area 

Focus 
area 
Energy 

Disaster 
Prevention 

Healthcare 

Cities  and 
regions 

Agricultur
e and food 

Logistics 

Public 
services 

Policies (defined in 
(Mavrodieva et al., 2020)) 

“Development of affordable 
sustainable energy; 
development of micro-grid 
systems to respond to local 
conditions” 
“information sharing across 
organizations; utilization of 
digital technologies; 
continuation of medical 
services and aid in the event 
of disasters” 
“Focus on prevention and 
individualized healthcare 
services;access to 
personalized life-stage data, 
utilizing AI-based medical 
services, such as 
telemedicine” 
“Improved data sharing on 
energy, transportation, 
water, waste, human traffic, 
etc.; community 
decentralization in suburban 
and rural areas; respect for 
diversity” 

“Utilization of technology 
for crop growth and 
optimization of the food 
value chain; inclusion of 
various actors” 

“Utilization of technology 
for automation of logistics; 
data sharing across the 
whole supply chain; 
personalized products 
responding to specific 
customer needs” 
“Improved services by 
public administration based 

Country  Organization and Project 

Case 

Portugal 

Indonesia 

Energias de Portugal 
(EDP) and Opendatasoft, 
EDP’s Open Data Portal 
https://opendata.edp.com/p
ages/showcase 
Yayasan Peta Bencana 
https://info.petabencana.id/ 

Energias de Portugal Open Data Portal 
provides resources about the energy 
sector in Portugal for spurring 
community innovation and 
confronting energy industry challenges 
Real-time disaster information sharing 
system of digital technologies; 
continuation of medical services and 
aid in the event of disasters 

Uruguay 

DATA 
ATuServicio 
http://atuservicio.uy/ 

Access to personalized healthcare 
providers data utilizing an open-data-
based platform for comparison and 
evidence-based decision-making 

United 
Kingdom 

Transport for London 
(TfL) 
https://tfl.gov.uk/  

Canada 

Global Open Data for 
Agriculture and Nutrition 
(GODAN) 

Germany 
and Japan  

FIWARE Foundation 
Member TIS Inc. and the 
University of Aizu 
https://www.fiware.org  

All public TfL data (or 'open data') is 
freely released for their further re-use. 
Users and software developers in 
particular are encouraged to use these 
feeds to present customer travel 
information in innovative ways - 
providing they adhere to the transport 
data terms and conditions.  
By making open data on agriculture & 
nutrition available, accessible & 
usable for all, GODAN tackles 
extreme poverty, eradicates hunger, 
improves 
nutrition, and achieves food security. 
FIWARE-based automated logistics 
system using heterogeneous mobile 
robots enabling the management of 
real-time data from various robots, IoT 
sensors and open data to control and 
manage robots and their operations. 

Buenos 
Aires  

BA Obras, 
https://www.buenosaires.g

BA Obras, where the most up-to-date 
information on public works to be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on digitization and improved 
data sharing; establishing 
safety nets in response to 
safety issues” 

Spain 

Papelea 
https://www.papelea.com/  

ob.ar/baobras 

useful for citizens is provided.  

Papelea provides the support for 
citizens of Spain and Mexico and 
solves their questions of both legal and 
administrative nature by collecting 
public information from various 
websites of these countries and 
providing it in a summarized and 
structured manner. 
Informed consent-based open banking, 
enabling generation of new business 
models, creation of global and local 
alliances providing added value 
through APIs, offer improved service 
compliant with the users’ needs  

Finance 

Manufactu
ring 
and 
services 

“Diversification of financial 
services with the help of 
digital technologies; better 
distribution of funds across 
society; improved access to 
financial services, based on 
utilization of crypto-
currencies and token 
economies, such as 
blockchain” 
“Focus on services, not 
hardware; customers will be 
able to order items 
specifically designed for 
their needs; support for 
small businesses to produce 
high-quality goods” 

Spain 

BBVA API market in 

Spain 

https://www.bbvaapimarke

t.com/en/ 

other 

see other areas 

see other areas 

see 
areas 

Let  us  provide  a  brief  overview  of  these  use-cases,  by  covering  their  main  idea  and  objective,  area, 

challenge they aimed to combat and what role the open data play in them. 

3.1  Energy area 
Renewable  energy  is  one  of  the  most  ongoing  topics  today  being  of  interest  for  both  private  and  public 
authorities  and  the  society  as  a  whole,  as  well  as  representing  the  7th  Sustainable  Development  Goal  of 
Affordable and Clean Energy. Therefore, the first use-case we refer to is the Energias de Portugal (EDP) - one 
of  the  main  producers  of wind  energy in  the  world (European  Commission,  2021),  and  the  respective  EDP 
Open  Data  Portal,  which  was  launched  to  provide  resources  related  to  the  energy  sector  (in  Portugal)  for 
spurring  community  innovation  and  confronting  energy  industry  challenges.  According  to  (OpenDataSoft, 
2018), in a number of cases, they were able to meet 100% of Portugal’s electricity demand from renewable 
energy  sources  alone  that  is  usually  claimed  to  be  unattainable,  thereby  providing  a  counterexample.  As  a 
result,  being  considered  as  a  marvel  in  this  area,  they  have  made  a  commitment  to  energy  innovation  and 
sustainability through collaboration and information sharing by means of open data. 

Challenge and Value 
Energias de Portugal deals with the new challenge of the high penetration of renewable energy - intermittency. 
The  production  of  these  energy  is  based  on  renewable  energy  sources,  which  are  not  mobile,  i.e.,  non-
dispatchable, where energy / power managers are unable to control the wind or the sun as the source of these 
energy, making them less manageable compared to the conventional and polluting fuels. Today’s electricity / 
power grid, as explained by Robert Fares (2015), was “conceived around the ability to control the generation 
of  power  to  produce  the  right  amount  of  electricity  at  the  right  time  to  meet  demand,  with  limited  storage 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capacity”.  As  a  result,  energy  system  operators  are  looking  for  leading  technologies  to  promote  and  even 
facilitate  the  global  distribution  of  renewable  energy  and  to  improve  the  operation,  management,  and 
reliability of respective assets. 
Open data are considered to be able to play an important and even decisive role here as is considered not only 
by us, but also by EDP. Therefore, EDP has transformed this task and even challenge into an opportunity to 
establish a community to create new services in a collaborative manner. Their open data initiative is aimed at 
providing  resources  for  communities  of  academics,  researchers,  and  other  stakeholders,  facilitating  co-
creation.  In  addition  to  the  opportunity  of  contributing  to community innovation  in order to address  energy 
related challenges, which EDP calls “challenges of tomorrow”, they believe that sharing the data will benefit 
the society as a whole by informing them, i.e., creating the knowledge of the energy sector, current state, room 
for improvements and challenges to overcome. 
To this end, EDP has turned to an open innovation approach, establishing closer relations with customers and 
partners  launching  a  respective  data  portal,  where  the  first  input  came  from  the  Hack  the  Wind  hackathon, 
seeking  for  new  solutions  to  the  operational  challenges  affecting  wind  turbines,  held  as  part  of  the  Wind 
Europe event  - the wind energy sector’s largest conference. EDP believes that by providing access to these 
data,  users  are  given  the  opportunity  to  freely  define  their  showcases  /  use-cases  /  re-uses  and  share  these 
solutions  to  the  key  problems  facing  the  energy  sector  (according  to  their  view),  thereby  exploiting  the 
collective intelligence of their communities. In this way EDP aimed to respond to the demand of data from the 
technology  community,  provide  data  for  start-up  projects,  academic  and  scientific  purposes  (since  open 
innovation approaches lead to new approaches to industrial challenges), thereby facilitating and encouraging 
the  extraction  of  the  value  from  these  data  and  development  of  new  services  and  be  part  of  the  ongoing 
transformation of the energy sector.  
However, although the general idea seems to be very promising and in line with the current trends, it should 
be  admitted  that  the  respective  portal  has  only  13  datasets,  where  the  most  recent  datasets  are  modified  in 
2019, while the data that could be potentially used answering the current challenges are on 2017, i.e. Sunlab 
Faro weather station data and Production data and Temperature of the photovoltaic modules, which reduces 
the value of these data significantly, especially given that these data cover only one region - Faro. This is also 
something similar to reuses available, where the latest reuse is of 2018.  
Although it might be stated that this data portal is not very active anymore and there is no evidence that the 
data published was actually reused by the communities and the value has been derived by transforming the 
data  in  solutions,  there  is  a  thread  of  informative  materials,  which  provide  a  sufficient  background  on  the 
current state of the art and challenges to be overcome in this sector. In other words, although the original aim 
of  the  portal  since  that  has  not  been  successful,  i.e.,  users  are  not  sharing  their  reuses,  the  data  are  not 
constantly opened and maintained, it partly meets their expectations and provides the visitors with the insights 
on the subject. 

3.2  Disaster Prevention area 
The  topic  of  disaster  prevention,  where  disasters  can  be  both  human-made  and  natural  (droughts,  floods, 
landslides,  volcanic  eruptions,  and  earthquakes)  affecting  people  wellbeing  and  even  lives  as  well  as  the 
economics,  is  another  area  where  the  value  of  open  data  is  considered  very  high  and  have  already  proved 
themself to be as such. It is clear that the open data is not the only source that is important in this respect, 
where social media has previously been assessed as a valuable resource for extracting, collecting and tracking 
data on the ongoing emergency or the first signs of it. However, the value of open data is in the possibility of 
using it as a source for different types of models and forecasts and determining potential disasters before they 
occur and preparing or even preventing them.  
This is all the more so for Japan, a country where the beginning of the open data movement can be found after 
one  of  such  disasters,  i.e.,  the  East  Japan  Earthquake  and  Tsunami  in  2011,  after  which  data  that  may  be 

 
 
 
 
 
potentially related to disaster prevention were recognised as the most valuable data for disclosure (Kanbara et 
al., 2022). Later in 2015, a Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Management has been defined, according to 
which  disaster risk  management  policies  and  practices  should promote  real-time  access to reliable data, the 
use  of  space-  and  ground-  based  data,  including  geographic  information  systems  (GIS),  and  the  use  of 
innovative  technologies,  including  but  not  limited  to  AI  and  ML,  improving  not  only  data  collection  and 
supply, but also their processing, analysis and derivation of the value from them. A similar conclusion was 
made as a result of the event organized by the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa “The Use of 
ICT  for  Disaster  Risk  Management  and  Climate  Change  Mitigation”  in  2013,  pointing  to  the  need  for 
governments to raise awareness on disaster risk management and climate change mitigation and to encourage 
countries  to  include  disaster  risk  reduction  in  national  policies  by  introducing  policies  on  open  data  on 
accessibility and usability of disaster information (UNECA, 2013). 
The study conducted by Kanbara et al. (2022) have stressed that, even if financial resources are limited or not 
available at all, the publishing of data consistent with the open data principles on such daily aspects as traffic, 
public  works  and  public  health  and  geospatial  data  and  information,  in  particular,  can  save  lives  in  crisis 
situation and can be used as an effective tool of information communication and rapid response by means of a 
coordinated  approach,  i.e.  “co-delivering”  risk  communication,  coordination,  strategy  setting  and  decision-
making before, during and after a disaster. 
Another  example  is  an  Indonesian  Petabencana.id  CogniCity  Open-Source  Software-based  platform  for 
emergency response and disaster management in megacities in South and Southeast Asia (Widyanarko, 2018). 

Challenge and Value 
Petabencana.id  is  a  digital  information-sharing  ecosystem  or  disaster  management  service,  which  produces 
real-time  disaster  maps  by  using  the  data  gathered/  crowdsourced  from  social  media  and  open  data 
repositories (the developer refers to them as government agency validations) of Jakarta. The data used by it is 
the data, by which citizens describe the current situations in the social media, including selfies, and since (if) 
these  posts  and  tweets  in  particular,  are  geo-referenced,  open-source  software  CogniCity  OSS  used  by  this 
service map the tweets and share them through a publicly available map. These data are then sorted, analysed 
and  displayed  if  the  risk  has  been  determined  and  confirmed  in  real-time,  thereby  providing  citizens, 
communities, and government agencies with the critical information (Widyanarko, 2018). In this way the map 
operates  as  decision-making  support  for  citizens  to  evacuate  and  navigate  the  city  during  floods  and  for 
government agencies to act in response to life-threatening situations. 
The  developers  of  this  service  describe  the  paradigm  they  are  using  as  “people  are  the  best  sensors”,  by 
collecting  the  data  directly  from  the  users  “at  street  level”,  which  allows  to  remove  expensive  and  time-
consuming  data  collection and  processing  activities  (although  not  all  of them  since  these  data  also suppose 
processing  and  sorting,  as  well  as  extracting  relevant  data).  Another  prerequisite  for  the  success  is 
understanding and satisfaction of both prerequisites of transparency and collaboration, which are considered 
to be a key for success and accurate and timely determination and response to the risks. This showcase has 
also led the developers to the conclusion that the combination of open-source software and open data support 
collaborative efforts for adapting to climate change, thereby allowing stakeholders to review and inspect both 
the  service  and  the  current  situation  and  then  develop  complementary  tools  that  could  further  enhance 
resilience.  
The  method  used,  i.e.,  crowdsourcing,  provides  a  competitive  response  to  the  limitation  of  data  collection 
during a disaster situation, when conventional data collection and management of sensor-produced data limit 
the  collection  of  real-time  and  street-level  data,  which  is  crucial  for  emergency  response.  Conventional 
sensors  must  be  located  in  static  places  and  require  regular  maintenance  to  enable  real-time  data  to  be 
provided, which should be also sufficiently accurate, while sensor data are sometimes described as noisy, and 
data  collection  is  limited  to  the  number  of  sensors  available  in  the  city,  while  stakeholders  need  to  get  an 
comprehensive overview of the emergency in the short time. 
According  to  the  PetaBencana.id,  this  platform  has  been  used  by  millions  of  resident  users  since  its 
announcement  in  2013,  being  thereby  able  to  take  time-critical  safety  and  navigation  decisions  in  case  of 

 
 
emergency disasters. What is more, it was adopted by the National Emergency Management Agency (BNPB) 
to monitor floods, improve response  times, and exchange critical information on emergencies with citizens, 
allowing  better  information  exchange  and  data  coordination  between  citizens  and  government  agencies, 
promoting fair and collaborative resilience to climate change. The developers believe that community-driven 
data  collection,  sharing  and  visualization  reduces  flood  risk  and  helps  in  rescue  efforts.  As  a  result  of  this 
project, it was recommended as a model for community involvement in disaster response and best practice for 
disaster information collective resources by the International Federation of the Red Cross in the 2015 World 
Disaster Report, and the United States Federal Communications Commission in 2016. Unfortunately, although 
the use of open data is announced and promoted, there is a limited insight on whether the data collected can be 
freely re-used by third parties. 
This example, however, is not the only one, since open data became widely used in this category and Haiti 
and  Philippines  are  two  more  examples,  which  used  open  data  along  with  the  aid  statistics  to  provide  a 
response to disasters in a similar manner. 

3.3  Healthcare area 
The Healthcare sector is one of the most important sectors, which became even more important in the light of 
the  COVID-19  pandemics.  However,  while  the  role  of  open  (government)  data  during  the  COVID-19 
pandemic was widely discussed and the open data enabled countries to track the current state of the art and 
spread of the disease, as well as analyse the trends of its spread etc., and triggered the development of various 
related services such as dynamic visualizations, contact tracking apps, mobility-related apps and modelling the 
spread of the disease for better informed decision making on the restrictions to be made (López et al., 2021) 
etc., the popularity and the importance of more traditional healthcare-related open data remain the same. Here, 
the access to personalized healthcare providers data utilizing an open-data-based platform for comparison and 
evidence-based  decision-making  come,  where  DATA  ATuServicio  in  Uruguay,  with  which  we  are  familiar 
with, is an example we would like to refer to. 

Challenge and Value 
The web-based Atuservicio.uy application was developed by DATA - Open Data, Transparency and Access to 
Information (DATA is the Spanish abbreviation), a civic  technology, non-government organization, and the 
Ministry of Health, supported by ILDA as part of its strategic initiatives programme. It relies on the principles 
of open government, open data, transparency, freedom of information (FOI) and participation through the use 
of  civic  technology  (Scrollini,  2017).  This  application  provides  citizens  with  an  opportunity  to  access 
personalized  healthcare  providers  data  utilizing  an  open-data-based  platform  for  comparison  and  evidence-
based decision-making on which health service provider should be given a preference at a critical time,  i.e., 
when  the  choice  on  a  health  service  provider  should  be  made  -  this  choice  should  be  done  by  Uruguayans 
every  February  (Scrollini,  2016).  It  is  considered  that  this  application  works  on  creating  social  tools  to 
promote participation and public debate through transparency, open data, and access to information.  
According to the previous study of one of us (see (Flores, 2020)), it focuses on open government principles 
through the use of civic technology, which can be described by three aspects: (1) the creation of social tools 
for participation and the reuse of open data, in collaboration with their partners and the community; (2) the 
strengthening of a local and regional civic tech community, organizing networks and events in Uruguay and 
abroad;  and  (3)  social  activism,  working  as  part  of  a  network  promoting  open  government,  open  data, 
transparency, freedom of information and participation. 
On  their  website  they  claim  that  they  are  a  horizontally  managed  and  consensus-based  organization, 
emphasizing that most of their projects have been co-created either with experts on this subject (Government, 
Academia,  Media,  other  CSOs)  or  with the community.  DATA  played  a significant  role in advancing  open 
data-related initiatives in Montevideo, and the city has benefited from its presence (Bonina and Eaton, 2020). 
Furthermore,  the  Latin  American  Open  Data  Initiative  (ILDA)  stated  that  the  tools  developed  by  the 

 
 
 
 
organization  also  generate  essential  contributions  to  the  open  data  use  and  open  ecosystem  in  two  ways 
(ILDA,  n.d.):  (1)  in  the  reusing  and  publishing  of  open  datasets  from  each  of  their  projects;  and  (2)  in  the 
highlighting of the need for improving data quality and availability. 
According to (Scrollini, 2016), more than 35 000 Uruguayans accessed this service once it has been launched 
and find it valuable, while in the second year, its audience increased to 60 000 users. Sangokoya et al (2015), 
however, have managed to determine the impact of the Atuservicio.uy on its intended beneficiaries, where in 
addition to the “average citizens”, several more beneficiaries were identified  - health providers, government 
agencies, the media and civil society and unions and a synthesis of this impact was provided. They found that 
this  service  enables  “average  citizens”  to  make  better  informed  health  decisions,  provide  them  with  data-
driven  evidence  and  tools  to  make  better  decisions  on  the  healthcare  choice,  as  well  as  promoting  their 
activities  as  a  facilitator  of  monitoring  and  continuously  assessing  the  health  service  they  received.  Health 
providers,  however,  can  make  it  clear  to  citizens  which  health  options  are  most  suited  to  their  needs  and 
improve  the  quality  of  responsiveness  of  services  based  on  data-driven  demand  from  citizens,  while 
government  agencies  can  improve  the  public  health  system  with  greater  transparency,  efficiency,  and 
accountability.  The  media  is  able  to  promote  better  data  journalism  efforts  and  data-based  arguments  for 
public  debate  on  healthcare,  while  civil  society  and  unions  are  able  to  better  inform  argumentation  and 
advocacy of the healthcare system. 

3.4  Cities and Regions area 

According  to  the  classification  we  utilize,  this  category  refers  to  the  services,  which  aim  at  improved  data 
sharing on energy, transportation, water, waste, human traffic, etc., community decentralization in suburban 
and rural areas, thereby respecting the diversity. This means that actually this category overlaps some other 
categories, such as the energy-related one. Therefore, we will not refer to the above discussed examples and, 
instead, will cover other showcases representing one of the most discussed in the literature  - transportation-
related  showcases  of  Finnish  Transport  and  Transport  for  London.  We  will  conclude  with  a  less  mature 
example fitting this category emphasizing that even very limited resources may launch great SDG-compliant 
initiatives. 

Challenge and Value 
First, let us refer to the case of Finnish Transport (Leviäkangas and Molarius, 2020), which estimated annual 
increased marginal turnover enabled by the open government data (OGD) of the private companies yielded to 
a minimum of 102 million EUR, while the estimated annual gross value added to the economy based on the 
use of OGD was 41 million EUR. They refer to the case of Finnish Transport Safety Agency’s (Trafi) data, 
which  allows  them  to  demonstrate  how  OGD  are  utilized  by  business  actors  and  how  they  are  capable  of 
being translated into economic gross value added. They found that the largest group of benefitting companies 
was the insurance and financial services, which stated that open data from Trafi generated ‘tens of millions of 
indirect business benefits. They were followed by marketing and publishing. In addition, the open data was 
seen  as  an  essential  business  asset by  companies  which  developed  their  business  and  services  based  on the 
data and thus, created jobs and economic well-being for the society. 
Probably  the most  well-known  example  with impressive  quantitative assessment  is the  British  national  use-
case of one of the world’s largest public transport operations, Transport for London (TfL). TfL have managed 
to  transform  the  availability  of  real-time  data  of  both  live  arrivals,  timetables,  air  quality,  network 
performance  and  accessibility,  for  its  customers  and personnel,  using  the  open data  approach,  and  what  the 
results of this transformation were thereby estimating the benefits that public transport authorities could gain 
from the publishing of data as open data (Stone and Aravopoulou, 2018)). The provided example of the data 
on the use of transport for London allowed them to prove both qualitatively and quantitatively that the benefits 
of data opening can be as high as those of major transport infrastructure development projects. The savings to 

 
 
 
 
individual  passengers  and  businesses  from  opening  TfL’s  data  were  quantified  in  £130m  per  year.  They 
emphasized an importance of defining and implementing an open data approach, stressing an importance of a 
clear  commitment  that  data  belong  to  the  public  and  that  third  parties  should  be  allowed  to  use  and  re-use 
data,  by  having  a  strong  digital  strategy,  and  through  creating  a  strong  partnership  with  data  management 
organizations that can support the provision of large amounts of data.  
Data opening allowed passengers and other road users to gain a better travel experience. This led them to the 
preposition that open data approach can be assessed as a financial/ economic contribution to customers and 
organizations,  thereby  contributing  significantly  to  the  society  and  improving  their  daily  activities. 
Considering the specificity of the open data and their availability for both commercial and non-commercial 
purposes, the data are also used by external companies, which in this case were Waze, Twitter, Google, Apple, 
Citymapper, Bus Checker, Bus Times and Mapway, as well as academics and professional developers. They 
found that such a wide availability and accessibility of data can lead to creation of more than 600 customer-
related products and services and more than 12 000 registered developers, whose number increased more than 
10 times in the last 7 years, reaching millions of active users, enabling passengers and other road users to gain 
a  better  travel  experience.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  although  more  than  600  services  have  been 
developed, same as with open data, not all of them are used and only 40 of those services were recognized as 
popular and used. Most of them are travel apps, which is not a surprise. But what is interesting, is savings, i.e., 
the authors found that live bus travel data accessed via these apps saves £58m a year, helping Londoners plan 
better routes and avoid long waits at bus stops. The authors highlight that interest in real-time open data has 
produced a feedback loop that has encouraged all data contributors within Transport for London to improve 
their  data  in  terms  of  both  granularity  and  quality,  which  should  be  considered  crucial  for  data  re-use  and 
success of a third-party app ecosystem. Similarly, this movement has led to the improvements for the portal 
since  in  July  2010  due  to  a  popularity  of  the  data  feed,  which  caused  a  temporary  halt  to  be  called  on  the 
newly introduced API feed because of huge demand by apps that use the service. 
This portal provides a wide variety of open data, including less transportation-oriented data, such as the open 
data  on  the  air  and  its  quality  provided  by  the  Kings  College  London  in  the  form  of  London  Air  API.  It 
provides users with the up-to-date data on air quality in London. This, however, points to another very popular 
movement of open-air data. This example is even more interesting in the light of some cases, where although 
the  gathering,  collection  and  supply  of  these  data  to  the  public  may  not  be  financially  supported  at  a 
governmental level, being of high interest and value for citizens, they tend to be collected and provided in a 
the  case  for  Latvia  and  PilsētaCIlvēkiem  (City  for  People, 
more  collaborative  nature.  This  is 
https://gaiss.pilsetacilvekiem.lv/) project standing for “open data air quality monitoring network”, where the 
organizers of the project encourage citizens to join this movement and built their own sensor (according to the 
provided  instruction  or  by  ordering  already  ready  sensor)  for  the  collection  of  the  respective  data  and 
distributing them as open data. At the moment this resulted in the establishing of 34 sensors in the capital of 
Latvia, while the intended number is of 100 sensors. Although this portal does not follow the best practices 
facilitating collaboration and cooperation by involving multiple stakeholders, this still became popular among 
citizens.  
At the same time, there are significantly more successful examples such as the Netherlands and Amsterdam, 
the USA and Chicago, Germany and Darmstadt, and Taiwan and Taipei. The last example (Chen et l., 2017), 
however  is  known  for  introducing  an  open  participatory  urban  sensing  framework  for  PM2.5  particle 
monitoring,  which  then,  in  collaboration  with  maker  communities,  industry  partners,  and  the  Taipei  City 
Government, has managed to develop various types of devices for different communities, which by May 2017 
were deployed not only in Taiwan, but also in 29 other countries. The data collected from these devices are 
then  deployed  in  the  form  of  the  real-time  open  data,  which  allowed  them  to  become  one  of  the  largest 
deployment projects for PM2.5 monitoring in the world, making them available to all stakeholders, including 
academic organizations and research groups, thereby allowing them to conduct research on air pollution along 
with any associated respiratory diseases, i.e. PM2.5 is directly related to many serious health problems, such 
as lung cancer, premature death, asthma, and cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. To sum up, this project 

 
 
 
 
contributes  to  the  development  of new  services  using  data  made  open, thereby  creating  a chain  of  valuable 
open data-based solutions and services. 

3.5  Finance area 
Another sector to be discussed is finances, where the philosophy of the Society 5.0 expects the diversification 
of financial services with the help of digital technologies, which should lead to the improved distribution of 
funds across  society and improved access to financial services based on utilization of crypto-currencies and 
token economies. 
Although the very direct connection between the financial or banking sector and the open data could be not 
very obvious, rather than speculating on the positive consequences and effect of opening and reusing the open 
data,  there  are  known  real  examples,  where  these  concepts  are  very  interconnected.  More  precisely,  the 
concept of open data triggered the development of a completely new and probably even revolutionary step in 
this area called “open banking”, considered to be a powerful tool for the FinTech industry. While this concept 
is  relatively  new  for  many  countries,  some  leaders  in  areas  of  digital  literacy  and  open  data,  have  already 
implemented  this  initiative  and  actively  work  on  the  increase  of  its  popularity,  although  there  are  known 
positive examples in less developed countries as well. 

Challenge and Value 
According  to  (Open  Banking,  2021),  Open  Banking  “uses  secure  application  programming  interface  (API) 
integration with banking systems to let consumers share their banking data with third-party fintech providers 
for new and innovative financial products and services”, where Nigeria took the leadership for this movement 
in Africa. This should allow equality in rules and principles, data sharing and access to them by actors of the 
banking  ecosystem,  by  means  of  its  standardization  and  opening  of  the  banking  ecosystem  to  external 
developers, thereby eliminating the gap between companies of different sizes or maturity levels and allowing 
better  personalized  services,  i.e.,  fitting  better  their  needs.  Another  closely  linked  concept  is  open  finance 
(sometimes used as synonyms), where any type of financial data may be shared on the informed consent basis 
from any type of business. This particular sector requires cooperation and collaboration of many stakeholders 
as well, since the success of the open baking initiative depends on the stakeholders.   
However, probably the best known and mature example in this area is the BBVA API market in Spain. It is 
expected that the paradigm of openness and open banking, in particular, will enable generation of new models 
based on a richer set of data to be used for this and respective changes in the whole banking ecosystem. At the 
same  time,  this  should  encourage  creation  of  new  alliances  and  scenarios  of  partnership  at  both  local  and 
global scales, which should be also more efficient since they will work on the basis of the APIs intended to be 
used despite the industry and business, consequently providing better service, which should better meet users’ 
needs  and  expectations.  The  creation  of  both  individual  models  and  the  whole  ecosystem  is  intended  to  be 
shared thereby eliminating inequality between different countries or enterprises. 
There are two notes to be added to this. Firstly, although the role of openness as a philosophy is at the core of 
this showcase, the open data used and produced by these services do not comply with the concept of the open 
data in a full manner as can be understood from the above. Second, although we do not intend to discuss this 
in very detail, it should be emphasized that this particular area requires extensive research on the legal, trust, 
privacy  etc.  issues,  which  is  also  something  to  be  described  as  a  new  opportunity  brought  by  this 
transformation but also a potential barrier and determinant of the resistance to this invention.  

3.6  Agriculture and Food area 

Another sector that is now popular in terms of both the SDGs and open (government) data (with the particular 
popularity in Mediterranean countries), is agriculture and food, including, but not limited to the use of crop 

 
 
 
 
growth technology, food safety (see also the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA)) and the optimization of 
the food value chain. 
It  indisputably  requires  an  inclusion  of  various  actors  as  a  prerequisite  for  the  success.  Here  examples 
deserving  the  attention  are  Global  Open  Data  for  Agriculture  and  Nutrition  and  global  food  security 
programme Plantwise. 

Challenge and Value 
The  idea  of  the  Global  Open  Data  for  Agriculture  and  Nutrition  (GODAN,  https://www.godan.info/)  is  to 
make  open  data  on  agriculture  and  nutrition  available,  accessible,  unrestricted  and  usable,  i.e.  open  data 
principles-compliant,  for  stakeholders  that  should  make  it  possible  to  tackle  extreme  poverty,  eradicate 
hunger, improve nutrition, and achieves food security. GODAN together with their partners aim to build high 
level  policy  and  private  sector  support  for  open  data,  thereby  enriching  both  the  current  set  of  data  they 
provide and the variety of further re-uses of these data. 
In  the  light  of  the  required  inclusion  of  different  actors,  GODAN  network  supports  and  encourages 
collaboration and cooperation across existing agriculture, nutrition and open data activities and stakeholders to 
identify and then resolve long-standing global topic-related challenges.  
As  one  of  examples,  they  mention  the  challenge  related  to  the  need  to  support  agricultural  innovations  in 
developing  countries  such  as  West  African  countries,  where  the  cocoa  plantations  are  not  as  productive  as 
expected,  leading  to  low  income  for  farmers,  and  given  other  important  factors  affecting  the  progress, 
including  but  not  limited  to  individual  rights  and  the  effects  of  climate  change,  poor  soil  fertility,  the 
knowledge gap on good crop nutrition and proper management of cocoa trees etc. The solution provided to 
respond to this challenge is called CocoaSoils (https://cocoasoils.org/) - project, which establishes long-term 
trials  on  cocoa,  fertilization,  and  production.  and  deploys  an  Integrated  Soil  Fertility  Management  (ISFM) 
approach  embracing  an  integrated  system’s  approach  to  cocoa  intensification  while  combining  improved 
planting materials, canopy cover management and pest/disease control with targeted fertilizer application to 
enhance sustainability and avoid deforestation. This is complemented by (re)-use of locally available (organic) 
nutrient sources and appropriate intercropping. It works across the globe, with trials in six countries working 
with over 90,000 farmers while also considering aspects of deforestation, child labour and ecosystem services. 
The  partnership  is  led  by  the  International  Institute  of  Tropical  Agriculture  (IITA),  WUR  and  IDH,  and 
involves a range of companies: Mondelez, Nestle, Barry Callebaut, Mars, Yara, ICL, and research institutes: 
CIAT, UN WCMC, and institutes for cocoa in Ghana and Cote d'Ivoire. As a result, the GODAN advocacy 
for open data, the partnership leadership has committed to publish all data as fully open (CC-BY) upon their 
availability. While the data of the current project is the first step, it is envisioned that other data sources on 
cocoa can also be captured as part of the project. They emphasize that benefits from open data can be gained 
by  both  commercial  organizations,  governments,  farmers,  traders  and  value-added  resellers,  science 
community,  consumers,  stressing  that  the  open  data  integration  with  methods  and  practices  with  advocacy, 
technical support and senior policy guidance, are capable to improve not only the food security and nutrition 
but  also  to  help  ensuring  zero  hunger  and  empowering  the  lives  and  livelihoods  of  people  and  farming 
communities across the globe (Worldbank, 2022). 
This  opinion 
is  also  shared  by  another  example  -  Plantwise  Global  food  security  programme 
(https://www.plantwise.org/impact/plantwise/)  led  by  CABI,  which  intends  to  increase  food  security  and 
improve rural livelihoods by reducing crop losses. Weak knowledge on the food security and complexity of 
making  decisions  on  the  diagnoses  and  recommendations  regarding  food  safety,  related  or  implying 
challenges,  lead  the  developers  to  the  idea  of  creating  a  global  knowledge  resource  for  plant  health 
information  called  the  PlantwiseKnowledge  Bank,  which  combines  global  and  local  open  data,  providing 
sufficient  information  for  the  experts  to  turn  questions  into  answers.  This  provides  doctors  with  the  right 
diagnoses and recommendations. This, however, allowed the establishment of sustainable networks of more 
than 5000 plant clinics (compared to 1800 in 2016), run by trained 13200 plant doctors (compared to 5000 in 
2016),  where  more  than  54  000  000  farmers  (compared  to  4500000  in  2016)  receive  practical  plant  health 

 
 
 
 
advice. Working in close partnership with over 170 in-country partners, Plantwise strengthened national plant 
health systems from within, enabling countries to provide farmers with the knowledge they need to lose less 
of what they grow. 
They  also  support  and  encourage  cooperation  and  collaboration  of  multiple  stakeholders,  in  terms  of  both 
different countries and respective government (at least some of them are - Australian Centre for International 
Agricultural  Research,  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Rural  Affairs  (MARA,  People’s  Republic  of  China), 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, Swiss Agency for  Development and Cooperation SDC, UK 
aid  from  British  people  and  European  Commission),  as  well  as  individual  participants  such  as  researchers, 
thereby building more comprehensive base of knowledge and digital skills to strengthen plant health systems, 
increase the supply of higher quality and safer food, improve availability of safer plant protection products, 
strengthen detection and response to pest outbreaks. 

3.7  Public service area 

Another sector representing public services is seeking for improved services  by public administration based 
on digitalization and improved data sharing that should result in establishing safety nets in response to safety 
issues. This is something overlapping with showcases we have elaborated on above in the context of disaster 
prevention and healthcare, although there can be provided other examples as well. 

Challenge and Value 
The example connecting not only citizens of two countries but rather countries of two continents is Papelea, 
which  provides  the  support  for  citizens  of  Spain  and  Mexico  and  solves  their  questions  of  both  legal  and 
administrative nature by collecting public information from various websites of these countries and providing 
it in a summarized and structured manner. In addition, it connects users with professionals in each field, so 
that they can answer their questions and offer them their services. It uses open data rather than the secondary 
data  source,  although  other  materials  used  are  freely  and  publicly  available  information,  which  should  not 
necessarily fulfil the open data principle but be compliant with basic principles of openness. 
Similar approach is seen in the  web portal of Buenos Aires titled BA Obras (BA Public Works), where the 
most  up-to-date  information  on  public  works,  including  but  not  limited  to  works’  budget,  start  and  finish 
dates, contractor and bidding documents, and preview progress with videos and photos, and other information, 
which can be useful for citizens is provided mainly by means of visualization, thereby reducing the level of 
complexity  of  provision  of  this  information  (Straface  et  al.,  2019).  The  platform  utilizes  the  user-centred 
design to allow the increasing use by residents, NGOs and journalists. This makes it a tool to engage locals in 
participatory processes such as town hall meetings, or co-creation urban design processes. 
Another  interesting  and  impressive  platform  is  Codeando  Mexico  (http://codeandomexico.org/)  with  a  very 
strong encouragement of collaboration and community engagement for improving the city and its citizens by 
providing both the support and knowledge and skills (if needed) and opportunity to change the city by either 
reporting  on  the  ongoing  issue  or  challenge  to  be  addressed  or  getting  involved  in  the  resolving  already 
identified being in line with the Smart City and Smart Society paradigms and facilitating their citizen-centred 
continuous improvement. 

3.8  Logistics area 

Another sector expects the combination of the concepts we consider, which in combination with technology 
would facilitate automation of logistics by means of data sharing across the whole supply chain.  

 
 
 
 
Challenge and Value 
The example we would like to draw the attention here is compliant with the topics covered and the concept of 
Industry  4.0  with  the  step  towards  Industry  5.0  and  technologies  expected  to  be  used  by  the  Society  5.0  - 
FIWARE-based  automated  logistics  system  developed  by  the  University  and  the  RoboticBase.  It  uses 
heterogeneous mobile robots that enable the management of real-time data from various robots, IoT sensors 
and open data (by means of Open Data Management Systems (ODMS) web application called Idra) to control 
and  manage  robots  and  their  operations.  It  is  expected  to  be  widely  used  and  be  value-adding  in  multiple 
“smart areas” such as smart city, smart water, smart industry and smart agri-food, which makes this ongoing 
project a perfect example of combination of these concepts.  
The  general  idea  of  the  whole  project  is  also  compliant  with the open  science principles  and  openness  as  a 
philosophy, including a strong support of community engagement. 
And  the  last  area  defined  is  related  to  manufacturing  and  services  where  the  focus  is  switched  from  the 
hardware  to  services,  with  the  prerequisite  of  providing  the  customers  with  an  opportunity  to  get  items 
specifically designed for their needs, as well as providing a support for small business. Respective examples 
have been already discussed above and demonstrated the role and result of the use of open data clearly (e.g., 
financial  sector  and  “open  financing”  and  “open  banking”  cases  discussed  above),  therefore  we  will  not 
discuss this area separately. However, the point we would like to emphasize is that in addition to open data, 
the paradigm of openness is the key to success in this case.    

3.9 

Summary 

Now,  let  us  discuss  whether  there  exists  a  relationship  between  the  open  data  and  features  of  Society  5.0. 
Table II provides a matrix of focus areas, which use-cases have been discussed above, and Society 5.0 main 
features. This very simple matrix makes it obvious that the concepts of the Society 5.0 and open data-driven 
services  are  interrelated  and  share  similar  objectives,  although  in  some  cases  these  links  are  stronger 
compared to others.  
As an example, services using the open data as a primary data, i.e., open data-driven services, and those using 
open data as a supplementary data or producing the open data as a result of their operation, are focused on 
problem solving and value creation, with prevailing number of those intended for “a society, where value is 
created”, where cooperation, collaboration, other parties and community engagement become crucial. In some 
areas covered,  i.e., disaster prevention, public services and healthcare, this form of the “society” becomes a 
key for success. PDCA cycle and strict set of guidelines to be followed is not mandatory  anymore and more 
freedom is given, including but not limited to the increasing popularity of the co-creation. However, it should 
be acknowledged that some showcases, opposite to the abovementioned, seeks for standardized approaches as 
was  the  case  for  Finance  sector  showcases  and  is  sometimes  the  case  for  Agriculture  and  Food,  since  the 
complete avoidance of the unification and standardization of processes in many areas will lead to fail instead 
of  the  promised  success  as  it  could  be  expected  from  this  Society  5.0  principle,  if  treated  in  a  too 
straightforward manner and extrapolated on all cases and areas. 
These  services  also  support  and  promotes  diversity,  where  not  only  a  society  but  also  different  types  of 
organization  despite  their  size  and  finances  are  expected  to  be  provided  with  the  same  set  of  data,  thereby 
eliminating  discrimination  and  alienation.  This  intends  to  give  businesses  the  opportunity  to  provide  their 
unique  and  diverse  services  without  the  need  to  collect  and  process  data,  which  may  turn  into  a  resource-
consuming task by re-using the data already collected and ready for the value extraction from them, thereby 
allowing them to identify diverse tasks, challenges and needs and turn them into real business. Moreover, as 
regards the determination of these tasks, it is expected to be done not only by users or businesses but also by 
the whole society as is expected to be done in the area of Public Services, where the community engagement 

 
 
 
 
 
supposes  notifying  the  audience  (not  only  the  portal  holders)  about  the  current  challenges  existing  and 
requiring actions. 
This  is  also  the  case  for  decentralization,  which  is  in  the  core  of  the  openness  and  open  data  -  data  being 
available and accessible to anyone and anywhere, thereby liberating the society from disparity. This remains 
to be the focus for the services created using open data since in many cases their aim is to provide the service 
to  be  used  and  be  beneficial  by  the  whole  society.  Here,  the  cases  belonging  to  Disaster  Prevention, 
Healthcare  and  Public  Service,  Agriculture  and  Food,  Finance,  Cities  and  Region  are  the  most  expressive 
examples due to their target audience. 
Resilience  and  sustainable  development  aimed  at  ensuring  liberation  from  anxiety  and  vulnerability  from 
disasters,  terrorism  and  attacks  in  cyberspace  is  an  interesting  point  to  be  mentioned.  Although  on  the  one 
hand the open data and respective reuses in the covered focus areas intend to ensure resilience, some of these 
advances  as  is  the  case  for  the  financial  sector,  for  instance,  bring  new  challenges  regarding  safety  and 
security of users and their data - although the general aim is the same, the related issues to be addressed are 
controversial.  Therefore,  it  is  questionable  whether  this  principle  can  be  considered  as  fully  fulfilled  and 
sharing the same objectives in both cases. On the other hand, in other areas such as Disaster Prevention, this 
objective  is  completely  compliant  with  ensuring  liberation  from  vulnerability  from  disasters,  while 
Healthcare, Agriculture and Food, and Public Service definitely complement the collection of the respective 
examples. 
And  last  but  not  the  least  is  sustainability  and  environmental  harmony  with  the  aim  of  transforming  the 
current form of the society to a society, where humankind lives in harmony with nature with the liberation of 
resources  and  environmental  constraints  and  mass  consumption  of  resources  with  a  major  impact  on  the 
environment,  where  the  Energy  area  is  probably  the  most  accurate  example  of  sharing  this  objective. 
Otherwise,  this  principle  is  sometimes  understood  as  a  long  term  objective  for  open  data-driven  services, 
particularly for those oriented to Smart Cities, Smart Living etc., with less focus on environmental harmony in 
a general case. 

Table 3.1. Summary of use-cases by focus area 

Use case by focus area / 
principle of Society 5.0 

problem solving and 
value creation 

diversity 

decentralizatio
n 

resilience 

sustainability and 
environmental harmony 

Energy 
Disaster Prevention 
Healthcare 

Cities and regions 

Agriculture and food 

Logistics 
Public services 

Finance 
Manufacturing 
services 

and 

+ 
++ 
++ 

++ 

++ 

+ 
++ 

++ 
+ 

++ 
+ 
+ 

+ 

+ 

++ 
++ 

++ 
++ 

++ 
++ 
++ 

++ 

++ 

++ 
++ 

++ 
++ 

++ 
++ 
++ 

++ 

++ 

+ 
++ 

+ 
+ 

++ 
++ 
+ 

++ 

++ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 

To  sum  up,  the  open  data  by  themselves,  i.e.,  by  definition,  fulfil  such  requirements  of  the  Society  5.0,  as 
diversity and decentralization, while problem solving and value creation, as well as resilience, are objectives 
to be met by the reuse of open data - their transformation into the value facilitating innovation and promoting 
societal progress with slightly different definition of sustainability and environmental harmony.  

 
 
4  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

To sum up, although there are relationships between the concepts of open (government) data and Society 5.0, 
there are some significant differences, implying the main aims of both. In other words, they share the same 
philosophy of openness, equal rights, diversity etc., but Society 5.0 can be understood as more isolated and 
society-oriented with transformation mainly affecting the way of thinking and living. Open data, in addition to 
being  a  driver  for  "collective  intelligence”  also  known  as  "wisdom-of-crowd",  is  a  resource  and  tool  of 
transformation of not only the society but also all areas of people's lives, including the forms of governance 
and  response  to  both  daily  challenges  and  different  types  of  crises,  including  but  not  limited  to  economic, 
natural crises and those requiring a response in a short time. However, the question to be asked here is “Are 
the open (government) data the answer?”. 
We  believe  that  the  open  (government)  data  (innovation  /  services)  trend  develops  a  new  form  of  society, 
which  we  refer  to  as  “open  data-driven  society”,  which  forms  a  bridge  from  Society  4.0  to  Society  5.0. 
However,  although  it  could  be  speculated  that  the  presence  of  OGD  portal  and  availability  of  open  data 
together  with  the  active  citizens,  who  would  like  to  contribute  and  get  involved  in  some  activities,  is  the 
answer to all the issues within the country, unfortunately, it should be admitted that it is not a “silver bullet”. 
This  is  all  the  more  case,  given  that  achieving  sustainability  is  a  challenging  task,  which  is  only  possible 
through sociotechnical transition, i.e., through the adoption of technological innovations in a complex social 
system with multiple parties / stakeholders (Kroh, 2021). In other words, not only users’ imagination and the 
desire to  create  value  from  the  OGD  for  society  do matter,  but also the  diversity  of the open  (government) 
data and the readiness of the country under question for digitization at all levels.  
In  every  case  presented,  the  availability  of  open  (government)  data,  obviously  compliant  with  open  data 
principles, and the knowledge of open (government) data, was a precondition for the creation of the service. 
Whereas before the emphasis was on the government to release data, the mental model has now switched, and 
it is important not only to release data in an open format, but also to encourage to use them and create new 
services  from  them,  perhaps  in  a  co-creative  manner,  i.e.,  ensuring  an  effective  multiple  stakeholder 
cooperation  or  collaboration.  Thus,  open  data-driven  co-created  services  do  not  only  represent  a  new 
technological  concept,  but  also  represents  a  paradigm  shift  in  the  way  of  thinking  and  collaboration  of 
different levels (individuals, public authorities, government), while the changes in the behaviour of data users 
lead  to  the  development  of  the  Society  5.0.  The  later  point,  however,  once  again  brings  us  to  the  issue  of 
digital literacy since the data are mainly used and transformed into the service or tool when the prospective 
users are capable of doing so, i.e., they have appropriate knowledge and skills of using data. There might be 
some  exceptions,  when  open  data  portals  have  some  data  transformation  in-built  tools  or  educational 
materials,  as  well  as  when  workshops  and  /  or  hackathons  are  organized  to  give  this  knowledge,  but, 
unfortunately, it is still not very widely spread practice, although attempts are seen very often.  
Not  least  important  point  is  data  quality  and  data  credibility,  which  became  more  than  ever  topical  and 
common for many countries in terms of pandemics. This once again proves that although data availability is 
the  prerequisite,  a  shift  should  be  made  from  "quantity  to  quality".  While  data  quality  can  be  examined  to 
some extent, however, it is not always clear for the OGD who is responsible for this (if any) or the data user 
should carry out data quality analysis prior to their use, data credibility is a more complex issue. This is also 
the case for (Yiannakoulias et al., 2020), which points to inaccuracies in the OGD pandemic data with low 
short-term decision-making value, encouraging data publishers to highlight the uncertainties associated with 
the data, because while the OGD can increase the government transparency and accountability, it is essential 
that all publication, use and re-use of these data highlight their weaknesses to ensure that the public is properly 
informed about the uncertainty associated with these data and their reuse will bring added value, which is only 
possible if data are correct, reliable and trustable.  
What is especially important in the light of active open data reuse and co-creation in particularly, is that the 
more stakeholders are involved especially those who are ready to transform data into the solution or service, 
the more qualitative data may potentially become since reusers are capable to notice inaccuracies and mistakes 

 
 
 
 
in  the  data  published.  Then,  if  the  communication  and  /  or  feedback  mechanisms  are  in  place,  the 
communication  with  the  data  publisher  can  take  place  to  inform  them  about  this  issue  with  hopefully  data 
improvement. We knowingly emphasize here those users who are more likely to become reusers – this is due 
to the fact that typical users, who are less likely to constantly use the data, are more under the risk of losing 
the trust and interest in the data, if the quality issues are identified. Here, definitely "quality-by-design" is a 
more appropriate paradigm, which, at the moment, is far away from the reality. 
The  COVID-19  driven  demand  for  actually  important  /  high-value  and  timely  data  increased  the  reuse  of 
OGD. Although the most popular and required was the health category, the reuse of other dataset categories 
also  contributed  to  raising  the  awareness  about  the  importance  of  OGD  for  crisis  management  through  co-
creation of web and mobile applications. On the other hand, if the OGD ecosystems are not prepared for this 
increased demand, whether in terms of datasets quality or existence of a robust and reliable data infrastructure, 
their  change  is  inevitable.  If  clear  procedures  are  not  defined  and  OGD  standards  are  not  implemented 
properly,  new  approaches  and  channels  for  communication  and  information  delivery  emerge  in  the  OGD 
ecosystem. They affect and reshape the relations and interactions between stakeholders and other components. 
Taking a step back to the necessity for timely and up-to-date data, we should mention that this is a key for 
data reuse to make the service to be created based on these data to be of interest to the audience and make it 
dynamic  and  as close  to  addressing the  real-time  situation as  possible.  Here, in  addition  to  data availability 
and timeliness, compliance with such principles as machine-readability, data currency, which suppose data to 
be regularly updated, as well as retrievability by means of data accessibility via API support becomes almost a 
prerequisite. 
The  range  of  stakeholders’  skills  can  also  limit  the  success  of  OGD  ecosystems.  Of  course,  not  of  least 
importance is the overall digital literacy of the society and the fact of the resistance to the use of open data, 
which can be extrapolated to other areas (digitization, transformation in the Society 5.0 etc). This seems to be 
important in terms of both, the developers of services and the interest of the society and more important their 
ability to use these services. This is something similar to what we already covered in section 3, where in the 
case of Transport for London, less than 7% of services are used. This is a question, which is often covered in 
studies devoted to the technology acceptance and determination of their determinants by means of UTAUT 
(the  Unified  Theory  of  Acceptance  and  Use  of  Technology),  TAM  (Technology  Acceptance  model),  TOE 
(Technology-Organization-Environment framework) etc. or those, exploring innovation resistance of both the 
passive and active forms, using one of relevant models such as Innovation Resistance Theory (IRT).  
In  other  words,  there  is  a  significant  room  for  improvement  at  levels  of  both  open  data  ecosystems  and 
society, which limits the potential of open data.  
However,  even  in  the  light  of  these  challenges,  which  are  not  likely  to  be  quickly  resolved,  the  trend  of 
openness at all levels with a particular focus on open data develops a new form of society we call “open data-
driven society”, which forms a bridge from Society 4.0 to Society 5.0. What is more, given that Society 5.0 
aims to address and resolve the critical social issues facing humankind today, which refers to the categories of 
open  data  found  to  be  popular  and  highly  valuable  today,  we  find  it  important  to  conduct  future  studies 
addressing the link between the open (government) data and trends in terms of their topic coverage in relation 
to the Sustainable Development Goals. Although we have partly covered the existence of these relationships 
here, more in-depth analysis should be made by raising awareness on this and defining further actions to be 
made  to  achieve  SDGs  by  means  of  the  OGD  as  is  done  actively  by  several  countries  such  as  Spain  and 
respective Spain open data portal. This should allow better identification of the role of openness in promoting 
human-centric Smart Society, Smart city, and Smart Living.  

5  REFERENCES 

1.  Chen, L. J., Ho, Y. H., Lee, H. C., Wu, H. C., Liu, H. M., Hsieh, H. H., ... & Lung, S. C. C. (2017). An open 

framework for participatory PM2. 5 monitoring in smart cities. Ieee Access, 5, 14441-14454. 

 
 
2.  European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation, Breque, M., De Nul, L., Petridis, A., 
Industry 5.0 : towards a sustainable, human-centric and resilient European industry, Publications Office, 2021, 
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/308407 

3.  European Commission (2021), Portugal: EIB and BPI provide EDP Renováveis with €112 million to construct 
MW, 
with 

capacity 

operate 

farms 

total 

125 

two 

of 

a 

and 
wind 
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_21_83  

4.  Fares  R.  (2015).  Renewable  Energy  Intermittency  Explained:  Challenges,  Solutions,  and  Opportunities,  in 
Scientific  American,  online:  https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/plugged-in/renewable-energy-intermittency-
explained-challenges-solutions-and-opportunities/   

5.  Flores,  A.  M.  (2020)  Creating  public  value  with  open government data  in  Latin  America.  Master  Thesis.  KU 

Leuven, WWU University of Münster, TalTech. Unpublished academic research. 

6.  Francey, A., & Mettler, T. (2021). The effects of open government data: some stylised facts. Information Polity, 

26(3), 273-288. 

7.  Gonzálvez-Gallego,  Nicolás,  Laura  Nieto-Torrejón,  and  María  Concepción  Pérez-Cárceles.  "Is  Open  Data  an 
Enabler for Trust? Exploring the Link and the Mediating Role of Citizen Satisfaction." International Journal of 
Public Administration 43.14 (2020): 1218-1227. 

8.  Hernàndez,  C.  A.  (2021).  The  role  of  citizens  in  smart  cities  and  urban  infrastructures.  In  Solving  Urban 

Infrastructure Problems Using Smart City Technologies (pp. 213-234). Elsevier. 

9.  Janssen, M., Charalabidis, Y., & Zuiderwijk, A. (2012). Benefits, adoption barriers and myths of open data and 

open government. Information systems management, 29(4), 258-268. 

10.  Kanbara, S., & Shaw, R. (2022). Disaster risk reduction regime in Japan: an analysis in the perspective of open 

data, open governance. Sustainability, 14(1), 19. 

11.  Keidanren 

5.0-Co-creating 
http://www.keidanren.or.jp/en/policy/2018/095_excerpt.pdf   

Society 

(2018) 

the 

future, 

available 

online: 

12.  Kroh,  J.  (2021).  Sustain  (able)  urban  (eco)  systems:  Stakeholder-related  success  factors  in  urban  innovation 

projects. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 168, 120767. 

13.  Lakomaa, E., & Kallberg, J. (2013). Open data as a foundation for innovation: The enabling effect of free public 

sector information for entrepreneurs. IEEE Access, 1, 558-563. 

14.  Leviäkangas, Pekka, and Riitta Molarius. "Open government data policy and value added-Evidence on transport 

safety agency case." Technology in Society 63 (2020): 101389. 

15.  Linåker,  J.,  &  Runeson,  P.  (2021).  How  to  Enable  Collaboration  in  Open  Government  Data  Ecosystems:  A 
Public Platform Provider’s Perspective. JeDEM-eJournal of eDemocracy and Open Government, 13(1), 1-30. 
16.  López,  V.,  &  Čukić,  M. (2021).  A dynamical  model  of  SARS-CoV-2  based  on people  flow  networks.  Safety 

Science, 134, 105034. 

17.  Loría-Solano, E., & Raffaghelli, J. E. Competency model for open data literacy in professional learning within 

the context of Open Government Data (OGD). 

18.  Mavrodieva, Aleksandrina V., and Rajib Shaw. "Disaster and climate change issues in Japan’s Society 5.0—A 

discussion." Sustainability 12.5 (2020): 1893. 

19.  Meschede, C., & Siebenlist, T. (2021). Open data portals for urban sustainable development: People, policies, 

and technology. In Smart Cities and the un SDGs (pp. 91-105). Elsevier. 

20.  Nakanishi,  H.  (2019),  Modern  society  has  reached  its  limits.  Society  5.0  will  liberate  us,  World  Economic 
Forum,  Keidanren,  online:  https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/01/modern-society-has-reached-its-limits-
society-5-0-will-liberate-us/ 

21.  Nikiforova,  A.  (2021).  Smarter  Open  Government  Data  for  Society  5.0:  are  your  open  data  smart  enough?. 

Sensors, 21(15), 5204. 

 
 
 
 
22.  Open Banking (2021). Open Banking In Africa,  https://www.openbanking.ng/open-banking-in-africa/   
23.  OpenDataSoft  (2018),  EDP  –  Powering  a  Data-Fueled  Energy  Revolution,  in  Energy  &  Utilities,  online: 

https://www.opendatasoft.com/en/blog/edp-energy-open-data-powering-data-fueled-energy-transition/  

24.  Sangokoya, D., Clare, A., Verhulst, S. & Young, A. (2015). Uruguay’s A tu Servicio: 
25.  Empowering citizens to make data-driven decisions on health care. New York: GovLab. 
26.  http://odimpact.org/files/case-study-uruguay.pdf 
27.  Scrollini, F. (2016). Open your data and will ‘they’build it? A case of open data co-production in health service 

delivery. The Social Dynamics of Open Data, 139. 

28.  Smith, Göran, and Johan Sandberg. "Barriers to innovating with open government data: Exploring experiences 

across service phases and user types." Information Polity 23.3 (2018): 249-265. 

29.  Sphinx  IT  (2019).  From  the  Agenda  of  the  World  Economic  Forum  2019:  Society  5.0,  online: 

https://www.sphinx-it.eu/from-the-agenda-of-the-world-economic-forum-2019-society-5-0/  

30.  Sołtysik-Piorunkiewicz, A., & Zdonek, I. (2021). How Society 5.0 and Industry 4.0 Ideas Shape the Open Data 

Performance Expectancy. Sustainability, 13(2), 917. 

31.  Stone, M., & Aravopoulou, E. (2018). Improving journeys by opening data: the case of Transport for London 

(TfL). The Bottom Line. 

32.  Straface F., Vila J.M. (2019). Open Data for Better Public Services, online: https://www.urbanet.info/open-data-

for-better-public-services/  

33.  Sunlight Foundation (2007). Eight principles of open government data. Retrieved July 
34.  13, 2021, from https://opengovdata.org 
35.  Suran,  S.,  Pattanaik,  V.,  Kurvers,  R.,  Antonia  Hallin,  C., De  Liddo,  A.,  Krimmer,  R., &  Draheim,  D. (2021). 
Building  Global  Societies  on  Collective  Intelligence:  Challenges  and  Opportunities.  Available  at  SSRN 
3963195. 

36.  UNECA  (2013)  ECA:  Promoting  Geospatial  Data  for  Disaster  Prevention,  Preparedness  and  Monitoring  in 
Africa,  United  Nations  Economic  Commission  for  Africa   online:  https://www.un-spider.org/space-
application/space-technologies-in-the-un/eca  

37.  Verhulst,  Stefaan,  et  al.  "Emerging  Uses  of  Technology  for  Development:  A  New  Intelligence  Paradigm." 

Available at SSRN 3937649 (2021). 

38.  Weber,  N.  M.,  Pamer,  C.  L.,  &  Norlander,  B.  (2018).  Advancing  open  data:  Aligning  education  with  public 
sector data challenges. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 55(1), 927-928. 
39.  Widyanarko, P. A. (2018, May). The use of social media and open data in promoting civic co-management: case 
of  Jakarta.  In  IOP  Conference  Series:  Earth  and  Environmental  Science  (Vol.  158,  No.  1,  p.  012049).  IOP 
Publishing. 

40.  Worldbank  (2022),  CREATING  AN  OPEN-DATA  REVOLUTION  TO  END  HUNGER,  IMPROVE 
online: 

NUTRITION 
GLOBAL 
https://olc.worldbank.org/system/files/Creating%20an%20Open%20Data%20Revolution%20to%20End%20Hu
nger%2C%20Improve%20Nutrition%20and%20Tackle%20Global%20Food%20Security.pdf  

SECURITY, 

TACKLE 

FOOD 

& 

 
 
 
 
