Web-Based Platform for Evaluation of Resilient and
Transactive Smart-Grids

Himanshu Neema, Harsh Vardhan, Carlos Barreto, and Xenofon Koutsoukos
Institute for Software Integrated Systems, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

1
1

]
T
E
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
5
5
5
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Today’s smart-grids have seen a clear rise in new
ways of energy generation, transmission, and storage. This has
not only introduced a huge degree of variability, but also a
continual shift away from traditionally centralized generation
and storage to distributed energy resources (DERs). In addition,
the distributed sensors, energy generators and storage devices,
and networking have led to a huge increase in attack vectors
that make the grid vulnerable to a variety of attacks. The
interconnection between computational and physical components
through a largely open, IP-based communication network enables
an attacker to cause physical damage through remote cyber-
attacks or attack on software-controlled grid operations via
physical- or cyber-attacks. Transactive Energy (TE) is an emerg-
ing approach for managing increasing DERs in the smart-grids
through economic and control techniques. Transactive Smart-
Grids use the TE approach to improve grid reliability and
efﬁciency. However, skepticism remains in their full-scale viability
for ensuring grid reliability. In addition, different TE approaches,
in speciﬁc situations, can lead to very different outcomes in grid
operations. In this paper, we present a comprehensive web-based
platform for evaluating resilience of smart-grids against a variety
of cyber- and physical-attacks and evaluating impact of various
TE approaches on grid performance. We also provide several
case-studies demonstrating evaluation of TE approaches as well
as grid resilience against cyber and physical attacks.

Index Terms—Power-grid simulation, smart-grids, transactive
energy, power-grid security, resilience, modeling and simulation,
collaboration platform, design studio.

I. INTRODUCTION

The power-grids of today are transforming dramatically in a
number of ways to become much more digitally controlled as
well as intelligently operated [1] [2]. Several new features have
emerged that make a power-grid more ’smart’. The key aspect
being increased participation by consumers in the demand
response. The increased digital connectivity and access to
sophisticated meters has enabled the power consumers to
make more informed decisions about how much and when
to consume power. In addition, increased availability of DERs
(e.g., solar panels, wind turbines, and storage batteries) has
enabled consumers to send excess power back to the grid.
These consumers are referred to as ‘prosumers’ as they both
produce and consume power. Thus, the model of previously
largely centralized electrical grid is morphing heavily into a
rather distributed grid with smart meters, and one that must
be managed for demand response in a dynamic manner.

Fig. 1 depicts a large number of concerns that must be
addressed for a holistic evaluation of smart-grids as well as
several higher-level objectives for their end-to-end analysis.

Fig. 1: Smart-Grid Modeling & Evaluation Requirements

The increase in DERs and sophisticated control methods has
enabled multiple power markets and mirco-grids to co-exist.
This makes power-grids even more dynamic and complex
to manage. Resilient power-grids have enough redundancies,
security mechanisms, and diversity built into its components
and systems such that
the overall grid operations are not
excessively impacted even in the presence of cyber- and/or
physical disruptions. Reliable power-grids are not only re-
silient, but also provide an assurance of the availability, quality,
and security of the power supply. Managing resilience and
reliability of smart-grids in a way that addresses all of the
concerns depicted in Fig. 1 is highly challenging. Yet the DERs
and digital connectivity among them enables one to operate
grid more efﬁciently by dynamically managing the demand
response through economic and digital control techniques such
as Transactive Energy (TE) [3]. However, analyzing different
TE approaches and evaluating grid for resilience against
attacks requires a comprehensive platform that supports end-
to-end analysis of a variety of grid conﬁgurations.

A signiﬁcant concern due to increased DERs and digital
control is a huge increase in grid’s attack surface. Grids are
more vulnerable to a variety of attacks, both cyber and physi-
cal. Grid’s physical components and the digital monitoring and
control equipment are interconnected using largely Internet
Protocol (IP) based communication networks. This can enable
adversaries to deploy sophisticated cyber-attacks to disrupt
the critical grid operations and even cause blackouts. For
example, the cyber-attack deployed on Ukraine power-grid
caused many substations to fail leading many communities

 
 
 
 
 
 
without power [4]. Adversaries could also deploy integrity
attacks that modify network packets in a subtle manner such
that the attack becomes apparent only after its cumulative
effect over time. In addition, faults can be introduced to cause
spikes in demand response, and as these components exchange
sensor data and control inputs, attacks causing faults in one
component can result in cascading faults throughout the grid.
Continuous monitoring using edge devices and smart meters
can help with detecting attacks on the grid. However, operating
the grids that deploy large number of DERs is still highly
challenging [5]. Evaluation of grid operations with DERs
and transactive energy systems, along with impact of cyber-
and physical-attacks, require a comprehensive platform where
different combinations of such scenarios can be analyzed for
a variety of grid conﬁgurations.

This paper describes a novel web-based platform that allows
evaluating smart-grids for resilience against cyber-physical
attacks and for their behavior when different transactive energy
approaches are used. The platform provides a highly conﬁg-
urable and extensible web-based metamodeling environment to
model power-grids, market behavior, and various attack conﬁg-
urations. This platform also provides a simulation backend for
power-grid simulation (using GridLAB-D [6]) of the modeled
grid conﬁgurations and experiments. Section II presents the
overall architecture of the platform including the workﬂow for
using it for smart-grid evaluations, as well as how the entire
system is implemented. In Sections III and IV, we respectively
describe how power-grids should be evaluated against cyber-
physical attacks and for transactive energy approaches. A few
relevant use-cases are demonstrated with experiment results
in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper and
highlights directions for future work.

II. PLATFORM ARCHITECTURE

In this research, we aim to provide a web-based platform [7]
for modeling and simulating power-grids that supports evalu-
ation of grid operations for different transactive energy (TE)
approaches and evaluating grid’s resilience against a variety of
cyber-physical attacks. It is accessible via a web-browser and
does not require any software installations. Fig. 2 shows the
modeling and simulation workﬂow for using the platform. The
optional elements are shown by dashed boxes. The user starts
with modeling the grid, which can also be input optionally as
an external input as a GridLAB-D model ﬁle (.GLM). Other
conﬁgurations for time-series parameter values can be input
as player ﬁles. Statistics to collect from simulation can be
speciﬁed in recorder ﬁles. Weather information - relevant to
many grid modules like solar panels - can also be provided.
The grid model can directly be simulated in the backend.
Several global parameters are also supported such as the
physical time being simulated (e.g., to match against weather
data). Researchers can also experiment with different market
and cyber-physical attack models in the grid simulation. Upon
simulation completion, the results including recorder statistics
are given to the user. Continues feedback is also presented to
monitor the simulation progress.

Fig. 2: Modeling & Simulation Workﬂow

Fig. 3: Implementation Architecture

A. Overview

As shown in Fig. 3,

the platform utilizes a web-based
metamodeling framework, called WebGME [8], to provide a
graphical modeling language for designing power-grids based
on concepts from the GridLAB-D simulator. The language
also allows modeling different market approaches and attack
conﬁgurations. When GridLAB-D adds or modiﬁes its con-
cepts, those can be automatically imported in the language.
A model interpreter can automatically synthesize executable
code and associated conﬁgurations for setting up and running
corresponding power-grid simulations. Experiment results are
also provided to the user using the same interface. WebGME
also permits multiple users to collaborate on the model simul-
taneously by maintaining change history and versions through
a MongoDB database. Our platform is hosted on the CPS-VO
portal [9] that enables creating users and user-groups, manag-
ing authentication and authorization, and providing secure and
private collaboration among group users.

Fig. 4 shows part of a sample grid modeled in our platform.
The full grid model consists of two nodes connected through
underground line (green dashed line). Each node is connected
to primary side of center-taped transformer. The secondary
side of transformer is connected with triplex node, which itself
is connected to triplex meters using triplex overhead lines.
There is one triplex meter for each house, which provides
net-metering. Each house is connected through a zip-load
and a water-heater. One of the net-meter (triplex meter) is
connected to a solar-inverter pair through another meter which
measures the power generated by solar-panel. The solar-
panel generates power based on climate data (as TMY3 ﬁle

Algorithm 1 Event manager
Require: List of schedules, start time t0, and stop time tf .

1: Pause the simulation at t0.
2: Add future events from schedules in an ordered list.
3: t ← t0
4: while t ≤ tf do
5:
6:
7:
8:

Wait for a pause in the simulation.
Update the simulation time t.
for Each event occurring at time t do

Execute the event.
Update the list of future events.

9:

10:

Continue the simulations.

Fig. 4: Part of Sample Grid Model with Attack Conﬁg.

Buyer

Market

Seller

from NOAA), power rating, and other parameters. The grid is
simulated using initial parametric values and using forward-
back sweep method. Component ’attack S B’ (in red) is an
attack conﬁguration for both seller and buyer prices. The
platform provides a library of many such components.

B. Simulation Backend

The backend of our platform consists of a Simulation Driver
& Event Manager module (Section II-C) and a conﬁgurable
GridLAB-D simulation infrastructure in a cloud environment.
We chose GridLAB-D power-grid simulator as it is open-
source, calculates power-ﬂow variable values before every
simulation step, and supports modeling of end-use load models
that incorporate weather and market behaviors. This enables
modeling of distribution systems and evaluation of DERs and
TE approaches. However, precise description of events must
still be supported efﬁciently when a large number of power-
grid components are used. An additional challenge is that
GridLAB-D restricts the parameters to be linear combinations
of variables. Our platform overcomes these challenges by
extending high-level modules in GridLAB-D for supporting
power-grid simulations with capability to model market vari-
ations as well as attacks that are speciﬁc (e.g., on a single
component) or generic (i.e., affecting multiple components).

C. Simulation Driver & Event Manager

As shown in Fig. 3, the WebGME generated artifacts are
sent to a Simulation Driver (SM) & Event Manager (EM) mod-
ule. SM executes and controls the simulation. The simulation
is executed in server mode if attacks or market approaches
are conﬁgured because that requires adding new events during
run-time. Algorithm 1 describes the behavior of EM. EM
processes the schedules speciﬁed in WebGME to create cor-
responding events-list for grid objects. The simulation loop
incorporates the actions with intervening pauses during which
object values are updated.

D. Modeling Physical Attacks

We leverage the reliability module from GridLAB-D to
model physical attacks that disconnect segments of the grid.

Attack

Fig. 5: Exploiting Market Infrastructure for Attacks

The reliability module allows the analysis of the system’s state
before and after a fault, but ignores the transients between
these states. Moreover, it only handles faults in lines, fuses,
and switches, causing topology changes (e.g., disconnections).
We simulate attacks by creating events that change the
connectivity of the system’s conductors (e.g., current ﬂow
can be interrupted by changing status of lines to ‘OPEN’).
Disconnection of speciﬁc switches and fuses is also supported.

E. GridLAB-D Extensions

Fig. 5 shows the general structure of a market that accepts
bids from both buyers and sellers. Attacks on this market type
of system usually pursues two objectives, namely damage the
system or proﬁt from the attack. GridLAB-D models repre-
sent mostly physical connections among components, except
interactions. A communication
communications for market
network among market participants is not supported. Instead,
the components communicate through internal functions.

The market’s communication structure makes it difﬁcult
to implement the false data injection attacks. The bids sent
by controllers to the Main Market (MM) cannot be directly
modiﬁed, but we can estimate them. Secondly, the controllers
observe the market’s clearing prices, which invalidates the
reported fake prices. We handle these by introducing Auxiliary
Market (AM) (see Fig. 6). Here, the buyer bids directly in AM
and makes decisions based on the prices in AM. We estimate

Buyer

Auxiliary
bidder

Main
Market

Seller

Auxiliary
Market

Auxiliary
bidder

Fig. 6: False Data Injection via Auxiliary Market and Bidder

the bids because precide bids are not observable. Thus, we
implement an Auxiliary Bidder (AB) that sends the estimated
bids to MM. AB also precisely replicates seller’s bids in AM
- possible because in our model seller’s bids are constant.

Without external interventions, the models in Figs. 5 and 6
are equivalent. Both markets will reach the same equilibrium
if ABs make the same bids as the buyer and seller.1 However,
the modiﬁcation shown in Fig. 6 enables one to modify the
bids by targeting the ABs.

III. EVALUATING GRID RESILIENCE AGAINST ATTACKS

Smart-grids utilize a large number of components which ex-
change data through largely IP-based communication networks
for relaying data. The increased digital connectivity and DERs
have made grids highly vulnerable to many different types of
cyber-physical attacks. The cyber-attacks could even be carried
out in a subtle manner such that they go unnoticed for long
periods of time or exploit connectivity among devices to reach
remote systems through multi-hop network propagation. Even
the physical-attacks on devices can lead to transients in the
grid causing faults to propagate to remote regions that were
the real intended targets of the attacker.

The attacks mainly serve two purposes for the attackers, viz.
derive proﬁt by manipulating the market’s prices or damage the
system by creating imbalances in the system, which translate
into frequency instability. For example, in the aurora attack
study, Idaho National Lab used fast opening and closure of
the circuit breakers of a generator that desynchronized it
and even damaged it permanently. Other attacks against the
transmission system could even disconnect lines, transformers,
and generators, thus changing the topology of the system.

Depending on how the attack directly impacts the grid
operations, they can be classiﬁed as speciﬁc (i.e., on a single
component such as solar-panel or a load) or generic (i.e.,
affecting multiple components such as varying the market
behavior). In our platform, we support modeling of these
types of attacks and executing the power-grid simulation to
determine grid’s performance amidst these attacks.

IV. EVALUATING TRANSACTIVE ENERGY APPROACHES

Transactive energy (TE) [3] is a distributed management ap-
proach that expands electricity markets into the retail domain.
The TE paradigm relies on economic and control mechanisms
to balance supply and demand dynamically. Some widely
analyzed TE price schemes are time of use (TOU) rates,
critical peak pricing (CPP), and real time pricing [10]. How-
ever, unlike some price mechanisms, the TE can implement
a market to allow transactions among the system’s elements.
However, TE creates uncertainities about grid operations due
to the use of DERs, widely varying consumer behaviors, and
increased risks associated with the large number of connected
and heterogeneous components [11], [12]. Both industry and
academia have focused their efforts [13], [14], [15] on evaluat-
ing the impact of TE on grid operations. In addition, NIST has

1In practice, the equilibrium of both the main and the auxiliary markets

have minor differences because of errors and delays calculating the bids.

organized a large program speciﬁcally to address challenges
with TE [16].

In our platform, we utilize the modules available in
GridLAB-D to support evaluation of TE approaches. For
example, using the transactive controller modules - which
manage appliances and submit market bids based on both
current prices and system’s state [17] - we support modeling
different market mechanisms [18] such as buyers-only, sellers-
only, and auctions. Our platform supports not only the evalua-
tion of different TE approaches, but also allows incorporating
cyber-physical attacks on the grid at the same time. Taken
together, the platform can be a powerful tool for analyzing a
variety of power-grid scenarios with many different types of
market and attack models.

V. EXPERIMENT RESULTS

A. Power System Model

In these experiments, we make a detailed simulation of
an electric distribution system using GridLAB-D and the
prototypical distribution feeder models provided by the Paciﬁc
Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) [19]. The distribution
models capture fundamental characteristics of distribution
utilities from the U.S. In this case, we use the prototypical
feeder R1-12.47-3, which represents a moderately populated
area. Furthermore, we added representative residential loads
to the distribution model using the script in [20].

In summary, our distribution model has 109 commercial and
residential loads, which in turn incorporate appliances such
as heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems,
water heaters, and pool pumps. GridLAB-D allows us to model
the response of the loads to weather and market’s prices,
giving realism to the simulations. In particular, we emulate
the temperature in Nashville, TN, during summer time. On
the other hand, we assume that the system has 50 generators,
that can output a maximum of 2 MW.

B. Attacks Utilized

In our attack scenarios, we illustrate attacks that directly
manipulate control commands or inject false data in the
system. In Attack Scenario 1, the adversary exploits the market
infrastructure to inﬂuence users and induce a peak in demand.
Thus, the attacker has to manipulate the market in such a way
that the users concentrate their demand at a particular time.
The success of this attack depends on both the attack resources
and the response of users to the market’s equilibrium.

In Attack Scenario 2, the adversary attempts to manipulate
the market’s equilibrium to proﬁt (e.g., with higher market
clearing prices). In this case, the success depends solely on
the attacker’s capacity to manipulate the market’s equilibrium,
in other words, in its resources to implement the attack.

C. Attack Scenario 1: Create Peaks in Demand

This attack attempts to create peaks in demand by modifying
the prices that the controllers (buyers) observe. Due to the
system’s restrictions, the adversary cannot change directly the
prices that the controllers observe. Instead, it can modify the

Buyer

Auxiliary
bidder

Main
Market

Seller

Auxiliary
Market

Auxiliary
bidder

the price change can induce a peak because most of the houses
reached high temperatures, which created a coordinating effect
in the demand. Thus, the adversary needs continuous access
to the cooling system and enough time to execute the attack.

Fig. 7: Market Price Manipulation via Auxiliary Bidders

bids submitted by sellers to the auxiliary market (see Fig. 7).
In particular, an adversary with enough resources can decide
the future market’s price by setting all the bids with the same
price. Thus, in the worst case, the adversary has the power to
(indirectly) set the prices.

Although manipulating the market’s price is essential, the
adversary cannot succeed unless the users (or more precisely,
the transactive controllers) increase their demand at a particu-
lar time. Since the power system has mechanisms to deal with
uncertainties in demand and operational failures, the adversary
must achieve a fast and large imbalance in the system. Hence,
the coordination of users plays a critical role.

In this scenario, an adversary targets HVAC with its attack.
These controllers choose the appliances set points (which in
turn determine the energy consumption) based on the system’s
state (internal and outdoor temperature) and both the current
and previous prices. For instance, the transactive controllers
can turn off (on) the HVAC when it observes high (low) prices
to reduce the cost of energy. The precise decisions follow
the preferences of users (e.g., their tolerance to temperature
changes as a function of monetary compensations).

In this case the adversary leverages the behavior of the
transactive controllers to create peaks in demand. The attack
ﬁrst increases the price, which forces the HVAC to use less
energy at the expenses of allowing higher indoor temperatures.
Later, when the indoor temperature is high enough, the attacker
suddenly reduces the price. This encourages higher energy
usage to reduce the indoor temperature. However, this signal
has a coordinating effect that raises the energy demand almost
simultaneously, resulting in a demand peak.

1) Experiments: Fig. 8 illustrates the impact of attacks
with different resources (fraction of bidders compromised) that
causes a demand peak at 12 pm. The attack starts at 10 am,
when the adversary modiﬁes the seller’s bids to the maximum
price accepted by the market (0.63). The high price signal
induces demand reduction because the controllers choose a
higher cooling set point (see Fig. 9). Despite of the sudden
price change,
the controllers do not react simultaneously;
hence, this ﬁrst stage doesn’t harm the system.

The adversary then lowers the prices suddenly at 12 pm,
which changes the cooling set points of HVAC systems (see
Fig. 9). By this time, most of the houses had high temperatures.
Consequently, the HVACs immediately turn on their cooling
systems, creating a demand peak. Fig. 10 shows that peak
demand can be created even when attacker compromises only
20% of bidders. despite the lower impact on the market’s price.
An attack’s timing is crucial for its success. In particular,

Fig. 8: Market Price Changes by Modiﬁed Seller Bids

Fig. 9: Indoor Temperature Setpoint of HVAC System

D. Attack Scenario 2: Modifying the Controllers’ Bids

This attack seeks to change the bids of the buyers to raise
the prices and beneﬁt the sellers. The adversary compromises
the bids of buyers (controllers) and sends the following price:

ˆpc = pc + λpm,

(1)

where pc is the price submitted by the controller, pm is the
market price, λ is the control parameter, and λ ≥ 0 represents
the intensity of the attack. When λ = 0 the attack doesn’t
change the bids; however, λ > 0 raises the bid for energy,
which increases the market’s clearing price. The adversary
may select a small value of λ to prevent attack discovery.

1) Experiments: Fig. 11 show the market prices in the
second attack scenario (the attack runs from 10am till 13pm).
The deviation from the normal price occurs due to the attack
that raises the prices, and depends on the parameter λ.

In the future, we plan to extend the platform to allow
speciﬁcation of a design of experiments (DOE) for different
combinations of topological and parametric variations and to
automatically execute simulations for all such combinations.
We also plan to extend and further parameterize the current
library of reusable models for grid components, markets,
and attack conﬁgurations. Better visualization of experiment
results both during and after simulation is also proposed. We
are also currently applying the platform’s tools and techniques
for higher-level evaluations such as societal implications of the
ongoing increase in renewable energy implementations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported in part by the NSF FORCES
program under grant CNS-1238959, by the NSF PIRE and
CPS program under award #1521617, and by NIST under
awards #70NANB18H269 and #70NANB17H266.

Fig. 10: Demand Peak Created in Attack Scenario 1

REFERENCES
[1] E. Santacana, G. Rackliffe, L. Tang, and X. Feng, “Getting smart,” IEEE

Power and Energy Magazine, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 41–48, 2010.

[2] J. J. Conti, P. D. Holtberg, J. A. Beamon, A. M. Schaal, J. Ayoub, and
J. T. Turnure, “Annual energy outlook 2014,” US Energy Information
Administration, 2014.

[3] GridWise Architecture Council, “Gridwise transactive energy frame-
work: Version 1.0,” Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, PNNL-
22946 Ver 1.0, 2015.

[4] G. Liang, S. R. Weller, J. Zhao, F. Luo, and Z. Y. Dong, “The 2015
ukraine blackout: Implications for false data injection attacks,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 3317–3318, 2017.

[5] E. F. Camacho, T. Samad, M. Garcia-Sanz, and I. Hiskens, “Control for
renewable energy and smart grids,” The Impact of Control Technology,
Control Systems Society, pp. 69–88, 2011.

[6] D. P. Chassin, K. Schneider, and C. Gerkensmeyer, “Gridlab-d: An
open-source power systems modeling and simulation environment,” in
Transmission and distribution conference and exposition, 2008. t&d.
IEEE/PES.

IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–5.

[7] “Power-grid analysis framework,” Feb. 2019.

[Online]. Available:

https://cps-vo.org/group/gridlabd

[8] M. Mar´oti, R. Keresk´enyi, T. Kecsk´es, P. V¨olgyesi, and A. L´edeczi,
“Online collaborative environment for designing complex computational
systems,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 29, pp. 2432–2441, 2014.

[9] “Cyber-Physical Systems Virtual Organization (CPS-VO),” Feb. 2018.

[Online]. Available: https://cps-vo.org

[10] P. Siano, “Demand response and smart grids—a survey,” Renewable and

sustainable energy reviews, vol. 30, pp. 461–478, 2014.

[11] S. Weerakkody and B. Sinopoli, “Challenges and opportunities: Cyber-
physical security in the smart grid,” in Smart Grid Control. Springer,
2019, pp. 257–273.

[12] C. Barreto and A. Cardenas, “Impact of the market infrastructure on the
security of smart grids,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
pp. 1–1, 2018.

[13] D. J. Hammerstrom, R. Ambrosio, T. A. Carlon, J. G. DeSteese, G. R.
Horst, R. Kajfasz, L. L. Kiesling, P. Michie, R. G. Pratt, M. Yao et al.,
“Paciﬁc northwest gridwise™ testbed demonstration projects; part i.
olympic peninsula project,” Paciﬁc Northwest National Lab.(PNNL),
Richland, WA (United States), Tech. Rep., 2008.
[14] A. Ohio, “gridsmart (sm) demonstration project,” 2016.
[15] R. Melton, “Paciﬁc northwest smart grid demonstration project tech-
nology performance report volume 1: Technology performance,” Paciﬁc
Northwest National Lab.(PNNL), Richland, WA (United States), Tech.
Rep., 2015.

[16] “NIST Transactive Energy Challenge,” Feb. 2019. [Online]. Available:

https://pages.nist.gov/TEChalleng

[17] J. C. Fuller, K. P. Schneider, and D. Chassin, “Analysis of residential
demand response and double-auction markets,” in Power and Energy
Society General Meeting, 2011 IEEE.

IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–7.

[18] T. Broeer, J. Fuller, F. Tuffner, D. Chassin, and N. Djilali, “Modeling
framework and validation of a smart grid and demand response system
for wind power integration,” Applied Energy, vol. 113, pp. 199–207,
2014.

[19] K. P. Schneider, Y. Chen, D. P. Chassin, R. G. Pratt, D. W. Engel, and
S. E. Thompson, “Modern grid initiative distribution taxonomy ﬁnal
report,” Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, Tech. Rep., 2008.

[20] https://github.com/gridlab-d/Taxonomy Feeders/tree/master/
PopulationScript, 2015, accessed: January 12, 2019.

Fig. 11: Deviation in Market Price in Attack Scenario 2

VI. CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK

Power-grids are a complex system involving many different
components. Recent increase in DERs have put tight opera-
tional constraints for balancing power demand and generation.
In addition, the increase in digital connectivity among grid
components and controllers has signiﬁcantly increased grid’s
vulnerability to cyber- and physical-attacks.

Transactive Energy (TE) methods can mitigate some de-
mand response issues and improve resource utilization and
operational efﬁciency. For safe and reliable grid operations to
ensure availability, security, and reliability of power supply, the
grid must incorporate security mechanisms and redundant and
diverse components. These are complex considerations that
must be effectively used based on comprehensive evaluations.
In this paper, we described a web-based platform that
enables researchers to evaluate such complex considerations
simply via a web-browser. We presented the platform’s archi-
tecture and discussed how it can be used to evaluate resilience
of smart-grids against a variety of cyber- and physical-attacks
and to model various TE approaches and evaluate them for
grid performance. We also provided several case-studies with
experiment results that demonstrate the platform’s capabilities
for conducting such modeling and simulation experiments.

