2
2
0
2

y
a
M
0
3

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
3
1
4
1
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Gender Bias in Password Managers

Jeﬀ Yan and Dearbhla McCabe
University of Strathclyde, UK
Email:{ﬁrst.last@strath.ac.uk}

Abstract

For the ﬁrst time, we report gender bias in people’s choice and use of
password managers, through a semi-structured interview (n = 18) and
a questionnaire-based survey (n = 200, conducted ‘in the wild’). Not
only do women and men prefer diﬀerent types of password managers,
but software features that women and men frequently use also diﬀer.
These diﬀerences are statistically signiﬁcant. The factors that women
and men consider the most important or inﬂuential in choosing their
password managers diﬀer, too. Choice of convenience and brand are
on the top of the women’s consideration, whereas security and the
number of features top the list for men. This diﬀerence is statistically
signiﬁcant.

1

Introduction

Usable security has gained traction in the past 25 years, in both academia
and industry, since the seminal ‘Why johnny can’t encrypt’ study [1] which
Whitten and Tygar conducted in 1998 helped launch the ﬁeld. Gender is
usually collected among demographics in usable security studies. However,
in this fast-moving community, there has been little research concentrating
on gender aspects of security, except for a few exceptions. For example,
Moore and Anderson [2] reported an empirical study where anti-phishing
advice oﬀered by some banks were found easier for men than women to
follow. In the research of deception1 deterrence in socio-technical systems led
by Cambridge University, gender biased deception in poker [3] was studied.
Gender and diversity matter for security. For a long time, it used to be
young geeky men writing software or engineering secure systems for male
geeks. Not any more. The user base of security technologies has been

1Deception is not only the basic problem underlying security and cybercrime, but is

central to human behaviour.

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
greatly diversiﬁed, and this has wide implications. First, as widely known
and appreciated nowadays, poor usability could lead to security failures.
Second, engineers without gender awareness/knowledge will likely create
products that lead to gender discrimination, either explicitly or implicitly,
and put some of the population at a disadvantage. Gender inequality, if
not properly addressed, could cause security failures, too. For example,
people who are or feel discriminated against will feel unfair and resentment,
it reduces their compliance of security policies and mechanisms but increases
their propensity to circumvent them. On the other hand, gender studies have
been a prominent subject in social sciences for long. In computer science,
gender has informed the ﬁeld of HCI [4]. We believe that studying gender
will oﬀer valuable and even unique insights to inform security, too.

In this article, we report the ﬁrst study that examines gender bias in
password managers, which are a popular security tool for people to use
passwords more eﬀectively.

We all have too many user accounts and passwords, but limited human
memory.
It has been known for long that mnemonic passwords achieve
good security and memorability simultaneously [5]. However, remembering a
number of unique and strong passwords, as well as their associated accounts
and services, is still demanding for everyone.

Password managers were invented to serve a number of goals, notably,
reducing people’s cognitive burden of remembering usernames, passwords
and their associated services; improving security by encouraging or even
generating strong passwords and by reducing password reuse, a poor but
common practice.

Numerous products are available for password managers on the market.
And there is a substantial and growing body of academic literature on
password manager research. However, little is known about gender aspects
of password managers.

We ask two main research questions: Do men and women choose password

managers diﬀerently? Do men and women use them diﬀerently, too?

To answer these questions, we conducted both qualitative and quantitative

experiments. We ﬁnd that women and men diﬀer signiﬁcantly not only in
their choice and use of password managers, but also in their decision making,
such as how they have made their choice.

2

2 Methodology

2.1 Theory and hypothesis

Many diﬀerent password managers are available for people to choose, and
they can be classiﬁed into three categories:

• Browser built-ins, which are built into browsers, provided by Google

Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Internet Explorer, Firefox, etc.

• OS built-ins, which are built into operating systems, for example,

Apple’s keychain and Samsung Pass.

• Standalone ones, which are not built into browsers or operating systems
and must be separately installed, for example, Dashlane, 1Password,
LastPass, KeePass, RoboForm, to name a few. Typically, these are
from third-party vendors.

With regard to where passwords are stored, each category might support
local storage, cloud storage, or both.

We postulate that when people choose their password managers, they

will consider a range of factors for their decision making, namely:

• Brand: a product’s brand reputation;

• Security: whether a product provides good security;

• Usability: whether a product is easy to use;

• Features: whether a product is feature-rich;

• Choice of convenience: the usual ‘shortcut route’ approach for decisions

in life. Clearly this is not about usability.

• Location of password storage: are passwords stored locally, on the

cloud, or both?

We have three main hypotheses:
1) Women and men diﬀer in their choices of password managers.
2) Women and men diﬀer in their most inﬂuencing factors for password

manager choices.

3) Women and men diﬀer in their use of password managers.

3

2.2 Experiments

We design a two-stage study: a semi-structured interview as a pilot, followed
by a main study, each with diﬀerent participants. Interviews cannot easily
scale to hundreds of participants. Therefore, we design our main study as a
questionnaire-based survey, aiming for statistically signiﬁcant results.

We intend to use the pilot to test our theory quickly, and if needed
make necessary adjustments accordingly. We expect the pilot will inform
our questionnaire design, too. This way, we will speed up our research in a
cost-eﬀective way and without losing rigor.

Both the pilot and the survey aim to explore people’s real-life experience
in choosing and using their password managers. For both, we explicitly
invite only password manager users (i.e. people who use or have used one),
but exclude non-users.

Both the pilot and the survey collect demographics including age, gender,
education level, discipline, security experience. Discipline allows one choice
of two: STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) vs others.

2.2.1 Pilot study

We aim for semi-structured interviews, conducted in a relaxed manner. The
more relaxed an interview is, the more likely a participant is to reveal honest
opinions rather than what they believe we want to ﬁnd out.

We mainly explore two themes: 1) what password manager do you
use?
and 2) why do you choose to use it? Further questions will be
prompted based on a participant’s answers to previous questions, keeping
in line with the framework of our theory, but the goal is to ensure the
participant feels all power dynamics are vanished, keeping the interview
conversational, bouncing oﬀ with our friendly interviewer. For this reason,
the interviewer may share self experiences, while ensuring that the interview
remains unbiased.

Our interview explores what factors in our framework a participant
regards as the most important for selecting their password managers. However,
the questions we ask will mostly based on ongoing discussions. We encourage
each participant to disagree and contribute their own suggestion.

Finally, we conduct a careful thematic analysis of interview transcripts

to derive our results.

The pilot has served us well.

It has led to interesting and promising
observations, which most importantly provide the ﬁrst set of evidence to
support our theory and hypotheses. Detailed results are useful but the

4

sample set is not representative, and thus we omit them in this article. We
notice that some ﬁne prior studies on password managers were based solely
on interviewing a small set of participants.

For reference, we include a summary of our demographic data here. In
total, 20 participants were recruited; two had to withdraw due to schedule
conﬂicts. 9 females and 9 males completed the interview. 12 participants
came from a STEM discipline; 16 participants had a degree or higher education.
15 participants were aged between 18-24, the remaining three one each in
the groups of 25-34, 35-44 and 45-54. 10 participants had no or little security
experience, 1 participants had 1-3 years, and 7 had 4+ years.

2.2.2 Survey questionnaire

Our questionnaire has 21 questions in total, aiming for a quick survey to be
completed in 10-15 minutes on average.

We set to solicit our participants’ truthful answers. Deliberately, we
do not start our questionnaire with demographics questions, in order to
prevent them from consciously or sub-consciously second-guessing answers
that they think we want, e.g. by associating their demographic data with
some answers.
Instead, we open with two questions, asking (Q1) their
experience in cyber security (in years), and (Q2) how good they feel about
their understanding of the best cybersecurity practices.

Next four questions (Q3-6) ask education level, discipline, age, and

gender sequentially.

Q7 asks what types of password managers they use. This is a multiple-
choice question, and three categories (browser built-ins, OS built-ins and
standalone) are given. To avoid confusion, we use ‘Standalone’ instead of
‘third party’. To help each participant to decide what types of password
managers they use, we give many examples in each category in the survey.

Next ten questions (Q8-17) correspond to the six factors in our framework.
For each factor, we design one to three questions to probe a participant’s
understanding and opinion. For these questions, participants are expected
to answer on a ﬁve-point scale ranging from 1 ‘Strongly Agree’ to 5 ‘Strongly
Disagree’.

Q18-19 explore people’s risk perception, although it is not part of our

framework.

Q20 explores common features of password managers that people use
frequently. Password storage and autoﬁll2 are two basic features which

2Fill passwords automatically so that a user does not have to enter it manually.

5

everybody uses, even if they does not realise it. Therefore, we are interested
only in the use of additional features such as password generation, easy
password reset, synchronisation between devices, store sensitive data and
VPN access. This is a multiple-choice question, and a participant can chose
one or all answers.

The decision on these ﬁve features is based on our experience, a ﬁne
systematization paper [6], as well as the output generated from our pilot.
VPN access was not on our list initially. However, some password managers
such as Dashlane, LastPass, NordPass and Kaspersky either oﬀer VPN as a
feature or are available with a VPN in a bundle. We have a strong impression
from the pilot that VPN access was widely regarded as a common feature
among our participants. Therefore, we include it on the list.

Our last question (Q21) asks a participant to pick only one out of six
candidate factors brand, security, usability, the number of features, location
of password storage, choice of convenience as the most important factor in
choosing their password managers

Two questions (Q2 on self-reported conﬁdence in security knowledge,
Q18 on risk perception) also serve the purpose of sanity checking for our
survey.

2.3 Research ethics

We obtained full approval from our Ethics Committee at Strathclyde before
our study started. For the pilot and the survey, we sought each participant’s
informed consent before enrolling them. Their participation was voluntary
and anonymous, and we made it explicit and clear that they could drop out
at any stage.

3 Results

3.1 Demographics

We collected two hundred completed responses (100 male, 100 female) for
data analysis. We followed an ‘in the wild’ approach in the hopes to gain
as much perspective as possible from a wide range of people, reﬂective of
the modern population, except for that a participant must be a password
manager user, and at the age of 18 or over. Our online questionnaire
was written in English, and recruit advertised by social media/networks.
Presumably, the majority of participants are based in the UK. We did not
collect race and country data, though.

6

Table 1 summarises participant demographics. In this sample set, female
participants and males do not diﬀer signiﬁcantly in the distribution of security
experience, discipline, age or education level. Our analysis does not return
any statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect.

A substantial portion of our participants did not declare extensive security
experience or a higher education. This is diﬀerent from most, if not all,
previous studies on password manager users.
It is diﬃcult to be certain
whether this is a truly representative sample of password manager users,
but for sure it is more representative than those in prior studies.

Gender wise, our questionnaire (as well as our pilot) was open to non-
binary participants, but unfortunately we received no responses from that
demographic. Alongside this, our analysis will look at gender from a binary
perspective, but use female/male as a social concept, rather than strictly
biological.

Experience in
cyber security

Discipline

Age

Fewer than 1 year
1-3 years
4+ years
None/little

Male
22
40
17
21

Female
28
30
19
23

STEM
Others

18-24 years
25-34 years
35-44 years
45-54 years
55-64 years
65+ years

52
48

32
18
25
15
8
2

22
57
21

54
46

31
17
24
17
8
3

11
69
20

Education

High school
Degree
Masters or above

Table 1: Demographics summary (participants: 100 males and 100 females)

7

Password Manager Type
OS built-ins
Browser built-ins
Standalone

Male
16
29
73

Female
49
66
3

Table 2: Password manager choices by types

3.2 Password manager choices

Table 2 shows the choices of password managers by types (the results from
Q7). Speciﬁcally, 73% males use standalone password managers, but 97%
females stay away from them altogether. Instead, 66% females use password
managers built into browsers, and 49% females use password managers
built into operating systems. Females and males diﬀer signiﬁcantly in their
password manager choices (Fisher-Freeman-Halton test, p < .001).

Our question allows multiple choices, and each participant can truthfully
report all password managers which they use. As each column in Table 2
adds up to over 100, clearly some males and females use more than one
type of password managers. Do females and males diﬀer in their password
manager combinations? Table 3 provides a participant classiﬁcation by
password manager combinations. Each row deﬁnes a possible combination,
and all combinations (rows) are mutually exclusive.

Password manager combinations
O + B + S
B + S
S
O + B
O + S
B
O
Total

Male
1
4
68
12
0
12
3
100

Female
1
0
2
16
0
49
32
100

Table 3: Password manager choices by combination. O: those built into
operating systems; B: those built into browsers; S: standalone ones.

Among our participants, females and males still diﬀer greatly in their
password manager combinations. 97% females use password mangers built
into browsers, or those built into operating systems, or both. Only 3%

8

females use standalone ones. However, 68% males use only standalone
password mangers.

While some females and males use two or three types of password managers

together, most of them use only one type. 80% males use either standalone
ones or those built into browsers, whereas 81% females use either browser
built-ins or those built into operating systems.

3.3 The most important factor for choices

Table 4 summarises the factors which our participants consider the most
important in choosing their password managers (the results from Q21).
In this regard, female and male participants diﬀer signiﬁcantly (Fisher-
Freeman-Halton test, p < .001).

Speciﬁcally, choice of convenience is the top inﬂuencing factor for females
(with 48% votes), and brand the second (35% votes); whereas only 9% males
consider choice of convenience the most important factor, and only 6% males
consider brand the most important.

For males, security is the ﬁrst priority (with 38% votes), and the number
of features available a close second (35% votes); whereas only 8% females
consider security the most important factor, and 3% females consider the
number of features the most important factor.

Location of password storage has got the least votes from both females
(4%) and males (2%). Usability has got the second least votes from both
females (8%) and males (4%).

Most Important Factor
Brand
Choice of convenience
Location of password storage
Number of Features
Security
Usability
Maximum votes per factor

Male
6
9
4
35
38
8
100

Female
35
48
2
3
8
4
100

Table 4: The most important factor in choosing password managers

We use logistic regression analyses to examine the association between
the most important factor for choices and participant characteristics. Gender
has a statistically signiﬁcant and positive eﬀect on the most important choice
factor, controlling for possible confounding factors including discipline, security

9

experience, education level, age and self-reported conﬁdence in security
knowledge (p < .001). Discipline does not have a signiﬁcant eﬀect. Therefore,
gender is the only variable that predicates the most important factor for
password manager choices.

3.4 Frequently used features

Table 5 summarises ﬁve frequently used features, with votes from our participants
(corresponding to Q20). Clearly, much more men use each of these features
than women do (all statistically signiﬁcant, p < .001).

Features
Password generation
Easy password reset
Synchronisation between devices
Store sensitive data
VPN access
Maximum votes per feature

Male
52
51
57
32
49
100

Female
16
16
20
8
6
100

Table 5: Use frequency of extra features (in addition to password storage
and autoﬁll)

10

How many features, in additional to password storage and autoﬁll, do
men and women frequently use, respectively? To answer this interesting
question, Table 6 provides a participant classiﬁcation by the number of extra
features they frequently use (from 0 to 5). All rows are mutually exclusive.
We observe some interesting patterns. First, the majority of female
participants (68%) use no extra features frequently at all, whereas most
males (83%) use at least two.

Second, the number of females monotonically decreases as the number
of features used increases. That is, the more features, the fewer females use
them frequently.

Third, it is not the case that the more features, the more males use
them all. A large portion of male participants (68%) use two or three extra
features frequently, and only 15% males use four or more.

The contrast between female and male participants becomes apparent

when we plot Table 6 data in Figure 1.

# Extra features used
5 (all)
4 only
3 only
2 only
1 only
0
Total

Male
6
9
29
39
10
7
100

Female
1
3
6
9
13
68
100

Table 6: Classifying participants by the number of extra features they
frequently use

11

Figure 1: Use of extra features: interesting contrasts by gender.

3.5

Individual factors

Brand

Q8 ‘When selecting a password manager, I look for a brand with a strong
reputation in security.’ : 89% males and 22% females agree or strongly agree,
whereas 62% females and only 6% males disagree or strongly disagree.
Q9 ‘When selecting a password manager, I look for a brand with a strong
reputation overall, not necessarily security related.’ : 73% females and 22%
males agree or strongly agree, whereas 67% males and only 7% females
disagree or strongly disagree.

Therefore, both males and females care about brand. However, when
selecting a password manager, for most males, a strong brand in security
trumps a brand with a strong reputation overall. For most females, it is
the other way around. These diﬀerences are statistically signiﬁcant (Fisher-
Freeman-Halton test, p < .001). This contributes to explaining why males
prefer standalone password managers, and females like those built into big-
name operating systems or browsers.

Choice of convenience

Q10 ‘I chose my password manager, simply because it was readily available
on my device.’ : 93% females and 24% males agree or strongly agree, whereas
66% males and only 2% females disagree or strongly disagree.

12

Q11 ‘I spent time researching password managers before making my choice.’ :
61% males and only 10% females agree or strongly agree, whereas 86%
females and 15% males disagree or strongly disagree.
Q12 ‘The initial inconvenience of downloading a password manager does
impede my ﬁnal choice.’ : 80% females and 22% males agree or strongly
agree, whereas 64% males and 10% females disagree or strongly disagree.

For each of these questions, the response distribution diﬀers signiﬁcantly
for female and male participants (Fisher-Freeman-Halton test, p < .001).
Clearly, choice of convenience has a signiﬁcant impact on women, but not
on men.

Location of password storage

Q13 ‘I would prefer a password manager to store my password credentials’ :
49% females prefer local storage, 13% prefer cloud storage, and 38% are
ok with either local or cloud storage. 28% males prefer cloud storage, 24%
prefer local storage, and 48% choose either local or cloud storage. The
response distribution diﬀers signiﬁcantly for female and male participants
(Fisher-Freeman-Halton test, p < .001).

Number of features

Q14 ‘The more features I get from a password manager, the better.’ : 16%
females and 65% males agree or strongly agree, whereas 15% males and 66%
females disagree or strongly disagree. Q15 ‘I use a password manager only
for the basic functions, and I do not require anything else.’ : 88% females
and 26% males agree or strongly agree, whereas 64% males and 8% females
disagree or strongly disagree.

For both questions, the response distribution diﬀers signiﬁcantly for
female and male participants (Fisher-Freeman-Halton test, p < .001). Clearly,
features have a signiﬁcant impact on males, but not on females.

Security

Q16 ‘When selecting password managers, I care and look into the level of
security oﬀered.’ : 18% females and 86% males agree or strongly agree,
whereas 8% males and 69% females disagree or strongly disagree. Most
male participants care about security, but most females do not seem so.
The response distribution diﬀers signiﬁcantly for females and males. (Fisher-
Freeman-Halton test, p < .001).

13

Usability

Q17 ‘The easier a password manager is to use, the more likely I will choose
it.’ : 53% females and 59% males agree or strongly agree, whereas 17% males
and 17% females disagree or strongly disagree. The remaining 24% males
and 30% females stay neutral.

The response distribution is not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for female and
male participants (Fisher-Freeman-Halton test, p = .138). This is one of
the rare factors which men and women have a similar opinion.

3.6 Risk perception

Q18 ‘The thought of being hacked online leaves me feeling anxious.’ : 90%
females and 56% males agree or strongly agree, whereas 22% males and
only 6% females disagree or strongly disagree. The response distribution
is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for males and females (Fisher-Freeman-Halton test,
p < .001). That is, women are more worried about being hacked online than
men are. This is in agreement with the conventional wisdom that women
have a higher level of anxiety with cyber security.

Q19 ‘Storing my passwords on a password manager reduces my anxiety of
being hacked.’ : 20% females and 59% males agree or strongly agree, whereas
7% males and 69% females disagree or strongly disagree. The response
distribution is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent for females and males (Fisher-Freeman-
Halton test, p < .001). More than half males believe that password managers
help with their anxiety reduction, but nearly 70% females disagree.

3.7 Self-reported conﬁdence in security knowledge

Q2 ‘I feel I have a good understanding of the best cybersecurity practices.’ :
42% female participants and 60% males agree or strongly agree, whereas
10% males and 22% females disagree or strongly disagree. 30% males and
36% females stay neutral. The response distribution is statistically diﬀerent
for females and males (Fisher-Freeman-Halton test, p = .011). That is, men
in general are more conﬁdent than women in their security knowledge. This
is in agreement with conventional wisdom.

4 Discussions

Comparing each gender’s choices of the most important factor with their
responses to other questions in the survey, we can see that they corroborate
and complement each other.

14

Women voted choice of convenience as their most important factor. Q10,
Q11 and Q12 clearly indicate that women want to avoid researching and
downloading password managers, and they are willing to use one that is
already readily available.

Women voted on brand reputation as the second, but they care a brand’s
reputation overall more than in security (Q8-9). This is also consistent with
women placing security the second last in importance.

Women’s password manager choices also support our analysis. A majority
used the password managers provided by their operating systems or browsers.
This indicates a willingness to use what was readily available. Also, these
password managers tend to be created by well-known major technology
brands, which have a high reputation in many areas of technology and should
have inﬂuenced female decision making, too.

Men voted security as their most important factor. Q16 clearly indicates
that they care a lot about the level of security oﬀered in their password
manager.Q9 and Q8 shows that a majority of men care much more about a
brand’s reputation in security than its overall reputation. Altogether, brand
does not have a signiﬁcant impact on men.

The number of features was second in men’s choice as most important
factor. Q14, Q15 and Q20 show they want and indeed use more than just
the basic functions of a password manager. Men clearly place high value in
features oﬀered in a password manager, since their answers are consistent
throughout the questionnaire in all the questions related to features.

Women, in contrast, did not place the number of features high.This is
consistent amongst the rest of the survey, with women in Q15 only wanting
the basic functions in a password manager, and only utilising either one or
no extra features oﬀered in a password manager in Q20.

On the other hand, two sanity-checking questions (Q2 on self-reported
conﬁdence in security knowledge, and Q18 on risk perception) both return
aﬃrmative results in agreement with the conventional wisdom. We detect
no abnormality in our data collection. Therefore, we believe that our survey
results are robust.

Moreover, we observe some interesting phenomena. First, Q17 showed
that both genders looked for good usability. However, both did not place
usability high in their most important factor. A possible and speculative
explanation is that they consider current password managers already provide
reasonable or good enough usability.

Second, nearly 60% male participants felt their anxiety was reduced by
using a password manager, whereas nearly 70% of women did not (Q19).
This is likely because men value security more in their decision-making

15

process than women do, and therefore understand more a password manager’s
role in security.

It is interesting to ﬁgure out solid explanations of these observations, but
beyond the scope of our study. Instead, we leave them for future research.

5 What do we inform developers of ?

To attract male users to browser or OS built-ins, password manager developers
could consider increasing the number of features their products oﬀer. However,
features help, but only to an extent. As we have observed, the number of
frequent users among men starts to signiﬁcantly drop when the number of
extra features reaches four (see Figure 1).

It could also help to attract male users, if browser and OS built-ins

increase their security, both for real and for user perception.

To attract women users,

it may be a useful strategy for standalone
password managers to get pre-installed onto devices or even browsers. Pre-
installation will increase ‘choice of convenience’ for women by reducing their
reluctance and burden of search, research, downloading and installation.
However, the brand reputations of standalone products do not appear to
work for women (eﬀectively). In this regard, brand building may help.

Some further thoughts on features turn out to be beneﬁcial for both
men and women. It is not that the more features, the better. This holds
true for both men and women. However, there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence,
namely, men tend to want all features they consider useful, but women tend
to use only the basic ones. The lesson for the developers is therefore the
following: getting the basic features done brilliantly, but giving the men all
the features they consider essential and useful, and getting these features
done really well.

Nonetheless, the best way forward appears to be for a big-name player
to acquire a decent standalone solution, get it pre-installed or integrated
into a browser or OS, and get it re-branded with the big name. This way, it
will increase attractions to both men and women users at the same time. If
this strategic suggestion is adopted, the acquisition beneﬁciaries
please make a donation to support our research.

In the competition for men and women users, what new equilibrium will
be established for password managers? This is an interesting open question
to observe and ponder.

16

6 Related work

Password managers have been extensively studied, including their security,
usability and adoption challenges. Our literature review will be brief, and
pay attention to 1) major studies in password manager research, and 2) the
latest development since 2019, for two reasons. First, Chaudhary et al. [7]
conducted a systematic literature review on this topic in 2019, covering over
30 papers. Second, prior art in the literature, albeit ﬁne work, collectively
tells us little about gender aspects of password managers.

Security. Major studies include vulnerabilities in password managers
built into browsers [8][9], vulnerabilities in Autoﬁll [10][11], and the impact
of password managers on users’ real-life password strength and reuse [12].

Usability. Chiasson et al.

[13] reported usability issues in two early
password managers, some of which could lead to security problems. Seiler-
Hwang et al. [14] studied the usability of mobile password managers. A ﬁne
systematization paper by Simmons et al.
[6] suggested that the literature
has not investigated all use cases yet. Huaman et al. [15] investigated how
to make password managers better interact with the Web. Oesch et al. [16]
reported an observational interviews with 32 users, aiming to explain their
use of password managers via the grounded theory approach.

Adoption. Alkaldi and Renaud [17] investigated how eﬀective the self-
determination theory, originated in psychology, was to encourage adoption
[18] reported a semi-structured
of password managers. Pearman et al.
interview study with 30 participants, including both password manager users
and non-users. Ray et al. [19] replicated the study of [18] on senior people.

7 Conclusion

We have observed some signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the choice and use of
password managers for men and women.

Most men use standalone password managers, but nearly all women
except some exceptions stay away from them altogether.
Instead, most
women use password mangers built into browsers, or those built into operating
systems, or both. While some women and men use more than one type of
password managers at the same time, most of them use only one.

In choosing password managers, women tend to rely more on choice
of convenience and brand reputation, whereas men tend to rely more on
security and the number of software features oﬀered. Human decision is
It might well be the case that many factors are
a complex procedure.

17

considered, with a diﬀerent weight for each, before a choice is made. We
have chosen to understand the most inﬂuencing factor, but leave the exact
decision-making process for future research.

Women and men diﬀer signiﬁcantly in their use of password managers,
too. In additional to basic features such as password storage and autoﬁll,
most women (68%) use no extra features frequently, whereas most men
(83%) use at least two.
‘The more features, the better’ is untrue for both
men and women. The number of women users monotonically decreases as
the number of features increases. And a large portion of men (68%) use only
two or three extra features frequently.

We have also discussed the implications of our ﬁndings for password
manager developers. We hope this study oﬀers them useful inspirations and
food for thoughts, so that better tools will be created to attract a wider
range of users.

Acknowledgements

We sincerely thank all participants of our study. They oﬀered valuable
insights, and made our study possible.

References

[1] Alma Whitten and J. Doug Tygar. Why johnny can’t encrypt: A
usability evaluation of PGP 5.0.
In Proceedings of the 8th USENIX
Security Symposium, Washington, DC, USA, August 23-26, 1999, 1999.

[2] Tyler Moore and Ross Anderson. How brain type inﬂuences online
safety. Security and Human Behaviour, 2008. University of Cambridge,
Computer Laboratory.

[3] Jussi Palom¨aki, Jeﬀ Yan, David Modic, and Michael Laakasuo. Gender
biased deceptive behavior in online poker. PLoS ONE, 11(7): e0157838,
2016.

[4] Justine Cassell.

In The Handbook of
Human–Computer Interaction, pages 402–411. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum,
2002.

Genderizing HCI.

[5] Jeﬀ Yan, Alan Blackwell, Ross Anderson, and Alasdair Grant.
The memorability and security of passwords – some empirical

18

results. Technical Report UCAM-CL-TR-500, University of Cambridge,
Computer Laboratory, September 2000.

[6] James Simmons, Oumar Diallo, Sean Oesch, and Scott Ruoti.
Systematization of password manageruse cases and design paradigms.
In Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, pages 528–540,
2021.

[7] Sunil Chaudhary, Tiina Schafeitel-T¨ahtinen, Marko Helenius, and Eleni
Berki. Usability, security and trust in password managers: A quest for
user-centric properties and features. Comput. Sci. Rev., 33:69–90, 2019.

[8] Zhiwei Li, Warren He, Devdatta Akhawe, and Dawn Song. The
emperor’s new password manager: Security analysis of web-based
password managers.
In Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX Conference
on Security Symposium, SEC’14, page 465–479, USA, 2014. USENIX
Association.

[9] Sean Oesch and Scott Ruoti. That was then, this is now: A
security evaluation of password generation, storage, and autoﬁll in
browser-based password managers. In Proceedings of the 29th USENIX
Conference on Security Symposium, pages 2165–2182, 2020.

[10] David Silver, Suman Jana, Dan Boneh, Eric Chen, and Collin Jackson.
Password managers: Attacks and defenses. In 23rd USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 14), pages 449–464, 2014.

[11] Sean Oesch, Anuj Gautam, and Scott Ruoti. The emperor’s new autoﬁll
framework: A security analysis of autoﬁll on ios and android. In Annual
Computer Security Applications Conference, pages 996–1010, 2021.

[12] Sanam Ghorbani Lyastani, Michael Schilling, Sascha Fahl, Michael
Backes, and Sven Bugiel. Better managed than memorized? studying
the impact of managers on password strength and reuse.
In 27th
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 18), pages 203–220,
Baltimore, MD, August 2018. USENIX Association.

[13] Sonia Chiasson, Paul C van Oorschot, and Robert Biddle. A usability
In USENIX Security

study and critique of two password managers.
Symposium, volume 15, pages 1–16, 2006.

[14] Sunyoung Seiler-Hwang, Patricia Arias-Cabarcos, Andr´es Mar´ın,
Florina Almenares, Daniel D´ıaz-S´anchez, and Christian Becker. “I

19

don’t see why I would ever want to use it”: Analyzing the usability
of popular smartphone password managers. In Proceedings of the 2019
ACM SIGSAC Conference on computer and communications security,
CCS ’19, pages 1937–1953. ACM, 2019.

[15] Nicolas Huaman, Sabrina Amft, Marten Oltrogge, Yasemin Acar, and
Sascha Fahl. They would do better if they worked together: Interaction
problems between password managers and the web. IEEE Security &
Privacy, 20(2):49–60, 2022.

[16] Sean Oesch, Scott Ruoti, James Simmons, and Anuj Gautam. “It
basically started using me:” an observational study of password
manager usage. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 1–23, 2022.

[17] Nora Alkaldi and Karen Renaud. Encouraging password manager
adoption by meeting adopter self-determination needs. In 52nd Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), January 8-11,
pages 1–10, 2019.

[18] Sarah Pearman, Shikun Aerin Zhang, Lujo Bauer, Nicolas Christin,
and Lorrie Faith Cranor. Why people (don’t) use password managers
eﬀectively.
In Fifteenth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security
(SOUPS 2019), pages 319–338, 2019.

[19] Hirak Ray, Flynn Wolf, Ravi Kuber, and Adam J Aviv. Why older
In 30th USENIX Security

adults (don’t) use password managers.
Symposium (USENIX Security 21), pages 73–90, 2021.

20

