Modeling Gender Differences in Membership
Change in Open Source Software Projects

Olivia B. Newton
College of Engineering and Computer Science
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL, USA
olivianewton@knights.ucf.edu

Jihye Song
College of Engineering and Computer Science
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL, USA
chsong@knights.ucf.edu

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

6
1

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
8
4
8
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Gender diversity in open source software develop-
ment continues to be a topic of growing interest among re-
searchers, practitioners, and organizations. To date, research has
revealed disparities in participation between developers on the
basis of gender, with women being signiﬁcantly underrepresented
in open source development. Using a large data set curated for
studies of diversity in open source projects, we contribute to
this body of work by characterizing the relationship between
gender-based participation differences and group composition
in GitHub. In this paper, we present the results of a study
examining the following: (1) similarities and differences between
open source project contributors whose gender was inferred and
those whose gender could not be inferred using existing gender
inference tools, (2) the representativeness of a sample of open
source projects with an identiﬁable mixed-gender contributor
base to the population from which it was drawn (collaborative
open source projects on GitHub), (3) differences between that
sample of projects and a comparable sample of projects that did
not have an inferable mixed-gender contributor base, and (4)
a case study of participation dynamics in a small set of open
source projects with a mixed-gender group of contributors. We
found that contributors identiﬁed as women and contributors of
unknown gender have a shorter tenure in open source projects
compared to those identiﬁed as men. Additionally, at the team
level, we found that project teams with mixed-gender composition
were associated with lower turnover and teams with greater
disparity in the distribution of platform tenure were associated
with higher turnover. Finally, our case study reveals that when
looking at the entire team, GitHub users were more likely to
remain in a project rather than leave after contributing but
when looking at women speciﬁcally, users were more likely to
leave rather than remain after contributing to a project.

Index Terms—Software development, distributed/Internet
based software engineering tools and techniques, social issues

I. INTRODUCTION

Research ﬁnds that participation among women in open
sourc software development is low compared to men [1]. This
issue is more complicated than a lack of women who are
interested in and skilled enough to participate in open source
projects. Recent studies provide evidence that women face
particular challenges and biases when attempting to participate
[2], [3]. In the context of expertise and turnover in open
source projects, the data suggest that this occurs even when
they are more competent than their male peers [4], and that
women are likely to disengage from open source projects faster

than men [5]. Owing to these differences in participation,
and because of the more general problem of diversity in
STEM ﬁelds, group diversity has become an increasingly
popular topic of discussion across technology-centered ﬁelds
and also speciﬁcally in human-computer interaction (HCI)
research [6] and open source project research [1], [4], [7]–[11].
Germonprez and colleagues suggest open source development
is undergoing a transformation that may reﬂect “an evolution
or a coming crisis in how open source projects are able to
encourage skillful, diverse, inclusive global work” [12, p. 4].
We recognize this transformation as an opportunity to effect
change, and aim to contribute to the related body of research
through a study characterizing the factors that distinguish
turnover in projects that are developed by mixed-gender groups
and projects that are developed by single gender groups. To
do this, we analyzed variable relationships extracted from
a longitudinal data set curated by Vasilescu et al. [13] to
promote studies of diversity in open source projects. Rather
than focus solely on the lack of contributors who are not
men in open source projects, we also pay particular attention
to those projects that have a mixed-gender contributor base
to characterize the participation dynamics observed within
them. Additionally, we extend prior work on diversity and
participation through an analysis of differences and similarities
between open source project contributors whose gender is
inferable via cues in a virtual space and contributors whose
gender is not inferable due to the lack of such cues, or the
noisiness of existing cues. Little research on membership
change and group composition in open source projects in
social coding platforms has explored this topic to date and
it leads us to consider the limitations of research on gender in
social coding platforms, both in terms of the lines of inquiry
that are available using data extracted from social coding
platforms and the questionable nature of studying related
phenomena through binary categories of gender [14], [15].

II. TURNOVER AND GENDER IN OPEN SOURCE PROJECTS

Membership change has been studied extensively by organi-
zational and group researchers to understand the phenomenon
and its effects on collaboration in a variety of work domains.
The term membership change is used to describe the departure
of members from a group, the addition or arrival of new

 
 
 
 
 
 
members to a group, and, to a lesser extent, the retention
of members in a group. Membership change is typically
used interchangeably with the term turnover, although the
latter term is often used to describe the rate at which group
members leave and are replaced by newcomers [16]. Research
on membership change in open source projects spans across
a number of topics, from studies of onboarding and related
social and technical challenges [2], [17], to the characterization
of participation among different types of contributors [18], to
the prediction of turnover and its relation to outcomes like
knowledge loss [19], software quality [20], and productivity
[21]. In the following sections, we brieﬂy summarize key
ﬁndings from these studies and then describe our study of
turnover and gender in GitHub.

A. Joining Projects

Emerging in the early 2000s, research on onboarding in
open source projects is extensive and, at least in part, driven
by the observation that joining and specialization are both
signiﬁcant challenges for individuals interested in participation
in software development and the individuals and teams that
mentor them. Some early work emphasizes the types of
behavior—referred to as ”joining scripts”—that newcomers
should engage in when attempting to join a project community
[22]. These joining scripts are based largely on activity;
newcomers are expected to maintain some level of activity and
engage in particular types of activity (e.g., reporting bugs) if
they would like to be accepted into a project’s community.

Recent work takes a nuanced approach to onboarding in
open source projects, distinguishing between different types
of barriers faced by newcomers and identifying ways that
project managers may be able to lower barriers and support
participation. Research in this area identiﬁes technical and
social challenges for newcomers attempting to join open
source projects in addition to the challenges faced by project
maintainers to identify and mentor candidates in the newcomer
pool for particular tasks [2], [17], [23]. In a study conducted by
Balali and colleagues, some mentors expressed experiencing
”difﬁculty in creating an inclusive community” [2, p. 693],
speciﬁcally pointing to the issue of correct gender pronoun
usage. Furthermore, contributors who are women shared that
they felt ”less comfortable with and accepted by their counter-
parts who are men” [2, p. 702]. Taken together, these ﬁndings
reveal a tension experienced by not only cis women1, but also
contributors of other marginalized genders (e.g., trans women
and men). This suggests there remains a set of challenges in
deﬁning and identifying contributors on the basis of gender
and a gap in understanding with respect to the experiences
and inclusion of these contributors in open source projects.

Pointing to the need to consider more tacit factors, re-
search conducted by Fronchetti et al. [25] and Qiu et al.
[5] models and characterizes the signals that social coding
platform users rely on when choosing a project to contribute

1The descriptor cis, or cisgender, indicates an individual whose gender
aligns with sex assigned at birth. A cis woman is thus one who was assigned
female at birth and is a woman [24].

to from the options available to them. Fronchetti et al. [25]
constructed a model to investigate the factors that predict
developer onboarding in open source projects and found that
popularity (measured in stars), the time to merge pull requests,
and number of programming languages were the highest
ranked predictors; among these factors, popularity was the
strongest predictor of developer onboarding. The effect of
the number of programming languages in their modeling is
consistent with prior theorizing on contribution barriers by
von Krogh et al. [22], in which developer familiarity with
programming language contributes to task difﬁculty and can
thus impede participation. Qiu and colleagues [5] employed
a mixed-methods approach to identify the signals used by
contributors in choosing projects, and characterized those
signals by investigating their observability in social coding
platforms. They found that the open source contributors rely
on many signals when selecting projects to join: the level
of activity in the project, the popularity of the project, the
disposition of issue and pull request handlers, the presence of
issue and pull request templates and labels, and the presence
of an organized, detailed README. Last, in interviews with
volunteer contributors, Barcomb et al. [18] found that contri-
butions in open source projects are oftentimes the result of an
invitation extended by a known person, providing evidence that
social ties and norms play an important role in participation.
In sum, the platform features inﬂuencing participation range
from implicit to explicit, where, for example, signals vary by
the degree to which they are observable, or discoverable, with
some signals necessitating multiple observations and/or actions
on the part of the potential contributors. Moving beyond the
platform, participation is sometimes driven by overt requests
to join and may depend on the breadth of connections one
has in a community. These studies thus uncover some of the
factors inﬂuencing participation decisions, factors which, in
some cases, may differ depending on gender.

B. Leaving Projects

Early research on turnover in open source projects suggested
that, in these types of projects, membership change is quite
common in the core group of contributors (i.e.,
the most
active 20% of all committers to the project [26]). However,
this ﬁnding is not consistent with network-based measures of
developer role showing that the core group is highly stable
whereas the periphery group is volatile [27], [28]. In studies
of open source projects, high turnover rates are associated
with lower software quality and productivity, and increases
in defects as newcomers lack sufﬁcient expertise and exhibit
different
levels of activity when compared to established
contributors in the project [20], [21], [29]. Researchers have
also found that both gender diversity (variety in the gender
of a project’s contributors) and tenure diversity (variety in
the tenure of a project’s contributors) in open source predict
turnover in medium-sized and large teams [13], [30].

1) Gender Differences: HCI and software engineering re-
searchers have examined gender differences in participation
and the diversity of collaborations in open source projects.

Qiu et al.’s [5] research demonstrates that there are quantiﬁable
gender differences in the length of time before a contributor
departs from a project, speciﬁcally showing that women are
more likely to disengage before men. Some research has begun
to explore the presence and effects of bias experienced in
open source projects. This work is insightful given that open
source developers have some level of awareness of potential
collaborators’ gender in social coding platforms [30] and the
salience of gender can inﬂuence interactions in social spaces
[31]. Indeed, Terrell et al. [4] found that contributions made
by women whose gender is identiﬁable are accepted at lower
rates when they are not ”insiders” and that they are accepted
at higher rates than those of men when their gender is not
identiﬁable, indicating that negative evaluations of women’s
contributions are driven by bias, rather than quality of work.
Imtiaz and colleagues [3] investigated the effects of different
types of bias that may be experienced by women in addition
to contribution differences between genders in social coding
platforms. They found that the contributions of women were
centralized to a smaller set of projects compared to men.
Furthermore,
in communication,
women were less likely to use profanity and less likely to ex-
press positive or negative sentiment, thus remaining relatively
reserved in their interactions compared to men. Findings across
the related areas of research suggest that the low participation
of women in open source projects is a complex issue.

their results showed that,

C. Present Work

We contribute to this body of work in two ways. First, we
conducted a big data analysis of GitHub projects to delin-
eate the association between gender, contributor tenure and
turnover, and project characteristics. Second, we conducted a
case study of membership change in projects with a mixed-
gender contributor based on ﬁfteen projects.

Our big data analysis was focused on deriving general
insights about gender differences in GitHub: (1) similarities
and differences between contributors whose gender can be
inferred and contributors whose gender remains obscured; (2)
the representativeness of a sample of open source projects with
a mixed-gender contributor base to the population from which
it is drawn (i.e., collaborative open source projects on GitHub);
(3) differences between that sample of projects and a compara-
ble sample of projects that do not have an identiﬁable mixed-
gender contributor base. The following questions guided the
big data component of our research:

• RQ1. Gender Differences in Platform Tenure: Are there
disparities in sustained participation between gender
groups on GitHub?

– RQ1.1: Do women typically have shorter platform
tenure compared to men? Based on research exam-
ining differences in tenure in software engineering
ﬁrms [32] and open source projects [5], we expect
that women, on average, have shorter platform tenure
when compared to men.

– RQ1.2: Is the distribution of platform tenure among
project contributors of an unknown gender similar to

that of either women or men, or is it quantitatively
distinct?

• RQ2. Representativeness of Mixed-Gender Teams: Are
projects maintained by a mixed-gender contributor base
quantitatively similar to or distinct from the broader open
source project population?

• RQ3. Turnover in Mixed-Gender Teams: Does the mixed-
gender status of a project team predict differences in
turnover?

Our case study was focused on characterizing participation
dynamics in projects maintained by a mixed-gender group
of contributors by modeling the probability that contributors,
overall and grouped by gender, will join a project, remain
present in a project, and/or maintain a period of absence in
the project after initial participation. The following questions
guided the case study component of our research:

• RQ4. Representativeness of Case Study Sample: Is the
case study sample quantitatively similar to or distinct
from the broader open source project population on
GitHub?

• RQ5. Project Contributor Transitions: Are contributors
more likely to remain in a project after joining? We expect
that, overall, contributors have a greater probability of
staying with a project than leaving a project after joining
[27].

• RQ6. Gender Differences in Contributor Transitions: Do
transition probabilities differ for contributors on the basis
of gender? We expect that men have a higher probability
of staying with a project rather than leaving after joining
[5]. We expect that women have a higher probability of
leaving a project rather than staying after joining [5].

III. METHOD

For our research study, we used the data set curated and
shared by Vasilescu and colleagues [13]. To explore dif-
ferences in sustained participation on the GitHub platform,
we ﬁrst analyzed platform tenure across three groups, with
contributors labeled as: woman, man, or unknown. We then
analyzed a subset of the data to identify predictors of mem-
bership change on the GitHub platform for two samples drawn
from the population via mixed effects models. From the subset
of projects with a mixed-gender contributor base, we selected
a small number of projects to model participation dynamics.
In this section, we ﬁrst describe Vasilescu et al.’s [13] data set,
including the computation and deﬁnition of their variables. We
then detail the approach used to sample projects and construct
models for the prediction of membership change (big data) and
the characterization of participation dynamics (case study).

A. Data Set

The longitudinal data set of 23,493 GitHub projects and
122,014 users was collected and enhanced by Vasilescu et al.
[13] with the goal of enabling studies of diversity in open
source projects on GitHub, a platform that provides tools and
services to support software development and its management
[33]. Projects were selected from the GHTorrent data dump

1/2/2014 for inclusion by the researchers if the project had
at least 2 committers, 10 total commits, and 6 months of
history. These selection criteria allowed for the curation of
a data set corresponding to active, collaborative open source
projects hosted on GitHub, where a project is deﬁned as a
base repository and all of its forks, or copies of the base.
The data set includes information about both GitHub users
(e.g., gender, commit activity, etc.) and projects (e.g., age,
main programming language, number of watchers, etc.).

To enhance the data set, Vasilescu et al. [13] applied a
username aliasing approach to user data in order to identify
project contributors using multiple aliases and merged their
information. In addition to this, the researchers used a gender
resolution technique to infer the gender of project contrib-
utors. This technique leveraged name and location data to
probabilistically determine gender and was used to infer the
gender of 873,392 users (”32.6% of all users, but 80% of
those who disclosed their names” [13, p. 515]). Vasilescu et
al. reported that, for these users, 91% were labeled as men and
9% were labeled as women; the gender of the remaining users
was labeled as unknown. Speciﬁcally, gender was inferred
using the genderComputer tool [34] which uses the individ-
ual’s name and location in combination with “transformations,
diminutive resolution, and heuristics” to infer gender [13, p.
515]. User and project data were segmented into quarters (i.e.,
3-month periods). 1,136 projects in the data set did not have a
main programming language and were excluded from further
processing, resulting in the selection of 22,357 open source
projects.

B. Big Data: Predictive Modeling

We modeled turnover in projects with a mixed-gender con-
tributor base (i.e., those with at least one woman on the team)
and projects that did not have an mixed-gender contributor
base (i.e., those where there were no identiﬁed women on
the team). To do this, we selected a subset of the projects in
the data set if, and only if, there was at least one contributor
who was a woman in at least one quarter of the project. From
the 23,357 projects in the data set, only 5,539 had at least
one woman contributor and were labeled as mixed-gender
teams; the remaining 16,818 were labeled as not mixed-gender
team. These two groups are unbalanced and, in the interest
of comparing teams with similar quantitative characteristics
to better understand the relationship between gender and
membership change, we applied a sampling technique to select
5,539 projects from the subset of 16,818 projects that did not
have women on the team. We next describe this sampling
approach.

1) Sample Selection: To attain equal samples for the mixed-
gender team categorical variable, we constructed a vector for
each project and calculated the euclidean distance between
them to select quantitatively similar projects. We created a
vector of features for each project that consisted of: number
of contributors (12-month period), number of commits (12-
month period), number of forks, number of watchers, and
project age. First, we normalized the feature vectors so that

each feature’s value was in a range between zero and one. The
normalization of these features prevented bias toward features
with a larger range. Then, for every project labeled as a mixed-
gender team, we found the nearest project—where the distance
between two projects is the euclidean distance between their
feature vectors—that did not have a mixed-gender team. This
allowed us to reduce the set of 16,818 projects that did not
have a mixed-gender team to a set of 5,539 projects. The ﬁnal
sample for membership change prediction modeling contained
11,078 projects with an even split across the mixed-gender
team variable.

2) Sample Evaluation: Following the guidance of Nagap-
pan et al. [35], we evaluated the representativeness of the
samples used in our analyses. To do this, we employed their
vocabulary and technique for measuring sample coverage,
speciﬁcally using their algorithm as implemented in statistical
computation software R [36]. This vocabulary and technique
was proposed with the aim of improving the generalizability
of methods and ﬁndings in software engineering research. As
a ﬁrst step, the universe, or population, is deﬁned and projects
in that universe are then characterized along one or more
dimensions. The set of dimensions is selected on the basis of
their relevance to the research topic; these dimensions ”deﬁne
the space of the research topic” within the universe [35, p. 2].
For our purposes, the population consists of the open source
projects developed by a team (i.e., more than one person)
on GitHub at the time of data collection; that is, all of the
projects in Vasilescu et al.’s data set. For empirical research on
membership change, we contend that, at minimum, the space
consists of the following dimensions: number of contributors
(12-month period), number of commits (12-month period),
number of forks, number of watchers, main programming
language, and project age. The selection of these dimensions
is based on prior research showing that activity and popularity
are related to growth and attraction of newcomers [25].

3) Model Implementation: We constructed mixed effects
models to analyze the factors that predict membership change
in open source projects. These models were implemented
using statistical computation software R [36] and, in particular,
the lmer function in the lme4 package [37]. The following
variables were implemented as ﬁxed effects:

• Mixed-gender team: binary value representing the pres-
ence of women in the contributor group across project
lifetime.

• Team size: number of contributors (committers, pull re-

quest submitters, commenters) in a given quarter.

• Tenure disparity: calculated using the Gini coefﬁcient, a
measure of disparity [0,1], where higher values indicate
greater disparity in contributors’ tenure.

• Pull requests: number of pull requests in a given quarter.
• Comments: number of comments in a given quarter.
• Issues: number of issues in a given quarter.
Ratio of turnover served as the response variable and we
included the intercept of a project as a random effect. The
p-values reported were obtained using the likelihood ratio
test with the anova function from the stats package. For the

models, which included a single ﬁxed effect, the test compared
the full model with the particular ﬁxed effect against a null
model without the particular ﬁxed effect. All assumptions of
the models were checked by examination of residual plots.

The primary ﬁxed effect of interest was group composition
with respect to gender; that is, was the project team labeled as
mixed gender or not. In addition to team mixed-gender status,
we modeled the effects of team size, platform tenure disparity,
and three indicators of project activity (pull requests, com-
ments, and issues). For team size, the project team consisted
of GitHub users who contributed to the project, including
committing code, submitting pull requests, contributing to
discussion via comments, and reporting issues [13]. Several
variables representing different types of tenure were provided
in the data set. We only made use of the GitHub tenure variable
as it was most appropriate for our research question concerning
participation in the broader open source development taking
place in GitHub rather than in a speciﬁc project. Platform
tenure disparity was included in our modeling because we con-
tend that it reﬂects important differences in group composition
with respect to status and experience based on activity traces
[38], and has implications for knowledge management and
turnover [39]. Tenure disparity was calculated for each project
team at each quarter using the Gini coefﬁcient. The Gini
coefﬁcient is a calculation initially developed to study income
disparity [40], and more recently adapted to study disparities
in other domains (e.g., in group diversity research [41]). The
larger a Gini coefﬁcient is, the higher the centralization among
a small number of people in a population. Groups with a
high value have higher levels of disparity in project tenure
(e.g., many relative newcomers and few contributors with long
tenure).

C. Case Study: Transition Probabilities

In this section, we describe the approach we used to model
the dynamics of membership change in a set of projects
selected from the mixed-gender team sample. Nagappan et
al. [35] developed a greedy algorithm for the selection of
projects that maximizes the coverage of a sample. We used
their algorithm to select ﬁfteen projects from the mixed-gender
projects sample and use their sample coverage scoring method
to evaluate its representativeness.

1) Contributor Transitions: We adopted an approach used
in prior work by Joblin and colleagues [27] to examine the
likelihood of open source contributors joining and leaving a
project.Joblin et al. used sequential data modeling to evaluate
the stability of the contributor base in ten large open source
projects. Speciﬁcally,
they used the discrete state Markov
model in which they assigned a state to developers at each
time window for a project. We similarly assigned one of
two discrete states to project contributors for each quarter
of the project lifetime. In each quarter, a project contributor
is classiﬁed as either absent or present; a contributor was
assigned an absent value for each quarter prior to the quarter
that they ﬁrst joined the project and for each quarter after they
left the project. A contributor was assigned a present value

TABLE I
USER COUNT AND GITHUB TENURE BY GENDER.

Gender
Women
Men
Unknown

User Count (%) Median GitHub Tenure

5,284 (7%)
57,103 (74%)
14,813 (19%)

502
549
506

Fig. 1. The distribution of platform tenure for GitHub users in Vasilescu et
al.’s data set. Most women and unknown gender contributors have relatively
short tenure on the platform.

for each quarter that they engaged in activity in the project as
recorded in the GitHub data. For this classiﬁcation, we used
four variables computed by Vasilescu and colleagues: team,
which lists the user IDs of contributors who were considered
members of the project team; left, the list of users who left
the project in a given quarter; joined, the list of users who
joined a project in a given quarter; and stayed, the list of
users who remained in the project in a given quarter. We thus
represented project contributor state transitions as a transition
matrix where each row corresponded to a single contributor
and each column corresponded to a speciﬁc quarter.

IV. RESULTS

A. Big Data: Gender Differences in Platform Tenure

Consistent with ﬁndings in research on software engineering
organizations [32], in Vasilescu et al.’s data set, we observed
that women tend to have shorter tenure in open source
projects when compared to men (Table I). This observation
complements work by Qiu et al. [5] showing that women were
more likely to disengage from the platform sooner than men.
Furthermore, we observed that contributors of unknown gender
similarly have shorter tenure when compared to contributors
who were identiﬁed as men. Distribution plots show that,
compared to both contributors identiﬁed as women and of
unknown gender, men are more heavily represented across
levels of platform tenure (Figure 1). These plots also show that
the distributions of platform tenure for women and contributors
of unknown gender are similar; both distributions have right
skew.

To statistically assess differences between these groups,
Kruskal-Wallis tests, non-parametric equivalent of a one-way
analysis of variance, were applied to users’ platform tenure
data (Table II). Women and unknown gender contributors had
a lower median tenure compared to men in the platform, and
there was an overall signiﬁcant difference between groups p
< .0000. There was a signiﬁcant difference between women
and men in addition to a signiﬁcant difference between men

TABLE II
RESULTS OF KRUSKAL-WALLIS TESTS. GITHUB PLATFORM TENURE IS
COUNTED IN DAYS; THE DIFFERENCE IN MEDIANS IS THUS COUNTED IN
NUMBER OF DAYS FOR THE TWO GROUPS BEING COMPARED.

Groups
Women and Men
Women and Unknown Gender Users
Men and Unknown Gender Users

Difference H-value
1224.80
3.11
3198.10

47
4
43

p-value
.0000
.08
.0000

TABLE III
MEAN VALUES FOR TWO GROUPS IN SAMPLE FOR MIXED EFFECTS MODEL.
MEDIAN VALUES ARE IDENTICAL FOR BOTH GROUPS AS A RESULT OF
SAMPLING TECHNIQUE DESCRIBED IN METHODS: SAMPLE SELECTION.

Contributors (12mos)
Commits (12mos)
Forks
Watchers
Project Age

has woman = TRUE
All Projects
19.23
18,762.70
25.76
52.57
16.93

has woman = FALSE
Sample
9.05
1,064.64
10.58
24.70
17.11

and contributors of unknown gender. The difference between
women and contributors of unknown gender was however non-
signiﬁcant. These results suggest that few women joined the
GitHub platform at its inception and/or some of the women
who joined early on did not remain on the platform for very
long. Contributors of unknown gender in the sample exhibit
a similar pattern of engagement which may be evidence of
other similarities between these groups (i.e., unknown gender
group is made up people who face a particular set challenges
and biases in open source projects).

B. Big Data: Modeling Membership Change

The summary statistics for the two groups in the sample—
all projects with identiﬁable mixed-gender contributor base
and the sample of projects that did not have an identiﬁable
mixed-gender contributor based—are provided in Table III. To
aid in the evaluation of our sample coverage, we ﬁrst character-
ize the population along the relevant dimensions. The primary
language of most projects was JavaScript. Additionally, most
projects had a relatively small contributor base and few forks
and watchers but were at least a year old. For the samples used
in our mixed effects models, we applied the sample coverage
algorithm to score the samples drawn from the population.
The coverage scores for these samples are provided in Table
IV.

1) Model Results: Table V provides a summary of the
models, including model estimates and standard error (se), t-
values, and R2 values. Although each model was statistically
signiﬁcant, the models with mixed-gender team status and
platform tenure disparity as terms have the largest estimates,
and the former has the largest R2 value. These results suggest
that that group composition, both in terms of gender and the
distribution of status and expertise in a project are associated
with differences in turnover in open source projects.

TABLE IV
COVERAGE SCORES FOR SAMPLES FROM STUDY POPULATION.

Score
Main Language
Contributors (12mos)
Commits (12mos)
Forks
Watchers
Project Age

Mixed-Gender
All Projects
0.881
0.998
1
1
1
1
1

Not Mixed-Gender
Sampled Projects
0.885
0.997
0.998
1
1
1
1

TABLE V
SUMMARY OF RESULTS FOR MIXED EFFECTS MODELS. MODEL INCLUDES
TERM AS FIXED EFFECT AND PROJECT AS RANDOM EFFECT.

Model Term

Estimate (±se)

t-value

mixed gender team -0.020 (± 0.003)
0.160 (± 0.007)
Gini gh tenure
-0.001 (±0.000)
num team
-0.000 (± 0.000)
num pull req
-0.000 (± 0.000)
num comments
-0.002 (± 0.000)
num issues

-5.17****
23.40****
-19.59****
-10.61****
-20.32****
-24.35****

Note: **** p < .0001

R2

.27
.25
.25
.26
.25
.23

∆R2
from null mod
-.00
-.02
-.02
-.01
-.02
-.04

C. Case Study: Modeling Contributor Transitions

The sample coverage score results for the ﬁfteen projects
the
that were selected are provided in Table VI. Overall,
sample has low coverage. This is expected given the small
size of the sample relative to the large population size.
Additionally, the low score appears to be driven primarily by
the main language and project age dimensions.

1) Contributor Transitions: Median values for transition
probabilities for users in the case study sample are given in
Figure 2 and details about projects in Table VII. Overall, we
observed some stability in these projects: contributors had a
higher probability of remaining in the project after joining (9
out of 15 projects), although there are some exceptions. When
looking at the transition probabilities for the woman or group
of women in a project, it was more likely that a contributor
would leave a project after joining (i.e., probability of present
→ absent is greater than probability of present → present).
This is in contrast to the transition probabilities for men, who
were more likely to remain in a project after joining (i.e.,

TABLE VI
COVERAGE SCORES FOR CASE STUDY SAMPLE.

Score
Main Language
Contributors (12mos)
Commits (12mos)
Forks
Watchers
Project Age

Case Study Sample
0.044
0.691
0.997
0.956
0.997
0.991
0.644

TABLE VII
TEAM SIZE AND PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE INFORMATION FOR PROJECTS
IN CASE STUDY SAMPLE.

Project

1
2
3
4
5
6
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Team Size
(# Women)
145 (6)
38 (2)
45 (2)
47 (5)
16 (1)
35 (3)
112 (9)
35 (2)
25 (2)
15 (2)
47 (1)
39 (1)
98 (5)
129 (3)

Main
Language
Ruby
Python
JavaScript
Java
Python
JavaScript
C
Python
Python
Ruby
Ruby
JavaScript
C++
C++

probability of present → present is greater than probability
of present → absent). This suggests the group of men in
mixed-gender teams is more stable than the group of women
in mixed-gender teams. However, relevant to the difference
between the overall trend and the trend among women, all of
the projects included in the case study had teams that were
made up primarily of men (see Team Size column in Table
VII). Even in the two projects with smaller teams, projects
5 and 11, there were few women, 1 and 2 respectively. It
is possible that the observation that women had a greater
probability of leaving rather than remaining in these projects
is due, in part, to the reported harassment and lack of comfort
experienced by women contributors when working alongside
men in open source projects [2], [4], [42]. These results in
addition to the ﬁnding that women’s contributions tend to be
centralized to a smaller number of projects than those of men
[3] help explain the shorter tenure of women in open source
projects and the GitHub platform in general.

V. DISCUSSION

In this study we set out to study factors that are related to
the low participation of women in open source projects. We
found that, in addition to factors already linked to turnover in
open source projects, group composition in terms of gender
predicted levels of turnover with mixed-gender teams exhibit-
ing lower levels. The signiﬁcant effect of gender composition
on turnover complements ﬁndings from a study by Blincoe et
al. [8] in which developers reported more negative behaviors
and experiences in male-only teams. In other words,
the
unpleasant nature of such experiences in homogeneous teams
produces increases in turnover. We analyzed projects and their
composition to better understand similarities and differences
between contributors based upon gender. Our ﬁndings add to
the body of evidence showing that participation dynamics vary
by gender. This research also extends prior work by revealing
similarities in tenure between GitHub users who are women
and those whose gender is unknown. Through our case study,

Fig. 2. Participation dynamics in GitHub: transition probabilities averaged
across all project contributors in case study sample and by gender group.

we demonstrated the utility of transition-probability models for
examining group differences in contexts where participation is
ephemeral yet recurrent. The application of this approach in
our study showed that women are not only more likely to leave
a project compared to men, but that they are also less likely to
return to a project after a period of absence. Furthermore, the
participation of GitHub users of unknown gender in a project
is very limited—they contribute in a small period of time and
their departure from the project is more permanent.

In conducting this study, we considered the ways that the
design of the GitHub platform shapes studies of gender in
open source projects. First,
the platform does not request
gender information upon account creation and, as a result,
likely diminishes the salience of gender and alters its effects on
social interactions [31]. This reﬂects a particular design choice
and, embedded within it, assumptions about the types of and
ways that individuals use the platform that have signiﬁcant
implications, both for the phenomena of interest and the ways
that
the phenomena can be studied. Although we do not
make a claim to the appropriateness of this design choice,
we do contend that it is one that warrants further attention.
Second, this design choice results in the need for researchers
interested in analyzing differences and similarities between
genders on the platform to infer gender based on a set of,
arguably, noisy cues, including, for example, displayed name,
location, and, as some other researchers have used, picture
and email information to locate accounts on other platforms
that belong to the same user which can result in misgendering
[14]. Related to this, and how gender information is requested
or otherwise inferred, we reﬂected on the observation that
research on gender in open source projects has largely relied
on binary categories of gender to account for differences and
similarities in participation. Platform design, in combination
with the gender binary frame applied to study gender differ-
ences, has resulted in an analysis of genders as relatively

homogeneous groups and the potential exclusion of open
source contributors of other marginalized genders, including in
the research presented here. This presents an opportunity for
future research to better understand and characterize within
group differences and different
types of diversity in open
source projects [6]. Researchers can employ a mixed-methods
approach to provide a more comprehensive analysis of the
gender binary issue and gender categories.

Like other research on membership change in open source
development, our study focused on modeling factors internal
to projects (i.e., group composition and project activity). Less
work has examined how factors exogenous to a speciﬁc
project and relevant to the larger population or ecosystem
may alter turnover within them. Signiﬁcant changes to the
platform and decisions made by corporate stakeholders may
have the potential to instigate an exodus of users from the
platform. For example, some GitHub users expressed dissat-
isfaction with the decision to sell the platform to Microsoft
and claimed they would leave the platform following the
acquisition [43]. GitHub has also been criticized by both its
users and employees for their continued relationship with the
U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s Immigration and
Customs Enforcement (ICE) [44], [45]. These actions taken
by GitHub decision makers likely inﬂuence the choices of
some developers to participate in open source development
on the platform. Here, an understanding of within group
differences could illuminate the causes of diversity issues in
open source along other sociodemographic dimensions. Such
an understanding however necessitates an analysis of how race,
class and status intersect with gender in studies of membership
change. Because these types of changes and decisions are
published, future research can leverage information about
the occurrence of these events to investigate their effects on
membership change in open source projects.

In the work presented here, we suggest GitHub users whose
gender was not
identiﬁable by Vasilescu were potentially
not men, but also not necessarily women. While there were
quantitative similarities between users who were identiﬁed
as women and unknown gender users, additional research is
needed to accurately characterize the latter group. The group
of users whose gender was not resolved may be made up
individuals who generally exhibit lower levels of engagement
in the platform for different reasons and thus do not provide
the type of information that
is used to infer gender by
researcher. The reasons for lower levels of engagement may
be tied to gender (e.g., the bias and harassment [42]), or
other factors that are not necessarily speciﬁc to gender but
reﬂect other sociodemographic dimensions (e.g., limited time
or ﬁnancial resources for ongoing participation).

A. Limitations

The data set used for the analysis presented here was
collected by Vasilescu et al. from a GHTorrent data dump in
2014. It does not capture changes in the platform user base and
participation in open source projects that have occurred since
then. This limits the interpretation of results. For example,

it is possible that there has been a reduction in the gender
imbalance observed in GitHub. Recent studies of gender
differences and diversity suggest, however, that this is likely
not the case (e.g., [1], [5]). We therefore expect the application
of our analyses to a more recent data set would likely produce
similar ﬁndings. The interpretation of results is also limited
given the inability to accurately label gender for all users. It
is possible that a project classiﬁed as having a mixed gender
contributor base could have a team size of two, and that one
contributor be labeled as a woman and the other unknown.
Furthermore, it is possible that the user of unknown gender is
a woman, meaning the project is not maintained by a mixed
gender team. This type of erroneous classiﬁcation is however
unlikely in the case study sample given the selected projects
had relatively large team sizes and that relatively few women
participate in open source projects on GitHub.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we reported the results of a quantitative
study of gender differences in membership change in open
source projects hosted on GitHub, a social coding platform.
Replicating and extending prior work on gender differences
in tenure, we observed that women had shorter tenure when
compared to men, and that unknown gender contributors
similarly had shorter tenure in the platform. Our application
of Nagappan et al.’s [35] sample coverage scoring approach
provides evidence that the open source projects maintained
by mixed-gender teams are not quantitatively distinct from
those that are maintained by teams who do not have a mixed-
gender composition. The results presented here also suggest
the need to further explore the relationship between gender and
status and expertise in open source projects, as we found that
these factors, in addition to activity levels, predicted turnover.
Future work in this area may reveal important insights about
the experiences of women as they relate to power dynamics
and membership change in open source projects. Lastly, we
observe that, although the overall project team is relatively
stable, there are gender differences in the movement in and
out of open source projects.

REFERENCES

[1] I. El Asri and N. Kerzazi, “Where are females in OSS projects?
Socio technical interactions,” in Collaborative Networks and Digital
Transformation, L. M. Camarinha-Matos, H. Afsarmanesh,
and
D. Antonelli, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019,
vol. 568, pp. 308–319. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/978-3-030-28464-0 27

[2] S. Balali, I. Steinmacher, U. Annamalai, A. Sarma, and M. A. Gerosa,
“Newcomers’ barriers.
. is that all? An analysis of mentors’ and
newcomers’ barriers in OSS projects,” Computer Supported Cooperative
Work (CSCW), vol. 27, no. 3-6, pp. 679–714, Dec. 2018. [Online].
Available: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10606-018-9310-8

.

[3] N. Imtiaz, J. Middleton, J. Chakraborty, N. Robson, G. Bai, and
E. Murphy-Hill, “Investigating the effects of gender bias on GitHub,”
in Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Software Engi-
neering. Montreal, QC, Canada: IEEE Press, 2019, pp. 700–711.
[4] J. Terrell, A. Koﬁnk, J. Middleton, C. Rainear, E. Murphy-Hill,
C. Parnin, and J. Stallings, “Gender differences and bias in open
request acceptance of women versus men,” PeerJ
source: pull
Computer Science, vol. 3, p. e111, May 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://peerj.com/articles/cs-111

[5] H. S. Qiu, A. Nolte, A. Brown, A. Serebrenik, and B. Vasilescu,
“Going farther together:
the impact of social capital on sustained
participation in open source,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). Montreal, QC, Canada:
IEEE, May 2019, pp. 688–699. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/8812044/

[6] J. Himmelsbach, S. Schwarz, C. Gerdenitsch, B. Wais-Zechmann,
J. Bobeth, and M. Tscheligi, “Do we care about diversity in human
computer interaction: a comprehensive content analysis on diversity
dimensions in research,” in Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’19. Glasgow,
Scotland Uk: ACM Press, 2019, pp. 1–16.
[Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=3290605.3300720

[7] J. Aue, M. Haisma, K. F. Tomasdottir, and A. Bacchelli, “Social
Diversity and Growth Levels of Open Source Software Projects
on GitHub,” in Proceedings of
the 10th ACM/IEEE International
Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement -
ESEM ’16. Ciudad Real, Spain: ACM Press, 2016, pp. 1–6. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2961111.2962633

[8] K. Blincoe, O. Springer, and M. R. Wrobel, “Perceptions of gender
teams,” IEEE
diversity’s impact on mood in software development
Software, pp. 1–1, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/8716518/

[9] S. Daniel, R. Agarwal, and K. J. Stewart, “The effects of diversity in
global, distributed collectives: a study of open source project success,”
Information Systems Research, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 312–333, Jun. 2013.
[Online]. Available: http://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/abs/10.1287/isre.
1120.0435

[10] M. Ortu, G. Destefanis, S. Counsell, S. Swift, M. Marchesi, and
R. Tonelli, “How diverse is your team? Investigating gender and
nationality diversity in GitHub teams,” PeerJ Preprints, Jul. 2016.
[Online]. Available: https://peerj.com/preprints/2285

[11] B. Vasilescu, V. Filkov, and A. Serebrenik, “Perceptions of diversity
on GitHub: a user survey,” in 2015 IEEE/ACM 8th International
Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering.
Florence, Italy: IEEE, May 2015, pp. 50–56. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7166088/

[12] M. Germonprez, J. Lipps, and S. Goggins, “The rising tide: Open
source’s steady transformation,” First Monday, Aug. 2019. [Online].
Available: https://journals.uic.edu/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/9297

[13] B. Vasilescu, A. Serebrenik, and V. Filkov, “A data set

for
social diversity studies of GitHub teams,” in 2015 IEEE/ACM 12th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories.
Florence,
Italy:
[Online]. Available: http:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7180131/

IEEE, May 2015, pp. 514–517.

[14] O. Keyes, “The misgendering machines: Trans/hci

implications of
automatic gender recognition,” Proceedings of the ACM on Human-
Computer Interaction, vol. 2, no. CSCW, p. 1–22, Nov 2018.

[15] S. B. Steinhardt, A. Menking,

I. Erickson, A. Marshall, A. Ze-
lenkauskaite, and J. Rode, “Feminism and feminist approaches in social
computing,” in CSCW’15 Companion: Proceedings of the 18th ACM
Conference Companion on Computer Supported Cooperative Work &
Social Computing. ACM Press, 2015, p. 303–308.

[16] J. D. Shaw, J. E. Delery, G. D. Jenkins, and N. Gupta, “An organization-
level analysis of voluntary and involuntary turnover.” Academy of
Management Journal, vol. 41, no. 5, p. 511–525, Oct 1998.

[17] I. Steinmacher, M. Gerosa, T. U. Conte, and D. F. Redmiles,
“Overcoming social barriers when contributing to open source
software projects,” Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW),
vol. 28, no. 1-2, pp. 247–290, Apr. 2019.
[Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10606-018-9335-z

[18] A. Barcomb, A. Kaufmann, D. Riehle, K.-J. Stol, and B. Fitzgerald,
“Uncovering the periphery: a qualitative survey of episodic volunteering
in free/libre and open source software communities,” IEEE Transactions
on Software Engineering, p. 18, 2018.

[19] M. Nassif and M. P. Robillard, “Revisiting turnover-induced knowledge
loss in software projects,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference
on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME).
Shanghai,
China:
[Online]. Available: http:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8094427/

IEEE, Sep. 2017, pp. 261–272.

[20] M. Foucault, M. Palyart, X. Blanc, G. C. Murphy, and J.-R.
turnover on quality in open-source
Falleri, “Impact of developer
software,” in Proceedings of
the 2015 10th Joint Meeting on
Foundations of Software Engineering - ESEC/FSE 2015. Bergamo,

Italy: ACM Press, 2015, pp. 829–841.
//dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2786805.2786870

[Online]. Available: http:

[21] A. Mockus, “Organizational volatility and its effects on software
the 18th ACM SIGSOFT International
defects,” in Proceedings of
Symposium Foundations of Software Engineering - FSE ’10.
Santa
Fe, New Mexico, USA: ACM Press, 2010, p. 117. [Online]. Available:
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=1882291.1882311

[22] G. von Krogh, S. Spaeth, and K. R. Lakhani, “Community,
joining, and specialization in open source software innovation: a
case study,” Research Policy, vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 1217–1241, Jul.
2003.
[Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0048733303000507

[23] G. Gousios, M.-A. Storey, and A. Bacchelli, “Work practices and
challenges in pull-based development: the contributor’s perspective,”
the 38th International Conference on Software
in Proceedings of
Engineering. Austin, Texas: ACM Press, 2016, pp. 285–296. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2884781.2884826
[24] K. Schilt and L. Westbrook, “Doing Gender, Doing Heteronormativity:
“Gender Normals,” Transgender People, and the Social Maintenance
of Heterosexuality,” Gender & Society, Jul. 2009, publisher: SAGE
PublicationsSage CA: Los Angeles, CA. [Online]. Available: https:
//journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0891243209340034

[25] F. Fronchetti, I. Wiese, G. Pinto, and I. Steinmacher, “What Attracts
Newcomers to Onboard on OSS Projects? TL;DR: Popularity,” in
Open Source Systems, F. Bordeleau, A. Sillitti, P. Meirelles, and
V. Lenarduzzi, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019,
vol. 556, pp. 91–103. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/978-3-030-20883-7 9

[26] G. Robles and J. M. Gonzalez-Barahona, “Contributor

turnover
in libre software projects,” in Open Source Systems,
IFIP
International Federation for
Information Processing, E. Damiani,
B. Fitzgerald, W. Scacchi, M. Scotto, and G. Succi, Eds. Boston,
MA: Springer US, 2006, vol. 203, pp. 273–286. [Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/0-387-34226-5 28

ser.

[27] M. Joblin, S. Apel, and W. Mauerer, “Evolutionary trends of developer
coordination: a network approach,” Empirical Software Engineering,
[Online]. Available:
vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 2050–2094, Aug. 2017.
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10664-016-9478-9

[28] M. Joblin, S. Apel, C. Hunsen, and W. Mauerer, “Classifying developers
into core and peripheral: an empirical study on count and network
metrics,” in 2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE). Buenos Aires: IEEE, May 2017, pp. 164–174.
[Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7985659/
[29] P. C. Rigby, Y. C. Zhu, S. M. Donadelli, and A. Mockus,
“Quantifying and mitigating turnover-induced knowledge loss: case
studies of chrome and a project at avaya,” in Proceedings of
the
38th International Conference on Software Engineering - ICSE ’16.
Austin, Texas: ACM Press, 2016, pp. 1006–1016. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2884781.2884851

[30] B. Vasilescu, D. Posnett, B. Ray, M. G. van den Brand, A. Serebrenik,
P. Devanbu, and V. Filkov, “Gender and tenure diversity in GitHub
the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on
teams,” in Proceedings of
Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’15.
Seoul, Republic
of Korea: ACM Press, 2015, pp. 3789–3798. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2702123.2702549

[31] A. McNicol, None of your business? Analyzing the legitimacy and effects
Institute of Network

of gendering social spaces through system design.
Cultures, 2013, pp. 200–219.

[32] T. James, M. Galster, K. Blincoe, and G. Miller, “What

is the
perception of female and male software professionals on performance,
team dynamics and job satisfaction? Insights from the trenches,”
in 2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software
Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice Track (ICSE-SEIP).
Buenos Aires:
[Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7965425/

IEEE, May 2017, pp. 13–22.

[33] A. Begel, J. Bosch, and M.-A. Storey, “Social networking meets software
development: Perspectives from GitHub, msdn, Stack Exchange, and
topcoder,” IEEE Software, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 52–66, 2013.

[34] B. Vasilescu, “Human aspects, gamiﬁcation, and social media in
collaborative software engineering,” in Companion Proceedings of
the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering - ICSE
Companion 2014. Hyderabad, India: ACM Press, 2014, pp. 646–
649. [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2591062.
2591091

[35] M. Nagappan, T. Zimmermann, and C. Bird, “Diversity in software
engineering research,” in Proceedings of the 2013 9th Joint Meeting
on Foundations of Software Engineering - ESEC/FSE 2013.
Saint
Petersburg, Russia: ACM Press, 2013, p. 466. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2491411.2491415

[36] R Core Team, R: A Language and Environment

for Statistical
Computing, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria,
2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.R-project.org

[37] D. Bates, M. M¨achler, B. Bolker, and S. Walker, “Fitting linear mixed-
effects models using lme4,” Journal of Statistical Software, vol. 67,
no. 1, pp. 1–48, 2015.

[38] J. Marlow, L. Dabbish, and J. Herbsleb, “Impression formation
in online peer production: activity traces and personal proﬁles in
GitHub,” in Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work. New York, NY: ACM Press, 2013, p. 117. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2441776.2441792
[39] O. B. Newton, S. M. Fiore, and J. Song, “Expertise and Complexity as
Mediators of Knowledge Loss in Open Source Software Development,”
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual
Meeting, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 1580–1584, Nov. 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1177/1071181319631445

[40] R. Dorfman, “A formula for the gini coefﬁcient,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 146–149, Feb 1979.
[41] A. Solanas, R. M. Selvam, J. Navarro, and D. Leiva, “Some common
indices of group diversity: upper boundaries,” Psychological Reports,
vol. 111, no. 3, p. 777–796, Dec 2012.

[42] D. Nafus, “‘Patches don’t have gender’: What is not open in open
source software,” New Media & Society, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 669–683,
Jun. 2012. [Online]. Available: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/
1461444811422887

[43] T. Warren,

“Here’s

think
line].
microsoft-github-acquisition-developer-reaction

about Microsoft’s
Available:

what

really
[On-
https://www.theverge.com/2018/6/18/17474284/

GitHub
acquisition,”

developers

2018.

Jun.

[44] R. Chan, “The Microsoft-owned GitHub is under pressure for its work
with ICE, as employees resign and activists protest its biggest event of
the year,” Nov. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.businessinsider.
com/github-employees-ice-contracts-protest-microsoft-2019-11
[45] S. Ghaffary, “GitHub is the latest tech company to face controversy
over its contracts with ICE,” Oct. 2019, library Catalog: www.vox.com.
[Online]. Available: https://www.vox.com/recode/2019/10/9/20906605/
github-ice-contract-immigration-ice-dan-friedman

