2
2
0
2

n
u
J

9
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
3
9
4
1
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

A Data Science Pipeline for Algorithmic Trading: A
Comparative Study of Applications for Finance and
Cryptoeconomics

1st Luyao Zhang
Data Science Research Center and Social Science Division
Duke Kunshan University
Suzhou, China
lz183@duke.edu

1st Tianyu Wu
Duke Kunshan University
Suzhou, China

1st Saad Lahrichi
Duke Kunshan University
Suzhou, China

2ndCarlos-Gustavo Salas-Flores
Duke Kunshan University
Suzhou, China

2nd Jiayi Li
Duke Kunshan University
Suzhou, China

Abstract—Recent advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) have
made algorithmic trading play a central role in ﬁnance. However,
current research and applications are disconnected information
islands. We propose a generally applicable pipeline for designing,
programming, and evaluating the algorithmic trading of stock
and crypto assets. Moreover, we demonstrate how our data
science pipeline works with respect to four conventional algo-
rithms: the moving average crossover, volume-weighted average
price, sentiment analysis, and statistical arbitrage algorithms.
Our study offers a systematic way to program, evaluate, and
compare different trading strategies. Furthermore, we implement
our algorithms through object-oriented programming in Python3,
which serves as open-source software for future academic re-
search and applications.

Index Terms—algorithmic trading, data science pipeline, ﬁ-

nance, cryptoeconomics, open-source software, Python

I. INTRODUCTION

Recent advances in AI have made algorithmic trading (AT)
play a central role in ﬁnance: Burgess [1] estimates that AT
accounted for 80% of the entire equity turnover in the U.S.
by transaction volume in 2018, up from 50% in 2011. AT
empowers traders with cutting-edge technological innovation
so that they can execute trades with predeﬁned strategies, cap-
turing proﬁtable opportunities faster and with a low attention
cost [2]. Moreover, AT contributes to market efﬁciency and
liquidity [3]. However, current research and applications are
disconnected information islands [4]. AT in ﬁnancial industries
is generally a black box for which scientiﬁc evaluation is
almost impossible [5]. Academic research has more clearly
elaborated on algorithms. However, current research diverges
in many ways. The lack of process consistency makes ceteris
paribus comparison difﬁcult. Moreover, there is little open-
source software for designing AT strategies, which leads to

Tianyu Wu, Saad Lahrichi, Jiayi Li, and Carlos-Gustavo Salas-Flores were
supported by the Summer Research Scholar Program at Duke Kunshan
University as research afﬁliates in Prof. Luyao Zhang’s project entitled ”How
Fintech Empowers Asset Valuation: Theory and Applications”

unnecessary obstacles to collaborative learning, research, and
innovation.

Fig. 1. The data science pipeline for algorithmic trading: The general
workﬂow includes inputs (pink), analysis (blue), and the output dashboard
(green). At the input stage, we ﬁrst connect with the data source API to
input variables for calculating indices that are necessary to calculate buy-
and-sell signals and then specify trading conditions. At the analysis stage,
we calculate indices that are necessary to calculate buy-and-sell signals and
execute algorithmic trading strategies. At the output stage, we visualize three
dashboards: (1) the time series of buy-and-sell signals, (2) the cash and holding
accounts and total assets, and (3) the return on investment (ROI).

We propose a generally applicable pipeline for designing,
programming, and evaluating the algorithmic trading of stock
and crypto tokens. Figure 1 represents the general workﬂow:
inputs, analysis, and the output dashboard. We ﬁrst connect
with the data source API to input variables for calculating in-
dices that are necessary to calculate buy-and-sell signals; then,

 
 
 
 
 
 
we further specify trading conditions to execute algorithmic
trading strategies based on the signals. Finally, we generate
visualizations to monitor cash and holding accounts and eval-
uate the return on investment (ROI). We demonstrate that our
data science pipeline is generally applicable to conventional
algorithms, including the moving average crossover, volume-
weighted average price, sentiment analysis, and statistical
arbitrage algorithms.

Our study offers a systematic way to program and compare
different trading strategies. Furthermore, we implement our
algorithms by object-oriented programming in Python3, which
serves as open-source software for future academic research
and applications. We introduce the methodology applied to
two algorithms in Section II, present the data and results in
Section III, and discuss the results in Section IV.

II. METHODOLOGY

A. Moving Average Crossover

The simple moving average (SMA), ﬁrst proposed by
Joseph E. Granville Granville [6], is an indicator of the trend
of stock prices [7, 8]. As in Equation 1, the SMA with window
n is the average of the stock price in the past n days.

SMAn

t =

1
n

t
(cid:88)

pi

i=t−n+1

(1)

A moving average crossover occurs when a short-window
moving average (SWMA) and a long-window moving av-
erage (LWMA) intersect. On the one hand, the SWMA is
an indicator of recent market prices. On the other hand, the
LWMA represents the long-term or equilibrium price. A buy
signal appears when the SWMA (such as the 50-day moving
average) crosses above the LWMA (such as the 200-day
moving average), predicting a bull market, and this is where
the golden crossover occurs. The embedded idea is that as
long-term indicators carry more weight, the golden crossover
indicates a bull market on the horizon and is reinforced
by high trading volumes. Similarly, a sell signal is released
when the SWMA crosses below the LWMA, predicting a
bear market, and this is where the death crossover happens.
Some researchers have already tested this trading rule on
some commonly used indices in the US stock market, ﬁnding
that this technical analysis can generate a higher return on
investment than the buy-and-hold strategy; however, it still
cannot reﬂect a downturn in a timely manner due to its lag
property [9].

Figure 2 represents the general pipeline for the moving
average crossover strategy. We ﬁrst input historical closing
prices through the Alpha Vantage API, from which we can
obtain all daily closing price data from the US stock market
from the time to market, but we select 40% of the historical
data here because we would like to make a comparison based
on the return on investment (RoI) and Sharpe ratio more
intuitively in the Discussion section. Then, we calculate the
SWMA and LWMA for generating buy-and-sell signals. Next,
we simulate the strategies with an initial capital of 10,000 USD

Fig. 2. Moving average crossover: The algorithm starts from the left with
inputs (pink), from which we obtain our data from the Alpha Vantage API
(purple). The raw input variables are historical daily closing prices. Then,
we perform our moving average analysis (blue) to determine the buy-or-sell
signals (green). Lastly, we evaluate the performance by using the ROI and
Sharpe ratio as metrics.

and set a maximum capacity to enable buying and selling at
each crossover. Here, for simplicity, we ignore the transaction
fee. Finally, we evaluate the performance of this strategy
by comparing the ROI and Sharpe ratio to a buy-and-hold
strategy.

B. Volume-Weighted Average Price

The SMA provides the recent price trend of a security.
However, it does not take into account the level of volume
traded at each price level. On the other hand, the volume-
weighted average price (VWAP) gives the average price for
intraday trading weighted by the transaction volume at each
price. Equation (3) represents the formal deﬁnition of the
VWAP, where P t
is the
corresponding volume traded at that price.

time t and Q t

is the price at

V W AP =

(cid:80) Pt · Qt
(cid:80) Qt

(2)

Cesari et al. [10] suggest that traders have incorporated
institutional investors’ tendency into target the VWAP into
their intraday trading strategies [10]. A bullish/bearish market
is indicated when prices cross above/below the VWAP and
traders shall buy/sell accordingly
[11, 12, 13]. Menkhoff
(2010) indicates that the performance of VWAP strategies
varies signiﬁcantly and that the VWAP does not necessarily
outperform the buy-and-hold strategy [14].

Figure 3 represents the pipeline for a VWAP case study.
We keep most parts consistent with the pipeline for the SMA.
the VWAP index is directly available from
Unfortunately,

Fig. 3. Summary of the VWAP trading algorithm: The data sources used
are shown in purple. We relied on the Alpha Vantage API to collect the
necessary data. The input variables used and the assets we trade are in pink.
The trading conditions and the calculated index (in our case, the VWAP) are
shown in blue. Green represents the conditions for buy/sell signals as well as
the metrics used for evaluating the algorithm.

as well as intraday cryptocurrency data. The interval chosen
was 5 min. Table II summarizes the data. It shows the variables
we use, the frequency at which these variables are collected,
the unit of each variable, and a short description.

TABLE II
VOLUME WEIGHTED AVERAGE PRICE: DATA
DATA SOURCE: ALPHA VANTAGE API

Variable

Frequency

Date

5 min

Unit
YYYY-MM-DD
HH:MM:SS

Close

5 min

USD

VWAP

5 min

USD

Ticker

-

-

Interval

5 min

min/hr/day

B. Results

Description
Date and time for
which the data were recorded
Price at which the stock ended
trading in a given time period
Average price of a security within
a day, adjusted for its volume.
Available for an API call
only for traditional stocks;
manually calculated using
the formula for crypto.
Stock symbol (e.g., TSLA, AAPL
for traditional, BTC, ETH for crypto)
Time difference between two data points

1) Moving Average Crossover: Here, we present one typical
cryptocurrency, Ether (ETH), to generate buy-and-sell signals,
followed by the moving average crossover strategies. We
visualize our holdings and cash ﬂow during this testing period,
and we determine and compare the performance of the moving
average crossover to the simple buy-and-hold strategy.

Figure 4 is a visualization of how the buy-and-sell strategy is
deﬁned when applying the moving average strategy to perform
the backtesting on ETH. According to Figure 2, when the
short-window moving average (SWMA) crosses above the
long-window moving average (LWMA), it generates a buy
signal. Conversely, it produces a sell signal. The signal is
speciﬁcally drawn on the closing price line.

Fig. 4. Buy-and-Sell Signal: ETH moving average crossover

Figure 5 shows how the portfolio would change in the time
series after applying the crossover strategy to claim to buy
or sell ETH during the backtesting period. Here, we assume
that the transaction fee is 0.1% per transaction. We carry out
buying behavior by buying the maximum number of shares
with all the cash held, and we carry out selling behavior by
selling all the shares to obtain cash.

From Figure 6, it is obvious that over the two-year back-

testing period, the total revenue increases.

From Figure 6, the ROI given this backtesting period is
849.8%, performing much better than the simple buy-and-hold
strategy, which produces an ROI of 12.0%.

the Alpha Vantage API 1 only for traditional stocks. For
cryptocurrencies, we perform the calculation ourselves.

III. DATA AND RESULTS

A. Data

1) Moving Average Crossover Data: Table I shows all the

data used in the moving average crossover algorithm:

TABLE I
MOVING AVERAGE CROSSOVER: DATA
DATA SOURCE: ALPHA VANTAGE API. THIS TABLE SHOWS THE RAW
DATA THAT WE RETRIEVED FROM THE API. THE PRICE OF STOCKS AND
CRYPTO ASSETS CORRESPONDS TO THE CLOSING PRICE OF THE GIVEN
ASSET ON A GIVEN DATE.

Variable

Frequency

Unit

Date

daily

YYYY-MM-DD

Close

daily

Short MA

daily

Long MA

daily

Signal

-

USD

USD

USD

-

Description
Date and time for
which the data were recorded
Price at which the stock ended
trading in a given time period
Average price of a security within a
certain period, typically 50 days.
Average price of a security within a certain
period, typically 200 days.
Buy-and-sell signal (e.g., TSLA, AAPL
for stock, BTC, ETH for crypto)

2) Volume-Weighted Average Price: Using the Alpha Van-
tage API, we collected intraday stock data derived from
securities information processor (SIP) market-aggregated data

1Alpha Vantage is a website that offers ﬁnancial market data through its
developer-friendly APIs. Alpha Vantage provides both traditional assets data
and forex and cryptocurrency data. Upon installation, we used its time series
stocks API to retrieve intraday time series of the stocks we explored. We
also used the tech indicators API, from which we retrieved daily VWAP data
for the same stocks. Without that API, we would have had to calculate the
VWAP by applying its formula to the data. We have used Alpha Vantage
because its API is among one of the few that offers free intraday data.
Unlike the open-high-low-closing data that many websites offer, intraday
data are rarer and usually are not free of charge. Quandl, for example, has
high-quality intraday data, but they are not free. A key limitation of the
use of Alpha Vantage’s free API is that it only allows us to query only
the last 15 days. It is worth noting that the documentation says that the
TIME SERIES INTRADAY method can retrieve 1-2 months of intraday data,
while the TIME SERIES INTRADAY EXTENDED returns the trailing 2
years. As another important limitation, the maximum number of requests is 5
API requests per minute and 500 API requests per day. Alpha Vantage offers
a premium API key, which allows for a higher call limit as well as more
historical data.

Fig. 5. Portfolio time series: ETH moving average crossover

Fig. 8. Buy-and-Sell Signal: Volume-Weighted Average Price

Fig. 6. Gross ROI: ETH moving average crossover vs. buy-and-hold
Moving average crossover strategy ROI: 849.84%
Buy & hold strategy ROI: 11.97%

left side of the graph. There are far fewer as we move to the
right (as there are fewer signals produced there). The overall
total seems to have decreased from its initial value of 100,000.

Fig. 9. Portfolio time series: Volume-Weighted Average Price

From Figure 7, the Sharpe ratio given this backtesting period
is 1.69, showing that this strategy, which produces a Sharpe
Ratio result of 3.24, has a higher ability to deal with ﬁnancial
risks.

Fig. 7. Sharpe Ratio: ETH moving average crossover vs. buy-and-hold
Moving average crossover strategy Sharpe ratio: 0.98
Buy-and-hold strategy Sharpe ratio: 2.60

Figure 10 displays a comparison of the ROI when trading
ETH using the buy-and-hold strategy (in black) and the VWAP
strategy (in blue). The buy-and-hold strategy looks the same
as the price evolution graph in Figure 8. For the studied time
period, the trader would have an ROI of approximately -4%.
Using the VWAP also results in a negative ROI, very close to
the buy-and-sell ROI. For this time period, using the buy-and-
sell strategy or the VWAP strategy would have resulted in a
loss.

Fig. 10. Gross ROI: Volume-Weighted Average Price vs. Buy-and-Hold
Volume-weighted average price strategy ROI: -3.93%
Buy-and-hold strategy ROI: -4.26%

2) Volume-Weighted Average Price: Figure 8 shows the
buy-and-sell signals generated using the VWAP strategy when
trading ETH. The black line shows the evolution of the price of
ETH for the period retrieved. The blue line shows the VWAP
value over the same period. The value of the VWAP was
calculated for each 5-min interval from the price and closing
data. We see that there is an upward green arrow signifying a
buy signal each time the price of ETH crosses the VWAP line
from below. We have downward red arrows for sell signals,
which are generated whenever the price of ETH crosses the
VWAP line from above. We see that when the current price
and the VWAP line intersect repeatedly in a short time period,
there are multiple consecutive buy-and-sell signals.

Figure 9 displays the evolution of the portfolio when trading
ETH using the VWAP strategy. We plotted the current amount
of cash in red, the value of the holdings in green, and the sum
of both cash and holdings in red (total). As expected from the
multiple buy-and-sell signals in Figure 8 early on, there are
many ﬂuctuations in the amount of cash and holdings on the

Figure 11 displays a comparison of the Sharpe ratio when
trading ETH using the buy-and-hold strategy (in black) and the
VWAP strategy (in blue). We see that both Sharpe ratios end
up being negative, with the buy-and-hold ratio being slightly
below zero, and the VWAP ratio being close to -2%. Both
the buy-and-hold and VWAP strategies return negative Sharpe
ratios in this case. We therefore cannot say that using the
VWAP improves our returns, especially in the very short term.

IV. DISCUSSION

In conclusion, we propose a data science pipeline for
algorithmic trading and verify that the pipeline is generally

Fig. 11. Sharpe Ratio: Volume-Weighted Average Price vs Buy-and-Hold
Volume-Weighted Average strategy Sharpe ratio: -1.62
Buy-and-hold strategy Sharpe ratio: -0.52

applicable for designing, programming, and evaluating the al-
gorithmic trading of stock and crypto assets. Furthermore, we
implement our algorithms through object-oriented program-
ming in Python3, which serves as open-source software for
future academic research and applications. The data, code, and
supplementary results can be found on the Github repository:
https://github.com/SciEcon/SRS2021.

We evaluated our data science pipeline based on two con-

ventional algorithmic trading strategies.

• The moving average crossover is among the most
prominent
investment strategies in ﬁnance that build
mathematical models to further forecast future market
movements through historical market records [15]. Cur-
rently, researchers and industry practitioners are keenly
interested in analyzing the moving average crossover
strategy in crypto trading. Fang et al. [16] applied the
simple moving average trading strategy based on daily
closing price data for the 11 most traded cryptocurrencies
over the period 2016-2018. Their results showed that
technical trading rules, excluding Bitcoin, produced a
desirable annualized excess return of 8.76%. Moreover,
due to the high volatility of crypto prices, a revised
approach to the moving average has started to be intro-
duced by considering the tolerance of time ranges for
the intersection of transaction signals in real industry
practices [17].

• The volume-weighted average price can be viewed as
an advanced version of the moving average crossover
strategy that averages by weights of transaction volumes.
Although the prior literature has mainly focused on using
the VWAP as one of the technical indicators used to trade
assets, few efforts have been made to use the index for
cryptocurrencies. One emerging trend, however, is the
adoption of the VWAP in the industry practices of DeFi
applications. A prominent example is the Ampleforth
DeFi protocol [18], which issues stable coin AMPL. Am-
pleforth uses VWAP data from decentralized Chainlink
oracles [19] to expand or contract the supply of AMPL
accordingly, every 24 hours, adjusting the price of AMPL
to be approximately one US dollar regardless of the
volatility in the market demand for AMPL [20].

We also provide an online appendix in the Github repos-
itory:https://github.com/SciEcon/SRS2021. In the online ap-
pendix, we present additional results of the aforementioned

two algorithms, the moving average crossover and volume-
weighted average price, and we provide an additional eval-
uation of our data science pipeline based on two additional
algorithms: sentiment analysis and pairs trading.

Our research is seminal in inspiring future innovations in

two ways.

• First, the current research shows how our data science
pipeline is generally applicable for implementing and
evaluating existing trading algorithms. Furthermore, our
approach can be applied to design, implement, and eval-
uate new trading algorithms, as in Liu and Zhang [21].
Since there currently does not exist a consensus on the
valuation of crypto assets, effective algorithmic trading
strategies for various crypto tokens have yet to be found.
• Second, our data science pipeline is general enough
for researchers to customize various settings, such as
data sources, input variables, assets, trading conditions,
indices, buy-and-sell signals, and evaluation indicators.
However, the pipeline might better serve more advanced
reinforcement learning algorithms and sentiment analysis
by incorporating existing general-purpose or domain-
speciﬁc data science frameworks, as in [22].

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the Alpha Vantage API for providing academic
accounts for the data querying in our research. We thank
Zesen Zhuang for his assistance in hosting tutorial sessions
for Tianyu Wu, Saad Lahrichi, Carlos-Gustavo Salas-Flores,
and Jiayi Li about object-oriented programming in Python3.

REFERENCES

[1] N. Burgess, “An introduction to algorithmic trading:
Opportunities & challenges within the systematic trading
industry,” SSRN Electronic Journal, 2019.

[2] G. P. M. Virgilio, “High-frequency trading: a literature
review,” Financial Markets and Portfolio Management,
vol. 33, pp. 183–208, 06 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
//link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11408-019-00331-6
[3] P. Gomber and K. Zimmermann, Algorithmic Trading in
Practice, S.-H. Chen, M. Kaboudan, and Y.-R. Du, Eds.
Oxford University Press, 02 2018.

[4] N. Reznik

and L. Pankratova,

a

as

component

trade
market
//ceur-ws.org/Vol-2104/paper 174.pdf

consequences.”

of

algorithmic

“High-frequency
trading:
http:

[Online]. Available:

[5] A. Azzutti, W.-G. Ringe, and H. S. Stiehl, “Machine
learning, market manipulation and collusion on capital
markets: Why the ’black box’ matters,” papers.ssrn.com,
02 2021. [Online]. Available: https://ssrn.com/abstract=
3788872

[6] J. E. Granville, New key to stock market proﬁts. Prentice-

Hall, 1963.

[7] A. RAUDYS and Z. PABARSKAITE, “Optimising the
smoothness and accuracy of moving average for stock
price data,” Technological and Economic Development
of Economy, vol. 24, pp. 984–1003, 05 2018.

[8] I. Bhattacharjee and P. Bhattacharja, “Stock price predic-
tion: A comparative study between traditional statistical
approach and machine learning approach,” 2019 4th
International Conference on Electrical Information and
Communication Technology (EICT), 12 2019.

automated trading environment for scientiﬁc research
and applications in Cryptoeconomics,” 2022. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/sciecon/cryptoenv

[9] W. BROCK, J. LAKONISHOK, and B. LeBARON,
trading rules and the stochastic
“Simple technical
of
The
properties
Finance,
1992.
[Online]. Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
full/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1992.tb04681.x

Journal
12

1731–1764,

stock
47,

returns,”

of
vol.

pp.

[10] R. Cesari, M. Marzo, and P. Zagaglia, “Effective trade

execution,” SSRN Electronic Journal, 2012.

[11] S. A. BERKOWITZ, D. E. LOGUE, and E. A. NOSER,
“The total cost of transactions on the nyse,” The Journal
of Finance, vol. 43, pp. 97–112, 03 1988.

[12] A. R. Admati and P. Pﬂeiderer, “A theory of intraday pat-
terns: Volume and price variability,” Review of Financial
Studies, vol. 1, pp. 3–40, 01 1988.

[13] T. G. ANDERSEN, “Return volatility and trading vol-
ume: An information ﬂow interpretation of stochastic
volatility,” The Journal of Finance, vol. 51, pp. 169–204,
03 1996.

[14] L. Menkhoff, “The use of technical analysis by fund
International evidence,” www.econstor.eu,
https://www.econstor.eu/

[Online]. Available:

managers:
2010.
handle/10419/38748

[15] M. S. Brown and M. Pelosi, “Moving averages
cryptocurrencies,”
applied
to
[Online].
2019.
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/

trading method
www.semanticscholar.org,
Available:
MOVING-AVERAGES-TRADING-METHOD-APPLIED\
-TO-Brown-Pelosi/81fad98931b58359a15f24b7bcada34ab\
5973268

[16] F. Fang, C. Ventre, M. Basios, L. Kanthan, D. Martinez-
Rego, F. Wu, and L. Li, “Cryptocurrency trading: a
comprehensive survey,” Financial Innovation, vol. 8, 02
2022.

[17] Interdax, “Research: A variable moving average strategy
for bitcoin outperforms hodling,” Interdax Blog, 12
2019. [Online]. Available: https://medium.com/interdax/
research-a-variable-moving-average-strategy-for-bitcoin\
-outperforms-hodling-def78b27d8eb

[18] E. Kuo, B. Iles, and M. R. Cruz, “Ampleforth: A new

synthetic commodity,” Ampleforth White Paper, 2019.

ampleforth

[19] E. Kuo,
integration
[Online].
the-ampleforth-chainlink-oracle-integration-is-going-live-\
16053ccdebd5

oracle
2020.
https://blog.ampleforth.org/

“The
is
going
Available:

+
live,” Medium,

chainlink
03

[20] L. Zhang and Y. Liu, “Optimal algorithmic monetary

policy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07888, 2021.

[21] Y. Liu and L. Zhang, “Cryptocurrency valuation: An ex-
plainable ai approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12893,
2022.
[22] L. Zhang

“CryptoEnv: An

and Z. Zhuang,

