The Open Corpus of the Veps and Karelian Languages: 
Overview and Applications

Tatyana Boyko1, Nina Zaitseva1, Natalia Krizhanovskaya2, Andrew
Krizhanovsky2,3,*, Irina Novak1, Nataliya Pellinen1, 
and Aleksandra Rodionova1

1 Institute of Linguistics, Literature and History, Karelian Research Centre, Russian Academy of Sciences 
2 Institute of Applied Mathematical Research, Karelian Research Centre, Russian Academy of Sciences
3 Petrozavodsk State University
*Corresponding author: Andrew Krizhanovsky; Email: andrew.krizhanovsky
3717-2079

 @gmail.com

 ; ORCID: 0000-0003-

Other ORCID iDs: Tatyana Boyko ORCID: 0000-0001-5095-2921; Nina Zaitseva ORCID: 0000-0002-
8335-2137; Natalia Krizhanovskaya ORCID: 0000-0002-9948-1910; Irina Novak ORCID: 0000-0002-
9436-9460; Nataliya Pellinen ORCID: 0000-0002-5648-6877; Aleksandra Rodionova ORCID: 0000-0001-
5645-9441

Abstract 
A growing priority in the study of Baltic-Finnic languages of the Republic of Karelia has been the 
methods and tools of corpus linguistics. Since 2016, linguists, mathematicians, and programmers at 
the Karelian Research Centre have been working with the Open Corpus of the Veps and Karelian 
Languages (VepKar), which is an extension of the Veps Corpus created in 2009. The VepKar corpus 
comprises texts in Karelian and Veps, multifunctional dictionaries linked to them, and software with 
an advanced system of search using various criteria of the texts (language, genre, etc.) and numerous 
linguistic categories (lexical and grammatical search in texts was implemented thanks to the generator
of word forms that we created earlier). A corpus of 3000 texts was compiled, texts were uploaded and 
marked up, the system for classifying texts into languages, dialects, types and genres was introduced, 
and the word-form generator was created. Future plans include developing a speech module for 
working with audio recordings and a syntactic tagging module using morphological analysis outputs. 
Owing to continuous functional advancements in the corpus manager and ongoing VepKar 
enrichment with new material and text markup, users can handle a wide range of scientific and 
applied tasks. In creating the universal national VepKar corpus, its developers and managers strive to 
preserve and exhibit as fully as possible the state of the Veps and Karelian languages in the 19 th-21st 
centuries.

Keywords: corpus linguistics, Veps language, Karelian language, national corpus, dictionary, tagging

Introduction

1.
One of the key focuses for Baltic-Finnic linguistic studies in Karelia in the past decade has been
corpus-based research on languages of the region. Although the corpus is an essential modern tool for
language  studies,  it must  be  said that  large  annotated  open-access  online  corpora  are  not  always
available even for languages spoken by large populations (e.g., a large Ukrainian corpus incorporating
all genres appeared in 2020 [1]).

The development of corpus linguistics activities at the Institute of Linguistics, Literature and
History of the Karelian Research Centre of the Russian Academy of Sciences (KarRC RAS) has been
enabled   by   close   and   productive   collaboration   with   mathematicians   and   programmers   from   the
Institute of Applied Mathematical Research KarRC RAS. This effort commenced in 2009, when the
Veps Corpus was created under the leadership of Nina Zaitseva1. The Veps Corpus consisted of five
text corpora, an electronic dictionary, and search tools [2]. Digitalization of scientific knowledge,
which is meant to augment data sampling, classification, and analysis possibilities, has dictated the

1

See http://vepsian.krc.karelia.ru/about/ 

 
 
need to widen corpus research to cover the language of the region’s titular ethnic group – Karelian,
and triggered the creation of the multilingual corpus since 2016. The extended corpus was entitled
“The Open Corpus of the Veps and Karelian Languages” (VepKar).

During these five years, much has been done to fill the digital resource with texts as well as to
supply it with dictionaries and diverse tools for conveniently using the corpus. The corpus manager in
the   VepKar   project   is   the   Dictorpus   open   source   code   software   complex   written   in   the   PHP
programming language on Laravel platform.  The data are stored in a MySQL database.  Significant
augmentation of the VepKar corpus volume and functions is critical for linguists, who need a fully-
featured research tool.

2. Corpus architecture and quantitative characteristics
The VepKar architecture with the latest statistics is shown in Fig. 1.

Figure 1: Corpus architecture and quantitative characteristics

2.1. Subcorpora

Expectedly, the central block of the resource is the corpus (assemblage) of texts. As of October 2021,
it contains over 3000 texts, and the process of adding new texts is continuous. The list of sources for
the corpus includes: published Karelian and Veps dialectal speech samples, folklore, literary, and
translated   texts   in   Karelian   and   Veps,   material   from   the   Karelian   newspaper   Oma   Mua,   Veps
newspaper   Kodima,   Taival   Almanac   in   Karelian   and   Verez   tullei   Almanac   in   Veps,   etc.   All
accessions   are   strictly  subject   to  approval   by  publishers   and  authors   (only  open-license   texts   are
used2). One more apparently inexhaustible source is the KarRC RAS Scientific Archives. Continuous
supplementation of the corpus with new material contributes to a wider recognition and popularity of
the Karelian and Veps languages, and to successful fulfillment of various publicity, educational, and
research tasks.

The process of uploading new texts to the corpus consists of several key stages:

i.

ii.
iii.
iv.

selection of texts to be included in the corpus and getting permission from the author
(if applicable);
text digitalization (this stage is skipped for digital resources);
processing and proofreading of the digitalized text to correct text recognition errors;
uploading   the   text   to   the   corpus   (includes   code   conversion   and   segmentation
processes);

2

See permissions from Veps and Karelian writers and poets for having their texts included in the VepKar 
corpus at http://dictorpus.krc.karelia.ru/ru/page/permission 

v.
vi.
vii.

viii.

ix.

metatextual markup (done manually according to template);
automatic structural markup (parsing into sentences and words); 
automatic lexico-grammatical markup: semantic (meaning or variant of meaning) and
grammatical (part of speech and the set of possible grammemes) characteristics are
assigned to each token (lexical unit);
revision of markup results by experts (error correction, elimination of homonymy,
tagging of unrecognized tokens);
parallel translation into Russian (sentence-wise). 

An important element for a researcher working with a text is its metatextual markup, which
includes information about the language and dialect affiliations, the author or performer (informant),
dates, genre features, etc.

All   the   uploaded   texts   are   distributed   among   subcorpora   (Figure   2)   according   to   two

parameters: language affiliation and type of the text.

As the corpus combines two Baltic-Finnic languages, it is expedient to make a division into
the respective subcorpora for the languages. However, the dialectal disunity of the Karelian language,
which has three notably distinct supradialects, urged the developers to create three rather than one
Karelian subcorpora [3]. It is within these lower-level subcorpora that texts are divided according to
their dialectal affiliation (4 Veps language dialects, 25 dialects of Karelian Proper, 8 Livvi dialects,
and 4 Ludian dialects) or belonging to a standardized variety of the language (one variety for Veps
and four for Karelian). Standardized varieties act as a kind of a reference baseline for building the
principal components of the corpus manager, permitting linguists to search through dialectal texts as
well.

Speaking   of   the   text   type   and   style,   the   texts   are   distributed   into   the   following   major
subcorpora: biblical texts, law, journalistic texts, subtitles, folklore texts, literary texts (Figure 2).
Texts in the literary and folklore text subcorpora are also subdivided into genres (Figure 3). 

Figure 2: Distribution of VepKar texts among subcorpora according to languages and types, as
of October20213

3

For updated statistics visit http://dictorpus.krc.karelia.ru/en/stats/by_corpus 

Figure 3: Distribution of VepKar texts among genres and languages, as of October 20214

Apart from the texts, VepKar corpus has various tools for processing them. Using advanced
search (Figure 4), one can filter the texts by language, type or genre as well as by informant, recorder
or author, year of recording or year of publication (Figure 5).

Figure 4: Advanced search interface for VepKar texts

4

For updated statistics visit http://dictorpus.krc.karelia.ru/en/stats/by_genre 

Figure   5:   Number   of   VepKar   texts   by   year   of   recording,   date   of   publication,   and   date   of
accession to the corpus, as of October 20215

2.2. Dictionary

The second major block that facilitates the work with the corpus of texts is the dictionary. The corpus
dictionary comprises over 60 000 entries and approx. 2.5 million word forms. Words in the dictionary
are   mainly   explained   in   Russian   and   English,  but   explanations   can   be   added   also   in   Veps,
supradialects of Karelian, and in Finnish (Figure 6). The search for lemmas in the dictionary can be
arranged by language and dialect affiliations, parts of speech, grammatical features, or even lexical-
semantic categories (Figure 7).

Figure 6: Fragment of the dictionary entry hoštta with translations, examples, and word forms6

Figure 7: Interface for the search for lemmas and the search results for Livvi verbs related to
the concept of “Dishes, household utensils” in the VepKar dictionary

5
6

For updated statistics visit http://dictorpus.krc.karelia.ru/en/stats/by_year 
Full version of the entry is available at http://dictorpus.krc.karelia.ru/en/dict/lemma/1274 

Lemmas and word forms with grammatical feature sets were exported from the Veps and Karelian
dictionaries of the VepKar corpus to the Universal Morphological Database UniMorph 3.0. These
data are available on GitHub website as separate subprojects of the project [4].

Due to the electronic format of the material, which permits retrieving various subsets and
running advanced search queries, the VepKar corpus dictionary is multifunctional. It is a full-fledged
interlingual   dictionary  (Karelian/Veps   -   Russian),   amply  illustrated  due   to  links   between   lemmas
(dictionary entries) and corpus texts. Owing to the search-by-explanation option, it can to a certain
extent   be   used   as   an   alternative   to   a   printed   Russian-Karelian   or   Russian-Veps   dictionary.   The
availability of full inflectional paradigms for nominals (ca. 30 word forms) and verbs (ca. 130 word
forms)   gives   the   dictionary   a   grammatical-spelling   perspective.   In   addition,   full   frequency-   and
reverse dictionaries are also available to the users. The phraseological dictionary is getting gradually
filled up. The possibility of creating government (verbal, adpositional, adadverbial, adnominal, etc.)
dictionaries is being considered. 

Apart   from   its   application   within   the   corpus,   VepKar   dictionary   is   an   ample   source   of
material for all sorts of electronic Karelian and Veps dictionaries to be created. In 2021 e.g., an open
source code mobile application Sanahelmi v.1 written in Kotlin language 7 was produced for Android
devices8. This app is a simplified version of the VepKar corpus dictionary, containing all Veps and
Karelian words (lemmas and word forms), grammatical features, and explanations in Russian from the
VepKar dictionary.

2.3. Corpus-dictionary interaction

Linguistic research is facilitated by special modules of the corpus manager which connect the corpus
and the dictionary. An essential feature of the VepKar corpus is automatic linguistic markup, which
includes tokenization (breaking up into words), lemmatization (returning word forms to the dictionary
form), and morphological markup (part-of-speech and grammatical category (gramset) identification).
The   percentage   of  automatic   markup  of   texts   in  the   corpus   is   now   73%.   This   level   was
achieved owing to the implementation in  2019–2020 of nominal and verbal word-form generation
algorithms for the Veps language, Livvi Karelian and, especially, Karelian Proper [5]. Project experts
revise the markup and eliminate semantic (selection of meaning) and morphological (selection of
grammatical features) homonymy (Figure 8). At the same time, a module for automatic elimination of
homonymy is being developed.

Figure 8: Examples of semantic and morphological homonymy in the process of marking up a
text in the VepKar corpus; editor chooses one of the meanings of the word and morphological
features

Interactions between the corpus and the dictionaries are facilitated by quite a number of tools. E.g.,
frequency   dictionaries,   which   retrieve   the   most   common   lexemes   and   word   forms,   help   editors
manage the priorities in their work i.e., enter the most common lemmas into the dictionaries, thereby
accelerating the rate of text markup. In addition, these dictionaries can be used for statistical research.

7
8

See https://github.com/componavt/sanahelmi 
See https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=vepkar.test 

E.g., the timeframe of the corpus permits tracking changes in the lexical composition of the Veps and
Karelian   languages   over   a   century.   With   stylistic   subcorpora   available,   a   similar   study   can   be
implemented for certain genres or for specific texts.

In 2021, after word form generators had been created, it became possible to deliver a tool for
advanced lexico-grammatical text search (Figure 9), which is especially important for dealing with
morphological homonymy elimination. The predictor module gives the editor suggestions to choose
from regarding parts of speech, grammatical features, and the root form of the word not recognized by
automatic markup [6].

Figure 9: Lexico-grammatical search

A major promising task for the future is to build a morphological analyzer, which is designed e.g., to
identify the endings of nominal and verbal word forms,  to predict  the  proper forms of  nominals
coming with verbs (verbal government), and word order in the sentence.

Thus, corpus-dictionary interconnections and the constantly expanding functionality of the
corpus manager enable multiple uses of the textual material for dealing with a variety of linguistic
tasks.

3. Conclusions

The conclusion following from the above is that VepKar:

i.
ii.
iii.

iv.

v.

vi.

provides users with free access to full-text documents;
is continuously supplemented with new data;
is  a   multilingual   resource:   includes   texts  in Veps   and Karelian (dictionaries   offer
explanations in Russian and partially in English);
is   a   full-text   corpus   i.e.,   texts   are   fully   tagged   and   the   entire   body   of   texts   is
searchable;
covers the languages as much as possible, i.e., includes texts of various types, genres
and styles. In this sense, according to the definition suggested in [7], VepKar is the
Veps   and Karelian National   Corpus.  Furthermore,  the  corpus  content  exhibits  the
state of the languages in different time periods;
includes the following type of markup: metatextual (text title, date of creation, author,
genre, place of recording, etc.), morphological (parts of speech and morphological

features are given for words in the texts), and semantic (words in texts are linked to
meanings in dictionary entries). 

Thus, VepKar is an open, dynamical, multilingual, written, full-text, representative national Veps and
Karelian corpus containing metatextual, morphological, and semantic markup. The system has tools
permitting  linguists  to import  and  export  data   in  different  formats,  test   and verify them,  retrieve
various sample sets for analysis.

Further   advancement   of   the   VepKar   corpus   will   presumably   proceed   in   two   directions:

volume and structure.

Filling of the corpus with new tagged texts i.e., volume augmentation, is limited only by the
physical   capacity   of   experts,   since   proofreading,   editing   and   homonymy   elimination   are   done
manually   by   a   small   group   of   linguists.   Certain   limitations   are   imposed   also   by   copyright
arrangements.

Project participants are dealing with a range of tasks related to expanding the functionality of
the corpus. One of the plans e.g., is to add an audio recording and playback module, permitting
linguists to record and users to listen to real Karelian and Veps speech. The syntactic markup module,
which works  with the  output of morphological  analysis, can be  used to study the  syntactic links
between lexical units. Semantic markup, in turn, can expand the range of studies based on the corpus
data to cover other areas in the humanities (literature studies, folklore studies, ethnology, history,
etc.).

The tools already available in the VepKar corpus offer unique opportunities for handling quite
a number of linguistic tasks in the study of Karelian and Veps vocabulary and grammar. Material
from the corpus is used in the making of new dictionaries and grammar books, and in the process of
editing the rules and norms of newly written varieties of the languages in question. The corpus can
also  be   a   source   of   material   for   Karelian  and  Veps   language   instruction.   Besides,   data   from   the
VepKar platform, provided that their volume and structural potential are further expanded, can be of
use   in   dealing   with   complicated   linguistic   tasks   such   as   the   development   of   automatic   tools   for
spellcheck, speech recognition and synthesis, machine translation, building of computer models of the
Karelian and Veps languages.

Funding
The study is carried out with regular budget funding to the Karelian Research Centre RAS.

References

[1] Shvedova M. The general regionally annotated corpus of Ukrainian (GRAC, 

uacorpus.org): Architecture and functionality. Paper presented at: the 4th International 

Conference on Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Systems (COLINS 2020); April 

23-24, 2020; Lviv, Ukraine. 

[2] Zaitseva NG, Krizhanovskaya NB. Corpus linguistics in the Baltic-Finnic research area 

(the corpus of the Veps language and the open corpus of the Veps and Karelian 

languages). Nordic and Baltic Studies Review. 2018;3:264-273. 

https://doi.org/10.15393/j103.art.2018.1062

[3] Krizhanovsky АА, Krizhanovskaya NB, Novak IP. Dialects in open corpus of Veps and 

Karelian languages (VepKar). Paper presented at: the International Conference Corpus 

Linguistics ‒ 2019; June 24–28, 2019; Saint Petersburg, Russia.

[4] McCarthy AD, Kirov C, Grella M et al. UniMorph 3.0: Universal morphology. Paper 

presented at: the 12th Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2020); 

May 13–15, 2020; Marseille, France.

[5] Novak IP, Krizhanovskaya NB, Boyko TP, Pellinen NA. Development of rules of 

generation of nominal word forms for new-written variants of the Karelian language. 

Bulletin of Ugric Studies. 2020;10(4):679–691. https://doi.org/10.30624/2220-4156-

2020-10-4-679-691

[6] Krizhanovsky A, Krizhanovskaya N, Novak I. Part of speech and gramset tagging 

algorithms for unknown words based on morphological dictionaries of the Veps and 

Karelian languages in management in data intensive domains. Communications in 

Computer and Information Science. 2021;1427:163–177. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-

030-81200-3_12.

[7] Kibrik AY, Tatevosov SG, Lyutikova  EA, et al. Introduction to the science of language. 

Moscow: Buki Vedi; 2019.

