An Autonomous Drone System with Jamming and
Relative Positioning Capabilities

Nicolas Souli, Panayiotis Kolios, and Georgios Ellinas

1

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

9

]
P
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
7
0
3
4
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—As the number of unauthorized operations of Un-
manned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) is rising, the implementation
of a versatile counter-drone system is becoming a necessity. In
this work, we develop a drone-based counter-drone system, that
employs algorithms for detecting and tracking a rogue drone, in
conjunction with wireless interception capabilities to jointly jam
the rogue drone while achieving self positioning for the pursuer
drone. In the proposed system a software-deﬁned-radio (SDR) is
used for switching between jamming transmissions and spectrum
sweeping functionalities to achieve the desired GPS disruption
and self-localization, respectively. Extensive ﬁeld experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed solution in a real-
world environment under various parameter settings.

Index Terms—Signals of opportunity, relative vehicle position-

ing, counter-drone system, jamming attacks

I. INTRODUCTION

Already UAV technologies have penetrated several indus-
trial domains, and thus unsafe and illegal drone operations
are becoming a major concern [1] especially in terms of
critical infrastructure security. Thus, counter-drone systems
must be developed to restrain illegal/unsafe drone operations.
Even though high-cost anti-drone military systems have been
developed to date, such solutions are not suited for civilian
use; rather, the use of localized interception technology for
malicious drones provides a more feasible solution for civilian
applications. Already simplistic jamming solutions have been
investigated to disable commercial UAVs that employ standard
GPS signals to navigate [2]–[4].

In the contrary, and to tackle the jamming problem, various
techniques have been applied to assist with vehicle navigation,
such as the inertial navigation system (INS) [5], as well as
data fusion of different measurements, for instance, from light
and range sensors [6]. Such techniques, however, are not as
reliable to meet the autonomous requirements, mainly due
to data degradation and loss of signal [4], [7]. A different
approach is to collect the SOPs available in the area and use
them for relative positioning [8], [9]. These signals (such as
radio signals, TV signals, etc.) are prime candidates for relative
positioning, as are freely available in the environment and
are transmitted at high power [5]. Such techniques, however,

assumed initial knowledge of the receiver’s reference position
or the location of the transmitters.

This work complements previous attempts for anti-drone
systems and develops a real-time counter-drone system utiliz-
ing detection, tracking, and jamming modules to counter the
rogue drone’s ﬂight with high performance. In conjunction,
a relative localization module is also utilized, via the use of
SOPs and inertial measurements, to maintain the positioning
is
of the friendly UAV agent when its own GPS signal
unavailable. This is achieve via the use of an SDR that can
switch between the jamming and relative positioning modules.
This work builds on our previous work in [10] which
described a novel relative positioning system that localizes
a UAV agent by fusing SOP information along with inertial
measurements. Speciﬁcally, it signiﬁcantly extends [10] as
follows:

• A novel autonomous drone system is developed that
integrates both jamming capabilities as well as relative
positioning technologies to achieve a two-fold objective,
namely real-time rogue-drone interception and relative
localization of the pursuer drone cosidering that its GPS
received signal become unavailable due to the jamming
operation. In particular, this integrated system:

– Employs an algorithm that detects, tracks and wire-

less jams a rogue drone in real-time.

– Utilizes an SDR for both jamming rogue drones as
well as self relatively localization via the fusion of
SOP information along with inertial measurements.
• To assess and validate the system’s performance, exten-
sive experimental results are utilized for a wide variety
of parameters in a real-world outdoor environment.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the related work, while the methodology and the
framework of the proposed technique are discussed in Sec-
tions III and IV, respectively. Performance results are pre-
sented in Section V and the main conclusions are discussed
in Section VI, including directions for future research.

II. RELATED WORK

Nicolas Souli, Panayiotis Kolios, and Georgios Ellinas are with the De-
partment of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the KIOS Research
and Innovation Center of Excellence, University of Cyprus, {nsouli02,
pkolios, gellinas}@ucy.ac.cy

This work has been supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 833611
(CARAMEL) and 739551 (KIOS CoE) and from the Government of the Re-
public of Cyprus through the Directorate General for European Programmes,
Coordination and Development.

The extensive civilian use of UAVs and the noncompliance
of a large number of drone users with the relevant drone
operation legislations has spurred the need for effective anti-
drone systems [11], [12]. A number of these systems are SDR-
based; for example, in [13], the authors focused on a UAV
GPS interference framework in low-altitude airspace in order
to induce virtual location and UAV communication signal

 
 
 
 
 
 
suppression. Similarly, in [14], the authors developed jam-
ming techniques using low-cost SDR technology, successfully
demonstrating GPS jamming, spooﬁng, and remote control
interference, via experimental results. Further, an SDR-based
UAV GPS jamming approach is described in [15], where
the performance of the jamming signal and the elevation
angle on the jamming attack’s range were studied. Moreover,
effective GPS jamming techniques for UAVs using low-cost
SDR platforms were also presented in [16], demonstrating
navigation interception in a number of real-life scenarios. A
similar realization was described in [17], where a Lidar, ac-
celerometer, magnetometer, and GPS receiver were employed
to estimate the position of a rogue UAV, integrated with SDR
platforms for jamming and spooﬁng.

In terms of other technologies considered, in [18] an RF
based anti-drone mechanism is described, for jamming the
communication link between the rogue drone and the remote
controller. Also, in [12], an anti-drone system is developed,
combining passive surveillance, localization, and frequency
jamming technologies. However, limitations were observed
in terms of drone detection, high energy consumption, and
increased computational load.

There have also been numerous efforts in the state-of-
the-art concerning vehicle navigation utilizing SOPs, inertial
measurements, and optical ﬂow information. In terms of SOPs,
signiﬁcant
literature exists concerning relative positioning
techniques via the usage of SOPs [5], [8], [9]. In general,
though, such techniques operate with the assumption that the
reference position of the receiver and the transmitters’ loca-
tions are known a priori. In addition, other relative positioning
techniques focus on inertial measurements, and optical ﬂow
data. For example, in [19], a SLAM methodology is developed
on mobile robots for reliable indoor localization, using LIDAR
and RGD-B camera information. Also, in [20], to avoid the
inertial navigation system drift, an EKF-based scheme is
proposed combining optical ﬂow and inertial measurements.
Further, in [21], curb and vertical features are employed for
localization, utilizing a multi-layer LIDAR, demonstrating that
the fusion of multi-layer data using an IMU led to an accurate
position estimate. Also, in [22], a navigation technique that
calculates the current position of a vehicle by using a pre-
viously determined position utilizing only IMU information
is presented, relying on Kalman ﬁltering and deep neural
networks. Finally, our work in [23], proposed an effective real-
time relative positioning technique, integrating SOPs, inertial,
and optical ﬂow modalities.

Contrary to the research efforts detailed above, the proposed
counter-drone system in this work integrates both counter-
drone and relative positioning functionalities to achieve the
two-fold objective of real-time rogue-drone interception and
relative localization of the pursuer drone that looses its GPS
signal while performing wireless interception.

III. INTEGRATED DETECTING-TRACKING-JAMMING

A. System Model

The system model comprises of a pursuer UAV agent that
employs an onboard camera to detect and track the rogue

2

drone, as well as a software-deﬁned radio (SDR) platform
with the capability to switch between jamming and relative po-
sitioning functionalities. Without loss of generality, jamming
is enabled at the most commonly used GPS band (band L1
at 1575MHz), to intercept the detected rogue drone’s GPS.
Localization is performed via SOPs and inertia measurement
information collected using an onboard unit.

B. Detecting-and-Tracking Methodology

A vision-based algorithm is utilized for detecting-and-
tracking the rogue drone in the vicinity. Initially, footage from
various UAV sightings were acquired and applied as a training
dataset that resulted in approximately 10000 labeled images.
To implement the detection module, an onboard unit processes
the captured video frames received by the pursuer UAV’s
camera using a convolutional neural network object detection
algorithm, using the Tiny Yolov4 [24] framework that support
real-time applications with high accuracy performance. Sub-
sequently, to retain the rogue drone’s trajectory over time, a
tracker algorithm is employed, using the intersection-of-union
scores method and the Hungarian algorithm as discussed in
[25]. Then the Euclidean distance is computed dc between the
pursuer and rogue UAVs as follows. Initially the focal length
is calculated using:

f =

wAp ∗ dr
wAm

(1)

where dr is the reference distance of acquisition and wAm
and wAp the reference object’s width, in meters and pixels
respectively. Subsequently, dc can be obtained from:

dc =

wRm ∗ f
wRp

.

(2)

with wRm and wRp denoting the width of the detected rogue
drone in meters and pixels, respectively.

C. Jamming Signal Model

Evidently, the physical layer of wireless systems can be
easily targeted by jamming attacks, aiming to disrupt the com-
munication link between communicating stations including
the ground controller and a UAV, and vital UAV subsystems
including GPS. In the later case, and in the absence of the
jamming attack, the GPS signal is denoted as:

yGP S(t) = xGP S(t) + nGP S(t),

(3)

where xGP S(t) is the desired signal, yGP S(t) is the received
signal, and nGP S(t) is the additive Gaussian noise at time t.
When the jamming signal is active, occupying the L1 band,
the received signal becomes

yGP S(t) = xGP S(t) + xjam(t) + nGP S(t) + njam(t),

(4)

where xjam(t) is the jammer’s signal and njam(t) the noise
between the jammer location and the receiver. In jamming
attack scenarios, the received signal strength (RSS) at the
receiver decreases and can be expressed as

RSS =

Pt ∗ Gt ∗ Gr ∗ (cid:0)ht2 ∗ hr2(cid:1)
d4
rt

,

(5)

where Pt is the transmitter signal power, Gt and Gr are the

transmitter and receiver antenna gains, respectively, ht and hr
are the transmitter and receiver antenna heights, respectively,
and drt is the transmitter-receiver link.

D. Relative Positioning Methodology

3

Relative positioning can be achieved using SOPs transmitted
from a number of ﬁxed transmitters (Ti), i ∈ I. Using SOP
measurements, vehicle positioning can be estimated using a
T
state vector of planar information xTi, pTi = [p(1) p(2)]
with discrete model pn+1
= Fpn
Ti
the dynamics of the system and w the process noise.

+ w, where F designates

Ti

Speciﬁcally, the path-loss (P-L) signal propagation model
is used to evaluate the distance (d(i, j)) between the ﬁxed i-
th (i ∈ I) estimated SOP transmitter, (pTi ∈ R2) and the
unknown location of the SDR receiver (pRj ∈ R2) mounted
on the UAV. Subsequently, d(i, j) is utilized to describe in
2D space the position of the receiver, [26]. The position
estimate can be achieved using a conventional multilateration
method with at least four transmitters. Computing the distances
d(i, j) ∀i ∈ I leads to an overdetermined system that
does not have a single unique solution. An approximated
solution p∗ to the problem can be achieved by utilizing a
LSQ technique [27] after the system’s linearization.

Hence an extended Kalman ﬁlter (EKF) can be employed
to produce position estimates (ˆp) by fusing the onboard
unit’s inertial measurements with the SOPs’ information, as
elaborated in [10], [23]. Speciﬁcally, EKF can predict the
vehicle’s position at time n+1, (ˆpn+1
+ ), and create an estimated
trajectory, utilizing the inertial data for the vehicle’s state at
time n [27], [28].

IV. RPS-JAMMING ALGORITHM

This section elaborates on the proposed integrated relative
positioning and jamming (RPS-JS) algorithm for detecting,
tracking and jamming a rogue drone while maintaining posi-
tioning by the pursuer agent as summarized in Alg. 1. Initially
a total of Xn frequency sweeps for a set of frequency bands
m are considered, and for each one of them the mean ψn
m
is found. Subsequently, ψn
m is used in conjunction with the
path-loss model, multilateration, LSQ, and EKF techniques
(detailed in the previous section) to ﬁnd the pursuer agents
relative coordinates and obtain ˆpn+1. A block diagram of the
RPS process ﬂow that uses the received signal strength (RSS)
of the SOP along with the multilateration, LSQ, and EKF pro-
cedures is illustrated in Fig. 1 [10], where pn = [p(1) p(2)]T
gives the current planar vehicle position, pn+1 = f (ˆpn, un)
is the next estimated position, and the relative coordinates can
be computed as follows:

ˆpn+1 = ˆpn + K(dn+1 − h(pn))

(6)

where the error covariance (cid:98)Pn+1, the Kalman gain (K) and
the updated covariance matrix error ( (cid:98)P+) are deﬁned as:

Fig. 1: RPS architecture.

In addition and in order to detect-and-track the rogue drone
the distance between the pursuer and rogue UAVs is calculated
(i.e., dc). If the distance is below a predeﬁned threshold djam
(i.e., the rogue drone is in range), then jamming can effectively
be conducted up until em > Td, where em is the position
error (in meters) for the pursuer agent and Td is deﬁned as
the switching threshold value, computed as the added a-th
percentile (of the mean range measurement) to the mean value
of the RPS relative range measurements at time n, ¯dn, prior
to the jamming attack. In this way both accurate positioning
and effective jamming can be achieved.

Algorithm 1 RPS-JS Algorithm

Input: RSS data obtained at each point in the route (Xn)

Execute Relative Position Algorithm (RPS)
Set the current truth value utilizing ˆp
procedure (Vision data extraction)
Detect and track the UAV(s)
Calculate depth distance and focal length
Compute horizontal distance
Find average of distances (for depth/horizontal)

1: Scan Xn at vehicle’s current position and set Ti
2: while n < N do
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21: end while

end procedure
Analyze Xn and extract the distribution moments ψn
m
Use ψn
m to compute relative distances via P-L model
Apply multilateration
Perform LSQ
Estimate relative position ˆpn+1 using EKF
procedure (Jamming Attack)

While em < Td Continue jamming
Else Goto line 3 (RPS restarts)

If dc ≤ djam jamming starts (and RPS is paused)

end procedure

The RPS-JS algorithm’s block diagram is also shown in

Fig. 2, illustrating the complete operation of the system.

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

(cid:98)Pn+1 = F (cid:98)PnF(cid:62) + Q
K = (cid:98)Pn+1H(cid:62)(H (cid:98)Pn+1H(cid:62) + R)−1
(cid:98)P+ = (I − KH) (cid:98)Pn+1

(7)

(8)

(9)

In order to evaluate the proposed counter-drone system,
several experiments were performed, by employing the afore-
mentioned algorithm. Various parameter settings were also
considered to examine the switching between the relative
positioning and jamming procedures.

Multilateration & LSQSensor readings(velocity, angle, acceleration) SOP receiver EKF (Prediction)Vehicle's dynamic model  relative position4

Fig. 2: RPS-JS algorithm’s block diagram.

A. Hardware and Software Conﬁguration

Figure 3 depicts the proposed system hardware/software
implementation. An onboard processing unit, NVIDIA Jetson
Nano Developer Kit, serves as the processing unit that executes
all the algorithm procedures. It is also responsible for the
communication between the pursuer UAV, SDR hardware
interfaces, and the remote controller application. For the
communication between the application and the UAV, a WiFi
dongle is employed to enable the transmission of data and
commands. Further, a HackRF SDR is used for the collection
of SOP measurements and the implementation of the jamming
procedure. Finally, the Robot Operating System (ROS) [29]
has been utilized, allowing command and control of the
pursuer agent (i.e., receiving telemetry data and transmitting
trajectory commands).

Fig. 4: Jamming attack on a DJI Mavic employing only GPS.

the proposed RPS framework (applied by the pursuer agent)
is addressed using the Td threshold as examined below.

TABLE I: Outdoor Jamming Experiments

Altitude (m)
Absolute distance (m)
10
Result (GPS)
x
Elevation angle
30
x : No GPS, - : GPS unaffected

25
5
x
0

30
5
x
0

10
x
30

50
5
x
0

10
-
30

Fig. 5: Rogue UAV’s Ns values during ﬂight (for different
jamming power values).

Fig. 3: Hardware and software implementation.

Fig. 6: Rogue UAV’s Ns values during ﬂight (red boxes
indicate jamming attacks.

B. Jamming Performance Analysis

To analyze the performance of the jamming module, an
omnidirectional antenna was connected to the HackRF and an
initial outdoor experiment was conducted, using a DJI Mavic
drone. The rogue drone’s GPS is affected considerably by the
implemented SDR-based jamming module (Fig. 4: jammed
trajectory (green) diverges signiﬁcantly from the ground truth
(red) shown in the ﬁgure), with the jamming module’s per-
formance evaluated for various distances and altitudes (Table
I) and different transmission jamming power values. As ex-
pected, as the transmission power increases, higher jamming
performance is achieved, since the number of satellites (Ns)
obtained by the rogue drone is decreasing (Fig. 5). However,
the decreasing number of satellite signals Ns due to jamming
(Fig. 6, red boxes), also affect the pursuer agent (since we
consider in this experiment the off-the-shelf GPS receivers
with omnidirectional antennas). Hence, the tradeoff between
jamming duration and possitioning accuracy achieved using

C. RPS-JS Experimentation

The performance of the proposed counter-drone system
methodology is evaluated in a number of outdoor ﬁeld exper-
iments. In these experiments, the frequency bands 0 − 3500
MHz were swept for SOPs, and the RPS parameters Ti = 13
and nP L = 2.8 (path loss exponent) were used, based on
previous experimental results [10] that have shown fast system
convergence to the relative coordinates.

Initially, Fig. 7 depicts the number of satellites (Ns) avail-
able when the proposed system switches between positioning
and jamming (shown with blue and black boxes, respectively,
with the insert numbers denoting the sequence of the events),
demonstrating that as the number of jamming attacks increases
the rogue UAV cannot regain its location accuracy (i.e.,
Ns decreases). Further, Fig. 8, illustrates the execution time
for both the RPS and jamming modules over 2600 samples
(N = 2600) and a threshold set at Td = 1.3m, for a complex

0306090051015route of 300m and an approximate 8 minutes of ﬂight, showing
a substantial decrease of both modules’ execution time as the
ﬂight time increases. This is due to the fact that the value of
em accumulates over time, due to the rapid switching between
the RPS and jamming modules that need to alternate in order
to maintain the relative position estimation while at the same
time effectively jam the rogue drone’s GPS.

Fig. 7: Rogue UAV’s Ns values during ﬂight
RPS/jamming switching).

(during

5

(a)

(b)

Fig. 9: (a) MAE (in meters) of RPS-JS and GPS vs. GT (b)
CDF of position estimation error for RPS-JS and GPS, in
jamming attack scenarios.

Fig. 8: RPS/jamming modules’ execution times over ﬂight
time.

As previously discussed in Section V-B, when a jamming
attack occurs, the UAV agent’s GPS data are not sufﬁcient for
positioning, and a position estimate for the navigation of the
UAV agent that can compensate for the agent’s GPS decreased
accuracy is a necessity. Thus, for various routes in outdoor
experiments, a comparison of range measurements between
the real, relative, and GPS trajectories, measured in meters,
using proposed the counter-drone system in an online fashion,
is tabulated in Table II, showing the difference between the
two systems in terms of localization performance. It is notable
that the proposed RPS-JS system leads to accurate relative
positioning even when extended jamming attacks occur.

Further, the deviations between real (GT), GPS, and relative
trajectories, when applying the proposed approach, are also
illustrated in Fig. 9. The performance of the counter-drone
system, comparing relative and GPS positioning to the GT,
is evident in the case of various jamming attacks that also
decrease the UAV agent’s GPS accuracy (Fig. 9(a)), as the
mean absolute error (MAE) of RPS-JS is signiﬁcantly lower
compared to GPS. This is also shown utilizing a cumulative
distribution function (CDF) plot of the position estimation
error in Fig. 9(b), which illustrates that the position estimation
error of RPS-JS is 90% of the time less than 6m as compared
with GPS, which has a value greater than 6m at 50% of the
time.

As previously discussed, RPS-JS requires a certain threshold
value (Td) in order to maintain an accurate estimation of
the UAV agent while switching from jamming to relative
positioning. When em > Td is reached, jamming is paused

(a)

(b)

Fig. 10: (a) CDF of range measurements. (b) Accumulated
error (in meters) using different a-th percentiles.

and the RPS process restarts so as to reduce the error and
achieve the predeﬁned ¯dn. Clearly, a larger Td will lead to
a more reliable localization performance, as the switching
between the jamming and relative positioning is reduced, at
the expense though of the jamming performance. To illustrate
this, Figure 10(a) captures the RPS-JS and GPS behavior
(MAE results) compared to the GT using various a-th per-
centile values, demonstrating that as the a-th percentile is
reduced, switching between the two modules increases and the
localization accuracy diminishes. Also, Fig. 10(b) presents the
accumulated error of RPS-JS and GPS compared to the GT by
altering the a-th percentile parameter, demonstrating the trade-
off between better localization performance (when employing
a larger Td) and better jamming performance (when employing
a lower Td).

Moreover, a statistical analysis is conducted to examine the
performance of RPS-JS and GPS vs. GT (Fig. 11). It is noted

1020304050607080900123456GPSRPS-JS0246810121400.20.40.60.8105101520253000.20.40.60.81RPS-JS (35-th percentile)GPS (35-th percentile)RPS-JS (25-th percentile)GPS (25-th percentile)102030405060708090051015202530GPS (35-th percentile)RPS-JS (35-th percentile)RPS-JS (25-th percentile)GPS (25-th percentile)TABLE II: Online Experiment - Trajectory Distances

B-C(m)/Dif(%)
Trajectory Segments
15/0
GT distance
13.8/8
Relative distance - (RPS-JS)
GPS+sensors distance
14/6.66
RPS-JS conﬁguration (Ti = 13, nP L = 2.8, Td = 1.3m)

A-B(m)/Dif (%)
20/0
18/10
19/5

C-D(m)/Dif(%)
30/0
26/13
20/33.33

D-E(m)/Dif(%)
15/0
13/13.33
10/33.33

E-F(m)/Dif(%)
13/0
11/15.3
21/61.5

6

[6] M. Maaref, et al., “Lane-Level Localization and Mapping in GNSS-
Challenged Environments by Fusing Lidar Data and Cellular Pseudor-
anges,” IEEE Trans. on Intelligent Vehicles, 4(1):73–89, 2018.

[7] K. Shamaei and Z.M. Kassas, “LTE Receiver Design and Multipath
Analysis for Navigation in Urban Environments,” Navig., 65(4), 2018.
[8] M. Maaref and Z.M. Kassas, “Ground Vehicle Navigation in GNSS-
Challenged Environments using Signals of Opportunity and a Closed-
Loop Map-Matching Approach,” IEEE Trans. on Intel. Transport. Sys-
tems, 21(7):2723–2738, 2019.

[9] J.F. Raquet and M.M. Miller, “Issues and Approaches for Navigation
using Signals of Opportunity,” Proc. Inst. Navig. Nat. Tech. Mtg., 2007.
[10] N. Souli, et al., “Relative Positioning of Autonomous Systems using
Signals of Opportunity,” Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology Conf., 2020.
[11] P. Cisar, et al., “Principles of Anti-Drone Defense,” Proc. IEEE CogIn-

foCom, 2020.

[12] X. Shi, et al., “Anti-drone System with Multiple Surveillance Technolo-
gies: Architecture, Implementation, and Challenges,” IEEE Communi-
cations Magazine, 56(4):68–74, 2018.

[13] L. Fang, et al., “Design of Portable Jammer for UAV based on SDR,”

Proc. ICMMT, 2018.

[14] A. Brito, et al, “Jamming for Unauthorized UAV Operations-

Communications Link,” Proc. YEF-ECE, 2019.

[15] A. Rahman, et al., “Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) GPS Jamming Test
by using Software Deﬁned Radio (SDR) Platform,” Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, 1793(1):12–60, 2021.

[16] R. Ferreira, et al., “Effective GPS Jamming Techniques for UAVs Using
Low-cost SDR Platforms,” Wireless. Pers. Comm., 115(4), 2020.
[17] J. Gaspar, et al., “Anti-UAV Mobile System with RTLS Integration and

User Authentication,” Proc. ISSI, 2019.

[18] A.H. Abunada, et al., “Design and Implementation of a RF Based Anti-

drone System,” Proc. IEEE ICIoT, 2020.

[19] Y. Xu, et al., “SLAM of Robot based on the Fusion of Vision and

LIDAR,” Proc. IEEE CBS, 2018.

[20] C. Shen, et al., “Optical Flow Sensor/INS/Magnetometer Integrated
Navigation System for MAV in GPS-denied Environment,” Journal of
Sensors, 2016:1–10, 2016.

[21] Z. Wang, et al., “Intelligent Vehicle Self-Localization Based on Double-
Layer Features and Multilayer LIDAR,” IEEE Trans. on Intelligent
Vehicles, 5(4):616–625, 2020.

[22] M. Brossard, et al., “AI-IMU Dead-Reckoning,” IEEE Trans. on Intel-

ligent Vehicles, 5(4):585–595, 2020.

[23] N. Souli, et al., “Real-Time Relative Positioning System Implementation,
employing Signals of Opportunity, Inertial, and Optical Flow Modali-
ties”, Proc. IEEE ICUAS, 2021.

[24] A. Bochkovskiy, et al., “YOLOv4: Optimal Speed and Accuracy of

Object Detection,” arXiv:2004.10934 [cs.CV], 2020.

[25] R. Makrigiorgis, et al., “Extracting the Fundamental Diagram from

Aerial Footage.” Proc. IEEE 91st Vehicular Technology Conf., 2020.

[26] S. Tomic, et al., “On Target Localization using Combined RSS and AoA

Measurements,” Sensors, 18(4):1–25, 2018.

[27] R. Brown and P. Hwang, Introduction to Random Signals and Applied

Kalman Filtering with MatLab Exercises, Wiley, 2011.

[28] V. Sazdovski, et al., “Kalman Filter Implementation for Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles Navigation”, IFAC Proc. Volumes, 38(1):12–17, 2005.
[29] M. Quigley, et al., “ROS: An Open-source Robot Operating System”,

Proc. ICRA Workshop on Open Source Software, 2009.

that in terms of localization (in 25 outdoor experiments), the
distribution of RPS-JS achieves acceptable performance, as the
median and mean values are analogous to the GT dataset.

Fig. 11: Boxplots of RPS-JS and GPS vs. GT.

Finally, various more complex routes were considered, and
it was demonstrated that even though the complexity of the
ﬂight routes increased, the proposed system was still capable
to detect, track, interfere with the positioning of a rogue drone,
and self-localize. This was achieved by increasing the switch-
ing between jamming and relative positioning procedures to
achieve a better localization and jamming performance. These
results are omitted due to space considerations.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

A novel real-time counter-drone system is proposed, ex-
ploiting vision-based measurements for rogue drone detection
and tracking, the information from SOPs and IMU for relative
positioning, and a jamming method for hijacking a rogue
drone. Field experiments, using a real hardware and software
implementation of the proposed methodology, demonstrated
that the proposed system can efﬁciently switch between the
navigation module, utilizing a relative trajectory, and the
jamming module, in order to increase the performance of the
system (disrupt the rogue drone’s actions and also navigate in
case the UAV agent’s GPS data are not available or unreliable).
Future research avenues include the use of a swarm of UAV
agents to counter the operation of a rogue drone, as well as
the use of passive radar for drone detection and for improved
relative navigation via received RF information.

REFERENCES

[1] S. Park, et al., “Survey on Anti-Drone Systems: Components, Designs,

and Challenges,” IEEE Access, 9:42635–42659, 2021.

[2] K. Shamaei, et al., “Exploiting LTE Signals for Navigation: Theory to
Implementation,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commun., 17(4), 2018.
[3] Z.M. Kassas, et al., “I Hear Therefore I Know Where I Am: Com-
pensating for GNSS Limitations with Cellular Signals,” IEEE Signal
Processing Mag., 34(5):111–124, 2017.

[4] R. Kapoor, et al., “UAV Navigation using Signals of Opportunity in
Urban Environments: A Review,” Energy Procedia, 110:377–383, 2017.
[5] J. Morales and Z.M. Kassas, “Event-based communication strategy for
collaborative navigation with signals of opportunity” Proc. ACSSC 2018.

GTRPS-RTHGPS010203040