Towards a Roadmap for Trustworthy 
Dynamic Systems-of-Systems  

Rasmus Adler, Frank Elberzhager, Julien Siebert 

Fraunhofer Platz 1, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany 
{first.last}@iese.fraunhofer.de 

Abstract. This paper gives insights into the DynaSoS project, which aims to pro-

pose a cross-domain roadmap for systems engineering research into trustworthy 

dynamic systems-of-systems with autonomous components. The project follows 

a methodology that combines interviews and workshops with experts from vari-

ous domains and a literature review. In this paper, we motivate the project, dis-

cuss five application areas with their drivers and visions, and draw initial conclu-

sions with respect to challenges that a research roadmap should address. Our goal 

is to share initial results with the research community about the DynaSoS project 

and invite them to contribute to the derivation of the research roadmap. 

Category: Short Research Paper 

Keywords: systems-of-systems, research roadmap, systems engineering 

1 

Introduction  

The digital transformation is making its way into all sectors, enabling the creation of 
digital products, processes, and business models that are radically changing markets. 
Most visions of the future – be it production as a service in Industry 4.0, autonomous 
transportation systems in smart mobility, or cyber-physical systems in digital health – 
are essentially made possible by the implementation of systems-of-systems (SoS) in 
which several stakeholders and systems from different domains with different interests 
have to interoperate. In addition, there is a trend towards increased (or planned) use of 
autonomous systems (enabled by the application of AI and big data methods such as 
deep  learning)  and  increased  dynamic  aspects  of SoS  (e.g., virtual operators,  on-de-
mand). A key characteristic of these future SoS is the high dynamism and the complex 
interdependencies  between  technology,  society,  and  the  ecological  environment. For 
instance, on-demand shared mobility implies dynamic adaptation to mobility demands 
and  possibly  dynamic  pricing  according  to  current  particle  pollution  status  or  de-
mand/offer.  Another  example  are  smart  grids,  which  adapt  to  needs  from  the  social 
subsystem and use dynamic pricing as a means to influence the behavior of the social 
subsystem and to adapt to current weather conditions. In this paper, we focus on such 

2 

dynamic Systems-of-Systems, which we investigate in the scope of the DynaSoS pro-
ject funded by the German Federal Ministry for Education and Research. 

Software and systems engineering as it has established itself in dynaSoS application 
domains originated from contexts in which singular, closed systems were developed, 
and is therefore only partially suited to address novel challenges brought on by dyna-
SoS. In areas where SoS thinking is traditionally more established, new dynaSoS as-
pects such as the increased dynamism and the greater autonomy of components bring 
new challenges, such as assuring that a smart grid will not cause a power blackout.  

We  are  witnessing  various  domains  engaging  in  similar  approaches  to  the  digital 
transformation. Indeed, different domains are proposing roadmaps and reference archi-
tectures such as the Reference Architecture Model for Industry 4.0 (RAMI 4.0), the 
AUTomotive Open System Architecture (AUTOSAR), or the Smart Grid Architecture 
Model  (SGAM).  From  an  SoS  engineering  perspective,  this  raises  the  question  of 
whether there is a risk of different domains reinventing the wheel and wasting effort, 
and whether SoS from multiple sectors are being developed in parallel without being 
able to interact. Another question is whether solutions from different domains can be 
adapted to each other. In summary, we observe the following: 

1)  Several trends are leading SoS to incorporate more and more dynamic aspects 
and autonomy. These aspects can provide solutions to global societal problems 
such as sustainability or resilience.  

2)  State-of-the-art SoS engineering (SoSE) needs to be enhanced to address these 
trends, foster cross-domain fertilization with respect to the engineering of dyna-
SoS, and enable cross-domain dynaSoS. 

Following these observations, the DynaSoS research project is developing a research 
roadmap for trustworthy, dynamic systems-of-systems with autonomous components. 
In  the  course  of  this  project,  a  team  of  38  experts  from  the  Fraunhofer  Institute  for 
Experimental Software Engineering IESE is performing an exhaustive literature review 
and conducts many interviews and workshops with representatives from industry and 
academia  from  different  domains  in  order  to  collect  domain-specific  challenges  and 
extract common underlying research challenges. Currently, we are still in the phase of 
consolidating and structuring the obtained information. However, we already want to 
share some of our main findings.  

This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents some aspects of the state of 
the art in SoSE. Section 3 shows initial key results of our domain analyses. Section 4 
discusses the two observations above and provides first examples demonstrating new 
research challenges. Section 5 concludes our short paper. 

2 

Related Work  

The methodology of the DynaSoS project relies upon both expert knowledge and 
scientific literature. In the past, several roadmaps and whitepapers have been published 
using such a methodology. For instance, Axelband et al. proposed a list of ten research 
themes and their corresponding challenges in the context of SoS architecture from a 
workshop (13 participants). Dogan et al. proposed 78 research elements grouped into 

3 

twelve major themes that emerged from T-AREA-SoS activities and were prioritized 
by a community of experts (38 participants). Ncube et al. discuss challenges related to 
requirements engineering for SoS and propose a list of ten research themes gathered 
from online surveys and workshops (150 participants) during the activities of four re-
search projects (T-AREA-SoS, Road2SoS, COMPASS, and DANSE). It is also worth 
mentioning INCOSE's Vision 2035 (and its earlier versions: Vision 2020 and Vision 
2025), which also brought together challenges and presents a roadmap in which SoS 
aspects are central. 

Note that each SoS engineering sub-domain also offers a set of agendas based upon 
literature reviews. For example, 32 primary studies (31 between 2005 and 2015, plus 
one study from 1994) were analyzed by Lana et al. in order to identify initiatives, trends, 
and challenges in SoS development. In the domain of architecture, several reviews have 
been  performed  over  the  last  ten  years  (e.g.,  Dridi  et  al.).  Santos  et  al.  analyzed  41 
studies (between 2006 and 2021) in order to extract challenges related to architecture 
evaluation. 

Note that traditional use cases for SoS are primarily in the fields of defense, national 
security,  military,  aerospace  (for  historical  reasons),  transportation,  and  energy.  Use 
cases for SoS in the fields of smart building, smart home, smart city, or healthcare are 
less common. The approach followed in the Dynasos project aims at targeting applica-
tion domains with lower levels of maturity than the traditional ones but with promising 
potential:  energy,  mobility,  farming,  manufacturing,  and  smart  cities.  Hence,  it  is 
broader (in terms of application domains) than most approaches found in the literature, 
but focuses more on the specific aspects of dynamics, autonomy, and trustworthiness. 

3 

DynaSoS Application Domains and Drivers 

In this section, we present initial major drivers for dynaSoS in different fields of appli-
cation that we have analyzed so far in the context of our DynaSoS research project in 
order  to  derive  domain-independent  research  challenges  and  a  related  research 
roadmap. 
Smart energy: A major driver in the energy sector is the necessary transition to green 
energy and the need to reduce CO2 emissions. This inevitably leads to an increase of 
dynamism. Energy based on wind and solar leads to volatile sources. Furthermore, pre-
dicting energy consumption and controlling it via dynamic pricing introduces further 
dynamics to the smart grid. In this way, the smart grid (a technical part of the dynaSoS) 
dynamically interacts with the weather (an ecological part of the dynaSoS) and the end 
users (a social part of the dynaSoS). 
Smart mobility: A major driver in mobility is again the reduction of CO2 emissions. 
However, vision zero includes not only zero emissions, but also zero congestion and 
zero  accidents.  Electrification  is  a  huge  and  reasonable  trend,  but  concepts  such  as 
shared mobility, on-demand mobility, and multimodal mobility are indispensable for 
achieving zero emissions and zero congestion. Automated and connected driving based 
on  intelligent  transportation  systems  supports  these  concepts  and  can  contribute  to 
safety. The aforementioned concepts inevitably introduce dynamics into the technical 

4 

part of the mobility SoS because the SoS has to adapt to the social demands. Further-
more, the technical part of the mobility dynaSoS will adapt to the current particle pol-
lution level, which in turn depends on the mobility demands of the social system. As in 
the energy domain, dynamic pricing can be used to influence the behavior of mobility 
service users. Moreover, dynamic pricing in the energy dynaSoS may even affect dy-
namic pricing in the mobility dynaSoS. 
Smart farming and agri-food sectors: The smart farming and agri-food sectors are 
strongly driven by sustainability goals and related regulations, like the European Green 
Deal, or the European Farm2Fork strategy. Swarms of partially autonomous systems 
such as field robots or drones can contribute to the achievement of sustainability goals 
in farming. First, this allows soil compaction to be reduced. Second, it allows adjusting 
the time spent on treating a plant and thus enables individual treatments that minimize 
the usage of fertilizer, fungicides, and other inputs. Third, smaller  and more diverse 
(polycultural) fields become possible. These machines collaborate not only with each 
other but are connected to a farm management information system (FMIS) in order to 
provide data about the plants, soil, and so on. The FMIS, in turn, can be combined with 
an agricultural data space that interacts with various stakeholders, including farmers for 
decision-making and machine manufacturers for improving their machines and dynam-
ically parameterizing them. Last but not least, it supports transparency of the food chain 
and provides sustainability information to supervisory authorities and end-users. The 
provided information can be used to dynamically adapt the overall agricultural dyna-
SoS. 
Smart  manufacturing:  Major  drivers  in  smart  manufacturing  are  sustainability  (cf. 
Industry  5.0),  sovereignty,  and  resilience  of  the  supply  chain.  A  general  vision  for 
achieving this resilience is to transition from a static supply chain to a flexible supply 
network. This requires opening up the automation pyramid and engineering factories 
that can be adapted according to the needs of the supply network. This dynamic adap-
tation includes not only the production plant itself, but also the related flow of material. 
In order to achieve this flexible material flow, autonomous forklifts, autonomous mo-
bile robots, and drones collaborate and interact with management systems within the 
factory. There are various triggers for adaptation at various levels in the overall manu-
facturing dynaSoS. The Covid-19 pandemic and the current war in Ukraine are the most 
recent examples of adaptation triggers with a strong impact. The bullwhip or whiplash 
effect shows that the dynamism of the adaptation is of crucial importance in a manu-
facturing dynaSoS. 
Smart city and smart (rural) regions: Major drivers for smart city or smart rural areas 
are resilience, sustainability, and demographics. Cities are areas where multiple SoS 
need to interact. Mobility, energy, climate, and water management are only a few ex-
amples of SoS that cooperate at the city level. In addition, there is the interaction with 
the urban environment and its biodiversity (e.g., parks, urban gardens) and also with 
the social systems (e.g., culture, politics, etc.). The constraints imposed by city infra-
structures (e.g., the fact that technical subsystems and infrastructure are often fixed and 
planned for the long term) make them a particularly interesting candidate for the appli-
cation of dynaSoS. 

5 

4 

Discussion on DynaSoS Engineering Challenges 

In the previous section, we exemplified the dynamism of dynaSoS in different do-
mains and the need to achieve objectives of crucial importance. In the following, we 
will present which challenges industry faces when engineering dynaSoS. Furthermore, 
we will analyze these challenges with respect to their potential for cross-domain ferti-
lization, and the need to enhance state-of-the-art SoSE with respect to the characteris-
tics of the exemplified dynaSoS.  

A first challenge concerns the interoperability between systems. V2X in mobility, 
agrirouter in agriculture, or the asset administration shell in smart manufacturing re-
quire many stakeholders to agree on interoperability solutions. Currently, there are of-
ten only proprietary APIs and data spaces exist only at a conceptual level, like the ag-
ricultural data space. Data  governance  is  under development  and needs  to  deal with 
regulations such as the GDPR. From the interviews and our own experiences, we see 
this  challenge rather  with  finding  consensus  than as  a fundamentally  technical  chal-
lenge. Nevertheless, this topic has high potential for cross-domain fertilization. For in-
stance, some concepts such as smart manufacturing (e.g., BaSys 4.0) could already be 
transferred to the mobility domain in the context of the project CATENA-X. We also 
see great potential of these solutions getting transferred to the agricultural domain. 

A second challenge is related to the inappropriate structures and incentives of the 
involved parties that build, operate, and use dynaSoS. For instance, it is not clear which 
stakeholders orchestrate and shape the digital ecosystem to offer on-demand, shared, 
multi-modal mobility-as-a-service solutions. As long as there is no party that takes on 
the orchestrating role, no dynaSoS will be engineered. It might somehow emerge some 
time when different parties offer services that build upon each other, but this differs 
from engineering with respect to objectives like the sustainability development goals. 
For instance, a dynaSoS that is not properly engineered may result in increased mobility 
due to cost reduction and thus in an increase of CO2 emissions. It is currently unclear 
who sets the main objectives and assures their achievement when shaping a digital eco-
system. 

A third challenge is related to the necessary complexity of the dynaSoS to support 
the achievement of the sustainability development goals (SDG). SDGs are diverse and 
typically one choice towards behavioral change by means of regulations or implement-
ing autonomous behavior of a technical system impacts several SDGs at once. For in-
stance, the sustainability triangle visualizes the complex interdependencies between so-
cial, environmental, and economic aspects that need to be considered when engineering 
solutions  that  promote  SGDs.  It  is  challenging  to  assure  that  a  dynaSoS  within  this 
triangle will steer the whole system towards SDGs. Who ought to be behind the steering 
wheel? How do we assure that these entities will actually steer the whole system in the 
right direction? Answering such questions requires the involvement of many research 
disciplines including ethics, regulatory science, economics, sociology, and computer 
science. Systems engineering is a transdisciplinary and integrative approach, but dyna-
SoS demands the involvement of disciplines that have not been considered in traditional 
SoSE from military or aerospace.  

6 

A fourth challenge concerns the assurance of critical properties. Engineering a smart 
grid that satisfies primary sustainability objectives is one thing, but assuring the absence 
of blackouts is another. A key characteristic of dynamism is a more efficient use of 
resources,  but  this  optimization  comes  at  the  risk  of  not  having  enough  back-up  re-
sources to deal with critical unforeseen events or to break chain reactions.  

5 

Summary and Conclusion 

The aim of the DynaSoS project is to collect, consolidate, and present research issues 
and potential directions in engineering systems-of-systems. We have begun analyzing 
the literature and are conducting interviews with experts from different domains. We 
presented initial results in this short paper, focusing on key drivers of different domains 
and on the four initial challenges we identified so far. From our point of view, we see 
dynaSoS as indispensable for the future, while acknowledging that such systems readily 
exist in certain domains. Furthermore, when engineering such SoS, approaches, tech-
niques, and methods have to be enhanced, or existing ones extended in order to address 
new challenges. We only highlighted some needs for enhancements in this short paper. 
Our next steps will be to continue the analyses and consolidate the gathered knowledge. 
We invite SoSE experts to contribute their insights to this ongoing process. 

6 

Acknowledgments 

The research described in this paper was performed in the DynaSoS project (grant no. 
01|S21104) of the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF). We 
thank Sonnhild Namingha for proofreading. 

References 

Axelband, E.; Baehren, T.; Dorenbos, D.; Madni, A.; Robitaille, P.; Valerdi, R. et al. (2007): 

A research agenda for systems of systems architecting. INCOSE 2007 

Dogan, H.; Ncube, C.; Lim, S. L.; Henshaw, M.; Siemieniuch, C.; Sinclair, M. et al. (2013): 
Economic and societal significance of the systems of systems research agenda, 2013 IEEE 
International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, SMC 2013 

Dridi,  C.  E.;  Benzadri,  Z.;  Belala,  F.  (2020):  System  of  Systems  Modelling:  Recent  work 
Review and a Path Forward. In ICAASE 2020 - Proceedings, 4th International Conference 
on Advanced Aspects of Software Engineering 

Lana, C. A.; Souza, N. M.; Delamaro, M. E.; Nakagawa, E. Y.; Oquendo, F.; Maldonado, J. 
C. (2017): Systems-of-systems development: Initiatives, trends, and challenges. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 42nd Latin American Computing Conference, CLEI 2016.  

Ncube, C.; Lim, S. L.; Amyot D., Maalej W., Ruhe G. (2018): On systems of systems engi-
neering: A requirements engineering perspective and research agenda. In Proceedings - 2018 
IEEE 26th International Requirements Engineering Conference, RE 2018. 

Santos, Daniel S.; Oliveira, Brauner R. N.; Kazman, Rick; Nakagawa, Elisa Y. (2022): Eval-
uation of Systems-of-Systems Software Architectures: State of the Art and Future Perspec-
tives. In ACM Comput. Surv. 

