IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, 2022

1

A peristaltic soft, wearable robot for compression
and massage therapy

Mengjia Zhu1, Adrian Ferstera1,2, Stejara Dinulescu1, Nikolas Kastor1, Max Linnander1,
Elliot W. Hawkes1, and Yon Visell1

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

2

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
3
3
1
0
.
6
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Soft robotics is attractive for wearable applications
that require conformal interactions with the human body. Soft
wearable robotic garments hold promise for supplying dynamic
compression or massage therapies, such as are applied for
disorders affecting lymphatic and blood circulation. In this paper,
we present a wearable robot capable of supplying dynamic
compression and massage therapy via peristaltic motion of ﬁnger-
sized soft, ﬂuidic actuators. We show that this peristaltic wearable
robot can supply dynamic compression pressures exceeding 22
kPa at frequencies of 14 Hz or more, meeting requirements for
compression and massage therapy. A large variety of software-
programmable compression wave patterns can be generated
by varying frequency, amplitude, phase delay, and duration
parameters. We ﬁrst demonstrate the utility of this peristaltic
wearable robot for compression therapy, showing ﬂuid transport
in a laboratory model of the upper limb. We theoretically
and empirically identify driving regimes that optimize ﬂuid
transport. We second demonstrate the utility of this garment
for dynamic massage therapy. These ﬁndings show the potential
of such a wearable robot for the treatment of several health
disorders associated with lymphatic and blood circulation, such
as lymphedema and blood clots.

Index Terms—Soft robotics, Wearable robotics, Compression

therapy, Peristalsis

I. INTRODUCTION

Emerging soft robotic technologies are becoming widely
investigated for applications in health and medicine. Soft,
wearable robotic systems are well-suited for delivering dy-
namic compression or massage therapy. Such therapies, when
administered by a health professional, are effective in treating
blood and lymphatic circulatory disorders, including chronic
venous insufﬁciency (CVI), venous ulcers, lymphedema, and
blood clots [1], [2], as well as for treating musculoskeletal
injuries [3].

Compression therapy devices are expected to meet func-
tional requirements arising from therapeutic standards that
help ensure efﬁcacy and safety or otherwise conform to
norms of massage practice. Such guidelines are necessarily
application-speciﬁc. Compression therapies requiring gross
occlusion of venous blood ﬂow in the lower limbs demand
substantial compression pressures, amounting to 3.3 kPa, 8.0
kPa, or 9.3 kPa in the supine, sitting, or standing positions

1Media Arts and Technology Program, Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Califor-
nia NanoSystems Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, USA
yonvisell@ucsb.edu

2Mechanical Engineering Program, Department of Mechanical Engineer-

ing, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Manuscript received XXX, 2022; revised XXX, 2022.

respectively [4]. Intermittent compression therapies, such as
are used for lymphedema, require pressure variations to be
supplied at frequencies of at least 1 Hz [5], [6]. In other
applications, massage therapies are supplied for mild pain
relief, easing of musculoskeletal tension, or touch elicited
(i.e., haptic) emotional comfort. Examples include sports,
Swedish, kinesiologic, or deep tissue massage. Such practices
can involve the application of light to ﬁrm pressures, ranging
from less than 12 kPa to 30 kPa or more [7].

Wearability introduces further requirements that arise from
ergonomics and safety. To ensure comfort, compression gar-
ments should be soft, low-proﬁle, and compliant. To avoid
pain and avoid injury or lesions damaging soft tissues, static
and dynamic forces should be distributed to avoid stress con-
centrations. For devices that emulate manual massage, it may
be appropriate that compression is supplied via individually
actuatable modules the size of a ﬁnger or hand.

Based on these requirements for compression therapies, the
two existing predominant
tools are graduated compression
stockings (GCS) and intermittent pneumatic pressure (IPC)
devices. GCS promote venous ﬂow by applying a constant
compression pressure to the limb to reduce venous caliber,
preventing the static accumulation of blood [2]. GCS are con-
venient and low-cost while lacking the capability of dynamic
pressure adjustment. IPC devices consist of single or multiple
pneumatic chambers that are inﬂated to exert compression
pressure on the limb [8]. Compared with GCS, IPC treatment
features dynamic pressure modes with a wide range of pressure
delivery (1-20 kPa) [9]. Studies have shown that the use of IPC
instead of GCS is associated with lower incidents of venous
thromboembolism (VTE) [10]. Researchers have also shown
that sequential actuation modes and high pressure in a multi-
chamber device generate a higher lymphatic ﬂow than other
modes of treatment [11].

IPC devices rely on the inﬂation of the bladders to exert
compression pressure on the skin, making it difﬁcult to control
the contact area for efﬁcient mechanical coupling with blood
vessels. It is also challenging for a user to move around when
wearing them because the bladders used in IPC devices are
usually bulky. The use of smaller bladders may reduce the
clinical efﬁcacy of the device due to the smaller volume of
blood being expelled [12].

Prior researchers have investigated the modeling, control,
and device designs for therapeutic massaging to overcome
these limitations in IPC devices. Guan et al. proposed an
evidence-based ﬂuid-structure coupling model for the inter-
action between IPC soft actuator and lower limb, providing

 
 
 
 
 
 
IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, 2022

2

Fig. 1. A. FFMS actuators are used for the peristaltic wearable robot design. These actuators are arranged in parallel to mimic peristalsis. B. The peristaltic
wearable robot can be used in various locations on human limbs, including the upper arm, forearm, and lower limb. The insert demonstrates the propagation of
the peristaltic wave generated. C. Peristaltic transport in biological organs such as the digestive tract involves sequential contraction and relaxation of muscles.

guidelines for improving the efﬁcacy of compression therapy
for venous ﬂow promotion [13]. To address control challenges
for pneumatic operations, Payne et al. incorporated closed-
loop force control in pneumatic actuators with similar sizes to
IPC modules [5]. Zhao et al. proposed a programmable and
self-adaptive dynamic pressure delivery system with a matrix
of soft sensors for IPC therapies [14].

In addition to IPC devices, several soft, wearable robotic
systems have been investigated for supplying forces to the
body [15], [16] via pneumatic muscles [17], shape memory
alloys [18], [19], or motor-driven tendons [20], [21]. For
example, Suarez et al. created a system for robotic lymphatic
drainage using three pneumatic bending fabric actuators to
compress and laterally push ﬂuid in a ﬂexible tube [22]. Yoo et
al. developed Z-folded pneumatic actuator modules to generate
normal and shear forces for lymphedema massaging [23].

Pneumatic actuation has been widely used in such appli-
cations, but is often energetically inefﬁcient, due to thermo-
dynamic losses arising from gas compression cycles [24].
Pneumatic actuators also store substantial energy in gas com-
pression, which can pose hazards upon soft material failure,
due to rapid energy release. Shape memory alloy actuators per-
form mechanical work via a thermally actuated phase change;
consequently, such actuators are energetically inefﬁcient and
operate at low speeds constrained by heat transport [19]. Other
designs utilize tendon- or Bowden-cable transmissions. Such
wearable devices require careful design to avoid painful or
hazardous stress concentration [20].

To overcome some of these limitations, we present a wear-
able system based on ﬂuidic fabric muscle sheets (FFMS),
described in recent publications by the authors [15], [24],
[25]. FFMS supply forces via soft, hydraulic transmissions
integrated into ﬁnger-sized compact textile matrices (Fig. 1 A).
They achieve greater energy efﬁciency and safety than many
pneumatic designs, avoid stress concentration through the use
of soft materials, and are capable of supplying large forces

(scalable based on application requirements) and of rapid
actuation at speeds exceeding 10 Hz, meeting requirements
for dynamic compression and massage therapies in many
application areas.

Leveraging the merits of FFMS actuators, we demonstrate
a soft wearable robot that generates massage-like motions on
the human limb through dynamic compression waves based
on peristalsis (Fig. 1 B). Peristalsis is a transport mechanism
produced via sequential squeezing of muscles, as in the
esophagus [26], uterus [27], ureter [28], or blood vessels [29].
Media within a peristaltic channel is transported via wave
motion of the channel walls (Fig. 1 C). Peristaltic transport has
been previously applied in robotic systems for liquid pumping
[30] or swallowing robots [31]. When applied to the exterior
of the body, peristalsis can supply forces similar to those used
in compression and massage therapies [7].

We present the design, fabrication, and modeling of the
peristaltic wearable robot and the associated control system.
We characterize the compression pressure, dynamic frequency
responses, and motion patterns generated by the peristaltic
wearable robot. Results show that the system we designed
can supply compression pressure as large as 22 kPa with
frequencies up to 14 Hz, meeting the requirements for com-
pression and massage therapy [4]–[6]. Our proof-of-concept
demonstration for compression therapy shows that this peri-
staltic wearable robot is capable of driving venous ﬂow in an
artiﬁcial limb with a ﬂow rate up to 1 mL/min. The ﬂow rate
increases linearly with peristaltic wavelength and frequency, in
agreement with theoretical models we derive based on prior
literature. Finally, we demonstrate that our wearable robot can
deliver a wide range of massage-like motions on the forearm.
This work provides a controllable and efﬁcient method for
supplying compression massage that could treat venous and
lymphatic inefﬁciencies, as well as a means for therapeutic
massage that could provide comfort or reduce anxiety.

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, 2022

3

motors are determined by the hydraulic pressure and the speed
of the actuation. A slider-crank linkage converts the rotary
motion to linear motion (Fig. 2). The minimum stroke position
occurs when the crank r is co-linear with the connecting rod
l (position C). It is the initial position of the motor when
ﬂuid pressure is maximum. This design uses l = r such
that the minimum operation angle α between the crank and
the horizontal line is 30◦. The range of α is adjustable to
accommodate a different ﬂuid volume. For our actuator, the
maximum α needed is 120◦ (position A). When the crank is
vertical, the connecting rod is co-linear with the stroke path
(position B). With this design, the torque τ of the motor can
be related to the force acting on the piston rod of the hydraulic
cylinder Ft by:

τ = rFt sin α, 30◦ ≤ α ≤ 120◦

(1)

In a quasi-static condition, Ft = P A, where P is the
quasi-static ﬂuid pressure and A is the inner cross-sectional
area of the hydraulic cylinder. The relationship between the
crank angle α and the piston location x is obtained from the
kinematics of a fourbar offset slider-crank [33]:

(cid:115)

x = r cos α + l

1 −

(cid:18) r · sin α − r
l

(cid:19)2

, 30◦ ≤ α ≤ 120◦

(2)
Our two-motor design is sufﬁcient to produce peristaltic
motions via coupled hydraulic channels (Fig. 3 A, E). As
the piston of the hydraulic cylinder moves back and forth,
the hydraulic pressure increases in one port but decreases
in the other port. With two motors, the eight actuators can
be connected to the four ports, with two channels sharing
one port. When two sinusoidal signals with a phase delay of
π/2 are fed into the two motors, a compression force pattern
similar to a sinusoidal wave can be generated spatially along
the wearable robot (Fig. 3 A). Different input signals result in
distinct spatial-temporal compression force patterns (Fig. 3 B,
C).

The two-motor compact design uses a minimal number of
motors at the cost of coupled compression forces. In many
other situations, each hydraulic channel needs to be controlled
independently. We designed a second driving system using
eight pistons to allow independent control over individual
channels to generate arbitrary compression force patterns (Fig.
3 D, F).

C. Software Development

Each piston is driven by a programmable high torque
servo (HerklueX DRS 0602, DST Robot) that is controlled
by computer via a synchronous serial communication. A
software graphical user interface (GUI) enables the design
of compression patterns via frequency, amplitude, duration,
and phase parameters (Fig. 4). The motors can be powered
using a rechargeable Lipo battery (14.8 V, 9 A). The software
also implements a two-step donning process. First, pistons are
positioned to fully pressurize one chamber in the hydraulic
cylinder, allowing actuators connected to that chamber to be

Fig. 2. Schematic design of the slider-crank driving mechanism.

II. DEVICE DESIGN AND OPERATING PRINCIPLE

A. Wearable Design and Fabrication

The peristaltic compression wearable aims to create dy-
namic compression force patterns on the wearer’s limbs (Fig.
1 B). It consists of eight ﬂuidic fabric muscle sheets (FFMS)
actuators and leverages several beneﬁts of this soft robotic
technology [24]. FFMS actuators are intrinsically compliant
and can be scaled to sizes as small as human ﬁngers. The
modular arrangement of these actuators offers extra ﬂexibility
for personalized conﬁgurations. In addition, these actuators
can be controlled efﬁciently with hydraulics [24] and are
capable of generating a large variety of compression patterns
that are easy to be detected and distinguished by humans
[25]. These characteristics make FFMS an ideal candidate that
meets the design requirements for compression therapy.

The operating principle of FFMS resembles Inverse Pneu-
matic Artiﬁcial Muscles (IPAM) [32]. When ﬂuid pressure is
high, the actuator extends to its longest state. When the ﬂuid
pressure decreases, the actuator contracts and exerts forces
on the payload (Fig. 1 A). When wrapped around a human
limb circumferentially, each actuator is capable of supplying
localized compressive pressure to the limb. This working
principle is intrinsically different from the IPC devices, such
that a compact-sized FFMS actuator may still supply large
compression pressures. The parallel arrangement of multiple
actuators makes it possible to provide spatial-temporal com-
pression patterns, including wave-like patterns that produce
peristalsis.

We fabricated the actuators using the methods described
in Zhu et al. [24]. The geometry of the soft latex tubing
used inside the fabric conduits affects the ﬂuid pressure
required to fully operate the actuator, as well as the maximum
compression force generated [24]. The actuator length should
be designed such that the actuator can wrap around the human
limb and produce compression pressure of at least 9.3 kPa
for compression therapy. Based on these requirements and the
analytical modeling in Zhu et al. [24], we speciﬁed the tubing
to have an outer diameter of 4.8 mm, and an inner diameter of
3.2 mm. We selected the stitching length as 177 mm and the
wrinkling ratio was 2.5. The fabricated actuators were then
pre-pressurized and hand-sewn onto a stretchable sleeve for
comfort using a zig-zag pattern that preserves stretchability.

B. Design and Modeling of the Fluid Driving System

The system uses compact, servo-driven hydraulic cylinders
to drive the ﬂuid (water). The power requirements for the

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, 2022

4

Fig. 3. Various control input designs can be used to generate spatial-temporal compression wave patterns. A. Two pistons can be used to control eight actuators
for maximum efﬁciency, with spatial compression forces coupled at locations routed to the same motor. The sinusoidal displacements with a phase delay of
π/2 on the top denote an example of the input signal for both pistons. The plot on the bottom illustrates the resulting spatial proﬁle of the compression force
at times t0 and t1. The two-piston driving system can also compose other spatial-temporal compression force patterns such as B and C, with the top ﬁgures
showing the piston input signals, and the bottom ﬁgures showing the composed spatial waves. D. The driving system can be expanded to eight pistons to
control each actuator independently. Arbitrary spatial compression force waves can be generated. E. The prototype of the two-piston driving system. F. The
prototype of the eight-piston driving system.

A. Single Actuator Compression Force Testing

We characterized the compression force of a single actuator
by wrapping it around a cylindrical testing ﬁxture with a
force sensor (ATI Nano17; ATI Industrial Automation) (Fig. 5
A). The force sensor measures part of the compression force
exerted on the arc segment with a central angle of 68.9 degrees.
The diameter of the cylinder in the testing setup is 63.7 mm to
mimic the size of a human limb. Different design parameters
of the testing ﬁxture, such as the cylinder radius, can affect the
compression pressure measurement. Applying the hoop stress
equation yields the following expression for the compression
pressure:

tactσact
R
where Pc represents the compression pressure, tact and σact
are the thickness and the axial stress of the actuator, R is
the radius of the cylinder wrapped by the actuator, F is the
force measured from the ATI nano 17, Ac is the contact
area between the actuator and the testing cylinder. A position
encoder measured the instantaneous stroke of the hydraulic
cylinder and a pressure sensor was used to monitor hydraulic
pressure. All sensing signals were recorded synchronously
using a real-time computer-in-the-loop system with a sampling
rate of 100 Hz (QPIDe; Quanser, Inc., with Simulink, The
MathWorks, Inc.).

F
Ac

Pc =

(3)

=

,

Fig. 4. The graphic user interface generates a user-deﬁned waveform with
input parameters such as frequency and amplitude. The interface also includes
a two-step donning design of the device.

fastened to the arm of the user. Then, pistons are positioned
to fully pressurize the other chamber, allowing the rest of the
actuators to be fastened.

III. MECHANICAL CHARACTERIZATION OF THE DYNAMIC
COMPRESSION SYSTEM

Various peristaltic, all-in-phase, and sequential squeez-
ing spatial-temporal compression patterns can be delivered
through time-varying signals for a single actuator, as well
as multiple actuators at different locations. In this section,
we evaluate the compression force generated by a single
actuator, the dynamic frequency response of the system, and
the large range of dynamic compression motion patterns that
the peristaltic wearable robot is capable of generating.

Results showed that compression pressure decreased with
increasing ﬂuid volume in the actuator, which is consistent
with the model presented in Zhu et al. [24] (Fig. 5 B). The
resting state of the actuator is when the ﬂuid volume is
maximum, leading to minimum compression pressure. When
ﬂuid volume is withdrawn from the actuator, the compression
pressure increases. This relationship was approximately linear
both before and after ﬂuid volume of 4 mL, with a larger slope

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, 2022

5

C. Dynamic Compression Motion Patterns

We characterized the dynamic spatial compression motion
patterns by measuring shape deformation with an optical
motion capture system (Flex 13; OptiTrack). Twenty-four
reﬂective markers (5 mm diameter) were distributed on the
surface of the wearable robot, with three on each actua-
tor. Compression patterns were generated and the dynamic
positions of each marker are measured. Fig. 7 shows the
average radius changes of the three markers on each actuator
over time. Five peristaltic motions were composed by varying
wavelength, wave speed, and the starting actuator (Fig. 7 A-
D, F), along with an all-in-phase synchronized compression
pattern (Fig. 7 E). Two sequential squeezing patterns were also
evaluated with squeezing times of 1 s and 2 s respectively (Fig.
7 G-H). These results mechanically validated that the wearable
robot was capable of generating different compression patterns
on a soft body.

IV. APPLICATIONS FOR COMPRESSION THERAPY AND
THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE

We demonstrated applications of the peristaltic wearable
robot for compression therapy to promote blood circulation
and for therapeutic massage therapy.

A. Compression Therapy for Blood Flow Promotion

Peristaltic action on a ﬂexible tube can introduce ﬂuid
ﬂow, thus, can be used to promote blood ﬂow in the veins,
to treat various medical conditions [1]–[3]. To demonstrate
the ability of the peristaltic compression robot to promote
blood circulation, we designed and fabricated an upper arm
model (Fig. 8 B) that mimics the anatomy of the human
upper arm (Fig. 8 A) [34]. The muscles (triceps, biceps, and
brachialis muscles) and skin were realized using a soft silicone
material (Ecoﬂex 00-30, shore hardness 00-30, Smooth-On,
Inc., Macungie, PA). A rigid 3D printed bone structure was
fabricated in CPE (Ultimaker ﬁlament). A latex tube was
placed adjacent to the bone, representing the brachial vein.
A soft strip made of stiffer silicone with a shore hardness of
2A (Dragon Skin FX-Pro, Smooth-On, Inc., Macungie, PA)
was used to direct compression pressure to the vein.

The limb apparatus is shown in Fig. 8 C. Vegetable glycerin
served as the ﬂuid for transport in the artiﬁcial vein, as it
can be mixed with water for different viscosity values [37].
Peristaltic compression patterns were generated when each
motor rotated sinusoidally with an onset delay time of ∆t
between adjacent actuators:

α = A sin( 2πf (t + (n − 1)∆t) ),

(4)

where α is the rotation degree for the motor, n indexes the
actuator channel, t is the time variable, A and f are the
amplitude and frequency of the sinusoidal wave respectively.
The spatial wave generated by all the actuators is described
as:

y(x, t) = A(cid:48) cos(

x − 2πf (t − ∆t)),

(5)

2π
λ

Fig. 5. Evaluation of the force generated by a single actuator. A. Compression
force testing set-up for a single actuator. B. Relationship between ﬂuid volume
and compression pressure follows a similar curve for different operation
strokes ranging from 10% to 100% with the margins marked in the plot.
Note that the minimum compression pressure occurs when the ﬂuid volume
is maximum. As the ﬂuid is withdrawn from the actuator, the compression
pressure increases. The inserted diagrams illustrate the extreme conditions for
maximum and minimum compression pressure to occur.

for ﬂuid volume between 4 mL and 5 mL. The maximum
compression pressure decreased with operation stroke range,
as the margins illustrated in Fig. 5 B.

B. Dynamic Frequency Response of the System

We evaluated the system’s dynamic frequency response
at frequencies ranging from 0.2 Hz to 50 Hz with stroke
amplitudes from 10% to 100%. The stroke of the piston was
measured, and the actual frequency (experimental frequency)
was obtained using spectrum analysis of the data. Fig. 6 A
shows the results for the stroke amplitude of 10%. Compres-
sion pressure decreased as frequency increased up to 17 Hz,
above which the compression pressure and the ﬂuid volume
had similar ranges. Results also revealed that the system was
capable of operating at frequencies up to 20 Hz (Fig. 6 B).
Motor power constrained the stroke amplitude in that the lower
the maximum stroke used, the higher frequency achieved.
The magnitude decrement was more prominent for larger
maximum stroke (Fig. 6 C), while little magnitude decrement
was observed when operating with 10% stroke.

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, 2022

6

Fig. 6. Frequency response of the system. A. The hysteresis loops presented in the relationship between ﬂuid volume and compression pressure show energy
loss during the actuation. The energy loss increases with increasing frequency. Legend: commanded frequency in Hz. B. Legend: different operation stroke
range in %. The experimental frequency reaches a plateau for all stroke ranges. The smaller the stroke range, the higher the experimental frequency achieved.
Overall, the system is able to operate at frequencies up to about 20 Hz despite some discrepancies between commanded frequency and experimental frequency.
C. As the stroke magnitude gets higher, the drop-off in stroke occurs at lower frequencies. The magnitude remains almost ﬂat across all frequencies for 10%
operation stroke range.

Fig. 7. Motion capture results for various dynamic compression patterns including peristaltic motions (A-D, F), all-in-phase actuation (E), and sequential
squeezing (G-H). The texts at the top left corner of each subﬁgure denote the wavelength and wave speed of each peristaltic pattern. For the sequential
squeezing patterns, the texts show the squeezing time of each actuator.

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, 2022

7

Fig. 8. The wearable robot is conﬁgured to promote hemodynamic circulation in a limb model via peristaltic transport. A. A simpliﬁed illustration of the
cross-section through the middle of upper arm [34]. B. The cross-section of the arm model used for the experiment. C. Testing apparatus for the peristaltic
transport.

Fig. 9. A. Experimental results of the ﬂow rate showed a linear relationship with the wavelength, in agreement with the theoretical prediction (equation 7).
B. Results showed that the viscosity had a weak effect on the ﬂow rate, agreeing with the analytical predictions in [35], [36].

where y and x are the vertical and horizontal position vari-
ables, A(cid:48) and λ are the amplitude and wavelength of the spatial
wave respectively.

The peristaltic compression robot was wrapped around the
limb model, with a spacing of about 1.1 cm between adjacent
actuators. During peristaltic actuation, a ﬂow was induced,
transporting ﬂuid from the source through an elbow connector
to the collection container (Fig. 8 C). From the theory of
peristaltic ﬂow in ﬂexible tubes [35], when the pressure change
over one wavelength ∆Pλ = 0, the time average peristaltic
ﬂow ¯Q in a tube depends on the average radius of the tube a,
wave amplitude b, and wavespeed c as follows:

¯Q =

πcb2
2

16a2 − b2
2a2 + 3b2

(6)

When the frequency f of the peristaltic wave is constant, the
time average ﬂow increases with wavelength λ due to the
increase in unoccluded volume:

¯Q =

πλf b2
2

16a2 − b2
2a2 + 3b2

(7)

Frequencies of 0.2 Hz and 0.5 Hz were tested. Different
peristaltic compression patterns were generated with onset
delay time stepping between 0 ms (all-in-phase actuation) and
1125 ms (90° phase shift) by 125 ms (9° phase shift). Each

TABLE I
THEORETICAL VISCOSITY AND REYNOLDS NUMBER OF GLYCERIN-WATER
MIXTURES WITH DIFFERENT GLYCERIN CONCENTRATIONS IN MASS Cm.

Cm Density
0.5
0.7
0.8
0.9
0.95
1

1.12
1.17
1.20
1.23
1.24
1.26

Dynamic viscosity [cP]

Reynolds number

5.57
20.88
53.96
193.24
438.10
1,178.64

0.6427
0.1799
0.0714
0.0204
0.0091
0.0034

wave pattern was repeated three times, and the ﬂuid volume
collected in the container was measured.

We found that

the ﬂow rate was higher for peristaltic
motions than all-in-phase actuation when the wavelength was
larger than about 5 cm. The time-average ﬂow rate increased
with the wavelength following a linear relationship (Fig. 9
A), in agreement with theoretical predictions (equation 7).
The maximum ﬂow rate was achieved when the wavelength
was about 22 cm. When the wavelength further increased
to 44 cm, the ﬂow rate decreased. This may be due to the
boundary conditions in the testing conﬁguration, as the total
length of actuation (about 9.2 cm) was much smaller than the
wavelength of 44 cm. When the wavelength was very large,
the wave pattern resembled all-in-phase actuation and the ﬂuid
reﬂux counteracting with the peristaltic ﬂow was large. This

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, 2022

8

ﬁnger for localized compression. We also implement a modu-
lar hydraulic actuation system for efﬁcient control compared to
commonly used pneumatic wearables. Each module is able to
generate compression pressure up to 22 kPa and frequency up
to 14 Hz, meeting the requirements for compression therapy
and therapeutic haptic massage [4]–[6]. With programmable
frequency, amplitude, phase delay, and duration, it is capable
of rendering a large range of spatial-temporal wave patterns.
We further demonstrate the application of the peristaltic wear-
able robot for blood ﬂow promotion and therapeutic haptic
massage.

The theoretical and experimental results demonstrate the de-
vice’s ability to drive ﬂuid ﬂow in a model limb via peristaltic
transport, and provide a quantitative model that parameters
governing the peristaltic pattern to the ﬂow rate and ﬂuid
properties. These ﬁndings indicate that such systems may hold
substantial promise for the treatment of lymphatic and blood
circulation inefﬁciencies, which are associated with several
health disorders. The model arm used in our experiments is
in reality quite different than a real arm. Future translational
research aimed at designing and evaluating the clinical efﬁcacy
of such a peristaltic robotic sleeve is warranted.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors acknowledge support from the U.S. National
Science Foundation Awards 1751348 and 2002529 to Visell,
2139319 to Dinulescu, and 1944816 to Hawkes. The authors
acknowledge the use of the Microﬂuidics Laboratory and Inno-
vation Workshop within the California NanoSystems Institute,
supported by the University of California, Santa Barbara and
the University of California, Ofﬁce of the President.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Dufﬁeld and J. Kalkhoven, “Effects of compression garments in
strength, power and speed based exercise,” in Compression garments
in sports: Athletic performance and recovery. Springer, 2016, pp. 63–
78.

[2] H. Partsch, “Compression therapy: clinical and experimental evidence,”

Annals of vascular diseases, pp. ra–12, 2012.

[3] J. D. Crane, D. I. Ogborn, C. Cupido, S. Melov, A. Hubbard, J. M.
Bourgeois, and M. A. Tarnopolsky, “Massage therapy attenuates in-
ﬂammatory signaling after exercise-induced muscle damage,” Science
translational medicine, vol. 4, no. 119, pp. 119ra13–119ra13, 2012.
[4] B. Partsch and H. Partsch, “Calf compression pressure required to
achieve venous closure from supine to standing positions,” Journal of
vascular surgery, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 734–738, 2005.

[5] C. J. Payne, E. G. Hevia, N. Phipps, A. Atalay, O. Atalay, B. R. Seo, D. J.
Mooney, and C. J. Walsh, “Force control of textile-based soft wearable
robots for mechanotherapy,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 5459–5465.

[6] K. Delis, Z. Azizi, R. Stevens, J. Wolfe, and A. Nicolaides, “Optimum
intermittent pneumatic compression stimulus for lower-limb venous
emptying,” European Journal of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery,
vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 261–269, 2000.

[7] L. Roberts, “Effects of patterns of pressure application on resting
electromyography during massage,” International journal of therapeutic
massage & bodywork, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 4, 2011.

[8] A. Chen, S. Frangos, S. Kilaru, and B. Sumpio, “Intermittent pneumatic
compression devices–physiological mechanisms of action,” European
Journal of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 383–
392, 2001.

[9] P. S. Moran, C. Teljeur, P. Harrington, and M. Ryan, “A systematic re-
view of intermittent pneumatic compression for critical limb ischaemia,”
Vascular Medicine, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 41–50, 2015.

Fig. 10. A. Our peristaltic wearable robot on user’s forearm for therapeutic
massage. B. The actuator side of the wearable robot. C. The closure side of
the wearable robot.

decrement for wavelengths above 22 cm was also presented
when frequency increased to 0.5 Hz. The overall ﬂow rate
for 0.5 Hz was slightly larger than 0.2 Hz, in agreement with
theoretical predictions (equation 7).

The dynamic viscosity of glycerin at temperature 22° is
about 1179 cP, which is much larger than the normal blood
viscosity values (between 3.3 cP and 5.5 cP) [38]. Blood is
also a non-Newtonian ﬂuid whose viscosity changes depending
on the hemodynamic conditions. Here, we evaluated the effect
of ﬂuid viscosity on induced ﬂow rate. The viscosity of the
transported ﬂuid was varied by mixing glycerin with water at
different weight percentages. The theoretical viscosity of the
glycerin-water mixture was obtained using published results
[37] (Table I).

Experimental results showed that viscosity had a weak effect
on the ﬂow rate (Fig. 9 B). The ﬂow rate decreased as the
viscosity decreased. This ﬁnding is consistent with predictions
in the literature that show that viscosity have little effect on the
ﬂow rate when viscous forces are dominant (small Reynolds
numbers) [35], [36].

B. Therapeutic Massage with a Haptic Sleeve

Wave-like peristaltic compression can also be used to emu-
late manual massage therapy for stress reduction and muscle
relaxation. Papadopoulou et al. developed an affective sleeve
that produces sequential compression and warmth on the
forearm using shape memory alloys (SMAs) [18].

We adapted our peristaltic wearable robot to supply massag-
ing patterns (Fig. 10). Different massage patterns may be gen-
erated by varying actuation frequency, amplitude (operation
stroke range), the phase time delay between adjacent actuators,
and the initialization location for the wave. A supplementary
video shows several examples illustrating patterns of haptic
massage feedback generated by the device.

V. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK

This article presents a peristaltic soft, wearable robot for
robotic compression therapy. Although IPC has remained the
main tool for automated compression therapy for decades,
little device renovation has been done to improve the spatial
arrangement due to the limitations of pneumatic operation.
We present a novel peristaltic wearable robot that has ﬁnely
distributed modules with a width comparable to the size of a

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, 2022

9

International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
2016, pp. 4022–4029.

IEEE,

[33] R. L. Norton, Design of Machinery: An Introduction to the Synthesis
and Analysis of Mechanisms and Machines, 3rd ed. McGraw Hill,
2004, pp. 178–180.

[34] A. C. Eycleshymer and D. M. Schoemaker, A cross-section anatomy.

D. Appleton, 1911.

[35] C. Barton and S. Raynor, “Peristaltic ﬂow in tubes,” The Bulletin of

mathematical biophysics, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 663–680, 1968.

[36] M. Y. Jaffrin, “Inertia and streamline curvature effects on peristaltic
pumping,” International Journal of Engineering Science, vol. 11, no. 6,
pp. 681–699, 1973.

[37] N.-S. Cheng, “Formula for the viscosity of a glycerol- water mixture,”
Industrial & engineering chemistry research, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 3285–
3288, 2008.

[38] E. Nader, S. Skinner, M. Romana, R. Fort, N. Lemonne, N. Guillot,
A. Gauthier, S. Antoine-Jonville, C. Renoux, M.-D. Hardy-Dessources
et al., “Blood rheology: key parameters, impact on blood ﬂow, role
in sickle cell disease and effects of exercise,” Frontiers in physiology,
vol. 10, p. 1329, 2019.

[10] Y. M. Arabi, M. Khedr, S. I. Dara, G. S. Dhar, S. A. Bhat, H. M. Tamim,
and L. Y. Afesh, “Use of intermittent pneumatic compression and not
graduated compression stockings is associated with lower incident vte
in critically ill patients: a multiple propensity scores adjusted analysis,”
Chest, vol. 144, no. 1, pp. 152–159, 2013.

[11] S. Kitayama, J. Maegawa, S. Matsubara, S. Kobayashi, T. Mikami,
K. Hirotomi, and S. Kagimoto, “Real-time direct evidence of the super-
ﬁcial lymphatic drainage effect of intermittent pneumatic compression
treatment for lower limb lymphedema,” Lymphatic research and biology,
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 77–86, 2017.

[12] A. J. COMEROTA, “Intermittent pneumatic compression for dvt pro-

phylaxis,” Supplement to endovascular today, pp. 3–5, 2011.

[13] D. Guan, R. Liu, C. Fei, S. Zhao, and L. Jing, “Fluid–structure coupling
model and experimental validation of interaction between pneumatic soft
actuator and lower limb,” Soft robotics, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 627–638, 2020.
[14] S. Zhao, R. Liu, X. Wu, C. Ye, and A. W. Zia, “A programmable and self-
adaptive dynamic pressure delivery and feedback system for efﬁcient
intermittent pneumatic compression therapy,” Sensors and Actuators A:
Physical, vol. 315, p. 112285, 2020.

[15] M. Zhu, S. Biswas, S. I. Dinulescu, N. Kastor, E. W. Hawkes, and
Y. Visell, “Soft, wearable robotics and haptics: Technologies, trends,
and emerging applications,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 110, no. 2,
pp. 246–272, 2022.

[16] C. Thalman and P. Artemiadis, “A review of soft wearable robots that
provide active assistance: trends, common actuation methods, fabrica-
tion, and applications,” Wearable Technologies, vol. 1, 2020.

[17] W. Wu and H. Culbertson, “Wearable haptic pneumatic device for
creating the illusion of lateral motion on the arm,” in 2019 IEEE World
Haptics Conference (WHC).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 193–198.

[18] A. Papadopoulou, J. Berry, T. Knight, and R. Picard, “Affective sleeve:
Wearable materials with haptic action for promoting calmness,” in
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction.
Springer,
2019, pp. 304–319.

[19] K. Otsuka and C. M. Wayman, Shape memory materials. Cambridge

university press, 1999.

[20] B. B. Kang, H. Choi, H. Lee, and K.-J. Cho, “Exo-glove poly ii: A
polymer-based soft wearable robot for the hand with a tendon-driven
actuation system,” Soft robotics, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 214–227, 2019.
[21] U. A. Hofmann, T. B¨utzer, O. Lambercy, and R. Gassert, “Design
and evaluation of a bowden-cable-based remote actuation system for
wearable robotics,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 3, no. 3,
pp. 2101–2108, 2018.

[22] E. Suarez, J. J. Huaroto, A. A. Reymundo, D. Holland, C. Walsh, and
E. Vela, “A soft pneumatic fabric-polymer actuator for wearable biomed-
ical devices: Proof of concept for lymphedema treatment,” in 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE,
2018, pp. 5452–5458.

[23] H. J. Yoo, W. Kim, S.-Y. Lee, J. Choi, Y. J. Kim, Y. Nam, K.-J. Cho
et al., “Wearable lymphedema massaging modules: Proof of concept
using origami-inspired soft fabric pneumatic actuators,” in 2019 IEEE
16th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 950–956.

[24] M. Zhu, T. N. Do, E. Hawkes, and Y. Visell, “Fluidic fabric muscle

sheets for wearable and soft robotics,” Soft Robotics, 2020.

[25] M. Zhu, A. H. Memar, A. Gupta, M. Samad, P. Agarwal, Y. Visell,
S. J. Keller, and N. Colonnese, “Pneusleeve: In-fabric multimodal
actuation and sensing in a soft, compact, and expressive haptic sleeve,”
in Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, 2020, pp. 1–12.

[26] W. G. Paterson, “Esophageal peristalsis,” GI Motility online, 2006.
[27] N. P. M. Kuijsters, W. G. Methorst, M. S. Q. Kortenhorst, C. Rabotti,
M. Mischi, and B. C. Schoot, “Uterine peristalsis and fertility: current
knowledge and future perspectives: a review and meta-analysis,” Repro-
ductive biomedicine online, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 50–71, 2017.

[28] P. Edmond, J. A. Ross, and I. S. Kirkland, “Human ureteral peristalsis,”

The Journal of urology, vol. 104, no. 5, pp. 670–674, 1970.

[29] J. Misra and S. Pandey, “Peristaltic transport of blood in small ves-
sels: study of a mathematical model,” Computers & Mathematics with
Applications, vol. 43, no. 8-9, pp. 1183–1193, 2002.

[30] M. Jaffrin and A. Shapiro, “Peristaltic pumping,” Annual review of ﬂuid

mechanics, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 13–37, 1971.

[31] F. Chen, S. Dirven, W. Xu, and X. Li, “Soft actuator mimicking human
esophageal peristalsis for a swallowing robot,” IEEE/ASME Transactions
on Mechatronics, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 1300–1308, 2013.

[32] E. W. Hawkes, D. L. Christensen, and A. M. Okamura, “Design and
implementation of a 300% strain soft artiﬁcial muscle,” in 2016 IEEE

IEEE/ASME TRANSACTIONS ON MECHATRONICS, 2022

10

Elliot Wright Hawkes (Member, IEEE) received
the A.B. degree with highest honors in mechanical
engineering from Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA, USA; the M.S. degree in mechanical engineer-
ing from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA;
and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from
Stanford University under the supervision of Prof.
M. Cutkosky, in 2009, 2012, and 2015, respectively.
He is an Assistant Professor with the Department
of Mechanical Engineering, University of California,
Santa Barbara, USA. His research interests include
compliant robot design, mechanism design, nontraditional materials, artiﬁcial
muscles, directional adhesion, and growing robots.

Dr. Hawkes recently received the National Science Foundation CAREER

Award and the NASA Early Faculty Career Award.

Yon Visell received the B.A. degree in physics from
the Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT, USA, in
1995, and the M.A. degree in physics from The
University of Texas, Austin, Austin, TX, USA, in
1999, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and com-
puter engineering from McGill University, Montreal,
QC, Canada, in 2011.

He is currently an Associate Professor with the
University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Bar-
bara, CA, USA, in the Media Arts and Technology
Program, Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, and Department of Mechanical Engineering (by courtesy). His
academic interests include haptics, soft robotics, and soft electronics. He was
a Postdoctoral Scholar with Sorbonne University, Paris. Prior to his Ph.D.
studies, Visell spent several years in industry positions, including that of
digital signal processing (DSP) developer for Ableton Live. He has authored
and coauthored more than 75 scientiﬁc works.

Dr. Visell was the recipient of several awards for work presented at
prominent academic conferences. He received a Google Faculty Research
Award in 2016, a Hellman Family Foundation Faculty Fellowship in 2017,
and a U.S. National Science Foundation CAREER award in 2018. He is an
Associate Editor for the IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS
and serves as General Co-Chair of the 2022 IEEE Haptics Symposium.

BIOGRAPHY SECTION

Mengjia Zhu received the B.Eng. (Hons.) degree in
apparel design and engineering from Soochow Uni-
versity, Suzhou, China, in 2015, and the M.S. degree
in materials science and engineering from Arizona
State University, Tempe, AZ, USA, in 2017.

She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
in media arts and technology at the University of
California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA,
under the supervision of Prof. Yon Visell in the RE
Touch Lab. Her research interests lie in the area of
functional wearables including wearable haptics, soft

robotics, and assistive technologies.

Adrian Ferstera received his M.Sc in Mech Eng
with a major in Robotics, Systems and Control from
ETH Zurich. During his time at ETH Zurich, he
focused on software development for any robotic
application under the supervision of Prof. Bradley
Nelson in the Multi-Scale Robotics Laboratory. He
is currently working for a software consultancy
company which focuses on software development for
novel banking applications.

Stejara Iulia Dinulescu received the B.S. degree
in Psychology (with Distinction), the B.A. degree
in Creative Computation, and the B.A. degree in
Studio Arts from Southern Methodist University,
Dallas, TX, USA, in 2019, with minors in Neuro-
science and Cognitive Science. She is currently a
Ph.D. candidate in the Media Arts and Technology
department at the University of California, Santa
Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, working in the
RE Touch Lab and mentored by Prof. Y. Visell. Her
research interests include studying the perceptual
and mechanical properties of interpersonal touch and developing wearable
haptic and soft robotic devices for reproducing touch experiences remotely.

Nikolas Kastor holds a Ph.D. in Mechanical En-
gineering from Tufts University and is a Fellow
of the Tufts University Soft Material Robotics Na-
tional Science Foundation (NSF) Integrative Gradu-
ate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT).
Dr. Kastor contributes over 13 years of research,
design, manufacturing, and project management ex-
perience in the ﬁelds of soft material robotics, hap-
tics, MEMS sensors, commercial transducers, and
consumer products; where he has published numer-
ous papers and patents. He has conducted business
and presented research in North America, Europe, and Asia. Dr. Kastor
has participated in the NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) customer discovery
training for a wearable robotics application and is currently self-employed.
During this project, Nikolas was a postdoctoral scholar at the University
of California Santa Barbara working on soft haptic, sensing, and actuation
systems with the RE Touch Lab.

Max Linnander received the B.Sc. degree in
physics from Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ,
in 2021. He is currently working toward
USA,
the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering with
the University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa
Barbara, CA, USA, under the supervision of Prof. Y.
Visell. His research interests include optics, acous-
tics, and haptics.

