ElectroVoxel: Electromagnetically Actuated Pivoting
for Scalable Modular Self-Reconﬁgurable Robots

Martin Nisser
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, MA
nisser@mit.edu

Leon Cheng
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, MA
leonc@mit.edu

Yashaswini Makaram
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, MA
ymakaram@mit.edu

Ryo Suzuki
University of Calgary
Calgary, AB
ryo.suzuki@ucalgary.ca

Stefanie Mueller
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, MA
stefanie.mueller@mit.edu

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

2
1

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
3
7
5
0
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—This paper introduces a cube-based reconﬁgurable
robot that utilizes an electromagnet-based actuation framework
to reconﬁgure in three dimensions via pivoting. While a va-
riety of actuation mechanisms for self-reconﬁgurable robots
have been explored, they often suffer from cost, complexity,
assembly and sizing requirements that prevent scaled production
of such robots. To address this challenge, we use an actuation
mechanism based on electromagnets embedded into the edges
of each cube to interchangeably create identically or oppositely
polarized electromagnet pairs, resulting in repulsive or attractive
forces, respectively. By leveraging attraction for hinge formation,
and repulsion to drive pivoting maneuvers, we can reconﬁg-
ure the robot by voxelizing it and actuating its constituent
modules—termed Electrovoxels—via electromagnetically actuated
pivoting. To demonstrate this, we develop fully untethered, three-
dimensional self-reconﬁgurable robots and demonstrate 2D and
3D self-reconﬁguration using pivot and traversal maneuvers on
an air-table and in microgravity on a parabolic ﬂight. This paper
describes the hardware design of our robots, its pivoting frame-
work, our reconﬁguration planning software, and an evaluation
of the dynamical and electrical characteristics of our system to
inform the design of scalable self-reconﬁgurable robots.

Index Terms—modular robots;

self-reconﬁgurable robots;

space robotics

I. INTRODUCTION

Roboticists have pursued a vision of modular

self-
reconﬁgurable robots for over 30 years [1]–[3]. Exhibiting
unique beneﬁts in adaptability, scalability, and robustness,
modular self-reconﬁgurable robots (MSRR) promise applica-
tion domains that include space exploration [4], [5], recon-
ﬁgurable environments [6], [7], search and rescue [8], and
shape-changing user interfaces [9]. Roboticists have typically
built MSRR via individually actuated modules connected
by temporary joints [6], [10], [11]. MSRR based on cubic
modules have moreover achieved self-reconﬁgurability in two
dimensions via sliding [12] and disassembly [13], as well
as in three dimensions via pivoting [14], [15]. However,
a grand challenge facing self-reconﬁgurable robots is their
scalability [16]—existing designs often require separate mech-
anisms for actuation and attachment [6], [14], and in addition,
require mechanical components such as motors, gears, and
transmissions. However, these components are often bulky,
complex, and expensive, hindering their miniaturization and
scalability.

One promising approach to addressing these challenges
is to leverage electromagnetic forces to connect and actuate
modules at the same time with a single component. Being

Fig. 1: Elements of an electromagnetically actuated reconﬁg-
urable robot. (Above) A single module. (Middle) An array
of four modules. (Bottom) 2D and 3D reconﬁguration exper-
iments on an air table and a microgravity environment.

solid-state—that is, having no moving parts itself—it is also
easy to maintain and manufacture for a large-scale system.
In particular, Nisser et al. [17] proposed and simulated the
use of inexpensive electromagnets embedded into cube edges
to actuate pivots between adjacent modules via repulsion
while creating temporary hinges via attraction. Unlike tra-
ditional hinges that require mechanical attachments between
two elements, this approach requires no dedicated physical
mechanism and can be formed between any electromagnet
pair dynamically. Kubits [18] built
the ﬁrst physical pro-
totype leveraging this electromagnetically actuated pivoting

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2: Reconﬁguration maneuvers for (above) Pivoting and (below) Traversal. Electromagnets are shaded in red and blue to
indicate polarization w.r.t. a global co-ordinate system; like polarizations repel, unlike polarizations attract.

framework and replaced electromagnets with programmable
magnets to conserve power. They also demonstrated how the
electromagnetically actuated pivoting framework can generate
forces signiﬁcant enough to pivot modules against gravity
moments if large currents are applied. However, the mod-
ules in their system were tethered to off-board electronics,
and because cube edges were only partially embedded with
electromagnets, interactions between all electromagnets in the
system could not be observed, such as using electromagnets
to maintain bonds between stationary cubes during traversals.
In this paper, we contribute the ﬁrst demonstration of recon-
ﬁgurable robots leveraging the electromagnetically actuated
pivoting framework that are fully untethered, supported by
reconﬁguration planning software and electromagnet force
predictions veriﬁed experimentally. A key goal is to validate
these robots’ use for microgravity environments to enable
near-term space industry applications [4], [16]–[18], where
propellant-free actuation and reconﬁgurability address many
challenges associated with today’s limitations on launch mass
and volume, as well as facilitating stowage during launch.
Reconﬁgurable modules can enable the augmentation and
replacement of structures over multiple launches, form tem-
porary structures to aid in spacecraft inspection and astronaut
assistance, function as self-sorting storage containers, and
allow spacecraft to actively change their inertia properties.
Microgravity alleviates demands placed on actuation forces,
facilitating untethering of the modules by moving electronics
onboard, and we chose electromagnet parameters such as
winding number, core radius and material to limit current.
We also parameterized Amp`ere’s Force law in terms of these
parameters to expand the design space of electromagnetic
actuators for future modules’ force and mass requirements.
We simulate a microgravity environment using an air table,
and deploy our modules on a parabolic ﬂight to demonstrate
untethered three-dimensional reconﬁgurability in space.

Relative to existing self-reconﬁgurable robots [14], [15],

our robots are light (103g), inexpensive ($68), and easy to
fabricate (80 min/cube), promising scalability. In addition,
using full assemblies, we demonstrate Sung et al.’s [19] two
reconﬁguration primitives,
the pivot and traversal, demon-
strating the electromagnetically actuated pivoting framework’s
compatibility with algorithms that allow reconﬁguring large
numbers of cube-based robots between arbitrary 3D shapes.
To show how the framework complies with [19] to reconﬁgure
more complex shapes, we constructed a web interface that
simulates reconﬁguration between user-deﬁned shapes.

II. ACTUATION MECHANISM & SIMULATION

Reconﬁguration algorithms for pivoting cubes [19], [20]
demonstrate transitioning between arbitrarily conﬁgured 3D
in under O(n2) moves,
lattices that are provably correct
barring three inadmissible sub-conﬁgurations. These reconﬁg-
uration maneuvers rely on two reconﬁguration primitives; a
simple pivot between two cubes along a shared edge (Fig.
2, 1st row) and a traversal between the face of one cube
and another (Fig. 2, 2nd row). In our work, we introduce an
algorithm that describes how the electromagnetically actuated
framework for individual cubes is compatible with these
reconﬁguration planning algorithms in three dimensions.

A. Actuation Mechanism

There are three steps to the polarization sequence for both
the pivot and traversal maneuvers, which we call the Launch,
the Travel, and Catch phases (Fig. 2). In each of these phases,
three cubes are involved: a traveling cube (the cube selected
for moving), an origin cube (from which the traveling cube
launches), and a destination cube (which catches the traveling
cube). For the pivot (Fig. 2, 1st row), the origin and destination
cubes correspond to the same physical cubes; for the Traversal
(Fig. 2, 2nd row), they correspond to different cubes. The
algorithm inputs are a cube ID,
its desired rotation axis
and rotation direction. Given these inputs, all electromagnet

assignments (repulse, attract, or OFF) are uniquely deﬁned
and identiﬁed by our software.

During the Launch phase (Fig. 2 A and D), we polarize
one electromagnet pair identically to launch the maneuver,
while oppositely polarizing a second pair to form an attractive
hinge. For the Traversal (Fig. 2, bottom), we energize two
additional pairs of electromagnets to keep the non-traveling
cubes attached to one another; for this, we choose electro-
magnets oriented orthogonally to the launching electromagnets
in order to avoid unwanted interactions between these pairs.
During the Travel phase (Fig. 2 B and E), after a short pulse we
switch the launching electromagnets off, while the remaining
electromagnet pair remain attractive to maintain the hinge.
During the Catch phase (Fig. 2 C and F), we energize a new
pair of attractive electromagnets to form a stable bond in the
newly acquired conﬁguration.

B. Simulation and Control Interface

Manually planning pivoting maneuvers and their associated
electromagnet assignments becomes intractable for more than
a few cubes. To let users visualize and plan reconﬁguration
maneuvers, we developed a simulation (Fig. 3) that computes
all electromagnet assignments based on desired reconﬁgu-
ration maneuvers speciﬁed by the user. The simulation is
browser-based and built using React, TypeScript, and Three.JS.
It consists of three parts: (A) different ways to interact with
the cubes (via buttons, direct manipulation, or code), (B) a
that simulates the cubes and affords their direct
viewport
manipulation, and (C) a settings panel to toggle simulation
features (e.g., different render modes for the cubes).

We provide three ways to deﬁne maneuvers. Users can
initiate maneuvers directly by clicking cubes and arrow di-
rections, each resulting in a single pivot. Alternatively, they
can launch pre-deﬁned scripts via the buttons that encode
multiple consecutive rotations. And ﬁnally, new buttons en-
coding different reconﬁguration maneuvers can be added at
any time in the underlying Typescript ﬁle. To do so, users
deﬁne the number and locations of starting cubes addressed
by (x,y,z) coordinates, and deﬁne each subsequent maneuver
by specifying the cube number and pivot direction.

Cubes in the viewport are afﬁxed to a grid of cubic cells of
unit length, with each cube occupying an integer address on
coordinates (x,y,z). Rotations are permitted along orthogonal
axes X,Y,Z, in clockwise or counter-clockwise directions. Be-
cause physical rotations require cubes to form both repulsive
and attractive edges, cubes must share a face with another
cube to execute a valid pivot. Each cube is assumed to have
access to the local occupancy information of its neighboring
cells. Prior to executing a pivot, this occupancy is checked
in order to determine whether a selected rotation results in
a pivot or a traversal. If the maneuver path is obstructed, the
viewport returns an error message. Given a pivot direction and
unobstructed path, there exists for each cube a unique valid
edge about which to form a hinge, but up to two valid edges
to repel and actuate the maneuver; in this case, we choose
the edge corresponding to the cube with which the hinge is
formed. We represent all rotations using quaternions in order
to facilitate unordered rotations about multiple axes.

Fig. 3: Web simulation for planning reconﬁgurations and
calculating the associated electromagnet commands. (A) Pre-
scripted maneuvers. (B) Viewport. (C) Settings.

Finally, the settings panel allows users to set rendering
features. These include displaying IDs for cubes, their electro-
magnets and their polarization values, displaying occupancy
requirements of neighboring cells to prevent collisions for
desired maneuvers,
toggling animation speed, and setting
rendering ﬁdelity. Once a sequence of maneuvers is deﬁned,
the associated electromagnet assignments can be ported to a
transmitting microcontroller for deployment on the hardware.

III. ELECTROMAGNETS

In this section, we ﬁrst describe the selection of the
electromagnet parameters for our system. To support further
exploration of electromagnetically driven pivoting cubes, we
then provide a force model to allow generating candidate
electromagnets by using Amp`ere’s Force law to compute mag-
netomotive force for a given electromagnet pair parametrically.
We ﬁnally apply this force to a preliminary dynamical model
of a 2-cube system.

A. Electromagnet Parameters

The idealized case of Amp`ere’s law gives that an elec-
to (N I)2µ, where µ is
tromagnet’s force is proportional
the permeability of its core, N the number of turns and I
the current applied. To limit each cube’s mass and size, we
ﬁrst selected the narrowest COTS ferrite cores available, at
1.625mm radius R and initial permeability µ0 of 2000. In
addition, larger cores proved difﬁcult to be supported by the
rated pressure of our air table on a 60mm-side cube footprint.
We next chose the COTS SMD drivers we found capable
of delivering the highest current, at 1.2A continuous. Using
exploratory experiments, we determined that an N of 800
provided sufﬁcient force to pivot 100g prototype cubes within
interactive times of 2s. Finally, choosing a wire gauge of AWG
34 at this N I yielded a coil resistance of 10.5Ω, allowing
driving the electromagnets, microcontroller and auxiliary elec-
tronics from a single untethered power source of 11.1V-12.6V.

B. Electromagnet Force Model

The dipole approximation commonly used to ﬁnd electro-
magnets’ magnetic ﬁeld strengths is invalid over short separa-
tion distances, such as when neighboring cubes are in contact.
As such, we use Amp`ere’s force law (1), which expresses the

Fig. 4: Computing electromagnet forces. Shown here for
D1, D2=10 between 1-turn coils (force vectors in magenta).

force F1,2 exerted on coil 1 due to coil 2 as a double line
integral over each coil’s geometry where inﬁnitesmal wire
elements dl1 and dl2 in wires 1 and 2 are energized with
currents I1 and I2, respectively, ˆr12 is a unit vector from each
element on wire 1 to those on wire 2 separated by distance
r, and µ(I) is the permeability of the electromagnet core as a
function of current.

F1,2 =

µ(I)
4π

(cid:90)

(cid:90)

1

2

I1dl1 × (I2dl2 × ˆr12)
||r||2

(1)

Equation (1) has no known analytical solution and is dis-
cretized to give (2), where D1 and D2 represent the number
of discretized elements in wires 1 and 2.

F1,2 =

µ(I)
4π

D1(cid:88)

D2(cid:88)

p = 1

q = 1

Ipdlp × (Iqdlq × ˆrpq)
||r||2

(2)

length,

We parameterize (2) in terms of radius,

turns,
and pitch, and solve this numerically for our electromagnet
parameters, using 8000 elements (D1, D2 = 8000) per coil to
compute F1,2 from the sum of 64,000,000 force vectors over
separation distances of 0.5mm to 20mm in 0.5mm increments
(85 minutes/increment on a Razer Blade Intel(R) Core(TM)
i7-8750H). Fig. 4 illustrates this computation for single-turn
electromagnet coils with 10 elements each (100 force vectors).

C. Dynamic Model

We apply these forces to a preliminary model (Fig. 5). We
model two 60-mm side length cubes as a 2-link pendulum
consisting of two point masses m placed at the distal ends
of two massless links (length L) connecting the hinge to
each cube’s center of mass. Electromagnet forces are applied
at
locations that correspond to the positions of the other
two electromagnet pairs associated with the maneuver along
vectors that connect them. We derive the equations of motion
and solve with Kane’s Method using Python’s SymPy package.

IV. HARDWARE

A. Electronics

Each electromagnet is comprised of 800 turns of 34 AWG
magnet wire wound around a ferromagnetic core (fair-rite
77) of 3.25mm diameter, 55.5mm length and initial per-
meability (µi) of 2000, with average electrical properties
characterized by a capacitance of 118.1µF , an inductance

Fig. 5: Dynamical model. Massless links of length L (solid
lines) connect point masses m. Force F actuates the pivot via
repulsion; G attracts electromagnets to form a new stable bond.

of 21.44mH, a resistance of 10.65Ω and a Q factor of
1.265. Each actuator (core + winding) costs just $0.66. The
circuitry for an untethered cube with 12 electromagnets con-
sists of a microcontroller (Arduino Nano) integrated with
a wireless transceiver (nRF24L01),
two 16-channel GPIO
expanders (Semtech SX1509) and 6 full dual H-bridges
(Toshiba TB6612FNG). These are distributed evenly between
two double-sided 0.78mm PCBs of square cross-section (side
length 42mm) which sandwich three serially connected 3.7V
batteries (ENGPOW 3.7v 150mAh Lipo, 4.2V at full charge).
Combined, this allows controlling each electromagnet as to
enable bidirectional pivoting in three orthogonal axes.

We use an NRF-equipped Arduino Nano as a centralized
controller to transmit commands from a laptop to modules
via radio. We utilize a simple open-loop bang-bang control
scheme. To accommodate addressing N cubes, each with 12
electromagnets, where each electromagnet can be polarized in
two directions or turned off, each command consists of a 16-bit
signed integer that encodes the cube ID [1..N ], electromagnet
ID [1..12] and its polarity [−1, 0, 1]. Individual messages are
transmitted in 20 milliseconds, and separate commands can
be transmitted to conﬁgure individual cubes to drive selected
electromagnets using PWM at a chosen duty cycle [0..255].

B. Mechanical Design

Each module (Figures 1 and 6) is a 60mm side length
cube and can be described as a unit cell of a primitive
cubic Bravais lattice, with edges representing electromagnets
that connect to vertices representing corner connectors. In
the middle of the cube, two PCBs sandwich three batteries,
centering the system’s mass to limit moment of inertia, and
are ﬁxated by a scaffold that interfaces via struts to all 8
corner connectors. The corner connectors are 3D printed on
a Formlabs 2 using Tough 2000 resin and the scaffold from
PLA using an Ultimaker 3. Table I details the cost and mass
breakdown of a cube; mass and cost are for total in each row,
and structure costs are based on raw material pricing.

Two Molex cables connect the upper and lower PCBs, and
four cables of 6 wires each (2 leads/electromagnet) harness
triads of three electromagnets to the PCBs. These four triads
consolidate all electromagnet wirings to two pairs of diamet-
rically opposed corners to simplify wire routing; each triad
connects three orthogonally positioned electromagnets to the
PCBs in order of axis to ensure symmetry between all cubes
such that they respond identically for a given command.

primitives; a pivot and a traversal (see supplemental video).
Each electromagnet drew 11.7W (nominally 11.1V x 1.06A)
to 15.1W (fully charged, 12.6V x 1.2A) for the duration of the
maneuver, which was 1.53s for pivots and 1.03s for traversals.
52 pivots and 30 traversal maneuvers were performed, with
a success rate of 100% and 94%, respectively. To yield this
success rate, the electromagnets of the manually assembled
cubes required careful positioning; small misalignments re-
sulted in failures of the cubes to generate sufﬁcient attractive
forces to catch stably, and traversal maneuvers showed a higher
likelihood of failure due to involving more electromagnets.

C. 3D Experiments: Parabolic Flight

The modules were deployed in microgravity on a parabolic
ﬂight to observe pivoting maneuvers unimpeded by kinematic
constraints from the ground plane or sliding friction. The
modules were deployed in a clear 460mm side length cubic
polycarbonate box with two 120mm diameter arm holes in one
side for the experimenter. Ten 15-second parabolas were ﬂown.
The ﬁrst 7 parabolas were utilized for calibrating the steps
and timing of the experimental protocol under microgravity
conditions. Most signiﬁcantly, the microgravity quality was
found to vary signiﬁcantly between and during individual
parabolas, resulting in re-programming the modules for a
shortened experiment window of approximately 4 seconds
of stable microgravity available before free-falling modules
would impact the polycarbonate enclosure. The last 3 parabo-
las were used to demonstrate the pivoting maneuver between
two modules. The procedure for each 15-second parabola
involved the experimenter rising from a lying to a strapped-
in kneeling position on the aircraft ﬂoor,
inserting hands
through arm holes, and positioning the cubes while waiting
for stable microgravity to settle. A trigger button was pushed
to wirelessly command execution of the pivoting maneuver,
and a second button was pushed to power down all cubes.

The pivoting maneuver was executed successfully each of
the three times in 1.13 seconds, while electromagnets for
launch, travel and catch phases performed correctly in all
tests. However, small oscillations orthogonal to the axis of
rotation were observed which led to the hinge disengaging
early once completing the maneuver. This result was unique
to microgravity experiments and unobserved on air tables as
these kinematically constrain cubes in the ground plane, and
arose due to imperfect alignments including protrusions of up
to 0.6mm in our manually wound coils.

D. Model Accuracy

We measured the force generated between two electromag-
nets using a Mettler Toledo Precision Balance ME203T/00
(10µN precision) while varying their separation distance and
their currents, shown in Fig. 9. We held two electromagnets
at a ﬁxed separation distance of 0.5mm, varying the current
applied to each electromagnet from 0A to 1.2A in 0.05A
increments. We then held the electromagnets at a ﬁxed current
of 1.2A, varying the separation distance from 0.5mm to
20mm in 0.5mm increments. Each of these experiments were
conducted 5 times. Measured data are plotted in raw form
(scatter plots) and as mean±1 standard deviation (shaded

Fig. 6: CAD model of a cube module.

Each cube took 80 minutes to assemble, discounting time

to reﬂow-solder PCBs and manually wind electromagnets.

V. EXPERIMENTS & RESULTS

A. Simulation

The simulation renders pivoting maneuvers and outputs
correct electromagnet IDs and polarity assignments for any
valid reconﬁguration; assignments were veriﬁed on hardware
by reconﬁgurations across all dimensions and electromagnets.
The simulation supports real-time interaction with up to 200
modules while rendering the associated CAD ﬁles (1.1Mb
.STL), and replacing these with low resolution proxy cubes
permits interaction with 1000 modules. Fig. 7 (see supplemen-
tary video) illustrates the viewport simulating and computing
electromagnet assignments for reconﬁguring 19 cubes from a
chair to a table (via 22 maneuvers) to a couch (40 maneuvers).

B. 2D Experiments: Air Table

The modules were deployed on an air table (ScienceFirst
#12000) and programmed to perform the two reconﬁguration

TABLE I: Module Cost/Mass Breakdown

Section
Electromagnet
Electromagnet
PCB
PCB
PCB
PCB
Structure
Structure
Total

Part
Ferrite core
Coil winding
MCU
Cabling
Boards & ICs
Batteries
Corners
Scaffold
/

Number Mass (g)

12
12
1
36
2
3
8
2
/

22.7
24.1
5.6
9.2
20.4
15.6
2.7
2.8
103.1

Cost ($)
6.2
1.8
8.9
11.4
31.6
8.2
0.4
0.2
68.7

Fig. 7: Reconﬁguring between a chair, table and couch

Ferromagnetic Core  •Fair-Rite 77 φ 3.25mm, 55.5mm length  μi 2000 initial permeabilityENGPOW Lipo Battery •3.7V 150mAh x 3 12.6V x 1.2A at Full ChargeElectromagnet Coils •800 turns of 34 AWG wirePCB  •Arduino Nano
•nRF24L01 Wireless Module
•16-ch GPIO Expanders x2 (Semtech SX1509) 
•Dual H-bridges x6 (Toshiba TB6612FNG)3D Printed Connector •Form Lab 2 Tough 2000 ResinScaﬀold •Ultimaker 3 PLA FilamentSide Length: 60 mm60 mmnetic actuation framework on an airtable and in microgravity,
Fig. 9 reveals the degree to which these misalignments reduce
attraction forces, at times disengaging the hinge. This resulted
in a 6% failure rate during air table traversals and minor
instabilities in microgravity without the kinematic constraint
of a ground plane; in the future, coils will be machine-wound
and the assembly rigidized before deployment.

Our parameterized force model accurately predicts forces
between electromagnets, supporting tailoring these actuators
for different module designs. The concave downwards rela-
tionship in the force v current data (Fig. 9) indicates the onset
of saturation of the ferrite cores in addition to potential heating
effects at higher currents. Although current can be raised with
higher voltage sources, this diminishes the returns on force
that could potentially be achieved using greater currents; by
exploiting larger cores with smaller currents, more favorable
force-current relationships could be achieved with future pro-
totypes. Nonetheless, the lack of opposing gravity moments
in microgravity obviates the need for large forces, and our
parabolic ﬂight deployment required preparatory testing on an
air table whose air pressure limited the total core mass.

Several avenues for future work present themselves. The
success of our open-loop bang bang control suggests self-
correction and robustness of the electromagnetic actuation
method to small disturbances, however future work could
support braking the traveling cube on impact via closed-loop
control. Promising bases for control could include model-
leverage the pivoting cube model’s
based strategies that
tractable dynamics, combined with IMUs and electromagnet-
based inductive sensing. To conserve power in a large scale
system, future modules should embed passive permanent mag-
nets in cube faces to form stable face-to-face bonds, or replace
electromagnets with electropermanent [12] or programmable
[18] magnets. Further applications of our microgravity-adapted
architecture, such as tangible or swarm user interfaces [21],
could be explored using air tables, caster wheels or low friction
surfaces. Of equal interest would be to incorporate power
electronics such as boost circuits for reconﬁguring untethered
cubes against gravity moments for terrestrial applications.

REFERENCES

[1] K. Stoy, D. Brandt, D.

J. Christensen, and D. Brandt, “Self-

reconﬁgurable robots: an introduction,” 2010.

[2] K. Gilpin, K. Kotay, D. Rus, and I. Vasilescu, “Miche: Modular shape
formation by self-disassembly,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 27, no. 3-4, pp. 345–372, 2008.

[3] M. Yim, D. G. Duff, and K. D. Roufas, “Polybot: a modular recon-
ﬁgurable robot,” in Proceedings 2000 ICRA. Millennium Conference.
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation. Symposia
Proceedings (Cat. No. 00CH37065), vol. 1.
IEEE, 2000, pp. 514–520.
[4] M. Yim, K. Roufas, D. Duff, Y. Zhang, C. Eldershaw, and S. Homans,
“Modular reconﬁgurable robots in space applications,” Autonomous
Robots, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 225–237, 2003.

[5] J. Baca, S. Hossain, P. Dasgupta, C. A. Nelson, and A. Dutta, “Modred:
Hardware design and reconﬁguration planning for a high dexterity mod-
ular self-reconﬁgurable robot for extra-terrestrial exploration,” Robotics
and Autonomous Systems, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1002–1015, 2014.

[6] A. Spr¨owitz, R. Moeckel, M. Vespignani, S. Bonardi, and A. J. Ijspeert,
“Roombots: A hardware perspective on 3d self-reconﬁguration and loco-
motion with a homogeneous modular robot,” Robotics and Autonomous
Systems, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1016–1033, 2014.

(a) Air table

(b) Parabolic ﬂight

Fig. 8: Two elements undergoing a pivoting maneuver (a) on
an air table, a low friction surface used to simulate micrograv-
ity environments for 2D maneuvers, and (b) in microgravity
aboard a parabolic ﬂight for 3D maneuvers.

Fig. 9: Force v current and electromagnet separation distance,
showing raw data and mean ±1 St.D for N=5. Predicted force-
distance relationship from (2) shown for comparison.

plots) for both experiments. Using the force-current mean at
I=1.2A to extract a characterised µ(1.2) of 874, we generated
predicted values for force v distance (line graph) with our
force model (2), correlating well with measured data.

Finally, tentative results of our simple dynamical model
including a simulation (supplemental video) agree qualitatively
with the experiments, however as physical experiments only
utilize a single force value (for I=1.2A), further work is
required to capture more data to validate the model.

VI. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK

This section discusses limitations and future work for our
current implementation. First, our cubes have to date been
manually assembled and soldered, and each electromagnet
hand-wound, resulting in imperfect alignments of electromag-
nets. While sufﬁcient to successfully showcase the electromag-

[7] J. Neubert and H. Lipson, “Soldercubes: a self-soldering self-
reconﬁguring modular robot system,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 40, no. 1,
pp. 139–158, 2016.

[8] J. Daudelin, G. Jing, T. Tosun, M. Yim, H. Kress-Gazit, and M. Camp-
bell, “An integrated system for perception-driven autonomy with mod-
ular robots,” Science Robotics, vol. 3, no. 23, 2018.

[9] A. Roudaut, D. Krusteva, M. McCoy, A. Karnik, K. Ramani, and
S. Subramanian, “Cubimorph: Designing modular interactive devices,”
in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA).

IEEE, 2016, pp. 3339–3345.

[10] D. Rus and M. Vona, “Crystalline robots: Self-reconﬁguration with
compressible unit modules,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 10, no. 1, pp.
107–124, 2001.

[11] K. Gilpin, A. Knaian, and D. Rus, “Robot pebbles: One centimeter
modules for programmable matter through self-disassembly,” in 2010
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
IEEE,
2010, pp. 2485–2492.

[12] B. K. An, “Em-cube: cube-shaped, self-reconﬁgurable robots sliding on
structure surfaces,” in Robotics and Automation, 2008. ICRA 2008. IEEE
International Conference on.

IEEE, 2008, pp. 3149–3155.

[13] K. Gilpin, K. Koyanagi, and D. Rus, “Making self-disassembling objects
with multiple components in the robot pebbles system,” in Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2011 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE,
2011, pp. 3614–3621.

[14] J. W. Romanishin, K. Gilpin, S. Claici, and D. Rus, “3d m-blocks: Self-
reconﬁguring robots capable of locomotion via pivoting in three dimen-
sions,” in Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2015 IEEE International
Conference on.

IEEE, 2015, pp. 1925–1932.
[15] J. W. Romanishin, K. Gilpin, and D. Rus, “M-blocks: Momentum-
driven, magnetic modular robots,” in 2013 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 4288–
4295.

[16] M. Yim, W.-M. Shen, B. Salemi, D. Rus, M. Moll, H. Lipson,
E. Klavins, and G. S. Chirikjian, “Modular self-reconﬁgurable robot
systems [grand challenges of robotics],” IEEE Robotics & Automation
Magazine, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 43–52, 2007.

[17] M. Nisser, D. Izzo, and A. Borggraefe, “An electromagnetically actuated,

self-reconﬁgurable space structure,” 2017.

[18] S. Hauser, M. Mutlu, and A. J. Ijspeert, “Kubits: solid-state self-
reconﬁguration with programmable magnets,” IEEE Robotics and Au-
tomation Letters, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 6443–6450, 2020.

[19] C. Sung, J. Bern, J. Romanishin, and D. Rus, “Reconﬁguration planning
for pivoting cube modular robots,” in 2015 IEEE international confer-
ence on robotics and automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1933–1940.
[20] D. A. Feshbach and C. Sung, “Reconﬁguring non-convex holes in
pivoting modular cube robots,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
2021.

[21] M. Le Goc, L. H. Kim, A. Parsaei, J.-D. Fekete, P. Dragicevic, and
S. Follmer, “Zooids: Building blocks for swarm user interfaces,” in
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology, 2016, pp. 97–109.

