Near Real-Time Distributed State Estimation via
AI/ML-Empowered 5G Networks

Ognjen Kundacina, Miodrag Forcan, Mirsad Cosovic, Darijo Raca, Merim Dzaferagic, Dragisa Miskovic, Mirjana
Maksimovic, Dejan Vukobratovic

2
2
0
2

l
u
J

2
2

]

G
L
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
1
1
1
1
.
7
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Fifth-Generation (5G) networks have a potential to
accelerate power system transition to a ﬂexible, softwarized,
data-driven, and intelligent grid. With their evolving support for
Machine Learning (ML)/Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) functions, 5G
networks are expected to enable novel data-centric Smart Grid
(SG) services. In this paper, we explore how data-driven SG
services could be integrated with ML/AI-enabled 5G networks
in a symbiotic relationship. We focus on the State Estimation
(SE) function as a key element of the energy management
system and focus on two main questions. Firstly, in a tutorial
fashion, we present an overview on how distributed SE can be
integrated with the elements of the 5G core network and radio
access network architecture. Secondly, we present and compare
two powerful distributed SE methods based on: i) graphical
models and belief propagation, and ii) graph neural networks.
We discuss their performance and capability to support a near
real-time distributed SE via 5G network, taking into account
communication delays.

Index Terms—Smart Grids, 5G, State Estimation, Wide-Area

Monitoring Systems, Phasor Measurement Units

I. INTRODUCTION

Fifth-Generation (5G) mobile cellular networks are evolving
towards a ubiquitous platform that offers large-scale and dis-
tributed communication and computation capacities to support
future Machine Learning (ML) and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI)-based services [1]. Integration of Smart Grid (SG) with
5G network will foster accelerated transition to a ﬂexible,
softwarized, data-driven and intelligent grid, recognised by
the Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) work plan
for Release 18 of 5G standards [2]. 5G networks provide nec-
essary bandwidth, connection density, low latency and ultra-
reliability to support different SG services [3]. Additionally,
5G networks are continuously upgraded to offer an increasing
in-network support for ML/AI-enabled services [4].

Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) and Wide-Area
Monitoring, Protection, and Control (WAMPAC) systems are
the major SG services that could match well with the emerging

O. Kundacina and D. Miskovic are with The Institute for Arti-
ﬁcial
Intelligence Research and Development of Serbia (e-mail: ogn-
jen.kundacina@ivi.ac.rs, dragisa.miskovic@ivi.ac.rs); M. Forcan and M. Mak-
simovic are with Faculty of Electrical Engineering, University of East Sara-
jevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina (e-mail: miodrag.forcan@etf.ues.rs.ba, mir-
jana.maksimovic@etf.ues.rs.ba); M. Cosovic and D. Raca are with Faculty
of Electrical Engineering, University of Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina
(e-mail: mcosovic@etf.unsa.ba, draca@etf.unsa.ba); M. Dzaferagic is with
CONNECT centre, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland (e-mail: dzaferam@tcd.ie);
D. Vukobratovic is with Faculty of Technical Sciences, University of Novi
Sad, Serbia, (email: dejanv@uns.ac.rs).

This paper has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement number 856967.

ML/AI-enabled 5G network services. AMI demands extreme
connection densities (106 devices/km2) to support smart meter
connectivity which is achievable using 5G Massive Machine-
type Communications (mMTC) [5], [6]. Wide-Area Moni-
toring System (WAMS), as a part of WAMPAC, delivers
Phasor Measurement Unit (PMU) measurements to the con-
trol center for the purpose of State Estimation (SE), power
system monitoring, warning, and event analysis [7]. Given the
number of connected AMI devices, and PMU reporting rates
of 10 − 100 frames per second, 5G is capable of supporting
extreme data volumes to enable next-generation data-driven
SG services [8]. Furthermore, relying on 5G Ultra-Reliable
Low-Latency Communications (URLLC), WAMS based on
PMUs will offer a near real-time view of power system
dynamics leading to novel ML/AI-based monitoring, control
and protection services [9].

In this paper, we ﬁrstly review an ongoing 5G network
evolution of both 5G Core Network (CN) and 5G Radio
Access Network (RAN) to support ML/AI-based services.
Then, we consider how data-driven SG services could be
integrated with ML/AI-enabled 5G networks in a symbiotic
relationship. Our focus is on the SE as one of the main routines
in the Energy Management System (EMS) [10]. In particu-
lar, we consider the distributed SE that exploits distributed
computation and communication in order to obtain the global
state of the system [11], [12]. Integrated with 5G network,
the distributed SE depends on massive and timely local data
inputs via 5G RAN, and the design and deployment of near
real-time distributed algorithms on top of 5G edge and cloud
computing capacities [13]. Herein, we present two powerful
distributed SE methods based on: i) factor graphs and Gaussian
Belief Propagation (GBP), and ii) Graph Neural Networks
(GNN). The performance and latency of a distributed SE
that relies on the message passing between edge computing
nodes are investigated. For both model-based methods, that
apply GBP approach, and data-based methods, that rely on
GNN approach, we present their performance, discuss their
integration into ML/AI-enabled 5G network architecture, and
outline their advantages and drawbacks.

II. 5G SUPPORT FOR SMART GRID SERVICES

In this section, we consider 5G network support for ML/AI-
based third-party services (e.g., SG services) in both central-
ized cloud-based 5G CN and distributed edge-based 5G RAN.

 
 
 
 
 
 
O1

E2

SG xApp

Near-RT RIC

E2

O1/A1

UE

SG UE App

NR-Uu

NG-RAN

RU

DU

CU

FH

P
H
Y
L
O
W

P
H
Y
H
G
H

I

M
A
C

R
I
C

MH

P
D
C
P

S
D
A
P

UDP

IP

L2

L1

R
R
C

5G CN (Mgt)

5G CN (Ctrl)

MDAF

Other NFs

SG rApp

Non-RT RIC

NWDAF

Other NFs

NEF

SG AF

BH

UPF

Customer Premises

rlτ

nrτ

ruτ

Far Edge
duτ

fhτ

mhτ

Edge Cloud

cuτ

Transport
bhτ

Central Telco Cloud
cnτ

Fig. 1. 5G network architecture support for SG services.

A. 5G Core Network Service-Based Architecture

Evolution and deployment of novel services with ever in-
creasing requirements motivated 3GPP to adopt a new 5G CN
system architecture called Service-based Architecture (SBA).
Fast and ﬂexible service deployment in 5G SBA is critical for
commercial viability of 5G [14], [15]. 5G SBA is deﬁned as
a set of interconnected Network Functions (NFs) that have
permission to access each other’s services [16]. Becoming
cloud-native means that the 5G CN employs Network Func-
tions Virtualization (NFV) and Software-Deﬁned Networking
(SDN) approaches, and service-based interactions between
control-plane functions [17], [18].

The 5G CN architecture consists of a number of NFs
responsible for network control and management, as shown
in Fig. 1 [15], [16]. The CN design principles include: sep-
aration of the control and user planes, modularization of the
functional and interface design, support for direct interaction
of NFs, reduction of mutual reliance of the 5G RAN and CN,
support for stateless NFs by separating computing and storage
resources, exposure of capability, and allowance of concurrent
access to both local and centralized services [16], [19], [20].
Besides standard NFs [19], novel data analytics functions:
Management Data Analytics Function (MDAF) and Network
Data Analytics Function (NWDAF), have been introduced.
MDAF manages data analytics for one or more NFs while
NWDAF collects and analyzes data for both centralized and
edge computing resources. NWDAF simpliﬁes the production
and consumption of CN data, and provides insights and
take actions to improve the end-user experience and network
performance [15], [16].

Application Functions (AFs) communicate securely with
other 5G NFs via the 5G SBA. AFs can be created for a
variety of application services, e.g., Smart Grid AFs (SGAFs),
and owned by the network operator or trusted third parties. For
services considered trusted by the operator, the AFs can access
NFs directly, while untrusted or third-party AFs access NFs
through the Network Exposure Function (NEF). NEF acts as a
communication mediator with the external systems and its role

SG Central Cloud

Coorporate PDC

Centralized EMS

SG Edge Cloud

Distributed EMS

Edge PDC

SG Substation

PMU

Field network

Local PDC

UE

SG UE App

PMU

5G CORE

Telco Central Cloud

5G CN (MGT)

SGAF

5G CN (CTRL)

SG rApp

UPF

Non-RT RIC

Telco Edge Cloud

BH and Transport

UPF

UPF

SG xApps

CU

CU

Near-RT RIC

MH

MH

DU

DU

DU

DU

DU

DU

FH

FH

FH

RU

RU

RU

RU

RU

RU

NR-Uu

5G RAN

Fig. 2. Example of SG service deployment over 5G network architectures.

is to store and retrieve NFs exposed capabilities and events.
In 5G CN, this data is exchanged among NFs via NEF, but
it can be securely exposed to third-party and edge-computing
entities outside of the 3GPP network, e.g., for the purpose of
data analytics [15], [16].

B. 5G Open Radio Access Network Architecture

The 5G RAN is undergoing the process of RAN disag-
gregation, i.e., a transition from inﬂexible, monolithic and
hardware-based RAN to a ﬂexible, elastic, software-based and
disaggregated RAN. The goal is to optimize radio resource

 
 
management and efﬁcient use of spectrum. The placement of
RAN functions across different locations started in Fourth-
Generation (4G) in the context of Cloud-RAN (C-RAN). Base
stations (also called eNBs) are separated into BaseBand Units
(BBUs) located in central ofﬁces and separated from Remote
Radio Units (RRUs) [21]. Further disaggregation divides the
BBU and the RRU into the Centralised Unit (CU), the Dis-
tributed Unit (DU), and the Radio Unit (RU). Such a disaggre-
gation, adopted by the Open Radio Access Network (O-RAN)
alliance, is under investigation within 3GPP targeting the most
efﬁcient functional split, i.e., the optimal allocation of RAN
functions to CU/DU/RU [22], see Fig. 1.

The introduction of ML/AI-based services is gradually ex-
panding from 5G CN towards 5G RAN. 3GPP is investigating
possible locations for data collection, training and deployment
of inference models [23]. In O-RAN, novel hierarchical RAN
Intelligent Controllers (RIC) are introduced: i) Near-Real-
Time (Near-RT) RIC deployed at
the edge, and ii) Non-
Real-Time (Non-RT) RIC deployed at the central cloud, con-
nected via a new set of open interfaces (E2/O1/A1). Near-
RT RIC supports a number of xApps operating at 10 ms -
1 s time scales: microservices capable of performing various
ML/AI-based resource management functions (e.g., network
slicing, radio resource management). In contrast, rApps have
more information about the network trafﬁc (understand the
context), thus they are mainly used for making predictions
and submitting policies to different network nodes. They also
share policies with the near-RT RIC. Then, those policies
are being enforced by the near-RT control loop. The near-
RT RIC can also collect data from multiple CUs and DUs
and make coordinated control decisions for multiple nodes
[24]. Although xApps/rApps address RAN management and
control, third-party xApps/rApps will enable integration and
control of speciﬁc network service requirements, e.g., SG
applications.

5G URLLC services are suitable for PMU-based WAMS
in SG that
target near real-time system state awareness.
A URLLC-based distributed SE for SG with latency and
reliability considerations is proposed in [13]. Similarly, the
implementation of SE functions in SG using 5G was recently
introduced by [25]. The challenges and promises of URLLC
for SG teleprotection are elaborated in [26]. In [27], a wire-
less line differential protection scheme based on URLLC is
proposed and tested using the real 5G test network. A testbed
composed of a microgrid and 5G network is introduced in [28]
and used to evaluate IEC-61850 [29] protocols in the case of
TCP/UDP message transmission. 5G network slicing for SG
is implemented and veriﬁed in [30]. Unlike the above papers,
we focus on ML/AI-based distributed SE methods and their
synergies with ML/AI-empowered 5G network.

III. DISTRIBUTED STATE ESTIMATION ARCHITECTURE IN
ML/AI-EMPOWERED 5G NETWORKS

Application layer

IED

WAN

R-SV

Transport and network layer

R-GOOSE

UDP/IP

IEC TR 61850-90-5

PMU

IEEE C37.118.2

TCP/IP

UDP/IP

Gateway

UDP/IP

IEC TR 61850-90-5

Fig. 3. OSI layers related to PMU wide-area communications, and compliant
with IEEE C37.118.2 and IEC TR 61850-90-5 protocols.

power systems [32]. PMUs are designed to support multiple
data reporting rates, usually up to 100 frames per second
in the case of 50 Hz power systems. In addition to PMUs,
Phasor Data Concentrators (PDC) are used in communication
systems in order to correlate synchrophasor data by time
stamps creating a system wide measurement sets [33].

Depending on SG architecture, both PMUs and PDCs can
access the network as a 5G New Radio (NR) User Equipment
(UE). PMUs can be deployed in two scenarios: i) as stand-
alone devices that send data as UEs to a remote PDC, or ii)
as part of a local ﬁeld network deployed by a power system
operator that connects multiple PMUs in a given region to
a PDC, which in turn connects to the 5G network as a UE
(see SG Substation block in Fig. 2). Besides local PDCs,
power system operator may deploy regional or corporate
PDCs envisioned as edge-cloud or central-cloud applications
(Fig. 2). Edge PDCs are usually deployed by a Distribution
System Operator (DSO) as part of the distribution network SE.
Corporate PDCs usually provide data to a single utility (state-
level
transmission network), while regional PDCs provide
data at interconnection level (multi state-level transmission
network).

Information stored in PMU/PDC should be formatted as
deﬁned in IEEE C37.118.2 [33]. The most widely used
protocols for the transfer of synchrophasor data are IEEE
C37.118.2 [33] and IEC TR 61850-90-5 [34]. IEC TR 61850-
90-5 protocol bridges the gap between IEC 61850, recom-
mended for Intelligent Electronic Devices (IEDs) at electrical
substations [29], and IEEE C37.118.2 designed speciﬁcally for
PMUs. It enables wide-area synchrophasor data transfer using
Routed Sampled Value (R-SV) and Routed Generic Object-
Oriented Substation Event (R-GOOSE) protocols. Application,
transport, and network layer encapsulation related to PMU
communications compliant with IEEE C37.118.2 and IEC TR
61850-90-5 protocols, are shown in Fig. 3. Upon UDP/IP
encapsulation of PMU/PDC data frames, they are transmitted
by 5G UE using URLLC service [28].

A. PMUs: Near Real-Time Data Sources for 5G Network

B. Distributed SE in ML/AI-Empowered 5G Networks

WAMS relies on PMUs that generate synchronized voltage
and current phasor measurements [31]. PMUs can be viewed
as sensors used to perform wide-area phasor measurements in

The SE is a key functionality of the EMS whose aim is
to provide a timely estimate of the system state variables
(magnitude and angle of the voltage) at all the buses of the

power system [13]. Traditional EMS is centralised, where data
collection and its processing is concentrated at a single node.
5G supports centralised EMS by deploying its functions as
cloud-native applications within the SG central cloud (see
Centralized EMS module in Fig. 2). Centralized EMS runs
centralised SE algorithm based on the set of PMU measure-
ments collected at the 5G central cloud either from local or
regional (edge) PDCs. Centralized EMS may interact with
the 5G CN through SGAF deployed in the 5G central cloud.
SGAF may expose its own data and access relevant network
statistics exposed by other 5G CN data analytics functions
such as MDAF or NWDAF in order to improve EMS services.
Recent trends see shifting the SE functionality from cen-
tralised to distributed system architecture. Distributed SE
implies the absence of the central coordinator, where each
local area communicates only with its neighbors [35]–[38].
In terms of estimation accuracy, the distributed approach is
equivalent to the hierarchical and centralized. For latency-
critical scenarios, distributed SE over 5G networks with
distributed information acquisition and processing represents
the most promising approach. In the envisioned architecture,
the distributed SE could be virtualized and deployed in
numerous SG edge cloud servers across the network (see
Distributed EMS module in Fig. 2). Distributed SE modules
receive local PMU measurements via 5G RAN either directly
from 5G-connected PMUs, from 5G-connected local PDCs,
or from edge PDCs. Based on the received measurements,
distributed SE performs message-passing among neighbouring
SE modules, by exchanging UDP/IP packets through 5G CN.
The following subsection provides more details on emerging
distributed SE algorithms based on message-passing, while
their performance is numerically evaluated in Section IV.

C. Model-Based versus Data-Based Distributed SE

1) Model-Based Distributed SE: The
state-of-the-art
model-based distributed SE algorithms exploit
the matrix
decomposition techniques applied over the Weighted Least
Squares (WLS) method. In particular, the SE algorithms based
on distributed optimization combined with the alternating
direction method of multipliers (ADMM) have become pop-
ular in the literature. To decentralise an optimisation prob-
lem, ADMM decouples the objective function with consensus
variables. The resulting algorithm can be interpreted as an
iterative message-passing procedure, in which agents solve
subproblems independently [13].

Another efﬁcient iterative message-passing algorithm for
distributed inference is GBP. Therein,
the power system
network with a given measurement conﬁguration is mapped
onto an equivalent factor graph containing the set of factor
and variable nodes. Factor nodes are deﬁned by the set of
measurements, measurement error and measurement function.
The variable nodes are determined by the set of state vari-
ables. When applied on factor graphs, the GBP algorithm
calculates the marginal distributions of the system of random
variables [13], [36].

2) Data-Based Distributed SE: The growing collection of
historical measurement data in juxtaposition with complex,

often untractable problems has increased interest in developing
data-driven SE methods. Data-driven SE, unlike model-based
methods, can be designed to avoid using power system’s
parameters if they are highly uncertain [39]. Deep learning-
based approaches that are completely data-driven or hybrid,
are typically designed using feed-forward or recurrent neural
networks [40] [41] which must be trained on sets of samples
with a ﬁxed power system topology, and do not offer a
possibility of distributed implementation.

Recent advancements in GNNs [42] solve the problems
speciﬁc to applying deep learning in power systems. GNNs
learn from the graph-structured data by recursively aggregating
the neighboring node vector embeddings, and transforming
them non-linearly into the new embedding space. The node
embeddings are initialised by dataset inputs, followed by a
predeﬁned number of neighborhood aggregations k, the GNN
outputs the ﬁnal node embeddings that can be used for classiﬁ-
cation or regression problems. Apart from not being restricted
to training and test examples with ﬁxed topologies, GNNs
have fewer trainable parameters, lower memory requirements,
and can easily incorporate connectivity information into the
learning process.

In recent proposals for GNN-based SE [43] [44], the GNN
models are trained to predict state variables based on the
dataset of power system’s measurements annotated with the
node voltage values. The centralised implementation of the
trained GNN model’s inference results in linear computational
complexity with the number of nodes in the power system
(assuming the constant node degree). Additionally, GNN-
based SE can be computationally and geographically dis-
tributed across multiple processing units, with the requirement
that all of the measurements in the k-hop neighbourhood are
gathered and sent into the unit that predicts the state variables
for each node. Furthermore,
the study [44] examines the
robustness of the GNN-based SE to communication failures or
PMU malfunctions that make the SE problem unobservable,
demonstrating that result deterioration occurs only in the
neighbourhood of the lost measurements.

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In this section, we explore the SE supported by WAMS
using the IEEE 30-bus and IEEE 118-bus test case. PMUs
can accurately measure voltage and current phasors and send
data at high reporting rates, requiring efﬁcient algorithms with
minimal computational latency to process their measurements.
We select two linear computational complexity methods for
comparison: the model-based GBP method and the data-based
GNN method.

A. Accuracy of GBP and GNN-based SE

In all simulation models, we start with a given IEEE
test case and apply power ﬂow analysis to generate exact
solutions. Furthermore, we induce errors in exact solutions
of the magnitudes and angles of the branch currents and
bus voltages by applying the additive white Gaussian noise
of variance v = 10−5 to exact values. The resulting set

of measurements represents the PMU data source for the
SE model. In particular, each PMU placed at a given bus
corresponds to the bus voltage phasor and current phasor
measurements along branches incident to the bus. Using the
optimal placement algorithm given in [45], we observe IEEE
30-bus and 118-bus power systems with 10 and 32 PMUs,
respectively.

We compare the behaviour of the GBP and GNN algorithms
in the dynamic scenario, where power systems change load
values in discrete time instances τ = {1, 2, . . . , 100}, de-
scribed with 100 different measurement sets. To evaluate SE
algorithms, we select the Weighted Residual Sum of Squares
(WRSS) as a evaluation metric:

WRSS(τ ) =

m

X
i=1

hz(τ )

i − hi(ˆx(τ ))i
v(τ )

i

2

,

(1)

i

i

and v(τ )

GBP/WRSS(τ )

where m is the number of measurements, z(τ )
are
the measurement value and variance in the corresponding time
instance τ , and hi(ˆx(τ )) represents the measurement function
evaluated at the point deﬁned by the estimate vector ˆx(τ ).
Next, we normalize the metrics WRSS(τ )
GNN and WRSS(τ )
GBP
obtained using GNN and GBP algorithm, respectively, by
WRSS(τ )
WLS produced by the WLS method. For the case
the same solution
when GBP or GNN algorithms output
to one,
as the WLS method, deﬁned ratio is equal
i.e.,
WLS) = 1, (WRSS(τ )
(WRSS(τ )
WLS) = 1.
To make a fair comparison, we observe the normalized
WRSS metric obtained after the ﬁrst iteration of the GBP
algorithm to that of the GNN algorithm, when both algorithms
provide a solution for the same time complexity. Fig. 4 com-
pares the normalized WRSS metric, WRSS(τ )
GBP/WRSS(τ )
WLS,
obtained using the GBP, and WRSS(τ )
WLS calcu-
lated according to the GNN algorithm, for each time instance
τ for the power systems with 30 and 118 buses. As shown in
Fig. 4, GNN gives better and more consistent results compared
to GBP in terms of SE accuracy. This result is intuitive as GNN
has ability to extract more complex non-linear patterns from
data compared to the pure linear GBP approach.

GNN/WRSS(τ )

GNN/WRSS(τ )

S
S
R
W
d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

102

101

100

S
S
R
W
d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

104

103

102

GBP GNN

(a)

GBP GNN

(b)

Fig. 4. The normalized WRSS metrics of the GNN and GBP algorithms (we
observe WRSS of the GBP algorithm obtained after the ﬁrst iteration), for
power systems with 30 buses (subﬁgure a) and 118 buses (subﬁgure b).

Fig. 5 shows the normalised WRSS metric of the GBP
algorithm after the ﬁrst iteration. The GBP in a few iterations
outperforms the prediction of the GNN. Therefore, it can be
concluded that the combination of these two algorithms can be
a promising solution for fast inference (e.g., GNN can provide

a more accurate starting point for GBP, signiﬁcantly reducing
the total number of iterations), especially since both algorithms
are distributed and operate on the same graphical model.

S
S
R
W
d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

S
S
R
W
d
e
z
i
l
a
m
r
o
N

101

100

103

102

101

100

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

GBP Iteration

(a)

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

GBP Iteration

(b)

Fig. 5. The normalized WRSS metrics of the GBP algorithm during iterations,
for power systems with 30 buses (subﬁgure a) and 118 buses (subﬁgure b).

B. Computation and Communication Delays in SE using 5G

Critical to establishing a near-real time SE is the delay
introduced by 5G communication network. Given the PMU
reporting periods of 10 − 20 ms, the SE process needs to
produce outputs within the time frame of consecutive reports.
At the bottom of Fig. 1, we identify the key delay components
for end-to-end PMU-to-edge or PMU-to-Cloud connectivity.
Initial delay is embedded in the PMU reporting process and
data concentration at PDCs [31]. Once the data frame is
encapsulated as UDP/IP packet, it is transmitted via 5G NR
interface. 5G URLLC service is designed to support sub-1 ms
latency, however, the exact latency the data will experience in
disaggregated O-RAN system should be carefully examined.
In [46], [47], delay components across CU/DU/RU split are
investigated, including the delays on fronthaul and midhaul
networks. After the UDP/IP packet is received at a nearby
5G CN User Plane Function (UPF), it is routed to a local
SG edge cloud to distributed EMS module for processing
at the local distributed SE agent. Communication between
neighbouring distributed SE agents (that run GBP or GNN-
based SE) proceeds via 5G CN packet delivery between
edge cloud servers via one or more UPFs. Providing precise
estimate of delays for GBP and GNN-based SE is out of the
scope of this paper, but we note that it strongly depends on
the mapping of power system factor graph to different edge
cloud computation nodes. We note that GNN approach may be
extremely fast, especially if the k-hop neighbourhood nodes
are all mapped to the same edge cloud node. In contrast,
GBP always requires several iterations of message exchanges
between neighbouring edge cloud nodes.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we presented our initial insights on matching
recently proposed ML/AI-based distributed SE algorithms to
the evolving ML/AI-empowered 5G network services. Our
preliminary investigation indicates the potential of data-based
SE methods to provide near real-time state estimates consistent
with PMU reporting rates. However, more work is needed,
in particular, in the domain of characterisation of complex
end-to-end delay statistics, age of information analysis, and
overall performance versus delay optimization of distributed
SE functions over 5G networks.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Li, Z. Zhao, X. Zhou, G. Ding, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, and H. Zhang,
“Intelligent 5G: When cellular networks meet artiﬁcial intelligence,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 175–183, 2017.
[2] X. Xia, C. Mei, X. Zhou, S. Wang, H. Wang, and Y. Xing, “A review of
3gpp release 18 on smart energy and infrastructure,” in in Proc. ICCC.
IEEE, 2021, pp. 384–388.

[3] T. Dragiˇcevi´c, P. Siano, and S. S. Prabaharan, “Future generation 5G
wireless networks for smart grid: A comprehensive review,” Energies,
vol. 12, no. 11, p. 2140, 2019.

[4] A. Chouman, D. M. Manias, and A. Shami, “Towards supporting
intelligence in 5G/6G core networks: NWDAF implementation and
initial analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15121, 2022.

[5] R. R. Mohassel, A. Fung, F. Mohammadi, and K. Raahemifar, “A survey
on advanced metering infrastructure,” International Journal of Electrical
Power & Energy Systems, vol. 63, pp. 473–484, 2014.

[6] Y. Song, P.-Y. Kong, Y. Kim, S. Baek, and Y. Choi, “Cellular-assisted
d2d communications for advanced metering infrastructure in smart gird,”
IEEE Syst. J., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 1347–1358, 2019.

Smart grid: technology and applications.

[7] J. B. Ekanayake, N. Jenkins, K. Liyanage, J. Wu, and A. Yokoyama,
John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[8] B. K. Bose, “Artiﬁcial intelligence techniques in smart grid and renew-
able energy systems—some example applications,” Proc. of the IEEE,
vol. 105, no. 11, pp. 2262–2273, 2017.

[9] A. G. Phadke, P. Wall, L. Ding, and V. Terzija, “Improving the
performance of power system protection using wide area monitoring
systems,” Journal of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy, vol. 4,
no. 3, pp. 319–331, 2016.

[10] A. Monticelli, “Electric power system state estimation,” Proc. of the

IEEE, vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 262–282, 2000.

[11] G. N. Korres, “A distributed multiarea state estimation,” IEEE Trans.

Power Syst., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 73–84, 2010.

[12] L. Xie, D.-H. Choi, S. Kar, and H. V. Poor, “Fully distributed state
estimation for wide-area monitoring systems,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1154–1169, 2012.

[13] M. Cosovic, A. Tsitsimelis, D. Vukobratovic, J. Matamoros, and
C. Anton-Haro, “5G mobile cellular networks: Enabling distributed state
estimation for smart grids,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 10, pp.
62–69, 2017.

[14] J. Lu, L. Xiao, Z. Tian, M. Zhao, and W. Wang, “5G enhanced service-

based core design,” in Proc. WOCC, pp. 1–5, 2019.

[15] J. T. Penttinen, 5G explained: security and deployment of advanced

mobile communications.

John Wiley & Sons, 2019.

[16] 3GPP, “5G; System architecture for the 5G System (5GS),” ETSI TS

123 501 V16.6.0 (2020-10), 2020.

[17] R. Borgaonkar and M. G. Jaatun, “5G as an enabler for secure IoT in

the smart grid,” in in Proc. SA.

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–7.

[18] L. Xia, M. Zhao, and Z. Tian, “5G service based core network design,”

in in Proc. WCNCW, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[19] V.-G. Nguyen, A. Brunstrom, K.-J. Grinnemo,

and J. Taheri,
“SDN/NFV-based mobile packet core network architectures: A survey,”
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1567–
1602, 2017.

[20] Y.-i. Choi and N. Park, “Slice architecture for 5G core network,” in in

Proc. ICUFN, 2017, pp. 571–575.

[21] A. Checko, H. L. Christiansen, Y. Yan, L. Scolari, G. Kardaras, M. S.
Berger, and L. Dittmann, “Cloud ran for mobile networks—a technology
overview,” IEEE Communications surveys & tutorials, vol. 17, no. 1, pp.
405–426, 2014.

[22] 3GPP, “Study on new radio access technology: Radio access architecture

and interfaces,” 3GPP TR38.801, V14.0.0 (2017–03), 2017.

[23] 3GPP, “Study on enhancement for data collection for nr and en-dc,”

3GPP TR37.817, V1.4.0 (2022–03), 2022.

[24] M. Polese, L. Bonati, S. D’Oro, S. Basagni, and T. Melodia, “Un-
interfaces, algorithms, security, and

derstanding o-ran: Architecture,
research challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01032, 2022.

[25] T. A. Zerihun, M. Garau, and B. E. Helvik, “Effect of communication
failures on state estimation of 5G-enabled smart grid,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 112 642–112 658, 2020.

[26] K. Ghanem, S. Ugwuanyi, R. Asif, and J. Irvine, “Challenges and
promises of 5G for smart grid teleprotection applications,” in in Proc.
ISNCC.

IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–7.

[27] P. Hovila, P. Syv¨aluoma, H. Kokkoniemi-Tarkkanen, S. Horsmanheimo,
S. Borenius, Z. Li, and M. Uusitalo, “5G networks enabling new smart
grid protection solutions,” in CIRED 2019 Conference. AIM, 2019.

[28] I. Demidov, D. C. Melgarejo, A. Pinomaa, L. Ault, J. Jolkkonen, and
K. Leppa, “IEC-61850 performance evaluation in a 5G cellular network:
UDP and TCP analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.08502, 2022.
[29] I. E. Commission et al., “Communication networks and systems for

power utility automation,” IEC Std, vol. 61850, 2013.

[30] L. Sun, L. Wang, P. Yang, Y. Zhong, D. Hong, G. Zhang, H. Zhu, P. Qian,
and J. Li, “Implementation and veriﬁcation of 5G network slicing for
smart grids,” in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 2095, no. 1.
IOP Publishing, 2021, p. 012019.

[31] IEEE/IEC International Standard - Measuring relays and protection
equipment - Part 118-1: Synchrophasor for power systems - Measure-
ments, 2018.

[32] Y. Liu, S. You, W. Yao, Y. Cui, L. Wu, D. Zhou, J. Zhao, H. Liu, and
Y. Liu, “A distribution level wide area monitoring system for the electric
power grid–fnet/grideye,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 2329–2338, 2017.

[33] IEEE Standard for Synchrophasor Data Transfer for Power Systems,

2011.

[34] Communication networks and systems for power utility automation -
Part 90-5: Use of IEC 61850 to transmit synchrophasor information
according to IEEE C37.118, 2012.

[35] E. Caro, A. J. Conejo, and R. Minguez, “Decentralized state estimation
and bad measurement identiﬁcation: An efﬁcient lagrangian relaxation
approach,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 2500–2508,
2011.

[36] M. Cosovic and D. Vukobratovic, “Distributed gauss–newton method
for state estimation using belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst.,
vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 648–658, 2018.

[37] V. Kekatos and G. B. Giannakis, “Distributed robust power system state
estimation,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 1617–1626,
2012.

[38] J. Matamoros, A. Tsitsimelis, M. Gregori, and C. Ant´on-Haro, “Multi-
area state estimation with legacy and synchronized measurements,” in
in Proc. ICC.

IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6.

[39] G. D’Antona, “Power system static-state estimation with uncertain
network parameters as input data,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 65,
no. 11, pp. 2485–2494, 2016.

[40] L. Zhang, G. Wang, and G. B. Giannakis, “Real-time power system state
estimation and forecasting via deep unrolled neural networks,” IEEE
Trans. Signal Process., vol. 67, no. 15, pp. 4069–4077, 2019.

[41] A. S. Zamzam, X. Fu, and N. D. Sidiropoulos, “Data-driven learning-
based optimization for distribution system state estimation,” IEEE Trans.
Power Syst., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 4796–4805, 2019.

[42] M. M. Bronstein, J. Bruna, Y. LeCun, A. Szlam, and P. Vandergheynst,
“Geometric deep learning: Going beyond euclidean data,” IEEE Signal
Process. Mag., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 18–42, 2017.

[43] M. J. Hossain and M. Rahnamay–Naeini, “State estimation in smart
grids using temporal graph convolution networks,” in in Proc. NAPS,
2021, pp. 01–05.

[44] O. Kundacina, M. Cosovic, and D. Vukobratovic, “State estimation in
electric power systems leveraging graph neural networks,” in in Proc.
PMAPS, 2022, pp. 1–6.

[45] B. Gou, “Optimal placement of PMUs by integer linear programming,”

IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1525–1526, Aug. 2008.

[46] S. C. Forum, “Small cell virtualization: Functional splits and use cases,”

2016.

[47] L. Diez, A. M. Alba, W. Kellerer, and R. Ag¨uero, “Flexible functional
split and fronthaul delay: A queuing-based model,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 151 049–151 066, 2021.

